Human Personality and Its Survival of Bodily Death (Frederic W. H. Myers, 1903)
===============================================================================
Frederic W. H. Myers — Posthumous masterwork founding the theory of the subliminal self — the single most cited text in psychical research. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive: Vol. I (humanpersonality01myeruoft), Vol. II (in.ernet.dli.2015.31563) — 1903 first edition, both volumes.

HUMAN    PERSONALITY

AND  ITS  SURVIVAL  OF
BODILY  DEATH

BY


FREDERIC  W%NVH^MTBBS

Cessas  in  voia  frecesque,

Tros,  ait,  Aenea,  cessas?     Neque  enim  ante  dehiscent
Adtonita  magna  ora  domus.—  VIRGIL.

"Nay!"  quoth  the  Sybil \  "  Trojan!  -wilt  thou  spare
The  impassioned  effort  and  the  conquering  prayer  ?
Nay.'  not  sai'e  thus  those  doors  shall  of  en  roll^  —
That  Power  -within  them  burst  upon  the  soul"

IN  TWO  VOLUMES
VOL.  I

LONGMANS,   GREEN,  AND    CO.

39  PATERNOSTER  ROW,  LONDON

NEW  YORK  AND  BOMBAY

1903

All  right*  referred


LONGMANS,  GREEN,  AND  CO.

All  rights  reserved.

First  Edition,  February,  1903
Reprinted,  March,  1903

DEDICA  TED

TO

HENRY    SIDGWICK

AND

EDMUND    GURNEY

PREFACE

THE  book  which  is  now  at  last  given  to  the  world  is  but  a  partial
presentation  of  an  ever-growing  subject  which  I  have  long  hoped  to
become  able  to  treat  in  more  adequate  fashion.  But  as  knowledge
increases  life  rolls  by,  and  I  have  thought  it  well  to  bring  out  while
I  can  even  this  most  imperfect  text-book  to  a  branch  of  research
whose  novelty  and  strangeness  call  urgently  for  some  provisional
systematisation,  which,  by  suggesting  fresh  inquiries,  further  ac-
cumulation of  evidence  may  tend  as  speedily  as  possible  to
its  own  supersession.  Few  critics  of  this  book  can,  I  think,
be  more  fully  conscious  than  its  author  of  its  defects  and  its
lacunae ;  but  also  few  critics,  I  think,  have  yet  realised  the  im-
portance of  the  new  facts  which  in  some  fashion  the  book  does
actually  present.

Many  of  these  facts  have  already  appeared  in  Phantasms  of  the
Lii-ing;  many  more  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research ;  but  they  are  far  indeed  from  having  yet  entered  into  the
scientific  consciousness  of  the  age.  In  future  years  the  wonder,
I  think,  will  be  that  their  announcement  was  so  largely  left  to  a
writer  with  leisure  so  scanty,  and  with  scientific  equipment  so  in-
complete.

Whatever  value  this  book  may  possess  is  in  great  measure  due
to  other  minds  than  its  actual  author's.  Its  very  existence,  in
the  first  place,  probably  depends  upon  the  existence  of  the  two
beloved  friends  and  invaluable  coadjutors  to  whose  memory  I
dedicate  it  now.

vii

viii  PREFACE

The  help  derived  from  these  departed  colleagues,  Henry  Sidg-
wick  and  Edmund  Gurney,  although  of  a  kind  and  quantity
absolutely  essential  to  the  existence  of  this  work,  is  not  easy
to  define  in  all  its  fulness  under  the  changed  circumstances  of
to-day.  There  was  indeed  much  which  is  measurable ;  —  much  of
revision  of  previous  work  of  my  own,  of  collaborative  experiments,
of  original  thought  and  discovery.  Large  quotations  purposely
introduced  from  Edmund  Gurney  indicate,  although  imperfectly,
how  closely  interwoven  our  work  on  all  these  subjects  continued
to  be  until  his  death.  But  the  benefit  which  I  drew  from  the
association  went  deeper  still.  The  conditions  under  which  this
inquiry  was  undertaken  were  such  as  to  emphasise  the  need  of
some  intimate  moral  support.  A  recluse,  perhaps,  or  an  eccentric,
—  or  a  man  living  mainly  with  his  intellectual  inferiors,  may  find
it  easy  to  work  steadily  and  confidently  at  a  task  which  he
knows  that  the  bulk  of  educated  men  will  ignore  or  despise.
But  this  is  more  difficult  for  a  man  who  feels  manifold  links
with  his  kind,  a  man  whose  desire  it  is  to  live  among  minds  equal
or  superior  to  his  own.  It  is  hard,  I  say,  for  such  a  man  to  dis-
regard altogether  the  expressed  or  implied  disapproval  of  those
groups  of  weighty  personages  to  whom  in  other  matters  he  is
accustomed  to  look  up.

I  need  not  say  that  the  attitude  of  the  scientific  world  —  of  all  the
intellectual  world  — then  was  very  much  more  marked  than  now.
Even  now  I  write  in  full  consciousness  of  the  low  value  commonly
attached  to  inquiries  of  the  kind  which  I  pursue.  Even  now  a  book
on  such  a  subject  must  still  expect  to  evoke,  not  only  legitimate
criticism  of  many  kinds,  but  also  much  of  that  disgust  and  resent-
ment which  novelty  and  heterodoxy  naturally  excite.  But  I  have
no  wish  to  exalt  into  a  deed  of  daring  an  enterprise  which  to  the
next  generation  must  seem  the  most  obvious  thing  in  the  world.
Nihil  ausi  nisi  vana  contemnere  will  certainly  be  the  highest
compliment  which  what  seemed  to  us  our  bold  independence  of  men

PREFACE  ix

will  receive.  Yet  gratitude  bids  me  to  say  that  however  I  might  in
the  privacy  of  my  own  bosom  have  '  dared  to  contemn  things  con-
temptible/ I  should  never  have  ventured  my  amateurish  acquire-
ments on  a  publication  of  this  scale  were  it  not  for  that  slow  growth
of  confidence  which  my  respect  for  the  judgment  of  these  two  friends
inspired.  Their  countenance  and  fellowship,  which  at  once  trans-
formed my  own  share  in  the  work  into  a  delight,  has  made  its
presentation  to  the  world  appear  as  a  duty.

My  thanks  are  due  also  to  another  colleague  who  has  passed
away,  my  brother,  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  F.R.C.P.,  who  helped  me  for
many  years  in  all  medical  points  arising  in  the  work.

To  the  original  furnishers  of  the  evidence  my  obligations  are
great  and  manifest,  and  to  the  Council  of  the  S.P.R.  I  also  owe
thanks  for  permission  to  use  that  evidence  freely.  But  I  must  leave
it  to  the  book  itself  to  indicate  in  fuller  detail  how  much  is  owing  to
how  many  men  and  women :  —  how  widely  diffused  are  the  work  and
the  interest  which  have  found  in  this  book  their  temporary  outcome
and  exposition.

The  book,  indeed,  is  an  exposition  rather  than  a  proof.  I  cannot
summarise  within  my  modest  limits  the  mass  of  evidence  already
gathered  together  in  the  sixteen  volumes  of  Proceedings  and  the
nine  volumes  of  the  Journal  Q{  the  S.P.R.,in  Phantasms  of  the  Living
and  other  books  hereafter  referred  to,  and  in  MS.  collections.  The
attempt  indeed  would  be  quite  out  of  place.  This  branch  of  know-
ledge, like  others,  must  be  studied  carefully  and  in  detail  by  those
who  care  to  understand  or  to  advance  it.

What  I  have  tried  to  do  here  is  to  render  that  knowledge  more
assimilable  by  co-ordinating  it  in  a  form  as  clear  and  intelligible  as
my  own  limited  skill  and  the  nature  of  the  facts  themselves  have
permitted.  I  have  tried  to  give,  in  text  and  in  Appendices,  enough
of  actual  evidence  to  illustrate  each  step  in  my  argument:  —  and  I
have  constantly  referred  the  reader  to  places  where  further  evidence
will  be  found.

x  PREFACE

In  minor  matters  I  have  aimed  above  all  things  at  clearness  and
readiness  in  reference.  The  division  of  the  book  into  sections,  with
Appendices  bearing  the  same  numbers,  will,  it  is  hoped,  facilitate
the  use  both  of  syllabus  and  of  references  in  general.  I  have  even
risked  the  appearance  of  pedantry  in  adding  a  glossary.  Where
many  unfamiliar  facts  and  ideas  have  to  be  dealt  with,  time  is  saved
in  the  end  if  the  writer  explains  precisely  what  his  terms  mean.

F.  W.  H.  MYERS.

EDITORIAL    NOTE

This  unfinished  preface  consists  of  several  passages  written  at  different
times  by  the  author,  who  died  on  January  i;th,  1901.  In  1896,  he  arranged
that  the  completion  of  his  book  should  be  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Richard
Hodgson  in  case  of  his  death  before  its  publication.  In  the  meantime  he  had
entrusted  the  general  supervision  of  the  press  work  and  much  of  the  detail  in
marshalling  the  Appendices  to  Miss  Alice  Johnson  of  Newnham  College,
Cambridge,  who  has  therefore  been  associated  with  Dr.  Hodgson  also  in  the
editorial  work  needed  for  the  completion  of  the  book,  and  much  the  greater
part  of  the  labour  involved  has  fallen  to  her  share.  At  the  time  of  the  author's
death,  Chapters  I. -VI.,  part  of  Chapter  VII.,  and  the  whole  of  Chapter  VIII.
were  in  the  first  proof,  the  rest  of  Chapter  VII.  and  Chapter  X.  were  ready  for
printing.  Most  of  the  Appendices  were  in  type,  but  required  much  revision
and  re-arrangement.  The  substance  of  nearly  all  Chapter  IX.  had  been
written,  in  one  form  or  another,  but  had  to  be  pieced  together.  The  asterisks
on  p.  209  (Vol.  II.)  mark  the  end  of  the  part  which  had  been  consecutively
composed  by  the  author.  Some  of  the  questions  involved  in  that  chapter
would  doubtless  have  been  treated  much  more  fully  by  him  had  he  lived
to  complete  it.  Mr.  Myers  left  on  record  his  wish  to  express  gratitude  to
Mr.  F.  N.  Hales,  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  for  help  in  the  preparation
of  some  Appendices,  especially  in  Chapters  II.  and  V.

RICHARD  HODGSON.
ALICE  JOHNSON.

CONTENTS

PAGE

PREFACE    .  .  .      vii

EDITORIAL   NOTE  .  x

GLOSSARY  ...  .     xiii

EXPLANATION  OF  PLAN  OF  ARRANGEMENT  AND  SYSTEM

OF  REFERENCES     .  .....   xxiii

SYLLABUSES  .  ,   xxiv

CHAP.

I.    INTRODUCTION     .  .                                  i

II.    DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY  .                        .       34

III.    GENIUS          .                                                  .  .70

IV.    SLEEP                                      .  .121

V.    HYPNOTISM             .  .     153

VI.   SENSORY   AUTOMATISM                        .  .            .            .220

APPENDICES  TO  CHAPTER   II  ...     298

APPENDICES  TO  CHAPTER   IV 369

APPENDICES  TO  CHAPTER   V  .    437

APPENDICES  TO  CHAPTER   VI  ...                        .565

GLOSSARY

[NOTE. — The  words  and  phrases  here  included  fall  under  three  main
heads  : —

1 i )  Words  in  common  philosophical  or  medical  use,  to  which  no  new
shade  of  meaning  is  given  in  this  inquiry,  eg.  ecmnesia.     Introducing  a
few  of  these  words  for  the  ordinary  reader's  convenience,  I  have  generally
taken  the  definition  from  Hack  Tuke's  Dictionary  of  Psychological  Medicine
(London:  Churchill,  1892),  which  is  the  most  authoritative — almost  the
only — English  work  of  its  kind.

(2)  Words  or  phrases  in  themselves  not  new,  but  used  in  psychical
research  with  some  special  significance  ; — as,  for  instance,  "  systematised
anaesthesia,"  "  negative  hallucination."     These  two  phrases  are  constantly
used  by  writers   on   hypnotism :    but   mere   familiarity   with   the   words
themselves  would  not  explain  their  meaning  in  that  context  to  a  reader
fresh  to  hypnotic  discussions.

(3)  A  few  words,  distinguished  by  an  asterisk,  for  which  I  am  myself
responsible.     I  must  leave  it  to  my  readers  to  judge  how  far  these  words
are  likely  to  be  useful.     But  I  would  suggest  that  when  a  subject  so  novel
as  ours  is  made  the  subject  of  discussion  in  many  countries,  there  is  a
convenience  in  using  words  of  Greek  or  Latin  derivation,  which  can  be
adapted  to  all  languages,  and  can  be  made  to  bear  a  clearly  defined
signification.]

Aboulia. — Loss  of  power  of  willing.  I  have  used  the  word  hyperboulia  to
express  that  increased  power  over  the  organism,  resembling  the  power  which
we  call  will  when  it  is  exercised  over  the  voluntary  muscles,  which  is  seen  in
the  bodily  changes  effected  by  self-suggestion.

After-image.— The  picture  of  an  object  seen  after  removing  the  gaze  from
the  object.  It  is  called  positive  when  it  reproduces,  negative  when  it  reverses
the  true  illumination  or  colours  of  the  actual  object.  After-images  are  regarded
as  retinal  or  entoptic,  belonging  to  the  interior  of  the  eye.  After-images  must
be  distinguished  from  memory-images,  which  may  appear  spontaneously,  or
may  be  summoned  by  an  effort  of  will,  long  after  the  original  si<;ht  of  the
object.

Agent. — The  person  on  whose  condition  a  telepathic  impression  seems  to  be
dependent ;  who  seems  to  initiate  the  telepathic  transmission.

Agraphia. — See  Aphasia.

Alexia.—See.  Aphasia.

<m  of  personality.— Set  Disintegration  of  person

rsthcsia,  or  the  loss  of  sensation  generally,  must  be  distinguished  from
analgesia,  or  the  loss  of  the  sense  of  pain  alone.     Many  hypnotic  subjects  are

xiii

XIV

GLOSSARY

analgesic  but  not  anaesthetic.    Systematised  anasthesia  or  negative  hallucinate
signifies  the  condition  of  an  entranced  subject  who  has  been  told  (for  instanc
that  Mr.  A.  is  not  in  the  room,  while  he  is  in  reality  present.     The  subject  ma}
thus  be  said  to  have  a  negative  hallucination,  or  to  have  been  deprived  of
certain  group  or  system  of  perceptions,  in  that  he  fails  to  see  Mr.  A.     Oth<
words  descriptive  of  the  general  sensory  condition  are  dysasthesia,  impaired  o
painful  sensation  ;  parcesthesia,  erroneous  or  morbid  sensation  ;  hypercesthesib
unusually  keen  sensation,   which   may  or  may   not  be  a  morbid  symptom.
Hyperaesthesia  may   be  peripheral,  when  it   affects  nerve-endings   near  the
surface  of  the  body,  or  central,  when  the  excessive  sensitiveness  belongs  to  the
central  sensorium ; — such  parts,  namely,  of  the  brain  as  are  concerned  in  receiv-
ing or  generating  sensory  images  and  impressions.     Hemi-ancssthesia  means
anaesthesia  of  half  the  body,  the  median  line  (down  the  middle  of  the  body)
separating  normal  sensation  from  absence  of  sensation.     Anaesthetic  zones  or
patches  (formerly  deemed  characteristic  of  witches)  are  common  in  hysteria.
Ccenesthesia  means  that  consensus  or  agreement  of  many  organic  sensations
which  is  a  fundamental  element  in  our  conception  of  personal  identity.     Finally,
I  have  suggested  the  word  *  pancesthesia  to  express  the  undifferentiated  sensory
capacity  of  the  supposed  primal  germ.

Analgesia. — Insensibility  to  pain.

Aphasia. — Incapacity  of  coherent  utterance,  not  caused  by  structural
impairment  of  the  vocal  organs,  but  by  lesion  of  the  cerebral  centres  for  speech.
Distinguished  from  congenital  or  acquired  aphonia,  due  to  paralysis  or  imperfect
approximation  of  the  vocal  cords,  and  also  from  hysterical  mutism,  when  the
patient  is  obstinately  and  involuntarily  silent,  although  the  vocal  organs  are
uninjured  and  the  cerebral  centres  of  speech  are  only  functionally  affected,  with
no  visible  lesion.  All  the  four  forms  of  "verbalisation  are  subject  to  separate
disorders  of  the  type  of  aphasia.  Lack  of  power  to  write  words  is  called
agraphia  or  agraphy /  lack  of  power  to  understand  words  written,  alexia  or
•word-blindness ;  lack  of  power  to  understand  words  uttered,  word-deafness.  In
each  case  the  trouble  may  lie  in  the  brain  and  not  in  the  organ  of  sense  or  other
organs.  For  instance,  a  man's  sight  even  for  printed  musical  notes  may  be
unimpaired,  while  yet  he  is  unable  to  understand  printed  words.

Aphonia. — Incapacity  of  uttering  sounds.

Attaque  de  sommeil. — This  French  term  is  more  correct  than  the  word
"trance,"  to  express  those  spontaneous  lapses  into  prolonged  and  profound
sleep  which  sometimes  occur  in  hysterical  subjects.

Automatism. — The  words  automatism  and  automatic  are  used  in  somewhat
different  senses  by  physiologists  and  psychologists.  Thus  Sir  M.  Foster  says
(Foster's  Physiology,  5th  edition,  p.  920),  "  We  speak  of  an  action  of  an  organ
or  of  a  living  body  as  being  spontaneous  or  automatic  when  it  appears  to  be
not  immediately  due  to  any  changes  in  the  circumstances  in  which  the  organ  or
body  is  placed,  but  to  be  the  result  of  changes  arising  in  the  organ  or  body
itself  and  determined  by  causes  other  than  the  influences  of  the  circumstances
of  the  moment.  The  most  striking  automatic  actions  of  the  living  body  [are"
those  which  we  attribute  to  the  working  of  the  will  and  which  we  call  voluntary
or  volitional."  That  is  to  say,  to  the  physiologist  an  action  is  "  self-moved
when  it  is  determined,  not  by  the  environment,  but  by  the  organism  itself.  The
word  thus  becomes  hardly  more  than  a  synonym  for  spontaneous.  The  psycho-
logist, on  the  other  hand,  regards  an  action  as  "  self-moved  "  when  it  is  deter-

GLOSSARY  xv

mined  in  an  organism  apart  from  the  central  will  or  control  of  that  organism.
Thus  when  an  act  at  first  needing  voluntary  guidance,  by  practice  comes  to  need
such  guidance  no  longer,  it  is  called  "  secondarily  automatic."  I  have  used  the
word  in  a  wider  sense,  as  expressing  such  images  as  arise,  as  well  as  such
movements  as  are  made,  without  the  initiation,  and  generally  without  the
concurrence,  of  conscious  thought  and  will.  Sensory  automatism  will  thus  in-
clude visual  and  auditory  hallucinations ;  motor  automatism  will  include
messages  written  without  intention  (automatic  script)  or  words  uttered  without
intention  (as  in  "speaking  with  tongues,"  trance-utterances,  &c.).  I  ascribe
these  processes  to  the  action  of  submerged  or  subliminal  elements  in  the  man's
being.  Such  phrases  as  "  reflex  cerebral  action,"  or  "  unconscious  cerebration,"
give  therefore,  in  my  view,  a  very  imperfect  conception  of  the  facts.

Automnesia. — Spontaneous  revival  of  memories  of  an  earlier  condition  of
life.

Autoscope. — Any  instrument  which  reveals  a  subliminal  motor  impulse  or

sensory  impression ;  e.g.  a  divining  rod,  a  tilting  table,  or  a  planchette  reveals

visible  motion  the  imperceptible,  involuntary,  and  unconscious  muscular

action  of  the  person   holding  or  touching  it ;   a  crystal  or  other  speculum

externalises  the  subliminal  impressions  of  the  person  who  sees  visions  in  it.

Bilocation. — The  sensation  of  being  in  two  different  places  at  once,  namely,
where  one's  organism  is,  and  a  place  distant  from  it,  involving  some  degree  of
perception  (whether  veridical  or  falsidical)  of  the  distant  scene.

Catalepsy. — "An  intermittent  neurosis,  characterised  by  the  patient's
inability  to  change  the  position  of  a  limb,  while  another  person  can  place  the
muscles  in  a  state  of  flexion  or  contraction  as  he  will." — (Tuke's  Diet.)
Catalepsy  may  also  be  induced  as  a  stage  of  hypnotism ;  although  Charcot's
view,  which  erected  catalepsy,  lethargy,  somnambulism  (their  relative  positions
sometimes  varied)  into  three  typical  or  necessary  stages  in  a  hypnotic  trance,  is
now  commonly  considered  to  have  been  a  too  hasty  generalisation  from  the
habits— largely  imitative— -of  the  group  of  hypnotic  patients  at  the  Salpetriere
(a  hospital  in  Paris).

Census  of  Hallucinations. — An  inquiry  undertaken  to  determine  the
frequency  of  hallucinations  in  sane  and  healthy  persons ;  described  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  (See  612  A.)

Centre  of  Consciousness. — The  place  where  a  percipient  imagines  himself  to
be.  The  point  from  which  he  seems  to  himself  to  be  surveying  some  phan-
tasmal scene.

Chromatism. — See  Secondary  Sensations.

Clairaudience.  — See  Clairvoyance.

Clairvoyance  (Lucuffte).—TY\e  faculty  or  act  of  perceiving,  as  though  visually,
with  some  coincidental  truth,  some  distant  scene;  used  sometimes,  but  hardly
;  ly,  for  transcendental  vision,  or  the  perception  of  beings  regarded  as  on
another  plane  of  existence.     Clairaudience  is  generally  used  of  the  sensation  of
Qg  an  internal  (but  in  some  way  veridical)  voice.     I  have  preferred  to  use
the  term  *telcesthesia  for  distant  perception.     For  the  faculty  has  seldom  any
close  analogy  with  an  extension  of  sight;  the  perception  of  distant  scenes  being
often  more  or  less  symbolical  and  in  other  ways  out  of  accord  with  what  actual
sight  would  show  in  the  locality  of  the  vision.     On  the  other  hand,  telasthesia
merges  into  telepathy,  since  we  cannot  say  how  far  the  perception  of  a  dis-
tant scene  may  in  essential  be  the  perception  of  the  content  of  a  distant  mind.
VOL.    I.

xvi  GLOSSARY

Ccenesthesia. — See  Anesthesia.

Coincidental. — This  word  is  used  when  there  is  some  degree  of  coincidence
in  time  of  occurrence  between  a  supernormal  incident  and  an  event  at  a  dis-
tance, which  makes  it  seem  probable  that  some  causal  connection  exists
between  the  two.  An  apparition,  for  instance,  seen  at  or  about  the  time
when  the  person  whose  phantasm  is  seen  dies,  is  a  coincidental  apparition.

Collective. — Applied  to  cases  where  two  or  more  persons  together  perceive  a
hallucination  or  phantasm.

Control. — This  word  is  used  of  the  intelligence  which  purports  to  communi-
cate messages  which  are  written  or  uttered  by  the  automatist,  sensitive,  or
medium.  The  word  is  used  for  convenience'  sake,  but  should  not  imply  that
the  source  of  the  messages  need  be  other  than  the  automatist's  own  subliminal
intelligence.

*Cosmopathic. — Open  to  the  access  of  supernormal  knowledge  or  emotion,
apparently  from  the  transcendental  world,  but  whose  precise  source  we  have  no
means  of  defining.

Cryptomnesia. — Submerged  or  subliminal  memory  of  events  forgotten  by  the
supraliminal  self.

Crystal-gazing. — The  act  of  looking  into  a  crystal,  glass  ball,  or  other
speculum,  or  reflecting  surface,  with  the  object  of  inducing  hallucinatory
pictures.  The  person  doing  this  is  called  a  seer  or  scryer.  The  pictures,  of
course,  exist  in  the  mind  and  not  in  the  crystal.  See  Shell-hearing.

Delusion  and  Delusive. — Applied  generally  to  all  cases  whether  of  hallucina-
tion or  illusion,  when  there  is  no  corresponding  reality  whatever; — i.e.  when
the  case  is  not  coincidental  or  in  any  other  way  veridical.

*Dextro-cerebral  (opposed  to  *Sinistro-cerebral}\  of  left-handed  persons,
as  employing  preferentially  the  right  hemisphere  of  the  brain.

Diathesis. — Habit,  capacity,  or  disposition.  (In  Medicine,  a  permanent  con-
dition of  the  body  which  renders  it  liable  to  certain  special  diseases  or  affections  ;
a  constitutional  predisposition  or  tendency.)  See  Psychorrhagic  diathesis.

Dimorphism. — In  crystals,  the  property  of  assuming  two  incompatible  forms  ;
in  plants  and  animals,  difference  of  form  between  members  of  the  same  species.
Used  of  a  condition  of  alternating  personalities  ;  a  kind  of  psychical  dimorphism
in  which  memory,  character,  faculty,  &c.,  present  themselves  at  different  times
in  different  forms  in  the  same  person.  Similarly,  polymorphism  is  the  property
of  assuming  many  forms.

Discarnate. — Disembodied,  opposed  to  incarnate.  Used  of  that  part  of  man
which  still  subsists  after  bodily  death.

Disintegration  of  personality. — Used  of  any  condition  where  the  sense  of
personality  is  not  unitary  and  continuous;  especially  when  secondary  and  transi-
tory personalities  intervene;  as,  for  instance,  when  a  hysterical  subject  calls
herself  at  one  time  Rose,  at  another  Adrienne,  &c.,  with  separate  chains  of
memory  for  each  condition.

Dissolutive. — Opposed  to  Evolutive;  of  changes  which  tend  not  towards
progress  but  towards  decay.

Dynamogeny.— The  increase  of  nervous  energy  by  appropriate  stimuli ;  often
opposed  to  inhibition.

Dyscesthesia. — See  Anasthesia.

Ecmnesia.—k  gap  in  memory :  "  a  form  of  amnesia  [forgetfulness]  in  which
there  is  a  normal  memory  of  occurrences  prior  to  a  given  date,  with  loss  of

GLOSSARY  xvii

memory  of  what  happened  for  a  certain  time  after  that  date."— (Tuke's  Diet.}.
It  should  be  added  that  the  gap  of  memory  may  include  some  period  of  time
previous  to  the  shock  or  accident  which  caused  it.

Ecstasy. — A  trance  during  which  the  spirit  of  the  automatist  partially
quits  his  body,  entering  into  a  state  in  which  the  spiritual  world  is  more  or
less  open  to  its  perception,  and  in  which  it  so  far  ceases  to  occupy  its  organism
as  to  leave  room  for  an  invading  spirit  to  use  it  in  somewhat  the  same  fashion
as  its  owner  is  accustomed  to  use  it.  See  Possession.

*  Entencephalic. — On  the  analogy  of  entoptic /  of  sensations,  &c.,  which  have
their  origin  within  the  brain,  not  in  the  external  world.

Eugenics. — The  science  of  improving  the  race.

Externalise. — This  word  is  used  to  represent  the  process  by  which  an  idea
or  impression  on  the  percipient's  mind  is  transformed  into  a  phantasm  appar-
ently outside  him.

Falsidical. — See   Hallucination .

Glossolaly. — "  Speaking  with  tongues,"  i>.  automatic  utterance  of  words  not
belonging  to  any  real  language.

Hallucination. — Any  supposed  sensory  perception  which  has  no  objective
counterpart  within  the  field  of  vision,  hearing,  &c.,  is  termed  a  hallucination.
Hallucinations  may  be  delusive  m  falsidical,  when  there  is  nothing  whatever  to
which  they  correspond ;  or  veridical,  when  they  correspond  (as  those  of  which
we  treat  generally  correspond)  to  real  events  happening  elsewhere.  A  pseudo-
hallucination  is  a  quasi-percept  not  sufficiently  externalised  to  rank  as  a  "full-
blown "  hallucination.  Contrast  with  illusion  and  delusion.

Hemi-anasthesia. — S  ee  A nasthesia.

Heterasthesia. — A  form  of  sensibility  decidedly  different  from  any  of  those
which  can  be  referred  to  the  action  of  the  known  senses — e.g.  the  perception  of
a  magnetic  field,  specific  sensibilities  to  running  water,  crystals,  metals  (see
Metallcesthesid),  &c.

Hyperboulia. — See  Aboulia.

Hyperasthesia. — See  Anesthesia.

Hypermnesia. — Defined  in  Tuke's  Diet,  as  "  over-activity  of  the  memory,  a
condition  in  which  past  acts,  feelings,  or  ideas  are  brought  vividly  to  the  mind,
which,  in  its  natural  condition,  has  wholly  lost  the  remembrance  of  them."  In
my  view  the  subliminal  memory  retains  these  remembrances  throughout,  and
their  supraliminal  evocation  implies  an  increased  grasp  of  natural  faculty.
*Panmnesia  would  imply  a  potential  recollection  of  all  impressions.

*Hyperpromethia. — Supernormal  power  of  foresight ;  attributed  to  the  sub-
liminal self  as  a  hypothesis  by  which  to  explain  premonitions  without  assuming
either  that  the  future  scene  is  shown  to  the  percipient  by  any  mind  external  to
his  own,  or  that  circumstances  which  we  regard  as  future  are  in  any  sense
already  existent.

Hypnagogic. — Illusions  hypnagogiques  (Maury)  are  the  vivid  illusions  of

or  sound—"  faces  in  the  dark,"  &c. — which  sometimes  accompany  the

oncoming  of  sleep.     To  similar  illusions  accompanying  the  departure  of  sleep,

en  a  dream-figure  persists  for  a  few  moments  into  waking  life,  I  have

given  the  name  *hypnopompic.

Hypnogenous.—^t^  Hysterogenous.

^Hypnopompic.—^*.  Hypnagogic.

Hypnotism.— Sec  Mesmerism.

xviii  GLOSSARY

Hysteria. — "  A  disordered  condition  of  the  nervous  system,  the  anatomical
seat  and  nature  of  which  are  unknown  to  medical  science,  but  of  which  the
symptoms  consist  in  well-marked  and  very  varied  disturbances  of  nerve-
function  "  (Ency.  Brit.).  For  further  definition  and  discussion,  see  below,
Chapter  II.

Hysterical  blindness,  contractures,  mutism,  oedema,  paralysis,  &c.,  signify
affections  not  dependent  on  any  discoverable  lesion,  but  on  the  defects  of
nervous  co-ordination  characteristic  of  hysteria.  Such  affections,  even  when  of
long  standing,  may  quite  suddenly  disappear.

Hysterogenous  zones. — Points  or  tracts  on  the  skin  of  a  hysterical  person
pressure  on  which  will  induce  a  hysterical  attack.  Hypnogenous  zones  are
regions  by  pressure  on  which  hypnosis  is  induced  in  a  hysterical  person,  by  a
similar  process  of  self-suggestion.

Ideational. — Used  of  impressions  which  convey  some  distinct  notion,  but
not  of  sensory  nature.

Idiognomonic. — Not  symptomatic  of  any  other  condition;  indicative  only  of
itself.

Idiopathic. — Symptomatic  of  some  special  morbid  state  or  condition,  which
exhibits  no  other  symptom — e.g.  idiopathic  somnambulism  is  sleep-walking  not
associated  with  any  other  disease.

Illusion.  —The  misinterpretation  of  some  object  actually  present  to  sight,
hearing,  &c.,  as  when  a  hanging  coat  is  taken  for  a  man,  a  ringing  in  the  ears
for  the  sound  of  a  bell,  &c.

Imaginal. — A  word  used  of  characteristics  belonging  to  the  perfect  insect
or  imago ; — and  thus  opposed  to  larval; — metaphorically  applied  to  transcen-
dental faculties  shown  in  rudiment  in  ordinary  life.

Induced. — Of  phantasms,  &c.,  intentionally  produced.

Levitation. — A  raising  of  objects  from  the  ground  by  supposed  supernormal
means:  especially  of  living  persons;  asserted  in  the  case  of  St.  Joseph  of
Copertino,  and  many  other  saints;  of  D.  D.  Home,  and  of  W.  Stainton
Moses.

Medium. — A  person  through  whom  communication  is  deemed  to  be  carried
on  between  living  men  and  spirits  of  the  departed.  As  commonly  used  in
spiritist  literature,  this  word  is  liable  to  the  objection  that  it  assumes  a  particular
theory  for  phenomena  which  admit  of  explanation  in  various  ways.  It  is  often
better  replaced  by  automatist  or  sensitive.

Mesmerism. — This  is  the  oldest  widely-recognised  word  for  a  large  group  of
phenomena  discussed  below  in  Chapter  V.  The  name  need  imply  nothing  more
than  the  fact  that  Mesmer  was  the  conspicuous  introducer  of  many  of  the
phenomena  to  the  European  public.  But  it  is  also  specially  used  to  imply
something  of  his  theory  of  their  production,  by  a  vital  effluence  from  the
mesmeriser,  conveyed  partly  by  mesmeric  passes,  or  wavings  of  the  hands.  The
term  Animal  Magnetism  implies  a  somewhat  different  theory.  The  term
Hypnotism,  when  first  started  by  Braid,  was  again  meant  to  imply  a  theory  of
the  genesis  of  these  phenomena,  but  it  is  now  generally  used  with  no  theoretical
implication.

Message. — Used  for  any  communication,  not  necessarily  verbal,  from  one  to
another  stratum  of  the  automatist's  personality,  or  from  an  external  intelligence
to  one  or  other  stratum  of  the  automatist.  Thus  any  automatic  script  may  be
called  a  message,  even  if  incoherent

GLOSSARY  xix

Metallesthesia. — A  form  of  sensibility  alleged  to  exist  which  enables
some  hypnotised  or  hysterical  subjects  to  discriminate  between  the  contacts
of  various  metals  by  sensations  not  derived  from  their  ordinary  properties  of
weight,  &c.

Metastasis.— Change  of  the  seat  of  a  bodily  function  from  one  place  (e.g.  a
brain-centre)  to  another.

*Metetherial.—1\i*\.  which  appears  to  lie  after  or  beyond  the  ether ;  the
metetherial  environment  denotes  the  spiritual  or  transcendental  world  in  which
the  soul  exists.

*Methectic.—Qi  communications  between  one  stratum  of  a  man's  intelligence
and  another;  as  when  he  writes  messages  whose  origin  is  in  his  own  subliminal
self.  Some  word  is  needed  to  express  this  novel  conception;  and  Plato's  use  of
the  word  p*6(£ts,  participation  (Farm.  132  D),  suggests  methectic  as  the  most
appropriate  term  of  Greek  origin.

Mirror-writing  (tcriture  renverste,  Spiegel-schriff).  Writing  so  inverted,
or,  more  exactly,  perverted,  as  to  resemble  writing  reflected  in  a  mirror,  or
blotted  off  on  to  a  sheet  of  blotting  paper.  This  form  of  writing  is  natural
to  some  left-handed  persons.  It  also  frequently  appears  in  automatic
script.

Mnemonic  chain. — A  continuous  series  of  memories,  especially  when  the
continuity  persists  after  an  interruption.  See  Disintegration  of  personality.

Monition. — A  message  involving  counsel  or  warning,  when  that  counsel  is
based  upon  facts  already  in  existence,  but  not  normally  known  to  the  person
who  receives  the  monition.

Motor. — Used  of  an  impulse  to  action  not  carrying  with  it  any  definite
idea  or  sensory  impression.

Negative  hallucination. — See  Anesthesia.

Number  forms. — See  Secondary  Sensations.

Objectify. — To  externalise  a  phantom  in  three  dimensions;  to  sec  it  as  a
solid  object  fitted  into  the  waking  world.

*P  anesthesia. — See  A  nesthesia.

*Panmnesia. — See  Hypermnesia.

Paresthesia. — See  Anesthesia.

Paramnesia. — See  Promnesia.

Paraphasia. — The  erroneous  and  involuntary  use  of  one  word  for  another,
or  of  one  syllable  for  another.  Cf.  Aphasia.

Percipient. — The  correlative  term  to  Agent;  the  person  on  whose  mind  the
telepathic  impact  falls ;  or  more  generally,  the  person  who  perceives  any  motor
or  sensory  impression.

J'hantasm  and  Phantom. — Phantasm  and  phantom  are,  of  course,  mere
variants  of  the  same  word  ;  but  since  phantom  has  become  generally  restricted
to  -visual  hallucinations,  it  is  convenient  to  take  phantasm  to  cover  a  wider
range,  and  to  signify  any  hallucinatory  sensory  impression,  whatever  sense —
whether  sight,  hearing,  touch,  smell,  taste,  or  diffused  sensibility — may  happen
to  be  affected.

l^htintasmogenetic  centre. — A  point  in  space  so  modified  by  the  presence
of  a  spirit  that  it  becomes  perceptible  to  persons  materially  present  near  it.
The  conception  of  psychical  excursion  or  invasion  implies  that  some  move-
ment bearing  some  relation  to  space  as  we  know  it  is  accomplished;  that
the  invading  spirit  modifies  a  certain  portion  of  space,  not  materially  nor

xx  GLOSSARY

optically,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  specially  susceptible  persons  may  perceive
it.     Cf.  Psychorrhagy.

Phobies  (term  adopted  from  the  French). — Irrational  restricting  or  disabling
preoccupations  or  fears;  morbid  aversions  for  certain  things  or  actions,  e.g.
agoraphobia,  fear  of  open  spaces  ;  mysophobia,  fear  of  uncleanliness.

Photism. — See  Secondary  Sensations.

Point  de  repere.— Guiding  mark.  Used  of  some  (generally  inconspicuous)
real  object  which  a  hallucinated  subject  sometimes  sees  along  with  his  hallucina-
tion, and  whose  behaviour  under  magnification,  &c.,  suggests  to  him  similar
changes  in  the  hallucinatory  figure.

Polymorphism. — See  Dimorphism.

Polyzoism. — The  property,  in  a  complex  organism,  of  being  composed  of
minor  and  quasi-independent  organisms  (like  the  polyzoa  or  "sea-mats").
This  is  sometimes  called  "  colonial  constitution,"  from  animal  colonies;  but  the
metaphor  implied  is  not  always  suitable.  The  word  polypsychism  is  sometimes
used  to  express  the  psychical  aspect  of  polyzoism.

Possession. — A  developed  form  of  motor  automatism,  in  which  the  automa-
tist's  own  personality  disappears  for  the  time,  while  there  is  a  more  or  less
complete  substitution  of  personality,  writing  or  speech  being  given  by  another
spirit  through  the  entranced  organism.

Post-hypnotic. — Used  of  a  suggestion  given  during  the  hypnotic  trance,  but
intended  to  operate  after  that  trance  has  ceased.

Precognition. — A  knowledge  of  impending  events  supernormally  acquired.

Premonition. — A  supernormal  indication  of  any  kind  of  event  still  in  the
future.

*Preversion. — A  tendency  to  characteristics  assumed  to  lie  at  a  further  point
of  the  evolutionary  progress  of  a  species  than  has  yet  been  reached ;  opposed
to  reversion.

Proleptic. — Anticipatory;  assuming  a  knowledge  of  a  fact  not  yet  com-
municated. A  dream  is  called  proleptic  when  it  assumes  some  fact  which  is
only  made  known  to  the  dreamer  later  in  the  dream.  For  instance,  a  person  in
one's  dream  may  ask  one  a  riddle,  and  not  tell  one  the  answer  for  some  time ;
yet  a  knowledge  of  that  answer  must  have  existed  in  one's  mind  all  the  time,
since  one  did  in  fact  ask  the  riddle  oneself.

*Promnesia. — The  paradoxical  sensation  of  recollecting  a  scene  which  is
only  now  occurring  for  the  first  time;  the  sense  of  the  de"j&  vu.  The  term
paramnesia,  which  is  sometimes  given  to  this  sensation,  should,  I  think,  cover
all  forms  of  erroneous  memory,  and  cannot  without  confusion  be  used  to
express  specifically  this  one  anomalous  sensation.
Pseudo-hallucination. — S  ee  Hallucination.

*Psychorrhagv. — A  special  idiosyncrasy  which  tends  to  make  the  phantasm
of  a  person  easily  perceptible;  the  breaking  loose  of  a  psychical  element,
definable  mainly  by  its  power  of  producing  a  phantasm,  perceptible  by  one  or
more  persons,  in  some  portion  of  space.  Cf.  Phantasmogenetic  centre.

*Psychorrhagic  diathesis. — A  habit  or  capacity  of  detaching  some  psychical
clement,  involuntarily  and  without  purpose,  in  such  a  manner  as  to  produce  a
phantasm.

Psycho-therapeutics. — "  Treatment  of  disease  by  the  influence  of  the  mind
on  the  body"  (Tuke's  Diet.}.  All  suggestion  of  course  comes  under  this
head.

GLOSSARY  xxi

Quasi-percept. — The  more  or  less  objectified  phantasm,  which  the  percipient
does,  in  a  certain  sense,  perceive.

Reciprocal. — Used  of  cases  where  there  is  both  agency  and  percipience  at
each  end  of  the  telepathic  chain,  so  that  (in  a  complete  or  developed  case)  A
perceives  P,  and  P  perceives  A  also.

*Retrocognition. — Knowledge  of  the  Past,  supernormally  acquired.

Secondary  Personality. — It  sometimes  happens,  as  the  result  of  shock,
disease,  or  unknown  causes,  that  a  man  or  a  woman  experiences  an  alteration
of  memory  and  character,  amounting  to  a  change  of  personality,  which  generally
seems  to  have  come  on  during  sleep.  The  new  personality  is  in  that  case
termed  secondary.  It  generally  disappears  after  a  time,  or  alternates  with  the
original,  or  primary,  personality.

Secondary  Sensations  (Secundarempfindungen  audition  colorte,  sound-seeing,
synasthesia,  firv.).— With  some  persons  every  sensation  of  one  type  is  accom-
panied by  a  sensation  of  another  type;  as,  for  instance,  a  special  sound  may  be
accompanied  by  a  special  sensation  of  colour  or  light  (chromatisms  or  photisms).
This  phenomenon  is  analogous  to  that  of  number-forms,  a  kind  of  diagram-
matic mental  pictures  which  accompany  the  conception  of  a  progression  of
numbers.  See  Gal  ton's  Inquiries  into  Human  faculty.

Shell-hearing. — The  induction  of  hallucinatory  voices,  &c.,  by  listening  to  a
shell.  Analogous  to  crystal-gazing.

Spectrum  of  consciousness. — A  comparison  of  man's  range  of  consciousness
or  faculty  to  the  solor  spectrum,  as  seen  by  us  after  passing  through  a  prism  or
as  examined  in  a  spectroscope.

Spiritualism  or  Spiritism. — A  religion,  philosophy,  or  mode  of  thinking,
based  on  the  belief  that  the  spirits  of  the  dead  communicate  with  living  men.
Since  the  words  spiritualisme  and  spiritualiste  have  long  been  used  in  France
for  a  school  of  philosophy  opposed  to  materialism,  there  is  some  advantage  in
choosing  the  word  Spiritism  for  the  belief  in  spirit  intercourse.

Stigmatisation. — The  production  of  blisters  or  other  cutaneous  changes  on
the  hands,  feet,  or  elsewhere,  by  self-suggestion  or  meditation.  These  marks
were  said  to  have  been  produced  on  St.  Francis  of  Assisi,  on  Louise  Lateau,  &c.,
by  meditation  on  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  Similar  marks  are  producible  by
suggestion  in  some  hypnotic  subjects,  and  even  •vesication  (the  formation  of
blisters)  seems  to  have  been  thus  induced.

Subliminal. — Of  thoughts,  feelings,  &c.,  lying  beneath  the  ordinary  thres-
hold (limen)  of  consciousness,  as  opposed  to  supraliminal,  lying  above  the
threshold.  Excitations  are  termed  subliminal  when  they  are  too  weak  to  rise
into  direct  notice ;  and  I  have  extended  the  application  of  the  term  to  feeling,
thought,  or  faculty,  which  is  kept  thus  submerged,  not  by  its  own  weakness,
but  by  the  constitution  of  man's  personality.  The  threshold  (Schwelle)  must  be
regarded  as  a  level  above  which  waves  may  rise,— like  a  slab  washed  by  the
sea, — rather  than  as  an  entrance  into  a  chamber.

Suggestion. — The  process  of  effectively  impressing  upon  the  subliminal
intelligence  the  wishes  of  the  man's  own  supraliminal  self  or  of  some  other
:i.  The  mechanism  of  this  process  is  obscure,  nor  is  it  known  why  some
persons  are  much  more  suggestible  than  others.  Self-suggestion  (sometimes
c.Ulcd  auto-suggestion  by  a  barbarism  easily  avoidable  in  English)  means  a
suggestion  conveyed  by  the  subject  himself  from  one  stratum  of  his  personality
to  another,  without  external  intervention.

xxii  GLOSSARY

*  Super  normal. — Of  a  faculty  or  phenomenon  which  goes  beyond  the  level
of  ordinary  experience,  in  the  direction  of  evolution,  or  as  pertaining  to  a
transcendental  world.  The  word  supernatural  is  open  to  grave  objections  ;  it
assumes  that  there  is  something  outside  nature,  and  it  has  become  associated
with  arbitrary  interference  with  law.  Now  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that
the  psychical  phenomena  with  which  we  deal  are  less  a  part  of  nature,  or  less
subject  to  fixed  and  definite  law,  than  any  other  phenomena.  Some  of  them
appear  to  indicate  a  higher  evolutionary  level  than  the  mass  of  men  have  yet
attained,  and  some  of  them  appear  to  be  governed  by  laws  of  such  a  kind  that
they  may  hold  good  in  a  transcendental  world  as  fully  as  in  the  world  of  sense.
In  either  case  they  are  above  the  norm  of  man  rather  than  outside  his  nature.

Supraliminal. — S ee  Subliminal.

Synasthesia. — See  Secondary  Sensations.

Synergy. — A  number  of  actions  correlated  together,  or  combined  into  a
group.

Telekinesis. — Used  of  alleged  supernormal  movements  of  objects,  not  due
to  any  known  force.

^Telepathy  and  *telasthesia. — It  has  become  possible,  I  think,  to  discriminate
between  these  two  words  somewhat  more  sharply  than  when  I  first  suggested
them  in  1882.  Telepathy  may  still  be  defined  as  "the  communication  of  im-
pressions of  any  kind  from  one  mind  to  another,  independently  of  the  recog-
nised channels  of  sense."  The  distance  between  agent  and  percipient  which
the  derivation  of  the  word — "  feeling  at  a  distance  " — implies,  need,  in  fact,  only
be  such  as  to  prevent  the  operation  of  whatever  known  modes  of  perception  are
not  excluded  by  the  other  conditions  of  the  case.  Telepathy  may  thus  exist
between  two  men  in  the  same  room  as  truly  as  between  one  man  in  England
and  another  in  Australia,  or  between  one  man  still  living  on  earth  and  another
man  long  since  departed.  Telcesthesia — perception  at  a  distance — may  con-
veniently be  interpreted  in  a  similar  way,  as  implying  any  direct  sensation  or
perception  of  objects  or  conditions  independently  of  the  recognised  channels
of  sense,  and  also  under  such  circumstances  that  no  known  mind  external  to
the  percipient's  can  be  suggested  as  the  source  of  the  knowledge  thus  gained.

*Telergv>—  The  force  exercised  by  the  mind  of  an  agent  in  impressing  a
percipient, — involving  a  direct  influence  of  the  extraneous  spirit  on  the  brain
or  organism  of  the  percipient.

Ver  idical. — S  ee  Hallucination .

EXPLANATION  OF   PLAN   OF   ARRANGEMENT
AND   SYSTEM   OF   REFERENCES

In  each  volume  of  the  book  the  argument  runs  on  continuously
through  the  Chapters  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  volume.  A  few
illustrative  cases  are  included  in  these  Chapters,  but  the  great  mass  of
cases,  together  with  detailed  discussions  of  individual  points,  are  placed
in  the  Appendices  corresponding  to  the  Chapters,  at  the  end  of  each
volume  (in  vol.  i.  from  p.  298  onwards),  in  order  not  to  interrupt  the
argument.

The  Appendices  are  divided  according  to  the  Chapters  to  which  they
belong,  as  "  Appendices  to  Chapter  II.,"  "  Appendices  to  Chapter  IV.,"
&c.  (Chapters  I.  and  III.  having  no  Appendices)  ;  see  page-headings  in
last  part  of  volume.

The  Chapters  are  divided  into  numbered  sections.  In  these  numbers,
the  hundreds  correspond  to  the  number  of  the  Chapter ;  thus,  in  Chapter
I.  the  sections  are  numbered  from  100  onwards;  in  Chapter  II.  they  are
numbered  from  200  onwards,  and  so  on.  The  result  of  this  is  that  the
numbers  of  sections  run  on  continuously  through  each  Chapter,  with  a
break  in  the  series  at  the  end  of  each  chapter ;  e.g.  the  last  section  of
Chapter  I.  (p.  33)  is  128,  and  the  first  section  of  Chapter  II.  (p.  34)  is  200.

To  facilitate  reference  to  the  sections,  their  numbering  is  repeated  in
the  inner  corners  of  the  page-headings.

The  Appendices  are  also  numbered,  to  correspond  with  the  sections
which  they  are  intended  to  illustrate ;  the  numbers  of  the  Appendices
being  distinguished  from  the  numbers  of  the  sections  by  letters  being
added  to  the  former.  Thus  the  first  Appendix  is  numbered  207  A  (see
p.  298),  this  being  an  illustration  of  section  207.

Some  of  the  sections  have  more  than  one  illustrative  Appendix ;  in
that  case,  the  same  number  is  repeated  with  a  different  letter.  Thus
section  223  (p.  60)  has  [two  Appendices,  which  are  numbered  223  A  and
223  B  (pp.  305  and  306).  On  the  other  hand,  many  sections  have  no
Appendices  corresponding  to  them.  The  result  is  that  the  numbering
of  the  Appendices  is  not  continuous,  but  has  many  gaps  in  it.  The
numbering  of  the  Appendices — like  that  of  the  sections — is  repeated  in
the  inner  corners  of  the  page-headings.

Whenever,  therefore,  a  reference  occurs  to  a  number  alone,  this  is  to
be  found  among  the  sections ;  but  when  a  reference  is  to  a  number  with
a  letter,  it  is  to  be  found  among  the  Appendices.

In  the  Syllabuses  which  immediately  follow,  the  references  to  the
Appendices  are  given  in  connection  with  the  sections  to  which  they
belong.

SYLLABUSES
CHAPTER    I

INTRODUCTION

100.  Man  has  never  yet  applied  the  method  of  science  to  the  problem  of
his  own  survival  of  death.

101.  There  has  been  much  belief  in  survival, — both  definite  belief  and  vague
belief,— but  nevertheless  no  attempt  to  test  that  belief  by  observation  and
experiment.

102.  In  fact,  the  very  importance  of  the  belief  has  barred  methodical
inquiry;  men  have  adopted  it  as  a  faith,  and  have  then  been  reluctant  to
analyse  it.     The  Christian  Church  has  absorbed  the  question  into  theology,  and
has  treated  theology  as  based  on  tradition  and  intuition,  not  on  fresh  experi-
ment.

103.  From  time  to  time  various  significant  phenomena  have  occurred,
which  recall  traditional  marvels,  but  are  now  gradually  being  brought  into
line  with  the  results  of  modern  science;    e.g.   Witchcraft  has  been  greatly
elucidated  by  modern  investigations  into  hysteria.

104.  Mesmerism  foreshadowed    hypnotic    suggestion   and    psycho-thera-
peutics.

105.  Sivedenborg  originated  the  notion  of  science  in  the  spiritual  world,
and  must  be  regarded  as  a  true  and  early  precursor  of  our  enquiry  into  the
nature  of  trance  manifestations.

106.  Sir  W.   Crookes  was  the  first  who  seriously  endeavoured  to  apply
scientific  tests  to    the  alleged  supernormal  influence  of  the  spiritual  on  the
material  world.     On  these  alleged  facts,  a  scheme  of  belief  known  as  Modern
Spiritualism  has  been  founded.

107.  Next  a  group  of    Cambridge  friends  became   convinced  that  the
questions  at  issue  could  only  be  decided  through  experiment  and  observation
of  contemporary  phenomena.     On  this  basis  the  S.P.R.  was  founded.     The  first
definite  and  important  point  towards  which  all  the  evidence  converged  was  the
thesis  of  Telepathy,  the  evidence  for  which  was  set  forth  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living.

108.  Telepathy,  rendered  probable,  leads  on  to  evidence  of  man's  survival
of  death  ;  but  we  need  first  a  searching  review  of  the  capacities  of  his  incarnate
personality.

109.  Contrasted  views  of  Personality  from  which  we  start.     Reid:  the
old-fashioned  view  of  a  single  unitary  personality.

110.  Ribot:  the  modern  view  that  the  self  is  a  co-ordination.

CHAPTER    I  xxv

l?i  The  new  evidence  adduced  in  this  book,  while  supporting  the  con-
ception of  the  composite  structure  of  the  Ego,  does  also  bring  the  strongest
proof  of  its  abiding  unity,  by  showing  that  it  withstands  the  shock  of
death.

112.  The  words  supraliminal  and  subliminal  may  be  used  to  express  the
mental  life  which  goes  on  above  and  below  the  ordinary  threshold  of  conscious-
ness.    The  subliminal  (or  ultra-marginal)  mental  life  is  sufficiently  complex
and  continuous  to  justify  us  in  speaking  of  a  subliminal  Self.

113.  This  view  may  be  attacked,  on  the  one  hand,  as  being  too  elaborate
for  the  facts ;  on  the  other  hand,  as  ascribing  to  some  part  of  our  own  person-
ality perceptions  and  impulses  which  are  really  due  to  extraneous  and  perhaps
discarnate  minds.

114.  The  theory  of  the  subliminal  self  need  not,  however,  be  pushed  so  far
as  altogether  to  negative  spirit-intervention ;    in  fact,  the  two  views  support
each  other.

115.  The  study  of  these  subliminal  workings  is  the  more  necessary  now
that  we  realise   the  slow  and  complex  evolution  of  man,  with   the  probable
lapse  from  consciousness  of  much  that  was  once  vividly  present.

116.  The  difference  between  old  and  new  conceptions  of  consciousness  is
like  the  difference  between  the  old  simple  conception  of  sunlight  and  our  pre-
sent conception  of  the  ray  fanned  out  into  a  spectrum,  and  barred  with  lines  of
varying  darkness.

117.  Just  as  the  solar  spectrum   has  been  prolonged  by  artifice  beyond
both  red  and  violet  ends,  so  may  the  spectrum  of  conscious  human  faculty  be
artificially  prolonged  beyond  both  the  lower  end  (where  consciousness  merges
into  mere  organic  operation)  and  the  higher  end  (where  consciousness  merges
into  reverie  or  ecstasy).

118.  Sketch  of  the  general  line  of  inquiry  to  be  pursued  in  this  book— an
advance  from  the  analysis  of  normal  to  the  evidence  for  supernormal  faculty,
ending  with  a  discussion  of  the  nature  of  the  proof  acquired  as  to  the  persistence
of  human  personality  after  bodily  death.

119.  Of  the  chapters  following  on  this  first  or  introductory  one,  the  second
will  contain  a  discussion  of  the  ways  in  which  human  personality  disintegrates
and  decays.

120.  The  third,  utilising  the  insight  thus  gained,  will  discuss  the  line  of
evolution  which  enables  man  to  maintain  and  intensify  his  true  normality.

121.  The  fourth  will  discuss  man's  normal  alternating  phase  of  personality
— sleep,  and   introduces  us  to  certain  supernormal  phenomena,  which  some-
times occur  in  that  state.

122.  The  fifth  chapter  will  deal  with  hypnotism,  considered  as  an  empirical
development  of  sleep.     Hypnotic  suggestion  intensifies  the  physical  recupera-
tion of  sleep,  and  aids  the  emergence  of  those  supernormal  phenomena  which
ordinary  sleep  and  spontaneous  somnambulism  sometimes  afford.

123.  From   hypnotism  we  pass  on  in   the  sixth   chapter  to  a  range  of
experiment  and  observation  of  still  wider  scope,  namely,  to  the  consideration  of
all   the  sensory  messages  which   the  subliminal  sends  upwards  to  the  supra-
limin.il  self;  phantasmal  externalisations  of  internal  vision  and  audition.     Many
of  these  messages  are  telepathic — involve,  that  is  to  say,  direct  transmission  of
thought  from  one  living  person  to  another.

124.  Nor  does  such  transmission  cease  with  the  bodily  death  of  the  trans-

xxvi  SYLLABUSES

mining  agent.     The  seventh  chapter  shows  that  veridical  messages  may  be
given  phantasmally  to  mortal  men  by  spirits  after  bodily  death.

125.  The  eighth  chapter  introduces  another  class  of  subliminal  messages —
those  unwilled  writings  and  utterances  which  may  be  styled  motor  automatisms.
Automatic  writing,  especially,  furnishes  the  opportunity  for  experiments  more
prolonged  and  continuous  than  the  phantasms  or  pictures  of  sensory  automa-
tisms can  often  give.

126.  These  motor  automatisms,  moreover,  as  the  ninth  chapter  shows,  are
apt  to  become  more  complete,  more  controlling,  than  sensory  automatisms.
They  culminate  in  the  possession  of  the  sensitive  by  some  extraneous  spirit,
who  writes  and  talks  through  the  temporarily  vacated  organism,  giving  proof  of
his  own  surviving  identity.

127.  The  conceptions  thus  gained  will  be  seen  to  have  bearings  on  the
fundamental  problems  of  the  relation  of  spiritual   phenomena  to   Space,  to
Time,  and  to  the  material  world.

128.  Finally,  we  shall  resume  in  a  tenth  chapter,  or  Epilogue,  some  of
the  reflections,  philosophical  or  religious,  to  which  these  new  facts  inevitably
give  rise.

CHAPTER    II

DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY

200.  Each  man  is  at  once  profoundly  unitary  and  almost  infinitely  com-
posite.

201.  I  believe  that  the  unifying  principle  of  his  personality  is  an  indwelling
soul,  and  that  souls  have  actually  been  observed  in  operation  apart  from  the
organisms  which  they  possess,  both  while  those  organisms  are  still  living  and
after  they  have  decayed.

202.  Our  aim  must  be  to  draw  from  a  study  of  the  disintegrations  of  human
personality  some  hints  which  may  tend  towards  its  more  complete  integration.

203.  We  shall  have  to  discuss  consciousness  in  various  ways,  and  we  shall
find  it  convenient  to  use  the  word  conscious  as  equivalent  to  potentially  mem-
orable.    That  will  be  in  our  view  a  conscious  act  which  we  imagine  as  capable
of  forming  under  any  conceivable  circumstances  (not  necessarily  on  this  planet)
a  link  in  a  mnemonic  chain.     We  must,  therefore,  feel  no  prepossession  against
any  given  arrangement  or  division  of  the  total  mass  of  consciousness  which
exists  within  us.

204.  As  to  the  mode  of  original  integration  of  consciousness  up  to  the
human  level  science  can  tell  us  nothing  ;  we  must  wait  for  the  discovery  of
laws  affecting  the  spiritual  world.

205.  We  have,  therefore,  no  right  to  assume  that  all  our  psychical  operations
will  fall  at  the  same  time,  or  at  any  time,  into  the  same  central  current  of  per-
ception.    More  probably  natural  selection  has  determined  what  elements  shall
rise   above   the   conscious   threshold.      In  processes  of    disintegration   these
needed  elements  sink  below  the  threshold  again.

206.  The  series  of  these  degenerations  seems  to  pass  thro'igh  a  certain

CHAPTER    II  xxvii

critical  point  where  the  demarcation  between  the  phases  of  personality  is
sufficiently  marked  to  involve  a  trance-state  in  passing  from  one  to  the  other.
We  begin  with  minor  and  partial  disaggregations — insistent  ideas  and  the
like.

207.  These  fixed  ideas  show  themselves  amenable  to  psychological  rather
than  to  physiological  treatment,  and  are  best  described  as  small  displacements
of  the  normal  level    of  voluntary  control.     207  A.  Janet's  cases  of  forgotten
terrors  giving  rise  to  hysterical  attacks.

208.  They  thus  lead  up  to  hysteria,  which  consists  essentially  in  an  undue
"  permeability  of  the  psychical  diaphragm,"  or  confused  interchange  of  elements
which  should  lie  above  and  elements  which  should  lie  below  the  threshold  of
waking  consciousness.

209.  In  hysteria  the  field  of  consciousness  is  narrowed,  so  that  hysterical
anaesthesia  is  not  a  real  loss  of  sensibility,  but  a  mere  distraction  of  attention
from  the  affected  part.

210.  Anaesthetic  patches  are  determined  not  by  anatomical  demarcations,
but  by  caprices  of  the  hypnotic  stratum — dream-like  self-suggestions  emanating
from  partially  intelligent  subliminal  centres.

211.  The  fragments  of  perceptive  power  over  which  the  hysteric  has  lost
control  still  exist  below  the  threshold,  and  are  capable  of  being  again  raised  by
suggestion  into  waking  consciousness.

212.  Example  from  the  recovery  by  hysterics  of   their    normal   field  of
vision  on  the  presentation  of  an  exciting  object.

213.  Examples  of  the  partial  regression  of  specific  senses  in  the  hysteric
to  the  vagueness  of  primitive  irritability.

214.  Similar    dissociation  of  the    sense  of    personality  from  purposive
movements.

215.  But  a  hysteric  who  squeezes  the  dynamometer  like  a  weak  child  can
exert  great  muscular  force  under  the  influence  of  emotion.

216.  Hysteria,  however,  does  not  necessarily  show  initial  weakness  of  mind.
It  may  result  from  the  shock  of  painful  circumstances  upon  natures  originally
intelligent  and  refined.

217.  Case  of  Miss  Lucy  R.,  as  given  by  Drs.  Breuer  and  Freud.

218.  Case  of  Fraulein  Anna  O.,  by  the  same  physicians.

219.  Gradual  transformation  of  hysterical  malady   in   this   case   into  a
secondary  personality.

220.  The  subliminal  convictions   or  fixed   ideas  which   become  morbid
when  they  are  encysted  in  the  mind  may  become  sources  of  power  and  in-
fluence when  they  are  worked  in  with  the   products  of  supraliminal  reason,
as  in  martyrs,  reformers,  &c.

221  From  these  cases  of  isolation  of  certain  emotional  groups  from  the
psychical  complex  I  pass  on  to  more  profound  cleavages; — our  best  starting
point  for  the  study  of  these  lies  among  the  phenomena  of  dreams— especially  in
their  dramatic  character.  221  A.  R.  L.  Stevenson's  dream  of  possessing  a
double  personality.

222.  In  some  cases  the  new  personality  seems  a  dramatisation  of  some
dominant  morbid  emotion.     222  A.  Janet's  case  of  "demoniacal  possession.*'

223.  Somnambulisms,  developing   from    accesses  of    sleep-waking,  may
merge  into  dimorphic  personalities.     223  A.  Dyce's  case.     223  B.  Mesaet's
case

xxviii  SYLLABUSES

224.  Somewhat    similar    are    post-epileptic   alternations  of  personality.
224  A.  Case  of  Sorgel.

225.  Other    alternations — though  possibly  post-epileptic  in  origin — seem
dimorphic    or  allotropic  rather  than    degenerative.     225  A.    Case  of  Ansel
Bourne  in  which  the  memory  of  the  secondary  state  was  recovered  through
hypnotism.

226.  Two  similar  cases,  in  which  the  secondary  state  was  perhaps  to  be
referred  to  a  form  of  hysteria.     226  A.  Proust's  case.     226  B.  Boeteau's  case.

227.  Case  reported  by  Sidis  in  which  an  accident  was  followed  by  amnesia
and  the  development  of  two  personalities.

228.  A  case  of  the  "  ambulatory "  type,   apparently  associated   with   a
definite  physical  lesion.    228  A.  Drewry's  case.

229.  In  some  cases  the  alternating  state  seems  due  to  lack  of  sufficient
vitality  to  maintain  the  normal  personality  without  intermission.     229  A.  Skae's
case.

230.  Allied  with  these  degenerative  alternations  are  the  factitious  alterna-
tions which  are  developed  in  hysterical  persons  by  hypnotic  suggestion  or  self-
suggestion.     Janet's   cases :    230   A.  Ldonie ;  230  B.  Lucie.     230  C.  Jules
Janet's  case  :  Marceline  R.

231.  In  other  cases  the  secondary  state  is  in  some  ways  an  improvement
on  the  primary.     231  A.     Case  of  Fe'lida  X.     231  B.     Barrett's  case.

232.  In  the  case  of  Mary  Reynolds,  the  second  state  showed  a  childish
gaiety  and  insouciance,  and  the  two  states  gradually  coalesced  into  a  third
phase  superior  to  both.    232  A.  Details  of  the  case.

233.  An  extreme  example  of  dissociations  dependent  on  time-relations ;
complex  ecmnesia  with  subjacent  hypermnesia.    233  A.  Case  of  Louis  Vive'.

234.  Example  of  a  subliminal  self  showing  a  grotesque  hostility  to  the
ordinary  self.     234  A.     Morton  Prince's  case  of  "  Sally  Beauchamp."

235.  Osgood  Mason's  case  of  Alma  Z.,  in  whom  the  recurring  secondary
personality  was  always  associated  with  immediate  and  marked  improvement  in
the  physical  condition.

236.  In  the  case   of    Mollie    Fancher,   there    were  several    secondary
personalities  with  a  childish   character  fitted  to  each ;  and  her  case  shows
indications  of  supernormal  faculty.     236  A.  Newbold's  review  of  the  case.

237.  The  case  of  Anna  Winsor  presents  a  contrast  and  conflict  between
positive  insanity  on  the  part  of  the  organism  generally  with  wise  and  watchful
sanity  on  the  part  of  a  single  limb — the  right  arm — which  appeared  to  become
the  permanent  possession  of  the  sane  secondary  personality.     237  A.  Barrows*
report  on  the  case.

238.  The  "  Watseka  Wonder  "  must  be  regarded  as  a  pseudo-possession
determined  by  suggestion  in  a  hysterical  child.    238  A.     Details  of  the  case.

239.  This  series   illustrates  the   complex  and  separable  nature  of  the
elements  of  human  personality.     Hysteria  the  most  delicate  form  of  psychical
dissection.

240.  Hysteria  exhibits  acquisitions  as  well  as  losses  of  faculty.

241.  If  the  elements  of  emergence  increase,  and  the  elements  of  sub-
mergence diminish,  the  permeability  of  the  psychical  diaphragm  may  mean
genius  instead  of  hysteria.

242.  And  the  sleeping  phase  may  develop  into  sleep-waking  conditions,
with  manifestations  of  submerged  faculty,  which  hypnotism  can  fix  and  utilise-

CHAPTER    III  xxix

243.  As  the  hysteric  stands  in  relation  to  ordinary  men,  so  do  we  ordinary
men  stand  in  relation  to  a  not  impossible  ideal  of  sanity  and  integration.

244.  We  may  be   as  unable  to  conceive  of  the  ideal  beyond   us  as  the
hysteric  is  unable  to  conceive,  except  by  fitful  flashes,  our  normal  sanity.

245.  We  have,  at  any  rate,  learnt  the  lesson  of  our  profound  modifiability ;
and  we  have  seen  that  it  is  by  appeals  to  the  subliminal  self  that  we  have  the
best  chance  of  being  modified  in  the  directions  that  we  desire.

CHAPTER    III

GENIUS

300.  Our  study,  in  the  last  chapter,  of  the  disintegrations  of  personality
will  teach  us  to  seek  our  type  of  normal  manhood  in  some  example  of  strongly
centralised  control  over  as  many  elements  of  the  personality  as  possible.

301.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  nervous  development  of  our  race  tends
rather  to  degeneracy ;  and  Professor  Lombroso,  for  instance,  regards  "  the  man
of  genius  "  as  an  aberrant  and  almost  a  morbid  type.

302.  I  hold,  on  the  other  hand,  that  Genius  may  be  best  defined  as  a  capa-
city of  utilising  powers  which  lie  too  deep  for  the  ordinary  man's  control ;  so
that  an  inspiration  of  genius  is  in  truth  a  subliminal  uprush  of  helpful  faculty .

303.  But  before  proceeding  further  we  must  clearly  realise  that  by  no
means  all  that  is  subliminal  in  us  is  potentially  "inspiration  ";  but  that  what
lies  beneath  the  threshold  is  at  least  as  mixed  in  quality  as  what  lies  above.

304.  The  descriptive  metaphor  of  highest-level,  middle-level,  and  lowest-
level   centres,   useful   in   distinguishing  great   classes    of   nervous  activities,
may  be  extended  to  different  forms  of  automatic  or  subliminal  manifestation.

305.  I  explain  these  inequalities  by  the  assumption  of  a  soul  which  exer-
cises an  imperfect  and  fluctuating  control  over  the  organism,  along  two  main
channels,  only  partly  coincident ;  and  I  claim  the  title  of  genius  for  states  in
which   some   rivulet   is  drawn   into   supraliminal  life  from  the  undercurrent
stream.     And  as  psychologists  we  are  bound  to  define  genius  by  the  mode  of
its  operation  ; — not  by  the  pleasure-giving  properties  of  the  result  achieved  ; —
by  the  source,  not  the  quality,  of  the  output.

306.  Now  as  to  normality,  I  urge  that  in  a  constantly  evolving  species
the  norm  is  best  represented  by  the  farthest  evolutionary  stage  yet  reached.

307.  Comparison  of  genius  to  an  intensification  of  the  glow  of  a  banded
spectrum.

308.  The  form  of  genius,  or  of  subliminal  uprush,  most  easily  measurable
is  the  gift  of  the  "  calculating  boy."     This  gift  is  usually  first  observed  in  child-
hood, and  often  disappears  in  a  few  years.

309.  Table  of  principal  Arithmetical  Prodigies.

310.  These  "  prodigies  "—who  are  not  "  degenerates  "—are  generally  un-
able to  explain  their  own  methods,  which  remain  purely  subliminal.     Case  of
Mr.  Blyth.     Details  of  some  other  cases.

xxx  SYLLABUSES

311.  Further  cases  of  similar  definiteness  of  subliminal  co-operation.  Ex-
periences of  Mr.  W.  Higton.

312  Sir  John  Herschel's  "  Geometrical  Spectres,"  which  he  regarded  as
"  evidence  of  an  intelligence  distinct  from  that  of  our  ordinary  personality."

313.  Vaguer  impressions  of   subliminal   mentation.     Case    quoted  from
Dr.  Paul  Chabaneix.

314.  Co-ordination  of  the  sleeping  and  waking  phases  of  existence.     R.  L.
Stevenson's  elaboration  of  stories  in  his  dreams.

315.  On  the  other  hand,  Lombroso's  collection  of  anecdotes  of  the  de-
generacy of  men  of  genius  is  on  several  grounds  very  weak  evidentially.

316.  Nervous    diseases    are    no    doubt    relatively    more    prominent    in
modern  life,  mainly  on  account  of  the  diminution  of  diseases  due  to  hunger,
filth,  and  exposure.

317.  Rapid  nervous  development  also  induces  perturbation  which  masks
evolution,  as  more  advanced  forms  of  faculty  come  into  play.

318.  The  planetary  scheme  of  man's  evolution  regards  as  mere  by-products
such  joys  and  powers  as  are  not  due  to  that  survival  of  the  fittest  which  adapts
man  for  success  in  the  material  world.

319.  But,  in  fact,  the  history  of  life  on  earth  has  been  a  history  not  merely
of  adaptation  to  an  environment  known  once  for  all,  but  of  gradual  discovery  of
the  environment.     The  dawn  of  new  faculty  has  again  and  again  manifested  a
wider  Cosmos  to  which  life  must  react.

320.  And  thus  the  higher  gifts  of  genius  are  no  by-products,  but  are  fresh
perceptions  of  truth,  and  lie  in  the  main  stream  of  human  evolution.

321.  Yet  since  the  output  of  genius  is  largely  subliminal,  and  thus  nearer
to  the  extra-terrene  source  of  life,  it  may  sometimes  be  out  of  harmony  with
terrene  existence ;  just  as  imaginal  characteristics  in  the  larva  may  be  out  of
harmony  with  larval  existence.

322.  Thus,  for  example,  subliminal  mentation,  while  capable,  with  great
poets,  of  using  words  much  after  the  manner  of  music,  does  not,  on  the  other
hand,  seem  to  be  so  closely  and  inevitably  linked  with  speech  as  is  mental
action  above  the  conscious  threshold.

323.  Speech  and  writing  are  summarisations  of  certain  forms  of  complex
gesture,  inevitably  inadequate  to  symbolise  our  whole  psychical  being.

324.  Certain  other  forms  of  symbolism, — as  observation  and  experiment
seem   to  show, — are  often  more    natural  than    speech   for   subliminal    self-
expression.

325.  In  this  fact,  indeed,  one  may  roughly  say,  lies  the  need  and  the  genesis
of  Art,  which   abandons  logical  definiteness  of   statement  for  the  sake   of  a
nearer  approach  to  truth  hidden  in  the  ideal  world.

326.  The  internal  audition  which  externalises  itself  in  poetry  or  music ; —
the   internal   visualisation   which    externalises   itself   as    plastic    art ; — these
represent  for  us  something  truer  and  more  permanent  than  the  products  of
supraliminal  thought.

327.  We  are  here  in  danger  of  transcending  our  definition  of  genius  as  the
crystallisation  by  subliminal  uprushes  of  the  content  of  supraliminal  thought.
But  genius  is  inevitably  linked  both  with  trance  and  with  automatism.

328.  The  flash  of  genius  is  a  brief  automatism,  and   certain  prolonged
efforts  of  genius  remind  us  of  the  complexity  of  cerebral  re-growth, — the  "  sub-
stitution of  function  "  which  takes  place  beneath  the  conscious  level.

CHAPTER    IV  xxxi

329.  The  talent  of  improvisation  also,  as  with  George  Sand,  may  reach  a
point  almost  indistinguishable  from  automatism.

330.  In  some  cases,  as  with  M.  de  Curel,  the  act  of  invention  merges  into
a  quasi-hallucinatory  perception  of  the  imagined  personages.

331.  We  may  then  naturally  ask  what  is  the  relation  of  the  man  of  genius
to  the  sensitive  ?     Do  his  inspirations  bring  with  them  any  supernormal  know
ledge  ?     He  may  get  true  impressions,  although  not  definite  impressions,  of  a
supersensory  world.

332.  For  evidence  on  this  point  we  must  consult  the  utterances  of  philo-
sophers or  poets.

333.  In  Wordsworth's  Prelude  we  find  an  honest  and  deliberate  attempt
to  answer  this  very  question.

334.  The  subliminal  uprush  may  bring  to  the  poet  a  vague  but  genuine
consciousness  of  the  spiritual  environment.

335.  And   similarly  to   the   lover   it   may  bring  a  consciousness  of   that
universal  link  of  spirit  with  spirit  which  is   the  generalisation  of   telepathy.
The  controversy  as  to  the  planetary  or  cosmical  scope  of  the  passion  of  Love
is,  in  fact,  central  to  our  whole  subject.

336.  The  planetary  view,  eloquently  illustrated  by  Professor  Pierre  Janet,
regards  the  sexual  instinct  as  the  nucleus  of  reality  around  which   baseless
fancies  gather.

337.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Platonic  view  (as  expressed  in  the  Symposium
and  elsewhere)  regards  earthly  passion  as  the  initiation  and  introduction  into
cosmic  sanctity  and  joy.

338.  Platonic  Love  represents  in  effect  what  would  now  be  rather  termed
Religion  :  an  attitude  of  devotion  and  worship  towards  an  Eternal  Goodness
and  Beauty.

339.  The  psychical  type  to  which  we  have  applied  the  name  of  genius  may
thus   be  recognised  in   every  region   of  thought   and   emotion,  and  appears
essential  to  the  evolution  of  the  race.

340.  But  whence  comes  this  wisdom  of  the  subliminal   Self?     Within
what  limits  can  these  favourable  "  sports  "  occur  ?

341.  My  own  argument,  while  not  insisting  on  Platonic  reminiscences,  yet
assumes  a  Soul  in  man  and  in  the  Universe  an  answering  Spirit.     These  are
familiar  religious  postulates,  but  we  must  extend  the  idea  of  indrawal  from
the  spiritual  world  to  the  whole  range  of  our  psychical  phenomena.

342.  That  process  of  indrawal  appears  healthy  and  joyous;  it  is  to  the
child,  not  to  the  madman,  that  genius  is  near  akin.

343.  And   men   of  genius,  among  whom  we   must  reckon  the  group  of
saints,  have  made  a  palmary  experiment  on  the  development  of  our  race, — a
sane  and  fruitful  effort  to  absorb  strength  and  grace  from  an  accessible  and
inexhaustible  source.

CHAPTER    IV
SLEEP

400.     In  the  two  preceding  chapters  I   have   reviewed  the  main  distur-
bances and  alternations  of  man's  personality,  and  have  then  considered  the
VOL.   i.  c

xxxii  SYLLABUSES

norm  of  the  waking  phase  of  that  personality.  The  sleeping  phase  must  now
be  discussed ;— what  its  characteristics  are,  how  its  special  faculties  can  be
developed,  and  what  light  the  study  of  its  manifestations  may  throw  upon  the
constitution  of  man.

401.  A  physiological  definition  of  sleep  has  never  yet  been  achieved,  and
is  rendered  increasingly  difficult  by  what  we  now  know  of  hypnotic  sleep ; —
induced  in  apparent  independence  of  the  supposed  physiological  requisites  of
slumber.

402.  On  the  psychological  side,  sleep  is  the  suspension  of  waking  con-
sciousness.    But  this  is  only  a  negative  definition.     We  must  seek  its  positive
characteristics,  regarding  it  as  a  secondary  personality.     The  abeyance  of  the
supraliminal  life  may  be  the  liberation  of  the  subliminal.

403.  To  begin  with,  the  mere  break  of  waking  consciousness  is  somehow
associated  with  a  potent  physiological  change — of  a  kind  whose  induction  lies
beyond  the  spectrum  of  our  ordinary  consciousness.

404.  And  when  we  pass  on  within  the  limits  of  powers  consciously  exer-
cised in  waking  hours,  we  find  that  sleep,  although  it  habitually  suspends^  yet
does  occasionally  enhance  those  powers.     Thus  muscular  control  is  enhanced
in  somnambulism.

405.  And  the  power  of  visualisation  is  heightened  in  illusions  hypnago-
piques, — inward  vision  on  the  verge  of  sleep.

406.  And  also  in  hypnopompic  pictures, — or  the  prolongation  of  dream-
images  into  waking  life.

407.  Sometimes  sensory  imagination,  inward  vision,  inward  audition,  and
the  like, — seem  to  be  heightened  and  intensified  in  dream.    407  A.  Case  of
Dr.  Hodgson.

408.  R.  L.  Stevenson  utilised  this  sleep-faculty  by  self-suggestion  to  secure
visual  and  dramatic  interest  for  imagined  scenes.

409.  And  similarly,  as  though  by  an   unwilled   self-suggestion,  a  dream
may  leave  permanent  nervous  injury,  or  nervous  benefit.    409  A.  Faure's  case.
409  B.  Case  of  Dr.  Holbrook.

410.  Even    stigmata  may   apparently  be  caused    by  self-suggestion  in
sleep :  Krafft-Ebing's  case.

411.  Dream-memory   and    hypnotic  memory   seem   to  be  connected ; —
suggesting   some    subliminal   continuity  of    memory  through   all    phases   of
personality.

412.  And  in  fact  we  find  that,  where  the  memories  of  several  states  can
be  compared,   it  is  the  memory  furthest  from   waking  life  whose   span   is
generally  the  widest.

413.  And  dream-memory  does  at  least  sometimes  include  ecmnesic  periods,
as  a  case  of  Charcot's  shows.

414.  Dream-memory  may  include  facts  once  known  but  now  forgotten  ;
and  also  facts  which  have  indeed  fallen  within  the  sensory  field,  but  which
waking  attention  has  never  observed.

415.  Example  from   Delboeuf  of  the  recovery  in   dream   of  a  forgotten
memory.     Cases  of:  415  A.  Mrs.  Bickford-Smith.     415  B.  Col.  A.  v.  S.

416.  Example  of  the  recovery  through  dream  of  an  object  whose  posi-
tion  seemed    beyond    the   range   of  waking  myopic  vision :    Case  of    Mr.
Lewis.

417.  Examples  of  dreams  which  reason  as  well   as  remember.     417  A.

CHAPTER    IV  xxxiii

Davey's  case.     417  B.     Case   of    Professor    Lamberton.     417   C.     Case  of
Professor  Hilprecht.

418.  Analogy  between  the  achievements  of  dream  and  the  achievements
of  genius.     Possibility  that  sleep  may  stand  in  closer  relation  than  vigilance
to  a  spiritual  environment.     Ancient  universality  of  this  belief.

419.  Both    tclcesthesia   and    telepathy, — terms    between   which    we   may
roughly  divide  our  first  groups  of  supernormal  faculty, — meet  us  indistinguish-
ably  in   the  phenomena  of  dream.     Other  groups,  as  premonitions,  present
further  difficulties  for  any  logical  scheme  of  classification.

420.  Nor  can  the  distinction   between  excursive  dreams  and   receptive
dreams  serve  as  a  definite  mark  of  division.     A  fuller  scheme  will  be  discussed
in   Chapter  VI.     For  the  present  we  shall  take  first  those  phenomena  most
nearly  allied  to  our  ordinary  perceptions  of  the  material  world,  and  shall  pro-
ceed to  those  which  suggest  relations  to  a  spiritual  world.

421.  Visions  of  objects  during  sleep,  no  longer  explicable  as  revivals  of
facts  which  had  once  fallen,  though  unnoticed,  within  the  field  of  vision,  but
suggesting  supernormal  perception  or  excursion  by  the  dreamer.     Cases  of  :

421  A.    Mr.  Squires.     421  B.    Mr.  Watts.     421   C.    Mrs.  Wilkie.     421   D.
Judge    Howe.      421    E.     Mr.     Brighten.     421    P.    Captain    Scott.     421    G.
Miss  Luke.     421  H.    Sir  L.  Jones.     421  J.    Mr.  Nascimento.

422.  Cases   where  there   is   an   apparently   telepathic  link  between  the
dreamer   and   the  scene  discerned :— Case  of  Canon  Warburton.     Cases  of:

422  A.    Mrs.  West.     422  B.    Sir  J.  Drummond  Hay.

423.  Case  of  Mr.  Boyle  :  vision  of  a  death-scene.

424.  Case  of  Sir  E.  Hamilton  :  dream  of  injury  to  brother's  arm.     Cases
of:  424  A.  Mr.  Crewdson.  424B.  Mrs.  Richardson/ 424  C.  Mr.  William  Tudor.

425.  Precognitive  dreams.     Indeterminate  whether  due  to  the  subliminal
self  of  the  dreamer  or  to  other  spirits  incarnate  or  discarnate.     Case  of  Duchess
of  Hamilton.    Cases  of  :  425  A.  Mr.  Pratt.    425  B.   Mr.  Ivey.    425  C.  Lady  Z.
425  D.    Mr.  Haggard.     425  E.    Lady  Q.

426.  Prolonged  vision  of  a  scene  of  death  :  426  A.    Case  of  Dr.  Bruce.

427.  Case  of  Mrs.  Storie.     Symbolical  presentation  of  a  scene  of  death.

428.  Illustrations  of  the  theory  of  "  psychical  invasion  "  by  the  spirits  of
living  persons  :  case  of  Mrs.  T.     Cases  of :  428  A.    Mr.  Pike.     428  B.    Mrs.
Manning.    428  C.    Mr.  Newnham.     428  D.    Mr.  W.     428  E.    Mrs.  Shagren.
428  F.    Mrs.  Venter.

429.  Sometimes   this   invasion   appears   to  come   from   departed  spirits.
of:  429  A.    Mrs.  Menneer.     429  B.  Mrs.  Lightfoot.     429  C.   Mr.  Wing-

held.    429  D.   Mrs.  Green.    429  E.  Mr.  Dignowity.    429  P.  Professor  Dolbear.

430.  Summary    of    the    lines  of    inquiry    dealt    with    in    the   preceding
sections,  and  the  conclusion  suggested  that  the  self  of  sleep  is  a  spirit  freed
from  ordinary  material  limitations.

431.  This  conclusion  accords  with  the  hypothesis  that  we  are  living  a  life
in  two  worlds.     The  waking  personality  is  adapted  to  the  needs  of  earthly  life;
the  p>  of  sleep  maintains  the  fundamental  connection  between  the
organism  and  the  spiritual  world  by  supplying  it  with  spiritual  energy  during
sleep,  and  itself  develops  by  the  exercise  of  its  own  spiritual  faculties.

432.  This   conclusion    will    be    further  justified    in    later  chapters,   and
especially  in  those  dealing  with  states  analogous  to  sleep  ;  somnambulistic  and
hypnotic  trance — possession  and  ecstasy.

xxxiv  SYLLABUSES

CHAPTER    V
HYPNOTISM

500.  Preliminary  survey  of  the  chapter.     I  first  show  that  hypnotism  is  an
experimental  development  of  the  sleeping  phase  of  personality.     Then,  review-
ing the  various  accredited  modes  of  inducing  hypnotic  effects,  I  show  that  these
resolve   themselves   into   suggestion   and   self-suggestion  ;    and,   further,    that
suggestion  from  hypnotisers  resolves  itself,  in  its  turn,  into  self-suggestion;  and
I  define  suggestion  as  a  successful  appeal  to  the  subliminal  self.

Analysing,  in  the  next  place,  the  main  achievements  of  hypnotism,  I  find  that
these  seem  all  of  them  to  imply  an  increased  subliminal  vitalisation  of  the
organism ;  and,  again,  that  self-suggestion  is  exercised  most  effectively  when  it
is  supported  by  strong  faith  in  some  external  vitalising  or  succouring  power.  I
conclude  that  man's  spirit  does  actually  draw  in  energy  from  some  spiritual
environment;  and  that  "by  Grace  we  are  saved  through  Faith."

501.  Our  study  of  sleep  in  the  last  chapter,  even  more  than  our  study  of
genius  in  the  chapter  preceding,  has  suggested  the  desirability  of  reproducing
and  consolidating  by  experiment  some  part  of  that  sporadic  and  spontaneous
faculty  which  has  come  to  the  surface  especially  in  vision  and  sleep-waking
states.

502.  Yet  at  the  same  time,   if  it  were  not  for  the  knowledge   which
hypnotism  has  almost  accidentally  brought  to  us,  we  should  find  it  hard  to
devise  any  appropriate   scheme   of   experiment.     Important   lesson   conveyed
by  the  fact  that  a  phenomenon  so  easily  produced  and  so  impressive  as  the
hypnotic  trance  should  have  remained  virtually  unknown  until  so  recent  a  period.

503.  Hypnotism  has  now,  in  fact,  been  discovered,  and  has  opened  an  easy
road  of  exploration.     Yet  we  should  realise  beforehand  that  we  are  only  likely
to  reach  experimentally  such  portions  of  our  subliminal  being  as  hysteria  and
somnambulism  have  affected  in  their  spontaneous  and  sporadic  way.     We  shall
probably  reach,  so  to  say,  only  "  middle-level  centres  "  of  the  subliminal  self.

504.  These  reflections,  at  any  rate,  show  that  hypnotism  is  no  disconnected
or  extraneous  insertion  into  experimental  psychology,  but  rather  a  summary
name  for  a  group  of  necessary,  although  empirical  and  isolated,  attempts  to
bring  under  control  that  range  of  submerged  faculty  which  has  already  from
time  to  time  risen  into  our  observation.

505.  Mesmer  showed  broadly  that  a  profound  nervous  change,  often  thera-
peutic, would  often  follow  upon  an  obscure  stimulus  which  he  regarded  as
a  specific  effluence  passing  from  hypnotiser  to  subject.

506.  De  Puyse'gur  developed  this  nervous  change  into  its  most  important
phase,  namely,  induced  somnambulism,  and  in  this  phase  obtained  indications
of  supernormal  faculty.

507.  Elliotson  and   Esdaile,  using  mesmeric  passes,  effected  remarkable
cures,  with  deep  anaesthesia  under  surgical  operations.

508.  Braid  and  Fahnestock  showed  that  hypnotic  results  could  be  pro-
duced without  passes  by  suggestion  and  self-suggestion.

509.  Charcot,  by  strongly  defending  a  definite,  but  mistaken,  conception  of

CHAPTER    V  xxxv

hypnotism,  gave  a  fresh  impulse  to  its  study.     509  A.  Bramwell's  criticism
of  Charcot.

510.  Lie*beault,  Bernheim,  and  other  hypnotists  representing  what  was  at
first  identified  with  "  the  Nancy  School,"  but  is  now  the  generally  accepted
view,  insisted  that  hypnotic  phenomena  are  wholly  due  to  suggestion  and  self-
suggestion,  but  left  these  terms  unexplained.

511.  On  a  closer  analysis  it  is  seen  that  "  suggestibility  "  means  nothing
more  than  increased  internal  responsiveness  of  the  organism,  which  is  the  result
which  we  wish  to  effect,  not  the  means  by  which  we  effect  it.

512.  This  plasticity,  or  readier  response  of  the  organism  to  our  desire  for
its  modification,  is,  in  fact,  aimed  at  by  the  use  of  various  nervous  stimuli,
massive  or  specialised.     Drugs  afford  a  form  of  massive   stimulus  which  is
sometimes   effective.      512   A.    Chloroform   may  sometimes  act  simply  as  a
suggestion  (Herrero's  cases).    512  B.   Voisin's  view  of  chloroform  as  facilitating
attention.      512   C.  Influence  of  opium   in  adding  force   to  self-suggestion:
Case  of  Dr.  Parsons.

513.  Sudden  shock  has  also  been  tried,  but  the  resultant  "  cataplexy  "  is
not  identical  with  hypnotic  trance.     513  A.  Bramwell  on  hypnosis  in  animals.
513  B.   Mesmerisation  of  animals  regarded  as  a  test  of  existence  of  mesmeric
effluence.     513  C.    Lidbeault  on  hypnotisation  of  infants.

514.  Hypnotic  trance  is  induced  in  some  hysterical  persons  by  pressure  on
certain  patches  of  skin  called  hyfinogenous  zones.     This  method,  however,  seems
to  be  merely  a  form  of  hysterical  self-suggestion.

515.  Monotonous  stimulation  (as  used  by  Voisin,  Braid,  &c.),  has  some
predisposing  effect,  but  its  apparent  effect  may  often  be  more  truly  referred
to  suggestion.

516.  And  mesmeric  passes  involve  too  little  monotonous  stimulation  to  be
thus  explicable.     Their  effect  must  be  due  either  to  suggestion  or  to  some  in-
fluence or  effluence  akin  to  telepathy.

517.  All  forms  of  nervous  stimulation,  resulting  in  increased  plasticity,  tend
thus  to  resolve  themselves  into  the  unexplained  efficacy  of  "  suggestion,"  while,
on  the  other  hand,  unless  there  exist  some  influence  or  effluence  of  unknown
type,  suggestion  by  hypnotisers  can  mean  little  more  than  self-suggestion.

518.  Self-suggestion  is  itself  capricious  and  unintelligible  ;  although  it  is  in
practice  observed  to  work  more  readily  along  certain  main   lines.     518  A.
Fahnestock  and  Delboeuf  on  self-suggestion.     518  B.  Bramwell  and  the  elder
Despine  on  the  same.     518  C.  Forel's  experience.     518  D.  Wingfield's  experi-
ments in  self-suggestion.

519.  I  define  suggestion  as  "  successful  appeal  to  the  subliminal  self  "  ;  and
thus,  in  the  first  place,  I  present  the  puzzle  of  the  capriciousness  of  successful
suggestion  as  part  and  parcel  of  the  larger  problem  of  the  relationships  of  the
supraliminal  and  the  subliminal  self.

520.  This  conception  should  throw  light  on  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism.
In  the  first  place,  since  the  subliminal  self  is  specially  concerned  with  the
sleeping  phase  of  personality,  we  may  expect  that  hypnotism  will  involve  some
developed  form  of  sleep.

521.  The  hypnotic  trance  is  not  identical  with  ordinary  sleep.     The  sub-
liminal self  comes  to  the  front  in  reply  to  our  appeal,  and  displaces  just  so
much  of  the  supraliminal  self  as  may  be  needful  for  its  purpos-

522.  The  stages  of  hypnotism  do  not  follow  any  fixed  physiological  law,— as

xxxvi  SYLLABUSES

Charcot,  for  instance,  supposed.     522  A.    Jules  Janet's  case.     522  B.   Gurney
on  hypnotic  stages.

523.  Rather,  as  Gurney  has  shown,  they  resemble  alternating  personalities,
of  shallow  type.     523  A.    Gurney  on  stages  of  memory  in  hypnosis.     523  B.
Mrs.  Sidgwick  on  the  same.

524.  Beneath  and  between  the  alert  states  lies  the  profound  hypnotic
trance,  which  resembles  a  scientific  rearrangement  of  sleep ; — at  once  more
stable  and  more  responsive  than  ordinary  sleep.

525.  This  generalised   conception  of  hypnotism  needs  a  survey,  wider
than  has  been  usually  attempted,  of  hypnotic  results.     The  impracticability  of
framing  a  physiological  scheme  of  these  results  teaches  us  to  fall  back  on
psychological  considerations.     Inhibition  and  dynamogeny  form  a  convenient
contrast  of  conceptions ;  both  factors  entering  into  all  processes  of  education.

526.  It  is  possible  that  the  influence  of  suggestion  begins  before  birth.    At
any  rate,  we  may  regard  hypnotic  suggestion  as  a  summarised  education,  and
may  discuss  the  rdle  of  inhibition  and  dynamogeny  from  the  nursery  onwards.
526  A.  Lie'beault's  case  of  suggested  birth-mark.    526  B.  Galton's  case  of  sug-
gested connate  idiosyncrasy.     526  C.    Maston's  case.

527.  Inhibition  of  childish  tricks  (acquired  morbid  synergies)  by  hypnotic
suggestion.     527  A.    Be'rillon's  cases  of  cures  of  childish  tricks,  &c.     527  B.
Vlavianos'  cure  of  similar  tricks  in  an  adult.

528.  Inhibition  of  kleptomania  and  of  violence.     528  A.    Cases  and  refe-
rences re  kleptomania.     528  B.    Janet's  cases.

529.  Inhibition  of  organic  proclivities— dipsomania,  nicotinism.     529  A.
Cases    and   references  re  dipsomania.      529   B.    Bramwell  on   dipsomania.
529  C.    Cure  of  nicotinism.

530.  Inhibition  of  morphinomania.     530  A.    Marot's  cure  of  a  case.

531.  Inhibition  of  aberrant  sexual  impulse  and  imagination.

532.  Inhibition  of  morbid  memory  and  attention, — of  id^es  fixes.     532  A.
References  to  cures  of  phobies  professionnelles.     532  B.   Vlavianos'  cure  of
agoraphobia.     532  C.    Mavroukakis'  cure  of  the  same.     532  D.    Bram well's
cures  of  obsessions.

533.  Inhibition  of  inconvenient  elements  of  normal  memory: — cure  of
shyness,  &c.     Hypnosis  not  a  state  of  mono-ideism.     533  A.    Bramwell  shows
it  to  be  rather  one  of  poly-ideism.

534.  Inhibition  of  pain; — the  most  forcible  control  of  attention.     534  A.
Delboeuf  s  experiment  of  the  two  burns.     534  B.   References  to  some  cases  of
hypnotic  analgesia.     534  C.    Delboeuf's  cure  of  neuralgia.     534  D.    A  cure  of
sycosis  menti.     534  E.    Hypnotic  analgesia  in  accouchements.

535.  Is  this  inhibited  pain  altogether  abrogated,  or  translated  to  some
other  plane  of  consciousness  ?    535  A.   Green's  cases.     535  B.    Bramwell's
cases.

536.  In  any  case  suggestion  has  the  power  of  dissociating  vital  phenomena
hitherto  conjoined,  and  thus  allowing  a  man  to  retain  in  consciousness  only
such  selection  of  faculties  as  may  suit  his  immediate  purpose.

537.  Turning  now  to  the  dynamogenic  results  of  suggestion,  we  find  that
even  the  results  already  classed  as  inhibitive  are  in  the  last  resort  dynamo-
genic; since  although  external  acts  may  be  inhibited,  there  must  be  a  dynamo-
genic reinforcement  of  the  ideas  which  check  the  acts.     The  more  obviously
dynamogenic  results  may  now  be  arranged  in  an  order  resembling  that  which

CHAPTER    V  xxxvii

we  try  to  follow  in  education ;— proceeding  from  external  senses  to  internal
sensory  and  other  central  operation;  and  thence  again  to  attention  and  will,
and  so  to  character,  which  is  a  kind  of  resultant  of  all  these.

538.  Sensory  dynamogeny;    correction  and  reinforcement    of   defective
end-organs  by  suggestion.     538  A.     Lidbeault  on  cases  of  Aubry  and  Loue\
538  B.    Bramwell's  subject,  as  examined  by  Hewetson.     538  C.    Cullerre's  case
of  suggestion  by  motor  images.     538  D.     Connection  of  hypnotic  suggestion
with  Restitution  of  Function.

539.  Hyperaesthesiae  of  sight  and  hearing  produced  by  suggestion.    539  A.
Bergson's  case  of  cornea-reading.

540.  Hypenesthesiae  of  the  less  defined  sense-organs  merge  into  what  we
may  term  heterasthesicc,  or  new  varieties  of  sensibility.     540  A.     Kropotkin  on
primitive  sense-organs.

541.  Difficulties  in   the  investigation  of  these;  different  types  of  heter-
aesthesiae.     541    A.     Sensibility  to    inorganic    objects;    e.g.   running    water.
541  B.     Barrett  on  "dowsing."     541  C.     Metallaesthesia.     541  D.     Sensibility
to  magnets.     541  B.     Sensibility  to  dead  or  living  organisms ;  or  to  mesmerised
objects.     541  P.    Medical  clairvoyance.    541  G.    Richet's  experiments.     541  H.
Richet's  case  of  clairvoyant  diagnosis  accompanied  by  some  prevision.     541  J.
Suggestive  dynamogeny  thus  leads  up  to  supernormal  faculty.     541  K.     Braid
on  medicamentous  substances,  &c.

542.  Dynamogenic  effects  of  suggestion  continued.     Effects  of  suggestion
on  the  vaso-motor  system.     542  A.     De  Jong's  cure  of  haemorrhage.     542  B.
Various  cases  of  vaso-motor  effects.     542  C.  Bramwell's  cure  of  hyperhydrosis.

543.  Stigmatisation.     543  A.  Case  of  Louise  Lateau.     543  B.  Biggs' cases.
543  C.    Coomes'  case.     543  D.    Krafft-Ebing's  case.     543  E.    Cases  by  Janet,
Backman,  &c.    543  P.   Charcot's  production  of  oedema  by  suggestion.   543  G.
Artigalas'  cure  of  haemorrhage.     543  H.    Schrenck-Notzing's  experiments.

544.  Dynamogeny  of  the  central  sensorium ;  visual  and  auditory  halluci-
nations.

545.  Certain  points  peculiar  to  hypnotic  hallucinations.    Their  capability
of  deferment.

546.  So-called  "  negative  hallucinations,"  or  "  systematised  anaesthesiae,"
imply  a  watchful  adaptation  of  the  hallucination  to  circumstances  unpredictable
when  the  suggestion  was  first  given.     546  A.     Mrs.  Sidgwick's  experiments.

547.  Organic  effects  of  hypnotic  hallucinations  may  be  profounder  than  in
spontaneous  cases.

548.  Possibility  of  utilising  this  vividness  and  durability  of  hallucinatory
ition  in  such  a  manner  as  to  extend  human  faculty.

549.  The  so-called  "transposition  of  senses"  is  perhaps  a  hallucinatory
self-suggestion   in1  explanation  of  a  real  emergence  of  telaesthetic  capacity.
549  A.  Experiments  of  Pdte'tin,  Fahnestock,  &c.    549  B.  Fontan's  experiments.

550.  Dynamogenic   efficacy  of  suggestion   on   attention,  will,  and   char-
acter.

551.  Suggestions  a    ichtance,   and    post-hypnotic    calculation    of    time-
intervals,  &c.     Experiments  of:  551  A.     Gurney;  551  B.     Delboeuf ;  551  C.
Bramwell.

552.  Vivification  of  memory,  reinforcement  of  histrionic  capacity,   &c.
552  A.     Duf.iy's  case.     552  B.     Bramwell  on  memory  in  hypnosis.     552  C.
Memory  of  secondary  states  recovered  by  hypnosis.

xxxviii  SYLLABUSES

553.  Capacity  for  attention  strengthened  and  waste  of  intelligence  checked
by  suggestion.     553  A.     Forel's  warders.     553  B.     Bramwell's  subject,  &c.

554.  Reinforcement  of  will-power.     Backman's  experiment.     Control  over
involuntary  muscles.

555.  Supposed  danger  of  loss  of  independence;  how  avoidable.     555  A.
Lie'geois,   Lidbeault,   &c.,  on   subject's  will-power   and   "suggested  crimes."
555  B.     Bramwell  on  the  same.

556.  Influence  of  suggestion  on  character.    556  B.     Voisin  and  Dufour
on  moral  reforms.

557.  Types  of  faults  and  relative  probability  of  hypnotic  amelioration.
557  A.     Bourdon's  cure  of  morbid  jealousy.

558.  Faults  from  which  the  erring  person  does  not  desire  to  be  free.

559.  Merging  of  hypnotic  suggestibility  into  susceptibility  to  religious
influences.

560.  We  have  thus  reviewed  that  branch  of  hypnotic  results  which  develop
the  capacity  of  the  subliminal  self  for  organic  recuperation   in  the  sleeping
phase  of  personality.     We  must  turn  to  the  results  which  develop  its  capacity
for  self-liberation  in  the  same  phase : — as  shown  by  the  emergence  of  super-
normal powers.

561.  Before  expanding  this  theme  I  must  introduce  another  subject  whose
consideration    has    thus    far    been    postponed,    namely,    spontaneous    som-
nambulisms.

562.  These  sleep- waking  states  form  a  development  of  dream,  and  show
the  middle-level  elements  of  the  subliminal  self  operating  unchecked,  with
supernormal  faculties,  for  the  most  part  aimlessly  and  incoherently  employed.

563.  Sleep-waking  parallels  to  genius.     563  A.  Case  of  Rachel  Baker.

564.  Sleep-waking  sagacity  and  organic  prevision.     564  A.     Teste's  case
and  references  to  others.

565.  Telaesthesia  and   telepathy  in  spontaneous  sleep-waking.     565  A.
Dufay's  case.     References  to  cases  of  Elizabeth  Squirrell,  Jane  Rider,  &c.

566.  Transition  from  spontaneous  sleep-waking  to  the  trance  of  "  posses-
sion."

567.  This  evidence  shows  us  that  the  supernormal  powers  which  we  have
traced  in  each  of  the  preceding  chapters  in  turn  present  themselves  in  much
the  same  fashion   in  spontaneous  sleep-waking  states  also.     We  must  now
return  to  hypnotism,  and  ask  whether  these  powers  are  also  manifest  in  sleep-
waking  states  experimentally  induced.

568.  And  first,  as  to  the  supernormal  induction  of  hypnotic  states.     Can
hypnosis  be  telepathically  produced  from  a  distance  ?     Experiments  of :  568  A.
Janet  and  Gibert.    568  B.  He'ricourt.     568  C.  Dusart.    568  D.  Dufay.    568  E.
Other  cases.

569.  If,  then,  a  supernormal  influence  is  exercised  from  a  distance,  it  may
presumably  be  exercised  from  close  at  hand,  and  we  may  thus  be  better  able
to  analyse    its  true   nature.     Experiments    in   the  telepathic  production    of
local  organic  effects  and  in  silent  'willing  in  proximity.     569  A.     Experiments
in  the  production  of  local   anaesthesia  by  Gurney.     569  B.     The  same,  by
Mrs.  Sidgwick.     569   C.     Experiments  in  silent  willing  by  Barrett,  H.   S.
Thompson,  &c.

570.  Possible  physical  effluence  as  a  hypnotic  agent  in  proximity,  perhaps
indicated  by  the  occasional  sensations  accompanying  mesmeric  passes.

CHAPTER    V  xxxix

571.  Supernormal  response  of  the  hypnotised  subject.     Rapport,  and  com-
munity of  sensation  with  hypnotiser.     571  A.    Bramwell  on  rapport.     571  B.
Experiments  in  community  of  sensation  by  Gurney.     571  C.    The  same,  by
Guthrie.

572.  Perception  of  past  sensation  or  action;   retrocognitive   telaesthesia.
572  A.   Debbie's  cases.     572  B.    Case  of  Ellen  Dawson.

573.  Perception  of   existing   facts  out  of  sensory  range;   telepathy  and
travelling  clairvoyance,  &c.,  with  occasional  elements  of  precognition.     573  A.
Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  experiments.    573  B.   Case  of  "Jane.''    573  C.
Backman's  experiments.     573  D.    Fahnestock's  experiments.     573  E.    Major
Buckley's  experiments.     573  F.    Case  of  prediction  of  result  of  operation.

574.  We  have  now  traced  out  the  second  line  in  which  hypnotism  is  a
development  of  the  sleeping  phase  of  personality ; — the  supernormal  pheno-
mena, as  contrasted  with  the  therapeutic.     The  chapter  might  here  conclude ;
save  that  it  is  felt  that,  if  hypnotism  be  thus  generalised  as  an  appeal  to  the
subliminal   self,  that  appeal   should   not  be   the   mere   appanage  of  medical
practice,  but  should  be  based  for  mankind  at  large  upon  some  deep-seated
instinct  or  faith.

575.  Such  faiths  or  instincts  form  what  I  have  called  "schemes  of  self-
suggestion  " ; — which  do,  in  fact,  shape  themselves  for  man  at  each  stage  in
turn  of  human  progress.     575  A.    Cases  of  efficacy  of  charms.

576.  Transition  from  fetichistic  to  polytheistic  conceptions  of  cure,  and
from  polytheism  to  monotheism;  the  so-called  "  miracles  of  Lourdes."

577.  Transition  from  monotheism  to  metaphysical  abstraction  ;  faith-heal-
ing ;   Christian  science;   mind-healing.     Reasons  for  not  here  treating  these
faiths  in  detail.     They  are  crude  attempts  at  a  practical  realisation  of  the  pro-
found conception  of  the  superior  reality  of  mind  over  matter.

578.  The  "  miracles  of  Lourdes,"  on  the  other  hand,  depend  on  a  complex
resuscitation   of  antique  methods   of    self-suggestion.     No   evidence   for  the
agency  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  or  that  the  cures  belong  to  a  different  category
from  hypnotic  cures.     578  A.    The  Lourdes  legend.

579.  The  Lourdes  legend  must  needs  be  fully  discussed,  since  it  is  im-
portant to  clear  away  all  that  we  can  of  superstition  and  delusion  from  the
essential  truth  that  it  is  possible  by  a  right  disposition  of  our  own  minds  to
draw  energy  from  an  environing  world  of  spiritual  life.     The  practical  result
of  hypnotic  artifice  has  been  to  strengthen  in  us  that  intelligent  central  force
which  guides  organic  metabolism  to  useful  ends.

580.  I  can  conceive  that  force  in  no  other  way  than  by  saying  that  man  is
a  spirit,  controlling  an  organism  irregularly  and  variably,  and  controlling  more
intimately  those  deeper  strata  which  hypnotic  suggestion  reaches.

581.  Thus  in  hypnotic  or  trance  states  the  spirit  can  more  easily  either
modify  the  organism,  with  self-sanative  results,  or  partially  quit  the  organism,
with  tclxsthctic  results.

582.  The  life  of  the  organism  depends  on  a  perpetual  and  varying  indraft
from  the  cosmic  energy,  and  there  will  be  effective  therapeutical  or  ethical  self-
suggestion  whenever  by  any  artifice  subliminal  attention  to  a  bodily  function
or  to  a  moral  purpose  is  carried  to  some  unknown  pitch  of  intensity  which
draws  fresh  energy  from  the  metetherial  world.

583.  We  cannot  at  present  define  the  form  of  faith  which  may  be  most
effective  in  this  illation  of  spiritual  strength  and  grace.     Yet  we  may  at  once

xl  SYLLABUSES

realise  that  our  most  comprehensive  duty,  in  this  or  other  worlds,  is  intensity
of  spiritual  life  ; — nay,  that  our  own  spirits  are  part  and  parcel  of  the  ultimate
vitalising  Power.

CHAPTER   VI
SENSORY  AUTOMATISM

600.  Summary  of  preceding  chapters.     While  various  kinds  of  manifesta-
tions of  the  Subliminal  Self  are  disintegrative  or  morbid  in  character,  we  find  in
each  class  indications  of  higher  faculties  and  of  an  evolutive  potency.     The
converging  lines  of  evidence  lead  to  the  conception  of  the  Subliminal  Self  as
the  principal,  deepest,  and   most  permanent  element  of  the   Self;   although
much  that  is  incoherent  or  outworn  is  also  subliminal.

601.  The  distinctive  subliminal  faculty  of  Telepathy  or  Telaesthesia  is
emancipated  from  the  ordinary  limitations  of  organic  life,  and  also  persists  after
organic  death ;  thus  showing  a  relation  between  the  subliminal  and  the  surviv-
ing self.     All  subliminal  action  may  be  called  Automatism  and  regarded  under
the  form  of  messages  conveying  information  from  the  subliminal  to  the  supra-
liminal  self,  in  either  a  sensory  or  a  motor  form.

602.  Supraliminal  life  is  here  regarded  as  a  special  or  privileged  case  of
the  whole  personality,  and  consequently  each  ordinary  faculty  or  sense  will
appear  as  a  special  case  of  some  more  general  power,  towards  which  its  evolu-
tion may  be   tending.     Each   sense  is  generally  supposed  to   obtain  fresh
information  only  through  its  own  end-organ,  but  it  will  appear  that  new  and
true  perceptions  are  also  generated  in  the  brain.

603.  Vestiges  of  the  primitive  undifferentiated  sensitivity  persist  in  the
form  of  synasthesice,  e.g.  when  the  hearing  of  an  external  sound  carries  with  it,
by  some  arbitrary  association  of  ideas,  the  seeing  of  some  form  or  colour.
These  phenomena   are  apparently  entencephalic.     603  A.   Flournoy's  case.
603  B.    Gruber's  case.

604.  The  successive  stages  leading  from  these  entencephalic   percepts
towards  ordinary  vision  are :  Entoptic  impressions  due  to  mechanical  stimuli
of  the  optic  nerve  or  eye.

605.  After-images :  the  retinal  sequelae  of  ordinary  vision.

606.  Ordinary  external  vision.

607.  The  further  stages   from  entencephalic  vision  towards  the   more
internal  forms  are :  Memory-images ;  either  cerebral  sequelae  of  external  vision,
or  a  psychical  rearrangement  of  these.     607  A.   Flournoy  on  memory-images.

608.  Dreams,  mostly  consisting  of  confused  memory -images.

609.  Imagination-images,  psychical  rearrangements  of  visual  imagery.

610.  All  these  forms  of  internal  vision  lead  up  to  the  most  completely
developed  form,  viz.,  hallucinations.     610  A.     Mrs.  Verrall  on  visualisation.

611.  A  hallucination  is  an  intensified  internal  vision,  a  case  of  central
hyperaesthesia.     The  faculty  of  internal  vision  varies  in  different  persons,  and
only  rarely  attains  to  hallucination.     Hallucinations  sometimes  arise  from  well-
known  morbid  causes,  but  those  which  occur  in  normal  conditions  are  more
instructive,  being  apparently  spontaneous  modifications  of  central  percepts.

CHAPTER    VI  xli

612.  The  popular  assumption  that  a  hallucination  was  proof  of  some
morbid  condition  was  shown  to  be  without  foundation  by  Curacy's  statistics  of
hallucinations  occurring  to  persons  "in  good  health,  free  from  anxiety,  and
completely  awake."     Through   the  investigation  initiated  by  Gurney  and  re-
sumed later  by  a  Committee  of  the  S.P.R.,  a  far  larger  collection,  and  one
more  completely  representative  of  all  classes  of  hallucinations  than  had  ever
existed  before,  was  formed.     It  showed  that  for  the  majority  of  hallucinations,
as  for  the  great  majority  of  dreams,  no  special  explanation  (either  physiological
or  supernormal)  can  be  offered.     In  most  of  the  coincident  cases,  the  events
coinciding  with  the  hallucinations  were  unknown  to  the  percipients  at  the  time.
612  A.     Summary  of  the  Report  on  the  "  Census  of  Hallucinations."

613.  These  veridical  hallucinations  afford  evidence  of  a  development  of
fresh  faculty.     The  usual  conformity  of  visual  hallucinations  to  optical  laws
is  the  result  of  self-suggestion ;  this  is  true  of  veridical  as  of  falsidical  hallu-
cinations.

614.  But  in  that  case,  is  the  apparent  spatial  relation  between  percipient
and  percept  due  only  to  self-suggestion  ?     Or  is  it  not  possible  that  real  spatial
relations  may  still  exist  in  percepts — whether  of  embodied  or  of  disembodied
percipients — which  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  sense-organs  ?

615.  If  so,  veridical  mental  visions  may  symbolically  represent  material
objects  from  a  point  of  view  outside  the  bodily  organism  of  the  percipient,  and
in  the  place  to  which  he  imagines  himself  to  have  travelled.     This  excursive
theory  may  be  applied  to  many  telepathic  and  to  all  telaesthetic  cases.     A  corol-
lary to  it  would  be  the  possible  perception  of  the  percipient,  in  the  place  where
he  imagines  himself  to  be,  by  other  persons  actually  present  there.

616.  Mental  visions  can  be  controlled;  e.g.  the  most  effective  means  of
checking  morbid  and  harmful  hallucinations  is  the  influence  of  hypnotic  sugges-
tion on  the  submerged  mental  strata.

617.  Another  instance  of  control  is  the  production  of  harmless  hallucina-
tions by  hypnotic  suggestion.     This  differs  from  ordinary  suggestion,  in  which
only  the  ordinary  powers  of  the  subject  are  brought  into  play,  since  it  involves
at  least  a  great  increase  in  his  ordinary  visualising  power,  and  forms  another
example  of  hypnotic  evocations  of  fresh  faculty,  such  as  were  given  in  Chapter
V.     The  present  cases  are  stimulations  of  central  sensory  tracts.     The  sub-
liminal formation  of  these  complex  centrally  initiated  images  is  fostered  by
the  suggestion  which  also  projects  them  into  the  ordinary  consciousness.

618.  Hallucinations,   then,  have  no  necessary  connection   with   disease,
though  they  may  often  accompany  it,  since  the  central  sensory  tracts  are  of
course  capable  of  morbid  as  well  as  of  healthful  stimulus.     The  therapeutic
study  of  hallucinations  naturally  preceded  their  psychological  study ;  but  in  the
newer  practical  study  of  eugenics — the  study  which   aims  at   improving  the
human  organism,  instead  of  merely  conserving  it — experimental  psychology  is
indispensable,  and  one  branch  of  this   is  the  experimental  study  of  mental
visions.

619.  For  this  purpose  it  would  be  convenient  to  dispense  with  external
suggestion,  and  confine  our  attention  to  the  mind  of  the  percipient.     There  are

y  in  ordinary  life  indications  of  some  faculty  of  projecting  supraliminally
visual  images  apparently  matured  elsewhere;  e.g.  in  dreams,  memory-images,
illusions  hypnagogiques.

620.  Crystal-vision  affords  a  simple  empirical  method  of  finding  the  cor-

xlii  SYLLABUSES

relation  between  all  these  types  of  internal  vision,  by  facilitating  in  the  seers
the  externalisation  of  subliminal  concepts  or  ideas.  620  A.  Resume  of  history
of  crystal-gazing.

621.  Hypnotisation,  which  is  sometimes  induced   by  prolonged  gazing,
may  occur  in  crystal-gazing  and  facilitate  hallucination.     And  the  visions  are
sometimes  determined  by  points  de  repere.

622.  But  crystal-visions  generally  occur  without  hypnotisation,  and  develop
in  a  way  independent  of  points  de  reptre.

623.  Crystal-gazing  is  a  harmless  empirical  method  of  developing  internal
vision.     Experiments  have  been  tried  to  test  if  the  visions  follow  optical  laws,
independently  of  suggestion; — and  should  be  tried  again.     623  A.     Discussion
of  optical  effects  in  hallucinations.

624.  A  hypnotised  person  may  be  made  to  see  visions  on  waking  from
the  trance,  and,  as  in  the  cases  quoted  in  the  Appendix,  the  seer,  having  for-
gotten the  suggestion,  may  be  unaware  of  the  origin  of  the  pictures  and  unable
to  explain  what  their  subject  or  meaning  is.     624  A.     Post-hypnotic  crystal
visions  recorded  by  the  present  writer.

625.  These  experiments  illustrate  the  transition   between   post-hypnotic
hallucinations  and  crystal-visions,  and  afford  further  evidence  of  the  genuine
occurrence   of  the  latter.     Crystal-visions  of:    625  A.     Mrs.  Verrall;  625  B.
Miss  Goodrich-Freer ;    625  C.  "  Miss.  A."  ;  625  D.  "  Miss  Angus."

626.  These  are  really  instances  of  the  control  of  inward  vision ;  although
at  first  sight  appearing  lawless  and  arbitrary,— a  random  mixture  of  normal
and  supernormal  knowledge  with  mere  imagination.

627.  Induced   crystal-visions  illustrate  the  various  types  of  spontaneous
sensory  automatism;  and  these — to  have  any  objective  validity — must  repre-
sent knowledge  supernormally  acquired,  or  direct  communication  between  the
subliminal  strata  of  two  minds, — that  is,  telepathy.

628.  Telepathy  must  exist  if  any  disembodied  intelligences   exist.     On
the  principle  of  continuity,  evolution  from  the  lower  carries  with  it  a  presump-
tion of  development  into  the  higher.     Conversely,  the  ancient  belief  in  the
possibility  of  telepathic  communication  with  higher  minds,  as  in  prayer,  might
well  have  suggested  that  such  communication  was  possible  between  minds  on
the  same  level.     This  notion  has  occurred  from  time  to  time  to  philosophic
thinkers,  but  has  only  recently  been  systematised  by  actual  experiment.

629.  The  operation  of  telepathy  is  probably  constant  and  far-reaching,
and  intermingled  with   ordinary  modes  of  acquiring   knowledge.     But   since
we  know  nothing  of  its  method  of  action,  we  can  only  specifically  postulate
it   when    all   other    known    causes    are    excluded.     The    best  experimental
evidence  is  where  the  ideas  to  be  transferred  are   trivial,  and  devoid  of  all
association  or  emotion.

630.  An  account  of  the  history  and  development  of  this  form  of  experi-
mentation, and  the  varied  yet  concordant  results  obtained,  was  given  by  Gurney
in  1886  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  and  some  part  of  this  history  is  repro-
duced in  our  Appendices,  with  examples  of  the  additional  evidence  received
since  as   to  experimental  thought-transference  in  the  normal  state.     630  A.
Note  on  "  Number-habits."     Experiments  with  agent   and  percipient   in  the
same  room  by:  630  B.  Mr.  Guthrie :  630  C.  Mr.  Rawson.     Experiments  with
a°:ent  and  percipient  at  a  distance  from  one  another  by  :  630  D.  Mr.  Kirk ;
630  E.  Mr.  Glardon ;  630  P.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S. ;  630  GK  Miss  Despard.

CHAPTER    VI  xliii

631.  Thus  telepathy  may  produce  definitely  sensory,  or  vague,  or  idea-
tional  impressions;  it  may  sometimes  be  assisted  by    hypnotisation ;  and  we
find  a  continuous  transition  from  experimental  to  spontaneous  telepathy.     The
apparently  favourable  effect  of  proximity  may  be  due  to  self-suggestion  alone.

632.  We  cannot  as  yet  command  success  in  the  experiments ; — (a)  the
idea  to  be  transferred  may  not  reach  the  percipient's  mind;  or  (b)  if  it  does,
it  may  be  prevented  from  emerging  into  his  ordinary  consciousness.     It  has
been  suggested  that  telepathy  is  propagated  by  "  brain-waves,"  that  is,  by  ether
waves  passing  from  brain  to  brain.

633.  But  this  suggestion  rests   on   very  superficial  analogies,  since  the
mental  images  of  agent  and  percipient  are  generally  dissimilar,  the  percipient
greatly  modifying  the  impression  before  externalising  it.

634.  Nor  does  it  meet  cases  of  collective  percipience,  or  of  varying  time-
relation,  or  of  telepathy  from  discarnate  spirits.     We  can  at  present  say  little
more  in  the  way  of  explanation  than  that  Life  has  the  power  of  manifesting
itself  to  Life.     Such  manifestation  may  involve  the  lower  animals  also.     634  A.
Case  of  animal  apparition :  Mrs.  Bagot.

635.  Hypothesis  of   a  possible  mode  of  psychical  interaction :  a  "  psy-
chical invasion  "  by  the  agent,  creating  a  "  phantasmogenetic  centre  "  in  the
place  invaded;  the  spirit  of  the  agent  being  actually  transferred  to  the  distant
scene,  which  it  perceives,  but  may  or  may  not  remember;  while  its  presence
may  or  may  not  be  perceived  by  the  persons  materially  present  in  the  scene.

636.  Mere  telepathy  may  explain  an  apparition  coinciding  with  the  death  of
the  person  seen ;  but  the  hypothesis  of  "  psychical  invasion  "  seems  to  apply
better  to  (i)  collective  cases;  (2)  telepathic  clairvoyance;  (3)  reciprocal  cases.

637.  The  increased  evidence  for  communications  from  the  dead  must  affect
our  view  of  telepathy ;  as  may  also  the  increasing  evidence  for  precognition  ;
and  theorising  must  simply  follow  the  evidence.

638.  The  present  theory  starts  from  the  conception  that  different  seg-
ments of  the  personality  can  operate  independently  of  and  unknown  to  each
other,  and  sometimes  apart  from  the  organism ;  (this  latter  is  implied  in  the
assumption  of  telepathy, — still  more  in  that  of  survival).     Through  hypnotism
the  first  important  step  has  been  proved  possible,  namely,  the  independent
operation  of  different  segments,  with  separate  streams  of  memory  and  conscious-
ness, all  working  through  the  same  organism.

639.  Between   these  minor  dissociations  expressing  themselves  through
the  brain  and  the  complete  dissociation  from  the  brain  itself  occurring  at
death  come  the  apparently  intermediate  cases  of  spiritual  activity  at  a  distance
during  the  comatose  condition  sometimes  preceding  death.

640.  The  cases  now  to  be  considered  are  regarded  as  coming  within  the
formula  "  Dissociation  of  personality,  combined  with  activity  in  the  metetherial
environment  ";  and  the  word  *'  spirit  "  is  here  used  to  mean  that  element  of  the
personality  which  operates,  before  or  after  death,  in  this  environment.

641.  Hallucinations,  however,  were  shown   by  Gurney's  Census  to  be  too
frequent  to  have  any  evidential  force  apart  from  some  correspondence  with
external  events.     They  can  easily  be  produced  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  and  the
percipient's  subjective  impression  as  to  their  validity  is  at  best  a  very  doubtful
criterion.

642.  The  only  valid  evidence,  then,  for  veridicality  depends  on  a  coin-
cidence with  some  external  event.     Thus  apparitions  of  the  dying

xliv  SYLLABUSES

facie  a  causal  connection  between  apparition  and  death  unless  the  coincidence
can  be  attributed  to  chance.  The  questions  of  evidence  and  chance  coinci-
dence were  dealt  with  fully  both  by  Gurney  and  in  the  Report  of  the  later
Census,  with  the  conclusion  that  these  coincidences  could  not  be  due  to  chance
alone.  642  A.  Gurney?s  general  criticism  of  the  evidence  for  telepathy.  642  B.
Contemporary  documentary  evidence,  with  references  to  some  cases  supported
by  such  evidence.  642  C.  Hallucinations  and  illusions  of  memory :  Royce  and
Parish  on  "pseudo-presentiments  ";  replies  by  Gurney  and  Hodgson.

643.  Coincidental  hallucinations  have  been  classified  from  different  points
of  view  according  to  (a)  the  external  event  to  which  they  correspond ;  (b)  the
condition,  waking  or  sleeping,  of  the  percipient ;  (c)  the  sense  affected  ;  (d)  the
collectivity,  or  otherwise,  of  the  perception.     We  take  here  as  the  basis  of  our
scheme  of  classification  the  conception  vi psychicalinvasion  by  the  agent.

644.  We  begin  with  cases   where  the  action  of  the    invader  is  of  the
weakest  kind,  so  as  to  be  hardly,  if  at  all,  evidential;  e.g.,  case  of  Col.   Bigge
seeing  phantasm  of  Col.  Reed  shortly  before  his  actual  arrival.     In  "  arrival
cases  "  the  agent  is  probably  imagining  himself  in  the  place  where  he  is  seen.

645.  In  other  cases  there  is  no  obvious  link  with  the  place  ;  but  the  phan-
tasm is  probably  veridical  if  seen  either  repeatedly  by  different    persons,  or
collectively ;  e.g.   repeated  apparitions  of  Mrs.  Hawkins ;  and  the  evidence  is
still  stronger  when  the  apparitions   are  both  repeated  and  collective.     Cases
of:  645  A.  Mr.  Williams.  645  B.  Mrs.  Stone.  645  C.  Mrs.  Beaumont.  645  D.
Canon  Bourne.  645  E.     Miss  Maughau.

646.  In  some  cases,  the  percipience  is  merely  collective,  not  repeated,  and
coincides  with  no  crisis ;  e.g.  apparition  of  Miss  E.  seen  by  her  two  sisters.

647.  Apparition  of  Mrs.  Hall  seen  by  herself  and  three  other  persons.

648.  Collective  percipience  has  sometimes  been  explained  by  telepathy,
but  is  here  attributed  to  psychical  invasion  by  the  agent ;  since  in  some  cases
there  is  no  link  between  him  and  any  of  the  percipients.     Further,  the  frequent
absence  of  any  crisis  on  his  part    suggests  a  special    facility   of  psychical
dissociations  of  a   kind  to   make  his  phantom  visible.     The  supposed  idio-
syncrasy is  here  called  the  "  psychorrhagic  diathesis."

649.  Canon  Bourne's  case  may  be  regarded  as  an  instance.     The  same
idiosyncrasy  may  exist  in  discarnate  spirits,  thus  causing  "haunts."

650.  This  hypothesis  of  a  non-material  effect  produced  on  space  is  supported
by  cases  in  which  the  phantasm  is  perceived — not  by  the  person  apparently
most  appropriate  as  percipient,  but  by  some  comparatively  uninterested  person
present  with  him,  who  happens  to  possess  greater  sensitivity  ;  e.g.  case  of  Mrs.
Reddell.

651.  Two  other  cases  of  the  same  kind  are  those  of  Mrs.  Clerke,  and  651  A.
Mr.  Brown.

652.  The  next  stage  of  psychical  invasion  consists  of  cases  where  the
agent  is  seen  in  a  place  where  he  is  probably  imagining  himself  to  be  at  the
time.     A  few  cases  of  precognitions  of  intended  suicide  are  especially  strong
evidence  of  this  ;  e.g.  case  of  Mrs.  McAlpine.

653.  As  already  mentioned,  phantasms  seen  just  before  arrival  are  of  the
same  type ;  e.g.  case  of  Mr.  Carroll.

654.  Any  accessories  to  the  picture  (carriages,  horses,  &c.)  are  merely  parts
of   the   subliminal   dream   or  scene   imagined   and  projected   by   the   agent.
Cases  of :  654  A.  Mr.  Mountford.     654  B.  Major  W.

CHAPTER    VI  xlv

655.  The  supposed  space-modification  may  take  the  form  of  a  phantas-
mal voice   (not  heard   acoustically),  instead   of   a  figure  ;  e.g.  case   of   Mr.
Stevenson.     655  A.  Case  of  Mr.  Fryer.

656.  Other   "  arrival  cases "  and  cases  where  contents  of  letters    just
arrived  are  discerned,  as  if  mere  vicinity  aided  clairvoyant  perception,  point  to
some  spatial  relation.     Cases  of:  656  A.  Miss  R.     656  B.  Dr.  Holmes.

657.  We  come  next  to  cases  where  the  supposed  psychical  invader  or
agent  himself  supernormally  acquires  information.     This  may  be  done  through
(a)  hyperaesthesia,  (b)  crystal-gazing  or  shell-hearing,  (c)  telepathy,  leading  to
telaesthesia,  (d)  telaesthetic  dreams  or  visions ;  in  all  of  which  the  percipient
often  has  the  impression  of  travelling  to  the  distant  scene.

658.  The  constitutional  habits  of  the  brain  would  dispose  the  perception  to
take  a  sensory  form,  but  it  is  often  symbolic,  showing  psychical  shaping  of  the
percept.

659.  Such  symbolism  is  no  proof  of  any  mental  agency  beyond  our  own,
since  all  our  percepts  are  ultimately  symbolic,  or  indirectly  representative  of
external  realities.     To  incarnate  spirits  the  material  world  seems  the  easiest  to
perceive,  and  consequently  immaterial  percepts  are  apt  to  assume  a  material
symbolism.     For  discaraate  spirits  this  position  may  be  reversed.

660.  There  may  be  a  continuous  transition  between  supernormal  percep-
tions of  ideas  and  of  matter.     In  travelling  clairvoyance  there  seem  to  be  all
forms  of  supernormal  faculty,  and  a  power  of  perceiving  objects  or  events  dis-
tant either  in  space  or  time,  and  sometimes  with  no  assignable  link  with  any
living  person.

661.  Cases  of  this  kind  occur  more  often  in  dreams  than  in  waking  hallu-
cinations ;  e.g.  case  of  Dr. .     In  many  of  these  cases  there  is  no  clear  in-
dication of  an  agent ;  they  suggest  rather  an  active  impulse  on  the  part  of  the
percipient.     The  scene  perceived  may  or  may  not  be  of  special  interest  to  him.

662.  Sometimes  a  scene  may  be  discerned  as  in  crystal  vision  ;  e.g.,  in
cases  of :  662  A.  Mr.  Keulemans.    662  B.  Mr.  Gottschalk.     662  C.  Mr.  Searle.
662  D.  Mrs.  Taunton.

663.  Clairvoyant  visions   representing  a  past  scene   (e.g.  case  of   Mrs.
Paquet)  suggest  either  latency  of  the  impression,  or— more  strongly— a  sense
of  time-relations  different  from  the  ordinary.     The  latter  conception  is  suggested
also  by  cases  of  premonition      663  A.  Case  of  Dr.  Wiltse.     References  to
Hulin's  cases  and  to  Ermacora's  theory  of  premonition.

664.  The  next  case  (that  of  Mr.  Dyne)  suggests  yet  another  explanation —
a  picture  of  its  last  scenes  on  earth  impressed  by  a  spirit  on  a  surviving  friend.

665.  Next  come  cases  where  there  was  probably  some  real  projection  of
will  or  desire  by  the  agent-invader,  who  (himself  retaining  no  memory  of  his
excursion)  is  seen  by  the  percipient  in  his  own  vicinity  ;  e.g.  the  case  of  Mrs.
Elgee  and  Mrs.  Ramsay,  which,  being  collective,  specially  suggests  invasion  by
the  agent.     Cases  of :  665  A.  Mr.  Kearne.    665  B.  Mr.  Lodge.     665  C.  Mr.
Dickinson.

666.  A  still  further  stage  is  reached  when  the  agent  perceives  and  remem-
bers the  scene  which  he  has  been  perceived  to  invade ;  />.  in  "  reciprocal "

f :  666  A.  Mrs.  Parker.    666  B.  Mrs.  S.    666  C.  Mr.  Wilmot.

667.  Premature  fulfilments  of  «•  death-compacts,"  when  the  agent  is  seen  at
the  time  of  some  dangerous  but  not  fatal  accident.     Cases  of:  667  A.  Miss  R.
667  B.  Commander  Aylesbury.

xlvi  SYLLABUSES

668.  Apparitions   produced   experimentally;  that  is,  when  the   agent  is
perceived  at  a  time  when  he  is  strongly  willing  to  appear,  though  he  may  not
himself  know  of  his  success ;  e.g.  case  of  Mr.  S.  H.  B.     Cases  of  :  668  A.  Mr.
Godfrey.     668  B.  Mr.  Kirk.     668  C.  Dr.  G.    668  D.  Miss  Maughan.    668  E.
"  Miss  Danvers."     668  P.  Mr.  Sinclair.     668  G.  Councillor  Wesermann.

669.  Experiments  should  be  tried  as  to  whether  self-projection  could  not  be
facilitated  by  hypnotic  suggestion.    Also  the  agent  might  be  made  to  recall  his
visit  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

670.  These  self-projections  represent  the  most  extraordinary  achievements
of  the  human  will,  and  are  perhaps  acts  which  a  man  might  perform  equally
well  before  and  after  death.

100]

CHAPTER    I
INTRODUCTION

Maior  agit  deus,  atque  opera  in  maiora  remittit.

— VIRGIL.

100.  In  the  long  story  of  man's  endeavours  to  understand  his  own
environment  and  to  govern  his  own  fates,  there  is  one  gap  or  omission
so  singular  that,  however  we  may  afterwards  contrive  to  explain  the  fact,
its  simple  statement  has  the  air  of  a  paradox.  Yet  it  is  strictly  true  to  say
that  man  has  never  yet  applied  to  the  problems  which  most  profoundly
concern  him  those  methods  of  inquiry  which  in  attacking  all  other
problems  he  has  found  the  most  efficacious.

The  question  for  man  most  momentous  of  all  is  whether  or  no  he  has
an  immortal  soul ;  or — to  avoid  the  word  immortal,  which  belongs  to  the
realm  of  infinities — whether  or  no  his  personality  involves  any  element
which  can  survive  bodily  death.  In  this  direction  have  always  lain  the
gravest  fears,  the  farthest-reaching  hopes,  which  could  either  oppress  or
stimulate  mortal  minds.

On  the  other  hand,  the  method  which  our  race  has  found  most
effective  in  acquiring  knowledge  is  by  this  time  familiar  to  all  men.  It  is
the  method  of  modern  Science — that  process  which  consists  in  an  in-
terrogation of  Nature  entirely  dispassionate,  patient,  systematic ;  such
careful  experiment  and  cumulative  record  as  can  often  elicit  from  her
slightest  indications  her  deepest  truths.  That  method  is  now  dominant
throughout  the  civilised  world ;  and  although  in  many  directions  ex-
periments may  be  difficult  and  dubious,  facts  rare  and  elusive,  Science
works  slowly  on  and  bides  her  time, — refusing  to  fall  back  upon  tradition
or  to  launch  into  speculation,  merely  because  strait  is  the  gate  which  leads
to  valid  discovery,  indisputable  truth.

1  say,  then,  that  this  method  has  never  yet  been  applied  to  the
all-important  problem  of  the  existence,  the  powers,  the  destiny  of  the
human  soul.

101.  Nor  is  this  strange  omission  due  to  any  general  belief  that  the
problem  is  in  its  nature  incapable  of  solution  by  any  observation  whatever
which  mankind  could  make.  That  resolutely  agnostic  view — I  may  almost
say  that  scientific  superstition — "  ignoramus  ft  ignorabimus  " — is  no  doubt
held  at  the  present  date  by  many  learned  minds.  But  it  lias  never  been

VOL,  I.  I  A

2  CHAPTER    I  [101

the  creed,  nor  is  it  now  the  creed,  of  the  human  race  generally.  In  most
civilised  countries  there  has  been  for  nearly  two  thousand  years  a  dis-
tinct belief  that  survival  has  actually  been  proved  by  certain  phenomena
observed  at  a  given  date  in  Palestine.  And  beyond  the  Christian  pale —
whether  through  reason,  instinct,  or  superstition — it  has  ever  been  com-
monly held  that  ghostly  phenomena  of  one  kind  or  another  exist  to  testify
to  a  life  beyond  the  life  we  know.

But,  nevertheless,  neither  those  who  believe  on  vague  grounds  nor
those  who  believe  on  definite  grounds  that  the  question  might  possibly  be
solved,  or  has  actually  been  solved,  by  human  observation  of  objective
facts,  have  hitherto  made  any  serious  attempt  to  connect  and  correlate  that
belief  with  the  general  scheme  of  belief  for  which  Science  already  vouches.
They  have  not  sought  for  fresh  corroborative  instances,  for  analogies,  for
explanations ;  rather  they  have  kept  their  convictions  on  these  funda-
mental matters  in  a  separate  and  sealed  compartment  of  their  minds,  a
compartment  consecrated  to  religion  or  to  superstition,  but  not  to  obser-
vation or  to  experiment.

It  is  my  object  in  the  present  work — as  it  has  from  the  first  been
the  object  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  on  whose  behalf  most
of  the  evidence  here  set  forth  has  been  collected, — to  do  what  can
be  done  to  break  down  that  artificial  wall  of  demarcation  which  has
thus  far  excluded  from  scientific  treatment  precisely  the  problems  which
stand  in  most  need  of  all  the  aids  to  discovery  which  such  treatment  can
afford.

Yet  let  me  first  explain  that  by  the  word  "scientific"  I  signify  an
authority  to  which  I  submit  myself — not  a  standard  which  I  claim  to
attain.  Any  science  of  which  I  can  here  speak  as  possible  must  be  a
nascent  science — not  such  as  one  of  those  vast  systems  of  connected
knowledge  which  thousands  of  experts  now  steadily  push  forward  in
laboratories  in  every  land — but  such  as  each  one  of  those  great  sciences
was  in  its  dim  and  poor  beginning,  when  a  few  monks  groped  among
the  properties  of  "the  noble  metals,"  or  a  few  Chaldean  shepherds  out-
watched  the  setting  stars.

What  I  am  able  to  insist  upon  is  the  mere  Socratic  rudiment  of  these
organisms  of  exact  thought — the  first  axiomatic  pre-requisite  of  any  valid
progress.  My  one  contention  is  that  in  the  discussion  of  the  deeper
problems  of  man's  nature  and  destiny  there  ought  to  be  exactly  the  same
openness  of  mind,  exactly  the  same  diligence  in  the  search  for  objective
evidence  of  any  kind,  exactly  the  same  critical  analysis  of  results,  as  is
habitually  shown,  for  instance,  in  the  discussion  of  the  nature  and  destiny
of  the  planet  upon  which  man  now  moves.

Obvious  truism  although  this  statement  may  at  first  seem,  it  will  pre-
sently be  found,  I  think,  that  those  who  subscribe  to  it  are  in  fact  com-
mitting themselves  to  inquiries  of  a  wider  and  stranger  type  than  any  to
which  they  are  accustomed ; — are  stepping  outside  certain  narrow  limits

102]  INTRODUCTION  3

within  which,  by  ancient  convention,  disputants  on  either  side  of  these
questions  are  commonly  confined.

102.  A  brief  recall  to  memory  of  certain  familiar  historical  facts  will
serve  to  make  my  meaning  clearer.  Let  us  consider  how  it  has  come
about  that,  whereas  the  problem  of  man's  survival  of  death  is  by  most
persons  regarded  as  a  problem  in  its  nature  soluble  by  sufficient  evidence,
and  whereas  to  many  persons  the  traditional  evidence  commonly  adduced
appears  insufficient, — nevertheless  no  serious  effort  has  been  made  on  either
side  to  discover  whether  other  and  more  recent  evidence  can  or  cannot
be  brought  forward.

A  certain  broad  answer  to  this  inquiry,  although  it  cannot  be  said  to
be  at  all  points  familiar,  is  not  in  reality  far  to  seek.  It  is  an  answer  which
would  seem  strange  indeed  to  some  visitant  from  a  planet  peopled  wholly
by  scientific  minds.  Yet  among  a  race  like  our  own,  concerned  first  and
primarily  to  live  and  work  with  thoughts  undistracted  from  immediate
needs,  the  answer  is  natural  enough.  For  the  fact  simply  is  that  the  inti-
mate importance  of  this  central  problem  has  barred  the  way  to  its  metho-
dical, its  scientific  solution.

There  are  some  beliefs  for  which  mankind  cannot  afford  to  wait.
"  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?"  is  a  question  quite  otherwise  urgent  than
the  cause  of  the  tides  or  the  meaning  of  the  marks  on  the  moon.  Men
must  settle  roughly  somehow  what  it  is  that  from  the  Unseen  World  they
have  reason  to  fear  or  to  hope.  Beliefs  grow  up  in  direct  response  to  this
need  of  belief;  in  order  to  support  themselves  they  claim  unique  sanction  ;
and  thus  along  with  these  specific  beliefs  grows  also  the  general  habit  of
regarding  matters  that  concern  that  Unseen  World  as  somehow  tabooed
or  segregated  from  ordinary  observation  or  inquiry.

Let  us  pass  from  generalities  to  the  actual  history  of  Western  civilisa-
tion. In  an  age  when  scattered  ritual,  local  faiths — tribal  solutions  of
cosmic  problems — were  destroying  each  other  by  mere  contact  and  fusion,
an  event  occurred  which  in  the  brief  record  of  man's  still  incipient  civilisa-
tion may  be  regarded  as  unique.  A  life  was  lived  in  which  the  loftiest
response  which  man's  need  of  moral  guidance  had  ever  received  was  corro-
borated by  phenomena  which  have  been  widely  regarded  as  convincingly
miraculous,  and  which  are  said  to  have  culminated  in  a  Resurrection  from
the  dead.  To  those  phenomena  or  to  that  Resurrection  it  would  at  this
point  be  illegitimate  for  me  to  refer  in  defence  of  my  argument.  I  have
appealed  to  Science,  and  to  Science  I  must  go  ; — in  the  sense  that  it  would
be  unfair  for  me  to  claim  support  from  that  which  Science  in  her  strictness
can  set  aside  as  the  tradition  of  a  pre-scientific  age.  Yet  this  one  great  tradi-
tion, as  we  know,  has,  as  a  fact,  won  the  adhesion  and  reverence  of  the  great
majority  of  European  minds.  The  complex  results  which  followed  from  this
triumph  of  Christianity  have  been  discussed  by  many  historians.  But  one
result  which  here  appears  to  us  in  a  new  light  was  this — that  the  Christian
religion,  the  Christian  Church,  became  for  Europe  the  accredited  repre-

4  CHAPTER    I  [103

sentative  and  guardian  of  all  phenomena  bearing  upon  the  World  Unseen.
So  long  as  Christianity  stood  dominant,  all  phenomena  which  seemed  to
transcend  experience  were  absorbed  in  her  realm — were  accounted  as  minor
indications  of  the  activity  of  her  angels  or  of  her  fiends.  And  when
Christianity  was  seriously  attacked,  these  minor  manifestations  passed  un-
considered.  The  priests  thought  it  safest  to  defend  their  own  traditions,
their  own  intuitions,  without  going  afield  in  search  of  independent  evi-
dence of  a  spiritual  world.  Their  assailants  kept  their  powder  and  shot
for  the  orthodox  ramparts,  ignoring  any  isolated  strongholds  which  formed
no  part  of  the  main  line  of  defence.

103.  Meantime,  indeed,  the  laws  of  Nature  held  their  wonted  way.  As
ever,  that  which  the  years  had  once  brought  they  brought  again ;  and  every
here  and  there  some  marvel,  liker  to  the  old  stories  than  any  one  cared  to
assert,  cropped  up  between  superstition  on  the  one  hand  and  contemp-
tuous indifference  on  the  other.  Witchcraft,  Mesmerism,  Swedenbor-
gianism,  Spiritism — these  especially,  amid  many  minor  phenomena,  stood
out  in  turn  as  precursory  of  the  inevitable  wider  inquiry.  A  very  few  words
on  each  of  these  four  movements  may  suffice  here  to  show  their  connec-
tion with  my  present  theme.

Witchcraft. — The  lesson  which  witchcraft  teaches  with  regard  to  the
validity  of  human  testimony  is  the  more  remarkable  because  it  was  so  long
and  so  completely  misunderstood.  The  belief  in  witches  long  passed —
as  well  it  might — as  the  culminant  example  of  human  ignorance  and  folly  ;
and  in  so  comparatively  recent  a  book  as  Mr.  Lecky's  "  History  of
Rationalism,"  the  sudden  decline  of  this  popular  conviction,  without  argu-
ment or  disapproval,  is  used  to  illustrate  the  irresistible  melting  away  of
error  and  falsity  in  the  "  intellectual  climate  "  of  a  wiser  age.  Since  about
1880,  however,  when  French  experiments  especially  had  afforded  con-
spicuous examples  of  what  a  hysterical  woman  could  come  to  believe
under  suggestion  from  others  or  from  herself,  it  has  begun  to  be  felt  that
the  phenomena  of  witchcraft  were  very  much  what  the  phenomena  of  the
Salpetriere  would  seem  to  be  to  the  patients  themselves,  if  left  alone  in
the  hospital  without  a  medical  staff.  And  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
Edmund  Gurney,  after  subjecting  the  literature  of  witchcraft  to  a  more
careful  analysis  than  any  one  till  then  had  thought  it  worth  while  to  apply,
was  able  to  show  that  practically  all  recorded  first-hand  depositions
(made  apart  from  torture)  in  the  long  story  of  witchcraft  may  quite  possibly
have  been  true,  to  the  best  belief  of  the  deponents ;  true,  that  is  to  say,
as  representing  the  conviction  of  sane  (though  often  hysterical)  persons,  who
merely  made  the  almost  inevitable  mistake  of  confusing  self-suggested
hallucinations  with  waking  fact.  Nay,  even  the  insensible  spots  on  the
witches  were  no  doubt  really  anaesthetic — involved  a  first  discovery  of  a
now  familiar  clinical  symptom — the  zones  analgJsiques  of  the  patients  of
Pitres  or  Charcot.  Witchcraft,  in  fact,  was  a  gigantic,  a  cruel  psycholo-
gical and  pathological  experiment  conducted  by  inquisitors  upon  hysteria ;

105]  INTRODUCTION  5

but  it  was  conducted  in  the  dark,  and  when  the  barbarous  explanation
dropped  out  of  credence  much  of  possible  discovery  was  submerged
as  well.

104.  Afesmer. —  Again,  the  latent  possibilities  of  "suggestion," — though
not  yet  under  that  name,  and  mingled  with  who  knows  what  else  ? — broke
forth  into  a  blaze  in  the  movement  headed  by  Mesmer; — at  once  dis-
coverer and  charlatan.     Again  the  age  was  unripe,  and  scientific  opposi-
tion, although  not  so  formidable  as  the  religious  opposition  which  had
sent  witches  to  the  stake,  was  yet  strong  enough  to  check  for  the  second
time  the  struggling  science.     Hardly  till  our  own  generation — hardly  even
now — has  a  third    effort  found    better  acceptance,    and    hypnotism  and
psycho-therapeutics,  in  which  every  well-attested  fact  of  witchcraft  or  of
mesmerism  finds,  if  not  its  explanation,  at  least  its  parallel,  are  establishing
themselves  as  a  recognised  and  advancing  method  of  relieving  human  ills.

105.  This  brief  sketch  of  the  development  as  it  were  by  successive
impulses,  under  strong  disbelief  and  discouragement,  of  a  group  of  mental
tendencies,  faculties,  or  sensibilities  now  recognised  as  truly  existing  and  as
often  salutary,  is  closely  paralleled  by  the   development,   under  similar
difficulties,  of  another  group  of  faculties  or  sensibilities,  whose  existence  is
still  disputed,  but  which  if  firmly  established  may  prove  to  be  of  even
greater  moment  for  mankind.

At  no  time  known  to  us,  whether  before  or  since  the  Christian  era,  has
the  series  of  trance-manifestations — of  supposed  communications  with  a
supernal  world — entirely  ceased.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  days  of  St.
Theresa,  such  trance  or  ecstasy  has  been,  one  may  say,  the  central  or  cul-
minant fact  in  the  Christian  world.  Of  these  experiences  I  must  not  here
treat.  The  evidence  for  them  is  largely  of  a  subjective  type,  and  they  may
belong  more  fitly  to  some  future  discussion  as  to  the  amount  of  confidence
due  to  the  interpretation  given  by  entranced  persons  to  their  own  pheno-
mena.

Hut  in  the  midst  of  this  long  series,  and  in  full  analogy  to  many  minor
cases,  occurs  the  exceptional  trance-history  of  Emmanuel  Swedenborg.  In
this  case,  as  is  well  known,  there  appears  to  have  been  excellent  objective
evidence  both  of  clairvoyance  or  telaesthesia  and  of  communication  with
:  ted  persons ; — and  we  can  only  regret  that  the  philosopher  Kant,
who  satisfied  himself  of  some  part  of  Swedenborg's  supernormal l  gift,  did

1  I  have  ventured  to  coin  the  word  "  supernormal "  to  be  applied  to  phenomena

which  are  beyond  what  usually  happfns— beyond,  that  is,  in  the  sense  of   suggrsiinj;

It  is  thus  formed  on  the  analogy  of  abnormal.     When  %\<

speak  mal  phenomenon  we  do  not  mean  one  which  contravenes  natural  laws,

but   one   which    exhibits  them  in   an   unusual   or    inexplicable   form.     Similarly  by   a

supernormal  phenomenon  T  mean,  not  on<  natural  laws,  for  I  believe

no  such  phenomenon  to  exist,  hut  one  which  exhibits  the  action  of  laws  higher,  in  a

cal  aspect,  than  arc  discerned  in  action  in  everyday  :  (either  in  a

*        ^cnsc)  I  mean,  apparently  belonging  to  a  more  advanced

8tag<  on.

6  CHAPTER    I  [106

not  press  further  an  inquiry  surpassed  in  importance  by  none  of  those
upon  which  his  master-mind  was  engaged.  Apart,  however,  from  these
objective  evidences,  the  mere  subject-matter  of  Swedenborg's  trance-revela-
tions was  enough  to  claim  respectful  attention.  I  cannot  here  discuss  the
strange  mixture  which  they  present  of  slavish  literalism  with  exalted  specu-
lation, of  pedantic  orthodoxy  with  physical  and  moral  insight  far  beyond
the  level  of  that  age.  It  is  enough  to  say  here  that  even  as  Socrates  called
down  philosophy  from  heaven  to  earth,  so  in  a  somewhat  different  sense  it
was  Swedenborg  who  called  up  philosophy  again  from  earth  to  heaven ; —
who  originated  the  notion  of  science  in  the  spiritual  world,  as  earnestly,
though  not  so  persuasively,  as  Socrates  originated  the  idea  of  science
in  this  world  which  we  seem  to  know.  It  was  to  Swedenborg  first
that  that  unseen  world  appeared  before  all  things  as  a  realm  of  law ;  a
region  not  of  mere  emotional  vagueness  or  stagnancy  of  adoration,  but
of  definite  progress  according  to  definite  relations  of  cause  and  effect,
resulting  from  structural  laws  of  spiritual  existence  and  intercourse  which
we  may  in  time  learn  partially  to  apprehend.  For  my  own  part  I  regard
Swedenborg, — not,  assuredly,  as  an  inspired  teacher,  nor  even  as  a  trust-
worthy interpreter  of  his  own  experiences, — but  yet  as  a  true  and  early
precursor  of  that  great  inquiry  which  it  is  our  present  object  to  advance.

106.  The  next  pioneer — fortunately  still  amongst  us — whom  I  must
mention  even  in  this  summary  notice,  is  the  celebrated  physicist  and
chemist,  Sir  W.  Crookes.  Just  as  Swedenborg  was  the  first  leading  man
of  science  who  distinctly  conceived  of  the  spiritual  world  as  a  world  of
law,  so  was  Sir  W.  Crookes  the  first  leading  man  of  science  who  seriously
endeavoured  to  test  the  alleged  mutual  influence  and  interpenetration  of
the  spiritual  world  and  our  own  by  experiments  of  scientific  precision.1
Beyond  the  establishment  of  certain  supernormal  facts  Crookes  declined
to  go.  But  a  large  group  of  persons  have  founded  upon  these  and
similar  facts  a  scheme  of  belief  known  as  Modern  Spiritualism,  or
Spiritism.  Later  chapters  in  this  book  will  show  how  much  I  owe  to
certain  observations  made  by  members  of  this  group — how  often  my  own
conclusions  concur  with  conclusions  at  which  they  have  previously  arrived.
And  yet  this  work  of  mine  is  in  large  measure  a  critical  attack  upon  the
main  Spiritist  position,  as  held,  say,  by  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  its  most
eminent  living  supporter, — the  belief,  namely,  that  all  or  almost  all  super-
normal phenomena  are  due  to  the  action  of  spirits  of  the  dead.  By  far
the  larger  proportion,  as  I  hold,  are  due  to  the  action  of  the  still  embodied
spirit  of  the  agent  or  percipient  himself.  Apart  from  speculative  differ-

1  Other  savants  of  eminence — the  great  name  of  Alfred  Russel  Wallace  will  occur  to
all — had  also  satisfied  themselves  of  the  reality  of  these  strange  phenomena ;  but  they
had  not  tested  or  demonstrated  that  reality  with  equal  care.  I  am  not  able  in  this  brief
sketch  to  allude  to  distinguished  men  of  earlier  date — Richard  Glanvil,  John  Wesley,
Samuel  Johnson,  &c.,  who  discerned  the  importance  of  phenomena  which  they  had  no
adequate  means  of  investigating.

107]  INTRODUCTION  7

ences,  moreover,  I  altogether  dissent  from  the  conversion  into  a  sectarian
creed  of  what  I  hold  should  be  a  branch  of  scientific  inquiry,  growing
naturally  out  of  our  existing  knowledge.  It  is,  I  believe,  largely  to  this
temper  of  uncritical  acceptance,  degenerating  often  into  blind  credulity,
that  we  must  refer  the  lack  of  progress  in  Spiritualistic  literature,  and  the
encouragement  which  has  often  been  bestowed  upon  manifest  fraud, — so
often,  indeed,  as  to  create  among  scientific  men  a  strong  indisposition  to
the  study  of  phenomena  recorded  or  advocated  in  a  tone  so  alien  from
Science.

107.  I  know  not  how  much  of  originality  or  importance  may  be
attributed  by  subsequent  students  of  the  subject  to  the  step  next  in  order
in  this  series  of  approximations.  To  those  immediately  concerned,  the
feeling  of  a  new  departure  was  inevitably  given  by  the  very  smallness  of
the  support  which  they  for  a  long  time  received,  and  by  the  difficulty
which  they  found  in  making  their  point  of  view  intelligible  to  the  scientific,
to  the  religious,  or  even  to  the  spiritualistic  world.  In  about  1873 — at  the
crest,  as  one  may  say,  of  perhaps  the  highest  wave  of  materialism  which  has
ever  swept  over  these  shores — it  became  the  conviction  of  a  small  group  of
Cambridge  friends  that  the  deep  questions  thus  at  issue  must  be  fought
out  in  a  way  more  thorough  than  the  champions  either  of  religion  or  of
materialism  had  yet  suggested.  Our  attitudes  of  mind  were  in  some  ways
different ;  but  to  myself,  at  least,  it  seemed  that  no  adequate  attempt  had
yet  been  made  even  to  determine  whether  anything  could  be  learnt  as  to
an  unseen  world  or  no ;  for  that  if  anything  were  knowable  about  such  a
world  in  such  fashion  that  Science  could  adopt  and  maintain  that  know-
ledge, it  must  be  discovered  by  no  analysis  of  tradition,  and  by  no  mani-
pulation of  metaphysics,  but  simply  by  experiment  and  observation; —
simply  by  the  application  to  phenomena  within  us  and  around  us  of  pre-
cisely the  same  methods  of  deliberate,  dispassionate,  exact  inquiry  which
have  built  up  our  actual  knowledge  of  the  world  which  we  can  touch  and
see.  I  can  hardly  even  now  guess  to  how  many  of  my  readers  this  will
seem  a  truism,  and  to  how  many  a  paradox.  Truism  or  paradox,  such  a
thought  suggested  a  kind  of  effort,  which,  so  far  as  we  could  discover,  had
never  yet  been  made.  For  what  seemed  needful  was  an  inquiry  of  quite
other  scope  than  the  mere  analysis  of  historical  documents,  or  of  the
:>•$  of  any  alleged  revelation  in  the  past.  It  must  be  an  inquiry  rest-
ing primarily,  as  all  scientific  inquiries  in  the  stricter  sense  now  must  rest,
objective  facts  actually  observable,  upon  experiments  which  we  can
repeat  to-day,  and  which  we  may  hope  to  carry  further  to-morrow.  It
must  be  an  inquiry  based,  to  use  an  old  term,  on  the  uniformitarian  hypo-
thesis;  on  the  presumption,  that  is  to  say,  that  //  a  spiritual  world V
and  if  that  world  has  atanyfpoch  been  manifest  or  even  discoverable,  then  it
ought  to  be  manifest  or  discoverable  now.

It  was  from  this  side,  and  from  these  general  considerations,  that  the
group  with  which  I  have  worked  approached  the  subject.      Our  methods,

8  CHAPTER    I  [108

our  canons,  were  all  to  make.  In  those  early  days  we  were  more  devoid
of  precedents,  of  guidance,  even  of  criticism  that  went  beyond  mere  ex-
pressions of  contempt,  than  is  now  readily  conceived.  Seeking  evidence
as  best  we  could — collecting  round  us  a  small  group  of  persons  willing  to
help  in  that  quest  for  residual  phenomena  in  the  nature  and  experience  of
man — we  were  at  last  fortunate  enough  to  discover  a  convergence  of  ex-
perimental and  of  spontaneous  evidence  upon  one  definite  and  important
point.  We  were  led  to  believe  that  there  was  truth  in  a  thesis  which  at
least  since  Swedenborg  and  the  early  mesmerists  had  been  repeatedly,  but
cursorily  and  ineffectually,  presented  to  mankind — the  thesis  that  a  com-
munication can  take  place  from  mind  to  mind  by  some  agency  not  that  of  the
recognised  organs  of  sense.  We  found  that  this  agency,  discernible  even
on  trivial  occasions  by  suitable  experiment,  seemed  to  connect  itself  with
an  agency  more  intense,  or  at  any  rate  more  recognisable,  which  operated  at
moments  of  crisis  or  at  the  hour  of  death.  Edmund  Gurney — the  invalu-
able collaborator  and  friend  whose  loss  in  1888  was  our  heaviest  dis-
couragement— set  forth  this  evidence  in  a  large  work,  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  in  whose  preparation  Mr.  Podmore  and  I  took  a  minor  part.  The
fifteen  years  which  have  elapsed  since  the  publication  of  this  book  in  1886
have  added  to  the  evidence  on  which  Gurney  relied,  and  have  shown  (I
venture  to  say)  the  general  soundness  of  the  canons  of  evidence  and  the
lines  of  argument  which  it  was  his  task  to  shape  and  to  employ.1

108.  Of  fundamental  importance,  indeed,  is  this  doctrine  of  telepathy
— the  first  law,  may  one  not  say? — laid  open  to  man's  discovery,  which,  in
my  view  at  least,  while  operating  in  the  material,  is  itself  a  law  of  the
spiritual  or  metethcrial 2  world.  In  the  course  of  this  work  it  will  be  my
task  to  show  in  many  connections  how  far-reaching  are  the  implications  of
this  direct  and  supersensory  communion  of  mind  with  mind.  Among
those  implications  none  can  be  more  momentous  than  the  light  thrown  by
this  discovery  upon  man's  intimate  nature  and  possible  survival  of  death.

We  gradually  discovered  that  the  accounts  of  apparitions  at  the  moment
of  death — testifying  to  a  supersensory  communication  between  the  dying
man  and  the  friend  who  sees  him — led  on  without  perceptible  break  to
apparitions  occurring  after  the  death  of  the  person  seen,  but  while  that
death  was  yet  unknown  to  the  percipient,  and  thus  apparently  due,  not  to
mere  brooding  memory,  but  to  a  continued  action  of  that  departed  spirit.
The  task  next  incumbent  on  us  therefore  seemed  plainly  to  be  the  collec-
tion and  analysis  of  evidence  of  this  and  other  types,  pointing  directly  to
the  survival  of  man's  spirit.  But  after  pursuing  this  task  for  some  years  I
felt  that  in  reality  the  step  from  the  action  of  embodied  to  the  action  of

1  The  Society  for  Psychical  Research  was  founded  in  1882,  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett
taking  a  leading  part  in  its  promotion.     Henry  Sidgwick  was  its  first  President,  and
Edmund  Gurney  was  its  first  Honorary  Secretary — he  and  I  being  joint  Honorary  Secre-
taries of  its  Literary  Committee,  whose  business  was  the  collection  of  evidence.

2  For  this  term  see  Glossary.

109]  INTRODUCTION  9

disembodied  spirits  would  still  seem  too  sudden  if  taken  in  this  direct
way.  So  for,  indeed,  as  the  evidence  from  apparitions  went,  the  series
seemed  continuous  from  phantasms  of  the  living  to  phantasms  of  the  dead.
But  the  whole  mass  of  evidence  prima  facie  pointing  to  man's  survival  was
of  a  much  more  complex  kind.  It  consisted  largely,  for  example,  in
written  or  spoken  utterances,  coming  through  the  hand  or  voice  of  living
men,  but  claiming  to  proceed  from  a  disembodied  source.  To  these
utterances,  as  a  whole,  no  satisfactory  criterion  had  ever  been  applied.

In  considering  cases  of  this  kind,  then,  it  became  gradually  plain  to
me  that  before  we  could  safely  mark  off  any  group  of  manifestations  as
definitely  implying  an  influence  from  beyond  the  grave,  there  was  need  of
a  more  searching  review  of  the  capacities  of  man's  incarnate  personality
than  psychologists  unfamiliar  with  this  new  evidence  had  thought  it  worth
their  while  to  undertake.

It  was  only  slowly,  and  as  it  were  of  necessity,  that  I  embarked  on  a
task  which  needed  for  its  proper  accomplishment  a  knowledge  and  train-
ing far  beyond  what  I  could  claim.  The  very  inadequate  sketch  which
has  resulted  from  my  efforts  is  even  in  its  author's  view  no  more  than  pre-
paratory and  precursive  to  the  fuller  and  sounder  treatment  of  the  same
subject  which  I  doubt  not  that  the  new  century  will  receive  from  more
competent  hands.  The  truest  success  of  this  book  will  lie  in  its  rapid
supersession  by  a  better.  For  this  will  show  that  at  least  I  have  not  erred
in  supposing  that  a  serious  treatise  on  these  topics  is  nothing  else  than
the  inevitable  complement  and  conclusion  of  the  slow  process  by  which
man  has  brought  under  the  domain  of  science  every  group  of  attainable
phenomena  in  turn — every  group  save  this.

109.     Let  me  then  without  further  preamble  embark  upon  that  some-
what detailed  survey  of  human  faculty,  as  manifested  during  various  phases
of  human  personality,  which  is  needful  in  order  to  throw  fresh  light  on
these  unfamiliar  themes.     My  discussion,  I  may  say  at  once,  will  avoid
metaphysics  as  carefully  as  it  will  avoid  theology.     I  avoid  theology,  as
already  explained,  because  I  consider  that  in  arguments  founded  upon
•mient  and  observation  I  have  no  right  to  appeal  for  support  to  tradi-
tional or   subjective    considerations,  however  important.     For  somewhat
similar  reasons   I   do  not  desire  to  introduce  the  idea  of  personality  with
any  historical  resume  of  the  philosophical  opinions  which  have  been  held
by  various  thinkers  in  the  past,  nor  myself  to  speculate  on  matters  lying
ul  the  possible  field  of  objective  proof.     I  shall  merely  for  the  sake  of
:ess  begin  by  the  briefest  possible  statement  of  two  views  of  human
personality    which    cannot    be    ignored,    namely,    the     old-fashioned   or
v  thereof,  which  is  still  held  by  the  mass  of  mankind,
and  the  newer  view  of  experimental  psychology,  bringing  out  that  com-
posite  or   "  colonial "    character   which   on   a   close   examination  every
personality  of  men  or  animals  is  seen  to  wear.

io  CHAPTER    I  [110

The  following  passage,  taken  from  a  work  once  of  much  note,  Reid's
"  Essay  on  the  Intellectual  Powers  of  Man,"  expresses  the  simple  primd
facie  view  with  care  and  precision,  yet  with  no  marked  impress  of  any  one
philosophical  school : —

The  conviction  which  every  man  has  of  his  identity,  as  far  back  as  his
memory  reaches,  needs  no  aid  of  philosophy  to  strengthen  it;  and  no  philo-
sophy can  weaken  it  without  first  producing  some  degree  of  insanity.  .  .  .  My
personal  identity,  therefore,  implies  the  continued  existence  of  that  indivisible
thing  which  I  call  myself.  Whatever  this  self  may  be,  it  is  something  which
thinks,  and  deliberates,  and  resolves,  and  acts,  and  suffers.  I  am  not  thought,
I  am  not  action,  I  am  not  feeling  ;  I  am  something  that  thinks,  and  acts,  and
suffers.  My  thoughts  and  actions  and  feelings  change  every  moment:  they
have  no  continued,  but  a  successive  existence  ;  but  that  self  or  /,  to  which  they
belong,  is  permanent,  and  has  the  same  relation  to  all  succeeding  thoughts,
actions,  and  feelings  which  I  call  mine.  .  .  .  The  identity  of  a  person  is  a  per-
fect identity;  wherever  it  is  real  it  admits  of  no  degrees;  and  it  is  impossible
that  a  person  should  be  in  part  the  same  and  in  part  different,  because  a  person
is  a  monad,  and  is  not  divisible  into  parts.  Identity,  when  applied  to  persons,
has  no  ambiguity,  and  admits  not  of  degrees,  or  of  more  and  less.  It  is  the
foundation  of  all  rights  and  obligations,  and  of  all  accountableness  ;  and  the
notion  of  it  is  fixed  and  precise.

110.  Contrast  with  this  the  passage  with  which  M.  Ribot  concludes
his  essay  on  "  Les  Maladies  de  la  PersonnaliteY'

It  is  the  organism,  with  the  brain,  its  supreme  representative,  which  con-
stitutes the  real  personality  ;  comprising  in  itself  the  remains  of  all  that  we
have  been  and  the  possibilities  of  all  that  we  shall  be.  The  whole  individual
character  is  there  inscribed,  with  its  active  and  passive  aptitudes,  its  sympathies
and  antipathies,  its  genius,  its  talent  or  its  stupidity,  its  virtues  and  its  vices,  its
torpor  or  its  activity.  The  part  thereof  which  emerges  into  consciousness  is  little
compared  with  what  remains  buried,  but  operative  nevertheless.  The  con-
scious personality  is  never  more  than  a  small  fraction  of  the  psychical  person-
ality. The  unity  of  the  Ego  is  not  therefore  the  unity  of  a  single  entity  diffusing
itself  among  multiple  phenomena;  it  is  the  co-ordination  of  a  certain  number
of  states  perpetually  renascent,  and  having  for  their  sole  common  basis  the
vague  feeling  of  our  body.  This  unity  does  not  diffuse  itself  downwards,  but
is  aggregated  by  ascent  from  below ;  it  is  not  an  initial  but  a  terminal  point.

Does  then  this  perfect  unity  really  exist  ?  In  the  rigorous,  the  mathe-
matical sense,  assuredly  it  does  not.  In  a  relative  sense  it  is  met  with, — rarely
and  for  a  moment.  When  a  good  marksman  takes  aim,  or  a  skilful  surgeon
operates,  his  whole  body  and  mind  converge  towards  a  single  act.  But  note
the  result ;  under  those  conditions  the  sentiment  of  real  personality  disappears,
for  the  conscious  individual  is  simplified  into  a  single  idea,  and  the  personal
sentiment  is  excluded  by  the  complete  unification  of  consciousness.  We  thus
return  by  another  route  to  the  same  conclusion  ;  the  Self  is  a  co-ordination.  It
oscillates  between  two  extremes  at  each  of  which  it  ceases  to  exist ; — absolute
unity  and  absolute  incoherence.

The  last  word  of  all  this  is  that  since  the  consensus  of  consciousness  is  sub-
ordinated to  the  consensus  of  the  organism,  the  problem  of  the  unity  of  the  Ego

Ill]  INTRODUCTION  11

is  in  its  ultimate  form  a  problem  of  Biology.  Let  Biology  explain,  if  it  can,  the
genesis  of  organisms  and  the  solidarity  of  their  constituent  parts.  The  psycho-
logical explanation  must  needs  follow  on  the  same  track.

111.  Here,  then,  we  have  two  clear  and  definite  views, — supported,
the  one  by  our  inmost  consciousness,  the  other  by  unanswerable  observation
and  inference, — yet  apparently  incompatible  the  one  with  the  other.  And
in  fact  by  most  writers  they  have  been  felt  and  acknowledged  to  be  even
hopelessly  incompatible.  The  supporters  of  the  view  that  "  The  Self  is  a
co-ordination," — and  this,  I  need  hardly  say,  is  now  the  view  prevalent
among  experimental  psychologists, — have  frankly  given  up  any  notion  of
an  underlying  unity, — of  a  life  independent  of  the  organism, — in  a  word,
of  a  human  soul.  The  supporters  of  the  unity  of  the  Ego,  on  the  other
hand,  if  they  have  not  been  able  to  be  equally  explicit  in  denying  the
opposite  view,  have  made  up  for  this  by  the  thorough-going  way  in  which
they  have  ignored  it.  I  know  of  no  source  from  which  valid  help  has  been
offered  towards  the  reconcilement  of  the  two  opposing  systems  in  a  pro-
founder  synthesis.  If  I  believe — as  I  do  believe — that  in  the  present
work  some  help  in  this  direction  is  actually  given,  this  certainly  does  not
mean  that  I  suppose  myself  capable  of  stitching  the  threadbare  meta-
physical arguments  into  a  more  stable  fabric.  It  simply  means  that
certain  fresh  evidence  can  now  be  adduced,  which  has  the  effect  of  showing
the  case  on  each  side  in  a  novel  light ; — nay,  even  of  closing  the  immediate
controversy  by  a  judgment  more  decisively  in  favour  of  both  parties  than
either  could  have  expected.  On  the  one  side,  and  in  favour  of  the
co-ordinators, — all  their  analysis  of  the  Self  into  its  constituent  elements,
all  that  they  urge  of  positive  observation,  of  objective  experiment,  must —
as  I  shall  maintain  on  the  strength  of  the  new  facts  which  I  shall  adduce
— be  unreservedly  conceded.  Let  them  push  their  analysis  as  far  as  they
like, — let  them  get  down,  if  they  can,  to  those  ultimate  infinitesimal
psychical  elements  from  which  is  upbuilt  the  complex,  the  composite,  the
"colonial"  structure  and  constitution  of  man.  All  this  may  well  be  valid
and  important  work.  It  is  only  on  their  negative  side  that  the  conclusions
of  this  school  need  a  complete  overhauling.  Deeper,  bolder  inquiry  along
their  own  line  shows  that  they  have  erred  when  they  asserted  that  analysis
showed  no  trace  of  faculty  beyond  such  as  the  life  of  earth — as  they  con-

it — could  foster,  or  the  environment  of  earth  employ.     For  in  reality!

il  shows  traces  of  faculty  which  this  material  or  planetary  life  could
not  have  called  into  being,  and  whose  exercise  even  here  and  now  involves
and  necessitates  the  existence  of  a  spiritual  world.

On  the  other  side,  and  in  favour  of  the  partisans  of  the  unity  of  the
Ego,  the  effect  of  the  new  evidence  is  to  raise  their  claim  to  a  far  higher
ground,  and  to  substantiate  it  for  the  first  time  with  the  strongest  pre-
>roof  which  can  be  imagined  for  it; — a  proof,  namely,  that  the
Ego  can  and  does  survive — not  only  the  minor  disintegrations  which
affect  it  during  earth-life — but  the  crowning  disintegration  of  bodily  death.

12  CHAPTER    I  [112

In  view  of  this  unhoped-for  ratification  of  their  highest  dream,  they  may
be  more  than  content  to  surrender  as  untenable  the  far  narrower  concep-
tion of  the  unitary  Self  which  was  all  that  "  common-sense  philosophies  "
had  ventured  to  claim.  The  "  conscious  Self"  of  each  of  us,  as  we  call  it,
—the  empirical,  the  supraliminal  Self,  as  I  should  prefer  to  say, — does  not
comprise  the  whole  of  the  consciousness  or  of  the  faculty  within  us.  There
exists  a  more  comprehensive  consciousness,  a  profounder  faculty,  which
for  the  most  part  remains  potential  only  so  far  as  regards  the  life  of  earth,
but  from  which  the  consciousness  and  the  faculty  of  earth-life  are  mere
selections,  and  which  reasserts  itself  in  its  plenitude  after  the  liberating
change  of  death.

Towards  this  conclusion,  which  assumed  for  me  something  like  its
present  shape  some  fourteen  years  since,1  a  long  series  of  tentative  specu-
lations, based  on  gradually  accruing  evidence,  has  slowly  conducted  me.
The  conception  is  one  which  has  hitherto  been  regarded  as  purely  mys-
tical ;  and  if  I  endeavour  to  plant  it  upon  a  scientific  basis  I  certainly
shall  not  succeed  in  stating  it  in  its  final  terms  or  in  supporting  it  with
the  best  arguments  which  longer  experience  will  suggest.  Its  validity,
indeed,  will  be  impressed — if  at  all — upon  the  reader  only  by  the  succes-
sive study  of  the  various  kinds  of  evidence  which  this  book  will  set  forth.

112.  Yet  so  far  as  the  initial  possibility  or  plausibility  of  such  a  widened
conception  of  human  consciousness  is  concerned ; — and  this  is  all  which
can  be  dealt  with  at  this  moment  of  its  first  introduction ; — I  have  not
seen  in  such  criticism  as  has  hitherto  been  bestowed  upon  my  theory  any
very  weighty  demurrer.  I  summarise  in  a  note  an  attack  of  this  kind,
with  what  seems  to  me  an  adequate  reply  from  a  colleague's  pen.2

1  See,  for  instance,  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  (henceforth  in
this  book  referred  to  as  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.),  vol.  iv.  p.  256,  Jan.  1887.

2  See  an  article  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  317  to  325, entitled  "Subliminal
Self  or  Unconscious  Cerebration,"  by  Mr.  A.  H.  Pierce,  of  Harvard  University.     Mr.
Pierce  maintains  ( i )  that  the  hypothesis  of  a  subliminal  self  or  secondary  consciousness  is
chiefly  based  on  a  study  of  hysteria,  in  which  sensations  and  movements  are  not  governed
by  the  primary  consciousness.     But  these  hysterical  phenomena  are,  he  argues,  simply
analogous  to  the  actions  of  animals  deprived  of  their  cerebral  hemispheres,  and  it  is
unnecessary  to  suppose  that  they  are  accompanied  by  any  consciousness  at  all.     (2)  The
ordinary  automatic  actions  of  normal  persons  are  ascribed  by  some  to  a  secondary  con-
sciousness.    But  "  if  this  theory  ...  be  made  to  do  its  full  duty,  the  doctrine  that
habits  are  due  to  well-worn  nervous  paths  must  be  abandoned,  and  all  the  phenomena
now  ascribed  to  habit  must  be  classed  under  the  head  of  relegations  to  a  secondary  con-
sciousness."

Further,  the  secondary  consciousness  is,  ex  hypothesi,  divided  into  two  parts, — one
associated  with  physiological  functions  and  the  other  with  the  highest  mental  processes,
such  as  the  "  inspirations  of  genius  "  ;  and  if  we  once  admit  the  possibility  of  such  sub-
division, consistency  demands  that  we  should  posit  a  separate  consciousness  for  each
physical  process.

(3)  We  have  no  direct  testimony  for  the  existence  of  a  split-off  consciousness.  The
dream-consciousness  is  said  to  be  thus  split  off  because  dream-images — forgotten  on
waking — are  sometimes  observed  to  recur  in  another  dream.  But  this  in  itself  proves

112]  INTRODUCTION  13

•  Normally  at  least,"  says  another  critic,  summarising  in  a  few  words
the  ordinary  view,  "  all  the  consciousness  we  have  at  any  moment  corre-
sponds to  all  the  activity  which  is  going  on  at  that  moment  in  the  brain.
There  is  one  unitary  conscious  state  accompanying  all  the  simultaneous
brain  excitations  together,  and  each  single  part  of  the  brain-process  con-
tributes something  to  its  nature.  None  of  the  brain- processes  split  them-
selves off  from  the  rest  and  have  a  separate  consciousness  of  their  own."
This  is,  no  doubt,  the  apparent  dictum  of  consciousness,  but  it  is  nothing
more.  And  the  dicta  of  consciousness  have  already  been  shown  to  need
correction  in  so  many  ways  which  the  ordinary  observer  could  never  have
anticipated  that  we  have  surely  no  right  to  trust  consciousness,  so  to  say,  a
step  further  than  we  can  feel  it, — to  hold  that  anything  whatever — even  a
separate  consciousness  in  our  own  organisms — can  be  proved  not  to  exist
by  the  mere  fact  that  we — as  we  know  ourselves — are  not  aware  of  it.

But  indeed  this  claim  to  a  unitary  consciousness  tends  to  become  less
forcible  as  it  is  more  scientifically  expressed.  It  rests  on  the  plain  man's  con-
viction that  there  is  only  one  of  him  ;  and  this  conviction  the  experimental
psychologist  is  always  tending  to  weaken  or  narrow  by  the  admission  of
coexistent  localised  degrees  of  consciousness  in  the  brain,  which  are  at  any
rate  not  obviously  reducible  to  a  single  state.  Even  those  who  would  stop

that  the  fact  of  recurrence  and  knowledge  of  the  recurring  events  were  present  in  the
primary  consciousness,  which  is  thereby  shown  not  to  be  separate  from  the  dream-con-
sciousness. If  the  primary  consciousness  attempts  to  bear  witness  to  the  existence  of  a
secondary  dissociated  fragment,  "  it  thereby  proves  that  the  fragment  is  a  portion  of
ind  therefore  no  fragment  at  all."  ..."  All  the  facts  usually  taken  in  support  of
a  double-consciousness  theory  appear  explicable  in  terms  of  brain  alone."

In  reply  to  this,  Mr.  Podmore  (op.  cit.  pp.  325  to  332)  has  well  pointed  out  that  the
criticism  n.-sts  almost  wholly  on  an  attempt  to  explain  mental  phenomena  on  a  physical
The  fact  is  that,  accompanying  the  mental  phenomena — states  of  consciousness,
there  are  physical  phenomena — brain-changes ;  but  no  knowledge  of  the  one  throws
any  light  on  the  other.     The  physical  explanation  cannot  be  substituted  for  the  mental
one,  because  it  applies  to  a  different  category  of  facts.     The  two  sets  may  indeed  be
diverse  aspects  of  the  same  essential  fact,  but  for  practical  purposes  we  have  to  regard
them  as  distinct  and  treat  them  separately.     From  the  actions  of  brainless  animals  we
therefore  argue  to  the  consciousness  of  hysterics.  Again,  to  ascribe  mental  habits
to  well-worn  brain-paths  has  no  bearing  on  the  question  whether  they  are  accompanied
by  consciousness  or  not.    With  regard  to  direct  testimony  to  the  existence  of  a  secondary
•"  rhaps  the  strongest  is  to  be  found  in  the  hypnotic  condition.     "The
^ubject  presents,  or  may  present,  ...  all  the  phenomena  which  we  associate
with  consciousness,  not  merely  in  our  own  case,  but  in  the  case  of  the  same  person  when
in  hb  normal  state.     He  talks,  acts,  reasons;  exhibits  emotion,  judgment,  volition."
c  frequently  so  difficult  and  complicated  as  necessarily  to  imply  the
•:  of  the  fullest  intelligence  of  which  [he]  is  capable.    Moreover,  the  re-hypnotised
t  remcml>ers  the  performance  of  the  enjoined  act,  and  can  explain  any  peculiarities
c,  and  correct  mistakes  made.     It  would  surely  be  extravagant  to  refuse
to  admit  that  such  acts  are  deliberately  and  consciously  performed."  ..."  And  the
consciousness  of  the  hypnotic  is  certainly  not  identical  with  the  consciousness  of  the
^  state.     With  rare  exceptions  it  is  more  extensive';  it  includes  the  waking  con-
sciousness as  a  larger  includes  a  smaller  concentric  circle,  itself  not  included  by  it."

14  CHAPTER    I  [112

far  short  of  my  own  position  find  it  needful  to  resort  to  metaphors  of  their
own  to  express  the  different  streams  of  "  awareness  "  which  we  all  feel  to
be  habitually  coexistent  within  us.  They  speak  of  "  fringes  "  of  ordinary
consciousness  ;  of  "  marginal  "  associations  ;  of  the  occasional  perception
of  "  currents  of  low  intensity."  These  metaphors  may  all  of  them  be  of
use,  in  a  region  where  metaphor  is  our  only  mode  of  expression ;  but  none
of  them  covers  all  the  facts  now  collected.  And  on  the  other  side,  I  need
not  say,  are  plenty  of  phrases  which  beg  the  question  of  soul  and  body,  or
of  the  man's  own  spirit  and  external  spirits,  in  no  scientific  fashion.
There  seems  to  be  need  of  a  term  of  wider  application,  which  shall  make
as  few  assumptions  as  possible.  Nor  is  such  a  term  difficult  to  find.

The  idea  of  a  threshold  (limen,  Schwelle^)  of  consciousness ; —  of  a  level
above  which  sensation  or  thought  must  rise  before  it  can  enter  into  our
conscious  life ; — is  a  simple  and  familiar  one.  The  word  subliminal, —
meaning  "  beneath  that  threshold," — has  already  been  used  to  define  those
sensations  which  are  too  feeble  to  be  individually  recognised.  I  propose
to  extend  the  meaning  of  the  term,  so  as  to  make  it  cover  all  that  takes
place  beneath  the  ordinary  threshold,  or  say,  if  preferred,  outside  the
ordinary  margin  of  consciousness ; — not  only  those  faint  stimulations
whose  very  faintness  keeps  them  submerged,  but  much  else  which  psycho-
logy as  yet  scarcely  recognises ;  sensations,  thoughts,  emotions,  which  may
be  strong,  definite,  and  independent,  but  which,  by  the  original  constitu-
tion, of  our  being,  seldom  emerge  into  that  supraliminal  current  of
consciousness  which  we  habitually  identify  with  ourselves.  Perceiving  (as
this  book  will  try  to  show)  that  these  submerged  thoughts  and  emotions
possess  the  characteristics  which  we  associate  with  conscious  life,  I  feel
bound  to  speak  of  a  subliminal  or  ultra-marginal  consciousness? —  a  con-
sciousness which  we  shall  see,  for  instance,  uttering  or  writing  sentences
quite  as  complex  and  coherent  as  the  supraliminal  consciousness  could
make  them.  Perceiving  further  that  this  conscious  life  beneath  the
threshold  or  beyond  the  margin  seems  to  be  no  discontinuous  or  inter-
mittent thing;  that  not  only  are  these  isolated  subliminal  processes
comparable  with  isolated  supraliminal  processes  (as  when  a  problem  is
solved  by  some  unknown  procedure  in  a  dream),  but  that  there  also  is  a

1  It  is  naturally  impossible  to  express  by  the  help  of  any  single  metaphor  the
complex  and  changing  relation  between  that  part  of  our  personality  with  which  in
waking  life  we  consciously  identify  ourselves,  and  that  part  which  is  not  habitually
represented  in  our  consciousness.  A  field  of  view  is  quite  as  natural  a  metaphor  as  a
threshold,  and  we  may  naturally  speak  of  infra-marginal  and  extra-marginal.

These  terms,  of  course,  are  merely  superficial,— denoting  a  relationship  to  conscious-
ness which  is  capable  of  frequent  change,  and  is  not  in  itself  fundamental.

We  may  attempt,  indeed,  deeper  distinctions,  and  speak  of  the  empirical  self  on  the
one  hand,  and  the  surviving  or  the  transcendental  self  on  the  other  hand.  But  my
object  at  present  is  to  use  whatever  title  makes  the  least  assumption  ;  and  to  leave  it
to  our  evidence  gradually  to  give  definite  meaning  to  a  distinction  at  first  apprehended
in  a  vague  superficial  way.

114]  INTRODUCTION  15

continuous  subliminal  chain  of  memory  (or  more  chains  than  one)  involv-
ing just  that  kind  of  individual  and  persistent  revival  of  old  impressions,
and  response  to  new  ones,  which  we  commonly  call  a  Self, — I  find  it  per-
missible and  convenient  to  speak  of  subliminal  Selves,  or  more  briefly  of  a
subliminal  Self.  I  do  not  indeed  by  using  this  term  assume  that  there  are
two  correlative  and  parallel  selves  existing  always  within  each  of  us.
Rather  I  mean  by  the  subliminal  Self  that  part  of  the  Self  which  is
commonly  subliminal;  and  I  conceive  that  there  may  be, — not  only
co-operations  between  these  quasi-independent  trains  of  thought, — but  also
upheavals  and  alternations  of  personality  of  many  kinds,  so  that  what  was
once  below  the  surface  may  for  a  time,  or  permanently,  rise  above  it.  And
I  conceive  also  that  no  Self  of  which  we  can  here  have  cognisance  is  in
reality  more  than  a  fragment  of  a  larger  Self, — revealed  in  a  fashion  at
once  shifting  and  limited  through  an  organism  not  so  framed  as  to  afford
it  full  manifestation.

113.  Now  this  hypothesis  is  exposed  manifestly  to  two  main  forms  of
attack,  which  to  a  certain  extent  neutralise  each  other.     On  the  one  hand
it  has  been  attacked,  as  has  already  been  indicated,  as  being  too  elaborate
for  the  facts, — as  endowing  transitory  moments  of  subconscious  intelligence
with  more  continuity  and  independence  than  they  really  possess.     These
ripples  over  the  threshold,  it  may  be  said,  can  be  explained  by  the  wind
of  circumstance,  without  assuming  springs  or  currents  in  the  personality
deep  below.

But  soon  we  shall  come  upon  a  group  of  phenomena  which  this  view
will  by  no  means  meet.  For  we  shall  find  that  the  subliminal  uprushes, —
the  impulses  or  communications  which  reach  our  emergent  from  our
submerged  selves, — are  (in  spite  of  their  miscellaneousness)  often  charac-
teristically different  in  quality  from  any  element  known  to  our  ordinary
supraliminal  life.  They  are  different  in  a  way  which  implies  faculty  of
which  we  have  had  no  previous  knowledge,  operating  in  an  environment
of  which  hitherto  we  have  been  wholly  unaware.  This  broad  statement  it
is  of  course  the  purpose  of  my  whole  work  to  justify.  Assuming  its  truth
here  for  argument's  sake,  we  see  at  once  that  the  problem  of  the  hidden  self
entirely  changes  its  aspect.  Telepathy  and  telaesthesia — the  perception  of
distant  thoughts  and  of  distant  scenes  without  the  agency  of  the  recog-
organs  of  sense  ; — those  faculties  suggest  either  incalculable  extension
of  our  own  mental  powers,  or  else  the  influence  upon  us  of  minds  freer
and  less  trammelled  than  our  own.  And  this  second  hypothesis, — which
!  explain  by  the  agency  of  discarnate  minds,  or  spirits,  all  these
normal  plu-nonu-na, — does  at  first  sight  simplify  the  problem,  and
has  by  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace  and  others  been  pushed  so  far  as  to  remove  all
need  of  what  he  deems  the  gratuitous  and  cumbrous  hypothesis  of  a
subliminal  self.

114.  I  believe,  indeed,  that  it  will  become  plain  as  we  proceed  that
h  hypothesis  as  this, — of  almost  continuous  spirit-intervention  and

16  CHAPTER    I  [115

spirit-guidance, — is  at  once  rendered  necessary  if  the  subliminal  faculties  for
which  I  argue  are  denied  to  man.  And  my  conception  of  a  subliminal
self  will  thus  appear,  not  as  an  extravagant  and  needless,  but  as  a  limiting
and  rationalising  hypothesis,  when  it  is  applied  to  phenomena  which  at
first  sight  suggest  Mr.  Wallace's  extremer  view,  but  which  I  explain  by  the
action  of  man's  own  spirit,  without  invoking  spirits  external  to  himself.  I
do  not  indeed  say  that  the  explanation  here  suggested  is  applicable  in  all
cases,  or  to  the  complete  exclusion  of  the  spirit- hypothesis.  On  the  contrary,
the  one  view  gives  support  to  the  other.  For  these  faculties  of  distant
communication  exist  none  the  less,  even  though  we  should  refer  them  to
our  own  subliminal  selves.  We  can,  in  that  case,  affect  each  other  at  a
distance,  telepathically ; — and  if  our  incarnate  spirits  can  act  thus  in  at
least  apparent  independence  of  the  fleshly  body,  the  presumption  is  strong
that  other  spirits  may  exist  independently  of  the  body,  and  may  affect  us
in  similar  manner.

The  much-debated  hypothesis  of  spirit-intervention,  in  short,  still  looms
behind  the  hypothesis  of  the  subliminal  Self;  but  that  intermediate  hypo-
thesis should,  I  think,  in  this  early  stage  of  what  must  be  a  long  inquiry,
prove  useful  to  the  partisans  of  either  side.  For  those  who  are  altogether
unwilling  to  admit  the  action  of  agencies  other  than  the  spirits  of  living
men,  it  will  be  needful  to  form  as  high  an  estimate  as  possible  of  the
faculties  held  in  reserve  by  these  spirits  while  still  in  the  flesh.  For  those,
on  the  other  hand,  who  believe  in  the  influence  of  discarnate  spirits,  this
scheme  affords  a  path  of  transition,  and  as  it  were  a  provisional  intelligi-
bility.

115.  These  far-reaching  speculations  make  the  element  of  keenest
interest  in  the  inquiry  which  follows.  But  even  apart  from  its  possible
bearing  on  a  future  life,  the  further  study  of  our  submerged  mentation, —
of  the  processes  within  us  of  which  we  catch  only  indirect,  and  as  it  were,
refracted  glimpses, — seems  at  this  time  especially  called  for  by  the  trend
of  modern  research.'  For  of  late  years  we  have  realised  more  and  more
fully  upon  how  shifting  and  complex  a  foundation  of  ancestral  experience
each  individual  life  is  based.  In  recapitulation,  in  summary,  in  symbol,
we  retraverse,  from  the  embryo  to  the  corpse,  the  history  of  life  on  earth
for  millions  of  years.  During  our  self-adaptation  to  continually  wider
environments,  there  may  probably  have  been  a  continual  displacement  of
the  threshold  of  consciousness ; — involving  the  lapse  and  submergence  of
much  that  once  floated  in  the  main  stream  of  our  being.  Our  conscious-
ness at  any  given  stage  of  our  evolution  is  but  the  phosphorescent  ripple
on  an  unsounded  sea.  And,  like  the  ripple,  it  is  not  only  superficial  but
manifold.  Our  psychical  unity  is  federative  and  unstable ;  it  has  arisen
from  irregular  accretions  in  the  remote  past ;  it  consists  even  now  only  in
the  limited  collaboration  of  multiple  groups.  These  discontinuities  and
incoherences  in  the  Ego  the  elder  psychologists  managed  to  ignore.  Yet
infancy,  idiocy,  sleep,  insanity,  decay ; — these  breaks  and  stagnancies  in

117]  INTRODUCTION  17

the  conscious  stream  were  always  present  to  show  us,  even  more  forcibly
than  more  delicate  analyses  show  us  now,  that  the  first  obvious  conception
of  man's  continuous  and  unitary  personality  was  wholly  insecure  ;  and
that  if  indeed  a  soul  inspired  the  body,  that  soul  must  be  sought  for  far
beneath  these  bodily  conditions  by  which  its  self-manifestation  was  clouded
and  obscured.

116.  The  difference    between  older   and   newer  conceptions  of  the
unifying  principle  or  soul  (if  soul  there  be)  in  man,  considered  as  mani-
festing  through  corporeal    limitations,  will   thus  resemble  the  difference
between  the  older  and  newer  conceptions  of  the  way  in  which  the  sun
reveals  himself  to  our  senses.     Night  and  storm-cloud  and  eclipse  men
have  known  from   the  earliest  ages;    but   now  they  know  that  even   at
noonday  the  sunbeam  which  reaches  them,  when  fanned  out  into  a  spec-
trum, is  barred  with  belts  and  lines  of  varying  darkness  ; — while  they  have
learnt  also  that  where  at  either  end  the  spectrum  fades  out  into  what  for
us  is  blackness,  there  stretches  onwards  in  reality  an  undiscovered  illimit-
able ray.

It  will  be  convenient  for  future  reference  if  I  draw  out  this  parallel
somewhat  more  fully.  I  compare,  then,  man's  gradual  progress  in  self-
knowledge  to  his  gradual  decipherment  of  the  nature  and  meaning  of  the
sunshine  which  reaches  him  as  light  and  heat  indiscernibly  intermingled.
So  also  Life  and  Consciousness, — the  sense  of  a  world  within  him  and  a
world  without — come  to  the  child  indiscernibly  intermingled  in  a  pervad-
ing glow.  Optical  analysis  splits  up  the  white  ray  into  the  various  coloured
A  hich  compose  it.  Philosophical  analysis  in  like  manner  splits  up  the
vague  consciousness  of  the  child  into  many  faculties ; — into  the  various
external  senses,  the  various  modes  of  thought  within.  This  has  been  the
task  of  descriptive  and  introspective  psychology.  Experimental  psychology
is  adding  a  further  refinement.  In  the  sun's  spectrum,  and  in  stellar
spectra,  are  many  dark  lines  or  bands,  due  to  the  absorption  of  certain
rays  by  certain  vapours  in  the  atmosphere  of  sun  or  stars  or  earth.  And
similarly  in  the  range  of  spectrum  of  our  own  sensation  and  faculty
there  are  many  inequalities — permanent  and  temporary — of  brightness  and
definition.  Our  mental  atmosphere  is  clouded  by  vapours  and  illumined
by  fires,  and  is  clouded  and  illumined  differently  at  different  times.  The
ologist  who  observes,  say,  how  his  reaction-times  are  modified  by
alcohol  is  like  the  physicist  who  observes  what  lines  are  darkened  by  the
Interposition  of  a  special  gas.  Our  knowledge  of  our  conscious  spectrum
is  thus  becoming  continually  more  accurate  and  detailed.

117.  But  turning  back  once  more  to  the  physical  side  of  our  simile,  we
observe  that  our  knowledge  of  the  visible  solar  spectrum,  however  minute,
is  but  an  introduction  to  the  knowledge  which  we    hope    ultimately   to
attain  of  the  sun's  rays.     The  limits  of  our  spectrum  do  not  inhere  in  the
sun  t  \t  but  in  the  eye  that  marks  his  shining.     Beyond  each  end
of  that  prismatic  ribbon  are  ether-waves  of  which  our  retina  takes  no  cog-

I.  B

i8  CHAPTER    I  [118

nisance.  Beyond  the  red  end  come  waves  whose  potency  we  still  recognise,
but  as  heat  and  not  as  light.  Beyond  the  violet  end  are  waves  still  more
mysterious  ;  whose  very  existence  man  for  ages  never  suspected,  and  whose
intimate  potencies  are  still  but  obscurely  known.  Even  thus,  I  venture  to
affirm,  beyond  each  end  of  our  conscious  spectrum  extends  a  range  of
faculty  and  perception,  exceeding  the  known  range,  but  as  yet  indistinctly
guessed.  The  artifices  of  the  modern  physicist  have  extended  far  in  each
direction  the  visible  spectrum  known  to  Newton.  It  is  for  the  modern
psychologist  to  discover  artifices  which  may  extend  in  each  direction  the
conscious  spectrum  as  known  to  Plato  or  to  Kant.  The  phenomena  cited
in  this  work  carry  us,  one  may  say,  as  far  onwards  as  fluorescence  carries
us  beyond  the  violet  end.  The  "  X  rays  "  of  the  psychical  spectrum  remain
for  a  later  age  to  discover.

Our  simile,  indeed — be  it  once  for  all  noted — is  a  most  imperfect  one.
The  range  of  human  faculty  cannot  be  truly  expressed  in  any  linear  form.
Even  a  three-dimensional  scheme, — a  radiation  of  faculties  from  a  centre
of  life, — would  ill  render  its  complexity.  Yet  something  of  clearness  will
be  gained  by  even  this  rudimentary  mental  picture ; — representing  con-
scious human  faculty  as  a  linear  spectrum  whose  red  rays  begin  where
voluntary  muscular  control  and  organic  sensation  begin,  and  whose  violet
rays  fade  away  at  the  point  at  which  man's  highest  strain  of  thought  or
imagination  merges  into  reverie  or  ecstasy.

At  both  ends  of  this  spectrum  I  believe  that  our  evidence  indicates  a
momentous  prolongation.  Beyond  the  m/end,  of  course,  we  already  know
that  vital  faculty  of  some  kind  must  needs  extend.  We  know  that  organic
processes  are  constantly  taking  place  within  us  which  are  not  subject  to  our
control,  but  which  make  the  very  foundation  of  our  physical  being.  We
know  that  the  habitual  limits  of  our  voluntary  action  can  be  far  extended
under  the  influence  of  strong  excitement.  It  need  not  surprise  us  to  find
that  appropriate  artifices — hypnotism  or  self-suggestion — can  carry  the
power  of  our  will  over  our  organism  to  a  yet  further  point.

The  faculties  that  lie  beyond  the  violet  end  of  our  psychological  spec-
trum will  need  more  delicate  exhibition  and  will  command  a  less  ready
belief.  The  actinic  energy  which  lies  beyond  the  violet  end  of  the  solar
spectrum  is  less  obviously  influential  in  our  material  world  than  is  the
dark  heat  which  lies  beyond  the  red  end.  Even  so,  one  may  say,  the
influence  of  the  ultra-intellectual  or  supernormal  faculties  upon  our  welfare
as  terrene  organisms  is  less  marked  in  common  life  than  the  influence  of
the  organic  or  subnormal  faculties.  Yet  it  is  that  prolongation  of  our
spectrum  upon  which  our  gaze  will  need  to  be  most  strenuously  fixed.  It
is  there  that  we  shall  find  our  inquiry  opening  upon  a  cosmic  prospect,  and
inciting  us  upon  an  endless  way.

118.  Even  the  first  stages  of  this  progress  are  long  and  labyrinthine  ;
and  it  may  be  useful  to  conclude  this  introductory  chapter  by  a  brief
sketch  of  the  main  tracts  across  which  our  winding  road  must  lie.  It  will

119]  INTRODUCTION  19

be  my  object  to  lead  by  transitions  as  varied  and  as  gradual  as  possible
from  phenomena  held  as  normal  to  phenomena  held  as  supernormal,  but
which  like  the  rest  are  simply  and  solely  the  inevitable  results  and  mani-
festations of  universal  Law.

Our  inquiry  will  naturally  begin  by  discussing  the  subliminal  structure,
in  disease  or  health,  of  those  two  familiar  phases  of  human  personality,
ordinary  waking  and  ordinary  sleep.  I  shall  go  on  to  consider  in  what
way  the  disintegration  of  personality  by  disease  is  met  by  its  reintegration
and  purposive  modification  by  hypnotism  and  self-suggestion.  By  that
time  enough  will  have  been  said  of  subliminal  phenomena  in  general  to
make  it  possible  to  deal  with  their  various  groups  in  separate  fashion.  I
shall  go  on,  then,  to  their  mode  of  automatic  manifestation,  and  first
(Chapter  VI.)  to  the  sensory  automatism  which  is  the  basis  of  hallucination.
This  includes  phenomena  claiming  an  origin  outside  the  automatist's  own
mind.  It  will  be  found  that  that  origin  is  often  to  be  sought  in  the  minds
of  other  living  men ;  and  various  forms  of  telepathy  will  be  brought  under
review.  The  conception  of  telepathy  is  not  one  that  in  its  nature  need  be
confined  to  spirits  still  incarnate ;  and  we  shall  find  evidence  (Chapter  VII.)
that  intercourse  of  similarly  direct  type  can  take  place  between  discarnate
and  incarnate  spirits.  The  remainder  of  the  book  will  discuss  the  methods
and  results  of  this  supernormal  intercourse.

This  scheme  will  be  developed  in  a  series  of  chapters  whose  general
drift  and  connection  I  am  anxious  that  the  reader  should  clearly  grasp
before  he  studies  them  in  detail.

119.  My  second  chapter  may  at  first  sight  appear  to  stray  somewhat  far
from  my  main  purport.  It  is  of  the  evolution  of  human  personality  that  this
work  proposes  to  treat ; — of  faculties,  newly  dawning,  and  of  a  destiny  greater
than  we  know.  Yet  I  must  begin  with  a  detailed  discussion  of  certain  modes
of  that  personality's  disintegration  and  decay.  The  extreme  instances  of  such
decay — actual  imbecility  or  insanity — do  indeed  lie  outside  my  province.
But  there  are  many  cases  where  there  is  no  actual  insanity, — probably  no  or-
ganic disease  of  the  brain, — but  in  which  nevertheless  there  are  disturbances
of  personality  which  teach  us  more  than  any  theoretical  treatise  can  do  as
to  that  complex  structure  or  synergy  which  it  is  our  object  to  upbuild  or  to
develop.  Alternations  of  personality  and  hysterical  phenomena  generally
i  fact  spontaneous  experiments  of  precisely  the  type  most  instructive
to  us.  For  my  own  argument,  indeed,  I  urgently  need  some  true  concep-
'  >f  the  psychological  meaning  of  hysteria, — a  vague  range  of  pheno-
.  called  by  a  meaningless  name  ; — and  when  that  conception  has  been
cd,  the  support  which  it  gives  by  analogy  to  my  own  principal  thesis
will  be  found  to  be  of  the  most  striking  kind.  For  in  hysteria  (as  my  second
chapter  will  show)  we  have  before  us  a  contraction,  an  effacement  of  the
spectrum  of  consciousness,  which  leaves  the  hysteric  occupying  much  the
same  position  relatively  to  ourselves  as  our  own  supraliminal  consciousness
occupies  (in  my  view)  relatively  to  our  whole  self.  Or,  to  return  to  our

20  CHAPTER    I  [120

other  metaphor: — the  essence  of  hysteria  is  an  instability  of  the  thresholds
of  consciousness  and  of  voluntary  movement, — insomuch  that  many  per-
ceptions which  should  be  fully  conscious  are  for  the  time  submerged,  and
many  actions  or  motor  syntheses  which  should  be  subject  to  waking  will
have  sunk  out  of  that  will's  control.  Occasionally,  indeed,  and  as  a  sort
of  incident  of  the  general  disturbance,  some  faculties  habitually  submerged
may  rise  into  apprehension,  and  there  may  thus  be  at  some  points  an
analogy  between  hysteria  and  genius.  But  on  the  whole  these  two  condi-
tions are  fundamentally  opposed ;  genius  consisting  (as  we  shall  presently
see)  in  an  intensification  of  the  conscious  spectrum, — hysteria  in  its
dimming  and  interruption  by  dark  belts  of  anaesthesia  and  aboulia, — defect
of  perception  and  of  will ; — genius  consisting  in  the  uprush  of  subliminal
faculty, — hysteria  in  the  descent  and  disappearance  of  faculty  which  should
be  supraliminal  into  depths  from  which  it  cannot  voluntarily  be  recalled.

120.  Continuing  this  inquiry  in  my  third  chapter,  I  shall  consider
what  kind  of  man  he  is  to  whom  the  epithet  of  normal, — an  epithet  often
obscure  and  misleading, — may  be  most  fitly  applied.  I  shall  urge  that  in
a  rapidly  altering  genus — and  such  the  genus  homo  undoubtedly  is — the
word  normal  may  be  best  used  to  signify  such  a  combination  of  new  with
old  powers  as  can  at  the  present  stage  be  effected  without  dangerous
instability.  If,  however,  it  be  held  that  man's  development  is  not  in  any
given  direction  sufficiently  definite  to  admit  of  this  mode  of  measurement,
then  I  shall  at  least  claim  that  that  man  shall  be  regarded  as  normal  who
has  the  fullest  grasp  of  faculties  which  inhere  in  the  whole  race.  Among
these  faculties  I  shall  venture  to  count  subliminal  as  well  as  supraliminal
powers ; — the  mental  processes  which  take  place  below  the  conscious
threshold  as  well  as  those  which  take  place  above  it.  What  class  of  men,
then,  can  we  regard  as  reaping  most  advantage  from  this  submerged  men-
tation? Men  of  genius,  I  shall  reply; — if  to  the  vague  word  genius  we
may  give  a  definite  or  psychological  meaning,  which,  while  adhering  pretty
closely  to  general  usage,  shall  distinguish  it  in  some  real  manner  from
other  forms  of  capacity.  Such  a  definition,  I  think,  we  shall  attain  if  we
describe  an  "  inspiration  of  genius  "  as  a  subliminal  uprush  ; — an  emergence
into  ordinary  consciousness  of  ideas  matured  below  the  threshold.  Falling
back  upon  our  simile  of  the  spectrum,  this  process  would  be  represented
by  the  brightening  of  lines  previously  dimmed  by  interposing  vapours ; —
such  a  brightening  as  seems  often  due  to  an  intensification  of  the  central
incandescence.  The  man  who  thus  receives  the  upward  message  of  his
submerged  self  may  or  may  not  find  in  it  something  of  value  to  the  world.
But  at  any  rate  he  tends  towards  the  employment  of  the  whole  range  of
his  faculty,  and  thus  also  (as  will  be  seen  later  on)  towards  a  profounder
realisation  of  his  environment  than  is  as  yet  possible  for  the  mass  of  men.

This  view  differs  widely  from  the  estimate  of  genius  now  in  fashion
with  a  certain  school  of  anthropologists,  who  regard  the  man  of  genius  as
in  some  sense  an  aberrant  or  even  degenerate  type, — and  class  him  with

121]  INTRODUCTION  21

the  criminal  and  the  lunatic.  The  alleged  nervous  disorder  of  men  of
genius,  on  which  this  apparent  paradox  is  based,  is  largely,  I  think,  the
creation  of  mere  gossip  and  anecdote.  So  far  as  it  really  exists,  I  regard
it  as  illustrating  the  instability  which  in  a  rapidly  changing  species  is  apt
to  characterise  those  very  organs  which  on  the  whole  are  moving  most
decisively  along  the  path  of  progress.  There  is  a  perturbation  which
masks  evolution ;  and  just  as  at  the  child's  birth  into  the  world,  or  at  his
entrance  into  the  wider  emotions  of  adolescence,  there  may  be  much  that
is  disturbing  and  strange,  so  too  in  that  new  birth,  that  entry  into  the
emotions  of  a  vaster  world,  for  which  Earth-life  at  its  best  is  one  great
opportunity,  there  is  likely  to  be  some  straining  and  disruption  of  the
spiritual  organism  adapted  to  the  earlier  phase.  The  true  analogue  of  the
genius  is  not  the  criminal  nor  the  lunatic,  but  the  child.

121.  In  the  fourth  chapter  I  shall  deal  with  the  alternating  phase
through  which  man's  personality  is  constructed  habitually  to  pass.  I  speak
of  sleep ;  which  I  regard  as  a  phase  of  personality,  adapted  to  maintain
our  existence  in  the  spiritual  environment,  and  to  draw  from  thence  the
vitality  of  our  physical  organisms.  Both  sleep  and  waking  will  thus  be
developed  phases  of  an  earlier  and  less  differentiated  condition,  from  which
waking  life  has  been  developed  by  practical  needs,  while  sleep,  less
changed  externally  from  the  primitive  state,  may  nevertheless  have  under-
gone some  parallel  evolution  in  its  relations  to  that  metetherial  world.
And  thus  I  regard  the  passage  back  from  waking  into  sleep  as  including
elements  both  of  reversion  and  of  what  I  may  term  preversion.  There  is
firstly  a  relapse  or  reversion  to  an  earlier  animal  condition ; — a  condition
where  the  conscious  part  of  the  spectrum  lay  nearer  to  the  red  end ;  con-
sisting mainly  of  organic  faculties  and  sensations  many  of  which  are  no
longer  present  to  waking  consciousness.  But  sleep  also  represents  a  stage
of  wider  potentiality ;  a  stage  where  a  longer  spectrum  is  more  faintly  seen  ;
whereas  the  waking  state  represents  a  stage  in  which  natural  selection  on
this  planet  has  operated  both  to  intensify  the  range  of  faculty,  and  also  to
confine  it  within  the  limits  serviceable  for  earthly  life.  When  waking
faculty,  thus  confined  and  thus  intensified,  is  dimmed  by  sleep,  we  are
able  to  catch  some  scattered  lines  of  feeble  radiance  beyond  each  end  of
our  ordinary  spectrum.  Of  the  ultra-red  activities  I  have  spoken  just
above.  But  there  are  traces  of  ultra-violet  luminosity  also.  Those  facul-
hich  form  man's  link  with  the  spiritual  world, — telepathy  and  telaes-
thesia — are  apt  (as  dreams  obscurely  show  us)  to  make  in  sit -ep  their  first
rudimentary  appearance  ;  or  to  use  another  metaphor,  sleep-waking  states
U)  think  of  sleep  as  a  kind  of  "primitive  m.-ipnn  "  or  "mother-
solution"  from  which  various  phases  of  personality  have  a  tendency  to
out.  Somnambulism,  trance,  ecstasy,  are  such  crystallisations;
representing  co-ordinations  of  faculty  unfitted  indeed  for  man's  self-pre-
servation upon  this  planet,  but  which  it  m.iy  be  worth  his  while  to  develop
experimentally,  when  once  that  preservation  has  been  secured.

22  CHAPTER    I  [122

Or  I  may  put  the  matter  in  yet  another  way,  so  as  to  bring  out  a
certain  parallel  between  the  forms  of  dissolution  and  of  evolution  to  which
each  phase  of  our  personality — the  waking  phase  and  the  sleeping — has
shown  itself  liable.

What  hysteria  is  to  ordinary  waking  life,  that  is  morbid  somnambulism
to  sleep ;  what  genius  is  to  ordinary  waking  life,  that  is  hypnotic  trance
to  sleep.

In  somnambulism,  as  in  waking  hysteria,  there  is  a  narrowing  of  the
field  of  attention,  accompanied  by  an  arbitrary  unsettlement  of  the  thresh-
old of  consciousness.  Some  of  the  normal  faculties  of  sleep, — as  its
organic  recuperative  power, — may  in  somnambulism  be  concealed  or
arrested ;  and  on  the  other  hand  some  faculties  not  normal  for  sleep, —
as  acute  sensory  perception,  delicate  muscular  co-ordination,  may  rise  into
prominence.  This  exactly  resembles  the  hysteric  instability ;  and  we  need
not  wonder  that  in  some  hysterical  conditions  there  is  a  mere  confusion
and  jumble  of  states  of  imperfect  sleep  and  of  imperfect  waking.

On  the  other  hand, — as  we  are  now  about  to  see, — the  sleeping  phase
of  personality  may  be  greatly  improved,  its  beneficent  effects  greatly
extended,  by  certain  artifices  which  evoke  in  the  sleeper  a  power  of  self-
suggestion  which  corresponds  to  what  in  the  waking  phase  we  call  an
inspiration  of  genius.

122.  Thus  far  I  shall  have  been  dealing  with  conditions  or  phases
of  personality  which,  whether  for  good  or  evil,  appear  spontaneously  and
without  artificial  induction.  Were  we  limited  to  such  a  review  alone,  I
should  still  trust  that  the  importance  and  in  a  certain  sense  the
independence  of  the  subliminal  portion  of  our  consciousness  might
be  brought  out  by  careful  inference.  But  we  are  not  in  fact  thus
restricted.  We  are  not  confined  to  observation  only.  We  are  able
to  mix  therewith  an  element  of  experiment  which,  although  yet  in  its
infancy,  has  already,  in  my  view,  given  us  an  insight  into  much  of  man's
nature  which  no  mere  speculation  or  introspection  could  ever  have  reached.
First  among  our  experimental  methods  I  must  speak  of  hypnotism.  That
word  indeed,  as  now  used,  is  a  vague  one.  It  includes  all  the  methods —
and  they  are  all  of  them  frankly  empirical — which  have  been  found
successful  in  inducing  in  man, — whether  apparently  waking  or  sleeping, —
what  is  in  fact  a  development  and  concentration  of  his  sleeping  phase ;
— and  in  thus  reaching  organic  processes  over  which  his  supraliminal  will
has  no  control.  The  chief — some  say  the  only — method  which  has  been
found  thus  effective  is  called  "  suggestion  "  ; — a  mere  name  for  an  appeal
to  subliminal  faculty  which  sometimes  succeeds  and  sometimes  fails,  with-
out our  being  able  either  to  predict  or  to  explain  its  success  or  its  failure.
Long  opposed  or  ignored  by  orthodox  Science,  this  mode  of  acting  on
man's  hidden  being  is  now  in  most  countries  established  in  medical
practice,  and  is  increasingly  successful  in  the  direction  especially  of  reliev-
ing pain.  At  the  same  time  the  psycho-physiological  problems  at  the  root

123]  INTRODUCTION  23

of  its  success  are  quite  unsolved  ;  and  its  profounder  influences  on  person-
ality have  hardly  yet  been  approached.

The  discussion  in  my  fifth  chapter — that  on  Hypnotism — will  naturally
fall  under  three  main  heads.  I  shall  first  briefly  discuss  the  psychology  of
hypnotism.  I  shall  consider  what  actually  are  the  methods  which  succeed  in
hypnotism, — whether  this  be  called  mesmerism  on  the  one  hand  or  suggestion
on  the  other ; — different  aspects  of  an  influence  which  no  name  fully  ex-
presses and  which  no  theory  fully  explains.  In  the  next  place  I  shall  describe
some  of  the  triumphs  of  psycho-therapeutics.  These  cures  effected  by
suggestion  belong  to  the  very  core  of  my  subject.  They  are,  so  to  say,
the  public  advertisement  or  commercial  application  of  just  those  hidden
and  subliminal  faculties  which  for  the  most  part  show  themselves  in  less
easily  apprehended  fashion.  Like  the  application  of  the  "X  rays"  to  the
discovery  and  extraction  of  bullets  or  needles,  these  cures  must  at  least
bring  home  to  the  most  conservative  reader  the  fact  that  there  is  some
unexplained  agency  operating  upon  human  nature, — something  of  extra-
ordinary potency  which  orthodox  science  has  thus  far  completely  failed  to
grasp.  So  surprising,  indeed,  are  some  of  these  cures, — they  reproduce  so
startlingly  certain  cures  held  of  old  as  miraculous, — that  many  men  have
been  led  to  ask  whether  it  be  not  in  some  way  or  other  religion  rather  than
science  which  is  answerable  for  the  marvels.  A  question,  this,  of  deeper
import  than  the  literature  either  of  the  Lourdes  miracles  or  of  American
'•  mental  science  "  might  lead  the  sceptical  reader  to  suppose  !  On  this
point  I  shall  dwell  at  some  length;  nor  is  there,  I  think,  any  line  of
inquiry  more  essential  to  the  physical  well-being  of  mankind.

Less  conspicuously  important,  but  of  equal  significance  for  my  argu-
ment, is  that  group  of  hypnotic  results  which  I  shall  in  the  third  place
briefly  discuss.  These  phenomena  I  shall  consider  first  as  they  occur  in
spontaneous  sleep-waking  states  or  somnambulisms,  and  then  as  they  ap-
pear in  cases  experimentally  induced,  where  they  are  manifested  in  a  more
marked  degree.  We  see  here  the  influence  exercised  by  suggestion  and
self-suggestion  on  higher  types  of  faculty,  supernormal  as  well  as  normal,
on  character,  on  personality.  It  is  on  this  side,  indeed,  that  the  outlook
is  the  most  deeply  interesting.  Man  is  in  course  of  evolution ;  and  the
most  pregnant  hint  which  these  nascent  experiments  have  yet  given  htm  is
that  it  may  be  in  his  power  to  hasten  his  own  evolution  in  ways  previously
unknown.

123.     In  the  following  chapter  on  Sensory  Automatism  (Chapter  VI.)  I

shall  proceed  to  describe  certain  other  experiments,  less  familiar  to  the

public  than  those  classed  as  hypnotic,  but  which  give  a  still  further  insight

>ur  subliminal  faculty.     With  those  experiments  will  be  intermingled

spontaneous  phenomena ;  and  the  chapter  will  take  up  and  con-

the  spontaneous  phenomena  of  Chapters  III.  and  IV.  as  well  as  the

MS  of  Chapter  V.     Its  thenu*  will  be  the  messages  which  the

subliminal  self  sends  up  to  the  supraliminal  in  sensory  form ; — the  visions

24  CHAPTER    I  [123

fashioned  internally,  but  manifested  not  to  the  inward  eye  alone  ;  the
voices  which  repeat  as  though  in  audible  tones  the  utterance  of  the  self
within.  In  this  way  we  shall  be  in  continued  connection  with  the  pheno-
mena of  Chapter  II.  also;  but,  instead  of  the  morbid  hallucinations  which
were  there  described,  we  shall  be  dealing  with  hallucinations  which  not
only  are  consistent  with  health  and  sanity,  but  also  resemble  and  in  a  sense
surpass  the  inspirations  of  genius  in  their  manifestation  of  important
faculty,  habitually  screened  from  our  view.

Even  so  long  as  these  subliminal  messages  convey  to  us  knowledge  of
no  new  kind, — even  while  they  are  still  occupied  with  the  known  spec-
trum,— they  are  nevertheless  full  of  instruction  as  regards  the  extent  of
subliminal  faculty.  They  are  the  products  of  internal  vision  ejected  into
apparent  externality  ;  and  the  sights  projected  outwards  from  within  us  are
to  the  psychologist  even  more  interesting  than  the  sights  projected  inwards
from  without.

But  at  this  point,  and  amid  these  subjective  hallucinations  which,
although  they  extend,  do  not  fundamentally  modify  previous  conceptions,
we  come  face  to  face  with  a  class  of  perceptions  which,  although  in  one
sense  hallucinatory,  are  in  another  sense  the  messengers  of  a  truth  deeper
and  more  direct  from  the  source  than  any  which  our  ordinary  senses
convey  to  us.  We  come  upon  experiments  which  prove  telepathy ; — the
transference  of  ideas  and  sensations  from  one  mind  to  another  without  the
agency  of  the  recognised  organs  of  sense.  We  shall  already  have  encoun-
tered some  telepathic  and  telaesthetic  incidents  among  the  phenomena  of
dreams  and  of  hypnosis.  But  we  shall  now  find  that  telepathy  and  telaes-
thesia  occur  in  waking  moments  also ;  occur  sometimes  as  the  result  of
direct  experiment ;  oftener  as  the  spontaneous  and  apparently  casual  con-
vergence of  forces  which  we  may  be  led  to  suppose  to  be  normally  opera-
tive between  all  of  us.  This  is  the  central  theme  of  Edmund  Curacy's
Phantasms  of  the  Living ;  and  subsequent  experiment  and  observation,
while  they  have  strengthened  the  evidence  for  the  conclusions  of  that
book,  have  in  no  way  diminished  their  startling  importance.  Believe  though
we  may  in  the  ultimate  continuity  of  all  existence  and  operation,  there  is
still  a  vast  and  sudden  separation — unbridgeable  at  present  by  any  hypo-
thesis of  etherial  vibrations  or  the  like — between  the  smallest  act  of  tele-
pathic transmission  and  all  that  we  have  previously  known  concerning
matter  and  motion.  Even  if  there  be  no  true  Rubicon  disparting  the
ocean  of  things,  we  have  here  for  mortal  minds  the  Rubicon  between  the
mechanical  and  the  spiritual  conceptions  of  the  Universe.  I  at  least  can
see  no  logical  halting-place  between  the  first  admission  of  supersensory
faculty  and  the  conclusion  that  such  faculty  is  exercised  by  somewhat
within  us  which  is  not  generated  from  material  elements,  nor  confined  by
mechanical  limitations,  but  which  may  survive  and  operate  uninjured  in  a
spiritual  world.

There  is  one  particular  line  of  telepathic  experiment  and  observation

124]  INTRODUCTION  25

which  seems  to  lead  us  by  an  almost  continuous  pathway  across  that
hitherto  impassable  gulf.  Among  telepathic  experiments,  to  begin  with,
none  is  more  remarkable  than  the  occasional  power  of  some  agent  to
project  himself  phantasmally ;  to  make  himself  manifest,  as  though  in
actual  presence,  to  some  percipient  at  a  distance.  The  mechanism  of
such  projection  is  entirely  unknown  to  the  agent  himself;  nor  is  the
act  always  preceded  by  any  effort  of  the  supraliminal  will.  But  our
records  of  such  cases  do  assuredly  suggest  a  quite  novel  disengagement
of  some  informing  spirit  from  the  restraint  of  the  organism  ; — a  form  of
distant  operation  in  which  we  cannot  say  whether  the  body  in  its  apparent
passivity  co-operates  or  no.

With  these  experiments  in  mind,  let  us  turn  to  the  main  groups  of
spontaneous  telepathic  phenomena  which  fill  the  work  on  Phantasms
of  the  Living  above  alluded  to.  These  are  apparitions  of  a  distant
person  mainly  at  moments  of  crisis,  and  at  the  moment  of  death.  Now
these  spontaneous  apparitions  at  moments  when  the  agent  whose
phantasm  appears  is  actually  passing  through  some  external  or  internal
crisis,  are  separated  by  no  clear  line  from  the  experimentally  induced
projection  of  a  man's  phantasmal  figure  of  which  I  have  spoken  above.
Sometimes,  as  I  have  already  implied,  we  hardly  know  whether  to  call
such  a  self-projection  experimental  or  not,  since  the  agent  does  not  know
how  to  accomplish  it,  and  may  not  even  have  been  conscious  of  desiring
it  at  the  precise  moment  when  it  occurred.  Thus  far  the  series  of
phenomena  is  plainly  continuous.  And  it  remains  continuous  as  we
gradually  pass  on  from  apparitions  coincident  with  crises — crises  often
involving  great  danger  or  even  apparent  death — to  apparitions  coincident
with  the  coma  which  frequently  precedes  death,  or  with  the  moment  of
death  itself.

124.  And  thus  (Chapter  VII.)  we  come  face  to  face  with  the  supreme
problem  ; — if  not  of  all  theoretical  knowledge,  at  least  of  all  knowledge  as
bearing  upon  the  fate  and  the  duty  of  man.  The  theoretical  question  of
primary  importance  may  be  simply  that  of  the  existence  or  non-existence  of
a  spiritual  world.  The  human  or  practical  question  of  supreme  import-
ance is  that  of  man's  presence  or  portion  in  that  world,  if  it  does  exist.
'1O  prove  that  telepathy  implies  a  spiritual  environment  would  be  at
once  to  lift  our  knowledge  of  the  Cosmos  to  a  higher  level.  To  prove
thit  man  survives  death  would  also  be  to  transform  and  transfigure
hole  life  here  and  now.  Before  us,  as  of  old,  is  that  all-embracing
problem;  but  before  us  also,  for  the  first  time,  is  some  hint  and  indica-
is  to  the  track  which  may  be  pursued  towards  its  solution.

The  old  conception  of   the  ghost — a  conception    which    seemed   to

belong  only  to  primitive  animism  and  to  modern  folk-lore — has  received

ncaning    from  observations  of  phenomena   occurring    between

men.     We  realise  that  a  phantasmal  figure  may  bear  a  true  relation

to  some  distant  person  whose    semblance   is  thus  shown ;    we  learn  by

26  CHAPTER    I  [125

instances  of  directly  provable  coincidence  that  wraiths  of  this  kind
correspond  with  death  too  often  to  leave  the  correspondence  attributable
to  chance  alone.  The  vague  question  of  former  times  narrows  down,
then,  to  the  more  precise  question  :  Are  there  still  coincidences,  is  there
still  evidence  of  some  such  definite  type  as  this,  showing  that  a  phantasm
can  appear  not  only  at  but  after  a  man's  bodily  death,  and  can  still
indicate  connection  with  a  persistent  and  individual  life  ?

To  this  distinct  question  there  can  now  be  given,  as  I  believe,  a
distinct  and  affirmative  answer.  When  evidence  has  been  duly  analysed,
when  alternative  hypotheses  have  been  duly  weighed,  it  seems  to  me
that  there  is  no  real  break  in  the  appearance  of  veridical  phantasms,  or
in  their  causation  at  the  moment  of  bodily  death ;  but  rather  that  (after
setting  aside  all  merely  subjective  post-mortem  apparitions)  there  is
evidence  that  the  self-same  living  spirit  is  still  operating,  and  it  may  be
in  the  self-same  way.  And  thus  my  general  dogma  will  have  received
its  specific  confirmation.  Telepathy,  I  have  said,  looks  like  a  law
prevailing  in  the  spiritual  as  well  as  in  the  material  world.  And  that
it  does  so  prevail,  I  now  add,  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  those  who
communicated  with  us  telepathically  in  this  world  communicate  with  us
telepathically  from  the  other.  Man,  therefore,  is  not  a  planetary  or  a
transitory  being ;  he  persists  as  very  man  among  cosmic  and  eternal
things.

If  this  bare  fact  be  gained,  we  have  a  basis  for  such  an  edifice  of
knowledge  as  will  take  many  generations  to  uprear.  At  first,  indeed,
the  mere  observation  of  these  phantasms  does  not  seem  as  though  it
could  lead  us  far.  It  is  like  the  observation  of  shooting  stars — of  meteors
which  appear  without  warning  and  vanish  in  a  flash  of  fire.  Yet
systematic  observation  has  learnt  much  as  to  these  meteors ;  has  learnt,
for  instance,  the  point  in  heaven  from  which  they  issue ;  their  orbital
relation  to  earth  and  sun.  Somewhat  similarly,  continuous  observation
of  these  brief  phantasmal  appearances  may  tell  us  much  of  them  at
last ;  much,  for  instance,  as  to  their  relative  frequency  at  different  epochs
after  death ;  something  as  to  their  apparent  knowledge  of  what  has
happened  on  earth  since  they  left  it.  From  the  study  of  meteorites,
again,  a  further  unexpected  discovery  has  been  made.  "The  stone
that  fell  down  from  Jupiter  "  is  nowhere  alone  in  its  glory.  The  solid
earth,  the  ocean's  floor,  are  covered  with  meteoric  dust ; — the  dust  of
the  cosmic  wayside,  which  we  have  gathered  in  our  rush  through  the
constellations.  Even  thus  we  come  to  find  that  there  are  traces  over
all  the  earth  of  indeterminate  and  unrecognised  communication  from
a  world  of  unembodied  intelligences; — hauntings  of  unknown  purport,
and  bearing  no  perceptible  relation  to  the  thoughts  or  deeds  of  living
men.

125.  Much  more,  indeed,  than  would  at  first  seem  likely  can  be
learnt  by  mere  prolonged  observation  of  spontaneous  phantasms  of  the

126J  INTRODUCTION  27

dead.  Yet  here  as  everywhere, — here  more  than  anywhere, — the  need  of
actual  experiment  is  felt.  For  experiment  here  would  mean  the  conversion
of  the  scarce  decipherable  flash  which  flits  before  our  spectroscope  into  a
steady  glow ;  it  would  mean  the  enlistment  of  the  departed  in  conscious
and  willing  co-operation, — the  long-desired  opportunity  to  hear  and  to
answer ; — veras  audire  et  reddere  voces.  And  in  fact  such  experiment  turns
out  to  be  actually  feasible.  It  is  feasible  in  connection  with  each  of  the  four
forms  of  communication,  of  verbalisation,  with  which  human  life  is  familiar.
There  is  a  possibility  of  inducing  a  spiritual  hearing  and  a  spiritual  picture-
seeing  or  reading  ;  and  also  a  spiritually-guided  writing  and  speech.  Both
our  sensory  automatism  and  our  motor  automatism  may  be  initiated  and
directed  by  intelligence  outside  our  own.

In  Chapter  VI.,  on  Sensory  Automatism,  we  shall  already  have  dis-
cussed the  passive  methods  in  which  communications  of  this  kind  may  be
awaited.  We  have  now  (in  Chapter  VIII.),  to  consider  in  what  ways  Motor
Automatism, — the  unwilled  activity  of  hand  or  voice, — may  be  used  to  con-
vey messages  which  come  to  the  automatist  as  though  from  without  himself.

As  though  from  without  himself,  I  say ;  but  of  course  their  apparent
externality  does  not  prove  that  they  have  not  originated  in  submerged
strata  of  his  own  mind.  In  most  cases,  indeed,  with  motor  as  with  sensory
automatism,  this  is  probably  what  really  occurs.  We  find  that  a  tendency
to  automatic  writing  is  by  no  means  uncommon  among  sane  and  healthy
persons.  But  we  also  find  that  the  messages  thus  given  do  not  generally
rise  above  the  level  of  an  incoherent  dream.  They  seem  to  emerge  from
a  region  where  scraps  of  thought  and  feeling  exist  confusedly,  with  no
adequate  central  control.  Yet  sometimes  the  vague  scrawling  changes  its
•character.  It  becomes  veridical ;  it  begins  to  convey  a  knowledge  of
actual  facts  of  which  the  automatist  has  no  previous  information ;  it
indicates  some  subliminal  activity  of  his  own,  or  some  telepathic  access  to
an  external  mind.  Apparitions  may  flash  their  signals;  the  automatic
script  will  lay  the  wire.  For  however  inchoate  and  ill-controlled  these
written  messages  may  be,  if  once  they  have  been  received  at  all  we  can
assign  no  limit  to  their  development  as  the  expression  of  thought  that
passes  incorporeally  from  mind  to  mind.

From  mind  to  mind,  as  we  have  already  seen  ground  to  hope,  indepen-
dently of  the  question  whether  both  minds,  or  one  only,  be  still  clad  in  flesh.
will  often  be  great  difficulty  of  interpretation  ;  great  perplexity  as  to
the  true  relation  between  a  message  and  its  alleged  source.  But  every
year  of  late  has  added, — every  year  ought  to  add, — both  to  the  mass  of
r  and  to  the  feasibility  of  interpretation.  These  are  not  the  hiero-
is  of  the  dead,  but  the  hieroglyphs  of  the  living.

126.     Side  by  side  with  the  automatism  of  arm  and  hand  we  nv,i*t

place  the  automatism  of  throat   and  tongue  (Chapter  IX.).      Automatic

nee  parallels  automatic  script  throughout    the  scale  of  degrees  by

::nc  familiar.     It  begins,  that  is  to  say,  with  mere  incoherence  ;  but  it

28  CHAPTER    I  [126

assumes  in  some  cases  a  veridical  character;  with  knowledge  delivered
from  some  subliminal  stratum  or  some  external  mind.  And  in  some
cases  the  special  knowledge  displayed  in  the  utterances  lends  probability
to  their  claim  to  proceed  from  a  departed  spirit.

When  this  occurs,  when  the  utterance  reaches  this  point  of  veracity
and  intensity,  it  is  sometimes  accompanied  by  certain  other  phenomena
which  for  those  who  have  witnessed  them  carry  a  sense  of  reality  which
description  can  hardly  reproduce.  The  ordinary  consciousness  of  the
automatist  appears  to  be  suspended  \  he  passes  into  a  state  of  trance, —
which  in  its  turn  seems  but  the  preparation  for  an  occupation  by  an
invading  intelligence, — by  the  surviving  spirit,  let  us  boldly  say,  of  some
recognisable  departed  friend.  This  friend  then  disposes  of  voice  and
hand  almost  as  freely  as  though  he  were  their  legitimate  owner.  Nay,
more  than  one  intelligence  may  thus  operate  simultaneously,  and  the
organism  may  thus  appear  as  indeed  no  more  than  the  organ  of  spiritual
influences  which  make  and  break  connection  with  it  at  will.

And  here  we  reach  a  point  which  has  become, — without  my  anticipa-
tion, and — as  a  matter  (so  to  say)  of  mere  scientific  policy — even  against
my  will, — the  principal  nodus  of  the  present  work.  This  book,  designed
originally  to  carry  on,  as  continuously  and  coherently  as  possible,  the
argument  and  exposition  of  facts  which  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  I  had
aided  in  setting  before  serious  readers,  has  been  forced  unexpectedly
forward  by  the  sheer  force  of  evidence,  until  it  must  now  dwell  largely  on
the  extreme  branch  of  the  subject,  far  beyond  the  reserves  and  cautious
approaches  of  the  earlier  work.

For  in  truth  during  the  last  ten  years  the  centre  of  gravity  of  our
evidence  has  shifted  so  profoundly  that  it  can  no  longer  be  said  that  the
relative  masses  of  evidence  for  each  class  of  phenomenon  correspond
roughly  to  the  degree  of  strangeness — of  apparent  difficulty — which  the
phenomena  themselves  exhibit.  Ten  years  ago  there  was  most  evidence
for  telepathy  between  the  living ;  next  most  for  phantasms  of  the  dead ;
least,  perhaps,  for  that  actual  possession  and  control  of  human  organisms
by  departed  spirits,  which  of  all  our  phenomena  is  likely  to  be  the
hardest  for  the  scientific  mind  to  accept, — since  it  carries  us  back  to  the
most  outrageously  savage  group  among  the  superstitions  of  the  early
world.  With  the  recent  development  of  trance-phenomena,  however,  this
semblance  of  logical  proportion  has  been  quickly  altered.  We  seem
suddenly  to  have  arrived,  by  a  kind  of  short  cut,  at  a  direct  solution  of
problems  which  we  had  till  then  been  approaching  by  difficult  inference  or
laborious  calculation  of  chances.  What  need  of  computing  coincidental
death-wraiths, — of  analysing  the  evidential  details  of  post-mortem  appari-
tions,— if  here  we  have  the  departed  ready  to  hear  and  answer  questions,
and  to  tell  us  frankly  of  the  fate  of  souls  ?  Might  not  those  earlier  lines
of  inquiry  be  now  abandoned  altogether? — nay,  must  not  our  former
results  seem  useless  now,  in  view  of  this  overwhelming  proof?

126]  INTRODUCTION  29

I  reply  to  this,  that  it  was  soon  evident,  in  the  first  place,  that  our
previous  disciplined  search  had  been  by  no  means  wasted.  There  was
need  of  our  canons  of  evidence,  our  analysis  of  the  sources  of  subliminal
messages,  in  order  to  satisfy  ourselves  that  these  trance-utterances  could
in  part,  but  in  part  only,  be  explained  by  telaesthesia  and  telepathy, —
operating  among  actual  scenes  and  the  minds  of  living  men.  Nay,  further,
that  old  evidence  of  ours  at  once  explained  and  was  explained  by  the  new.
Fresh  light  was  thrown  on  many  previous  groups  of  phenomena,  and  they
in  their  turn  were  seen  to  have  preluded  to  the  new  phenomena  in  such
fashion  that  the  continuity  of  the  whole  series— albeit  a  series  advancing
by  leaps  and  bounds— was  intelligibly  maintained  for  us.

Following  on  the  first  revelation  of  Mrs.  Piper's  trance-phenomena  came
the  permission  accorded  to  me  by  the  executors  of  Mr.  Stainton  Moses  to
read  and  analyse  his  private  records  after  his  death.  The  strong  im-
pression which  his  phenomena  had  made  upon  me  during  his  life  was
increased, — as  the  reader  will  afterwards  see, — by  this  posthumous  and
intimate  study ;  and  his  history  was  seen  to  be  in  many  respects  analogous
to  Mrs.  Piper's.  Further  parallels  have  been  afforded  since  by  more  than
one  other  medium ; — and  it  seems  to  me  now  that  the  evidence  for  com-
munication with  the  spirits  of  identified  deceased  persons  through  the
trance-utterances  and  writings  of  sensitives  apparently  controlled  by  those
spirits  is  established  beyond  serious  attack.

In  saying  this,  however,  I  desire  to  explain, — in  anticipation  of  obvious
and  legitimate  criticism, — that  throughout  all  this  discussion  of  "  spirit-
possession  "  I  use  purposely  the  simplest  and  most  popular  terms,  without
by  any  means  denying  that  terms  more  accurate  and  philosophical  may  be
ultimately  attainable.  What  I  feel  sure  of  is  that  such  more  accurate
terms  have  not  yet  been  attained ; — that  we  are  not  yet  justified  in  using
any  nomenclature  which  assumes  that  we  possess  a  deeper  knowledge  of
what  is  going  on  than  the  messages  themselves  have  given  us.  I  do  not
of  course  mean  that  we  ought  to  accept  the  messages  unquestioningly  as
being  in  all  cases  literally  what  they  claim  to  be.  We  know  of  various
causa, — conscious  or  unconscious  fraud,  self-suggestion,  telepathy
between  the  living,  and  the  like,  which  we  are  bound  to  regard  as  possibly
aive,  and  which  enable  us  to  resolve  many  automatic  messages  into
illustrations  of  agencies  previously  known.  But  I  mean  that  where
we  get  beyond  these  simpler  causes, — where  we  are  forced  to  accept  the
iges  as  representing  in  some  way  the  continued  identity  of  a  former
denizen  of  earth, — I  do  not  think  that  either  tradition  or  philosophy
•fiords  us  any  solid  stand-point  from  which  to  criticise  those  messages;
— any  such  knowledge  of  the  nature  or  destiny  of  the  human  soul  as  can
at  present  justify  us  in  translating  them,  so  to  say,  into  any  would-be  inter-
pretative terminology  of  our  own.  Such  critical  power  we  may  perhaps
achieve  in  the  future  ;  but  \\v  hh.ill  have  to  achieve  it,  I  think,  by  rarrful
collation  of  many  more  such  messages  than  we  as  yet  possess.

30  CHAPTER    I  [127

127.  The  reader  who  may  feel  disposed  to  give  his  adhesion  to  this
culminating  group  of  the  long  series  of  evidences  which  have  pointed  with
more  and  more  clearness  to  the  survival  of  human  personality,  and  to  the
possibility  for  men  on  earth  of  actual  commerce  with  a  world  beyond,  may-
feel  perhaps  that  the  desiderium  orbis  catholici,  the  intimate  and  universal
hope  of  every  generation  of  men,  has  never  till  this  day  approached  so  near
to  fulfilment.  There  has  never  been  so  fair  a  prospect  for  Life  an  Love.
But  the  goal  to  which  we  tend  is  not  an  ideal  of  personal  happiness  alone.
The  anticipation  of  our  own  future  is  but  one  element  in  the  prospect
which  opens  to  us  now.  Our  inquiry  has  broadened  into  a  wider  scope.
The  point  from  which  we  started  was  an  analysis  of  the  latent  faculties  of
man.  The  point  towards  which  our  argument  has  carried  us  is  the  exist-
ence of  a  spiritual  environment  in  which  those  faculties  operate,  and  of
unseen  neighbours  who  speak  to  us  thence  with  slowly  gathering  power.
Deep  in  this  spiritual  environment  the  cosmic  secret  lies.  It  is  our  busi-
ness to  collect  the  smallest  indications ;  to  carry  out  from  this  treasury  of
Rhampsinitus  so  much  as  our  bare  hands  can  steal  away.  We  have  won
our  scraps  of  spiritual  experience,  our  messages  from  behind  the  veil ;  we
can  try  them  in  their  connection  with  certain  enigmas  which  philosophy
hardly  hoped  to  be  able  to  put  to  proof.  Can  we,  for  instance,  learn  any-
thing,— to  begin  with  fundamental  problems, — of  the  relation  of  spiritual
phenomena  to  Space,  to  Time,  to  the  material  world?

As  to  the  idea  of  Space,  the  evidence  which  will  have  been  presented
will  enable  us  to  speak  with  perhaps  more  clearness  than  could  have  been
hoped  for  in  such  a  matter.  Spiritual  life,  we  infer,  is  not  bound  and
confined  by  space-considerations  in  the  same  way  as  the  life  of  earth.
But  in  what  way  is  that  greater  freedom  attained?  It  appears  to  be
attained  by  the  mere  extension  of  certain  licenses  (so  to  call  them)  per-
mitted to  ourselves.  We  on  earth  submit  to  two  familiar  laws  of  the
physical  universe.  A  body  can  only  act  where  it  is.  Only  one  body
can  occupy  the  same  part  of  space  at  the  same  moment.  Applied  to
common  affairs  these  rules  are  of  plain  construction.  But  once  get  beyond
ponderable  matter, — once  bring  life  and  ether  into  play,  and  definitions
become  difficult  indeed.  The  orator,  the  poet,  we  say,  can  only  act  where
he  is ; — but  where  is  he  ?  He  has  transformed  the  sheet  of  paper  into
a  spiritual  <agency ; — nay,  the  mere  memory  of  him  persists  as  a  source
of  energy  in  other  minds.  Again,  we  may  say  that  no  other  body  can
be  in  the  same  place  as  this  writing-table;  but  what  of  the  ether?  What
we  have  thus  far  learnt  of  spiritual  operation  seems  merely  to  extend  these
two  possibilities.  Telepathy  indefinitely  extends  the  range  of  an  unem-
bodied  spirit's  potential  presence.  The  interpenetration  of  the  spiritual
with  the  material  environment  leaves  this  ponderable  planet  unable  to
check  or  to  hamper  spiritual  presence  or  operation.  Strange  and  new
though  our  evidepce  may  be,  it  needs  at  present  in  its  relation  to
space  nothing  more  than  an  immense  extension  of  conceptions  which

127]  INTRODUCTION  31

the  disappearance  of  earthly  limitations  was  certain  immensely  to
extend.

How,  then,  does  the  matter  stand  with  regard  to  our  relation  to  Time  ?
Do  we  find  that  our  new  phenomena  point  to  any  mode  of  understanding,
or  of  transcending  Time  fundamentally  different  from  those  modes  which
we  have  at  our  command  ?

In  dealing  with  Time  Past  we  have  memory  and  written  record  ;  in
dealing  with  Time  Future  we  have  forethought,  drawing  inferences  from
the  past.

Can,  then,  the  spiritual  knowledge  of  Past  and  Future  which  our
evidence  shows  be  explained  by  assuming  that  these  existing  means  of
knowledge  are  raised  to  a  higher  power?  Or  are  we  driven  to  postulate
something  in  the  nature  of  Time  which  is  to  us  inconceivable ; — some  co-
existence of  Past  and  Future  in  an  eternal  Now?  It  is  plainly  with  Time
Past  that  we  must  begin  the  inquiry.

The  knowledge  of  the  past  which  automatic  communications  mani-
fest is  in  most  cases  apparently  referable  to  the  actual  memory  of  persons
still  existing  beyond  the  tomb.  It  reaches  us  telepathically,  as  from  a
mind  in  which  remote  scenes  are  still  imprinted.  But  there  are  certain
scenes  which  are  not  easily  assigned  to  the  individual  memory  of  any  given
spirit.  And  if  it  be  possible  for  us  to  learn  of  present  facts  by  telaesthesia
as  well  as  by  telepathy ; — by  some  direct  supernormal  percipience  without
the  intervention  of  any  other  mind  to  which  the  facts  are  already  known,
—may  there  not  be  also  a  retrocognitive  telaesthesia  by  which  we  may
attain  a  direct  knowledge  of  facts  in  the  past  ?

Some  conception  of  this  kind  may  possibly  come  nearest  to  the  truth.
It  may  even  be  that  some  World-Soul  is  perennially  conscious  of  all  its
and  that  individual  souls,  as  they  enter  into  deeper  consciousness,
enter  into  something  which  is  at  once  reminiscence  and  actuality.  But
nevertheless  a  narrower  hypothesis  will  cover  the  actual  cases  with  which
we  have  to  deal.  Past  facts  are  known  to  men  on  earth  not  from  memory
only,  but  by  written  record ;  and  there  may  be  records,  of  what  kind  we
know  not,  which  persist  in  the  spiritual  world.  Our  retrocognitions  seem
often  a  recovery  of  isolated  fragments  of  thought  and  feeling,  pebbles  still
hard  and  rounded  amid  the  indecipherable  sands  over  which  the  mighty
•  "  rolling  evermore."

When  we  look  from  Time  Past  to  Time  Future  we  are  confronted

essentially  the  same  problems,  though    in  a  still    more  perplexing

form,  and  with  the  world -old  mystery  of  Free  Will  versus  Necessity  looming

in  the  background.     Again  we  find  that,  just  as  individual  memory  would

serve    to   explain    a  large   proportion   of    Retrocognition,    so    individual

M  night — a  subliminal  forethought,  based  often  on  profound  organic

not  normally  known  to  us — will  explain  a  large  proportion  of  Pre-

cognition.     But  Ivre   again  we  find    also  precognitions  which  transcend

what  seems  explicable  by  the  foresight  of  any  mind  such  as  we  know;

32  CHAPTER    I  [123

and  we  are  tempted  to  dream  of  a  World-Soul  whose  Future  is  as
present  to  it  as  its  Past.  But  in  this  speculation  also,  so  vast  and  vague
an  explanation  seems  for  the  present  beyond  our  needs ;  and  it  is  safer—
if  aught  be  safe  in  this  region  which  only  actual  evidence  could  have
emboldened  us  to  approach — to  take  refuge  in  the  conception  of  intelli-
gences not  infinite,  yet  gifted  with  a  foresight  which  strangely  transcends
our  own.

Closely  allied  to  speculations  such  as  these  is  another  speculation,
more  capable  of  being  subjected  to  experimental  test,  yet  which  remains
still  inconclusively  tested,  and  which  has  become  for  many  reasons  a
stumbling-block  rather  than  a  corroboration  in  the  spiritual  inquiry.  I
refer  to  the  question  whether  any  influence  is  exercised  by  spirits  upon  the
gross  material  world  otherwise  than  through  ordinary  organic  structures.
We  know  that  the  spirit  of  a  living  man  controls  his  own  organism,  and  we
shall  see  reason  to  think  that  discarnate  spirits  may  also  control,  by
some  form  of  "  possession,"  the  organisms  of  living  persons, — may  affect
directly,  that  is  to  say,  some  portions  of  matter  which  we  call  living,
namely,  the  brain  of  the  entranced  sensitive.  There  seems  to  me,
then,  no  paradox  in  the  supposition  that  some  effect  should  be  produced
by  spiritual  agency — possibly  through  the  mediation  of  some  kind  of
energy  derived  from  living  human  beings — upon  inanimate  matter  as
well.  And  I  believe  that  as  a  fact  such  effects  have  been  observed
and  recorded  in  a  trustworthy  manner  by  Sir  W.  Crookes,  the  late
Dr.  Speer,  and  others,  in  the  cases  especially  of  D.  D.  Home  and  of
W.  Stainton  Moses.  If  indeed,  I  call  these  and  certain  other  records
still  inconclusive,  it  is  mainly  on  account  of  the  mass  of  worthless
narratives  with  which  they  have  been  in  some  sense  smothered;  the
long  history  of  so-called  investigations  which  have  consisted  merely
in  an  interchange  of  credulity  and  fraud.  For  the  present  the  evi-
dence of  this  kind  which  has  real  value  is  better  presented,  I  think,
in  separate  records  than  collected  or  discussed  in  any  generalised
form.  All  that  I  purpose  in  this  work,  therefore,  is  briefly  to  indicate
the  relation  which  these  "physical  phenomena"  hold  to  the  psychical
phenomena  with  which  my  book  is  concerned.  Alongside  of  the  faculty
or  achievement  of  man's  ordinary  or  supraliminal  self  I  shall  demarcate
the  faculty  or  achievement  which  I  ascribe  to  his  subliminal  self;  and
alongside  of  this  again  I  shall  arrange  such  few  well-attested  phenomena
as  seem  prima  facie  to  demand  the  physical  intervention  of  discarnate
intelligences.

128.  I  have  traced  the  utmost  limits  to  which  any  claim  to  a  scientific
basis  for  these  inquiries  can  at  present  be  pushed.  Yet  the  subject-
matter  has  not  yet  been  exhausted  of  half  its  significance.  The  con-
clusions to  which  our  evidence  points  are  not  such  as  can  be  discussed
or  dismissed  as  a  mere  matter  of  speculative  curiosity.  They  affect  every

128]  INTRODUCTION  33

belief,  every  faculty,  every  hope  and  aim  of  man ;  and  they  affect  him  the
more  intimately  as  his  interests  grow  more  profound.  Whatever  meaning
be  applied  to  ethics,  to  philosophy,  to  religion,  the  concern  of  all  these  is
here.

It  would  have  been  inconsistent  with  my  main  purpose  had  I  inter-
polated considerations  of  this  kind  into  the  body  of  this  work.  For  that
purpose  was  above  all  to  show  that  realms  left  thus  far  to  philosophy  or  to
religion, — too  often  to  mere  superstition  and  idle  dream, — might  in  the
end  be  brought  under  steady  scientific  rule.  I  contend  that  Religion  and
Science  are  no  separable  or  independent  provinces  of  thought  or  action ;
but  rather  that  each  name  implies  a  different  aspect  of  the  same  ideal ; —
that  ideal  being  the  completely  normal  reaction  of  the  individual  spirit  to
the  whole  of  cosmic  law.

Assuredly  this  deepening  response  of  man's  spirit  to  the  Cosmos
deepening  round  him  must  be  affected  by  all  the  signals  which  now  are
glimmering  out  of  night  to  tell  him  of  his  inmost  nature  and  his  endless
fate.  Who  can  think  that  either  Science  or  Revelation  has  spoken  as  yet
more  than  a  first  half-comprehended  word  ?  But  if  in  truth  souls  departed
call  to  us,  it  is  to  them  that  we  shall  listen  most  of  all.  We  shall  weigh
their  undesigned  concordances,  we  shall  analyze  the  congruity  of  their
message  with  the  facts  which  such  a  message  should  explain.  To  some
thoughts  which  may  thus  be  generated  I  shall  try  to  give  expression  in  an
Epilogue  to  the  present  work.

VOL.  i.

[200

CHAPTER    II
DISINTEGRATIONS  OF  PERSONALITY

Gdvaros  «rr«>  OKWTO.  iyepQevTts  opeo/Acv,  OKotra  8c  evSovrcs,  VT

—  HERACLITUS.

200.  Of  the  race  of  man  we  know  for  certain  that  it  has  been
evolved  through  many  ages  and  through  countless  forms  of  change.
We  know  for  certain  that  its  changes  continue  still;  nay,  that  more
causes  of  change  act  upon  us  in  "  fifty  years  of  Europe  "  than  in  "  a
cycle  of  Cathay."  We  may  reasonably  conjecture  that  the  race  will
continue  to  change  with  increasing  rapidity,  and  through  a  period  in
comparison  with  which  our  range  of  recorded  history  shrinks  into  a
moment.

The  actual  nature  of  these  coming  changes,  indeed,  lies  beyond  our
imagination.  Many  of  them  are  probably  as  inconceivable  to  us  now
as  eyesight  would  have  been  to  our  eyeless  ancestors.  All  that  we
can  do  is  to  note  so  far  as  possible  the  structural  laws  of  our  per-
sonality as  deduced  from  its  changes  thus  far;  inferring  that  for  some
time  to  come,  at  any  rate,  its  further  changes  will  proceed  upon  similar
lines.

I  have  already  (Chapter  I.)  indicated  the  general  view  as  to  the  nature
of  human  personality  which  is  maintained  in  this  work.  I  regard  each  man
as  at  once  profoundly  unitary  and  almost  infinitely  composite,  as  inherit-
ing from  earthly  ancestors  a  multiplex  and  "  colonial  "  organism  —  polyzoic
and  perhaps  polypsychic  in  an  extreme  degree  ;  but  also  as  ruling  and
unifying  that  organism  by  a  soul  or  spirit  absolutely  beyond  our  present
analysis  —  a  soul  which  has  originated  in  a  spiritual  or  metetherial  environ-
ment ;  which  even  while  embodied  subsists  in  that  environment  ;  and
which  will  still  subsist  therein  after  the  body's  decay.

It  is,  of  course,  impossible  for  us  to  picture  to  ourselves  the  way  in
which  the  individual  life  of  each  cell  of  the  body  is  reconciled  with  the
unity  of  the  central  life  which  controls  the  body  as  a  whole.  But  this
difficulty  is  not  created  or  intensified  by  the  hypothesis  of  a  separate  and
persistent  soul.  On  no  hypothesis  can  we  really  understand  the  collabora-
tion and  the  subordination  of  the  cell-lives  of  any  multicellular  animal.  It
is  as  mysterious  in  the  starfish  as  it  is  in  Plato  ;  and  the  "  eight  brains  of
Aurelia  "  with  their  individual  and  their  common  life  are  as  inconceivable

34

202]     DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY     35

as  the  life  of  the  phagocytes  in  the  philosopher's  veins,  in  their  relation  to
his  central  thought.1

201.  I  claim,  in  fact,  that  the  ancient  hypothesis  of  an  indwelling
soul,  possessing  and  using  the  body  as  a  whole,  yet  bearing  a  real,  though
obscure  relation  to  the  various  more  or  less  apparently  disparate  conscious
groupings  manifested  in  connection  with  the  organism  and  in  connection
with  more  or  less  localised  groups  of  nerve-matter,  is  a  hypothesis  not
more  perplexing,  not  more  cumbrous,  than  any  other  hypothesis  yet  sug-
gested.    I  claim  also  that  it  is  conceivably  provable, — I  myself  hold  it  as
actually  proved, — by  direct   observation.     I  hold  that  certain  manifesta-
tions of  central  individualities,  associated  now  or  formerly  with  certain
definite   organisms,  have  been  observed  in  operation  apart  from   those
organisms,  both  while  the  organisms  were  still  living,  and  after  they  had
decayed.     Whether  or  no  this  thesis  be  as  yet  sufficiently  proved,  it  is  at
least  at  variance  with  no  scientific  principle  nor  established  fact  whatever ;
and  it  is  of  a  nature  which  continued  observation  may  conceivably  establish
to  the  satisfaction  of  all.     The  negative  thesis,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a
thesis  in  unstable  equilibrium.     It  cannot  be  absolutely  proved   by  any
number  of  negative  instances ;  and  it  may  be  absolutely  disproved  by  a
single  positive    instance.     It   may  have   at  present   a   greater   scientific
currency,  but  it  can  have  no  real  scientific  authority  as  against  the  view
defended   in  these  pages.

202.  Leaving  these  questions,  however,  aside  for  the  present,  we  may
agree  that  in  the  organism  as  we  can  observe  it  in  common  life  we  have  no
complete  or  unchanging  unity,  but  rather  a  complex  hierarchy  of  groups
of  cells  exercising  vaguely  limited  functions,  and  working  together  with
rough  precision,  tolerable  harmony,  fair  success.     That  these  powers  ever
work  perfectly  together  we  have  no  evidence.     Our  feeling  of  health  is  but
a  rough  haphazard  register  of  what  is  passing  within  us.     Nor  would  it
ever  be  possible  to  define  a  permanently  ideal  status  in  an  organism  in
moving   equilibrium, — an   organism    which    lives    by  exploding   unstable
compounds,  and  which  is  constantly  aiming  at  new  ends  at  the  expense  of
the  old.

Many  disturbances  and   disintegrations  of  the   personality  must  pre-
sently fall  to  be  described.     But  the  reader  who  may  follow  me  must
remember  the  point  of  view  from  which   I   am  writing.     The  aim  of  my
is  is  not  to  destroy  but  to   fulfil; — or  say,  rather,  my  hope  is  that
.  ;ition  of  the  ways  in  which  the  personality  tends  to  disintegrate  may
suggest  methods  which  may  tend  on  the  other  hand  to  its  more  complete
integration.

•  h  improvements  upon  the  natural  conditions  of  the  organism  are  not
unknown.     Just  as  the  study  of  hysteria  deals  mainly  with  instabilities  in

1  The  difficulty  of  conceiving  any  cellular  focus,  either  fixed  or  shifting,  has  actually
ne  psychologists  to  demand  a  unifying  principle  which  is  not  cellular,  and  yet  is
soul.

36  CHAPTER     II  [203

the  threshold  of  consciousness,  so  does  the  study  of  zymotic  disease  deal
mainly  with  instabilities  in  the  constitution  of  the  blood.  The  ordinary
object  of  the  physician  is  to  check  these  instabilities  when  they  occur ;  to
restore  healthy  blood  in  the  place  of  vitiated.  The  experimental  biologist
has  a  further  aim.  He  wishes  to  provide  men  with  better  blood  than
nature  has  bestowed ;  to  elicit  from  virus  and  decay  some  element  whose
infusion  into  the  veins  may  give  immunity  against  microbic  invasion.  As
the  adult  is  safer  against  such  attacks  than  the  child  by  dint  of  his  more
advanced  development,  so  is  the  immunised  adult  safer  than  the  common
man.  The  change  in  his  blood  which  healthy  maturity  has  induced  has
made  him  safe  against  whooping-cough.  The  change  in  his  blood  which  we
effect  by  injecting  antitoxin  makes  him  temporarily  safe  against  diphtheria.
We  have  improved  upon  nature  ; — and  our  artifice  has  been  prophylactic
by  virtue  of  being  in  a  certain  sense  developmental.

Even  such,  I  trust,  may  be  the  achievement  of  experimental  psychology
in  a  later  day.  I  shall  be  well  content  if  in  this  chapter  I  can  give  hints
for  some  future  colligation  of  such  evolutive  phenomena  as  may  lurk  amid  a
mass  of  phenomena  mainly  dissolutive — phenomena  whose  records  are
scattered  and  imperfect,  and  have  as  yet  only  in  some  few  directions,  and
by  quite  recent  writers,  been  collated  or  systematised  on  any  definite  plan.

203.  The  discussion  of  these  disintegrations  of  personality  needs,  I
think,  some  little  clearing  of  the  ground  beforehand,  if  it  is  to  avoid  con-
fusion. It  will  be  needful  to  speak  of  concurrent  and  alternating  streams
of  consciousness, — of  subliminal  and  supralimmal  strata  of  personality  and
the  like ; — phrases  which  save  much  trouble  when  used  with  care,  but
which  need  some  words  of  preliminary  explanation.  It  is  not  easy  to
realise  that  anything  which  deserves  the  name  of  consciousness  can  be
going  on  within  us,  apart  from  that  central  stream  of  thought  and  feeling
with  which  we  identify  ourselves  in  common  life.  Something  of  definition
is  needed ; — not  indeed  of  any  formal  or  dogmatic  kind  ; — but  enough  to
make  clear  the  sense  given  to  such  words  as  consciousness,  memory,  per-
sonality, in  the  ensuing  pages.

I  begin,  then,  with  the  obvious  remark  that  when  we  conceive  any  act
other  than  our  own  as  a  conscious  act,  we  do  so  either  because  we  regard
it  as  complex,  and  therefore  purposive,  or  because  we  perceive  that  it  has
been  remembered.  Thus  we  call  the  fencer  or  the  chess-player  fully  con-
scious ;  or,  again,  we  say,  "  The  man  who  seemed  stunned  after  that  blow
on  the  head  must  really  have  been  conscious  all  the  time ;  for  he  after-
wards recalled  every  incident."  The  memorability  of  an  act  is,  in  fact,  a
better  proof  of  consciousness  than  its  complexity.  Thus  consciousness  has
been  denied  both  to  hypnotised  subjects  and  to  dogs ;  but  it  is  easier  to
prove  that  the  hypnotised  subject  is  conscious  than  that  the  dog  is  con-
scious. For  the  hypnotised  subject,  though  he  may  forget  the  incidents
of  the  trance  when  he  awakes,  will  remember  them  in  the  next  trance ;  or
he  may  be  trained  to  remember  them  in  the  waking  state  also ;  while  with

203]     DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY     37

regard  to  the  dog  we  cannot  decide  from  the  mere  complexity  of  his
actions  how  far  he  is  conscious  of  their  performance.  With  him,  too,  the
best  line  of  proof  lies  in  his  obvious  memory  of  past  acts.  And  yet,
although  all  agree  that  our  own  memory,  broadly  speaking,  proves  our
past  consciousness,  some  persons  would  not  admit  that  a  dog's  memory
does  so  too.  The  dog's  organism,  they  would  say,  responds,  no  doubt,  in
a  new  manner  to  a  second  repetition  of  a  previous  stimulus ;  but  this  is
more  or  less  true  of  all  living  organisms,  or  parts  of  organisms,  even  far
below  what  we  generally  regard  as  a  conscious  level.

Reflections  of  this  kind  naturally  lead  to  a  wider  conception  of  con-
sciousness. It  is  gradually  seen  that  the  earlier  inquiries  which  men  have
made  about  consciousness  have  been  of  a  merely  ethical  or  legal  char-
acter ; — have  simply  aimed  at  deciding  whether  at  a  given  moment  a  man
was  responsible  for  his  acts,  either  to  a  human  or  to  a  divine  tribunal.
Common  sense  has  seemed  to  encourage  this  method  of  definite  demarca-
tion ;  we  judge  practically  either  that  a  man  is  conscious  or  that  he  is  not ;
in  the  experience  of  life  intermediate  states  are  of  little  importance.

As  soon,  however,  as  the  problem  is  regarded  as  a  psychological  one,
to  be  decided  by  observation  and  experiment,  these  hard  and  fast  lines
grow  fainter  and  fainter.  We  come  to  regard  consciousness  as  an  attri-
bute which  may  possibly  be  present  in  all  kinds  of  varying  degrees  in  con-
nection with  the  animal  and  vegetable  worlds ;  as  the  psychical  counter-
part of  life ;  as  conceivably  the  psychical  counterpart  of  all  phenomenal
existence.  Or,  rather,  we  may  say  this  of  mind,  to  which,  in  its  more  ele-
mentary forms,  consciousness  bears  somewhat  the  same  relation  as  self-
consciousness  bears  to  consciousness,  or  some  higher  evolution  may  bear
to  self-consciousness.

This  being  so,  I  cannot  see  how  we  can  phrase  our  definition  more
simply  than  by  saying  that  any  act  or  condition  must  be  regarded  as  con-
scious if  it  is  potentially  memorable; — if  it  can  be  recollected,  under  any
circumstances,  by  the  subject  concerned.  It  does  not  seem  needful  that
the  circumstances  under  which  such  recollection  may  occur  should  arise
while  the  subject  is  still  incarnated  on  this  planet.  We  shall  never  on  this
planet  remember  the  great  majority  of  our  dreams  ;  but  those  dreams  were
presumably  no  less  conscious  than  the  dreams  which  a  sudden  awakening
allowed  us  to  keep  in  memory.  Certain  hypnotic  subjects,  indeed,  who
'  made  to  remember  their  dreams  by  suggestion,  apparently  remem-
ber dreams  previously  latent  just  as  easily  as  dreams  previously  remem-
And  we  shall  have  various  other  examples  of  the  unexpected
recollection  of  experiences  supposed  to  have  been  entirely  devoid  of
consciousness.

are  bound,  I  think,  to  draw  at  least  this  negative  conclusion  :  that
we  must  not  take  for  granted  that  our  apparently  central  consciousness  is
something  wholly  different  in  kind  from  the  minor  consciousnesses  out  of
which  it  is  in  some  sense  elaborated.  I  do  indeed  believe  it  to  be  in  an

38  CHAPTER    II  [204

important  sense  different ;  but  this  difference  must  not  be  assumed  on  the
basis  of  our  subjective  sensations  alone.  We  must  approach  the  whole
subject  of  split  or  duplicated  personalities  with  no  prepossession  against
the  possibility  of  any  given  arrangement  or  division  of  the  total  mass  of
consciousness  which  exists  within  us.

204.  Before  we  can  picture  to  ourselves  how  that  mass  of  conscious-
ness may  disintegrate,  we  ought,  were  it  possible,  to  picture  to  ourselves
how  it  is  in  the  first  instance  integrated.  That,  however,  is  a  difficulty
which  does  not  begin  with  the  constitution  of  man.  It  begins  when  uni-
cellular develop  into  multicellular  organisms.  It  is,  of  course,  a  mystery
how  a  single  cell  can  hold  together,  and  what  kind  of  unity  it  can  possess.
But  it  is  a  fresh  mystery  when  several  cells  cohere  in  a  conjoint  and  inde-
pendent life.  In  the  collective  unity  of  certain  "  colonial  animals  "  we
have  a  kind  of  sketch  or  parody  of  our  own  complex  being.  Higher  in-
telligences may  possibly  see  us  as  we  see  the  hydrozoon — a  creature  split
up  into  different  "  persons,"  a  "  hydriform  person  "  who  feeds,  a  "  medusi-
form  person  "  who  propagates,  and  so  on — elements  of  the  animal  dif-
ferentiated for  different  ends — interconnected  from  one  point  of  view  as
closely  as  our  stomach  and  brain,  yet  from  another  point  of  view  separable
existences,  capable  of  detachment  and  of  independent  regeneration  in  all
kinds  of  different  ways.  Still  more  composite,  though  less  conspicuously
composite,  is  every  animal  that  we  meet  as  we  rise  through  the  scale ;  and
in  man  we  reach  the  summit  both  of  colonial  complexity  and  of  centralised
control.

I  need  hardly  say  that  as  regards  the  inner  nature  of  this  close  co-
ordination, this  central  government,  science  can  at  present  tell  us  little  or
nothing.  The  growth  of  the  nervous  mechanism  may  be  to  some  extent
deciphered ;  but  how  this  mechanism  is  centrally  governed ;  what  is  the
tendency  which  makes  for  unity ;  where  precisely  this  unity  resides,  and
what  is  its  exact  relation  to  the  various  parts  of  the  multicellular  organism
— all  these  are  problems  in  the  nature  of  life,  to  which  as  yet  no  solution
is  known.

The  needed  clue,  as  I  believe,  can  be  afforded  only  by  the  discovery
of  laws  affecting  primarily  that  unseen  or  spiritual  plane  of  being  where  I
imagine  the  origin  of  life  to  lie.  If  we  can  suppose  telepathy  to  be  a  first
indication  of  a  law  of  this  type,  and  to  occupy  in  the  spiritual  world  some
such  place  as  gravitation  occupies  in  the  material  world,  we  might  imagine
something  analogous  to  the  force  of  cohesion  as  operating  in  the  psychical
contexture  of  a  human  personality.  Such  a  personality,  at  any  rate,  as  the
development  of  higher  from  lower  organisms  shows,  involves  the  aggrega-
tion of  countless  minor  psychical  entities,  whose  characteristics  still  per-
sist, although  in  a  manner  consistent  with  the  possibility  that  one  larger
psychical  entity,  whether  pre-existent  or  otherwise,  is  the  unifying  con-
tinuum of  which  those  smaller  entities  are  fragments,  and  exercises  over
them  a  pervading,  though  an  incomplete,  control.

206]      DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY     39

205.  It  is  plainly  impossible  to  say  beforehand  what  will  be  the  rela-
tion to  the  ordinary  stream  of  consciousness  of  a  personality  thus  composed.
We  have  no  right  to  assume  that  all  our  psychical  operations  will  fall  at
the  same  time,  or  at  any  time,  into  the  same  central  current  of  perception,
or  rise  above  what  we  have  called  the  ordinary  conscious  threshold.     We
can  be  sure,  in  fact,  that  there  will  be  much  which  will  not  so  rise ;  can  we
predict  what  will  rise  ?

We  can  only  reply  that  the  perception  of  stimuli  by  the  supraliminal
consciousness  is  a  kind  of  exercise  of  function ;  and  that  here,  as  in  other
cases  where  a  function  is  exercised,  part  of  its  range  will  consist  of  such
operation  as  the  primary  structure  of  the  organism  obliges  it  to  perform,
and  part  will  consist  of  such  operation  as  natural  selection  (after  the
structure  has  come  into  being)  has  trained  it  to  perform.  There  will
be  something  which  is  structurally  inevitable,  and  something  which  was
not  structurally  inevitable,  but  which  has  proved  itself  practically  ad-
vantageous.

Thus  it  may  be  inevitable — a  necessary  result  of  nervous  structure — that
consciousness  should  accompany  unfamiliar  cerebral  combinations  ; — that
the  "  fraying  of  fresh  channels  "  should  carry  with  it  a  perceptible  tingle  of
novelty.  Or  it  is  possible,  again,  that  this  vivid  consciousness  of  new
cerebral  combinations  may  be  a  later  acquisition,  and  merely  due  to  the
obvious  advantage  of  preventing  new  achievements  from  stereotyping
themselves  before  they  have  been  thoroughly  practised ; — as  a  musician
will  keep  his  attention  fixed  on  a  difficult  novelty,  lest  his  execution  should
become  automatic  before  he  has  learnt  to  render  the  piece  as  he  desires.
It  seems  likely,  at  any  rate,  that  the  greater  part  of  the  contents  of  our
supraliminal  consciousness  may  be  determined  in  some  such  fashion  as  this,
by  natural  selection  so  operating  as  to  keep  ready  at  hand  those  percep-
tions which  are  most  needed  for  the  conduct  of  life.

The  notion  of  the  upbuilding  of  the  personality  here  briefly  given  is  of
use,  I  think,  in  suggesting  its  practical  tendencies  to  dissolution.  Sub-
jected continually  to  both  internal  and  external  stress  and  strain,  its  ways
of  yielding  indicate  the  grain  of  its  texture.

206.  It  is  possible  that  if  we  could  discern  the  minute  psychology  of
this  long  series  of  changes,  ranging  from  modifications  too  minute  to  be
noted  as  abnormal  to  absolute  revolutions  of  the  whole  character  and  in-
telligence, we  might  find  no  definite  break  in  all  the  series ;  but  rather  a
slow,  continuous  detachment  of  one  psychical  unit  or  element  of  conscious-

ifter  another  from  the  primary  synthesis.     It  is  possible,  on  the  other
that  there  may  be  a  real  break  at  a  point  where  there  appears  to  our
external  observation  to  be  a  break,  namely,  where  the  personality  passes
into  its  new  phase  through  an  interval  of  sleep  or  trance.     And  I  be-
that  there  is  another  break,  at  a  point  much  further  advanced,  and
not  to  be  reached  in  this  chapter,  where  some  external  intelligence  begins
in  some  way  to  possess  the  organism  and  to  replace  for  a  time  the  ordinary

40  CHAPTER    II  [206

intellectual  activity  by  an  activity  of  its  own.  Setting,  however,  this  last
possibility  for  the  present  aside,  we  must  adopt  some  arrangement  on
which  to  hang  our  cases.  For  this  purpose  the  appearance  of  sleep  or
trance  will  make  a  useful,  although  not  a  definite  line  of  demarcation.

We  may  begin  with  localised  psychical  hypertrophies  and  isolations, —
terms  which  I  shall  explain  as  we  proceed ;  and  then  pass  on  through
hysterical  instabilities  (where  intermediate  periods  of  trance  may  or  may
not  be  present)  to  those  more  advanced  sleep-wakings  and  dimorphisms
which  a  barrier  of  trance  seems  always  to  separate  from  the  primary  stream
of  conscious  life.  All  such  changes,  of  course,  are  generally  noxious  to
the  psychical  organism ;  and  it  will  be  simpler  to  begin  by  dwelling  on
their  noxious  aspect,  and  regarding  them  as  steps  on  the  road — on  one  of
the  many  roads — to  mental  overthrow.

The  process  begins,  then,  with  something  which  is  to  the  psychical
organism  no  more  than  a  boil  or  a  corn  is  to  the  physical.  In  conse-
quence of  some  suggestion  from  without,  or  of  some  inherited  tendency,  a
small  group  of  psychical  units  set  up  a  process  of  exaggerated  growth
which  shuts  them  off  from  free  and  healthy  interchange  with  the  rest  of
the  personality.

The  first  symptom  of  disaggregation  is  thus  the  idte  fixe,  that  is  to
say,  the  persistence  of  an  uncontrolled  and  unmodifiable  group  of  thoughts
or  emotions,  which  from  their  brooding  isolation, — from  the  very  fact  of
deficient  interchange  with  the  general  current  of  thought, — become  alien
and  intrusive,  so  that  some  special  idea  or  image  presses  into  conscious-
ness with  undue  and  painful  frequency.  We  may  perhaps  suppose  that
the  fixed  idea  here  represents  the  psychological  aspect  of  some  definite,
although  ultra-microscopic,  cerebral  lesion.  One  may  look  for  analogy
sometimes,  as  I  have  said,  to  a  corn,  sometimes  to  a  boil,  sometimes  to  an
encysted  tumour,  sometimes  to  a  cancer.  The  idee  fixe  may  be  little  more
than  an  indurated  prejudice,  which  hurts  when  pressed  upon.  Or,  again,
it  may  be  like  a  hypertrophied  centre  of  inflammation,  which  sends  its
smart  and  ache  abroad  through  the  organism.  Or  for  certain  hysterical
fixed  ideas  we  shall  find  our  best  parallel  if,  accepting  a  well-known  hypo-
thesis, we  suppose  that  a  tumour  may  originate  in  the  isolated  and
extravagant  growth  of  some  fragment  of  embryonic  matter,  accidentally
nipped  off  or  extruded  from  the  embryo's  concordant  development.  Such
tumours  may  be  encysted  or  encapsuled,  so  that  they  injure  surrounding
tissues  by  pressure,  while  yet  their  own  contents  can  only  be  discovered
by  incision.  Just  such,  one  may  say,  are  the  forgotten  and  irrecoverable
terrors  which  Dr.  Janet  has  shown  us  as  giving  rise  to  hysterical  attacks.
(See  207  A,  in  Appendices  at  end  of  volume.)  Such  tumours  of  the  mind
may  sometimes  be  psychologically  cut  down  upon  and  removed  by  free  dis-
cussion ;  "  talked  out,"  as  Dr.  Breuer  has  it.1  Worst  of  all,  of  course,  are

1  For  a  series  of  independent,  but  fully  concordant  observations,  see  "  The  Use  of
Hypnotism  in  the  First  Degree,"  by  Dr.  Russell  Sturgis  (Boston,  1894).

207]      DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY     41

the  cancer-like  cases,  where  the  degeneration,  beginning  it  hardly  matters
where,  invades  with  rapid  incoherence  the  whole  compass  of  the  mind.

The  fixed  idea,  thus  originating  probably  from  various  causes,  may
develop  in  different  ways.  It  may  become  a  centre  of  explosion,  or  a
nucleus  of  separation,  or  a  beginning  of  death.  It  may  induce  an  access
of  hysterical  convulsions,  thus  acting  like  a  material  foreign  body  which
presses  on  a  sensitive  part  of  the  organism.  Or  it  may  draw  to  its  new
parasitic  centre  so  many  psychical  elements  that  it  forms  a  kind  of
secondary  personality,  co-existing  secretly  with  the  primary  one,  or  even
able  at  times  (as  in  some  well-known  cases)  to  carry  the  whole  organism
by  a  covp-dc-main.  (Such  changes,  it  may  be  noted  in  passing,  are  not
always  for  the  worse.}  Or,  again,  the  new  quasi-independent  centres  may
be  merely  anarchical ;  the  revolt  may  spread  to  every  cell ;  and  the  forces
of  the  environment,  ever  making  war  upon  the  organism,  may  thus  effect
its  total  decay.

207.  Let  us  dwell  for  a  few  moments  on  the  nature  of  these  fixed  or
insistent  ideas.  They  are  not  generally  or  at  the  first  outset  extravagant
fancies, — as  that  one  is  made  of  glass,  or  the  like.  Rather  will  "  fixed
ideas  "  come  to  seem  a  mere  expression  for  something  in  a  minor  degree
common  to  most  of  us.  Hardly  any  mind,  I  suppose,  is  wholly  free  from
tendencies  to  certain  types  of  thought  or  emotion  for  which  we  cannot
summon  any  adequate  check — useless  recurrent  broodings  over  the  past
or  anxieties  for  the  future,  perhaps  traces  of  old  childish  experience
which  have  become  too  firmly  fixed  ever  wholly  to  disappear.  Nay,  it

veil  be  that  we  must  look  even  further  back  than  our  own  childhood
for  the  origin  of  many  haunting  troubles.  Inherited  tendencies  to  terror,
especially,  seem  to  reach  back  far  into  a  prehistoric  past.  In  a  recent
"  Study  of  Fears,"  which  Professor  Stanley  Hall  has  based  on  a  wide
statistical  collection,1  it  would  seem  that  the  fears  of  childhood, — indica-
tions of  the  nervous  instability  of  the  yet  immature  system, — often  cor-

nd  to  no  existing  cause  for  uneasiness,  but  rather  to  the  vanished
perils  of  primitive  man.  The  fear  of  darkness,  for  instance,  the  fear  of
solitude,  the  fear  of  thunderstorms,  the  fear  of  the  loss  of  orientation,
speak  of  primitive  helplessness, — just  as  the  fear  of  animals,  the  fear  of
strangers,  suggest  the  fierce  and  hazardous  life  of  early  man.  To  all  such
instinctive  feelings  as  these  a  morbid  development  is  easily  given.

Of  what   nature   must  we  suppose   this    morbid  development  to  be?

it  fill  properly  within  our  prrsrnt   discussion?  or  is  it  not  simply  a

beginning  of  brain-disease,  which  concerns  the  physician  rather  than  the

:ologist?     The  psychologist's  best  answer  to  this  question  will  be  to

<:ases  of  fixed  ideas  eurrtt  by  psychological  means.  (For  instances  of
such  cures,  set-  207  A,  in  Appendices  at  end  of  volume.)  And  indeed  there
are  few  cases  to  show  which  have  been  cured  by  any  methods  txcrpt  the

1  Stanley  Hall's  "Study  of  Fears,"  American  Journal  of  Psychology,  vol.  viii.,  No.  2,
January  1897.

42  CHAPTER    II  [208

psychological ;  if  hypnotic  suggestion  does  not  succeed  with  an  idee  fixe,
it  is  seldom  that  any  other  treatment  will  cure  it.  We  may,  of  course,  say
that  the  brain  troubles  thus  cured  were  functional,  and  that  those  which
went  on  inevitably  into  insanity  were  organic,  although  the  distinction
between  functional  and  organic  is  not  easily  demonstrable  in  this  ultra-
microscopic  realm.

At  any  rate,  we  have  actually  on  record, — and  that  is  what  our  argument
needs, — a  great  series  of  tWes  fixes,  of  various  degrees  of  intensity,  cured
by  suggestion ; — cured,  that  is  to  say,  by  a  subliminal  setting  in  action  of
minute  nervous  movements  which  our  supraliminal  consciousness  cannot
in  even  the  blindest  manner  manage  to  set  to  work.  Some  such  differ-
ence as  exists  on  a  gross  scale  between  striped  and  unstriped  muscle  seems
to  exist  on  a  minute  scale  among  these  smallest  involved  cells  and  fibres,
or  whatever  they  be.  Some  of  them  obey  our  conscious  will,  but  most  of
them  are  capable  of  being  governed  only  by  subliminal  strata  of  the  self.

If,  however,  it  be  the  subliminal  self  which  can  reduce  these  elements
to  order,  it  is  often  probably  the  subliminal  self  to  which  their  disorder  is
originally  due.  If  a  fixed  idea,  say  agoraphobia,  grows  up  in  me,  this  may
probably  be  because  the  proper  controlling  co-ordinations  of  thought,  which
I  ought  to  be  able  to  summon  up  at  will,  have  sunk  below  the  level  at  which
will  can  reach  them.  I  am  no  longer  able,  that  is  to  say,  to  convince  myself
by  reasoning  that  there  is  no  danger  in  crossing  the  open  square.  And
this  may  be  the  fault  of  my  subliminal  self,  whose  business  it  is  to  keep
the  ideas  which  I  need  for  common  life  easily  within  my  reach,  and
which  has  failed  to  do  this,  owing  to  some  enfeeblement  of  its  grasp  of
my  organism.

208.  If  we  imagine  these  obscure  operations  under  some  such  form
as  this,  we  get  the  advantage  of  being  able  to  connect  these  insistent
ideas  in  a  coherent  sequence  with  the  more  advanced  phenomena  of
hysteria.  We  have  seen  that  the  insistent  ideas  are  essentially  a  kind  of
small  displacements  of  the  habitual  level  of  consciousness.  They  imply
that  some  small  but  necessary  scraps  of  supraliminal  equipment  have
dropped,  so  to  say,  through  chinks  in  the  floor  of  the  waking  mind  (as
where  the  visual  field  has  been  narrowed  hysterically),  and  have  sunk  to  a
point  whence  only  hypnotic  suggestion  is  likely  to  be  able  to  call  them
back  to  use.  Or  in  some  cases  we  may  go  a  step  further,  and  say  that
these  fixed  ideas  show  us,  not  merely  an  ordinary  supraliminal  instinct
functioning  without  due  check,  but  rather  a  submerged  and  primitive
instinct  rising  with  a  subliminal  uprush  into  undesired  prominence,  and
functioning  wildly  instead  of  remaining  hidden  and  quiescent.  That  is  to
say,  we  have  to  do  with  an  instability  of  the  conscious  threshold  which
often  implies  or  manifests  a  disorderly  or  diseased  condition  of  the  hyp-
notic stratum, — of  that  region  of  the  personality  which,  as  we  shall  see,  is
best  known  to  us  through  the  fact  that  it  is  reached  by  hypnotic
suggestion.

209]      DISINTEGRATIONS-  OF   PERSONALITY     43

Now  we  shall  find,  I  think,  that  all  the  phenomena  of  hysteria  are
reducible  to  the  same  general  conception.  To  understand  their  many
puzzles  we  have  to  keep  our  eyes  fixed  upon  just  these  psychological
notions — upon  a  threshold  of  ordinary  consciousness  above  which
certain  perceptions  and  faculties  ought  to  be,  but  are  not  always,  main-
tained, and  upon  a  "  hypnotic  stratum  "  or  region  of  the  personality  to
which  hypnotic  suggestion  appeals ;  and  which  includes  faculty  and  per-
ception which  surpass  the  supraliminal,  but  whose  operation  is  capricious
and  dreamlike,  inasmuch  as  they  lie,  so  to  say,  in  a  debateable  region
between  two  rules — the  known  rule  of  the  supraliminal  self,  adapted  to
this  life's  experience  and  uses,  and  the  conjectured  rule  of  a  fuller  and
profounder  self,  rarely  reached  by  any  artifice  which  our  present  skill
suggests.  Some  of  these  conscious  groupings  have  got  separated  from  the
ordinary  stream  of  consciousness.  These  may  still  be  unified  in  the  sub-
liminal, but  they  need  to  be  unified  in  the  supraliminal  also.  The  normal
relation  between  the  supraliminal  and  the  subliminal  may  be  disturbed
by  the  action  of  either.

Let  us  now  see  how  far  this  view,  which  I  suggested  in  the  S.  P.  R.
Proceedings  as  far  back  as  1892 ,l  fits  in  with  those  modern  observations
of  hysteria,  in  Paris  and  Vienna  especially,  which  are  transforming  all  that
group  of  troubles  from  the  mere  opprobrium  of  medicine  into  one  of  the
most  fertile  sources  of  new  knowledge  of  body  and  mind.

209.  First,  then,  let  us  briefly  consider  what  is  the  general  type  of
hysterical  troubles.  Speaking  broadly,  we  may  say  that  the  symptoms  of
hysteria  form,  in  the  first  place,  a  series  of  phantom  copies  of  real  maladies
of  the  nervous  system ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  a  series  of  fantasies
played  upon  that  system — of  unreal,  dreamlike  ailments,  often  such  as
no  physiological  mechanism  can  be  shown  to  have  determined.  These
latter  cases  are  often  due,  as  we  shall  see,  not  to  purely  physiological,  but
rather  to  intellectual  causes ;  they  represent,  not  a  particular  pattern  in
which  the  nervous  system  tends  of  itself  to  disintegrate,  but  a  particular
pattern  which  has  been  imposed  upon  it  by  some  intellectual  process ; —
in  short,  by  some  form  of  self-suggestion.

Let  us  briefly  review  some  common  types  of  hysterical  disability, —
taking  as  our  first  guide  Dr.  Pierre  Janet's  admirable  work,  DEtat
Mental  des  Hysteriques  (Paris,  1893).

What,  then,  to  begin  with,  is  Dr.  Janet's  general  conception  of  the
psychological  states  of  the  advanced  hysteric?  "  In  the  expression  I  feel"
he  says  (L'Etat  Mental,  p.  39),  "we  have  two  elements:  a  small  new
psychological  fact,  'feel,'  and  an  enormous  mass  of  thoughts  al:
formed  into  a  system  « I.'  These  two  things  mix  and  combine,  and  to  say
I  feel  is  to  say  that  the  personality,  already  enormous,  has  seized  and
absorbed  this  small  new  sensation  ;  ...  as  though  the  /  were  an  ai.

1  See  vol.  vii.  p.  309.

44  CHAPTER    II  [209

which  sent  out  a  prolongation  to  suck  in  this  little  sensation  which  has
come  into  existence  beside  it."  Now  it  is  in  the  assimilation  of  these
elementary  sensations  or  affective  states  with  the  perception  personnelle,  as
Janet  terms  it,  that  the  advanced  hysteric  fails.  His  field  of  conscious-
ness is  so  far  narrowed  that  it  can  only  take  in  the  minimum  of  sensations
necessary  for  the  support  of  life.  "  One  must  needs  have  consciousness
of  what  one  sees  and  hears,  and  so  the  patient  neglects  to  perceive  the
tactile  and  muscular  sensations  with  which  he  thinks  that  he  can  manage
to  dispense.  At  first  he  could  perhaps  turn  his  attention  to  them,  and
recover  them  at  least  momentarily  within  the  field  of  personal  perception.
But  the  occasion  does  not  present  itself,  and  the  psychological  bad  habit  is
formed.  .  .  .  One  day  the  patient — for  he  is  now  veritably  a  patient — is
examined  by  the  doctor.  His  left  arm  is  pinched,  and  he  is  asked
whether  he  feels  the  pinch.  To  his  surprise  the  patient  realises  that  he
can  no  longer  feel  consciously,  can  no  longer  bring  back  into  his  personal
perception  sensations  which  he  has  neglected  too  long — he  has  become
anaesthetic.  .  .  .  Hysterical  anaesthesia  is  thus  a  fixed  and  perpetual  dis-
traction, which  renders  its  subjects  incapable  of  attaching  certain  sensa-
tions to  their  personality ;  it  is  a  restriction  of  the  conscious  field."

The  proof  of  these  assertions  depends  on  a  number  of  observations,  all
of  which  point  in  the  same  direction,  and  show  that  hysterical  anaesthesia
does  not  descend  so  deep  into  the  personality,  so  to  say,  as  true  anaes-
thesia caused  by  nervous  decay,  or  by  the  section  of  a  nerve.

Thus  the  hysteric  is  often  unconscious  of  the  anaesthesia,  which  is  only
discovered  by  the  physician.  There  is  none  of  the  distress  caused  by
true  anaesthesia,  as,  for  instance,  by  the  "tabetic  mask,"  or  insensibility
of  part  of  the  face,  which  sometimes  occurs  in  tabes  dorsalis.  An  incident
reported  by  Dr.  Jules  Janet  illustrates  this  peculiarity.  A  young  woman
cut  her  right  hand  severely  with  broken  glass,  and  complained  of  insensi-
bility in  the  palm.  The  physician  who  examined  her  found  that  the
sensibility  of  the  right  palm  was,  in  fact,  diminished  by  the  section  of  cer-
tain nerves.  But  he  discovered  at  the  same  time  that  the  girl  was
hysterically  anaesthetic  over  the  whole  left  side  of  her  body.  She  had
never  even  found  out  this  disability,  and  the  doctor  twitted  her  with  com-
plaining of  the  small  patch  of  anaesthesia,  while  she  said  nothing  of  that
which  covered  half  her  body.  But,  as  Dr.  Pierre  Janet  remarks,  she
might  well  have  retorted  that  these  were  the  facts,  and  that  it  was  for  the
man  of  science  to  say  why  the  small  patch  annoyed  her  while  the  large
one  gave  her  no  trouble  at  all.

Of  similar  import  is  the  ingenious  observation  that  hysterical  anaes-
thesia rarely  leads  to  any  accident  to  the  limb  ; — differing  in  this  respect,
for  instance,  from  the  true  and  profound  anaesthesia  of  syringomyelitis,  in
which  burns  and  bruises  frequently  result  from  the  patient's  forgetfulness
of  the  part  affected.  There  is  usually,  in  fact,  a  supervision — a  subliminal
supervision — exercised  over  the  hysteric's  limbs.  Part  of  her  personality

210]     DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY    45

is  still  alive  to  the  danger,  and  modifies  her  movements,  unknown  to  her
supraliminal  self.

This  curious  point,  I  may  remark  in  passing,  well  illustrates  the  kind
of  action  which  I  attribute  to  the  subliminal  self  in  many  phases  of  life.
Thus  it  is  that  the  hypnotised  subject  is  prevented  (as  I  hold)  from  com-
mitting a  real  as  opposed  to  a  fictitious  crime ;  thus  it  is  that  fresh  ideas
are  suggested  to  the  man  of  genius ;  thus  it  is — I  will  even  say — that  in
some  cases  monitory  hallucinations  are  generated,  which  save  the  supra-
liminal self  from  some  sudden  danger.

210.  I  pass  on  to  another  peculiarity  of  hysterical  anaesthesise ; — also
in  my  eyes  of  deep  significance.  The  anaesthetic  belts  or  patches  do  not
always,  or  even  generally,  correspond  with  true  anatomical  areas,  such  as
would  be  affected  by  the  actual  lesion  of  any  given  nerve.  They  follow
what  may  be  called  fancy  arrangements ; — sometimes  corresponding  to
rough  popular  notions  of  divisions  of  the  body, — sometimes  seeming  to
reflect  a  merely  childish  caprice.  "  It  is  not,"  says  Dr.  Janet,  "  the  region
innervated  by  the  cubital  or  the  median  nerve  which  is  anaesthetic ;  it  is
the  hand  or  the  wrist.  The  whole  arm,  shoulder  included,  is  insensible,
not  the  region  innervated  by  the  brachial  plexus.  ...  In  hysterical
blindness  the  anaesthesia  is  not  confined  to  the  retina,  but  extends  to
the  conjunctiva  and  even  to  the  eyelids;  the  amaurotic  hysterical
patient  has  a  pair  of  anaesthetic  spectacles  across  her  face.  That  is
to  say,  she  has  lost  the  use  of  the  eye,  taking  the  eye  not  in  the
physiological  but  in  the  popular  sense,  as  including  all  that  is  contained
in  the  orbit."

Now  to  ordinary  notions  it  will  seem  very  strange  that  a  crude,  vulgar
conception  of  this  kind — a  conception,  moreover,  upon  which  the  patient
may  never  have  consciously  dwelt — should  be  able  to  modify  the  state  of
the  nervous  system  in  so  marked  a  way.  A  mere  silly  fancy  seems  to  have
produced  an  effect  which  is  not  merely  fanciful ; — which  is  objective,
measurable,  and  capable  of  causing  long  and  serious  disablement.  This
result,  however,  is  quite  accordant  with  my  view  of  what  I  have  termed
\pnotic  stratum  of  the  personality.  I  hold,  as  our  coming  discussion
of  hypnotism  will  more  fully  explain,  that  the  region  into  which  the

•tic  suggestion  gives  us  access  is  one  of  strangely  mingled  str<
and  weakness ; — of  a  faculty  at  once  more  potent  and  less  coherent  than
that  of  waking  hours.  I  think  that  in  these  cases  we  get  at  the  subliminal
self  only  somewhat  in  the  same  sense  as  we  get  at  the  supraliminal  self  when
the  "  highest-level  centres  "  are  for  the  time  inoperative  (as  in  a  dream)  and
only  "  middle-level  centres"  are  left  to  follow  their  own  devices  without
inhibition  or  co-ordination.  I  hold  that  this  is  the  explanation  of  the
strange  contrasts  which  hypnosis  makes  familiar  to  us — the  combination
of  profound  power  over  the  organism  with  childish  readiness  to  obey  the
merest  whims  of  the  hypnotiser.  The  intelligence  which  thus  responds  is
in  my  view  only  a  fragmentary  intelligence ;  it  is  a  dreamlike  scrap  of  the

46  CHAPTER    II  [211

subliminal  self,  functioning  apart  from  that  self  s  central  and  pro  founder
control.

What  happens  in  hypnotism  in  obedience  to  the  hypnotiser's  caprice
happens  in  hysteria  in  obedience  to  the  caprice  of  the  hypnotic  stratv^
itself.  Some  middle-level  centre  of  the  subliminal  self  (to  express  a
difficult  idea  by  the  nearest  phrase  I  can  find)  gets  the  notion  that  there
is  an  "anaesthetic  bracelet,"  say,  round  the  left  wrist; — and  lo,  this
straightway  is  so ;  and  the  hysteric  loses  supraliminal  sensation  in  this
fantastic  belt.  The  fact,  indeed,  is  most  instructive  ;  for  it  begins  to  show
us  divisions  of  the  human  body  based  not  upon  local  innervation  but  upon
ideation  (however  incoherent) ; — upon  intellectual  conceptions  like  "  a
bracelet,"  "a  cross," — applied  though  these  conceptions  may  be  with
dreamlike  futility.

211.  This  mode  of  description, — it  may  be  convenient  to  point  out,
— is  thoroughly  concordant  with  Professor  Janet's  phrase  of  rdtrecissement
de  la  personnalite.  As  he  justly  insists,  the  hysterical  loss  of  sensibility  is
due  to  a  state  of  misere  psychologique, — to  a  "  psychical  poverty,"  a  slackness
of  the  grip  with  which  the  known  or  apparent  personality  holds  and  con-
trols the  organism's  capacity  of  sensation.  Over  a  certain  part  of  the
mechanism  of  sensation  this  grasp  gives  way ;  there  is  a  deep  and  pro-
longed distraction  of  attention,  which  ends  in  the  permanent  loss  of  the
power  to  recognise  the  sensations  of  the  special  part  affected.  With  all
this  I  agree ;  these  words  describe  the  phenomena  from  the  supraliminal
point  of  view.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  first  subliminal  region — of
the  hypnotic  stratum — matters  look  slightly  different.  There  we  see
certain  dreamlike  incoherent  faculties  functioning  with  undue  freedom,  for
the  same  reason  which  affected  the  supraliminal  attention,  namely,  the
enfeebled  hold  which  the  personality  now  has  upon  the  organism.  Acting
in  dreamlike  fashion  these  fragments  of  subliminal  faculty  disturb  and
confuse  the  weakened  threshold, — the  psychical  diaphragm,  now  grown
too  permeable, — above  which  should  lie  all  the  faculty  needed  for  the
conduct  of  life  by  the  supraliminal  self.  The  morbid  subliminal  activity
attracts  or  sucks  down  scraps  of  supraliminal  activity, — scraps  often  quite
fantastic  in  their  delimitation, — and  deprives  the  supraliminal  self  of  thus
much  of  its  due  scope  of  control.  And  observe  that  even  at  this  early
stage  the  conception  here  given  of  subliminal  operation  is  needed  to
fill  gaps  which  remain  in  the  explanation  which  is  given  from  above  the
threshold  alone.  Whence  comes,  for  instance,  the  notion  of  the  "  anaes-
thetic bracelet"?  Not  from  the  hysteric's  supraliminal  self;  for  she  is
generally  unaware  of  its  existence  until  the  physician  discovers  it.  Nor  is  it
a  chance  combination  ; — even  were  there  such  a  thing  as  chance.  It  is  a
dream  of  the  hypnotic  stratum ; — an  incoherent  self-suggestion  starting
from  and  affecting  a  region  below  the  reach  of  conscious  will.

In  this  view,  then,  we  regard  the  fragments  of  perceptive  power  over
which  the  hysteric  has  lost  control  as  being  by  no  means  really  extin-

213]     DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY    47

guished,  but  rather  as  existing  immediately  beneath  the  threshold,  in  the
custody,  so  to  say,  of  a  dreamlike  or  hypnotic  stratum  of  the  subliminal  self,
which  has  selected  them  for  reasons  sometimes  explicable  as  the  result
of  past  suggestions,  sometimes  to  us  inexplicable.  If  this  be  so,  we  may
expect  that  the  same  kind  of  suggestions  which  originally  cut  off  these  per-
ceptions from  the  main  body  of  perception  may  stimulate  them  again  to
action  either  below  or  above  the  conscious  threshold.

212.  We  have  already,  indeed,  seen  reason  to  suppose  that  the  sub-
merged perceptions  are  still  at  work,  when  Dr.  Janet  pointed  out  how  rare
a  thing  it  was  that  any  accident  or  injury  followed  upon  hysterical  loss  of
feeling  in  the  limbs.  A  still  more  curious  illustration  is  afforded  by  the
condition  of  the  field  of  vision  in  a  hysteric.  It  often  happens  that  the
field  of  vision  is  much  reduced,  so  that  the  hysteric,  when  tested  with  the
perimeter,  can  discern  only  objects  almost  directly  in  front  of  the  eye.
But  if  an  object  which  happens  to  be  particularly  exciting  to  the  hypnotic
stratum — for  instance,  the  hypnotised s  finger,  used  often  as  a  signal  for
trance — is  advanced  into  that  part  of  the  hysteric's  normal  visual  field  of
which  she  has  apparently  lost  all  consciousness,  there  will  often  be  an
instant  subliminal  perception, — shown  by  the  fact  that  the  subject  promptly
falls  into  trance.  A  hysterical  boy,  a  patient  of  Professor  Janet's,  with  great
retrenchment  of  the  visual  field,  had  been  frightened  into  his  first  attack
by  a  conflagration,  and  the  sight  of  a  flame  near  him  was  enough  to  bring
on  an  attack  again.  Professor  Janet,  with  due  precautions,  moved  a  lighted
match  into  the  normal  visual  field,  far  beyond  his  hysterically  narrowed
range  of  conscious  sight.  Almost  at  once  the  boy  cried,  "  Fire  !  fire  !  "
and  fell  into  hysterical  convulsions.  The  same  experiment  was  tried  by
M.  Laurent  with  a  girl  who  had  first  been  frightened  into  hysteria  by  the
sight  of  a  mouse.  A  stuffed  mouse — held  quite  outside  her  narrowed  field
of  conscious  vision — had  the  same  effect  upon  this  girl  as  the  lighted  match
upon  the  boy.

In  these  cases  the  action  of  the  submerged  perceptions,  while  pro-
voked by  very  shallow  artifices,  continued  definitely  subliminal.  The
patient  herself,  as  we  say,  does  not  know  why  she  does  not  burn  her
anaesthetic  limbs,  or  why  she  suddenly  falls  into  a  trance  while  being  sub-
jected to  optical  tests.

But  it  is  equally  easy  to  devise  experiments  which  shall  call  these  sub-
merg«  ions  up  again  into  supraliminal  consciousness.  A  hysteric

>st  sensation  in  one  arm;  Dr.  Janet  tells  her  that  there  is  a  cater-
on  that  arm ;  and  the  reinforcement  of  attention  thus  generated
brings  back  the  sensibility.  A  patient  of  Professor  Pitres  is  hysterically
unable  to  see  with  the  left  eye.  On  a  screen  before  her  he  places  a  word
or  sentence  so  arranged  that  her  right  eye  can  only  see  half  the  print.  The
attention  thus  generated  enables  the  left  eye  to  aid  her  in  reading  the
inscription.

213.     These  hysterical  anaesthesia,  it  may  be  added  here,  may  be  not

48  CHAPTER    II  [214

only  very  definite  but  very  profound.  Just  as  the  reality, — though  also
the  impermanence, — of  the  hysterical  retrenchment  of  field  of  vision  of
which  I  have  been  speaking  can  be  shown  by  optical  experiments  beyond
the  patient's  comprehension,  so  the  reality  of  some  profound  organic
hysterical  insensibilities  is  sometimes  shown  by  the  progress  of  independ-
ent disease.  A  certain  patient  feels  no  hunger  or  thirst ;  this  indifference
might  be  simulated  for  a  time  ;  but  her  ignorance  of  severe  inflammation
of  the  bladder  is  easily  recognisable  as  real.  Throw  her  into  hypnosis  and
her  sensibilities  return.  The  disease  is  for  the  first  time  felt,  and  the
patient  screams  with  the  pain.  This  result  well  illustrates  one  main  effect
of  hypnosis,  viz.,  to  bring  the  organism  into  a  more  normal  state.  The
deep  organic  anaesthesia  of  this  patient  was  dangerously  abnormal ;  the
missing  sensibility  had  first  to  be  restored,  although  it  might  be  desirable
afterwards  to  remove  the  painful  elements  in  that  sensibility  again,  under,
so  to  say,  a  wiser  and  deeper  control.

Another  peculiarity  of  interest  for  us  in  these  anaesthesias  lies  in  what
I  may  term  a  partial  regression  to  the  vagueness  of  primitive  irritability.
The  patient  M.,  Dr.  Janet  tells  us,  has  been  for  years  totally  anaesthetic.

"  Under  certain  circumstances,  and  particularly  after  she  has  long  been
kept  in  the  somnambulic  state,  she  recovers  for  a  time,  but  incompletely,
tactile  sensations.  Sometimes  sensibility  seems  to  return  in  the  vague
form  of  pain  or  distress,  with  no  distinctive  sign.  Her  sensations  are  in-
definite ;  heat,  cold,  a  pinch,  an  object  placed  in  her  hands, — each  of  these
stimuli  produces  only  a  vague  sense  of  something  disagreeable."  And
even  when  the  sense  of  touch  becomes  more  definite,  confusion  and  error
of  localisation  still  persist.  Thus  may  hysteria  present  to  us  in  a  few
minutes  a  series  of  stages  through  which  our  early  ancestors  have  slowly
travelled ; — stages  to  which  we  may  fall  back  in  dementia,  but  through
which  only  in  this  quasi-experiment  which  nature  offers  us  can  we  see  the
spirit  pass  and  repass  unmoved.

214.  What  has  been  said  of  hysterical  defects  of  sensation  might  be
repeated  for  motor  defects.  There,  too,  the  powers  of  which  the  supra-
liminal  self  has  lost  control  continue  to  act  in  obedience  to  subliminal
promptings.

"  I  cannot  in  the  least  understand  what  is  going  on,"  said  Maria,  when  she
entered  the  hospital  [I  quote  Dr.  Janet  again] ;  "  for  some  time  past  I  have
been  working  in  an  odd  way ;  it  is  no  longer  I  who  am  working,  but  only  my
hands.  They  get  on  pretty  well,  but  I  have  no  part  in  what  they  do.  When
it  is  over  I  do  not  recognise  my  work  at  all.  I  see  that  it  is  all  right;  but  I
feel  that  I  am  quite  incapable  of  having  accomplished  it.  If  any  one  said,  '  It
is  TiQ\.yo2t  who  did  that !'  I  would  answer,  '  True  enough,  it  is  not  I.'  When  I
want  to  sing  it  is  impossible  to  me  ;  yet  at  other  times  I  hear  my  voice  singing
the  song  very  well.  It  is  certainly  not  I  who  walk;  I  feel  like  a  balloon  which
jumps  up  and  down  of  itself.  When  I  want  to  write  I  find  nothing  to  say,  my
head  is  empty,  and  I  must  let  my  hand  write  what  it  chooses,  and  it  fills  four
pages,  and  if  the  stuff  is  silly  I  cannot  help  it."

215]     DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY    49

"The  curious  point  is,"  continues  M.  Janet,  "that  in  this  fashion  she  pro-
duces some  really  good  things.  If  she  makes  up  a  dress  or  writes  a  letter  she
sometimes  shows  real  talent,  but  it  is  all  done  in  a  bizarre  way.  She  looks
absorbed  in  her  work,  but  yet  unconscious  of  it ;  when  she  lifts  her  head  she
seems  dazed  as  if  she  was  coming  out  of  a  dream,  and  does  not  recollect  what
she  has  been  doing.  Her  way  of  acting  recalls  what  is  said  of  men  of  genius
who  obey  their  inspiration  without  being  themselves  aware  of  accomplishing
their  masterpieces.  ...  To  take  a  humbler  comparison,  she  acts  as  we  occa-
sionally do  when  we  let  our  hand  write  of  itself  a  word  which  we  have  forgotten
how  to  spell.  But  what  with  us  is  accidental  is  with  her  perpetual ;  although
she  has  still  activity  she  has  no  longer  the  personal  consciousness  of  this  activity,
and  her  acts  therefore  can  no  longer  be  called  voluntary.  .  .  .  Some  patients,
on  the  other  hand,  will  not  or  cannot  abandon  themselves  to  this  automatic
activity.  They  try  to  perform  the  actions  consciously  and  voluntarily,  and  then
they  fail  altogether."

215.  I  pass  on  to  one  of  M.  Janet's  most  acute  observations1 — a
case  where  the  difference  between  the  faculty  still  at  the  command  of  the
supraliminal  personality  and  the  faculty  transmissible  only  by  automatic
impulse  from  the  subliminal  self  reaches  its  maximum  point,  and  suggests
some  reflections  of  novel  import.

"  If  we  tell  hemiplegics  or  amyotrophics  to  squeeze  the  dynamometer,
we  get  such  figures  as  5  and  10, — very  much  what  these  hysterics  manage
to  reach.  But  with  the  truly  paralysed  such  figures  do  not  surprise  us.
We  know  that  we  are  dealing  with  impotent  persons  whose  every  action
shows  their  weakness.  But  our  hysterics  who  mark  5  and  10  are  by  no
means  impotent ;  they  sew,  they  work,  they  carry  burdens  without  any
apparent  trouble.  Celestine,  for  instance,  is  a  robust  country  girl,  accus-
tomed to  hard  work,  and  still  asking  as  a  favour  to  be  allowed  to  sweep
and  rub  the  floors.  She  is  quick-tempered,  and  when  things  do  not  go
just  as  she  likes  she  shakes  the  beds,  changes  their  places,  and  lifts  with  one
arm  the  wooden  armchairs.  She  has  terrible  fits  of  passion  ;  and  in  some
asylums  where  she  has  been  she  has  soundly  thrashed  strong  men.  Well,
I  stop  this  young  woman  in  the  middle  of  her  work,  and  give  her  the
dynamometer  to  squeeze.  To  begin  with,  she  is  absolutely  anaesthetic  on
both  sides  of  her  body,  and  must  needs  look  at  the  instrument  in  order  to
be  able  to  squeeze  it  at  all.  I  have  tried  this  experiment  often ;  and  the
dynamometer  generally  marks  9  with  the  squeeze  of  her  right  hand,  5  with
that  of  her  left.  Now  I  repeat  that  such  indications  of  feeble  muscular
power  are  in  complete  contradiction  with  what  I  see  her  doing  every
minute.  I  have  made  the  trial  myself,  and  although  I  can  squeeze  the
same  dynamometer  up  to  50,  I  cannot  lift  and  move  the  chairs  and  beds
lestine  does.  ...  It  is  clear  that  in  the  hysteric  there  is  a  special
mollification  of  muscular  power  when  she  is  made  the  subject  .of  an  ex-
periment, when  she  is  told  to  pay  attention,  and  to  squeeze  an  instru-
ment with  personal  will  in  order  to  show  her  personal  strength.  She  can

1  Etat  Mtntal  des  /{ysteriquct,  p.  171.
YOL.  I.  D

5o  CHAPTER    II  [216

then  no  longer  get  at  her  strength ;  she  cannot  use  it  in  this  fashion ;
albeit  the  strength  is  really  there,  and  is  lavishly  expended  in  all  the  acts
of  common  life  when  the  patient  is  not  thinking  of  it.  What  we  have
here  is  a  defect  not  of  muscle  but  of  will."

216.  The  above  examples,  which  might  be  greatly  multiplied,  especi-
ally from  French  sources  will  suffice  to  give  a  notion  of  dissolutive
hysterical  processes,  as  now  observed  with  closer  insight  than  formerly,  in
certain  great  hospitals.  But,  nevertheless,  these  hospital  observations  do
not  exhaust  what  has  recently  been  learnt  of  hysteria.  Dealing  almost
exclusively  with  a  certain  class  of  patients,  they  leave  almost  untouched
another  group,  smaller,  indeed,  but  equally  instructive  for  our  study.

Hysteria  is  no  doubt  a  disease,  but  it  is  by  no  means  on  that  account
an  indication  of  initial  weakness  of  mind,  any  more  than  an  Arctic  ex-
plorer's frost-bite  is  an  indication  of  bad  circulation.  Disease  is  a  function
of  two  variables  :  power  of  resistance  and  strength  of  injurious  stimulus.  In
the  case  of  hysteria,  as  in  the  case  of  frost-bite,  the  inborn  power  of  resist-
ance may  be  unusually  great,  and  yet  the  stimulus  may  be  so  excessive
that  that  power  may  be  overcome.  Arctic  explorers  have  generally,  of
course,  been  among  the  most  robust  of  men.  And  with  some  hysterics
there  is  an  even  closer  connection  between  initial  strength  and  destructive
malady.  For  it  has  often  happened  that  the  very  feelings  which  we  regard
as  characteristically  civilised,  characteristically  honourable,  have  reached  a
pitch  of  vividness  and 'delicacy  which  exposes  their  owners  to  shocks  such
as  the  selfish  clown  can  never  know.  It  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  sup-
pose that  all  psychical  upsets  are  due  to  vanity,  to  anger,  to  terror,  to
sexual  passion.  The  instincts  of  personal  cleanliness  and  of  feminine
modesty  are  responsible  for  many  a  breakdown  of  a  sensitive,  but  not  a
relatively  feeble  organisation.  The  love  of  one's  fellow- creatures  arid  the
love  of  God  are  responsible  for  many  more.  And  why  should  it  not  be
so?  There  exist  for  many  men  and  women  stimuli  far  stronger  than  self-
esteem  or  bodily  desires.  Human  life  rests  more  and  more  upon  ideas
and  emotions  whose  relation  to  the  conservation  of  the  race  or  of  the  in-
dividual is  indirect  and  obscure.  Feelings  which  may  once  have  been
utilitarian  have  developed  wholly  out  of  proportion  to  any  advantage
which  they  can  gain  for  their  possessor  in  the  struggle  for  life.  The
dangers  which  are  now  most  shudderingly  felt  are  often  no  real  risks  to
life  or  fortune.  The  aims  most  ardently  pursued  are  often  worse  than  use-
less for  man  regarded  as  a  mere  over-runner  of  the  earth.

There  is  thus  real  psychological  danger  in  fixing  our  conception  of
human  character  too  low.  Some  essential  lessons  of  a  complex  perturba-
tion of  personality  are  apt  to  be  missed  if  we  begin  with  the  conviction
that  there  is  nothing  before  us  but  a  study  of  decay.  As  I  have  more
than  once  found  need  to  maintain,  it  is  his  steady  advance,  and  not  his
occasional  regression,  which  makes  the  chief  concern  of  man.

To  this  side  of  the  study  of  hysteria  Drs.  Breuer  and  Freud  (in,  e.  g.,

217]     DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY    51

their  Studien  uber  Hysteric,  Leipzig,  1895)  have  made  valuable  contribution.
Drawing  their  patients  not  from  hospital  wards,  but  from  private  practice,
they  have  had  the  good  fortune  to  encounter,  and  the  penetration  to
understand,  some  remarkable  cases  where  unselfish  but  powerful  passions
have  proved  too  much  for  the  equilibrium  of  minds  previously  well-
fortified  both  by  principle  and  by  education.  A  somewhat  detailed
account  of  two  of  these  cases  may  serve  my  purpose  in  this  chapter  in
more  ways  than  one.  In  the  first  case  we  shall  see  the  insistent  idea  in
its  most  interesting  form,  midway  between  the  unreachable  subliminal  re-
miniscences, which  give  the  signal  (as  in  Janet's  cases)  for  hysterical
attacks,  and  the  supraliminal  and  recognised  idee  fixe,  which  is  the  tor-
ment of  many  waking  existences.  Nowhere  have  we  a  better  example  of
the  mutual  convertibility  of  moral  and  physical  sensations — the  way  in
which  an  emotional  idea  may  be  symbolised  for  the  sufferer  by  the  affection
of  an  external  sense.  Here  is  the  converse  process  to  psycho-therapeutics,
a  kind  of  psychical  self-infection — self-suggestion  in  a  powerful  and  a
noxious  form.

In  the  second  case  to  be  here  analysed  we  see  a  still  stranger  process
of  disintegration  at  work.  Here  also  the  first  symptoms  are  subliminal
ide'es  fixes,  translating  themselves  into  somatic  symptoms,  whose  origin  is
only  recovered  by  help  of  the  profounder  memory  of  hypnotic  trance.  But
with  Fraulein  Anna  these  submerged  ideas,  these  hidden  ulcers  of  the
mind,  become,  so  to  say,  confluent.  We  have  a  transition  from  ide'es  fixes
to  a  secondary  personality,  dominated  by  those  ideas,  and  sinking  into  in-
coherent insanity.  Yet  even  from  that  depth  a  certain  resolute  firmness
of  the  patient's  temper,  aided  by  Dr.  Breuer's  skill  in  suggestion,  raises  her
once  more,  and  replaces  her  uninjured  among  sane  and  vigorous  women.
V  217.  Miss  Lucy  R.,  the  heroine  of  the  first  case,  was  an  English
governess  in  the  family  of  a  German  manufacturer.  She  was  thirty  years
of  age,  in  perfect  health,  except  for  a  local  inflammation  of  the  nose.

interesting  to  note  that  this  local  trouble  probably  suggested  the
special  sense  on  which  a  hallucination  could  most  readily  fix  itself.

The  symptom  for  which  Miss  R.  consulted  Dr.  Freud  was,  in  fact,  a

tent  hallucinatory  smell  of  burnt  pudding.  Careful  inquiry  traced
the  origin  of  this  smell  to  a  scene  when  the  children  under  her  charge,
affectionately  sporting  with  her,  had  allowed  some  pudding  which  was  on
the  schoolroom  fire  to  burn.  It  was  not  obvious  why  this  incident  should

carried  so  much  emotional  import.  Gradually  the  truth  came  out,
a  truth  which  Miss  R. — and  this  is  an  essential  point — had  concealed  from

If  with  all  the  resolution  of  which  she  was  capable.     She  had  un-

Miisly  fallen  in  love  with  her  employer,  a  widower,  whose  children
she  had  promised  their  dying  mother  to  care  for  always.  The  scene  of
the  burnt  pudding  represented  a  moment  at  which  an  obscure  scruple  of
conscience  urged  her  to  quit  her  trust,  to  leave  these  children,  who  were

ievoted  to  her,  on  account  of  something  dimly  felt  to  be  unsuitable

52  CHAPTER    II  [217

in  her  own  attitude  of  mind  towards  their  father.  When  once  this  con-
fession had  been  made — a  confession  new  to  herself  as  well  as  to  the
physician — the  hallucinatory  smell  of  burnt  pudding  disappeared.  Its
persistence  had  indicated  that  the  emotional  memory  on  which  it  was
based  had  not,  so  to  say,  been  absorbed  into  the  general  psychical  circu-
lation, but  had  remained  encysted  in  the  personality,  a  cause  of  pressure
and  distress.

But  now  occurred  a  symptom  which  to  a  less  skilful  or  patient  observer
would  have  seemed  merely  baffling  and  capricious,  but  from  which  Dr.
Freud  drew  a  psychological  lesson  which  illustrates  with  curious  delicacy
the  superposition  of  strata  more  and  more  segregated  from  waking  con-
sciousness.

As  the  scent  of  burnt  pudding  went  off  it  became  clear  that  another
scent  had  underlain  it,  which  still  persisted — a  scent  of  tobacco-smoke.
It  seemed  impossible  to  trace  the  moment  of  origin  of  so  everyday  an
odour.  But  by  strong  suggestions  in  a  waking  or  lightly  hypnotised
state, — placing  his  hand  on  the  patient's  forehead, — Dr.  Freud  was  able  to
evoke  a  stream  of  pictorial  memory,  closely  analogous  to  crystal-vision.
He  called  upon  her  to  picture  thus  the  scene  required.  Then  slowly  and
fragmentarily  "a  picture  rises  to  the  surface  "  (auftauchf).  But  it  repre-
sents only  the  dining-room  of  her  employer's  house,  where  she  is  waiting
with  the  children  for  his  return  to  early  dinner  from  the  manufactory.
"  And  now,"  she  says,  "  we  are  all  sitting  down  at  table — the  gentlemen,
the  French  governess,  the  housekeeper,  the  children,  and  I.  But  this  is
just  an  everyday  scene  !  "  "  Go  on  looking  at  the  picture,"  replies  Dr.
Freud,  "  it  will  develop  and  specialise  itself."  "  I  see  that  there  is  a
guest,  the  head  cashier,  an  old  gentleman  who  loves  the  children  like  an
uncle ;  but  he  comes  so  often  to  dinner  that  there  is  nothing  unusual  in
his  presence."  "  Patience  !  go  on  looking  at  the  picture  ;  I  am  sure  that
something  will  happen."  "  Nothing  particular  happens.  Now  we  are
rising  from  table ;  the  children  are  leaving  the  room,  and  are  going  into
the  next  room  with  the  French  governess  and  myself  as  they  always  do."
"Well,  what  next?"  "Ah  !  here  is  an  unusual  circumstance,  and  now  I
recognise  the  scene  completely !  As  the  children  leave  the  room  the
cashier  makes  as  though  to  kiss  them.  The  father  jumps  up  and  calls
out  roughly,  '  Don't  kiss  the  children  ! '  I  feel  a  kind  of  stab  in  my  heart.
The  gentlemen  are  smoking ;  hence  it  is  that  the  smell  of  cigars  remains
fixed  in  my  memory/'

The  point  is  easy  to  understand.  It  was  this  harshness,  pride,  aloof-
ness in  the  nature  of  the  manufacturer,  who  treated  thus  roughly  a  subor-
dinate who  was  also  an  old  friend,  which  burnt  itself  upon  the  brain,  as  we
say,  of  this  other  subordinate  who  had  obscurely  hoped  that  her  employer
had  a  gentler  and  more  accessible  heart.  She  put  aside  the  painful
impression :  but  the  thought  which  was  kept  out  of  the  supraliminal
lodged  in  the  hypnotic  stratum.

218]      DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY     53

The  way  to  minister  to  a  mind  thus  diseased  was  not  hard  to  discover.
There  was  nothing  in  this  deep-hidden  affection  which  was  unworthy  of  a
pure  heart.  There  was  only  the  maidenly  shame  at  having,  however
secretly,  entertained  it  for  one  who  was  above  her  in  worldly  fortune,  and
who  was  not  prepared  to  respond.  By  sympathy,  by  suggestion,  the  tone
of  the  affection  was  changed.  "  Gewiss,  ich  liebe  ihn,  aber  das  macht
mir  weiter  nichts.  Man  kann  ja  bei  sich  denken  und  empfinden  was
man  will."  With  the  disappearance  of  all  personal  claim  or  hope  the
love  ceased  to  perturb,  and  the  patient  recovered  health  and  spirits.

218.  Still  more  remarkable  was  the  case  of  Fraulein  Anna  O.,  of  which
a  brief  record  must  now  be  given.  Dr.  Breuer  asserts,  and  the  details  of
the  story  support  his  view,  that  Fraulein  O.  was  greatly  above  the  average
standard  in  character,  education,  and  physical  vigour.  There  was  here  no
misere  psychologique,  no  thinness  or  feebleness  in  the  original  structure  of
the  personality.  Fraulein  O.  led  an  active  and  happy  life ;  her  strongest
attachment  was  to  her  father.  Her  thoughts  did  not  dwell  on  love  or
marriage  (in  the  whole  range  of  her  hallucinations  and  delirium  there  was
no  trace  of  this),  but  she  had  great  imaginative  activity  in  day-dreams,  the
invention  of  stories,  and  the  like.

The  cause  of  her  break-down  lay  in  a  long,  distressing,  and  ultimately
fatal  illness  of  her  father's  (i  880-81)  when  she  was  twenty-one  years  old.
She  nursed  him  with  a  passionate  self-devotion,  which  was,  no  doubt,
,  but  which  can  hardly  be  called  morbid.  Her  nervous  system  gave
;nd  a  quantity  of  hysterical  affections  set  in.  There  were  headaches,
strabismus,  disturbances  of  sight  and  of  speech,  positive  and  negative
hallucinations,  the  influence  of  idees  fixes,  contractions,  anaesthesias,  &c.
The  condition  of  extreme  instability  thus  induced,  varying  from  hour  to
hour,  gave  rise  at  times  to  a  secondary  personality  which  lay  outside  the
primary  memory.  We  thus  have  a  very  direct  transition  from  isolated
disturbances  to  a  cleavage  of  the  whole  personality.

turbances  of  speech  may  give  very  delicate  indications  of  internal

turmoil  of  the  personality ;  and  Fraulein  O.'s  great  linguistic  gift  made  her

perhaps  the  most  interesting  example  on  record  of  hysterical  aphasia  and

u     Sometimes  she    was  altogether  speechless.     Sometimes  she

•rman  in  the  ungrammatical,  negro-like  fashion  which  so  often

accompanies  trance  or  secondary  states  ; — well  indicating,  in  my  view,  the

it  character  of  the  then  operative  control.     Sometimes  she  spoke

:|'l>arcntly  believing  it  to  be  German,  but  understood  German;

:  Mulish  and   could   not   understand   C.erman.      (The

h  phrases  of  hers  which  I  )r.  Hreuer  quotes  are,  be  it  noted,  remark-

:;eat  ami  well  chosen.)     Sometimes  she  spoke  French  or  Italian  :  and

ench  or  Italian  static  slu-  had  no  memory  of  Knijish  states,  and   ricr

.     Sometimes,  however,  in  an   English  state  she  could  understand

h  or  Italian  Imuks;  but  if  she  read  them  aloud  she  read  them  in

rently  unaware  that  they  were  not  in  that  language.

54  CHAPTER    II  [219

The  origin  of  this  tendency  to  English  was  afterwards  explained  in  the
hypnotic  state.  Each  of  the  specific  hysterical  symptoms  took  its  rise
from  some  incident  which  had  happened  in  hours  of  anxious  anguish  by
her  father's  bedside.  In  an  hour  of  bewildered  exhaustion  she  had
suffered  from  a  kind  of  half- waking  nightmare,  had  striven  to  pray,  could
find  no  words,  and  had  at  last  remembered  only  a  line  from  an  English
child's  hymn.  This  effort,  with  this  casual  result,  seemed  to  have  given  a
persistent  suggestion  of  English  speech,  in  a  manner  somewhat  remind-
ing us  of  the  phrase  which  has  been  last  uttered  before  aphasia  sets  in,
and  which  often  persists  for  the  aphasic  as  his  single  utterance.  Through-
out the  year  1881  these  symptoms  continued,  and  as  the  time  of  year
came  round  when  she  was  first  taken  ill.  a  singular  time-hallucination
sprang  up.  This  was,  in  fact,  a  duplex  existence  at  two  dates,  reminding
us  of  Louis  Vive"  (see  Section  233)  and  some  other  hysterics  who  can  be
set  back  by  artifice  to  a  former  period  of  their  lives.  Healthy  hypnotic
subjects,  as  I  have  seen,  can  sometimes  be  thus  transported  backwards,
although  in  a  less  profound  manner.

219.  "The  two  conditions,"  says  Dr.  Breuer,  "no  longer  differed,  as
formerly,  only  in  the  fact  that  in  the  first  condition  she  was  normal  and  in
the  second  practically  insane.  For  now  in  her  first  condition  she  lived,
like  the  rest  of  us,  in  the  winter  of  1881-82,  while  in  her  second  condition
she  lived  in  the  winter  of  1 880-81,  and  in  that  state  all  that  had  happened
subsequently  was  clean  forgotten.  Only  the  consciousness  that  her  father
was  dead  seemed  to  persist  throughout.  The  set-back  into  the  past  year
was  so  definite  and  strong  that  in  her  new  house  she  was  subject  to  the
hallucination  of  her  former  bedroom ;  and  when  she  wished  to  go  to  the
door  she  ran  to  the  stove,  which  in  her  new  room  stood  in  the  same  place
relatively  to  the  window  as  the  door  had  stood  in  the  old  room.  The
transition  from  one  state  to  another  came  on  spontaneously,  and  could
also  be  easily  summoned  up  by  means  of  any  sense-impression  which
vividly  reminded  her  of  the  preyious  year.  It  was  enough  to  hold  before
her  an  orange  (oranges  had  been  her  main  food  in  her  illness),  to  put  her
back  from  1882  to  1881.  And  this  return  to  the  past  year  took  place  in
no  vague  or  general  fashion,  but  she  lived  each  day  through  each  corre-
sponding day  of  the  past  winter.  I  discovered  this  in  two  ways  :  in  the
evening's  hypnosis  she  confessed  day  by  day  the  troubles  or  illusions
which  had  disturbed  her  on  the  corresponding  day  of  1881,  and  also  a
private  diary  of  her  mother's  showed  me  the  absolute  accuracy  of  the
external  facts  of  the  previous  winter  as  revived  in  the  hysterical  illusion.

"  It  was  curious  to  see  how  these  revived  psychical  stimuli  exercised
an  effect  from  the  second  condition  upon  the  first  or  normal  condition.
It  happened,  for  instance,  that  the  patient  said  to  me  laughingly  in  the
morning  that  she  did  not  know  why,  but  she  was  angry  with  me.  Thanks
to  the  mother's  diary  I  found  out  what  was  the  matter,  and  removed  it  by
'  talking  it  out '  in  the  evening's  hypnosis.  I  had  in  point  of  fact  greatly

219]      DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY     55

angered  the  patient  on  that  evening  in  the  previous  year.  Or  she  said
another  day  that  there  was  something  wrong  with  her  eyes;  she  saw
colours  untruly ;  she  knew  that  her  dress  was  brown,  but  she  saw  it  blue.
Experiment  showed  that  she  could  perfectly  well  distinguish  tints  on  test-
papers,  and  that  the  disturbance  affected  only  her  vision  of  the  stuff  of  her
dress.  The  reason  was  that  on  that  day  in  the  previous  year  she  had  been
very  busy  with  a  dressing-gown  for  her  father,  made  of  the  same  stuff  as
this  dress,  but  blue  instead  of  brown."

A  most  distressing  inability  to  drink  came  on  in  the  summer  of  1882,
and  lasted  for  six  weeks,  obliging  the  patient  to  live  mainly  on  melons, —
until  it  was  discovered  that  this  shuddering  incapacity  to  swallow  liquids
was  the  result  of  a  disgust  experienced  at  a  like  period  in  1881,  at  the
sight  of  a  dog  allowed  to  drink  from  an  acquaintance's  glass.  Fraulein  O.
had  concealed  this  disgust  at  the  time,  out  of  politeness,  but  the  unex-
pressed loathing  had  so  worked  itself  out  in  her  organism,  as  to  produce  a
kind  of  hydrophobic  spasm  when  the  subliminally  remembered  time  of
year  came  round.

During  the  nights  the  "  second  condition,"  which  still  reproduced  the
previous  year,  was  dominant.  Consequently,  since  the  family  had
changed  houses  since  that  date,  the  patient,  if  she  woke  in  the  night,  was
liable  to  greater  alarm  than  in  the  day,  thinking,  in  the  loss  of  correc-
tion from  recent  memories,  that  she  had  been  carried  away  from  home.
This  awkwardness  was  averted  by  a  suggestion  from  Dr.  Breuer  that  she
could  not  open  her  eyes  at  night ;  although  once  when  she  wept  in  her
sleep  her  eyelids  were,  so  to  say,  forced  open  by  the  tears,  and  she  was
seized  with  the  same  terror  at  her  surroundings.

Here,  as  in  so  many  cases,  hypnotism  showed  itself  the  exact  correla-
tive, the  specific  antidote,  of  hysteria.  Exactly  the  symptoms  which
hysteria  had  caused  hypnotic  suggestion  could  remedy.  Exactly  the
puzzles  which  hysteria  had  woven  hypnotic  suggestion  could  unlock.

"The  talking  cure"  or  " chimney-sweeping,"  as  Fraulein  O.  called  it,
was  practically  equivalent  to  confession  under  hypnosis.  Every  evening
iireuer  hypnotised  her,  and  then  inquired  as  to  the  origin  of  each
symptom  in  turn.  For  each  symptom  there  did  exist  such  a  moment  of
origin  ;  often  a  trivial  accident  originating  a  long  and  serious  trouble.  For
instance,  the  "  macropsy  and  strabismus  convergens "  which  had  long
troubled  the  patient  were  traced  to  a  moment  when  her  father  asked  her
what  time  it  was,  and  she,  looking  hastily  while  she  wept,  saw  the  dial  of
her  watch  magnified  and  distorted  through  her  tears.  So  soon  as  the
cause  of  each  accident  of  this  kind  was  traced  and  discussed,  with  special
arguments  to  remove  any  self-blame  thereto  attaching,  the  perversion  of
sensibility  or  of  motricity  disappeared.  The  isolated,  hypertrophied
memory  was  brought  back,  as  I  have  said,  into  the  general  current  of  the
psychical  circulation.  It  is  as  though  the  past  passage  of  life  was  re-lived,
and  altered  in  the  re-living.

56  CHAPTER    II  [220

220.  In  certain  cases  of  Janet's,  indeed,  a  new  and  false,  but  helpful
memory  was  substituted  for  the  old  distressing  memory ;  as  where  a  hysteric,
suffering  from  horror  at  the  recollection  of  having  been  made  to  sleep  as  a
child  along  with  another  child  suffering  from  skin-disease,  was  persuaded
by  hypnotic  suggestion  that  this  other  child  had  really  been  perfectly  sound
and  well.  In  Fraulein  O.'s  case  no  deception  was  needful.  All  that  was
necessary  was  to  make  her  see  past  events  in  their  true  proportion.  The
confession  was  cathartic;  it  cleared  away  the  morbid  products  and
strengthened  the  coherence  of  the  sane  personality ;  it  restored  Fraulein
O.  to  mental  and  bodily  vigour.

"Wax  to  receive  and  marble  to  retain;  "  such,  as  we  all  have  felt,  is
the  human  mind  in  moments  of  excitement  which  transcend  its  resistant
powers.  This  may  be  for  good  or  for  evil,  may  tend  to  that  radical
change  in  ethical  standpoint  which  is  called  conversion,  or  to  the  mere
setting-up  of  some  hysterical  disability.  Who  shall  say  how  far  we  desire
to  be  susceptible  to  stimulus?  Most  rash  would  it  be  to  assign  any  fixed
limit,  or  to  class  as  inferior  those  whose  main  difference  from  ourselves
may  be  that  they  feel  sincerely  and  passionately  what  we  feel  torpidly,  or
perhaps  only  affect  to  feel.  "  The  term  degenerate,"  says  Dr.  Milne  Bram-
well,  "is  applied  so  freely  and  widely  by  some  modern  authors  that  one
cannot  help  concluding  that  they  rank  as  such  all  who  do  not  conform  to
some  primitive,  savage  type,  possessing  an  imperfectly  developed  nervous
system."  Our  "degenerates"  may  sometimes  be  in  truth  progenerate  ;
and  their  perturbation  may  mask  an  evolution  which  we  or  our  children
needs  must  traverse  when  they  have  shown  the  way.

Let  us  pause  for  a  moment  and  consider  what  is  here  implied.  We
are  getting  here  among  the  hysteriques  qui  menent  le  monde.  We  have
advanced,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  region  of  ide'es  fixes  of  a  paltry  or
morbid  type  to  the  region  of  idees  fixes  which  in  themselves  are  reason-
able and  honourable,  and  which  become  morbid  only  on  account  of  their
relative  intensity.  Here  is  the  debateable  ground  between  hysteria  and
genius.  The  kind  of  genius  which  we  approach  here  is  not,  indeed,  the
purely  intellectual  form.  Rather  it  is  the  "  moral  genius,"  the  "  genius  of
sanctity,"  or  that  "  possession  "  by  some  altruistic  idea  which  lies  at  the
root  of  so  many  heroic  lives.

The  hagiology  of  all  religions  offers  endless  examples  of  this  type.
That  man  would  hardly  be  regarded  as  a  great  saint  whose  conduct
seemed  completely  reasonable  to  the  mass  of  mankind.  The  saint  in  con-
sequence is  apt  to  be  set  unduly  apart,  whether  for  veneration  or  for
ridicule.  He  is  regarded  either  as  inspired  or  as  morbid ;  when  in  reality
all  that  his  mode  of  life  shows  is  that  certain  ide'es  fixes,  in  themselves  of
no  unworthy  kind,  have  obtained  such  dominance  that  their  impulsive
action  may  take  and  retake,  as  accident  wills,  the  step  between  the
sublime  and  the  ridiculous.

Martyrs,    missionaries,  crusaders,   nihilists, — enthusiasts   of  any  kind

221]      DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY     57

who  are  swayed  by  impulses  largely  below  the  threshold  of  ordinary  con-
sciousness,— these  men  bring  to  bear  on  human  affairs  a  force  more
concentrated  and  at  higher  tension  than  deliberate  reason  can  generate.
They  are  virtually  carrying  out  self-suggestions  which  have  acquired  the
permanence  of  idees  fixes.  Their  fixed  ideas,  however,  are  not  so  isolated,
so  encysted  as  those  of  true  hysterics.  Although  more  deeply  and
immutably  rooted  than  their  ideas  on  other  matters,  these  subliminal  con-
victions are  worked  in  with  the  products  of  supraliminal  reason,  and  of
course  can  only  thus  be  made  effective  over  other  minds.  A  deep  sub-
liminal horror,  generated,  say,  by  the  sight  of  some  loathsome  cruelty,
must  not  only  prompt  hallucinations, — as  it  might  do  in  the  hysteric  and
has  often  done  in  the  reformer  as  well, — it  must  also,  if  it  is  to  work  out
its  mission  of  reform,  be  held  clearly  before  the  supraliminal  reason,  and
must  learn  to  express  itself  in  writing  or  speech  adapted  to  influence
ordinary  minds.

221.  We  may  now  pass  from  the  first  to  the  second  of  the  categories
of  disintegration  of  personality  suggested  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter.
The  cases  which  I  have  thus  far  described  have  been  mainly  cases  of
isolation  of  elements  of  personality.  They  have  exhibited  minor  de-
tachments from  the  main  personality,  assuming  a  quasi-independent  exist-
ence either  as  recognisable  fixed  ideas,  or  as  the  physical  representations
or  somatic  equivalents  of  obscure  fixed  ideas, — as,  for  instance,  persistent
hallucinations  or  disturbances  of  smell  or  of  sight.  We  have  not  deal!  as
yet  with  secondary  personalities  as  such.  There  is,  however,  a  close  con-
nection between  these  two  classes.  We  have  seen  that  in  Fraulein  O.'s
case,  for  example,  a  kind  of  secondary  state  at  times  intervened — a
sort  of  bewilderment  arising  from  confluent  idees  fixes  and  overrunning

hole  personality.  This  new  state  was  preceded  or  accompanied  by
something  of  somnambulic  change.  It  is  this  new  feature  of  which  we

here  a  first  hint  which  seems  to  me  of  sufficient  importance  for  the
diagnosis  of  my  second  class  of  psychical  disintegrations.  This  second

>tarts  from  sleep-wakings  of  all  kinds,  and  includes  all  stages  of
alternation  of  personality,  from  brief  somnambulisms  up  to  those  per-
manent and  thorough  changes  which  deserve  the  name  of  dimorphisms.

\Ve  are  making  here  a  transition  somewhat  resembling  the  transition
from  isolated  bodily  injuries  to  those  subtler  changes  of  diathesis  which
change  of  climate  or  of  nutrition  may  induce.  Something  has  happened
which  makes  the  organism  react  to  all  stimuli  in  a  new  way.  Our  best
starting-point  for  the  study  of  these  secondary  states  lies  among  the
phenomena  of  rfrfam.

We  shall  in  a    later  chapter   discuss   certain    rare   characteristics   of

is;  occasional  manifestations  in  sleep  of  waking  faculty  heightened,

:>u  nlty  altogether  new.      We  have  now  to  consider  ordinary  di
in  their  aspect  as  indications  of  the  structure  of  our  personality,  and  as
agencies  which  tend  to  its  modification.

58  CHAPTER    II  [221

In  the  first  place,  it  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  dreaming  state,
though  I  will  not  call  it  the  normal  form  of  mentation,  is  nevertheless  the
form  which  our  mentation  most  readily  and  habitually  assumes.  Dreams
of  a  kind  are  probably  going  on  within  us  both  by  night  and  by  day,  un-
checked by  any  degree  of  tension  of  waking  thought.  This  view — theo-
retically probable — seems  to  me  to  be  supported  by  one's  own  actual  ex-
perience in  momentary  dozes  or  even  momentary  lapses  of  attention.  The
condition  of  which  one  then  becomes  conscious  is  that  of  swarming  frag-
ments of  thought  or  imagery,  which  have  apparently  been  going  on  con-
tinuously, though  one  may  become  aware  of  them  and  then  unaware  at
momentary  intervals ; — while  one  tries,  for  instance,  to  listen  to  a  speech
or  to  read  a  book  aloud  between  sleep  and  waking.

This,  then,  is  the  kind  of  mentation  from  which  our  clearer  and  more
coherent  states  may  be  supposed  to  develop.  Waking  life  implies  a
fixation  of  attention  on  one  thread  of  thought  running  through  a  tangled
skein.  In  hysterical  patients  we  see  some  cases  where  no  such  fixation
is  possible,  and  other  cases  where  the  fixation  is  involuntary,  or  follows  a
thread  which  it  is  not  desirable  to  pursue.

There  is,  moreover,  another  peculiarity  of  dreams  which  has  hardly
attracted  sufficient  notice  from  psychologists,  but  which  it  is  essential  to
review  when  we  are  dealing  with  fractionations  of  personality.1  I  allude
to  their  dramatic  character.  In  dream,  to  begin  with,  we  have  an  environ-
ment, a  surrounding  scene  which  we  have  not  wittingly  invented,  but
which  we  find,  as  it  were,  awaiting  our  entry.  And  in  many  cases  our
dream  contains  a  conversation  in  which  we  await  with  eagerness  and  hear
/  with  surprise  the  remarks  of  our  interlocutor,  who  must,  of  course,  all  the
>  time  represent  only  another  segment  or  stratum  of  ourselves.  This  dup-
lication may  become  either  painful  or  pleasant.  A  feverish  dream  may
simulate  the  confusions  of  insanity — cases  where  the  patient  believes
himself  to  be  two  persons  at  once,  and  the  like.2  On  the  other  hand,  a
relatively, coherent  dream  may  agreeably  split  off  visual  memories  and
imagination  from  the  consciousness  with  which  the  dreamer  identifies  him-
self. One  may  walk  in  dream  through  a  picture-gallery  criticising  pictures
which  another  element  of  one's  personality  has  hung  on  the  walls.  Again,
one  may  be  able  to  identify  a  division  of  date  between  two  mental  strata ;
the  first  stratum  being  puzzled  by  a  scrap  of  memory  which  the  second
stratum  retains.  In  other  cases  one's  higher  and  one's  lower  moral  im-
pulses may  be  arrayed  against  each  other  in  dream  ;  the  dreamer  identify-
ing himself  sometimes  with  his  worse,  sometimes  with  his  better  impulse.
These  complications  rarely  cause  the  dreamer  any  surprise.  One  may  even
say  that  with  the  first  touch  of  sleep  the  superficial  unity  of  consciousness
disappears,  and  that  the  dream  world  gives  a  truer  representation  than

1  On  this  subject  see  Du  Prel, "  Philosophy  of  Mysticism,"  Eng.  trans.,  vol.  i.,  passim.

2  See  R.  L.  Stevenson's  dream  (221  A).     Note. — The  lettering  of  cases  refers  to  their
place  in  the  Appendices.

222]      DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY     59

the  waking  world  of  the  real  fractionation  or  multiplicity  existing  beneath
that  delusive  simplicity  which  the  glare  of  waking  consciousness  imposes
upon  the  mental  field  of  view.

Bearing  these  analogies  in  mind,  we  shall  see  that  the  development  of
somnambulism  out  of  ordinary  dream  is  no  isolated  oddity.  It  is  parallel
to  the  development  of  a  secondary  state  from  idees  fixes  when  these  have
passed  a  certain  pitch  of  intensity.  The  sleep-waking  states  which  develop
from  sleep  have  the  characteristics  which  we  should  expect  from  their
largely  subliminal  origin.  They  are  less  coherent  than  waking  secondary
personalities,  but  richer  in  supernormal  faculty.  It  is  in  connection  with
displays  of  such  faculty — hyperaesthesia  or  telaesthesia — that  they  have  been
mainly  observed,  and  that  I  shall,  in  a  future  chapter,  have  most  need  to
deal  with  them.  But  there  is  also  great  interest  simply  in  observing  what
fraction  of  the  sleep-waker's  personality  is  able  to  hold  intercourse  with
other  minds.  A  trivial  instance  of  such  intercourse  reduced  to  its  lowest
point  has  often  recurred  to  me.  When  I  was  a  boy  another  boy  sleeping
in  the  same  room  began  to  talk  in  his  sleep.  To  some  slight  extent  he
could  answer  me ;  and  the  names  and  other  words  uttered — Harry,  the  boat,
£c. — were  appropriate  to  the  day's  incidents,  and  would  have  been  enough
to  prove  to  me,  had  I  not  otherwise  known,  who  the  boy  was.  But  his
few  coherent  remarks  represented  not  facts  but  dreaming  fancies — the  boat
is  waiting,  and  so  forth.  This  trivial  jumble,  I  say,  has  since  recurred  to
me  as  precisely  parallel  to  many  communications  professing  to  come  from
disembodied  spirits.  There  are  other  explanations,  no  doubt,  but  one
explanation  of  such  incoherent  utterances  would  be  that  the  spirit  was
speaking  under  conditions  resembling  those  in  which  this  sleeping  boy
spoke.

There  are,  of  course,  many  stages  above  this.  Spontaneous  somnam-
bulistic states  become  longer  in  duration,  more  coherent  in  content,  and
may  gradually  merge,  as  in  the  well-known  case  of  Fe"lida  X.  (see  231)
into  a  continuous  or  dimorphic  new  personality.

222.  The  transition  which  has  now  to  be  made  is  a  very  decided  one.
We  have  been  dealing  with  a  class  of  secondary  personalities  consisting  of
elements  emotionally  selected  from  the  total  or  primary  personality.  We
have  seen  some  special  group  of  feelings  grow  to  morbid  intensity,  until  at
last  it  dominates  the  sufferer's  mental  being,  either  fitfully  or  continuously,
but  to  such  an  extent  that  he  is  "  a  changed  person,"  not  precisely  insane,
but  quite  other  than  he  was  when  in  normal  mental  health.  In  such
the  new  personality  is  of  course  dyed  in  the  morbid  emotion.  It
is  a  kind  of  dramatic  impersonation,  say,  of  jealousy  or  of  fear,  like  the
case  of  "demoniacal  possession,"  quoted  from  Dr.  Janet  in  the  Appendix
(222  A).  In  other  respects  the  severance  between  the  new  and  the
old  self  is  not  very  profound.  Dissociations  of  memory,  for  instance,  are
seldom  beyond  the  reach  of  hypnotic  suggestion.  The  cleavage  has  not
gone  down  to  the  depths  of  the  psychical  being.

60  CHAPTER    II  [223

223.  We  must  now  go  on  to  cases  where  the  origin  of  the  cleavage
seems  to  us  quite  arbitrary,  but  where  the  cleavage  itself  seems  even  for
that  very  reason  to  be  more  profound.     It  is  no  longer  a  question  of  some
one  morbidly  exaggerated  emotion,  but  rather  of  a  scrap  of  the  personality
taken  at  random  and  developing  apart  from  the  rest.     To  recur  to  our
physical  simile,  we  are  dealing  no  longer  with  a  corn,  a  boil,  a  cancer,  but
with  a  tumour  starting  apparently  from  some  scrap  of  embryonic  tissue
which    has   become    excluded    from    the    general   development   of    the
organism.

The  commonest  mode  of  origin  for  such  secondary  personalities  is
from  some  access  of  sleep-waking,  which,  instead  of  merging  into  sleep
again,  repeats  and  consolidates  itself,  until  it  acquires  a  chain  of  memories
of  its  own,  alternating  with  the  primary  chain.

An  old  case  of  Dr.  Dyce's  forms  a  simple  example  of  this  type.
Dr.  Mesnet's  case  also  should  be  referred  to  here  (see  Appendices).  In
these  instances  the  secondary  state  is  manifestly  a  degeneration  of  the
primary  state,  even  when  certain  traces  of  supernormal  faculty  are
discernible  in  the  narrowed  psychical  field.

224.  And  here,  as  an  illustration  of  a  secondary  condition   purely
degenerative,    I    may   first   mention  post-epileptic   states,    although    they
belong  too  definitely  to  pathology  for  full  discussion  here.     Post-epileptic
conditions  may  run  parallel  to  almost  all  the  secondary  phases  which  we
have  described.     They  may  to  all  outward  semblance  closely  resemble
normality, — differing  mainly  by  a  lack  of  rational  purpose,  and  perhaps  by
a  recurrence  to  the   habits  and  ideas  of  some  earlier  moment  in  the
patient's  history.     Such  a  condition  resembles  some  hypnotic  trances,  and
some   factitious   personalities  as   developed    by  automatic   writing.     Or,
again,  the  post-epileptic  state  may  resemble  a  suddenly  developed  idee  fixe
triumphing  over  all  restraint,  and  may  prompt  to  serious  crime,  abhor-
rent to  the  normal,  but  premeditated  in  the  morbid  state.     There  could
not,  in  fact,  be  a  better  example  of  the  unchecked  rule  of  middle-level
centres ; — no    longer  secretly  controlled,  as  in    hypnotic  trance,  by  the
higher-level  centres ; — which  centres  in  the  epileptic  are  in  a  state  not
merely  of  psychological   abeyance,  but  of  physiological  exhaustion.     I
give  in  an  Appendix  a  remarkable  narrative  from  the  Zoist,  which  shows
the  inevitable  accomplishment  of  a  post-epileptic  crime  in  such  a  way  as
to  bring  out  its  analogy  with  the  inevitable  working  out  of  a  post-hypnotic
suggestion  (224  A).

225.  The  case  of  Ansel  Bourne,  which  I  give  next  in  an  Appendix,
is  a  very  unusual    one.     It    is   perhaps  safest    to  regard    his  change  of
personality  as  post-epileptic,  although    I    know  of  no  recorded   parallel
to  the  length  of  time  during  which  the  influence  of  the  attack  must  have
continued.     The  effect  on    mind  and  character  would  suit  well  enough
with  this  hypothesis.     The  "Brown"  personality  showed  the  narrowness
of  interests  and  the  uninquiring  indifference  which  is  common  in  such

230]      DISINTEGRATIONS   OF    PERSONALITY     61

states.  l>ut  on  this  theory  the  case  shows  one  striking  novelty,  namely,
the  recall  by  the  aid  of  hypnotism  of  the  memory  of  the  post-epileptic
state.  It  is  doubtful,  I  think,  whether  any  definite  post-epileptic  memory
had  ever  previously  been  recovered.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  doubtful
whether  serious  recourse  had  ever  been  had  at  such  times  to  hypnotic
methods,  whose  increasing  employment  certainly  differentiates  the  later
from  the  earlier  cases  of  split  personality  in  a  very  favourable  way.
An  1  this  application  of  hypnotism  to  post-epileptic  states  affords  us
possibly  our  best  chance— I  do  not  say  of  directly  checking  epilepsy,
but  of  getting  down  to  the  obscure  conditions  which  predispose  to  each
attack.

226.  The  two  cases  reported  by  Dr.  Proust  and  M.  Boeteau  quoted  in
the  next  Appendices  belong  to  the  same  general  type  as  Ansel  Bourne's.
There  does   not  seem,  however,   to  be  any  definite    evidence  that  the
secondary  state  was  connected   with  epileptic  attacks.     It  was  referred
rather  by  the  physicians  who  witnessed  it  to  a  functional  derangement
analogous  to   hysteria,  though   it  must  be   remembered    that   there  are
various  forms  of  epilepsy,  which  are  not  completely  understood,  and  some
of  which  may  be  overlooked   by  persons  who  are  not  familiar  with  the
symptoms.     In  both  these  cases,  again,   the   memory  of  the  secondary
states  was  recovered  through  hypnotism.

227.  Another   remarkable    case    was  that   of  the  Rev.  Thomas    C.
Hanna,1  in  whom  complete  amnesia  followed  an  accident.     By  means  of
a  method  which  Dr.  Sidis  (who  studied  the  case)  calls  "  hypnoidisation,"
he  was  able  to  prove  that  the  patient  had  all  his  lost  memories  stored  in
his  subliminal  consciousness,  and  could  temporarily  recall   them  to  the
supraliminal.     By   degrees   the    two  personalities  which    had   developed
since  the  accident  were  thus  fused   into  one   and  the  patient  was  com-
pletely cured.

228.  The  next  case  I  give  (228  A)  is  one  reported  by  Dr.  Drewry.
This  is  of  the  "  ambulatory  "  type,  like  Ansel   Bourne's,  but  is  remark-
able in  that  it  was  apparently  associated  with  a  definite  physical  lesion —
an  abscess  in  the  ear — the  cure  of  which  was  followed  by  the  rapid  return
of  the  patient  to  his  normal  condition.     There  was  also  in  this  c;i
inherited  tendency  to  eccentricity,  if  not  to  insanity.

229.  I  may  next  cite  a  case  in  which  the  secondary  state  seems  to
Kl   origination  to  a   kind  of  tidal   exhaustion  of  vitality,  as  though

the  repose  of  sleep  were  not  enough  to  sustain  the  weakened  personality,
whirl:  ,n  alternate  days  into  exhaustion  and  incoherence  (229  A).

230.  The  secondary  personalities  thus  far  dealt  with  have  been  the
spontaneous  results  of  some  form  of  mislre  psychologiquc,  of  defective
integration  of  the  psychical  being.     We  shall  now  see  that  when  cohesion
is  thus  relaxed  a  slight  touch  from  without  can  effect  dissociations  which,

>r  full  details  of  this,  see  Dr.  Boris  Sidis' work,  "  The  Psychology  of  Suggestion  •
a  Research  into  the  Subconscious  Nature  of  Man  and  Society"  (New  York,  1898).

62  CHAPTER    II  [231

however  shallow  and  almost  playful  in  their  first  inception,  may  stiffen  by
repetition  into  phases  as  marked  and  definite  as  those  secondary  states
which  spring  up  of  themselves,  that  is  to  say,  from  self-suggestions  which
we  cannot  trace.  I  quote  in  Appendices  some  examples  of  these  factitious
secondary  personalities,  drawn  from  Dr.  Pierre  Janet,  the  most  ingenious
and  indefatigable  of  workers  in  this  field.

231.  Up  to  this  point  the  secondary  states  which  we  have  considered,
however  startling  to  old-fashioned  ideas  of  personality,  may,  at  any  rate,  be
regarded  as  forms  of  mental  derangement  or  decay — varieties  on  a  theme
already  known.     Now,  however,  we  approach  a  group  of  cases  to  which  it
is  difficult  to  make  any  such  definition  apply.     They  are  cases  where  the
secondary  state    is    not  obviously  a  degeneration; — where   it  may  even
appear  to  be  in  some  ways  an  improvement  on  the  primary ;  so  that  one  is
left  wondering  how  it  came  about  that  the  man  either  originally  was  what
he  was,  or — being  what   he  was — suddenly   became  something  so  very
different.     There  has  been  a  shake  given  to  the  kaleidoscope,  and  no  one
can  say  why  either  arrangement  of  the  component  pieces  should  have  had
the  priority.

In  the  classical  case  of  Fe"lida  X.  the  second  state  is,  as  regards  health
and  happiness,  markedly  superior  to  the  first  (see  231  A).

232.  The  old  case  of  Mary  Reynolds,  which  I  next  cite   (232  A),  is
again  remarkable  in  respect  of  the  change  of  character  involved.     The
deliverance    from   gloomy   preoccupations — the    childish   insouciance    of
the  secondary  state — again  illustrates  the  difference  between  these  allo-
tropic  changes  or  reconstructions  of  personality  and  that  mere  predomi-
nance of  a  morbid  factor  which  marked  the  cases  of  idee  fixe  and  hysteria.
Observe,  also,  in  Mary  Reynolds's  case  the  tendency  of  the  two   states
gradually  to  coalesce  apparently  in  a  third  phase  likely  to  be  preferable  to
either  of  the  two  already  known.

233.  The  next  two  cases  which  I  shall  cite  — Louis  Vive  and  "  Sally
Beauchamp  " — while  extremely  different  from  each  other,  are  among  the
most  remarkable  of  all.     In  Louis  Vive"   we  have  the  extreme  example  of
dissociations  dependent  on  time-relations,  on  the  special  epoch  of  life  in
which  the  subject  is  ordered  to  find  himself.     My  readers  may  have  wit-
nessed the  amusing  hypnotic  experiment  which  consists  in  putting  back
the  adult  into  early  childhood  by  suggestion  —  in  making  the  grown  man
write  round  hand  and  play  with  his  tin  soldiers,  the  grown  woman  give
a  tea-party  to  her  dolls.     But  Louis  Vive",  as  will  be  seen  in  the  detailed
account  in  the  Appendix  to  this  section,  is  put  back  into  earlier  stages  of
life  in  a  much  profounder  way.     Among  various  conditions  of  his  organ-
ism— all  but  one  of  them  implying,  or  at  least  simulating,  some  grave
central  lesion  —  any  given  condition  can  be  revived  in  a  moment,  and  the
whole  gamut  of  changes  rung  on  his  nervous  system  as  easily  as  if  one  were
setting  back  or  forward  a  continuous  cinematograph.     It  is  hard  to  frame
a  theory  of  memory  which  shall  admit  of  these  sudden  reversions,  —  of

235]      DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY    63

playing  fast  and  loose  in  this  manner  with  the  accumulated  impressions  of
years.

234.  Yet  if  Louis  Viva's  case  thus  strangely  intensifies  the  already
puzzling  notion  of  ecmnesia — as  though  the  whole  organism  could  be  tricked
into  forgetting  the  events  which  had  most  deeply  stamped  it — what  are  we  to
say  to  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  case  of  "  Sally  Beauchamp,"  with  its  grotesque
exaggeration  of  a  subliminal    self — a   kind   of  hostile    bedfellow   which
knows  everything  and  remembers  everything — which  mocks  the  emotions
and  thwarts  the  projects  of  the  ordinary  reasonable  self  which  can  be  seen
and  known  ?     The  case  must  be  studied  in  full  as  it  stands  (see  234  A)  ;
its  later  developments  may  help  to  unravel  the  mysteries  which  its  earlier
stages  have  already  woven.

235.  I  quote  in  full  in  the  text  the  next  case,  reported  by  Dr.  R.
Osgood  Mason  (in  a  paper  entitled  "  Duplex  Personality :  its  Relation  to
Hypnotism  and  to  Lucidity,"  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Medical  Asso-
ciation, November  30th,  1895).     Dr.  Mason  writes  : —

Alma  Z.  was  an  unusually  healthy  and  intellectual  girl,  a  strong  and  attrac-
tive character,  a  leading  spirit  in  whatever  she  undertook,  whether  in  study,
sport,  or  society.  From  overwork  in  school,  and  overtaxed  strength  in  a  case
of  sickness  at  home,  her  health  was  completely  broken  down,  and  after  two
years  of  great  suffering  suddenly  a  second  personality  appeared.  In  a  peculiar
child-like  and  Indian-like  dialect  she  announced  herself  as  "  Twoey,"  and  that
she  had  come  to  help  "  Number  One  "  in  her  suffering.  The  condition  of
iiber  One  "  was  at  this  time  most  deplorable  ;  there  was  great  pain,  ex-
treme debility,  frequent  attacks  of  syncope,  insomnia,  and  a  mercurial  stoma-
titis which  had  been  kept  up  for  months  by  way  of  medical  treatment  and  which
rendered  it  nearly  impossible  to  take  nourishment  in  any  form.  "  Twoey"  was
vivacious  and  cheerful,  full  of  quaint  and  witty  talk,  never  lost  consciousness,
and  could  take  abundant  nourishment,  which  she  declared  she  must  do  for  the
sake  of  "  Number  One."  Her  talk  was  most  quaint  and  fascinating,  but  with-
out a  trace  of  the  acquired  knowledge  of  the  primary  personality.  She  gave
frequent  evidence  of  supranormal  intelligence  regarding  events  transpiring  in
the  neighbourhood.  It  was  at  this  time  that  the  case  came  under  my  observation,
and  has  remained  so  for  the  past  ten  years.  Four  years  later,  under  depressing
circumstances,  a  third  personality  made  its  appearance  and  announced  itself  as
"The  Boy."  This  personality  was  entirely  distinct  and  different  from  either  of
the  others.  It  remained  the  chief  alternating  personality  for  four  years,  when

.'.  oey  "  again  returned.

All  these  personalities,  though  absolutely  different  and  characteristic,  were

tful  each  in  its  own  way,  and  "Twoey"  especially  was,  and  still  is,  the

delight  of  the  friends  who  are  permitted  to  know  her,  whenever  she  make

appearance;  and  this  is  always  at  times  of  unusual  fatigue,  mental  excitement,

on  :  then  she  comes  and  remains  days  at  a  time.     The  original  self

s  her  superiority  when  she  is  present,  and  the  others  are  always  perfectly

devoted  to  her  interest  and  comfort.     "  Number  One  "  has  no  personal  know-

of  either  of  the  other  personalities,  but  she  knows  them  well,  and  espe-

'  from  the  report  of  others  and  from  characteristic  letters  which

are  often  received  from  her ;  and  "  Number  One  "  greatly  enjoys  the  spicy,

64  CHAPTER    II  [236

witty,  and  often  useful  messages  which  come  to  her  through  these  letters  and
the  report  of  friends.

Dr.  Mason  goes  on  to  say : —

Here  are  three  cases  [the  one  just  given,  that  of  another  patient  of  his  own,
and  that  of  Fdlida  X.]  in  which  a  second  personality — perfectly  sane,  thoroughly
practical,  and  perfectly  in  touch  and  harmony  with  its  surroundings — came  to  the
surface,  so  to  speak,  and  assumed  absolute  control  of  the  physical  organisation
for  long  periods  of  time  together.  During  the  stay  of  the  second  person-
ality the  primary  or  original  self  was  entirely  blotted  out,  and  the  time  so  occu-
pied was  a  blank.  In  neither  of  the  cases  described  had  the  primary  self  any
knowledge  of  the  second  personality,  except  from  the  report  of  others  or  letters
from  the  second  self,  left  where  they  could  be  found  on  the  return  of  the  primary
self  to  consciousness.  The  second  personality,  on  the  other  hand,  in  each  case,
knew  of  the  primary  self,  but  only  as  another  person — never  as  forming  a  part
of,  or  in  any  way  belonging  to  their  own  personalities.  In  the  case  of  both
Felida  X.  and  Alma  Z.,  there  was  always  immediate  and  marked  improvement
in  the  physical  condition  when  the  second  personality  made  its  appearance.

236.  The  case  of  Mollie  Fancher,  of  which  I  quote  (in  236  A)  such
brief  and  imperfect  account  as  is  accessible,   might  have  been  one  of
the  most  instructive  of  all,  had  it  been  observed  and  recorded  with  scien-
tific accuracy — nay,  even  with  the  most  ordinary  diligence  and  care.     It
is  true  that  at  the  remote  date  when  Miss  Fancher's  phenomena  were  at
their  best  an  observer  both  willing  and  capable  would  have  been  as  hard
to  find  among  professed  savants  as  among  professed  spiritualists.      And
there  is  at  least  this  good  point  in  the  case,  that  the  probity  of  the  whole
group  has  always  been  held  above  suspicion.     The  indications  of  super-
normal  faculty,  which  occur  throughout  the  story,  were  not,  at  any  rate,
invented  as  a  self-advertisement.     And  the  sudden  changes  of  personality,
with  a  childish  character  fitted  to  each,  seem  to  stand  midway  between
the  transformations  of  Louis  Vive, — each   of  them   frankly  himself  at  a
different    epoch   of  life, — and  the    "pseudo-possessions"    of  imaginary
spirits  with  which  we  shall  in  a  later  chapter  have  to  deal.

237.  The  case  of  Anna  Winsor,  next  to  be  cited,  goes  so  far  further
in  its  suggestion  of  interference  from  without,  that  it  presents  to  us,  at  any
rate,  a  contrast  and  even  conflict  between  positive  insanity  on  the  part  of
the  organism  generally  with  wise  and  watchful  sanity  on  the  part  of  a
single  limb,  with   which  that  organism  professes  to  have  no  longer  any
concern.

Perhaps,  indeed,  the  conception  which  this  case  suggests  is  not  so
much  that  of  an  external  spirit  intervening  on  the  sufferer's  behalf,  as  of
her  own  spirit,  coexisting  in  gentleness  and  wisdom  alongside  of  all  that
wild  organic  excitement  and  decay.  Of  course  I  do  not  press  so  strange
a  notion ;  yet  to  myself,  I  must  in  fairness  add,  it  is  by  no  means
ludicrous.  Indeed,  I  think  that  all  these  sudden  changes  and  recupera-
tions should  teach  us  our  inability  to  say  how  deep  even  the  severest

239]     DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY    65

psychical  lesion  goes — whether  there  may  not  at  the  worst  be  that  within
us  which  persists  unmutilated  and  untarnished  through  all  confusion  of
the  flesh.

238.  The    case    which    I    place    last   in   this  series,    the  "  Watseka
Wonder,"  must  plainly  be  presented  to  the  reader  as  a  duplication  of
personality — a  pseudo-possession,  if  you  will — determined  in  a  hysterical
child  by  the  suggestion  of  friends.     Thus,  I  repeat,  the  story  must  for  the
present  be  offered  and  received.     At  a  later  stage,  and  when  some  other
wonders  have  become  to  us  more  familiar — not  less  wonderful — than  now,
we  may  perhaps  consider  once  more  what  further  lessons  this  singular
narrative   may  have   to   teach  us.

239.  We    have  now  briefly  surveyed  a  series  of  disintegrations   of
personality  ranging  from  the  most  trifling  idee  fixe  to  actual  alternations
or  permanent  changes  of  the  whole  type  of  character.     All  these  form  a
kind  of  continuous  series,  and  illustrate  the  structure  of  the  personality  in
concordant  ways.     There  do  exist,  it  must  be  added,  other  forms  of  modi-
fied personality  with  which  I  shall  not  at  present  deal.     Those  are  cases
where  some  telepathic  influence  from  outside  has  been  at  work,  so  that
there  is  not  merely  dissociation  of  existing  elements,  but  apparent  intro-
duction of  a  novel  element.     Such  cases  also  pass  through  a  long  series,
from  small  phenomena  of  motor  automatism  up  to  trance  and  so-called
possession.     But  all  this  group  I  mention  here  merely  in  order  to  defer
their  discussion  to  later  chapters.

The  brief  review  already  made  will  suffice  to  indicate  the  complex  and
separable  nature  of  the  elements  of  human  personality.     Of  course  a  far
fuller  list  might  have  been  given ;  many  phenomena  of  actual  insanity
would  need  to  be  cited  in  any  complete  conspectus.     But  hysteria  is  in
some  ways  a  better  dissecting  agent  than  any  other  where  delicate  psychical
dissociations  are  concerned.     Just  as  the  microscopist  stains  a  particular
tissue  for  observation,  so  does  hysteria  stain  with  definiteness,  as  it  were,
particular  synergies — definite  complexes  of  thought  and  action — more  mani-
festly than  any  grosser  lesion,   any  more   profound  or  persistent  injury
could  do.     Hysterical  mutism,  for  instance  (the  observation  is  Charcot's1),
supplies  almost  the  only  cases  where  the  faculty  of  vocal  utterance  is
attacked  in  a  quite  isolated  way.     In  aphasia  dependent  upon  organic
we  generally  find  other  word-memories  attacked  also, — elements  of
;y,  of  word-blindness,  of  word-deafness  appear.     In  the  hysteric  the
icity  to  speak  may  be  the  single  symptom.     So  with  anaesthesias ;  we
\\  hysteria  a  separation  of  sensibility  to  heat  and  to  pain,  possibly  even
a  separate  subsistence  of  electrical  sensibility.     It  is  worth  remarking  here
'  was  during  the  hypnotic  trance,  which  in  delicacy  of  discriminating
power  resembles  hysteria,  that  (so  far  as  I  can  make  out)  the  distinctness
of  the  temperature-sense  from  the  pain-sense  was  first  observed.     Esdaile,

i  Kevut  dt  r Hypnotism tt  July  1889.
VO!  E

66  CHAPTER    II  [240

when  removing  tumours  under  mesmerism  in  Calcutta,  noticed  that  patients,
who  were  actually  undergoing  capital  operations  without  a  murmur,  com-
plained  if  a  draught  blew  in  upon  them  from  an  open  window.

240.  Nor  is  it  only  as  a  dissecting  agent  that  hysteria  can  aid  our
research.     There  are  in  hysteria  frequent  acquisitions  as  well  as  losses  of
faculty.     It  is  not  unusual  to  find  great  hyperaesthesia  in  certain  special
directions — of  touch,  hearing,  perception  of  light,  &c. — combined  with
hysterical  loss  of  sensation  of  other  kinds.     This  subject  will  be  more
conveniently  treated  along  with  the  hypersesthesia  of  the  hypnotic  trance.
But  I  may  note  here  that  just  such  occasional  quickenings  of  faculty  were,
in  my  view,  almost  certain  to  accompany  that  instability  of  psychical
threshold  which  is  the  distinguishing  characteristic  of  hysteria,  since  I  hold
that  subliminal  faculty  habitually  overpasses  su.praliminal.     These  also  are
a  kind  of  capricious  idees  fixes ;  only  the  caprice  in  such  cases  raises  what
was  previously  submerged  instead  of  exaggerating  what  was  previously
emergent.

And  from  this  point  it  is  that  our  inquiries  must  now  take  their  fresh
departure.  We  in  this  work  are  concerned  with  changes  which  are  the
converse  of  hysterical  changes.  We  are  looking  for  integrations  in  lieu  of
disintegrations ;  for  intensifications  of  control,  widenings  of  faculty,  instead
of  relaxation,  scattering,  or  decay.

241.  Suppose,   then,   that  in  a  case  of  instability  of  the   psychical
threshold, — ready  permeability,  if  you  will,  of  the  psychical  diaphragm
separating  the  supraliminal  from   the   subliminal   self, — the  elements  of
emergence  tend  to  increase  and  the  elements  of  submergence  to  diminish.
Suppose  that  the  permeability  depends  upon  the  force  of  the  uprushes
from  below  the  diaphragm  rather  than  on  the  tendency  to  sink  downwards
from  above  it.     We  shall  then  reach  the  point  where  the  vague  name  of
hysteria  must  give  place  to  the  vague  name  of  genius.     The  uprushes  from
the  subliminal  self  will  now  be  the  important  feature;  the  down-draught
from  the  supraliminal,  if  it  still  exists,  will  be  trivial  in  comparison.     The
content  of  the  uprush  will  be  congruous  with  the  train  of  voluntary  thought ;
and  the  man  of  genius  will  be  a  man  more  capable  than  others  of  utilising
for  his  waking  purposes  the  subliminal  region  of  his  being.

242.  Next  in  order  to  the  uprushes  of  genius  will  come  the  uprushes
of  dream.     All  men  pass  normally  and  healthily  into  a  second  phase  of
personality,  alternating  with  the  first.     That  is  sleep,  and  sleep  is  charac-
terised by  those  incoherent  forms  of  subliminal  uprush  which  we  know  as
dreams.      It  is  here  that  our  evidence  for  telepathy  and  telaesthesia  will
first  present  itself  for  discussion.     Sleep  will  indicate  the  existence  of
submerged  faculty  of  a  rarer  type  than  even  that  to  which  genius  has
already  testified.

There  are,  moreover,  other  states,  both  spontaneous  and  induced,
analogous  to  sleep,  and  these  will  form  the  subject  of  my  fifth  chapter,
that  on  Hypnotism.  Hypnotism,  however,  does  not  mean  trance  or

243]     DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY     67

somnambulism  only.  It  is  a  name,  if  not  for  the  whole  ensemble,  yet
for  a  large  group  of  those  artifices  which  we  have  as  yet  discovered  for
the  purpose  of  eliciting  and  utilising  subliminal  faculty.  The  results  of
hypnotic  suggestion  will  be  found  to  imitate  sometimes  the  subliminal
uprushes  of  genius,  and  sometimes  the  visions  of  spontaneous  somnam-
bulism ;  while  they  also  open  to  us  fresh  and  characteristic  accesses  into
subliminal  knowledge  and  power.

243.  Further  than  this  point  our  immediate  forecast  need  not  go.
But  when  we  shall  have  completed  the  survey  here  indicated,  we  shall  see,
I  think,  how  significant  are  the  phenomena  of  hysteria  in  any  psychological
scheme  which  aims  at  including  the  hidden  powers  of  man.  For  much  as
the  hysteric  stands  in  comparison  with  us  ordinary  men,  so  perhaps  do  we
ordinary  men  stand  in  comparison  with  a  not  impossible  ideal  of  faculty
and  of  self-control.

For  might  not  all  the  hysteric  tale  be  told,  mutato  nomine,  of  the  whole
race  of  mortal  men?  What  assurance  have  we  that  from  some  point  of
higher  vision  we  men  are  not  as  these  shrunken  and  shadowed  souls?
Suppose  that  we  had  all  been  a  community  of  hysterics;  all  of  us  to-
gether subject  to  these  shifting  losses  of  sensation,  these  inexplicable  gaps
of  memory,  these  sudden  defects  and  paralyses  of  movement  and  of  will.
Assuredly  we  should  soon  have  argued  that  our  actual  powers  were  all
with  which  the  human  organism  was  or  could  be  endowed.  We  should
have  thought  it  natural  that  nervous  energy  should  only  just  suffice  to
keep  attention  fixed  upon  the  action  which  at  the  moment  we  needed  to
perform.  We  should  have  pointed  out  that  our  lack  of  sensation  over
large  tracts  of  the  body  rarely  led  to  positive  injury ;  but  by  what  means
such  injury  was  averted,  by  the  action  of  what  subjacent  intelligence  our
skin  was  saved  from  steel  or  fire — of  this  we  should  have  been  too  con-
tentedly ignorant  even  to  ask  the  question.  Nor,  again,  should  we  have
been  astonished  at  our  capricious  lack  of  power  over  our  organisms,  our
intermittent  defect  of  will.  We  should  have  held,  and  with  some  reason,
that  the  mystery  as  to  how  our  will  could  ever  move  any  limb  of  our
bodies  was  far  greater  than  the  mystery  as  to  why  certain  limbs  at  certain
moments  failed  to  obey  it.  And  as  for  defects  of  recollection ; — is  the
reader  inclined  to  think  that  the  hysterical  memory  could  never  have  been
accepted  as  normal  ?  That  some  guess  of  a  more  continuous  conscious-
ness, of  an  identity  unmoved  and  stable  beneath  the  tossing  of  the  psychic
storm,  must  needs  have  been  suggested  by  all  those  strange  interruptions?
—by  the  lapses  into  other  phases  of  personality,  by  the  competing  fields
of  reminiscence,  by  the  clean  sweep  and  blank  destruction  of  great  slices
and  cantles  of  the  Past?  I  ask  in  turn  how  much  of  guess  at  an  under-
lying continuity  has  been  suggested,  I  do  not  say  to  the  popular,  but  even
to  the  scientific  mind,  by  life  broken  as  we  know  it  now? — by  our  nightly
lapses  into  a  primitive  phase  of  personality?  by  the  competing  fields  of
recollection  which  shift  around  the  hypnotic  trance  ?  by  the  irrecoverable

68  CHAPTER    II  [244

gaps  in  past  existence  when  the  sun's  ray  or  the  robber's  bludgeon  has
struck  too  rudely  on  the  skull?

244.  Nay,  if  we  had  been  a  populace  of  hysterics  we  should  have
acquiesced  in  our  hysteria.     We  should  have  pushed  aside  as  a  fantastic
enthusiast  the  fellow- sufferer  who  strove  to  tell  us  that  this  was  not  all
that  we  were  meant  to  be.     As  we  now  stand, — each  one  of  us  totus,  teres,
atquc  rotundus  in  his  own  esteem, — we  see  at  least  how  cowardly  would
have  been  that  contentment,  how  vast  the  ignored  possibilities,  the  for-
gotten hope.     Yet  who  assures  us  that   even   here   and   now  we    have
developed  into  the  full  height  and  scope  of  our  being  ?     A  moment  comes
when  the  most  beclouded  of  these  hysterics  has  a  glimpse  of  the  truth.
A   moment  comes   when,  after  a  profound   slumber,  she  wakes  into  an
instant  clair — a  flash  of  full  perception,  which  shows  her  as  solid  vivid
realities  all  that  she  has  in  her  bewilderment  been  apprehending  phantas-
mally  as  a  dream.      *E£  <Wpov  S'avriVa — *H»/  \nrap.     Is  there  for  us  also
any  possibility  of  a  like  resurrection  into  reality  and  day  ?     Is  there  for  us
any  sleep  so  deep  that  waking  from  it  after  the  likeness  of  perfect  man  we
shall  be  satisfied ;  and  shall  see  face  to  face ;  and  shall  know  even  as  also
we  are  known?

245.  But  apart  from  these  broader  speculations,  it  will  surely  have
become  evident,  as  we  have  studied  the  evidence  in  this  chapter  that
human  personality  is,  at  any  rate,  a  much  more  modifiable  complex  of  forces
than  is  commonly   assumed,    and  is   a  complex,    moreover,    which  has
hitherto  been  dealt  with  only  in  crude,  empirical  fashion.     Each  stage,
each  method   of  disintegration,  suggests  a  corresponding  possibility  of
integration.     Two  points  have  been  especially  noticeable  throughout  the
chapter.     In  the  first  place,  we  observe  in  many  of  the  narratives  some
rudiment  of  supernormal  perceptivity  cropping  up ;  probably  something
in  itself  useless,  yet  enough   to  indicate  to  us   how  great  a  reserve  of
untapped  faculty  is  latent  at  no  great  depth  beneath  our  conscious  level.
In  the  second  place,  we  observe  that  in  the  more  recent  cases,  where  it
has  been  possible  to  appeal,  mainly  through  hypnotic  suggestion,  to  the
deeper  strata  of  the  personality,  that  appeal  has  seldom  been  made  in  vain,
In  almost  every  case  something  more  has  been  thus  learnt  of  the  actual
mischief  which  was  going  on,  something  effected  towards  the  re-establish-
ment of  psychical   stability.     These  disturbances  of  personality  are  no
longer  for  us — as  they  were  even  for  the  last  generation — mere  empty
marvels,  which  the  old-fashioned  sceptic  would  often  plume   himself  on
refusing  to  believe.     On  the  contrary,  they  are  beginning  to  be  recognised
as  psycho-pathological  problems  of  the  utmost  interest ; — no  one  of  them
exactly  like  another,  and  no  one  of  them  without  some  possible  aper$u  into
the  intimate  structure  of  man.

The  purpose  of  this  book,  of  course,  is  not  primarily  practical.  It
aims  rather  at  the  satisfaction  of  scientific  curiosity  as  to  man's  psychical
structure ;  esteeming  that  as  a  form  of  experimental  research  which  the

245]      DISINTEGRATIONS   OF   PERSONALITY     69

more  urgent  needs  of  therapeutics  have  kept  in  the  background  too  long.
Yet  it  may  not  have  been  amiss  to  realise  thus,  on  the  threshold  of  our
discussion,  that  already  even  the  most  delicate  speculations  in  this  line
have  found  their  justification  in  helpful  act ;  that  strange  bewilderments,
paralysing  perturbations,  which  no  treatment  could  alleviate,  no  drug
control,  have  been  soothed  and  stablished  into  sanity  by  some  appropriate
and  sagacious  mode  of  appeal  to  a  natura  medicatrix  deep-hidden  in  the
labouring  breast.

\

[300

CHAPTER   III
GENIUS

Igneus  est  ollis  vigor  et  ccelestis  origo
Seminibus,  quantum  non  noxia  corpora  tardant
Terrenique  hebetant  artus  moribundaque  membra.

— VIRGIL.

300.  In  my  second  chapter  I  made  no  formal  attempt  to  define  that
human  personality  which  is  to  form  the  main  subject  of  this  book.     I
was  content  to  take  the  conception  roughly  for  granted,  and  to  enter  at
once  on  the  study  of  the  lapses  of  personality  into  abnormal  conditions,
— short  of  the  lowest  depths  of  idiocy  or  madness.     From  that  survey
it  appeared   that   these  degenerations  could    be  traced   to  some   defect
in  that  central  control  which  ought   to  clasp  and  integrate  into   steady
manhood     the   hierarchies   of  living   cells   which    compose    the   human
organism.     This  insight  into  the  Selfs  decay  was  the  needed  prerequisite
to  our  present  task — that  of  apprehending  its  true  normality,  and  there-
after  of  analysing   certain    obscurer  faculties  which  indicate  the  line  of
its  evolution  during  and  after  the  life  of  earth.

Strength  and  concentration  of  the  inward  unifying  control — that  must
be  the  true  normality  which  we  seek  ;  and  in  seeking  it  we  must  remember
how  much  of  psychical  operation  goes  on  below  the  conscious  threshold,
imperfectly  obedient  to  any  supraliminal  appeal.  What  advance  can
we  make  in  inward  mastery  ?  how  far  extend  our  grasp  over  the  whole
range  of  faculty  with  which  we  are  obscurely  endowed  ?

301.  "  Human   perfectibility "    has   been   the   theme   of  many   en-
thusiasts;   and   many   Utopian   schemes  of  society  have   been   and   still
are  suggested,  which  postulate  in  the  men  and  women  of  the  future  an
increase  in  moral  and  physical  health  and  vigour.      And  it  is  plain  that
in  a  broad  and  general  way  natural  selection,  sexual  selection,  and  the
advance  of  science  are  working  together  towards  improvements  of  these
kinds.     But   it   is   plain  also  that   these  onward   tendencies,  at  least  in
comparison  with  our  desires  and  ideals,  are  slow  and  uncertain ;  and  it
is  possible  to  argue  that  the  apparent  advance  in  our  race  is  due  merely
to  the  improvement  which  science  has  effected  in  its  material  environment,
and  not  to  any  real  development,  during   the  historical   period,  in  the
character  or  faculties  of  man  himself.     Nay,  since  we   have   no   means

70

303]  GENIUS  71

of  knowing  to  what  extent  any  genus  has  an  inward  potentiality  of
improvement,  it  is  possible  for  the  pessimist  to  argue  that  the  genus  homo
has  reached  its  fore-ordained  evolutionary  limit ;  so  that  it  cannot  be
pushed  further  in  any  direction  without  risk  of  nervous  instability,  sterility,
and  ultimate  extinction.  Somewhat  similarly  (it  might  be  urged)  you
cannot  domesticate  some  wild  tribes  of  animals  (perhaps  some  wild  tribes
of  men)  without  checking  their  fertility ;  and  even  among  animals  most
susceptible  to  domestication,  and  to  the  induction  of  varieties  in  the
domesticated  state, — as,  for  instance,  pigeons, — you  cannot  at  present
exaggerate  fantail  or  pouter  beyond  a  certain  limit  without  bringing  on
a  fragility  of  constitution  which  would  soon  extinguish  the  overpressed
variety.  Some  dim  apprehension  of  this  kind  lends  plausibility  to  many
popular  diatribes.  Dr.  Max  Nordau's  works  afford  a  well-known  example
of  this  line  of  protest  against  the  present  age  as  an  age  of  overwork  and
of  nervous  exhaustion.  And  narrowing  the  vague  discussion  to  a  some-
what more  definite  test,  Professor  Lombroso  and  other  anthropologists
have  discussed  the  characteristics  of  the  "man  of  genius";  with  the  result
of  showing  (as  they  believe)  that  this  apparently  highest  product  of  the
race  is  in  reality  not  a  culminant  but  an  aberrant  manifestation ;  and  that
men  of  genius  must  be  classed  with  criminals  and  lunatics,  as  persons  in
whom  a  want  of  balance  or  completeness  of  organisation  has  led  on  to  an
over-development  of  one  side  of  their  nature ; — helpful  or  injurious  to
other  men  as  accident  may  decide.

302.  On  this  point  I  shall  join  issue ;  and  I  shall  suggest,  on  the  other
hand,  that  Genius — if  that  vaguely  used  word  is  to  receive  anything  like  a
psychological  definition — should  rather  be  regarded  as  a  power  of  utilising
a  wider  range  than  other  men  can  utilise  of  faculties  in  some  degree  innate
in  all ; — a  power  of  appropriating  the  results  of  subliminal  mentation  to
subserve  the   supraliminal  stream  of  thought ; — so  that  an  "  inspiration
of  Genius  "  will  be  in  truth  a  subliminal  uprush,  an  emergence  into  the
current  of   ideas  which  the  man  is    consciously  manipulating    of  other
ideas  which   he  has  not  consciously  originated,  but  which  have   shaped
themselves  beyond  his  will,  in  profounder  regions  of  his  being.     I  shall
urge  that  there  is  here  no  real  departure  from  normality ;  no  abnormality,
at  least  in  the  sense  of  degeneration ;  but  rather  a  fulfilment  of  the  true
norm  of  man,  with  suggestions,  it  may  be,  of  something  supernormal; — of
something  which   transcends  existing  normality  as  an  advanced  stage  of
evolutionary  progress  transcends  an  earlier  stage.

303.  Hut  before  proceeding  further  I  wish  to  guard  against  a  possible
misapprehension.     I  shall  be  obliged  in  this  chapter  to  dwell  on  valuable

ndered  by  subliminal  mentation;  but  I  do  not  mean  to  imply  that
such  mentation  is  ipso  facto  superior  to  supraliminal,  or  even  that  it  covers
a  large  proportion  of  practically  useful  human  achievement.  When  I  say
"The  differentia  of  genius  lies  in  an  increased  control  over  subliminal
mentation,"  I  express,  I  think,  a  well-evidenced  thesis,  and  I  suggest  an

72  CHAPTER    III  [304

important  inference,  namely,  that  the  man  of  genius  is  for  us  the  best  type
of  the  normal  man,  in  so  far  as  he  effects  a  successful  co-operation  of  an
unusually  large  number  of  elements  of  his  personality — reaching  a  stage  of
integration  slightly  in  advance  of  our  own.  Thus  much  I  wish  to  say :
but  my  thesis  is  not  to  be  pushed  further : — as  though  I  claimed  that  all
our  best  thought  was  subliminal,  or  that  all  that  was  subliminal  was  poten-
tially "  inspiration."

Hidden  in  the  deep  of  our  being  is  a  rubbish-heap  as  well  as  a  treasure-
house  ; — degenerations  and  insanities  as  well  as  beginnings  of  higher  de-
velopment ;  and  any  prospectus  which  insists  on  the  amount  of  gold  to  be
had  for  the  washing  should  describe  also  the  mass  of  detritus  in  which  the
bright  grains  lie  concealed.  The  range  of  the  subliminal  is  wide  :  nor
will  it  be  waste  of  time  if  I  pause  here  to  expound  it.

The  distinction,  then,  between  supraliminal  and  subliminal, — between
intra-marginal  and  extra- marginal ; — in  short,  between  the  thoughts  and
sensations  which  fall  within  our  ordinary  waking  consciousness  and  those
which  find  place  beneath  or  outside  it, — cannot  possibly  be  a  distinction
at  once  applicable  to  practical  ends ; — as  though  (for  instance)  one  were
able  to  say  at  once  that  the  subliminal  idea  or  impulse  was  always  wiser
than  the  supraliminal.  On  the  contrary,  the  basis  of  the  distinction  is,  as
I  have  just  said,  a  purely  psychological  one :  it  is  founded  on  the  attempt
to  analyse  the  relation  of  one  chain  of  memory  to  another  chain  of
memory,  of  one  type  to  another  type  of  human  perception  and  faculty.
Our  simplest  observation  indeed  must  be  that  that  which  extends  beneath
the  threshold,  beyond  the  margin  of  a  field  of  consciousness  specialised  for
our  ordinary  needs,  will  probably  be  both  more  extensive  and  more  miscel-
laneous than  that  which  is  contained  within  those  limits.  The  range  of  our
subliminal  mentation  is  more  extended  than  the  range  of  our  supraliminal.
At  one  end  of  the  scale  we  find  dreams, — a  normal  subliminal  product,  but
of  less  practical  value  than  any  form  of  sane  supraliminal  thought.  At  the
other  end  of  the  scale  we  find  that  the  rarest,  most  precious  knowledge
comes  to  us  from  outside  the  ordinary  field, — through  the  eminently  sub-
liminal processes  of  telepathy,  telsesthesia,  ecstasy.  And  between  these
two  extremes  lie  many  subliminal  products,  varying  in  value  according  to
the  dignity  and  trustworthiness  of  the  subliminal  mentation  concerned.

304.  This  last  phrase, — inevitably  obscure, — maybe  illustrated  by  refer-
ence to  that  hierarchical  arrangement  of  supraliminal  action  and  perception
which  Dr.  Hughlings  Jackson  has  so  used  as  to  clear  up  much  previous  con-
fusion of  thought.  Following  him,  we  now  speak  of  highest-level  nerve-
centres,  governing  our  highest,  most  complex  thought  and  will ;  of  middle-
level  centres,  governing  movements  of  voluntary  muscles,  and  the  like  ;  and
of  lowest-level  centres  (which  from  my  point  of  view  are  purely  subliminal) ,
governing  those  automatic  processes,  as  respiration  and  circulation,  which
are  independent  of  conscious  rule,  but  necessary  to  the  maintenance  of
life.  We  can  roughly  judge  from  the  nature  of  any  observed  action

304]  GENIUS  73

whether  the  highest-level  centres  are  directing  it,  or  whether  they  are
for  the  time  inhibited,  so  that  middle-level  centres  operate  uncon-
trolled.

Thus  ordinary  speech  and  writing  are  ruled  by  highest-level  centres.
But  when  an  epileptic  discharge  of  nervous  energy  has  exhausted  the
highest-level  centres,  we  see  the  middle-level  centres  operating  unchecked,
and  producing  the  convulsive  movements  of  arms  and  legs  in  the  "  fit."  As
these  centres  in  their  turn  become  exhausted,  the  patient  is  left  to  the
guidance  of  lowest- level  centres  alone  ; — that  is  to  say,  he  becomes  comatose,
though  he  continues  to  breathe  as  regularly  as  usual.

Now  this  series  of  phenomena, — descending  in  coherence  and  co-ordina-
tion from  an  active  consensus  of  the  whole  organism  to  a  mere  automatic
maintenance  of  its  most  stably  organised  processes, — may  be  pretty  closely
paralleled  by  the  series  of  subliminal  phenomena  also.

Sometimes  we  seem  to  see  our  subliminal  perceptions  and  faculties
acting  truly  in  unity,  truly  as  a  Self ;— co-ordinated  into  some  harmonious
"  inspiration  of  genius,"  or  some  profound  and  reasonable  hypnotic  self-
reformation,  or  some  far-reaching  supernormal  achievement  of  clairvoyant
vision  or  of  self-projection  into  a  spiritual  world.  Whatever  of  subliminal
personality  is  thus  acting  corresponds  with  the  highest-level  centres  of
supraliminal  life.  At  such  moments  the  subliminal  represents  (as  I  believe)
most  nearly  what  will  become  the  surviving  Self.

But  it  seems  that  this  degree  of  clarity,  of  integration,  cannot  be  long
preserved.  Much  oftener  we  find  the  subliminal  perceptions  and  faculties
acting  in  less  co-ordinated,  less  coherent  ways.  We  have  products  which,
while  containing  traces  of  some  faculty  beyond  our  common  scope,  involve,
nevertheless,  something  as  random  and  meaningless  as  the  discharge  of  the
uncontrolled  middle-level  centres  of  arms  and  legs  in  the  epileptic  fit.  We
get,  in  short,  a  series  of  phenomena  which  the  term  dream-like  seems  best
to  describe.

In  the  realm  of  genius, — of  uprushes  of  thought  and  feeling  fused
beneath  the  conscious  threshold  into  artistic  shape, — we  get  no  longer
rpieces  but  half-insanities, — not  the  Sistine  Madonna,  but  Wiertz's
:i  of  the  Guillotined  Head  ;  not  Kubla  Khan,  but  the  disordered
opium  dream.  Throughout  all  the  work  of  William  Blake  (I  should  say)
tc  the  subliminal  self  flashing  for  moments  into  unity,  then  smoulder-
ing again  in  a  lurid  and  scattered  glow.

In  the  realm  of  hypnotism,  again,  we  sink  from  the  reasonable  self-
suggestion  to  the  "  platform  experiments," — the  smelling  of  ammonia,  the
1  of  tallow  candles; — all  the  tricks  which  show  ^profound  control,
but  not  a  wise  control,  over  the  arcana  of  organic  life.  I  speak,  of  course,
of  the  subject's  own  control  over  his  organism ;  for  in  the  last  resort  it  is
he  and  not  his  hypnotise!  who  really  exercises  that  directive  power.  And
ipare  these  tricks  of  middle-level  subliminal  centres  to  the  powerful
Mtional  control  which  the  middle-level  centres  ruling  the  epileptic's

74  CHAPTER    III  [305

arms  and  legs  exercise  over  his  muscles  in  the  violence  of  the  epileptic
attack.

And  so  again  with  the  automatisms  which  are,  one  may  say,  the  subliminal
selfs  peculiar  province.  Automatic  script,  for  instance,  may  represent
highest-level  subliminal  centres,  even  when  no  extraneous  spirit,  but  the
automatist's  own  mind  alone,  is  concerned.  It  will  then  give  us  true  tele-
pathic messages,  or  perhaps  messages  of  high  moral  import,  surpassing  the
automatist's  conscious  powers.  But  much  oftener  the  automatic  script  is
regulated  by  what  I  have  called  middle-level  subliminal  centres  only ; —
and  then,  though  we  may  have  scraps  of  supernormal  intelligence,  we  have
confusion  and  incoherence  as  well.  We  have  the  falsity  which  the  dis-
gusted automatist  is  sometimes  fain  to  ascribe  to  a  devil ;  though  it  is  in
reality  not  a  devil,  but  a  dream.

And  hence  again,  just  as  the  epileptic  sinks  lower  and  lower  in  the  fit, —
from  the  incoordinated  movements  of  the  limbs  down  to  the  mere  stertor-
ous breathing  of  coma, — so  do  these  incoherent  automatisms  sink  down  at
last,  through  the  utterances  and  drawings  of  the  degenerate  and  the  para-
noiac,— through  mere  fragmentary  dreams,  or  vague  impersonal  bewilder-
ment,— into  the  minimum  psychical  concomitant,  whatever  that  be,  which
must  co-exist  with  brain-circulation.

305.  Such  is  the  apparent  parallelism  ;  but  of  course  no  knowledge  of
a  hierarchy  of  the  familiar  forms  of  nervous  action  can  really  explain  to  us
the  mysterious  fluctuations  of  subliminal  power.  When  we  speak  of  the
highest-level  and  other  centres  which  govern  our  supraliminal  being,  and
which  are  fitted  to  direct  this  planetary  life  in  a  material  world,  we  can
to  some  extent  point  out  actual  brain-centres  whose  action  enables  us  to
meet  those  needs.  What  are  the  needs  of  our  cosmic  life  we  do  not
know ;  nor  can  we  indicate  any  point  in  our  organism  (as  in  the  "  solar
plexus,"  or  the  like),  which  is  adapted  to  meet  them.  We  cannot  even
either  affirm  or  deny  that  such  spiritual  life  as  we  maintain  while  incarnated
in  this  material  envelope  involves  any  physical  concomitants  at  all.

For  my  part,  I  feel  forced  to  fall  back  upon  the  old-world  conception  of
a  soul  which  exercises  an  imperfect  and  fluctuating  control  over  the  organ-
ism ;  and  exercises  that  control,  I  would  add,  along  two  main  channels,
only  partly  coincident — that  of  ordinary  consciousness,  adapted  to  the
maintenance  and  guidance  of  earth-life ;  and  that  of  subliminal  con-
sciousness, adapted  to  the  maintenance  of  our  larger  spiritual  life  during
our  confinement  in  the  flesh.

We  men,  therefore,  clausi  tenebris  et  carcere  c&co,  can  sometimes  widen,
as  we  must  sometimes  narrow,  our  outlook  on  the  reality  of  things.  In
mania  or  epilepsy  we  lose  control  even  of  those  highest-level  supraliminal
centres  on  which  our  rational  earth-life  depends.  But  through  automatism
and  in  trance  and  allied  states  we  draw  into  supraliminal  life  some  rivulet
from  the  undercurrent  stream.  If  the  subliminal  centres  which  we  thus
impress  into  our  waking  service  correspond  to  the  middle-level  only,  they

305]  GENIUS  75

may  bring  to  us  merely  error  and  confusion ;  if  they  correspond  to  the
highest-level,  they  may  introduce  us  to  previously  unimagined  truth.

It  is  to  work  done  by  the  aid  of  some  such  subliminal  uprush,  I  say
once  more,  that  the  word  "  genius  "  may  be  most  fitly  applied.  "  A  work  of
genius,"  indeed,  in  common  parlance,  means  a  work  which  satisfies  two
quite  distinct  requirements.  It  must  involve  something  original,  spontan-
eous, unteachable,  unexpected ;  and  it  must  also  in  some  way  win  for  itself
the  admiration  of  mankind.  Now,  psychologically  speaking,  the  first  of
these  requirements  corresponds  to  a  real  class,  the  second  to  a  purely
accidental  one.  What  the  poet  feels  while  he  writes  his  poem  is  the  psy-
chological fact  in  his  history ;  what  his  friends  feel  while  they  read  it  may
be  a  psychological  fact  in  their  history,  but  does  not  alter  the  poet's
creative  effort,  which  was  what  it  was,  whether  any  one  but  himself  ever  ,
reads  his  poem  or  no.

And  popular  phraseology  justifies  our  insistence  upon  this  subjective
side  of  genius.  Thus  it  is  common  to  say  that  "  Hartley  Coleridge  "  (for
example)  "  was  a  genius,  although  he  never  produced  anything  worth
speaking  of."  Men  recognise,  that  is  to  say,  from  descriptions  of  Hartley
Coleridge,  and  from  the  fragments  which  he  has  left,  that  ideas  came
to  him  with  what  I  have  termed  a  sense  of  subliminal  uprush, — with
an  authentic,  although  not  to  us  an  instructive,  inspiration.

As  psychologists,  I  maintain,  we  are  bound  to  base  our  definition  of
genius  upon  some  criterion  of  this  strictly  psychological  kind,  rather  than
on  the  external  tests  which  as  artists  or  men  of  letters  we  should  employ ;
— and  which  consider  mainly  the  degree  of  delight  which  any  given
achievement  can  bestow  upon  other  men.  The  artist  will  speak  of  the
pictorial  genius  of  Raphael,  but  not  of  Haydon ;  of  the  dramatic  genius  of
Corncille,  but  not  of  Voltaire.  Yet  Haydon's  Autobiography — a  record
of  tragic  intensity,  and  closing  in  suicide — shows  that  the  tame  yet  con-
torted figures  of  his  "  Raising  of  Lazarus  "  flashed  upon  him  with  an  over-

tcring  sense  of  direct  inspiration.  Voltaire,  again,  writes  to  the
president  Henault  of  his  unreadable  tragedy  Catilina  :  "  Five  acts  in  a

;  !     I  know  that  this  sounds  ridiculous ;  but  if  men  could  guess  what

enthusiasm  can  do, — how  a  poet  in  spite  of  himself,  idolising  his  subject,

devoured  by  his  genius,  can  accomplish  in  a  few  days  a  task  for  which

without  that  genius  a  year  would  not  suffice  ; — in  a  word,  si  srirent  donum

— if  they  knew  the  gift  of  God, — their  astonishment  might  be  less  than

nist  be  now."  I  do  not  shrink  from  these  extreme  instances.  It  would
be  absurd,  of  course,  to  place  Haydon's  "  Raising  of  I^azarus  "  in  the  same
artistic  class  as  Raphael's  "Madonna  di  San  Sisto."  But  in  the  same
hohgical  class  I  maintain  that  both  works  must  be  placed.  For  each
painter,  after  his  several  kind,  there  was  the  same  inward  process, — the
same  sense  of  subliminal  uprush; — that  extension,  in  other  words,  of

•ital  concentration  which  draws  into  immediate  cognisance  some  work-
or  elements  of  the  hidden  self.

76  CHAPTER    III  [306

Let  me  illustrate  this  conception  by  a  return  to  the  metaphor  of  the
"  conscious  spectrum "  to  which  I  introduced  my  reader  in  the  first
chapter.  I  there  described  our  conscious  spectrum  as  representing  but  a
small  fraction  of  the  aurai  simplicis  ignis,  or  individual  psychical  ray ; —
just  as  our  visible  solar  spectrum  represents  but  a  small  fraction  of  the
solar  ray.  And  even  as  many  waves  of  ether  lie  beyond  the  red  end,  and
many  beyond  the  violet  end,  of  that  visible  spectrum,  so  have  I  urged
that  much  of  unrecognised  or  subliminal  faculty  lies  beyond  the  red  (or
organic)  end,  and  much  beyond  the  violet  (or  intellectual)  end  of  my
imaginary  spectrum.  My  main  task  in  this  book  will  be  to  prolong
the  psychical  spectrum  beyond  either  limit,  by  collecting  traces  of
latent  faculties,  organic  or  transcendental : — just  as  by  the  bolometer,
by  fluorescence,  by  other  artifices,  physicists  have  prolonged  the  solar
spectrum  far  beyond  either  limit  of  ordinary  visibility.

306.  But  at  present,  and  before  entering  on  that  task  of  rendering
manifest  supernormal  faculty,  I  am  considering  what  we  ought  to  regard
as  the  normal  range  of  faculty  from  which  we  start  j — what,  in  relation  to
man,  the  words  norm  and  normal  should  most  reasonably  mean.

The  word  normal  in  common  speech  is  used  almost  indifferently  to
imply  either  of  two  things,  which  may  be  very  different  from  each  other —
conformity  to  a  standard  and  position  as  an  average  between  extremes.
Often  indeed  the  average  constitutes  the  standard — as  when  a  gas  is  of
normal  density ;  or  is  practically  equivalent  to  the  standard — as  when  a
sovereign  is  of  normal  weight.  But  when  we  come  to  living  organisms  a
new  factor  is  introduced.  Life  is  change ;  each  living  organism  changes ;
each  generation  differs  from  its  predecessor.  To  assign  a  fixed  norm  to  a
changing  species  is  to  shoot  point-blank  at  a  flying  bird.  The  actual
average  at  any  given  moment  is  no  ideal  standard ;  rather,  the  furthest
evolutionary  stage  now  reached  is  tending,  given  stability  in  the  environ-
ment, to  become  the  average  of  the  future.  Human  evolution  is  not  so
simple  or  so  conspicuous  a  thing  as  the  evolution  of  the  pouter  pigeon.
But  it  would  be  rash  to  affirm  that  it  is  not  even  swifter  than  any  variation
among  domesticated  animals.  Not  a  hundred  generations  separate  us
from  the  dawn  of  history ; — about  as  many  generations  as  some  microbes
can  traverse  in  a  month ; — about  as  many  as  separate  the  modern  Derby-
winner  from  the  war-horse  of  Gustavus  Adolphus.  Man's  change  has  been
less  than  the  horse's  change  in  physical  contour, — probably  only  because
man  has  not  been  specially  bred  with  that  view ; — but  taking  as  a  test
the  power  of  self- adaptation  to  environment,  man  has  traversed  in  these
thirty  centuries  a  wider  arc  of  evolution  than  separates  the  race-horse  from
the  eohippus.  Or  if  we  go  back  further,  and  to  the  primal  germ,  we  see
that  man's  ancestors  must  have  varied  faster  than  any  animal's,  since  they
have  travelled  farthest  in  the  same  time.  They  have  varied  also  in  the
greatest  number  of  directions  ;  they  have  evoked  in  greatest  multiplicity
the  unnumbered  faculties  latent  in  the  irritability  of  a  speck  of  slime.  Of

306]  GENIUS  77

all  creatures  man  has  gone  furthest  both  in  differentiation  and  in  integra-
tion ;  he  has  called  into  activity  the  greatest  number  of  those  faculties
which  lay  potential  in  the  primal  germ, — and  he  has  established  over  those
faculties  the  strongest  central  control.  The  process  still  continues.
Civilisation  adds  to  the  complexity  of  his  faculties ;  education  helps  him
to  their  concentration.  It  is  in  the  direction  of  a  still  wider  range,  a  still
firmer  hold,  that  his  evolution  now  must  lie.  I  shall  maintain  that  this
ideal  is  best  attained  by  the  man  of  genius.

Let  us  consider  the  way  in  which  the  maximum  of  faculty  is  habitually
manifested  ;  the  circumstances  under  which  a  man  does  what  he  has  never
supposed  himself  able  to  do  before.  We  may  take  an  instance  where  the
faculty  drawn  upon  lies  only  a  little  way  beneath  the  surface.  A  man,  we
say,  outdoes  himself  in  a  great  emergency.  If  his  house  is  on  fire,  let  us
suppose,  he  carries  his  children  out  over  the  roof  with  a  strength  and
agility  which  seem  beyond  his  own.  That  effective  impulse  seems  more
akin  to  instinct  than  to  calculation.  We  hardly  know  whether  to  call  the
act  reflex  or  voluntary.  It  is  performed  with  almost  no  conscious  inter-
vention of  thought  or  judgment,  but  it  involves  a  new  and  complex
adaptation  of  voluntary  muscles  such  as  would  need  habitually  the  man's
most  careful  thought  to  plan  and  execute.  From  the  point  of  view  here
taken  the  action  will  appear  to  have  been  neither  reflex  nor  voluntary  in
the  ordinary  sense,  but  subliminal ; — a  subliminal  uprush,  an  emergence
of  hidden  faculty, — of  nerve  co-ordinations  potential  in  his  organism,  but
till  now  unused, — which  takes  command  of  the  man  and  guides  his  action
at  the  moment  when  his  being  is  deeply  stirred.

This  stock  instance  of  a  man's  possible  behaviour  in  moments  of  great

physical  risk  does  but  illustrate  in  a  gross  and  obvious  manner,  and  in  the

motor  region,  a  phenomenon  which,  as  I  hold,  is  constantly  occurring  on

a  smaller  scale  in  the  inner  life  of  most  of  us.     We  identify  ourselves  for

the  most  part  with  a  stream  of  voluntary,  fully  conscious  ideas, — cerebral

movements  connected  and  purposive  as  the  movement  of  the  hand  which

records  them.     Meantime  we  are  aware  also  of  a  substratum  of  fragment-

itomatic,  liminal  ideas,  of  which  we  take  small  account.     These  are

bubbles  that  break  on  the  surface ;  but  every  now  and  then  there  is  a  stir

among  them.     There  is  a  rush  upwards  as  of  a  subaqueous  spring ;  an  in-

:on  flashes  into  the  mind  for  which  our  conscious  effort  has  not  pre-

us.     This  so-called  inspiration  may  in  itself  be  trivial  or  worthless ;

but  it  is  the  initial  stage  of  a  phenomenon  to  which,  when  certain  rare

:tes  are  also  present,  the  name  of  genius  will  be  naturally  given.

I  am  urging,  then,  that  where  life  is  concerned,  and  where,  therefore,

-:e  is  normality,  we  ought  to  place  our  norm  somewhat  ahead  of  the

hough  on  the  evolutionary  track  which  our  race  is  pursuing.

I  have  suggested  that  that  evolutionary  track  is  at  present  leading  him  in

•  irection  of  greater  complexity  in  the  perceptions  which  he  forms  of

without,  and  of  greater  concentration  in  his  own  will  and  thought, —

78  CHAPTER    III  [307

in  that  response  to  perceptions  which  he  makes  from  within.  Lastly,  I  have
argued  that  men  of  genius,  whose  perceptions  are  presumably  more  vivid
and  complex  than  those  of  average  men,  are  also  the  men  who  carry  the
power  of  concentration  furthest; — reaching  downwards,  by  some  self-
suggestion  which  they  no  more  than  we  can  explain,  to  treasures  of  latent
faculty  in  the  hidden  Self.

307.  I  am  not  indeed  here  assuming  that  the  faculty  which  is  at  the
sendee  of  the  man  of  genius  is  of  a  kind  different  from  that  of  common
men,  in  such  a  sense  that  it  would  need  to  be  represented  by  a  prolonga-
tion of  either  end  of  the  conscious  spectrum.     Rather  it  will  be  repre-
sented by  such  a  brightening  of  the  familiar  spectrum  as  may  follow  upon
an  intensification  of  the  central  glow.

The  solar  spectrum  itself,  as  all  know,  is  by  no  means  a  uniform  or  con-
tinuous band  of  coloured  light.  It  contains  many  dark  lines,  where  some
element  held  in  vaporous  suspension  absorbs  the  special  line  of  light  which
the  still  hotter  vapour  of  that  same  element  characteristically  emits.  Still
more  dimmed  and  interrupted  are  the  spectra  of  some  other  stars.  Bands
and  bars  of  comparative  darkness  stud  their  dispersed  light.  Even  thus
the  spectrum  of  man's  conscious  faculty  is  not  a  continuous  but  a  banded
spectrum.  There  are  groups  of  the  dark  lines  of  obstruction  and  in-
capacity, and  even  in  the  best  of  us  a  dim  unequal  glow.

It  will,  then,  be  the  special  characteristic  of  genius  that  its  uprushes  of
subliminal  faculty  will  make  the  bright  parts  of  the  habitual  spectrum  more
brilliant,  will  kindle  the  dim  absorption-bands  to  fuller  brightness,  and  will
even  raise  quite  dark  lines  into  an  occasional  glimmer.  But  if,  as  I  be-
lieve, we  can  best  give  to  the  idea  of  genius  some  useful  distinctness  by
regarding  it  in  some  such  way  as  this,  we  shall  find  also  that  genius  will  fall
into  line  with  many  other  sensory  and  motor  automatisms  to  which  the
word  could  not  naturally  be  applied.  Genius  represents  a  narrow  selection
among  a  great  many  cognate  phenomena ; — among  a  great  many  uprushes
or  emergences  or  subliminal  faculty  both  within  and  beyond  the  limits  of
the  ordinary  conscious  spectrum.

It  will  be  more  convenient  to  study  all  these  together,  under  the  heading
of  sensory  or  of  motor  automatism.  It  will  then  be  seen  that  there  is  no
kind  of  perception  which  may  not  emerge  from  beneath  the  threshold  in  an
indefinitely  heightened  form,  with  just  that  convincing  suddenness  of  impres-
sion which  is  described  by  men  of  genius  as  characteristic  of  their  highest
flights.  Even  with  so  simple  a  range  of  sensation  as  that  which  records
the  lapse  of  time  there  are  subliminal  uprushes  of  this  type,  and  we  shall
see  that  a  man  may  have  a  sudden  and  accurate  inspiration  of  what  o'clock
it  is,  in  just  the  same  way  as  Virgil  might  have  an  inspiration  of  the  second
half  of  a  difficult  hexameter.

308.  For  the  purpose  of  present  illustration  of  the  workings  of  genius
it  seems  well  to  choose  a  kind  of  ability  which  is  quite  indisputable,  and
which  also  admits  of  some  degree  of  quantitative  measurement.     I  would

308]  GENIUS  79

choose  the  higher  mathematical  processes,  were  data  available ;  and  I  may
say  in  passing  how  grateful  I  should  be  to  receive  from  mathematicians
any  account  of  the  mental  processes  of  which  they  are  conscious  during
the  attainment  of  their  highest  results.  Meantime  there  is  a  lower  class  of
mathematical  gift  which  by  its  very  specialisation  and  isolation  seems  likely
to  throw  light  on  our  present  inquiry.

During  the  course  of  the  present  century, — and  alas  !  the  scientific
observation  of  unusual  specimens  of  humanity  hardly  runs  back  further,  or
so  far, — the  public  of  great  cities  has  been  from  time  to  time  surprised  and
diverted  by  some  so-called  "calculating  boy,"  or  "  arithmetical  prodigy,"
generally  of  tender  years,  and  capable  of  performing  "  in  his  head,"  and
almost  instantaneously,  problems  for  which  ordinary  workers  would  require
pencil  and  paper  and  a  much  longer  time.  In  some  few  cases,  indeed,  the
ordinary  student  would  have  no  means  whatever  of  solving  the  problem
which  the  calculating  boy  unriddled  with  ease  and  exactness.

The  especial  advantage  of  the  study  of  arithmetical  prodigies  is  that
in  their  case  the  subjective  impression  coincides  closely  with  the  objective
result.  The  subliminal  computator  feels  that  the  sum  is  right,  and  it  is
right.  Forms  of  real  or  supposed  genius  which  are  more  interesting  are
apt  to  be  less  undeniable.

An  American  and  a  French  psychologist *  have  collected  such  hints  and
explanations  as  these  prodigies  have  given  of  their  methods  of  working ;
methods  which  one  might  naturally  hope  to  find  useful  in  ordinary  educa-
tion. The  result,  however,  has  been  very  meagre,  and  the  records  left  to  us,
imperfect  as  they  are,  are  enough  to  show  that  the  main  and  primary
achievement  has  in  fact  been  subliminal,  while  conscious  or  supraliminal
effort  has  sometimes  been  wholly  absent,  sometimes  has  supervened  only
after  the  gift  has  been  so  long  exercised  that  the  accesses  between  different
strata  have  become  easy  by  frequent  traversing.  The  prodigy  grown  to
manhood,  who  now  recognises  the  arithmetical  artifices  which  he  used  un-
consciously as  a  boy,  resembles  the  hypnotic  subject  trained  by  suggestion
to  remember  in  waking  hours  the  events  of  the  trance.

In  almost  every  point,  indeed,  where  comparison  is  possible,  we  shall
find  this  computative  gift  resembling  other  manifestations  of  subliminal
faculty,— such  as  the  power  of  seeing  hallucinatory  figures, — rather  than
the  results  of  steady  supraliminal  effort,  such  as  the  power  of  logical
is.  In  the  first  place,  this  faculty,  in  spite  of  its  obvious  connection
with  general  mathematical  grasp  and  insight,  is  found  almost  at  random, —
among  non-mathematical  and  even  quite  stupid  persons,  as  well  as  among

1  Professor  Scripture  in  the  American  Journal  of  Psychology,  vol.  iv.,  No.  I,  April  1891 ;
sor  Binct  in  the  A'eruf  r/i{fas<>j>hi</ur,  1895.    Professor  Binet's  article  deals  largely
uli,  the  most  recent  prodigy,  who  appears  to  differ  from  the  rest  in  that
Kiditile  rat:  sual.     His  gift  was  first  observed  in  childhood

il  intelligence  is  below  the  average.    Another  recent  prodigy,  Diamanti,  seems,  on
the  other  hand,  to  be  in  other  ways  quick-witted.

8o

CHAPTER    III

[309

mathematicians  of  mark.  In  the  second  place,  it  shows  itself  mostly  in
early  childhood,  and  tends  to  disappear  in  later  life  ; — in  this  resembling
visualising  power  in  general,  and  the  power  of  seeing  hallucinatory  figures
in  particular ;  which  powers,  as  both  Mr.  Galton's  inquiries  and  our  own
tend  to  show,  are  habitually  stronger  in  childhood  and  youth  than  in  later
years.  Again,  it  is  noticeable  that  when  the  power  disappears  early  in  life
it  is  apt  to  leave  behind  it  no  memory  whatever  of  the  processes  involved.
And  even  when,  by  long  persistence  in  a  reflective  mind,  the  power  has
become,  so  to  say,  adopted  into  the  supraliminal  consciousness,  there
nevertheless  may  still  be  flashes  of  pure  "  inspiration,"  when  the  answer
"  comes  into  the  mind  "  with  absolutely  no  perception  of  intermediate
steps.

309.  I  subjoin  a  table,  compiled  by  the  help  of  Dr.  Scripture's
collection,  which  will  broadly  illustrate  the  main  points  above  men-
tioned. Some  more  detailed  remarks  may  then  follow.

TABLE  OF  PRINCIPAL  ARITHMETICAL  PRODIGIES.

Name  (alphabetically).

Age  when  gift
was  observed.

Duration  of  gift.

Intelligence.

Ampere

4

p

eminent

Bidder

IO

through  life

good

Buxton

?

?

low

Colburn

6

few  years

average

Dase  [or  Dahse]

boyhood

through  life

very  low

Fuller

boyhood

?

low

Gauss

3

p

eminent

Mangiamele
Mondeux    .

10
10

few  years
few  years

average  ?
low

Prolongeau
Safford

6
6

few  years
few  years

low
good

"Mr.  Van  R.,  of  Utica"

6

few  years

average  ?

Whately     .

3

few  years

good

Now  among  these  thirteen  names  we  have  two  men  of  transcendent,
and  three  of  high  ability.  What  accounts  have  they  given  us  of  their
methods  ?

310.  Of  the  gift  of  Gauss  and  Ampere  we  know  nothing  except  a  few
striking  anecdotes.  After  manifesting  itself  at  an  age  when  there  is
usually  no  continuous  supraliminal  mental  effort  worth  speaking  of,  it
appears  to  have  been  soon  merged  in  the  general  blaze  of  their  genius.
With  Bidder  the  gift  persisted  through  life,  but  grew  weaker  as  he  grew
older.  His  paper  in  Vol.  XV.  of  the  Proceedings  of  the  Institute  of  Civil
Engineers,  while  furnishing  a  number  of  practical  hints  to  the  calculator,
indicates  also  a  singular  readiness  of  communication  between  different
mental  strata.  "  Whenever,"  he  says  (p.  255),  "  I  feel  called  upon  to  make
use  of  the  stores  of  my  mind,  they  seem  to  rise  with  the  rapidity  of  light-

310]  GENIUS  81

ning."  And  in  Vol.  CIII.  of  the  same  Proceedings,  Mr.  W.  Pole,  F.R.S.,
in  describing  how  Mr.  Bidder  could  determine  mentally  the  logarithm  of
any  number  to  7  or  8  places,  says  (p.  252)  :  "  He  had  an  almost  miraculous
power  of  seeing,  as  it  were,  intuitively  what  factors  would  divide  any  large
number,  not  a  prime.  Thus,  if  he  were  given  the  number  17,861,  he
would  instantly  remark  it  was  337  X  53.  ...  He  could  not,  he  said,  ex-
plain how  he  did  this ;  it  seemed  a  natural  instinct  to  him."

Mr.  Bidder's  case  is  well  known  ;  but  it  may  be  of  interest  to  quote
here  some  passages  from  an  autobiographical  statement  kindly  furnished
to  me  by  Mr.  Blyth,  of  Edinburgh,  the  well-known  civil  engineer,  whose
own  gift,  like  that  of  the  younger  Mr.  Bidder,  though  not  such  as  to  entitle
him  to  rank  as  a  "  prodigy,"  yet  marks  him  out  distinctly  from  ordinary
mankind.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  352.)

12  BELGRAVE  CRESCENT,  EDINBURGH,
February  2&tA,  1892.

I  shall  now  endeavour,  in  response  to  your  request,  to  give  some  account  of
my  late  brother's  and  my  own  faculty  of  arithmetical  calculation  mentally,  and
it  may  be  interesting  if  I  allude  to  influences  even  before  birth  which  I  have
always  felt  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  my  brother's  great  power.

Benjamin  Hall  Blyth  was  born  on  July  6th,  1819.     Our  mother  had  a  natural
arithmetical  gift — not  to  any  very  marked   degree,  but  decidedly  above   the
_e,  and  especially  so  among  females.      Some  months  before  Benjamin's
he  wonderful  calculating  boy,  Bidder  (then,  I  think,  about  12  or  14  years
of  age),  was  exhibiting  in  Edinburgh,  and  made  a  private  exhibition  in  my
's  house.     My  mother  was  greatly  astonished  and  interested,  put  various
questions  to  Bidder,  and  some  weeks  later  requested  my  father  to  invite  him  to
another  stance,  which  was  done.     Her  interest  increased  on  this  second  occa-
sion, and  the  wonderful  boy  continued  to  occupy  her  mind  frequently.

It  is,  I  believe,  admitted  by  physiologists,  that  anything  greatly  occupying  a
mother's  mind  certainly  may,  and  frequently  does,  influence  the  character  of  her
unborn  child.  At  all  events,  my  brother,  whether  from  this  or  heredity,  or  both,
very  early  manifested  a  marvellous  power  of  mental  calculation.  When  almost
exactly  six  years  of  age  Benjamin  was  walking  with  his  father  before  breakfast,
when  he  said,  *'  Papa,  at  what  hour  was  I  born  ?  "  He  was  told  four  A.M.
Ben.—"  What  o'clock  is  it  at  present  ?  "

.— "  Seven  fifty  A.M."    [My  father  always  took  exercise  before  breakfast
in  summer.]

The  child  walked  on  a  few  hundred  yards,  then  turned  to  his  father  and

the  number  of  seconds  he  had  lived.     My  father  noted  down  the  fiu
made  the  calculation  when  he  got  home,  and  told  Hen  he  was  172,800  seconds
wrong,  to  which  he  got  a  ready  reply :   "  Oh,  papa,  you  have  left  out  two  days

c  leap-years— 1820  and  1824,"  which  was  the  case.

Thi  :t  of  the  extra  day  in  leap-year  is  not  known  to  many  children

.md  if  any  one  will  try  to  teach  an  ordinary  child  of  these  years  the  mul-

tion  table  up  to  12  x  12  he  will  be  better  able  to  realise  how  extraordinary

is  calculation  for  such  an  infant.

I  am  conscious  of  an  intuitive  recognition  of  the  relation  of  figures       lor

•   I.  F

82  CHAPTER    III  [310

instance,  in  reading  statements  of  figures  in  newspapers,  which  are  very  often
egregiously  wrong,  it  seems  to  come  to  me  intuitively  that  something  is  wrong,
and  when  that  occurs  I  am  usually  right.

I  have  always  felt  that  there  were  times  when  my  power  was  much  weaker
than  others,  not  only  when  tired,  but,  like  a  musician,  when  not  in  the  mood.  I
have  not  the  same  confidence  now  at  66  years  of  age  as  when  younger.  That
is  to  say,  I  like  to  check  a  calculation  before  stating  it,  though  I  can  do  nearly
as  difficult  ones  as  at  any  time  of  my  life,  though  not  so  rapidly.

As  to  there  being  any  degree  of  connection  between  this  arithmetical
power  and  ambidexterity,  there  is  none,  I  think,  in  my  case.  I  do  not
possess  the  latter  gift  consciously,  though  I  may  perhaps  be  able  to  use  the
left  hand  better  than  the  average  of  people,  but  I  should  not  for  a  moment  claim
to  be  ambidextrous.  .  .  .  Left-handedness  runs  in  our  family  on  both  sides,  and
so  I  say  I  may  have  some  little  ambidexterity  without  knowing  it.

EDWARD  L.   I.   BLYTH.

Mr.  Blyth's  interesting  record  contains  other  illustrations  of  several
points  above  mentioned ; — the  early  and  instinctive  appearance  of  the
faculty ;  its  gradual  subjection  to  supraliminal  guidance ;  yet  the  persist-
ence of  occasional  "  subliminal  uprushes,"  which  give  the  problem's
answer  without  its  intermediate  steps.

Passing  on  to  the  two  other  men  of  high  ability  known  to  have
possessed  this  gift,  Professor  Safford  and  Archbishop  Whately,  we  are
struck  with  the  evanescence  of  the  power  after  early  youth, — or  even  before
the  end  of  childhood.  I  quote  from  Dr.  Scripture  Archbishop  Whately 's
account  of  his  powers  : —

There  was  certainly  something  peculiar  in  my  calculating  faculty.  It  began
to  show  itself  at  between  five  and  six,  and  lasted  about  three  years.  ...  I  soon
got  to  do  the  most  difficult  sums,  always  in  my  head,  for  I  knew  nothing  of
figures  beyond  numeration.  I  did  these  sums  much  quicker  than  any  one  could
upon  paper,  and  I  never  remember  committing  the  smallest  error.  When  I
went  to  school,  at  which  time  the  passion  wore  off,  I  was  a  perfect  dunce  at
ciphering,  and  have  continued  so  ever  since.

Still  more  remarkable,  perhaps,  was  Professor  Safford's  loss  of  power.
Professor  Safford's  whole  bent  was  mathematical ;  his  boyish  gift  of  calcu-
lation raised  him  into  notice ;  and  he  is  now  a  Professor  of  Astronomy.
He  had  therefore  every  motive  and  every  opportunity  to  retain  the  gift,  if
thought  and  practice  could  have  retained  it.  But  whereas  at  ten  years
old  he  worked  correctly  in  his  head,  in  one  minute,  a  multiplication  sum
whose  answer  consisted  of  36  figures,  he  is  now,  J  believe,  neither  more
nor  less  capable  of  such  calculation  than  his  neighbours.

Similar  was  the  fate  of  a  personage  who  never  rises  above  initials,  and
of  whose  general  capacity  we  know  nothing.

"  Mr.  Van  R.,  of  Utica,"  says  Dr.  Scripture  on  the  authority  of  Gall,
"  at  the  age  of  six  years  distinguished  himself  by  a  singular  faculty  for
calculating  in  his  head.  At  eight  he  entirely  lost  this  faculty,  and  after
that  time  he  could  calculate  neither  better  nor  faster  than  any  other  person.

310]  GENIUS  83

He  did  not  retain  the  slightest  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  he  performed  his
calculations  in  childhood"

Turning  now  to  the  stupid  or  uneducated  prodigies,  Base  alone  seems
to  have  retained  his  power  through  life.  Colburn  and  Mondeux,  and
apparently  Prolongeau  and  Mangiamele,  lost  their  gift  after  childhood.

A  few  hints  as  to  processes  have  been  gleaned  from  this  group ; — the
most  interesting  point  being  that  Colburn  was  for  some  years  unable,  but
afterwards  to  some  extent  able,  to  explain  his  own  processes.  "  His
friends  tried  to  elicit  a  disclosure  of  the  methods  by  which  he  performed
his  calculations,  but  for  nearly  three  years  he  was  unable  to  satisfy  their
inquiries.  He  positively  declared  that  he  did  not  know  how  the  answers
came  into  his  mind."  *  Later  on  he  did  give  an  account  of  his  artifices,
which,  however,  showed  no  great  ingenuity.

But  on  the  whole  the  ignorant  prodigies  seldom  appear  to  have  been
conscious  of  any  continuous  logical  process,  while  in  some  cases  the
separation  of  the  supraliminal  and  subliminal  trains  of  thought  must
have  been  very  complete.  "  Buxton  would  talk  freely  whilst  doing
his  questions,  that  being  no  molestation  or  hindrance  to  him."  2  Fixity
and  clearness  of  inward  visualisation  seems  to  have  been  the  leading
necessity  in  all  these  achievements;  and  it  apparently  mattered  little
whether  the  mental  blackboard  (so  to  say)  on  which  the  steps  of  the
calculation  were  recorded  were  or  were  not  visible  to  the  mind's  eye
of  the  supraliminal  self.

I  have  been  speaking  only  of  visualisation ;  but  it  would  be  interesting
if  we  could  discover  how  much  actual  mathematical  insight  or  inventive-
ness can  be  subliminally  exercised.  Here,  however,  our  materials  are  very
imperfect.  From  Gauss  and  Ampere  we  have,  so  far  as  I  know,  no  record.
At  the  other  end  of  the  scale,  we  know  that  Dase  (perhaps  the  most
successful  of  all  these  prodigies)  was  singularly  devoid  of  mathematical
grasp.  "  On  one  occasion  Petersen  tried  in  vain  for  six  weeks  to  get  the
first  elements  of  mathematics  into  his  head."  "  He  could  not  be  made  to
'.lie  least  idea  of  a  proposition  in  Euclid.  Of  any  language  but  his
own  he  could  never  master  a  word."  Yet  Dase  received  a  grant  from  the
my  of  Sciences  at  Hamburg,  on  the  recommendation  of  Gauss,  for
mathematical  work ;  and  actually  in  twelve  years  made  tables  of  factors
and  prime  numbers  for  the  seventh  and  nearly  the  whole  of  the  eighth
million,— a  task  which  probably  few  men  could  have  accomplished,  with-
out mechanical  aid,  in  an  ordinary  lifetime.  He  may  thus  be  ranked  as
the  only  man  who  has  ever  done  valuable  service  to  Mathematics  without
being  able  to  cross  the  Ass's  Bridge.

On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  Mangiamele,  there  may  have  been
real  ingenuity  subliminally  at  work.  Our  account  of  this  prodigy  is
authentic,  but  tantalising  from  its  brevity.

npture,  r>/  fit.,  p.  50.  *  Scripture,*/,  cit.,  p.  54,

84  CHAPTER    III  [310

In  the  year  1837  Vito  Mangiamele,  who  gave  his  age  as  10  years  and  4
months,  presented  himself  before  Arago  in  Paris.  He  was  the  son  of  a  shep-
herd of  Sicily,  who  was  not  able  to  give  his  son  any  instruction.  By  chance  it
was  discovered  that  by  methods  peculiar  to  himself  he  resolved  problems  that
seemed  at  the  first  view  to  require  extended  mathematical  knowledge.  In  the
presence  of  the  Academy  Arago  proposed  the  following  questions:  "What
is  the  cubic  root  of  3,796,416 ?"  In  the  space  of  about  half  a  minute  the
child  responded  156,  which  is  correct.  "What  satisfies  the  condition  that
its  cube  plus  five  times  its  square  is  equal  to  42  times  itself  increased  by  40?"
Everybody  understands  that  this  is  a  demand  for  the  root  of  the  equation
x9  +  5  jr2  —  42  x  -  40  =  o.  In  less  than  a  minute  Vito  responded  that  5  satisfied
the  condition ;  which  is  correct.  The  third  question  related  to  the  solution
of  the  equation  x6  —  4  x—  16779  —  °-  This  time  the  child  remained  four  to
five  minutes  without  answering :  finally  he  demanded  with  some  hesitation
if  3  would  not  be  the  solution  desired.  The  secretary  having  informed
him  that  he  was  wrong,  Vito,  a  few  moments  afterwards,  gave  the  number
7  as  the  true  solution.  Having  finally  been  requested  to  extract  the  loth
root  of  282,475,249  Vito  found  in  a  short  time  that  the  root  is  7.

At  a  later  date  a  committee,  composed  of  Arago,  Cauchy,  and  others,
complains  that  "  the  masters  of  Mangiamele  have  always  kept  secret  the
methods  of  calculation  which  he  made  use  of."1

There  is  another  point  on  which  something  might  have  been  learnt
from  the  study  of  so  marked  a  group  of  automatists — utilisers  of  sub-
liminal capacity — as  these  "  prodigies "  form.  Their  bodily  character-
istics might  have  been  examined  with  a  view  to  tracing  such  physical
concomitants  as  may  go  with  this  facility  of  communication  between
psychical  strata.  We  have,  however,  few  data  available  for  this  pur-
pose. Colburn  inherited  supernumerary  digits,  and  Mondeux  is  re-
ported to  have  been  hysterical.  On  the  other  hand  the  "  prodigies  "  of
whose  lives  after  childhood  anything  is  known  seem  to  have  been  free
from  nervous  taint.  No  one,  for  instance,  could  well  be  more  remote
from  hysteria  than  the  elder  Bidder ; — or  than  his  son,  the  late  Mr.
Bidder,  Q.C.,  or  than  Mr.  Blyth  of  Edinburgh,  perhaps  the  best  living
English  representative  of  what  we  may  call  the  calculating  diathesis.

It  is  plain,  then,  that  no  support  is  given  by  what  we  know  of  this
group  to  the  theory  which  regards  subliminal  mentation  as  necessarily
a  sign  of  some  morbid  dissociation  of  psychical  elements.  Is  there,  on
the  other  hand,  anything  to  confirm  a  suggestion  which  will  occur  in
some  similar  cases,  namely,  that, — inasmuch  as  the  addition  of  subliminal
to  supraliminal  mentation  may  often  be  a  completion  and  integration
rather  than  a  fractionation  or  disintegration  of  the  total  individuality,
— we  are  likely  sometimes  to  find  traces  of  a  more  than  common
activity  of  the  right  or  less  used  cerebral  hemisphere?  Finding  no
mention  of  ambidexterity  in  the  meagre  notices  which  have  come  down
to  us  of  the  greater  "  prodigies,"  I  begged  Mr.  Blyth  and  the  late

1  Scripture,  op.  at.,  p.  17.

311]  GENIUS  85

Mr.  Bidder,  Q.C.,  to  tell  me  whether  their  left  hands  possessed  more
than  usual  power.  Mr.  Blyth's  reply  has  been  already  given  above;
I  now  quote  Mr.  Bidder's.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  356.)

RAVENSBURY  PARK,

September  nth,  1891.

As  to  ambidexterity.  Of  course  I  am  ignorant  of  the  train  of  thought
that  led  you  to  ask  the  question;  but  oddly  enough  I  am  a  very  good
example  of  it.  I  -am  not  aware  that  my  father  was  ambidextrous;  nor
are  any  of  my  children,  so  far  as  I  know.  For  myself,  in  all  sports, — bowl-
ing, throwing,  fishing,  tennis,  racquets,  &c., — I  almost  invariably  use  the
left  hand.  I  cannot  throw  to  any  purpose  with  the  right.  In  cricket,
however,  I  bat  with  the  right  hand.  In  shaving,  I  shave  one  half  of  the
face  with  the  left  hand  and  the  other  with  the  right,  in  each  case  taking
the  part  which  shaves  forwards,  so  as  to  have  no  backward  shaving.  In
writing  I  write  with  the  right  hand,  being  so  taught ;  but  some  years  ago
I  discovered  that  if  I  let  my  left  hand  move  unconstrainedly  and  without
conscious  thought  as  to  how  it  should  form  the  letters,  I  could  write  with
equal  fluency,  though  not  so  well-formed  letters.  But  the  direction  of  the
writing  is  reversed  ;  so  that  it  is  requisite  either  to  look  through  the  paper
or  view  it  in  a  looking-glass  to  read  the  writing.  My  left  hand  and  nerve
system  seems  to  have  learnt  by  sympathy  what  the  right  had  acquired  by
education  and  practice.

Further,  I  found  that  taking  two  pencils  one  in  each  hand  I  could
write  simultaneously  with  both  hands, — the  two  writings  proceeding  in
opposite  directions.  I  have  occasionally  found  since  that  other  people
could  to  some  extent  do  the  same.  I  repeatedly  tried  very  hard  to  write
one  word  with  one  hand  and  another  with  the  other; — but  it  won't  do;
the  result  is  always  a  nondescript  production  of  parts  of  both  words, —
something  like  the  nonsense  words  in  Alice  in  Wonderland.  I  enclose  a
specimen  which  will  show  the  simultaneous  writing.

It  thus  appears  that  in  the  only  two  cases  in  which  I  have  been
able  to  make  inquiry  there  is  somewhat  more  of  dextro-cerebral  capacity
than  in  the  mass  of  mankind.

311.  We  may  now  pass  on  to  review  some  further  instances  of  sub-
liminal co-operation  with  conscious  thought; — first  looking  about  us  for
any  cases  comparable  in  dcfiniteness  with  the  preceding ;  and  then  ex-
tending our  view  over  the  wider  and  vaguer  realm  of  creative  and  artistic
work.

Before  we  proceed  to   the  highly-specialised  senses  of  hearing  and

let  us  see  whether  we  can  find  traces  of  subliminal  intensification

of  those  perceptions  of  a  less  specialised  kind  which  underlie  our  more

rate    modes   of    cognising    the    world  around   us.     The    sense    of

the  efflux  of  tim<-,  and    the  sense  of  weight,  or  of  muscular  resistance,

are  amongst  the  profoundest  elements  in  our  organic  being.     And  the

sense  of  time  is  indicated  in  several  ways  as  a  largely  subliminal  faculty.

86  CHAPTER    III  [311

There  is  much  evidence  to  show  that  it  is  often  more  exact  in  men
sleeping  than  in  men  awake,  and  in  men  hypnotised  than  in  men
sleeping.  The  records  of  spontaneous  somnambulism  are  full  of  pre-
dictions made  by  the  subject  as  to  his  own  case,  and  accomplished,
presumably  by  self-suggestion,  but  without  help  from  clocks,  at  the
precise  minute  foretold.  Or  this  hidden  knowledge  may  take  shape
in  the  imagery  of  dream,  as  in  a  case  published  by  Professor  Royce,
of  Harvard,1  where  his  correspondent  describes  "  a  dream  in  which
I  saw  an  enormous  flaming  clock-dial  with  the  hands  standing  at  2.20.
Awaking  immediately,  I  struck  a  match,  and  upon  looking  at  my  watch
found  it  was  a  few  seconds  past  2.20."

I  should,  however,  have  been  puzzled  to  produce  any  clear  example
of  the  subliminal  time-sense  as  manifesting  itself  in  a  sane  and  waking
person,  had  not  a  Mr.  Higton  sent  to  me  some  years  ago  the  follow-
ing record  of  personal  experiences  on  which  he  desired  my  opinion.
I  made  his  acquaintance,  and  found  him  a  sensible,  serious  witness;
but  I  did  not  then  perceive  the  full  significance  of  his  communication,
and  I  have,  unfortunately,  lost  sight  of  him.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  337.)

Mr.  W.  Higton,  27  St.  Leonard  Street,  Pimlico,  S.W.,  sends  me,  Sep-
tember 1889,  the  following  experiences — abbreviated  from  a  long  paper
which  I  have  returned  to  him.

1.  "It  is  now  some  three  years  since  the  exact  time  of  day  presented
itself  to   my  mind  independently  of  any  internal  knowledge  or  of  any  ex-
ternal physical  appearances "  (as  of  clock,  &c.).

Mr.  Higton  had  no  idea  of  the  exact^time,  when  "within  a  few  yards
of  Tattersall's  there  instantaneously  appeared  before  me  the  face  of  a  clock
of  an  immense  size.  Every  figure  was  perfectly  visible ;  and  the  huge
black  hands  distinctly  indicated  11.25;  while  at  the  same  moment  or,  cor-
rectly speaking,  a  fraction  of  a  second  later,  I  felt  convinced  and  absolutely
certain  that  the  time  indicated  on  the  dial  was  the  right  time  "  (as  in  fact  it
was  by  his  watch).  "  The  phenomenon  has  recurred  during  the  past  three
years  at  least  five  and,  I  think,  six  times;  the  first  three  occurring  at
intervals  of  about  three  months,  and  the  last  two  or  three  being  divided
by  a  considerably  longer  interval."

2.  On    another  occasion   Mr.    Higton   was   walking  through  a   field  as
to  which  a  legend  ran  that   a  young  lady  was  murdered  there,  while  she
held  a  sprig  of  thyme,   and   that  any  one    passing  through   the  field   and
not    thinking    of    the    murder  would    smell    thyme.     Mr.   Higton    paid  no
credit  to   this  legend ; — often  walked   through   the  field,  but  thought  about
the  murder.     "  However,  I  did  walk  through   the  field  one  gloomy   Novem-
ber afternoon,   absorbed  so   deeply  in  some   new  practical    scheme  that  I
did  not  think  about  the  murder,  and  most  certainly  should  not  have  thought
about  it  if  the  strongest  conceivable   smell  of  thyme  that  ever  rose  to  human
nostrils  had  not  risen  to  mine.     The  odour  of  it  lasted  at  least  a  quarter

1  Proceedings  of  American  S.P.R.,  vol.  i.  No.  4,  p.  360.

312]  GENIUS  87

of  a   minute,  until   my  concentrated  thoughts  were   disorganised,  and  made
to  dwell  on  the  magical  subject."

3.  •'  When  I  was  at  home  assisting  my  father  in  his  business  it  used
to  be  my  work  to  weigh  the  hides  which  were  taken  from  the  beasts  we
killed,  preparatory  to  sending  them  to  the  dealer ;  and  it  was  my  custom
before  placing  them  in  the  scale  to  see  how  near  the  weight  I  would
guess  them  to  be.  By  this  means  I  became  tolerably  expert  in  estimating
their  weight,  invariably  being  not  more  than  three  or  four  pounds  out.
on  several  occasions  before  I  guessed,  or  even  thought  of  guessing,  a
certain  weight  came  into  my  mind  which  (as  in  the  case  of  the  time  in-
dicated on  the  dial)  I  was  inwardly  assured  was  correct.  I  remember
one  case  distinctly,  in  which  the  hide  weighed  8;f  lb.,  which  were  the
exact  figures  which  occurred  to  me  prior  to  weighing,  and  independently
of  any  computation  whatever.  Indeed,  on  one  occasion,  the  fourth,  I  think,
I  ventured  to  ticket  the  hide,  without  weighing  it,  in  accordance  with  the
figures  which  came  into  my  mind;  and  on  the  following  Tuesday  exactly
the  number  of  pounds  named  on  the  ticket  were  paid  for  at  the  market
to  which  the  hides  were  delivered.  As  you  will  easily  believe,  I  did  not
tell  my  father  I  had  not  weighed  the  hide  on  the  ground  that  I  knew
the  weight  without  doing  so ! "

Setting  aside  for  the  moment  the  hallucination  of  the  sense  of
smell,  I  would  point  out  that  we  have  here  precisely  such  uprushes
of  subliminal  faculty,  concerned  with  the  deep  organic  sensations  of
the  efflux  of  time  and  of  muscular  resistance,  as  theory  had  led  us
to  expect.  We  need  not  postulate  any  direct  or  supernormal  know-
ledge,— but  merely  a  subliminal  calculation,  such  as  we  shall  see  in
the  case  of  "arithmetical  prodigies,"  expressing  itself  supraliminally,
sometimes  in  a  phantasmal  picture,  sometimes  as  a  mere  "  conviction,"
without  sensory  clothing.  And  I  would  interpret  in  much  the  same
way  the  story  of  the  smell  of  thyme  in  the  haunted  field.  We  may
suppose,  I  think,  that  although  Mr.  Higton  was  not  "consciously"
thinking  of  the  local  legend,  his  subliminal  self  remembered  it,  and
produced  the  appropriate  hallucination  of  smell  in  the  same  way
in  which  it  produced  the  picture  of  the  clock-face,  as  indicating  that
it  knew  the  precise  hour.  Thus  we  have,  I  think,  a  reasonable  ex-
tion  of  what  seems  at  first  sight  an  extravagant  ghost  story; — an
explanation  which  is  the  more  probable  insomuch  as  it  is  deduced
from  our  own  analysis  of  Mr.  Higton's  evidence,  and  does  not  seem
to  have  occurred  to  himself.

312.     Passing  on  here  to  subliminal  products  of  visual  type,  I   am
to  be  able  to  quote  the  following  passage,  which  seems  to  me  to
m  germ  the  very  theory  for  which  I  am  now  contending   on   the
;  ity  of  one  of  the  most  lucid  thinkers  of  the  last  generation,
it    passage  occurs  in  an  article  by  Sir   John   Herschel  on  "  Sen-
sor in!  i  mi  liar  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects,  1816.     Sir
John   describes   some   experiences   of  his   own,  "  which   consist  in   the

88  CHAPTER    III  [312

involuntary  production  of  visual  impressions,  into  which  geometrical
regularity  of  form  enters  as  the  leading  character,  and  that,  under
circumstances  which  altogether  preclude  any  explanation  drawn  from
a  possible  regularity  of  structure  in  the  retina  of  the  optic  nerve."  1
Twice  these  patterns  appeared  in  waking  daylight  hours, — with  no  ill-
ness or  discomfort  at  the  time  or  afterwards.  More  frequently  they
appeared  in  darkness;  but  still  while  Sir  John  was  fully  awake.  They
appeared  also  twice  when  he  was  placed  under  chloroform ;  "  and>  I
should  observe  that  I  never  lost  my  consciousness  of  being  awake
and  in  full  possession  of  my  mind,  though  quite  insensible  to  what
was  going  on.  .  .  .  Now  the  question  at  once  presents  itself — What
are  these  Geometrical  Spectres?  and  how,  and  in  what  department  of  the
bodily  or  mental  economy  do  they  originate?  They  are  evidently
not  dreams.  The  mind  is  not  dormant,  but  active  and  conscious  of
the  direction  of  its  thoughts ;  while  these  things  obtrude  themselves
on  notice,  and  by  calling  attention  to  them,  direct  the  train  of  thought
into  a  channel  it  would  not  have  taken  of  itself.  ...  If  it  be  true  that
the  conception  of  a  regular  geometrical  pattern  implies  the  exercise
of  thought  and  intelligence,  it  would  almost  seem  that  in  such  cases
as  those  above  adduced  we  have  evidence  of  a  thought,  an  intelligence,
working  within  our  own  organisation  distinct  from  that  of  our  own
personality."  And  Sir  John  further  suggests  that  these  complex  figures,
entering  the  mind  in  this  apparently  arbitrary  fashion,  throw  light  upon
"the  suggestive  principle  "  to  which  "we  must  look  for  much  that  is  de-
terminant and  decisive  of  our  volition  when  carried  into  action."  "  It  strikes
me  as  not  by  any  means  devoid  of  interest  to  contemplate  cases  where,  in  a
matter  so  entirely  abstract,  so  completely  devoid  of  any  moral  or  emotional
bearing,  as  the  production  of  a  geometrical  figure,  we,  as  it  were,  seize
upon  that  principle  in  the  very  act,  and  in  the  performance  of  its  office."

From  my  point  of  view,  of  course,  I  can  but  admire  the  acumen
which  enabled  this  great  thinker  to  pierce  to  the  root  of  the  matter
by  the  aid  of  so  few  observations.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  per-
ceived the  connection  between  these  "schematic  phantasms,"  to
borrow  a  phrase  from  Professor  Ladd,2  and  the  hallucinatory  figures
of  men  or  animals  seen  in  health  or  in  disease.  But  even  from  his
scanty  data  his  inference  seems  to  me  irresistible ; — "  we  have
evidence  of  a  thought,  an  intelligence,  working  within  our  own  organisa-
tion, distinct  from  that  of  our  own  personality."  I  shall  venture  to
claim  him  as  the  first  originator  of  the  theory  to  which  the  far  fuller
evidence  now  accessible  had  independently  led  myself.

1  On  this  point  see  Professor  James's  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  ii.  p.  84,  note.
Goethe's  well-known  phantasmal  flower  was  clearly  no  mere  representation  of  retinal
structure.     A  near  analogy  to  these  patterns  lies  in  the  so-called  "spirit-drawings,"  or
automatic  arabesques,  discussed  elsewhere  in  this  chapter  (see  Section  324).

2  See  Professor  Ladd's  paper  on  this  subject  in  Mind,  April  1892.

313]  GENIUS  89

313.  Cases  observed  as  definitely  as  those  just  quoted  are  few
in  number;  and  I  must  pass  on  into  a  much  trodden — even  a  con-
fusedly trampled — field; — the  records,  namely,  left  by  eminent  men
as  to  the  element  of  subconscious  mentation,  which  was  involved  in
their  best  work.  Most  of  these  stories  have  been  again  and  again
repeated  ; — and  they  have  been  collected  on  a  large  scale  in  a  celebrated
work, — to  me  especially  distasteful,  as  containing  what  seems  to  me
the  loose  and  extravagant  parody  of  important  truth.  It  is  not  my
business  here  to  criticise  Dr.  Von  Hartmann's  Philosophy  of  the  Uncon-
scious in  detail;  but  I  prefer  to  direct  my  readers'  attention  to  a
much  more  modest  volume,  in  which  a  young  physician  has  put  to-
gether the  results  of  a  direct  inquiry  addressed  to  some  Frenchmen
of  distinction  as  to  their  methods  especially  of  imaginative  work.1  I
quote  a  few  of  the  replies  addressed  to  him,  beginning  with  some
words  from  M.  Sully  Prudhomme, — at  once  psychologist  and  poet, —
who  is  here  speaking  of  the  subconscious  clarification  of  a  chain  of
abstract  reasoning.  "  I  have  sometimes  suddenly  understood  a  geomet-
rical demonstration  made  to  me  a  year  previously  without  having  in
any  way  directed  thereto  my  attention  or  will.  It  seemed  that  the
mere  spontaneous  ripening  of  the  conceptions  which  the  lectures  had
implanted  in  my  brain  had  brought  about  within  me  this  novel  grasp
of  the  proof."

^  With  this  we  may  compare  a  statement  of  Arago's —  "  Instead  of
obstinately  endeavouring  to  understand  a  proposition  at  once,  I  would
admit  its  truth  provisionally; — and  next  day  I  would  be  astonished
at  understanding  thoroughly  that  which  seemed  all  dark  before."

Condillac  similarly  speaks  of  finding  an  incomplete  piece  of  work
finished  next  day  in  his  head.

Somewhat  similarly,  though  in  another  field,  M.  Rette",  a  poet,
tells  Dr.  Chabaneix  that  he  falls  asleep  in  the  middle  of  an  unfinished
,  and  when  thinking  of  it  again  in  the  morning  finds  it  com-
pleted. And  M.  Vincent  d'Indy,  a  musical  composer,  says  that  he
often  has  on  waking  a  fugitive  glimpse  of  a  musical  effect  which  (like
the  memory  of  a  dream)  needs  a  strong  immediate  concentration  of
mind  to  keep  it  from  vanishing.

De  Musset  writes,  "  On  ne  travaille  pas,  on  e*coute,  c'est  comme
un  inconnu  que  vous  parle  a  1'oreille."

I^imartine  says,  "Ce  n'est  pas  moi  qui  pense ;  ce  sont  mes  ide'es  qui
pcnsent  pour  moi."

Re"my  de  Gourmont :  "  My  conceptions  rise  into  the  field  of  con-
sciousness like  a  flash  of  lightning  or  like  the  flight  of  a  bird."

M.  S.  writes:  "In  writing  these  dramas  I  seemed  to  be  a  spectator
at  the  play;  I  gazed  at  what  was  passing  on  the  scene  in  an  eager,

1  T,e  Subconscient  chcz  les  Artistes,  les  Savants,  ct  let  Ecrivains,"  par  le  Dr.  Paul
Chabaneix,  Paris,  1897.

90  CHAPTER    III  [314

wondering  expectation  of  what  was  to  follow.     And  yet  I  felt  that  all
this  came  from  the  depth  of  my  own  being."

Saint-Saens  had  only  to  listen,  as  Socrates  to  his  Daemon;  and
M.  Ribot,  summing  up  a  number  of  similar  cases,  says :  "  It  is
the  unconscious  which  produces  what  is  vulgarly  called  inspiration.
This  condition  is  a  positive  fact,  accompanied  with  physical  and  psy-
chical characteristics  peculiar  to  itself.  Above  all,  it  is  impersonal  and
involuntary,  it  acts  like  an  instinct,  when  and  how  it  chooses ;  it  may
be  wooed,  but  cannot  be  compelled.  Neither  reflection  nor  will  can
supply  its  place  in  original  creation.  .  .  .  The  bizarre  habits  of  artists
when  composing  tend  to  create  a  special  physiological  condition, —
to  augment  the  cerebral  circulation  in  order  to  provoke  or  to  maintain
the  unconscious  activity."

In  what  precise  way  the  cerebral  circulation  is  altered  we  can  hardly
at  present  hope  to  know.  Meantime  a  few  psychological  remarks  fall
more  easily  within  our  reach.

314.  In  the  first  place,  we  note  that  a  very  brief  and  shallow
submergence  beneath  the  conscious  level  is  enough  to  infuse  fresh
vigour  into  supraliminal  trains  of  thought.  Ideas  left  to  mature
unnoticed  for  a  few  days,  or  for  a  single  night,  seem  to  pass  but  a
very  little  way  beneath  the  threshold.  They  resemble  pebbles  which
the  earthworm  sucks  into  its  burrow  and  re-ejects  upon  the  lawn,
rather  than  an  uprushing  lava-stream  from  caves  of  hidden  fire.  They
represent,  one  may  say,  the  first  stage  of  a  process  which,  although
often  inconspicuous,  is  not  likely  to  be  discontinuous, — the  sustenance,
namely,  of  the  supraliminal  life  by  impulse  or  guidance  from  below.

In  the  second  place,  we  see  in  some  of  these  cases  of  deep  and  fruitful
abstraction  a  slight  approach  to  duplication  of  personality.  John  Stuart
Mill,  intent  on  his  Principles  of  Logic,  as  he  threaded  the  crowds
of  Leadenhall  Street,  recalls  certain  morbid  cases  of  hysterical  distrac-
tion ; — only  that  with  Mill  the  process  was  an  integrative  one  and  not
a  dissolutive  one — a  gain  and  not  a  loss  of  power  over  the  organism.

And  thirdly,  in  some  of  these  instances  we  see  the  man  of  genius
achieving  spontaneously,  and  unawares,  much  the  same  result  as  that
which  is  achieved  for  the  hypnotic  subject  by  deliberate  artifice.  For
he  is  in  fact  co-ordinating  the  waking  and  the  sleeping  phases  of  his
existence.  He  is  carrying  into  sleep  the  knowledge  and  the  purpose
of  waking  hours ; — and  he  is  carrying  back  into  waking  hours  again
the  benefit  of  those  profound  assimilations  which  are  the  privilege  of
sleep.  Hypnotic  suggestion  aims  at  co-operations  of  just  this  kind
between  the  waking  state  in  which  the  suggestion,  say,  of  some  func-
tional change,  is  planned  and  the  sleeping  state  in  which  that  change
is  carried  out, — with  benefit  persisting  anew  into  waking  life.  The
hypnotic  trance,  which  is  a  developed  sleep,  thus  accomplishes  for  the
ordinary  man  what  ordinary  sleep  accomplishes  for  the  man  of  genius.

315]  GENIUS  91

The  coming  chapters  on  Sleep  and  Hypnotism  will  illustrate  this
point  more  fully.  But  I  may  here  anticipate  my  discussion  of  dreams
by  quoting  one  instance  where  dreams,  self-suggested  by  waking  will,
formed,  as  one  may  say,  an  integral  element  in  distinguished  genius.

The  late  Robert  Louis  Stevenson,  being  in  many  ways  a  typical
man  of  genius,  was  in  no  way  more  markedly  gifted  with  that  integrat-
ing faculty — that  increased  power  over  all  strata  of  the  personality —
which  I  have  ascribed  to  genius,  than  in  his  relation  to  his  dreams
(see  "  A  Chapter  on  Dreams"  in  his  volume  Across  the  Plains}.  Seldom
has  the  essential  analogy  between  dreams  and  inspiration  been  exhibited
in  such  a  striking  way.  His  dreams  had  always  (he  tells  us)  been  of
great  vividness,  and  often  of  markedly  recurrent  type.  But  the  point  of
interest  is  that,  when  he  began  to  write  stories  for  publication,  the  "  little
people  who  managed  man's  internal  theatre  "  understood  the  change  as
well  as  he.

When  he  lay  down  to  prepare  himself  for  sleep,  he  no  longer  sought
amusement,  but  printable  and  profitable  tales  ;  and  after  he  had  dozed  off  in  his
box-seat,  his  little  people  continued  their  evolutions  with  the  same  mercantile
designs.  .  .  .  For  the  most  part,  whether  awake  or  asleep,  he  is  simply  occupied
— he  or  his  little  people — in  consciously  making  stories  for  the  market.  .  .  .

The  more  I  think  of  it,  the  more  I  am  moved  to  press  upon  the  world  my
question  :  "  Who  are  the  Little  People  ?  "  They  are  near  connections  of  the
dreamer's,  beyond  doubt ;  they  share  in  his  financial  worries  and  have  an  eye
to  the  bank-book;  they  share  plainly  in  his  training;  .  .  .  they  have  plainly
learned  like  him  to  build  the  scheme  of  a  considerate  story  and  to  arrange
emotion  in  progressive  order ;  only  I  think  they  have  more  talent ;  and  one
thing  is  beyond  doubt,— they  can  tell  him  a  story  piece  by  piece,  like  a  serial,
and  keep  him  all  the  while  in  ignorance  of  where  they  aim.

That  part  [of  my  work]  which  is  done  while  I  am  sleeping  is  the  Brownies'
part  beyond  contention ;  but  that  which  is  done  when  I  am  up  and  about  is  by
no  means  necessarily  mine,  since  all  goes  to  show  the  Brownies  have  a  hand  in

•  n  then.

Slight  and  imperfect  as  the  above  statistics  and  observations  admittedly
are,  they  seem  to  me  to  point  in  a  more  useful  direction  than  do  some  of
ts  collected  by  that  modern  group  of  anthropologists  who  hold  that
genius  is  in  itself  a  kind  of  nervous  malady,  a  disturbance  of  mental
balance,  akin  to  criminality  or  even  to  madness.  I  must  here  pause  and
briefly  consider  the  evidence  advanced  in  support  of  a  thesis  almost
directly  contradictory  of  my  own.

315.    Professor  Lombroso  especially,  in  his  popular  if  somewhat  super-

i)ook  on  the  Man  of  Genius,  has  gathered  together  many  anecdotes

of  the  follies  and  frailties  of  eminent  men.     Striking,  however,  though  his

collection  is,  there  are  many  reasons  for  caution  in  drawing  from  it  the

deductions  which  he  suggests.     In  the  first  place  (and  this  the  author

If  to  a  great  extent  admits)   the  distinguished  men  with  whom  he

92  CHAPTER    III  [316

deals  do  not  and  cannot  form  any  true  psychological  class.  They  are
merely  a  somewhat  random  selection  from  a  much  larger  number  of
persons  whose  acts  or  writings  have  made  them  well  known  in  the  ancient
or  in  the  modern  world.  Many  of  them  succeeded  by  means  of  qualities
as  remote  as  possible  from  those  elsewhere  in  the  book  assumed  as
characteristic  of  genius ;  rose  in  their  professions,  for  instance,  by  mere
hard  work  and  worldly  wisdom,  or  were  brought  into  prominence  by
political  accidents.  Were  any  charge  of  degeneracy  or  "  nervosity  "  made
out  against  all  these  eminent  men  as  a  body,  it  would  merely  seem  to
prove  the  paradox  that  degeneracy  makes  for  success.  But  in  truth
many  of  the  cases  alleged  admit  of  a  much  simpler  explanation.  There
are  in  most  of  us  some  traits  of  human  nature  which  we  are  not  very
anxious  to  reveal.  If  the  great  world  looks  at  us  too  closely  these  traits
tend  to  come  out.  The  case  is  the  same  with  those  who  are  born  great
as  with  those  who  achieve  greatness.  Lombroso's  chronique  scandaleuse
of  poets  and  painters  might  be  well  matched  by  the  chronique  scandaleuse
of  princes  and  peers.  The  Mtmoires  de  St.  Simon,  for  instance,  would
amply  suffice  to  prove  the  thesis  that  a  trace  of  the  blood  royal — or  even
a  place  at  court — in  itself  implied  a  neurotic  heredity.  But  it  is  scarcely
worth  while  to  go  to  history  for  what  any  valet  de  chambre  will  maintain
of  any  hero.  What  you  have  to  prove  is  rather  that  the  average  man  is
any  less  degenerate  than  his  betters.  And  this  is  not  easy ;  for  we  must
reckon  hi  our  account  abnormalities  of  defect  as  well  as  of  exaggeration ;
bluntness  and  opacities  must  be  set  against  irritabilities  and  illusions ;
and  hardly  a  good  easy  man  among  us  but  might  be  analysed  into  half
neuropath  and  half  Philistine,  if  it  would  serve  a  theory.

316.  Yet  while  thus  demurring  at  many  points  both  to  Professor  Lom-
broso's statistics  themselves  and  to  the  conclusions  based  upon  them,  I
recognise  that  there  are  underlying  facts  of  great  importance  which  give  to
his  view  such  plausibility  as  it  possesses.  It  is  certainly  not  true,  as  I
hold,  either  that  the  human  race  in  general  is  nervously  degenerating,  or
that  nervous  degeneration  tends  to  a  maximum  in  its  most  eminent  mem-
bers. But  it  can  be  plausibly  maintained  that  the  proportion  of  nervous
to  other  disorders  tends  to  increase.  And  it  is  certain  that  not  nervous
degeneration  but  nervous  change  or  development  is  now  proceeding
among  civilised  peoples  more  rapidly  than  ever  before,  and  that  this  self-
adaptation  to  wider  environments  must  inevitably  be  accompanied  in  the
more  marked  cases  by  something  of  nervous  instability.  And  it  is  true
also  that  from  one  point  of  view  these  changes  might  form  matter  for
regret ;  and  that  in  order  to  discern  what  I  take  to  be  their  true  meaning
we  have  to  regard  the  problem  of  human  evolution  from  a  somewhat
unfamiliar  standpoint.

The  thesis  which  I  have  called  plausible  only, — the  increased  modern
importance  of  nervous  in  comparison  with  other  disorders — is  quite  un-
trustworthy unless  in  the  first  place  we  remember  that  such  increase  is

317]  GENIUS  93

probably  relative  only,  other  types  of  disease  having  positively  declined,
as  their  common  causes — hunger,  filth,  and  exposure — have  become  rarer
among  civilised  men.  Moreover,  our  standard  of  health  and  sanity
becomes  constantly  higher.  Savages  and  rude  populations  probably
suffer  from  nervous  instabilities  as  often  as  we,  but  they  notice  it  less
intelligently,  and  care  less  about  it.  The  second  proposition,  that  nervous
development  is  now  proceeding  more  rapidly  than  ever  before,  is  I  think
proved  by  the  great  general  advance  in  all  achievements  needing  rapid
and  precise  nervous  adjustment.  The  perpetual  "record-breaking"  in
athletics,  which  we  take  in  this  age  as  a  matter  of  course,  is  far  more  of  a
nervous  than  of  a  muscular  affair,  and  the  standard  of  modern  capacity
for  every  kind  of  work  of  brain  and  hand  (I  do  not  say  the  standard  of
industrial  probity,  or  of  imaginative  elevation),  rises  as  steadily  as  the
standard  of  the  machinery  with  which  we  supplement  our  bodily  powers.

317.  I  pass  on  to  the  second  point  mentioned  just  above.  The  nervous
system  itself  is  probably  tending  in  each  generation  to  become  more
complex  and  more  delicately  ramified.  As  is  usual  when  any  part  of  an
organism  is  undergoing  rapid  evolutive  changes,  this  nervous  progress  is
accompanied  with  some  instability.  Those  individuals  in  whom  the
hereditary  or  the  acquired  change  is  the  most  rapid  are  likely  also  to
suffer  most  from  this  perturbation  which  masks  evolution — this  occasional
appearance  of  what  may  be  termed  "  nervous  sports  "  of  a  useless  or  even
injurious  type.  Such  are  the  fancies  and  fanaticisms,  the  bizarre  likes
and  dislikes,  the  excessive  or  aberrant  sensibilities,  which  have  been
observed  in  some  of  the  eminent  men  whom  Lombroso  discusses.  Their
truest  analogue,  as  we  shall  presently  see  more  fully,  lies  in  the  oddities
or  morbidities  of  sentiment  or  sensation  which  so  often  accompany  the
development  of  the  human  organism  into  its  full  potencies,  or  precede  the
crowning  effort  by  which  a  fresh  organism  is  introduced  into  the  world.

Such  at  least  is  my  view ;  but  the  full  acceptance  of  this  view  must
;d  upon  some  very  remote  and  very  speculative  considerations  bear-
ing upon  the  nature  and  purport  of  the  whole  existence  and  evolution  of
man.  Vet  however  remote  and  speculative  the  thesis  which  I  defend  may
be,  it  is  not  one  whit  remoter  or  more  speculative  than  the  view  which,
fautc  de  mieux,  is  often  tacitly  assumed  by  scientific  writers.  My  sup-
posed opponent  and  I  are  like  two  children  who  have  looked  through  a
le  at  the  first  few  moves  in  a  game  of  chess, — of  whose  rules  we  are
entirely  ignorant.  My  companion  urges  that  since  we  have  only  seen
.  moved,  it  is  probable  that  the  game  is  played  with  the  pawns
1  that  the  major  pieces  seen  confusedly  behind  the  pawns  are
kind  of  fringe  or  ornament  of  the  board.  1  reply  that  those  pieces
on  the  board  like  the  pawns ;  and  that  since  they  are  larger  and
••(I  than  the  pawns,  it  is  probable  that  they  are  meant  to  play
some  even  more  important  rule  in  the  game  as  it  develops.  We  agree
;mst  wait  and  see  whether  the  pieces  are  moved;  and  I  now

94  CHAPTER    III  [318

maintain  that  I  have  seen  a  piece  moved,  although  my  companion  has
not  noticed  it.

The  chessboard  in  this  parable  is  the  Cosmos ;  the  pawns  are  those
human  faculties  which  make  for  the  preservation  and  development  on  this
planet  of  the  individual  and  the  race ;  the  pieces  are  faculties  which  may
either  be  the  mere  by-products  of  terrene  evolution,  or  on  the  other  hand
may  form  an  essential  part  of  the  faculty  with  which  the  human  germ  or  the
human  spirit  is  originally  equipped,  for  the  purpose  of  self-development  in
a  cosmical,  as  opposed  to  a  merely  planetary,  environment.

318.  I  know  not  where  to  find  what  I  may  call  the  planetary  scheme  of
man's  evolution  set  forth  at  length.     Perhaps  one  of  its  supporters  might
argue  somewhat  as  follows :  "  The  basis  from  which  we  start  must  be  the
existence  of  the  material  universe.     This  universe  has  certain  laws,  pre-
sumably antecedent  to  living  matter,  and  to  which  living  matter,  however
it   may   have   come   to  exist   in  the  universe,  must   inevitably  conform.
Living  creatures,  if  life  is  to  persist,  must  eat  and  must  propagate ;  and
the  germ  from  which  they  sprang  must  have  involved  the  faculties  neces-
sary for  thus  persisting.      That  germ  developed  along  various  lines  into
various  animals ;  and  the  higher  animals  prove  their  superiority  by  out-
living and  dominating  the  lower.     The  main  set  and  tendency  of  man's
faculties  points  to  a  more  and  more  complete  dominion  over  the  material
world.     But  the  way  in  which  faculties  develop  is  largely  by  the  occur-
rence of  sports, — of  unpredictable  varieties.      Some  of  these,  although
they  may  not  tend  to  increase  man's  power  over  the  material  world,  tend
to  his  pleasure  in  other  ways,  and  are  fostered  by  him.     And,  apart  from
actual  sports,  the  brain  is  such  a  complex  affair,  and  the  inter-connections
of  faculty   are   so   subtle,  that   the  mere   development   of  those   useful
faculties  which   lie  in  the   direct   track   of  evolution   tends  also  to  the
formation  of  by-products, — instincts,  appetites,  and  powers,  which  tend  to
persist  and  grow,  and  which  gradually  come  to  fill  a  large  part  of  human
consciousness.     Religion,  Art,  spiritual  love,  &c.,  are  such  by-products;
their  existence  proves  that  the  brain  is  a  complex  thing ;  but  it  does  not
prove  that  any  spiritual  world  exists  which  can  satisfy  their  cravings."

These  arguments  of  course  receive  many  answers  from  theological
and  philosophical  standpoints.  It  is  urged  in  various  ways  that  the
qualities  here  described  as  by-products  are  at  once  too  fundamental
and  too  elevated  to  be  thus  regarded  as  the  mere  incidental  concomitants
of  faculties  of  far  lower  range.

Arguments  of  this  type,  however,  for  the  most  part  ignore  altogether
the  evolutionary  scheme  put  forward  on  the  other  side,  and  rest  upon
considerations  which  in  this  work  I  am  myself  precluded  from  urging.
I  must  now  try  to  show  that  the  evolutionary  scheme  itself,  when  more
closely  considered,  points  to  a  wider  than  planetary  scope.

319.  The  weak  point  in  the  materialistic  synthesis,  briefly  given  above,
is  of  course  the  superficial  way  in  which  it  is  forced  to  treat  the  appearance

319]  GENIUS  95

of  life  on  the  planet.  In  our  absolute  ignorance  of  the  source  from
whence  life  came,  we  have  no  ground  for  assuming  that  it  was  a  purely
planetary  product,  or  that  its  unknown  potentialities  are  concerned  with
purely  planetary  ends.  It  would  be  as  rash  for  the  biologist  to  assume
that  life  on  earth  can  only  point  to  generations  of  further  life  on  earth
as  it  would  have  been  for  some  cosmic  geologist  to  assume — before  the
appearance  of  life  on  earth —  that  geological  forces  must  needs  constitute
all  the  activity  which  could  take  place  on  this  planet.

Since  the  germ  of  life  appeared  on  earth,  its  history  has  been  a  history
not  only  of  gradual  self-adaptation  to  a  known  environment,  but  of  gradual
discovery  of  an  environment,  always  there,  but  unknown.  What  we  call  its
primitive  simple  irritability  was  in  fact  a  dim  panaesthesia ;  a  potential
faculty,  as  yet  unconscious  of  all  the  stimuli  to  which  it  had  not  yet
learnt  to  respond.  As  these  powers  of  sensation  and  of  response  have
developed,  they  have  gradually  revealed  to  the  living  germ  environments
of  which  at  first  it  could  have  no  conception.

It  is  probable,  to  begin  with,  that  the  only  environment  which  the
vast  majority  of  our  ancestors  knew  was  simply  hot  water.  For  the
greater  part  of  the  time  during  which  life  has  existed  on  earth  it
would  have  been  thought  chimerical  to  suggest  that  we  could  live
in  anything  else.  It  was  a  great  day  for  us  when  an  ancestor  crawled  up
out  of  the  slowly-cooling  sea ; — or  say  rather  when  a  previously  unsuspected
capacity  for  directly  breathing  air  gradually  revealed  the  fact  that  we  had
for  long  been  breathing  air  in  the  water ; — and  that  we  were  living  in  the
midst  of  a  vastly  extended  environment, — the  atmosphere  of  the  earth.
It  was  a  great  day  again  when  another  ancestor  felt  on  his  pigment-spot
the  solar  ray ; — or  say  rather  when  a  previously  unsuspected  capacity  for
perceiving  light  revealed  the  fact  that  we  had  for  long  been  acted  upon  by
light  as  well  as  by  heat ;  and  that  we  were  living  in  the  midst  of  a  vastly
led  environment, — namely,  the  illumined  Universe  that  stretches  to
I  ilky  Way.  It  was  a  great  day  when  the  first  skate  (if  skate  he  were)
felt  an  unknown  virtue  go  out  from  him  towards  some  worm  or  mudfish ;
— or  say  rather  when  a  previously  unsuspected  capacity  for  electrical
excitation  demonstrated  the  fact  that  we  had  long  been  acted  upon
by  electricity  as  well  as  by  heat  and  by  light ;  and  that  we  were  living  in
an  inconceivable  and  limitless  environment, — namely,  an  ether  charged
with  infinite  energy,  overpassing  and  interpenetrating  alike  the  last  gulf  of
darkness  and  the  extremes!  star.  All  this, — phrased  perhaps  in  some
other  fashion, — all  men  admit  as  true.  May  we  not  then  suppose  that
there  are  yet  other  environments,  other  interpretations,  which  a  further
awakening  of  faculty  still  subliminal  is  yet  fated  by  its  own  nascent
response  to  discover?  Will  it  be  alien  to  the  past  history  of  evolution  if
I :  It  was  a  great  day  when  the  first  thought  or  feeling  flashed  into
some  mind  of  beast  or  man  from  a  mind  distant  from  his  own? — when  a
>usly  unsuspected  capacity  of  telepathic  percipience  revealed  the  fact

96  CHAPTER    III  [320

that  we  had  long  been  acted  upon  by  telepathic  as  well  as  by  sensory
stimuli ;  and  that  we  were  living  in  an  inconceivable  and  limitless  environ-
ment,— a  thought-world  or  spiritual  universe  charged  with  infinite  life,  and
interpenetrating  and  overpassing  all  human  spirits, — up  to  what  some
have  called  World-Soul,  and  some  God?

This,  as  I  conceive,  is  the  scheme  of  Evolution,  so  far  as  we  can  as  yet
guess  it.  This  is  the  progress  of  the  game  of  chess,  from  the  play  of  pawns
to  the  play  of  pieces ;  and  in  telepathy,  as  I  take  it,  we  have  seen  a  piece
already  moved.

320.  It  is  not,  however,  with  the  more  advanced  moves  in  this  game  that
I  am  at  present  concerned.  I  am  dealing  not  with  supernormal  sensitivities,
but  with  genius, — defined  as  the  co-operation  of  the  submerged  with  the
emergent  self, — as  the  integration  of  subliminal  with  supraliminal  faculty
within  the  limits  of  the  range  of  faculties  which  all  men  admit  and  know.
Yet  it  seemed  needful  to  look  for  a  moment  somewhat  further,  in  order  to
show  the  true  position  of  genius  in  the  evolutionary  scale,  in  which  it
forms  by  no  means  either  an  extreme  term  or  an  accidental  deviation.
For  it  will  be  easily  understood  that  one  of  the  corollaries  from  the  con-
ception of  a  constantly  widening  and  deepening  perception  of  an  environ-
ment infinite  in  infinite  ways,  will  be  that  the  faculties  which  befit  the
material  environment  have  absolutely  no  primacy,  unless  it  be  of  the
merely  chronological  kind,  over  those  faculties  which  science  has  often
called  by-products t  because  they  have  no  manifest  tendency  to  aid  their
possessor  in  the  struggle  for  existence  in  a  material  world.  The  higher
gifts  of  genius — poetry,  the  plastic  arts,  music,  philosophy,  pure  mathe-
matics— all  of  these  are  precisely  as  much  in  the  central  stream  of
evolution — are  perceptions  of  new  truth  and  powers  of  new  action  just  as
decisively  predestined  for  the  race  of  man — as  the  aboriginal  Australian's
faculty  for  throwing  a  boomerang  or  for  swarming  up  a  tree  for  grubs.
There  is,  then,  about  those  loftier  interests  nothing  exotic,  nothing
accidental ;  they  are  an  intrinsic  part  of  that  ever-evolving  response  to  our
surroundings  which  forms  not  only  the  planetary  but  the  cosmic  history
of  all  our  race.

What  inconsistencies,  what  absurdities,  underlie  that  assumption  that
evolution   means   nothing    more    than  the   survival  of    animals  fittest    to
conquer  enemies  and  to  overrun  the  earth.     On  that  bare  hypothesis  the
genus  homo  is  impossible  to  explain.     No  one  really  attempts  to  explain  him
except  on  the  tacit  supposition  that  Nature  somehow  intended  to  evolve
intelligence — somehow  needed  to  evolve  joy ;  was  not  satisfied  with  such  I
an  earth-over-runner  as  the  rabbit,  or  such  an  invincible  conqueror  as  the  |
influenza  microbe.     But  how  much  intelligence,  what  kind  of  joy  Nature  I
aimed  at — is  this  to  be  left  to  be  settled  by  the  instinct  of  rhomme  sensuel
moyen  ?  or  ought  we  not  rather  to  ask  of  the  best  specimens  of  our  race
what  it  is   that   they  live  for? — whether  they  labour  for    the  meat  that
perisheth,  or  for  Love  and  Wisdom  ?     To  more  and  more  among  mankind  |

321]  GENIUS  97

the  need  of  food  is  supplied  with  as  little  conscious  effort  as  the  need  of
air ;  yet  these  are  often  the  very  men  through  whom  evolution  is  going  on
most  unmistakably — who  are  becoming  the  typical  figures  of  the  swiftly-
changing  race.

321.  Once  more.  If  this  point  of  view  be  steadily  maintained,  we  shall
gain  further  light  on  some  of  those  strangenesses  and  irregularities  of  genius
which  have  led  to  its  paradoxical  juxtaposition  with  insanity  as  a  divergence
from  the  accepted  human  type.  The  distinctive  characteristic  of  genius  is
the  large  infusion  of  the  subliminal  in  its  mental  output ;  and  one  character-
istic of  the  subliminal  in  my  view  is  that  it  is  in  closer  relation  than  the
supraliminal  to  the  spiritual  world,  and  is  thus  nearer  to  the  primitive
source  and  extra-terrene  initiation  of  life.  And  earthly  Life  itself —
embodied  as  it  is  in  psycho-physically  individualised  forms — is,  on  the
theory  advanced  in  these  pages,  a  product  or  characteristic  of  the  etherial
or  metetherial  and  not  of  the  gross  material  world.  Thence  in  some
unknown  fashion  it  came ;  there  in  some  unknown  fashion  it  subsists  even
throughout  its  earthly  manifestation ;  thither  in  some  unknown  fashion  it
must  after  earthly  death  return.  If  indeed  the  inspirations  of  genius
spring  from  a  source  one  step  nearer  to  primitive  reality  than  is  that
specialised  consensus  of  faculties  which  natural  selection  has  lifted  above
the  threshold  for  the  purposes  of  working-day  existence,  then  surely  we
need  not  wonder  if  the  mind  and  frame  of  man  should  not  always  suffice
for  smooth  and  complete  amalgamation ;  if  some  prefiguration  of  faculties
adapted  to  a  later  stage  of  being  should  mar  the  symmetry  of  the  life  of
earth.  An  often-quoted  analogy  has  here  a  closer  application  than  is  often
apprehended.  The  grub  comes  from  the  egg  laid  by  a  winged  insect,
and  a  winged  insect  it  must  itself  become ;  but  meantime  it  must  for  the
sake  of  its  own  nurture  and  preservation  acquire  certain  larval  characters —
characters  sometimes  so  complex  that  the  observer  may  be  excused  for
mistaking  that  larva  for  a  perfect  insect  destined  for  no  further  change
save  death.  Such  larval  characters,  acquired  to  meet  the  risks  of  a  tem-
porary environment,  I  seem  to  see  in  man's  earthly  strength  and  glory,
the  human  analogues  of  the  poisonous  tufts  which  choke  the  captor —
the  attitudes  of  mimicry  which  suggest  an  absent  sting — the  "  death's
head  "  coloration  which  disconcerts  a  stronger  foe.

But  meantime  the  adaptation  to  aerial  life  is  going  on ;  something  of

the  imago  or  perfect  insect  is  preformed  within  the  grub ;  and  in  some

s,  even  before  they  sink  into  their  transitional  slumber,  the  rudi-

of  wings  still  helpless  protrude  awkwardly  beneath  the  larval  skin.

Those  who  call  Shelley,  for   instance,  "  a  beautiful  but   ineffectual  angel

his  wings  in   the  void,"  may  adopt,  if  they  choose,  this  homelier

\arter  parallel.     Shelley's   special  gifts  were  no  more  by-products

Alley's  digestive  system  than  the  wings  are  by-products  of  the  grub.

tc  this  new  use  of  a  well-worn  simile  may  serve  to  suggest
that  f  ,r  a  long  time  yet  it  must  be  on  the  future  as  much  as  on  the  past,
VOL.  i.  G

98  CHAPTER    III  [322

on  what  is  now  in  process  of  evolution  as  much  as  on  what  has  already
been  evolved,  that  the  attention  of  psychologists  should  be  fixed.  We
are  watching  the  emergence  of  unguessed  potentialities  from  the  primal
germ.  The  mind  is  no  walled  plot  which  a  diagram  will  figure  ;  it  is  a
landscape  with  lines  which  stretch  out  of  view,  and  an  ever-changing
horizon.

322.  And  thus  there  may  really  be  something  at  times  incommensurable
between  the  inspirations  of  genius  and  the  results  of  conscious  logical
thought.      Just  as  the  calculating  boy  solves  his  problems  by  methods
which  differ  from  the  methods  of  the  trained  mathematician,  so  in  artistic
matters  also  that  "  something  of  strangeness  "  which  is  in  "  all  excellent
beauty,"  may  be  the  expression  of  a  real  difference  between  subliminal  and
supraliminal  modes  of  perception.     I  cannot  help  thinking  that   such  a
difference  is  perceptible  in  subliminal  relations  to  speech ;    that  the  sub-
liminal self  will  sometimes  surpass  conscious  effort,  if  it  is  treating  speech
as  a  branch  of  Art,  in  Poetry ; — or  else  in  some  sense  will  fall  short  of
conscious  effort,  when  it  is  merely  using  words  as  an  unavoidable  medium
to  express  ideas  which  common  speech  was  hardly  designed  to  convey.

Thus,  on  the  one  hand,  when  in  presence  of  one  of  the  great  verbal
achievements  of  the  race — say  the  Agamemnon  of  ^Eschylus — it  is  hard
to  resist  the  obscure  impression  that  some  form  of  intelligence  other  than
supraliminal  reason  or  conscious  selection  has  been  at  work.  The  result
less  resembles  the  perfection  of  rational  choice  among  known  data  than
the  imperfect  presentation  of  some  scheme  based  on  perceptions  which
we  cannot  entirely  follow.

But,  on  the  other  hand,  even  though  words  may  thus  be  used  by
genius  with  something  of  the  mysterious  remoteness  of  music  itself,  it
seems  to  me  that  our  subliminal  mentation  is  less  closely  bound  to  the
faculty  of  speech  than  is  our  supraliminal.  There  is  a  phrase  in  common
use  which  involves  perhaps  more  of  psychological  significance  than  has
yet  been  brought  out.  Of  all  which  we  can  call  genius,  or  which  we  can
ally  with  genius — of  art,  of  love,  of  religious  emotion — it  is  common  to
hear  men  say  that  they  transcend  the  scope  of  speech.

Now,  to  many  persons  this  seems  a  mere  vague  sentimental  ex-
pression. They  hold,  perhaps,  that  language — in  however  inward  and
abbreviated  a  form — is  the  absolutely  necessary  instrument  of  all  definite
thinking.  Or  even  if  they  do  not  insist  upon  this  view  a  priori,  they  con-
sider that  just  as  at  the  opera,  ce  qui  ne  vaut pas  la  peine  d'etre  dit,  on  le
chantc,  so  in  a  more  general  way  the  assertion  that  an  idea  is  not  ex-
pressible in  words,  can  but  mean  that  it  in  some  way  falls  short  of  the
standard  implied  in  articulate  speech.

From  the  point  of  view  of  this  work  no  such  presumption  can  be
formed.  On  the  contrary,  the  relation  to  language  of  the  subliminal
self  is  a  question  which  obviously  stands  in  need  of  special  inquiry.

323.  Let  us  consider  the  position  of  speech  among  human  modes  of

323]  GENIUS  99

self-expression.  The  whole  person  of  one  human  being  is  more  or  less
expressive  to  others  of  his  kind.  In  repose  it  tells  of  action  and  emotion
in  the  past ;  in  movement  it  shows  action  and  emotion  as  now  going
forward.  Gesture — the  way  in  which  the  body  is  held — is  even  now
used  along  with  speech  as  the  most  general  term  for  communication.

Now,  if  we  are  thus  communicating  by  the  movement  of  our  muscles,
we  shall  naturally  seek  out  such  groups  of  muscles  as  we  can  move  the
most  rapidly  and  delicately.  There  are  four  such  groups,  namely:
the  muscles  (i)  of  the  eye  and  orbit;  (2)  of  the  mouth  and  throat;  (3)
of  the  fingers,  and  (4)  of  the  toes.

Three  of  these  groups  we  all  of  us  use.  With  the  muscles  of  the  eye
and  orbit  we  express  emotion ;  with  the  muscles  of  mouth  and  throat
we  express  both  emotion  and  definite  ideas ;  with  the  fingers  we  write ;
and  the  experience  moreover  of  such  men  as  are  born  without  fingers  has
shown  us  that  the  toes  can  be  trained  to  nearly  equal  efficiency ;  as  with
certain  handless  copyists  of  pictures  familiar  for  many  years  now  in  Con-
tinental galleries.

Now  among  many  ways  of  self-expression  which  can  be  educed  from
these  groups  of  muscles,  taken  singly  or  together,  one  great  system  has
dominated  the  rest.  Above  all  things  men  have  needed  definite  sound
to  carry  the  message  to  a  distance  in  space,  and  fixed  record  in  order  to
preserve  it  in  time.  Spoken  language  has  become  an  absolute  necessity
for  any  intellectual  life  much  above  the  level  of  brutes ;  and  written
language — a  symbolic  and  summarised  gesture — has  become  an  absolute
necessity  for  anything  which  we  can  call  civilisation.  The  constant  use
of  throat  and  fingers  for  verbalisation  has  relegated  to  the  background  all
other  forms  of  gesture.

There  is,  however,  no  a  priori  ground  for  supposing  that  language  will
have  the  power  to  express  all  the  thoughts  and  emotions  of  man.  It  may
indeed  be  maintained  that  the  inevitable  course  of  its  development  tends
to  exhibit  more  and  more  clearly  its  inherent  limitations.  "  Every
language,"  it  has  been  said,  "  begins  as  poetry  and  ends  as  algebra."  To
use  the  terms  employed  in  this  work,  every  language  begins  as  a  subliminal
uprush  and  ends  as  a  supraliminal  artifice.  Organic  instincts  impel  to
primitive  ejaculation ;  unconscious  laws  of  mind  shape  early  grammar.
But  even  in  our  own  day— and  we  are  still  in  the  earth's  infancy— this
naivete  of  language  is  fast  disappearing.  The  needs  of  science  and  of
commerce  have  become  dominant.  Science  has  deliberately  created  for
herself  an  arbitrary  system  of  signs  ;— either  actual  arrangements  of  letters
and  numerals,  or  technical  vocabularies,  constructed  on  elaborate  plans.
Commerce  is  endeavouring  to  reach  the  same  algebraical  pitch,  with  book-
keeping, telegraphic  codes,  pidgin  English,  Volapuk  and  the  like.

course,  the  development  of  language  is  not  left  entirely  to  the

counting-house  and  the  laboratory.     In  other  directions  a  spiritualisation

f  human  speech  is  being  pushed  on,  and  our  vocabulary,  based  as  it  is  on

ioo  CHAPTER    III  [324

concrete  objects  and  direct  sensations,  is  refined  for  the  expression  of
philosophical  thought.  But  this  is  as  though  one  were  to  try  to  chip  flint
arrow-heads  into  razors ;  nor  can  we  wonder  if  our  supraliminal  manipula-
tion leaves  us  with  an  instrument  less  and  less  capable  of  expressing  the
growing  complexity  of  our  whole  psychical  being.

324.  What  then,  we  may  ask,  is  the  attitude  and  habit  of  the  subliminal
self  likely  to  be  with  regard  to  language  ?  Is  it  not  probable  that  other
forms  of  symbolism  may  retain  a  greater  proportional  importance  among
those  submerged  mental  operations  which  have  not  been  systematised  for
the  convenience  of  communication  with  other  men  ?

I  think  that  an  intelligent  study  of  visual  and  motor  automatism  will
afford  us  sufficient  proof  that  symbolism,  at  any  rate  pictorial  symbolism,
becomes  increasingly  important  as  we  get  at  the  contents  of  those  hidden
strata.  Telepathic  messages,  especially,  which  form,  as  we  shall  see,  the
special  prerogative  or  characteristic  of  subliminal  communication,  seem  to
be  conveyed  by  vague  impression  or  by  inward  or  externalised  picture
oftener  than  by  articulate  speech.  And  I  may  so  far  anticipate  later  dis-
cussion of  automatic  writings  (whether  self- inspired  or  telepathic),  as  to
point  out  a  curious  linguistic  quality  which  almost  all  such  writings  share.
The  "  messages  "  of  a  number  of  automatists,  taken  at  random,  will  be  sure
to  resemble  each  other  much  more  closely  than  do  the  supraliminal  writings
of  the  same  persons.  Quite  apart  from  their  general  correspondence  in  ideas
— which  belongs  to  another  branch  of  our  subject — there  is  among  the
automatic  writings  of  quite  independent  automatists  a  remarkable  corre-
spondence of  literary  style.  There  is  a  certain  quality  which  reminds
one  of  a  translation,  or  of  the  compositions  of  a  person  writing  in  a
language  which  he  is  not  accustomed  to  talk.  These  characteristics
appear  at  once  in  automatic  script,  even  of  the  incoherent  kind ;  they  per-
sist when  there  is  no  longer  any  dream-like  incoherence ;  they  are  equally
marked,  even  when,  as  often  happens,  the  automatic  script  surpasses  in
intelligence,  and  even  in  its  own  kind  of  eloquence,  the  products  of  the
waking  or  supraliminal  mind.

And  side  by  side  and  intercurrent  with  these  written  messages  come
those  strange  meaningless  arabesques  which  have  been  baptized  as  "  spirit-
drawings  " — though  they  rarely  show  any  clear  trace  of  the  operation  of
an  external  intelligence.  Instances  of  this  form  of  automatism  are  described
in  a  book  called  Spirit  Drawings  :  a  Personal  Narrative,  by  W.  M.  Wil-
kinson, some  account  of  which  is  given  in  Appendix  811  A  (Vol.  II.).
These  complex  and  fanciful  compositions — often  absolutely  automatic —
appear  to  me  like  a  stammering  or  rudimentary  symbolism ;  as  though
the  subliminal  intelligence  were  striving  to  express  itself  through  a  vehicle
perhaps  more  congenial  to  its  habits  than  articulate  language.

325.  Returning,  then,  from  these  illustrations  drawn  from  actual  auto-
matism to  our  proper  subject  of  genius, — that  happy  mixture  of  subliminal
with  supraliminal  faculty — we  may  ask  ourselves  in  what  kind  of  subliminal

326]  GENIUS  101

uprush  this  hidden  habit  of  wider  symbolism,  of  self-communion  beyond
the  limits  of  speech,  will  be  likely  to  manifest  itself  above  the  conscious
threshold.

The  obvious  answer  to  this  question  lies  in  the  one  word  Art.  The
inspiration  of  Art  of  all  kinds  consists  in  the  invention  of  precisely  such  a
wider  symbolism  as  has  been  above  adumbrated.  I  am  not  speaking,  of
course,  of  symbolism  of  a  forced  and  mechanical  kind — symbolism  de-
signed and  elaborated  as  such — but  rather  of  that  pre-existent  but  hidden
concordance  between  visible  and  invisible  things,  between  matter  and
thought,  between  thought  and  emotion,  which  the  plastic  arts,  and  music,
and  poetry,  do  each  in  their  own  special  field  discover  and  manifest  for
human  wisdom  and  joy.

In  using  these  words,  I  must  repeat,  I  am  far  from  adopting  the  formulae
of  any  special  school.  The  symbolism  of  which  I  speak  implies  nothing
of  mysticism.  Nor  indeed,  in  my  view,  can  there  be  any  real  gulf  or  deep
division  between  so-called  realistic  and  idealistic  schools.  All  that  exists
is  continuous ;  nor  can  Art  symbolise  any  one  aspect  of  the  universe  with-
out also  implicitly  symbolising  aspects  which  He  beyond.

326.  And  thus  in  the  Arts  we  have  symbolism  at  every  stage  of  trans-
parency and  obscurity ;  from  symbolisms  which  merely  summarise  speech
to  symbolisms  which  transcend  it.  Sometimes,  as  with  Music,  it  is  worse
than  useless  to  press  for  too  close  an  interpretation.  Music  marches,  and
will  march  for  ever,  through  an  ideal  and  unimaginable  world.  Her
melody  may  be  a  mighty  symbolism,  but  it  is  a  symbolism  to  which  man
has  lost  the  key.  Poetry's  material,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  very  language
which  she  would  fain  transcend.  But  her  utterance  must  be  subliminal
and  symbolic,  if  it  is  to  be  poetry  indeed  ;  it  must  rise  (as  has  been  already
hinted)  from  a  realm  profounder  than  deliberate  speech;  it  must  come
charged,  as  Tennyson  has  it,  with  that "  charm  in  words,  a  charm  no  words
can  give."

This  branch,  indeed,  of  internal  audition, — that  which  involves  com-
plexity rather  than  intensity  of  imagined  sounds, — offers,  so  to  say,  the
richest  opportunities  for  subliminal  manifestation, — the  readiest  vent-holes
for  the  uprush  of  the  hidden  fire.     The  sounds  that  rise  within  our  waking
consciousness  from  a  source  beyond  the  will  do  not  confine  themselves  to
the  mere  shaping  of  scattered  sentences, — the  airy  syllabling  of  phrases
that  tend  to  nought.     There  is  an  inward  consonance,  an  obscure  concent,
which  forms  the  groundwork  of  Poetry,  the  fount  of  Song, — the  cradle
whence  those  "  sphere-born  harmonious  sisters,  Voice  and  Verse,"
in  preformed  divinity  into  the  common  day.     This  is  true  not  only
ng,  strictly  so  termed,  but  also  for  Poetry  unaccompanied  by  music ;
that  is  to  say,  for  interrelations  of  rhythm  and  articulation  taken  apart
interrelations   of  pitch,  definite  time-intervals,  or  timbre.     For  the
poet — as  Goethe  has  somewhere  said — the  melody  of  his  coming
poem  floats  as  a  self-created  and   impalpable  entity  within  him,  before

102  CHAPTER    III  [326

words  have  shaped  themselves  or  thought  itself  is  born.     lo  mi  son  un,
said  a  greater  even  than  Goethe, —

"  lo  mi  son  un,  che  quando
Amore  spira,  noto,  ed  in  quel  modo
Che  detta  dentro,  vo  significando."

And  here  a  reflection  may  be  made  which,  while  it  clears  up  (as  seems
to  me)  an  old  confusion,  will  also  well  illustrate  the  latent  capacities
of  the  subliminal  consciousness ;  its  power  to  convey  potent  and  intimate
messages  through  mechanism  of  the  slenderest  kind.  We  know  that  as
we  advance  from  sounds  non-human  to  human  sounds,  from  sounds  non-
vocal  to  sounds  which  the  human  throat  can  produce,  our  conception  of
any  given  sound  increasingly  needs,  to  make  it  complete,  a  motor  as  well
as  an  auditory  representation  within  us.  Our  grasp,  say,  of  the  word
London  is  imperfect  if  we  cannot  articulate  the  word  with  our  mind's  voice
as  well  as  hear  it  with  our  mind's  ear.

In  all  definite  inward  audition  there  is,  then,  probably  a  motor  element
as  well  as  a  sensory.  And  I  hold  that  one  difference  between  imagined
poetry  and  imagined  music  or  song  lies  in  the  fact  that  imagined  verbal
rhythm  may  be  almost  wholly  motor,  while  imagined  tunes  must  be  largely
sensory  as  well.  To  those,  then,  who  are  perplexed  at  the  fact  that  many
poets  have  lacked  musical  ear  it  may  be  answered  that  the  mental  imagery
of  such  poets  may  have  been  mainly  motile ;  — may  have  consisted  in  a
delicate  imagination  of  such  laryngeal  movements  as  are  concerned  in  the
utterance  of  melodious  speech.  I  believe  that  with  careful  self-observa-
tion many  men  "  with  an  ear  for  verse  "  will  recognise  that  the  essential
part  of  poetic  excitation  has  lain  in  scarcely  perceptible  changes  of  tension
in  the  muscles  of  the  throat.  The  rhythmical  modulations,  indeed,  have
their  birth  beyond  the  will ;  but  it  is  about  that  physical  centre  of  ima-
gined utterance  that  the  emotional  stress  will  gather  and  the  inexplicable
promptings  throng ;  through  that  motor  channel  the  reverberating  tremors
rise  and  fall ; — and  flood  the  flats  of  common  consciousness  as  with  the
earthquake-wave  of  an  unfathomed  sea.

And  there  is  yet  another  and  even  stranger  form  of  inward  audition.
There  exists  among  men  a  mighty  complex  of  conceptions  which  lie  apart
from — some  say  beyond — articulate  speech  and  reasoned  thought.  There
is  a  march  and  uprising  through  ideal  spaces  which  some  hold  as  the
only  true  ascent;  there  is  an  architecture  which  some  count  as  alone
abiding, —

"  seeing  it  is  built

Of  music,  therefore  never  built  at  all,
And,  therefore,  built  for  ever."

Whether  considered  in  regard  to  its  development  in  the  race,  or  to  its
activity  in  the  individual,  Music  resembles  not  so  much  a  product  of
terrene  needs  and  of  natural  selection  as  a  subliminal  capacity  attaining  to

327]  GENIUS  103

an  accidental  manifestation  independently  of  the  requirements  or  of  the
external  stimuli  of  the  supraliminal  self.  We  know  the  difficulty  of
explaining  its  rise  on  any  current  theory  of  the  evolution  of  human  faculty.
We  know  that  it  is  like  something  discovered,  not  like  something  manu-
factured ; — like  wine  found  in  a  walled-up  cellar,  rather  than  like  furniture
made  in  the  workshop  above.  And  the  subjective  sensations  of  the
musician  himself  accord  with  this  view  of  the  essentially  subliminal
character  of  the  gift  with  which  he  deals.  In  no  direction  is  "  genius  "
or  "  inspiration  "  more  essential  to  true  success.  It  is  not  from  careful
poring  over  the  mutual  relations  of  musical  notes  that  the  masterpieces  of
melody  have  been  born.  They  have  come  as  they  came  to  Mozart —
whose  often- quoted  words  I  need  not  cite  again — in  an  uprush  of  unsum-
moned  audition,  of  unpremeditated  and  self-revealing  joy.  They  have
come,  as  to  Browning's  Abt  Vogler,  with  a  sense  of  irrecoverable  com-
mingling of  depths  of  soul  and  heights  of  heaven.1  Translating  the
phrases  of  poetry  into  such  terms  as  we  here  employ,  we  may  say  that  we
have  reached  a  point  where  the  subliminal  uprush  is  felt  by  the  supra-
liminal personality  to  be  deeper,  truer,  more  permanent  than  the  products
of  voluntary  thought.

Here,  too,  we  must  dwell  for  a  moment  upon  another  and  higher
kind  of  internal  visualisation.  I  have  spoken  of  the  arithmetical  prodigy
as  possessing  a  kind  of  internal  blackboard,  on  which  he  inscribes  with
ease  and  permanence  his  imaginary  memoranda.  But  blackboards  are
not  the  only  surfaces  on  which  inscriptions  can  be  made.  There  are
other  men — prodigies  of  a  different  order — whose  internal  tabula  is  not
of  blackened  wood,  but  of  canvas  or  of  marble ;  whose  inscriptions  are
not  rows  of  Arabic  numerals,  but  living  lines  of  colour,  or  curves  of
breathing  stone.  Even  the  most  realistic  art  is  something  more  than
transcript  and  calculation ;  and  for  art's  higher  imaginative  achievements
there  must  needs  be  moments  of  inward  idealisation  when  visible  beauty
seems  but  the  token  and  symbol  of  beauty  unrevealed ;  when  Praxiteles
must "  draw  from  his  own  heart  the  archetype  of  the  Eros  that  he  made  "  ;
when  Tintoret  must  feel  with  Heraclitus  that  "  whatsoever  we  see  waking
is  but  deadness,  and  whatsoever  sleeping,  is  but  dream."

327.  But  when  we  reach  this  point  we  have  begun  (as  I  say)  to  transcend
i-ecial  province  to  which,  in  Chapter  I.,  I  assigned  the  title  of  genius.
re  pointed  out  that  the  influence  of  the  subliminal  on  the  supra-
liminal might  conveniently  be  divided  under  three  main  heads.  When

1  More  definite  than  most  of  the  descriptions  of  this  type  in  musical  literature  are

the  following  words  of  Schumann  (Robert  Schumann's  K  ,  p.  268):   "The

is  getting  too  limited  for  me.     It  is  most  extraordinary  how  I  write  almost  every-

\\  canon,  and  then  only  detect  the  imitation  afterwards, — and  often  find  inversions,

is  in  contrary  motion,  &c."    And  again,  p.  271 :  "I  do  not  realise  all  this  while

"mposing;  it  only  comes  to  me  afterwards  ;  you  who  are  at  the  top  of  the  tree

will  understand  what  I  mean."

104  CHAPTER    III  [328

the  subliminal  mentation  co-operates  with  and  supplements  the  supra-
liminal,  without  changing  the  apparent  phase  of  personality,  we  have
genius.  When  subliminal  operations  change  the  apparent  phase  of
personality  from  the  state  of  waking  in  the  direction  of  trance,  we  have
hypnotism.  When  the  subliminal  mentation  forces  itself  up  through  the
supraliminal,  without  amalgamation,  as  in  crystal-vision,  automatic  writing,
&:c.,  we  have  sensory  or  motor  automatism.  In  accordance  with  this
definition,  the  content  of  the  inspirations  of  genius  is  supposed  to  be  of
the  same  general  type  as  the  content  of  ordinary  thought.  We  have
regarded  genius  as  crystallising  fluid  ideas ;  or,  if  you  will,  as  concen-
trating and  throwing  upwards  in  its  clear  fountain  a  maze  of  subterranean
streams.  But  we  have  not  regarded  it  as  modifying,  in  such  operation,
the  ordinary  alert  wakefulness  of  the  thinker,  nor  as  providing  him  with
any  fresh  knowledge,  obtainable  by  supernormal  methods  alone.

It  is  plain,  however,  that  such  distinctions  as  those  which  I  have
drawn  between  genius,  trance,  automatism,  cannot  possibly  be  rigid  or
absolute.  They  are  distinctions  made  for  convenience  between  different
phases  of  what  must  really  be  a  continuous  process — namely,  the  influence
of  the  Self  below  the  threshold  upon  the  Self  above  it.  Between  each  of
these  definite  phases  all  kinds  of  connections  and  intermediate  stages  must
surely  exist.

Connections  between  trance  and  automatism,  indeed,  are  obvious
enough.  The  difficulty  has  rather  lain  in  their  clear  separation.  Trance,
when  habitual,  is  pretty  sure  to  lead  to  automatic  speech  or  writing.
Automatism,  when  prolonged,  is  similarly  apt  to  induce  a  state  of  trance.

The  links  between  Genius  and  these  cognate  states  are  of  a  less  con-
spicuous kind.  They  do,  however,  exist  in  such  variety  as  to  confirm  in
marked  fashion  the  analogies  suggested  above.

328.  And  first,  as  to  the  connection  between  genius  and  automatism,
one  may  say  that  just  as  anger  is  a  brief  madness,  so  the  flash  of  Genius
is  essentially  a  brief  automatism.

Wordsworth's  moments  of  inspiration,  when,  as  he  says,

"  Some  lovely  image  in  the  song  rose  up
Full-formed,  like  Venus  rising  from  the  sea,"

were  in  effect  moments  of  automatic  utterance ;  albeit  of  utterance  held
fast  in  immediate  co-operation  with  the  simultaneous  workings  of  the
supraliminal  self.  Such  a  sudden  poetic  creation,  like  the  calculating
boy's  announcement  of  the  product  of  two  numbers,  resembles  the  sudden
rush  of  planchette  or  pencil,  in  haste  to  scrawl  some  long-wished-for  word.
Now  extend  this  momentary  automatism  a  little  further.  We  come
then  to  what  is  called  the  faculty  of  improvisation.  How  much  is  meant
by  this  term?  Is  the  extempore  oration,  "the  unpremeditated  lay,"  in
truth  a  subliminal  product?  or  have  we  to  do  merely  with  the  rapid
exercise  of  ordinary  powers?

329]  GENIUS  105

In  the  first  place,  it  is  clear  that  much  of  what  is  called  improvisation
is  a  matter  of  memory.  The  so-called  secondary  automatism  which
enables  the  pianist  to  play  a  known  piece  without  conscious  attention
passes  easily  into  improvisations  which  the  player  himself  may  genuinely
accept  as  original ;  but  which  really  consist  of  remembered  fragments
united  by  conventional  links  of  connection.  Thus  also  the  orator,  "  think-
ing on  his  legs,"  trusts  himself  at  first  to  the  automatic  repetition  of  a  few
stock  phrases,  but  gradually  finds  that  long  periods  flow  unforeseen  and
unremembered  from  his  tongue.

We  thus  get  beyond  the  range  of  stereotyped  synergies,  of  habituations
of  particular  groups  of  nerve-centres  to  common  action.  There  is  some
adaptability  and  invention ;  some  new  paths  are  traversed ;  adjustments
are  made  for  which  no  mere  recurrence  to  old  precedents  will  suffice.

The  problem  here  resembles  that  well-known  difficulty  of  explaining
what  goes  on  during  the  restoration  or  "  substitution  "  of  function  after  an
injury  to  the  brain.  In  that  case,  the  brain-elements  which  remain  un-
injured slowly  assume  functions  which  they  apparently  never  exercised
before, — rearranging  paths  of  cerebral  communication  in  order  to  get  the
old  efficiency  out  of  the  damaged  and  diminished  brain-material.  This
recovery  is  not  rapid  like  an  extemporisation,  but  gradual,  like  a  healing  or
re-growth,  and  it  therefore  does  not  suggest  an  intelligent  control  so  much
as  a  physiological  process,  like  the  re- budding  on  a  certain  preordained
pattern  of  the  severed  claw  of  a  crab.  Of  course  this  restoration  of
brain- functions  is  inexplicable,  as  all  growth  is  at  present  inexplicable.  We
may  call  it  indeed  with  some  reason  the  highest  process  of  human  growth.
So  viewed,  it  forms  a  kind  of  middle  term  between  ordinary  growth  of
bone  or  muscle,  always  on  a  predetermined  plan,  and  that  sudden  creation
of  new  cerebral  connections  or  pathways  which  is  implied  in  an  inspira-
tion of  genius.  Such  a  juxtaposition  need  not  weaken  my  claim  that  the
rations  of  genius  represent  a  co-operant  stream  of  submerged  menta-
fully  as  developed  in  its  own  way  as  the  mentation  of  which  we  are
conscious  above  the  threshold.  The  nature  and  degree  of  subliminal
faculty  must  of  course  be  judged  by  its  highest  manifestations.  And  this
analogy  between  the  hidden  operations  of  genius  and  of  growth  would  rather
support  me  in  regarding  organic  growth  also  as  controlled  by  something
of  intelligence  or  memory,  which  under  fitting  conditions — as  in  the
hypnotic  trance — may  be  induced  to  co-operate  with  the  waking  will.

329.   The  talent  of  improvisation,  which  suggested  these  analogies,  will

sometimes  act  much  more  persistently  than  in  the  case  of  the  orator  or

the  musician.     There  is  reason  to  believe   (both  from  internal  style  and

il  statements)  that  it  plays  a  large  part  in  imaginative  literature

even  of  the  more  commonplace  kind.     And  in  one  instance  at  least  the

•  is,  so  to  term  it,  has  given  birth  to  a  mass  of  literature

which  formed  for  a  generation  one  of  the  most  potent  emotional  elements

iropean  thought.     One  needs  to  know  George  Sand's  life  and  writings

io6  CHAPTER    III  [330

well  before  one  can  venture  to  discriminate  in  her  self-revelations  between
the  ingeniously  false  and  the  naively,  transparently  true.  My  own  belief
is  that,  except  in  certain  cases  where  she  had  an  urgent  motive  for  false-
hood in  self-defence,  she  is  almost  as  veracious  an  introspective  psycho-
logist as  Wordsworth  himself.  Various  passages  from  her  life-history,  one
or  two  of  which  represent  I  believe  actual  fact,  are  corroborated,  or  at
least  not  contradicted,  by  the  statements  of  other  persons  familiar  with  her
methods  of  working.  If  taken  as  accurate,  they  reveal  an  unusual  vigour
and  fertility  of  literary  outflow  going  on  in  an  almost  dream-like  con-
dition ;  a  condition  midway  between  the  actual  inventive  dreams  of
R.  L.  Stevenson  and  the  conscious  labour  of  an  ordinary  man's  com-
position. Or  another  parallel  would  be  the  day-dreaming  habit ;  which,
as  is  well  known,  has  led  in  some  morbid  cases  to  a  bewildering  confusion
between  the  actual  and  the  imaginary  life.

George  Sand's  career  was  not  without  moral  faults ;  but  they  were  the
faults,  not  of  a  morbid,  but  of  a  prepotent  organisation ;  and  they  be-
longed, moreover,  almost  wholly  to  her  early  life.  Throughout  long  years
of  healthy  maturity  and  age  she  formed  a  striking  example  of  the  com-
bination of  enormous  imaginative  productiveness  with  inward  tranquillity
and  meditative  calm.  What  George  Sand  felt  in  the  act  of  composition
was  a  continuous  and  effortless  flow  of  ideas,  sometimes  with  and  some-
times without  an  apparent  externalisation  of  the  characters  who  spoke  in
her  romances.  Turning  now  to  another  author,  as  sane  and  almost  as
potent  as  George  Sand  herself,  we  find  a  phenomenon  which  would  have
suggested  to  us  actual  insanity  if  observed  in  a  mind  less  robust  and
efficient.  If  the  allusions  to  the  apparent  independence  of  Dickens's
characters  which  are  scattered  through  his  letters  be  read  with  our  related
facts  in  view,  it  will  no  longer  be  thought  that  they  are  intended  as  a
mystification.  Mrs.  Gamp,  his  greatest  creation,  spoke  to  him,  he  tells  us
(generally  in  church),  as  with  an  inward  monitory  voice.

330.  And  note  further  that  as  scientific  introspection  develops  we  are
likely  to  receive  fuller  accounts  of  these  concurrent  mental  processes,  these
partial  externalisations  of  the  creatures  of  the  romancer's  brain.  One  such
account,  both  definite  and  elaborate,  has  been  published  by  M.  Binet  in
UAnntc  Psychologique  for  1894,  and  I  summarise  it  here.1

M.  de  Curel,  a  French  dramatist  of  distinction,  while  apparently  quite
unaware  of  the  phenomena  described  either  by  Dickens  or  by  Stevenson,
does  nevertheless  carry  the  waking  experiences  of  the  one  to  a  point  where
they  closely  approach  the  dream-experiences  of  the  other.  M.  de  Curel's
personages,  after  a  period  of  painful  incubation,  seem  to  assume  an  inde-
pendent type  ;  they  carry  on  their  conversations  independently  of  his  will,
nor  need  he  even  keep  his  attention  fixed  on  them.  The  process  of
invention  thus  continues  without  conscious  fatigue.  We  are  here  reminded

1  I? Annie  Psychologique ',  i.  1894,  p.  124,  F.  de  Curel,  par  A.  Binet.

331]  GENIUS  107

of  certain  performances  under  hypnotic  suggestion,  where  mental  or
bodily  feats,  as  play-acting,  are  accomplished  without  effort  or  exhaustion.

M.  de  Curel  is  an  ingenious  and  refined,  if  not  a  widely  popular
dramatist.  His  work  is  of  a  sufficiently  high  class  to  give  real  interest  to
his  careful  and  serious  analysis  of  his  methods,  or  rather  his  experiences
while  working.

He  begins  in  an  ordinary  way,  or  with  even  more  than  the  usual  degree
of  difficulty  and  distress  in  getting  into  his  subject.  Then  gradually  he
begins  to  feel  the  creation  of  a  number  of  quasi-personalities  within  him  ;
—the  characters  of  his  play,  who  speak  to  him ; — exactly  as  Dickens  used
to  describe  Mrs.  Gamp  as  speaking  to  him  in  church.  These  personages
are  not  clearly  visible,  but  they  seem  to  move  round  him  in  a  scene —
say  a  house  and  garden — which  he  also  dimly  perceives,  somewhat  as  we
perceive  the  scene  of  a  dream.  He  now  no  longer  has  the  feeling  of
composition,  of  creation,  but  merely  of  literary  revision ;  the  personages
speak  and  act  for  themselves,  and  even  if  he  is  interrupted  while  writing,
or  when  he  is  asleep  at  night,  the  play  continues  to  compose  itself  in  his
head.  Sometimes  while  out  shooting,  &c.,  and  not  thinking  of  the  play,
he  hears  sentences  rising  within  him  which  belong  to  a  part  of  this  play
which  he  has  not  yet  reached.  He  believes  that  subliminally  the  piece
has  been  worked  out  to  that  further  point  already.  M.  de  Curel  calls
these  minor  duplications  of  personality  a  bourgeonnement  or  budding  of
his  primary  personality ; — into  which  they  gradually,  though  not  without
some  painful  struggle,  re-enter  after  the  play  is  finished.

It  will  be  seen  that  this  account, — contributed  as  serious  evidence,  as
net's  long  article  shows, — is  thoroughly  concordant  with  several  other
cases  already  known  to  us.  It  comes  midway  between  Stevenson's  dreams
and  the  hysteric's  id^es  fixes.

M.  de  Curel's  insistent  ideas  are  self-suggested.  Just  that  power  of
lising  round  a  nucleus  which,  when  hysterically  started,  makes  the
Me  obsedante, — makes,  when  supraliminally  started  and  well  directed,  the
personage  of  the  play.

331.  I  have  thus  far  endeavoured  to  show  that  Genius  represents  not
only  the  crystallisation  of  ideas  already  existing  in  floating  form  in  the  supra-
liminal  intelligence,  but  also  an  independent,  although  concurrent,  stream
of  mentation,  spreading  often  to  wider  range,  although  still  concerned
'with  matters  in  themselves  cognisable  by  the  normal  intelligence.

Let  us  proceed  to  push  the  inquiry  a  step  further.     It  has  been  claimed

in  this  work  for  subliminal  uprushes  generally  that  they  often  contain

edge  which  no  ordinary  method  of  research  could  acquire.     Is  this

npernormal  knowledge — we  ought  now  to  ask — ever  represented  in  the

upnishrs  to  which  we  give  the  name  of  Genius?

What  is  the  relation,  in  short,  of  the  man  of  Genius  to  the  sensitive?

If  the  man  of  Genius  be,  as  I  have  urged,  on  the  whole  the  completest
type  of  humanity,  and  if  the  sensitive's  special  gift  be  in  itself  one  of  the

io8  CHAPTER    III  [332

most  advanced  forms  of  human  faculty,  ought  not  the  inspirations  of
genius  to  bring  with  them  flashes  of  supernormal  knowledge  as  intimate  as
those  which  the  sensitive — perhaps  in  other  respects  a  commonplace  per-
son— from  time  to  time  is  privileged  to  receive  ?

Some  remarkable  instances  of  this  kind  undoubtedly  do  exist.  The
most  conspicuous  and  most  important  of  all  cannot,  from  motives  of
reverence,  be  here  discussed.  Nor  will  I  dwell  upon  other  founders  of
religions,  or  on  certain  traditional  saints  or  sages.  But  among  historical
characters  of  the  first  mark  the  names  of  Socrates  and  of  Joan  of  Arc  are
enough  to  cite.  I  shall  try  in  a  later  chapter  to  show  that  the  monitions
of  the  Daemon  of  Socrates, — the  subliminal  self  of  a  man  of  transcendent
genius, — have  in  all  probability  been  described  to  us  with  literal  truth :
and  did  in  fact  convey  to  that  great  philosopher  precisely  the  kind  of
telaesthetic  or  precognitive  information  which  forms  the  sensitive's  privilege
to-day.  We  have  thus  in  Socrates  the  ideal  unification  of  human  powers.

It  must,  however,  be  admitted  that  such  complete  unification  is  not  the
general  rule  for  men  of  genius ;  that  their  inspirations  generally  stop  short
of  telepathy  or  of  telaesthesia.  I  think  we  may  explain  this  limitation  some-
what as  follows.  The  man  of  genius  is  what  he  is  by  virtue  of  possessing
a  readier  communication  than  most  men  possess  between  his  supraliminal
and  his  subliminal  self.  From  his  subliminal  self,  he  can  only  draw  what
it  already  possesses ;  and  we  must  not  assume  as  a  matter  of  course  that
the  subliminal  region  of  any  one  of  us  possesses  that  particular  sensitivity
— that  specific  transparency — which  can  receive  and  register  definite  facts
from  the  unseen.  That  may  be  a  gift  which  stands  as  much  alone — in
independence  of  other  gifts  or  faculties — in  the  subliminal  region,  as,  say,
a  perfect  musical  ear  in  the  supraliminal.  The  man  of  genius  may  draw
much  from  those  hidden  wells  of  being  without  seeing  reflected  therein
any  actual  physical  scene  in  the  universe  beyond  his  ordinary  ken.

And  yet  neither  must  we  hastily  assume  that  because  the  man  of
genius  gets  no  definite  impression  of  a  world  beyond  our  senses  he  does
not  therefore  get  any  true  impression,  which  is  all  his  own.

I  believe,  on  the  contrary,  that  true,  though  vague,  impressions  of  a
world  beyond  the  range  of  sense  are  actually  received — I  do  not  say  by
all  men  of  genius,  but  by  men  of  genius  of  certain  types.

332.  Certain  very  important  types  of  genius,  indeed, — those,  for
instance,  concerned  with  numbers,  forms,  and  sounds, — do  not  seem
habitually  to  tend  towards  the  apprehension  of  deeper  aspects  of  the
cosmic  mystery.  Or  perhaps  I  ought  rather  to  say  that  the  mathematician,
on  the  one  hand,  is  unlikely  to  give  expression  to  any  such  supernormal
intimations,  while  the  painter  and  the  musician,  on  the  other  hand,  com-
mand acts  of  expression  so  subtly  and  obscurely  suggestive,  that  it  is  hard
for  the  mere  onlooker  to  infer  what  the  artist's  own  spiritual  attitude  may
in  fact  have  been.  Deeply  interesting,  therefore,  as  such  discussions  may
be — discussions  as  to  what  was  the  inward  experience  of  a  Raphael  or  a

333]  GENIUS  109

Beethoven — the  content  of  that  experience  must  at  present  be  too  un-
certain for  any  psychological  analysis,  such  as  we  wish  to  make  here,  of
ritable  truth, — of  its  trustworthiness  as  actual  insight  into  a  spiritual
world.

It  would  seem,  then,  that  for  any  valid  appreciation  of  what  I  may  call
the  vague  supernormal  content  of  moments  of  inspiration,  we  shall  have  to
examine  a  very  limited  group  of  men  of  genius.  Chiefly,  perhaps,  of  the
philosopher  and  the  poet  must  we  needs  feel  that  if  any  genius  reaches
out  into  an  interpenetrating  spiritual  world,  theirs  must  do  so ;  that  they
ought  to  have  some  message  corroborating,  even  though  but  in  vague
general  fashion,  the  results  to  which  sensitives  have  been  led  by  a  plainer,
if  a  narrower,  way.

Even  among  this  small  class,  however,  our  choice  of  instructive
examples  is  still  further  limited.  Few  philosophers  have  been  men  of
genius  in  the  sense  in  which  we  are  using  the  word  in  the  present  chapter ;
and  few  poets  have  spoken  with  enough  of  weight  and  sincerity  to  make
their  testimony  to  subjective  moods  worth  quoting  in  serious  argument.
Yet  it  must  be  mainly  in  the  works  of  poets  of  pronounced  subjective
type — rather  than  in  epos  or  drama — that  passages  to  us  instructive  are
likely  to  be  found.

333.  I  shall  not  attempt  an  anthology  of  such  passages.  We  all
know  that  their  general  tone  supports,  as  far  as  it  goes,  the  thesis  here
advanced : — namely,  that  moments  of  poetical  inspiration  are  apt  to  be
moments  also  of  some  sense  of  insight  or  entrance  into  a  supernal  world.
Most  poets  have  been  Platonists;  their  influence  tends  to  swell  that
ancient  stream  of  idealistic  thought  which  lies  at  the  root  of  all  civilised
religions.

For  our  present  purposes,  however,  one  single  poet — almost  one  single
poem — will  practically  suffice.      In  whatever  rank  Wordsworth  may  be
placed  as  an  artist  in  language,  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  his  con-
scientious veracity  as  an  introspective  psychologist.     "The  Prelude,  or
:h  of  a  Poet's  Mind,"  has  been  regarded  by  some  critics  as  a  tedious
^otistical  poem.     But  whether  or  not  it  is  suited  to  give  wide  poetic
its  value  as  a  "  human  document "  is,  for  our  present  purposes,
.ture  to  say,  unique.     In  Goethe  indeed,  in  Browning,  in  Tennyson
above  all,  we  find  introspective  passages  of  extreme  interest  and  beauty.
10  one  save  Wordsworth — not  even  Goethe — has  treated  his  own
ies  so  seriously  or  on  so  ample  a  scale.      The  "Prelude"  is  a
deliberate,  persistent  attempt  to  tell  the  truth,  the  whole  truth,  and  nothing
but  the  truth,  about  exactly  those  emotions  and  intuitions  which  differen-
common  men.     And  it  must  be  added,  as  a  judgment
>ve  the  ebb  and  flow  of  popular  criticism,  that  Wordsworth
valid  right  to  deal  thus  with   himself  as  a  kind   of  typical  poet.
cr  recognised  coldly  or  enthusiastically,  his  position  is  secure.
It  must  be  remembered,  too,  that  Wordsworth  was  not  only  particularly

no  CHAPTER    III  [333

anxious  to  tell  the  truth  about  himself,  but  particularly  capable  of  doing
so.  His  self-esteem  never  took  the  form  of  making  him  wish  to  appear
other  than  he  was.  As  he  genuinely  was,  so  did  he  clearly  see  himself;
and  although  both  his  experience  and  his  appreciativeness  had  serious
limitations,  yet,  from  a  psychological  point  of  view,  his  limitations  were
rather  advantages.  What  can  we  want  more  than  this  kind  of  sworn
and  unbiassed  deposition  as  to  the  growth  and  content  of  a  mind  which
in  sheer  force  of  what  we  call  original  genius — as  distinguished  from
subtlety,  acquirement,  universality,  and  so  forth — has  hardly  ever  been
surpassed?  Here  was  a  great  motor  force  in  the  world  of  mind;  how
was  that  force  worked  from  inside?

Let  us  begin  with  the  strictly  limited  inquiry  from  which  we  started,
and  let  us  consider  merely  the  description  given  by  this  one  poet  of  the
apparent  content  of  moments  of  profound  inspiration.  We  find  Words-
worth insisting,  in  the  first  place,  upon  the  distinctive  character  of  this
subliminal  uprush.

He  speaks  of  the  "  haze  within,"  which  becomes

"  A  tempest,  a  redundant  energy
Vexing  its  own  creation."

Of  "  imagination  "  he  says  (Book  VI.)  : —

"  That  awful  Power  rose  from  the  mind's  abyss,
Like  an  unfathomed  vapour  that  enwraps,
At  once,  some  lonely  traveller.     I  was  lost ;
Halted  without  an  effort  to  break  through ;
But  to  my  conscious  soul  I  now  can  say —
'  I  recognise  thy  glory  ; '  in  such  strength
Of  usurpation,  when  the  light  of  sense
Goes  out,  but  with  a  flash  that  has  revealed
The  invisible  world,  doth  greatness  make  abode."

This  passage  expresses  in  the  language  of  poetry  the  very  relations
between  the  supraliminal  and  the  subliminal  on  which  I  have  in  this
chapter  dwelt.

The  influence  rises  from  no  discoverable  source;  for  a  moment  it
may  startle  or  bewilder  the  conscious  mind ;  then  it  is  recognised  as  a
source  of  knowledge,  arriving  through  inner  vision ;  while  the  action
of  the  senses  is  suspended  in  a  kind  of  momentary  trance.  The  know-
ledge gained,  however,  is  simply  a  perception  of  "  the  invisible  world  "  ;
there  is  no  claim  to  any  more  definite  revelation.

Concordant  with  this  passage  are  other  descriptions  of  "  these  fleeting
moods  of  shadowy  exultation  "  ;  they  bear  an  unmistakable,  though  hardly
a  translatable  message.  Of  childish  hours  the  poet  says  (Book  I.)  : —

"  Even  then  I  felt

Gleams  like  the  flashing  of  a  shield  ;  the  earth
And  common  face  of  Nature  spake  to  me
Rememberable  things."

335]  GENIUS  in

And  since  it  is  mainly  by  inward  vision  that  these  rememberable
things  are  in  truth  discerned,  there  is  a  growing  fusion  between  subjective
and  objective ;  between  that  which  is  generated  in  the  seer  himself  and
that  of  which  the  visible  universe  conveys  the  half-caught  intimation
(Book  II.)  :—

"  An  auxiliar  light

Came  from  my  mind,  which  on  the  setting  sun
Bestowed  new  splendour."

Or  at  a  still  further  stage  (Book  II.)  :—

"  Bodily  eyes

Were  utterly  forgotten,  and  what  I  saw
Appeared  like  something  in  myself,  a  dream,
A  prospect  in  the  mind."

Thus  it  fares,  Wordsworth  repeats  in  a  later  passage  (Book  XIV.),
with  minds  sustained  by  recognition  of  transcendent  power  : —

"  In  a  world  of  life  they  live,
By  sensible  impressions  not  enthralled,
But  by  their  quickening  impulse  made  more  prompt
To  hold  fit  converse  with  the  spiritual  world."

334.  Vague  though  these  passages  (and  others  like  them)  may  be,
they  nevertheless  carry  more  conviction  than  do  the  more  definite  visions
of  the  saints  and  illumines  of  various  creeds.     The  sane  simplicity  of
Wordsworth  has  been  subject  to  less  of  prepossession ;    he,  if  any  man,
has  kept  his  mind,  as  Bacon  advised,  concentric  to  the  universe ;    and
there    is   nothing    in    his    revelation   which    any   other    revelation   can
invalidate  or  contradict.

A  vague  but  genuine  consciousness  of  the  spiritual  environment ;
that  (it  seems)  is  the  degree  of  revelation  which  artistic  or  philosophic
genius  is  capable  of  conferring.  Subliminal  uprushes,  in  other  words,
so  far  as  they  are  intellectual,  tend  to  become  tdtesthctic.  They  bring
with  them  indefinite  intimations  of  what  I  hold  to  be  the  great  truth
that  the  human  spirit  is  essentially  capable  of  a  deeper  than  sensorial
perception,  of  a  direct  knowledge  of  facts  of  the  universe  outside  the
range  of  any  specialised  organ  or  of  any  planetary  view.

335.  But  this  conclusion  points  the  way  to  a  speculation  more  important
still.     Telsesthesia  is  not  the  only  spiritual   law,  nor  are  subliminal  up-

.  affairs  of   the  intellect  alone.     Beyond    and    above  man's  innate
power  of  world-wide  perception,  there  exists  also  that  universal  link  of
it  which  in  its  minor  earthly  manifestations  we  call  tele-
pathy.    Our  submerged  faculty — the  subliminal  uprushes  of  genius — can
.'1  in  that  direction  as  well  as  in  tlu-  direction  of  telaesthesia.     The
•nal  content,  indeed,  of  those  uprushes  is  even  profounder  and  more
important  than  the  intellectual  ; — in  proportion  as  Love  and  Religion  are
profounder  and  more  important  than  Science  or  Art.

H2  CHAPTER    III  [336

That  primary  passion,  I  repeat,  which  binds  life  to  life,  which  links  us
both  to  life  near  and  visible  and  to  life  imagined  but  unseen ; — that  is  no
mere  organic,  no  mere  planetary  impulse,  but  the  inward  aspect  of  the
telepathic  law.  Love  and  religion  are  thus  continuous  ; — they  represent
different  phases  of  one  all-pervading  mutual  gravitation  of  souls.  .  The
flesh  does  not  conjoin,  but  dissever ;  although  through  its  very  severance
it  suggests  a  shadow  of  the  union  which  it  cannot  bestow.  We  have  to
do  here  neither  with  a  corporeal  nor  with  a  purely  human  emotion.
Love  is  the  energy  of  integration  which  makes  a  Cosmos  of  the  Sum  of
Things.

But  here  there  is  something  of  controversy  to  traverse  before  a  revived
Platonic  conception  of  love  can  hope  to  be  treated  by  the  physiologist  as
more  than  a  pedantic  jest.  And  naturally  so ;  since  there  is  no  emotion
subliminal  over  so  wide  a  range  of  origin, — fed  so  obscurely  by  "all
thoughts,  all  passions,  all  delights," — and  consequently  so  mysterious  even
to  the  percipient  himself.  At  one  end  of  its  scale  love  is  based  upon  an
instinct  as  primitive  as  the  need  of  nutrition ;  even  if  at  the  other  end  it
becomes,  as  Plato  has  it,  the  ep/x^vewv  KCU  SiaTropfl/xeuov,  "  the  Interpreter
and  Mediator  between  God  and  Man."  The  controversy  as  to  the
planetary  or  cosmical  scope  of  the  passion  of  Love  is  in  fact  central  to
our  whole  subject.

336.  It  will  give  clearness  to  the  question  in  dispute  if  I  quote  here  a
strong  expression  of  each  view  in  turn.  For  the  physiological  or  materia-
list conception  of  the  passion  of  love, — where  love's  subliminal  element  is
held  to  be  of  the  organic  type, — set  forth  in  no  light  or  cynical  spirit,  but
with  the  moral  earnestness  of  a  modern  Lucretius,  I  can  turn  to  no  better
authority  than  Professor  Pierre  Janet.  The  passage  which  follows  is  no
mere  boutade  or  paradox ;  it  is  a  kind  of  culminating  expression  of  the
theory  which  regards  the  supraliminal  man  as  the  normal  man,  and
distrusts  all  deep  disturbance  of  his  accustomed  psychical  routine.

It  is  commonly  said  that  love  is  a  passion  to  which  man  is  always  liable,
and  which  may  surprise  him  at  any  moment  of  his  life  from  15  to  75.  This
does  not  seem  to  me  accurate ;  and  a  man  is  not  throughout  all  his  life  and  at
every  moment  susceptible  of  falling  in  love  (de  devenir  amoureux).  When  a
man  is  in  good  physical  and  moral  health,  when  he  has  easy  and  complete
command  of  all  his  ideas,  he  may  expose  himself  to  circumstances  the  most
capable  of  giving  rise  to  a  passion,  but  he  will  not  feel  it.  His  desires  will  be
reasonable  and  obedient  to  his  will,  leading  the  man  only  so  far  as  he  wishes
to  go,  and  disappearing  when  he  wishes  to  be  rid  of  them.  On  the  other  hand
if  a  man  is  morally  below  the  mark  (malade  au  moral),  —  if  in  consequence  of
physical  fatigue  or  excessive  intellectual  work,  or  of  violent  shocks  and  pro-
longed sorrow,  he  is  exhausted,  melancholy,  distracted,  timid,  incapable  of
controlling  his  ideas,  —  in  a  word,  depressed,  — then  he  will  fall  in  love,  or  receive
the  germ  of  some  kind  of  passion,  on  the  first  and  most  trivial  occasion.  .  .  .
The  least  thing  is  then  enough  ;  the  sight  of  some  face,  a  gesture,  a  word,
which  previously  would  have  left  us  altogether  indifferent,  strikes  us,  and

337]  GENIUS  113

becomes  the  starting  point  of  a  long  amorous  malady.  Or  more  than  this,  an
object  which  had  made  no  impression  oil  us,  at  a  moment  when  our  mind  was
healthier  and  not  capable  of  inoculation,  may  have  left  in  us  some  insignificant
memory  which  reappears  in  a  moment  of  morbid  receptivity.  That  is  enough  ;
the  germ  is  sown  in  a  favourable  soil  ;  it  will  develop  itself  and  grow.

There  is  at  first,  as  in  every  virulent  malady,  a  period  of  incubation  ;  the
new  idea  passes  and  repasses  in  the  vague  reveries  of  the  enfeebled  conscious-
ness :  then  seems  for  a  few  days  to  have  disappeared  and  to  leave  the  mind  to
recover  from  its  passing  trouble.  But  the  idea  has  done  its  work  below  the
surface;  it  has  become  strong  enough  to  shake  the  body;  and  to  provoke
movements  whose  origin  lies  outside  the  primary  consciousness.  What  is  the
surprise  of  a  sensible  man  when  he  finds  himself  piteously  returning  beneath
the  windows  of  his  charmer,  whither  his  wandering  feet  have  taken  him  without
his  knowledge ; — or  when  in  the  midst  of  his  daily  work  he  hears  his  lips
murmuring  perpetually  the  well-known  name!  .  .  .  Such  is  passion  in  its
reality ;  not  as  idealised  by  fantastic  description,  but  reduced  to  its  essential
psychological  characteristics.  (L1  Automatisms  Psychologique,  p.  466.)

337.  On  the  other  side  I  will  appeal  to  Plato  himself,  giving  a  brief
sketch  merely  of  one  of  the  leading  passages  (Symposium,  192-212)  where
the  Platonic  conception  of  love  is  set  forth.1

Plato  begins  by  recognising,  as  fully  as  pessimist  or  cynic  could  do,

the  absolute  inadequacy  of  what  is  called  on  earth  the  satisfaction  of  this

profound  desire.     Lovers  who  love  aright  will  feel  that  no  physical  nearness

can  content  them,  but  what  will  content  them  they  cannot  say.     "  Their

soul,"  says  Plato,  "  is  manifestly  desiring  something  else ;  and  what  it  is

she  cannot  tell,  only  she  darkly  prophesies  thereof  and  guesses  it  from

afar.     But  if  Hephaestus  with  his  forging  fire  were  to  stand  beside  that

pair  and  say  :  <  Is  this  what  ye  desire — to  be  wholly  one  ?  to  be  together

by  night  and  day  ? — for  I  am  ready  to  melt  you  together  and  to  make  you

grow  in  one,  so  that  from  two  ye  shall  become  one  only,  and  in  this  life

shall  be  undivided,  and  dying  shall  die  together,  and  in  the  underworld

shall  be  a  single  soul ;  ' — there  is  no  lover  who  would  not  eagerly  accept

the  offer,  and  acknowledge  it  as  the  expression  of  the  unknown  yearning

•he   fulfilment  of  the   ancient   need."     And  through  the  mouth  of

Diotima,   Plato   insists  that  it  is  an  unfailing  sign  of  true  love  that  its

s  are  for  tvcr;  nay,  that  love  may  be  even  defined  as  the  desire

of  the  crerlasting  possession  of  the  good.     And  in  all  love's  acts  he  finds

ipress  of  man's  craving  for  immortality, — for  immortality  whose  only

image  for  us  on  earth  is  the  birth  of  children  to  us  as  we  ourselves

decay, — so  that  when  the  slow  self-renewal  of  our  own  everchanging  bodies

passage  which  follows  some  use  has  been  made  of  Jowett's  translation.     It
that  this  utterance,  unsurpassed  among  the  utterances  of  antiquity,has  been
the  mouth  of  a  woman — the  prophetess  Diotima— with  the  express
I  think,  of  generalising  it,  and  of  raising  it  above  the  region  of  sexual  passion.
s  nothing  else  in  antiquity  resembling  the  position  thus  ascribed  to  Diotima  in
c  to  Socrates,— the  woman  being  represented  as  capable  of  raising  the  highest
•.Humming  the  wisest  soul.
VOI.   I.  H

U4  CHAPTER    III  [337

has  worn  out  and  ceased,  we  may  be  renewed  in  brighter,  younger  bodies
which  we  desire  to  be  born  to  us  from  whomsoever  we  find  most  fair.
"And  then,"  says  Plato,  rising,  as  ever,  from  visible  to  invisible  things,
"  if  active  bodies  have  so  strong  a  yearning  that  an  endless  series  of  lovely
images  of  themselves  may  constitute,  as  it  were,  an  earthly  immortality  for
them  when  they  have  worn  away,  how  greatly  must  creative  souls  desire
that  partnership  and  close  communion  with  other  souls  as  fair  as  they
may  bring  to  birth  a  brood  of  lofty  thoughts,  poems,  statutes,  institutions,
laws, — the  fitting  progeny  of  the  soul  ?

"  And  he  who  in  his  youth  hath  the  need  of  these  things  in  him,  and
grows  to  be  a  godlike  man,  wanders  about  in  search  of  a  noble  and  well-
nurtured  soul ;  and  finding  it,  and  in  presence  of  that  beauty  which  he
forgets  not  night  or  day,  brings  forth  the  beautiful  which  he  conceived
long  ago ;  and  the  twain  together  tend  that  which  he  hath  brought  forth,
and  are  bound  by  a  far  closer  bond  than  that  of  earthly  children,  since  the
children  which  are  born  to  them  are  fairer  and  more  immortal  far.  Who
would  not  choose  to  have  Homer's  offspring  rather  than  any  sons  or
daughters  of  men  ?  Who  would  not  choose  the  offspring  which  Lycurgus
left  behind  him,  to  be  the  very  salvation  of  Lacedaemon  and  of  Greece  ?
or  the  children  of  Solon,  whom  we  call  Father  of  our  Laws  ?  or  of  other
men  like  these,  whether  Greeks  or  barbarians,  who  by  great  deeds  that
they  have  done  have  become  the  begetters  of  every  kind  of  virtue  ? — ay,
and  to  these  men's  children  have  temples  been  set  up,  and  never  to  any
other  progeny  of  man.  ..."

"  He,  then,  who  to  this  end  would  strive  aright,  must  begin  in  youth
to  seek  fair  forms,  and  should  learn  first  to  love  one  fair  form  only,  and
therein  to  engender  noble  thoughts.  And  then  he  will  perceive  that  the
beauty  of  one  fair  form  is  to  the  beauty  of  another  near  akin ;  and  that  if
it  be  Beauty's  self  he  seek,  it  were  madness  not  to  account  the  beauty  of
all  forms  as  one  same  thing ;  and  considering  this,  he  will  be  the  lover  of
all  lovely  shapes,  and  will  abate  his  passion  for  one  shape  alone,  despising
and  deeming  it  but  a  little  thing.  And  this  will  lead  him  on  to  see  that
the  beauty  of  the  soul  is  far  more  precious  than  any  beauty  of  outward
form,  so  that  if  he  find  a  fair  soul,  though  it  be  in  a  body  which  hath  but
little  charm,  he  will  be  constant  thereunto,  and  bring  to  birth  such  thoughts
as  teach  and  strengthen,  till  he  lead  that  soul  on  to  see  the  beauty  of  actions
and  of  laws,  and  how  all  beauty  is  in  truth  akin,  and  the  body's  beauty  is
but  a  little  matter ;  and  from  actions  he  will  lead  him  on  to  sciences,  that
he  may  see  how  sciences  are  fair ;  and  looking  on  the  abundance  of  beauty
may  no  longer  be  as  the  slave  or  bondman  of  one  beauty  or  of  one  law ;
but  setting  sail  into  the  ocean  of  beauty,  and  creating  and  beholding  many
fair  and  glorious  thoughts  and  images  in  a  philosophy  without  stint  or  stay,
he  may  thus  at  last  wax  strong  and  grow,  and  may  perceive  that  there  is
one  science  only,  the  science  of  infinite  beauty.

"  For  he  who  hath  thus  far  had  intelligence  of  love,  and  hath  beheld  all

338]  GENIUS  115

fair  things  in  order  and  aright,- — he  drawing  near  to  the  ena  of  things
lovable  shall  behold  a  BEING  marvellously  fair ;  for  whose  sake  in  truth  it
is  that  all  the  previous  labours  have  been  undergone  :  One  who  is  from
everlasting,  and  neither  is  born  nor  perisheth,  nor  can  wax  nor  wane,  nor
hath  change  or  turning  or  alteration  of  foul  and  fair ;  nor  can  that  beauty
be  imagined  after  the  fashion  of  face  or  hands  or  bodily  parts  and
members,  nor  in  any  form  of  speech  or  knowledge,  nor  as  dwelling  in
aught  but  in  itself;  neither  in  beast  nor  man  nor  earth  nor  heaven  nor  any
other  creature ;  but  Beauty  only  and  alone  and  separate  and  eternal,
which,  albeit  all  other  fair  things  partake  thereof  and  grow  and  perish,
itself  without  change  or  increase  or  diminution  endures  for  everlasting.
And  whoso  being  led  on  and  upward  by  human  loves  begins  to  see  that
Beauty,  he  is  not  far,  I  say,  from  reaching  the  end  of  all.  And  surely
then,  O  Socrates  (said  that  guest  from  Mantinea),  man's  life  is  worth  the
living,  when  he  beholds  that  Primal  Fair ;  which  when  thou  seest  it  shall
not  seem  to  thee  to  be  made  after  the  fashion  of  gold  or  raiment  or  those
forms  of  earth, — whom  now  beholding  thou  art  stricken  dumb,  and  fain,
if  it  were  possible,  without  thought  of  meat  or  drink,  wouldst  look  and
love  for  ever.  What  would  it  be  then,  were  it  granted  to  any  man  to  see
Very  Beauty  clear ; — incorruptible  and  undefiled,  not  mingled  with  colour
or  flesh  of  man,  or  with  aught  that  can  consume  away,  but  single  and
divine?  Could  man's  life,  in  that  vision  and  beatitude,  be  poor  or  low?
or  deemest  thou  not  (said  she),  that  then  alone  it  will  be  possible  for  this
man,  discerning  spiritual  beauty  with  those  eyes  by  which  it  is  spiritually
discerned,  to  beget  no  shadows  of  virtue,  since  that  is  no  shadow  to  which
he  clings,  but  virtue  in  very  truth,  since  he  hath  the  very  Truth  in  his
embrace  ?  and  begetting  and  rearing  Virtue  as  his  child,  he  must  needs
become  the  friend  of  God ;  and  if  there  be  any  man  who  is  immortal,  that
man  is  he."

338.     Between  the  aspects  of  love  here  expressed  in  extreme  terms, —

the  planetary  aspect,  if  I  may  so  term  it,  and  the  cosmical, — the  choice  is

momentous.     I  do  not  indeed  say  that  in  our  estimate  of  love  is  involved

our  estimate  of  Religion ;  for  Religion  should  mean  the  sane  response  of

the  spirit  to  all  that  is  known  of  Cosmic  Law.     But  Religion  in  the  sense

.ch  it  is  often  used, — our  emotional  and  ethical  attitude  towards  Life

n; — this  is  in  reality  too  closely  parallel  to  Platonic  Love  to  allow

the  psychologist  who  denies  reality  in  the  one  to  assume  reality  in  the

other.     I-'or  the  Platonic  lover  the  image  of  the  Beloved  one,— no  longer

ttcr  of  conscious  summons  and  imagination, — has  become  the  in-

:ng  and  instinctive  impulse  to  noble  thought  and  deed.     Even  such

:icis  or  to  a  Theresa  is  the  image  of  the  Divinity  whom  they

;  and  if  they  claim  that  sometimes  in  moments  of  crisis  they  feel

iy,  a  guidance,  a  communicatio  idiomatum  with  the  Divine,  we  may

point  in  reply  to  the  humbler,  but  more  tangible,  evidence  which  assures

us  that  even  between  souls  still  inhabiting  and  souls  who  have  quitted  the

116  CHAPTER    III  [339

flesh  there  may  exist  a  telepathic  intercommunication  and  an  impalpable
confluence  from  afar.

339.  Brief  as  this  survey  has  been,  it  has  served  to  indicate  that  the
psychical   type  to  which  we  have  applied  the  name  of  genius    may  be
recognised  in  every  region  of  thought  and  emotion.     In  each  direction  a
man's  everyday  self  may  be  more  or  less  permeable  to  subliminal  impulses.
The  man  who  is  in  but  small  degree  thus  permeable,  who  acts  uniformly
on  supraliminal  considerations, — on  ratiocination,  as  he  will  say,  and  not
on  impulse, — this  man  is  likely  to  be  safe  in  prudent  mediocrity.     He
subsists  upon  a  part  of  human  nature  which  has  already  been  thoroughly
trained  and  prepared  for  this  world's  work.     The  man,  on  the  other  hand,
who  is  more  readily  permeable  to  subliminal  uprushes,  takes  the  chance
of  wider  possibilities,  and  moves  through  life  on  a  more  uncertain  way.
Nature  rears  such  men  from  seed  and  not  from  cuttings ;  she  does  not
simply  reproduce  the  common  conformation,  but  gives  a  chance  to  what-
ever of  untried  potency  may  lurk  within  the  germ.

But  how  much  may  there  be  which  is  thus  hidden  and  undeveloped?
Within  what  limits  of  variation  may  we  expect  these  psychical  "sports  "
to  find  their  play?  To  help  in  deciding  this  question  we  must  go  back
once  more  to  our  simplest  and,  so  to  say,  diagrammatic  examples  of  genius.

340.  If  I  have  dwelt  at  some  length  on  arithmetical  prodigies,  this  is
not,  of  course,  because  I  regard  this  gift  of  subliminal  computation  as  a  high
form  of  genius,  but  because  the  definiteness  of  the  achievements  presents
some  vague  and  illusive  problems  in  a  comparatively  manageable  form.
Thus  it  is  easier  in  the  case  of  a  Mangiamele  than  in  the  case  of  a  Dante
to  ask  oneself  with  exactness  which  is  the  least  improbable  of  the  con-
ceivable  answers  —  all   of    them   largely   conjectural  —  to   the   question,
"  Whence  did  the  child  get  his  genius?  " — a  question  which  the  evolutionist,
although  he  cannot  solve  it,  must  not  ignore.

It  appears  to  me  that  the  answers  which  have  been  implicitly  or
explicitly  given  to  such  a  question  are  reducible  under  four  main  heads.
I  shall  cite  these  in  the  order  in  which  they  push  the  required  answer
further  and  further  back.  But  the  reader  must  remember  that  there  is
absolutely  no  difference  in  point  of  the  mystery  involved  between  one  reply
and  another.  All  have  to  deal  with  the  same  ultimately  inexplicable  facts,
and  the  most  Lamarckian  of  answers  is  in  reality  as  mystical  as  the  most
Platonic.

( i )  First,  then,  I  place  what  I  have  called  the  Lamarckian  reply, — ac-
cording to  which  the  eminent  capacity  of  the  individual  under  discussion
was  inherited  from  the  acquired  capacities  of  self-improving  ancestors.  To
this  we  must  here  answer  that  even  assuming  acquired  characteristics  to
be  inheritable,  there  were  as  a  rule  no  such  acquired  capacities  for  our
prodigies  to  inherit.  Mangiamele  the  father,  the  rough  Sicilian  peasant,
who  did  not  teach  his  son  his  letters ;  Mondeux  the  father,  the  wood-
cutter of  Tours,  who  did  not  teach  his  son  the  numerals, — these  were  not

340]  GENIUS  117

men  who  had  developed  their  mathematical  gifts  as  the  Lamarckian
giraffe  developed  the  bones  of  his  neck.  The  only  case  where  heredity
could  be  pleaded  is  that  of  the  younger  (not  of  the  elder)  Bidder — unless
we  count  under  this  head  the  pre-natal  suggestion  which  Mr.  Blyth  believes
to  have  been  efficacious  in  his  own  and  his  brother's  case.

(2)  Next  comes  the  reply  which  I  suppose  would  now  be  commonly
given,  and  which,  to  avoid  the  ambiguities  of  the  word  Darwinian,  I  will
call  the  protoplasmic  solution.     Mangiamele's  gift,  in  this  view,  was  a  sport
or  by-product  occurring  in  the  course  of  evolution, — a  new  quality  derived
from  old  qualities    not    obviously    resembling   it.     It  was  one  of  those
favourable   spontaneous   variations   of  which  natural   selection   has  often
been  able  to  take  advantage ;  and  whose  occasional  unpredictable  occur-
rence has  raised  our   race  to  its  present  level.     Now  the  cause  of  such
sports,  I  need  not  say,  Darwin  expressly  leaves  unexplained.     All  that  he
says  is  that  to  sport  in  this  way  is  characteristic  of  living  matter.     Sudden
differentiation  in  unpredictable    directions    must,   in  short,   be    a   latent
capacity  of  protoplasm ;  and   the   explanation    of  Mangiamele's   gift    is
virtually  referred  to  the  nature  of  the  stock  of  protoplasm  with  which  his
earliest  ancestors  started  operations.

This  answer  has  the  logical  advantage  over  the  Lamarckian  answer
(which,  of  course,  at  bottom  is  protoplasmic  also),  that,  being  hardly  more
than  a  mere  restatement  of  the  facts,  it  cannot  help  being  true  so  far  as  it
goes.  But  it  does  not  supply,  and  was  not  propounded  by  Darwin  as
supplying  an  explanation  of  the  ultimate  source  of  faculty,  but  only  of
certain  incidents  in  its  terrene  development.

(3)  In  direct  contrast  to  these   terrene  explanations  comes  the  pre-
terrene  explanation  of  Plato.     A  man  learns  geometrical   truths  easily,
Plato  said,   because   in   reality   he    is   only  remembering  them.      He  is
remembering  them  because  he  learnt  them  originally  in  the  ideal  world,
before  his  incarnation  "  in  this  body,  which  is  our  tomb."     One  wishes
that  Plato  had  had  the  facts  now  before  us  to  work  up  into  a  dialogue,
'•"  Dase  or  Inspiration."     If  he   thought  his   hypothesis  of  reminiscence
necessary  in  order  to  explain   the  mental  effort  of  an  intelligent  adult

ring  such  startling  novelties  as  are  now  contained  in  the  first  books

-.did — what  would  he  have  said  of  Pascal,  who  Trats  €<W  aOvpe  /txeyaAa
Ipya,  sported  with  cosmic  laws  in  childish  play ;  of  Gauss  flinging  down

ue  with  the  answer  alone  written  upon  it — "  Da  liegt  es  !  " — the
moment  that  the  master  had  dictated  the  question  which  was  to  occupy

iss  for  an  hour ;  or  above  all,  as  I  say,  of  the  crass  and  stolid  Dase,
as  it  were  an  idiot  supported  from  the  Prytaneum,  to  declare  secrets  which
the  gods  hail  hid  from  men?

(4)  lastly,  the  view  which  I  am  here  suggesting  is  in  some  sort  a

t"  the  old   Platonic   "  reminiscence,"  in  the  light  of  that  fuller

dpc  which  is  common  property  to-day.     I  hold,  of  course,  that  in

the  protoplasm  or  primary  basis  of  all  organic  life  there  must  have  been

n8  CHAPTER    III  [341

an  inherent  adaptability  to  the  manifestation  of  all  faculties  which  organic
life  has  in  fact  manifested.  I  hold,  of  course,  that  sports  or  variations
occur,  which  are  at  present  unpredictable,  and  which  reveal  in  occasional
offspring  faculties  which  their  parents  showed  no  signs  of  possessing.  But
I  differ  from  those  who  hold  that  the  faculty  itself  thus  manifested  is  now
for  the  first  time  initiated  in  that  stock  by  some  chance  combination  of
hereditary  elements.  I  hold  that  it  is  not  initiated,  but  only  revealed ;
that  the  "  sport "  has  not  called  a  new  faculty  into  being,  but  has  merely
raised  an  existing  faculty  above  the  threshold  of  supraliminal  consciousness.

This  view,  if  pushed  back  far  enough,  is  no  doubt  inconsistent  with  the
way  in  which  evolution  is  generally  conceived.  For  it  denies  that  all
human  faculties  must  have  been  evoked  by  terrene  experience.  It  assumes
a  subliminal  self,  with  unknown  faculties,  originated  in  some  unknown  way,
and  not  merely  by  contact  with  the  needs  which  the  terrene  organism  has
had  to  meet.  It  thus  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  introducing  a  new  mystery,
and  to  be  introducing  it  in  a  gratuitous  way.

To  this  I  reply  in  the  first  place  that  so  far  as  the  origin  of  man's  known
powers  is  concerned,  no  fresh  mystery  is  in  fact  introduced.  All  human
powers,  to  put  the  thing  broadly,  have  somehow  or  other  to  be  got  into
protoplasm  and  then  got  out  again.  You  have  to  explain  first  how  they
became  implicit  in  the  earliest  and  lowest  living  thing,  and  then  how  they
have  become  thus  far  explicit  in  the  latest  and  highest.  All  the  faculties
of  that  highest  being,  I  repeat,  existed  virtually  in  the  lowest,  and  in  so
far  as  the  admitted  faculties  are  concerned  the  difference  between  my  view
and  the  ordinary  view  may  be  said  to  be  little  more  than  a  difference  as  to
the  sense  which  that  word  virtually  is  here  to  assume.

341.  The  real  difference  between  the  two  views  appears  when  the  facul-
ties which  I  have  called  unknown  come  to  be  considered.  If  they  are  held
to  be  real,  my  view  is  certainly  the  better  able  to  embrace  them.  I  hold
that  telepathy  and  telaesthesia  do  in  fact  exist — telepathy,  a  communication
between  incarnate  mind  and  incarnate  mind,  and  perhaps  between  incarnate
minds  and  minds  unembodied  ;  telsesthesia,  a  knowledge  of  things  terrene
which  overpasses  the  limits  of  ordinary  perception,  and  which  perhaps  also
achieves  an  insight  into  some  other  than  terrene  world.  And  these  faculties,
I  say,  cannot  have  been  acquired  by  natural  selection,  for  the  preservation
of  the  race,  during  the  process  of  terrene  evolution ;  they  were  (as  we  may
phrase  it)  the  products  of  extra-terrene  evolution.  And  if  they  were  so,
man's  other  powers  may  well  have  been  so  also.  The  specialised  forms  of
terrene  perception  were  not  real  novelties  in  the  universe,  but  imperfect
adaptations  of  protoplasm  to  the  manifestation  of  the  indwelling  general
perceptive  power.  The  mathematical  faculty,  for  instance  (we  may,  per-
haps, say  with  Plato),  pre-existed.  When  Dase  solved  all  those  sums  in
his  head,  his  power  of  solving  them  was  not  a  fresh  development  in  his
ancestral  stock,  but  depended  on  the  accidental  adaptation  of  his  organism
to  the  manifestation  of  the  indwelling  computative  power.  I  do  not  indeed

342]  GENIUS  119

venture  to  follow  Plato  in  his  ontogenetic  argument — his  claim  that  the
individual  computator  has  had  already  an  individual  training  in  com-
putation. I  do  not  say  that  Dase  himself  learnt  or  divined  the  multipli-
cation-table in  some  ideal  world.  I  only  say  that  Dase  and  all  the  rest
of  us  are  the  spawn  or  output  of  some  unseen  world  in  which  the  multipli-
cation-table is,  so  to  speak,  in  the  air.  Dase  trailed  it  after  him,  as  the
poet  says  of  the  clouds  of  glory,  when  he  "  descended  into  generation  "  in
a  humble  position  at  Hamburg.

In  him  and  in  his  ancestors  were  many  faculties  which  were  called  out
by  the  struggle  for  existence,  and  became  supraliminal.  But  there  were
many  faculties  also  which  were  not  thus  called  out,  and  which  consequently
remained  subliminal.  To  these  faculties,  as  a  rule,  his  supraliminal  self
could  get  no  access.  But  by  some  chance  of  evolution — some  sport — a
vent-hole  was  opened  at  this  one  point  between  the  different  strata  of  his
being,  and  a  subliminal  uprush  carried  his  computative  faculty  into  the
open  day.

Two  things,  of  course,  are  assumed  in  this  argument  for  which
Science  offers  no  guarantee.  I  assume  in  the  man  a  soul  which  can  draw
strength  and  grace  from  a  spiritual  Universe,  and  conversely  I  assume  in
the  Universe  a  Spirit  accessible  and  responsive  to  the  soul  of  man.  These
are  familiar  postulates.  Every  religion  has  claimed  them  in  turn ;  although
every  religion  in  turn  has  so  narrowed  their  application  as  grievously  to
narrow  the  evidence  available  for  their  support.  But  that  which  religions
have  claimed  for  their  Founders  or  for  their  Saints — and  what  is  sanctity
but  the  genius  of  the  ethical  realm? — Psychology  must  claim  for  every
form  of  spiritual  indrawing,  every  form  of  spiritual  response ;  for  sleeping
vision,  for  hypnotic  rejuvenation,  for  sensory  and  motor  automatisms,  for
trance,  for  ecstasy.  The  philosopher  who  has  cried  with  Marcus  Aurelius
icr  Providence  or  atoms  !  " — who  has  declared  that  without  this  basis
in  the  Unseen,  "  the  moral  Cosmos  would  be  reduced  to  a  Chaos  "  ; —
should  he  not  welcome  even  the  humblest  line  of  research  which  fain
would  gather  from  every  unsolved  problem  some  hint  as  to  the  spiritual
mknown  which  in  time  may  give  the  solution  of  all?

342.  We  know  not  in  what  directions — directions  how  definitely  pre-
determined— even  physical  organisms  can  vary  from  the  common  type.  We
know  not  what  amount  of  energy  any  given  plant  or  animal  can  absorb  and
incorporate  from  earth  and  air  and  sun.  Still  less  can  we  predict  or  limit
the  possible  variations  of  the  soul,  the  fulness  which  it  may  receive  from
the  World-Soul,  its  possible  heritage  of  grace  and  truth.  But  in  genius  we
can  watch  at  each  stage  the  processes  of  this  celestial  nurture.  We  can
lie  outlook  of  joyous  trustfulness ;  we  can  almost  seem,  with
worth,  to  remember  the  child's  soul  entering  into  the  Kingdom  of
Childhood  is  genius  without  capacity ;  it  makes  for  most  of  us
>est  memory  of  inspiration,  and  our  truest  outlook  upon  the  real,
which  is  the  ideal,  world.

120  CHAPTER    III  [343

343.  From  a  greater  distance  we  can  watch  the  inward  stir  of  mighty
thought,  the  same  for  yEschylus,  for  Newton,  for  Virgil ; — a  stir  indepen-
dent of  worldly  agitation ;  like  the  swing  and  libration  of  the  tide-wave
across  the  ocean,  which  takes  no  note  of  billow  or  of  storm.

Nay,  we  can  see  against  the  sun  "  the  eagle  soaring  above  the  tomb  of
Plato,"  and  in  Paul,  as  in  Plotinus,  we  can  catch  that  sense  of  self-fulfil-
ment in  self-absorption,  of  rapture,  of  deliverance,  which  the  highest  minds
have  bequeathed  to  us  as  the  heritage  of  their  highest  hours.

These  our  spiritual  ancestors  are  no  eccentrics  nor  degenerates ;  they
have  made  for  us  the  sanest  and  most  fruitful  experiment  yet  made  by
man ;  they  have  endeavoured  to  exalt  the  human  race  in  a  way  in  which
it  can  in  truth  be  exalted ;  they  have  drawn  on  forces  which  exist,  and  on
a  Soul  which  answers ;  they  have  dwelt  on  those  things  "  by  dwelling  on
which  it  is,"  as  Plato  has  it,  "  that  even  God  is  divine."

401]

CHAPTER    IV

SLEEP

oA/?ia  8'  aVa^TCS  aura  Awwrovov  /ACTaviWovrai  TcAevrav.

KCU  (ru>fta  /xcv  Travroav  eTrcrat  0avaVa>  Trepurflevcr,

£u>ov  8'  tri  Ae'tTierai  aiaivos  €i8a>Aov  *   TO  yap  eori  /xovov

€<  0€a>v*  euSet  Sc  Trpcunrdnru)!'  /xeAcwv,  drap  cvSovreoxTtv  ev  TroAAots  ovctpots

&€LKw<rt  T€pTTvH)v  tyepTTOUTdv  ^aAeTraiv  TC  Kpuriv.

— PINDAR.

400.  The  preceding  chapters  have  carried  us  two  steps  upon  our  way.
In  Chapter  II.  we  gained  some  insight  into  the  structure  of  human  person-
ality by  analysing  some  of  the  accidents  to  which  it  is  subject ; — the  insistent
ideas,  the  hysterical  instabilities,  the  splits  and  alternations  which  seem
to  destroy  that  inward  unity  to  the  sense  of  which  we  instinctively  cling.
In  the  third  chapter  we  viewed  this    personality   in   its   normal  waking
state,  and  considered  how  that  norm   should   be  defined,  and   in  what
manner  certain  fortunate  persons  had  extended  the  grasp  of  that  inward
concentration,  and  had  integrated  the  personality  still  further  by  utilising
uprushes  of  subliminal  faculty  to  supplement  or  to  crystallise  the  products
of  supraliminal  thought.

The  review  of  these  two  chapters  indicates  clearly  enough  what  my
next  step  must  be.  It  is  obvious  that  in  my  review  of  phases  or  alterna-
of  personality  I  have  left  out  of  sight  the  most  constant,  the  most
important  alternation  of  all.  I  have  thus  far  said  nothing  of  sleep.  Yet
that  change  of  personality,  at  least,  has  been  borne  in  on  every  one's
notice ; — not,  certainly,  as  a  morbid  curiosity,  but  as  an  essential  part
of  life.

Sleep  must  assuredly  now  be  studied,  and  from  two  points  of  view.

yarding  sleep  as  an  alternating  phase  of  personality,  we  must  con-
sider what  are  its  special  characteristics  and  faculties.     Regarding  it  as  an
integral  factor  in  our  earthly  existence,  and  on  an  equal  footing  with  the
ig  state,  we  must  consider  how  the  faculties  of  sleep,  as  of  waking.
can  be  improved  and  concentrated  in  the  course  of  the    physical  and
psychical  evolution  of  man.     Such  improvement  or  concentration,  how-
'ipposes  a  comprehension  of  the  true  nature  of  sleep  which  we
are  by  no  means  entitled  to  take  for  granted.

401.  First,  then,  let  us  consider  the  specific  characteristics  of  sleep.

121

122  CHAPTER     IV  [402

The  definition  of  sleep  is  an  acknowledged  crux  in  physiology.  And  I
would  point  out  that  the  increased  experience  of  hypnotic  sleep  which
recent  years  have  afforded  has  made  this  difficulty  even  more  striking  than
before.  A  physiological  explanation  must  needs  assume  that  some  special
bodily  condition, — such,  for  instance,  as  the  clogging  of  the  brain  by
waste- products, — is  at  least  the  usual  antecedent  of  sound  sleep.  But  it  is
certain,  on  the  other  hand,  that  with  a  large  percentage  of  persons  pro-
found and  prolonged  sleep  can  be  induced,  in  any  bodily  condition,  by
simple  suggestion.  Hypnosis,  indeed  (as  Wetterstrand  and  others  have
shown)  may  be  prolonged,  with  actual  benefit  to  the  sleeper,  far  beyond
the  point  which  the  spontaneous  sleep  of  a  healthy  subject  ever  reaches.
A  good  subject  can  be  awakened  and  thrown  into  hypnosis  again  almost
at  pleasure,  and  independently  of  any  state  either  of  nutrition  or  of
fatigue.  Such  sleep  belongs  to  those  phenomena  which  we  may  call
nervous  if  we  will,  but  which  we  can  observe  or  influence  from  the
psychological  side  alone.

402.  We  can  hardly  hope,  from  the  ordinary  data,  to  arrive  at  a
definition  of  sleep  more  satisfactory  than  others  have  reached.  We
must  defer  that  attempt  until  we  have  collected  something  more  than  the
ordinary  evidence  as  to  what  occurs  or  does  not  occur  during  the
abeyance  of  waking  life.  One  point,  however,  is  plain  at  once.  We
cannot  treat  sleep, — as  it  has  generally  been  treated, — in  its  purely
negative  aspect.  We  cannot  be  content  merely  to  dwell,  with  the  common
text-books,  on  the  mere  absence  of  waking  faculties  ; — on  the  diminution
of  external  perception,  the  absence  of  controlling  intelligence.  We  must  treat
sleep  positively,  so  far  as  we  can,  as  a  definite  phase  of  our  personality,
co-ordinate  with  the  waking  phase.  Each  phase,  as  I  believe,  has  been
differentiated  alike  from  a  primitive  indifference ; — from  a  condition  of  lowly
organisms  which  merited  the  name  neither  of  sleep  nor  of  waking.  Nay,
if  there  were  to  be  a  contest  as  to  which  state  should  be  deemed  primary
and  which  secondary,  sleep  might  put  forward  its  claim  to  be  regarded  as
the  more  primitive  phase.  It  is ''sleep  rather  than  vigilance  which  pre-
natal and  infantile  life  suggest ;  and  even  for  us  adults,  however  much  we
may  associate  ourselves  in  thought  with  the  waking  state  alone,  that  state
has  at  least  thus  much  of  secondary  and  adventitious  that  it  is  maintained
for  short  periods  only,  which  we  cannot  artificially  lengthen,  being  plainly
unable  to  sustain  itself  without  frequent  recourse  to  that  fuller  influx  of
vitality  which  slumber  brings.

Out  of  slumber  proceeds  each  fresh  arousal  and  initiation  of  waking
activities.  What  other  activities  may  in  slumber  be  aroused  and  initiated
the  evidence  to  be  set  forth  in  this  chapter  should  help  us  to  say.  To
some  extent  at  least  the  abeyance  of  the  supraliminal  life  must  be  the
liberation  of  the  subliminal.  To  some  extent  the  obscuration  of  the  noon-
day glare  of  man's  waking  consciousness  must  reveal  the  far-reaching
faint  corona  of  his  unsuspected  and  impalpable  powers.

404]  SLEEP  123

403.  Entering,  then,  upon  a  review  of  sleeping  faculty,  thus  inevitably
imperfect,  we  may  best  begin  from  the  red  end  of  our  spectrum  of  con-
sciousness ; — the   red  end,   which  represents   the  deepest  power  which
waking  effort  can  exert  upon  our  physical  organism.

Our  survey  of  the  efficacy  of  sleep,  indeed,  must  make  its  beginning
beyond  that  limit.  For  assuredly  in  sleep  some  agency  is  at  work  which
far  surpasses  waking  efficacy  in  this  respect.  It  is  a  fully  admitted,  although
an  absolutely  unexplained  fact,  that  the  regenerative  quality  of  healthy
sleep  is  something  sui  generis,  which  no  completeness  of  waking  quies-
cence can  rival  or  approach.  A  few  moments  of  sleep — a  mere  blur
across  the  field  of  consciousness — will  sometimes  bring  a  renovation  which
hours  of  lying  down  in  darkness  and  silence  would  not  yield.  A  mere
bowing  of  the  head  on  the  breast,  if  consciousness  ceases  for  a  second  or
two,  may  change  a  man's  outlook  on  the  world.  At  such  moments, — and
many  persons,  like  myself,  can  fully  vouch  for  their  reality, — one  feels  that
what  has  occurred  in  one's  organism, — alteration  of  blood-pressure,  or
whatever  it  be, — has  been  in  some  sense  discontinuous  ;  that  there  has  been
a  break  in  the  inward  r/gime,  amounting  to  much  more  than  a  mere  brief
ignoring  of  stimuli  from  without.  The  break  of  consciousness  is  associated
in  some  way  with  a  potent  physiological  change.  That  is  to  say,  even  in
the  case  of  a  moment  of  ordinary  sleep  we  already  note  the  appearance  of
that  special  recuperative  energy  which  is  familiar  in  longer  periods  of  sleep,
and  which,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  reaches  a  still  higher  level  in  hyp-
notic trance.

404.  This  recuperative  power,  then,  lies  just  beyond  the  red  end  of
our   spectrum  of  waking  faculty.     In  that  obscure  region  we  note  only
added  power ;  an  increased  control  over  organic  functions  at  the  founda-
tion of  bodily  life.     But  when  we  pass  on  within  the  limits  of  our  spectrum
of  waking   consciousness ; — when    we   come  to   control   over  voluntary
muscles,  or  to  sensory  capacity,  we  find  that  our  comparison  between
sleeping  and  waking  faculty  is  no  longer  a  simple  one.     On  the  one  hand,
there  is  of  course  a  general  blank  and  abeyance  of  control  over  the  realm

king  energies; — or  in  partial  sleep  a  mere  fantastic  parody  of  those
energies  in  incoherent  dream.  On  the  other  hand,  we  find  that  sleep  is
capable  of  strange  developments, — and  that  night  can  sometimes  suddenly
outdo  the  most  complex  achievements  of  day.

Take  first  the   degree    of  control   over  the   voluntary   muscles.     In

try  sleep  this  is  neither  possessed  nor  desired  ;  in  nightmare  its  loss
is  exaggerated,  in  quasi-hysterical  fashion,  into  an  appalling  fear;  while  in
somnambulism, — a  kind  of  new  personality  developed  ad  hoc, — the  sleeper
(as  we  shall  see  later  on)  walks  on  perilous  ridges  with  steady  feet.  I  have

:y  s:iid  that  morbid  somnambulism  bears  to  sound  sleep  a  relation
something  like  that  which  hysteria  bears  to  normal  life.  But  between  the
healthy  somnambulist  and  the  subject  of  nightmare  we  find  from  another
point  of  view  a  contrast  resembling  that  between  the  man  of  genius  and  the

124  CHAPTER    IV  [405

hysteric.  The  somnambulist,  like  the  man  of  genius,  brings  into  play
resources  which  are  beyond  ordinary  reach.  On  the  other  hand,  just  as
in  many  hysterics  certain  ordinary  powers  of  movement  have  lapsed  below
voluntary  control,  so  also  the  dreamer  who  dimly  wishes  to  move  a  con-
strained limb  is  often  unable  to  send  thither  a  sufficient  current  of  motor
energy  to  effect  the  desired  change  of  position.  That  nightmare  inability
to  move,  which  we  thus  feel  in  dream, — "  when  neither  he  that  fleeth  can
flee,  nor  he  that  pursueth  pursue," — that  sensation  which  both  Homer  and
Virgil  have  selected  as  the  type  of  paralysing  bewilderment,1 — this  is  just
the  aboulia  of  the  hysteric ; — the  condition  when  it  takes  a  man  half-an-
hour  to  put  on  his  hat,  or  when  a  woman  sits  all  the  morning  looking  at
her  knitting,  but  unable  to  add  a  stitch.

"Somnambulism,"  however,  is  too  vague  and  undefined  a  term  for
our  present  discussion.  It  will  only  be  by  a  comparison  with  hypnotism,
in  the  next  chapter,  that  we  can  hope  to  get  some  clearer  notion  of
"  sleep-waking  "  states.

405.  Let  us  pass  on  to  consider  entencephalic  sensory  faculty, —
"  mind's  eye  "  faculty, — as  shown  in  sleep  or  dream.  Here  too  we  shall
find  the  same  rule  to  prevail  as  with  motor  faculty.  That  is  to  say,  on
the  whole  the  sensory  faculty  is  of  course  dimmed  and  inhibited  by  sleep ;
but  there  are  nevertheless  indications  of  a  power  subsisting  as  vividly  as
ever,  or  with  even  added  acuteness.

There  seems,  of  course,  at  first  sight,  something  of  paradox  in  expect-
ing hyperaesthesia  from  somnolence; — vivid  sensation  from  a  condition
usually  described  as  a  progressive  dulling  or  subsidence  of  one  sense  after
another.  'And,  naturally,  it  will  be  in  the  generation  of  internal  rather
than  in  the  perception  of  external  imagery  that  we  may  expect  to  find  the
closed  eye  active, —

opSavra  Xa/iTrpoi/  cV  O-KOTO)  va)p.a>vr  o(f)pi>v.

There  is  in  fact  a  phenomenon,  by  no  means  uncommon,  and  very
conspicuous,  which,  like  many  other  human  phenomena  whose  interest  is
really  scientific  rather  than  therapeutic,  remained  unnoticed  by  science
until  a  very  recent  date.  Baillarger  in  France  and  Griesinger  in  Germany
(both  about  1845)  were  among  the  first  to  call  attention  to  the  vivid
images  which  rise  before  the  internal  vision  of  many  persons,  between
sleep  and  waking.  M.  Alfred  Maury,  the  well-known  Greek  scholar  and
antiquary,  gave  to  these  images  a  few  years  later  the  title  of  illusions
hypnagogiques,  and  published  a  remarkable  series  of  observations  upon
himself.  Mr.  Galton  has  further  treated  of  them  in  his  Inquiry  into
Human  Faculty ;  and  cases  will  be  found  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living
vol.  i.  pp.  390,  473,  &c.

These  visions  may  be  hypnopompic  as  well  as  hypnagogic  ; — may  appear,
that  is  to  say,  at  the  moment  when  slumber  is  departing  as  well  as  at  the

1  Iliad,  xxii.  199  ;  sErteid,  xii.  908.

407]  SLEEP  125

moment  when  it  is  coming  on ; — and  in  either  case  they  are  closely  related
to  dreams ;  the  "  hypnagogic  illusions  "  or  pictures  being  sometimes  re-
peated in  dream  (as  with  Maury),  and  the  hypnopompic  pictures  consist-
ing generally  in  the  persistence  of  some  dream-image  into  the  first
moments  of  waking.  In  either  case  they  testify  to  an  intensified  power
of  inward  visualisation  at  a  very  significant  moment ; — a  moment  which  is
actually  or  virtually  one  of  sleep,  but  which  yet  admits  of  definite  com-
parison with  adjacent  moments  of  waking.  We  may  call  the  condition
one  of  cerebral  or  "  mind's  eye  "  hyperaesthesia, — an  exalted  sensibility  of
special  brain-centres  in  response  to  those  unknown  internal  stimuli  which
are  always  giving  rise  to  similar  but  fainter  inward  visions  even  in  broadly
waking  hours.

For  those  who  are  already  good  visualisers  such  phenomena  as  these,
though  striking  enough,  present  no  quite  unique  experience.  For  bad
visualisers,  on  the  other  hand,  the  vividness  of  these  hypnagogic  pictures
may  be  absolutely  a  revelation.  For  myself,  I  may  say  that  were  it  not
for  an  occasional  flash  of  this  kind  between  sleep  and  waking,  I  should
be  unable  to  conceive  what  good  visualisation  really  is.  The  dim,
blurred,  unstable  images  which  are  all  that  my  waking  will  can  summon
up  are  every  now  and  then  replaced  in  a  moment  of  somnolence  by  a
picture — say  of  a  wet  hedge  in  the  sun — which  seems,  to  my  hurried
glance,  to  be  absolutely  as  clear  and  brilliant  as  the  object  itself  could  be.
The  difference  is  like  that  between  an  instantaneous  photograph  (and  in
natural  colours  !)  and  a  dim  dissolving  view  cast  by  a  magic  lantern  on
the  point  of  going  out.  Many  men  must  have  had  this  experience  ;  and
must  have  been  struck  with  the  unguessed  reserve  of  faculty  which  for  a
moment  was  thus  revealed.

406.  Equally  remarkable   are  the  hypnopompic  pictures,  as  I  have
termed  them ;  those,  namely,  which  accompany  the  departure  of  sleep.
For  it  often  happens  (as  in  the  cases  cited   by  Gurney  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living)  that  a  figure  which  has  formed  part  of  a  dream  continues
to  be  seen  as  a  hallucination  for  some  moments  after  waking ; — a  strong
testimony  to  the  vividness  of  dream-visualisation.     The  generation  of  a
hallucinatory  figure  (however  useless  an  achievement)  marks  probably  the

•^t  point  which  man's  visualising  faculty  ever  reaches ;  and  it  is  note-
worthy that  with  most  persons  this  point  should  be  attained  in  dream
alone.  Sometimes,  it  may  be,  this  prolongation  of  hallucination  may  best
be  described  as  an  after-image,  sometimes  as  the  result  of  a  "  suggestion  "
cd  by  the  dream.  In  these  hypnopompic  cases  the  vivid  visualisation
seems  to  originate  in  sleep  ;  while  in  illusions  hypnagogiques  the  vividness
bel  i  intermediate  phase.

407.  The  degree  of  acuteness  of  all  the  senses  in  dream  is  a  subject
for  direct  observation,  and  even — for  persons  who  can  at  all  control  their

'S — for  direct  experiment.     I  have  elsewhere  described '  some  efforts
1  S.P.K.  Proceedings,  vol.  iv.  p.  241.

126  CHAPTER    IV  [408

of  my  own  to  test  my  own  power  of  visualisation  in  dream ;  with  the
result,  as  I  must  confess,  that  I  have  not  found  it  superior  to  my  very  low
waking  capacity.  Some  correspondents,  however,  report  a  considerable
apparent  accession  of  sensory  power  in  dream.  An  impressive  dream,
dreamt  by  Mrs.  A.  W.  Verrall,  of  Cambridge,  and  at  once  carefully  re-
corded, had  for  its  theme  an  intensification  of  each  sense  in  turn.  Mrs.
Verrall  has  poor  musical  perceptions,  and  when  told  in  her  dream  that  the
sense  of  sound  was  next  to  be  exalted,  she  anticipated  little  pleasure.  The
sensation  came,  however,  as  something  entirely  new, — as  "  very  harmony,
which  I  had  only  heard  till  then  in  echoes, — in  the  rhythm  of  verse,  or  in
the  sighing  of  the  wind  among  the  pine-trees.  My  hearing  was  purified,
not  by  the  fulfilment  of  desire,  but  by  the  creation  of  desire,  which  in  its
very  birth  attained  fruition."  (See  Dr.  Hodgson's  experience  in  407  A.)
Others  speak  of  the  increased  vividness  of  dramatic  conception,  or
of  what  has  been  called  in  a  hypnotic  subject  "  objectivation  of  types."
"  In  each  of  these  dreams,"  writes  one  lady,  "  I  was  a  man ; — in  one  of
them  a  low  brute,  in  the  other  a  dipsomaniac.  I  never  had  the  slightest
conception  of  how  such  persons  felt  or  thought  until  these  experiences."
Another  correspondent  speaks  of  dreaming  two  disconnected  dreams, —
one  emotional  and  one  geometrical, — simultaneously,  and  of  consequent
sense  of  confusion  and  fatigue.

408.  The  "  Chapter  on  Dreams,"  in  R.  L.  Stevenson's  volume,  Across
the  Plains  (already  referred  to  in  Section  314) ,  contains  a  description  of  the
most  successful  dream-experiments  thus  far  recorded.     By  self-suggestion
before  sleep  Stevenson  could  secure  a  visual  and  dramatic  intensity  of
dream-representation  which  furnished  him  with  the  motives  for  some  of  his
most  striking  romances.    His  account,  written  with  admirable  psychological
insight,  is  indispensable  to  students  of  this  subject.     I  am  mentioning
these  well-known  phenomena,  as  the  reader  will  understand,  with  a  some-
what novel  purpose — to  show,  namely,  that  the  internal  sensory  perceptions
or  imaginative  faculty  of  sleep  may  exceed  that  of  vigilance  in  something
the  same  way  as  the  recuperative  agency  of  sleep  surpasses  the  vis  medicatrix
of  waking  hours.

409.  I  pass  on  to  a  less  frequent  phenomenon,  which  shows  us  at
once  intense  imagination  during  sleep,  and  a  lasting  imprint  left  by  these
imaginations  upon  the  waking  organism ; — an  unintended  self-suggestion
which  we  may  compare  with  Stevenson's  voluntary  self-suggestion  men-
tioned just  above.

The  permanent  result  of  a  dream,  I  say,  is  sometimes  such  as  to  show
that  the  dream  has  not  been  a  mere  superficial  confusion  of  past  waking
experiences,  but  has  had  an  unexplained  potency  of  its  own, — drawn,  like
the  potency  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  from  some  depth  in  our  being  which
the  waking  self  cannot  reach.  Two  main  classes  of  this  kind  are  con-
spicuous enough  to  be  easily  recognised — those,  namely,  where  the  dream
has  led  to  a  "  conversion  "  or  marked  religious  change,  and  those  where  it

410]  SLEEP  127

has  been  the  starting-point  of  an  "  insistent  idea  "  or  of  a  fit  of  actual
insanity.1  The  dreams  which  convert,  reform,  change  character  and
creed,  have  of  course  a  primd  facie  claim  to  be  considered  as  something
other  than  ordinary  dreams  ;  and  their  discussion  may  be  deferred  till  a
later  stage  of  our  inquiry.  Those,  on  the  other  hand,  which  suddenly
generate  an  insistent  idea  of  an  irrational  type  are  closely  and  obviously
analogous  to  post-hypnotic  self-suggestions,  which  the  self  that  inspired
them  cannot  be  induced  to  countermand.  Such  is  the  dream  related  by
M.  Taine,2  where  a  gendarme,  impressed  by  an  execution  at  which  he  has
assisted,  dreams  that  he  himself  is  to  be  guillotined,  and  is  afterwards  so
influenced  by  the  dream  that  he  attempts  suicide.  Several  cases  of  this
kind  have  been  collected  by  Dr.  Faure  ;  8  and  Dr.  Tissie",  in  his  interesting
little  work,  Les  Rtves,  has  added  some  striking  instances  from  his  own
observation.  I  quote,  in  409  A,  one  of  M.  Faure's  cases  as  a  sample,
showing  that  in  an  apparently  healthy  subject  an  apparently  causeless
a  may  leave  traces  quite  as  persistent  as  any  hypnotic  suggestion
could  implant  from  without.  The  dream  is  in  fact  a  self-suggestion  of
the  most  potent  kind.  The  case  of  Dr.  Holbrook  (409  B)  seems  to  belong
to  the  same  category.

410.  A  still  more  striking  illustration  may  be  drawn  from  the  following
incident  in  the  story  of  Dr.  Krafft-Ebing's  patient,4  lima  S.,  the  genuineness
of  whose  stigmata  seems  proved  by  that  physician's  care  in  observation,
and  by  the  painfulness  of  certain  experiments  performed  upon  her  by
students  as  practical  jokes  and  against  her  will  :  —

/  6/ft,  1888.  —  The  patient  is  disturbed  to-day.     She  complains  to  the

<>f  severe  pain  under  the  left  breast,  thinks  that  the  professor  has  burnt

her  in  the  night,  and  begs  the  sister  to  obtain  a  retreat  for  her  in  a  convent,

she  will  be  secure  against  such  attacks.     The  sister's  refusal  causes  a

•  >-epileptic  attack.     [At  length,  in  the  hypnotic  trance]  the  patient  gives
the  following  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  pain  :  "  Last  night  an  old  man
came  to  me  ;  he  looked  like  a  priest  and  came  in  company  with  a  Sister  of
Charity,  on  whose  collet  there  was  a  large  golden  B.     I  was  afraid  of  her.     The
old  man  was  amiable  and  friendly.     He  dipped  a  pen  in  the  sister's  pocket,  and

it  wrote  a  W  and  B  on  my  skin  under  the  left  breast.     Once  he  dipped

;i  badly  and  made  a  blot  in  the  middle  of  the  figure.     This  spot  and  the  B

pain  me  severely,  but  the  W  does  not.     The  man  explained  the  W  as  meaning

^hould  go  to  the  M  church  and  confess  at  the  W  confessional."

r  this  account  the  patient  cried  out  and  said,  "  There  stands  the  man

•  Now  he  has  chains  on  his  hands."

•n  the  patient  woke  into  ordinary  life  she  was  suffering  pain  in  the
place  indicated,  where  there  were  "  superficial  losses  of  substance,  penetrating

i  <:r^  in  Brain  for  January  1887.
2  /'<•  f  fnltlligfticf,  vol.  i.  p.  119.

•  Archi-es  de  .Midtcin  ,  vol.  i.  1876,  p.  554.

•  A  -mtal  Study  in  Hypnotism,  by  Dr.  R.  von  Krafft-Ebing,  translated  by

•ck,  p.  91.

128  CHAPTER    IV  [411

to  the  corium,  which  have  a  resemblance  to  a  reversed  W  and  B,"  with  "  a
hyperaemic  raised  spot  between  the  two."  Nowhere  in  this  peculiar  neurotrophic
alteration  of  the  skin,  which  is  identical  with  those  previously  produced  experi-
mentally, are  there  traces  of  inflammation.  The  pain  and  the  memory  of  the
dream  were  removed  by  the  doctor's  suggestion ;  but  the  dream  self-suggestion
to  confess  at  the  M  church  persisted ;  and  the  patient,  without  knowing  why,
did  actually  go  and  confess  to  the  priest  of  her  vision.

In  this  last  case  we  have  a  dream  playing  the  part  of  a  powerful  post-
hypnotic  suggestion.  The  meaning  of  this  vague  term  "  suggestion  "  we
shall  have  to  discuss  in  a  later  chapter.  It  is  enough  to  notice  here  the
great  power  of  a  subliminal  suggestion  which  can  make  an  impression  so
much  stronger  not  only  than  the  usual  evanescent  touch  of  dream,  but  than
the  actual  experiences  of  waking  day.

411.  But  this  case  may  also  serve  to  lead  us  on  to  further  reflections  as
to  the  connection  between  dream-memory  and  hypnotic  memory,  a  connec-
tion which  points,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  towards  the  existence  of  some
subliminal  continuity  of  memory,  lying  deeper  down  than  the  evocable
memory  of  common  life — the  stock  of  conscious  reminiscences  on  which
we  can  draw  at  will.

With  regard  to  memory,  as  with  regard  to  sensation,  we  seem  in  waking
life  to  be  dealing  with  a  selection  made  for  purposes  of  earthly  use.  From
the  pre-conscious  unselective  memory  which  depends  on  the  mere  organi-
sation of  living  matter,  it  is  the  task  of  consciousness,  as  it  dawns  in  each
higher  organism,  to  make  its  own  appropriate  selection  and  to  develop
into  distinctness  certain  helpful  lines  of  reminiscence.  The  question  of
self-preservation, — What  must  I  needs  be  aware  of  in  order  to  escape  my
foes  ? — involves  the  question,  What  must  I  needs  remember  in  order  to  act
upon  the  facts  of  which  I  am  aware  ?  The  selected  currents  of  memory
follow  the  selected  avenues  of  sensation ;  what  by  disuse  I  lose  the  power
of  noticing  at  the  time,  I  also  lose  the  power  of  recalling  afterwards.

For  simpler  organisms  this  rule  may  perhaps  suffice.  Man  needs  a
more  complex  formula.  For  it  may  happen,  as  we  have  already  seen,
that  two  or  more  phases  of  personality  in  one  man  may  each  select  from
the  mass  of  potential  reminiscences  a  special  group  of  memories  of  its
own.  These  special  groups,  moreover,  may  bear  to  one  another  all  kinds
of  relations ;  one  may  include  another,  or  they  may  alternate  and  may  be
apparently  co-exclusive.

From  these  dissociations  and  alternations  of  memory  there  will  be
many  lessons  to  learn.  The  lesson  which  here  presents  itself  is  not  the
least  important.  What  is  the  relation  of  the  sleeping  state  to  these  dis-
sociated, these  parallel  or  concentric  memories  ?  Is  it  the  case  that  when
one  memory  includes  another  it  is  the  waking  memory — as  one  might
expect  from  that  state's  apparently  superior  vividness — which  shows  itself
the  deeper,  the  more  comprehensive  record?  Or  can  it  be  that  other
states — sleep  and  its  congeners — less  finished  and  effective  though  they  be

412]  SLEEP  129

for  life's  common  purposes,  may  yet  show  by  this  test  of  comparative
memory  that  they  embrace  and  underlie  that  specialised  vigilance  which
we  commonly  take  for  the  whole  of  our  intellectual  being?

412.  The  answer  of  actual  experience  to  these  questions  is  unexpec-
tedly direct  and  clear.  In  every  recorded  instance — so  far  at  least  as  my
memory  serves  me,  where  there  has  been  any  unification  between  alternating
states,  so  as  to  make  comparison  possible — it  is  the  memory  furthest  from
waking  life  whose  span  is  the  widest,  whose  grasp  of  the  organism's  up-
stored  impressions  is  the  most  profound.  Inexplicable  as  this  phenomenon
has  been  to  observers  who  have  encountered  it  without  the  needed  key,
the  independent  observations  of  hundreds  of  physicians  and  hypnotists  have
united  in  affirming  its  reality.  The  commonest  instance,  of  course,  is  fur-
nished by  the  ordinary  hypnotic  trance.  The  degree  of  intelligence,
indeed,  which  finds  its  way  to  expression  in  that  trance  or  slumber  varies
greatly  in  different  subjects  and  at  different  times.  But  whensoever  there
is  enough  of  alertness  to  admit  of  our  forming  a  judgment,  we  find  that  in
the  hypnotic  state  there  is  a  considerable  memory — though  not  necessarily
a  complete  or  a  reasoned  memory — of  the  waking  state;  whereas  with
most  subjects  in  the  waking  state — unless  some  special  command  be  im-
posed upon  the  hypnotic  self — there  is  no  memory  whatever  of  the  hypnotic
state.  In  many  hysterical  conditions  also  the  same  general  rule  subsists ;
namely,  that  the  further  we  get  from  the  surface  the  wider  is  the  expanse
of  memory  which  we  encounter.

If  all  this  be  true,  there  are  several  points  on  which  we  may  form  ex-
pectations definite  enough  to  suggest  inquiry.  Ordinary  sleep  is  roughly
intermediate  between  waking  life  and  deep  hypnotic  trance  ;  and  it  seems
4  priori  probable  that  its  memory  will  have  links  of  almost  equal  strength
with  the  memory  which  belongs  to  waking  life  and  the  memory  which
belongs  to  the  hypnotic  trance.  And  this  is  in  fact  the  case ;  the  fragments
am-memory  are  interlinked  with  both  these  other  chains.  Thus,  for
example,  without  any  suggestion  to  that  effect,  acts  accomplished  in  the
•tic  trance  may  be  remembered  in  dream ;  and  remembered  under
the  illusion  which  was  thrown  round  them  by  the  hypnotiser.  Thus  Dr.
Auguste  Voisin  suggested  to  a  hypnotised  subject  to  stab  a  patient — really
a  stuffed  figure — in  the  neighbouring  bed.1  The  subject  did  so ;  and  of
course  knew  nothing  of  it  on  waking.  But  three  days  afterwards  he  re-
turned to  the  hospital  complaining  that  his  dreams  were  haunted  by  the
figure  of  a  woman,  who  accused  him  of  having  stabbed  and  killed  her.
App-  uggestion  laid  this  ghost  of  a  doll.

Conversely,  dreams  forgotten  in  waking  life  may  be  remembered  in  the
•tic  trance.  Thus  Dr.  Tissi^'s  patient,  Albert,  dreamt  that  he  was
to  set  out  on  one  of  his  somnambulic  "  fugues,"  or  aimless  journeys,
hen  hypnotised  mentioned  to  the  physician  this  dream,  which  in  his

1  Revutde  -r:e,  June  1891,  p.  302.

130  CHAPTER    IV  [413

waking  state  he  had  forgotten.1  The  probable  truth  of  this  statement  was
shown  by  the  fact  that  he  did  actually  set  out  on  the  journey  thus  dreamt
of,  and  that  his  journeys  were  usually  preceded  and  incited  by  remembered
dreams.

I  need  not  dwell  on  the  existence,  but  at  the  same  time  the  incom-
pleteness, of  our  dream-memory  of  waking  life ;  nor  on  the  occasional
formation  of  a  separate  chain  of  memory,  constructed  from  successive  and
cohering  dreams.  It  should  be  added  that  we  do  not  really  know  how  far
our  memory  in  dream  of  waking  life  may  have  extended  ;  since  we  can
only  infer  this  from  our  notoriously  imperfect  waking  memory  of  past
dreams.

413.  A  cognate  anticipation  to  which  our  theory  will  point  will  be
that  dream-memory  will  occasionally  be  found  to  fill  up  gaps  in  waking
memory,  other  than  those  due  to  hypnotic  trance ;  such  so-called  "  ec-
mnesic  "  periods,  for  instance,  as  sometimes  succeed  a  violent  shock  to  the
system,  and  may  even  embrace  some  space  of  time  anterior  to  the  shock.
These  periods  themselves  resemble  prolonged  and  unremembered  dreams.
Such  accidents,  however,  are  so  rare,  and  such  dream-memory  so  hard
to  detect,  that  I  mention  the  point  mainly  for  the  sake  of  theoretical  com-
pleteness ;  and  must  think  myself  fortunate  ^y'^eing  able  to  cite  a  case
of  M.  Charcot's  which  affords  an  interesting  confirmation  of  the  sug-
gested view.2

A  certain  Madame  D.,  a  healthy  and  sensible  woman  of  thirty-four,  was
subjected,  on  August  28th,  1891,  to  a  terrible  shock.  Some  scoundrel  who  has
not  been  identified  entered  her  cottage  and  told  her  brusquely  that  her  husband
was  dead,  and  that  his  corpse  was  being  brought  home.  This  was  absolutely
false;  but  the  news  threw  her  into  a  state  of  profound  agitation;  and  when
some  indiscreet  friend,  seeing  the  husband  approach,  cried  out  Le  voila  /  the
poor  woman,  supposing  that  the  corpse  was  thus  announced,  fell  into  a  pro-
longed hysterical  attack.  After  two  days  of  raving  she  came  to  herself ; — but
had  lost  the  memory  of  all  events  since  July  I4th  ;  /.  e.  since  a  date  six  weeks
before  the  shock.  This  kind  of  retroactive  ecmnesia — inexplicable  as  it  is — is
known  to  occur  sometimes  after  a  physical  concussion.  In  Madame  D/s  case
the  shock  had  been  wholly  a  mental  one ;  yet  the  forgetfulness  continued,  and
had  spread  over  all  the  period  up  to  M.  Charcot's  lecture  on  the  case,  December
22nd,  1891.  Madame  D.  was  then  possessed  of  full  recollection  of  her  life  up
to  July  I4th,  1891  ;  but  she  could  recall  no  event  whatever  which  had  occurred
since  that  date.  She  endeavoured  to  continue  her  domestic  duties  ;  but  if  she
wished  to  recollect  anything  she  had  to  write  it  down  instantly  in  a  note-book
to  which  she  constantly  referred.  For  instance,  she  was  bitten  by  a  dog
believed  to  be  mad.  She  instantly  made  a  written  note  of  the  fact ;  but  except

1  Les  Rfrves,  p.  135.     This  remarkable  patient  afforded  examples  of  many  forms  of
communication  of  memory  between  different  states  of  personality.     See  pp.  192-200
for  a  conspectus  of  these  complex  recollections.

2  Revue  de  Mtdecine,  February  1892.     A  full  account  and  discussion  of  the  case  of
Madame  D.  is  contained  in  Dr.  P.  Janet's  Nevroses  ft  Idees  fixes,  vol.  i.  pp.  n6  et  seq.

414]  SLEEP  131

when  actually  referring  to  her  note-book  she  retained  no  recollection  whatever
of  the  bite  or  of  her  subsequent  treatment  in  M.  Pasteur's  laboratory.

Here,  surely,  was  a  case  where  it  might  have  seemed  that  there  had  been
some  absolute  evanescence,  absolute  abolition  of  whatsoever  traces  or  tendencies
may  be  held  to  constitute  memory.

But  one  fact  was  observed  which  threw  a  decisive  light  upon  this  puzzling
case.  The  patients  in  the  two  beds  adjoining  Madame  D.'s  were  told  to
observe  her  at  night.  They  reported  that  she  was  in  the  habit  of  talking  in  her
sleep :  and  that  in  the  fragments  of  dreams  thus  revealed  she  made  frequent
allusions  to  the  mad  dog's  bite,  and  to  other  events  which  had  occurred  during
her  ecmnesic  period.  This  hint,  of  course,  was  enough  for  M.  Charcot.
Gassing  her  ecmnesia  as  a  kind  of  prolongation  of  a  hystero-epileptic  attack,
he  hypnotised  the  patient,  and  found  that  in  the  hypnotic  trance  her  memory
for  the  ecmnesic  period  was  absolutely  intact.  Post-hypnotic  suggestions  to
remember  the  lost  days  are  now  slowly  restoring  the  poor  woman  to  the
possession  of  her  whole  past.

The  fact  which  interests  us  here  is  the  accidentally  discovered  persist-
ence in  dream  of  memories  which  had  vanished  from  the  supraliminal
consciousness.  This  shows  that  in  dream  Madame  D.  had  got  down —
not  merely  to  a  stratum  of  confusion, — but  to  a  state  so  far  deeper  than
the  waking  state  that  the  memories  of  which  shock  or  hysteria  had
robbed  the  waking  state  were  there  found  to  be  uninjured.  This  well-
observed  case  may  here  stand  as  representative  of  the  gap-filling
dream-memory  which  I  ventured  to  anticipate.  Other  cases  will  be
noticeable  when  spontaneous  somnambulism  comes  under  review, — in
its  complex  relations  with  common  dreams,  hypnotism,  hysteria,  and  even
epilepsy.

414.    I  pass  on  to  the  still  more  novel  and  curious  questions  involved

in  the  apparent  existence  of  a  dream-memory  which,  while  accompanying

the  memory  of  ordinary  life,  seems  also  to  have  a  wider  purview,  and  to

ite  that  the  record  of  external  events  which  is  kept  within  us  is  far

fuller  than  we  know.

Let  us  consider  what  stages  such  a  memory  may  show.

I.  It  may  include  events  once  known  to  the  waking  self,  but  now
definitely  forgotten.

II.  It  may  include  facts  which  have  fallen  within  the  sensory  field,
but  which  have  never  been  supraliminally  "  apperceived  "  or  cognised  in

•vay.     And  thus  also  it  may  indicate  that  from  this  wider  range  of

fatam-infirences  have  been  drawn  ; — which  inferences

1)C  retrospective,  prospective,  or,  if  I  may  use  a  word  of  Pope's  with  a

,— that  is  to  say,  relating  not  to  the  past  or

to  the  future,  but  to  the  present  condition  of  matters  beyond  the  range  of
I>erception.     It  i*  plain  that  inferences  of  this  kind  (if  they  exist)
will  be  liable  to  b<  n  for  direct  retrocognition,  direct  premonition,

direct  clairvoyance  ;  while  yet  they  need  not  actually  prove  anything  more
thin  a  perception  on  the  part  of  the  subliminal  self  more  far-reaching, —

132  CHAPTER    IV  [415

a  memory  more  stable, — than  is  the  perception  or  the  memory  of  the
supraliminal  self  which  we  know.

These  hypermnesic  dreams,  then,  may  afford  a  means  of  drawing  our
lines  of  evidence  more  exactly ;  of  relegating  some  marvellous  narratives
to  a  realm  of  lesser  marvel,  and  at  the  same  time  of  realising  more  clearly
what  it  is  in  the  most  advanced  cases  which  ordinary  theories  are  really
powerless  to  explain.

415.  As  to  thejirstof  the1  above-mentioned  categories  no  one  will
raise  any  doubt.  It  is  a  familiar  fact — or  a  fact  only  sufficiently  unfamiliar
to  be  noted  with  slight  surprise — that  we  occasionally  recover  in  sleep  a
memory  which  has  wholly  dropped  out  of  waking  consciousness.  As  an
example,  we  may  take  the  dream  of  M.  Delboeuf  s,  discussed  in  his
interesting  book,  Le  Sommeil  et  les  Rtves.  In  that  dream  the  name  of
the  "  Asplenium  Ruta  Muralis  "  figured  as  a  familiar  phrase.  On  waking,
he  puzzled  himself  in  vain  to  think  where  he  could  have  learnt  that
botanical  appellation.  Long  afterwards  he  discovered  the  name  "  Asple-
nium Ruta  Muraria"  in  his  own  handwriting, — in  a  little  collection  of
flowers  and  ferns  to  which  he  had  added  their  designations,  under  the
dictation  of  a  botanical  friend.

In  this  and  similar  cases  the  original  piece  of  knowledge  had  at  the
time  made  a  definite  impress  on  the  mind, — had  come  well  within  the
span  of  apprehension  of  the  supraliminal  consciousness.  Its  reappearance
after  however  long  an  interval  is  a  fact  to  which  there  are  already  plenty
of  parallels.  But  the  conclusion  to  which  the  cases  about  to  be  cited
seem  to  me  to  point  is  one  of  a  much  stranger  character.  I  think  that
there  is  evidence  to  show  that  many  facts  or  pictures  which  have  never
even  for  a  moment  come  within  the  apprehension  of  the  supraliminal
consciousness  are  nevertheless  retained  by  the  subliminal  memory,  and
are  occasionally  presented  in  dreams  with  what  seems  a  definite
purpose.1

The  same  point,  as  we  shall  hereafter  see,  is  illustrated  by  the  pheno-
mena of  crystal-vision.  Miss  Goodrich-Freer,2  for  example,  saw  in  the
crystal  the  announcement  of  the  death  of  a  friend ; — a  piece  of  news
which  certainly  had  never  been  apprehended  by  her  ordinary  conscious
self.  On  referring  to  the  Times,  it  was  found  that  an  announcement  of
the  death  of  some  one  of  the  same  unusual  name  was  contained  in  a  sheet
with  which  she  had  screened  her  face  from  the  fire ; — so  that  the  words
may  have  fallen  within  her  range  of  vision,  although  they  had  not  reached
what  we  broadly  call  her  waking  mind.

This  instance  was  of  value  from  the  strong  probability  that  the  news
could  never  have  been  supraliminally  known  at  all ; — since  it  was  too
important  to  have  been  merely  glanced  at  and  forgotten.

416.    I  quote  another  case  which  raises  a  somewhat  curious  point  as

1  See  cases  given  in  Appendix  415.

2  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  507.

416]  SLEEP  133

to  the  relation  of  what  I  may  call  the   subliminal  gaze  to  defects   of
ordinary  vision.

From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  389  ;  related  by  Mr.  Herbert).  Lewis,
19  Park  Place,  Cardiff.

In  September  1880,  I  lost  the  landing  order  of  a  large  steamer  containing
a  cargo  of  iron  ore,  which  had  arrived  in  the  port  of  Cardiff.  She  had  to
commence  discharging  at  six  o'clock  the  next  morning.  I  received  the  landing
order  at  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  and  when  I  arrived  at  the  office  at  six
I  found  that  I  had  lost  it  During  all  the  evening  I  was  doing  my  utmost  to
find  the  officials  of  the  Custom  House  to  get  a  permit,  as  the  loss  was  of  the
greatest  importance,  preventing  the  ship  from  discharging.  I  came  home  in  a
great  degree  of  trouble  about  the  matter,  as  I  feared  that  I  should  lose  my  situa-
tion in  consequence.

That  night  I  dreamed  that  I  saw  the  lost  landing  order  lying  in  a  crack  in
the  wall  under  a  desk  in  the  Long  Room  of  the  Custom  House.

At  five  the  next  morning  I  went  down  to  the  Custom  House  and  got  the
keeper  to  get  up  and  open  it.  I  went  to  the  spot  of  which  I  had  dreamed,  and
found  the  paper  in  the  very  place.  The  ship  was  not  ready  to  discharge  at  her
proper  time,  and  I  went  on  board  at  seven  and  delivered  the  landing  order,
saving  her  from  all  delay.  HERBERT  J.  LEWIS.

I  can  certify  to  the  truth  of  the  above  statement.

THOMAS  LEWIS
(Herbert  Lewis's  father),

July  I4//&,  1884.  H.  WALLIS.

[Mr.  E.  J.  Newell,  of  the  George  and  Abbotsford  Hotel,  Melrose,  adds  the
following  corroborative  note : — ]

August  1 4th,  1884.

I  made  some  inquiries  about  Mr.  Herbert  Lewis's  dream  before  I  left
Cardiff.  He  had  been  searching  throughout  the  room  in  which  the  order  was
found.  His  theory  as  to  how  the  order  got  in  the  place  in  which  it  was  found
is  that  it  was  probably  put  there  by  some  one  (perhaps  with  malicious  intent),
as  he  does  not  see  how  it  could  have  fallen  so.

The  fact  that  Mr.  H.  Lewis  is  exceedingly  short-sighted  adds  to  the
probability  of  the  thing  which  you  suggest,  that  the  dream  was  simply  an
unconscious  act  of  memory  in  sleep.  On  the  other  hand  he  does  not  believe
it  was  there  when  he  searched.  E.  J.  NEWELL.

Can  there  have  been  a  momentary  unnoticed  spasm  of  the  ciliary
ie,  with  the  result  of  extending  the  range  of  vision?  It  may  suffice
to  quote — that  my  suggestion  may  not  seem  too  fantastic — a  few  lines

I  observation  of  a  somnambule  by  Dr.  D\~

i  t  is  eight  o'clock  :  several  workwomen  are  busy  around  a  table,  on

which  a  lamp  is  placed.     Mdlle.  R.  L.  directs  and  shares  in  the  work,

mg  cheerfully  meantime.     Suddenly  a  noise  is  heard;  it  is  her  head

which  has  fallen  sharply  on  the  edge  of  the  table.     This  is  the  beginning

ut  Scicntifiqut,  3*  s^rie,  xxxii.  p.  167.

134  CHAPTER     IV  [417

of  the  access.  She  picks  herself  up  in  a  few  seconds,  pulls  off  her
spectacles  with  disgust,  and  continues  the  work  which  she  had  begun ; —
having  no  further  need  of  the  concave  glasses  which  a  pronounced
myopia  renders  needful  to  her  in  ordinary  life ; — and  even  placing  herself
so  that  her  work  is  less  exposed  to  the  light  of  the  lamp."  Similarly,  and
yet  differently,  Miss  Goodrich-Freer  has  had  an  experience  where  the  title
of  a  book  quite  unknown  to  her,  which  she  had  vainly  endeavoured  to
read  where  it  lay  at  some  distance  from  her,  presented  itself  in  the  crystal.
In  such  a  case  we  can  hardly  suppose  any  such  spasmodic  alteration  in
ocular  conditions  as  may  perhaps  occur  in  trance.

417.  In  the  cases  which  I  have  thus  far  quoted  the  dream-self  has
presented  a  significant  scene, — has  chosen,  so  to  say,  from  its  gallery  of
photographs  the  special  picture  which  the  waking  mind  desired, — but  has
not  needed  to  draw  any  more  complex  inference  from  the  facts  presumably
at  its  disposal.     I  have  now  to  deal  with  a  small  group  of  dreams  which
reason  as  well  as  remember ; — if  indeed  in  some  of  them  there  be  not
something   more    than   mere   reasoning   on   facts   already  in  some  way
acquired, — something   which  overpasses  the    scheme  prescribed  for  the
present  chapter.

In  the  first  place  we  cannot  doubt  that  definite  data  already  known
may  sometimes  be  treated  in  somnambulism  or  ordinary  dream  with  more
than  waking  intelligence.  Such  are  the  cases  of  mathematical  problems
solved  in  somnambulism,  or  of  the  skeletal  arrangement  discovered  by
Agassiz  in  common  sleep  for  scattered  bones  which  had  baffled  his  waking
skill.  I  give  in  Appendices  some  striking  cases.  The  first  case  is  of
old  date,  but  it  was  reported  by  the  dreamer  about  a  month  after  its
occurrence  to  Dr.  Davey,  a  physician  well  known  in  his  day,  and  was  sent
by  him  to  Dr.  Elliotson,  who  printed  it  in  the  Zoist,  where  it  is  published
as  a  case  of  clairvoyance.  But  the  needed  data  had  passed  before  the
waking  eyes,  although  it  was  left  for  dream  to  interpret  them  fruitfully.
Professor  Lamberton's  case  is  about  the  best  of  the  dream-solutions  of
mathematical  problems  which  I  have  seen  recorded.  And  Professor
Hilprecht's  second  case  carries  dream- intelligence  to  its  highest  point.
Professor  Romaine  Newbold  (who  records  these  cases)  is  well  versed  in
the  analysis  of  evidence  making  for  supernormal  powers,  and  his  explana-
tion of  the  vision  as  the  result  of  "processes  of  associative  reasoning
analogous  to  those  of  the  upper  consciousness  "  must,  I  think,  be  taken
as  correct.  But  had  the  incident  occurred  in  a  less  critical  age  of  the
world, — in  any  generation,  one  may  say,  but  this, — how  majestic  a  proof
would  the  phantasmal  Babylonian's  message  be  held  to  have  afforded  of
his  veritable  co-operation  with  the  modern  savant  in  the  reconstruction  of
his  remote  past !

418.  I  repeat  that  with  this  case  of  Professor  Hilprecht's  we  seem  to
have  reached  the  utmost   intensity  of  sleep-faculty  within  the  limits  of
our   ordinary  spectrum.     In   almost  every  region  of  that  spectrum  we

419]  SLEEP  135

have  found  that  the  sleeper's  faculty,  under  its  narrow  conditions,  shows
scattered  signs  of  at  least  a  potential  equality  with  the  faculty  of  waking
hours.

\Ve  have  already  seen  this  as  regards  muscular  movements,  as  regards
inward  vision  and  audition,  and  as  regards  memory  ;  and  these  last  records
complete  the  series  by  showing  us  the  achievement  in  sleep  of  intellectual
work  of  the  severest  order.  Coleridge's  Kubla  Khan  had  long  ago  shown
the  world  that  a  great  poet  might  owe  his  masterpiece  to  the  obscuration
of  waking  sense.1  And  the  very  imperfection  of  Kubla  Khan — the
memory  truncated  by  an  interruption — may  again  remind  us  how  partial
must  ever  be  our  waking  knowledge  of  the  achievements  of  sleep.

May  I  not,  then,  claim  a  real  analogy  between  certain  of  the  achieve-
ments of  sleep  and  the  achievements  of  genius  ?  In  both  there  is  the  same
triumphant  spontaneity,  the  same  sense  of  drawing  no  longer  upon  the
narrow  and  brief  endurance  of  nerves  and  brain,  but  upon  some  unknown
source  exempt  from  those  limitations.

Thus  far,  indeed,  the  sleep-faculties  which  we  have  been  considering,
however  strangely  intensified,  have  belonged  to  the  same  class  as  the
normal  faculties  of  waking  life.  We  have  now  to  consider  whether  we  can
detect  in  sleep  any  manifestation  of  supernormal  faculty — any  experience
which  seems  to  suggest  that  man  is  a  cosmical  spirit  as  well  as  a  terrestrial
organism,  and  is  in  some  way  in  relation  with  a  spiritual  as  well  as  with
a  material  world.  It  will  seem,  in  this  view,  to  be  natural  that  this
commerce  with  a  spiritual  environment  should  be  more  perceptible  in  sleep
than  in  waking.  The  dogma  which  my  point  of  view  thus  renders  probable
is  perhaps,  as  a  mere  matter  of  history,  the  dogma  of  all  dogmas  which
has  been  most  universally  believed  by  mankind.

"  Quod  semper,  quod  ubique,  quod  ab  omnibus  " — for  how  many  narrow

theological  propositions  have  we  not  heard  this  proud  claim — that  they

been    believed  everywhere,  and    by  everybody,  and  in  every  age?

hat  can  approach  the  antiquity,  the  ubiquity,  the  unanimity  of  man's

belief  in  the  wanderings  of  the  spirit  in  dream  ?     In  the  Stone  Age,  the

sceptic  would  have  been  rash  indeed  who  ventured  to  contradict  it.     And

though  I  grant  that  this  "palaeolithic  psychology"  has  gone  out  of  fashion

for  the  last  few  centuries,  I  do  not  think  that  (in  view  of  the  tetoesthetic

;ice  now  collected)  we  can  any  longer  dismiss  as  a  mere  bizarrerie  of

i- imagery  the  constant  recurrence  of  the  idea  of  visiting  in  sleep  some

distant  scene, — with  the  acquisition  thereby  of  new  facts  not  otherwise

accessible.

419.  Starting,  then,  not  from  savage  authority,  but  from  the  evidential
scrutiny  of  modern  facts,  we  shall  find,  I  think,  that  there  are  coincidences
of  dream  with  truth  which  neither  pure  chance  nor  any  subconscious
mentation  of  an  ordinary  kind  will  adequately  explain.  We  shall  find
that  there  is  a  perception  of  concealed  material  objects  or  of  distant  scenes,

1  Csedmon's  poem  was  traditionally  said  to  have  come  to  him  in  like  fashion.

136  CHAPTER     IV  [420

and  also  a  perception  of  or  communion  with  the  thoughts  and  emotions  of
other  minds.  Both  these  phenomena  have  been  noted  sporadically  in
many  ages  and  countries,  and  were  observed  with  serious  attention
especially  by  the  early  French  mesmerists.  The  first  group  of  phenomena
was  called  clairvoyance  or  luciditf,  and  the  second  communication  de  pensees,
or  in  English,  thought-transference.  These  terms  are  scarcely  comprehensive
enough  to  satisfy  a  more  systematic  study.  The  distant  perception  is  not
optical,  nor  is  it  confined  even  to  the  apparent  sense  of  sight  alone.  It
extends  to  all  the  senses,  and  includes  also  impressions  hardly  referable  to
any  special  sense.  Similarly  the  communication  between  distant  persons
is  not  a  transference  of  thought  alone,  but  of  emotion,  of  motor  impulses,
and  of  many  impressions  not  easy  to  define.  I  ventured  in  1882  to  suggest
the  wider  terms  telcesthesia,  sensation  at  a  distance,  and  telepathy,  fellow-
feeling  at  a  distance,  and  shall  use  these  words  in  the  present  work.  But
I  am  far  from  assuming  that  these  terms  correspond  with  definite  and
clearly  separated  groups  of  phenomena,  or  comprise  the  whole  field  of
supernormal  faculty.  On  the  contrary,  I  think  it  probable  that  the  facts
of  the  metetherial  world  are  far  more  complex  than  the  facts  of  the  material
world ;  and  that  the  ways  in  which  spirits  perceive  and  communicate,
apart  from  fleshly  organisms,  are  subtler  and  more  varied  than  any  per-
ception or  communication  which  we  know.  Just  as  each  organism  is  in
fact  a  system  of  forces,  influencing  and  influenced  by  similar  systems  of
forces  in  known  and  unknown  ways,  so  also  must  we  regard  human  spirits
as  interacting  systems  of  forces,  yet  more  complex,  and  yet  further  beyond
our  ken.  Specially  manifest  is  this  when  we  have  to  deal  with  premonitions,
of  which  a  few  instances  are  given  in  this  chapter,  which  seem  even  further
away  from  our  ordinary  processes  of  perception  than  the  phenomena  of
telepathy  or  telaesthesia.

It  follows  from  what  has  been  said  that  there  is  no  one  logical  order
in  which  to  arrange  these  supernormal  phenomena.  They  do  not  spring
one  from  another  in  traceable  sequence ;  rather  they  are  emergent  and
scattered  manifestations  of  some  deeper  and  more  comprehensive  law.
The  distinction  suggested  above  between  telepathy  and  telaesthesia — be-
tween supernormal  knowledge  apparently  acquired  through  another  mind,
and  supernormal  knowledge  apparently  acquired  directly,  and  without  an-
other mind's  intervention — even  this  distinction,  I  say,  cannot  be  made  fun-
damental. We  cannot  really  tell  in  what  cases,  and  to  what  extent,  some
external  mind  has  aided  the  percipient's  perception  of  the  distant  scene.
We  do  not  even  know  whether  in  any  supernormal  perception  one  mind
alone  can  be  concerned.

420.  I  have  hinted  above  at  another  line  of  demarcation  which  the
dreamer's  own  sensations  suggest, — the  distinction  between  active  psychical
excursion  or  invasion  and  the  passive  reception  of  psychical  invasion  from
without.  But  even  here,  as  was  also  hinted,  a  clear  line  of  division  is  hard
to  draw.  For  whether  we  are  dealing  with  dream-perceptions  of  distant

422]  SLEEP  137

material  scenes,  or  of  distant  living  persons,  or  of  discarnate  spirits,  it  is  often
impossible  for  the  dreamer  himself  to  say  either  from  what  point  he  is  him-
self observing,  or  where  the  scene  of  the  vision  is  laid.  Where  is  he  when
he  is  taking  part  in  a  scene  which  is  still  in  the  future  ?  and  in  what  way
does  his  apparent  presence  in  the  future  scene  differ  from  his  apparent
presence  in  an  actually  existing,  although  distant,  scene ;— in  the  midst
of  which  his  own  phantasmal  presence  may  perhaps  be  discerned  by  some
one  of  the  actors  ?  Our  answers  to  such  questions— imperfect  at  the  best —
must  be  deferred  until  we  have  before  us  not  dreams  alone,  but  that  whole
range  of  sensory  automatisms  which  bears  throughout  such  perplexing
relations  to  our  current  notions  of  Space  and  Time.

For  the  present  I  must  confine  myself  to  a  brief  sketch  of  some  of  the
main  types  of  supernormal  dreams,  arranged  in  a  kind  of  ascending  order.
I  shall  begin  with  such  dreams  as  primarily  suggest  a  kind  of  heighten-
ing or  extension  of  the  dreamer's  own  innate  perceptive  powers,  as  exer-
cised on  the  world  around  him.  And  I  shall  end  with  dreams  which  suggest
his  entrance  into  a  spiritual  world,  where  commerce  with  incarnate  or  dis-
carnate spirits  is  subject  no  longer  to  the  conditions  of  earthly  thought.

421.  I  begin,  then,  with  some  dreams  which  seem  to  carry  perceptive
faculty  beyond  the  point  at  which  (as  in  Mr.  Lewis's  dream  of  the  landing
order,  Section  416)  some  unusual  form  of  common  vision  can  be  plausibly
suggested  in  explanation.    In  the  first  of  these  cases  (Mr.  Squires's) ,  given  in
full  in  421  A,  a  young  man  sees  in  a  dream  the  place  where  his  friend's
watch  has  fallen  in  a  lonely  field.     In  another  case  (Mr.  Watts's,  421  B)
there  is  a  vision  of  a  broken  statue,  whose  injury  seems  to  have  been  known
to  no  other  mind  than  the  dreamer's  ; — so  that  we  cannot  here  invoke — as
we  still  might  invoke  in  Mr.  Squires's  case — some  subliminal  knowledge  of
another  man's  as  possibly  suggesting  the  dream.     And  similarly  in  other
cases  cited  in  the  Appendix, — while  telepathy  from  the  living  or  the  dead
may  be  theoretically  conceivable, — the  simplest  hypothesis  is  that  which
goes  no  further  than  telaesthetic  perception  by  the  dreamer's  own  sub-
liminal self.

422.  I  will  next  refer  to  certain  cases  where  the  sleeper  by  clairvoyant
;  discerns  a  scene  of  direct  interest  to  a  mind  other  than  his  own  ; —

as  the  danger  or  death  of  some  near  friend.  Sometimes  there  is  a  flash  of
i,  which  seems  to  represent  correctly  the  critical  scene.  Sometimes
there  is  what  seems  like  a  longer  gaze,  accompanied,  perhaps,  by  some
sense  of  communion  with  the  invaded  person.  And  in  some  few  cases —
the  most  interesting  of  all — the  circumstances  of  a  death  seem  to  be
symbolically  shown  to  a  dreamer,  as  though  by  the  deceased  person,  or  by
some  intelligence  connected  with  him  (see  Section  427).

One  of  the  best  instances  of  the  flash  of  vision  is  Canon  Warburton's,
which  I  quote  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  338 — a  case  whose
remot  rendered  less  of  a  drawback  than  usual  by  the  character

of  the  narrator  and  the  simplicity  and  definiteness  of  the  fact  attested.

138  CHAPTER    IV  [423

The  following  is  his  account : —

THE  CLOSE,  WINCHESTER,  July  i6M,  1883.

Somewhere  about  the  year  1848  I  went  up  from  Oxford  to  stay  a  day  or  two
with  my  brother,  Acton  Warburton,  then  a  barrister,  living  at  10  Fish  Street,
Lincoln's  Inn.  When  I  got  to  his  chambers  I  found  a  note  on  the  table  apolo-
gising for  his  absence,  and  saying  that  he  had  gone  to  a  dance  somewhere  in
the  West  End,  and  intended  to  be  home  soon  after  i  o'clock.  Instead  of  going
to  bed,  I  dozed  in  an  armchair,  but  started  up  wide  awake  exactly  at  I,  ejacu-
lating "  By  Jove  !  he's  down  !  "  and  seeing  him  coming  out  of  a  drawing-room
into  a  brightly  illuminated  landing,  catching  his  foot  in  the  edge  of  the  top
stair,  and  falling  headlong,  just  saving  himself  by  his  elbows  and  hands.  (The
house  was  one  which  I  had  never  seen,  nor  did  I  know  where  it  was.)  Thinking
very  little  of  the  matter,  I  fell  a-doze  again  for  half-an-hour,  and  was  awakened
by  my  brother  suddenly  coming  in  and  saying,  "  Oh,  there  you  are  !  I  have  just
had  as  narrow  an  escape  of  breaking  my  neck  as  I  ever  had  in  my  life.  Coming
out  of  the  ballroom,  I  caught  my  foot,  and  tumbled  full  length  down  the  stairs."

That  is  all.  It  may  have  been  "  only  a  dream,"  but  I  always  thought  it  must
have  been  something  more.  W.  WARBURTON.

In  a  second  letter  Canon  Warburton  adds  : —

July  20th,  1883.

My  brother  was  hurrying  home  from  his  dance,  with  some  little  self-reproach
in  his  mind  for  not  having  been  at  his  chambers  to  receive  his  guest,  so  the
chances  are  that  he  was  thinking  of  me.  The  whole  scene  was  vividly  present
to  me  at  the  moment,  but  I  did  not  note  particulars  any  more  than  one  would
in  real  life.  The  general  impression  was  of  a  narrow  landing  brilliantly  illumi-
nated, and  I  remember  verifying  the  correctness  of  this  by  questions  at  the  time.

This  is  my  sole  experience  of  the  kind.

[The  last  words  are  in  answer  to  the  question  whether  he  had  had  similar
vivid  visions  which  had  not  corresponded  with  any  real  event.]

The  impression  here  produced  is  as  though  a  jerk  were  given  to  some
delicate  link  connecting  the  two  brothers.  The  brother  suffering  the  crisis
thinks  vividly  of  the  other  ;  and  one  can  of  course  explain  the  incident,  as
we  did  on  its  first  publication,  as  the  endangered  man's  projection  of  the
scene  upon  his  brother's  mind.  The  passive  dozing  brother,  on  the  other
hand,  feels  as  though  he  were  suddenly  present  in  the  scene, — say  in
response  to  some  sudden  call  from  the  brother  in  danger, — and  I  am  here
bringing  into  relief  that  aspect  of  the  incident,  on  account  of  its  analogy
with  cases  soon  to  be  quoted.  But  the  main  lesson  no  doubt  may  be  that
no  hard  and  fast  line  can  be  drawn  between  the  two  explanations.  I
quote  another  case,  that  of  Mrs.  West,  in  422  A.

423.  I  next  quote  a  case  investigated  by  Edmund  Gurney  shortly
before  his  death,  and  printed  in  S.P.R.  Journal,  vol.  iii.  pp.  265,  266.

From  Mr.  R.  V.  BOYLE,  3  Stanhope  Terrace,  W.

July  Tfttk,  1884.

In  India,  early  on  the  morning  of  November  2nd,  1868  (which  would  be
about  10  to  ii  P.M.  of  November  ist  in  England),  I  had  so  clear  and  striking

423]  SLEEP  139

a  dream  or  vision  (repeated  a  second  time  after  a  short  waking  interval)  that,
on  rising  as  usual  between  6  and  7  o'clock,  I  felt  impelled  at  once  to  write  an
entry  in  my  diary,  which  is  now  before  me.

At  the  time  referred  to  my  wife  and  I  were  in  Simla,  in  the  Himalayas,  the
summer  seat  of  the  Governor-General,  and  my  father-in-law  and  mother-in-law
were  living  in  Brighton.  We  had  not  heard  of  or  from  either  of  them  for  weeks,
nor  had  I  been  recently  speaking  or  thinking  of  them,  for  there  was  no  reason
ior  anxiety  regarding  them.1

It  seemed  in  my  dream  that  I  stood  at  the  open  door  of  a  bedroom  in  a
house  in  Brighton,  and  that  before  me,  by  candlelight,  I  saw  my  father-in-law
lying  pale  upon  his  bed,  while  my  mother-in-law  passed  silently  across  the
room  in  attendance  on  him.  The  vision  soon  passed  away,  and  I  slept  on  for
some  time.  On  waking,  however,  the  nature  of  the  impression  left  upon  me
unmistakably  was  that  my  father-in-law  was  dead.  I  at  once  noted  down
the  dream,  after  which  I  broke  the  news  of  what  I  felt  t6  be  a  revelation  to
my  wife,  when  we  thought  over  again  and  again  all  that  could  bear  upon  the
matter,  without  being  able  to  assign  any  reason  for  my  being  so  strongly  and
thoroughly  impressed.  The  telegraph  from  England  to  Simla  had  been  open
for  some  time,  but  now  there  was  an  interruption,  which  lasted  for  about  a
fortnight  longer,  and  on  the  i;th  (fifteen  days  after  my  dream)  I  was  neither
unprepared  nor  surprised  to  receive  a  telegram  from  England,  saying  that  my
father-in-law  had  died  in  Brighton  on  November  ist.  Subsequent  letters  showed
that  the  death  occurred  on  the  night  of  the  ist.

Dreams,  as  a  rule,  leave  little  impression  on  me,  and  the  one  above  re-
ferred to  is  the  only  one  I  ever  thought  of  making  a  note  of,  or  of  looking
expectantly  for  its  fulfilment.

I  may  mention  that  at  a  much  earlier  period  of  my  life  I  was  sitting  occupied
in  a  room  of  a  house,  from  which  I  could  not  see  the  approach  to  the  hall
door,  when  suddenly  my  thoughts  were  arrested,  and  I  turned  away  from  my
papers,  feeling  that  a  person  whom  I  had  not  been  thinking  of,  nor  had  seen
for  years,  was  at  that  moment  within  a  few  steps  of  the  house,  noiselessly,  but
rapidly,  approaching.  I  listened  intently  for  a  knock,  which  instantly  followed.
I  did  not  move  from  my  seat,  feeling  satisfied  that  what  did  follow  would
follow,  viz.,  that  a  servant  immediately  afterwards  announced  the  heretofore
invisible,  but  unaccountably  sudden,  expected  visitor.  These  occurrences  I
have  often  thought  over,  without  being  able  in  anyway  to  satisfactorily  account
for  them ;  they  stand  out  in  relief  upon  a  memory  but  lightly  charged  with,
though  not  insensible  to,  such  things.  R.  VICARY  BOYLE.

[Mrs.  Boyle  writes  as  follows  : — ]

6th  August  1887.

I  well  remember  my  husband  telling  me  one  morning,  early  in  November,

when  at  Simla,  in  India,  that  he  had  had  a  striking  dream  (repeated)  in

Mther,  then  at  Brighton,  seemed  to  be  dying.     We  were  both  deeply

^sed  and  then  anxiously  awaited  news  from  home.      A  telegram  first

reached  us,  in  about  a  fortnight,  which  was  afterwards  confirmed  by  letters,

right,  however,  to   say  that  my  wife's  father  had  gone  to  Brighton  some
s  before  on  account  of  his  health,  though  he  was  not  more  delicate  than  his  elder
brother,  who  is  (1884)  ^till  living.

140  CHAPTER    IV  [424

telling  of  my  father's  death  having  occurred  on  the   same   night  when   my
husband  had  the  dream.  ELEONORE  A.  BOYLE.

[Gurney  adds  : — ]
The  following  entries  were  copied  by  me  from  Mr.  Boyle's  diary  :  —

the  night  of1

"  Nov.  2.     Dreamed  of  E.'s  F[ather]  early  this  morning.
Written  before  dressing.

"Nov.  17.     Got  telegram  from  L[ouis]  H[ack]  this  morning
of  his  father's  death  on  ist  Nov.  inst."

The  following  obituary  notice  of  the  decease  of  Mr.  Boyle's  father-in-law
occurred  in  the  Times  for  4th  November  1868: —

"  On  ist  Nov.,  at  Brighton,  William  Hack,  late  of  Dieppe,  aged  72."

On  September  I7th,  1887,  I  received  from  Mr.  Boyle  a  copy  (made  by
Miss  P.  Hack,  niece  of  the  deceased)  of  an  entry  made  by  his  mother
(sister-in-law  of  deceased)  in  her  journal,  on  Sunday,  November  ist,  1868,
which  shows  the  hour  of  death.  In  this  entry,  after  some  details  of  the  last
hours,  occur  the  words :  "  At  a  few  minutes  after  2  o'clock  [P.M.]  he  ceased  to
breathe."

Mr.  Boyle  informed  me  that  he  is  a  "  particularly  sound  sleeper,  and  very
rarely  dreams."  This  dream  was  a  very  unique  and  impressive  experience,
apart  from  the  coincidence.

There  was  a  regular  correspondence  between  Mrs.  Boyle  and  her  mother,
but  for  several  mails  the  letters  had  contained  no  mention  of  her  father,  on
whose  account  absolutely  no  anxiety  was  felt.  E.  G.

It  will  be  seen  that  in  this  case  there  is  an  entry  made  before  the
death  was  known  in  Mr.  Boyle's  diary.  The  vision,  which  recurred
twice,  was  of  a  simple  kind ;  and  here  again  might  be  interpreted  as  an
impression  from  the  mind  of  the  wife  who  had  been  watching  beside  the
dying  man,  transferred  some  nine  hours  later  to  the  sleeping  son-in-law.
So  far  as  the  wife's  conscious  thought  turned  to  others  at  that  time,  it
would  probably  turn  to  her  daughter  rather  than  to  her  son-in-law.
Mr.  Boyle's  other  experience  indicates  a  psychical  sensibility  which  might
deflect  the  message  from  Mrs.  Boyle  to  himself;  although  even  on  that
view  his  special  proximity  to  Mrs.  Boyle  may  have  been  a  necessary  factor
in  his  percipience.

424.  The  single  dream  which  a  man  has  noted  down  in  all  his  life
stands  evidentially  in  almost  as  good  a  position  as  a  single  waking
hallucination.  Compare  the  single  dream  noted  down  in  all  his  life  by
Mr.  (now  Sir  Edward)  Hamilton,  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  Hi.  p.  267,  which  may
fitly  be  quoted  here  in  illustration,  although  perhaps  not  precisely  of  the
same  type.  It  suggests  rather  the  projection  of  the  suffering  brother's

1  These  three  words  were  added  above  the  line  after  the  subsequent  receipt  of  the
letter.  But  there  must  apparently  have  been  some  misunderstanding  ;  as  the  evidence
which  follows  seems  conclusive  as  to  the  hour  of  the  death.

424]  SLEEP  141

conception  of  himself,  especially  if  he  were  writing  to  the  brother  at  home
at  the  time.

PARK  LANE  CHAMBERS,  PARK  LANE,  W.,
AprU  6tfi,  1888.

On  Tuesday  morning,  March  2oth,  1888,  I  woke  up  with  the  impression
of  a  very  vivid  dream.  I  had  dreamt  that  my  brother,  who  had  long  been  in
Australia,  and  of  whom  I  had  heard  nothing  for  several  months,  had  come
home ;  that  after  an  absence  of  twelve  years  and  a  half  he  was  very  little
altered  in  appearance,  but  that  he  had  something  wrong  with  one  of  his  arms  ;
it  looked  horribly  red  near  the  wrist,  his  hand  being  bent  back.

When  I  got  up  that  morning  the  dream  recurred  constantly  to  my
thoughts,  and  I  at  last  determined  to  take  a  note  of  it,  notwithstanding  my
natural  prejudices  against  attaching  any  importance  to  dreams,  to  which,
indeed,  I  am  not  much  subject.  Accordingly,  in  the  course  of  the  day,  I
made  in  my  little  Letts's  Diary  a  mark  thus :  X,  with  my  brother's  name
after  it.

On  the  following  Monday  morning,  the  26th  March,  I  received  a  letter
from  my  brother,  which  bore  the  date  of  the  2ist  March,  and  which  had  been
posted  at  Naples  (where  the  Orient  steamers  touch),  informing  me  that  he  was
on  his  way  home,  and  that  he  hoped  to  reach  London  on  or  about  the  3oth
March,  and  adding  that  he  was  suffering  from  a  very  severe  attack  of  gout  in
the  left  arm.

The  next  day  I  related  to  some  one  this  curious  incident,  and  I  commented
on  the  extraordinary  coincidence  of  facts  with  the  dream  with  all  but  one  detail,
and  that  was,  that  the  arm  which  I  had  seen  in  my  dream  did  not  look  as  if  it
were  merely  affected  with  gout :  the  appearance  it  had  presented  to  me  was
more  like  extremely  bad  eczema.

My  brother  duly  reached  England  on  the  29th,  having  disembarked  at
Plymouth,  owing  to  the  painful  condition  of  his  arm.  It  turned  out  that  the
doctor  on  board  ship  had  mistaken  the  case ;  it  was  not  gout,  but  a  case  of
blood-poisoning,  resulting  in  a  very  bad  carbuncle  or  abscess  over  the  wrist
joint.

Since  my  brother's  return,  I  have  endeavoured  to  ascertain  from  him  the
exact  hour  at  which  he  wrote  to  me  on  March  2ist.  He  is  not  certain  whether
the  letter  to  me  was  written  before  noon  or  after  noon  of  that  day.  He
remembers  writing  four  short  letters  in  the  course  of  that  day — two  before
luncheon  and  two  after  luncheon.  Had  the  note  addressed  to  me  been  written
in  the  forenoon,  it  might  nearly  have  coincided  in  time  with  my  dream,  if
allowance  be  made  for  the  difference  of  time  between  Greenwich  and  Naples ;
for,  having  no  recollection  of  the  dream  when  I  woke,  according  to  custom,  at
an  early  hour  on  the  morning  of  the  2ist,  I  presume  I  must  have  dreamt  it  very
before  eight  o'clock,  the  hour  at  which  I  am  called.

I  may  add  that,  notwithstanding  an  absence  of  twelve  years  and  a  half,
other  has  altered  very  little  in  appearance ;  and  that  I  have  not  to  my
knowledge  ever  noted  a  dream  before  in  my  life.  E.  W.  HAMILTON.

[C.urney  adds: — ]

April  I2/A,  1888.

I  have  seen  the  diary  with  the  entry  (X,  Clem.)  under  Tuesday,  March
2oth.  1888,  though,  as  Mr.  Hamilton  says,  "  it  was  early  the  next  morning  that

142  CHAPTER    IV  [425

I  had  the  dream ;  for  I  generally  consider  all  that  appertains  to  bed  relates  to
the  day  on  which  one  gets  into  it."

I  have  seen  the  letter,  signed  Clement  E.  Hamilton,  and  dated  Naples,
March  2ist,  1888,  which  says,  "Am  suffering  from  very  severe  attack  of  gout  in
left  arm."— E.  G.

Somewhat  similar  again,  is  a  case  which  I  give  in  424  A,  where
a  little  boy  of  four  years  old  absent  from  his  home,  with  his  father,
becomes  aware,  while  asleep,  of  the  unexpected  fact  that  "  there  is  a  little
baby  in  bed  with  mamma."  "What  makes  you  think  that?"  asked  the
father,  to  'whom,  probably,  rather  than  to  little  Hughie,  the  mother  might
have  wished  to  send  this  information.  "  Because  I  saw  it  laying  beside
her  in  the  bed,"  was  the  ungrammatical,  but  decisive  reply.

Next  I  quote  in  424  B,  a  case  where  a  wife  between  sleeping  and
waking  sees  her  husband  carried  wounded  off  the  field  of  battle,  and
hears  his  voice  saying,  "Take  this  ring  off  my  finger  and  send  it  to
my  wife."

A  third  case  which  I  also  give  (in  424  C),  exemplifies  the  com-
munication of  an  emotional  distress  from  a  lady  to  her  distant  husband,
who  was  waked  by  hearing  her  call  him  on  the  night  after  she  had  heard
of  a  dangerous  accident  to  her  nephew.

425.  And  here  I  feel  bound  to  introduce  some  samples  of  a  certain
class  of  dreams, — more  interesting,  perhaps,  and  certainly  more  perplexing
than  any  others ; — but  belonging  to  a  category  of  phenomena  which  at
present  I  can  make  no  attempt  to  explain.  I  mean  precognitive  dreams ;
— pictures  or  visions  in  which  future  events  are  foretold  or  depicted,  gene-
rally with  more  or  less  of  symbolism, — and  generally  also  in  a  mode  so
remote  from  the  previsions  of  our  earthly  sagacity  that  we  shall  find  our-
selves driven,  in  a  later  discussion,  to  speak  in  vague  terms  of  glimpses
into  a  cosmic  picture-gallery ; — or  of  scenic  representations  composed  and
offered  to  us  by  intelligences  higher  and  more  distant  than  any  spirit
whom  we  have  known.  I  give  in  the  text  a  thoroughly  characteristic
example ; — characteristic  alike  in  its  definiteness,  its  purposelessness,  its
isolated  unintelligibility ; — and  others  are  quoted  in  Appendices.

(From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  505.)

From  Mr.  Alfred  Cooper,  of  9  Henrietta  Street,  Cavendish  Square,  W.

[This  account  was  orally  confirmed  by  him  to  Mr.  E.  Gurney,  June  6th,
1888.  It  is  written  by  Mr.  Cooper,  but  attested  also  by  the  Duchess  of
Hamilton.]

A  fortnight  before  the  death  of  the  late  Earl  of  L ,  in  1882,  I  called

upon  the  Duke  of  Hamilton,  in  Hill  Street,  to  see  him  professionally.  After
I  had  finished  seeing  him  we  went  into  the  drawing-room,  where  the  Duchess
was,  and  the  Duke  said  to  me,  "  Oh,  Cooper ;  how  is  the  Earl  ?  "

The  Duchess  said,  "  What  Earl  ?"  and  on  my  answering  "  Lord  L ,"  she

replied,  "  That  is  very  odd.  I  have  had  a  most  extraordinary  vision.  I  went
to  bed,  but  after  being  in  bed  a  short  time,  I  was  not  exactly  asleep,  but

426]  SLEEP  143

thought  I  saw  a  scene  as  if  from  a  play  before  me.  The  actors  in  it  were  Lord

L ,  in  a  chair,  as  if  in  a  fit,  with  a  man  standing  over  him  with  a  red  beard.

He  was  by  the  side  of  a  bath,  over  which  bath  a  red  lamp  was  distinctly
shown.''

I  then  said,  "  I  am  attending  Lord  L at  present ;  there  is  very  little  the

matter  with  him ;  he  is  not  going  to  die ;  he  will  be  all  right  very  soon."

Well,  he  got  better  for  a  week  and  was  nearly  well,  but  at  the  end  of  six  or
seven  days  after  this  I  was  called  to  see  him  suddenly.  He  had  inflammation
of  both  lungs.

I  called  in  Sir  William  Jenner,  but  in  six  days  he  was  a  dead  man.  There
were  two  male  nurses  attending  on  him  ;  one  had  been  taken  ill.  But  when  I
saw  the  other  the  dream  of  the  Duchess  was  exactly  represented.  He  was
standing  near  a  bath  over  the  Earl  and,  strange  to  say,  his  beard  was  red.
There  was  the  bath  with  the  red  lamp  over  it.  It  is  rather  rare  to  find  a  bath
with  a  red  lamp  over  it,  and  this  brought  the  story  to  my  mind.

The  vision  seen  by  the  Duchess  was  told  two  weeks  before  the  death  of
Lord  L .  It  is  a  most  remarkable  thing.

This  account,  written  in  1888,  has  been  revised  by  the  [late]  Duke  of  Man-
chester, father  of  the  Duchess  of  Hamilton,  who  heard  the  vision  from  his
daughter  on  the  morning  after  she  had  seen  it.

(Signed)        MARY  HAMILTON.
ALFRED  COOPER.

Her  Grace  had  been  reading  and  had  just  blown  out  the  candle.
Her  Grace  has  had  many  dreams  which  have  come  true  years  after.

ALFRED  COOPER.

[The  Duchess  only  knew  Lord  L by  sight,  and  had  not  heard  that  he

was  ill.  She  knew  she  was  not  asleep,  for  she  opened  her  eyes  to  get  rid  of
the  vision  and,  shutting  them,  saw  the  same  thing  again.]

An  independent  and  concordant  account  has  been  given  to  me  (F.  W.  H.  M.)
orally  by  a  gentleman  to  whom  the  Duchess  related  the  dream  on  the  morning
after  its  occurrence.

426.     Dr.  Bruce's  narrative,  which  I  next  give  in  426  A,  written  by
an  intelligent  man,  while  the  facts  were  yet  fresh,  seems  to  me  of  high
importance.     If  we  accept  the  rest  of  his  story,  we  must,  I  think,  suppose
that  the  sense  of  spiritual  presence  with  which  the  incident  began  was
more  than  a  mere  subjective  fancy.     Shall  we  refer  it  to  the  murdered
vr; — with  whom  the  dreamer  seemed  afterwards  to  be  in  tele-
pathic relation?     Or  shall  we  interpret  it  as  a  kind  of  summons  from  the
man,  drawing  on,  as  it  were,  his  friend's  spirit  to  witness  the  actual
r  and   the  subsequent  scene?     The  fact    that    another  friend,   in
rr  locality  apparently,  had  a  vision  of  similar  nature,  tells  som<
•  our  of  the  supposition  that  the  decedent's  spirit  was  operative  in
both  cases;  since  we  very  seldom — if  ever —  find  an  agent  producing  an
>sion  in  two  separate  places  at  once — or  nearly  so — except  at  or  just
the  moment  of  death.
In   this  view,  the  incident  resembles  a  scene  passing  in  a  spiritual

144  CHAPTER    IV  [427

world.  The  dying  man  summons  his  brother-in-law;  the  brother-in-law
visits  the  scene  of  murder,  and  there  spiritually  communicates  with  his
wife,  the  sister,  who  is  corporeally  in  that  scene,  and  then  sees  further
details  of  the  scene,  which  he  does  not  understand,  and  which  are  not
explained  to  him.

Fantastic  though  this  explanation  seems,  it  is  not  easy  to  hit  on  a
simpler  one  which  will  cover  the  facts  as  stated.  Could  we  accept  it,  we
should  have  a  kind  of  transition  between  two  groups  of  cases,  which
although  apparently  so  different  may  form  parts  of  a  continuous  series.  I
mean  the  cases  where  the  dreamer  visits  a  distant  scene,  and  the  cases
where  another  spirit  visits  the  dreamer.

427.  Taking,  then,  Dr.  Bruce's  case  to  bridge  the  interval  between  these
two  groups,  I  go  on  to  a  case  which  properly  belongs  to  the  second,  though  it
still  has  much  in  common  with  \hefirst.  I  shall  quote  Mrs.  Stone's  narra-
tive at  full  length  in  the  text ;  because  the  case  is,  in  my  judgment,  both
evidentially  very  strong,  and  also  in  the  naivete"  of  its  confusion,  extremely
suggestive  of  the  way  in  which  these  psychical  communications  are  made.
Mrs.  Storie,  who  is  now  dead,  was,  by  the  testimony  of  Edmund  Gurney,
Professor  Sidgwick,  and  others,  a  witness  eminently  deserving  of  trust ;
and,  besides  a  corroboration  from  her  husband  of  the  manifestation  of  a
troubled  dream,  before  the  event  was  known,  we  have  the  actual  notes
written  clown  by  her,  as  she  informed  us,  the  day,  or  the  day  after,  the
news  of  the  fatal  accident  arrived,  solely  for  her  own  use,  and  unmistak-
ably reflecting  the  incoherent  impressiveness  of  the  broken  vision.  These
notes  form  the  narrative  given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (vol.  i.  p.  370)
which  I  reproduce  here.  The  fact  that  the  deceased  brother  was  a  hvin
of  Mrs.  Storie's  adds  interest  to  the  case,  since  one  clue  (a  vague  one  as
yet)  to  the  causes  directing  and  determining  telepathic  communications
lies  in  what  seems  their  exceptional  frequency  between  twins  ; — the  closest
of  all  relations.

HOBART  TOWN,  July  1874.

On  the  evening  of  the  i8th  July,  I  felt  unusually  nervous.  This  seemed
to  begin  [with  the  occurrence  of  a  small  domestic  annoyance]  about  half-
past  8  o'clock.  When  I  went  to  my  room  I  even  felt  as  if  some  one  was
there.  I  fancied,  as  I  stepped  into  bed,  that  some  one  in  thought  tried  to  stop
me.  At  2  o'clock  I  woke  from  the  following  dream.  It  seemed  like  in  dissolv-
ing views.  In  a  twinkle  of  light  I  saw  a  railway,  and  the  puff  of  the  engine.  I
thought,  "  What's  going  on  up  there  ?  Travelling  ?  I  wonder  if  any  of  us  are
travelling  and  I  dreaming  of  it."  Some  one  unseen  by  me  answered,  "  No ;
something  quite  different — something  wrong."  "  I  don't  like  to  look  at  these
things,"  I  said.  Then  I  saw  behind  and  above  my  head  William's  upper  half
reclining,  eyes  and  mouth  half  shut ;  his  chest  moved  forward  convulsively,  and
he  raised  his  right  arm.  Then  he  bent  forward,  saying,  "  I  suppose  I  should
move  out  of  this."  Then  I  saw  him  lying,  eyes  shut,  on  the  ground,  flat.  The
chimney  of  an  engine  at  his  head.  I  called  in  excitement,  "  That  will  strike
him  !  "  The  "  some  one  "  answered  "  Yes — well,  here's  what  it  was  "  ;  and  im-
mediately I  saw  William  sitting  in  the  open  air — faint  moonlight — on  a  raised

427]  SLEEP  145

place  sideways.  He  raised  his  right  arm,  shuddered,  and  said,  "  I  can't  go  on,
or  back,  No.  "  Then  he  seemed  lying  flat.  I  cried  out,  "  Oh  !  Oh  !  "  and  others
seemed  to  echo,  "  Oh  !  Oh  !  "  He  seemed  then  upon  his  elbow,  saying,  "  Now
it  comes."  Then  as  if  struggling  to  rise,  turned  twice  round  quickly,  saying,  "  Is
it  the  train  ?  the  train,  the  train"  his  right  shoulder  reverberating  as  if  struck
from  behind.  He  fell  back  like  fainting  ;  his  eyes  rolled.  A  large  dark  object  came
between  us  like  panelling  of  wood,  and  rather  in  the  dark  something  rolled  over,
and  like  an  arm  was  thrown  up,  and  the  whole  thing  went  away  with  a  swish.
Close  beside  me  on  the  ground  there  seemed  a  long  dark  object.  I  called  out,
"They've  left  something  behind;  it's  like  a  man."  It  then  raised  its  shoulders
and  head,  and  fell  down  again.  The  same  some  one  answered,  "  Yes,  sadly.1'
[?  ••  }>.?,"  sadly.]  After  a  moment  I  seemed  called  on  to  look  up,  and  said,  "  Is
that  M/Mf  not  away  yet?"  Answered,  "  Ar0."  And  in  front,  in  light,  there  was
a  railway  compartment  in  which  sat  Rev.  Mr.  Johnstone,  of  Echuca.  I  said,
"  What's  he  doing  there  ?  "  Answered,  "  He's  there."  A  railway  porter  went  up

to  the  window  asking,  "  Have  you  seen  any  of ."     I  caught  no  more,  but  I

;.7  he  referred  to  the  thing  left  behind.     Mr.  Johnstone  seemed  to  answer
:  and  the  man  went  quickly  away — I  thought  to  look  for  it.     After  all
this  the  some  one  said  close  to  me,  "  Now  I'm  going."     I  started,  and  at  once  saw
(  a  tall  dark  figure  at  my  head  )

.iam's  back  at  my  side.      $      He  put  his  right  hand  (in  grief)  over  his  face,

and  the  other  almost  touching  my  shoulder,  he  crossed  in  front,  looking  stern

and  solemn.     There  was  a  flash  from  the  eyes,  and  I  caught  a  glimpse  of  a  fine

pale  face  like  ushering  him  along,  and  indistinctly  another.     I  felt  frightened,

and  called  out,  "  Is  he  angry  ?  "     "  Oh,  no."     "  Is  he  going  away  ?  "     Answered,

."  by  the  same  some  one,  and  I  woke  with  a  loud  sigh,  which  woke  my

husband,  who  said,  **  What  is  it  ?  "     I  told  him  I  had  been  dreaming  "  something

unpleasant " — named  a  "  railway,"  and  dismissed  it  all  from  my  mind  as  a  dream.

A\  asleep  again  I  fancied  the  "  some  one  "  said,  "  It's  all  gone,"  and  another

red,  "  I'll  come  and  remind  her."

The  news  reached  me  one  week  afterwards.     The  accident  had  happened

to  my  brother  on  the  same  night  about  half-past  9  o'clock.     Rev.  Mr.  Johnstone

and  his  wife  were  actually  in  the  train  which  struck  him.     He  was  walking

along  the  line,  which  is  raised  two  feet  on  a  level  country.     He  seemed  to  have

16  miles— must  have  been  tired  and  sat  down  to  take  off  his  boot,  which

side  him,  dozed  off  and  was  very  likely  roused  by  the  sound  of  the  train  ;

^p-trucks  had  passed  without  touching  him,  but  some  wooden  projection,

the  step,    had   touched  the  right  side  of  his  head,  bruised  his  right

nd  killed  him  instantaneously.     The  night  was  very  dark.     I  believe

.at  the  some  one  was  (from  something  in  the  way  he  spoke)  William

The  face  with  him  was  white  as  alabaster,  and  something  like  this

[a  small  sketch  pasted  on]  in   profile.     There  were  many  other  thoughts  or

words  seemed  to  pass,  but  they  are  too  many  to  write  down  here.

The  voice  of  the  "  some  one  "  unseen  seemed  always  above  the  figure  of
n  which    I    law      And   when    I    was  shown  the  compartment   of  the
•_re  with  Mr.  Johnstone,  the  some  one  seemed  on  a  line  between  me  and
>we  me.

[In  an  account-book  of  Mrs.  Storie's,  on  a  page  headed  July  1874,  we  find
lay  marked,  and  the  words,  "Dear  Willie  died,"  and   ''Dreamed,

ppended.
The  first  letter,  from  the  Rev.  J.  C.  Johnstone  to  the  Rev.  John  Stone,

VOL.    I.  K

146  CHAPTER     IV  [427

announcing  the  news  of  the  accident,  is  lost.     The  following  are  extracts  from
his  second  and  third  letters  on  the  subject : — ]

ECHUCA,  loth  August  1874.

The  place  where  Hunter  was  killed  is  on  an  open  plain,  and  there  was
consequently  plenty  of  room  for  him  to  escape  the  train  had  he  been  conscious ;
but  I  think  Meldrum's  theory  is  the  correct  one,  that  he  had  sat  down  to  adjust
some  bandages  on  his  leg  and  had  thoughtlessly  gone  off  to  sleep.  There  is
only  one  line  of  rails,  and  the  ground  is  raised  about  2  feet— the  ground  on
which  the  rails  rest.  He  had  probably  sat  down  on  the  edge,  and  lain  down
backwards  so  as  to  be  within  reach  of  some  part  of  the  train.  It  was  not
known  at  the  time  that  an  accident  had  occurred.  Mrs.  Johnstone  and  myself
were  in  the  train.  Meldrum  says  he  was  not  very  much  crushed.  The  top  of
the  skull  was  struck  off,  and  some  ribs  were  broken  under  the  armpit  on  one
side.  His  body  was  found  on  the  Sunday  morning  by  a  herd-boy  from  the
adjoining  station.

August  zgtk,  1874.

The  exact  time  at  which  the  train  struck  poor  Hunter  must  have  been
about  9.55  P.M.,  and  his  death  must  have  been  instantaneous.

[The  above  corresponds  with  the  account  of  the  inquest  in  the  Riverine
Herald 'for  July  22nd.  The  Melbourne  Argus  also  describes  the  accident  as
having  taken  place  on  the  night  of  Saturday,  the  i8th.

The  following  remarks  are  taken  from  notes  made  by  Professor  Sidgwick,
during  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Storie,  in  April  1884,  an^  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick
after  another  interview  in  September  1885  : — J

Mrs.  Storie  cannot  regard  the  experience  exactly  as  a  dream,  though  she
woke  up  from  it.  She  is  sure  that  it  did  not  grow  more  definite  in  recollection
afterwards.  She  never  had  a  series  of  scenes  in  a  dream  at  any  other  time  ;
and  she  has  never  had  anything  like  a  hallucination.  They  were  introduced  by
a  voice  in  a  whisper,  not  recognised  as  her  brother's.  He  had  sat  on  the  bank
as  he  appeared  in  the  dream.  The  engine  she  saw  behind  him  had  a  chimney
of  peculiar  shape,  such  as  she  had  not  at  that  time  seen ;  and  she  remembers
that  Mr.  Storie  thought  her  foolish  about  insisting  on  the  chimney — unlike  (he
said)  any  which  existed  ;  but  he  informed  her  when  he  came  back  from  Victoria,
where  her  brother  was,  that  engines  of  this  kind  had  just  been  introduced  there.
She  had  no  reason  to  think  that  any  conversation  between  the  porter  and  the
clergyman  actually  occurred.  The  persons  who  seemed  to  lead  her  brother
away  were  not  recognised  by  her,  and  she  only  saw  the  face  of  one  of  them.

Mr.  Storie  confirms  his  wife  having  said  to  him  at  the  time  of  the  dream,
"What  is  that  light?"  Before  writing  the  account  first  quoted,  she  had  just
mentioned  the  dream  to  her  husband,  l3ut  had  not  described  it.  She  desired
not  to  think  of  it,  and  also  was  unwilling  to  worry  him  about  it  because  of  his
Sunday's  work.  This  last  point,  it  will  be  observed,  is  a  confirmation  of  the
fact  that  the  dream  took  place  on  the  Saturday  night;  and  "it  came  out
clearly"  (Mrs.  Sidgwick  says)  "that  her  recollection  about  the  Saturday  night
was  an  independent  recollection,  and  not  read  back  after  the  accident  was
known."  The  strongly  nervous  state  that  preceded  the  dream  was  quite  unique
in  Mrs.  S.'s  experience.  But  as  it  appeared  that,  according  to  her  recollection,
it  commenced  at  least  an  hour  before  the  accident  took  place,  it  must  be
regarded  as  of  no  importance  evidentially.  The  feeling  of  a  presence  in  the
room  was  also  quite  unique.

428]  SLEEP  147

"  Here,"  says  Gurney,  "  the  difficulty  of  referring  the  true  elements  of
the  dream  to  the  agent's  mind  [is  very  great].  For  Mr.  Hunter  was
asleep;  and  even  if  we  can  conceive  that  the  image  of  the  advancing
engine  may  have  had  some  place  in  his  mind,  the  presence  of  Mr.  John-
stone  could  not  have  been  perceived  by  him.  But  it  is  possible,  of  course,
to  regard  this  last  item  of  correspondence  as  accidental,  even  though  the
dream  was  telepathic.  It  will  be  observed  that  the  dream  followed  the
accident  by  about  four  hours ;  such  deferment  is,  I  think,  a  strong  point  in
favour  of  telepathic,  as  opposed  to  independent,  clairvoyance."

I  propose  as  an  alternative  explanation, — for  reasons  which  I  endeavour
to  justify  in  later  chapters, — that  the  deceased  brother,  aided  by  some
other  dimly  discerned  spirit,  was  endeavouring  to  present  to  Mrs.
Storie  a  series  of  pictures  representing  his  death — as  realised  after  his
death.  I  add  this  last  clause,  because  one  of  the  marked  points  in
the  dream  was  the  presence  in  the  train  of  Mr.  Johnstone  of  Echuca
— a  fact  which  (as  Gurney  remarks)  the  dying  man  could  not  possibly
know.

I  have  dwelt  on  these  two  cases  of  Dr.  Bruce  and  Mrs.  Storie,  because
the  reader  will,  I  think,  come  to  feel,  as  our  evidence  unrolls  itself,  that  he
has  here  complex  experiences  which  are  confirmed  at  various  points  by
simpler  experiences,  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  these  stories  seem  a  con-
fused but  an  intimate  transcript  of  what  other  narratives  show  in  hints  and
glimpses  alone.

428.     In  Mrs.  Storie's  case  the  whole  experience,  as  we  have  seen,

presented  itself  as  a  dream  ;  yet  as  a  dream  of  quite  unusual  type,  like

a  series  of  pictures  presented  to  the  sleeper  who  was  still  conscious  that

she  was  lying  in  bed.     In  other  cases   the  "  pyschical  invasion  "  of  the

spirit  either  of  a  living  or  of  a  deceased  person  seems  to  set  up  a  variety

of  sleep-waking  states — both   in  agent  and  percipient.      In  one  bizarre

narrative  (that  of  Mr.  Pike)  which  I  give  in  428  A,  a  man  dreaming  that  he

turned  home  is  heard  in  his  home  calling  for  hot  water — and  has

if  a  singular  sense  of  "  bilocation  "  between  the  railway  carriage  and

•droom.    The  case  of  Mrs.  Manning  (428  B)  is  closely  similar,  except

that  Mrs.  Manning  is  not,  like  Mr.  Pike,  looking  forward  in  her  dream  to

liate  future,  but  is  reviving  with  singular  spontaneous  force  the

i  the  childish  past.     In  each  case  the  dream  has  set  the  dreamer  at

vrent  point  of  time  and  place  in  his  career, — with  such  vividness

-o  seem  to  perceive  him  at  that  imaginary  point.

Somewhat  similar  is  .1  narrative  of  Mr.  Newnham's  (428 C),  but  in  that

ice  he  himself  seems  not  only  to  be  transported  to  his  fiances  close

hood,  but  actnallv  to  touch  her  (as  she  also  feels  herself  touched

tl  moment  (of  goinur  upstairs  to  bed)  which  he  could  not

by  mere  ralrul.it ion.     This  case  tells  strongly  for

i  " — a  conception  which  we  shall  have  to  discuss  more

n  a  later  chapter.     In  another  Appendix  (428  D)  I  give  a  singular

148  CHAPTER    IV  [428

story  of  a  kind  of  encounter  in  dreamland,  apparently  more  or  less  remem-
bered by  both  persons.

An  invasion  of  this  type  coming  upon  a  sleeping  person  is  apt  to
induce  some  change  in  the  sleeper's  state,  which,  even  if  he  regards  it  as  a
complete  awakening,  is  generally  shown  not  to  be  so  in  fact  by  the  dream-
like character  of  his  own  recorded  feelings  and  utterances.  Gurney  called
these  "  Borderland  Cases,"  and  the  whole  collection  in  Phantasms  of  the
Living  will  repay  perusal.  I  introduce  one  such  case  here  in  my  text  as
being  at  once  very  perplexing,  and,  I  think,  very  strongly  attested.  I
knew  Mr.  and  Mrs.  T.,  who  certainly  were  seriously  anxious  for  com-
plete accuracy,  and  who  had  (as  the  narrative  shows)  made  a  brief
memorandum  and  consulted  various  persons  on  the  incident  at  the  time.
(I  may  add  that  November  iSth,  1863,  was  a  Wednesday,  so  that  Mr.  T.
returned  three  days  after  the  vision.)  I  quote  the  case  from  Phantasms  of
the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  425,  with  Edmund  Gurney's  comments.  The  account
was  written  by  Mrs.  T.  in  1883.

On  November  i8th,  1863,  I  was  living  near  Adelaide,  and  not  long  recovered
from  a  severe  illness  at  the  birth  of  an  infant,  who  was  then  five  months  old.
My  husband  had  also  suffered  from  neuralgia,  and  had  gone  to  stay  with  friends
at  the  seaside  for  the  benefit  of  bathing.  One  night  during  his  absence  the
child  woke  me  about  midnight ;  having  hushed  him  off  to  sleep,  I  said,  "  Now,
sir,  I  hope  you  will  let  me  rest !  "  I  lay  down,  and  instantly  became  conscious
of  two  figures  standing  at  the  door  of  my  room.  One,  M.  N.  [these  are  not  the
real  initials],  whom  I  recognised  at  once,  was  that  of  a  former  lover,  whose  mis-
conduct and  neglect  had  compelled  me  to  renounce  him.  Of  this  I  am  sure,
that  if  ever  I  saw  him  in  my  life,  it  was  then.  I  was  not  in  the  least  frightened  ;
but  said  to  myself,  as  it  were,  "  You  never  used  to  wear  that  kind  of  waistcoat."
The  door  close  to  which  he  stood  was  in  a  deep  recess  close  to  the  fireplace,
for  there  was  no  grate ;  we  burnt  logs  only.  In  that  recess  stood  a  man  in  a
tweed  suit.  I  saw  the  whole  figure  distinctly,  but  not  the  face,  and  for  this  reason  :
on  the  edge  of  the  mantelshelf  always  stood  a  morocco  leather  medicine
chest,  which  concealed  the  face  from  me.  (On  this  being  stated  to  our  friends,
the  Singletons,  they  asked  to  go  into  the  room  and  judge  for  themselves.  They
expressed  themselves  satisfied  that  would  be  the  case  to  any  one  on  the  bed
where  I  was.)  I  had  an  impression  that  this  other  was  a  cousin  of  M.  N.'s,  who
had  been  the  means  of  leading  him  astray  while  in  the  North  of  England.  I
never  saw  him  in  my  life ;  he  died  in  India.

M.  N.  was  in  deep  mourning  ;  he  had  a  look  of  unutterable  sorrow  upon  his
face,  and  was  deadly  pale.  He  never  opened  his  lips,  but  I  read  his  heart  as  if
it  were  an  open  book,  and  it  said,  "  My  father  is  dead,  and  I  have  come  into  his
property."  I  answered,  "  How  much  you  have  grown  like  your  father !  "  Then
in  a  moment,  without  appearing  to  walk,  he  stood  at  the  foot  of  the  child's  cot,
and  I  saw  distinctly  the  blueness  of  his  eyes  as  he  gazed  on  my  boy,  and  then
raised  them  to  Heaven  as  if  in  prayer.

All  vanished.  I  looked  round  and  remarked  a  trivial  circumstance,  viz.,
that  the  brass  handles  of  my  chest  of  drawers  had  been  rubbed  very  bright.
Not  till  then  was  I  conscious  of  having  seen  a  spirit,  but  a  feeling  of  awe  (not
fear)  came  over  me,  and  I  prayed  to  be  kept  from  harm,  although  there  was  no

428]  SLEEP  149

reason  to  dread  it.  I  slept  tranquilly,  and  in  the  morning  I  went  across  to  the
parsonage  and  told  the  clergyman's  wife  what  I  had  seen.  She,  of  course,
thought  it  was  merely  a  dream.  But  no — if  it  were  a  dream  should  I  not  have
seen  him  as  I  had  known  him,  a  young  man  of  twenty-two,  without  beard  or
whiskers  ?  But  there  was  all  the  difference  that  sixteen  years  would  make  in  a
man's  aspect.

On  Saturday  my  husband  returned,  and  my  brother  having  ridden  out  to  see
us  on  Sunday  afternoon,  I  told  them  both  my  vision  as  we  sat  together  on  the
verandah.  They  treated  it  so  lightly  that  I  determined  to  write  it  down  in  my
diary  and  see  if  the  news  were  verified.  And  from  that  diary  I  am  now  quoting.
Also  I  mentioned  it  to  at  least  twelve  or  fourteen  other  people,  and  bid  them
await  the  result.

And  surely  enough,  at  the  end  of  several  weeks,  my  sister-in-law  wrote  that

M  X.'s  father  died  at  C Common  on  November  i8th,  1863,  which  exactly

tallied  with  the  date  of  the  vision.  He  left  ,£45,000  to  be  divided  between  his
son  and  daughter,  but  the  son  has  never  been  found.

Many  people  in  Adelaide  heard  the  story  before  the  confirmation  came,  and
I  wrote  and  told  M.  N.'s  mother.  She  was  much  distressed  about  it,  fearing  he
was  unhappy.  She  is  now  dead.  My  husband  was  profoundly  struck  when  he
saw  my  diary  corresponding  exactly  to  the  news  in  the  letter  I  had  that  moment
received  in  his  presence.

Gurney  adds  the  following  note  and  comments  :  —

Mr.  T.  has  confirmed  to  us  the  accuracy  of  this  narrative,  and  Mrs.  T.  has
shown  to  one  of  us  a  memorandum  of  the  appearance  of  two  figures,  under  date
November  i8th,  in  her  diary  of  the  year  1863,  and  a  newspaper  obituary  con-
firms this  as  the  date  of  the  death.  We  learn  from  a  gentleman  who  is  a  near
relative  of  M.  N.'s,  that  M.  N.,  though  long  lost  sight  of,  was  afterwards  heard
of,  and  outlived  his  father.

If  we  regard  this  vision  as  telepathic,  the  agent  can  apparently  only  have

been  the  dying  man  ;  and  the  case  would  then  seem  to  be  an  extreme  instance

of  the  very  rare  type  where  the  agent's  personality  does  not  appear,  but  some

idea  or  picture  in  his  mind  is  reproduced  in  the  percipient's  mind  with  a  force

that  leads  to  an  actual  percept.     For,  as  the  narrator  herself  suggests,  had  she

bodied  forth  the  idea  of  M.  N.  from  her  own  unaided  resources,  she  would

-t  certainly  have  pictured  him  with  the  aspect  that  had  been  familiar  to

her.     But  though  we  have   to  draw  on    the  father's  mind  for  the  unfamiliar

features,  we  must  not  forget  the  possibilities  of  agency  below  the  threshold  of

And    it  is  at   least   worth   suggesting  that   the  percipient's

mind  brought  its  own  affinities  to  bear — exercised,  so  to  speak,  a  selective

influence;  and  that  thus  it  was  rather  owing  to  her  special  interest  in  the

son  than  to  the  conscious  occupation  of  his  father's  mind  with  him.  that  the

ithic  impulse  manifested  itself  to  her  in  this  particular  form.     As  for  the

appearance  of  the  second  figure,  it  may  possibly  have  been  also  telepathically

ccd  ;   but  I  prefer  to  lay  stress  on  it  simply  as  one  of  the  numerous  in-

hat  these  waking  percepts  are  really  dream-creations,  not  objective

presences.

I  should  not  now  take  it  for  granted  that  the  agent  here  "  can  appar-
ently only  have  been  the  dying  man."  I  think  it  possible,  in  the  light  of
our  now  somewhat  fuller  knowledge,  that  M.  N.'s  spirit  was  aware  of  his

150  CHAPTER    IV  [429

father's  death, — even  though  possibly  M.  N.'s  supraliminal  self  may  not
have  heard  of  it ; — so  that  the  invading  presence  in  this  case  may  have
been  the  discarded  lover  himself, — dreaming  on  his  own  account  at  a  dis-
tance from  Mrs.  T.  The  second  figure  I  regard  as  having  been  an  object
in  M.  N.'s  dream ; — symbolical  of  his  own  alienation  from  Mrs.  T.  All
this  sounds  fanciful;  but  I  may  remark  here  (as  often  elsewhere),  that  I
think  that  we  gain  little  by  attempting  to  enforce  our  own  ideas  of  simpli-
city upon  narratives  of  this  bizarre  type.

429.  These  cases  of  invasion    by  the  spirits  of   living  persons  pass
on  into  cases  of  invasion  by  the  dying,  of  which  several   instances  are
given  in  the  next  Appendix,  the  impression  being  generally  that  of  the
presence  of  the  visitant  in  the  percipient's  surroundings.     Sometimes  the
phantasm  is  seen  as  nearly  as  can  be  ascertained  at  the  time  of  death.
But  there  is  no  perceptible  break  in  the  series  at  this  point.     Some  appear
shortly  after  death  (e.g.  in  the  cases  of  Mr.  Wingfield,  429  C,  Mrs.  Green,
429  D,  and  Mr.  Dignowity,  429  E),  before  the  death  is  known  to  the
percipient.     Finally,  there  are  cases,  of  which  I  give  one  (429  F),  when
the  appearance  takes  place  some  time  after  death,  but  presents  features
unknown  to  the  percipient.

430.  We  have  now  briefly  reviewed  certain  phenomena  of  sleep  from
a  standpoint  somewhat  differing  from  that  which  is  commonly  taken.     We
have  not  (as  is  usual)  fixed  our  attention  primarily  on  the  negative  charac-
teristics of  sleep,  or  the  extent  to  which  it  lacks  the  capacities  of  waking
hours.    On  the  contrary,  we  have  regarded  sleep  as  an  independent  phase
of  personality,  existing  with  as  good  a  right  as  the  waking  phase,  and
dowered  with  imperfectly  expressed  faculties  of  its  own.     In  investigating
those  faculties  we  have  been  in   no  wise  deterred   by  the  fact   of  the
apparent  uselessness  of  some  of  them  for  our  waking  ends.       Useless  is  a  pre-
scientific,  even  an  anti-scientific  term,  which  has  perhaps  proved  a  greater
stumbling-block  to  research  in  psychology  than  in  any  other  science.     In
science  the  use  of  phenomena  is  to  prove  laws,  and  the  more  bizarre  and
trivial  the  phenomena,  the  greater  the  chance  of  their  directing  us  to  some
law  which  has  been  overlooked  till  now.     In  reviewing  the  phenomena  of
sleep,  then,  we  found  in  the  first  place  that  it  possesses  a  specific  recu-
perative energy  which  the  commonly  accepted  data  of  physiology  and
psychology  cannot  explain.     We  saw  that  in  sleep  there  may  be  an  in-
creased co-ordination  or  centralisation  of  muscular  control,  and  also  an

-  increased  vividness  of  entencephalic  perception,  indicating  a  more  inti-
mate appreciation  of  intra-peripheral  changes  than  is  manifest  in  waking
life.  In  accordance  with  this  view,  we  found  that  the  dreaming  self  may
undergo  sensory  and  emotional  experiences  apparently  more  intense  than
those  of  vigilance,  and  may  produce  thereby  lasting  effects  upon  the
waking  body  and  mind.  Similarly  again,  we  saw  that  that  specific  impress
on  body  and  mind  which  we  term  memory,  may  in  sleeping  or  hypnotic
states  be  both  wider  in  range  and  fuller  in  content  than  the  evocable

431]  SLEEP  151

memory  of  the  waking  day.     Nay,  not  memory  only,  but  power  of  infer-
ence, of  argument,  may  be  thus  intensified,  as  is  shown  by  the  solution  \
in  sleep  of  problems  which  have  baffled  waking  effort.

All  these  are  fragmentary  indications, — useless  for  practical  purposes  if
you  will, — of  sleeping  faculty  exercised  on  the  same  order  of  things  as  wak-
ing faculty,  and  with  comparable  or  even  superior  power.  But  we  were
bound  to  push  our  inquiry  further  still — we  were  bound  to  ask  whether  the
self  of  sleep  showed  any  faculty  of  a  quite  different  order  from  that  by
which  waking  consciousness  maintains  the  activity  of  man.  We  found
that  this  was  so  indeed ;  that  there  was  evidence  that  the  sleeping  spirit
was  susceptible  of  relations  unfettered  by  spatial  bonds;  of  telaesthetic
perception  of  distant  scenes;  of  telepathic  communication  with  distant
persons,  or  even  with  spirits  of  whom  we  can  predicate  neither  distance
nor  nearness,  since  they  are  released  from  the  prison  of  the  flesh.

431.  The  inference  which  all  this  evidence  suggests  is  entirely  in
accordance  with  the  hypothesis  on  which  my  whole  work  is  based.

I  have  assumed  that  man  is  an  organism  informed  or  possessed  by  a
soul.  This  view  obviously  involves  the  hypothesis  that  we  are  living  a  life
in  two  worlds  at  once  ;  a  planetary  life  in  this  material  world,  to  which  the
organism  is  intended  to  react ;  and  also  a  cosmic  life  in  that  spiritual  or
metetherial  world,  which  is  the  native  environment  of  the  soul.  From
that  unseen  world  the  energy  of  the  organism  needs  to  be  perpetually
replenished.  That  replenishment  we  cannot  understand  :  we  may  figure
it  to  ourselves  as  a  protoplasmic  process ; — as  some  relation  between
protoplasm,  ether,  and  whatever  is  beyond  ether,  on  which  it  is  at  present
useless  to  speculate.

Admitting,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  these  vast  assumptions,  it  will  be

to  draw  the  further  inference  that  it  may  be  needful  that  the  soul's

attention  should  be  frequently  withdrawn  from  the  business  of  earthly  life,

so  as  to  pursue  with  greater  intensity  what  we  may  call  its  protoplasmic

task, — the  maintenance  of  the  fundamental,  pervading  connection  between

the  organism  and  the  spiritual  world.     Nay,  this  profounder  condition,  as

ruling  to  more  primitive,  more  fundamental  needs,  will  itself  be  more

primitive  than  the  waking  state.       And  this  is  so :  sleep  is  the  infant's

dominant  phase  :  the  pre-natal  state  resembles  sleep  rather  than  waking ;

and  so  does  the  whole  life-condition  of  our  lowly  ancestors.     And  as  the

mg  state  is  the  more  primitive,  so  also  is  it  the  more  generalised,  and

lore  plastic.     Out  of  this  dreamy  abeyance  between  two  worlds,  the

s  of  the  material  world  are  constantly  developing  some  form  of  alert

activity,  some  faculty  which  was  potential  only  until  search  for  food  and

fence  against  enemies  compelled  a  closer  heed  to  "the  life  of  rela-

the  relation  should  become  only  that  of  victim  to  devourer.
hall  thus  have  two  phases  of  personality  developing  into  scpiruc
rses  an«l   in  separate  directions  from  a  parent   stem.     The  waking
personality  will  develop  external  sense  organs  and  will  fit  itself  progres-

152  CHAPTER    IV  [432

sively  for  the  life  of  relation  to  the  external  world.  It  will  endeavour
to  attain  an  ever  completer  control  over  the  resources  of  the  personality,
and  it  will  culminate  in  what  we  term  genius  when  it  has  unified  the  sub-
liminal as  far  as  possible  with  the  supraliminal  in  its  pursuit  of  deliberate
waking  ends.

The  sleeping  personality  will  develop  in  ways  less  easy  to  foresee.
What,  on  any  theory,  will  it  aim  at,  beyond  the  familiar  intensification  of
recuperative  power?  We  can  only  guess,  on  my  theory,  that  its  develop-
ment will  show  some  increasing  trace  of  the  soul's  less  exclusive  absorption
in  the  activity  of  the  organism.  The  soul  has  withdrawn  from  the  special-
ised material  surface  of  things  (to  use  such  poor  metaphor  as  we  can)  into
a  realm  where  the  nature  of  the  connection  between  matter  and  spirit —
whether  through  the  intermediacy  of  the  ether  or  otherwise — is  more
profoundly  discerned.  That  same  withdrawal  from  the  surface  which,
while  it  diminishes  power  over  complex  muscular  processes,  increases
power  over  profound  organic  processes,  may  at  the  same  time  increase  the
soul's  power  of  operating  in  that  spiritual  world  to  which  sleep  has  drawn
it  nearer.

On  this  view  of  sleep,  be  it  observed,  there  will  be  nothing  to  surprise
us  in  the  possibility  of  increasing  the  proportion  of  the  sleeping  to  the
waking  phase  of  life  by  hypnotic  suggestion.  All  we  can  say  is  that,
while  the  soul  must  insist  on  at  least  the  minimum  quantity  of  sleep
needful  to  keep  the  body  alive,  we  can  see  no  superior  limit  to  the
quantity  of  sleep  which  it  may  choose  to  take, — the  quantity  of  attention,
that  is,  which  it  may  choose  to  give  to  the  special  operations  of  sleep  as
compared  with  those  of  waking  life.

432.  At  this  point  we  must  for  the  present  pause.  The  suggested
hypothesis  will  indeed  cover  the  actual  facts  as  to  sleep  adduced  in  this
chapter.  But  it  covers  them  by  virtue  of  assumptions  too  vast  to  be
accepted  without  further  confirmation.  It  must  necessarily  be  our  duty
in  later  chapters  to  trace  the  development  of  the  sleeping  personality  in
both  the  directions  indicated  above; — in  the  direction  of  organic  re-
cuperation through  the  hypnotic  trance,  and  in  the  direction  of  the  soul's
independent  operation  through  that  form  of  trance  which  leads  to  posses-
sion  and  to  ecstasy.  We  shall  begin  at  once  in  the  next  chapter  to  trace
out  that  great  experimental  modification  of  sleep,  from  which,  under  the
names  of  mesmerism  or  of  hypnotism,  results  of  such  conspicuous  practical
value  have  already  been  won.

500]

CHAPTER    V
HYPNOTISM

ctXero  8c  pdf3&ov  rg  r'  av&puv  o^ara

<5v  €0eA«,  TOVS  8'  avre  KCU  vTrvuovras  ryapa.

—  HOMER.

500.  A  very  complex  subject  must  in  this  chapter  be  discussed  with
as  much  completeness  as  brevity  will  allow.  It  will  be  convenient  to  lay
at  once  before  the  reader  the  main  divisions  under  which  Hypnotism  will
be  treated  here.

(a)  In  the  first  place  (sections  500-504) ,  I  shall  endeavour  to  trace
the  connection  of  hypnotism  with  the  subjects  of  the  former  chapters, —
especially  with  sleep  and  hysteria, — and  to  indicate  what  kind  of  advance
in  faculty  may  be  expected  from  such  experimental  developments  of  sleep-
waking  states,  and  of  subliminal  activity  in  general,  as  those  to  which  the
broad  general  title  of  hypnotism  (or  hypnotic  suggestion)  is  now  commonly
given.  Hypnotism  is  too  often  presented  as  though  it  comprised  a  quite
isolated  group  of  phenomena.  Until  it  is  more  definitely  correlated  with
other  phases  of  personality,  it  can  hardly  occupy  the  place  which  it  merits
in  any  psychological  scheme.

(/?)  The  ordinary  methods  and  theories  of  hypnotism  must  occupy  the
second  division  of  this  chapter  (505-516).  I  shall  not,  indeed,  repeat
the  customary  historical  survey ; — feeling  that  the  history  of  hypnotism
is  a  history  rather  of  isolated  and  scattered  reconnaissances  than  of  syste-
matic advance  upon  the  unknown.  Rather  I  shall  try  to  analyse  the
intrinsic  nature  of  the  stimuli  employed,  and  to  compare  them  with  the
results  attained.  My  general  conclusion  will  be  one  which  has  now
become  widely  prevalent — namely,  that  small  physiological  causes  cannot
be  credited  with  these  profound  psychological  effects.  Faute  de  mieux,
and  with  some  reserves  as  to  telepathic  action,  I  shall  assent  to  the
dogma  of  the  Nancy  school, — that  hypnotic  agencies  may  be  simplified
into  suggestion  and  self-suggestion.

}    In  the  third  place,  however  (517-525),  I  shall  show  that  these

words   bring   no  true  solution; — that  they  are  mere  names  which   dis-

our  ignorance.     We  do  not  know  either  why  a  subject  obeys  any

suggestion  which  may  be  made  to  him,  or  how  he  obeys  it.     We  do  not

'S3

I54  CHAPTER    V  [500

know  this  even  when  the  suggestion  bears  upon  some  easy,  external
matter.  Still  deeper  is  the  mystery  when  the  suggestion  is  an  organic  or
therapeutic  command ; — when  the  subject  is  old  (for  instance)  not  to  feel
an  aching  tooth.  If  he  cannot  stop  feeling  the  ache  by  his  own  strong
desire,  how  can  he  stop  feeling  it  out  of  deference  to  a  doctor?  Unless
there  be  some  supernormal  influence  or  effluence — telepathic  or  mesmeric
— from  doctor  to  patient,  we  cannot  credit  the  doctor  with  doing  more
than  set  in  motion  some  self-suggestive  machinery  by  which  the  patient
cures  his  toothache  himself.  Where  no  such  telepathic  influence  is
exercised  (and  I  do  not  claim  that  it  is  often  exercised,  although  I  believe
that  it  is  exercised  sometimes),  suggestion  is  merely  equivalent  to  self-
suggestion  ; — and  self-suggestion  remains  for  our  solution  as  an  inexplic-
able and  capricious  responsiveness ; — a  sudden  obedience  of  subliminal
agencies  to  supraliminal  commands,  which  at  certain  times  will  modify
both  body  and  mind  far  more  effectively  than  any  exertion  of  the  ordinary
will.  No  serious  attempt  has  yet  been  made  to  explain  this  obedience  to
control ;  and  before  trying  to  explain  it  we  must  review  its  range  and
limits  from  a  psychological  as  well  as  from  a  physiological  standpoint.  In
the  meantime  I  define  suggestion  as  successful  appeal  to  the  subliminal
self.

(S)  My  fourth  sub-chapter,  therefore  (526-562),  will  briefly  set  forth
the  main  achievements  of  suggestion  ; — including  that  most  important
of  all  achievements,  the  suggestive  or  hypnotic  induction  of  super-
normal powers.  Even  apart  from  these  new  powers,  which  indefinitely
extend  the  significance  of  the  whole  inquiry,  it  will  be  found  that  the
work  of  suggestion,  even  when  it  seems  to  be  purely  inhibitive,  is  in  fact
essentially  dynamogenic ; — that  however  capricious  or  grotesque  its  effects
may  be,  they  are,  nevertheless,  effects  of  vitalisation ; — that  some  energy  is
added,  though  in  an  irregular  fashion,  to  both  organic  and  psychical
operations.

(e)  In  \hefifth  place  (563-578),  our  task  must  be  to  inquire  as  to
the  nature  and  source  of  this  energy  which  both  telepathic  suggestion
and  self-suggestion  imply.  Self-suggestion, — which  is  probably  still  in  its
infancy, — has  thus  far  proved  successful  on  a  large  scale  mainly  when
applied  according  to  one  or  other  of  two  popular  schemes, — the  "  Miracles
of  Lourdes,"  and  "  Christian  Science  "  or  Mind-healing.  As  to  the  value  of
the  Lourdes  legend  I  shall  give  the  reader  ample  opportunity  of  judging
for  himself.  But  as  to  "Christian  Science,"  I  shall  endeavour  to  show
that  here,  at  least,  beneath  a  mask  of  vulgar  crudity,  certain  ancient
philosophic  conceptions  of  permanent  value  are  reasserting  themselves  in
the  modern  world.

(£)  Lastly,  then  (579-583),  we  are  driven — here  as  elsewhere — to
consider  how  far  it  may  be  possible  for  science  to  confirm  and  utilise
man's  ancient  instinct  of  trust  in  the  unseen.  I  shall  state  in  answer  my
belief  that  that  trust  has  never  as  yet  (save  in  the  very  highest  of  our  race)

501]  HYPNOTISM  155

risen  within  measurable  distance  of  the  actual  and  provable  truth ;  that
even  now  the  organism  of  each  man  is  passing  and  must  pass  increasingly
under  the  control  of  his  spirit ;  and  that  his  spirit  indraws  from  the  met-
etherial  environment  an  energy  limited  only  by  the  intensity  of  its  own
appeal.  In  things  physical  as  well  as  in  things  spiritual,  "  by  grace  we  are
saved,  through  faith."

501.  In  the  course  of  this  study  of  human  personality  and  human
evolution,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  at  every  stage  of  our  collection  and  dis-
cussion of  evidence  we  may  attain  a  somewhat  wider  conception  of  the
directions  in  which  that  evolution  may  be  looked  for,  or  may  even  be
actively  pursued.

Our  discussion  in  Chapter  II.  of  the  ways  in  which  human  personality
is  apt  to  disintegrate  helped  us  to  grasp  in  Chapter  III.  the  conception  of
genius  as  an  integration  of  subliminal  faculty  with  supraliminal, — an  utilisa-
tion of  a  greater  proportion  of  man's  psychical  being  in  subservience  to
ends  desired  by  his  supraliminal  control.  Genius,  indeed,  seems  at
present  attainable  rather  by  fortunate  sports  of  heredity  than  by  any
systematic  training;  but  it  is,  nevertheless,  important  to  realise  that  a
level  thus  definitely  higher  than  our  own  has  already  often  been  reached
in  the  normal  progress  of  the  race.

In  Chapter  IV.  we  reviewed  the  sleeping  phase  of  our  personality.
Dreams  introduced  us  —  though  incoherently  and  obscurely  —  into  a
strangely  widened  conception  of  man's  environment  and  his  destiny.
They  showed  him  in  relation  with  a  world  profounder  than  even  genius
had  apprehended,  and  on  the  threshold  of  powers  to  which  not  even
genius  has  aspired.

U'e  were  led  on,  indeed,  into  a  conception  of  sleep  which,  whether
or  not   it  prove   ultimately   in   any  form    acceptable  by  science,    is   at
any   rate  in  deep  congruity  with  the  evidence   brought   forward  in  this
work.     Our  human  life,  in  this  view,  exists  and  energises,  at  the  present
moment,  both  in  the  material  and  in  the  spiritual  world.     Human  per-
sonality, as  it  has   developed   from   lowly   ancestors,  has  become  differ-
entiated into  two  phases;    one  of   them  mainly  adapted  to  material  or
planetary,  the  other  to  spiritual  or  cosmic  operation.     The   subliminal
.lainly  directing  the  sleeping  phase,  is  able  either  to  rejuvenate  the
sm  by  energy  drawn  in  from  the  spiritual  world  ; — or,  on  the  other
temporarily  and  partially  to  relax  its  connection  with  that  organism,
in  order  to  expatiate  in  the  exercise  of  supernormal  powers; — telepathy,
aesia,  ecstasy.

Such  were  the  suggestions  of  the  evidence  as  to  dream  and  vision ;

vadd,  will  be  seen  to  be  the  suggestions  of  spontaneous  somnam-

.  which  h  is  not  yet  fallen  under  our  discussion.     Yet  claims  so  large

1  corroboration  from  observation  and   experiment  ;ilong

lificrcnt  lines  of  approach.     Some  such  corroboration  \v<-  have,  in

anticipatory  fashion,  already  acquired.     Discussing   in  Chapter   II.    the

156  CHAPTER    V  [502

various  forms  of  disintegration  of  personality,  we  had  frequent  glimpses
of  beneficent  subliminal  powers.  We  saw  the  deepest  stratum  of  the  self
intervening  from  time  to  time  with  a  therapeutic  object  (in  the  cases,
e.g.  of  "  Iconic  III. "  or  "  Le"onore "  in  230  A,  or  Anna  Winsor  in
237  A),  or  we  caught  it  in  the  act  of  exercising,  even  if  aimlessly
or  sporadically,  some  faculty  beyond  supraliminal  reach.  And  we
observed,  moreover,  that  the  agency  by  which  these  subliminal  powers
were  invoked  was  generally  the  hypnotic  trance.  Of  the  nature  of  that
trance  I  then  said  nothing;  it  was  manifest  only  that  here  was  some
kind  of  induced  or  artificial  somnambulism,  which  seemed  to  syste-
matise that  beneficial  control  of  the  organism  which  spontaneous  sleep-
waking  states  had  exercised  in  a  fitful  way.  It  must  plainly  be  our
business  to  understand  ab  initio  these  hypnotic  phenomena ;  to  push  as
far  as  may  be  what  seems  like  an  experimental  evolution  of  the  sleeping
phase  of  personality.

502.  Let  us  suppose,  then,  that  we  are  standing  at  our  present  point,
but  with  no  more  knowledge  of  hypnotic  phenomena  than  existed  in  the
boyhood  of  Mesmer.  We  shall  know  well  enough  what,  as  experimental
psychologists,  we  desire  to  do ;  but  we  shall  have  little  notion  of  how  to
set  about  it.  We  desire  to  summon  at  our  will,  and  to  subdue  to  our
use,  these  rarely  emergent  sleep-waking  faculties.  On  their  physical  side,
we  desire  to  develop  their  inhibition  of  pain  and  their  reinforcement  of
energy;  on  their  intellectual  side,  their  concentration  of  attention;  on
their  emotional  side,  their  sense  of  freedom,  expansion,  joy.  Above  all,
we  desire  to  get  hold  of  those  supernormal  faculties — telepathy  and
telaesthesia — of  which  we  have  caught  fitful  glimpses  in  somnambulism
and  in  dream.

Yet  to  such  hopes  as  these  the  so-called  "  experience  of  ages "
(generally  a  very  short  and  scrappy  induction  !)  will  seem  altogether  to
refuse  any  practical  outcome.  History,  indeed, — with  the  wonted  vague-
ness of  history, — will  offer  us  a  long  series  of  stories  of  the  strange  sana-
tive suggestion  or  influence  of  man  on  man ;  — beginning,  say  with  David
and  Saul,  or  with  David  and  Abishag,  and  ending  with  Valentine  Great-
rakes, — or  with  the  Stuarts'  last  touch  for  the  King's  evil.  But  in  know-
ledge of  how  actually  to  set  about  it,  we  should  still  be  just  on  the  level
of  the  Seven  Sages.1

And  now  let  the  reader  note  this  lesson  on  the  unexhausted  possibili-
ties of  human  organisms  and  human  life.  Let  him  take  his  stand  at  one
of  the  modern  centres  of  hypnotic  practice, — in  Professor  Bernheim's
hospital-ward,  or  Dr.  van  Renterghem's  clinique  ;  let  him  see  the  hundreds
of  patients  thrown  daily  into  hypnotic  trance,  in  a  few  moments,  and  as  a
matter  of  course ;  and  let  him  then  remember  that  this  process,  which

1  Long  ago  Solon  had  said,  apparently  of  mesmeric  cure —

Tbv  5(  Kcucais  votiffoiffi  KVKU>IJ.SVOV  apyaXfais  re
^TJJ'  vyirj.

503]  HYPNOTISM  157

now  seems  as  obvious  and  easy  as  giving  a  pill,  was  absolutely  unknown
not  only  to  Galen  and  to  Celsus,  but  to  Hunter  and  to  Harvey ;  and  when
at  last  discovered  was  commonly  denounced  as  a  fraudulent  fiction,
almost  up  to  the  present  day.  Nay,  if  one  chances  to  have  watched  as
a  boy  some  cure  effected  in  Dr.  Elliotson's  Mesmeric  Hospital,  before
neglect  and  calumny  had  closed  that  too  early  effort  for  human  good ; — if
one  has  seen  popular  indifference  and  professional  prejudice  check  the  new
healing  art  for  a  generation ; — is  not  one  likely  to  have  imbibed  a  deep  dis-
trust of  all  a  priori  negations  in  the  matter  of  human  faculty ; — of  all  obiter
dicta  of  eminent  men  on  subjects  with  which  they  do  not  happen  to  be
acquainted?  Would  not  one,  after  such  an  experience,  rather  choose
(with  Darwin)  "  the  fool's  experiment "  than  any  immemorial  ignorance
which  has  stiffened  into  an  unreasoning  incredulity?

503.  Mesmer's  experiment  was  almost  a  "  fool's  experiment,"  and
Mesmer  himself  was  almost  a  charlatan.  Yet  Mesmer  and  his  successors, —
working  from  many  different  points  of  view,  and  following  many  divergent
theories, — have  opened  an  ever-widening  way,  and  have  brought  us  now  to
a  position  where  we  can  fairly  hope,  by  experiments  made  no  longer  at
random,  to  reproduce  and  systematise  most  of  those  phenomena  of  spon-
taneous somnambulism  which  once  seemed  to  lie  so  tantalisingly  beyond
our  grasp.

That  promise  is  great  indeed ;  yet  it  is  well  to  begin  by  considering
precisely  how  far  it  extends.  We  must  not  suppose  that  we  shall  at  once
be  subduing  to  our  experiment  a  central,  integrated,  reasonable  Self.  On
the  contrary  (as  has  already  been  explained  in  Chapter  III.,  section  304) ,
it  has  been  characteristic  of  hysteria  and  usually  also  of  somnambulism
that  the  spontaneous  changes,  although  subliminal,  have  been  piecemeal
changes ;  that  (to  adopt  Hughlings- Jackson's  well-known  phraseology)
they  have  involved  not  highest-level  but  middle-level  centres ;  not  those
centres  which  determine  highest  perception  and  ideation,  but  centres
which  control  complex  co-ordinated  movements,  such  as  the  synergies
necessary  for  walking  or  for  sight  or  for  dreamlike  unintelligent
speech.

This  metaphor  of  higher  and  lower,  although  it  may  sound  inappro-
priate, is  still  of  service  when  we  are  dealing  with  stages  of  faculty  all  of
them  ex  hypothesi  below  the  level  of  the  conscious  threshold.  For  our
il  evidence  as  to  subliminal  processes  has  by  this  time  obliged  us
to  assume  that  there  exists  in  that  submerged  region  also  a  gradation  of
somewh.it  similar  type.  We  may  reach  by  artifice  (that  is  to  say)  some
subliminal  faculty,  and  yet  we  may  not  be  reaching  any  central  or  con-
trolling judgment.  We  may  be  reaching  centres  which  exercise  over
those  subliminal  faculties  only  a  fragmentary  sway  ;  so  that  we  shall  have
no  reason  for  surprise  if  there  be  something  dreamlike,  something  of
:erie  or  of  incoherence,  in  the  man  which  our  experiment

evokes.  We  must  be  content  (at  first  at  any  rate)  if  we  can  affect  the

158  CHAPTER    V  [504

personality  in  the  same  limited  way  as  hysteria  and  somnambulism  have
affected  it;  but  yet  can  act  deliberately  and  usefully  where  these  have
acted  hurtfully  and  at  random.  It  is  enough  to  hope  that  we  may  inhibit
pain,  as  it  is  inhibited  for  the  hysteric  ;  or  concentrate  attention,  as  it  is
concentrated  for  the  somnambulist;  or  change  the  tastes  and  passions,  as
these  are  changed  in  alternating  personalities ;  or  (best  of  all)  recover  and
fix  something  of  that  supernormal  faculty  of  which  we  have  caught  fugitive
glimpses  in  vision  and  dream.  Our  proof  of  the  origination  of  any  pheno-
menon in  the  deeper  strata  of  our  be  ing  must  lie  in  the  intrinsic  nature  of
the  faculty  exhibited  ; — not  in  the  wisdom  of  its  actual  direction.  That
must  often  depend  on  the  order  given  from  above  the  threshold  ;  just
as  the  magic  mill  of  the  fable  continues  magical,  although,  for  lack  of  the
proper  formula  to  stop  it,  it  be  still  grinding  out  superfluous  salt  at  the
bottom  of  the  sea.

504.  I  hope  that  this  brief  introduction  may  be  of  service  in  two
different  ways.  In  the  first  place,  it  may  show  the  reader  that  hypnotism,
with  its  bewildering  labyrinth  of  marvels,  has  yet  a  legitimate,  an  essential,
almost  a  predictable  place  in  experimental  psychology.  It  is  no  longer
possible  for  the  philosopher  to  relegate  it  to  the  physician ; — any  more  than
for  the  physician  to  relegate  it  to  the  quack.  It  is  a  discovery  which  has
been  achieved  almost  at  random,  and  which  is  still  used  in  tentative
ignorance ;  but  it  is  just  the  kind  of  discovery  which  was  to  be  desired
and  expected ;  and  if  it  had  not  come  to  us  in  one  way,  it  must,  sooner
or  later,  have  come  to  us  in  another.  And  in  the  second  place,  this  pre-
liminary notion  of  what  might  be  expected  from  the  experimental  control
of  sleep-waking  states  should  prepare  the  student  for  what  has  seemed  to
many  an  observer  a  strange  anomaly — the  contrast,  namely,  between  the
intrinsic  potency  of  the  faculties  thus  evoked  and  the  absurd  ends  to
which  (in  public  exhibitions  especially)  they  often  seem  to  be  directed.
We  have  advanced,  so  to  say,  within  sight  of  the  great  stream  of  our  being,
but  we  must  not  expect  as  yet  to  control  more  than  some  eddying  back-
water or  subsidiary  channel.

The  early  history  of  mesmerism  or  hypnotism  was  certain,  on  these
showings,  to  be  but  a  confused  and  disjointed  story.  The  achievements
of  hypnotisers  (even  when  cleared  from  much  needless  or  exaggerated
controversy)  are  not  like  a  series  of  parallel  advances,  all  of  them  arrested
by  the  same  obstacle  at  the  same  point.  Rather  they  resemble  a  handful
of  rapid  incursions  into  an  unknown  country,  each  of  them  more  or  less
successful,  but  encountering  difficulties  of  various  kinds,  which  no  per-
sistent effort  is  made  to  overcome.  That  is  to  say,  the  inquiry  has  been
mainly  the  work  of  a  few  distinguished  men,  who  have  each  of  them
pushed  some  useful  ideas  as  far  as  they  could,  but  whose  work  has  not
been  adequately  supported  by  successors.  I  should  much  doubt  whether
there  have  been  a  hundred  men  in  all  countries  together,  at  the  ordinary
level  of  professional  intelligence,  who  during  the  century  since  Mesmer  have

506]  HYPNOTISM  159

treated  hypnotism  as  the  serious  study  of  their  lives.  Some  few  of  the
men  who  have  so  treated  it  have  been  men  of  great  force  and  strong  con-
victions ;  and  it  will  be  found  that  there  has  consequently  been  a  series  of
sudden  developments  of  groups  of  phenomena,  differing  much  from  each
other,  but  corresponding  with  the  special  beliefs  and  desires  of  the  person
who  headed  each  movement  in  turn.  I  will  mention  some  of  the  chief
examples,  so  as  to  show  the  sporadic  nature  of  the  efforts  made,  and  the
great  variety  of  the  phenomena  elicited.  Such  a  review  should  suggest
also  that  if  some  of  those  phenomena  have  seldom  been  repeated  since
the  burst  of  novel  interest  when  they  were  first  observed,  this  by  no  means
proves  that  they  may  not  again  recur  if  sufficiently  sought  for.  There  has
not  been  as  yet  experience  enough  for  more  than  a  mere  beginning  in
some  few  of  the  many  directions  in  which  the  problem  of  the  limits  of
suggestion — of  the  capacity  of  the  subliminal  self — must  sooner  or  later
be  pushed.

505.  The  first  name,  then,  that  must  be  mentioned  is,  of  course,  that
of  Mesmer  himself.     He  believed  primarily  in  a  sanative  effluence,  and
his  method  seems  to  have  been  a  combination  of  passes,  suggestion,  and  a
supposed  "  metallotherapy  "  or  "  magneto-therapy  " — the  celebrated  baquet
—which  no  doubt  was  merely  a  form  of  suggestion.     His  results,  though
very  imperfectly  described,  seem  to  have  been  peculiar  to  himself.     The
crise  which  many  of  his  patients  underwent  sounds  like  a  hysterical  attack  ;
but  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  rapid  improvement  in  symptoms  often  fol-
lowed it,  or  he  would  not  have  made  so  great  an  impression  on  savants  as
well   as  on  the   fashionable  world  of  Paris.     To  Mesmer,  then,  we  owe
the  first  conception  of  the  therapeutic  power  of  a  sudden  and  profound
nervous  change.     To  Mesmer,  still  more  markedly,  we  owe  the  doctrine
of    a    nervous    influence   or   effluence    passing   from    man   to    man, — a
doctrine    which,    though    it   must   assume    a  less    exclusive    importance
than  he  assigned  to  it,  cannot,   in   my  view,   be  altogether  ignored  or
denied.

506.  The  leading  figure  among  his  immediate  successors,  the  Marquis
;ys£gur,  seems  from  his  writings  l  to  have  been  one  of  the  ablest  and
<  and  id  men  who  have  practised  mesmerism ;  and  he  was  one  of  the

very  few  who  have  conducted  experiments,  other  than  therapeutic,  on  a
large  scale.     The  somnambulic  state  may  almost  be  said  to  have  been  his
discovery  ;  and  he  obtained  clairvoyance  or  telaesthesia  in  so  many  in-
stances, and  recorded  them  with  so  much  of  detail,  that  it  is  hard  to  att ri-
ll to  mal-observation,  or  even  to  telepathy  from  persons  present.
r  observers,  as  Bertrand,  a  physician  of  great  promise,  folloxved  in  the
same  track,  and  this  brief  period  was  perhaps  the  most  fertile  in  disin-
terested experiments  that  our  subject  has  yet  known.     Much  was  then

1    Kecherche*  Physiohfiques  tur  Cl/cmme   (Paris,    i8il);  Mtmoirts  pour  Sfrvir  a
Cement  du  Magnttisme  A>  :<me  Animal  «m-

rfs  avff  diverges  brant  he  s  tie  la  Physique  Genirale ;  &c.

160  CHAPTER    V  [507

done  in  Germany  also ;  and  there,  too,  there  is  scattered  testimony  to
supernormal  powers.1

507.  Next  came  the  era  of  Elliotson  in  England,  and  of  Esdaile  in  his
hospital  at  Calcutta.     Their  method  lay  in  mesmeric  passes,  Elliotson's
object  being  mostly  the  direct  cure  of  maladies,  Esdaile's  a  deep  anaesthesia,
under  which  he  performed  hundreds  of  serious  operations.     His  success
in   this    direction   was    absolutely  unique  ; — was  certainly    (setting  aside
supernormal  phenomena)  the  most  extraordinary  performance  in  mesmeric
history.     Had  not  his  achievements  been  matters  of  official  record,  the
apparent  impossibility  of  repeating  them  would  probably  by  this  time  have
been  held  to  have  disproved  them  altogether.

508.  The  next  great  step  which   hypnotism  made  was  actually  re-
garded by  Elliotson  and  his  group  as  a  hostile  demonstration.     When
Braid  discovered  that  hypnosis  could  be  induced  without  passes,  the  mes-
merists  felt   that  their  theory  of   a  sanative   effluence  was  dangerously
attacked.     And  this  was  true ;  for  that  theory  has  in  fact  been  thrown  into
the  shade, — too  completely  so,  in  my  opinion, — first  by  the  method  used
in  Braid's  earlier  work  of  the  production  of  hypnotic  phenomena  by  means
of  the  upward  and  inward  squint,  and,  secondly,  by  the  much  wider  and
more  important  discovery  of  the  efficacy  of  mere  suggestion,  set  forth  in
his  later  writings.     Braid's  hypnotic  experience  differed  much  from  that  of
hypnotists  before  and  after  him.      His  early  method  of  the  convergent
squint  produced  results  which  no  one  else   has  been    able  to  produce ;
and  the  state  which  it  induced  appeared  in  his  view  to  arrest  and  dissi-
pate even  maladies  of  which  neither  hypnotist   nor  patient  had  thought
as  capable  of  cure.     But  he  afterwards  abandoned  this  method  in  favour
of  simple  verbal  suggestion,   as  he   found  that  what  was  required  was
merely  to  influence  the  ideas  of  his  patients.     He  showed  further  that  all
so-called  phrenological  phenomena  and  the  supposed  effects  of  magnets,
metals,  &c.,  could  be  produced  equally  well   by  suggestion.2     He   also
laid  stress  on  the  subject's  power  both  of  resisting  the  commands  of  the
operator  and  of  inducing  hypnotic  effects  in  himself  without  the  aid  of  an
operator.     To  my  mind  the  most  important  novelty  brought  out  by  Braid
was  the  possibility  of  self-hypnotisation  by  concentration  of  will.     This
inlet  into  human  faculty,  in  some  ways  the  most  important  of  all,  has  been
as  yet  but  slackly  followed.     But  it  is  along  with  Braid's  group  of  ideas
that  I  should  place  those  of  an  able  but  much  inferior  investigator,  Dr.
Fahnestock,  although  it  is  not  clear  that  the  latter  knew  of  Braid's  work.
His  book,  Statuvolism,  or  Artificial  Somnambulism  (Chicago,  1871),  has

1  See  Nasse's  Zeitschrift  fiirHypnotismus,  passim.

2  This  later  work  of  Braid's  has  been  generally  overlooked,  and  his  theories  were

writings,  and  references  to  his  work  by  other  writers.

510]  HYPNOTISM  161

received  less  attention  than  it  merits ; — partly  perhaps  from  its  barbarous
title,  partly  from  the  crudities  with  which  it  is  encumbered,  and  partly
from  the  fact  of  its  publication  at  what  was  at  that  date  a  town  on  the
outskirts  of  civilisation.  Fahnestock  seems  to  have  obtained  by  self-
suggestion  with  healthy  persons  results  in  some  ways  surpassing  anything
since  recorded.

There  is  no  reason  to  doubt  these  results,  except  the  fact  that  they
have  not  yet  been  repeated  with  equal  success ;  and  my  present  purpose
is  to  show  how  little  importance  can  as  yet  be  attached  in  the  history  of
hypnotic  experiment  to  the  mere  absence  thus  far  of  successful  repetition.

509.  The   next  great  stage  was  again    strikingly   different.     It    was
mainly   French ;    the    impulse    was   given    largely   by   Professor   Charles
Richet,    whose   work   has    proved    singularly   free    from    narrowness    or
misconception ;    but  the  movement    was  developed    in  a  special  and  a
very  unfortunate  direction  by  Charcot  and  his  school.     It  is  a  remark-
able fact  that  although  Charcot  was  perhaps  the  only  man  of  eminence
whose  professional  reputation  has  ever  been  raised  by  his  dealings  with
hypnotism,  most  of  his  work  thereon  is  now  seen  to  have  been  mistaken
and  aberrant, — a  mere  following  of  a  blind  alley,  from  which  his  disciples
are    now   gradually   returning.     Charcot's    leading   phenomena   (as   with
several  of  his  predecessors  above  mentioned)  were  of  a  type  which  has
seldom  since  been  obtained.     The  once  celebrated  "  three  stages  "  of  the

hypnotismc  are  hardly  anywhere  now  to  be  seen.  But  in  this  case
the  reason  is  not  that  other  hypnotists  could  not  obtain  the  phenomena  if
they  would;  it  is  rather  (as  I  have  already  indicated)  that  experience  has
convinced  them  that  the  sequences  and  symptoms  on  which  Charcot  laid

were  merely  very  elaborate  products  of  the  long-continued,  and,  so
to  say,  endemic  suggestions  of  the  Salpetriere  (see  509  A).

510.  We  come  next  to  the  movement  which  is  now  on  the  whole
dominant,  and  to  which  the  greatest  number  of  cures  may  at  present  be

•d.     The  school  of  Nancy — which  originated   with  Lie'beault,  and

which   is  now  gradually   merging  into  a  general  consensus  of  hypnotic

<e — threw  aside  more  and  more  decisively  the  supposed  "somatic

'  of  Charcot, — the  phenomena  of  neuro-muscular  irritability  and  the

A  hich  he  regarded  as  the  requisite  proof  of  hypnosis ; — until  Bern-

heim  boldly  affirmed  that   hypnotic  trance  was  no  more  than  sleep,  and

that  hypnotic  suggestion  was  at  once  the  sole  cause  of  hypnotic  respon-

undifferentiated  from  mere  ordinary  advisory  speech.

mfortunately  too  good  to  be  true.     Not  one  sleep  in  a  million

ly  hypnosis;  not  one  suggestion  in  a  million  reaches  or  influences

bliminal  self.     If  Bernheim's  theories,  in  their  extreme  form,  were

here  would  by  this  time  have  been  no  sufferers  left  to  heal.

Wh.u    Bernheim   has  done  is   to  cure  a  number  of  people  without

<  Tic  passes,  and  without  any  special  predisposing  belief  on  either

—beyond  a  trust  in  his  own  power.     And  this  is  a  most  valuable

VOL.  i.  L

162  CHAPTERV  [511

achievement,  especially  as  showing  how  much  may  be  dispensed  with  in
hypnotic  practice — to  how  simple  elements  it  may  be  reduced.

"  Hypnotic  trance,"  says  Bernheim,  in  effect,  "  is  ordinary  sleep ;
hypnotic  suggestion  is  ordinary  command.  You  tell  the  patient  to  go  to
sleep,  and  he  goes  to  sleep ;  you  tell  him  to  get  well,  and  he  gets  well  im-
mediately." Even  thus  (one  thinks)  has  one  heard  the  conjuror  explain-
ing "  how  it's  done," — with  little  resulting  hope  of  emulating  his  brilliant
performance.  An  ordinary  command  does  not  enable  an  ordinary  man  to
get  rid  of  his  rheumatism,  or  to  detest  the  previously  too  acceptable  taste
of  brandy.  In  suggestion,  in  short,  there  must  needs  be  something  more
than  a  name ;  a  profound  nervous  change  must  needs  be  started  by  some
powerful  nervous  stimulus  from  without  or  from  within.  Before  content-
ing ourselves  with  Bernheim's  formula,  we  must  consider  yet  again  what
change  we  want  to  effect,  and  whether  hypnotists  have  actually  used  any
form  of  stimulus  which  was  likely  to  effect  it.

511.  According  to  Bernheim   we  are   all  naturally   suggestible,  and
what  we  want  to  effect  through  suggestion  is  increased  suggestibility.     But
let  us  get  rid  for  the  moment  of  that  oracular  word.     What  it  seems  to
mean  here  is  mainly  a  readier  obedience  of  the  organism  to  what  we  wish
it  to  do.     The  sleep  or  trance  with  which  hypnotism  is  popularly  identified
is  not  essential  to  our  object,  for  the  subliminal  modifications  are  some-
times attained  without  any  trace  of  somnolence.     Let  us  consider,  then,
whether  any  known  nervous  stimuli,  either  massive  or  specialised,  tend  to
induce — not  mere  sleep  or  catalepsy — but  that  kind  of  ready  modifiability,
—of  responsiveness  both  in  visible  gesture  and  in  invisible  nutritive  pro-
cesses,— for  the  sake  of  which  hypnosis  is  in  serious  practice  induced.

512.  Now    of    the    external    stimuli    which    influence    the    whole
nervous    system    the    most    conspicuous    are    narcotic    drugs.      Opium,
alcohol,  chloroform,  cannabis  indica,  &c.,  affect  the  nerves  in  so  many
strange  ways  that  one  might  hope  that  they  would  be  of  use  as  hypnotic
agents.     And   some  observers  have    found  that   slight  chloroformisation
rendered  subjects  more  suggestible    (see  Appendices).     Janet  has  cited
one  case  where  suggestibility  was  developed  during  recovery  from  delirium
tremens.     Other  hypnotisers   (as  Bramwell)   have  found  chloroform  fail
to  render  patients  hypnotisable ;    and   alcohol  is  generally  regarded    as
a  positive  hindrance  to  hypnotic  susceptibility.     More  experiment  with
various  narcotics  is  much  needed ;  but  thus  far  the  scantiness  of  proof
that  narcotics   help  towards  hypnosis  goes  rather  against  the  view  that
hypnosis  is  a  direct  physiological   sequence   from  any  form   of  external
stimulus.

The  apparent  resemblance,  indeed,  between  narcosis  and  hypnosis
diminishes  on  a  closer  analysis.  A  stage  may  occur  both  in  narcotised
and  in  hypnotised  subjects  where  there  is  incoherent,  dream-like  menta-
tion ;  but  in  the  narcotised  subject  this  is  a  step  towards  inhibition  of  the
whole  nervous  energy — the  highest  centres  being  paralysed  first ;  whereas

514]  HYPNOTISM  163

in  hypnosis  the  inhibition  of  supraliminal  faculty  seems  often  at  least  to
be  merely  a  necessary  preliminary  to  the  liberation  of  fresh  faculty  which
presently  manifests  itself  from  a  profounder  region  of  the  self.

513.  Next  take  another  group  of  massive  effects  produced  on  the
nervous  system  by  external  stimuli ; — those  forms,  namely,  of  trance  and
cataplexy  which  are  due   to  sudden   shock.     With   human    beings   this
phenomenon   varies  from  actual  death  from  failure   of  heart-action,  or
paralysis,  or  stupor  attonitus  (a  recognised  form  of  insanity),  any  of  which
may    result   from  a    mere   alarming  sight  or  unwelcome   announcement,
down  to  the  cataleptic  immobility  of  a  Salpetriere  patient,  when  she  hears
a  sudden  stroke  on  the  gong.

Similar  phenomena  in  certain  animals,  as  frogs,  beetles,  &c.,  are  well
known.  It  is  doubtful,  however,  whether  any  of  these  sudden  disable-
ments should  be  classed  as  true  hypnoses.  It  has  not,  I  think,  been
shown  that  in  any  case  they  have  induced  any  real  responsiveness  to
control,  or  power  of  obeying  suggestion;  unless  it  be  (as  in  some
Salpetriere  cases)  a  form  of  suggestion  so  obvious  and  habitual  that  the
obedience  thereto  may  be  called  part  of  the  actual  cataplexy  itself.  Thus
the  "  wax-like  flexibility  "  of  the  cataleptic,  whose  arms  remain  in  the
position  where  you  place  them,  must  not  be  regarded  as  a  readier  obedi-
ence to  control,  but  rather  as  a  state  which  involves  not  a  more  but  a  less
alert  and  capable  responsiveness  ot  the  organism  to  either  external  or
internal  stimuli.

So  with  regard  to  animals — crocodiles,   frogs,  and  the  like.     I  hold

theoretically  that  animals  are  probably  hypnotisable  and  suggestible ;  and

the  records  of  Rarey's  horse-taming,  &c.,  seem  to  point  in  that  direction

also  Zoist  cases   of  mesmerisation  of  animals   in  513  B    and    Dr.

ault's  experiments  with  infants  in  513  C).     But  in   the   commoner

experiments  with  frogs,  where  mere  passivity  is  produced,  the  resemblance

seems  to  extend  only  to  the  lethargic  stage  in  human  beings   (see    Dr.

.well's  discussion  of  the  subject  in   513  A),  and  what   relation  that

lethargy  bears  to  suggestibility   is  not,  I   think,  really  known;  although

I  shall  later  on  suggest  some  explanation  on  psychological  grounds.

It  seems  plain,  at  any  rate,  that  it  must  be  from  stimuli  applied  to  men
an<l  not  to  animals,  and  from  stimuli  of  a  special  and  localised  rather  than
of  a  massive  kind,  that  we  shall  have  to  learn  whatever  can  be  learnt  as  to
cnesis  of  the  true  hypnotic  control.

514.  Now  there  exists  a  way  of  inducing  hypnosis  in  some  hysterical
persons  which  seems  intermediate  between  massive  and  localised  stimula-
tions.    It  is    indeed    a  local    stimulation ;    but    there   seems   no   reason
beyond  some  deep-seated   caprice  of  the  organism  why  the  special  tract

>hould  have  become  developed  in  that  direction.
peak  of  the  induction  of  trance  in  certain  subjects  by  pressure  upon
>nes.     These  zones  form  a  curious  development  of
/ues.     Their  starting-point  is  the  well-known  phenomenon

i64  CHAPTER    V  [515

of  patches  of  anaesthesia  found   upon  hysterical   subjects — the   "witch-
marks"  of  our  ancestors.

So  far  as  we  at  present  know,  the  situation  of  these  "  marks "  is
altogether  capricious.  It  does  not  apparently  depend,  that  is  to  say,
upon  any  central  lesion,  in  the  same  way  as  do  the  "  referred  pains,"
familiar  in  deep-seated  organic  complaints,  which  manifest  themselves  by
superficial  patches  of  tenderness,  explicable  by  the  distribution  of  nerve-
trunks.  The  anaesthetic  patches  are  an  example  of  what  I  have  called  the
irrational  self-suggestions  of  the  hypnotic  stratum  ; — determined  by  dream-
like fancies  rather  than  necessitated  by  purely  physiological  antecedents.

Quite  in  accordance  with  this  view,  we  find  that  under  favourable  con-
ditions— especially  in  a  hospital  of  hysterics — these  anomalous  patches
or  zones  develop  and  specialise  themselves  in  various  ways.  Under  Dr.
Pitres  at  Bordeaux  (for  example),  we  have  zones  hystfrogenes,  zones  hypno-
genes,  zones  hypnofre'natrices,  &c. ;  that  is  to  say,  he  finds  that  pressure  on
certain  spots  in  certain  subjects  will  bring  on  or  will  check  hysterical
accesses,  or  accesses  of  what  is  ranked  as  hypnotic  sleep.  There  is  no
doubt  that  this  sleep  does  in  certain  subjects  follow  instantly  upon  the
pressure  of  certain  spots, — constant  for  each  subject,  but  different  for  one
subject  and  for  another ; — and  this  without  any  conscious  co-operation,  or
even  foreknowledge,  on  the  patient's  part.  Stated  thus  nakedly,  this  seems
the  strongest  possible  instance  of  the  induction  of  hypnosis  by  localised
stimulus.  The  reader,  however,  will  at  once  understand  that  in  my  view
there  is  here  no  simple  physiological  sequence  of  cause  and  effect.  I
must  regard  the  local  pressure  as  a  mere  signal — an  appeal  to  the  pre-
formed capacities  of  lawlessly  acting  centres  in  the  hypnotic  stratum.  A
scrap  of  the  self  has  decided,  in  dreamlike  fashion,  that  pressure  on  a
certain  point  of  the  body's  surface  shall  produce  sleep ; — just  as  it  has
decided  that  pressure  on  that  same  point  or  on  some  other  point  shall
not  produce  pain.  Self-suggestion,  and  no  mere  physiological  nexus,  is
responsible  for  the  sleep  or  the  hysterical  access  which  follows  the  touch.
The  anaesthetic  patches  are  here  a  direct,  but  a  capriciously  chosen  avenue
to  the  subliminal  being,  and  the  same  random  self-suggestiveness  which  is
responsible  for  frequent  determinations  that  hysterical  subjects  shall  not
be  hypnotised  has  in  this  case  decided  that  they  shall  be  hypnotised,  if
you  go  about  it  in  exactly  the  right  way.

515.  Next  in  order  among  forms  of  localised  stimulus  used  for  in-
ducing hypnosis  may  be  placed  monotonous  stimulation, — to  whatever  part
of  the  body  it  be  applied.  It  was  at  one  time  the  fashion  to  attribute
almost  all  hypnotic  phenomena  to  this  cause,  and  Edmund  Gurney  and
endeavoured  to  point  out  the  exaggeration.1  Of  this  presently ;  but  first
let  us  consider  the  few  cases  where  the  monotonous  stimulation  has  un-

1  This  view  unfortunately  dominates  Professor  M'Kendrick's  article  on  "  Hypnotism  *
in  the  Encylopadia  Britannica.

516]  HYPNOTISM  165

doubtedly  been  of  a  kind  to  affect  the  organism  strongly.  The  late  Dr.
Auguste  Voisin,  of  Paris,  was  perhaps  more  markedly  successful  than  any
physician  in  producing  hypnosis  in  extreme  cases ; — in  maniacal  persons
especially,  whose  attention  it  seemed  impossible  to  fix.  He  often  accom-
plished this  by  holding  their  eyes  open  with  the  blepharostat,  and  com-
pelling them  to  gaze,  sometimes  for  hours  together,  at  a  brilliant  electric
light.  Exhaustion  produces  tranquillity  and  an  almost  comatose  sleep —
in  which  the  physician  has  often  managed  to  give  suggestions  of  great
value.  This  seems  practically  the  only  class  of  cases  where  a  directly
physiological  antecedent  for  the  sleep  can  be  proved ;  and  even  here  the
provable  effect  is  rather  the  exhaustion  of  morbid  excitability  than  any
direct  induction  of  suggestibility.  This  dazzling  process  is  generally
accompanied  with  vigorous  verbal  suggestion ;  and  it  is,  of  course,  quite
possible  that  the  patients  might  have  been  thrown  into  hypnosis  by  that
suggestion  alone,  had  their  minds  been  capable  at  first  of  sufficient  atten-
tion to  receive  it.

Braid's  upward  and  inward  squint  has  an  effect  of  the  same  deadening
kind  as  the  long  gazing  at  a  light,  and  helps  in  controlling  wandering
attention  ;  but  Braid  himself  in  later  years  (as  mentioned  above)  attributed
his  hypnotic  successes  wholly  to  suggestion.

516.     From  monotonous   excitations  which,  whatever   their   part    in

inducing  hypnosis,  are,  at  any  rate,  such  as  can  sensibly  affect  the  organism,

I  come  down  to  the  trivial  monotonies  of  watch-tickings,  "passes,"  &c.,

which  are  still  by  a  certain  school  regarded  as  capable  of  producing  a

profound  change  in  the  nervous  condition  of  the  person  before  whose  face

the  hypnotiser's  hands  are  slowly  waved  for  ten  or  twenty  minutes.     I

regard  this  as  a  much  exaggerated  view.    The  clock's  ticking,  for  instance,

if  it  is  marked  at  all,  is  at  least  as  likely  to  irritate  as  to  soothe ;  and  the

constant  experience  of  life  shows  that  continued  monotonous  stimuli,  say

the  throbbing  of  the  screw  at  sea,  soon  escape  notice  and  produce  no

hypnotic  effect  at  all.     It  is  true,  indeed,  that  monotonous  rocking  sends

babies  to  sleep  ;  but  other  babies  are  merely  irritated  by  the  process,

^ich  soporific  effect  as  rocking  may  possess  is  probably  an  effect  on

1  centres  or  on  the  semicircular  canals.     It  depends  less  on  mere

monotony  than  on  massive  movement  of  the  whole  organism.

I  think,  then,  that  there  is  no  real  ground  for  supposing  that  the  trivial

degree  of  monotonous   stimulation   produced   by  passes  often  repeated

nduce  in  any  ordinary  physiological  manner  that  "profound  nervous

••«•  "  which  is  recognised  as  the  prerequisite  condition  of  any  hypnotic

i   think  that  passes  are  effectual  generally  as  mere  suggestions,

primd  facie  be  regarded    in  that    light,  as  they  are,   in  fact,

•  led   by  many  experienced   hypnotisers  (as   Milne   Bramwell)  who

>y  them  with  good   effect.      Afterwards,  when  reason  is  given   for

believing  in  a  telepathic  influence  or  impact  occasionally  transmitted  from

the  operator  to  the  subject  at  a  distance,  we  shall  consider  whether  passes

166  CHAPTER    V  [517

may  represent  some  other  form  of  the  same  influence,  operating  in  close
physical  contiguity.

517.  First,  however,  let  us  consider  the  point  which  we  have  now
reached.  We  have  successively  dismissed  various  supposed  modes  of
physiologically  inducing  hypnotic  trance.  We  stand  at  present  in  the
position  of  the  Nancy  school ; — we  have  found  nothing  but  suggestion  which
really  induces  the  phenomena.

But  on  the  other  hand  we  cannot  possibly  regard  the  word  suggestion
as  any  real  answer  to  the  important  question  how  the  hypnotic  responsive-
ness is  induced,  on  what  conditions  it  depends.

Does  suggestion  (asks  Dr.  Bramwell J)  explain  hypnosis  and  its  phenomena?

The  answer  to  this  question  must,  I  think,  be  a  distinctly  negative  one.
The  success  of  suggestion  depends,  not  on  the  suggestion  itself,  but  on  condi-
tions inherent  in  the  subject.  These  are  (i)  willingness  to  accept  and  carry
out  the  suggestion,  and  (2)  the  power  to  do  so.  In  the  hypnotised  subject,
except  in  reference  to  criminal  or  improper  suggestions,  the  first  condition  is
generally  present.  The  second  varies  according  to  the  depth  of  the  hypnosis
and  the  personality  of  the  patient.  For  instance,  I  might  suggest  analgesia,
in  precisely  similar  terms,  to  three  subjects  and  yet  obtain  quite  different  results.
One  might  become  profoundly  analgesic,  the  second  slightly  so,  and  the  third
not  at  all.  Just  in  the  same  way,  if  three  jockeys  attempt  to  make  their  horses
gallop  a  certain  distance  in  a  given  time,  the  suggestions  conveyed  by  voice,
spur,  and  whip  may  be  similar,  and  yet  the  results  quite  different.  One  horse,
in  response  to  suggestion,  may  easily  cover  the  required  distance  in  the  allotted
time.  It  was  both  able  and  willing  to  perform  the  feat.  The  second,  in  response
to  somewhat  increased  suggestion,  may  nearly  do  so.  It  was  willing,  but  had
not  sufficient  staying  power.  The  third,  able  but  unwilling,  not  only  refuses
to  begin  the  race,  but  bolts  off  in  the  contrary  direction.  With  this  horse  we
have  the  exact  opposite  of  the  result  obtained  in  the  first  instance;  and  yet
possibly  the  amount  of  suggestion  it  received  largely  exceeded  that  administered
to  the  others.  As  Mr.  Myers  has  pointed  out,  the  operator  directs  the  con-
dition upon  which  hypnotic  phenomena  depend,  but  does  not  create  it.  "  Pro-
fessor Bernheim's  command,  '  Feel  pain  no  more,'  is  no  more  a  scientific
instruction  HOW  not  to  feel  pain,  than  the  prophet's  '  Wash  in  Jordan  and  be
clean'  was  a  pharmacopoeal  prescription  for  leprosy."  In  hypnosis  the  essen-
tial condition  is  not  the  means  used  to  excite  the  phenomena,  but  the  peculiar
state  which  enables  them  to  be  evoked.  Suggestion  no  more  explains  the
phenomena  of  hypnotism  than  the  crack  of  a  pistol  explains  a  boat  race.  Both
are  simply  signals,  mere  points  of  departure,  and  nothing  more.  In  Bernheim's
hands  the  word  "suggestion  "  has  acquired  an  entirely  new  signification,  and
differs  only  in  name  from  the  odyllic  force  of  the  mesmerists.  It  has  become
mysterious  and  all-powerful,  and  is  supposed  to  be  capable,  not  only  of  evoking
and  explaining  all  the  phenomena  of  hypnotism,  but  also  of  originating,  nay
even  of  being,  the  condition  itself.  According  to  his  view,  suggestion  not  only
starts  the  race,  but  also  creates  the  rowers  and  builds  the  boat !

Besides  what  is  here  said  with  obvious  truth,  it  must  be  remembered

1  "What  is  Hypnotism  ?"  By  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell.  Proceedings  S.P.B.,
vol.  xii.  p.  224.

518]  HYPNOTISM  167

that  many  of  the  results  which  follow  upon  suggestion  are  of  a  type  which
no  amount  of  willingness  to  follow  the  suggestion  could  induce,  since  they
lie  quite  outside  the  voluntary  realm.  However  disposed  a  man  may  be  to
believe  me,  however  anxious  to  please  me,  one  does  not  see  how  that
should  enable  him,  for  instance,  to  govern  the  morbidly-secreting  cells  in
an  eruption  of  erysipelas.  He  already  fruitlessly  wishes  them  to  stop  their
inflammation ;  the  mere  fact  of  my  expressing  the  same  wish  can  hardly
alter  his  cellular  tissue.

Here,  then,  we  come  to  an  important  conclusion  which  cannot  well  be
denied,  yet  is  seldom  looked  fully  in  the  face.  Suggestion  from  without
must  for  the  most  part  resolve  itself  into  suggestion  from  within.  Unless
there  be  some  telepathic  or  other  supernormal  influence  at  work  between
hypnotiser  and  patient  (which  I  shall  presently  show  ground  for  believing
to  be  sometimes,  though  not  often,  the  case) ,  the  hypnotiser  can  plainly
do  nothing  by  his  word  of  command  beyond  starting  a  train  of  thought
which  the  patient  has  in  most  cases  started  many  times  for  himself  with
no  result ;  the  difference  being  that  now  at  last  the  patient  starts  it  again,
and  it  has  a  result.  But  why  it  thus  succeeds  on  this  particular  occasion,
we  simply  do  not  know.  We  cannot  predict  when  the  result  will  occur ;
still  less  can  we  bring  it  about  at  pleasure.

Nay,  we  do  not  even  know  whether  it  might  not  be  possible  to  dis-
pense altogether  with  suggestion  from  outside  in  most  of  the  cases  now
treated  in  this  way,  and  merely  to  teach  the  patient  to  make  the  sugges-
tions for  himself.  If  there  be  no  "  mesmeric  effluence  "  passing  from
hypnotiser  to  patient,  the  hypnotiser  seems  little  more  than  a  mere  objet
df  luxe  ; — a  personage  provided  simply  to  impress  the  imagination,  who
must  needs  become  even  absurdly  useless  so  soon  as  it  is  understood  that
he  has  no  other  function  or  power.

518.  Self-suggestion,  whatever  this  may  really  mean,  is  thus  in  most
cases,  whether  avowedly  or  not,  at  the  bottom  of  the  effect  produced.  It

i  ready  been  used  most  successfully,  and  it  will  probably  become
much  commoner  than  it  now  is ; — or,  I  should  rather  say  (since  every  one
no  doubt  suggests  to  himself  when  he  is  in  pain  that  he  would  like  the
pain  to  cease),  I  anticipate  that  self-suggestion,  by  being  in  some  way
better  directed,  will  become  more  effective,  and  that  the  average  of  volun-

jwer  over  the  organism  will  rise  to  a  far  higher  level  than  it  at  pre-
sent reaches.  I  believe  that  this  is  taking  place  even  now ;  and  that

\\  schemes  of  self-suggestion,  so  to  call  them,  are  coming  into  vogue,
where  patients  in  large  masses  are  supplied  with  effective  conceptions,
which  they  thus  impress  repeatedly  upon  themselves  without  the  need  of
a  hypnotiser's  attendance  on  each  occasion.  I  shall  presently  explain  that
the  "  Miracles  of  Lourdes  "  and  the  cures  effected  by  "  Christian  Science  "
fall,  in  my  view,  under  this  category.  We  have  here  suggestions  given  to

ntity  of  more  or  less  suitable  people  en  masse,  much  as  a  platform

>tiser  gives  suggestions  to  a  mixed  audience,  some  of  whom  may  then

168  CHAPTER    V  [518

be  affected  without  individual  attention  from  himself.  The  suggestion  of
the  curative  power  of  the  Lourdes  water,  for  instance,  is  thus  thrown  out,
partly  in  books,  partly  by  oral  addresses ;  and  a  certain  percentage  of
persons  succeed  in  so  persuading  themselves  of  that  curative  efficacy  that
when  they  bathe  in  the  water  they  are  actually  cured.

These  schemes  of  self-suggestion,  as  I  have  termed  them,  constitute  one
of  the  most  interesting  parts  of  my  subject,  and  will  need  careful  study  at
a  later  point.  But  here  it  is  important  to  point  out  that  in  order  to  make
self-suggestion  operative,  no  strong  belief  or  enthusiasm,  such  as  those
schemes  imply,  is  really  necessary.  No  recorded  cases  of  self-suggestion,
I  think,  are  more  instructive  than  those  published  by  Dr.  Hugh  Wingfield
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  279.  (The  paper  was  printed  anony-
mously.) Dr.  Wingfield  was  a  Demonstrator  in  Physiology  in  the  Univer- '
sity  of  Cambridge,  and  his  subjects  were  mainly  candidates  for  the  Natural
Sciences  Tripos.  In  these  cases  there  was  no  excitement  of  any  kind,
and  no  previous  belief.  The  phenomena  occurred  incidentally  during  a
series  of  experiments  on  other  points,  and  were  a  surprise  to  every  one
concerned.  The  results  achieved  were  partly  automatic  writing  and  partly
phenomena  of  neuro-muscular  excitability ; — stiffening  of  the  arms,  and  so
forth.  The  passage  quoted  in  518  D  goes  far  to  prove  Dr.  Wingfield's
general  thesis  (p.  283),  "It  seems  probable  that  ...  all  phenomena
capable  of  being  produced  by  the  suggestion  of  the  hypnotiser  can  also
be  produced  by  self-suggestion  in  a  self-suggestive  subject."

Experiments  like  these, — confirming  with  modern  care  the  conclusions
reached  by  Fahnestock  (see  518  A)  and  others  at  various  points  in  hypnotic
history, — seem  to  me  to  open  a  new  inlet  into  human  faculty,  as  surprising
in  its  way  as  those  first  wild  experiments  of  Mesmer  himself.  Who  would
have  supposed  that  a  healthy  undergraduate  could  "  by  an  effort  of  mind
throw  his  whole  body  into  a  state  of  cataleptic  rigidity,  so  that  he  could
rest  with  his  heels  on  one  chair  and  head  on  another,  and  remain  sup-
ported in  that  condition  "  ?  or  that  other  healthy  young  men  could  "  close
their  own  eyes  so  that  they  were  unable  to  open  them,"  and  the  like?
The  trivial  character  of  these  laboratory  experiments  makes  them  physio-
logically the  more  remarkable.  There  is  the  very  minimum  of  pre-
disposing conditions,  of  excited  expectation,  or  of  external  motive  prompting
to  extraordinary  effort.  And  the  results  are  not  subjective  merely — relief
of  pain  and  so  on — but  are  definite  neuro-muscular  changes,  capable  of
unmistakable  test.

Yet,  important  though  these  and  similar  experiments  in  self-suggestion
may  be,  they  do  not  solve  our  problem  as  to  the  ultimate  origin  and  dis-
tribution of  the  faculty  thus  displayed.  We  know  no  better  with  self-
suggestion  than  with  suggestion  from  outside  why  it  is  that  one  man
succeeds  where  others  fail,  or  why  a  man  who  succeeds  once  fails  in  his
next  attempt.  Within  the  ordinary  range  of  physiological  explanations
nothing  (I  repeat)  has  as  yet  been  discovered  which  can  guide  us  to  the

520]  HYPNOTISM  169

true  nature  or  exciting  causes  of  this  characteristic  responsiveness  of
hypnosis.  If  we  are  to  find  any  light,  it  must  be  in  some  direction  which
has  as  yet  been  little  explored.

519.  The  hint  which  I  have  to  offer  here  involves,  I  hope,  something
more  than  a  mere  change  of  appellation.     I  define  suggestion  as  "  success-
ful appeal  to  the  subliminal  self"  ; — not  necessarily  to  that  self  in  its  most
central,  most  unitary  aspect ;  but  to  some  one  at  least  of  those  strata  of
subliminal  faculty  which  I  have  in  an  earlier  chapter  described.

I  do  not  indeed  pretend  that  my  explanation  can  enable  us  to  reduce
hypnotic  success  to  a  certainty.  I  cannot  say  why  the  process  should  be
so  irregular  and  capricious ;  so  that  now  and  then  we  seem  to  touch  a
spring  which  gives  instant  access  to  profound  recesses ;  then  all  is  closed
and  inaccessible  again.  But  I  can  show  that  this  puzzle  is  part  of  a  wider
problem,  which  meets  us  in  all  departments  of  subliminal  operation.  In
split  personalities,  in  genius,  in  dreams,  in  sensory  and  motor  automatisms,
we  find  the  same  fitfulness,  the  same  apparent  caprice.  The  answer  to
the  problem  of  the  uncertainty  of  hypnotism  must  be  involved  in  the
answer  to  all  these  other  problems  too.  Hypnotic  success  or  failure
cannot  depend,  as  some  have  fancied,  on  some  superficial  difference  in
the  kind  of  suggestion  given.  It  is  part  and  parcel  of  a  wider  mystery ; —
of  the  obscure  relationships  and  interdependencies  of  the  supraliminal
and  the  subliminal  self.

For  light  upon  such  a  problem  as  this  we  must  wait,  I  believe,  until  a
much  later  stage  of  our  inquiry,  when  the  possibility  of  the  possession  of
the  organism  by  a  discarnate  intelligence  comes  to  be  considered.  As  has
been  already  observed,  the  acquisition  of  a  standpoint — even  of  a  somewhat
unstable  and  shifting  standpoint — outside  the  incarnate  human  personality
should  enable  us,  with  clearer  eyes,  to  see  much  which  is  now  too  inti-
mate, too  deeply  rooted  in  us,  for  our  unaided  analysis.

520.  Leaving  perforce  this  problem  for  the  present  unsolved,  let  us
consider  other  ways  in  which  this  conception  of  subliminal  operation  may

light  on   the    actual   phenomena  of  hypnotism ; — phenomena   at
•-•nt  scattered  in  bewildering  confusion.

In  the  first  place,  then,  since  we  have  found  that  it  is  in  the  sleeping

phase  of  personality  that  subliminal  faculty  is  most  readily  exercised,  wo

shall  expect  that  any  evocation  of  that  faculty  will  involve  some  kind  of

opment  of  sleep.     Let  us  here  pause  and  consider  the  validity  of  this

:nption.     The  place  in  our  argument  is  suitable  for  such  an  inquiry.

already  discussed  the  empirical  ways  in  which  hypnotism  has

induced.     We  must  presently  go  on  to  discuss  the  therapeutic  effects

i  hypnotism  brings  in  its  train.     It  is  fitting  that  we  should  here

view  the  familiar  phenomena  of  the  hypnotic  condition  itself.
Now  the  word  hy  itself  implies  that  some  kind  of  sleep  or  trance

is  regarded  as  its  leading  characteristic.     And  although  so-called  hypnotic
•uggestions  do  sometimes  take  effect  in  the  waking  state,  our  usual  test  of

1 70  CHAPTER    V  [521

the  hypnotiser's  success  lies  in  the  slumber — light  or  deep — into  which  his
subject  is  thrown.  It  is,  indeed,  a  slumber  which  admits  at  times  of  strange
wakings  and  activities ;  but  it  is  also  manifestly  profounder  than  the  sleep
which  we  habitually  enjoy.

The  true  nature  of  this  hypnotic  sleep  has  been  a  subject  of  much
debate.  At  first  it  was  regarded  as  a  specific  form  of  trance,  brought  on
by  a  specific  agency — namely,  the  mesmeric  or  magnetic  effluence,  com-
municated from  the  baquet  or  from  the  hands  or  eyes  of  the  mesmerist.
Similarly  Elliotson  and  Esdaile  continued  to  treat  the  mesmeric  sleep  as  a
condition  sui  generis,  evoked  by  the  mesmeric  effluence  in  which  they  also
believed.

When,  however,  it  became  known  that  hypnosis  could  often  be  induced
by  mere  verbal  suggestion  or  by  self-suggestion,  under  circumstances  which
precluded  the  idea  of  any  transmission  of  effluence,  it  was  found  very  hard
to  explain  the  nature  of  the  characteristic  sleep ; — until  at  last  Bernheim
and  his  followers  took  the  bull  by  the  horns,  and  declared  that  the  sleep
was  not  characteristic ;  but  that  the  hypnotic  trance  was  identical  with
ordinary  slumber, — ordinary  slumber  "  rendered  by  suggestion  more  sug-
gestible." That  is  to  say,  out  of  ordinary  sleep,  regarded  as  a  definite
result  of  certain  physiological  conditions,  Bernheim  nevertheless  develops
(without  further  physiological  agency  of  any  kind)  a  psychological  con-
dition which  differs  obviously  and  profoundly  from  ordinary  sleep,  and
which  is  even  consistent  with  apparently  complete  vigilance.  This,  surely,
is  a  mere  abandonment  of  the  real  problem.

521.  From  my  point  of  view,  on  the  other  hand,  the  problem  here  is
merely  an  inevitable  part  of  a  problem  already  faced  (albeit  not  solved)  in
a  wider  form.     If  sleep  be  the  phase  of  personality  specially  consecrated  to
subliminal  operation,  it  follows  that  any  successful  appeal  to  the  subliminal
self  will  be  likely  to  induce  some  form  of  sleep.     And  further,  if  that  form
of  sleep  be  in  fact  not  an  inevitable  result  of  physiological  needs,  but  a
response  to  a  psychological  appeal,  it  seems  not  unlikely  that  we  should  be
able  to  communicate  with  it  without  interrupting  it ; — and  should  thus  be
able  to  guide  or  supplement  subliminal  operations,  just  as  in  genius  the
subliminal  self  guided  or  supplemented  supraliminal  operations.

For  my  part,  then,  I  shall  abandon  the  attempt  to  force  all  the  varied
trances,  lethargies,  sleep-waking  states,  to  which  hypnotism  introduces  us
into  the  similitude  of  ordinary  sleep.  Rather  I  shall  say  that  in  these
states  we  see  the  subliminal  self  coming  to  the  surface  in  ways  already
familiar  to  us,  and  displacing  just  so  much  of  the  supraliminal  as  may  from
time  to  time  be  needful  for  the  performance  of  .its  own  work.  That  work,
I  say,  will  be  of  a  character  which  we  know  already ;  the  difference  is  that
what  we  have  seen  done  spontaneously  we  now  see  done  in  response  to
our  appeal.

522.  Armed  with  this  simplifying  conception, — simplifying  in  spite  of
its  frank  admission  of  an  underlying  mystery, — we  shall  find  no  added

523]  HYPNOTISM  171

difficulty  in  several  points  which  have  been  the  subjects  of  eager  contro-
versy. The  sequence  of  hypnotic  phenomena,  the  question  of  the  stages  of
hypnotism,  is  one  of  these.  I  have  already  briefly  described  how  Charcot
propounded  his  three  stages — lethargy,  catalepsy,  somnambulism — as  though
they  formed  the  inevitable  development  of  a  physiological  law  ; — and  how
completely  this  claim  has  now  had  to  be  withdrawn.  Other  schemes  have
been  drawn  out,  by  Li£beault,  &c.,  but  none  of  them  seem  to  do  more  than
reflect  the  experience  of  some  one  hypnotist's  practice.  The  simplest
arrangement  is  that  of  Edmund  Gurney,  who  spoke  only  of  an  "  alert  stage  "
and  a  "  deep  stage  "  of  hypnosis  (522  B) ;  and  even  here  we  cannot  say
that  either  stage  invariably  precedes  the  other.  The  alert  stage,  which
often  came  first  with  Gurney's  subjects,  comes  last  in  Charcot's  scheme ;
and  it  is  hardly  safe  to  say  more  than  that  hypnotism  is  apt  to  show  a
series  of  changes  from  sleep-waking  to  lethargy  and  back  again,  and  that
the  advanced  stages  show  more  of  subliminal  faculty  than  the  earlier  ones.
There  is  much  significance  in  an  experiment  of  Dr.  Jules  Janet,  who,  by
continued  "  passes,"  carried  on  Wittman,  Charcot's  leading  subject,  be-
yond her  usual  somnambulic  state  into  a  new  lethargic  state,  and  out  again
from  thence  into  a  new  sleep-waking  state  markedly  superior  to  the  old
(522  A).

523.     Gurney  held  the  view  that  the  main  distinction  of  kind  between

alert  "  and  his  "  deep  "  stage  of  hypnosis  was  to  be  found  in  the
domain  of  memory,  while  memory  also  afforded  the  means  for  distinguish-
ing the  hypnotic  state  as  a  whole  from  the  normal  one.  As  a  general
rule  (though  with  numerous  exceptions),  the  events  of  ordinary  life  are
remembered  in  the  trance,  while  the  trance  events  are  forgotten  on
waking,  but  tend  to  recur  to  the  memory  on  rehvpnotisation.  But  the
most  interesting  part  of  his  observations  (see  523  A)  consisted  in
showing  alternations  of  memory  in  the  alert  and  deep  stages  of  the
trance  itself; — the  ideas  impressed  in  the  one  sort  of  state  being  almost

s  forgotten  in  the  other,  and  as  invariably  again  remembered  when
the  former  state  recurs.  On  experimenting  further,  he  met  with  a  stage

;ch  there  was  a  distinct  third  train  of  memory,  independent  of  the

others  : — and  this,  of  course,  suggests  a  further  doubt  as  to  there  being

any  fixed  number  of  stages  in  the  trance.     The  later  experiments  of  Mrs.

Sidgwick   on   the   same  subject  (recorded   in   523  B),   in   which  eight

or   nim    distinct  trains   of  memory  were   found — each   recurring  when

the  corresponding  stage  of  depth  of  the  trance  was  reached — seem  to

conclusively  that  the  number  may  vary  almost  indefinitely.     We

<ly  seen  that  in  cases  of  alternating  personalities  the  number  of

personalities  similarly  varies,1  and  the  student  who  now  follows  or  repeats

•sides  those  mentioned  in  Chapter  II.  (especially  sections  233  to  236),  see  a
remarkable  recent  case  recorded  by  1  >  Summer  Number,  1900,  on

ithority  of  Dr.  Albert  Wilson,  of  Leytonstonc.     In  this  case  there  were  sixteen
.iges  or  personalities,  with  distinct  memories  and  different  characteristics.

i;2  CHAPTER    V  [524

Gurney's  experiments,  with  the  increased  knowledge  of  split  personalities
which  recent  years  have  brought,  cannot  fail  to  be  struck  with  the
analogies  between  Gurney's  artificial  light  and  deep  states, — with  their
separate  chains  of  memory, — and  those  morbid  alternating  personalities,
with  their  complex  mnemonic  cleavages  and  lacunse,  with  which  we  dealt
in  Chapter  II.  The  hypnotic  stages  are  in  fact  secondary  or  alternating
personalities  of  very  shallow  type,  but  for  that  very  reason  all  the  better
adapted  for  teaching  us  from  what  kinds  of  subliminal  disaggregation  the
more  serious  splits  in  personality  take  their  rise.

524.  And  beneath  and  between  these  awakenings  into  limited,  partial
alertness  lies  that  profound  hypnotic  trance  which  one  can  best  describe  as
a  scientific  or  purposive  rearrangement  of  the  elements  of  sleep ; — a  re-
arrangement in  which  what  is  helpful  is  intensified,  what  is  merely  hinder-
ing or  isolating  is  removed  or  reduced.  A  man's  ordinary  sleep  is  at  once
unstable  and  irresponsive.  You  can  wake  him  with  a  pin-prick,  but  if
you  talk  to  him  he  will  not  hear  or  answer  you,  until  you  rouse  him  with
the  mere  noise.  That  is  sleep  as  the  needs  of  our  timorous  ancestors
determined  that  it  should  be.

Hypnotic  sleep,  on  the  contrary,  is  at  once  stable  and  responsive ;
strong  in  its  resistance  to  such  stimuli  as  it  chooses  to  ignore ;  ready  in
its  accessibility  to  such  appeals  as  it  chooses  to  answer.

Prick  or  pinch  the  hypnotised  subject,  and  although  some  stratum  of  his
personality  may  be  aware,  in  some  fashion,  of  your  act,  the  sleep  will
generally  remain  unbroken.  But  if  you  speak  to  him, — or  even  speak
before  him, — then,  however  profound  his  apparent  lethargy,  there  is  some-
thing in  him  which  will  hear.1

All  this  is  true  even  of  earlier  stages  of  trance.  Deeper  still  lies  the
stage  of  highest  interest ; — that  sleep-waking  in  which  the  subliminal  self  is
at  last  set  free, — is  at  last  able  not  only  to  receive  but  to  respond ;  when
it  begins  to  tell  us  the  secrets  of  the  sleeping  phase  of  personality,  be-
ginning with  directions  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  trance  or  of  the  cure,  and
going  on  to  who  knows  what  insight  into  who  knows  what  world  afar?

Without,  then,  entering  into  more  detail  as  to  the  varying  forms  which
hypnosis  at  different  stages  may  assume,  I  have  here  traced  its  central
characteristic ; — the  development,  namely,  of  the  sleeping  phase  of  per-
sonality in  such  fashion  as  to  allow  of  some  supraliminal  guidance  of  the
subliminal  self.

1  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  this  is  always  the  case.  For  a  long  time  the  lethargic
state  was  supposed  at  the  Salpetriere  to  preclude  all  knowledge  of  what  was  going  on  ;
and  I  have  heard  Charcot  speak  before  a  deeply-entranced  subject  as  if  there  were  no
danger  of  her  gathering  hints  as  to  what  he  expected  her  to  do.  I  believe  that  his
patients  did  subliminally  receive  such  hints,  and  work  them  out  in  their  own  hypnotic
behaviour.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  heard  the  late  Dr.  Auguste  Voisin,  one  of  the
most  persistent  and  successful  of  hypnotisers,  make  suggestion  after  suggestion  to  a  sub-
ject apparently  almost  comatose, — which  suggestions,  nevertheless,  she  obeyed  as  soon  as
she  awoke.

526]  HYPNOTISM  173

525.  We  have  here  a  definition  of  much  wider  purview  than  any
which  has  been  habitually  applied  to  the  process  of  hypnotisation  or  to
the  state  of  hypnosis.     To  test  its  validity,  to  explain  its  scope,  we  need  a
survey  of  hypnotic  results  much  wider  in  range  than  any  enumeration  of
the  kind  at  present  usual  in  text-books, — than  any  mere  list  of  neuro-
muscular  and  vaso-motor  phenomena  provoked,  or  of  maladies  cured  by
hypnotic  suggestion.     Regarding  hypnotic  achievements  mainly  in  their
mental  aspects,  I  must  seek  for  some  broad  principle  of  classification  which
on  the  one  hand  may  not  be  so  exclusively  moral  as  to  be  physiologically
untranslatable, — like  the  distinction  between  vice  and  virtue ; — or  on  the
other  hand  so  exclusively  physiological  as  to  be  morally  untranslatable, —
like  the  distinction  between  cerebral  anaemia  and  hyperaemia.

Perhaps  the  broadest  contrast  which  is  expressible  in  both  moral  and
physiological  terms  is  the  contrast  between  check  and  stimulus, — between
inhibition  and  dynamogeny.  Not,  indeed,  that  such  terms  as  check  and
stimulus  can  be  pressed  in  detail ;  it  is  quite  possible,  for  instance,  that
the  action  of  what  we  call  inhibitory  nerves  may  give  a  sense  of  increased
moral  activity.  Yet  the  terms  do  correspond  well  enough  with  a  deep
distinction  in  our  practical  education, — the  distinction  between  the  check-
ing or  countermanding  on  the  one  hand  of  impulses  already  existent,  and
the  heightening,  on  the  other  hand,  of  existent  powers,  or  the  infusion
of  new  impulses.  The  central  power, — the  ruling  agency  within  the  man
which  gives  the  command, — is  no  doubt  the  same  in  both  cases.  But  the
common  contrast  between  negative  and  positive  exhortations, — "this  you
shall  not  do,"  "  this  you  shall  do," — will  help  to  give  clearness  to  our  review
of  the  influences  of  hypnotism  in  its  bearings  on  intelligence  and  character,
— its  psychological  efficacy.

526.  Let  us  then  regard  hypnotic  suggestion  as  a  summarised  educa-
tion, and  consider  over  what  range  of  inhibition  and  dynamogeny  an
ordinary  education  is  expected  to  extend.     I  deal  in  Appendices  with  the
obscure  but  important  question  of  prenatal  suggestion,  and  pass  on  to  the
point  when  education  admittedly  begins ;  that  is,  of  course,  in  the  cradle.
There  it  enters  at  once  upon  its  double  task  of  repression  and  stimulus.

•-ssion  is  needed  long  before  moral  teaching  begins,  from  the  mere

hat  all  kinds  of  impulses  tend  to  express  themselves  in  act, — and  that

of  the  resultant  acts,  if  often  repeated,  are  unbecoming  or  injurious.

••ntion  and  cure  of  bad  tricks  is  a  main  business  of  the  nursery.

ly  more  than  bad  tricks,  in  their  inception,  are  various  other  impulses

te,  anger,  greed,  sensuality,  which  if  left  unchecked  may  develop  into

deep-seated  vice.     And  even  when  the  frame  is  matured  and  self-control

in  most  other  matters  assured,  the  special  attractiveness  of  certain  stimu-

for  certain  organisms   overcomes   the   whole   inhibitory  strength —

most   needful   prudence  —  of  no   small   proportion   of   the   human

The  field  over  which  inhibition  is  necessary  is  thus  a  very  wide  one.

174  CHAPTER    V  [526

We  shall  presently  find  that  hypnotic  suggestion  is  able  to  exert  effective
control  at  every  point.

The  work  of  stimulus  or  dynamogeny  in  education  is  even  more  diffi-
cult to  execute  properly  than  that  of  inhibition.  We  know  pretty  well
what  we  wish  to  prevent  the  child  from  doing.  It  is  harder  to  discover
all  that  a  judicious  education  might  advantageously  teach  him  to  do.  The
very  first  lesson  which  we  have  to  impress  upon  him — attention — is  really
of  unknown  scope.  We  are  usually  satisfied  with  the  inhibitory  side  of  the
lesson ;  with  the  restraint  of  wandering  thought.  The  intensity  of  the
attention  thus  steadied  is  a  different  matter ;  and  I  shall  presently  quote
certain  experiments  which  point  to  possibilities  in  this  direction  as  yet
seldom  realised.  Intellectual  education,  rendered  possible  by  attention,
includes  the  training  of  perception,  memory,  and  imagination ;  and  all
these  faculties  will  be  found  to  have  been  sometimes  much  heightened  by
hypnotic  suggestion.

Moral  education,  again,  presupposes  a  training  of  attention,  mainly  in
emotional  directions,  and  by  methods  often  both  inhibitive  and  dynamo-
genie.  We  restrain  morbid  fears  by  inculcating  courage  and  self-respect ;
we  use  "the  expulsive  power  of  a  new  affection"  to  banish  unworthy
desire.  A  review  of  certain  hypnotic  triumphs  will  presently  illustrate  the
potency  of  suggestion  in  cases  where  a  life  has  seemed  irretrievably  ruined
by  some  insistent  pre-occupation  or  inescapable  fear.

The  self-regarding  virtues,  as  has  been  said,  depend  largely  upon  power
of  inhibition  ;  and  where  dynamogeny  is  needed  for  the  attainment  of  those
virtues, — where  it  is  important  to  stimulate  rather  than  to  control, — the
stimulus  is  applied  to  instincts  which  we  are  pretty  sure  to  find  already
existing.  Every  man  wishes  with  more  or  less  energy  for  health,  wealth,
consideration,  success.  But  when  from  the  self-regarding  we  pass  on  to
the  altruistic  virtues,  we  cannot  be  equally  sure  of  finding  an  impulse  ready
for  development.

After  a  certain  point  of  helpfulness  and  kindliness  has  been  reached,
the  higher  strains  of  generosity,  self-abnegation,  impersonal  enthusiasm,  lie
outside  the  field  of  ordinary  education.  Similarly  they  seem  as  yet  to  lie
outside  the  field  of  ordinary  hypnotic  suggestion.  We  shall  indeed  pre-
sently find  that  the  cured  dipsomaniac  or  morphinomaniac  is  reported  as
leading  a  life  which  wins  the  esteem  of  his  fellow-men.  He  reaches,  one
may  say,  a  position  of  ethical  stability ;  but  we  have  no  evidence  of  his
attaining  to  any  eminent  virtue.

In  point  of  fact  no  one  is  likely  to  apply  to  a  physician  to  hypnotise
him  into  a  saint.  Nor  again, — and  this  is  of  more  practical  importance, —
is  any  selfish  successful  man  likely  to  ask  to  be  rendered  generous  and
unworldly.  He  has  in  his  own  way  adapted  himself  to  his  environment ;
he  does  not  wish  to  be  profoundly  changed.

It  is  not,  therefore,  from  the  hospital  or  the  consulting-room  that  we
should  expect  to  hear  of  great  changes  of  character  for  lofty  ends.  Such

528]  HYPNOTISM  175

changes  have  not  been  made,  and  perhaps  can  hardly  be  made,  the  sub-
jects of  experiments  in  cold  blood.  They  occur,  nevertheless.  In  every
race,  in  every  age,  there  have  been  conversions  —  changes  and  elevations  of
character  ascribed  to  Divine  Grace.  We  shall  find  as  we  proceed  that  at
this  point  our  review  of  hypnotic  effects  merges  —  as  on  any  satisfactory
theory  it  ought  to  merge  —  into  a  wider  consideration  of  the  spiritual
strength  of  man.

To  some  such  widened  outlook  we  must  gradually  lead  up,  reviewing
in  turn  the  various  forms — first  of  inhibition,  then  of  dynamogeny  —  of
which  ordinary  education,  from  the  nursery  onwards,  is  wont  to  consist.

527.  The  most  rudimentary  form  of  restraint  or  inhibition,  as  already
said,  lies  in  our  effort  to  preserve  the  infant  or  young  child  from  acquir-
ing what  we  call  "  bad  tricks."     These  morbid  affections  of  motor  centres,
trifling  in  their  inception,  will  sometimes  grow  until  they  are  incurable  by
any  regime  or  medicament ; — nay,  till  an  action  so  insignificant  as  sucking
the  thumb  may  work  the  ruin  of  a  life.

In  no  direction,  perhaps,  do  the  results  of  suggestion  appear  more  in-
explicable than  here.  Nowhere — as  the  cases  in  my  Appendices  (527  A
and  B)  show — have  we  a  more  conspicuous  touching  of  a  spring; — a
more  complete  achievement,  almost  in  a  single  moment,  of  the  deliverance
which  years  of  painful  effort  have  failed  to  effect.

These  cases  stand  midway  between  ordinary  therapeutics  and  moral
suasion.     No  one  can  here  doubt  the  importance  of  finding  the  shortest
and  swiftest  path  to  cure.     Nor  is  there  any  reason  to  think  that  cures
thus  obtained  are  less  complete  or  permanent  than  if  they  had  been
achieved  by  gradual  moral  effort.     These  facts  should  be  borne  in  mind
throughout  the  whole  series  of  the  higher  hypnotic  effects,  and  should
serve  to  dispel  any  anxiety  as  to  the  possible  loss  of  moral  training  when
cure  is  thus  magically  swift.     Each  of  these  effects  consists,  as  we  must
suppose,  in  the  modification  of  some  group  of  nervous  centres ;  and,  so
we  can  tell,  that  is  just  the  same  result  which  moral  effort  made
above  the  conscious  threshold  more  slowly  and  painfully  attains.     This
difference,  in  fact,  is  like  the  difference  between  results  achieved  by  dili-
gence and  results  achieved  by  genius.     Something  valuable  in  the  way
of  training, — some  exercise  in  patience  and  resolve, — no  doubt  may  be
d  by  the  man  who  is  "suggested  "  into  sobriety; — in  the  sam<
was  missed  by  the  schoolboy  Gauss, — writing  down  the  answers  to
problems  as  soon  as  set,  instead  of  spending  on  them  a  diligent  hour,
noral  progress  is  in  its  essence  as  limitless  as  mathematical ;  and   the
man  who  is  thus  carried  over  rudimentary  struggles  may  still  find  plenty
of  moral  effort  in  life  to  train  his  character  and  tax  his  resolution.

528.  Among  these  morbid  tricks  kleptomania  has  an   interest  of  its
on  account  of  the  frequent  doubt  whether  it  is  not  put  forward  as  a
excuse  for  pilfering.     It  may  thus  happen  that  the  cure  is  the  best

proof  of  the  existence  of  the  disease ;    and  certain   cures   (quoted  in

1 76  CHAPTER    V  [529

528  A  and  B)  indicate  that  the  impulse  has  veritably  involved  a  morbid
excitability  of  motor  centres,  acted  on  by  special  stimuli, — an  ide'e  fixe
with  an  immediate  outcome  in  act.

Many  words  and  acts  of  violence  fall  under  the  same  category,  in  cases
where  the  impulse  to  swear  or  to  strike  has  acquired  the  unreasoning  auto-
matic promptness  of  a  tic,  and  yet  may  be  at  once  inhibited  by  suggestion.
Many  undesirable  impulses  in  the  realm  of  sex  are  also  capable  of  being
thus  corrected  or  removed.

529.  The  stimulants  and  narcotics,  to  which  our  review  next  leads
us,  forms  a  standing  menace  to  human  virtue.     By  some  strange  accident
of  our  development,  the  impulse  of  our  organisms  towards  certain  drugs
— alcohol,  opium,  and  the  like — is  strong  enough  to  overpower,  in  a  large
proportion  of  mankind,  not  only  the  late-acquired  altruistic  impulses,  but
even  the  primary  impulses  of  self-regard  and  self-preservation.     We  are
brought  back,  one  may  almost  say,  to  the  "  chimiotaxy  "  of  the  lowest
organisms,  which  arrange  themselves  inevitably  in  specific    relation  to
oxygen,  malic  acid,  or  whatever  the  stimulus  may  be.     We  thus  experi-
ence in  ourselves  a  strange  conflict  between  moral  responsibility  and  mole-
cular affinities ; — the  central  will  overborne  by  dumb  unnumbered  ele-
ments of  our  being.     With  this  condition  of  things  hypnotic  suggestion
deals  often  in  a  curious  way.     The  suggestion  is  not  generally  felt  as  a
strengthening  of  the  central  will.     It  resembles  rather  a  molecular  redis-
position ;  it  leaves  the  patient  indifferent  to  the  stimulus,  or  even  disgusted
with  it.     The  man  for  whom  alcohol  has  combined  the  extremes  of  delight
and  terror  now  lives  as  though  in  a  world  in  which  alcohol  did  not  exist
at  all.     (See  529  A  and  B ;  also  a  case  of  the  cure  of  excessive  smoking
in  529  C.)

530.  Even  for  the  slave  of  morphia  the  same  sudden  freedom  is  some-
times achieved.     It  has  been  said  of  victims  to  morphia-injection  that  a
cure  means  death ; — so  often  has  suicide  followed  on  the  distress  caused
by  giving  up  the  drug.     But  in  certain  cases  cured  by  suggestion  it  seems
that  no  craving  whatsoever  has  persisted  after  the  sudden  disuse  of  the
drug.     There  is  something  here  which  is  in  one  sense  profounder  than
moral  reform.     There  is  something  which  suggests  a  spirit  within  us  less
injured  than  we   might  have  feared   by  the    body's   degradation.     The
morphinomaniac  character — the  lowest  type  of  subjection  to  a  ruling  vice
— disappears  from  the  personality  in  proportion  as  the  drug  is  eliminated
from  the  system.     The  shrinking  outcast  turns  at  once  into  the  respectable
man.     (See  530  A.)

531.  The  theme  which  comes  next  in  order,  while  of  first-rate  im-
portance, cannot  be  freely  treated  except  in  a  purely  medical  work.     I
have  spoken  of  the  standing  danger  which  the  stimulus  of  alcohol  consti-
tutes to  human  health  and  happiness.     There  exists,  I  need  not  say,  a
stimulus  still  more  powerful,  and  still  more  inextricably  interwoven  with
the  tissue  of  life  itself.     In  my  chapter  on  Genius  I  have  endeavoured  (as

532]  HYPNOTISM  177

the  disciple  of  Plato)  to  show  how  that  instinct  for  union  with  beauty
which  manifests  itself  most  obviously  in  sexual  passion  may  be  exalted  into
a  symbolical  introduction  into  a  sacred  and  spiritual  world.  In  my  dis-
cussion of  hysteria  I  showed  how  suggestion  may  be  used  to  relieve  certain
of  the  more  delicate  sorrows  into  which  that  passion  may  betray  the  yearn-
ing and  unconscious  heart.  But  there  are  baser  yearnings,  sorrows  of
fouler  stain ;  there  are  madnesses  and  melancholies  whose  cause  even  the
physician  or  the  confessor  must  often  guess  rather  than  hear.  It  must  be
enough  to  say  that  in  many  such  cases  the  hypnotising  physician  has
proved  the  most  helpful  of  confessors ;  that  in  this  direction  also  impulses
have  been  arrested,  appetites  transformed;  that  here,  too,  as  with  the
victims  of  alcohol  or  morphia,  the  world  holds  many  men  and  women
sane  and  sound  whom  but  for  hypnotic  suggestion  we  might  now  have
sought  in  vain ; — save  in  the  prison,  the  madhouse,  or  the  grave.1

532.  Some  of  these  profound  and  pervasive  disorders  of  the  sexual
passion,  if  fully  analysed,  might  supply  us  with  types  of  almost  every
variety  of  perversity  and  folly.  But  even  apart  from  these,  and  apart  from
troubles  consequent  on  any  intelligible  instinct,  any  discoverable  stimulus
of  pleasure,  there  are  a  multitude  of  impulses,  fears,  imaginations,  one  or
more  of  which  may  take  possession  of  persons  not  otherwise  apparently
unhealthy  or  hysterical,  sometimes  to  an  extent  so  distressing  as  to  impel
to  suicide.  I  believe  that  these  irrational  fears  or  "  phobies  "  are  often  due
to  heredity ; — not  always  to  a  reversion  to  primitive  terrors, — but  (as  in
the  case  of  horror  at  injury  to  finger-nails  quoted  from  Mr.  Francis  Galton
in  526  B )  to  an  accidental  and,  so  to  say,  traumatic  inheritance  of  some
prenatal  suggestion.  However  originated,  these  morbid  aversions  (like
other  idees  fixes  which  I  reserve  for  later  mention)  may  often  lie  very
deep,  and  in  their  sudden  removal  by  hypnotic  suggestion  they  remind
one  of  the  deep-seated  tumours  which  Esdaile  used  to  astonish  the
Calcutta  coolies  by  extirpating  while  they  slept.

A  frequent  form  of  idee  fixe  consists  of  some  restricting  or  disabling

preoccupation  or  fear.     Some  of  these  "  phobies  "  have  been  often  de-

(1  of  late  years, — as,  for  instance,  agoraphobia,  which  makes  a  man

to  cross  an  open  space ;  and  its  converse,  claustrophobia,  which

\  him  shrink  from  sitting  in  a  room  with  closed  doors ;  or  the  still

more  distressing  mysophobia,  which  makes  him  constantly  uneasy  lest  he

should  have  become  dirty  or  defiled  (see  Appendices  to  this  section).

All  these  disorders  involve  a  kind  of  displacement  or  cramp  of  the
attention  ;  and  for  all  of  them,  one  may  broadly  say,  hypnotic  suggestion
is  the  best  and  often  the  only  cure.  Suggestion  seems  to  stimulate  an-
tagonistic centres ;  to  open  clogged  channels  ;  to  produce,  in  short,  how-
ve  imagine  the  process,  a  rapid  disappearance  of  the  insistent  notion.

See,  for  example,  Von  Schrenck-Notzing's  work,  Die  Suggestions-Tkcrapie  bei
krankhnften  Enchtinun-en  des  Geschlechts-Lebetu.

M

i;8  CHAPTER    V  [533

I  have  spoken  of  this  effect  as  though  it  were  mainly  to  be  valued  in-
tellectually, as  a  readjustment  of  the  dislocated  attention.  But  I  must
note  also  that  the  moral  results  may  be  as  important  here  as  in  the  cases
of  inhibition  of  dipsomania  and  the  like,  already  mentioned.  These
morbid  fears  which  suggestion  relieves  may  be  ruinously  degrading  to  a
man's  character.  The  ingredients  of  antipathy,  of  jealousy,  which  they
sometimes  contain,  may  make  him  dangerous  to  his  fellows  as  well  as
loathsome  to  himself.  One  or  two  cases  of  the  cure  of  morbid  jealousy
are  to  my  mind  among  the  best  records  which  hypnotism  has  to  show
(see  557  A).

533.  The  extirpation  of  tumours,  however,  is  not  the  only  purgative
process  which  the  bodily  organism  ever  needs.  And  the  psychical
organism  also — to  continue  our  metaphor —  is  subject  to  many  blockings
and  cloggings  which  it  would  be  well  to  disperse  if  we  could.  The
treasure  of  memory  is  mixed  with  rubbish ;  the  caution  which  experience
has  taught  has  often  been  taught  too  well ;  philosophic  calm  has  often
frozen  into  apathy.  Plato  would  have  the  old  men  in  his  republic  plied
well  with  wine  on  festal  days,  that  their  tongues  might  be  unloosed  to
communicate  their  wisdom  without  reserve.  "  Accumulated  experience,"
it  has  been  said  with  much  truth  in  more  modern  language,1  "  hampers
action,  disturbs  the  logical  reaction  of  the  individual  to  his  environment.
The  want  of  control  which  marks  the  decadence  of  mental  power  is  [some-
times] itself  undue  control,  a  preponderance  of  the  secondary  over  the
primary  influences."

Now  the  removal  of  shyness,  or  mauvaise  honte,  which  hypnotic
suggestion  can  effect,  is  in  fact  a  purgation  of  memory, — inhibiting  the
recollection  of  previous  failures,  and  setting  free  whatever  group  of
aptitudes  is  for  the  moment  required.  Thus,  for  the  boy  called  on  to
make  an  oration  in  a  platform  exhibition,  hypnotisation  sets  free  the
primary  instinct  of  garrulity  without  the  restraining  fear  of  ridicule.  For
the  musical  executant,  on  the  other  hand,  a  similar  suggestion  will  set
free  the  secondary  instinct  which  the  fingers  have  acquired,  without  the
interference  of  the  learner's  puzzled,  hesitating  thoughts.

I  may  remark  here  (following  Gurney  and  Bramwell)  how  misleading  a
term  is  mono-ideism  for  almost  any  hypnotic  state.  There  is  a  selection  of
ideas  to  which  the  hypnotic  subject  will  attend,  and  there  is  a  concentra-
tion upon  the  idea  thus  selected ;  but  those  ideas  themselves  may  be  both
complex  and  constantly  shifting,  and  indeed  this  is  just  one  of  the  ways
in  which  the  hypnotic  trance  differs  from  the  somnambulic — in  which  it
may  happen  that  only  a  relatively  small  group  of  brain-centres  are  awake
enough  to  act.  The  somnambulic  servant-girl,  for  instance,  may  persist
in  laying  the  tea-table,  whatever  you  say  to  her,  and  this  may  fairly  be
called  mono-ideism ;  but  the  hypnotic  subject  (as  Bramwell  has  justly

1  Dr.  Hill,  British  Medical  Journal,  July  4th,  1891.

534]  HYPNOTISM  179

insisted,  see  534  A)  can  be  made  to  obey  simultaneously  a  greater  number
of  separate  commands  than  he  could  possibly  attend  to  in  waking  life.

534.  From  these  inhibitions  of  memory, — of  attention  as  directed  to
the  experiences  of  the  past, — we  pass  on  to  attention  as  directed  to  the
experiences  of  the  present.  And  here  we  are  reaching  a  central  point ;
we  are  affecting  the  macula  lutea  (as  it  has  been  well  called)  of  the  mental
field.  Many  of  the  most  important  of  hypnotic  results  will  be  best
described  as  modifications  of  attention.

Any  modification  of  attention  is  of  course  likely  to  be  at  once  a  check
and  a  stimulus ; — a  check  to  certain  thoughts  and  emotions,  a  stimulus
to  others.  And  in  many  cases  it  will  be  the  dynamogenic  aspect  of  the
change — the  new  vigour  supplied  in  needed  directions — which  will  be
for  us  of  greatest  interest.  Yet  from  the  inhibitive  side  also  we  have
already  had  important  achievements  to  record.  All  these  arrests  and
destructions  of  idees  fixes,  of  which  so  much  has  been  said,  were  powerful
modifications  of  attention,  although  the  limited  field  which  they  covered
made  it  simpler  to  introduce  them  under  a  separate  heading.

And  even  now  it  may  not  be  without  surprise  that  the  reader  finds
described  under  the  heading  of  inhibition  of  attention  a  phenomenon  so  con-
siderable and  so  apparently  independent  as  hypnotic  suppre ssion  of  pain.
This  induced  analgesia  has  from  the  first  been  one  of  the  main  triumphs
of  mesmerism  or  hypnotism.  All  have  heard  that  mesmerism  will  stop
headaches  ; — that  you  can  have  a  tooth  out  "  under  mesmerism  "  without
feeling  it.  The  rivalry  between  mesmerism  and  ether,  as  anaesthetic
agents  in  capital  operations,  was  a  conspicuous  fact  in  the  medical  history
of  early  Victorian  times.  But  the  ordinary  talk,  at  any  rate  of  that  day,
seemed  to  assume  that  if  mesmerism  produced  an  effect  at  all  it  was  an
effect  resembling  that  produced  by  narcotics — a  modification  of  the
intimate  structure  of  the  nerve  or  of  the  brain  which  rendered  them  for
the  time  incapable  of  transmitting  or  of  feeling  painful  sensations.  The
state  of  a  man's  nervous  system,  in  fact,  when  he  is  poisoned  by
'form,  or  stunned  by  a  blow,  or  almost  frozen  to  death,  or  nearly
.-•(I,  &c.,  is  such  that  a  great  part  of  it  is  no  longer  fit  for  its  usual
work, — is  no  longer  capable  of  those  prolongations  of  neurons,  or  whatever
they  be,  which  constitute  its  specific  nervous  activity.  We  thus  get
rid  of  pain  by  getting  rid  for  the  time  of  a  great  deal  of  other  nervous
)  as  well ;  and  we  have  to  take  care  lest  by  pushing  the  experiment
too  far  we  get  rid  of  life  into  the  bargain.  But  on  the  other  hand,  a  man's
nervo  no,  when  hypnotic  suggestion  has  rendered  him  incapable

of  pain,  is  quite  as  active  and  vigorous  as  ever, — quite  as  capable   of
; titling  and   feeling   pain, — although    capable  also  of   inhibiting   it
thcr.     In  a  word,  the  hypnotic  subject  is  above  pain  instead  of
•  it.

apparent  paradox,  we  must  reflect  for  a  moment
on  the  probable  origin  and  meaning  of  pain.     The  human  organisi

i8o  CHAPTER    V  [535

the  Darwinian  analysis  has  shown  us,  may  be  roughly  said  to  consist  of  a
complex  of  ingenious  but  imperfect  mechanisms  designed  to  enable  our
race  to  overrun  the  earth.  As  competition  has  become  more  severe,
fresh  artifices  have  been  developed  to  enable  our  ancestors  to  secure
food  and  to  avoid  danger.  Pain  is  a  warning  of  danger,  useless  to
the  protozoon  or  to  the  stationary  vegetable,  but  indispensable  to  active
creatures  with  miscellaneous  risks.  Yet  as  intelligence  advances  and
nerves  at  the  same  time  grow  more  sensitive,  pain  becomes  but  a
mixed  advantage.  It  is  well  to  be  warned  (say)  not  to  touch  the  fire ;
but  a  neuralgia's  constant  signal  of  mal-nutrition  tends  simply  to  exhaust
the  sufferer  and  to  hinder  its  own  cure.  What  we  want  to  do  now  is
to  choose  our  capacities  of  pain ;  to  shut  off  pain  when  we  know  it  will  be
useless ;  to  rise  as  definitely  above  it  as  our  earliest  ancestors  were  below  it,
or  as  the  drunken  or  narcotised  man  is  below  it  now.  Nay,  if  one  counts
weariness  and  wakefulness  along  with  pain,  one  may  say  that  the  suppres-
sion of  pain  and  the  suppression  of  microbes  have  become  the  two  main
physical  needs  of  the  human  race.  With  noxious  microbes  hypnotic
suggestion  can  only  indirectly  deal ;  but  with  pain  and  weariness  it  can
deal  more  directly  and  successfully  than  any  other  agency  whatever.  It
attacks  the  real  origo  mali ; — not,  indeed,  the  pressure  on  the  tooth-nerve,
which  can  only  be  removed  by  extraction,  but  the  representative  power  ot
the  central  sensorium  which  converts  that  pressure  for  us  into  pain.  It
diverts  attention  from  the  pain,  as  the  excitement  of  battle  might  do ;  but
diverts  it  without  any  competing  excitement  whatever.  The  battle-
excitement  (so  to  say)  pours  so  much  water  out  through  pipe  A  that  there
is  none  left  to  flow  through  pipe  B  ;  the  hypnotic  suggestion  simply  shuts  a
cock  on  pipe  B,  and  leaves  pipe  A  to  flow  or  not,  as  may  be  convenient.
For  some  fortunately  susceptible  persons,  such  as  I  have  seen,  this
power  of  suppressing  pain  and  weariness  simply  abolishes  the  main
troubles  of  life  at  a  blow.  The  drawback  is  that  for  many  persons  the
process  is  a  tedious  one,  or  cannot  with  our  present  knowledge  be  per-
formed at  all.  Hypnotic  suggestion  is  not  yet  a  panacea ;  but  it  is  much
nearer  to  being  a  panacea  than  anything  else  has  ever  been ;  and  it  works
on  the  only  plan  from  which  a  panacea  can  possibly  be  developed.

To  this  topic  of  influence  on  attention  we  shall  have  to  recur  again  and
again.  For  the  present  it  may  suffice  if  I  refer  the  reader  to  a  few  cases —
chosen  from  among  some  thousands  which  have  been  printed,  from  the
Zoist  downwards,  in  more  or  less  detail,  where  mesmeric  and  hypnotic
practice  has  removed  or  obviated  the  distress  or  anguish  till  now  unmis-
takably associated  with  various  bodily  incidents — from  the  extraction  of  a
tooth  to  the  great  pain  and  peril  of  childbirth  (see  Appendices) .

535.  This  suppression  of  pain  has  naturally  been  treated  from  the
therapeutic  point  of  view,  as  an  end  in  itself;  and  neither  physician  nor
patient  has  been  inclined  to  inquire  exactly  what  has  occurred ; — what
physiological  or  psychological  condition  has  underlain  this  great  subjec-

535]  HYPNOTISM  181

live  relief.  Yet  in  the  eye  of  experimental  psychology  the  matter  is  far
from  a  simple  one.  We  are  bound  to  ask  what  has  been  altered.  Has
there  been  a  total  ablation,  or  some  mere  translation  of  pain?  What
objective  change  on  the  bodily  side  has  occurred  in  nerve  or  tissue?  and,
on  the  mental  side,  how  far  does  the  change  in  consciousness  extend?
How  deep  does  it  go?  Does  any  subliminal  knowledge  of  the  pain
persist  ?

The  very  imperfect  answers  which  can  at  present  be  given  to  these
questions  may,  at  any  rate,  suggest  directions  for  further  inquiry.

(1)  In  the  first  place,  it  seems  clear  that  when  pain  is  inhibited  in
any  but  the  most  simple  cases,  a  certain  group  of  changes  is  produced
whose  nexus  is  psychological  rather  than  physiological.     That  is  to  say,
one  suggestion  seems  to  relieve  at  once  all  the  symptoms  which  form  one
idea  of  pain  or  distress  in  the  patient's  mind ;  while  another  suggestion  is
often   needed  to  remove  some   remaining  symptom,  which    the  patient
regards  as  a  different  trouble  altogether.     The  suggestion  thus  differs  both
from  a  specific  remedy,  which  might  relieve  a  specific  symptom,  and  from
a  general  narcotisation,  which  would  relieve  all  symptoms  equally.     In
making  suggestions,  moreover,  the   hypnotiser  finds  that  he  has  to  con-
sider  and   meet   the   patient's  own    subjective    feelings,    describing   the
intended  relief  as  the  patient  wishes  it  to  be  described,  and  not  attempt-
ing technical  language  which  the  patient  could  not  follow.     In  a  word,  it
is  plain  that  in  this  class,  as  in  other  classes  of  suggestion,  we  are  address-
ing ourselves  to  a  mind,  an  intelligence,  which  can  of  itself  select  and
combine,  and  not  merely  to  a  tissue  or  a  gland  responsive  in  a  merely
automatic  way.

(2)  It  will  not  then  surprise  us  if, — pain  being  thus  treated  as  a  psycho-
logical entity, — there  shall  prove  to  be  a  certain  psychological  complexity
in  the  response  to  analgesic  suggestion.

By  this  I  mean  that  there  are  occasional  indications  that  some  memory

of  the   pain,  say,  of  an  operation,  has  persisted  in  some  stratum  of  the

personality ; — thus  apparently  indicating  that    there   was  somewhere  an

1  consciousness  of  the  pain  when  the  operation  was  performed.     Thus

in  the  Revue  de  fHypnotisme,   August   1887,  Dr.  Mesnet  records  a  case

where  after  an  accouchement,  rendered  apparently  painless  by  hypnotic

trance,  the  patient  remembered  in  a  subsequent  hypnotic  trance  the  latter

f  the  delivery;  a  period,  that  is  to  say,  when  the  length  of  the  trial

•mcwhat  weakened  the  hypnotic  control.     With  this  we  may  compare

.n  accounts  of  the  revival  of  pain  in  dreams  after  operations  performed

r  chloroform  (see  535  A).

i   Such  experiences,  if  more  frequent,  might  tempt  us  to  suppose  that

wholly  abrogated,  but  merely  translated  to  some  stratum  of

•<•  experiences  do  not  enter  into  our  habitual  chain  of

>ries.     Yet  we  possess  (strangely  enough)  what  seems  direct  evidence

that  the  profoundest   organic  substratum  of  our  being   is  by  suggestion

182  CHAPTER    V  [536

wholly  freed  from  pain.  It  had  long  been  observed  that  recoveries  from
operations  performed  in  hypnotic  trance  were  unusually  benign ; —
there  being  less  tendency  to  inflammation  than  when  the  patient  had  felt
the  knife.  The  same  observation — perhaps  in  a  less  marked  degree — has
since  been  made  as  to  operations  under  chemical  anaesthesia.  The  shock
to  the  system,  and  the  irritation  to  the  special  parts  affected,  are  greatly
diminished  by  chloroform.  And  more  recently  Professor  Delboeuf,  by  an
experiment  of  great  delicacy  on  two  symmetrical  wounds,  of  which  one
was  rendered  painless  by  suggestion,  has  distinctly  demonstrated  that  pain
tends  to  induce  and  keep  up  inflammation  (see  534  A).

Thus  it  seems  that  pain  is  abrogated  at  once  on  the  highest  and  on
the  lowest  level  of  consciousness;  yet  possibly  in  some  cases  (though
not  usually,  see  535  B)  persists  obscurely  in  some  stratum  of  our  per-
sonality into  which  we  gain  only  occasional  and  indirect  glimpses.  And
if  indeed  this  be  so,  it  need  in  no  way  surprise  us.  We  need  to  remember
at  every  point  that  we  have  no  reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  we  are
cognisant  of  all  the  trains  of  consciousness,  or  chains  of  memory,  which
are  weaving  themselves  within  us.  I  shall  never  attain  on  earth — perhaps
I  never  shall  in  any  world  attain — to  any  complete  conspectus  of  the
variously  interwoven  streams  of  vitality  which  are,  in  fact,  obscurely  present
in  my  conception  of  myself.

536.  It  is  to  hypnotism  in  the  first  place  that  we  may  look  for  an
increased  power  of  analysis  of  these  intercurrent  streams,  these  irregularly
superposed  strata  of  our  psychical  being.     In  the  meantime,  this  power  of
inhibiting   almost  any  fraction  of  our  habitual  consciousness  at  pleasure
gives    for  the   first   time   to   the   ordinary  man — if  only   he    be   a  sug-
gestible subject — a  power  of  concentration,  of  choice  in  the  exercise  of
faculty,  such  as  up  till  now  only  the  most  powerful  spirits — a  Newton  or
an  Archimedes — have  been  able  to  exert.

The  man  who  sits  down  in  his  study  to  write  or  read, — in  perfect
safety  and  intent  on  his  work, — continues  nevertheless  to  be  involuntarily
and  inevitably  armed  with  all  that  alertness  to  external  sights  and  sounds,
and  all  that  sensibility  to  pain,  which  protected  his  lowly  ancestors  at
different  stages  of  even  pre-human  development.  It  is  much  as  though  he
were  forced  to  carry  about  with  him  all  the  external  defences  which  his
forefathers  have  invented  for  their  defence ; — to  sit  at  his  writing-table
clad  in  chain-mail  and  a  respirator,  and  grasping  an  umbrella  and  a
boomerang.  Let  him  learn,  if  he  can,  inwardly  as  well  as  outwardly,  to
get  rid  of  all  that,  to  keep  at  his  command  only  the  half  of  his  faculties
which  for  his  purpose  is  worth  more  than  the  whole.  Dissociation  and
choice  ; — dissociation  between  elements  which  have  always  hitherto  seemed
inextricably  knit ; — choice  between  faculties  which  till  now  we  have  had
to  use  all  together  or  not  at  all ; — such  is  the  promise,  such  is  the  incipient
performance  of  hypnotic  plasticity  in  its  aspect  of  inhibitive  suggestion.

537.  I  come  now  to  the  division  of  hypnotic  achievement  with  which

537]  HYPNOTISM  183

I  next  proposed  to  deal,  namely,  the  dynamogenic  results  of  hypnotic
suggestion.  Intensified  vitality,  heightened  faculty,  concentrated  atten-
tion, strengthened  will ;  such  are  the  fittest  descriptive  phrases  which
we  can  find  for  these  phenomena — phrases  which  all  of  them  imply  some
obscure  operation  in  a  realm  beyond  our  view.  Nay,  more,  the  realisation
of  these  phrases  presently  shows  us  that  even  the  effects  which  we  have
for  convenience*  sake  classed  as  inhibitive  are  in  reality  dynamogenic.
Inhibition  is  not  disability,  and  the  active,  purposive  restraint  which  the
word  connotes  implies  first  that  effective  command  of  attention — that
sway  over  the  hidden  springs  of  thought  and  emotion — which  we  shall
now  be  tracing  on  a  larger  scale,  and  with  different  purposes,  in  its
dynamogenic  aspect.

Yet  the  practical  convenience  of  our  arrangement  is  hereby  only  the
more  plainly  seen.  What  has  thus  far  been  written  is  well  fitted  to  clear
the  way  for  what  is  to  follow.  While  we  dealt  with  inhibitions  our  subject
was  clearly  defined ;  we  knew  what  phenomena  of  life  we  desired  to
check  ;  we  could  measure  the  success  attained  in  each  several  direction.
But  now  that  we  launch  out  upon  the  dynamogenic  power  of  hypnotic
suggestion,  in  whatsoever  direction  it  may  lie,  we  are  embarking  on  an
inquiry  to  which  no  term  can  be  foreseen.  We  know,  of  course,  that  the
physical  energy  manifested  in  the  organism  can  never  overpass  its  physical
sources  of  supply  in  warmth  and  nutriment.  But  this  is  a  test  so  rough
as  to  be  practically  useless  here.  Within  these  broad  limits  the  metabolism
in  the  organism — the  kind  of  energy  into  which  food  and  warmth  are
transformed — may  vary  indefinitely  in  character  and  in  intensity.  And  as
for  a  psychical  energy  informing  each  one  of  us, — if  such  exist  apart  from
the  physical, — we  have  no  reason  whatever  for  supposing  that  we  are
here  moving  in  a  closed  circuit,  or  manipulating  a  constant  sum.

In  default  of  any  more  comprehensive  purview  of  the  phenomena
before  us,  it  will  be  convenient  to  return  again  to  the  mere  practical  or
educational  standpoint ; — to  consider  what  it  is  which  we  are  wont  sub-
jectively to  regard  as  a  heightening  or  concentration  of  power.     We  can
roughly  define  the  directions   in  which,  as  we  say,  we  strengthen  the
faculties  of  the  young.     Perception,  imagination,  attention,  character, —
these  we  endeavour  to  train.     We  try  to  teach  our  children  (i)  to  get
from  their  external  sensory  organs  all  the  healthful  pleasure  and  knowledge
they  can;  (2)  and  to  develop  their  central  sensory  organs,  or  inner
1  of  imagination,  into  sane  and  helpful  fertility;   (3)  and  to  direct
their  intellectual  energy  whithersoever  they  may  desire,  keeping  hold  by
ry  on  previous  acts  of  attention;    (4)  and,  finally,  to  convert  know
ledge   and   imagination   into  wisdom   and   virtue  by  the  exercise  of  en-
ncd  will.     This  road  is  long  and  hard  ;  but  we  shall  find  that  at
every  point  there  is  already  some  beginning  of  aid  from  hypnotic  sug-
gestion ;  some  hint  of  a  short  cut  which  may  some  day  take  us  far  on
our  v

1 84  CHAPTER    V  [538

538.  I  will  begin,  then,  with  what  seems  the  most  external  and
measurable  of  these  different  influences — the  influence,  namely,  of  sugges-
tion upon  man's  perceptive  faculties ; — its  power  to  educate  his  external
organs  of  sense.

This  wide  subject  is  almost  untouched  as  yet ;  and  there  is  no  direction
in  which  one  could  be  more  confident  of  interesting  results  from  further
experiment.

The  exposition  falls  naturally  into  three  parts,  as  suggestion  effects  one
or  other  of  the  three  following  objects  : —

(1)  Restoration  of  ordinary  senses  from  some  deficient  condition.

(2)  Vivification  of  ordinary  senses; — hyperaesthesiae.

(3)  Development  of  new  senses ; — heteraesthesiae.

(i)  The  first  of  these  three  headings  seems  at  first  sight  to  belong  to
therapeutics  rather  than  to  psychology.  It  is,  however,  indispensable  as  a
preliminary  to  the  other  two  heads ;  since  by  learning  how  and  to  what
extent  suggestion  can  repair  defective  senses  we  have  the  best  chance  of
guessing  at  its  modus  operandi  when  it  seems  to  excite  the  healthy  senses
to  a  point  beyond  their  normal  powers.  I  give  in  Appendices  several
cases  bearing  on  this  subject.

Two  points  may  be  mentioned  here.  Improvement  of  vision  seems
sometimes  to  result  from  relaxation  of  an  involuntary  ciliary  spasm,  which
habitually  over-corrects  some  defect  of  the  lens  (see  538  B).  This  is
interesting,  from  the  analogy  thus  shown  in  quite  healthy  persons  to  the
fixed  ideas,  the  subliminal  errors  and  fancies  characteristic  of  hysteria.
The  stratum  of  self  whose  business  it  is  to  correct  the  mechanical  defect
of  the  eye  has  in  these  instances  done  so  amiss,  and  cannot  set  itself  right.
The  corrected  form  of  vision  is  as  defective  as  the  form  of  vision  which  it
replaced.  But  if  the  state  of  trance  be  induced,  or  if  it  occur  spon-
taneously, it  sometimes  happens  that  the  error  is  suddenly  righted ;  the
patient  lays  aside  spectacles ;  and  since  we  must  assume  that  the  original
defect  of  mechanism  remains,  it  seems  that  that  defect  is  now  perfectly
instead  of  imperfectly  met  (see  416).  This  shows  a  subliminal  adjusting
power  operating  during  trance  more  intelligently  than  the  supraliminal
intelligence  had  been  able  to  operate  during  waking  life.

Another  point  of  interest  lies  in  the  effect  of  increased  attention,  as
stimulated  by  suggestion,  upon  the  power  of  hearing.  The  two  cases  of
Loue  and  another,  quoted  in  538  A,  are  among  the  most  significant  that
I  know.  If  Lout's  susceptibility  to  self-suggestion  could  be  reached  by
patients  generally,  there  might  be,  with  no  miracle  at  all,  a  removal  of
perhaps  half  the  annoyance  which  deafness  inflicts  on  mankind.

539.  I  pass  on  to  cases  of  the  production  by  suggestion  or  self-
suggestion  of  hyperaesthesia, — of  a  degree  of  sensory  delicacy  which  over-
passes the  ordinary  level,  and  the  previous  level  of  the  subject  himself.

The  rudimentary  state  of  our  study  of  hypnotism  is  somewhat  strangely
illustrated  by  the  fact  that  most  of  the  experiments  which  show  hyper-

540]  HYPNOTISM  185

aesthesia  most  delicately  have  been  undertaken  with  a  view  of  proving
something  else  —  namely,  mesmeric  rapport,  or  the  mesmerisation  of
objects,  or  telepathy.  In  these  cases  the  proof  of  rapport,  telepathy,  &c.,
generally  just  falls  short, — because  one  cannot  say  that  the  action  of  the
ordinary  senses  might  not  have  reached  the  point  necessary  for  the
achievement,  though  there  is  often  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  subject
was  supraliminally  ignorant  of  the  way  in  which  he  was,  in  fact,  attaining
the  knowledge  in  question.

In  these  extreme  cases,  indeed,  the  explanation  by  hyperaesthesia  is
not  always  proved.  There  may  have  been  telepathy,  although  one  has
not  the  right  to  assume  telepathy,  in  view  of  certain  slighter,  but  still
remarkable,  hyperaesthetic  achievements,  which  are  common  subjects  of
demonstration.  The  ready  recognition  of  points  de  repere,  on  the  back  of
a  card  or  the  like,  which  are  hardly  perceptible  to  ordinary  eyes,  is  one  of
the  most  usual  of  these  performances.

In  this  connection  the  question  arises  as  to  the  existence  of  physio-
logical limits  to  the  exercise  of  the  ordinary  senses.  In  the  case  of  the
eye  a  minimum  visibile  is  generally  assumed ;  and  there  is  special  interest
in  a  case  of  clairvoyance  versus  cornea-reading,  where,  if  the  words  were
read  (as  appears  most  probable)  from  their  reflection  upon  the  cornea  of
the  hypnotiser,  the  common  view  as  to  the  minimum  visibile  is  greatly
stretched  (see  539  A) .

540.  With  regard  to  the  other  senses,  whose  mechanism  is  less  capable
of  minute  dissection,  one  meets  problems  of  a  rather  different  kind.  What
are  the  definitions  of  smell  and  touch?  Touch  is  already  split  up  into
various  factors — tactile,  algesic,  thermal ;  and  thermal  touch  is  itself  a
duplicate  sense,  depending  apparently  on  one  set  of  nerve-terminations
adapted  to  perceive  heat,  and  another  set  adapted  to  perceive  cold.  Taste
is  similarly  split  up;  and  we  do  not  call  anything  taste  which  is  not  defi-
nitely referred  to  the  mouth  and  adjacent  regions.  Smell  is  vaguer ;  and
there  are  cognate  sensations  (like  that  of  the  presence  of  a  cat)  which  are
not  referred  by  their  subject  to  the  nose.  The  study  of  hypersesthesia
does  in  this  sense  prepare  the  way  for  what  I  have  termed  heteraesthesia,
in  that  it  leaves  us  more  cautious  in  definition  as  to  what  the  senses  are ;
it  accustoms  us  to  the  notion  that  people  become  aware  of  things  in  many
which  they  cannot  definitely  realise.

Let  us  now  consider  the  evidence  for  heteraesthesia ; — for  the  existence,
that  is  to  say,  under  hypnotic  suggestion,  of  any  form  of  sensibility  de-
cidedly different  from  those  with  which  we  are  familiar.     It  would  sound
accurate  if  one  could  say  "demanding  some  end-organ  different
those  which  we  know  that  we  possess."     But  we  know  too  little  of
nge  of  perceptivity  of  these  end-organs  in  the  skin  which  we  are
gradu  to  distinguish — of  the  heat- feeling  spots,  cold- feeling

spots,  and  the  like — to  be  able  to  say  for  what  purposes  a  new  organ
would  be  needed.     For  certain  hetersesthctic  sensations,  indeed,  as  the

1 86  CHAPTER    V  [540

perception  of  a  magnetic  field,  one  can  hardly  assume  that  any  end-organ
would  be  necessary.  It  is  better,  therefore,  to  speak  only  of  modes  of
sensibility.

Now  to  any  one  who  reflects  on  the  evolutionary  process  by  which,  as
is  commonly  assumed,  man's  organism  has  been  developed  from  the  sim-
plest germ — a  process  which  is  undoubtedly  still  at  work,  and  which  must,
so  far  as  we  can  tell,  continue  at  work  for  ages  perhaps  very  far  exceeding
the  ages  already  past — to  any  one,  I  say,  who  takes  a  broad  view  of  human
development,  it  must  seem  a  very  improbable  thing  that  that  development
should  at  this  particular  moment  have  reached  its  final  term ;  or  rather,  to
put  the  question  at  issue  in  a  narrower  form,  that  this  immensely  complex
nervous  system,  which  has  gradually  become  responsive  in  so  many  ways
to  external  nature,  should  never  again  become  responsive,  or  be  recog-
nised as  responsive,  in  any  fresh  way.  I  can  imagine  no  theory,  except
the  theory  that  all  species  were  created  immutably  as  they  stand  to-day,
which  could  even  seem  to  justify  the  tacit  assumption,  still  frequently  met
with,  that  new  forms  of  human  sensitivity  are  antecedently  improbable.
They  may  be,  and  they  often  have  been,  claimed  on  insufficient  evidence  ;
but  that  they  must  occur  some  time  and  somehow  I,  for  one,  can  hardly
doubt.

Let  us  consider  a  moment  in  what  general  fashion  we  can  conceive  the
differentiation  of  senses  to  have  taken  place.

In  some  sense  or  other  we  must  needs  attribute  what  I  have  called
panasthesia  to  the  primal  germ.  We  must  suppose  that  its  potential  sen-
sations were  such  that  all  actual  sensations  of  animals  and  men  could  be
got  out  of  them.  The  protoplasm  may  itself  have  been  capable  (and  in
low  forms  may  still  be  capable)  of  vague  sensations  of  many  different
kinds.  Or  it  may  have  been  capable  only  of  some  one  vague  sensation,
though  able  also  to  develop  new  forms  of  protoplasm  with  varied
sensitivities.1

In  either  of  these  cases — let  us  take  the  former  as  somewhat  the  simpler
to  deal  with — the  question  among  sensations  was  one  of  the  development  of
the  fittest ;  that  is  to  say,  that,  as  the  organism  became  more  complex  and
needed  sensations  more  definite  than  sufficed  for  the  protozoon,  certain
sensibilities  got  themselves  defined  and  stereotyped  upon  the  organism  by
the  evolution  of  end-organs.  Others  failed  to  get  thus  externalised ;  but
may,  for  aught  we  know,  persist  nevertheless  in  the  central  organs ; — say,
for  instance,  in  what  for  man  are  the  optic  or  olfactory  tracts  of  the  brain.
There  will  then  be  no  apparent  reason  why  these  latent  powers  should
not  from  time  to  time  receive  sufficient  stimulus,  either  from  within  or
from  without,  to  make  them  perceptible  to  the  waking  intelligence,  or
perceptible  at  least  in  states  (like  trance)  of  narrow  concentration.

The  great  variety  of  senses  which  we  believe  the  lower  animals  to

1  Or,  as  suggested  by  Nagel  (540  A),  there  may  have  been  at  a  certain  stage  mixed
sense-organs,  by  means  of  which  two  or  three  sensations  were  perceived  simultaneously.

542]  HYPNOTISM  187

possess  may  well  suggest  to  us  that  we  also  might  have  been  developed
thus  or  thus ; — that  we  need  not  be  surprised  if  the  human  organism
should  some  day  show  a  trace  of  any  form  of  sensibility  which  the  ant  or
the  bee  may  have  inherited  along  with  us  from  the  ancestral  germ,  although
only  they  and  not  we  may  have  thus  far  needed  to  develop  it.

541.  As    the    result    of   these    considerations,    I    approach   alleged
heteraesthesiae  of  various  kinds  with   no   presumption   whatever   against
their  real  occurrence.     Yet  on  the  other  hand,  my  belief  in  the  extent  of
possible  hyperasthesia  continually  suggests  to  me  that  the  apparently  new
perceptions  may  only  consist  of  a  mixture  of  familiar  forms  of  perception,
pushed  to  a  new  extreme,  and  centrally  interpreted  with  a  new  acumen.

The  conditions  of  experiment  are  by  no  means  easy.  I  set  aside,  in
the  first  place,  a  large  number  of  experiments  where  there  has  been
reason  to  think  that  the  subject  has  followed,  either  fraudulently,  or  merely
as  the  result  of  suggestion,  the  preconceived  ideas  of  the  experimenters.
But  more  than  this;  self-suggestion  on  the  subject's  own  part  may  be
quite  enough  to  make  him  translate  some  perception  really  gained  in  an
old  way  into  terms  of  some  imagined  new  sensibility.  Without  presuming
to  criticise  past  evidence  wholesale,  I  yet  hope  that  the  experience  now
attained  may  lead  to  a  much  greater  number  of  well-guarded  experiments
in  the  near  future.  In  a  series  of  Appendices  I  very  briefly  present  the
actual  state  of  this  inquiry.  In  default  of  any  logical  principle,  I  shall
there  divide  these  alleged  forms  of  sensibility  according  as  they  are
excited  by  inorganic  objects  on  the  one  hand,  or  by  organisms  (dead  or
living)  on  the  other.

542.  In  the  meantime  I  pass  on  to  that  group  of  the  dynamogenic
effects  of  suggestion  which  takes  the  next  place   in  my  scheme   above
indicated.     I    proceed    from   changes    affecting   the   external   senses   to
changes  affecting  the  more  central  vital  operations — either  the  vaso-motor
system,  or  the  neuro-muscular  system,  or  the  central  sensory  tracts.     The
effects  of  suggestion  on  character — induced   changes  to  which  we  can
hardly  guess  the  nervous  concomitant — will  remain  to  be  dealt  with  in  yet
another  section.

First,  then,  as  to  the*  effects  of  suggestion  on  the  vaso-motor  system.
Simple  effects  of  this  type  form  the  commonest  of"  platform  experiments."
The  mesmerist  holds  ammonia  under  his  subject's  nose,  and  tells  him  it
e-water.  The  subject  smells  it  eagerly,  and  his  eyes  do  not  water.
The  suggestion,  that  is  to  say,  that  the  stinging  vapour  is  inert  lias
inhibited  the  vaso-motor  reflexes  which  would  ordinarily  follow,  and
which  no  ordinary  effort  of  will  could  restrain.  Viet  versd,  when  the
subject  smells  rose-water,  described  as  ammonia,  he  sneezes  and  his  eyes
These  results,  which  his  own  will  could  not  produce,  follow  on
the  mesmerist's  word.  No  one  who  sees  these  simple  tests  applied  can
doubt  the  genuineness  of  the  influence  at  work.  \Ve  find  then,  as
might  be  expected,  that  action  on  glands  and  secretions  constitutes  a

188  CHAPTER    V  [543

large  element  in  hypnotic  therapeutics.  The  literature  of  suggestion  is
full  of  instances  where  a  suppressed  secretion  has  been  restored  at  a
previously  arranged  moment,  almost  with  "astronomical  punctuality."
And  yet  in  what  memory  is  that  command  retained  ?  by  what  signal  is
it  announced  ?  or  by  what  agency  obeyed  ?

In  spite  of  this  underlying  obscurity,  common  to  every  branch  of
suggestion,  these  vaso-motor  phenomena  are  by  this  time  so  familiar  that
a  few  references  in  my  Appendices  will  suffice  for  their  illustration.

543.  This  delicate  responsiveness  of  the  vaso-motor  system  has  given
rise  to  some  curious  spontaneous  phenomena,  and  has  suggested  some
experiments,  which  are  probably  as  yet  in  their  infancy.  The  main  point
of  interest  is  that  at  this  point  spontaneous  self-suggestion,  and  subse-
quently suggestion  from  without,  have  made  a  kind  of  first  attempt  at  the
modification  of  the  human  organism  in  what  may  be  called  fancy  direc-
tions,— at  the  production  of  a  change  which  has  no  therapeutic  aim,  and
so  to  say,  no  physiological  unity ;  but  which  is  guided  by  an  intellectual
caprice  along  lines  with  which  the  organism  is  not  previously  familiar.  I
speak  of  the  phenomenon  commonly  known  as  "  stigmatisation,"  from  the
fact  that  its  earliest  spontaneous  manifestations  were  suggested  by  imagina-
tions brooding  on  the  stigmata  of  Christ's  passion ; — the  marks  of  wounds
in  hands  and  feet  and  side.  This  phenomenon,  which  was  long  treated
both  by  savants  and  by  devotees  as  though  it  must  be  either  fraudulent  or
miraculous, — ou  supercherie,  ou  miracle, — is  now  found  (like  a  good  many
other  phenomena  previously  deemed  subject  to  that  dilemma)  to  enter
readily  within  the  widening  circuit  of  natural  law.  Stigmatisation  is,  in  fact,
a  form  of  vesication ;  and  suggested  vesication — with  the  quasi-burns  and
real  blisters  which  obediently  appear  in  any  place  and  pattern  that  is
ordered — is  a  high  development  of  that  same  vaso-motor  plasticity  of
which  the  ammonia-rose-water  experiment  was  an  early  example  (see  cases
in  Appendices).

Equally  striking,  in  a  somewhat  different  direction,  was  Professor
Charcot's  production  by  suggestion  of  "blue  oedema"  (see  543  F),  an
experiment  which,  in  itself  a  mere  curiosity,  was  typical  of  a  wide
range  of  analogous  effects  which  might  in  various  states  of  the  system
prove  actively  beneficial.

544.  The  group  of  suggestive  effects  which  we  reach  next  in  order  is  a
wide  and  important  one.  The  education  of  the  central  sensory  faculties, —
of  our  power  of  inwardly  representing  to  ourselves  sights  and  sounds,  &c.,
— is  not  less  important  than  the  education  of  the  external  senses.  The
powers  of  construction  and  combination  which  our  central  organs  possess
differ  more  widely  in  degree  in  different  healthy  individuals  than  the
degrees  of  external  perception  itself.  And  the  stimulating  influence  of
hypnotism  on  imagination  is  perhaps  the  rnost  conspicuous  phenomenon
which  the  whole  subject  offers;  yet  it  has  been  little  dwelt  upon,  save
from  one  quite  superficial  point  of  view.

545]  HYPNOTISM  189

Every  one  knows  that  a  hypnotised  subject  is  easily  hallucinated  ; —
that  if  he  is  told  to  see  a  non-existent  dog,  he  sees  a  dog, — that  if  he  is
told  not  to  see  Mr.  A.,  he  sees  everything  in  the  room,  Mr.  A.  excepted.
Common  and  conspicuous,  I  say,  as  this  experiment  is,  even  the  scientific
observer  has  too  often  dealt  with  it  with  the  shallowness  of  the  platform
lecturer.  The  lecturer  represents  this  induced  hallucinability  simply  as  an
odd  illustration  of  his  own  power  over  the  subject.  "  I  tell  him  to  forget  his
name,  and  he  forgets  his  name ;  I  tell  him  that  he  has  a  baby  on  his  lap,
and  he  sees  and  feels  and  dandles  it."  At  the  best,  such  a  hallucination
is  quoted  as  an  instance  of  "mono-ideism."  But  surely  to  criticise  thus  is
to  judge  something  which  is  profound  and  complex  from  a  merely  external
and  accidental  point  of  view.  The  hypnotiser's  power  over  his  patient
is  itself  (telepathy  apart)  a  mere  result  of  suggestion.  There  may  be  a
kind  of  delegation  of  that  power  by  the  subject  to  the  hypnotiser,  but  all
analogy  shows  us  that  it  is  really  exercised  by  the  subject  over  himself.
A  truly  hallucinable  person  can  suggest  to  himself  his  own  hallucinations
with  no  external  aid  (see  a  case  recorded  by  Dr.  Wingfield  in  518  D).
"  Mono-ideism,"  again,  so  far  as  it  is  ever  a  true  description  of  the
hypnotised  subject's  state,  is  a  description  only  of  its  inhibitive  and  not
of  its  dynamogenic  aspect,— of  what  is  not  going  on  in  his  mind,  rather
than  of  what  is  going  on.  No  mere  inhibition  will  produce  hallucina-
tions. An  ordinary  person  cannot  feel  a  baby  on  his  lap  any  the  better
for  abstracting  his  attention  from  all  objects  of  thought  except  babies.
The  real  kernel  of  the  phenomenon  is  not  the  inhibition  but  the  dyna-
mogeny  ; — not  the  abstraction  of  attention  or  imagination  from  other
topics,  but  the  increased  power  which  imagination  gains  under  sug-
gestion ; — the  development  of  faculty,  useless,  if  you  will,  in  that  special
form  of  imagining  the  baby,  but  faculty  mentally  of  a  high  order — faculty
in  one  shape  or  another  essential  to  the  production  of  almost  all  the  most
admired  forms  of  human  achievement.

On  this  theme  I  shall  have  much  to  say ;  yet  here  again  it  will  be
convenient  to  defer  fuller  discussion  until  I  review  what  I  have  termed
"  sensory  automatism  "  in  a  more  general  way.     We  shall  then  see  that
this  quickened  imaginative  faculty  is  not  educed  by  hypnosis  alone  ;  that
i  part  of  the  equipment  of  the  subliminal  self,  and  will  be  better
treated  at  length  in  connection  with   other  spontaneous  manifestations.
Enough  here  to  have  pointed  out  the  main  fact ;  for  when  pointed  out  it
-.ardly  be  disputed,  although  its  significance  for  the  true  compre-
hension of  hypnotic  phenomena  has  been  too  often  overlooked.

545.    Yet  here,  and  in  direct  connection  with  hypnotism,  certain  special
features  of  hallucinations  need  to  be  insisted  upon,  both  as  partly  ex-
plaining certain  more  advanced  hypnotic  phenomena,  and  also  as  suggesting
of  important  experiment.     The  first  point  is  this.

t-hypnotic    hallucinations   can    be  postponed  at   will.      The    sin-
gular accuracy,  indeed,  with  which  they  can  sometimes  be  ordered  for

190  CHAPTER    V  [546

any  given  minute  in  the  remote  future  will  demand  our  attention  when  we
are  considering  the  stimulating  effects  of  hypnotism  on  memory  and
intelligence.  For  the  moment  it  is  enough  to  note  that  post-hypnotic
hallucinations  afford  a  striking  corroboration  of  the  view  here  insisted  on —
namely,  that  it  is  an  abiding  element  in  the  personality, — the  subliminal
self,  or  some  fragment  of  the  subliminal  self, — which  manufactures  these
quasi-percepts.  Experience  shows  that  a  constant  watchfulness  is  exer-
cised, so  that  if,  for  example,  the  hypnotiser  tells  the  subject  that  he
will  (when  awakened)  poke  the  fire  when  the  hypnotiser  has  coughed
three  times,  the  awakened  subject,  although  knowing  nothing  of  the
order  in  his  waking  state,  will  be  on  the  look-out  for  the  coughs,  amid  all
other  disturbances,  and  will  poke  the  fire  at  the  fore-ordained  signal
(see  551  A).  Moreover,  when  the  post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  executed
there  will  often  be  a  slight  momentary  relapse  into  the  hypnotic  state,  and
the  subject  will  not  afterwards  be  aware  that  he  has  (for  instance)  poked
the  fire  at  all.  This  means  that  the  suggested  act  belongs  properly  to
the  hypnotic,  not  to  the  normal  chain  of  memory ;  so  that  its  perform-
ance involves  a  brief  reappearance  of  the  subliminal  self  which  received
the  order.

546.  Another  characteristic  of  these  suggested  hallucinations  tells  in
exactly  the  same  direction.     It  is  possible  to  suggest  no  mere  isolated
picture, — a  black  cat  on  the  table,  or  the   like, — but  a  whole  complex
series  of  responses  to  circumstances  not  at  the  time  predictable.     This
point  is  well  illustrated  by  what  are  called  "  negative  hallucinations  "  or
"  systematised  anaesthesias"     Suppose,  for  instance,  that  I  tell  a  hypno-
tised subject  that  when  he  awakes  there  will  be  no  one  in  the  room  with
him  but  myself.     He  awakes  and  remembers  nothing  of  this  order,  but
sees  me  alone  in  the  room.     Other  persons  present  endeavour  to  attract
his  attention  in  various  ways.     Sometimes  he  will  be  quite  unconscious  of
their  noises  and  movements ;  sometimes  he  will  perceive  them,  but  will
explain  them  away,  as  due  to  other  causes,  in  the  same  irrational  manner
as  one  might  do  in  a  dream.     Or  he  may  perceive  them,  be  unable  to
explain  them,  and  feel  considerable  terror  until  the  "  negative  hallucina-
tion "  is   dissolved   by  a  fresh  word  of  command.     It  is  plain,  in  fact,
throughout,  that  some  element  in  him  is  at  work  all  the  time  in  obedience
to  the  suggestion  given, — is  keeping  him  by  ever  fresh  modifications  of  his
illusion  from  discovering  its  unreality  (see  e.g.,  in  546  A,  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
experiments  on  the  function  of  points  de  reptre  in  negative  hallucinations).
Nothing  could  be  more  characteristic  of  what  I  have  called  a  "  middle-
level  centre  "  of  the  subliminal  self, — of  some  element  in  his  nature  which
is  potent  and  persistent  without  being  completely  intelligent; — a  kind
of  dream-producer,  ready  at  any  moment  to  vary  and  defend  the  dream.

547.  Another  indication  of  the  subliminal  power  at  work  to  produce
these  hallucinations  is  their  remarkable  range — a  range  as  wide,  perhaps,
as  that  over  which  therapeutic  effects  are  obtainable  by  suggestion.     The

549]  HYPNOTISM  191

post-hypnotic  hallucination  may  affect  not  sight  and  hearing  alone  (to
which  spontaneous  hallucinations  are  in  most  cases  confined),  but  all  kinds
of  vaso- motor  responses  and  organic  sensations — cardiac,  stomachic,  and
the  like — which  no  artifice  can  affect  in  a  waking  person.  The  legendary
flow  of  perspiration  with  which  the  flatterer  sympathises  with  his  patron's
complaint  of  heat — si  dixeris  "&stuo"  sudat — is  no  exaggeration  if  applied
to  the  hypnotic  subject,  who  will  often  sweat  and  shiver  at  your  bidding  as
you  transplant  him  from  the  Equator  to  frosty  Caucasus.

548.  Well,  then,  given  this  strength  and  vigour  of  hallucination,  one
sees  a  possible  extension  of  knowledge  in  more  than  one  direction.     To
begin  with,  by  suggesting  to  the  subject  that  he  is  feeling  or  doing  some-
thing which  is  beyond   his  normal  range   of  faculties,  we  may  perhaps
enable  him  to  perceive  or  to  act  as  thus  suggested.

Here,  as  elsewhere,  it  is  desirable  to  push  as  far  as  possible  our
inquiry  into  phenomena  which  may  still  count  as  normal,  so  as  to  see  if
any  bridge  or  passage  between  normal  and  supernormal  be  anywhere  in-
dicated ;  and  here,  as  elsewhere,  we  have  to  regret  the  lamentable  scarcity
of  purely  psychological  experiments  over  the  whole  hypnotic  field.  We
are  habitually  forced  to  base  our  psychological  inferences  on  therapeutic
practice ;  and  in  directions  where  there  has  been  no  therapeutic  effort
there  are  gaps  in  our  knowledge,  which  those  hypnotists  who  have  good
subjects  at  their  disposal  should  be  invited  to  fill  up  as  soon  as  may  be.

What  we  need  is  to  address  to  a  sensitive  subject  a  series  of  strong
suggestions  of  the  increase  of  his  sensory  range  and  power.  We  must
needs  begin  by  suggesting  hallucinatory  sensations : — the  subject  should
be  told  that  he  perceives  some  stimulus  which  is,  in  fact,  too  feeble  for
ordinary  perception.  If  you  can  make  him  think  that  he  perceives  it,  he
probably  will  after  a  time  perceive  it ;  the  direction  given  to  his  attention
heightening  either  peripheral  or  central  sensory  faculty.  You  may  then
be  able  to  attack  the  question  as  to  how  far  his  specialised  end-organs  are
really  concerned  in  the  perception ; — and  it  may  then  be  possible  to  deal
nore  fruitful  way  with  those  alleged  cases  of  transposition  of  senses
which  have  so  great  a  theoretical  interest  as  being  apparently  intermediate
between  hyperaesthesia  and  telaesthesia  or  clairvoyance.  If  we  once  admit
(as  I,  of  course,  admit)  the  reality  of  telaesthesia,  it  is  just  in  some  such
s  this  that  we  should  expect  to  find  it  beginning.

549.  I  start  from  the  thesis  that  the  perceptive  power  within  us  pre-
cedes and  is  independent  of  the  specialised  sense-organs,  which  it  has
developed  for  earthly  use.

vovs  opij  KOI  vovt  dxovrt  *  ruXXn  «ax£a  KOI  rv^Xa.

I  <  onceive  further  that  under  certain  circumstances  this  primary  telaes-
thctic  faculty  resumes  direct  operations,  in  spite  of  the  fleshly  barriers
which  are  constructed  so  as  to  allow  it  to  operate  through  certain  channels
alone.  And  I  conceive  that  in  thus  resuming  exercise  of  the  wider  faculty,

192  CHAPTER    V  [550

the  incarnate  spirit  will  be  influenced  or  hampered  by  the  habits  or  self-
suggestions  of  the  more  specialised  faculty ;  so  that  there  may  be  apparent
compromises  of  different  kinds  between  telaesthetic  and  hyperaesthetic  per-
ception,— as  the  specialised  senses  endeavour,  as  it  were,  to  retain  credit
for  the  perception  which  is  in  reality  widening  beyond  their  scope.

In  this  attitude  of  mind,  then,  I  approach  the  recorded  cases  of  trans-
position of  special  sense.  I  quote  at  some  length  in  549  B  certain
experiments  which  cannot  lightly  be  set  aside.

The  case  there  cited,  I  say,  is  not  easy  to  explain.  Two  main  hypo-
theses have  been  put  forward  as  a  general  explanation  of  such  cases,
neither  of  which  seems  to  me  quite  satisfactory,  (i)  The  common  theory
would  be  that  these  are  merely  cases  of  erroneous  self-suggestion ; — that
the  subject  really  sees  with  the  eye,  but  thinks  that  he  sees  with  the  knee,
or  the  stomach,  or  the  finger-tips.  This  may  probably  have  been  so  in
many  instances  (see  549  A)  ;  but  Dr.  Fontan's  case  cannot,  I  think,  be
so  explained  without  overriding  his  definite  statements  in  an  unjustifiable
way.  (2)  Dr.  Prosper  Despine  and  others  suppose  that,  while  the  accus-
tomed cerebral  centres  are  still  concerned  in  the  act  of  sight,  the  finger-
end  (for  example)  acts  for  the  nonce  as  the  end-organ  required  to  carry
the  visual  sensation  to  the  brain.  I  cannot  here  get  over  the  mechanical
difficulty  of  the  absence  of  a  lens.  However  hyperaesthetic  the  finger-end
might  be  (say)  to  light  and  darkness,  I  can  hardly  imagine  its  acting  as
an  organ  of  definite  sight.

My  own  suggestion  (which,  for  aught  I  know,  may  have  been  made
before)  is  that  the  finger-end  is  no  more  a  true  organ  of  sight  than  the
arbitrary  "  hypnogenous  zone  "  is  a  true  organ  for  inducing  trance.  I
think  it  possible  that  there  may  be  actual  telaesthesia, — not  necessarily  in-
volving any  perception  by  the  bodily  organism ; — and  that  the  spirit  which
thus  perceives  in  wholly  supernormal  fashion  may  be  under  the  impression
that  it  is  perceiving  through  some  bizarre  corporeal  channel — as  the  knee
or  the  stomach.  I  think,  therefore,  that  the  perception  may  not  be
optical  sight  at  all,  but  rather  some  generalised  telaesthetic  perception  re-
presented as  visual,  but  incoherently  so  represented ;  so  that  it  may  be
referred  to  the  knee  instead  of  the  retina.  And  here  again,  as  at  several
previous  points  in  my  argument,  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  what  will  be
said  in  my  chapter  on  Possession  by  external  spirits  (Chapter  IX.)  to
illustrate  the  operation  even  of  the  subject's  own  spirit  acting  without
external  aid.

550.  And  now  I  come  to  the  third  main  type  of  the  dynamogenic
efficacy  of  suggestion ; — its  influence,  namely,  on  attention,  on  will,  and  on
character; — character,  indeed,  being  largely  a  resultant  of  the  direction
and  persistence  of  voluntary  attention.

It  will  be  remembered  that  for  convenience'  sake  I  have  discussed  the
dynamogenic  effect  of  suggestion  first  upon  the  external  senses,  then  upon
the  internal  sensibility, — the  mind's  eye,  the  mind's  ear,  and  the  imagina-

550]  HYPNOTISM  193

tion  generally ; — and  now  I  am  turning  to  similar  effects  exercised  upon
that  central  power  which  reasons  upon  the  ideas  and  images  which  external
and  internal  senses  supply,  which  chooses  between  them,  and  which  re-
acts according  to  its  choice.  These  are  the  "highest-level  centres,"  which
I  began  by  saying  that  the  hypnotist  could  rarely  hope  to  reach ; — since
those  spontaneous  somnambulisms  which  the  hypnotic  trance  imitates  and
develops  do  so  seldom  reach  them.  The  phenomena  which  here  follow,
therefore,  lie  beyond  our  original  ground  of  hope.  They  show  that  the
hypnotic  range  is  wider  than  the  somnambulic ; — how  much  wider,  experi-
ence alone  can  show.  The  step  which  we  are  making  here,  though  a  con-
siderable one,  is  not  a  sudden  one.  We  have  already  found  a  good  deal  of
intelligence  of  a  certain  kind  in  hypnotic  phenomena ;  what  we  do  here  is
to  pass  from  one  stage  to  another  and  higher  stage  of  consciousness  of
intelligent  action.  To  explain  my  point,  I  may  roughly  say  that  there  are
three  habitual  degrees  of  such  consciousness,  as  follows  : — (a)  I  do  not  at
all  know  how  I  supply  my  arm  with  blood.  That  is  an  organic  process
wholly  below  my  conscious  level.  (£)  I  know  in  a  certain  sense  how  I
move  my  arm.  That  is  an  organic  process  associated  with  certain  con-
scious sensations  of  choice  and  will,  (c)  Given  this  fact  that  I  am  moving
my  arm,  I  can  understand,  more  fully  than  at  those  previous  stages,  how
I  am  writing  words  on  paper.  In  that  action  there  is  a  larger  element  of
acquired  capacity  and  conscious  choice.  And  I  wish  to  explain  that  the
forward  step  which  we  are  making  in  this  section  is,  in  fact,  a  carrying  on
of  the  results  of  suggestion  from  stage  (If}  to  stage  (c} — from  a  point  at
which  there  is  but  a  small  element  resembling  conscious  choice  to  a  point
•where  that  element  is  important  and  complex.

To  explain  this  statement,  let  us  dwell  for  a  moment  upon  the  degree
of  intelligence  which  we  have  already  seen  displayed  in  those  modifications
of  the  organism  which  suggestion  has  effected.  Take,  for  instance,  the
formation  of  a  cruciform  blister,  as  recorded  by  Dr.  Biggs,  of  Lima  (543  B).
That  performance  needed  an  unusual  combination  of  capacities ; — the
capacity  of  directing  physiological  changes  in  a  new  way,  and  also,  and
combined  therewith,  the  capacity  of  recognising  and  imitating  an  abstract,
arbitrary,  non-physiological  idea,  such  as  that  of  cruciformity.

All  this,  in  my  view,  is  the  expression  of  subliminal  control  over  the

organism — more  potent  and  profound  than  supraliminaL     Or  here,  per-

in  order  to  give  some  toncreteness  to  this  abstract  expression,  I  may

describe  this  increased  physiological  modifiability  as  a  recovery  of  primitive

plasticity.     Not  that  this  really  is  a  simple  idea ;  for  we  do  not  know  how  or

iuit  early  plasticity  of  the  indefinite  amojba,  the  claw-renewing  crab,

has  been  lost  by  higher  animals.     We  have  no  notion  what  kind  of  change

would  be  needed  to  enable  a  higher  animal  to  take  that  plasticity  on  again.

The  problem  here  presented  on  a  larger  scale  has  some  resemblance  to

problems  involved  in  such  histories  of  alternating  person-

as   Louis  Viva's   (233  A).     That  partially  paralysed  and  otherwise

194  CHAPTER    V  [551

much  damaged  young  man  could  be  put  back  by  certain  artifices  into  his
state  of  uninjured  boyhood, — "  before  the  viper  bit  him,"  and  his  long
series  of  troubles  began.  His  paralysis  disappeared  in  a  moment,  and
there  was  thus  a  real  recovery  of  plasticity, — of  power  of  many  kinds  over
his  organism.  If  we  ask  how  those  powers  came  to  have  been  so  long
obscured,  the  only  answer  is  hysterical  self-suggestion.  Can  it  be  some
kind  of  self-suggestion  which  prevents  the  mammal  from  crediting  himself
with  crustacean  recuperativeness  ?  Or,  in  more  sober  language,  do  not
these  experiments  in  suggestive  blistering  show  that  there  does  still
persist  in  us  a  potential  control  over  reparative  secretions  much  greater
than  the  common  experience  of  life  is  apt  to  reveal  to  us?

This  dormant  plasticity,  then,  the  hypnotic  suggestions  reawaken.
But  now  consider  with  what  degree  of  intelligence,  of  directive  choice,
they  reawaken  it.  They  reawaken  it  neither  blindly  nor  wisely,  but  with
intelligent  caprice.  The  plasticity,  I  say  first,  is  not  blindly  and  vaguely
restored ;  the  vesication  is  localised  on  a  pre-arranged  plan,  the  rest  of
the  body  remaining  unchanged.  Nor,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  plasticity
restored  with  perfect  wisdom ;  in  lima  S.'s  case,  for  instance  (543  D),  the
vesication  is  annoying  to  the  subject,  who  would  have  gladly  avoided  it.
The  order  given  for  specifically  shaped  blisters  is  a  capricious  one ;  but
in  each  case  the  capricious  order  is  intelligently  obeyed.  Bizarre  as  this
result  may  seem,  it  is  very  much  what  might  have  been  expected  on  the
theory  suggested  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter.  It  is  a  result  of  the
action  of  middle-level  centres  putting  into  exercise  subliminal  powers.

I  have  chosen  this  point  in  my  argument  for  a  brief  analysis  of  the
intelligence  involved  in  the  vaso-motor  effects  of  suggestion,  just  because
we  are  now  going  on  to  suggestions  more  directly  affecting  central  faculty,
and  in  which,  as  I  have  said,  highest-level  centres  begin  to  be  involved.
For  I  want  to  prepare  the  reader  for  an  intermediate  stage  in  which  high
faculties  are  used,  in  obedience  to  suggestion,  for  purely  capricious  ends.

551.  I  speak  of  calculations  subliminally  performed  in  the  carrying
out  of  post-hypnotic  suggestions.

These  suggestions  a  echtance — commands,  given  in  the  trance,  to  do
something  under  certain  contingent  circumstances,  or  after  a  certain  time
has  elapsed — form  a  very  convenient  mode  of  testing  the  amount  of  men-
tation which  can  be  started  and  carried  out  without  the  intervention  of  the
supraliminal  consciousness.  Experiments  have  been  made  in  this  direc-
tion by  three  men  especially  who  have  in  recent  times  done  some  of  the
best  work  on  the  psychological  side  of  hypnotism,  namely,  Edmund
Gurney,  Delboeuf,  and  Milne  Bramwell.  A  summary  of  their  results  is
given  in  551  A,  B,  and  C.

Dr.  Milne  BramwelPs  experiments  (to  mention  these  as  a  sample  of  the
rest)  were  post-hypnotic  suggestions  involving  arithmetical  calculations;
the  entranced  subject,  for  instance,  being  told  to  make  a  cross  when  20,180
minutes  had  elapsed  from  the  moment  of  the  order.  Their  primary  im-

552]  HYPNOTISM  195

portance  lay  in  showing  that  a  subliminal  or  hypnotic  memory  persisted
across  the  intervening  gulf  of  time, — days  and  nights  of  ordinary  life, — and
prompted  obedience  to  the  order  when  at  last  it  fell  due.  But  incidentally,
as  I  say,  it  became  clear  that  the  subject,  whose  arithmetical  capacity  in
common  life  was  small,  worked  out  these  sums  subliminally  a  good  deal
better  than  she  could  work  them  out  by  her  normal  waking  intelligence.

Of  course,  all  that  was  needed  for  such  simple  calculations  was  close
attention  to  easy  rules ;  but  this  was  just  what  the  waking  mind  was  unable
to  give,  at  least  without  the  help  of  pencil  and  paper.  If  we  lay  this
long  and  careful  experiment,  concerned  though  it  was  with  very  easy
problems,  side  by  side  with  the  accounts  already  given  of  the  solution
of  problems  in  somnambulic  states,  which  states  were  forgotten  on  waking,
it  seems  clear  that  there  is  yet  much  to  be  done  in  the  education  of
subliminal  memory  and  acumen  as  a  help  to  supraliminal  work.

552.  Important  in  this  connection  is  an  account  given  by  Dr.  Dufay  of
help  given  by  him  to  an  actress  in  the  representation  of  her  rdUs  by
hypnotisation  (see  552  A).  Every  one  knows  how  much  more  vividly
the  objectivation  de  types,  as  Professor  Richet  long  ago  called  it,  is
effected  in  the  hypnotic  than  in  the  normal  state ;  and  it  seems  obvious
that  stage-fright  is  just  the  kind  of  nervous  annoyance  from  which  hypno-
tisation should  give  relief.  Somewhat  similarly  I  believe  that  self- hypnotisa-
tion is  employed  by  some  professional  "  trance-speakers,"  whose  utterances
(while  by  no  means  obliging  us  to  refer  them  to  "spirit-control")  are
often  remarkably  ready  and  fluent.  It  is  possible  for  some  persons,  that  is
to  say,  thus  to  secure  a  cheap  substitute  for  genius  on  stage  or  platform ;
to  evoke  by  suggestion  or  self-suggestion  an  uprush  of  subliminal  thought
and  diction,  or  of  dramatic  gesture  and  intonation,  which,  even  if  it  is
of  no  very  rare  quality,  at  least  carries  the  self-inspired  artist  over  many
ordinary  stumbling-blocks.

Here,  again,  the  hypnotisation  is  a  kind  of  extension  of  "  secondary
automatism  "  ;  — of  the  familiar  lapse  from  ordinary  consciousness  of  move-
ments (walking,  pianoforte  playing,  &c.),  which  have  been  very  frequently
performed.  The  possibilities  thus  opened  up  are  very  great :  no  less  than
the  combination  by  mankind  of  the  stability  of  instinct  with  the  plasticity
>on.  The  insect,  as  we  know,  performs  with  great  ease  and  perfec-
tion certain  difficult  acts,  by  dint  of  an  instinct  which  perhaps  in  many
cases  is  "  lapsed  intelligence  "  ; — an  obscurely  conscious  effort  gradually
>rmed  through  generations  into  an  unintelligent  but  accurate  auto-
:i.  Man  benefits  by  a  similar  lapsed  intelligence  or  secondary
•n,  but  to  a  very  small  degree  in  comparison  with  the  amount  of
work  which  he  has  to  perform  by  conscious  effort.  There  seems  no
i  why  his  range  of  automatism  should  not  thus  be  largely  increased
iys.  Many  things  (namely)  which  now  are  unpleasant  to
ight  be  done  with  indifference,  and  many  things  which  now  are  diffi-
cult to  do  might  be  done  with  ease.

196  CHAPTER    V  [553

Other  cases  where  memory  has  been  greatly  quickened  by  hypnotic
suggestion  are  given  in  552  B,  and  we  have  already  found  that  the  lapsed
recollections  of  secondary  states  may  be  recovered  by  hypnotism  in  the
primary  state  (see  also  552  C).

553.  Let  us  pass  on  from  these  specialised  influences  of  suggestion
on  certain  kinds  of  attention  to  its  influence  on  attention  generally,  as
needed,  for  instance,  in  education.     This  is  eminently  one  of  the  directions
where  a  wider  knowledge  of  hypnotism  is  likely  to  stimulate   experiment
which  may  be  of  great  practical  value.     Incapacity,  indolence,  and  in-
attention divide  between  them  the  responsibility  for  most  failures  whether
in  work  or  in  play.     Inattention  may  no  doubt  be  called  a  special  form  of
indolence  ;  but  it  is  often  so  far  "  constitutional  "  that  strenuous  voluntary
effort  cannot  cure  it.     If  we  can  arrest  this  shifting  of  the  mental  focus  to
undesired  ideational  centres  in  at  all  the  same  way  as  we  can  arrest  the
choreic  or  fidgetty  shiftings  of  motor  impulse  to  undesired  motor  centres,
we  shall  have  done  perhaps  as  much  for  the  world's  ordinary  work  as  if  we
had  raised  the  average  man's  actual  intelligence  a  step  higher  in  the  scale.
We   shall  have  checked   waste,    although   we    may  not   have   improved
quality.     The  well-known  case  of  Dr.  Forel's  warders  (553  A)  who  were
enabled    by   hypnotic   suggestion   to  sleep   soundly  by  the  side  of  the
patients  they  had  to  watch,  and  wake  only  when  the  patients  required
to  be  restrained,  shows  us  how  by  this  means  the  attention  may  be  con-
centrated on  selected  impressions  and  waste  of  energy  be  avoided  in  a
way  that  could  hardly  be  compassed  by  any  ordinary  exercise  of  the  will.

How  far,  indeed,  we  can  go  in  actually  heightening  intelligence  by
suggestion  we  have  yet  to  learn.  We  must  not  expect  to  add  a  cubit  to
intellectual  any  more  than  to  physical  stature.  Limitations  at  birth  must
prevent  our  developing  the  common  man  into  a  Newton ;  but  there  seems
no  reason  why  we  should  not  bring  up  his  practical  achievements  much
nearer  than  at  present  to  the  maximum  of  his  innate  capacity.  One
illustrative  instance  and  references  to  others  are  given  in  553  B.

554.  In  passing  on  from  the  influence  of  suggestion  on  attention  to
its  influence  on  will,  I  am  not  meaning  to  draw  any  but  the  most  every-
day distinction  between  these  two  forms  of  inward  concentration.     The
point,  in  fact,  which  I  wish  now  to  notice  is  rather  a  matter  of  common
observation  than  a  provable  and  measurable  phenomenon.     I  speak  of  the
energy  and  resolution  with  which  a  hypnotic  suggestion  is  carried  out  ;—
the  ferocity,  even,  with  which  the  entranced  subject  pushes  aside  the  oppo-
sition of  much  more  powerful  men.     I  do  not,  indeed,  assert  that  he  would
thus  risk  very  serious  injury ;  for  I  believe  (with  Bramwell  and  others)  that
there  does  exist  somewhere  within  him  a  knowledge  that  the  whole  pro-
ceeding is  a  mere  experiment.     But,  nevertheless,  he  actually  risks  some-
thing ;  he  behaves,  in  short,  as  a  confident,  resolute  man  would  behave,
and  this  however  timid  and  unaggressive  his  habitual  character  may  be.
I  believe  that  much  advantage  may  yet  be  drawn  from  this  confident

555]  HYPNOTISM  197

temper.  We  can  thus  inhibit  the  acquired  self-distrust  and  shyness  of  the
supraliminal  self,  and  get  the  subliminal  self  concentrated  upon  some  task
which  may  be  as  difficult  as  we  please ; — which  may,  if  we  can  adjust  it
rightly,  draw  out  to  the  uttermost  the  innate  powers  of  man.  We  can
command — sometimes  with  success — clairvoyant  excursions ;  nay,  we  may
order — not  without  some  hope — even  action  upon  matter  at  a  distance.
Among  his  experiments  with  the  subject  referred  to  in  573  C,  Dr.  Backman
records  a  case  in  which,  during  one  of  her  clairvoyant  excursions,  he  had
tried  to  make  her  seize  and  shake  a  bunch  of  keys  which  she  had  observed
in  the  room  she  was  clairvoyantly  visiting.  It  was  afterwards  ascertained
that  there  really  was  a  bunch  of  keys  in  the  place  as  described,  though  it
did  not  appear  that  the  desired  movement  had  taken  place.1  Still,  if
"  telekinesis  "  be  (as  I  hold)  a  reality,  such  experiments  as  these  seem,  at
any  rate,  a  reasonable  way  of  trying  to  achieve  it.

One  direction,  at  any  rate,  in  which  a  beginning  can  be  made  is  the
attainment  of  control  over  muscles  not  habitually  subject  to  will,  whether
from  ancestral  disuse,  or  as  belonging  to  the  unstriped  or  "  involuntary  "
type.  Various  movements  of  this  kind  may  be  made  as  the  result  of
suggestion ;  and  I  may  add  here  that  when  a  definite  type  of  action  is  set
before  several  hypnotised  subjects  a  spirit  of  emulation  will  often  carry
them  far.  A  singular  illustration  of  this  may  be  drawn  from  the  very
phenomena  which  Charcot  used  to  cite  in  order  to  prove  an  almost
opposite  thesis;— the  thesis,  namely,  that  the  subject  was  an  obedient
automaton,  and  that  in  order  to  prove  hypnosis. — to  demonstrate  "le
grand  hypnotisme,"  at  any  rate, — there  must  needs  occur  some  muscular
phenomena  incapable  of  being  simulated  by  the  subject.  And  in  effect,
in  his  once  famous  "  three  stages,"  there  did  sometimes  occur  certain
neuro-muscular  phenomena  which  no  one  in  an  ordinary  waking  condi-
tion could  reproduce.  Yet  it  by  no  means  follows  hence  that  these  are
phenomena  inevitably  accompanying  the  trance,  or  in  themselves  beyond
the  range  of  the  subliminal  will  of  the  subject.  On  the  contrary,  I  rather
:hese  Salpetriere  phenomena  as  showing  us  how  much  the  subliminal

f  entranced  subjects  is  capable  of  achieving.  I  believe  that  these
women  wished  to  be  hypnotised,  and  wished  to  go  through  the  "  classical

."  and  wished  m  the  course  of  these  often-described  stages  to  perform
evolutions  which  should  attract  admiring  attention.  What  one  really  saw
exhibited  was  not  the  powerful  will  of  the  hypnotiser,  but  the  still  more
powerful  will  of  the  hysteric.

555.     It  is  not  indeed  in  the  Salpetriere  school  alone  that  there  has
been  much  confusion  of  thought  as  regards  the  will-power  and  general

•ndence  of  the  hypnotised  subject.     It  has  been  supposed  that  the
of  being    hypnotised    tended    to   weaken   the    will  ;  that    the

•tised  person  fell  inevitably  more  and  more  under  the  control  of  the

tiscr,  and  even  that  he  could  at  last  be  induced  to  commit  crimes
1  See  Dr.  Backman 's  paper  in  the  Proceeding*  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  207.

I98  CHAPTER    V  [556

by  suggestion  (see  555  A) .  A  few  quotations  from  Dr.  Milne  Bramwell,
given  in  555  B,  will  show  on  how  small  a  foundation  of  fact  these  fanciful
theories  have  been  erected.  It  may  suffice  to  say  here  that  nothing  is
easier,  either  for  subject  or  for  hypnotiser,  than  to  avert  undue  influence.
A  trusted  friend  has  only  to  suggest  to  the  hypnotised  subject  that  no  one
else  will  be  able  to  affect  him,  and  the  thing  is  done.  As  to  the  crimes
supposed  to  be  committed  by  hypnotised  persons  under  the  influence  of
suggestion,  the  evidence  for  such  crimes,  in  spite  of  great  efforts  made  to
collect  it  and  set  it  forth,  remains,  I  think,  practically  nil.

This  fact,  I  must  add,  is  quite  in  harmony  with  the  views  expressed  in
the  present  chapter.  For  it  implies  that  the  higher  subliminal  centres
(so  to  term  them)  never  really  abdicate  their  rule ;  that  they  may  indeed
remain  passive  while  the  middle  centres  obey  the  experimenter's  caprice,
but  are  still  ready  to  resume  their  control  if  such  experiment  should
become  really  dangerous  to  the  individual.  And  this  runs  parallel  with
common  experience  in  the  spontaneous  somnambulisms.  The  sleeper
may  perform  apparently  rash  exploits;  but  yet,  unless  he  be  suddenly
awakened,  serious  accidents  are  very  rare.  Nevertheless,  both  in  spon-
taneous and  in  induced  somnambulism,  accidents  may  occur ;  nor  should
any  experiment  be  undertaken  in  a  careless  or  jesting  spirit.

But  the  role  of  the  hypnotiser,  as  our  command  over  hypnotic  artifice
increases,  is  likely  to  become  continually  smaller  in  proportion  to  the  role
played  by  the  subject  himself.  Especially  must  this  be  so  where  the
object  is  to  strengthen  the  subject's  own  power  of  will.  All  that  can  be
done  from  without  in  such  a  case  is  to  imbue  the  man's  spirit  with  the
sense  of  its  unexhausted  prerogatives, — the  strength  which  he  may  then
employ,  not  only  to  avert  pain  or  anxiety,  but  in  any  active  direction
which  his  original  nature  itself  admits.

556.  These  last  words  may  naturally  lead  us  on  to  our  next  topic :
the  influence  of  suggestion  on  character, — on  that  function  of  combined
attention  and  will,  which  is,  of  course,  also  ultimately  a  function  of  the
possibilities  latent  in  the  individual  germ.

And  while  character  is  thus  a  complex  notion,  the  effect  on  character
of  suggestion  and  self-suggestion  seems  at  first  sight  a  notion  at  once  too
complex  and  too  diffused  for  definite  treatment.  All  men  endeavour  to
influence  character,  not  indeed  hypnotically,  but  yet  by  such  intensest
suggestion  and  self-suggestion  as  they  can  bring  to  bear.  Many  men,
moreover,  trust  for  the  improvement  of  character  to  another  influence,  not
easy  of  discussion  here,  namely,  to  prayer, — to  the  aid  of  saints  or  of  a
Divine  Mediator,  or  to  the  direct  Grace  of  God.  And  yet  again,  these
religious  or  philosophic  creeds,  which  might  have  been  thought  to  lie  out-
side my  present  topic,  are  brought  within  it  by  the  confidence  of  many
believers  in  the  efficacy  of  their  faith  to  relieve  physical  as  well  as  moral
ill.  These  creeds  thus  become  schemes  of  self -suggestion, — of  which  it  is
not  only  legitimate  but  necessary  for  me  to  give  some  account.

556]  HYPNOTISM  199

In  approaching  this  mingled  matter  it  will  be  most  convenient  (re-
curring to  the  subjects  already  discussed  from  a  somewhat  different  point
of  view  in  sections  527-531)  to  begin  with  those  moral  suggestions  which
are  obviously  hypnotic,  and  which  develop  themselves  directly  from  some
therapeutic  purpose,  as  when  the  suggestion  to  avoid  morphia  leads  to
the  moral  reform  of  the  morphinomaniac.  From  the  morphinomaniac  or
the  drunkard  the  transition  is  easy  to  the  criminel-net — the  apparently
hopeless  case  of  congenital  moral  deficiency.  And  we  may  then  inquire
how  far  the  crude  moral  stimuli  which  affect  this  extreme  type  of  physical
and  moral  disaster  can  be  best  elevated  into  a  more  intellectual  air — can
be  best  modified  for  the  advantage  of  sufferers  who  can  be  reached
by  religious  and  philosophical  thought, — by  what  I  have  called  those
"  schemes  of  self-suggestion  "  which  the  great  traditions  and  the  great
conceptions  of  our  race  can  alone  supply.

First  of  all,  then,  and  going  back  to  the  evidence  already  given  as  to
the  cure  of  the  victims  of  morphia  (see  350) ,  we  may  say  with  truth  that
there  we  have  seen  as  tremendous  a  moral  lift — as  sudden  an  elevation
from  utter  baseness  to  at  least  normal  living — as  can  be  anywhere  pre-
sented to  us.  The  morphia  habit,  as  is  well  known,  leaves  absolutely  no
department  of  character  unpoisoned.  Cowardice,  treachery,  callous  self-
absorption, — such  are  the  characteristics  of  the  morphinomaniac,  even
though  physical  exhaustion  may  preclude  the  drunkard's  more  active  sins
of  violence  or  lust.  In  this  slimy  dissolution  of  self-respect  there  seems
to  be  nothing  on  which  sage  or  evangelist  can  take  hold.  Yet  we  have
seen  hypnotic  suggestion  effect  the  magical  change,  and  restore  the  de-
graded outcast  to  a  safe  and  honourable  position  among  his  fellow-men.

Here,  then,  the  question  arises  as  to  the  possible  range  of  such  sudden
reformations.  Did  we  succeed  with  the  morphinomaniac  only  because
his  was  a  functional,  and  not  an  organic,  degradation?  We  know,  indeed,
that  we  can  cure  a  morbid  condition  of  tissue  where  we  could  not  rectify
a  congenital  distortion  or  defect.  May  not  the  morphinomaniac's  state  be
a  kind  of  ^<r/w/Vfl/sinfulness? — a  poisoning  of  cells  which  once  functioned
normally,  and  which  are  capable  of  functioning  normally  again,  if  only  the
poison  be  removed?

A   may  it   not   be  a  much  harder  task  to  create  honesty,  purity,

unselfishness  in  a  brain  whose  very  conformation  must  keep  the  spirit  that

thinks  through  it  nearly  on  the  level  of  the  brute?     The  question  is  of

the  highest  psychological  interest ;  the  answer,  though  as  yet  rudimentary,

is  unexpectedly  encouraging.     The  examples  given  in  556  A  show  that  if

ibject  is  hypnotisable,  and  if  hypnotic  suggestion  be  applied  with

nt  persistency  and  skill,  no  depth  of  previous  baseness  and  foulness

prevent  the  man  or  woman  whom  we  charge  with  "  moral  insanity,"

or  stamp  as  a  "  criminal-born,"  from  rising  into  a  state  where  he  or  she

can  work  steadily,  and  render  services  useful  to  the  community.

I  purposely  limit  my  assertion  to  these  words.     We  must  still  work

200  CHAPTER    V  [557

within  the  bounds  of  natural  capacity.  Just  as  we  cannot  improvise  a
genius,  we  cannot  improvise  a  saint.  But  what  experience  seems  to  show
is  that  we  can  select  from  the  lowest  and  poorest  range  of  feelings  and
faculties  enough  of  sound  feeling,  enough  of  helpful  faculty,  to  keep  the
man  in  a  position  of  moral  stability,  and  capable  of  falling  in  with  the
common  labours  of  his  kind.

We  can  produce  in  time  somewhat  the  same  sort  of  effect  which  Rarey
and  others  have  produced  (perhaps  by  somewhat  similar  means)  upon
horses  rendered  useless  through  those  defects  of  stability  which  in  a  horse
we  call  vice.  Rarey  effected  a  life-long  inhibition  of  those  equine  impulses
which  were  inconvenient  to  man.  Enough  of  horse-power  was  left  in  the
horse  to  render  him  a  harmless  and  tractable,  even  if  an  insipid,  companion
and  servant  in  stable  or  hunting-field.  Looking  to  parallel  effects  pro-
duced in  human  beings,  it  will  be  seen  that  I  was  justified  in  saying  that
hypnotic  suggestion  had  effected  changes  of  character  in  cases  which  the
ordinary  educator,  or  the  ordinary  missionary,  would  have  deemed  most
unfavourable,  and  in  which  the  common  opinion  of  science  would  have
strongly  endorsed  their  despairing  prognosis.  The  advantage  gained  is
great,  and  should  not  be  forgotten  by  criminologists.  But  it  is  another
question  whether  we  shall  be  justified  in  concluding  that  because  these
apparently  extreme  cases  have  yielded  to  our  treatment,  therefore  all  cases
of  moral  obliquity  are  likely  so  to  yield.

557.  Such  an  expectation  is  hardly  legitimate  without  something  of
closer  analysis.    With  no  pretence  at  logic,  but  merely  for  the  convenience
of  the  present  argument,  we  may  divide  known  faults  or  sins  into  the
four  following  classes  : —

(1)  Bodily  sins  depending  on  specific  temptation,  as  drunkenness,

&c.  These,  as  we  have  seen,  can  generally  be  reached  by
suggestion.

(2)  Faults   associated   with  gross   congenital   defects   of  organisms.

These  also  can  be  reached  in  surprising  degree.

(3)  Faults  depending  on  an  ide'e  fixe.     Jealousy  is  the  type  of  such  a

fault.  All  jealousy,  we  may  say,  is  morbid ;  that  I  should  hate  B.
simply  because  A.  prefers  B.  to  myself  is  the  rational  result  of
an  insistent  association  of  ideas  which  appropriate  suggestion  has
sometimes  demolished  at  a  stroke.

(4)  Sins  deliberately  maintained  for  the  supposed  advantage  of  the

sinner.

Now  the  first  three  of  these  are  faults  from  which  the  afflicted  person
generally,  although  not  always,  earnestly  desires  to  be  free.  The  jealous
person,  like  the  drunkard,  can  often  recognise  that  beneath  the  morbid
insistence  there  is  a  stratum  of  cool  self-reproval ; — an  ideal  of  life  with
the  morbid  craving  removed.  It  is  where  that  subjacent  wish  for  improve-
ment exists  that  suggestion  can  get  an  adequate  hold  (see  557  A).

558.  This  last  observation  affords  a  hint  as  to  the  kind  of  moral  faults

559]  HYPNOTISM  201

which  suggestion  can  be  expected  to  cure.  As  a  matter  of  experience  thus
far,  we  find  that  the  sins  which  popular  theology  attributes  to  the  flesh,
rather  than  those  which  are  credited  to  the  world  or  to  the  devil,  have
been  the  readiest  to  disappear.  If  we  expand  our  definition  of  the  flesh  to
include  not  only  faults  of  self-indulgence  but  also  faults  of  sloth  and
cowardice  on  the  one  hand,  and  faults  of  hastiness  and  irascibility  on  the
other, — such  failings  as  obviously  vary  with  the  state  of  the  bodily
organism, — we  shall  include,  I  think,  almost  all  attested  moral  cures.

There  remains  \hzfourth  class  of  sins,  namely,  sins  deliberately  main-
tained for  the  supposed  advantage  of  the  sinner.

e  we  to  suppose  that  the  effect  of  suggestion  is  necessarily  limited  to
the  three  earlier  categories?  Must  we  despair  of  reaching  our  fourth  class
of  faults, — the  deep-seated  sins  such  as  hardness,  selfishness,  treachery,
spiritual  pride?  There  is  no  a  priori  reason  for  such  a  distinction.  How-
ever remote  from  the  so-called  "  flesh,"  all  moral  faults  alike  may  probably
have  some  counterpart  in  the  organism ;  and,  if  so,  all  should  be  modi-
fiable by  the  same  subliminal  attack.

Nor  have  we  any  experimental  proof  that  these  "  worldly  and  devilish  "
sins  are  not  in  fact  capable  of  similar  cure  by  suggestion.     The  absence  of
notable  cures  may  be  sufficiently  explained  by  two  facts,  already  hinted  at,
namely,  that  the  sufferers  from  these  defects  are  seldom  anxious  to  have  them
removed  ;  and  that  if  they  are  thus  anxious  they  are  not  likely  to  consult
a  physician,  but  rather  to  seek  support  of  a  directly  moral  or  religious  kind.
The  mental  attitude,  say,  of  the  fraudulent  trustee  is  very  different
from  that  of  the  dipsomaniac.     The  dipsomaniac  feels  himself  wholly  un-
suitcd  to  his  environment ;  beneath  all  his  morbid  craving  the  instinct  of
self-preservation  bids  him  to  desist.     The  fraudulent  man,  on  the  other
.  has  in  one  sense  adapted  himself  with  special  skill  to  his  temporary
environment.     I  say  his  temporary  environment ; — reverting  to  the  com-
parison of  man  on  earth  to  the  larva,  of  man  after  bodily  death  to  the
imago.     Selfishness,   hardness,  treachery   (as  I  have  said)   are  like  the
clumps  of  stinging  hairs  with  which  the  caterpillar  is  protected ;  and  the
i  man  is  like  a  caterpillar  which  has  so  developed  those  protective
characters  that  it  has  no  energy  left  for  transformation  into  the  imago,
cannot  reckon  on  any  instinct  of  self-preservation  to  make  him
for  change  of  character;  although  we  may  hope  that  in  every  man
some  subliminal  consciousness  of  his  connection  with  another  world  persists.
559.     And   here  we  approach  a  point  of  much  interest.     Hypnotic
suggestion  or  self-suggestion,  although  it  is  an  agency  in  great  part  un-
.   is  of  course  not  an  agency  which  stands  wholly  alone  rind
ite  from  all  other  influences.     It  melts  into  the  suasion  of  ordinary
-into  modes  of  influence  which  were  practised  before  hypnotisn
dreamt  of.     The  physician  (as  we  have  seen)  has  extended  his  domain  by
becoming  a  confessor  and  a  counsellor  as  well ;  he  has  utilised  for  moral
the  authority  with  which  his  scientific  knowledge  has  invested  him.

202  CHAPTER    V  [560

But  there  are  already  other  persons  wielding  with  authority  this  suasive
power,  and  it  is,  as  I  have  above  implied,  to  ministers  of  religion  rather  than
to  physicians  that  a  man  turns  who  is  conscious  of  sin  rather  than  of  disease.

There  must  of  course  be  a  connection  between  all  these  suasive  pro-
cesses. Can  we  find  any  intermediate  instances ; — cases  where  religious
conviction  seems  to  be  communicated  with  the  rapidity  and  decision  of
hypnotic  suggestion?

I  need  not  say  that  there  are  many  such  instances.  From  the  rude
animistic  dances  and  ceremonies  of  the  savage  up  to  the  "  missions  "  and
"  revivals  "  in  English  and  American  churches  and  chapels,  we  find  sudden
and  exciting  impressions  on  mind  and  sense  called  into  play  for  the  purpose
of  producing  religious  and  moral  change ;  and  sometimes  actually  produc-
ing not  only — what  from  the  analogy  of  hypnotic  suggestion  seems  compara-
tively easy — a  change  of  belief,  but  also — what  is  far  harder — a  change  of
habits.  Among  the  lower  races  especially  these  exciting  reunions  often
involve  both  hysterical  and  hypnotic  phenomena.  There  are  sometimes
convulsive  accesses  ;  and  there  is  sometimes  the  milder,  and  probably
wholly  healthy,  phenomenon  of  a  deep  restorative  sleep,  out  of  which  the
anxious  and  repentant  neophyte  awakes  with  a  sense  of  settled  conviction
and  of  peace.  The  influence  which  has  been  exerted  upon  him  is  thus
intermediate  between  hypnotic  artifice,,  dependent  on  trance-states  for
access  to  subliminal  plasticity,  and  ordinary  moral  suasion,  addressed
primarily  to  ordinary  waking  reason.

This,  of  course,  is  what  we  must  desire  ; — that  the  series  of  influences
should  thus  be  continuous ;  that  hypnotism  should  be  regarded  as  simply
a  systematisation  of  artifices  by  which  a  man's  own  self-suggestive  power,
— the  will  which  he  exerts  over  his  own  organism, — should  become  con-
tinually more  potent  for  both  his  moral  and  his  physical  good.

560.  Let  us  pause  here  to  consider  the  point  which  we  have  already
reached.  We  began  by  defining  hypnotism  as  the  empirical  development
of  the  sleeping  phase  of  man's  personality.  In  that  sleeping  phase  the
most  conspicuous  element, — the  most  obvious  function  of  the  subliminal
self, — is  the  repair  of  wasted  tissues,  the  physical,  and  therefore  also
largely  the  moral,  refreshment  and  rejuvenation  of  the  tired  organism.
We  have  now  traced  the  manner  in  which  that  function  has  been  per-
formed in  the  hypnotic  state,  and  by  suggestion  and  self-suggestion.  We
have  found  that  the  promised  development  of  sleep  is  a  reality ;  that  we
have  in  hypnotism  a  veritable  evolution  of  those  recuperative  energies  which
give  its  practical  value  to  sleep.  From  this  side, — and  it  is  from  this  side
only  that  the  mass  of  men  regard  sleep, — the  case  for  hypnotism  is  now
fairly  complete ;  and  this  long  chapter  might  here  draw  to  a  close.

The  reader,  however,  knows  that  my  initial  promise  would  not  in
reality  be  thus  fulfilled.  My  own  definition  of  sleep, — of  the  phase  of
personality  which  I  undertook  that  hypnotism  would  be  found  to  develop,
— was  of  much  wider  scope.  I  believe  that  during  sleep  the  subliminal

562]  HYPNOTISM  203

self  has  other  functions  beyond  the  recuperation  of  the  organism.  Those
other  functions  are  concerned  in  some  unknown  way  with  the  spiritual
world ;  and  the  indication  of  their  exercise  is  given  by  the  sporadic
occurrence,  in  the  sleeping  phase,  of  supernormal  phenomena.  Such
phenomena,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  occur  also  at  various  points  in
hypnotic  practice.  To  them  we  must  now  turn,  if  our  account  of  the
phenomena  of  induced  somnambulism  is  to  be  complete.

561.  Yet  here,  in  order  to  give  completeness  to  our  intended  review,
we  shall  need  a  certain  apparent  extension  of  the  scope  of  this  chapter.
We  shall  need  to  consider  a  group  of  cases  which  might  have  been  intro-
duced at  various  points  in  our  scheme,  but  which  are  perhaps  richest  in
their  illustrations  of  the  supernormal  phenomena  of  hypnotism.

Spontaneous  somnambulisms, — those  crude  uprushes  of  incoherent  subli-
minal faculty  which  sometimes  break  through  the  surface  of  sleep, — seem
to  occupy  a  kind  of  midway  position  among  the  various  phenomena
through  which  our  inquiry  has  thus  far  carried  us.

The  somnambulism  often  starts  as  an  exaggerated  dream  ;  it  develops
into  a  kind  of  secondary  personality.  The  thoughts  and  impulses  which
the  upheaval  raises  into  manifestation, — the  psychical  output, — resemble
sometimes  the  inspirations  of  genius,  sometimes  the  follies  of  hysteria.
And,  finally,  the  spontaneous  sleep-waking  state  itself  is  manifestly  akin  to
hypnosis, — is  sometimes  actually  interchangeable  with  the  induced  som-
nambulisms of  the  hypnotic  trance.  The  chain  of  memory  which  repeated
spontaneous  somnambulisms  gradually  form, — while  lying  quite  outside
the  primary  or  waking  memory, — will  often  be  found  to  form  part  of  the
hypnotic  memory,  which  gradually  accretes  in  similar  fashion  from  repeated
hypnosis.

It  would  be  easy  to  go  further,  and  to  compare  these  sudden  uprushes
of  the  subliminal  during  sleep  to  those  urgent  uprushes  in  waking  hours
which  we  shall  presently  have  to  discuss  as  sensory  and  motor  automatisms.
But  the  reader  will  already  have  understood  the  true  affinities  of  these
singular  intercalations  in  the  uniformity  of  sleep ; — will  already  have
realised  that  such  things  needs  must  be ; — that  it  would  have  been  strange
indeed  if  that  phase  of  the  personality  in  which  subliminal  operation  is
relatively  the  most  dominant  should  have  been  without  those  insurgences
or  outbreaks  of  the  subliminal  which  even  the  most  strenuous  waking
vigilance  cannot  always  avert  or  control.

562.  Nor,  again,  will  it  surprise  us  to  find  these  sleep-wakings  fertile
in  supernormal  operation,  though  it  be  supernormal  operation  scattered
and  diffused  upon  random  and  trivial  ends.     What  is  here  thrown  forth
comes  not  from  the  mine,  but  from  the  volcano ;  we  have  not  to  deal  with

peutic  results  educed  by  careful  suggestion,  but  with  the  miscellaneous
ejects  of  some  focus  of  submerged  excitation.  From  what  has  been  ob-
served in  spontaneous  somnambulism  (I  have  already  said),  we  might  luvr
divined  almost  the  full  range  of  phenomena  to  which  induced  somnam-

204  CHAPTER    V  [563

bulism  has  now  introduced  us.  Nay,  even  at  the  present  day,  the  lessons
of  spontaneous  somnambulism  are  not  exhausted.  They  should  teach  us
still  to  watch  for  further  developments ;  they  should  forbid  us  to  abandon,
in  the  plain  uniformity  of  hypnotic  practice,  our  hope  of  some  sudden
felicitous  inroad  upon  the  more  secret  faculties  of  man.

563.  For  one  form  of  sleep-waking  capacity  we  are  already  prepared
by  what  has  been  said  in  Chapter  IV.  of  the  solution  of  problems  in  sleep.
This  is  one  of  the  ways  in  which  we  can  watch  the  gradual  merging  of  a
vivid  dream  into  a  definite  somnambulic  act.     The  solution  of  a  problem
(as  we  have  seen)  may  present  itself  merely  as  a  sentence  or  a  diagram,
constructed  in  dream  and  remembered  on  waking.     Or  the  sleeper  (as  in
various  cases  familiar  in  text-books)  may  rise  from  bed  and  write  out  the
chain  of  reasoning,  or  the  sermon,  or  whatever  it  may  be.     Or  again,  in
rarer   cases   ("Rachel  Baker"  is   a  curious  example — see  563  A)    the
somnambulic  output  may  take  the  form  of  oratory,  and  edifying  discourses
may  be  delivered  by  a  preacher  whom  no  amount  of  shaking  or  pinching
will  silence  or,  generally,  even  interrupt.     This,  so  to  speak,  is  genius  with
a  vengeance  ;  this  is  a  too  persistent  uprush  of  subliminal  zeal,  co-operating
even  out  of  season  with  the  hortatory  instincts  of  the  waking  self.

564.  The  group  of  sleep-waking  cases  which  we   may  next  discuss
illustrate  a  natural  evolution  of  the  faculty  of  the  sleeping  phase  of  per-
sonality.    The  subliminal  self,  exercising  in  sleep  a  profounder  influence
over  the  organism  than  the  supraliminal  can  exert,  may  also  be  presumed
to  possess  a  profounder  knowledge  of  the  organism, — of  its  present,  and
therefore  of  its  future, — than  the  supraliminal  self  enjoys.

I  refer  in  564  A  to  two  cases  in  which  the  somnambulic  personality
is  discerned  throughout  as  a  wiser  self — advising  a  treatment,  or  at  least
foreseeing  future  developments  of  the  disease  with  great  particularity.  Of
course  in  such  a  case  prediction  is  often  simply  a  form  of  suggestion ;  the
symptom  occurs  simply  because  it  has  been  ordained  beforehand.  In  the
case  of  cures  of  long-standing  disease  the  sagacity  which  foresees  probably
co-operates  with  the  control  which  directs  the  changes  in  the  organism.

565.  The  next  stage  is  a  very  important  one.     We  come  to  the  mani-
festation in  spontaneous   sleep-waking  states  of  manifestly  supernormal
powers, — sometimes  of  telepathy,  but  more  commonly  of  clairvoyance  or
telaesthesia.     Unfortunately  these  cases  have    been,   as  a  rule,  very  in-
sufficiently observed   (see,  e.g.,  the  case  of  Mollie   Fancher,  in  236  A).
Still,  it  appears   that  in   spontaneous  somnambulism  there  is  frequently
some  indication  of  supernormal  powers,  though  the  observers — even  if
competent  in  other  ways — have  generally  neglected  to  take  account  of
the  hyperaesthesia  and  heightening  of  memory  and  of  general  intelligence
that  often   accompany  the  state.     I  quote,  however,  from  Dr.   Dufay  (in
565  A)  a  case  which  does  not  seem  open  to  these  objections,  and  give
some  references  to  other  cases.

566.  Before  leaving  this  subject  of  spontaneous  sleep- waking  states,

567]  HYPNOTISM  205

I  ought  briefly  to  mention  a  form  of  trance  with  which  we  shall  have  to
deal  more  at  length  in  a  later  chapter.  I  speak  of  trance  ascribed  to
spirit-possession.  As  will  be  seen,  I  myself  fully  adopt  this  explanation
in  a  small  number  of  the  cases  where  it  is  put  forward.  Yet  I  do  not
think  that  spirit-agency  is  necessarily  present  in  all  the  trances  even  of  a
true  subject  of  possession.  With  all  the  leading  sensitives — with  D.  D.
Home,  with  Stainton  Moses,  with  Mrs.  Piper  and  others — I  think  that
the  depth  of  the  trance  has  varied  greatly  on  different  occasions,  and
that  sometimes  the  subliminal  self  of  the  sensitive  is  vaguely  simulating,
probably  in  an  unconscious  dream-like  way,  an  external  intelligence.  This
hypothesis  suggested  itself  to  several  observers  in  the  case  especially  of
D.  D.  Home,  with  whom  the  moments  of  strong  characterisation  of  a
departed  personality,  though  far  from  rare,  were  yet  scattered  among  tracts
of  dreamy  improvisation  which  suggested  only  the  utterance  of  Home's
subliminal  self  (see  Chapter  IX.).  However  we  choose  to  interpret  these
trances,  they  should  be  mentioned  in  comparison  with  all  the  other  sleep-
waking  states.  They  probably  form  the  best  transition  between  those  shallow
somnambulisms,  on  the  one  hand,  which  are  little  more  than  a  vivid  dream,
and  those  profound  trances,  on  the  other  hand,  in  which  the  native  spirit
quits,  as  nearly  as  may  be,  the  sensitive's  organism,  and  is  for  the  time
replaced,  as  nearly  as  may  be,  by  an  invading  spirit  from  that  unseen  world.

567.  This  brief  review  of  non-hypnotic  somnambulisms  has  not  been
without  its  lessons.  It  has  shown  us  that  the  supernormal  powers  which
we  have  traced  in  each  of  the  preceding  chapters  in  turn  do  also  show
themselves,  in  much  the  same  fashion,  in  spontaneous  sleep-waking  states
of  various  types.  We  must  now  inquire  how  far  they  occur  in  sleep-
waking  states  experimentally  induced.

And  here  the  very  fact  of  induction  suggests  to  us  a  question  specially
applicable  to  the  hypnotic  state  itself.  Is  hypnosis  ever  supernormally
induced  ?  Can  any  one,  that  is  to  say,  be  thrown  into  hypnotic  trance
by  a  telepathic  impact  ?  or,  to  phrase  it  more  generally,  by  any  influence,
inexplicable  by  existing  science,  which  may  pass  from  man  to  man?

The  question  which  I  thus  attack  at  a  comparatively  late  point  of  my
discussion  has  given  rise  to  more  of  heated  controversy  than  any  other  in
the  history  of  my  subject.     A  battle  which  seemed  internecine  raged  for
between  the  partisans  of  "  mesmeric  effluence,"  on  the  one  hand,
and  the  partisans  of  a  purely  physiological  or  a  purely  '  suggestive  "  causa  -
>f  hypnosis  on  the  other.     The  victory  gradually  fell  to  the  latter
of  these  groups,  and  when  Edmund  Gurney  and  I  first  wrote  on  hypnotism,
some  twenty  years  ago,  hardly  a  single  hypnotist  supported  us  in  our  ques-
tion as  to  the  real  discomfiture  of  the  old,  or  "  mesmeric,"  hypothesis.

I  do  not  say  that  even  now  much  change  has  occurred  in  the  tluMi
general  opinion.  Yet  efflux  of  time,  and  certain  considerations  set  forth
in  earlier  sections  of  this  chapter,  may  now  enable  us  to  a  certain  extent
to  see  round  the  former  controversy,  to  concede  to  each  side  the  estab-

206  CHAPTER    V  [568

lishment  of  certain  definite  theses,  and  to  suggest  limitations  of  the  field
still  open  to  dispute.

In  the  first  place  one  may  say  that  of  the  anti-mesmeric  schools  of
opinion,  the  "  purely  physiological "  school  has  on  the  whole  failed,  the
"  purely  suggestive  "  school  has  triumphantly  succeeded.  The  school  of
Nancy,  reinforced  by  hypnotists  all  over  Europe,  has  abundantly  proved
that  "  pure  suggestion  "  (whatever  that  be)  is  the  determining  cause  of  a
very  large  proportion  of  hypnotic  phenomena.  That  is  beyond  dispute  ;
and  the  two  other  schools,  the  "  pure  physiologists  "  and  the  "  mesmerists  "
alike,  must  now  manage  to  prove  as  best  they  can  that  their  favourite
methods  play  any  real  part  in  the  induction  of  any  case  of  hypnosis.  For
to  the  pure  suggestionist,  monotonous  stimulation  and  mesmeric  passes  are
alike  in  themselves  inert,  are  alike  mere  facilitations  of  suggestion,  acting
not  directly  on  the  patient's  organism,  but  rather  on  his  state  of  mental
expectation.

I  reply  that  there  is  absolutely  no  need  to  go  as  far  as  this.  In
admitting  suggestion  as  a  vera  causa  of  hypnosis,  we  are  recognising  a  cause
which,  if  we  really  try  to  grasp  it,  resolves  itself  into  subliminal  operation,
brought  about  we  know  not  how.  So  far,  therefore,  from  negativing  and
excluding  any  obscure  and  perhaps  supernormal  agency,  the  suggestion
theory  leaves  the  way  for  any  such  agency  broadly  open.  Some  unknown
cause  or  other  must  determine  whether  each  suggestion  is  to  "  take  "  or
no ;  and  that  unknown  cause  must  presumably  act  somehow  upon  the
subliminal  self.  We  should  have  something  like  a  real  explanation  of
suggestion,  if  we  could  show  that  a  suggestion's  success  or  failure  was
linked  with  some  telepathic  impact  from  the  suggester's  mind,  or  with
some  mesmeric  effluence  from  his  person.

I  know  well  that  in  many  cases  we  can  establish  no  link  of  this  kind.
In  Bernheim's  rapid  hospital  practice  there  seems  no  opportunity  to  bring
the  hypnotist's  will,  or  the  hypnotiser's  organism,  into  any  effective
rapport  with  the  subject.  Rather,  the  subject  seems  to  do  all  that  is  wanted
for  himself  almost  instantaneously.  He  often  falls  into  the  suggested
slumber  almost  before  the  word  "  Dormez!  "  has  left  the  physician's  mouth.
But  on  the  other  hand,  this  is  by  no  means  the  only  type  of  hypnotic
success.  Just  as  in  the  mesmeric  days,  so  also  now  there  are  continual
instances  where  much  more  than  the  mere  command  has  been  needed  for
effective  hypnotisation.  Persistence,  proximity,  passes — all  these  prove
needful  still  in  the  practice  even  of  physicians  who  place  no  faith  at  all
in  the  old  mesmeric  theory.

568.  The  fact  is,  that  since  the  days  of  those  old  controversies  between
mesmerists  proper  and  hypnotists  proper,  the  conditions  of  the  contro-
versy have  greatly  changed.  The  supposed  mesmeric  effluence  was  then
treated  as  an  entirely  isolated,  yet  an  entirely  physiological  phenomenon.
There  was  supposed  to  be  a  kind  of  radiation  or  infection  passing  from
one  nervous  system  to  another.  It  was  of  this  that  Cuvier  (for  instance)

569]  HYPNOTISM  207

was  convinced ;  it  was  this  theory  which  Elliotson  defended  in  the  Zoist
with  a  wealth  of  illustration  and  argument  to  which  little  justice  has  even
yet  been  done.  Yet  it  was  hard  to  prove  effluence  as  opposed  to  suggestion,
because  where  there  was  proximity  enough  for  effluence  to  be  effective
there  was  also  proximity  enough  for  suggestion  to  be  possible.  Only  in
some  few  circumstances, — such  as  Esdaile's  mesmerisation  of  a  blind
man  over  a  wall,1 — was  it  possible  to  claim  that  the  mesmeric  trance  had
been  induced  without  any  suspicion  whatever  on  the  subject's  part  that
the  mesmerist  was  trying  to  entrance  him.

Since  those  days,  however,  the  evidence  for  telepathy — for  psychical
influence  from  a  distance — has  grown  to  goodly  proportions.  A  new  form
of  experiment  has  been  found  possible,  from  which  the  influence  of  sugges-
tion can  be  entirely  excluded.  It  has  now,  as  I  shall  presently  try  to  show,
been  actually  proved  that  the  hypnotic  trance  can  be  induced  from  a  dis-
tance so  great,  and  with  precautions  so  complete,  that  telepathy  or  some  simi-
lar supernormal  influence  is  the  only  efficient  cause  which  can  be  conceived.

I  subjoin  a  series  of  experiments  in  this  "  telepathic  hypnotism,"  in
one  of  the  best  of  which  (Dr.  Gibert's,  see  568  A)  I  had  the  good  fortune
to  take  a  part.  These  experiments  are  not  easy  to  manage,  since  it  is
essential  at  once  to  prevent  the  subject  from  suspecting  that  the  experi-
ment is  being  tried,  and  also  to  provide  for  his  safety  in  the  event  of  its
success.  In  Dr.  Gibert's  experiment,  for  instance,  it  was  a  responsible
matter  to  bring  this  elderly  woman  in  her  dream-like  state  through  the
streets  of  Havre.  It  was  needful  to  provide  her  with  an  unnoticed  escort ;
and,  in  fact,  several  persons  had  to  devote  themselves  for  some  hours  to  a
single  experiment.

569.  I  have  cited  first  this  long  series  of  experiments  at  a
distance,  without  attempting  to  analyse  the  nature  of  the  suggestion
or  power  employed  by  the  hypnotist.  Of  course  it  is  plain
that  if  one  can  thus  influence  unexpectant  persons  from  a  distance,
there  must  be  sometimes  some  kind  of  power  actually  exercised  by  the
>tiser ; — something  beyond  the  mere  tact  and  impressiveness  of
^s,  which  is  all  that  Bernheim  and  his  followers  admit  or  claim,
nee  of  this  has  been  afforded  by  the  occasional  production  of
organic  and  other  effects  in  hypnotised  subjects  by  the  unuttered  will
of  the  operator  when  near  them.  The  ingenious  experiments  of  Gurney
i  569  A)  in  the  production  of  local  rigidity  and  anaesthesia  were  under-
taken to  test  whether  the  agency  employed  were  more  in  the  nature  of
an  effort  of  will  or, — as  the  early  mesmerists  claimed, — of  an  emission  of
1  "  mesmeric  fluid  "  or  physical  effluence  of  some  sort.  Gurney  was
•d  to  think  that  his  results  could  not  be  explained  solely  by  mnit.il
suggestion  or  telepathy,  because  the  physical  proximity  of  the  operator's
seemed  necessary  to  produce  them,  and  he  thought  it  probable  that
they  were  due  to  a  direct  nervous  influence,  exercised  through  the  hand

i  turn?  and  Mesmcrit   Clairvoyance,  pp.  227-28;  quoted  in  Phantasms  of  tkt
88.

208  CHAPTER    V  [570

of  the  operator,  but  not  perceptible  through  the  ordinary  sensory  channels.
Mrs.  Sidgwick's  experiments  of  the  same  kind,  however  (569  B),  in  which
success  was  obtained  when  the  operator  was  standing  with  folded  arms
several  feet  away  from  the  subject,  removed  Gurney's  main  objection  to
the  telepathic  explanation.  The  fact  that  a  thick  sheet  of  glass  over  the
subject's  hands  did  not  interfere  with  the  results  also  afforded  some  pre-
sumption against  the  hypothesis  of  a  physical  influence ;  and  Mrs.
Sidgwick  pointed  out  that  the  delicate  discrimination  involved  in  the
specific  limitations  of  the  effects  is  much  more  easily  attributable  to
mental  suggestion,  through  the  action  of  the  operator's  mind  on  that  of
the  subject,  than  to  any  direct  physical  influence  on  the  latter's  nerves.
Following  these  accounts,  I  refer  briefly  (in  569  C)  to  experiments  in  the
so-called  "  silent  willing,"  frequently  practised  by  the  early  mesmerists.
I  may  mention  that  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson,  who  figures  largely  in  their
records,  was  a  gentleman  of  high  character,  active  benevolence,  and
marked  ability.  I  never  saw  him  myself;  but  I  have  known  various
persons  (some  of  these  his  own  relations)  in  the  Yorkshire  county  society
of  that  date,  and  his  powers  were  there  universally  recognised  as  genuine,
although  they  were  sometimes  regarded  with  social  disapproval,  or  even
with  superstitious  horror.

Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson's  history  is  to  my  mind  a  real  proof  that  some
one  individual  man  may  be  endowed  for  hypnotic  efficacy  in  a  quite  excep-
tional way.  His  experience,  indeed,  goes  far  to  prove  the  reality  of
"  silent  willing "  and  was  thought  by  himself  to  prove  also  the  direct
local  influence  of  passes, — the  "mesmeric  effluence"  theory.

570.  With  all  our  later  evidence  in  view,  however, — with  so  much
proof  of  a  transmission  from  man  to  man  of  something  which  needs  no
action  of  the  finger-tips, — it  would  be  natural  indeed  to  dismiss  that
notion  altogether,  as  a  first  rude  theory  which  wider  knowledge  had  shown
to  be  needless.  Needless  it  is,  in  the  sense  that  we  could  plausibly  refer
to  mere  suggestion  all  the  sensations  which  subjects  have  alleged  as  accom-
panying the  passes  ; — as  following  the  track,  so  to  say,  of  the  mesmerising
hand.  If  the  effluence  were  something  in  itself  monstrously  improbable,
we  might  think  it  needful  to  interpret  the  evidence  in  this  way.  But
since,  in  my  view,  it  is  by  no  means  improbable  that  effluences,  as  yet
unknown  to  science,  but  perceptible  by  sensitive  persons  as  the  telepathic
impulse  is  perceptible,  should  radiate  from  living  human  organisms,  I
see  no  reason  to  assume  that  the  varied  and  concordant  statements  made
by  patients  in  the  Zoist  and  early  mesmeric  works  merely  reflect
subjective  fancies.  I  have  myself  performed  and  witnessed  experiments
on  intelligent  persons  expressly  designed  to  test  whether  or  no  the  sensa-
tion following  the  hand  was  a  mere  fancy.  It  seems  to  me  hardly  likely
that  persons  who  have  never  experienced  other  purely  subjective  sensations,
and  who  are  expressly  alive  to  the  question  here  at  issue,  should  never-
theless again  and  again  feel  the  classical  tingling,  &c.,  along  the  track  of

572]  HYPNOTISM  209

the  hypnotiser's  passes  without  any  real  external  cause.  To  assume
that  all  which  they  feel  is  a  mere  result  of  suggestion  may  be  a  premature
attempt  at  simplifying  modes  of  supernormal  communication  which,  in
fact,  are  probably  not  simpler  but  more  complex  than  any  idea  which  we
have  as  yet  formed  of  them.

571.  And   here    at   last  we    arrive    at    what  is   in  reality  the    most
interesting  group  of  inquiries  connected  with  the  hypnotic  trance.

\Ve  have  just  seen  that  the  subliminal  state  of  the  hypnotised  subject
may  be  approached  by  ways  subtler  than  mere  verbal  suggestion — by
telepathic  impacts  and  perhaps  by  some  effluence  of  kindred  supernormal
type.  We  have  now  to  trace  the  supernormal  elements  in  the  hypnotic
response.  Whether  those  elements  are  most  readily  excited  by  a  directly
subliminal  appeal,  or  whether  they  depend  mainly  on  the  special  powers
innate  in  the  hypnotised  person,  we  can  as  yet  but  imperfectly  guess.
We  can  be  pretty  sure,  at  any  rate,  that  they  are  not  often  evoked  in
answer  to  any  rapid  and,  so  to  say,  perfunctory  hypnotic  suggestion ;  they
do  not  spring  up  in  miscellaneous  hospital  practice ;  they  need  an  education
and  a  development  which  is  hardly  bestowed  on  one  hypnotised  subject
in  a  hundred.  The  first  stage  of  this  response  lies  in  a  subliminal
relation  established  between  the  subject  and  his  hypnotiser,  and  mani-
festing itself  in  what  is  called  rapport,  or  in  community  of  sensation.  The
earlier  stages  of  rapport — conditions  when  the  subject  apparently  hears  or
feels  the  hypnotiser  only,  and  so  forth — arise  probably  from  mere  self-
suggestion  or  from  the  suggestions  of  the  operator  (see  571  A)  causing
the  conscious  attention  of  the  subject  to  be  exclusively  directed  to  him.
Indications  of  the  possible  development  of  a  real  link  between  the  two  per-
sons may  rather  be  found  in  the  cases  where  there  is  provable  community  of
sensation, — the  hypnotised  subject  tasting  or  feeling  what  the  hypnotiser
(unknown  to  the  subject)  does  actually  at  that  moment  taste  or  feel.  Of
this  there  was  much  evidence  in  the  palmy  days  of  Esdaile  and  Elliotson,
when  psychological  experiment  was  pursued  regardless  of  time  or  trouble ;
there  is  some  evidence  of  our  own  recent  collecting  (see  571  B)  ;  and
will  be,  I  venture  to  say,  far  more  evidence  so  soon  as  the  study
of  hypnotism  devolves  upon  the  psychologist,  without  therefore  being
deserted  by  the  physician.  It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  in  experi-
Hents  of  this  kind  with  hypnotised  persons,  the  hypnotist  was  generally—
invariably — the  only  person  who  attempted  to  play  the  part  of
agent,  so  that  the  evidence  of  a  special  relation  between  him  an«l  his
subject  is  inconclusive.  And  in  the  similar  experiments  with  non-hypno-
'luoted  in  571  C,  several  different  agents  were  successful  in
^  sensations  to  the  same  percipients.

572.  We  have  thus  brought  the  hypnotised  subject  up  to  the  point

normally,   at    any  rate,  the    superficial    sensations   of

ivpnotiser.     From   that  starting-point, — or,  at  any  rate,   from  some

supernormal    perception  of   narrow    range, — his   cognition    widens  and

o

210  CHAPTER    V  [573

deepens.  He  may  seem  to  discern  some  picture  of  the  past,  and  may
retrace  the  history  of  some  object  which  he  holds  in  his  hand,  or  he  may
seem  to  wander  in  spirit  over  the  habitable  globe,  and  to  bring  back
knowledge  of  present  facts  discernible  by  no  other  means.  Perhaps  he
seems  to  behold  the  future,  predicting  oftenest  the  organic  history  of  some
person  near  him  ;  but  sometimes  discerning,  as  it  were  pictorially,  scattered
events  to  which  we  can  guess  at  no  attainable  clue.  For  all  this  there  is
already  more  of  positive  evidence  than  is  generally  realised;  nor  (I  must
repeat)  is  there  any  negative  evidence  which  might  lead  us  to  doubt  that
further  care  in  developing  hypnotic  subjects  may  not  at  any  moment  be
rewarded  in  the  same  way.  We  have  here,  in  fact,  a  successful  branch  of
investigation  which  has  of  late  years  been  practically  dropped  from  mere
inattention  to  what  has  been  done  already, — mere  diversion  of  effort  to  the
easier  and  more  practical  triumphs  of  suggestive  therapeutics.
I  begin  with  two  cases  partly  retrocognitive,  in  572  A  and  B.

573.  The  next  group  of  cases  to  which  I  pass  relate  chiefly  to  know-
ledge of  present  facts.     I  place  first  some  experiments  in  thought-trans-
ference with  hypnotised  persons  (573  A)  analogous  to  the  experiments
with  persons  in  a  normal  condition  recorded  in  my  next  chapter.     Here
the  subject  seems  simply  to  become  aware  telepathically  of  the  thoughts
of  his  hypnotiser,  the  hypnotic  condition  perhaps  facilitating  the  transfer
of  the  impression.     Next  come   the  cases  of  what  used  to  be  called
"  travelling  clairvoyance  "  in  the  hypnotic  state.     These  are  more  like  the
partially  retrocognitive  cases  in  that  they  cannot  be  traced  with  certainty  to
the  contemporary  thoughts  of  any  particular  person,  though  they  very  rarely
relate  to  facts  unknown  to  any  one  (as  in  Major  Buckley's  cases,  573  E).
In  travelling  clairvoyance  we  seem  to  have  a  development  of  "  invasive
dreams," — of  those  visions  of  the  night  in  which  the  sleeper  seems  to  visit
distant   scenes   and   to  bring   back   intelligence   otherwise  unattainable.
These  distant   hypnotic   visions  seem   to  develop  out   of  thought-trans-
ference ;  thus  the  subject  may  discern  an  imaginary  picture  as  it  is  con-
ceived in  the  hypnotiser's  mind   (e.g.  in  573  A).     Thence  he  may  pass
on  and  discern  a  true  contemporaneous  scene  (e.g.  in  573  B,  C,  and  D),
unknown  to  any  one  present,  and  in  some  few  cases  there  is  an  element  of
apparent  prevision  in  the  impression  (573  F).

574.  Our  survey  of  that  important,  though  inchoate,  appeal  to  the  sub-
liminal self  which  passes  under  the  name  of  hypnotism  is  now  nearly  as
complete — in  its  brief  sketchy  form — as  the  present  state  of  knowledge
permits.    I  have  traced  the  inception  of  the  mesmeric  or  hypnotic  processes
I  have  followed  out  in  both  directions  the  development  of  the  sleeping
phase  of  personality  which  hypnotism  involves.     In  the  first  place,  I  have
illustrated  the  hypnotic  extension  of  that  regenerative  or  vivifying  power
which  the  subliminal  self  habitually  manifests  in  sleep.     In  the   second
place,  I  have  indicated  the  still  more  important  hypnotic  development  o;
that  greater  detachment,  that  supernormal  faculty,  which  also  the  sub-

575]  HYPNOTISM  211

liminal  self  has  been  found  in  the  visions  of  slumber  not  rarely  to
display.

Here,  then,  my  review  of  hypnotism  might  not  unfitly  close  ;  and  I
might  venture  to  hope  that  I  had  welded  many  scattered  and  obscure
phenomena  into  at  least  something  more  of  apparent  unity  than  previous
writers  have  achieved.

And  yet  from  my  point  of  view — attaching  to  hypnotism  the  grave
importance  which  has  here  been  attached  to  it — one  line  of  reflection
seems  still  lacking  before  we  can  pass  on  with  satisfaction  to  another  topic.

I  have  attempted  to  trace  the  inevitable  rise  of  hypnotism — its  neces-
sary development  out  of  the  spontaneous  phenomena  which  preceded  and
which  might  so  naturally  have  suggested  it.  I  have  shown,  nevertheless,
its  almost  accidental  initiation,  and  then  its  rapid  development  in  ways
which  no  single  experimenter  has  ever  been  able  to  correlate  or  to  foresee.
I  am  bound  to  say  something  further  as  to  its  prospect  in  the  future.  A
systematic  appeal  to  the  deeper  powers  in  man — conceived  with  the  gene-
rality with  which  I  have  here  conceived  it — cannot  remain  a  mere  appanage
of  medical  practice.  It  must  be  fitted  on  in  some  way  to  the  whole
serious  life  of  man ;  it  must  present  itself  to  him  as  a  development  of
faiths  and  instincts  which  lie  already  deep  in  his  heart.  In  other  words,
there  must  needs  be  some  scheme  of  self-suggestion^ — some  general  theory
which  can  give  the  individual  a  basis  for  his  appeal,  whether  he  regards
that  appeal  as  directed  to  an  intelligence  outside  himself  or  to  his  own
inherent  faculties  and  informing  soul.  These  helps  to  the  power  of  gene-
ralisation— to  the  feeling  of  confidence — we  must  consider  now.

575.  The  schemes  of  self-suggestion  which  have  actually  been  found
effective  have  covered,  not  unnaturally,  a  range  as  wide  as  all  the  super-
stition and  all  the  religion  of  men.  That  is  to  say,  that  each  form  of
supernatural  belief  in  turn  has  been  utilised  as  a  means  of  securing  that
urgently-needed  temporal  blessing — relief  from  physical  pain.  We  see
the  same  tendency  running  through  fetichistic,  polytheistic,  monotheistic
forms  of  belief.  Beginning  with  fetichistic  peoples,  we  observe  that
charms  of  various  kinds, — inert  objects,  arbitrary  gestures,  meaningless
words, — have  probably  been  actually  the  most  general  means  which  our
race  has  employed  for  the  cure  of  disease.  We  know  how  long  some
of  primitive  belief  persisted  in  medicine, — as,  for  example,  the
doctrine  of  likenesses,  or  the  cure  of  a  disease  by  some  object  supposed  to
resemble  its  leading  symptom.  What  is,  however,  even  more  remarkable
is  the  efficacy  which  charms  still  continue  in  some  cases  to  possess,  even
when  they  are  worn  merely  as  an  experiment  in  self-suggestion  by  a  person
who  is  perfectly  well  aware  of  their  intrinsic  futility.  The  experiments
on  this  subject,  given  in  575  A,  seem  to  show  that  the  mere  continual
•  t  of  some  small  unfamiliar  object  will  often  act  as  a  reminder  to  the
nin.il  self,  and  ki-cp.  at  any  rate,  some  nervous  disturbances  in  check.
(/mil  one  reads  these  modern  examples,  one  can  hardly  realise  ho\v

212  CHAPTER    V  [576

veritably  potent  for  good  may  have  been  the  savage  amulet,  the  savage
incantation.

576.  The  transition    from    fetichistic  to  polytheistic    conceptions  of
cure  is,  of  course,  a  gradual  one.     It  may  be  said  to  begin  when  curative
properties  are  ascribed  to  objects  not  arbitrarily,  nor  on  account  of  the
look  of  the  objects  themselves,  but  on  account  of  their  having  been  blessed
or  handled  by  some  divine  or  semi-divine  personage,  or  having  formed
part  of  his  body  or  surroundings  during  some  incarnation.     Thus  Lourdes
water,  bottled  and   exported,  is  still  held  to  possess  curative  virtue  on
account  of  the  Virgin's  original   blessing    bestowed    upon   the    Lourdes
spring.     But  generally  the  influence  of  the  divine  or  divinised  being  is
more  directly  exercised,  as  in  oracles,  dreams,  invisible  touches,  or  actual
theophanies,  or  appearances  of  the  gods  to  the  adoring  patient.     It  will  be
seen  as  we  proceed  how  amply  the  tradition  of  Lourdes  has  incorporated
these  ancient  aids  to  faith.

But  at  this  point  our  modern  experience  suggests  to  us  a  remarkable
interpolation  in  the  antique  chain  of  ideas.  It  is  now  alleged  that  de-
parted persons  need  not  exert  influence  through  their  dead  bones  alone,
nor  yet  only  by  their  supposed  intermediacy  with  higher  powers.  There
intervenes,  in  fact,  the  whole  topic  of  spirit-healing, — which  cannot,  how-
ever, be  treated  fully  here.

Next  in  the  ascending  scale  from  polytheism  to  monotheism  we  come
to  the  "Miracles  of  Lourdes,"  to  which  I  have  just  alluded,  where  the
supposed  healer  is  the  Virgin  Mary,  reverenced  as  semi-divine.  This
form  of  belief,  however,  retains  (as  has  been  said)  some  affinity  with
fetichism,  since  the  actual  water  from  the  Lourdes  spring,  supposed  to
have  been  blessed  by  the  Virgin,  is  an  important  factor  in  the  cures.

Much  further  removed  from  primitive  belief  is  the  appeal  made  by
Christian  scientists  to  the  aid  of  Jesus  Christ ; — either  as  directly  answer-
ing prayer,  or  as  enabling  the  worshippers  to  comprehend  the  infinite
love  on  which  the  universe  is  based,  and  in  face  of  which  pain  and
sickness  become  a  vain  imagination  or  even  a  sheer  nonentity.

577.  Nor,  again,  is  this  attempt  to  rise  above  pain  at  all  exclusively
dependent  upon  the  Christian  revelation.     "Mind-healing"   is  a  gene-
ralised term  which  includes  not  only  so-called  Christian  science,  but  a
number  of  other  ways  of  so  regarding  the  universe  as  to  triumph,  while
still  in  the  body,  over  bodily  distress  and  infirmity.     Oriental  ideas  of  the
unreality  of  matter   (Maya),  stoical  ideas  of  the  sage's  command   over
external  circumstances,  mystical  ideas  of  the  painless  ecstasy  into  which
the  purified  spirit  can  enter  at  will ; — all  these  conceptions  have  the  ad-
vantage of  being  independent  of  dogmatic  systems,  with  the  accompanying
disadvantage  of  being  difficult  for  ordinary  minds  to  grasp.     Mind-healing
is  a  modern  name  for  all  this  ancient  and  lofty  protest  against  the  tyranny
of  the  flesh.

The  points  of  view  thus  briefly  hinted  at  do,  no  doubt,  differ  widely

577]  HYPNOTISM  213

from  one  another.  To  the  believer  in  mind-cure, — tne  denier  of  physical
evils, — that  anguished  supplication  of  the  Lourdes  pilgrim  for  the  removal
of  pains,  which  the  sufferer  holds  as  the  most  urgent  of  realities,  would  be
in  the  highest  degree  distasteful.  To  both  mind-curer  and  Lourdes
pilgrim  alike  the  charms  and  fetiches  of  the  African  savage  would  seem
contemptible  or  shocking.

To  the  readers  of  this  chapter,  however,  there  will  be  nothing  surpris-
ing in  my  own  inclination  to  include  almost  all  these  efforts  at  health
under  the  general  category  of  schemes  of  self-suggestion.  Almost  all,  I
reserving  thus  for  future  notice  the  special  case — a  small  element  in
the  general  total — of  possible  cure  by  definite  spirit-agency.1  But  with
regard  to  the  great  bulk  of  these  psychical  cures,  the  differences  involved
are  subjective  rather  than  objective ; — are  differences  in  the  frames  of
min  1  of  the  sufferers  rather  than  in  any  scientific  evidence  as  to  the
nature  of  the  healing  agency.

It  would  not  be  difficult,  I  think,  to  show  in  detail  the  crudity  even
of  those  schemes  of  thought  which  have  proved  in  practice  the  most  help-
ful in  the  relief  of  pain.  This  crudity,  indeed,  is  inevitable ;  we  are  in  the
very  earliest  days  of  self-suggestion ; — a  few  pioneers  only  are  groping
after  ways  in  which  the  suggestions  may  be  made  to  take  hold ; — and  the
task  is  quite  as  difficult  for  the  self-suggester  as  for  the  hypnotist.  The
present  duty,  therefore,  of  psychical  criticism  is  not  so  much  to  expose
the  inconsistencies  of  each  in  turn,  as  to  indicate  the  lines  on  which  this
difficult  attempt  may  be  pushed  with  the  best  chance  of  lasting  success.

In  a  paper  printed  in  vol.  ix.  of  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  in  i893,2  my  late
brother,  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  and  I  found  little  difficulty  in  pointing  out  the
childish  inadequacy  of  much  of  the  evidence  which  had  then  been  offered
by  mind-curers  or  Christian  scientists.  We  endeavoured  to  indicate  certain
simple  rules  to  which  such  evidence  ought  to  conform,  in  order  to  bring
it  into  line  with  ordinary  medical  practice.  Other  critics,  no  doubt,  have
urm/d  the  same  precautions ;  but  I  am  not  aware  that  any  serious  effort  has
yet  been  made  by  mind-healers  to  comply  with  such  conditions.  Yet  I
see  a  real  reason  for  this  reluctance  :  the  Christian  scientists,  &c.,  feel
more  or  less  consciously  that  the  all-important  thing  is  to  keep  the  self-
>tion  strong  and  undisturbed,  and  that  medical  discussion  would  tend
iken  and  disturb  it.  There  is  some  truth  here ;  and  in  view  of  that
truth  I  now  think  that  it  may  be  well  to  abstain  from  analysing  ab-
surdities which  may  very  easily  drop  off  from  the  self-suggestive  movement
as  it  gathers  confidence  from  success.

>cci.illy  must  one  insist  on  the  underlying  philosophical  aspiration, —

not  merely  for  the  prolongation  of  life  on  earth,  but  for  the  abrogation

Annihilation  of  evil,  including  physical  pain.     The  strength  of  the

1  See  the  case  of  Dr.  X.  in  Ch.i;  t.  t  \  III.,  section  833.

th-Cure,  and  the  Miracles  of  Lourdes,"  by  :  yers,  M.D.,

H.  Myers,  Proceedings  S.P.K.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  160-210.

214  CHAPTER    V  [578

mind-curer's  position  lies  in  the  true  thesis  that  evil  is  a  less  real,  a  less
permanent  thing  than  good.  It  is  well  that  self-suggestion  should  be
turned  in  this  direction,  through  whatever  strange  perversions  or  exaggera-
tions the  ultimate  goal  be  won.

578.  The  so-called  "  Miracles  of  Lourdes  "  present  a  somewhat  dif-
ferent problem.  They  resemble  rather  a  resuscitation  of  antique  methods
of  self-suggestion  than  an  attempt  at  breaking  new  ground.  In  describing
these  as  a  form  of  self-suggestion  (I  should  at  once  explain),  I  am  by  no
means  denying  (what  I  am,  in  fact,  presently  about  to  assert)  that  some
inflow  from  the  spiritual  world  may  be  an  essential  element  in  all  these
triumphs  over  the  infirmities  of  the  flesh.  All  that  I  deny, — and  I  think
that  my  Appendix  will  show  that  I  have  ample  reason  for  the  denial, — is
that  there  is  any  real  evidence  whatever  for  the  agency  of  the  Virgin  Mary
in  these  cures.  The  story  is,  no  doubt,  a  picturesque  one,  and  (as  will
again  be  seen  in  578  A)  one  may  fairly  credit  the  original  seeress,  Berna-
dette,  with  the  possession  of  some  kind  of  psychical  faculty.  Further
than  that  the  legend  cannot,  I  think,  be  maintained.  Judged  by  our
habitual  canons  of  evidence, — which,  as  the  reader  knows,  do,  in  fact,
admit  the  veridical  character  of  many  apparitions. — there  is  no  reason  to
suppose  that  the  figure  which  appeared  to  Bernadette  was  more  than  a
purely  subjective  hallucination ; — still  less  reason  to  assume  that  that
apparition  was  in  any  way  connected  with  the  subsequent  cures.  As  to
those  cures  themselves,  moreover, — in  spite  of  many  loud  assertions,  in
spite  of  what  I  must  call  the  pseudo-accuracy,  the  pseudo-candour,  of
some  of  the  advocates  of  the  miraculous  at  Lourdes, — neither  my  brother
nor  I  could  discover  any  well-attested  incident  which  raised  them  into  a
different  category  from  the  marvels  which  hypnotic  suggestion  is  effecting
daily  in  the  cliniques  of  many  physicians.  For  my  brother's  discussion  of
some  of  the  cases  oftenest  cited  at  that  date  I  must  refer  the  reader  to
our  article  in  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  previously  mentioned.  My  own
analysis  of  the  legend  I  have  thought  it  needful  to  reprint  in  this  volume.
I  have  treated  the  story,  I  hope,  not  without  sympathy, — in  its  analogies
with  much  of  ancient  and  venerable  tradition, — in  its  appeal  to  hopes,  not
necessarily  illegitimate,  and  ever  recurrent  in  the  heart  of  man.  To  the
student  of  suggestion,  indeed,  to  the  psychologist,  the  story  of  Lourdes  is
a  mine  of  attractive  material.  Yet  from  a  point  of  view  perhaps  pro-
founder  still,  I  cannot  but  sympathise  with  those  wiser  Catholics  who
bitterly  regret  the  whole  series  of  incidents  ; — who  stand  aloof  from  that  i
organised  traffic  in  human  ignorance ; — from  the  vested  interests  sancti-  '
moniously  alert  on  every  side  ; — from  the  money-changers  in  the  temple ;
— nay,  even  from  that  cowardly  craving  for  earth-life  prolonged  at  any
cost  which  drives  the  leprous  and  the  cancerous  to  implore  a  deferment
of  their  entry  into  the  promised  heaven.  What  a  contrast  between  that
crippled  and  abject  multitude,  supplicating  for  another  year  of  useless
pain,  and  Odin's  worshippers  of  old,  in  a  ruder  but  a  braver  faith  !

580]  HYPNOTISM  215

"  For  on  earth  they  thought  of  my  threshold,  and  the  gifts  1  have  to  give ;
Xor  prayed  for  a  little  longer,  and  a  little  longer  to  live."

579.  These  words  will  sound,  perhaps,  needlessly  severe.     Corruptio
optimi  pessima.     It  is  hard  to  keep  the   balance  when  one  sees,  as  one
surely  does  at  Lourdes,  forces — which,  if  rightly  directed,  may  indefinitely
bless  and  elevate  mankind — distorted  and  abused  in  such  fashion  as  must
ultimately  lead  to   some  infidel  reaction, — some  crushing  desertion  and
downfall  of  ancient  faith.     It  is  not  true,  a  thousand  times  it  is  not  true,
that  a  bottle  of  water  from  a  spring  near  which  a  girl  saw  a  hallucinatory
figure  will  by  miraculous  virtue  heal  a  Turk  in  Constantinople ;  but  it  is
true  that  on  some   influx  from  the  unseen  world, — an  influence  dimly
adumbrated  in  that  Virgin  figure  and  that  sanctified  spring, — depends  the
life  and  energy  of  this  world  of  every  day.

*  To  me,  at  least,  it  seems  that  no  real  explanation  of  hypnotic  vitalisa-
tion  can,  in  fact,  be  given  except  upon  the  general  theory  supported  in  this
work — the  theory  that  a  world  of  spiritual  life  exists,  an  environment
profounder  than  those  environments  of  matter  and  ether  which  in  a  sense
we  know.  Let  us  look  at  this  hypothesis  a  little  more  closely.  When  we
say  that  an  organism  exists  in  a  certain  environment,  we  mean  that  its
energy,  or  some  part  thereof,  forms  an  element  in  a  certain  system  of
cosmic  forces,  which  represents  some  special  modification  of  the  ultimate
energy.  The  life  of  the  organism  consists  in  its  power  of  interchanging
energy  with  its  environment, — of  appropriating  by  its  own  action  some
fragment  of  that  pre-existent  and  limitless  Power.  We  human  beings
exist  in  the  first  place  in  a  world  of  matter,  whence  we  draw  the  obvious
sustenance  of  our  bodily  functions.

We  exist  also  in  a  world  of  ether ; — that  is  to  say,  we  are  constructed
to  respond  to  a  system  of  laws, — ultimately  continuous,  no  doubt,  with
the  laws  of  matter,  but  affording  a  new,  a  generalised,  a  profounder  con-
ception of  the  Cosmos.  So  widely  different,  indeed,  is  this  new  aspect  of
things  from  the  old,  that  it  is  common  to  speak  of  the  ether  as  a  newly-
known  environment.  On  this  environment  our  organic  existence  depends
as  absolutely  as  on  the  material  environment,  although  less  obviously.  In
ways  which  we  cannot  fathom,  the  ether  is  at  the  foundation  of  our  physical
being.  Perceiving  heat,  light,  electricity,  we  do  but  recognise  in  certain
conspicuous  ways, — as  in  perceiving  the  "X  rays  "  we  recognise  in
less  conspicuous, — the  pervading  influence  of  etherial  vibrations  which  in
range  and  variety  far  transcend  our  capacity  of  response.

580.  Within,  beyond,  the  world  of  ether, — as  a  still  profounder,  still
more  generalised  aspect  of  the  Cosmos, — must  lie,  as  I  believe,  the  world
of  spiritual  life.     That  the  world  of  spiritual  life  does  not  depend  upon
the  existence  of  the  material    world   I  hold   as  now    proved  by  actual

MCC.     That  it   is  in  some  way  continuous  with  the  world  of  ether  I

suppose.     But  for  our  mimls  there   must  needs   be  a  "critical

point "  in  any  such  imagined  continuity ;  so  that  the  world  where  life  and

216  CHAPTER    V  [580

thought  are  carried  on  apart  from  matter,  must  certainly  rank  again  as  a
new,  a  metetherial  environment.  In  giving  it  this  name  I  expressly  imply
only  that  from  our  human  point  of  view  it  lies  after  or  beyond  the  ether,
as  metaphysic  lies  after  or  beyond  physics.  I  say  only  that  what  does  not
originate  in  matter  or  in  ether  originates  there ;  but  I  well  believe  that
beyond  the  ether  there  must  be  not  one  stage  only,  but  countless  stages
in  the  infinity  of  things.

Having  thus  indicated  this  third  great  environment  on  whose  pre-
existent  energy  I  conceive  that  our  organisms  do  actually  draw,  I  return
to  show  the  manner  in  which  this  hypothesis  may  be  used  to  explain  the
hypnotic  results  which  I  have  in  this  chapter  recorded.  Those  results
must  have  brought  before  the  reader  with  new  vividness  the  ancient  un-
solved problem  of  the  ultimate  source  of  energy.  For  what  we  have  in
effect  been  doing  with  the  aid  of  these  hypnotic  artifices  is  simply  to
energise  Life.  What  Life  does  for  the  organism,  in  slow  imperfect
fashion,  we  here  train  it  to  do  a  little  faster,  a  little  more  completely.
Typical  of  Life  is  its  self-adaptive  power,  its  capacity  of  responding  to  new
needs,  of  righting  the  organism  when  it  has  been  in  any  way  injured ; —
that  vis  medicatrix  Natures  which  is  the  inmost  secret  of  the  living
organism.  Hypnotism  has  shown  us  this  vis  medicatrix  in  an  unpre-
cedently  definite  and  controllable  form.  It  has  shown  us  in  this  Natura
— the  subliminal  self  of  the  self-suggester — an  intelligence  no  longer  vague
and  impersonal,  but  bearing  some  analogy,  some  direct  relation,  to  that
which  we  recognise  as  our  own.

We  have  here,  in  short,  a  striking  picture  not  only  of  subliminal  intelli-
gence but  of  subliminal  power.  Of  our  submerged  intelligence  enough
has  already  been  said  to  make  it  conceivable  that  these  complex  thera-
peutical commands  should  be  thus  comprehended ;  but  whence  comes
the  energy  needful  for  so  effectual  a  response?

The  word  energy  is,  of  course,  open  to  immediate  objection.  It  may
be  urged  that  there  is  here  no  true  increase  or  illation  of  energy,  but
merely  a  translation  into  some  fresh  mode  of  action  of  energy  already
developed  by  ordinary  material  nutrition.  Man's  prayer,  it  is  said,  implies
no  more  energy  than  his  curse ;  the  philosopher's  theorem  no  more  than
the  maniac's  fancy.  It  is  obvious,  indeed,  that  the  rapidity  of  organic
metabolism  does  not  vary  in  proportion  to  the  value  of  the  results  ob-
tained. In  fact,  the  maniac's  hurrying  anarchic  thought  is  probably  more
destructive  of  tissue  than  the  steady  thought  of  the  philosopher.  But
plainly  this  mere  chemical  change  by  no  means  goes  to  the  root  of  the
matter.  What  I  desire  for  my  life  is  neither  slow  metabolism  nor  rapid
metabolism  as  such,  but  metabolism  guided  by  intelligent  central  force  to
useful  ends.  I  desire  integration  of  the  personality, — intellectual,  moral,
spiritual  concentration.  This  concentration  is  hard  for  me  to  maintain \  I
feel  it  to  need,  even  in  its  lowest  degrees,  that  special  effort  which  we  call
attention ;  and  I  see  reason  to  believe  that  there  are  far  higher  degrees

581]  HYPNOTISM  217

which  no  voluntary  effort  of  mine  can  reach.  Now  no  one  can  say  under
what  cycle  of  forces  the  energy  of  this  vital  effort  falls ;  and  until  it  be
resolved  into  better  known  forces,  I  cannot  justly  be  condemned  for  a
hypothesis  which  treats  it  as  an  energy  sui  generis,  and  seeks  for  traces  of
its  realm  of  origin  and  hints  as  to  its  possible  extent.

581.  In  my  view,  then,  each  man  is  essentially  a  spirit,  controlling
an  organism  which  is  itself  a  complex  of  lower  and  smaller  lives.  The
spirit's  control  is  not  uniform  throughout  the  organism,  nor  in  all  phases
of  organic  life.  In  waking  life  it  controls  mainly  the  centres  of  supra-
liminal  thought  and  feeling,  exercising  little  control  over  deeper  centres,
which  have  been  educated  into  a  routine  sufficient  for  common  needs.
But  in  subliminal  states — trance  and  the  like — the  supraliminal  processes
are  inhibited,  and  the  lower  organic  centres  are  retained  more  directly
under  the  spirit's  control.  As  you  get  into  the  profounder  part  of  man's
being,  you  get  nearer  to  the  source  of  his  human  vitality.  You  get  thus
into  a  region  of  essentially  greater  responsiveness  to  spiritual  appeal  than  is
offered  by  the  superficial  stratum  which  has  been  shaped  and  hardened
by  external  needs  into  a  definite  adaptation  to  the  earthly  environment.
Even  thus  the  caterpillar's  outside  integument  is  fashioned  stiffly  to  suit
larval  requirements ;  while,  deeper  in  the  animal,  unseen  processes  of
rapid  change  are  going  on,  in  obedience  to  an  impulse  not  derived  from
larval  life.

The  ultimate  lesson  of  hypnotic  suggestion,  especially  in  the  somnam-
bulic  state,  is,  therefore,  that  we  thus  get,  by  empirical  artifices,  at  these
strata  of  greater  plasticity — plasticity  not  to  external  but  to  internal  forces
— where  the  informing  spirit  controls  the  organism  more  immediately,  and
can  act  on  it  with  greater  freedom.

This  conception  seems  to  throw  light  on  a  fact  repeatedly  observed,
but  hitherto  hard  of  explanation.  The  somnambulic  state  seems  to  be
the  introduction  to  two  powers  apparently  quite  disparate — the  self-
sanative  and  the  telaesthetic.  The  highest  development  of  sleep  thus  in-
volves at  once  more  penetrative  bodily  recuperation,  and  more  inde-
pendent spiritual  activity.  The  spirit  is  more  powerful  either  to  draw
metetherial  energy  into  the  organism,  or  to  act  in  partial  independence  of
the  organism.  The  cases  already  cited  of  "  travelling  clairvoyance  "  have,
t,  generally  occurred  during  sleep-waking  states,  originally  induced
for  some  healing  purpose.  I  take  this  to  mean  that  the  spirit  can  in  such
more  easily  either  modify  the  body,  or  partially  quit  and  return  to
the  body.  In  other  words,  it  can  for  the  time  either  pay  the  body  more
benefit,  or  less  attention,  without  injury.  I  use  the  word
!ion  because,  in  the  impossibility  of  conceiving  how  a  spirit  can  affect
or  control  an  organism,  the  most  fitting  term  seems  to  be  that  by  which
we  designate  our  own  attempts  at  concentrating  the  personality.  I  would
i  crude  terms  that  the  soul  keeps  the  body  alive  by  attending  to  it,
.is  explained  in  Chapter  IV.)  can  attend  to  central  operations  more

218  CHAPTER    V  [582

directly  than  to  superficial  ones — to  the  activities  of  sleep  more  directly
than  to  those  of  waking.  Hence  in  deep  states  it  can  partially  withdraw
attention  from  the  organism  and  bestow  it  elsewhere,  while  remaining
capable  of  at  once  resuming  its  ordinary  attitude  towards  that  organism.
Bodily  death  ensues  when  the  soul's  attention  is  wholly  and  irrevocably
withdrawn  from  the  organism,  which  has  become  from  physical  causes
unfit  to  act  as  the  exponent  of  an  informing  spirit.  Life  means  the  main-
tenance of  this  attention ;  achieved,  in  this  view,  by  the  soul's  absorption
of  energy  from  the  spiritual  or  metetherial  environment.  For  if  our  in-
dividual spirits  and  organisms  live  by  dint  of  this  spiritual  energy,  under-
lying the  chemical  energy  by  which  organic  change  is  carried  on,  then  we
must  presumably  renew  and  replenish  the  spiritual  energy  as  continuously
as  the  chemical.  To  keep  our  chemical  energy  at  work,  we  live  in  a  warm
environment,  and  from  time  to  time  take  food.  By  analogy,  in  order  to
keep  the  spiritual  energy  at  work,  we  should  live  in  a  spiritual  environ-
ment, and  possibly  from  time  to  time  absorb  some  special  influx  of
spiritual  life.

582.  If  this  be  so,  there  may  be  a  truth — deeper  than  we  can  at  this
moment    stay   to    discuss — in   many   subjective    experiences    of    poets,
philosophers,    mystics,    saints.      And    if    their    sense    of  inflowing   and
indwelling  life  indeed  be  true ; — if  the  subliminal  uprushes  which  renew
and  illumine  them  are  fed  in  reality  from  some  metetherial  environment ;
— then  a  similar  influence  may  by  analogy  exist  and  be  recognisable  along
the  whole  gamut  of  psychophysical  phenomena ; — not  only  in  the  realm
of  high  spiritual  emotions,  but  wheresoever  there  is  a  quickening  and  an
elevation  of  even  our  lower  organic  life.     The  nascent  life  of  each  of  us
is  perhaps  a  fresh  draft, — the  continued  life  is  an  ever-varying  draft, — upon
the  cosmic  energy.     In  that  environing  energy — call  it  by  what  name  we
will — we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being;  and  it  may  well  be  that
certain  dispositions  of  mind,  certain  phases  of  personality,  may  draw  in
for  the  moment  from  that  energy  a  fuller  vitalising  stream.

On  this  hypothesis  there  will  be  an  essential  concordance  between  all
views — spiritual  or  materialistic — which  ascribe  to  any  direction  of
attention  or  will  any  practical  effect  upon  the  human  organism.  "  The
prayer  of  faith  shall  save  the  sick,"  says  St.  James.  "There  is  nothing  in
hypnotism  but  suggestion,"  says  Bernheim.  In  my  clumsier  language
these  two  statements  (setting  aside  a  possible  telepathic  element  in  St.
James'  words)  will  be  expressible  in  identical  terms.  "There  will  be
effective  therapeutical  or  ethical  self-suggestion  whenever  by  any  artifice
subliminal  attention  to  a  bodily  function  or  to  a  moral  purpose  is  carried
to  some  unknown  pitch  of  intensity  which  draws  energy  from  the  mete-
therial world."

583.  A  great  practical  question  remains,  to  which  St.  James'  words
supply  a  direct,  though  perhaps  an  inadequate  answer,  while  Bernheim's
words  supply  no  answer  at  all.

583]  HYPNOTISM  219

What  is  this  saving  faith  to  be,  and  how  is  it  to  be  attained  ?  Can  we
find  any  sure  way  of  touching  the  spring  which  moves  us  so  potently,  at
once  from  without  and  from  within  ?  Can  we  propose  any  form  of  self-
suggestion  effective  for  all  the  human  race  ?  any  controlling  thought  on
which  all  alike  can  fix  that  long-sought  mountain- moving  faith?

Assuredly  no  man  can  extemporise  such  a  faith  as  this.  Whatever
form  it  may  ultimately  take,  it  must  begin  as  the  purification,  the  intensi-
fication, of  the  purest,  the  intensest  beliefs  to  which  human  minds  have
yet  attained.  It  must  invoke  the  whole  strength  of  all  philosophies,  of  all
religions; — not  indeed  the  special  arguments  or  evidence  adduced  for
each,  which  lie  outside  my  present  theme,  but  all  the  spiritual  energy  by
which  in  truth  they  live.  And  so  far  as  this  purpose  goes,  of  drawing
strength  from  the  unseen,  if  one  faith  is  true,  all  faiths  are  true ;  in  so  far
at  least  as  human  mind  can  grasp  or  human  prayer  appropriate  the
unknown  metetherial  energy,  the  inscrutable  Grace  of  God.

The  mystery  of  these  extreme  phenomena  of  suggestion  is  certainly
not  thus  fully  solved.  No  more  than  my  predecessors  have  I  been  able
to  explain  why  it  is  that  certain  organisms  at  certain  moments  should
become  thus  superior  to  themselves ; — capable  of  a  response  so  vigorous,
submissive  to  a  control  so  profound.  But  I  have  set  forth  a  point  of  view
which  helps  towards  the  subsumption  of  this  minor  mystery  under  a
mystery  of  universal  scope  and  world-old  experience.  I  have  placed
41  suggestion,"  I  think,  in  a  truer  relation  to  other  forms  of  external  suasion
or  internal  will  than  the  Nancy  School  have  done.  They  have  spoken  as
though  suggestion  were  comparable  with  supraliminal  suasion,  supraliminal
endeavour.  I  have  tried  to  show  that  its  real  efficacy  lies  among  sub-
liminal processes ; — as  an  empirical  facilitation  of  our  absorption  of
spiritual  energy  or  acquisition  of  directive  force  from  a  metetherial
environment.  Large  and  assumptive  as  this  definition  may  seem  to  be,  it
is  not  too  wide  for  nascent  phenomena  which  already  include  mind-cure
and  the  miracles  of  Lourdes  as  well  as  ordinary  hypnotic  practice.  And
it  suggests — what  narrower  definitions  have  not  yet  suggested — the
possibility  of  a  world-wide  faith,  or  set  of  the  human  spirit,  which  may
make  for  an  ever  more  potent  mastery  over  organic  hindrance  and
physical  ill.  Let  the  great  currents  of  belief  run  gradually  into  a  deeper
channel.  Let  men  realise  that  their  most  comprehensive  duty,  in  this  or
other  worlds,  is  intensity  of  spiritual  life  ;  nay,  that  their  own  spin:
co-operative  elements  in  the  cosmic  evolution,  are  part  and  parcel  of  the
nate  vitalising  Power.

[600

CHAPTER  VI

SENSORY  AUTOMATISM
yap  aprt  BL  eVoTrrpov  ev

600.  We  have  now  reached  a  central  node  in  our  complex  argument.
Several  lines  of  evidence,  already  pursued,  converge  here  to  form  the
starting-point  for  a  new  departure.  Our  view  of  the  subliminal  self
must  pass  in  this  chapter  through  a  profound  transition.  The  glimpses
which  we  have  till  now  obtained  of  it  have  shown  it  as  something  in-
cidental, subordinate,  fragmentary.  But  henceforth  it  will  gradually
assume  the  character  of  something  persistent,  principal,  unitary  ;  appear-
ing at  last  as  the  deepest  and  most  permanent  representative  of  man's
true  being.

Let  us  consider  what  the  successive  stages  of  our  realisation  of  this
submerged  consciousness  have  thus  far  taught  us.

First  of  all,  in  Chapter  II.,  we  realised  that  secondary  streams  of
consciousness  and  memory,  separate  from  the  ordinary  supraliminal
stream,  are  in  certain  cases  developed,  and  may  even  become  permanent,
thus  either  alternating  with  the  original  stream  of  memory  or  supplanting
it  altogether.  Yet  in  most  cases  the  uprush  of  these  subterranean  streams,
the  upheaval  of  these  submerged  strata,  seemed  merely  disintegrative
phenomena;  seemed  rather  to  reveal  the  incoherent  elements  from
which  human  personality  has  been  thus  far  unified  than  to  suggest
hope  of  its  still  closer  unity,  its  still  further  concentration.

In  the  next  Chapter  (III.)  we  approached  the  subject  from  a  different
side.  Without  entering  on  any  cases  obviously  abnormal,  we  traced
the  uprushes  of  the  subliminal  faculty  which  occur,  helpfully  and  sanely,
in  the  course  of  ordinary  thought  and  life.  We  saw  that  there  lay  hidden
beneath  the  threshold  a  concentrative  or  imaginative  power  more  vivid
than  that  with  which  we  habitually  deal.  The  "  inspirations  of  genius  "
which  seem  to  spring  full-armed  into  our  ken  from  the  depths  of  our
being  must  count  as  a  form  of  subliminal  faculty,  when  that  is  otherwise
established,  although  no  theory  of  such  faculty  could  be  based  solely
upon  mental  products  so  closely  interwoven  with  supraliminal  or  voluntary
thinking.

In  the  next  following  Chapter  (IV.)  we  traced  the  varieties  of  subliminal

220

600]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  221

action   in  that  alternating  phase  of  our  personality  which  may  be  said
to  lie  wholly  beneath  the  threshold  of  waking  consciousness.

We  found  that  the  state  of  sleep  reproduced  and  varied  the  subliminal
phenomena  observed  in  waking  hours.  The  pictures  and  utterances  of
some  dreams,  presenting  themselves  without  our  conscious  elaboration,
resemble  confused  fragments  of  the  inspiration  of  genius.  Pushed  some-
what further,  becoming  more  intense  and  more  separate  from  waking
life,  dreams  turn  into  somnambulisms  (discussed  in  Chapter  V.),  and  thus
may  develop  into  veritable  fissions  of  personality.

For  the  most  part,  dream  introduces  us  only  to  incoherent  thought,
somnambulism  only  to  irrational  action.  Yet  from  time  to  time  we
have  found  in  dreams  indications  of  a  memory  which  surpasses  waking
memory ;  nay,  which  even  implies  that  something  within  us  has  exercised
in  waking  hours  a  perception  more  minute  and  comprehensive  than
our  supraliminal  consciousness  ever  knew.  During  various  forms  of
sleep  itself,  moreover,  something  of  unusual  faculty  seems  to  be  exercised  ;
mathematical  or  philological  ingenuity  may  surpass  its  waking  level ;
the  senses  may  show  a  delicacy  of  which  we  had  not  judged  them
capable.  And  in  the  background  of  all  this  we  catch  glimpses  of  still
higher  faculty ;  of  those  supernormal  powers  of  telepathy  and  tekesthesia
on  whose  existence  our  belief  in  a  unitary  Self  must  ultimately  be  so
largely  based.

Beneath  the  apparent  blankness  of  sleep,  many  changes,  both  physical
and  psychical,  may  occur  unnoted,  for  evil  or  for  good.  On  the  de-
generative side  sleep  passes  into  coma,  and  somnambulisms  merge  into
hysteria;  and  at  many  points  our  description  of  sleep  indicates  the
nearness  of  those  morbid  dissociations  already  described.  But  sleep
and  sleep- \vaking  states  may  be  developed  on  the  other,  the  evolutive
side  as  well.  The  subliminal  self  appears  to  exercise  in  sleep  an  increased
control,  and  to  be  able  to  carry  thereby  the  physical  organism  into  higher
vitality,  the  mind  into  readier  communication,  by  supernormal  methods,
with  other  minds,  and  into  scenes  beyond  the  range  of  sense.  Inciden-
tally we  peiceive  a  new  development  of  multiplex  personality ;  a  new
power  of  alternating  or  combining  streams  of  memory,  of  changing  for
a  time  or  permanently  the  character  and  the  will.

Our  last  Chapter  (V.)  was  devoted  to  this  hypnotic  concentration  and
expansion  of  human  faculty.  I  briefly  detailed  the  empirical  artifices
employed  to  give  effect  to  self-suggestion,  and  reviewed  the  results,
especially  the  intellectual  and  moral  results,  to  which  that  self-suggestion
ultimately  leads.  And  here  more  than  ever, — both  in  hypnotic  pheno-
mena and  in  the  analogous  cases  of  spontaneous  somnambulism  des<
in  the  same  chapter, — we  perceived  elements  of  new  supiTnorni.il  faculty
mingling  with  heightened  faculty  of  familiar  types.

<  h,  then,  of  these   several   lines  of  inquiry  has  led   us,  through
widely  varying  phenomena,  in  substantially  the  same   direction.     From

222  CHAPTER    VI  [601

every  side  we  have  indications  of  something  complex  and  obscure  in
the  structure  of  human  personality ;  of  something  transcending  sensory
experience  in  the  reserves  of  human  faculty.

601.  We  have  come  to  a  point  where  we  need  some  further  colligating
generalisation ;  some  conception  under  which  these  scattered  phenomena
may  be  gathered  and  exhibited  in  their  true  kinship.

Some  steps  at  least  towards  such  a  generalisation  the  evidence  to
be  presented  in  these  next  chapters  may  allow  us  to  take.  Considering
together,  under  the  heading  of  sensory  and  motor  automatism,  the  whole
range  of  that  subliminal  action  of  which  we  have  as  yet  discussed  frag-
ments only,  we  shall  gradually  come  to  see  that  its  distinctive  faculty
of  telepathy  or  telaesthesia  is  in  fact  an  introduction  into  a  realm  where
the  limitations  of  organic  life  can  no  longer  be  assumed  to  persist.
Considering,  again,  the  evidence  which  shows  that  that  portion  of  the
personality  which  exercises  these  powers  during  our  earthly  existence
does  actually  continue  to  exercise  them  after  our  bodily  decay,  we  shall
recognise  a  relation — obscure  but  indisputable — between  the  subliminal  and
the  surviving  self.

I  begin,  then,  with  my  definition  of  automatism,  as  the  widest  term
under  which  to  include  the  range  of  subliminal  emergences  into  ordinary
life.  Different  classes  of  those  uprushes  have  already  received  special
names.  The  turbulent  uprush  and  downdraught  of  hysteria ;  the  helpful
uprushes  of  genius,  co-operating  with  supraliminal  thought ;  the  profound
and  recuperative  changes  which  follow  on  hypnotic  suggestion;  these
have  been  described  under  their  separate  headings.  But  the  main  mass
of  subliminal  manifestations  remains  undescribed.  I  have  dealt  little
with  veridical  hallucinations,  not  at  all  with  automatic  writing,  nor  with
the  utterances  of  spontaneous  trance.  The  products  of  inner  vision  or
inner  audition  externalised  into  quasi-percepts, — these  form  what  I  term
sensory  automatisms.  The  messages  conveyed  by  movement  of  limbs
or  hand  or  tongue,  initiated  by  an  inner  motor  impulse  beyond  the
conscious  will — these  are  what  I  term  motor  automatisms.  And  I  claim
that  when  all  these  are  surveyed  together  their  essential  analogy  will  be
recognised  beneath  much  diversity  of  form.  They  will  be  seen  to  be
messages  from  the  subliminal  to  the  supraliminal  self;  endeavours —
conscious  or  unconscious — of  submerged  tracts  of  our  personality  to
present  to  ordinary  waking  thought  fragments  of  a  knowledge  which  no
ordinary  waking  thought  could  attain.

602.  And  since  it  is  plain  that  the  point  of  view  here  taken  is  one
unfamiliar  to  psychologists — and  indeed  that  the  distinction  here  insisted
on  would  have  seemed  till  recently  quite  unmeaning — I    must  dwell  a
little  longer  on  the  relation  which  I  conceive  to  exist  between  intellectual
life  above  and  below  the  conscious  threshold.     By  ordinary  psychology,
supraliminal   life  is  accepted  as  representing  the  normal  or  substantive
personality,  of  which  subliminal  life  is  the  semi-conscious  substratum,  or

602]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  223

half-illuminated  fringe,  or  the  morbid  excrescence.  I,  on  the  other
hand,  regard  supraliminal  life  merely  as  a  privileged  case  of  personality ;
a  special  phase  of  our  personality,  which  is  easiest  for  us  to  study,
because  it  is  simplified  for  us  by  our  ready  consciousness  of  what  is
going  on  in  it ;  yet  which  is  by  no  means  necessarily  either  central  or
prepotent,  could  we  see  our  whole  being  in  comprehensive  view.

Now  if  we  thus  regard  the  whole  supraliminal  personality  as  a  special
case  of  something  much  more  extensive,  it  follows  that  we  must  similarly
regard  all  human  faculty,  and  each  sense  severally,  as  mere  special  or
privileged  cases  of  some  more  general  power.

All  human  terrene  faculty  will  be  in  this  view  simply  a  selection
from  faculty  existing  in  the  metetherial  world ;  such  part  of  that  ante-
cedent, even  if  not  individualised,  faculty  as  may  be  expressible  through
each  several  human  organism.

Each  of  our  special  senses,  therefore,  may  be  conceived  as  straining
towards  development  of  a  wider  kind  than  earthly  experience  has  as  yet
allowed.  And  each  special  sense  is  both  an  internal  and  an  external
sense ;  involves  a  tract  of  the  brain,  of  unknown  capacity,  as  well  as
an  end-organ,  whose  capacity  is  more  nearly  measurable.  The  relation
of  this  internal,  mental,  mind's-eye  vision  to  non-sensory  psychological
perception  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  ocular  vision  on  the  other  hand,  is
exactly  one  of  the  points  on  which  some  profounder  observation  will  be
seen  to  be  necessary.  One  must  at  least  speak  of  "  mind's  eye  "  perception
in  these  sensory  terms,  if  one  is  to  discuss  it  at  all.

But  ordinary  experience  at  any  rate  assumes  that  the  end-organ  alone
can  acquire  fresh  information,  and  that  the  central  tract  can  but  combine
this  new  information  with  information  already  sent  in  to  it.  This  must
plainly  be  the  case,  for  instance,  with  optical  or  acoustic  knowledge ; —
with  such  knowledge  as  is  borne  on  waves  of  ether  or  of  air,  and  is
caught  by  a  terminal  apparatus,  evolved  for  the  purpose.  But  observe
that  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  that  all  seeing  and  all  hearing  should
be  through  eye  or  ear.

The  vision  of  our  dreams — to  keep  to  vision  alone  for  greater  simpli-
city— is  non-optical  vision.  It  is  usually  generated  in  the  central  brain,
not  sent  up  thither  from  an  excited  retina.  Optical  laws  can  only  by  a
stretch  of  terms  be  said  to  apply  to  it  at  all.

This  fact  is  commonly  held  to  be  unimportant,  because  dream-
vision  itself  is  commonly  held  to  be  worthless ;  achieving  nothing  more
than  a  mere  rifacimento  of  the  knowledge  gained  by  day.

From  our  present  point  of  view,  however,  we  have  no  right  to  make
:n])tion.     We  cannot  possibly  say  a  priori  by  wh.it  means,
or    from    what   quarters,   knowledge    may   come    to    the    subliminal    self.
That  must  be  purely  a  matter  for  observation  and  experiment.

iat  we  are  bound  to  do  is  to  generalise  our  conception  of  vision
as  far  as  possible, — no  longer  confining  it  to  the  definite  phenomenon

224  CHAPTER    VI  [603

of  retinal  or  optical  vision, — and  thus  to  find  out  by  actual  inquiry,  what
sort  of  messages  are  brought  to  us  by  each  form  of  vision  which  this
enlarged  conception  contains.

There  is  a  point,  as  all  know,  where  vision  differentiates  itself  from
various  indefinite  forms  of  perception.  There  is  a  point,  as  I  shall
claim,  where  vision  merges  again  into  perception  not  less  definite  but
more  general  than  sight  itself.

Between  this  inferior  and  this  superior  limit  two  main  streams  of
vision  may  be  discerned — the  external  and  the  internal,  the  optical
and  the  mental,  of  which  the  one  is  almost  wholly  supraliminal,  the
other  largely  subliminal.  Let  us  attempt  some  rough  conspectus,  which
may  show  something  of  the  relation  in  which  central  and  peripheral
vision  stand  to  each  other.

603.  We  start  from  a  region  below  the  specialisation  of  visual
faculty.  The  study  of  the  successive  dermal  and  nervous  modifications
which  have  led  up  to  that  faculty  belongs  to  Biology,  and  all  that  our
argument  needs  here  is  to  point  out  that  the  very  fact  that  this  faculty
has  been  developed  in  a  germ,  animated  by  metetherial  life,  indicates
that  some  perceptivity  from  which  sight  could  take  its  origin  pre-existed
in  the  originating,  the  unseen  world.  The  germ  was  so  constructed
ab  initio  that  it  could  develop  in  this  and  in  other  ways  :  whether  we
assume  that  each  specific  modifiability  existed  (and  might  have  been
discerned  in  the  germ  by  an  all-wise  spectator)  from  the  first,  or  that
only  a  ground-plan  existed,  to  which,  in  successive  generations,  fresh
elements  of  determination  and  precision  were  added  from  the  world  of
Life.  We  know  vaguely  how  vision  differentiated  itself  peripherally,
with  the  growing  sensibility  of  the  pigment-spot  to  light  and  shadow.
But  there  must  have  been  a  cerebral  differentiation  also,  and  also  a
psychological  differentiation,  namely,  a  gradual  shaping  of  a  distinct
feeling  from  obscure  feelings,  whose  history  we  cannot  recover.

Yet  I  believe  that  we  have  still  persistent  in  our  brain-structure  some
dim  vestige  of  the  transition  from  that  early  undifferentiated  continuous
sensitivity  to  our  existing  specialisation  of  sense.  Probably  in  all  of  us,
though  in  some  men  much  more  distinctly  than  in  others,  there  exist
certain  syn&sthesice.  or  concomitances  of  sense-impression,  which  are  at
any  rate  not  dependent  on  any  recognisable  link  of  association.  A  second
sense  sometimes  reacts  automatically  to  a  stimulus  which  seems  fitted  to
excite  a  single  sense  alone.  I  do  not  merely  mean  that  the  dog's  bark
calls  up  the  look  of  the  dog,  while  his  look  suggests  his  bark ;  that  is  an
association  formed  by  the  mere  experience  of  life.  But  for  a  true  synaes-
thetic  or  "sound-seer," — to  take  the  commonest  form  of  these  central
repercussions  of  sensory  shock, — there  is  a  connection  between  sight  and
sound  which  is  instinctive,  complex,  and  yet  for  our  intelligence  altogether
arbitrary.  In  some  cases,  indeed,  these  chromatisms  can  be  watched  in
development,  if  not  in  origination,  and  may  be  referred  to  some  odd

607]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  225

chance  of  fanciful  association.  But  this  first  group  of  cases  of  sound-
seeing  melts  into  a  second,  where  the  chromatisms  seem  to  be  determined
before  birth,  and  to  have  preceded  conscious  mentation,  in  all  their
meaningless  precision  of  correspondence,  between,  say,  a  particular  note
played  on  the  piano  and  a  particular  tint  of  apple-green.  The  specimens
given  in  603  A  and  B  will  show  something  of  this  irrational  complexity.
My  present  point  is  that  these  synaesthesiae  stand  on  the  dividing  line
between  percepts  externally  and  internally  originated.  These  irradiations
of  sensitivity,  sometimes,  as  I  have  said,  apparently  congenital,  cannot,  on
the  one  hand,  be  called  a  purely  mental  phenomenon.  Nor  again  can
they  be  definitely  classed  under  external  vision ;  since  they  do  sometimes
follow  upon  a  mental  process  of  association.  It  seems  safer  to  term  them
entencephalic,  on  the  analogy  of  entoptic,  since  they  seem  to  be  due  to
something  in  brain- structure,  much  as  entoptic  percepts  are  due  to  some-
thing in  the  structure  of  the  eye.

604.  I  will,  then,  start  with  the  synaesthesiae  as  the  most  generalised
form    of   inward    perception,  and  will    pass   on   to  other  classes    which
approach  more  nearly  to  ordinary  external  vision.

From  these  entencephalic  photisms  we  seem  to  proceed  by  an  easy
transition  to  the  most  inward  form  of  unmistakable  entoptic  vision —
which  is  therefore  the  most  inward  form  of  all  external  vision — the  flash  of
light  consequent  on  electrisation  of  the  optic  nerve.  Next  on  our  outward
road  we  may  place  the  phosphenes  caused  by  pressure  on  the  optic  nerve
or  irritation  of  the  retina.  Next  Purkinje's  figures,  or  shadows  cast  by  the
blood-vessels  of  the  middle  layer  upon  the  bacillary  layer  of  the  retina.
Then  musctz  volitantes,  or  shadows  cast  by  motes  in  the  vitreous  humour
upon  the  fibrous  layer  of  the  retina.

605.  Midway,  again,  between  entoptic  and  ordinary  external  vision  we
may  place  after-images  ;  which,  although  themselves  perceptible  with  shut
eyes,  presuppose  a  previous  retinal  stimulation  from  without ; — forming,  in
fact,  the  entoptic  sequelae  of  ordinary  external  vision.

606.  Next  comes  our  ordinary  vision  of  the  external  world — and  this,
again,  is  pushed  to  its  highest  degree  of  externality  by  the  employment  of

ial  aids  to  sight.  He  who  gazes  through  a  telescope  at  the  stars
has  mechanically  improved  his  end-organs  to  the  furthest  point  now  pos-
sible to  man.

607.  And  now,  standing  once  more  upon  our  watershed  of  entence-
phalic vision,  let  us  trace  the  advancing  capacities  of  internal  vision.     The
forms  of  vision  now  to  be  considered  are  virtually  independent  of  the  eye  ;
they  can  persist,  that  is  to  say,  after  the  destruction  of  the  eye,  if  only  the
eye  has  worked  for  a  few  years,  so  as  to  give  visual  education  to  the  brain.

>  not.  in  fact,  fully  know  the  limits  of  this  independence,  which  can

only  be  learnt  by  a  fuller  examination  of  intelligent  blind  persons  than  has

yet  been  made.     Nor  can  we  say  with  certainty  how  far  in  a  seeing  person

the  eye  is  in  its  turn  influenced  by  the  brain.     I  shall  avoid  postulating

voi  p

226  CHAPTER    VI

any  "  retropulsive  current  "  from  brain  to  retina,  just  as  I  have  avoided
any  expression  more  specific  than  "  the  brain "  to  indicate  the  primary
seat  of  sight.  The  arrangement  here  presented,  as  already  explained,  is  a
psychological  one,  and  can  be  set  forth  without  trespassing  on  contro-
verted physiological  ground.

We  may  take  memory-images  as  the  simplest  type  of  internal  vision.
These  images,  as  commonly  understood,  introduce  us  to  no  fresh  know-
ledge ;  they  preserve  the  knowledge  gained  by  conscious  gaze  upon  the
outer  world.  In  their  simplest  spontaneous  form  they  are  the  cerebral
sequelae  of  external  vision,  just  as  after-images  are  its  entoptic  sequelae.
And  we  find  that  in  some  cases  these  two  classes  of  vision  are  confounded
(see  607  A).  But  we  see  that  into  the  cerebral  storage  of  impressions  one
element  habitually  enters  which  is  totally  absent  from  the  mere  retinal
storage,  namely,  a  psychical  element — a  rearrangement  or  generalisation
of  the  impressions  retinally  received.

608.  Next  we  come  to  a  common  class  of  memory-images,  in  which  the
subliminal  rearrangement  is  particularly  marked.     I  speak  of  dreams—
which  lead  us  on  in  two  directions  from  memory-images ; — in  the  direc-
tion of  imagination-images,  and  in  the  direction  of  hallucinations.     Certain
individual   dreams,  indeed,  of  rare  types  point  also  in  other  directions
which  later  on  we  shall  have  to  follow.     But  dreams  as  a  class  consist  of
confused  memory-images,  reaching  a  kind  of  low  hallucinatory  intensity,.
a  glow,  so  to  say,  sufficient  to  be  perceptible  in  darkness.

609.  I  will  give  the  name  of  imagination-images  to  those  conscious  re-
combinations of  our  store  of  visual  imagery  which  we  compose  either  for
our  mere  enjoyment,  as  "  waking  dreams,"  or  as  artifices  to  help  us  to  the
better  understanding  of  facts  of  nature  confusedly  discerned.     Such,  for
instance,  are  imagined  geometrical  diagrams ;  and  Watt,  lying  in  bed  in  a
dark  room  and  conceiving  the  steam-engine,  illustrates  the  utmost  limit  to
which  voluntary  internal  visualisation  can  go.

610.  Here  at  any  rate  the  commonly  admitted  category  of  stages  of
inward  vision  will  close.     Thus  far  and  no  farther  the  brain's  capacity  for
presenting  visual  images  can  be  pushed  on  under  the  guidance  of  the  con-
scious will  of  man.     It  is  now  my  business  to  show,  on  the  contrary,  that
we  have  here  reached  a  mere  intermediate  point  in  the  development  of
internal  vision.     These   imagination-images,   valuable    as   they  are,    are
merely  attempts   to   control   supraliminally  a   form   of  vision  which — as
spontaneous   memory-images   have  already  shown   us — is  predominantly
subliminal.     The    memory-images    welled    up    from    a     just-submerged
stratum  ;  we  must  now  consider  what  other  images  also  well  upward  from
the  same  hidden  source.

To  begin  with,  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  some  of  Watt's  images
of  steam-engines  did  not  well  up  from  that  source, — did  not  emerge  ready-
made  into  the  supraliminal  mind  while  it  rested  in  that  merely  expectant
state  which  forms  generally  a  great  part  of  invention.  We  have  seen  in

611]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  227

Chapter  III.  that  there  is  reason  to  believe  in  such  a  conveyance  in  the
much  inferior  mental  processes  of  calculating  boys,  &c.,  and  also  in  the
mental  processes  of  the  painter.  In  short,  without  pretending  to  judge  of
the  proportion  of  voluntary  to  involuntary  imagery  in  each  several  creative
mind,  we  must  undoubtedly  rank  the  spontaneously  emergent  visual
images  of  genius  as  a  further  stage  of  internal  vision.

And  now  we  have  reached,  by  a  triple  road,  the  verge  of  a  most  im-
portant development  of  inward  vision — namely,  that  vast  range  of  pheno-
mena which  we  call  hallucination.  Each  of  our  last  three  classes  had  led
up  to  hallucination  in  a  different  way.  Dreams  actually  are  hallucinations ;
but  they  are  usually  hallucinations  of  low  intensity ;  and  are  only  rarely
capable  of  maintaining  themselves  for  a  few  seconds  (as  hypnopompic
illusions)  when  the  dreamer  wakes  to  the  stimuli  of  the  material  world.
Imaginations-images  may  be  carried  to  a  hallucinatory  pitch  by  good
visualisers  (see  610  A).  And  the  inspirations  of  genius — Raphael's  San
Sisto  is  the  classical  instance — may  present  themselves  in  hallucinatory
vividness  to  the  astonished  artist.

611.  A  hallucination,  one  may  say  boldly,  is  in  fact  a  hyperasthesia  ;
and  generally  a  central  hypergesthesia.  That  is  to  say,  the  hallucination  is
in  some  cases  due  indirectly  to  peripheral  stimulation ;  but  often  also  it  is
the  result  of  a  stimulus  to  "  mind's-eye  vision,"  which  sweeps  the  idea
onwards  into  visual  form,  regardless  of  ordinary  checks.  It  is  a  familiar
remark,  indeed,  that  each  idea,  according  as  its  motor  or  its  sensory
elements  predominate,  is  either  a  nascent  movement  or  a  nascent  hallu-
cination. We  cannot  possibly  tell  beforehand  what  kind  of  stimulus, —
healthful  or  harmful,  reinforcement  of  energy  or  mere  breakdown  of  inhi-
bition,— will  carry  on  this  nascency  into  actual  birth.  "  Mind's-eye
vision,"  like  retinal  vision,  has  a  habitual  limit,  in  each  case  presumably
determined  by  natural  selection  or  otherwise  as  the  limit  most  convenient
for  the  race,  considering  the  resources  of  the  organism.  In  some  indi-
viduals, however,  these  average  limits  are  greatly  overpassed,  with  or  with-
out resultant  advantage.  Exceptional  keenness  of  ocular  vision,  useless
to  most  men,  may  help  the  astronomer;  exceptional  power  of  inward
visualisation,  to  most  men  a  mere  curiosity,  may  singularly  help  (as  in  an
;ce  to  which  I  have  often  alluded)  the  pourtrayers  from  memory  of
flying  bir

Here,  then,  is  a  comprehensive  and  reasonable  way  of  regarding  these
multifarious  hallucinations  or  sensory  automatisms.  They  are  phenomena
of  central  or  cerebral  hyperaesthesia — phenomena  which  must  neither  be
I  ignored,  but  rather  controlled  and  interpreted.  Nor  will  that
interpretation  be  an  easy  matter.  The  interpretation  of  the  symbols  by
which  the  retina  represents  the  external  world  has  been,  whether  for  the
race  or  for  the  individual,  no  short  or  simple  process.  Yet  ocular  vision
is  in  my  view  a  simple,  easy,  privileged  case  of  vision  generally  :  and  the
symbols  which  represent  our  internal  percepts  of  an  immaterial  world  are

228  CHAPTER    VI  [612

likely  to  be  far  more  complex  than  any  impressions  from  the  material
world  on  the  retina.

All  inward  visions  are  like  symbols  abridged  from  a  picture-alphabet.
In  order  to  understand  any  one  class  of  hallucinations,  we  ought  to  have
all  classes  before  us.  At  the  lower  limit  of  the  series,  indeed,  the  analysis
of  the  physician  should  precede  that  of  the  psychologist.  We  already
know  to  some  extent,  and  may  hope  soon  to  know  more  accurately,  what
sensory  disturbance  corresponds  to  what  nervous  lesion.  Yet  these  violent
disturbances  of  inward  perception — the  snakes  of  the  drunkard,  the  scarlet
fire  of  the  epileptic,  the  jeering  voices  of  the  paranoiac — these  are  perhaps
of  too  gross  a  kind  to  afford  more  than  a  kind  of  neurological  introduction
to  the  subtler  points  which  arise  when  hallucination  is  unaccompanied  by
any  observable  defect  or  malady.

It  is,  indeed,  obvious  enough  that  the  more  idiognomonic  the  hallu-
cination is,  the  more  isolated  from  any  other  disturbance  of  normality,  the
greater  will  be  its  psychological  interest.  An  apparently  spontaneous
modification  of  central  percepts — what  phenomenon  could  promise  to  take
us  deeper  into  the  mystery  of  the  mind  ?

612.  Yet  until  quite  recently — until,  in  short,  Edmund  Gurney  took
up  the  inquiry  in  1882 — this  wide,  important  subject  was  treated,  even  in
serious  text-books,  in  a  superficial  and  perfunctory  way.  Few  statistics
were  collected;  hardly  anything  was  really  known;  rather  there  was  a
facile  assumption  that  all  hallucinations  or  sensory  automatisms  must
somehow  be  due  to  physical  malady,  even  when  there  was  no  evidence
whatever  for  such  a  connection.  I  must  refer  my  readers  to  Gurney's
re"sum£  in  his  chapter  on  "  Hallucinations  "  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  if
they  would  realise  the  gradual  confused  fashion  in  which  men's  minds  had
been  prepared  for  the  wider  view  soon  to  be  opened,  largely  by  Gurney's
own  statistical  and  analytical  work.  The  wide  collection  of  first-hand
experiences  of  sensory  automatisms  of  every  kind  which  he  initiated,  and
which  the  S.P.R.  "  Census  of  Hallucinations  "  continued  after  his  death
(see  612  A)  has  for  the  first  time  made  it  possible  to  treat  these  phenomena
with  some  surety  of  hand.

The  results  of  these  inquiries  show  that  a  great  number  of  sensory
automatisms  occur  among  sane  and  healthy  persons,  and  that  for  many  of
these  we  can  at  present  offer  no  explanation  whatever.  For  some  of  them,
however,  we  can  offer  a  kind  of  explanation,  or  at  least  an  indication  of  a
probable  determining  cause,  whose  mode  of  working  remains  wholly
obscure.

Thus,  in  some  few  instances,  although  there  is  no  disturbance  of  health,
there  seems  to  be  a  predisposition  to  the  externalisation  of  figures  or
sounds.  Since  this  in  no  way  interferes  with  comfort,  we  must  simply
class  it  as  an  idiosyncratic  central  hyperaesthesia — much  like  the  tendency
to  extremely  vivid  dreams,  which  by  no  means  always  implies  a  poor
quality  of  sleep.

613]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  229

In  a  few  instances,  again,  we  can  trace  moral  predisposing  causes —
expectation,  grief,  anxiety.

These  causes,  however,  turn  out  to  be  much  less  often  effective  than
might  have  been  expected  from  the  popular  readiness  to  invoke  them.
In  two  ways  especially  the  weakness  of  this  predisposing  cause  is  impressed
upon  us.  In  the  first  place,  the  bulk  of  our  percipients  experience  their
hallucinations  at  ordinary  unexciting  moments ;  traversing  their  more
anxious  crises  without  any  such  phenomenon.  In  the  second  place,  those
of  our  percipients  whose  hallucination  is  in  fact  more  or  less  coincident
with  some  distressing  external  event,  seldom  seem  to  have  been  predis-
posed to  the  hallucination  by  a  knowledge  of  the  event.  For  the  event
was  generally  unknown  to  them  when  the  corresponding  hallucination
occurred.

613.  This  last  remark,  it  will  be  seen,  introduces  us  to  the  most
interesting  and  important  group  of  percipients  and  of  percepts ;  the  per-
cipients whose  gift  constitutes  a  fresh  faculty  rather  than  a  degeneration ;
the  percepts  which  are  veridical — which  are  (as  we  shall  see  cause  to  infer)
in  some  way  generated  by  some  event  outside  the  percipient's  mind,  so
that  their  correspondence  with  that  event  conveys  some  new  fact,  in  how-
ever obscure  a  form.  It  is  this  group,  of  course,  which  gives  high
importance  to  the  whole  inquiry ;  which  makes  the  study  of  inward  vision
no  mere  curiosity,  but  rather  the  opening  of  an  inlet  into  forms  of  know-
ledge to  which  we  can  assign  no  bound.

Now  these  telepathic  hallucinations  will  introduce  us  to  very  varying
forms  of  inward  vision.  It  will  be  well  to  begin  their  study  by  recalling
and  somewhat  expanding  the  thesis  already  advanced  :  that  man's  ocular
vision  is  but  a  special  or  privileged  case  of  visual  power,  of  which  power
his  inner  vision  affords  a  more  extensive  example.

Ocular  vision  is  the  perception  of  material  objects,  in  accordance  with
optical  laws,  from  a  definite  point  in  space.     Our  review  of  hallucinations
has  already  removed  two  of  these  limitations.     If  I  see  a  hallucinatory
figure — and  figures  seen  in  dreams  come  under  this  category — I  see  some-
thing which  is  not  a  material  object,  and  I  see  it  in  a  manner  not  deter-
1  by  optical  laws.     A  dream-figure  may  indeed  seem  to  conform  to
;1  laws;  but  that  will  be  the  result  of  self-suggestion,  or  of  organised
memories,  and  will  vary  according  to  the  dreamer's  visualising  power.
While  a  portrait- painter  may  see  a  face  in  dream  which  he  can  paint  from
ry  when  he  wakes,  the  ordinary  man's  dream-percept  will  be  vague,
shifting,  and  unrememberable.

..iiarly,  if  I  see  a  subjective  hallucinatory  figure  "out  in  the  room,"

pect  is  not  determined  by  optical  laws  (it  may  even  seem  to  stand

/the  observer,  or  otherwise  outside  his  visual  field),  but  it  will  more

i — by  my  mere  self-suggestion,  if  by  nothing  else — to  optical

laws ;  and,  moreover,  it  will  still  seem  to  be  seen  from  a  fixed  point  in

,  namely,  from  the  stationary  observer's  eyes  or  brain.

230  CHAPTER    VI  [614

All  this  seems  fairly  plain,  so  long  as  we  are  admittedly  dealing  with
hallucinatory  figures  whose  origin  must  be  in  the  percipient's  own  mind.
But  so  soon  as  we  come  to  quasi-percepts  which  we  believe  to  exist  or  to
originate  somewhere  outside  the  percipient's  mind,  our  difficulties  come
thick  and  fast.

If  there  be  some  external  origin  for  our  inward  vision  (which  thereby
becomes  veridical)  we  must  not  any  longer  assume  that  all  veridical  inward
vision  starts  or  is  exercised  from  the  same  point.  If  it  gets  hold  of  facts
(veridical  impressions  or  pictures,  not  mere  subjective  fancies),  we  cannot
be  sure  a  priori  whether  it  somehow  goes  to  find  the  facts,  or  the  facts
come  to  find  it.  Again,  we  cannot  any  longer  take  for  granted  that  it  will
be  cognisant  only  of  phantasmal  or  immaterial  percepts.  If  it  can  get  at
phantasmal  percepts  outside  the  organism,  may  it  not  get  at  material
percepts  also?  May  it  not  see  distant  houses,  as  well  as  the  images  of
distant  souls?

The  theoretical  possibilities  fall  under  four  heads  : —

(1)  One  may  see  material  objects  from  the  fixed  point  where  one's
body  stands.     This  is  ordinary  optical  vision.

(2)  One  may  see  immaterial  apparitions  from  a  fixed  point.     This  is
the  case  with  some  dreams,  with  purely  subjective  hallucinations,
and  with  some  veridical  hallucinations — as  crystal-visions.

(3)  One  may  see  material  objects,  as  though  by  "  bilocation,"  from  a
point  apparently  remote  from  one's  body.     This  would  be  what
used  to  be  called  "  travelling  clairvoyance,"  or  what  I  have  spoken
of  as  psychical  excursion,  involving  some  kind  of  perception  as  from
a   new  standpoint,  which   perception   may  or   may  not   include
material  objects  in  its  purview.

(4)  One  may  see  phantasmal  pictures  from  a  point  apparently  remote
from  one's  body.     This  last  possibility  follows  necessarily  upon  the
rest.     If  there  be  immaterial  apparitions  at  all,  and  if  one's  point  of
observation  can  move,  one  may  see  visions  or  symbolical  pictures,
as  though  by  "bilocation,"  from  a  point  apparently  remote  from
one's  physical  frame.

614.  Hazardous  as  these  speculations  may  seem,  they  nevertheless
represent  an  attempt  to  get  our  notions  of  supersensory  things  as  near
down  to  our  notions  of  sensory  things  as  we  fairly  can.

I  deliberately  adopt  the  language  which  the  percipient's  own  conscious-
ness dictates  as  to  "travelling  clairvoyance"  and  the  like;  and  this  for
two  reasons.  In  the  first  place,  as  will  be  seen  as  we  proceed,  I  think
that  this  phraseology  approximates  as  nearly  as  is  now  possible  to  a  truth
which  we  cannot  hope  to  render  in  any  adequate  way ;  and  in  the  second
place,  I  cannot  discover  any  other  form  of  words  which  would  in  reality
carry  greater  philosophic  authority,  or  involve  a  conception  in  itself
more  definite  or  reasonable  than  that  which  I  adopt.  Any  attempt  to
deal  with  these  spiritual  phenomena  as  realities — as  phenomena  capable

615]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  231

of  correlation  with  the  material  phenomena  which  we  know — does  at  once
and  inevitably  demonstrate  the  uselessness  for  such  a  purpose  of  ordinary
metaphysical  terminology.  Whatever  may  be  our  ultimate  conception  of
an  ideal  world,  we  must  not  for  the  present  attempt  to  start  from  any
standpoint  too  far  removed  from  the  spatial  and  temporal  existence  which
alone  we  know.

We  cannot,  however,  use  these  terms  of  "travelling  clairvoyance,"
"  psychical  invasion,"  and  the  like,  without  making  some  suggestion
towards  an  intermediate  conception  of  space — something  between  space
as  we  know  it  in  the  material  world  and  space  as  we  imagine  it  to  dis-
appear in  the  ideal  world — which  may  enable  the  reader  to  grasp  with
less  confusion  the  discussions  which  follow.  Telepathy  is  a  conception
intermediate  between  the  apparent  isolation  of  minds  here  communicating
only  as  a  rule  through  material  organs,  and  the  ultimate  conception  of  the
unity  of  all  mind.  And  similarly  the  conception  which  I  am  about  to
propose,  of  a  recognition  of  space  without  our  concomitant  subjection  to
laws  of  matter,  is  strictly  intermediate  between  man's  incarnate  condition
and  the  condition  of  exemption  from  our  present  forms  of  thought  to
which  we  may  imagine  him  ultimately  to  attain.  I  may  go  further  and
say  that  the  general  drift  of  all  our  evidence  makes  for  the  thesis  of  con-
tinuity in  cosmic  phenomena.  We  have  no  right  to  assume  that  our
physical  death  is  a  unique  crisis  in  our  history;  nor,  again,  if  our  soul
survives,  that  death  involves  more  of  change  in  the  soul's  perceptions  than
we  can  plainly  infer  that  it  must  involve.  We  perceive  that  the  material
body  is  destroyed;  and  we  may  therefore  infer  that  there  is  no  further
friction  or  inertia  to  overcome.  We  perceive  that  the  sense-organs  perish
with  the  body ;  and  we  may  therefore  infer  that  there  are  new  forms  of
perceptivity.  But  we  cannot  possibly  infer  a  priori  that  all  recognition  of
space  must  needs  disappear  with  the  disappearance  of  the  particular  bodily
sensations  by  means  of  which  our  conception  of  space  has  been  developed.
Under  new  conditions,  involving  the  absence  of  various  limitations  which
now  bind  us,  there  may  even  be  a  clearer  and  completer  perception  of
space  than  is  at  present  possible  to  us.  We  can  at  least  imagine  that
a  spirit  should  be  essentially  independent  of  space,  but  yet  capable  of
recognising  space,  not  only  while  yet  confined  by  the  material  body,  but  in
such  action  as  he  may  take  when  partially  and  temporarily,  or  wholly

permanently,  delivered  from  the  body's  constraint.
615.     Provisionally  admitting  this  view,  let  us  consider  what  range
we  are  now  led  to  assign  to  inner  vision,  when  it  is  no  longer  merely

ctive  but  veridical;   bringing  news  to  the  percipient  of  actu.V

ie  his  own  organism.

infer  that   it    may  represent  to  us  (i)  mutrri.il  objects;  or  (2)

<>ls  of  immaterial  things;   (3)  in  ways  not  necessarily  accordant  with
>vs  ;  ami  (4)  from  a  point  of  view  not  necessarily  located  within
I  will  take  an  illustration  from  a  case  which  will  Liter  on
be  quoted  in  detail  (666  C).

232  CHAPTER    VI  [616

A  Mrs.  Wilmot  has  a  vision  of  her  husband  in  a  cabin  in  a  distant
steamer.  Besides  her  husband,  she  sees  in  the  cabin  a  stranger  (who
was  in  fact  present  there),  with  certain  material  details.  Now  here  I
should  say  that  Mrs.  Wilmot's  inner  vision  discerned  material  objects,
from  a  point  of  view  outside  her  own  organism.  But,  on  the  other
hand,  although  the  perception  came  to  her  in  visual  terms,  I  do  not
suppose  that  it  was  really  optical,  that  it  came  through  the  eye.

Mrs.  Wilmot  might  believe,  say,  that  her  husband's  head  concealed
from  her  some  part  of  the  berth  in  which  he  lay;  but  this  would  not
mean  a  real  optical  concealment,  but  only  a  special  direction  of  her
attention,  guided  by  preconceived  notions  of  what  would  be  optically
visible  from  a  given  point.

As  we  proceed  further  we  shall  see,  I  think,  in  many  ways  how
needful  is  this  excursive  theory  to  explain  many  telepathic  and  all
telsesthetic  experiences;  many,  I  mean,  of  the  cases  where  two  minds
are  in  communication,  and  all  the  cases  where  the  percipient  learns
material  facts  (as  words  in  a  book,  mottoes  in  a  nutshell,  see  573  E,  &c.)
with  which  no  other  known  mind  is  concerned.

Another  most  important  corollary  of  this  excursive  theory  must
just  be  mentioned  here.  If  there  be  spiritual  excursion  to  a  particular
point  of  space,  it  is  conceivable  that  this  should  involve  not  only  the
migrant  spirit's  perception  from  that  point,  but  also  perception  of  that
point  by  persons  materially  present  near  it.  That  point  may  become
a  phantasmogenetic  centre,  as  well  as  a  centre  of  outlook.  In  plain  words,
if  A  has  spiritually  invaded  B's  room,  and  there  sees  B,  B  on  his  part
may  see  A  symbolically  standing  there;  and  C  and  D  if  present  may
see  A  as  well.

This  hint,  here  thrown  out  as  an  additional  argument  for  the
excursive  theory,  will  fall  to  be  developed  later  on.  For  the  present
we  must  confine  our  attention  to  our  immediate  subject;  the  range  of
man's  inner  vision,  and  the  means  which  he  must  take  to  understand,
to  foster,  and  to  control  it.

616.  The  word  control  implies  repression  as  well  as  guidance ;
and  we  have  seen  that  there  is  in  fact  a  class  of  inner  visions  where
mere  repression  is  needed.  The  hallucinatory  delirium,  indeed,  of
the  drunkard  or  the  maniac — the  most  disintegrated  output  of  inner
vision — can  seldom  be  checked  while  the  brain  remains  poisoned  and
unsound.  But  it  is  a  noteworthy  fact  that  such  degenerative  hallucina-
tions as  are  at  all  curable  are  much  more  often  curable  by  hypnotic
suggestion  than  in  any  other  way.  The  same  kind  of  influence  which
generates  harmless  hallucinations  can  destroy  harmful  ones.  That
extension  of  power  over  submerged  strata  of  the  patient's  mind,  that
ability  to  touch  a  deep-seated  spring,  which  at  first  seemed  a  mere
scientific  curiosity,  is  found  to  have  a  novel  practical  use.

This  is  the  first  and  simplest  step  in  the  control  of  inner  vision.

617]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  233

617.  The  next  step  is  one  to  which,  as  the  reader  of  my  chapter
on  hypnotism  already  knows,  I  attribute  an  importance  much  greater
than  is  generally  accorded  to  it.  I  refer  to  the  hypnotiser's  power
not  only  of  controlling  but  of  inducing  hallucinations  in  his  subject.

These  I  have  already  described  in  some  detail.  I  have  noticed
the  facility  of  their  production,  their  harmlessness,  the  advance  which
they  show  on  ordinary  imaginative  power.  Let  us  now  consider  them
in  relation  to  a  wider  field ;  as  the  outcome  of  central  sensory  stimula-
tion— as  the  result  of  an  empirical  effort  to  guide  and  quicken  the  inner
vision.

It  is  at  once  clear  that  the  explanation  of  induced  hypnotic  hallucina-
tions which  is  offered  in  ordinary  handbooks  is  quite  insufficient.  As  I
have  already  said  (in  544),  the  evocation  of  hallucinations  is  commonly
spoken  of  as  a  mere  example  of  the  subject's  obedience  to  the  hypnotiser.
"  I  tell  my  subject  to  raise  his  arm,  and  he  raises  it ;  I  tell  him  to  see  a
tiger  in  the  room,  and  he  sees  one  accordingly."  But  manifestly  these  two
incidents  are  not  on  the  same  level,  and  only  appear  to  be  so  through  a
certain  laxity  of  language.  The  usage  of  speech  allows  me  to  say,  "  I  will
make  my  subject  lift  his  arm,"  although  I  am  of  course  unable  to  affect
the  motor  centres  in  his  brain  which  start  that  motion.  But  it  is  so  easy
for  a  man  to  lift  his  arm  that  my  speech  takes  that  familiar  power  for
granted,  and  notes  only  his  readiness  to  lift  it  when  I  tell  him — the
hypnotic  complaisance  which  prompts  him  to  obey  me  if  I  suggest
this  trivial  action.  But  when  I  say,  "  I  will  make  him  see  a  tiger,"  I
take  for  granted  a  power  on  his  part  which  is  not  familiar,  which  I  have  no
longer  a  right  to  assume.  For  under  ordinary  circumstances  my  subject
simply  cannot  see  a  tiger  at  will;  nor  can  I  affect  the  visual  centres
which  might  enable  him  to  do  so.  All  that  I  can  ask  him  to  do,
therefore,  is  to  choose  this  particular  way  of  indicating  that  in  his
hypnotic  condition  he  has  become  able  to  stimulate  his  central  sensory
more  powerfully  than  ever  before.  In  his  hypnotic  complaisance
he  adopts  my  suggestion ;  he  makes  it  a  self-suggestion ;  he  uses  his
newly  developed  faculty  in  the  trivial  manner  which  I  desire.  It  is
not  my  command,  but  his  faculty,  that  is  the  kernel  of  the  whole  matter.
Of  what  kind  precisely,  then,  is  the  new  capacity  here  involved?

Our   discussion   of  hypnotism  in  the  last  chapter  reviewed  hypnotic

of  faculty  of  various  kinds.     First  of  all   came  that  in<  :
•  found  organic  faculty,  of  the  vigour  of  the  nutritive  system,  which
t  the  base  of  psycho-therapeutics.     Then  came  increase  of  sensi-
bility  to    external    stimuli ;    hypnotic    hypersesthesia,    or   quickening  of
sight,  hearing,  taste,  and  smell ;  apparently  capable  of  being  pushed  to
an   unknown    degree.     Then  came  a  group  of  extensions  of  faculty  to
i  I  gave  the  general  name  of  htterasthfsia.    These  were  perceptions
or   discriminations   of  a   novel  kind  ;   as   of  magnetic  fields,  or  of  the
contact  of  specific  metals.     We  could  not,  of  course,  determine  whether

234  CHAPTER    VI  [618

these  were  stimulations  of  peripheral  or  of  central  sensibility :  whether
the  end-organs  transmitted  a  message  from  the  outer  world  in  novel
terms,  or  whether  the  brain  applied  to  a  familiar  message  a  novel  delicacy
of  interpretation.

We  then  passed  on  to  those  exaltations  of  faculty  which  were
definitely  central,  and  which  were  no  longer  sensory,  but  affected  rather
the  intellect  or  the  moral  sense.  But  in  making  this  transition  I  passed
quickly  over  a  wide  range  of  possible  stimulations  to  faculty — such
stimulations,  namely,  as  might  be  applied  to  central  sensory  tracts;
"  quickening  the  imagination,"  as  we  say,  and  giving  to  images  centrally
initiated  something  more  of  that  vividness  to  which  only  images  from
the  external  world  can  generally  attain.

To  this  class  of  stimuli  it  is  that  our  study  of  hallucinations  now
brings  us  back.  And  in  another  way  these  hallucinations  connect
themselves  with  an  already  traversed  range  of  phenomena.  The
hallucinations  with  which  we  shall  care  to  deal  are  not  mere  crude
externalisations  of  some  interior  commotion,  such  as  the  flash  of  light
with  which  the  optic  tracts  respond  to  a  blow  on  the  head.  They  are
in  most  cases  elaborate  products — complex  images  which  must  have
needed  intelligence  to  fashion  them — although  the  process  of  their
fashioning  is  hidden  from  our  view.  In  this  respect  they  resemble  the
inspirations  of  genius.  For  here  we  find  again  just  what  we  found  in
those  inspirations — the  uprush  of  a  complex  intellectual  product,  pre-
formed beneath  the  threshold,  and  projected  ready-made  into  ordinary
consciousness.  The  uprushing  stream  of  intelligence,  indeed,  in  the
man  of  genius  flowed  habitually  in  conformity  with  the  superficial  stream.
Only  rarely  does  the  great  conception  intrude  itself  upon  him  with  such
vigour  and  such  untimeliness  as  to  bring  confusion  and  incoherence
into  his  ordinary  life.  But  in  the  case  of  these  induced  hallucinations
the  incongruity  between  the  two  streams  of  intelligence  is  much  more
marked.  When  a  subject,  for  instance,  is  trying  to  keep  down  some
post-hypnotic  hallucinatory  suggestion,  one  can  watch  the  smooth  surface
of  the  supraliminal  river  disturbed  by  that  suggestion,  as  though  by  jets
of  steam  from  below,  which  sometimes  merely  break  in  bubbles,  but
sometimes  force  themselves  up  bodily  through  the  superficial  film.

618.  It  is  by  considering  hallucinations  in  this  generalised  manner
and  among  these  analogies,  that  we  can  best  realise  their  absence  of
necessary  connection  with  any  bodily  degeneration  or  disease.  Often,  of
course,  they  accompany  disease ;  but  that  is  only  to  say  that  the  central
sensory  tracts,  like  any  other  part  of  the  organism,  are  capable  of  morbid
as  well  as  of  healthful  stimulus.  Taken  in  itself,  the  mere  fact  of  the
quasi- externalisation  of  a  centrally  initiated  image  indicates  strong  central
stimulation,  and  absolutely  nothing  more.  There  is  no  physiological  law
whatever  which  can  tell  us  what  degree  of  vividness  our  central  pictures
may  assume  consistently  with  health — short  of  the  point  where  they  get  to

619]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  235

be  so  indistinguishable  from  external  perceptions  that,  as  in  madness,  they
interfere  with  the  rational  conduct  of  life.  That  point  no  well-attested
case  of  veridical  hallucinations,  so  far  as  my  knowledge  goes,  has  yet
approached.

It  was,  of  course,  natural  that  in  the  study  of  these  phantasms,  as  else-
where, the  therapeutic  interest  should  have  preceded  the  psychological.
Men's  need  to  understand  themselves  has  never  been  so  pressing  as  their
need  to  keep  themselves  alive  and  comfortable.  In  the  popular  mind  the
rats  and  snakes  that  terrify  the  drunkard  stand,  one  may  say,  for  the  whole
category  of  externalised  quasi-percepts ;  and  the  plain  duty  of  man  seems
to  be  to  avoid  them.  Such  a  view — still  lingering  in  a  modified  form  even
in  some  scientific  circles — must  gradually  give  way  to  the  newer  feeling
that  it  is  only  by  gazing  long  and  profoundly  into  man  that  we  can  learn
how  to  improve  him  in  a  profound  and  lasting  way ;  and  that  it  is  on
man's  steady  and  generic  evolution,  rather  than  on  his  occasional  and
individual  degenerations,  that  the  main  thought  and  effort  of  science  must
henceforth  be  fixed.1  The  main  use  of  knowing  in  what  ways  the  race
tends  to  slip  backwards  is  that  we  may  know  how  to  press  it  forward  in-
stead. In  short,  it  is  a  science  of  eugenics  rather  than  of  therapeutics
which  is  the  characteristic,  the  primary  science  for  any  living  and  modifi-
able race  ;  and  for  our  dawning  practical  science  of  eugenics  experimental
psychology  is  the  indispensable  theoretic  precursor.

These  reflections,  I  suppose,  like  many  others  in  this  work,  will  for
the  present  hover,  as  it  were,  in  men's  minds  between  the  paradox  and  the
truism.  To  turn  them  definitely  into  truisms  it  is,  I  think,  only  needful
that  the  study  of  inner  vision  should  be  pursued  experimentally  by  com-
petent persons  from  its  very  inception  up  to  the  most  advanced  degree
which  experimentation  can  attain.  In  the  meantime  I  can  offer  as  usual
•he  vindemiatio prima,  the  scanty  and  hasty  first  ingatherings  from  an
unharvested  field.

619.  I  have  spoken  of  the  hallucinations  which  suggestion  can  in-
duce, during  or  after  the  hypnotic  trance,  or  in  some  few  cases  in  a  sub-
ject in  the  waking  condition.  With  the  possibility  of  such  quasi-percepts

1  We  may  say  that  psychology  is  passing  from  the  initial  state  of  each  science  in  turn,
w  science  depends  on  observation  only  without  experiment,  into  the  second
•  hen  it  depends  on  experiment ;  but  that  thus  far  it  remain^  in  that  early  stage  of
the  second  state  when  the  methods  of  experiment  are  such  as  other  sciences  have  sug-
gested, not  such  as  this  special  branch  of  inquiry  suggests  for  itself,  or  can  us
unique  effect.     Thus,  for  instance,  in  the  study  of  crystals  men  began  by  measuring  their
il  angles.     Then  they  sliced  them  and  found  their  planes  of  cleavage;  ami  it
seemed  as  though  the  crystals  had  been  examined  through  and  through.     I'ut  with  the
disco v«ry  of  the  polarisation  of  light  came  a  more  intimate  analysis  ;  and  we  classify  the
crystal  now  by  the  behaviour  of  the  ray  within.     What  we  want  to  get  hold  of  in  psycho-
logy is  some  experiment  which  shall  compare  with  the  registry  of  reflexes  and  the  de-
^^^•on  of  end-organs  as  the  polariscope  compares  with  the  goniometer  ;  which  shall
to  detect  double  or  multiple  refraction  within  a  personality  which  to  less  subtle
vses  seems  still  a  limpid  homogeneous  whole.

236  CHAPTER    VI  [620

the  world  is  now  familiar,  however  little  attention  their  true  significance
may  have  received.  But  when  we  leave  these,  to  what  must  we  next
turn  ?  Can  this  form  of  experiment  be  varied  and  improved  upon  ?  Can
we  get  rid  of  the  superfluous  and  intensify  the  interesting  part  ?

We  have  been  studying  the  hallucinatory  images  generated  in  obedience
to  A's  suggestion  in  the  mind  of  the  hypnotised  B.

Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  no  longer  interesting  to  us  that  A  should
have  any  directing  voice  in  starting  the  images.  It  is  B's  mind  that  we
want  to  study,  and  we  would  rather  leave  it  undisturbed  by  ordinary  verbal
suggestion;  although,  of  course,  we  shall  be  glad  to  observe  telepathic
impact,  if  we  can.

In  the  second  place,  it  would  plainly  be  more  convenient  if  we  could
dispense  with  hypnotisation,  and  get  B  to  see  and  describe  the  hallucina-
tions in  his  waking  state.  But  can  B  get  at  these  subliminal  pictures  by
any  mere  effort  of  will  ?  Can  he  do  anything  more  than  simply  summon
up  memory-images  and  combine  them  in  fantastic  ways?  Can  he  get  at
anything  deeper  than  vague  day-dreams  or  scrappy  recollections?  Let  us
consider  whether,  apart  from  such  a  rare  and  startling  incident  as  an
actual  hallucination,  there  is  any  previous  indication  of  a  habit  of  receiving,
or  a  power  of  summoning,  pictures  from  a  subliminal  store-house  ?  Any
self-suggestion,  conscious  or  unconscious,  which  places  before  the  supra-
liminal  intelligence  visual  images  apparently  matured  elsewhere?

Such  indications  have  not  been  wanting.  In  the  chapter  on  Genius,
in  the  chapter  on  Sleep,  and  in  610  A  we  have  traced  the  existence  of
many  classes  of  these  pictures ;  all  of  them  ready,  as  it  would  seem,  to
manifest  themselves  on  slight  inducement.  Dream-figures  will  rise  in
any  momentary  blur  of  consciousness ;  inspirations  will  respond  to  the
concentrated  desire  or  the  mere  passing  emotion  of  the  man  of  genius ;
after-images  will  recur,  under  unknown  conditions,  long  after  the  original
stimulus  has  been  withdrawn ;  memory-images  will  surge  up  into  our  minds
with  even  unwished-for  vividness;  the  brilliant  exactness  of  illusions
hypnagogiques  will  astonish  us  in  the  revealing  transition  from  waking  to
sleep.

All  is  prepared,  so  to  say,  for  some  empirical  short-cut  to  a  fuller  con-
trol of  these  subjacent  pictures ;  just  as  before  Mesmer  and  Puyse'gur  all
was  prepared  for  an  empirical  short-cut  to  trance,  somnambulism,  sug-
gestibility.

All  that  we  want  is  to  hit  on  some  simple  empirical  way  of  bringing
out  the  correlation  between  all  these  types  of  subjacent  vision,  just  as
mesmerism  was  a  simple  empirical  way  of  bringing  out  the  correlation
between  various  trances  and  sleep-waking  states.

620.  Crystal-vision,  then,  like  hypnotic  trance,  might  have  been
gradually  evolved  by  a  series  of  reasoned  experiments,  along  an  unexcep-
tionable scientific  road.

In  reality,  of  course,  this  prehistoric  practice  must  have  been  reached

621]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  237

in  some  quite  different  way.  It  does  not  fall  within  the  scope  of  this  book
to  trace  the  various  streams  of  divination  which  converge  into  Dr.  Dee's
magic,  and  "  the  attracting  of  spirits  into  the  ball."  But  it  is  really  to  the
Elizabethan  Dr.  Dee — one  of  the  leading  savants  of  his  time — that  the
credit  must  be  given  of  the  first  systematic  attempt  to  describe,  analyse,
and  utilise  these  externalised  pictures.1

From  the  time  of  Dr.  Dee  the  practice  had  continued,  faintly  and
intermittently,  in  England  as  in  many  other  countries.  The  "  Miss  A."
of  our  Proceedings  (vol.  viii.  p.  498)  had  her  attention  directed  to  this
psychical  artifice  by  a  spontaneous  symbolical  vision  of  a  golden  key  lying
at  the  bottom  of  a  glass  of  water.  I  saw  her  use  a  crystal ;  tried  it  myself,
but  in  vain ;  and  begged  others  to  try  it.  Several  of  these  experimenters
proved  successful ;  especially  Miss  Goodrich- Freer,  whose  careful  obser-
vations have  been,  in  my  view,  of  great  importance  in  showing  the  wide
range  of  phenomena  which  this  simple  artifice  can  induce.  Other
observers  ("  Miss  Angus,"  &c.)  have  followed  ;  and  it  is  already  clear  that
we  have  here  one  of  the  most  puissant  "  autoscopes  "  (to  use  a  word  of
Professor  Barrett's)  which  experimental  psychology  can  offer.

621.  Before  citing  individual  cases,  it  will  be  well  to  describe  briefly
the  general  type  of  the  experiment,  and  to  see  how  near  we  can  get  to  a
psychological  explanation.

Let  the  observer  gaze,  steadily  but  not  fatiguingly,  into  some  speculum,
or  clear  depth,  so  arranged  as  to  return  as  little  reflection  as  possible.  A
good  example  of  what  is  meant  will  be  a  glass  ball  enveloped  in  a  black
shawl,  or  placed  in  the  back  part  of  a  half-opened  drawer ;  so  arranged,  in
short,  that  the  observer  can  gaze  into  it  with  as  little  distraction  as  may
be  from  the  reflection  of  his  own  face  or  of  surrounding  objects.  After  he
has  tried  (say)  three  or  four  times,  for  ten  minutes  or  so  at  a  time — pre-
ferably in  solitude,  and  in  a  state  of  mental  passivity — he  will  perhaps
begin  to  see  the  glass  ball  or  crystal  clouding,  or  to  see  some  figure  or
picture  apparently  in  the  ball.  Perhaps  one  man  or  woman  in  twenty  will
ome  slight  occasional  experience  of  this  kind ;  and  perhaps  one  in
twenty  of  these  seers  (the  percentages  must  as  yet  be  mainly  guess-work)
will  be  able  by  practice  to  develop  this  faculty  of  inward  vision  up  to  a
point  where  it  will  sometimes  convey  to  him  information  not  attainable  by
ordi:  ns.

\v  comes  it,  in  the  first  place,  that  he  sees  any  figure  in  the  crystal
at  all  ?    Common  hypnotic  experiments  supply  two  obvious  answers,  each

:w-h  no  doubt  explains  some  part  of  the  phenomena.

In  the  first  place,  we  know  that  the  hypnotic  trance  is  often  induced

it  some  small  bright  object.     This  may  or  may  not  be  a  mere

^^H of  suggestion  ;  but  it  certainly  sometimes  occurs,  and  the  "  scryer  "

rehistoric  and  historic  crystal-gazing  see  Mr.  Andrew  Lang's  Making  of  Rttt-
<1  Miss  Goodrich- Freer's  "  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal-Vision,"  Proceeding*
ol.  v.  p.  486,  to  both  of  which  I  refer  in  620  A.

238  CHAPTER    VI  [622

consequently  may  be  partially  hypnotised,  and  in  a  state  which  facilitates
hallucinations.

In  the  second  place,  a  hypnotised  subject — hypnotised  but  in  a  fully
alert  state — can  often  be  caused  by  suggestion  to  see  (say)  a  portrait  upon
a  blank  card ;  and  will  continue  to  see  that  portrait  on  that  card,  after  the
card  has  been  shuffled  with  others ;  thus  showing  that  he  discerns  with
unusual  acuteness  such  points  de  reptre,  or  little  guiding  marks,  as  may
exist  on  the  surface  of  even  an  apparently  blank  card.

Correspondently  with  the  first  of  these  observations,  we  find  t
crystal-vision  is  sometimes  accompanied  by  a  state  of  partial  hypnotisation,
perhaps  merging  into  trance.  This  has  been  the  case  with  various  French
hysterical  subjects ;  and  not  only  with  them  but  with  that  exceptionally
sound  and  vigorous  observer,  Mr.  J.  G.  Keulemans.  His  evidence  (see
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  516-521)  is  just  what  one  would  have
expected  a  priori  on  such  a  matter.

Correspondently  with  the  second  of  the  above  observations,  we  find
that  points  de  repere  do  occasionally  seem  to  determine  crystal-visions.

This,  again,  has  been  noticed  among  the  French  hysterical  subjects;
and  not  only  with  them,  but  with  another  among  our  best  observers,  Mrs.
Verrall  (see  623  A).

622.  These  things  being  so — both  these  causes  being  apparently  opera-
tive along  the  whole  series  of  "  scryers,"  or  crystal-gazers,  from  the  most
unstable  to  the  most  scientific — one  might  be  tempted  to  assume  that
these  two  clues,  if  we  could  follow  them  far  enough,  would  explain  the
whole  group  of  phenomena.  Persons  who  have  not  seen  the  phenomena,
indeed,  can  hardly  be  persuaded  to  the  contrary.  But  the  real  fact  is,
as  even  those  who  have  seen  much  less  of  crystal-gazing  than  I  have  will
very  well  know,  that  these  explanations  cannot  be  stretched  to  cover  a
quarter — perhaps  not  even  a  tenth — of  the  phenomena  which  actually
occur.

Judging  both  from  the  testimony  of  scryers  themselves,  and  from  the
observations  of  Dr.  Hodgson  and  others  (myself  included),  who  have
had  many  opportunities  of  watching  them,  it  is  very  seldom  that  the  gaze
into  the  glass  ball  induces  any  hypnotic  symptoms  whatever.  It  does  not
induce  such  symptoms  with  successful  scryers  any  more  than  with  unsuc-
cessful. Furthermore,  there  is  no  proof  that  the  gift  of  crystal-vision  goes
along  with  hypnotic  sensibility.  The  most  that  one  can  say  is  that  the
gift  often  goes  along  with  telepathic  sensibility ;  but  although  telepathic
sensibility  may  sometimes  be  quickened  by  hypnotism,  we  have  no  proof
that  those  two  forms  of  sensitiveness  habitually  go  together.

The  ordinary  attitude  of  the  scryer,  I  repeat,  is  one  of  complete
detachment ;  an  interested  and  often  puzzled  scrutiny  and  analysis  of  the
figures  which  display  themselves  in  swift  or  slow  succession  in  the  crystal
ball.

This  last  sentence  applies  to  the  theory  of  points  de  repere  as  well.     As

623]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  239

a  general  rule,  the  crystal  vision,  however  meaningless  and  fantastic,  is  a
thing  which  changes  and  develops  somewhat  as  a  dream  does  ;  following,
it  may  be,  some  trivial  chain  of  associations,  but  not  maintaining,  any
more  than  a  dream  maintains,  any  continuous  scheme  of  line  or  colour.
At  the  most,  the  scraps  of  reflection  in  the  crystal  could  only  start  such  a
series  of  pictures  as  this.  And  the  start,  the  initiation  of  one  of  these
series,  is  often  accompanied  by  an  odd  phenomenon  mentioned  above  —  a
milky  clouding  of  the  crystal,  which  obscures  any  fragments  of  reflected
images,  and  from  out  of  which  the  images  of  the  vision  gradually  grow
clear.  I  cannot  explain  this  clouding.  It  occurs  too  often  and  too
independently  to  be  a  mere  effect  of  suggestion.  It  does  not  seem  to
depend  on  any  optical  condition  —  to  be,  for  instance,  a  result  of  change  of
focus  of  the  eye,  or  of  prolonged  gazing.  It  is  a  picture  like  other
pictures  ;  it  may  come  when  the  eyes  are  quite  fresh  (nor  ought  they  ever
to  be  strained)  ;  and  it  may  persist  for  some  time,  so  that  the  scryer
looks  away  and  back  again,  and  sees  it  still.  It  comes  at  the  beginning  of
a  first  series  of  pictures,  or  as  a  kind  of  drop-scene  between  one  series  of
pictures  and  another.  Its  closest  parallel,  perhaps,  is  the  mist  or  cloud  out
of  which  phantasmal  figures,  "  out  in  the  room,"  sometimes  seem  to  form
themselves.

Moreover,  the  connection,  if  one  can  so  call  it,  between  the  crystal
and  the  vision  is  a  very  variable  one.  Sometimes  the  figures  seem  clearly
defined  within  the  crystal  and  limited  thereby  :  sometimes  all  perception
of  the  crystal  or  other  speculum  disappears,  and  the  scryer  seems  clair-
voyantly  introduced  into  some  group  of  life-sized  figures.  Nay,  further,
when  the  habit  of  gazing  is  fully  acquired,  some  scryers  can  dispense
with  any  speculum  whatever,  and  can  see  pictures  in  mere  blackness;
thus  approximating  to  the  seers  of  "  faces  in  the  dark,"  or  of  illusions

623.     On  the  whole  it  seems  safest  to  attempt  at  present  no  further

explanation  of  crystal-gazing  than  to  say  that  it  is  an  empirical  method

of  developing  internal  vision  ;  of  externalising  pictures  which  are  associ-

ated with  changes  in   the  sensorial  tracts  of  the    brain,   due    partly   to

internal  stimuli,   and    partly   to   stimuli   which    may   come    from    minds

external  to  the  scryer's  own.     The  hallucinations  thus   induced  appear

to  be  absolutely  harmless.     I  at  least  know  of  no  kind  of  injury  resulting

them  ;  and    I    have    probably  heard  of  most   of  the   experiments

in   England,  with  any  scientific  aim  or  care,  during  the  somewhat

limited  revival  of  crystal-gazing  which  has  proceeded  for  the    last  few

We   still    want   to  know  more   on   every   point  connected   with

visions.     How  far,   for  instance,  do  they  follow  optical  laws?     Is

any  tendency  to  complementary  colouring,  so  that  a  green  picture

would  be  seen   after  a  red?     Are  they  magnified   by  the   interposition

of  a   magnifying  glass?  and,   if  so,  is  this  a  mere  result  of  suggestion,

or  of  the  presence  of  something   in   the  field  of  view  which  is  really

240  CHAPTER    VI

magnified?  Would  they  be  magnified  if  the  scryer  did  not  know  that
a  magnifier  was  interposed,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  if  he  believed  that
a  plain  glass  interposed  was  a  magnifier?  Some  interesting  experiments
on  these  and  kindred  questions  will  be  found  in  623  A.  I  can  imagine
no  fitter  problem  for  research  in  a  psychological  laboratory.

624.  A  simpler  experiment,  which  should  be   within  the  power  of
almost   any   one   who   has   a   good   hypnotic   subject,   is  the  following :
Describe  some   historic  scene  to  the  entranced  subject,  telling  him  that
he   will   see   the   scene,    as   he   conceives   it,    in   a   glass   ball  when  he
awakes.     Awaken  him,  and  make  him  look  into  the  ball.     He  is  then
confronted  with  his  own  mental  images,  as  though  in  an  external  picture,
and   he   explains   them   as   best  he  can.     If  these  externalised  pictures
show  a  tendency  to  contain  explanatory  words,  helping  him  to  grasp  their
meaning,  it  will  be  needful  to  suggest  in  the  trance  that  no  such  words
should  appear.      In  the  experiments  which  I  quote  in  624  A,  it  will  be
seen  that  the  hypnotic  stratum  sent  up  no  such   explanation  along  with
the  pictures ;  so  that  it  was  safe  to  offer  these  working  lads  large  sums
of  money  if  they  could  tell  me  the  subjects  of  pictures  which  they  were
actually  drawing  from  memories  of  their  own  not  five  minutes  old.     These
experiments,  which  I  record  at  some  length  as  eminently  suitable  for  re-
petition, were  made  with  two  excellent  hypnotic  subjects  with  whom  the
late  Edmund  Gurney  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  long  worked.

625.  These   experiments   illustrate   the   gradual   transition   between
the    common    forms    of    post-hypnotic    hallucination,    which,    however
surprising  at  first,  are    now  undisputed,  and  the  crystal-vision  which   I
am  anxious  to  present  as  no  "  occult  practice "  or  superstitious  fancy,
but  as  the  empirical  development  of  processes  more  familiar  but  quite
equally  empirical.

But,  indeed,  as  with  automatic  script,  so  here  also  we  shall  soon
find  that  hypnotic  experiments  of  this  kind  are  not  necessary  in  order
to  convince  us  that  the  crystal-pictures  are,  in  their  own  sense,  a  reality.
Quite  apart  from  the  vcridicality  of  some  of  them  ; — the  intrinsic  evidence
which  they  contain  of  knowledge  outside  the  experimenter's  ordinary
knowledge ; — they  occur  to  a  greater  or  less  extent  with  so  many  persons
of  sanity  and  probity  that  we  can  no  more  doubt  their  existence  than
we  can  doubt  the  existence  of  the  allied  phenomena  of  hypnagogic
hallucinations  or  of  coloured  audition  already  discussed.  I  give  in
Appendices  an  account  of  several  important  groups  of  these  crystal-
visions.

626.  The  crystal-visions  which  the  reader  will  find  in  detail  in  those
Appendices  have  been  in  one  sense  logically  placed  at  this  point  in  my
argument.  We  are  discussing  the  control  of  inward  vision,  and  crystal-
gazing  stands  along  with  hypnotic  suggestion  as  an  empirical  method
of  establishing  that  control.

A  general  review  of  results  already  thus  obtained  was  needed  for  com-

628]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  241

parison  with  the  phenomena  of  spontaneous  inward  vision — the  veridical
hallucinations — of  which  we  shall  presently  have  to  treat.

But  from  another  point  of  view  the  crystal-visions  come  here  too  early
in  our  scheme.  For  few  of  our  phenomena  are  likely  to  strike  the  reader
as  more  fantastic  and  incredible.  The  visions  appear  lawless  ; — it  seems  to
depend  on  mere  chance  whether  one  sees  a  skeleton  or  a  scene  of  one's
childhood — a  nonsensical  string  of  letters,  or  a  picture  of  what  a  friend
is  doing  at  a  distance — a  Punch  and  Judy  show,  or  a  prophetic
vision.

In  a  sense  this  is  so ;  the  crystal  picture  is  what  we  must  call  (for
want  of  knowledge  of  determining  causes)  a  random  glimpse  into  inner
vision,  a  reflection  caught  at  some  odd  angle  from  the  universe  as  it  shines
through  the  perturbing  medium  of  that  special  soul.  Normal  and  super-
normal knowledge  and  imaginings  are  blended  in  strangely  mingled  rays.
Memory,  dream,  telepathy,  telaesthesia,  retrocognition,  precognition,  all
are  there.  Nay,  there  are  indications  of  spiritual  communications  and  of
a  kind  of  ecstasy.1

627.  We  cannot  pursue  all  these  phenomena  at  once.     In  turning,
must  now  turn,  to  the  spontaneous  cases  of  sensory  automatism — of

every  type  of  which  the  induced  visions  of  the  crystal  have  afforded  us  a
foretaste — we  must  needs  single  out  first  some  fundamental  phenomenon,
illustrating  some  principle  from  which  the  rarer  or  more  complex  pheno-
mena may  be  in  part  at  least  derived.  Nor  will  there  be  difficulty  in  such
a  choice.  Theory  and  actual  experience  point  here  in  the  same  direction.
If  this  inward  vision,  this  inward  audition,  on  whose  importance  I  have
been  insisting,  are  to  have  any  such  importance — if  they  are  to  have  any
validity  at  all — if  their  contents  are  to  represent  anything  more  than  dream
or  meditation — they  must  receive  knowledge  from  other  minds  or  from
distant  objects ; — knowledge  which  is  not  received  by  the  external  organs
of  sense.  Communication  must  exist  from  the  subliminal  to  the  subliminal
11  as  from  the  supraliminal  to  the  supraliminal  parts  of  the  being  of
different  individual  men.  Telepathy,  in  short,  must  be  the  prerequisite
of  all  these  supernormal  phenomena.

Actual  experience,  as  we  shall  presently  see,  confirms  this  view  of  the
of  telepathy.     For  when  we  pass  from  the  induced  to  the  spontaneous
phenomena  we  shall  find  that  these  illustrate  before  all  else  this  transmis-
sion of  thought  and  emotion  directly  from  mind  to  mind.

628.  Now  as  to  telepathy,  there  is  in  the  first  place  this  to  be  said,
ich  a  faculty  must  absolutely  exist  somewhere  in  the  universe,  if  the

rse  contains  any  unembodied  intelligences  at  all.  Only  if  all  the  life
of  the  cosmos  be  incarnated  in  organisms  like  our  own,  is  it  conceivable
that  all  communication  may  pass  through  sensory  channels  resembling

ight  also  to  state,  although  I  cannot  here  discuss  the  problems  involved,
that  I  believe  these  visions  to  be  sometimes  seen  by  more  than  one  person,  simultane-
ously or  successively.

VOL.   i  Q

242  CHAPTER    VI  [629

ours.  If  there  be  any  life  less  rooted  in  flesh — any  life  more  spiritual  (as
men  have  supposed  that  a  higher  life  would  be),  then  either  it  must  not  be
social  life — there  can  be  no  exchange  of  thought  in  it  at  all — or  else  there
must  exist  some  method  of  exchanging  thought  which  does  not  depend
upon  either  tongue  or  brain.

Thus  much,  one  may  say,  has  been  evident  since  man  first  speculated
on  such  subjects  at  all.  But  the  advance  of  knowledge  has  added  a  new
presumption — it  can  be  no  more  than  a  presumption — to  all  such  cosmic
speculations.  I  mean  the  presumption  of  continuity.  Learning  how  close
a  tie  in  reality  unites  man  with  inferior  lives, — once  treated  as  something
wholly  alien,  impassably  separated  from  the  human  race — we  are  led  to
conceive  that  a  close  tie  may  unite  him  also  with  superior  lives, — that  the
series  may  be  fundamentally  unbroken,  the  essential  qualities  of  life
the  same  throughout.  It  used  to  be  asked  whether  man  was  akin  to  the
ape  or  to  the  angel.  I  reply  that  the  very  fact  of  his  kinship  with  the  ape
is  proof  presumptive  of  his  kinship  with  the  angel.

It  is  natural  enough  that  man's  instinctive  feeling  should  have  antici-
pated any  argument  of  this  speculative  type.  Men  have  in  most  ages  be-
lieved, and  do  still  widely  believe,  in  the  reality  of  prayer ;  that  is,  in  the
possibility  of  telepathic  communication  between  our  human  minds  and
minds  above  our  own,  which  are  supposed  not  only  to  understand  our  wish
or  aspiration,  but  to  impress  or  influence  us  inwardly  in  return.

So  widely  spread  has  been  this  belief  in  prayer  that  it  is  somewhat
strange  that  men  should  not  have  more  commonly  made  what  seems  the
natural  deduction — namely,  that  if  our  spirits  can  communicate  with  higher
spirits  in  a  way  transcending  sense,  they  may  also  perhaps  be  able  in  like
manner  to  communicate  with  each  other.  The  idea,  indeed,  has  been
thrown  out  at  intervals  by  leading  thinkers — from  Augustine  to  Bacon,
from  Bacon  to  Goethe,  from  Goethe  to  Tennyson.

Isolated  experiments  from  time  to  time  indicated  its  practical  truth.
Yet  it  is  only  within  the  last  few  years  that  the  vague  and  floating  notion
has  been  developed  into  definite  theory  by  systematic  experiment.

629.  To  make  such  experiment  possible  has  indeed  been  no  easy
matter.  It  has  been  needful  to  elicit  and  to  isolate  from  the  complex
emotions  and  interactions  of  common  life  a  certain  psychical  element
of  whose  nature  and  working  we  have  beforehand  but  a  very  obscure
idea.

If  indeed  we  possessed  any  certain  method  of  detecting  the  action  of
telepathy, — of  distinguishing  it  from  chance-coincidence  or  from  uncon-
scious suggestion, — we  should  probably  find  that  its  action  was  widely
diffused  and  mingled  with  other  more  commonplace  causes  in  many
incidents  of  life.  We  should  find  telepathy,  perhaps,  at  the  base  of
many  sympathies  and  antipathies,  of  many  wide  communities  of  feeling ;
operating,  it  may  be,  in  cases  as  different  as  the  quasi-recognition  of  some
friend  in  a  stranger  seen  at  a  distance  just  before  the  friend  himself  unex-

630]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  243

pectedly  appears,  and  the  Phemt  or  Rumour  which  in  Hindostan  or  in
ancient  Greece  is  said  to  have  often  spread  far  an  inexplicable  knowledge
of  victory  or  disaster.

Could  the  growing  influence  of  telepathy  be  thus  traced  onwards  from
communications  where  it  merely  vivifies,  so  to  say,  an  emotion  or  a  know-
ledge mainly  due  to  common  sensory  sources — to  communications  where
no  such  ordinary  means  of  knowledge  can  have  intervened,  we  might  learn
much  of  the  interweaving  of  sensory  and  supersensory  faculty  which  we
cannot  at  present  reach.

We  cannot  do  this,  I  say,  because  we  are  obliged,  for  the  sake  of  clear-
ness of  evidence,  to  set  aside,  when  dealing  with  experimentation,  all  these
mixed  emotional  cases,  and  to  start  from  telepathic  communications  inten-
tionally planned  to  be  so  trivial,  so  devoid  of  associations  or  emotions,  that
it  shall  be  impossible  to  refer  them  to  any  common  memory  or  sympathy ;
to  anything  save  a  direct  transmission  of  idea,  or  impulse,  or  sensation,  or
image,  from  one  to  another  mind.

The  history  of  the  first  sporadic  attempts  at  this  form  of  experiment
in  the  early  days  of  mesmerism,  of  the  various  steps  by  which  recent
workers  have  developed  and  systematised  the  investigation,  and  of  the
varied,  yet  concordant,  results  already  obtained,  must,  I  think,  be  regarded
as  one  of  the  most  important  chapters  in  psychology.

630.  On  that  chapter,  then,  it  would  be  needful  for  me  now  to
embark,  but  that,  in  my  view,  it  has  been  already  written  by  a  master-
hand.  I  speak  from  too  intimate  a  connection  of  friendship  with  the  late
Edmund  Gurney  to  allow  me  to  give  full  expression  to  my  opinion  of  the
quality  of  his  work,  and  of  its  value  to  the  world.  But  at  this  special
point  the  argument  of  my  own  book  comes  into  contact  so  close  with
tasm s  of  the  Living,  that  I  am  forced  to  choose  between  two  courses.
I  must  either  myself  rewrite  his  Chapters  II.  and  III. — with  much  addi-
tional evidence,  indeed,  but  with  less  of  freshness  and  of  scientific  skill —
or  I  must  transfer  much  of  those  chapters  to  my  own  pages,  working  in
our  additional  evidence  where  I  deem  that  he  would  himself  have  inserted
;  .  I  have  chosen  the  second  alternative.  The  fate  of  Phantasms  of  the
:  has  been  in  one  way  peculiarly  unfortunate.  A  pioneer  book  on  a
and  complex  subject,  it  needed  to  create  its  own  public ;  while  at
the  same  time  it  was  not  only  the  opinion  but  the  confident  hope  of  its
author  and  his  collaborators  that  if  the  demand  for  a  second  issue  came,
the  accretion  of  evidence  and  the  progress  of  the  inquiry  would  then
necessitate  an  amount  of  change,  enlargement,  reconsideration,  such  as  is
iled  for  between  a  first  and  a  second  edition.  By  the  time  that
the  first  large  edition  was  exhausted — 1886-1889 — this  expectation  of
'.\\  our  knowledge  of  the  subject  had  been  amply  fulfilled.  But
in  the  meantime  the  author  had  from  earth.  No  one  of  the  sur-

•?  felt  competent  to  the  task  of  reproducing  the  work  in  such  form
rmy  would  now  have  wished  it  to  assume.  Reluctantly  we  gave  up

244  CHAPTER    VI  [631

the  attempt.1  However,  the  book,  of  course,  subsists ;  it  can  be  found  in
many  libraries ;  it  is  still  indispensable  for  any  one  who  desires  to  make
his  study  of  the  subject  complete.  For  those  who  cannot  consult  it,  the
numerous  extracts  in  my  Appendices  will  give  some  notion  of  its  style
and  methods.

631.  Meanwhile,  the  evidence  collected  in  the  Appendices  to  630
will   carry  us  over   certain   stepping-stones  of  great    importance  to  our
general  argument.     Setting  aside  for  the  present  the  motor  automatisms
to  be  discussed  later  (in  Chapter  VIII.),  and  confining  our  attention  to
the  sensory  alone,  we  see  that  telepathy  may  act  upon  each  definite  type
of  sensation  in  turn,  or  may  generate  vague  impressions  not  referable  to
any   special  organ  of   sense.     We  have  seen  that   the   hypnotic  trance
assists  but  is  not  essential  to  its  action.     We  see  that  there  is  a  fairly
continuous    " transition   from    experimental    to   spontaneous   telepathy"
(e.g.  in  the  case  of  Dr.  and  Mrs.  S.,  630  F)  ;  so  that  at  no  point  is  there
a   decisive   gap ;    although   it   is  of  course  impossible    to  say  that   the
agency  operative  in  close  proximity  is  absolutely  identical  with  the  agency
operative  at  indefinite  distances.     The  one  may  differ  from  the  other,  for
example,  in  some  such  way  as  cohesion  differs  from  gravitation.

The  reader,  I  trust,  will  carry  away  from  the  evidence  originally  in-
cluded in  these  chapters  of  Edmund  Gurney's,  and  from  that  which  I
quote  in  addition,  a  pretty  clear  notion  of  what  can  at  present  actually
be  done  in  the  way  of  experimental  transferences  of  small  definite  ideas  or
pictures  from  one  or  more  persons — the  "  agent "  or  "  agents  " — to  one  or
more  persons — the  "  percipient  "  or  "  percipients."  In  these  experiments
actual  contact  has  been  forbidden,  to  avoid  the  risk  of  unconscious  indica-
tions by  pressure.  In  many  cases,  however,  the  agent  and  percipient  have
been  in  the  same  room ;  and  there  has  therefore  still  been  some  possible
risk  of  unconscious  whispering — a  risk  which  has  been  fully  discussed
(see  573  A),  and,  as  I  believe,  successfully  avoided.  It  is,  however,  at
present  still  doubtful  how  far  close  proximity  really  operates  in  aid  of  tele-
pathy, or  how  far  its  advantage  is  a  mere  effect  of  self-suggestion — on  the
part  either  of  agent  or  of  percipient.  Some  few  pairs  of  experimenters —
notably  the  late  Mr.  Kirk  with  Miss  G.  (630  D)  and  Mr.  Glardon  with
Mrs.  M.  (630  E) — have  obtained  results  of  just  the  same  type  at  distances
of  half  a  mile  or  more.  Similarly,  in  the  case  of  induction  of  hypnotic
trance,  Dr.  Gibert,  as  we  have  already  seen  (568  A),  attained  at  the
distance  of  nearly  a  mile  results  which  are  usually  supposed  to  require
close  and  actual  presence.

632.  We    must    clearly   realise   that   in    telepathic    experiment   we
encounter  just  the  same  difficulty  which  makes   our  results  in  hypnotic

1  The  abridged  French  translation,  "  Les  Hallucinations  Telepathiques "  in  the
"  Bibliotheque  de  Philosophic  Contemporaine  "  (Alcan,  Paris,  1891),  is  still  procurable
in  a  second  edition.  Mr.  Podmore's  book,  "  Apparitions  and  Thought-transference,"
contains  much  of  the  same  material.

633]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  245

therapeutics  so  unpredictable  and  irregular.  We  do  not  know  how  to  get
our  suggestions  to  take  hold  of  the  subliminal  self.  They  are  liable  to  fail  for
two  main  reasons.  Either  they  somehow  never  reach  the  subliminal  centres
which  we  wish  to  affect,  or  they  find  those  centres  preoccupied  with  some
self-suggestion  hostile  to  our  behest.  This  source  of  uncertainty  can  only
be  removed  by  a  far  greater  number  of  experiments  than  have  yet  been
made — experiments  repeated  until  we  have  oftener  struck  upon  the  happy
veins  which  make  up  for  an  immense  amount  of  sterile  exploration.
Meantime  we  must  record,  but  can  hardly  interpret.  Yet  there  is  one
provisional  interpretation  of  telepathic  experiment  which  must  be  noticed
thus  early  in  our  discussion,  because,  if  true,  it  may  conceivably  connect
our  groping  work  with  more  advanced  departments  of  science,  while,  if
seen  to  be  inadequate,  it  may  bid  us  turn  our  inquiry  in  some  other  direc-
tion. I  refer  to  the  suggestion  that  telepathy  is  propagated  by  "  brain-
waves " ;  or,  as  Sir  W.  Crookes  has  more  exactly  expressed  it,  by  ether-
waves  of  even  smaller  amplitude  and  greater  frequency  than  those  which
carry  the  X  rays.  These  waves  are  conceived  as  passing  from  one  brain
to  another,  and  arousing  in  the  second  brain  an  excitation  or  image  similar
to  the  excitation  or  image  from  which  they  start  in  the  first.  The  hypo-
thesis is  an  attractive  one  ;  because  it  fits  an  agency  which  certainly  exists,
but  whose  effect  is  unknown,  to  an  effect  which  certainly  exists,  but  whose
agency  is  unknown.

633.  In  this  world  of  vibrations  it  may  seem  at  first  the  simplest
plan  to  invoke  a  vibration  the  more.  It  would  be  rash,  indeed,  to  affirm
that  any  phenomenon  perceptible  by  men  may  not  be  expressible,  in  part
at  least,  in  terms  of  ethereal  undulations.  But  in  the  case  of  telepathy  the
analogy  which  suggests  this  explanation,  the  obvious  likeness  between  the
picture  emitted  (so  to  say)  by  the  agent  and  the  picture  received  by  the
percipient — as  when  I  fix  my  mind  on  the  two  of  diamonds,  and  he  sees
a  mental  picture  of  that  card — goes  but  a  very  short  way.  One  has  very
soon  to  begin  assuming  that  the  percipient's  mind  modifies  the  picture
despatched  from  the  agent :  until  the  likeness  between  the  two  pictures
becomes  a  quite  symbolical  affair.  We  have  seen  that  there  is  a  con-
tinuous transition  from  experimental  to  spontaneous  telepathy ;  from  our
transferred  pictures  of  cards  to  monitions  of  a  friend's  death  at  a  distance.
These  monitions  may  indeed  be  pictures  of  the  dying  friend,  but  they  are
seldom  such  pictures  as  the  decedent's  brain  seems  likely  to  project  in  the
form  in  which  they  reach  the  percipient.  Mr.  L. — to  take  a  well-known
case  in  our  collection  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  210) — dies  of
disease  when  in  the  act  of  lying  down  undressed,  in  bed.  At  or
about  the  same  moment  Mr.  N.  J.  S.  sees  Mr.  L.  standing  beside  him  with
a  cheerful  air,  dressed  for  walking  and  with  a  cane  in  his  hand.  One  does
not  see  how  a  system  of  undulations  could  have  transmuted  the  physical

-till  greater  difficulty  for  the  vibration-theory  is  presented  by  collective

246  CHAPTER    VI  [634

telepathic  hallucinations.  It  is  hard  to  understand  how  A  can  emit  a
pattern  of  vibrations  which,  radiating  equally  in  all  directions,  shall  affect
not  only  his  distant  friend  B,  but  also  the  strangers  C  and  D,  who  happen
to  be  standing  near  B ; — and  affect  no  other  persons,  so  far  as  we  know,
in  the  world.

634.  The  above  points  have  been  fair  matter  of  argument  almost  since
our  research  began.  But  as  our  evidence  has  developed,  our  conception  of
telepathy  has  needed  to  be  more  and  more  generalised  in  other  and  new
directions, — still  less  compatible  with  the  vibration  theory.  Three  such
directions  may  be  briefly  specified  here — namely,  the  relation  of  telepathy
(a)  to  telsesthesia  or  clairvoyance,  (£)  to  time,  and  (c)  to  disembodied
spirits,  (a)  It  is  increasingly  hard  to  refer  all  the  scenes  of  which  per-
cipients become  aware  to  the  action  of  any  given  mind  which  is  perceiving
those  distant  scenes.  This  is  especially  noticeable  in  crystal-gazing
experiments.  (£)  And  these  crystal-visions  also  show  what,  from  the  strict
telepathic  point  of  view,  we  should  call  a  great  laxity  of  time  relations.
The  server  chooses  his  own  time  to  look  in  the  ball ; — and  though  some-
times he  sees  events  which  are  taking  place  at  the  moment,  he  may  also
see  past  events, — and  even,  as  it  seems,  future  events  (cf.  663) .  I  at  least
cannot  deny  precognition,  nor  can  I  draw  a  definite  line  amid  these  complex
visions  which  may  separate  precognition  from  telepathy,  (c)  Precognition
itself  may  be  explained,  if  you  will,  as  telepathy  from  disembodied  spirits  ;
— and  this  would  at  any  rate  bring  it  under  a  class  of  phenomena  which  I
think  all  students  of  our  subject  must  before  long  admit.  Admitting
here,  for  argument's  sake,  that  we  do  receive  communications  from  the
dead  which  we  should  term  telepathic  if  we  received  them  from  the  living,
it  is  of  course  open  to  us  to  conjecture  that  these  messages  also  are  con-
veyed on  ether-waves.  But  since  those  waves  do  not  at  any  rate  emanate
from  material  brains,  we  shall  by  this  time  have  got  so  far  from  the  original
brain-wave  hypothesis  that  few  will  care  still  to  defend  it.

I  doubt,  indeed,  whether  we  can  safely  say  of  telepathy  anything  more
definite  than  this  :  Life  has  the  power  of  manifesting  itself  to  life.  The  laws
of  life,  as  we  have  thus  far  known  them,  have  been  only  laws  of  life  when
already  associated  with  matter.  Thus  limited,  we  have  learnt  little  as  to
Life's  true  nature.  We  know  not  even  whether  Life  be  only  a  directive
Force,  or,  on  the  other  hand,  an  effective  Energy.  We  know  not  in  what
way  it  operates  on  matter.  We  can  in  no  way  define  the  connection  between
our  own  consciousness  and  our  organisms.  Just  here  it  is,  I  should  say,
that  telepathic  observations  ought  to  supply  us  with  some  hint.  From  the
mode  in  which  some  element  of  one  individual  life, — apart  from  material
impact, — gets  hold  of  another  organism,  we  may  in  time  learn  something
of  the  way  in  which  our  own  life  gets  hold  of  our  own  organism, — and
maintains,  intermits,  or  abandons  its  organic  sway.1

i  It  is  plain  that  on  this  view  there  is  no  theoretical  reason  for  limiting  telepathy  to
human  beings.  For  aught  we  can  say,  the  impulse  may  pass  between  man  and  the
lower  animals,  or  between  the  lower  animals  themselves.  See  634  A.

636]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  247

635.  The  hypothesis  which  I  suggested  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living
itself,  in  my  "  Note  on  a  possible  mode  of  psychical  interaction,"  seems  to  me
to  have  been  rendered  increasingly  plausible  by  evidence  of  many  kinds  since
received ;  evidence  of  which  the  larger  part  falls  outside  the  limits  of  this
present  work.     I  still  believe — and  more  confidently  than  in  1886 — that  a
"  psychical  invasion  "  does  take  place ;  that  a  "  phantasmogenetic  centre  "
is  actually  established  in  the  percipient's  surroundings ;  that  some  move-
ment bearing  some  relation  to  space  as  we  know  it  is  actually  accom-
plished;   and  some  presence   is  transferred,   and   may  or   may  not  be
discerned  by  the  invaded  person ;  some  perception  of  the  distant  scene  in
itself  is  acquired,  and  may  or  may  not  be  remembered  by  the  invader.

But  the  words  which  I  am  here  beginning  to  use  carry  with  them
associations  from  which  not  the  scientific  reader  alone  may  well  shrink
in  disgust.  I  am  falling  into  the  language  of  a  "palaeolithic  psycho-
logy " — into  the  habits  of  thought  of  the  savage  who  believes  that  you
can  travel  in  dreams  and  infest  your  enemy  as  a  haunting  spirit.  Fully
realising  the  offence  which  such  expressions  must  give,  —  the  apparent
levity  of  a  return  to  conceptions  so  enormously  out  of  date, — I  see  no
better  line  of  excuse  than  simply  to  retrace  to  my  reader  the  way  in
which  the  gradual  accretion  of  evidence  has  obliged  me,  for  the  mere
sake  of  covering  all  the  phenomena,  to  use  phrases  and  assumptions
which  go  far  beyond  those  which  Edmund  Gurney  and  I  employed  in
our  first  papers  on  this  inquiry  in  1883.

636.  The  facts  of  the  case,  then,  are  briefly  as  follows.     When  in  1882
our  small  group  began  the  collection  of  evidence  bearing  upon  "  veridical
hallucinations  " — or  apparitions  which  coincided  with  other  events  in  such
a  way  as  to  suggest  a  casual  connection — we  found  that  the  subject  had
hardly  as  yet  been  seriously  attacked.     Cases,  indeed,  of  various  kinds
had   been   vaguely   recorded ;    but   scarcely  any   of  these   reached   the
evidential  level  on  which  we  wished  our  narratives  to  stand.     Our  own
collection  was  miserably  scanty  as  compared  with  the  magnitude  of  the
harvest  waiting  to  be  reaped ;  but  at  the  same  time  it  was  copious  enough
to  indicate  those  types  of  coincidental  apparition  which  were  at  once

nonest  and  most  capable  of  evidential  treatment.     These  were  appari-
tions of  living  persons,  coinciding  with  some  crisis  which  those  persons
were  undergoing  at  a  distance ;  and  especially  the  apparitions  of  persons
who  might  indeed  be  regarded  as  still  living,  but  who  were  undergoing  the
of  death.     These  cases,  I  say,  were  the  first  to  attain  to  a  number
i  weight  which  carried  conviction  to  our  own  minds,  and  in  various
papers  in  the  S.P.R.  Proceedings,  and  then  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
vere  set  forth  in  evidential  form,  and  were  connected  with  experi-
mental telepathy,  being  themselves   regarded   as  spontaneous  examples,
upon  a  more  impressive  scale,  of  these  transferences  of  impression  from
one  to  another  miml.

But  at  the  same  time  there  were  scattered  among  these  cases  from  the

248  CHAPTER    VI  [637

first  certain  types  which  were  with  difficulty  reducible  under  the  concep-
tion of  telepathy  pure  and  simple — even  if  such  a  conception  could  be
distinctly  formed.  Sometimes  the  apparition  was  seen  by  more  than  one
percipient  at  once — a  result  which  we  could  hardly  have  expected  if  all
that  had  passed  were  the  transference  of  an  impression  from  the  agent's
mind  to  another  mind,  which  then  bodied  forth  that  impression  in  exter-
nalised shape  according  to  laws  of  its  own  structure.  There  were  in-
stances, too,  where  the  percipient  seemed  to  be  the  agent  also — in  so  far
that  it  was  he  who  had  an  impression  of  having  somehow  visited  and  noted
a  distant  scene,  whose  occupant  was  not  necessarily  conscious  of  any  im-
mediate relation  with  him.  Or  sometimes  this  "  telepathic  clairvoyance  "
developed  into  "  reciprocity,"  and  each  of  the  two  persons  concerned
was  conscious  of  the  other  ; — the  scene  of  their  encounter  being  the  same
in  the  vision  of  each,  or  at  least  the  experience  being  in  some  way  common
to  both.  These  and  cognate  difficulties  were  present  to  my  mind  from
the  first ;  and  in  the  above-mentioned  "  Note  on  a  suggested  mode  of
psychical  interaction,"  included  in  vol.  ii.  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  I
indicated  briefly  the  extension  of  the  telepathic  theory  to  which  they
seemed  to  me  to  point.

637.  Meantime  cases  of  certain  other  definite  types  continued  to  come
steadily  to  hand,  although  in  lesser  numbers  than  the  cases  of  apparition
at  death.  To  mention  two  important  types  only — there  were  apparitions
of  the  so-called  dead  and  there  were  cases  of  precognition.  With  regard
to  each  of  these  classes,  it  seemed  reasonable  to  defer  belief  until  time
snould  have  shown  whether  the  influx  of  first-hand  cases  was  likely  to  be
permanent ;  whether  independent  witnesses  continued  to  testify  to  inci-
dents which  could  be  better  explained  on  these  hypotheses  than  on  any
other.  Before  Edmund  Gurney's  death  in  1888  our  cases  of  apparitions
and  other  manifestations  of  the  dead  had  reached  a  degree  of  weight  and
consistency  which,  as  his  last  paper  showed,  was  beginning  to  convince
him  of  their  veridical  character;  and  since  that  date  these  have  been
much  further  increased;  and  especially  have  drawn  from  Mrs.  Piper's
and  other  trance-phenomena  an  unexpected  enlargement  and  corro-
boration.  The  evidence  for  communication  from  the  departed  is  now  in
my  personal  estimate  quite  as  strong  as  that  for  telepathic  communication
between  the  living ;  and  it  is  moreover  evidence  which  inevitably  alters
and  widens  our  conception  of  telepathy  between  living  men.

The  evidence  for  precognition,  again,  was  from  the  first  scantier,  and
has  advanced  at  a  slower  rate.  It  has  increased  steadily  enough  to  lead
me  to  feel  confident  that  it  will  have  to  be  seriously  reckoned  with ;  but  I
cannot  yet  say — as  I  do  say  with  reference  to  the  evidence  for  messages
from  the  departed — that  almost  every  one  who  accepts  our  evidence  for
telepathy  at  all,  must  ultimately  accept  this  evidence  also.  It  must  run
on  at  any  rate  for  some  years  longer  before  it  shall  have  accreted  a  con-
vincing weight.

638]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  249

But  at  whatever  point  one  or  another  inquirer  may  happen  at  present
to  stand,  I  urge  that  this  is  the  reasonable  course  for  conviction  to  follow.
First  analyse  the  miscellaneous  stream  of  evidence  into  definite  types;
then  observe  the  frequency  with  which  these  types  recur,  and  let  your
sense  of  their  importance  gradually  grow,  if  the  evidence  grows  also.

Now  this  mode  of  procedure  evidently  excludes  all  definite  a  priori
views,  and  compels  one's  conceptions  to  be  little  more  than  the  mere
grouping  to  which  the  facts  thus  far  known  have  to  be  subjected  in  order
that  they  may  be  realised  in  their  ensemble.

No  more  ambitious  than  this  is  my  "  palaeolithic  psychology."  I
merely  endeavour,  like  my  cannibal  precursors,  to  find  a  formula  which
will  somehow  cover  the  observed  facts — though  with  this  difference,  that
where  they  find  their  formula  easily  credible,  and  do  not  care  what  white
men  say,  I  find  my  formula  credible  with  difficulty — credible  mainly  just
because  I  have  heard  what  white  men  say,  and  because  I  cannot  think  that
they  have  "  saved  the  phenomena  " — or  have  even  shown  much  more  grasp
than  the  Stone  Age  possessed  of  the  limit  of  cosmic  possibilities.

"What  definite  reason  do  I  know  why  this  should  not  be  true?" —
this  is  the  question  which  needs  to  be  pushed  home  again  and  again  if
one  is  to  realise — and  not  in  the  ordinary  paths  of  scientific  speculation
alone — how  profound  our  ignorance  of  the  Universe  really  is.

My  own  ignorance,  at  any  rate,  I  recognise  to  be  such  that  my  notions
of  the  probable  or  improbable  in  the  Universe  are  not  of  weight  enough
to  lead  me  to  set  aside  any  facts  which  seem  to  me  well  attested,  and
which  are  not  shown  by  experts  actually  to  conflict  with  any  better-estab-
lished facts  or  generalisations.  Wide  though  the  range  of  established
science  may  be,  it  represents,  as  its  most  far-sighted  prophets  are  the  first
to  admit,  a  narrow  glance  only  into  the  unknown  and  infinite  realm  of

638.  The  evidence,  then,  leading  me  thus  unresisting  along,  has  led
me  to  this  main  difference  from  our  early  treatment  of  veridical  phantasms.
id  of  starting  from  a  root-conception  of  a  telepathic  impulse  merely
passing  from  mind  to  mind,  I  now  start  from  a  root-conception  of  the
dissociability  of  the  self,  of  the  possibility  that  different  fractions  of  the
personality  can  act  so  far  independently  of  each  other  that  the  one  is  not
conscious  of  the  other's  action.

Naturally  the  two  conceptions  coincide  over  much   of  the   ground.

:c  experimental  thought-transference  is  concerned — even  where  the

commoner  types  of  coincidental  phantasms  are  concerned — the  second

ila  seems  a  needless  and  unprovable  variation  on  the  first.     But  as

soon  as  we  get  among  the  difficult  types — reciprocal  cases,  clairvoyant

,  collective  cases,  above  all,  manifestations  of  the  dead — we  find  that

•  >nception  of  a  telepathic  impulse  as  a  message  despatched  and  then

lone,  as  it  were,  to  effect  its  purpose  needs  more  and  more  of  str.iin-

>f  manipulation,  to  fit  it  to  the  evidence.     On  the  other  hand,  it  is

250  CHAPTER    VI  [638

just  in  those  difficult  regions  that  the  analogies  of  other  splits  of  personality
recur,  and  that  phantasmal  or  automatic  behaviour  recalls  to  us  the  be-
haviour of  segments  of  personality  detached  from  primary  personality,  but
operating  through  the  organism  which  is  common  to  both.

The  innovation  which  we  are  here  called  upon  to  make  is  to  suppose
that  segments  of  the  personality  can  operate  in  apparent  separation  from
the  organism.  Such  a  supposition,  of  course,  could  not  have  been  started
without  proof  of  telepathy,  and  could  with  difficulty  be  sustained  without
proof  of  survival  of  death.  But,  given  telepathy,  we  have  some  psychical
agency  connected  with  man  operating  apart  from  his  organism.  Given
survival,  we  have  an  element  of  his  personality — to  say  the  least  of  it —
operating  when  his  organism  is  destroyed.  There  is  therefore  no  very
great  additional  burden  in  supposing  that  an  element  of  his  personality
may  operate  apart  from  his  organism,  while  that  organism  still
exists.

Cc  n'est  que  le  premier  pas  qui  coute*  If  we  have  once  got  a  man's
thought  operating  apart  from  his  body — if  my  fixation  of  attention  on  the
two  of  diamonds  does  somehow  so  modify  another  man's  brain  a  few  yards
off  that  he  seems  to  see  the  two  of  diamonds  floating  before  him — there
is  no  obvious  halting- place  on  his  side  till  we  come  to  "possession"  by  a
departed  spirit,  and  there  is  no  obvious  halting-place  on  my  side  till  we
come  to  "  travelling  clairvoyance,"  with  a  corresponding  visibility  of  my
own  phantasm  to  other  persons  in  the  scenes  which  I  spiritually  visit.
No  obvious  halting- place,  I  say;  for  the  point  which  at  first  seems
abruptly  transitional  has  been  already  shown  to  be  only  the  critical  point
of  a  continuous  curve.  I  mean,  of  course,  the  point  where  consciousness
is  duplicated — where  each  segment  of  the  personality  begins  to  possess  a
separate  and  definite,  but  contemporaneous  stream  of  memory  and  percep-
tion. That  these  can  exist  concurrently  in  the  same  organism  our  study
of  hypnotism  has  already  shown,  and  our  study  of  motor  automatisms  will
still  further  prove  to  us.

Here,  then,  we  see  in  operation  just  the  kind  of  split  which  would  have
seemed  most  definitely  improbable  beforehand.  "  Whatever  "  (the  objector
might  have  thought)  "  may  be  the  vagaries  of  spirit,  if  spirit  exist,  it  is  hard
to  suppose  that  a  brain,  constructed  to  give  expression  to  one  single
intelligence,  accustomed  to  co-ordinate  many  minor  impulses  under  one
central  control,  can  express  two  concurrent  streams  of  intelligence,  the
secondary  intelligence  showing  no  sign  of  disorganisation,  but  being  often
at  least  the  equal  of  the  first."  We  know,  however,  that  this  kind  of
mental  analogue  of  duplex  telegraphy  is  not  found  in  practice  a  difficulty.
Whether  the  secondary  intelligence  represent  another  phase  of  the  primary
or  be  the  manifestation  of  some  extraneous  mind,  it  seems  at  any  rate  to
have  plenty  of  room  to  work  in.  Nay,  more  than  two  streams  of  intelli-
gence have  in  this  book  already  been  seen,  and  will  be  again  seen  later
on,  to  be  able  to  operate  through  the  same  organism,  with  imperfections

641]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  251

apparently  merely  due  to   defect   of  external  muscular  modes   of   self-
expression.

639.  Such,  then,  being  the  observed  facts,  we  cannot  suppose  that
they  have  already  revealed  to  us  all  the  ways  in  which  dissociations  of
personality  may  take  place.     On  the  principle  of  continuity  we  might  even
expect  to  find  something  intermediate  between  the  dissociations  which
express  themselves  through  the  brain  and  that  great  dissociation  in  which
the  brain  is  at  last  discarded  for  good  and  all  in  what  we  know  as  Death.
Already  in  a  certain  sense  a  man  is  in  two  places  at  once  when  his  brain
is  acting  as  two  centres  for  two  different  groups  of  the  elements  of  char-
acter and  memory.     There  is  already  what  the  schoolmen  called  a  "  bilo-
cation,"  although  it  is  hidden  among  unseen  cells.     And  before  we  reach
the  supreme- dissociation  of  death,  we  shall  be  prepared  by  this  line  of
argument  for  evidence  which  shows  spiritual  activity  at  a  distance  during
the  comatose  condition  which  often  precedes  and  merges  into  death.    That
phenomenon  will  present    itself  as   a   form   of  dissociation,  with   some
analogies  to  death  on  the  one  hand,  and  some  analogies  to  the  hypnotic
trance  on  the  other.

640.  Dissociation    of  personality,    combined    with    activity    in    the
metetherial  environment;  such,  in  the  phraseology  used  in  this  book,  will
be  the  formula  which  will  most  easily  cover  those  actually  observed  facts
of  veridical  apparition  on  which  we  must  now  enter  at  considerable  length.
And  after  this  preliminary  explanation  I  shall  ask  leave  to  use  for  clear-
ness in  my  argument  such  words  as  are  simplest  and  shortest,  however
vague  or  disputable  their  connotation  may  be.     I  must  needs,  for  instance,
use  the  word  "  spirit,"  when  I  speak  of  that  unknown  fraction  of  a  man's
personality — not  the  supraliminal  fraction — which  we  discern  as  operating
before  or  after  death  in  the  metetherial  environment.     For  this  conception
I  can  find  no  other  term,  but  by  the  word  spirit  I  wish  to  imply  nothing
more  definite  than  this.     Of  the  spirit's  relation  to  space,  or  (which  is  a
part  of  the  same  problem)  to  its  own  spatial  manifestation  in  definite  form,
something  has  already  been  said,  and  there  will  be  more  to  say  hereafter.
And  similarly  those  terms,  invader  or  invaded,  from  whose  strangeness  and
barbarity  our  immediate  discussion  began,  will  depend  for  their  meaning
upon  conceptions  which  the  evidence  itself  must  gradually  supply.

641.  That  evidence,  as  it  now  lies  before  us,  is  perplexingly  various
both   in   content   and  quality.     For   some   of  the  canons  needed  in  its

have  already  referred  the  reader  to  long  extracts  from  Edmund
y's  writings.     Certain  points  must  still  be  mentioned  here  before  the
itive  begins.

It  must  be  remembered,  in  the  first  place,  that  all  these  veridical  or

coincidental  cases  stand  out  together  as  a  single  group  from  a  background

of  halluri:  inch  involve  no  coincidence,  which  have  no  claim  to

veridicality.     If  purely  subjective    hallucinations  of  the   senses  affected

e  or  disordered  brains  alone, — as  was  pretty  generally  the  assumption,

252  CHAPTER    VI  [642

even  in  scientific  circles,  when  our  inquiry  began, — our  task  would  have
been  much  easier  than  it  is.  There  can  be  no  question  as  to  the  sound
and  healthy  condition  of  many  of  our  informants,  and  it  would  much
simplify  matters  if  we  were  entitled  to  argue — say,  in  one  of  our  cases  where
a  schoolboy  sees  his  brother's  phantom  while  he  is  playing  in  a  cricket
match, — "  This  schoolboy  was  in  perfect  health ;  this  apparition  was  the
only  one  which  he  ever  saw,  therefore  it  necessarily  had  some  cause  out-
side himself."

Most  people,  in  point  of  fact,  do  thus  argue,  when  an  apparition,
unique  in  their  lives,  presents  itself  to  them  while  they  are  feeling
thoroughly  well  and  at  ease  in  mind.  It  so  happens  that  it  was  left  for
Edmund  Gurney  to  show  unexpected  difficulties  in  this  presumption.  His
census  of  hallucinations  (1884)  showed  a  frequency,  previously  unsus-
pected, of  scattered  hallucinations  among  sane  and  healthy  persons,  the
experience  being  often  unique  in  a  lifetime,  and  in  no  apparent  connection
with  any  other  circumstance  whatever  (see  612).

Since  casual  hallucinations  of  the  sane,  I  say,  are  ihusfregztent,we  can
hardly  venture  to  assume  that  they  are  all  veridical.  And  the  existence  of
all  these  perhaps  merely  subjective  hallucinations  greatly  complicates  our
investigation  of  veridical  hallucinations.  It  prevents  the  mere  existence
of  the  hallucinations,  however  strangely  interposed  in  ordinary  life,  from
having  any  evidential  value,  and  throws  us  upon  external  forms  of
evidence ; — coincidences,  especially,  between  the  hallucinations  and  some
event  taking  place  at  a  distance.  For  we  have  as  yet  no  clear  criterion  in
the  percipient's  feelings  which  can  show  us  which  hallucination  is  or  is
not  caused  by  something  otherwise  unknown  which  is  occurring  outside
him.  Hypnotic  hallucinations,  for  instance,  which  correspond  to  no
external  fact  beyond  the  hypnotiser's  suggestive  utterance  heard  in  the
usual  way,  form  perhaps  the  most  distinct  and  persistent  group  of  all
hallucinations  of  the  sane.  We  have  then,  I  repeat,  at  present  no  general
subjective  test  which  can  discriminate  falsidical  from  veridical  hallucina-
tions. It  does  not  indeed  follow  that  we  need  despair  of  finding  such  a
test.  Some  individual  sensitives,  liable  to  both  kinds  of  hallucinations,
believe  that  they  have  actually  learnt  to  distinguish  for  themselves  between
the  two  classes,  or  even  to  distinguish  in  the  veridical  class  between
apparitions  due  to  the  agency  of  incarnate  or  of  discarnate  spirits ;  and  it
is  of  course  to  be  hoped  that  as  such  sensitivity  comes  to  be  more
often  recognised,  and  more  seriously  valued,  the  sensitive's  own  discri-
minative power  may  become  an  increasingly  important  factor  of
evidence.

642.  Meantime  we  have  to  rely  on  the  evidence  afforded  by  ex-
ternal coincidence ; — on  the  mere  fact,  to  put  such  a  coincidence  in  its
simplest  form,  that  I  see  a  phantom  of  my  friend  Smith  at  the  moment
when  Smith  is  unexpectedly  dying  at  a  distance.  A  coincidence  of  this
general  type,  if  it  occurs,  need  not  be  difficult  to  substantiate,  and  we  have

643]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  253

in  fact  substantiated  it  with  more  or  less  completeness  in  several  hundred
cases.

The  primd  facie  conclusion  will  obviously  be  that  there  is  a  causal
connection  between  the  death  and  the  apparition.  To  overcome  this  pre-
sumption it  would  be  necessary  either  to  impugn  the  accuracy  of  the
informant's  testimony,  or  to  show  that  chance  alone  might  have  brought
about  the  observed  coincidences.

On  both  of  these  questions  there  have  been  full  and  repeated  discus-
sions elsewhere.  I  need  not  re-argue  them  at  length  here,  but  will  give
in  the  Appendices  to  this  section  some  of  the  more  important  points.
Thus  the  general  canons  of  evidence  for  coincidental  hallucinations  were
given  by  Edmund  Gurney  at  the  outset  of  this  inquiry  so  clearly  that  no
restatement  is  needed.  It  then  became  manifest  that  our  evidence  was
weak  in  one  particular  where  our  canons  dwelt  on  the  importance  of
strength.  Only  a  small  proportion  of  the  coincidental  phantasms  were
recorded  in  writing  before  the  coincidental  event  was  known.  Some  dis-
cussion of  this  point  is  given  in  642  B ;  to  which  I  have  added  a  list  of
cases — much  more  numerous  now  than  when  the  question  was  first  raised
— where  some  contemporary  record  has  actually  been  preserved.  The
next  Appendix  deals  with  a  cognate  point — the  danger  of  illusions  of
memory,  creating  or  magnifying  the  interesting  coincidences.  But  on
these  and  other  points  the  reader  should  also  consult  the  "  Report  on
the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  (already
analysed  in  612  A),  where  every  source  of  error  as  yet  discovered  has
been  pretty  fully  considered.

To  that  volume  also  I  must  refer  him  for  a  thorough  discussion  of  the
arguments  for  and  against  chance-coincidence  (summarised  in  612  A).
The  conclusion  to  which  the  Committee  unanimously  came  is  expressed
in  the  closing  words :  "  Between  deaths  and  apparitions  of  the  dying
person  a  connection  exists  which  is  not  due  to  chance  alone."

We  have  a  right,  I  think,  to  say  that  only  by  another  census  of  hallu-
cinations, equally  careful,  more  extensive,  and  yielding  absolutely  different
results,  could  this  conclusion  be  overthrown.

643.     In  forming  this  conclusion,  apparitions  at  death  are  of  course

selected,  because,  death  being  an  unique  event  in  man's  earthly  existence,

the  coincidences  between  death  and  apparitions  afford  a  favourable  case

Mtistical  treatment.      But  the  coincidences  between  apparitions  and

other  than  death,  although  not  susceptible  of  the  same  arithmetical

precision  of  estimate,  are,  as  will  be  seen,  quite  equally  convincing.     To

this  great  mass  of  spontaneous  cases  we  must  now  turn.

The  arrangement  of  these  cases  is  not  easy ;  nor  are  they  capable  of
being  presented  in  one  logically  consequent  series.  Each  narrative  may
be  regarded  from  many  points  of  view.  There  is  first  of  all  the  nature
of  the  external  event,  as  death  or  crisis,  to  which  they  correspond ;  there
is  the  mode  of  their  appearance — in  dreams,  semi-somnolence,  or  vigi-

254  CHAPTER    VI  [644

lance ;  there  is  the  special  sense  (or  senses)  which  they  affect — as  sight  or
hearing ;  and,  lastly,  there  is  the  effect  produced  on  possible  percipients —
as  their  collective  perception,  by  several  persons  together,  or  their  elective
perception  by  one  person  only  out  of  several,  &c.  One  of  these  divisions
— the  distinction  of  visual  and  auditory  cases — which  was  fittingly  enough
employed  in  arranging  the  first  collection  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living —
may  here  fall  into  the  background.1  The  statistical  proportions  of  visual,
auditory,  bisensory,  and  trisensory  hallucinations  have  now  been  worked
out,  so  far  as  our  materials  carry  us ;  and,  since  we  do  not  suppose  that
we  are  concerned  with  ocular  sight  or  with  aural  audition,  it  becomes  a
minor  question  which  inner  sense  in  each  special  percipient  is  most  easily
stimulated ;  or,  I  ought  to  add,  which  inner  sense  each  special  agent  can
most  easily  stimulate.  This  distinction,  at  least,  with  many  others,  can
conveniently  be  discussed  a  propos  of  individual  cases ;  while  the  basis  of
our  general  arrangement  should  be  found  in  some  more  fundamental
character.

Now  one  advantage  of  the  conception  of  psychical  invasion  or  excursion
on  which  I  have  already  dwelt  is  that  it  is  at  any  rate  sufficiently  funda-
mental to  allow  of  our  arrangement  of  all  our  recorded  cases — perhaps  of
all  possible  cases  of  apparition — in  accordance  with  its  own  lines.  And
even  though  there  be  many  cases  for  which  the  metaphor  of  invasion  seems
needlessly  strong,  and  the  older  metaphor  of  "  telepathic  impact  "  quite
sufficient,  yet  these  cases  also,  although  in  some  sense  less  complete,  will
arrange  themselves  naturally  in  the  same  divisions.

Let  us  take  A  for  the  "agent,"  or  the  spirit  supposed  in  each  case  to
be  invasive  or  excursive  :  P  for  the  "  percipient,"  the  spirit  which  plays
the  more  passive  role,  receiving  and  sometimes  observing  the  visit  of  A.
Naturally  the  agent  is  often — perhaps  in  reality  always — a  percipient  also.
He  goes  forth  to  acquire  information  as  well  as  to  give  it ;  but  his  sub-
liminal self,  which  makes  this  excursion,  cannot  always  report  the  results
to  his  supraliminal  self — from  whom  we  outsiders  are  forced  to  make  our
inquiry.  His  power  of  giving  us  information,  indeed,  is,  as  we  shall  see,
particularly  liable  to  be  cut  short  by  his  death.

We  want,  then,  a  scheme  which  is  to  include,  on  the  lines  of  this  con-
ception of  invasion  or  excursion,  all  observable  telepathic  action,  from  the
faint  currents  which  we  may  imagine  to  be  continually  passing  'between
man  and  man,  up  to  the  point — reserved  for  the  following  chapter — where
one  of  the  parties  to  the  telepathic  intercourse  has  definitely  quitted  the
flesh.  The  first  term  in  our  series  must  be  conveniently  vague ;  the  last
must  lead  us  to  the  threshold  of  the  spiritual  world.

644.  I  must  begin  with  cases  where  the  action  of  the  excursive
fragment  of  the  personality  is  of  the  weakest  kind — the  least  capable  of

1  Visual  cases,  when  occurring  indoors  at  any  rate,  are  generally  stronger  evi-
dentially than  auditory  cases,  because  less  likely  to  be  originated  by  mere  mistake  or
illusion.

644]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  255

affecting  other  observers,  or  of  being  recalled  into  the  agent's  own  waking
memory.

Such  cases,  naturally  enough,  will  be  hard  to  bring  up  to  evidential
level.  It  must  depend  on  mere  chance  whether  these  weak  and  aimless
psychical  excursions  are  observed  at  all ;  or  are  observed  in  such  a  way  as
to  lead  us  to  attribute  them  to  anything  more  than  the  subjective  fancy  of
the  observers.

How  can  a  casual  vision — say,  of  a  lady  sitting  in  her  drawing-room, — of
a  man  returning  home  at  six  o'clock — be  distinguished  from  memory-images
on  the  one  hand  and  from  what  I  may  term  "  expectation-images  "  on  the
other?  The  picture  of  the  lady  may  be  a  slightly  modified  and  exter-
nalised reminiscence  ;  the  picture  of  the  man  walking  up  to  the  door  may
be  a  mere  projection  of  what  the  observer  was  hoping  to  see.

I  have  assumed  that  these  phantoms  coincided  with  no  marked  event.
The  lady  may  have  been  thinking  of  going  to  her  drawing-room  ;  the  man
may  have  been  in  the  act  of  walking  home ; — but  these  are  trivial  circum-
stances which  might  be  repeated  any  day.

Yet,  however  trivial,  almost  any  set  of  human  circumstances  are  suffi-
ciently complex  to  leave  room  for  coincidence.  If  the  sitter  in  the
drawing-room  is  wearing  a  distinctive  article  of  dress,  never  seen  by  the
percipient  until  it  is  seen  in  the  hallucination ; — if  the  phantasmal  home-
traveller  is  carrying  a  parcel  of  unusual  shape,  which  the  real  man
does  afterwards  unexpectedly  bring  home  with  him  ; — there  may  be  reason
to  think  that  there  is  a  causal  connection  between  the  apparent  agent's
condition  at  the  moment,  and  the  apparition.

I  will  quote  one  of  these  "  arrival-cases,"  so  to  term  them,  where  the
peculiarity  of  dress  was  such  as  to  make  the  coincidence  between  vision
and  reality  well  worth  attention.  The  case  is  interesting  also  as  one  of
our  earliest  examples  of  a  psychical  incident  carefully  recorded  at  the
time  ;  so  that  after  the  lapse  of  nearly  forty  years  it  was  possible  to  cor-
rect the  percipient's  surviving  recollection  by  his  contemporary  written
statement.

It  is  taken  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  94,  having  been
contributed  by  Colonel  Bigge,  of  2  Morpeth  Terrace,  S.W.,  who  took  the
account  out  of  a  sealed  envelope,  in  Gurney's  presence,  for  the  first  time
it  was  written  on  the  day  of  the  occurrence.

An  account  of  a  circumstance  which  occurred  to  me  when  quartered  at
Tcmplemore,  Co.  Tipperary,  on  2Oth  February  1847.

This  .  ftcrnoon,  about  3  o'clock   P.M.,    I  was  walking  from  my  quarters
towards  the  mess-room  to  put  some  letters  into  the  letter-box,  When  I  distinctly
cut. -Colonel  Reed,  yoth  Regiment,  walking  from  the  corner  of  tin  :

s  occupied  by  the  officers  towards  the  mess-room  door;  and  I  saw

>  the  passage.    He  was  dressed  in  a  brown  shooting-jacket,  with  grey

sumnur  r. Dilation  tweed  trousers,  and  had  a  fishing-rod  and  a  landing-net  in

n<  1      Although  at  the  time  I  saw  him  he  was  about  15  or  20  yards  from

256  CHAPTER    VI  [644

me,  and  although  anxious  to  speak  to  him  at  the  moment,  I  did  not  do  so,  but
followed  him  into  the  passage  and  turned  into  the  ante-room  on  the  left-hand
side,  where  I  expected  to  find  him.  On  opening  the  door,  to  my  great  surprise,
he  was  not  there  ;  the  only  person  in  the  room  was  Quartermaster  Nolan,
7oth  Regiment,  and  I  immediately  asked  him  if  he  had  seen  the  colonel,
and  he  replied  he  had  not  ;  upon  which  I  said,  "  I  suppose  he  has  gone
upstairs,"  and  I  immediately  left  the  room.  Thinking  he  might  have  gone
upstairs  to  one  of  the  officers'  rooms,  I  listened  at  the  bottom  of  the  stairs  and
then  went  up  to  the  first  landing-place  ;  but  not  hearing  anything  I  went  down-
stairs again  and  tried  to  open  the  bedroom  door,  which  is  opposite  to  the  ante-
room, thinking  he  might  have  gone  there  ;  but  I  found  the  door  locked,  as  it
usually  is  in  the  middle  of  the  day.  I  was  very  much  surprised  at  not  finding
the  colonel,  and  I  walked  into  the  barrack-yard  and  joined  Lieutenant  Caulfield,
66th  Regiment,  who  was  walking  there  ;  and  I  told  the  story  to  him,  and  par-
ticularly described  the  dress  in  which  I  had  seen  the  colonel.  We  walked  up
and  down  the  barrack-yard  talking  about  it  for  about  ten  minutes,  when,  to  my
great  surprise,  never  having  kept  my  eye  from  the  door  leading  to  the  mess-room
(there  is  only  one  outlet  from  it),  I  saw  the  colonel  walk  into  the  barracks  through
the  gate — which  is  in  the  opposite  direction — accompanied  by  Ensign  Willing-
ton,  yoth  Regiment,  in  precisely  the  same  dress  in  which  I  had  seen  him,  and
with  a  fishing-rod  and  a  landing-net  in  his  hand.  Lieutenant  Caulfield  and  I
immediately  walked  to  them,  and  we  were  joined  by  Lieut-Colonel  Goldie,  66th
Regiment,  and  Captain  Hartford,  and  I  asked  Colonel  Reed  if  he  had  not  gone
into  the  mess-room  about  ten  minutes  before.  He  replied  that  he  certainly  had
not,  for  that  he  had  been  out  fishing  for  more  than  two  hours  at  some  ponds
about  a  mile  from  the  barracks,  and  that  he  had  not  been  near  the  mess-room
at  all  since  the  morning.

At  the  time  I  saw  Colonel  Reed  going  into  the  mess-room,  I  was  not  aware
that  he  had  gone  out  fishing — a  very  unusual  thing  to  do  at  this  time  of  the
year;  neither  had  I  seen  him  before  in  the  dress  I  have  described  during  that
day.  I  had  seen  him  in  uniform  in  the  morning  at  parade,  but  not  afterwards
at  all  until  3  o'clock — having  been  engaged  in  my  room  writing  letters,  and
upon  other  business.  My  eyesight  being  very  good,  and  the  colonel's  figure
and  general  appearance  somewhat  remarkable,  it  is  morally  impossible  that  I
could  have  mistaken  any  other  person  in  the  world  for  him.  That  I  did  see
him  I  shall  continue  to  believe  until  the  last  day  of  my  existence.

WILLIAM  MATTHEW  BIGGE,

Major,  yoth  Regiment.

[On  July  I7th,  1885,  after  Colonel  Bigge  had  described  the  occurrence,  but
before  the  account  was  taken  from  the  envelope  and  read,  he  dictated  the
following  remarks  to  Gurney]  :  —

When  Colonel  R.  got  off  the  car  about  a  couple  of  hours  afterwards,  Colonel
Goldie  and  other  officers  said  to  me,  "  Why,  that's  the  very  dress  you  described."
They  had  not  known  where  he  was  or  how  he  was  engaged.  The  month,
February,  was  a  most  unlikely  one  to  be  fishing  in.  Colonel  Reed  was  much
alarmed  when  told  what  I  had  seen.

The  quartermaster,  sitting  at  the  window,  would  have  been  bound  to  see  a
real  figure  ;  he  denied  having  seen  anything.

I  have  never  had  the  slightest  hallucination  of  the  senses  on  any  other
occasion.

645]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  257

[It  will  be  seen  that  these  recent  remarks  exhibit  two  slips  of  memory.  It
is  quite  unimportant  whether  Colonel  Reed  was  seen  walking  in  at  the  gate  or
getting  off  a  car.  But  in  making  the  interval  between  the  vision  and  the
return  two  hours  instead  of  ten  minutes,  the  later  account  unduly  diminishes
the  force  of  the  case.  If  there  is  any  justification  at  all  for  the  provisional
hypothesis  that  the  sense  of  impending  arrival  is  a  condition  favourable  for  the
emission  of  a  telepathic  influence,  it  is  of  importance  that,  at  the  time  when
the  phantasmal  form  was  seen,  Colonel  Reed  was  not  busy  with  his  fishing,  but
was  rapidly  approaching  his  destination  ;  for  thus  the  incident,  at  any  rate,  gets
the  benefit  of  analogy  with  other  cases.]

In  these  arrival  cases,  there  is,  I  say,  a  certain  likelihood  that  the
man's  mind  may  be  fixed  on  his  return  home,  so  that  his  phantasm  is  seen
in  what  might  seem  both  to  himself  and  to  others  the  most  probable
place.

645.  But  there  are  other  cases  where  a  man's  phantasm  is  seen  in
a  place  where  there  is  no  special  reason  for  his  appearing,  although  these
places  seem  always  to  lie  within  the  beat  and  circuit  of  his  habitual
thought.

In  such  cases  there  are  still  possible  circumstances  which  may  give
reason  to  think  that  the  apparition  is  causally  connected  with  the  apparent
agent.  The  phantasm  of  a  given  person  may  be  seen  repeatedly  by
different  percipients,  or  it  may  be  seen  collectively  by  several  persons  at  a
time  ;  or  it  may  combine  both  these  evidential  characteristics,  and  may  be
seen  several  times  and  by  several  persons  together.

Now  considering  the  rarity  of  phantasmal  appearances,  considering
that  not  one  person  in  (say)  five  thousand  is  ever  phantasmally  seen  at  all ;
the  mere  fact  that  a  given  person's  phantasm  is  seen  even  twice,  by  dif-
ferent percipients  (for  we  cannot  count  a  second  appearance  to  the  same
percipient  as  of  equal  value),  is  in  itself  a  remarkable  fact;  while  if  this
happens  three  or  four  times  we  can  hardly  ascribe  such  a  sequence  of
rare  occurrences  to  chance  alone.  I  cite  almost  in  full  the  case  of
;  lawkins  (ne'e  Eden,  daughter  of  the  late  Primus  of  Scotland),  from

ntasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  78.

Mrs.  Hawkins  writes  from  Beyton  Rectory,  Bury  St.  Edmunds,  as
follows :  —

>ch  2$/A,  1885.
I  send  you  my  cousins'  accounts  of  my  apparition.

ive  also  sent  you  the  account  of  my  next  appearance,  which  unfortunately
cannot  now  be  related  by  the  eye-witness.1

Again,  a  third  time  one  of  my  little  sisters  reported  that  she  had  seen  me  on
-.  rs,  when  I  was  seven  miles  off;  but  she  might  so  easily  have  been  mis-
taken that  I  have  never  put  any  faith  in  that  appearance.     Then  I  was  about

iccount— omitted  here— is  related  by  Mrs.  Hawkins  herself  and  refers  to  her
aving  been  seen  in  her  own  home  in  1847  by  the  nursery-maid,  now  dead.
.    1.  R

258  CHAPTER    VI  [645

For  many  years  after  that  these  appearances  seem  to  have  entirely  ceased,
but  in  the  autumn  of  1877  I  was  seen  in  this  house  by  my  eldest  son,  then
aged  twenty-seven,  who  may,  I  hope,  give  you  his  own  account  of  it.

LUCY  HAWKINS.

Mrs.  Hawkins  prefaces  her  cousins'  accounts  thus :  -

The  event  described  in  the  enclosed  accounts  took  place  at  Cherington,
near  Shipston-on-Stour,  in  Warwickshire,  the  residence  of  my  uncle,  Mr.
William  Dickins,  who  was  for  many  years  chairman  of  Quarter  Sessions  in
the  county.  The  ladies  who  saw  the  appearance  are  two  of  his  daughters,  one
of  them  a  little  older  than  myself,  the  other  three  or  four  years  younger.  I  was
then  just  seventeen.

The  only  mistake  that  I  can  discover  in  either  of  the  accounts  is  that  Mrs.
Malcolm  says  I  had  been  hiding  with  her  "  brother,"  whereas  I  had  really  been
all  the  time  with  her  sister,  Miss  Lucy  Dickins — a  fact  of  no  importance,  except
that  she  (Miss  D.)  might  (if  necessary)  bear  witness  that  I  had  really  been  with
her  all  the  time  in  the  washhouse,  and  so  could  not  have  been  near  where  I  was
seen.

I  remember  we  were  all  somewhat  awed  by  what  had  happened,  and  that  it
broke  up  our  game.  I  myself  quite  thought  it  was  a  warning  of  speedy  death  ;
but  as  I  was  not  a  nervous  or  excitable  girl,  it  did  not  make  me  anxious  or
unhappy,  and  in  course  of  time  the  impression  passed  off.

Writing  to  Mrs.  Hawkins  in  September  1884,  Miss  Dickins  said  :  —

Georgie  [Mrs.  Malcolm]  is  coming  here  on  Friday,  and  I  propose  then  to
show  her  your  letters,  and  Mr.  Gurney's,  and  that  we  should  each  write  our
impressions  of  what  we  saw  independently,  and  see  how  far  they  agree,  and
we  will  send  the  result  to  you.  It  is  all  very  fresh  in  my  memory,  and  I  can  at
this  moment  conjure  you  up  in  my  mind's  eye,  as  you  appeared  under  that  tree
and  disappeared  in  the  yard.  I  even  recollect  distinctly  the  dress  you  wore,  a
sort  of  brown  and  white,  rather  large  check,  such  as  was  in  fashion  then,  and  is
now,  but  was  in  abeyance  in  the  intermediate  years.

Shortly  afterwards  Miss  Dickins  wrote  : —

CHERINGTON,  SHIPSTON-ON-STOUR.
September  zqth,  1884.

I  send  the  two  accounts  which  Georgie  and  I  wrote  about  your  apparition.
We  wrote  them  independently,  and  so  I  think  they  are  wonderfully  good  evi-
dence, as  they  tally  to  almost  every  particular,  except  the  little  fact  that  I
thought  she  joined  me  in  searching  the  yard  for  you,  and  she  thinks  not — but
that  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  main  fact  of  the  story,  our  entire  belief  that  we
saw  you  in  the  body.

In  the  autumn  of  1845,  we  were  a  large  party  of  young  ones  staying  in  the
house,  and  on  one  occasion  were  playing  at  a  species  of  hide-and-seek,  in  which
we  were  allowed  to  move  from  one  hiding-place  to  another,  until  caught  by  the
opposite  side.  At  the  back  of  the  house  there  was  a  small  fold-yard  opening
on  one  side  into  the  orchard,  on  the  other  into  the  stableyard,  and  there  were
other  buildings  to  the  left.  I  came  round  the  corner  of  these  buildings,  and
saw  my  cousin  standing  under  some  trees  about  twenty  yards  from  me,  and  I

645]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  259

distinctly  saw  her  face;  my  sister,  who  at  the  moment  appeared  on  the  other
side,  also  saw  her  and  shouted  to  me  to  give  chase.  My  cousin  ran  between
us  in  the  direction  of  the  fold-yard,  and  when  she  reached  the  door  we  were  both
close  behind  her  and  followed  instantly,  but  she  had  entirely  disappeared,
though  scarcely  a  second  had  elapsed.  We  looked  at  one  another  in  amaze-
ment, and  searched  every  corner  of  the  yard  in  vain;  and  when  found  some
little  time  afterwards,  she  assured  us  that  she  had  never  been  on  that  side  of
the  house  at  all,  or  anywhere  near,  the  spot,  but  had  remained  hidden  in  the
same  place  until  discovered  by  one  of  the  enemy.  S.  F.  D.

I  well  remember  the  incident  of  your  "  fetch  "  appearing  to  us.  I  believe  I
wrote  down  the  details  at  the  time,"  but  do  not  know  what  has  become  of  that
record,  so  must  trust  to  my  memory  to  recall  the  circumstances,  and  do  not  fear
its  [not]  being  faithful  though  nearly  forty  years  have  passed.

\Ve  were  playing  our  favourite  game  of  Golowain,  which  consisted  in  divid-
ing into  sides  at  hide-and-seek,  the  party  hiding  having  the  privilege  of  moving
on  from  place  to  place  until  they  reached  the  "  Home,"  unless  meanwhile  caught
by  the  pursuing  party.

As  I  stood  towards  the  end  of  the  game,  as  a  seeker,  in  the  orchard,  I  saw
you,  who  belonged  to  the  opposite  party,  stealing  toward  me.  As  your  dress
was  the  same  as  your  sister's  and  there  was  the  possibility  of  my  mistaking  you
for  her,  who  was  on  my  side,  I  shouted  her  name,  and  she  answered  me  from
the  opposite  side  of  the  wood.  I  then  gave  chase,  and  you  turned,  and  looked
at  me  laughing,  and  I  saw  your  face  distinctly.  But  at  the  same  instant,  Nina,
also  my  friend,  but  your  enemy,  appeared  round  some  corner,  and  being  still
nearer  to  you  than  I  was,  I  left  the  glory  of  your  capture  to  her.  She  was  close
upon  you  as  you  fled  into  a  cow-yard.  I  was  so  sure  your  fate  was  sealed  that
I  followed  more  slowly,  and  hearing  the  bell  ring,  that,  according  to  the  rules
of  our  game,  recalled  us  to  the  "  Home,"  I  went  on  there,  to  find  Nina  upbraid-
ing you  for  having  so  mysteriously  escaped  her  in  this  cow-yard.

In  astonishment  you  said  you  never  had  been  near  the  place.  Of  course  I
supported  my  little  sister  in  her  assertion;  whilst  our  brother  supported  you,
5  he  had  been  hiding  with  you,  and  that,  being  tired,  you  ha'd  both  re-
mained hidden  in  one  place  until  the  bell  warned  you  that  the  game  was  over —
that  place  being  a  washhouse  in  a  distinct  part  of  the  premises  from  the  cow  or
fold-yard,  into  which  we  believed  we  had  chased  you.

G.  M.  (n£c  DICKINS).

In  answer  to  inquiries,  both  Miss  Dickins  and  Mrs.  Malcolm  say  that
they  have  never  had  any  other  experience  of  visual  hallucination.

The  following  account  is  from  Mrs.  Hawkins's  son  : —

June  2oM,  1885.

In  the  autumn  of  1877,  I  was  living  at  my  father's  house,  IJeyton  Rectory,
Bury  St.  Edmunds.     The   household   consisted   of  my  father,  mother,  three
.  and  three  maid-servants.     One  moonlight  night  I  was  sleeping  in  my
room,  and  had  been  asleep  some  hours,  when  I  was  awakened  by  hear
like  the  chinking  of  money.     My  waking  idea,  t
iat  a  man  was  trying  to  take  my  money  out  of  my  trousers  pocket,
which  l;iy  on  a  chair  close  to  the  head  of  my  bed.     On  opening  my  eyes,  I  was
astonished  to  see  a  woman,  and  I  well  remember  thinking  with  sorrow  that  it

26o  CHAPTER    VI  [646

must  be  one  of  our  servants  who  was  trying  to  take  my  money.  I  mention
these  two  thoughts  to  show  that  I  was  not  thinking  in  the  slightest  degree  of
my  mother.  When  my  eyes  had  become  more  accustomed  to  the  light,  I  was
more  than  ever  surprised  to  see  that  it  was  my  mother,  dressed  in  a  peculiar
silver-grey  dress,  which  she  had  originally  got  for  a  fancy  ball.  She  was  stand-
ing with  both  hands  stretched  out  in  front  of  her  as  if  feeling  her  way  ;  and  in
that  manner  moved  slowly  away  from  me,  passing  in  front  of  the  dressing-table,
which  stood  in  front  of  the  curtained  window,  through  which  the  moon  threw  a
certain  amount  of  light.  Of  course,  my  idea  all  this  time  was  that  she  was  walk-
ing in  her  sleep.  On  getting  beyond  the  table  she  was  lost  to  my  sight  in  the
darkness.  I  then  sat  up  in  bed,  listening,  but  hearing  nothing;  and,  on  peer-
ing through  the  darkness,  saw  that  the  door,  which  was  at  the  foot  of  my  bed,
and  to  get  to  which  she  would  have  had  to  pass  in  front  of  the  light,  was  still
shut.  I  then  jumped  out  of  bed,  struck  a  light,  and  instead  of  finding  my  mother
at  the  far  end  of  the  room,  as  I  expected,  found  the  room  empty.  I  then  for  the
first  time  supposed  that  it  was  an  "  appearance,"  and  greatly  dreaded  that  it
signified  her  death.

I  might  add  that  I  had,  at  that  time,  quite  forgotten  that  my  mother  had
ever  appeared  to  any  one  before,  her  last  appearance  having  been  about  the
year  1847,  three  years  before  I  was  born.

EDWARD  HAWKINS.

[In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  E.  Hawkins  says  : — ]     I  can  assure  you  that
neither  before  nor  since  that  time  have  I  ever  had  any  experience  of  the  sort.

I  quote  several  other  cases  of  repeated  apparitions  in  the  Appendices
to  this  section.  Mr.  Gorham  Blake's  case  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living
(vol.  ii.  p.  86),  should  also  be  consulted.

Impressive  as  is  the  repetition  of  the  apparition  in  these  cases,  it  is  yet
less  so  to  my  mind  than  the  collective  character  of  some  of  the  perceptions.
In  Mrs.  Hawkins's  first  case  there  were  two  simultaneous  percipients.
In  one  of  Mr.  Blake's  cases  there  were  two ;  and  in  Canon  Bourne's  first
case  (645  D)  there  were  three  percipients.

646.  And  we  now  come  to  other  cases,  where  the  percipience  has
been  collective,  although  it  has  not  been  repeated.  Here  is  a  case  where
two  persons  at  one  moment — a  moment  of  no  stress  or  excitement  what-
ever— see  the  phantasm  of  a  third ;  that  third  person  being  perhaps  occu-
pied with  some  supraliminal  or  subliminal  thought  of  the  scene  in  the
midst  of  which  she  is  phantasmally  discerned.  Both  the  percipients
supposed  at  the  moment,  naturally  enough,  that  it  was  their  actual  sister
whom  they  saw :  and  one  can  hardly  fancy  that  a  mere  act  of  tranquil
recognition  of  the  figure  by  one  percipient  would  communicate  to  the
other  percipient  a  telepathic  shock  such  as  would  make  her  see  the  same
figure  as  well.

The  account  is  taken  from  the  "  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucina-
tions "  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  306).

646]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  261

From  Miss  C.  /.  E.

March  1892.

I  was  playing  the  harmonium  in  the  church  of at  about  4  P.M.,  August

1889,  when  I  saw  my  eldest  sister  walk  up  the  church  towards  the  chancel  with
a  roll  of  papers  under  her  arm.  When  I  looked  up  again  she  had  disappeared,
and  I  thought  she  had  just  come  in  for  a  few  minutes  and  gone  out  again  ;  but
when  I  asked  her  afterwards  what  she  wanted  in  the  church,  she  was  much
surprised,  and  told  me  she  had  been  in  the  rectory  library  all  the  afternoon,
studying  genealogical  tables.  I  am  not  sure  of  the  exact  date,  but  it  was  about
the  time  I  mention.

I  was  practising  on  the  harmonium  ;  as  far  as  I  remember  I  was  quite  well
and  not  worried  about  anything.  I  was  eighteen  years  old.  A  younger  sister
was  the  only  other  person  in  the  church  with  me  at  the  time.  She  was  stand-
ing beside  me  on  an  old  stone  coffin,  and  also  noticed  my  eldest  sister  walk  up
the  church  with  papers  under  her  arm,  but  thought  it  nothing  unusual  and
looked  away,  and  when  she  looked  back  again  my  sister  had  disappeared.

My  eldest  sister  looked  just  as  usual  and  wore  her  hat  and  jacket,  as  I  and
my  younger  sister  both  noticed.  She  walked  rather  briskly,  looking  straight
before  her.  She  assures  us  that  she  was  sitting  alone  in  the  rectory  library
(the  rectory  is  within  a  stone's  throw  of  the  church)  all  the  afternoon.

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  she  has  had  any  other  hallucinations
Miss  E.  says  : —

I  have  seen  dark  forms  in  my  room  at  night  when  there  was  no  one  in  the
room  but  myself,  but  as  I  am  nervously  inclined  I  am  not  very  positive  about
it,  as  it  may  have  been  partly  imagination.  But  the  apparition  [of  my  sister]  I
positively  saw.

Miss  E.  writes  further  : —

April  I4//&,  1892.

I  am  quite  sure  that  the  figure  could  not  have  been  any  one  else  looking  like
K.,  for  I  saw  distinctly  every  detail  of  her  face  and  figure  and  dress,  and  noticed
that  she  was  looking  straight  before  her.  My  sight  is  excellent,  and  I  know  I
could  not  have  been  mistaken.  When  I  looked  up,  the  figure  was  about  three
yards  from  me,  I  should  say.  The  figure  may  have  gone  back  past  me  without
my  noticing  it,  but  I  think  it  very  improbable,  as  I  was  sitting  with  my  face
towards  the  aisle  through  which  it  must  have  passed.

The  other  percipient,  Miss  H.  E.,  writes  :—

sisters  and  I  were  spending  the  day  with  our  uncle  at ;  as  he  is

the  rector  his  garden  leads  into  the  churchyard.     In  the  course  of  the  afternoon

C.  and  I  went  into  the  church ;  she  began  to  play  the  harmonium  and  I  stood

on  a  stone  coffin  beside  her  with  my  hand  on  her  shoulder;  my  sister  was

i;  a  hymn,  and  I  was  looking  down  at  the  book  to  read  the  words.     C.

•ked  up ;  I  did  the  same,  and  following  the  direction  of  her  eyes  saw

iking  to  us  up  the  church  with — and  this  rather  surprised  me — a  long

-  of  papers  in  her  hand.     We  made  no  remark  and  took  no  further  notice

movements,  for  when  we  go  to we  often  just  wander  in  to  see  the

i      It  was  certainly  K.  herself;  I  could  see  her  face  quite  well.     C.  and  I
finished  our  hymn  and  found  that  she  had  gone.     C.  and  I  soon  after  went  in  to

262  CHAPTER    VI  [647

tea.  At  tea  we  were  surprised  to  hear  K.  say,  "  I  am  so  sorry  I  did  not  see  the
church,  but  part  of  the  afternoon  I  was  looking  at  pedigrees  in  the  study;
before  that  I  passed  the  church  gate ;  I  was  going  in,  but  turned  back  to  the
study  instead,"  or  words  to  that  effect.  C.  and  I  exchanged  glances,  but  said
nothing.  However,  next  morning  we  attacked  K.  on  the  subject ;  she  was
much  surprised,  had  certainly  not  been  in  church  at  all,  but  had  first  been  in
the  library  studying  the  family  pedigree,  and  then  gone  to  the  church  gate  and
returned.  My  sister  and  I  both  have  perfectly  good  eyesight.  It  seems
impossible  that  K.  can  have  visited  the  church,  but  my  sister  and  I  are  both
positively  certain  that  we  saw  K.  or  her  likeness.  The  day  after  we  both
described  the  details  of  her  dress,  so  far  as  we  could  recollect  them,  and  K.  said
that  it  was  a  correct  account  of  her  dress  the  day  before.  I  saw  the  pedigree
papers  before  I  went  out,  and  both  C.  and  I  thought  them  very  like  the  papers
the  figure  had  in  her  hand.  These  are,  as  far  as  I  remember,  the  details  of  the
case  without  exaggeration  or  diminution.

It  was  possible,  but  rather  improbable,  that  K.  should  have  left  the  church
without  our  notice,  because  she  must  have  passed  back  the  same  way  close
to  us.

Miss  K.  E.  writes  : —

Upon  the  afternoon  during  which  this  curious  incident  happened,  I  wandered
about  my  uncle's  garden  for  a  while,  and  half  thought  of  going  into  the  church,
but  changed  my  mind  and  did  not.  I  went  into  the  library,  and  being  interested
in  genealogy,  studied  my  uncle's  family  pedigree  until  tea-time,  when  I  remarked
to  my  sisters  that  I  had  not  been  to  the  church  all  the  afternoon,  and  they  told
me  that  they  had  seen  me  there.  I  felt  no  unusual  sensations  during  the  after-
noon, and  am  much  mystified  by  the  incident.

647.  In  the  following  case  the  apparition  was  seen  by  its  original
and  by  others  at  the  same  time.  The  account  (taken  from  Phantasms  of
the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  217)  came  from  Mrs.  Hall,  of  The  Yews,  Gretton,
near  Kettering,  and  was  received  in  December  1883.

In  the  autumn  of  1863,  I  was  living  with  my  husband  and  first  baby,  a
child  of  eight  months,  in  a  lone  house,  called  Sibberton,  near  Wansford,
Northamptonshire,  which  in  bygone  days  had  been  a  church.  As  the  weather
became  more  wintry,  a  married  cousin  and  her  husband  came  on  a  visit.  One
night,  when  we  were  having  supper,  an  apparition  stood  at  the  end  of  the
sideboard.  We  four  sat  at  the  dining-table  ;  and  yet,  with  great  inconsistency,
1  stood  as  this  ghostly  visitor  again,  in  a  spotted,  light  muslin  summer  dress,
and  without  any  terrible  peculiarities  of  air  or  manner.  We  all  four  saw  it,
my  husband  having  attracted  our  attention  to  it,  saying,  "  It  is  Sarah,"  in  a
tone  of  recognition,  meaning  me.  It  at  once  disappeared.  None  of  us  felt  any
fear,  it  seemed  too  natural  and  familiar.

The  apparition  seemed  utterly  apart  from  myself  and  my  feelings,  as  a
picture  or  statue.  My  three  relatives,  who,  with  me,  saw  the  apparition,  are
all  dead;  they  died  in  about  the  years  1868-69.  SARAH  JANE  HALL.

[The  dress  in  which  the  figure  appeared  was  not  like  any  that  Mrs.  Hall
had  at  the  time,  though  she  wore  one  like  it  nearly  two  years  afterwards.  Mrs.
Hall  has  had  other  visual  hallucinations,  which  were  all  connected  with  ill-

648]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  263

health  or  nervous  shock ;  one  which  occurred  a  few  months  before  that  here
described  had  represented  herself  as  if  "laid  out."]

648.  The  question  of  the  true  import  of  collectivity  of  percipience
renews  in  another  form  that  problem  of  invasion  to  which  our  evidence  so
often  brings  us  back.  When  two  or  three  persons  see  what  seems  to  be
the  same  phantom  in  the  same  place  and  at  the  same  time,  does  that  mean
that  that  special  part  of  space  is  somehow  modified  ?  or  does  it  mean  that
a  mental  impression,  conveyed  by  the  distant  agent — the  phantom-begetter
—to  one  of  the  percipients  is  reflected  telepathically  from  that  percipient's
mind  to  the  minds  of  the  other — as  it  were  secondary — percipients?  The
reader  already  knows  that  I  prefer  the  former  of  these  views.  And  I
observe — as  telling  against  that  other  view,  of  pyschical  contagion — that
in  certain  collective  cases  we  discern  no  probable  link  between  any  one  of
the  percipient  minds  and  the  distant  agent.

In  some  of  that  group  of  collective  cases  which  we  are  at  this  moment
considering,  this  absence  of  link  is  noticeable  in  a  special  way.  The
agent  may  indeed  be  acquainted  with  the  percipients, — as  Mrs.  Beaumont
( 645  C )  was  acquainted  with  the  various  persons  who  saw  her.  But  there  is
nothing  to  show  that  any  thought  or  emotion  was  passing  from  agent  to
percipients  at  the  moment  of  the  apparition.  On  the  contrary,  the  indica-
tion is  that  there  is  no  necessary  connection  whatever  between  the  agent's
condition  of  mind  at  the  moment  and  the  fact  that  such  and  such  persons
observed  his  phantasm.  The  projection  of  the  phantasm,  if  I  may  so  term
it,  seems  a  matter  wholly  automatic  on  the  agent's  part,  as  automatic  and
meaningless  as  a  dream.

Assuming,  then,  that  this  is  so — that  these  bilocations  do  occur  without
any  appreciable  stimulus  from  without,  and  in  moments  of  apparent  calm
and  indifference — in  what  way  will  this  fact  tend  to  modify  previous  con-
ceptions?

It  suggests  that  the  continuous  dream-life  which  we  must  suppose  to
run  concurrently  with  our  waking  life  is  potent  enough  to  effect  from  time
to  time  enough  of  dissociation  to  enable  some  element  of  the  personality
to  be  perceived  at  a  distance  from  the  organism.     How  much  of  con-
sciousness, if  any,  may  be  felt  at  the  point  where  the  excursive  phantasm
is  seen,  we  cannot  say.     But  the  notion  that  a  mere  incoherent  quasi -
dream  should  thus  become  perceptible  to  others  is  fully  in  accordance
with  the  theories  suggested  in  this  work.     For  I  regard  subliminal  opera-
s  continuously  going  on,  and  I  hold  that  the  degree  of  dissociation
h  can  generate  a  perceptible  phantasm  is  not  necessarily  a  profound
^fc,  since  that  perceptibility  depends  so  largely  upon  idiosyncrasies  of
agent  and  percipient  as  yet  wholly  unexplained.

it  special  idiosyncrasy  on  the  part  of  the  agent  which  tends  to  make

hantasm  easily  visible  has  never  yet,  so  far  as  I  know,  received  a

name,  although  for  convenience'  sake  it  certainly  needs  one.     I  propose  to

264  CHAPTER    VI  [649

use  the  Greek  word  \jruxoppayS),  which  means  strictly  "  to  let  the  soul  break
loose,"  and  from  which  I  form  the  words  psychorrhagy  and  psychorrhagic,
on  obvious  analogies.  When  I  say  that  Mrs.  Beaumont  or  Mr.  Williams,
agents  in  the  cases  cited  in  645  A  and  C,  were  born  with  the  psychor-
rhagic diathesis,  I  express  what  I  believe  to  be  an  important  fact,  physio-
logical as  well  as  psychological,  in  terms  which  seem  pedantic,  but  which
are  the  only  ones  which  mean  exactly  what  the  facts  oblige  me  to  say.
That  which  "  breaks  loose  "  on  my  hypothesis  is  not  (as  in  the  Greek  use
of  the  word)  the  whole  principle  of  life  in  the  organism  ;  rather  it  is  some
psychical  element  probably  of  very  varying  character,  and  definable  mainly
by  its  power  of  producing  a  phantasm,  perceptible  by  one  or  more  persons,
in  some  portion  or  other  of  space.  I  hold  that  this  phantasmogenetic
effect  may  be  produced  either  on  the  mind,  and  consequently  on  the  brain
of  another  person — in  which  case  he  may  discern  the  phantasm  somewhere
in  his  vicinity,  according  to  his  own  mental  habit  or  prepossession — or
else  directly  on  a  portion  of  space,  "  out  in  the  open,"  in  which  case
several  persons  may  simultaneously  discern  the  phantasm  in  that  actual
spot.

649.  Let  us  apply  the  view  to  one  of  our  most  bizarre  and  puzzling
cases — that  of  Canon  Bourne  (see  645  D).  Here  I  conceive  that
Canon  Bourne,  while  riding  in  the  hunting-field,  was  also  subliminally
dreaming  of  himself  (imagining  himself  with  some  part  of  his  submerged
consciousness)  as  having  had  a  fall,  and  as  beckoning  to  his  daughters —
an  incoherent  dream  indeed,  but  of  a  quite  ordinary  type.  I  go  on  to
suppose  that,  Canon  Bourne  being  born  with  the  psychorrhagic  diathesis,
a  certain  psychical  element  so  far  detached  itself  from  his  organism  as  to
affect  a  certain  portion  of  space — near  the  daughters  of  whom  he  was
thinking — to  affect  it,  I  say,  not  materially  nor  even  optically,  but  yet  in
such  a  manner  that  to  a  certain  kind  of  immaterial  and  non-optical  sensi-
tivity a  phantasm  of  himself  and  his  horse  became  discernible.  His  horse
was  of  course  as  purely  a  part  of  the  phantasmal  picture  as  his  hat.  The
non-optical  distinctness  with  which  the  words  printed  inside  his  hat  were
seen  indicates  that  it  was  some  inner  non-retinal  vision  which  received  the
impression  from  the  phantasmogenetic  centre.  The  other  phantasmal
appearance  of  Canon  Bourne  chanced  to  affect  only  one  percipient,  but
was  of  precisely  the  same  character ;  and  of  course  adds,  so  far  as  it  goes,
to  the  plausibility  of  the  above  explanation.

That  explanation,  indeed,  suffers  from  the  complexity  and  apparent
absurdity  inevitable  in  dealing  with  phenomena  which  greatly  transcend
known  laws ;  but  on  the  other  hand  it  does  in  its  way  colligate  Canon  Bourne's
case  with  a  good  many  others  of  odd  and  varying  types.  Thus  these
appearances  of  Canon  Bourne's,  Mrs.  Beaumont's,  Mrs.  Hawkins',  &c.,
are  in  my  view  exactly  parallel  to  the  hauntings  ascribed  to  departed
spirits.  There  also  we  find  a  psychorrhagic  diathesis — a  habit  or  capacity
on  the  part  of  certain  spirits  of  detaching  some  psychical  element  in  such

650J  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  265

a  manner  as  to  form  a  phantasmal  picture,  which  represents  the  spirit  as
going  through  some  dream-like  action  in  a  given  place.

The  phantasmogenetic  centre  may  thus,  in  my  view,  be  equally  well
produced  by  an  incarnate  or  by  a  discarnate  spirit.

These  psychorrhagic  cases  are  also,  I  think,  important  as  showing  us
the  earliest  or  feeblest  stages  of  self-projection — where  the  dissociation
belongs  to  the  dream-stratum — implicating  neither  the  supraliminal  will
nor  the  profounder  subliminal  strata.

650.  And  now  let  us  pass  on  from  these  psychorrhagic  cases,  which
hardly  concern  anybody  beyond  the  phantom-begetter  himself — and  do
not  even  add  anything  to  his  own  knowledge — to  cases  where  there  is  some
sort  of  communication  from  one  mind  to  another,  or  some  knowledge
gained  by  the  excursive  spirit.

It  is  impossible  to  arrange  these  groups  in  one  continuous  logical
series.  But,  roughly  speaking,  the  degree  in  which  the  psychical  collision
is  rf collected  on  either  side  may  in  some  degree  indicate  its  intensity,  and
may  serve  as  a  guide  to  our  provisional  arrangement.

And  following  this  scheme  I  shall  begin  with  a  group  of  cases  which
seem  to  promise  but  little  information, — cases,  namely,  where  A,  the  agent,
in  some  way  impresses  or  invades  P,  the  percipient, — but  nevertheless
neither  A  nor  P  retains  in  supraliminal  memory  any  knowledge  of  what  has
occurred.

Now  to  begin  with  we  shall  have  no  difficulty  in  admitting  that  cases
of  this  type  are  likely  often  to  occur.  The  psychical  rapprochement  of
telepathy  takes  place,  ex  hypothesi,  in  a  region  which  is  subliminal  for  both
agent  and  percipient,  and  from  whence  but  few  and  scattered  impressions
rise  for  either  of  them  above  the  conscious  threshold.  Telepathy  will  thus
probably  operate  far  more  continuously  than  our  scattered  glimpses  would
in  themselves  suggest.

But  how  can  we  outside  inquirers  know  anything  of  telepathic  inci-
dents which  the  principals  themselves  fail  altogether  to  remember?

In  ordinary  life  we  may  sometimes  learn  from   bystanders  incidents
which  we  cannot  learn  from  the  principals  themselves.     Can  there  be
.nders  who  look  on  at  a  psychical  invasion?

The  question  is  of  much  theoretical  import.     On  my  view  that  there

is  a  real  transference  of  something  from  the  agent,  involving  an  alteration

of  some  kind  in  a  particular  part  of  space,  there  might  theoretically  be

some  bystander  who  might  discern  that  alteration  in  space  more  clearly

than  the  person  for  whose  benefit,  so  to  say,  the  alteration  was  made.     If,

on  the  other  hand,  what  has  happened  is  merely  a  transference  of  some

impulse  "  from  mind  to  mind  " ; — then  one  can  hardly  understand  how

1 1  ml  except  the  mind  aimed  at  could  perceive  the  telepathic  impres-

' ,  in  collective  cases,  persons  in  whom  the  agent  feels  no  interest,

iose  presence  along  with  the  intended  percipient  he  is  not  v

do  in  fact  receive  the  impression  in  just  the  same  way  as  that  intended

266  CHAPTER    VI  [650

percipient  himself.  This  was  explained  by  Gurney  as  probably  due  to  a
fresh  telepathic  transmission, — this  time  from  the  due  or  original  perci-
pient's mind  to  the  minds  of  his  neighbours  of  the  moment.

Such  a  supposition,  however,  in  itself  a  difficult  one,  becomes  much
more  difficult  when  the  telepathic  impulse  has  never,  so  far  as  we  know,
penetrated  into  the  due  or  intended  percipient's  mind  at  all.  If  in  such  a
case  a  bystander  perceives  the  invading  figure,  I  must  think  that  he  per-
ceives it  merely  as  a  bystander, — not  as  a  person  telepathically  influenced
by  the  intended  percipient,  who  does  not  in  fact  perceive  anything  what-
soever. I  quote  in  illustration  a  bizarre  but  well-attested  case,  which  this
explanation  seems  to  fit  better  than  any  other.

From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  214.  We  received  the  first
account  of  this  case — the  percipient's  evidence — through  the  kindness
of  Mrs.  Martin,  of  Ham  Court,  Upton-on-Severn,  Worcester.

ANTONY,  TORPOINT,  December  i^th,  1882.

Helen  Alexander  (maid  to  Lady  Waldegrave)  was  lying  here  very  ill  with
typhoid  fever,  and  was  attended  by  me.  I  was  standing  at  the  table  by  her
bedside,  pouring  out  her  medicine,  at  about  4  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  the  4th
October  1880.  I  heard  the  call-bell  ring  (this  had  been  heard  twice  before
during  the  night  in  that  same  week),  and  was  attracted  by  the  door  of  the
room  opening,  and  by  seeing  a  person  entering  the  room  whom  I  instantly
felt  to  be  the  mother  of  the  sick  woman.  She  had  a  brass  candlestick  in  her
hand,  a  red  shawl  over  her  shoulders,  and  a  flannel  petticoat  on  which  had  a
hole  in  the  front.  I  looked  at  her  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I  am  glad  you  have
come,"  but  the  woman  looked  at  me  sternly,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  Why  wasn't
I  sent  for  before  ?  "  I  gave  the  medicine  to  Helen  Alexander,  and  then  turned
round  to  speak  to  the  vision,  but  no  one  was  there.  She  had  gone.  She  was
a  short,  dark  person,  and  very  stout.  At  about  6  o'clock  that  morning  Helen
Alexander  died.  Two  days  after  her  parents  and  a  sister  came  to  Antony,  and
arrived  between  I  and  2  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  I  and  another  maid  let  them
in,  and  it  gave  me  a  great  turn  when  I  saw  the  living  likeness  of  the  vision
I  had  seen  two  nights  before.  I  told  the  sister  about  the  vision,  and  she  said
that  the  description  of  the  dress  exactly  answered  to  her  mother's,  and  that
they  had  brass  candlesticks  at  home  exactly  like  the  one  described.  There  was
not  the  slightest  resemblance  between  the  mother  and  daughter.

FRANCES  REDDELL.

This  at  first  sight  might  be  taken  for  a  mere  delusion  of  an  excitable
or  over-tired  servant,  modified  and  exaggerated  by  the  subsequent  sight
of  the  real  mother.  If  such  a  case  is  to  have  evidential  force,  we  must
ascertain  beyond  doubt  that  the  description  of  the  experience  was  given
in  detail  before  any  knowledge  of  the  reality  can  have  affected  the  per-
cipient's memory  or  imagination.  This  necessary  corroboration  has  been
kindly  supplied  by  Mrs.  Pole-Carew,  of  Antony,  Torpoint,  Devonport.

December  y.st,  1883.

In  October  1880,  Lord  and  Lady  Waldegrave  came  with  their  Scotch
maid,  Helen  Alexander,  to  stay  with  us.  [The  account  then  describes  how

650]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  267

Helen  was  discovered  to  have  caught  typhoid  fever.]     She  did  not  seem  to  be

very  ill  in  spite  of  it,  and  as  there  seemed  no  fear  of  danger,  and  Lord  and

Lady  Waldegrave  had  to  go  a  long  journey  the  following  day  (Thursday),  they

d  to  leave  her,  as  they  were  advised  to  do,  under  their  friends'  care.

The  illness  ran  its  usual  course,  and  she  seemed  to  be  going  on  perfectly
well  till  the  Sunday  week  following,  when  the  doctor  told  me  that  the  fever  had
left  her,  but  the  state  of  weakness  which  had  supervened  was  such  as  to  make
him  extremely  anxious.  I  immediately  engaged  a  regular  nurse,  greatly
against  the  wish  of  Reddell,  my  maid,  who  had  been  her  chief  nurse  all
through  the  illness,  and  who  was  quite  devoted  to  her.  However,  as  the
nurse  could  not  conveniently  come  till  the  following  day,  I  allowed  Reddell  to
sit  up  with  Helen  again  that  night,  to  give  her  the  medicine  and  food,  which
were  to  be  taken  constantly.

At  about  4.30  that  night,  or  rather  Monday  morning,  Reddell  looked  at  her
watch,  poured  out  the  medicine,  and  was  bending  over  the  bed  to  give  it  to
Helen,  when  the  call-bell  in  the  passage  rang.  She  said  to  herself,  "  There's
that  tiresome  bell  with  the  wire  caught  again."  (It  seems  it  did  occasionally
ring  of  itself  in  this  manner.)  At  that  moment,  however,  she  heard  the  door
open,  and  looking  round,  saw  a  very  stout  old  woman  walk  in.  She  was
dressed  in  a  night-gown  and  red  flannel  petticoat,  and  carried  an  old-fashioned
brass  candlestick  in  her  hand.  The  petticoat  had  a  hole  rubbed  in  it.  She
walked  into  the  room,  and  appeared  to  be  going  towards  the  dressing-table  to
put  her  candle  down.  She  was  a  perfect  stranger  to  Reddell,  who,  however,
merely  thought,  "  This  is  her  mother  come  to  see  after  her,"  and  she  felt  quite
glad  it  was  so,  accepting  the  idea  without  reasoning  upon  it,  as  one  would  in  a
dream.  She  thought  the  mother  looked  annoyed,  possibly  at  not  having  been
sent  for  before.  She  then  gave  Helen  the  medicine,  and  turning  round,  found
that  the  apparition  had  disappeared,  and  that  the  door  was  shut.  A  great
change,  meanwhile,  had  taken  place  in  Helen,  and  Reddell  fetched  me,  who
sent  off  for  the  doctor,  and  meanwhile  applied  hot  poultices,  &c.,  but  Helen
died  a  little  before  the  doctor  came.  She  was  quite  conscious  up  to  about
half-an-hour  before  she  died,  when  she  seemed  to  be  going  to  sleep.

I  )uring  the  early  days  of  her  illness  Helen  had  written  to  a  sister,  mention-
ing her  being  unwell,  but  making  nothing  of  it,  and  as  she  never  mentioned
any  one  but  this  sister,  it  was  supposed  by  the  household,  to  whom  she  was  a
perfect  stranger,  that  she  had  no  other  relation  alive.  Reddell  was  always
offering  to  write  for  her,  but  she  always  declined,  saying  there  was  no  need,
she  would  write  herself  in  a  day  or  two.  No  one  at  home,  therefore,  know
ng  of  her  being  so  ill,  and  it  is,  therefore,  remarkable  that  her  mother,
a  far  from  nervous  person,  should  have  said  that  evening  going  up  to  bed,  "  I
am  sure  Helen  is  very  ill."

Reddell  told  me  and  my  daughter  of  the  apparition,  about  an  hour  after

Helen's  death,   prefacing  with,  "  I  am   not  superstitious,   or  nervous,   and    I

the   least   frightened,   but  her  mother  came  last  night,"  and  she  then

told  the  story,  giving  a  careful  description  of  the  figure  she  had  seen.     The

relations  were  asked  to  come  to  the  funeral,  and  the  father,  mother,  and  sister

in  the  mother  Reddell  recognised  the  apparition,  as  I  did  also,  for

Reddell's  description  had  been  most  accurate,  even  to  the  expression,  which

id  ascribed  to  annoyance,  but  which  was  due  to  deafness.      It  was  judged

best  not  to  speak  about  it  to  the  mother,  but  Reddell  told  the  sister,  who  said

268  CHAPTER    VI  [651

the  description  of  the  figure  corresponded  exactly  with  the  probable  appearance
of  her  mother  if  roused  in  the  night ;  that  they  had  exactly  such  a  candlestick
at  home,  and  that  there  was  a  hole  in  her  mother's  petticoat  produced  by  the
way  she  always  wore  it.  It  seems  curious  that  neither  Helen  nor  her  mother
appeared  to  be  aware  of  the  visit.  Neither  of  them,  at  any  rate,  ever  spoke  of
having  seen  the  other,  nor  even  of  having  dreamt  of  having  done  so.

F.  A.  POLE-CAREW.

[Frances  Reddell  states  that  she  has  never  had  any  hallucination,  or  any
odd  experience  of  any  kind,  except  on  this  one  occasion.  The  Hon.  Mrs.
Lyttelton,  formerly  of  Selwyn  College,  Cambridge,  who  knows  her,  tells  us
that  "  she  appears  to  be  a  most  matter-of-fact  person,  and  was  apparently  most
impressed  by  the  fact  that  she  saw  a  hole  in  the  mother's  flannel  petticoat,
made  by  the  busk  of  her  stays,  reproduced  in  the  apparition."]

Now  what  I  imagine  to  have  happened  here  is  this.  The  mother,
anxious  about  her  daughter,  paid  her  a  psychical  visit  during  the  sleep  of
both.  In  so  doing  she  actually  modified  a  certain  portion  of  space,  not
materially  nor  optically,  but  in  such  a  manner  that  persons  perceptive  in
a  certain  fashion  would  discern  in  that  part  of  space  an  image  approxi-
mately corresponding  to  the  conception  of  her  own  aspect  latent  in  the
invading  mother's  mind.  A  person  thus  susceptible  happened  to  be  in
the  room,  and  thus,  as  a  bystander,  witnessed  a  psychical  invasion  whose
memory  the  invader  apparently  did  not  retain,  while  the  invaded  person —
the  due  percipient — may  or  may  not  have  perceived  it  in  a  dream,  but
died  and  left  no  sign  of  having  done  so.

651.  I  give  in  651  A  a  somewhat  similar  case,  where  there  is  strong
attestation  that  a  sailor,  watching  by  a  dying  comrade,  saw  figures  around
his  hammock,  apparently  representing  the  dying  man's  family,  in  mourning
garb.  The  family,  although  they  had  no  ordinary  knowledge  of  the  sailor's
illness,  had  been  alarmed  by  noises,  &c.,  which  rightly  or  wrongly  they
took  as  indications  of  some  danger  to  him.  I  conceive,  then,  that  the
wife  paid  a  psychical  visit  to  her  husband ;  and  I  take  the  mourning  garb
and  the  accompanying  children's  figures  to  be  symbolical  accompaniments,
representing  her  thought,  "  My  children  will  be  orphans,"  in  just  the  same
way  as  the  figure  in  the  flannel  petticoat,  &c.,  represented  Mrs.  Reddell's
thought,  "  I  must  get  out  of  bed  and  see  how  my  daughter  looks  to-night."
I  think  this  more  likely  than  that  the  Pearce  children  also  should  have
possessed  this  rare  peculiarity  of  becoming  perceptible  at  a  distant  point  in
space.  And  secondary  figures,  as  we  shall  see  later  on,  are  not  uncommon
in  such  telepathic  presentations.  One  may  picture  oneself  as  though
holding  a  child  by  the  hand,  or  even  driving  in  a  carriage  and  pair,  as
vividly  as  though  carrying  an  umbrella  or  walking  across  a  room ;  and  one
may  be  thus  pictured  to  others.  I  will  give  one  more  instance  of  this
deflected  perception,  where  a  dying  (or  dead)  man,  apparently  wishing  to
appear  to  his  sister,  fails  to  attract  her  attention,  but  is  observed  by  a
black  nurse,  who  has  never  seen  him  in  the  flesh.

651]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  269

From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  6 1 .

This  case  came  from  Mrs.  Clerke,  of  Clifton  Lodge,  Farquhar  Road,
Upper  Norwood,  S.  E.

October  3oM,  1885.

In  the  month  of  August  1864,  about  3  or  4  o'clock  in  the  afternoon,  I
was  sitting  reading  in  the  verandah  of  our  house  in  Barbadoes.  My  black
nurse  was  driving  my  little  girl,  about  eighteen  months  or  so  old,  in  her  peram-
bulator in  the  garden.  I  got  up  after  some  time  to  go  into  the  house,  not  having
noticed  anything  at  all — when  this  black  woman  said  to  me,  "  Missis,  who  was
that  gentleman  that  was  talking  to  you  just  now  ?  "  "  There  was  no  one  talking
to  me,"  I  said.  "  Oh,  yes,  dere  was,  missis — a  very  pale  gentleman,  very  tall,
and  he  talked  to  you,  and  you  was  very  rude,  for  you  never  answered  him."
I  repeated  there  was  no  one,  and  got  rather  cross  with  the  woman,  and  she
begged  me  to  write  down  the  day,  for  she  knew  she  had  seen  some  one.  I  did,
and  in  a  few  days  I  heard  of  the  death  of  my  brother  in  Tobago.  Now,  the
curious  part  is  this,  that  /  did  not  see  him,  but  she — a  stranger  to  him — did  ;
and  she  said  that  he  seemed  very  anxious  for  me  to  notice  him.

MAY  CLERKE.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Clerke  says —

(1)  The  day  of  death  was  the  same,  for  I  wrote  it  down.     I  think  it  was  the
3rd  of  August,  but  I  know  it  was  the  same.

(2)  The  description,  *'  very  tall  and  pale,"  was  accurate.

(3)  I  had  no  idea  that  he  was  ill.     He  was  only  a  few  days  ill.

(4)  The  woman  had  never  seen  him.     She  had  been  with  me  for  about
eighteen  months,  and  I  considered  her  truthful.    She  had  no  object  in  telling  me.

In  conversation,  Gurney  learned  that  Mrs.  Clerke  had  immediately
mentioned  what  the  servant  said,  and  the  fact  that  she  had  written  down
the  date,  to  her  husband,  Colonel  Clerke,  who  corroborates  as  follows : —

I  well  remember  that  on  the  day  on  which  Mr.  John  Beresford,  my  wife's
brother,  died  in  Tobago — after  a  short  illness  of  which  we  were  not  aware —
our  black  nurse  declared  she  saw,  at  as  nearly  as  possible  the  time  of  his
death,  a  gentleman,  exactly  answering  to  Mr.  Beresford's  description,  leaning
over  the  back  of  Mrs.  Clerke's  easy-chair  in  the  open  verandah.  The  figure
was  not  seen  by  any  one  else.  SHAD  WELL  H.  CLERKE.

\\  c  find  it  stated  in  Burke's  Peerage  that  Mr.  J.  H.  de  la  Poer
Beresford,  Secretary  for  the  Island  of  Tobago,  died  on  August  3,  1863
(not  1864).  It  is  on  this  case  that  Gurney  remarks : —

If  this  incident  is  to  be  interpreted  telepathic.illy,  it  is  scarcely  possible  to

suppose  that  Mrs.  Clerke's  own  presence  did  not  play  a  part  in  the  phenomenon.

The  case  would  then  be  comparable  to  some  "collective"  cases  where  one  of

the  percipients  is  a  stranger  to  the  agent ;  the  difference  being  that  here  the

person  who  should  (so  to  speak)  have  been   the  principal  percipient  was  as

iscious  of  the  impression  which  she  received  as  we  have  found  the  per-

t  to  be  in  some  of  the  experimental  cases.

270  CHAPTER    VI

To  me  it  seems  that  the  nurse  was  merely  the  bystander,  endowed
with  a  special  perceptivity,  more  effective  here  than  the  kinship  of  the  in-
tended percipient.  Note  that  in  this  case  we  have  no  means  of  knowing
whether  the  invader  recollected  the  incident  or  not.  The  narrative
belongs  to  a  class  as  to  which  we  shall  afterwards  have  to  say  much,
where  the  death  of  the  agent  has  prevented  question,  and  has  left  it  un-
certain what  his  condition  at  the  time  or  his  subsequent  recollection  may
have  been.

652.  And  here  I  note  a  gradual  transition  to  the  next  large  class  of
cases  on  which  I  am  about  to  enter.  I  am  about  to  deal  with  telasthesia  ;
—with  cases  where  an  agent-percipient — for  he  is  both  in  one — makes  a
clairvoyant  excursion  (of  a  more  serious  type  than  the  mere  psychorrhagies
already  described),  and  brings  back  some  memory  of  the  scene  which  he
has  psychically  visited.  Now,  of  course,  it  may  happen  that  he  fails  to
bring  back  any  such  memory,  or  that  if  he  does  bring  it  back,  he  tells  no
one  about  it.  In  such  cases,  just  as  in  the  telepathic  cases  of  which  I
have  just  spoken,  the  excursive  phantom  may  possibly  be  observed  by  a
bystander,  and  the  circumstances  may  be  such  as  to  involve  some  coin-
cidence which  negatives  the  supposition  of  the  bystander's  mere  subjec-
tive fancy.  Such,  I  think,  is  the  following  case.  The  narrator  is  a  lady
well  known  to  me,  who  has  had  other  veridical  experiences.

From  the  "  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  332.  The  account  is  given  by  Mrs.  Me  Alpine.

GARSCADDEN,  BEARSDEN,  GLASGOW,  April  zoth,  1892.

I  remember  in  the  June  of  1889, 1  drove  to  Castleblaney,  a  little  town  in  the
county  Monaghan,  to  meet  my  sister,  who  was  coming  by  train  from  Longford.
I  expected  her  at  three  o'clock,  but  as  she  did  not  come  with  that  train,  I  got
the  horse  put  up,  and  went  for  a  walk  in  the  demesne.  The  day  was  very  warm
and  bright,  and  I  wandered  on  under  the  shade  of  the  trees  to  the  side  of  a  lake,
which  is  in  the  demesne.  Being  at  length  tired,  I  sat  down  to  rest  upon  a  rock,
at  the  edge  of  the  water.  My  attention  was  quite  taken  up  with  the  extreme
beauty  of  the  scene  before  me.  There  was  not  a  sound  or  movement,  except
the  soft  ripple  of  the  water  on  the  sand  at  my  feet.  Presently  I  felt  a  cold  chill
creep  through  me,  and  a  curious  stiffness  of  my  limbs,  as  if  I  could  not  move,
though  wishing  to  do  so.  I  felt  frightened,  yet  chained  to  the  spot,  and  as  if
impelled  to  stare  at  the  water  straight  in  front  of  me.  Gradually  a  black  cloud
seemed  to  rise,  and  in  the  midst  of  it  I  saw  a  tall  man,  in  a  suit  of  tweed,  jump
into  the  water  and  sink.

In  a  moment  the  darkness  was  gone,  and  I  again  became  sensible  of  the
heat  and  sunshine,  but  I  was  awed  and  felt  "  eerie  " — it  was  then  about  four
o'clock  or  so — I  cannot  remember  either  the  exact  time  or  date.  On  my  sister's
arrival  I  told  her  of  the  occurrence ;  she  was  surprised,  but  inclined  to  laugh
at  it.  When  we  got  home  I  told  my  brother;  he  treated  the  subject  much  in
the  same  manner.  However,  about  a  week  afterwards,  a  Mr.  Espie,  a  bank
clerk  (unknown  to  me),  committed  suicide  by  drowning  in  that  very  spot.  He
left  a  letter  for  his  wife,  indicating  that  he  had  for  some  time  contemplated  his.

652]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  271

death.  My  sister's  memory  of  the  event  is  the  only  evidence  I  can  give.  I  did
not  see  the  account  of  the  inquest  at  the  time,  and  did  not  mention  my  strange
experience  to  any  one,  saving  my  sister  and  brother.  F.  C.  McALPiNE.

Mrs.  McAlpine's  sister  writes  : —

RoXBORO',  February  i$th,  1892.

I  remember  perfectly  you  meeting  me  in  Castleblaney,  on  my  way  home
from  Longford,  and  telling  me  of  the  strange  thing  which  happened  in  the
demesne.  You  know  you  were  always  hearing  or  seeing  something,  and  I
paid  little  attention,  but  I  remember  it  distinctly — your  troubled  expression  more
than  the  story.  You  said  a  tall  gentleman,  dressed  in  tweed,  walked  past  you,
and  went  into  a  little  inlet  or  creek.  I  think,  but  am  not  sure,  that  you  said  he
had  a  beard.  You  were  troubled  about  it,  or  looked  so  ;  and  I  talked  of  other
things.  You  told  me  while  we  were  driving  home.  I  think,  but  I  am  not  sure,
that  it  was  about  the  25th  or  27th  of  June  1889  that  I  left  Longford.  I  am
sure  of  that  being  the  day,  but  cannot  remember  the  date.  //  was  in  June,  and
on  the  3rd  of  July  1889  a  Mr.  Espie,  a  bank  clerk,  drowned  himself  in  the  lake
in  the  demesne  in  'Blaney.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  day  I  came  home  you
saw  Mr.  Espie's  "fetch."'

The  following  account  is  taken  from  a  local  paper,  the  Northern
Standard,  Saturday,  July  6th,  1889  : —

Sad  Case  of  Suicide. — The  town  of  Castleblaney  was  put  into  a  fearful
state  of  excitement  when  it  became  known  on  Wednesday  last  that  Mr.  Espy
had  committed  suicide  by  drowning  himself  in  the  lake  in  the  demesne.
Latterly  he  was  noticed  to  be  rather  dull  and  low  in  spirits,  but  no  serious
notice  was  taken  of  his  conduct,  nor  had  any  one  the  most  remote  idea  that  he
contemplated  suicide.  On  Wednesday  morning  he  seemed  in  his  usual  health,
and,  as  was  customary  with  him,  walked  down  to  get  his  newspaper  on  the
arrival  of  the  9.45  train  from  Dublin.  He  met  Mr.  Fox  (in  whose  office  he
has  been  for  years)  at  the  station,  and  having  procured  his  paper  walked  up  to
the  office,  wrote  a  note  in  which  he  stated  what  he  was  going  to  do,  and  indi-
cating where  his  body  would  be  found.  This  seemed  to  concern  him  a  good
deal,  for  he  seemed  very  anxious  that  his  body  should  be  recovered  without  any
.  He  had  fishing-tackle  in  his  pocket,  and  having  tied  one  end  of  a  pike-
line  to  a  tree,  and  the  other  end  round  one  of  his  legs,  he  threw  himself  into  about
three  feet  deep  of  water,  where  he  was  found  shortly  afterwards  quite  dead,  and
before  the  note  that  he  had  left  in  the  office  had  been  opened.

It  would  be  possible,  no  doubt,  to  explain  this  appearance  as  simply
precognitive — as  a  picture  from  the  future  impressed  in  some  unknown
way  upon  the  percipient's  inner  vision.  We  shall  later  on  encounter  cer-
tain cases  which  may  drive  us  to  this  extreme  hypothesis.  But  it  seems
here  simpler  to  assume  that  the  unhappy  man  was  already  imagining  his
plunge  into  the  lake  when  Mrs.  McAlpine  visited  the  shore,  and  that  his
intense  thought  effected  a  self-projection,  conscious  or  unconscious,  of
element  of  his  being.  I  may  refer  to  a  similar  case  from  Phantasms
of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  541,  where  a  girl,  who  is  corporeally  present  in  a
certain  drawing-room,  is  seen  phantasmally  in  a  neighbouring  grove,
whither  she  herself  presently  goes  and  hangs  herself.

272  CHAPTER    VI  [653

653.  These  ponderings  on  projected  suicide  form  perhaps  the  strongest
instance  of  mental  preoccupation  with  a  particular  spot.  But  of  course,
in  our  ignorance  of  the  precise  quality  of  thought  or  emotion  needed
to  prompt  a  psychical  excursion,  we  need  not  be  surprised  to  find  such
an  excursion  observed  on  some  occasions  as  trivial  as  the  "  arrival-case  "
of  Col.  Reed,  with  which  I  prefaced  the  mere  psychorrhagic  cases.

The  evidential  value  of  that  case  depended  on  the  improbability  of  the
costume ;  since  no  coincidence  was  involved  in  the  mere  fact  of  the
Colonel's  entering  the  barracks.  I  now  go  on  to  some  cases  where  a
man's  coming  is  unexpected,  so  that  there  is  a  real  coincidence  in  the
fact  that  his  phantom  is  seen  in  the  place  to  which  he  is  going,  shortly
before  he  arrives  there  in  flesh  and  blood.  I  quote  a  case  from  Phantasms
of  the  Living.  The  informant,  a  butler  named  James  Carroll,  was  per-
sonally known  to  Edmund  Gurney,  and  has  had  another  psychical
experience,  not  visual — a  feeling  of  extreme  exhaustion  and  sadness,
coupled  with  the  idea  of  his  twin-brother,  on  the  first  day  of  his  distant
twin- brother's  fatal  illness ;  and  again  just  before  the  receipt  of  a  telegram
summoning  him  to  the  deathbed.  It  is  an  interesting  observation  based
by  Gurney  on  his  analysis  of  relationships  in  telepathic  cases,  that  the  link
of  twinship  seems  markedly  to  facilitate  this  kind  of  communication.1

From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  96  : —

September,  1884.

In  the  autumn  of  1877,  while  at  Sholebrook  Lodge,  Towcester,  Northampton-
shire, one  night,  at  a  little  after  ten  o'clock,  I  remember  I  was  about  to  move  a
lamp  in  my  room  to  a  position  where  I  usually  sat  a  little  while  before  retiring
to  bed,  when  I  suddenly  saw  a  vision  of  my  brother.  It  seemed  to  affect  me
like  a  mild  shock  of  electricity.  It  surprised  me  so  that  I  hesitated  to  carry  out
what  I  had  intended,  my  eyes  remaining  fixed  on  the  apparition  of  my  brother.
It  gradually  disappeared,  leaving  me  wondering  what  it  meant.  I  am  positive
no  light  or  reflection  deceived  me.  I  had  not  been  sleeping  or  rubbing  my  eyes.
I  was  again  in  the  act  of  moving  my  lamp  when  I  heard  taps  along  the  window.
I  looked  towards.it — the  window  was  on  the  ground-floor — and  heard  a  voice,
my  brother's,  say,  "  It's  I,  don't  be  frightened."  I  let  him  in;  he  remarked,
"  How  cool  you  are  !  I  thought  I  should  have  frightened  you."

The  fact  was,  that  the  distinct  vision  of  my  brother  had  quite  prepared  me
for  his  call.  He  found  the  window  by  accident,  as  he  had  never  been  to  the
house  before ;  to  use  his  own  words,  *'  I  thought  it  was  your  window,  and  that
I  should  find  you."  He  had  unexpectedly  left  London  to  pay  me  a  visit,  and
when  near  the  house  lost  his  way,  and  had  found  his  way  in  the  dark  to  the
back  of  the  place.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Carroll  says :  —

You  are  quite  right  in  supposing  the  hallucination  of  my  brother  to  be  the
only  instance  in  my  experience.

i  Cf.  the  case  of  Mrs.  Storie  in  427  and  the  cases  given  by  Mr.  F.  Galton  (Enquiries
into  Human  Faculty,  pp.  226-231)  of  consentaneous  thought  and  action  on  the  part  of
twins,  which  he  attributes  to  a  specially  close  similarity  of  constitution.

655]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  273

In  another  letter,  Mr.  Carroll  says  :—

As  to  the  apparition  of  my  brother  in  Northamptonshire,  at  a  place  and  window
where  he  had  never  before  been — I  think  I  said  the  room  was  very  light  indeed,
the  night  very  dark.  Even  had  I  looked  out  of  the  window  I  could  not
have  seen  him.  With  my  head  turned  from  the  window,  I  distinctly  saw  his
face.  I  was  affected  and  surprised.  It  seemed  like  a  slight  shock  of  electricity.
I  had  not  recovered  from  the  effects  when  the  second  surprise  came,  the  reality
— my  brother.  I  did  not  mention  the  subject  to  him  then,  being  rather  flattered
at  his  astonishment  at  my  cool  demeanour.  The  coolness  was  caused  by  the
apparition  first  of  him.  The  window  my  brother  came  to  was  at  the  back  of
the  house.  He  found  my  window  out  only  by  accident,  or,  as  he  said,  he
thought  it  was  my  window.

On  this  case  Gurney  notes  : —

Mr.  Carroll  is  a  clear-headed  and  careful  witness.  He  is  quite  positive  as
to  this  being  his  only  experience  of  a  hallucination.  In  conversation,  he  stated
that  there  were  no  mirrors  in  the  room,  and  that  the  figure  was  seen  not  in  the
direction  of  the  window.  He  thinks  that  the  interval  between  the  hallucination
and  his  brother's  appearance  was  about  a  minute.

654.  I  give  in  654  A  a  strange  case,  which  comes  to  us  on  good
authority,  where  we  must  suppose  one  man's  subliminal  impulse  to  have
created  a  picture  of  himself,  his  wife,  a  carriage  and  a  horse,  persistent
enough  to  have  been  watched  for  some  seconds  at  least  by  three  observers
in  one  place,  and  by  a  fourth  and  independent  observer  at  another  point
in  the  moving  picture's  career.     The  only  alternative,  if  the  narrative  be
accepted  as  substantially  true,  will  be  the  hypothesis  before  alluded  to  of
the  flashing  of  an  impending  scene,  as  in  crystal-vision,  from  some  source
external  to  any  of  the  human  minds  concerned.     I  need  hardly  at  this
point  repeat  that  in  my  view  the  wife  and  the  horse  will  be  as  purely  a
part  of  the  man's  conception  of  his  own  aspect  or  environment  as  the  coat
on  his  back.

I   add   in   654  B,   for   purposes   of  comparison,   one   of    the   most

bizarre  cases  in  our  collection.     Four  credible  persons,  to  some  extent

endently,  see  a  carriage  and  pair,  with  two  men  on  the  box  and  an

occupant,  under  circumstances  which  make  it  impossible  that  the

qe  was  real.     Now  this  vision  cannot  have  been  prf cognitive  ;  nothing

of  the  kind  occurred  for  years  after  it,  nor  well  could  occur ;  and  I  am

forced  to  regard  it  as  the  exteraalisation  of  some  dream,  whether  of  an

incarnate  or  of  a  discarnate  mind.     The  parallel  between  this  midnight

near  the  Moray  Firth,  and  the  mid-day  drive  on  the  Norfolk  Fens,

in  the  previous  Appendix,  tends  therefore  to  show  that  that  Norfolk

in  spite  of  the  paraphernalia  of  wife,  horse,  and  dog-cart,  may  have

\  he  outcome  of  a  single  waking  dream  ; — of  the  phantasmogenetic

•.ion  of  elements  of  one  sole  personality.

655.  1  will  add  here,  still  following  Phantasms  of  the  Living   (vol.  ii.
p.  iooj,  a  case  of  auditory  intimation  of  an  arrival.

LI.  S

274  CHAPTER    VI  [656

The  account  comes  from  Mr.  J.  Stevenson,  of  28  Prospect  Street,
Gateshead.

April  20th,  1885.

During  the  months  of  May  and  June  1881,  my  brother  was  staying  with  us.
He  went  out  one  Sunday  night  between  5  and  6  o'clock.  He  did  not  say  what
time  he  would  return,  but  his  time  was  generally  about  10  P.M.  About  7
o'clock,  while  I  was  reading  by  the  window,  and  Mrs.  Stevenson  by  the  fire,
all  being  quiet,  I  heard  a  voice  say  "  David  is  corning"  I  instantly  turned  to
Mrs.  S.,  asking  what  she  said.  She  said,  "  I  have  not  spoken  a  word."  I  told
her  that  I  heard  some  one  say  that  "  David  is  coming."  I  then  thought  I  had
imagined  it,  but,  lo  and  behold !  in  less  than  3  minutes,  in  he  comes,  quite
unexpected.  I  was  surprised,  but  did  not  mention  anything  to  him  about  it.
The  position  of  the  house  prevented  us  from  seeing  him  until  just  about  to
enter  the  house.  He  was  in  good  health,  as  we  all  were  at  the  time.  This  is  a
candid  statement  of  the  facts.  Jos.  STEVENSON.

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Stevenson  adds  : —

This  was  the  sole  experience   I   have  had  of  the   kind.     I   have   never
experienced  any  hallucination.

Mrs.  Stevenson  corroborates  as  follows  : —

In  reference  to  my  husband's  letter  of  April  zoth,  I  have  pleasure  in  testi-
fying to  the  accuracy  of  his  account,  and  of  his  drawing  my  attention  to  the
fact  at  the  time  mentioned.  SERENA  STEVENSON.

I  need  hardly  repeat  that  my  hypothesis  of  a  real  modification  of  a
part  of  space,  transforming  it  into  a  phantasmogenetic  centre,  applies  to
a  phantasmal  voice  just  as  well  as  to  a  phantasmal  figure.  The  voice  is
not  heard  acoustically  any  more  than  the  figure  is  seen  optically.  Yet  a
phantasmal  voice  may  in  a  true  sense  "  come  from  "  a  given  spot.  In
such  a  case  as  the  above,  however,  where  it  is  only  heard  by  one  person,
it  is  simpler  to  suppose  that  the  auditory  tract  of  the  percipient's  brain
was  the  only  portion  of  space  affected.  A  case  of  a  similar  kind  is  given
in  655  A.

656.  I  add  another  "  arrival-case  "  in  656  A.  But  before  leaving
the  subject  I  must  remind  the  reader  that  among  telaesthetic  cases  we  have
already  encountered  some  where  a  percipient  seemed  to  have  become
aware  of  the  contents  of  a  letter  when  it  had  reached  his  vicinity  (see  the
cases  of  Sir  L.  Jones  and  Professor  Alexander  in  421  H  and  J),  and
another  instance  of  this,  related  by  Dr.  O.  W.  Holmes,  is  quoted  in
656  B.

It  is  of  course  possible  that  in  the  same  way  the  percipient  may
become  aware  of  the  contents  of  another  mind  when  it  comes  into  its
vicinity ;  so  that  the  intimations  of  nearness  above  discussed  may  some-
times have  been  gathered  by  the  percipient  spirit  alone.  In  either  case
the  link  of  spatial  nearness  still  persists.  That  link  indeed  seems  more
directly  operative  in  cases  of  telaesthesia  than  in  cases  of  telepathy.  When
a  telepathic  message  is  transmitted  from  one  person  to  his  neighbour  in

657]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  275

space,  one  may  say,  as  Edmund  Gurney  did,  that  two  minds  looking  on
the  same  scene  have  much  of  their  content  in  common :  so  that  a
psychical  bond  is  thus  established.  But  if  the  contents  of  a  letter  become
known  when  it  is  close  at  hand,  then,  unless  we  assume  that  the  writer  is
thinking  of  its  arrival  (which  would  in  several  of  our  cases  be  a  very  far-
fetched supposition),  it  seems  that  the  clairvoyant  perception  must  have
been  prompted  or  facilitated  by  the  mere  contiguity.  This  is  of  course
by  no  means  the  same  thing  as  to  suppose  that  there  is  any  "  law  of
distances  "  governing  the  telepathic  message.

It  is  more  like  a  difference  in  facility  of  reception  than  in  facility  of
action — as  though  trifles  attracted  the  clairvoyant*  s  notice  more  readily
when  they  happened  to  be  close  at  hand.

657.  The  cases  which  I  have  lately  been  recounting  can  be  called
telaesthetic  only  by  courtesy.  There  has  been  a  psychical  excursion,  with
its  possibilities  of  clairvoyance ;  but  the  excursive  element  has  not  brought
home  any  assignable  knowledge  to  the  supraliminal  personality.  I  go  on
now  to  cases  where  such  knowledge  has  thus  been  garnered.  But  here
there  is  need  of  some  further  pause,  to  consider  a  little  in  how  many  ways
we  can  imagine  that  knowledge  to  be  reached.

Firstly,  the  distant  knowledge  may,  it  would  seem,  be  reached  through
hyperaesthesia, — an  extended  power  of  the  ordinary  senses.  Secondly,  it
sometimes  seems  to  come  through  crystal-gazing  or  its  correlative  shell-
hearing, — artifices  which  seem  to  utilise  the  ordinary  senses  in  a  new  way.
And  besides  these  two  avenues  to  distant  knowledge  there  is  a  third,  the
telepathic  avenue,  which,  as  we  have  already  surmised,  sometimes  shades
off  into  the  purely  telaesthetic ;  when  no  distant  mind,  but  only  the  distant
scene,  seems  to  be  attracting  the  excursive  spirit.  And  in  fas  fourth  place
we  must  remember  that  it  is  mainly  in  the  form  of  dream  or  vision  that  the
most  striking  instances  of  telaesthesia  which  I  have  as  yet  recorded  have
come.  Can  we  in  any  way  harmonise  these  various  modes  of  perception  ?
\ve  discover  any  condition  of  the  percipient  which  is  common
to  all?

To  a  certain  limited  extent  such  co-ordination  is  possible.     In  each

approach  to  telaesthesia  in  turn  we  find  a  tendency  to  something  like  a

dream-excursion.      Hyperaesthesia,    in  the  first  place,  although   it  exists

sometimes  in   persons  wide  awake,   is  characteristically  an   attribute  of

waking  states.

We  have  seen  in  discussing  hypnotic  experiments  that  it  is  sometimes

possible  to  extend  the  subject's  perceptive  faculty  by  gradual  suggestion,

as  to  transform  a  hyperaesthesia  which  can  still  be  referred  to  the

\  of  the  sense-organs  into  a  tetoesthesia  which  cannot  be  so  referred.

!<-•  that  percipients  in  such  cases  sometimes  describe

at  of  receiving  an  impression,  or  seeing  a  picture  placed

before  them  ;  sometimes  as  that  of  travelling  and  visiting  th<  scene

or  person.     Or  the  feeling  may  oscillate  between  these  two  sensations,

276  CHAPTER    VI  [658

just  as  the  sense  of  time-relation  in  the  picture  shown  may  oscillate  between
past,  present,  and  future.

To  all  these  complex  sensations  the  phenomena  of  crystal-gazing  offer
close  analogies.  I  have  already  remarked  on  the  curious  fact  that  the
simple  artifice  of  gazing  into  a  speculum  should  prove  the  avenue  to
phenomena  of  such  various  types.  There  may  be  very  different  origins
even  for  pictures  which  in  the  crystal  present  very  similar  aspects ;  and
certain  sensations  do  also  accompany  these  pictures ;  sensations  not
merely  of  gazing  but  sometimes  (though  rarely)  of  partial  trance;  and
oftener  of  bilocation  ; — of  psychical  presence  among  the  scenes  which  the
crystal  has  indeed  initiated,  but  no  longer  seems  to  limit  or  to  contain.

658.  The  idea  of  psychical  excursion  thus  suggested  must,  however,  be
somehow  reconciled  with  the  frequently  symbolic  character  of  these  visions.
The  features  of  a  crystal-vision  seem  often  to  be  no  mere  transcription  of
material  facts,  but  an  abbreviated  selection  from  such  facts,  or  even  a  bold
modification  of  such  facts  with  a  view  of  telling  some  story  more  quickly
and  clearly.  We  are  familiar  with  the  same  kind  of  succession  of  sym-
bolical scenes  in  dream,  or  in  waking  reverie.  And  of  course  if  an
intelligence  outside  the  crystal-gazer's  mind  is  endeavouring  to  impress
him,  this  might  well  be  the  chosen  way.

And  moreover  through  all  telsesthetic  vision  some  element  of  similar
character  is  wont  to  run — some  indication  that  mind  has  been  at  work
upon  the  picture — that  the  scene  has  not  been  presented,  so  to  say,  in
crude  objectivity,  but  that  there  has  been  some  choice  as  to  the  details
discerned ;  and  some  symbolism  in  the  way  in  which  they  are  presented.

Let  us  consider  how  these  characteristics  affect  different  theories  of
the  mechanism  of  clairvoyance.  Let  us  suppose  first  that  there  is  some
kind  of  transition  from  hyperaesthesia  to  telaesthesia,  so  that  when
peripheral  sensation  is  no  longer  possible,  central  perception  may  be  still
operating  across  obstacles  otherwise  insurmountable.

If  this  be  the  case,  it  seems  likely  that  central  perception  will  shape
itself  on  the  types  of  perception  to  which  the  central  tracts  of  the  brain
are  accustomed ;  and  that  the  connaissance  superieure,  the  telaesthetic
knowledge,  however  it  may  really  be  acquired,  will  present  itself  mainly  as
clairvoyance  or  clairaudience — as  some  form  of  sight  or  sound.  Yet  these
telsesthetic  sights  and  sounds  may  be  expected  to  show  some  trace  of  their
unusual  origin.  They  may,  for  instance,  be  imperfectly  co-ordinated  with
sights  and  sounds  arriving  through  external  channels;  and,  since  they
must  in  some  way  be  a  translation  of  supernormal  impressions  into  sensory
terms,  they  are  likely  to  show  something  symbolic  in  character.

I  take  as  an  illustration  certain  experiments — carefully  made  in  their
day — which  were  reported  in  the  Zoist,  and  some  of  which  are  quoted
in  573  E.  Mottoes  printed  on  folded  scraps  of  paper,  inside  nuts  bought
by  the  experimenters,  were  read  by  the  mesmerised  clairvoyant.  But
she  saw  these  folded  slips  of  paper  as  though  stretched  out  straight ;  and

659]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  277

once  or  twice  she  gave  the  general  purport  of  the  motto,  not  the  exact
words.  There  was  want  of  co-ordination  with  optical  sight,  and  there
was  symbolism — a  retranslation  of  thoughts  into  words — certain  words
being  reported  to  the  supraliminal  self  which  were  not  identical,  but
synonymous  with  the  actual  words  on  the  slip.

659.  This  tendency  to  subliminal  symbolism,  indeed,  has  met  us  at
each  point  of  our  inquiry.  As  an  instance  of  it  in  its  simplest  form,  I
may  mention  a  case  where  a  botanical  student  passing  inattentively
in  front  of  the  glass  door  of  a  restaurant  thought  that  he  had  seen
Verbascum  Thapsus  printed  thereon.  The  real  word  was  Bouillon  ;  and
that  happens  to  be  the  trivial  name  in  French  for  the  plant  Verbascum
Thapsus.  The  actual  optical  perception  had  thus  been  subliminally  trans-
formed ;  the  words  Verbascum  Thapsus  were  the  report  sent  up  to  the
inattentive  supraliminal  self  by  a  subliminal  self  more  interested  in  botany
than  in  dinner.

Nay,  we  know  that  our  own  optical  perception  is  in  its  own  way  highly
symbolic.  The  scene  which  the  baby  sees  instinctively, — which  the  im-
pressionist painter  manages  to  see  by  a  sort  of  deliberate  self-simplification,
— is  very  different  from  the  highly  elaborate  interpretation  and  selection
of  blotches  of  colour  by  which  the  ordinary  adult  figures  to  himself  the
visible  world.

Now  we  adults  stand  towards  this  subliminal  symbolism  in  much  the
same  attitude  as  the  baby  stands  towards  our  educated  optical  symbolism.
Just  as  the  baby  fails  to  grasp  the  third  dimension,  so  may  we  still  be  fail-
ing to  grasp  a  fourth ; — or  whatever  be  the  law  of  that  higher  cognisance
which  begins  to  report  fragmentarily  to  man  that  which  his  ordinary  senses
cannot  discern.

Assuredly  then  we  must  not  take  the  fact  that  any  knowledge  comes  to
us  symbolically  as  a  proof  that  it  comes  to  us  from  a  mind  outside  our
own.  The  symbolism  may  be  the  inevitable  language  in  which  one  stratum
of  our  personality  makes  its  report  to  another.  The  symbolism,  in  short,
may  be  either  the  easiest,  or  the  only  possible  psychical  record  of  actual
objective  fact ;  whether  that  fact  be  in  the  first  instance  discerned  by  our
deeper  selves,  or  be  conveyed  to  us  from  other  minds  in  this  form ; —
1  for  our  mind's  digestion,  as  animal  food  has  been  elaborated
for  our  body's  digestion,  from  a  primitive  crudity  of  things.

But  again  one  must  question,  on  general  idealistic  principles,  whether
there  be  in  such  cases  any  real  distinction  between  symbolism  and  reality,
—between  subjective  and  objective  as  we  commonly  use  those  terms.
resisting  matter  which  we  see  and  touch  has  "  solid  "  reality  for  minds
so  constituted  as  to  have  the  same  subjective  feeling  awakened  by  it.  But
to  other  minds,  endowed  with  other  forms  of  sensibility — minds  possibly
both  higher  and  more  numerous  than  our  own — this  solid  matter  may
seem  disputable  and  unreal,  while  thought  and  emotion,  perceived  in  ways
unknown  to  us,  may  be  the  only  reality.

278  CHAPTER    VI  [660

This  material  world  constitutes,  in  fact,  a  "  privileged  case  " — a  simpli-
fied example — among  all  discernible  worlds,  so  far  as  the  perception  of
incarnate  spirits  is  concerned.  For  discarnate  spirits  it  is  no  longer  a
privileged  case ;  to  them  it  is  apparently  easier  to  discern  thoughts  and
emotions  by  non-material  signs.1  But  they  need  not  therefore  be  wholly
cut  off  from  discerning  material  things,  any  more  than  incarnate  spirits  are
wholly  cut  off  from  discerning  immaterial  things — thoughts  and  emotions
symbolised  in  phantasmal  form.  Very  possibly  the  spirit  has  the  same
kind  of  advantage  that  the  sea-gull  has  over  the  mackerel ; — the  bird  can
see  the  fish  better  than  the  fish  can  see  the  bird.  Certain  hindrances  to
clear  vision  (as  refraction)  may  affect  bird  and  fish  alike ;  certain  other
hindrances  (as  position  of  eyes  and  density  of  water)  may  be  worse  for  the
fish  than  for  the  bird;  while  others  again  (as  incidence  of  sunlight  on
ripple)  may  baffle  the  bird  in  ways  of  which  the  fish  can  form  no  idea.

"The  ghost  in  man,  the  ghost  that  once  was  man,"  to  use  Tennyson's
words,  have  each  of  them  got  to  overcome  by  empirical  artifices  certain
difficulties  which  are  of  different  type  for  each,  but  are  not  insurmountable
by  either.

660.  These  reflections,  applicable  at  various  points  in  our  argu-
ment, have  seemed  specially  needed  when  we  had  first  to  attack  the
meaning  of  the  so-called  •'  travelling  clairvoyance,"  of  which  instances
were  given  in  the  chapter  on  hypnotism.  It  was  needful  to  consider  how
far  there  was  a  continuous  transition  between  these  excursions  and  directer
transferences  between  mind  and  mind, — between  telaesthesia  and  telepathy.
It;  now  seems  to  me  that  such  a  continuous  transition  may  well  exist,  and
that  there  is  no  absolute  gulf  between  the  supernormal  perception  of  ideas
as  existing  in  other  minds,  and  the  supernormal  perception  of  what
we  know  as  matter.  All  matter  may,  for  aught  we  know,  exist  as  an  idea
in  some  cosmic  mind,  with  which  mind  each  individual  spirit  may  be  in
relation,  as  fully  as  with  individual  minds.  The  difference  perhaps  lies
rather  in  the  fact  that  there  may  be  generally  a  summons  from  a  cognate
mind  which  starts  the  so-called  agent's  mind  into  action;  his  invasion
may  be  in  some  way  invited ;  while  a  spiritual  excursion  among  inanimate
objects  only  may  often  lack  an  impulse  to  start  it.  If  this  be  so,  it  would
explain  the  fact  that  such  excursions  have  mainly  succeeded  under  the
influence  of  hypnotic  suggestion.

Looking  back  to  those  records  of  travelling  clairvoyance  already  cited
in  the  Appendices  to  sections  572  and  573  (Mr.  Dobbie,  Dr.  F.,  Dr.
Backman,  Dr.  Fahnestock,  &c.)  we  shall  see  in  them,  just  as  we  saw
in  the  crystal-visions,  a  kind  of  fusion  of  all  our  forms  of  supernormal
faculty.  There  was  telepathy,  telaesthesia,  retrocognition,  precognition ;
and  in  the  cases  reported  by  Cahagnet,  which  will  be  referred  to  in
Chapter  IX.,  there  was  apparently  something  more  besides.  We  see,  in

1  See  Chapter  IX., passim.

661]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  279

short,  as  we  saw  with  the  crystal-visions,  that  any  empirical  inlet  into
the  metetherial  world  is  apt  to  show  us  those  powers,  which  we  try  to
distinguish,  co-existing  in  some  synthesis  by  us  incomprehensible.  Here,
therefore,  just  as  with  the  crystal-visions,  we  have  artificially  to  separate
out  the  special  class  of  phenomena  with  which  we  wish  first  to  deal.

In  these  experiments,  then,  there  seems  to  be  an  independent  power
of  visiting  almost  any  desired  place,  its  position  having  been  perhaps  first
explained  by  reference  to  some  landmark  already  known.  The  clairvoyante
( I  use  the  female  word,  but  in  several  cases  a  man  or  boy  has  shown  this
power)  will  frequently  miss  her  way,  and  describe  houses  or  scenes
adjacent  to  those  desired.  Then  if  she  almost  literally  gets  on  the  scent, —
if  she  finds  some  place  which  the  man  whom  she  is  sent  to  seek  has  some
time  traversed, — she  follows  up  his  track  with  greater  ease,  apparently
recognising  past  events  in  his  life  as  well  as  present  circumstances.  The
process  often  reminds  one  of  the  dog  who,  if  let  loose  far  from  home,  will
find  his  way  homewards  vaguely  at  first,  and  using  we  do  not  quite  know
what  instinct ;  then  if  he  once  gets  on  the  scent  will  hold  it  easily  across
much  of  confusion  and  obstacle.

In  these  prolonged  experimental  cases  there  is  thus  time  enough  to
allow  of  the  clairvoy ante's  traversing  certain  places,  such  as  empty  rooms,
factories,  and  the  like,  whither  no  assignable  link  from  any  living  person
could  draw  her.  The  evidence  to  prove  telaesthesia,  unmixed  with  tele-
pathy, has  thus  generally  come  incidentally  in  the  course  of  some  experi-
ment mainly  telepathic  in  character.

661.  These  long  clairvoyant  wanderings  are  more  nearly  paralleled
by  dreams  than  by  waking  hallucinations.  And  among  dreams  (cited  in
Chapter  IV.)  we  have  already  seen  some  cases  much  resembling,  for
instance,  "Jane's"  experiences  (Dr.  F.'s  case  in  573  B).  See  also  in
Chapter  IV.  two  dreams,  in  one  of  which  (Mr.  Watts'  case,  421  B)  the
dreamer  visits  a  garden  scene  with  no  occupant;  in  the  other  (Miss
Luke's  case,  421  G)  a  room  which  has  been  dismantled  by  thieves.  The
first  case  depends  on  a  single  statement,  but  from  an  informant  whom  we
believe  to  be  trustworthy.  The  second  incident  is  well  authenticated,  and
telaesthetic  significance  is  attacked,  that  must  be  by  ascribing  the
coincidence  to  chance  alone.  On  this  occasion  the  thieves  must,  no
doubt,  have  been  eagerly  excited  over  their  successful  thefts.  It  is  pos-
sible that  this  focus  of  excitement  was  a  contributory  cause  of  Miss
<  dream ; — in  some  way  drew  her  excursive  spirit  to  the  scene  of
the  loss.

Here  again  is  a  case  essentially  parallel,  where  a  physician  is  impressed,
probably  in  dream,  with  a  picture  of  a  special  place  in  a  street,  where
something  is  happening,  which,  though  in  itself  unemotional — merely  that
a  man  is  standing  and  talking  in  the  street — is  of  moment  to  the  physician,
who  wants  to  get  unobtrusively  into  the  man's  house.

From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.   267.     The  case  is  there

280  CHAPTER    VI  [661

described  as  coming  "  from  a  Fellow  of  the  College  of  Physicians,  who
fears  professional  injury  if  he  were  '  supposed  to  defend  opinions  at  vari-
ance with  general  scientific  belief,'  and  does  not  therefore  allow  his  name
to  appear.  He  is  candid  enough  to  admit  that  if  every  one  argued  as  he
does,  '  progress  would  be  impossible.'  "

May  20 f /i,  1884.

Twenty  years  ago  [abroad]  I  had  a  patient,  wife  of  a  parson.  She  had  a
peculiar  kind  of  delirium  which  did  not  belong  to  her  disease,  and  perplexed
me.  The  house  in  which  she  lived  was  closed  at  midnight,  that  is — the  outer
door  had  no  bell.  One  night  I  saw  her  at  nine.  When  I  came  home  I  said  to
my  wife,  "  I  don't  understand  that  case ;  I  wish  I  could  get  into  the  house  late."
We  went  to  bed  rather  early.  At  about  one  o'clock  I  got  up.  She  said,  "  What
are  you  about?  are  you  not  well?"  I  said,  **  Perfectly  so."  "Then  why  get
up  ?  "  "  Because  I  can  get  into  that  house."  "  How,  if  it  is  shut  up  ?  "  "  I  see
the  proprietor  standing  under  the  lamp-post  this  side  of  the  bridge,  with  another
man."  "  You  have  been  dreaming."  "  No,  I  have  been  wide  awake ;  but
dreaming  or  waking,  I  mean  to  try."  I  started  with  the  firm  conviction  that  I
should  find  the  individual  in  question.  Sure  enough  there  he  was  under  the
lamp-post,  talking  to  a  friend.  I  asked  him  if  he  was  going  home.  (I  knew
him  very  well.)  He  said  he  was,  so  I  told  him  I  was  going  to  see  a
patient,  and  would  accompany  him.  I  was  positively  ashamed  to  explain
matters  ;  it  seemed  so  absurd  that  I  knew  he  would  not  believe  me.  On  arriv-
ing at  the  house  I  said,  **  Now  I  am  here,  I  will  drop  in  and  see  my  patient."
On  entering  the  room  I  found  the  maid  giving  her  a  tumbler  of  strong  grog.
The  case  was  clear ;  it  was  as  I  suspected — delirium  from  drink.  The  next
day  I  delicately  spoke  to  the  husband  about  it.  He  denied  it,  and  in  the  after-
noon I  received  a  note  requesting  me  not  to  repeat  the  visits.  Three  weeks
ago  I  was  recounting  the  story  and  mentioned  the  name.  A  lady  present  said  :
"  That  is  the  name  of  the  clergyman  in  my  parish,  at  B.,  and  his  wife  is  in  a
lunatic  asylum  from  drink  !  "

In  conversation  with  Gurney,  the  narrator  explained  that  the  vision —
though  giving  an  impression  of  externality  and  seen,  as  he  believes,  with
open  eyes — was  not  definably  located  in  space.  He  had  never  encoun-
tered the  proprietor  in  the  spot  where  he  saw  him,  and  it  was  not  a  likely
thing  that  he  should  be  standing  talking  in  the  streets  at  so  late  an  hour.

In  this  case  we  cannot  consider  either  the  drunken  patient  or  the
indifferent  proprietor  as  in  any  sense  the  agent.  Somehow  or  other  the
physician's  own  persistent  wish  to  get  some  such  opportunity  induced  a
collaboration  of  his  subliminal  with  his  supraliminal  self,  akin  to  the
inspirations  of  genius.  Genius,  however,  operates  within  ordinary  sensory
limits;  while  in  this  physician's  case  the  subliminal  self  exercised  its
farthest-reaching  supernormal  powers.

With  this  again  may  be  compared  a  case  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living
(vol.  ii.  p.  368),  where  a  dreamer  seems  to  himself  to  be  present  in  the
Thames  Tunnel  during  a  fatal  accident,  which  did  in  fact  occur  during
that  night.  Here  again  the  drowned  workman — who  was  quite  unknown

662]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  281

to  the  distant  dreamer — can  hardly  be  called  an  agent ;  yet  it  may  have
been  the  excitement  surrounding  his  death  which  attracted  the  dreamer's
spirit  to  that  scene,  as  a  conflagration  might  attract  a  waking  night-
wanderer.

662.  There  are,  on  the  other  hand,  a  good  many  cases  where  a  scene
thus  discerned  in  a  flash  is  one  of  special  interest  to  the  percipient,
although  no  one  in  the  scene  may  have  actually  wished  to  transfer  it
to  him.

A  case  again  of  a  somewhat  different  type  is  the  sudden  waking
vision  of  Mr.  Gottschalk  (662  B),  who  sees  in  a  circle  of  light  the
chalked  hands  and  ruffled  wrists  of  Mr.  Courtenay  Thorpe — a  well-
known  actor — who  was  opening  a  letter  of  Mr.  Gottschalk's  in  that
costume  at  the  time.  Trivial  in  itself,  this  incident  illustrates  an  inter-
esting class  of  cases,  where  a  picture  very  much  like  a  crystal-vision
suddenly  appears  on  a  wall  or  even  in  the  air  with  no  apparent
background.

I  know  one  or  two  persons  who  have  had  in  their  lives  one  single
round  or  oval  hallucinatory  picture  of  this  kind,  of  which  no  interpretation
was  apparent, — a  curious  indication  of  some  subliminal  predisposition
towards  this  somewhat  elaborate  form  of  message.

Somewhat  like  Mr.  Gottschalk's  projection  of  his  picture  upon  a
background  of  dark  air  are  two  experiences  of  Mr.  Searle  (662  C)  and
of  Mrs.  Taunton  (662  D) — excellent  informants — which  I  give  next
with  an  important  note  of  Edmund  Curacy's  on  the  occasional  trans-
parency of  these  phantasmal  pictures.  Gurney  regards  this  transparency
as  indicating  imperfect  externalisation  of  the  hallucinatory  image.

My  own  phrase,  "  imperfect  co-ordination  of  inner  with  outward  vision,"

comes  to  much  the  same  thing,  and  seems  specially  applicable  to  Mrs.

Taunton's  words :  "  The  appearance  was  not  transparent   or   filmy,  but

perfectly  solid-looking ;  and  yet  I  could  somehow  see  the  orchestra,  not

through,  but  behind  it."     There  are  a  few  cases  where  the  percipient  seems

to  see  a  hallucinatory  figure  behind  him,  out  of  the  range  of  optical  vision

the   case  of  Mr.  Kearne,  665  A).     There  is  of  course  no  reason

why  this  should  not  be  so, — even  if  a  part  of  space  external  to  the  perci-

's  brain  should  be  actually  affected.

Mr.  Searle's   case   also  is  very  interesting.     Here  Mrs.  Searle  faints

visiting  a  house  a  few  miles  from  Mr.  Searle's  chambers   in    the

Temple.     At  or  about  the  same  sime,  he  sees  as  though  in  a  looking-glass,

upon   a   window   opposite   him,   his   wife's   head   and    face,    white    and

bloodless.

Gurney  suggests  that  this  was  a  transference  from  Mrs.  Searle's  mind
simply   of  "the   idea   of  fainting,"    which    then  worked    itself  out  into
:>tion  in  an  appropriate  fashion.

thus?     Or  did  Mr.  Searle  in  the  Temple  see  with  inner  vision
ife's  head  as  she  lay  back  faint  and  pallid  in  Gloucester  Gardens?

282  CHAPTER    VI  [663

Our  nearest  analogy  here  is  plainly  crystal-vision ;  and  crystal-visions,  as
we  have  observed,  point  both  ways.  Sometimes  the  picture  in  the  crystal
is  conspicuously  symbolical ;  sometimes  it  seems  a  transcript  of  an  actual
distant  scene.

663.  It  is  likely  enough  that,  if  we  could  really  understand  the
mechanism  involved,  some  of  these  questions  would  be  seen  to  be —
not  indeed  merely  verbal — but  beside  the  point.  If  each  of  us  is  a  system
of  forces  united  in  innumerable  ways  to  other  systems  of  forces ;  and  if
there  comes  a  tug  somewhere — a  perturbation  of  one  of  these  linked
personalities — then  the  resultant  thrill  (whether  of  ether  or  beyond  ether)
may  affect  those  other  human  systems  in  ways  which  our  experience
cannot  help  us  to  imagine.

I  will  add  here  two  cases  which  will  illustrate  two  problems  which
occur  as  we  deal  with  each  class  of  cases  in  turn, — the  problem  of  time-
relations  and  the  problem  of  spirit-agency.  Can  an  incident  be  said  to  be
seen  clairvoyantly  if  it  is  seen  some  hours  after  it  occurred  ?  Ought  we
to  say  that  a  scene  is  clairvoyantly  visited,  or  that  it  is  spiritually  shown,
if  it  represents  a  still  chamber  of  death,  where  no  emotion  is  any  longer
stirring ;  but  to  which  the  freed  spirit  might  desire  to  attract  the  friend's
attention  and  sympathy?  The  first  of  these  two  cases  appeared  in  a
paper  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  whose  comments  I  reproduce.

From  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  "  On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance,"  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  32-35.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  :—

I  shall  begin  with  cases  closely  parallel  to  many  which  have  been  in-
cluded in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  as  cases  of  telepathic  clairvoyance,  and
in  which  telepathy  is  prima  facie  the  simplest  explanation.  In  these  cases
the  agent  is  clearly  designated,  and  also  his  connection  with  the  percipient ;
and  the  experience  of  the  supposed  agent  at  the  moment  is  generally  of  a
marked  and  exceptional  character.  Moreover,  in  most  of  these  cases  the  initia-
tive, or  at  least  the  psychical  disturbance  or  impulse  which  leads  to  the  vision,
is,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  entirely  on  the  side  of  the  agent,  the  percipient  being
in  an  apparently  normal  state  and  not  expecting  or  seeking  any  vision.

The  first  case  I  shall  give  comes  to  us  through  the  American  Branch  of
the  Society.  Mr.  A.  B.  Wood  writes  to  Mr.  F.  A.  Nims,  an  Associate  of  the
American  Branch,  as  follows : —

MUSKEGON,  April  29^,  1890.

In  compliance  with  your  suggestion,  supplemented  by  the  request  of  Mr.
Richard  Hodgson,  I  sought  an  interview  with  Mrs.  Agnes  Paquet,  and  obtained
the  following  information  regarding  her  strange  experience  on  the  day  of  her
brother's  death.  I  submit  the  papers  to  you  feeling  that  they  should  go  forward
with  the  fullest  and  clearest  information  obtainable,  and  believing  that  you  may
suggest  other  questions,  the  answers  to  which  may  have  important  bearing  on
the  case.  A.  B.  WOOD.

Statement  of  Accident.

On  October  24th,  1889,  Edmund  Dunn,  brother  of  Mrs.  Agnes  Paquet,  was
serving  as  fireman  on  the  tug  Wolf,  a  small  steamer  engaged  in  towing  vessels

663]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  283

in  Chicago  Harbour.  At  about  3  o'clock  A.M.,  the  tug  fastened  to  a  vessel,  in-
side the  piers,  to  tow  her  up  the  river.  While  adjusting  the  tow-line  Mr.  Dunn
fell  or  was  thrown  overboard  by  the  tow-line,  and  drowned.  The  body,  though
sought  for,  was  not  found  until  about  three  weeks  after  the  accident,  when  it
came  to  the  surface  near  the  place  where  Mr.  Dunn  disappeared.

Mrs.  Paquefs  Statement.

I  arose  about  the  usual  hour  on  the  morning  of  the  accident,  probably  about
six  o'clock.  I  had  slept  well  throughout  the  night,  had  no  dreams  or  sudden
awakenings.  I  awoke  feeling  gloomy  and  depressed,  which  feeling  I  could  not
shake  off.  After  breakfast  my  husband  went  to  his  work,  and,  at  the  proper
time,  the  children  were  gotten  ready  and  sent  to  school,  leaving  me  alone  in
the  house.  Soon  after  this  I  decided  to  steep  and  drink  some  tea,  hoping  it
would  relieve  me  of  the  gloomy  feelings  aforementioned.  I  went  into  the
pantry,  took  down  the  tea  canister,  and  as  I  turned  around  my  brother  Edmund
— or  his  exact  image — stood  before  me  and  only  a  few  feet  away.  The  appari-
tion stood  with  back  toward  me,  or,  rather,  partially  so,  and  was  in  the  act  of
falling  forward — away  from  me — seemingly  impelled  by  two  ropes  or  a  loop  of
rope  drawing  against  his  legs.  The  vision  lasted  but  a  moment,  disappearing
over  a  low  railing  or  bulwark,  but  was  very  distinct.  I  dropped  the  tea,  clasped
my  hands  to  my  face,  and  exclaimed,  "  My  God !  Ed  is  drowned."

At  about  half-past  ten  A.M.  my  husband  received  a  telegram  from  Chicago,
announcing  the  drowning  of  my  brother.  When  he  arrived  home  he  said  to
me,  "  Ed  is  sick  in  hospital  at  Chicago ;  I  have  just  received  a  telegram."  To
which  I  replied,  "  Ed  is  drowned ;  I  saw  him  go  overboard."  I  then  gave
him  a  minute  description  of  what  I  had  seen.  I  stated  that  my  brother,  as
I  saw  him,  was  bareheaded,  had  on  a  heavy,  blue  sailor's  shirt,  no  coat,  and
that  he  went  over  the  rail  or  bulwark.  I  noticed  that  his  pants  legs  were
rolled  up  enough  to  show  the  white  lining  inside.  I  also  described  the  appear-
ance of  the  boat  at  the  point  where  my  brother  went  overboard.

I  am  not  nervous,  and  neither  before  nor  since  have  I  had  any  experience  in
the  least  degree  similar  to  that  above  related.

brother  was  not  subject  to  fainting  or  vertigo.  AGNES  PAQUET.

Mr.  Paquefs  Statement.

At  about  10.30  o'clock  A.M.,  October  24th,  1889,  I  received  a  telegram  from
^o,  announcing  the  drowning  of  my  brother-in-law,  Edmund  Dunn,  at
3  o'clock  that  morning.  I  went  directly  home,  and,  wishing  to  break  the  force
of  the  sad  news  I  had  to  convey  to  my  wife,  I  said  to  her :  "  Ed  is  sick  in
hospital  at  Chicago;  I  have  just  received  a  telegram."  To  which  she  replied :
"  Ed  is  drowned ;  I  saw  him  go  overboard."  She  then  described  to  me  the
appearance  and  dress  of  her  brother  as  described  in  her  statement ;  also  the
appearance  of  the  boat,  &c.

irtcd  at  once  for  Chicago,  and  when  I  arrived  there  I  found  the  appear-
ance of  that  part  of  the  vessel  described  by  my  wife  to  be  exactly  as  she  had
described  it,  though  she  had  never  seen  the  vessel ;  and  the  crew  verified  my
iption  of  her  brother's  dress,  &c.,  except  that  they  thought  that  he
t  on  ;it  the  time  of  the  accident.     They  said  that  Mr.   Dunn  had
purchased  ;i  pair  of  pants  a  few  days  before  the  accident  occurred,  and  as  they
t  trifle  long  befor. ,  wrinkling  at  the  knees,  he  had  worn  them  rolled  up,
:.g  the  white  lining  as  seen  by  my  wife.

284  CHAPTER    VI  [663

The  captain  of  the  tug,  who  was  at  the  wheel  at  the  time  of  the  accident,
seemed  reticent.  He  thought  my  brother-in-law  was  taken  with  a  fainting  fit
or  vertigo  and  fell  over  backward  ;  but  a  sailor  (Frank  Yemont)  told  a  friend  of
mine  that  he  (Yemont)  stood  on  the  bow  of  the  vessel  that  was  being  towed
and  saw  the  accident.  He  stated  that  my  brother-in-law  was  caught  by  the
tow-line  and  thrown  overboard,  as  described  by  my  wife.  I  think  that  the
captain,  in  his  statement,  wished  to  avoid  responsibility,  as  he  had  no  right  to
order  a  fireman — my  brother-in-law's  occupation — to  handle  the  tow-line.

My  brother-in-law  was  never,  to  my  knowledge,  subject  to  fainting  or
vertigo.  PETER  PAQUET.

Mr.  Wood  writes  again  on  August  i2th,  1890  : —

In  accordance  with  request,  I  have  had  statements  made  in  first  person.  .  .

I  have  made  diligent  inquiry,  but  cannot  place  the  sailor  Yemont.  A  letter
sent  to  his  last  known,  or  supposed,  address  has  been  returned,  marked  "  Not
called  for."  ...  A.  B.  WOOD.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  adds  : —

Here  Mrs.  Paquet  not  only  had  a  vivid  impression  of  her  brother  within  a
few  hours  of  his  death — not  only  knew  that  he  was  dead — but  saw  a  more  or
less  accurate  representation  of  the  scene  of  his  death.

It  will  have  been  noticed  that  her  impression  was  not  contemporaneous  with
the  event  to  which  it  related,  but  occurred  some  six  hours  afterwards.  It  was
preceded  by  a  feeling  of  depression  with  which  she  had  awoken  in  the  morning,
and  one  is  at  first  tempted  to  suppose  that  she  had  dreamed  of  the  event  and
forgotten  it,  and  that  her  subsequent  vision  was  the  result  of  a  sudden  revivi-
fication of  the  dream  in  her  memory.  But  we  do  not  know  enough  to  justify  us
in  assuming  this,  and  against  such  a  hypothesis  may  be  urged  the  experience  of
Mrs.  Storie  related  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  [quoted  in  427],  which
somewhat  resembles  Mrs.  Paquet's.  Mrs.  Storie  tells  us  that  all  the  evening
she  felt  unusually  nervous,  and  then,  when  she  went  to  bed,  she  had  a  remark-
able dream,  in  which  she  saw  a  series  of  scenes  which  afterwards  turned  out  to-
have  a  clear  relation  to  the  death  of  her  brother,  who  had  been  killed  by  a
passing  train  four  hours  earlier.  In  her  case  the  nervousness  cannot  be  re-
garded as  telepathic,  as  it  is  stated  to  have  begun  before  the  accident,  but  it
seems  quite  possible  that  the  nervousness  and  depression  may  have  had  to  da
with  some  condition  in  the  percipient  which  rendered  the  vision  possible.

Can  we  fairly  press  an  idea  of  any  mere  latency  of  the  scene  in  the  per-
cipient's mind  to  account  for  such  an  incident  as  this  ?  Or  must  we  not  feel
that  there  is  here  a  mode  of  dealing  with  time  which  is  not  ours?  This
apparently  different  mode  of  conceiving  time-relations  is  also  shown  in
cases  of  precognition, — already  referred  to  in  Chapter  IV.  (425), — and
I  add  in  663  A  a  case  of  waking  premonition  which  there  seems  no
reason  to  ascribe  to  spirit  agency.  I  recur  to  the  problem  of  time-
relations  in  Chapter  IX. ;  meanwhile  it  is  well  to  be  reminded  at  every
stage  that  no  category  which  we  can  make  can  be  a  really  distinct  cate-
gory, but  that  all  these  supernormal  phenomena  are  somehow  linked
together  beyond  our  sight.

664]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  285

664.  The  decedent  in  the  next  case  was  a  man  of  some  note,  who
would,  I  think,  have  been  anxious  to  manifest  his  continued  existence  if
he  found  that  possible.

From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  265.  I  quote  Curacy's  pre-
fatory remarks  on  the  case.

We  received  the  next  account  through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  J.  Bradley  Dyne,
of  2  New  Square,  Lincoln's  Inn.  The  incident  took  place  in  his  house  at  High-
gate,  and  the  narrator  is  his  sister-in-law.  The  case  brings  us  again  to  the  very
verge  of  actual  sensory  hallucination.  It  seems  also  to  be  an  extreme  instance
of  a  deferred  or  latent  telepathic  impression — the  death  of  the  agent  (allowing
for  longitude)  having  preceded  the  percipient's  experience  by  about  ten  hours.
This  feature  does  not  seem  specially  surprising,  when  we  remember  how  actual
impressions  of  sense  may  pass  unnoted,  and  yet  emerge  into  consciousness
hours  afterwards,  either  in  dream  or  in  some  moment  of  silence  and  recueille-
menf.

The  following  is  the  percipient's  account : —

1883.

I  had  known  Mr. as  a  medical  man,  under  whose  treatment  I  had  been

for  some  years,  and  at  whose  hands  I  had  experienced  great  kindness.  He  had
ceased  to  attend  me  for  considerably  more  than  a  year  at  the  time  of  his  death.
I  was  aware  that  he  had  given  up  practice,  but  beyond  that  I  knew  nothing  of
his  proceedings,  or  of  the  state  of  his  health.  At  the  time  I  last  saw  him  he
appeared  particularly  well,  and  even  made  some  remark  himself  as  to  the  amount
igour  and  work  left  in  him.

On  Thursday,  the  i6th  day  of  December  1875,  I  had  been  for  some  little
time  on  a  visit  at  my  brother-in-law's  and  sister's  house  near  London.  I  was  in
good  health,  but  from  the  morning  and  throughout  the  day  I  felt  unaccountably
depressed  and  out  of  spirits,  which  I  attributed  to  the  gloominess  of  the  weather.
A  short  time  after  lunch,  about  two  o'clock,  I  thought  I  would  go  up  to  the
nursery  to  amuse  myself  with  the  children,  and  try  to  recover  my  spirits.  The
attempt  failed,  and  I  returned  to  the  dining-room,  where  I  sat  by  myself,  my

being  engaged  elsewhere.      The  thought  of  Mr. came  into  my  mind,

and  suddenly,  with  ray  eyes  open,  as  I  believe,  for  I  was  not  feeling  sleepy,  I
seemed  to  be  in  a  room  in  which  a  man  was  lying  dead  in  a  small  bed.     I

recognised  the  face  at  once  as  that  of  Mr. ,  and  felt  no  doubt  that  he  was

md  not  asleep  only.     The  room  appeared  to  be  bare  and  without  carpet

or  furniture.     I  cannot  say  how  long  the  appearance  lasted.     I  did  not  mention

the  appearance  to  my  sister  or  brother-in-law  at  the  time.    I  tried  to  argue  with

;  that  there  could  be  nothing  in  what  I  had  seen,  chiefly  on  the  ground

that  from  what  I  knew  of  Mr. 's  circumstances  it  was  most  improbable  that,

if  dead,  he  would  be  in  a  room  in  so  bare  and  unfurnished  a  state.      Two  days
afterwards,  on  December  i8th,  I  left  my  sister's  house  for  home.  About  a  week
my  arrival,  another  of  my  sisters  read  out  of  the  daily  papers  the  announce-
ment of  Mr. 's  death,  which  had  taken  place  abroad,  and  on  December  i6th,

v  on  which  I  had  seen  the  appearance.

I  have  since  been  informed  that  Mr         -  had  died  in  a  small  village  hos-
in  a  warm  foreign  climate,  having  been  suddenly  attacked  with  illness
whilst  on  hi-,  travels.

286  CHAPTER    VI  [665

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  Dyne  says  :  —

My  sister-in-law  tells  me  that  the  occasion  which  I  mentioned  to  you  is
absolutely  the  only  one  on  which  she  has  seen  any  vision  of  the  kind.

We  learnt  from  Mr. 's  widow  that  the  room  in  which  he  died

fairly  corresponded  with  the  above  description,  and  that  the  hour  of  death
was  3.30  A.M.

Now  this  incident  begins  with  what  looks  like  a  telepathic  impression
of  calamity  of  familiar  type,  coinciding  with,  or  following  closely  upon,  the
death  of  a  friend.  But  then  this  depression  suddenly  develops,  as  it  were,
into  a  waking  vision  of  the  material  scene — an  absolutely  unexpected  one —
in  which  that  friend's  dead  body  is  lying.  Now  what  is  to  draw  the  perci-
pient's mind  to  this  scene,  unless  it  be  indeed  the  agency  of  the  departed
spirit?  We  shall  find  later  on  that  we  have  indications  that  departed  spirits
may  for  a  time  be  cognisant  of  the  position  or  aspect  of  their  bodies,  and
may  impress  this  knowledge  upon  survivors.  (See  also  the  case  of  Mrs.
Storie  in  427.)  May  not  the  picture  of  the  cottage-hospital  have  been
impressed  by  the  action  of  the  spirit  which  had  quitted  the  corpse  there
lying?

Such  problems  cannot  at  present  be  solved ;  nor,  as  I  have  said,  can
any  one  class  of  these  psychical  interchanges  be  clearly  demarcated  from
other  classes.  Recognising  this,  we  must  explain  the  central  character-
istics of  each  group  in  turn,  and  show  at  what  points  that  group  appears  to
merge  into  the  next.

665.  We  now  come,  then,  to  that  class  of  cases  where  B  invades  A,
and  A  perceives  the  invasion ;  but  B  retains  no  memory  of  it  in  supra-
liminal  life.  From  one  point  of  view,  as  will  be  seen,  this  is  just  the  re-
verse of  the  class  last  discussed — where  the  invader  remembered  an
invasion  which  the  invaded  person  (when  there  was  one)  did  not
perceive.

We  have  already  discussed  some  cases  of  this  sort  which  seemed  to  be
psychorrhagic — to  have  occurred  without  will  or  purpose  on  the  part  of  the
invader.  What  we  must  now  do  is  to  collect  cases  where  there  may  pro-
bably have  been  some  real  projection  of  will  or  desire  on  the  invader's
part,  leading  to  the  projection  of  his  phantasm  in  a  manner  recognisable
by  the  distant  friend  whom  he  thus  invades — yet  without  subsequent
memory  of  his  own.  These  cases  will  be  intermediate  between  the
psychorrhagic  cases  already  described  and  the  experimental  cases  on  which
we  shall  presently  enter.

I  will  remind  the  reader,  to  begin  with,  of  two  cases  printed  in  a
previous  chapter.  In  the  first — the  case  of  Mrs.  West  (422  A) — a
dangerous  accident  happens,  and  a  near  relation  suddenly  sees  the  en-
dangered persons  in  the  scene.  They  know  nothing  of  having  been  seen.
In  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  from  which  the  case  is  quoted,  this  was  re-
garded as  a  projection  from  their  minds,  or  from  the  mind  of  one  of

665J  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  287

them.     I  should  now  prefer  to  call  it  a  spasmodic  tightening  of  the  bond
always  existing  between  the  father  and  daughter.

In  the  second  case — that  of  Canon  Warburton — in  section  422 — the
person  undergoing  the  accident  did  recollect  a  vivid  thought  of  his  brother
at  the  moment ; — while  his  brother  on  the  other  hand  was  startled  from  a
slight  dose  by  the  vision  of  the  scene  of  danger  as  then  taking  place  ; — the
steep  stairs  and  the  falling  figure.  This  is  an  acute  crisis,  much  resembling
impending  death  by  drowning,  &c. ;  and  the  apparition  may  be  construed
either  way — either  as  a  scene  clairvoyantly  discerned  by  Canon  Warbur-
ton, owing,  as  I  say,  to  a  spasmodic  tightening  of  his  psychical  link  with
his  brother,  or  as  a  sudden  invasion  on  that  brother's  part,  whose  very
rapidity  perhaps  helped  to  prevent  his  remembering  it.

The  following  case,  again,  is  interesting  both  evidentially  and  from  its
intrinsic  character.  The  narrative,  printed  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  on
the  authority  of  one  only  of  the  witnesses  concerned,  led  to  the  discovery
of  the  second  witness — whom  we  had  no  other  means  of  finding — and  has
been  amply  corroborated  by  her  independent  account.

The  case  stands  about  midway  between  psychorrhagic  cases  and  inten-
tional self-projections,  and  is  clearly  of  the  nature  of  an  invasion,  since  the
phantasm  was  seen  by  a  stranger  as  well  as  by  the  friend,  and  seemed  to
both  to  be  moving  about  the  room.  The  figure,  that  is  to  say,  was  adapted
to  the  percipient's  environment.

From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  239.  Mrs.  Elgee,  of  18
Woburn  Road,  Bedford,  gave  the  following  account : —

March  ist,  1885.

In  the  month  of  November  1864,  being  detained  in  Cairo,  on  my  way  out  to

i,  the  following  curious  circumstance  occurred  to  me  : —

Owing  to  an  unusual  influx  of  travellers,  I,  with  the  young  lady  under  my

charge  (whom  we  will  call  D.)  and  some  other  passengers  of  the  outward-bound

mail  to  India,  had  to  take  up  our  abode  in  a  somewhat  unfrequented  hotel.    The

room  shared  by  Miss  D.  and  myself  was  large,  lofty,  and  gloomy;  the  furniture

scantiest,  consisting  of  two  small  beds,  placed  nearly  in  the  middle  of  the

room  and  not  touching  the  walls  at  all,  two  or  three  rush-bottomed  chairs,  a

>mall  washing-stand,  and  a  large  old-fashioned  sofa  of  the  settee  sort,

was   placed   against  one-half  of  the  large   folding  doors  which  gave

entrance  to  the  room.     This  settee  was  far  too  heavy  to  be  removed,  unless  by

two  or  three  people.     The  other  half  of  the  door  was  used  for  entrance,  ami

faced  the  two  beds.     Feeling  rather  desolate  and  strange,  and  Miss  D.  being  a

nervous  person,  I   locked  the  door,  and,  taking  out  the  key,  put  it  under  my

but  on  Miss  D.  remarking  that  there  might  be  a  duplicate  which  could

open  the  door  from  outside,  I  put  a  chair  against  the  door,  with  my  tr.iv

bag  on  it,  so  arranged  that,  on  any  pressure  outside,  one  or  both  must  fall  on

the  bare  floor,  and  make  noise  enough  to  rouse  me.     We  then  proceeded  to

retire  to  bed,  the  one  I  had  chosen  being  near  the  only  window  in  the  room,

which  opened  with  two  glazed  doors,  almost  to  the  floor.     These  doors,  on

.;it  of  the  heat,  I  left  open,  first  assuring  myself  that  no  communication

288  CHAPTER    VI  [665

from  the  outside  could  be  obtained.     The  window  led  on  to  a  small  balcony,
which  was  isolated,  and  was  three  stories  above  the  ground.

I  suddenly  woke  from  a  sound  sleep  with  the  impression  that  somebody  had
called  me,  and,  sitting  up  in  bed,  to  my  unbounded  astonishment,  by  the  clear
light  of  early  dawn  coming  in  through  the  large  window  before  mentioned,  I
beheld  the  figure  of  an  old  and  very  valued  friend  whom  I  knew  to  be  in  Eng-
land. He  appeared  as  if  most  eager  to  speak  to  me,  and  I  addressed  him  with,
"  Good  gracious  !  how  did  you  come  here  ?  "  So  clear  was  the  figure,  that  I
noted  every  detail  of  his  dress,  even  to  three  onyx  shirt-studs  which  he  always
wore.  He  seemed  to  come  a  step  nearer  to  me,  when  he  suddenly  pointed
across  the  room,  and  on  my  looking  round,  I  saw  Miss  D.  sitting  up  in  her
bed,  gazing  at  the  figure  with  every  expression  of  terror.  On  looking  back,  my
friend  seemed  to  shake  his  head,  and  retreated  step  by  step,  slowly,  till  he
seemed  to  sink  through  that  portion  of  the  door  where  the  settee  stood.  I  never
knew  what  happened  to  me  after  this ;  but  my  next  remembrance  is  of  bright
sunshine  pouring  through  the  window.  Gradually  the  remembrance  of  what
had  happened  came  back  to  me,  and  the  question  arose  in  my  mind,  had  I  been
dreaming,  or  had  I  seen  a  visitant  from  another  world  ? — the  bodily  presence  of
my  friend  being  utterly  impossible.  Remembering  that  Miss  D.  had  seemed
aware  of  the  figure  as  well  as  myself,  I  determined  to  allow  the  test  of  my  dream
or  vision  to  be  whatever  she  said  to  me  upon  the  subject,  I  intending  to  say
nothing  to  her  unless  she  spoke  to  me.  As  she  seemed  still  asleep,  I  got  out  of
bed,  examined  the  door  carefully,  and  found  the  chair  and  my  bag  untouched,
and  the  key  under  my  pillow;  the  settee  had  not  been  touched,  nor  had  that
portion  of  the  door  against  which  it  was  placed  any  appearance  of  being  opened
for  years.

Presently,  on  Miss  D.  waking  up,  she  looked  about  the  room,  and,  noticing
the  chair  and  bag,  made  some  remark  as  to  their  not  having  been  much  use.
I  said,  "What  do  you  mean?"  and  then  she  said,  "Why,  that  man  who  was  in
the  room  this  morning  must  have  got  in  somehow."  She  then  proceeded  to
describe  to  me  exactly  what  I  myself  had  seen.  Without  giving  any  satis-
factory answer  as  to  what  I  had  seen,  I  made  her  rather  angry  by  affecting  to
treat  the  matter  as  a  fancy  on  her  part,  and  showed  her  the  key  still  under  my
pillow,  and  the  chair  and  bag  untouched.  I  then  asked  her,  if  she  was  so  sure
that  she  had  seen  somebody  in  the  room,  did  not  she  know  who  it  was  ?  "  No,"
said  she,  "  I  have  never  seen  him  before,  nor  any  one  like  him."  I  said,  "  Have
you  ever  seen  a  photograph  of  him?"  She  said,  "No."  This  lady  never  was
told  what  I  saw,  and  yet  described  exactly  to  a  third  person  what  we  both  had
seen.

Of  course,  I  was  under  the  impression  my  friend  was  dead.  Such,  however,
was  not  the  case ;  and  I  met  him  some  four  years  later,  when,  without  telling
him  anything  of  my  experience  in  Cairo,  I  asked  him,  in  a  joking  way,  could  he
remember  what  he  was  doing  on  a  certain  night  in  November  1864.  "  Well,"
he  said,  "you  require  me  to  have  a  good  memory  ;  "  but  after  a  little  reflection
he  replied,  "  Why,  that  was  the  time  I  was  so  harassed  with  trying  to  decide  for
or  against  the  appointment  which  was  offered  me,  and  I  so  much  wished  you
could  have  been  with  me  to  talk  the  matter  over.  I  sat  over  the  fire  quite  late,
trying  to  think  what  you  would  have  advised  me  to  do."  A  little  cross-question-
ing and  comparing  of  dates  brought  out  the  curious  fact  that,  allowing  for  the
difference  of  time  between  England  and  Cairo,  his  meditations  over  the  fire  and

665]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  289

my  experience  were  simultaneous.  Having  told  him  the  circumstances  above
narrated,  I  asked  him  had  he  been  aware  of  any  peculiar  or  unusual  sensation.
He  said  none,  only  that  he  had  wanted  to  see  me  very  much.

E.  H.  ELGEE.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mrs.  Elgee  says : —

I  fear  it  is  quite  impossible  to  get  any  information  from  Miss  D.  She
married  soon  after  we  reached  India,  and  I  never  met  her  since,  nor  do  I  know
where  she  is,  if  alive.  I  quite  understand  the  value  of  her  corroboration  ;  and
at  the  time  she  told  the  whole  circumstance  to  a  fellow-traveller,  who  repeated
it  to  me,  and  her  story  and  mine  agreed  in  every  particular,  save  that  to  her
the  visitant  was  a  complete  stranger  ;  and  her  tale  was  quite  unbiassed  by  mine,
as  I  always  treated  hers  as  a  fancy,  and  never  acknowledged  I  had  been  aware
of  anything  unusual  having  taken  place  in  our  room  at  Cairo.  I  never  have
seen,  or  fancied  I  saw,  any  one  before  or  since.

My  visitant,  also,  is  dead,  or  he  would,  I  know,  have  added  his  testimony,
small  as  it  was,  to  mine.  He  was  a  very  calm,  quiet,  clever,  scientific  man,  not
given  to  vain  fancies  on  any  subject,  and  certainly  was  not  aware  of  any  desire
of  appearing  to  me.

The  publication  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living  led  fortunately  to  our
obtaining  the  testimony  of  the  second  percipient,  now  Mrs.  Ramsay,  of
Clcvelands,  Bassett,  Southampton,  whose  account  follows  :—

July  1891.

I  have  been  asked  by  a  leading  member  of  the  Psychical  Society  to  write
down  what  I  can  remember  of  a  strange  experience  that  occurred  no  less  than
twenty-seven  years  ago.  I  now  do  so  as  simply  as  I  can,  and  to  the  best  of  my
recollection.

In  October  1864  I  was  travelling  to  India,  going  to  rejoin  my  parents,  from
whom  I  had  been  separated  twelve  years,  a  kind  friend — a  Mrs.  E. — having
undertaken  to  chaperon  me  as  far  as  Calcutta.     She  was  going  out  to  join  her
p.d,   Major   E.,  of  the   23rd  Royal   Welsh   Fusiliers.     We  started  by  a
< ).  steamer — the  Ceylon — from  Southampton,  and  travelled  by  the  over-
land route,  via  Alexandria,  and  Cairo,  to  Suez.

landed  at  Alexandria,  and  went  by  rail  across  the  desert  to  Cairo.

all  passengers  had  to  sleep  the  night  before  proceeding  on  to  Suez.

Shepherd's  Hotel  was  the  best  hotel  then,  and  there  was  consequently  a  great

rush  to  try  and  get  rooms  in  it;  but  Mrs.  E.  and  I,  finding  we  could  get  no

r,  decided,  with  two  or  three  other  passengers,  to  get  accommodation  in

•i-l  <1<   r  Europe.     We  felt  somewhat  nervous  at  the  swarthy  visages  of

I  the  Arabs  all  round  us,  and  for  this  reason  selected  our  quarters  on  the  very

rey,  thinking  we  should  be  more  out  of  reach  of  robbers  and  thieves

i  than  if  we  were  on  the  ground  floor.     This  is  an  important  point  to  remember,

las  no  one  could  have  effected  an  entrance  into  our  room  from  outside.     It  was

ht  moonlight  night  when  we  went  to  bed,  and  I  can  recollect  as  if  it  were

i.iy  this  fact,  that  the  shadow  of  a  "pepul "  tree  was  reflected  on  th

opposite  our  beds — the  leaves  of  the  tree  were  trembling  and  shaking,  as  the

of  a  "  pepul "  always  do,  making  the  shadows  dance  about  the  wall.
Before  we  tr  d  to  rest  we  made  the  grandest  arrangements  for

personal  security !     The  window  looking  out  on  to  the  street  below  was  much

.    I.  T

290  CHAPTERVI  [665

too  high  up  to  be  at  all  unsafe.  So  we  left  that  open  (I  think),  but  we  closed
our  door  very  firmly  indeed  !  It  was  a  large  folding  door,  and  opened  inwards.
We  locked  it  carefully,  leaving  the  key  in  the  lock;  pushed  an  arm-chair
against  the  middle  of  the  door ;  and,  to  crown  all,  we  balanced  a  hand-bag  on
one  of  the  arms,  with  a  bunch  of  keys  in  the  lock  thereof !  so  that  if  any  in-
truder should  venture  to  open  that  door,  we  should  know  of  it  at  any  rate ! !
(But  no  one  did  venture,  and  we  found  everything  in  the  morning  exactly  as  we
had  left  it.)  I  remember  that  Mrs.  E.  was  very  careful  about  tucking  her
mosquito  curtains  all  round,  but  I  disliked  the  feeling  of  suffocation  they  gave,
and  put  mine  up ;  not  realising,  of  course,  in  my  inexperience,  what  the  con-
sequences would  be  for  myself;  for  these  small  plagues  of  Egypt  (!)  soon
descended  upon  me,  nearly  eating  me  up,  and  absolutely  prevented  sleep.
This  is  another  important  fact  to  remember,  for  had  I  slept  I  might  have
dreamed,  but,  as  it  happened,  I  was  wide  awake.  I  was  looking  at  the  shadows
of  the  tree  shaking  on  the  wall  when  gradually  they  seemed  to  merge  into  a
form,  which  form  took  the  shape  of  a  man,  not  of  an  Arab,  but  of  an  English
gentleman.  Then  this  form  glided  into  the  room,  advancing  towards  my
chaperon,  stretching  out  his  hands  as  if  in  blessing,  turned  round,  looked  at
me,  sadly  and  sorrowfully  (so  I  thought),  and  then  vanished  again  into  the
shadows  as  it  came.  I  do  not  remember  feeling  terrified,  only  awed — the
face  was  so  kind  and  human,  only  the  moonlight  made  it  look  very  white.  I
did  not  wake  Mrs.  E.,  as  she  appeared  to  me  to  be  asleep.  I  felt  sure  I  had
seen  a  vision,  and  something  that  had  to  do  with  her.

The  next  morning,  while  we  were  dressing,  she  remarked  how  odd  I  looked,
and  quite  apart  from  the  mosquito  bites,  I  know  I  did.  We  had  a  good  laugh
over  my  comical  appearance,  for  I  had  not  scrupled  to  scratch  the  bites,  until
my  forehead  and  face  resembled  a  plum  bun  !  I  believe  I  then  told  her  it  was
not  strange  that  I  should  look  odd,  for  I  "  had  seen  a  ghost."  She  started
violently,  and  asked  me  to  tell  her  what  I  saw.  I  described  it  as  best  I  could,
and  she  said  she  had  seen  "zt"  too,  and  that  she  knew  it  to  be  the  form  and
face  of  a  valued  friend.  She  was  much  disturbed  about  it— as  indeed,  so  was
I,  for  I  had  never  indulged  in  "hallucinations"  and  was  not  given  to  seeing
visions.

We  proceeded  next  day  to  join  our  ship  at  Suez,  and  when  on  board,  it  was
a  great  relief  to  us  to  be  able  to  tell  it  to  a  kind  fellow-passenger.  He  was
an  absolute  sceptic  in  all  matters  relating  to  the  invisible  world,  but  he  was
obliged  to  admit  that  it  was  the  most  extraordinary  thing  he  had  ever  heard.
...  I  should  like  to  add,  that  I  have  never,  before  or  since,  had  any  kind  of
vision.

Our  experience  at  Cairo  had  this  sequel,  that  Mrs.  E.'s  spirit-friend  happened
to  be,  at  that  very  time,  in  great  perplexity  of  mind— most  anxious  about  some
very  important  event  in  his  life.  He  was  sitting  in  his  room  one  night  in  the
month  of  October  1864,  and  a  most  intense  yearning  came  over  him  for  her
advice  and  assistance — so  great  was  it,  that  he  felt  as  if  an  invisible  power  had
drawn  him  into  some  spirit-state,  in  which  he  could  and  did  see  her.1

1  I  noted  on  this  narrative  at  the  time  I  received  it :  "  This  account  is  entirely
concordant  with  the  account  written  by  Mrs.  Ramsay  before  reading  Mrs.  Elgee's
account  in  1888,  and  abstracted  by  me  for  an  article  in  Murray's  Magazine.  There
was  this  discrepancy  between  Mrs.  Elgee  and  Mrs.  Ramsay,— that  Mrs.  Ramsay  thought
that  the  figure  wore  a  beard,  whereas  Mrs.  Elgee  saw  him  as  she  knew  him— with
whiskers  only.  He  certainly  had  no  beard  at  the  time."

668]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  291'

For  a  somewhat  similar  case,  that  of  the  apparition  of  General  Fremont
(too  lengthy  to  quote  here),  I  may  refer  the  reader  to  the  Journal  S.  P.  R.,
vol.  v.  p.  54.  The  crisis  there  is  the  removal  of  long  and  wearing  anxiety  ;
the  self-projection  into  the  home-scene  which  now  at  last  the  General  felt
assured  of  being  able  to  reach  alive.

Cases  of  this  general  character,  both  visual  and  auditory,  occupy  a
great  part  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  and  others  have  been  frequently
quoted  in  the  S.  P.  R.  Journal  during  recent  years.  I  cannot  in  this  work
attempt  any  complete  collection,  but  I  give  examples  of  various  types  in
Appendices  to  this  section.

666.  Of  still  greater  interest  is  the  class  which  comes  next  in  order
in  my  ascending  scale  of  apparent  intensity  /  the  cases,  namely,  where  there
is  recollection  on  both  sides,  so  that  the  experience  is  reciprocal.     Of
these  I  give  in  Appendices  several  examples.     (See  also  some  cases  in
the  Appendices  to  428.)      They  deserve  study,  for  it  is  by  noting  under
what   circumstances  these  spontaneously  reciprocal  cases  occur  that  we
have  the  best  chance  of  learning  how  to  produce  them  experimentally.
It  will  be  seen  that  there  have  been  various  degrees  of  tension  of  thought
on  the  agent's  part.

667.  And   here  comes  in  a  small  but  important  group — the  group
of  what  I  may  call  death-compacts  prematurely  fulfilled.     We  shall  see  in
the  next  chapter  that  the  exchange  of  a  solemn  promise   between  two
friends  to  appear  to  one  another,  if  possible,  after  death  is  far  from  being
a  useless  piece  of  sentiment.     Such  posthumous  appearances,  it  is  true,
may  be  in  most  cases  impossible,  but  nevertheless  there  is  real  ground  to
believe  that  the  previous  tension  of  the  will  in  that  direction  makes  it
more  likely  that  the  longed-for  meeting  shall  be  accomplished.     If  so,
this  is  a  kind  of  experiment,  and  an  experiment  which  all  can  make.

Now  we  have  two  or  three  cases  where  this  compact  has  been  made,
and  where    an  apparition    has  followed — but   before   and   not  after  the
agent* s  death — at  the  moment,  that  is  to  say,  of  some  dangerous  accident,
when  the  sufferer  was  perhaps  all  but  drowned,  or  was  stunned,  or  other-
wise insensible.     One  of  these  cases  I  quote  in  667  A,  and  I  add  for
comparison  in  667  B  an  auditory  case  of  a  similar  kind,  in  which,  how-
there  had  been  no  previous  compact.     In  this  latter  case  it  is  notice-
hat  the  agent  (Commander  Aylesbury),  who  was  in  imminent  danger
•\vning,  did  not  lose  consciousness ;  and  we  therefore  can  feel  certain
that  the  phantasmal  voice  did  not  involve  any  distinctive  supraliminal
•ion  on  his  part.     This  shows  how  decisive  an  action  may  be  going
on  below  the  surface,  while  nothing  is  known  of  it  above.

668.  lastly,    the    lessons   of    these    spontaneous    apparitions    have
been  confirmed  and  widened  by  actual  experiment.     It  is  plain  that  just
as  we  are   not  confined  to  noting  small   spontaneous  telepathic   trans-

•  es  when  they  occur,  but  can  also  endeavour  to  reproduce  them  by
;iment,  so  also  we  can  endeavour  to  reproduce  experimentally  these

292  CHAPTER    VI

more  advanced  telepathic  phenomena  of  the  invasion  of  the  presence  of
the  percipient  by  the  agent.  It  is  to  be  hoped,  indeed,  that  such  experi-
ment may  become  one  of  the  most  important  features  of  our  inquiry.  The
type  of  the  experiment  is  somewhat  as  follows.  The  intending  agent  en-
deavours by  an  effort  at  self-concentration,  made  either  in  waking  hours  or
just  before  sleep,  to  render  himself  perceptible  to  a  given  person  at  a
distance,  who,  of  course,  must  have  no  reason  to  expect  a  phantasmal
visit  at  that  hour.  Independent  records  must  be  made  on  each  side,
of  all  attempts  made,  and  of  all  phantoms  seen.  The  evidential  point
is,  of  course,  the  coincidence  between  the  attempt  and  the  phantom,
whether  or  not  the  agent  can  afterwards  remember  his  own  success.  (See
Appendices.)

Now  the  experimental  element  here  is  obviously  very  incomplete.
It  consists  in  little  more  than  in  a  concentrated  desire  to  produce  an
effect  which  one  can  never  explain,  and  seldom  fully  remember.  I  have
seen  no  evidence  to  show  that  any  one  can  claim  to  be  an  adept  in  such
matters — has  learned  a  method  of  thus  appearing  at  will.1  We  are  acting
in  the  dark.  Yet  nevertheless  the  mere  fact  that  on  some  few  occasions
this  strong  desire  has  actually  been  followed  by  a  result  of  this  extremely
interesting  kind  is  one  of  the  most  encouraging  phenomena  in  our  whole
research.  The  successes  indeed  have  borne  a  higher  proportion  to  the
failures  than  I  should  have  ventured  to  hope.  But  nowhere  is  there  more
need  of  persistent  and  careful  experimentation ; — nowhere,  I  may  add,  have
emotions  quite  alien  from  Science — mere  groundless  fears  of  seeing  any-
thing unusual — interfered  with  more  disastrous  effect.  Such  fears,  one
hopes,  will  pass  away,  and  the  friend's  visible  image  will  be  recognised  as
a  welcome  proof  of  the  link  that  binds  the  two  spirits  together.

The  case  which  I  shall  next  quote  illustrates  both  the  essential  harm-
lessness — nay,  naturalness — of  such  an  experiment,  and  the  causeless  fear
which  it  may  engender  even  in  rational  and  serious  minds.

The  long  friendship  of  Mr.  S.  H.  B.  with  the  Verity  family  was  pro-
bably one  of  the  factors  which  enabled  him  to  appear  to  them ;  yet-
willing  though  they  were  to  help  in  the  investigations — the  experiment  was
found  too  trying  to  the  percipients  for  frequent  repetition.

From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  pp.  104-109.  The  following
case  was  especially  remarkable  in  that  there  were  two  percipients.  The
narrative  was  copied  by  Gurney  from  a  MS.  book  of  Mr.  S.  H.  B.'s,
to  which  he  transferred  it  from  an  almanac  diary,  since  lost.

On  a  certain  Sunday  evening  in  November  1881,  having  been  reading  of  the
great  power  which  the  human  will  is  capable  of  exercising,  I  determined  with
the  whole  force  of  my  being,  that  I  would  be  present  in  spirit  in  the  front  bed-

1  Some  such  power  as  this  is  frequently  claimed  in  oriental  books  as  attainable  by
mystic  practices.  We  have  not  thus  far  been  fortunate  enough  to  discover  any  perform-
ances corresponding  to  these  promises.

668]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  293

room  on  the  second  floor  of  a  house  situated  at  22  Hogarth  Road,  Kensington,
in  which  room  slept  two  ladies  of  my  acquaintance,  viz.,  Miss  L.  S.  V.  and  Miss
E.  C.  V.,  aged  respectively  25  and  n  years.  I  was  living  at  this  time  at  23
Kildare  Gardens,  a  distance  of  about  three  miles  from  Hogarth  Road,  and  I
had  not  mentioned  in  any  way  my  intention  of  trying  this  experiment  to  either
of  the  above  ladies,  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  was  only  on  retiring  to  rest
upon  this  Sunday  night  that  I  made  up  my  mind  to  do  so.  The  time  at  which
I  determined  I  would  be  there  was  i  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  I  also  had  a
strong  intention  of  making  my  presence  perceptible.

On  the  following  Thursday  I  went  to  see  the  ladies  in  question,  and  in  the
course  of  conversation  (without  any  allusion  to  the  subject  on  my  part)  the  elder
one  told  me,  that  on  the  previous  Sunday  night  she  had  been  much  terrified  by
perceiving  me  standing  by  her  bedside,  and  that  she  screamed  when  the  appa-
rition advanced  towards  her,  and  awoke  her  little  sister,  who  saw  me  also.

I  asked  her  if  she  was  awake  at  the  time,  and  she  replied  most  decidedly  in
the  affirmative,  and  upon  my  inquiring  the  time  of  the  occurrence,  she  replied,
about  i  o'clock  in  the  morning.

This  lady,  at  my  request,  wrote  down  a  statement  of  the  event  and
signed  it.

This  was  the  first  occasion  upon  which  I  tried  an  experiment  of  this  kind,
and  its  complete  success  startled  me  very  much.

Besides  exercising  my  power  of  volition  very  strongly,  I  put  forth  an  effort
which  I  cannot  find  words  to  describe.  I  was  conscious  of  a  mysterious  influ-
ence of  some  sort  permeating  in  my  body,  and  had  a  distinct  impression  that
I  was  exercising  some  force  with  which  I  had  been  hitherto  unacquainted,  but
which  I  can  now  at  certain  times  set  in  motion  at  will.  S.  H.  B.

Of  the  original  entry  in  the  almanac  diary,  Mr.  B.  says :  "  I  recollect
having  made  it  within  a  week  or  so  of  the  occurrence  of  the  experiment,
and  whilst  it  was  perfectly  fresh  in  my  memory."

Miss  Verity's  account  is  as  follows  : —

January  i8M,  1883.

On  a  certain  Sunday  evening,  about  twelve  months  since,  at  our  house  in
rth  Road,  Kensington,  I  distinctly  saw  Mr.  B.  in  my  room,  about  i  o'clock,
perfectly  awake  and  was  much  terrified.     I  awoke  my  sister  by  scream-
ed she  saw  the  apparition  herself.     Three  days  after,  when  I  saw  Mr.
H.,  I  told  him  what  had  happened ;  but  it  was  some  time  before  I  could  recover
from  the  shock  I  had  received,  and  the  remembrance  is  too  vivid  to  be  ever
erased  from  my  memory.  L.  S.  VE:

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Miss  Verity  adds :  "  I  had  never  had  any
hallucination  of  the  senses  of  any  sort  whatever."

<  E.  C.  Verity  says  : —

I   remember  the  occurrence  of  the  event  described  by  my  sister  in  the
\cd  paragraph,  and  her  description  is  quite  correct     I  saw  the  apparition
which  she  saw,  at  the  same  time  and  under  the  same  c  ices.

E.  C.  VERITY.

294  CHAPTER    VI  [668

Miss  A.  S.  Verity  says : —

I  remember  quite  clearly  the  evening  my  eldest  sister  awoke  me  by  calling
to  me  from  an  adjoining  room ;  and  upon  my  going  to  her  bedside,  where  she
slept  with  my  youngest  sister,  they  both  told  me  they  had  seen  S.  H.  B.  stand-
ing in  the  room.  The  time  was  about  i  o'clock.  S.  H.  B.  was  in  evening
dress,  they  told  me.  A.  S.  VERITY.

Mr.  B.  does  not  remember  how  he  was  dressed  on  the  night  of  the
occurrence.

Miss  E.  C.  Verity  was  asleep  when  her  sister  caught  sight  of  the  figure,
and  was  awoke  by  her  sister's  exclaiming,  "  There  is  S."  The  name  had
therefore  met  her  ear  before  she  herself  saw  the  figure  ;  and  the  hallucina-
tion on  her  part  might  thus  be  attributed  to  suggestion.  But  it  is  against
this  view  that  she  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination,  and  cannot
therefore  be  considered  as  predisposed  to  such  experiences.  The  sisters
are  both  equally  certain  that  the  figure  was  in  evening  dress,  and  that  it
stood  in  one  particular  spot  in  the  room.  The  gas  was  burning  low,  and
the  phantasmal  figure  was  seen  with  far  more  clearness  than  a  real  figure
would  have  been.

"The  witnesses"  (says  Gurney)  "have  been  very  carefully  cross-exa-
mined by  the  present  writer.  There  is  not  the  slightest  doubt  that  their
mention  of  the  occurrence  to  S.  H.  B.  was  spontaneous.  They  had  not
at  first  intended  to  mention  it;  but  when  they  saw  him  their  sense  of
its  oddness  overcame  their  resolution.  Miss  Verity  is  a  perfectly  sober-
minded  and  sensible  witness,  with  no  love  of  marvels,  and  with  a  consider-
able dread  and  dislike  of  this  particular  form  of  marvel."

[I  omit  here  for  want  of  space  the  next  case,  in  which  Mr.  S.  H.  B.
attempted  to  appear  in  Miss  Verity's  house  at  two  different  hours  on  the
same  evening,  and  was  seen  there,  at  both  the  times  fixed,  by  a  married
sister  who  was  visiting  in  the  house.]

Gurney  requested  Mr.  B.  to  send  him  a  note  on  the  night  that  he
intended  to  make  his  next  experiment  of  the  kind,  and  received  the
following  note  by  the  first  post  on  Monday,  March  24th,  1884.

March  22nd,  1884.

DEAR  MR.  GURNEY, — I  am  going  to  try  the  experiment  to-night  of  making
my  presence  perceptible  at  44  Norland  Square,  at  12  P.M.  I  will  let  you  know
the  result  in  a  few  days. — Yours  very  sincerely,  S.  H.  B.

The  next  letter  was  received  in  the  course  of  the  following  week  :—

April,  yd,  1884.

DEAR  MR.  GURNEY, — I  have  a  strange  statement  to  show  you,  respecting
my  experiment,  which  was  tried  at  your  suggestion,  and  under  the  test  condi-
tions which  you  imposed.

Having  quite  forgotten  which  night  it  was  on  which  I  attempted  the  pro-
jection. I  cannot  say  whether  the  result  is  a  brilliant  success,  or  only  a  slight

668]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  295

one,  until  I  see  the  letter  which  I  posted  you  on  the  evening  of  the  experi-
ment.

Having  sent  you  that  letter,  I  did  not  deem  it  necessary  to  make  a  note  in
my  diary,  and  consequently  have  let  the  exact  date  slip  my  memory.

If  the  dates  correspond,  the  success  is  complete  in  every  detail,  and  I  have
an  account  signed  and  witnessed  to  show  you.

I  saw  the  lady  (who  was  the  subject)  for  the  first  time  last  night,  since  the
experiment,  and  she  made  a  voluntary  statement  to  me,  which  I  wrote  down  at
her  dictation,  and  to  which  she  has  attached  her  signature.  The  date  and  time
of  the  apparition  are  specified  in  this  statement,  and  it  will  be  for  you  to  decide
whether  they  are  identical  with  those  given  in  my  letter  to  you.  I  have  com-
pletely forgotten,  but  yet  I  fancy  that  they  are  the  same.  S.  H.  B.

This  is  the  statement : —

44  NORLAND  SQUARE,  W.

On  Saturday  night,  March  22nd,  1884,  at  about  midnight,  I  had  a  distinct
impression  that  Mr.  S.  H.  B.  was  present  in  my  room,  and  I  distinctly  saw  him
whilst  I  was  quite  widely  awake.  He  came  towards  me,  and  stroked  my  hair.
I  voluntarily  gave  him  this  information,  when  he  called  to  see  me  on  Wed-
nesday, April  2nd,  telling  him  the  time  and  the  circumstances  of  the  apparition,
without  any  suggestion  on  his  part.  The  appearance  in  my  room  was  most
vivid,  and  quite  unmistakable.  L.  S.  VERITY.

Miss  A.  S.  Verity  corroborates  as  follows : —

I  remember  my  sister  telling  me  that  she  had  seen  S.  H.  B.,  and  that  he
had  touched  her  hair,  before  he  came  to  see  us  on  April  2nd.  A.  S.  V.

Mr.  B.'s  own  account  is  as  follows : —

On  Saturday,  March  22nd,  I  determined  to  make  my  presence  perceptible
to  Miss  V.,  at  44  Norland  Square,  Netting  Hill,  at  12  midnight,  and  as  I  had
previously  arranged  with  Mr.  Gurney  that  I  should  post  him  a  letter  on  the
evening  on  which  I  tried  my  next  experiment  (stating  the  time  and  other
particulars),  I  sent  a  note  to  acquaint  him  with  the  above  facts.

About  ten  days  afterwards  I  called  upon  Miss  V.,  and  she  voluntarily  told
me,  that  on  March  22nd,  at  12  o'clock  midnight,  she  had  seen  me  so  vividly  in
her  room  (whilst  widely  awake)  that  her  nerves  had  been  much  shaken,  and  she
had  been  obliged  to  send  for  a  doctor  in  the  morning.  S.  H.  B.

Unfortunately  Mr.  B.'s  intention  to  produce  the  impression  of  touching
the  percipient's  hair  is  not  included  in  his  written  account.  On  August  21  st,
1885,  he  wrote  to  Gurney,  "  I  remember  that  I  had  this  intention ;  "  and
(iurncy  remembered  that,  very  soon  after  the  occurrence,  he  mentioned
this  ns  one  of  the  points  which  made  the  success  "  complete  in  every  de-
'  and  that  he  recommended  him  in  any  future  trial  to  endeavour

»  produce  the  impression  of  some  spoken  phrase.
On  this  case,  Gurney  observes  : —

It  will  be  observed  that  in  all  these  instances  the  conditions  were  the  same
— the  agent  concentrating  his  thoughts  on  the  object  in  view  before  going  to
sleep.  Mr.  B.  has  never  succeeded  in  producing  a  similar  effect  when  he  has

296  CHAPTER    VI  [669

been  awake.  And  this  restriction  as  to  time  has  made  it  difficult  to  devise  a
plan  by  which  the  phenomenon  could  be  tested  by  independent  observers,  one
of  whom  might  arrange  to  be  in  the  company  of  the  agent  at  a  given  time,  and
the  other  in  that  of  the  percipient.  Nor  isjt  easy  to  press  for  repetitions  of  the
experiment,  which  is  not  an  agreeable  one  to  the  percipient,  and  is  followed  by
a  considerable  amount  of  nervous  prostration.  Moreover,  if  trials  were  fre-
quently made  with  the  same  percipient,  the  value  of  success  would  diminish ;
for  any  latent  expectation  on  the  percipient's  part  might  be  argued  to  be  itself
productive  of  the  delusion,  and  the  coincidence  with  the  agent's  resolve  might
be  explained  as  accidental.  We  have,  of  course,  requested  Mr.  B.  to  try  to
produce  the  effect  on  ourselves ;  but  though  he  has  more  than  once  made  the
attempt,  it  has  not  succeeded.

669.  In  these  experimental  apparitions,  which  form,  as  it  were,  the
spolia  opima  of  the  collector,  we  naturally  wish  to  know  all  that  we  can  about
each  detail  in  the  experience.     Two  important  points  are  the  amount  of
effort  made  by  the  experimenter,  and  the  degree  of  his  consciousness  of  suc-
cess.    The  amount  of  effort  in  Mr.  S.  H.  B.'s  case  (for  instance)  and  in  Mr.
Godfrey's  (668  A)  seems  to  have  been  great ;  and  this  is  encouraging,
since  what  we  want  is  to  be  assured  that  the  tension  of  will  has  really  some
power.     It  seems  to  act  in  much  the  same  way  as  a  therapeutic  suggestion
from  the  conscious  self;  one  can  never  make  sure  that  any  given  self-
suggestion  will  "  take  " ;  but,  on  the  whole,  the  stronger  the  self-sugges-
tions,  the  better   the   result.      It  is  therefore  quite  in  accordance  with
analogy  that  a  suggestion  from  without,  given  to  a  hypnotised  person,
should  be  the  most  promising  way  of  inducing  these  self-projections.     It
should  be  strongly  impressed  on  hypnotised  subjects  that  they  can  and
must  temporarily  "leave  the  body,"  as  they  call  it,  and  manifest  them-
selves to  distant  persons — the  consent,  of  course,  of  both  parties  to  the
experiment  having  been  previously  secured.

Of  this  type  were  Dr.  Backman's  experiments  with  his  subject  "  Alma,"
already  mentioned  (in  573  C)  ;  and  although  that  series  of  efforts  was  pre-
maturely broken  off,  it  was  full  of  promise.  There  were  some  slight  indi-
cations that  Alma's  clairvoyant  excursions  were  sometimes  perceptible  to
persons  in  the  scenes  psychically  invaded ;  and  there  was  considerable  and
growing  evidence  to  her  own  retention  in  subsequent  memory  of  some
details  of  those  distant  scenes.

By  all  analogy,  indeed,  that  subsequent  memory  should  be  an  eminently
e  due  able  thing.  The  carrying  over  of  recollections  from  one  stratum  of
personality  into  another — as  hypnotic  experiment  shows  us — is  largely  a
matter  of  patient  suggestion.  It  would  be  very  desirable  to  hypnotise  the
person  who  had  succeeded  in  producing  an  experimental  apparition,  of
Mr.  S.  H.  B.'s  type,  and  to  see  if  he  could  then  recall  the  psychical  excur-
sion. Hypnotic  states  should  be  far  more  carefully  utilised  in  connection
with  all  these  forms  of  self-projection.

670.  In  these  self-projections  we  have  before  us,  I  do  not  say  the  most
useful,  but  the  most  extraordinary  achievement  of  the  human  will.     What

670]  SENSORY    AUTOMATISM  297

can  lie  further  outside  any  known  capacity  than  the  power  to  cause  a  sem-
blance of  oneself  to  appear  at  a  distance  ?  What  can  be  a  more  central
action — more  manifestly  the  outcome  of  whatsoever  is  deepest  and  most
unitary  in  man's  whole  being?  Here,  indeed,  begins  the  justification  of
the  conception  expressed  at  the  beginning  of  this  chapter; — that  we
should  now  see  the  subliminal  self  no  longer  as  a  mere  chain  of  eddies
or  backwaters,  in  some  way  secluded  from  the  main  stream  of  man's  being,
but  rather  as  itself  the  central  and  potent  current,  the  most  truly  identifiable
with  the  man  himself.  Other  achievements  have  their  manifest  limit ;
where  is  the  limit  here  ?  The  spirit  has  shown  itself  in  part  dissociated
from  the  organism ;  to  what  point  may  its  dissociation  go  ?  It  has  shown
some  independence,  some  intelligence,  some  permanence.  To  what  degree
of  intelligence,  independence,  permanence,  may  it  conceivably  attain?  Of
all  vital  phenomena,  I  say,  this  is  the  most  significant ;  this  self-projection
is  the  one  definite  act  which  it  seems  as  though  a  man  might  perform
equally  well  before  and  after  bodily  death.

[207  A

APPENDICES

TO

CHAPTER   II

207  A.  Some  striking  cases  of  forgotten  terrors  giving  rise  to
hysterical  attacks,  which  have  been  cured  by  the  skilful  use  of  hypnotic
suggestion,  are  given  in  Drs.  Raymond  and  Janet's  Nevroses  ft  Idees  fixes.

The  book  contains  many  examples  of  "fixed  subconscious  ideas"  at
various  depths  of  submergence,  the  most  completely  forgotten  being  often
the  most  potent  for  mischief.  A  fixed  memory  of  this  kind,  removed,  so
to  say,  from  the  general  mental  circulation,  may  act  in  precisely  the  same
way  as  an  actual  lesion  to  motor  nerves,  inducing  definite  physical  dis-
abilities.

"  The  contraction  persists,"  says  Dr.  Janet  of  one  such  case  (vol.  i.  p.
344),  "  because  the  emotion  persists,  involving  always  the  same  psycho-
logical and  physiological  consequences.  It  is,  so  to  say,  a  fixed  emotion
— a  variety  of  fixed  idea  of  which  we  from  outside  can  see  only  one
exterior  manifestation,  while  the  patient  herself  is  unaware  of  the  interior
phenomenon  which  determines  it."

To  attempt  to  cure  such  patients  without  first  discovering  the  true
cause  of  mischief  by  some  automatic  message  (as  writing,  or  crystal  vision,
or  utterance  in  hypnotic  trance)  which  emanates  from  subliminal  strata  of
their  being,  is  like  trying  to  open  a  secret  drawer  without  having  dis-
covered the  spring.

But  Dr.  Janet  finds  that  hypnotic  suggestion, — used  with  great
patience  and  tact,  —  is  able  gradually  to  remove  a  great  number
of  these  mental  spasms  and  insistent  memories.  It  is  not,  of  course,
enough  to  make  the  suggestion  crudely  and  bluntly.  In  order  to  enable
it  to  take,  it  must  be  grafted  adroitly  upon  the  patient's  mental  condition
of  the  moment.  First  of  all,  one  must  discover  the  hidden  sources  of
her  trouble — of  which  sources,  strangely  enough,  she  is  often  herself  un-
aware— and  then  one  must  gradually  suggest  successive  slight  modifica-
tions in  the  painful  memory.  "  The  incident  which  gave  you  the  shock
was  not  so  bad  as  you  think ;  it  really  happened  thus  and  thus,"  says  Dr.
Janet,  until  at  last  the  old  horror  is  forgotten,  or  transformed  into  some-
thing grotesque  or  innocuous.

Thus  one  patient  is  led  to  believe  that  the  haunting  word  "  cholera  "

207A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  299

is  really  the  name  of  a  Chinese  general;  another,  who  has  loved  not
wisely,  but  too  well,  is  induced  to  see  the  lover  of  her  hallucinatory
memories  with  head  transformed  into  a  pig's,  and  undergoes  a  revulsion
of  feeling,  a  la  Titania  (vol.  ii.  p.  135).

Another  curious  case  (vol.  ii.  p.  256)  in  which  hypnotism  first  ex-
plained the  trouble  and  then  did  much  to  amend  it,  is  that  of  a  boy,
"  Rou,"  whose  short  life  has  been  plentifully  interspersed  with  hysterical
"fugues  "  or  escapades,  of  which  (like  Ansel  Bourne,  225  A)  he  loses  all
memory  when  he  returns  to  normal  life.  He  comes  to  himself  suddenly
— in  a  forest,  in  a  convent,  in  a  street- passage — and,  as  I  say,  remembers
nothing,  except  an  occasional  drenching  from  rain  or  river,  which  has,  in
fact,  for  the  moment  partially  awakened  him  from  his  somnambulic  state.
Hypnotisation,  however,  brings  back  the  memory  of  the  "  fugues  "  (just  as
it  did  with  Ansel  Bourne),  and  we  find  that  they  have  all  been  the  work-
ing out  of  an  id^e  fixe — that  of  going  to  sea  as  a  cabin-boy.  During  these
"fugues  "the  lad  was  anaesthetic,  and  consequently  endured  cheerfully
extraordinary  hardships,  allowing  himself  with  perfect  insouciance  to  be
treated  by  rough  canal-men  like  a  beast  of  burden.  Hypnotic  suggestion
was  able  to  avert  these  "  fugues  "  whenever  the  boy  was  dimly  conscious
that  they  were  coming  on,  although  his  brain  was  too  profoundly  affected
to  make  the  prognosis  a  hopeful  one.

Many  of  these  cases  remind  us  of  the  narratives  of  Drs.  Breuer  and
Freud,  in  their  Studien  uber  Hysterie  (of  which  accounts  are  given  above,
in  sections  217  and  218).  I  give  as  a  sample  one  case  of  this  type
(Janet,  vol.  ii.  p.  234),  where  hysterical  attacks  depending  on  the  revival
of  a  scheme  of  emotion  (etat  emotif  systematique}  which  has  become  sub-
conscious are  cured  by  this  same  process  of  first  discovering,  and  then
gradually  retrieving,  the  alarming  memory.

A  girl  of  eighteen,  designated  as  Lie,  has  suffered  for  two  years  from
almost  daily  convulsive  attacks.  Each  attack  constitutes  a  revival  of
a  past  scene,  constituting  in  rudimentary  form  a  secondary  state  of
personality.  The  attack  begins  with  syncope,  and  the  return  to  conscious
life  is  a  return  to  a  condition  of  terror,  with  cries  of  "  Lucien,  Lucien,"
as  if  appealing  to  some  one  for  defence ;  then  she  rushes  to  the  window
and  cries  "  Thieves  ! "  and  then  gradually  re-enters  her  ordinary  state.
Asked  what  she  can  remember  of  such  a  scene,  the  girl  can  recollect
nothing.  She  thinks  that  her  attacks  were  originally  induced  by  distress
and  fear  at  the  sight  of  her  father's  drunkenness.  She  knows  no  one
:  Lurien.  She  came  to  Paris  alone,  and  there  seems  to  be  no  external
way  of  supplying  any  possible  defect  in  her  memory.

Hypnotism,  however,  comes  promptly  to  the  physician's  aid.  Thrown
into  the  hypnotic  sleep,  the  patient  recovers  at  once  the  details  of  a
tragic  story  of  her  childhood — of  an  insult  offered  to  her,  from  which  a
"  Lucien  "  had  defended  her,  and  of  a  theft  at  the  chateau  where  she
worked,  which  followed  a  few  days  later.  These  terrifying  events  gave

300  APPENDICES  [221  A

rise  to  attacks  of  syncope,  somnambulism,  &c., — and  those  attacks  had
now,  in  their  turn,  obliterated  the  memory  of  the  events  from  the  patient's
waking  mind.  When  she  was  reminded  of  them,  they  gradually  recurred
to  her,  and  at  the  same  moment  the  convulsive  attacks  which  had  been
troubling  her  more  or  less  ever  since  the  events  occurred  entirely  ceased.

Here  is  another  remarkable  case  (p.  248)  of  the  efficacy  of  hypnotic
suggestion,  first  in  discovering  the  nature  of  a  mental  confusion,  and
then  in  curing  it.  A  young  officer,  Pk.,  is  brought  to  the  Salpetriere,
having  fallen  down  in  the  Champs  Elyse"es,  and  seeming' entirely  be-
wildered on  rising  up  again.  Arrived  at  the  hospital,  he  holds  out  his
hand  to  Dr.  Janet,  and  addresses  him  as  Dr.  N. — a  doctor  at  a  military
hospital  at  Brest.  Asked  what  he  means,  and  where  he  supposes  himself
to  be,  he  replies,  "  We  are  at  the  military  hospital  at  Brest,  and  you  are
Dr.  N.  •  They  brought  me  here  a  few  days  ago — in  May  1896."  As  a
matter  of  fact,  this  occurred  on  July  6th,  1895.  Next  day  the  patient  is
in  a  different  phase,  and  knows  quite  well  that  he  is  in  Paris,  although
he  remembers  nothing  about  imagining  himself  to  be  at  Brest.  On
inquiry  it  appears  that  this  young  man  of  twenty-eight  is  suffering  from
the  combined  effects  of  typhoid,  dysentery,  marsh-fever,  sunstroke,  an
unfortunate  marriage,  and  a  tendency  to  absinthe.  These  troubles  have
made  him  hysterical,  so  that  if  he  receives  any  shock  or  stimulus — as  a
threat  of  divorce  or  a  glass  of  brandy — he  is  apt  to  become  unconscious,
and  then  to  act  in  all  sorts  of  odd  ways,  till  he  wakes  up  again  in  sur-
prise, and  with  no  recollection.

Fortunately  he  can  be  thrown  at  once  into  a  somnambulic  state  which
brings  back  the  memory  of  the  spontaneous  somnambulisms.  He  is  then
able  to  explain  how  he  came  to  suppose  himself  to  be  in  the  hospital  at
Brest,  and  in  the  year  1896.  He  had,  in  fact,  while  walking  in  the  Champs
Elyse"es,  been  planning  to  apply  for  treatment  in  a  military  hospital  and
calculating  that  by  about  May  1896  he  would  be  in  the  hospital,  at
Brest,  where  he  knew  the  aforesaid  Dr.  N.  Falling  into  his  secondary
state,  he  had  no  longer  the  ability  to  distinguish  between  this  reverie  and
reality ;  and  the  continuing  reverie  substituted  itself  for  the  actual  sur-
roundings, so  that  he  imagined  himself  to  be  already  in  the  Brest  hospital,
as  if  his  calculation  had  already  worked  itself  out.

So  soon  as  his  excessive  modifiability  had  thus  been  discovered,  it  was
comparatively  easy  to  give  him  the  suggestions  needed  to  set  right  his
habits  and  to  inspire  him  with  strength  for  the  future.  He  has  since
distinguished  himself  in  military  service  abroad.

221  A.  It  is  well  known  that  a  great  variety  of  slight  causes — hunger,
fatigue,  slight  poisoning  by  impure  air,  a  small  degree  of  fever,  &c.
— are  sometimes  enough  to  produce  a  transient  perturbation  of  personality
of  the  most  violent  kind.  I  give  as  an  instance  the  following  account  of  a
feverish  experience,  sent  to  me  by  the  late  Robert  Louis  Stevenson,  from
Samoa,  in  1892  (and  published  in  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  9).  In

221  A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  301

Stevenson's  paper  on  his  own  dreams,  alluded  to  in  314,  we  have  one  of
the  most  striking  examples  known  to  me  of  that  helpful  and  productive
subliminal  uprush  which  I  have  characterised  as  the  mechanism  of  genius.
It  is,  therefore,  interesting  to  observe  how,  under  morbid  conditions,  this
temperament  of  genius — this  ready  permeability  of  the  psychical  dia-
phragm— transforms  what  might  in  others  be  a  mere  vague  and  massive
discomfort  into  a  vivid  though  incoherent  message  from  the  subliminal
storm  and  fire.  The  result  is  a  kind  of  supraliminal  duality,  the  percep-
tion at  the  same  time  of  two  personalities — the  one  rational  and  moral,  the
other  belonging  to  the  stratum  of  dreams  and  nightmare.

VAILIMA  PLANTATION,  UPOHO,  SAMOAN  ISLANDS,
July  \Mh,  1892.

DEAR  MR.  MYERS, — I  am  tempted  to  communicate  to  you  some  experi-
ences of  mine  which  seem  to  me  (ignorant  as  I  am)  of  a  high  psychological
interest.

I  had  infamous  bad  health  when  I  was  a  child  and  suffered  much  from
night  fears ;  but  from  the  age  of  about  thirteen  until  I  was  past  thirty  I  did
not  know  what  it  was  to  have  a  high  fever  or  to  wander  in  my  mind.  So  that
these  experiences,  when  they  were  renewed,  came  upon  me  with  entire  fresh-
ness ;  and  either  I  am  a  peculiar  subject,  or  I  was  thus  enabled  to  observe
them  with  unusual  closeness.

Experience  A.  During  an  illness  at  Nice  I  lay  awake  a  whole  night  in
extreme  pain.  From  the  beginning  of  the  evening  one  part  of  my  mind  became
possessed  of  a  notion  so  grotesque  and  shapeless  that  it  may  best  be  described
as  a  form  of  words.  I  thought  the  pain  was,  or  was  connected  with,  a  wisp
or  coil  of  some  sort ;  I  knew  not  of  what  it  consisted  nor  yet  where  it  was,
and  cared  not;  only  I  thought,  if  the  two  ends  were  brought  together,  the
pain  would  cease.  Now  all  the  time,  with  another  part  of  my  mind,  which  I
ventured  to  think  was  myself,  I  was  fully  alive  to  the  absurdity  of  this  idea,
knew  it  to  be  a  mark  of  impaired  sanity,  and  was  engaged  with  my  other  self\n.
a  perpetual  conflict.  Myself  had  nothing  more  at  heart  than  to  keep  from
fe,  who  was  nursing  me,  any  hint  of  this  ridiculous  hallucination  ;  the
other  was  bound  that  she  should  be  told  of  it  and  ordered  to  effect  the  cure.
I  believe  it  must  have  been  well  on  in  the  morning  before  the  fever  (or  the
other  fellow}  triumphed,  and  I  called  my  wife  to  my  bedside,  seized  her
savagely  by  the  wrist,  and  looking  on  her  with  a  face  of  fury,  cried:  "Why
do  you  not  put  the  two  ends  together  and  put  me  out  of  pain  ?  "

.ericnce  B.     The  other  day  in  Sydney  I  was  seized  on  a  Saturday  with

a  high  fever.     Early  in  the  afternoon  I  began  to  repeat  mechanically  the  sound

written    "mhn,"    caught  myself  in  the  act,  instantly  stopped  it,  and

ncd    to    my    mother,  who   was  in  the  room,  my  reasons  for  so  doing.

is  the    beginning  of    the    mind   to    wander,"    I  said,  "and  has  to  be

resisted  at  the  outset."     I  fell  asleep  and  woke,  and  for  the  rest  of  the  night

repeated  to  myself  mentally  a  nonsense  word  which  I  could  not  recall  next

morning.     I   had  been  reading  the  day  before  the  life  of  Swift,  and  all  night

ne  part  of  my  mind  {the  other  fellow)  kept   informing  me   that  I  was

•pi-ating   the   word   myself,  but  was  only  reading  in  a  book  that  Swift

had  so  repeated  it  in  his  last  sickness.     The  temptation  to  communicate  this

302  APPENDICES  [221 A

nonsense  was  again  strongly  felt  by  myself,  but  was  on  this  occasion
triumphantly  resisted,  and  my  watcher  heard  from  me  all  night  nothing
of  Dean  Swift  or  the  word,  nothing  but  what  was  rational  and  to  the  point.
So  much  for  the  two  consciousnesses  when  I  can  disentangle  them  ;  but  there
is  a  part  of  my  thoughts  that  I  have  more  difficulty  in  attributing.  One  part
of  my  mind  continually  bid  me  remark  the  transrational  felicity  of  the  word,
examined  all  the  syllables,  showed  me  that  not  one  was  in  itself  significant,
and  yet  the  whole  expressed  to  a  nicety  a  voluminous  distress  of  one  in
a  high  fever  and  his  annoyance  at  and  recoil  from  the  attentions  of  his  nurses.
It  was  probably  the  same  part  (and  for  a  guess  the  other  fellow}  who  bid  me
compare  it  with  the  nonsense  words  of  Lewis  Carroll  as  the  invention  of  a
lunatic  with  those  of  a  sane  man.  But  surely  it  was  myself  {and  myself  in
a  perfectly  clear-headed  state)  that  kept  me  trying  all  night  to  get  the  word
by  heart,  on  the  ground  that  it  would  afterwards  be  useful  in  literature  if  I
wanted  to  deal  with  mad  folk.  It  must  have  been  myself,  I  say,  because  the
other  fellow  believed  (or  pretended  to  believe)  he  was  reading  the  passage  in
a  book  where  it  could  always  be  found  again  when  wanted.

Experience  C.  The  next  night  the  other  fellow  had  an  explanation  ready
for  my  sufferings,  of  which  I  can  only  say  that  it  had  something  to  do  with
the  navy,  that  it  was  sheer  undiluted  nonsense,  had  neither  end  nor  beginning,
and  was  insusceptible  of  being  expressed  in  words.  Myself  knew  this;  yet
I  gave  way,  and  my  watcher  was  favoured  with  some  references  to  the  navy.
Nor  only  that ;  the  other  fellow  was  annoyed — or  /  was  annoyed — on  two
inconsistent  accounts :  first,  because  he  had  failed  to  make  his  meaning
comprehensible ;  and  second,  because  the  nurse  displayed  no  interest.
The  other  fellow  would  have  liked  to  explain  further ;  but  myself  was  much
hurt  at  having  been  got  into  this  false  position,  and  would  be  led  no
further.

In  cases  A  and  C  the  illusion  was  amorphous.  I  knew  it  to  be  so,  and  yet
succumbed  to  the  temptation  of  trying  to  communicate  it.  In  case  B  the  idea
was  coherent,  and  I  managed  to  hold  my  peace.  Both  consciousnesses,  in  other
words,  were  less  affected  in  case  B,  and  both  more  affected  in  cases  A  and  C.
It  is  perhaps  not  always  so  :  the  illusion  might  be  coherent,  even  practical,  and
the  rational  authority  of  the  mind  quite  in  abeyance.  Would  not  that  be-
lunacy  ?

In  case  A  I  had  an  absolute  knowledge  that  I  was  out  of  my  mind,  and
that  there  was  no  meaning  in  my  words  ;  these  were  the  very  facts  that  I  was
anxious  to  conceal ;  and  yet  when  I  succumbed  to  the  temptation  of  speaking,
my  face  was  convulsed  with  anger,  and  I  wrung  my  watcher's  wrist  with  cruelty.
Here  is  action,  unnatural  and  uncharacteristic  action,  flowing  from  an  idea  in
which  I  had  no  belief,  and  which  I  had  been  concealing  for  hours  as  a  plain
mark  of  aberration.  Is  it  not  so  with  lunatics  ?

I  have  called  the  one  person  myself,  and  the  other  the  other  fellow.  It  was
myself  who  spoke  and  acted ;  the  other  fellow  seemed  to  have  no  control  of
the  body  or  the  tongue ;  he  could  only  act  through  myself,  on  whom  he
brought  to  bear  a  heavy  strain,  resisted  in  one  case,  triumphant  in  the  two
others.  Yet  I  am  tempted  to  think  that  I  know  the  other  fellow ;  I  am  tempted
to  think  he  is  the  dreamer  described  in  my  Chapter  on  Dreams  to  which  you
refer.  Here  at  least  is  a  dream  belonging  to  the  same  period,  but  this  time  a
pure  dream,  an  illusion,  I  mean,  that  disappeared  with  the  return  of  the  sense  of
sight,  not  one  that  persevered  during  waking  moments,  and  while  I  was  able

222A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  303

to  speak  and  take  my  medicine.  It  occurred  the  day  after  case  B  and  before
case  C.

Case  D.  In  the  afternoon  there  sprang  up  a  storm  of  wind  with  monstrous
clouds  of  dust ;  my  room  looked  on  a  steep  hill  of  trees  whose  boughs  were  all
blowing  in  the  same  direction;  the  world  seemed  to  pass  by  my  windows  like
a  mill-race.  By  this  turmoil  and  movement  I  was  confused,  but  not  distressed,
and  surprised  not  to  be  distressed ;  for  even  in  good  health  a  high  wind  has
often  a  painful  influence  on  my  nerves.  In  the  midst  of  this  I  dozed  off  asleep.
I  had  just  been  reading  Scott's  *  Life  of  Dryden,'  had  been  struck  with  the  fact
that  Dryden  had  translated  some  of  the  Latin  hymns,  and  had  wondered  that
I  had  never  remarked  them  in  his  works.  As  soon  as  I  was  asleep  I  dreamed
a  reason  why  the  sound  of  the  wind  and  the  sight  of  the  flying  dust  had  not
distressed  me.  There  was  no  wind,  it  seemed,  no  dust ;  it  was  only  Dryden
singing  his  translated  hymns  in  one  direction,  and  all  those  who  had  blamed
and  attacked  him  after  the  Revolution  singing  them  in  another.  This  point
of  the  two  directions  is  very  singular  and  insane.  In  part  it  meant  that  Dryden
was  continuously  flying  past  yet  never  passing  my  window  in  the  direction  of
the  wind  and  dust,  and  all  his  detractors  similarly  flying  past  yet  not  passing
towards  the  other  side.  But  it  applied,  besides  this,  both  to  the  words  and  to
the  music  in  a  manner  wholly  insusceptible  of  expression.

That  was  a  dream ;  and  yet  how  exactly  it  reproduces  the  method  of  my
other  fellow  while  I  was  awake.  Here  is  an  explanation  for  a  state  of  mind  or
body  sought,  and  found,  in  a  tissue  of  rabid,  complicated,  and  inexpressible
folly.  — Yours  very  sincerely,  ROBERT  Louis  STEVENSON.

222  A.  A  good  example  of  the  application  of  true  scientific
method  to  problems  which  doctors  of  the  old  school  did  not  think  worth
their  science  is  Dr.  Janet's  treatment  of  a  singular  problem  which  the
mistakes  of  brutal  ignorance  turned  in  old  times  into  a  veritable  scourge
of  our  race.  I  speak  of  demoniacal  possession,  in  which  affliction  Dr,
Janet  has  shown  himself  a  better  than  ecclesiastical  exorcist.

I  give  here  a  typical  case  of  pseudo-possession  from  Ntvroses  et  Idtes
fixes  (vol.  i.  pp.  377-389)  :  Achille,  as  Professor  Janet  calls  him,  was  a
timid  and  rather  morbid  young  man,  but  he  was  married  to  a  good
wife,  and  nothing  went  specially  wrong  with  him  until  his  return  from
a  business  journey  in  1890.  He  then  became  sombre  and  taciturn—
sometimes  even  seemed  unable  to  speak — then  took  to  his  bed  and
lay  murmuring  incomprehensible  words,  and  at  last  said  farewell  to  his
wife  and  children,  and  stretched  himself  out  motionless  for  a  couple  of
days,  while  his  family  waited  for  his  last  breath.

"Suddenly  one  morning,  after  two  days  of  apparent  death,  Achille

sat  up  in  bed  with  his  eyes  wide  open,  and  burst  into  a  terrible  laugh.

s  a  convulsive  laugh  which  shook  all   his   limbs;   an   exaggerated

laugh  which  twisted  his  mouth ;    a  lugubrious,  satanic  laugh  which  went

on  tor  more  than  two  hours.

i  rom  this  moment  everything  was  changed.  Achille  leapt  from  his
bed  and  refused  all  attentions.  To  every  question  he  answered,  '  There's
nothing  to  be  done  !  let's  have  some  champagne ;  it's  the  end  of  the

304  APPENDICES  [222  A

world  ! '      Then  he  uttered  piercing  cries,  '  They  are  burning  me — they
are  cutting  me  to  pieces  ! '  "

After  an  agitated  sleep,  Achille  woke  up  with  the  conviction  that  he
was  possessed  with  a  devil.  And  in  fact  his  mouth  now  uttered  blas-
phemies, his  limbs  were  contorted,  and  he  repeatedly  made  unsuccessful
efforts  at  suicide.  Ultimately  he  was  taken  to  the  Salpetriere,  and  placed
under  Professor  Janet,  who  recognised  at  once  the  classic  signs  of  posses-
sion. The  poor  man  kept  protesting  against  the  odious  outrages  on  re-
ligion, which  he  attributed  to  a  devil  inside  him,  moving  his  tongue  against
his  will.  "  Achille  could  say,  like  a  celebrated  victim  of  possession,  Pere
Surin,  '  It  is  as  though  I  had  two  souls ;  one  of  which  has  been  dispos-
sessed of  its  body  and  the  use  of  its  organs,  and  is  frantic  at  the  sight  of
the  other  soul  which  has  crept  in.'  "

It  was  by  no  means  easy  to  get  either  at  Achille  or  at  his  possessing
devil.  Attempts  to  hypnotise  him  failed,  and  any  remonstrance  was  met
with  insult.  But  the  wily  psychologist  was  accustomed  to  such  diffi-
culties, and  had  resort  to  a  plan  too  insidious  for  a  common  devil  to
suspect.  He  gently  moved  the  hand  of  Achille  in  such  a  way  as  to
suggest  the  act  of  writing,  and  having  thus  succeeded  in  starting  auto-
matic script,  he  got  the  devil  thus  to  answer  questions  quietly  put  while
the  raving  was  going  on  as  usual.  "  I  will  not  believe  in  your  power,"
said  Professor  Janet  to  the  malignant  intruder,  "unless  you  give  me  a
proof."  "What  proof?"  "Raise  the  poor  man's  left  arm  without  his
knowing  it."  This  was  done — to  the  astonishment  of  poor  Achille —
and  a  series  of  suggestions  followed,  all  of  which  the  demon  triumphantly
and  unsuspectingly  carried  out,  to  show  his  power.  Then  came  the
suggestion  to  which  Professor  Janet  had  been  leading  up.  It  was  like
getting  the  djinn  into  the  bottle.  "  You  cannot  put  Achille  soundly  to
sleep  in  that  arm-chair  !  "  "  Yes,  I  can  !  "  No  sooner  said  than  done,
and  no  sooner  done  than  Achille  was  delivered  from  his  tormentor —
from  his  own  tormenting  self.

For  there  in  that  hypnotic  sleep  he  was  gently  led  on  to  tell  all  his
story ;  and  such  stories,  when  told  to  a  skilled  and  kindly  auditor,  are
apt  to  come  to  an  end  in  the  very  act  of  being  told.

Achille  had  been  living  in  a  day-dream ;  it  was  a  day-dream  which
had  swollen  to  these  nightmare  proportions,  and  had,  as  it  were,  ousted
his  rational  being ;  and  in  the  deeper  self-knowledge  which  the  somnam-
bulic  state  brings  with  it  the  dream  and  the  interpretation  thereof  became
present  to  his  bewildered  mind.

The  fact  was  that  on  that  fateful  journey  when  Achille's  troubles
began  he  had  committed  an  act  of  unfaithfulness  to  his  wife.  A  gloomy
anxiety  to  conceal  this  action  prompted  him  to  an  increasing  taciturnity,
and  morbid  fancies  as  to  his  health  grew  on  him  until  at  last  his  day-
dream led  him  to  imagine  himself  as  actually  dead.  "His  two  days'
lethargy  was  but  an  episode,  a  chapter  in  the  long  dream."

223A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  305

What  then  was  the  natural  next  stage  of  the  dream's  development?
"  He  dreamt  that,  now  that  he  was  dead  indeed,  the  devil  rose  from  the
abyss  and  came  to  take  him.  The  poor  man,  as  in  his  somnambulic  state
he  retraced  the  series  of  his  dreams,  remembered  the  precise  instant
when  this  lamentable  event  took  place.  It  was  about  1 1  A.M.  :  a  dog
barked  in  the  court  at  the  moment,  incommoded,  no  doubt,  by  the  smell
of  brimstone ;  flames  filled  the  room ;  numbers  of  little  fiends  scourged
the  unhappy  man,  or  drove  nails  into  his  eyes,  and  through  the  wounds
in  his  body  Satan  entered  in  to  take  possession  of  head  and  heart."

From  this  point  the  pseudo-possession  may  be  said  to  have  begun.
The  fixed  idea  developed  itself  into  sensory  and  motor  automatisms —
visions  of  devils,  uncontrollable  utterances,  automatic  script — ascribed  by
the  automatist  to  the  possessing  devil  within.

And  now  came  the  moment  when  the  veracity,  the  utility,  of  this
new  type  of  psychological  analysis  was  to  be  submitted  to  yet  another
test.  From  the  point  of  view  of  the  ordinary  physician  Achille's  condition
was  almost  hopeless.  Physical  treatment  had  failed,  and  death  from
exhaustion  and  misery  seemed  near  at  hand.  Nor  could  any  appeal
have  been  effective  which  did  not  go  to  the  hidden  root  of  the  evil,
which  did  not  lighten  the  load  of  morbid  remorse  from  which  the  whole
series  of  troubles  had  developed.  Fortunately  for  Achille,  he  was  in
the  hands  of  an  unsurpassed  minister  to  minds  thus  diseased.  Professor
Janet  adopted  his  usual  tactics — what  he  terms  the  dissociation  and  the
gradual  substitution  of  ideas.  The  incidents  of  the  miserable  memory
were  modified,  were  explained  away,  were  slowly  dissolved  from  the
brooding  brain,  and  the  hallucinatory  image  of  the  offended  wife  was
presented  to  the  sufferer  at  what  novelists  call  the  psychological  moment,
with  pardon  in  her  eyes.  "Such  stuff  as  dreams  are  made  of!" — but
even  by  such  means  was  Achille  restored  to  physical  and  moral  health ;
he  leads  now  the  life  of  normal  man ;  he  no  longer  "  walketh  in  a  vain
shadow,  and  disquieteth  himself  in  vain."

Compare  with  this  the  mediaeval  case  of  "  Soeur  Jeanne"  (832  B).
Professor  Flournoy's  subject  "  He*lene  Smith"  (834r-842)  is  another
instance  of  "  pseudo-possession,"  though  not  by  imaginary  demons.

223   A.     The  following  is  a  case  of  alternating  consciousnesses  ap-
tly developed  out  of  accesses  of  "sleep-waking."     The  account  is
from  a  paper  by  Dr.  Elliotson  on  "  Instances  of  Double  States  of
Consciousness  independent  of  Mesmerism"  in  the  Zoisf,  vol.  iv.  p.  158,
being  quoted  by  him  from  the  Edinburgh  Philosophical  Transactions  of
1822.

Dcvan  read  to  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  in  February  1822,  the

^^Hhr  of  a  case  observed  by  Dr.  Dyce  of  Aberdeen,  in  a  girl  sixteen  years  old,

which  lasted  from  March  2nd  to  June  nth,  1815.     The  first  symptom  was  an

imon  propensity  to  fall  asleep  in  the  evenings.     1  followed  by  the

f  talking  in  her  sleep  on  these  occasions.    One  evening  she  fell  asleep  in

U

306  APPENDICES  [223  B

this  manner:  imagining  herself  an  Episcopal  clergyman,  she  went  through  the
ceremony  of  baptizing  three  children,  and  gave  an  appropriate  prayer.  Her
mistress  shook  her  by  the  shoulders,  on  which  she  awoke,  and  appeared
unconscious  of  everything,  except  that  she  had  fallen  asleep,  of  which  she
showed  herself  ashamed.  She  sometimes  dressed  herself  and  the  children
while  in  this  state  .  .  .  answered  questions  put  to  her  in  such  a  manner  as  to
show  that  she  understood  the  question.  .  .  .  One  day,  in  this  state,  she  sat  at
breakfast,  with  perfect  correctness,  with  her  eyes  shut.  She  afterwards  awoke
with  the  child  on  her  knees,  and  wondered  how  she  got  on  her  clothes.  .  .  .
She  sang  a  hymn  delightfully  while  in  this  state,  and  ...  it  appeared  incom-
parably better  done  than  she  could  accomplish  when  awake.  .  .  .  The  circum-
stances which  occurred  during  the  paroxysm  were  completely  forgotten  by  her
when  the  paroxysms  were  over,  but  were  perfectly  remarked  during  subsequent
paroxysms.  .  .  .  [One]  Sunday  she  was  taken  to  church  by  her  mistress  while
the  paroxysm  was  on  her.  She  shed  tears  during  the  sermon,  particularly
during  the  account  given  of  the  'execution  of  three  young  men  at  Edinburgh
who  had  described,  in  their  dying  declarations,  the  dangerous  steps  with  which
their  career  of  infamy  and  vice  took  its  commencement.  When  she  returned
home  she  recovered  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  was  quite  amazed  at  the  questions
put  to  her  about  the  church  sermon,  and  denied  that  she  had  been  to  any  such
place ;  but  next  night  on  being  taken  ill  she  mentioned  that  she  had  been  at
church,  repeated  the  words  of  the  text,  and  in  Dr.  Dyce's  hearing  gave  an
accurate  account  of  the  tragical  narrative  of  the  three  young  men  by  which  her
feelings  had  been  so  powerfully  affected.

223  B.  I  give  next  an  early  instance  of  the  method  of  elucida-
tion of  the  mental  condition  in  the  secondary  state  through  suitable
experiments  in  automatic  action, — the  method  which — as  we  see  in  other
sections  of  this  chapter — has  been  so  successfully  developed  in  the  hands
of  Dr.  Janet  and  other  psychologists.

Dr.  Mesnet1  records  the  case  of  a  soldier,  F ,  who  received  a

gunshot  wound  in  the'  head  at  Sedan,  and  was  afterwards  subject  to
periodical  attacks,  lasting  for  about  a  day  in  each  month,  of  a  kind  of
somnambulism,  during  which  he  hears,  tastes, , and  smells  nothing;  and
hardly  sees  at  all  except  when  the  sense  of  touch  calls  his  attention  to
objects,  which  he  can  then,  as  it  seems,  see  distinctly.

During  these  accesses  his  actions  seem  purely  automatic,  and  are  for
the  most  part  an  exact  repetition  of  his  everyday  mode  of  life  at  the
hospital.  But  by  tactile  suggestion  the  memory  can  be  made  to  go  back
to  an  earlier  epoch.

Thus  if  a  cane  is  put  into  his  hand  in  a  way  which  suggests  a  rifle,  he
goes  through  the  movements,  and  utters  the  brief  cries,  of  battle :
"  Henri ! "  "  There  they  are  !  at  least  a  score  of  them  !  "  "  We  must  try
and  settle  this  beween  us  ! "  &c.

Now  let  us  see  in  what  way  the  act  of  writing  revivified  past  experience.
I  abridge  Dr.  Mesnet' s  account  (p.  18  scgq.)  which  contains  several  points

1  DeF  Automatism  f  de  la  Mtmoire,  &c.     Par  le  Dr.  Ernest  Mesnet.    Paris,  1874.

223B]  TO     CHAPTER    II  307

of  interest.  "  He  passed  his  hands  over  the  table ;  felt  the  handle  of  a
drawer ;  opened  it  and  took  out  a  pen,  which  at  once  excited  in  him  the
idea  of  writing.  He  felt  in  the  drawer,  and  took  out  some  sheets  of  paper
and  an  ink-bottle.  These  he  placed  on  the  table,  sat  down,  and  began  a
letter  addressed  to  his  general,  urging  his  own  good  conduct  and  courage,
and  asking  his  general  to  endeavour  to  procure  for  him  the  military
medal.

"  The  faults  of  spelling,  &c.,  in  the  letter  were  neither  more  nor  less
numerous  than  was  habitual  with  the  subject  in  his  normal  state.  The
facility  with  which  he  wrote,  keeping  to  the  true  lines,  showed  that  he  saw
what  he  was  doing.  To  test  this,  we  repeatedly  placed  a  sheet  of  iron
between  his  eyes  and  hand.  He  continued  to  write  a  few  words  illegibly,
then  ceased  to  write,  without  showing  impatience.  When  the  obstacle
was  removed  he  finished  the  imperfect  line,  and  began  another.  The
sense  of  sight  was  therefore  needful  to  the  written  expression  of  the
subject's  thought.

"  The  ink  in  his  inkstand  was  then  replaced  by  water.  He  perceived
the  faintness  of  the  letters  traced,  wiped  his  pen  again  and  again,  but
never  looked  at  the  ink-bottle.  His  field  of  vision,  it  seemed,  was
awakened  by  touch  alone,  and  was  limited  to  objects  with  which  he  was
actually  in  contact.

"  He  was  writing  on  a  sheet  of  paper  which  lay  on  a  pile  of  about  ten
similar  sheets.  We  quickly  drew  this  top  sheet  away,  and  his  pen  con-
tinued to  write  on  the  second  sheet.  When  he  had  written  about  ten
words  on  the  second  sheet  we  snatched  this  also  away,  and  he  continued
his  phrase  at  exactly  the  same  point  on  the  third  sheet.  This  process
was  repeated,  and  on  the  fifth  sheet  there  was  nothing  but  his  signature  at
the  bottom.  Nevertheless,  he  read  over  and  corrected  his  letter  on  this
blank  fifth  sheet,  scattering  stops  and  corrections  over  the  empty  page,
each  of  which  corresponded  to  mistakes  made  on  the  co-ordinate  points
of  the  pages  which  had  been  snatched  away  from  him."

On  a  later  occasion  (p.  23)  pens  were  put  in  his  way  again;  and  as
soon  as  he  touched  them  he  sat  down  and  began  a  letter  to  a  friend,  this
aaking  an  appointment  for  the  evening,  after  a  concert  at  the  caft  of
the  Champs  Elyse"es,  at  which  (as  he  supposed)  he  had  to  sing.  Some
slight  change  in  the  surroundings  had  carried  his  automatic  reminiscence
back  to  this  other  phase  of  his  past  career.

Here,  then,  we  have  automatic  writings  appearing  to  proceed  from  the

iown  personality,  but  projected  backwards  to  an  earlier  point  of

They  may  be  compared  with  writings  professing  to  emanate  from  a

nality  other  than  the  writer's,  but  at  the  present  moment  of  time.

.ill  find.  I  think,  that  this  is  not  necessarily  a  deep-seated  distinc-

rathcr  that  the  automatic  writing,  while  representing  some  disloca-

.ngement — some    "  allotropic  form,"   as  I  have    elsewhere

suggested — of  the  writer's  personality,  yet  may  sometimes  take  its  super-

308  APPENDICES  [224  A

ficial  colour  from  some  almost  accidental  circumstance,  some  suggestion
round  which  the  flow  of  more  or  less  incoherent  mentation  crystallises
into  definite  shape.  The  subject  is  discussed  fully  in  Chapter  VIII.

224  A.  The  following  case  of  involuntary  crime  committed  by  a  boy
named  Sorgel,  in  a  state  of  secondary  consciousness,  is  summarised  from
an  account  given  in  the  paper  by  Dr.  Elliotson,  already  referred  to  in
223  A  (Zoist,\Q\.  iv.  pp.  172-79),  being  quoted  by  him  from  Anselm
Ritter  von  Feuerbach's  l  collection  of  trials.

"  Sorgel  (says  Dr.  Elliotson)  was  a  poor,  innocent,  industrious  youth,
subject  first  to  violent  epilepsy,  and  then  to  paroxysms  of  second  con-
sciousness, in  which  he  had  delusions  and  ungovernable  criminal  pro-
pensities, the  whole  of  which  he  was  ignorant  of  upon  returning  to  his
ordinary  state  of  consciousness,  though  in  his  morbid  state  he  remembered
the  occurrences  of  his  natural  state."  On  September  7th,  1824,  in  a
state  of  post-epileptic  consciousness,  Sorgel  murdered  an  old  wood-
cutter in  a  forest,  chopping  off  his  head  and  both  his  feet  with  one  of
his  own  axes.  Returning  from  the  forest,  Sorgel  told  several  people
what  he  had  done.  He  said  that  he  had  drunk  a  felon's  blood,  and
that  he  was  now  quite  well,  as  a  felon's  blood  was  supposed  to  be  a  cure
for  the  falling  sickness.  He  also  said  that  a  year  ago  some  one  had
buried  his  blood  on  the  hill ;  that  he  had  gone  there  and  found  the  man
who  had  done  it  and  had  killed  him.

The  next  day  Sorgel  was  examined  by  the  criminal  court,  and  repeated
the  same  story ;  he  was  taken  to  see  the  body,  and  recognised  it  without
the  slightest  air  of  embarrassment  or  remorse.  As  an  excuse  for  the
murder,  he  repeatedly  said  that  he  killed  the  man  in  order  to  drink  his
blood  and  be  cured  by  it.

This  state  of  consciousness  lasted  a  week.  He  then  returned  spon-
taneously to  his  natural  state.  On  September  i5th  the  judges  found  him
quiet :  his  conversation  was  coherent ;  his  appearance  and  manner  totally
changed.  He  did  not  remember  anything  about  the  murder,  but  sup-
posed he  must  have  committed  it,  since  every  one  told  him  he  had.  Nor
did  he  remember  having  confessed  to  the  crime,  or  having  been  shown  his
victim's  body.  He  admitted  having  heard  that  the  blood  of  a  felon  was  a
cure  for  the  falling  sickness,  but  observed  that  the  man  he  killed  was  no
felon.  Examined  again,  September  28th,  the  axe  was  laid  before  him  :  he
did  not  know  it.  Nothing  new  could  be  elicited.  Of  the  period  between
September  7th  and  i5th,  he  only  knew  that  "  his  head  was  very  confused,
and  that  he  dreamt  all  manner  of  nonsense."  He  did  not  remember  the
substance  of  his  dreams ;  only  one  or  two  circumstances  remained  with
him,  as  that  the  judge  had  visited  him  in  prison,  and  that  some  one  had

1  Feuerbach  was  for  ten  years  President  of  the  Central  Criminal  Court  of  a  province
of  Bavaria.  It  was  chiefly  owing  to  his  exertions  that  torture  was  abolished  in  the
criminal  procedure  of  that  state ;  and  he  was  the  composer  of  a  reformed  code  which
was  adopted  in  1813,  and  formed  the  basis  of  reforms  in  other  German  States.

225A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  309

written  at  the  table.  He  was  acquitted  of  the  crime,  as  not  being
responsible  for  his  action  at  the  time,  and  died  a  few  months  later  in  a
lunatic  asylum.

A  somewhat  similar  case  of  the  post-epileptic  type  was  recorded
by  Elliotson  in  the  Zoist  (vol.  i.  pp.  340-49,  and  vol.  viii.  pp.  237—52)
as  having  come  under  his  own  observation.  The  patient,  a  lad  named
Thomas  Russen,  having  become  blind,  deaf,  and  dumb  after  an  epileptic
fit,  was  cured  by  "  mesmeric  "  treatment.  Three  months  later  he  had
another  seizure — apparently  due  to  a  remark  casually  overheard  about
deafness,  dumbness,  and  blindness — and  was  again  cured  by  "  mesmerism,"
by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson.

Another  case  of  a  man  whose  secondary  condition  was  characterised
by  violent  criminal  propensities  was  given  in  the  Medical  News  (Phila-
delphia, U.S.A.),  February  2ist,  1891,  in  an  article  by  G.  R.  Trowbridge,
M.D.,  entitled  "A  Case  of  Epilepsy  with  Double  Consciousness."  This
case  is  quoted  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  256.

225  A.  A  full  account  of  the  well-known  case  of  Ansel  Bourne  was
first  published  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  221—58,  in  a
paper  by  Dr.  Hodgson,  entitled  "  A  Case  of  Double  Consciousness."
I  give  extracts  from  this  paper,  as  follows  : —

The  case  which  I  am  about  to  relate  has  many  points  of  interest.  The
secondary  condition  has,  so  far  as  can  be  ascertained,  occurred  only  once  in
the  lifetime  of  the  subject ;  and  the  memory  of  it,  entirely  lost  during  waking
hours,  is  easily,  though  incompletely,  brought  back  by  putting  the  patient  into
the  hypnotic  trance.

Ansel  Bourne,  at  the  time  of  his  seizure,  was  an  itinerant  preacher  sixty-one
years  old,  and  residing  in  the  small  town  of  Greene,  in  the  State  of   Rhode
Island.     One  morning,  whilst  apparently  in  his  usual  state  of  health,  he  disap-
peared, and  in  spite  of  the  publicity  which  the  newspapers  gave  to  the  fact,  and
the  efforts  of  the  police  to  find  him,  he  remained  undiscovered  for  a  period  of
two  months,  at  the  end  of  which  time  he  turned  up  at  Norristown,  Pennsylvania,
for  the  previous  six  weeks  he  had  been  keeping  a  small  variety  store
under  the  name  of  A.  J.  Brown,  appearing  to  his  neighbours  and  customers  as
a  normal  person,  but  being,  as  it  would  seem,  in  a  somnambulistic  condition
all  the  while.     As  Elder  Bourne's  life  presents  at  least  one  other  incident  of
interest,  I  shall  give  a  sketch  of  its  entire  course,  as  an  introduction  to
ount  of  the  episode  which  forms  the  main  subject  of  this  paper,
^el  Bourne  is  of  New  England  parentage,  and  was  born  in    X  \v  York
July  8th,   1826.     His  maternal  grandfather  "lost  his  mind  "late  in  life
("about  seventy "),  but  seems  to  have  had  no  acute  form  of  insanity.     His
"  became  dissipated,"  so  that   Ansel's  mother  and  he  separated  when
Ansel  was  only  seven  years  old,  and  the  boy's  early  life  was  spent  in  poverty,
with  little  schooling  and  much  work,  until  at  the  age  of  fifteen  he  was  set  to
trade  at  Olneyville,  Rhode  Island.     From  then  to  the  age
of  thirty-one  he  worked  at  his  trade  at  various  places  in  that  state.     Being  of
a  serious  turn  of  mind,  he  read  and  studied  a  good  deal  in  his  K-isvnc  m<>:
and  from  having  become  a  member  of  the  Baptist  Church,  changed  at  last  into

3io  APPENDICES  [225  A

a  convinced  atheist,  not  of  the  disputatious  and  aggressive  sort,  but  silent  and
stubborn,  as  he  is  wont  to  be  in  other  matters  which  are  exclusively  "  his  own
business."  Meantime  he  had  married,  in  1854,  and  had  children,  and  in  1857
was  living  at  Westerly,  Rhode  Island,  next  door  to  Mr.  Taylor,  minister  of  the
so-called  "  Christian  "  Church,  for  whom  he  had  come  to  cherish  a  decided
feeling  of  enmity.  In  relating  the  crisis  of  that  year,  I  abridge  the  account
given  in  a  pamphlet 1  which  has  had  a  wide  circulation.

The  following  is  a  brief  summary  of  the  facts  related  in  the  pamphlet,
which  are  given  fully  in  Dr.  Hodgson's  paper  :—

On  August  6th,  1857,  Ansel  Bourne  was  brought  home  ill.  Thinking  him-
self recovered,  he  was  working  again  in  his  garden  on  August  I4th,  the  hottest
day  of  the  season ;  in  the  middle  of  the  day  he  experienced  much  pain  in  his
head,  but  went  on  working  at  intervals.  On  August  i6th  he  suddenly  became
unconscious,  and  this  lasted  for  two  days.  The  doctor  who  attended  him  put
it  down  to  a  severe  sunstroke.  He  recovered,  but  had  several  relapses.

On  Wednesday,  October  28th,  he  went  out  for  a  walk,  feeling  quite  well.
An  unaccountable  idea  suddenly  occurred  to  him  that  he  ought  to  go  to  church ;
but  he  said  to  himself  that  he  would  rather  be  struck  deaf  and  dumb  for  ever
than  go  there.  A  few  minutes  later  he  felt  dizzy,  and  sat  down  on  a  stone  by
the  side  of  the  road.  Then,  in  the  words  of  the  pamphlet :  "  In  an  instant  it
seemed  as  though  some  powerful  hand  drew  something  down  over  his  head,
and  then  over  his  face,  and  finally  over  his  whole  body ;  depriving  him  of  his
sight,  his  hearing,  and  his  speech,  and  rendering  him  perfectly  helpless.  Yet
he  had  as  perfect  power  of  thought  as  at  any  time  in  his  life.  His  mind  in-
stantly went  back  to  the  conflict  of  his  thoughts,  some  eight  or  ten  minutes
before.  The  terrible  decision  and  choice,  '  I  would  rather  be  struck  deaf  and
dumb  for  ever,  than  go  to  the  Christian  Chapel,'  came  before  him  with  awful  sig-
nificance. It  seemed  that  God  had  truly  taken  him  at  his  word,  and  given  him
what  he  had  chosen."  He  was  soon  found  and  carried  home  in  a  waggon.  He
was  perfectly  sensible  of  everything  that  happened  ;  he  could  feel  perfectly,  but
could  not  see,  hear,  or  speak,  so  that  he  was  thought  by  the  doctor  and  his
friends  to  be  entirely  unconscious.  He  remained  firmly  convinced  that  this
was  a  judgment  on  him  for  his  sins.  About  twenty-six  hours  after  the  seizure
his  sight  was  suddenly  restored,  and  he  was  then  able  to  communicate  with  his
friends  in  writing.  He  could  still  neither  hear  nor  speak,  though  he  could  use
his  tongue  freely  in  other  ways.  On  November  nth,  at  his  own  desire,  he  was
carried  to  the  "  Christian  Chapel,"  and  wrote  a  message  on  his  slate  to  be  read
to  the  congregation,  announcing  his  conversion.

On  the  following  Sunday,  November  i5th,  he  went  again  to  the  chapel  and
wrote  another  message  to  the  same  effect  to  be  read  aloud.  As  a  further  sign
to  them  of  his  state  of  mind,  he  wished  to  stand  up  before  the  congregation  and

1  "  Wonderful  Works  of  God :  a  narrative  of  the  wonderful  facts  in  the  case  of
Ansel  Bourne,  of  West  Shelby,  Orleans  Co.,  N.  Y.,  who,  in  the  midst  of  opposition  to
the  Christian  religion,  was  suddenly  struck  blind,  dumb,  and  deaf  ;  and  after  eighteen
days  was  suddenly  and  completely  restored,  in  the  presence  of  hundreds  of  persons,  in
the  Christian  Chapel  at  Westerley,  on  the  I5th  of  November  1857.  Written  under  his
direction."  (Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1858,  by  Ansel  Bourne,
in  the  clerk's  office  of  the  District  Court  for  the  Southern  District  of  the  State  of  New
York.)

225A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  311

hold  up  his  hands.  In  the  general  emotional  excitement  that  followed  the  read-
ing of  his  message,  he  stood  up  in  the  pulpit  and  lifted  up  his  hand,  and  in  an
instant  his  hearing  and  speech  were  suddenly  restored,  and  from  that  time
onwards  he  has  always  had  the  complete  use  of  his  faculties.

The  result  of  these  experiences  was  to  make  him  adopt  the  career  of  an
itinerant  preacher;  but  finding  the  hard  work  and  incessant  travelling  too  much
for  his  health,  he  returned  to  his  former  trade  of  a  carpenter.  His  second  wife,
whom  he  married  in  1882,  disapproved  of  his  absences  from  home  in  the  course
of  his  preaching,  so  that  he  confined  his  labours  to  the  immediate  vicinity.  On
this  account  he  became  somewhat  troubled,  thinking  that  he  was  not  so  active
in  religious  work  as  he  ought  to  be,  and  he  was  afterwards  inclined  to  think  that
if  he  had  been  more  active  and  therefore  more  contented  with  his  work,  his
subsequent  experiences  would  never  have  occurred.

At  this  point  I  resume  Dr.  Hodgson's  narrative.

January  lyth,  1887,  he  went  from  his  home  in  Coventry,  R.I.,  to  Providence,
in  order  to  get  money  to  pay  for  a  farm  which  he  had  arranged  to  buy,  leaving
his  horse  at  Greene  Station,  in  a  stable,  expecting  to  return  the  same  afternoon
from  the  city.  He  drew  out  of  bank  $551,  and  paid  several  small  bills,  after
which  he  went  to  his  nephew's  store,  121  Broad  Street,  and  then  started
to  go  to  his  sister's  house  in  Westminster  Street.  This  was  the  last  that
was  known  of  his  doings  at  that  .time.  He  did  not  appear  at  his  sister's
house,  and  did  not  return  to  Greene,  where  his  horse  remained  for  about
three  weeks,  and  was  finally  taken  away  by  Mrs.  Bourne.  [The  police  were
communicated  with,  and  the  disappearance  was  announced  in  the  local
paper.]

Notwithstanding  the  publicity  given  to  the  fact  of  his  disappearance,  no
tidings  whatever  were  received  of  him  till  March  I4th,  eight  weeks  later.
The  account  of  the  morning  of  March  I4th,  as  given  to  us  by  Mr.  Bourne  in
reply  to  our  inquiries,  agrees  substantially  with  that  given  to  Dr.  Weir
Mitchell  (who  has  taken  much  interest  in  the  case,  and  has  kindly  allowed
us  to  use  his  notes  in  the  preparation  of  this  paper)  a  year  ago  by  Mr.  Bourne,
and  with  that  furnished  to  Dr.  Weir  Mitchell  by  Surgeon-General  L.  H.
Rea<l,  who  was  summoned  to  examine  Mr.  Bourne  on  the  morning  of
March  i4th,  soon  after  he  regained  his  ordinary  waking  consciousness.
The  contemporary  newspaper  accounts  which  we  have  seen  are  also  in
mtial  agreement  with  the  results  of  our  recent  inquiries.

It  appears  that  Ansel  Bourne  arrived  at  Norristown,  Pa.,  about  February
ist,  1887,  i.e.  two  weeks  after  his  disappearance  from  Providence,  R.I.  Under
the  name  of  A.  J.  Brown  he  rented  a  store-room  at  252  East  Main  Street,
from  Mr.  Pinkston  Knrle,  and  divided  the  room  into  two  by  means  of  curtains.
The  rear  portion  of  the  room  he  filled  with  furniture  and  used  as  a  "general
artment,  not  only  sleeping  there,  but  preparing  his  own  meals  there
also.  The  front  portion  of  the  room  he  stocked  with  notions,  toys,  con-
fectionery, &c.  These  he  purchased  and  paid  for  in  Philadelphia,  which  lie
1  each  week  for  the  purpose  of  replenishing  his  stock.  He  fastened  a
sign  to  his  window,  reading  A.  J.  Brown.  The  room  which  he  rented  was
part  of  the  house  in  which  the  Earle  family  were  dwelling,  but  although  they
came  in  daily  contact  with  "Mr.  Brown,"  there  was  nothing  in  his  manner  or
proceedings  which  suggested  anything  peculiar.  He  was  quiet  in  his  behaviour,

312  APPENDICES  [225  A

precise  and  regular  in  his  habits,  and  paid  his  bills  promptly.  He  was  espe-
cially punctual  in  the  closing  of  his  store  at  9  P.M.  on  ordinary  week-days,  and
at  10  P.M.  on  Saturday.  He  attended  the  Methodist  church  on  Sunday,  and
on  one  occasion,  at  a  religious  meeting,  he  related  an  incident  which  he
said  he  had  witnessed  on  a  steamboat  years  previously  on  the  passage  from
Albany  to  New  York,  and  his  remarks  were  thought  particularly  relevant  to
the  point  under  consideration.  In  short,  none  of  the  persons  who  had  any
dealings  with  him  seem  to  have  conceived  any  suspicion  that  he  was  in  any
unusual  condition  or  labouring  under  any  form  of  vagary.

On  the  morning  of  Monday,  March  I4th,  about  five  o'clock,  he  heard,  he
says,  an  explosion  like  the  report  of  a  gun  or  pistol,  and  waking,  he  noticed  that
there  was  a  ridge  in  his  bed  not  like  the  bed  he  had  been  accustomed  to  sleep
in.  He  noticed  the  electric  light  opposite  his  windows.  He  rose  and  pulled
away  the  curtains  and  looked  out  on  the  street.  He  felt  very  weak,  and
thought  that  he  had  been  drugged.  His  next  sensation  was  that  of  fear,  know-
ing that  he  was  in  a  place  where  he  had  no  business  to  be.  He  feared  arrest
as  a  burglar,  or  possibly  injury.  He  says  this  is  the  only  time  in  his  life  he
ever  feared  a  policeman.

The  last  thing  he  could  remember  before  waking  was  seeing  the  Adams
express  waggons  at  the  corner  of  Dorrance  and  Broad  Streets,  in  Providence,
on  his  way  from  the  store  of  his  nephew  in  Broad  Street  to  his  sister's  residence
in  Westminster  Street,  on  January  I7th.

He  waited  to  hear  some  one  move,  and  for  two  hours  he  suffered  great
mental  distress.  Finally  he  tried  the  door,  and  finding  it  fastened  on  the
inside,  opened  it.  Hearing  some  one  moving  in  another  room,  he  rapped  at
the  door.  Mr.  Earle  opened  it,  and  said,  "  Good-morning,  Mr.  Brown."  Mr.
B. :  "  Where  am  I  ?  "  Mr.  E. :  "  You're  all  right."  Mr.  B. :  "  I'm  all  wrong.  My
name  isn't  Brown.  Where  am  I  ?  "  Mr.  E. :  "  Norristown."  Mr.  B. :  "  Where
is  that  ?  "  Mr.  E. :  "  In  Pennsylvania."  Mr.  B. :  "  What  part  of  the  country  ?  "
Mr.  E. :  "  About  seventeen  miles  west  of  Philadelphia."  Mr.  B. :  "What  time
in  the  month  is  it?"  Mr.  E.  :  "The  I4th."  Mr.  B. :  "Does  time  run  back-
wards here?  When  I  left  home  it  was  the  lyth."  Mr.  E. :  "  i;th  of  what?  "
Mr.  B.:  "lythof  January."  Mr.  E. :  "It's  the  Hth  of  March."

Mr.  Earle  thought  that  "  Mr.  Brown  "  was  out  of  his  mind,  and  said  that  he
would  send  for  a  doctor.  He  summoned  Dr.  Louis  H.  Read,  to  whom  Mr.
Bourne  told  the  story  of  his  doings  in  Rhode  Island  on  the  morning  of  January
iyth,  and  said  that  he  remembered  nothing  between  the  time  of  seeing  the
Adams  express  waggons  on  Dorrance  Street  on  January  I7th  and  waking
up  that  morning,  March  I4th.  "  These  persons,"  he  said,  "  tell  me  I  am  in
Norristown,  Pennsylvania,  and  that  I  have  been  here  for  six  weeks,  and  that
I  have  lived  with  them  all  that  time.  I  have  no  recollection  of  ever  having
seen  one  of  them  before  this  morning."  He  requested  Dr.  Read  to  telegraph
to  his  nephew,  Andrew  Harris,  then  at  121  Broad  Street,  Providence,  R.I.  Dr,
Read  telegraphed,  "  Do  you  know  Ansel  Bourne?  Please  answer."  The  reply
came,  "  He  is  my  uncle.  Wire  me  where  he  is,  and  if  well.  Write  parti-
culars."

Later,  Mr.  Harris  journeyed  to  Norristown,  sold  the  goods  in  the  store  by
auction,  and  settled  up  the  business  affairs  of  "  Mr.  Brown,"  who,  as  Mr.  Bourne,
returned  with  him  to  Rhode  Island.  Dr.  Read  adds,  in  his  account  of  the
case  which  he  furnished  to  Dr.  Weir  Mitchell :  —

4<  He  said  he  was  a  preacher  and  farmer,  and  could  not  conceive  why  he

225A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  313

should  have  engaged  in  a  business  he  knew  nothing  about,  and  never  had  any
desire  to  engage  in  it.  When  asked  about  his  purchasing  and  paying  for  goods,
and  paying  freight  bills,  he  said  he  had  no  recollection  of  any  such  transac-
tions.

"The  family  with  whom  he  lived  say  that  after  the  occurrence  of  that
morning  he  was  greatly  changed.  He  was  annoyed  at  any  reference  to  his
store,  and  never  entered  it  afterwards.  He  became  despondent,  took  no  food,
was  unable  to  sleep,  and  became  greatly  prostrated  both  physically  and  men-
tally, and,  from  information  recently  received,  those  conditions  are  said  to
continue.

"  There  are  a  number  of  circumstances  connected  with  and  preceding  the
peculiar  dual  condition  that  have  satisfied  me  that  he  is  a  sincere  man,  and
not  an  impostor."

Early  in  1890  Professor  James  heard  of  the  case  from  one  of  our  Associates,
Mr.  J.  N.  Arnold,  who  was  the  means  of  putting  him  into  communication  with
Mr.  Harris  and  Mr.  Bourne,  and  for  whose  assistance  in  this  and  in  other  cases
we  are  much  indebted.

It  will  have  been  observed  that  no  account  was  forthcoming  of  Mr.  Bourne's
doings  between  the  time  of  his  disappearance  from  Providence  and  his  advent
in  Norristown  two  weeks  later,  and  Professor  James  conceived  the  idea  that
if  Mr.  Bourne  could  be  hypnotised,  we  might  obtain  from  him  while  in  the
hypnotic  trance  a  complete  history  of  the  whole  incident,  and  at  the  same  time,
by  post-hypnotic  suggestion,  prevent  the  recurrence  of  any  such  episode.  The
circumstances  had  naturally  left  a  painful  and  perplexed  impression  upon  Mr.
Bourne ;  he  was  anxious  to  have  any  light  possible  thrown  upon  his  strange
experience,  and  he  readily  acquiesced  in  the  proposals  made  for  hypnotisation.

Mr.  Bourne   is  still  living  in  Greene,  R.I.,  and  in  accordance  with  our

arrangement1  he  came  to  Boston  on  five  consecutive  days,  May  27th  to  3151,

and  submitted  to  our  investigations,  returning  each  day  to  Greene.     Professor

James  and  myself  also  visited  Mr.  Bourne  and  hypnotised  him  in  his  home  at

ne,  R.I.,  on  June  7th,  1890.

On  May  27th  we  questioned  him  in  detail  concerning  his  past  life,  and
ascertained,  inter  alia,  that  he  was  "  mesmerised  "  once,  about  forty  years  pre-
viously; he  thinks  that  he  was  not  "transformed"  into  any  one  else  by  the
"  mesmerist,"  but  was  made  to  go  through  various  laughable  performances.
At  1.50  P.M.  Professor  James  began  to  hypnotise  him — using  passes — and  he
proved  a  sensitive  subject,  becoming  entranced  in  the  course  of  a  few  minutes.
He  was  unable  to  open  his  eyes,  to  unclasp  his  hands,  &c.  No  inquiry  was
made  on  this  occasion  concerning  the  *«  Brown"  incident  ;  we  determined
simply  that  he  could  be  readily  entranced  and  readily  waked.

On  the  next  day  we  endeavoured  to  obtain  a  detailed  account  from  him,
while  in  tin-  trance  state,  of  his  doings  during  the  eight  weeks,  January  I7th  to
\\  i3th,  1887.     The  following  statements •  were  elicited  from  him  after  he
had  been  enjoined  to  go  into  a  deeper  sleep  and  recall  everything  that  hap-
pened on  January  i7th,  1887,  and  afterwards.

1  Mr.  Bourne  received  his  travelling  expenses,  and  in  addition  the  amount  which  he
would  have  earned  by  his  ordinary  work  as  carpenter.  He  arrived  in  Boston  about
n  \  M.  and  left  at  3  P.M.

here  give  a  general  summary  of  the  various  statements  made  by  Mr.  Bourne
•ice  at  our  different  sittings.     The  more  detailed  account  of  these  is  given  in
Appendix  A  ,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  241.

APPENDICES  [225  A

He  said  that  his  name  was  Albert  John  Brown,  that  on  January  I7th,  1887,
he  went  from  Providence  to  Pawtucket  in  a  horse-car,  thence  by  train  to
Boston,  and  thence  to  New  York,  where  he  arrived  at  9  P.M.,  and  went  to  the
Grand  Union  Hotel,  registering  as  A.  J.  Brown.  He  left  New  York  on  the
following  morning  and  went  to  Newark,  N.  J.,  thence  to  Philadelphia,  where
he  arrived  in  the  evening,  and  stayed  for  three  or  four  days  in  a  hotel  near  the
Depot.  He  then  spent  a  week  or  so  in  a  boarding-house  in  Filbert  Street,
about  No.  1115,  near  the  Dep6t.  It  was  kept  by  two  ladies,  but  he  could  not
remember  their  names.  He  thought  of  taking  a  store  in  a  small  town,  and
after  looking  round  at  several  places,  among  them  Germantown,  chose  Norris-
town,  about  twenty  miles  from  Philadelphia,  where  he  started  a  little  business
of  five  cent  goods,  confectionery,  stationery,  &c.

He  stated  that  he  was  born  in  Newton,  New  Hampshire,  July  8th,  1826
(he  was  born  in  New  York  city,  July  8th,  1826),  had  passed  through  a  great
deal  of  trouble,  losses  of  friends  and  property ;  loss  of  his  wife  was  one  trouble
— she  died  in  1881 ;  three  children  living — but  everything  was  confused  prior  to
his  finding  himself  in  the  horse-car  on  the  way  to  Pawtucket ;  he  wanted  to
get  away  somewhere — he  didn't  know  where — and  have  rest.  He  had  six  or
seven  hundred  dollars  with  him  when  he  went  into  the  store.  He  lived  very
closely,  boarded  by  himself,  and  did  his  own  cooking.  He  went  to  church,  and
also  to  one  prayer-meeting.  At  one  of  these  meetings  he  spoke  about  a  boy
who  had  kneeled  down  and  prayed  in  the  midst  of  the  passengers  on  a  steam-
boat from  Albany  to  New  York.

He  had  heard  of  the  singular  experience  of  Ansel  Bourne,  but  did  not  know
whether  he  had  ever  met  Ansel  Bourne  or  not.  He  had  been  a  professor  of
religion  himself  for  many  years,  belonged  to  the  "Christian"  denomination,
but  back  there  everything  was  mixed  up.  He  used  to  keep  a  store  in  Newton,
New  Hampshire,  and  was  engaged  in  lumber  and  trading  business  ;  had  never
previously  dealt  in  the  business  which  he  took  up  at  Norristown.  He  kept  the
Norristown  store  for  six  or  eight  weeks ;  how  he  got  away  from  there  was  all
confused;  since  then  it  has  been  a  blank.  The  last  thing  he  remembered
about  the  store  was  going  to  bed  on  Sunday  night,  March  I3th,  1887.  He
went  to  the  Methodist  church  in  the  morning,  walked  out  in  the  afternoon,
stayed  in  his  room  in  the  evening  and  read  a  book.  He  did  not  feel  "  any-
thing out  of  the  way."  Went  to  bed  at  eight  or  nine  o'clock,  and  remembered
being  in  bed,  but  nothing  further.

The  statements  made  by  Mr.  Bourne  in  trance  concerning  his  doings  in
Norristown  agree  with  those  made  by  his  landlord  there  and  other  persons ;
but  since  Mr.  Bourne,  in  his  normal  state,  has  heard  of  these,  they  afforded  no
presumption  in  favour  of  the  correctness  of  his  statements  concerning  the  first
two  weeks  of  his  absence,  those  which  immediately  preceded  his  arrival  in
Norristown.  The  register-books  of  the  hotels  had  been  destroyed,  so  that  we
were  unable  to  trace  his  travels  in  detail  by  finding  the  name  "  A.  J.  Brown"
at  the  hotels  which  he  described  himself  as  having  visited.  We  have,  how-
ever, through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  William  Romaine  Newbold,  Lecturer  on
Psychology  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  ascertained  that  he  boarded  for
a  week  or  more  at  "The  Kellogg  House,"  Nos.  1605-7  Filbert  Street,  Phila-
delphia. Mr.  Newbold's  report  (see  Appendix  B)  seems  to  establish  the  general
trustworthiness  of  Mr.  Bourne's  account  (in  trance)  of  his  doings  before  going
to  Norristown,  although  his  recollections  may  be  inaccurate  as  regards  such
minor  points  as  the  number  of  the  boarding-house,  &c.

225A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  315

Mr.  Newbold  thinks  "the  reason  that  Bourne  found  his  way  into  'The
Kellogg  House  '  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact  that  it  is  the  first  house  in  Filbert
Street  going  west  from  the  Pennsylvania  Railroad  Dep6t  that  displays  a  sign
such  as  would  be  likely  to  attract  a  man  of  moderate  means  but  staid  habits.
Indeed,  I  believe  that  it  is  the  first  house  in  that  direction  that  has  any  sign
at  all,  and  the  hotels  directly  in  view  upon  coming  out  of  the  station  all  have
the  general  appearance  of  the  ordinary  saloon.  4  The  Kellogg  House '  is  plain
and  respectable  in  appearance."

It  may  be  worth  mentioning  here  that  the  Grand  Union  Hotel,  where  Mr.
Bourne  in  trance  states  that  he  stayed  in  New  York,  is  just  across  the  street
from  the  station,  and  that,  as  we  learn  from  Mrs.  Bourne,  he  had  stayed  there
on  his  honeymoon  trip  with  her  in  September,  1882,  and  had  previously  been
there  with  his  sisters.

Additional  corroboration  of  the  accuracy  of  his  trance-memory  has  been
furnished  by  statements  which  Mr.  Bourne  (in  trance)  made  concerning  the
money  and  other  property  in  his  possession  at  Norristown  on  the  night  of  the
I3thof  March,  1887.  We  have  satisfactory  reasons  for  regarding  these  state-
ments as  correct,  but  the  details  of  the  circumstances  connected  with  their
verification  involve  matters  which  we  do  not  feel  justified  in  publishing.  It  is
enough  to  say  that  the  money  which  he  took  away  on  January  iyth  has  been,
in  our  opinion,  accounted  for,  though,  prior  to  our  inquiries  made  in  con-
sequence of  his  trance-statements,  there  was  an  unexplained  deficiency  of  about
$150.00.

It  will  be  seen  from  the  account  which  Mr.  Newbold  obtained  of  the  con-
versations which  "Mr.  Brown"  had  with  Mrs.  Kellogg  and  the  waiter,  Mr.
Jackson,  that  Mr.  Bourne  in  his  secondary  state  recollected  certain  portions  of
his  past  life,  and  especially  the  character  of  his  own  trade.  His  memory  seems
to  have  been  considerably  better  during  his  eight  weeks'  spontaneous  "ambu-
latory trance  "  than  it  is  now  in  the  artificially  produced  trance,  and  it  may  be
worth  while  adding  that  it  appeared  to  be,  as  regards  some  details  of  his  entire
life,  more  obscure  in  our  latest  hypnotisations  than  in  our  earliest.  Many  of
our  questions  were  repeated  again  and  again,  and  we  have  not  recorded  all
these  in  full  detail,  but  the  result  suggests  that  the  "  Brown  "  state  is  much  less
coherent  now  than  in  its  first  inception  in  1887,  and  that  the  personality  of
.vn  "  is  slowly  disintegrating.

From  the  tests  of  the  sense  organs  made  upon  Mr.  Bourne,  both  waking  and
entranced,  it  would  seem  that  the  only  difference  between  trance  and  waking
as  to  sensibility  is  u  a  not  very  pronounced  analgesia  during  the  trance."  (See
Appendix  C,  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  255.)

made  attempts  while  Mr.  Bourne  was  in  his  normal  state  to  evoke  the
"  Brown  "  personality  by  automatic  writing,  &c.,  and  similarly,  while  he  was
entranced,  we  endeavoured  to  "tap  "  Mr.  Bourne,  but  our  efforts  were  unavail-
ing. So,  likewise,  were  the  attempts,  by  prolonged  passes,  to  produce  a  deeper
trance  in  which  the  "  Bourne  "  and  "  Brown  "  personalities  might  be  unified.
We  could  get  no  manifestation  of  either  personality  while  the  other  was  to
the  front,  not  even  the  fulfilment  of  post-hypnotic  suggestions,  and  at  the  end
of  our  experiments  Brown  and  Bourne  seemed  as  far  as  ever  from  realising  that
each  belonged  to  the  other.

Taken  altogether,  the  case  is  not  a  little  perplexing.      In  the  Brown  state,

while  forgetting  some  of  the  most  important  events  of  his  past  life,  including

vn  name  and  his  second  marriage,  and  the  place  of  his  birth,  he  remcm-

316  APPENDICES  [225

»

bered  the  date  of  his  birth  correctly,  the  date  of  his  first  wife's  death,  his  trade,
&c.,  and  curiously  enough,  on  one  occasion  related  an  incident  that  occurred  on
a  steamboat  between  Albany  and  New  York,  and  which  in  his  Bourne  state  he
also  well  remembers.  In  trance,  on  May  28th,  he  recalled  that  he  had
children  living,  but  on  June  7th  he  had  no  recollection  of  them.  It  is  difficult
to  see  along  what  definite  channels  the  temporary  obliteration  of  Bourne's
memories  proceeded,  with,  as  consequence,  his  transformation  into  Brown.
We  learn  from  Mr.  Bourne  that  he  never  knew  a  Mr.  A.  J.  Brown,  and  never
lived  ih  Newton,  N.H.  Neither  Mr.  Bourne  nor  his  wife  could  suggest  any
clue  which  might  lead  to  any  explanation  of  his  adopting  A.  J.  Brown  as  his
name,  or  Newton,  N.H.,  as  his  birthplace.1  But,  indeed,  we  could  hardly
hope  to  trace  the  antecedents  of  his  peculiar  actions  in  detail.  And  it  remains
now  to  mention  some  additional  facts  which  appear  to  throw  some  light  upon
both  of  his  remarkable  experiences,  at  least  to  the  extent  of  suggesting  that  his
case  should  be  classified  in  its  essentials  as  belonging  to  a  well-recognised
type.

In  reply  to  our  inquiries  (see  also  Dr.  Hinsdale's  report,  Appendix  C.,  p.
254),  he  stated  that  he  injured  his  eyesight  as  a  young  man  by  too  much  study,
working  at  night  to  educate  himself.  His  vision  improved  after  his  strange
experience  in  1857,  and  remained  improved  until  1887.  He  used  to  have
headaches  frequently,  now  seldom.  They  diminished  as  he  began  to  lose  his
hair,  which  was  very  thick  in  1857.  (Of  course  the  loss  of  his  hair  may  not
have  been  the  cause  of  the  diminution  of  his  headaches.)

He  stated  also  that  he  had  been  subject  to  the  "  blues  "  since  childhood,
but  these  had  not  been  so  frequent  for  a  year  and  a  half.  When  under  them  he
did  not  want  to  see  anybody  or  talk  to  anybody.  These  would  sometimes  last
a  few  hours,  sometimes  a  week.  Occasionally,  at  such  times,  when  walking,
he  would  find  himself  two  or  three  miles  away  from  where  he  had  last  noticed
himself  as  being.

Mrs.  Bourne  informed  us  that  Mr.  Bourne  had  had  several  "  fainting  fits  n
in  the  course  of  his  life.  She  knew  of  four  such  occurrences.  The  first  of
these  happened  about  July  1882,  two  months  before  her  marriage,  in  church.
Mr.  Bourne  had  gone  into  the  pulpit  just  before  the  service.  He  was  not  going
to  preach  that  day.  It  was  very  warm,  and,  as  Mr.  Bourne  was  coming  out  of
the  pulpit,  he  fell  down  unconscious.  The  second  occurred  about  December
1882,  when  he  fell  off  a  lounge  in  the  room.  On  the  third  occasion  he  was
standing  by  the  side  of  the  carriage  after  harnessing  the  horses,  when  he  sud-
denly fell  unconscious.  This  was  in  February  1886.  The  last  time  occurred
soon  after  his  return  from  Norristown  in  1887.  He  was  sitting  in  a  chair
under  a  tree  in  the  shade,  and  he  slid  out  of  the  chair  to  the  ground.  On
these  occasions  he  remained  unconscious  for  several  hours,  probably  two  hours
at  least  and  six  hours  at  most.

These  facts,  taken  in  connection  with  his  experiences  in  1857  and  1887,
suggest  that  Mr.  Bourne  has  been  subject  to  some  form  of  epilepsy,  and  that
during  his  eight  weeks'  absence  in  1887  he  was  suffering  from  a  post-epileptic
partial  loss  of  memory.  I  suppose  that  on  January  I7th,  1887,  he  may  have  had
a  mild  epileptic  seizure,  and  that  "after  the  fit,  he  was  a  different  person,

1  The  postmaster  at  Newton,  N.H.,  in  reply  to  my  inquiry,  states  that  he  has
"  asked  some  of  the  oldest  inhabitants,  and  none  of  them  ever  knew  of  any  A.  J.
Brown."

226A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  317

although  in  the  same  skin ;  or,  as  the  popular  phrase  is,  the  post-epileptic
patient  '  was  not  himself.' "  l

226  A.  This  case  was  reported  by  Dr.  Proust,  Professor  of  Hygiene
at  the  Hotel  Dieu  of  Paris,  before  the  Academic  des  Sciences  Morales  et
Politiques,  as  an  instance  of  what  he  called  "  ambulatory  automatism  in
a  hysterical  man,"  or,  as  it  might  otherwise  be  phrased,  of  double  person-
ality with  an  active  second  self.  I  give  a  brief  resume  from  the  Revue  de
rhypnotisme,  March  1890,  p.  267.

Emile  X.,  at.  33,  is  a  barrister  in  Paris  ;  of  good  ability  and  education  in
classical  studies,  both  as  a  boy  and  at  the  university.  He  was  always  nervous
and  over  sensitive,  with  some  hysterical  attacks  and  functional  derangements
of  motion  and  sensation,  signs,  in  fact,  of  la  grande  hysttrie.  He  could  be
hypnotised  very  easily,  and  whilst  M.  Luys  had  him  in  charge  he  could  be  put
to  sleep  by  a  loud  noise,  or  any  sudden  impression.  One  day  in  a  cafe"  he  saw
himself  in  the  looking-glass  and  at  once  fell  into  a  hypnotic  state  which  fright-
ened his  friends  and  led  them  to  take  him  to  an  hospital,  where  he  recovered
without  any  difficulty.  Sometimes  his  attacks  were  different;  he  would  seem
to  his  companions  to  undergo  no  loss  of  consciousness,  but  would  lose  the
memory  of  all  his  past  life  during  a  few  minutes  or  a  few  days,  and  in  this  con-
dition of  secondary  consciousness  would  lead  an  active  and  apparently  normal
life  on  foot  or  on  horseback,  in  his  friends'  houses  or  in  shops.  From  such  a
state  he  woke  suddenly,  and  was  entirely  without  memory  of  what  had  hap-
pened to  him  in  this  secondary  state.  An  instance  of  this  occurred  on  Sep-
tember 23rd,  1888.  He  had  had  a  quarrel  with  his  stepfather  in  Paris,  which
had  excited  him  considerably,  and  "he  fell  into  his  second  state.  Three  weeks
later  he  woke  after  his  usual  fashion,  without  any  memory  whatever  of  what
had  been  happening,  and  found  himself  at  Villars-Saint-Marcelin,  in  the  Haute
Marne,  more  than  100  miles  from  Paris.  He  picked  up  from  various  sources  a
little  knowledge  of  what  he  had  done.  He  was  told  he  had  visited  the  priest
of  the  village,  who  had  thought  him  "  odd"  ;  that  he  had  also  stayed  with  one
of  his  uncles,  who  was  a  bishop  in  the  Haute  Marne,  and  at  his  house  had
broken  various  things,  and  torn  up  some  MSS.  of  his  uncle;  that  he  had  run
into  debt  to  the  extent  of  ^20,  and  that  he  had  been  summoned  before  the
Court  at  Vassy  on  some  charge  of  petty  theft,  and  in  his  absence  judgment  had
been  given  against  him.  Again,  on  May  nth,  1889,  he  was  breakfasting  at  a
restaurant  in  Paris,  and  two  days  later  found  himself  at  Troyes.  Of  what  had
happened  during  these  two  days  he  could  remember  nothing.  He  recollected
that  before  losing  his  consciousness  he  had  had  a  great-coat  and  a  purse  in  it
containing  226  fr.

These  facts  reminded  Professor  Proust  of  the  well-known  case  of  Fe*lida  X.
[231  A],  and  of  the  more  recent  case  of  Louis  V.  [283  A],  in  which  the  memory
of  the  secondary  personality  was  recalled  by  hypnotism.  Emile  X.  was  easily
:.  and  in  that  state  could  give  a  full  account  of  what  had  happened  to
him  in  his  states  of  secondary  personality.  In  his  first  of  these  two  attacks  he
described  how  he  had  lost  some  of  the  ^20  at  cards,  and  told  the  complete

1  "  The  Croonian  Lectures  on  Evolution  and  Dissolution  of  the  Nervous  System  "
(1884),  by  J.  Hughlings  Jackson,  M.D.    See  also,  by  the  same  author,  "  Ophthalmology
s  of  the  Nervo':  "  (1885),  and  "  Temporary  Mental  Disorders  after

Epileptic  Paroxysms,"  in  Tkt  West  Riding  Lunatic  Asylum  Reports,  vol.  v.

318  APPENDICES  [226  B

story  of  what  he  had  done  when  staying  with  his  uncle  the  bishop,  and  after-
wards with  the  priest.  In  the  same  way  as  to  his  visit  to  Troyes,  he  told  the
details  of  his  journey,  of  the  friends  he  had  dined  with  there,  and  where  he  had
left  his  overcoat  and  purse.  Notes  were  taken  of  his  hypnotic  account,  and  on
the  strength  of  these  he  wrote  to  the  hotel-keeper  at  Troyes  asking  for  his  coat
and  purse,  and  describing  where  he  had  left  them.  Two  days  later,  to  his
great  astonishment,  he  received  them  both,  and  the  226  fr.  in  the  purse.  The
Court  at  Vassy  also,  when  his  true  condition  had  become  known,  reversed  the
judgment  given  against  him.

226  B.  The  following  case  of  "  Automatisme  Somnambulique  avec
de"doublement  de  la  personnalit£  "  was  reported  by  J.  M.  Boeteau,  Interne
des  Asiles  de  la  Seine,  in  the  Annales  Medico-psychologiques  for  January,
1892.  It  has  some  resemblance  to  the  Ansel  Bourne  case,  insomuch  as
the  lost  memory  of  an  escapade  is  recovered  under  hypnotisation,  but
differs  from  it  in  the  presence  of  marked  hysteria.  There  seemed  to  be
no  suspicion  of  epilepsy.  I  abbreviate  M.  Boeteau's  very  full  and  clear
account : —

Marie  M.,  now  aged  twenty-two,  has  been  subject  to  hysterical  attacks  since
she  was  twelve  years  old.  She  became  an  out-patient  at  the  Hdpital  Andral
for  these  attacks  ;  and  on  April  24th,  1891,  the  house  physician  there  advised
her  to  enter  the  surgical  ward  at  the  H6tel-Dieu,  as  she  would  probably  need
an  operation  for  an  internal  trouble.  Greatly  shocked  by  this  news,  she  left
the  hospital  at  10  A.M.,  and  lost  consciousness.  When  she  recovered  conscious-
ness she  found  herself  in  quite  another  hospital — that  of  Ste.  Anne — at  6  A.M.
on  April  27th.  She  had  been  found  wandering  in  the  streets  of  Paris,  with
haggard  aspect,  worn-out  boots,  and  lacerated  feet,  in  the  evening  of  the  day
on  which  she  left  the  HSpital  Andral,  under  the  shock  of  painful  apprehension.
On  returning  to  herself,  she  could  recollect  absolutely  nothing  of  what  had
passed  in  the  interval.  While  she  was  thus  perplexed  at  her  unexplained
fatigue  and  footsoreness,  and  at  the  gap  in  her  memory,  M.  Boeteau  hypnotised
her.  Like  Ansel  Bourne,  she  passed  with  ease  into  the  hypnotic  state,  although
she  had  never  before  been  hypnotised,  and  like  him  she  at  once  remembered
the  events  which  filled  at  least  the  earlier  part  of  the  gap  in  her  primary
consciousness.

It  appears  that  when  she  left  the  HSpital  Andral  .she  set  out  at  first  for  the
H6tel-Dieu,  as  recommended;  but  that  the  horror  of  the  impending  operation
upset  her  balance  of  mind,  and  suddenly  transformed  itself  into  a  conviction
that  her  baby,  which  had  died  at  the  Assistance  Publique,  was  being  kept  from
her  by  the  nurse  to  whom  she  had  entrusted  it  at  Chaville.  She  had  walked  to
Chaville,  and  then  on  to  Versailles,  whither  the  nurse  had  removed.  She  could
learn  nothing  of  her  baby,  and  walked  back  to  Paris.  During  this  long  walk,
which  wore  out  her  boots  and  wounded  her  feet,  she  was  insensible  to  fatigue  or
hunger.  But  on  regaining  Paris  she  began  to  be  haunted  by  spectral  surgeons,
endeavouring  to  perform  operations  on  her.  She  was  found  in  an  increasing
state  of  maniacal  excitation,  and  was  taken  to  a  police  infirmary  on  the  25th
and  to  the  Hospital  of  Ste.  Anne  on  the  26th  April.

The  patient's  account  of  her  adventures  was  found  to  be  correct.  The  novel
point  here  is  the  recovery  by  hypnotism  of  the  memory  of  a  state  resembling  a
sudden  access  of  mania.  There  seems  to  have  been  some  fragmentary  recollec-

228A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  319

tion  of  the  primary  state  during  the  secondary  state,  inasmuch  as  the  poor
woman  recollected  the  fact  that  she  had  a  baby,  and  the  name  and  address  of
the  nurse.  But  there  was  so  little  of  such  memory  that  Dr.  Boeteau  feels  justi-
fied in  saying  that  "for  a  time  she  had  had  a  real  mental  life  differing  from  the
normal  life,  with  a  recurrence  to  her  normal  life  after  three  days ;  thus  present-
ing a  clear  example  of  alternating  and  divided  personality,  with  complete
separation  between  the  two  psychical  existences."

One  further  point  should  be  noted.  If  the  patient  is  hypnotised  and  told  to
write  the  day  of  the  month,  she  writes  April  25th,  1891.  This  is  one  of  the  days
during  her  fugue — the  day,  as  it  appears,  on  which  she  sank  from  coherent  into
incoherent  delirium.  It  thus  appears  that  some  kind  of  secondary  personality,
identified  with  the  earlier  part  of  the  fugue,  still  exists  subliminally,  although
the  patient  has  apparently  quite  recovered  her  mental  balance.

228  A.  The  next  case  is  taken  from  an  article  entitled  "  Duplex
Personality:  Report  of  a  Case,"  by  William  F.  Drewry,  M.D.,  of
Petersburg,  Virginia,  U.S.A.,  in  the  Medico-  Legal  Journal  for  June
1896:  —

The  following  case,  which  came  under  my  observation  within  the  past  year,
and  the  details  of  which  were  kindly  given  me  by  an  eminent  practitioner  of
Virginia, *  who  was  the  family  physician  of  the  patient,  typifies  the  peculiar
phases  of  duplex  personality  and  periodic  extinction  of  memory,  and  is  interest-
ing from  a  psychologic,  as  well  as  clinical  point  of  view.  It  is  also  of  interest  as
regards  forensic  medicine.

Mr.  K.  was  a  man  fifty  years  old,  of  splendid  physique,  in  good  health,  in
fairly  comfortable  circumstances,  doing  a  mercantile  business,  sober,  moral  and
industrious,  of  affable  disposition,  popular  with  a  large  circle  of  friends,  member
of  several  secret  benevolent  orders,  and  happy  and  contented  in  his  domestic
relations.  He  was  born  and  reared  in  the  State ;  had  resided  and  conducted

business  in for  twenty  or  more  years,  and  deservedly  bore  the  reputation

of  being  a  correct,  straightforward  man  in  every  particular.  He  had  for  years
been  one  of  the  town  officials.

One  of  his  near  relatives  (an  uncle,  I  think)  at  about  the  age  of  fifty,  without
any  apparent  reason  whatever,  went  out  West,  leaving  his  wife  and  children,
and  was  not  heard  of  for  many  years.     Finally  he  came  back  on  a  visit,  and
remained  a  short  time  with  his  family  and  old  acquaintances.     No  explanation
iven  of  his  strange  conduct.     It  was  thought  that  he  had  some  form  of
i  disease.      I   mention  this  case  to  show  that   Mr.   K.  might  have  in-
herited some  neuropathic  taint  or  eccentricity.

One  day,  while  apparently  in  perfect  health,  without  any  premonitory  symp-

>f  mental  derangement,  Mr.  K.  went  to  a  northern  city  to  purchase  goods

for  hi.s  store.     While  there  two  days  he  transacted  a  great  deal  of  busines

many  old  friends,  and  exhibited  no  indication  of  aberration  of  mind.     Starting

homeward,  he  registered  as  a  passenger  on  a  certain  steamer  :  feeling  very  tired

tired  a  state-room,  to  which  at  once  he  repaired,  changed  his  linen,  &c.

When  tickets  were  collected  he  was  missing.     He  had  suddenly  and  mysteri-

lisappcared.     No  one  had  seen  him  leave  the  boat,  jump  or  fall  overboard.

An  acquaintance,  however,  said  that  he  was  reasonably  certain  that  he  saw

Mr.  K.  several  hours  after  the  boat  had  left  in  one  of  the  depots  in  the  city.

1  Dr.  H.  G.  Leigh,  Sr.,  of  Petersburg,  Va.

320  APPENDICES  [228  A

He  was  sitting  down,  hat  pulled  over  his  face,  and  seemed  to  be  in  a  "  deep
study,"  so  he  was  not  disturbed.  Mr.  K.'s  open  valise  and  all  his  clothes,  except
those  he  wore,  were  found  in  his  state-room.  The  room  door  was  open,  but  the
key  had  been  taken  away.

Some  suspected  he  had  been  robbed  and  thrown  overboard ;  others  thought
he  had  (suddenly)  become  insane,  or  had  had  a  fit  and  fallen  into  the  sea  ;  the
suicide  theory  was  also  indulged  in,  and  the  opinion  was  entertained  by  some
that  he  had  absconded.  But  what  had  become  of  him,  why,  when,  and  how
he  disappeared  were  mysteries.  He  had,  unobserved,  simply  "  stepped  out  into
the  great  unknown."  A  vigorous  search  was  made  to  find  him,  dead  or  alive,
detectives  were  employed,  the  newspapers  teemed  with  accounts  of  the  strange
and  unaccountable  going  away  of  this  well-known  man,  but  no  clue  was  to  be
had  that  would  throw  any  light  whatever  upon  his  mysterious  disappearance.

Finally  search  was  abandoned,  the  theory  that  he  was  dead  accepted,  and
the  court  appointed  an  administrator  of  his  estate  and  a  guardian  for  his  children.
His  business  was  purchased  by  his  son,  and  everything  was  moving  along
smoothly,  when,  six-  months  after  he  was  last  heard  of,  he  suddenly  and  unex-
pectedly appeared  at  the  home  of  a  relative  in  a  distant  southern  city.  He  was
brought  home  in  a  composed,  but  partially  dazed  condition,  able  to  recognise
but  few  of  his  friends.  He  was  an  entirely  changed  man — the  physical  and
psychical  metamorphoses  were  quite  complete.  He  was  hardly  recognised  by
his  friends.  He  had  reduced  in  weight  from  250  to  150  pounds,  and  was  very
feeble.  He  wore  the  same  suit  of  clothes  he  had  on  at  the  time  he  disappeared,
and  had  in  his  pocket  the  check  and  key  which  were  given  him  on  the  boat.

He  was  at  once  put  under  treatment,  and  in  four  weeks  he  recovered  his
previous  bodily  and  mental  health,  and  has  since  conducted  his  same  old
business  with  his  accustomed  skill  and  industry.  A  day  or  two  after  his
return  home  an  abscess,  deep  down  in  the  auditory  canal,  broke  and  discharged
a  large  quantity  of  sanguino-purulent  matter.  Immediately  thereupon  im-
provement began  and  went  on  rapidly.  This  was  a  remarkable  fact,  and  is,  I
think,  worthy  of  special  note.

Hear  Mr.  K.'s  own  account  of  his  strange  case :  "  I  was  feeling  very  tired
— thoroughly  fatigued — after  a  very  busy  day  in  the  city,  so  went  to  my  state-
room immediately  upon  going  aboard  the  boat  and  changed  my  clothes.  Up
to  that  time  I  was  thoroughly  conscious,  but  after  that  I  recall  nothing— all
was  oblivion— till  six  months  later  when  '  I  came  suddenly  to  myself  in  a
distant  city  in  the  South,  where  I  knew  no  one.  I  found  myself  driving  a
fruit-waggon  on  the  street.  I  was  utterly  astounded.  Why  I  was  there,  how
and  when  I  got  there,  where  I  came  from,  what  I  had  been  doing,  were
puzzling  questions  to  me.  Upon  inquiry  I  learned  that  I  had  been  there,  and
at  work,  for  some  time.  My  life  since  I  was  in  that  state-room  had  been  an
absolute  blank  to  me.  I  can  give  no  account  of  myself  during  that  period  of
time.  I  started  at  once  for  Virginia,  but  on  the  way  I  again  lost  consciousness,
though  only  for  a  day  or  two.  When  further  on  my  way  home,  I  felt  so  utterly
worn  out,  I  stopped  in  a  certain  town  and  went  to  the  house  of  a  very  near
relative.  From  there  I  was  taken  home.  I  was  in  a  half-dazed,  -confused
condition,  and  remained  so  some  days  longer.  I  am  now  feeling  well  and  all
right."

This  case  bears  many  striking  resemblances  to  others  that  have  been  from
time  to  time  reported,  but  there  are  two  points  of  special  interest.  First,  the
inherited  tendency  to  eccentricity,  if  not  to  insanity.  His  mysterious  dis-

229A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  321

appearance  occurred  at  the  same  age  at  which  his  progenitor  so  strangely
disappeared.  Second,  the  abscess  in  the  ear,  the  discharge  of  which  was
followed  by  a  rapid  return  to  normal  mentality.  Is  it  not  probable  that  this
abscess  had  some  etiologic  connection  with  the  mental  trouble,  by  producing
a  maladjustment  of  the  cerebral  functions,  a  disturbance  of  the  circulation,  an
endarteritis,  which  would  induce  a  condition  of  encephalic  anaemia,  or  a
suppression  of  suppuration,  which  would  effect  a  hyperaemia?

••  Loss  of  memory,"  says  Rosse,  "following  organic  lesion, dynamic  trouble,
or  any  sudden  metabolic  disturbance  of  the  brain,  may  recover  rapidly."
Certainly  Mr.  K.  made  a  rapid,  uninterrupted  recovery  after  the  abscess  had
discharged.  His  physician  said  that  there  was  a  perceptible  change  for  the
better  just  as  soon  as  the  ear  was  relieved.

229  A.  The  following  case  is  taken  from  the  paper  by  Dr.  Elliotson
referred  to  in  223  A  and  224  A  (Zoist,  vol.  iv.  p.  185),  being  quoted  by
him  from  the  Northern  Journal  of  Medicine  for  June  1845.  The  case  was
there  reported  by  Dr.  David  Skae.

The  patient  was  an  unmarried  man,  in  the  prime  of  life,  connected
with  the  legal  profession,  regular  and  temperate  in  his  habits.  His  com-
plaint began  with  the  usual  symptoms  of  dyspepsia,  passing  into  hypo-
chondria and  ultimately  into  a  state  between  hypochondria  and  mental
alienation.  The  dyspeptic  symptoms  had  become  a  subject  of  complaint
and  solicitude  to  the  patient  about  ten  or  twelve  years  earlier.  There
generally  succeeded  a  train  of  morbid  feelings  and  finally  of  illusions
founded  upon  them,  the  sensations  felt  being  imagined  to  be  sufferings  of
a  mysterious  and  unparalleled  kind.  Feelings  of  gloom  and  despondency
were  at  the  same  time  developed ;  the  most  trifling  errors  were  magnified
into  unpardonable  crimes.  He  began  a  system  of  reading  the  Bible  with
great  zeal  and  rapidity  ;  by  quickly  scanning  the  pages  and  turning  over
the  leaves,  he  grew  to  believe  that  he  read  through  the  whole  Bible  once
and  all  the  metrical  psalms  once  or  twice  daily.  He  sat  up  most  of  the
night  and  lay  in  bed  all  day,  surrounded  with  Bibles  and  Psalm-books.
He  also  developed  suicidal  tendencies,  but  these  were  restrained  by
his  natural  timidity  and  conscientiousness.

Dr.  Skae  writes:—

From  an  early  period  in  the  history  of  this  case  it  was  observed  that  the
symptoms   displayed    an   aggravation   every  alternate  day.     This  gradually
became   more    and   more   marked;   and   for   the    last    eighteen  months    the
symptoms  described  have  become  distinctly  periodic.     On  each  alternate  day
tient  is  affected  in  the  manner  just  described  and  will  neither  eat,  sleep,
;lk,  but  continues  incessantly  turning  over  the  leaves  of  a  Bible,  and
complaining  pkcously  of  his  misery.     On  the  intermediate  days  he  is,  corn-
speaking,  quite  well,  enters  into  the  domestic  duties  of  his  family,
ilks  out,  transacts  business,  assures  every  one  he  is  quite  well,
and  appears  to  entertain  no  apprehension  of  a  return  of  his  complaints.     What
fa  chiefly  remarkable  ...  is  the  sort  of  double  existence  which  the  individual
appears  to  have.     On  those  days  on  which  he  is  affected  with  his  malady,  he
I.  X

322  APPENDICES  [230  A

appears  to  have  no  remembrance  whatever  of  the  previous  or  of  any  former
day  on  which  he  was  comparatively  well,  nor  of  any  of  the  engagements  of
those  days ;  he  cannot  tell  whether  he  was  out,  nor  what  he  did,  nor  whom  he
saw,  nor  any  transaction  in  which  he  was  occupied.  Neither  does  he  anticipate
any  amendment  on  the  succeeding  day.  ...  On  the  intermediate  days  .  .  .
he  distinctly  remembers  the  transactions  of  previous  days  on  which  he  was
well,  but  appears  to  have  little  or  no  recollection  of  the  occurrences  of  the  days
on  which  he  was  ill.  He  appears  in  short  to  have  a  ...  sort  of  two-fold
existence,  one  half  of  which  he  spends  in  the  rational  enjoyment  of  life  and
discharge  of  its  duties,  and  the  other  in  a  state  of  hopeless  hypochondriacism,
amounting  almost  to  complete  mental  aberration.

230  A.  We  next  come  to  cases  of  factitious  secondary  personalities,
developed  apparently  from  self-suggestions  in  the  hypnotic  state.  I  give
first  the  classic  case  of  Professor  Pierre  Janet's  patient,  Mme.  B.  (or
Le"onie),  the  subject  of  the  experiments  in  telepathic  hypnotisation  de-
scribed in  568  A.  The  summary  here  given  is  founded  on  a  paper  by
Professor  Janet,  entitled  "  Les  Actes  Inconscients  dans  le  Somnambulisme,"
in  the  Revue  Philosophique,  March  1888,  with  comments  of  my  own.
The  case  is  also  constantly  referred  to  in  Professor  Janet's  L? Automatisme
Psychologique^  (1889).

I  may  begin  with  a  trivial  incident,  containing  nothing  new  to  students  of
hypnotism,  but  well  illustrating  the- concurrent  action  of  the  supraliminal  and
the  hypnotic  personality — the  hidden  criticism  which  the  subliminal  self  seems
to  be  ever  exercising  upon  the  words  and  actions  which  our  supraliminal  selves
fondly  suppose  to  be  the  full  expression  of  what  we  are.

In  these  researches  Mme.  B.  in  her  everyday  condition  is  known  by  the
name  of  Le'onie.  In  the  hypnotic  trance  she  has  chosen  for  herself  the  name
of  Le'ontine,  which  thus  represents  her  secondary  personality.  Behind  these
two,  this  triple  personality  is  completed  by  a  mysterious  Ldonore,  who  may  for
the  present  be  taken  as  non-existent.  A  post-hypnotic  suggestion  was  given  to
Ldontine,  that  is  to  say,  Le'onie  was  hypnotised  and  straightway  became
Le'ontine,  and  Le'ontine  was  told  by  Professor  Janet  that  after  the  trance  was
over,  and  Le'onie  had  resumed  her  ordinary  life,  she,  Le'ontine,  was  to  take  off
her  apron — the  joint  apron  of  Le'onie  and  Le'ontine — and  then  to  tie  it  on
again.  The  trance  .was  stopped,  Le'onie  was  awakened,  and  conducted  Pro-
fessor Janet  to  the  door,  talking  with  her  usual  respectful  gravity  on  ordinary
topics.  Meantime  her  hands — the  joint  hands  of  L&mie  and  Le'ontine — untied
her  apron,  the  joint  apron,  and  took  it  off.  Professor  Janet  called  Le'onie 's
attention  to  the  loosened  apron.  "Why,  my  apron  is  coming  off!"  Le'onie
exclaimed,  and  with  full  consciousness  and  intention  she  tied  it  on  again.  She
then  continued  to  talk,  and  for  her — for  Le'onie — the  incident  was  over.  The
apron,  she  supposed,  had  somehow  come  untied,  and  she  had  retied  it.  This,
however,  was  not  enough  for  Le'ontine.  At  Le'ontine's  prompting  the  joint
hands  again  began  their  work,  and  the  apron  was  taken  off  again  and  again

1  In  this  work  and  in  most  of  the  later  references  to  the  case  by  other  writers,
the  three  stages  of  personality  are  designated  :  Leonie  i,  Leonie  2,  Le'onie  3.  I  use
here  the  corresponding  nomenclature  of  Dr.  Janet's  earlier  report— Leonie,  Leontine,
and  Leonore.

230A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  323

replaced,  this  time  without  Le'onie's  attention  having  been  directed  to  the  matter
at  all.

Next  day  Professor  Janet  hypnotised  Le'onie  again,  and  presently  Le*on-
tine,  as  usual,  assumed  control  of  the  joint  personality.  "  Well,"  she  said,  "  I
did  what  you  told  me  yesterday  !  How  stupid  the  other  one  looked" — Le*on-
tine  always  calls  Le'onie  "  the  other  one  " — "  while  I  took  her  apron  off  !  Why
did  you  tell  her  that  her  apron  was  falling  off?  I  was  obliged  to  begin  the  job
over  again."

This  trifling  incident  well  illustrates  the  important  point  which  M.  Janet  in
France  and  Gurney  in  England  have  largely  helped  to  establish,  namely,  the
persistence  of  the  hypnotic  self,  as  a  remembering  and  reasoning  entity,  during
the  reign  of  the  ordinary  self.

Thus  far  we  have  dealt  with  a  secondary  personality  summoned  into  being,
so  to  say,  by  our  own  experiments,  and  taking  its  orders  entirely  from  us.  It
seems,  however,  that,  when  once  set  up,  this  new  personality  can  occasionally
assume  the  initiative,  and  can  say  what  it  wants  to  say  without  any  prompting.
This  is  curiously  illustrated  by  what  may  be  termed  a  conjoint  epistle  addressed
to  Professor  Janet  by  Mme.  B.,  and  her  secondary  personality,  Le'ontine.  "  She
had  left  Havre  more  than  two  months  when  I  received  from  her  a  very  curious
letter.  On  the  first  page  was  a  short  note,  written  in  a  serious  and  respectful
style.  She  was  unwell,  she  said,  worse  on  some  days  than  on  others,  and  she
signed  her  true  name,  Mme.  B.  But  over  the  page  began  another  letter  in  a
quite  different  style,  and  which  I  may  quote  as  a  curiosity,  *  My  dear  good  sir,  I
must  tell  you  that  B.  really,  really  makes  me  suffer  very  much ;  she  cannot
sleep,  she  spits  blood,  she  hurts  me ;  I  am  going  to  demolish  her,  she  bores
me,  I  am  ill  also,  this  is  from  your  devoted  Le'ontine.'  When  Mme.  B.  re-
turned to  Havre  I  naturally  questioned  her  about  this  singular  missive.  She
remembered  the  first  letter  very  distinctly,  .  .  .  but  had  not  the  slightest
recollection  of  the  second.  ...  I  at  first  thought  that  there  must  have  been
an  attack  of  spontaneous  somnambulism  between  the  moment  when  she
finished  the  first  letter  and  the  moment  when  she  closed  the  envelope.  .  .  .
But  afterwards  these  unconscious,  spontaneous  letters  became  common,
and  I  was  better  able  to  study  their  mode  of  production.  I  was  fortunately
able  to  watch  Mme.  B.  on  one  occasion  while  she  went  through  this  curious
performance.  She  was  seated  at  a  table,  and  held  in  her  left  hand  the  piece
of  knitting  at  which  she  had  been  working.  Her  face  was  calm,  her  eyes
looked  into  space  with  a  certain  fixity,  but  she  was  not  cataleptic,  for  she  was
humming  a  rustic  air;  her  right  hand  wrote  quickly,  and,  as  it  were,  surrepti-
tiously. I  removed  the  paper  without  her  noticing  me,  and  then  spoke  to  her;
she  turned  round,  wide  awake,  but  surprised  to  see  me,  for  in  her  state  of
tion  she  had  not  noticed  my  approach.  Of  the  letter  which  she  was
writing  she  knew  nothing  whatever."

Le*ontine's  independent  action  is  not  entirely  confined  to  writing  letters.    She

ed  (apparently)  that  when   her  primary  self,  Le'onie,  discovered

letters,  she  (Le'onie)  tore  them  up.     So  Le'ontine  hit  on  the  plan  of  placing

them  in  a  photographic  album  into  which  Le'onie  could  not  look  without  falling

into  catalepsy  (on  account  of  an  association  of  ideas  with  Dr.  Gibert,  whose

id    been  in  the  album).      In  order  to  accomplish  an  act  like  this

ne  has  to  wait  for  a  moment  when  Le'onie  is  distracted,  or,  as  we  say,

'-minded.     If  she  can  catch  her  in  this  state  Le'ontine  can  direct  Le'onie's

324  APPENDICES  [230  A

walks,  for  instance,  or  make  her  start  on  a  railway  journey  without  luggage,  in
order  to  get  to  Havre  as  quickly  as  possible.

It  will  be  observed  that  Le'ontine  has  now  arrived  at  a  point  midway  between
the  mat  stages — which  cannot  be  called  personalities — through  which  Gurney's
hypnotic  subjects  could  be  led  backwards  and  forwards  at  pleasure  (see  523  A),
and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  fully-developed  alternating  personalities  of  such
a  case  as  Fe'lida  X.  (see  231  A).  If  Le'ontine  were  habitually  encouraged,  if
a  large  part  of  Mme.  B.'s  life  were  passed  in  that  hypnotic  stage  in  which
Le'ontine  holds  unchecked  dominion,  we  must  suppose  that  Le'ontine  would
acquire  more  and  more  power  of  intervening  in  Mme.  B.'s  waking  state — her
Ldonie  state — also;  until  perhaps  the  relapses  from  Le'ontine  into  Ldonie, —
from  the  secondary  into  the  primary  personality, — might  become  as  brief  and
rare  as  they  have  become  in  the  often-cited  case  of  Fe'lida  X.  And  thus  the
whole  personage  might  undergo  profound  alteration  by  gradual  steps  leading
on  from  what  was  at  first  a  mere  momentary  experiment.

There  are,  however,  even  now  striking  differences  between  the  characters  of
Ldonie  and  Ldontine.

"  This  poor  peasant,"  says  Professor  Janet,  "  is  in  her  normal  state  a  serious
and  somewhat  melancholy  woman,  calm  and  slow,  very  gentle  and  extremely
timid.  No  one  would  suspect  the  existence  of  the  personage  whom  she  in-
cludes within  her.  Hardly  is  she  entranced  when  she  is  metamorphosed :  her
face  is  no  longer  the  same ;  her  eyes  indeed  remain  closed,  but  the  acuteness
of  her  other  senses  compensates  for  the  absence  of  sight.  She  becomes  gay,
noisy,  and  restless  to  an  insupportable  degree ;  she  continues  good-natured,
but  she  has  acquired  a  singular  tendency  to  irony  and  bitter  jests.  ...  In  this
state  she  does  not  recognise  her  identity  with  her  waking  self.  '  That  good
woman  is  not  I,'  she  says,  '  she  is  too  stupid  ! '  "

Besides  these  differences  of  character,  Le'ontine  is  in  another  way  also  a
remarkable  hypnotic  personality.  Mme.  B.  has  been  so  often  hypnotised,  and
during  so  many  years  (for  she  was  hypnotised  by  other  physicians  as  long  ago
as  1860),  that  Ldontine  has  by  this  time  acquired  a  very  considerable  stock  of
memories  which  Mme.  B.  does  not  share.  Leontine,  therefore,  counts,  as  pro-
perly belonging  to  her  own  history  and  not  to  Mme.  B.'s,  all  the  events  which
have  taken  place  while  Mme.  B.'s  normal  self  was  hypnotised  into  unconscious-
ness. It  was  not  always  easy  at  first  to  understand  this  partition  of  past
experiences.

"  Mme.  B.,  in  the  normal  state,"  says  Professor  Janet,  "  has  a  husband  and
children.  Ldontme,  speaking  in  the  somnambulic  trance,  attributes  the  husband
to  'the  other'  (Mme.  B.),  but  attributes  the  children  to  herself.  ...  At  last  I
learnt  that  her  former  mesmerisers,  as  bold  in  their  practice  as  certain  hypno-
tisers  of  to-day,  had  induced  somnambulism  at  the  time  of  her  accouchements ;
Le'ontine,  therefore,  was  quite  right  in  attributing  the  children  to  herself  ;  the
rule  of  partition  was  unbroken,  and  the  somnambulism  was  characterised  by  a
duplication  of  the  subject's  existence."  There  surely  could  hardly  be  a  more
striking  illustration  of  the  remark  made  (Proceedings,  vol.  iv.  p.  225)  that  ;'  when
once  a  second  mnemonic  chain  is  woven,  the  emergence  of  a  second  personality
is  only  a  matter  of  degree."

We  now  come  to  consider  the  third  personality,  Ldonore.  Although
Le'onie's  unconscious  acts  are  sometimes  (not  always)  coincident  with  Le'ontine's
conscious  ones,  Le'ontine's  unconscious  acts  are  never  included  in  Le'onie's

230A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  32$

memory,  any  more  than  in  Ldontine's  own.  They  belong  to  some  other,  to
some  profounder  manifestation  of  personality,  to  which  M.  Janet  has  given  the
name  of  Le'onore.  And  observe  that  just  as  Le'ontine  can  sometimes  by  her
own  motion  and  without  suggestion  write  a  letter  during  Le'onie's  waking  state
and  give  advice  which  Le'onie  might  do  well  to  follow,  so  also  Le'onore  can
occasionally  intervene  of  her  own  motion  during  Ldontine's  dominance  and
give  advice  which  Le'ontine  might  with  advantage  obey.

"  The  spontaneous  acts  of  the  unconscious  self,"  says  M.  Janet,  here  mean-
ing by  Vinconscicnt  the  entity  to  which  he  has  given  the  name  of  Le'onore,
"  may  also  assume  a  very  reasonable  form,  a  form  which,  were  it  better  under-
stood, might  perhaps  serve  to  explain  certain  cases  of  insanity.  Mme.  B.,
during  her  somnambulism  (i.e.  Le'ontine),  had  had  a  sort  of  hysterical  crisis;
she  was  restless  and  noisy,  and  I  could  not  calm  her.  Suddenly  she  stopped
and  said  to  me  with  terror,  *  Oh,  who  is  talking  to  me  like  that  ?  it  frightens
me.'  *  No  one  is  talking  to  you.'  4  Yes  !  there  on  the  left  ! '  And  she  got  up
and  tried  to  open  a  wardrobe  on  her  left  hand,  to  see  if  some  one  was  hidden
there.  'What  is  it  that  you  hear?'  I  asked.  *  I  hear  on  the  left  a  voice  which
repeats,  "Enough!  enough!  be  quiet;  you  are  a  nuisance."'  Assuredly  the
voice  which  thus  spoke  was  a  reasonable  one,  for  Le'ontine  was  insupportable;
but  I  had  suggested  nothing  of  the  kind,  and  had  had  no  idea  of  inspiring  a
hallucination  of  hearing.  Another  day  Le'ontine  was  quite  calm,  but  obstinately
refused  to  answer  a  question  which  I  asked.  Again  she  heard  with  terror  the
same  voice  to  her  left,  saying,  *  Come,  be  sensible,  you  must  answer.'  Thus  the
unconscious  sometimes  gave  her  excellent  advice."

And  in  effect,  so  soon  as  Le'onore,  in  her  turn,  was  summoned  into  com-
munication, she  accepted  the  responsibility  of  this  counsel.  "  What  was  it  that
happened,"  asked  M.  Janet,  "when  Le'ontine  was  so  frightened?"  "Oh,
nothing ;  it  was  I  who  told  her  to  keep  quiet ;  I  saw  that  she  was  annoying
you ;  I  don't  know  why  she  was  so  frightened."

Note  the  significance  of  this  incident.  Here  we  have  got  at  the  root  of  a
hallucination.  We  have  not  merely  inferential  but  direct  evidence  that  the
imaginary  voice  which  terrified  Le'ontine  proceeded  from  a  profounder  stratum
of  consciousness  in  the  same  individual.

Just  as  Mme.  B.  was  sent  by  passes  into  a  state  of  lethargy  from  which  she
emerged  as  Le'ontine,  so  also  Le'ontine  in  her  turn  was  reduced  by  renewed
passes  to  a  state  of  lethargy  from  which  she  emerged  no  longer  as  Le'ontine,
but  as  Le'onore.  This  second  awakening  is  slow  and  gradual,  but  the  person-
ality which  emerges  is  in  one  most  important  point  superior  to  either  Le'onie  or
Le'ontine.  Alone  among  the  subject's  phases  this  phase  possesses  the  memory

every  phase.     Le'onore,  like  Le'ontine,  knows  the  normal  life  of  Le'onie,  but

tinguishes  herself  from  Le'onie,  in  whom,  it  must  be  said,  these  subjacent
personalities  appear  to  take  little  interest.  But  Le'onore  also  remembers  the
life  of  Ldontinc,  condemns  her  as  noisy  and  frivolous,  and  is  anxious  not  to  be
confounded  with  her  either.  "  Vous  voycz  bien  que  je  ne  suis  pas  cette  bavarde,
cette  folle ; — nous  ne  nous  ressemblons  pas  du  tout."  And  in  fact  L^onore's
own  character,  so  far  as  it  has  yet  been  manifested,  is  worthy  of  that  pro-
r  place  in  the  personality  which  she  seems  to  occupy.

Yet  one  further  variation,  and  I  end  my  brief  resume"  of  this  complex  history.
Le'onore  is  liable  to  pass  into  a  state  which  does  not,  indeed,  interrupt  her  chain
of  memory,  but  which  removes  her  for  a  time  from  the  possibility  of  communi-
cation with  other  minds.  She  grows  pale,  she  ceases  to  speak  or  to  hear,  her

326

APPENDICES

[230  B

eyes,  though  still  shut,  are  turned  heavenwards,  her  mouth  smiles,  and  her  face
takes  an  expression  of  beatitude.

This  is  plainly  a  state  of  so-called  ecstasy  ;  but  it  differs  from  the  ecstasy
common  in  hysterical  attacks  in  one  capital  point.  Not  only  is  it  remembered
— indistinctly,  perhaps — by  Le'onore,  who  describes  herself  as  having  been
dazzled  by  a  light  on  the  left  side,  but  also  it  brings  with  it  the  most  complex  of
all  the  chains  of  memory,  supplementing  even  L6onore's  recollection  on  certain
acts  which  have  been  accomplished  unconsciously  by  Le'onore  herself.

The  subjoined  scheme,  simplified  from  that  given  by  Professor  Janet,  may
enable  the  reader  to  follow  the  above  description  with  greater  ease.  The
shaded  spaces  indicate  absence  of  consciousness.

Diagram

of  the

joint  life  "

of

Leonie

Leontine

Leonore

Ordinary

waking

life

Knowledge

of  Leonie :

latent

Knowledge

of  Leonie  &

Leontine :

latent

Emergence

in  somnam-

bulic  life

Knowledge

of

Leontine  :
latent

Emergence

and
ecstasy

Emergence

in  somnam-

bulic  life

Knowledge

of

Leontine :
latent

Ordinary

waking

life

Knowledge

of  Leonie :

latent

Knowledge

of  Leonie  &

Leontine :

latent

230  B.  The  greater  number  of  facts  reported  in  L1  Automatisme
Psychologique,  as  Professor  Janet  says  in  his  introduction,  were  observed
in  four  of  his  principal  subjects,  whom  he  called  Leonie,  Lucie,  Rose,  and
Marie.  Among  all  the  subjects  he  knew,  he  regarded  these  four  as  the
most  satisfactory  for  purposes  of  psychological  experiment ;  partly  because
of  his  long  and  complete  acquaintance  with  all  the  details  of  their  maladies
and  characters,  and  partly  because — having  been  always  observed  with
care  and  only  by  competent  persons — they  had  been  as  little  as  possible
affected  by  the  example  of  other  patients,  or  by  suggestions  imprudently
made  in  their  presence.  The  case  of  Leonie  has  just  been  given,  and  that
of  Lucie  is  almost  equally  instructive.  She  was  described  first  in  articles
published  by  Professor  Janet  in  the  Revue  Philosophique,  being  there  called
"  L.,"  and  the  summary  here  given  is  founded  chiefly  on  an  article  in
the  Revue  for  December  1886,  but  adopts  the  nomenclature  of  the  differ-
ent personalities  or  stages  of  personality — Lucie  i,  Lucie  2,  Lucie  3 —
used  in  L' Automatisme  Psychologique.

The  subject  was  a  girl  of  nineteen,  who  was  highly  hysterical,  having
attacks  daily  of  several  hours'  duration.  She  was  also  devoid  of  the  sense  of
pain,  or  the  sense  of  contact,  so  that  she  "lost  her  legs  in  bed,"  as  she  put  it.
I  may  begin  by  saying  that  M.  Janet  and  Dr.  Powilewicz  completely  cured  her,
mainly  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  so  that  the  phenomena  which  I  am  about  to
describe,  though  morbid  in  the  sense  that  they  occurred  in  a  morbid  person,
were  healthy  in  the  sense  that  they  were  incidental  to  a  process  of  cure.

230B]  TO     CHAPTER    II  327

Post-hypnotic  suggestion  succeeded  easily,  with  no  recollection  in  the  waking
state  of  the  hypnotic  command.  At  first,  however,  it  was  necessary  that  the
hypnotised  subject — Lucie  2 — should  assent  when  she  was  told  to  do  something
on  awakening.  When  the  command  was  an  unwelcome  one  she  would  say  no
instead  of  yes,  and  would  not  fulfil  it  on  awaking.

On  her  fifth  hypnotisation,  however,  Lucie  underwent  a  kind  of  brief
catalepsy,  after  which  she  returned  to  the  somnambulic  state  ;  but  that
state  was  deeper  than  before.  (This  was  the  first  appearance  of  Lucie  3.)
She  no  longer  made  any  sign,  whether  of  assent  or  refusal,  when  she  received
the  hypnotic  commands ;  but  she  executed  them  infallibly,  whether  they
were  to  take  effect  immediately  or  after  awaking.  Moreover,  the  suggested
actions  became  absolutely  a  portion  of  the  trance-life.  She  executed  them
without  apparently  knowing  what  she  was  doing.  If,  for  instance,  in  her
waking  state  she  was  told  (in  the  tone  which  in  her  hypnotic  state  signified
command)  to  get  up  and  walk  about,  she  walked  about,  but,  to  judge  from  her
conversation,  she  supposed  herself  to  be  still  sitting  quiet.  She  would  weep
violently  when  commanded,  but  while  she  wept  she  continued  to  talk  as  gaily
and  unconcernedly  as  if  the  tears  had  been  turned  on  by  a  stop-cock.  One  day
M.  Janet  begged  Lucie,  in  her  waking  state  (i.e.  Lucie  i),  to  resist  his  next
command.  She  said  that  she  was  not  aware  that  she  had  ever  obeyed  him,
and  would  certainly  resist  now.  The  command  was  given,  and  she  executed  it
unconsciously,  while  still  protesting  that  she  would  certainly  resist.

Here,  then,  was  an  indication  of  a  new  partition  of  the  identity — not  merely
that  partition  which  is  habitually  established  between  the  hypnotic  trance  and
the  waking  state.  For  this  new  partition  subsisted  equally  in  both  states,  and
the  dividing  boundary  was  no  obvious  gulf,  but  a  line  as  imaginary  as  the
Equator.  For  the  line  was  merely  this,  that  any  suggestion  uttered  by
M.  Janet  in  a  brusque  tone  of  command  reached  the  subliminal  self  alone;
any  other  remark  reached  the  subject— awake  or  somnambulic — in  the  ordi-
nary *

The  next  step  was  to  test  the  intelligence  of  Lucie  3.  M.  Janet  began  with
a  simple  experiment.  "  When  I  shall  have  clapped  my  hands  together  twelve
times,"  he  said  to  the  entranced  subject  before  awakening  her,  **  you  will  go  to
sleep  again."  There  was  no  sign  that  the  sleeper  heard  or  understood  ;  and
when  she  was  awakened  the  events  of  the  trance  were  blank  to  her,  as  usual.
She  began  talking  to  other  persons.  M.  Janet,  at  some  little  distance,  clapped
his  hands  feebly  together  five  times.  Seeing  that  she  did  not  seem  to  be
ing  to  him,  he  went  up  to  her  and  said,  "Did  you  hear  what  I  did  just
now  ?  "  "  No,  what  ?  "  "  Do  you  hear  this  f  "  and  he  clapped  his  hands  once
more.  "  Yes,  you  clapped  your  hands."  "  How  often  ?  "  "  Once."  M.  Janet
again  withdrew,  and  now  clapped  his  hands  six  times  gently,  with  pauses
between  the  claps.  Lucie  paid  no  apparent  attention  ;  but  when  the  sixth  clap
of  this  second  series— making  the  twelfth  altogether— was  reached,  she  fell
instantly  into  the*  trance  ag;iin.

It  seemed,  then,  that  Lucie  3  had  counted  the  cla;  \  had

1  the  order.  M.  Janet  varied  the  conditions;  ordering  that  the  girl
should  fall  asleep  when  he  should  mention  the  same  letter  of  the  alphabet  twit-t-
in succession  :  or  when  the  sum  of  the  dibits  which  he  mentioned  should  reach
The  result  showed  that  Lucie  3  could  successfully  attend  and  obey  so  long
as  the  problem  was  a  simple  one,  but  that  when  the  problem  became  too
complex,  confusion  ensued.

328  APPENDICES  [230  B

Thus  far,  however,  the  knowledge  gained  as  to  Lucie  3  was  not  direct  but
inferential.  The  nature  of  the  commands  which  she  could  execute  showed  her
to  be  capable  of  attention  and  memory  ;  but  there  was  no  way  of  learning  her
own  conception  of  herself,  if  such  existed,  nor  of  determining  her  relation  to
other  phenomena  of  the  trance.  And  here  it  is  that  automatic  writing  was  suc-
cessfully invoked.  M.  Janet  began  by  the  following  simple  command :  "  When
I  clap  my  hands  you  will  write  Bonjour"  This  was  done  in  the  usual  loose  and
scrawling  script  of  automatism,  and  Lucie,  though  fully  awake,  was  not  aware
that  she  had  written  anything  at  all.  She  was  next  ordered  to  write  a  letter,
which  she  did  in  a  commonplace  style,  and  signed  "  Lucie."  But  Lucie  was
unconscious  of  the  letter-writing,  and  when  the  epistle  was  shown  to  her
she  pronounced  it  a  forgery.  The  unconscious  hand  was  again  bidden  to  write
a  letter;  it  wrote  word  for  word  the  same  letter  as  before,  as  if  it  were  a  musical-
box  wound  up  to  repeat  a  particular  tune.

By  means  of  a  simple  artifice,  however,  it  was  found  possible  to  do  more
than  this.  M.  Janet  simply  ordered  the  entranced  girl  to  write  answers  to  all
questions  of  his  after  her  awakening.  The  command  thus  given  had  a  persist-
ent effect,  and  while  Lucie  I  continued  to  chatter  as  usual  with  other  persons,
Lucie  3  wrote  brief  and  scrawling  responses  to  M.  Janet's  questions.  This  was
the  moment  at  which  in  many  cases  a  new  and  separate  invading  personality  is
assumed;  and  if  Lucie  had  believed  in  possession  by  devils — as  so  many
similarly-constituted  subjects  in  old  times  believed — we  can  hardly  doubt  that
the  energy  now  writing  through  her  hand  would  have  assumed  the  style  and
title  of  a  "  familiar  spirit."  Or  if,  again,  she  had  been  a  modern  Spiritualist,  it
is  probable  that  the  signature  of  some  deceased  friend  would  have  appeared  at
the  foot  of  these  communications.  But  here  the  "communicating  intelligence  "
was  of  so  obviously  artificial  a  kind  that  it  could  scarcely  venture  to  pretend  to
be  either  a  devil  or  Lucie's  grandmother.  A  singular  conversation  gave  to  this
limited  creation,  this  statutory  intelligence,  an  identity  sufficient  for  practical
convenience.  "  Do  you  hear  me?  "  asked  Professor  Janet.  Answer  (by  writ-
ing), "  No."  "  But  in  order  to  answer  one  must  hear?  "  "  Certainly."  "  Then
how  do  you  manage?7'  "I  don't  know."  "There  must  be  somebody  who
hears  me?"  "Yes."  "  Who  is  it  ?  "  "Not  Lucie."  "  Oh,  some  one  else  ?
Shall  we  call  her  Blanche  ?  "  "  Yes,  Blanche."  «  Well  then,  Blanche,  do  you
hear  me  ?  "  "  Yes.'7  This  name,  however,  had  to  be  changed,  for  the  following
reason  : — The  name  Blanche  happened  to  'have  very  disagreeable  associations
in  Lucie's  mind ;  and  when  Lucie  was  shown  the  paper  with  the  name  Blanche,
which  she  had  unconsciously  written,  she  was  angry,  and  wanted  to  tear  it  up.
Another  name  had  to  be  chosen.  "  What  name  will  you  have  ?  "  "  No  name."
"You  must — it  will  be  more  convenient."  "Well  then,  Adrienne."  Never,
perhaps,  has  a  personality  had  less  spontaneity  about  it.

Yet  Adrienne  (Lucie  3)  was  in  some  respects  deeper  down  than  Lucie  I.  She
could  get  at  the  genesis  of  certain  psychical  manifestations  of  which  Lucie  i  ex-
perienced only  the  results.  A  striking  instance  of  this  was  afforded  by  the
phenomena  of  the  hystero-epileptic  attacks  to  which  this  patient  was  subject.

In  cases  of  this  sort  it  often  happens  that  the  patient's  imagination  during
the  attack  is  excited  by  the  reminiscence  of  some  scene  of  terror  which  perhaps
first  set  on  foot  this  nervous  disturbance.  On  a  smaller  scale  this  recurrence
to  a  still  dominant  moment  of  past  fear  may  be  familiar  to  some  of  my  readers.
I  know  a  lady  who  was  much  frightened  in  childhood  by  a  large  dog  which
sprang  out  on  her ;  and  who  still,  in  moments  of  alarm  or  agitation,  seems  to

230B]  TO    CHAPTER    II  329

see  the  creature  spring  at  her  again.  Well,  Lucie's  special  terror,  which  re-
curred in  wild  exclamation  in  her  hysterical  fits,  was  somehow  connected  with
hidden  men.  She  could  not,  however,  recollect  the  incident  to  which  her  cries
referred ;  she  only  knew  that  she  had  had  a  severe  fright  at  seven  years  old,
and  an  illness  in  consequence.  Now  during  these  «'  crises  "  Lucie  (except,  pre-
sumably, in  the  periods  of  unconsciousness  which  form  a  pretty  constant  ele-
ment in  such  attacks)  could  hear  what  Professor  Janet  said  to  her.  Adrienne,
on  the  contrary,  was  hard  to  get  at,  could  no  longer  obey  orders,  and  if  she
wrote,  wrote  only,  faipeur.faipeur.

M.  Janet,  however,  waited  till  the  attack  was  over,  and  then  questioned
Adrienne  as  to  the  true  meaning  of  the  agitated  scene.  Adrienne  was  able  to
describe  to  him  the  terrifying  incident  in  her  childish  life  which  had  originated
the  confused  hallucinations  which  recurred  during  the  attack.  She  could  not
explain  the  recrudescence  of  the  hallucinations  ;  but  she  knew  what  Lucie  saw
and  why  she  saw  it :  nay,  indeed,  it  was  Adrienne  rather  than  Lucie  to  whom
the  hallucinations  were  directly  visible.

Adrienne  thus  appeared  to  be  in  a  sense  more  deeply  involved  than  Lucie
I  and  2  in  the  hysterical  attacks.  But  it  must  not  be  therefore  supposed  that
Adrienne  represented  a  necessarily  morbid  aspect  of  the  complex  identity.
And  the  experiments  showed  that  her  plane  of  existence  lay  beneath  some  of
the  superficial  evils  from  which  Lucie  I  suffered.

Lucie  i  was  a  hysterical  patient,  very  seriously  amiss.  One  conspicuous
symptom  was  an  almost  absolute  defect  of  sensibility,  whether  to  pain,  to  heat,
or  to  contact,  which  persisted  both  when  she  was  awake  and  when  entranced.
There  was,  as  already  mentioned,  an  entire  defect  of  the  muscular  sense  also,
so  that  when  her  eyes  were  shut  she  did  not  know  the  position  of  her  limbs.
;  theless,  it  was  remarked  as  an  anomaly  that  when  she  was  thrown  into
the  cataleptic  state  (Lucie  3),  not  only  did  the  movements  impressed  on  her
continue  to  be  made,  but  the  corresponding  or  complementary  movements,  the
corresponding  facial  expression,  followed  just  as  they  usually  follow  in  such
experiments.  Thus,  if  M.  Janet  clenched  her  fist  in  the  cataleptic  stage,  her
arm  began  to  deal  blows,  and  her  face  assumed  a  look  of  anger.  The  sugges-
tion given  through  the  so-called  muscular  sense  had  operated  on  a  subject  in
whom  the  muscular  sense,  as  tested  in  other  ways,  had  seemed  to  be  wholly
lacking.  As  soon  as  Adrienne  could  be  communicated  with,  it  was  possible  to
get  somewhat  nearer  to  a  solution  of  this  puzzle.  Lucie  was  thrown  into  cata-
lepsy ;  then  M.  Janet  clenched  her  left  hand  (she  began  at  once  to  strike  out),
put  a  pencil  in  her  right  hand,  and  said,  "  Adrienne,  what  are  you  doing?"
The  left  hand  continued  to  strike,  and  the  face  to  bear  the  look  of  rage,  while
4ht  hand  wrote,  "  I  am  furious."  «'  With  whom  ?  "  "  With  F."  "  Why  ?  "
;»'t  know,  but  I  am  very  angry."  M.  Janet  then  unclenched  the  subject's
left  hand  and  put  it  gently  to  her  lips.  It  began  to  "  blow  kisses,"  and  th

1      "  Adrienne,  are  you  still  angry  ? "    «»  No,  that's  over."     "  And  now  ? "
"  Oh  !  I  am  happy."     •*  And  Lucie  ?  "    "  She  knows  nothing,  she  is  asleep."

Nov.  ^  I  know,  this  is  absolutely  the  first  glimpse  that  has  yet  been

ed  into  the  subjective  being  of  the  subject  in  the  cattile;  We

have  thus  far  only  been  able  to  conjecture  whether  there  was  or  was  not  any

psychical  concomitant  of  the  cataleptic  gestures  of  anger  or  satisfaction.     M  II

n'y  aque  le  cataleptique,"  say  MM.  Binet  and  Fe*reV  "qui  meYite  le  nom  d'auto-

ct  et  Fere,  Lc  Magntttsmt  Animal,  p.  105.

330  APPENDICES  [230  B

mate.  .  .  .  On  a  dit  avec  raison  que  le  cataleptique  n'a  point  une  personnalite'  a
lui,  qu'il  n'existe  pas  de  moi  cataleptique"  Yet  the  key  of  automatic  writing
has  unlocked  this  closely-barred  chamber,  and  has  shown  us  that  the  clenched
fist,  which  strikes  out  at  our  suggestion  as  if  it  were  moved  by  a  spring,  does
in  fact  imply  a  corresponding  emotion  of  anger,  which  (in  Lucie's  case  at  least)
is  definite  enough  to  select  its  own  object,  although  it  cannot  explain  to  us  its
own  origin.

The  peculiar  condition  of  Lucie  when  awake  adds  a  further  interest  to  this
experiment.  When  awake,  she  suffered,  as  I  have  explained,  from  a  grave
sensory  disturbance — an  entire  absence  of  the  so-called  muscular  sense.  But
here  we  find  Lucie  3  (Adrienne)  possessed  of  that  sense — responding  to
muscular  stimuli  in  a  way  which  showed  normal  sensibility.  Adrienne's  intelli-
gence, indeed,  showed  little  -verve  or  spontaneity ;  but  she  might  claim  that  if
she  were  beneath  the  level  of  Lucie's  waking  intellect,  she  was — in  another
sense — beneath  the  level  of  Lucie's  sensory  disturbances  as  well:  somewhat
as  deep-sea  denizens  are  beneath  not  the  sunlight  only  but  the  storm.  This
was,  in  fact,  a  culminant  example  of  the  disappearance,  in  hypnotic  trance,  of
functional  nervous  derangements.  The  inabilities  which  result  from  organic
lesion  subsist,  of  course,  though  they  may  lose  their  painful  character  ;  but  the
inabilities  which,  for  want  of  a  better  name,  we  call  hysterical,  may,  any  of
them,  in  any  phase  of  hypnotism,  change,  diminish,  or  disappear.

Thus,  as  in  Fe'lida  X.'s  case  (given  in  231  A),  the  secondary  or  in-
duced state  was  in  some  respects  less  morbid  than  the  habitual  state — free
from  the  nervous  troubles  which  crippled  the  patient's  waking  life.  Unless
"  morbid  "  is  to  become  a  word  as  question-begging  as  the  word  "  natural "  long
has  been,  we  must  be  as  careful  not  to  call  these  novel  states  morbid  as  we
should  be  not  to  describe  these  operations  of  Nature  as  unnatural.

In  Lucie's  case,  indeed,  these  odd  manifestations  were — as  the  pure  experi-
mentalist might  say — only  too  sanative,  only  too  rapidly  tending  to  normality.
M.  Janet  accompanied  his  psychological  inquiries  with  therapeutic  suggestion
— telling  Adrienne  not  only  to  go  to  sleep  when  he  clapped  his  hands,  or  to
answer  his  questions  in  writing,  but  to  cease  having  headaches,  to  cease  having
convulsive  attacks,  to  recover  normal  sensibility,  and  so  on.  Adrienne  obeyed;
and  even  as  she  obeyed  the  rational  command,  her  own  Undine-like  identity
vanished  away.  The  day  came  when  M.  Janet  called  on  Adrienne,  and  Lucie
laughed  and  asked  him  whom  he  was  talking  to.  Lucie  was  now  a  healthy
young  woman  ;  but  Adrienne,  who  had  risen  out  of  the  Unconscious,  had  sunk
into  the  Unconscious  again — must  I  say  ? — for  evermore.

I  must  now  point  out  the  chief  lesson  which  is  in  my  view  to  be
drawn  from  a  study  of  this  case.  We  have  here  demonstrably  what  we  can
find  in  other  cases  only  infer entially — an  intelligence  manifesting  itself
continuously  by  written  answers,  of  purport  quite  outside  the  normal
subject's  supraliminal  mind,  while  yet  that  intelligence  was  but  a  part,  a
fraction,  an  aspect,  of  the  normal  subject's  own  identity.

We  must  bear  this  ascertained  fact — for  it  is  as  near  to  an  ascertained
fact  as  anything  which  this  perplexing  inquiry  can  bring  us — steadily  in
mind  while  we  deal  with  future  cases.  And  we  must  remember  that
Adrienne — while  she  was,  if  I  may  so  say,  the  subliminal  self  reduced  to

230C]  TO     CHAPTER    II  331

its  simplest  expression— did,  nevertheless,  manifest  certain  differences
from  Lucie,  which,  if  slightly  exaggerated,  might  have  been  very  per-
plexing. Her  handwriting  was  slightly  different,  though  only  in  the
loose  and  scrawling  character  so  frequent  in  automatic  script.  Suppose
the  handwriting  had  been  rather  more  different,  and  had  vaguely  re-
sembled that  of  some  deceased  member  of  the  family?  It  is  easy  to
understand  what  inferences  might  have  been  based  on  such  a  fact.
Again,  Adrienne  remembered  certain  incidents  in  Lucie's  childhood  which
Lucie  had  wholly  forgotten.  These  events  occurred  at  a  grandmother's
house.  Suppose  that  the  sentence  recording  them  had  been  signed  with
the  grandmother's  name,  instead  of  with  the  merely  arbitrary  name  selected
for  the  convenience  of  a  cool  observer?  Here,  too,  it  is  easy  to  imagine
the  confidence — in  one  sense  the  well-grounded  confidence — with  which
any  knowledge  on  Lucie's  own  part  of  those  long  past  events  would  have
been  disclaimed.

230  C.  Other  cases  of  multiple  personality  developed  in  connection
with  the  hypnotic  trance  have  been  studied  by  Professor  Pierre  Janet's
brother,  Dr.  Jules  Janet,  and  were  described  by  the  latter  in  a  paper
entitled  "  L'Hyst£rie  et  1'Hypnotisme,  d'apres  la  Theorie  de  la  Double
Personnalite,"  in  the  Revue  Scientifique,  May  ipth,  1888.  One  of  these
cases  was  that  of  Professor  Charcot's  famous  subject,  Blanche  Wittman,
whose  history,  as  developed  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Jules  Janet,  I  give  in
a  later  Appendix  (225  A).

Another  case,1  treated  also  by  M.  Jules  Janet,  and  which  he  kindly
gave  me  the  opportunity  of  seeing,  was  even  more  remarkable  in  a
therapeutic  aspect.  It  is  perhaps  the  most  marked  among  those  very
rare  cases  where  it  can  be  said  with  confidence  that  death  itself  has
been  averted  by  a  hypnotic  change  of  personality.

From  the  age  of  thirteen  the  patient,  Marceline  R.,  had  been  subject
to  a  miserable  series  of  hysterical  troubles— chorea,  crises,  anaesthesia,  &c.
In  January  1886  the  hysterical  tendency  took  its  most  serious  form — of
insuperable  vomiting,  which  became  so  bad  that  the  very  sight  of  a
spoonful  of  soup  produced  distressing  spasms.  Artificial  means  of
feeding  were  tried,  with  diminishing  success,  and  in  June  1887  she
iralytic  and  so  emaciated  that  (in  spite  of  the  rarity  of  deaths  from
any  form  of  hysteria)  her  death  from  exhaustion  appeared  imminent.

M.  Janet  was  then  asked  to  hypnotise  her.  Almost  at  once  he
succeeded  in  inducing  a  somnambulic  state  in  which  she  could  eat
readily  and  digest  well.  Her  weight  increased  rapidly,  and  there
no  longer  any  anxiety  as  to  a  fatal  result.  But  the  grave  inconvenience
remained  that  she  could  only  eat  when  hypnotised.  M.  Janet  tried  to
overcome  this  difficulty ;  for  a  time  he  succeeded ;  and  she  left  the

tie  earlier  part  of  this  case  is  described  in   M.  Jules  Janet's  paper,  "  Un  CM
•eric  Grave."  Kcrut  dc  T llyfnoti<mc.  May  1889.

332  APPENDICES  [230  C

hospital  for  a  few  months.  She  soon,  however,  returned  in  her  old
state  of  starvation.  M.  Janet  now  changed  his  tactics.  Instead  of
trying  to  enable  her  to  eat  in  her  first  or  so-called  normal  state,  he
resolved  to  try  to  enable  her  to  live  comfortably  in  her  secondary  state.
In  this  he  gradually  succeeded,  and  sent  her  out  in  October  1888,
established  in  her  new  personality.  The  only  inconveniences  of  this
change  seem  to  be  (i)  that  when  she  has  been  left  some  months  without
re-hypnotisation  a  tendency  to  hysterical  mutism  sets  in;  and  (2)  that
whenever  she  is  "  awakened  "  into  her  first  personality  she  has  lost  (like
Felida  X.)  all  memory  of  the  time  passed  in  the  second.

After  some  shorter  trials,  M.Janet  hypnotised  her  November  i2th,
1888,  and  left  her  in  her  secondary  state  till  January  i5th,  1889.  He  then
"  awoke  "  her,  but  the  vomiting  at  once  returned,  and  she  again  applied
to  M.  Janet  for  help.  He  hypnotised  her,  and  left  her  in  her  second
state  till  March  3ist.  He  then  again  "  awoke  "  her,  with  the  same  result.
Again  he  hypnotised  her;  and  when  he  took  me  to  see  her  on  August
loth,  she  had  been  in  the  hypnotic  state  continuously  for  three  months
and  ten  days,  during  which  time  she  had  successfully  passed  a  written
examination  for  the  office  of  hospital  nurse,  which  she  had  failed  to  pass
in  her  normal  state.

When  we  saw  her,  August  loth,  she  was  normal  in  appearance  and
manner,  except  for  a  certain  shortness  of  breath,  or  difficulty  of  speaking,
which  M.  Janet  explained  as  likely  to  develop  into  hysterical  mutism  if
hypnotisation  were  not  renewed.  She  was  fairly  well  nourished,  and
her  expression  was  open  and  contented.

M.  Janet  resolved  not  merely  to  re-hypnotise  her,  but  to  wake  her
and  leave  her  for  a  time  in  her  first  state,  in  order  to  see  whether  the
dysphagia  had  disappeared,  and  at  the  same  time  to  observe  whether
the  loss  of  recollection  of  the  events  of  the  secondary  state  was  really
complete.  He  woke  her — in  the  old  Elliotsonian  fashion — by  "  reverse
passes."  Her  change  of  expression  was  very  noticeable.  The  look  of
easy  content  was  replaced  by  a  pained,  anxious  air.  Her  attention  was
at  once  arrested  by  some  masons  at  work  in  the  courtyard,  who
apparently  had  pulled  down  a  wall,  or  made  some  similar  change,  since
her  last  wakening.  Asked  what  she  was  looking  at,  she  said,  in  a  low,
timid  voice,  "  I  had  not  observed  the  alterations."  Asked  what  day  of
the  week  it  was,  she  said  "Sunday" — and  in  fact  March  3ist  was  a
Sunday.  "What  day  of  the  month?"  "March  3ist."  "How,  then,
is  this  oleander  in  the  courtyard  in  flower?  "  "  Oh,  sir,"  she  said,  "those
flowers  are  only  paper."  "  Feel  them  ! "  She  felt  them  timidly,  and
said  nothing  more.  "What  had  you  for  breakfast  this  morning?"  "I
tried  to  take  some  milk."  This  again  referred  to  March  3ist — on
August  loth  she  had  breakfasted  on  ordinary  solid  food.  "  Drink  a
little  now."  She  attempted,  but  spasms  at  once  began,  and  she  could
not  retain  it.  We  then  left  her;  but  Professor  Pierre  Janet  (who  was

231  A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  333

also  present)  told  me  later  that  during  the  two  or  three  days  for  which
she  was  left  in  her  first  state  the  alarming  vomiting  continued  and  she
began  to  spit  blood.  "  My  brother  was  sent  for,  and  determined  to
re-hypnotise  her.  She  was  calmed  as  if  by  enchantment,  and  is  now  in
excellent  condition.  During  her  two  '  waking  '  days  she  made  a  number
of  serious  blunders  not  only  as  regards  her  mother,  but  with  lodgers  in
the  house.  Her  conduct  absolutely  proved  a  complete  forgetfumess  of
the  preceding  months.  After  making  inquiries  from  the  various  persons
who  saw  her,  my  brother  told  me  that  he  could  retain  no  doubt  as  to
her  forgetfulness."  M.  Jules  Janet  added  that  since  she  had  been
replaced  in  the  second  condition  the  loss  of  flesh  had  been  rapidly
repaired,  and  she  was  again  comfortable.

231  A.  I  give  next  the  case  of  Dr.  Azam's  often  quoted  patient,
i  X.1  In  this  case  the  somnambulic  life  finally  became  the  normal
life ;  as  the  "  second  state,"  which  appeared  at  first  only  in  short,  dream-
like accesses,  gradually  replaced  the  "  first  state,"  which  finally  recurred
but  for  a  few  hours  at  long  intervals.  But  the  point  on  which  I  wish  to
dwell  is  this  :  that  Felida's  second  state  was  altogether  superior  to  the  first
— physically  superior,  since  the  nervous  pains  which  had  troubled  her
from  childhood  disappeared ;  and  morally  superior,  inasmuch  as  her
morose,  self-centred  disposition  was  exchanged  for  a  cheerful  activity
which  enabled  her  to  attend  to  her  children  and  her  shop  much  more
effectively  than  when  she  was  in  the  "  etat  bete,"  as  she  called  what  was
once  the  only  personality  that  she  knew.  In  this  case,  then,  which  at  the
time  Dr.  Azam  wrote — 1887 — was  of  nearly  thirty  years'  standing,  the
spontaneous  readjustment  of  nervous  activities — the  second  state,  no
memory  of  which  remained  in  the  first  state — resulted  in  an  improvement
profounder  than  could  have  been  anticipated  from  any  moral  or  medical
treatment  that  we  know.  The  case  shows  us  how  often  the  word  "  normal "
means  nothing  more  than  "  what  happens  to  exist."  For  Felida's  normal
state  was  in  fact  her  morbid  state ;  and  the  new  condition,  which  seemed
at  first  a  mere  hysterical  abnormality,  brought  her  at  last  to  a  life  of  bodily
and  mental  sanity  which  made  her  fully  the  equal  of  average  women  of  her

A  very  complete  account  of  the  case,  reproducing  in  full  almost  the
whole  of  Dr.  Azam's  report,  is  given  in  Dr.  A.  Binet's  Alterations  de  la
Personnalitc'  (pp.  6-20),  and  I  briefly  summarise  this  here  : —

Fdlida  was  born  at  Bordeaux,  in  1843,  °f  healthy  parents.  Towards  the  age
of  thirteen  years  she  began  to  exhibit  symptoms  of  hysteria.  When  about
fourteen  and  a  half  she  used  suddenly  to  feel  a  pain  in  her  forehead,  and  then
into  a  profound  sleep  for  some  ten  minutes,  after  which  she  woke  spon-
taneously in  her  secondary  condition.  This  lasted  an  hour  or  two;  then  the
sleep  came  on  again,  and  she  awoke  in  her  normal  state.  The  change  at  first

>r  the  fullest  account  of  Filtda,  »ee  Hypnottsme,  DoubU  Conscunce,  &c.,  par  1
Paris,  1887.

334  APPENDICES  [231  A

occurred  every  five  or  six  days.     As  the  hysterical   symptoms  increased,  Dr.
Azam  was  called  in  to  attend  her  in  1858.

His  report  of  that  time  states  that  in  the  primary  state  she  appears  very
intelligent  and  fairly  well  educated  ;  of  a  melancholy  disposition,  talking  little,
very  industrious ;  constantly  thinking  of  her  maladies  and  suffering  acute  pains
in  various  parts  of  the  body,  especially  the  head — the  clou  hysttrique  being
very  marked;  all  her  actions,  ideas,  and  words  perfectly  rational.  Almost
every  day  what  she  calls  her  crise  comes  on  spontaneously— often  while  she
is  sitting  at  her  needlework — preceded  by  a  brief  interval  of  the  profound  sleep,
from  which  no  external  stimulus  can  rouse  her.  On  waking  into  the  secondary
state,  she  appears  like  an  entirely  different  person,  smiling  and  gay ;  she  con-
tinues her  work  cheerfully  or  walks  about  briskly,  no  longer  feeling  all  the
pains  she  has  just  before  been  complaining  of.  She  looks  after  her  ordinary
domestic  duties,  goes  out,  walks  about  the  town,  and  pays  calls  ;  behaves  in
every  way  like  an  ordinary  healthy  girl.

In  this  condition  she  remembers  perfectly  all  that  has  happened  on  previous
occasions  when  she  was  in  the  same  state,  and  also  all  the  events  of  her  normal
life ;  whereas  during  her  normal  life  she  forgets  absolutely  the  occurrences  of
the  secondary  state.  She  declares  constantly  that  whatever  state  she  is  in  at
the  moment  is  the  normal  one — her  raison — while  the  other  one  is  always  her
crise.

The  change  of  character  in  the  secondary  state  is  strongly  marked  ;  she
becomes  gay  and  vivacious — almost  noisy;  instead  of  being  indifferent  to
everything,  her  sensibilities — both  imaginative  and  emotional — become
excessive.  All  her  faculties  appear  more  developed  and  more  complete.  The
condition,  in  fact,  is  much  superior  to  her  ordinary  one,  as  shown  by  the
disappearance  of  her  physical  pains,  and  especially  by  the  state  of  her
memory.

She  married  early,  and  her  crises  became  more  frequent,  though  there  were
occasionally  long  intervals  when  they  never  came  at  all.  But  the  secondary
state,  which  in  [858  and  1859  only  occupied  about  a  tenth  part  of  her  life,
gradually  encroached  more  and  more  on  the  primary  state,  till  the  latter  began
to  appear  only  at  intervals  and  for  a  brief  space  of  time.

In  1875  Dr.  Azam,  having  for  long  lost  sight  of  her,  found  her  a  mother  of
a  family,  keeping  a  shop.  Now  and  then,  but  more  and  more  rarely,  occurred
what  she  called  her  crises — really  relapses  into  her  primary  condition.  These
were  excessively  inconvenient,  since  she  forgot  in  them  all  the  events  of  what
was  now  her  ordinary  life,  all  the  arrangements  of  her  business,  &c. ;  for  in-
stance, in  going  to  a  funeral,  she  had  a  crise,  and  consequently  found  it  impos-
sible to  remember  who  the  deceased  person  was.  She  had  a  great  dread  of
these  occurrences,  though,  by  long  practice,  she  had  become  very  skilful  at
concealing  them  from  every  one  but  her  husband ;  and  the  transition  periods
in  passing  from  one  state  to  another,  during  which  she  was  completely  uncon-
scious, were  now  so  short  as  to  escape  general  notice.  A  peculiar  feeling  of
pressure  in  the  head  warned  her  that  the  crise  was  coming,  and  she  would  then,
for  fear  of  making  mistakes  in  her  business,  hastily  write  down  whatever  facts
she  most  needed  to  keep  in  mind.

While  the  primary  state  lasted,  she  relapsed  into  the  extreme  melancholy
and  depression  that  characterised  her  early  life,  these  being,  in  fact,  now  aggra-
vated by  her  troublesome  amnesia.  She  also  lost  her  affection  for  her  husband
and  children,  and  suffered  from  many  hysterical  pains  and  other  symptoms

231  B]  TO     CHAPTER    II  355

which  were  much  less  acute  in  the  secondary  state.  By  1887,  however,  the
primary  state  only  occurred  every  month  or  two,  lasting  only  for  a  few  hours
at  a  time.

231  B.  The  following  is  another  case  in  which  the  faculties  appeared
to  be  heightened  in  the  secondary  condition.  The  account  is  taken  from
the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  230-32.  The  case  was  sent  to  Pro-
fessor Barrett,  in  1876,  by  a  clergyman,  then  vicar  of  a  London  parish,
and  father  of  the  subject.  He  did  not  choose  to  give  further  particulars,
or  to  allow  his  name  to  be  published.

My  son  was  in  his  seventeenth  year  attacked  by  what  was  said  to  be  cata-
leptic hysteria.  At  their  first  commencement  they  were  little  more  than  pro-
longed fainting  fits;  afterwards,  each  attack  began  by  his  passing  in  an  instant
into  a  state  of  complete  rigidity.  Occasionally  he  would  remain  for  five  minutes
to  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  that  state,  retaining  the  attitude  in  which  he  was  when
attacked,  as  if  made  of  marble,  with  his  eyes  open  and  fixed  and  perfectly  un-
conscious. After  a  time  he  would  rise  with  a  sigh,  move  about,  and  speak  with-
out the  slightest  hesitation  or  incoherency,  and  thence  continue  for  hours  or
leading  an  entirely  separate  existence,  not  recognising  friends  or  relations
or  even  the  way  to  his  own  bedroom,  and  taking  no  notice  if  addressed  by  his
own  name,  writing  letters  with  another  signature,  always  imagining  himself  to
have  arrived  at  middle-age,  and  alluding  to  incidents  of  his  imaginary  youth,
which  teemed  with  echoes  of  his  past  reading;  he  was  most  courteous  and
pleasant  in  his  manner,  excepting  when  any  doubt  was  implied  as  to  the  accuracy
of  any  statement  which  he  made.

At  times  all  his  faculties  were  in  a  most  excited  state.     He  would  continue
for  hours  playing  games  of  skill  with  almost  preternatural  dexterity  ;  he  would
repeat  to  the  air  pages  of  poetry ;  and  he  would  play  and  sing  in  a  wild  and
original  manner,  of  which  he  was  incapable  at  other  times,  quite  unconscious  of
the  presence  of  others  and  impervious  to  any  interruptions.     In  this  state  he  has
continued  for  a  week  at  a  time,  going  out  with  us  to  dine  with  old  friends,  whom,
however,  he  never  recognised,  but  treated  as  new  acquaintances.     He  always
spoke  of  his  parents  as  far  off  in  some  distant  Eastern  country,  in  which  he
himself  had  been  born,  and  spoke  to  us  (his  father  and  mother)  as  kind  hosts
and  friends  whom  he  was  soon  to  leave.    Suddenly  he  would  fall  to  the  ground,
roll  about  in  convulsive  agony  with  loud  groans,  and,  a  little  water  being  poured
into  his  lips,  would  get  up  and  go  on  talking  upon  the  subject  of  conversation
ich  he  had  been  engaged  at  the  time  of  his  seizure,  and  without  the
•st  remembrance  of  anything  that  had  passed  meanwhile.     These  attacks
>ied  every  few  days  for  more  than  two  years,  during  which  he  wa-
n  all  kinds  of  study.     At  the  age  of  nineteen  we  were  advised  to  send  him
on  .1  voyage,  and  accordingly  he  paid  a  visit  to  an  uncle,  a  military  officer  at
rom  thence  he  returned  in  six  or  seven  months  quite  cured,  went  up
to  the  University  of  Cambridge,  where  he  went  out  in  honours,  and  is  now  at
r.     These  attacks  never  came  upon  him  whilst  actually  employed,  but
lly  at  church,  in  bed,  or  during  quiet  conversation;  they  were  often  in-
by  anything  that  vexed  or  startled  him.     He  has  since  told  me  that  he
mi:;;  :^ted  them,  but  that  they  came  upon  him  with  a  sensation  of

:it  drowsiness  that  fascinated  him.     Certainly  he  was  the  worse  for  any
of  sympathy.    I  may  add  that  he  suffers  now  at  times  from  some  defect

336  APPENDICES  [232  A

in  the  circulation  which  prevents  great  bodily  exertion  and  which  produces  pain
in  his  heart  and  head ;  in  all  other  respects  he  is  hale  and  hearty.

232  A.  The  following  account  of  Mary  Reynolds  is  taken  from  Pro-
fessor W.  James'  "Principles  of  Psychology,"  vol.  i.  pp.  381-84,  being
there  quoted  from  Dr.  Weir  Mitchell's  report  in  the  Transactions  of  the
College  of  Physicians  of  Philadelphia,  April  4th,  1888.

This  dull  and  melancholy  young  woman,  inhabiting  the  Pennsylvania
wilderness  in  1811,  was  found  one  morning,  long  after  her  habitual  time  for
rising,  in  a  profound  sleep  from  which  it  was  impossible  to  arouse  her.  After
eighteen  or  twenty  hours  of  sleeping  she  awakened,  but  in  a  state  of  unnatural
consciousness.  Memory  had  fled.  To  all  intents  and  purposes  she  was  as  a
being  for  the  first  time  ushered  into  the  world.  All  of  the  past  that  remained
to  her  was  the  faculty  of  pronouncing  a  few  words,  and  this  seems  to  have  been
as  purely  instinctive  as  the  wailings  of  an  infant;  for  at  first  the  words  which
she  uttered  were  connected  with  no  ideas  in  her  mind.  Until  she  was  taught
their  significance  they  were  unmeaning  sounds.

Her  eyes  were  virtually  for  the  first  time  opened  upon  the  world.  Old  things
had  passed  away ;  all  things  had  become  new.  Her  parents,  brothers,  sisters,
friends,  were  not  recognised  or  acknowledged  as  such  by  her.  She  had  never
seen  them  before — never  known  them.  ...  To  the  scenes  by  which  she  was
surrounded  she  was  a  perfect  stranger.  The  house,  the  fields,  the  forest,  the
hills,  the  vales,  the  streams — all  were  novelties.  .  .  .  She  had  not  the  slightest
consciousness  that  she  had  ever  existed  previous  to  the  moment  in  which  she
awoke  from  that  mysterious  slumber.  In  a  word,  she  was  an  infant,  just  born,
yet  born  in  a  state  of  maturity.  .  .  .

The  first  lesson  in  her  education  was  to  teach  her  by  what  ties  she  was
bound  to  those  by  whom  she  was  surrounded.  .  .  .  This  she  was  very  slow  to
learn,  and,  indeed,  never  did  learn,  or,  at  least,  never  would  acknowledge  the
ties  of  consanguinity,  or  scarcely  those  of  friendship.  .  .  .

The  next  lesson  was  to  re-teach  her  the  arts  of  reading  and  writing.  She
was  apt  enough,  and  made  such  rapid  progress  in  both,  that  in  a  few  weeks
she  had  readily  re-learned  to  read  and  write.  .  .  .

The  next  thing  that  is  noteworthy  is  the  change  which  took  place  in  her
disposition.  Instead  of  being  melancholy,  she  was  now  cheerful  to  extremity.
Instead  of  being  reserved,  she  was  buoyant  and  social.  Formerly  taciturn  and
retiring,  she  was  now  merry  and  jocose.  .  .  .  While  she  was,  in  this  second
state,  extravagantly  fond  of  company,  she  was  much  more  enamoured  of  nature's
works,  as  exhibited  in  the  forests,  hills,  vales,  and  water-courses.  She  used  to
start  in  the  morning,  either  on  foot  or  horseback,  and  ramble  until  nightfall
over  the  whole  country ;  nor  was  she  at  all  particular  whether  she  were  on  a
path  or  in  the  trackless  forest.  .  .  .

She  knew  no  fear,  and  as  bears  and  panthers  were  numerous  in  the  woods,
and  rattlesnakes  and  copperheads  abounded  everywhere,  her  friends  told  her
of  the  danger  to  which  she  exposed  herself ;  but  it  produced  no  other  effect
than  to  draw  forth  a  contemptuous  laugh,  as  she  said,  "  I  know  you  only  want
to  frighten  me  and  keep  me  at  home,  but  you  miss  it,  for  I  often  see  your  bears,
and  I  am  perfectly  convinced  that  they  are  nothing  more  than  black  hogs."

One  evening,  after  her  return  from  her  daily  excursion,  she  told  the  follow-
ing incident:  "  As  I  was  riding  to-day  along  a  narrow  path  a  great  black  hog

232A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  337

came  out  of  the  woods  and  stopped  before  me.  I  never  saw  such  an  impudent
black  hog  before.  It  stood  up  on  its  hind  feet  and  grinned  and  gnashed  its
teeth  at  me.  I  could  not  make  the  horse  go  on.  I  told  him  he  was  a  fool  to
be  frightened  at  a  hog,  and  tried  to  whip  him  past,  but  he  would  not  go,  and
wanted  to  turn  back.  I  told  the  hog  to  get  out  of  the  way,  but  he  did  not  mind
me.  4  Well,'  said  I,  '  if  you  won't  for  words,  I  '11  try  blows  ; '  so  I  got  off  and
took  a  stick,  and  walked  up  toward  it.  When  I  got  pretty  close  by,  it  got  down
on  all  fours  and  walked  away  slowly  and  sullenly,  stopping  every  few  steps  and
looking  back  and  grinning  and  growling.  Then  I  got  on  my  horse  and  rode
on."  .  .  .

Thus  it  continued  for  five  weeks,  when  one  morning  after  a  protracted
sleep,  she  awoke  and  was  herself  again.  She  recognised  the  parental,  the
brotherly,  and  sisterly  ties  as  though  nothing  had  happened,  and  immediately
went  about  the  performance  of  duties  incumbent  upon  her,  and  which  she  had
planned  five  weeks  previously.  Great  was  her  surprise  at  the  change  which
one  night  (as  she  supposed)  had  produced.  Nature  bore  a  different  aspect.
Not  a  trace  was  left  in  her  mind  of  the  giddy  scenes  through  which  she  had
passed.  Her  ramblings  through  the  forest,  her  tricks  and  humour,  all  were
faded  from  her  memory,  and  not  a  shadow  left  behind.  ...  Of  course  her
natural  disposition  returned;  her  melancholy  was  deepened  by  the  information
of  what  had  occurred.  All  went  on  in  the  old-fashioned  way.  .  .  .  After  the
lapse  of  a  few  weeks  she  fell  into  a  profound  sleep,  and  awoke  in  her  second
state,  taking  up  her  new  life  again  precisely  where  she  had  left  it  when  she
before  passed  from  that  state.  .  .  .  All  the  knowledge  she  possessed  was  that
acquired  during  the  fews  weeks  of  her  former  period  of  second  consciousness.
She  knew  nothing  of  the  intervening  time.  ...  In  this  state  she  came  to
understand  perfectly  the  facts  of  her  case,  not  from  memory,  but  from  informa-
tion. Yet  her  buoyancy  of  spirits  was  so  great  that  no  depression  was  pro-
duced. On  the  contrary,  it  added  to  her  cheerfulness,  and  was  made  the
foundation,  as  was  everything  else,  of  mirth.

These  alternations  from  one  state  to  another  continued  at  intervals  of  vary-
ing length  for  fifteen  or  sixteen  years,  but  finally  ceased  when  she  attained  the
age  of  thirty-five  or  thirty-six,  leaving  her  permanently  in  her  second  state.  In
^he  remained  without  change  for  the  last  quarter  of  a  century  of  her  life.

The  emotional  opposition  of  the  two  states  seems,  however,  to  have
become  gradually  effaced  in  Mary  Reynolds.

change  from  a  gay,  hysterical,  mischievous  woman,  fond  of  jests  and
ibsurd  beliefs  or  delusive  convictions,  to  one  retaining  the  joyousness
and  love  of  society,  but  sobered  down  to  levels  of  practical  usefulness,  was
I  h    most  of  the  twenty-five  years  which  followed  she  was  as  different
from  her  melancholy,  morbid  self  as  from  the  hilarious  condition  of  the  early
of  her  second  state.     Some  of  her  family  spoke  of  it  as  her  third  state.
is  described  as  becoming  rational,  industrious,  and   very  cheerful,  yet
reason  possessed  of  a  well-balanced  temperament,  and  not  having

the  si;  lication  of  an  injured  or  disturbed  mind.     For  some  years  she

ool,  and  in  that  capacity  was  both  useful  and  acceptable,  being  a
general  favourite  with  old  and  young.

During  tl  twenty-five  years  she  lived  in  the  same  house  with  the

Rev   Dr.  John  V.  Reynolds,  her  nephew,  part  of  that  time  keeping  house  for

v

338  APPENDICES  [233  A

him,  showing  a  sound  judgment  and  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  the  duties  of
her  position.

'*  Dr.  Reynolds,  who  is  still  living  in  Meadville,"  says  Dr.  Mitchell,  "  and
who  has  most  kindly  placed  the  facts  at  my  disposal,  states  in  his  letter  to  me
of  January  4th,  1888,  that  at  a  later  period  of  her  life  she  said  she  did  sometimes
seem  to  have  a  dim,  dreamy  idea  of  a  shadowy  past,  which  she  could  not  fully
grasp,  and  could  not  be  certain  whether  it  originated  in  a  partially  restored
memory  or  in  the  statements  of  the  events  by  others  during  her  abnormal  state.

"Miss  Reynolds  died  in  January  1854,  at  the  age  of  sixty-one.  On  the
morning  of  the  day  of  her  death  she  rose  in  her  usual  health,  ate  her  breakfast,
and  superintended  household  duties !  While  thus  employed  she  suddenly
raised  her  hands  to  her  head  and  exclaimed  :  '  Oh  !  I  wonder  what  is  the  matter
with  my  head  ! '  and  immediately  fell  to  the  floor.  When  carried  to  a  sofa  she
gasped  once  or  twice  and  died."

For  another  and  more  detailed  account,  see  "  Mary  Reynolds  :  a  Case
of  Double  Consciousness,"  by  the  Rev.  W.  S.  Plummer,  D.D.,  in  Harper's
Magazine  for  May  1860  (reprinted  in  pamphlet  form  together  with
Dr.  Stevens'  report  of  the  "  Watseka  Wonder,"  referred  to  in  238  A, — by
the  Religio-Philosophical  Publishing  House,  Chicago,  1887).  The  most
important  additional  details  in  this  account  are:  (i)  Immediately  after
falling  asleep  in  her  secondary  state,  Miss  Reynolds  would  sometimes
narrate  audibly  what  she  had  done  the  day  before,  and  plan  what  to  do
the  next  day ;  which  plans  she  would  duly  carry  out, — as  if  they  were
post- hypnotic  suggestions,  —  unless  prevented.  (2)  The  first  time  she  was
in  the  secondary  state,  she  recovered  through  dreams  some  of  the  know-
ledge that  she  had  lost  while  awake.  She  dreamt  that  she  heard  a  man
preach  and  explain  passages  in  the  Bible  to  her,  and  after  the  dream
seemed  to  regain  all  her  knowledge  of  the  Bible,  though  at  the  time
unable  to  read  it.  In  the  same  dream  she  saw  and  talked  with  a  woman,
whom  she  did  not  recognise,  but  described  minutely  on  waking ;  and  the
description  was  said  to  correspond  exactly  to  a  dead  sister,  whose  exist-
ence while  awake — she  had  forgotten.  After  this  she  often  dreamt  of
the  same  sister,  and  also  of  another  dead  friend.

233  A.  We  now  come  to  spontaneous  cases  of  multiplex  personality,1
of  which  Louis  Viva's  is  one  of  the  best  known.  Louis  Vive"
exhibited  an  extraordinary  number  and  variety  of  phases  of  personrlity,
partly  spontaneous  and  partly  the  result  of  different  experiments  in
"  metallotherapy "  tried  by  the  physicians  in  charge  of  him.  These
experiments  produced  curious  variations  in  the  hysterical  paralyses
from  which  he  suffered,  and  produced  at  the  same  time  reversions
to  different  past  periods  of  his  life — probably  associated  with  the
particular  forms  of  paralysis.  It  appeared  that  not  only  were  certain
past  and  forgotten  mental  states  recalled  by  the  physical  impression
of  these  variations,  but  also  if  a  past  and  forgotten  mental  state  were

1  Besides  the  cases  of  multiplex  personality  given  in  this  chapter,  see  reference  to  a
remarkable  recent  case  (recorded  by  Dr.  Bramwell)  in  a  footnote  to  section  523.

233A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  339

suggested  to  the  patient  as  his  actual  present  condition,  he  accepted  the
belief,  and  with  it  came  back  his  past  physical  condition.  It  is  important
to  note  that  the  first  experiments  with  metals  were  made  when  the  experi-
menters had  no  knowledge  of  what  had  been  the  actual  history  of  the
past  paralyses  of  their  patient.  They  recovered  this  from  him  bit  by  bit,
and  after  carefully  comparing  his  recollections  with  contemporary  records,
concluded  that  on  the  whole  his  various  phases  really  represented  himself
at  various  periods  of  his  life.

Louis  Vive"  began  life  (in  1863)  as  the  neglected  child  of  a  turbulent
mother.  He  was  sent  to  a  reformatory  at  ten  years  old,  and  there  showed
himself,  as  he  has  always  done  when  his  organisation  has  given  him  a
chance,  quiet,  well-behaved,  and  obedient.  Then  at  fourteen  years  old
he  had  a  great  fright  from  a  viper — a  fright  which  threw  him  off  his
balance  and  started  the  series  of  psychical  oscillations  on  which  he  has
been  tossed  ever  since.  At  first  the  symptoms  were  only  physical,  epilepsy
and  hysterical  paralysis  of  the  legs  ;  and  at  the  asylum  of  Bonneval,  whither
he  was  next  sent,  he  worked  at  tailoring  steadily  for  a  couple  of  months.
Then  suddenly  he  had  a  hystero-epileptic  attack — fifty  hours  of  convulsions
and  ecstasy — and  when  he  awoke  from  it  he  was  no  longer  paralysed,  no
longer  acquainted  with  tailoring,  and  no  longer  virtuous.  His  memory
was  set  back,  so  to  say,  to  the  moment  of  the  viper's  appearance,  and  he
could  remember  nothing  since.  His  character  had  become  violent,
greedy,  and  quarrelsome,  and  his  tastes  were  radically  changed.  For
instance,  though  he  had  before  the  attack  been  a  total  abstainer,  he  now
not  only  drank  his  own  wine  but  stole  the  wine  of  the  other  patients.  He
escaped  from  Bonneval,  and  after  a  few  turbulent  years,  tracked  by  his
occasional  relapses  into  hospital  or  madhouse,  he  turned  up  once  more
at  the  Rochefort  asylum  in  the  character  of  a  private  of  marines,  con-
:  of  theft,  but  considered  to  be  of  unsound  mind.  And  at  Roche-
fort  and  La  Rochelle,  by  great  good  fortune,  he  fell  into  the  hands  of
three  physicians — Professors  Bourru  and  Burot,  and  Dr.  Mabille — able
and  willing  to  continue  and  extend  the  observations  which  Dr.  Camuset
nneval  and  Dr.  Jules  Voisin  at  Bicetre  had  already  made  on  this  most
>us  of  mauvais  sujets  at  earlier  points  in  his  chequered  career.1

In  1887  he  was  no  longer  at  Rochefort,  and  Dr.  Burot  informed  me
that  his  health  had  much  improved,  and  that  his  peculiarities  had  in  great
part  disappeared.  I  must,  however,  for  clearness'  sake,  use  the  present
tense  in  briefly  describing  his  condition  at  the  time  when  the  long  series
of  experiments  were  made.

The  state  into  which  he  has  gravitated   is  a  very  unpleasing  one.

1   For    Dr.  Camuset's  account  sec  Ann.j.'n  Mfdito-Psychologiquet^  1882,  p.  75;  for
'»  Archives  de  Nturologit,  September,  1885.     The  observations  at  Rochefort
have  been  carefullv  r  Dr.  Berjon,  La  Grande  //ysttrie  thez  /'//

1886,  and  by  Drs.  Hourru  and  I'.urot  in  a  treatise,  De  la  suggcs:  .  (titbl.

'  .jue  conttmporainc],  Paris,  1887.

340  APPENDICES  [233  A

There  is  paralysis  and  insenibility  of  the  right  side,  and  (as  is  often  the
case  in  right  hemiplegia)  the  speech  is  indistinct  and  difficult.  Neverthe-
less, he  is  constantly  haranguing  any  one  who  will  listen  to  him,  abusing
his  physicians,  or  preaching,  with  a  monkey-like  impudence  rather  than
with  reasoned  clearness,  radicalism  in  politics  and  atheism  in  religion.
He  makes  bad  jokes,  and  if  any  one  pleases  him  he  endeavours  to  caress
him.  He  remembers  recent  events  during  his  residence  at  Rochefort
asylum,  but  only  two  scraps  of  his  life  before  that  date,  namely,  his  vicious
period  at  Bonneval  and  a  part  of  his  stay  at  Bicetre.

Except  this  strangely  fragmentary  memory  there  is  nothing  very
unusual  in  this  condition,  and  in  many  asylums  no  experiments  on  it
would  have  been  attempted.  But  the  physicians  of  Rochefort  had  faith
in  the  efficacy  of  the  contact  of  metals  in  provoking  transfer  of  hysterical
hemiplegia  from  one  side  to  the  other.  They  tried  various  metals  in  turn
on  Louis  Vive.  Lead,  silver,  and  zinc  had  no  effect.  Copper  produced
a  slight  return  of  sensibility  in  the  paralysed  arm.  But  steel,  applied  to
the  right  arm,  transferred  the  whole  insensibility  to  the  left  side  of  the
body.

Such  phenomena  are  now,  of  course,  generally  attributed  to  sugges-
tion. They  are  at  least  sufficiently  common  (as  some  French  physicians
hold)  in  hysterical  cases  to  excite  little  surprise.  What  puzzled  the
doctors  was  the  change  of  character  which  accompanied  the  change  of
sensibility.  When  Louis  Vive"  issued  from  the  crisis  of  transfer,  with  its
minute  of  anxious  expression  and  panting  breath,  he  was  what  might
fairly  be  called  a  new  man.  The  restless  insolence,  the  savage  impul-
siveness, have  wholly  disappeared.  The  patient  is  now  gentle,  respect-
ful, and  modest.  He  can  speak  clearly  now,  but  he  only  speaks  when
he  is  spoken  to.  If  he  is  asked  his  views  on  religion  and  politics,  he
prefers  to  leave  such  matters  to  wiser  heads  than  his  own.  It  might
seem  that  morally  and  intellectually  the  patient's  cure  had  been  complete.

But  now  ask  him  what  he  thinks  of  Rochefort ;  how  he  liked  his
regiment  of  marines.  He  will  blankly  answer  that  he  knows  nothing  of
Rochefort,  and  was  never  a  soldier  in  his  life.  "  Where  are  you,  then,
and  what  is  the  date  of  to-day?  "  "  I  am  at  Bicetre  ;  it  is  January  2nd,
1884 ;  and  I  hope  to  see  M.  Voisin  to-day,  as  I  did  yesterday."

It  is  found,  in  fact,  that  he  has  now  the  memory  of  two  short  periods
of  life  (different  from  those  which  he  remembers  when  his  right  side  is
paralysed),  periods  during  which,  so  far  as  can  now  be  ascertained,  his
character  was  of  the  same  decorous  type  and  his  paralysis  was  on  the
left  side.

These  two  conditions  are  what  are  now  termed  his  first  and  his  second,
out  of  a  series  of  six  or  more  through  which  he  can  be  made  to  pass.
For  brevity's  sake  I  will  further  describe  his  fifth  state  only.

If  he  is  placed  in  an  electric  bath,  or  if  a  magnet  be  placed  on  his
head,  it  looks  at  first  sight  as  though  a  complete  physical  cure  had  been

234A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  341

effected.  All  paralysis,  all  defect  of  sensibility,  has  disappeared.  His
movements  are  light  and  active,  his  expression  gentle  and  timid.  But
ask  him  where  he  is,  and  you  find  that  he  has  gone  back  to  a  boy  of
fourteen,  that  he  is  at  St.  Urbain,  his  first  reformatory,  and  that  his
memory  embraces  his  years  of  childhood,  and  stops  short  on  the  very
•  hen  he  had  the  fright  with  the  viper.  If  he  is  pressed  to  recollect
the  incident  of  the  viper  a  violent  epileptiform  crisis  puts  a  sudden  end  to
this  phase  of  his  personality.

This  complicated  history  may  be  rendered  clearer  by  reference  to  the
tabular  statement  of  it — reproduced  below — which  was  drawn  up  by  my
brother,  the  late  A.  T.  Myers,  M.  D.,  F.  R.  C.  P.,  for  his  account  of  the  case
in  The  Journal  of  Mental  Science,  January  1886,  and  approved  by  Drs.
Bourru  and  Burot.  The  six  states  of  the  patient  are  represented  by  six
vertical  columns,  and  the  memories  attaching  to  them  by  thick  black  lines
on  their  left-hand  borders  (see  pp.  342-3).

234  A.  The  following  account  of  Dr.  Morton  Prince's  patient,  "  the
Misses  Beauchamp,"  is  slightly  abridged  from  his  report  to  the  Inter-
national Congress  of  Psychology,  Paris,  August,  1900,  which  was  published
in  the  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  xv.  pp.  466-83.

.  .  .  This  case  has  been  the  subject  of  a  continuous  study  for  at  least  three
years,  and  has  occupied  hundreds  of  hours  of  time.  .  .  .

When  Miss  Beauchamp  first  came  under  observation  she  was  a  neurasthenic
of  a  very  severe  type.  She  was  a  student  in  one  of  our  colleges,  and  there
received  a  very  good  education.  But  in  consequence  of  her  neurasthenic
condition  it  was  simply  impossible  for  her  to  go  on  with  her  work.  She  was  a
wreck,  I  might  say,  in  body.  In  temperament  she  is  a  person  of  extreme
idealism,  with  a  very  morbid  New  England  conscientiousness,  and  a  great  deal
of  pride  and  reserve,  so  that  she  is  very  unwilling  to  expose  herself  or  her  life
to  anybody's  scrutiny.

Now  she  came  to  see  me  in  this  neurasthenic  state,  but  I  found  treatment
was  of  almost  no  use.     The  usual  methods  were  employed  with  no  result,  and
it  seemed  as  if  her  case  was  hopeless.     Finally  I  concluded  to  try  hypnotic
suggestions.     She  proved  a  very  good  subject,  and  the  suggestions  produced
time  rather  brilliant   results.      In    hypnosis   she  went   easily  into  the
somnambulistic  state.     This  somnambulistic  state  came  later  to  be  known  as
B.  II.,  while  the  first  personality  with  whom  I  became  acquainted,  Miss   I'.i.ui-
champ  herself,  was  known  as  B.  I.     Now  I  used  to  notice  that  as  B.  I!
was  continually  rubbing  her  eyes;  her  hands  were  in  constant  motion,  always
ct  at  her  eyes.     Still  I  paid  very  little  attention  to  it,  or  placed  very
ticancc  in  this  fact,  merely  attributing  it  to  nervousness.     One  day
pnotised   her  and   referred   to   something  that  she  had  done  in  a
pnotic  state,— that  is  to  say,  something  that  she  had  said  or  done
In  a  previous  state  when  I  supposed  she  wai  I'..  1 1.,     she  denied  all  knowledge
md  said  it  was  not  so.     This  surprised  me,  and  I  attributed  the  denial  at
<>  an  attempt  at  deception.     [Finally],  it  turned  out  that  when  she  went
into  the  state  of  which  she  later  denied  the  facts,  she  was  an  entirely  distinct
and  separate  person.     This  third  personality,  which  then  developed,  came  to

342

APPENDICES

[233  A

c

rt

0

w

8

<u

~  *

P

'7.

2

i

•SJP

£  JU

1

1

1

It

^_,  JS

S'i.
ii  ii

o

E°

1

0

S

en  M

23

*

5

»«h

!l

1-

>

•33  ~

<£

•"!§

T3

c*o

°r^

<U   •*-»

^

QJ    >-^

0

Ma

II  II

fin"

0

D*

0

s2

23

j3    ••>

W>

2

If

c  <u

0<5

II

>

f

i

o

i|s

l2^

IT  if

>-,     ^

3

-H

i

»

S  "^  c

23

rt  cj

c

§>£

o

M

Left  hemipl
not  affecting

<u

B

.^

3

|

CJ

i

1

So

II  II

a.

•S)

^  rt

*c

s

d

If

o

!

§

^Q

So

Hi  |

*j  «

^

o

1  §

M

Jrt

2

J3

o*

O

23

rt

^OJ

t/i

-

I

o
2

M

1

.0

ooo

**

*^

4i

II  II

bO

bfl

[o

"rt

2

C4

>

fe

p^h-J

tfi

IP

i  T3  T3  S3

en
15

§  ;|

1

&

h-3Fc"S

otlf

•r

bO  _,
O    C

o    ''*S

a

rt
§

_>   C3S   g

ill-It

II
£s

iff

<u

.

rt

5

g

4>

*"   f3

•

1

w

§

I

|

j

cS  °

"I
•g

X
to

i

o

rt
C

rt

rt
i

^

43
"^

g

rt

C

^

u

ill

1

c

<;

J3

u

•X3

W

3

i?

•<

Is  *

^

x

o

0

<D

cu

E

rt

s

u
H

r^

en

s

s

Q

i

I

rn

oo

1

0"

33  A]

TO    CHAPTER    II

343

—  ^—

4

3t
rf

r§

£a
I3

ill

p

§131

^5
•a  u

15
;-

3-1

1  ransterred  to
Bourg  Asylum,
where  he  stayed
18  months  .  .  .
Left  Bourg

Lived  in  I'ans

Visited  AsileSte.
Anne

2  5

S:i

5>
o  8

!i

.=
&p

l-a

o^;

-  a.

0

Kecovery  after
hemiplegia

u

H
i*

<~ame  to  Kocne-
fort  and  enlist-
ed in  Marines.
Convicted  of
theft

Sj

fl
Sis

^OJ  =

i

4

ill

^

3

8

>

8

!

•

-r

u
V

{•

S-3
u,  «

;T3

i

y

s  £:
?«

I!

N  ?

1

1

f

§

ns

X

'-     1

8?       8

1885,  July  (?)

&

r
r

[Trx

2,1  o

4<   '•

32

r

•
i

?

*>V
^

3s

32

fr
a

?.       :
*
?        1

"

]
1

-0

2

344  APPENDICES  [234  A

be  known  as  B.  III.     We  had  then  three   mental    states,  B.   I.,  B.  II.,  and
B.  III.

B.  I.  knew  nothing  of  the  others.  B.  II.  knew  B.  I.,  but  no  more.  B.  III.
knew  both  B.  I.  and  B.  II.  Thus  far  there  was  nothing  very  unusual.

Now  B.  III.  has  proved  to  be  one  of  the  most  interesting  of  all  the  person-
alities that  have  developed  in  the  case.  In  one  respect  it  is  one  of  the  most
remarkable  personalities,  I  think,  that  has  ever  been  exhibited  in  any  of  these
cases  of  multiple  personality,  as  will,  I  think,  presently  appear.  B.  II I.,  like
B.  II.,  was  constantly  rubbing  her  eyes,  so  that  I  was  frequently  compelled  to
hold  her  hands  by  force  to  prevent  her  from  doing  so.  When  asked  why  she
did  this,  she  said  she  wished  to  get  her  eyes  opened,  and  it  turned  out  after-
wards that  it  was  she  who  was  rubbing  the  eyes  of  B.  II.  in  the  earlier  times.
At  this  time  I  prevented  B.  III.  from  opening  her  eyes  for  the  reason  that  I
feared  that,  if  she  got  her  eyes  opened  and  was  thereby  able  to  add  the  visual
images  of  her  surroundings  to  her  mental  life  as  B.  III.,  these  same  images  of
her  surroundings  which  she  would  also  have,  of  course,  when  she  was  B.  I.,
would  by  force  of  the  association  awaken  all  her  mental  associations  as  B.  III.,
and  that,  in  consequence,  B.  III.  spontaneously  would  be  constantly  coming
into  existence  of  her  own  accord.  This  afterwards  proved  to  be  the  case.
B.  III.  always  insisted  upon  having  her  eyes  opened,  complaining  that  she
wished  to  see,  and  had  a  "right  to  see."  One  day,  some  time  after  this,  when
she  was  at  home,  owing  to  some  nervous  excitement,  she  was  thrown  into  the
condition  of  B.  III.,  and  then,  I  not  being  there  to  prevent  it,  she  rubbed  her
eyes  until  she  got  them  opened,  and  from  that  time  to  this  she  (B.  III.)  has  had
a  spontaneous  and  independent  existence.

This  personality  dates  her  whole  independent  existence  from  this  day,  and
she  always  refers  to  events  as  being  "  before  "  or  "  after  she  got  her  eyes
opened."  That  is  the  central  event  in  her  life,  just  as  mothers  date  periods
before  or  after  the  birth  of  a  child.  Now  this  personality  came  afterwards  to
be  known  as  Sally  Beauchamp.  (The  name  Beauchamp  has  been  adopted  in
this  account  for  all  the  personalities.)  She  took  the  name  for  fun  one  day,  a
name  that  she  got  out  of  some  book,  and  by  that  name  she  has  been  known
ever  since.  In  character  she  differs  very  remarkably  from  B.  I.  I  would  say
here  that  B.  I.  is  a  very  serious-minded  person,  fond  of  books  and  study,  of  a
religious  turn  of  mind,  and  possesses  a  very  morbid  conscientiousness.  She
has  a  great  sense  of  responsibility  in  life,  and  with  those  who  know  her  trouble
is  rather  sad  and  depressed  in  her  general  aspect,  the  latter  the  result  of  the
general  troubles  and  trials  of  her  life.  Sally,  on  the  other  hand,  is  full  of  fun,
does  not  worry  about  anything ;  all  life  is  one  great  joke  to  her,  she  hates
books,  loves  fun  and  amusement,  does  not  like  serious  things,  hates  church,  in
fact  is  thoroughly  childlike  in  every  way.  She  is  a  child  of  nature.  She  is  not
as  well  educated  as  is  Miss  Beauchamp,  although  she  reads  and  writes  English
well ;  yet  she  complains  constantly  that  she  cannot  express  herself  easily  in
writing,  but  she  does  it  quite  well  all  the  same.  She  cannot  read  French  or
any  of  the  foreign  languages  which  Miss  Beauchamp  knows,  and  she  cannot
write  shorthand ;  in  short,  lacks  a  great  many  of  the  educational  accomplish-
ments which  the  other  character  possesses.  She  insists,  although  of  this  I
have  no  absolute  proof,  that  she  never  sleeps,  and  that  she  is  always  awake
while  Miss  Beauchamp  is  asleep.  I  believe  it  to  be  true.  Then  Miss  B.  is  a
neurasthenic,  Sally  is  perfectly  well.  She  is  never  fatigued  and  never  suffers
pain.  During  the  first  year  Sally  and  Miss  Beauchamp  used  to  come  and  go

234A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  345

in  succession.  At  first  whenever  B.  I.  became  fatigued  or  upset  from  any  cause,
Sally  was  likely  to  come.  The  periods  during  which  Sally  was  in  existence
might  be  any  time  from  a  few  minutes  to  several  hours.  Later  these  periods
became  prolonged  to  several  days.  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  though  Miss
Beauchamp  knows  nothing  of  Sally,  Sally,  when  not  in  the  flesh,  is  conscious
of  all  Miss  Beauchamp's  thoughts  and  doings,  and  the  latter  could  hide  nothing
from  her.  Curiously  enough,  Sally  took  an  intense  dislike  to  B.  I.  She
actually  hated  her.  She  used  to  say  to  me,  "  Why,  I  hate  her,  Dr.  Prince !  "
and  there  was  no  length  to  which  Sally  would  not  go  to  cause  her  annoyance.
She  would  play  every  kind  of  prank  on  her  to  make  her  miserable.  She  tor-
mented her  to  a  degree  almost  incredible.  While  Sally  would  never  do  any-
thing to  make  any  one  else  unhappy,  she  was  absolutely  remorseless  in  the  way
she  tormented  Miss  Beauchamp  by  practical  jokes  and  by  playing  upon  her
sensibilities.  For  example,  I  will  give  a  few  illustrations.  If  there  is  one  thing
which  Miss  Beauchamp  has  a  perfect  horror  of,  it  is  snakes  and  spiders.  They
throw  her  into  a  condition  of  terror.  One  day  Sally  went  out  into  the  country
and  collected  some  snakes  and  spiders  and  put  them  into  a  little  box.  She
brought  them  home  and  did  them  up  in  a  little  package,  and  addressed  them
to  Miss  Beauchamp,  and  when  B.  I.  opened  the  package  they  ran  out  and
about  the  room  and  nearly  sent  her  into  fits.  In  order  to  get  rid  of  them  she
had  to  handle  them,  which  added  to  her  terror.  Another  joke  was  to  take
Heauchamp  out  into  the  country  when  she  was  very  tired,  and  in  an  unfit
condition  to  walk ;  that  is,  Sally  would  take  a  car  and  go  out  six  or  seven  miles
into  the  country  to  some  retired  place,  and  wake  up  Miss  Beauchamp,  who
would  find  herself  far  out  in  the  country  with  no  means  of  getting  home,  no
money  in  her  pocket,  and  nothing  for  it  but  to  walk.  She  had  to  beg  rides
when  she  could  from  passing  waggons,  and  come  back  tired,  worn  out,  used  up
for  a  week.

A  great  friend  of  Miss  Beauchamp,  to  whom  she  felt  under  strong  obliga-
tions, had  asked  her  to  knit  a  baby's  blanket.     She  worked  on  that  blanket  for
nearly  a  year ;  as  fast  as  she  would  get  it  near  completion,  Sally  would  unravel
it,  and  then,  like  Sisyphus,  she  would  have  to  begin  the  task  again,  and  regu-
larly every  time  Sally  would  pull  the  whole  thing  to  pieces.      Finally  she  came
to  herself  one  day  and  found  herself  standing  in  the  middle  of  the  room  tied
up  in  a  perfect  network  and  snarl  of  worsted  yarn  ;  it  was  wound  round  the
pictures  and  then  round  and  round  the  furniture,  the  bed,  the  chairs,  herself,
and  she  had  to  cut  it  to  get  out  of  the  snarl.      Another  favourite  joke  of  Sally's
was  to  make  Miss  Beauchamp  lie.     She  had  the  power,  when  she  pleased,  of
producing  aboulia,  and  also  of  making  B.  I.  say  and  do  things  against  her  will ;
:         ;er  a  fashion  she  can  get  control  of  her  arms  and  legs,  and  of  her  tongue.
ly  made  her  tell  most  frightful  fibs.     For  instance,  when  asked  who
lived  in  a  small   squalid  little  house  at  the  side  of  the  road,  she  said,  "  Mrs.
."  a  very  prominent  lady  in  society,  and  very  wealthy.      "Why,  I  thought
•he   was   rich!"     "  Oh  yes,   but  she   has  lost   all   her  money  now."      Mi>s
Beauchamp  would  be  mortified  at  hearing  herself  tell  these  astounding  bare-
faced fibs,  which  her  listener  must  know  were  fibs,  but  she  could  not  help  it.
,  for  a  time  at  least,  Sally  put  B.  I.  on  an  allowance  of  five  cents  a  day,
•  ould  find  the  money  waiting  for  her  in  the  morning  on  the  table  with
a  note  saying  that  it  was  her  allowance  for  the  day  and  she  could  not  spend
Sally  took  away  her  postage  stamps,  and  if  Miss  Beauchamp  wrote
a  letter  it  had  first  to  be  exhibited  to  Sally,  and  if  Sally  approved  it,  it  was

346  APPENDICES  [234  A

posted ;  if  not,  it  did  not  go,  and  that  was  the  end  of  it.  Miss  Beauchamp  is
a  person  with  a  great  sense  of  dignity,  and  dislikes  anything  that  smacks  of
a  lack  of  decorum  or  of  familiarity.  Sally  had  a  way  of  punishing  her  by
making  her  sit  on  a  chair  with  her  feet  upon  the  mantelpiece.  B.  I.  could
not  take  her  feet  down,  and  was  mortified  to  think  she  had  to  sit  that  way.
Sally  carries  on  a  correspondence  with  Miss  Beauchamp,  writes  letters  to
her  pointing  out  all  the  weak  points  of  her  character,  dwelling  on  all  the  little
slips  and  foibles  of  her  mind,  telling  her  all  the  reckless  acts  and  secret
thoughts,  indeed,  everything  she  has  done  that  won't  bear  criticism.  In  fact,
when  she  has  a  chance  to  stick  a  pin  into  her  she  does  it.  When  Miss
Beauchamp  wakes  in  the  morning  she  will  find  pinned  up  on  the  wall  of  the
room  verses  containing  all  sorts  of  personal  allusions,  letters  calling  her
names,  telling  fictitious  things  that  people  have  said  about  her  ;  in  short,
doing  everything  imaginable  to  make  her  life  miserable.  Nevertheless,  at
times  when  she  goes  too  far,  Sally  has  got  frightened,  and  then  she  would
write  me  a  letter  and  ask  for  help,  saying  that  she  "  could  not  do  anything
with  Miss  Beauchamp,  and  I  really  must  help  her."

One  of  the  most  interesting  problems  is,  who  is  Sally  ?  .  .  .  Sally  as  an
individuality  goes  back  to  early  infancy,  and  has  grown  with  the  growth  of
Miss  Beauchamp.  The  theory  which  finally,  I  think,  has  been  demonstrated,
is  that  Sally  represents  the  subliminal  consciousness.

Although  B.  I.  knows  nothing  of  Sally,  Sally  not  only  is  conscious  of  Miss
Beauchamp's  thoughts  at  the  moment  they  arise,  but  she  is  capable,  as  I  have
said,  of  controlling  her  thoughts  and  her  arms  and  legs  and  tongue  to  a
certain  extent.  Sally  can  produce  positive  and  negative  hallucination  in  B.  I.,
and  frequently  does  so  for  a  practical  joke.  During  the  times  when  Sally  is
in  existence,  B.  I.  is — as  Sally  puts  it — "  dead,"  and  these  times  represent
complete  gaps  in  Miss  Beauchamp's  memory,  and  she  has  no  knowledge  of
them  whatever.  "What  becomes  of  her?"  Sally  frequently  asks.  Sally  is
never  "dead."  Her  memory  is  continuous;  there  are  no  gaps  in  it.  She  not
only  knows  all  B.  I.'s  thoughts  and  emotions  and  sensations,  but  will  have
a  train  of  thought  at  the  same  time  with  B.  I.,  of  an  entirely  different  nature.
All  this  is  also  true  of  the  relation  of  Sally's  mind  to  that  of  the  third
personality — B.  IV. — who  came  later,  excepting  that  Sally  does  not  know
B.  IV.'s  thoughts.  While  either  Miss  B.  I.  or  IV.  is  thinking  and  feeling  one
thing — is  depressed  and  self-reproachful,  for  example — Sally  is  feeling  gay
and  indifferent  and  enjoying  Miss  B.'s  discomfiture  and  perhaps  planning
some  amusement  distasteful  to  her.

Speak  to  either  B.  I.  or  B.  IV.,  and  Sally  hears  you.  Say  something  that
Sally  alone  understands,  and  you  see  her  smile.  Then  Sally  remembers
things  in  the  past  that  B.  I.  knows  nothing  about  at  all,  things  that  she
apparently  never  was  conscious  of,  or  which  she  has  completely  forgotten.
The  most  remarkable  part  of  Sally's  personality,  I  think,  is  that  she  has  been
able  to  write  out  for  me  her  autobiography,  beginning  with  the  time  when
she  was  in  her  cradle,  which  she  remembers.  She  actually  describes  her  own
thoughts  and  feelings  as  distinct  from  B.  I.'s,  all  through  her  childhood,  up  to
and  including  the  present  time;  although,  as  she  says,  she  never  got  an
independent  existence  until  she  "got  her  eyes  open."  She  remembers  her
cradle,  draws  a  picture  of  the  bars  in  its  sides,  and  remembers  what  she,  as
distinct  from  Miss  Beauchamp,  thought  at  the  time  when  she  was  learning
to  walk.  Then  B.  I.  was  frightened  and  wanted  to  go  back,  but  Sally  was

234A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  347

not  at  all  frightened  and  wanted  to  go  ahead.  She  describes  B.  I.  as  having
had  a  butterfly  mind  as  contrasted  with  her  own.  She,  as  a  small  child,
disliked  the  things  that  B.  I.  liked,  and  vice  versa.  She  describes  her  school
life,  her  own  feelings  when  B.  I.  did  things,  and  the  different  sensations  of
the  two  selves  when,  for  example,  B.  I.  was  punished  and  felt  badly,  and  she
herself  was  entirely  indifferent  and  without  remorse.  Thus  I  have  been  able
to  get  an  actual  autobiography  of  a  subliminal  consciousness,  in  which  are
described  the  contemporaneous  and  contrasted  mental  lives  of  two  conscious-
nesses, the  subliminal  and  the  dominant,  from  early  infancy  to  adult  life.  In
this  Sally  has  described  for  me  various  scenes  and  incidents  which  occurred
and  which  she  saw  during  her  early  life,  but  of  which  Miss  Beauchamp  is
entirely  ignorant.  These  usually  represent  scenes  which  occurred  while  B.  I.
was  absorbed  in  thought,  but  which  Sally  as  a  subliminal  noticed.  Taking
all  this  into  consideration — taking  the  present  relations  of  Sally's  thoughts
to  Miss  Beauchamp's  thought,  and  many  other  facts,  like  automatic  writing,
which  Sally  performs  with  ease,  and  uses  for  purposes  of  correspondence — I
think  we  are  safe  in  saying  that  Sally  is  the  subliminal  consciousness,  which
has  become  highly  developed  and  organised  and  obtained  finally  an  indepen-
dent existence,  and  led  an  individual  life  of  its  own.

After  Sally's  escape  from  her  mental  Bastille,  the  two  went  on  leading  their
independent  lives,  coming  and  going  for  a  year  or  two,  until  one  day,  June  7th,
1899,  an  event  occurred  which  had  an  influence  upon  the  whole  history  of  this
case.  To  understand  it,  it  is  necessary  to  go  back  six  years,  to  the  year  1893.
It  appeared  that  in  1893  Miss  Beauchamp  was  in  a  hospital  in  a  neighbouring
city,  call  it  Providence.  She  had  been  taken  with  the  fancy  that  she  would
like  to  be  a  nurse  (it  was  the  passion  of  her  life),  and  in  a  fit  of  idealism  she
entered  the  hospital.  One  night  she  was  sitting  in  her  room  with  a  friend,  a
Miss  L.,  when,  upon  looking  up,  she  was  startled  to  see  a  face  in  the  window.
It  was  the  face  of  an  old  friend  of  hers,  a  Mr.  "Jones,"  as  we  have  agreed  to
call  him,  whom  she  had  known  ever  since  she  was  a  small  girl,  and  who  had
been  a  sort  of  preceptor  to  her.  At  first  she  thought  it  was  a  hallucination,
but  she  presently  saw  that  it  was  a  real  person.  She  then  hastily  got  her
friend  out  of  the  room,  and  she  went  downstairs  and  out  of  the  side  door,
where  this  person  met  her.  It  appeared  that  this  person  was  in  Providence
on  his  way  to  New  York,  had  wandered  to  the  hospital,  and  seeing  the  ladder
had  climbed  it  for  a  joke,  and  looked  into  the  window.  Outside  the  hospital
door  an  exciting  conversation  occurred.  It  was  to  her  of  an  intensely  disturb-
ing nature,  and  gave  her  a  tremendous  shock.  Perhaps  I  should  say  here —
as  I  have  told  so  much  of  the  story — that  it  was  the  kind  of  thing  that  upon
the  ordinary  person  would  not  have  had  much  influence,  but  with  her  sensitive
and  idealistic  nature  she  exaggerated  it  and  gave  it  an  intensity  that  an  ordi-
nary person  would  not  have  given  to  it.  At  any  rate,  it  did  give  her  a  violent
shock.  The  surroundings,  too,  were  dramatic.  It  was  night,  and  pitch  dark,
but  a  storm  was  coming  up,  and  great  peals  of  thunder  and  flashes  of  lightning
heightened  the  emotional  effect.  It  was  only  by  these  flashes  that  she  saw
her  companion.  From  that  time  she  was  changed.  She  went  out  and  \v.
the  fields  at  night  by  the  hour ;  she  became  nervous,  excitable,  and  neuras-
thenic, all  her  peculiarities  became  very  much  exaggerated  and  her  character
;<-d;  she  became  unstable,  developed  aboulia,  and,  in  other  words,
changed  into  B.  I.  So  that  B.  I.— or,  more  correctly,  Miss  Beauchamp  T

nto  B.  I. — dates  from  the  time  of  that  scene  outside  the  hospital  that

348  APPENDICES  [234  A

night.     Sally,  too,  who  knows  the  inmost  soul  of  Miss  Beauchamp,  says  she
changed  after  that  night.

So  it  follows  that  the  Miss  Beauchamp  who  has  been  the  object  of  this  study,
has  been  educated  in  college,  and  been  the  solicitude  of  many  friends,  is  not,
properly  speaking,  the  original  Miss  B.,  but  a  modified  personality  rightfully
designated  as  B.  I.

On  the  afternoon  of  June  7th,  1899,  six  years  later,  Miss  Beauchamp  was
in  my  office.  She  was  not  in  any  way  noticeably  different  from  her  usual  con-
dition. After  leaving  the  office  she  went  to  the  public  library,  as  was  her
custom.  In  the  library  she  met  a  messenger,  who  quite  unexpectedly  brought
her  a  letter,  and  this  letter  was  from  the  person  whom  we  have  agreed  to  call
Jones.  The  letter  was  couched  in  almost  the  same  language  as  was  his  con-
versation at  the  time  of  the  hospital  incident  in  1893.  It  threw  her  into  a  very
highly-excited  state,  and  she  actually  saw  a  vision  : — the  scene  outside  the
hospital  with  herself  and  Jones  as  the  actors — and  actually  saw  herself  and  him,
and  saw  the  flashes  of  lightning  and  heard  the  thunder,  and  through  it  all  his
voice.  Under  the  influence  of  this  excitement  she  went  to  the  reading-room,
and  there  had  an  illusion.  In  the  evening  newspaper  she  saw  my  name
printed  in  large  letters  in  the  headlines,  in  place  of  that  which  was  really
printed,  the  name  of  a  relative  of  mine  who  had  died  that  morning.  Still
further  upset  by  this,  she  made  her  way  home.  It  was  not  until  many  months
after  this  that  I  learned  of  this  scene,  or  of  the  hospital  episode  in  1893,  so
that  it  was  long  before  I  found  the  key  to  the  sequel.  (As  will  appear,  if  I  had
known  of  it  all,  I  should  have  been  saved  many  hours  and  much  labour  in  the
attempt  to  understand  the  later  psychical  developments.)  All  I  knew  then
was  this.  After  returning  from  the  library,  Miss  Beauchamp  was  in  such  a
nervous  state  that  I  was  soon  sent  for.  On  arrival  I  found  her  in  a  very
nervous,  highly-excited  condition.  She  was  unable  to  sit  still ;  her  limbs  were
in  more  or  less  constant  motion.  Her  condition  was  one  that  I  had  frequently
seen  after  she  had  been  exposed  to  emotional  influences.  Presently  she
changed  completely.  She  became  quiet,  perfectly  natural,  talked  affably,  was
very  sociable,  and,  in  fact,  seemed  to  be  in  a  condition  in  which  I  had  never
seen  her  before — more  natural  in  many  ways  than  I  had  ever  seen  her,  quiet
and  calm,  and  apparently  in  a  perfectly  healthy  state  of  body  and  mind ;  but,
to  my  surprise,  I  found  that  she  did  not  know  me.  She  said  I  was  not  Dr.
Prince,  and  when  I  insisted  that  I  was,  she  laughed  and  took  it  just  as  if  I  was
talking  nonsense  to  her— if  I  insisted  that  I  was,  well,  I  could  have  it  so,  but
she  knew  I  wasn't.  She  said  that  I  was  perfectly  reckless  in  coming,  that  I
ought  not  to  have  come,  and  then  I  discovered  that  she  was  under  the  impres-
sion, in  fact  insisted,  that  I  had  come  in  through  the  window.  As  we  were  in
the  fourth  story,  it  was  plain  that  she  was  also  under  an  illusion  as  to  the  place
where  we  were.  The  contrast  of  these  illusions  with  her  normality  in  other
respects  was  striking.  The  scene  lasted  some  little  time.  Finally  I  showed
her  my  name  in  my  watch.  She  underwent  a  slight  mental  shock.  A  change
came  over  her.  She  passed  through  a  brief  period  of  confusion  and  then
became  herself  again,  but  without  any  recollection  of  what  had  occurred.  The
essential  points  I  would  emphasise  are  that — besides  appearing  perfectly
normal — she  insisted  that  I  was  Jones,  imagined  we  were  somewhere  else,
that  I  had  come  in  through  the  window,  that  I  ran  great  risks  in  coming
because  of  the  publicity,  that  I  ought  not  to  have  done  it,  and  that  it  was  a
foolish  thing  to  have  done.  Being  ignorant  of  the  preceding  events  just

234A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  349

narrated,  it  was  not  clear  at  first  whether  this  was  simply  Miss  B.  under  an
illusion,  or  whether  it  was  a  new  personality  similarly  affected.

To  cut  a  long  story  short  (for  it  took  a  long  time  to  unravel  the  mystery),  it
turned  out  to  be  a  new  personality,  who  had  at  this  moment  waked  up,  and
had  gone  back  six  years  in  her  life,  and  now  imagined  it  was  the  same  night
and  she  was  in  the  same  room  in  the  hospital  where  she  had  seen  that  face  in
the  window  in  1893.  The  impetus  to  her  awakening  had  evidently  been  given
by  the  shock  of  the  letter  and  the  vision  in  the  library  a  few  hours  before ;
awakening,  she  went  on  with  her  life  where  she  had  left  off,  with  the  last  vestige
of  memory,  which  was  seeing  Jones  at  the  window.  Under  the  influence  of
this  suggestion  (she  and  B.  I.  are  very  suggestible)  she  mistook  me  for  Jones,
and,  having  seen  him,  as  she  thought,  a  moment  before  (really  six  years
previously)  at  the  window,  inferred  I  had  entered  by  that  means.  The  impro-
priety and  unwisdom  of  it  all  was  a  natural  thought.  This  new  personality
became  known  in  these  studies  as  B.  IV.

The  next  time  I  saw  B.  IV.  she  was  free  from  all  illusion,  but  I  was  struck
by  her  formal  and  distant  attitude.  It  soon  transpired  that  she  did  not  know
me  or  the  consulting-room,  where  B.  I.  had  been  time  and  again.  In  fact,  she
knew  absolutely  nothing  of  the  events  of  the  past  six  years,  knew  nothing  of
B.  I.'s  life  in  college,  knew  nothing  of  the  friends  whom  B.  I.  had  made  during
these  years,  knew  nothing  of  me,  knew  nothing  of  any  of  these  events  what-
soever, nor  later,  after  she  was  domiciled  as  one  of  the  Beauchamp  family,
did  she  know  anything  about  the  present  times  when  B.  I.  or  Sally  was  present.
From  this  it  follows  that  she  knew,  and  continued  to  know,  nothing  of  either
B.  I.  or  Sally,  or  that  there  ever  were  such  personalities.

It  took  her  a  long  time  to  accommodate  herself  to  the  new  order  of  things
and  to  take  up  the  thread  of  events.  Like  Rip  Van  Winkle,  she  did  not  know
that  the  world  had  moved  since  she  went  to  sleep.  Sally,  who  was  invaluable
as  an  informer,  used  to  report  that  she  seemed  to  live  in  the  past,  and  used  to
speak  to  people  as  if  it  was  still  1893.  So  the  family  now  was  increased  by
one,  and  there  were  three  who  kept  changing  with  one  another.

B.  IV.  is  a  very  different  character  from  either  Sally  or  Miss  Beauchamp.
A  study  of  the  different  habits  of  thought,  tastes,  and  emotions  of  these  three
people,  has  thrown,  I  believe,  much  light  upon  the  psychology  of  character,  but
in  this  report  I  must  limit  myself  to  a  mere  outline  of  events.  There  were,  of
course,  gaps  in  the  memory  of  B.  IV.  (as  with  B.  I.)  corresponding  to  the  time
of  the  existence  of  the  other  two  personalities.  But  this  B.  IV.  was  never
willing  to  admit.  Unlike  the  others,  she  is  irritable  and  quick-tempered,  and  re-
sented as  an  impertinence — especially  as  she  regarded  most  of  us  as  strangers —
any  inquiry  into  her  private  thoughts  and  affairs,  and  above  all  any  interference
with  her  habits  of  life  and  private  conduct.  Though  anxious  to  know,  she  was
11  ing  to  ask  about  what  had  occurred  in  the  gaps  when  the  others  were  in
the  flesh,  and  so  was  in  the  habit  of  inferring  and  guessing,  at  which  she  was
very  skilful.  She  was,  as  stated,  even  unwilling  for  a  long  time  to  admit  that
were  gaps,  but  it  was  easy  to  convict  her  here  by  a  few  questions.  After
fibbing  and  inferring  and  guessing,  she  would  break  down  and  confess  she  did
not  know,  which  was  the  fact.

Now,  Sally,  although  her  mental  life  is  also  continuous  during  that  of
B.  IV.  (as  with  B.  I.),  and  although  she  knows  everything  B.  IV.  does  at  the  time
she  does  it,  hears  what  she  says,  reads  what  she  writes,  and  sees  what  she
does,  nevertheless  Sally  does  not  know  B.  IV's  thoughts.  Herein  is  a  very

350  APPENDICES  [234  A

interesting  psychological  distinction  between  Sally's  relation  to  B.  I.  and  to
B.  IV.  She  knows  B.  I.'s  inmost  soul,  she  can  only  infer  B.  IV. 's  thoughts
from  what><:she  says  and  does.  But  Sally  studied  her  closely,  and  soon  dis-
covered for  herself  that  B.  IV.  knew  nothing  of  the  past  six  years,  but  was
always  secretly  trying  to  obtain  information,  and  guessing.  Sally,  in  her
astonishment,  used  to  say,  "  Why,  she  doesn't  know  anything,  she  is  always
fishing  and  guessing."  For  this  reason,  Sally,  until  she  learned  to  know
B.  IV.  better,  had  a  great  contempt  for  her,  and  dubbed  her  the  "  Idiot,"  and
whenever  after  this,  she  spoke  of  her,  it  was  as  the  "  Idiot."  From  this  time
on,  Sally  transferred  her  hatred  from  B.  I.  to  the  "  Idiot."  She  came  to  regard
B.  I.  as  rather  a  poor  sort  of  creature,  and  hardly  worthy  of  her  consideration
anyway,  and  let  her  alone;  but  B.  IV.  became  the  object  of  her  attacks.  But
B.  IV.  is  more  than  a  match  for  Sally,  who  is  really  afraid  of  her.  They
quarrel  like  cats  and  dogs.  One  of  the  most  curious  and  puzzling  things  was
the  cause  of  Sally's  hatred  of  B.  I.  It  was  unmitigated  jealousy.  She  was
jealous  of  the  attentions  B.  I.  received,  jealous  of  the  fact  that  people  liked
B.  I.  and  wanted  to  keep  her  in  existence  instead  of  herself,  and  therefore  —
difficult  as  it  is  to  conceive  of  a  person  jealous  of  herself — Sally  was  immensely
jealous  of  herself.

I  have  said  that  B.  IV.'s  memory  ceases  at  Providence  with  seeing  the  face
in  the  window.  She  can  tell  you  nothing  after  that,  and  knows  nothing  of  the
scene  outside  the  door.  Both  B.  I.  and  Sally  recall  and  describe  similarly  that
scene,  but  the  last  thing  B.  IV.  remembers  is  the  face  at  the  window  a  few
minutes  before.  1  As  one  method  of  corroboration  of  these  events,  I  produced
in  B.  IV.  a  crystal  vision.2  I  gave  her  a  glass  globe  to  look  at,  and  told  her  to
think  of  Providence.  As  she  looked  into  the  glass  she  was  horrified  to  see
there  the  scene  that  took  place  outside  the  hospital  door.  She  declared  with
much  excitement  that  it  was  not  true,  that  it  never  had  occurred,  and  this  she
repeated  again  and  again,  and  remonstrated  against  my  believing  it.  Like
B.  I.  in  the  library,  she  saw  herself  by  flashes  of  lightning  standing  by  the
door  with  Jones.  She  saw  his  excited  manner,  and  heard  his  voice  between
the  peals  of  thunder.  She  saw  it  all  as  a  vision,  just  as  it  occurred.  She  was
startled  by  what  she  saw,  and  experienced  over  again  all  the  emotion  of  the
original  scene.  .  .  .

Now  the  most  interesting  and  most  important  question  is,  what  is  the
relationship  between  all  the  personalities  ?  What  relation  do  they  bear  to  the
normal  personality,  and,  for  that  matter,  which  is  the  normal  Miss  Beauchamp,
or  is  any  one  of  them  the  real  and  normal  individual  ?  .  .  .  Sally  has  been
sufficiently  emphasised.  .  .  .  But  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.,  who  are  they?

One  thing  must  be  insisted  upon — namely,  however  normal  each  may
appear  superficially,  neither  is  quite  normal.  In  each  are  missing  some  of  the
attributes  of  the  original  Miss  Beauchamp,  but  in  B.  I.  the  departure  from  the
normal  is  the  least.  Her  neurasthenic  condition,  her  aboulia,  her  extreme
suggestibility,  by  which  negative  hallucination  can  be  .produced  at  will,  her
exaggerated  sensitiveness  to  emotional  influences,  like  music  and  religion,
which  produce  certain  psychical  phenomena,  the  dominion  which  ideas  acquire

1  The  lack  of  this  knowledge  was  afterwards  the  cause  of  much  trouble  to  B.  IV.,
which  was  strong  evidence  of  her  ignorance.

2  A  study  of  Visions  based  on  this  case  may  be  found  in  Brain,  1898.     See  also
Proceedings  y  S.P.R,.  vol.  xiv.  pp.  366  ft  seq.

234A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  351

in  her  mind,  the  exaggeration  of  certain  traits  always  possessed  by  her,  her
tendency  to  disintegration,  by  which  she  at  times  loses  temporarily  certain
acquirements,  like  the  French  language — these  and  other  peculiarities  are
evidence  that  a  certain  amount  of  disintegration  took  place  in  1893  by  which
the  original  personality  became  fractured  and  modified.  Nevertheless,  it  would
be  an  exaggeration  to  affirm  that  she  is  a  wholly  new  and  distinct  personality,  or
that  she  is  a  vigilambulist.  It  is  more  correct  to  say  that  certain  components
of  her  personality  have  become  disintegrated  from  the  rest,  certain  local  areas
of  her  brain,  as  I  have  elsewhere  put  it,1  have  gone  to  sleep.  The  original  self
has  become  modified  into  B.  I.

B.  IV.,  notwithstanding  her  greater  stability,  is  a  still  greater  departure
from  the  original  self.  Her  character  is  totally  different;  her  general  attitude
towards  her  environment  has  changed,  for  there  is  missing  the  taste  for,  that
is,  the  normal  reactions  to  music,  literature,  and  religion.  She  has  also  lost
her  knowledge  of  music.  She  has  no  emotionability,  excepting  bad  temper;
in  short,  she  has  retained  some  characteristics  and  lost  others  of  the  original
self.

Now  any  theory  we  adopt  must  explain  all  this,  as  well  as  the  particular
forms  of  amnesia  and  continuities  of  memory.  The  explanation  which  I  believe
to  be  the  correct  one  is  this:  neither  B.  I.  nor  B.  IV.  is  strictly  the  original
self,  nor  are  they  somnambulistic  personalities,  but  modifications  of  the  original
self.  The  original  Miss  B.  became  disintegrated  and  as  a  complete  psychical
composition  departed  this  life  in  1893.  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  are  each  different
disintegrated  parts  of  the  complete  Miss  Beauchamp.  In  the  [first]  disintegra-
tion of  the  primary  consciousness  a  certain  portion — B.  IV. — split  itself  off  and
became  dormant.  The  remainder  persisted  as  a  modified  personality — B.  I.
Sufficient  remained  to  retain  the  memories  of  the  past,  which  from  this  time
became  organised  with  all  future  experiences  and  made  a  continuous  memory
and  personality.

The  split-off  dormant  portion  was  awakened  six  years  later  as  the  result  of
an  intense  excitation  of  its  constituent  memories  by  the  shock  in  the  library,
and  in  the  awakening  wrenched  away  from  B.  I.  a  portion  of  her  mental  asso-
ciations, which  thus  became  common  to  both.  As  in  1893,  a  certain  number
of  groups  of  psychical  associations  that  belonged  to  B.  I.  now  remained  split
off  and  dormant.  Those  that  remained  awake  became  organised  into  another
personality  as  B.  IV.  .  .  .

Thus  the  dominant  part  of  B.  IV.'s  consciousness,  being  awake  up  to  1893,
remembers  her  whole  life  until  that  date;  but  being  asleep  from  1893  to  1899,
she  has  no  knowledge  of  the  events  of  this  period.  Waking  up  again  suddenly
in  1899,  she  goes  back  to  the  day  when  she  went  to  sleep.  .  .  .

In    1897   B.    III.,   the  subliminal   consciousness,   became  developed   and

acquired  an  independent  existence,  and  became  known  as  Sally  ;  so  that  Sally

represents  the  subliminal  consciousness,  and  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  simply  certain  disin-

•d  elements  in  the  primary  supernatant  consciousness.     The  result  is  that

I.  nor  B.   IV.  is  the  whole  original  Miss  Beauchamp,  but— if  my

s  have  led  me  to  the  right  interpretation— the  original  self  is  a  combina-

:  the  two.     If  this  be  true,  it  should  be  possible  to  combine  them  and

obtain  the  original  self.  .  .  .

1  See  "  A  Contribution  to  the  Study  of  Hysteria  and  Hypnosis,  Ac.,"  in  the  Procetd-
ings  oj 'the Society  for  Psychical  Ketearch^  vol.  xiv.  p.  95.

352  APPENDICES  [236  A

There  remains  B.  II. ;  who  is  B.  II.  ?  Now  it  is  possible  to  hypnotise  B.  I.
and  also  B.  IV.  [and]  it  transpired  that  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  hypnotised  became
the  same  person,  or  B.  II.  ...  B.  II.  knows  the  thoughts  of  B.  I.  and  equally
knows  the  thoughts  of  B.  IV.,  but  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  know  nothing  of  B.  II.

Now,  if  the  original  complete  Miss  Beauchamp  is  a  total  combination
of  the  whole  of  B.  I.  and  of  B.  IV.,  then  if  we  could  put  I.  and  II.  together,
we  ought  to  get  Miss  Beauchamp.  This  I  was  able  to  do  by  suggestion
given  to  the  hypnotic  self,  B.  II.,  and  to  obtain  the  original  self  for  a  number
of  hours  at  a  time.  I  suggested  to  B.  II.  that  when  awake  as  B.  I.  she  would
know  all  about  B.  IV.,  and  as  B.  IV.  would  know  all  about  B.  I.  and  feel  and
think  as  B.  I.  did.  I  then  waked  her  up  successively  as  B.  I.  and  as  B.  IV.
In  each  case  she  knew  all  about  the  times  to  which  I  had  special  reference
when  I  gave  the  suggestions.  As  B.  I.  she  told  me  what  she  had  been  doing
as  B.  IV.,  and  as  B.  IV.  what  she  had  been  doing  as  B.  I.  ...  So  that  in  her
sensations,  and  acquirements,  and  memory,  she,  when  thus  put  together,  to  all
appearances  was  the  original  Miss  Beauchamp.

This  new  personality  is  plainly  a  composite  of  B.  I.  and  B.  IV.  ;  not  only  in
memory,  but  in  character,  tastes,  and  general  make-up.  Sally  calls  her  "  that
new  thing,-"  and  has  very  little,  if  any,  control  over  her.  She  herself  does  not
know  which  she  is — I.  or  IV. — but  says  she  is  both.  When  she  is  present,
Sally  tends  to  sink  out  of  sight  and  go  back — as  Sally  puts  it — "to  where  I
came  from."

This  final  synthesis — the  construction  of  what  appears  to  be  the  original
self — seems  to  me  akin  to  a  proof  of  the  correctness  of  the  diagnosis.

236  A.  The  case  of  "  Mollie  Fancher  "  was  recorded  in  a  book  by
Judge  Abram  H.  Dailey,  entitled  "  Mollie  Fancher :  the  Brooklyn
Enigma.  An  Authentic  Statement  of  Facts  in  the  Life  of  Mary  J.
Fancher,  the  Psychological  Marvel  of  the  Nineteenth  Century  "  (Brooklyn,
N.  Y.).  This  book  consists  of  a  rather  disconnected  narrative  by  Judge
Dailey,  abstracts  of  a  diary  kept  by  Miss  Fancher's  aunt,  a  series  of
signed  statements  made  by  friends,  and  a  number  of  reprints  of  articles
which  had  originally  appeared  in  the  daily  papers.  I  quote  a  review  of  it
by  Dr.  William  Romaine  Newbold,  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  which
appeared  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiv.  pp.  396-98.  Although  my
main  discussion  of  supernormal  phenomena  is  deferred  to  later  chapters,
it  will  be  convenient  to  include  here  Dr.  Newbold's  criticism  of  the
evidence  for  such  phenomena  in  Miss  Fancher's  case.

Miss  Fancher  was  born  August  i6th,  1848.  As  a  child  her  health  was  good,
but  in  March  of  1864  it  began  to  fail.  She  had  "  nervous  indigestion,"  inability
to  retain  food,  "fainting  spells,"  "weakness  in  the  chest,"  and  she  "wasted
away."  May  loth,  1864,  she  was  thrown  from  her  horse  and  severely  injured.
In  the  course  of  the  following  summer  the  lower  part  of  her  body  suddenly
became  paralysed.  She  seemed  to  recover  from  the  effects  of  this  accident
during  the  autumn,  but  on  June  8th,  1865,  as  she  was  stepping  from  a  street
car,  the  car  started  too  soon,  she  was  thrown  to  the  ground,  her  skirt  caught
upon  a  projecting  hook,  and  she  was  dragged  some  yards,  again  receiving
serious  injuries.  This  was  followed  by  weakness,  transient  paralyses,  pain,
cough,  and  haemorrhages  from  the  lungs.  In  February  1866  convulsions

236A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  353

appeared.  Soon  afterwards  she  lost,  in  rapid  succession,  sight,  speech,  and
hearing.  From  that  date  to  1894,  when  the  book  was  written,  her  history  \vas
that  of  a  hysteric  of  the  worst  type — anaesthesias,  paralyses,  contractures,  and
convulsions  involving  now  this,  now  that  organ  of  sense  or  group  of  muscles,
and  succeeding  one  another  in  bewildering  variety.  Her  sight,  however,  was
never  restored,  although  in  recent  years  she  seems  to  be  recovering  some  por-
tion of  it.  Throughout  this  period  normal  sleep  seemed  to  be  replaced  by
"  trance,"  in  which  the  whole  body  became  rigid.

In  1875,  after  a  trance  lasting  a  month,  it  was  found  that  her  memory  of  the
nine  years  immediately  preceding  had  been  totally  obliterated,  the  contractures
which  had  marked  those  years  had  disappeared,  and  all  the  skill  in  embroidery,
&c.,  which  she  had  acquired  during  them  was  lost.

From  1875  to  the  date  of  the  book  Miss  Fancher's  memories  were  approxi-
mately continuous,  the  only  exceptions  being  found  in  the  lives  of  her  secondary
selves.  She  also  remembers  the  events  of  her  early  life  up  to  the  beginning  of
the  nine-year  period.  About  1878  a  new  memory-synthesis  appeared,  but  soon
vanished,  and  was  not  again  observed  until  1887.  It  was  then  named  by  her
friends  "  Idol."  Others  of  later  date  were  named  "  Rosebud,"  "  Pearl,"  and
"  Ruby."  The  "  normal "  Miss  Fancher  was  named  "  Sunbeam,"  to  distinguish
her  from  these.  Each  of  these  memory-systems  or  personalities  calls  itself
Mollie  Fancher,  possesses  a  portion  of  Miss  Fancher's  memories,  and  remem-
bers its  own  previous  occurrences.  No  one  has  any  knowledge  of  any  other
save  in  so  far  as  informed  by  other  persons.  "  Rosebud  "  seems  to  be  identical
with  Mollie  Fancher  as  she  was  at  six  or  seven  years.  "  Idol "  and  "  Pearl "
are  young  girls  of  about  sixteen,  but  neither  recalls  the  first  accident,  while
"  Ruby,"  who  seems  to  be  about  the  same  age,  recalls  the  first,  but  not  the
second  accident.  "  Idol"  and  "  Pearl  "  are  quiet,  and  not  markedly  unlike  one
another,  while  "  Ruby  "  is  vivacious,  cheerful,  and  talkative.  None  of  them
possesses  "  Sunbeam's  "  acquired  skill,  and  all  are  extremely  unstable,  appearing
only  during  the  night,  and  lasting  but  a  few  minutes.

During  her  years  of  blindness  Miss  Fancher  has  convinced  her  friends  that
she  possessed  supernormal  powers  of  vision.  It  is  claimed  that  she  has  re-
peatedly read  sealed  letters,  described  events  at  a  distance,  and  found  lost
articles.  She  also  believes  that  she  sees  the  world  of  spirits,  but  is  extremely
reticent  upon  that  topic.

One  is  disappointed  to  find  that  Judge  Dailey  adduces  little  evidence  of
value  in  support  of  these  claims.  He  has,  indeed,  recorded  the  narratives  of
many  witnesses  whose  truthfulness  no  one  would  question,  but  in  not  one  of
these  narratives  are  the  facts  given  with  that  attention  to  details  and  that  care
to  avoid  misdescription  which  the  nature  of  the  case  demands.  Many  are  vague
in  the  extreme,  and  very  few  tell  us  how  much  time  elapsed  between  the  event
and  its  committal  to  writing.  To  glance  at  only  the  best  of  these  :  Professor
Parkhurst  submitted  to  Miss  Fancher  a  sealed  envelope  containing  a  slip  of
printed  paper,  the  contents  of  which  he  did  not  himself  know.  She  told  him  it
ined  the  words  "  court,"  "  jurisdiction,"  and  the  numerals  6,  2,  3,  4.  Those
he  wrote  in  his  notebook,  took  the  envelope  away  still  sealed,  read  Miss
Fancher's  statement  to  two  friends,  and  in  their  presence  opened  the  envelope.
her's  statements  were  found  to  be  correct.  But  we  are  not  told  how
large  the  type  was,  how  many  thicknesses  of  paper  covered  it,  how  Miss
i  r  handled  the  envelope,  how  long  she  had  it  in  her  possession,  or  whether
•he  had  it  at  any  time  when  Professor  Parkhurst  was  not  present.

VOL.    i.  Z

354  APPENDICES  [237  A

Dr.  Speir  states  that  Miss  Fancher  once  wrote  for  him  upon  a  slate  the  con-
tents of  a  letter  which  had  just  been  brought  to  her  by  the  postman,  and  was  as
yet  unopened.  We  are  not  given  copies  of  the  two,  nor  are  we  told  how  much
time  elapsed  between  the  event  and  the  record,  nor  who  wrote  the  letter,  nor
whether  Miss  Fancher  could  have  known  that  Dr.  Speir  would  be  present  when
the  postman  came.

Miss  Fancher  once  told  Judge  Dailey  that  she  had  seen  him  upon  a  given
evening  with  a  gentleman  whom  she  described.  After  some  difficulty  Judge
Dailey  recollected  that  upon  that  evening  he  had  been  with  a  friend  named
Sisson.  We  are  not  told  how  he  identified  the  evening.  Some  months  later
Judge  Dailey,  Mr.  Sisson,  and  another  person  called  upon  Miss  Fancher.  She
at  first  said  she  had  not  before  seen  either  of  the  two  gentlemen,  but  after  a
moment's  reflection  said  that  one,  pointing  to  Mr.  Sisson,  was  the  man  she  had
seen  with  the  Judge.  This  is  one  of  the  best  cases,  as  it  is  corroborated  by  Mr.
Sisson,  and  it  appears  that  his  account  was  written  only  six  months  or  so  after
the  event.  We  would  like  to  know,  however,  whether  any  further  questions
were  asked  Miss  Fancher  after  she  had  first  stated  that  she  did  not  recognise
Mr.  Sisson.

In  brief,  the  evidence  which  Judge  Dailey  has  collected  will  seem  satisfactory
only  to  those  who  are  already  satisfied  of  the  possibility  of  clairvoyance.  It  will
do  little  towards  establishing  that  possibility.  And  as  Miss  Fancher's  clair-
voyant powers  are  said  to  be  much  less  keen  now  than  they  were  some  years
ago,  it  is  not  probable  that  her  case  will  contribute  much  of  value  to  the  evidence
for  the  supernormal.  One  can  readily  appreciate  the  repugnance  which  Miss
Fancher  felt  to  submitting  herself  to  the  commission  of  experts  suggested  by
the  New  York  Medico-Legal  Society,  but  it  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  her
friends  should  have  allowed  the  value  of  her  case  to  be  lost  through  mere
negligence.

237  A.  The  following  account  is  taken  from  the  "  Report  of  Dr.  Ira
Barrows  on  the  Case  of  Miss  Anna  Winsor"  Extracts  from  this  Report
were  made  by  Dr.  C.  W.  Fillmore,  and  sent  to  the  American  Society  for
Psychical  Research.  Dr.  Barrows  and  Dr.  Fillmore  were  both  of  Provi-
dence, R.  I.,  and  are  now  deceased.  Professor  James  made  some  inquiry
into  the  case  in  1889,  and  stated  (Proceedings  of  the  American  S.P.R,,
Vol.  I.,  p.  552)  that  the  mother  and  brother  of  the  patient,  and  Dr.  Wilcox,
the  former  partner  of  Dr.  Barrows,  bore  corroborative  testimony.  I  re-
count the  case  as  far  as  possible  in  the  words  of  Dr.  Barrows,  with
some  abridgments  and  omissions,  and  a  few  explanatory  remarks.  The
parts  omitted  are  chiefly  accounts  of  the  patient's  spasms,  and  purely
medical  descriptions.

The  case  of  Anna  Winsor  represents  an  extreme  form  of  hystero-
epilepsy,  with  very  violent  and  frequent  convulsions,  and  intervals  of
insane  delusions.  Much  relief  was  given  by  hypnotism  (called  by  Dr.
Barrows  "magnetism,"  or  "  animal  magnetism  "),  but  no  cure  was  effected.
The  detailed  record  extends  over  two  and  a  half  years,  from  May  pth,
1860,  to  January  1863,  but  some  of  Dr.  Barrows'  comments  were  made
at  a  later  date.  Miss  Winsor  died  in  1873.

237A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  355

There  is  clear  evidence  of  a  secondary  personality,  and  there  seems  to
have  been  hypenesthesia  of  vision,  and  perhaps  also  telaesthesia,  and  even
heteraesthesia ;  but  in  the  absence  of  details  concerning  the  experiments
made  in  these  directions,  we  cannot  infer  with  any  certainty  that  super-
normal faculty  was  manifested.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  first
attempt  apparently  of  the  secondary  personality  to  communicate  re-
sulted in  a  writing  movement  of  the  toes.  But  the  most  remarkable
feature  in  the  case  was  that  later  on  the  right  arm  became,  as  it  were,  the
permanent  possession  of  the  secondary  personality.  The  personations
appear  to  have  been — chiefly,  at  least, — of  the  insane  type,  and  there  is
no  evidence  of  the  control  of  the  organism  by  any  external  intelligence.
The  beneficent  control  of  the  "right  arm  "  personality  is  doubtless  to  be
referred  to  the  subject's  own  subliminal  self.

Afay  pM,  1860. — Called  to  visit  Miss  Winsor,  aged  eighteen  years.  From
her  mother  and  sister  learned  the  following  regarding  her  history.

When  teething  had  been  subject  to  convulsions.  Had  grown  up  a  tolerably
healthy  girl.  Had  passed  through  the  primary  school ;  was  attending  a  higher
one  when  at  fifteen  she  was  attacked  with  rheumatic  fever.  She  suffered  par-
ticularly in  her  joints,  and  especially  the  vertebral  joints.  For  seven  months
she  was  unable  to  walk.  It  was  2$  years  before  she  was  able  to  return  to
school,  and  then  was  very  weak,  and  suffered  with  rheumatic  cardialgia.  She
continued  in  school  eight  months,  and  then,  May  6th,  1860,  left  school;  com-
plained of  chilliness  and  severe  headache.

May  Tth. — Unusually  quiet,  wandering  about  the  house  unconscious  of  what
she  did,  scarcely  tasting  food,  and  oppressed  with  drowsiness.  May  8th. —
Reclined  upon  lounge  all  day.

May  gth. — First  visit.  Found  her  stupid,  pulse  small,  frequent,  irregular.
Tongue  dry  ;  skin  hot  and  dry.  Treated  her  for  what  appeared  to  be  typhoid
fever.  At  the  end  of  about  seventeen  days  she  became  convalescent,  and  I
anticipated  a  speedy  recovery.  Now,  suddenly  and  without  apparent  cause,
about  June  ist,  a  relapse  of  fever.  Head  ached;  tongue  dried;  delirium
supervened ;  convulsions  followed ;  loss  of  consciousness.  The  whole  verte-
bral column  sensitive  to  slight  pressure.  Hard  pressure  upon  the  cervical  and
upper  dorsal  vertebrae  would  produce  spasm.  Tetanic  spasms  alternating  with
coma.

No  change  worthy  of  notice  until  June  I5th.     Apparently  unconscious  of

thing  around  her;  emaciated,  haggard,  and  seemingly  about  to  du
noticed  her  toes  moving  as  if  trying  to  form  letters  on  the  sheet.  Not  giving
any  particular  attention  to  this,  she  began,  with  her  forefinger,  to  form  letters
on  the  sheet  as  if  trying  to  spell  some  word.  It  was  suggested  that  paper  and
a  pencil  be  given  to  her.  She  began  to  write  names  of  persons  long  since
dead.  Then  followed  directions  about  her  sickness,  and  predictions  as  to  her
future,  saying:  "  It  (always  using  the  third  person  singular)  will  be  a  long  time
her  sense  of  smell ;  be  blind  many  months ;  doubtful  if  she  ever
walks  again.  Her  sickness  will  develop  many  phases  and  strange  phenomena."
Continues  to  be  very  sick.  Spasms  increase  in  frequency  and  severity.

About  June  26th  she  became  very  sensitive  to  magnetic  influence.  The
touch  of  many  persons  became  painful,  so  that  it  was  difficult  to  get  suitable

356  APPENDICES  [237  A

watchers.  A  rubber  comb,  the  contact  of  a  cat,  as  well  as  the  touch  of  sundry
persons,  were  not  only  painful,  but  caused  spasms.

August  Qth. — Tried  animal  magnetism.  Succeeded  in  putting  her  to  sleep;
slept  a  short  time,  but  more  quiet  through  the  day.  August  loth  (apparently),
tried  magnetism  again  ;  did  not  succeed.  On  August  26th  she  thinks  it  is  the
4th  of  July.  [This  suggests  the  waking  here  of  some  fragment  of  her  per-
sonality that  had  been  dormant  since  July  4th.]

September  8M. — She  has  not  been  able  to  utter  a  word  for  ten  weeks.  All
communications  are  made  by  writing.

September  i^th. — Complains  that  the  room  is  dark;  cannot  see.  Tells
what  is  going  on  in  an  adjoining  room.  Tells  the  time  by  a  clock  in  another
room.  I4th  and  I5th. — "  Balls  "  of  pain  in  back  and  head.  i6th,  A.M. — Some
delirium;  in  the  evening  a  raving  maniac.  Tore  her  hair  out  by  handfuls;
fought  and  bit  all  who  came  near  her.  Rubbed  with  Tinct.  Bell.:  magnetism.
Succeeded  at  12.50  in  getting  her  quiet.  iyth  and  i8th. — Wild  with  delirium.
Tears  her  hair,  bed-clothes,  pillow-cases,  both  sheets,  night-dress  all  to  pieces.
Her  right  hand  prevents  her  left  hand,  by  seizing  and  holding  it,  from  tearing
out  her  hair,  but  tears  her  clothes  with  her  left  hand  and  teeth.

[This  appears  to  be  the  first  distinctly  noted  usurpation  of  the  right  arm  by
the  secondary  personality.]

September  z^th. — Writes  the  time  of  day;  motions  for  a  book;  holds  it
upside  down.  Right  hand  predicts  the  number  of  spasms  she  will  have  a  day  :
some  days  more,  some  less.  25th,  26th,  27th,  28th. — Talks  again,  but  in
whispers.  29th. — Complains  of  great  pain  in  right  arm,  more  and  more
intense,  when  suddenly  it  falls  down  by  her  side.  She  looks  at  it  in  amaze-
ment. Thinks  it  belongs  to  some  one  else ;  positive  it  is  not  hers.  Sees  her
right  arm  drawn  around  upon  her  spine.  Cut  it,  prick  it,  do  what  you  please
to  it,  she  takes  no  notice  of  it.  Complains  of  great  pain  in  the  neck  and  back,
which  she  now  calls  her  shoulder  and  arm ;  no  process  of  reasoning  can  con-
vince her  of  the  contrary.  [To  the  present  time  (1866,  when  the  Report  was
read  at  a  Medical  Society  in  Boston),  now  nearly  five  years,  the  hallucination
remains  firm.  She  believes  her  spine  is  her  right  arm,  and  that  her  right  arm
is  a  foreign  object  and  a  nuisance.  She  believes  it  to  be  an  arm  and  hand,  but
treats  it  as  if  it  had  intelligence  and  might  keep  away  from  her.  She  bites  it,
pounds  it,  pricks  it,  and  in  many  ways  seeks  to  drive  it  from  her.  She  calls  it
"  Stump  ;  old  Stump."  Sometimes  she  is  in  great  excitement  and  tears,  pound-
ing "  Old  Stump."  Says  "  Stump  "  has  got  this,  that,  or  the  other  that  belongs
to  her.]

The  history  of  September  is  her  daily  and  nightly  history  to  October  25th.

October  2$th. — After  a  spasm,  becomes  speechless.

October  26th. — One  spasm  lasting  one  hour;  still  speechless.  27th. — Sleeps
all  day,  but  occasionally  screams  as  from  pain.  Rouses  in  evening  and  per-
sonates different  people.  28th,  29th,  soth.— Same.  3ist. — Right  hand  writes,
"On  November  2ist  at  five  o'clock  precisely  she  will  swallow  water;  will
swallow  nothing  but  liquid  until  December  ist,  when  she  will  swallow  a  piece
of  cracker  the  size  of  a  wafer."

November  ist  to  iQth. — More  or  less  spasms  daily.  Reason  gradually  re-
turns. Much  depressed  in  spirits,  nth. — Strings  beads  ;  makes  figured  bead
basket  and  lamp  mats;  works  only  with  the  left  hand;  every  bead  in  its  exact
place ;  works  with  her  eyes  closed,  and  the  same  in  the  evening  without  light
as  in  the  daytime.  November  I2th. — Fell  from  bed  to  lounge  in  a  spasm.

237A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  357

From  eleven  to  twelve  at  night  sits  up  apparently  asleep  and  writes  with  her
paper  against  the  wall ;  after  she  awakes  seems  to  be  unconscious  of  what  she
has  written.  I3th. — Spasms  as  usual.  In  the  evening,  while  sleeping,  person-
ates "Aunt  Chloe";  writes  for  flour,  mixes  and  makes  some  biscuits;  pares  an
apple  and  makes  a  pie ;  uses  both  hands  when  asleep,  when  awake  has  no  power
to  move  the  right,  November  I4th,  i5th,  i6th,  i7th,  i8th. — Diary  about  the
same.  2oth  and  2ist. — Delirious  and  spasms.  To-day,  November  21  st,  is  the
day  she  is  to  swallow,  at  five  o'clock  P.M.,  water.  A  quarter  before  five  I
secretly  took  the  striking  weight  from  the  clock  standing  in  the  entry ;  took
two  tumblers  of  water  and  put  a  drop  of  medicine  into  one ;  at  three  minutes
before  five  offered  her  each  glass  successively ;  rejected  both.  At  five  o'clock
a  gurgling  sound  was  heard  in  her  throat.  She  motioned  for  the  water;
passed  the  tumbler  in  which  I  had  secretly  put  a  drop  of  medicine ;  rejected
it ;  passed  the  other ;  took  a  mouthful,  and  with  great  effort  swallowed  a  part
of  it,  some  of  it  running  out  of  her  mouth.  The  deglutition  was  performed
like  one  attempting  it  with  the  mouth  wide  open.

January  \st.  1861. — From  November  2oth  up  to  this  time,  raving  delirium;
pulls  her  hair  nearly  all  out  from  the  top  of  her  head.  If  she  can  get  a  pin,
plunges  it  into  whoever  comes  near  her.  Tears  her  clothes  sadly.  Swallows
the  bit  of  cracker  December  ist,  as  predicted.  The  right  hand  protects  her
against  the  left  as  much  as  possible.  She  now  becomes  more  rational ;  talks
again  ;  first  loud  words  uttered  since  November  6th.  Calls  for  a  book ;  reads
with  it  upside  down.  January  4th. — Becomes  blind.  From  this  time  to
February  ist,  constant  delirium  ;  frequent  spasms.

February  ist  to  nth. — No  particular  change.  Swallows  water  when  in
the  magnetic  sleep,  and  personates  sundry  persons ;  personates  a  Quaker ;
speaks  loud  and  rapidly;  gives  an  amusing  lecture.  When  the  magnetism
passes  off,  remembers  nothing  of  the  past;  can  hardly  speak  in  whispers,  and
is  much  prostrated.  February  nth. — Takes  and  swallows  a  little  nourishment
— a  few  tea-spoonfuls  of  whips,  blanc-mange,  &c.  More  or  less  spasms  nearly
every  day.  Under  the  influence  of  magnetism  writes  poetry;  personates
different  persons,  mostly  those  who  have  long  since  passed  away.  Whenever
in  the  magnetic  state,  whatever  she  does  or  says  is  not  remembered  when  she
comes  out  of  it.  Commences  a  series  of  drawings  with  her  right  (paralysed)
hand,  "  Old  Stump."  Also  writes  poetry  with  it.  Whatever  "  Stump  "  writes
or  draws,  or  does,  she  appears  to  take  no  interest  in ;  says  it  is  none  of  hers,
and  that  she  wants  nothing  to  do  with  "  Stump  "  or  «« Stump's."  I  have  sat  by
her  bed  and  engaged  her  in  conversation,  and  drawn  her  attention  in  various
while  the  writing  and  drawing  has  been  uninterrupted.  She  had  never
exhibited  any  taste  for  or  taken  any  lessons  in  drawing.

March. — During  this  month  she  complains  much  of  pain  in  her  head,  in
back  of  head  chiefly,  in  nape  and  dorsal  vertebrae,  which  she  now  calls  her
right  arm.  I  will  here  remark  further  about  these  drawings.  She  became
blind,  4th  January  ;  is  still  blind  ;  sees  as  well  with  eyes  closed  as  open ;  keeps
them  closed  much  of  the  time.  Reads  and  draws  with  them  closed.  Draws
in  the  dark  as  well  as  in  the  light ;  is  clairvoyant.  She  writes  several  pieces
of  poetry,  chiefly  with  the  right  hand,  and  as  often  in  twilight  and  evening
before  gas  is  lighted,  while  it  is  dark.  The  handwriting  differs  greatly  in
different  pieces.  The  spasms  do  not  differ,  eith  -n  or  frequency,  from

last  month.  The  only  remedy  that  has  appeared  to  afford  any  relief  is  animal
magnetism.  The  galvanic  current  has  been  tried  without  any  success.

358  APPENDICES  [237  A

April  qth.—  Becomes  deaf;  great  pain  in  head  ;  is  conscious  of  her  suffering
most  of  the  time.  Commences  bead  work;  makes  three  bead  baskets;  does
it  all  with  her  left  hand ;  threads  her  needle,  strings  her  beads,  makes  her
baskets  ;  works  alike  by  daylight,  gaslight,  twilight,  and  in  the  dark.  I  have
sat  by  her  in  the  evening  and  witnessed  her  work.  I  lowered  the  gas  to  almost
total  darkness,  and  asked  her  to  thread  her  needle  and  proceed  with  her  work,
which  she  did  at  once,  not  seeming  to  notice  that  the  room  was  darkened.
She  selected  a  small  needle  from  her  needlebook,  stuck  it  perpendicularly  into
a  cushion  lying  by  her,  bit  off  the  end  of  the  thread,  rolled  it  between  her
thumb  and  finger  and  passed  it  through  the  needle's  eye  as  easily  and  readily
as  I  would  have  passed  it  through  a  finger  ring,  and  proceeded  at  once  to
string  her  beads  ;  eyes  closed.

May  \$th. — Delirious,  imagining  herself  Queen  Anne.  .  .  .  May  ipth. —
Three  spasms  in  the  A.M.;  at  2  P.M.  a  fourth.  Her  head  is  drawn  downward
and  rests  upon  her  knees ;  but  suddenly  her  body  elevates  and  she  balances
upon  her  head  ;  remains  in  this  position  a  few  moments,  falls  over  upon  her
right  side ;  her  body  forms  an  arch  while  she  rests  upon  the  right  side  of  her
right  foot  and  upon  her  right  hand,  and  remains  in  this  position  half-an-hour.
The  spasm  passes  off ;  she  sinks  down  prostrate,  still  delirious  ;  seizes  a  pencil
and  paper  with  her  right  hand  and  writes,  "  Give  an  injection  of  Tinct.  of
Aconite  and  warm  water."  Gave  it ;  slept  after  it  several  hours.  2oth  to
23rd. — Daily  spasms,  but  not  so  severe.  24th. — Raving  delirium  ;  imagines  her-
self a  dog;  barks  and  growls.  26th. — Awakes  delirious.  At  5.30  A.M.  has  a
spasm  lasting  until  8  o'clock.  All  the  muscles  of  the  body  and  limbs  are  rigid,
except  those  of  right  arm.  With  this  hand,  but  partially  rigid,  she  takes  a
pencil  and  paper  and  writes,  "After  some  time  in  June  Anna  will  be  able  to
swallow  for  the  remainder  of  the  summer."  3ist. — Imagines  herself  a  dog;
barks,  growls,  howls ;  sets  dogs  in  the  street  to  barking.  Seems  pleased  and
imitates  them;  laps  water;  sometimes  draws  back  from  it;  growls  and
gnashes  her  teeth ;  froths  at  the  mouth ;  attempts  to  bite ;  acts  as  if  she  had
hydrophobia.

June  u/and  2nd. — Hydrophobia  and  dog  personation  continued.  Spasms
in  which  the  legs  being  drawn  under  her,  her  head  is  drawn  down  upon  her
knees,  somewhat  resembling  a  ball ;  she  rolls  over  and  over  from  left  to  right
and  from  right  to  left,  to  which  I  give  the  name  "  Rolling  spasms  "  or  Anaku-
lisma  (revolving),  nth. — Gave  Tinct.  Bell,  in  warm  water.  This  prescription
is  written  by  her  right  hand  while  she  is  delirious.  Her  finger  and  toe  nails
become  very  dark  purple.  These  spasms  with  delirium  continue  nearly  every
day  through  the  month.  Bell,  injections  appear  to  mitigate,  and  magnetism
enables  her  to  sleep  several  hours  during  the  nights.

August. — Head  drawn  over  upon  right  shoulder  ;  left  hand  closed  so  that  it
cannot  be  forced  open.  Cannot  use  either  hand  while  awake,  although  she  uses
her  right  hand  readily  while  asleep.

Oao6er.-Sp3.sms  vary;  body  jerks  from  side  to  side;  motion  like  the
pendulum  of  a  clock,  but  rapid ;  continues  several  minutes,  sometimes  making
1000  vibrations,  after  which  she  faints.  Draws  pictures  ;  sews ;  does  bead
work,  chiefly  with  her  right  hand,  her  left  being  still  closed,  although  she  can
use  her  thumb,  and  helps  with  that.  This  seems  to  be  done  in  a  clairvoyant
state,  as  light  and  darkness  are  the  same  to  her,  and  the  work  goes  on  in  both
alike.

November.— Ruptured   a  blood-vessel   in  the  lungs ;  hemorrhage ;  speaks

237A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  359

only  in  whispers.  December. — Hemorrhage  continues  ;  still  clairvoyant ;
draws ;  sews  ;  bead  work  with  left  hand  only  when  awake,  with  both  when
asleep.

January  1862. — Nine  weeks  since  she  has  spoken  aloud,  twenty-two  since
she  has  swallowed.  January  2;th.— Sight  restored.  Obliged  to  have  the
room  darkened  because  the  light  is  painful.  Eighteen  months'  erratic  vision.
During  these  months  she  had  read  with  her  eyes  closed  and  her  book  upside
down.  Thinks  she  sees  through  her  forehead  and  top  of  her  head.  Seldom
sleeps  without  magnetism.

June  -jth.— Recovered  her  voice  ;  can  speak  loud.  .  .  .

September  loth.— Great  pain  in  head ;  delirious  and  beats  her  head  against
the  wall.  September  2oth.— Sitting  on  the  floor  ;  raving;  imagines  herself  a
dog  ;  growls,  barks,  and  laps  water.  Has  not  slept ;  eyes  crossed.  Put  her
on  bed  ;  tears  clothing.  Magnetised  her  ;  slept  several  hours.

[  When  her  delirium  was  at  its  height,  as  well  as  at  all  other  times,  her
right  hand  is  rational,  asking  and  answering  questions  in  writing;  giving
directions ;  trying  to  prevent  her  tearing  her  clothes ;  when  she  pulls  out  her
hair  seizes  and  holds  her  left  hand.  When  she  is  asleep,  carries  on  conversa-
tion the  same  ;  writes  poetry  ;  never  sleeps  ;  acts  the  part  of  a  nurse  as  far  as
it  can  ;  pulls  the  bed-clothes  over  the  patient,  if  it  can  reach  them,  when  un-
covered ;  raps  on  the  headboard  to  awaken  her  mother  (who  always  sleeps  in
the  room)  if  anything  occurs,  as  spasms,  &c.]

January  1863. — At  night  and  during  her  sleep  "Stump"  writes  letters,
some  of  them  very  amusing ;  writes  poetry ;  some  pictures  original.  Writes
"  Hasty  Pudding,"  by  Barlow,  in  several  cantos,  which  she  had  never  read ;  all
correctly  written,  but  queerly  arranged,  as,  e.g.,  one  line  belonging  in  one  canto,
would  be  transposed  with  a  line  in  another  canto.  She  has  no  knowledge  of
Latin  or  French,  yet  "  Stump  "  produces  the  following  rhyme  of  Latin  and
English.1

"  Stump  "  writes  both  asleep  and  awake,  and  the  writing  goes  on  while  she
is  occupied  with  her  left  hand  in  other  matters.  Ask  her  what  she  is  writing,
she  replies,  "/  am  not  writing;  that  is  *  Stump'  writing.  I  don't  know  what
he  is  writing.  I  don't  trouble  myself  with  4  Stump's '  doings."  Reads  with  her
book  upside  down  and  sometimes  when  covered  with  the  sheet.  "  Stump  "
produces  two  bills  of  fare  in  French.  .  .  .  Cannot  sleep  without  being  magnet-
ised fifteen  or  twenty  minutes  at  night,  and  then  usually  sleeps  twelve  to
fourteen  hours.

During  the  last  two  and  a  half  years  I  have  been  obliged  to  be  absent  three
or  four  times  for  a  week  or  more,  and  although  she  has  been  attended  and
magnetised  by  either  my  friend  Dr.  C,  or  Dr.  S.— who  both  have  the  power
of  magnetising — she  has  lost  sleep  and  become  raving  crazy,  tearing  her  hair,
pounding  her  head ;  giving  herself  the  name  "  Queen  Victoria,"  "  Queen  Anne,"
&c.,  and  calling  her  mother  "  Queen  of  Sheba,"  "  Bloody  Mary,"  &c. ;
myself  "  Dr.  Kane,"  the  "Old  Giant,"  "  God  Almighty,"  and  so  on.  ...  After
going  into  the  magnetic  sleep  at  night  she  is  very  patient,  pleasant,  modest.
Is  pleased  to  see  friends ;  converses  pleasantly  and  rationally  upon  all  subjects
but  one ;  upon  this  she  is  monomaniac.  Her  right  hand  and  arm  is  not  hers.
Attempt  to  reason  with  her  and  she  holds  up  her  left  arm  and  says,  •'  This  is

1  These  were  six  doggerel  verses  of  four  lines  each,  each  line  beginning  in  Latin  and
ending  in  English,  given  in  full  in  Dr.  Barrows'  report,  but  omitted  here.

3<5o  APPENDICES  [238  A

my  left  arm.  I  see  and  feel  my  right  arm  drawn  behind  me.  You  say  this
'stump  '  is  my  right  arm.  Then  I  have  three  arms  and  hands."  In  this  arm
the  nerves  of  sensation  are  paralysed,  but  the  nerves  of  motion  preserved.  She
has  no  will  to  move  it.  She  has  no  knowledge  of  its  motion.  This  arm  appears
to  have  a  separate  intelligence.  IV hen  she  sleeps  it  writes  or  converses  by  signs.
It  never  sleeps  ;  watches  over  her  when  she  sleeps;  endeavours  to  prevent  her
from  injuring  herself  or  her  clothing  when  she  is  raving.  It  seems  to  possess
an  independent  life,  and,  to  some  extent,  foreknowledge.

238  A.  A  detailed  record  of  the  case  of  Mary  Lurancy  Vennum  was
originally  given  in  the  Religio-Philosophical  Journal  \o.  1879,  and  shortly
afterwards  published  in  pamphlet  form  under  the  title  "  The  Watseka
Wonder,"  by  E.  W.  Stevens.  The  first  part  of  the  account  which  I  shall
give  here  consists  of  an  abridgment  from  the  narrative  given  in  the
pamphlet  by  Dr.  Stevens  (second  edition,  Chicago,  Religio- Philo-
sophical Publishing  House,  1887),  with  some  further  statements  by  Mr.
Roff.  The  second  part  consists  of  some  additional  evidence  obtained  by
Dr.  Hodgson  in  personal  interviews  with  some  of  the  chief  witnesses,
which  was  published  in  the  Religio-Philosophical  Journal  for  December
20th,  1890.  Colonel  J.  C.  Bundy,  who  was  Editor  of  the  Rdigio-
Philosophical  Journal  when  the  record  was  first  published,  and  was
himself  well  known  as  a  skilful  and  scrupulously  honest  investigator  of
spiritistic  phenomena,  speaks  in  the  highest  terms  of  Dr.  Stevens  (who
died  in  1885),  and  adds:  "We  took  great  pains  before  and  during
publication  to  obtain  full  corroboration  of  the  astounding  facts  from  unim-
peachable and  competent  witnesses."

The  case  briefly  is  one  of  alleged  "possession  "  or  "spirit-control."
The  subject  of  the  account,  Mary  Lurancy  Vennum,  a  girl  nearly  fourteen
years  old,  living  at  Watseka,  Illinois,  became  apparently  controlled  by  the
spirit  of  Mary  Roff,  a  neighbour's  daughter  who  had  died  at  the  age  of
eighteen  years  and  nine  months,  when  Lurancy  Vennum  was  a  child  of
about  fifteen  months  old.  The  most  extraordinary  feature  in  the  case
was  that  the  "  control "  by  Mary  Roff  lasted  almost  continuously  for  a
period  of  nearly  four  months,  from  February  ist  till  May  2ist,  1878.  The
narrative  by  Dr.  Stevens  was  prepared  shortly  afterwards  with  the  assist-
ance of  the  chief  witnesses,  and  confirmed  by  the  parents  of  both  Mary
Roff  and  Lurancy  Vennum.  I  give  extracts  from  it,  with  some  slight
verbal  alterations,  and  abridgments  which  are  indicated  by  the  square
brackets.

[Mary  Lurancy  Vennum,  the  "  Watseka  Wonder,"  was  born  April
l6th,  1864,  in  Milford  township,  about  seven  miles  from  Watseka,  Illinois.
The  family  moved  to  Iowa  in  July  1864  (when  Lurancy  was  about  three
months  old),  and  returned  to  within  eight  miles  from  Watseka  in  October  1865
(three  months  after  the  death  of  Mary  Roff).  Lurancy  was  then  about  a  year
and  a  half  old.  After  two  other  moves  in  the  neighbourhood,  the  family  moved
into  Watseka  on  April  ist,  1871],  locating  about  forty  rods  from  the  residence
of  A.  B.  Roff.  They  remained  at  this  place  during  the  summer.  The  only

238A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  361

acquaintance  ever  had  between  the  two  families  during  the  season  was  simply
one  brief  call  of  Mrs.  Roff,  for  a  few  minutes,  on  Mrs.  Vennum,  which  call  was
never  returned,  and  a  formal  speaking  acquaintance  between  the  two  gentle-
men. Since  1871  the  Vennum  family  have  lived  entirely  away  from  the  vicinity
of  Mr.  Roff' s,  and  never  nearer  than  now,  on  extreme  opposite  limits  of  the  city.

"  Rancy,"  as  she  is  familiarly  called,  had  never  been  sick,  save  a  light  run  of
measles  in  1873.  A  few  days  before  the  following  incidents  took  place  she  said
to  her  family :  "  There  were  persons  in  my  room  last  night,  and  they  called
•  Rancy  !  Rancy  ! ! '  and  I  felt  their  breath  on  my  face."  The  very  next  night
she  arose  from  her  bed,  saying  that  she  could  not  sleep,  that  every  time  she
tried  to  sleep  persons  came  and  called  "Rancy!  Rancy!!"  to  her.  Her
mother  went  to  bed  with  her,  after  which  she  rested  and  slept  the  rest  of  the
night.

[On  July  nth,  1877,  she  had  a  sort  of  fit,  and  was  unconscious  for  five  hours.
Next  day  the  fit  recurred,  but  while  lying  as  if  dead  she  described  her  sensa-
tions to  her  family,  declaring  that  she  could  see  heaven  and  the  angels,  and  a
little  brother  and  sister  and  others  who  had  died.  The  fits  or  trances,  occa-
sionally passing  into  ecstasy,  when  she  claimed  to  be  in  heaven,  occurred
several  times  a  day  up  to  the  end  of  January  1878;  she  was  generally  believed
to  be  insane,  and  most  friends  of  the  family  urged  that  she  should  be  sent  to
an  insane  asylum.

At  this  stage  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Asa  B.  Roff,  whose  daughter,  Mary  Roff,  as
we  shall  see,  had  had  periods  of  insanity,  persuaded  Mr.  Vennum  to  allow
him  to  bring  Dr.  E.  W.  Stevens  of  Janesville,  Wisconsin,  to  investigate  the
case.]

On  the  afternoon  of  January  3ist,  1878,  the  two  gentlemen  repaired  to  Mr.
Vennum's  residence,  a  little  out  of  the  city.  Dr.  Stevens,  an  entire  stranger  to
the  family,  was  introduced  by  Mr.  Roff  at  four  o'clock  P.M.  ;  no  other  persons
present  but  the  family.  The  girl  sat  near  the  stove,  in  a  common  chair,  her
elbows  on  her  knees,  her  hands  under  her  chin,  feet  curled  up  on  the  chair,
eyes  staring,  looking  every  way  like  an  "old  hag."  She  sat  for  a  time  in
silence,  until  Dr.  Stevens  moved  his  chair,  when  she  savagely  warned  him  not
to  come  nearer.  She  appeared  sullen  and  crabbed,  calling  her  father  "Old
Black  Dick  "  and  her  mother  "  Old  Granny."  She  refused  to  be  touched,  even
to  shake  hands,  and  was  reticent  and  sullen  with  all  save  the  doctor,  with  whom
she  entered  freely  into  conversation,  giving  her  reasons  for  doing  so  ;  she  said
he  was  a  spiritual  doctor,  and  would  understand  her.

[She  described  herself  first  as  an  old  woman  named  Katrina  Hogan,  and
then  as  a  young  man  named  Willie  Canning,  and  after  some  insane  conversa-
tion had  another  fit,  which  Dr.  Stevens  relieved  by  hypnotising  her.     She  then
became  calm,  and  said  that  she  had  been  controlled   by  evil  spirits.      Dr.
Stevens  suggested  that  she  should  try  to  have  a  better  control,  and  encou
try  and  find  one.     She  then  mentioned  the  names  of  several  deo
persons,  saying  there  was  one  who  wanted  to  come,  named  Mary  Roff.]

Mr.  Roff  being  present,  said  :  "  That  is  my  daughter ;  Mary  Roff  is  my
girl.  \V!iy.  >hc  has  been  in  heaven  twelve  years.  Yes,  let  her  come,  we'll  be
•<>  have  her  corm.''  Mr.  Roff  assured  Lurancy  that  M.uy  \v  is  good  and
intelligent,  and  would  help  her  all  she  could ;  stating  further  that  Mary  used  to
be  subject  to  conditions  like  herself.  Lurancy,  after  due  deliberation  and
counsel  with  spirits,  said  that  Mary  would  take  the  place  of  the  former  wild  and
unreasonable  influence.  Mr.  Roff  said  to  her,  "Have  your  nv.tlur  bring  you

362  APPENDICES  [238  A

to  my  house,  and  Mary  will  be  likely  to  come  along,  and  a  mutual  benefit  may
be  derived  from  our  former  experience  with  Mary."

[On  the  following  morning,  Friday,  February  ist,  Mr.  Vennum  called  at  the
office  of  Mr.  Rorf  and  informed  him  that  the  girl  claimed  to  be  Mary  Roff,
and  wanted  to  go  home.  He  said,  "  She  seems  like  a  child  real  homesick,
wanting  to  see  her  pa  and  ma  and  her  brothers."

Mary  Roff  was  born  in  Indiana  in  October  1846.  The  family,  after  several
changes  of  residence,  including  a  visit  to  Texas  in  1857,  finally  made  their  per-
manent home  in  Watseka  in  1859.  Mary  had  had  fits  frequently  from  the  age
of  six  months,  which  gradually  increased  in  violence.  She  also  had  periods  of
despondency,  in  one  of  which,  in  July  1864,  she  cut  her  arm  with  a  knife  until
she  fainted.  Five  days  of  raving  mania  followed,  after  which  she  recognised  no
one,  and  seemed  to  lose  all  her  natural  senses,  but  when  blindfolded  could  read
and  do  everything  as  if  she  saw.  After  a  few  days  she  returned  to  her  normal
condition,  but  the  fits  became  still  worse,  and  she  died  in  one  of  them  in  July
1865.  Her  mysterious  illness  had  made  her  notorious  in  the  neighbourhood
during  her  life-time,  and  her  alleged  clairvoyant  powers  are  said  to  have  been
carefully  investigated  "  by  all  the  prominent  citizens  of  Watseka,"  including
newspaper  editors  and  clergymen.

It  was  in  February  1878  that  her  supposed  "control"  of  Lurancy  began.
The  girl  then  became  "  mild,  docile,  polite,  and  timid,  knowing  none  of  the
family,  but  constantly  pleading  to  go  home,"  and  "only  found  contentment  in
going  back  to  heaven,  as  she  said,  for  short  visits."]

About  a  week  after  she  took  control  of  the  body,  Mrs.  A.  B.  Roff  and  her
daughter,  Mrs.  Minerva  Alter,  Mary's  sister,  hearing  of  the  remarkable  change,
went  to  see  the  girl.  As  they  came  in  sight,  far  down  the  street,  Mary,  looking
out  of  the  window,  exclaimed  exultingly,  "There  comes  my  ma  and  sister
Nervie !  "  — the  name  by  which  Mary  used  to  call  Mrs.  Alter  in  girlhood.  As
they  came  into  the  house  she  caught  them  around  their  necks,  wept  and  cried
for  joy,  and  seemed  so  happy  to  meet  them.  From  this  time  on  she  seemed
more  homesick  than  before.  At  times  she  seemed  almost  frantic  to  go
home.

On  the  nth  day  of  February,  1878,  they  sent  the  girl  to  Mr.  Roff's,  where  she
met  her  "  pa  and  ma,"  and  each  member  of  the  family,  with  the  most  gratifying
expressions  of  love  and  affection,  by  words  and  embraces.  On  being  asked
how  long  she  would  stay,  she  said,  "The  angels  will  let  me  stay  till  some  time
in  May ;  "  and  she  made  it  her  home  there  till  May  2ist,  three  months  and  ten
days,  a  happy,  contented  daughter  and  sister  in  a  borrowed  body.

The  girl  now  in  her  new  home  seemed  perfectly  happy  and  content,  know-
ing every  person  and  everything  that  Mary  knew  when  in  her  original  body,
twelve  to  twenty-five  years  ago,  recognising  and  calling  by  name  those  who
were  friends  and  neighbours  of  the  family  from  1852  to  1865,  when  Mary  died,
calling  attention  to  scores,  yes,  hundreds  of  incidents  that  transpired  during  her
natural  life.  During  all  the  period  of  her  sojourn  at  Mr.  Roff's  she  had  no
knowledge  of,  and  did  not  recognise  any  of  Mr.  Vennum's  family,  their  friends
or  neighbours,  yet  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Vennum  and  their  children  visited  her  and
Mr.  RofFs  people,  she  being  introduced  to  them  as  to  any  strangers.  After
frequent  visits,  and  hearing  them  often  and  favourably  spoken  of,  she  learned
to  love  them  as  acquaintances,  and  visited  them  with  Mrs.  Roff  three  times.

One  day  she  met  an  old  friend  and  neighbour  of  Mr.  Roff's,  who  was  a
widow  when  Mary  was  a  girl  at  home.  Some  years  since  the  lady  married  a

238A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  363

Mr.  Wagoner,  with  whom  she  yet  lives.  But  when  she  met  Mrs.  Wagoner  she
clasped  her  around  the  neck  and  said, 4<  O  Mary  Lord,  you  look  so  very  natural,
and  have  changed  the  least  of  any  one  I  have  seen  since  I  came  back."  Mrs.
Lord  was  in  some  way  related  to  the  Vennum  family,  and  lived  close  by  them,
but  Mary  could  only  call  her  by  the  name  by  which  she  knew  her  fifteen  years
ago,  and  could  not  seem  to  realise  that  she  was  married.  Mrs.  Lord  lived  just
across  the  street  from  Mr.  Roff's  for  several  years,  prior  and  up  to  within  a  few
months  of  Mary's  death ;  both  being  members  of  the  same  Methodist  church,
they  were  very  intimate.

Some  days  after  Mary  was  settled  in  her  new  home  Mrs.  Parker,  who  lived
neighbour  to  the  Roffs  in  Middleport  in  1852,  and  next  door  to  them  in  Wat-
seka  in  1860,  came  in  with  her  daughter-in-law,  Nellie  Parker.  Mary  imme-
diately recognised  both  of  the  ladies,  calling  Mrs.  Parker  "  Auntie  Parker,"  and
the  other  "  Nellie,"  as  in  the  acquaintance  of  eighteen  years  ago.  In  conversa-
tion with  Mrs.  Parker  Mary  asked,  "  Do  you  remember  how  Nervie  and  I  used
to  come  to  your  house  and  sing? "  Mrs.  Parker  says  that  was  the  first  allusion
made  to  that  matter,  nothing  having  been  said  by  any  one  on  that  subject,  and
says  that  Mary  and  Minerva  used  to  come  to  their  house  and  sit  and  sing
'•  Mary  had  a  little  lamb,"  &c.  Mrs.  Dr.  Alter  (Minerva)  says  she  remembers
it  well.  This  was  when  Mr.  Roff  kept  the  post-office,  and  could  not  have  been
later  than  1852,  and  twelve  years  before  Lurancy  was  born.

One  evening,  in  the  latter  part  of  March,  Mr.  Roff  was  sitting  in  the  room
waiting  for  tea,  and  reading  the  paper,  Mary  being  out  in  the  yard.  He  asked
Mrs.  Roff  if  she  could  find  a  certain  velvet  head-dress  that  Mary  used  to  wear
the  last  year  before  she  died.  If  so,  to  lay  it  on  the  stand  and  say  nothing
about  it,  to  see  if  Mary  would  recognise  it.  Mrs.  Roff  readily  found  and  laid  it
on  the  stand.  The  girl  soon  came  in,  and  immediately  exclaimed  as  she  ap-
proached the  stand,  "  Oh,  there  is  my  head-dress  I  wore  when  my  hair  was
short !  "  She  then  asked,  "  Ma,  where  is  my  box  of  letters  ?  Have  you  got
them  yet?"  Mrs.  Roff  replied,  "Yes,  Mary,  I  have  some  of  them."  She  at
once  got  the  box  with  many  letters  in  it.  As  Mary  began  to  examine  them  she
said,  •*  Oh,  ma,  here  is  a  collar  I  tatted !  Ma,  why  did  you  not  show  to  me  my
letters  and  things  before?"  The  collar  had  been  preserved  among  the  relics
of  the  lamented  child  as  one  of  the  beautiful  things  her  fingers  had  wrought
before  Lurancy  was  born ;  and  so  Mary  continually  recognised  every  little  thing
and  remembered  every  little  incident  of  her  girlhood.

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  family  moved  to  Texas  in  1857.  Mr.  Roff
asked  Mary  if  she  remembered  moving  to  Texas  or  anything  about  it.  "Yes,
pa,  and  I  remember  crossing  Red  River  and  of  seeing  a  great  many  Indians,
and  I  remember  Mrs.  Reeder's  girls,  who  were  in  our  company."  And  thus  she
from  time  to  time  made  first  mention  of  things  that  transpired  thirteen  to
.  e  years  ago.

[Occasionally  she  would  go  into  trance,  and  the  control,  Mary  Roff,  described
this  as  going  to  heaven,  and  seeing  the  beautiful  things  there  and  talking  with  the
angels,  and  sometimes  during  the  trance  other  spirits  would  present  themselves
and  speak  freely  their  own  language  and  sentiments.]

On  May  ;th  Mary  called  Mrs.  Roff  to  a  private  room,  and  there  in  tears
told  her  that  Lurancy  Vennum  was  coming  back.  She  seemed  very  sad,  and
said  she  could  not  tell  whether  she  was  coming  to  stay  or  not;  that  if  she
thought  she  was  coming  to  stay,  she  would  want  to  see  Nervie  and  Dr.  Alter
and  Allic,  and  bid  them  good-bye.  She  sat  down,  closed  her  eyes,  and  in  a  few

364  APPENDICES  [238A

moments  the  change  took  place,  and  Lurancy  had  control  of  her  own  body.
Looking  wildly  around  the  room,  she  anxiously  asked,  "  Where  am  I  ?  I  was
never  here  before."

Mrs.  Roff  replied,  "You  are  at  Mr.  Roff's,  brought  here  by  Mary  to  cure
your  body."

She  cried  and  said,  "  I  want  to  go  home."

Mrs.  Roff  asked  her  if  she  could  stay  till  her  folks  were  sent  for.  She  said,
"No."

She  was  then  asked  if  she  felt  any  pain  in  her  breast.  (This  was  during  the
period  that  Mary  was  suffering  pain  in  the  left  breast ;  continually  holding  her
hand,  pressing  it.)  She  replied,  "  No,  but  Mary  did."

In  about  five  minutes  the  change  was  again  made,  and  Mary  came  over-
joyed to  find  herself  permitted  to  return,  and  called,  as  she  often  had,  for  the
singing  of  her  previous  girlhood's  favourite  song,  "  We  are  Coming,  Sister
Mary."

In  conversation  with  the  writer  about  her  former  life,  she  spoke  of  cutting
her  arm  as  hereinbefore  stated,  and  asked  if  he  ever  saw  where  she  did  it.  On
receiving  a  negative  answer,  she  proceeded  to  slip  up  her  sleeve  as  if  to  exhibit
the  scar,  but  suddenly  arrested  the  movement,  as  if  by  a  sudden  thought,  and
quickly  said,  "  Oh,  this  is  not  the  arm ;  that  one  is  in  the  ground,"  and  pro-
ceeded to  tell  where  it  was  buried,  and  how  she  saw  it  done,  and  who  stood
around,  how  they  felt,  &c.,  but  she  did  not  feel  bad.  I  heard  her  tell  Mr.  Roff
and  the  friends  present,  how  she  wrote  to  him  a  message  some  years  ago
through  the  hand  of  a  medium,  giving  name,  time,  and  place.  Also  of  rapping
and  of  spelling  out  a  message  by  another  medium,  giving  time,  name,  place,
&c.,  &c.,  which  the  parents  admitted  to  be  all  true.  I  heard  her  relate  a  story
of  her  going  into  the  country  with  the  men,  some  twenty  odd  years  ago,  after  a
load  of  hay,  naming  incidents  that  occurred  on  the  road,  which  two  of  the
gentlemen  distinctly  remembered.

For  the  discovery  of  facts  unknown  to  others,  Mary  seemed  remarkably
developed.  One  afternoon  she,  with  much  concern  and  great  anxiety,
declared  that  her  brother  Frank  must  be  carefully  watched  the  coming  night,
for  he  would  be  taken  very  sick,  and  would  die  if  not  properly  cared  for.  At
the  time  of  this  announcement  he  was  in  his  usual  health,  and  engaged  with
the  Roff  Bros.'  band  of  music  up  town.  The  same  evening  Dr.  Stevens  had
been  in  to  see  the  family,  and  on  leaving  was  to  go  directly  to  Mrs.  Hawks,  far
off  in  the  Old  Town,  and  the  family  so  understood  it.  But  at  about  nine  and  a
half  o'clock  the  same  evening  Dr.  Stevens  returned  unannounced  to  Mr.
Marsh's,  Mr.  Roff's  next  neighbour,  for  the  night.  At  two  o'clock  in  the  morn-
ing Frank  was  attacked  with  something  like  a  spasm  and  congestive  chill,
which  almost  destroyed  his  consciousness.  Mary  at  once  saw  the  situation  as
predicted,  and  said,  "  Send  to  Mrs.  Marsh's  for  Dr.  Stevens."  "  No,  Dr.
Stevens  is  at  Old  Town,"  said  the  family.  "No,"  said  Mary,  "he  is  at  Mr.
Marsh's;  go  quick  for  him,  pa."  Mr.  Roff  called,  and  the  doctor,  as  Mary
said,  was  at  Mr.  Marsh's.  On  his  arrival  at  the  sick  bed  Mary  had  entire
control  of  the  case.  She  had  made  Mrs.  Roff  sit  down,  had  provided  hot
water  and  cloths  and  other  necessaries,  and  was  doing  all  that  could  be  done
for  Frank.  The  doctor  seconded  her  efforts,  and  allowed  her  to  continue.  She
saved  her  brother,  but  never  made  a  move  after  the  doctor's  arrival,  without
his  co-operation  or  advice.

Mary  often  spoke  of  seeing  the  children  of  Dr.  Stevens  in  heaven,  who

238A]  TO     CHAPTER    II  365

were  about  her  age  and  of  longer  residence  there  than  herself.  She  said
she  was  with  them  much,  and  went  to  his  home  with  him.  She  correctly
described  his  home,  the  rooms  and  furniture,  gave  the  names  and  ages  of  his
children.

During  her  stay  at  Mr.  RofFs  her  physical  condition  continually  improved,
being  under  the  care  and  treatment  of  her  supposed  parents  and  the  advice  and
help  of  her  physician.  She  was  ever  obedient  to  the  government  and  rules  of
the  family,  like  a  careful  and  wise  child,  always  keeping  in  the  company  of  some
of  the  family,  unless  to  go  in  to  the  nearest  neighbours  across  the  street.  She
was  often  invited  and  went  with  Mrs.  Roff  to  visit  the  first  families  of  the  city,
who  soon  became  satisfied  that  the  girl  was  not  crazy,  but  a  fine,  well-mannered
child.

As  the  time  drew  near  for  the  restoration  of  Lurancy  to  her  parents  and
home,  Mary  would  sometimes  seem  to  recede  into  the  memory  and  manner  of
Lurancy  for  a  little  time,  yet  not  enough  to  lose  her  identity  or  permit  the
manifestation  of  Lurancy's  mind,  but  enough  to  show  she  was  impressing  her
presence  upon  her  own  body.

[On  May  I9th,  in  the  presence  of  Henry  Vennum,  Lurancy's  brother,  Mary
left  control  for  a  time,  and  "  Lurancy  took  full  possession  of  her  own  body,"
recognising  Henry  as  her  brother.  The  change  of  control  occurred  again  when
Mrs.  Vennum  came  to  see  her  the  same  day.]

On  the  morning  of  May  2ist  Mr.  Roff  writes  as  follows: —

'•  Mary  is  to  leave  the  body  of  Rancy  to-day,  about  eleven  o'clock,  so  she
says.  She  is  bidding  neighbours  and  friends  good-bye.  Rancy  to  return
home  all  right  to-day.  Mary  came  from  her  room  upstairs,  where  she  was
sleeping  with  Lottie,  at  ten  o'clock  last  night,  lay  down  by  us,  hugged  and
kissed  us,  and  cried  because  she  must  bid  us  good-bye,  telling  us  to  give  all  her
pictures,  marbles,  and  cards,  and  twenty-five  cents  Mrs.  Vennum  had  given  her
to  Rancy,  and  had  us  promise  to  visit  Rancy  often."

[Mary  arranged  that  her  sister,  Mrs.  Alter,  should  come  to  the  house  to
say  good-bye  to  her,  and  that  when  Lurancy  came  at  eleven  o'clock  she  should
take  her  to  Mr.  RofFs  office,  and  he  would  go  to  Mr.  Vennum's  with  her.
There  was  some  alternation  of  the  control  on  the  way,  but  the  final  return  of
the  normal  Lurancy  Vennum  took  place  before  they  reached  Mr.  RofFs  office,
and  on  arriving  at  her  own  home  she  recognised  all  the  members  of  her  own
family  as  such,  and  was  perfectly  well  and  happy  in  her  own  surroundings.
A  few  days  later,  on  meeting  Dr.  Stevens,  under  whose  care  she  had  been  at
Mr.  RofFs  house,  she  had  to  be  introduced  to  him  as  an  entire  stranger,  and
treated  him  as  such.  The  next  day  she  came  to  him  spontaneously,  saying
Roff  had  told  her  to  come  and  meet  him,  and  had  made  her  feel  he  had
been  a  very  kind  friend  to  her,  and  she  gave  him  a  long  message  purporting  to
be  from  Mary.

A  letter  from  Mr.  Roff,  dated  December  4th,  1886,  published  in  the  Religio-
Philosophical  Journal,  states  that  Lurancy  Vennum  continued  to  live  with  her
parents  until  January  ist,  1882,  when  she  married  a  farmer,  George  Binning.
The  Roffs  saw  her  often  both  before  and  after  her  marriage,  until  she  moved
further  west  in  1884,  "and  then,"  Mr.  Roff  says,  "Mary  would  take  control  of
Lurancy  just  as  she  did  during  the  time  she  was  at  our  house  in  1878.  .  .  .  Aside
from  this,  she  had  little  opportunity  of  using  her  mediumship,  her  parents  being
afraid  to  converse  with  her  on  the  subject  lest  it  should  cause  a  return  of  the
•spells'  (as  they  called  them),  .  .  .  and  her  husband  never  having  made

366  APPENDICES  [238  A

himself  acquainted  with  spiritualism.  .  .  .  Lurancy  has  what  might  be  called,
perhaps,  a  remembrance  of  her  old  experience  while  controlled  by  the  spirit.
She  always  speaks  of  it  thus  :  '  Mary  told  me,'  or  '  Mary  made  me  ac-
quainted,' &c.  She  became  acquainted  with  several  persons  while  Mary  con-
trolled her,  .  .  .  and  when  the  control  left  her,  she  continued  the  acquaintance
thus  formed.  .  .  .  She  has  never  had  any  occasion  for  a  physician  since  she
left  us,  never  having  been  sick  since  then."  Mr.  Roff  also  stated  that  at  the
birth  of  her  first  child  she  became  entranced,  and  did  not  recover  consciousness
till  after  the  child  was  born.]

Dr.  Hodgson  visited  Watseka  on  April  i2th,  1890,  and  cross-examined
the  principal  witnesses  of  the  case  who  were  still  living  in  the  neighbour-
hood, including  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Roff,  Mrs.  Minerva  Alter  (their  daughter),
Mrs.  Robert  Doyle,  Mrs.  Kay,  Mrs.  Marsh,  Mrs.  Wagner,  and  Mrs.  T.
Vennum,  a  distant  cousin  of  Lurancy 's.  The  evidence  obtained  from
them  was  published  by  Dr.  Hodgson  in  the  Religio- Philosophical  Journal
for  December  2Oth,  1890,  from  which  I  quote  extracts  as  follows : —

Mr.  Roff  stated  that  when  Lurancy  Vennum  first  arrived  at  his  house  she
looked  around  and  said,  "Where's  Nervie?" — the  name  by  which  Mary  Roff
had  been  accustomed  to  call  her  sister  Minerva,  now,  and  at  the  time  of  Lurancy
Vennum's  experience,  Mrs.  Minerva  Alter.

Mrs.  Roff  stated  that  Lurancy  Vennum  had  never  been  in  her  house  until
she  came  there  as  Mary  Roff.  After  looking  round  the  house  she  said,  "  Why,
there's  our  old  piano,  and  there's  the  same  old  piano  cover."  This  piano  and
cover  had  been  familiar  to  Mary  Roff  in  another  house,  where  Mary  Roff  died.
Lurancy  referred  to  some  peculiar  incidents  in  Mary  Roff's  life  almost  every
day,  and  she  spoke  once  in  detail  about  her  stay  at  a  water-cure  place  in  Peoria
where  Mary  Roff  had  been.  Mrs.  Roff  once  said  to  her,  "Mary,  do  you  re-
member when  the  stove  pipe  fell  down  and  Frank  was  burned?"  "Yes."
"  Do  you  know  where  he  was  burned  ?  "  "  Yes  ;  I'll  show  you,"  and  she  showed
the  exact  spot  on  the  arm  where  Frank  was  burned.

Mrs.  Minerva  Alter  said  that  the  mannerisms  and  behaviour  of  Lurancy
when  under  the  control  resembled  those  of  her  sister  Mary.  Lurancy  Vennum
knew  Mrs.  Alter  previously  as  Mrs.  Alter,  having  met  her  at  the  school,  &c.,
but  when  under  the  control  of  Mary  she  embraced  Mrs.  Alter  affectionately  and
called  her  "  Nervie" — a  name  by  which  Mrs.  Alter  had  not  been  called  for  many
years,  but  which  was  Mary's  special  pet  name  for  her.  In  later  years  she  had
been  commonly  called  Minnie  by  her  intimate  friends.  Lurancy,  as  Mary
Roff,  stayed  at  Mrs.  Alter's  home  for  some  time,  and  almost  every  hour  of  the
day  some  trifling  incident  of  Mary  Roff's  life  was  recalled  by  Lurancy.  One
morning  she  said,  "  Right  over  there  by  the  currant  bushes  is  where  Allie
greased  the  chicken's  eye."  Allie  was  a  cousin  of  Mary  Roff,  and  lived  in
Peoria,  111.  She  visited  the  Roffs  in  the  lifetime  of  Mary,  with  whom  she
played.  This  incident  happened  several  years  before  the  death  of  Mary  Roff.
Mrs.  Alter  remembered  it  very  well,  and  recalled  their  bringing  the  chicken
into  the  house  for  treatment.  Lurancy  in  her  ordinary  state  had  never  met

Allie,  who  is  now  Mrs.  H ,  living  in  Peoria,  111.  One  morning  Mrs.  Alter

asked  her  if  she  remembered  the  old  dog  (a  dog  which  died  during  the  lifetime

238  A]  TO    CHAPTER    II  367

of  Mary  Roff).     Lurancy  replied,  "  Yes  ;  he  died  just  there,"  and  she  pointed
out  the  exact  spot  where  the  dog  had  breathed  his  last.

Mrs.  Robert  Doyle  stated  that  she  called  upon  Lurancy  Vennum  before
she  was  removed  to  the  house  of  Mr.  Roff.  She  said,  "  What's  the  matter,
Lurancy  ?  "

L.  V.— "  That's  not  my  name.  You  knew  me  when  I  was  a  little  girl.  You
know  well  enough  what  my  name  is.  It  is  Mary  Roff.  Your  husband's  in
partnership  with  my  father,  and  you  have  a  baby  named  for  my  sister
Minerva."

Mr.  Doyle  was  a  partner  of  Mr.  Roff  in  1863,  and  was  in  partnership  with
him  when  Mary  Roff  died.  The  partnership  was  dissolved  about  six  years
later,  when  Lurancy  Vennum  was  six  or  seven  years  old.  Mrs.  Doyle  had  a
daughter  named  Minerva  after  Mary  Roff's  sister,  who  was  a  baby  at  the  time
of  the  death  of  Mary  Roff.

When  Lurancy  was  being  taken  to  Mr.  RofFs  house  she  tried  to  get  to
another  house  on  the  way,  insisting  that  it  was  her  home.  They  had  to  take
her  past  it  almost  forcibly.  This  house  was  the  house  where  Mr.  Roff  was
living  at  the  time  of  Mary  Roff's  death,  and  was  also  the  house  in  which  Mary
Roff  died.  They  shortly  afterwards  moved  to  another  house,  to  which  Lurancy
was  being  taken.

Mrs.  Wagner  stated  that  she  knew  Lurancy  Vennum  very  well  both
before,  and  during,  and  after  the  remarkable  circumstances  of  her  connection
with  Mary  Roff.  When  Mary  Roff  died  Mrs.  Wagner's  name  was  Mrs.  Lord,
and  Mary  Roff  had  been  in  her  class  at  Sunday  School.  She  had  known  Mary
Roff  for  several  years  before  her  death — since  the  year  1861.  Mary  Roff  died
in  1865,  and  Mrs.  Lord  married  a  second  time  in  1866.  When  she  called  upon
the  Roffs  after  Lurancy  had  gone  there  she  was  greeted  very  affectionately  by
Lurancy  as  Mrs.  Lord.  She  made  inquiries,  and  ascertained  that  none  of  the
family  had  mentioned  that  she  was  going  to  the  house.  Mrs.  Wagner  said  that
throughout  the  time  during  which  Lurancy  purported  to  be  Mary  Roff  she  in-
variably called  her  Mrs.  Lord,  and  that  after  Lurancy  Vennum's  return  to  her
ordinary  state  she  invariably  called  her  Mrs.  Wagner.

One  circumstance  which  I  ascertained  seemed  at  first  sight  to  weaken,  but
on  further  consideration,  to  strengthen  the  evidence  in  favour  of  the  spiritistic
interpretation.  Mrs.  Kay  stated  that  she  knew  Lurancy  Vennum  and  also
Roff,  but  that  Lurancy  as  Mary  Roff  did  not  know  her.  It  appeared,
however,  that  Mary  Roff  had  not  seen  Mrs.  Kay  for  two  years  before  her
death.  Mrs.  Kay  had  lived  in  the  state  of  Wisconsin  for  two  years,  returning
to  Watseka  in  August,  1865,  the  month  after  Mary  Roff's  death,  and  Mrs.  Kay
thought  she  had  changed  in  appearance  somewhat  during  the  fifteen
which  had  elapsed  between  the  time  of  her  seeing  Mary  Roff  and  that  of  seeing
Lurancy  under  the  control.

Dr.  Hodgson  tried  in  vain  to  get  some  direct  statements  from  Mrs.
George  Binning  (formerly  Lurancy  Vennum),  but  received  no  answer  to
his  inquiries.  He  writes: —

I  have  no  doubt  that  the  incidents  occurred  substantially  as  described  in
the  narrative  by  Dr.  Stevens,  and  in  my  view  the  only  other  interpretation  of
the  case — besides  the  spiritistic— that  seems  at  all  plausible  is  that  which  has
been  put  forward  as  the  alternative  to  the  spiritistic  theory  to  account  for  the

368  APPENDICES  [238  A

trance-communications  of  Mrs.  Piper  and  similar  cases,  viz.,  secondary  person-
ality with  supernormal  powers.  It  would  be  difficult  to  disprove  this  hypothesis
in  the  case  of  the  \Vatseka  Wonder,  owing  to  the  comparative  meagreness  of
the  record  and  the  probable  abundance  of  "  suggestion  "  in  the  environment,
and  any  conclusion  that  we  may  reach  would  probably  be  determined  largely
by  our  convictions  concerning  other  cases.  My  personal  opinion  is  that  the
"  Watseka  Wonder  "  case  belongs  in  the  main  manifestations  to  the  spiritistic
category.

409  A]

APPENDICES

TO

CHAPTER   IV

407  A.  In  illustration  of  the  occasional  heightening  of  the  sensory
faculties  in  dreams,  I  give  the  following  case,  described  by  Dr.  Hodgson  :  —

July  3oM,  1900.

One  of  the  most  vivid  experiences  in  my  life  occurred  when  I  was  eighteen
or  nineteen  years  old.  It  was  a  "  dream  "  of  music  in  sleep  which  continued  to  be
audible  after  I  woke  for  at  least  a  quarter  of  an  hour.  So  it  appears  in  memory
now.  I  seemed  to  be  well  aware  at  the  time  that  I  was  listening  to  music
from  "the  other  world."  No  special  melody  or  harmony  remained  in  recollec-
tion, but  the  music  was  very  complex,  very  widespread  as  it  were,  very  rich,
very  sweet,  and  with  an  ineffable  one-ness  about  it.  I  awoke  during  the
influence  of  it,  and  lay  in  ecstasy  still  hearing  it,  and  remember  gazing  mean-
while at  a  star  which  was  visible  through  a  gap  in  my  window-blind.  It  was
just  before  dawn,  and  the  music  seemed  to  die  away  as  the  first  light  grew.
No  pleasure  that  I  have  ever  had  in  hearing  music  before  or  since  was  at  all
comparable  with  the  exquisite  peaceful  joy  which  flooded  me  as  I  listened  to
that  music  then.  It  produced  such  an  effect  upon  me  that  I  began  to  learn
the  violin,  which  I  practised  regularly  for  four  years.  R.  HODGSON.

409  A.  The  two  next  cases  are  illustrative  of  self-suggestion  in
dreams.  I  quote  the  first  from  a  paper  by  Dr.  Faure  in  the  Archives  de
Mcdccine,  vol.  i.,  1876,  p.  554.

A  shop  assistant,  strongly  built  and  regular  in  habits,  awoke  one  morning

in  a  state  of  fever  and  agitation,  perspiring  copiously,  anxious  and  uneasy.

He  announced  that  all  his  savings  were  gone;  he  was  ruined,  done  for.     He

said  that  on  the  previous  day,  while  driving  a  van,  he  had  got  into  a  quarrel

.  coachman ;  and  that,  in  the  confusion,  his  van  had  broken  in  the  front

window  of  a  mirror-maker.     He  would  have  to  pay  for  the  damage.     He  told

the  story  with  great  detail ;  and  still  saw  himself  caught  round  the  neck  by  his

who  had  struck  him  so  violently  that  he  had  lost  consciousness,  and

that  they  had  had  to  carry  him  into  a  wine-merchant's  shop  to  bring  him  to.

sured  us  that  when  he  had  returned  home  the  evening  before  he  was

1  condition ;  that  he  had  seen  to  his  business,  passed  the  evening  at

and  gone  to  bed  with  no  trouble  upon  him.

For  three  days  X  continued  in  this  state  of  mind,  unable  to  calm  himself

for  a  moment,  although  he  was  taken  to  the  actual  place  where  the  imaginary

accident  had  occurred.    It  was  some  days  later  before  he  thoroughly  understood

that  it  had  been  a  dream.     And  for  a  whole  month  he  would  fall  daily  into  the

vou  I.  369  2  A

370  APPENDICES  [409  B

same  confusion  of  memory — would  sit  down  in  despair,  crying  and  repeating
"  We  are  ruined !  "  Even  seven  years  afterwards  he  still  had  occasional  crises
of  this  nature,  when  he  forgot  the  truth,  and  lived  for  several  days  under  the
shock  of  this  imaginary  disaster.

We  may  compare  with  this  the  next  case,  where  "  the  touch  of  a  vanished
hand"  appeared  to  bring  physical  relief  to  the  dreamer — the  recovery
being  more  rapid  than  ordinary  conditions  could  explain.

409  B.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  374.  The  account  is
given  by  M.  L.  Holbrook,  M.D.,  Edftor  of  the  Herald  of  Health,  13  and
15  Laight  Street,  New  York,  and  is  dated  July  30,  1884.

In  the  spring  of  1870,!  had  an  attack  of  acute  bronchitis,which  was  very  severe,
and  from  the  fact  that  I  had  had  a  similar  attack  every  winter  and  spring  for  several
years,  I  felt  considerable  alarm,  and  believed  it  would  ultimately  become  chronic,
and  perhaps  terminate  my  life.  As  I  was  then  young,  and  had  just  entered  on
a  career  of  labour  which  I  wished  to  follow  for  a  long  time,  I  became  very
despondent  at  such  a  prospect.  In  this  depressed  condition  I  fell  into  a  sleep
which  was  not  very  profound,  and  the  following  circumstance,  which  is  still
fresh  in  my  mind,  appeared  to  take  place.  My  sister,  who  had  been  dead  more
than  twenty  years,  and  whom  I  had  almost  forgotten,  came  to  my  bedside,  and
said,  "  Do  not  worry  about  your  health,  we  have  come  to  cure  you;  there  is
much  yet  for  you  to  do  in  the  world."  Then  she  vanished,  and  my  brain  seemed
to  be  electrified  as  if  by  a  shock  from  a  battery,  only  it  was  not  painful,  but
delicious.  The  shock  spread  downwards,  and  over  the  chest  and  lungs  it  was
very  strong.  From  here  it  extended  \o  the  extremities,  where  it  appeared  like
a  delightful  glow.  I  awoke  almost  immediately  and  found  myself  well.  Since
then  I  have  never  had  an  attack  of  the  disease.  The  form  of  my  sister  was
indistinct,  but  the  voice  was  very  plain ;  and  I  have  never  before  had  such  an
experience,  nor  since.  M.  L.  HOLBROOK,  M.D.

Compare  this  again  with  Dr.  Tissie"'s  account  of  his  hysterical  subject,
Albert.  ''Every  time,"  said  Albert,  "that  I  dream  that  I  have  been
bitten  or  beaten,  I  suffer  all  day  in  the  part  attacked."  J

415  A.  The  following  is  a  case  of  a  lost  object,  where  waking  effort
soon  after  the  loss  fails  to  recall  any  supraliminal  knowledge  of  the  place
of  deposit.  The  account  is  quoted  from  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.
p.  142  (October  1889).

February  tfh,  1889.

On  reaching  Morley's  Hotel,  at  five  o'clock  on  Tuesday,  29th  January  1889,
I  missed  a  gold  brooch,  which  I  supposed  I  had  left  in  a  fitting-room  at  Swan
&  Edgar's.  I  sent  there  at  once,  but  was  very  disappointed  to  hear  that  after
a  diligent  search  they  could  not  find  the  brooch.  I  was  very  vexed,  and  worried
about  the  brooch,  and  that  night  dreamed  that  I  should  find  it  shut  up  in  a
number  of  the  Queen  newspaper  that  had  been  on  the  table,  and  in  my  dream
I  saw  the  very  page  where  it  would  be.  I  had  noticed  one  of  the  plates  on  that
page.  Directly  after  breakfast  I  went  to  Swan  &  Edgar's  and  asked  to  see  the
papers,  at  the  same  time  telling  the  young  ladies  about  the  dream,  and  where
I  had  seen  the  brooch.  The  papers  had  been  moved  from  that  room,  but  were

1  Tissie,  Les  Rfrves,  p.  121.

415  B]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  371

found,  and,  to  the  astonishment  of  the  young  ladies,  I  said,  "  This  is  the  one
that  contains  my  brooch  ; "  and  there,  at  the  very  page  I  expected,  I  found  it.

A.  M.  BICKFORD-SMITH.

We  received  a  substantially  similar  account  from  Mrs.  Bickford-Smith's
brother-in-law,  Mr.  H.  A.  Smith,  who  was  a  witness  of  the  trouble  taken
to  find  the  brooch,  both  at  the  hotel,  and  by  sending  to  Swan  &  Edgar's,
on  the  previous  evening.

Yet  here,  be  it  observed,  Mrs.  Bickford-Smith  had  not  had  an  oppor-
tunity of  herself  inspecting  the  scene  of  the  loss.  Had  she  returned  to
Swan  &  Edgar's  before  the  dream,  it  is  possible  that  the  sight  of  the  books
on  the  table  might  have  revived  some  recollection  of  seeing  the  brooch
between  the  leaves  of  the  Queen.

415  B.  The  next  case  was  given  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American
S.P.R.  (vol.  i.  No.  4,  p.  363)  on  the  authority  of  Professor  Royce  of
Harvard.  The  narrator  was  Colonel  A.  v.  S.  of  Texas  (whose  full  name
was  known  to  Professor  Royce).  This  case  is  more  complicated  than
that  last  given,  inasmuch  as  the  missing  article  was  apparently  revealed
to  the  percipient  by  her  dead  brother  in  a  dream — and  revealed  in  a  place
where  it  had  been  previously  looked  for  in  vain.  The  "  orthodox "
explanation,  however,  would  be  that  the  position  of  the  knife  was
first  perceived  by  the  subliminal  self,  which  only  succeeded  in  informing
the  supraliminal  self  through  a  dramatic  dream.

In  the  New  York  Herald  si  December  nth  inst.  I  have  noticed  your  inter-
view, in  which  you  say  that  you  request  any  person  having  some  unusual
experience,  such  as  an  exceptionally  vivid  dream,  &c.  &c.,  should  address  you.
The  following  seems  to  me  a  very  extraordinary  dream,  for  the  truth  of  which  I
pledge  you  my  word  of  honour.

About  five  years  ago  I  lived  with  my  four  children,  one  boy  and  three  girls,
on  a  farm  in  Massachusetts.  This  only  son,  at  the  age  of  about  fourteen  years,
lost  his  life  in  an  accident,  about  six  months  previous  to  this  narration.  The
youngest  of  the  girls  was  the  pet  sister  of  his  since  her  birth.  My  wife  had
died  some  six  years  previous  to  this  story;  being  motherless,  made  these
children  unusually  affectionate  towards  each  other.  One  day  I  had  occasion
to  buy  for  my  girls  each  a  very  small  lady's  knife,  about  two  and  a  half  inches
A  few  days  afterwards  the  girls  received  company  from  our  neighbours'
>ome  five  or  six  of  them.  My  youngest  one,  some  eight  or  nine  years
old,  was  so  delighted  with  this,  her  first  knife,  that  she  carried  it  with  her  at  all
During  the  afternoon  the  children  strolled  to  the  large  barn,  filled  with
hay,  and  at  once  set  to  climbing  the  mow  to  play,  and  jumping  on  the  hay.
During  the  excitement  of  the  play  my  little  girl  lost  her  knife.  This  terrible
loss  nearly  broke  her  heart,  and  all  hands  set  to  work  to  find  the  lost  treasure,
but  without  success.  This  finally  broke  up  the  party  in  gloominess.  In  spite
of  my  greatest  efforts  to  pacify  the  child  with  all  sorts  of  promises,  she  went  to
bed  weeping.  During  the  night  the  child  dreamed  that  her  dead  dear  beloved
brother  came  to  her,  taking  her  by  the  hand,  saying,  *'  Come,  my  dar-
jpg,  I  will  show  you  where  your  little  knife  is,"  and.  leading  her  to  the  barn,
mg  the  mow,  showed  her  the  knife,  marking  the  place.  The  dream  was

372  APPENDICES  [417  A

so  life-like  that  she  awoke,  joyfully  telling  her  sister  that  her  brother  had  been
here,  and  showing  her  where  she  would  find  her  knife.  Both  girls  hastily
dressed,  and  running  to  the  barn,  the  little  girl,  assisted  by  her  sister,  got  on
top  of  the  hay,  and  walked  direct  to  the  spot  indicated  by  her  brother,  and
found  the  knife  on  top  of  the  hay.  The  whole  party  said  that  they  all  looked
there  many  times  the  day  before,  and  insisted  that  the  knife  was  not  there  then.
This,  I  think,  is  a  very  remarkable  dream. — Yours,  &c.

"  In  answer  to  a  request  for  further  confirmation,"  continues  Professor
Royce,  "our  correspondent  writes,  under  date  of  December  29th,
1887  :  "—

Yours  of  December  22nd  inst.  to  hand.  According  to  your  request  I  will
give  the  statement  of  my  girls.  The  little  dreamer  says  : —

"  I  have  a  very  vivid  recollection  of  my  dream  up  to  this  day.  I  could  to-
day walk  every  step  that  I  walked  in  my  dream  with  brother.  I  cannot
recollect  at  what  time  of  the  night  I  had  my  dream.  I  don't  think  I  ever  was
awake  during  the  night,  but,  on  waking  in  the  morning,  I  had  the  feeling  that
I  was  sure  I  could  go  and  get  the  knife.  I  told  my  sisters.  They  at  first
laughed  at  my  dream,  but  I  insisted  that  brother  had  shown  me  the  knife,  and
I  could  not  have  peace  in  my  mind  until  I  went  to  the  barn  to  get  it.  One  sister
went  with  me.  On  reaching  the  hay,  I  told  her  to  let  me  go  ahead,  and  walked
direct  to  the  spot  without  hesitating  a  moment,  and  picked  up  my  knife !  "

She  never  had  any  other  similar  experience,  and  no  other  similar  experience
happened  in  my  family.  The  sister  who  went  along  with  her  says : —

**  As  we  got  up  and  were  dressing,  sister  told  me  she  knew  where  her  knife
was ;  that  brother  took  her  out  to  the  barn  during  the  night  and  showed  it  to
her.  I  laughed  and  tried  to  persuade  her  that  this  was  only  a  dream,  but  she
said  that  she  was  so  sure  of  seeing  the  knife  that  she  would  show  it  to  me.  She
said  that  brother  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  led  her  to  the  place,  talking  to  her
all  the  way,  and  tried  to  quiet  her.  She  would  not  give  peace  until  I  went  along.
On  getting  on  top  of  the  hay  she  walked  direct  to  the  spot,  saying,  '  Here
brother  picked  the  knife  up  out  of  the  hay,'  and  at  once  said,  '  and  oh,  here  it
is,'  picking  up  the  knife.  We  had  been  looking  this  place  all  over,  again  and
again,  the  previous  evening."

417  A.  Here  is  a  case  in  which  a  difficult  problem  in  bookkeeping,
which  had  baffled  the  narrator's  waking  endeavours,  was  solved  during
sleep.  I  quote  it  from  the  Zoist,  vol.  viii.  p.  328.  It  was  communicated
to  Dr.  Elliotson,  with  the  dreamer's  name  and  address,  by  Dr.  Davey,  of
the  Colney  Hatch  Lunatic  Asylum.

January  iqth,  1850.

MY  DEAR ,  —In  accordance  with  your  request,  I  herewith  transmit

you  particulars,  as  they  occurred,  of  the  peculiar  dream,  if  such  it  may  be
called,  which  proved  of  so  essential  service  to  me.

As  I  mentioned  to  you,  I  had  been  bothered  since  September  with  an  error
in  my  cash  account  for  that  month,  and  despite  many  hours'  examination,  it
defied  all  my  efforts,  and  I  almost  gave  it  up  as  a  hopeless  case.  It  had  been
the  subject  of  my  waking  thoughts  for  many  nights,  and  had  occupied  a  large
portion  of  my  leisure  hours.  Matters  remained  thus  unsettled  until  the  I  ith

417  B]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  373

December.  On  this  night  I  had  not,  to  my  knowledge,  once  thought  of  the
subject,  but  I  had  not  long  been  in  bed,  and  asleep,  when  my  brain  was  as  busy
with  the  books  as  though  I  had  been  at  my  desk.  The  cash-book,  banker's
pass-books,  &c.,  &c.,  appeared  before  me,  and  without  any  apparent  trouble  I
almost  immediately  discovered  the  cause  of  the  mistake,  which  had  arisen  out
of  a  complicated  cross-entry.  I  perfectly  recollect  having  taken  a  slip  of  paper
in  my  dream  and  made  such  a  memorandum  as  would  enable  me  to  correct  the
error  at  some  leisure  time ;  and,  having  done  this,  that  the  whole  of  the  circum-
stances had  passed  from  my  mind.  When  I  awoke  in  the  morning  I  had  not
the  slightest  recollection  of  my  dream,  nor  did  it  once  occur  to  me  throughout
the  day,  although  I  had  the  very  books  before  me  on  which  I  had  apparently
been  engaged  in  my  sleep.  When  I  returned  home  in  the  afternoon,  as  I  did
early  for  the  purpose  of  dressing,  and  proceeded  to  shave,  I  took  up  a  piece  of
paper  from  my  dressing-table  to  wipe  my  razor,  and  you  may  imagine  my
surprise  at  finding  thereon  the  very  memorandum  I  fancied  had  been  made
during  the  previous  night.  The  effect  on  me  was  such  that  I  returned  to  our
office  and  turned  to  the  cash-book,  when  I  found  that  I  had  really,  when,
asleep,  detected  the  error  which  I  could  not  detect  in  my  waking  hours,  and
had  actually  jotted  it  down  at  the  time.  .  .  .

P.S. — I  may  add  that,  on  a  former  occasion,  nearly  a  similar  occurrence
took  place ;  with,  however,  this  difference,  that  I  awoke  at  the  conclusion  of
the  dream,  and  was  perfectly  aware,  when  certainly  awake,  of  having  made  the
memorandum  at  that  time.  This,  however,  was  not  the  case  in  the  occurrence
I  have  above  detailed.  ...  C.  J.  E.

Mr.  E.  wrote  later  : —

I  have  no  recollection  whatever  as  to  where  I  obtained  the  writing  mate-
rials, or  rather  paper  and  pencil,  with  which  I  made  the  memorandum  referred
to.  It  certainly  must  have  been  written  in  the  dark,  and  in  my  bedroom,  as  I
found  both  paper  and  pencil  there  the  following  afternoon,  and  could  not  for  a
long  time  understand  anything  about  it.  The  pencil  was  not  one  which  I  am
in  the  habit  of  carrying,  and  my  impression  is  that  I  must  have  either  found  it
accidentally  in  the  room,  or  gone  downstairs  for  it.  C.  J.  E.

417  B.  Some  striking  cases  in  which,  during  sleep,  complex  infer-
ences have  been  drawn,  from  data  presumably  present  to  the  waking  mind,
with  more  than  waking  intelligence,  were  recorded  by  Professor  W.
Romaine  Newbold,  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  in  a  paper  entitled
"Sub-conscious  Reasoning,"  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  pp.  11-20,
from  which  I  give  the  following  extracts : —

The  first  case  (says  Professor  Newbold)  was  given  me  by  my  friend  and
4uo,  William  A.  Lamberton,  Professor  of   Greek  in  the   University  of
Pennsylvania,  and  I  transcribe  his  own  written  statement.

went  to  the  Lehigh  University  in  the  fall  of  1869  as  instructor  in  Latin

My  spare  time,  however,  partly  as  the  result  of  old  leanings  of

•;atc   days,    partly    in    consequence    of    a  somewhat    intimate

mionship  that  sprang  up  between  me  and  the  instructor  in  mathcrr

i  few  months  came  to  be  givrn  almost  entirely  to  mathematics.     I  then

made  acquaintance  for  the  first  time  with  the  pleasures  of  descriptive  geometry;

374  APPENDICES  [417  B

I  may  say  here  that  this  branch  of  mathematics  has  a  more  direct  tendency
towards  quickening  the  power  of  mentally  picturing  bodies  and  lines  in  space
than  any  other  part  of  mathematics  that  can  be  called  elementary.  I  mention
this  here  because  it  may  have  some  bearing  upon  the  experience  now  to  be
related.

"  Outside  of  this  study  of  descriptive  geometry,  my  mathematical  work  was
entirely  algebraic  and  analytic.  I  soon  began  to  try  my  hand  at  certain
problems.  Somewhere  in  the  spring,  I  think  it  was,  of  1870,  I  attacked  this
problem  :  Given  an  ellipse,  to  find  the  locus  of  the  foot  of  the  perpendicular
let  fall  from  either  focus  upon  a  tangent  to  this  ellipse  at  any  point.  I
endeavoured  to  solve  this  analytically,  starting  from  the  well-known  equations
of  the  tangent  to  an  ellipse,  and  of  a  perpendicular  to  a  given  line  from  a  given
point.  No  thought  of  attempting  a  geometrical  solution  ever  entered  my  head.
After  battling  with  these  equations  for  a  considerable  time — it  was  over  a  week
and  may  have  been  two  weeks — I  came  to  the  natural  conclusion  that  I  was
bogged,  and  that  all  my  efforts,  if  continued,  would  only  sink  me  deeper  in  the
bog  ;  the  proper  thing  to  do  was  to  call  a  halt,  dismissing  the  problem  as  far
as  possible  from  my  thoughts,  and  after  some  time,  when  my  mind  had  got
completely  free  from  it,  to  return  to  it  afresh,  when,  I  had  no  doubt,  a  few
minutes  would  put  me  in  possession  of  the  solution.  This  I  did  absolutely  and
with  success.  After  about  a  week,  I  woke  one  morning  and  found  myself  in
possession  of  the  desired  solution  under  circumstances  to  me  strange  and
interesting,  so  much  so  that  the  impression  of  them  has  never  died  away,  or
even,  so  far  as  I  can  say,  become  dim  or  altered  in  any  way.  First :  the
solution  was  entirely  geometrical,  whereas  I  had  been  labouring  for  it
analytically  without  ever  drawing  or  attempting  to  draw  a  single  figure.
Second  :  it  presented  itself  by  means  of  a  figure  objectively  pictured  at  a
considerable  distance  from  me  on  the  opposite  wall.  Now,  although  I  have
been  able,  and  have  been  so  for  years,  to  picture  to  myself  a  geometrical
figure — even  moderately  complicated — and  use  it  for  solution  of  a  geometrical
problem  without  external  lines  being  drawn,  such  figures  have  sensationally
for  me  a  distinct  location  in  myself,  viz.,  in  the  eye  itself  ;  they  are  never,  so
far  as  I  know,  externally  presented.  This,  however,  was  distinctly  external.
The  room  that  I  occupied  had  once  been  a  recitation  room.  It  was  a  long
room,  running  east  and  west,  with  two  windows  on  the  south  side,  one  in  the
south-east  corner.  The  north  wall  had  once  been  partially  occupied  by  a  long
blackboard,  set  in  the  wall  and  surrounded  by  a  moulding.  The  blackboard
surface  was  simply  a  blackened — possibly  slated — portion  of  the  wall  itself.
This  had  been  painted  over,  but  the  black  showed  through  the  white  paint  and
the  moulding  was  still  there  ;  so  that,  apart  from  the  tradition,  with  which  I
was  familiar,  the  fact  of  a  blackboard  having  been  there  was  perfectly  clear
and  evident.  My  bed  was  so  placed  between  the  windows  on  the  south  and
the  north  wall,  that  on  opening  my  eyes  in  the  morning  the  first  thing  I  would
be  likely  to  see  was  the  blackboard  surface.  On  opening  my  eyes  on  the
morning  in  question,  I  saw  projected  upon  this  blackboard  surface  a  complete
figure,  containing  not  only  the  lines  given  by  the  problem,  but  also  a  number
of  auxiliary  lines,  and  just  such  lines  as  without  further  thought  solved  the
problem  at  once.  Both  foci  were  joined  with  the  point  of  contact  of  the
tangent :  the  perpendicular  was  prolonged  beyond  its  point  of  intersection
with  the  tangent  till  it  met  the  line  from  the  other  focus  through  the  point  of
contact  with  the  ellipse  ;  a  line  was  drawn  from  the  centre  of  the  ellipse  to  the

417  C]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  375

foot  of  the  perpendicular,  and,  lastly,  the  locus,  a  circle  on  the  major  axis  of
the  ellipse  as  diameter,  was  drawn.  I  sprang  from  bed  and  drew  the  figure  on
paper;  needless  to  say,  perhaps,  that  the  geometrical  solution  being  thus
given,  only  a  few  minutes  were  needed  to  get  the  analytical  one.

"W.  A.  LAMBERTON."

Professor  Newbold  continues  : —

Professor  Lamberton  has  showed  me  his  note-book  containing  the  state-
ment of  the  problem  and  the  analytical  solution.  He  is  unable  to  find  the
contemporary  drawing  above  mentioned,  and  no  contemporary  account  is
forthcoming.  It  is  possible  that  some  of  the  details  of  the  phenomenon  have
become  obscured  in  the  lapse  of  twenty-five  years,  but  the  essential  points
seem  to  me  to  be  indubitable, — that  Professor  Lamberton  saw  that  morning  an
externalised  hallucinatory  figure,  and  that,  whatever  its  precise  character,  it
suggested  to  him  the  solution  which  he  had  sought  in  vain  by  the  analytical
method.  There  is  no  clue  to  the  time  at  which  the  reasoning  processes
necessary  to  attain  the  result  were  carried  out,  but  from  general  considerations
it  seems  to  me  most  probable  that  they  formed  part  of  some  forgotten  dream
and  were  not  going  on  **  sub-consciously "  during  waking  life.  Professor
Lamberton  is  of  Scotch-Irish  descent,  is  a  man  of  the  most  robust  physical  and
mental  health,  and  is  of  a  temperament  precisely  the  opposite  of  that  in  which
traces  of  true  "  sub-conscious  "  processes  are  usually  found.  The  function  of
the  disused  blackboard,  as  apparently  providing  a  point  de  reptre  for  the
hallucination,  is  of  interest  and  will  suggest  many  analogies.  This  is  Professor
Lamberton's  only  hallucinatory  experience.  He  informs  me  further  that  his
colour  memory  is  bad,  although  his  memory  for  line  and  form  is  excellent.  He
visualises  little,  and  it  was  not  until  some  time  after  the  above  experience  that
he  learned  that  it  was  within  the  power  of  some  persons  voluntarily  to  exter-
nalise their  visual  memories.

417  C.  The  following  account  is  also  taken  from  Professor  New-
hold's  paper,  just  quoted.  He  writes  : —

For  [these]  cases  I  am  indebted  to  another  friend  and  colleague,  Dr.  Herman
V  Hilprecht,  Professor  of  Assyrian  in  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  Both
occurred  in  his  own  experience,  and  I  write  the  account  of  the  first  from  notes
made  by  me  upon  his  narrative.

During  the  winter,  1882-1883,  he  was  working  with  Professor  Friedrich
Delitzsch,  and  was  preparing  to  publish,  as  his  dissertation,  a  text,  translitera-
tion, and  translation  of  a  stone  of  Nebuchadnezzar  I.  with  notes.  He  accepted
at  that  time  the  explanation  given  by  Professor  Delitzsch  of  the  name  Nebu-
chadnezzar—" NabA-kud&rrv-urur?  "  Nebo  protect  my  mason's  pad,  or  mortar
boarci  iv  work  as  a  builder."  One  night,  after  working  late,  he  went  to

bed  about  two  o'clock  in  the  morning.     After  a  somewhat  restless  sleep,  he
awoke  with  his  mind  full  of  the  thought  that  the  name  should  be  translated
)  protect  my  boundary."     He  had  a  dim  consciousness  of  having  been
working  at  his  table  in  a  dream,  but  could  never  recall  the  details  of  the  process
iich  he  arrived  at  this  conclusion.     Reflecting  upon  it  wh  .  how-

he  at  once  saw  that  kud&rru,  *'  boundary,"  could  be  derived  from  the  verb
enclose.      Shortly  afterwards  he  published  t  ition  in  his  dis-

•citation,  and  it  has  since  been  universally  adopted.

376  APPENDICES  [417  C

I  quote  this  experience,  in  itself  of  a  familiar  type,  on  account  of  its  interest
when  viewed  in  connection  with  the  more  curious  dream  next  to  be  related.
I  was  told  of  the  latter  shortly  after  it  happened,  and  here  translate  an  account
written  in  German  by  Professor  Hilprecht,  August  8th,  1893,  before  the  more
complete  confirmation  was  received.

"One  Saturday  evening,  about  the  middle  of  March  1893,  I  had  been
wearying  myself,  as  I  had  done  so  often  in  the  weeks  preceding,  in  the  vain
attempt  to  decipher  two  small  fragments  of  agate  which  were  supposed  to
belong  to  the  finger-rings  of  some  Babylonian.  The  labour  was  much  in-
creased by  the  fact  that  the  fragments  presented  remnants  only  of  characters
and  lines,  that  dozens  of  similar  small  fragments  had  been  found  in  the  ruins  of
the  temple  of  Bel  at  Nippur  with  which  nothing  could  be  done,  that  in  this
case  furthermore  I  had  never  had  the  originals  before  me,  but  only  a  hasty
sketch  made  by  one  of  the  members  of  the  expedition  sent  by  the  University  of
Pennsylvania  to  Babylonia.  I  could  not  say  more  than  that  the  fragments,
taking  into  consideration  the  place  in  which  they  were  found  and  the  peculiar
characteristics  of  the  cuneiform  characters  preserved  upon  them,  sprang  from
the  Cassite  period  of  Babylonian  history  (circa  1700-1 140  B.C.)  ;  moreover,  as  the
first  character  of  the  third  line  of  the  first  fragment  seemed  to  be  KU,  I
ascribed  this  fragment,  with  an  interrogation  point,  to  King  Kurigalzu,  while  I
placed  the  other  fragment,  as  unclassifiable,  with  other  Cassite  fragments  upon
a  page  of  my  book  where  I  published  the  unclassifiable  fragments.  The  proofs
already  lay  before  me,  but  I  was  far  from  satisfied.  The  whole  problem  passed
yet  again  through  my  mind  that  March  evening  before  I  placed  my  mark  of
approval  under  the  last  correction  in  the  book.  Even  then  I  had  come  to
no  conclusion.  About  midnight,  weary  and  exhausted,  I  went  to  bed  and  was
soon  in  deep  sleep.  Then  I  dreamed  the  following  remarkable  dream.  A  tall,
thin  priest  of  the  old  pre-Christian  Nippur,  about  forty  years  of  age  and  clad  in
a  simple  abba,  led  me  to  the  treasure-chamber  of  the  temple,  on  its  south-east
side.  He  went  with  me  into  a  small,  low-ceiled  room,  without  windows,  in
which  there  was  a  large  wooden  chest,  while  scraps  of  agate  and  lapis-lazuli  lay
scattered  on  the  floor.  Here  he  addressed  me  as  follows  :  '  The  two  fragments
which  you  have  published  separately  upon  pages  22  and  26,  belong  together,
are  not  finger-rings,  and  their  history  is  as  follows.  King  Kurigalzu  (circa  1300
B.C.)  once  sent  to  the  temple  of  Bel,  among  other  articles  of  agate  and  lapis-
lazuli,  an  inscribed  votive  cylinder  of  agate.  Then  we  priests  suddenly  received
the  command  to  make  for  the  statue  of  the  god  Ninib  a  pair  of  earrings  of
agate.  We  were  in  great  dismay,  since  there  was  no  agate  as  raw  material  at
hand.  In  order  to  execute  the  command  there  was  nothing  for  us  to  do  but
cut  the  votive  cylinder  into  three  parts,  thus  making  three  rings,  each  of  which
contained  a  portion  of  the  original  inscription.  The  first  two  rings  served  as
earrings  for  the  statue  of  the  god ;  the  two  fragments  which  have  given  you  so
much  trouble  are  portions  of  them.  If  you  will  put  the  two  together  you  will
have  confirmation  of  my  words.  But  the  third  ring  you  have  not  yet  found  in
the  course  of  your  excavations,  and  you  never  will  find  it.'  With  this,  the  priest
disappeared.  I  awoke  at  once  and  immediately  told  my  wife  the  dream  that  I
might  not  forget  it.  Next  morning — Sunday — I  examined  the  fragments  once
more  in  the  light  of  these  disclosures,  and  to  my  astonishment  found  all  the
details  of  the  dream 'precisely  verified  in  so  far  as  the  means  of  verification  were
in  my  hands.  The  original  inscription  on  the  votive  cylinder  read  :  '  To  the
god  Ninib,  son  of  Bel,  his  lord,  has  Kurigalzu,  pontifex  of  Bel,  presented  this.'

417  C]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  377

"  The  problem  was  thus  at  last  solved.  I  stated  in  the  preface  that  I  had
unfortunately  discovered  too  late  that  the  two  fragments  belonged  together,
made  the  corresponding  changes  in  the  Table  of  Contents,  pp.  50  and  52,  and,
it  being  not  possible  to  transpose  the  fragments,  as  the  plates  were  already
made,  I  put  in  each  plate  a  brief  reference  to  the  other.  (Cf.  Hilprecht,  *  The
Babylonian  Expedition  of  the  University  of  Pennsylvania,' Series  A,  Cuneiform
Texts,  Vol.  I.,  Part  i,  '  Old  Babylonian  Inscriptions,  chiefly  from  Nippur.')

"H.  V.  HILPRECHT."

Upon  the  priest's  statement  that  the  fragments  were  those  of  a  votive
cylinder,  Professor  Hilprecht  makes  the  following  comment : —

"  There  are  not  many  of  these  votive  cylinders.  I  had  seen,  all  told,  up  to
that  evening,  not  more  than  two.  They  very  much  resemble  the  so-called  seal
cylinders,  but  usually  have  no  pictorial  representations  upon  them,  and  the
inscription  is  not  reversed,  not  being  intended  for  use  in  sealing,  but  is  written
as  it  is  read."

The  following  transliteration  of  the  inscription,  in  the  Sumerian  language,
will  serve  to  give  those  of  us  who  are  unlearned  in  cuneiform  languages  an  idea
of  the  material  which  suggested  the  dream.  The  straight  vertical  lines  repre-
sent the  cuts  by  which  the  stone-cutter  divided  the  original  cylinder  into  three
sections.  The  bracketed  words  are  entirely  lost,  and  have  been  supplied
by  analogy  from  the  many  similar  inscriptions.

Line  i.  Dingir  N

2.  dingir

3.  luga
„     4.  Ku-r

>*     5-  pa-

„     6.  (in-       na-

inib     du
En-

1  -  a  -  ni
(i-  galzu)

(mu)  To  the  god  Ninib,  child

(lil)  of  the  god  Bel

(ir)  his  lord

Kurigalzu

(tesi  dingir  Enlil)  pontifex  of  the  god  Bel

ba)  has  presented  it.

I  translate  also  the  following  statement  which  Mrs.  Hilprecht  kindly  made
at  my  request.

"  I  was  awakened  from  sleep  by  a  sigh,  immediately  thereafter  heard  a
spring  from  the  bed,  and  at  the  same  moment  saw  Professor  Hilprecht  hurrying
into  his  study.  Thence  came  the  cry,  '  It  is  so,  it  is  so.'  Grasping  the  situa-
tion, I  followed  him  and  satisfied  myself  in  the  midnight  hour  as  to  the  outcome
of  his  most  interesting  dream.1  "  J.  C.  HILPRECHT."

At  the  time  Professor  Hilprecht  told  me  of  this  curious  dream,  which  was  a
few  weeks  after  its  occurrence,  there  remained  a  serious  difficulty  which  he  was
not  able  to  explain.  According  to  the  memoranda  in  our  possession,  the  frag-
ments were  of  different  colours,  and  therefore  could  have  scarcely  belonged  to
the  same  object.  The  original  fragments  were  in  Constantinople,  and  it  was
with  no  little  interest  that  I  awaited  Professor  Hilprecht's  return  from  the  trip

1  An  apparent  discrepancy  between   Professor  Hilprecht's  account  and  that  of
!  I ilprecht  calls  for  explanation.     Professor  Hilprecht  states  that  he  verified  his
dream  on    Sunday  morning  at  the    University;  Mrs.  Hilprecht   that   he  verified  it
immediately  upon  awaking,  in  his  library.     Both  statements  are  correct.    He  had  a
working  copy  in  i  which  he  examined  at  once,  but  hurried  to  the  University

next  morning  to  verify  it  by  comparison  with  the  authorised  copy  made  from  the
originals.— W.  R.  N.

3/8  APPENDICES  [417  C

which  he  made  thither  in  the  summer  of   1893.     I  translate  again  his  own
account  of  what  he  then  ascertained.

November  iQth,  1895.

"In  August  1893,  I  was  sent  by  the  Committee  on  the  Babylonian  Expedi-
tion to  Constantinople,  to  catalogue  and  study  the  objects  got  from  Nippur  and
preserved  there  in  the  Imperial  Museum.  It  was  to  me  a  matter  of  the  greatest
interest  to  see  for  myself  the  objects  which,  according  to  my  dream,  belonged
together,  in  order  to  satisfy  myself  that  they  had  both  originally  been  parts  of
the  same  votive  cylinder.  Halil  Bey,  the  director  of  the  museum,  to  whom  I
told  my  dream,  and  of  whom  I  asked  permission  to  see  the  objects,  was  so
interested  in  the  matter,  that  he  at  once  opened  all  the  cases  of  the  Babylonian
section,  and  requested  me  to  search.  Father  Scheil,  an  Assyriologist  from  Paris,
who  had  examined  and  arranged  the  articles  excavated  by  us  before  me,  had
not  recognised  the  fact  that  these  fragments  belonged  together,  and  conse-
quently I  found  one  fragment  in  one  case,  and  the  other  in  a  case  far  away
from  it.  As  soon  as  I  found  the  fragments  and  put  them  together,  the  truth  of
the  dream  was  demonstrated  ad  oculos — they  had,  in  fact,  once  belonged  to  one
and  the  same  votive  cylinder.  As  it  had  been  originally  of  finely  veined  agate,
the  stone-cutter's  saw  had  accidentally  divided  the  object  in  such  a  way  that  the
whitish  vein  of  the  stone  appeared  only  upon  the  one  fragment  and  the  larger
grey  surface  upon  the  other.  Thus  I  was  able  to  explain  Dr.  Peters's  discordant
description  of  the  two  fragments."

Professor  Hilprecht  is  unable  to  say  what  language  the  old  priest  used  in
addressing  him.  He  is  quite  certain  that  it  was  not  Assyrian,  and  thinks  it  was
either  English  or  German.

There  are  two  especial  points  of  interest  in  this  case,  the  character  of  the
information  conveyed,  and  the  dramatic  form  in  which  it  was  put.  The
apparently  novel  points  of  information  given  were  : —

1.  That  the  fragments  belonged  together.

2.  That  they  were  fragments  of  a  votive  cylinder.

3.  That  the  cylinder  was  presented  by  King  Kurigalzu.

4.  That  it  was  dedicated  to  Ninib.

5.  That  it  had  been  made  into  a  pair  of  earrings.

6.  That  the  "treasure  chamber"  was  located  upon  the  south-east  side  of
the  temple.

A  careful  analysis  reveals  the  fact  that  not  one  of  these  items  was  beyond
the  reach  of  the  processes  of  associative  reasoning  which  Professor  Hilprecht
daily  employs.  Among  the  possible  associative  consequents  of  the  writing
upon  the  one  fragment,  some  of  the  associative  consequents  of  the  writing  on
the  other  were  sub-consciously  involved ;  the  attraction  of  these  identical
elements  brings  the  separate  pieces  into  mental  juxtaposition,  precisely  as  the
pieces  of  a  "  dissected  map  "  find  one  another  in  thought.  In  waking  life  the
dissimilarity  of  colour  inhibited  any  tendency  on  the  part  of  the  associative
processes  to  bring  them  together,  but  in  sleep  this  difference  of  colour  seems  to
have  been  forgotten — there  being  no  mention  made  of  it — and  the  assimilation
took  place.  The  second  point  is  more  curious,  but  is  not  inexplicable.  For  as
soon  as  the  fragments  were  brought  into  juxtaposition  mentally,  enough  of  the
inscription  became  legible  to  suggest  the  original  character  of  the  object.  This
is  true  also  of  the  third  and  fourth  points.  The  source  of  the  fifth  is  not  so  clear.
Upon  examining  the  originals,  Professor  Hilprecht  felt  convinced  from  the  size

421  A]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  379

of  the  hole  still  to  be  seen  through  the  fragments  that  they  could  not  have
been  used  as  finger-rings,  and  that  they  had  been  used  as  earrings,  but  the
written  description  which  he  had  before  him  at  the  time  of  his  dream  did  not
bring  these  points  to  view.  Still,  such  earrings  are  by  no  means  uncommon
objects.  Such  a  supposition  might  well  have  occurred  to  Professor  Hilprecht
in  his  waking  state,  and,  in  view  of  the  lack  of  positive  confirmation,  it  would  be
rash  to  ascribe  it  to  any  supernormal  power.  The  last  point  is  most  interesting.
When  he  told  me  this  story,  Professor  Hilprecht  remembered  that  he  had  heard
from  Dr.  John  P.  Peters,  before  he  had  the  dream,  of  the  discovery  of  a  room
in  which  were  remnants  of  a  wooden  box,  while  the  floor  was  strewn  with
fragments  of  agate  and  lapis-lazuli.  The  walls,  of  course,  and  ceiling  have  long
since  perished.  The  location,  however,  of  the  room  he  did  not  know,  and
suggested  I  should  write  to  Dr.  Peters  and  find  out  whether  it  was  correctly
given  in  his  dream,  and  whether  Dr.  Peters  had  told  him  of  it.  Dr.  Peters
replied  that  the  location  given  was  correct,  but,  he  adds,  he  told  Professor
Hilprecht  all  these  facts  as  long  ago  as  1891,  and  thinks  he  provided  him  with
a  drawing  of  the  room's  relation  to  the  temple.  Of  this  Professor  Hilprecht
has  no  recollection.  He  thinks  it  probable  that  Dr.  Peters  told  him  orally  of
the  location  of  the  room,  but  feels  sure  that  if  any  such  plan  was  given  him  it
would  now  be  found  among  his  papers.  This  is  a  point  of  no  importance,
however.  We  certainly  cannot  regard  the  location  as  ascertained  by  super-
normal means.

421  A.  In  the  case  next  to  be  quoted,  in  which  a  young  man  sees  in
a  dream  the  place  where  his  friend's  watch  has  fallen  in  a  field,  it  might  be
suggested  that  the  loser's  subliminal  self  had  seen  the  watch  fall,  and  after-
wards communicated  that  knowledge  telepathically  to  his  sleeping  friend.
The  analogy  of  other  cases,  however,  would  seem  rather  to  point  to  an
excursion  or  extension  of  the  dreamer's  perception,  so  as  to  include  the
field  where  the  watch  was  found.  The  account  was  originally  sent  to
Professor  W.  James,  and  I  quote  it  from  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.
P-  397-

l

PROF.  JAMES,— DEAR  SIR,— I  am  informed  that  you  are  at  the  head  of  the
Boston  Branch  of  the  English  Society  of  Psychical  Research,  and  beg  to  call
your  attention  to  a  singular  incident  which  took  place  near  here  some  time  ago,
and  which  has  never  been  chronicled.  It  is,  in  brief,  as  follows  :  —

A  young  man  of  this  place,  J.  L.  Squires  by  name,  was  at  work  on  the  farm
of  T.  L.  Johnson,  with  another  young  man,  Wesley  Davis,  who  was  one  day  far
from  the  buildings  mending  fence  around  a  large  pasture.  Squires  was  not
with  him,  nor  had  he  ever  been  far  into  the  pasture.  At  some  time  during  the
lost  his  watch  and  chain  from  the  vest  pocket,  and  although  he
searched  diligently,  could  not  find  it,  as  he  had  no  idea  as  to  the  probable
locality  of  the  watch.  Although  only  a  silver  watch,  Davis  worked  for  a  living
and  could  hardly  afford  its  loss.

In  his  sympathy  for  his  friend,  Squires  could  not  keep  his  mind  off  the
watch,  and  after  two  or  three  days'  thinking  of  it,  went  to  bed  one  night  still
thinking  of  it.  During  the  night  he  had  a  dream,  or  vision,  as  we  may  call  it,
\v  the  watch  lying  on  the  ground  with  the  chain  coiled  in  a  peculiar  posi-
tion ;  rocks,  trees,  and  all  the  surroundings  were  perfectly  plain  to  him.  Telling

38o  APPENDICES  [421  A

his  story  at  the  breakfast  table,  he  was,  of  course,  well  laughed  at,  but  being  so
convinced  that  he  could  go  straight  to  the  watch,  he  saddled  a  horse  and  found
it  exactly  as  he  expected  to.

All  the  parties  concerned  are  wholly  honest  and  reliable.  I  will  have  a
detailed  statement  sworn  to  if  you  would  like  it.

JOHN  E.  GALE,  Guilford,  Vermont.

Mr.  Squires  writes  : —

In  the  month  of  March  1887,  I,  Jesse  L.  Squires,  of  Guilford,  in  the
county  of  Windham,  and  State  of  Vermont,  being  then  in  the  twenty-third
year  of  my  age,  began  working  for  T.  L.  Johnson,  a  farmer  living  in  the
town  aforesaid.

In  the  month  of  September  following — the  exact  day  of  the  month  I  do  not
remember — I  was  about  one  mile  from  the  farm  buildings  with  a  young  man
named  Wesley  Davis,  with  whom  I  had  for  several  years  been  acquainted,  and
who  had  been  working  with  me  at  said  Johnson's  for  several  months,  looking
after  some  cattle  that  had  strayed  from  a  pasture.  The  cattle,  eighteen  or
twenty  head,  were  found  in  a  large  mow  lot,  and  seeing  us,  started  to  run  away
in  a  direction  opposite  to  that  in  which  we  wished  to  drive  them.  In  order  to
head  off  the  cattle  and  turn  them  back,  Davis  ran  one  way  and  I  the  other,
and  while  running  Davis  lost  his  watch  and  chain  from  his  vest  pocket,  but  did
not  discover  his  loss  until  eight  or  nine  o'clock  that  night,  when  it  was,  of  course,
too  late  to  search  for  it.  Believing  that  he  must  have  lost  the  watch  while
engaged  in  getting  the  cattle  back  into  the  pasture,  Davis  and  myself  returned
to  the  place  the  next  morning  and  looked  for  the  watch  all  the  forenoon.  Not
having  any  idea  of  the  probable  locality  in  which  the  watch  was  lost,  and  not
being  at  all  certain  that  it  was  lost  while  after  the  cattle,  we  did  not  succeed  in
finding  it,  although  we  searched  for  it  until  twelve  o'clock.  The  watch  was  one
that  Davis  had  had  for  some  time,  and  he  was  much  attached  to  it,  and  felt  very
badly  about  his  loss.  He  worked  hard  for  his  living,  and  could  not  afford  to
lose  the  watch,  for  which  he  had  paid  twenty-five  dollars.  I  felt  sorry  for  him,
and  thought  about  the  watch  continually  all  the  afternoon  after  we  returned  from
looking  for  it,  and  was  still  thinking  of  it  when  I  went  to  sleep  that  night.

During  my  sleep,  at  what  hour  I  could  not  tell,  I  saw  the  watch  as  it  lay
upon  the  ground  in  the  mow  lot,  over  a  mile  away.  It  was  in  the  tall  grass,  at
least  ten  inches  high.  The  face  of  the  watch  was  turned  up,  and  the  small  steel
chain  which  was  attached  to  it,  lay  in  a  curve  like  a  half  circle.  About  three
feet  from  the  watch  was  a  large  spot  where  the  grass  had  been  crushed  and
matted  by  a  creature  lying  down;  about  ten  rods  to  the  north  was  a  brush
fence ;  about  ten  or  twelve  feet  to  the  eastward  of  the  watch  was  a  granite  cobble
stone  one  or  two  feet  in  diameter,  which  lay  about  half  out  of  the  ground.
When  I  awoke  the  next  morning,  which  was  Sunday,  I  felt  as  certain  that  I
could  go  straight  to  the  watch  as  if  I  had  really  seen  it,  and  told  Davis  so,  and
tried  to  have  him  go  out  and  get  it.  He  had  no  faith  in  my  "  vision,"  "  dream,"
or  whatever  it  may  be  called,  and  would  not  go.  In  spite  of  the  jests  and
laughter  of  the  entire  family,  I  saddled  a  horse  and  went  directly  to  the  watch,
which  I  found  with  all  its  surroundings  exactly  as  I  had  seen  it.  I  was  not
nearer  than  forty  rods  to  Davis  when  the  watch  was  lost,  as  I  ascertained  after
it  was  found.

The  watch  had  run  down  and  stopped,  the  hands  pointing  to  9.40  o'clock,
which  I  also  noted  in  my  dream.  J.  L.  SQUIRES.

421  B]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  381

Mr.  Gale  adds  :—

GUILFORD,  VERMONT,  Af.irck  tfh,  1892.

I  hereby  certify  that  I  have  known  the  above  J.  L.  Squires  for  over  twenty
years,  and  that  I  know  him  to  be  strictly  temperate,  honest,  and  truthful.  He
has  always  been  in  the  best  of  health.  He  tells  me  that  he  has  recently  had
an  experience  similar  to  the  above,  which  I  will  send  you  if  you  wish.  .  .  .

JOHN  E.  GALE,  Justice  of  the  Peace.

421  B.  The  next  case  also  points  to  an  extension  of  the  dreamer's
perception.  It  is  taken  from  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  210.  Mr.
Podmore,  who  obtained  the  account,  wrote  : —

Mr.  Watts,  who  told  me  the  incident  immediately  before  writing  it  down
at  my  request,  is  quite  unable  to  find  any  explanation  of  the  matter.  He  is
quite  clear  that  he  had  no  opportunity  to  tell  any  one  beforehand,  that  the
image  of  the  broken  statue  had  actually  come  into  his  mind  at  the  moment
when  he  was  brushing  his  hair,  and  the  violent  shock  which  he  seems  to  have
felt  when  he  saw  his  dream  realised  is  strong  evidence  that  he  is  not  mistaken
on  this  point.

From  Mr.  J.  HUNTER  WATTS,  of  39  Seething  Lane,  E.G.

July  i6M,  1889.

I  will  endeavour  to  commit  to  paper  the  little  episode  which  I  related  to
you  verbally.  About  six  years  ago  I  was  with  my  brother  George  in  Paris,
where  he  bought  for  some  eight  or  ten  francs  a  plaster-of-Paris  "  Venus  de
Milo" — a  ghastly  copy  of  the  original.  I  protested  against  the  purchase  as  I
had  to  share  the  bother  of  bringing  the  thing  home,  and  as  it  was  some  four  or
five  feet  high  our  fellow-travellers  imagined  we  had  with  us  a  corpse  rolled  up
in  paper.  Arrived  home  I  would  not  consent  to  the  house  being  disfigured
with  the  thing,  so  as  a  compromise  my  brother  planted  it  on  the  summit  of  a
fern  rockery  in  the  corner  of  the  garden,  where  it  stood  for  many  months,  and
I  had  forgotten  its  existence  save  when  it  was  directly  in  sight.  Out  of  sight  it
was  out  of  mind.  One  autumn  morning,  just  after  I  had  risen  from  bed,  I  was
combing  my  ambrosial  locks  before  the  looking-glass,  and  I  caught  myself
reflecting  that  after  all  it  was  a  pity  the  thing  had  blown  down  and  broken,
for  it  did  not  look  so  bad  at  a  distance  surrounded  by  the  ferns.  "  Strange
too,"  I  thought  to  myself,  "that  the  head  should  be  so  neatly  decapitated,
though  the  fall  made  no  other  fracture."  Then  I  pulled  myself  up  mentally,
for  all  at  once  it  came  to  my  mind  that  I  had  been  dreaming,  and  I  smiled  to
myself  that  such  a  trumpery  thing  should  be  the  subject  of  my  dreams,
.hole  matter  would  have  been  forgotten,  would  have  gone  to  the  limbo
of  "things  unremembered,  but  on  going  downstairs  to  breakfast  and  finding
the  table  not  yet  furnished,  I  went  for  a  stroll  into  the  garden.  It  was  wet
under  foot  and  a  strong  wind  was  blowing.  When  I  came  to  the  fernery  I
i  start  and  for  a  moment  I  stood  tout  ttahi,  for  there  was  the  poor
"  Venus  de  Milo,"  the  body  unbroken,  lying  across  the  ferns,  and  the  head,
neatly  decapitated,  in  the  middle  of  the  walk,  exactly  as  I  had  seen  it  in  my
I  or  the  moment  I  was  convinced  that  I  had  been  walking  in  my  sleep
and  had  visited  the  garden,  but  that  I  found  could  not  be  the  case,  as  it  had
rained  all  night  and  my  garments  would  have  been  wet  through,  and  my  feet,

382  APPENDICES  [421  C

if  unshod,  muddy,  or  their  covering,  if  they  had  any,  defiled,  which  was  not  the
case.  Neither  am  I  given  to  walking  in  my  sleep.  I  have  never  done  so.
I  walked  back  to  the  house  feeling,  to  use  a  vulgar  phrase,  "  knocked  all  silly."
Can  it  be,  I  asked  myself  and  I  have  asked  myself  the  same  question  a  score
of  times  since,  that  while  my  body  material  slumbered  in  bed  some  immaterial
part  of  my  being  wandered  in  the  garden.  If  so,  that  immaterial  part  of  me
had  a  remarkable  disregard  for  wind  and  rain.

The  episode  is  a  trifling  one,  but  it  has  often  given  me  pause  and  it
remains  to  me  inexplicable.  As  you  know  I  am  a  Bank  Holiday  sort  of  young
man,  not  given  to  day-dreams.  J.  HUNTER  WATTS.

In  answer  to  the  inquiry  whether  the  statue  could  have  been  seen  from
his  bedroom  window,  or  from  any  other  window  in  the  house,  Mr.  Hunter
Watts  says :  "  No,  impossible ;  only  by  stretching  the  head  out  of
window  another  side  of  house — from  rooms  occupied  by  ladies."

A  lady  to  whom  Mr.  Watts  related  the  dream  corroborates  as
follows : —

45  HUNGERFORD  ROAD,  CAMDEN  ROAD,  N.

August  gtA.

All  I  can  at  all  remember  about  the  Venus  is  that  Mr.  Watts  told  us  one
morning  that  a  strange  thing  had  happened,  he  having  dreamt  that  the  statue
had  been  decapitated,  and  on  going  into  the  garden  he  found  it  was  so,  and
that  the  head  of  the  Venus  had  been  cut  clean  off,  and  had  rolled  on  to  the
path  from  the  figure,  which  had  been  placed  in  the  rockery  among  the  ferns.
He  was  very  much  astonished,  as  the  dream  was  vivid,  and  he  saw  the  head-
less statue  as  he  had  seen  it  in  his  dream.  We  could  never  explain  how  it
happened,  the  head  being  as  it  were  cut  off.  M.  ADAMS.

421  C.  Again  this  quasi-instinctive  knowledge,  realised  on  awaking
from  sleep,  of  the  mutilation  of  a  secluded  statue  may  be  compared
with  cases  where  a  seer  becomes  aware  of  the  position  of  a  dead  body,
— sometimes  of  no  special  interest  to  himself.

From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  375.

The  following  case  was  borrowed  originally  from  the  Religio-Philosophical
Journal,  which  described  it  as  follows  : —

"  A  prominent  Chicago  journalist  states  [in  the  Chicago  Times}  that  his  wife
asked  him  one  morning  while  still  engaged  in  dressing,  and  before  either  of
them  had  left  their  sleeping-room,  if  he  knew  any  one  named  Edsale  or  Esdale.
A  negative  reply  was  given,  and  then  a  *  Why  do  you  ask  ? '  She  replied :
*  During  the  night  I  dreamed  that  I  was  on  the  lake  shore,  and  found  a  coffin
there  with  the  name  of  Edsale  or  Esdale  on  it,  and  I  am  confident  that  some
one  of  that  name  has  recently  been  drowned  there.'  On  opening  the  morning
paper,  the  first  item  that  attracted  his  attention  was  the  report  of  the  mysterious
disappearance  from  his  home  in  Hyde  Park  of  a  young  man  named  Esdale.  A
few  days  afterwards  the  body  of  a  young  man  was  found  on  the  lake  shore."

In  answer  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  inquiries,  the  late  Colonel  Bundy,  who
was  then  editor  of  the  Religio- Philosophical  Journal,  wrote  : —

421  C]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  383

I  have  known  the  gentleman  and  his  wife  mentioned  in  case  No.  10,  by
reputation,  for  some  fifteen  years,  and  personally  for  six  years.  I  obtained
from  each  of  them  a  report  of  the  case  when  first  published,  October  I4th,
1885,  and  each  said  that  the  statement  was  true  as  published  in  the  Chicago
Times  of  that  date.  I  saw  both  of  them  September  23rd  [1888],  just  prior  to
publishing  the  report,  and  read  it  to  them ;  each  declared  it  to  be  a  true  report
of  the  occurrence.  After  receipt  of  Mr.  Hodgson's  letter  I  called  to  see  what
further  information  they  could  furnish  in  regard  to  the  other  points  mentioned
therein.  After  reading  the  letter,  the  gentleman,  who  is  Mr.  Franc  B.  Wilkie,
the  well-known  editorial  writer,  and  "  Poliuto  "  of  the  Chicago  Times ,  at  once
volunteered  the  following  statement : —

CHICAGO,  October  z&h,  1888.

In  October,  1885,  I  was  one  of  the  editorial  writers  on  the  Chicago  Times,
and  wrote  the  item  referred  to.  I  am  the  individual  mentioned  therein.  The
date  of  the  occurrence  was  about  a  week  prior  to  the  date  of  the  report  in  the
Times.  I  did  not  make  any  written  memorandum  on  the  day  it  occurred  ;  as
the  coincidence  was  so  strong  and  distinctly  marked,  it  made  such  an  indelible
impression  on  my  mind,  I  did  not  forget  any  of  the  details  during  the  time
prior  to  writing  the  item.  The  name  was  one  unknown  to  me  previous  to
seeing  it  in  the  Chicago  Daily  News  the  morning  referred  to.  I  had  not  seen
any  reference  to  the  disappearance  before  that  morning.  My  wife  said  at  the
time,  and  still  says,  that  she  had  never  seen  the  name,  or  heard  in  any  way  of
the  disappearance.  I  was,  of  course,  on  the  look-out  for  any  report  of  the
return  of  the  young  man,  or  of  the  finding  of  his  body,  and  saw  the  account  of
the  finding  of  the  body  in  the  Chicago  papers  a  few  days  after  the  appearance
of  the  first  item  in  regard  to  his  disappearance  ;  and  then  wrote  the  item  for  the
Times  of  October  I4th.  I  had  at  the  time  carefully  examined  the  case  in  all  its
bearings,  and  although  I  may  not  agree  with  the  various  explanations  or
theories  that  might  be  offered  in  regard  to  it,  I  gave  it  as  a  curious  coincidence
and  one  that  I  knew  to  be  true.  FRANC  B.  WILKIE.

To  which  Mrs.  Wilkie  adds  the  following : —

Having  read  the  foregoing  statement,  I  wish  to  certify  to  its  truth.  The
dream  was  the  cause  of  considerable  comment  for  the  few  days  following,  as
to  the  various  features  of  the  case,  and  whether  the  dream  would  be  verified.
My  previous  presentiments  had  been  with  reference  to  intimate  friends,  which
made  this  one  appear  the  more  marked,  and  caused  Mr.  Wilkie  to  examine
the  matter  more  carefully  in  all  its  details.

The  residence  of  the  young  man  was  eight  miles  from  our  home.  I  am  not
aware  that  we  have  ever  known  any  of  the  young  man's  friends,  or  any  one  who
him;  and  am  certain  that  had  the  fact  of  his  disappearance  been  men-
tioned in  my  hearing  prior  to  the  morning  after  the  dream,  I  should  have  re-
membered the  name,  for  I  distinctly  remembered  that  it  seemed  peculiar  to  me
when  I  saw  it  in  apparently  large  silver  letters  on  the  coffin.

MRS.  FRANC  B.  WILKIE.

In  the  Chicago  Daily  News  of  the  morning  of  Wednesday,  October
7th,  1885,  appeared  the  following:—

E.    Esdailc,    in   the  employ  of   Robert   Warren   &   Co.,   commission
merchants  in  the  Royal  Insurance  Building,  and  residing  at  4523  Woodlawn

384  APPENDICES  [421  C

Avenue,  Kenwood,  has  been  missing  since  last  Friday  morning.  Mr.  Esdaile
is  a  Canadian,  unmarried,  and  twenty-seven  years  of  age.  His  family  resides
at  Montreal.  He  has  been  resting  from  business  during  the  last  week,  and  has
spent  much  of  his  time  strolling  along  the  lake  shore.  As  his  accounts  are  all
right,  and  there  is  no  assignable  reason  for  his  disappearance,  his  friends  fear
that  he  has  committed  suicide.  Overwork,  it  is  thought,  and  an  injury  to  his
skull,  received  some  years  ago,  may  possibly  have  brought  on  insanity.  The
police  are  searching  for  him.

The  following  further  evidence  was  obtained : —

The  records  in  the  coroner's  office  for  Cook  County,  111.,  show  that  inquest
No.  941  was  held  on  October  loth,  1885,  on  the  body  of  Wm.  E.  Esdaile,
drowned  October  2nd,  in  Lake  Michigan,  whether  by  accident  or  otherwise  the
jury  were  unable  to  determine.

Mr.  Robert  Warren,  of  the  above-named  firm  of  Robert  Warren  &  Co.,  says
that  he  landed  in  New  York  on  his  return  from  a  trip  to  England  on  Monday,
October  5th,  1885,  and  reached  Chicago,  Wednesday,  P.M.,  October  7th ;  that
he  did  not  hear  of  the  disappearance  of  Mr.  Esdaile  until  he  reached  home,  and
knows  of  no  public  announcement  of  the  disappearance  prior  to  that  in  the
News  of  October  7th ;  that,  had  there  been  any,  he  would  very  likely  have
heard  of  it  between  New  York  and  Chicago,  as  he  was  on  the  look-out  for  news
from  Chicago.

Mr.  Ward,  who  had  charge  of  Mr.  Warren's  business  during  his  absence,
says  that  he  was  informed  of  Mr.  Esdaile's  disappearance  on  Friday  evening,
October  2nd.  On  Saturday,  A.M.,  he  examined  the  papers,  &c..  found  in  the
young  man's  room  ;  found  no  evidence  of  suicidal  intent,  but  indications  that  he
was  not  in  his  right  mind,  and  concluding  that  he  might  have  wandered  off,  a
detective  was  employed  to  search  for  him.  The  matter  was  kept  very  quiet,  so
as  to  prevent  publication  of  sensational  reports  that  would  alarm  his  friends,
and  also  render  it  unpleasant  for  the  young  man  should  he  be  found.  Mr.
Ward  is  not  aware  that  any  announcement  of  the  matter  was  made  in  any
papers  before  the  item  in  the  News  of  October  7th.  They  were  following  on
the  track  of  a  young  man,  whose  description  corresponded  somewhat  with  that
of  Mr.  Esdaile,  who  had  been  seen  at  the  waterworks  of  Hyde  Park  (and  Ken-
wood), and  then  had  travelled  around  the  end  of  Lake  Michigan  into  Indiana,
and  were  expecting  to  find  him  very  soon,  when  on  Saturday  morning,  October
loth,  notice  was  received  that  the  body  of  Esdaile  had  been  found  on  the  lake
shore  near  his  home.

In  referring  to  the  matter,  the  Chicago  Tribune  of  Saturday,  October  loth,
1885,  says:  "  It  will  be  seen  that  the  detectives  are  on  a  warm  trail  and  will
probably  overtake  the  young  man,  who  is  believed  to  be  insanely  wandering
about  without  aim  or  purpose."  [There  was  thus  no  general  belief  that  he  had
been  droiuned.~\

A  Chicago  reporter,  who  resides  at  Kenwood,  and  was  acquainted  with
Esdaile,  says  that  he  first  heard  of  the  disappearance  through  the  school
children,  who  said  that  the  teacher  had  told  them  that  Mr.  Esdaile  was  missing,
and  requested  them  to  tell  their  parents,  and  ask  if  any  one  had  seen  him.  The
reporter,  knowing  Mr.  Ward,  called  on  him  to  obtain  the  particulars  for  publi-
cation, out  Mr.  Ward  objected,  saying  that  Mr.  Warren  had  been  away  for
some  time;  that  Mr.  Esdaile  had  been  practically  in  charge  of  the  affairs  of  the

421  D]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  385

firm ;  that  Mr.  Warren  had  just  landed  in  New  York,  and  a  public  announce-
ment of  the  matter  in  the  papers  would  cause  him  unnecessary  alarm.  The
reporter  says  that  the  item  in  the  papers,  Wednesday,  October  7th,  was  the
first  public  announcement  of  the  matter.

421  D.  In  the  following  case,  the  dream  conveys  information  con-
cerning past  business  transactions,  entirely  unknown  to  the  dreamer,
and  which,  had  the  dream  been  true,  might  have  seriously  affected  his
interests.  But  the  facts  are  so  presented  as  to  be  wholly  misleading ;  and  in
a  way  in  which  no  other  assignable  intelligence  (unless  it  were  a  forgetful
dream  of  the  deceased  debtor's  or  of  the  satisfied  creditor's)  would  have
been  likely  to  have  presented  them.  The  dream,  however,  may  have  con-
ceivably originated  in  the  dreamer's  subliminal  perception  of  the  amount
in  the  ledger.

From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  403.  The  account  was  originally
addressed  to  Professor  James.

LAW  OFFICES  OF  H.  &  P.,

NEW  ORLEANS,  January  %th,  1894.

MY  DEAR  SIR, — In  May  1889  I  had  purchased  the  residence  property
where  I  now  live,  and  of  course  had  looked  into  the  title,  as  to  conveyances
and  liens.  This  work  was  concluded,  when  one  night  I  dreamed  this  dream.

I  was  walking  through  the  business  part  of  the  city,  and  met  our  sheriff,  who
said,  "  I  am  going  to  sell  that  house  and  lot,  corner  of  2nd  and  Chestnut  Streets,

for  the  claim  of  R.  M v.  J.  C ,  for  446.50  dols."     I  was  annoyed,  of

course,  thinking  that  there  might  have  been  some  mistake  in  the  search  for
judgment  liens — and  then  I  woke  up.

J.  C had  been  a  former  owner.     On  my  way  down  to  my  office  next

morning  I  stopped  to  see  his  son,  W.  C , — his  successor  in  business, — and

as  a  kind  of  joke,  told  him  my  dream.  As  I  told  him  his  face  lengthened
visibly,  and  without  saying  anything,  he  went  to  his  ledger,  and  after  looking  at
it  said,  "  You  made  a  slight  mistake  in  figures — it  was  444.50  dols." — and  then,
with  a  sort  of  awe,  continued,  "  But  with  the  interest,  figured  here  in  pencil,  it

was  just  446.50  dols."    I  should  add  that  J.  C had  been  embarrassed  before

his  death,  but  had  settled  up  his  debts,  so  I  had  no  trouble.  Now,  had  the
claim  been  sued  on,  the  sheriff  and  lien  part  of  my  dream  had  no  truth,  but  the
debt  and  amount  were  precise.  I  knew  R.  M very  well,  but  never  asso-
ciated him  in  any  way  with  J.  C ,  nor  had  the  slightest  reason,  that  I  can

recall,  to  suspect  that  C had  ever  had  any  dealings  with  M ,  C

being  "  in  cotton  "  and  M "  in  sugar."  W.  W.  HOWE.

In  answer  to  Professor  James*  inquiries,  the  following  letter  was
received  : —

No.  54  UNION  STREET,  NEW  ORLEANS,

March  14/4,  1894.

PROFESSOR  WILLIAM  JAMES,— DEAR  SIR,— Your  favour  of  the  loth  inst.is
at  hand,  and  in  reply :  The  occurrence  referred  to  was  certainly  quite  start-
ling, and  it  was  about  as  follows  :—

The  heirs  of  my  father,  deceased,  had  sold  a  property  here  to  Judge  W.  W.
H .  and  some  time  after  the  sale  had  been  passed  and  completed  and  pur-

'  26

386  APPENDICES  [421  E

chase  price  paid,  Judge  H called  at  our  office  one  morning  and  said  that

he  had  had  a  dream  (probably  the  night  before)  which  had  annoyed  him  a  little,
although  he  was  not  disposed  to  attach  any  importance  to  it,  but  simply  to
satisfy  a  not-understood  desire  to  do  so,  he  had  come  around  to  mention  it  to
me,  and  it  was  this  :—

That  his  dream  was  that,  notwithstanding  his  careful  research  of  the  title
of  the  property  and  that  all  encumbrances  found  had  been  removed,  there  had

been  presented  to  him  for  payment  a  judgment  obtained  by  Mr.  R.  M for  an

amount  which  he  specified  in  dollars  and  cents.  I  remarked  to  him  that  it  was  very
remarkable  indeed  that  that  amount  would  vary  very  little  from  what  a  liability

would  have  been  to  Mr.  M had  it  not  been  paid,  and  had  drawn  interest  to

that  date.  I  referred  to  data  and  computed  the  interest,  and  was,  as  said  before,
quite  startled  to  find  that  there  was  no  difference  between  the  figures  men-
tioned by  him  and  what  I  found  the  liability  to  Mr.  M would  have  been,

had  it  not  been  paid  off.  I  regret  very  much  that  I  did  not  make  memorandum
of  this  amount,  and  the  date,  so  that  it  might  have  been  given  you  explicitly
and  definitely,  but  did  not,  and  without  knowing  the  date,  I  cannot  give  even
approximately  the  amount  mentioned.

I  told  the  Judge,  however,  that  there  was  an  inaccuracy  in  the  dream,  and

that  was  that  Mr.  M 's  claim  had  never  gone  to  judgment,  nor  had  there

been  any  legal  contention  or  contest  about  it,  but  that  it  was  a  liability  that  had
been  settled  in  the  regular  course  of  business  at  the  proper  time.

WM.  H.  CHAFFE.

421  E.  The  next  case  is  again  explicable  on  the  supposition
that  the  subliminal  self  of  the  dreamer  perceived  the  positions  of  the
vessels  and  gave  the  warning.  Mr.  Brighten  is  known  to  Mr.  Podmore, —
who  concurs  in  what  appears  to  be  the  estimate  generally  formed  of  that
gentleman,  namely,  that  he  is  a  shrewd,  unimaginative,  practical  man.
The  account  is  taken  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  400.  Mr.
Brighten  writes : —

ARGYLE  HOUSE,  SOUTHEND-ON-SEA,
December  6th ,  1884.

I  owned  a  33-ton  schooner,  and  in  August  1876,  in  very  calm  weather,  I
dropped  anchor  in  the  Thames  at  the  North  shore,  opposite  Gravesend,  as  it
was  impossible  to  get  to  the  other  side,  there  being  no  wind.

The  current  being  exceedingly  swift  at  that  part  we  let  out  plenty  of  chain
cable  before  going  to  bed.  I  had  captain  and  crew  of  three  men  on  board,
besides  visitors.  Towards  morning  I  found  myself  awake  in  my  (owner's)  cabin
with  the  words  ringing  in  my  ears,  "Wake,  awake,  you'll  be  run  down."
I  waited  a  few  moments,  then  dropped  off  to  sleep,  but  was  again  awakened  by
the  same  words  ringing  in  my  ears.  Upon  this  I  leisurely  put  on  some  clothes
and  went  on  deck  and  found  the  tide  rushing  past  very  swiftly,  and  that  we
were  enveloped  in  a  dense  fog,  and  all  was  calm  and  quiet  in  the  early  morning,
and  there  was  already  some  daylight.  I  paced  the  deck  once  or  twice,  then
went  below,  undressed,  got  into  my  berth,  and  fell  asleep,  only  to  be  again
awakened  by  the  same  words.  I  then  somewhat  more  hastily  dressed,  went  on
deck,  and  climbed  some  way  up  the  rigging  to  get  above  the  fog,  and  was  soon
in  a  bright,  clear  atmosphere,  with  the  fog  like  a  sea  at  my  feet,  when  looking

421  F]  TO     CHAPTER     IV

round  I  saw  a  large  vessel  bearing  down  directly  upon  us.  I  fell,  rather  than
scrambled,  out  of  the  rigging,  rushed  to  the  forecastle,  shouted  to  the  captain,
who  rushed  on  deck,  explained  all  in  a  word  or  two;  he  ran  to  the  tiller,  unlashed
it,  put  it  hard  aport :  the  swift  current  acting  upon  the  rudder  caused  the  boat
to  slew  across  and  upward  in  the  current,  when  on  came  the  large  vessel  pass-
ing our  side,  and  it  would  have  cleared  us,  but  her  anchor  which  she  was
carrying  (having  lifted  it  in  consequence  of  having  heaved  anchor  at  low  tide  with
very  little  cable)  caught  in  our  chain,  when  she  swung  round  and  came  along-
side, fortunately,  however,  doing  us  very  little  damage.  I  at  once  jumped  on
her  deck  and  woke  up  some  men  who  appeared  on  deck  in  various  stages  of
intoxication,  who  stupidly  wanted  to  remain  as  they  were,  but  by  dint  of  coaxing
and  threatening  in  turn  I  induced  them  to  take  some  turns  at  their  capstan,
which  had  the  effect  of  freeing  their  anchor  from  my  chain,  and  she  soon  left
us  and  dropped  her  anchor  a  little  lower  down.  I  at  once  narrated  the  above
facts  to  the  captain,  and  next  day  informed  my  visitors  of  the  voice  to  which  we
all  owed  our  preservation.  I  cannot  think  that  it  was  really  a  human  voice,  as
in  consequence  of  the  fog  no  one  could  have  seen  the  relative  position  of  the
vessels,  and  no  other  vessels  were  near  us  within  half  a  mile  or  more.  My
visitors  at  once  desired  me  to  return  to  Greenhithe,  and  discontinued  their  trip.

WM.  E.  BRIGHTEN.

I  was  one  of  the  visitors  on  the  occasion  above  referred  to,  and  Mr.  Brighten
related  the  occurrence  to  us  on  the  following  day.  ROBERT  PARKER.

421  F.  The  next  case  is  analogous  to  the  preceding  one,  and  may
also  be  explained  by  supposing  that  the  subliminal  self  of  the  dreamer
had  some  perception  of  the  schooner  and  the  shipwrecked  crew.  It  is
quoted  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  5  70.  It  is  not  quite  clear  how
much  of  Captain  Scott's  narrative  was  taken  from  contemporary  notes,
and  probably  no  further  evidence  could  be  obtained  as  to  this  now.

Document  I. — From  Bishop  Hale.

March  gtA,  1892.

The  colony  of  Western  Australia  (called  at  the  time  the  Swan  River
Settlement)  was  founded  in  1829.  Captain  Scott  must  have  gone  there  very
shortly  after  that  period.

In  the  year  1848,  I  being  then  Archdeacon  of  Adelaide,  went  to  Western
Australia  in  attendance  upon  the  Bishop  of  Adelaide.  Captain  Scott  showed
great  readiness  to  assist  the  Bishop,  and  both  he  and  I  received  from  him
many  acts  of  kindness.

He,  one  day,  told  me  about  his  dreams  and  the  circumstances  connected
therewith.  He  told  it  all  with  such  animation  and  such  varying  expressions
of  face  that  he  gave  one  the  idea  that  the  things  he  spoke  of  were  passing
vividly  before  his  mind's  eye  as  he  described  them.

I  was,  of  course,  greatly  struck  by  the  narrative,  and  said  I  should  like
very  much  indeed  to  have  it  in  writing.  He  said  at  once  that  I  should  have
it ;  lie  would  have  the  copy  of  his  log,  which  he  had  by  him,  transcribed  for
me.  I  received  the  MS.  a  few  days  afterwards.

His  last  illness  was  a  long  and  wearisome  one,  and  the  old  man  was
pleased  when  any  friend  would  look  in  and  sit  with  him  for  a  time.  I  was

383  APPENDICES  [421  F

then  Bishop  of  the  Diocese,  and  I  was  aware  that  the  clergyman  of  his  parish
(Fremantle),  Mr.  Bostock,  was  in  the  habit  of  sometimes  taking  his  seat  by
the  old  man's  bedside,  in  addition  to  the  performance  of  the  usual  devotional
services.

I  never  had  upon  my  own  mind  the  slightest  doubt  about  the  truth  of  the
narrative,  but  I  was  quite  aware  that  some  persons  to  whom  I  might  chance
to  show  it  might  feel  doubtful  about  it,  and  it  occurred  to  me  that  Mr.
Bostock 's  friendly  visits  to  the  old  man  afforded  an  excellent  opportunity  for
getting  some  declaration  such  as  that  which  he  did  obtain.

MATHEW  B.  HALE  (Bishop).

Document  II. — Captain  Scott's  Account.

June  lotA,  1825.

On  the  night  of  the  7th  of  June  I  dreamed  that  I  saw  a  schooner,  and
apparently  water-logged,  with  several  men  in  her  and  a  black  man  among
them.  On  the  8th  I  dreamed  the  same  and  got  up  and  started  the  mate  up
aloft  I  stayed  on  deck  until  daylight.  On  the  pth  the  same  dream  occurred.
Got  up  and  altered  the  ship's  course,  having  passed  between  Guadeloupe  and
Antigua,  the  day  previous,  and  at  8  P.M.  heavy  squalls  with  heavy  thunder
and  lightning ;  shortened  sail.  Daylight  made  all  sail,  fine  pleasant  weather.
On  the  loth,  at  8  o'clock,  altered  the  ship's  course  from  W.S.W.  to  S  W.  two
points  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  true  position  of  the  Bird  Islands,
or  to  see  if  these  really  existed  (as  on  my  chart  it  was  marked  doubtful).
I  was  at  this  time  very  uneasy  in  my  mind,  supposing  that  something  was
going  to  happen  to  my  ship.  I  had  related  my  dream  to  my  mate  and
passengers,  Don  Joseph  Sevarra,  John  Poingestre  and  William  Richenburg,
Esquires,  merchants  at  Carthagena,  who  wrote  the  circumstances  to  the
Humane  Society  and  to  their  house  in  London.

On  the  morning  of  the  loth,  at  9.3  A.M.,  we  were  all  at  breakfast;  the
officer  on  deck  called  down  the  skylight  and  said  that  a  squall  was  coming.  I
immediately  repaired  on  deck  to  take  in  the  small  sails.  On  looking  astern
the  ship  where  the  squall  was  coming  from,  we  saw  a  boat  with  a  large  flag
flying  on  an  oar,  and  a  man  standing  up  in  the  bow  holding  it.  I  immediately
hove  the  ship  to  and  took  in  all  studding  and  small  sails.  My  men  that  were
aloft  furling  royals  said  that  they  could  see  a  number  of  men  and  that  they
thought  it  was  a  pirate.  One  of  the  men  stated  that  was  just  the  way  that
he  was  taken  the  year  previous  in  the  same  seas.  My  passengers  and  officers
then  requested  me  to  keep  the  ship  away,  which  I  did,  they  stating  that  if
they  should  turn  out  to  be  pirates,  I  should  not  recover  my  insurance  for  my
ship.  I  then  kept  her  away  under  her  reefed  sails  and  went  down  to
breakfast.  After  my  entering  my  cabin,  I  felt  very  uneasy  and  returned  to
the  state-room.  Immediately  my  dream  came  forcibly  in  my  mind.  I  then
put  two  pistols  and  my  cutlass  by  my  side  and  went  on  deck,  called  all  hands
on  deck,  and  again  hove  the  ship  to  and  desired  Mr.  Poingestre  to  take  the
wheel  and  steer  the  ship.  I  then  ordered  the  first  officer  to  lower  his  boat
down  and  go  and  see  what  the  boat  was.  I  then  ordered  the  guns  to  be
loaded,  made  sail,  and  made  a  tack  towards  the  boats.  On  my  coming  up
with  them,  found  that  my  mate  had  taken  the  captain  and  his  men  out  of  the
boat  and  taken  them  into  his,  Captain  Jellard's  boat  having  a  great  quantity

421  F]  TO     CHAPTER     IV  389

of  water  in,  very  nearly  up  to  the  thwarts,  also  a  large  shark,  and  had  her
in  tow.

After  getting  Captain  Jellard  on  board,  and  his  men,  who  were  in  a
very  weak  state,  not  able  to  speak  with  the  exception  of  the  black  man,  from
him  I  got  all  the  particulars,  as  follows :  It  appeared  that  they  belonged  to
the  schooner  James  Hambleton,  of  Grenada,  from  America,  bound  to  Grenada,
and  being  short  of  water,  having  a  very  long  passage  through  light  winds,
were  going  on  shore  for  water  on  the  Island  of  Saints,  it  then  being  calm.
After  leaving  their  ship  a  light  breeze  sprang  up  and  the  schooner  kept  her
ground,  but  the  boat  pulling  in  a  different  direction  and  the  current  running
so  strong  that  the  boat's  crew  became  quite  exhausted.  That  at  daylight
they  had  the  mortification  of  seeing  the  schooner  inshore  of  them  as  far  as
they  could  see  from  the  boat,  the  boat  still  drifting  farther  from  land  and
ship  until  they  lost  sight  of  her  altogether.  The  following  day  they  had  a
very  dreadful  time  of  it;  it  blew  a  heavy  gale,  with  thunder  and  lightning;
they  had  to  make  fast  the  oars,  mast,  and  sail  to  the  painter  of  the  boat,  and
let  the  boat  drift  to  break  off  the  sea  that  was  running.  During  all  this  time
they  had  no  water  or  anything  to  eat  The  following  day  was  nearly  calm,
very*  light  winds  and  a  hot  scorching  sun :  being  in  the  latitude  of  16°  21',
longitude  63°  14',  their  sufferings  were  very  great  all  day.  Both  captain  and
men  tore  their  clothes  off  their  backs  and  poured  water  on  themselves  to
keep  them  cool.  On  the  morning  that  I  discovered  them  the  black  man
appealed  to  his  God,  saying,  "  If  God  hear  black  man  as  well  as  white  man,
pray  send  me  fish  or  shark  for  massa  to  eat,  no  let  him  die."  The  all-merciful
Father  heard  his  prayers  and  sent  him  a  large  shark,  which  was  lying  in  the
boat  on  her  being  brought  alongside,  of  which  they  had  drunk  the  blood  and
eaten  part  of  the  flesh.  I  immediately  knocked  in  the  head  of  a  water-
puncheon  and  made  them  a  warm  bath  and  put  them  severally  into  it  for  the
purpose  of  cooling  them  and  getting  some  parts  of  their  shirts  off  their  skin
which  were  sticking  to  their  backs,  their  skin  being  all  blistered  with  the  sun
and  salt  water.  I  gave  them  a  little  tea  to  moisten  their  mouths  every  few
minutes,  until  some  of  them  prayed  for  food  and  asked  for  some  biscuit;  and
gave  them  rice-water  and  barley-water  occasionally.  After  a  good  sleep
Captain  Jellard  sent  for  me  below  and  wished  to  speak  to  me.  On  searching
his  pockets  to  see  if  the  black  man  had  told  the  truth  about  his  ship,  I  found
Bister  and  manifest  of  his  cargo.  This  satisfied  me  all  was  correct,  and
that  they  were  not  pirates.  During  our  conversation  I  found  that  I  had
been  in  company  with  Captain  Jellard  in  St.  John's,  Newfoundland,  in  the
year  1814,  he  then  commanding  a  fine  schooner  called  the  Catch  Mt  Who  Can,
belonging  to  Spuryar  &  Co.,  of  Cool.

In  a  few  days  they  all  came  round.  I  gave  them  up  to  the  British
Consul  at  Carthagena  and  requested  him  to  lose  no  time  to  send  them  on,  as
we  feared  that  something  would  be  brought  against  the  mate  of  the  schooner,
Captain  Jellard  having  all  his  papers  with  him.  On  my  arrival  in  England,
I  found  that  Captain  Jellard  only  arrived  there  three  days  previous  to  the
execution  of  his  mate  and  remaining  three  men,  they  having  been  tried  for
murdering  tlu-ir  captain  and  the  other  three  men.  Had  not  the  Consul  sent
them  over  in  the  packet  to  Jamaica,  and  requested  the  admiral  to  send  them
up  to  Grenada  with  all  despatch,  these  four  poor  souls  would  have  lost  their
lives  innocently.  [Signed]  DANIEL  SCOTT,

Commanding  the  Brig  Ocean  from  [illegible]  bound  to  Carthagena.

390  APPENDICES  [421  G

I,  George  James  Bostock,  Chaplain  of  Fremantle,  W.  Australia,  do
hereby  certify  that  I  attended  Daniel  Scott  in  his  last  illness,  February  1865,
wherein  he  repeated  the  substance  of  the  above  as  most  solemnly  true,  and
ascribed  the  whole  event  to  the  direct  guidance  of  an  over-ruling  Providence.

[Signed]        GEORGE  J.  BOSTOCK.
9/5/1865.

[We  have  endeavoured  to  trace  the  log-book  referred  to  in  Bishop  Kale's
letter,  but  without  success.  Inquiries  have  been  made  through  Lloyd's
Shipping  Agency  and  the  Board  of  Trade,  but  no  log  dated  as  far  back
as  1825  can  be  produced;  it  was  not  till  1854  that  trading  vessels  were
compelled  to  render  official  log-books.]

421  G.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  140.  The  fol-
lowing statement  of  experiences  by  Miss  Luke  was  sent  to  us  by  Dr.  R.
Osgood  Mason,  of  New  York,  author  of  Telepathy  and  the  Subliminal  Self.
Dr.  Mason  wrote  on  January  Qth,  1896,  concerning  Miss  Luke  :  "I  have
two  or  three  recent  dreams  or  night  visions  and  their  fulfilment,  of  which
she  told  me  only  a  few  days  since,  and  which  can  be  dated  and  substan-
tiated." The  statement  was  finally  sent  apparently  in  September  1896.

Miss  Mary  Luke,  202  Hudson  Street,  New  York  City,  the  percipient  in  the
following  cases  of  veridical  dreams,  has  been  very  well  known  to  me  for  more
than  fifteen  years,  I  having  been  the  attending  physician  in  the  family  during
that  time.  Her  own  health,  however,  has  been  almost  perfect ;  she  is  free  from
all  hysterical  or  nervous  symptoms  ;  in  fact,  I  have  hardly  had  occasion  to  pre-
scribe for  her  during  this  whole  period.  She  is  a  busy,  energetic,  self-reliant,
but  very  kind-hearted  woman,  now  nearly  forty  years  of  age,  though  looking  at
least  ten  years  younger.  She  is  unmarried.

She  has  from  childhood  been  an  inveterate  somnambulist,  walking  almost
every  night,  until  two  years  ago  when  I  hypnotised  her  and  suggested  that  she
should  not  again  leave  her  bed  in  her  sleep.  The  effect  was  prompt  and  decided.
She  has  never  since  that  time  walked  nor  even  left  her  bed  while  asleep.

She  is  exceedingly  impressionable,  and  seldom  fails  to  receive  definite  and
true  ideas  and  impressions  regarding  people  who  come  into  her  presence  or  with
whom  she  sits — a  faculty  which  she  often  exercises,  but  never  for  any  re-
muneration. On  one  occasion  a  few  years  ago  she  varied  from  this  rule,  for
charity.  Being  on  a  visit  in  a  distant  country  village  where  she  was  quite
unknown,  during  a  church  fair  she  was  asked  to  occupy  the  gipsy  tent  and  tell
fortunes,  a  character  for  which  her  personal  appearance  as  well  as  her  peculiar
psychical  endowment  especially  fitted  her.  The  first  day  she  had  the  usual
share  of  patronage,  but  on  the  second  day — the  accuracy  of  her  delineations
having  become  the  talk  of  the  town — there  was  a  constant  stream  of  visitors  to
her  tent,  and  more  than  300  dollars  were  realised  for  the  charity.

She  has  had  a  large  number  of  veridical  dreams,  but  she  was  so  ridiculed
by  her  family  on  account  of  them  that  she  seldom  told  them,  especially  not
before  their  fulfilment,  so  they  are  not  available  for  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research.

Within  the  past  two  years,  however,  since  I  have  known  something  of  her
psychic  experiences,  the  dream  here  related  occurred,  and  fortunately  [it  was]
related  before  the  events  were  known.  .  .  .

421  G]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  391

I  will  give  it  substantially  in  her  own  language,  as  I  took  it  down  while  she
related  it.  I  will  premise  that  she  occupies  a  three-storey  and  basement  house.
Her  sister,  Mrs.  S.,  with  her  family,  occupies  the  third  floor;  she  rents  the
second  floor  to  lodgers,  and  uses  the  first  floor  and  basement  for  her  own  busi-
ness. The  second  floor  front,  over  her  parlour,  was  occupied  by  a  man  and  his
wife,  named  L.,  who  had  been  with  her  six  months;  they  seemed  very  pleasant
people,  and  she  had  no  occasion  to  mistrust  their  honesty.  The  back  room  on
the  same  floor  was  occupied  by  Mr.  B.,  who  had  been  her  tenant  for  six  years.

She  says : —

On  Wednesday,  August  28th,  1895,  I  had  been  absent  all  day;  I  came  in
late  in  the  evening  and  went  directly  to  bed.  I  noticed  nothing  out  of  the  way
excepting  that  I  missed  a  small  and  rather  pretty  alarm  clock  from  the  parlour
mantel ;  I  supposed,  however,  that  my  lodger  Mr.  B.  had  taken  it,  as  he  some-
times did  if  he  wished  to  be  aroused  at  a  particular  hour,  and  I  thought  no  more
about  it.

That  night  I  dreamed  or  rather  seemed  to  see  Mr.  and  Mrs.  L.'s  room  in
great  disorder;  Mr.  and  Mrs.  L.  were  gone  and  everything  belonging  to  them,
and  also  everything  of  mine  which  was  valuable  was  gone,  and  the  house  was
robbed  of  valuables  generally.  The  scene  of  the  room  was  very  vivid  and
exact.

In  the  morning  I  went  directly  up  to  my  sisters  apartment  and  asked  her,
"When  have  you  seen  Mrs.  L.  ?  "  She  replied,  "  She  was  up  here  with  me  at
three  o'clock  yesterday  afternoon;  she  brought  up  some  refreshments  and  was
particularly  agreeable."  I  said  at  once,  "  I  dreamed  last  night  that  she  had  gone
and  had  robbed  the  house  of  its  valuables,  and  had  left  the  room  in  great  dis-
order.'' My  sister  had  not  seen  either  of  them  nor  heard  any  sound  in  their
room  after  three  o'clock.  My  sister,  who  had  always  been  inclined  to  laugh  at
cams,  exclaimed,  "Your  dreams  are  so  queer,  M.,  I  cannot  help  feeling
anxious."  I  went  down  to  my  own  apartment  on  the  first  floor  and  listened  for
sounds  of  people  moving  overhead,  but  all  was  silent.  I  then  went  up  to  their
room  and  rapped  repeatedly,  but  got  no  reply.  I  then  used  my  duplicate  key
and  opened  the  door.  The  room  was  unoccupied  and  in  great  disorder ;  all
their  own  property,  together  with  everything  of  value  belonging  to  me,  had  dis-
appeared, and  the  room  presented  the  exact  appearance  in  every  respect  that  I
had  seen  in  my  dream.

An  examination  of  the  house  directly  afterwards  showed  that  they  had  taken
all  my  jewellery  and  trinkets,  and  the  little  clock  which  I  had  missed  the  even-
ing before.  They  had  also  taken  a  suit  of  new  clothes  and  an  umbrella  from
the  room  of  their  neighbour  B.  on  the  same  floor.

Miss  Luke  adds  : —

This  is  a  perfectly  correct  account  of  my  dream  and  its  fulfilment.

MARY  LUKE.

MRS.  STALLINGS*  STATEMENT.

202  HUDSON  STREET,  NEW  YORK,  September  ;M,  1896.
My  sister  Mary,  known  in  Dr.  Mason's  statement  as  M.  L.,  came  up-
on Thursday  morning,  August  29th,  1895,  and  said  to  me,  "When  have  you
seen  V  I  said,  "  Not  since  three  o'clock  yesterday.     She  was  up  here

brought  some  refreshments,  and  was  very  agreeable."    Mary  then  said,  "  I

392  APPENDICES  [421  H

dreamed  last  night  that  she  had  gone  and  had  stripped  the  house  of  everything
valuable.  I  saw  the  room  empty  and  in  disorder — everything  valuable  was  taken
away,  both  hers  and  mine.  I  have  not  heard  a  sound  from  them  overhead  this
morning."  I  said,  "Your  dreams  are  so  queer,  Mary,  I  can't  help  feeling
anxious."  She  went  downstairs,  and  soon  after  went  into  the  room  and  found
it  empty ;  everything  valuable  was  taken.  Afterwards  it  was  found  that  she
had  taken  my  sister's  jewellery  and  trinkets,  and  also  a  suit  of  clothes  and  an
umbrella  from  a  lodger  on  the  same  floor.  HENRIETTA  STALLINGS.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Dr.  Mason  wrote  : —

NEW  YORK,  October  $th,  1896.

MY  DEAR  DR.  HODGSON,—.  .  .  Regarding  tracing  the  robbery,  Miss  Luke
went  to  the  office  of  the  detective  force,  where  she  was  treated  so  indifferently
because  there  was  u  nothing  in  it "  for  them,  that  she  surprised  them  by  giving
them  a  piece  of  her  mind  and  walked  out.  Afterwards,  fearing  she  would  make
the  matter  public,  they  sent  two  or  three  times  offering  to  take  the  matter  up,
but  she  would  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  them.  .  .  .

R.  OSGOOD  MASON.

421  H.  The  following  case  is  taken  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiv.
p.  279.  It  comes  from  Sir  Lawrence  Jones,  Bart,  j  the  account  having
been  written  on  the  day  of  the  incident.

VENTNOR,  March  2yd,  1891.

I  was  called  at  eight  this  morning,  and  my  letters  left  outside  the  door.  I
fell  asleep  again,  and  had  what  seemed  a  long  and  troublesome  dream  about  a
cheque  which  I  had  to  fill  up  and  sign.  At  nine  I  awoke,  with  a  vivid  recol-
lection of  my  dream,  got  up,  opened  a  packet  of  letters  forwarded  from  home,
and  found  among  them  a  registered  letter  containing  a  cheque  for  a  large  sum,
which  I  had  to  sign  as  trustee.  L.  J.  J.

N.B. — I  had  no  reason  to  expect  the  receipt  of  the  cheque.  The  dream
was  not  in  any  way  concerned  with  the  real  cheque,  but  was  rather  my
ineffectual  attempts  to  draw  a  cheque  properly  on  a  blank  sheet  of  paper.
But  the  coincidence  was  very  remarkable.

Lady  Jones  writes  : —

April  1st,  1893.

I  can  entirely  corroborate  from  my  own  memory  the  story  of  my  husband's
dream  about  the  cheque.  EVELYN  M.  JONES.

Sir  Lawrence  Jones  writes  later  : —

CRANMER  HALL,  FAKENHAM,  April  ist,  1893.

I  related  my  dream  to  Lady  Jones  immediately  after  opening  my  letter.
This  dream  was  unusually  vivid,  and  the  impression  of  it  remained  with  me
much  longer  than  usual.  I  dream  a  good  deal,  but  rarely  remember  anything
except  in  the  case  of  morning  dreams,  when  I  have  woken  early  and  gone  to
sleep  again.

421  J.  The  next  case  (quoted  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiv.  p.
280)  rests  on  specially  good  evidence,  since  it  was  noted  before  verifica-
tion, while  the  full  account  of  it  was  written  from  notes  made  immedi-

421J]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  393

ately   after   by   Professor   A.   Alexander,  of  Rio   Janeiro.     He   says,  in
sending  the  account : —

February  tfh,  1896.

My  informant,  Senhor  Nascimento,  is  a  life  member  of  the  "  Society  of
Arts,"  and  received  his  technical  education  in  London.

RlO,  February  yd,  1896.

A  recent  case  of  apparent  clairvoyance  has  been  communicated  to  me  by  a
Brazilian  engineer,  called  Jose'  Custodio  Fernandes  do  Nascimento,  who  is  him-
self the  percipient.  I  have  been  acquainted  with  this  gentleman  for  several
years,  and  know  him  to  be  a  careful  and  trustworthy  witness.  It  will  be  seen
that  he  has  enabled  me  also  to  give  direct  testimony  to  the  care  with  which  he
has  provided  for  proper  evidence.

In  thus  proceeding,  he  endeavours  to  atone  for  former  laxness,  inasmuch
as  some  seven  or  eight  years  ago  he  failed  to  take  adequate  note  of  a  probably
veridical  dream,  in  which  he  seemed  to  be  trying  to  escape  with  his  family
from  the  deck  of  a  burning  vessel,  and  to  witness  the  jumping  overboard  of  a
man  whose  clothes  had  caught  fire.  A  telegram  from  a  northern  Brazilian
port  subsequently  gave  the  news  that  about  that  time  fire  had  broken  out  on
board  a  certain  vessel,  and  that  on  the  occasion  some  individual  had  in  reality
jumped  into  the  sea,  more  or  less  in  the  manner  perceived  in  the  dream.

Shortly  after  three  P.M.  on  Saturday,  January  nth,  1896,  I  met  Senhor
Nascimento  in  the  Rua  do  Ouvidor  in  this  city,  and  he  at  once  gave  me
verbal  particulars  of  a  second  experience  of  the  kind,  which  he  had  had  on  that
very  date.

He  stated  that,  as  the  result  of  slackness  in  his  business,  he  had  lately  been
straitened  for  want  of  means,  and  had  felt  this  impecuniosity  all  the  more  that
his  eldest  daughter  is  shortly  to  be  married  to  the  son  of  a  Don  J.,  a  merchant
resident  in  Montevideo.

On  the  preceding  evening  of  the  loth,  the  young  man  J.  came  to  visit
\i\sfiancte  at  the  usual  hour,  and  mentioned  that  a  letter  from  his  father  was
waiting  for  Senhor  Nascimento  in  the  Rua  da  Alfandega  at  the  firm  of  Jorge
Dias  Brothers,  the  correspondents  in  Rio  of  Don  J.  He  had  not  brought  it
himself,  as  it  was  to  be  delivered  to  Senhor  Xascimento  personally.

My  informant  awoke  on  the  following  morning  at  an  early  hour,  and  fell
again  into  a  state  of  slumber  between  five  and  six  o'clock.  He  then  dreamt
that  he  had  called  at  Dias  Brothers,  and  that  they  handed  him  a  present  from
Don  J.  of  one  conto  of  reis  (about  ^40),  which  he  was  so  glad  to  receive  that
he  embraced  the  members  of  that  firm  with  an  effusion  of  tears.  In  the  dream
he  seemed  to  count  the  money.

He  rose  with  the  conviction  that  his  vision  would  be  realised,  although  no
iry  reasons  concurred  to  make  him  suppose  that  such  would  be  the  case.
This  belief  led  him  to  write  down  on  a  slip  of  paper  (which  is  herewith  enclosed)
the  following  note  : —

"Sonhei  que  ao  ir  receber  a  carta  dos  Senhores  Jorge  Dias  cstes  me
entrcu'.iram  a  somma  de  i  :ooofooo  de  reis,  e  que  eu  commovido  abracei-os
chorando."  11-1-96.

("  I   dreimt  that  on  going  to  receive  the  letter  from  Senhores  Jorge  I
the  latter  delivered   to  me   the  sum  of   I  :ooo  $000  of  reis,  and  that  I,  being
moved,  embraced  them  with  tears."  11-1-96.)

394  APPENDICES  [422  A

Senhor  Nascimento  said  nothing  to  his  wife  or  children  about  the  dream.
He  merely  put  the  above  note  under  other  papers  in  a  pigeon-hole  of  his
bureau,  which  he  then  locked.  He  went  into  town;  called  at  half-past  ten  at
the  house  of  Jorge  Dias  Brothers,  and  received  the  letter,  which  he  afterwards
opened  in  the  street.  This  letter  he  showed  to  me  when  we  met.  In  it  Don  J.
makes  a  present  of  one  conto  of  reis  to  his  future  daughter-in-law,  and  instructs
Senhor  Nascimento  to  draw  the  money  at  the  house  of  John  Moore  &  Co.  of
this  city.  This  sum  Senhor  Nascimento  had  duly  received  about  i  o'clock  on
that  day,  and  he  invited  me  to  accompany  him  home  to  verify  what  he  had
stated  regarding  the  note  taken  in  the  morning.  The  conto  of  reis  was  shown
to  me;  the  bureau  was  opened  in  my  presence,  and  the  slip  of  paper  was  taken
out  of  the  pigeon-hole  and  immediately  delivered  into  my  keeping.

On  Monday  the  I3th,  I  returned  for  further  information.  By  direct  ques-
tioning, Senhor  Nascimento  had  learnt  that  his  friends,  the  Dias  Brothers,
were  not  aware  of  the  contents  of  the  letter  at  the  time  of  its  receipt.  A  similar
declaration  was  made  in  my  hearing  by  the  young  man  J.,  who  added,  however,
that  he  had  afterwards  (i.e.  at  an  hour  later  than  that  of  the  dream)  been
informed  by  a  brother  of  his  what  their  father  had  done.

John  Moore  &  Co.  are  not  personally  known  to  my  informant.  J.'s  brother
has  no  other  connection  with  him  than  that  established  by  the  coming  union
between  the  families,  and  yet  the  dream  coincided  with  the  arrival  of  the  letter
at  Rio  and  not  with  its  despatch  from  Montevideo.  The  circumstances  of  the
case,  then,  seem  to  render  the  explanation  by  clairvoyance  more  plausible  than
that  by  telepathy.

Senhor  Nascimento  states  that,  although  he  sometimes  has  waking  presenti-
ments, the  two  dreams  above  narrated  are  the  only  vivid  ones  of  the  kind  he
recollects  having  had  in  his  experience.  He  does  not  remember  ever  receiving
similarly  positive  indications  in  a  vision  which  have  remained  unfulfilled.

(The  above  is  written  out  from  notes  taken  by  me  on  the  date  of  the
occurrence.)  A.  ALEXANDER.

Professor  Alexander's  account  is  confirmed  as  follows  by  the
percipient : —

Rio,  February  yd,  1896.

I  can  testify  to  the  fulness  and  exactness  of  all  the  details  above  given.
I   still  have  a  vivid  remembrance  of  the  dream  of  the  burning  vessel,  the
confirmation  of  which  came  on  the  same  day.     A  man  was  reported  to  have
jumped  overboard  with  his  clothes  on  fire,  just  as  I  saw  him  in  my  dream.

I  reside  at  No.  33  Travessa  de  Sao  Salvador,  Haddock  Lobo,  half-an-hour's
journey  from  town  in  the  tramcars,  and  I  never  come  home  during  the  course
of  the  day.

Jos£  C.  FERNANDES  DO  NASCIMENTO.

The  original  note,  made  by  Senhor  Nascimento  on  the  morning  after
his  dream  and  before  its  verification,  was  sent  with  the  narrative  by
Professor  Alexander.

422  A.  The  following  account  (taken  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
vol.  i.  p.  202)  comes  from  Mrs.  West,  of  Hildegarde,  Furness  Road,
Eastbourne.  It  was  written  in  1883.

422A]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  395

My  father  and  brother  were  on  a  journey  during  the  winter.  I  was  expect-
ing them  home,  without  knowing  the  exact  day  of  their  return.  The  date,  to
the  best  of  my  recollection,  was  the  winter  of  1871-72.  I  had  gone  to  bed  at
my  usual  time,  about  1 1  P.  M.  Some  time  in  the  night  I  had  a  vivid  dream,
which  made  a  great  impression  on  me.  I  dreamt  I  was  looking  out  of  a  win-
dow, when  I  saw  father  driving  in  a  Spids  sledge,  followed  in  another  by  my
brother.  They  had  to  pass  a  cross-road,  on  which  another  traveller  was  driving
very  fast,  also  in  a  sledge  with  one  horse.  Father  seemed  to  drive  on  without
observing  the  other  fellow,  who  would  without  fail  have  driven  over  father  if  he
had  not  made  his  horse  rear,  so  that  I  saw  my  father  drive  under  the  hoofs  of
the  horse.  Every  moment  I  expected  the  horse  would  fall  down  and  crush
him.  I  called  out  "  Father!  father!"  and  woke  in  a  great  fright.  The  next
morning  my  father  and  brother  returned.  I  said  to  him,  "  I  am  so  glad  to  see
you  arrive  quite  safely,  as  I  had  such  a  dreadful  dream  about  you  last  night."
My  brother  said,  "  You  could  not  have  been  in  greater  fright  about  him  than  I
was,"  and  then  he  related  to  me  what  had  happened,  which  tallied  exactly  with
my  dream.  My  brother  in  his  fright,  when  he  saw  the  feet  of  the  horse  over
father's  head,  called  out,  "  Oh  !  father,  father ! "

I  have  never  had  any  other  dream  of  this  kind,  nor  do  I  remember  ever  to
have  had  another  dream  of  an  accident  happening  to  any  one  in  whom  I  was
interested.  I  often  dream  of  people,  and  when  this  happens  I  generally  expect
to  receive  a  letter  from  them,  or  to  hear  of  them  in  the  course  of  the  next  day.
I  dreamt  of  Mrs.  G.  Bidder  the  night  before  I  received  her  letter  asking  me
for  an  account  of  this  dream ;  and  I  told  Mr.  West,  before  we  went  down  to
breakfast,  that  I  should  have  a  letter  that  day  from  her.  I  had  no  other  reason
to  expect  a  letter  from  her,  nor  had  I  received  one  for  some  time,  I  should  think
some  years,  previously.  HILDA  WEST.

Mrs.  West's  father,  Sir  John  Crowe,  late  Consul-General  for  Norway,
is  since  dead ;  but  her  brother,  Mr.  Septimus  Crowe,  of  Librola,  Mary's
Hill  Road,  Shortlands,  sends  us  the  following  confirmation  : —

I  remember  vividly,  on  my  return  once  with  my  father  from  a  trip  to  the
North  of  Norway  in  the  winter  time,  my  sister  meeting  us  at  the  hall  door  as
we  entered,  and  exclaiming  how  pleased  she  was  to  see  us,  and  that  we  were
§afe,  as  she  said  at  once  to  me  that  she  had  had  such  an  unpleasant  dream  the
evening  before.  I  said,  "What  was  it?"  She  then  minutely  explained  to  me
the  dream,  as  she  related  it  to  you,  and  which  is  in  accordance  with  the  facts.
It  naturally  astonished  my  father  and  myself  a  good  deal,  that  she  so  vividly  in
her  sleep  saw  exactly  what  happened,  and  I  should  say,  too,  she  dreamt  it  at
the  very  time  it  happened,  about  1 1.30  P.M.  SEPTIMUS  CaowE.1

1  Our  friend  Mrs.  Bidder,  the  wife  of  Mr.  G.  Bidder,  Q.C.,  sends  us  the  following
recollection  of  the  narrative  as  told  at  her  table  by  Mr.  S.  Crowe,  who  is  her  husband's
brother-in-law.

"RAVENSBURY  PARK,  MITCHAM,  SURREY,

"  loM  January  1883.

"The  following  was  related  at  our  table  by  my  husband's  brother-in-law,  Mr.
Septimus  Crowe.  His  father,  since  dead,  was  Sir  John  Crowe,  Consul-General  for
Norway.

0  '  My  father  and  I  were  travelling  one  winter  in  Norway.  We  had  our  carrioles  as
[•ledges, and  my  father  drove  6rst,  I  following.  One  day  we  were  driving  very  quickly

396  APPENDICES  [422  B

422  B.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  40.  The  following
narrative  was  sent  to  us  by  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  John  Drummond  Hay,
K.C.B.,  G.C.M.G.,  who  was  for  many  years  H.M.'s  Minister  in  Marocco
and  resided  at  Tangier.

September  \6tk,  1889.

In  the  year  1879  my  son  Robert  Drummond  Hay  resided  at  Mogodor  with
his  family,  where  he  was  at  that  time  Consul.  It  was  in  the  month  of  February.
I  had  lately  received  good  accounts  of  my  son  and  his  family ;  I  was  also  in
perfect  health.  About  I  A.M.  (I  forget  the  exact  day  in  February),  whilst
sleeping  soundly  [at  Tangier],  I  was  woke  by  hearing  distinctly  the  voice  of
my  daughter-in-law,  who  was  with  her  husband  at  Mogodor,  saying  in  a  clear,
but  distressed  tone  of  voice,  "Oh,  I  wish  papa  only  knew  that  Robert  is  ill."
There  was  a  night  lamp  in  the  room.  I  sat  up  and  listened,  looking  around
the  room,  but  there  was  no  one  except  my  wife,  sleeping  quietly  in  bed.  I
listened  for  some  seconds,  expecting  to  hear  footsteps  outside,  but  complete
stillness  prevailed,  so  I  lay  down  again,  thanking  God  that  the  voice  which
woke  me  was  a  hallucination.  I  had  hardly  closed  my  eyes  when  I  heard  the
same  voice  and  words,  upon  which  I  woke  Lady  Drummond  Hay,  and  told  her
what  had  occurred,  and  got  up  and  went  into  my  study,  adjoining  the  bedroom,
and  noted  it  in  my  diary.  Next  morning  I  related  what  had  happened  to  my
daughter,  saying  that,  though  I  did  not  believe  in  dreams,  I  felt  anxious  for
tidings  from  Mogodor.  That  port,  as  you  will  see  in  the  map,  is  about  300
miles  south  of  Tangier.  A  few  days  after  this  incident  a  letter  arrived  from  my
daughter-in-law,  Mrs.  R.  Drummond  Hay,  telling  us  that  my  son  was  seriously
ill  with  typhoid  fever  and  mentioning  the  night  during  which  he  had  been
delirious.  Much  struck  by  the  coincidence  that  it  was  the  same  night  I  had
heard  her  voice,  I  wrote  to  tell  her  what  had  happened.  She  replied,  the  fol-
lowing post,  that  in  her  distress  at  seeing  her  husband  so  dangerously  ill,  and
from  being  alone  in  a  distant  land,  she  had  made  use  of  the  precise  words
which  had  startled  me  from  sleep,  and  had  repeated  them.  As  it  may  be  of
interest  for  you  to  receive  a  corroboration  of  what  I  have  related  from  the  per-
sons I  have  mentioned,  who  happen  to  be  with  me  at  this  date,  they  also  sign
to  affirm  the  accuracy  of  all  I  have  related.

When  I  resigned,  in  1886,  I  destroyed,  unfortunately,  a  number  of  my
diaries  and  amongst  them  that  of  1879,  or  I  should  have  been  able  to  state  the
day,  and  might  have  sent  you  the  leaf  on  which  I  noted  the  incident.  .  .  .

{J.  H.  DRUMMOND  HAY.
ANNETTE  DRUMMOND  HAY.
EUPHEMIA  DRUMMOND  HAY.
ALICE  DRUMMOND  HAY.

down  a  steep  hill,  at  the  bottom  of  which  ran  a  road,  at  right  angles  with  the  one  we
were  on.  As  we  neared  the  bottom  of  the  hill  we  saw  a  carriole,  going  as  quickly  as
ourselves,  just  ready  to  cross  our  path.  My  father  reined  in  suddenly,  his  horse  reared
and  fell  over,  and  I  could  not,  at  first,  see  whether  he  was  hurt  or  not.  He,  luckily,  had
sustained  no  injury,  and  in  due  time  we  reached  home.  My  sister,  on  our  approach,
rushed  out,  exclaiming  :  "  Then  you  are  not  hurt  ?  I  saw  the  horse  rear,  but  I  could  not
see  whether  you  were  hurt  or  not." '  "

It  will  be  seen  that  if  Mrs.  Bidder's  report  is  strictly  accurate,  there  is  a  discrepancy
as  to  which  of  the  two  horses  it  was  that  reared.  But  even  eye-witnesses  of  a  sudden
and  confusing  accident  might  afterwards  differ  in  such  a  point  as  this.

424  A]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  397

424  A.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  61.  The  account  comes
from  Mr.  Edward  Crewdson,  jun.,  of  Tuckerville,  Chester  Co.,  Nebraska,
t\S.A.

Mr.  Crewdson  explains  that  at  the  time  of  the  occurrence  described
he  owned  two  ranches  in  Nebraska,  called  the  "East"  and  "West"
ranches.  On  the  former  he  resided  with  his  family.  The  other  con-
sisted of  three  sections,  partially  separated  from  one  another  by  a  section
of  Government  land.  In  order  to  acquire  a  piece  of  this  to  connect  two
of  his  sections,  certain  conditions  were  necessary,  of  which  continuous
residence  for  six  months  was  one.  He  was  building  a  "frame  house"
there  for  this  purpose,  and  meanwhile  had  a  sod-house  built  and  went
over  every  week  with  one  or  two  of  his  three  sons  to  stay  a  night
or  two.

He  continues : —

November  2oM,  1889.

This  brings  me  to  about  March  zoth,  1885.  My  wife  expected  to  have  a
baby  towards  the  end  of  April.  March  2oth  (as  nearly  as  I  can  remember),  I
was  leaving  the  East  Ranche  as  usual,  with  blankets,  food,  &c.,  for  the  two
eldest  boys  and  myself,  when  the  youngest  boy  Hugh  came  running  out  crying
and  begged  to  be  taken.  I  forgot  to  mention  that  the  three  girls  were  at  school
in  England.  Mrs.  Crewdson  was  standing  by  the  buckboard,  bidding  us  good-
bye, and  said,  "  Oh  yes,  do  take  Hughie,  and  I  will  have  a  thorough  rest  till
you  come  back."  So  Hughie  jumped  up  and  we  left.  The  West  Ranche  is
fifteen  miles  from  the  East,  and  we  got  there  about  6.30.  I  cooked  our  supper,
had  a  pipe,  and  I  suppose  by  9.30  or  10  we  were  all  sound  asleep.

How  long  I  slept  I  could  not  tell,  but  I  was  awakened  by  Hughie,  who  was
sleeping  with  me,  sitting  up  and  crying,  "  Oh,  pa  !  pa  !  "  "  What  is  it,  Hughie  ?  "
"Oh,  pa,  there  is  a  little  baby  in  bed  with  mamma."  Now  the  child  had  no
idea  there  was  one  expected — could  have  had  none,  for  our  children  are  absurdly
innocent,  even  the  older  ones — awkwardly  innocent  at  times.  It  was  so  strange,
and  I  was  so  thoroughly  awake  that  I  did  not  go  to  sleep  for  some  time,  and
was  on  the  point  of  getting  up  and  driving  home,  but  felt  that  if  there  was
nothing  I  should  look  so  very  foolish.

In  the  morning  I  hurried  through  my  business,  telling  the  last  man  my
reason  for  cutting  him  short.  Before  I  was  five  miles  away  from  the  ranche  a
cowboy  met  me  with  the  news  that  a  baby  had  been  born  in  the  night.  We
were  without  servants  at  the  time,  and  though  my  old  Scotch  foreman  had
done  his  best  in  sending  off  for  the  nearest  women  and  the  doctor  (twenty
miles  off),  my  wife  had  a  very  trying  time,  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  her
intense  wish  for  me  may  have  had  something  to  do  with  Hughie's  communi-
cation.

Hughie  is  a  very  sensitive  and  clever  boy — too  clever.    He  wants  no  encour-
agement, but  rather  holding  back ;   not  delicate  in   any  way — none  of  our
children  are,  I  am  thankful  to  say — but  a  sort  of  child  who  understands  an
explanation  before  you  have  said  a  dozen  words;  very  excitable;  will  wake
up,  scream,  and  shiver  if  he  has  been  too  long  in  the  schoolroom.     The  cow-
of  course,  got  up  all  sorts  of  ideas,  which  I  paid  no  attention  to — such  as
icy  had  long  known  that  Hughie  knew  instinctively  if  it  was  going  to  rain,
especially  thunder  rain.

398  APPENDICES  [424  B

The  farmer's  name  to  whom  I  told  the  incident,  before  leaving  the  West
Ranche,  is  James  Whitehead  ;  his  address  is  Redfern,  &c.

EDW.  CREWDSON,  JUN.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Crewdson  says  :—

Hughie  was  4^  years  old.  His  exclamation  occurred  just  at  the  time  or
shortly  after  the  birth  of  our  baby.  He  simply  stated  it  as  a  fact,  and  did  not
say  if  he  dreamt  it  or  not,  but,  as  he  jumped  up  suddenly  awakened,  it  seems
likely  that  he  dreamt  it.  No  explanation  was  ever  asked,  nor  could  he,  I  think,
have  given  one.

We  wrote  to  Mr.  Whitehead,  who  now  resides  at  Broken  Bow,  Nebraska,
and  he  replied  : —

January  2jthy  1891.

The  circumstances  you  call  upon  me  to  corroborate  are  substantially  as
follows : —

Mr.  Crewdson,  with  three  of  his  boys,  was  at  his  "  West  Ranche,"  looking
after  his  interests  there.  His  wife  remained  at  Tuckerville,  some  eighteen  miles
distant.  Some  time  during  the  night  he  was  awakened  by  his  youngest  boy,
Hughie,  about  3^  years  old — nicknamed  "  Bah  " — who  said,  "  Pa,  pa,  ma  has  a
little  baby  in  bed  with  her."  "Nonsense,  'Bah.'  What  makes  you  think
that  ?  "  asked  the  father.  "  Because  I  saw  it  laying  beside  her  in  the  bed,"  the
child  replied.

The  next  morning,  having  some  business  with  Mr.  C,  I  visited  his  ranch e,
about  one  mile  distant  from  my  farm.  With  considerable  relish  and  amuse-
ment he  related  his  dream  to  me.  Coming  from  a  child  so  young,  who  could  not
possibly  be  aware  of  the  condition  of  its  mother,  the  time  of  whose  confinement
was  drawing  near,  yet  not  sufficiently  near  at  hand  (as  was  supposed)  to  excite
anxiety  on  the  part  of  Mr.  Crewdson  owing  to  his  enforced  absence,  the  dream
impressed  me  at  the  time  as  being  remarkable.  Later  on,  the  same  day,  Mr.  C.
remained  at  my  place  and  took  dinner,  repeating  the  dream  to  myself  and
family.

Starting  for  home,  while  still  in  sight,  he  met  the  young  man  (Mr.  Morgan)
he  had  left  in  charge  at  Tuckerville,  who  informed  him  that  Mrs.  Crewdson
had  given  birth  to  a  child  during  the  night,  about  the  hour  he  had  been
awakened  by  the  child  to  hear  his  dream.  Mr.  C.  hurried  on  home.  Mr.
Morgan,  who  was  on  horseback,  rode  up  to  my  door,  and  remarked,  "  Hughie's
dream  is  true."  JAMES  WHITEHEAD.

424  B.  The  next  case  is  from  Mrs.  Richardson,  of  Coombe  Down,
Bath.  It  is  quoted  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  443.

August  26tk,  1882.

On  September  Qth,  1848,  at  the  siege  of  Mooltan,  my  husband,  Major-
General  Richardson,  C.B.,  then  adjutant  of  his  regiment,  was  most  severely
and  dangerously  wounded,  and  supposing  himself  dying,  asked  one  of  the
officers  with  him  to  take  the  ring  off  his  finger  and  send  it  to  his  wife,  who,
at  that  time,  was  fully  150  miles  distant,  at  Ferozepore.  On  the  night  of
September  Qth,  1848,  I  was  lying  on  my  bed,  between  sleeping  and  waking,
when  I  distinctly  saw  my  husband  being  carried  off  the  field,  seriously  wounded,

424C]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  399

and  heard  his  voice  saying,  **  Take  this  ring  off  my  finger,  and  send  it  to  my  wife."
All  the  next  day  I  could  not  get  the  sight  or  the  voice  out  of  my  mind.  In  due
time  I  heard  of  General  Richardson  having  been  severely  wounded  in  the  assault
on  Mooltan.  He  survived,  however,  and  is  still  living.  It  was  not  for  some
time  after  the  siege  that  I  heard  from  Colonel  L.,  the  officer  who  helped  to
carry  General  Richardson  off  the  field,  that  the  request  as  to  the  ring  was  actually
made  to  him,  just  as  I  had  heard  it  at  Ferozepore  at  that  very  time.

M.  A.  RICHARDSON.

The  following  questions  were  addressed  by  us  to  General  Richardson,
whose  answers  are  appended  : —

(1)  Does  General  R.  remember  saying,  when  he  was  wounded  at  Mooltan,
"  Take  this  ring  off  my  finger,  and  send  it  to  my  wife,"  or  words  to  this  effect?

"Most  distinctly;  I  made  the  request  to  my  commanding  officer,  Major
E.  S.  Lloyd,  who  was  supporting  me  while  my  man  had  gone  for  assistance.
Major  Lloyd,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  is  dead."

(2)  Can  he  remember  the  time  of  this  incident  ?     Was  it  morning,  noon,
or  night  ?

"  As  far  as  memory  serves,  I  was  wounded  about  9  P.M.  on  Sunday,  the
9th  September  1848."

(3)  Had  General  R.,  before  he  left  home,  promised  or  said  anything  to
Mrs.  R.  as  to  sending  his  ring  to  her,  in  case  he  should  be  wounded  ?

**  To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  never.  Nor  had  I  any  kind  of  presenti-
ment on  the  subject.  I  naturally  felt  that  with  such  a  fire  as  we  were  exposed
to  I  might  get  hurt."

The  details  as  to  the  ring  seem  fairly  to  raise  this  case  out  of  the
category  of  mere  visions  of  absent  persons  who  are  known  to  be  in
danger,  and  with  whom  the  percipient's  thoughts  have  been  anxiously
engaged.

424  C.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  252.  The  following
narrative  was  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  Mr.  William  Tudor : —

AUBURNDALE,  MASS.,/M/>  IlM,  1890.

Your  favour  of  the  joth  ult.,  addressed  to  Mrs.  Tudor,  I  will  answer,  as  the
incident  more  directly  concerned  me.

Late  in  the  evening  of  Monday,  March  i;th,  near  midnight,  my  nephew,

Frederic  Tudor,  jun.,  fell  in  front  of  an  electric  car  going  to  Cambridge,  was

•d  some  distance,  and  so  badly  injured  that  for  a  time  his  life  was  in

.  though  he  recovered  with  the  loss  of  a  foot.     My  wife  heard  of  the

accident  on   Tuesday  afternoon,  and   was   much  distressed  all  the  night  of

Tuesday,  and  quite  restless  and  wakeful.

At  this  time  I  was  in   Gainesville,  Florida,  having  important  business  there

in  connection  with  land  purchases.     On  the  night  of  Tuesday  I  went  to  bed

early  in  a  calm  state  of  mind.     I  slept  soundly,  as  I  usually  do.     About

^ht,  as  I  should  judge,  I  heard  my  wife  call  my  name  quite  distinctly  and

randy  broad  aw.tk< .     I  sat  up  in  bed,  but  soon  remembering  where

I  was,  fell  asleep  again  and  waked  no  more  until  morning.     The  next  day  the

incident  of  the  night  made  me  quite  uneasy,  also  during  the  following  day,  and

400  APPENDICES  [425  A

as  I  was  obliged  to  leave  on  the  afternoon  of  Friday  for  a  rough  journey  in  the
country,  I  telegraphed  to  my  wife  to  know  what  was  the  matter.  I  usually
receive  a  letter  from  home  every  day  and  on  these  days  no  letter  arrived,  which
added  to  my  uneasiness.  No  answer  was  received  to  my  first  telegram,  for  the
very  good  reason  that  it  was  never  delivered.  I  was  obliged  to  start,  however,
in  the  afternoon  of  this  day,  Friday  the  2ist,  and  in  the  morning  of  the  22nd,
from  a  small  town  called  New  Branford,  sent  another  telegram,  of  which  the
following  is  the  substance  :  "  Shall  be  gone  three  days  ;  what  has  happened  ?
Answer  Branford."  I  had  a  strong  impression  that  something  serious  had
occurred,  that  my  wife  was  possibly  ill,  or  some  of  the  children  were  ill,  or  that
some  accident  or  death  had  occurred  to  a  near  relation,  not  however  involving
my  immediate  family.  The  following  extracts  from  my  letters  will  illustrate
this  feeling.

Letter  of  March  igth:—

"  I  thought  you  called  me  last  night,  I  waked  up  and  was  much  worried,
I  hope  you  are  not  ill."

Letter  of  March  22nd,  from  New  Branford : —

"  No  answer  comes  to  my  telegram  although  I  left  word  to  have  it  forwarded
here."  "  Surely  some  one  would  telegraph  if  you  were  ill.  Surely  you  would
let  me  know  if  anything  had  happened.  I  do  not  feel  that  anything  serious  has
happened,  and  yet  I  cannot  understand  such  a  combination  of  circumstances."
"  I  have  no  confidence  in  these  telegraph  people,  and  daresay  you  never  received
my  message."

Letter  of  March  24th,  from  Gainesville,  after  telegram  giving  account  of
accident  was  finally  received  : —

"  I  had  a  feeling  that  something  was  wrong,  but  that  you  were  all  right."

Such  I  give  as  the  substance  of  the  facts  in  this  case,  which  I  trust  may  be
interesting  to  the  Society.  WILLIAM  TUDOR.

Mrs.  W.  Tudor  writes  :—

AUBURN  DALE,  July  ztyh,  1890.

My  nephew's  accident  occurred  on  Monday  night.  Being  out  of  town  I
heard  of  it  on  Tuesday  afternoon.  I  immediately  went  to  Boston  and  returned
the  same  evening  about  nine  o'clock,  feeling  greatly  distressed.  I  wrote  a  letter
to  my  husband  after  my  return  describing  the  accident,  and  retired  to  bed  rather
late  and  passed  a  restless  night.  The  telegram  received  from  my  husband
rather  surprised  me,  as  he  is  not  usually  anxious  when  away  from  home,
believe  this  is  all  I  know  connected  with  this  incident.

ELIZABETH  TUDOR.

425  A.  When  a  prediction  affecting  the  percipient  only  is  fulfilled,  it
is  obviously  unnecessary  to  ascribe  the  information  that  has  been  received
to  any  external  intelligence.  Apart  from  the  possibility  that  the  fulfilment
of  the  prediction  may  be  due  simply  to  self-suggestion  (on  the  efficacy  of
which  see  sections  409  and  410),  even  when  the  crisis  predicted  is  death
itself,  we  may  in  some  cases  suppose  that  the  subliminal  self  has  but  drawn
an  inference  from  its  perception  of  a  disease  likely  to  be  soon  fatal.  Thus
in  the  following  case  (quoted  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  428)
heart-disease  may  have  been  far  advanced,  unknown  to  Mr.  Pratt's
waking  self.

425A]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  401

The  following  paragraph  was  sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  from  some  unknown
newspaper : —

VALPARAISO,  Inn.,  January  i^/A  [1894].

Thomas  Pratt,  an  old  resident  of  this  city,  was  found  dead  in  his  bed  this
morning.  He  was  born  in  1823  at  Cleveland,  Ohio,  and  was  a  veteran  of  the
civil  war.

Pratt's  store  on  College  Hill  has  long  been  the  meeting  place  of  a  half-
dozen  friends  and  old-time  comrades  of  the  proprietor.  Last  night  when  his
friends  came  in,  Mr.  Pratt  told  a  dream  he  had  had  the  night  previous.  He
had  dreamed  that  he  was  dead,  yet  he  possessed  the  peculiar  power  of  one  in  a
trance — to  see  all  that  went  on  about  him,  though  he  was  unable  to  move  or
speak.  He  had  noted  the  preparations  for  his  burial,  and  he  even  named  the
half-dozen  friends  who  served  as  pallbearers.  He  also  told  of  the  funeral
services  being  held  in  the  Memorial  Hall,  and  of  his  ride  to  the  cemetery
and  the  lowering  of  his  coffin  into  the  grave.  And  when  the  first  dirt  was
thrown  upon  the  box  he  awoke  from  the  trance  and  called  to  his  comrades,
and  they  drew  him  from  the  grave.  The  pallbearers  of  the  dream  will  be
the  pallbearers  at  his  burial,  Monday,  which  will  be  from  the  new  Memorial
Hall.

[Dr.  Hodgson  applied  to  the  postmaster  at  Valparaiso  and  received  the
following  reply  : — ]

VALPARAISO,  IND.,  January  2&A,  1894.

Mr.  Pratt  told  his  dream  the  day  after  it  occurred  and  the  day  before  he
died,  to  John  C.  Flint,  George  Herrington,  W.  S.  Flint,  and  Albert  Amos
and  others.  They  would  give  you  truthful  statements  in  regard  to  it.

MARK  L.  DICKOVER,  Assistant  Postmaster.

[In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Dickover  says  that  a  doctor,  arriving  shortly
after  Mr.  Pratt's  death,  ascribed  it  to  heart-disease.

Further  inquiries  elicited  the  two  letters  which  follow  :— ]

VALPARAISO,  IND.,  February  tfh,  1894.

RICHARD  HODGSON,— MY  DEAR  SIR,— Your  communication  of  the  29th
ult..  asking  information  of  the  dream  which  Thomas  Pratt  had  concerning
his  death,  has  been  received.

On  the  night  previous  to  the  night  on  which  he  died,  he  said  he  dreamed

he  died  at  twelve  o'clock.

During  the  dream  he  selected  the  pallbearers,  and  seemed  to  be  conscious
of  all  proceedings  of  his  funeral,  until  dirt  was  thrown  on  the  coffin,  which
suddenly  aroused  him.  WILLIAM  S.  FLINT.

VALPARAISO,  IND.,  February  2nd,  1894.

DEAR  SIR,— Yours  of  the  29th  received.  As  regards  Mr.  Thomas  Pi
dream  of  January  nth  :  Mr.  Pratt  was  a  merchant  here.  I  went  in  the  store
in  the  morning  of  the  I2th  January.  He  related  to  me  the  circumstance  of  his
dream.  He  said  that  he  died  last  night.  I  said,  "  Well,  you  an  alivo  yet."
Then  he  told  me  about  his  dream.  He  said  that  he  dreamt  tint  he  died  and
Me  his  pallbearers,  and  was  taken  to  the  grave,  and  then  lowered  down.
When  they  began  to  put  the  dirt  on  the  coffin  he  woke  up.  When  I  went
VOL.  I.  2  C

402  APPENDICES  [425  B

down  the  next  morning  he  was  dead.     He  died  3  A.M.,  on  the  i3th  of  January.
The  same  pallbearers  officiated  him  to  the  grave.

I  was  the  first  one  that  he  related  his  dream  to.  He  laughed  at  it  the  same
day  that  he  died,  and  said  that  he  was  good  for  forty  years  longer.  When  he
died  he  was  71  years  old.  GEORGE  HERRINGTON.

Compare  the  case  of  Christopher  Brooks,  quoted  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  291.  The  doctor  there  could  find  nothing
amiss ;  yet  must  we  not  suppose  that  some  heart-disease  already  existed
when  the  premonition  came  ?  At  any  rate  the  death  of  a  healthy  and
contented  young  man,  at  a  predetermined  day  and  hour,  merely  on
account  of  an  impression  received  in  a  dream, — this  would  be  a  result
going  far  beyond  any  efficacy  with  which  mere  unsupported  suggestion  has
hitherto  been  credited.

425  B.  In  the  next  case  (taken  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.
509),  the  precognition  does  not  refer  to  a  danger  threatening  the  percipient
himself;  there  is,  moreover,  an  element  of  collectivity  in  it.  The  account
was  addressed  to  Professor  James.

FORNEY,  TEX.,  February  u/,  1894.

PROF.  WILLIAM  JAMES,— DEAR  SIR,— Replying  to  your  request,  I  find  it
hard  for  me  to  present  to  you  the  "  premonition  "  as  it  impressed  me.

In  the  first  place  I  will  state  that  I  am,  or  have  been,  in  perfect  health.  I  am
not  in  the  least  superstitious  and  am  not  subject  to  hallucinations,  and  have
never  taken  but  little  interest  in  the  investigation  of  such  phenomena.  Three
years  ago  last  December  my  son,  then  eighteen  years  of  age,  left  home
to  accept  a  position  in  a  drug-house  in  an  adjoining  county.  I  was  perfectly
willing  for  him  to  go,  and  never  felt  a  moment's  uneasiness  about  him.
Last  summer  I  took  an  extended  trip  east  and  was  gone  some  time.  During  my
absence  I  never  once  felt  the  least  apprehension  about  my  son  or  any  member  of
my  family.  I  am  naturally  of  a  buoyant  disposition.  Some  time  last  fall,  in  a
vague  and  indescribable  way,  I  became  dissatisfied  about  my  son.  I  can't  say
I  was  uneasy — only  dissatisfied — though  I  cannot  tell  why.  I  wrote  him  several
letters — more  than  I  had  written  him  the  entire  three  years  of  his  absence.
Early  in  November  he  came  home  on  a  visit,  and  after  he  left,  I  seemed  to  get
more  troubled  and  dissatisfied  about  him  ;  it  was  not  uneasiness  or  apprehen-
sion as  to  any  danger,  simply  I  was  dissatisfied  and  troubled  about  him.
I  cannot  explain  my  feelings.  As  near  as  I  can  remember,  I  felt  just  as  I  did
after  my  father's  death,  when  I  was  quite  a  small  boy.  It  seemed  that  the  light
had  suddenly  gone  out  of  my  life  and  there  was  nothing  left  for  me  to  live  for.
A  weight  like  a  mill-stone  seemed  crushing  out  my  life.  I  remarked  often  to
my  friends  that  living  seemed  to  have  lost  its  attraction  for  me.  As  December
wore  along  this  feeling  became  intensified,  and  in  some  way  my  son  seemed
to  be  the  centre  of  it  all.  Often  I  would  awake  in  the  night  thinking  about  him,
and  so  impressed  with  the  emptiness  and  hollowness  of  life  that  I  could  not
sleep.  On  the  morning  of  the  iQth  [i7th]  of  December  I  awoke  some  time
before  day.  It  seemed  that  I  had  reached  a  crisis.  I  got  up  and  kindled  a  fire
without  disturbing  any  member  of  my  family.  In  all  my  life  I  do  not  remember
ever  doing  such  a  thing  before.  I  sat  down  by  the  fire  to  think.  I  cannot
explain  the  awful  weight  that  oppressed  me.  I  did  not  know  what  it  was,  nor

425B]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  403

what  was  the  matter  with  me,  yet  in  no  way  did  I  anticipate  trouble  or  danger
to  my  son.  About  7  A.M.  my  wife  awoke,  and  sitting  in  the  bed,  told  me  a
dream  that  was  strangely  impressing  her, — in  fact,  it  caused  her  to  awake.

**  I  thought,"  she  said,  "that  you  were  in  a  strange  place,  and  among  people
I  had  never  seen  before.  It  was  a  large  family  of  people,  with  several  small
children  who  were  going  to  school  and  a  grown-up  daughter.  I  came  to  the
place  in  a  wagon,  but  you  were  there  already.  I  thought  you  were  very  inti-
mate with  the  family.  The  large  girl  sat  in  your  lap  and  put  her  arms  round
your  neck  and  kissed  you  repeatedly.  While  I  was  wondering  where  you  had
met  these  people  to  become  so  intimate  with  them,  you  suddenly  dropped  over
and  died.  And  I  awoke."

I  replied  to  her  that  I  felt  wretched  enough  to  wish  the  dream  a  reality  ;  that  I
was  so  troubled  about  Walter  that  life  had  become  a  burden.  After  breakfast  I
got  my  writing  material,  and  called  my  daughter  and  told  her  to  write  Walter  a
letter  at  once  and  tell  him  to  come  home.  To  be  sure  and  get  her  letter  off  by
the  first  mail  train.  I  then  rode  out  to  one  of  my  farms  for  recreation.  About
12  M.  I  received  a  despatch  to  the  effect  that  my  son  was  badly  hurt  and  was
unconscious.  I  boarded  a  freight  train  and  hurried  at  once  to  the  scene,  with
the  understanding  that  my  wife  and  daughter  come  later  on  the  passenger.
Now,  right  here  comes  in  a  remarkable  feature  in  that  strange  matter.  Through
some  misunderstanding  they  failed  to  catch  the  train  and  had  to  get  private
conveyance  and  come  directly  across  the  country.  By  their  changing  horses  at
each  little  town,  they  were  enabled  to  reach  my  son  by  II  o'clock  at  night.
The  accident  had  happened  near  the  residence  of  a  most  excellent  farmer,
whose  daughter  my  son  had  been  long  visiting.  To  the  house  of  this  gentleman
he  was  taken,  as  it  was  not  only  near  by,  but  was  the  house  of  his  best  friends.
He  had  a  large  family  of  children  who  were  all  deeply  attached  to  my  son.  Of
a  truth,  I  could  not  say  that  we  suffered  more  than  did  those  people  because  of
my  son's  death.  When  my  wife  entered  the  room  where  our  boy  lay  uncon-
scious, this  girl  I  speak  of  was  standing  at  the  head  of  his  bed  weeping.  She
gave  a  glance  around,  and  then  whispered  in  my  ear,  "  This  is  my  dream !  This  is
the  room  I  saw  you  in — these  are  the  people  I  dreamed  of."  Even  her  trip
there  in  a  wagon  was  a  verification  of  her  dream,  and  the  family  were  just  such
people  as  she  described  to  me— "very  plain,  but  most  excellent  country  people."
The  very  nature  of  the  country  through  which  she  travelled  was  in  perfect  ful-
filment of  her  dream,  as  was  also  the  scenery  surrounding  the  house.

In  conclusion  I  will  say  that  the  heaviness  of  feeling  that  so  oppressed  me
has  all  disappeared.  I  have  never  felt  that  peculiar,  that  indescribable  weight
that  was  crushing  out  my  very  life,  since  Sunday  morning,  the  i/th  of  December.
Of  course,  I  feel  sad  because  of  my  loss,  but  it  is  altogether  a  different  feeling.

T.  F.  IVEY.

Mrs.  Ivey  adds  the  following  corroboration  : —

February  iqth,  1894.

PROF.  JAMES, — It  was  after  daylight  on  the  morning  of  iyth  December
1893,  that  I  had  the  dream.  I  thought  that  I  was  at  a  strange  place.  I  had
gone  there  in  a  wagon.  I  had  no  recollection  of  my  husband  going  with  me,
but  he  was  there  and  seemed  to  be  a  particular  friend  of  the  family.  It
large  family,  and  I  was  very  much  struck  with  their  manner  and  dress  and
il  appearance.  I  observed  the  house  closely  and  the  scantiness  of  its
furniture  and  the  slipshod  way  it  seemed  to  be  kept.  The  children  were  get-

404  APPENDICES  [425  B

ting  lessons,  and  would  go  to  my  husband  for  assistance.  The  largest  one  of
the  children,  a  girl  about  budding  into  womanhood,  sat  on  my  husband's  lap
and  was  very  affectionate.  I  was  not  the  least  jealous  of  this  girl,  only  I
wondered  how  in  the  world  came  my  husband  so  intimate  with  those  people
whom  I  had  never  seen  or  even  heard  of  before.  They  did  not  seem  to  pay
any  attention  to  me,  but  to  devote  themselves  entirely  to  my  husband,  who
seemed  to  be  the  centre  of  attraction.  Suddenly  my  husband  dropped  over  and
died, — and  then  I  seemed  to  be  at  home,  and  awoke.

About  12  M.  the  same  day,  we  got  a  telegram  from  Copeville,  Tex.,  that
our  son  was  fatally  injured,  and  to  come  at  once.  My  husband  went  immedi-
ately on  a  freight  train.  Through  some  misunderstanding  I  had  to  go  in  a
private  conveyance  across  the  country.  As  soon  as  I  entered  the  house  I
thought  of  my  dream,  for  it  was  all  just  as  I  had  dreamt,  even  the  house  and  its
surroundings.  The  peculiar  dress  and  manner  of  the  people,  their  scantiness  of
furniture  and  negligent  housekeeping,  even  to  the  children  getting  their  lessons,
and  the  larger  girl  who  wept  over  our  son  like  her  heart  would  break — all  were
just  as  I  had  dreamed  that  very  morning.  No  one  could  have  told  that  the
dead  boy  was  not  their  son  instead  of  ours.  We  learned  that  he  was  indeed  an
intimate  and  most  particular  friend  of  the  family ;  that  he  spent  more  of  his
time  there  than  anywhere  else ;  that  all  the  children  looked  on  him  as  a  brother
and  that  the  larger  girl  loved  him  more  than  a  brother.  With  the  single  excep-
tion of  putting  my  husband  in  place  of  my  son,  the  dream  was  a  real  and  vivid
anticipation  of  the  actual.  A.  L.  IVEY.

Even  this  great  inaccuracy — the  substitution  of  the  husband  for  the
son — does  not,  I  think,  destroy  the  impression  of  a  true  relation  between
the  actual  and  the  visionary  scene.

In  a  subsequent  letter  Mr.  Ivey  gives  some  further  particulars  : —

FORNEY,  TEXAS,  April  2oth,  1895.

MR.  RICHARD  HODGSON,— DEAR  SIR,— Replying  to  yours  of  the  i2th  inst.,
I  will  say  : —

ist.  My  son  was  hurt  about  11.30  A.M.  Sunday,  December  I7th,  1893.

2nd.  I  awoke  about  3  A.M.  the  same  morning,  but  not  being  able  to  go  back
to  sleep  from  some  undefinable  cause,  I  got  up  about  4  o'clock  and  kindled  a
fire  and  remained  up.

3rd.  He  was  returning  from  church  with  two  other  young  men  in  a  buggy
when  the  horses  took  fright,  and,  running  away,  came  in  contact  with  a  tree
which,  striking  my  son,  produced  the  fatal  injuries  from  which  he  died.

4th.  The  blow  produced  concussion  of  the  brain,  from  which  he  was  un-
conscious the  greater  part  of  the  time.  He  died  about  i  A.M.,  Tuesday  ipth.

After  more  than  a  year  I  know  of  nothing  I  can  add  to  the  letter  I  wrote
Prof.  James.  I  believe  it  contained  as  near  the  truth  as  it  was  possible  for  me
to  write.  As  near  as  I  can  remember,  for  six  weeks  or  more  before  the  accident
I  was  to  a  great  extent  two  different  distinct  persons.  During  the  day,  I  was
my  normal  self — satisfied— interested  in  my  business  and  going  along  as  usual.
But  at  night  I  was  altogether  another  person.  I  would  generally  take  a  short
nap  and  then  awake  with  the  most  awful  feeling  of  weight  and  depression  that
it  is  possible  to  conceive  of.  I  could  seldom  sleep  all  night  (though  I  am  usually
a  sound  sleeper),  I  would  lie  and  toss  vainly  trying  to  sleep — feeling  all  the  time
that  there  was  nothing  more  to  live  for — that  all  that  was  worth  living  for  had

425  B]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  405

gone  out  of  my  life — that  I  had  lived  too  long — and  that  my  life  was  nothing
henceforth  but  a  burden.  When  I  would  awake  after  a  short  nap,  I  felt  like  I
imagine  a  person  must  feel  who  was  to  have  been  hanged  that  day  and  realised
the  dreadful  fact  immediately  after  awakening.  This  expresses  it  better  than
anything  I  can  think  of.  I  once  called  the  attention  of  a  friend  to  my  singular
condition — it  was  something  unusual  in  my  life— I  couldn't  understand  it — I
remarked  to  him  that  I  was  so  low-spirited  as  soon  as  I  went  to  bed  that  I  could
not  rest,  and  that  I  could  see  no  sense  in  it,  as  my  business  was  in  good  condition.
I  thought  possibly  that  I  was  going  to  be  sick,  as  I  was  only  troubled  at  night
and  was  as  cheerful  and  full  of  life  during  the  day  as  I  usually  am.  I  don't
know,  for  some  time,  that  this  state  of  mind  was  in  any  way  associated  with
my  son,  but  gradually  he  became  the  centre,  as  it  were,  around  which  the
awfulness  seemed  to  crystallise.  On  Sunday  morning,  December  I7th,  I  awoke
about  3  o'clock,  and  the  feeling  was  so  heavy  that  I  could  not  stand  it  and  got
up  and  made  me  a  fire.  As  soon  as  breakfast  was  over  I  got  pen  and  paper
and  ordered  my  daughter  to  write  to  Walter  to  come  home  at  once.

I  remember  well  walking  the  floor  after  breakfast ;  and,  turning  to  a  friend
who  was  at  my  house,  I  remarked  to  him,  "  Jo,  I  am  troubled  to  death  about
Walter — I  see  ahead  of  him — and  there  is  ruin."  I  then  called  my  daughter,
and,  getting  material  and  placing  it  on  the  table  before  her,  ordered  her  to  write
to  Walter  then  to  come  home  at  once.

Understand  though,  I  never  dreamed  of  any  accident  happening  to  him  that
day — I  never  thought  of  his  getting  hurt,  or  I  would  have  telegraphed  to  him.
I  was  simply  troubled  to  death  about  him  and  couldn't  tell  why.  It  never  once
crossed  my  mind  that  he  was  in  any  danger  at  all.  I  had  no  premonition  of
any  evil  happening  to  him.  I  was  simply  troubled  to  death,  and  he  seemed  to
be  the  centre  of  it.  I  am  a  farmer.  Buckle  says  that  farmers  and  sailors  are
the  most  superstitious  of  people.  Possibly  this  may  be  true,  but  I  don't  think
I  am  the  least  so.  I  never  had  anything  in  the  way  of  a  premonition  in  my  life
before,  though  I  once  had  a  remarkable  experience  in  connection  with  my  first
child  who  died  at  nine  years  of  age  ;  still  it  was  in  no  sense  a  premonition.  In
the  whole  range  of  human  experience  I  know  of  no  class  of  phenomena  so
inexplicable  as  premonitions.  Even  if  Spiritualism  be  true,  I  cannot  see  how
spirit  intercourse  can  explain  it.  T.  F.  IVEY.

This  case  seems  to  tell  against  the  view  that  the  father's  transcendental
foresight  discerned  the  accident  long  beforehand.  It  suggests  rather  that
some  intelligence  to  which  the  impending  accident  was  long  previously
known  may  have  endeavoured  to  inform  the  father,  but  only  when  the
accident  was  just  about  to  occur  was  able  to  impress  the  father  still  more
strongly,  and  also  to  inform  the  mother  of  the  event,  though  with  much
symbolic  confusion.

n  we  suppose  that  the  boy's  own  spirit  was  thus  aware  beforehand
of  his  own  impending  death,  and  was  able  to  transmit  the  knowledge  to
the  father,  although  not  to  the  boy's  own  supraliminal  consciousness —
with  the  desire,  perhaps,  that  the  father  should  avert  the  accident  by

.oning  the  boy  home?     Far-fetched  though  this  sounds,  we  have  a
few  cases  of  so-called  "  banshees  "  where  the  fact  that  all  the  family  except

.ing  man  himself  wtt,  roused  by  the  alarming  sounds,  looks  as  though
those  premonitory  sounds  were  somehow  caused  by  the  spirit  which  is

406  APPENDICES  [425  C

about  to  quit  the  flesh  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  307).  But  the
evidence  for  "  banshees  "  and  "  doubles  "  is  too  scanty  to  justify  insistence
on  this  view,  and  we  shall  presently  find  that  the  agency  of  disembodied
spirits  is  more  often  suggested.

425  C.  In  some  cases  the  premonitory  dream,  although  it  may  have
made  a  vivid  impression,  and  perhaps  have  even  been  narrated  to  others,
is  then  apparently  clean  forgotten  until  the  moment  of  its  fulfilment.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  has  justly  urged  (of  a  similar  case)  that  this  looks
rather  as  though  we  were  dealing  with  a  pseudo-memory,  created  by
the  very  circumstance  which  seems  merely  to  revive  it.1  There  may,
however,  be  another  explanation.  We  know  that  when  a  suggestion  is
given  to  a  good  subject  in  the  hypnotic  trance  to  the  effect  that  he  will
(say)  open  the  window  half-an-hour  after  awaking,  he  passes  that  half-
hour  in  unconsciousness  of  the  order,  which  order  nevertheless  he  fulfils
at  the  right  minute.  Well,  while  he  is  thus  fulfilling  it,  or  just  before
he  fulfils  it,  he  lapses  into  a  state  more  akin  to  the  hypnotic  state  in
which  he  received  the  order  than  to  the  waking  state  in  which  he  has
since  remained.  The  memory  of  what  he  has  to  do  comes  to  him  only
just  in  time,  and  derives  its  efficacy  from  a  partial  recrudescence  of  the
condition  in  which  he  was  when  he  accepted  the  order.  Even  thus,
perhaps,  we  might  by  analogy  consider  the  condition  of  the  dreamer  of
a  precognitive  dream  as  a  secondary  state,  the  recollection  of  which  has
a  tendency  to  fade  from  the  waking  mind,  but  which  is  partially  revived
when  the  prefigured  incident — which  belongs  in  a  sense  to  the  secondary
state — suddenly  presents  itself  in  the  waking  day.

The  following  case,  from  a  lady  known  to  me,  is  interesting  in  this
connection  ;  since  a  dream  is  at  first  remembered  so  impressively  as  to
affect  action,  is  then  apparently  forgotten,  and  finally  revives  in  memory
just  in  time  to  enable  the  dreamer  to  avert  its  complete  fulfilment.  I
quote  the  case  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  497.

On  the  second  occasion  my  warning  in  dream  did  probably  prevent  a  rather
serious  accident.  We  were  living  in  about  188 — ,  in  Hertford  Street,  Mayfair.
One  day  I  determined  that  on  the  morrow  I  would  drive  to  Woolwich  in  our
brougham,  taking  my  little  child  and  nurse,  to  spend  the  day  with  a  relation.
During  the  night  I  had  a  painfully  clear  dream  in  vision  of  the  brougham
turning  up  one  of  the  streets  north  of  Piccadilly;  and  then  of  myself  standing
on  the  pavement  and  holding  my  child,  our  old  coachman  falling  on  his  head
on  the  road, — his  hat  smashed  in.  This  so  much  discomposed  me  that  when  in
the  morning  I  sent  for  the  coachman  to  give  him  his  orders,  I  almost  hoped
that  some  obstacle  to  the  drive  might  arise,  so  that  I  might  have  an  excuse  for
going  by  train.  The  coachman  was  an  old  and  valued  servant.  I  asked  him
if  he  would  have  the  carriage  ready  to  drive  to  Woolwich  at  ten.  He  was  not
given  to  making  difficulties  ;  but  he  hesitated,  and  when  I  suggested  eleven
instead,  he  said  that  he  would  prefer  that  hour.  He  gave  no  reason  for  his

1  See  her  article,  "  On  the  Evidence  for  Premonitions,"  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.

425  C]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  407

hesitation,  and  said  that  the  horse  was  quite  well.     I  told  him  almost  eagerly
that  I  could  quite  well  go  by  train ;  but  he  said  that  all  was  right.

We  went  to  Woolwich  and  spent  the  day.  All  went  well  until  we  reached
Piccadilly  on  the  return  journey.  Then  I  saw  that  other  coachmen  were  look-
ing at  us ;  and  looking  through  the  glass  front  of  the  brougham  I  saw  that  the
coachman  was  leaning  back  in  his  seat,  as  though  the  horse  were  pulling
violently,  of  which,  however,  I  felt  no  sign.  We  turned  up  Down  Street.  He
retained  his  attitude.  My  dream  flashed  back  upon  me.  I  called  to  him  to
stop,  jumped  out,  caught  hold  of  my  child,  and  called  to  a  policeman  to  catch
the  coachman.  Just  as  he  did  so  the  coachman  swayed  and  fell  off  the  box.
If  I  had  been  in  the  least  less  prompt,  he  would  have  fallen  just  as  I  saw  him
in  my  dream.  I  found  afterwards  that  the  poor  man  had  been  suffering  from
a  serious  attack  of  diarrhoea  on  the  previous  day,  and  had  gradually  fainted
from  exhaustion  during  the  drive  home.  He  was  absolutely  sober;  and  his
only  mistake  had  been  in  thinking  that  he  was  strong  enough  to  undertake  the
long  drive.  In  this  case  my  premonitory  dream  differed  from  the  reality  in  two
points.  In  my  dream  we  approached  Down  Street  from  the  west;  in  reality  we
came  from  the  east.  In  my  dream  the  coachman  actually  fell  on  his  head ;  the
crushing  of  his  hat  on  the  road  being  the  most  vivid  point  of  the  dream.  In
reality  this  was  just  averted  by  the  prompt  action  which  my  anxious  memory  of
the  dream  inspired.  Signed  [LADY  Z.]

The  aversion  of  the  fulfilment,  by  reasonable  precaution,  is  here  an
important  feature.  Another  dream  of  the  same  lady's  presents  us  with
a  fatal  fulfilment  occurring  in  spite  of  the  dreamer's  aroused  anxiety.
But  in  that  case  no  precautions  were  taken, — nor  indeed  could  they  have
been  easily  taken, — to  avert  the  calamity.

I  am  not  usually  a  great  dreamer ;  but  on  two  occasions,  and  two  occasions
only  in  my  life,  I  have  acted  on  dreams  or  impressions,  and  in  each  case  there
seems  to  have  been  some  meaning  in  the  impression  which  I  received.

In  or  about  the  year  1866,  Lord  Z.  and  I  were  inhabiting  a  house  in
Charles  Street,  Mayfair.  We  had  built  out  a  bedroom  into  the  small  court
behind.  This  bedroom  was  separated  only  by  a  narrow  passage  or  strip  of
court  from  our  neighbour  Mrs.  L.'s  kitchen,  which  was  built  out  into  the  court
in  the  same  fashion,  and  was  of  one  storey  only.

In  the  middle  of  a  very  cold  night  I  was  suddenly  awakened  by  a  heavy
fall  into  this  passage  outside  our  bedroom  wall,  as  if  some  heavy  body  had
fallen  into  it  from  the  roof  of  Mrs.  L.'s  kitchen.  I  listened,  much  alarmed,  and
heard  groans  from  the  passage.  I  thought  that  some  burglar  had  slipped  from
the  kitchen  roof  down  on  to  the  pavement  and  was  lying  there  injured.  I
begged  Lord  Z.  to  get  up  and  look;  but  he  could  hear  nothing,  and  told  me

had  been  dreaming.     I  went  to  sleep  again  at  length  ;  but

awakened   by  a   similar  thud   in   the   passage.     I    now  begged    Lord   Z.   so

earnestly  to  look  that  he  got  up  and  partially  dressed  and  opened  a  door  on

round  floor  which  led  into  this  passage.     The  moon  was  shining  brightly,

and  there  was  no  trace  whatever  of  anything  unusual.     Much  perplexed,  I

again  went  to  sleep.     After  I  had  left  the  bedroom  in  the  morning,  a  servant

to  ask  me  whether  he  might  get  ready  a  bedroom  to  receive  a  workman

who  had  come  to  work  on  the  roof  of  Mrs.  L.'s  kitchen,  and  had  fallen  into  the

4o8  APPENDICES  [425  D

passage  from  the  kitchen-roof,  just  as  I  had  thought  that  I  heard  a  man  fall
some  few  hours  previously.

The  premonition,  if  such  it  was,  was  here  of  no  special  use.  It  seemed  as
though  I  had  received  an  intimation  of  a  coming  fact  which  only  concerned
me  by  its  mere  physical  nearness.  Signed  [LADY  Z.]

Lord  Z.  is  no  longer  living,  so  that  his  corroboration  of  this  incident
could  not  be  obtained.

425  D.  Here  again  is  a  case  where  a  somewhat  complex  scene,
involving  the  action  of  several  persons,  is  dreamt  and  narrated  before-
hand. It  is  quoted  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  491,  the  account
being  given  by  Mr.  Haggard,  of  the  British  Consulate,  Trieste,  Austria.

September  21  sf,  1893.

A  few  months  ago  I  had  an  extraordinarily  vivid  dream,  and  waking  up
repeated  it  to  my  wife  at  once.  All  I  dreamt  actually  occurred  about  six
weeks  afterwards,  the  details  of  my  dream  falling  out  exactly  as  dreamt.

There  seems  to  have  been  no  purpose  whatsoever  in  the  dream ;  and  one
cannot  help  thinking,  what  was  the  good  of  it?

I  dreamt  that  I  was  asked  to  dinner  by  the  German  Consul-General,  and
accepting,  was  ushered  into  a  large  room  with  trophies  of  East  African  arms
on  shields  against  the  walls.  (N.JS. — I  have  myself  been  a  great  deal  in
East  Africa.)

After  dinner  I  went  to  inspect  the  arms,  and  amongst  them  saw  a
beautifully  gold-mounted  sword  which  I  pointed  out  to  the  French  Vice-
Consul — who  at  that  moment  joined  me — as  having  probably  been  a  present
from  the  Sultan  of  Zanzibar  to  my  host  the  German  Consul-General.

At  that  moment  the  Russian  Consul  came  up  too.  He  pointed  out  how
small  was  the  hilt  of  the  sword  and  how  impossible  in  consequence  it  would
be  for  a  European  to  use  the  weapon,  and  whilst  talking  he  waved  his  arm
in  an  excited  manner  over  his  head  as  if  he  was  wielding  the  sword,  and  to
illustrate  what  he  was  saying.

At  that  moment  I  woke  up  and  marvelled  so  at  the  vividness  of  the
dream  that  I  woke  my  wife  up  too  and  told  it  to  her.

About  six  weeks  afterwards  my  wife  and  myself  were  asked  to  dine  with
the  German  Consul-General  ;  but  the  dream  had  long  been  forgotten  by
us  both.

We  were  shown  into  a  large  withdrawing  room  which  I  had  never  been
in  before,  but  which  somehow  seemed  familiar  to  me.  Against  the  walls
were  some  beautiful  trophies  of  East  African  arms,  amongst  which  was  a
gold-hilted  sword,  a  gift  to  my  host  from  the  Sultan  of  Zanzibar.

To  make  a  long  story  short,  everything  happened  exactly  as  I  had  dreamt
— but  I  never  remembered  the  dream  until  the  Russian  Consul  began  to
wave  his  arm  over  his  head,  when  it  came  back  to  me  like  a  flash.

Without  saying  a  word  to  the  Russian  Consul  and  French  Vice-Consul
(whom  I  left  standing  before  the  trophy),  I  walked  quickly  across  to  my  wife,
who  was  standing  at  the  entrance  of  a  boudoir  opening  out  of  the  withdraw-
ing room,  and  said  to  her:  "Do  you  remember  my  dream  about  the
Zanzibar  arms?"  She  remembered  everything  perfectly,  and  was  a  witness

425D]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  409

to  its  realisation.     On  the  spot  we  informed  all  the  persons  concerned  of  the
dream,  which  naturally  much  interested  them.

Mrs.  Haggard's  corroboration  of  her  husband's  dream  and  its  fulfil-
ment runs  as  follows  : —

TRIESTE,  October  2oM,  1893.

I  remember  being  awoke  one  night  by  my  husband  to  hear  a  curiously
vivid  dream  he  had  just  had.  It  is  now  some  months  ago,  and  possibly
some  of  the  more  minute  details  of  his  relation  may  have  escaped  my
memory,  but  what  I  remember  of  his  dream  is  the  following.  He  dreamed
that  we  were  dining  with  the  German  Consul-General,  whose  drawing-
room,  a  remarkably  handsome  apartment,  was  ornamented  with  trophies
of  arms  from  the  East  Coast  of  Africa.  Having  been  in  those  regions
himself,  he  felt  some  interest  in  them,  and  went  nearer  to  examine  them
more  closely.  While  he  was  doing  so,  the  Russian  Consul  came  up,  and
in  his  usual  rather  excitable  fashion  began  flourishing  his  arm,  as  he
dilated  upon  the  extraordinary  smallness  of  the  native  hand  for  which
the  hilt  of  a  certain  sword  must  have  been  designed.  That  is  what  I
recollect  of  the  dream.  Its  fulfilment  took  place  a  few  weeks  later  when
the  circumstance  of  the  dream  had  almost  passed  from  our  thoughts.

We  dined  one  evening  with  the  German  Consul-General,  the  Russian
Consul  being  also  present,  among  others.  After  dinner  my  husband  went  to
examine  one  of  the  trophies  of  East  African  arms,  with  which  the  room — as
in  his  dream,— was  hung.  While  he  was  doing  so,  the  Russian  Consul  went
up  to  speak  to  him  upon  the  subject,  and  the  dramatic  flourish  of  his  arm,
with  which  he  emphasised  his  conversation,  at  once  recalled  the  dream,
in  which  it  had  taken  place,  so  vividly  to  my  husband's  mind,  that  he
immediately  crossed  the  room  to  me,  and  asked  me  if  I  did  not  remember  it
also,  which  of  course  I  did,  though,  as  I  was  talking  to  some  one  else  at  the
time,  and  only  knew  the  room  previously  by  my  husband's  description  of  his
dream,  the  coincidence  might  not  have  occurred  to  me  had  he  not  called  my
attention  to  it.  Directly  he  did  so,  however,  by  asking  me  if  I  did  not
remember  his  dream,  I  recollected  quite  well  all  the  details  I  have  previously
mentioned.  AGNES  M.  HAGGARD.

Below  are  given  a  letter  from  Mr.  Kolemine,  Russian  Consul,  and  a
statement  from  Herr  Michabelles,  German  Consul-General  at  Trieste,
both  of  whom  were  witnesses  of  the  fulfilment  of  Mr.  Haggard's  dream,
and  of  the  great  impression  which  it  made  upon  him  at  the  time.

Monsieur  Haggard,  mon  collegue  d'Angleterre,  en  a  eu  un  trcs  remar-
quahle  au  point  de  vue  psychologique.  .  .  .  Veuillez  accepter  tout  ce  que
Monsieur  Haggard  vous  a  e*crit  comme  e*tant  parfaitement  la  vdrit<5  et
1'asserter  de  mon  nom  si  vous  le  jugez  ne*cess

Agrdez,  cher  Monsieur,  Tassurance  de  ma  consideration  tres  distingue^.

A.    DE    KOLEM

BERLIN.  November  loM,  1893.

1st  I  was  German  Consul-General  at  Trieste,  I  had  one  evening,  in
February  or  March  of  this  year,  the  pleasure  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Haggard's
company  at  dinner  ;  among  others  the  Russian  Consul  was  present.  It  was

410  APPENDICES  [425  E

the  first  time  that  Mr.  Haggard  came  into  my  private  house :  before,  we  had
always  met  in  my  office.  After  dinner  I  was  busy  in  entertaining  my  party,
when  suddenly  Mr.  Haggard  joined  me  and  told  me  that  a  few  weeks  before
he  had  seen,  in  a  very  vivid  dream,  my  drawing-room  with  the  trophies  of
East  African  arms  on  shields  against  the  walls,  and  Mr.  Kolemine,  the
Russian  Consul,  standing  before  one  trophy  had  explained  something  to
him  in  his  usual  excited  manner,  waving  his  arms  over  his  head  in  order  to
illustrate  what  he  said.  All  this  had  happened  just  at  the  moment  with  all
particulars  seen  in  the  dream.  I  was  extremely  astonished  at  the  strange
occurrence,  and  observed  that  the  realisation  of  his  dream  had  produced  a
strong  effect  on  Mr.  Haggard's  mind.  J.  MICHABELLES,

Counsellor  of  Legation  in  the  Foreign  Office.

,  425  E.  I  shall  conclude  this  group  with  a  case  (quoted  from  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  577)  where  there  is  again  a  suggestion  of  per-
sonal guardianship  and  care.  But  the  facts  prefigured  do  not  fall  within
the  life-history  of  the  decedent ;  so  that  if  we  suppose  that  it  was  his  spirit
which  foresaw  and  informed  his  niece  of  the  future,  we  must  suppose  also
that  he  foresaw  what  would  happen  to  his  body  after  his  death.  The
percipient,  whom  I  have  called  Lady  Q.,  has  given  me  orally  a  slightly
fuller  account.  An  unauthorised  version  of  the  main  points  here  to  be
detailed  was  compiled  shortly  after  the  event.

December  22nd,  1892.

I  have  been  asked  to  give  an  account  of  an  experience  which  was  certainly
the  most  remarkable  in  my  life :  a  dream  which  came  to  me  three  times  at  long
intervals,  and  which  was  at  last  fulfilled.

My  father  died  when  I  was  a  child  ;  my  mother  married  again,  and  I  went
to  live  with  an  uncle,  who  became  like  a  father  to  me.  In  the  spring  of  1882
I  dreamt  that  my  sister  and  I  were  sitting  in  my  uncle's  drawing-room.  In  my
dream  it  was  a  brilliant  spring  day,  and  from  the  window  we  saw  quantities  of
flowers  in  the  garden,  many  more  than  were  in  fact  to  be  seen  from  that  window.
But  over  the  garden  there  lay  a  thin  covering  of  snow.  I  knew  in  my  dream
that  my  uncle  had  been  found  dead  by  the  side  of  a  certain  bridle-path  about
three  miles  from  the  house — a  field-road  where  I  had  often  ridden  with  him,
and  along  which  he  often  rode  when  going  to  fish  in  a  neighbouring  lake.  I
knew  that  his  horse  was  standing  by  him,  and  that  he  was  wearing  a  dark
homespun  suit  of  cloth  made  from  the  wool  of  a  herd  of  black  sheep  which  he
kept.  I  knew  that  his  body  was  being  brought  home  in  a  waggon  with  two
horses,  with  hay  in  the  bottom,  and  that  we  were  waiting  for  his  body  to  arrive.
Then  in  my  dream  the  waggon  came  to  the  door ;  and  two  men  well  known  to
me — one  a  gardener,  the  other  the  kennel  huntsman — helped  to  carry  the  body
up  the  stairs,  which  were  rather  narrow.  My  uncle  was  a  very  tall  and  heavy
man,  and  in  my  dream  I  saw  the  men  carrying  him  with  difficulty,  and  his  left
hand  hanging  down  and  striking  against  the  banisters  as  the  men  mounted  the
stairs.  This  detail  gave  me  in  my  dream  an  unreasonable  horror.  I  could  not
help  painfully  thinking,  "  Oh,  why  did  they  not  prevent  his  hand  from  being
bruised  in  this  way  ?  "

In  the  sadness  and  horror  of  this  sight  I  awoke,  and  I  slept  no  more  that
night.  I  had  determined  not  to  tell  my  uncle  of  the  dream  ;  but  in  the  morning

425E]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  411

I  looked  so  changed  and  ill  that  I  could  not  escape  his  affectionate  questioning ;
and  at  last  I  told  him  of  my  vision  of  him  lying  dead  in  that  field-road.  I  had
no  anxiety  about  his  health.  He  was  a  robust  man  of  sixty-six,  accustomed  to
hunt  his  own  pack  of  hounds  and  to  take  much  exercise.  He  listened  to  me
very  kindly,  and  although  he  was  not  himself  at  all  alarmed  by  my  dream,  he
offered  me  to  do  anything  I  liked  which  might  calm  my  mind.  I  begged  him
to  promise  me  never  to  go  alone  by  that  particular  road.  He  promised  me
that  he  would  always  make  an  excuse  to  have  a  groom  or  some  one  with  him  ;
I  remember  my  compunction  at  the  thought  of  giving  him  this  trouble — and
yet  I  could  not  help  asking  for  his  promise.

The  impression  of  the  dream  grew  gradually  fainter,  but  it  did  not  leave
me  ;  and  I  remember  that  when  a  little  boy  came  to  stay  with  us  some  time
after,  and  boy-like  drew  his  stick  along  the  banisters  as  he  went  upstairs,  the
sound  brought  back  the  horror  of  my  dream.  Two  years  passed  by,  and  the
thought  of  the  dream  was  becoming  less  frequent,  when  I  dreamt  it  again
with  all  its  details  the  same  as  before,  and  again  with  the  same  profoundly
disturbing  effect.  I  told  my  uncle,  and  said  to  him  that  I  felt  sure  that  he  had
been  neglecting  his  promise,  and  riding  by  that  field-road  alone.  He  admitted
that  he  had  occasionally  done  so,  "although,"  he  said,  "I  think  I  have  been
very  good  on  the  whole."  He  renewed  the  promise ;  and  again  the  impression
grew  weaker  as  four  years  passed  by,  during  which  I  married  and  left  his  home.
In  the  May  of  1888  I  was  in  London,  expecting  my  baby.  On  the  night  before
I  was  taken  ill,  I  dreamt  the  same  dream  again,  but  with  this  variation.  Instead
of  dreaming  that  I  was  at  my  uncle's  home  with  my  sister,  I  knew  in  my  dream
that  I  was  lying  in  bed  in  our  London  house.  But  from  that  bedroom,  just  as
from  the  drawing-room  in  the  former  dreams,  I  seemed  to  see  my  uncle  lying
dead  in  the  same  well-known  place.  And  I  seemed  also  to  perceive  the  same
scene  of  the  bringing  home  of  the  body.  Then  came  a  new  point.  As  I  lay
in  bed,  a  gentleman  dressed  in  black,  but  whose  face  I  could  not  see,  seemed
to  stand  by  me  and  tell  me  that  my  uncle  was  dead.  I  woke  in  great  distress.
But  as  I  was  ill  from  then  for  two  days,  as  soon  as  the  child  was  born  I  ceased
to  dwell  on  the  dream— only  I  felt  an  overpowering  desire  to  write  at  once  to
my  uncle  myself  and  to  tell  him  that  I  was  getting  better.  I  was  not  allowed
to  do  this;  but  afterwards  I  managed  to  write  a  few  lines  in  pencil  unknown  to
any  one  but  the  nurse.  This  note  reached  my  uncle  two  days  before  his  death.

As  I  grew  better,  I  began  to  wonder  greatly  at  not  hearing  from  my  uncle,
who  generally  wrote  to  me  every  day.     Then  my  dream  came  back  to  me,  and
I  was  certain  that  he  was  ill  or  dead — but  my  husband,  nurse,  and  maid  (all  I
seemed  cheerful  as  usual.     Then  one  morning  my  husband  said  my  step-
father wished  to  see  me,  and  I  at  once  guessed  his  errand.     He  entered  the
room  dressed  in  black  and  stood  by  my  bedside.     At  once  I  recognised  that
as  the  figure  which  I  had  seen  in  my  dream.     I  said,  "The  Colonel  is
dead — I  know  all  about  it — I  have  dreamt  it  often."     And  as  he  was  unable  to
speak  from  emotion,  I  told  him  all  about  it,  place,  time  of  day  (morning),  and
the  clothes  my  uncle  wore.

Then  I  thought  of  that  scene  on  the  staircase,  which  had  always  remained
in  my  mind.  I  asked  if  there  were  any  bruises  on  the  hands.  "  No  bru
said  my  step-father,  "either  on  hands  or  face."  He  thought  that  I  fancied  that
my  uncle  had  fallen  from  his  horse.  Soon  afterwards  my  sister— the  sister  who
een  in  my  dream — came  to  sec  me,  and  brought  me  a  ring  which  my
uncle  had  always  worn  on  his  left  hand.  I  was  very  thankful  for  this  memento

4i2  APPENDICES  [425  E

of  him ;  and  I  told  my  sister  how  I  had  feared  that  the  ring  would  have  been  for-
gotten. "  I  only  came  just  in  time,"  she  said,  "  they  were  just  going  to  close  the
coffin."  "  Was  there  any  bruise  on  the  left  hand  ?  "  I  asked.  At  first  she  said
there  was  not ;  but  then  she  said  she  thought  there  was  a  bluish  discoloration
across  the  back  of  the  first  joints  of  the  fingers.  She  did  not  know  how  it  had
been  caused.  When  I  was  well  enough  to  travel,  I  went  to  my  old  home ;  there
I  saw  my  old  nurse,  who  had  been  in  the  house  when  my  uncle  died.  Her
account,  added  to  my  step-father's,  enabled  me  to  realise  the  events  of  that  day.
My  uncle  had  received  my  pencil-note  on  the  Sunday  morning,  and  had  been
greatly  pleased,  feeling  that  the  wished-for  heir  was  born,  and  that  I,  whom  he
loved  as  a  daughter,  was  through  my  trouble.  He  had  a  few  friends  to  lunch
with  him,  including  my  step-father,  and  said  that  he  had  seen  all  that  he  wished
to  see  in  life,  and  could  now  die  happy  at  any  moment.  His  guests  left  him  in
[the]  greatest  spirits,  and  two  days  afterwards  he  died,  and  his  body  had  been
brought  back  as  I  describe,  and  he  had  been  found  half  sitting  and  half  lying
on  that  very  field-road,  where  I  had  three  times  seen  him.  He  was  dressed  in
the  same  homespun  suit  in  which  I  had  seen  him  in  my  dream.  The  cause  of
his  death  had  been  heart-disease,  of  whose  existence  neither  I  nor,  I  believe,  any
of  those  near  and  dear  to  him  had  been  aware.  He  had  evidently  felt  faint,  and
slipped  from  his  horse.  The  same  two  men  whom  I  had  seen  in  my  dream  as
helping  to  carry  the  body  had  in  fact  done  so,  and  my  nurse  admitted  that  the
left  hand  had  knocked  against  the  banisters.  She  seemed  afraid  lest  I  should
blame  the  men  who  carried  the  body,  and  did  not  like  to  speak  of  the  incident.
I  do  not  think  that  she  had  seen  the  incident  herself;  and  I  did  not  like  to
speak  to  the  men  about  it.  It  was  enough  for  me  that  it  was  on  the  back  of  the
left  hand,  as  I  had  seen  it  in  my  dream,  and  as  from  the  arrangement  of  the
staircase  it  must  have  been,  had  it  been  caused  in  the  way  that  I  saw.  I  will
add  one  fact  which,  although  it  was  purely  a  matter  of  my  own  feeling,  made
perhaps  as  much  impression  upon  me  as  anything  in  this  history.  I  do  not  think
that  any  daughter  could  love  a  father  better  than  I  loved  my  uncle;  and,  as  will
have  been  seen,  the  prospect  of  his  death  was  always  a  deeply-lying  fear.  But  as
soon  as  I  knew  that  all  had  happened  as  my  dream  foretold,  I  somehow  felt
that  all  was  well,  and  the  death  left  me  with  a  sensation  of  complete  acquiescence
and  peace.  It  may  have  been  noticed  that  there  were  two  unreal  or  fantastic
points  in  my  original  dream  : — viz.,  the  multitude  of  flowers  in  the  garden,  and
the  thin  covering  of  snow.  I  think  that  I  can  throw  some  light  on  these  points
by  narrating  the  only  two  other  impressive  dreams  which  I  have  ever  had.  The
first  of  these  two  dreams  I  mentioned  to  others,  and  acted  upon  it.  The  second
I  neither  mentioned  nor  acted  upon  ;  so  that  it  has  no  value  as  evidence,  and  is
really  given  as  helping  to  explain  the  symbolism  of  snow.

I  had  heard  from  several  relations  (although  I  cannot  quote  definite  cases),
that  they  had  found  that  dreams  si  flowers  and  of  snow  were  followed  by  deaths  in
our  family.  This  may  have  suggested  that  form  of  symbolism  to  my  mind  ; — or
the  same  cause,  whatever  it  was,  which  acted  with  them  may  have  acted  with  me.
In  any  case,  what  happened  was  as  follows.  In  1887  I  heard  from  my  step-
father that  my  mother,  who  had  long  been  an  invalid,  was  seriously  worse  ;  and
he  asked  me  when  I  could  go  to  see  her.  My  mind  was  therefore  occupied
with  her  illness,  but  the  tone  of  his  letter  was  not  immediately  alarming;— so
that  we  saw  no  reason  for  my  not  attending  some  races  in  the  neighbour-
hood, for  which  we  had  friends  staying.  But  one  night  I  dreamt  a  dream
— which,  though  very  impressive,  was  somewhat  confused — about  my  mother

426A]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  413

seated  in  a  carriage  full  of  /lowers.  I  remembered  the  symbolism ;  and  I  felt
assured  that  my  mother  was  dead  or  dying.  I  mentioned  the  dream  to  my
husband,  and  prepared  for  an  immediate  summons,  which  came  directly  after-
wards. Having  all  preparations  already  made,  I  left  immediately  and  arrived  in
time  to  see  my  mother  die.  This  dream  and  that  of  my  uncle  are  the  only  two
dreams  on  which  I  ever  acted  in  any  way.  The  second  dream  to  which  I  have
alluded  was  as  follows:  In  18 —  I  saw  a  gentleman  whom  I  knew  lying  dead
in  a  red  coat  on  an  open  field,  with  snow  on  the  ground.  Beside  him  knelt  his
mother,  who  was  alive  and  well  at  the  time  of  the  dream.  I  tried  to  approach
and  speak  to  her;  but  she  said,  "  Don't  touch  me ;  I  have  come  for  him."  I
understood  that  she  had  died  before  him.  Two  years,  later  this  lady  did  in
fact  die,  and  in  two  years  more  her  son  was  killed,  just" as  I  saw  him  lying,  in
a  scarlet  coat.  There  was,  of  course,  no  snow  on  the  ground,  as  it  was  in  late
spring ;  so  I  fancy  that  the  snow  may  have  been  symbolical  both  here  and  in
my  dream  about  my  uncle.  I  may  add  that  I  am  not  of  an  imaginative  tempera-
ment; and  that  these  are  the  only  incidents  in  my  life  which  seem  to  lie
outside  ordinary  explanations.

My  husband  and  step-father  add  their  confirmation  of  the  incidents  which
concern  them.

The  above  account  is  true  and  accurate  in  every  particular.

[Signatures  of  Lord  and  Lady  Q.]

[Lord  Q.'s  signature  attests  (besides  his  general  concurrence  with  the
account)  his  presence  at  the  interview  with  Lady  Q.'s  step-father,  as  described.]

January  \6tk,  1893.
The  account  is  correct  so  far  as  what  happened  when  I  went  to  London  to

inform  Lady  Q of  her  uncle's  death,  which  is  all  that  is  within  my  own

personal  knowledge.  [Signature  of  Lady  Q's.  step-father.]

426  A.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  384.  The  next  account,
which  first  appeared  in  a  letter  in  the  Religio-Philosophical  Journal,  is
from  Dr.  Bruce,  of  Micanopy,  Fla.,  U.S.A.  The  case  might  be  called
"collective,"  but  for  the  fact  that  one  of  the  dreams,  though  vivid  and
alarming,  was  probably  not  so  distinctive  as  was  afterwards  imagined,  and
moreover,  was  possibly  dreamt  on  Ithe  night  afttr  that  on  which  the
tragic  event  took  place.

February  17 th,  1884.

On  Thursday,  the  27th  of  December  last,  I  returned  from  Gainesville,
(twelve  miles  from  here)  to  my  orange  grove,  near  Micanopy.  I  have  only  a  small
plank  house  of  three  rooms  at  my  grove,  where  I  spend  most  of  my  time  when
the  grove  is  being  cultivated.  There  was  no  one  in  the  house  but  myself  at  the
md  being  somewhat  fatigued  with  my  ride,  I  retired  to  my  bed  very  early,
probably  6  o'clock  ;  and,  as  I  am  frequently  in  the  habit  of  doing,  I  lit  my
lamp  on  a  stand  by  the  bed  for  the  purpose  of  reading.  After  reading  a  short
I  began  to  feel  a  little  drowsy,  put  out  the  light,  and  soon  fell  asleep.
Quito  early  in  the  night  I  was  awakened.  I  could  not  have  been  asleep  very
long,  I  am  sure.  I  felt  as  if  I  had  been  aroused  intentionally,  and  at  first
thought  some  one  was  breaking  into  the  house.  I  looked  from  where  I  lay  into
the  other  two  rooms  (the  doors  of  both  being  open),  and  at  once  recognised

414  APPENDICES  [426  A

where  I  was,  and  that  there  was  no  ground  for  the  burglar  theory  ;  there  being
nothing  in  the  house  to  make  it  worth  a  burglar's  time  to  come  after.

I  then  turned  on  my  side  to  go  to  sleep  again,  and  immediately  felt  a  con-
sciousness of  a  presence  in  the  room,  and,  singular  to  state,  it  was  not  the  con-
sciousness of  a  live  person,  but  of  a  spiritual  presence.  This  may  provoke  a
smile,  but  I  can  only  tell  you  the  facts  as  they  occurred  to  me.  I  do  not  know
how  to  better  describe  my  sensations  than  by  simply  stating  that  I  felt  a  con-
sciousness of  a  spiritual  presence.  This  may  have  been  a  part  of  the  dream,
for  I  felt  as  if  I  were  dozing  off  again  to  sleep ;  but  it  vas  unlike  any  dream  I
ever  had.  I  felt  also  at  the  same  time  a  strong  feeling  of  superstitious  dread,  as
if  something  strange  and  fearful  were  about  to  happen.  I  was  soon  asleep  again,
or  unconscious,  at  any  rate,  to  my  surroundings.  Then  I  saw  two  men  engaged
in  a  slight  scuffle  ;  one  fell  fatally  wounded — the  other  immediately  disappeared.
I  did  not  see  the  gash  in  the  wounded  man's  throat,  but  knew  that  his  throat
was  cut.  I  did  not  recognise  him,  either,  as  my  brother-in-law.  I  saw  him
lying  with  his  hands  under  him,  his  head  turned  slightly  to  the  left,  his  feet
close  together.  I  could,  from  the  position  in  which  I  stood,  see  but  a  small
portion  of  his  face ;  his  coat,  collar,  hair,  or  something  partly  obscured  it.  I
looked  at  him  the  second  time  a  little  closer  to  see  if  I  could  make  out  who  it
was.  I  was  aware  it  was  some  one  I  knew,  but  still  could  not  recognise  him.  I
turned,  and  then  saw  my  wife  sitting  not  far  from  him.  She  told  me  she  could
not  leave  until  he  was  attended  to.  (I  had  got  a  letter  a  few  days  previously
from  my  wife,  telling  me  she  would  leave  in  a  day  or  two,  and  was  expecting
every  day  a  letter  or  telegram  telling  me  when  to  meet  her  at  the  dep6t.)  My
attention  was  struck  by  the  surroundings  of  the  dead  man.  He  appeared  to  be
lying  on  an  elevated  platform  of  some  kind,  surrounded  by  chairs,  benches,  and
desks,  reminding  me  somewhat  of  a  schoolroom.  Outside  of  the  room  in  which
he  was  lying  was  a  crowd  of  people,  mostly  females,  some  of  whom  I  thought  I
knew.  Here  my  dream  terminated.  I  awoke  again  about  midnight  ;  got  up
and  went  to  the  door  to  see  if  there  were  any  prospect  of  rain  ;  returned  to  my
bed  again,  and  lay  there  until  nearly  daylight  before  falling  asleep  again.  I
thought  of  my  dream,  and  was  strongly  impressed  by  it.  All  strange,  supersti-
tious feelings  had  passed  off.

It  was  not  until  a  week  or  ten  days  after  this  that  I  got  a  letter  from  my
wife,  giving  me  an  account  of  her  brother's  death.  Her  letter,  which  was
written  the  day  after  his  death,  was  mis-sent.  The  account  she  gave  me  of  his
death  tallies  most  remarkably  with  my  dream.  Her  brother  was  with  a  wed-
ding party  at  the  dep6t  at  Markham  station,  Fauquier  Co.,  Va.  He  went  into  a
store  near  by  to  see  a  young  man  who  kept  a  bar-room  near  the  dep6t,  and
with  whom  he  had  some  words.  He  turned  and  left  the  man,  and  walked  out
of  the  store.  The  bar-room  keeper  followed  him  out,  and  without  further  words
deliberately  cut  his  throat.  It  was  a  most  brutal  and  unprovoked  murder.  My
brother-in-law  had  on  his  overcoat  with  the  .collar  turned  up.  The  knife  went
through  the  collar  and  clear  to  the  bone.  He  was  carried  into  the  store  and
laid  on  the  counter,  near  a  desk  and  show  case.  He  swooned  from  loss  of
blood  soon  after  being  cut.  The  cutting  occurred  early  Thursday  night,
December  27th.  He  did  not  die,  however,  until  almost  daylight,  Saturday
morning.

I  have  not  had  a  complete  account  of  my  sister-in-law's  dream.  She  was
visiting  a  young.lady,  a  cousin,  in  Kentucky.  They  slept  together  Friday  night,
I  think,  the  night  of  her  brother's  death.  She  dreamed  of  seeing  a  man  with

428A]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  415

his  throat  cut,  and  awoke  very  much  alarmed.  She  awoke  her  cousin,  and  they
got  up  and  lighted  the  lamp  and  sat  up  until  daylight.  That  day  she  received  a
telegram  announcing  her  brother's  death.

I  cannot  give  you  any  certain  explanation  of  these  dreams.  I  do  not  be-
lieve that  they  are  due  to  ordinary  causes,  but  to  causes  of  which  science  does
not  at  present  take  cognisance.  WALTER  BRUCE.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Dr.  Bruce  says  : —

July  9rt,  1884.

I  have  never  had  another  dream  similar  to  the  one  related  in  the  letter.  I
have  at  times  had  dreams  that  were  vivid,  or  from  some  cause  impressed  them-
selves upon  my  mind  for  a  time,  such  as  any  one  would  be  likely  to  have.  I
cannot  call  to  mind,  though,  any  of  special  importance,  or  with  any  bearing
upon  the  dream  in  question.

I  did  not  mention  the  dream  to  any  one  before  receiving  the  letter  confirm-
ing it.  I  live  in  rather  a  retired  place  in  the  country,  and  if  I  saw  any  one
during  that  time  to  whom  I  would  care  to  relate  the  dream,  it  did  not  occur  to
me  to  do  so.

You  ask  me  how  my  wife  knew  of  the  circumstances  of  her  brother's  death.
She  was  visiting  her  relatives  in  Va.  at  the  time,  and  was  present  when  her
brother  died.

The  following  account  is  from  Dr.  Bruce's  sister-in-law,  Mrs.
Stubbing  : —

March  2&A,  1885.

Whilst  in  Kentucky  on  a  visit  in  the  year  1883,  I  had  a  dream,  in  which  I
saw  two  persons — one  with  his  throat  cut.  I  could  not  tell  who  it  was,  though  I
knew  it  was  somebody  that  I  knew,  and  as  soon  as  I  heard  of  my  brother's  death,
I  said  at  once  that  1  knew  it  was  he  that  I  had  seen  murdered  in  my  dream ;
and  though  I  did  not  hear  how  my  brother  died,  I  told  my  cousin,  whom  I  was
staying  with,  that  I  knew  he  had  been  murdered.  This  dream  took  place  on
Thursday  or  Friday  night,  I  do  not  remember  which.  I  saw  the  exact  spot  where
he  was  murdered,  and  just  as  it  happened.  ANNIE  S.  STUBBING.

The  Thursday  and  Friday  night  mentioned  in  this  account  are  December
26th  and  2;th  [2;th  and  28th],  1883.  It  was  upon  the  Thursday  night  my
dream  occurred.  WALTER  BRUCE.

In  reply  to  questions,  Mrs.  Stubbing  says  : —

Yes,  I  saw  one  man  cut  the  other.     The  wound  was  told  to  me  to  be  just
like  what  I   had  seen  in  my  dream.     I  received  a  telegram  announcing  the
death  of  my  brother  on  Saturday  morning.     No,  I  never  had  any  such  dream
a  before.

428  A.     The    following    are    cases    illustrating    my   hypothesis    of
"psychical  invasion."     The  first  is  taken  from  Phantasms  of  the  I.
vol.  ii.  p.  105.     In  this  case,  the  words  heard  were  vividly  imagined  by
the  agent,  and   may  very  probably  have  been   uttered,  or  half-uttered.
The  account  is  from  Mr.  J.  Pike,  of  122  Stockwell  Park  Road,  S.W.

October  1883.

Travelling  some  years  since  from  Carlisle  to  Highbury,  by  the  night  mail
and  finding  myself  alone  in  my  compartment,  I  lay  at  full  length  on  the

4i6  APPENDICES  [428  A

seat  with  a  view  to  sleep,  having  previously  requested  the  guard  to  wake  me  at
the  Camden  Town  Station.  I  soon  fell  into  a  deep  sleep,  one  of  those  profound
slumbers  the  awakening  from  which  is  almost  painful.  Roused  suddenly  by  the
guard  waking  me  (somewhat  roughly  and  impatiently,  because  the  train  was
behind  its  time),  I  found  that  I  had  been  dreaming  (what  proved  indeed  to  be
the  case)  that  it  was  morning ;  that  I  was  at  home,  in  my  bedroom,  in  the  act
of  dressing,  and  at  the  moment  of  awakening  had  been  on  the  landing  and  twice
called  the  servant  by  her  name,  "Sarah,"  and  asked  her  to  bring  me  some  hot
water.

On  actually  arriving  at  home,  I  learnt  that  at  the  time  when  I  had  been  thus
dreaming  that  I  was  calling  to  the  servant,  she  had  heard  her  name  called  by
me  twice,  distinctly  ;  that— forgetting  for  the  moment  that  I  was  not  in  the
house— she,  hastily  discontinuing  the  breakfast  preparations,  ran  upstairs,  and
afterwards  came  down  again  "  as  white  as  a  ghost  "—according  to  the  descrip-
tion given  to  me  by  the  children  who,  with  astonishment,  witnessed  her  pro-
ceedings, and  not  having  themselves  heard  the  call,  naturally  wondered  what  it
all  meant.  Sarah  subsequently  informed  me  that  the  "  fright "  she  experienced
on  realising  the  fact  that  I  was  not  there  had  made  her  "  quite  ill."

Mr.  Pike's  daughter  gave  the  following  corroboration  on  October  30th,
1883:—

I  distinctly  remember  the  incident  of  our  servant  being  frightened  by  hearing
my  father's  voice  calling  from  upstairs,  at  a  time  when  we  knew  he  could  not  be
anywhere  near  our  home.  The  servant  took  a  poker  in  her  hand  and  went  up-
stairs, thinking  there  must  be  some  man  there  who  had  imitated  my  father's
voice.  Nothing,  however,  was  discovered  to  explain  the  mystery  until  my
father's  arrival  at  home,  when  he  told  us  that  at  the  time  the  call  was  heard  he
had  been  dreaming  that  he  was  at  home  and  calling  for  hot  water.

ALMA  M.  PIKE.

The  genuineness  of  this  case  does  not,  of  course,  depend  on  the  ser-
vant's evidence,  but  on  the  testimony  of  Miss  Pike  that  the  servant  men-
tioned her  experience  before  Mr.  Pike's  arrival.  Gurney  observes  that  his
collection  of  purely  subjective  hallucinations  includes  several  instances
where  a  servant  has  seemed  to  hear  her  mistress  calling  her — a  fact
which  of  course  goes  to  weaken  the  force  of  the  described  coincidence.
But  the  superior  vividness  of  the  impression  in  the  present  instance  seems
proved  by  the  emotion  and  alarm  which  followed  it,  and  which  had  no
sort  of  parallel  in  the  purely  subjective  cases  referred  to.

Here,  it  will  be  seen,  the  condition  of  the  agent  was  not  one  of  distress
or  crisis,  but  simply  that  of  vivid  dream ;  and  the  case  is  in  this  way  ex-
ceptional. It  should  be  noted  that  the  part  of  the  dream  which  apparently
affected  the  percipient  took  place  in  the  very  shock  of  waking ;  and  such
a  shock,  though  not  critical  or  exactly  painful,  clearly  involves  a  far  wider
and  more  sudden  change  of  psychical  condition  than  often  occurs  to  us
during  waking  life.

See  also  a  case  given  in  Phantasms,  vol.  ii.  p.  159.  Mr.  T.  W.  Smith
relates  that  his  wife  told  him  she  had  dreamt  of  finding  herself  in  a  house

428B]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  417

in  which  she  used  to  live,  where  she  saw  a  friend  of  hers  going  to  bed.
She  went  up  to  her,  took  her  by  the  hand,  and  said,  "  Bessie,  let  us  be
friends."  Some  months  later,  Mr.  Smith  was  informed  by  a  friend  of
"  Bessie's  "  that  one  night,  about  that  time,  "  Bessie  "  had  told  her  that
she  had  seen  Mrs.  Smith — that  she  had  touched  her  and  said,  "  Let  us  be
friends."  They  were  not,  however,  able  to  fix  the  dates  with  complete
certainty,  so  that  the  coincidence  was  doubtful,  and  the  case  is  evidentially
weak  for  this  reason.

428  B.  In  the  following  case  (quoted  from  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.
vii.  p.  100)  there  seems  to  have  been  on  the  part  of  the  agent,  Mrs.
Manning,  a  spontaneous  revival  of  memory  of  long  past  and  forgotten
scenes,  such  as  often  occurs  in  crystal  visions,  but  rarely  in  ordinary  life.
Mrs.  Manning  writes  to  Professor  James  as  follows  :  —

105  WINTER  STREET,  PORTLAND,  MAINE,
October  2%tA  [1894].

DEAR  SIR, — At  the  request  of  Colonel  Woodhull,  I  send  you  the  following
statement,  which  I  hope  may  be  of  use  to  you.

When  I  was  a  child  at  my  home  in  Rochester,  N.  Y.,  my  elder  sister  had
almost  entire  care  of  me.  At  night,  after  putting  me  in  bed,  she  would  sit  be-
side me  for  a  few  moments  until  I  fell  asleep.  Frequently  I  would  wake  up,
and  finding  myself  alone  and  in  the  dark,  of  which  I  was  much  afraid,  I  would
call  out  to  her ;  she  would  come  and  soothe  me  to  sleep  again.  In  1875,  I  was
living  at  Fort  Hartsuff,  Nebraska,  a  military  post,  the  station  of  my  husband.
Our  nearest  railway  station  was  Grand  Island,  on  the  Union  Pacific  Railroad,
75  miles  away.  My  sister  then  lived  at  Omaha,  about  300  miles  east  of  Grand
Island.  Our  mail  reached  us  by  buckboard  from  Grand  Island  every  Wednes-
day and  Saturday.  One  night  in  November,  I  awoke  from  a  dreamless  sleep,
wide  awake,  and  yet  to  my  own  consciousness  the  little  child  of  years  ago,  in
y  own  room  in  the  old  home ;  the  sister  had  gone,  and  I  was  alone  in  the
darkness.  I  sat  up  in  bed,  and  called  with  all  my  voice,  "Jessie  !  Jessie!" —
my  sister's  name.  This  aroused  my  husband,  who  spoke  to  me.  I  seemed  to
come  gradually  to  realisation  of  my  surroundings,  and  with  difficulty  adjusted
myself  to  the  present.  In  that  moment  I  seemed  to  live  again  in  the  childhood
days  and  home.  I  cannot  express  too  strongly  the  feeling  of  actuality  I  had.
For  days  after  this  the  strange  impression  was  with  me,  and  I  could  recall
many  little  incidents  and  scenes  of  child-life  that  I  had  entirely  forgotten.

I  wrote  to  my  sister  the  next  day,  and  told  her  of  the  strange  experience  of
the  night  before.  In  a  few  days  I  received  a  letter  from  her,  the  date  the  s.ime
as  mine,  and  having  passed  mine  on  the  way,  in  which  she  said  that  such  a
strange  thing  had  happened  the  night  before ;  that  she  had  been  awakened  by
my  voice  calling  her  name  twice ;  that  the  impression  was  so  strong  that  her
;id  went  to  the  door  to  see  if  it  could  possibly  be  I.  No  one  else  had
called  her  ;  she  had  not  been  dreaming  of  me.  She  distinctly  recognised  my
voice.  MARY  M.  CLARKSON  MANMV.

Captain  Manning  writes  : —

PORTLAND,  MB.,  October  agtA,  1894.
I  distinctly  recall  the  circumstances  as  related  above  by  my  \\

W.  C.  MANN;
(Captain  23rd  Infantry,  U.S.  Army>

VOL.    I.  2  D

4i8  APPENDICES  [428  C

Mrs.  Manning's  sister  and  brother-in-law  give  their  testimony  as  fol-
lows : —

DETROIT,  MICH.,  November  1st,  1894.

The  statement  made  by  my  sister  is  as  I  remember  the  experience.  That  it
made  a  deep  impression  upon  us  both  is  evidenced  by  each  writing  of  it  to  the
other  on  the  day  following  its  occurrence.  The  impression  made  was  so
forcible,  it  has  never  been  forgotten.  JESSIE  CLARKSON  THRALL.

DETROIT,  MICH.,  November  ist,  1894.

The  within  statement  of  a  curious  coincidence  might  have  been  forgotten
by  me  during  the  past  twenty  years,  had  the  facts  not  been  recalled  to  my
memory  from  time  to  time  as  they  have  by  the  principal  actors  in  it.  I  have
always  regarded  it  as  a  strange  coincidence,  but  nothing  more.

I  heard  no  call,  but  went  to  the  door  to  satisfy  my  wife  that  her  sister  was
not  in  the  hall.  GEORGE  THRALL.

In  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  inquiries,  Mrs.  Manning  informed  him  that
the  original  letters  referred  to  had  been  destroyed  long  ago,  and  that
neither  she  herself  nor  her  sister  had  ever  had  any  similar  experience.

428  C.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  225.  The  narrator
of  the  following  case  is  the  late  Rev.  P.  H.  Newnham,  of  whose  telepathic
rapport  with  his  wife  we  had  such  striking  experimental  proof  (see  vol.  ii.
849  A) ,  and  who  described  himself  as  "  an  utter  sceptic,  in  the  true  sense
of  the  word."

In  March  1854,  I  was  up  at  Oxford,  keeping  my  last  term,  in  lodgings.  I
was  subject  to  violent  neuralgic  headaches,  which  always  culminated  in  sleep.
One  evening,  about  8  P.M.,  I  had  an  unusually  violent  one ;  when  it  became
unendurable,  about  9  P.M.,  I  went  into  my  bedroom,  and  flung  myself,  without
undressing,  on  the  bed,  and  soon  fell  asleep.

I  then  had  a  singularly  clear  and  vivid  dream,  all  the  incidents  of  which  are
still  as  clear  to  my  memory  as  ever.  I  dreamed  that  I  was  stopping  with  the
family  of  the  lady  who  subsequently  became  my  wife.  All  the  younger  ones  had
gone  to  bed,  and  I  stopped  chatting  to  the  father  and  mother,  standing  up  by  the
fireplace.  Presently  I  bade  them  good-night,  took  my  candle,  and  went  off  to
bed.  On  arriving  in  the  hall,  I  perceived  that  myjianc&  had  been  detained
downstairs,  and  was  only  then  near  the  top  of  the  staircase.  I  rushed  upstairs,
overtook  her  on  the  top  step,  and  passed  my  two  arms  round  her  waist,  under
her  arms,  from  behind.  Although  I  was  carrying  my  candle  in  my  left  hand,
when  I  ran  upstairs,  this  did  not,  in  my  dream,  interfere  with  this  gesture.

On  this  I  woke,  and  a  clock  in  the  house  struck  ten  almost  immediately
afterwards.  So  strong  was  the  impression  of  the  dream  that  I  wrote  a  detailed
account  of  it  next  morning  to  myjiance'e.

Crossing  my  letter,  not  in  answer  to  it,  I  received  a  letter  from  the  lady  in
question:  "  Were  you  thinking  about  me,  very  specially,  last  night,  just  about
ten  o'clock  ?  For,  as  I  was  going  upstairs  to  bed,  I  distinctly  heard  your  foot-
steps on  the  stairs,  and  felt  you  put  your  arms  round  my  waist."

The  letters  in  question  are  now  destroyed,  but  we  verified  the  statement
made  therein  some  years  later,  when  we  read  over  our  old  letters,  previous  to
their  destruction,  and  we  found  that  our  personal  recollections  had  not  varied

428D]  TO     CHAPTER     IV  419

in  the  least  degree  therefrom.     The  above  narratives  may  therefore  be  accepted
as  absolutely  accurate.  P.  H.  NEWNHAM.

Asked  if  his  wife  has  ever  had  any  other  hallucinations,  Mr.  Newnham
replied,  "  No,  Mrs  N.  never  had  any  fancy  of  either  myself  or  any  one  else
being  present  on  any  other  occasion."

The  following  is  Mrs.  Newnham's  account : —

Junt  gfh,  1884.

I  remember  distinctly  the  circumstance  which  my  husband  has  described  as
corresponding  with  his  dream.  I  was  on  my  way  up  to  bed,  as  usual,  about  ten
o'clock,  and  on  reaching  the  first  landing  I  heard  distinctly  the  footsteps  of  the
gentleman  to  whom  I  was  engaged,  quickly  mounting  the  stairs  after  me,  and
then  I  as  plainly  felt  him  put  his  arms  round  my  waist.  So  strong  an  impres-
sion did  this  make  upon  me  that  I  wrote  the  very  next  morning  to  the  gentle-
man, asking  if  he  had  been  particularly  thinking  of  me  at  ten  o'clock  the  night
before,  and  to  my  astonishment  I  received  (at  the  same  time  that  my  letter
would  reach  him)  a  letter  from  him  describing  his  dream,  in  almost  the  same
words  that  I  had  used  in  describing  my  impression  of  his  presence.

M.  NEWNHAM.

It  is  unfortunate  that  the  actual  letters  cannot  be  put  in  evidence.  But
Mr.  Newnham's  distinct  statement  that  the  letters  were  examined,  and  the
coincidence  verified,  some  years  after  the  occurrence,  strongly  confirms
his  own  and  his  wife's  recollections  of  the  original  incident.

428  D.  The  following  account  (taken  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
vol.  ii.  p.  154)  was  received  through  the  kindness  of  the  late  Mr.  G.  J.
Romanes,  F.R.S.,  who  was  well  acquainted  with  the  narrator.

March  i8M,  1883.

On  the  night  of  the  26th  of  October  1872,  I  suddenly  felt  very  unwell,  and
went  to  bed  about  half-past  nine,  an  hour  earlier  than  usual,  and  fell  asleep  almost
immediately,  when  I  had  a  very  vivid  dream,  which  impressed  me  greatly;  so
much  so,  that  I  remarked  to  my  wife,  on  waking,  that  I  feared  we  should  shortly
receive  bad  news.  I  imagined  I  was  sitting  in  the  drawing-room  near  a  table,
reading,  when  an  old  lady  suddenly  appeared  seated  on  the  opposite  side,  close
to  the  table.  She  neither  spoke  nor  moved  much,  but  gazed  very  intently  on
me,  and  I  on  her,  for  at  least  20  minutes.  I  was  much  struck  by  her  appear-
ance, she  having  white  hair,  very  dark  eyebrows,  and  penetrating  eyes.  I  did
not  recognise  her  at  all,  but  thought  she  was  a  stranger.  My  attention  was
then  directed  to  the  door,  which  opened,  and  my  aunt  entering  and  seeing  me
and  the  old  lady  staring  at  each  other  in  this  extraordinary  way,  with  much
surprise  and  in  a  tone  of  reproach  exclaimed,  "  John !  don't  you  know  who  this
is?"  and  without  giving  me  time  to  reply  said,  **  Why,  this  is  your  grandmother,"
whereupon  my  ghostly  visitor  suddenly  rose  from  her  chair,  embraced  me,  and
icd.  At  that  moment  I  awoke.  Such  was  the  impression  it  made  on  my
mind,  that  I  got  my  note-book  and  made  a  note  of  this  strange  dream, believing
foreboded  bad  tidings.  However,  several  days  passed  without  bringing
cnce,  when  one  night  I  received  a  letter  from  my  father,
Vnouncing  the  rather  sudden  death  of  my  grandmother,  which  took  place  OQ
the  very  night  and  hour  of  my  dream,  half-past  ten.

420  APPENDICES  [428  D

About  four  months  after  her  death,  I  went  to  the  Isle  of  Wight,  where  she
lived,  to  get  information  from  my  relatives  as  to  what  my  grandmother  was
really  like.  My  aunt  and  cousin  described  her  in  every  particular,  and  their
descriptions  of  her  coincided  most  marvellously  with  the  figure  and  face  that
appeared  to  me,  the  white  hair  and  dark  eyebrows  being  a  peculiarity  in  her.
This  I  particularly  observed  in  my  dream.  I  learnt,  too,  that  she  was  extremely
fussy  in  the  arrangement  of  her  cap,  always  being  anxious  that  no  part,  even
the  strings,  should  be  out  of  place,  and  curious  to  relate,  I  noticed  in  my  dream
that  she  was  nervously  touching  her  cap-strings,  now  and  again,  for  fear  they
should  be  out  of  place.  My  cousin,  who  was  with  her  when  she  died,  told  me
that  my  grandmother  had  been  delirious  for  some  time  previous  to  her  de-
parture; and  for  a  moment,  when  in  that  state,  she  suddenly  put  her  arms
round  my  cousin's  neck,  and  on  opening  her  eyes  and  regaining  consciousness,
she  said  with  a  look  of  surprise,  "  Oh,  Polly,  is  it  you  ?  I  thought  it  was  some-
body else."  This  seems  to  me  very  curious,  as  it  was  just  what  she  did  before  she
vanished  from  me  in  the  drawing-room.  I  must  add  that  I  had  not  seen  my
grandparent  for  at  least  14  years,  and  the  last  time  I  saw  her  she  had  dark
hair,  but  this  had  gradually  changed  to  white,  leaving  her  eyebrows  dark,  and
I  am  positive  that  nobody  ever  mentioned  this  peculiarity  to  me.1

J.  H.  W.

Mrs.  W.  says  :—

July  1st,  1885.

I  quite  remember  my  husband  telling  me,  on  my  going  to  my  room  on  the
evening  of  the  26th  October,  of  a  remarkable  dream  he  had  just  had,  and  also
his  making  an  entry  in  the  pocket-book  on  the  following  morning.  F.  W.

We  find  from  the  Register  of  Deaths  that  Jane  W.  died  at  the  age  of
72,  on  Oct.  26,  1870  [see  below],  at  Brixton,  Isle  of  Wight.
Mr.  Podmore  says  : —

I  called  on  Mr.  J.  H.  W.  to-day  (July  4th,  1884),  and  heard  the  account
from  him  viva  voce.  His  cousin's  corroboration,  for  a  reason  which  he  ex-
plained to  me,  cannot  be  obtained.  But  he  explained  to  me  that  he  went  to
see  his  cousin  within  three  months  of  the  death,  and  received  full  particulars  of
the  death-scene  from  her  then.  I  asked  him  if  he  stood  by]  the  phrase  "  at
least  20  minutes,"  pointing  out  that  it  was  difficult  to  attach  any  precise  meaning
to  these  words ;  if  they  were  a  correct  description  of  his  impressions,  a  grotesque
incident  must  have  been  interpolated  in  the  midst  of  an  otherwise  realistic
dream.  He  maintains  that  the  words  are  correct;  it  seemed  to  him  that  he
and  the  old  lady  sat  staring  at  each  other  across  the  table  for  a  very  long  time.
Mr.  W.  told  me  that  he  dreams  very  little ;  and  that  he  has  never  had  another
dream  which  he  thought  worth  noting.  He  has  never  dreamt  of  death.

After  a  second  call  Mr.  Podmore  writes  : —

I  received  an  account  from  Mrs.  W.  of  her  husband's  dream,  as  she  re-
membered to  have  heard  it  within  an  hour  of  its  occurrence  and  subsequently,

1  In  respect  of  this  last  feature,  the  case  may  be  classed  with  those  of  [Phantasms]
chap.  xii.  §  8.  The  nervous  fidgeting  with  the  cap-strings  may  possibly  be  regarded  as
a  distinctive  habit,  sufficiently  deeply  organised  to  be  a  feature  in  the  person's  latent
representation  of  her  own  physique. — E.  GURNEY.

428E]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  421

which  tallied  precisely  with  the  account  here  given.  I  saw  also  the  note  made
on  the  following  morning.  It  occurs  at  the  head  of  the  first  page  of  a  small
pocket  sketch-book,  the  rest  of  the  page  being  occupied  with  pen  or  pencil
memoranda  of  accounts,  &c.  The  entry  is  "  Odd  dream,  night  of  October  26th,
1870."  The  last  numeral,  which  is  very  indistinct,  is  apparently  o.  Mr.  W.,  in
writing  his  original  account  in  March  1883,  had  referred  to  this  note  and  read
the  final  numeral  as  2.  Hence  the  discrepancy.  He  has  no  other  memorandum
of  the  death.

I  pressed  him  as  far  as  I  could,  but  he  still  declines  to  give  his  name,  fearing
that  he  might  acquire  the  reputation  of  being  "ghostly"  and  fanciful,  and  thus
injure  his  professional  prospects.

428  E.  From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  444.  Mrs.  Tabour  writes
to  Dr.  Hodgson  : —

2718  CHICAGO  AVENUE,  MINNEAPOLIS,  MINN.,

May&h,  1895.

I  have  recently  learned  of  a  case  of  remarkable  appearance  before  death,  or
rather  a  short  time  previous  to  death.  A  man  ill  with  consumption  appeared  to
a  lady  (a  friend  of  mine  and  also  a  friend  of  his)  in  a  perfectly  natural  manner,
properly  clothed,  although  he  was  ill  in  bed  at  the  time,  and  was  found
upon  investigation  to  have  been  asleep  at  the  time  of  the  appearance.  Now,
the  reason  why  they  were  able  to  establish  the  above  fact  so  accurately  was
that  the  man  related  to  his  wife,  directly  upon  awaking,  that  he  had  dreamed
of  this  lady  in  the  most  vivid  manner,  and  described  her  appearance  and  the
position  of  the  furniture  in  her  rooms.  The  two  families  were  about  one  day's
journey  apart  by  rail.  The  man  died  about  a  fortnight  later.  These  people
are  willing  to  give  dates  and  names,  and  if  you  will  have  your  secretary  prepare
a  list  of  such  questions  as  you  may  want  answered,  and  forward  to  me,  I  will
get  all  information  possible.  I  think  it  may  be  well  to  see  to  the  matter  while
I  am  here. — Very  sincerely  yours,  JOSIE  L.  FOWLER  TABOUR.

Mrs.  Tabour  adds  : —

Mrs.  Shagren  is  a  woman  of  strong  clairvoyant  powers.     All  the  parties  are
of  Swedish  birth,  and  of  unusual  intelligence.     At  the  time  of  this  appearance
Shagren  was  about  thirty-one.    Occurred  over  ten  years  ago.    No  appear-
ance at  time  of  death.

Statement  of  Mrs.  Shagren  regarding  Appearance  of  Mr.  Hendricksott.

This  happened  one  day  after  I  had  finished  my  morning's  work,  housework.
It  was  about  10  o'clock.  I  stood  before  the  mirror  doing  my  hair,  when  I
suddenly  saw  him  (Mr.  Hendrickson)  coming  from  behind,  as  if  approaching
on  tip-toe.  His  hands  were  outstretched,  and  I  had  an  impression  that  he
would  place  them  on  my  shoulders;  I  could  even  hear  his  last  step,  like  the
squeak  of  a  boot,  as  he  put  his  foot  down.  I  turned  in  surprise,  and  faced  him,

;uently  seeing  him  out  of  the  glass  and  in  the  glass.     As  I  turned  I  ex-
claimed, "  Is  that  you? "    At  least  I  felt  that  I  said  that,  but  as  I  spoke  he

icd.     He  was  perfectly  natural  in  appearance,  and  fully  dressed,  just  as

always  seen  him.

In  the  afternoon  of  the  same  day,  which  I  know  was  April  24th,  1884,  as
I  was  passing  from  the  room  in  which  I  had  seen  him  in  the  morning,  going
through  a  small  hallway,  I  heard  steps  from  behind.  Turned  and  saw  him

422  APPENDICES  [428  E

again,  dressed  as  in  the  morning,  and  again  as  I  turned  toward  him  he
vanished.

The  impression  of  seeing  him  was  not  so  strong  as  in  the  morning.

The  next  day  a  young  lady  friend  of  mine,  and  also  a  friend  of  Mr.
Hendrickson's  family,  came  to  visit  me,  and  knowing  of  her  friendship  with
Mr.  Hendrickson,  I  asked  her  if  she  knew  anything  of  the  family,  or  where
they  were  living,  as  I  had  heard  nothing  from  them  for  about  four  years,  I
having  been  south  during  that  time,  and  they  in  the  meantime  having  left  the
city.

I  asked  if  she  knew  if  Mr.  Hendrickson  was  still  living,  as  I  knew  he  had
consumption.  She  replied  that  he  was  living  the  last  time  she  had  heard  from
them.  And  then  I  said,  "  I  saw  him  yesterday  morning."

My  friend  was  not  surprised,  and  regarded  the  appearance  as  a  warning  of
death.  To  my  statement  she  said,  "  I  would  not  be  surprised,  as  I  received  a
letter  from  his  wife  saying  he  had  a  hemorrhage  of  the  lungs.1  Let  us  write,"
she  continued,  "  and  find  out  if  he  is  living  or  dead."  Then  we  wrote  we  both
felt  uneasy,  and  I  told  of  seeing  him.  In  a  few  days  we  received  a  reply  saying
that  he  was  not  dead,  but  the  doctors  had  said  he  could  not  live,  and  then
[Mrs.  H.]  related  his  experience  of  seeing  me  in  a  dream,  while  asleep  on  tl\e
morning  he  had  appeared  to  me.  Although  he  had  never  been  in  the  house,  he
described  my  room,  and  said  to  his  wife,  when  speaking  of  his  dream,  "  She
looked  stouter  than  she  used  to,"  which  was  true,  as  I  had  grown  much  stouter
in  the  four  years  since  they  had  seen  me.

Mrs.  Hendrickson  and  myself  were  friends  from  childhood.  I  had  only
known  Mr.  Hendrickson  since  his  marriage.  We  were  just  good  friends.  Mr.
Hendrickson  once  told  his  wife  that  I  had  appeared  to  him.  That  was  long
before  my  experience  of  seeing  him.

Mrs.  Hendrickson  has  remarried,  and  is  now  Mrs.  Erickson,  of  Beresford,
South  Dakota.  (Signed)  [MRS.]  C.  M.  SHAGREN.

708  SOUTH  SIXTH  STREET.

BERESFORD,  S.D.,  May  27^,  1895.

MRS.  C.  M.  SHAGREN, — DEAR  FRIEND, — I  received  your  welcome  letter  a
few  days  ago,  and  will  now  answer  it.  It  was  in  the  morning  of  April  24th,
1884,  when  Mr.  Hendrickson  awoke  and  said  he  had  been  dreaming  of  you.
I  said,  "  I'll  mark  this  down  and  see  if  it  means  something."  He  slept  longer
that  morning  than  he  used  to  do,  and  in  five  days  we  had  a  letter  from  you,
and  you  said  you  had  seen  him  in  your  room  that  morning  and  you  thought
something  would  happen  to  him  before  long.  He  was  dressed  in  his  night
clothes  at  the  time.  On  the  2oth  of  May  he  died.  I  wrote  to  Dora,  but  I  do
not  remember  what  I  did  write  or  when  it  was.  It  was  before  he  died,  any-
way. I  had  not  heard  from  you  since  you  went  to  Tennessee  until  this  time.
I  believe  you  said  in  your  letter  that  you  got  my  address  from  Dora.  .  .  .

MRS.  F.  ERICKSON.

From  private  letter  written  by  Miss  Dora  Edenoff,  of  Chicago,  June
I4th,  1895,  to  Mrs.  Shagren  : —

I  have  been  trying  to  think,  but  cannot  remember  what  you  said  about

1  Hemorrhage  of  the  lungs  has  been  associated  with  psychical  manifestations
oftener  than  from  the  relative  frequency  of  that  mode  of  death  would  seem  anto-
cedently  probable.

428F]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  423

Mr.  Hendrickson.     It  does  seem  that  you  did  tell  me  that  you  had  seen  him  in
your  room,  but  I  cannot  remember  any  more. — Your  friend,  DORA.

In  reply  to  Dr.  Hodgson's  question  how  Mrs.  Shagren  remembered
that  the  date  was  April  24th,  1884,  Mrs.  Tabour  adds  : —

There  are  many  reasons  why  Mrs.  Shagren  remembered  that  date.  First,
because  of  the  young  lady,  who  came  from  another  city,  and  was  on  her  way  to
Europe,  and  other  facts  which  I  might  tell  you  if  necessary.  I  looked  into  it
pretty  carefully,  as  I  am  rather  a  doubter  myself.  .  .  .

428  F.     From  \hejournal  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  128.

The  first  account  which  follows  is  taken  from  an  article  on  "  Dreams,"
by  Miss  Giddings,  which  appeared  in  The  Metaphysical  Magazine  for
September  1895.

Some  few  years  ago  I  was  the  guest  in  the  home  of  an  intimate  friend,
whose  unmarried  sister,  also  an  associate  of  my  own,  was  away  at  the  time.
My  hostess,  whom  I  will  call  Mrs.  J.,  was  taken  suddenly  and  seriously  ill.
The  family  doctor  was  summoned,  but  as  he  was  away,  a  strange  physician  was
called,  and  he  was  in  attendance  upon  Mrs.  J.  when  at  midnight  her  own  doctor
arrived.  Early  on  the  following  morning  I  received  a  telegram  from  the  absent
sister,  saying  :  "  Is  anything  wrong  at  home  ?  Answer  immediately."  I  replied,
and  before  the  day  was  over  a  letter  addressed  to  me,  and  mailed  when  the
telegram  was  sent,  came  from  the  absent  sister,  saying : —

14 1  have  had  a  peculiar  and  impressive  dream  of  home.  I  saw  A.  lying  on
the  bed  as  if  very  ill ;  while  in  the  dressing-room,  as  if  in  consultation,  were  two
doctors—  Dr.  L.  (the  family  physician)  and  a  stranger,  a  tall,  dark  man,  whom
Dr.  L.  addressed  as  Dr.  Rice.  So  impressed  am  I  that  something  is  wrong,
that  I  write  to  you  in  order  to  know  as  soon  as  possible  the  meaning  of  this

-ion."

dream  was  as  vivid  a  portrayal  of  what  was  actually  occurring  at  her
home  during  the  night,  as  I,  personally  present,  could  have  given.  She  was
almost  correct  as  to  the  name  of  the  strange  doctor,  whom  she  heard  addressed
as  Dr.  Rice,  but  whose  name  was  Reed.  It  will  be  offered  in  explanation  that
she  was  anxious  about  home,  and  naturally  dreamed  of  her  sister.  But  this
explanation  will  not  suffice,  for  she  was  a  girl  much  away  from  home.  The
married  sister  was  never  ill,  and  no  member  of  the  family  had  ever  seen  or
heard  of  the  strange  physician.  That  the  sick  sister  was  thinking  of  the  absent
1  know.  She  was  a  woman  of  determined  will  and  of  unusual  magnetic
power,  as  her  success  as  a  public  speaker  attests.  May  she  not,  through  her
^  have  unconsciously  thrown  upon  the  mind  of  the  absent  one  certain
photographic  revelations  of  what  was  actually  occurring  ?

Miss  Giddings  writes  : —

37  WALNUT  STREET,  SOMERVILLE,  MASS  ,

January  8///,  1896.

DK  i)  HODGSON,— DEAR  SIR,—  .  .  .  The  dream  related  occurred

to  my  friend  Mabel  Jenness  at  a  time  when  her  sister,  Annie  Jenness  Miller,
11- known  lecturer  on  "Dress,"  was  ill  at  her  New  York  residence.     The
are  as  I  have  related  them.

I  was  at  that  time  editing  Mrs.  Miller's  magazine,  and  the  letter  to  which
reference  is  made  came  to  me.  I  did  not  keep  it,  but  Mabel  Jenness,  now

424  APPENDICES  [429  A

Mrs.  Wm.  A.  Venter,  Coates  House,  Kansas  City,  will  verify  my  statement,  or
so  ...  would  Mrs.  Miller,  114  Fifth  Avenue,  N.Y.  .  .  .

(Miss)  LAURA  E.  GIDDINGS.

Mrs.  Venter  writes  : —

COATES  HOUSE,  KANSAS  CITY,  Mo.
February  yd,  1896.

MR.  RICHARD  HODGSON,— DEAR  SIR,— Your  letter  of  January  28th  has
just  reached  me.  I  will  endeavour  to  give  you  as  nearly  as  possible  the  facts
concerning  the  "  vision  "  of  which  Miss  Giddings  has  told  you.  I  was  in  the
West  on  a  lecture  tour,  and  the  last  night  of  my  stay  in  Detroit,  Mich.,  I  had  a
dream  in  which  I  saw  my  sister,  Mrs.  Miller,  lying  ill.  There  were  several
people  about  her,  and  all  was  excitement.  There  were  two  physicians  in  con-
sultation ;  one  I  recognised  as  Dr.  Louis  Sayer,  of  New  York  (now  deceased),
the  other  I  did  not  recognise,  but  his  name  came  to  me  as  Rice.  In  appearance
this  man  was  above  medium  height,  very  slender,  and  had  dark  side-beard.

The  exact  date  of  this  experience  I  cannot  give,  but  I  should  say  it  was
about  the  middle  of  December  1889.  The  dream  greatly  impressed  and
annoyed  me.  I  tried  to  put  it  from  me,  but  it  persistently  recurred  to  my
thought — a  haunting  fear.  I  could  not  make  it  seem  a  dream,  and  after  several
hours  I  sent  the  telegram  to  which  Miss  Giddings  referred.  The  message  was
sent  from  Ypsilanti,  Mich.,  at  about  noontime,  on  a  Monday  (I  remember  well
the  day  of  the  week)  ;  the  answer  to  it  was  received  at  about  9.30  o'clock  in  the
evening  of  the  same  day.  That  which  to  me  was  a  dream  actually  occurred  in
detail  while  I  was  dreaming ;  and  the  physician  who  was  in  reality  in  attendance
with  Dr.  Sayer  was  the  embodiment  of  the  one  in  my  "  vision,"  but  his  name
was  Ried,  instead  of  Rice  as  I  dreamed.

I  have  had  other  and  similar  experiences,  but  none  so  authentic.  The
others  I  cannot  prove  to  have  happened.  .  .  .

MABEL  JENNESS  VENTER.

Mrs.  Miller  writes  : —

ST.  DENIS  HOTEL,  N.Y.,  February  ist,  1896.

MR.  RICHARD  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR,—  .  .  .  The  dream  experience
related  by  Miss  Giddings  occurred  just  as  related  in  her  article.  The  date  of
the  illness  was  December  '89.  She  was  my  guest  at  the  time,  and  consequently
knew  the  details.

When  my  sister's  telegram  arrived  Dr.  Louis  Sayer  (he  died  immediately
afterward)  was  sitting  upon  the  side  of  my  bed,  and  I  remember  that  he  was
profoundly  impressed  by  the  inquiry,  knowing  it  the  result  of  a  psychological
impression  received  from  a  dream.  ...  A.  JENNESS  MILLER.

429  A.  The  following  case  is  quoted  from  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  vol.  i.  p.  365.  The  account  is  written  by  Mr.  N.  T.  Menneer,
Principal  of  Torre  College,  Torquay  :—

December  i8//&,  1883.

I  thought  you  would  be  interested  in  the  following  account  of  a  strange
dream  that  came  under  my  notice  some  twenty-six  years  ago.

My  wife,  since  deceased,  had  a  brother  residing  at  Sarawak,  and  at  the
time  to  which  I  refer,  staying  with  the  Raja,  Sir  James  Brooke.

The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  second  volume  of  The  Raja  of
Sarawak,  by  Gertrude  L.  Jacob,  p.  238.  "  Mr.  Wellington  "  (my  wife's  brother)

429  A]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  425

"was  killed  in  a  brave  attempt  to  defend  Mrs.  Middleton  and  her  children."
The  Chinese,  it  appears,  taking  Mr.  Wellington  for  the  Raja's  son,  struck  off
his  head.

And  now  for  the  dream.  I  was  awoke  one  night  by  my  wife,  who  started
from  her  sleep,  terrified  by  the  following  dream.  She  saw  her  headless  brother
standing  at  the  foot  of  the  bed  with  his  head  lying  on  a  coffin  by  his  side.  I
did  my  best  to  console  my  wife,  who  continued  to  be  much  distressed  for  some
considerable  time.  At  length  she  fell  asleep  again,  to  be  awoke  by  a  similar
dream.  In  the  morning,  and  for  several  days  after,  she  constantly  referred  to
her  dream,  and  anticipated  sad  news  of  her  brother.

And  now  comes  the  strangest  part  of  the  story.  When  the  news  reached
England  I  computed  approximately  the  time,  and  found  /"/  coincided  with  the
memorable  night  to  which  I  have  referred.  N.  T.  MENNEER.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Menneer  adds : —

My  deceased  wife  never  had,  as  far  as  I  know,  similar  distressing  dreams
of  death  to  which  no  real  event  corresponded.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Chinese  struck  off  his  head.  Particulars  of  his
fate  were  sent  to  Mr.  Wellington's  father  by  the  Raja  himself.

In  saying  I  calculated  the  time  and  found  it  to  correspond  approximately,
I  probably  gave  you  a  wrong  impression.  I  did  not  note  down  the  date  of  the
dream,  but  when  the  news  reached  England  I  calculated  the  usual  time  of  such
a  voyage,  and  found  it  corresponded  with  the  time  I  considered  had  elapsed
since  the  night  of  the  dream.

Professor  Sidgwick,  after  an  interview  with  Mr.  Menneer,  on  September
1 7th,  1884,  wrote:

He  said  that  Mrs.  Menneer  had  no  definite  idea  where  her  brother  had
gone;  they  had  not  heard  from  him  since  his  departure;  she  had  certainly  no
idea  that  he  would  be  engaged  in  military  operations  at  all,  still  less  that  he
would  be  engaged  with  Chinese.  In  fact  she  was  in  no  state  of  alarm  about
him  at  all.  Mr.  Menneer  said  that  they  did  not  put  down  the  date  of  the  dream
at  the  time,  and  that  when  the  news  came  he  could  not  remember  it  exactly ;
but  he  took  pains  to  calculate  it  at  the  time,  and  satisfied  himself  that  it  was  at
the  time  of  the  death  as  nearly  as  he  could  reckon.  He  had  not  been  a
believer  in  dreams  previously.  He  heard  the  particulars  of  the  death  from
Mr.  Wellington,  the  father.

"  This  dream  "  (said  Gurney), "  if  it  is  to  be  telepathically  explained,  must
apparently  have  been  due  to  the  last  flash  of  thought  in  the  brother's
consciousness.  It  may  seem  strange  that  a  definite  picture  of  his  mode
of  death  should  present  itself  to  a  man  in  the  instant  of  receiving  an  un-
expected and  fatal  blow ;  but,  as  Hobbes  said,  '  thought  is  quick.'  The
coffin,  at  any  rate,  may  be  taken  as  an  item  of  death-imagery  supplied  by
the  dreamer's  mind."

have   since,   however,   seen   a   letter    from   Sir    James   Brooke

ih  of  Sarawak)    and  an  extract  from  the  Straits  Times  of  March

1857,  in  the  (London)    Times  for  April  29th,   1857,  which  make

it,    I    think,   quite   conceivable    that    the    dream   was    a    reflection   of

426  APPENDICES  [429  B

knowledge  acquired  by  Mr.  Wellington  after  death,  and  that  the  head  on
the  coffin  had  a  distinct  meaning.  Sir  James  Brooke  says :  "  Poor
Wellington's  remains  were  consumed  [by  the  Chinese]  ;  his  head,  borne
off  in  triumph,  alone  attesting  his  previous  murder."  The  Straits  Times
says  :  "  The  head  was  given  up  on  the  following  day."  The  head,  there-
fore, and  the  head  alone,  must  undoubtedly  have  been  buried  by  Mr.
Wellington's  friends ;  and  its  appearance  in  the  dream  on  a  coffin,  with  the
headless  body  standing  beside  it,  is  a  coincidence  even  more  significant
than  the  facts  which  Gurney  had  before  him  when  he  wrote.

429  B.  The  next  case  (quoted  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.
p.  453)  is  from  Mrs.  Lightfoot,  a  lady  who  was  none  the  worse  witness
because  she  took  not  the  slightest  interest  in  our  work.  The  names  and
dates  were  rilled  in  by  Gurney,  immediately  after  a  personal  interview,
January  3oth,  1884.

51  SHAFTESBURY  ROAD,  RAVENSCOURT  PARK,  W.,
January  nth,  1884.

In  giving  the  following  experience,  I  may  premise  that  as  a  child,
and  since,  I  have  comparatively  had  but  little  knowledge  (as  a  personal
experience)  of  fear;  and  in  the  existence  of  ghosts  I  have  always  dis-
believed. Did  I  ever  see  or  hear  sights  or  sounds  for  which,  on  examina-
tion, I  could  not  account,  I  have  always  come  to  the  conclusion  that  they
arose  from  natural  causes  which  were  beyond  my  reach  of  inquiry  —  hence
I  always  refused  to  accept  anything  without  proof,  and  I  may  add,  that  I
have  rarely  been  convinced.

Some  ten  years  ago,  when  in  India,  I  contracted  a  great  friendship,
which  was  reciprocated,  for  a  lady,  Mrs.  Reed,  the  wife  of  an  officer.  She
had  not  been  very  strong,  but  when  I  parted  from  her  with  the  intention
of  returning  to  England,  no  danger  (the  word  had  not  even  been  mentioned)
was  anticipated,  and  for  some  few  months  after  my  return,  I  heard  from
her,  bright  and  cheerful  letters  enough.  In  them  she  certainly  spoke  of
her  health  not  being  good,  but  nothing  more.  Then  after  a  time  her  letters
ceased,  but  I  heard  very  regularly  from  others  in  the  same  place,  and  they
mentioned  that  her  health  was  gradually  getting  worse,  and  that  she  would
probably  be  ordered  to  England  for  a  thorough  change,  but  still  I  heard
no  sound  of  fatal  ending,  and  I  was  looking  forward  to  her  return  with  a
great  degree  of  pleasure.

It  was  my  practice  not  only  to  go  to  bed  very  late,  but  also  for  the  last
half-hour  to  pick  up  a  book,  the  most  uninteresting  and  dry  that  it  was  possible
to  find,  and  so  try  to  soothe  the  mind.  The  moment  I  commenced  to  really
feel  sleepy  I  would  lower  the  gas  to  almost  a  pin's  point  (for  I  did  not  care  to
extinguish  it,  as  I  had  a  child  of  three  sleeping  in  the  same  room),  and  then  I
could  always  compose  myself  comfortably  to  a  sleep  into  which  I  could  then
fall  in  a  very  few  minutes.

On  the  night  of  September  2ist,  1874,  I  had  followed  this  exact  routine.
I  had  put  aside  my  book,  lowered  the  gas,  and  at  a  little  after  midnight  I  was
sound  asleep.  As  I  knew  afterwards,  I  must  have  slept  about  three  hours,
when  I  was  suddenly  aroused  (and  was,  so  far  as  I  know, perfectly  wide  awake)  by
a  violent  noise  at  my  door,  which  was  locked.  I  have  some  recollection  of  feeling

429B]  TO    CHAPTER    IV  427

astonished  (of  fear  I  then  had  none)  at  seeing  or  rather  hearing  within  the
instant  my  door  thrown  violently  open,  as  though  by  some  one  in  great  anger,
and  I  was  instantly  conscious  that  some  one,  something,  what  shall  I  call  //,
was  in  the  room.  For  the  hundredth  part  of  a  second  it  seemed  to  pause  just
within  the  room,  and  then  by  a  movement,  which  it  is  impossible  for  me  to
describe  —  but  it  seemed  to  move  with  a  rapid  push  —  //  was  at  the  foot  of  my
bed.  Again  a  pause  ;  for  again  the  hundredth  part  of  a  second,  and  the  figure-
shape  rose.  I  heard  it,  but  as  it  got  higher  its  movements  quieted,  and
presently  //  was  above  my  bed,  lying  horizontally,  its  face  downwards,  parallel
with  my  face,  its  feet  to  my  feet,  but  with  a  distance  of  some  three  or  four  feet
between  us.  This  for  a  moment,  whilst  I  waited  simply  in  astonishment  and
curiosity  (for  I  had  not  the  very  faintest  idea  of  either  who  or  what  it  was),  but
no  fear,  and  then  it  spoke.  In  an  instant  I  recognised  the  voice,  the  old
familiar  imperious  way  of  speaking,  as  my  Christian  name  sounded  clear  and
full  through  the  room.  "Frances,"  it  repeated,  "  I  want  you;  come  with  me.
Come  at  once."  My  voice  responded  as  instantaneously,  "  Yes,  I'll  come.
What  need  for  such  a  hurry  ?  "  and  then  came  a  quick  imperative  reply,  "  But
you  must  come  at  once;  come  instantly,  and  without  a  moment's  pause  or
hesitation."  I  seemed  to  be  drawn  upwards  by  some  extraordinary  magnetic
influence,  and  then  just  as  suddenly  and  violently  thrown  down  again.

In  one  second  of  time  the  room  was  in  a  deathly  stillness,  and  the  words,
"  She  is  dead,"  were  simply  burnt  into  my  mind.  I  sat  up  in  bed  dazed,  and
now,  for  the  first  time,  frightened  beyond  measure.  I  sat  very  still  for  a  few
moments,  gradually  making  out  the  different  forms  in  the  room,  then  I  turned
the  gas,  which  was  just  above  my  head,  full  on,  only  to  see  that  the  room  was
totally  unchanged.  At  the  foot  of  my  bed,  at  some  distance  from  it,  was  the
child's  iron  cot.  I  got  up  and  looked  at  him  ;  he  was  sleeping  quite  peacefully,
and  had  evidently  been  totally  undisturbed.  I  went  to  the  door,  to  find  \\.fast
locked.  I  opened  it,  and  gazed  into  the  passage  —  total  silence  and  stillness
everywhere.  I  went  into  the  next  room,  where  there  were  sleeping  two  other
children  and  their  nurse,  to  find  equal  quietness  there.  Then  I  returned  to  my
room,  and  I  must  confess  it,  with  an  awful  fear  oppressing  me.  She  had  come
once  —  might  she  not  come  again  ?  I  wrote  down  the  date  and  the  hour,  and
then  opening  shutter  and  window  only  looked  out  for  the  welcome  dawn.

I  went  down  to  breakfast  that  morning,  but  said  nothing  of  the  details  of
my  dream,1  only  mentioning  that  I  had  had  a  very  bad  and  a  very  vivid  one.
Afterwards  I  found  I  could  settle  to  nothing,  and  at  last  was  becoming  positively
so  ill  that  I  was  obliged  to  go  back  to  bed.  That  same  afternoon,  curiously
enough,  a  sister  came  to  see  me,  who  had  been  abroad  with  me,  and  whilst
there  had  known  and  liked  this  same  friend.  She  saw  I  was  much  upset  about
something  of  which  I  did  not  care  to  speak,  and,  by  way  of  cheering  me  up,
began  telling  me  news  of  various  mutual  friends.  At  last,  during  a  slight  pause,
she  said,  "  By  the  way,  have  you  heard  anything  lately  of  Mrs.  Reed  ?  when  List
I  heard,  she  was  not  very  well."  Instantly  came  my  reply,  *•  Oh,  she  is  dead,"
and  it  was  only  my  sister's  look  of  blank  horror  and  astonishment  that  recalled
me  to  myself.  "  What  do  you  mean  ?  when  did  you  hear  ?  "  came  from  her  in
rapid  utterance,  and  then  I  bethought  me  how  indeed  did  I  hear?  who  had
told  me  ?  Hut  tell  her  the  dream  I  could  not,  so  I  merely  answered,  *'  You  will

the  narrator  twice  uses    this  word,  she  certainly  did   not  regard   her
experience  as  a  dream.

428  APPENDICES  [429  B

see  that  I  am  right  when  you  look  in  the  newspapers — how  I  have  heard  of  it
I  will  tell  you  some  other  time,"  and  directly  I  changed  the  conversation.  The
visit  did  good,  however,  for  I  got  up  and  went  out  with  her,  and  I  can  only  say
that  the  impression  my  manner  and  words  made  upon  her  was  so  deep  that  the
moment  she  arrived  home  she  sat  down  and  wrote  to  a  lady  in  the  West  of
England — one  who  knew  us  all,  and  who  heard  by  every  mail  from  her  husband,
who  was  in  the  same  place  as  our  friend.  My  sister  told  her  exactly  what  I
had  said,  and  begged  that  she  would  at  once  send  her  particulars,  since  I  had
not  done  so.  By  return  came  the  reply : —

"  I  cannot,  dear  Lady  B.,  in  the  least  understand  your  letter,  nor  what  your
sister  can  possibly  mean.  The  last  foreign  mail  only  came  in  this  morning  "
(after  the  date,  of  course,  of  my  dream),  "and  so  far  from  being  'dead,'  my
husband  tells  me  Mrs.  Reed  is  much  better ;  therefore,  where  Mrs.  L.  (myself)
can  have  obtained  her  news  is  beyond  my  comprehension,  for  it  is  quite  impos-
sible that  she  can  have  had  later  news  than  mine,  in  fact,  not  so  late,  since  my
foreign  letter  arrived  after  your  visit  to  her,"  [This  is  not  a  copy,  but  a  reminis-
cence of  the  letter.]

And  so  the  matter  rested,  but  within  a  month  from  the  date  of  my  dream
came  the  news  of  Mrs.  Reed's  death,  on  September  2ist.

I  have  but  little  now  to  add.  The  bereaved  husband  returned  to  England
and  called  upon  me.  He  gave  me  some  details  of  the  last  days,  and  on  my
asking  whether  he  remembered  her  last  words,  he  turned  to  me  with  quite  a
look  of  surprise,  and  said,  "Why,  Mrs.  Lightfoot,  I  believe  your  name  was  the
last  she  mentioned."  Further,  it  was  many  months  afterwards  before  my  sister
again  broached  the  subject,  but  at  last  one  day  she  said,  "  I  do  wish  you  would
tell  me  how  you  knew  of  Mrs.  Reed's  death."  Of  course  I  then  told  her,  and  I
may  add,  that  so  deep  was  the  impression  produced  upon  her  that  even  in  her
last  illness,  which  occurred  seven  or  eight  years  afterwards,  she  spoke  of  it.
For  myself  I  never  really  recovered  the  shock  for  a  long  time,  and  even  now  the
impression  is  as  vivid  as  though  it  had  only  happened  yesterday.

FRANCES  W.  LIGHTFOOT.

Gurney  adds  to  this  account : —

Both  the  Calcutta  Englishman  and  the  Pioneer  Mail  (Allahabad)  give
September  2oth,  1874,  as  the  date  of  Mrs.  Reed's  death.  Mrs.  Lightfoot  has
unfortunately  not  kept  her  note  of  the  day  and  hour.  As  she  has  now  no  inde-
pendent recollection  of  the  date  of  her  experience,  but  only  remembers  the  fact
of  the  coincidence,  and  as  it  is  practically  certain  that  she  heard  the  correct  date
of  the  death,  the  2oth,  which  has  since  become  converted  in  her  memory  to
the  2 ist,  it  seems  tolerably  safe  to  assume  that  her  experience  fell  on  the  night
of  the  2Oth,  that  is,  on  the  early  morning  of  the  2ist — not  on  the  night  of  the
2 ist,  as  stated  in  the  account.

In  answer  to  the  question  whether  this  was  the  only  occasion  on  which  she
has  had  a  sensory  hallucination  of  this  kind,  Mrs.  Lightfoot  answered  "  Yes."
She  adds  that  her  sister,  Lady  B.,  "mentioned  the  matter  at  once  to  several
friends  and  relatives."  This  sister  has  since  died.

In  conversation,  Mrs.  Lightfoot  confirmed  again  the  fact  of  having  had  no
sort  of  visual  hallucination  on  any  other  occasion.  She  once,  and  once  only,
has  had  another  remarkable  anditory  experience,  when  the  sudden  hearing  of
her  Christian  name  saved  her  from  a  terrible  fall  in  the  dark.  The  origin  of
the  sound  was  carefully  inquired  into  and  could  not  be  ascertained.

429C]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  429

As  a  proof  of  the  absolute  conviction  produced  in  her  that  her  friend  was
dead,  she  told  me  that  she  had  prepared  a  birthday  present  to  send  her,  and  the
box  was  actually  soldered  up,  and  had  been  going  by  the  next  mail;  but  she
felt  it  impossible  to  send  it.

She  had  been  under  the  impression  that  the  time  of  death  exactly  coincided
with  her  vision ;  but  she  had  reckoned  difference  of  longitude  the  wrong  way.
Mrs.  Reed's  husband  informed  her,  on  her  inquiry,  that  the  death  took  place
at  eleven,  that  is,  u  P.M.  (as  she  thinks  of  September  2 1st,  but  no  doubt  of
September  2oth) ;  and  the  vision  was  probably,  therefore,  eight  or  nine  hours
after  it.

My  impression  of  Mrs.  Lightfoot  entirely  corresponds  with  her  own  descrip-
tion of  herself — that  she  is  a  practical  person,  and  without  any  sort  of  pre-
disposition to  frights  or  visions.  The  present  one  gave  her  a  most  severe  shock,
the  effects  of  which  lasted  for  some  time.

429  C.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  199.  As  to  the
evidential  force  of  this  case,  I  may  point  out  that  the  percipient  states  the
experience  to  have  been  unique  in  his  life ;  and  that  the  violence  of  the
effect  produced,  leading  to  the  very  unusual  entry  in  the  diary,  puts  the
vision  outside  the  common  run  of  dreams  which  may  justly  be  held  to
afford  almost  limitless  scope  for  accidental  coincidences.  The  narrative
is  from  Mr.  Frederick  Wingfield,  of  Belle  Isle  en  Terre,  Cotes  du  Nord,
France.

December  2Otk,  1883.

I  give  you  my  most  solemn  assurance  that  what  I  am  about  to  relate  is  the
exact  account  of  what  occurred.  I  may  remark  that  I  am  so  little  liable  to  the
imputation  of  being  easily  impressed  with  a  sense  of  the  supernatural l  that  I
have  been  accused,  and  with  reason,  of  being  unduly  sceptical  upon  matters
which  lay  beyond  my  powers  of  explanation.

On  the  night  of  Thursday  the  25th  of  March  1880  I  retired  to  bed  after
reading  till  late,  as  is  my  habit.  I  dreamed  that  I  was  lying  on  my  sofa  read-
ing, when  on  looking  up  I  saw  distinctly  the  figure  of  my  brother,  Richard
Wingfield-Baker,  sitting  on  the  chair  before  me.  I  dreamed  that  I  spoke  to
him,  but  that  he  simply  bent  his  head  in  reply,  rose,  and  left  the  room.  When
I  awoke  I  found  myself  standing  with  one  foot  on  the  ground  by  my  bedside,
and  the  other  on  the  bed,  trying  to  speak  and  to  pronounce  my  brother's  name.
So  strong  was  the  impression  as  to  the  reality  of  his  presence,  and  so  vivid  the
whole  scene  as  dreamt,  that  I  left  my  bedroom  to  search  for  my  brother  in  the
sitting-room.  I  examined  the  chair  where  I  had  seen  him  seated,  I  returned
to  bed,  tried  to  fall  asleep  in  the  hope  of  a  repetition  of  the  appearance,  but  my
mind  was  too  excited,  too  painfully  disturbed,  as  I  recalled  what  I  had  dreamed.
I  must  have,  however,  fallen  asleep  towards  the  morning ;  but  when  I  awoke
the  impression  of  my  dream  was  as  vivid  as  ever,  and  I  may  add  is  to  this  very
hour  equally  strong  and  clear.  My  sense  of  impending  evil  was  so  strong  that
I  at  once  made  a  note  in  my  memorandum-book  of  this  "appearance,"  and
added  the  words,  "  God  forbid ! "

Three  days  afterwards  I  received  the  news  that  my  brother,  Richard  Wing-
field-Baker, had  died  on  Thursday  evening  the  25th  of  March  1880,  at  8.30  P.M.,

1  This  expression  cannot  be  excluded  when  the  words  of  our  informant  are
quoted.  We,  ourselves,  of  coarse,  regard  all  these  occurrences  as  strictly  natural.

430  APPENDICES  [429  C

from  the  effects  of  the  terrible  injuries  received  in  a  fall  while  hunting  with  the
Blackmore  Vale  hounds.

I  will  only  add  that  I  have  been  living  in  this  town  some  twelve  months ;
that  I  had  not  had  any  recent  communication  with  my  brother  ;  that  I  knew
him  to  be  in  good  health,  and  that  he  was  a  perfect  horseman.  I  did  not  at
once  communicate  this  dream  to  any  intimate  friend — there  was  unluckily  none
here  at  that  very  moment — but  I  did  relate  the  story  after  the  receipt  of  the
news  of  my  brother's  death,  and  showed  the  entry  in  my  memorandum-book.
As  evidence,  of  course,  this  is  worthless ;  but  I  give  you  my  word  of  honour
that  the  circumstances  I  have  related  are  the  positive  truth.

FRED.  WINGFIELD.

February  4^,  1884.

I  must  explain  my  silence  by  the  excuse  that  I  could  not  procure  till  to-day
a  letter  from  my  friend  the  Prince  de  Lucinge-Faucigny,  in  which  he  mentions
the  fact  of  my  having  related  to  him  the  particulars  of  my  dream  on  the  25th
of  March  1880.  He  came  from  Paris  to  stay  a  few  days  with  me  early  in  April,
and  saw  the  entry  in  my  note-book,  which  I  now  enclose  for  your  inspection.
You  will  observe  the  initials  R.  B.  W.  B.,  and  a  curious  story  is  attached  to
these  letters.  During  that  sleepless  night  I  naturally  dwelt  upon  the  incident,
and  recalled  the  circumstances  connected  with  the  apparition.  Though  I  dis-
tinctly recognised  my  brother's  features,  the  idea  flashed  upon  me  that  the
figure  bore  some  slight  resemblance  to  my  most  intimate  and  valued  friend,
Colonel  Bigge,  and  in  my  dread  of  impending  evil  to  one  to  whom  I  am  so
much  attached,  I  wrote  the  four  initials,  R.  B.  for  Richard  Baker,  and  W.  B.
for  William  Bigge.  When  the  tidings  of  my  brother's  death  reached  me  I
again  looked  at  the  entry,  and  saw  with  astonishment  that  the  four  letters  stood
for  my  brother's  full  name,  Richard  Baker  Wingfield-Baker,  though  I  had
always  spoken  of  him  as  Richard  Baker  in  common  with  the  rest  of  my  family.
The  figure  I  saw  was  that  of  my  brother  ;  and  in  my  anxious  state  of  mind  I
worried  myself  into  the  belief  that  possibly  it  might  be  that  of  my  old  friend,  as
a  resemblance  did  exist  in  the  fashion  of  their  beards.  I  can  give  you  no
further  explanations,  nor  can  I  produce  further  testimony  in  support  of  my
assertions.  FRED.  WINGFIELD.

"  With  this  letter  "  (writes  Gurney)  "  Mr.  Wingfield  sent  me  the  note-
book, in  which,  among  a  number  of  business  memoranda,  notes  of  books,
&c.,  I  find  the  entry — '  Appearance — Thursday  night,  25th  of  March  1880.
R.  B.  W.  B.  God  forbid  ! ' "

The  following  letter  was  enclosed  : —

COAT-AN-NOS,  zftvrier,  1884.

MON  CHER  AMI, — Je  n'ai  aucun  effort  de  me*moire  a  faire  pour  me  rappeler
le  fait  dont  vous  me  parlez,  car  j'en  ai  conserve*  un  souvenir  tres  net  et  tres
pre*cis.

Je  me  souviens  parfaitement  que  le  dimanche,  4  avril,  1880,  e*tant  arrive*  de
Paris  le  matin  meme  pour  passer  ici  quelques  jours,  j'ai  e*te*  de*jeuner  avec  vous.
Je  me  souviens  aussi  parfaitement  que  je  vous  ai  trouve*  fort  e*mu  de  la  doulou-
reuse  nouvelle  qui  vous  e*tait  parvenue  quelques  jours l  auparavant,  de  la  mort
de  1'un  des  messieurs  vos  freres.  Je  me  rappelle  aussi  comme  si  le  fait  s'e*tait
passe*  hier,  tant  j'en  ai  e*te*  frappe*,  que  quelques  jours  avant  d'apprendre  la

429D]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  431

triste  nouvelle,  vous  aviez  un  soir,  dtant  deja  couchd,  vu,  ou  cm  voir,  mais  en
tous  cas  tres  distinctement,  votre  frere,  celui  dont  vous  veniez  d'apprendre  la
mort  subite,  tout  pres  de  votre  lit,  et  que,  dans  la  conviction  ou  vous  £tiez  que
c'^tait  bien  lui  que  vous  perceviez,  vous  vous  £tiez  leve*  et  lui  aviez  adresse*  la
parole,  et  qu'a  ce  moment  vous  aviez  cessd  de  le  voir  comme  s'il  s'dtait  eVanoui
ainsi  qu'un  spectre.  Je  me  souviens  encore  que,  sous  1'impression  de  Emotion
bien  naturelle  qui  avait  &£  la  suite  de  cet  dvenement,  vous  1'aviez  inscrit  dans
un  petit  carnet  ou  vous  avez  1'habitude  d'e'crire  les  faits  saillants  de  votre  tres
paisible  existence,  et  que  vous  m'avez  fait  voir  ce  carnet.  Cette  apparition,
cette  vision,  ou  ce  songe,  comme  vous  voudrez  1'appeler,  est  inscrit,  si  j'ai  bon
souvenir,  a  la  date  du  24  ou  du  25  feVrier,1  et  ce  n'est  que  deux  ou  trois  jours
apres  que  vous  avez  recu  la  nouvelle  officielle  de  la  mort  de  votre  frere.

J'ai  6t6  d'autant  moins  surpris  de  ce  que  vous  me  disiez  alors,  et  j'en  ai  aussi
conserve*  un  souvenir  d'autant  plus  net  et  precis,  comme  je  vous  le  disais  en
commencant,  que  j'ai  dans  ma  famille  des  faits  similaires  auxquels  je  crois
absolument  .  .  .  FAUCIGNY,  PRINCE  LUCINGE.

In  answer  to  inquiries,  Mr.  Wingfield  adds  : —

I  have  never  had  any  other  startling  dream  of  the  same  nature,  nor  any
dream  from  which  I  woke  with  the  same  sense  of  reality  and  distress,  and  of
which  the  effect  continued  long  after  I  was  well  awake.  Nor  have  I  upon  any
other  occasion  had  a  hallucination  of  the  senses.

The  Times  obituary  for  March  3Oth,  1880,  records  the  death  of  Mr.
R.  B.  Wingfield-Baker,  of  Orsett  Hall,  Essex,  as  having  taken  place  on  the
25th.  The  Essex  Independent  gives  the  same  date,  adding  that  Mr.  Baker
breathed  his  last  about  9  o'clock.

429  D.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  420.*

From  Miss  RICHARDSON,  47  Bedford  Gardens,  Kensington,  W.

The  writer  is  a  very  worthy  wife  of  a  shopkeeper,  who  told  me  the  occur-
rence some  years  ago,  then  with  more  detail,  as  it  was  fresh  in  her  memory,
and  her  husband  can  vouch  for  the  facts  told  him  at  the  time,  and  the  strange
"  uncanny  "  effect  of  the  dream  on  her  mind  for  some  time  after.

From  Mrs.  GREEN  to  Miss  RICHARDSON.

NEWRY,  2ist  First  Month,  1885.

DEAR  FRIEND,— In  compliance  with  thy  request,  I  give  thee  the  particulars
of  my  dream.

I  saw  two  respectably-dressed  females  driving  alone  in  a  vehicle  like  a
mineral-water  cart.  Their  horse  stopped  at  a  water  to  drink  ;  but  as  there  was

1  The  words  "  quelques  jours  auparavant,"  coupled  with  the  fact  that  the  number  of

is  right,  suggest  that/A/r/>r  is  a  mere  slip  of  the  pen  for  mars,
*  This  case  was  admitted  to  Phantasms  of  the  Living  as  a  death  coincidence  by
mistake.     (Case  138,  vol.  i.  p.  375.)     The  death  took  place  at  the  Antipodes,  and  the
coincidence  between  it  and  the  percipient's  experience  was  represented  by  the  narrator
as  exact,  through  the  not  very  uncommon  error  of  reckoning  the  difference  of  time  made
erence  of  longitude  the  wrong  way.     We  did  not  discover  this  error  till  the  first
edition  of  the  book  had  been  published.     In  fact,  the  percipient's  experience  followed
the  death  by  more  than  twelve  hours.

432  APPENDICES  [429  D

no  footing,  he  lost  his  balance,  and  in  trying  to  recover  it  he  plunged  right  in.
With  the  shock,  the  women  stood  up  and  shouted  for  help,  and  their  hats  rose
off  their  heads,  and  as  all  were  going  down  I  turned  away  crying,  and  saying,
"  Was  there  no  one  at  all  to  help  them  ?  "  upon  which  I  awoke,  and  my  hus-
band asked  me  what  was  the  matter.  I  related  the  above  dream  to  him,  and
he  asked  me  if  I  knew  them.  I  said  I  did  not,  and  thought  I  had  never  seen
either  of  them.  The  impression  of  the  dream  and  the  trouble  it  brought  was
over  me  all  day.  I  remarked  to  my  son  it  was  the  anniversary  of  his  birthday
and  my  own  also— the  loth  of  First  Month,  and  this  is  why  I  remember  the
date.

The  following  Third  Month  I  got  a  letter  and  newspaper  from  my  brother
in  Australia,  named  Allen,  letting  me  know  the  sad  trouble  which  had  befallen
him  in  the  loss,  by  drowning,  of  one  of  his  daughters  and  her  companion.
Thou  wilt  see  by  the  description  given  of  it  in  the  paper  how  the  event  cor-
responded with  my  dream.  My  niece  was  born  in  Australia,  and  I  never
saw  her.

Please  return  the  paper  at  thy  convenience.  Considering  that  our  night  is
their  day,  I  must  have  been  in  sympathy  with  the  sufferers  at  the  time  of  the
accident,  on  the  loth  of  First  Month,  1878.

It  is  referred  to  in  two  separate  places  in  the  newspaper.

From  the  Inglewood  Advertiser.

Friday  evening,  January  utA,  1878.

A  dreadful  accident  occurred  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Wedderburn  on
Wednesday  last,  resulting  in  the  death  of  two  women,  named  Lehey  and  Allen.
It  appears  that  the  deceased  were  driving  into  Wedderburn  in  a  spring  cart
from  the  direction  of  Kinypanial,  when  they  attempted  to  water  their  horse  at
a  dam  on  the  boundary  of  Torpichen  Station.  The  dam  was  10  or  12  feet
Jeep  in  one  spot,  and  into  this  deep  hole  they  must  have  inadvertently  driven,
for  Mr.  W.  McKechnie,  manager  of  Torpichen  Station,  upon  going  to  the
dam  some  hours  afterwards,  discovered  the  spring  cart  and  horse  under  the
water,  and  two  women's  hats  floating  on  the  surface.  .  .  .  The  dam  was
searched,  and  the  bodies  of  the  two  women,  clasped  in  each  other's  arms,
recovered.

Extract  from  Evidence  given  at  the  Inquest.

Joseph  John  Allen,  farmer,  deposed :  «*  I  identify  one  of  the  bodies  as  that
of  my  sister.  I  saw  her  about  1 1  A.M.  yesterday.  .  .  .  The  horse  had  broken
away  and  I  caught  it  for  her.  Mrs.  Lehey  and  my  sister  met  me  when  I  caught
the  horse.  .  ,  .  They  then  took  the  horse  and  went  to  Mr.  Clarke's.  I  did  not
see  them  afterwards  alive."  William  McKechnie  deposed:  "About  4  P.M.
yesterday  I  was  riding  by  the  dam  when  I  observed  the  legs  of  a  horse  and
the  chest  above  the  water."

Mr.  Green  confirms  as  follows  : —

NEWRY,  i$tA  Second  Month,  1885.

DEAR  FRIEND,  EDITH  RICHARDSON, — In  reference  to  the  dream  that  my
wife  had  of  seeing  two  women  thrown  out  of  a  spring  cart  by  their  horse  stop-
ping to  drink  out  of  some  deep  water,  I  remember  she  was  greatly  distressed
about  it,  and  seemed  to  feel  great  sympathy  for  them.  It  occurred  on  the
night  of  the  pth  of  January.

429E]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  433

The  reason  I  can  remember  the  date  so  well  is  that  the  roth  was  the  anni-
versary of  my  wife  and  our  son's  birthday.  As  the  day  advanced  she  seemed
to  get  worse,  and  I  advised  her  to  go  out  for  a  drive ;  when  she  returned  she
told  me  she  was  no  better,  and  also  said  she  had  told  the  driver  not  to  go  near
water,  lest  some  accident  should  happen,  as  she  had  had  such  a  dreadful  dream
the  night  before,  at  the  same  time  telling  him  the  nature  of  it.  As  my  wife's
niece  did  not  live  with  her  father,  he  was  not  told  of  it  until  the  next  morning,
which  would  be  our  evening  of  the  loth,  and  which  we  think  accounted  for  the
increased  trouble  she  felt  in  sympathy  with  him.  THOS.  GREEN.

Mrs.  Green  has  had  no  other  experience  of  the  sort.

Inglewood  is  in  Queensland,  on  the  border  of  New  South  Wales.

429  E.     From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  341.
Communicated  by  Fraulein  Schneller,  sister-in-law  of  the  percipient,
and  known  to  F.  W.  H.  M.,  January  1890.

DOBER  UNO  PAUSE,  SCHLESIEN,  December  izth,  1889.

About  a  year  ago  there  died  in  a  neighbouring  village  a  brewer  called
Wiinscher,  with  whom  I  stood  in  friendly  relations.  His  death  ensued  after  a
short  illness,  and  as  I  seldom  had  an  opportunity  of  visiting  him,  I  knew  nothing
of  his  illness  nor  of  his  death.  On  the  day  of  his  death  I  went  to  bed  at  nine
o'clock,  tired  with  the  labours  which  my  calling  as  a  farmer  demands  of  me.
Here  I  must  observe  that  my  diet  is  of  a  frugal  kind ;  beer  and  wine  are  rare
things  in  my  house,  and  water,  as  usual,  had  been  my  drink  that  night.  Being
of  a  very  healthy  constitution,  I  fell  asleep  as  soon  as  I  lay  down.  In  my  dream
I  heard  the  deceased  call  out  with  a  loud  voice,  "  Boy,  make  haste  and  give  me
my  boots.''  This  awoke  me,  and  I  noticed  that,  for  the  sake  of  our  child,  my
wife  had  left  the  light  burning.  I  pondered  with  pleasure  over  my  dream,  think-
ing in  my  mind  how  Wiinscher,  who  was  a  good-natured,  humorous  man,  would
laugh  when  I  told  him  of  this  dream.  Still  thinking  on  it,  I  hear  Wiinscher's
voice  scolding  outside,  just  under  my  window.  I  sit  up  in  my  bed  at  once  and
listen,  but  cannot  understand  his  words.  What  can  the  brewer  want  ?  I  thought,
and  I  know  for  certain  that  I  was  much  vexed  with  him,  that  he  should  make  a
disturbance  in  the  night,  as  I  felt  convinced  that  his  affairs  might  surely  have
waited  till  the  morrow.  Suddenly  he  comes  into  the  room  from  behind  the
linen  press,  steps  with  long  strides  past  the  bed  of  my  wife  and  the  child's  bed ;
gesticulating  with  his  arms  all  the  time,  as  his  habit  was,  he  called  out,
44  What  do  you  say  to  this,  Herr  Oberamtmann  ?  This  afternoon  at  five  o'clock

e  died."     Startled  by  this  information,  I  exclaim,  "  Oh,  that  is  not  true !  "
He  replied:  "  Truly,  as  I   tell  you;  and  what  do  you  think?    They  want  to
bury  me  already  on  Tuesday  afternoon  at  two  o'clock,"  accentuating  his
lions  all  the  while  by  his  gesticulations.     During  this  long  speech  of  my  visitor
I  examined  myself  as  to  whether  I  was  really  awake  and  not  dreaming.

myself:  Is  this  a  hallucination?  Is  my  mind  in  full  possession  of
its  faculties  ?  Yes,  there  is  the  light,  there  the  jug,  this  is  the  mirror,  and  this
the  brewer  ;  and  I  came  to  the  conclusion :  I  am  awake.  Then  the  thought
occurred  to  me,  What  will  my  wife  think  if  she  awakes  and  sees  the  brewer  in
bedroom?  In  this  fear  of  her  waking  up  I  turn  round  to  my  wife,  and  to
great  relief  I  see  from  her  face,  which  is  turned  towards  me,  that  she  is  still
but  she  looks  very  pale.  I  say  to  the  brewer,  "  Herr  Wiinscher,  we

VOL.  I.  2  F.

434  APPENDICES  [429  F

will  speak  softly,  so  that  my  wife  may  not  wake  up,  it  would  be  very  disagree-
able to  her  to  find  you  here."  To  which  Wiinscher  answered  in  a  lower  and
calmer  tone :  "  Don't  be  afraid,  I  will  do  no  harm  to  your  wife."  Things  do
happen  indeed  for  which  we  find  no  explanation—  I  thought  to  myself,  and  said
to  Wiinscher:  "  If  this  be  true,  that  you  have  died,  I  am  sincerely  sorry  for  it ;
I  will  look  after  your  children."  Wiinscher  stepped  towards  me,  stretched  out
his  arms  and  moved  his  lips  as  though  he  would  embrace  me ;  therefore  I  said
in  a  threatening  tone,  and  looking  steadfastly  at  him  with  frowning  brow:
"  Don't  come  so  near,  it  is  disagreeable  to  me,"  and  lifted  my  right  arm  to  ward
him  off,  but  before  my  arm  reached  him  the  apparition  had  vanished.  My  first
look  was  to  my  wife  to  see  if  she  were  still  asleep.  She  was.  I  got  up  and
looked  at  my  watch,  it  was  seven  minutes  past  twelve.  My  wife  woke  up  and
asked  me:  "To  whom  did  you  speak  so  loud  just  now?"  "Have  you  under-
stood anything?"  I  said.  "  No,"  she  answered,  and  went  to  sleep  again.

I  impart  this  experience  to  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  in  the
belief  that  it  may  serve  as  a  new  proof  for  the  real  existence  of  telepathy.  I
must  further  remark  that  the  brewer  had  died  that  afternoon  at  five  o'clock,
and  was  buried  on  the  following  Tuesday  at  two.— With  great  respect,

KARL  DIGNOWITY

(Landed  Proprietor).

The  usual  time  for  burial  in  Germany,  adds  Fraulein  Schneller,  is  three
days  after  death.  This  time  may  be  prolonged,  however,  on  application.
There  are  no  special  hours  fixed.

In  conversation  Fraulein  S.  described  her  brother-in-law  as  a  man  of
strong  practical  sense  and  of  extremely  active  habits.

We  have  received  the  "  Sterbeurkunde  "  from  the  "  Standesbeamte  "
Siegismund,  Kreis  Sagan,  certifying  that  Karl  Wiinscher  died  Saturday,
September  i5th,  1888,  at  4.30  P.M.,  and  was  buried  Tuesday,  September
1 8th,  1888,  at  2  P.M.

Herr  Dignowity  writes  again,  January  i8th,  1890  : —

Frau  Wiinscher  told  me  that  the  time  of  the  burial  was  settled  in  the  death-
room  immediately  after  Wiinscher's  death,  because  relations  at  a  distance  had
to  be  summoned  by  telegram.  Wiinscher  had  suffered  from  inflammation  of
the  lungs,  which  ended  in  spasm  of  the  heart.  During  his  illness  his  thoughts
had  been  much  occupied  with  me,  and  he  often  wondered  what  I  should  say
if  I  knew  how  ill  he  was.

Finally,  Frau  Dignowity  (born  Schneller)  writes  from  Pause,  January
1 8th,  1890:—,

I  confirm  that  my  husband  told  me  on  the  morning  of  September  i6th,  i88&
that  the  brewer  Wiinscher  had  given  him  intimation  of  his  death.

429  F.  From  t\\z  Journal  §.?&.,  vol.  viii.  p.  123.  The  account  was
sent  to  Dr.  Hodgson  by  Mr.  A.  E.  Dolbear,  Professor  of  Physics  in  Tufts
College,  Mass.

TUFTS  COLLEGE,  MASS.,  April  nth,  1895.

DR.  R.  HODGSON, — DEAR  SIR, — .  .  .  Perhaps  I  have  told  you  before  that  I
have  had  a  great  many  such  or  hallucinations,  but  I  am  reminded  of  one  which

429F]  TO     CHAPTER    IV  435

happened  last  summer.  I  was  a  lecturer  at  Greenacre,  Me.,  where  Miss
Farmer,  daughter  of  the  late  electrician,  Moses  G.,  had  a  summer  hotel,  and
many  of  the  prominent  occult  folks  of  the  country  gathered.  I  stopped  for  the
night  at  the  house  of  Miss  Farmer — the  old  homestead.  During  the  night  I
dreamed  that  Mr.  Farmer  was  in  the  room  and  talked  with  me,  though  I
could  n't  see  him.  I  said  to  him,  "  How  shall  I  know  it  is  you,  and  not  some
one  else?  "  He  replied,  "  I'll  show  you  my  hand  ;  "  so  his  left  hand  was  ex-
tended to  me,  and  I  took  hold  of  it.  It  was  very  cold,  and  made  me  so  shudder
that  I  was  at  once  awakened.  I  found  myself  uneasy,  and  turned  over  in
bed  to  ease  my  uncomfortableness.  Directly  I  slept  again  and  dreamed  over
the  same  occurrence  ;  when  Farmer  showed  his  hand,  I  asked  him  how  I  should
know  it  to  be  his  hand.  He  replied,  "I'll  move  my  fingers  so,"  and  he
straightened  out  his  first  and  third  fingers,  while  the  second  and  fourth  were
bent  in  a  very  uncommon  way.  I  can't  move  my  fingers  in  such  positions  with-
out the  aid  of  the  other  hand.  After  that  the  **  stance  "  ended,  and  I  forgot  all
about  it,  till  next  morning  at  breakfast  with  Miss  F.  I  chanced  to  recall  it,  and
told  her  I  had  dreamed  of  her  father,  and  I  related  the  above  to  her ;  when  I
came  to  the  -finger  business  she  dropped  her  fork,  and  with  much  earnestness
said,  "  That  was  one  of  his  tricks.  He  could  get  the  fingers  of  his  left  hand
into  uncommon  positions,  and  for  the  amusement  of  visitors  and  intimate  ac-
quaintances would  do  it."  I  never  knew  he  had  any  such  trick,  so  I  was
surprised.  I  recorded  the  above  facts  the  same  day.  Those  whom  I  told,
and  especially  Miss  F.,  who  were  spiritualists,  seemed  sure  I  had  had  a  visit
from  Mr.  Farmer.  ...  A.  E.  DOLBEAR.

TUFTS  COLLEGE,  MASS.,  April  i8M,  1895.

DR.  R.  HODGSON,— DEAR  SIR,— I  had  met  Mr.  Farmer  two  or  three  times.
Was  not  intimately  acquainted,  and  have  no  recollection  of  ever  seeing  him  do
any  kind  of  a  trick,  or  indeed  that  he  could  do  any.  Each  time  when  I  did
meet  him  it  was  on  electrical  business,  and  I  knew  nothing  about  him  socially.
It  does  not  seem  probable  to  me  that  I  ever  saw  him  twist  his  fingers  in  any
way.  ...  A.  E.  DOLBEAR.

Miss  Farmer  writes  as  follows  to  Professor  William  James  in  corro-
boration  of  Professor  Dolbear's  statement : —

ELIOT,  MAINE,  June  i$tA,  1896.

...  My  father  had  great  regard  for  his  friend  (Prof.  Dolbear),  and  respect

for  his  valuable  contributions  to  science.     After  reading  his  book,   Matter,

,  and  Motion,  he  said,  "  I  would  like  to  talk  with  Dolbear  and  tell  him

some  of  the  experiences  that  have  come  to  us  since  mother  went,  and  see  what

he  would  say  to  them."  .  .  .  Callers  coming  in,  the  subject  was  dropped.

In  1894  Professor  Dolbear  kindly  consented  to  become  one  of  the  speakers

at  Greenacre.     The  inn  being  full,  I  took  him  to  Bittersweet,  and  he  occupied  the

library  chamber.     In  course  of  conversation  the  next  morning,  he  said,  ••  I   had

tnge  dream  last  night — I  dreamed  of  your  father."    That  didtnot  seem

c,  as  he  had  looked  at  his  life-sized  portrait  before  retiring.     I   asked

about  the  dream,  and  he  said  he  dreamed  he  heard  his  voice,  and  was  told  it

was  my  father.     He  asked  how  he  should  know  it  was  he.     The  reply  \v

will  show  you  my  left  hand  and  arm,"  and  he  did  so  twice.     The  professor  still

questioned,  "  How  shall  I  know  it  is  your  hand  and  arm  rather  than  some  one

436  APPENDICES  [429  F

else's  ?"  The  reply  was,  "  I  will  show  you  a  trick  with  my  fingers,"  and  then
the  professor  described  and  tried  to  imitate  it,  but  could  not.  I  was  dumb  with
astonishment,  and  then  said,  "  Why,  professor,  that  was  a  favourite  trick  of  my
fathers.  When  tricks  were  performed,  he  would  say,  *  Who  can  do  this  ?  '  and
then,  without  using  the  right,  would  bend  the  joints  and  twist  the  fingers  of  the
left  hand  in  a  way  that  I  never  saw  imitated."  That  to  me  was  a  positive  proof
of  my  father's  identity;  it  was  like  him — he  liked  a  joke.  He  longed  to  be  able
to  share  with  his  friends  the  conviction  of  truth  which  had  come  to  him.  He
knew  that  with  Professor  Dolbear  no  proof  would  be  convincing  unless  of  the
most  unique  character.  The  professor  said  he  was  wakened  and  lay  for  a  time
thinking  of  it ;  then  fell  asleep  and  dreamed  the  same  thing  again.  He  was
much  pleased  with  my  corroboration  of  the  circumstance,  and  said  he  would
willingly  travel  sixty  miles  for  an  experience  like  that.  In  1895  he  came  to
Greenacre  a  second  time,  and  at  dinner  with  Rev.  E.  P.  Powell,  of  Clinton,
New  York,  in  speaking  of  my  father,  used  these  words,  "  I  talked  with  him  last
summer."  Knowing  that  my  father  had  passed  out  in  1893,  Mr.  Powell  was
mystified,  and  I  said,  "  Professor,  Mr.  Powell  does  not  understand  how  that
can  be,  you  should  explain  yourself."  He  then  related  his  dream.  I  listened
carefully,  and  noted  that  the  story  was  just  as  he  had  given  it  the  year  before.

I  omitted  one  circumstance  of  1894.  Coming  from  the  tent  after  the  lecture,
I  met  Dr.  J.  L.  M.  Willis,  my  father's  physician,  and  a  very  intelligent  man.  I
presented  him  to  Professor  Dolbear,  and  then  said,  "  Do  you  remember,
doctor,  of  any  special  trick  that  my  father  could  do  with  his  hands  ? "  He
answered,  "No,  I  do  not  know  of  any  except  this."  He  then  put  up  his  left
hand,  and  trying  to  cross  his  fingers,  said,  "  I  can't  do  it ;  I  never  saw  anybody
else  who  could."  .  .  .  SARAH  J.  FARMER.

509  A]

APPENDICES

TO

CHAPTER  V

509  A.  The  following  criticism  of  the  Salpetriere  School  is  taken
from  an  article  by  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell  on  "What  is  Hypnotism?"  in
the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  pp.  205-209.

Charcofs  Theory,  or  that  of  the  Salpetriere  School.

According  to  this  school,  hypnosis  is  an  artificially  produced  morbid  condi-
tion, characterised  by  certain  chemical  changes  in  the  secretions — a  neurosis
only  to  be  found  in  the  hysterical.  Women  are  more  easily  hypnotised  than
men  ;  children  and  old  people  are  almost  entirely  insusceptible.

Hypnosis  can  be  produced  by  purely  physical  means,  such  as  pressure  on
certain  regions  of  the  body ;  and  a  person  can  be  hypnotised,  as  it  were,
unknown  to  himself.

The  hypnotic  phenomena  are  divided  into  three  different  stages,  which
usually  appear  in  regular  sequence.  These  are  induced  and  terminated  by
certain  definite  physical  stimuli.

Hypnotism  has  so  far  not  proved  of  much  therapeutic  value.

There  is  danger  of  provoking  hysteria  in  trying  to  induce  hypnosis.

There  is  a  difference  between  suggestion  in  normal  life  and  in  hypnosis.
The  former  is  a  physiological  phenomenon,  the  latter  a  pathological  one.  Sug-
gestibility does  not  constitute  hypnosis,  it  is  only  one  of  its  symptoms.  There
does  not  exist  a  single  case  in  which  a  somnambule  has  acted  criminally  under
the  influence  of  suggestion.

This  theory  has  been  strongly  attacked,  chiefly  by  the  hypnotic  observers
who  belong  to  what  is  termed  the  Nancy  School.  To  commence  with,  they
point  out  the  insufficiency  of  the  data  upon  which  the  theory  has  been  founded,
ite  the  confession  of  its  own  supporters  that  only  a  dozen  cases  of  true
hypnosis  have  occurred  in  the  Salpetriere  in  ten  years,  and  that  a  very  large
proportion  of  the  experiments  were  conducted  on  one  subject,  who  had  long
been  an  inmate  of  that  hospital.  On  the  other  hand,  they  call  attention  to  the
extended  nature  of  their  own  observations  and  to  the  fact  that  their  conclusions
are  drawn  from  the  study  of  many  thousand  cases.

Is  Hypnosis  a  Morbid  Condition  which  can  only  be  Induced  in  the
Hysterical?

This  question  must,  I  think,  be  answered  in  the  negative.  Moll,  in  reference
to  Charcot's  argument  that  hypnotism  and  hysteria  are  identical,  because  the

437

438  APPENDICES  [509  A

chemical  character  of  certain  secretions  is  similar  in  both,  pointed  out  that
Charcot's  subjects  all  suffered  from  hysteria  ;  and  that,  as  the  phenomena  which
characterise  waking  life  are  readily  induced  in  hypnosis,  Charcot  easily  created
a  complete  type  of  hysteria  by  suggestion.  It  would  be  equally  easy  to  suggest
stammering  in  hypnosis,  but  one  would  not  be  justified,  therefore,  in  character-
ising hypnosis  as  a  condition  of  stammering.

Again,  as  the  following  statistics  show,  if  the  hysterical  alone  can  be  hyp-
notised, over  90  per  cent,  of  mankind  apparently  suffer  from  hysteria.  Some
years  ago  Bernheim  had  already  attempted  to  hypnotise  10,000  hospital
patients  with  over  90  per  cent,  of  successes,  while  Wetterstrand  recently  re-
ported 6500  cases  with  105  failures.  Schrenck-Notzing  in  his  First  Interna-
tional Statistics,  published  in  1892,  gave  8705  cases  by  15  observers  in
different  countries,  with  6  per  cent,  of  failures.  Mr.  Hugh  Wingfield,  when
Demonstrator  of  Physiology  at  Cambridge,  attempted  to  hypnotise  over  170
men,  all  of  whom,  with  the  exception  of  18,  were  undergraduates.  In  about
80  per  cent,  hypnosis  was  induced  at  the  first  attempt ;  but  as  no  second  trial
was  ever  made  with  the  unsuccessful  cases,  these  results  undoubtedly  understate
the  susceptibility.  (See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  198.)  Most  of  the
undergraduates  would  be  drawn  from  our  public  schools,  and,  if  these  do  not
always  turn  out  good  scholars,  they  cannot  at  least  be  accused  of  producing
hysterical  invalids.  Braid  stated  that  the  nervous  and  hysterical  were  the  most
difficult  to  hypnotise,  while  Lie*beault  found  soldiers  and  sailors  particularly
easy  to  influence.  Grossmann,  of  Berlin,  recently  asserted  that  hard-headed
North  Germans  were  very  susceptible,  and  I  observed  that  healthy  Yorkshire
farm  labourers  made  remarkably  good  subjects.  Professor  Forel  told  me  that
he  had  hypnotised  nearly  all  his  asylum  warders;  that  he  selected  these  him-
self, and  certainly  did  not  choose  them  from  the  ranks  of  the  hysterical.
In  former  times  Esdaile's  patients  were  stated  to  be  hysterical.  In  reply  to
this,  he  said,  "  I  cannot  possibly  see  how  hysteria  has  got  into  my  hospitals,
where  I  never  saw  it  before— coolies  and  felons  not  being  at  all  nervous  sub-
jects. ...  As  natural  hysteria  may  be  supposed  to  be  more  powerful  than
imitation,  I  shall  look  with  impatience  for  the  announcement  in  the  Morning
Post  that  Mrs.  Freake  has  been  cured  of  her  nervous  headaches  by  the  skilful
application  of  hysteria,  and  that  Lady  Tantrum  has  had  her  arm  cut  off  while
in  a  fit  of  hysterics,  without  knowing  it.  These  should  be  easy  feats  for  our
fashionable  physicians  and  surgeons,  as  they  have  the  disease  and  antidote
ready  made  to  their  hands,  whereas  it  costs  me  and  my  assistants  great  trouble
to  make  the  coolies  and  prisoners  of  Bengal  hysterical  to  the  degree  necessary
to  render  them  insensible  to  the  loss  of  their  members."

These  and  similar  facts  apparently  justify  the  statements  of  Forel  and  Moll
that  it  is  not  the  healthy  but  the  hysterical  who  are  the  most  difficult  to  hypno-
tise. According  to  the  former,  "  every  mentally  healthy  man  is  naturally
hypnotisable ; "  while  the  latter  says,  "  If  we  take  a  pathological  condition  of
the  organism  as  necessary  for  hypnosis,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  conclude  that
nearly  everybody  is  not  quite  right  in  the  head.  The  mentally  unsound,  par-
ticularly idiots,  are  much  more  difficult  to  hypnotise  than  the  healthy.  Intelli-
gent people,  and  those  with  strong  wills,  are  more  easily  hypnotisable  than  the
dull,  the  stupid,  or  the  weak-willed."

Are  Women  more  Susceptible  than  Men  f

All  observers,  with  the  exception  of  those  of  the  Salpetriere  School,  agree
in  stating  that  sex  has  little  or  no  influence  upon  the  susceptibility  to  hypnosis.

509A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  439

According  to  Lie*beault,  the  difference  between  the  sexes  is  rather  less  than  i
per  cent.  The  majority  of  Esdaile's  subjects  were  men,  and,  as  we  have  seen,
Mr.  Wingfield  was  able  to  hypnotise  about  80  per  cent,  of  the  Cambridge
undergraduates  at  the  first  attempt.

Are  Children  and  Old  People  Insusceptible  f

Wetterstrand  found  that  all  children  from  three  or  four  to  fifteen  years  of
age  could  be  influenced  without  exception.  Dr.  BeYillon.  out  of  250  cases  in
children,  hypnotised  80  per  cent,  at  the  first  attempt.  Lie'beault  also  found
children  peculiarly  susceptible,  and  one  of  his  statistical  tables  records  100  per
cent,  of  successes  up  to  the  age  of  fourteen.  In  adult  life  age  apparently
makes  little  difference.  In  the  same  table  we  find  that  from  the  ages  of  fourteen
to  twenty-one  the  failures  were  about  10  per  cent.,  and  from  sixty-three  years
and  upwards  about  13  per  cent.

Can  Hypnosis  be  Induced  by  Mechanical  Means  alone  ?

This  question  is  answered  by  the  Nancy  School  in  the  negative,  and  my
own  experience  agrees  with  this.  I  know  of  no  single  instance  where  hypnosis
has  followed  the  employment  of  mechanical  means,  when  mental  influences
have  been  carefully  excluded,  and  the  subjects  have  been  absolutely  ignorant  of
what  was  expected  of  them.  No  one  was  ever  hypnotised  by  looking  at  a  lark-
mirror  until  Dr.  Luys  had  borrowed  this  lure  from  the  bird-catchers  and
invested  it  with  hypnotic  power.  On  the  other  hand,  any  physical  method  will
succeed  with  a  susceptible  subject  who  knows  what  is  expected  of  him.

A  re  Hypnotic  Phenomena  divided  into  three  Distinct  Stages  f

The  stages  described  by  the  Salpetriere  School,  as  arising  from  definite
physical  stimuli,  have  never  been  noticed  by  other  observers.  Amongst  the
many  hundred  hypnotised  subjects  I.  have  seen,  none  have  responded  to  the
manipulations  which  produced  such  striking  phenomena  at  the  Salpetriere.  On
the  other  hand,  I  and  many  others  have  found  that  we  could  easily  evoke  these
stages  by  verbal  suggestion,  and  train  the  patients  to  manifest  them  at  any
given  signal.  The  condition,  however,  was  always  an  artificial  one.

Is  Hypnotism  of  Little  Therapeutic  Value  f

On  the  one  hand,  we  have  the  negative  evidence  of  a  few  cases  observed
at  the  Salp£triere,  where  experiment,  not  cure,  seemed  the  main  end.  On  the
other,  the  positive  evidence,  drawn  from  many  thousands  of  cases,  where  hypno-
tism has  been  successfully  employed  for  the  relief  or  cure  of  disease.

Is  Hypnotism  Dangerous  f

The  Salpetriere  School  answer  this  in  the  affirmative,  asserting  that  hys-
terical symptoms  have  sometimes  appeared  after  the  attempted  induction  of
hypnosis.     That  such  phenomena  should  occur  with  them  is  not  surprising,
one  considers  the  nature  of  the  subjects  and  their  surroundings,  and  the
violent  and  startling   methods  sometimes  resorted   to.     The  slight  accidents
which  they  record  have  not  occurred  in  other  and  more  experienced  hands.
,sor  Forel  says :— "  Li^beault,   Bernheim,  Wetterstrand,  van  Eeden,  de
Jong,  Moll,   I  myself,  and  the  other  followers  of  the  Nancy  School,  declare
categorically  that,  although  we  have  seen  many  thousands  of  hypnotised  per-

440  APPENDICES  [512  A

sons  we  have  never  observed  a  single  case  of  mental  or  bodily  harm  caused  by
hypnosis,  but,  on  the  contrary,  have  seen  many  cases  of  illness  relieved  or  cured
by  it."  This  statement  I  can  fully  endorse,  as  I  have  never  seen  an  unpleasant
symptom,  even  of  the  most  trivial  nature,  follow  the  skilled  induction  of
hypnosis.

See  also  an  important  paper  by  Dr.  Bramwell,  relating  chiefly  to  the
therapeutic  value  of  hypnotism,  and  entitled  "  Hypnotism  :  A  Reply  to
Recent  Criticisms,"  in  Brain,  Part  Ixxxv.  (Spring,  1899),  p.  141.

512  A.  It  has  been  maintained  by  Rifat  (see  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,
1888,  p.  297)  that  during  the  process  of  narcotisation,  whether  by  chloro-
form, choral,  morphia,  or  any  other  narcotic,  there  is  a  period  in  which  the
patient  is  as  suggestible  as  if  he  were  in  the  hypnotic  state.  This  asser-
tion is  repeated  by  Herrero,  of  Valladolid  (Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  January
1890,  p.  195).  The  suggestible  period  in  chloroformic  sleep  is,  however,
very  short,  unless  the  chloroformisation  is  but  slight.  In  one  case
Herrero  found  that  five  or  six  inhalations  of  the  narcotic  sufficed  to  put
the  subject  into  a  somnabulic  state  which  lasted  as  long  as  he  wished.
This  subject  had  been  refractory  until  then  to  ordinary  methods  of  hypno-
tisation ;  but  the  suggestion  now  given  that  in  future  simple  fixation  of  the
attention  would  suffice  to  produce  sleep,  was  obeyed.  A  similar  result
was  obtained  in  three  other  cases  of  refractory  subjects.  Yet  another
case,  in  which  the  resistance  to  suggested  sleep  was  voluntary  and  in-
tentional, deserves  more  detailed  notice,  as  it  throws  some  light  on  the
probable  nature  of  this  method  of  inducing  somnambulism.  It  is  the
case  of  a  lady  who  looked  upon  hypnotism  as  a  work  of  the  devil,  and
whose  objection  to  this  therapeutic  means  had  the  strength  of  a  mono-
mania. Herrero  proposed  chloroform  as  the  only  remedy  possible —
breathing  not  a  word  more  of  hypnotism.  Fifteen  grams  of  chloroform
were  sufficient  to  induce,  in  less  than  five  minutes,  the  suggestible  period
of  the  anaesthetic  sleep.  The  next  day  only  three  grams  were  needed  ;  and
on  the  following  day,  the  inhalator,  empty  of  chloroform,  and  applied  to
the  nostrils,  produced  the  requisite  effect.  After  the  fourth  day  the  patient
acknowledged  her  mistake,  and  allowed  Herrero  to  hypnotise  her  without
the  superfluous  apparatus.  The  chloroform  itself  had  here  apparently  acted
less  as  a  drug  than  as  a  suggestion.

512  B.  Compare  with  this  last  case  those  reported  by  Dr.  Auguste
Voisin  (Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  October  1891,  pp.  114-16).  He  has
obtained  hypnotic  sleep  in  cases  of  acute  mania  and  obsession  by  means
of  slight  chloroformisation.  "  Patients  (he  says)  who  throw  themselves
violently  about  and  struggle  and  scream,  fall  after  a  few  seconds  into  a
deep  sleep,  and  answer  my  questions  and  my  orders  in  a  subdued  tone.
This  sudden  calm  after  the  storm  is  a  very  impressive  sight.  A  few  drops
of  chloroform  are  sufficient  to  bring  this  about.  //  cannot  be  said  that
chloroformic  sleep  has  been  induced.  Moreover,  this  sleep  may  last  several
days,  and  suggestion  may  put  an  end  to  it.  Under  the  same  conditions  it

513A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  441

has  been  possible  to  obtain  hypnotic  sleep ;  it  is  identical  with  the  other,
and  lasts  as  long  as  I  like."  Voisin's  conclusion  is  that  the  narcotic  dimi-
nishes the  agitation  of  the  maniac,  or  lowers  the  intensity  of  the  obses-
sion, thus  permitting  the  patient  to  fix  his  attention  upon  the  idea  of  sleep.
See  also  Schrenck-Notzing  :  Die  Bedeutungnarcotischer  Mittelfiirden
Hypnotismus  (1891).  He  recommends  the  use  of  narcotics  in  extreme
cases ;  and  thinks  that  the  hypnosis  induced  by  means  of  a  narcotic  is
deeper  than  that  which  ordinary  hypnotic  methods  applied  for  the  first
time  generally  produce.

512  C.     The  following  is  a  somewhat  similar  case  of  self-suggestion
where  the  suggestibility  was  apparently  heightened  under  the  influence  of
opium,  which  at  the  same  time  developed  a  monitory  hallucination.     The
narrator  is  Dr.  D.  J.  Parsons,  and  the  account  is  taken  from  the  Proceed-
ings S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  427.

Sixteen  years  ago  I  was  a  little  sick ;  took  half  a  grain  of  opium,  and  lay
down  upon  the  bed.  Soon  as  I  began  to  feel  the  tranquillising  effect  of  the
opium,  I  saw  three  men  approaching  me;  the  one  in  front  said:  "You  smoke
too  much  tobacco."  I  replied:  "I  know  I  do."  He  then  said:  "Why  don't
you  quit  it  ?  "  I  answered  by  saying :  •'  I  have  been  thinking  about  it,  but  I  am
afraid  I  can't."  He  extended  his  right  arm,  and,  placing  his  forefinger  very
near  my  face,  gave  it  a  few  very  significant  shakes,  said,  in  a  very  impressive
and  emphatic  manner  :  "  You  will  never  want  to  use  tobacco  any  more  as  long
as  you  live."  He  continued,  by  saying  :  "  You  swear  sometimes."  I  answered  :
"  Yes."  He  said :  "  Will  you  promise  to  quit? "  I  intended  to  say  yes,  but  just
as  I  was  about  to  utter  the  word  yes,  instantly  a  change  came  over  me,  and  I
felt  like  I  had  been  held  under  some  unknown  influence,  which  was  suddenly
withdrawn  or  exhausted.  I  had  been  a  constant  smoker  for  more  than  twenty
years.

Since  the  occurrence  of  the  above  incident,  I  have  not  touched  tobacco;
have  felt  ever  since  like  it  would  poison  me,  and  I  now  feel  like  one  draw  at  the
pipe  would  kill  me  instantly.  My  desire  for  tobacco  was  suddenly  and  effec-
tually torn  out  by  the  roots,  but  perhaps  I  shall  never  know  just  how  it  was
done.  D.  J.  PARSONS,  M.D.

SWEKT  SPRINGS,  Mo.

513  A.     Dr.  Bramwell  describes  the  differences  between  the  so-called
hypnosis  in  animals  and  true  hypnosis  in  human  beings  in  his  article
"What  is  Hypnotism?"  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  p.  213,  as
follows : —

Mr.  [Ernest]  Hart  believes  that  animals,  such  as  guinea-pigs,  rabbits,  frogs,
birds,  crayfish,  and  even  young  alligators  can  be  hypnotised  by  methods  similar
to  those  employed  with  the  human  subject,  and  that  they  present  like  pheno-
The  only  argument  in  favor  of  this  is  drawn  from  the  fact  that  these
animals,  after  certain  physical  stimuli  have  been  applied  to  them,  present  the
phenomenon  of  catalepsy.  Is  this  catalepsy  invariably  a  genuine  one?  I  am
inclined  to  think  that  in  many  instances  it  is  a  conscious  simulation  of  death,
adopted  by  the  animal  from  the  instinctive  knowledge  of  the  fact  that  certain
birds  and  beasts  of  prey,  except  under  pressure  of  extreme  hunger,  will  not

442  APPENDICES  [513  B

attack  what  is  dead.  If,  for  example,  you  turn  a  beetle  over  on  its  back  it  will
remain  motionless  and  apparently  cataleptic,  with  its  legs  sticking  rigidly  in  the
air.  The  moment  you  turn  away,  however,  it  scrambles  to  its  feet  and  resumes
its  journey.  Here  death  or  catalepsy  was  in  all  probability  only  shammed,  and
doubtless  the  insect  was  keenly  watching  your  every  movement  and  anxiously
waiting  for  your  departure.  Again,  catalepsy  is  only  one,  and  a  comparatively
unimportant,  phenomenon  of  hypnosis.  One  of  the  main  characteristics  of  the
hypnotic  state  is  the  rapidity  with  which  one  phenomenon  can  be  changed  into
its  opposite.  Have  we  any  evidence  of  this  in  the  so-called  hypnosis  of
animals?  I  think  not.  Again,  is  it  logical  to  conclude  similarity  of  cause  from
identity  of  effect?  In  order  to  induce  hypnotic  catalepsy  in  the  human  subject,
a  clear  idea  of  the  suggested  act  is  necessary.  What  evidence  have  we  for  con-
cluding that  a  crayfish  becomes  cataleptic  from  a  clear  idea  that  the  operator
has  suggested  this  condition  ?  It  is  possible  that  in  some  instances  the  pheno-
menon is  genuine,  and  then,  according  to  Preyer,  the  condition  is  one  of
paralysis  resulting  from  fright.  Now  fear  is  not  necessary  for  the  induction  of
hypnosis  ;  and,  before  concluding  that  the  condition  is  a  hypnotic  one,  it  would
be  wise  to  exclude  this  factor  from  the  equation.  To  do  this  experimentally
would  not  be  difficult ;  it  would  only  be  necessary  to  get  rid  of  the  dispropor-
tion between  the  size  and  strength  of  the  operator  and  the  animal,  a  dispropor-
tion which,  in  the  experiments  referred  to,  has  always  existed  in  favour  of  the
hypnotiser.  Instead  of  a  young  alligator,  let  one  of  .greater  age  and  larger
growth  be  chosen  and  the  experiment  repeated.  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  in
such  a  case  the  r61es  would  be  reversed,  the  operator  would  become  cataleptic,
and  the  subject  uncommonly  and  disagreeably  mobile.

See  also  W.  Preyer,  Die  Cataplexie  und  der  thierische  Hypnotismus.

Also  a  paper  by  Dr.  J.  N.  Langley  "  On  the  Physiological  Aspect  of
Mesmerism,"  read  before  the  Royal  Institution,  March  14,  1884;  and
Verworn's  Die  sogenannte  Hypnose  der  Tiere.

513  B.  It  used  to  be  claimed  by  the  mesmerists  that  the  possibility
of  affecting  animals  mesmerically  afforded  a  crucial  test  of  the  reality  of
the  mesmeric  effluence,  since  effects  on  animals  could  not  be  put  down
to  the  power  of  their  imagination.  The  various  phenomena  obtained,
however,  do  not  seem  really  all  to  belong  to  the  same  category.  Thus
the  comatose  condition  produced  in  sparrows,  in  savage  dogs,  in  a
young  bear,  in  a  furious  bull  (Zoist,  vol.  viii.  pp.  156,  297-99),  by  the  fixed
gaze  of  the  mesmerist  or  by  his  passes,  was  no  doubt  analogous  to  the
"  fascination  "  exercised  by  snakes  on  their  prey,  or  by  tigers  on  human
beings  (Zoist,  vol.  ix.  pp.  7-9),  and  is  equivalent  to  the  catalepsy
described  by  Dr.  Bramwell.

On  the  other  hand,  the  so-called  "  mesmeric  cures  "  of  animals  re-
ported in  the  Zoist  seem  to  have  been  generally  effected  by  something
like  massage.  Thus  in  the  once  celebrated  case  of  Harriet  Martineau's
cow  (Zoist,  vol.  viii.  p.  301),  which  had  been  given  up  as  incurable  by  the
cow  doctor,  relief  was  obtained  by  passes  along  the  spine  and  across  the
chest.  Two  cures  of  lock-jaw  in  horses  by  similar  means  are  reported-
one  by  Mr.  H.  S.  Thompson — in  the  Zoist,  vol.  ix.  pp.  49-51,  the  passes
being  made  daily  for  some  hours,  and  the  recovery  being  gradual.

513C]  TO    CHAPTER    V  443

Two  other  cases  of  the  cure  of  inflammation  in  horses,  reported  by  Mr.
Thompson  (pp.  cit.,  vol.  viii.  p.  300),  were  much  more  striking,  in  that  the
passes  were  made  without  contact,  and  the  effect  was  produced  very  rapidly.
In  the  first  case  passes  were  made  for  half-an-hour  over  the  injured  organ
— the  eye — at  a  distance  of  a  few  inches,  and  "  the  inflammation  was  con-
siderably abated."  In  the  second  case  the  injury  was  in  the  leg,  and
passes  made  for  half-an-hour  at  the  distance  of  about  an  inch  from  it
reduced  the  inflammation  considerably.

See  also  some  curious  recent  accounts  of  the  cure  of  warts  in  horses
and  cows  by  "  charming,"  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.
p.  100.

513  C.  Some  experiments  on  young  children,  designed  to  test  the
reality  of  the  alleged  mesmeric  effluence,  were  carried  out  by  Dr.  Lie"beault,
as  described  in  the  chapter  on  "  Zoomagnetism  "  in  his  Thtrapcutique  Sug-
gestive, 1891  (pp.  246-68).  Having  heard  in  1882  from  a  mesmerist — a
M.  Longpretz — that  he  had  cured  a  number  of  maladies  in  children  less
than  2^  years  old  by  merely  laying  his  hands  on  them  for  a  few  minutes
morning  and  evening,  Lie"beault  tried  the  plan  on  his  own  young  patients
with  the  most  satisfactory  results.  The  children  were  sometimes  asleep  at
the  time ;  in  any  case  they  showed  none  of  the  usual  symptoms  of
hypnosis,  and  gave  no  indication  of  understanding  his  remedial  intentions.
From  these  results  he  maintained  in  his  Etude  sur  le  Zoomagnttismi  (1883)
the  probable  existence  of  a  nervous  energy,  transmissible  from  one  human
being  to  another,  the  essential  characteristic  of  which  was  its  curative
power.

In  reply  to  this  paper,  Dr.  Bernheim  argued  that  the  intelligence,  com-
prehension, and  will  of  infants  are  much  more  developed  than  is  ordinarily
supposed,  and  that  they  probably  are  accessible  to  mental  influence.
Lie"beault  himself  had  been  inclined  to  attribute  the  effects  he  had  found
from  the  use  of  "  mesmerised  water  "  to  some  form  of  suggestion,  since, —
like  hypnotism,  and  unlike  therapeutic  remedies, — the  same  remedial  agent
was  used  for  many  different  maladies.  He  therefore  carried  out  a  fresh
series  of  control  experiments,  using  ordinary  unmesmerised  spring  water,
combined  with  suggestion,  as  a  means  of  cure.

He  placed  a  bottle  of  water  in  full  view  in  the  room  where  he  received
his  patients.  After  examining  the  infants  brought  to  him,  he  pointed  out
the  bottle  to  their  mothers,  announcing  that  he  had  there  a  potent  remedy
which  would  certainly  cure  them.  He  took  care  to  keep  them  in  the
room  some  time,  so  as  to  impress  the  idea  strongly  on  the  children  and
their  parents,  and  create  a  general  atmosphere  of  faith  in  the  remedy.
Details  are  given  of  twenty-six  cases  of  children  with  various  infantile
UPS,  varying  in  age  from  19  days  to  2$  years,  except  one  of  five  years
old  ;  in  these  cases  there  were  nineteen  cures,  six  ameliorations,  and  one
failure.  In  several  cases  previous  treatment  of  the  ordinary  medical  kind
had  failed  to  give  relief.  In  four  of  the  nineteen  successful  cases  he

APPENDICES  [518A

had  added  the  method  of  laying  on  of  hands  to  the  use  of  the  water,  and
in  three  cases  of  catarrhal  ophthalmia  the  water  had  been  used  to  bathe
the  eyelids  as  well  as  taken  internally,  so  that  the  general  suggestive
effect  might  be  reinforced  by  the  local  suggestion.

These  results  led  Dr.  Liebeault  to  abandon  his  provisional  belief  in
the  mesmeric  effluence,  and  to  conclude  that  in  all  the  cases  he  had
studied  suggestion  alone  was  at  work.  The  experiments  not  only  proved
the  potency  of  mental  influence,  even  in  a  non-hypnotised  condition,  but
also  —  by  exhibiting  this  influence  in  action  at  a  stage  apparently  so  rudi-
mentary— showed  how  early  the  intelligence  of  infants  is  developed.

518  A.  Dr.  W.  B.  Fahnestock,  in  Statuvolism,  or  Artificial  Somnambu-
lism (Chicago,  1871),  maintained  (p.  77),  "That  this  state  was  a  peculiar
one  (somnus  a  voluntate)  .  .  .  and  was  entered  by  the  subject  at  pleasure.
That  it  was  a  state  into  which  any  person  could  throw  themselves  and
awaken  themselves,  either  in  part  or  the  whole  body  at  once,  slowly  or
otherwise,  independent  of  any  one  else,  or  subject  to  any  one's  control."
(P.  78),  "I  have  had  over  three  hundred  different  individuals  to  enter
this  state  under  my  care,  and  have  found  by  innumerable  experiments
that  they  are  entirely  independent  of  me.  .  .  .  They  can  throw  the  whole
or  any  part  of  the  body  into  this  state  at  pleasure.  ...  I  have  had
them  to  throw  in  a  single  finger,  a  hand,  an  arm,  the  whole  brain,  or
even  a  single  organ  (or  portion),  and  awake  them  at  pleasure.  ...  I  have
had  many  to  fall  into  this  sleep — and  some  who  were  seemingly  deter-
mined not  to  do  so — by  simply  stating  that  at  a  certain  time  I  would
magnetise  all  in  the  room,  although  I  was  thinking  of  other  things,  and
did  nothing  but  walk  up  and  down."

See  also  a  case  recorded  by  Delboeuf  (Revue  de  FHypnotismc,  May
1889,  p.  339),  where  a  sufferer  from  toothache,  angry  at  the  dentist's
refusal  to  hypnotise  her  for  a  trifling  operation,  "  sends  herself  off"
triumphantly  in  his  chair,  and  eludes  his  twinges  in  spite  of  him.

518  B.  Dr.  Milne  Bramwell  has  often  taught  subjects  to  hypnotise
themselves  without  his  intervention.  The  following  statement  is  from  his
paper  on  "What  is  Hypnotism?"  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.
pp.  240-41  :—

Some  six  years  ago  I  commenced  to  instruct  patients  to  hypnotise  them-
selves. This  was  done  by  suggesting  in  hypnosis  that  they  should  be  able  to
reinduce  the  state  at  a  given  signal,  as  for  example,  by  counting  "  One,  two,
three."  These  subjects  could  afterwards  evoke  the  condition  at  will.  I  also
found  that  the  use  of  suggestion  during  hypnosis  was  not  necessary  for  the  in-
duction of  its  phenomena.  On  the  contrary,  the  suggestions  could  be  made
equally  well  beforehand  in  the  waking  state.  The  subject  was  able  to  suggest
to  himself  when  hypnosis  should  appear  and  terminate,  and  also  the  phenomena
which  he  wished  to  obtain  during  and  after  it.  This  training  was  at  first  a
limited  one;  the  patients,  for  example,  were  instructed  how  to  get  sleep  at
night  or  relief  from  pain.  They  did  not,  however,  always  confine  themselves

518D]  TO    CHAPTER    V  445

to  my  suggestions,  but  originated  others,  and  widely  varying  ones,  regarding
their  health,  comfort,  or  work.  Some,  trained  in  this  way  six  years  ago,  still
retain  the  power  of  hypnotising  themselves.

It  is  true  that  the  same  author  declares  (loc.  cit.y  p.  202)  that  he  has
never  met  with  an  instance  in  which  a  subject  had  succeeded  in  hypno-
tising himself,  without  having  previously  been  hypnotised  by  others,  and
Fahnestock  also  lays  stress  upon  the  practical  advisability  of  preliminary
training :  "  By  observing  carefully  the  instructions  which  I  have  given,  it  is
possible  for  any  person  to  throw  themselves  into  this  state  at  pleasure,  in-
dependent of  any  one ;  but  it  might  not  always  be  prudent  to  do  so  for
the  first  time"  But  he  insists  that  the  "  operator  "  or  "  instructor  "  is
merely  useful,  not  essential,  in  the  production  of  the  "  state."  So  of  his
cataleptic  patient  Estelle,  Dr.  Despine  writes  that  during  the  third  period
of  her  cure  at  Aix-les- Bains,  she  was  able  to  bring  about  the  crise  herself
by  means  of  formules  magnetiques.  In  like  manner  she  could  make  it
cease,  and  at  will  she  could  deepen  or  lighten  her  sleep.  (Observations  de
Medecine  Pratique,  pp.  61-2.)  Dr.  Wingfield's  experiments  quoted  below
confirm  these  results.

518  C.  Professor  Forel,  in  "  Un  cas  d'Auto-hypnotisation  "  (Revue
de  F Hypnotisme,  March  1889),  records  that  he  has  himself  been  several
times  in  a  cataleptoid  state,  which — in  his  own  view — is  clearly  due  to  self-
suggestion.  He  was  able  to  open  his  eyes  and  to  slightly  move  one  arm
or  his  head ;  but  more  extended  movements  remained  for  some  time  im-
possible in  spite  of  all  his  efforts.  He  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  rous-
ing himself  from  this  state.  There  was  no  anaesthesia  in  it.  Sometimes
strange  hallucinations  occurred,  and  it  was  difficult  to  distinguish  between
reality  and  illusion,  especially  with  regard  to  the  sound  of  footsteps.

518  D.  From  a  paper  on  "  The  Connection  of  Hypnotism  with  the
Subjective  Phenomena  of  Spiritualism,"  by  Dr.  Hugh  Wingfield,  in  the
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  2  79  et  seq.

The  facts  of  self-suggestion  adduced  in  this  paper  were  not,  I  would  ex-
pressly state,  the  subject  of  a  series  of  experiments.  The  cases  occurred  quite
unexpectedly  during  a  series  of  experiments  on  other  points  ;  but  owing  to  the
possible  danger  of  such  phenomena  if  carried  too  far,  I  did  not  feel  justified  in
attempting  to  work  out  the  subject.  Hence  the  chain  of  experiments  is  neces-
sarily very  incomplete.  The  experiments  adduced  were  all  made  on  subjects
in  the  waking  state.  Muscular  rigidity,  though  the  most  general  form  of  pheno-
menon produced  by  self-suggestion,  was  not  by  any  means  the  only  one  met
with.  Inhibition  of  voluntary  movements,  local  anaesthesia,  even  delusions  were
produced  by  it  in  some  cases.  No  subject  however,  in  whom  I  could  produce
delusions  was  allowed  to  experiment  on  himself,  as  it  was  considered  unsafe,  so
that  the  most  interesting  field  of  experiment  in  this  direction  had  to  be  left  un-
touched. All  the  subjects  referred  to  were  men  between  the  ages  of  eighteen
and  twenty-four,  and  all  healthy.  In  no  case,  except  when  specially  mentioned,
had  the  hypnotic  sleep  ever  been  induced,  but  merely  waking  phenomena,  e.g.

446  APPENDICES  [518  D

susceptibility  to  inhibitory  and  imperative  suggestions,  muscular  rigidity,  and,
in  some  cases,  local  anaesthesia.

We  will  first  take  the  case  of  muscular  rigidity  and  anaesthesia.

N.,  by  means  of  stroking  his  arm  and  looking  at  it,  could  render  it  rigid.  He
could  not  do  so,  however,  if  unable  to  see  his  arm.

Fi.  could  make  his  arm  rigid  by  stroking  only ;  this  he  could  do  whether  he
could  see  his  arm  or  not.

F.  could  also  make  his  arm  rigid  by  merely  looking  at  it.

E.  could  make  his  arm  rigid  by  an  effort  of  mind  without  seeing  it  or
stroking  it.

In  all  cases  they  were  able  at  once  to  remove  the  rigidity  by  reverse  strokes.
These  instances  serve  to  show  how  the  degree  in  which  subjects  possess  this
power  varies.

F.  when  he  rendered  his  arm  rigid  also  made  it  anaesthetic ;  the  anaesthesia
was  removed  at  the  same  time  as  the  rigidity.

In  N.  (who  had  afterwards  been  sent  to  sleep),  I  succeeded  eventually  in
producing  anaesthesia.  He  could  then  do  it  himself.

The  case  of  E.  was  very  striking :  his  power  of  producing  muscular  rigidity
was  astonishing.  He  was  able  by  an  effort  of  mind  to  throw  his  whole  body
into  a  state  of  cataleptic  rigidity,  so  that  he  could  rest  with  his  heels  on  one
chair  and  head  on  another,  and  remain  supported  in  that  condition.  When  he
made  his  hand  rigid  and  attempted  to  relax  it  again  by  an  effort  of  will,  he  was
unable  to  do  so  as  long  as  he  attempted  to  bend  his  hand.  If,  however,  he  did
not  attempt  to  bend  it,  he  was  able  gradually  to  relax  the  muscles.  Those  who
could  produce  rigidity  of  the  arm  and  who  tried  to  produce  rigidity  of  the  leg
were,  at  any  rate  in  most  instances,  successful.  Unfortunately,  the  notes  which
were  made  at  the  time  of  the  experiments  on  this  point  were  mislaid,  so  I  can-
not give  the  percentage  of  successes.

Other  phenomena  of  the  waking  state  were  also  produced  by  self-sugges-
tion. T.  and  L.  could  both  close  their  own  eyes  so  that  they  were  unable  to
open  them.  T.  used  to  shut  his  eyes  and  stroke  the  lids  downwards.  He  was
then  unable  to  open  them.  Several  other  subjects  showed  the  same  phe-
nomenon. T.  could  fix  his  hand  to  the  table  by  a  few  passes ;  this  also  was
done  by  several  others.

Other  subjects  could  fix  their  hands  together.  The  following  experiment
was  tried :  Five  subjects  were  taken,  two  of  whom  had  been  previously
hypnotised ;  none  had  been  sent  to  sleep.  They  were  asked  to  put  their  hands
together,  and  imagine  that  they  could  not  part  them.  They  closed  their  eyes,
put  their  hands  together,  and  tried.  One  could  not  part  his  hands,  the  others
could.  They  were  then  told  to  shut  their  eyes  and  imagine  the  operator
gazing  at  them,  and  saying,  "  You  cannot  part  your  hands."  Not  one  was  able
to  do  so.  They  were  able  after  this  to  produce  the  same  phenomena  in
themselves,  quite  apart  from  the  operator,  in  their  own  rooms.  They  found  at
first  that  they  were  obliged  to  imagine  the  operator  giving  the  suggestion,  but
afterwards  were  able  to  do  it  without  imagining  him  at  all.

T.,  who  was  one  of  the  five,  presents  one  interesting  feature.  He  gave  up
experimenting  with  himself  very  soon  after  this.  I  did  not  see  him  again  for
nearly  three  months,  and  then  asked  him  to  close  his  eyes  as  he  used  to.  He
tried,  but  could  not.  I  then  closed  his  eyes  myself  so  that  he  could  not  open
them.  He  then  found  that  he  could  close  them  himself.

The  case  of  G,  who  could  fix  his  hands  together,  close  his  own  eyes,  &c.,

522  A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  447

was  also  interesting,  as  showing  that  suggestions  given  to  the  subject  by  himself
may  act  more  powerfully  than  those  given  him  by  the  operator.  I  could  only
fix  his  hands  together  with  some  difficulty,  and  then  not  for  long.  He  could  do
so  himself  for  a  considerable  time,  and  the  muscular  power  exerted  to  keep
them  together,  if  an  attempt  was  made  by  some  one  else  to  part  them,  was  far
greater  if  he  fixed  them  together  himself  than  if  I  did  so  for  him,  and  certainly
far  greater  than  he  could  exert  by  his  own  will.

The  case  of  P.  will  serve  to  show  that  it  is  not  only  the  hypnotic  subject  who
is  susceptible  to  self-suggestion.  P.  had  never  been  hypnotised,  or  even  tried  by
any  one.  He  was  able  to  fix  his  hand  on  his  knee  by  simply  stroking  it,  and  it
took  him  about  half  a  minute  or  so  to  get  it  off  again  if  he  simply  tried  to  do
so.  If,  however,  he  made  upward  strokes  he  was  able  at  once  to  remove  it.  I
afterwards  tried  to  hypnotise  him  and  failed.  Doubtless  had  I  gone  on  long
enough  I  might  have  succeeded,  but  he  was  obviously  not  a  good  subject.

As  regards  delusions  I  can  only  give  one  instance.  Doubtless  many  sub-
jects could  produce  them  in  themselves  if  they  tried,  but  I  have  never  allowed
them  to  do  so.  In  the  case  of  C,  however,  we  have  proof  that  they  can  be
produced  by  self-suggestion.  He  could  by  a  simple  effort  of  mind  make  him-
self believe  almost  any  delusion,  e.g.  that  he  was  riding  on  horseback,  that  he
was  a  dog,  or  anything  else,  or  that  he  saw  snakes,  &c.  If  left  to  himself  the
delusion  vanished  slowly.  Any  one  else  could  remove  it  at  once  by  a  counter-
suggestion.  He  made  these  experiments  without  my  consent,  as  I  consider
them  unsafe.

[Further  experiments  recorded  in  the  same  paper  demonstrate  the  influence
of  self-suggestion  in  automatic  writing  and  trance-utterance.]

522  A.  The  artificial  character  of  Charcot's  "  three  stages  "  of  hypno-
tism is  well  shown  by  the  further  development  of  one  of  his  best  known  sub-
jects in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Jules  Janet — brother  of  Professor  Pierre  Janet  and
nephew  of  Professor  Paul  Janet — as  described  in  a  paper  contributed  by
him  to  the  Revue  Scientifique,  May  igth,  1888,  under  the  title  "  L'Hyste"rie
et  1'  Hypnotisme,  d'apres  la  The"orie  de  la  double  PersonnaliteY'  which  I
summarise  as  follows  : —

Blanche  Wittmann  is  one  of  the  best  known  personalities— -or  groups  of  per-
sonalities— in  Paris.  A  hystero-epileptic  of  the  most  pronounced  type,  she  has
never  been  able  for  long  together  to  meet  the  stresses  of  ordinary  life.  She  has
long  been  an  inmate  of  the  Salpe"triere ;  and  has  often  been  exhibited  there  as
the  type— I  may  almost  say  the  prototype— of  the  celebrated  "three  stages"
of  lethargy,  catalepsy,  and  somnambulism,  of  which  she  realised  every  charac-
detail  with  marvellous  precision.  Arrived  at  somnambulism,  her  state
could  be  no  further  changed  by  the  various  means  employed, — closing  or
opening  the  eyes,  rubbing  the  top  of  the  head,  startling  with  lights  or  sounds,
&c.— and  she  was  led  back  to  waking  life  through  the  stages  in  inverse  order.

In  .ill  h< T  states  she  was  without  feeling  of  contact,  feeling  of  position,  or

feeling  of  pain.    When  her  eyes  were  closed  (in  the  waking  state)  she  could  not

stand  upright,  nor  close  her  hands  completely,  nor  hold  a  heavy  object.     She

could  not  hear  with  the  left  ear,  nor  see  colours  with  the  left  eye,  whose  visual

moreover,  was  greatly  restricted.

Such  was  her  condition  when  she  came  under  Dr.  Dumont|ulli« -r's  charge
at  another  hospital,— the  HOtel  Dieu,— and  was  hypnotised  by  M.  Jules  Janet.

448  APPENDICES  [522  B

She  passed  as  usual  through  the  three  ''classical"  stages.  But  M.  Janet,
instead  of  opening  the  subject's  eyes  in  the  lethargic  stage — the  regular
method  for  inducing  the  cataleptic  stage — continued  to  make  passes,  and
presently  found  that  she  passed  into  an  absolutely  inert  state, — "the  deep
state  "  of  Gurney's  experiments  (see  below,  522  B),  in  which  no  muscular  con-
traction could  be  obtained  by  pressure,  nor  did  opening  of  the  eyes  induce
catalepsy.  After  some  further  passes  the  subject  re-awakened  into  what
seemed  at  first  sight  simply  a  more  alert  somnambulism  than  ever  before.

But  on  examining  this  new  condition  it  was  found  that  Blanche  Wittmann
was  now  perfectly  possessed  of  the  senses  of  touch, — capable  of  perceiving
contact,  position,  heat,  and  pain.  She  could  now  close  her  hands  perfectly,
and  compress  the  dynamometer  with  normal  power.  She  heard  perfectly  with
her  left  ear,  previously  deaf,  and  saw  normally  with  both  eyes.  It  was  no
longer  possible  to  inspire  in  her  any  hallucination.

In  this  second  state,  "  Blanche  2  "  had  a  full  remembrance  of  the  life  of
"Blanche  I,"  while  Blanche  I  knew  nothing  of  Blanche  2.  But  when  the
subject  was  in  her  first  or  ordinary  somnambulism,  her  memory  extended
over  the  fully-developed  state  of  Blanche  2,  so  that  we  may  consider  the
"  three  classical  stages  "  as  incomplete  manifestations  of  Blanche  2,  who  had
never  till  now  been  able  to  come  fully  to  the  front.

Furthermore,  it  was  not  difficult  to  show  that  Blanche  2  really
existed  throughout  the  whole  life  of  Blanche  i.  If  colours  were  shown  to
Blanche  I  (with  her  right  eye  blinded)  and  she  failed  to  distinguish  them,
Blanche  2  nevertheless  saw  them  perfectly,  with  the  same  eye  and  at  the  same
moment,  and,  when  summoned,  could  describe  what  she  had  seen.  Or  if
Blanche  I  were  pinched  or  pricked,  to  demonstrate  her  insensibility,  Blanche  2
felt  everything,  and,  when  summoned,  began  to  complain.  It  is  strange  to
reflect  for  how  many  years  the  dumbly-raging  Blanche  2  has  thus  assisted  at
experiments  to  which  Blanche  I  submitted  with  easy  complaisance.

Blanche  2  could  also  remember  what  had  happened  during  the  chloroformed
condition,  and  could  recount  ordinary  dreams  of  which  Blanche  i  had  no
knowledge.

On  the  whole,  then,  we  may  say  that  Blanche  2  represents,  not,  indeed,
the  complete  personality,  for  that  is  never  represented  by  any  state  of  any  of
us,  but  at  least  a  pretty  complete  group  or  co-ordination  of  the  various
elements  which  go  to  make  up  a  normal  human  being.  Blanche  i,  on  the
other  hand,  is  scantily  supplied  with  these  elements ;  she  has  only  just  enough
to  get  on  with,  namely,  motility,  speech,  vision  of  one  eye,  and  hearing  of  one
ear.  Blanche  2  adds  to  these  vision  of  the  other  eye,  hearing  of  the  other  ear,
and  general  and  muscular  sensibility.

M.  Janet  tells  me  that  he  has  kept  Blanche  Wittmann  for  months  together
in  her  second  state,  with  much  comfort  to  her ;  and  that  now,  though  he  has
ceased  to  attend  her,  he  understands  that  her  condition  in  the  first  state  is  much
better  than  of  old.

522  B.  The  following  are  extracts,  slightly  abridged,  from  a  paper
by  Edmund  Gurney  on  "  The  Stages  of  Hypnotism  "  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  ii.  pp.  6 1  et  seq.

Before  the  hypnotised  subject  reaches  the  profound  sleep  in  which  his
mental  condition  is  a  mere  blank,  there  lie  before  him  two,  and  only  two,

522B]  TO    CHAPTER    V  449

markedly  distinct  states  or  stages,  each  of  which,  however,  may  present  within
itself  a  very  large  amount  of  variety.  We  may  conveniently  designate  them
as  the  alert  state  or  stage  and  the  deep  state  or  stage.

The  alert  state  is  that  in  which  a  "  subject "  is  when  after  hypnotisation
and  the  usual  involuntary  closure  of  his  eyes,  the  strain  on  his  eyelids  is  re-
leased by  a  few  touches  and  words,  and  he  is  restored  to  what  may  look  quite
like  his  natural  waking  condition.  Sometimes,  it  is  true,  the  difference  is  very
marked,  and  he  will  sit  with  a  vacant  air,  irresponsive  to  every  voice  except
that  of  the  operator,  and  clearly  not  in  possession  of  his  ordinary  faculties.  He
may  be  made  to  perform  imitative  actions,  and  to  obey  commands  in  a  mechani-
cal way;  but  his  consciousness  may  be  at  a  very  low  ebb,  or  (as  some  have
held)  may  have  lapsed  altogether.  But  in  any  case  the  "subject's"  eyes  will
be  open  and  capable  of  seeing;  and  he  will  (almost  invariably)  prove  sensi-
tive to  pain  if  he  be  pinched  or  pricked.  Often  he  will  be  found  to  converse
with  perfect  comprehension,  memory,  and  even  humour.

But  though  perfectly  capable  of  sustaining  a  conversation,  he  does  not
originate  remarks.  If  not  spoken  to  he  will  sit  quiet,  and  if  simply  asked  what
he  is  thinking  about,  he  will  almost  always  answer  "  Nothing."  The  essential
difference  between  this  condition  and  the  waking  one  lies  in  two  possibilities
attaching  to  it,  either  of  which  demands  appropriate  treatment  to  become  a
reality.  In  the  first  place,  if  the  "subject"  be  left  completely  to  himself,  he
will  rapidly  sink  into  the  deeper  state,  and  thence  into  hypnotic  sleep,  in
either  of  which  he  will  prove  insensitive  to  any  moderate  amount  of  torture.
The  passage  into  these  deeper  conditions,  it  should  be  observed,  is  often  so
rapid  that  the  fact  of  their  being  reached  through  the  alert  stage  may  be
wholly  unnoticed.

The  alert  state  is  characterised,  in  the  second  place,  by  the  possibility  of
obtaining,  while  it  lasts,  certain  special  phenomena  of  an  active  sort.  The  "  sub-
ject "  can  be  made  to  do,  and  to  continue  doing,  any  action  which  the  operator
commands,  although  he  may  be  perfectly  conscious  of  making  a  fool  of  himself,
and  may  strongly  desire  to  resist  the  command.  He  can  also  be  put  under
the  influence  of  delusions.

Passing  now  to  the  deep  stage,  we  find  that  this  in  turn  is  liable  to  be  con-
founded with  a  contiguous  condition,  namely,  the  genuine  hypnotic  sleep  into
which  it  tends  to  merge.  It  resembles  that  condition  in  the  fact  that  the
eyelids  are  closed ;  that,  if  one  of  them  be  forcibly  raised,  the  eyeball  is  found
to  be  rolled  upwards ;  in  the  general  insensibility  to  pain  and  to  ordinary
modes  of  stimulation.  And  there  exists  here  precisely  the  same  chance  as  we
noted  in  the  former  case,  that  the  particular  stage  will  escape  detection.  If  the
"subject"  be  left  to  himself,  he  will  have  no  opportunity  to  manifest  its
characteristics,  but,  passing  rapidly  through  the  period  during  which  these
might  be  evoked,  will  soon  lose  consciousness  and  individuality  in  profound
slumber.  With  some  "subjects,"  moreover,  the  invasion  of  mental  torpor  is  so
rapid  that  it  might  be  hard  to  fix  and  retain  them  in  the  genuine  deep  stage,
if  the  proper  means  were  adopted.  But  many  others,  if  taken  in  time,
after  their  eyes  are  closed  and  they  have  become  insensible  to  pain,  but  before
•leep  has  intervened,  will  prove  quite  capable  of  rational  conversation;  they
are  mentally  awake,  even  when  their  bodies  are  almost  past  movement,  and
when  even  a  simple  command  is  obeyed  in  the  most  languid  ami  imperfect
manner.  The  state  is,  however,  harder  to  sustain  at  an  even  level  than  the
VOL.  i.  2  r

450  APPENDICES  [523  A

alert  one,  owing  to  a  stronger  and  more  continuous  tendency  to  lapse  into  a
deeper  condition.

[The  writer  goes  on  to  give  many  instances  of  variability  of  characteristics
in  the  two  stages.]

523  A.  In  the  paper  just  quoted  Gurney  maintained  that  the  pheno-
mena needed  to  establish  the  distinction  between  his  "  alert  "  and  "  deep  "
stages  were  to  be  found  in  the  domain  of  memory,  much  of  the  alert
state  being  remembered  after  waking,  but  nothing  of  the  deep  state.
Within  the  hypnotic  condition  itself,  says  Gurney : —

Facts  of  the  "  subject 's  "  general  knowledge,  his  address,  business,  recent
employments,  and  so  on,  are  remembered  even  in  the  deep  state.

With  a  favourable  "subject,"  something  that  has  happened  during  one  of
the  hypnotic  states  will  often  recur  to  the  memory  on  the  next  occasion  when
that  state  is  produced,  though  in  the  interval  of  normality — amounting,  it  may
be,  to  several  days  and  nights — which  has  intervened  between  the  two  occasions,
it  has  been  completely  forgotten.

The  chief  interest  of  this  induced  phenomenon  of  alternating  memory  lies
in  its  resemblance  to  what  occurs  in  spontaneous  conditions,  especially  the
spontaneous  alternations  in  cases  of  double  consciousness,  where  a  single
individual  lives  in  turn  two  (or  more)  separate  existences.  The  same  alter-
nation of  memory  occurs  when  a  deep  hypnotic  state  intervenes  between  two
alert,  or  an  alert  between  two  deep  states.  I  have  then  found  that  (with
certain  well-marked  exceptions  to  be  mentioned  hereafter)  the  ideas  impressed
in  the  one  sort  of  state  are  invariably  forgotten  in  the  other,  and  are  as
invariably  again  remembered  when  the  former  state  recurs.  Occasionally  I
have  succeeded  in  hitting  a  transitional  moment  at  which  both  things  were  re-
membered ;  but  it  was  a  sort  of  knife-edge,  and  the  slightest  manipulation  or
pause  tending  to  deepen  the  condition  brought  about  the  customary  separation
and  oblivion  of  the  thing  told  in  the  alert  state.

The  subject  was  continued,  and  some  experiments  illustrating  it  were
given  in  detail  in  a  later  paper,  under  the  title  "  Stages  of  Hypnotic
Memory,"  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  pp.  515  et  seq.y  from  which  I
quote,  with  abridgments,  the  following  passages : —

I  made  the  trials  with  a  considerable  number  of  "subjects,"  in  different
parts  of  England,  employing  three  different  hypnotisers,  to  each  of  whom  the
results  were  as  new  and  surprising  as  they  were  at  first  to  myself ;  there  seems
reason  to  think,  therefore,  that  the  results  are  tolerably  normal,  and  not  due  to
any  special  idiosyncrasies  of  operator  or  "  subject "  ;  as  they  certainly  were  not
due  to  any  guidance,  or  any  interference  with  the  free  play  of  the  "  subject's"
mind,  in  the  remarks  addressed  to  him  during  the  progress  of  the  experiment.
The  mode  of  effecting  the  passage  from  one  stage  to  another  has  usually  con-
sisted in  gentle  passes  over  the  face,  without  contact.  It  is  most  impressive  to
find  that  a  few  noiseless  movements  of  one  person's  fingers,  at  a  short  distance
from  another  person's  face,  have  completely  obliterated  that  with  which  the
latter's  attention  two  or  three  seconds  ago  was  entirely  engrossed,  and  have
brought  back  within  his  mental  horizon  that  which  no  other  means  in  the
world — no  other  physical  operation,  not  the  clearest  verbal  reminder,  not  the

523A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  451

fear  of  death,  nor  the  offer  of  ^1000  reward — could  have  induced  or  enabled
him  to  recall.

With  the  assistance  of  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  (whom  I  will  in  future  call  S.),  I
have  lately  made  a  fresh  series  of  experiments  in  hypnotic  memory,  in  which
some  further  points  have  been  observed  ;  and  it  may  make  the  matter  more
intelligible  to  give  the  details  of  a  few  cases.  The  great  point,  of  course,  is  to
use  the  right  means  for  ascertaining  whether  the  thing  told  is  or  is  not  remem-
bered, and  to  avoid  reminding  the  subject  of  it.

As  I  have  said,  the  rule  is  to  obtain  two  states  or  stages.  [Some  instances
of  this  are  given  in  the  paper.]  If  the  attempt  is  made  to  carry  the  trance-
condition  beyond  state  B,  the  effect  is  either  to  bring  the  "subject"  into  an
apparently  deep  sleep,  in  which  he  is  incapable  of  answering,  and  probably  of
hearing  ;  or  to  create  such  a  desire  for  sleep,  and  aversion  to  being  questioned,
that  he  becomes  more  or  less  intractable.  With  one  "  subject  "  I  have  found
that  even  the  second  stage,  on  one  or  two  occasions,  could  not  be  obtained.
But  there  are  other  cases  where  the  course  of  the  trance  allows  a  distinct*  third
stage  of  memory  to  manifest  itself  before  unconsciousness  sets  in.  The  follow-
ing instance  will  make  this  clear.

In  state  A,  S 1  was  hypnotised  ;  and  the  fact  of  his  being  in  state  A  was

ascertained  by  his  remembering  an  incident  previously  told  him  when  in  that
state — that  a  balloon  had  been  seen  passing  over  the  King's  Road  —  and  forget-
ting two  incidents  previously  told  him  when  in  state  B, — that  an  engine-boiler
had  burst  at  Brighton  station,  and  that  two  large  dogs  had  been  having  a  fight
in  the  Western  Road.  He  was  now  told  that  a  foreign  flag  had  been  seen
floating  over  the  Pavilion,  and  was  then  carried  on  into  state  B,  when  S.  said,
"  People  may  well  complain."

S T.     "Yes."

S.     "Why?"

S T.     "Why,  the  nuisance— those  dogs  fighting  in  the  Western  Road."

(The  idea  proper  to  state  B  is  revived.)

S.     "  No,  I  meant  about  the  flag."

S T.    "  What  flag?    There  are  plenty  of  flags  about."    (The  idea  proper

to  state  A  is  forgotten.)

S.  "  No,  I  meant  that  cart  running  away  in  Montpelier  Road" — a  new
idea,  which  will  belong  henceforth  to  the  B  class.

S T.   "  What  cart  ?  "     Then,  scornfully,  "  Cart  running  away  !     It's  the

horse  that  runs  away."

He  was  then  informed  more  particularly  that  a  horse  with  a  cart  had  bolted
nitpelier  Road;  and  the  deepening  passes  were  continued.
"So  they  found  it  bottom  upwards."

There  was  no  answer  ;  the  "  subject  "  had  lapsed  into  sleep.     He  was  called
by   name,   and   a  few   reverse   passes   were    made,   when   he   woke   with  an
.?"

4  They  found  it  bottom  upwards."

S T.     "What?     When

S.     "  A  boat,  I  mean."     He  was  then  told  that  a  very  lii-h  tide  had  washed
away  a  boat  on  the  beach;  but  that  after  a  time  it  had  drifted  ashore.     This
•.  as  suggested  in  what  proved  to  be  a  separate  and  third  stage,  C,  when

was  on  the  very  verge  of  lapsing  into  unconsciousness ;  and  he  did  lapse
v  afterwards.  He  was  roused,  and  S.  said,  "  That's  the  effect  of  not
urely."  S t's  answers  now  showed  that  the  rousing  had  carried

452  APPENDICES  [523  B

him  over  stage  C,  and  that  he  was  once  more  in  stage  B.  He  said,  "  Tied  ?
They  never  tie  them."

S.     "  No  wonder  it  was  washed  away  then."

S T.     "  Washed  away  !     Did  it  go  over  the  cliff  ?  "

S.     "  No  ;  what  do  you  mean  ?  "

S T.     "  That  horse  and  cart  you  were  talking  about."

Here,  then,  was  the  stage  B  idea,  the  boat  of  stage  C  being  forgotten.  It
remained  to  ascertain  that  what  I  have  called  stage  C  was  not  identical  with
stage  A — that  there  had  been  a  real  progression  beyond  stage  B,  and  not  a
mere  oscillation  between  the  A  and  B  states.  Accordingly,  some  reverse
passes  were  made,  with  the  view  of  bringing  the  subject  into  the  A  state  ;  and
S.  said,  "  I  dare  say  it  will  get  knocked  about  on  the  beach."

S T.     "  What  knocked  about  ?  "

S.     "  What  I  was  telling  you  about."

S T.     "  Why,  have  they  taken  it  on  the  beach  now,  then  ?  "

S.     "  It  was  on  the  beach."

S T.     "  Why,  you  said  it  was  on  the  Pavilion."

S.     "  What  do  you  mean  ?  "

S T.     "  That  large  flag."

Here,  then,  was  the  stage  A  idea,  and  the  memory  of  the  boat  of  .stage  C

proved  as  unrevivable  as  it  had  been  in  stage  B.     S 1  was  now  carried

down  without  pause  into  the  state  of  deep  sleep — the  most  certain  way  of
lighting  on  stage  C  being  to  go  beyond  it  in  this  way,  and  then  to  revive  the
"  subject "  just  enough  to  enable  him  to  understand  and  answer.  He  was
called  by  name  several  times,  and  a  few  reverse  passes  were  made  before  he
answered,  "  Eh?  what?"  S.  replied  in  words  which  would  apply  equally  to
carts  or  boats ;  but,  as  I  expected,  they  were  understood  as  applying  to  boats —
the  stage  C  idea.

S.     "  Is  it  customary  to  tie  them  ?  "

S T.     "  Yes."

S.  "  I  thought  you  said  it  wasn't."  (He  had  said  before  that  it  was  not
customary  to  tie  carts.)

S T.     "  Oh  yes ;  sometimes  they  tie  them  to  capstans,  sometimes  to

larger  vessels."

He  was  now  questioned  about  the  cart,  but  had  no  remembrance  of  it;  also
about  the  dog  fight  (which,  the  reader  will  recall,  was  another  stage  B  idea),
with  the  same  result.  Some  upward  passes  were  now  made,  and  S.  said,  "  Did
you  say  they  tie  them  to  a  capstan  ?  "

S T.     "  No  ;  they  throw  the  reins  loose  over  the  horse's  back."

S.     "A  lot  of  people  saw  it  coming  down."

S T.     "  What,  the  horse  and  cart  ?  "

Here  is  evidently  the  reappearance  of  stage  B ;  and  proceeding  again  on
the  upward  or  lightening  course,  we  found  the  A  idea,  the  flag  on  the  Pavilion,
duly  remembered.  This  was  on  February  28th.  On  March  2nd  the  same
process  was  briefly  repeated,  and  it  was  found  that  the  subject  still  remembered  |
each  of  the  topics  already  mentioned  when  its  appropriate  stage  was  reached,
and  at  that  stage  alone.

t/523  B.     Gurney's  experiments,  quoted  above,  on  stages  of  memory  in
the  hypnotic  trance  were  several  times  repeated  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and

523B]  TO    CHAPTER    V  453

Miss  Johnson  in  the  course  of  their  experiments  on  thought-transference
with  hypnotised  subjects  at  Brighton,  the  hypnotiser  being  again  Mr.  G.  A.
Smith.  Miss  Johnson  informs  me  that  it  was  generally  found  possible  to  ob-
tain three  stages ;  but  the  memories  did  not  always  remain  distinct.  Thus
one  subject  who  kept  the  recollections  of  the  three  stages  distinct  one  day,
when  re- hypnotised  on  the  next  day,  succeeded  with  some  effort  in  re-
membering the  topics  belonging  to  all  three  stages  of  the  day  before,  and
these  recollections  persisted  through  the  three  stages  induced  on  this  day,
although  the  fresh  topics  suggested  for  each  of  these  stages  remained
distinct.  This  probably  indicates  that  there  is  a  stratum  of  consciousness
in  which  all  the  recollections  are  retained.

The  most  interesting  experiments,  however,  occurred  with  another
subject,  T.,  who  on  one  occasion  exhibited  eight  different  stages  with
distinct  memories.

It  must  be  understood  that  the  test  of  distinctness  of  these  memories
does  not  consist  in  each  statement  made  to  the  subject  being  forgotten  as
each  deeper  stage  of  hypnosis  (produced  by  downward  passes)  was  reached,
— which  might  be  due  merely  to  a  general  forgetfulness  or  inattention, —
but  in  the  spontaneous  recrudescence  of  each  memory  in  its  corresponding
stage  when  the  operation  was  reversed  and  a  lighter  and  lighter  stage  con-
tinually produced  by  upward  passes.

The  following  account  of  the  occasion  referred  to  is  written  by  Miss
Johnson,  from  her  notes  taken  at  the  time,  July  gth,  1891.  The  only
other  persons  present  were  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Mr.  Smith,  and  T.

T.  was  hypnotised  by  Mr.  Smith,  and  told  that  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  going  to
talk  to  him, — Mr.  Smith  meanwhile,  at  the  intervals  between  her  statements,
making  passes  over  him — downwards  or  upwards,  according  to  whether  it  was
desired  to  make  the  hypnotic  state  more  or  less  deep — but  saying  nothing.

Stage  A.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  told  T.  that  the  Hotel  Me"tropole  had  been  burnt
down  that  afternoon  ;  all  the  people  had  escaped,  but  great  damage  had  been
done.

[After  downward  passes]  Stage  B.  T.  told  tnat  the  coach  was  upset  coming
into  Brighton — the  Comet — one  or  two  people  were  rather  hurt ;  the  horses  ran
,  and  turning  round  a  corner  too  quickly  upset  the  coach.

[After  downward  passes]  Stage  C.  Told  that  the  Emperor  of  Germany  had
to  go  back  to  Germany  to-morrow,  on  account  of  the  death  of  one  of  his  rela-

[ After  downward  passes]  Stage  D.     T.,  in  answer  to  a  question  whether  he
remembered  anything,  said  he  only  remembered  that  Mr.  Smith  had  s.iid  Mrs.
ick  was  going  to  talk  to  him;  he  could  not  remember  that  she  had  said
anything.

He  was  then  told  that  there  had  been  a  railway  accident  on  the  Brighton
;.<-ar  Hayward's  Heath— a  bad  accident— the  train  had  run  off  the  line.
marked  that  it  was  probably  a  false  report.

[After  downward  passes]  Stage  E.  T.  was  told  that  the  lights  went  out  at
the  t!  night  and  everything  was  left  in  darkness,  but  it  only  lasted  for

a  few  moments.

454  APPENDICES  [523  B

[After  downward  passes]  Stage  F.  He  was  told  that  the  key  of  the  theatre
door  had  been  lost  and  no  one  could  get  in  for  a  long  time  ;  the  people  were
all  kept  waiting  outside.

He  seemed  rather  drowsy,  expressed  no  interest  in  what  he  was  told,  and
only  spoke  in  answer  to  questions  as  briefly  as  possible.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  asked
him  once  or  twice  what  she  had  been  telling  him ;  at  last  he  said  sleepily,
"  Key  lost."

[After  upward  passes]  Return  of  Stage  E.  In  answer  to  the  question  what
he  had  been  told,  he  replied  that  the  lights  went  out  at  the  theatre.

[After  downward  passes]  Stage  F.  In  answer  to  the  same  question,  replied
that  the  key  had  been  lost.

[After  downward  passes]  Stage  G.  He  was  told  that  two  goat  carriages
racing  along  the  front  had  run  into  one  another,  and  were  smashed.  He  seemed
still  more  drowsy,  and  could  hardly  be  got  by  questions  to  repeat  this
story.

[After  downward  passes]  Stage  H.  He  was  told  that  Mr.  Smith  had  been
playing  a  guitar  and  all  the  strings  broke  at  once.  He  repeated  this  story  after
being  asked  what  Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  said,  and  even  volunteered  the  remark  that
Mr.  Smith  could  get  fresh  strings.

[After  downward  passes]  Stage  K.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  asked  several  times,
"  Can  you  hear  me  ? "  T.  at  last  said,  "  Yes."  Mrs.  Sidgwick  asked,  "  Do  you
think  Mr.  Smith  will  ever  get  that  put  right  ?  "  No  answer,  though  the  ques-
tion was  repeated  many  times.  At  length  she  said,  "  Mr.  Smith  dropped  his
watch  into  the  sea."  No  answer  or  remark  could  be  elicited  from  T.

[After  upward  passes]  Stage  H.  In  answer  to  the  question  what  Mr.  Smith
had  better  do,  T.  replied,  "  Strings, — I  don't  know  anything  about  strings."

[After  upward  passes]  Stage  G.  In  answer  to  a  similar  vague  question,  he
showed  that  he  remembered  about  the  goat  carriages.

[After  upward  passes]  Stage  F.  In  answer  to  the  question  whether  it  was
not  funny,  he  replied,  "  What  ?  the  people  standing  outside  and  getting  wet  ?
No,  that  wasn't  amusing."

[After  upward  passes]  Stage  E.  He  remarked,  "  Ask  Mr.  Smith  who  put
the  lights  out — several  fellows  who  were  there  never  told  me — funny  thing."
At  this  point  he  began  to  talk  spontaneously  in  a  lively  way.  (Mrs.  Sidgwick
notes :  "  I  independently  noted  that  it  was  at  this  stage  he  became  compara-
tively lively,  and  I  did  not  notice  any  special  increase  of  liveliness  afterwards.")

[After  upward  passes]  Stage  D.  He  said,  "  They'll  have  to  pay  a  lot  of
money.  But  it  was  better  than  a  bridge  breaking  down,  or  being  in  a  tunnel."

[After  upward  passes]  Stage  C.  T.  remarked,  "  I  suppose  the  Queen  will
be  put  out,  but  the  papers  say  it's  inconvenient  to  her  his  coming  to  England.
You  don't  know  who  died  ?"

[After  upward  passes]  Stage  B.  He  said,  "  It's  a  sharp  turn  round  that
corner,  if  you  come  down  that  hill.  The  horses  got  frightened  at  the  corner,  I
suppose.  Coaching  must  be  very  nice."  Further  spontaneous  remarks  of  the
same  kind  followed,  and  when  Mrs.  Sidgwick  asked  him  what  else  they  were
talking  about  besides  that  coach,  he  only  repeated  the  coach  story  in  detail
and  said  he  knew  of  nothing  else.

[After  upward  passes]  Stage  A.  He  said,  *'  You'd  think  I  might  have  heard
of  it — a  fire  at  a  large  place  like  that."

After  more  upward  passes  T.  awoke  or  very  nearly  awoke,  opening  his  eyes.
Mrs.  Sidgwick  asked  him  what  they  were  talking  about;  he  said  he  had  an

526B]  TO    CHAPTER    V  455

idea  it  was  "  Something  about  the  Me*tropole ;  I  was  dreaming  ;  I  dreamt  it  was
on  fire  or  something."

He  was  rehypnotised  almost  at  once  ;  Mr.  Smith  made  a  good  many  down-
ward passes,  then  woke  him  suddenly  and  asked  if  he  could  remember  dream-
ing about  anything.  After  making  an  effort  to  remember,  he  said  he  had  a
confused  idea  of  Mr.  Smith  sitting  in  a  fire, — "  Mr.  Smith  sitting  here — three
of  you  sitting  here,  and  something  about  a  fire."  All  the  experimenters
thought  that  this  referred  to  the  last  time  he  had  been  awake,  not  to  what  he
had  been  told  during  the  previous  hypnosis.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  revised  Miss  Johnson's  notes  immediately  after  the  sitting,
and  added  the  following  note  of  her  own : —

"The  above  notes  give  a  brief  account  of  T.'s  answers,  &c.,  the  questions
put  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  being  generally  omitted ;  but  on  each  occasion  going  up
the  scale,  the  subject  was  started  by  her  after  the  passes  with  questions  care-
fully selected  so  as  not  to  hint  what  subject  he  was  expected  to  speak  about.
Going  down  the  scale,  she  first  asked  a  question  which  he  might  have
answered  in  connection  with  the  subject  of  the  previous  stage,  and  asked  him
whether  he  remembered  nothing,  then  told  him  the  new  story.

"In  going  up,  he  always  remembered  the  subject  appropriate  to  that  stage
at  once,  and  without  the  effort  that  Whybrew  [the  hypnotic  subject  referred  to
in  the  first  paragraph  of  this  Appendix]  seemed  to  have  to  bring  to  bear."

526  A.  The  following  is  a  case  of  apparent  pre-natal  suggestion  re-
corded by  Dr.  Liebeault  in  the  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  August  1891,  p.  53.

The  child  in  question  is  a  girl  of  eleven.  On  her  left  cheek  and  neck  she
has  a  "  port-wine  mark,"  twelve  centimetres  wide  and  twenty  centimetres  long,
extending  from  the  collar-bone  to  above  the  ear.  The  mother,  Mrs.  L.,  in  the
course  of  gestation  suddenly  one  day  in  a  street  at  Nancy  came  face  to  face
with  a  woman,  one  whole  side  of  whose  face  was  claret  colour.  Scared  out  of
composure,  Mrs.  L.,  who  was  just  then  suffering  from  toothache,  and  wore  a
cotton-wool  bandage  on  her  left  cheek,  put  her  hand  up  to  her  bandage ;  where-
upon, to  her  astonishment,  she  saw  that  most  of  the  people  in  the  street  had
claret-coloured  spots  on  their  faces  very  similar  to  the  one  which  had  frightened
her.  This  hallucination  occurred  in  the  first  month  of  pregnancy,  and  persisted
until  her  child  was  born.  No  effort  of  hers,  no  argument  or  admonition  of  her
husband's,  could  avail  against  this  strange  illusion.  However,  it  did  not  occur
to  her  that  the  unborn  child  might  be  marked  with  the  very  same  stigmata
which  she  constantly  saw  on  the  faces  of  passers-by.  But  upon  her  delivery,
as  the  child  was  not  shown  to  her  immediately,  she  became  anxious,  wondered
whether  it  might  not  have  a  claret-coloured  mark  on  the  face,  and  expressed
her  fears  spontaneously.

Liebeault  supposes  that  Mrs.  L.  caused  this  mark  to  appear  upon  her
unborn   infant  by  unconscious  suggestion.     He  found  that  Mrs.  L.  w:is
suggestible,  and  fell  in  less  than  one  minute  into  a  state  of  light
somnambulism.

526  B.     The  following  case  was  recorded  by  Mr.  Francis  Galton,  in
vol.  liv.,  p.  76,  May  28th,  1896),  under  the  title,  "A  Curious
Idiosyncr.

456  APPENDICES  [526  C

A  strongly-marked  idiosyncrasy  has  lately  come  to  my  notice,  which  should
be  recorded.  A  lady  of  my  acquaintance  was  walking  with  a  relative,  Colonel
M.,  when  the  wife  of  a  tenant  addressed  her,  and  described  how  the  hand  of
her  own  child  had  been  pinched  in  a  door.  Overhearing  her  story,  Colonel  M.
became  quite  unwell,  so  much  so  as  to  lead  to  particular  inquiry,  which  resulted
in  showing  that  allusions  to  any  accidents  of  that  kind  affected  him  at  once  in
a  very  perceptible  way.  Finally,  at  the  request  of  the  lady,  he  wrote  an
account  of  his  peculiarity,  which  she  forwarded  to  me.  Thereupon  I  corre-
sponded with  Colonel  M.,  who  slightly  revised  what  he  had  written,  and  sanc-
tioned its  publication.  It  is  as  follows  : —

"From  my  earliest  remembrance,  and  still  up  to  now,  any  sight  of  an
injured  nail  in  any  person,  even  if  a  total  stranger,  or  any  injury,  however
slight,  to  one  of  my  own  nails,  causes  me  to  break  into  a  deadly  cold  perspira-
tion, with  feeling  of  sick  faintness.  But  still  further;  if  I  chance  to  hear  any
one  else  narrating  in  casual  conversation  any  injury  of  this  particular  sort  to
themselves  or  others,  it  brings  on  me  exactly  the  same  feeling  I  have  described
above.  So  much  is  this  the  case,  that  many  years  ago,  when  I  was  in  the  prime
of  life,  at  a  large  dinner-party,  when  one  of  the  guests  near  me  persistently
chanced  to  go  on  talking  minutely  of  some  such  little  accidental  injury  that  had
befallen  him,  I  turned  very  faint,  tried  all  I  knew  to  shake  it  off,  but  could  not,
and  presently  slid  right  under  the  table,  quite  unconscious  for  the  moment.
This  is  the  more  singular  because  on  no  other  point  am  I  in  the  least  squeam-
ish. In  old  days  I  have  seen  soldiers  flogged  before  breakfast  without  its
affecting  me,  though  some  of  the  rank  and  file  would  be  very  much  upset,  and
in  cases  of  death,  illness,  or  wounds  I  have  never  experienced,  as  an  onlooker,
the  sensations  I  have  alluded  to  above."

I  may  mention  that  the  mother  of  Colonel  M.  had  pinched  her  own  finger-
nail badly  shortly  before  his  birth,  and,  as  is  not  uncommon  in  coincidences  of
ihat  kind,  she  believed  her  accident  to  have  been  the  cause  of  her  son's  pecu-
liarity. He  writes  to  me: —

"  As  a  boy  I  was  conscious  of  this  repugnance  of  mine,  but  was  ashamed  of
it,  and  never  used  to  mention  it  to  any  one.  When  I  became  a  young  man  I
one  day  mentioned  it  privately  to  my  mother,  who  it  appeared  had  already
noticed  it  in  me  as  a  child.  She  then  told  me  the  incident  about  her  own
finger,  and  she  and  I  being  both  utterly  unscientific  persons,  assumed  then  and
there  that  my  squeamish  feelings  about  injuries  to  finger-tips  must  be  connected
with  her  little  accident."

In  reply  to  further  questions,  I  learn  that  the  injury  to  the  mother,  however
painful  at  the  time,  was  not  so  severe  as  to  leave  a  permanent  mark.  Also,
that  no  analogous  peculiarity  is  known  to  exist  among  the  near  relations  of
Colonel  M.,  of  whom  he  specifies  his  father,  brother,  three  sisters,  nephews  and
nieces.  He  has  no  children.  .  .  .

526  C.  The  next  case  is  taken  from  an  article  entitled  "  Mater-
nal Impressions  and  their  Influence  upon  the  Fcetus  in  Utero,"  by
Claudius  Henry  Maston,  M.D.,  of  Mobile,  Ala.,  in  The  Medical  News,
vol.  Ixxii.,  January — June  1898  (New  York).

[I  here]  present  a  brief  history  of  a  case  of  very  great  interest,  and  since  it
has  occurred  under  my  own  immediate  observation,  I  can  vouch  for  its  truth.
William  Y.,  aged  twenty-two  years,  was  shot  on  the  morning  of  September

526C]  TO     CHAPTER     V  457

24th,  1894.  The  ball,  a  38-calibre,  was  fired  from  a  Winchester  rifle,  and  entered
the  rear  of  the  chest  on  the  left  side,  just  below  and  to  the  outer  side  of  the
angle  of  the  scapula ;  at  this  point  it  penetrated  the  chest  between  the  seventh
and  eighth  ribs,  and  passing  through  the  entire  chest,  emerged  from  the  inter-
costal space  between  the  fourth  and  fifth  ribs,  two  and  a  quarter  inches  from  the
left  nipple  on  the  inner  side.  The  exact  measurement  of  the  man's  chest  shows
that  the  distance  from  the  midsternal  line  in  a  transverse  direction  to  the
centre  of  the  left  nipple  is  four  and  a  quarter  inches ;  a  line  drawn  from  the
wound  of  entrance  to  that  of  exit  passes  directly  through  the  location  of  the
right  ventricle ;  and  it  is  upon  this  anatomic  fact  that  I  diagnosed  the  case  to
be  one  of  direct  heart  penetration.

I  shall  not  consume  time  with  a  detail  of  the  case,  which  has  been  the
subject  of  a  paper  upon  "  Gunshot  Wounds  of  the  Heart,"  which  was  read  before
the  American  Surgical  Association  at  its  New  York  Meeting  in  1895,  and
published  in  vol.  xiii.  of  its  Transactions.  At  the  time  when  this  man  was
shot  his  wife  was  near  by,  and  reached  him  very  soon  afterwards.  In'  attempt-
ing to  render  what  assistance  was  in  her  power,  her  hands  were  stained  with
blood,  and  she  also  had  her  face  covered  with  blood.  When  I  saw  the  patient
late  that  afternoon,  I  found  her  very  much  agitated,  and  seemingly  as  much
exercised  on  account  of  her  condition  as  she  was  for  her  husband's  safety.  She
then  informed  me  that  she  was  pregnant,  and  felt  certain  that  her  child  would
be  born  with  a  "  bloody  face."  I  asked  her — "  Why  a  bloody  face  ?  "  and  she
said—"  Because  I  put  my  bloody  hands  to  my  face  and  covered  it  with  blood,
and  I  know  my  child  will  be  born  with  a  bloody  face."  She  was  an  ignorant
country  woman,  and  filled  with  superstitious  notions.  I  calmed  her  fears  as
much  as  I  possibly  could,  and  dismissed  the  subject  from  my  mind.  After  a
long  and  tedious  convalescence  her  husband  was  able  to  be  taken  home  in  the
country,  and  I  thought  no  more  of  the  case  beyond  the  remarkable  recovery
from  a  severe  wound.

During  the  succeeding  spring,  1895,  the  man  and  his  wife  came  to  the  city
and  called  at  my  office,  bringing  with  them  a  new-born  infant.  She  said  to  me
— 4*  Doctor,  my  baby  has  not  got  a  bloody  face,  but  it  has  got  the  holes  where
the  ball  went  through  Bill's  breast."  Upon  examination  of  the  child  I  did  not
find  "  the  holes  "  which  she  said  were  there,  but  in  place  of  them  I  discovered
bright  red  marks,  clearly  shown  upon  the  chest  of  the  child ;  they  were  not
simply  discoloured  spots,  but  elevated  naevi,  and  bright  carmine-coloured  spots
easily  to  be  seen  at  a  distance  of  a  hundred  feet.  There  they  were  on  the  left
side  of  the  chest,  and  although  not  in  the  exact  anatomic  location  of  the  wound
on  the  father's  chest,  still  so  near  the  spot  that  they  are  easily  recognised  as
resulting  therefrom.  The  mother  had  seen  the  wounds  in  her  husband's  chest,
and  had  told  me  during  his  illness  that  they  made  her  sick  every  time  she
looked  at  them.

Interested  now  in  the  condition  of  the  case,  I  made  accurate  inquiries  as  to

her  pregnancy  and   the   date   of   her  delivery.     She   informed   me   that  her

.mcy  had  passed  as  usual  in  former  ones,  with  the  exception  that  she  had

been  very  nervous,  and  that  the  motions  of  the  child  had  been  more  violent,

and  were  brought  on  by  any  noise  or  excitement.     Her  labour  took  place  on

loth,  1895;   was  about  as  previous  deliveries.     Assuming  the  term  of

ion  to  be  280  days,  and  this  child  being  born  on  May  loth,  1895,  it  is

fair  to  calculate  that  her  conception  took  place  about  August  3rd,  1894,  and

from  that  date  to  September  24th,  the  date  on  which  the  father  was  shot,  gives

458  APPENDICES  [527  A

us  52  days.  The  question  is,— Was  the  maternal  excitement  at  the  sight  of
the  wound  in  her  husband's  chest  the  cause  of  the  marks  upon  the  child  with
which  she  was  then  pregnant?  I  present  the  facts  and  leave  the  reader  to
answer.

527  A.  According  to  Dr.  Edgar  B£rillon,  who  was  the  first  systema-
tically to  apply  the  hypnotic  method  to  the  education  of  children  (see
his  paper,  "  De  la  Suggestion  envisaged  au  point  de  vue  pedagogique  "  in
the  Revue  de  FHypnotisme,  vol.  i.  1887,  p.  84),  the  percentage  of  those
who  can  be  hypnotised  is  more  than  80,  and  he  asserts  that  suggesti-
bility varies  directly  as  the  intellectual  development  of  the  subject.  He
classes  under  four  heads  the  affections  which  can  be  successfully  treated
by  hypnotic  suggestion.  (See  the  Revue  de  FHypnotisme,  July  1895.)

( i )  Psychical  derangements  caused  by  acute  diseases :  in  particular,
insomnia,  restlessness,  nocturnal  delirium,  incontrollable  vomiting,  in-
continence of  urine  and  of  faeces.

(  2  )  Functional  affections  connected  with  nervous  disease  :  chorea,  tics,
convulsions,  ansesthesiae,  contractures  and  hysterical  paresis,  hysterical
hiccough,  blepharospasm.

(3)  Psychical  derangements,  such  as  habit  of  biting  nails,  precocious
impulsive  tendencies,   nocturnal  terrors,  speaking  in  sleep,  kleptomania,
nervousness,  shyness.

(4)  Chorea,  hysteria,  epilepsy,  or  mental  derangements  considered  as
resulting  from  the  combination  of  several  nervous  diseases.

One  of  Dr.  Be"rillon's  most  characteristic  instances  may  be  described.
(It  is  given  in  full  in  the  Revue  de  FHypnotisme,  July  1893,  p.  n.)

Emile  P.,  eleven  years  old,  had  acquired,  when  he  was  about  one  year
of  age,  the  habit  of  constantly  keeping  in  his  mouth  two  fingers  of  his  left  hand,
the  first  and  second  fingers  up  to  the  middle  of  the  second  phalanx.  Ever
since  then,  at  night,  as  soon  as  he  was  in  bed,  he  began  to  suck  his  fingers,  and
could  not  get  to  sleep  unless  they  were  in  his  mouth.  Very  frequently  he  would
suck  them  in  the  daytime  too.  This  finger-sucking  could  only  be  put  a  stop
to  by  some  occupation  which  kept  both  hands  busy.  All  sorts  of  methods  were
adopted  to  cure  him  of  this  bad  habit,  without  any  sort1  of  result.  A  good  many
gastric  and  digestive  troubles  ensued,  which  the  parents  rightly  attributed  to
this  bad  trick.

In  the  first  hypnotic  stance  Be'rillon  suggested  to  the  boy  to  go  to  sleep
without  putting  his  fingers  in  his  mouth  on  that  and  the  following  nights.
Although  the  hypnosis  had  been  very  light,  the  suggestion  was  carried  out.
Emile  P.  had  felt  inclined  to  suck  his  fingers,  but  had  been  able  to  resist  the
temptation.  On  the  third  day  after  this  first  stance  the  temptation  recurred
with  greater  intensity,  and  the  boy  remarked  to  his  grandmother :  "  It's
peculiar,  but  I  feel  every  now  and  then  like  sucking  my  fingers  ;  but  I  feel  that
I  am  unable  to."

After  three  sittings,  in  the  course  of  which  the  hypnosis  obtained  became
progressively  deeper,  he  was  able  to  go  to  sleep  without  thinking  of  sucking  his
fingers.  Since  then  he  has  never  fallen  into  his  bad  habit  again.  And  yet  the

527  A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  459

patient  was  very  degenerate:  his  father  was  a  drunkard;  also  his  grandfather;
his  mother  suffered  from  hysterical  convulsions.

In  the  case  of  these  automatic  impulses,  the  first  care  of  the  physician
should  be,  as  Berillon  observes,  to  raise  into  the  field  of  consciousness
motor  presentations  which  have  sunk  partially  or  wholly  below  the  threshold.
The  process  of  hypnotic  cure  consists  generally  in  calling  the  attention  of
the  patient  to  movements  which  have  become  automatic  and  unconscious.
In  the  most  severe  cases  it  is  possible  to  counteract  the  automatic  impulse
by  creating  another  impulse  which  is  aroused  by  and  inhibits  the  first.
(Berillon,  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  April  1895,  P-  3°6.)  Thus  Berillon
took  firm  hold  of  the  wrists  of  one  of  his  patients  while  in  the  waking  state
and  told  him  to  try  to  bite  his  nails.  This  was,  of  course,  impossible.
The  suggestion  was  then  made  that  whenever  the  automatic  movement
was  about  to  be  carried  out,  the  patient  would  feel  a  heaviness  in  his  arms,
which  could  not  be  lifted  without  considerable  effort.  He  would  then
become  intensely  conscious  of  the  incipient  movement,  and  would  be
able  to  reinforce  the  automatic  inhibition  of  it  by  an  effort  of  conscious
will.

For  reports  of  hypnotic  cure  of  onychophagy,  see  Berillon,  the  articles
already  quoted ;  Bourdon,  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  November  1 895,  p.  1 34  ;
Bouffe,  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  September  1898,  p.  76.

For  reports  of  hypnotic  cure  of  even  graver  habits,  see  Van  Renterghem
and  Van  Eeden,  Psycho-Therapie,  p.  250  ;  Bernheim,  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,
December  1891,  a  case  in  which  the  habit  had  become  quite  automatic
and  irresistible,  and  where  every  other  method  of  treatment  had  failed ;
also  De  la  Suggestion;  Schrenck-Notzing,  Die  Suggestions- Therapie  bei
krankhaften  Erscheinungen  des  Geschlechtssinnes ;  Berillon,  Revue  de
rHypnotisme,  July  1893,  pp.  12,  14,  15  ;  Bourdon,  Revue  de  rHypno-
tisme, November  1895,  pp.  136,  139,  140;  Auguste  Voisin,  Revue  de
I' llypnotisme,  November  1887,  p.  151.

For  cures  of  enuresis  nocturna,  see  Li^beault,  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,
September  1886,  p.  71  ;  Berillon,  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  June  1894,
P*  35 9  >  Van  Renterghem  and  Van  Eeden,  Psycho-Therapie;  Paul
Farez,  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  August  1899,  P«  53-  This  author  recom-
mends the  method  of  suggestion  in  normal  sleep.

Lie'beault,  in  the  Revue  de  rHypnotisme  for  January  1889,  gives
twenty- two  cases  in  which  hypnotic  suggestion  was  used  in  the  moral
ition  of  children  from  the  age  of  fourteen  months  upwards,  with  the
aim  of  curing  the  habit  of  lying,  excessive  developments  of  emotions,  such
as  fear  and  anger,  and  precocious  or  depraved  appetites,  etc. ;  and  of
improving  the  normal  faculties  of  attention  and  memory.  He  repoi
cures,  eight  improvements,  and  four  failures.

For  other  cases  of  moral  education,  see   Berillon,  De  la  susgfstion

et  de  ses  applications  a  la  ptdagogie  (1887)  ;  L1 Hypnotisme  et  T  Orthopedie

>  ( 1 898)  ;  Revue  de  /'//»/ notisme,  December  1887,  pp.  169-180,  and

460  APPENDICES  [527  B

December  1897,  p.  162  ;  Bernheim,  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  November
1886,  p.  129 ;  Ladame,  the  same,  June  and  July  1887  ;  Voisin,  the  same,
November  1888;  De  Jong,  the  same,  September  1891;  Bourdon,  the
same,  August  1896;  Van  Renterghem  and  Van  Eeden,  Psycho-Therapie,
p.  215.

527  B.     Nervous  troubles  in  adults  have   often  been  cured  by  the
same  means.     Thus,  in  the  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  September  1899,  p.  73,
Dr.  Vlavianos  records  a  case  of  tic  convulsif  cured  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

Jeanne  A.,  twenty-five  years  old,  strong — nothing  special  to  note  in  her
parents'  or  in  her  own  personal  antecedents.  Her  tic  is  the  first  disease  which
she  has  had.  It  began  three  and  a  half  years  before  Dr.  V.  saw  the  patient.
Her  parents  noticed  that  she  often  shook  her  head  as  if  in  the  usual  gesture  of
denial.  She  was  quite  unconscious  of  it.  Her  attention  having  been  drawn  to
this  movement,  it  became  conscious,  but  involuntary.  She  endeavoured  without
success  to  inhibit  it.  If  for  a  time  she  succeeded,  the  tic  would  reappear  in
quick  succession  as  if  to  make  up  for  loss  of  time.  Under  the  influence  of
emotion  the  tic  was  twice  suspended  for  some  months.  On  the  first  occasion
this  occurred  apparently  as  a  result  of  the  joy  and  excitement  of  attending  her
first  ball.  On  the  second,  after  a  great  fright  produced  by  a  severe  scalding.
No  hysteria,  no  sign  of  degeneration,  physical  or  psychical.  Hypnotic  sugges-
tion and  appropriate  gymnastic  exercises  removed  the  tic  at  the  end  of  three
sittings.

Wetterstrand  has  used  the  same  method  with  success  (loc.  cit.,  p.  76).
See  also  Janet,  Nevroses  et  Idees  Fixes,  vol.  ii.  part  ii.  ch.  iii.,  "  Les
Tics."

528  A.     The  impulse  to  steal  admits  of  many  degrees  which  lead  on
one  to  another.     The  removal  of  the  impulse  by  hypnotic  suggestion  can-
not therefore  be  fully  illustrated  by  quoting  one  case  only.     In  degenerate
children  the  impulse  may  result  in  action  with  all  the  automatism  of  an
unconscious  mechanism.     When  such  children  are  questioned  as  to  the
motives  which  led  them  to  commit  the   theft,  they  answer :   "  I   don't
know;  I  couldn't  help  it."     Hypnotic  suggestion,  by  strengthening  the
power  of  inhibition,  and  by  bringing  into  full  consciousness  the  impulse  and
the  movements  which  have  partially  sunk  below  the  threshold,  may  eradi-
cate the  bad  habit.     For  illustrations  see  Be'rillon,  Revue  de  I*  Hypnotisme,
September  1890,  p.   75,  and  February  1896,  p.  237;  Re'gis,  the  same,
May  1896;  also  the  case  of  Krafft-Ebing's  patient,  lima  S.,  described  in
his  Experimental  Study  in  Hypnotism,  translated  by  Dr.  C.  G.  Chattock
(New  York),  1889.

Cognate  with  the  kleptomaniacal  impulse  of  the  degenerate,  but  widely
different  from  each  other,  are  two  further  forms  of  the  impulse  to  steal
which  have  been  successfully  combated  by  hypnotic  suggestion.  The  one
is  the  impulse  to  steal  which  is  found  in  "  moral  idiots.7'  (See  cases  re-
ported by  De  Jong,  Revue  de  r Hypnotisme,  September  1891,  p.  82,  and
Auguste  Voisin,  Revue  de  I* Hypnotisme,  November  1888,  p.  130.)  The

528B]  TO     CHAPTER    V  461

disturbance  of  character  is  even  more  profound  than  in  the  cases  first
mentioned,  for  the  automatic  nature  of  the  impulse  has  become  so  far
exaggerated  that  round  it  crystallises  a  partially  or  wholly  independent
chain  of  memory.  The  development  of  the  disease  is  complete  when  the
patient's  original  personality  has  become  split  up  into  two,  which  alternate  ;
the  one  which  steals,  the  other  which  knows  nothing  of  the  thefts.  To
this  type  belongs  a  case  observed  by  Pierre  Janet,  and  described  in
Nevroses  et  Ide'es  Fixes,  vol.  ii.  p.  197  foil. : — "  Le  vol  a  lieu  dans  une
espece  d'e'tat  second  avec  amne'sie.  II  semble  que  I'ide'e  du  vol,  e>eille"e
par  la  vue  d'un  objet  quelconque,  produise  une  Emotion,  un  choc  qui
annihile  le  reste  de  la  conscience,  et  que  cette  ide"e  se  deVeloppe  seule  dans
une  conscience  re'tre'cie."

528  B.  Another  distressing  but  somewhat  grotesque  case  in  Professor
Janet's  Nevroses  et  Idees  Fixes  was  that  of  a  kleptomaniac  who  stole  from
everybody,  but  especially  from  himself.  Worse  than  the  somnambulic
hero  of  an  old  Ingoldsby  Legend,  who  buried  a  fresh  pair  of  his  own
trousers  every  night  in  the  garden,  this  boy  could  keep  nothing  by  night  or
day  from  his  own  marauding  hands.  He  stole  from  himself  when  he  was
asleep,  but  he  stole  from  other  people  when  they,  at  any  rate,  were  wide
awake,  and  saw  perfectly  what  he  was  doing.  In  fact,  the  psychological
interest  of  this  case  lies  in  the  poor  fellow's  own  condition  at  the  moment
of  his  thefts, — which  was  a  kind  of  semi-hypnotisation  by  involuntary  self-
suggestion,  closely  resembling  the  half- hypnotised  state  into  which  an
awakened  subject  falls  when  the  time  comes  for  him  to  execute  some
post-hypnotic  suggestion.  This  unwilling  kleptomaniac  seemed  to  be
subject  to  a  permanent  self-suggestion  to  carry  off  any  object  which  he
particularly  noticed ;  and  his  own  gaze  at  a  silver  spoon  would  throw  him
into  a  dreamy  condition  in  which  he  inevitably  put  that  spoon  in  his
pocket.

Another  melancholy  aberration,  which  is  not  without  its  comic  element,
is  described  by  Janet  under  the  heading  of  "  Dipsomania  of  cafe*  au  lait,
complicated  with  kleptomania  vi petits  pains.''

Mroe  Pt.,  a  nervous  personage,  suffered  from  a  dyspepsia  which  her
doctor  mistakenly  attributed  to  dilatation  of  the  stomach.  He  limited  her
to  a  wineglass  of  liquid  at  each  meal,  and  made  her  live  mainly  on  dry
toast.  Her  husband  supported  the  doctor,  but  meantime  she  saw  him
drinking  c  aft  au  lait  and  eating  rolls  with  gusto  and  freedom; — "c'ctait
pour  elie  le  supplice  de  Tantale"  One  day  her  patience  gave  way.  When
her  husband's  back  was  turned,  she  threw  herself  upon  a  roll  which  he  had
left  on  his  plate,  then  rushed  to  the  cremerie,  and  made  herself  an  ex-
cellent cafe  au  lait.  She  was  none  the  worse  for  it ;  her  husband  it  was
who  died.  After  his  death  the  passion  for  cafe  au  lait  grew  on  her,  so
that  when  her  stock  of  milk  was  exhausted  at  night  she  would  tread  her
room  in  anguished  longing  till  the  crlmeries  opened  in  the  morning.  Not
venturing  to  drink  more  than  two  cups  at  the  same  cremerie,  she  would

462  APPENDICES  [529  A

wander  about  Paris  and  drink  at  various  shops  twenty  or  thirty  cups  per
day.

All  these  cups  she  duly  and  promptly  paid  for.  But  a  morbid  aggra-
vation came.  She  wanted  rolls  with  her  coffee ;  but  now  that  there  was
no  one  to  forbid  her  the  rolls,  they  lost  their  savour, — the  savour  of  petit
pain  defendu.  A  -way  of  supplying  this  savour  occurred  to  her ; — she  stole
the  rolls.  She  would  go  to  a  shop  and  pay  for  one  roll, — and  adroitly
make  several  others  fall  into  a  Gampish  umbrella.  Having  collected  a
dozen  or  so,  she  would  go  home  to  eat  them,  and  start  again.

Now,  this  poor  woman — this  coffee -megalomaniac,  as  an  erudite  friend
of  Professor  Janet's  has  termed  her — becomes  not  infrequently  very  un-
comfortable inside.  She  detests  her  own  obsession,  her  ide'e  fixe,  but
she  cannot  cure  herself ;  nor  had  Professor  Janet,  at  the  time  of  writing,
succeeded  in  curing  her.

529  A.  Alcoholism,  as  the  vice  which  least  easily  escapes  notice,  is
that  which  medical  practitioners  have  most  frequently  endeavoured  to
combat.  The  list  of  specifics  alleged  to  cure  drunkenness  is  inexhaustible.
It  is  probable  that  the  temporary  success  of  those  which  have  met  with  any
success  at  all  is  due  to  the  suggestive  action  of  a  convinced  physician  upon
a  patient  anxious  to  be  rid  of  his  curse.  At  any  rate,  it  is  the  vice  which
suggestion,  intentionally  and  consciously  used  as  a  therapeutic  method,  has
been  (with  varying  success)  most  universally  employed  to  eradicate.  Lists
of  cures  of  alcoholism  by  suggestion  have  been  published  by  practitioners
in  every  country  ever  since  the  first  impulse  given  to  psycho- therapeutics
by  the  Nancy  School.

See  Otto  Wetterstrand,  Der  Hypnotismus  und  seine  Anwendung  in  der
praktischen  Medicin  ;  Georg  Ringier,  Erfolge  des  therapeutischen  Hypno-
tismus in  der  Landpraxis ;  Van  Renterghem  and  Van  Eeden,  Psycho-
Therapie  ,-  Auguste  Forel,  Einige  therapeutische  Versuche  mit  dem  Hypno-
tismus bei  Geisteskranken  ;  Lloyd  Tuckey,  Revue  de  ^Hypnotisme,  January
1897,  p.  207  ;  Ladame,  Revue  de  ^Hypnotisme,  November  1887,  p.  131,
and  December  1887,  p.  165;  A.  Voisin,  Revue  de  I'Hypnotisme,  vol.  ii.
(1888),  p.  69,  and  vol.  iii.(i889),  p.  353  ;  Vlavianos,  Revue  deT "Hypnotism cy
June  1899,  p.  361  ;  Neilson,  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  vol.  vi.  (1892),  p.  17.
See  also  the  works  of  Li6beault,  Bernheim,  and  Milne  Bramwell.

The  impulse  to  drink,  like  the  impulse  to  steal,  can  be  traced  through
a  variety  of  stages  ;  from  the  most  elementary,  when  the  impulse  is  allowed
to  follow  its  course  because  the  satisfaction  of  it  is  pleasurable,  through
the  diminishing  degrees  of  the  power  of  inhibition,  and  the  progressive
mechanisation  of  the  process,  until  the  impulse  becomes  irresistible,  and
is  felt  as  a  curse,  which  the  will  is  powerless  to  oppose.  The  complete
evolution  of  the  process  is  to  be  found  in  those  cases  where  the  impulse
and  its  associated  states  of  consciousness  have  become  entirely  separated
from  the  normal  stream  of  thought,  and  the  dipsomaniac  presents  alter-
nating personalities.

529  C]  TO     CHAPTER    V  463

The  case  of  one  of  Pierre  Janet's  patients,  Maria  (see  Neuroses  et
Idtes  Fixes,  vol.  i.  p.  222),  illustrates  the  final  stage.  She  had  a  hysterical
brother  and  an  insane  sister.  Her  father  and  grandfather  were  drunkards.
She,  however,  abhorred  this  vice  so  thoroughly  that  she  always  drank  water
in  her  normal  state.  Moreover,  she  had  no  taste  for  alcohol  nor  desire
to  drink  it.  From  time  to  time,  however,  she  had  a  feeling  of  distress
which  drove  her  out  of  the  house  into  the  streets.  This  was  the  be-
ginning of  a  dipsomaniacal  attack.  She  drank  ether,  alcohol,  anything
she  could  get.  After  a  few  days  of  such  conduct  she  used  to  be  found
by  the  police  lying  intoxicated  in  the  street,  and  would  after  some  time
awaken  to  find  herself  in  a  police  station  or  hospital.  In  her  then  normal
condition  she  could  remember  nothing  of  the  attack  after  the  initial  feel-
ing of  distress  that  had  led  to  it.

529  B.  A  case  recorded  by  Dr.  Milne  Bramwell  in  a  paper  entitled
"  Dipsomania  and  its  Treatment  by  Suggestion  "  in  the  Proceedings  of  the
Society  for  the  Study  of  Inebriety,  June  1900.

Mrs.  C.,  aged  forty-four,  November  2$rd,  1894.  Family  history  of  alco-
holism. At  the  age  of  twenty  the  patient  began  to  have  frequent  hysterical
attacks,  and  for  these  stimulants  were  prescribed  in  rather  large  quantities.
Two  years  later  she  began  to  take  stimulants  in  excess,  but  did  not  do  so  fre-
quently, and  rarely  became  intoxicated.  From  thirty-two  to  thirty-six  she  was
an  abstainer;  then  commenced  taking  stimulants  again,  and  attacks  of  genuine
dipsomania  soon  appeared.  The  patient  suffered  from  an  almost  constant
craving  for  alcohol.  She  was,  however,  a  woman  of  culture,  refinement,  and
high  principle,  devoted  to  her  husband  and  children,  and  the  idea  of  giving
way  to  drink  was  in  every  way  abhorrent  to  her.  She  therefore  struggled  with
all  her  might  against  the  temptation ;  resisted  it  successfully  for  a  week  or  two,
then  the  craving  became  irresistible,  and  a  drinking  bout  followed.  I  hypno-
tised Mrs.  C.  thirty  times,  from  November  23rd,  1894,  to  February  I4th,  1895.
From  the  very  beginning  of  the  treatment  she  abstained  from  stimulants,  but
the  craving,  although  much  diminished,  did  not  entirely  disappear  for  some
months.  Up  to  the  present  date  there  has  been  absolutely  no  relapse.

Other  successful  cases,  and  a  general  discussion  of  dipsomania  and  the
conditions  favourable  to  its  successful  treatment,  are  given  in  this  paper.

529  C.  Nicotinism  has  also  been  successfully  treated  by  suggestion.
The  following  is  a  typical  instance,  recorded  by  Auguste  Voisin,  Revue
de  rfiypnotisme,  vol.  ix.  (1895),  p.  245.

Mr.  X.,  forty-five  years  old,  hypochondriacal,  memory  and  moral  power
considerably  diminished.  For  the  last  fifteen  years  has  smoked  between  forty
and  sixty  cigarettes  a  day.  Pains  at  the  level  of  the  first  dorsal  vertebra;  con-
stant sensation  of  fatigue  ;  emaciated.  Heart-beats  very  feeble  ;  patient  coughs
frequently.  Nothing  abnormal  in  the  senses  of  sight,  hearing,  and  smell.
Taste  alone  somewhat  impaired.  Speech  clear.  Hardly  any  appetite.  Hyp-
was  only  attained  after  two  attempts  by  the  method  of  fixation  of  the  eyes
or  of  the  fingers.  The  degree  obtained  was  one  of  semi-lethargy.  Patient
cannot  open  his  eyes ;  although  he  asserts  afterwards  that  he  was  not  entirely

464  APPENDICES  [530  A

asleep.  The  suggestion  given  was,  first,  that  he  should  dislike  tobacco,  and
not  smoke  more  than  three  cigarettes  a  day  ;  later,  that  he  should  detest  tobacco.
Suggestions  perfectly  carried  out.  Cure  complete  and  final.

See  also  Dr.  Hugenschmidt,  Revue  de  r Hypnotisms,  vol.  ix.  (1895),  p.
217;  and  Wetterstrand,  Ringier,  Van  Renterghem  and  Van  Eeden,  loc.  cit.

530  A.  There  are  many  instances  of  the  cure  of  morphinomania.  I
select  the  following  (recorded  by  Dr.  Marot  in  the  Revue  de  r Hypnotisms,
February  1893)  on  account  of  the  psychological  interest  of  the  patient's  own
remarks.

The  patient  was  a  woman  of  thirty-seven,  mother  of  five  children,  and
subject  to  morphinomania  since  the  age  of  thirty-one.

Always  of  somewhat  hysterical  temperament,  she  had  been  since  the  age  of
twenty-six  a  hysteric  of  the  most  advanced  type ; — violent  attacks,  anaesthesia
of  left  side  and  of  pharynx,  diminution  of  visual  field,  etc. ;  then  insistence  on
keeping  her  bed,  and  constant  druggings  with  ether,  chloroform,  chloral,  finally
with  injections  of  morphia  every  few  hours.  Exhaustion ;  lividity  ;  cold  sweat
and  hallucinations  if  the  injection  was  deferred.

In  1889  Dr.  Marot  was  asked  by  the  patient  to  hypnotise  her  for  sleepless-
ness. He  succeeded;  and  next  day  it  occurred  to  him  to  suggest  to  her  in  the
trance  to  abstain  altogether  from  morphia.  The  suggestion  at  once  succeeded,
and  she  refused  an  injection  on  the  following  day.  There  was  great  discomfort,
as  is  usually  the  case,  from  the  sudden  cessation ;  but  the  patient,  to  her  own
extreme  surprise,  resisted  all  renewal  of  the  practice.

Extracts  from  her  private  correspondence  give  an  insight  into  her  state  of
mind.

"September  2istt  1889.

"One  idea  dominates  all  others  in  my  mind:  the  desire  to  know  why  I
have  no  desire  for  morphia.  I  should  be  obliged  indeed  to  any  one  who  would
tell  me  why  !  I  have  always  liked  to  understand  things,  and  it  is  a  real  source
of  suffering  to  me  not  to  be  able  to  get  at  this.  It  is  a  fixed  idea,  a  real  mono-
mania. If  any  one  speaks  to  me  of  morphia,  I  answer  as  if  it  were  a  thing
which  does  not  attract  me  ;  if  I  suffer  from  the  want  of  it,  I  never  say  to  my-
self, '  If  only  I  had  some  ! '  No ;  the  idea  never  comes  to  me  that  I  could  easily
get  some.  Why  is  this  ?  I  believe  that  if  any  one  wished  to  give  me  any  I
should  resist.  One  night  I  dreamt  that  some  one  had  made  an  injection,  and
the  sensation  was  so  strong  that  I  woke  up  with  a  jump  and  sprang  out  of  bed,
feeling  my  arms  and  legs  to  see  if  there  was  a  mark ;  I  thought  that  possibly  I
had  had  a  fit  of  hysterics,  and  that  a  doctor  had  been  called  in  and  had  injected
me.  You  can't  imagine  how  this  fear  distressed  me  till  day  came,  when  I  could
reassure  myself.  And  all  day  I  have  been  troubled  and  restless ;  the  very
notion  that  such  a  thing  could  happen  makes  me  tremble."

Now  it  is  to  be  remarked  here  that  there  is  practically  no  moral  effort  called
for.  The  suggestion,  whose  efficacy  puzzled  the  patient  herself,  operated,  as
she  naively  said,  like  an  idtefixe.  It  was,  in  fact,  an  idtefixe;  but  one  implanted
in  her  for  a  good  purpose,  not  spontaneous  and  hurtful.

Wetterstrand,  out  of  fourteen  cases,  records  eleven  cures  of  morphino-
mania. In  a  paper  in  the  Revue  de  /  'Hypnotisms ,  November  1890,  he
discusses  the  benefit  of  prolonged  hypnosis — causing  the  patient  to  sleep

532  A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  465

for  a  week  or  more  at  a  time — which  he  tried  in  one  case.  See  also
Voisin,  Revue  de  r  Hypnotisme,  December  1886,  p.  163.

532  A.  Phobies  are  complex  emotional  states  in  which  a  feeling  of
abject,  torturing,  unreflective  fear  predominates.  The  object  of  this
unconquerable  fear  is  some  particular  action,  or  some  particular  event ;
thus,  an  officer  will  be  able  to  cross  the  barrack-yard  on  horseback  without
discomfort,  but  not  to  cross  it  on  foot  without  horrid  pangs  and  reeling
gait ;  a  medical  man,  every  time  he  sends  away  a  patient  with  a  prescrip-
tion, will  fall  into  an  intense  fright  lest  he  should  by  mistake  have  pre-
scribed poison.1  Each  profession,  every  walk  of  life,  has  its  special
phobies;  and  although  several  have  received  special  names,  as  agora-
phobia, claustrophobia,  &c.,  there  is  an  indefinitely  large  variety  of  them.
Phobies  sometimes  appear  in  people  who  are  afflicted  with  no  other  morbid
symptoms.  They  constitute  then  a  special  disease  in  themselves.  On  the
other  hand,  they  constitute  frequently  but  one  out  of  many  symptoms  of  a
deeper  nervous  derangement, — neurasthenia.  The  latter  class  are  called
phobies  neurastheniques  by  the  French  authors.  The  former  have  been
called  by  Ge'lineau  2  phobies  essentielles  ;  and  Freud  has  given  to  the  state
which  is  specially  favourable  to  their  evolution, — a  state  entirely  distinct,
according  to  him,  from  neurasthenia, — the  name  of  Angstneurose.  Accord-
ing to  Hartenberg  8  these  phobies  cannot  be  cured  by  suggestion,  as  their
origin  is  to  be  found  in  organic  derangements.  However  this  may  be,  it
is  at  least  certain  that  the  great  majority  of  the  phobies  which  have
been  cured  by  hypnotic  suggestion  are  clearly  phobies  neurastheniques,
and  it  is  most  probable  that  the  removal  of  the  phobia  will  arrest  the
development  of  the  neurasthenia,  and  contribute  largely  to  the  restoration
of  neural  stability.

For  the  use  of  the  psycho- therapeutic  method  in  the  treatment  of
neurasthenia  see  Bernheim,  Hypnotisme ;  Suggestion  ;  Psycho-therapie  (he
expresses  the  opinion  that  inherited  neurasthenia  is  very  difficult  to  cure
by  suggestion,  if  not  incurable)  ;  Bernheim,  Revue  de  r Hypnotisme,  1892,
pp.  23,  225  ;  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  Die psychische  Behandlung  der  Neuras-
theme ;  Van  Renterghem  and  Van  Eeden,  Psycho- thtrapie,  p.  162  et  seq.
(according  to  these  authors  even  inherited  neurasthenia  can  be  cured  with
time,  tact,  and  patience)  ;  Wetterstrand,  Der  Hypnotismus  und  seine
Anwfndung  in  der  praktischen  Medicin ;  Ringier,  Erfolge  des  therapeu-
tischcn  Hypnotismus  in  der  Landpraxis.

In  all  the  cases  just  referred  to,  the  removal  of  phobies  was  incidental

1  Cf.   Bcrillon,  "  Les  Phobies  Professionnelles,"  Revue  de  rHypnotitme,  August
p.    }3 ;  "  I'hobies  et  Service  Militaire,"  Revue  de  CHypnotisme,  February  1894,

*  See  observations  on"  Phobies  Essentielles,"  in  Gclineau's  "  Peurs  Maladives  ou
Phobies;"  also  Revue  de  r Hypnotisme,  August  1896,  p.  51,  and  September  1898,

>mmunications  on  "  Ne'vroses  d'Angoisse  "  to  the  International  Congresses
Of  Psychology  and  Neurology  at  Paris,  1900.

vo  a  c

466  APPENDICES  [532  B

to  the  cure  of  the  neurasthenia.     In  the  following  Appendices  I  quote
some  cases  of  the  direct  removal  of  phobies  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

532  B.  In  the  Revue  dc  r Hypnotisms ,  July  1899,  p.  n,  Dr.  Vlavianos
reports  a  case  of  agoraphobia  cured  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

Victor  L.,  fifty-two  years  old.  Bad  hereditary  conditions.  His  father  was
very  irritable ;  his  mother  also ;  she  besides  had  a  tic  and  frequent  headaches.
Grandfather  died  at  Bicetre  asylum.  L.  is  one  of  nine  children,  seven  of  whom
died  of  convulsions.  He  has  had  two  children,  one  of  whom  died  of  con-
vulsions ;  the  other  has  kleptomania.  From  the  age  of  twenty-one  L.  drank
immoderately;  after  various  accidents,  paraplegia  set  in;  this  passed  off  at  the
end  of  six  months.  The  first  time  he  attempted  to  go  out  after  his  recovery
he  found  he  could  not  remain  on  his  terrace  nor  look  at  the  horizon  without
giddiness  and  terror.  He  could  not  cross  an  open  space  or  a  bridge.  He  was
equally  afraid  of  going  in  a  tramcar  or  a  carriage.  His  terror  was  much  more
intense  in  lonely  than  in  busy  streets.  He  was  also  afraid  of  remaining
alone.  At  church  the  sound  of  the  organ  terrified  him.  In  this  case  we
see  agoraphobia,  musicophobia,  &c.  Strange  to  say,  he  had  no  fear  of
empty  space  in  the  country,  but  only  in  the  town.  Besides  this,  there  were
delusions  of  persecution  and  all  sorts  of  eccentricities.  Six  seances  of  hyp-
notic suggestion  removed  the  agoraphobia,  so  that  the  patient  could  walk  about
the  boulevards  in  comfort,  even  unaccompanied.  The  other  phobies  were
successively  removed.  The  cure  was  complete.

See  also  Vlavianos,  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  April  1899,  p.  299 ;
Godorichze,  Revue  de  THypnotisme,  1893,  p.  53  ;  Gelineau,  "  De  l'He"mato-
phobie,"  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  1893,  p.  39.

532  C.  In  the  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  June  1893,  Dr.  Mavroukakis
reports  a  case  of  agoraphobia  cured  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

Jules  J.,  sixty-four  years  old.  No  hereditary  antecedents.  Venereal  excesses
from  the  age  of  fourteen.  Has  always  smoked  immoderately.  Contracted
yellow  fever  in  Brazil.  No  physical  stigmata  of  degeneration ;  fairly  good  intellect
and  memory  ;  frequent  giddiness,  probably  due  to  the  use  of  tobacco.  At  the
age  of  ten  he  had  morbid  aversions  for  knives,  scissors,  &c.  Later  these  fears
waxed  more  intense  ;  he  could  not  venture  into  the  street  unaccompanied.  At
the  same  time  appeared  impulsive  obsessions.  Thus,  while  on  a  steamer,  he
suddenly  felt  an  impulse  to  jump  overboard  and  drown  himself,  which  he  was
only  just  able  to  inhibit.  In  his  own  words  :  "he  is  afraid  of  extended  space."
He  cannot  cross  a  square,  nor  walk  alone  in  the  streets;  he  is  afraid  of  fear,
even  in  his  dreams.  He  does  not  dare  to  go  out  alone,  lest  some  accident
should  happen.  He  fears  the  unknown.  And  yet  he  is  in  other  ways  a  very
courageous  man.  He  will  rush  through  flames  to  save  people  from  burning
alive.  He  has  in  Brazil  nursed  many  cases  of  yellow  fever  without  giving  a
thought  to  his  own  danger.  He  is  of  an  inquiring  turn  of  mind,  tries  to  dis-
cover reasons  for  everything,  but  cannot  find  any  for  his  morbid  fears.

Suggestion  in  the  waking  and  the  hypnotic  state  brought  about  a  marked
improvement,  which  gave  hopes  of  a  complete  cure.  After  thirteen  hypnotic
seances  he  was  able  to  go  out  alone,  cross  the  streets  and  the  squares,  travel
on  the  top  of  an  omnibus  without  any  impulse  to  throw  himself  over  the  side.

532  D]  TO    CHAPTER    V  467

532  D.  In  a  paper  "  On  Imperative  Ideas,"  published  in  Brain
(Summer  and  Autumn,  1895),  Dr.  Bramwell  gives  a  brief  historical  account
and  discussion  of  different  varieties  of  phobies,  &c.,  and  a  list  of  refer-
ences to  the  most  important  papers  on  the  subject.  He  describes  the
effect  of  hypnotic  suggestion  on  many  cases,  including  ten  treated  by  him-
self. In  one  of  these  the  patient,  an  athletic  and  strong  man,  whose
mother  had  died  from  cancer  of  the  breast,  contracted  a  dread  of  this
disease  which  developed  into  a  firm  conviction  that  his  left  breast  was
infected  by  it.  He  spent  his  days  confined  almost  continually  in  one
room,  and  would  not  pass  into  another  without  mufHing  himself  up  and
putting  on  an  overcoat.  His  health  naturally  suffered  ;  his  muscles  were
gradually  wasting  from  disuse.  All  his  morbid  ideas  were  removed  by
hypnotic  suggestion.  He  was  entirely  cured  in  a  month,  and  suffered  no
relapse.

Another  man  suffered  acutely  from  the  fixed  idea  that  every  one
noticed  and  criticised  him,  and  he  would  blush  whenever  looked  at.  This
morbid  self-consciousness,  which  tortured  him,  and  made  him  cherish
ideas  of  suicide,  was  finally  removed  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

One  lady,  who  had  been  a  sleep-walker  in  girlhood,  had  so  persistent
a  dread  of  having  attacks  of  somnambulism,  that  she  could  not  go  to
sleep  unless  she  were  securely  tied  to  the  bedposts.  No  argument,  how-
ever much  she  might  recognise  its  logical  cogency,  could  avail  to  remove
her  baseless  fears.  She  was  first  hypnotised  for  insomnia,  and  two  months
later  a  single  suggestive  treatment  completely  cured  her  morbid  fears  of
sleep-walking.

The  most  remarkable  case  in  this  group,  both  from  its  clinical  interest
and  its  therapeutic  importance,  is  undoubtedly  that  of  Mr.  G.,  aged
:y -eight.

His  father  was  very  nervous  and  passionate,  and  had  suffered  from  "  brain
fever "  and  chorea.  The  patient  is  slight  and  undersized,  and  suffers  from

is  neurasthenic  symptoms.  At  the  age  of  fourteen  he  had  many  religious
doubts  and  fears,  and  believed  he  had  committed  the  unpardonable  sin.  At
the  age  of  sixteen,  while  working  in  a  cocoa  manufactory,  he  began  to  fear  that
the  red  lead  which  was  used  in  fastening  certain  hot  pipes  might  get  into  the
tins  containing  cocoa,  and  so  poison  people.  This  was  the  commencement

folie  du  doute  and  tUlire  du  toucher  which  have  never  since  left  him.

al  of  going  on  with  his  work,  he  was  irresistibly  impelled  to  clean  and  re-

the  tins.  The  following  is  taken  from  the  letter  of  a  friend  to  whom  he
confided  his  troubles :  "  On  October  ist,  1891,  he  told  me  that  he  had  attempted
to  commit  suicide,  as  his  life  was  so  miserable  [he  had  taken  poison].  He  had

of  a  case  of  poisoning  through  eating  chocolate,  and  connected  himself
with  it,  though  it  was  five  years  since  he  had  helped  to  manufacture  any.  He
now  believed  he  might  have  been  careless  with  the  moulds,  and  thus  have  pro-
duced a  poisoned  chocolate,  which  years  afterwards  had  caused  the  child's
death  !  The  grotesque  absurdity  of  the  story,  as  he  related  it  to  me,  would
have  made  me  laugh,  had  I  not  felt  how  terribly  real  it  was  to  him.  His  vivid

468  APPENDICES  [533  A

imagination  had  pictured  every  incident  of  the  tragedy  ;  the  child  buying  the
chocolate,  running  home  full  of  happiness,  then  becoming  ill,  and  gradually
sickening  in  awful  agony  till  released  by  death.  The  keenness  of  mind  with
which  he  sought  to  prove  the  reasonableness  of  his  belief  that  he  had  poisoned
the  child  was  extraordinary.  He  wrote  :  '  Yesterday  I  was  unscrewing  some  gas
burners  in  a  provision  shop  and  got  some  white  lead  on  my  hands,  and  I  have
been  thinking  that  it  may  have  got  amongst  the  food.'  I  found  that  brooding
over  this  fancy  had  brought  him  to  the  verge  of  despair,  and  for  weeks  his  life
was  a  perpetual  agony.  He  worried  himself  about  his  work  of  fixing  advertise-
ment plates  to  walls,  and  can  never  persuade  himself  that  they  are  securely
fastened.  He  fancies  the  nails  are  bad,  or  the  mortar  loose,  and  makes  himself
ill  over  it.  I  have  pointed  out  to  him  that  if  a  plate  fell,  it  would  almost  inevit-
ably slide  down  the  wall.  This  has  not  prevented  him  from  painting  a  most
elaborate  mental  picture  of  the  decapitation  of  an  unfortunate  youngster  who
happened  to  be  playing  marbles  with  his  head  against  the  wall.  To  enumerate
all  his  troubles  would  take  a  small  volume.  I  have  a  great  pile  of  his  letters
before  me  now,  and  I  suppose  they  constitute  one  of  the  most  extraordinary
analytical  autobiographies  it  would  be  possible  to  find.  In  reading  them  I
cannot  help  marvelling  at  the  strange  unshapely  wonder  of  such  an  imagination.
He  makes  every  incident  in  his  life  the  foundation  stone  of  a  castle  of  fancies,
and  of  late  years  each  castle  has  become  a  prison — a  torture-chamber  in  which
he  has  dissected  his  motives  and  his  actions  until  he  has  ceased  to  believe  in
himself  at  all."

When  I  first  saw  this  patient  the  folie  du  doute  and  dtlire  du  toucher
were  constant  and  most  varied  in  their  manifestations.  If  he  accidentally
touched  persons  in  the  street,  he  began  to  fear  that  he  might  have  in-
jured them,  and  exaggerated  the  touch  into  a  more  or  less  violent  push.  If  the
person  touched  were  a  woman,  he  feared  that  she  might  have  been  pregnant,
and  that  he  might  have  injured  the  child.  If  he  saw  a  piece  of  orange  peel  on
the  pavement,  he  kicked  it  into  the  road,  but  soon  afterwards  began  to  think  this
was  a  more  dangerous  place,  as  any  one  slipping  on  it  might  strike  his  head
against  the  curb-stone,  and  so  he  was  irresistibly  impelled  to  return  and  put  it
in  its  former  position.  At  one  time  he  used  to  bind  himself  to  perform  certain
acts,  by  vowing  he  would  give  God  his  money  if  he  did  not  do  them.  Then
sometimes  he  was  uncertain  if  he  had  vowed  or  not.  Owing  to  this  he  gave
sums  to  religious  objects  which  were  quite  disproportionate  to  his  income.
Apart  from  his  peculiar  fancies  I  found  the  patient  perfectly  rational  and  intelli-
gent, and  though  his  dtlire  du  toucher  hindered  him  greatly  in  his  work,  he
generally  managed  to  execute  it,  though  on  some  occasions  he  was  compelled
to  abandon  the  attempt.  At  this  time  I  tried  to  hypnotise  him  on  twenty -four
occasions,  but  apparently  without  success,  and  he  was  then  compelled  to  leave
town.  He  returned  on  April  2nd,  1895,  for  a  week's  further  treatment,  and  told
me  that  since  his  former  visit  his  morbid  ideas  had  not  been  so  frequent  and
marked,  and  were  accompanied  with  less  mental  agony.  His  condition,  how-
ever, leaves  much  to  be  desired.

Dr.  Bramwell  informs  me  that  this  patient  has  since  recovered.
533  A.     From  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell's  "  What,  is  Hypnotism?"  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  p.  241.

Although  Braid  and  Bernheim  differ  on  many  points  [with  regard  to  the
theory  of  hypnotism],  they  are  in  complete  agreement  as  to  the  main  factor  in

533  A]

TO    CHAPTER    V

469

the  problem.  According  to  both,  the  essential  condition  is  one  of  mono-ideism.
The  mind  of  the  subject  is  concentrated  on  a  single  idea.  Only  one  function  is
active  at  any  one  time;  and  intensely  so,  because  all  the  attention  is  given
to  it.  Other  functions  are  inactive,  other  sensations  unperceived,  because  the
subject  has  no  attention  left  to  give  to  them.  .  .  .

In  reference  to  this,  Gurney  says,  "the  energy  of  attention  is  not  a  fixed
quantity,  bound  to  be  always  in  operation  in  one  direction  or  another ;  nor  does
the  human  mind,  any  more  truly  than  Nature,  abhor  a  vacuum.  .  .  .  What  do
we  gain,  then,  by  employing  a  general  term  to  describe  such  special  effects  ?
When  once  the  chandelier  metaphor  is  abandoned — when  once  it  is  recognised
that  in  a  multitude  of  cases  the  quantity  of  attention  turned  on  in  one  direction
is  in  no  way  connected  with  the  withdrawal  from  any  other — the  idea  of  a
common  psychic  factor  seems  out  of  place  and  misleading."  (See  Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  276,  277.)

This  theoretical  objection  is  in  accordance  with  observed  facts.  Doubtless
certain  hypnotic  states  exist  in  which  all  the  attention,  so  far  as  it  is  called  into
action,  is  concentrated  upon  one  idea.  In  order  to  prove,  however,  that  direct-
ing the  attention  upon  a  fresh  point  necessarily  withdraws  it  entirely  from
another,  it  must  be  shown  that  the  phenomenon  which  resulted  from  the  first
concentration  inevitably  ceased  when  the  second  one  arose.  A  cutaneous
analgesia  of  the  arm  might,  with  some  show  of  reason,  be  said  to  result  from
attention  directed  to  the  muscles  during  suggested  catalepsy,  on  the  ground
that  no  attention  was  left  wherewith  to  attend  to  painful  sensations.  But,  while
the  catalepsy  still  exists,  how — on  this  theory — can  one  explain,  for  example,  a
cutaneous  tactile  hyperaesthesia  of  the  same  limb,  by  means  of  which  the
subject  can  distinguish  the  points  of  the  compass  at  half  the  normal  distance  ?
If  the  subject  is  unconscious  of  painful  sensations  because  his  attention  is
entirely  concentrated  on  his  muscular  condition,  this  same  lack  of  attention  to
the  skin  ought  not  only  to  have  prevented  abnormal  distinctness  of  tactile
impressions,  but  also  to  have  inhibited  the  usual  ones.  The  experiment  can  be
still  further  complicated,  for,  while  still  permitting  the  catalepsy  to  persist,  the
cutaneous  tactile  hyperaesthesia  can  be  associated  by  suggestion  with  a  cutane-
ous analgesia  over  the  same  area.  Now  the  subject's  whole  attention  cannot  be
directed  to  maintaining  a  condition  of  muscular  rigidity,  if  he  has  still  enough
of  it  left  to  suffice,  not  only  for  the  increased  perception  of  certain  tactile  sensa-
tions, but  also  for  the  selection  and  inhibition  of  other  painful  ones.  Further,
the  opposite  of  these  phenomena  can  be  simultaneously  evoked  on  the  other
side  of  the  body  :  the  patient's  muscles  be  paralysed  by  suggestion,  his  tactile
sensibility  abolished,  and  his  sensibility  to  pain  increased.  The  attention  is
now  directed  to  six  different  points,  and  could  with  equal  ease  be  simultaneously
directed  to  many  others.  A  psychic  blindness,  for  example,  could  be  suggested
on  one  side;  a  psychic  deafness  on  the  other;  hyperaesthesia  of  the  sense  of
smell  and  taste  on  one  side,  and  diminished  or  abolished  sensibility  on  the
other,  &c.,  &c.  But  this  is  not  all,  for  while  the  attention  is  presumably  turned
in  all  these  different  directions,  the  subject  may  be  engaged  in  the  attempted
solution  of  some  intellectual  problem.  A  still  further  complication  is  possible.
Let  us  suppose  that  a  fortnight  before,  in  a  previous  hypnosis,  a  suggestion  to
record  the  time  at  the  expiration  of  20,213  minutes  had  been  made  ;  this  will  be
(1  out,  despite  the  existence  of  the  various  muscular  and  sensorial  con-
ditions already  referred  to,  and  the  fact  that  at  the  moment  of  its  fulfilment  the
patient  is  engaged  in  some  other  mental  effort.

470  APPENDICES  [534  A

This  picture  of  the  hypnotic  state  is  neither  fanciful  nor  dependent  solely  on
my  own  personal  observation.  The  fact  that  numerous  and  varied  hypnotic
phenomena  can  be  simultaneously  evoked  in  the  same  subject  has  been  re-
peatedly observed  and  recorded  by  others,  and,  strange  to  say,  even  by  those
who  attempt  to  explain  hypnosis  by  the  concentration  of  the  attention  upon  a
single  point.  It  is  solely  the  importance  of  these  facts  with  regard  to  this  parti-
cular theory  which  has  hitherto  been  so  largely  overlooked.

Granting  that  hypnotic  phenomena  are  the  result  of  changes  in  the  atten-
tion, one  is  forced  to  conclude  that  these  are  the  exact  reverse  of  those  stated
by  Bernheim'as  explanatory  of  the  hypnotic  state.  .  .  .  The  hypnotic  condition
differs  from  the  normal,  not  because  only  one  phenomenon  can  be  manifested
in  it  at  once,  but  because  it  may  present  simultaneously  many  and  more  varied
phenomena  than  can  be  evoked  in  the  normal  state  at  any  one  time.  In  one
word,  hypnosis  is  a  state  of  poly-ideism,  not  of  mono-ideism.

534  A.  In  some  articles  in  the  Revue  Philosophique,  published  in  1886
and  1887,  Delbceuf  described  some  experiments  with  two  maid-servants
of  his  own,  whom  he  calls  M.  and  J.  Both  were  strong  healthy  peasant
girls  who  had  frequently  been  hypnotised  and  were  good  somnambules
(see  also  551  B).  The  following  experiment  was  made  with  J.  After
explaining  what  he  proposed  to  do  and  obtaining  her  consent  in  the
waking  state,  Delboeuf  hypnotised  her,  extended  her  arms  on  a  table,  and
suggested  that  the  right  arm  should  be  insensible  to  pain.  Each  arm
was  then  burnt  with  a  red-hot  bar  of  iron,  8  mm.  in  diameter,  the  extent
and  duration  of  its  application  being  the  same  in  both,  but  pain  being
felt  in  the  left  arm  alone.  The  burns  were  bandaged  and  J.  was  sent  to
bed.  During  the  night  the  pain  in  the  left  arm  continued,  and  next
morning  there  was  a  wound  on  it,  3  cm.  in  diameter,  with  an  outer  circle
of  inflamed  blisters.  On  the  right  there  was  only  a  defined  eschar,  the
exact  size  of  the  iron  and  without  inflammation  or  redness.  The  day
following  the  left  arm  was  still  more  painful  and  inflamed ;  analgesia  was
then  successfully  suggested,  when  the  wound  soon  dried  and  the  inflam-
mation disappeared.  Thus  in  the  originally  painless  wound  there  was  at
first  much  less  inflammation  and  a  more  rapid  healing  than  in  the  painful
one.

534  B.  Delboeuf  s  experiment  suggests  that  in  many  of  the  remark-
able hypnotic  cures  recorded  in  the  Zoist  (as  well  as  in  modern  cases)  the
removal  of  pain  was  probably  an  important  element  in  the  cure ;  see  e.g.
cures  of  inflammation  (Zoist,  vol.  x.  p.  347)  ;  of  neuralgia  and  chronic
rheumatism  (vol.  ix.  pp.  74-79)  ;  of  abdominal  pains  (vol.  ix.  p.  155)  ;  of
tic  douloureux  (vol.  viii.  p.  185)  ;  of  severe  headaches  (vol.  x.  p.  369)  ;  of
eczema  impetiginodes  (vol.  x.  p.  96).

The  general  subject  of  hypnotic  analgesia  is  strikingly  illustrated  by
Esdaile's  well-known  work  in  the  Indian  hospitals ;  see  his  books,  Mes-
merism in  India  (London,  1846)  ;  The  Introduction  of  Mesmerism  with
Sanction  of  Government  into  the  Public  Hospitals  of  India  (2nd  edit.
London,  1856);  Natural  and  Mesmeric  Clairvoyance  (London,  1852);

534D]  TO    CHAPTER    V  471

and  constant  references  to  him  in  the  Zoist.  Braid  also  made  extensive
use  of  it.

After  their  period,  the  subject  sank  into  oblivion,  until  the  hypnotic
revival  of  the  last  twenty  years,  but  it  is  now  too  well  recognised  to  need
discussion.  As  an  instance  I  may  refer  to  Dr.  Bramwell's  demonstration
in  1890  to  the  leading  doctors  and  dentists  of  Leeds  of  the  use  of  hypno-
tism as  an  anaesthetic  in  extracting  the  stumps  of  sixteen  teeth  at  one
operation,  and  in  the  surgical  dressing  of  a  large,  deep-seated  abscess  in
the  cheek.  To  some  patients  who  had  been  often  hypnotised,  it  was
sufficient  to  send  a  command  by  letter  that  they  should  go  to  sleep  at
once  and  obey  the  dentist's  order  during  an  operation,  which  was  conse-
quently painless.  (See  British  Medical  Journal,  April  5,  1890,  p.  80 1.)
Later,  Dr.  Bramwell  showed  a  case  in  which  Mr.  H.  Bendelack  Hewetson
had  performed  the  surgical  operation  for  correcting  a  squint  under  the
anaesthesia  of  hypnotism  only ;  and  Mr.  Hewetson  stated  that  he  had
found  such  anaesthesia  complete  in  many  other  surgical  operations  on  the
eye.  (See  British  Medical  Journal,  February  28,  1891,  pp.  460-468.)

Many  instances  of  the  use  of  hypnotism  in  the  relief  of  pains  arising
from  a  variety  of  causes  are  given  in  van  Renterghem  and  van  Eeden's
Psycho- the  rapie,  pp.  262-280.

534  C.  The  following  case  reported  by  Delbceuf  in  the  Revue  de
I' Ihpnotisme,  November  1891,  p.  132,  shows  that  suggestion  in  the  normal
waking  state  may  be  sufficient  to  suppress  pain.

Mr.  J.,  an  old  man  of  eighty,  had  been  suffering  from  facial  neuralgia  for
twenty  years.  He  had  had  most  of  his  teeth  extracted,  and  besides  half  an  inch
of  the  superorbicular  nerve  removed.  He  applied  in  the  last  resort  to  Delboeuf.
The  Liege  professor  did  not  at  first  wish  to  hypnotise  so  old  a  man,  who  might
have  died  suddenly  in  his  chair  in  the  absence  of  any  doctor.  Some  days  later,
however,  Delboeuf,  accompanied  by  a  medical  friend,  visits  J.  They  find  him
all  huddled  up  in  his  arm-chair,  suffering  intensely.  J.  had  a  plentiful  beard
and  thick  eyebrows.  Merely  to  touch  the  hairs  of  his  beard  and  eyebrows
caused  him  intense  suffering.  J.  tells  of  his  martyrdom  in  detail.  Suddenly
Delbceuf,  turning  towards  the  doctor,  says :  "  You  see  this  man.  Well !  all  his
sufferings  are  about  to  cease."  Then  looking  steadily  into  J.'s  eyes,  Delboeuf
iolently  hold  of  his  beard  and  pulls  it,  crying:  "  You  don't  feel  any  more
p.iin  ;  nor  will  you  in  future!"  J.  felt  no  pain.  Delboeuf  pulls  J.'s  mou-
and  eyebrows,  presses  his  fingers  upon  J.'s  paralysed  cheek.  No  sign  of  suffer-
ing. Delboeuf  requests  the  doctor  to  do  the  same,  with  the  same  result.  The
neuralgic  pains  never  returned.

See  also  a  paper  by  Mr.  C.  M.  Barrows,  entitled  "Suggestion  without

Motism :    an  account  of  experiments   in   preventing   or   suppressing

in    the   Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.   xii.   p.    21.     Fahnestock   at   an

r  date  showed  that  pain  may  sometimes  be  entirely  suppressed  by

:^gestion.

534  D.     Dr.  Hamilton  Osgood  reports  four  cases  of  eczema  cured  by
otic  suggestion  {Revue  de  rHypnotismt,  1895,  P-  3°°)»  an^  ^  seems

472  APPENDICES  [534  E

probable  that  in  the  following  extraordinary  case  of  the  cure  of  sycosis
menti,  the  cure  was  effected  by  essentially  similar  means.  The  sufferer
was  a  privat  decent  at  the  university  of  Moscow.  During  the  nine  months
which  his  disease  lasted  he  consulted  the  most  eminent  dermatologists
of  Germany,  Austria,  and  Russia.  They  unanimously  diagnosed  sycosis.
No  treatment  brought  him  any  help.  He  at  last  consulted  a  "wise
woman,"  who  declared  that  his  disease  could  be  cured  by  prayer.  He
accompanied  her  to  a  church,  where  she  prayed  for  three  or  four  minutes ;
the  same  process  was  repeated  in  the  evening  and  on  the  two  following
days.  Amelioration  had  set  in  almost  instantly;  on  the  third  day  he
was  so  well  that  he  was  able  to  be  shaved.

For  a  discussion  of  the  case  from  various  points  of  view  see  Be"rillon,
Revue  de  r Hypnotisms,  January  1896,  p.  195  ;  Delboeuf,  Revue  de  I'Hypno-
tisme,  February  1896,  p.  225  ;  Durand  (de  Gros),  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,
1896,  p.  37.  It  was  also  quoted  in  the  British  Medical  Journal  for
November  i6th,  1895.

534  E.     The   use   of  hypnotic  analgesia   in  accouchements  was  well
known  to  the  early  mesmerists.     A  typical  instance  will  be  found  in  the
Zoist,  vol.  x.  p.  91.    Fahnestock  also  practised  it  (see  Statuvolism,  p.  315).
Among  recent  cases  I  may  mention  that  of  a  girl  of  about  fifteen,  recorded
by  Dr.  G.  C.  Kingsbury  in  the  British  Medical  Journal,  1891,  p.  460.
Others  have  been  recorded  from  time  to  time  in  the  Revue  de  rHypno-
tisme,  e.g.  by  Mesnet  (August  1887)  ;  by  Fanton   (November  1890)  ;  by
Delboeuf  (April  1891),  the  patient  being  "  J.,"  the  subject  referred  to  in
534  A,  and  this  being  her  first  confinement ;  by  Dumontpallier  (Decem-
ber 1891)  ;  in  this  case  the  patient  was  awake  and  fully  conscious  during
the  last  period  of  the  confinement,  but  the  pain  was  entirely  averted  by
suggestion;  by  Voisin  (June  1896).     In  the  same  Revue  (June  1892),
Bourdon  reported  a  case  in  which  by  hypnotic  suggestion  he  had  arrested
contractions  which  had  begun  and  postponed  the  confinement  for  a  week.

Joire  and  Bourdon  have  applied  with  success  a  method  of  waking
suggestion  which,  they  contend,  can  be  used  at  a  moment's  notice,
without  specially  training  the  subject.  See  Revue  de  r  Hypnotisme,
account  by  Joire  (August  1898,  pp.  39-59)  ;  by  Bourdon  (December
1899,  pp.  176-181).

535  A.     The  following  cases  (quoted  from  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.
vi.  p.  209,  March  1894)  indicate  that  the  pain  suppressed  by  anaesthetics
may  under  some  circumstances  be  remembered  afterwards.

(i)  On  November  3rd,  1893,  a  middle-aged  woman  was  operated  on  for  a
bony  tumour  of  the  upper  jaw.  She  was,  of  course,  under  an  anaesthetic.  When
she  awoke,  after  completion  of  the  operation,  she  said  she  had  no  recollection
whatever  of  what  had  occurred.  When  I  called  on  her,  on  November  7th,  she
said  she  had  had  severe  neuralgia  during  the  night  in  the  situation  of  the  opera-
tion. During  the  continuance  of  this  pain,  and  while  half  awake  and  half
asleep,  she  thought  she  could  follow  each  step  of  the  operation  of  November  3rd.

535  B]

TO    CHAPTER    V

473

She  described  the  cutting  and  slipping  of  the  steel  chisel,  the  blows  of  the
mallet,  and  scraping  back  of  the  gum — in  fact,  it  seemed  to  her  that  she  under-
went the  whole  operation  again.

(2)  A  lady  to  whom  I  told  the  above  said  she  once  took  "  gas  "  for  a  tooth
extraction.    This  was  quite  successful,  for  she  "felt  nothing."    But  on  an  occa-
sion subsequent  to  this  she  had  a  return  of  toothache — some  time  in  the  night.
She  declared  that  she  could  then  feel  all  the  symptoms  of  becoming  unconscious
while  inhaling  the  gas ;  then  came  the  digging  of  the  forceps  to  get  a  grip  on
the  tooth,  the  wrench,  and  awful  pain — every  detail  was  "  felt "  now,  although
her   waking   consciousness  had  been  quite  unaware  of  any  pain  during  the
actual  extraction.

(3)  I  have  many  times  noted  that  people  while  anaesthetised,  who  do  not
feel  pain  in  the  ordinary  sense,  and  who  on  coming  to  themselves  declare  that
they  did  feel  no  pain  during  the  operation,  have  struggled,  groaned,  spoken,
or  given  some  other  evidence  that  some  stratum  of  their  consciousness  was

iwake  during  the  anaesthesia,  and  was  being  impressed  by  the  pain  of  the

oration.

The  above  appears  to  show  that  the  subliminal  consciousness  does  take  note
of  what  is  going  on,  while  the  work-a-day  self  is  oblivious  to  all  external  stimuli
when  under  the  influence  of  an  anaesthetic ;  and  that  the  memory  of  this  sul>
liminal  self  may  be  brought  to  the  surface  by  some  appropriate  stimulus,  such
as  the  neuralgia,  which,  we  may  note,  occurred  between  sleeping  and  waking —
that  is,  at  a  time  when  the  subliminal  is  more  active  than  the  supraliminal
stratum  of  our  conscious  personality.  .  .  .

Note  to  Case  I. — The  patient  did  not  see  the  operator's  instruments  at  all,
nor  was  she  told  after  the  operation  how  it  was  done,  but  merely  that  the
tumour  had  been  cut  away  entirely  and  successfully.  No  one  was  present  at
the  operation  except  the  patient,  operator,  and  myself.  The  operation  was  de^
scribed  by  the  patient  as  accurately  as  a  non-medical  person  was  likely  to  do.
It  may  be  thought  that  she  was  enabled  to  describe  the  operation  by  her  vivid
imagination ;  but  under  the  circumstances  I  should  regard  this  "  vivid  imagi-
nation "  as  only  another  name  for  her  subliminal  memory.

With  regard  to  Case  II.,  as  I  was  not  present  during  the  extraction  of  the
teeth,  I  know  none  of  the  details.

In  each  of  these  two  cases  I  was,  of  course,  careful  not  to  suggest  to  the
patient  the  details  of  the  operation — such  as  "  Did  you  feel  this  or  that?"  I
merely  asked  them  twice  over  to  tell  me  what  they  felt.  Both  the  patients  were
thoroughly  under  the  influence  of  the  anaesthetic — chloroform  in  the  first  case,
and  nitrous  oxide  gas  in  the  second.  C.  THEODORE  GREEN,

M.R.C.S.,  L.R.C.P.,  London.

See  also  Laurent's  Des  Etats  Seconds  (p.  37),  where  the  details  of  an
operation  under  chloroform  were  recovered  in  a  dream.

535  B.  On  the  other  hand,  compare  the  following  case  recorded  by
Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell  in  his  "  Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Pheno-
mena" (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  p.  193).

Miss  A.     I  had  frequently  hypnotised  this  patient  and  could  influence  by

ti<>n,  not  only  the  voluntary  muscles,  but  also  the  special  senses.     On

ning  she  could  always  recall  what  had  passed,  despite  suggestions  to  the

contrary.     At  a  later  date  I  found  I  could  make  her  analgesic  by  suggestion.

474  APPENDICES  [538  A

Touching  the  cornea,  passing  needles  deeply  into  the  flesh,  and  probing  the
nose  and  vocal  chords  were  unaccompanied  by  pain  or  disagreeable  sensation.
On  awaking,  despite  suggested  amnesia,  the  patient  could  recall  all  the  tactile
sensations  associated  with  these  operations,  but  was  unable,  even  in  response
to  suggestion,  to  revive  any  memory  of  pain.  .  .  .

This  case  may  be  taken  as  a  typical  one,  for  amongst  the  numerous  opera-
tions performed  during  hypnosis  with  which  I  have  had  to  do,  I  have  in  no
instance  been  able  to  revive  any  memory  of  pain,

538  A.  Two  observations  of  Dr.  Lidbeault's  show  how  hypnosis,  by
improving  the  faculty  of  attention,  may  increase  the  acuteness  of  the  sense
of  hearing.  (Summarised  from  Therapeutique  Suggestive,  pp.  64  et  seq.)

(1)  A.  Aubry,  aged  twenty-three,  nearly  deaf  with  both  ears  from  birth,
goes  to  school  where  jjgTz-language  is  taught,  becomes  less  able  to  hear,  no
longer  needing  to  fix  his  attention  so  much  on  sounds.     Hypnotised  by  Lid-
beault,  recovers  at  once  his  previous  degree  of  hearing ;  this  lasted  for  four
years,  when  the  suggestion  of  attention  became  exhausted.

The  most  noteworthy  point  is  that  when  Aubry  was  specially  anxious  to
hear  he  threw  himself  into  une  esphe  d^tat  passif, — a  kind  of  self-hypnotisation
in  which  his  respiration  became  slower  and  his  power  of  hearing  was  increased.

(2)  C.  Loud  was  a  deaf-mute,  aged  fifty,  deaf  since  a  year  old ;  very  slight
hearing  of  right  ear.     Hypnotised  by  Lidbeault,  he  heard  better,  not  only  during
the  light  sleep,  but  after  awaking.     Heard  even  with  left  ear,  which  had  never
heard  before ;    and   was  able   for  the   first  time  to  pronounce  a  few  words
taught  to  him.     Loud  found  that  he  had  the  power  of  throwing  himself  almost
instantaneously  into  a  light  sleep-waking  state.     This  power  once  gained,  it
was  observed  that  in  his  ordinary  condition  he  was  as  deaf  as  ever.     The  fact
was  that  whenever  he  really  wished  to  hear  he  threw  himself  into  this  self-
hypnotised  state ;  he  stood  motionless,  with  eyes  fixed  and  pupils  dilated,  and
loud  panting  breath.     Finding  this  condition  so  helpful,  he  ceased  to  make  the
effort  to  hear  in  his  normal  state.

It  should  be  added  that  his  sight  was  weak;  and  that  when  he  wanted  to
execute  some  delicate  piece  of  work  he  hypnotised  himself  in  the  same  way,
with  the  result  that  he  saw  objects  both  more  clearly  and  "  larger  than  life,"-
macropsy.  The  same  subject,  as  Lidbeault  mentions  in  an  earlier  work,  was
able  in  this  self-induced  sleep-waking  state  to  suggest  to  himself  the  bodily
presence  and  contact  of  other  persons  with  hallucinatory  vividness.  He  cured
himself  almost  instantly  of  staggering  intoxication  by  a  similar  process.

Loud  was  perhaps  born  exceptionally  capable  of  self-suggestion.  But
it  looks  as  though  his  great  stake  in  the  matter  had  helped  him ; — his
seclusion  from  ordinary  stimuli  rendering  it  easier  for  him  to  evoke  his
subliminal  powers.

On  the  question  of  the  bearing  of  attention  on  deafness,  see  Dussaud's
"  Methode  d'dducation  de  1'ouie  chez  les  sourds  et  du  toucher  chez  les
aveugles  "  {Bulletin  de  r Institut  Psychologique  International,  May  1901),
consisting  of  an  apparatus  ingeniously  contrived  to  produce  various
sounds,  graduated  in  loudness,  &c.,  to  which  the  patients  practise
listening,  and  thus  gradually  learn  to  hear  fainter  and  fainter  sounds.

538  B]  TO    CHAPTER    V  475

538  B.  I  quote  the  following  observations  as  to  the  improvement
of  muscular  powers  and  of  the  senses  during  hypnosis  from  Dr.  BramwelPs
"  Personally  observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena  "  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.
P.  i77)-

Closure  of  the  eyes  is  usually  the  first  phenomenon  observed  in  hypnosis,
and  as  soon  as  this  occurs  other  alterations  in  the  voluntary  muscles  can
usually  be  induced  by  suggestion.  In  reference  to  these  I  have  nothing  special
to  report.  I,  like  others,  have  seen  that  voluntary  muscular  power  can  be  in-
creased or  diminished  to  a  remarkable  extent.

lni>olitntary  Muscles  and  Special  Senses. — The  action  of  the  involuntary
muscles  and  the  special  senses  can  be  influenced  in  hypnosis.  Of  this  I  have
seen  many  striking  instances,  but  will  confine  myself  almost  entirely  to  one
case,  that  of  a  woman  aged  forty,  in  which  all  the  experiments  were  checked  by
independent  observers.

Pu/se. — In  this  subject  the  rapidity  of  the  pulse  could  be  quickly  increased
or  diminished  by  simply  suggesting  that  it  should  beat  faster  or  slower.  These
changes,  as  recorded  by  the  sphygmograph,  showed  corresponding  alterations
in  tension.

Muscular  Sense- — Differences  in  weight  as  small  as  eight  grains  could  be
distinguished  in  the  hypnotic  state  ;  this  the  patient  was  quite  unable  to  do  in
the  normal  condition.

Thermal  Sensibility. — She  was  able  to  discriminate  between  very  slight
changes  in  temperature,  such  as  she  was  unable  to  appreciate  when  awake.

Common  Cutaneous  Sensibility. — The  common  cutaneous  sensibility  was
nearly  double,  i.e.  the  patient  could  distinguish  the  points  of  a  compass,
applied  to  different  parts  of  the  body,  at  about  half  the  normal  distance.  She
possessed  no  increased  power  when  awake.

Hearing. — The  range  of  hearing  could  be  doubled  by  suggestion.

Sight. — The  variations  in  this  patient's  range  of  vision  were  recorded  for
me  by  Mr.  Bendelack  Hewetson,  Ophthalmic  Surgeon  to  the  Leeds  Infir-
mary; and,  as  they  appear  to  be  of  considerable  interest,  I  will  give  them  in
detail.  He  first  saw  her  in  1889,  long  before  she  had  been  hypnotised,  and
reported  that  she  was  hypermetropic ;  that  this  condition  was  over-corrected
by  ciliary  spasms ;  that  she  could  only  read  the  third  line  of  Snellen's  test
types,  and  required  a  minus  glass  to  enable  her  to  read  the  bottom  line.  In
netropia,  as  many  of  my  readers  are  doubtless  aware,  the  axis  of  the
eye  is  shorter  than  normal,  and  the  rays  of  light,  or  a  certain  proportion  of
them,  in  passing  through  the  lens,  are  focussed  at  a  point  behind  the  retina.
In  this  case,  as  the  result  of  spasm  of  the  muscles  of  accommodation,  the
position,  and  possibly  the  curvature  of  the  lens  was  altered,  i.e.  it  was  pro-
jected further  forward  and  rendered  more  convex.  In  consequence  of  this,  tho
hypermetropia,  which  was  only  slight,  was  not  only  neutralised,  but  over-
corrected.  Thus  the  patient  was  rendered  virtually  myopic ;  the  axis  of  the
eye  had  become  longer  than  normal,  and  the  rays  of  light  were  focussed  at  a
point  in  front  of,  instead  of  behind,  the  retina.  At  this  time  tr  .itment  by  glasses
failed  to  relieve  the  defect,  as  the  patient,  who  suffered  from  other  nervous  affec-
tions, was  unable  to  wear  them.  She  was  first  hypnotised  in  March  1892,  when  I
observed  that  I  could  apparently  alter  the  range  of  vision  by  suggestion .  In
llowing  July  she  was  again  examined  by  Mr.  Hewetson,  who  found  the

476  APPENDICES  [538  C

physical  condition  and  range  of  vision  identical  with  what  it  had  been  in  1889.
Suggestions  were  then  made  in  his  presence,  with  the  view  of  increasing  the
range  of  vision,  whereupon  the  spasm  disappeared,  and  the  patient  easily&read
the  bottom  line  of  Snellen's  test  types  without  a  glass.  After  having  shown
that  the  spasm,  with  its  accompanying  defective  vision,  could  be  restored,  I
suggested  its  total  disappearance.  In  June  1893  Mr.  Hewetson  again
examined  the  patient,  and  reported  that  the  range  of  vision  was  normal,  and
that  there  was  no  return  of  the  spasm.

Cf.  the  improvement  of  vision  during  spontaneous  somnambulism  in
the  case  of  Dr.  Dufay's  patient,  MUe  R.  L.,  referred  to  in  section  416.

Beaunis  (Le  Somnambulisme  Provoque,  pp.  102  et  seq.}  found  in  one  of
his  subjects  that  the  sense  of  hearing  was  more  acute  in  hypnosis  and
could  then  be  still  further  heightened  by  suggestion.  Similarly  the
reaction-times  for  touch  and  hearing  were  shortened  in  hypnosis  and
rendered  shorter  still  by  suggestion.

538  C.  In  the  Revue  de  r Hypnotisms,  January  1893,  Dr.  Cullerre
records  a  case  of  suggestion  by  motor  images.  This  singular  case  in-
volves recovery  of  the  use  of  sight  and  hearing  by  suggestion.

Mme  X.,  twenty-eight  years  old,  a  hystero-epileptic,  suffered  from  a  variety
of  fits  or  attacks,  convulsive,  delirious,  and  spontaneously  somnambulic.
Hypnotic  somnambulism  was  easily  induced,  but  quickly  degenerated  into  a
hysterical  attack.

From  the  somnambulic  accesses  a  kind  of  secondary  state  developed  itself,
lasting  once,  with  a  few  minutes'  interruption,  for  a  month  at  a  time.  On
returning  to  ordinary  consciousness  she  had  lost  that  month  from  memory.

Both  in  her  primary  and  in  her  secondary  condition  she  was  from  time  to
time  troubled  by  a  hallucinatory  figure,  which  she  called  Timoleon,  and  which
urged  her  to  suicide.  On  recovering  from  these  attacks  Mme  X.  was  in  a
pitiable  state — blind,  deaf,  speechless,  and  unable  to  swallow.

The  religieuse  who  attended  her  tried  in  many  ways  to  recall  the  patient's
power  of  sensation,  but  in  vain,  until  at  last  she  bethought  herself  of  the  follow-
ing plan.  She  held  the  patient's  hand,  and  with  that  hand  traced  the  words:
"You  will  now  go  to  sleep,  and  will  awake  in  ten  seconds,  able  to  hear,  see,
and  speak."  After  many  repetitions  of  this  process,  the  patient  succeeded  in
grasping  the  meaning  of  the  written  words  from  the  movement  of  her  own  hand.
She  then  instantly  went  to  sleep,  and  awoke  in  a  few  seconds  able  to  speak,  but
not  to  see  or  to  hear.  Further  efforts  of  the  same  kind  gradually  brought  all
the  senses  back.

538  D.  The  mystery  of  the  organic  effects  of  hypnotism  lies  bound
up  with  the  mystery  of  the  Restitution  of  Function.  Functions  of  the
brain — motor,  sensory,  intellectual — which  have  been  destroyed  for  a  time
by  operations  on  animals  or  by  disease  in  man,  tend  often  to  re-establish
themselves,  in  part,  at  least,  through  the  vicarious  action  of  other  nervous
centres  which  learn  to  perform  tasks  unknown  to  them  before.  (See
James,  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  i.  p.  67.)  Here  we  have  the  vis  re-
paratrix  Natura  carried  to  the  highest  point  to  which  it  will  go  in  man..

539A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  477

In  my  view,  such  substitutions  of  faculty  are  subliminally  guided,  and
since  hypnotic  suggestion  is  an  appeal  to  and  a  furtherance  of  subliminal
faculty,  it  seems  to  me  natural  that  it  should  bring  about,  not  only  such
restitutions  of  function  after  mutilation,  but  also  other  educations  and  de-
velopments of  nervous  centres,  whose  result  may  often  involve  recovery
from  some  apparently  hopeless  organic  malady.

539  A.  In  the  Revue  Philosophique  for  November  1886  M.  Bergson,
of  Clermont-Ferrand,  gives  an  account  of  a  case  of  supposed  thought-
transference  or  clairvoyance  which  turned  out  to  be  much  more  probably
explicable  by  hypnotic  hyperacuity  of  vision.  The  following  is  a  summary
and  discussion  of  the  case  which  I  contributed  to  Mind  for  January  1887.

MM.  Bergson  and  Robinet  found  that  a  boy,  who  was  supposed  to  be  a

clairvoyant,  or  a  telepathic  percipient,  could  read  figures  and  words  under  the

blowing  conditions.     One  of  the  observers  hypnotised  the  boy,  stood  with  his

:k  nearly  against  the  light,  opened  a  book  at  random,  held  it  nearly  vertically
facing  himself,  at  about  four  inches  from  his  own  eyes,  but  below  him,  and  looked
sometimes  at  the  page  and  sometimes  into  the  boy's  eyes.  The  book  had
often  to  be  slightly  shifted,  but  ultimately  the  boy  could  generally  read  the
number  of  the  page.  Asked  where  he  saw  it,  he  pointed  to  the  back  of  the
book,  just  opposite  the  number's  true  position.  Asked  where  the  binding  of  the
book  was,  he  put  his  hand  underneath  the  book,  and  indicated  the  place  where
the  binding  would  have  been  had  the  book  faced  him.

It  occurred  to  M.  Bergson — and  he  deserves  full  credit  for  being  the  first  to
insist  on  this  precaution — that,  small  though  the  figures  were,  the  boy  might
really  be  reading  them  as  reflected  on  the  cornea  of  the  hypnotiser.  Experi-
ments with  slightly  altered  position  showed  that,  in  fact,  the  boy  could  not  read
the  letters  unless  adjustment  and  illumination  were  carefully  made  as  favourable
as  possible.  The  letters  were  3  mm.  in  height — nothing  is  said  of  their  thick-
ness—and their  corneal  image  would  be  about  o.i  mm.  in  height,  as  M.  Bergson
computes,  under  the  conditions  employed.  This  seems  a  very  small  image  to
see  distinctly ;  but  Mr.  J.  N.  Langley  and  Mr.  H.  E.  Wingfield,  who  have
kindly  tried  some  careful  experiments  to  test  this  point,  inform  me  that
they  can  read  on  each  other's  corneae  the  corneal  image  of  printed  letters  of
about  10  mm.  in  height.  We  know  from  Binet  and  Fe>e*'s  experiments,  &c.,
how  greatly  the  hypnotic  state  does  sometimes  increase  acuity  of  vision;  and  we
I  think,  conclude  that  the  boy  probably  did  read  the  letters  on  his
hypnotiser's  cornea.

What,  then,  are  we  to  make  of  the  boy's  statement  that  he  saw  the  words  as
though  in  a  book  facing  him  ?  M.  Bergson  feels  sure  that  this  was  the  boy's
tlief.  There  was  no  suspicion  of  charlatanism,  and,  in  fact,  the  boy  dis-
liked the  experiments,  and  now,  as  M.  Bergson  writes  to  me,  refuses  to  renew
them.  M.  Bergson  supposes,  and  I  think  justly,  that  this  was  a  case  of  simula-
tion inconscientc  ;  the  hypnotised  subject  genuinely  referring  his  sensations  to
the  source  to  which  his/rx/  hypnotiser  (a  believer  in  thought-transference)  had
•uggested  to  him  that  they  were  due.

And,  in  fact,  this  unconscious  simulation  which  leads  the  subject  to  refer  his
unusual  sensations  to  the  special  cause  which  his  hypnotiser,  or  some  caprice
of  his  own  mind,  suggests,  is  a  not  uncommon  and  a  very  interesting  pheno-
menon. It  was  observed,  for  instance,  by  Elliotson,  who  pointed  out  a  good

478  APPENDICES  [539  A

many  hypnotic  peculiarities  which  his  successors  are  now  gradually  rediscover-
ing. It  is  a  hypnotic  exaggeration  of  a  familiar  phenomenon,  namely,  of  the
large  infusion  of  erroneous  inference  which  we  most  of  us  import  into  the
account  which  we  render  to  ourselves  of  our  ordinary  sensations.

A  particularly  curious  case  is  briefly  described  in  the  Journal  of  the  Society
for  Psychical  Research,  June  1884.  A  man  was  brought  to  us  who,  when
hypnotised,  could  often  name  cards  held  in  front  of  him,  although  his  eyes  had
been  plastered  up  and  bandaged  in  a  most  elaborate  way.  The  man's  friends
took  this  for  clairvoyance,  and  the  man  assented,  being  sure  that  he  could  not
see  the  cards  in  the  usual  way.  They  "  flashed  upon  him,"  as  he  said.  Now,
after  a  good  deal  of  puzzling  over  the  case,  Mr.  R.  Hodgson  found  that  he  also
could  sometimes  manage  to  see  over  similar  bandages,  through  small  chinks
between  the  skin  and  the  paper  gummed  over  the  eyes.  But  he,  too,  found
that  he  saw  fitfully,  the  power  of  vision  seeming  to  come  and  go, — and  he
actually  could  not  tell  with  which  eye  he  was  seeing,  except  by  covering  each
eye  in  turn  with  his  hand.  The  distorted  position  of  the  eyeball,  and  the
minute  and  oddly-placed  channels  of  vision,  produced  so  much  confusion  that
there  seemed  no  reason  to  suppose  that  the  hypnotised  subject's  belief  that  he
was  seeing  "  clairvoyantly  "  was  other  than  genuine.

The  case  of  M.  Bergson's  boy  seems  to  have  been  a  similar  one.  And  his
idea  that  he  was  reading  from  the  book  seems  to  have  been  a  sort  of  com-
promise between  the  feeling  that  he  was  reading  somewhere  and  the  hypno-
tiser's  suggestion  that  the  words  were  being  transferred  supernormally  from
mind  to  mind.

Thus  far,  then,  M.  Bergson's  narration  and  explanation  seem  credible
enough,  and  his  argument  as  against  thought-transference  in  this  boy's  case
seems  well  made  out.  But  he  proceeded  to  further  experiments  which,  as  re-
counted, seem  incredible,  and  which  may  lead  some  readers  to  distrust  the
accuracy  of  the  whole  series.

To  explain  the  difficulty  I  must  first  point  out  that  the  word  hyperaesthesia
is  loosely  used  for  three  different  classes  of  phenomena.  It  is  used  (i)  for  an
exaggeration  of  the  familiar  action  of  specialised  organs,  as  when  the  eye  is
sensible  to  very  small  amounts  of  light.  It  is  used  (2)  for  alleged  perceptions,
which  would  imply  a  specialisation  of  what  I  may  term  our  undifferentiated
fund  of  nervous  sensibility  in  novel  directions.  Sensibility  to  the  action  of
magnets,  of  metals  in  contact,  of  medicaments  at  a  distance,  may  or  may  not
exist,  but  should  scarcely  be  called  by  the  same  name  as  (say)  the  eye's  extra
sensitiveness  to  light.  And  again,  the  word  is  used  (3)  for  cases  where  our
non-specialised  organs  are  credited  with  performing  functions  which,  so  far  as
we  can  see,  demand  a  definite  sense-specialisation,  or  our  specialised  organs
are  credited  with  functions  which,  on  measurable  anatomical  grounds,  appear
to  overpass  the  limits  of  their  specialisation.  This  last  class  of  cases  must  be
received  with  extreme  caution.

Well,  M.  Bergson  says  that  he  showed  the  boy  a  microscopic  photograph  of
twelve  men,  its  longest  diameter  2  mm.,  and  that  the  boy  saw  and  imitated  the
attitude  of  each  man.  Also  that  he  showed  the  boy  a  microscopic  preparation,
involving  cells  not  greater  than  .06  mm.  in  diameter,  and  that  the  boy  saw  and
drew  these  cells.

Now  I  might,  in  the  first  place,  object  that  thought-transference  was  not
formally  excluded,  since  M.  Bergson  himself  knew  the  photograph  and  the  look
of  the  cells.  I  do  not  press  this,  for  the  other  experiments  seem  to  me  to  nega-

540  A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  479

tive  thought-transference  in  this  case.  I  merely  point  out  that  if  we  wish  to
prove  that  a  subject  does  not  receive  an  image  from  our  minds,  we  should  pre-
sent to  him  an  object  with  which  we  are  ourselves  unacquainted.

But  the  real  difficulty  is  as  regards  the  minimum  visibile.  It  is  usually
(though  not  universally)  supposed  that  in  order  to  produce  a  definite  image  more
than  one  retinal  rod  or  cone  must  be  stimulated ;  and  that  consequently  no
object  can  be  separately  discernible  which  does  not  subtend  (say)  an  angle  of
60  seconds,  or  whose  retinal  image  is  less  than  (say)  .004  mm.  in  diameter.
Floating  particles,  none  of  them  exceeding  .0029  mm.  in  diameter,  have,  I  be-
lieve, been  seen  as  a  cloud  in  a  ray  of  electric  light  sent  through  a  tube  of
filtered  air,  but  have  never  been  seen  separately  by  the  naked  eye.

Now,  the  retinal  image  of  an  object  itself  only  .06  mm.  in  diameter,  and
placed  within  the  range  of  distinct  vision,  will  be  much  less  than  .004  mm.  in
diameter.  To  bring  it  up  to  this  minimum  the  retinal  image  must  be  ^  of  the
size  of  the  object  itself;  and  this  implies  a  nearness  to  the  eye  involving  mere
darkness  and  blur.  The  microscopic  slide  was  presumably  transparent ;  but
nothing  was  said  as  to  the  transparency  of  the  photograph,  and  yet  the  points
distinctly  visible  on  the  photograph  must  have  been  even  smaller  than  the  cells
on  the  slide.

A  letter  with  which  M.  Bergson  has  favoured  me  has  done  much  to  remove
these  difficulties.  It  seems  that  the  photograph  was  transparent,  and  that  the
boy  held  it  close  to  his  eye.  Moreover,  after  seeing  the  photograph  the  boy
could  not  read  ordinary  print.  "  C'est  trop  grand,"  he  said  ;  and  it  was  some
time  before  the  eye  (which  M.  Bergson  believes  to  have  been  always  myopic)
resumed  its  normal  state.  It  seems,  then,  conceivable  that  hypnotic  suggestion
had  induced  (by  spasm  of  the  ciliary  muscle  ?)  some  change  in  the  shape  of  the
crystalline  lens,  which  made  the  eye  a  microscope  for  the  time  being.  Mr.
George  Wherry  has  kindly  communicated  to  me  two  somewhat  analogous
cases,  where  ciliary  spasm  (itself  induced  by  microscopic  or  telescopic  work)
led  to  uniocular  diplopia,  in  one  case  even  triplopia.  In  these  cases  irregular
ciliary  spasm  apparently  turned  the  lens  into  a  kind  of  multiplying  glass : —
is  it  possible  that  M.  Bergson  induced  a  regular  ciliary  spasm,  which  turned
the  lens  into  a  magnifier  f

540  A.  The  probable  course  of  evolution  of  early  sense-organs  is
thus  described  by  Prince  Kropotkin  in  an  article  on  "  Recent  Science  "  in
the  Nineteenth  Century  for  August  1896  :  —

In  order  to  trace  the  progressive  specialisation  of  senses  in  the  animal  series,
...  we  only  need  to  admit  that  the  appearance  of  the  more  specialised  senses
of  touch,  hearing,  taste,  smell,  and  vision  is  preceded  by  the  existence  of  the
leas  specialised  mechanical,  chemical,  temperature,  and  light  senses;  but  this
is  what  may  have  been  presumed  in  advance  under  the  theory  of  evolution.
Another  admission,  advocated  by  Nagel,1  namely,  the  existence  of  mixed  or
rather  undefined  sense-organs — which  appears  as  a  mere  development  of  the
same  idea— would  further  simplify  the  comprehension  of  the  facts.  At  the
lowest  end  of  the  scale  we  have  what  Nagel  describes  (perhaps  not  quite
exactly)  as  "the  universal  organ  of  senses,"  which  means  t!  hole  proto-

plasm of  the  animal's  body  (or,  perhaps,  some  components  of  it)  acts  as  an

1  \V.  Nagel,  Bibliotkeca  Zoologita,  xviii.  Also  his  earlier  more  general  work,  Dtf
nitdtren  Stnnc  der  Insekten,  Tubingen,  1892.

480  APPENDICES  [541  A

organ  for  receiving  excitations  from  various  stimuli.  And  at  the  other  end  of
the  scale  there  are  specialised  organs,  so  specialised  that  each  of  them  is
capable  of  transmitting  one  sort  of  sensations  only.  Between  the  two  Nagel
proposes  to  place  intermediate  mixed  organs  (Wechselsinnesorgane),  which,  in
their  normal  state,  aid  the  animal  in  perceiving  two  or  three  different  sensa-
tions, such  as  taste  and  smell,  or  touch,  hearing,  and  taste.  Having  no  such
mixed  organs,  we  evidently  have  a  difficulty  in  understanding  the  corre-
sponding sensations,  and  we  may  ask  ourselves  whether  the  animal  possessed
of  one  organ  for  touch  and  taste,  or  for  taste  and  smell,  receives  from  it  two
different  sensations,  or  has  one  sensation  only,  which  is  neither  of  the  two,  but
lies  between  them.  We  may  not  be  able  to  answer  this  question,  but  we  fully
understand  that  the  world  of  sensations  should  grow  in  complexity,  precision,
and  variety,  as  the  sense-organs  become  more  and  more  definite.

541  A.  The  principal  inorganic  objects  alleged  to  have  elicited
novel  sensations  are  running  water,  metals,  crystals,  and  magnets ; — in-
cluding under  this  last  heading  the  magnetism  of  the  earth,  as  claimed
to  be  felt  differently  by  sleepers  according  as  they  lie  in  the  north-south
or  in  the  east-west  positions.

The  faculty  of  finding  running  water  has  the  interest  of  being  the  first
subliminal  faculty  which  has  been  so  habitually  utilised  for  public  ends  as
to  form  for  its  possessors  a  recognised  and  lucrative  occupation.  From
Professor  Barrett's  monograph  "  On  the  So-called  Divining  Rod  "  (see  next
Appendix),  and  the  "  dowsers  "  who  have  so  often  discovered  water  where
geologists  and  engineers  have  failed,  it  seems  clear  that  this  power  of  dis-
covery is  genuine,  and  is  not  dependent  on  the  dowser's  conscious  know-
ledge or  observation.  It  forms  a  subliminal  uprush ;  but  whether  it  is
akin  to  genius,  as  being  a  subconscious  manipulation  of  facts  accessible
through  normal  sensory  channels,  or  to  heterasthesia  (as  resting  on  a
specific  sensibility  to  the  proximity  of  running  water),  is  a  question
which  will  be  variously  decided  in  each  special  case.  The  dowser,  I
should  add,  is  not  hypnotised  before  he  finds  the  water.  But  (as  Professor
Barrett  has  shown)  he  is  often  thrown,  presumably  by  self-suggestion,  into
a  state  much  resembling  light  hypnotic  trance.  The  perceptivity  (we  may
say)  of  central  organs,  in  an  unfamiliar  direction,  is  stimulated  by  con-
centrated attention,  involving  a  certain  disturbance  or  abeyance  of
perceptivity  in  other  directions.

541  B.  An  exhaustive  and  impartial  survey  of  the  existing  evidence
for  the  faculty  of  "  dowsing  "  is  given  in  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett's  two
articles  aOn  the  So-called  Divining  Rod"  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  xiii.  pp.  2-282,  and  vol.  xv.  pp.  130-383.  From  the  latter  I  quote
the  general  conclusions  at  which  Professor  Barrett  has  arrived  (p.  313).

(i)  For  some  centuries  past  certain  individuals  locally  known  as  dowsers
have  declared  that  they  can  discover  the  presence  of  underground  water,
mineral  lodes,  coal,  building  stone,  or  other  buried  objects  which  may  be
sought  for  by  the  apparently  spontaneous  motion  of  the  so-called  divining  rod ;
when  their  pretensions  have  been  tested,  the  result,  though  by  no  means

541  B]  TO    CHAPTER    V  481

uniformly  in  their  favour,  has  been   so  remarkable  that  chance  coincidence
appears  a  wholly  inadequate  explanation.

(2)  Any  explanation  based  upon  trickery  or  unconscious  hints  from  by-
standers, or  the  detection  of  faint  surface  indications  of  the  concealed  object,
or  other  known  cause,  is  insufficient  to  cover  all  the  facts.

(3)  The  movement  of  the  rod  or  forked  twig  is  only  a  special  case  of  motor
automatism  exhibited  by  a  large  number  of  individuals,  and  arises  from  a  sub-
conscious and  involuntary  "  suggestion  "  impressed  on  the  mind  of  the  dowser.

(4)  Accompanying  the  involuntary  and  usually  unconscious  muscular  con-
traction which  causes  the  motion  of  the  forked  twig  or  rod,  many  dowsers
experience  a  peculiar  malaise  and  some  a  violent  convulsive  spasm.     This  is
a  psycho-physiological  effect,  akin  to  emotion.     Moreover,  the  state  of  mono-
ideism   of  the  dowser  creates  a  condition  of  partial   catalepsy  when  some
suggestion  causes  the  idea  to  culminate.

(5)  This  subconscious  suggestion  may  arise  from  a  variety  of  causes ;  some-
times it  is  merely  an  auto-suggestion,  at  others  it  is  unconsciously  derived
through  the  senses  from  the  environment,  but  in  a  certain  number  of  those  who
exhibit  motor  automatism  the  suggestion  appears  to  be  due  to  some  kind  of
transcendental  perceptive  power.

(6)  Such  persons  appear  only  able  to  exercise  this  transcendental  faculty
when  their  normal  self-consciousness  is  more  or  less  in  abeyance,  or  when  it  is
completely  submerged,  as  in  profound  hypnosis.

(7)  This  subconscious  perceptive  power,  commonly  called  "  clairvoyance,"
may  provisionally  be  taken  as  the  explanation  of  those  successes  of  the  dowser
which  are  inexplicable  on  any  grounds  at  present  known  to  science.

The  malaise  mentioned  above  as  a  frequent  accompaniment  of  the
exercise  of  their  art  by  dowsers  is  thus  described  in  an  earlier  part  of  the
same  paper  (p.  299).

Nearly  all  dowsers  assert  that  when  the  rod  moves  in  their  hands,  or  when
they  believe  that  underground  water  is  beneath  them,  they  experience  a
peculiar  sensation,  which  some  describe  as  felt  in  the  limbs  like  the  tingling  of
an  electric  shock,  others  as  a  shivering  or  trembling,  and  others  as  an  unplea-
sant sensation  in  the  epigastric  region.  With  all  there  is  more  or  less  of  a
convulsive  spasm,  sometimes  of  a  violent  character.  This  malaise  is  very
marked  in  some  cases,  but  not  experienced  in  others.  That  these  physiological
disturbances  have  a  purely  psychological  origin  is  obvious — (i)  from  the  fact
that  they  are  not  experienced  when  the  dowser  is  off  duty,  that  is,  when  he  has
no  suspicion  that  he  is  in  the  neighbourhood  of  underground  water,  and  (2)
that  like  effects  are  not  produced  by  the  much  greater  masses  of  visible  water  in
rivers,  lakes,  or  the  sea.  The  interesting  point  is  that  these  psycho-physio-
logical phenomena  have  a  real  existence;  they  exist  among  dowsers  in  all
countries,  and  can  be  traced  back,  as  historical  investigation  shows,  for  upwards
of  two  centuries.  In  the  preceding  Report  I  devoted  an  Appendix  to  this
subject.  .  .  .  [Proceedings  S. P. R.,  vol.  xiii.  pp.  272  et  seq.]

The  writer  proceeds  to  give  further  cases — ancient  and  modern — of
the   malaise  associated  with  dowsing,  and  shows   its   analogy  with   the
ological  disturbances,  arising  from  psychological  causes,  that  some-
accompany  other  phases  of  automatism.

VOL.    I.  2    H

482  APPENDICES  [541  C

541  C.  I  next  take  the  case  of  metallaesthesia, — that  alleged
reaction  to  special  metals  which  has  often  been  asserted  both  in  hypnotic
and  in  hysterical  cases.  As  a  definite  instance  I  will  take  the  statement
made  by  certain  physicians  attending  Louis  Vive'  (see  233  A)  that  while
they  supported  him  during  a  hysterical  attack  a  gold  ring  on  the  finger  of
one  of  them  touched  him  for  some  time  and  left  a  red  mark,  as  of  a  burn,
of  whose  origin  the  patient  knew  nothing.  It  is  further  alleged — and  this
is  a  quite  separate  point,  although  often  confused  with  the  first — that  gold
is  distinguished  by  some  subjects  under  conditions  where  no  degree  of
sensitiveness  to  weight  or  temperature  could  have  shown  them  that  gold
was  near.

Now  as  to  the  first  point,  e.g.  the  Louis  Viv£  incident,  I  can  readily
believe  that  the  touch  of  gold,  unknown  to  the  subject's  supraliminal  con-
sciousness, may  produce  a  redness,  subsequent  pain,  &c.  All  that  is
needed  for  this  is  a  capricious  self-suggestion,  like  any  other  hysterical  idea.
This  self-suggestion  might  remain  completely  unknown  to  the  waking  self,
which  might  be  puzzled  as  to  the  cause  of  the  redness  and  pain.  And
observe  that  such  a  result  might  even  deserve  the  name  of  heteraesthesia.
There  might  be  a  whole  complex  range  of  specific  reactions  to  substances
chemically  inert  paralleling  our  reactions  to  drugs  which  chemically  affect
our  tissues.  The  second  claim,  however,  involves  much  more  than  this.
If  gold  is  recognised  through  a  covering,  for  instance,  or  heated  to  the
same  point  as  other  metals,  so  that  no  sensation  of  weight  or  temperature
can  help  observation,  this  might  possibly  be  by  virtue  of  some  sensibility
more  resembling  the  attraction  of  low  organisms  to  specific  substances
whose  chemical  action  on  them  we  cannot  determine,  or  to  particular  rays
in  the  spectrum.  I  am  not  convinced  that  this  has  yet  been  proved  ;  but
I  should  not  regard  it  as  a  priori  impossible.  I  think  it  probable  that
our  central  sensorium  may  have  the  capacity  of  discriminating  many
sensations  which  it  does  not  habitually  discriminate,  and  that  dermal  end-
organs  may  transmit  messages  which  are  not  habitually  interpreted  in  all
their  fulness.  It  is  with  central  rather  than  with  peripheral  capacities
that  such  a  problem  is  ultimately  concerned.

541  D.  Considering  in  the  next  place  the  alleged  sensibility  of  cer-
tain persons  to  crystals  and  magnets, — known  to  be  absolutely  inert  in
relation  to  ordinary  men, — we  should  note  the  alleged  connection  between
the  perception  of  magnets  and  that  of  running  water.  And  here  we  may
note  in  passing  a  point  which  in  these  inquiries  should  be  often  re-
membered. I  mean  the  great  irregularity  with  which  sensibilities  are  dis-
tributed in  the  organic  world ; — even  sensibility  to  a  stimulus  so  potent
and  universal  as  light  itself.  The  mere  fact  that  sensibility  to  magnets
has  not  yet  been  observed  is  no  strong  presumption  against  its  being
observed  before  long.  The  central  organs  of  perception,  as  yet  un-
exhausted in  their  manifestation  by  the  external  organs,  may,  for  aught  we
can  say,  possess  this  potential  sensibility,  to  be  developed  in  process
of  time.

541  E]  TO    CHAPTER    V  483

Some  experiments  intended  to  test  the  reality  of  the  "  magnetic
sense,"  and  especially  of  the  so-called  "  magnetic  light " — luminous
appearances  described  by  Baron  Reichenbach  as  being  seen  by  his  sensi-
tives in  the  neighbourhood  of  magnets — were  carried  out  by  a  Committee
of  the  S.P.R.  in  1883.  After  careful  and  repeated  trials  with  forty-five
"  subjects  "  of  both  sexes  and  of  ages  between  sixteen  and  sixty,  only  three
of  these  professed  to  see  luminous  appearances.  They  were  entirely
ignorant  of  Reichenbach's  works,  and  no  information  was  given  to  them
beforehand  of  the  nature  of  the  experiment.  The  sensations  they
described  were  remarkably  concordant.  The  light,  they  said,  took  the
form  of  two  rounded  or  blunted  cones,  apices  downwards,  one  of  each
being  directly  over  and  upon  a  pole  of  the  magnet.  The  chief  instrument
used  was  an  electro- magnet,  and  the  light  appeared  and  disappeared
with  the  making  and  breaking  of  the  current,  unknown  to  the  subject.
Two  of  the  subjects  and  a  member  of  the  Committee  also  experienced
peculiar  sensations  in  the  face  and  head  when  the  head  was  placed  in  the
strongest  part  of  the  magnetic  field,  by  which  they  were  able  to  distinguish
accurately  whether  the  magnet  was  excited  or  not.

The  value  of  these  experiments  as  evidence  of  a  magnetic  sense  of
course  depends  primarily  on  whether  the  subjects  had  any  means,  direct
or  indirect,  of  knowing  when  the  current  was  made  or  broken.  The  pre-
cautions taken  to  avoid  this  and  the  other  conditions  of  the  experiments
are  described  in  detail  in  the  report  of  them  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  i.  pp.  230-237.  See  also  a  further  note  by  the  Chairman  of  the
Committee,  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  vol.  ii.  pp.  56-60.

541  E.  And  next  as  to  the  heteraesthesiae  alleged  to  be  evoked  by
dead  organic  substances,  or  by  living  organisms.  We  may  begin  by  ob-
serving that  some  of  our  senses,  at  any  rate,  form  the  subjective  expression
of  certain  chemical  reactions.  But  many  kinds  of  chemical  reactions  go
on  in  us  besides  those  which,  for  example,  form  the  basis  of  our  sense  of
taste.  And  some  persons  are  much  more  affected  than  others  by  certain
special  reactions,  which  from  a  purely  chemical  point  of  view  may  or  may
not  be  precisely  the  same  for  all.  Some  persons  have  a  specific  sensi-
bility to  certain  foods,  or  to  certain  drugs ; — the  presence  of  which  their
stomach  detects,  and  to  which  it  responds  with  extraordinary  delicacy.
Now,  if  it  were  an  important  object  to  discover  the  presence  of  a  certain
drug,  such  a  sensibility  would  be  regarded  as  a  precious  gift,  and  the  dis-
covery might  be  quite  as  valuable  when  made  by  the  stomach  as  it  would
been  if  made  by  the  nose.  These  are  nascent  hetenesthesiae,
which,  however,  are  not  fostered  either  by  natural  selection  or  by  human
care.

Of  similar  type  are  the  specific  sensibilities  to  the  presence  of  certain
plants  or  animals, — familiar  in  certain  cases  of  "  rose-asthma,"  "  horse-
asthma,"  and  discomfort  felt  if  a  cat  is  in  the  room.  These  feelings  have
many  causes.  At  one  end  there  is  ordinary  mechanical  irritation  by  solid

484  APPENDICES  [541  F

particles.  At  the  other  end  of  the  scale  there  is,  of  course,  mere  self-
suggestion.  But  between  the  two  there  seems  to  be  a  kind  of  sensibility
which  is  not  purely  self-suggestive,  and  not  exactly  olfactory,  but  resembles
rather  the  instincts  by  which  insects  or  other  animals  discern  each  other's
neighbourhood.

There  seems  indeed  no  reason  why  the  sense  still  vaguely  known  as
smell  should  not  be  divisible  into  as  many  specific  sensibilities  as  the  sense
which  till  lately  was  vaguely  known  as  touch.  On  the  one  hand,  sensibility
to  effluvia — even  assuming  all  smell  to  depend  on  effluvia — is  not  confined
to  the  nose,  and  may  surely  take  varied  forms  as  various  tracts  of  mucous
membrane  are  affected.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  animal  kingdom
shows  us  in  abundant  instances  a  sense  of  smell  already  developed  to  a
point  which  surpasses  the  sense  of  hearing  and  rivals  the  sense  of  sight.

Now,  the  very  fact  that  the  bloodhound  can  distinguish  as  he  can  a
given  person's  traces  from  all  the  world  beside  is  enough,  I  think,  to
point  to  the  probability  that  the  hypnotised  subject, — already  hyperaesthetic
and  perhaps  heteraesthetic, — may  distinguish  between  one  human  being
and  another  in  a  manner,  and  with  an  acuteness,  to  us  unknown.  A
natural  direction  for  hetersesthesiae  to  take  would  seem  to  be  a  revival  of
primitive  powers,  till  now  developed  more  fully  in  other  animal  races  than
in  man.

Returning,  then,  from  this  new  point  of  view  to  the  problem  of  the
influence  of  mesmeric  passes,  we  see  that  there  are  now  two  different  lines
of  observation  which  point  to  the  probability  of  their  possessing  some
specific  potency.  From  the  supernormal  or  spiritual  side  I  urge  that  since
telepathy  from  a  distance  is  a  vera  causa  of  hypnosis  (see  568),  mesmeric
passes  near  at  hand  may  possess  some  similar  hypnogenous  value.  And
from  the  normal  or  material  side  I  urge  that  among  the  delicate  dis-
criminative powers  with  which  hypnotism  is  found  to  endow  the  sensitive
subject,  it  is  not  unlikely  that  we  shall  find  some  specific  sensibility  to
human  proximity  per  se,  and  perhaps  to  the  proximity  of  certain  human
beings,  as  distinguished  from  the  rest.

It  is  perhaps  through  some  such  power  of  discrimination  that  effects
are  produced  on  sensitive  subjects  by  "  mesmerised  objects," — assuming,
of  course,  that  sufficient  care  has  been  taken  to  avoid  their  discovering  by
ordinary  means  that  the  objects  have  been  specially  manipulated  in  any
way.  See  some  experiments  recorded  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  i.
pp.  260-262,  and  a  description  of  Esdaile's  experiments  with  mesmerised
water  in  vol.  iii.  p.  409  ;  also  cases  in  the  Zoist,  e.g.  vol.  v.  p.  129,  and  vol.
x.  p.  99.

541  F.  And  now  I  pass  on  to  a  third  concurrent  line  of  inference,
derived  from  a  set  of  experiments  which  seem  in  a  sense  to  stand  midway
between  the  two  classes  just  mentioned, — the  telepathic,  namely,  and  the
heteraesthetic.  I  speak  of  medical  clairvoyance,  or  the  power  of  diag-
nosing the  present  or  past  state  of  a  living  organism  either  from  actual

541  F]  TO    CHAPTER    V  485

contact  or  even  in  the  absence  of  the  invalid,  and  from  contact  with  some
object  which  he  has  himself  touched.  If  impressions  of  this  type  are
actually  conveyed  from  one  organism  to  another,  it  can  hardly  be  the  case
that  mesmeric  passes  are  altogether  inert.  If  there  is  a  diffused  influence
which  reveals  the  state  of  a  distant  person  by  means  of  an  object  which
he  has  touched,  this  specific  influence  is  likely  to  be  felt  when  he  is  in
close  proximity  and  is  fixing  his  attention  on  its  communication.  And
the  apparent  effects  of  mesmeric  passes  suggest  the  possible  existence  of
a  so-called  "aura,"  or  influence  environing  each  human  being,  whose
limits  it  is  not  easy  to  define.1

The  early  mesmerists,  e.g.  Puysdgur,  Pe'te'tin,  Despine,  and  Teste,  all
had  the  utmost  faith  in  the  faculty  of  their  subjects  to  see  their  own
disease  and  prescribe  the  right  remedy.  The  same  attitude  of  mind  can
be  traced  all  through  the  Zoist.  Fahnestock  was  perhaps  the  first  to  point
out  the  ambiguity  of  this  alleged  introvision.  "  It  is  well  known  to  me,"
he  says,  "  that  when  a  resolution  is  taken,  a  belief  cherished,  or  a  deter-
mination formed  by  persons  while  in  the  somnambulic  state,  that,  when
they  awake,  although  they  may  know  nothing  about  it  or  relative  to  it,
they  always  do  what  has  been  so  resolved  or  determined  upon  at  the  time
appointed  or  specified  "  (Statuvolism,  p.  203),  and  he  quotes  experiments  to
prove  his  point.  With  the  knowledge  we  now  possess  of  the  extraordi-
nary power  of  self-suggestion  in  producing  all  kinds  of  bodily  symptoms,
it  is  obvious  that  these  cases  cannot  be  adduced  as  evidence  of  anything
more.  A  typical  instance  of  one  of  these  early  observations  is  to  be
found  in  the  Zoist,  vol.  x.  p.  347.  See  also  Puyse'gur,  Recherches  sur
rHomme  dans  le  Somnambulisme  (Paris,  181 1),  pp.  140  etseq.  and  pp.  214
ct  scq. ;  Pe'te'tin,  Electricite'  Animate  (Paris,  1808)  ;  Despine,  Observations
de  Medfdne  Pratique  (1838) — "  Estelle  nous  a  indique*  tous  les  soirs,  dans
sa  crise,  ce  qu'il  y  avait  a  faire  pour  le  lendemain,  tant  pour  le  re'gime
alimentaire  que  pour  les  moyens  me'dicamentaires  "  (p.  38).

In  addition  to  the  belief  that  a  mesmerised  patient  was  his  own  best
doctor,  the  mesmerists  also  held  that  somnambules  were  able  clairvoyantly
to  obtain  knowledge  of  the  state  of  diseased  organs  in  other  persons.
This  clairvoyant  diagnosis  might  be  performed  under  a  variety  of  condi-
tions, none  of  which  were  really  essential.  There  were  somnambules
who  required  contact  with  the  patient ;  there  were  others  who  required
mere  proximity ;  others  must  handle  some  object  which  belonged  to  the
sufferer.  Finally,  others  could  "  travel,"  and  diagnose  the  disease  of  an
absent  person  who  was  merely  named  or  merely  described.

Pnyse'gur's  subject,  Agnes  Burguet,  is  alleged  by  him  to  have  been  uni-
formly successful  in  prognosis  as  well  as  in  diagnosis.     He  emphasises
the  necessity  of  the  patient's  faith  in  the  clairvoyante,  and  it  appears  that
rophecies  were  announced  by  her  to  the  patient,  so  that  there  is  no
difficulty  in  attributing  their  fulfilment,  or  the  success  of  the  remedies  she
1  See,  however,  my  discussion  of  this  subject  above,  in  sections  569  and  570.

486  APPENDICES  [541  G

prescribed,  to  suggestion.  A  number  of  instances  are  given  in  the  works
of  Puysegur  and  Pe'tetin  mentioned  above  ;  also  in  Bertrand's  Du  Magne1-
tisme  en  France  (Paris,  1826).  See  the  Revue  de  THypnotisme,  September
1888,  p.  8 1,  for  references  to  other  sources.

A  good  case  of  what  may  have  been  clairvoyant  diagnosis,  in  which
many  of  the  details  mentioned  were  verified  by  a  post-mortem  examina-
tion, is  given  in  the  Zoist,  vol.  x.  p.  307.

541  G.  In  an  article  by  Professor  Charles  Richet,  entitled  "  Rela-
tion de  di verses  Experiences  sur  la  Transmission  Mentale,  la  Lucidite",  &c.,"
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  18-168,  one  section  is  devoted  to  the
subject  of  clairvoyance  of  maladies.  Professor  Richet  remarks  that  there
are  many  mediums  who  habitually  give  medical  consultations.  Their
usual  custom  is  to  go  rapidly  over  the  various  organs  which  may  be
affected,  and  when  they  come  to  the  one  which  actually  is  affected,  the
sitter  is  delighted,  and  believes  in  their  success.  The  medium  then
arrives  quickly  at  the  general  diagnosis  of  the  case,  and  describes  the
illness  according  to  a  sort  of  scheme  which  is  easily  made  with  the  help  of
medical  books  and  the  experience  gained  by  practice.  The  clairvoyants
with  whom  Professor  Richet  experimented  were  three  subjects  of  his
own,  whom  he  calls  Alice,  He'le'na,  and  Eugenie.  Alice  had  never  prac-
tised medical  consultations,  and  had  never  been  hypnotised  by  any  one
but  Professor  Richet.  He'le'na  had  had  a  little  previous  experience  of
the  kind,  while  Eugenie  kept  a  cabinet  de  consultations,  and  was  much
accustomed  to  patients.

Fifty-three  experiments  were  made,  which  are  recorded  in  full,  and  a
fair  degree  of  success  was  attained.  This  can  only  be  judged  of  from  a
study  of  the  complete  record,  which  I  have  not  space  here  to  quote ;
Professor  Richet's  general  discussion  (loc.  tit.,  pp.  131-132)  is  also  impor-
tant as  bearing  on  the  proper  interpretation  of  the  phenomena.

541  H.  The  following  case  was  sent  to  me  by  Professor  Richet,  and
was  first  printed  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  91.  The  sensitive  em-
ployed was  one  of  the  three  mentioned  in  541  G.

PARIS,  le  8  Mars,  1889.

J'ai  un  tres  beau  cas  de  luciditd,  que  je  vais  vous  raconter  avec  detail.

Vous  ne  savez  peut-etre  pas  que  mon  beau-pere,  Mr.  F.  A.,  a  dtd  malade
assez  gravement  a  partir  du  mois  d'aout,  1887.  (C'est  lui  dont  j'ai  eu  1'occasion
de  parler  dans  les  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  126,  Exp.  XL.)  II  a  e'td  de  plus
en  plus  malade  jusqu'au  mois  de  Janvier,  1888.  A  ce  moment  (Janvier  et  feVrier,
1888)  j'interroge  a  plusieurs  reprises  Alice  [a  person  whom  Mr.  Richet  hypno-
tised] sur  la  santd  de  Mr.  F.  A.  J'avoue  que  je  croyais  Mr.  F.  A.  absolument
perdu,  et  un  jour  entre  autres  en  feVrier,  1888,  j'ai  interrogd  Alice;  elle  m'a  dit,
"  Ne  vous  inquie'tez  pas."  Pour  ma  part  je  croyais  que  Mr.  A.  ne  vivrait  plus
que  huit  jours.

De  fait,  contrairement  a  ce  que  je  pensais  et  ce  que  pensaient  tous  les
me'decins,  il  a  a  peu  pres  gue'ri.  [Certain  symptoms,  however,  described  by  Mr.
Richet,  remained,  which  necessitated  the  constant  attention  of  a  surgical  nurse.]

541  J]  TO    CHAPTER    V  487

Quoiqu'il  soit  ige'  (76  ans),  qu'il  s'amaigrisse  beaucoup,  et  que  ses  forces  ne
s'ame'liorent  pas,  a  partir  du  mois  de  feVrier,  1888  (vers  le  9  feVrier  environ)  il  a
e'te'  sans  empirer.  .  .  .

A  diverses  reprises  (peut-etre  trois  ou  quatre  fois)  j'ai  demand^  a  Alice  de
me  parler  de  lui.  Elle  m'a  dit,  "  Ne  vous  inquie'tez  pas  ;  je  vous  en  parlerai."

II  y  a  deux  jours,  le  jeudi,  7  mars,  a  une  heure  de  1'apres-midi,  des  que  j'ai
cndormi  Alice,  elle  me  dit  (ce  sont  ses  paroles  textueiles  que  je  copie  d'apres  la
stdnographie  que  j'ai  prise):  "J 'avals  hate  de  vous  voir;  je  voulais  vous  voir
hier  pour  vous  parler  de  M.A.  Ou  il  est  plus  souftrant  ou  il  va  avoir  une  crise ;
de  la  fievre,  de  1'alte'ration,  de  la  fatigue.  Quel  mauvais  moment !  Le  mal
s'aggrave;  il  est  tres  abattu.  II  ne  faut  rien  attendre  pour  cette  crise-la."
(Cela  signifie  que  la  crise  ne  se  terminera  pas  par  la  mort.)  "  II  ne  pourra  pas
bouger  ni  faire  un  mouvement.  La  douleur  est  surtout  dans  les  reins,  a  gauche,
et  tres  forte.  Ce  ne  sera  pas  la  derniere  crise.  II  la  supportera  encore.  Elle
aura  lieu  avant  peu,  dans  deux  ou  trois  jours.  Elle  sera  plus  forte  que  toutes
celles  qu'il  a  eu  depuis  un  an.  Le  moment  approche.  II  souffrira  moins  a  la
fin.  II  mourra  au  moment  ou  vous  ne  vous  y  attendrez  pas  ;  ce  n'est  pas  dans
une  crise  qu'il  mourra.  II  ne  pourra  pas  prendre  d'aliments,  on  lui  mouille  les
levres.  ...  II  avait  peur  de  mourir;  maintenant  c'est  bien  change*,  et  il  est
plus  indifferent." l

Voila  ce  que  m'a  dit  Alice  a  une  heure  le  jeudi.  Ce  mdme  jeudi  soir,  en
rentrant  chez  moi,  je  trouve  ma  femme  fort  inquiete,  et  elle  me  raconte  que
dans  la  nuit  du  mercredi  au  jeudi,  vers  une  heure  du  matin — [here  Mr.
Richet  relates  in  detail  how  for  the  first  time  for  thirteen  months  the  attendant
had  been  unable  to  assist  Mr.  A.,  who  had  been  in  great  agony  for  three  hours,
until  at  length  a  surgeon  was  sent  for,  with  whose  aid  the  sufferings  of  the
patient  were  instantly  relieved.]  II  est  Evident,  et  meme  absolument  sur,
qu' Alice  n'a  pu  savoir  cela;  moi-meme  je  1'ignorais  absolument  a  une
heure.  .  .  .

II  faut  noter  comme  essentiel  que  depuis  un  an  et  un  mois  jamais  Mr.  A.
n'a  eu  une  crise  aussi  forte  et  avec  autant  d'an  goisseque  dans  la  nuit  de
mercredi  a  jeudi.  [Signed]  CH.  RICHET.

541  J.  It  will  be  found  as  we  proceed  that  in  each  direction  in  turn
suggestive  dynamogeny  leads  up  to  some  definite  form  of  supernormal
faculty.  Thus,  to  begin  with,  these  heteraesthesiae,  or  new  sensibilities  to
living  beings,  with  which  we  are  for  the  moment  concerned,  glide  in-
sensibly into  "community  of  sensation"  and  "medical  clairvoyance."
The  perception,  that  is  to  say,  of  some  organic  influence  from  a  person  in
proximity  passes  on  into  perception  of  the  sensations  which  that  person  is
experiencing,  and  then  of  the  state  of  his  body  which  gives  rise  to  those
sensations.  In  saying,  however,  that  the  narrower  and  nearer  faculties
"pass  on  "  into  the  wider  and  more  remote,  I  am  by  no  means  asserting
that  there  is  a  real  continuity  of  operation, — as  though  the  same  agencies
were  acting  with  less  or  greater  power.  On  the  other  hand,  I  believe  that
each  of  these  apparently  gradual  series  involves  a  fundamental  transition
from  organic  to  spiritual  faculties; — from  powers  developed  by  natural

1  Ces  details  sur  les  aliments,  la  secheresse  des  levres,  et  Pindifference  progressive  i  la
mort,  sont  absolument  vrais.

488  APPENDICES  [541  K

selection  on  earth,  and  exercised  through  the  material  organism,  to  powers
derived  from  the  metetherial  world,  and  exercised  in  spite  of,  rather  than
by  aid  of,  the  material  organism.  There  must,  indeed,  on  such  a  hypo-
thesis exist  somewhere  a  unity  more  fundamental  even  than  that  division ;
since  the  terrene  faculties  must  needs  be  derived  and  narrowed  from  the
cosmical  faculties,  and  the  laws  of  matter  must  form  an  incidental  case  of
the  more  universal  laws  of  spirit.  The  time,  however,  has  certainly  not  yet
come  at  which  we  can  attempt  any  real  fusion  of  that  narrower  or  material
scheme  of  laws — of  which  we  know  something  already — with  that  wider
or  spiritual  scheme,  whose  existence  we  merely  infer  from  certain  residual
phenomena  which  the  laws  of  matter  as  known  to  us  will  not  explain.

And  therefore  in  this  serial  enumeration  of  the  effects  of  hypnotic
suggestion  I  will  not  for  the  moment  press  these  hetersesthesiae  further,  so
as  to  try  to  lead  them  on  into  clairvoyance,  but  will  rather  leave  the
various  supernormal  powers  into  which  hypnotism  introduces  us  to  be
dealt  with  together  at  a  more  advanced  point  in  the  discussion.

541  K.  Medicamentous  substances  have  also  been  claimed  by  many
different  hypnotists  as  exerting  from  a  little  distance,  or  when  in  sealed
tubes,  specific  influences  on  patients.  The  phenomenon  is  of  the  same
nature  as  the  alleged  specific  influences  of  metals, — all  being  very
possibly  explicable  as  the  mere  freak  of  self-suggestion.  This  explanation
was  offered  long  ago  by  Braid,  and  I  quote  the  following  account  of  the
experiments  with  which  he  supported  it  from  an  article  by  Dr.  Bramwell,
entitled  "James  Braid;  his  Work  and  Writings,"  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.
xii.  p.  127  et  seq.

In  Braid's  time  the  mesmerists  held  that  magnets,  certain  metals,  crystals,
&c.,  possessed  a  peculiar  power  and,  with  sensitive  subjects,  were  capable  of
producing  attraction  and  other  remarkable  phenomena.  Some  experienced  an
unpleasant  sensation  like  an  aura,  others  got  headache,  or  attacks  of  fainting  or
catalepsy,  with  spasms  so  violent  that  they  apparently  endangered  life.  Fre-
quently there  was  hyperaesthesia  of  the  special  senses.  Many  also  fancied
they  saw  fiery  bundles  of  light  stream  from  the  poles  of  the  magnet.  All  this
was  said  to  happen  even  when  the  subjects  did  not  see  the  magnets  and  did
not  know  what  was  being  done.  Braid  performed  many  experiments  in  order
to  test  these  statements,  with  the  following  results :  the  phenomena  appeared
when  the  patients  had  preconceived  ideas  on  the  subject,  or  when  these  were
excited  by  leading  questions,  but  were  invariably  absent  when  they  were
ignorant  of  what  was  being  done.  Pretended  magnets  also  produced  the
phenomena  when  the  patients  knew  what  was  expected  to  occur.  Reichen-
bach  recorded  an  instance  where,  by  the  mere  exposure  of  a  sensitive  plate  in
a  box  with  a  magnet,  an  impression  had  been  made,  as  if  it  had  been  exposed
to  the  full  influence  of  the  light.  Braid  repeated  the  experiment,  and  also  had
similar  ones  performed  for  him  by  an  expert  photographer,  and,  when  all
sources  of  fallacy  were  guarded  against,  the  results  were  invariably  negative.
According  to  Braid,  the  mind  of  the  patient  alone  was  sufficient  to  produce  tf
effects  attributed  to  magnetic  or  odyllic  force,  and  suggested  ideas  were  capable
of  exciting  a  great  variety  of  physical  sensations  and  mental  conditions.

541  K]  TO    CHAPTER    V  489

[Here  follows  an  account  of  an  experiment  of  Braid's  to  show  that
suggestion  was  the  true  explanation  of  the  supposed  mesmeric  powers  of
magnets  and  certain  metals.  A  physician  having  demonstrated  to  him  the
effects  produced  by  a  magnet  on  a  mesmerised  patient,  Braid  in  turn  showed
that  he  could  produce  effects  of  just  the  same  kind  on  her  by  means  of  a  key
and  ring, — all  that  was  necessary  being  to  mention  in  her  presence  that  certain
specified  effects  would  follow  from  her  holding  or  touching  it  in  specified
ways.]

In  1843  Braid  referred  to  Elliotson's  belief  in  the  powers  of  certain  metals,
and  to  Wakley's  experiments.  The  latter,  operating  with  a  non-mesmerising
metal,  made  the  patient  believe  he  was  using  a  mesmerising  one,  whereupon
she  fell  asleep ;  and  he  concluded  that  all  the  subjects  were  impostors.  Braid
denied  this,  asserting  that  the  active  agent  was  simply  the  imagination,  and
that  the  metals  were  neither  mesmeric  nor  non-mesmeric.  In  the  same  way  he
explained  the  action  of  the  wooden  tractors  which  Dr.  Hayarth,  in  1799,  suc-
cessfully substituted  for  the  metal  ones  of  Mr.  Perkins.  The  latter  consisted  of
two  pieces  of  metal,  one  apparently  of  iron  and  the  other  of  brass,  about  three
inches  long,  blunt  at  one  end  and  pointed  at  the  other.  They  were  invented  by
Dr.  Elisha  Perkins,  of  Norwich,  Connecticut,  who  in  1796  took  out  a  patent  for
them,  and  were  applied  by  drawing  them  lightly  over  the  part  affected  for  about
twenty  minutes.  This  method  of  treatment,  which  was  very  fashionable  at  one
time,  was  termed  Perkinism,  in  honour  of  its  inventor.  .  .  .

The  power  of  imagination  and  excited  attention  in  producing  a  specific  in-
fluence in  a  healthy  person,  was  beautifully  illustrated,  he  said,  in  the  following
case  :  [Having  read  an  account  of  certain  medicines  which  could  manifest  their
influence  through  glass,  the  patient  simply  holding  the  closed  phial  in  his  hand,
he  took  a  phial  and  filled  it  with  coloured  water.  He  then  stated  in  the  pres-
ence of  a  lady,  who  was  not  hypnotised,  that  it  would  act  as  an  emetic  through
the  glass,  and  asked  her  to  hold  it  in  her  hand,  and  try  the  effect.  Almost  at
once  she  felt  the  appropriate  sensations,  and  vomiting  was  apparently  imminent
when  Braid  stopped  it  by  giving  her  a  second  phial,  which  he  said  would
neutralise  the  effect  of  the  first.]

These  views  of  the  specific  action  of  different  metals,  &c.,  were  revived
by  the  Salpetriere  School  and  a  few  other  hypnotists ;  but  tests  by  more
careful  observers  have  again  practically  proved  the  results  obtained  to
be  due  to  suggestion.  It  is  not  enough  merely  to  abstain  from  mention-
ing to  the  hypnotised  subject  what  substance  is  being  used  in  the  experi-
ment ;  it  is  necessary  also  to  remember  his  extraordinary  acuteness  in
picking  up  hints  from  the  voice,  gestures,  or  facial  expression  of  all  the
persons  present  with  him, — even  when  he  appears  to  be  in  a  totally  uncon-
scious condition.  For  this  reason  no  experiment  of  this  kind  can  be
considered  evidential  if  the  experimenters  themselves  know  what  substance
ng  employed.

The  Committee  appointed  by  the  Paris  Academic  de  Me"decine
to  test  the  experiments  of  Luys— one  of  the  most  notorious  expo-
nents of  the  doctrine  of  specific  influences  in  the  present  day — found
that  when  the  substances  were  wrapped  up  so  as  to  be  indistinguish-
able, and  the  experimenters  did  not  know  which  they  were  using — con-

490  APPENDICES  [542  A

trary  to  Luys'  own  practice — no  specific  results  followed.     The  Report  of
this  Committee  was  presented  by  Dujardin-Beaumetz  in  1888.

The  following  passage  is  from  Dr.  BramwelPs  article  just  quoted
(op.  cit.,  p.  156).

Before  Braid  appreciated  the  mental  influence  in  hypnosis,  he  was  inclined
to  believe  in  phrenology,  and  the  same  cause  seems  to  have  led  the  Salpetriere
School  into  error  as  to  the  action  of  magnets,  metals,  and  medicines  in  sealed
tubes.  That  all  these  owed  their  virtue  to  suggestion  was  clearly  demonstrated
by  Braid  ;  yet,  despite  this  fact,  the  metallo-therapeutics  of  Burq  were  revived
by  Charcot  and  his  disciples,  and  Dr.  Luys  still  plays  with  his  india-rubber
dolls,  and  Professor  Benedikt  with  his  magnets.  An  account,  by  Dr.  F.
Peterson  and  others,  of  Professor  Benedikt's  theory  of  the  action  of  magnets,
and  of  the  experimental  exposure  of  its  fallacious  nature,  read  before  the  New
York  Academy  of  Medicine,  closely  resembles  what  was  said  and  done  by
Braid  on  the  same  subject.  According  to  Professor  Benedikt,  "certain  forms  of
hysteria  are  better  treated  by  the  magnet  than  by  electricity,  hydropathy,  or
drugs.  When  a  magnet  is  applied  to  the  sensitive  vertebrae  without  removal  of
the  dress,  the  irritable  patient  soon  becomes  quiet  and  even  quasi-paralysed,  the
muscles  gradually  relax,  the  respiration  becomes  sighing,  consciousness  slowly
disappears ;  the  resistance  to  conduction  in  motor  nerves  could  easily  become
absolute.  The  two  poles  have  different  effects,  the  magnet  must  be  employed
with  caution,  patients  may  be  injured  by  it."  These  statements  were  tested  in
America ;  magnets  of  enormous  power  were  used,  and  experiments  made  on
human  subjects  and  lower  animals.  A  young  dog  was  subjected  to  magnetic
influence  for  five  hours ;  but,  instead  of  being  paralysed  from  "  increased
resistance  to  conduction  in  motor  nerves,"  on  being  liberated,  it  was  more
lively  than  before.  The  experimenters  conclude  "  that  the  human  organism  is
in  no  wise  appreciably  affected  by  the  most  powerful  magnets  known  to  modern
science;  that  neither  direct  nor  reversed  magnetism  exerts  any  perceptible
influence  upon  the  iron  contained  in  the  blood,  upon  the  circulation,  upon
ciliary  or  protoplasmic  movements,  upon  sensory  or  motor  nerves,  or  upon  the
brain.  The  ordinary  magnets  used  in  medicine,"  they  say,  "  have  a  purely
suggestive  or  psychic  effect,  and  would  in  all  probability  be  quite  as  useful  if
made  of  wood."

542  A.  We  now  come  to  the  effects  of  hypnotic  suggestion  in  produc-
ing certain  definite  changes  in  the  vaso-motor  system,  in  glands  and  secre-
tions, &c.  I  give  a  few  examples  in  this  and  the  two  next  Appendices.
In  the  Revue  de  r  Hypnotisme,  September  1891,  p.  85,  De  Jong  reports
a  complete  cure  achieved  by  suggestion,  of  a  most  desperate  case  of
haemorrhagy  in  a  boy  of  nine.  The  symptoms  first  appeared  when  he  '
was  eighteen  months  old.  One  of  his  sisters  had  died  of  the  same
disease.  The  loss  of  blood,  through  the  nose  or  through  the  mouth,
occurred  irregularly,  at  intervals  sometimes  of  two  months,  sometimes
of  two  weeks.

Grasset  (in  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  November  1887,  p.  141)  reports
some  cases  in  which,  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  he  arrested  loss  of  blood
through  the  mouth  in  hysterical  patients.

543A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  491

542  B.  Dr.  Burot  in  the  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  January  1890,
p.  197,  reports  the  case  of  a  patient  whose  arms  were  contracted  by
hysterical  attacks,  the  contracture  being  accompanied  by  local  asphyxia  of
the  hands,  which  lasted  for  several  weeks.  Both  hands  were  swollen  and
violet  in  color,  and  of  a  temperature  far  below  the  normal.  The  tempera-
ture was  raised  day  by  day  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  which  at  length  cured
the  asphyxia.  At  a  later  stage  it  recurred,  but  was  found  more  amenable
to  treatment.  It  also  appeared  that  the  temperature  could  be  lowered  as
well  as  raised  by  suggestion.  The  contracture  always  recurred  when  the
asphyxia  was  brought  back  by  suggestion.

Professor  Beaunis  and  Dr.  KrafTt-Ebing  have  slowed  the  pulse  by
hypnotic  suggestion,1  and  these  savants,  as  well  as  Professor  Bernheim,  M.
Focachon  and  others,  have  produced  redness  and  blisters  by  the  same
means.  Drs.  Mabille,  Ramadier,  Bourru,  Burot,  have  produced  localised
hypenemia,  epistaxis,  ecchymosis.2  Dr.  Forel  and  others  have  restored
arrested  secretions  at  a  precisely  fixed  hour.8  Dr.  Krafft-Ebing  has  pro-
duced a  rise  of  temperature  at  moments  fixed  by  himself — a  rise,  for
instance,  from  37°  to  38.5°  C.4  Burot  has  lowered  the  temperature
of  a  hand  as  much  as  10  C.  by  suggestion.6  He  supposes  that  the
mechanism  employed  is  the  constriction  of  the  brachial  artery,  beneath  the
biceps.  "  How  can  it  be,"  he  asks,  "  that  when  one  merely  says  to  the
subject,  'your  hand  will  become  cold,'  the  vaso-motor  nervous  system
answers  by  constricting  the  artery  to  the  degree  necessary  to  achieve  the
result  desired  ?  Oest  ce  qui  depasse  notre  imagination"

542  C.     The  following  is  a  summary  of  a  case  of  the  cure  of  hyper-
hydrosis   reported  by  Dr.    Bramwell  in   the   British  Medical  Journal,
September  loth,  1898  : —

Miss  B.,  aged  fifteen,  January  1890.  On  the  back  of  the  left  arm,  just  above
the  wrist,  a  patch  of  skin  2\  inches  long  by  \\  broad  was  the  seat  of  constant
perspiration.  This  had  existed  from  early  childhood,  was  always  excessive,  and
invariably  rendered  more  so  by  exertion  or  emotion.  The  forearm  was  always
enveloped  in  bandages,  but  these  rapidly  became  saturated,  and  the  perspiration
dripped  upon  the  floor.  On  January  loth  the  patient  was  hypnotised  for  the
first  time,  and  somnambulism  induced.  By  the  following  day  the  perspiration
had  markedly  diminished;  the  patient  was  again  hypnotised,  when  the  per-
spiration ceased.  Two  years  later  there  had  been  no  relapse.

543  A.     The  best  known  and  in  some  respects  best  observed  modern

1  Beaunis,  Le  Soninambulisme  Provogue.

8  See  for  a  brief  account,  He-cue  de  I  'Hypnotisme,  December  1887,  p.  183.

•  Rtvue  de  rffypnottsme,  April  1889,  p.  298.

4  Rn<ue  de  T Hypnotism^  March   1890,  p.  278.     Compare  the  inexplicable  rises  of

temperature  in  Dr.  Teale's  case,  Lancet,  1875,  vo1-  *•  PP-  34°»  343-  457  >'  vo1-  "•  P-  i<>7  \

and  iSSi,  vol.  i.  pp.  797,  842.    This  apparent  isolability  of  temperature  changes,  gener-

ielicatclv  indicative  of  conditions  of  the  entire  organism,  U  a  phenomenon  quite

a*  noteworthy  as  the  dissociability  of  pain  from  organic  injury

*  Revue  de  I' Hypnotisme,  January  1890,  p.  197.

492  APPENDICES  [543  A

case  of  stigmatisation  is  that  of  Louise  Lateau.  In  spite  of  Virchow's
famous  alternative  with  regard  to  this  case,  ou  supercherie,  ou  miracle,
the  facts  are  now  thoroughly  established  and  generally  accepted  by
physiologists,  and,  from  the  point  of  view  of  this  book,  they  fall  naturally
enough  among  subliminal  responses  to  self-suggestion.  They  have  an
interesting  bearing,  too,  on  mediaeval  traditions  of  stigmatisation  in  St.
Francis  of  Assisi  and  others.

Louise  Lateau  was  born  in  January  1850,  in  the  village  of  Bois  d'Haine,
Hainault,  Belgium.  Both  her  parents  were  robust  and  hardy  persons,  who  had
never  suffered  from  any  form  of  haemorrhage  or  of  nervous  disturbance,  and  it
is  further  noteworthy  that  Louise  herself  had  good  health  up  to  the  age  of
seventeen,  was  accustomed  to  hard  work,  and  had  shown  a  large  amount  of
physical  endurance,  was  noted  for  her  common  sense  and  power  of  self-control,
and  bore  a  good  character  with  all  her  neighbours  and  acquaintances,  showing
no  traces,  either  physical  or  moral,  of  any  hysterical  tendencies.

An  illness  of  an  indefinite  character,  involving  intense  neuralgic  pains,  began
in  1867,  and  increased  up  to  March  1868.  At  that  time  her  appetite  was  com-
pletely gone,  and  for  an  entire  month  she  took  nothing  but  water  and  the
medicines  prescribed  for  her.  On  April  i6th  she  was  thought  to  be  dying,
and  received  the  Sacrament.  From  that  day  she  so  rapidly  improved  that  on
the  2ist  she  was  able  to  walk  to  the  parish  church,  a  distance  of  three-quarters
of  a  mile,  and  her  remarkable  cure  was  the  first  incident  that  attracted  public
attention.

Three  days  later  the  stigmata  first  appeared,  and  thirteen  weeks  later,  on
July  1 7th,  she  began  to  exhibit  the  phenomena  of  ecstasy,  during  which  there
was  a  complete  suspension  of  the  exercise  of  the  senses.  This  occurred  every
Friday  from  July  I7th  onwards,  the  attack  lasting  from  about  8.30  A.M.  to  6  P.M.
She  was  then  entirely  unconscious  of  her  surroundings,  but  on  waking  had  a
clear  recollection  of  all  that  had  passed  through  her  mind  during  the  attack.

The  first  appearance  of  blood  issuing  from  the  skin  occurred  on  Friday,
April  24th,  1868,  when  she  saw  it  flowing  from  a  spot  on  the  left  side  of  her
chest.  In  accordance  with  her  ordinary  reserved  habits,  she  kept  silence  on
the  subject.  The  following  Friday  she  again  remarked  it  on  the  same  spot,
and  also  on  the  upper  surface  of  each  foot,  and  she  now  mentioned  it  in  con-
fession to  the  priest,  who  reassured  her,  and  bade  her  not  to  speak  of  the
circumstance.  On  the  third  Friday,  May  8th,  blood  began  to  ooze  during  the
night  from  the  left  side  and  both  feet,  and  by  9  o'clock  it  also  flowed  from  the
palms  and  backs  of  both  the  hands.  Finally,  on  September  28th,  the  forehead
also  became  moist  with  blood,  and  these  bleedings  recurred  regularly  every
Friday  up  to  April  I5th,  1870,  when  Dr.  Lefebvre  published  his  report,  and
later,  in  1872,  when  Dr.  Warlomont  published  his.

It  was  the  religious  authorities  who  requested  Dr.  Lefebvre,  an  eminent
Louvain  physician  and  university  professor,  and  a  specialist  in  nervous
diseases,  to  undertake  the  examination  of  the  case.  She  was  under  his  super-
intendence from  August  3oth,  1868,  for  twenty  weeks,  during  which  time  he
took  more  than  a  hundred  medical  friends  to  examine  the  phenomena.

On  any  day  during  the  week,  from  Saturday  till  Thursday  morning,  there
was  on  the  back  and  palm  of  each  hand  an  oval  spot  or  patch,  redder  than  the
rest  of  the  skin,  and  about  half  an  inch  in  its  longest  diameter  ;  these  patches

543  B]  TO     CHAPTER    V  493

were  dry  and  somewhat  glistening  on  the  surface,  and  the  centres  of  the  two
exactly  corresponded.  On  the  dorsum  and  sole  of  each  foot  there  were  similar
marks,  nearly  three-quarters  of  an  inch  in  length.  The  marks  on  the  forehead
were  not  permanent,  and,  except  on  Fridays,  the  points  from  which  the  blood
escaped  could  not  be  distinguished.  The  signs  announcing  the  approaching
bleeding  began  to  show  themselves  on  Thursday  about  noon.  Bleeding  almost
always  began  between  midnight  and  I  A.M.  on  Friday.  The  stigmata  did  not
all  bleed  at  once,  but  successively,  in  no  fixed  order.  On  the  chest  the  stigma
lay  in  the  space  between  the  fifth  and  sixth  ribs,  external  to  and  a  little  below
the  left  breast,  and  the  blood  oozed  from  a  circular  spot  nearly  a  quarter  of  an
inch  in  diameter.  On  the  forehead  the  blood  was  seen  to  issue  from  twelve  or
fifteen  minute  points,  arranged  in  circular  form.  A  band,  two  fingers  in  breadth,
passing  round  the  head  equidistant  from  the  eyebrows  and  the  roots  of  the
hair,  would  include  this  bleeding  zone,  which  was  puffy  and  painful  on  pressure.
Dr.  Lefebvre  estimated  the  quantity  of  blood  lost  on  each  occasion  at  about
seven-eighths  of  a  quart.  The  bleeding  lasted  twenty-four  hours.  On  the
Saturday  the  stigmata  were  quite  dry,  with  occasional  little  scales  of  dried  blood
on  their  surface,  and  quite  painless.

The  chief  authority  for  this  case  is  Dr.  Lefebvre's  report,  Louise  Lattau
de  Bois  d'Haine :  sa  Vie,  ses  Extases,  ses  Stigmates  (Louvain,  1870).  Dr.
Warlomont  examined  her  six  years  later,  and  found  that  the  places  of  the
stigmata  had  become  continuously  painful,  and  that  there  was  an  addi-
tional stigma  on  the  right  shoulder.

An  excellent  and  circumstantial  English  account,  based  on  Lefebvre's
report,  was  published  in  Macmillarfs  Magazine,  April  1871  (vol.  xxiii.
pp.  488  et  seq.),  and  the  above  summary  is  chiefly  founded  on  this.

Gorres'  Christliche  Mystik,  translated  into  French  under  the  title  of
La  Mystique  Divine,  naturelle  et  diabolique  (1862),  and  A  Letter  from  the
Earl  of  Shrewsbury,  descriptive  of  the  Estatica  of  Caldamo,  &c.  (1842)
give  some  earlier  cases,  the  most  important  of  which  is  that  of  Maria  Mori,
the  Estatica  of  Caldarno  (1812-1868).

543  B.  Three  cases  of  the  production  of  cruciform  marks  reported
by  Dr.  Biggs,  of  Lima,  appeared  in  the/<7»r«tf/S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  TOO,  and
I  quote  one  of  them.

October  i8M,  1885.

.   .   .  Another  case  .  .  .  was  the  first  of  this  kind  of  experiment  that  I  tried;

in  Santa  Barbara,  California.     I  was  staying  there  in  1879  with  a  friend,

Mr.  <;.,  a  long-resident  chemist  in  that  town.     His  wife  had  a  kind  of  half

servant  and  half  companion,  a  girl  of  about  eighteen,  who  complained  to  me

one  day  of  a  pain  through  her  chest.     Without  her  knowing  what  I  intended  to

do,  I  tried  magnetism;  she  fell  into  a  deep  magnetic  sleep  in  a  few  minutes.

With  this  subject  I  tried  many  interesting  experiments,  which  I  will  pass  over.

One  day  I  magnetised  her  as  usual,  and  told  her  in  a  whisper  (I  had  found  her

more  susceptible  this  way  than  when  I  spoke  aloud  in  my  usual  voice),

*  You  will  have  a  red  cross  appear  on  the  upper  part  of  your  chest,  only  on

Friday.     In  the  course  of  some  time  the  words  Sancta  above  the  cross,

and  Cruets  und  •   will  appear  also;  at  same  time  a  little  blood  will

come  from  the  cross."     In  my  vest  pocket  I  had  a  cross  of  rock  crystal.     I

494  APPENDICES  [543  B

opened  the  top  button  of  her  dress  and  placed  this  cross  on  the  upper  part  of
the  manubrium,  a  point  she  could  not  see  unless  by  aid  of  a  looking-glass,
saying  to  her,  "  This  is  the  spot  where  the  cross  will  appear."  This  was  on  a
Tuesday.  I  asked  Mrs.  G.  to  watch  the  girl  and  tell  me  if  anything  seemed  to
ail  her.  Next  day  Mrs.  G.  told  me  she  had  seen  the  girl  now  and  again  put
her  left  wrist  over  the  top  part  of  her  chest,  over  the  dress  ;  this  was  frequently
repeated,  as  if  she  felt  some  tickling  or  slight  irritation  about  the  part,  but  not
otherwise  noticed;  she  seemed  to  carry  her  hand  up  now  and  then  uncon-
sciously. When  Friday  came  I  said,  after  breakfast,  "  Come,  let  me  magnetise
you  a  little ;  you  have  not  had  a  dose  for  several  days."  She  was  always  willing
to  be  magnetised,  as  she  always  expressed  herself  as  feeling  very  much  rested  and
comfortable  afterwards.  In  a  few  minutes  she  was  in  a  deep  sleep.  I  un-
buttoned the  top  part  of  her  dress,  and  there,  to  my  complete  and  utter
astonishment,  was  a  pink  cross,  exactly  over  the  place  where  I  had  put  the  one
of  crystal.  It  appeared  every  Friday,  and  was  invisible  on  all  other  days.
This  was  seen  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  G.,  and  my  old  friend  and  colleague,  Dr.  B.,
who  had  become  much  interested  in  my  experiments  in  magnetism,  and  often
suggested  the  class  of  experiments  he  wished  to  see  tried.  About  six  weeks
after  the  cross  first  appeared  I  had  occasion  to  take  a  trip  to  the  Sandwich
Islands.  Before  going  I  magnetised  the  girl,  told  her  that  the  cross  would  keep
on  showing  itself  every  Friday  for  about  four  months.  I  intended  my  trip  to
the  Islands  to  last  about  three  months.  I  did  this  to  save  the  girl  from  the
infliction  of  this  mark  so  strangely  appearing  perhaps  for  a  lifetime,  in  case  any-
thing might  happen  to  me  and  prevent  me  from  seeing  her  again.  I  also  asked
Dr.  B.  and  Mr.  G.  to  write  me  by  every  mail  to  Honolulu,  and  tell  me  if  the
cross  kept  on  appearing  every  Friday,  and  to  be  very  careful  to  note  any
change,  should  any  take  place,  such  as  the  surging  of  blood  or  any  appearance
of  the  words  Sancta  Crucis.  I  was  rather  curious  to  know  if  distance
between  us,  the  girl  and  myself,  over  2000  miles,  made  any  difference  in  the
apparition  of  the  cross.  While  I  was  at  the  Sandwich  Islands  I  received  two
letters  from  Mr.  G.  and  one  from  Dr.  B.  by  three  different  mails,  each  telling
that  the  cross  kept  on  making  its  appearance  as  usual ;  blood  had  been  noticed
once,  and  also  part  of  the  letter  S  above  the  cross,  nothing  more.  I  returned
in  a  little  less  than  three  months.  The  cross  still  made  its  appearance  every
Friday,  and  did  so  for  about  a  month  more,  but  getting  paler  and  paler  until  it
became  invisible,  as  nearly  as  possible  four  months  from  the  time  I  left  for  the
Sandwich  Islands.  The  above-mentioned  young  woman  was  a  native  Cali-
fornian,  of  Spanish  parentage,  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  of  tolerably  good
health,  parents  and  grandparents  alive.  She  was  of  fair  natural  intelligence,
but  utterly  ignorant  and  uneducated.  ...  M.  H.  BIGGS,  M.D.

To  this  account  Edmund  Gurney  adds  in  a  note  : —

As  to  the  first  two  of  these  cases  [the  one  quoted  above  and  another],  it  is
possible  to  suppose  that  the  hypnotic  suggestion  took  effect  indirectly,  by
causing  the  girls  to  rub  a  patch  of  the  right  shape.  The  suggestion  may
have  been  received  as  a  command,  and  there  would  be  nothing  very  surprising
in  a  subject's  automatically  adopting  the  right  means  to  fulfil  a  previous
hypnotic  command.  And  even  the  third  case  might  be  so  accounted  for,  if
the  rubbing  took  place  in  sleep.  At  the  same  time  it  would  be  rash,  I
think,  absolutely  to  reject  the  hypothesis  of  the  more  direct  effect.  [The

543  D]  TO    CHAPTER    V  495

writer  goes  on  to  quote  other  cases  of  the  far-reaching  effects  of  hypnotic
suggestion  in  producing  organic  changes,  with  which  these  may  be  compared;
and  points  out  the  difficulties  in  the  way  of  any  precise  physiological  explana-
tion of  the  affection  of  areas  of  the  body  that  have  no  definite  physiological

limit.]

543  C.  Another  remarkable  American  case  of  stigmatisation  was
reported  in  the  Courier-Journal,  Louisville,  Ky.,  December  yth,  1891,
on  the  authority  of  Dr.  M.  F.  Coomes  and  of  several  other  physicians.
According  to  Dr.  Coomes'  account,  a  certain  Mrs.  Stuckenborg  seems  to
have  bled  from  spontaneously  formed  stigmata  on  every  Friday  since  the
beginning  of  June.  There  are  wounds  on  the  hands  and  feet,  a  wound
on  the  side  (from  whence  issues  a  watery  exudation  tinged  with  blood),  a
cross  on  the  forehead,  a  large  cross  and  a  heart  on  the  chest,  and  the
letters  I.H.S.  on  the  right  shoulder.  From  three  to  six  every  Friday  there
is  profound  trance,  with  superficial  anaesthesia,  but  much  convulsive  move-
ment and  manifestation  of  inward  pain.  If  we  may  rely  on  Dr.  Coomes'
account,  which  seems  a  careful  one,  simulation  is  quite  out  of  the  question.
The  patient  seems  to  desire  neither  money  nor  notoriety.  She  is  a  devout
Catholic,  but  does  not  talk  about  religion ;  and  complains  much  of  the
pain  and  exhaustion  due  to  the  wounds  and  the  convulsive  trance.

Dr.  Hodgson  paid  two  visits  to  Louisville  in  the  hope  of  seeing  Mrs.
Stuckenborg,  but  was  unable  to  do  so  owing  to  the  restrictions  imposed
on  her  by  the  Roman  Catholic  authorities.  He  made  the  acquaintance,
however,  of  Dr.  Coomes  (himself  a  Catholic),  and  one  or  two  other
medical  men  who  had  seen  the  case,  and  he  reported,  after  his  talks  with
them,  that  there  seemed  no  doubt  of  its  genuineness.  Dr.  Coomes  also
sent  us  several  photographs  of  the  stigmata,  but  no  further  information  as
to  the  later  developments  of  the  case  has  been  obtainable.

543  D.  In  the  following  case  the  intellectual  character,  as  I  have
termed  it,  of  the  organic  process  which  responds  to  suggestion  is  illus-
trated in  a  striking  and  complex  way.  Mdlle.  lima  S.,  a  subject  observed
by  Drs.  Jendrassik  and  von  Krafft-Ebing1  (mainly  at  Gratz),  was  ultimately
cured  by  hypnotic  suggestion  (or  so  Dr.  Krafft-Ebing  claims  in  1888)  of  a
lifelong  tendency  to  hysteria  and  melancholy,  such  as  had  driven  her
grandfather,  father,  brother,  and  sister  to  suicide.  She  was  therefore  on
the  whole  a  great  gainer ;  but  her  extreme  susceptibility  to  blistering  by
suggestion  amounted  to  a  real  risk  in  the  absence  of  careful  guardianship.
Once  at  least  she  was  much  injured  and  offended  by  the  culpable  act  of
a  medical  student  who  laid  a  pair  of  scissors  upon  her  chest,  telling  her
that  they  were  red-hot,  and  thus  created  a  serious  wound,  which  took
two  months  to  heal.  Krafft-Ebing  made  a  humane  variation  on  this  risky
experiment.  Like  Dr.  Biggs  in  the  case  quoted  above,  he  ordered  the  pro-
duction of  red  patches  of  definite  shapes,  which  were  to  be  formed  without

*  "  An  Experimental  Study  in  Hypnotism,"  by  Dr.  R.  von  Krafft-Ebing,  translated
by  C.  G.  Chaddock,  M.D.,  New  York,  1889.

496  APPENDICES  [543  E

itching,  pain,  or  inflammation.  The  history  of  the  process  thus  set  up  is
a  curious  one.  The  organism  had  to  perform,  so  to  say,  a  novel  feat,
which  took  a  great  deal  longer  than  the  rough  and  ready  process  of  vesi-
cation.  From  February  24th  to  May  3rd,  1888,  a  livid  red  hypersemic
surface  corresponding  to  the  letter  K  was  slowly  and  painlessly  developing
itself  on  a  selected  and  protected  area  between  the  shoulder-blades.  It
seems  doubtful  whether  this  performance  was  not  altogether  a  new  one,
— whether  any  precisely  similar  trophic  changes  have  ever  occurred  spon-
taneously. The  support  thus  given  to  Dr.  Biggs'  narrative  is  most
striking;  and  one  lesson  of  the  experiments  of  both  physicians  un-
doubtedly is  that  science  need  not  be  the  loser  by  a  careful  adherence  to
the  rules  of  ordinary  humanity.

But  it  is  the  incident  next  to  be  cited  which  speaks  the  most  strongly
for  the  educated  character — so  to  say — of  the  intelligence  presiding  over
these  organic  suggestions.

Mdlle.  lima  S.  was  permanently  anaesthetic  on  the  right  side,  and
that  side  was  therefore,  in  my  view,  likely  to  be  more  immediately  subject
to  subliminal  control.  At  any  rate,  it  appeared  that  when  any  object  was
pressed  on  her  left  side,  and  suggested  as  hot,  no  mark  followed  at  the
place  of  contact;  but  a  corresponding  brand  appeared,  symmetrically
and  reversed,  upon  the  right  side.  For  example,  an  initial  letter,  K,  was
pressed  by  Dr.  Jendrassik  on  her  left  shoulder.  In  a  few  hours  a  K-like
blister,  "with  quite  sharp  outlines,"  came  on  the  corresponding  spot  on
the  right  side.  But  note  that  the  new  K  (the  letters  are  figured  in  Krafft-
Ebing's  work)  was  by  no  means  an  exact  reproduction  of  the  original  one.
It  was  of  about  the  same  size,  but  of  a  different  type,  in  fact  a  capital  K
in  another  person's  handwriting.  Just  as  in  Dr.  Biggs'  cases  it  was  the
idea  of  cruciformity  which  was  induced  by  suggestion,  so  here  it  was  the
idea  of  K-shape ;  and  insomuch  as  this  suggested  mark  corresponded  to
an  intellectual  idea,  that  idea  underwent  some  idiosyncratic  modification
in  the  subject's  subliminal  intelligence,  and  the  resultant  mark,  though
identical  in  significance,  was  different  in  contour.  And  here  again  we
have  confirmation  of  one  of  the  most  curious  of  Dr.  Biggs'  phenomena —
the  tardy  appearance  of  part  of  an  S — an  attempt  at  SANCTA — as  the
result  of  suggestion,  unaided  by  the  physical  contact  of  any  S-shaped
object,  but  in  its  due  position  above  the  suggested  cross.

543  E.  Dr.  Pierre  Janet  describes  similar  experiments — in  particular
the  production  of  red  marks  by  means  of  imaginary  mustard  poultices —
in  the  case  of  his  subjects  Le'onie  and  Rose  (D Automatisme  Psychologique,
p.  1 66).  The  place  and  form  of  the  marks  corresponded  closely  to  the
mental  conception  of  the  patient.  For  instance  : —

Je  dis  un  jour  a  Rose,  qui  souffrait  de  contractures  hystdriques  a  1'estomac,
que  je  lui  pla9ais  un  sinapisme  sur  la  region  malade  pour  la  gue*rir.  Je  con-
statais  quelques  heures  plus  tard  une  marque  gonfle*e  d'un  rouge  sombre  ayant
la  forme  d'un  rectangle  allonge*,  mais,  detail  singulier,  dont  aucun  angle  n'dtait

543  F]  TO    CHAPTER    V  497

marque*,  car  ils  semblaient  coupes  nettement.  Je  fis  la  remarque  que  son
sinapisme  avail  une  forme  Strange.  "Vous  ne  savez  done  pas,"  me  dit-elle,
"  que  Ton  coupe  toujours  les  angles  des  papiers  Rigollot  pour  que  les  coins  ne
fassent  pas  mal."  L'ide'e  pre*concue  de  la  forme  du  sinapisme  avait  determine'
la  dimension  et  la  forme  de  la  rougeur.

J'essayai  alors  un  autre  jour  (les  sinapismes  de  ce  genre  enlevaient  tres
facilement  ses  contractures  et  ses  points  douloureux)  de  lui  sugge*rer  que  je
ddcoupais  un  sinapisme  en  forme  d'e*toile  a  six  branches ;  la  marque  rouge  cut
exactement  la  forme  que  j'avais  dite.  Je  commandai  a  Le*onie  un  sinapisme
sur  la  poitrine  du  cote*  gauche  en  forme  d'un  S  pour  lui  en  lever  de  1'asthme
nerveux.  Ma  suggestion  gue*rit  parfaitement  la  maladie  et  marqua  sur  la
poitrine  un  grand  S  tout  a  fait  net.

Dr.  Backman  relates  the  following  of  one  of  his  clairvoyant  subjects,
AlmaRadberg1:—

"  In  the  middle  of  an  experiment  I  put  a  drop  of  water  on  her  arm,
suggesting  to  her  that  it  was  a  drop  of  burning  sealing-wax,  and  that  it
would  produce  a  blister,  which  would,  however,  be  healed  after  the  third
day.  During  the  progress  of  the  experiment  I  accidentally  touched  the
water,  making  it  spread  on  her  skin,  whereupon  I  hastened  to  wipe  it
away.  The  blister,  which  appeared  the  next  day,  extended  as  far  as  the
water  had  run,  just  as  if  it  had  been  a  corroding  acid,  and  the  wound
healed  on  the  night  of  the  third  day."

Somewhat  similar  is  a  case  recorded  by  Dr.  J.  Rybalkin  in  the  Revue
de  r Hypnotisme,  June  1890  (p.  361),  in  which  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion
to  the  subject  to  burn  his  arm  at  a  stove — really  unlighted — produced
blisters  as  of  a  burn.

Haemorrhage  and  bleeding  stigmata  were  several  times  produced  in  the
famous  subject,  Louis  Vive*  (whose  life-history  is  given  in  233  A),  by
verbal  suggestion  alone.*

Professor  Beaunis  (Recherches  Experimental  s,  &c.,  Paris,  1886,  p.  29)
produced  redness  and  cutaneous  congestion  in  his  subject,  MUe*  A.  E.,  by
suggestion,  and  the  experiment  was  repeated  on  the  same  subject  by  the
present  writer  and  Edmund  Gurney  in  September  1885  (see  Proceedings
S.l'.R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  167).

It  appears  that  there  is  at  present  at  the  SalpStriere  a  stigmatisee,  the
development  of  whose  stigmata  has  been  watched  by  Dr.  Janet  under
copper  shields  with  glass  windows  inserted  in  them  (Revue  de  I'Hypno-
tismr,  December  1900,  p.  190).

543  F.  The  following  is  an  abstract  of  Dr.  Levillain's  account  of  an
nment  performed  by  Professor  Charcot  before  a  large  class  at  the
Salpetriere  3  :_

1  From  "Experiments  in  Clairvoyance,"  by  Dr.  Alfred  Backman,  Procttdings
S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  204.

•  See  Drs.  Bourru  and  Burot,  CompUs  Ktndus  dt  la  SociM  eU  Biologit,  July  12th,
1885;  and  Dr.  Mabille,  Progrit Mldical%  August  29th,  1885.

•  Rnue  de  ? Hypnotism* t  June  1890  (p.  353),  Profrts  Mldital,  October  nth  and  iSth,

.1.  21

498  APPENDICES  [543  G

Some  few  hysterical  patients,  it  appears,  suSer  from  a  swelling  with  local
cyanosis  and  low  surface  temperature,  styled  by  Professor  Charcot  "blue
cedema."  Professor  Charcot,  indeed,  claims  to  have  been  the  first  to  describe,
in  June  1889,  this  exceedingly  rare  hysterical  abnormality.  It  then  occurred  to
him  to  try  whether  he  could  produce  the  condition  by  hypnotic  suggestion.
"On  April  26th,  1890,  a  hysterical  woman  was  deeply  hypnotised,  and  it  was
suggested  to  her  that  her  right  hand  and  wrist  would  swell  and  become
cyanosed.  After  she  was  woke  this  suggestion  gradually  realised  itself,  and  in
four  days  the  right  hand  was  in  the  condition  of  that  of  the  patients  who  had
had  spontaneous  attacks.  There  was  a  smooth  surface,  hardly  any  pitting  on
pressure,  but  much  dull-blue  mottled  swelling  (which  had  obliged  her  to  dis-
continue wearing  her  rings)  and  anaesthesia.  A  bright  red  patch  was  produced
by  touch.  .  .  .  M.  Charcot  re-hypnotised  the  patient,  and  assured  her  that  her
hand  was  quite  natural  again,  helping  his  suggestion  with  a  little  massage.
After  a  quarter  of  an  hour  the  anaesthesia,  venous  colour,  and  swelling  were
gone."

543  G.  A  case  was  described  by  Professor  Artigalas  in  the  Revue  de
riJypnotisme,1?£\xM2iry  1892  (p.  251),  of  a  hysterical  hospital  patient  with
a  tendency  to  apparently  causeless  haemorrhage,  which  appeared  first  in  the
ear  and  afterwards  as  tears  of  blood  in  the  eye,  which  was  quite  healthy.
Hypnotic  suggestion  failed  at  first  to  cure  this  symptom,  but  caused  it  to
occur  only  at  stated  times.  Next  it  was  suggested  that  instead  of  the
ocular  haemorrhage  the  patient  should  bleed  at  the  palm  of  the  left  hand ;
this  occurred,  the  skin,  however,  remaining  intact,  and  the  blood  appear-
ing to  ooze  through  it  like  perspiration.  After  further  hypnotic  suggestion
these  symptoms  entirely  ceased.

543  H.  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  (in  the  Zdtschrift lfur  Hypnotismus,
Band  iv.,  Heft.  4,  p.  209),  criticises  the  recorded  experiments  in  blistering
by  suggestion  on  the  ground  that  in  some  cases  the  patients  may  have  had
specially  sensitive  skins,  and  that  in  other  cases  the  supervision  exercised
over  them  was  inadequate.  He  describes  three  test  experiments  carried
out  by  several  doctors  on  the  maid-servant  of  one  of  them  (in  October
1895  and  January  1896),  he  himself  taking  part  on  the  last  two  occasions.
On  the  first  occasion,  blistering  was  produced  on  the  left  arm,  as  sug-
gested, within  twenty-four  hours.  The  arm  had  been  carefully  bandaged,
and  the  bandage  appeared  not  to  have  been  moved.  Next  time  the  arm
was  enclosed  in  a  shield  made  of  three  thin  boards,  and  completely
bandaged,  and  the  patient  was  watched  continuously.  A  rudimentary
blister  appeared,  but  not  in  the  place  suggested,  and  where  she  might  have
caused  it  by  rubbing,  and  there  was  some  evidence  that  she  had  tried  to
scratch  her  arm  with  a  hairpin.  Once  more  the  arm  was  enclosed  in
plaster  of  Paris  and  the  patient  was  watched  continuously,  and  no  blisters
were  formed.

1890,  and  see  Practitioner,  January  1891  (p.  50).  It  would  be  well  to  be  able  to  state
explicitly  in  experiments  of  this  class  that  theconsent  of  the  subject  had  been  previously
obtained.

546  A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  499

These  results  seem  to  confirm  what  had  previously  been  pointed  out
by  other  writers, — that  the  subject  may  deliberately  try  to  produce  stig-
mata on  herself  in  response  to  the  hypnotic  suggestion.  But  it  must  be
noticed  that  in  this  case  the  experimenters  deliberately  suggested  that  she
should  feel  the  irritation  and  pain  that  would  accompany  an  actual  burn,
as  well  as  that  blisters  should  be  formed.  She  complained  much  of  the
pain,  and  may  have  tried  to  rub  her  arm  merely  to  relieve  it.

546  A.  The  following  experiments  on  the  relation  of  points  de  reperc
to  negative  hallucinations  were  tried  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  in  the  course  of
her  experiments  on  thought-transference  quoted  below  (573  A).  P.  was
the  subject,  and  was  hypnotised,  as  usual,  by  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith.  The
account  is  written  by  Miss  Johnson,  who  was  present,  and  is  based  on  her
notes  made  at  the  time,  March  25th,  1890  : —

P.  being  hypnotised,  eight  plain  cards  marked  with  the  numbers  2-9  were
placed  on  a  chair  by  his  side,  and  he  was  told  that  those  marked  with  odd
numbers  would  be  invisible.  On  being  then  asked  how  many  cards  he  saw,  he
said  "  six."  When  the  cards  were  held  so  as  to  hide  the  numbers,  and  he  was
made  to  count  them  by  feeling  their  corners,  his  counting  varied,  but  once
came  to  eight.  It  appeared,  therefore,  that  the  failure  of  the  suggestion  of
nvisibility  depended,  partially  at  least,  on  the  hiding  of  the  numbers,  i.e.  of  the
points  de  replre  with  which  the  invisibility  was  associated.

Mr.  Smith  then  took  the  card  with  the  number  5  marked  on  it  ;  when
this  was  turned  with  the  mark  towards  P.  he  could  not  see  it,  but  when  the
other  side  was  turned  towards  him  he  could.  He  was  much  puzzled  at  seeing
the  card  disappear  and  reappear  several  times  in  Mr.  Smith's  hand  by  a  slight
twist  of  his  fingers,  but  concluded  that  it  was  done  by  sleight-of-hand,  that
Mr.  Smith  somehow  got  it  up  his  sleeve,  or  otherwise  concealed  it.  He  was
then  made  to  take  the  card  into  his  own  hand  and  turn  it  backwards  and  for-
wards himself,  and  was  very  much  astonished  at  its  continuing — as  he  did  so—
to  disappear  and  reappear  when  no  one  but  himself  was  touching  it.  He
asked  to  be  allowed  to  keep  it  as  an  entertaining  puzzle  to  show  off  to  his  friends,
and,  on  leave  being  given,  pocketed  it.  Soon  after  he  took  it  out  again,  and  the
nvisible  side  being  uppermost,  saw  nothing  and  dropped  it.  It  dropped  with  the
side  upwards,  so  he  found  it  again,  and  again  made  it  appear  and
disappear.

-imilar  experiment  was  tried  with  the  Knave  of  Hearts,  and  this  was  at
first  invisible  on  both  sides,  but  soon  he  was  able  to  see  the  back  side,  though
not  the  front.

then  took  the  card  marked  5  out  of  his  pocket  again,  and  found  it  still

>le  on  the  marked  side,  though  he  had  been  twice  awakened  and   re-
since  looking  at  it.     This,  however,  only  held  as  long  as  the  mark

covered,  and  soon  the  effect  wore  off  altogether,  and  both  sides  became
Bbally  visible  to  him.

^ood  deal  of  variety  was  observed  in  the  behaviour  of  different  subjects
Bh  regard  to  negative  halluc  Miss  B.,  for  instance,  did  not  appear  to

make  use  of  points  de  reptre  in  the  way  that  P.  did  ;  a  card  made  invisible  to

is  equally  invisible  on  both  sides,  and  she  exhibited  no  sort  of  interest  or
alarm  in  the  mysterious  disappearances  which  so  strongly  excited  P.'s  curiosity
and  sometimes  caused  him  alarm.

500  APPENDICES  [549  A

549  A.  In  the  so-called  "  transposition  of  the  senses  "  it  is  claimed
that  stimuli  which  normally  affect  only  one  particular  sense-organ  affect
some  other  part  of  the  body ;  e.g.  when  letters  are  said  to  be  read  by  the
skin  the  part  of  the  skin  concerned  is  supposed  to  be  stimulated  by  the
light  rays.

Pe'tetin,  a  famous  doctor  of  Lyons,  first  gave  currency  to  this  notion  in
his  Electricite  Animate,  Paris,  1808.  Thus  the  sense  of  hearing  was
alleged  to  be  transposed  sometimes  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach  (p.  7),  and
sometimes  to  the  tips  of  the  fingers  or  the  toes  (p.  10)  ;  the  sense  of  taste
to  the  same  regions  (p.  25)  ;  and  the  sense  of  sight  to  the  stomach  (p.  45).
These  phenomena  were  observed  in  several  different  subjects.

The  most  obvious  explanation  of  them  is  that  the  sensations  received
through  one  organ  were  referred  to  some  other  part  of  the  body  arbitrarily
associated  with  them  through  some  chance  suggestion  of  the  subject's  own
or  of  the  operator's.  Thus  Fahnestock  (Statuvolism,  p.  174),  in  criticising
Durand's  account  of  a  patient  whose  five  senses  were  transposed  to  the  pit
of  the  stomach,  attributes  it  "  to  the  manner  in  which  the  doctor  pro-
ceeded. ...  He  succeeded  in  drawing  the  patient's  attention  to  her
stomach.  .  .  .  She  could  have  answered  his  questions  quite  as  well  had  he
applied  his  lips  to  any  other  part  of  her  body ;  ...  for  I  have  seen  trans-
position effected  at  the  will  of  the  subject  in  many  cases  of  artificial
somnambulism  by  simply  requesting  them  to  throw  their  minds  to  the
stomach  or  any  other  part  of  the  body."  Similarly  in  the  case  of  a
hysterical  patient  reported  by  Dr.  Niccolo  Cervello,1  it  was  significant  that
immediately  after  the  doctor  had  spoken  in  her  hearing  of  a  case  he  had
recently  witnessed  of  "  transposition  of  the  senses  "  to  the  hands  and  feet,
the  patient  proceeded  to  exhibit  the  same  phenomenon.

In  the  case  of  hearing,  it  is  clearly  impossible  to  prove  transposition,
since  no  sound  made  near  any  part  of  the  body  can  be  out  of  ear-shot.
In  the  cases  of  sight  and  taste,  since  the  early  mesmerists  were  unaware  of
the  extreme  acuteness  of  hypnotised  subjects  in  picking  up  hints,  it  must
remain  doubtful  whether  sufficient  precautions  were  taken  to  guard  against
their  discovering  the  nature  of  the  objects  presented  to  them  by  the
ordinary  use  of  the  senses.  Even  if  this  was  guarded  against,  they  might
have  acquired  their  knowledge  of  the  objects  by  thought-transference  from
the  operators,  who  knew  what  they  were.

See  the  works  of  P£te"tin,  Durand,  Foissac,  and  Despine,  especially
Observations  de  Me'decine  Pratique,  pp.  45,  62,  and  Etude  Scientifique  sur
Somnambulisme,  p.  167.  One  of  Despine's  patients  apparently  read
through  the  sole  of  her  foot,  and  another  by  the  tips  of  her  fingers.

The  phenomenon  called  by  De  Rochas  "  exteriorisation  of  sensi-
bility," is  an  extravagant  version  of  the  theory  of  transposition  of  the
senses,  the  sense  being  supposed  to  be  transferred  to  some  object  outside

1  Storia  di  un  Caso  (flsterismo  con  Sognazione  Spontanea,  Palermo,  1853.  A  sum-
mary of  this  case  was  given  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,for  December  1900  (vol.  ix.  p.  333).

549B]  TO    CHAPTER    V  501

the  organism,  such  as  a  glass  of  water  or  the  shadow  of  the  hypnotised
person ;  any  stimulus  applied  to  these  objects  is  then  felt  by  the  person,
who  becomes  anaesthetic  meanwhile.  These  experiments  were  repeated
and  extended  by  Dr.  Joire  of  Lille.  Since  the  accounts  show  that  sug-
gestion was  freely  exercised,  it  is  unnecessary  to  criticise  them  in  detail.

549  B.  Perhaps  the  best  evidence  for  transposition  of  the  senses  is
to  be  found  in  some  experiments  made  by  Professor  Fontan  of  Toulon,
and  described  in  his  paper  on  Hystero-epilepsie  Masculine :  Suggestion,
Inhibition,  Transposition  des  Sens,  in  the  Revue  Philosophique,  August
1887.  A  full  account  of  this  is  given  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.
263-268 ;  but  I  have  space  here  for  a  short  extract  only.

The  subject,  B.,  is  a  sailor,  aged  twenty-two,  apparently  robust,  but  suffering
from  hysteria,  with  attacks  of  catalepsy — the  result,  apparently,  of  a  sojourn  in
Madagascar.  When  he  came  under  Dr.  Fontan's  care  his  left  side  was  wholly
devoid  of  feeling,  and  the  sense  of  smell  was  absent  on  that  side ;  sight  and
hearing  diminished  ;  taste  normal.  A  hysterogenous  zone  on  the  right  side
remained  unaffected  by  any  treatment.  Hypnotic  suggestion  suspended  the
anaesthesia  for  a  few  hours  at  a  time,  but  the  magnet,  and  the  magnet  only,
removed  it  permanently,  and  practically  cured  the  patient.

[Transpositions  of  hearing,  taste  and  smell  are  next  described.]

Transposition  of  sight  is,  of  course,  the  most  bewildering  of  these  super-
normalities.  We  seem  here  to  be  overriding  the  lack  not  only  of  physiological
but  of  physical  adaptation,  dispensing  not  only  with  the  specially  percipient
retina,  but  with  the  lens,  indispensable  for  the  mere  purpose  of  refracting  the
incident  rays,  so  that  they  may  meet  in  a  focus  and  give  a  distinct  image.  Dr.
Fontan,  indeed,  says  that  he  would  not  have  thought  of  trying  these  visual  ex-
periments at  all  had  it  not  been  for  the  fumbling  of  B.'s  fingers  on  the  printed
letters,  as  already  described.  It  was  suggested  to  the  subject  that  he  could
only  see  with  his  fingers,  and  the  psychical  blindness  was  reinforced  by  placing
a  screen  close  to  the  subject's  face,  so  that  he  could  not  see  his  own  hands,  nor
the  objects  offered,  nor  the  faces  or  gestures  of  the  bystanders.

Printed  letters  were  first  tried  ;  and  the  subject,  who  could  scarcely  read  in
his  normal  state,  deciphered  a  few  of  these  with  difficulty.  A  number  of  skeins
of  coloured  wool,  which  he  had  never  seen,  were  then  placed  before  him,  and
he  was  told  to  choose  the  red  ones.  He  felt  the  wools,  rejected  unhesitatingly
the  colours  not  asked  for,  and  arranged  the  red  in  a  series.  He  did  this  also
with  the  green  and  with  the  blue  wools.  The  wools  were  again  mixed,  and  he
was  told  to  put  the  red  ones  on  the  right,  the  green  on  the  left.  But  he  was
now  exhausted,  and  recognised  nothing.

The  same  experiments  were  repeated  next  day  with  fresh  specimens  of
wool.  And  next  the  room  was  completely  darkened,  B.'s  hand  was  placed  in  a
box  containing  various  patterns  of  wool,  which  he  had  never  either  seen  or
touched,  and  he  was  told  to  choose  the  blue  ones.  "  He  seized  them."  says  Dr.
Fontan,  in  a  letter  rather  more  detailed  than  the  printed  account,  "  with  such
rapidity,  such  force,  •  ide  all  those  which  he  did  not  want,  that  we  sup-

posed that  the  experiment  had  failed.  Shut  up  in  a  dark  room,  where  we  could
not  see  each  other,  we  did  not  know  what  was  going  on,  and  fearing  some
,  of  frenzy,  I  precipitated  myself  on  the  subject  and  hypnotised  him
strongly,  by  pressing  the  globes  of  his  eyes.  He  had  had  time  enough  during

502  APPENDICES  [551  A

this  scene,  which  did  not  last  five  seconds,  to  choose  the  wools,  and  to  hide
them  in  his  bosom.  At  no  other  time  did  he  show  such  eagerness  for  the  sug-
gested colour."  He  had,  in  fact,  selected  four  blue  skeins,  which  he  clutched
so  closely  that  he  had  to  be  altogether  inhibited  before  they  could  be  taken
from  him.

The  next  experiment  was  perhaps  the  best  of  all.  The  wools  were  placed
on  a  table  under  a  strong  sheet  of  glass.  B.  (psychically  blinded  and  with  the
screen  interposed)  placed  his  hand  on  the  glass,  and  was  ordered  to  indicate
the  red  wool.  He  resisted  for  a  time,  but  "  ended  by  consenting  to  search  for
the  red  wools,  whose  position  he  indicated  by  a  tap  on  the  glass,  which  left  no
room  for  doubt."  He  repeated  this  process  several  times  with  the  green,  the
blue,  and  the  yellow  wools,  and  always  with  complete  success.

Once  more.  Five  photographs,  of  which  one  only  was  of  a  child,  were
placed  on  the  table,  and  he  was  told  to  find  the  child's  photograph.  "  He  felt
the  faces,  turned  them  with  head  upwards,  felt  over  the  child's  figure  care-
fully, and  gave  the  photograph  to  me  correctly."

551  A.  The  following  examples  of  post-hypnotic  suggestions  in-
volving calculations  are  quoted  from  Gurney's  paper,  "  Peculiarities  of
certain  Post-Hypnotic  States,"  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  pp.
268-323  (1887).  The  paper  treats  generally  of  the  mental  state  of  the
subject,  as  exhibited  especially  by  means  of  automatic  writing,  while
carrying  out  suggestions.  Speaking  of  commands  to  be  executed  at  a
certain  future  time,  Gurney  says  (p.  287)  : —

A  distinction  must  first  be  made  between  cases  where  a  date  is  named—
especially  if  the  date  be  a  marked  one,  such  as  January  ist,  or  the  anniversary
of  the  day  of  the  command  1— and  cases  where  simply  a  length  of  time  is  named,
not  immediately  suggestive  of  a  particular  date,  as  in  the  direction  to  do  such
and  such  a  thing  "on  the  sixty-ninth  day  from  this."  In  the  former  case  the
impression  of  the  date  might  be  immediately  registered  in  the  brain,  in  associa-
tion with  that  of  the  order,  and  the  mere  arrival  of  the  date  might  thus  suffice
to  revive  the  order.  But  how  is  a  length  of  time  to  be  so  registered  ?  Its
further  end,  till  reckoned  out  by  the  aid  of  the  calendar,  is  perfectly  indefinite  ;
and  there  is  nothing  in  the  mere  arrival  of  the  day  calculated  to  revive  the
terms  of  the  order — it  carries  no  more  sixty -ninthness  about  it  than  any  other
day.  .  .  .  Though  "  a  day "  may  be  a  sufficiently  familiar  and  definite  unit  to
present  a  concrete  character,  it  does  not  follow  that  this  is  the  case  with  "  sixty-
nine  days."  And  the  organic  conditions  [suggested  by  Professor  Beaunis2  as
the  means  used  for  making  the  calculation],  which  are  just  what  the  measure-
ment of  established  physiological  periods  ip so  facto  has,  are  just  what  the
measurement  of  periods  suddenly  and  arbitrarily  fixed  by  human  volition  has
not.  The  vital  processes  will  no  more  work  out  such  a  measurement  as  this
than  a  schoolboy's  digestion  will  work  out  a  proposition  of  Euclid.  However
carried  through,  it  is  at  least  not  a  function  of  animal  life.  It  issues  in  a  per-
fectly needless  act,  not  in  an  inevitable  bodily  state ;  and  it  depends,  not  on

1  It  is  unfortunate  that  in  some  of  the  best  known  cases  of  commands  4  longue
tcheancc,  such  dates  have  been  selected ;  but  the  proof  of  the  phenomenon  does  not
depend  on  these  cases.

2  Le  Somnambulisms  Provoqut,  pp.  139-41.

551  A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  503

progressive  changes  in  the  stomach  or  the  blood,  but  on  a  quite  original  course
of  cerebration,  proceeding,  we  cannot  doubt,  in  the  higher  tracts  of  the  brain,
having  been  initiated  by  an  impression — that  of  the  command — which  had  a
distinct  psychical  side.  Now  looking  at  the  brain-side  alone,  we  should  con-
clude, I  think,  that  the  passage  of  time  must  be  registered,  not  by  any  general
gradual  change,  but  by  a  series  of  specific  changes,  corresponding  probably  to
the  days  or  units  of  measurement.  We  should  conclude,  that  is,  that  cerebral
events  of  the  sort  normally  correlated  with  the  ideas  "sixty,"  "sixty-one,"
"  sixty-two,"  &c.,  really  take  place ;  for  how  otherwise  could  the  gulf  be  spanned
with  precision  ?  how  would  any  other  sort  of  change  know  when  to  stop,  or
associate  some  point  that  it  had  reached  with  the  order  given  weeks  before  ?
Such  a  cerebral  process  alone  would  wholly  differentiate  the  case  from  that  of
ordinary  physiological  time-reckoning.  But  if  the  specific  brain-changes  take
place,  does  it  not  seem  at  least  a  reasonable  surmise  that  their  mental  correlate
may  exist,  though  hidden  from  our  view — that  there  may  further  be  an  actual
watching  of  the  course  of  time  ?  [Then]  the  "  unknown  faculty  "  would  simply
be  a  known  faculty,  working  in  a  normal  way,  but  be'ow  the  surface  of
normal  consciousness.  .  .  .

[In  some  cases]  the  watching  is  of  a  wholly  interior  kind,  and  is  not  only
forgotten  afterwards,  but  is  accompanied  by  no  consciousness  of  which  the
normal  waking  subject  can  render  any  account ;  but  which  still,  I  believe,
involves  mental  action  of  a  sort.

Here  are  a  couple  of  instances  of  this  extremer  kind.  My  "subject,"

W s,  was  one  day  told  that  on  the  thirty-ninth  day  from  then,  at  9.30  P.M.,

he  was  to  come  and  call  on  a  gentleman  resident  in  the  house  where  I  was
lodging,  with  whom  he  had  no  acquaintance.  He  of  course  had  no  memory  of
this  direction  when  awake.  No  reference  was  made  to  the  command  till  March
1 9th,  when  he  was  suddenly  asked,  in  the  trance,  how  many  days  had  elapsed
since  it  was  given.  He  instantly  said  sixteen,  and  added  that  there  were  twenty-
three  more  to  run,  and  that  the  day  when  he  was  due  was  Easter  Monday.1  All
these  statements  were  correct.  But  the  odd  thing  was  that,  on  further  ques-
tioning, he  misdated  both  the  day  of  the  order  and  the  day  of  fulfilment,
calling  the  former  March  ist  and  the  latter  April  I2th,  whereas  they  were
respectively  March  3rd  and  April  nth.  This  makes  it  tolerably  clear  that  he
did  not  originally  arrive  at  the  date  of  fulfilment  by  immediate  reckoning  from
the  date  of  command,  and  then  fix  it  in  his  mind  simply  as  a  date.  (Easter
Monday,  when  so  near  as  twenty-three  days,  might  be  arrived  at  in  a  moment
by  remarking  the  day  of  the  week.)  Moreover,  if  he  made  March  ist  his
terminus  a  quo,  he  ought  to  have  said  eighteen  instead  of  sixteen,  and  would
probably  have  had  to  pause  to  reckon.  The  reasonable  interpretation  of  the
result  is  surely  that  he  was  in  some  way  actually  counting  the  days  as  they
passed.

In  the  next  case,  which  occurred  after  the  above  remarks  were  written,  I  got

an  actual  account  of  the  process,  which  singularly  confirms  them.  P 11  was

told,  on  March  2f>th,  that  on  the  one  hundred  and  twenty-third  day  from  then  he
was  to  put  a  blank  sheet  of  paper  in  an  envelope,  and  send  it  to  a  friend  of  mine
whose  name  and  residence  he  knew,  but  whom  he  had  never  seen.  The  subject
was  not  referred  to  again  till  April  i8th,  when  he  was  hypnotised  and  asked  if

1  Unfortunately  the  accident  of  the  ichtanceQ*  Easter  Monday  prevented  the  exe-
cution of  the  order,  as  W s  went  off  on  a  holiday  excursion  for  the  whole  day.

504  APPENDICES  [551  A

he  remembered  anything  in  connection  with  this  gentleman.  He  at  once
repeated  the  order,  and  said,  "  This  is  the  twenty-third  day  ;  a  hundred  more."

S.  " How  do  you  know?     Have  you  noted  each  day  ? "

P LL.  "No  ;  it  seemed  natural."

S.  "  Have  you  thought  of  it  often  ?  "

P LL.  "  It  generally  strikes  me  in  the  morning,  early.  Something  seems

to  say  to  me,  *  You've  got  to  count.' "

S.  "  Does  that  happen  every  day  ?  "

P LL.  "  No,  not  every  day — perhaps  more  like  every  other  day.  It  goes

from  my  mind ;  I  never  think  of  it  during  the  day.  I  only  know  it's  got  to  be
done."

Questioned  further,  he  made  it  clear  that  the  interval  between  these  im-
pressions was  never  long  enough  to  be  doubtful.  He  "  may  not  think  of  it  for  two
or  three  days ;  then  something  seems  to  tell  him."  He  was  questioned  again
on  April  2oth,  and  at  once  said,  "  That's  going  on  all  right — twenty-five  days  ; "
and  on  April  22nd,  when  in  the  trance,  he  spontaneously  recalled  the  subject,
and  added,  "Twenty-seven  days."  After  he  was  woke  on  April  i8th,  I  asked
him  if  he  knew  the  gentleman  in  question,  or  had  been  thinking  about  him.
He  was  clearly  surprised  at  the  question,  said  he  fancied  he  had  once  seen  him
in  my  room  (which,  however,  was  not  the  case),  and  that  the  idea  of  him  had
never  since  crossed  his  mind.

But  there  is  another  way  in  which  the  moment  for  the  performance  of  the
action  can  be  fixed.  The  "  subject  "  can  be  told  to  perform  it  when  some  signal  is
given — as  when  some  one  gives  a  cough  or  pokes  the  fire.  .  .  [And]  we  can  arrange
the  conditions  in  such  a  way  as  again  to  involve  reckoning  of  a  certain  kind,  and  of
a  kind  which  it  is  hard  to  conceive  as  having  no  mentation  of  any  sort  associated
with  it.  For  instance,  the  direction  may  be  to  perform  the  act  when  some  one
coughs  for  the  third  time,  or  pokes  the  fire  for  the  fourth  time.  ...  If  the
"  subject "  be  re-hypnotised  before  the  final  cough — say  the  fourth — has  been
given,  and  questioned  as  to  what  has  passed,  he  shows  clearly  that  he  remem-
bers being  in  the  attitude  of  expectancy  for  the  coming  signal.  Sometimes  the
hidden  mental  condition  during  the  time  of  waiting  has  been  a  very  curious

one.  Thus  W s,  who  had  been  told  that  at  my  fifth  cough  the  candles

would  go  out,  then  woke,  and  then  hypnotised  again  before  the  final  cough  had
been  given,  disowned  all  memory  of  the  four  coughs  which  had  been  actually
given,  but  knew  that  the  next  would  be  the  fifth,  "  because  then  the  candles
would  go  out."  At  other  times  the  signals  have  been  clearly  and  correctly
counted.  .  .  .

[In  other  experiments  the  mental  condition  of  the  subject  in  the  interval
between  the  suggestion  and  its  fulfilment  was  tested  by  automatic  writing  instead
of  by  re-hypnotising  and  asking  him  questions.  Thus : — ]

On  March  2ist  [W s]  was  told  that  on  the  morrow,  a  quarter  of  an  hour

after  his  arrival,  he  was  to  pull  up  the  blind  and  look  out  of  the  window.  He
arrived  next  evening  at  7.10,  and  was  soon  set  to  the  planchette  ;  but  as  the
instrument  did  not  move,  he  was  hypnotised,  told  that  I  wanted  to  know  how
the  time  was  going,  and  immediately  awakened.  The  writing

7  minutes  and  8  more

was  now  produced.  The  process  began  at  just  7.17,  so  that  at  that  moment  the
reckoning  was  exactly  right ;  but,  owing  to  a  wheel  coming  off  the  instrument
and  having  to  be  replaced,  the  writing  itself  was  spread  over  four  minutes.  .  .  .

551  A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  505

On  April  2oth  [P 11]  was  told  that  half-an-hour  after  his  next  arrival  he

was  to  wind  up  a  ball  of  string,  and  to  let  me  know  how  the  time  was  going.
He  arrived  next  evening  at  8.30,  and  was  set  to  the  planchette  at  8.43.  He
wrote,

13  minett  has  passed  and  17  more  minetts  to  pass.

Some  more  experiments  followed,  and  it  so  happened  that  at  9,  the  exact
time  when  the  fulfilment  was  due,  he  was  in  the  trance.  He  suddenly  said
**  Oh  !  "  as  if  recollecting  something,  but  did  not  move ;  he  was  then  woke,  and
at  9.2  he  walked  across  the  room  to  where  some  string  was  lying,  and  wound  it
up.  On  April  iSth  an  exactly  similar  order  was  given,  except  that  the  thing  to
be  done  was  to  take  off  his  coat  He  arrived  at  9. 10  on  April  2oth,  and  was  set
to  the  planchette  at  9.15,  and  while  reading  a  newspaper  aloud  with  intelligence
and  complete  comprehension,  he  wrote,

5  minett  has  passed  25  minuett  hass  got  passed  and  then  I  shas

take  off  my  coat.

The  order,  however,  was  fulfilled  at  9.21,  almost  immediately  after  the  con-
clusion of  the  writing.  .  .  .

Another  day  the  same  "  subject"  was  told  that  when  I  coughed  for  the  sixth
time  he  was  to  look  out  of  the  window.  He  was  woke,  and  I  gave  at  intervals
five  coughs — one  of  which,  however,  was  a  failure,  owing  to  its  obvious  arti-
ficiality. He  was  set  to  the  planchette,  and  the  words  produced  were,

When  Mr.  Gurney  cough  6  times  I  am  to  look  out.

At  this  point  I  read  the  writing,  and  stopped  it.  I  asked  if  he  had  noticed  my
coughing,  and  he  said,  "  No,  sir ;  "  but  this,  of  course,  showed  no  more  than
[that]  he  had  heard  without  attending.  He  was  now  hypnotised,  told  that  I
wanted  to  know  how  often  I  had  coughed,  and  at  once  woke.  The  writing  re-
commenced,

4  times  he  has  cough  and  2  times  more  he  has  to  cough.

I  coughed  twice  more,  and  he  went  to  the  window,  drew  aside  the  blind,  and
looked  out.  Two  minutes  afterwards  I  asked  him  what  sort  of  a  night  it
was.  He  said,  "  Fine  when  I  came  in."  I  said  I  thought  I  had  seen  him  look-
ing out  just  now,  but  he  absolutely  denied  it.  ...

Later,  P 11  was  told  that  when  I  spoke  the  thirtieth  word  he  was  to  walk

to  the  door  and  come  back  again,  and  was  then  woke.  I  made  natural  remarks
at  intervals,  taking  care  to  count  the  words  I  used.  The  thirtieth  produced  no
result.  I  added  one,  and  then  told  him  to  come  and  write.  The  writing  was,

Mr.  Gurney  spoke  30  words  Mr.  Smith  I  think  I  am  right  don't

you  think  so  f

He  then  returned  to  his  former  seat,  and  sat  down  for  a  second ;  then  got  up,
walked  to  the  door,  looked  at  it,  and  came  back  again.  Re-hypnotised,  and  ques-
tioned as  to  the  words  I  had  used,  he  remembered  most  of  them,  but  not  all.

In  Curacy's  paper,  "  Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism,"  in  the  Pro-
ceedings S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  3-17  (1888),  are  recorded  a  number  of  other
ingenious  experiments  showing  the  intelligence  of  subliminal  mentation  in
carrying  out  post-hypnotic  suggestions.  These  were  executed  automati-
cally while  the  supraliminal  intelligence  of  the  subject  was  closely  engaged
in  some  other  task;  e.g.  he  would,  while  reading  aloud,  automatically
work  sums  or  write  a  second  line  to  a  couplet  rhyming  with  the  first,

506  APPENDICES  [551  B

which  had  been  given  him.  On  one  occasion  a  subject  "  correctly  multi-
plied 1 2 s.  3fd.  by  8,  repeating  *  God  save  the  Queen'  meanwhile,  with
every  other  word  left  out."

551  B.  Professor  Delboeuf s  experiments,  recorded  in  the  paper
entitled  "  De  PAppre'ciation  du  Temps  par  les  Somnambules,"  in  the
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  414-421,  were  directed  simply  towards
testing  the  power  of  calculating  the  lapse  of  time.  His  subjects  were  two
sisters,  whom  he  calls  M.  and  J.,  country  girls  of  twenty  and  twenty-three,
servants  in  his  family,  with  whom  many  of  his  most  famous  hypnotic
experiments  had  been  made  (see  534  A  and  E) .  He  made  suggestions
to  them  to  perform  various  trivial  actions  in  a  certain  number  of
minutes  from  the  time  the  suggestion  was  given.  Eleven  experiments
were  made,  the  suggestions  to  take  effect  after  intervals  varying  from
350  to  3300  minutes.  Two  experiments  (with  intervals  of  900  and
1500  minutes)  succeeded  completely;  in  three  others  the  idea  of  the
action  suggested  occurred  to  the  subject  at  the  right  time,  but  was  not
carried  out ;  in  four  cases  the  action  was  performed  at  the  wrong  time,
the  errors  varying  from  25  to  95  minutes ;  in  the  two  experiments  with
intervals  of  3300  minutes,  the  impulse  to  do  the  action  arose,  but  at  the
wrong  time,  and  was  not  carried  out.  It  must  be  noted  that  M.  and  J.
were  quite  uneducated,  could  hardly  tell  the  time  by  the  clock,  and
constantly  made  mistakes  in  the  simplest  sums.  Delboeuf  also  found
that  J.  could  apparently  calculate  no  better  when  hypnotised  than  when
awake.

551  C.  The  results  obtained  by  Professor  Delboeuf  led  Dr.  J.  M.
Bramwell  to  try  a  much  longer  series  of  experiments  on  the  appreciation
of  time  by  somnambules,  which  are  by  far  the  best  observed  and  most
instructive  of  any  yet  recorded.  The  account  of  them  appeared  first
in  Dr.  Bramwell's  paper  on  "  Personally  Observed  Hypnotic  Phenomena  "
in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  pp.  176-203  (1896),  and  a  further
account,  with  additional  details  and  a  discussion  of  cognate  mental
phenomena — hypnotic  and  other — was  published  in  Brain,  Summer
Number,  1900,  under  the  title  of  "Hypnotic  and  Post- Hypnotic  Appre-
ciation of  Time  :  Secondary  and  Multiplex  Personalities."  I  give  extracts
from  both  these  sources.  Full  details  are  given  in  the  original  papers  of
the  numerous  precautions  devised  to  guard  against  errors  or  deceptions,
and  other  details,  which  are  omitted  here  for  want  of  space.

Miss  A.,  the  patient  in  question,  aged  nineteen,  was  first  hypnotised  by  me
on  September  2nd,  1895.  .  .  .  The  patient  is  intelligent  and  fairly  well  educated,
but  possesses  no  extraordinary  calculating  powers  either  in  the  normal  state
or  in  hypnosis.  According  to  her  mother,  she  has  always  been  remarkably
truthful  and  well-conducted,  rather  grave  in  disposition,  and  inclined  to  take
the  duties  of  life  seriously.  She  is  a  dressmaker.  .  .  .  She  never  spontaneously
recalled  in  the  waking  state  anything  that  occurred  in  hypnosis.  .  .  .

The   experiments   were  all  of  the  same  character.     On  each  occasion   I

551  C]  TO    CHAPTER    V  507

suggested  to  her,  during  hypnosis,  that  at  the  expiration  of  a  varying  number
of  minutes  she  should  feel  impelled  to  make  a  cross  on  a  piece  of  paper  with  a
pencil,  and  also,  without  looking  at  clock  or  watch,  write  down  what  time  she
believed  it  to  be,  and  then  immediately  compare  this  with  the  actual  time  and,
if  possible,  obtain  corroborative  testimony  from  her  friends.

Experiment  No.  I. — November  5th,  1895,  4  P.M.  Suggestion  to  be  realised
in  five  hours  and  twenty  minutes,  i.e.  at  the  expiration  of  that  time  the  patient
was  to  make  a  cross  and  put  down  the  time  in  the  manner  just  described.
Result.— Correct.

Remarks. — On  this  occasion  I  did  not  say  anything  to  the  patient  about  the
experiment,  either  before  or  after  hypnosis.  I  told  her  mother  its  nature,  but
not  the  time  at  which  the  suggestion  should  be  fulfilled.  At  9.15  the  same
evening  her  mother  noticed  that  the  patient  was  restless,  and  asked  her  what
was  the  matter.  She  replied,  "  I  feel  I  must  do  something,  but  cannot  tell
what."  At  9.20  P.M.  she  rapidly  made  a  cross  with  a  pencil  and  wrote  twenty
minutes  past  nine  on  apiece  of  paper,  at  the  same  time  saying,  "  It's  all  silliness."
There  was  no  clock  in  the  room,  but  her  mother  went  into  the  next  room  where
there  was  one,  and  found  that  the  time  was  9.20.  When  I  again  saw  the
patient  I  explained  the  nature  of  the  experiments  I  proposed  making  to  her,
and  instructed  her  always  to  carry  a  pencil  and  paper  with  her  during  the  day,
and  to  put  one  by  her  bedside  at  night.  I  told  her  I  should  make  these  experi-
mental suggestions  from  time  to  time,  but  not  on  each  occasion  when  she
visited  me.  In  many  instances  I  did  not  calculate  when  the  suggestions  fell
due,  and  in  others  the  calculations  I  made  at  the  time  were  proved  to  be
erroneous,  and  the  results  of  the  experiments  were  in  these  cases  only  deter-
mined when  the  series  was  completed.  .  .  .

Experiment  No.  5. — Wednesday,  December  i8th,  3.45  P.M.  Suggestion
in  24  hours,  2880  minutes.  Result. — 3.45  P.M.,  Saturday,  December  2ist.
Correct.  .  .  .

Experiment  No.  9. — December  3ist,  1895,  4  P.M.  Suggestion  in  11,525
minutes.  Result. — 11.5  A.M.,  Wednesday,  January  8th.  Wrong.

Remarks. — The  result  ought  to  have  been  4.5  P.M.,  January  8th.  I  re-hypno-
tised her  on  that  day,  and  asked  her  to  recall  the  suggestion  I  had  made  on
December  3ist.  She  said  it  was  to  be  executed  in  11,225  minutes.  The  sup-
posed suggestion  of  11,225  minutes  had  been  carried  out  correctly.

I  now  attempted  to  find  out  during  hypnosis  the  patient's  mental  condition
in  reference  to  these  suggestions.  In  reply  to  my  questions  she  informed  me :
i.  That  when  the  suggestions  were  made  in  hypnosis  she  did  not  calculate
when  they  fell  due.  2.  That  she  did  not  calculate  them  at  any  time  afterwards.
3.  That  she  had  no  recollection  of  them  when  awakened.  4.  That  no  memory
of  them  ever  arose  in  the  waking  state.  5.  That  shortly  before  their  fulfilment
she  always  experienced  a  motor  impulse,  that  her  fingers  moved  as  if  to
grasp  a  pencil  and  to  perform  the  act  of  writing.  6.  That  this  impulse  was
immediately  followed  by  the  idea  of  making  a  cross,  and  of  the  time.  7.  That
she  never  looked  at  clock  or  watch  until  after  she  had  written  the  figures.

Experiments.—  Wednesday,  January  8th,  1896.
to. — 4.5  P.M.     Suggestion  in  4417  minutes.

No.  u. — 4.5  P.M.     Suggestion  in  11,470  minutes.

No.  12. — 4.30.  P.M.     Suggestion  in  10,070  minutes.

Results.— No.  io.— 5.42  P.M.,  Saturday,  January  nth.

No.  u.— 3.15  P.M.,  Thursday,  January  i6th.

508  APPENDICES  [551  C

No.  12. — 4.20  P.M.,  Wednesday,  January  I5th. — All  were  correct.
Remarks. — As  the  patient  had  stated  in  hypnosis  that  she  made  no  calcula-
tions in  reference  to  the  suggestions,  in  order  to  vary  the  experiments  I  asked
her  as  soon  as  I  had  made  them,  and  before  awakening  her,  to  calculate  men-
tally when  they  would  fall  due,  and  to  tell  me  the  result.
She  replied  as  follows  : —

•'  No.  10  in  3  days,  37  minutes,  or  twenty-three  minutes  to  five  next  Saturday
afternoon.

"  No.  II  in  187  hours,  50  minutes,  or  7  days,  9  hours,  50  minutes.  Next
Wednesday  morning  at  five  minutes  to  twelve.

"  No.  12  in  1067  hours,  40  minutes,  or  6  days,  23  hours,  and  40  minutes.
4.20  P.M.  next  Wednesday."

[All  these  answers  were  wrong,  except  No.  12,  in  which  the  answer  was  right,
but  the  calculation  wrong.  In  spite  of  this,  the  suggestions  were  all  carried
out  at  the  right  time.]

When  I  made  the  patient  calculate  when  the  suggestions  would  fall  due,  and
found  that  her  calculations  were  wrong,  I  naturally  concluded  that,  as  she  had
fixed  the  date  at  which  the  suggestions  were  to  be  fulfilled  in  her  own  mind,  in
the  hypnotic  state,  they  would  be  carried  out  at  the  erroneous  times.  My
astonishment  was  great  when  I  found  they  were  executed  correctly.  I  re-
hypnotised  the  patient  and  said  to  her,  "  You  have  not  carried  out  these
suggestions  at  the  time  you  told  me  they  would  fall  due.  Why  is  this  ?  "  She
replied,  "  What  I  told  you  was  all  wrong."  "  How  do  you  know  the  others  are
right  ?  "  "I  can't  tell  you,  I  only  feel  that  they  are."  I  was  not  able  to  elicit
by  questioning  any  memory  of  the  processes  by  which  the  original  mistakes
were  corrected.  The  patient  assured  me  that  from  the  time  the  suggestions
were  made  she  had  never  again  thought  of  them,  and  that  at  the  time  of  their
fulfilment  she  had  suddenly  had  the  impulse  to  put  down  the  figures.  When
doing  so  she  had  no  recollection  of  her  original  calculations.

From  this  time  I  usually  made  a  number  of  suggestions  to  the  patient  at
each  stance.  Sometimes  these  started  from  the  same  hour,  sometimes  from  dif-
ferent hours.  In  the  latter  case,  the  starting-points  were  usually  imaginary.  .  .  .
[From  three  to  six  suggestions  were  made  in  rapid  succession  on  each
occasion,  to  be  fulfilled  at  intervals  varying  from  720  to  21,434  minutes.  These
series  of  suggestions  were  never  read  over  to  the  patient  more  than  twice,  and
sometimes  only  once,  and  that  quickly.  The  last  two  series  were  the  most  com-
plicated of  all,  as  follows : — ]

Experiments. — Thursday,  May  7th,  3  P.M.
No.  50. — Suggestion  in  8650  minutes.
No.  51. — Suggestion  in  8680  minutes.
No.  52. — Suggestion  in  8700  minutes.

I  still  further  complicated  these  by  suggesting  as  follows  : —
"  No.  50  is  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  waking  state.     Five  minutes  before  5 1  comes
due  you  are  to  fall  asleep.     No.  51  is  to  be  fulfilled  while  you  are  asleep,  and  five
minutes  afterwards  you  are  to  awake  and  remain  so  until  after  the  fulfilment  of
No.  52.     Eight  minutes  after  52  falls  due  you  are  again  to  fall  asleep."

Result. — These  suggestions  were  carried  out  correctly,  with  the  exception
that  she  fell  asleep  at  3. 31  instead  of  3.35.

Experiments. — Wednesday,  May  I3th,  4.30  P.M.

On  this  occasion  I  said  to  the  patient,  "  You  are  to  carry  out  all  the  sug-
gestions made  last  Thursday,  but  to-day  you  are  to  start  from  2.55  instead  of

551  C]  TO    CHAPTER    V  509

from  3  P.M.,  and  to  each  of  them  you  are  to  add  1440  minutes."  As  I  was  much
pressed  for  time,  these  suggestions  were  made  very  hurriedly,  and  without
explanation,  and  I  was  not  at  all  certain  whether  the  patient  understood  them.

Results. — Correct,  with  the  exception  of  slight  differences  between  the
correctly  estimated  time  and  the  moment  at  which  the  suggestion  was  fulfilled.

Summary. — Fifty-five  experiments  are  cited;  of  these  one,  apparently,
was  either  not  carried  out  by  Miss  A.,  or  unrecorded  by  me,  while  in  another
(No.  9)  she  mistook  the  original  suggestion,  but  fulfilled  it  correctly  in  accord-
ance with  what  she  thought  it  had  been.  Forty-five  were  completely  successful,
i.e.  not  only  did  Miss  A.  write  down  the  correct  terminal  time,  but  this  was  done,
also,  at  the  moment  the  experiment  fell  due.  Eight  were  partially  successful.
In  these  the  terminal  time  was  correctly  recorded  in  every  instance,  but  there
were  minute  differences,  never  exceeding  five  minutes,  between  the  patient's
correct  estimate  of  when  the  suggestion  fell  due  and  the  moment  at  which  she
carried  it  out  The  proportion  which  these  errors  bear  to  their  respective  in-
tervals varies  between  i  to  2028  and  I  to  21,420.

On  twenty-four  occasions  Miss  A.  was  asked  to  calculate  [in  hypnosis]  when
the  suggestions  fell  due ;  she  was  wrong  in  the  first  nine  instances,  but  in  the
remaining  fifteen  right  in  eleven  and  wrong  in  four.  As  the  experiments
advanced,  not  only  the  frequency,  but  also  the  extent  of  Miss  A.'s  errors  in
calculation  decreased,  and  the  answers  were  given  much  more  rapidly.  Some-
times the  correct  replies  were  almost  instantaneous,  and  in  these  instances  no
conscious  calculation  could  be  traced.  It  is  to  be  noted  that  Miss  A.'s  mistaken
calculations  had  no  effect  on  the  correctness  of  her  results.  .  .  .

On  [all  occasions  but  one]  when  Miss  A.  was  questioned  in  hypnosis  as  to  the
unfulfilled  suggestions,  she  .  .  .  recalled  the  fact  that  these  had  been  made,  but
rarely  remembered  their  exact  terms.  She  always  asserted  that  she  had  never
thought  of  them,  did  not  know  how  much  time  had  elapsed  since  they  had  been
given,  nor  when  they  were  due.  This  was  so  even  in  cases  where  she  had  calcu-
lated the  terminal  time.  .  .  .  When  Miss  A.  was  questioned  in  hypnosis,  after
the  execution  of  the  suggestions,  her  memory  on  certain  points  was  very  clear.
She  could  recall  in  every  detail  the  terms  of  all  experiments  that  had  recently
been  carried  out,  i.e.  she  remembered  the  hours  at  which  they  had  been  made,
the  number  of  minutes  suggested,  her  own  calculations,  if  any,  and  the  moment
and  circumstances  under  which  the  suggestions  had  been  fulfilled.  Putting
aside  the  calculations  she  made  at  the  time,  in  response  to  suggestion,  she  was
unable  to  recall  having  made  any  others,  or  to  give  any  information  as  to  the
methods  by  means  of  which  she  had  correctly  fulfilled  the  experiments.  .  .  .

[Similar  experiments,  more  or  less  successful,  but  not  so  striking  as  those
with  Miss  A.,  were  made  with  other  somnambules,  and  details  are  given  of  some
with  Miss  B.  In  her  case],  when  a  simple  suggestion  was  given,  Miss  B.  some-
times spontaneously  calculated  when  it  would  fall  due.  Miss  A.,  on  the  other
hand,  never  made  any  spontaneous  calculations  at  all.  Apparently  Miss  B.  did
not  spontaneously  calculate  the  more  complicated  arithmetical  problems.  When
she  did  so,  in  response  to  suggestion,  her  results  were  invariably  correct,  but,
despite  this,  the  experiments  were  not  always  fulfilled  at  their  appropriate  time.
A.,  on  the  contrary,  was  often  wrong  in  her  calculations,  while  the  sug-
gestions themselves  were  carried  out  with  phenomenal  accm

The  most  fundamental  difference  between  these  cases  and  those  of
Gurney's  given  above  seems  to  be  that  the  method  of  estimation  of  time

5io  APPENDICES  [552  A

really  used  by  Dr.  Bramwell's  subjects  could  not  be  discovered  by  ques-
tioning during  hypnosis,  but  appeared  to  belong  to  some  stratum  of  con-
sciousness more  profound  than  the  hypnotic  (suggesting  an  analogy  with
the  "inspirations  of  genius"  or  the  feats  of  "  calculating  boys")  ;  whereas
Gurney's  subjects,  when  hypnotised  again  before  a  suggestion  was  fulfilled,
were  conscious  of  keeping  count  of  the  lapse  of  time.

552  A.  The  following  case  of  improvement  of  dramatic  faculty  in
hypnosis  is  recorded  by  Dr.  Dufay  in  a  paper  in  the  Revue  Philosophique
for  September  1888,  a  translation  of  which  appeared  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  vi.  pp.  407-427.  The  subject  was  a  hysterical  young  actress,  whom  he
had  hypnotised  several  times  previously.  The  special  interest  of  this  case
is  that  hypnosis  was  produced  apparently  without  the  subject's  knowledge,
or  suspicion  that  it  was  being  attempted.  (Other  instances  of  the  appa-
rently telepathic  production  of  hypnosis  are  given  in  the  Appendices  to
Section  568.)

I  said  just  now  that  I  had  managed  to  hypnotise  Mdlle.  B.  by  a  word  or  a
look,  but  I  did  not  think  that  without  real  contact  it  could  succeed  unless  I  was
close  to  her  at  the  time.  Having  always  noticed  that  intelligence  is  much  more
highly  developed  in  the  somnambulic  state,  I  had  sometimes  hypnotised  this
very  indifferent  little  actress  by  merely  telling  her,  just  as  she  was  about  to
make  her  appearance  on  the  scene,  that  she  was  going  to  sleep,  which  always
procured  her  a  great  success  with  the  public.  It  is  a  circumstance  of  this
nature  which  introduces  her  into  my  present  subject.

One  evening  I  arrived  late  at  the  theatre.  The  manager  was  waiting
anxiously  for  me  in  his  office ;  he  had  changed  the  order  of  the  pieces,  and  put
the  "  Caprice  "  at  the  end  of  the  entertainment,  because  he  had  just  been  in-
formed by  telegram  that  his  grande  coquette  had  missed  the  train,  which
was  to  have  brought  her  from  Tours  to  Blois.  But  he  was  relying  on  my
assistance  to  substitute  Mdlle.  B.  without  damaging  the  performance.

"  Does  she  so  much  as  know  her  part?"  I  asked  him.

"  She  has  seen  it  played  several  times,  but  she  has  not  rehearsed  it."

"  Have  you  expressed  any  hope  that  I  might  come  to  her  assistance  ?  "

"  I  took  care  not  to  do  that :  any  doubt  as  to  her  talents  would  have  been
sufficient  to  have  produced  one  of  her  attacks."

"  Very  well,  do  not  let  her  know  I  am  here.  I  will  take  advantage  of  this
opportunity  to  make  a  very  interesting  experiment."

I  did  not  show  myself  on  the  stage,  but  took  my  place  in  a  close  box  at  the
far  end  of  the  house,  which  happened  to  be  unoccupied,  and  the  grating  closed.
Then,  drawing  myself  together,  I  willed  intently  that  Mdlle.  B.  might  fail
asleep.

It  was  then  half-past  ten.  I  learned  at  the  end  of  the  performance  that  at
this  same  time  the  young  artiste,  stopping  in  the  middle  of  her  toilette,  suddenly
sank  down  on  the  sofa  in  her  room,  begging  the  dresser  to  let  her  rest  a  little.
After  a  few  minutes  of  drowsiness  she  got  up,  finished  dressing  herself,  and
went  down  to  the  stage.  When  the  curtain  rose  I  was  not  very  confident  of  the
success  of  my  experiment,  not  then  knowing  what  had  taken  place  in  the  actress's
dressing-room ;  but  I  was  not  long  in  satisfying  myself,  merely  by  seeing  the
action  and  attitude  of  my  subject.  She  had  retained  in  her  memory  this  part

552C]  TO    CHAPTER    V  511

which  she  had  not  learnt,  but  had  only  seen  played,  and  acquitted  herself  mar-
vellously. There  was,  however,  another  suggestion  that  I  must  unconsciously
have  given  her,  when  mentally  ordering  her  to  play  the  comedy,  and  that  was
to  put  herself  en  rapport  with  the  other  characters  in  the  piece,  since  without
that  somnambulists  only  see  and  hear  the  person  who  has  put  them  to  sleep.
However  that  may  be,  I  was  obliged  to  awaken  Mdlle.  B.  in  order  that  she
might  take  part  in  the  supper  which  was  given  by  the  delighted  manager.

She  then  remembered  having  thrown  herself  on  the  sofa,  just  as  she  had  put
on  one  of  her  gloves,  and,  finding  herself  seated  there  again,  she  imagined  that
we  had  come  to  tell  her  that  the  curtain  was  rising  for  the  "  Caprice."  It  was
only  on  seeing  her  companions  surrounding  her,  and  congratulating  her  on  her
progress,  that  she  understood  what  had  taken  place,  and  thanked  me  with  a
glance.

If  it  be  objected  that  she  had  expected  my  arrival,  then  suspected  my  pre-
sence, or  at  least  my  influence,  which  had  been  so  favourable  to  her  talent  on
other  occasions,  and  that  self-suggestion  had  even  in  this  case  produced  som-
nambulism— I  have  no  reply  to  make.

In  the  same  paper  Dr.  Dufay  gives  several  other  instances  of  the
improvement  of  memory  in  hypnosis.  Thus,  a  lady,  after  reading  once
a  poem  of  a  hundred  and  two  lines,  was  hypnotised,  and  reproduced  it
correctly  in  automatic  writing.  The  same  lady,  who  was  an  excellent
musician,  when  hypnotised,  played  from  memory  with  perfect  execution
an  overture  of  eight  or  ten  pages  to  a  new  opera,  which  she  had  played
through  only  once  the  day  before.

552  B.  From  Dr.  J.  Milne  Bramwell's  "  Personally  Observed  Hyp-
notic Phenomena"  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  p.  194).

In  response  to  suggestion  the  subject  may  recall  the  events  of  waking  life
to  a  greater  extent  than  he  could  do  in  the  normal  condition,  as  well  as  what
has  taken  place  during  previous  hypnoses  ;  and,  on  awaking,  may  have  lost  all
recollection  of  what  has  occurred.  The  lost  memory  can  be  restored  to  a
greater  or  lesser  extent  by  suggestion.  The  improvement  in  memory  extends
to  remote  as  well  as  recent  incidents,  and  I  have  noticed  numerous  examples  of
both.  One  patient,  whose  natural  memory  was  unusually  bad,  was  able  to
recall  on  awaking  some  verses  with  which  she  was  previously  unacquainted,  and
which  were  only  read  over  to  her  twice  during  hypnosis.  Another,  who  could
few  dance  tunes  upon  the  piano,  but  who  could  only  do  so  with  the  music
before  her  when  awake,  was  able,  when  hypnotised  and  blindfolded,  to  play  the
same  tunes  much  more  brilliantly.  I  have  found  that  subjects  who  could  not
remember  events  which  happened  at  an  earlier  age  than  six  or  seven  were  able,
hypnotised,  to  recall  those  which  had  occurred  at  the  age  of  two  and  a
half  years.  In  many  of  these  instances  I  have  obtained  confirmatory  evidence,
at  all  events  as  regards  the  occurrence  of  the  facts  themselves,  from  the  testi-
mony of  older  relatives.

552  C.  It  is  possible  not  only  to  improve  memory  by  hypnosis,  but
also  to  recover  memories  that  have  lapsed  from  the  normal  consciousness,

s   I  >r.   Bramwell  has  shown — those  relating  to  the  events  of
childhood.     Further,  the  memory  of  events  occurring  during  secondary

512  APPENDICES  [553  A

states  of  consciousness,  which  the  primary  consciousness  has  never  been
aware  of  at  all,  may  sometimes  be  recovered  by  hypnosis.     The  best
known  instance  of  this  is  the  case  of  Ansel  Bourne  (225  A).
Dr.  Dufay  records  another  case  as  follows : —

With  respect  to  the  forgetfulness  of  what  had  taken  place  during  an  attack
of  somnambulism,  I  have  published  in  \hzRevue  Scientifique  of  December  ist,
1883,  the  case  of  a  young  servant  girl,  who,  thinking  that  her  mistress's  jewels
were  not  safe  in  the  drawer  where  she  had  put  them,  hid  them  in  another  piece
of  furniture,  where  they  seemed  to  her  to  be  safer.  Accused  of  having  stolen
them,  and  despite  her  denials  (which  were  quite  sincere),  she  was  put  in  prison.
One  day,  in  paying  a  professional  visit  at  the  prison,  I  recognised  her,  having
seen  her  serving  at  the  house  of  one  of  my  colleagues.  Knowing  her  to  be
somnambulic,  I  put  her  to  sleep,  and  she  then  related  to  me  what  she  had  done,
and  was  much  distressed  at  having  no  recollection  of  it  when  awake.  I  made
her  repeat  her  declaration  before  the  examining  magistrate,  who,  after  verifica-
tion, had  her  set  at  liberty.

Many  cases  of  the  effects  of  hypnotism  on  memory  are  given  in  the
Revue  de  FHypnotisme,  e.g.  a  case  recorded  by  Dr.  Pitres  (vol.  ix.,  1895,
p.  164)  of  a  patient  who  for  several  days  in  succession  remembered  when
hypnotised  her  dreams  of  the  previous  night,  which  she  could  not  recollect
while  awake.

553  A.  The  following  is  a  striking  instance  of  the  utilisation  of
hypnotic  suggestion  to  avoid  waste  of  energy  in  a  responsible  and  ex-
hausting occupation.  Dr.  A.  Forel,  in  a  paper  on  "  Quelques  Sugges-
tions "  in  the  Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  vol.  vi.  p.  357  (1892),  writes  : —

At  the  Burgh  olzli  Asylum,  in  order  to  watch  the  patients  with  suicidal
tendencies  during  the  night,  we  employ  warders  who  have  received  appropriate
hypnotic  suggestions.  The  nurse's  bed  is  placed  at  the  side  of  the  patient's,
and  the  suggestion  is  given  that  she  shall  sleep  well  and  hear  nothing  except
any  unusual  sound  the  patient  may  make.  If  the  latter  attempts  to  get  out  of
bed,  or  to  do  herself  any  harm,  the  nurse  awakes  at  once,  otherwise  she  sleeps
soundly,  despite  the  unimportant  noises  and  movements  made  by  the  patient.

This  system  succeeds  admirably,  provided  we  select  suggestible  warders  for
it  The  inappreciable  advantage  is  that  the  nurse  does  not  get  tired  (I  have
sometimes  continued  this  sleeping  watch  with  the  same  nurse  for  more  than
six  months  without  her  suffering  the  slightest  fatigue),  and  that  the  danger
of  ordinary  watching — that  of  falling  asleep,  despite  every  precaution— does
not  exist.

I  have  not  had  a  single  accident  to  report,  with  regard  to  patients  watched
in  this  manner,  for  four  years.  It  is  curious  to  observe  the  surprise  sustained
by  the  said  patients— melancholies— to  see  themselves  so  well  watched  in
this  way.

553  B.  An  interesting  case  of  intelligent  mental  action,  which  was
apparently  beyond  the  subject's  normal  powers,  and  the  origin  of  which
was  only  traced  to  the  hypnotic  condition  by  accident,  is  recorded  by  Dr.
Bramwell  in  one  of  the  papers  above  referred  to  (Braint  Summer  Number,

555A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  513

1900,  p.  207).  The  subject  was  the  Miss  A.  of  his  time  experiments
(551  C).  She  sometimes  remained  undisturbed  for  an  hour  or  two  in  his
room  in  the  hypnotic  condition  while  he  was  treating  other  patients.  On
being  questioned  in  hypnosis  as  to  her  mental  life  under  these  conditions,
she  replied  as  follows  : —

"  When  you  do  not  speak  to  me,  and  nothing  occurs  that  interests  me
directly,  I  generally  think  of  nothing,  and  pass  into  a  condition  of  profound
restfulness.  Once,  however,  I  had  an  important  dress  to  make  and  was  puzzled
how  to  do  it.  After  you  had  hypnotised  me  and  left  me  resting  quietly,  I
planned  the  dress.  When  I  awoke  I  did  not  know  I  had  done  so,  and  was
still  troubled  about  it.  On  my  way  home  I  suddenly  thought  how  the  dress
ought  to  be  made,  and  afterwards  successfully  carried  out  my  ideas.  I  believed
I  had  found  the  way  out  of  the  difficulty  there  and  then,  in  the  waking  state  ;  I
now  know  I  did  so  some  hours  previously  when  hypnotised."  When  the  subject
was  aroused  she  had  no  recollection  of  what  she  had  said,  and  still  believed  she
had  planned  the  dress  when  awake.

Dr.  Liebeault,  in  a  paper  in  the  Revue  de  rffypnotisme,  January
1889  (already  referred  to  in  527  A),  gives  several  cases  of  the  use  of
hypnotism  in  education, — the  schoolboys  on  whom  suggestion  was  prac-
tised for  the  purpose  acquiring  a  greater  power  of  concentrating  their
attention  on  their  lessons.  See  also  the  references  to  papers  by  Dr.
Berillon  and  others  in  the  same  Appendix,  and  in  528  A.

555  A.  The  question  of  "  hypnotic  crimes  "  was  thoroughly  discussed
by  Dr.  Liebeault  in  his  book,  Du  Sommeil  et  des  Etats  Analogues  (1866).
Later,  Dr.  Liegeois,  whose  speciality  is  medical  jurisprudence,  made
many  experiments  with  Dr.  Lie'beault's  patients  to  test  the  practicability  of
criminal  suggestion.  He  suggested  to  them  fictitious  crimes,  such  as  murder,
theft,  perjury,  &c.,  and  made  them  give  him  receipts  for  money  which
he  had  never  really  lent  them.  One  subject  was  induced  to  fire  a  revolver,
which  she  was  told  was  loaded,  at  a  magistrate;  another  at  her  own
mother ;  the  latter  subject  was  also  made  to  accuse  herself  before  a  magis-
trate of  having  committed  a  murder.  A  young  man  dissolved  in  water  a
powder  which  he  was  told  was  arsenic,  and  gave  it  to  his  aunt  to  drink ;
afterwards  he  completely  forgot  this  act.  These  experiments  were  pub-
:  in  1884  in  a  memoir  entitled  La  Suggestion  Hypnotique  dans  sts
le  Droit  Civil  et  le  Droit  Crimine!,  which  was  expanded  in
1889  into  a  book,  De  la  Suggestion  et  du  Somnambulismt  dans  leurs
Rjpports  avec  la  Jurisprudence  et  la  Medecine  Legale.

Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing,  in  Die gerichtlich  medicinischf  Bedeutung  der

Suggestion  (published  in  the  Archivfur  Kriminal-Anthropologie  und  Krimi-

nalistik,  Leipzig,  1900),  distinguishes  three  classes  of  crimes  which  might  be

1  by  suggestion  :  ( i )  crimes  against  a  hypnotised  person,  of  which

ces  have  been  known  to  occur;   (2)  crimes  committed  by  means  of

hypnotised  persons  ;  and  (3)  crimes  incited  by  suggestion  in  the  waking

About  the  possibility  of  the  second  class,  there  is  much  difference

2    K

514  APPENDICES  [555  B

of  opinion ;  some  authors,  as  Fuchs  and  Benedikt,  denying  it  completely,
while  others,  as  Lie'beault  and  Lie'geois,  think  it  sufficiently  important
to  be  taken  account  of  in  the  administration  of  justice ;  Bernheim  and
Forel,  again,  take  an  intermediate  view.  Liebeault,  as  quoted  by  Schrenck-
Notzing,  instances  a  boy  who  had  often  been  made  to  commit  small
thefts  by  way  of  experiment,  and  who  afterwards  developed  kleptomania.

Under  the  head  of  crimes  caused  by  suggestion  in  the  waking  state,
Schrenck-Notzing  quotes  the  Sauter  case  (1899),  in  which  a  woman  was
accused  of  attempts  to  commit  several  murders  by  unlawful  means  (black
magic).  The  evidence  showed  that  she  had  been  incited  to  these  attempts
by  a  fortune-teller  playing  on  her  superstitious  and  hysterical  temperament.
Falsification  of  evidence  by  suggestion  comes  under  the  same  head,  e.g.  in
the  trial  of  Berchtold  for  murder  at  Munich  in  1896,  newspaper  reports  of
the  case  excited  the  public  mind,  and  produced  a  crop  of  false  witnesses,
who  made  on  oath  a  number  of  contradictory  statements,  all  apparently  in
good  faith.

Bernheim,  in  "  Les  Hallucinations  re'troactives  suggerees  dans  le  som-
meil  naturel  ou  artificiel "  {Revue  de  rHypnotisme,  December  1889,
p.  1 68),  describes  how  he  made  a  roomful  of  eleven  patients  believe  that
they  had  witnessed  an  assault  on  one  of  the  hospital  attendants,  the  sup-
posed culprit  himself  sharing  in  the  delusion.

It  must  be  observed,  however,  that  most  of  the  subjects  used  in  the
"  laboratory  "  experiments  of  Liebeault,  Liegeois,  and  Bernheim  seem  to
have  been  in  a  feeble  state  of  body  or  mind,  with  little  power  of  moral
resistance — sometimes,  perhaps,  with  positive  criminal  tendencies;  and
the  false  witnesses  in  the  Berchtold  trial  were  obviously  ill-balanced  and
hysterical.  Such  cases,  therefore,  afford  no  evidence  of  the  possibility  of
undermining  settled  moral  principles  by  hypnotic  suggestion.  Further,
it  has  been  pointed  out  that  Liegeois'  subjects  probably  knew,  in  spite  of
his  precautions,  that  the  crimes  suggested  to  them  were  fictitious,  and
would  have  refused  to  commit  real  crimes.

Other  investigators,  such  as  Delbceuf,  have  found  that  their  subjects
resist  improper  or  immoral  suggestions,  and  the  ability  of  the  subject  to
resist  anything  opposed  to  his  waking  conscience  is  also  maintained  by
Dr.  J.  M.  Creed,  of  Sydney  (see  "  My  Experience  of  Hypnotic  Suggestion  as
a  Therapeutic  Agent,"  in  The  Australian  Medical  Gazette  of  January  2Oth,
1899).  These  views  are  strongly  supported  by  the  experience  of  Dr.
Bramwell,  quoted  below.

On  the  subject  of  hypnotic  crimes,  see  also  Gilles  de  la  Tourette,
UHypnotisme  et  les  Etats  Analogues  au  point  de  vue  medico-tigal,  and
V.  Bentivegni,  Die  Hypnose  und  ihre  civilrechtliche  Bedeutung  (Leipzig,
1890).  A  useful  general  discussion  of  the  subject,  with  numerous
references  to  authorities,  is  given  in  the  chapter  on  "  The  Legal  Aspects
of  Hypnotism  "  in  Moll's  Hypnotism.

555  B.     Dr.   Bramwell  points  out   (see    "What  is  Hypnotism?"   in

555BJ  TO     CHAPTER    V  515

Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  pp.  204-58)  that  his  own  views  as  to  the
complete  independence  of  the  hypnotised  subject's  will  had  been  long  ago
maintained  by  Braid,  who  considered  that  the  subject  had  acquired  new
and  varied  powers,  but  had  not  at  the  same  time  lost  his  volition  or  moral
sense.  Braid  asserted  that  he  had  proved  that  no  one  could  be  affected
by  hypnotism  at  any  stage  of  the  process  unless  by  voluntary  compliance.
His  subjects  were  docile  and  obliging ;  but  despite  this,  they  refused  all
criminal  suggestions,  and  even  developed  a  higher  sense  of  propriety  than
characterised  their  normal  condition.1  Against  the  view  of  Bernheim,
Dr.  Bramwell  maintains  that  the  so-called  hypnotic  crimes  have  no
analogy  with  the  simple  automatic  actions  which  subjects  may  easily  be
trained  to  perform.  He  goes  on  (p.  233)  : —

When  I  commenced  hypnotic  work  some  seven  years  ago,  I,  like  Delbceuf,
believed  that  the  hypnotic  subject  was  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  the  operator.  I
was  soon  aroused  from  this  dream,  however,  not  by  the  result  of  experiments
made  to  test  the  condition,  but  from  the  constantly  recurring  facts  which  spon-
taneously arose  in  opposition  to  my  preconceived  theories.  In  the  paper  printed
[in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  pp.  176-203]  under  the  heading  4>  So-called
Hypnotic  Automatism,"  I  cited  a  number  of  cases  in  which  suggestions  had
been  refused  by  hypnotic  subjects.  I  also  mentioned  two  subjects  who  had
rejected  certain  suggestions  and  accepted  others.  Miss  F.,  for  example,  recited
a  poem,  but  would  not  help  herself  to  a  glass  of  water  from  my  sideboard,  while
Mr.  G.  would  play  one  part,  but  not  others,  and  committed  an  imaginary  crime.

These  subjects  accepted  suggestions  which  were  apparently  in  opposition  to
their  normal  character.  For  instance.  Miss  F.,  who  was  extremely  nervous  and
shy  about  singing  or  reading  aloud,  not  only  before  strangers,  but  also  before
certain  members  of  her  own  family,  recited  a  poem  in  the  waking  state  which  I
had  read  to  her  during  hypnosis.  Her  mother  told  me  that,  under  ordinary
circumstances,  she  would  rather  have  died  than  have  done  so.  While  Mr.  G.,
who  refused  the  roles  of  dissenting  minister  and  hawker,  accepted  that  of  show-
man. He  also,  without  the- least  hesitation,  promptly  put  a  piece  of  sugar  in  a
friend's  tea-cup,  after  having  been  assured  it  was  arsenic.  When  asked  why  he
had  poisoned  his  friend,  he  replied,  laughing,  "  Oh,  that's  all  right,  he  has  lived
long  enough  !  "  I  made  no  attempt  to  ascertain  G.'s  mental  condition  in  refer-
ence to  the  supposed  crime,  but  I  think  one  can,  without  much  difficulty,  imagine
it.  G.  was  a  respectable  tradesman  and  a  somewhat  devout  Dissenter,  and  it  is
not  unnatural  to  suppose  he  refused  the  part  of  fish-hawker  as  this  was  not  in
keeping  with  his  social  position,  and  that  of  minister  as  it  offended  his  religious
susceptibilities,  and  accepted  that  of  showman  because  it  contained  nothing
objectionable  to  him.  Would  it  be  reasonable  to  suppose  that  he  should  at  the
same  time  be  capable  of  weighing  fine  distinctions  between  the  suggested
alterations  in  personality  and  unable  to  understand  the  experimental  nature  of
the  crime  ?  He,  by  the  way,  affords  the  only  instance  in  which  an  imaginary
has  been  carried  out  by  one  of  my  own  patients.  All  others,  without
tion.  have  absolutely  refused  such  suggestions.

Why  should  Miss  F.  have  recited  the  poem  and  refused  to  take  a  glass  of

1  See  also  as  to  Braid's  views  on  this  point,  "James  Braid  ;  his  Work  and  Writ-
ings," by  Dr.  Bramwcll,  in  Froctedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  pp.  127-66.

5i6  APPENDICES  [555  B

water  from  my  sideboard  ?  The  answer  to  the  first  question  is  obvious.  She
was  extremely  anxious  to  get  rid  of  the  nervous  embarrassment  from  which  she
suffered,  and  thus  the  suggestion  contained  nothing  opposed  to  her  volition.
She  herself  explained  the  second ;  after  leaving  my  house  her  mother  re-hypno-
tised her,  and  asked  why  she  had  refused  my  suggestion,  whereupon  she
replied,  "  I  do  not  know  Dr.  Bramwell  well  enough  to  help  myself  unasked  to  a
glass  of  water."  .  .  .

[Other  illustrative  cases  are  given,  and  Dr.  Bramwell  continues : — ]
These,  and  many  similar  facts,  have  forced  me  to  abandon  all  belief  in
so-called  automatism  or  helpless  obedience ;  still,  I  must  refer  to  some  of  the
arguments  in  support  of  it  before  attempting  to  analyse  further  the  mental
condition  in  hypnosis.

(1)  When  subjects  successfully  resist  suggestion,  it  is  usual  to  explain  this
by  assuming  that  they  have  not  been  so  deeply  hypnotised  as  those  in  whom  no
resistance  has  manifested  itself.     I  cannot  admit  the  correctness  of  this  in  my
cases.    During  the  last  seven  years  I  have  had  frequent  opportunities  of  examin-
ing hypnotic  subjects,  at  home  and  abroad,  and  have  nowhere  observed  more
profound  somnambules  than  amongst  my  own  patients,  rarely,  in  fact,  seeing
cases  to  equal  them.     All  to  whom  I  have  referred  not  only  exhibited  the
phenomena  of  profoundest  somnambulism,  but  nearly  all  had  been  subjects  of
painless  operations  in  the  hypnotic  state.

(2)  The  personality  of  the  operator,  and  his  method  of  training  his  subjects,
is  supposed  to  play  an  important  part  in  the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  sug-
gestions.    Granting  that  this  be  true,  it  does  not  explain  the  resistance  which
I  encountered.     I  commenced  by  believing  that  the  subjects  were  entirely  at
my  mercy,  and  did  my  best  to  develop  their  supposed  obedience.

(3)  The  existence  of  one  class  of  phenomena  is  considered  as  necessarily
implying  the  existence  of  another  and  totally  differing  class.     Durand  le  Gros
asks :  "  Is  it  possible  that  suggestion  should  have  the  power  of  producing  extra-
ordinary physical  changes  and  yet  be  without  this  particular  effect  upon  the
moral  state?"     The  facts  I   have  already  cited  answer  this  question  in  the
affirmative.  .  .  .

(4)  Evidence  in  favour  of  obedience  afforded  by  cases  in  which  the  subjects
are  alleged  to  have  accepted  criminal  and  analogous  suggestions.     These  are
important.    The  fact  that  the  phenomenon  of  helpless  obedience  was  invariably
absent  in  my  patients  does  not  justify  me  in  concluding  that  it  did  not  some-
times occur  in  those  of  others.     These  cases  of  so-called  automatism  fall  into
two  classes :  (0)  where  an  imaginary  crime  has  been  suggested ;  (£)  where  a
real  act  has  been  performed,  which  it  is  assumed  the  patient  would  not  have
submitted  to  in  the  normal  state.

(a)  First,  as  regards  imaginary  crime.  ...  A  somnambule  puts  a  piece  of
sugar  into  her  mother's  tea-cup,  while  her  medical  man  makes  various  absurd
and  untruthful  assertions  as  to  its  composition.  Bernheim  and  Lidbeault  assert
that  the  subject  accepted  these  absurd  statements  as  true,  because,  being
hypnotised,  she  was  unable  to  distinguish  between  truth  and  falsehood,  while
Delbceuf  claims  that  she  had  sufficient  sense  left  to  know  exactly  what  she  was
doing.  To  neither  does  it  seem  to  have  occurred  to  ask  the  subject  during
hypnosis  what  she  thought  about  the  matter  herself.  If  they  had  done  so,  she
would  promptly  have  solved  the  difficulty,  and  told  them  that  while  they  were
gravely  discussing  probabilities,  she  was  quietly  laughing  in  her  sleeve  at  the
grotesque  absurdity  of  the  whole  performance.  [In  his  paper  referred  to  above,

556A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  517

pp.  197-202,  Dr.  Bramwell  gives  instances  showing  that  his  patients  when
hypnotised  fully  understood  the  nature  of  the  suggestions  made  to  them.]  .  .  .

(3)  Where  a  real  act  has  been  performed,  which  it  is  assumed  the  patient
would  not  have  submitted  to  in  the  normal  state.  .  .  .  Before  this  can  be  used
as  an  argument  in  favour  of  the  helpless  obedience  of  the  hypnotised  subject,
one  is  justified  in  demanding  that  it  should  be  clearly  proved  that  under  similar
circumstances  the  patient  would  have  objected  to  [it]  in  the  waking  con-
dition. .  .  .

Strangely  enough,  the  most  marked  case  of  resistance  to  suggestion  that  I
have  observed  was  shown  by  Lie*beault's  celebrated  somnambule,  Camille.  To
this  I  have  already  referred  (pp.  cit.,  p.  197),  but  I  wish  to  emphasise  the  fact
that  the  classic  hypnotic  automaton,  the  one  who  was  supposed  to  carry  out  a
suggestion  with  the  fatality  of  a  falling  stone,  refused  one,  not  on  moral  grounds,
but  apparently  from  pure  caprice.

The  difference  between  the  hypnotised  and  the  normal  subject,  as  it  appears
to  me  from  a  long  series  of  observed  facts,  is  not  so  much  in  conduct  as  in
increased  mental  and  physical  powers.  Any  changes  in  the  moral  sense,  I  have
noticed,  have  invariably  been  for  the  better,  the  hypnotised  subject  evincing
superior  refinement.  As  regards  obedience  to  suggestion,  there  is  apparently
little  to  choose  between  the  two.  A  hypnotised  subject,  who  has  acquired  the
power  of  manifesting  various  physical  and  mental  phenomena,  will  do  so  in
response  to  suggestion,  for  much  the  same  reasons  as  one  in  the  normal  con-
dition. In  the  normal  state  we  are  usually  pleased  to  show  off  our  various  gifts
and  attainments,  more  especially  if  we  think  they  are  superior  to  those  of  others,
and  in  this  respect  the  hypnotised  subject  does  not  differ  from  the  normal.  Both
will  refuse  what  is  disagreeable ;  in  both  this  refusal  may  be  modified  or  over-
come by  appeals  to  the  reason,  or  to  the  usual  motives  which  influence  conduct.
When  the  act  demanded  is  contrary  to  the  moral  sense,  it  is  usually  refused  by
the  normal  subject,  and  invariably  by  the  hynotised  one.

556  A.  Some  of  the  most  striking  cases  of  moral  reforms  produced
by  hypnotic  suggestion  are  those  recorded  by  Dr.  Auguste  Voisin.  For
instance  : —

In  the  summer  of  1884  there  was  at  the  Salpe"triere  a  young  woman  of  a

>lorable  type.1    Jeanne   Sch was  a  criminal  lunatic,   filthy  in   habits,

>lent  in  demeanour,  and  with  a  lifelong  history  of  impurity  and  theft  M.
Voisin,  who  was  one  of  the  physicians  on  the  staff,  undertook  to  hypnotise  her
on  May  3ist,  at  a  time  when  she  could  only  be  kept  quiet  by  the  strait  jacket
and  bonnet  <f  irrigation,  or  perpetual  cold  douche  to  the  head.  She  would
not— indeed,  she  could  not— look  steadily  at  the  operator,  but  raved  and  spat
at  him.  M.  Voisin  kept  his  face  close  to  hers,  and  followed  her  eyes  wl  .
she  moved  them.  In  about  ten  minutes  a  stertorous  sleep  ensued,  and  in  five
minutes  more  she  passed  into  a  sleep-waking  state,  and  began  to  talk  in-
coherently. The  process  was  repeated  on  many  days,  and  gradually  she  became
sane  when  in  the  trance,  though  she  still  raved  when  awake.  Gradually,  too,
she  became  able  to  obey  in  waking  hours  commands  impressed  on  her  in  the
—first  trivial  orders  (to  sweep  the  room  and  so  forth),  then  orders  in-
volving a  marked  change  of  behaviour.  Nay  more;  in  the  hypnotic  state  she

1  Annales  Mtdieo-Psychohgiques,  1884,  vol.  ii.  p.  289  seqq.

5i8  APPENDICES  [557  A

voluntarily  expressed  repentance  for  her  past  life,  made  a  confession  which
involved  more  evil  than  the  police  were  cognisant  of  (though  it  agreed  with
facts  otherwise  known),  and  finally  of  her  own  impulse  made  good  resolves  for
the  future.  Two  years  later,  M.  Voisin  wrote  to  me  (July  3151,  1886)  that  she
was  then  a  nurse  in  a  Paris  hospital,  and  that  her  conduct  was  irreproachable.
It  appeared,  then,  that  this  poor  woman,  whose  history  since  the  age  of  thirteen
had  been  one  of  reckless  folly  and  vice,  had  become  capable  of  the  steady,  self-
controlled  work  of  a  nurse  at  a  hospital,  the  reformed  character  having  first
manifested  itself  in  the  hypnotic  state,  partly  in  obedience  to  suggestion,  and
partly  as  the  natural  result  of  the  tranquilisation  of  morbid  passions.

M.  Dufour,  the  medical  head  of  another  asylum,1  has  adopted  hypnotic
suggestion  as  a  regular  element  in  his  treatment.  "  Des  a  present,"  he  says,
"  notre  opinion  est  faite :  sans  crainte  de  nous  tromper,  nous  affirmons  que
1'hypnotisme  peut  rendre  service  dans  le  traitement  des  maladies  mentales."
As  was  to  be  expected,  he  finds  that  only  a  small  proportion  of  lunatics  are
hypnotisable  ;  but  the  effect  produced  on  these,  whether  by  entrancement  or
suggestion,  is  uniformly  good.  His  best  subject  is  a  depraved  young  man,  who
after  many  convictions  for  crimes  (including  attempted  murder)  has  become  a
violent  lunatic.  "  T.,"  says  Dr.  Dufour,  "  a  €\&  un  assez  mauvais  sujet.  Nous
n'avons  plus  a  parler  au  present,  tellement  ses  sentiments  moraux  ont  etc"
ame'liore's  par  1'hypnotisme."  This  change  and  amelioration  of  character  (over
and  above  the  simple  recovery  of  sanity)  has  been  a  marked  feature  in  some  of
Dr.  Voisin's  cases  as  well.

See  also  a  case  given  by  Dr.  Voisin  in  the  Revue  de  FHypnotisme,
vol.  iii.,  1889,  p.  130,  and  Appendices  to  sections  527-530.

557  A.  A  case  in  which  jealousy  had  produced  actual  insanity  is
given  in  the  Revue  de  FHypnotisme  for  May  1889,  p.  345,  by  Dr.  A.  Dorez.
In  the  same  Revue,  for  November  1893,  p.  141,  Dr.  Bourdon  records  a
case  of  morbid  jealousy  cured  by  hypnotic  suggestion,  of  which  the
following  is  a  summary  : —

Mme.  X.,  twenty-four  years  old,  anaemic,  irritable,  had  under  the  influence
of  an  ungovernable  jealousy  become  violent,  subject  to  fits  of  unreasonable
temper.  She  could  no  longer  eat  nor  sleep  ;  had  reached  an  extreme  degree
of  emaciation ;  she  coughed,  and  her  breathing  was  irregular  and  hard.  Her
life  appeared  to  be  in  danger,  and  Dr.  Bourdon  was  consulted.  Mme.  X.  was
hypnotised  with  tolerable  ease,  after  fifteen  minutes'  fixation  of  the  eyes  and
suggestion  of  the  idea  of  sleep.  Dr.  Bourdon  suggests  to  her  in  a  state  of
light  hypnosis  that  she  is  not  jealous,  and  knows  she  has  no  reason  to  be  ;  that
she  will  yield  no  more  to  bad  temper,  and  will  be  amiable  towards  her  husband;
finally,  that  she  feels  the  need  of  sleep,  and  food,  and  calm.  On  waking  she
has  no  recollection  of  the  hypnotic  suggestions.  This  first  stance  is  followed  by
amelioration,  and  the  suggestions  are  repeated  on  seven  consecutive  days.
After  the  seventh  day  she  feels  quite  well,  and  wishes  to  go  back  home  and
to  see  her  husband.  Her  affection  for  him  has  returned.  Finally,  harmony
and  happiness  were  restored  in  the  home,  and  her  jealousy  was  completely

1  Dr.  E.  Dufour,  medecin   en   chef  de  1'asile  Saint- Robert  (Isere).     See  Annales
Mfdico-Psychologiques,  September  1886,  p.  238,  and  Contribution  dT  etude
par  le  Dr.  Dufour,  Grenoble,  1887.

564A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  519

cured.     Dr.  Bourdon  states  that  at  the  time  of  writing,  eight  months  after  the
treatment,  there  had  been  no  relapse.

563  A.     Rachel  Baker,1  one  of  the  most  noted  "  sleeping  preachers,"
was  born  at  Pelham,  in  Massachusetts,  in  1794.     Her  parents  were  Pres-
byterians of  limited  means,  and  the  chief  element  in  her  education,  which
was  otherwise  limited  to  seven  months'  regular  schooling,  was  religious
instruction.     She  is  said  to  have  been  a  child  "  of  a  serious  make,  of  few
words,  timorous,  and  much  given  to  melancholy,  .  .  .   [her]  mental  facul-
ties, in  the  opinion  of  all  those  best  acquainted  with  her,  are  far  from  being
beyond  what  is  common   to   females."     In   June   1811,  at   the   age   of
seventeen,  she  fell  into  a  state  of  religious  melancholy,  which  gradually
became  more  acute  till  November  of  the  same  year,  when  the  somnam-
bulic  condition  first  appeared ;  being  apparently  asleep  in  a  chair  in  the
evening,  she  talked  incoherently  of  her  fears  of  hell,  &c.     The  fit  or  trance,
with  the  same  kind  of  talk,  constantly  recurred  till  January  27th,  1812,
when  a  mental  crisis  occurred  in  the  waking  state — a  climax  of  terror  and
despair,  succeeded  by  a  kind  of  "  conversion,"  which  produced  a  happy  and
calming  effect  on  her  mind.     From  this  time  onwards  the  trances  con-
tinued, but  her  talk  became  much  more  regular  and  rational,  and  many
persons  used  to  come  and  listen  to  it.a     It  consisted  of  prayers  and  religious
addresses,  and   those  who  knew  her  well  declared  that  her  intellectual
faculties  were  increased  to  an  extraordinary  degree  while  in  the  trance.
It  was  observed  "  that  all  that  Rachel  expresses  in  her  state  of  somnilo-
quism  is  the  result  of  preconceived  ideas  and  opinions,  but  delivered  with
a  readiness  and  a  fluency  which  is  very  far  above  her  waking  state,"  and
the  specimens  quoted  bear  out  this  view.     The  so-called  "  fits,"  which
occurred  almost  every  evening,  lasted  about  forty-five  minutes,  beginning
and   ending   with   slight    epileptiform   symptoms,  and   passing  off    into
natural  sleep  for  the  rest  of  the  night.     In  her  waking  state  she   knew
nothing   of  what  had   happened  in   the    "  fit,"  except  from   the   infor-
mation of  others.     No  other  morbid  symptoms  of  any  kind  were  detected
in  her  by  the  doctors  who  report  on  the  case  ;  the  "  fits  "  ceased  during
temporary  ill-health,  and  returned  as  soon  as  she  recovered.

Two  other  cases  of  "  sleeping  preachers  "  are  recorded  in  the  same
book — that  of  Job  Cooper,  a  Pennsylvanian  weaver,  in  1 7  74,  and  Joseph
Payne,  a  boy  of  about  sixteen,  at  Reading  in  England,  in  1759,  whose
case  is  described  in  The  Gentleman's  Magazine  for  May  1 760.  See  also
the  case  of  «  X+Y=Z  "  in  Chapter  IX.

564  A.     Besides   the  references  given  in  541  F  to  hypnotised  and

c  "  Remarkable  Sermons  of  Rachel  Baker,  and  Piou»  Ejaculations,  delivered
daring  Sleep,"  by  Dr.  Mitchill,  M.D.,  Professor  of  Physic,  the  late  tley,  LL.D.,

and  Dr.  Douglass  (London,  1815).

3  "  Several  hundreds  every  evening  flock  to  hear  this  most  wonderful  Preacher,  who
rumental  in  converting  more  persons  to  Christianity,  when  asleep,  than  all  the  other
Ministers  together,  whilst  awake."     (Op.  fit.  title  page.)

520  APPENDICES  [564  A

somnambulic  subjects  foreseeing  and  successfully  prescribing  for  the
symptoms  of  their  diseases,  see  also  the  remarkable  case  of  Anna
Winsor  (237  A),  and  that  of  Elizabeth  Squirrell,  referred  to  below
(565  A).

A  case  in  which  symptoms  of  a  markedly  hysterical  type  followed
accurately  the  predictions  of  the  patient,  ending  in  her  complete  recovery,
was  given  by  Dr.  N.  Cervello,  in  his  Storia  di  un  Caso  (Thterisono  con
Sognazione  Spontanea  (Palermo,  1853),  and  is  summarised  in  the  Journal
S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  p.  333.

Another  curious  case  of  prevision  of  the  details  of  an  illness — exercised
not  in  spontaneous  somnambulism,  but  in  hypnosis — was  given  in  Dr.
Alphonse  Teste's  Manuel  Pratique  du  Magnttismc  Animal  (1841),  and
recently  reprinted  in  the  Revue  des  Etudes  Psychiques,  January,  February,
and  March,  1901,  p.  74,  from  which  I  summarise  it.

The  subject,  Mme.  M.,  was  a  patient  of  Dr.  Teste's,  who  had  often  proved
clairvoyant.  On  a  certain  Friday,  being  alone  with  her  and  her  husband,  Dr.
Teste  hypnotised  her  and  tried  to  find  out  how  far  she  could  foretell  the  future.
She  proceeded  to  tell  them  what  would  happen,  but  only  in  relation  to  herself.
She  said  that  on  the  following  Tuesday,  between  3  and  3.30,  something — she
could  not  tell  what  or  where — would  frighten  her ;  she  would  have  a  fall,  which
would  cause  a  miscarriage ;  at  3.30  she  would  faint  for  eight  minutes,  and  would
be  very  ill  for  the  rest  of  the  day  and  night.  On  Wednesday  there  would  be
considerable  haemorrhage  ;  on  Thursday  she  would  be  much  better,  and  would
get  up,  but  at  5.30  P.M.  the  haemorrhage  would  come  on  again  and  be  followed
by  delirium ;  she  would  then  have  a  good  night,  but  would  lose  her  reason  on
Friday  evening.  This  state  would  last  for  three  days,  after  which  she  would
recover.  In  answer  to  questions,  she  declared  that  no  precautions  could  pos-
sibly avert  the  accident.  On  awaking  she  ignored,  as  usual,  everything  that
had  happened  in  her  trance.  Dr.  Teste  impressed  on  her  anxious  husband
the  necessity  of  keeping  her  in  complete  ignorance  of  the  prediction,  and
himself  took  careful  notes  of  all  the  details  of  it,  which  he  showed  the  next
day  to  a  medical  friend  of  his,  Dr.  Latour.

On  the  Tuesday  he  came  to  Mme.  M.'s  house,  and  found  her  lunching  with
her  husband,  apparently  in  the  best  of  health  and  spirits.  He  said  that  he
wished  to  spend  the  day  with  them.  Soon  afterwards  he  hypnotised  her  for  a
few  minutes,  when  she  repeated  her  prediction  exactly,  saying  as  before  that
she  could  not  tell  what  would  frighten  her,  nor  where  it  would  be.  On  waking
she  again  knew  nothing  of  the  prediction.

Dr.  Teste  and  her  husband  determined  to  take  all  possible  precautions
against  the  accident,  and,  as  the  hour  approached,  not  to  let  her  out  of  their
sight  for  a  moment.  Nevertheless,  a  few  minutes  after  3.30  she  went  out  of
the  room,  accompanied  by  her  husband,  suddenly  saw  a  rat — an  animal  to
which  she  had  an  intense  antipathy  ;  the  shock  of  seeing  it  caused  her  to  fall,
and  the  results  of  the  accident  followed  exactly  as  she  had  predicted.

This  case — though  a  remarkable  instance  of  self-suggestion — ob-
viously affords  no  clear  evidence  of  anything  further,  since  Mme.  M.'s

565A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  521

prevision  related  simply  to  her  own  actions.  She  could  not  tell  be-
forehand what  would  be  the  cause  of  her  fright;  the  rat — if  it  was  a
real,  and  not  a  hallucinatory  one — seems  to  have  acted  as  a  mere  point  de
repere  for  the  suggestion  to  attach  itself  to.  If  there  had  been  no  rat,
Mme.  M.'s  subliminal  self  would  probably  have  conjured  up  some  other
cause  of  fright,  real  or  imaginary,  and  the  effects  would  have  followed  in
due  course.

It  will  be  noted  that  many,  if  not  all,  these  cases  of  self-suggestion
relate  to  hysterical  symptoms,  which  are  probably  caused,  as  well  as  cured,
by  the  subliminal  self.

565  A.  The  following  case  of  clairvoyance  during  spontaneous
somnambulism  was  published  by  Dr.  Dufay  in  a  paper  in  the  Revue
Philosophique  for  February  1889,  a  translation  of  which  appeared  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  415-27.  The  writer  of  the  account  was
M.  Badaire,  formerly  director  of  the  Ecole  Normale  at  Gue'ret,  the
subject,  The'ophile  Janicaud,  having  been  one  of  his  pupil-teachers.  Jani-
caud  had  been  subject  to  frequent  attacks  of  somnambulism  from  about
the  age  of  eight  to  ten  ;  afterwards  they  ceased  almost  entirely  till  he  was
nineteen.  M.  Badaire  writes  : —

GU£RET,  Fcbnuiry  yh,  1860.

.  .  .  During  the  first  year  that  he  was  at  school  we  noticed  nothing  unusual
in  him ;  but  during  the  excessive  heat  in  the  months  of  June  and  July  1859  the
condition  of  young  Janicaud  completely  changed,  and  attacks  of  somnambulism
occurred  every  night,  with  a  frequency  which  soon  gave  cause  for  anxiety  as  to
his  health.  In  a  few  weeks  he  was  so  much  altered  as  to  be  hardly  recognisable
even  to  the  members  of  his  family.  His  eyes  were  sunken,  tired,  and  haggard,
and  an  extreme  thinness  took  the  place  of  robust  health.

Every  evening  he  got  up,  walked  about  the  dormitory,  descended  to  the
study  to  work  in  the  dark,  or  wandered  about  the  gardens  for  hours  at  a  time,
after  which  he  went  back  to  bed.  .  .  .

One  evening  about  1 1  o'clock  Janicaud,  having  escaped  from  the  dormi-
tory [in  spite  of  all  the  precautions  taken  to  avoid  the  risks  of  his  nocturnal
expeditions]  knocked  at  the  door  of  my  bedroom.

"  I  have  just  arrived  from  Vend6me,"  he  said,  "  and  have  come  to  give  you
the  news  of  your  family.  M.  and  Mme.  Arnault  are  well,  and  your  little  son
has  four  teeth."

"As  you  have  seen  them  at  Vend6me,  could  you  go  back  again  and  tell  me
where  they  are  at  present?"

Wait  ...  I  am  there  .  .  .  They  are  sleeping  in  a  room  on  the  first  floor;
their  bed  is  at  the  farther  end  of  the  room,  to  the  left.  The  nurse's  bed  is  to
the  right,  and  Henry's  cradle  close  to  it."

The  description  of  the  room  and  the  position  of  the  beds  were  perfectly
exact,  and  the  following  day  I  received  a  letter  from  my  father-in-law  telling  me
that  my  child  had  cut  his  fourth  tooth.

A  few  days  later  Janicaud  came  to  me  at  about  the  same  time,  telling  me
that  he  had  again  come  from  VendOme,  and  that  an  accident  had  happened  to
the  child  during  the  day.  My  wife,  being  much  startled,  anxiously  inquired
what  the  accident  was.

522  APPENDICES  [565  A

"  Oh  !  do  not  be  frightened,  Madame,  reassure  yourself,  there  will  be  no
serious  consequences,  whatever  the  doctor,  who  is  now  with  the  child,  may
think.  If  I  had  known  that  I  should  have  caused  you  so  much  alarm,  I  should
not  have  spoken  of  it.  It  will  be  nothing."

The  next  morning  I  wrote  to  my  father-in-law  to  tell  him  what  Janicaud  had
said,  and  begged  for  news  of  the  child  by  return  of  post.  The  answer  was  that
he  was  perfectly  well,  and  that  no  accident  had  taken  place.

But  in  the  month  of  September,  when  I  went  home  for  the  holidays,  I  learnt
the  whole  truth,  which  my  father-in-law,  on  the  advice  of  the  doctor,  had
hidden  from  me.  He  told  me  that  at  the  time  when  Janicaud  came  to  tell  me
that  an  accident  had  happened,  the  doctor  did  not  expect  the  child  to  live
through  the  night.  During  the  day  the  nurse,  having  got  hold  of  the  key  of  the
cellar,  had  become  completely  intoxicated,  and  the  child  having  been  fed  by  her
when  in  this  condition,  was  seized  with  violent  sickness,  which  endangered  his
life  for  several  days.

One  night  Janicaud  suddenly  jumped  up  in  bed,  and  turning  to  one  of  his
companions,  said  —

"  See,  Roullet,  how  careless  you  are.  I  certainly  told  you  to  shut  the  door
of  the  bookbinding  workshop,  but  you  did  not  do  it,  and  a  cat,  in  eating  the
paste,  has  just  knocked  over  the  dish,  which  is  broken  into  five  pieces."

Some  one  went  down  at  once  to  the  workshop,  and  it  was  found  that  what
the  somnambulist  had  said  was  perfectly  correct.

The  following  night  he  related  how  he  saw  on  the  Gteny  road  the  body  of
a  man,  who  had  been  drowned  while  bathing  in  the  Creuse,  and  that  he  was
being  brought  to  Gue'ret  in  a  carriage.  Next  day  I  made  inquiries,  and  heard
that  an  inhabitant  of  the  town  had  really  been  drowned  the  previous  day  at
Gl^ny,  and  that  his  body  had  been  brought  to  Gue'ret  during  the  night.  But
nobody  in  the  house,  not  even  in  the  town,  had  known  of  the  accident  the  day
before.1

M.  Simonet,  the  assistant  master,  and  Janicaud's  brother-in-law,  once  con-
sulted him,  when  in  the  somnambulic  state,  about  his  child,  who  had  been  suffer-
ing for  some  months  from  a  cyst  behind  the  ear,  which  the  doctors  feared  might
result  in  decay  of  the  bone.  Janicaud  pronounced  their  fears  groundless,  and
recommended  the  use  of  a  certain  herb,  which  grew  in  the  garden,  and  which
he  undertook  to  gather  for  them.2

But  the  somnambulist,  walking  barefoot,  accidentally  stepped  upon  a  thorn,
and  the  shock  woke  him  before  the  plant  was  secured.8

The  child  recovered  soon  after,  as  Janicaud  had  said  it  would.  .  .  .

His  health  now  giving  cause  for  alarm,  he  was  sent  home  for  change  and
exercise,  and  while  away  suffered  very  few  attacks,  and  these  only  during  the
first  few  days.  One  which  took  place  two  days  after  joining  his  family  deserves
some  notice.  He  rose  up  during  the  night  with  the  fixed  determination  of  going
fishing.  M.  Simonet  decided  to  accompany  him,  and  before  starting  succeeded
in  inducing  him  to  alter  the  nature  of  his  excursion,  and  go  and  visit  a  relative

1  Facts  of  the  same  description  are  reported  by  Dr.  Macario  (Dusommeil,

ft  du  somnambulisms,  1857),  who  borrowed  them  from  F.  Lebeuf.     Here  also  it  is  a
case  of  spontaneous  somnambulism.     (Dr.  D.)

2  Possibly  comfrey,  of  whose  astringent  properties  Janicaud  may  have  heard.
(Dr.  D.)

8  When  he  got  up  in  the  sleeping  state  he  always  dressed  himself  completely,  with
the  exception  of  his  feet.

565A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  523

residing  some  distance  off.  This  was  done,  Janicaud  being  undisturbed  from  his
sleeping  condition  either  by  the  noise  of  barking  dogs  or  by  the  fatigues  of  the
walk.  At  last  he  decided  upon  going  home,  and  on  the  way,  having  come  to  a
narrow  and  dangerous  path  by  the  river,  his  brother-in-law  begged  him  to  be
careful  as  to  where  he  put  his  foot.  Janicaud,  however,  assured  him  that  he
could  see  the  better  of  the  two,  and  as  a  proof  asked  his  companion  whether  he
saw  the  match  which  was  under  his  left  foot.  M.  Simonet  at  once  felt  under
his  foot,  and  sure  enough  found  a  match  there.  Not  only  was  it  very  dark,  but
Janicaud  with  his  night-cap  drawn  over  his  face  was  some  thirty  paces  ahead.

Noteworthy,  too,  were  the  means  which  he  used  to  take  to  free  himself  from
his  chain  at  night.  Once  with  a  penknife  he  cut  off  a  small  portion  of  a  window-
sash  close  at  hand,  and  from  it  modelled  a  key,  with  which  he  easily  undid  his
padlock.

[M.  Badaire  concludes  : — ]

It  may  not  be  useless  to  make  an  observation  of  possible  interest  from  a
scientific  point  of  view,  which  is,  that  during  an  attack  of  somnambulism  Jani-
caud is  perfectly  conscious  of  the  state  in  which  he  finds  himself.  Indeed,  he  is
generally  very  well  pleased  at  his  condition,  and  if  attempts  are  made  to  awaken
him,  begs  that  it  may  not  be  done,  as  he  is  so  much  happier  than  in  his  waking
state.  Nevertheless,  after  each  attack  he  suffers  greatly  from  fatigue,  and  his
appearance  is  noticeably  altered.  Ought  this  fatigue  to  be  attributed  to  the
extraordinary  activities  of  his  faculties  during  somnambulism,  or  may  it  be  the
result  of  the  shock  which  he  sustains  in  passing  from  one  state  to  another?

Once  awake,  Janicaud  has  not  the  least  recollection  of  what  has  taken  place
in  his  somnambulic  state.  But  in  each  attack  he  remembers  perfectly  all  that
has  been  said  and  done  in  the  preceding  ones.

In  his  natural  state  Janicaud  has  an  uncertain  memory,  and  retains  what  he
learns  with  difficulty ;  but  on  several  occasions  when  he  has  been  studying  his
history  lessons  in  bed  the  assistant  master  has  taken  the  book  from  his  hand,
and  the  somnambulist  has  then  repeated  the  five  or  six  pages  which  he  had  just
read  without  omitting  a  syllable.  Awakened  immediately  after,  he  had  no  recol-
lection of  what  he  had  just  read  and  repeated.  BADAIRE.

[Before  forwarding  his  report,  M.  Badaire  had  called  together  the  teachers
and  pupils  of  the  Ecole  Normale  and  had  read  it  aloud  to  them,  asking  them
if  they  had  any  observations  to  make.  All  declared  it  to  be  scrupulously
accurate.]

Dr.  Pe'te'tin,  in  his  EUctricite  Animate  (Paris,  1808), describes  a  cata-
leptic patient  of  his,  with  remarkable  powers  of  thought-transference.
His  account  (pp.  55-57,  and  62-65)  of  some  experiments  in  which
this  lady  was  able  to  specify  objects  held  in  his  hand,  or  inside  his
coat,  or  in  the  pockets  of  the  bystanders,  &c.,  is  quoted  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  345.

Serjeant  Cox,  in  his  "  Mechanism  of  Man,"  vol.  ii.  pp.  1 75-7  7  (quoted  in
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.   ii.  p.   347),  gives  an  account  of  similar
experiments  performed  by  him  with  his  sister  when  she  was  in  a  M-mi
conscious,  trance-like  state,  which  used  to  succeed  the  cataleptic  fits  from
which  she  suffered.

In  the  case  of  Elizabeth  Squirrell  there  was  some  indications  of  clair-

524  APPENDICES  [568  A

voyance  (see  The  Autobiography  of  Elizabeth  Squirrel!  of  Shottisham  and
Selections  from  her  Writings  :  together  with  an  examination  and  defence  of
her  statements  relative  to  her  sufferings,  blindness,  deafness,  entire  abstention
from  food  and  drink  during  twenty-five  weeks,  and  other  extraordinary
phenomena  :  also  facts  and  opinions  illustrative  and  suggestive.  By  one  of
her  Watchers.  London,  1853).

In  the  case  of  Jane  Rider  (see  An  Account  of  Jane  C.  Rider,  the
Springfield  Somnambulist.  By  L.  W.  Belden,  M.D.,  Springfield,  Mass.,
1834),  the  phenomena,  which  seem  to  have  been  carefully  observed  and
recorded,  do  not  go  clearly  beyond  hypersesthesia.  Her  frequent  attacks
of  spontaneous  somnambulism  were  accompanied  by  an  extraordinary  in-
crease in  her  power  of  vision,  so  that  she  could  carry  on  domestic  work,
cooking,  needlework,  &c.,  rapidly  and  easily  in  a  quite  dark  room,  and
could  read  fluently,  as  well  as  write,  with  thick  bandages  over  her  eyes  and
on  both  sides  of  her  nose.  But  she  could  only  read  words  within  what
would  have  been  her  field  of  vision  had  her  eyes  been  opened  and  un-
bandaged ;  and  she  could  not  read  through  an  opaque  obstacle,  such  as
brown  paper.  Dr.  Belden  concludes  from  these  facts  that  she  actually
saw  through  the  bandages,  and  puts  down  her  special  power  of  vision  to
an  increased  sensibility  of  the  retina,  combined  with  "  a  high  degree  of
excitement  in  the  brain  itself,  enabling  the  mind  to  perceive  even  a  con-
fused image  of  the  object."  He  gives  in  an  Appendix  the  case  of  Caspar
Hauser,  of  Nuremburg  (date  about  1828),  as  recorded  by  Professor
Daumer,  in  whom  not  only  sight,  but  all  the  senses,  were  heightened  to
an  almost  incredible  degree.  (C/.  539  A.)

568  A.  The  subject  of  these  experiments  in  telepathic  hypnotisation
was  Professor  Pierre  Janet's  well-known  subject,  Madame  B.  ("  Le'onie  "
— see  230  A,  &c.)  and  the  first  experiments  were  carried  out  with  her
at  Havre,  by  Professor  Janet  and  Dr.  Gibert,  a  leading  physician  there,
and  described  in  the  Bulletins  de  la  SocM  de  Psychologic  Physiologique,
Tome  I.,  p.  24,  and  in  the  Revue  Philosophique,  August  I886.1  I  sum-
marise those  relating  to  hypnotisation  at  a  distance.

October  3,  1885.— M.  Gibert  tries  to  put  her  to  sleep  from  distance  of  half  a
mile;  M.  Janet  finds  her  awake;  puts  her  to  sleep  ;  she  says,  "I  know  very
well  that  M.  Gibert  tried  to  put  me  to  sleep,  but  when  I  felt  him  I  looked  for
some  water,  and  put  my  hands  in  cold  water.  I  don't  want  people  to  put  me  to
sleep  in  that  way;  it  puts  me  out,  and  makes  me  look  silly."  She  had,  in  fact,
held  her  hands  in  water  at  the  time  when  M.  Gibert  willed  her  to  sleep.

October^.— M.  Gibert  succeeds  in  a  similar  attempt;  she  says  in  trance,
**  Why  does  M.  Gibert  put  me  to  sleep  from  his  house  ?  I  had  not  time  to  put
my  hands  in  my  basin."  That  the  sleep  was  of  M.  Gibert's  induction  was
shown  by  M.  Janet's  inability  to  wake  her.  M.  Gibert  had  to  be  sent  for.

It  is  observable,  however,  that  MM.  Janet  and  Gibert  can  now  (April  1886)
operate  interchangeably  on  the  subject;  her  familiarity  with  both  seems  to
enable  either  to  wake  her  from  a  trance  which  the  other  has  induced.

1  See  also  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  pp.  679-83.

568A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  525

October  14. — Dr.  Gibert  again  succeeded  in  inducing  the  trance,  from  a  dis-
tance of  two-thirds  of  a  mile,  at  an  hour  suggested  by  a  third  person,  and  not
known  to  M.  Janet,  who  watched  the  patient.

In  February  and  in  April,  1886,  Madame  B.  was  again  brought  to
Havre,  and  some  successful  experiments  (tabulated  below)  were  made
before  my  arrival  on  April  2Oth.

I  give  next  extracts  from  my  own  notes  of  experiments,  April  2Oth
to  24th,  1886,  taken  at  the  time  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  and
forming  the  bulk  of  a  paper  presented  to  the  Socie'te'  de  Psychologic
Physiologique  on  May  24th  (also  published  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.

PP-  I3I-37)-

Dr.  A.  T.  Myers  was  present  at  the  experiments  throughout.  Other
observers  were  Dr.  Gibert,  Professor  Paul  Janet,  Professor  Pierre  Janet,
Dr.  Jules  Janet,  Dr.  Ochorowicz,  and  M.  Marillier.

In  order  that  the  phenomenon  of  sommeil  d  distance  may  be  satisfactory,  we
have  to  guard  against  three  possible  sources  of  error,  namely,  fraud,  accidental
coincidence,  and  suggestion  by  word  or  gesture.

The  hypothesis  si  fraud  on  the  part  of  operators  or  subject  may  here  be  set
aside.  The  operators  were  Dr.  Gibert  and  Professor  Pierre  Janet,  and  the
detailed  observations  of  Professor  Pierre  Janet,  elsewhere  published,  sufficiently
prove  the  genuineness  of  Madame  B.'s  somnambulic  sleep.

The  hypothesis  of  accidental  coincidence  would  be  tenable,  though  not
probable,  did  the  events  of  April  2oth  to  24th  constitute  the  whole  of  the  ob-
served series.  But  the  number  of  coincidences  noticed  by  Dr.  Gibert,  Professor
Janet,  and  others  has  been  so  large  that  the  action  of  mere  chance  seems  to  be
quite  excluded.  It  is  to  be  observed  that,  as  Professor  Janet  tells  us,  the  subject
has,  during  an  observation  of  several  weeks  (maintained  by  Mile.  Gibert  when
Professor  Janet  is  not  present),  only  twice  fallen  spontaneously  into  this  som-
nambulic sleep,  when  no  one  willed  her  to  do  so;  once  before  our  arrival,  on
looking  at  a  picture  of  Dr.  Gibert,  and  once  on  April  2ist,  as  narrated  below.
On  the  other  hand,  the  observed  cases  of  sleep  deliberately  induced  from  a
distance  amount,  I  believe,  to  at  least  a  dozen.1  I  exclude,  of  course,  the  very
numerous  occasions  when  sleep  has  been  induced  by  an  operator  present  with
the  patient,  by  holding  her  thumbs,  looking  at  her,  &c.  This,  however,  brings
us  to  the  third  source  of  doubt,  whether  the  sleep  may  not  on  all  occasions  have
been  induced  by  some  suggestion,  given  perhaps  unconsciously,  by  word  or
gesture.  It  was  thus  that  I  was  at  first  inclined  to  explain  Cases  I.  and  II.
among  those  that  follow,  but  the  other  cases  here  given  seem  to  negative  the
supposition.  .  .  .

I.  I  pass  on  to  describe  the  first  case  of  sommeil  a  distance,  April  2ist.  At
5.50  P.M.  (an  hour  which  was  selected  by  drawing  lots  among  various  suggested
hours)  Dr.  Gibert  retired  to  his  study  and  endeavoured  to  send  Madame  B.  to
sleep  in  the  Pavilion,  at  a  distance  of  about  two-thirds  of  a  mile.  She  was  to
fall  asleep  in  the  salon  ;  whereas  she  habitually  sits  in  the  kitchen  of  the  Pavilion
(a  house  occupied  by  Dr.  Gibert's  sister).

It  was  supposed  that  the  command  would  take  about  ten  minutes  to  operate,
and  at  about  six  Professor  Janet,  Dr.  Ochorowicz,  M.  Marillier,  my  brother,  and

1  This  number,  as  will  be  hereafter  seen,  has  since  been  increased.

526  APPENDICES  [568  A

myself  entered  the  Pavilion,  but  found  that  Madame  B.  was  not  in  the  salon,
but  in  the  kitchen.  We  immediately  went  out  again,  supposing  that  the  experi-
ment had  failed.  A  few  minutes  later  Professor  Janet  re-entered  with  M.
Ochorowicz,  and  found  her  asleep  in  the  salon.  In  the  somnambulic  state  she
told  us  that  she  had  been  in  the  salon,  and  nearly  asleep  when  our  arrival
startled  her,  and  had  then  rushed  down  to  the  kitchen  to  avoid  us ;  had
returned  to  the  salon  and  fallen  asleep  as  soon  as  we  left  the  house.  These
movements  were  attested  by  the  bonne,  but  it  of  course  seemed  probable  that  it
was  merely  our  arrival  which  had  suggested  to  her  that  she  was  expected  to
fall  asleep.

On  this  day  she  was  ill  and  exhausted  from  too  prolonged  experiments  on
the  previous  days.  In  the  afternoon  she  fell  asleep  of  her  own  accord,  and  in
the  late  evening  (11.35  P.M.),  when  she  had  long  been  in  bed,  M.  Gibert  willed
that  her  natural  sleep  should  be  transferred  into  somnambulic,  and  that  she
should  dress  and  go  into  the  garden  of  the  Pavilion.  Nothing  followed  on  this
attempt,  unless  an  unusually  prolonged  sleep  and  complaints  of  unwonted  head-
ache next  day  were  to  be  in  any  way  connected  herewith.  On  the  whole,  had  I
left  after  these  experiments  only,  I  should  have  referred  the  phenomena  to
suggestion  of  the  ordinary  hypnotic  kind.

II.  On  the  morning  of  the  22nd,  however,  we  again  selected  by  lot  an  hour
(i  i  A.M.)  at  which  M.  Gibert  should  will,  from  his  dispensary,  which  is  close  to
his  house,  that  Madame  B.  should  go  to  sleep  in  the  Pavilion.     It  was  agreed
that  a  rather  longer  time  should  be  allowed  for  the  process  to  take  effect,  as  it
had  been  observed  (see  M.  Janet's  previous  communication)  that  she  some-
times struggled  against  the  influence,  and  averted  the  effect  for  a  time  by  putting
her  hands  in  cold  water,  &c.     At  11.25  we  entered  the  Pavilion  quietly,  and
almost  at  once  she  descended  from  her  room  to  the  salon,  profoundly  asleep.
Here,  however,  suggestion  might  again  have  been  at  work.     We  did  not,  of
course,  mention  M.  Gibert's  attempt  of  the  previous  night.     But  she  told  us  in
her  sleep  that  she  had  been  very  ill  in  the  night,  and  repeatedly  exclaimed,
"  Pourquoi  M.  Gibert  m'a-t-il  fait  souffrir  ?     Mais  j'ai  lavd  les  mains  continuelle-
ment."     This  is  what  she  does  when  she  wishes  to  avoid  being  influenced.

III.  In  the  evening  (22nd)  we  all  dined  at  M.  Gibert's,  and  in  the  evening
M.  Gibert  made  another  attempt  to  put  her  to  sleep  at  a  distance  from  his
house  in  the  Rue  SeYy — she  being  at  the  Pavilion,  Rue  de  la  Ferme — and  to
bring  her  to  his  house  by  an  effort  of  will.1     At  8.55  he  retired  to  his  study,  and
MM.  Ochorowicz,  Marillier,  Janet,  and  A.  T.  Myers  went  to  the  Pavilion,  and
waited  outside  in  the  street,  out  of  sight  of  the  house.     At  9.22   Dr.   Myers
observed  Madame  B.  coming  half-way  out  of  the  garden-gate,  and  again  retreat-
ing.    Those  who  saw  her  more  closely  observed  that  she  was  plainly  in  the
somnambulic  state,  and  was  wandering  about  and  muttering.     At  9.25  she  came
out  (with  eyes  persistently  closed,  so  far  as  could  be  seen),  walked  quickly  past
MM.   Janet  and  Marillier,  without  noticing  them,  and  made  for  M.  Gibert's
house,  though  not  by  the  usual  or  shortest  route.     (It  appeared  afterwards  that
the  bonne  had  seen  her  go  into  the  salon  at  8.45,  and  issue  thence  asleep  at
9.15  ;   had   not  looked   in  between   those   times.2)     She   avoided  lamp-posts,

1  It  will  be  seen  from  the  synopsis  of  experiments  given  below  that  the  afternoon,  and
not  the  evening,  was  the  time  of  day  usually  chosen.

3  It  was  not  unusual  for  her  to  sit  in  the  salon  in  the  evening,  after  the  day's  occupa-
tions were  over.

568A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  527

vehicles,  &c.,  but  crossed  and  recrossed  the  street  repeatedly.  No  one  went  in
front  of  her  or  spoke  to  her.  After  eight  or  ten  minutes  she  grew  much  more
uncertain  in  gait,  and  paused  as  though  she  would  fall.  Dr.  Myers  noted  the
moment  in  the  Rue  Faure  ;  it  was  9.35.  At  about  9.40  she  grew  bolder,  and  at
9.55  reached  the  street  in  front  of  M.  Gibert's  house.  There  she  met  him,  but
did  not  notice  him,  and  walked  into  his  house,  where  she  rushed  hurriedly  from
room  to  room  on  the  ground-floor.  M.  Gibert  had  to  take  her  hand  before  she
recognised  him.  She  then  grew  calm.

M.  Gibert  said  that  from  8.55  to  9.20  he  thought  intently  about  her,  from
9.20  to  9.35  he  thought  more  feebly  ;  at  9.35  he  gave  the  experiment  up,  and
began  to  play  billiards;  but  in  a  few  minutes  began  to  will  her  again.  It
appeared  that  his  visit  to  the  billiard-room  had  coincided  with  her  hesitation
and  stumbling  in  the  street.  But  this  coincidence  may  of  course  have  been
accidental.  .  .  .

IV.  [Account  of  a  deferred  mental  suggestion,  omitted  here.]

V.  On  [April  23rd]  M.  Janet  lunched  in  our  company,  and  retired  to  his
own  house  at  4.30  (a  time  chosen  by  lot)  to  try  to  put  her  to  sleep  from  thence.
At  5.5  we  all  entered  the  salon  of  the  Pavilion,  and  found  her  asleep  with  shut
eyes,  but   sewing  vigorously,  being  in  that  stage  in  which   movements  once
suggested  are  automatically  continued.     Passing  into  the  talkative  state,  she
said  to  M.  Janet,  "  C'est  vous  qui  m'avez  fait  dormir  a  quatre  heures  et  demi."
The  impression  as  to  the  hour  may  have  been  a  suggestion  received  from  M.
Janet's  mind.     We  tried  to  make  her  believe  that  it  was  M.  Gibert  who  had
sent  her  to  sleep,  but  she  maintained  that  she  had  felt  that  it  was  M.  Janet.1

VI.  On  April  24th  the  whole  party  chanced  to  meet  at  M.  Janet's  house  at
3  P.M.,  and  he  then,  at  my  suggestion,  entered  his  study  to  will  that  Madame
B.  should  sleep.     We  waited  in  his  garden,  and  at  3.20  proceeded  together  to
the  Pavilion,  which  I  entered  first  at  3.30,  and  found  Madame  B.  profoundly
sleeping  over  her  sewing,  having  ceased  to  sew.     Becoming  talkative,  she  said
to  M.  Janet,  "  C'est  vous  qui  m'avez  commanded."     She  said  that  she  fell  asleep
at  3.5  P.M.2

Professor  Janet's  paper  in  the  Revue  Philosophiqueim  August  1886  enables
me  to  give  a  conspectus  of  the  experiments  on  sommeil  d  distance  made  with
Madame  B.  up  to  the  end  of  May  (see  next  page).  The  distance  was  in  each
case  between  \  mile  and  I  mile.

We  have  thus  nineteen  coincidences  and  six  failures  • — the  failures  all  more
or  less  explicable  by  special  circumstances.  During  Madame  B.'s  visits  to
Havre,  about  two  months  in  all,  she  once  fell  into  ordinary  sleep  during  the
day,  and  twice,  as  already  mentioned,  became  spontaneously  entranced,  one
of  these  times  being  on  April  2ist,  a  day  of  illness  and  failure.  She  never  left
the  house  in  the  evening  except  on  the  three  occasions  on  which  she  was  willed
to  do  so  (experiments  14,  17,  21).  Trials  of  this  kind  had  to  be  made  after  dark,
for  fear  her  aspect  should  attract  notice.  The  hours  of  the  other  experiments
were  generally  chosen  at  the  moment,  to  suit  the  operators'  convenience ;  some-
.  as  I  have  said  above,  they  were  chosen  by  lot.

1  M.  Gibert  was  not  with  us ;  but  M.  Janet  often  came  to  see  her  after  M.  Gibert
had  hypnotised  her.

8  On  these  two  occasions  (V.  and  VI.)  no  one  actually  saw  her  asleep  before  we
entered  the  Pavilion,  since  we  desired  Mile.  Gibert  not  to  watch  her,  for  fear  that  she
might  guess  that  an  experiment  was  going  on.

•  Cues  I  and  4  were  practically  successes,  but  I  have  counted  them  as  one  success
and  one  failure.

528

APPENDICES

[568  A

No.  of
Experiments.

Date.

Operator.

Hour  when
Given

Remarks.

Success  or
Failure.

I885

I

Oct.      3

Gibert

11.30  A.M.

She  washes  hands  and  wards

off  trance     ....

|

2

»       9

do.

11.40  A.M.

Found  entranced  11.45    •

I

3

»      14

do.

4.IS  P.M.

Found    entranced   4.30:    had

been  asleep  about  1  5  minutes

I

1886

4

Feb.    22

Janet

She  washes  hands  and  wards

off  trance     ....

[i]

|

;:  u

do.
do.

5  P.M.

Asleep  at  once
Mere  discomfort  observed

i

0

7

March  I

do.

do.                 do.

0

8

2

do.

3  P.M.

Found  asleep  at  4  :  has  slept

about  an  hour

I

9

4

do.

Will  interrupted  :  trance  coin-

cident, but  incomplete

I

10

S

do.'

5-S.IO  P.M.

Found  asleep  a  few  minutes

afterwards    ....

I

ii

„        6

Gibert

8  P.M.

Found  asleep  8.3     .

I

12

„         10

do.

Success  —  no  details

I

*3

„      14

Janet

3P.M.

Success  —  no  details

I

14

„      16

Gibert

9  P.M.

Brings  her  to  his  house:  she

leaves    her    house    a    few

minutes  after  9  .

I

15

April  18

Janet

Found  asleep  in  10  minutes    .

I

1  6

„       19

Gibert

4  P.M.

Found  asleep  4.15   .

I

17

„        20

do.

8  P.M.

Made  to  come  to  his  house     .

I

18

„        21

do.

5.50  P.M.

My  case  I.  :  trance  too  tardy  .

0

19

„         21

do.

11-35  P'M'

Attempt     at     trance     during

sleep:  see  my  case  I.  .

0

20

„        22

do.

II  A.M.

Asleep  11.25:  trance  too  tardy:

my  case  II.  :  count  as  failure.

0

21

„         22

do.

9  P.M.

Comes  to  his  house:  leaves  her

house  9.15:  my  case  III.     .

I

22

»         23

Janet

4.30  P.M.

Found  asleep  5.5,  says  she  has

slept  since  4.30  :  my  case  V.

I

23

„         24

do.

3  P-M.

Found  asleep  3.30,  says  she  has

24

May      5

do.

slept  since  3.5  :  my  case  VI.
Success—  no  details

I
I

25

„        6

do.

Success  —  no  details

I

19

Further  experiments  with  the  same  subject  were  made  by  Professor
Janet  in  the  autumn  of  1886.  The  results,  communicated  to  Professor
Richet,  were  published  by  him  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  43-45
(also  in  the  Revue  de  FHypnotisme  for  February  1888,  which  also  contains
an  account  of  some  less  successful  experiments  by  Professor  Richet
himself).  Thirty-five  experiments  were  made,  of  which  sixteen  were
successful,  Madame  B.  being  found  asleep  at  intervals  varying  from  five

568B]  TO    CHAPTER    V  529

minutes  to  an  hour  after  the  attempt  was  made  ;  in  two  cases  the  result
was  doubtful,  and  the  other  seventeen  attempts  failed  altogether.

568  B.  With  regard  to  the  cases  next  to  be  quoted,  it  must  be
observed  that  when  the  operator  is  within  sight  or  hearing  of  the  subject,
either  the  production  of  hypnosis  by  mental  suggestion  alone,  or  its  pre-
vention by  "  silent  willing "  while  ostensibly  trying  to  produce  it,  is
inconclusive  as  evidence  of  telepathy.  The  subject,  having  been  previ-
ously hypnotised  by  the  operator,  must  be  assumed  to  be  familiar — sub-
liminally  at  least — with  his  particular  habits  of  unconscious  physical
expression  in  connection  with  hypnotisation,  so  that  the  slight  uncon-
scious indications  of  his  intentions  that  would  perhaps  escape  the  notice
of  the  ordinary  bystanders  might  very  likely  be  perceived  by  the  subject.

The  same  objection  cannot,  of  course,  apply  to  the  instances  of
hypnotisation  at  a  distance  by  the  same  experimenters,  which,  if  not
produced  telepathically  or  occurring  accidentally,  can  only  be  attributed
to  self-suggestion.

The  following  account  is  from  Dr.  J.  He'ricourt,  who  was  one  of
Professor  Richet's  ablest  assistants  in  the  editing  of  the  Revue  Scienti-
fique.  The  observations  were  made  and  recorded  in  1878,  and  con-
tributed to  the  Societe  de  Psychologie  Physiologique,  November  3Oth,  1885
(Bulletins,  Tome  I.  p.  35).  Dr.  He'ricourt's  account,  as  well  as  Dr.  Gley's,
to  be  next  quoted,  were  published  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.
pp.  683,  685.  In  both  cases  I  give  a  slightly  abbreviated  English
translation,  taken  from  Edmund  Gurney's  paper  on  "  Hypnotism  and
Telepathy"  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  222,  223.

The  "subject" — Madame  D. — was  a  young  widow,  in  whom  no  trace  of
hysteria  could  be  discovered.  M.  He'ricourt  found  her  exceedingly  easy  to
hypnotise,  and  after  about  a  fortnight  could  entrance  her  by  his  will  alone,
exercised  without  any  word  or  gesture,  and  sometimes  while  Madame  D.  was
in  the  midst  of  an  animated  conversation  with  other  persons.  On  the  other
hand,  he  found  that  all  the  ordinary  physical  processes  remained  completely
ineffectual  if  his  will  was  not  that  the  trance  should  ensue.  He  soon  began  to
extend  the  distance  between  himself  and  his  '*  subject,"  and  instead  of  pro-
ducing the  effect  from  one  corner  of  a  room  to  another,  he  could  produce  it
from  one  house  or  one  street  to  another.  The  first  trial  from  a  distant  street
was  specially  interesting.  While  concentrating  his  thoughts  on  the  cl
effect,  at  3  P.M.,  Dr.  He'ricourt  was  summoned  to  see  some  patients,  and  for  a
time  forgot  all  about  Madame  D.  He  then  remembered  that  he  was  engaged
to  meet  her  on  the  promenade  at  4.30,  but  not  finding  her,  he  bethought
him  that  possibly  his  experiment  had  succeeded,  and  towards  five  o'clock  he
vigorously  willed  that  she  should  wake.  In  the  evening  Madame  D.,  spon-
taneously, and  without  his  having  made  the  slightest  allusion  to  her  absence
from  the  promenade,  informed  him  that  about  three  o'clock  she  had  been
nly  seized  by  an  irresistible  inclination  to  go  to  sleep,  though  she  never
slept  in  the  daytime.  It  was  all  she  could  do  to  walk  into  another  room,  where
she  fell  on  a  sofa,  and  was  afterwards  found  by  a  servant  cold  and  motionless,
commc  tnorte.  The  servant  shook  Madame  D.  vigorously,  but  could  not  make
VOL.  i.  2  L

530  APPENDICES  [568  C

her  do  more  than  open  her  eyes.  All  that  Madame  D.  remembered  ex-
periencing at  this  time  was  a  violent  headache,  which  disappeared  towards
five  o'clock,  the  hour  when  M.  Hericourt  willed  the  undoing  of  his  work.

This  experiment  was  the  first  of  a  series,  during  which  a  number  of  persons
had  the  opportunity  of  arranging  the  conditions  and  testing  the  results.  The
hypothesis  of  expectant  attention  was  doubly  excluded;  for  if  M.  He'ricourt
gave  Madame  D.  notice  of  his  intention  to  entrance  her,  but  actually  willed  that
she  should  remain  awake,  she  retained  her  normal  condition,  and  imagined  that
he  had  failed.

568  C.  The  next  case,  contributed  by  Dr.  E.  Gley,  of  37  Rue  Claude
Bernard,  Paris,  is  a  record  of  some  observations  of  his  friend,  Dr.  Dusart,
published  in  the  Tribune  Medicate,  in  May  1875.

The  "  subject "  was  a  hysterical  girl  of  fourteen,  whom  Dr.  Dusart  found  very
susceptible  to  hypnotism.  He  early  remarked  that  his  passes  were  ineffective
if  his  attention  was  not  strongly  directed  to  the  desired  result;  and  this
suggested  to  him  to  try  the  effect  of  purely  mental  suggestion.  One  day,  before
the  usual  hour  for  waking  the  patient  had  arrived,  he  gave  her  the  mental
command  to  awake.  The  effect  was  instantaneous :  the  patient  woke,  and  again,
in  accordance  with  his  will,  began  her  hysterical  screaming.  He  took  a  seat
with  his  back  to  her,  and  conversed  with  other  persons,  without  appearing  to
pay  any  attention  to  her;  but  on  his  silently  giving  her  the  mental  suggestion
to  fall  again  into  the  trance,  his  will  was  again  obeyed.  More  than  one  hundred
experiments  of  the  sort  were  made  under  various  conditions,  and  with  uniform
success.  On  one  occasion  Dr.  Dusart  left  without  giving  his  usual  order  to
the  patient  to  sleep  till  a  particular  hour  next  morning.  Remembering  the
omission,  he  gave  the  order  mentally,  when  at  a  distance  of  700  metres  from
the  house.  On  arriving  next  morning  at  7.30  he  found  the  patient  asleep,
and  asked  her  the  reason.  She  replied  that  she  was  obeying  his  order.  He
said:  "You  are  wrong;  I  left  without  giving  you  any  order."  "True,"  she
said,  "  but  five  minutes  afterwards  I  clearly  heard  you  tell  me  to  sleep  till  eight
o'clock."  Dr.  Dusart  then  told  the  patient  to  sleep  till  she  received  the  com-
mand to  wake,  and  directed  her  parents  to  mark  the  exact  hour  of  her  waking.
At  2  P.M.  he  gave  the  order  mentally,  at  a  distance  of  seven  kilometres,  and
found  that  it  had  been  punctually  obeyed.  This  experiment  was  successfully
repeated  several  times,  at  different  hours.

After  a  time  Dr.  Dusart  discontinued  his  visits,  and  the  girl's  father  used
to  hypnotise  her  instead.  Nearly  a  fortnight  after  this  change  it  occurred  to
Dr.  Dusart,  when  at  a  distance  of  ten  kilometres,  to  try  whether  he  still  re-
tained his  power,  and  he  willed  that  the  patient  should  not  allow  herself  to  be
entranced;  then  after  half-an-hour,  thinking  that  the  effect  might  be  bad  for
her,  he  removed  the  prohibition.  Early  next  morning  he  was  surprised  to
receive  a  letter  from  the  father,  stating  that  on  the  previous  day  he  had  only
succeeded  in  hypnotising  his  daughter  after  a  prolonged  and  painful  struggle ;
and  that,  when  entranced,  she  had  declared  that  her  resistance  had  been
due  to  Dr.  Dusart's  command,  and  that  she  had  only  succumbed  when  he
permitted  her.

568  D.  The  next  case  is  quoted  from  Dr.  Dufay's  paper  already
referred  to  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  411).  The  author's  caution  in

568D]  TO    CHAPTER    V  531

interpreting  the  phenomena  adds  to  the  value  of  his  observations.  The
account  is  dated  Blois,  May  1888.  It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the
case  quoted  in  552  A,  Dr.  Dufay  hypnotised  an  actress  from  a  distant
part  of  the  theatre,  but  in  that  case  it  did  not  seem  absolutely  certain
that  she  could  not  have  suspected  his  presence  in  the  theatre  and  his
intention.

.  .  .  Madame  C.  was  thirty-five  years  of  age,  of  a  nervous  temperament,  and
slightly  rheumatic.  For  some  time  she  had  been  subject  to  periodical  attacks
of  headache  and  sickness,  which  the  usual  remedies  had  failed  to  relieve.
Under  these  circumstances,  I  did  not  hesitate  to  try  the  effect  of  magnetism
on  my  first  visit  to  her.  At  the  end  of  five  minutes  the  pain  passed  off  and  the
sickness  ceased,  and  on  every  subsequent  occasion  the  same  thing  took  place.
If  my  arrival  was  delayed  the  troubles  continued;  but  hardly  had  I  pulled  the
bell,  and  before  the  door  was  opened,  Madame  C.  fell  into  a  calm  sleep.  It
was  quite  a  different  thing  if  any  one  else  rang  the  bell,  for  then  the  invalid
complained  bitterly  of  the  noise  that  was  splitting  her  head.

Later  on  she  even  felt  my  approach  from  the  further  end  of  the  street :
"Ah!  what  happiness!"  she  would  say,  "here  is  the  doctor  coming,  I  feel
myself  cured  ! "  and  Monsieur  C.  would  open  the  window  to  make  certain  of
it.  and  would  see  me  in  the  distance.  And  his  wife  never  made  a  mistake.
Sometimes  he  would  try  to  encourage  her  by  telling  her  that  he  saw  me
coming,  but  she  knew  that  this  was  not  true,  and  the  sickness  continued.

In  a  case  of  this  sort,  how  could  I  hesitate  to  make  an  attempt  at  in-
fluencing her  from  a  distance  ?  Moreover,  I  was  driven  to  it  by  circumstances.
At  the  height  of  an  attack  Monsieur  C-,  who  had  already  been  twice  to  fetch
me,  discovered  where  I  was  to  be  found.  Being  with  a  patient  whom  I  could
not  leave  for  several  hours,  I  assured  Monsieur  C.,  without  being  at  all  certain
of  it  myself,  that  his  wife  would  be  asleep  and  cured  when  he  got  home  again.
I  had  the  satisfaction  of  verifying  this  three  hours  later,  when  I  ordered  a
profound  sleep  to  last  till  the  following  day,  which  repaired  the  fatigues  of  the
morning.  a  Thus  the  possibility  of  magnetising  at  a  distance  is  not  to  be
doubted,"  say  my  notes.  But  nowadays  the  objection  of  self-suggestion  pre-
sents itself:  I  was  expected;  Monsieur  Chad  promised  to  bring  me  with  him.

Am  I  going  to  find  a  more  convincing  example?  Yes,  certainly.  It  was,
however,  an  act  of  simple  curiosity  without  any  therapeutic  aim.  Madame  C.
was  in  perfect  health,  but  her  name  happening  to  be  mentioned  in  my  hearing,
the  idea  struck  me  that  I  would  mentally  order  her  to  sleep,  without  her  wish-
ing it  this  time,  and  also  without  her  suspecting  it.  Then,  an  hour  later  I
went  to  her  house  and  asked  the  servant  who  opened  the  door  whether  an
instrument,  which  I  had  mislaid  out  of  my  case,  had  been  found  in  Madame
C.'s  room.

'•  Is  not  that  the  doctor's  voice  that  I  hear  ?"  asked  Monsieur  C.  from  the  top
of  the  staircase  ;  "  beg  him  to  come  up  Just  imagine,"  he  says  to  me,  "  I  was
going  to  send  for  you.  Nearly  an  hour  ago  my  wife  lost  consciousness,  and
her  mother  and  I  have  not  been  able  to  bring  her  to  her  senses.  Her  mother,
who  wished  to  take  her  into  the  country,  is  distracted.  .

I  did  not  dare  to  confess  myself  guilty  of  this  catastrophe,  but  was  betrayed
by  Madame  C.,  who  gave  me  her  hand,  saying,  "You  did  well  to  put  me  to
sleep,  Doctor,  because  I  was  going  to  allow  myself  to  be  taken  away,  and  then
I  should  not  have  been  able  to  finish  my  embroidery."

532  APPENDICES  [568  E

"  You  have  another  piece  of  embroidery  in  hand  ?  "

"Yes;  a  mantle-border  ...  for  your  birthday.  You  must  not  look  as
though  you  knew  about  it,  when  I  am  awake,  because  I  want  to  give  you  a
surprise."

'•  Make  yourself  easy  as  to  that,  you  will  see  me  just  as  surprised  as  grateful
the  day  when  you  make  me  this  valuable  present.  But  why  do  you  mention  it
to  me  now  ?  "

"  Because  you  ought  to  know  why  I  am  pleased  at  not  being  able  to  go
away."

I  then  explained  to  the  husband  and  the  mother  that  I  had  allowed  myself
to  make  an  experiment,  and  it  was  settled  amongst  us  that  Madame  C.  should
not  be  told  of  it  I  then  woke  her  as  usual  by  means  of  passes  from  within
outwards  in  front  of  her  eyes,  and  she  was  told  that  she  had  fallen  asleep  after
lunch,  while  reading  the  newspaper,  which  did  not  astonish  her  at  all.  ...

I  repeated  the  experiment  many  times  with  [Madame  C],  and  always  with
success,  which  was  a  great  help  to  me  when  unable  to  go  to  her  at  once  when
sent  for.  I  even  completed  the  experiment  by  also  waking  her  from  a  distance,
solely  by  an  act  of  volition,  which  formerly  I  should  not  have  believed  possible.
The  agreement  in  time  was  so  perfect  that  no  doubt  could  be  entertained.

To  conclude,  I  was  about  to  take  a  holiday  of  six  weeks,  and  should  thus
be  absent  when  one  of  the  attacks  was  due.  So  it  was  settled  between  M.  C.
and  myself  that,  as  soon  as  the  headache  began,  he  should  let  me  know  by
telegraph  ;  that  I  should  then  do  from  afar  off  what  succeeded  so  well  near
at  hand ;  that  after  five  or  six  hours  I  should  endeavour  to  awaken  the  patient,
and  that  M.  C.  should  let  me  know  by  means  of  a  second  telegram  whether
the  result  had  been  satisfactory.  He  had  no  doubt  about  it;  I  was  less  certain.
Madame  C.  did  not  know  that  I  was  going  away.

The  sound  of  moanings  one  morning  announced  to  M.  C.  that  the  moment
had  come  ;  without  entering  his  wife's  room  he  ran  to  the  telegraph  office,  and
I  received  his  message  at  ten  o'clock.  He  returned  home  again  at  that  same
hour,  and  found  his  wife  asleep  and  not  suffering  any  more.  At  four  o'clock  I
willed  that  she  should  wake,  and  at  eight  o'clock  in  the  evening  I  received  a
second  telegram :  "  Satisfactory  result,  woke  at  four  o'clock.  Thanks."

And  I  was  then  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sully-sur- Loire,  28  leagues— 112
kilometres— from  Blois.  .  .  .

I  had  no  doubt  as  to  the  reality  of  action  at  a  (perhaps  unlimited)  distance,
when  I  observed  this  case,  about  twenty-five  years  ago.  But  now,  so  much  am
I  struck  by  the  improbability  of  the  story,  that  I  am  more  ready  to  admit  that
Madame  C,  at  the  moment  when  the  pain  and  sickness  commenced,  thought
that  her  husband  had  heard  her  moans  and  had  hurried  to  secure  my  assist-
ance, since  she  was  unaware  of  my  absence;  that  her  conviction  that  I  should
give  her  relief  as  usual  had  sufficed  to  produce  sleep  by  self-suggestion,
and  that  the  waking  had  taken  place  under  the  same  influence,  after  a
lapse  of  time  sensibly  equivalent  to  that  during  which  I  usually  caused  her  to
sleep.  .  .  .

568  E.  In  the  Zoist  for  April  1849  Mr-  Adams,  a  surgeon  of
Lymington,  writing  four  months  after  the  event,  describes  how  a  guest  of
his  own  twice  succeeded  in  mesmerising  the  man-servant  of  a  common
friend  at  a  distance  of  nearly  fifty  miles,  the  time  when  the  attempt  was

569  A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  533

to  be  made  having  in  each  case  been  privately  arranged  with  the  man's
master.  On  the  first  occasion  the  unwitting  "  subject "  fell  at  the  time
named,  7.30  P.M.,  into  a  state  of  profound  coma  not  at  all  resembling
natural  sleep,  from  which  he  was  with  difficulty  aroused.  He  said  that
"  before  he  fell  asleep  he  had  lost  the  use  of  his  legs  ;  he  had  endeavoured
to  kick  the  cat  away,  and  could  not  do  so."  On  the  second  occasion  a
similar  fit  was  induced  at  9.30  A.M.,  when  the  man  was  in  the  act  oi  walk-
ing across  a  meadow  to  feed  the  pigs.

For  other  cases  of  hypnotisation  at  a  distance,  see  Professor  Richet  in
the  Revue  Philosophique,  February  1886,  p.  199  (quoted  in  Phantasms  of
the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  332),  and  Dr.  Dariex  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences
Psychiques,  vol.  hi.,  1893,  pp.  257-67.  Dr.  Wetterstrand  of  Stockholm
also  states  in  a  letter  published  in  Dr.  Schmidkunz's  Psychologic  der
Suggestion  (Stuttgart,  Enke,  189 2),  and  translated  in  Proceedings ,  vol.  ix.
p.  216,  that  he  has  a  patient  whom  he  can  send  to  sleep  and  wake  up  again
from  his  house,  and  that  he  has  also  made  her  get  up  in  a  state  of  sleep
from  her  own  room  and  come  to  his.

Another  case,  involving  an  experiment  not  to  be  recommended,  was
recorded  by  Dr.  Tolosa-Latour  in  the  Annales  des  Sciences  Psychiquest
vol.  iii.,  1893,  pp.  268-73.  The  subject  of  the  experiment  was  a
Mile.  R.,  whom  Dr.  Latour  had  treated  hypnotically  for  hysterical  paralysis
since  September  1886.  Prior  to  his  treatment,  in  1885,  she  had  had
daily  hysterical  attacks,  but  both  these  and  the  paralysis  had  almost
entirely  disappeared  at  the  time  of  his  experiment,  October  1890.  She
was  then  living  at  Madrid,  and  he  was  travelling  in  France.  During  a
journey  from  Poitiers  to  Migne*  he  attempted  for  an  hour  or  two  to  send
her  to  sleep  and  pour  fixer  bien  la  suggestion  to  produce  a  violent  hysteric
attack  after  the  sleep.  Some  time  after  his  return  to  Madrid  he  learnt  of
the  complete  success  of  his  experiment.  A  letter  from  Mile.  R.,  written
in  March  1891,  describing  her  experience,  states  that  she  had  been
perfectly  well  just  before  the  attack,  and  had  had  no  attacks  of  the
kind  since.

569  A.  The  production  of  local  anaesthesia  and  rigidity  is  a
common  phenomenon,  familiar  to  all  hypnotic  operators  as  the  result
of  a  definite  verbal  suggestion,  and  one  that  can  also  be  produced  in
some  subjects  by  self-suggestion  (see  518  D).  The  special  feature  of  the
experiments  recorded  in  this  Appendix  and  569  B  is  that  they  were  carried
out  under  conditions  which,  as  the  experimenters  believed,  precluded  any
knoivledge  on  the  part  of  the  subject  as  to  which  of  his  fingers  was  to  be
operated  on.  Experiments  of  this  type  were  first  tried  by  Gurney  from
1883  onwards,  partly  with  a  view  to  testing  the  reality  of  the  "  mesmeric
effluence."  I  quote  extracts  from  his  latest  account  of  them  in  his  paper
on  "  Recent  Experiments  in  Hypnotism  "  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.
v.  (1888),  pp.  14-17.  For  the  details,  I  must  refer  the  reader  to  the  paper
itself.

534  APPENDICES  [569  A

Experiments  of  this  most  important  class  have  been  already  described  in
these  Proceedings.1  In  outline  the  modus  operandi  has  been  as  follows :  The
"  subject"  is  made  to  put  his  arm  through  a  thick  screen,  extending  high  above
his  head,  and  to  spread  his  ten  fingers  on  a  table  in  front  of  him.  The  fingers
are  thus  completely  concealed  from  his  view,  and  the  operator's  hand  is  held,
without  contact,  at  a  distance  varying  from  about  a  third  to  three-quarters  of  an
inch,  over  one  or  another  of  them,  according  to  my  selection,  with  the  result
that  in  a  very  large  majority  of  cases  the  finger  so  treated,  and  that  finger  alone,
becomes  rigid  and  insensible  to  extremely  severe  treatment  in  the  way  of  stabs,
burns,  and  electric  shocks.  From  my  knowledge  of  the  "subjects,"  and  of  the
circumstances,  I  regard  simulation  as  practically  out  of  the  question.  But  this
is  not  really  important,  for  the  hypothesis  of  simulation  has  no  application  to
the  frequent  cases  where  the  rigidity  was  tested  before  the  anaesthesia.  The
"subject"  is  told  to  double  his  fist,  and  no  desire  to  deceive  could  have  taught
him  which  particular  one  of  his  ten  digits  was  to  remain  recalcitrant.

In  the  recent  series  there  have  been  160  experiments  of  the  described  type
with  five  "subjects."  In  all  these  cases  I  held  my  hand,  in  the  same  position  as
S.'s["  S."  is  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  the  hypnotist  who  constantly  assisted  in  Gurney's
experiments],  over  one  of  the  remaining  nine  fingers.  In  124  cases  S.  alone
produced  the  effect  intended.  In  16  cases  S.  and  I  both  succeeded;  and  in  13
cases  1  succeeded,  and  S.  failed.  In  the  remaining  7  cases  no  effect  at  all  was
produced.  .  .  .

The  finger  operated  upon  was  generally  restored  to  its  normal  condition  by
reverse  passes,  made  with  contact — about  twenty  being  the  average  number
required.  Most  of  the  attempts  to  annul  the  effect  without  contact  were  incon-
clusive. Sometimes  the  effort  was  successful,  and  in  a  few  instances  very  dis-
tinctly so,  but  in  other  cases  the  process  took  so  much  time  that  contact  was
eventually  resorted  to.  I  frequently  tried,  by  stroking  the  finger,  to  undo  the
effect  which  S.  had  produced;  but  I  succeeded  on  only  one  occasion.  .  .  .

The  "subject"  is  occasionally,  but  not  usually,  conscious  of  some  change  in
the  finger  as  the  experiment  progresses.  Asked  to  say  whether  he  felt  any-
thing unusual,  he  would  sometimes  say  that  he  felt  "cold,"  "pins  and  needles,"
"  numbness,"  or  "  creepiness,"  in  a  certain  finger — which  finger  was  in  nearly
every  case  the  one  under  experiment.  In  connection  with  this  point  the  follow-
ing experiment  with  Wells  is  of  great  interest.  Without  telling  him  specially
to  observe  any  change  in  his  fingers,  one  was  made  insensitive  and  rigid  in  the
usual  way.  It  was  then  "undone"  by  reverse  strokings  over  the  back  of  his
hand,  and  he  appeared  to  be  in  complete  ignorance  as  to  which  particular  finger
had  been  the  subject  of  experiment,  and  could  not  say  which  one  had  been
affected.  But  entranced  immediately  afterwards,  and  told  to  write  which  finger
had  been  stiffened,  and  then  woke  and  set  to  the  planch ette,  he  wrote  the  right
one.  The  experiment  was  repeated  several  times,  with  the  same  result.  The
planchette  gave  the  information  which  the  "subject"  could  not  consciously
supply.

Besides  the  above,  forty-one  experiments  were  made  in  which  S.,  while  hold-
ing his  hand  as  usual,  willed  that  no  effect  should  be  produced.  Of  these,  thirty-
six  were  successful  (in  the  sense  that  no  effect  was  produced),  and  five  failed.

1  See  vol.  i.  pp.  257-60;  vol.  ii.  pp.  201-205;  vol.  iii.  pp.  453-59.  For  a  dis-
cussion of  the  subject  see  the  concluding  portion  of  my  paper  in  this  number  on
"  Hypnotism  and  Telegraphy."— E.  G.

569  B]  TO     CHAPTER    V  535

[Several  experiments  were  made  in  which  the  selected  fingers  were  covered
with  small  screens,  but  these  were  generally  unsuccessful.  In  other  successful
cases,  selected  spots  on  the  bare  arms  of  the  subjects  were  operated  upon,
instead  of  fingers.]

569  B.  Further  experiments  of  the  kind  just  described  were  carried
out  by  Mrs.  H.  Sidgwick  in  1890  and  1892  with  the  help  of  the  same
hypnotist,  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  in  the  course  of  her  experiments  on  thought-
transference  (see  573  A).  I  quote  a  few  extracts  from  the  account  given
(pp.  577-93)  in  the  paper  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson  on
"  Experiments  in  Thought-Transference  "  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.
PP-  53^-96,  beginning  with  their  summary  of  Gurney's  theoretical  dis-
cussion of  his  results.

Mr.  Gurney  discusses  the  possible  explanation  of  his  results  in  the  .  .  .
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  254-59.  He  assumes  that  the  conditions
adopted  secure — as  they  are  designed  to  secure — that  no  indications  as  to  which
finger  is  to  be  operated  on  should  unintentionally  reach  the  subject  through  the
eye,  or  the  ear,  or  by  touch.  There  remain  then  three  hypotheses :  (a)  that
this  knowledge  may  reach  his  brain  by  means  of  a  delicate  perception,  conscious
or  unconscious,  of  temperature  or  air-currents,  caused  by  the  proximity  of  Mr.
Smith's  fingers  :  (V)  that  it  may  be  conveyed  from  Mr.  Smith's  mind  to  that  of
the  subject  by  thought-transference  ;  and  (c)  that  some  direct  physical  influence
in  which  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense  are  not  concerned  is  exercised  through
Mr.  Smith's  hand  on  that  of  the  subject.1

Mr.  Gurney  considered  that  the  ineffectiveness  of  Mr.  Smith's  hand  unless
his  will  was  engaged  at  the  same  time  seemed  alone  fatal  to  hypothesis  (a),
which  was  also  rendered  almost  untenable  by  the  difficulty  of  supposing  that
the  delicate  perception  assumed  could  have  been  delicate  enough  to  make  it
possible  to  distinguish  Mr.  Smith's  hand  from  Mr.  Gurney's  held  similarly  over
another  finger  at  the  same  time.  Hypothesis  (£),  Mr.  Gurney  says,  **  seems
excluded  by  the  fact  that  the  physical  proximity  of  Mr.  Smith's  hand  (no  less
than  his  concentration  of  will  on  the  desired  result)  proves  to  be  a  necessary
condition,"  and  he  concludes  that  the  balance  of  probability  is  greatly  in  favour
of  hypothesis  (c)— a  direct  physical  influence,  exercised  through  Mr.  Smith's
hand,  in  which  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense  are  not  concerned.

This  brief  introduction  seemed  necessary  in  order  to  explain  the  state  of  the
question  and  the  bearing  of  our  own  experiments  on  it.  These,  as  will  be  seen,
still  further  confirm  Mr.  Gurney's  view  as  to  the  untenablenessof  his  hypothesis
(a),  because  we  have  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  result  with  a  thick  sheet  of  glass

1  Mr.  Gurney  explains  this  hypothesis  at  greater  length  on  pp.  257-59,  vol.  v.  He
thinks  that  if  this  specific  influence  exists,  as  a  property  of  living  tissue,  there  can  be  no
doubt  that  it  depends  on  the  brain  of  the  operator ;  since  his  attention  and  will  to  pro-
duce the  effect  are  indispensable,  and  the  same  proximity  of  his  hand  which  produces  the
effect  also  removes  it — the  only  change  of  condition  being  in  his  intention.  It  is  clear,
however,  that  the  nervous  condition  of  the  operator  is  not  simply  reproduced  in  the  sub-
ject—the hand  operated  on  assuming  quite  a  different  condition  from  that  of  the  hand
that  operates.  Therefore,  "though  finding  its  nearest  analogue  in  induced  electric
currents,  and  though  best,  perhaps,  described  as  nervous  induction,  [the  influence]  is
essentially  vital  and  tuigtntrts."

536  APPENDICES  [569  B

between  Mr.  Smith's  fingers  and  the  subject's.  They  also  exclude  hypothesis
(£•)  and  remove  Mr.  Gurney's  main  objection  to  hypothesis  (£)  (thought-
transference),  because  we  have  succeeded  when  Mr.  Smith  did  not  hold  his
hand  over  the  subject's  at  all,  but  merely  stood  with  folded  arms  looking  at  the
finger  to  be  affected.  We  therefore  believe  that  the  true  explanation  of  the
results  is  thought-transference  or  mental  suggestion,  received  in  some  uncon-
scious or  "subliminal"  manner  by  the  subject's  mind,  and  acting  on  his
organism  in  the  same  way  that  an  ordinary  verbal  suggestion  may  act.  The
process  would  thus  be  analogous  to  that  supposed  by  Mr.  Gurney  to  occur  in
hypnotisation  at  a  distance.

Before  proceeding  to  a  detailed  description  of  our  own  experiments,  we  may
remark  that  even  taking  Mr.  Gurney's  alone,  the  balance  of  probability  seems
to  us  to  be  rather  on  the  side  of  thought-transference  than  of  a  direct  physical
influence.  His  contrary  opinion  appears  to  us  to  rely  too  much  on  negative
evidence,  the  force  of  which  it  is  easy  to  over-estimate.  In  his  unsuccessful
experiments  where  willing  without  approaching  the  hand  was  used,  the  only
observed  difference  in  conditions  was  the  intentional  withholding  of  Mr.  Smith's
hand ;  but  this  difference  may  easily  not  have  been  the  whole  change  actually
produced  in  the  conditions,  and  therefore  may  not  have  been  the  cause  of  the
#0#-occurrence  of  the  phenomena  under  observation.  Our  experiments  show,
in  fact,  that  it  was  not  the  cause.

But  we  also  think  some  of  Mr.  Gurney's  positive  results  hard  to  interpret
on  any  hypothesis  of  a  physical  influence  acting  immediately  on  the  subject's
nerves,  and  not  through  his  brain  by  means  of  suggestion.  We  refer  especi-
ally to  the  fact  that  occasionally  the  wrong  finger  was  affected  instead  of,  or  as
well  as,  the  right  one.  For  instance,  in  Mr.  Gurney's  experiments  with  little
paper  screens  already  mentioned,  two  fingers,  the  selected  one  and  another,
were  protected  by  them,  and  in  the  first  experiment  both  these  fingers  became
stiff  and  insensitive.  Now  it  is  easy  to  see  how  this  might  happen  if  the  result
were  due  to  "  suggestion  " — that  is,  to  an  impulse  communicated  to  the  per-
cipient's brain  which  set  the  machinery  to  work  to  produce  the  nervous  effect —
for  the  suggestion  can  easily  be  conceived  to  go  wrong.  If  it  was  self-sugges-
tion, due  to  the  perception  of  the  little  screens  through  the  senses,  it  might
naturally  affect  both  fingers  alike  ;  and  if  it  was  mental  suggestion  through  the
action  of  the  operator's  mind  on  that  of  the  subject,  it  is  easy  to  suppose  that
Mr.  Smith's  attention  was  equally  directed  to  both  the  marked  fingers,  though
his  hand  only  pointed  to  one.  But  it  is  hard  to  see  how  any  specific  influence
from  Mr.  Smith's  hand  could  affect  the  finger  he  was  and  the  finger  he  was  not
pointing  at,  without  affecting  also  the  intervening  ones.

Details  of  the  Experiments.

For  our  own  experiments  we  adopted  the  same  arrangements  as  Mr.  Gurney.
The  subject,  who  was  always  in  a  normal  condition  at  the  time  of  the  experiments,
sat  with  his  hands  passed  through  holes  in  a  screen  which  extended  sufficiently
above  and  on  each  side  of  him  to  prevent  his  seeing  the  operator  or  his  own
hands.  The  hands  were  spread  out  on  a  table,  and  the  finger  to  be  operated
on  was  silently  indicated  to  Mr.  Smith  behind  the  screen  by  one  of  our-
selves either  by  signs  or  in  writing.  Mr.  Smith  generally  said  nothing  while  an
experiment  was  going  on,  and  he  remained  behind  the  screen  until  the  testing
was  finished.  The  subject  was  frequently  engaged  by  one  of  us  in  conversa-

569  B]

TO    CHAPTER    V

557

tion  on  topics  outside  the  matter  in  hand  during  the  process  of  making  the
finger  insensitive,  but  sometimes  we  encouraged  him  to  attend  to  his  own  sen-
sations, with  results  which  will  be  described  below.  When  we  believed  the  in-
sensitiveness  to  have  been  produced,  we  ascertained,  without  moving  the
screen,  which  finger  it  was  in  by  touching  the  fingers  with  the  point  of  a  pencil
or  some  other  convenient  instrument,  taking  care  to  attack  them  in  varying
orders,  sometimes  beginning  with  the  selected  finger  and  sometimes  taking  it
later  in  the  series,  so  that  no  indication  as  to  which  finger  we  expected  to  find
affected  might  be  given  by  the  order  of  testing.  Occasionally  the  testing  was
done  by  one  of  us  who  was  ignorant  of  which  finger  had  been  selected.  Rigidity
was  ascertained  by  telling  the  subject  to  close  his  hands,  when  the  affected
finger  remained  extended.  We  often  tried  this  before  testing  for  insensitive-
ness,  because  it  was  free  from  the  objection  that  in  testing  we  might  possibly  our-
selves indicate  the  finger.  In  some  experiments  we  attempted  to  ascertain
roughly  the  degree  of  insensitiveness  by  means  of  a  small  induction  coil.  To
this  we  shall  recur  later  when  we  discuss  the  nature  of  the  effect  produced.

Our  experiments  may  be  divided  into  six  heads,  according  to  the  position
and  procedure  of  Mr.  Smith.

[I  omit  the  details,  and  give  only  the  summary  of  the  experiments  made
with  the  subject  P.  as  follows  :— ]

Number  of

3

do

Partial
Successes.

Failures.

i

(a)  With  Mr.  Smith  pointing  1  at  the  selected  )
finger      .                 .                          •         •  S

19

6

25

(£)  A  glass  screen  placed  over  P.'s  hands,  Mr.  \
Smith  pointing  at  the  finger   .         .         .  f

18

3

21

(c)  Mr.  Smith   not  pointing  at  the  finger,  in  >

the   same    room   with    P.,   from    2\  toV

19

2

16

37

about  12  feet  off     )

(d)  Mr.  Smith  in  another  room  across  a  pas-  )

sage,  both  intervening  doors  open,  look-  >
m£  through  an  opera-glass  at  the  finger  )
(f)  Mr.  Smith  in  a  different  room  from  P.,  an  >

3

3

6

intervening  door  closed  .         .         .         .  C

2

12

14

(f)  Mr.   Smith   pointing,   but  willing  that  no  >
effect  should  be  produced       .        .        .  {

4

4

Totals         ....

63

4

40

107

[The  writers  describe  fully  the  means  they  used  to  test  the  anaesthesia,  the
degree  of  anaesthesia  attained,  and  the  means  used  for  restoring  sensibility.
The  next  point  described  is  one  which,  as  they  say,  affords  further  strong
evidence  of  the  genuineness  of  the  experiments,  since  the  subjects  were  quite

1  The  writers  explain  this  expression  to  mean  that  Mr.  Smith's  hand  was  held  above
the  selected  finger,  his  fingers  pointing  downwards  towards  it,  at  a  distance  varying  up
to  about  four  inches  from  it.

538  APPENDICES  [569  B

unaware  that  the  observations  were  being  made,  "such  points  never  being
discussed  in  their  presence,  even  when  they  were  hypnotised."]

Sequence  of  Effects.

An  interesting  point  observed  was  that  the  loss  of  sensibility  seemed  to
spread  from  the  lower  part  of  the  finger  upwards,  and  when  the  effect  was  slight
the  tip  of  the  finger  only  was  affected.  We  have  recorded  fourteen  cases  in
which  either  the  lower  part  only — or  the  lower  part  first — became  insensitive,
or  more  insensitive  than  the  upper.  The  only  case  observed  in  which  this  rule
did  not  appear  to  hold  good  was  one  (No.  55)  in  which — after  an  attempt  longer
than  usual,  viz.,  from  five  to  ten  minutes — the  only  part  of  the  selected  finger  (the
right  thumb)  that  became  insensitive  was  the  inner  side  of  the  proximal  joint.
Another  possible  exception  to  the  rule  was  an  experiment  with  Miss  B.,  in
which  the  part  selected  to  be  made  anaesthetic  was  a  spot  in  the  middle  of  the
back  of  the  left  hand.  Here  the  anaesthesia  extended  both  above  and  below
the  spot,  over  the  metacarpal  and  proximal  joints  of  the  middle  finger.

Recovery  seemed  to  proceed  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  sensibility  spread
ing  downwards  towards  the  tip  of  the  finger.  It  was  only  possible  to  observe  this
in  a  few  cases,  as  recovery  of  the  whole  finger,  when  upward  passes  were  used
for  the  purpose,  was  generally  very  rapid.  One  case  is  recorded  when  the
sensibility  was  completely  restored  by  two  such  passes.  In  seven  cases,  how-
ever, we  detected  the  gradual  recovery  referred  to,  which  always  followed  the
rule  given.

The  recovery  of  motor  power  and  of  sensibility  was  not  always  simultaneous.
We  have  noted  five  cases  in  which  the  sensibility  was  recovered  first  and  none
in  which  the  motor  power  first  reappeared.  Also,  in  making  the  experiments,*
the  motor  power  was  sometimes  lost  while  the  sensibility  was  wholly  or  partially
retained  (this  was  noted  in  five  cases) ;  but  we  never  detected  any  case  in
which  the  loss  of  sensibility  extended  further  than  the  loss  of  the  motor
power.  In  other  words,  it  seemed  that  the  motor  effect  could  be  produced
both  more  easily  and  more  completely  than  the  sensory.

These  latter  observations,  though  only  made  casually  in  the  course  of  our
experiments,  are  in  accordance  with  the  general  experience  of  other  investiga-
tors. In  the  paper  already  referred  to  [518  D]  on  the  influence  of  self-
suggestion,  it  is  said  that  "  muscular  rigidity  [was  the]  most  general  form  of
phenomenon  produced  by  self-suggestion,"  whereas  local  anaesthesia  appeared
more  rarely.  It  is  well  known  also  that  muscular  rigidity  is  one  of  the  easiest
effects  to  produce  by  verbal  suggestion.

Sensations  Described  by  the  Subjects  in  the  Course  of  the  Experiments.

When  their  attention  was  directed  to  their  hands,  the  subjects  were  some-
times aware  of  peculiar  sensations  in  one  or  more  of  their  fingers  during  the
operation.  Mr.  Gurney  found  this  with  two  of  his  subjects,  after  he  had  experi-
mented with  them  for  some  time  and  got  them  to  attend  to  their  sensations
during  the  process,  and  the  finger  in  which  they  occurred  was  nearly  always  the
one  under  experiment.  The  prevailing  sensation  was  cold,  sometimes  also
"pins  and  needles,"  "numbness,"  and  the  like  (Proceedings,  vol.  v.  p.  15).

Both  P.  and  Miss  B.,  when  asked  to  attend  to  their  hands,  often  mentioned
a  sensation  of  cold  in  the  selected  finger,  and  if  we  tested  at  once  we  generally
found  its  sensibility  reduced  below  the  normal.  The  difference  of  temperature,

569C]  TO    CHAPTER    V  539

if  it  existed  at  all,  was  not  such  as  to  be  perceptible  to  ordinary  touch.  The
sensation  of  cold  soon  went  off,  and  the  finger  then  became  completely  anaes-
thetic. It  would,  of  course,  be  very  easy — especially  under  the  circumstances
of  the  experiments — to  imagine  such  a  feeling  as  this,  but  its  association  with
the  right  finger  was  certainly  significant.  The  sensation,  however,  sometimes
occurred  in  the  wrong  finger,  but  then  anaesthesia  never  followed  with  P.,
though  it  occasionally  did  so  with  Miss  B.  ...

Care  was,  of  course,  always  taken,  when  the  subject  first  spoke  of  the  sensa-
tion, to  avoid  giving  him  hints  as  to  whether  the  finger  he  mentioned  was  the
one  we  had  selected  for  experiment.  After  a  time  we  left  off  encouraging  him
to  pay  attention  to  his  sensations,  for  fear  of  rendering  the  fingers  too  suscept-
ible to  any  chance  suggestions.  [Some  experiments  illustrating  this  are  next
described.]

569  C.  Several  sets  of  experiments  are  recorded  in  the  S.P.R.  Pro-
ceedings 1  in  which  the  subject's  power  of  response  to  a  question  was  shown
to  be  under  the  control  of  the  unspoken  will  of  the  hypnotist,  that  will
being  directed  during  a  long  series  of  trials  in  accordance  with  an  arbitrary
list  of  yeses  and  noes  drawn  up  by  the  committee  who  were  conducting  the
experiments.  One  series  of  trials  conducted  by  Professor  Barrett  (see
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  417,  and,  for  a  more  detailed  account,
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  pp.  59-61)  gave  forty- three  successes
without  a  single  failure.  In  the  last  six  of  these  trials  the  hypnotist,  who
was  a  complete  stranger  to  the  subject,  was  at  a  distance  of  17  feet
from  him,  outside  a  door,  through  a  narrow  chink  in  which  he  received
from  Professor  Barrett  one  or  other  of  two  cards,  containing  respectively
the  words  yes  and  no.  The  question,  "  Do  you  hear  me  ? "  was  every
time  addressed  to  the  subject  by  Professor  Barrett.  To  ensure  a  neutral
tone,  he  took  care  (after  the  first  twelve  trials)  not  to  know  himself  which
of  the  two  cards  he  gave  the  hypnotist  until  after  the  result,  which,
according  to  the  will  that  had  been  exerted,  was  either  the  answer  "  yes,"
or  silence.

Many  cases  are  recorded  in  the  Zoist  of  the  induction  or  inhibition  of
particular  actions  through  the  "  silent  willing "  of  the  mesmerist,2  the
subject  being  generally  hypnotised  at  the  time.  These  experiments  were
mostly  of  the  type  of  the  "  willing  game,"  but  without  contact  between
the  agent  and  the  subject.8  Unconscious  muscular  guidance  was  thus

1  See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  i.  p.  256;  vol.  ii.  pp.   13-17 ;  also  Phantasms  of  the

.  ;,  vol.  i.  p.  59.

3  See,  e.g.,  Zoist,  vol.  iii.  pp.  321,  323-24;  vol.  v.  pp.  253,  260,  323;  vol.  vi.  p.  289;
vol.  viii.  pp.  126,  142,  &c.  See  also  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  pp.  89-91.  Petetin
(ElectricitJ  Animate,  p.  103)  records  that  he  could  produce  any  movement  in  his  cata-
leptic patients  by  his  will  alone.  Puysegur  also  gives  instances  of  "  silent  willing."

8  Sneaking  of  the  relation  of  the  it-ill  to  telepathic  experiments  in  general.  Gumey
remarks  (Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  92)  that  the  will  of  the  agent  or  operator
seems  at  first  sight  to  come  more  into  play  when  the  subject  is  desired  to  perform  some
action  than  when  the  image  of  some  object  is  attempted  to  be  conveyed  to  his  mind.
But  even  in  the  former  case  "there  is  little  foundation  for  the  idea  that  the  operator's

540  APPENDICES  [571  A

excluded,  but  the  records  are  seldom  sufficiently  detailed  to  show  that  the
possibility  of  all  other  physical  indications  was  excluded,  and  though  some
of  the  observers  (H.  S.  Thompson,  at  least,  see  Zoist,  vol.  v.  p.  256)  were
well  aware  that  hypnosis  is  often  accompanied  by  hyperaesthesia,  especi-
ally in  reference  to  the  hypnotist,  they  had  not  the  knowledge  that  we
now  have  of  the  possibilities  of  subconscious  perception  and  interpreta-
tion. Still,  it  is  difficult  thus  to  explain  away  all  the  cases  of  "  silent
willing,"  for  instance,  those  in  which  the  subject  was  in  a  different  place
from  the  operator  (see,  e.g.,Zoist,  vol.  viii.  pp.  131-33,  and  143-44),  and
we  can  hardly  doubt  that  H.  S.  Thompson  had  real  telepathic  power  as
well  as  unusual  facility  as  a  hypnotist.

571  A.  Different  observers  take  different  views  of  rapport.  Bernheim
and  Lidbeault  believe  that  a  real  rapport  exists  between  the  subject  and
the  operator,  and  that  this  follows  as  a  natural  consequence  from  the
methods  employed  in  inducing  hypnosis.  On  the  other  hand,  according
to  Braid,  it  was  possible  to  create  by  suggestion  an  artificial  state  in  which
the  subjects  appeared  to  be  en  rapport  only  with  the  operator,  but  this
condition  was  only  apparent,  not  real.  The  subjects  really  heard  the
suggestions  of  others,  though  special  artifices  might  be  required  to  make
them  respond  to  them.  Dr.  Bramwell  says  (see  "  What  is  Hypnotism  ?  "
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  p.  229)  : —

My  own  observations  in  reference  to  rapport  have  led  me  to  conclusions
similar  to  those  of  Braid,  viz. :  i.  That  rapport  does  not  appear  unless  it  has
been  directly  or  indirectly  suggested.  2.  That  the  condition  is  always  an
apparent,  and  never  a  real  one.  It  could  always  be  experimentally  proved  that
the  subjects  actually  had  been  cognisant  of  what  had  been  said  and  done  by
others  who  had  not  been  placed  en  rapport  with  them.  In  those  who  did  not
know  what  was  expected  of  them,  and  to  whom  neither  direct  nor  indirect  sug-
gestions of  rapport  were  made,  this  condition  did  not  appear.  On  the  contrary,
they  heard  and  obeyed  any  one  who  might  address  them.

Moll,  in  Der  Rapport  in  der  Hypnose,  published  in  1892,  comes  practically
to  the  same  conclusion  as  Braid  in  regard  to  rapport,  viz. :  that  it  is  caused  by
direct  or  indirect  suggestions  of  the  operator,  or  by  self-suggestions  which
result  from  the  subject's  conception  of  the  nature  of  the  hypnotic  state.

571  B.  Experiments  in  "community  of  sensation"  were  made  by
the  "Committee  on  Mesmerism"  of  the  S.P.R.  first  in  1883.  The  first
series  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  i.  pp.  224-27)  were  carried  out  with
a  boy  named  Wells,  who  was  blindfolded  and  hypnotised  by  Mr.  G.  A.
Smith.  Out  of  twenty-four  experiments  in  the  transference  of  pains,  the
exact  spot  was  correctly  indicated  by  the  subject  twenty  times.

will  in  any  way  dominates  the  other  will,  or  that  he  succeeds  by  superior  '  strength  of
will '  in  any  ordinary  sense.  It  is  still  primarily  an  image,  not  any  form  of  force,  that  is
conveyed — but  an  image  of  movement,  i.e.  an  image  whose  nervous  correlate  in  the
brain  is  in  intimate  connection  with  motor-centres ;  and  the  muscular  effect  is  thus
evoked  while  the  subject  remains  a  sort  of  spectator  of  his  own  conduct."

571  B]  TO    CHAPTER     V  541

On  September  roth,  1883,  Gurney  made  further  experiments  in  the
transference  of  pains  and  tastes  with  another  subject,  Conway.  His
account  of  them  is  as  follows  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  p.  17).

Conway  sat  with  his  eyes  closed,  in  a  tolerably  deep  trance.  Mr.  Smith  and
I  stood  behind  him,  without  contact,  and  Mr.  Smith  preserved  absolute  silence.
I  from  time  to  time  asked  Conway  whether  he  felt  anything,  but  of  course  gave
no  guiding  hint  or  indication  of  whether  he  was  right  or  wrong.

I  pinched  Mr.  Smith's  right  upper  arm.  Conway  at  once  showed  signs  of
pain,  rubbed  his  right  hand,  then  passed  his  left  hand  up  to  his  right  shoulder,
and  finally  localised  the  exact  spot.

I  silently  changed  to  Mr.  Smith's  left  arm.  In  a  very  few  seconds  Conway 's
right  hand  flew  to  the  corresponding  place  on  his  own  left  arm,  and  he  rubbed
it,  uttering  strong  complaints.

I  nipped  the  lobe  of  Mr.  Smith's  right  ear.  Conway  first  rubbed  the  right
side  of  his  neck  close  to  his  ear ;  he  then  complained  of  his  right  leg,  and  used
threats.  I  then  gave  a  severe  nip  to  his  own  right  ear,  and  he  made  no  sign  of
any  sort.  He  then  rubbed  close  to  the  left  ear,  and  finally  localised  the  spot  on
that  ear  exactly  corresponding  to  the  place  touched  on  Mr.  Smith's  right  ear.

I  now  pinched  the  right  side  of  Mr.  Smith's  right  thigh.  Conway,  without
receiving  any  hint  that  he  was  expected  to  feel  anything,  immediately  began  to
rub  the  corresponding  part  of  his  left  leg.

Mr.  Smith  now  put  a  succession  of  substances  into  his  mouth,  according  to
my  indications,  still  keeping  behind  Conway,  and  preserving  total  silence.  I
kept  Conway's  attention  alive  by  asking  him  from  time  to  time  what  the  taste
was  like,  but  gave  not  the  faintest  guidance,  except  in  the  single  case  of  cloves,
when— to  see  if  Conway  would  take  a  hint— I  asked  if  it  tasted  like  spice,  and
he  said  it  did  not.

Mustard.—"  Something  bitter."     «« It's  rather  warm."

Cloves.—"  Some  sort  of  fruit."  "  Mixed  with  spirits  of  wine."  "  Not  like
spice."  "Tastes  warm."

Bitter  Aloes.— "  Not  nice."  "  Bitter  and  hot."  "  Sort  of  harshness."  "  Not
sweet."  (I  had  suggested  that  it  was  sweet.)  "  Not  nice."  •«  Frightful  stuff."
"  Hurt  your  throat  when  you  swallow  it."  *c  Bitterness  and  saltness  about  it/'

Sugar.—"  It's  getting  better."  "Sweetish  taste."  "Sweet."  "Something
approaching  sugar."

Powdered  Alum. — "Fills  your  mouth  with  water."  "  Precious  hot."  ''Some
stuff  from  a  chemist's  shop,  that  they  put  in  medicine."  "  Leaves  a  brackish
taste."  "  Makes  your  mouth  water."  "  Something  after  the  style  of  alum."

Cayenne  Pepper. — Conway  showed  strong  signs  of  distress.     "  Oh  !  you  call
it  good,  do  you?"     "Oh!  give  us  something  to  rinse  that  down."     "  Draws
your  mouth  all  manner  of  shapes."     "  Bitter  and  acid,  frightful."    "  You've  got
some  Cayenne  down  my  throat,  I  know."     Renewed  signs  of  pain  and  ent:
for  water.

The  subject  was  now  waked.  He  immediately  said,  "What's  this  I've  got
in  my  mouth?"  "Something  precious  hot."  "Something  much  hotter  than
ginger."  "  Pepper  and  ginger."

Further  experiments  of  the  same  kind  with  the  same  subject,  made  by
Gurney  and  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  arc  recorded  in  Proceedings,  vol.  ii.  pp.  205-
206.

542  APPENDICES  [571  C

571  C.  Mr.  M.  Guthrie,  whose  experiments  in  thought-transference
with  persons  in  a  normal  waking  condition  are  given  in  630  B,  found  that
"  community  of  sensation "  sometimes  existed  between  persons  in  a
normal  state,  he  being  the  first  to  observe  this  in  the  case  of  taste.  In
some  of  his  experiments  the  tasters  were  himself,  Gurney,  and  the  present
writer,  and  the  percipients  were  his  two  principal  subjects,  Miss  Relph
and  Miss  Edwards.  I  quote  part  of  the  report  made  at  the  time  from
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  pp.  52-54.

The  taste  to  be  discerned  was  known  only  to  one  or  more  of  the  three  actual
experimenters,  and  the  sensations  experienced  were  verbally  described  by  the
subjects  (not  written  down),  so  that  all  danger  of  involuntary  muscular  guidance
was  eliminated.

A  selection  of  about  twenty  strongly-tasting  substances  was  made.  These
substances  were  enclosed  in  small  bottles  and  small  parcels,  precisely  similar  to
one  another,  and  kept  carefully  out  of  the  range  of  vision  of  the  subjects,  who
were,  moreover,  blindfolded,  so  that  no  grimaces  made  by  the  tasters  could  be
seen.  The  subjects,  in  fact,  had  no  means  whatever  of  knowing,  through  the
sense  of  sight,  what  was  the  substance  tasted.

Smell  had  to  be  guarded  against  with  still  greater  care.  When  the  sub-
stance was  odoriferous  the  packet  or  bottle  was  opened  outside  the  room,  or  at
such  a  distance  and  so  cautiously  as  to  prevent  any  sensible  smell  from
escaping.  The  experiments,  moreover,  were  conducted  in  the  close  vicinity  of
a  very  large  kitchen,  from  whence  a  strong  odour  of  beefsteak  and  onions  pro-
ceeded during  almost  all  the  time  occupied.  The  tasters  took  pains  to  keep
their  heads  high  above  the  subjects,  and  to  avoid  breathing  with  open  mouth.
One  substance  (coffee)  tried  was  found  to  give  off  a  slight  smell,  in  spite  of  all
precautions,  and  an  experiment  made  with  this  has  been  omitted.

The  tasters  were  Mr.  Guthrie  (M.  G.),  Mr.  Gurney  (E.  G.),  and  Mr.  Myers
(M.).  The  percipients  may  be  called  R.  and  E.  The  tasters  lightly  placed  a
hand  on  one  of  the  shoulders  or  hands  of  the  percipients — there  not  being  the
same  objection  to  contact  in  trials  of  this  type  as  where  lines  and  figures  are
concerned,  and  the  subjects  themselves  seeming  to  have  some  faith  in  it.
During  the  first  experiments  (September  3rd  and  4th)  [1883]  there  were  one  or
two  other  persons  in  the  room,  who,  however,  were  kept  entirely  ignorant  of
the  substance  tasted.  During  the  experiments  silence  was  preserved.  The
last  fifteen  of  them  (September  5th)  were  made  when  only  M.  G.,  E.  G.,  and  M.,
with  the  two  percipients,  were  present.  On  this  evening  E.  was,  unfortunately,
suffering  from  sore  throat,  which  seemed  to  blunt  her  susceptibility.  On  this
occasion  none  of  the  substances  were  allowed  even  to  enter  the  room  where  the
percipients  were.  They  were  kept  in  a  dark  lobby  outside,  and  taken  by  the
investigators  at  random,  so  that  often  one  investigator  did  not  even  know  what
the  other  took.  Still  less  could  any  spy  have  discerned  what  was  chosen,  had
such  spy  been  there,  which  he  certainly  was  not.

Under  these  conditions  thirty-two  experiments  were  made,  which  are
described  in  detail.  In  nine  cases  the  percipients  named  the  actual
substance  used,  and  in  five  other  cases  described  the  taste  with  fair
accuracy  (e.g.  "  a  sharp  and  nasty  taste  "  for  vinegar,  "horrible  and  bitter  "
for  bitter  aloes,  "  something  sweet  and  hot "  for  candied  ginger).  Other

572A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  543

experiments  of  the  same  kind  were  tried  later  (op.  cit.  pp.  55-58).  See  also
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  pp.  424-52,  for  experiments  by  Mr.  Guthrie  in
the  transference  of  sensations  of  many  different  kinds;  some  of  those
relating  to  pains  are  quoted  in  630  B.

For  other  experiments  with  hypnotised  subjects  in  the  transference  of
sensations  by  many  different  observers,  see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.
ii.  pp.  324-29,  338-45,  666-68.  Some  of  these  are  quoted  from  the
early  mesmerists — Dr.  Esdaile,  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Townshend,  Professor
Gregory,  and  Dr.  Elliotson.

572  A.  The  following  case  is  quoted  from  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper
"  On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance  "  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  pp.
30—99.  It  is  one  of  a  group  of  four  cases  given  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  which
were  observed  by  Mr.  A.  W.  Dobbie,  of  Gawler  Place,  Adelaide,  South
Australia,  with  various  hypnotic  subjects  of  his  own.  Mr.  Dobbie  had  at
that  time  practised  hypnotism  for  ten  or  twelve  years,  chiefly  with  a  view
to  alleviating  suffering,  and  out  of  some  five  hundred  subjects,  had  come
across  a  few  who  seemed  capable  of  clairvoyance.  Mrs.  Sidgwick  made
his  acquaintance  and  talked  over  his  cases  with  him  during  a  visit  of  his
to  England  in  1889.  The  account  quoted  here  is  a  copy,  Mr.  Dobbie
informed  us,  of  the  notes  he  "  wrote  down  the  moment  the  words  were
uttered."

July  4/A,  1886.

Striking  case  of  clairvoyance,  which  occurred  May  28th,  1886,  in  the
presence  of  the  Hon.  Dr.  Campbell,  M.L.C.,  Hon.  David  Murray,  M.L.C.,  and
Chief  Secretary  of  South  Australia,  Mr.  Lyall,  and  Mr.  Fleming,  solicitor  : —

The  circumstances  are  briefly  as  follows,  viz.  :  Dr.  Campbell,  being  present
at  one  of  my  usual  clairvoyant  evenings,  handed  me  a  gold  sleeve-link,  at  the
same  time  telling  me  that  he  had  lost  the  fellow  one  to  it,  but  had  no  idea  as  to
what  had  become  of  it;  he  asked  me  to  give  the  remaining  one  to  one  of  my
clairvoyants,  and  see  if  they  could  find  the  missing  one.  I  should  state  that
neither  of  the  clairvoyants  had  ever  seen  either  of  the  rooms  they  referred  to,
nor  did  they  know  the  names  of  the  children,  or  anything  in  connection  with
this  case,  so  that  it  is  either  a  case  of  genuine  clairvoyance  or  else  a  most
remarkable  case  of  thought-reading.

I  first  handed  the  sleeve-link  to  the  younger  of  the  two  sisters  [Misses  Eliza
and  Martha  Dixon],  who  is  not  so  lucid  as  her  sister  (I  was  giving  the  elder  one
a  rest,  as  she  had  been  hard  at  work,  clairvoyantly,  for  the  past  hour).

s  Martha  began  by  first  accurately  describing  Dr.  Campbell's  feat
then  spoke  of  a  little  fair-haired  boy  who  had  a  stud,  or  sleeve-link,  in  his  hand,
also  of  a  lady  calling  him  "  Neil  "  ;  then  said  that  this  little  boy  had  taken  the
link  into  a  place  like  a  nursery  where  there  were  some  toys,  especially  a  large
toy  elephant,  and  that  he  had  dropped  the  link  into  this  elephant  through  u
hole  which  had  been  torn  or  knocked  in  the  breast ;  also  that  he  had  tak<  n  it
out  again,  and  gave  two  or  three  other  interesting  particulars.  We  were
reluctantly  compelled  to  postpone  further  investigation  until  two  or  three
evenings  afterwards.

On  the  next  occasion  (in  the  interval,  however,  the  missing  sleeve-link  had
been  found,  but  left  untouched),  I  again  placed  the  link  in  her  hand,  and  the

544  APPENDICES  [572  A

previous  particulars  were  at  once  reproduced  ;  but  as  she  seemed  to  be  getting
on  very  slowly,  it  occurred  to  Dr.  Campbell  to  suggest  placing  his  hand  on  that
of  the  clairvoyant,  so  I  placed  him  en  rapport  and  allowed  him  to  do  so,  he
simply  touching  the  back  of  her  hand  with  the  points  of  his  fingers.  As  she
still  seemed  to  have  great  difficulty  (she  is  always  much  slower  than  her  sister)
in  proceeding,  it  suddenly  occurred  to  me  that  it  would  be  an  interesting  ex-
periment to  place  Miss  Eliza  Dixon  en  rapport  with  Miss  Martha,  so  I  simply
joined  their  disengaged  hands,  and  Miss  Eliza  immediately  commenced  as
follows,  viz. : —

"  I'm  in  a  house,  upstairs,  I  was  in  a  bathroom,  then  I  went  into  another
room  nearly  opposite,  there  is  a  large  mirror  just  inside  the  door  on  the  left
hand,  there  is  a  double-sized  dressing-table  with  drawers  down  each  side  of  it,
the  sleeve-link  is  in  the  corner  of  the  drawer  nearest  the  door.  When  they
found  it  they  left  it  there.  I  know  why  they  left  it  there,  it  was  because  they
wanted  to  see  if  we  would  find  it.  I  can  see  a  nice  easy  chair  there,  it  is  an  old
one,  I  would  like  it  when  I  am  put  to  sleep,  because  it  is  nice  and  low.  The
bed  has  curtains,  they  are  a  sort  of  brownish  net  and  have  a  fringe  of  darker
brown.  The  wall  paper  is  of  a  light  blue  colour.  There  is  a  cane  lounge
there  and  a  pretty  Japanese  screen  behind  it,  the  screen  folds  up.  There  is  a
portrait  of  an  old  gentleman  over  the  mantelpiece,  he  is  dead,  I  knew  him  when
he  was  alive,  his  name  is  the  same  as  the  gentleman  who  acts  as  Governor  when
the  Governor  is  absent  from  the  colony,1  I  will  tell  you  his  name  directly — it  is
the  Rev.  Mr.  Way.  It  was  a  little  boy  who  put  the  sleeve-link  in  that  drawer,
he  is  very  fair,  his  hair  is  almost  white,  he  is  a  pretty  little  boy,  he  has  blue
eyes,  and  about  three  years  old.  ,  The  link  had  been  left  on  that  table,  the  little
boy  was  in  the  nursery,  and  he  went  into  the  bedroom  after  the  gentleman  had
left.  I  can  see  who  the  gentleman  is,  it  is  Dr.  Campbell.  Doesn't  that  little
boy  look  a  young  Turk,  the  link  is  quite  a  handful  for  his  little  hand,  he  is
running  about  with  it  very  pleased ;  but  he  doesn't  seem  to  know  what  to  do
with  it."  (A)  [Dr.  Campbell  was  not  present  from  this  point.]

"  Now  I  can  hear  some  one  calling  up  the  stairs,  a  lady  is  calling  two  names,
Colin  is  one  and  Neil  is  the  other,  the  other  boy  is  about  five  years  old  and  is
darker  than  the  other.  The  eldest,  Colin,  is  going  downstairs  now,  he  is  gone
into  what  looks  like  a  dining-room,  the  lady  says,  '  Where  is  Neil  ? '  '  Upstairs,
ma.'  '  Go  and  tell  him  to  come  down  at  once.'  The  little  fair-haired  boy  had
put  the  link  down ;  but  when  he  heard  his  brother  coming  up  he  picked  it  up
again.  Colin  says, '  Neil,  you  are  to  come  down  at  once.'  'I  won't,'  says  Neil.
*  You're  a  goose,'  replies  Colin,  and  he  turned  and  went  down  without  Neil.
What  a  young  monkey  !  now  he  has  gone  into  the  nursery  and  put  the  link  into
a  large  toy  elephant,  he  put  it  through  a  hole  in  front,  which  is  broken.  He  has
gone  downstairs  now,  I  suppose  he  thinks  it  is  safe  there.

"  Now  that  gentleman  has  come  into  the  room  again  and  he  wants  that  link ;
he  is  looking  all  about  for  it,  he  thinks  it  might  be  knocked  down ;  the  lady  is
there  now  too,  and  they  are  both  looking  for  it.  The  lady  says,  '  Are  you  sure
you  put  it  there  ? '  The  gentleman  says,  '  Yes.'

"  Now  it  seems  like  next  day,  the  servant  is  turning  the  carpet  up  and  look-
ing all  about  for  it ;  but  can't  find  it.

"  The  gentleman  is  asking  that  young  Turk  if  he  has  seen  it,  he  knows  that

1  Chief  Justice  Way  is  the  gentleman  who  acts  as  Deputy  for  his  Excellency  when
absent  from  the  colony. — A.  W.  D.

572  A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  545

he  is  fond  of  pretty  things.     The  little  boy  says  *  No.'     He  seems  to  think  it  is
fine  fun  to  serve  his  father  like  that.

"  Now  it  seems  to  be  another  day,  and  the  little  boy  is  in  the  nursery  again,
he  has  taken  the  link  out  of  the  elephant,  now  he  has  dropped  it  into  that
drawer,  that  is  all  I  have  to  tell  you  about  it,  I  told  you  the  rest  before."

July  iSM,  1886.

Since  writing  the  above  pages  I  have  handed  them  to  Dr.  Campbell  for
perusal,  so  that  he  might  check  the  account  and  ratify  it  or  otherwise,  and  after
going  carefully  through  it  he  has  returned  it  to  me,  accompanied  by  a  complete
ratification  in  writing,  which  I  herewith  enclose.  A.  W.  DOBBIE.

Memo,  by  Dr.  Campbell.

ADELAIDE,  July  yht  1886.

At  the  point  (A)  the  stance  was  discontinued  till  the  next  sitting,  when  I  was
absent.  The  conversation  reported  as  passing  between  the  children  is  correct.
The  description  of  the  room  is  accurate  in  every  point.  The  portrait  is  that  of
the  late  Rev.  James  Way.  The  description  of  the  children  and  their  names  are
true.  The  fact  that  the  link  was  discovered  in  the  drawer,  in  the  interval
between  one  sitting  and  the  final  one,  and  that  the  link  was  left  there,  pending
the  discovery  of  it  by  the  clairvoyant,  is  also  correct,  as  this  was  my  suggestion
to  Mrs.  Campbell  when  she  showed  it  to  me  in  the  corner  of  the  drawer.  In
fact,  every  circumstance  reported  is  absolutely  correct  I  know,  further,  that
neither  of  the  clairvoyants  has  ever  been  inside  of  my  door.  My  children  are
utterly  unknown  to  them,  either  in  appearance  or  by  name.  I  may  say  also
that  they  had  no  knowledge  of  my  intention  to  place  the  link  in  their  possession,
or  even  of  my  presence  at  the  stance,  as  they  were  both  on  each  occasion  in  the
mesmeric  sleep  when  I  arrived.  ALLAN  CAMPBELL.

[In  a  later  letter,  dated  December  i6th,  1887,  Dr.  Campbell  writes :— ]

DEAR  MR.  DOBBIE,— Your  London  correspondent  asks  if  I  had  any  know-
ledge of  the  conversation  that  the  clairvoyant  stated  had  passed  between  the
children.  I  had  no  knowledge  whatever  of  this  conversation,  nor  the  circum-
stances attending  it,  until  she  repeated  it.  It  was  subsequently  confirmed  to
me  in  part  by  Mrs.  Campbell,  such  part  as  she  herself  is  reported  to  have  taken
in  the  tableau.

With  respect  to  the  large  toy  elephant,  I  certainly  knew  of  its  existence,  but
was  not  thinking  of  it  at  the  time  the  clairvoyant  was  speaking.  I  did  not  know
even  by  suspicion  that  the  elephant  was  so  mutilated  as  to  have  a  large  opening
in  its  chest,  and  on  coming  home  had  to  examine  the  toy  to  see  whether  tlu
statement  was  correct.  I  need  hardly  say  that  it  was  absolutely  correct. — I  am,
yours  sincerely,  ALLAN  CAMPBELL.

[Mr.  Dobbie  tells  us  that  "neither  he  nor  his  clairvoyants  had  any  oppor-
tunity, directly  or  indirectly,  of  knowing  any  of  the  particulars  brought  out  by
the  clairvoyant."  He  afterwards  saw  the  room  described,  and  says  "the  de-
scription is  simply  perfect  in  every  particular."

On  this  narrative  Mrs.  Sidgwick  comments  as  follows:—]

There  are  several  noteworthy  points  about  this  rather  complicated  case.  In
the  first  place,  it  will  be  noticed  that  the  greater  part  of  the  information  given
by  the  clairvoyants  might  have  been  obtained  by  thought-transference  from  the

VOL.1.  2    M

546  APPENDICES  [572  B

mind  of  Dr.  Campbell,  who  was  present  most  of  the  time.  It  would  then,  at
any  rate,  be  a  very  remarkable  and  interesting  case  of  thought-transference,
but  so  far  it  would  not  be  clairvoyance  as  we  have  defined  it.  Further,  a  large
proportion  of  the  statements  made — all  about  the  little  boy  taking,  hiding,  and
restoring  the  sleeve-link — are  unverifiable.  But  there  is  one  important  point
unknown  to  Dr.  Campbell  (so  far  as  his  conscious  memory,  at  least,  was  con-
cerned) and  afterwards  proved  true,  and  that  is  the  existence  of  the  hole  in  the
front  of  the  toy  elephant.  The  introduction  of  this  peculiar  fact — which,  if
learnt  by  mind-reading,  must,  it  would  seem,  have  been  learnt  from  the  child  or
some  other  person  quite  unknown  to  the  percipient— is  so  remarkable  that  it
makes  it  seem  more  probable  than  not  that  the  hiding  of  the  sleeve-link  there
was  also  a  fact.  If  so,  it  is  greatly  to  be  regretted  in  the  interests  of  science
that  the  child  ever  took  it  out  again  1  I  attach  less  importance,  as  evidence  of
clairvoyance,  to  the  knowledge  of  the  conversation  of  the  children  than  to  that
of  the  hole  in  the  toy  elephant,  because  it  is  more  the  kind  of  thing  that  might
be  guessed.

Another  noticeable  point  in  this  case  is  that  so  far  as  the  clairvoyants'
remarks  relate  to  the  actions  of  those  concerned — the  children,  Dr.  and  Mrs.
Campbell,  the  servant — the  descriptions  are  not  of  the  present,  but  of  the  past.

Another  case  of  Mr.  Bobbie's  relates  to  the  tracing  of  a  lost  gold
pencil-case  through  the  same  clairvoyant  (pp.  cit.,  pp.  68—70).

572  B.     The  Zoist,  vol.  vii.  pp.  95—101,  contains  a  similar  case,  com-
municated by  Mr.  E.  H.  Barth,  of  the  finding  of  a  lost  brooch  by  means  of
the  noted  clairvoyant  Ellen  Dawson.     The  account  is  given  by  a  Mrs.  M.,
the  owner  of  the  brooch.     Ellen  Dawson  described  a  former  servant  of
Mrs.  M.'s,  who  she  said  had  stolen  the  brooch,  and  said  that  she  had  kept
the  case,  with  some  diamonds  in  it,  in  her  trunk,  and  sold  the  brooch  for
a  very  small  sum ;  that  it  was  then  in  a  place  like  a  cellar,  with  "  lots  of
other  property,"  silver  spoons,  &c.,  and  that  the  servant  had  moved  from
the  place  she  had  lived  at  when  she  first  left  Mrs.  M.     This  latter  point
was  found  to  be  correct,  and  Mrs.  M.  (who  had  suspected  another  of  her
servants) ,  on  the  advice  of  the  clairvoyant,  sent  for  the  girl  to  come  to  her
house,  and  taxed  her  with  the  theft.     Finally  she  confessed  that  she  had
stolen  the  brooch  and  pawned  it,  keeping   the  case   and  two  diamond
chains  which  were  worn  with  the  brooch.     All  the  property  was  finally
recovered.     Mrs.  M.  had  never  seen  Ellen  Dawson  before.

Ellen  Dawson  had  been  subject  to  epileptic  fits  as  a  child,  for  which
she  had  been  treated  mesmerically,  first  by  the  Baron  Dupotet,  and  after-
wards by  Mr.  W.  Hands,  who,  observing  that  she  appeared  to  be  able  to-
see  objects  without  the  use  of  her  eyes  when  in  the  sleep-waking  state,
endeavoured  to  cultivate  the  clairvoyant  faculty  in  her.  Some  remarkable
cases  of  her  "  travelling  clairvoyance  "  are  recounted  by  him  in  the  Zoist,
vol.  iii.  pp.  226-36,  and  the  same  number,  pp.  236-41,  contains  a  further
account  by  Miss  Boyle  of  her  description  of  Rouen  Cathedral,  and  inci-
dents that  had  happened  to  Miss  Boyle  there,  &c.

573  A.     The  longest   and  most   important   series  of  experiments  in

573  A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  547

thought-transference  with  hypnotised  subjects  carried  out  by  members  of
the  S.P.R.  are  those  of  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  described  in  the
paper  by  them  and  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.
128-70,  and  in  the  paper  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  and  Miss  Alice  Johnson  in
vol.  viii.  pp.  536-96.  I  give  brief  extracts  from  both  these  papers.

The  following  is  a  general  description  of  the  first  series  of  experiments,
which  took  place  in  1889  : —

The  experiments  in  thought-transference  about  to  be  described  have  been
carried  out  with  four  different  percipients  while  in  the  hypnotic  trance,  Mr.
[G.  A.]  Smith,  who  hypnotised  them,  being  the  agent.  The  experiments  were
usually  directed  and  arranged  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  also  took  the  notes  which
form  the  basis  of  the  present  paper.  On  two  or  three  occasions,  however,  she
was  absent,  and  her  place  was  taken  by  Professor  Sidgwick,  who  was  also
present  on  most  other  occasions  in  July  and  August.

Most  of  the  experiments  were  in  the  transference  of  numbers  of  two  digits,
Mr.  Smith  looking  at  the  numbers  and  the  percipient  guessing  them.  The
number  of  experiments  of  this  nature  tried  with  Mr.  Smith  in  the  same  room
as  the  percipient  was  664,  of  which  131  were  successes;  and  the  number  tried
with  Mr.  Smith  in  another  room  was  228,  of  which  only  9  were  successes.  In
these  numbers  an  experiment  in  which  two  percipients  were  at  work  at  the  same
time  is  counted  as  two.  By  a  success  we  mean  that  both  digits  are  correctly
given,  but  not  necessarily  placed  in  the  right  order.  Of  the  131  successes  with
Mr.  Smith  in  the  same  room  the  digits  were  reversed  in  14 ;  and  of  the  9  suc-
cesses with  Mr.  Smith  in  a  different  room  the  digits  were  reversed  in  I.  We
had  no  numbers  above  90  among  those  we  used.  If  the  percipients  had  been
aware  of  this,  the  probability  of  their  guessing  the  right  digits  in  the  right  order
in  one  trial  by  pure  chance  would  have  been  i  to  81,  and  the  probability  of
their  guessing  the  right  digits  in  any  order  half  that.  But,  as  at  different  times
they  guessed  all  the  numbers  between  90  and  100,  we  believe  that  they  were
not  aware  that  our  series  stopped  at  90.  in  which  case  their  chance  of  being
right  in  a  single  guess  was  I  to  90.  No  one  will  suppose,  therefore,  that  1 1 7
complete  successes  in  664  guesses  was  the  result  of  chance.  Good  days  and
bad  days  alike  are  included  in  the  numbers  given,  though,  as  will  be  seen  in  the
sequel,  on  some  days  no  success  at  all  was  obtained.  It  was  clear  that  the
power  of  divining  the  numbers  was  exceedingly  variable,  but  whether  the  differ-
ence was  in  the  agent  or  the  percipient,  or  on  what  circumstances  it  depended,
we  have  so  far  been  unable  to  discover.

Eight  persons,  at  least,  besides  Mr.  Smith,  tried  to  act  as  agents,  but  cither
failed  to  hypnotise  the  percipients  or  to  transfer  any  impression.  Nor  did
others  succeed  in  transferring  impressions  when  the  hypnotic  state  had  been
induced  by  Mr.  Smith.  Mr.  Smith  himself  did  not  succeed  except  when  the
percipients  were  hypnotised.

[The  account,  written  at  the  time,  of  the  first  day's  experiments  with  each
of  the  four  percipients— Mr.  W.,  Mr.  T.,  Mr.  P.,  and  Miss  B.— - is  next  given.
The  numbers  used  were  all  those  from  101090  inclusive;  each  number  was
drawn  at  random  from  a  bag,  and  placed  in  a  little  box  which  Mr.  Smith
held  in  his  hand  with  its  back  towards  the  subject,  who  sat  facing  him  with
closed  eyes.  It  was  ascertained  by  experiment  that  the  subject  would  have  had

548

APPENDICES

[573  A

to  move  his  head  several  feet  to  see  the  number.     He  was  only  told  that  he  was
to  see  numbers  of  two  figures.

All  the  experiments  are  given  in  order  in  a  tabulated  form,  including
in  each  case  the  number  drawn,  the  number  guessed,  and  the  conditions.
The  following  is  a  summary  of  the  trials  with  P.  and  T.  : —

Percipient.

Guess
completely
Right-

Digits  Right,
but  in
Reverse  Order.

One  Digit
Right  in
Right  Place.

Wrong.

Total  number
of  Trials.

With  Mr.  S.  in  same  (  P.  .
room  .  .  l  T.  .

Total

69
30

10

4

8l
6l

»

|

99

H

142

362

6l7

Most  probable  number  of  )
successes  by  chance  .  J

8

...

106

...

...

With  Mr.  S.  in  another  (  p
room          .        .         J

7

I

17

114

139

Most  probable  number  of  ?
successes  by  chance  .  }

2

...

27

Of  the  139  trials  "  with  Mr.  Smith  in  another  room,"  there  were  52  in  which
the  two  rooms  were  only  separated  by  a  curtain;  3  of  the  complete  successes
were  obtained  under  these  conditions.  In  the  other  87  trials  Mr.  Smith  (accom-
panied by  one  of  the  other  experimenters)  was  in  the  passage  outside,  with  the
door  closed,  or  in  a  room  below.  With  T.  79  trials  were  made  with  Mr.  Smith
in  another  room,  but  the  success  obtained  was  not  beyond  what  might  be
expected  by  chance.

The  nature  of  the  percipients'  impressions  and  other  cognate  points  are
fully  discussed  in  the  paper.  A  detailed  discussion  is  also  given  as  to  how  far
the  conditions  were  adequate  to  prevent  the  impressions  reaching  the  perci-
pients through  any  of  the  ordinary  channels  of  sense.  The  question  of  the
possibility  of  unconscious  whispering  or  counting  by  the  agent  is  fully  dealt
with,  and  an  analysis  is  given  of  all  the  wrong  guesses,  in  order  to  test  whether
the  mistakes  are  such  as  could  have  been  produced  by  this  means.  The  con-
clusion is  reached  that  the  mistakes  could  not  be  thus  accounted  for.1

The  question  of  the  bearing  of  "  number-habits  "  on  these  experiments  is
also  discussed.  On  this  subject,  see  the  "  Note  on  Number-habits,"  in  630  A.

1  Messrs.  Hansen  and  Lehmann,  in  a  pamphlet  entitled  Ucber  unwillkurliche  Fluslern
...  (in  Wundt's  Philosophhche  Studien,  vol.  xi.  part  4)  endeavoured  to  show  that  the
success  of  these  experiments  was  due  to  unconscious  whispering,  on  the  ground  that  the
mistakes  made  in  them  were  similar  to  the  mistakes  that  occurred  in  their  own  experi-
ments in  unconscious  whispering.  Professor  Sidgwick,  however,  showed  (Proceeding s
S.P.R.,  vol.  xii.  pp.  298-315),  by  analysing  all  the  experiments,  that  the  number  of
correspondences  in  mistakes  in  the  two  sets  were  not  more  than  might  have  been  pro-
duced by  chance,  and  that,  therefore,  no  argument  could  be  founded  on  them.

573A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  549

The  experiments  were  continued  at  intervals  during  1890  and  1891  by
Mrs.  Sidgwick,  assisted  by  Miss  Alice  Johnson,  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  being  the
hypnotiser,  and  the  principal  subjects  being  P.,  T.,  and  Miss  B.  The
experiments  were  all  made  at  Brighton,  some  in  Mr.  Smith's  rooms,  and
some  in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  lodgings.

Three  different  kinds  of  experiments  were  made:  (i)  in  transferring
numbers  of  two  digits  ;  (2)  in  transferring  ideas  other  than  numbers  ;  (3)
in  producing  local  anaesthesia  and  rigidity  by  mental  suggestion.1

The  first  kind  of  experiments  afforded  important  confirmation  of  the
earlier  series,  in  that  success  was  obtained  with  agent  and  percipient  in
different  rooms,  no  one  in  the  same  room  with  the  percipient  knowing  what
the  numbers  to  be  guessed  were.  A  full  description,  with  a  plan,  is  given
of  Mr.  Smith's  rooms  (one  of  the  "  arches"  on  the  beach  at  Brighton),  in
which  most  of  the  experiments  were  made.  The  arch  contained  two
floors,  the  upper  entirely  occupied  by  a  sitting-room,  and  the  lower  con-
sisting of  a  little  lobby  and  two  small  rooms.  The  first  conditions  of  the
evening's  experiments  with  Miss  B.  are  described  as  follows : —

The  persons  present  were  Miss  B.,  Professor  Barrett,  Mr.  Smith,  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  Miss  Johnson,  and  T.;  but  T.,  with  whom  we  have  been  experiment-
ing, was  hypnotised,  and  not  attending  to  what  was  going  on.  Mr.  Smith
hypnotised  Miss  B.  and  tried  three  numbers  while  in  the  room  with  her  and
speaking  to  her.  There  was  some  success  with  these,  and  then  Mr.  Smith  and
Miss  Johnson  went  downstairs  to  the  lobby.  Miss  Johnson  drew  a  number  at
random  out  of  a  bag  containing  all  the  numbers  from  10  to  90,  and  handed
it  to  Mr.  Smith,  who  then  tried  to  communicate  it  mentally  to  Miss  B.  A  little
bell  or  gong  was  rung  upstairs  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  as  soon  as  a  guess  had  been
made,  and  again  when  the  party  upstairs  were  ready  to  begin  another.  As  the
bell  was  rung  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  who  had  previously  been  put  en  rapport  with  Miss
B.,  said,  "  There's  another,  Miss  B.,"or  words  to  that  effect ;  and  Miss  B.  began
to  look  out  for  an  impression,  which  usually  came  to  her  in  a  visual  form.  Mrs.
Sidgwick  noted  down  her  guesses  and  remarks,  while  Miss  Johnson  noted  the
numbers  that  she  drew  from  the  bag,  and  at  intervals  we  compared  notes.  .  .  .
It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that,  as  Mrs.  Sidgwick  was  herself  wholly  ignorant
of  the  number,  it  was  impossible  for  her  remarks  to  give  any  indications  to
Miss  B.

[The  nature  and  development  of  the  percipients'  impressions  are  fully  dis-
cussed. Miss  B.'s  impressions  were  mostly  visual,  and  generally  seemed  to
develop  gradually.  Sometimes  her  eyes  were  opened,  and  she  was  made  to
see  the  number  as  a  hallucination  on  a  piece  of  paper.  The  number  then
sometimes  appeared  in  a  fragmentary  way,  and  was  liable  to  appear  and  dis-
appear. On  one  occasion  it  was  suggested  successfully  that  the  percipients
should  hear  the  numbers  repeated  instead  of  seeing  them.

In  forty-five  out  of  the  seventy -one  experiments  made  in  Mrs.  Sidgwick's
lodgings  (the  third  section  of  the  table  given  on  p.  550),  the  numbers  were  guessed
by  means  of  table-tilting.  Miss  B.  in  forty-one  cases  being  in  a  normal  condition
at  the  time,  and  tilting  out  the  numbers  apparently  quite  automatically.  In  four

1  These  experiments  are  described  in  669  B.

550

APPENDICES

[573  A

cases,  being  hypnotised,  she  tilted  out  the  numbers  with  the  table,  and  at  the  same
time  made  verbal  guesses,  which  were  different irom  those  made  through  the  table.
The  same  method  was  used  occasionally  with  P.  and  T.,  and  on  one  evening  the
percipients  were  made  to  guess  the  numbers  both  verbally  and  by  planchette-
writing.  A  detailed  comparison  of  the  verbal  guesses  with  those  made  uncon-
sciously at  the  same  time  is  given  on  pp.  550-52  of  the  paper.  The  two
guesses  were  in  most  cases  different  No  more  success  was  obtained  with
these  automatic  methods  than  by  guessing  in  the  ordinary  way.

A  table  is  given  of  the  experiments  of  each  day,  with  Miss  B.  as  percipient,  in
guessing  numbers  of  two  digits,  the  agent,  Mr.  Smith,  being  in  a  different  room.
I  summarise  this  table  as  follows  : —

1.

1

1

.

1

BJ:

0  M

1

|£

s§

II

•3

(A

52

•o«

M

^H

1

"So

a

S2

s

o  >^

11

1

r

(l)  Place  —  the  Arch.     Percipient   up-  J
stairs  ;  agent  downstairs      .         .  j

20

5

56

II

56

,43

(2)  Place  —  the  Arch.    Percipient  down-  )
stairs  ;  agent  upstairs  .         .         .  )

7

4

22

33

(3)  Place—  Mrs.  Sidgwick's    lodgings.  )
Percipient    in    room  ;     agent    in  >

7

3

23

8

3°

7i

passage,  with  door  closed    .        .  )

Totals    ....

27

8

86

23

108

252

Most  probable  number  of  successes  by  )
chance           (

3

...

^                 j

...

46

Results  obtained  during  the  same  period  )
by  Mr.  Smith   as   agent  in   the  >

26

3

27

21

69

146

room  with  Miss  B.        .        .        .  )

Experiments  in  Transferring  Ideas  other  than  Numbers.

The  most  successful  experiments  under  this  head  were  those  in  which  Mr.
Smith  was  merely  concentrating  his  mind  on  a  "mental  picture  "  of  some  sort,
without  looking  at  any  real  representation.  The  person  who  carried  on  the
conversation  with  the  percipient  during  the  course  of  each  experiment,  and
took  notes  of  his  remarks,  was  generally  ignorant  of  the  subject  of  the  picture.

The  percipient  was  sometimes  made  to  receive  the  impression  as  a  fully
externalised  visual  hallucination  seen  with  open  eyes ;  usually  as  a  picture  on
a  blank  white  card  on  which  he  had  been  told  that  a  picture  would  appear,
and  occasionally  in  a  crystal  used  in  the  same  way.1  Latterly,  the  percipients

1  Compare  the  similar  experiments  with  P.  and  T.  described  in  624  A.

573  A]

TO    CHAPTER    V

were  generally  induced  to  see  the  pictures  when  hypnotised  with  closed  eyes.
Full  details  are  given  of  the  experiments  which  the  writers  regarded  as  success-
ful, with  accounts  of  some  failures,  also  a  tabulated  list  of  all  the  experiments
tried.  Those  with  agent  and  percipients  in  the  same  room  are  summarised  by
the  authors  as  follows : —

Impression.

Percipient.

Correct  or

Number  of
Trials.

partially

Wrong.

None.

correct.

Miss  B.  .

7

6

,

14

P

14

6

7

27

T

2

13

3

IS

Whybrew
Major     .

6

2

2

2

10

2

Totals    .

31

27

13

71

I  quote  the  first  seven  experiments  with  Miss  B.,  of  which  four  are  counted
as  successful,  viz.  Nos.  i,  2,  5,  and  7.

The  first  experiments  with  Miss  B.  took  place  on  July  Qth,  1890.  The  per-
cipient, being  in  a  hypnotic  trance,  had  her  eyes  opened,  and  was  given  a  card
and  told  to  look  out  for  a  picture  which  would  come  on  it.

No.  i.  The  subject,  chosen  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  was  a  little  boy  with  a  ball.
Mr.  Smith  sat  close  to  Miss  B.,  but  neither  spoke  to  her  nor  touched  her.
Miss  B.  presently  said,  "  A  figure  is  coming — a  little  boy."  Mrs.  Sidgwick
asked  what  he  had  in  his  hand,  and  Miss  B.  replied,  "  A  round  thing,  a  ball,  I
suppose."

No.  2.  For  the  next  experiment  Mr.  Smith  sat  behind  a  screen.  The  sub-
ject, a  kitten  in  ajar,  was  again  set  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick.  Miss  B.  said,  "  Some-
thing like  an  old  cat— a  cat— I  think  it's  a  cat."  Mrs.  Sidgwick.—"  What  is  the
cat  doing?"  Miss  B.  (doubtfully). — "Sitting  down."  Mrs.  Sidgwick.— " Is
there  anything  else  but  a  cat?"  Miss  B.— "  No,  only  scratches  about."

No.  3.  (Failure.)  .  .  .

No.  4.  Subject :  a  Christy  Minstrel  with  a  bdnjo  (chosen  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick.
who  took  the  notes).  Miss  B.  said,  "  There's  something  long,  something  round
in  that  one — a  little  cage  of  some  sort — something  that  looks  like  a  cage
there's  something  like  a  handle.  A  can  !  oh,  it's  a  can !  It's  quite  clear  now."
We  then  gave  her  a  fresh  card,  and  Mr.  Smith  moved  round  from  behind  the
screen  and  sat  close  to  her,  still  without  speaking.

No.  5.  The  same  subject  (continued).  Miss  B.  said,  "  Something  here  dark
— a  hand."  Mrs.  Sidgwick.—"  Is  it  a  woman's  hand  or  a  man's  ?"  Miss  !>.—
"  A  black  hand."  This  seemed  to  be  a  partial  success.

Mr.  Smith  then  woke  Miss  B.  up  to  ask  her  when  she  had  to  go,  but  find-
ing that  there  was  still  a  little  time  to  spare,  re-hypnotised  her,  and  tried
another  subject.

No.  6.  A  sailing-boat  on  the  sea.  Mr.  Smith  sat  behind  the  screen.
Presently  Miss  B.  said,  "A  man — black.  He's  got  something  in  his  hand— an
instrument— sort  of  guitar  thing."  As  we  had  not  spoken  about  the  Christy

552  APPENDICES  [573  A

Minstrel  and  banjo,  this  tardy  emergence  of  the  idea  when  Mr.  Smith  was
thinking  of  something  else,  and  after  awaking  and  re-hypnotisation,  was  inte-
resting.

We  then  changed  Miss  B.'s  card,  and  Mr.  Smith  continued  to  think  of  the
sailing-boat,  but  Miss  B.  only  saw  something  like  a  bear,  and  we  changed  her
card  again.  Of  course  during  these  changes  we  told  her  nothing  about  the
subject,  nor  whether  it  was  changed,  nor  whether  she  was  right  or  wrong.
Miss  B.  then  said,  "  Very  funny  thing "  (shaking  her  head) ;  "  can't  see  it
coming  to  any  figure.  There's  a  mess — it  doesn't  come  to  any  shape."

No.  7.  At  this  point  Mrs.  Sidgwick  asked  Mr.  Smith  to  come  from  behind
the  screen  and  sit  near  Miss  B.  Miss  Johnson,  who  did  not  know  what  the
subject  of  the  picture  was,  asked  Miss  B.  whether  it  was  anything  like  an
animal.  Miss  B.  said,  "  No — got  some  prong  sort  of  things — something  at  the
bottom  like  a  little  boat.  What  can  that  be  up  in  the  air  ?  Cliffs,  I  suppose —
cliffs  in  the  air  high  up — it's  joining  the  boat — oh,  sails— a  sailing-boat — not
cliffs — sails."  This  was  not  all  uttered  consecutively,  but  partly  in  answer  to
questions  put  by  Miss  Johnson;  but  as  Miss  Johnson  was  ignorant  of  the
subject  of  the  supposed  picture,  her  questions  could,  of  course,  give  no  guidance.

[The  following  are  five  experiments  made  with  P. : — ]

As  a  preliminary  to  each  experiment,  P.  was  hypnotised  and  told  by  Mr.
Smith  that  he  would  see  a  picture,  then  had  his  eyes  opened,  and  was  given  a
blank  card  to  look  at.  The  subjects  of  the  pictures  were  chosen  by  Mrs.
Sidgwick  and  written  down  by  her.  In  the  case  of  the  first  two,  the  subject  for
the  picture  was  shown  in  writing  to  Mr.  Smith  before  his  final  remarks  to  P.
about  looking  for  the  picture  to  come  on  the  card.  In  the  case  of  the  last
three,  it  was  only  shown  to  him  after  he  had  explained  to  P.  what  he  was  to
do,  and  he  did  not  speak  at  all  after  he  knew  what  the  subject  was.  He  sat
near  P.,  but  behind  him  in  all  cases.  Miss  Johnson,  who  was  ignorant  of  the
subjects,  took  notes  of  P.'s  conversation  and  other  remarks  that  were  made
during  the  course  of  each  experiment.  P.  occasionally  addressed  Mrs.
Sidgwick,  and  she  answered  him,  being  of  course  very  careful  to  avoid  giving
any  indications  by  her  remarks.

No.  15.  (Failure.)  .  .  .

No.  1 6.  Subject:  A  black  kitten  playing  with  a  cork.  P.— " Something
like  a  cat ;  it's  a  cat."  Mrs.  Sidgwick. — "What  is  it  doing?"  P.— "Some-
thing it's  been  feeding  out  of— some  milk,  is  it  a  saucer?  Can't  see  where  its
other  paw  is — only  see  three  paws."

No.  17.  Subject:  A  sandwich  man  with  advertisement  of ^a  play.  P.  said,
"  Something  like  letter  A— stroke  there,  then  there."  Mrs.  Sidgwick.— "  Well,
perhaps  it  will  become  clearer."  P.—"  Something  like  a  head  on  the  top  of
it ;  a  V  upside  down — two  legs  and  then  a  head. — A  man  with  two  boards —
looks  like  a  man  that  goes  about  the  streets  with  two  boards.  I  can  see  a  head
at  the  top,  and  the  body  and  legs  between  the  boards.  I  couldn't  see  what
was  written  on  the  boards,  because  the  edges  were  turned  towards  me."  Mr.
Smith  told  us  afterwards  that  he  had  pictured  to  himself  the  man  and  one
board  facing  him,  thus  not  corresponding  to  the  impression  which  P.  had.

No.  18.  Subject:  A  choir  boy.  P.  said,  "Edge  of  card's  going  a  dark
colour.  Somebody  dressed  up  in  white,  eh  ?  Can  see  something  all  white ;
edge  all  black,  and  like  a  figure  in  the  middle.  There's  his  hands  up  "  (making
a  gesture  to  show  the  attitude)  "  like  a  ghost  or  something— you  couldn't  mis-
take it  for  anything  but  a  ghost.  It's  not  getting  any  better,  it's  fading— no,
it's  still  there.  It  might  frighten  any  one."  .  .  .

573B]  TO    CHAPTER    V  553

Xo.  19.  Subject:  A  vase  with  flowers.  (Mr.  Smith,  still  behind  P.,  was
looking  at  a  blue  flower-pot  in  the  window,  containing  an  india-rubber  plant).
P.  said,  4i  I  see  something  round,  like  a  round  ring.  I  can  see  some  straight
things  from  the  round  thing.  I  think  it's  a  glass — it  goes  up.  I'll  tell  you
what  it  is  ;  it  must  be  a  pot,  a  flower-pot,  you  know,  with  things  growing  in  it.
I  only  guessed  that,  because  you  don't  see  things  growing  out  of  a  glass.  It's
not  clear  at  the  top  yet.  You  see  something  going  up,  and  you  can't  see  the
top  because  of  the  edge  of  the  paper,  it's  cut  off.  I  don't  wonder,  because  it's
no  good  wondering  what  Mr.  Smith  does,  he  does  such  funny  things.  I  should
fancy  it  might  be  a  geranium,  but  there's  only  sticks,  so  you  can't  tell."  Mrs.
Sidgwick.— "  What  colour  is  the  pot  ?  "  P. — "  Dark  colour,  between  terra-cotta
and  red— dark  red,  you'd  call  it."

573  B.  In  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper  "On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoy-
ance "  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  30-99,  an  account  is  given  of
several  striking  cases  of  "  travelling  clairvoyance  "  on  the  part  of  a  woman
there  called  Jane,  the  wife  of  a  Durham  pitman  (pp.  tit.,  pp.  53-62  and
82—94).  She  was  hypnotised  at  intervals  for  many  years  from  1845
onwards,  for  the  sake  of  her  health,  and  used  then  to  ask  to  "  travel " —
that  is,  to  be  guided  by  suggestion  to  places  which  she  should  clairvoy-
antly  visit.  The  main  evidence  about  her  is  contained  in  the  contem-
poraneous notes  of  a  Dr.  F.,  which,  however,  do  not  appear  to  have
been  made  before  the  truth  of  her  statements  was  verified.  I  quote  an
extract  from  these  notes.

Before  commencing  the  sitting  I  fixed  to  take  her  to  a  house,  without  com-
municating my  intentions  to  any  of  the  parties  present.  In  the  morning  of  the
day  I  stated  to  a  patient  of  my  own,  Mr.  Eglinton,  at  present  residing  in  the
village  of  Tynemouth,  that  I  intended  to  visit  him.  He  stated  that  he  would
be  present  between  8  and  10  P.M.  in  a  particular  room,  so  that  there  might  be
no  difficulty  in  finding  him.  He  was  just  recovering  from  a  very  severe  illness,
and  was  so  weak  that  he  could  scarcely  walk.  He  was  exceedingly  thin  from
the  effects  of  his  complaint.

After  the  usual  state  had  been  obtained,  I  said,  "  We  are  standing  beside  a
railway  station,  now  we  pass  along  a  road,  and  in  front  of  us  see  a  house  with
a  laburnum  tree  in  front  of  it."  She  directly  replied,  "  Is  it  the  red  house  with
a  brass  knocker  ?  "  I  said,  "  No,  it  has  an  iron  knocker."  I  have  since  looked,
however,  and  find  that  the  door  has  an  old-fashioned  brass  handle  in  the  shape
of  a  knocker.  She  then  asked,  "  Shall  we  go  up  the  steps  ?  Shall  we  go  along
this  passage  and  up  these  stairs  ?  Is  this  a  window  on  the  stair  head  ?  "  I  said,
"You  are  quite  right,  and  now  I  want  you  to  look  into  the  room  upon  the  left-
hand  side."  She  replied,  "Oh  yes,  in  the  bedroom.  There  is  no  one  in  this
room;  there  is  a  bed  in  it,  but  there  is  no  person  in  it."  I  was  not  aware  that
a  bedroom  was  in  the  place  I  mentioned,  but  upon  inquiry  next  day  I  found
she  was  correct.  I  told  her  she  must  look  into  the  next  room  and  she  would
see  n  sofa.  She  answered,  ••  But  there  is  here  a  little  gallery.  Now  I  am
in  the  room,  and  see  a  lady  with  black  hair  lying  upon  the  sofa."  I  attempted
to  puzzle  her  about  the  colour  of  her  hair,  and  feeling  sure  it  was  Mr.  Eglinton
who  was  lying  there,  I  sharply  cross-questioned  her,  but  still  she  persisted  in
her  story.  The  questioning,  however,  seemed  to  distract  her  mind,  and  she

554  APPENDICES  [573  C

commenced  talking  about  a  lady  at  Whickham,  until  I  at  last  recalled  her  to
the  room  at  Tynemouth  by  asking  her  whether  there  was  not  a  gentleman  in
the  room.  "  No,"  she  said ;  "  we  can  sec  no  gentleman  there."

After  a  little  she  described  the  door  opening,  and  asked  with  a  tone  of
great  surprise,  "Is  that  a  gentleman  ?"  I  replied,  "Yes;  is  he  thin  or  fat?"
"Very  fat,"  she  answered;  "but  has  he  a  cork  leg  ?  "  I  assured  her  that  he
had  no  cork  leg,  and  tried  to  puzzle  her  again  about  him.  She,  however,
assured  me  that  he  was  very  fat  and  had  a  great  corporation,  and  asked  me
whether  I  did  not  think  such  a  fat  man  must  eat  and  drink  a  great  deal  to  get
such  a  corporation  as  that.  She  also  described  him  as  sitting  by  the  table
with  papers  beside  him,  and  a  glass  of  brandy  and  water.  "  Is  it  not  wine?  "
I  asked.  "  No,"  she  said,  "  it's  brandy."  "  Is  it  not  whisky  or  rum  ?  "  "  No,
it  is  brandy,"  was  the  answer ;  "  and  now,"  she  continued,  "  the  lady  is  going  to
get  her  supper,  but  the  fat  gentleman  does  not  take  any."  I  requested  her  to
tell  me  the  colour  of  his  hair,  but  she  only  answered  that  the  lady's  hair  was
dark.  I  then  inquired  if  he  had  any  brains  in  his  head,  but  she  seemed  alto-
gether puzzled  about  him,  and  said  she  could  not  see  any.  I  then  asked  her
if  she  could  see  his  name  upon  any  of  the  letters  lying  about.  She  replied,
"Yes;"  and  upon  my  saying  that  the  name  began  with  E,  she  spelt  each
letter  of  the  name  "  Eglinton."

I  was  so  convinced  that  I  had  at  last  detected  her  in  a  complete  mistake
that  I  arose,  and  declined  proceeding  further  in  the  matter,  stating  that,
although  her  description  of  the  house  and  the  name  of  the  person  were  correct,
in  everything  connected  with  the  gentleman  she  had  guessed  the  opposite  from
the  truth.

On  the  following  morning  Mr.  E.  asked  me  the  result  of  the  experiment,  and
after  having  related  it  to  him,  he  gave  me  the  following  account :  He  had  found
himself  unable  to  sit  up  to  so  late  an  hour,  but  wishful  fairly  to  test  the  powers
of  the  clairvoyante,  he  had  ordered  his  clothes  to  be  stuffed  into  the  form  of  a
figure,  and  to  make  the  contrast  more  striking  to  his  natural  appearance,  had
an  extra  pillow  pushed  into  the  clothes  so  as  to  form  a  "corporation."  This
figure  had  been  placed  near  the  table,  in  a  sitting  position,  and  a  glass  of
brandy  and  water  and  the  newspapers  placed  beside  it.  The  name,  he  further
added,  was  spelt  correctly,  though  up  to  that  time  I  had  been  in  the  habit  of
writing  it  "  Eglington,"  instead  of  as  spelt  by  the  clairvoyante,  "Eglinton."

573  C.  Dr.  Alfred  Backman,  of  Kalmar,  Sweden,  published  a  paper
on  "  Experiments  in  Clairvoyance  "  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  pp.
199-220.  His  subjects  were  patients  of  his  own,  hypnotised  by  him  for
medical  treatment,  and  among  them  he  found  a  certain  number  who
seemed  to  possess  the  clairvoyant  faculty.  One  of  the  best  was  Alma
Radberg,  a  maid-servant,  aged  about  twenty-six  (the  subject  of  the  experi-
ment described  in  543  E),  and  I  quote  a  case  that  occurred  with  her.
Dr.  Backman  writes  : —

On  April  8th,  1890, 1  received  a  letter  from  Dr.  F.  Kjellman,1  of  Stockholm,

1  Dr.  Backman  says  that  all  the  notes  made  of  the  experiments  with  Dr.  Kjellman
were  sent  to  the  latter  before  he  (Dr.  Backman)  knew  anything  about  whether  they  had
been  successful  or  not.  It  is  these  notes  which  are  reproduced  in  his  paper,  without
any  additions.

573D]  TO     CHAPTER    V  555

in  which  he  asked  me  to  arrange  a  time  at  which  I  should  hypnotise  Alma,  of
whom  he  had  heard,  and  "ask  her  to  find  a  certain  Dr.  von  B.,  who  was
known  to  her,  and  describe  the  room  in  which  he  was,  the  other  persons
present,  the  arrangements  of  the  room,  &c.  Dr.  K.  had  purposely  hung  some-
thing on  the  chandelier  that  is  not  generally  there,  in  order  to  make  the  ex-
periment more  crucial."  In  answer  to  this,  I  merely  sent  this  telegram,  "  From
one  to  two  to-morrow,  in  your  apartment."  No  further  arrangement  was  made,
and  Dr.  Kjellman's  appearance,  as  well  as  his  apartment,  was  quite  unknown
both  to  me  and  the  clairvoyant,  and  also  to  all  the  persons  present  with  us.
Alma  was  hypnotised  in  my  house  at  Kalmar,  and  the  record  made  of  the  sitting
is  as  follows  x  •. —

April  9th,  1890,  at  1.40  P.M.  Alma  is  hypnotised  and  ordered  to  go  to
Stockholm  to  the  apartments  of  Dr.  Kjellman.  i.  "Is  Alma  there?  "  "  No."
2.  Question  repeated.  "Yes."  9.  "Is  there  a  chandelier  hanging  from  the
ceiling?"  "No,  no  chandelier,  something  more  like  a  lamp."  10.  "Do  you
see  anything  particular  there?"  '*  Something  long  and  narrow  is  hanging  in
the  chandelier."  n.  "What  is  it  made  of,  stuff  or  metal?"  "It  must  be
metal,  I  think,  and  stuff  also."  12.  "Have  you  ever  seen  such  a  thing?"
"  No,  I  never  saw  anything  like  it."  13.  "  Try  to  see  what  it  is,  or  what  it  is
called."  (No  answer.)  14.  "  What  is  it  used  for?  "  "  I  do  not  know  what  it
is  used  for."  "  Is  it  anything  used  by  physicians,  or  an  ornament  ?  "  "  More
like  an  ornament,  larger  than  a  ribbon."  15.  "What  is  it  like,  what  colour
is  it?"  "It  is  white."  16.  "Are  there  several  colours?"  "  It  is  also  red."
17.  "What  is  the  metal  like?"  "It  is  white,  probably  silver."  18.  "Are
there  mountings  fixed  to  the  stuff,  or  stuff  on  a  piece  of  metal  ?  "  "I  think  the
stuff  is  wound  round  a  piece  of  metal."  19.  "  How  long  and  how  broad  is  it  ?  "
"A  quarter  of  a  yard  broad,  and  three-quarters  of  a  yard  long."  20.  "  What
kind  of  stuff  is  it?"  "Probably  silk."  21.  "Does  the  stuff  belong  to  the
piece  of  metal?  "  "  No,  it  is  wound  round  it  for  the  occasion."  22.  "  What  is
it  generally  used  for  ?  "  "It  ought  to  stand  on  a  writing-table."  23.  "  What  is
the  use  of  it  ?  "  (She  does  not  know.)  24.  "  Is  it  fixed  to  the  lamp,  or  could  it
be  easily  taken  off  ?  "  "It  is  not  fixed  firmly."  She  cannot  possibly  tell  what  is
hanging  in  the  chandelier.  When  awake,  she  states  that  she  believes  it  was  a
pair  of  scissors  for  cutting  paper,  or  a  paper-knife,  that  was  hanging  in  the
chandelier;  and  it  was  probably  fixed  with  a  handkerchief.  .  .  .

After  having  communicated  to  Dr.  Kjellman  what  Alma  had  said,  I  re-
ceived from  him  two  letters,  containing  the  following  information  : —

"  There  was  really  hanging  in  the  chandelier  a  large  pair  of  paper-scissors
fixed  by  an  india-rubber  otoscope,  and  with  a  tea-rose  and  some  forget-me-nots
in  one  of  the  handles  of  the  scissors  .  .  ."

"  Her  statement  that  the  object  was  hanging  in  a  lamp,  not  in  a  chandelier,
was  right.  It  is  both  a  lamp  and  a  chandelier,  and  the  lamp  was  drawn  down
a  long  way  under  the  chandelier.  .  .  ."

573  D.     Some  good  cases  of  telepathy  and  telepathic  clairvoyance
occurring   with   hypnotised   percipients  are   given   in   Dr.    Fahnestock's
I'olism  (see  especially  pp.   127-35  an<*  PP-  221-32).     I  quote  one
of  these  (from  pp.  229-32).

1  I  quote  only  the  part  of  the  record  relating  to  the  object  hung  on  the  chandelier.—
F  W.  H.  M.

556  APPENDICES  [573  E

[A  Mr. had  requested  some  friends  of  his  at  Baltimore  to  place  some-
thing in  a  particular  place  in  a  certain  house,  after  he  had  left  the  city,  to  test
if  it  could  be  seen  by  any  of  Dr.  Fahnestock's  clairvoyants  at  Lancaster.]

Subject :  Mrs.  E.  She  had  never  been  in  Baltimore  in  her  life,  and  after
she  had  entered  the  state,  it  was  necessary,  as  I  was  not  acquainted  with  the
location  of  the  house,  for  him  to  convey  her  in  thought  to  the  appointed  place.
Having  done  so,  I  requested  her  to  describe  the  room,  which  she  did  to  his
satisfaction ;  and  as  the  thing  to  be  looked  at  was  to  be  at  or  about  the  time-
piece, I  directed  her  attention  to  it,  and  desired  her  to  look  whether  there  was
anything  about  the  clock  which  did  not  belong  to  it.  She  said  she  saw  some-
thing dark  there,  which  looked  like  a  bottle,  but  that  she  felt  as  if  she  were
going  backwards,  and  could  not  keep  herself  there  long  enough  to  see  it  dis-
tinctly. This  being  the  case,  and  finding  that  her  mind  was  wandering  about
the  city,  I  directed  her  to  look  about  the  city,  and  after  I  had  taken  her  to  the
Washington  Monument  and  various  other  places  of  interest,  I  desired  her  to  go
back  to  the  clock  again,  and  to  go  up  to  it,  and  to  take  the  article  which  she
before  described  as  being  a  dark  bottle  into  her  hands,  and  to  examine  it
minutely,  so  that  she  could  be  certain  as  to  what  it  really  was.  After  having
done  so,  she  declared  that  she  now  saw  it  distinctly,  and  stated  that  "  it  was  a
dark  bottle,  about  the  length  of  her  index  finger,  and  was  suspended  by  a
white  string,  tied  about  its  neck,  that  it  was  empty,  and  had  no  cork."

The  gentleman  left  Lancaster  for  Baltimore  the  next  day,  and  when  he
returned  he  stated  that,  as  he  approached  the  house  of  his  friend  in  Baltimore,
where  the  thing  to  be  looked  at  was  to  be  placed,  he  saw  his  friend  at  the
door,  and  as  he  came  up  to  him  his  friend  immediately  asked  him  to  tell  what
he  had  seen  placed  near  the  clock.  After  he  had  related  the  circumstances,
and  told  what  the  lady  said,  his  friend  produced  the  bottle,  which  had
been  suspended  at  the  time  agreed  upon,  and  which,  to  their  mutual  astonish-
ment, they  now  saw  she  had  described  to  the  very  letter.  The  gentleman
brought  the  bottle  with  him  to  Lancaster,  with  a  piece  of  the  white  string  still
attached,  and  after  it  was  shown  to  Mrs.  E.  she  declared  that  it  was  the  very
same  which  she  had  seen  suspended  in  Baltimore.

The  bottle  is  of  a  very  dark  brown  colour,  and  looks  nearly  black  when  not
held  up  between  the  light  and  the  eye,  of  a  peculiar  shape,  and  not  easily  mis-
taken. It  is  about  the  length  of  an  index  finger,  and  was  empty,  and  without  a
cork  or  stopper.

A  purer  case  of  actual  clairvoyance  could  not  be  desired,  because  there  was
no  person  in  the  room  that  knew  or  had  any  suspicion  of  what  might  be  placed
there.

Some  good  instances  of  apparent  clairvoyance  or  telepathic  clair-
voyance on  the  part  of  a  hypnotised  subject  are  also  to  be  found  in
Somnolism  and  Psycheism,  by  Joseph  W.  Haddock,  M.D.  (London,  1851).

573  E.  From  "  Facts  in  Clairvoyance,"  by  Dr.  Ashburner  (Zoist,  vol.
vi.  pp.  96-110).  In  the  following  case  the  information  given  by  the
clairvoyants  related  to  facts  which  were  apparently  not  known  by  normal
means  to  any  person.

Major  Buckley,  a  well-known  mesmerist,  brought  to  Dr.  Ashburner's
house  in  London  on  February  i2th,  1848,  two  young  women,  A.  B.  and
E.  L.,  whom  he  had  brought  from  Cheltenham  that  day.  They  had  often

573  E]  TO    CHAPTER    V  557

been  mesmerised  by  him,  and  Dr.  Ashburner  wished  to  investigate  their
alleged  clairvoyant  powers.  On  this  first  evening  only  the  two  subjects,
Major  Buckley,  and  Dr.  Ashburner  were  present.  The  latter  writes  : —

We  assembled  in  my  little  library.  I  had  provided  myself  with  a  dozen
walnut-shells,  bought  at  Grange's  in  Piccadilly,  containing  carraway  comfits
and,  as  I  thought,  a  motto  each,  and  two  ounces  of  hazel-nut  shells  containing
comfits  and  printed  mottoes.  These  were  in  two  packets  of  an  ounce  each,  and
had  been  purchased  by  me  about  two  hours  before  at  Lawrence's  in  Oxford
Street,  at  the  corner  of  Marylebone  Lane.  One  of  the  young  women  was
seated  at  either  side  of  the  fireplace;  Major  Buckley  placed  himself  at  the
apex  of  a  triangle,  of  which  they  formed  the  basal  angles.  He  made  a  few
slow  passes  from  his  forehead  to  the  pit  of  his  stomach  on  his  own  person.
The  girls  said,  after  he  had  made  eight  or  ten  of  these  passes,  "  that  they  were
sufficient."  They  saw  a  blue  light  upon  him,  and  A.  B.  having  taken  up  one
of  the  nut-shells  provided  by  me,  placed  it  upon  the  chimney-piece  above  her
head.  E.  L.  then  did  the  same  thing  with  one  of  the  nut-shells  allotted  to  her.
I  was  fully  aware  of  the  objections  of  sceptics,  that  a  possibility  existed  of
changing  these  shells  by  sleight-of-hand.  I  watched  the  proceedings  anxiously
and  accurately,  to  avoid  the  possibility  of  being  deceived.  The  movements  of
these  young  women  were  slow  and  deliberate,  not  like  the  hocus-pocus  quick
jerk  of  the  conjurer.  A.  B.  first  announced  her  readiness  to  read  the  motto  in
her  nut-shell.  She  said  that  the  words  were —

"  The  little  sweetmeat  here  revealed,
Lays,  as  good  deeds  should  lay,  concealed."

I  wrote  down  to  her  dictation,  then  I  cracked  the  shell,  emptied  out  the  com-
fits, and  found  among  them  a  little  strip  of  paper,  several  times  folded,  on
which  were  printed  the  very  words  she  had  spoken.  Remember,  reader,  she
was  not  asleep ;  both  the  girls  were  wide  awake,  and  joined  in  the  conversation
with  Major  Buckley  and  myself  in  the  intervals  of  the  phenomena  which  they
were  exhibiting.

Then  E.  L.  read  the  motto  in  her  hazel-nut  shell.     It  ran  thus—

"  An  honest  man  may  take  a  knave's  advice,
But  idiots  only  will  be  cheated  twice."

After  I  had  written  this  down,  and  before  I  opened  the  shell  by  the  aid  of  the
nut-crackers,  she  said,  "  At  the  top,  above  the  first  line,  is  part  of  another
n.otto  ;  it  runs  thus —

'  Who  smiles  to  see  me  in  despair.'

The  word  despair  is  cut  close."  When  the  nut-shell  was  opened  and  the
motto  unfolded,  the  description  given  by  E.  L.  was  found  to  be  quite  correct.

A.  B.  then  took  another  shell,  and  in  a  very  short  time  read  these  words,
which  I  wrote  down —

"  She's  little  in  size,
Has  bright  speaking  eyes,
And  if  you  prove  true,
be  happy  with  you."

The  shell  was  broken  open,  and  the  words  printed  on  the  little  slip  of  folded

558  APPENDICES  [573  F

paper  found  among  the  sweetmeats  within  were  word  for  word  with  those
written  down  by  me.

E.  L.  took  her  turn  at  reading.     The  words  she  read  out  were —

"  In  every  beholder  a  rival  I  view,
I  ne'er  can  be  equalled  in  loving  of  you."

Having  written  down  these  words,  the  shell  was  opened,  and  it  was  found  that
E.  L.  had  read  the  motto  quite  correctly.

The  servant  announced  that  Mr.  Arnott  wished  to  see  me.  He  had  come
on  professional  business,  and  with  no  view  of  witnessing  these  phenomena.  I
asked  Major  Buckley's  permission  to  introduce  him.  He  came  in  and  sat
down.  A.  B.  proposed  that  he  should  take  up  a  nut-shell  from  the  table,  and
she  offered  to  read  the  motto  while  he  held  it  in  his  hand.  He  seemed  hardly
to  be  aware  of  what  wonder  he  was  to  witness.  He  took  up  a  nut,  held  it  in
his  closed  hand,  and  A.  B.  read  thus —

"  The  pangs  of  absence,  how  severe,
Have  they  ne'er  waked  thy  bitter  tear  ?"

Mr.  Arnott  took  the  nut-crackers,  broke  his  nut-shell,  and  found  that  A.  B.  had
read  quite  correctly.  His  laugh  and  look  of  surprise  told  enough  of  the  con-
viction of  his  mind.  The  event  had  become  a  fact.  How  to  account  for  it  was
another  matter.  He  could  not  deny  that  he  had  witnessed  the  fact.

On  the  next  occasion,  February  i5th,  the  twelve  walnut-shells  were
used ;  the  trials  were  made  under  the  same  conditions  as  before,  the  walnut-
shells  being  held  in  the  hands  of  the  percipient.  All  the  mottoes  were  read
correctly,  with  the  following  exception  : —

A.  B.  then  read  from  the  fourth  of  her  walnut-shells,  and  here  she  made  a
mistake,  attended  by  some  remarkable  circumstances.  I  wrote  down  her
words  thus —

"  'Tis  love  like  the  sun  that  gives  light  to  the  year,
The  sweetest  of  blessings  that  life  can  endear."

She  added,  underneath  the  printing  of  this  motto  is  the  top  part  of  a  capital  T  and
of  two  small  t's.  At  the  commencing  side  there  appears  to  be  half  of  an  N  and
a  small  e  belonging  to  another  motto.  All  this  was  quite  true  that  she  added,
but  she  had  mistaken  the  motto,  which  ran  thus —

"  My  love's  too  great,  you  may  perceive,
And  clearly  see  I  don't  deceive."

Five  further  successful  trials  were  made,  in  which  the  nut-shells  were
held  in  the  hands  of  Dr.  Ashburner,  or  of  a  visitor,  or  on  the  chimney-
piece,  and  about  a  dozen  others  are  recorded  in  the  rest  of  the  paper.

Other  cases,  witnessed  by  the  Earl  of  Stanhope,  of  the  reading  of  mottoes
in  nuts  by  Major  Buckley's  subjects  are  given  in  the  Zoist,  vol.  viii.  pp.
265-67.  See  also  Zoist,  vol.  ix.  p.  234,  for  references  to  a  large  number  of
cases  of  clairvoyance  published  in  that  journal.

573  F.  In  the  Zoist,  vol.  xii.  pp.  249-5  2>  a  case  °f  clairvoyance  involv-
ing some  apparent  prevision  is  recorded  by  the  Rev.  J.  Peed.  A  Miss  A.,
whom  he  was  hypnotising  in  Dublin  in  September  1853  for  medical  pur-

575  A]  TO    CHAPTER    V  559

poses,  described  in  detail,  while  hypnotised,  the  lameness  of  his  sister-in-
law,  whom  she  had  never  seen  or  heard  of,  as  far  as  he  knew,  and  advised
him  to  get  her  own  medical  man,  Dr.  E.,  to  treat  it.  Mr.  Peed  told  Dr.
E.,  and  Miss  A.  repeated  her  diagnosis  to  Dr.  E.  before  he  had  seen  the
patient ;  after  examining  her,  he  pronounced  it  remarkably  correct,  and
proposed  an  operation.  Miss  A.,  on  being  questioned  in  the  hypnotic
condition  about  the  operation,  said  that  it  would  be  a  mere  trifle,  but  that
the  patient  would  suffer  much  pain  after  it,  which  could  be  removed  by
mesmerism  ;  that  the  after  treatment,  in  which  some  surgical  machinery
must  be  used,  would  be  tedious  and  trying ;  that  in  three  weeks  she  would
be  able  to  walk  downstairs  without  assistance,  but  that  it  would  take  three
months  to  complete  the  cure.  Mr.  Peed  states  that  all  these  predictions
turned  out  accurately  correct ;  also  that  Miss  A.  showed  knowledge  of  the
progress  of  the  cure  as  it  was  going  on  and  of  what  the  doctor  was  pre-
scribing for  it.  Unfortunately  the  doctor's  own  testimony  is  lacking,  and
it  seems  that  the  prediction  was  not  recorded  till  a  few  months  after  its
fulfilment.  The  clairvoyant's  knowledge  of  contemporary  events  in  this
case  seems  more  clearly  beyond  guesswork  than  her  knowledge  of  the
future.

575  A.  The  following  account  of  experiments  in  the  efficacy  of
charms  appeared  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  152  : —

.  .  .  The  uncivilised  Africans,  among  whom  I  have  spent  many  years  (six-
teen), make  large  use  of  charms,  worn  on  the  person,  in  cases  of  illness.
Missionaries  and  traders  are  at  one  that  they  occasionally  derive  great  benefit
from  this  "superstition."  ...  I  was  curious  to  know  whether  any  evidence
could  be  obtained  pointing  to  a  probable  cause  for  their  effect.

In  order  to  do  this  I  imitated  the  African,  but  did  my  best  to  exclude  the
factor  of  faith.  I  prepared  a  "  charm,"  consisting  of  a  few  hieroglyphics  written
on  paper.  This  was  wrapped  up  and  sewn  into  a  piece  of  tape,  and  tied  firmly
on  the  bare  arm  of  the  subject  of  the  experiment.  It  was  to  be  worn  night  and
lay  for  a  few  days,  no  time  limit  being  given.  I  gave  the  subjects  to  understand
that  I  was  only  asking  them  to  assist  in  an  experiment;  that  the  charm  was
only  paper  with  writing  on  it ;  that  they  were  not  to  expect  any  improvement,
but  simply  to  tell  me  if  such  happened.  If  any  faith  element  remained  it  was
against  my  wish,  and  must  be  a  quantity  resisting  all  methods  of  expulsion,
even  in  people  of  education.  Now  for  the  results  in  detail:  (i)  Mysel:
forty-six.  I  have,  all  my  life,  been  subject  to  some  nervous  trick  or  twitching
of  a  muscle;  sometimes  of  the  face,  the  head,  the  shoulder,  &c.  This  took  the
form  of  a  peculiar  snort  from  time  to  time,  and  I  was  aware  that  it  must  be  un-
pleasant. I  therefore  tried  earnestly  to  suppress  it,  but  without  effect.  I  wore
a  charm,  and  it  immediately  disappeared.  Some  few  days  after  I  found  myself
at  it  again,  and  found  that  the  charm  had  slipped  from  where  I  could  feel  it  to
the  elbow.  On  replacing  it  the  annoyance  ceased.  The  same  lapse  occurred
two  or  three  times,  but  I  always  found  the  charm  had  slipped.  After  a  few
weeks  I  discontinued  its  use,  and  the  bad  habit  has  not  recommenced.

Another  case  lately  occurring  to  myself  is  the  following :  I  have  for  the  last
two  months  been  very  weak  and  ill— slight  valvular  affection  of  the  heart,  on

560  APPENDICES  [575  A

the  occasion  I  mention  accompanied  by  severe  pain  in  the  back  and  sides.  I
was  visiting  my  sister,  having  a  rest,  but  did  not  seem  to  improve.  One  night
she  tied  me  a  charm  on  the  left  arm,  and  I  passed  a  good  night.  The  following
morning  a  servant  said  "  Good-morning  "  to  me,  but  made  no  further  remark.
She  went  into  the  kitchen  and  said  to  the  cook,  *'  I  can't  think  what  has  hap-
pened to  Mr.  Phillips  ;  he  looks  quite  well  this  morning.  I  never  saw  such  a
change  in  anybody  !"  And  I  felt  well,  though  weak.  I  had  no  pain  whatever,
and  for  the  first  time  in  many  months  was  not  conscious  that  I  had  a  heart.
This  freedom  from  pain  has  remained  for  about  three  weeks,  up  to  the  present
time.  I  am  hardly  ever  conscious  of  pain,  but  only  of  weakness,  and  I  feel  con-
siderably better  on  that  score.

The  next  case  is  Miss  G.,  cook  at  the  establishment  of  which  my  sister  is
matron— the  "  Convalescent  Home,"  S.  Age,  say  fifty.  The  kitchen  of  the
place  is  very  hot — 90  to  100  degrees  Fahr.  every  day.  Miss  G.  is  sadly  over-
worked, being  constantly  on  her  feet  in  this  temperature  from  8  A.M  to  8  P.M.
What  wonder  that  her  health  gave  way  and  she  became  a  martyr  to  sick  head-
ache !  Scarcely  ever  a  week  passed  but  she  had  to  remain  in  bed  some  portion
of  or  all  day.  I  gave  her  a  charm  some  nine  or  ten  weeks  ago,  and  am  not
aware  that  she  has  been  laid  up  since.  She  has  told  me,  when  visiting,  that
she  has  not  been  so,  and  that  her  headaches  have  been  remarkably  lessened,
though,  as  she  says,  nothing  will  set  her  up  so  long  as  she  has  to  work  all  day
in  that  excessive  temperature.  She  has  actually  given  notice  to  leave,  and
intended  to  do  so  for  a  long  time  past.

Next  case :  Mrs.  M.,  age  fifty,  complained  that  on  trying  to  open  her  eyes
in  the  night,  or  on  awakening  in  the  morning,  she  was  obliged  to  push  the  eye-
lids up  with  her  fingers.  She  seemed  to  lack  the  power  of  opening  them.  A
charm  acted  "  like  a  charm,"  and  the  annoyance  ceased.

Miss  B.  M.,  age,  say  twenty-five,  complained  of  chronic  cold  in  the  head,
remaining  persistently  for  several  months.  I  gave  her  a  charm,  and  four  days
afterwards  she  told  me  the  cold  had  quite  gone.  She  said,  half  ashamed  to
confess  her  credulity,  that  she  really  thought  the  charm  had  cured  her.

L.  H.,  seventy-eight,  chronic  sufferer  from  rheumatism.  I  gave  him  a  charm,
which  he,  for  convenience,  wore  loosely  buttoned  round  his  neck.  No  result.
I  told  him  that  he  had  disobeyed  orders,  and  must  wear  it  round  his  arm,
tightly  enough  to  feel  it.

I  did  not  see  him  for  some  time,  but  he  told  me  that,  from  whatever  cause,
he  had  been  very  free  from  pain,  and  had  discontinued  the  charm.  He  then
had  a  fatiguing  journey  in  Holland,  and  on  his  return  told  me  he  was  going  to
look  for  his  charm,  as  he  had  had  a  recurrence  of  the  pain.  A  week  or  so  after
he  told  me  he  was  wearing  it ;  had  no  pain ;  nothing  but  weakness  from  old
age  to  trouble  him.

M.  H.,  age,  say  forty-two,  rheumatic;  is  reported  to  me  to  be  much  the
same.

M.   L.,  age,  say  forty,  troubled  with  chronic  fits  of  sneezing,  is  reported

entirely  free.

Recent  case:  M.D.,  age,  say  fifty,  has  chronic  bronchitis  and  difficulty  o
breathing.  I  gave  her  my  charm  to  wear  three  days  ago,  and  she  says  she  is
very  much  better.

J.  M.,  age,  say  fifty-five,  has  suffered  for  fifteen  years  from  locomotor  ataxy;
has  insupportable  pains,  for  which  reason  he  often  drinks  a  pint  of  whisky  per
day,  without  any  sign  of  intoxication  (so  he  says).  I  gave  him  a  charm,  which

578  A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  561

he  only  wore  when  the  pains  became  violent — not  to  prevent  their  attack.     He
says  the  thing  is  a  snare  and  a  delusion ;  it  has  done  him  no  good.

P.  H.,  aged  twenty-one  ;  has  four  times  had  rheumatic  fever ;  heart  affected ;
no  constitution.  He  was  recovering  from  last  attack,  and  I  gave  him  a  charm,
which  he  immediately  lost.  He  continues  to  improve.

These  are  the  details  of  all  the  experiments  I  have  made,  except  one  of
which  I  have  had  no  report.  ...  R.  C.  PHILLIPS.

THE  ARTS  CLUB,  MANCHESTER,
September  ztfh,  1893.

For  a  number  of  instances  of  the  cure  of  warts  by  charms,  see  Journal
S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  pp.  7-10,  40,  96,  226,  and  vol.  ix.  pp.  100,  121,  225.

578  A.  The  following  account  of  the  Lourdes  legend  was  given  by
me  in  an  article  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  ix.  pp.  176—82.

Let  us  begin  by  examining  the  three  essential  factors  of  the  Lourdes  story.
In  a  few  words,  that  story  is  as  follows :  The  Virgin  Mary  appeared  to  Berna-
dette,  and  in  direct  consequence  of  that  apparition  miraculous  cures  are  per-
formed in  and  near  the  same  grotto  where  the  divine  figure  was  seen.

Plainly  we  have  three  points  to  look  into  :  (i)  What  is  the  evidence  that
the  apparition  was  really  seen,  or,  if  seen,  was  more  than  a  purely  subjective
hallucination?  (2)  What  is  the  evidence  which  connects  the  apparition  with
the  cures  ?  (3)  What  evidence  is  there  of  cures  so  far  surpassing  the  known
effects  of  suggestion  and  self-suggestion  as  to  demand  a  special  or  a  miraculous
explanation  ?  On  each  of  these  points  there  is  a  good  deal  to  say.

(i)  The  apparition.  "On  a  great  tablet  of  marble,"  says  Dr.  Boissarie
[in  his  book,  Lourdes}  "  magnificently  framed,  fastened  into  the  rock  near
the  grotto,"  the  following  inscription  is  to  be  read  : —

Dates  of  the  Eighteen  apparitions
and  words  of  the  Blessed  Virgin

in  the  year  of  grace  1858.

In  the  hollow  of  the  rock  where  her  statue  is  now  seen
the  Blessed  Virgin  appeared  to  Bernadette  Soubirous

Eighteen  times.

The  nth  and  the  I4th  of  February;
Each  day,  with  two  exceptions,  from  February  i8th  till  March  4th,

March  25th,  April  ;th,  July  i6th.

The  Blessed  Virgin  said  to  the  child  on  February  i8th,
"  Will  you  do  me  the  favour  (me  faire  la  grace)  of  coming  here  daily

for  a  fortnight  ?
I  do  not  promise  to  make  you  happy

In  this  world,  but  in  the  next  ;
I  want  many  people  to  come  (qu'il  vienne  du  monde)."

The  Virgin  said  to  her  during  the  fortnight :
''You  will  pray  for  sinners;  you  will  kiss  the  earth  for  sinners.

Penitence  !  penitence  !  penitence !
Go  and  tell  the  priests  to  cause  a  chapel  to  be  built ;

I  want  people  to  come  thither  in  procession.
Go  and  drink  of  the  fountain  and  wash  yourself  in  it.
Go  and  eat  of  that  grass  which  is  there  (de  cette  herbe  qui  est  la)  "

On  March  25th  the  Virgin  said :
I  AM  THE  IMMACULATE  CONCKPTION."

vol..    I.  2    N

562  APPENDICES  [578  A

This,  then,  is  the  official  account  of  the  vision.  We  will  simplify  our  dis-
cussion by  waiving  all  question  as  to  its  good  faith  or  accuracy,  and  accepting
it  as  an  exact  account  of  what  Bernadette  believed  that  she  heard  and  saw.
How,  then,  should  we  classify  such  a  narrative,  if  sent  to  us  in  the  ordinary
course  of  our  collection  of  evidence  ?

Undoubtedly  we  should  regard  it  as  a  purely  subjective  experience.  It  does
not  answer  any  of  the  tests  which  we  habitually  impose  on  a  hallucination
which  claims  to  be  veridical.  The  figure  was  seen  by  one  person  only.  The
apparition  did  not  coincide  with  any  objective  event.  It  did  not  even — though
to  this  point  we  must  presently  return — contain  any  prediction  whose  fulfilment
could  be  a  retrospective  proof  of  the  reality  of  the  message.  And — worst  of  all
from  an  evidential  point  of  view — the  figure  seen  was  one  which,  by  the  admis-
sion, we  believe,  of  the  Catholic  clergy  themselves,  has  been  often  reported  as
seen,  mainly  by  young  girls,  under  circumstances  where  no  objective  value
whatever  could  be  attributed  to  the  apparition.

It  so  happens  that  on  this  last  and  very  important  point  we  can  adduce  a
significant  series  of  facts.  ^Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  100,  maybe  found
a  description,  written  for  the  S.P.R.  by  M.  Marillier  from  observation  on  the
spot,  of  a  series  of  apparitions  of  the  Virgin  near  Pontinet  in  the  Dordogne.
There  the  Virgin  was  seen  many  times  by  many  persons,  generally  through  a
special  hole  in  a  wall,  but  sometimes  on  the  open  heath.  We  entirely  con-
curred, however,  with  M.  Marillier  in  ranking  all  these  visions  as  purely  sub-
jective. .  .  .  And  the  Bishop  of  Perigueux  must  obviously  have  shared  this  view,
for  he  discouraged  the  visions  at  Pontinet,  and  nothing  has  come  of  them-

It  is  not  easy  to  explain  why  this  long  series  of  mutually  corroborative
visions  should  be  thus  tacitly  dropped,  while  the  similar  visions  of  a  single  un-
corroborated child  should  receive  so  much  attention.  Dr.  Boissarie  makes
two  points  based  on  the  apparition  itself,  namely,  the  beauty  of  the  figure  and
the  loftiness  of  the  message.  .  .  .

How,  it  may  be  asked,  do  we  know  of  the  extraordinary  beauty  of  the  form
which  Bernadette  perceived?  We  know  this,  it  appears,  from  the  statement
of  the  sculptor  Fabisch,  who  made  a  statue  of  the  Virgin  which  Bernadette
regarded  as  a  faithful  copy  of  what  she  had  seen.  Of  the  pose  and  expression
which  he  had  thus  faithfully  reproduced,  Fabisch  informs  us  that  '*  he  has  seen
nothing  to  equal  them  in  suavity  and  rapture  in  the  chefs  d'azuvreoi\hz  greatest
masters — of  Perugino  or  Raphael."  It  was  fortunate  that  the  task  was  com-
mitted to  an  artist  so  fully  equal  to  the  occasion  ;  and  the  less  favourable  im-
pression made  upon  one  of  ourselves  by  the  sight  of  the  statue  in  the  grotto
should  not,  perhaps,  be  placed  in  opposition  to  this  decisive  judgment  of  the
sculptor  himself.

As  regards  the  loftiness  of  the  message,  we  have  less  definite  guidance.  Dr.
Boissarie  does  not  tell  us  whether  it  is  the  divine  command  to  kiss  the  earth
for  sinners,  or  the  divine  command  to  eat  grass,  which  is  manifestly  beyond  the
intelligence  of  a  simple  child.  He  dwells  only  upon  the  phrase,  "  I  am  the
Immaculate  Conception  ;"  and  we  may  indeed  admit  that  this  particular  mode
of  reproducing  the  probably  often-heard  statement  that  the  Virgin  was  con-
ceived without  sin  does  indicate  a  mind  which  is  either  supra  or  infra  gram-
maticam.  .  .  .

If,  however,  we  must  admit  that  the  story  of  the  apparition  is  not  one  which
could  have  found  a  place  as  evidential  in  these  Proceedings,  the  same  thing
cannot  be  said  of  another  incident,  much  less  noticed,  but  in  itself  far  more  sur-

578A]  TO     CHAPTER    V  563

prising,  in  the  recorded  life  of  Bernadette.  This  incident  was  observed  and
described  by  Dr.  Dozous — the  physician  to  whose  advocacy  the  credence  be-
stowed on  Bernadette,  and  the  consequent  fame  of  Lourdes,  seem  to  have  been
in  the  first  instance  mainly  due.  Dr.  Boissarie  quotes  from  Dr.  Dozous'
account,  but  without  giving  any  reference,  nor  even  the  name  of  the  work
where  the  citation  occurs.  We  repeat  the  story,  therefore,  as  Dr.  Boissarie
gives  it  (p.  49)  :—

"  The  girl,  upon  her  knees,  held  in  one  hand  a  lighted  taper,  which  rested
upon  the  ground.  During  her  ecstasy  she  put  her  hands  together,  and  her
fingers  were  loosely  crossed  above  the  flame,  which  they  enveloped  in  the
cavity  between  the  two  hands  (dans  1'espece  de  voute  qui  les  se'parait).  The
taper  burnt ;  the  flame  showed  its  point  between  the  fingers  and  was  blown
about  at  the  time  by  a  rather  strong  current  of  air.  But  the  flame  did  not  seem
to  produce  any  alteration  in  the  skin  which  it  touched."

"  Astonished,"  says  Dr.  Dozous,  "  at  this  strange  fact,  I  did  not  allow  any  one
to  put  a  stop  to  it,  and  taking  out  my  watch  I  could  observe  it  perfectly  for  a
quarter  of  an  hour."

[He  then  describes  how  he  examined  her  hand  immediately  afterwards,  and
found  no  trace  of  burning  on  it.]

If  Dr.  Dozous'  story  be  true,  what  are  we  to  hold  that  it  proves?  What
parallel  cases  have  we  with  which  to  compare  it?  The  obvious  answer  is  that
we  have  a  series  of  similar  occurrences  reported  in  the  case  of  D.  D.  Home.
Home's  phenomena  of  resistance  to  fire  are,  in  fact,  both  in  themselves  more
striking  and  better  attested.  .  .  .

The  "miracle  of  the  taper,"  therefore,  if  truly  reported,  may  show  that
Bernadette  was  a  "medium,"  but  cannot  fairly  be  used  to  prove  the  action  of
the  Virgin  Mary.  Still  less  safe  would  it  be  to  appeal  to  the  ecstasies  them-
selves as  proving  the  divine  character  of  their  inspiring  cause.  Here,  again,  Mr.
Daniel  Home  also  had  his  ecstasies,  controlled  by  **  guides"  who  were  quite
as  sensitive  to  human  incredulity  as  better-authorised  saints  might  have  been.
"  Little  faith  !  "  they  would  exclaim,  "  little  faith  !  Will  you  not  trust  in  Dan  ?  "

And  this  brings  us  to  the  second  point  marked  out  for  our  discussion.
What  connection  is  to  be  discerned  between  the  visions  of  Bernadette  and  the
cures  subsequently  occurring  at  Lourdes  ?

In  the  first  place,  it  may  be  observed  that  the  original  words  of  the  message
make  no  mention  whatever  of  physical  healing.  On  the  contrary,  the  Virgin
expressly  states  that  the  happiness  which  she  promises  is  to  be  enjoyed  in  the
next  world,  and  not  in  this.  What  she  apparently  aims  at  in  this  world  is
worship  for  herself:  "I  want  people  to  come,"  "I  want  people  to  come  in
procession."  There  was  also,  indeed,  a  direction  to  wash  in  the  stream,  nnd
to  drink  of  it,  [and  to  eat  the  grass  growing  on  its  banks].  Whether  Bernadette,
or  any  one  else,  did  eat  it  is  not  quite  clear.  And  why  they  were  to  eat  it,
why  they  were  to  wash  in  the  stream,  is  still  more  mysterious.  .  .  .  But  we  need
hardly  perhaps  further  analyse  the  somewhat  incoherent  message  which  has
since  been  made  to  mean  so  much  more  than  its  actual  words  will  carry.

A  quarryman  of  the  name  of  Bourriette,  however  (Boissarie,  p.  99),  con-
ceived the  idea  that  the  water  of  the  spring  in  the  grotto  might  with  advantage
be  applied  to  his  eyes,  injured  by  an  explosion.  The  alleged  good  effects  of
the  water,  in  this  and  other  cases  among  the  neighbouring  peasantry,  started
the  long  series  of  cures  with  which  we  shall  presently  have  to  deal.

The  connection  between  these  cures  and  the  Virgin  Mary  lies  in  almost

564  APPENDICES  [578  A

all  cases  in  the  subjective  conviction  of  the  sufferer  that  he  will  be  cured  at
Lourdes,  and  that  the  Virgin's  aid  will  do  it.  Sometimes,  no  doubt,  his  con-
viction may  be  reinforced  by  a  dream,  as  when  Mustapha,  a  Mussulman  in
Constantinople,  dreamt  that  a  lady  in  white  told  him  that  she  was  the  Virgin
adored  by  the  Georgian  Fathers  in  that  city;  in  whose  chapel,  in  fact,  water
from  Lourdes  is  distributed  gratis.  Mustapha's  right  eye,  which  he  had  com-
pletemeni  perdu — "lost  altogether,"  was  radicalement  gu^rt — "completely
cured  "  (we  are  told)  when  he  awoke,  and  Dr.  Boissarie  concludes  (p.  237)  that
"  Our  Lady  of  Lourdes  seems  to  have  commenced  the  religious  reformation  of
the  East.  ..."

We  have  not  in  analogous  cases  considered  that  subjective  evidence  of  this
kind,  even  when  backed  up  by  definite  assertions  of  identity  and  continuous
action  on  the  part  of  some  unseen  agent,  did  really  constitute  a  proof  that  that
agent  was  at  work.  We  have  regarded  it  as  still  possible,  and  even  probable,
that  the  effects  were  produced  by  self-suggestion,  and  that  the  alleged  Spirit  or
Guardian  was  no  more  than  a  form  in  which  the  self-suggestion  clothed  itself.

An  excellent  account  of  the  religious  history  and  experiences  of
Bernadette — written  from  the  point  of  view  of  a  devout  Catholic — is
J.  B.  Estrade's  Les  Apparitions  de  Lourdes  :  Souvenirs  intimes  d'un  Temoin
(Tours,  1899).  M.  Estrade  was  a  resident  of  Lourdes;  he  several  times
witnessed  the  ecstasies  of  Bernadette,  and  personally  investigated  the
whole  case  with  great  care.  He  does  not,  however,  bring  forward  any
evidence  to  show  that  the  apparitions  were  veridical,  and  the  account  of
the  burning  taper  which  he  gives  as  quoted  from  Dr.  Dozous  is  less
remarkable  than  Dr.  Boissarie's  narrative  of  the  same  incident.  Berna-
dette, he  says  (p.  151),  was  holding  her  rosary  in  her  left  hand,  and  in
the  right  a  large  lighted  taper.  "  Suddenly  the  right  hand,  approaching
the  left,  placed  the  flame  of  the  large  taper  under  the  fingers  of  the  latter,
which  were  so  far  apart  that  the  flame  could  easily  pass  between  them.
Blown  about  at  the  moment  by  a  rather  strong  current  of  air,  it  did  not
appear  to  produce  any  effect  on  the  skin  that  it  touched."  This  went  on
for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  and  on  examining  the  hand  before  Bernadette
left  the  place,  Dr.  Dozous  found  no  trace  of  burning  on  it.  M.  Estrade
states  that  on  another  occasion  his  own  sister  saw  the  fingers  of  Berna-
dette resting  on  the  flame  of  a  taper.

603  AJ

APPENDICES

TO

CHAPTER   VI

603  A.  Since  Mr.  Gallon's  well-known  work  we  have  become  familiar
with  "  number-forms  "  and  other  visual  schemata  of  thought,  which  tend
to  shape  themselves  in  many  minds.  These  number-forms  involve  a  com-
plex internal  visualisation,  the  mind's  eye  following  their  apparently  fixed
lines  and  angles ;  but  they  are  also  sometimes  externalised  by  the  subject.
Professor  Flournoy  thus  describes  the  case  of  M.  Yowanovitch,  an  intel-
ligent student  at  Geneva.1

M.  Y.  is  an  excellent  visual,  of  the  geometrical  rather  than  the  pictur-
esque type.  He  has  no  trace  of  coloured  audition ;  but  on  the  other  hand
possesses  well-defined  and  localised  visual  schemata  for  the  numerals,  the  days
of  the  week,  the  months,  &c.  His  number-form,  composed  of  parallel  lines
representing  the  hundreds,  occupies  the  right  half  of  the  space  in  front  of  him.
In  the  left  half  floats  his  diagram  of  the  week  in  the  form  of  a  horizontal
rectangular  figure  divided  into  seven  bands,  something  like  a  leaf  of  ruled
paper,  floating  in  the  air  about  a  metre  from  him,  opposite  his  left  thigh.  Still
more  to  the  left,  and  at  the  height  of  his  head,  is  situated  his  year-form,  an
ellipse  of  small  eccentricity  presented  in  a  nearly  vertical  plane.  Whenever
M.  V.  thinks  of  a  date  of  the  year,  of  a  day  past  or  future  of  the  current  week,
or  of  a  number,  he  perceives  it  in  its  proper  place  on  the  corresponding  schema.
I  have  often  had  occasion  to  make  him  write  down  rapidly  a  series  of  figures  at
random ;  now  these  figures  do  not  flow  of  themselves  from  his  pen ;  nor  are
they  preceded  in  him  by  their  auditory,  motor,  or  graphic  image ;  but  he  is
obliged,  in  order  to  write  them,  to  choose  them  on  his  number-form  as  on  a
picture  placed  in  front  of  him.  For  this  purpose,  he  does  not  look  straight  at
the  page  over  which  his  pen  is  travelling,  but  looks  to  the  side  and  above  the
paper  in  the  direction  of  the  internal  diagram,  which  is  the  central  object  of  his
attention.  He  follows  what  he  is  writing  only  with  an  indirect  vision,  like  a
hurried  copyist  who  lets  his  hand  work  of  itself  and  will  not  lose  sight  of  the
page  which  he  has  to  copy.

It  will  be  observed  that  this  case  presents  a  curious  analogy  with  the
"  arithmetical  prodigies  "  on  whom  I  dwelt  in  Chapter  III.  With  some
of  them  there  was  a  kind  of  mental  blackboard  on  which  the  figures  which

1  Archives  dts  Sciences  Physiques  et  Natttrellts,  vol.  xxviii.,  No.  10,  October  I5th,
1892,  pp.  326-27.  Geneva.

565

566  APPENDICES  [603  B

were  to  be  added  up  remained  visible  as  long  as  needed.  But  in  their
case  the  subliminal  self  supplied  also  the  calculating  facility ;  in  M.  Y.'s
case  it  seems  only  to  have  stereotyped  the  visual  framework  for  common
mental  operations.

We  take  one  step  further  in  the  direction  both  of  the  definite  character
and  of  the  potential  externalisation  of  these  subliminal  quasi- percepts
when  we  pass — by  gradual  transitions — from  number- forms  to  audition
colorfa.  A  number-form  is  an  association  of  an  image  with  an  idea — pre-
sumably as  entirely  a  result  of  post-natal  experience  as  is  my  association
of  my  friend's  face  with  his  name.  And  so  also  indeed  audition  coloree, —
the  perception  of  a  definite  "  imaginary  "  or  "  subjective  "  colour  in  asso-
ciation with  each  definite  actual  sound, — may  in  some  slighter  cases  be
due  to  post-natal  (mainly  infantile)  experience  working  upon  an  innate
predisposition.  But  when  the  synaesthesiae  of  which  sound-seeing  is  only
the  most  conspicuous  example  are  found  in  fuller  development ; — when
gradated,  peremptory,  inexplicable  associations  connect  sensations  of
light  and  colour  with  sensations  of  temperature,  smell,  taste,  muscular
resistance,  &c.,  &c.  ; — for  M.  Gruber  finds  that  these  links  exist  in  yet
unexplored  variety ; — then  it  becomes  probable  that  we  are  dealing,  not
with  the  casual  associations  of  childish  experience,  but  with  some  reflec-
tion or  irradiation  of  specialised  sensations  which  must  depend  on  the
connate  structure  of  the  brain  itself.1  And  the  degree  of  precision  shown
in  these  entencephalic  reflexes, — if  I  may  so  term  them, — seems  to  exceed
the  precision  attainable  by  the  voluntary  attention  of  the  supraliminal
self.

603  B.  A  striking  case,  combining  both  the  subliminal  intelligence
and  the  visual  externalisation,  was  described  by  Professor  Gruber,
of  the  University  of  Jassy,  Roumania,  at  the  International  Congress  of
Experimental  Psychology  in  London,  August  1892.  In  one  self-observer
of  exceptional  endowment,  M.  Gruber  finds  that  the  "  chromatisms,"  as  he
calls  them, — the  patches  of  colour  accompanying  the  audition  of  particular
words, — follow  certain  definite  rules  as  to  size  and  shape,  depending  partly
on  the  phonetic,  and  partly  on  the  intellectual,  significance  of  the  word
which  the  subject  heard.2  This  curious  fact  would  obviously  have  re-
mained unprovable  had  there  been  no  possibility  of  objective  measure-
ment. But  this  possibility  fortunately  exists.

1  This  view  is  consistent  with  the  results  of  an  Enquete  sur  ['audition  colorle  con-
ducted by  Professor  Flournoy,  from  which  it  appears  that  of  213  persons  presenting
these  associations  only  48  could  assign  the  date  of  their  origin  ;  and  is  supported  by  a  case
described  in  the  Revue  de  F Hypnoiisme,  December  1892,  p.  185,  where  a  man  who  had
long  exhibited  a  limited  form  of  audition  coloree  developed  gustation  colorts  in  addition
when  in  a  low  state  of  health.

3  For  a  full  description  of  this  case,  see  the  "  Report  of  the  International  Congress
of  Experimental  Psychology,  Second  Session,  London,  1892,"  pp.  10-20  (Williams  &
Norgate,  London,  1892).

607A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  567

"  My  subject,"  says  M.  Gruber,  "has  the  power  of  externalising  his  chroma-
tisms;  he  projects  them,  for  instance,  upon  the  opposite  wall,  at  no  matter
what  distance.  I  chose  a  distance  of  three  metres,  which  is  that  at  which
his  vision  is  most  distinct.  I  then  made  a  circle  of  white  paper  which  I  sup-
posed to  be  of  the  same  size  as  his  chromatism  of  the  number  dol  (two),  and
bordered  it  with  bright  scarlet.  He  projected  his  chromatism  into  this  circle.
But  the  circle  was,  in  fact,  smaller  than  his  chromatic  circle,  and  a  ring  of
orange  was  made  by  the  superposition  of  the  subjective  yellow  of  his  chro-
matism upon  the  objective  scarlet.  I  enlarged  the  circle.  This  time  he  saw  a
white  ring  between  the  objective  frame  of  scarlet  and  the  subjective  yellow.  At
last  we  got  the  edges  of  the  chromatism  to  touch  precisely  the  edges  of  the
white  circle.  We  had  found  the  exact  size  of  the  chromatism  and  could  now
measure  it  to  a  millimetre."

The  foregoing  passage  will  show  how  clearly  defined  these  enten-
cephalic  percepts  may  be.  It  is  sometimes  possible  also  to  show  that
they  represent  (as  I  should  expect  them  to  represent)  a  memory  more
complete  and  a  perception  more  exact  than  the  supraliminal  self  can
command.  Thus,  Mr.  Gallon  had  already  mentioned  a  case  where  a
lady  used  her  chromatisms  to  correct  her  spelling — the  chromatism
showing,  say,  whether  or  not  there  were  two  e's  in  agreeable,  and  cor-
recting her  supraliminal  picture  of  the  word  by  the  symbolic  coloured
equivalent  of  each  successive  letter  which  thus  rose  from  a  memory  deeper
in  her  being.  In  the  discussion  following  Professor  Gruber's  report  at
the  Congress,  Mr.  Gallon  mentioned  Lepsius  the  Orientalist  as  having
been  similarly  guided  in  philological  investigation.  And  one  of  M.  Gruber's
subjects,  a  professional  singer,  when  taught  to  analyse  his  own  chromatisms,
found  that  they  corrected  his  ear  in  singing ;  so  that  if  he  sang  a  false
note  without  detecting  it  by  ear  the  accompanying  patch  of  colour  showed
him  his  mistake.1

In  the  American  Journal  of  Psychology  for  April  1900  (vol.  xi.  pp.
377-404),  Mr.  G.  M.  Whipple  gives  a  report  of  detailed  observations  of
his  own  on  two  cases  of  synaesthesiae,  and  remarks  that  investigators  must
be  prepared  not  only  for  a  considerable  degree  of  variation  between
different  individuals,  but  also  for  variation  within  the  same  individual.
One  of  his  subjects  showed  marked  taste  photisms,  together  with  the  still
more  unusual  feature  of  phonisms  to  pain,  pressure,  and  temperature.

607  A.  The  distinction  between  after-images  and  memory-images,
although  sometimes  neglected  by  careless  writers,  is  a  marked  one ;  sincr
after-images,  properly  so  called,  are  a  form  of  entoptic  vision,  due  to  the
actual  condition  of  the  retina  at  the  moment ;  while  memory-images  are  a

1  This  curious  case  may  be  compared  with  that  of  Pedrono,  cited  by  Dr.  Krohn  in
his  useful  historical  sketch  of"  Pseudo-Chromesthesia,"  American  Journal  of  Psy.
vol.  v.,  part  i.,  p.  25:  "These  colour  impressions  he  describes  as  sudden  and  spon-
taneous. The  sounds  are  translated  into  colour  before  he  can  stop  to  think  whether  the
li  high  or  low."  In  other  experiments  it  has  been  found  that  the  colour  was  seen
before  the  meaning  of  the  word  which  determined  the  colour  was  consciously  observed.

568  APPENDICES  [607  A

form  of  that  "  mind's-eye  "  vision  (central,  cerebral,  internal,  subjective)
which  lacks  as  yet  a  recognised  scientific  name.  Nevertheless,  a  transi-
tional phenomenon  is  found  in  illusions  hypnagogiques,  the  vivid  pictures
which  with  many  persons  rise  before  the  "  inward  eye  "  at  the  moment  of
falling  asleep,  or  even  in  waking  hours.  These  may  closely  resemble
postponed  after-images ;  or  again,  they  may  assume  the  more  generalised
character  of  memory-images ;  or  (and  this  perhaps  is  the  commonest  case)
they  may  show  combinations  as  novel  and  fantastic  as  any  which  deliberate
imagination  could  summon  up.  A  good  example  of  this  transition  from
after-images  to  memory-images  is  afforded  by  the  following  careful  account,
which  I  owe  to  the  kindness  of  Dr.  Th.  Flournoy,  Professor  of  Philo-
sophy in  the  University  of  Geneva,  and  now  quote  from  an  article  of  my
own  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  453  : —

August  1892.

Although  not  habitually  subject  to  hypnagogic  hallucinations,  I  have  ex-
perienced some  ten  or  twelve,  of  the  visual  type,  and  concerned  with  objects
which  had  engaged  my  prolonged  attention  during  the  day.

In  1875,  after  my  first  day  of  anatomical  dissection,  I  had  the  hallucination
of  an  aponeurosis,  spread  out  widely.  In  1879,  after  a  long  afternoon  spent  at
chess,  the  vision  of  a  chessboard  came  to  me  before  I  went  to  sleep.  Several
times  in  1878,  after  a  day  of  microscopical  work,  the  image  of  a  preparation
came  before  me  as  a  hypnagogic  hallucination.  These  three  cases  struck  me
forcibly,  because  at  that  date  I  had  never  heard  any  mention  of  such  pheno-
mena. Since  then  I  have  had  a  few  more  experiences,  under  the  following
conditions : —

(i)  When  after  a  long  interval  I  occupy  myself  earnestly  with  some  given
subject  I  see  that  evening  a  corresponding  hypnagogic  hallucination ; — as  of
chessboard,  geometrical  figures,  microscopical  preparation  ; — which  does  not
repeat  itself  if  I  continue  to  attend  to  the  same  matter  on  subsequent  days.
(2)  But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  sometimes  see  in  the  daytime,  two  or  three  days
later,  a  very  distinct  image  of  the  object  in  question.  This  image  does  not
amount  to  a  hallucination  ;  it  is  not  externalised,  nor  is  it  as  vivid  as  a  percep-
tion ; — but,  as  I  am  a  very  bad  visualiser,  this  vivid  and  precise  image  is  broadly
distinguished  from  my  habitual  images,  which  are  weak,  fragmentary,  and  in-
distinct. (3)  Neither  the  hypnagogic  image  nor  the  diurnal  image  are  exact
reproductions  of  the  given  object  at  a  given  moment.  They  are  typical  images
of  aponeurosis  or  chessboard — not  reproductions  of  some  specific  aspect  which
has  strongly  impressed  me.  Yet  they  are  concrete  and  precise.

I  regard  these  hypnagogic  images,  and  all  memory-images,  however  recent
and  intense,  as  radically  different  from  the  "  after-images  "  of  the  eye.  These
last  have  a  quality  sui  generis,  a  "  sensational  co-efficient "  which  makes  them
seem  to  me  to  exist  outside  me,  if  I  see  them  with  open  eyes;  or  to  belong  to
my  eye,  as  though  stuck  inside  rny  eyelid,  if  I  see  them  with  eyes  closed.  All
other  images  seem  to  me  to  be  seen  with  the  mind's  eye.  I  class  after-images
with  external  perceptions :  all  other  images,  whether  as  vivid  as  my  hypnagogic
hallucinations  or  as  faint  as  the  ordinary  visual  furniture  of  my  mind,  I  place  in
a  quite  different  category.

In  this  case  two  points  come  clearly  out — namely,  (i)  the  resurgence

610A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  569

of  a  decadent  image  with  something  like  its  original  brilliancy;  (2)  the
process  of  generalisation  which  this  image  has  subliminally  undergone.
There  are  other  well-known  instances  of  the  same  kind  :  Newton  and
the  spectrum ;  Baillarger  and  the  gauze  which  he  had  been  using  in
anatomical  preparations;  Pouchet  and  the  microscopical  objects.1  In
all  these  cases  the  resurgent  images  appear  to  have  been  of  a  generalised
type, — but  generalised,  so  to  say,  diagrammatically,  not  blurred  or  un-
certain, but  as  one  would  prepare  them  for  a  demonstration.2  For  this
reason  it  is  certainly  better  not  to  class  them  as  "  after-images,"  reserving
that  term  for  cases  of  purely  physiological  reproductions  of  external
images.  And  in  fact  we  find  that  these  hallucinations  hypnagogiques
depart  further  and  further  from  mere  reproductions  of  objects  seen.  They
assume  all  kinds  of  grotesque  forms,  and  show  remarkable  inventiveness
in  producing  hundreds  of  faces  which  the  percipient  has  never  seen  before.
610  A.  The  following  remarks  by  Mrs.  Verrall  (which  I  quote  from
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  480)  are  of  interest  on  the  whole  question
of  the  externalisation  of  images,  and  also  as  to  the  transformation  into
visual  terms  of  a  tactile  impression  subliminally  received  : —

Since  recording  my  experiments  in  crystal-vision  I  have  been  trying  some
further  experiments  of  a  different  kind,  with  a  view  to  testing  my  power  of
visualisation.

1  find  that  I  am  able  to  call  up  a  voluntary  picture  of  an  object  or  a  scene
with  extreme  distinctness;  indeed,  in  the  case  of  a  simple  object,  the  visual
image,  as  far  as  I  can  discover,  differs  from  the  actual  object  only  in  having  no
solidity — that  is,  it  casts  no  shadow  and  appears  to  be  all  on  the  same  plane.
The  form  is  as  well  defined  and  the  colour  appears  as  vivid  in  the  visualisation
as  in  the  real  thing.     I  have  endeavoured  to  ascertain  whether  form  and  colour
are  equally  well  reproduced  in  the  visualisation,  and  as  far  as  my  own  impres-
sion goes  there  is  no  difference  ;  I  never  think  of  a  coloured  object  without  its
colour,  but  I  have  not  been  able  to  produce  complementary  after-images  from
gazing  at  an  imaginary  colour.     I  may  say  that  it  is  only  after  a  prolonged
gazing  at  a  real  colour  that  I  can  see  the  complementary  after-image,  and  the
colour  of  the  after-image  is  never  anything  but  very  faint.

My  visualisations  usually,  as  I  have  said,  have  no  solidity,  but  I  am  able  at
any  time  to  invest  them  with  solidity  by  imagining  that  I  see  the  real  thing  and
not  a  memory  or  imagination  picture.  In  that  case  they  cast  shadows,  and  I
am  able  to  realise  distance.  I  have  much  more  control  over  them  when  once
they  are  there  than  I  have  over  crystal-visions.

e  W.  James's  Principles  of  Psychology,  vol.  ii.  p.  66,  &c. ;  Binct's  La  Psyiko-
logic  du  Raisonnementi  p.  48,  &c.

2  It  is  probable  that  something  of  the  same  kind  takes  place  in  hypnotic  hallucina-
tions, where,  say,  a  dog  seen  by  suggestion  is  not  necessarily  any  special  remembered
dog.    On  the  other  hand,  if  the  order  is  to  see  some  special  object,  it  will  be  seen  more
accurately  than  it  is  remembered ; — as  is  curiously  illustrated  by  the  frequent  dissatisfac-
tion of  a  female  subject  when  told  to  see  her  own  portrait  on  a  blank  card.   The  idealised
memory-picture,  which  modifies  even  her  perception  of  her  own  image  in  the  looking-
glass,  is  ruthlessly  displaced  by  the  subliminal  fidelity  to  truth.     "  J'ai  bien  des  taches
de  rousseur,"  said  a  subject  of  Binet's,  "  raais  je  n'en  ai  pas  tant  que  93."

570  APPENDICES  [612  A

At  one  time,  some  three  years  ago,  I  tried  a  longish  series  of  experi-
ments with  cards  with  a  view  to  seeing  whether  I  could  educate  my  sense
of  touch  sufficiently  to  distinguish  the  cards  after  passing  my  thumbs  once
swiftly  over  the  face  of  each  card.1  I  had  some  success,  but  the  reason  I  record
the  experiment  here  is  this:  At  first,  while  my  attention  was  consciously
directed  to  my  fingers,  I  was  aware  that  I  could  detect  differences  in  smooth-
ness of  surface,  which  I  learnt  gradually  to  interpret;  but  after  a  couple  of
hundred  trials,  when  I  grew  more  expert  and  more  familiar  with  the  experi-
ment, I  lost  all  consciousness  of  the  means  which  enabled  me  to  guess,  and
"  saw  "  pictures  of  the  cards  which  "  determined  "  the  particular  guess.  This
experiment  seems  to  show  that  conclusions  arrived  at  by  other  means  are  pre-
sented to  my  mind  in  the  form  of  visual  images,  and  suggests  that  sudden
visual  impressions,  spontaneous  as  well  as  induced,  may  in  my  case  be  pro-
jected visually  after  they  have  been  produced  in  some  other  way.

612  A,— SUMMARY  OF  THE   REPORT   ON  THE    CENSUS
OF  HALLUCINATIONS

The  "Census  of  Hallucinations"  was  undertaken  in  1889  by  a  Committee
of  the  S.P.R.,  under  the  direction  of  Professor  Sidgwick,  and  consisting  of
himself  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  Dr.  A.  T.  Myers,  Mr.  F.  Podmore,  Miss  A.
Johnson,  and  the  present  writer,  and  the  full  report  of  the  Committee  was  pub-
lished in  1894  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  pp.  25-422).  The  object  of  the
inquiry  was —

(1)  To  ascertain  approximately  what  proportion  of  persons  have  experi-
enced sensory  hallucinations :

(2)  To  obtain  details  as  to  such  experiences  with  a  view  to  examining  into
their  cause  and  meaning.

It  was  especially  intended  to  test  whether  the  number  of  "veridical"
hallucinations  (i.e.  hallucinations  representing  some  external  fact)  was,  or  was
not,  sufficiently  numerous  in  proportion  to  the  whole  to  preclude  us  from
regarding  as  merely  accidental  the  coincidence  of  fact  and  phantasm.

The  inquiry  was  conducted  by  the  assistance  of  "collectors"  (410  in
number).  Each  of  these  was  instructed  to  address  the  following  question  to
twenty-five  adults,  to  be  chosen  without  reference  to  the  probability  of  an
affirmative  answer : —

"  Have  you  ever,  when  believing  yourself  to  be  completely  awake,  had  a
vivid  impression  of  seeing,  or  being  touched  by  a  living  being  or  inanimate
object,  or  of  hearing  a  voice ;  which  impression,  so  far  as  you  could  discover,
was  not  due  to  any  external  physical  cause  ? "

The  answer  "  No  "  and  the  answer  "  Yes  "  were  to  be  recorded  with  equal
scrupulousness ;  but  in  the  case  of  an  affirmative  answer,  a  first-hand  written
account  of  the  details  was,  if  possible,  to  be  obtained.  The  scope  of  the  inquiry
was  designed  to  exclude  the  hallucinations  of  sleep,  delirium,  and  insanity.

A  similar  method  of  inquiry  had  been  employed  by  Gurney  (v.  Phan-
tasms of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  chap,  xiii.),  but  on  a  scale  perhaps  hardly  large
enough  to  enable  valid  inferences  as  to  the  proportion  of  veridical  and  non-
veridical  cases  to  be  drawn  from  the  number  of  persons  questioned  (5705).

1  These  experiments  were  afterwards  described  in  full  in  a  paper  by  Mrs.  Verrall  in
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  174-197.

612A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  571

In  the  present  inquiry,  conducted  during  the  three  years  1889-92,  17,000
persons  were  questioned.  After  deducting  such  affirmative  answers  as  were
found  to  refer  to  experiences  outside  the  scope  of  the  inquiry  (*.§'.,  dreams,
impressions  of  inarticulate  sounds,  hallucinations  occurring  during  any  illness
of  a  kind  that  is  known  to  produce  delirium)  there  remained  1684  affirmative
answers  (Report,  p.  39),  that  is  to  say,  99  per  cent,  of  the  whole.

The  question  arises,  How  far  does  this  result  represent  the  true  state  of
things?  Is  it  to  any  considerable  extent  vitiated  by  possibilities  of  error  and
deception  ?

Intentional  deception  is  not  likely  to  have  had  any  appreciable  influence.
The  method  of  inquiry — the  questioning  by  the  collector  of  his  acquaintances  —
and  the  absence  of  any  motive  for  deception,  practically  entitle  us  to  leave  it
out  of  account.

A  certain  number  of  persons  refused  to  answer  the  Census  question.  But
the  proportion  of  refusals  reported  was  in  general  small;  and  a  consideration
of  the  reasons  reported  for  refusing  led  to  the  conclusion  that  refusals  probably
only  reduced  to  a  small  extent  the  proportion  of  affirmative  answers.

An  obvious  danger  was  that  of  selection  by  the  collectors  of  persons  to  be
questioned  according  to  what  they  were  likely  to  say.  The  instructions  to  collec-
tors (Report,  Appendix  A,  p.  403),  and  the  number  of  answers  (25)  to  be  obtained
by  each,  were  designed  to  obviate  this  error.  In  order,  moreover,  to  check  the
results  on  this  point,  collectors  were  asked  to  mark  in  their  lists  the  names  of
those  persons  whose  answers  were  previously  known.  This  check,  unfortu-
nately, was  not  fully  operative,  through  the  neglect  of  some  collectors  to  carry-
it  out.  A  further  more  efficient  check  was  a  comparison  between  the  whole
collection  and —

(a)  Answers  obtained  from  complete  unselected  groups  of  persons,  e.  g.
households  or  chance  gatherings.

(b)  Answers  collected  by  the   Committee   and  vouched   for  by  them  as
unselected.

(c)  Answers  collected  by  persons  trained  in  medicine  or  psycholoL.

These  three  sets  of  answers  are  given  in  a  table  on  p.  49  of  the  Report,  and
in  this  table  the  percentage  of  affirmative  answers  is  above  the  average.  It
may  then  be  inferred  that  the  percentage  of  affirmative  answers  in  the  whole
collection  has  not  been  increased  by  selection.

A  more  important  source  of  error  has  next  to  be  considered,  namely,  for-
getfulness  ;  either  a  temporary  and  superficial  forgetful  ness,  which  may  lead
people  to  answer  "No"  when  further  care  and  thought  would  have  produced
the  answer  *•  Yes  "  ;  or  the  real  oblivion  which  in  course  of  time  may  banish
many  experiences  beyond  the  power  of  recall.  In  order  to  judge  of  the  effect
of  this,  the  number  of  visual  hallucinations  reported  were  tabulated  according
to  the  time  that  had  elapsed  in  each  case  between  their  occurrence  and  the
date  when  the  percipient  answered  the  Census  question.  It  was  found  that
the  number  was  comparatively  large  for  the  most  recent  year,  and  decreased
rapidly  as  the  years  became  more  remote — at  eight,  nine,  and  ten  years  ago
becoming  less  than  half  what  it  was  at  first  (Report,  table  iv.,  pp.  43  and  66).
The  conclusion  (based  on  this  table  and  on  other  considerations  given  fully  on
pp.  63-65  of  the  Report)  was  arrived  at  that,  roughly  speaking,  the  number  of
visual  hallucinations  reported  must  be  multiplied  by  four  to  give  the  true
number  experienced  over  the  age  of  ten.  At  the  same  time,  the  numbers
reported  are  valuable  as  a  record  of  the  number  of  hallucinations  remembered,

572  APPENDICES  [612  A

and   afford   means  of  comparing  the  number  and   impressiveness  of  different
kinds  of  hallucinations.

Chapters  IV.  to  XI.  of  the  Report  contain  discussions  of—

IV.  The  phenomena  of  hallucinations  in  general,  different  degrees  of

externalisation  of  hallucinations,  and  their  relation  to  sensory
impressions  which  are  not  fully  externalised,  and  to  the  power  of
visualisation.

V.  The  relation  of  illusions  to  hallucinations,  and  the  part  played  by

points  de  repere  in  the  latter.
VI.  The  form  and  development  of  hallucinations.

VII.  Their  physiology;  the  physiological  action  involved  in  most  halluci-
nations is  probably  exclusively  cerebral.

VIII.  Age,  sex,  heredity,  nationality,  and  health  considered  in  relation  to
hallucinations.  Number  of  persons  who  have  had  more  than  one
hallucination,  and  cases  in  which  the  same  form  of  hallucination
is  repeated  several  times.

IX.  Mental  and  nervous  conditions;  effects  of  emotion  and  anxiety.
X.  Expectancy  and  suggestion  ;  the  operation  of  suggestion  in  the  pro-
duction and  development  of  hallucinations.

XI.  Organic  effects  sometimes  accompanying   hallucinations,  and  the
operation  of  suggestion  in  producing  these.

These  chapters  are  profusely  illustrated  with  examples  of  all  kinds.

For  our  present  purpose  the  main  question  relates  to  the  reported  propor-
tion of  veridical  hallucinations,  and  especially  of  "  death-coincidences,"  that  is
to  say,  cases  in  which  a  recognised  apparition  occurred  within  twelve  hoars
of  the  death  of  the  person  represented  by  it,  the  death  being  unknown  to  the
percipient  at  the  time  (Report,  Chapters  XII.  and  XIII.).

Excluding  cases  occurring  to  percipients  who  have  had  other  hallucinations,
the  exact  number  of  which  was  not  reported,  and  experiences  of  children  under
ten,  we  find  65  death-coincidences  (Report,  p. 209)  reported  at  first-hand  out  of  the
total  of  350  recognised  apparitions  of  living  persons  (ibid.,  p.  246).  Since  death-
coincidences  are  better  remembered  and  more  spoken  of  than  the  generality  of
hallucinations,  a  disproportionate  number  may  be  expected  to  have  been  known
by  the  collectors,  and,  in  fact,  25  per  cent,  of  death-coincidences,  as  against
8  per  cent,  of  all  other  recognised  apparitions  of  living  persons,  are  stated  to
have  been  so  known.  Some  allowance  must  therefore  be  made  in  this  class  of
cases  for  the  possibility  of  error  arising  from  selection.

Of  the  65  cases,  3  were  known  to  have  been  selected,  and  therefore  left  out
of  account  in  the  calculation.  Of  the  remaining  62,  16  were  known  before-
hand to  the  collector ;  26  were  not  known  ;  and  for  the  remaining  20  there  was
no  evidence  either  way.  On  the  supposition  that  the  influence  of  previous  know-
ledge and  selection  was  the  same  proportionately  in  those  cases  as  in  the
cases  where  its  operation  was  ascertainable  (v.  Report,  p.  243,  footnote  3  for
detailed  calculation),  a  deduction  of  8  was  made  to  cover  the  possible  dispro-
portion due  to  selection.  A  further  special  allowance  was  made  for  the  possi-
bility of  exaggeration,  since  in  comparing  death-coincidences  with  hallucinations
in  general,  it  was  found  that  the  remoter  cases  of  death-coincidences  were
unduly  numerous  in  proportion  to  the  recent  ones,  which  suggested  that  some
of  the  remote  cases  reported  were  not  really  coincidental.  On  this  ground,  22
cases  were  deducted,  leaving  32  death-coincidences  (Report ',  pp.  242-43).

612A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  573

On  the  other  hand,  to  obtain  a  fair  estimate  of  the  totai  number  of  recog-
nised apparitions  of  living  persons  which  had  actually  occurred,  in  order  to
compare  these  with  the  number  of  death-coincidences,  the  number  of  the
former  reported  was  raised,  by  making  the  correction  for  forgetfulness,  to  1300
(v.  Report,  pp.  63-5,  and  p.  247  for  details  of  the  calculations).  The  final
result  was  thus  about  30  death-coincidences  out  of  1300  cases,  or  a  proportion
of  about  i  in  43.

Since  the  average  annual  death-rate  in  England  and  Wales  is  19.15  per  1000,
(according  to  the  Registrar-General's  Report  for  1890),  the  probability  that
anyone  person  taken  at  random  will  die  on  a  given  day  is  19.15  in  365,000,
or  about  i  in  19,000.  This  may  be  taken  as  the  general  probability  that  he
will  die  on  the  day  on  which  his  apparition  is  seen  and  recognised,  supposing
that  there  is  no  causal  connection  between  the  apparition  and  the  death.  In
other  words,  out  of  every  19,000  apparitions  of  living  persons  there  should  be
by  chance  one  death-coincidence.

But  the  actual  proportion  found,  viz.,  i  in  43,  is  equal  to  about  440  in  19,000,
or  440  times  the  most  probable  number.  Or,  looking  at  the  matter  another
way,  we  should  require  30  X  19,000,  or  570,000  apparitions  to  produce  by
chance  30  cases  of  death-coincidences.  Of  these  apparitions,  we  may  assume
that  about  one-quarter,  or  142,500,  would  be  remembered.  We  should  there-
fore expect  to  have  to  collect  142,500  cases,  instead  of  350,  in  order  to  obtain
by  chance  30  death-coincidences.

This  is  the  case  if  we  take,  as  we  have  done,  death-coincidences  to  mean
an  apparition  occurring  within  twelve  hours  of  the  death  of  the  person  seen.
But  the  great  majority  of  the  coincidences  are  believed  by  the  percipients  to
be  closer  than  this,  and  the  improbability  of  the  apparition  occurring  by  chance
within  an  hour  of  the  death  is  of  course  twelve  times  as  great  as  that  of  its
occurring  within  twelve  hours  of  it.

This  statistical  result  is  of  course  worthless,  unless  the  coincidences  them-
selves are  well  authenticated.  It  is  impossible  to  summarise  the  evidence  for
them,  which  would  no  doubt  be  estimated  differently  by  different  persons ;  but
a  large  number  of  the  best-evidenced  cases  are  printed  in  the  Report,  and
supposing  that  only  a  few  of  these  are  correctly  reported,  the  proportion
remains  far  too  large  to  be  attributed  to  chance.

The  explanation  of  chance  coincidence  being  thus  put  out  of  court,  the
opponent  of  a  telepathic  or  other  supernormal  explanation  must  maintain  one
of  three  other  hypotheses,  (i)  He  may  assert  that  the  coincidences  have
been  exaggerated  to  a  much  greater  extent  than  the  Committee  allowed  for ;
which  argument  can  only  be  met  by  reference  to  the  evidence— given  fully  in
the  Report— for  the  various  cases.  (2)  He  may  suppose  that  they  were  specially
sought  after  by  the  collectors  and  illegitimately  introduced  into  the  collection
to  a  much  larger  extent  in  proportion  to  non-coincidental  cases  than  was
allowed  for.  Our  reply  would  be  that  in  twenty-six  of  the  total  num-
ber of  death-coincidences,  the  collectors  reported  that  they  did  not  know
of  the  case  beforehand,  and  therefore  could  not  have  selected  it  to  include.
Sixteen  of  these  cases  are  printed  in  the  Report,  so  that  the  evidence  for  them
can  be  studied.  (3)  Admitting  that  death-coincidences  really  exist,  and  are  too
frequent  to  be  attributed  to  chance,  it  may  be  argued  that  the  causal  connection
between  hallucination  and  death  is  not  telepathic,  but  consists  in  a  condition
favourable  to  hallucination  being  produced  in  the  percipient  in  some  normal
way  by  the  circumstances  of  the  case  ;  for  instance,  by  anxiety  about  the  dying

574  APPENDICES  [620  A

person.  There  is  some  evidence  in  the  Report  that  mental  tension,  anxiety,  or
other  emotional  causes  are  to  some  extent  favourable  to  hallucinations,  and  if
a  hallucination  occurs,  its  form  is  likely  to  be  determined  by  whatever  subject
the  percipient  is  thinking  of.  But  such  a  cause  could  only  produce  a  death-
coincidence  if  the  percipient  were  aware  of  the  dying  person's  condition,  and
in  many  of  the  cases  reported  (ten  of  which  are  printed  in  the  Report),  the
percipient  had  not  even  heard  of  the  dying  person's  illness.  It  was  therefore
impossible  that  anxiety  should  have  caused  the  hallucination  in  those  cases,
and  even  in  cases  where  some  degree  of  anxiety  existed,  the  closeness  of  the
coincidence  is  inadequately  accounted  for  by  it.

The  remainder  of  the  Report  treats  of  hallucinations  coinciding  with  other
events  than  deaths,  collective  hallucinations,  premonitions,  and  what  are  called
"local  apparitions" — that  is,  those  seen  repeatedly  in  certain  localities — and
phantasms  of  the  dead.

I  must  add  that  while  this  argument  from  statistics  and  percentages, —
capable  as  it  is  at  once  of  accurate  estimation  and  of  indefinite  extension, —
constitutes  technically  the  strongest  support  of  the  thesis  of  causal  connection
between  deaths  and  apparitions,  it  is  yet  by  no  means  the  only  support,  nor
even  the  most  practically  convincing.  Those  deaths  and  those  apparitions  are
not  mere  simple  momentary  facts, — as  though  we  were  dealing  with  two  clocks
which  struck  simultaneously.  Each  is  a  complex  occurrence,  and  the  corre-
spondence is  often  much  more  than  a  mere  coincidence  of  time  alone.  Some-
times, indeed,  the  alleged  coincidence  is  so  detailed  and  intimate  that,  if  the
evidence  for  a  single  case  is  fully  believed,  that  case  is  enough  to  carry
conviction.

The  man,  therefore, — he  is  common  enough — who  believes  in  one  single
case  where  he  happens  to  know  the  people  concerned,  and  yet  discredits  all
other  cases,  is  not  quite  so  absurd  as  he  seems;  he  does  but  exaggerate  a
mental  attitude  in  itself  easily  explicable.  One  strong  disintegrating  shock
has  broken  down  his  lifelong  presumptions  with  more  force  than  pages  of
unanswerable  but  dimly  realised  statistics.

And  I  admit  that  for  myself  the  actual  colloquy  with  trusted  persons  fresh
from  these  experiences  has  brought  home  their  reality  to  me  with  much  more
vividness  than  the  study  of  equally  good  cases  collected  by  my  colleagues.  I
mention  this  because  I  think  that  students  of  these  matters  should  spare  no  pains
to  get  at  cases  first-hand, — should  themselves  talk  with  percipients  ;  and  should
thus  realise  how  deep  and  lasting  a  mark  these  incidents  leave  behind  them.

620  A.  The  following  historical  re'sume'  is  derived  from  Mr.  Andrew  Lang's
The  Making  of  Religion  (Chapter  V.,  "  Crystal  Visions,  Savage  and  Civilised,"
p.  90),  and  Miss  A.  Goodrich-Freer's  "  Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal  Vision  "
(Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  486),  in  both  of  which  numerous  references  to
the  history  of  the  subject  and  the  facts  here  adduced  are  given.  The  crystal
was  only  one  of  many  objects  used  in  a  similar  way  as  a  means  of  obtaining
supernormal  knowledge  through  induced  hallucinations;  e.g.,  vessels  containing
liquid — usually  water — water  in  springs,  mirrors  of  polished  steel,  liquid  poured
into  the  palm  of  the  hand,  a  drop  of  blood,  or  ink,  and  various  objects  having  a
reflecting  surface,  such  as  the  beryl  or  other  gems,  the  blade  of  a  sword,  a  ball
of  polished  stone,  or  the  human  finger-nail.  Crystal-gazing  in  some  such  form
has  been  practised  for  at  least  3000  years  and  is  practically  of  world-wide  dis-
tribution, having  been  found  among  the  customs  of  Assyria,  Persia,  Egypt —
ancient  and  modern — Greece,  Rome,  China,  Japan  and  India,  North  American

623A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  575

Indians,  Africans  of  Fez,  Zulus,  Maoris.  It  was  also  practised  by  the  Incas,
and  is  still  by  Australian  savages  and  Polynesians,  the  Shamans  of  Siberia  and
Eastern  Russia,  and  in  Madagascar.  Usually  a  more  or  less  elaborate  ritual
formed  part  of  the  procedure,  and  in  all  ages  and  many  places  the  Seer — variously
called  Speculator,  Scryer,  Viewer,  or  Reader— was  usually  a  child  "  who  had  not
known  sin.''

Among  the  Greeks,  several  different  methods  were  used,  (i)  Hydromancy,
practised  chiefly  at  the  temple  of  Demeter  in  Patrae.  Before  the  temple  was  a
fountain,  into  -which  a  mirror  was  let  down  by  a  small  cord,  so  that  its  lower
edge  just  touched  the  water.  From  the  various  figures  and  images  seen  in  it,
predictions  were  made  as  to  the  progress  of  diseases  in  the  patients  who  came
to  consult  the  oracle.  (2)  Lecanomancy,  divination  by  a  bowl  containing  water,
or  oil  and  wine.  (3)  Catoptromancy,  in  which  mirrors  alone  were  used.  (4)
Gastromancy,  in  which  glass  vessels  filled  with  water  and  surrounded  by  torches
were  used.  A  demon  was  invoked  and  a  boy  appointed  to  observe  the  appear-
ance produced  by  the  demon's  action  on  the  water.  (5)  Onychomancy,  in  which
a  boy's  nails  covered  with  oil  and  soot  were  turned  to  the  sun,  the  reflection  of
whose  rays  produced  images  supposed  to  represent  certain  things.  (6)  Crystal-
lomancy,  where  polished  and  enchanted  crystals  were  used.

In  India  we  find  divination  by  mirrors  and  also  a  method  in  which  the  ashes
of  incense  moistened  with  castor-oil  are  poured  into  the  palm  of  the  child  seer.
The  Arabians  also  use  a  mirror  in  which  they  see  visions  after  long  fasting  and
prayers.

In  Polynesia,  Ellis  relates  that  when  any  one  has  been  robbed,  the  priest,
after  praying,  has  a  hole  dug  in  the  floor  of  the  house  and  filled  with  water.
Then  he  gazes  into  the  water,  over  which  the  god  is  supposed  to  place  the  spirit
of  the  thief.  The  image  of  the  thief  is  then  supposed  to  be  reflected  in  the
water  and  perceived  by  the  priest.

Among  the  Apaches  also,  one  of  the  chief  duties  of  the  medicine-men  was  to
find  out  the  whereabouts  of  lost  or  stolen  property,  and  for  this  purpose  crystal-
gazing  was  employed.

Other  Red  Indians  make  their  patients  gaze  into  the  water,  in  which  they
see  the  pictures  of  what  food  or  medicine  will  do  them  good.

The  art,  which  was  attributed  in  early  times  to  divine  power,  came  to  be  re-
garded in  the  Middle  Ages  by  the  Christian  Church  as  the  work  of  evil  spirits,
and  the  Specularii — as  they  were  then  called — were  looked  upon  as  heretics  and
treated  accordingly.  They  continued,  however,  to  flourish,  and  the  art  lingered
on  till  the  sixteenth  century,  when  it  received  a  new  impetus  and  reached  its
highest  development  in  the  hands  of  the  famous  Dr.  John  Dee  (1527-1608),
whose  "Shew-stone  "  is  now  to  be  seen  in  the  British  Museum.  His  seer — a
man  named  Kelly— professed  not  only  to  see  various  spirits  in  the  crystal,  but
also  to  hear  them  speak,  and  long  conversations  were  carried  on  with  them.
Other  sounds  were  also  said  to  be  heard  in  or  near  the  stone,  and  occasionally
apparitions  were  seen  in  its  neighbourhood.  Sometimes  writing  was  seen  in  it
instead  of  figures.  The  stone  was  generally  set  in  a  frame  of  gold  on  a  table,
and  its  use  was  prefaced  with  long  prayers.

The  practice  was  carried  on  both  in  England  and  on  the  Continent  of
Europe  through  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries,  and  lias,  in  fact,
never  become  extinct.

623  A.    The  following  account  of  optical  effects  observed  in  her  crystal

5;6  APPENDICES  [623  A

visions  is  given  by  Miss  Goodrich-Freer  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.   viii.
p.  485).

These  experiments  have  been  for  the  most  part  unsatisfactory,  as  it  is
almost  impossible  to  say  how  far  the  results  are  due  to  mere  expectation.  In
no  case  thus  far  have  I  obtained  an  optical  result  which  surprised  me,  nor  a
result  capable  of  such  exact  measurement  as  to  prove  that  it  was  either  optically
wrong,  or  more  exactly  right  than  my  general  knowledge  could  have  made  it.
I  mention  a  few  experiments.

1.  Distortion. — If  I  look  in  a  spoon  I  see  the  image  distorted  in  the  familiar
way.     But  I  cannot  say  whether  it  is  distorted  precisely  as  a  real  image  would
be.     For  in  the  first  place  the  picture  does  not  always  appear  to  be  on  the
surface  of  the  spoon  or  other  speculum.     For  instance,  in  a  globular  crystal,  or
semi-globular  ring-stone,  the  picture  appears  as  on  a  flat  surface.     In  the  second
place,  I  could  not,  at  any  rate  in  the  short  time  allowed,  draw  the  distorted
picture  accurately  enough  to  admit  of  subsequent  comparison  with  the  reflection
of  the  real  object  itself  in  the  spoon.

2.  Reflection. — If  I  see  a  picture  under  circumstances  which  suggest  that  it
is  a  reflection,  I  see  it  reversed  as  in  a  mirror.     Thus,  in  a  railway  carriage,  I
experimented  with  a   small  crystal  and   small   mirror,   both   hanging  at  my
chatelaine.     I  easily  reproduced  in  the  crystal  pictures  (not  real  reflections}  of
the  advertisements  on  the  carriage  walls,  and  just  as  Lane's  Egyptian  magician
told  him  that  the  crystal  "  made  left  appear  right,"  so  were  these  pictures
reversed,  and  the  print  appeared  as  Spiegel-schrift.     But  I  could  then  reflect
the  imaginary  picture  from  the  crystal  into  the  mirror,  and  there  the  letters,
"  Compton's  Hotel,"  appeared  set  right  again,  and  legible  in  the  ordinary  way.

On  the  other  hand,  I  once  suddenly  entered  a  drawing-room  where  there
was  a  large  mirror,  and  saw  a  name  for  which  I  had  been  hunting  in  vain
prnted  as  though  on  a  visiting-card  fastened  on  the  wall,  and  not  reversed,
in  the  middle  of  the  mirror,  which  thus  acted  as  a  speculum.  But  note
that  when  I  saw  the  word  I  had  for  the  instant  forgotten  that  there  was  a
mirror  there,  and  I  took  the  reflected  wall  in  the  mirror  for  a  real  wall.  So
that  the  picture  conformed  to  my  erroneous  conception,  and  not  to  any  true
optical  law.

3.  Magnification.— -\  have  used  the  magnifying-glass  eleven  times,  and  it
has  always  appeared  to  magnify.     In  one  case  already  recorded  {Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  513)  the  apparent  enlargement  of  the  picture  enabled  me  to  read
significant  letters,  without  which  the  picture  would  have  been  meaningless.    But
this,  of  course,  may  be  classed  as  merely  one  form  of  the  picture's  development ;
that  is  to  say,  the  letters  might  have  become  visible  without  the  magnifying-glass,
although  they  seemed  to  be  vanishing  and  to  be  only  just  caught.     I   have
three  times  used  a  bogus  glass  of  similar  size  and  appearance,  and  that  glass
did  not  magnify.     However,  I  have  never  felt  sure  that  I  did  not  in  some  way
distinguish  between  the  true  and  the  false  magnifier  even  in  the  act  of  carrying
them  to  my  picture.

4.  Double  Refraction— \  once  tried  a  flake  of  Iceland  spar,  an  object  which
I  had  never  before  handled.     I  knew,  however,  its  property  of  double  refrac-
tion,  so  that  the  duplication  of  the  picture  which  followed  may  have  been
due  to  expectation,   although  it  looked  to  me   rather   more   curious   than  I
consciously  anticipated.

5.  Colour  Contrast. — It  is  my  impression  that  there  is  retinal  fatigue,  and

623A]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  577

consequent  sequence  of  complementary  colours,  from  gazing  at  crystal  pictures
as  much  as  from  gazing  at  real  objects.  I  never  doubted  this  until  the  question
was  put  to  me,  although  I  now  find  it  difficult  to  prove  that  unconscious  expec-
tation may  not  account  for  this  also.

I  will  first  mention  spontaneous  and  then  experimental  instances.

I  received  one  day  a  visit  from  a  friend  in  a  rather  striking  blue  gown,
which,  some  hours  later,  the  crystal  reproduced.  This  picture  was  followed  by
another  of  the  lady's  little  boy,  whom  I  had  not  seen  lately,  dressed  in  a  bright
orange  garment,  which  I  feel  sure  he  does  not  possess.

Again,  one  afternoon  some  one  was  talking  about  Palissy  ware.  I  was  not
specially  addressed,  and  was  staring  aimlessly  at  a  dark  green,  almost  black
glass  scent-bottle.  I  observed  in  it  a  picture,  all  in  pale  green,  of  a  man  hastily
tearing  up  some  wooden  garden  palings;  and  before  I  had  time  to  wonder
what  this  meant,  it  was  followed  by  another  picture,  all  in  red,  of  the  corner  of
the  library  where  as  a  child  I  kept  my  books,  including  one  distinctly  recognis-
able, which  I  have  not  seen  these  fifteen  years,  called  The  Provocations  of  Mme.
Palissy.  Then  I  remembered  that  one  of  this  lady's  provocations  consisted  in
the  fact  that  her  husband  fed  his  furnace  with  the  household  furniture,  or  even
the  fixtures  of  the  house  itself.

These  are  the  only  spontaneous  colour-sequences  which  I  can  recall,  as  the
pictures  do  not  usually  show  any  one  predominating  colour.  By  experiment  I
find  that  if  I  tire  the  retina  by  staring  at  a  red  flower,  I  see  a  green  one  in  the
crystal :  and  conversely  that  if  I  summon  up  (as  I  sometimes  can  do)  a  red
flower  in  the  crystal,  I  then  see  a  green  patch  on  the  wall.  If  I  use  two
crystals  there  is  a  similar  change  of  colour  between  the  first  picture  and  the
second.  Or  if  I  merely  desire  a  change  of  colour  in  a  crystal-picture  I  find
that  blue  is  followed  by  orange,  yellow  by  purple,  green  by  red.  But  this  may,
of  course,  be  due  to  unconscious  self-suggestion,  although  I  am  not  so  familiar
with  the  sequence  of  colours  that  I  could  without  hesitation  name  the  comple-
ment of  any  given  colour.

The  same  result  would  occur  if  my  blue  picture  were  merely  conjured  up
with  closed  eyes.  On  being  transferred  to  the  crystal— I,  as  it  were,  remaining
entirely  passive — it  would  appear  as  orange.  When  I  first  discerned  this  fact
it  was  distinctly  to  my  own  surprise,  and  it  required  a  moment's  thought  to
assure  myself  that  this  was  in  the  natural  course  of  events.  It  may  be  worth
noting  that  a  distinct  effort  is  required  to  convert  a  scene— lighted,  for  example,
with  red — to  its  natural  colouring  or  even  to  a  neutral  tint.  It  is  necessary  to
close  the  eyes  or  to  look  away  for  a  moment ;  so  that  what  follows  is  a  second
edition  rather  than  a  prolongation  of  the  first  picture.  On  the  other  hand,  the
mere  desire  for  change  will  produce  a  green  light  rapidly  alternating  with  the
original  hue.

It  is  significant  that  these  optical  effects  seem  to  have  been  dependent
on  Miss  Frecr's  knowledge  of  how  real  objects  would  have  appeared
under  the  same  conditions.

In  order  to  test  further  whether  the  results  were  due  to  suggestion,  Mr
W.  A.  Dixey,1  the  well-known  optician  of  New  Bond  Street,  carried  out  a  series
of  experiments  with  Miss  Freer  on  the  effect  of  different  kinds  of  lenses  on  her

1  See  "  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  Procetdings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  108.
VOL.   I.  2O

578  APPENDICES  [624  A

crystal  visions,  the  conditions  being  arranged  so  that  she  did  not  know  the
normal  effects  of  the  lenses  on  real  objects  (see  Borderland  for  January  1894).
The  lenses  were  fitted  into  four  pairs  of  eye-glasses,  and,  with  normal  binocular
sight,  their  respective  effects  on  real  objects  at  the  given  distance  would  have
been:  (A)  to  duplicate  the  object  vertically;  (B)  to  blur  it ;  (C)  no  effect ;  (D)
to  duplicate  the  object  horizontally.  Mr.  Dixey  handed  the  lenses  to  Miss
Freer,  and  the  eight  experiments  were  as  follows:  (i)  A  gave  distance  r
(2)  B,  the  picture  disappeared,  but  after  about  a  minute  the  colours  became
intenser,  and  the  shadows  more  defined  ;  (3)  C,  no  difference ;  (4)  D  dupli-
cated the  picture  horizontally;  (5)  A  duplicated  it  vertically;  (6)  A  lowered
part  of  the  picture;  (7)  D  moved  it  to  the  right;  (8)  B,  the  picture  dis-
appeared. In  experiments  (3)  (4)  and  (5)  the  effects  were  what  they  would
have  been  on  real  objects,  while  in  (6)  and  (7)  they  were  what  they  would  have
been  if  the  right  eye  only  had  been  looking  at  a  real  object.  In  (i)  (2)  and  (8)
the  effects  were  not  similar  to  what  would  have  been  produced  on  real  objects.
Thus  the  general  result  was  that  in  five  out  of  eight  experiments  the  crystal
pictures  changed  in  appearance  in  the  same  way  that  real  objects  would  have
done  on  applying  the  lenses,  but  in  the  other  three  the  changes  that  followed  in
the  pictures  on  applying  the  lenses  were  not  those  that  would  have  been
produced  in  real  objects.

Mr.  Dixey  has  since  repeated  these  experiments,  under  as  nearly  as  possible
the  same  conditions,  with  Mrs.  Verrall,  who  found,  on  applying  the  lenses,  that
her  crystal  pictures  either  disappeared  or  remained  unaffected,  except  in  one
case,  where  a  temporary  enlargement  of  the  picture — which  was  not  the  normal
effect  of  the  lens — took  place.  These  negative  results  are  of  special  interest,
because  Mrs.  Verrall,  unlike  most  crystal-seers,  is  conscious  of  using  points  de
replre  in  her  visions,  and  informs  us  that  on  this  occasion  they  were  more  con-
spicuous to  her  than  usual  when  the  pictures  began  to  develop,  though,  as  usual,,
she  lost  sight  of  them  when  the  pictures  became  fully  formed.

It  seems  probable,  therefore,  that  Miss  Freer  in  her  experiments  may
have  unconsciously  made  use  of  points  de  reptre,  and  that  the  effects
actually  produced  by  the  lenses  on  them  were  transferred  by  self-suggestion
to  the  visions.  It  would  obviously  be  difficult  to  exclude  this  explanation
in  any  such  experiments.

Some  experiments  made  by  Mrs.  Sidgwick  on  the  function  of  points
de  replre  in  the  case  of  hallucinations  that  seem  to  move  are  described  in:
the  "Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations  "  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x»
p.  108).

Cases  of  hallucinations  apparently, following  optical  laws  are  important
in  view  of  their  possible  bearing  on  physiological  theories  of  the  origin  of
hallucinations,  having  often  been  cited  as  evidence  that  the  retina — as
well  as  the  brain — must  be  affected  by  the  hallucination.  For  a  dis-
cussion of  this  view — with  illustrative  cases — see  the  "  Report  on  the
Census  of  Hallucinations  "  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  pp.  144-48).

624  A.  The  following  is  an  account  (taken  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  viii.  p.  459)  of  experiments  in  crystal  vision  made  by  myself  with  two<
of  the  hypnotic  subjects  of  Gurney  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  referred  to  in
569  A  and  B  and  573  A.  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  was  the  hypnotist.

G24A]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  579

Experiments  made  at  Brighton,  March  9,  26,  27,  28,  189:.
Extract  from  account  written  out  after  the  experiments  from  notes  made  at
the  time,  with  some  comments  added  later.

March  9.— Present,  G.  A.  Smith  and  the  two  subjects,  P.  and  T.

1.  I  began  with  repeating  the  experiment  already  frequently  made  with
these  and  other  subjects,  viz.,  suggesting  to  the  hypnotised  P.  that  he  would
see   a  given  picture  on  a  card  when  awakened.      [G.  A.  S.  hypnotised  and
awoke  the  subjects  throughout.]     I   told   P.   that  on  awaking  he  would   be
shown  a  card  with  a  picture  of  a  baby  on  it.     I  said  the  one  word  "  baby  "
without  detail  in  order  to  see  how  his  mind  developed  the  idea.     He  was
shown  a  blank  card  and  saw,  not  a  veritable  baby,  but  a  child  of  six.

2.  Next  time  I  suggested  a  hippopotamus— an  animal  which  P.  had  never
seen  in  the  flesh.     On  being  awakened  he  saw  on  the  card  what  he  called  a
rhinoceros.     He  complained  that  it  was  rather  indistinct ;  he  was   not  sure
whether  it  had  horns  or  tusks.     There  is  a  certain  interest  in  this  as  indicating
that  the  hallucination  was  founded  upon  a  mental  picture  suggested  by  my
words,  rather  than  on  the  words  themselves.     One  might  have  supposed  that,
since  my  whole  suggestion  consisted  of  the  word  hippopotamus,  the  awakened
subject,  however  vaguely  he  saw  the   beast,  would   have  known  that  it  was
meant  for  a  hippopotamus.     But  the   picture,  vague  as  it  was,  seemed  to  be
more  communicable  from  the  hypnotic  to  the  supraliminal  self  than  the  word
which  had  originally  generated  it.     A  picture  was  what  had  been  ordered,  and
a  picture  came.

3.  I  repeated  this  form  of  experiment  once  more,  telling  P.  that  he  would
see  a  picture  of  T. ;  which  he  saw  clearly.

4.  I  next  determined  to  try  the  effect  of  a  glass  of  water,  arranged  as  a
speculum,  in  giving  additional  vividness  to  these  post-hypnotic  pictures.     I
suggested  to  each  young  man  separately  a  different  scene,  and  then  set  them
to  gaze  into  the  same  glass  of  water,  behind  which   I  placed  a  dark  back-
ground.    T.  had  once  looked  into  ink :  but  beyond  this  neither  of  them  knew
anything  of  crystal-gazing,  and  they  were  told  that  they  were  to  see  an  optical
illusion  of  my  invention.     They  naturally  assumed  that  they  would  both  equally
see  whatever  there  was  to  be  seen.

I  told  P.  ( hypnotised)  that  the  electric  light  on  the  Eastbourne  Parade  had
gone  out  on  the  previous  evening,  but  had  been  relighted  in  a  few  minutes.

I  told  T.  (hypnotised)  that  at  Barnum's  Circus  there  was  a  race  of  ponies
with  monkeys  on  their  backs.

P.,  though  generally  the  better  seer  of  hallucinatory  pictures,  began  (when
awakened  and  set  before  the  glass  of  water)  by  saying  that  all  was  quite
black.

lid  :   M  Look,  there's  something  going  round  and  round  in  the  water

P. :  It's  your  fancy  ;  it's  all  dark."

"  No,  it's  horses— they're  horses  going  round  and  round— they've  got
something  small  on  their  backs,  not  so  big  as  those  girls  who  jump  through
hoops.  It's  like  a  circus."

Suddenly  P.  looked  sharply  up  at  me  as  though  to  see  what  I  was  doing.
"  What  have  you  done  with  the  light  ? "  he  said  ;  "  you've  made  a  great  ball  of
liiMit  in  the  glass,  like  a  round  thing  with  a  light  in  the  middle  of  it."  He  did
not  see  the  meaning  of  this ;  but  it  appeared  that  he  had  be^un  with  simply  a
vision  of  darkness,  and  then  had  seen  the  electric  light  rekindled.  This  was
not  the  way  in  which  1  had  conceived  my  picture— I  had  thought  of  the  look

58o  APPENDICES  [624  A

of  the  long  Parade  and  a  line  of  lamps  going  out)— but  it  gave  the  essential
point.

It  will  be  observed  that  in  this  experiment,  as  in  that  of  the  hippopotamus,
and  in  most  of  those  that  follow,  neither  percipient  recognised  the  full  meaning
of  the  picture  seen.  The  undistinguished  "  small  things  "  in  T.'s  picture  were,
of  course,  the  monkeys  of  my  story.  •  I  shall  recount  later  on  some  attempts  to
make  similar  obscure  details  clear  by  magnification.  Both  a  true  and  a  pre-
tended or  suggested  magnify  ing-glass  should  be  tried  with  many  subjects  under
such  conditions  as  these.

5.  I  next  told  P.  (hypnotised)    the   story  of  Robinson  Crusoe  finding  the
footprint  and  fearing  savages.

I  told  T.  that  Moses  Primrose  took  a  cow  to  the  fair  and  returned  with  a
gross  of  green  spectacles,  to  the  derision  of  his  family.

Awakened  and  set  before  the  glass  of  water,  P.  at  once  exclaimed  :  "  Why,
there's  Buffalo  Bill !  He's  dressed  in  feathers,  and  skins  round  him ;  almost
like  a  savage.  He's  walking  about  in  a  waste  place."  T.  :  "  Is  he  leading  a
cow  along  ?  "  P. :  "No,  no,  he's  all  alone."  T. :  *'  That's  a  cow,  not  Buffalo
Bill."  P. :  "  I  can  see  something  else  coming  from  another  part, — it's  a  blackie."
T.  :  "  No,  it's  a  sack,  a  sack  on  his  back."  P.  :  "  Look  at  them  now,  how
they're  arguing  !  Buffalo  Bill  and  his  black  man."  T.  :  "  /  can  see  them  arguing
now — he's  got  into  a  house — there's  four  of  them."  P.  :  "  No,  no,  only  two."
T. :  "  No,  four, — look  at  them  roaring  !  "  (z.*.,  with  laughter).  P.  :  "  No,  they're
behind  some  trees."  T.  :  "  They're  crying  now."

Observe  that  in  P.'s  case  the  footmark,  which  was  the  point  on  which  I
had  chiefly  dwelt,  was  not  observed  ;  although  I  suspect  from  P.'s  insistence  on
the  long  pacing  about  of  his  Buffalo  Bill,  that  the  footmark  was  in  some  sense
intended  to  form  part  of  the  picture,  although  too  small  to  be  noticed  by  an
observer  not  aware  of  its  importance.  P.  had  read  "  Robinson  Crusoe  ;  "  but
Buffalo  Bill  was  plainly  fresher  in  his  memory.

T.  saw  no  meaning  in  his  story  whatever.  He  did  not  know  what  was  in
the  sack — (a  detail  of  his  own  adding,  as  I  had  not  clearly  conceived  how  the
spectacles  were  brought  home) — and  he  saw  no  reason  for  the  laughter  or
weeping.  The  crying  was  added  from  his  hypnotic  self's  own  conception  of
the  probable  effect  of  such  a  bargain  upon  the  family,  after  their  first  amuse-
ment. T.  had  never  read  the  "  Vicar  of  Wakefield."

6.  Observing  the  attempts  made  by  the  two  seers  to  harmonise  these  diver-
gent stories,  I  chose  two  scenes  which  had  a  certain  similarity,  to  see  whether
either  seer  would  be  able  to  persuade  the  other  to  accept  his  version  of  what
was  going  on.

I  told  P.  briefly  that  Banquo's  ghost  had  appeared  to  Macbeth,  his  murderer,
as  he  sat  with  warriors  and  nobles  round  him  at  a  feast.

I  told  T.  (what  he  already  knew  to  have  happened)  that  at  the  North
Kilkenny  election  Mr.  Parnell,  while  addressing  the  crowd,  received  a  bag  of
lime  in  his  face  from  a  political  opponent.  Thus  each  scene  had  its  central
and  commanding  figure ;  I  wished  to  see  if  the  two  could  be  combined.

P. :  "I  see  two  or  three  men  standing — some  sitting — one  in  a  chair  on  a
raised  place,  like  where  the  head  man  sits.  That's  the  Mayor,  I  suppose."
[P.  is  more  familiar  with  municipal  government  than  with  military  or  imperial
rule.]

T. :  "  Why,  there  are  a  whole  lot  of  men — a  town — a  lot  of  cars — not  like
our  carriages."

624A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  581

P.  (with  a  loud  whistle):  "  Oh,  here  he  comes,  the  bogey-man!"  (appa-
rently quoting  a  song).

T. :  u There  he  is  standing  up  in  the  middle  of  them;— I've  seen  the  man
at  Brighton."

P.:  "Look  at  that  chap  in  the  corner!  isn't  he  frightened  of  him?  The
Mayor's  quite  upset."

T. :  "I  know  the  man  well  enough  ;  he  has  a  beard— about  my  height
I've  seen  him  walk  up  and  down  the  front  (the  Parade)  with  two  dogs  after
him."

P.:  "He's  a  ghost!"

T.  :  "He's  no  ghost,  I  say  ;  he's  talking  to  them;  look  at  that  stuff  all
gone  into  his  face ;  now  three  or  four  men  are  up  talking ;  they've  got  some
sticks — there's  a  row."

P.  (imitating  conventional  ghostly  action)  :  "  Look  at  him !  They  all  stick
their  swords  through  him — it  doesn't  hurt  him ;  he's  a  ghost ! "

T. :  "  Nonsense  ;  how  can  he  be  a  ghost  ?  I  tell  you  I've  spoken  to  him  in
the  [telegraph]  office  ;  he's  a  man  any  one  would  remember — a  stand-off  man.
He's  all  white  now;  they're  all  running."  "Was  his  name  Parnell?"  I  asked.
"  Yes,  yes,"  said  T.,  "  Parnell,  of  course."  Here  also,  it  will  be  observed,  as  in
the  case  of  the  hippopotamus,  it  was  the  picture  framed  by  the  percipient's
subliminal  self,  not  the  mere  name  as  uttered  by  me,  which  was  transmitted  to
his  supraliminal  consciousness.

These  scenes  excited  the  seers ;  and  there  was  some  absurdity  in  their
endeavours  to  imitate,  and  to  conciliate,  the  attitudes  of  hovering  ghost  and
impassioned  orator.

7.  March  26,  1891.     Magnification. —  I  told  T.  (hypnotised)  that  he  would
see  in  the  crystal  (a  real  one)  a  playbill  of  "  Jack  Sheppard,"  which  had  recently
been   acted   in   Brighton,  the  large  print   distinct,  but   not  the  small  print.
Awakened,  he  saw  a  girl  in  man's  clothes — something  like  knickerbockers —
could  make  out  J  C  K   T  H.     On  looking  through  a  (real)  magnifying-glass
he  easily  read  JACK  SHEPPARD,  THEATRE   ROYAL,  and  recognised
that  the  knickerbockers  were  jack-boots.     He  said  that  the  letters  persisted,
but  were  clearer  when  the  magnifier  was  applied  to  the  crystal.     The  picture
seen  was  remembered  from  an  actual  poster.

8.  Forgotten  Memories. — T.  was  told  (same  conditions)  that  he  would  see
scenes  of  his  past  life.     He  was  greatly  interested  by  seeing  a  number  of  old
schoolfellows  sitting  in  his  old  school;  some  whom  he  could  not  identify;  some
of  whom  he  had  scarcely  thought  since  he  left  school.     On  being  re-hypnotised
he  did  not  remember  seeing  these  pictures — only  remembered  my  talking  to
him   about  his  boyhood.     We  could  not  therefore  get  the  hypnotic  self  to
identify  the  unknown  boys.

9.  March   27.      Test  of   disappearance   from  waking  memory  of  words
spoken  to  hypnotised  subject. — I  offered  each  subject  /io  if  he  could  explain
to  me  the  next  picture  which  he  saw.     It  was  plainly  necessary  to  choose  some
scenes  whose  meaning  they  could  not  guess,  if  my  description,  given  to  them
when  hypnotised,  was  forgotten  on  awaking.     I   told  P.  of  the   Finding  of
Brynhild,  and  T.  of  the  Niblun^s'  Need.     Each  saw  his  picture  well  (Greyfell,
the  flickering  flame-wall,  the  Sleepful  Thorn,  &c.)>  but  was  completely  puzzled
as  to  its  meaning.

10.  March  28.  Magnification.— \  told  T.  (hypnotised)  that  when  awakened
he  would  see  a  telegraph  form  (he  is  a  telegraphist)  in  a  glass  of  water ;  that

582  APPENDICES  [624  A

he  would  not  be  able  to  make  out  the  words,  but  only  to  count  them ;  then
with  a  magnifier  would  make  them  out.  Awakened,  he  saw  a  telegraph  form
so  bent  that  he  could  only  see  a  fragment  of  a  message,  containing  seven  words
which  he  could  not  read.  Looking  in  the  glass  he  made  out  "Met — B'ton
(abbreviation  used  for  Brighton) — Hotel— come."  We  cannot  say  whether  a
coherent  message  in  any  sense  underlay  this  fragmentary  attempt  at  communi-
cation.

11.  I  now  resolved  to  supply  the  message  myself  (same  conditions),  and
told  him  that  he  would  be  able  to  see  the  lengths  of  the  words  with  the  naked
eye,  and  to  read  them  with  the  magnifier.     The  telegram  was  to  be  [To]
"Myers,   Cambridge — Oxford  won  by  half  a  length.      Harris."     With   the
naked  eye  he  could  see  that  there  were  only  two  words  in  the  address,  the
second  rather  long.     With  the  magnifier  he  gradually  picked  out  letters  here
and  there — saw  the  capital  letters  right,  partly  saw  and  partly  guessed  my
name — could  not  make  out  the  message.     Experiments  such  as  this  show,  I
think,  that  there  is  some  appropriateness  in  speaking  of  messages  or  communi-
cations from  one  to  another  stratum  of  the  Self.   Judging  from  the  analogy  of  many
other  post-hypnotic  suggestions  with  the  same  subject,  we  can  hardly  doubt
that  the  whole  of  this  simple  telegram  was  remembered  by  the  hypnotic  self,
and  could  have  been  reproduced  in  obedience  to  a  direct  order.     But  the  order
was  to  reproduce  it  with  a   certain  degree  of  obscurity;  and  that  obscurity
turned  out  to  be  slightly  greater  than  the  magnifying-glass  (however  acting)
could  overcome.     The  suggestion  was  thus  slightly  too  complex ;  but,  although
never  fully  delivered,  the  "  inter-state  "  or  "  methectic  "  message — call  it  as  you
will,  but  let  us  have  some  name  for  it — was  ready  made  up,  and  waiting  to  be
transmitted  from  the  hypnotic  to  the  supraliminal  self.

12.  The  experiments  thus  far  described,  although  presenting  some  novel
points,  have  been  such  as  any  observer  with  good  hypnotic  subjects  at  his
disposal  will  probably  be  able  to  repeat.     Those  to  which  I  now  come  involve
the  rarer  phenomenon  of  thought-transference,  which  cannot   be  guaranteed
in  the  case  of  any  hypnotic  subject,  although  it  would  doubtless  be  oftener
found  if  it  were  oftener  looked  for.     The  evidence  for  Mr.  G.  A.   Smith's
power  of  transmitting  ideas,  without  the  use  of  ordinary  means,  to  the  minds
of  these  and  other  subjects  has  been  so  often  discussed  in  these  Proceedings
that  I  need  here  only  remark   that  in  all   these   experiments  a  close  watch
was  kept  by  Dr.  Dill  or  myself,  or  both  of  us,  to  guard  against  indications
(which,  of  course,  may  be  quite  involuntarily  given),  while  at  the  same  time
the  picture  to  be  discerned  in  the  crystal  involved  conceptions  more  com-
plicated than  a  mere  card-name  or  number.     I   omit  the  first  of  these  ex-
periments, which  was  successful,  but  during  which  I  left  the  room  to  speak
to  Dr.  J.  Gordon  Dill,  a  physician  who  had  previously  assisted  in  similar
experiments,  and  who  kindly  consented  to  help  me  in  these,  in  which  it  is
naturally  desirable  to  have  two  observers.     In  each  case  Dr.  Dill  or  I  wrote
down  the  desired  picture  carefully  on  a  piece  of  paper  out  of  sight  of  the
subject  and  showed  it  to  Mr.  G.  A.  Smith,  while  the  subject  was  entranced
(in  the  last  two  experiments  after  he  was  awakened).     Mr.  G.  A.  Smith  then
stood  at  some  distance  from  the  percipient,  and  out  of  his  sight,  while  the
percipient  fixed  his  eyes  on  the  glass  of  water,  and  made  remarks  to  which
(unless  otherwise  stated)  no  one  replied.     Dr.  Dill  watched  Mr.  Smith,  and  I
watched  the  percipient,  or  vice  versa.     Such  precautions  imply  no  distrust  of
either  agent  or  percipient,  but  should  be  taken  as  a  matter  of  course  in  all

624  A]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  583

experiments  of  this  kind.  Were  I  myself  acting  as  agent  I  should  prefer  to
be  watched,  since  no  one  can  be  absolutely  certain  as  to  what  sounds  or
movements  he  may  unconsciously  make.  If  it  is  once  for  all  assumed  that
the  human  organism,  when  used  in  experiments  which  do  not  in  themselves
present  any  means  of  eliminating  the  "  personal  equation,"  needs  some  other
eye  to  guard  against  possible  idiosyncrasies  which  may  confuse  the  experi-
ments, then  such  supervision  may  be  submitted  to  with  no  more  sense  of
discredit  than  the  astronomer  feels  when  his  individual  observations  are
accepted  not  as  absolute  truth,  but  as  data  to  be  corrected  in  a  special  recog-
nised way.  I  wrote  down  "  Two  cats  fighting,"  and  showed  the  paper  care-
fully to  Dr.  Dill  and  Mr.  Smith— whom  I  will  call  D.  and  S.  T.  (in  waking
state)  at  once  saw  "  two  cats — both  with  their  backs  up — fighting,  one  black
and  striped,  the  other  with  patches  of  white."  "  Where  are  the  cats? "  "  On
a  wall."  S.  had  mentally  reproduced  a  picture  of  two  cats  fighting,  done  in
whitewash  on  a  wall — so  that  his  cats  were  both  white.  During  this  experi-
ment D.  left  the  room  for  a  few  minutes:  I  watched  T.,  whose  eyes,  as  I
believe,  never  left  the  glass  of  water.

13.  Next  time  both  subjects  (hypnotised  and  awakened  as  usual)  were  to
see  in  the  same  water-glass  the  same  theme,  written  down  by  D.  and  shown  to
S.  and  myself  :  "  Boat  putting  off  from  beach."     P.  saw  nothing.     T.  saw  "  A
room   cleared  for  dancing,  the  gas-branches  wreathed  with  flowers."     This
appeared  to  be  a  deferred  picture  belonging  to  a  previous  series.     He  had
been  told,  in  an  experiment  which  I  have  omitted,  to  see  four  scenes  of  his
past  life,  at  different  ages.     He  had  seen  three,  and  this  scene  was  probably
enough  the  fourth,  which  was  to  be  typical  of  his  adolescence.     At  any  rate
he  was  simply  hypnotised  again,  and  again  awakened  (D.  and  I  watching
throughout).     On  reawaking   he  said:   "There   are  boats — several  steamers
and  two  boats  rowing  in  front,  like  a  picture  of  a  boat-race  in  the  Graphic?'
This  was  an  approximation  to  the  desired  picture.

14.  In  the  next  experiment  (same  conditions)  the  theme,  written  down  by
me,  which  S.  was  mentally  to  suggest,  was  "acrobats  swinging  from  trapeze."
Neither  P.  nor  T.  saw  anything  at  first.     They  were   rehypnotised   and   re-
awakened.   P.  sees  a  man.    T.  sees  nothing.    P. :  "  He  has  got  something  round
on  his  hand  like  a  sailor  with  a  life-buoy,  and  a  rope  hanging  from  his  hand."
T. :  "I  imagine  that  I  see  the  same  thing."     P. :  "I  believe  he's  standing  on  a
vessel — on  the  deck  of  a  boat — now  he's  still  there,  but  the  vessel's  gone — you
can  only  see  his  feet  and  nothing  beneath  him."     T. :  "He  looks  to  me  like
a  half-photograph."     T.  then  had  to  leave.     We  told  P.  to  put  himself  into
the  man's  attitude.     The  pose  assumed  was  just  that  of  a  man  who  has  lifted
himself  half  over  his  trapeze,  the  rope  which  P.  saw  being  across  his  body,  just
about  where  the  trapeze's  seat  (of  rope  or  wood)  would  come.     Such  a  picture
would  also  correspond  to  T.'s  "half  [length]  photograph."

15.  Same  conditions.     I  chose  the  subject,  "a  house  on  fire."    This  time
both  D.  and  I  watched  P.  and  S.,  who  stood  behind  P.  (of  course  not  in  con-
tact), looking  at  the  lamp,  and  imagining  (as  he  afterwards  told  us)  a  great
square  of  flame.     P.:  "I  see  something  like  a  bright  light;  there's  a  ladder
up  at  the  window — a  house  on  fire — no  doubt  about  it."

16.  Same  conditions.    Subject  written  down  by  D. :  •«  Mr.  Gladstone."    P. :
"  I  think  I  see  something  like  a  man — a  man's  head — comes  and  goes  in  a
flash.     I  know,  it's  Gladstone,  a  photograph — head  and  shoulders."     Here  I
had   to   leave,  but   Dr.    Dill   continued   the   experiments.     I   now   quote   his

584  APPENDICES  [625  A

account.     Mrs.  G.  A.  Smith  was  now  present,  but  was  not  informed  of  the
scene.

17.  [Same  conditions.]   "Jack  the  Ripper  committing  a  murder."    [Subject
written  down  by  D.]     P. :    "I  can  see  something  now — it's  a  man — rather
faint.     Very  awful-looking    man.     Nothing   like   Gladstone.     Repulsive   and
dirty-looking.     Has    something  in  his   hand— it's   a  knife.     Good   gracious!
what  a  terrible-looking  man— in  rags— with  his  hat  coming  over  his  eyes-
looks  like  a  murderer."     D. :  "  Is  any  one  with  him  ?  "     P.  :  "  No,  he's  alone."
Presently :  "  Yes,  he  is  talking  to  some  one— another  man.     No,  it's  a  woman."
[A  few  more  details  are  seen  and  P.  recognises  the  murderer.]

18.  Same  conditions.     "St.  George  and  the  Dragon."     P. :  "  Oh,  I  can'  see
what  that  is — it's  a  picture  of  St.  George  and  the  Dragon.     The  usual  picture.
Not  moving,  simply  a  picture."

19.  Here  P.,  as  D.  tells  me  in  a  letter,  became  anxious  to  go  off  to  catch
a  train,  a  preoccupation  which  generally  interfered  with  success.     On  this
and  the  next  occasion  S.  was  not  shown  the  theme  until  after  P.  had  been
awakened.     [He  was  hypnotised,  as  already  stated,  between  each  experiment.]
Subject:  "A  pantomime — clown  and  policeman  on  stage."     P.:  "I  see  some-
thing like  a  lion,  I  think.     Can't  tell  what  it  is  till  it  comes  closer.     Quite  gone.
Saw  something  like  a  man  in  a  white  hat — gone — looks  like  one  of  the  circus
clowns — very  smudgy,  with  a  mist  in  front  of  it."     Then  about   15  minutes
during  which  he  saw  nothing.     Then  "  The  clown  again !  but  I  lose  sight  of
him  when  he  moves."

20.  Subject:  "A  photograph  of  Mr.  Myers."     [This  time  S.  opened  and
read  the  paper  designating  the  desired  picture  downstairs,  and  did  not  enter
the  room.     P.  saw  the  beach — boats — nothing.]

625  A.  I  quote  next  a  record  of  crystal  visions  by  Mrs.  A.  W.
Verrall,  a  lecturer  at  Newnham  College,  and  known  to  the  classical  world
as  the  translator  of  Pausanias.  Mrs.  Verrall  made  the  experiments  simply
at  my  request,  without  previous  knowledge  of  the  subject  or  interest  in  it.
It  will  be  seen  that  her  crystal-visions  do  not  involve  any  telepathy  or
clairvoyance.  They  present  in  somewhat  developed  form  what  appear  to
be  usual  early  stages  in  this  form  of  experiment.  The  numbers  within
brackets  represent  the  chronological  order  of  the  experiments,  all  of  which
have  been  recorded  without  delay.  (From  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.
pp.  473-77.  See  also  610  A  and  623  A.)

...  I  have  tried  various  objects  in  crystal-gazing,  such  as  a  cut  crystal,  a
globular  crystal,  a  glass  paper-weight,  and  a  glass  full  of  water,  and  I  find  no
difference  in  their  efficacy.  I  have  also  tried  under  varying  conditions  of  light,
with  the  conclusion  that  a  dim  light  is  the  most  likely  to  result  in  the  seeing  of
a  picture.  I  have  sometimes  seen  pictures  in  quite  bright  light,  but  never  in
absolute  darkness.  Often  I  see  nothing  at  all  but  the  bright  points  of  light
in  the  crystal,  and  often  I  see  nothing  in  the  crystal,  but  get  a  mental  picture
suggesting  something  I  have  forgotten  to  do.  Indeed,  I  find  crystal-gazing  a
very  convenient  way  of  recalling  things  forgotten,  but  in  that  case  I  see  nothing
in  the  crystal.  The  difference  between  a  picture  in  the  crystal  and  a  mental
picture  is  quite  marked,  but  difficult  to  describe ;  it  will  perhaps  help  to  show
what  I  mean  if  I  say  that  the  recalled  image  of  what  I  have  seen  in  the  crystal

625  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  585

differs  as  much  from  the  actual  image  as  the  mental  image  of  a  person  differs
from  the  actual  person.  I  believe  that  with  me  the  crystal  picture  is  built  up
from  the  bright  points  in  the  crystal,  as  they  sometimes  enter  into  it ;  but  the
picture,  when  once  produced,  has  a  reality  which  I  have  never  been  able  to
obtain  when  looking  into  the  fire  or  trying  to  call  up  an  imaginary  scene  with
my  eyes  shut.  It  has  occasionally  happened  that  I  have  been  able  to  see  more
on  a  closer  investigation  than  on  the  first  glance,  but  if  I  try  to  interpose  a
magnifying-glass  between  my  eye  and  the  crystal  the  picture  instantly  goes
and  only  the  recollection  remains.  The  following  case  is  almost  the  only
one  where  I  have  seen  a  real  person,  and  here  the  picture  grew  distinct  as
I  looted.

I  saw  (27)  a  black  object  which  defined  itself  into  the  head  of  a  man  ;  then
I  saw  that  it  was  my  husband's  head  turned  nearly  in  profile  towards  my  left.
Behind  it  was  a  square-backed  chair  of  brown  leather.  He  was  reading,  his
eyes  being  on  a  book,  which  I  could  not  see.  I  tried  to  see  the  whole  figure,  in
order  to  know  what  the  book  was,  and  shut  my  eyes.  On  opening  them  I  saw
the  whole  figure  for  a  moment,  but  it  was  too  small  for  me  to  distinguish  any-
thing. In  a  moment  the  head  came  back,  and  I  had  an  impression  that  the
book  was  red,  though  I  could  not  see  it.

As  far  as  I  could  ascertain,  this  picture  was  not  telepathic.  This  is  not  the
only  occasion  on  which  I  have  had  a  distinct  impression  of  colour  coupled  with
a  consciousness  that  I  had  not  seen  the  colour.  Once  I  saw  a  flower  (20)  which
"  I  knew  to  be  pink,  though  I  saw  no  colour,"  and  again  (12)  I  once  saw  a
"black  cat  with  ribbon  round  neck  which  I  knew  to  be  red,  though  it  had  no
colour."  In  these  last  two  cases  I  spent  some  time  trying  to  see  the  colour  which
I  knew  to  be  there,  but  I  was  not  successful.  In  the  greater  number  of  cases
the  picture  has  been  coloured,  but  sometimes  I  am  (3,  32)  only  aware  of  lumi-
nosity and  darkness,  sometimes  (23)  of  black  and  white  as  in  a  pen-and-ink
sketch.  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  that  the  colour  of  the  background  for
the  crystal  produces  any  effect  on  the  colour  of  the  picture.  I  have  tried
placing  the  crystal  on  white  linen,  dark-blue  silk,  bright-blue  stuff  and  red
leather,  but  have  never  been  conscious  of  any  suggestion  of  colour  from  the
background,  or  able  to  trace  any  connection  between  the  background  and  the
vision.  .  .  .

The  variety  of  pictures  seen  is  considerable ;  I  have  classified  as  follows  the
thirty-three  crystal- visions  recorded,  covering  a  period  of  twenty-one  months.
(a)  Animals,  5 ;  (b)  Human  figures,  7 ;  (c)  Common  objects,  5  (such  as  clock,
ring,  melon,  &c.) ;  (</)  Geometrical  figure,  I ;  (e)  Written  words,  2 ;  (/)  Scenes,
4  :  (g)  Fanciful  groups  or  scenes,  9.

With  regard  to  the  written  words  (e  ),  I  may  say  that  both  instances  occurred
after  a  distinct  suggestion  from  myself.  On  the  first  occasion  I  looked  in  the
1  immediately  after  writing  to  ask  for  an  address  which  I  had  known,  but
forgotten.  I  saw  a  row  of  small  letters,  wondered  if  they  represented  the  address
required,  then  saw  plainly  39  Onslow  Square.  It  was  only  the  number  which
I  wanted,  and  I  found  that  the  number  was  not  correct.  On  the  second  occasion
(10)  I  had  been  trying  to  obtain  automatic  writing  while  looking  in  the  cr
I  was  also  wondering  who  had  put  a  pair  of  lost  scissors  in  a  very  conspicuous
place,  where  I  had  just  found  them.  I  saw  a  name  written,  and  found  that
ht  hand  had  written  the  same  name ;  it  was  a  name  likely  to  occur  to
me.  .  .  .

I  have  taken  considerable  pains  to  endeavour  to  trace  connections  between

586  APPENDICES  [625  B

the  pictures  in  the  crystal  and  ideas  or  objects  lately  present  to  my  mind,  but
there  are  only  nine  cases  out  of  the  thirty-three  where  I  have  perceived  any
possible  connection  between  my  thoughts  and  my  visions.  .  .  .

Two  of  these  (4,  10)  have  already  been  mentioned  ;  they  are  the  cases  where
written  words  appeared.  In  the  next  case  (5)  I  had  been  wondering  what
people  we  should  meet  at  a  luncheon  party  to  which  we  were  going,  and  I  saw
in  the  crystal  a  human  figure,  that  of  «*  an  old  lady  in  black,  with  a  veil  or  hood
on,"  not  a  very  likely  guest,  perhaps.  In  the  fourth  case  (24)  after  "  endless
fleeting  pictures,  single  figures,  groups,  sense  of  rush,  figure  with  arm  out,"
suddenly  the  whole  became  clear  "  and  I  saw  a  man  in  uniform  and  cap,  with  gold
or  silver  braid,  holding  out  his  arm  to  signal,  and  a  train  rushing  on  full  speed,
and  I  knew  there  was  an  accident,  though  I  saw  none."  I  had  been  to  town
and  back  on  that  day.  The  next  two  (29,  30)  were  seen  in  immediate  succession ;
I  saw  first  the  letter  A  in  small  bright  stars,  with  a  comet  overhead,  and  on
looking  again,  a  pyramid  dark  against  a  red  sky.  I  find  a  note  in  the  book
that  we  had  been  "  noticing  the  red  glow  of  the  sky,  and  a  star,"  just  before  I
looked  in  the  crystal.  The  last  of  these  cases  (32)  is  one  already  described ;  I
need  only  add  the  suggested  explanation,  that  I  had  been  in  the  late  afternoon
at  a  lecture  illustrated  by  lantern,  and  that  this  vision  [a  black  revolving
sphere,  with  outer  fiery  ring]  occurred  about  an  hour  after  my  return  from  the
lecture.  .  .  .

625  B.  The  following  cases  are  extracted  from  Miss  A.  Goodrich-
Freer's  paper  on  "Recent  Experiments  in  Crystal  Vision "  (Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  v.,  1889,  pp.  505-519).  Miss  Goodrich- Freer  classifies  her
visions  under  three  heads,  as  follows  : —

1.  After-images  or   recrudescent   memories,  often  rising  thus  and  thus

only  from  the  sub-conscious  strata  to  which  they  had  sunk.

2.  Objectivations  of  ideas  or  images  ;  (a)  consciously  or  (£)  unconsciously

in  the  mind  of  the  percipient.

3.  Visions,  possibly  telepathic   or  clairvoyant,  implying   acquirement  of

knowledge  by  supernormal  means.

I  quote  first  two  examples  of  recrudescent  memories  : —

I  had  been  occupied  with  accounts ;  I  opened  a  drawer  to  take  out  my
banking-book.  My  hand  came  in  contact  with  the  crystal,  and  I  welcomed  the
suggestion  of  a  change  of  occupation.  However,  figures  were  still  uppermost,
and  the  crystal  had  nothing  more  attractive  to  show  me  than  the  combination
7694.  Dismissing  this  as  probably  the  number  of  the  cab  I  had  driven  in  that
day  or  a  chance  grouping  of  the  figures  with  which  I  had  been  occupied,  I  laid
aside  the  crystal  and  took  up  my  banking-book,  which  I  had  certainly  not  seen
for  some  months,  and  found,  to  my  surprise,  that  the  number  on  the  cover  was
7694.  Had  I  wished  to  recall  the  figures  I  should,  without  doubt,  have  failed,
and  could  not  even  have  guessed  at  the  number  of  digits  or  the  value  of  the
first  figure.  .  .  .

To  quote  again  from  my  note-book.  ...  I  had  carelessly  destroyed  a  letter
without  preserving  the  address  of  my  correspondent.  I  knew  the  county,  and
searching  in  a  map  recognised  the  name  of  the  town,  one  unfamiliar  to  me,  but
which  I  was  sure  I  should  know  when  I  saw  it.  But  I  had  no  clue  to  the  name
of  house  or  street,  till  at  last  it  struck  me  to  test  the  value  of  the  crystal  as  a

625  B]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  587

means  of  recalling  forgotten  knowledge.  A  very  short  inspection  supplied  me
with  "  H.  House  "  *  in  grey  letters  on  a  white  ground,  and  having  nothing
better  to  suggest  from  any  other  source,  I  risked  posting  my  letter  to  the
address  so  strangely  supplied.  A  day  or  two  brought  me  an  answer,  headed
H.  House  in  grey  letters  on  a  white  ground.

The  next  is  a  possibly  telepathic  case  : —

On  Monday  evening,  February  ir,  I  took  up  the  crystal,  with  the  deliber-
ate intention  of  seeing  in  it  a  figure,  which  happened  to  occupy  my  thoughts  at
the  moment,  but  I  found  the  field  pre-occupied  by  a  small  bunch  of  daffodils —
a  prim  little  posy,  not  larger  than  might  be  formed  by  two  or  three  fine  heads.
This  presented  itself  in  various  positions,  in  spite  of  my  hurry  to  be  rid  of  it,  for
I  rashly  concluded  my  vision  to  be  a  consequence  of  my  having  the  day  before
seen,  on  a  friend's  dinner-table,  the  first  daffodils  of  the  season.  The  resem-
blance was  not  complete,  for  those  I  had  seen  were  loosely  arranged  and  inter-
mixed with  ferns  and  ivy,  whereas  my  crystal-vision  had  no  foliage,  and  was  a
compact  little  bunch.  It  was  not  till  Thursday,  I4th,  that  I  received,  as  a
wholly  unexpected  "  Valentine,"  a  painting,  on  a  blue  satin  ground,  of  a  bunch
of  daffodils,  corresponding  exactly  with  my  crystal  picture,  and  learnt  that  the
artist  had  spent  some  hours  on  Monday,  previous  to  my  vision,  in  making
studies  of  the  flowers  in  various  positions.

The  following  are  other  cases  in  Miss  Goodrich-Freer's  experience,
taken  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  viii.  p.  49.

In  some  cases  ...  I  have  actually  tried  my  best  to  see  or  hear  something,
but  failed ;  and  then  the  crystal  has  shown  me  that  something  within  me  has
been  able  to  see  or  hear  at  longer  range  than  I  knew.2

From  a  letter,  written  July  I,  1891,  I  take  the  following  account:  "I
looked  across  the  room  this  morning  to  a  distant  table,  where  I  expected  to
see  a  book  I  wanted.  It  was  not  there,  but  my  eye  was  caught  by  another
book  which  I  saw  was  strange  to  me.  I  tried,  but  could  not  read  the  title
at  that  distance  (I  have  since  proved  that,  even  now  I  know  it,  this  is  impos-
sible) ;  and  turned  away  to  resume  my  writing.  On  my  blank  paper — as  in  a
crystal-scene — I  read  *  The  Valley  of  Lilies,'  which  I  found  to  be  the  title  of  the

1  The  entire  word — one  I  know  in  no  other  connection — was  supplied.

2  I  may  here  remind  the  reader  of  the  large  group  of  ill-understood  phenomena
at  present  grouped  together  under  the  name  of  Dynamogeny  (Fere*,  Rtv.  Phil.,  xx.,
364,  &c. ).    These  are  cases  where  either  muscular  power,  as  tested  by  grip  of  the
dynamometer,  or  the  acuteness  of  some  one  sense,  is  increased  by  a  stimulus  to  some
other  sense.    Thus  the  Viennese  aurist  Urbantschisch  (James's  Psychology,  ii.,  p.  29 ;
Pfliiger's  Archiv.,  xlii.,  p.  154)  finds  that  "  a  tuning  fork  sounded  close  to  the  ear  will
sometimes  increase  acuteness  of  vision  so  that  letters  can  he  read  at  a  greater  distance.
Conversely  sounds  became  audible  when  lights  were  exhibited  to  the  eye."    Similarly
Fere  finds  that  in  healthy  subjects  lost  after-images  can  be  recalled  by  the  application  of
a  tuning-fork  in  vibration  to  the  top  of  the  head  (Pathologu  det  f  motions,  p.  29).     So
with  hysterical  subjects  red  light  quickens  perceptions  of   taste  and  smell.     And  in
many  healthy  subjects  an  increased  acuteness  of  vision  and  other  senses  may  be  produced
by  hypnotic  suggestion.     It  is  the  subliminal  self,  in  my  terminology,   which  has  to
•upply  this  extra  acuteness  ;  and  the  crystal-vision  is  merely  another  way  of  getting  at
this  reserve  of  power.— £F.  \V.  H.  M."|

588  APPENDICES  [625  C

book.  I  have  no  recollection  of  ever  seeing  the  book  before,  certainly  not  in
this  house,  though  it  may  have  caught  my  eye  in  a  shop."  On  July  2  I
add :  "  The  book  was  brought  into  the  house  in  my  absence,  and  placed  [by  a
relative]  on  her  special  table,  on  which  my  things  are  never  put,  and  which,
therefore ,  I  should  not  necessarily  glance  at  on  entering  the  room,  as  at  my
own  table,  for  cards  or  letters.  I  did  not  enter  the  room  till  after  lunch,
and,  so  far  as  I  know,  went  straight  to  my  own  seat,  not  passing  her  table,
which  is  in  the  opposite  corner.  The  book  is  of  rather  peculiar  appearance —
an  imitation  of  wood.  If  I  had  consciously  seen  it  in  a  shop  I  should  probably
have  bought  it,  for  it  purports  to  be  by  my  favourite  a  Kempis."

I  give  another  instance  in  which  a  similar  slight  extension  of  the  power  of
hearing  seems  to  be  involved  : —

In  August  1891  we  went  for  a  few  weeks  to  a  small  country  place,  where
we  had  taken  a  house  for  the  autumn,  and  which  I  had  never  visited  before,
except  once  for  a  single  day.  One  day  a  kindly  neighbour  called  to  offer  us
the  use  of  his  garden  during  his  own  absence  from  home.  As  he  left  the  house
he  looked  up  in  passing  the  window,  and  said  something,  of  which  neither
I  nor  a  girl  who  was  staying  with  me  could  catch  a  single  word.

The  same  evening  I  saw  in  the  crystal  a  picture  of  some  extraordinarily
tall  and  bushy  sweet-peas  trained  over  wire  fencing — a  picture  to  which  I
could  assign  no  meaning.  The  next  day  we  met  our  friend's  housekeeper,
who  referred  to  the  invitation,  and  added,  "  Mr.  P.  says  he  hopes  you  heard
his  warning  not  to  lose  yourselves  among  the  sweet-peas  !  "  On  visiting  the
garden,  I  found  the  fencing  covered  exactly  as  the  crystal  had  shown,  the
sweet-peas,  of  which  Mr.  P.  was  justly  so  proud,  having  been  arranged  to
intercept  a  view  of  the  railway.

625  C.  The  following  case  is  extracted  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.
viii.  pp.  499-515.

In  this  case,  crystal-vision  has  formed  but  a  small  part  of  a  long  and
complex  group  of  phenomena  centring  in  a  lady  who  wishes  to  be
known  as  Miss  A.  I  have  been  intimately  acquainted  with  Miss  A.
and  her  family  for  some  years,  and  have  personally  witnessed  many  of
these  phenomena.  I  add  to  her  account,  between  square  brackets,  some
notes  made  by  the  Countess  of  Radnor,  the  friend  in  whose  presence
many  of  the  phenomena  occurred  and  who  has  revised  the  account,  and
some  unsigned  notes  of  my  own.

1.  Health. — I  do  not  know  if  my  health  affects  the  crystal-seeing  ;  I  am  so
seldom  ill  that  I  have  not  tried.     If  I  have  a  headache  I  never  look  in  the
crystal ;  but  I  should  imagine  I  should  see  equally  well  anyway.

2.  Visualising  Power,  &•£. — I  see  in  the  crystal  much  more  distinctly  than
I  could  ever  imagine  things.     I  am  a  very  bad  visualiser;  and  when  I  think
of  people  I  do  so  much  more  by  the  sound  of  their  voice  than  by  their  faces  or
figures.     I  don't  think  I  ever  imagined  a  group  in  motion  in  my  life.     I  am
very  short-sighted,  and  seldom  wear  glasses ;  consequently,  I  rarely  get  a  clear
picture  of  any  room  or  scene.     But  when  I  look  in  the  crystal  I  see  everything
as  clearly  as  though  I  had  strong  glasses  on.     I  cannot  be  sure  whether  either
my  short  sight  or  my  visualising  power  is  better  in  dreams  than  in  waking
hours;  but  I  think  both  are  better.     Certainly,  however,  I  never  see  in  dreams
any  scene  at  all  comparable  in  clearness  to  what  I  see  in  the  crystal.

625  C]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  589

I  have  no  artistic  gift,  although  I  have  received  a  few  lessons  in  drawing
and  painting.  I  have  automatically  drawn  flowers,  figures,  a  snake,  &c.,  much
better  than  I  can  draw  by  conscious  effort.  .  .  .

3.  Visions    apart  front  Crystal  or   Other  Speculum. — I  have  sometimes,
generally   as   the   result  of  effort,  seen  hallucinatory  figures — all  of   them,  I
believe,  in  some  sense  veridical,  never  mere  subjective  hallucinations, — stand-
ing or  sitting  in  the  room.     And  I  have,  once  at  least,  seen  the  room  itself
alter.     I  saw  a  large  modern  room  change  into  the  likeness  (as  shown  after-
wards by  independent  record)  of  what  it  was  200  years  ago  ;  and  I  saw  persons
in  it  who  apparently  belonged  to  that  date.

[The  history  of  the  room  was  known  to  Lady  Radnor,  who  attests  :  "  Miss
A.  has,  without  looking  into  anything,  described  a  room,  whose  history  was
unknown  to  her,  as  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  200  years  ago.  It  was
the  Long  Parlour  at  Longford,  which  in  1670  was  used  as  the  chapel. — H.  M.
RADNOR."  Other  visions  of  this  kind  will  be  dealt  with  later.]

4.  First  Discovery  of  the  Power.— \\.  is  now  some  years  since  I  first  began
to  look  in  the  crystal.     I  had  already  written  automatically,  but  knew  nothing
of  crystal-vision.     I  happened  one  day  to  be  lunching  with  some  friends  who
talked  on  the  subject,  and  said  that  they  believed  that  a  glass  of  clear  water
acted  in  the  same  manner.     Two  or  three  of  us  looked  in  glasses  of  water,
and  after  a  little  while  I  seemed  to  see  at  the  bottom  of  my  glass  a  small  gold
key.     This  was  so  distinct  that  I  looked  on  the  tablecloth,  thinking  that  there
must  be  a  real  key  there.     There  was   none,  and  nothing   to   explain  what
I  saw.

5.  Speculum  and  Mode  of  Gazing. — We  bought  a  glass  ball,  and  I  gradually
began  to  see  a  good  deal  in  it.     I    have  since  seen  in  several  crystals,  in  a
moonstone  in  a  bracelet,  &c.     [I   have   known   her  see  things   in  a  polished
table. — H.  M.  RADNOR.]     It  does  not  seem  to  matter  much  what  the  smooth
surface  is  ;  but  I  have  sometimes  fancied  that  the  scenes  were  brighter  if  seen
in  a  real  crystal.     Occasionally  I  see  things  in  a  mirror,  or  even  without  any
clear  surface,  as  though  I  were  in  the  midst  of  them.

I  either  take  the  crystal  into  a  dark  corner  of  the  room,  or  wrap  it  up  in
black  with  only  a  little  bit  uncovered,  or  if  it  is  small  I  hold  it  inside  my  hand
and  look  right  into  it.  I  can  see  equally  well  in  the  dark.  After  a  minute  or
two  I  seem  to  see  a  very  bright  light  in  it,  which  disappears  after  a  few
seconds,  and  then  the  surface  appears  cloudy  and  thick.  This  mist  clears
away,  and  I  see  sometimes  views,  sometimes  faces,  sometimes  letters,  and  all
kinds  of  things  in  it.  They  only  last  for  a  few  seconds  or  sometimes  minutes,
and  between  each  new  picture  I  see  the  same  light  and  then  mist.  I  cannot
look  in  the  crystal  for  long,  as  it  makes  my  eyes  water  with  the  brightness  of
the  light  and  gives  me  a  feeling  as  if  a  band  were  tied  round  my  head  ;  but  if
I  only  look  a  little  while  it  does  not  hurt  me  at  all.  The  crystal  seems  to
become  a  globe  of  light.  If  a  sunlit  scene  appears,  the  light  may  continue,  or
it  may  disappear  before  the  figure  shows  itself.  [Her  eyes  often  stream  with
tears  from  "the  brightness  of  the  light."— H.  M.  RADNOR.]  I  am  in  a  perfectly
normal  condition  when  I  look  ;  not  sleepy,  nor  in  a  trance,  nor  unconscious  of
my  surroundings.

6.  Magnification,  &*<;.— I  have  tried  the  magnifying  glass.    The  results  are
just  the  same  as  without  it;  only  the  glass  being  on  the  top,  I  suppose  I  see
in  it  instead  of  in  the  crystal.  .  .  .

7.  Verbal  Messages  in  the  Crystal.— When  I  see  writing  in  the  crystal  I  see

590  APPENDICES  [625  C

it  only  one  letter  at  a  time  ;  and  when  the  letters  are  put  down  they  are  found
to  be  words  spelt  backwards.

[Each  letter  in  turn  seems  to  fill  the  crystal ;  and  the  letters  succeed  each
other  so  rapidly  that  it  is  hard  to  take  them  down  from  Miss  A.'s  dictation.
The  words  may  come  to  explain  a  picture,  or  may  form  a  message  by  them-
selves. The  backward  spelling  is  probably  adopted  in  order  to  prevent  Miss
A.'s  supraliminal  intelligence  from  guessing  at,  and  thereby  disturbing,  the
message  which  is  being  given.]

Fourteen  cases  are  given  in  detail,  seven  of  which  I  quote,  as  follows  :

B.  Second  contemporaneous  scene.

In  one  case  I  saw  and  described  Mr.  B.  (a  well-known  writer),  whom  I
knew  slightly,  as  hunting  for  a  paper  in  the  drawers  of  a  writing-table.  He
used  a  particular  pen,  which  I  described,  and  with  his  hands  ruffled  his  hair
till  it  stood  up  in  a  kind  of  halo.  A  lady  came  in  and  pointed  to  his  hair  and
laughed.  Lord  Radnor  inquired  of  Mr.  B.,  and  all  this  was  found  to  be
correct.  He  was  writing  with  a  pen  unusual  to  him  (silver  instead  of  quill,
or  vice  versa),  and  was  looking  for  a  paper  which  he  wanted  to  send  by  post.
His  sister  (I  did  not  know  that  she  lived  with  him,  and  had  never  seen  her)
entered  the  room,  and  pointed  laughing  to  his  hair,  just  as  I  had  seen.

[Confirmed.— H.  M.  RADNOR.]

The  four  next  cases  are  recounted  by  Sir  Joseph  Barnby,  the  well-
known  musician,  and  I  give  two  of  them.  Case  C  is  probably  exactly
contemporaneous,  and  case  F  seems  precognitive.

C.  Sir  Joseph  Barnby  writes  as  follows  : —

November  1892.

I  was  invited  by  Lord  and  Lady  Radnor  to  the  wedding  of  their  daughter,
Lady  Wilma  Bouverie,  which  took  place  August  15,  1889.

I  was  met  at  Salisbury  by  Lord  and  Lady  Radnor  and  driven  to  Longford
Castle.  In  the  course  of  the  drive,  Lady  Radnor  said  to  me  :  "  We  have  a
young  lady  staying  with  us  in  whom,  I  think,  you  will  be  much  interested.
She  possesses  the  faculty  of  seeing  visions,  and  is  otherwise  closely  connected
with  the  spiritual  world.  Only  last  night  she  was  looking  in  her  crystal  and
described  a  room  which  she  saw  therein,  as  a  kind  of  London  dining-room.
[The  room  described  was  not  in  London  but  at  L.,  and  Miss  A.  particularly
remarked  that  the  floor  was  in  large  squares  of  black  and  white  marble — as  it
is  in  the  big  hall  at  L.,  where  family  prayers  are  said. — H.  M.  RADNOR.]
With  a  little  laugh,  she  added,  *  And  the  family  are  evidently  at  prayers,  the
servants  are  kneeling  at  the  chairs  round  the  room,  and  the  prayers  are
being  read  by  a  tall  and  distinguished-looking  gentleman  with  a  very  hand-
some, long  grey  beard.'  With  another  little  laugh,  she  continued:  'A  lady
just  behind  him  rises  from  her  knees  and  speaks  to  him.  He  puts  her  aside
with  a  wave  of  the  hand,  and  continues  his  reading.'  The  young  lady  here
gave  a  careful  description  of  the  lady  who  had  risen  from  her  knees."

Lady  Radnor  then  said :  "  From  the  description  given  I  cannot  help  think-
ing that  the  two  principal  personages  described  are  Lord  and  Lady  L.,  but  I
shall  ask  Lord  L.  this  evening,  as  they  are  coming  by  a  later  train,  and  I  should
like  you  to  be  present  when  the  answer  is  given."

That  same   evening,   after  dinner,  I   was  talking  to  Lord  L.  when  Lady

625  C]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  591

Radnor  came  up  to  him  and  said :  "  I  want  to  ask  you  a  question.  I  am  afraid
you  will  think  it  a  very  silly  one,  but  in  any  case  I  hope  you  will  not  ask  me
why  I  have  put  the  question?"  To  this  Lord  L.  courteously  assented.  She
then  said :  "  Were  you  at  home  last  night?  "  He  replied,  "  Yes."  She  said:
"Were  you  having  family  prayers  at  such  a  time  last  evening?"  With  a
slight  look  of  surprise  he  replied,  "Yes,  we  were."  She  then  said:  "During
the  course  of  the  prayers  did  Lady  L.  rise  from  her  knees  and  speak  to  you,
and  did  you  put  her  aside  with  a  wave  of  the  hand?"  Much  astonished,
Lord  L.  answered:  **  Yes,  that  was  so,  but  may  I  inquire  why  you  have  asked
this  question?"  To  which  Lady  Radnor  answered:  "You  promised  you
wouldn't  ask  me  that !  "

F.  One  more  incident  in  connection  with  the  extraordinary  powers  of  this
young  lady  remains  to  be  noted.  Whilst  looking  in  her  crystal  during  one
of  the  days  I  spent  at  Longford,  she  described,  amongst  a  number  of  things
unnecessary  to  mention,  a  room  which  appeared  to  her  to  be  a  bedroom.
She  appeared  to  be  viewing  the  room  from  just  0w/side  the  open  door,  for  she
said:  "If  there  be  a  bed  in  the  room  it  must  be  behind  the  door  on  the
left;"  in  any  case  the  room  was  a  long  one  and  the  end  of  it  was  occupied
by  a  large  window  which  formed  the  entire  end  of  the  room.  She  added:
*•  There  is  a  lady  in  the  room,  drying  her  hands  on  a  towel."  She  described
the  lady  as  tall,  dark,  slightly  foreign  in  appearance  and  with  rather  "an  air"
about  her.  This  described  with  such  astonishing  accuracy  my  wife,  and
the  room  she  was  then  occupying  at  a  hotel  at  Eastbourne,  that  I  was  im-
pelled to  ask  for  particulars  as  to  dress,  &c.  She  stated  that  the  dress  was
of  serge,  with  a  good  deal  of  braid  on  the  bodice  and  a  strip  of  braid  down
one  side  of  the  skirt.  This  threw  me  off  the  scent,  as  before  I  had  started
for  Longford  my  wife  had  expressed  regret  that  she  had  not  a  serge  dress
with  her.  My  astonishment,  therefore,  was  great  on  returning  to  East-
bourne to  find  my  wife  wearing  a  serge  dress  exactly  answering  to  the
description  given  above.  The  sequel  to  this  incident  comes  some  sixteen
months  later  on,  when  my  wife  and  I  attended  a  performance  given  by  the
Magpie  Minstrels  (a  society  of  musical  amateurs)  at  Princes'  Hall,  Piccadilly.
We  arrived  early,  and  after  placing  my  wife  in  a  seat  I  moved  about  the
room  speaking  to  friends  here  and  there.  In  the  course  of  ten  minutes  or
so,  Lady  Radnor  and  Miss  A.  entered  the  room.  During  the  greetings  which
ensued,  Miss  A.  called  my  attention  to  a  standing  figure,  saying:  "You  will
remember  my  seeing  a  lady  in  her  bedroom  while  looking  in  my  crystal;  that
is  the  lady  I  saw."  That  was  my  wife!  I  only  need  add  that  she  had  never
seen  my  wife.  JOSEPH  BARNEY.

Lady  Barnby  writes  as  follows  in  corroboration  of  the  incident  relating  to
her  own  dress  :—

9  ST.  GEORGE'S  SQUARE,  S.W.
trday,  November  12,  1892.

The  account  about  me  and  my  dress  is  remarkable  as  being  out  of  the
general  course  of  things  in  this  way :  I  had  been  remarking  to  Sir  Joseph
that  it  was  a  mistake  to  come  to  the  seaside  without  a  serge  dress,  that  being
a  material  particularly  suited  for  wear  at  the  seaside,  but  I  added  :  "  I  do  not
think  there  is  much  use  in  ordering  one  now,  as  Madame  D.  will  be  gone  for
her  holiday,  it  being  August."  Sir  Joseph  left  the  next  day  for  Longford,
and  I  wrote  to  Madame  D.,  telling  her  to  make  me  this  gown.  She  pot  the
letter  Tuesday  [August  13,  1889],  and  in  the  marvellously  short  time  by

592  APPENDICES  [625  C

Saturday,  I  received  my  gown.  Then  again,  it  is  not  usual  in  a  hotel  to
have  one's  bedroom  door  open  when  one  is  occupying  the  room,  but  the
reason  for  it  on  this  occasion  was  the  fact  that  I  was  to  meet  Sir  Joseph  on
his  return  from  Longford  [Tuesday,  August  20]  (as  a  surprise  in  this  new
serge  gown)  and  having  no  clock  in  our  bedroom,  which  was  at  the  end  of  the
corridor,  with  my  daughter's  room  at  an  angle  to  ours,  where  she  slept  with  her
maid,  I — thinking  I  was  somewhat  late  for  meeting  the  train — opened  the  door
to  call  to  the  maid  to  tell  me  the  time  as  I  washed  my  hands  standing  at  the
washhand-stand  in  a  line  with  the  open  door.  I  do  not  suppose  I  have  ever
done  such  a  thing  at  a  hotel  before  or  since.  EDITH  MARY  BARNEY.

[These  dates  have  been  confirmed  by  Lady  Barnby  from  her  diary.  Lady
Barnby  also  tells  me  that  her  nurse  confirms  the  little  incident  of  the  wearing
of  the  serge  dress  first  on  August  20.  The  crystal-scene,  therefore,  seems  to
have  anticipated  a  certain  definite  moment,  which  happens  to  have  been  well
remembered.

Case  C  (Lord  L.  at  prayers). — This  incident  has  been  independently
recounted  to  me  both  by  Lady  Radnor  and  by  Miss  A.  herself.  Another
small  point  not  given  by  Sir  J.  Barnby  is  that  Miss  A.  did  not  at  first  under-
stand that  family  prayers  were  going  on,  but  exclaimed  :  "  Here  are  a  number
of  people  coming  into  the  room.  Why,  they're  smelling  their  chairs  !  "]

Four  cases  of  apparently  historical  scenes  connected  with  Salisbury
Cathedral  are  given,  of  which  I  quote  one,  related  by  Lady  Radnor.

H.    Retrocognitive  Scene  (Brian  Duppa).

On  February  23,  1890,  Miss  A.  and  I  were  in  the  "  Cage"  [or  Hungerford
Chapel]  and  she  told  me  she  saw  a  grand  ceremonial  taking  place.  There
appeared  to  be  a  tall  chair  which  obstructed  the  view  down  the  choir,  and
gradually  the  place  appeared  filled  with  clericals  and  others  dressed  in  their
best  attire.  Then  she  saw  a  tall  big  man,  slowly  walking  up,  dressed  in  red
with  white  and  lace  over  it,  something  that  hung  round  his  neck  and  down  to
his  feet  of  broad  gold  embroidery,  and  a  broad  sort  of  mitre  (but  not  peaked)
more  like  a  biretta,  of  beautiful  embroidery.

Then  there  were  three  or  four  dressed  very  much  like  him,  gorgeously
dressed,  and  lots  of  little  boys  about  in  red  and  white  and  lace — holding
candles,  books,  &c.  The  whole  place  was  very  full  of  people,  and  it  was
evidently  a  great  occasion.  After  the  principal  figure  had  knelt  in  front  of
the  chair — looking  to  the  west  for  some  little  time — he  stood  up,  and  ten  little
boys  lifted  up  the  chair,  and  carried  it  higher  up  and  placed  it  in  front  of  the
altar,  still  facing  west.  Then  the  principal  figure  walked  up  two  steps  and
faced  the  east.  (The  whole  of  the  arrangements  of  the  altar,  &c.,  as  Miss  A.
saw  them,  are  quite  different  from  what  they  are  now.)  [It  is  here  meant  that
Miss  A.'s  description  was  correct  for  that  past  date ;  as  Lord  Radnor  explicitly
told  me  was  the  case.]  He  had  nothing  on  his  head  now.  He  knelt  some
little  time,  and  then  the  most  gorgeously  dressed  of  the  other  figures  placed
something  like  a  mitre  on  his  head  and  retired,  and  the  principal  figure  walked
up  to  the  chair,  and  sat  down  on  it  facing  the  congregation.  Miss  A.  said  she
saw  him  later  dead  in  a  coffin,  with  the  Winchester  Cross  over  him.  She  says
he  was  tall,  big,  clean-shaven,  a  little  curling  hair,  and  blue-grey  eyes.

Miss  A.  asked  what  she  was  seeing,  and  the  answer  came  by  raps.

A.  The  induction  of  Briant  Uppa.

625C]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  593

Then  Miss  A.  said  :  There  can't  be  such  a  name  ;  it  must  be  wrong.

She  tried  again,  and  got —

A.  You  are  wrong.  It  is  Duppa,  not  Uppa.  Brian  Duppa.  Q.  Who  was
Brian  Duppa  ?  A.  Chister.  Q.  What  was  he  ?  A.  Bishop  here.  Q.  When  ?
or  what  was  his  date  ?  A.  44-16.  His  researches  would  help  you.  Manuscripts
should  lay  at  Winchester.

On  returning  home,  we  were  talking  after  tea,  and  I  casually  took  up  Britton's
"  History  of  Wiltshire,"  and  said  to  Miss  A.,  laughing:  "  Now  I  will  look  for
your  Bishop."  .  .  .  The  pages  where  the  Bishops'  names  were  were  uncut,  sides
and  top.  I  cut  them,  and  to  our  delight  we  found  on  p.  149: —

"Brian  Duppa  or  De  Uphaugh,  D.D.  .  .  .  tutor  to  Prince  Charles  .  .  .
translated  to  the  See  of  Chichester  (Chister?)  .  .  .  Bishop  of  1641  .  .  .  (deposed
soon  after  by  Parliament)  .  .  .  preferred  soon  after  the  Restoration  to  the  See
of  Winchester."  He  was  at  Carisbrooke  with  Charles  I.,  and  is  supposed  to
have  assisted  him  in  the  writing  of  the  Eikon  Basilike,  which  book  Miss  A.
had  been  looking  at  in  my  boudoir  a  few  days  previously,  but  which  contains  no
mention  of  him  nor  his  name.

Miss  A.  writes  : —

A'.   Retrocognitive  Scene  (White  Webs).

I  was  looking  in  the  crystal  a  year  or  two  ago  at  Longford  Castle.  Lady
Radnor  was  in  the  room  with  me.  I  saw  amongst  other  things  a  large  carved
fireplace  with  a  coat  of  arms  in  the  middle  and  curious  serpents  entwined.
There  seemed  to  be  a  secret  passage,  which  opened  on  touching  one  of  the
serpents'  heads.  I  seemed  to  follow  this  path  until  it  led  out  by  a  river,  and  I
saw  figures  pass  along  it  in  old-fashioned  dress.  The  name  Ed  wye  de  Bovery
was  then  spelt  out  in  the  crystal  ;  and  Lady  Radnor  said  that  the  vision  must
be  all  wrong,  as  the  name  had  never  been  spelt  like  that.  The  name  "  White
Webs  "  was  also  spelt  out — a  name  of  which  I  had  never  heard.  A  few  days
afterwards,  when  I  was  looking  at  some  books  in  the  library,  I  saw  a  curious
old  book  with  crests  and  coats  of  arms,  drawn  by  hand,  not  printed;  and  in  this
book  I  found  one  of  the  coats  of  arms  which  I  had  seen  in  the  crystal ;  only  the
one  in  the  book  was  quartered  with  another,  and  the  one  I  saw  in  the  crystal
was  quite  by  itself.  Lady  Radnor  found  that  it  was  the  coat  belonging  to  an
heiress,  a  Miss  Smith.  A  little  while  afterwards,  in  an  old  church  register  or
account-book  or  something,  the  name  of  Sir  Edwye  de  Bovery  was  found.

[It  was  in  an  extract  from  a  parish  register  at  Britford  Church,  in  which
parish  Longford  is.  Sir  Edward  des  Bouverie,  Kt.,  whose  name  I  have  since
found  spelt  in  old  deeds  de  Bovery,  though  he  signed  it  himself  des  Bouverie,
lived  at  the  Red  House,  Cheshunt,  Herts,  and  died  there  1694.  His  son,  Sir
William,  sold  the  house,  and  lived  partly  at  the  Parsonage  of  Cheshunt.  There
is  a  place  called  White  Webs  in  that  neighbourhood.  Sir  Edward's  grandson,
Edward  des  Bouverie,  sold  the  property  and  settled  at  Longford  in  1717.  In
1718  he  married  Mary  Smith,  daughter  and  co-heiress  of  John  Smith  of  London,
one  of  the  first  Governors  of  the  Bank  of  England.  There  were  many  secret
passages  leading  to  and  from  the  Red  House  at  Cheshunt ;  but  I  have  not
tried  to  identify  the  house  at  White  Webs.— H.  M.  RADNOR.]

Af.   Retrocognitivc  Scene.

Mrs.  A.  gives  the  following  account :  "  In  October  1886  my  daughter  saw  in
the  stone  in  her  bracelet  a  scene  which  considerably  impressed  me,  as  it  was
VOL.  I.  2  P

594  APPENDICES  [625  C

one  which  I  at  once  identified,  while  I  was  absolutely  sure  that  I  had  never
mentioned  it  to  her  or  to  any  of  my  children.  She  saw  a  man  in  a  barge-like
boat  with  a  very  large  gun  fixed  in  it,  the  object  of  which  she  could  not  under-
stand. The  man  was  alone  and  lying  in  the  bottom  of  the  boat,  and  this  also
puzzled  her.  Waves  seemed  to  get  up,  and  the  man  rowed  extremely  hard,  as
though  trying  to  get  to  shore.  Then  she  saw  him  throw  himself  down  motionless
on  to  the  low  beach,  as  if  dead.  Now  this  plainly  refers  to  a  sad  crisis  in  my
father's  life.  He  went  out  duck-shooting  alone  on  a  Norfolk  Broad,  with  an
opening  to  the  sea.  A  storm  got  up,  and  he  was  all  but  blown  out  to  sea.  He
was  a  very  strong  man,  and  by  great  exertion  he  got  to  land.  Then  he  threw
himself  down  absolutely  spent ;  and  the  exhaustion  of  that  day  was  the
beginning  of  an  illness  which  ultimately  killed  him."

[Another  case,  which  in  one  sense  at  least  is  retrocognitive,  is  supplied  by
the  Hon.  Eric  Barrington,  and  confirmed  by  Mrs.  Barrington.  I  have  also
received  a  concordant  account  of  the  crystal-message  from  Lady  Radnor,  the
hostess  on  the  occasion  alluded  to.]

62  CADOGAN  PLACE,

O.  November  21,  1892.

Two  years  ago  I  met  Miss  A.,  I  think  for  the  first  time,  at  dinner  at  a
friend's  house.  She  told  my  wife  that  she  had  seen  standing  behind  my  chair
a  figure  which  from  her  description,  though  somewhat  vague,  seemed  to  be
that  of  a  very  great  friend  of  mine,  an  officer  who  had  died  about  seven  years
ago  on  active  service.  She  referred  particularly  to  the  attitude  assumed  by  the
figure,  which  was  like  the  one  in  a  photograph  I  possess  of  him,  but  which  she
had  never  seen.  She  knew  nothing  of  this  friendship,  and  the  name  of  the
officer  was  not  mentioned  to  her.

Last  summer  we  met  again  at  the  same  house,  and  although  in  the  interval
we  had  become  better  acquainted  with  Miss  A.  and  her  family,  I  am  not  con-
scious of  having  ever  said  anything  to  her  on  the  subject  of  my  friend.  On
reaching  the  drawing-room  after  dinner  I  found  her  looking  into  a  crystal  and
dictating  with  extraordinary  rapidity  a  number  of  letters  of  the  alphabet  which
were  passing  before  her,  and  were  being  taken  down  by  the  lady  of  the  house,
who  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  keeping  pace  with  her.  When  the  letters
ceased,  it  was  discovered  by  marking  them  off  from  the  end  that  they  formed  a
complete  message,  of  which  each  word  was  spelt  backwards.  Before  the  letters
began  to  show  themselves  Miss  A.  saw  in  the  crystal  the  same  figure  that  she
had  seen  two  years  before,  dressed  in  what  appeared  to  be  a  dark  uniform,  and
in  the  same  peculiar  attitude,  but  I  was  not  in  the  room  when  this  occurred.
As  soon,  however,  as  the  message  was  deciphered  by  our  hostess,  it  became
evident  that  it  purported  to  proceed  from  the  person  whose  likeness  had  just
been  reproduced.  It  was  addressed,  not  to  me,  who  was  absent  from  the  room
when  the  letters  first  appeared,  but  to  my  wife,  and  was  to  the  following
effect  :—

"  Ask  your  husband  whether  he  still  remembers  T.  T.  Tell  him  that  I  am
constantly  with  him,  and  that  death  makes  no  difference  in  friendship."

The  full  surname  was  given,  preceded  by  a  nickname  which  had  been
dropped  when  he  grew  up,  and  was  only  known  to  those  who,  like  myself,  had
been  intimate  with  him  from  childhood.

It  cannot  be  suggested  that  Miss  A.  had  been  in  any  way  impressed  by  my
thoughts,  for  it  was  not  until  I  sat  by  my  hostess  and  helped  her  to  spell  out

625D]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  59$

the  words  of  the  message  that  I  realised  from  whom  it  came,  when  I  was  able
to  explain  the  meaning  of  the  nickname  that  had  completely  puzzled  her,
though  she  had  been  well  acquainted  with  the  bearer  after  he  entered  the
army.  ERIC  BARRINGTON.

This  entirely  agrees  with  my  recollection  of  the  circumstances.  The
moment  Miss  A.  described  the  figure  on  our  first  meeting,  I  felt  a  very  peculiar
sensation,  accompanied  by  a  certainty  as  to  the  identity  of  the  person  she  saw.

CHRISTINA  BARRINGTON.

[There  is  a  privately  printed  life  of  the  officer  in  question,  in  which  an  early
nickname  of  his  is  given.  But  I  find  that  this  nickname  is  not  the  same  as
that  shown  in  the  crystal,  which  was  appropriate  for  recognition  by  friends  of
boyhood  only.]

625  D.  The  following  accounts  are  extracts  from  Mr.  Andrew  Lang's
Making  of  Religion  (1898).  Mr.  Lang  tells  us  that  he  made  the  acquaint-
ance of  the  lady  whom  he  calls  "  Miss  Angus  "  early  in  1897  ;  he  obtained
a  glass  ball  for  the  purpose  of  asking  her  to  experiment  with  it,  and  was
present  when  she  first  did  so.  The  first  case  given  here  occurred  on  the
day  after  she  began  her  experiments,  and  is  described  in  her  own  words
(op.  cit.y  p.  96).

A  lady  one  day  asked  me  to  scry  out  a  friend  of  whom  she  would  think.
Almost  immediately  I  exclaimed,  *4  Here  is  an  old,  old  lady  looking  at  me  with
a  triumphant  smile  on  her  face.  She  has  a  prominent  nose  and  nut-cracker
chin.  Her  face  is  very  much  wrinkled,  especially  at  the  sides  of  her  eyes,  as  if
she  were  always  smiling.  She  is  wearing  a  little  white  shawl  with  a  black  edge.
But  .  .  .  she  cartt  be  old,  as  her  hair  is  quite  brown,  although  her  face  looks  so
very,  very  old."  The  picture  then  vanished,  and  the  lady  said  that  I  had  accu-
rately described  her  friend's  mother  instead  of  himself ;  that  it  was  a  family  joke
that  the  mother  must  dye  her  hair,  it  was  so  brown,  and  she  was  eighty-two
years  old.  The  lady  asked  me  if  the  vision  were  distinct  enough  for  me  to
recognise  a  likeness  in  the  son's  photograph ;  next  day  she  laid  several  photo-
graphs before  me,  and  in  a  moment,  without  the  slightest  hesitation,  I  picked
him  out  from  his  wonderful  likeness  to  my  vision.

Mr.  Lang  adds  : —

The  inquirer  verbally  corroborated  all  the  facts  to  me,  within  a  week,  but
leaned  to  a  theory  of  "  electricity."  She  has  read  and  confirms  this  account.

The  next  case  which  I  quote  is  given,  says  Mr.  Lang  (p.  101),  first  in
the  version  ot  the  lady  who  was  unconsciously  scried  for,  and  next  in
that  of  Miss  Angus.  The  other  lady  writes  : —

November  2yd,  1897.

I  met  Miss  A.  for  the  first  time  in  a  friend's  house  in  the  south  of  England,
and  one  evening  mention  was  made  of  a  crystal  ball,  and  our  hostess  asked
Miss  A.  to  look  in  it,  and  if  possible,  tell  her  what  was  happening  to  a  friend  of
hers.  Miss  A.  took  the  crystal,  and  our  hostess  put  her  hand  on  Miss  A.'s
forehead  to  "will  her."  I,  not  believing  in  this,  took  up  a  book  and  went  to
the  other  side  of  the  room.  I  was  suddenly  very  much  startled  to  hear  Miss

596  APPENDICES  [625  D

A.,  in  quite  an  agitated  way,  describe  a  scene  that  had  most  certainly  been  very
often  in  my  thoughts,  but  of  which  I  had  never  mentioned  a  word.  She  accu-
rately described  a  race-course  in  Scotland,  and  an  accident  which  happened  to  a
friend  of  mine  only  a  week  or  two  before,  and  she  was  evidently  going  through
the  same  doubt  and  anxiety  that  I  did  at  the  time  as  to  whether  he  was  actu-
ally killed  or  only  very  much  hurt.  It  really  was  a  most  wonderful  revelation
to  me,  as  it  was  the  very  first  time  I  had  seen  a  crystal.  Our  hostess,  of
course,  was  very  much  annoyed  that  she  had  not  been  able  to  influence  Miss
A.,  while  I,  who  had  appeared  so  very  indifferent,  should  have  affected  her.

Miss  Angus  herself  writes  :  —

Another  case  was  a  rather  interesting  one,  as  I  somehow  got  inside  the
thoughts  of  one  lady  while  another  was  doing  her  best  to  influence  me !

Miss  ,  a  friend  in  Brighton,  has  strange  "  magnetic "  powers,  and  felt

quite  sure  of  success  with  me  and  the  ball.

Another  lady,  Miss  H.,  who  was  present,  laughed  at  the  whole  thing,

especially  when  Miss insisted  on  holding  my  hand,  and  putting  her  other

hand  on  my  forehead.  Miss  H.  in  a  scornful  manner  took  up  a  book,  and
crossing  to  the  other  side  of  the  room,  left  us  to  our  folly.

In  a  very  short  time  I  felt  myself  getting  excited,  which  had  never  happened
before,  when  I  looked  in  the  crystal.  I  saw  a  crowd  of  people,  and  in  some
strange  way  I  felt  I  was  in  it,  and  we  all  seemed  to  be  waiting  for  something.
Soon  a  rider  came  past,  young,  dressed  for  racing.  His  horse  ambled  past,
and  he  smiled  and  nodded  to  those  he  knew  in  the  crowd,  and  then  was  lost  to
sight.

In  a  moment  we  all  seemed  to  feel  as  if  something  had  happened,  and  I
went  through  great  agony  of  suspense,  trying  to  see  what  seemed  just  beyond
my  view.  Soon,  however,  two  or  three  men  approached,  and  carried  him  past
before  my  eyes,  and  again  my  anxiety  was  intense  to  discover  if  he  were  only
very  badly  hurt  or  if  life  were  really  extinct.  All  this  happened  in  a  few
moments,  but  long  enough  to  have  left  me  so  agitated  that  I  could  not  realise
it  had  only  been  a  vision  in  a  glass  ball.

By  this  time  Miss  H.  had  laid  aside  her  book  and  came  forward  quite
startled,  and  told  me  that  I  had  accurately  described  a  scene  on  a  race-course  in
Scotland  which  she  had  witnessed  just  a  week  or  two  before — a  scene  that  had
very  often  been  in  her  thoughts,  but,  as  we  were  strangers  to  each  other,  she
had  never  mentioned.  She  also  said  I  had  exactly  described  her  own  feelings
at  the  time,  and  had  brought  it  all  back  in  a  most  vivid  manner.

The  other  lady  was  rather  disappointed  that,  after  she  had  concentrated  her
thoughts  so  hard,  I  should  have  been  influenced  instead  by  one  who  had  jeered
at  the  whole  affair.

[This  anecdote  was  also  told  to  me,  within  a  few  days  of  the  occurrence,  by
Miss  Angus.  Her  version  was  that  she  first  saw  a  gentleman  rider  going  to  the
post  and  nodding  to  his  friends.  Then  she  saw  him  carried  on  a  stretcher
through  the  crowd.  She  seemed,  she  said,  to  be  actually  present,  and  felt
somewhat  agitated.  The  fact  of  the  accident  was,  later,  mentioned  to  me  in
Scotland  by  another  lady,  a  stranger  to  all  the  persons.  A.  L.]

The  next  case  is  thus  described  by  Mr.  Lang  (p.  106)  :  —

The   following   examples   have  some  curious   and  unusual  features.      On

625  D]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  597

Wednesday,  February  2,  1897,  Miss  Angus  was  looking  in  the  crystal,  to  amuse
six  or  seven  people  whose  acquaintance  she  had  that  day  made.  A  gentleman,
Mr.  Bissett,  asked  her  "  What  letter  was  in  his  pocket  ?  "  She  then  saw,  under  a
bright  sky,  and,  as  it  were,  a  long  way  off,  a  large  building,  in  and  out  of  which
many  men  were  coming  and  going.  Her  impression  was  that  the  scene  must
be  abroad.  In  the  little  company  present,  it  should  be  added,  was  a  lady,  Mrs.
Cockburn,  who  had  considerable  reason  to  think  of  her  young  married  daughter,
then  at  a  place  about  fifty  miles  away.  After  Miss  Angus  had  described  the
large  building  and  crowds  of  men,  some  one  asked,  *'  Is  it  an  Exchange  ?  "  "  It
might  be,"  she  said.  "  Now  comes  a  man  in  a  great  hurry.  He  has  a  broad
brow,  and  short,  curly  hair;1  hat  pressed  low  down  on  his  eyes.  The  face
is  very  serious,  but  he  has  a  delightful  smile."  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bissett  now  both
recognised  their  friend  and  stockbroker,  whose  letter  was  in  Mr.  Bissett's
pocket.

The  vision,  which  interested  Miss  Angus,  passed  away,  and  was  interrupted
by  that  of  a  hospital  nurse,  and  of  a  lady  in  a  peignoir,  lying  on  a  sofa,  with  bare
feet. 2  Miss  Angus  mentioned  this  vision  as  a  bore,  she  being  more  interested  in
the  stockbroker,  who  seems  to  have  inherited  what  was  once  in  the  possession
of  another  stockbroker— "  the  smile  of  Charles  Lamb."  Mrs.  Cockburn,  for
whom  no  pictures  appeared,  was  rather  vexed,  and  privately  expressed  with
freedom  a  very  sceptical  opinion  about  the  whole  affair.  But,  on  Saturday,
February  5,  1897,  Miss  Angus  was  again  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bissett.  When
Mrs.  Bissett  announced  that  she  had  "  thought  of  something,"  Miss  Angus  saw
a  walk  in  a  wood  or  garden,  beside  a  river,  under  a  brilliant  blue  sky.  Here
was  a  lady,  very  well  dressed,  twirling  a  white  parasol  on  her  shoulder  as  she
walked,  in  a  curious  "  stumpy  "  way,  beside  a  gentleman  in  light  clothes,  such
as  are  worn  in  India.  He  was  broad-shouldered,  had  a  short  neck  and  a
straight  nose,  and  seemed  to  listen,  laughing,  but  indifferent,  to  his  obviously
vivacious  companion.  The  lady  had  a  "drawn  "  face,  indicative  of  ill  health.
Then  followed  a  scene  in  which  the  man,  without  the  lady,  was  looking  on  at
a  number  of  Orientals  busy  in  the  felling  of  trees.  Mrs.  Bissett  recognised  in
the  lady  her  sister,  Mrs.  Clifton,  in  India— above  all,  when  Miss  Angus  gave  a
realistic  imitation  of  Mrs.  Clifton's  walk,  the  peculiarity  of  which  was  caused
by  an  illness  some  years  ago.  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bissett  also  recognised  their
brother-in-law  in  the  gentleman  seen  in  both  pictures.  On  being  shown  a  por-
trait of  Mrs.  Clifton  as  a  girl,  Miss  Angus  said  it  was  "  like,  but  too  pretty."  A
photograph  done  recently,  however,  showed  her  "  the  drawn  face "  of  the
crystal  picture.*

Next  day,  Sunday,  February  6,  Mrs.  Bissett  received — what  was  not  usual —
a  letter  from  her  sister  in  India,  Mrs.  Clifton,  dated  January  20.  Mrs.  Clifton
described  a  place  in  a  native  State,  where  she  had  been  at  a  great  "function  "
in  certain  gardens  beside  a  river.  She  added  that  they  were  going  to  another
place  for  a  certain  purpose,  "and  then  we  go  into  camp  till  the  end  of  Feb-
ruary." One  of  Mr.  Clifton's  duties  is  to  direct  the  clearing  of  wood  preparatory
to  the  formation  of  the  camp,  as  in  Miss  Angus's  crystal  picture.4  The  sceptical

i  Miss  Angus  could  not  be  sure  of  the  colour  of  the  hair.

*  The  position  was  such  that  Miss  Angus  could  not  see  the  face  of  the  lady.
8  I  saw  the  photographs.

*  I  have  been  shown  the  letter  of  January  20,  which  confirmed  the  evidence  of  the
crystal  pictures.    The  camp  was  formed  for  official  purposes  in  which  Mr.  Clifton  waa
concerned.    A  letter  of  February  9  unconsciously  corroborates.

598  APPENDICES  [630  A

Mrs.  Cockburn  heard  of  these  coincidences,  and  an  idea  occurred  to  her.  She
wrote  to  her  daughter,  who  has  been  mentioned,  and  asked  whether,  on  Wed-
nesday, February  2,  she  had  been  lying  on  a  sofa  in  her  bedroom  with  bare
feet.  The  young  lady  confessed  that  it  was  indeed  so,1  and,  when  she  heard
how  the  fact  came  to  be  known,  expressed  herself  with  some  warmth  on  the
abuse  of  glass  balls,  which  tend  to  rob  life  of  its  privacy.2

630  A.     Note  on  "  Number- Habits"

Some  critics  of  the  experimental  evidence  for  thought-transference  have
attempted  to  show  that  a  large  proportion  of  the  successes  obtained  may  be
due,  not  to  telepathy,  but  to  the  mental  idiosyncrasies  of  the  experimenters.
This  is  a  possible  source  of  error  which  should  always  be  kept  in  mind,  but  its
actual  bearing  on  the  evidence  has  been  widely  misunderstood.  A  brief  general
review  of  the  subject  of  "  mental  habits  "  is  therefore  given  here.

It  has  long  been  recognised  by  psychologists  that  most— if  not  all — persons
have  unconscious  preferences  for  certain  objects  or  ideas  over  others  of  the  same
class ;  so  that,  if  one  is  asked  to  guess  or  to  think  of,  say,  a  colour,  a  playing-
card,  or  a  number, — certain  colours,  cards,  or  numbers  occur  to  the  mind  more
frequently  than  others,  and  are  therefore  guessed  more  often.  These  idiosyn-
crasies are  called  "mental  habits,"  or — if  we  are  referring  to  numbers  only —
"  number-habits,"  and  they  may  vary  in  the  same  person  at  different  times.  But
different  persons  may  exhibit  the  same  preferences,  and  when  this  is  so  in  the
case  of  two  experimenters,  a  certain  proportion  of  the  diagrams  drawn  by  the
percipient  may  resemble  those  drawn  by  the  agent,  and  thus  simulate  the
phenomenon  of  thought-transference.  Similarly,  if  the  cards  or  numbers  to
be  guessed  are  chosen  by  the  agent,  his  mental  habits  may  lead  him  to  choose
a  large  proportion  of  those  that  happen  also  to  be  favourites  with  the  per-
cipient, who  will  therefore  have  a  better  chance  of  guessing  right.  This  is,  of
course,  one  reason  why  it  is  always  best  for  the  agent  in  experiments  with
cards  or  numbers  to  draw  them  at  random  from  a  batch  and  not  to  choose
them.

It  is  sometimes  found,  in  fact,  that  in  experiments  with  diagrams  of  which
only  a  small  proportion  have  succeeded,  the  successes  relate  to  the  most  familiar
forms,  such  as  circles  and  triangles.  To  explain,  however,  by  "  mental  habits  "
the  large  proportion  of  success  in  the  series  cited  below,  it  would  be  necessary
to  prove  that  almost  all  the  diagrams  used  were  general  favourites.8

In  order  to  test  empirically  how  far  mental  habits  might  have  simulated
thought-transference  in  the  experiments  with  diagrams,  Colonel  G.  L.  Le  M.

1  The  incident  of  the  feet  occurred  at  4.30  to  7.30  P.M.    The  crystal  picture  was
about  10  P.M.

2  [Mr.  Lang  gives  further  footnotes  referring  to  these  cases  as  follows :]  "  Miss  Angus
had  only  within  the  week  made  the  acquaintance  of  Mrs.  Cockburn  and  the  Bissetts.
Of  these  relations  of  theirs  at  a  distance  she  had  no  knowledge.     This  account  I  wrote
from  the  verbal  statement  of  Mrs.  Bissett.     It  was  then  read  and  corroborated  by
herself,  Mr.  Bissett,  Mr.  Cockburn,  Mrs.  Cockburn,  and  Miss  Angus,  who  added  dates
and  signatures.     The  letters  attesting  each  of  these  experiments  are  in  my  possession.
The  real  names  are  in  no  case  given  in  this  account,  by  my   own  desire,  but  (with
permission  of  the  persons  concerned)  can  be  communicated  privately."

8  An  attempt  was  made  by  Professor  C.  S.  Minot  (see  his  paper  "  Upon  the  Diagram
Tests  "  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  S.P.R.,  vol.  i.  p.  302)  to  find  statistically  what
forms  occur  most  often  when  people  are  asked  to  draw  or  to  think  of  diagrams.

630A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  599

Taylor  carried  out  a  series  of  dummy  experiments,  made  in  the  same  manner
as  the  experiments  in  thought-transference,  but  with  the  element  of  thought-
transference  eliminated  (see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  398).  He  got  eighty
persons  to  draw  twenty-five  diagrams  each,  and  so  obtained  1000  pairs  of
diagrams,  which  could  be  compared  according  to  a  prearranged  plan.  The
comparison  showed  how  many  resemblances  were  actually  produced  by  chance,
combined  with  similarity  in  the  mental  habits  of  the  persons  who  drew  the  dia-
grams ;  and  the  number  of  resemblances  were  found  to  be  proportionately  far
less  than  those  found  in  the  experiments  in  thought-transference.

To  this  it  might  be  objected  that  the  persons  who  drew  the  diagrams  being
taken  at  random,  there  was  no  reason  to  expect  similarity  in  their  mental  habits ;
whereas— since  some  experiments  in  thought-transference  fail,  while  others  suc-
ceed— it  might  be  argued  that  only  those  succeed  where  the  mental  habits  of
agent  and  percipient  happen  to  be  similar.  Similarity  of  mental  habits  could
not,  of  course,  in  any  case  ensure  success,  because  it  would  be  very  unlikely  that
the  percipient  would  think  of  his  favourite  forms  in  the  same  order  as  the  agent ;
but  it  might  increase  the  chance  of  success.  In  many  of  the  experiments  in
thought-transference,  however,  the  diagrams  were  drawn  or  selected  by  some
person  other  than  the  agent,  and  not  always  the  same  person,  so  that  a  general
similarity  in  mental  habits— as  well  as  a  general  tendency  to  think  of  the
favourites  in  the  same  order — would  have  to  be  assumed,  and  this  seems  to  be
negatived  by  Colonel  Taylor's  experiments.

In  the  case  of  experiments  with  such  objects  as  numbers,1  the  effect  of
"  mental  habits  "  can  be  more  precisely  tested.  Supposing  first  that  the  same
numbers  happen  to  be  the  favourites  of  both  agent  and  percipient.  If,  then,  the
agent  selects  numbers  to  think  of,  some  successful  guesses  may  be  made  which
are  due— not  to  thought-transference,  but  to  similarity  in  the  number-habits  of
the  two  experimenters.

This  source  of  error,  however,  may  be  absolutely  excluded  if  the  numbers  to
be  guessed  are  not  selected  -voluntarily  by  the  agent,  but  drawn  at  random  from
a  batch  of  numbers.  As  early  as  1886,  therefore  (see  Phantasms  of  the  Living,
vol.  i.  pp.  31-35,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  653),  experimenters  who  worked  in  connection
with  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research  were  accustomed  to  use  the  method  of
drawing  numbers  at  random.

On  the  other  hand,  supposing  again  that  the  agent  selects  the  numbers  and
that  his  number-habits  are  markedly  dissimilar  from  those  of  the  percipient,
then  the  successes  would  probably  be  decidedly  fewer  than  they  would  be  if
due  to  chance  alone.

Now,  confining  ourselves  to  cases  where  the  numbers  to  be  guessed  are
drawn  at  random,  it  is  clear  that  the  existence  of  any  decided  number-habit
does  not  affect  in  any  way  the  probability  of  guessing  right  by  chance,  since  the
number  drawn  at  any  moment  is  neither  more  nor  less  likely  to  be  one  of  the
percipient's  favourites  than  to  be  any  other  number.  On  the  average,  there-
fore, the  number  of  accidental  successes  would  be  the  same,  whether  a  number-
habit  existed  or  not.

1  For  examples  of  the  experimental  study  of  number-habits,  see  Professor  and  Mrs.

Sidgwick's  articles  on  their  experiments  in  thought-transference  in  the  Proceedings

,  vol.  vi.  p.  170,  and  vol.  viii.  p.  548  ;  also  a  further  discussion  by  Professor  Sidg-

wick  in  vol.  xii.  pp.  303-4  ;  and  a  brief  account  in  a  review  of  Dr.  Dessoir's  Das  Dopptl-

Ich  in  vol.  vi.  p.  209.

6oo  APPENDICES  [630  B

A  decided  number-habit  may,  however,  affect  prejudicially  the  number  of
successes  produced  by  telepathy  (assuming,  for  the  sake  of  the  argument,  that
successes  may  sometimes  be  due  to  telepathy),  because  the  idea  of  the  favourite
number,  constantly  obtruding  itself  into  the  mind,  would  tend  to  obscure  or
replace  the  impressions  derived  telepathically ;  just  as,  when  a  material  object
is  perceived  in  the  ordinary  way  through  the  senses,  a  preconceived  idea  as  to
what  the  object  is  may  often  make  us  perceive  it  wrongly.

Thus,  in  experiments  of  the  kind  under  consideration,  there  is  only  one  case
in  which  the  existence  of  number-habits  can  increase  the  successes  and  so  make
the  evidence  for  telepathy  in  that  case  appear  stronger  than  it  really  is  ;  namely,
the  case  in  which  (i)  the  agent  selects  the  numbers  to  be  guessed  and  at  the
same  time  (2)  his  number-habits  are  similar  to  those  of  the  percipient.  In  all
other  cases,  number-habits  would  decrease  those  successes  which  are  due  to
any  other  agency  than  chance.

630  B.  The  first  experimental  study  of  thought-transference  was
connected  with  the  discovery  that  the  somnambulistic  state  could  be
artificially  induced,  and  the  greater  number  of  observations  made  during
this  early  stage  were  carried  out  in  this  country  during  the  second  quarter
of  the  nineteenth  century.  Thought-transference  in  these  cases  took  the
form  of  community  of  sensation  between  operator  and  subject,  depending,
as  was  supposed,  on  a  specific  rapport  between  them  (see  571).  The
phenomenon  was  not  studied  by  itself,  but  regarded  as  belonging  essen-
tially to  mesmerism ;  consequently  it  shared  in  the  discredit  into  which
the  latter  fell,  being  only  one  of  the  numerous  reported  mesmeric
marvels,  which — speaking  generally — were  rejected  wholesale  and  without
inquiry.

The  first  impetus  to  the  more  recent  scientific  study  of  telepathy  was
given  by  Professor  W.  F.  Barrett,  F.R.S.,  who  brought  forward  some
results  of  his  own  with  a  hypnotised  girl,  in  a  paper  read  before  the
British  Association  in  1876.  In  the  course  of  the  correspondence
arising  out  of  his  paper,  Professor  Barrett  learnt  of  other  instances,
which  he  carefully  investigated,  in  which  telepathy  had  been  observed
in  the  normal  waking  state.  Later,  in  the  years  1881-2,  a  long  series
of  experiments  in  which  Professor  Sidgwick,  Professor  Balfour  Stewart,
Edmund  Gurney,  myself,  and  others  joined  with  Professor  Barrett,  seemed
to  establish  the  possibility  of  a  new  mode  of  communication  from  mind
to  mind.  And  these  early  results  have  been  confirmed  by  further  experi-
ments continued  down  to  the  present  time  by  observers  both  in  this
country  and  abroad.

At  about  the  time  of  the  early  S.P.R.  experiments  in  thought-transfer-
ence, popular  interest  had  been  roused  in  the  subject  by  the  invention  of
the  "willing  game,"  and  the  discussions  and  experiments — especially  of
Professor  Barrett  and  other  members  of  the  S.P.R. — which  showed  that
success  in  the  game  depended  on  "  muscle-reading," — that  the  subject
was  led  to  perform  actions  by  unconscious  guidance  from  the  person
touching  him,  in  the  same  way  that  table-tilting,  or  even  such  com-

630B]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  601

plicated  processes  as  writing,  may  be  carried  out  by  many  persons  in
complete  ignorance  that  their  wills,  or  even  their  muscles,  are  concerned.
Even  if  the  subject  is  not  in  contact  with  any  one,  he  may  be  guided
through  unconscious  variations  in  tone  of  voice,  gesture,  or  expression,
by  the  persons  watching  his  progress.  On  the  other  hand,  if  contact
ceases  before  he  begins  to  perform  the  required  movement ;  or  if,  while
in  contact,  he  has  only  to  say  what  mental  impression  he  has  received
— as  in  experiments  in  guessing  playing-cards,  numbers,  and  the  like —
the  possibility  of  unconscious  guidance  by  contact  is  much  reduced.
Since,  however,  it  is  impossible  to  make  sure  that  guidance  has  not  been
operative  under  such  circumstances,  we  cannot  claim  as  evidence  of
thought-transference  experiments  in  which  contact  has  been  allowed  at
any  stage.  The  experiments  cited  here  have  been  selected  with  a  special
view  to  the  exclusion  of  these  possible  sources  of  error,  and  therefore  no
cases  in  which  any  contact  had  been  allowed  are  given.

With  regard  to  the  possibility  of  deliberate  collusion  or  fraud,  no
general  statement  can  be  made  as  to  conditions  that  would  absolutely
exclude  this.  In  the  last  resort,  all  scientific  experiments  rest  on  the
bona  fides  of  the  experimenter.  There  are  many  psychological  observa-
tions which  cannot  be  controlled  by  others,  or  repeated  at  will,  since  they
relate  to  subjective  sensations,  or  depend  on  unknown  conditions;  but
they  are  generally  accepted  as  correct,  because  it  is  believed  that  the
observers  are  genuinely  interested  in  the  truth  of  the  facts.  Similar
presumption  of  the  genuineness  of  experiments  in  thought-transference
is  afforded  by  the  intelligence  of  the  experimenters,  the  scientific  standing
of  some  of  them,  and  the  general  spirit  in  which  their  work  has  been
done,  as  may  be  seen  from  the  detailed  accounts,  a  few  of  which  I
now  proceed  to  give.1

Mr.  Outline's  Experiments. — Full  records  of  these  experiments  were
published  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  i.  pp.  263-283  ;  vol.  ii.  pp.  1-5,
24-42,  189-200;  vol.  iii.  pp.  424-452.  The  account  here  quoted  is  a
briefer  one,  which  was  given  by  Gurney  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.
pp.  36-58.

In  [this]  series  of  experiments  .  .  .  there  were  two  percipients,  and  a  con-
siderable  group  of  agents,  each  of  whom,  when  alone  with  one  or  other  of  the
percipients,  was  successful  in  transferring  his  impression.  .  .  .

We  owe  these  remarkable  experiments  to  the  sagacity  and  energy  of  Mr.
Malcolm  Guthrie,  J.P.,  of  Liverpool.  At  the  beginning  of  1883,  Mr.  Guthrie

csiclcs  the  experiments  here  given,  see  those  of  Herr  Max  Dessoir  (Proceedings
S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.  p.  in,  and  vol.  v.  p.  355);  Herr  Anton  Schmoll  and  M.  Etienne
Mabire  (ibid.  vol.  iv.  p.  324,  and  vol.  v.  p.  169);  Mr.  J.  W.  Smith  (ibid.  vol.  ii.
p.  207);  Professor  Oliver  Lodge  (ibid.  vol.  vii.  p.  374);  Dr.  A.  Blair  Thaw  (ibid.  vol.
viii.  p.  422);  Dr.  von  Schrenck-Notzing  (ibid.  vol.  vii.  p.  3);  Professor  Richet  (ibid.
vol.  v.  p.  18).  See  also  Phantasms  of  tfu  Living,  vol.  i.  pp.  32-34,  and  vol.  ii.  pp.  653-
654.

602  APPENDICES  [630  B

happened  to  read  an  article  on  thought-transference  in  a  magazine,  and  though
completely  sceptical,  he  determined  to  make  some  trials  on  his  own  account.
He  was  then  at  the  head  of  an  establishment  which  gives  employment  to  many
hundreds  of  persons ;  and  he  was  informed  by  a  relative  who  occupied  a  posi-
tion of  responsibility  in  this  establishment  that  she  had  witnessed  remarkable
results  in  some  casual  trials  made  by  a  group  of  his  employees  after  business
hours.  He  at  once  took  the  matter  into  his  own  hands,  and  went  steadily,  but
cautiously,  to  work.  He  restricted  the  practice  of  the  novel  accomplishment  to
weekly  meetings;  and  he  arranged  with  his  friend,  Mr.  James  Birchall,  the
hon.  secretary  of  the  Liverpool  Literary  and  Philosophical  Society,  that  the
latter  should  make  a  full  and  complete  record  of  every  experiment  made.  Mr.
Guthrie  thus  describes  the  proceedings  : —

"  I  have  had  the  advantage  of  studying  a  series  of  experiments  ab  ovo.  I
have  witnessed  the  genuine  surprise  which  the  operators  and  the  '  subjects '  have
alike  exhibited  at  their  increasing  successes,  and  at  the  results  of  our  excursions
into  novel  lines  of  experiment.  The  affair  has  not  been  the  discovery  of  the
possession  of  special  powers,  first  made  and  then  worked  up  by  the  parties
themselves  for  gain  or  glory.  The  experimenters  in  this  case  were  disposed  to
pass  the  matter  over  altogether  as  one  of  no  moment,  and  only  put  themselves
at  my  disposal  in  regard  to  experiments  in  order  to  oblige  me.  The  experi-
ments have  all  been  devised  and  conducted  by  myself  and  Mr.  Birchall,  without
any  previous  intimation  of  their  nature,  and  could  not  possibly  have  been  fore-
seen. In  fact  they  have  been  to  the  young  ladies  a  succession  of  surprises.
No  set  of  experiments  of  a  similar  nature  has  ever  been  more  completely  known
from  its  origin,  or  more  completely  under  the  control  of  the  scientific  observer."

[In]  the  earlier  experiments,  the  ideas  transferred  were  of  colours,  geometri-
cal figures,  cards,  and  visible  objects  of  all  sorts,  which  the  percipient  was  to
name.  .  .  -1  The  reproduction  of  diagrams  was  introduced  in  October  1883,  and
in  that  and  the  following  month  about  150  trials  were  made.  The  whole  series
has  been  carefully  mounted  and  preserved  by  Mr.  Guthrie.  No  one  could  look
through  them  without  perceiving  that  the  hypothesis  of  chance  or  guesswork
is  out  of  the  question;  that  in  most  instances  some  idea,  and  in  many  a
complete  idea,  of  the  original  must,  by  whatever  means,  have  been  present  in
the  mind  of  the  person  who  made  the  reproduction.  In  Mr.  Guthrie's  words: —

"  It  is  difficult  to  classify  them.  A  great  number  of  them  are  decided
successes ;  another  large  number  give  part  of  the  drawing ;  others  exhibit  the
general  idea,  and  others  again  manifest  a  kind  of  composition  of  form.  Others,
such  as  the  drawings  of  flowers,  have  been  described  and  named,  but  have
been  too  difficult  to  draw.  A  good  many  are  perfect  failures.  The  drawings
generally  run  in  lots.  A  number  of  successful  copies  will  be  produced  very

1  There  is  one  point  of  novelty  which  is  thus  described  by  Mr.  Guthrie  :  "  We  tried
also  the  perception  of  motion,  and  found  that  the  movements  of  objects  exhibited  could
be  discerned.  The  idea  was  suggested  by  an  experiment  tried  with  a  card,  which  in
order  that  all  present  should  see,  I  moved  about,  and  was  informed  by  the  percipient
that  it  was  a  card,  but  she  could  not  tell  which  one  because  it  seemed  to  be  moving
about.  On  a  subsequent  occasion,  in  order  to  test  this  perception  of  motion,  I  bought  a
toy  monkey,  which  worked  up  and  down  on  a  stick  by  means  of  a  string  drawing  the
arms  and  legs  together.  The  answer  was  :  '  I  see  red  and  yellow,  and  it  is  darker  at  one
end  than  the  other.  It  is  like  a  flag  moving  about — it  is  moving.  .  .  .  Now  it  is  opening
and  shutting  like  a  pair  of  scissors.' "

630  B]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  603

quickly,  and  again  a  number  of  failures— indicating,  I  think,  faultiness  on  the
part  of  the  agent,  or  growing  fatigue  on  the  part  of  the  '  subject.'  Every  experi-
ment, whether  successful  or  a  failure,  is  given  in  the  order  of  trial,  with  the
conditions,  name  of  '  subject '  and  agent,  and  any  remarks  made  by  the  *  sub-
ject '  specified  at  the  bottom.  Some  of  the  reproductions  exhibit  the  curious
phenomenon  of  inversion.  These  drawings  must  speak  for  themselves.  The
principal  facts  to  be  borne  in  mind  regarding  them  are  that  they  have  been
executed  through  the  instrumentality,  as  agents,  of  persons  of  unquestioned
probity,  and  that  the  responsibility  for  them  is  spread  over  a  considerable  group
of  such  persons ;  while  the  conditions  to  be  observed  were  so  simple— for  they
amounted  really  to  nothing  more  than  taking  care  that  the  original  should  not
be  seen  by  the  'subject ' — that  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  suppose  them  to  have
been  eluded."

I  give  a  few  specimens— not  unduly  favourable  ones,  but  illustrating  the
"spreading  of  responsibility"  to  which  Mr.  Guthrie  refers.  The  agents  con-
cerned were  Mr.  Guthrie ;  Mr.  Steel,  the  President  of  the  Liverpool  Literary
and  Philosophical  Society;  Mr.  Birchall,  mentioned  above;  Mr.  Hughes,  B.A.,
of  St.  John's  College,  Cambridge ;  and  myself.  The  names  of  the  percipients
were  Miss  Relph  and  Miss  Edwards.  The  conditions  which  I  shall  describe
were  those  of  the  experiments  in  which  I  myself  took  part ;  and  I  have  Mr.
Guthrie's  authority  for  stating  that  they  were  uniformly  observed  in  the  other
cases.  The  originals  were  for  the  most  part  drawn  in  another  room  from  that
in  which  the  percipient  was  placed.  The  few  executed  in  the  same  room  were
drawn  while  the  percipient  was  blindfolded,  at  a  distance  from  her,  and  in  such
a  way  that  the  process  would  have  been  wholly  invisible  to  her  or  any  one  else,
even  had  an  attempt  been  made  to  observe  it.  During  the  process  of  trans-
ference, the  agent  looked  steadily  and  in  perfect  silence  at  the  original  drawing,
which  was  placed  upon  an  intervening  wooden  stand;  the  percipient  sitting
opposite  to  him,  and  behind  the  stand,  blindfolded  and  quite  still.  The  agent
ceased  looking  at  the  drawing,  and  the  blindfolding  was  removed,  only  when
the  percipient  professed  herself  ready  to  make  the  reproduction,  which  hap-
pened usually  in  times  varying  from  half  a  minute  to  two  or  three  minutes.
Her  position  rendered  it  absolutely  impossible  that  she  should  obtain  a  glimpse
of  the  original.  Apart  from  the  blindfolding,  she  could  not  have  done  so  with-
out rising  from  her  seat  and  advancing  her  head  several  feet;  and  as  she  was
very  nearly  in  the  same  line  of  sight  as  the  drawing,  and  so  very  nearly  in  the
centre  of  the  agent's  field  of  vision,  the  slightest  approach  to  such  a  movement
must  have  been  instantly  detected.  The  reproductions  were  made  in  perfect
silence,  the  agent  forbearing  to  follow  the  actual  process  of  the  drawing  with  his
eyes,  though  he  was,  of  course,  able  to  keep  the  percipient  under  the  closest
observation.

In  the  case  of  all  the  diagrams,  except  those  numbered  7  and  8,  the  agent
and  the  percipient  were  the  only  two  persons  in  the  room  during  the  experi-
ment. In  the  case  of  numbers  7  and  8,  the  agent  and  Miss  Relph  were  sitting
quite  apart  in  a  corner  of  the  room,  while  Mr.  Guthrie  and  Miss  Edwards  were
talking  in  another  part  of  it.  Numbers  1-6  are  specially  interesting  as  being
the  complete  and  consecutive  series  of  a  single  sitting.

[There  was  no  contact  between  the  agent  and  percipient  in  the  case  of  any
of  the  diagrams  here  reproduced.]

6o4

APPENDICES

[630  B

No.  i.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.  No.  i.    REPRODUCTION

Mr.  Guthrie  and  Miss  Edwards.     No  contact.

No.  2.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

No.  2.    REPRODUCTION.

Mr.  Guthrie  and  Miss  Edwards.    No  contact.

630  B]

TO    CHAPTER    VI

605

No.  3.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

No.  3.    REPRODUCTION.

Mr.  Guthrie  and  Miss  Edwards.
No  contact.

No.  4.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

No.  4.    REPRODUCTION.

Mr.  Guthrie  and  Miss  Edward*.
No  contact.

606

APPENDICES

[630  B

No.  5.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

No.  5.    REPRODUCTION.

Mr.  Guthrie  and  Miss  Edwards.
No  contact.

No.  6.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

Mr.  Guthrie  and  Miss  Edwards.    No  contact.

No.  6.    REPRODUCTION.

Miss   Edwards  almost  directly  said,    "  Are  you  thinking  of  the  bottom  of  the  sea,   with
shells  and  fishes  ?  "  and  then,  "  Is  it  a  snail  or  a  fish  ?  " — then  drew  as  above.

630  B]

TO    CHAPTER    VI

607

No.  8.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

No.  8.    REPRODUCTION.

Mr.  Gurney  and  Miss  Relph.    No  contact.

No.  9.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

Mr.  Birchall  and  Miss  Relph.    No  contact.

No.  9.    REPRODUCTION.

Miss  Relph  said  she  seemed  to  see  a  lot  of  rings,  as  if  they  were  moving,  and  she  could
not  get  them  steadily  before  her  eyes.

6o8

APPENDICES

[630  B

No.  10.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

No.  10.    REPRODUCTION.

Mr.  Birchall  and  Miss  Relph.     No  contact.

No.  n.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

Mr.  Birchall  and  Miss  Edwards.    No  contact.

630B]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  609

No.  12.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

Mr.  Steel  and  Miss  Relph.    No  contact.

No.  12.    REPRODUCTION.

VOL.    I.  2  Q

6io

APPENDICES

[630  B

No.  15.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

Mr.  Hughes  and  Miss  Edwards.     No  contact.

No.  15.    REPRODUCTION.

Miss  Edwards  said,  "  It  is  like  a  mask  at  a  pantomime,"  and  immediately  drew  as  adove.

630  B]

TO    CHAPTER    VI

611

No.  16.    ORIGINAL  DRAWING.

Mr.  Hughes  and  Miss  Edwards.     No  contact.

No.  16.    REPRODUCTION.

612  APPENDICES  [630  B

Soon  after  the  publication  of  these  results,  Mr.  Guthrie  was  fortunate  enough
to  obtain  the  active  co-operation  of  Dr.  Oliver  J.  Lodge,  Professor  of  Physics  in
University  College,  Liverpool,  who  carried  out  a  long  and  independent  series  of
experiments  with  the  same  two  percipients,  and  completely  convinced  himself
of  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomena.  In  his  report,1  he  says:  "...  We
have  many  times  succeeded  with  agents  quite  disconnected  from  the  per-
cipient in  ordinary  life,  and  sometimes  complete  strangers  to  them.  Mr.
Birchall,  the  headmaster  of  the  Birkdale  Industrial  School,  frequently  acted ;
and  the  house  physician  at  the  Eye  and  Ear  Hospital,  Dr.  Shears,  had  a  suc-
cessful experiment,  acting  alone,  on  his  first  and  only  visit.  All  suspicion  of  a
pre-arranged  code  is  thus  rendered  impossible  even  to  outsiders  who  are  unable
to  witness  the  obvious  fairness  of  all  the  experiments."

The  objects  of  which  the  idea  was  transferred  were  sometimes  things  with
names  (cards,  key,  teapot,  flag,  locket,  picture  of  donkey,  and  so  on),  sometimes
irregular  drawings  with  no  name.  Professor  Lodge  satisfied  himself  that  audi-
tory as  well  as  visual  impressions  played  a  part — that  in  some  cases  the  idea
transferred  was  that  of  the  object  itself,  and,  in  others,  that  of  its  name.  .  .  .
Of  the  two  percipients  one  seemed  more  susceptible  to  the  visual,  and  the
other  to  the  auditory  impressions.  A  case  where  the  auditory  element  seems
clearly  to  have  come  in  is  the  following.  The  object  was  a  tetrahedron
rudely  drawn  in  projection,  thus —

A

The  percipient  said:   "Is  it  another  triangle?"     No  answer  was  given,  but
Professor  Lodge  silently  passed  round   to  the   agents  a  scribbled  message,
"Think  of  a  pyramid."     The  percipient  then  said,  "  I  only  see  a  triangle  "•
then  hastily,  **  Pyramids  of  Egypt.     No,  I  shan't  do  this."     Asked  to  draw,  she
only  drew  a  triangle.

I  will  give  only  one  other  case  from  this  series,  which  is  important  as  show-
ing that  the  percipient  may  be  simultaneously  influenced  by  two  minds,  which
are  concentrated  on  two  different  things.  The  two  agents  being  seated  opposite
to  one  another,  Professor  Lodge  placed  between  them  a  piece  of  paper,  on  one
side  of  which  was  drawn  a  square,  and  on  the  other  a  cross.  They  thus  had

n   x

ORIGINALS.  REPRODUCTION.

different  objects  to  contemplate,  and  neither  knew  what  the  other  was  looking
at ;  nor  did  the  percipient  know  that  anything  unusual  was  being  tried.  There
was  no  contact.  Very  soon  the  percipient  said,  "  I  see  things  moving  about
...  I  seem  to  see  two  things  ...  I  see  first  one  up  there,  and  then  one  down
there  ...  I  don't  know  which  to  draw  ...  I  can't  see  either  distinctly."  Pro-
fessor Lodge  said:  "  Well,  anyhow,  draw  what  you  have  seen."  She  took  off
the  bandage  and  drew  first  a  square,  and  then  said,  "  Then  there  was  the  other
thing  as  well  .  .  .  afterwards  they  seemed  to  go  into  one," — and  she  drew  a
cross  inside  the  square  from  corner  to  corner,  adding  afterwards,  "  I  don't  know

1  Proceedings  of  the  S.P.R.,  vol.  ii.  p.  189,  &c.

630B]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  613

what  made  me  put  it  inside."  The  significance  of  this  experimental  proof  of
joint  agency  will  be  more  fully  realised  in  connection  with  some  of  the  spon-
taneous cases.

Further  experiments  of  Mr.  Guthrie's  related  to  the  transference  of
tastes,  which  he  was  the  first  to  observe  in  the  case  of  non-hypnotised
persons  (and  of  which  some  account  has  been  given  in  571  C),  and  of
smells.  In  these,  it  is  difficult  to  make  the  conditions  such  as  to  ensure
that  no  indications  reach  the  percipient  through  any  of  the  ordinary
channels  of  sense.  With  regard  to  the  transference  of  pains  in  the
normal  state  (akin  to  the  community  of  sensation  occasionally  observed
between  hypnotists  and  their  subjects,  see  571)  there  is  not  the  same
difficulty  of  experimenting  under  satisfactory  conditions,  since  a  pain
cannot  travel  like  a  smell.  The  following  are  some  of  Mr.  Guthrie's
experiments  carried  out  without  contact  between  agent  and  percipient.
I  quote  them  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  5  7  : —

At  seven  of  the  Liverpool  meetings,  which  took  place   at  intervals  from
November  1884  to  July  1885,  the  experiment  was  arranged  in  the  following  way.
The  percipient  being  seated  blindfolded,  and  with  her  back  to  the  rest  of  the
party,  all  the  other  persons  present  inflicted  on  themselves  the  same  pain  on  the
same  part  of  the  body.     Those  who  took  part  in  this  collective  agency  were
three  or  more  of  the  following :  Mr.  Guthrie,  Professor  Herdman,  Dr.  Hicks,
Dr.  Hyla  Greves,  Mr.  R.  C.  Johnson,  F.R.A.S.,  Mr.  Birchall,  Miss  Redmond,
and  on  one  occasion  another  lady.     The  percipient  throughout  was  Miss  Relph.
In  all,  20  trials  were  made.     The  parts  pained  were —
I.— Back  of  left  hand  pricked.     Rightly  localised.
2. — Lobe  of  left  ear  pricked.     Rightly  localised.
3.— Left  wrist  pricked.    "  Is  it  in  the  left  hand  ?  "—pointing  to  the  back  near

the  little  finger.
4.— Third  finger  of  left  hand  tightly  bound  round  with  wire.     A  lower  joint

of  that  finger  was  guessed.
5.— Left  wrist  scratched  with  pins.     "  It   is  in  the  left  wrist,  like   being

scratched."

6.— Left  ankle  pricked.     Rightly  localised.
7. — Spot  behind  left  ear  pricked.     No  result.
8.— Right  knee  pricked.     Rightly  localised.
9. — Right  shoulder  pricked.     Rightly  localised.
io.— Hands  burned  over  gas.     "  Like  a  pulling  pain  .  .  .  then  tingling,  like

cold  and  hot  alternately  "—localised  by  gesture  only.
1 1.— End  of  tongue  bitten.     «« It  is  in  the  lip  or  the  tongue."
12.— Palm  of  left  hand  pricked.     "  Is  it  a  tingling  pain  in  the  hand,  here?"-

placing  her  finger  on  the  palm  of  the  left  hand.
13.— Back  of  neck  pricked.     "  Is  it  a  pricking  of  the  neck  ? "
14. — Front  of  left  arm  above  elbow  pricked.     Rightly  localised.
1 5.  —Spot  just  above  left  ankle  pricked.     Rightly  localised.
1 6. — Spot  just  above  right  wrist  pricked.    "  I  am  not  quite  sure,  but  I  feel

a  pain  in  the  rii;ht  arm,  from  the  thumb  upwards,  to  above  the  wrist."
17.  — Inside  of  left  ankle  pricked.     Outside  of  left  ankle  guessed.

614  APPENDICES  [630  C

1 8. — Spot  beneath  right  collar-bone  pricked.  The  exactly  corresponding  spot
on  the  left  side  was  guessed.

19. — Back  hair  pulled.     No  result.

20. — Inside  of  right  wrist  pricked.     Right  foot  guessed.

Thus  in  10  out  of  the  20  cases,  the  percipient  localised  the  pain  with  great
precision  ;  in  6  the  localisation  was  nearly  exact,  and  with  these  we  may  include
No.  10,  where  the  pain  was  probably  not  confined  to  a  single  well-defined  area
in  the  hands  of  all  the  agents  ;  in  2  no  local  impression  was  produced;  and  in
i,  the  last,  the  answer  was  wholly  wrong.

Some  other  experiments  with  diagrams  in  which  the  amount  of  success
obtained  was  very  striking  (and  which  I  omit  here  for  want  of  space)  were
carried  out  by  the  "  Committee  on  Thought-transference"  of  the  S.P.R.
in  1883,  and  are  recorded  in  the  Proceedings,vQ\.  i.  pp.  161-167  and  J74~
215.

630  C.  Mr.  Henry  G.  Rawson' s  Experiments?- — Mr.  Rawson  had
previously  been  successful  as  percipient  in  several  short  sets  of  experi-
ments in  card-guessing  with  different  agents.  In  the  paper  referred  to
here,  he  describes  experiments  of  various  kinds  carried  out  with  a  party  of
his  friends :  three  sisters,  Mrs.  L.,  Mrs.  B.  and  Miss  B.,  and  Mr.  L.,  the
husband  of  Mrs.  L.  Mr.  Z.,  an  uncle  of  Mr.  Rawson,  was  also  present
on  one  occasion,  and  confirms  what  was  reported  then.  The  full  names
of  all  these  persons  were  given  us  in  confidence,  and  the  originals  of  most
of  the  notes  of  the  experiments  and  of  all  the  diagrams  were  sent  to  us.
The  following  is  Mr.  Rawson's  account  of  experiments  on  two  evenings  in
the  transference  of  diagrams  : —

November  24^,  1894. — The  first  evening  was  occupied  with  experiments  in
the  transference  of  diagrams,  Mrs.  L.  and  Mrs.  B.  (who  are  sisters),  being  the
operators,  and  myself  the  only  other  person  present.

The  positions  on  that  occasion  were  throughout  as  follows  :  Mrs.  L.  sat  on
a  low  chair  by  the  fire,  drawing  in  her  lap  ;  Mrs.  B.  sat  some  distance  off  at  a
table  in  the  middle  of  the  room,  with  her  back  to  Mrs.  L. ;  and  I  stood  almost
between  them  with  my  back  to  the  fire,  looking  occasionally  over  Mrs.  B.'s
shoulder.  To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  I  never  saw  Mrs.  L.'s  drawings  until
they  were  complete  and  handed  up  for  comparison.

From  the  sitters'  positions,  it  was  impossible  that  they  could  look  over  one
another,  and  as  one  was  sitting  throughout  with  her  back  to  the  other,  some
eight  feet  distant,  no  collusion  was  possible.  In  one  case  only,  that  of  the  fern-
palms  (No.  6,  see  below),  was  anything  said  except,  "  Oh  !  I  know  what  she  is
thinking  of,"  or  words  to  that  effect,  which  the  percipient  exclaimed  on  two  or
three  occasions  almost  immediately  the  agent  began  drawing,  and  at  once  com-
menced her  own  sketch.  All  the  diagrams  drawn  by  both  agent  and  percipient
are  reproduced  below,  those  of  the  agent  being  marked  O.,  and  those  of  the
percipient  R.  In  the  first  three,  Mrs  B.  was  agent,  and  in  the  last  three
Mrs.  L.  No.  2  (the  triangle)  was  the  only  one  suggested  by  me,  and  also  the
only  instance  in  which  there  was  a  failure.  In  this  case  alone  some  additions
were  made  subsequently  to  the  percipient's  drawing  by  myself,  showing  how  a

1  See  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp  2-17.

630  C]

TO    CHAPTER    VI

615

kind  of  triangle  was  to  be  seen  in  the  figure  of  the  cat.  At  that  time  I  had  not
thought  of  reproducing  the  record.  The  agent  then  made  some  additions  to
her  sketch,  but  in  the  reproductions  which  accompany  this  paper,  both
diagrams  are  given  as  originally  drawn.  The  other  diagrams  were  chosen  by
the  agent  in  every  case  without  communication  with  any  one,  and  were  drawn
in  the  positions  I  have  indicated.

i  O.

i  R.

2R.

2O.

6i6

APPENDICES

[630  C

4o

6R.

December  \2.th,  1894. — Present:  Mrs.  L.,  Mrs.  B.,  and  myself.

We  tried  first  experiments  with  drawings,  all  of  which  are  reproduced
below.  The  annexed  plan  [omitted  here]  shows  the  relative  positions  of  the
sitters.  Mrs.  L.  on  chair  facing  [Mrs.  B.],  writing  on  lap.  Mrs.  B.  sitting  at
table,  back  to  Mrs.  L.,  11  feet  distant.  H.  G.  R.  facing  Mrs.  L.

630  C]

TO    CHAPTER    VI

617

0.1  B.1

0.2

O.  3

0.6

6i8

APPENDICES

[630  C

o.  e

C

R.  6

The  originals  of  Nos.  I,  2,  and  3  were  drawn  by  Mrs.  L. ;  in  some  cases
Mrs.  B.  had  finished  her  thought  copy  almost  as  soon  as  Mrs.  L.

The  originals  of  Nos.  4,  5,  and  6  were  drawn  by  Mrs.  B.,  in  each  case  at  my
suggestion.

I  have  recorded  all  that  was  said.

(No.  i)  Shortly  after  Mrs.  L.  began  drawing  this  (a  nose)  Mrs.  B.  said,
"I  can  think  of  nothing;  I  can  only  hold  my  nose."  At  that  time  I  did  not
know  what  Mrs.  L.  was  drawing.  In  some  10  seconds  Mrs.  B.  began  drawing,
and  was  finished  within  15  seconds  of  Mrs.  L.

(No.  2)  This  was  more  like  a  foot  at  first,  but  while  waiting  for  Mrs.  L.  to
begin  a  fresh  subject  Mrs.  B.  began  shading  the  boot — without  thinking — and
this  accentuates  the  dissimilarity.  This  and  the  case  mentioned  on  November
24th,  are  the  only  instances  in  which  the  drawing  was  touched  after  the  original
had  been  seen.

(No.  4)  Mrs.  L.  said  almost  at  once — after,  say,  10  seconds:  "  Now  I  know
what  it  is  ;  I  am  sure  ;  I  can  see  it."

(No.  5)  Mrs.  L.  began  drawing  within  10  to  15  seconds,  and  presently  said,
"  I  am  drawing  something  I  can  see."  The  clock  was  in  front  of  her  on  the
mantelpiece.

(No.  6)    Mrs.  L.  said,  "  I  know  what  it  is."

Afterwards  Mrs.  B.  told  me  that  she  thought  of  putting  a  label  on  the
champagne  bottle  she  drew  (No.  4).

A  few  experiments  in  "willing"  the  subject  to  perform  various  actions
were  tried  at  different  times.  No  contact  was  used,  but  the  subject  was
generally  in  sight  of  the  agents,  so  that  there  might  have  been  uncon-
scious guidance  through  looks,  &c.

Some  short  series  of  card-guesses  were  also  carried  out,  the  percipients
on  different  occasions  being  Mr.  Rawson,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  L.  and  Mrs.  B.,
and  the  agents,  Mrs.  L.,  Mrs.  B.,  and  Miss  B.  The  following  is  a
summary  of  the  results  obtained : —

Total  number  of  trials
Complete  successes
Number  of  pips  only  right
Suit  only  right

59

22

5
27

630D]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  619

Sometimes  second  guesses  were  allowed,  but  first  guesses  only  are  included
in  the  above  summary.  In  fourteen  cases  the  card  to  be  guessed  was
selected  by  the  agent ;  in  the  other  cases  it  was  drawn  from  the  pack  at
random.

630  D.  Comparatively  few  cases  have  been  recorded  on  good  evi-
dence of  the  experimental  transference  of  impressions  when  the  agent  and
percipient  were  in  different  places,  and  their  value,  of  course,  depends
primarily  on  the  total  number  of  experiments  tried  in  any  one  case,  and
the  proportion  of  success  obtained.  Considering  how  seldom  experiments
seem  to  have  been  made  under  this  condition,  the  amount  of  success  is
perhaps  greater  than  might  have  been  expected.1

Mr.  Joseph  Kirk's  Experiments. — The  account  is  taken  from  Mr.  F.
Podmore's  Apparitions  and  Thought- transference,  pp.  131—136.  (See
also  experiment  by  Mr.  Kirk,  in  668  B.)

During  the  year  1890  and  onwards,  Mr.  Joseph  Kirk,  of  2  Ripon  Villas,  Plum-
stead,  has  carried  on  with  a  friend,  Miss  G.,  a  series  of  experiments  in  thought-
transference  at  a  distance  varying  from  400  yards  to  about  200  miles.  Some
account  of  these  experiments  will  be  found  in  the  Journal  of  the  S.P.R.  for
February  and  July  1891  and  January  1892.  There  are  22  (excluding  two  in
which  the  distance  was  only  a  few  yards)  trials  in  the  transference  of  diagrams,
£c.,  there  recorded.  The  object  looked  at  by  Mr.  Kirk  was  generally  a  square
or  oblong  card,  or  a  white  disc  with  or  without  a  picture,  diagram,  or  letter  on
it.  The  object  was  always  illuminated  by  a  strong  light  Notes  of  the  experi-
ments were  in  every  case  made  independently  in  writing  by  agent  and  perci-
pient. In  each  case,  with  the  exception  of  two  occasions  (on  which  Mr.  Kirk's
notes  record  his  anticipation  of  failure),  the  percipient  saw  luminous  appear-
ances, often  taking  the  form  of  round  or  square  patches  of  light,  in  correspon-
dence with  the  shape  of  the  surface  looked  at  by  the  agent.  When  Miss  G.  was
at  Pembroke  or  Ilfracombe  (Mr.  Kirk  remaining  at  Plumstead)  the  correspon-
dence did  not  go  beyond  this  ;  but  in  two  or  three  cases,  when  Miss  G.  was  also
at  Plumstead,  at  a  distance  of  only  400  yards,  the  percipient  appears  to  have
seen  some  details  of  the  diagram  on  the  card,  and  in  one  instance  a  fairly  accu-
rate reproduction  of  the  diagram  was  given.  Mr.  Kirk,  on  this  occasion,  4th
June  1891,  was  trying  to  impress  three  percipients — of  whom  Miss  G.  was  one
— and  used  three  diagrams,  viz.,  a  Maltese  cross,  a  white  oval  plate  with  the
figure  3  on  it,  and  a  full-sized  drawing  of  a  man's  hand  in  black  on  white.  Miss
G.'s  report  is  as  follows: —

"5/^/91.  Sat  last  night  from  11.15  to  n-45-  After  a  few  minutes  wavy
clouds  appeared,  [these  are  drawn  as  a  group  of  roundish  objects,]  followed  by  a
pale  bluish  light  very  bright  in  centre.  [This  is  drawn  of  an  indefinite  oval  shape
with  roundish  white  spot  in  centre.]  Near  the  end  of  experiment  saw  a  larger
luminous  form,  lasting  only  a  moment,  but  reappearing  three  or  four  times;  it
had  lines  or  spikes  about  half  an  inch  wide  darting  from  it  in  varied  positions."

1  See  Mr.  F.  Podmore's  Apparitions  and  Thougkt-transferente,  chapter  v.,for  other
cases  of  the  experimental  production  of  telepathic  effects  at  a  distance,  besides  those
given  here.

620  APPENDICES  [630  D

Appended  are  reproductions  of  Miss  G.'s  original  drawings  of  her  impres-
sion, which  bear,  it  will  be  seen,  a  marked  likeness  to  a  man's  hand.

It  should  be  added  that  Miss  G.  has  not  had  any  hallucinations  of  the  kind
except  at  times  when  Mr.  Kirk  was  experimenting ;  and  the  amount  of  corre-
spondence between  her  visions  and  the  images  which  Mr.  Kirk  endeavoured  to
transfer  would  certainly  seem  beyond  what  chance  could  produce.

A  further  series  of  seven  trials  with  the  same  percipient  in  April-June  1 892
produced  some  interesting  results.  Full  notes  of  the  experiments  were,  as  in
the  previous  cases,  made  by  Mr.  Kirk  and  Miss  G.  independently.  Mr.  Kirk
wrote  his  notes  immediately  after  the  conclusion  of  the  experiments,  which  were
made  late  in  the  evening,  at  a  time  previously  agreed  upon.  Miss  G.,  who  was
in  the  dark,  and  as  a  rule  in  bed,  wrote  her  notes  on  the  following  morning
before  hearing  from  Mr.  Kirk.  No  diagrams  were  used  in  this  series,  "the
object  being,"  in  Mr.  Kirk's  words,  "  to  test  the  possibility  of  influencing  the
imagination,  and  inducing  the  percipient  to  visualise  hallucinatory  figures  of
persons  or  animals  thought  of  by  the  agent."  Miss  G.  knew  only  that  diagrams
would  not  be  used.  The  distance  between  agent  and  percipient  was  about  400
yards.

In  the  first  three  trials  (April  loth,  I7th,  and  24th,  1892),  Mr.  Kirk  pictured
to  himself  some  ducks  in  a  room,  a  witch,  and  other  figures.  On  the  I7th,  Miss
G.  saw  at  one  time  a  sunlike  light,  but  with  this  exception  she  had  no  impres-
sion at  all  on  any  of  the  three  occasions.

At  the  fourth  trial  (ist  May),  Miss  G.  records  the  same  night  that  she  saw
"a  broken  circle  O>  then  only  patches  of  faint  light,  not  cloudlike,  but  flat,
which  alternated  with  vertical  streaks  of  pale  light."  Afterwards,  however,  she
had  another  vision,  which  she  thus  records  on  the  following  morning  before
meeting  Mr.  Kirk  : —

"  Soon  after  lying  down  last  night,  I  had  a  rapid  but  most  realistic  glimpse
of  Mr.  Kirk  leaning  against  his  dining-room  mantelpiece  ;  the  room  seemed
brightly  lighted,  and  he  looked  rather  bothered,  and  just  as  I  saw  him  he  ap-
peared to  say  *  Doctor '  (a  familiar  name  given  to  Miss  G.  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.
Kirk),  *  I  haven't  got  my  pipe.'  This  seems  very  absurd,  the  more  so  as  I  do
not  know  whether  Mr.  Kirk  ever  smokes  a  pipe.  I  see  him  occasionally  with  a
cigar  or  cigarette,  but  cannot  remember  ever  seeing  him  with  a  pipe :  if  I  have,
it  must  have  been  years  ago.  I  do  not  know  whether  my  eyes  were  open  or
closed,  but  the  vividness  of  the  impression  quite  startled  me.  This  occurred
just  after  the  expiration  of  time  appointed  for  experiment  (10.45 — 11.15)."

Mr.  Kirk  reports  in  his  account  of  the  trial,  written  on  the  ist  May,  that  he
tried  to  transfer  an  image  of  himself,  sitting  on  a  low  chair,  and  also  the  part  of
the  room  facing  him  in  the  light  of  the  lamp.  But  after  seeing  Miss  G.'s  report,
he  adds :—

630D]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  621

"  The  fact  that  I  had  another  experiment  to  make,  i.e.  after  the  trial  with
Miss.  G. ,  enables  me  to  trace  minutely  my  actions  before  beginning  it  Imme-
diately the  time  had  expired  with  Miss  G.,  I  got  up  and  rapidly  lit  the  gas  and
three  pieces  of  candle,  which  I  had  ready  in  the  cardboard  box-cover,  to  illu-
minate the  diagram.  The  room  was  therefore  brilliantly  lighted.  I  now  rested
my  right  shoulder  against  the  mantelpiece,  with  my  face  towards  Miss  G. ,  but
with  my  eyes  bent  on  the  carpet.  In  this  position  I  thought  intensely  of  myself
and  the  whole  room,  and  feeling  really  anxious  to  make  a  success,  for  at  least
six  minutes.  By  this  time  my  shoulder  was  aching  very  much  with  the  con-
strained attitude  and  the  pressure  on  the  mantelpiece,  and  I  broke  off,  using
words  (talking  to  myself)  very  similar  to  those  given  by  Miss  G.  What  I
muttered,  as  nearly  as  I  can  remember,  was,  '  Now,  Doctor,  I'll  get  my  pipe.'
.  .  .  Until  within  the  last  few  weeks  I  have  not  smoked  a  pipe  for  many  years,
and  I  do  not  think  it  probable  that  Miss  G.  has  ever  seen  me  use  one  ;  but  it
is  an  absolute  certainty  that  she  was  not  aware  I  had  taken  to  smoke  one
recently."

In  the  fifth  experiment  of  the  series,  made  on  the  9th  May,  the  impression
which  appears  to  have  been  transferred  was  fortunately  recorded  beforehand.
Mr.  Kirk's  report  of  that  date,  after  describing  an  attempt  to  transfer  an  image
of  the  room,  and  of  an  imaginary  witch,  runs  as  follows : —

"  Continued  to  influence  her  some  minutes  after  limit  of  time  for  experiment
(11.30  P.M.).  During  this  time  I  was  much  bothered  by  a  subcurrent  of  thought,
which  I  in  vain  strove  to  cast  off.  In  the  morning,  just  before  time  to  get  up,
I  had  a  vivid  dream  of  my  lost  dog  ('Laddie').1  I  dreamt  he  had  returned,
and  that  my  wife,  Miss  G.,  and  myself  made  much  of  him.  I  thought  of  him
all  day,  and  tried  to  suppress  the  thought,  fearing  it  would  interfere  with
the  success  of  experiments;  feel  worried  and  irritated  at  this,  being  really
anxious  to  make  an  impression.  Do  not  expect  favourable  result.  Written
same  night.  J.  K."

Miss  G.'s  report  is  as  follows  :—

"  Experiment  last  night  (9-5-92)  most  unsatisfactory.  Saw  only  a  glow  of
light  and  once  for  a  few  seconds  a  figure  (of  a  vase).  Some  minutes  after  1 1.  30
(time  for  conclusion  of  experiment)  it  seemed  as  if  the  door  of  my  room  were
open,  and  on  the  landing  I  saw  a  very  large  dog  moving  as  though  it  had  just
come  upstairs.  I  cannot  conceive  what  suggested  this,  nor  can  I  understand
why  I  thought  of  Laddie  during  time  of  experiment.  I  do  not  think  we  have
mentioned  him  recently.  My  door  was  locked  as  usual.  L.  G."

The  sixth  experiment  (isth  May  1892)  was,  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Kirk's  con-
temporary report,  "  devoted  to  making  hypnotic  passes,  done  with  great  energy
and  concentration  of  mind.  The  passes  were  made,  not  only  over  Miss  G.'s
(imagined)  face  and  arms,  but  specially  over  her  hands,"  with  the  view  of
inducing  hypnotic  sleep.

Miss  G.  reports  that  she  "fell  asleep  before  the  time  arranged  had  expired.
But  it  was  only  to  awake  again  very  soon,  through  dreaming  I  was  in  a  basement
room  .  .  .  making  frantic  efforts  to  strike  a  match,  prevented  doing  so  by  some
one  behind  clasping  my  wrists.  The  sensation  was  so  unpleasantly  real  that  it
awoke  me."  The  time  fixed  for  the  experiment  had  then  passed.  This  was  the

1  r.  Kirk  explains  later  that  this  dog  had  been  lost  six  years  before.  They  had
all  been  much  attached  to  him,  and  his  loss  was  still  an  occasional  topic  of  conversation
and  of  dreams  by  Mr.  Kirk.

622  APPENDICES  [630  E

only  occasion  in  this  series  on  which  Miss  G.  went  to  sleep  during  an  experi-
ment.

In  the  seventh  experiment  (5th  June  1892)  Mr.  Kirk  again  made  passes  to
send  Miss  G.  to  sleep.  Miss  G.  on  her  side,  saw  only  something  "  like  the
varied  but  regular  movements  one  sees  in  turning  a  kaleidoscope,  only  without
the  colouring ;  it  was  simply  luminous,  and  lasted  more  or  less  distinctly  from
15  to  20  minutes."  This  impression  may  conceivably  have  been  due,  as  Mr.
Kirk  suggests,  to  the  regular  movements  of  his  hands  in  making  the  hypnotic
passes.

In  estimating  the  value  of  the  coincidences  between  Mr.  Kirk's  thought  and
Miss  G.'s  impressions  in  the  fourth  and  fifth  trials,  it  should  not  be  overlooked
that  the  percipient's  impressions  were  not  vague  images  such  as  are  wont  to
crowd  through  our  minds  on  the  near  approach  of  sleep,  but  clear-cut  visions,
approximating  to  visual  hallucinations.

630  E.  Mr*  A.  Glardori 's  Experiments. —  The  following  experiments
in  the  transference  of  diagrams  were  carried  out  by  the  Rev.  A.  Glardon,
of  Tour-de-Peilz,  Vaud,  Switzerland,  as  agent,  with  a  friend  of  his,  Mrs.
M.,  as  percipient,  both  being  Associates  of  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research.

An  earlier  and  somewhat  less  successful  series  of  the  same  kind  was
carried  out  by  them  in  1893,  at  a  distance  of  at  least  200  miles  from  one
another.  (See  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  98-101.)  This  account  is
taken  from  the  Journal  S.P.R.  vol.  vii.  pp.  325-329.

The  original  diagrams  drawn  by  both  agent  and  percipient,  carefully  dated
and  with  the  notes  they  made  on  them  at  the  time,  have  been  sent  to  us,  and
most  of  them  are  reproduced  in  the  Plates.  ...  It  will  be  seen  from  the
account  what  proportion  of  success  was  attained,  though  it  is  not  easy  to  estimate
this  with  exactitude,  because  the  percipient  several  times  made  a  number  of
little  scribbles  which  might  be  counted  either  as  parts  of  one  drawing,  or  all  as
separate  drawings.  See  e.g,  Plate  II.,  R-3.  Where  we  have  given  the  number
of  drawings  she  made,  without  reproducing  all  of  them  (see  e.g.  Plate  I.,  R.  I  b)
we  have,  of  course,  counted  as  many  as  possible,  in  order  not  to  over-estimate
the  argument  against  chance  coincidence.  Thus,  such  a  case  as  R.  3  would
have  been  counted  as  eight  drawings.

The  experiments  will  be  best  understood  by  a  full  description  of  the  Plates,
which  we  now  proceed  to  give.

In  all  cases  the  letter  O  on  the  Plates  denotes  the  drawings  of  the  agent  and
the  letter  R  those  of  the  percipient;  and  the  dotted  lines  mark  off  the  drawings
belonging  to  each  experiment.

PLATE  I. — In  the  experiments  here  illustrated,  the  agent  was  at  Tour-de-
Peilz,  and  the  percipient  at  Florence,  and  the  former  notes  "  10  P.M.  "  on  his
sheet  of  diagrams  as  the  hour  of  the  experiments,  also  that  he  used  the  diagram
O.  i  on  May  8th  and  9th  [1893],  and  O.  2  on  May  loth  and  nth.

The  percipient  made  one  drawing,  reproduced  as  R.  I  a,  on  May  8th.  On
May  9th  she  made  eight  attempts,  of  which  the  one  most  nearly  resembling
O.  I  is  given,  as  R.  I  b.  On  her  paper  is  noted  "  1893,  Tuesday,  May  9th,
10.15."  On  May  loth,  she  attempted  nothing.  The  whole  of  what  she  drew
on  May  nth  is  reproduced  as  "  R.  2  " ;  her  paper  being  marked,  "  May  1 1,  '93  ;
10  P.M."

630E]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  623

PLATE  II.— The  diagrams  O.  3  and  O.  4  were  used  in  experiments  in  which
the  agent  was  at  Tour-de-Peilz  and  the  percipient  at  Torre  Pellice,  Italy;  O.  3
was  used  on  May  I9th  and  O.  4  on  May  22nd  and  23rd ;  in  all  cases  at  10  P.M.
R.  3  represents  all  the  drawings  made  by  the  percipient  on  May  iQth ;  her
paper  is  marked  "19  May  1893;  10  P.M.;"  and  also  bears  the  note:  "a
small  very  bright  design  or  object."  On  May  23rd,  at  10.5  P.M.,  she  made
three  drawings,  two  of  which  are  reproduced  as  R.  4.  It  will  be  observed  that
the  bracket  in  the  agent's  drawing  seems  to  be  reproduced  in  the  second  of
these,  but  this  may  be  a  mere  chance  resemblance.  O.  5  is  the  diagram  used
by  the  agent  on  June  2nd  at  10  P.M.,  he  being  still  at  Tour-de-Peilz,  and  the
percipient  at  Vevey.  She  made  no  drawing  on  this  date,  but  notes:  "June
2nd,  1893;  10  P.M.  See  nothing  but  a  sort  of  frame  and  a  crown;  too  sleepy
to  draw  it."

The  agent's  drawing  corresponding  to  R.  6  is  shown  as  O.  6  on  Plate  III.
In  this  experiment,  the  agent  and  percipient  were  both  in  the  same  house  at
Tour-de-Peilz,  but  in  different  rooms.  It  occurred  on  June  7th,  1893,  and  Mr.
Glardon  gives  the  following  account  of  it : —

"  GRYON-SUR-BEX,  VAUD./WW  2-jth,  1893.

"  Mrs.  M.  was  sitting  alone  in  a  room  adjoining  the  one  I  was  in.  I  drew
the  diagram  and  fixed  my  attention  on  it.  After  two  or  three  minutes,  Mrs.  M.
called  aloud,  saying,  '  I  am  too  much  excited  to-day,  don't  go  on ; '  and  on  my
entering  the  room,  she  said,  *  I  can  see  nothing  but  the  design  of  the  embroidery
I  have  been  working  at  this  morning,  and  I  will  not  draw  it  because  I  think  it
too  silly.'

"  She  sent  me  afterwards  that  design ;  you  can  judge  for  yourself.  The  fact
is  that,  unawares,  I  had  drawn  a  diagram  resembling  closely  that  design."  .  .  .

The  rest  of  the  diagrams  on  Plates  III.  and  IV.  belong  to  a  later  series  of
experiments,  carried  out  between  December  I4th,  1893,  and  January  9th,  1894.
They  were  sent  to  us  in  April  1894  by  Mr.  Glardon,  who  writes : —

TOUR-DK-PEILZ,  April  ztfh,  1894.

"...  I  have  made  a  new  series  with  the  same  correspondent,  Mrs.  M.,
she  being  in  Ajaccio,  Corsica,  where  she  is  still,  and  I  here.  The  time  was
half-past  nine  P.M.,  French  time  ;  and  the  results  have  not  been  very  satisfac-
tory. During  December  1893  and  January  1894,  we  tried  many  times  a  week.
Unfortunately,  Mrs.  M.  did  not  always  attend,  and  I  myself  was  sometimes  pre-
vented by  visits  or  committees  from  attending;  so  that,  in  all,  we  had  only  a
dozen  real  experiments,  both  attending  the  same  night  and  at  the  same
moment.  Of  these,  I  send  you  four  instances  in  which  it  seems  to  me  that  \\  <•
achieved  a  fair  amount  of  success.  One  is  a  striking  example  of  delayed  and
persistent  impression.  Two  nights  running  I  tried  to  send  a  Maltese  cross
[see  O.  10].  Mrs.  M.  sat  on  the  same  days,  and  the  two  days  following-
pencil  in  hand  and  eyes  shut  as  usual — on  the  5th,  the  6th,  the  8th,  and  the  9th
of  January ;  and  the  approximation  was  every  time  greater,  till  the  cross  came
out  distinctly.

*'  On  December  28th,  Mrs.  M.  seems  to  have  seen  the  comet  I  had  drawn
pretty  well  [see  O.  9].  On  the  I4th,  she  had  an  impression  of  something
resembling  a  crown,  and  I  had  drawn  a  rose  [sec  O.  7].  Finally,  on  the  2ist,
she  reproduced  at  once  and  exactly  my  drawing,  as  you  will  see  from  her  own

624

APPENDICES
PLATE  I

[630  £

630  E]

TO    CHAPTER    VI
PLATE  II

625

VOL.    I.

2    R

626

APPENDICES
PLATE  III

[630  £

630  E]

TO    CHAPTER    VI
PLATE  IV

627

628  APPENDICES  [630  F

bit  of  paper  [see  O.  8  and  R.  8].  It  is  a  pity  she  did  not  use  for  our  sittings
anything  larger  than  a  common  note-book.  However,  I  send  you  leaves  torn
from  it,  corresponding  to  my  drawings."

In  these  four  experiments,  we  have  reproduced  all  the  drawings  made
by  the  agent,  and  also  all  made  by  the  percipient  on  each  occasion,  except
in  the  experiment  of  January  5th~9th,  1894,  which  is  marked  O.  10  and
R.  10.

In  her  drawings  marked  in  the  Plate  R.  7,  she  notes  the  date  and  hour  as
December  I4th,  10  P.M.;  and  writes:  "Like  a  pair  of  tongs — a  tooth  with
prongs — a  crown"  the  three  descriptions  apparently  referring  to  her  three
drawings.  The  agent's  drawing,  O.  7,  is  dated  December  I4th,  1893.  Her
drawings  marked  R.  8  are  dated  December  2ist,  1893,  9.30  P.M.,  the  agent's,
O.  8,  being  dated  December  2ist,  1893;  and  those  marked  R.  9  are  dated
December  28th,  1893,  9.30  P.M.,  the  agent's,  O.  9,  being  also  dated  December
28th,  1893.

With  regard  to  the  experiment  of  January  5th~9th,  1894,  the  original
diagram  was  a  Maltese  cross  (Plate  III.,  O.  10),  which  the  agent  notes  that  he
used  on  January  5th  and  6th,  1894.  The  percipient  made  on  January  5th,  at
9.30  P.M.,  four  drawings,  of  which  the  one  most  like  a  Maltese  cross  is  repro-
duced as  R.  10  a.  On  January  6th,  at  the  same  hour,  she  made  four  drawings,
none  of  which  are  at  all  like  the  cross.  On  January  8th,  at  9.30  P.M.,  she  made
four  drawings,  the  most  successful  of  which  is  reproduced  as  R.  10  b.  On
January  9th,  at  9.30  P.M.,  she  made  first  two  drawings,  resembling  each  other
pretty  closely,  and  added  the  note,  "  same  impression  as  last  time."  One  of
these  is  reproduced  as  R.  10  c.  She  seems  then  to  have  gone  off  on  an  alto-
gether wrong  tack,  as  nine  diagrams  of  a  different  character,  some  of  them
resembling  a  flag  or  key,  follow.  Next  she  appears  to  have  made  a  fresh  start,
drawing  three  diagrams,  one  of  which  is  R.  10  d.  To  these  she  appends  the
note:  "Always  come  back  to  the  same  thing.  Probably  he  has  sent  nothing."
Finally,  on  one  corner  of  the  sheet,  she  draws  a  Greek  key  pattern,  marked
"  afterwards."

In  this  experiment,  the  large  number  of  attempts  made,  and  the  fact
that  success  was  not  attained  until  two  or  three  days  after  the  agent  was
trying  to  transfer  the  drawing,  of  course  strengthen  the  probability  that  the
success  may  have  been  merely  due  to  chance.  On  the  other  hand,  all  the
diagrams  made  on  each  day,  except  the  last,  resemble  one  another  more  or  less
closely,  as  if  the  percipient  had  had  only  one  or  two  ideas  of  a  form  in  her
mind  on  each  evening.  On  January  9th  also,  the  drawings  of  each  of  the  three
sets  just  described  show  marked  resemblances  to  one  another.  Consequently,
the  probability  of  a  chance  coincidence  is  not  so  great  as  the  total  number  of
drawings  would  make  it  appear  to  be.

We  have  also  to  remember  that,  as  Mr.  Glardon  informs  us,  there  was  no
written  communication  between  agent  and  percipient  during  this  time,  so  that
she  did  not  know  that  he  was  using  the  same  diagram  two  days  running.  In
answer  to  the  question  whether  he  attempted  to  transfer  any  diagrams  to  Mrs.
M.  on  January  8th  and  9th,  Mr.  Glardon  says  (May  2nd,  1894)  that  he  does
not  remember,  but  he  believes  not.

630  F.  We  have  as  yet  received  very  few  cases  of  anything  like  a
series  of  telepathic  messages.  One  carefully  reported  case,  carried  out

630F]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  629

by  Miss  Goodrich-Freer  with  a  friend  of  hers,  was  given  in  her  paper,
"  A  Record  of  Telepathic  and  Other  Experiences  "  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  vi.  pp.  377-397).  Another  series,  also  carefully  noted,  of  apparently
telepathic  impressions  of  a  trivial  kind— occurring  between  a  doctor  and
one  of  his  patients — was  printed  in  the/<wr«#/S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  299-
306,  and  311-319.  The  following  is  a  striking  case  of  the  same  kind,
obtained  from  a  gentleman,  Dr.  J.  S.,  who  prefers  his  initials  only  to  be
published.  The  account  is  taken  from  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  455.
We  may  observe  in  this  case,  as  in  others  of  the  same  kind,  that  some
element  of  apparent  prediction  is  included  ;  though  this  is  probably  often
a  mere  conversion  of  the  agent's  expectation  and  inference  into  what
appears  to  the  percipient  an  actual  fact.  It  must,  however,  also  be
remembered  that  the  occasional  want  of  contemporaneity  adds  slightly
to  the  probability  of  chance  coincidence  between  the  thoughts  of  the  two
experimenters.

From  the  Pacific  Theosophist,  San  Francisco,  August  1893.

The  following  experiments  were  conducted  by  a  well-known  physician  of
this  city  and  his  wife.  Both  were  somewhat  interested  in  the  subject  and,  upon
the  latter  leaving  for  a  visit  in  the  country,  it  was  arranged  that  at  a  certain
time  of  each  day  ten  minutes  should  be  devoted  to  an  attempt  to  communicate
telepathically,  each  alternating  as  transmitter  and  receiver.

The  notes,  carefully  written  down  while  separated  nearly  a  hundred  miles,
speak  for  themselves.  They  also  make  it  apparent  that  the  physician  accom-
plished something  more  than  mere  telepathy.  In  receiving  supposed  messages,
he  several  times  got  accurate  information  of  things  which  the  wife  had  no  idea
she  was  imparting,  and  in  one  or  two  instances  actually  foresaw  occurrences
which  could  not  possibly  have  been  known  to  his  transmitter.  This  shows  how
intimately  our  psychic  senses  blend  one  with  the  other,  and  how  hard  it  is  for
an  untrained  person  to  distinguish  just  what  psychic  faculty  is  active.  The
phenomena  recorded  are  commonplace  in  their  character  ;  the  interest  lies  in
their  truthfulness  and  the  scientific  accuracy  of  their  observation.  The  results
are  as  follows : —

May  1 2th.— Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.  May  12th.— Received.

Arrived  safely.     Pleasant  trip.     B.  Had   a  good  trip.      B.   slept  well,

feels  fairly  well.      We   have  a    nice       House  squarely  built  and  plain;  porch
place  in  an  old-fashioned  house.  surrounded  by  trees  ;  not  fronting  the

road ;  rooms  very  sunny.  [All  accurate.
What  follows  was  seen  clairvoyantly,
apparently. — ED.]  Landlady  wears
sun-bonnet  with  jacket  of  same.  Little
boy  three  years  old.  [Boy  expected,
but  did  not  arrive  until  next  day.  The
description  accurate.]  Fire  in  north-
east [Fire  occurred  next  night.]

630

APPENDICES

[630  F

May  1 3/A.— Transmitter,  Dr.  S.

Theresa  B.  and  her  mother  were
here  yesterday.  Also  Clara  and
Emma.  Business  somewhat  dull.
W.'s  house  burned  yesterday.

May

Nothing  sent.

May  1 5^.— Transmitter,  Dr.  S.

E.  and  R.  went  to  park.     Mrs.  A.  is
angry.     S.  paid  his  bill.

May  1 6th.— Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.

Paid  a  visit  to  K.'s.     B.  feels  quite
well.

May  ijth.-—  Transmitter,  Dr.  S.
Nothing  sent;  business  prevented.

May  i8M.  —  Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.

B.  does  not  feel  well  at  all.  Went
for  medicine.

May  igth. — Transmitter,  Dr.  S.

Case  of  D.  will  come  off  in  the
courts  29th.  Business  still  quiet.
Played  whist.

May  2oth.—  Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.

My  clothes  and  shoes  are  all  torn.
I  have  poison  oak  on  my  arms.  Hope
it  will  not  be  bad.

May  \-tfh. — Received.
I  think  Theresa  B.  was  there  or  is
coming.    Something,  I  can't  make  out,
about  business.     I  think  it  is  bad.

May  i^th.
Forgot  to  keep  the  appointed  time.

May  i$tk. — Received.

Could  get  nothing  definite;  think
you  collected  some  money.

May  \6th. — Received.
You   took  a  long  walk.      I  see  a
young  man  with   a  revolver  in    his
hand.     [A  young  man  shot  a  dog  in
the  garden  that  day.]

May  ijth. — Received.

Could  get  nothing  at  all.  Think
you  were  out.

May  1 8/yfc.— Received.

See  a  lot  of  wine  casks  and  demi-
johns. Something  about  curtains.
[Mrs.  S.  visited  a  large  wine  cellar  on
the  1 7th.  The  curtains  in  her  room
annoyed  her  very  much.  But  nothing
about  either  was  consciously  sent.]

May  i  gth.— Received.

Think  you  had  rain.  You  seem
dissatisfied.  You  are  telling  me  some-
thing about  D.,  I  am  sure.  [It  did
rain,  but  the  fact  was  not  consciously
sent.]

May  2oth.—  Received.

You  went  out  riding.  I  see  you
holding  a  shoe  in  your  hand.  You
have  poison  oak  on  your  right  arm.
B.  is  better.  You  want  me  to  mail
you  the  Bulletin  and  Chronicle.  [Mrs.
S.  did  ride  out  to  some  sulphur  springs.
Poison  oak  was  on  right  arm  only.
B.  gained  three  pounds.  She  was
hoping  for  the  Bulletin  supplement
only.]

630  F]

Appointment  forgotten.

TO    CHAPTER
May  21  st.

VI

631

May  22nd. — Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.

Visited   springs.      Very    warm    all
day.     I  have  a  sick  headache.

May  2yd.— Transmitter,  Dr.  S.
Up  all  night.    Very  tired.     Nothing
new.

May  2$th. — Transmitter,  Mrs.  S.
Sent  nothing.

May  2$th.— Transmitter,  Dr.  S.
I   have  a  bad   sore   throat.     I    am
going  to  Drs.  F.  and  S.  (dentists)  to
give  ether.     It  is  a  windy  day.

May  21  st,
Not  at  home ;  did  not  sit  to  receive.

May  22nd. — Received.

It  must  be  warm ;  I  see  you  fanning
yourself;  you  were  riding  ;  on  a  donkey,
I  think.  [She  rode  in  a  carriage,  but
saw  a  donkey  on  her  trip  which  amused
her  very  much.]

May  2yd. — Received.
You   are    looking  very   cross    and
tired.

May  24th. — Received.

I  see  a  big  church-like  building —
brick.  [Mrs.  S.  went  the  evening
previous  to  a  church  entertainment.
The  description  correct.  Not  sent
consciously.]

May  2$th. — Received.
You  have  unpleasant  weather.    You
are  trying  to  tell  me  something  about
Dr.  F.  and  his  partner,  Dr.  S.,  but  I
can't  make  it  out.

Mrs.  S.  was  somewhat  doubtful  about  the  success  or  even  possibility  of  such
experiments  succeeding,  and  was  fairly  startled  upon  comparing  memoranda
on  her  return  home.  B.  is  a  sister  of  Mrs.  S.,  for  whose  benefit  the  trip  was
taken.  The  doctor  had  never  been  in  that  part  of  the  country,  and  so  could
not  have  seen  the  house  and  church  he  so  accurately  described.  The  experi-
ments throw  much  light  on  psychic  faculties  other  than  mere  telepathy.

J.  S.,  M.D.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.

SAN  FRANCISCO,  November  2gth,  1893.

R.  HODGSON,  ESQ.,— DEAR  SIR,— In  reply  to  yours  of  November  isth,  my
statement  is  that  my  experiment  with  my  wife  in  telepathy  resulted  precisely  as
you  find  it  given  in  the  Pacific  Theosophist.  [In  a  later  letter  Dr.  S.  states
that  he  is  not  himself  a  Theosophist.]

I  came  to  try  the  experiment  this  way:  I  read  in  the  daily  papers  of  a
certain  drummer  who,  when  absent  from  his  home,  made  it  a  practice  to  sit  at
ten  o'clock  P.M.,  for  about  half-an-hour,  his  wife  the  same,  and  mentally  com-
municate the  news  of  the  day  to  each  other,  as  exchanging  letters  was  incon-
venient, he  being  compelled  to  change  his  location  every  day.

As  my  wife  was  to  go  away  from  San  Francisco  last  summer  with  a  sick
sister  of  hers,  we  decided  to  try  the  experiment,  with  the  result  given  in  the
Pacific  Theosophist.  My  wife  has  grown  up  in  an  atmosphere  of  scepticism,
consequently  she  did  not  give  the  subject  as  much  attention  as  I  did,  other-
wise we  might  have  had  better  results.  Now,  of  course,  her  personal  experi-
ence convinced  her  of  something.

No  third  person  was  aware  of  our  doing,  excepting  what  I  state  here :  I

632  APPENDICES  [6300

met  Dr.  J.  Anderson  in  consultation  about  a  patient,  when  I  told  him  I  be-
lieved in  the  possibilities  of  telepathy,  and  that  I  was  making  experiments  just
then  with  my  wife.  He  asked  me  to  show  him  the  result,  good  or  bad,  which
I  did.  Dr.  Anderson  never  met  my  wife,  neither  did  he  know  where  she  went
to.  She  was  in  St.  Helena,  Sonoma  County,  about  sixty-three  miles  from  the
city.

We  agreed  to  sit  twenty  minutes  at  ten  o'clock  P.M.  In  sending  news,  I
fixed  my  mind  strongly  on  the  messages ;  in  receiving,  I  made  my  mind  as
near  blank  as  I  could,  excluding  all  thought.  Everything  I  received  came  to
me  as  a  mental  picture.  Sometimes  I  would  see  things  only  partly,  like  half
of  a  face.  When  I  saw  her  arm,  with  the  poison  oak,  it  came  very  clearly.  I
almost  thought  I  could  speak  to  her,  but  I  never  heard  anything  like  noise.  .  .  .

(Signed)  DR.  J.  S.

I  corroborate  the  above  statement  in  every  detail.  MRS.  E.  S.

Mr.  W.  E.  Coleman,  well  known  to  Dr.  Hodgson,  writes  to  him  as
follows : —

CHIEF  Q.M.  OFFICE,  SAN  FRANCISCO,  CALIFORNIA,

December  2ist,  1893,

Upon  inquiry  I  find  that  Dr.  J.  S.  is  a  reputable  physician  of  character
and  standing.  All  speak  well  of  him,  and  he  is  considered  a  man  of  veracity.
I  can  find  nothing  against  him  as  man  or  as  doctor.  W.  E.  COLEMAN.

630  G.  Miss  Despard1  s  Experiments. — The  following  case  comes
from  two  ladies  well  known  to  me,  Miss  R.  C.  Despard  and  Miss  C.  M.
Campbell.  After  successful  experiments  with  both  in  the  same  room,
they  made  two  trials,  both  of  which  were  successful,  with  agent  and  per-
cipient  in  different  parts  of  London.  Some  time  later  they  carried  out
another  short  series  of  experiments  at  a  distance,  which  I  quote  in  full
from  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  pp.  234-237.  (For  full  details  of  all
their  experiments,  see  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  pp.  4-9,  and  vol.  vii.
pp.  234-238.)

The  descriptions  of  each  witness  were  always  written  before  compar-
ing notes  with  the  other.  All  the  letters  quoted,  with  the  envelopes
corresponding  to  the  first  two  of  them,  were  sent  to  the  Editor  of  the
Journal  S.P.R.

[Miss  Despard  describes  the  general  conditions  of  the  experiments  thus : — }

Agent  in  Surbiton,  Percipient  in  London,  W.C.  district,  distance  about
14  miles.

Agreed  upon:  Agent  to  concentrate  attention  at  11  P.M.;  percipient  to
then  write  down  any  impression  received.  Experiments  to  begin  on  December
2yth,  1895;  one  experiment  each  night,  alternately  an  object  and  a  diagram.
December  3ist  to  be  omitted.

[The  first  account  is  a  letter  written  from  Surbiton  by  the  agent,  Miss
Despard,  to  Miss  Campbell  in  London.]

STRATHMORB,  SURBITON  HILL  PARK,  SURBITON,

December  z^th,  1895.     II-3°  P>M-

DEAR  K., — As  you  know,  we  agreed  a  few  days  ago  to  try  some  experiments
in  thought-transference — to  begin  to-night  at  1 1  P.  M. — alternate  nights  to  think

630G]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  633

of  an  object  and  a  diagram.  So  to-night  I  fixed  my  attention  about  1 1.4  P.M.  on
a  brass  candlestick  with  a  lighted  candle  in  it.  I  feel  the  result  will  not  be  very
satisfactory,  for  I  found  difficulty  in  concentrating  my  mind,  and  not  having
decided  previously  what  object  to  think  of,  I  looked  over  the  mantelpiece  first
and  rejected  two  or  three  things  before  fixing  on  the  candlestick.  A  very  noisy
train  was  also  distracting  my  attention,  so  I  wonder  if  you  will  think  of  that.

December  28M,  11.45  P.M. — I  thought  of  this  diagram  [a  cross  inscribed  in  a
triangle],  the  [triangle]  in  thick  black,  and  the  cross  inside  in  lighter.

December  29/A,  11.40  P.M. — I  hope  this  will  be  more  successful.  I  found
to-night  I  could  bring  up  a  much  clearer  mental  picture  of  the  object — a  small
Bristol-ware  jug  about  six  inches  high,  the  lower  part  being  brownish  red,  of  a
metallic  coppery  colour,  the  upper  part  having  a  band  of  reddish  and  light-
purple  flowers  of  a  somewhat  conventional  rose  pattern — handle  greenish.  I
do  not  think  you  have  seen  this  jug,  as  it  has  been  put  away  in  a  cupboard
and  only  lately  brought  out.  I  saw  the  jug  chiefly  by  bright  firelight.

December  3oM,  12  midnight. — I  am  very  tired  and  fear  the  result  is  vague;
this  is  the  diagram.

My  mental  image  was  not  as  correct,  but  tended  to  slope
up  to  the  right.

Let  me  know  your  impressions  soon. — Yours,  &c.,

R.  C.  DESPARD.

[The  corresponding    account    of    the    percipient,    Miss
Campbell,  is  as  follows  : — ]

77  CHESTERTON  ROAD,  W.,  December  29^,  1895.

DEAR  R.,— I  have  nothing  very  satisfactory  td  report.  I  am  sorry  to  say  I
quite  forgot  on  the  27th  about  our  projected  experiments  until  I  was  just  getting
into  bed,  when  I  suddenly  remembered,  and  just  then  I  heard  a  train  making  a
great  noise,  and  as  I  have  never  noticed  it  like  that  before,  I  wondered  if  it  was
one  of  your  trains.  I  could  not  fix  my  mind  on  any  object,  but  clock,  watch,
bath,  all  flitted  past,  and  the  circle  of  firelight  in  the  front  room ;  the  only  word
that  came  to  me  was  "  sand  "  and  a  sound  like  k  or  q  at  the  beginning  of  a  word
(you  know  I  as  often  hear  the  name  of  the  object  as  see  the  thing  itself).  I
stopped,  for  it  seemed  ridiculous,  but  you  must  have  attracted  my  attention,  for
just  after  I  stopped  I  heard  the  clock  here  strike  the  half-hour,  and  found  next
morning  it  was  twenty  minutes  fast,  so  when  I  "suddenly  remembered/'  it
must  have  been  just  after  eleven.

Last  night  I  believe  you  forgot,  for  I  had  no  strong  impression,  but  you  see
the  paper  enclosed.1  The  scribbles  in  corner  my  pencil  did  without  me  ;  the
rectangle  I  believe  was  a  guess;  as  for  the  circle,  my  pencil  would  go  round
and  round  in  the  centre  making  that  spot,  the  circle  itself  being  a  very  shadowy
impression.

11.15  P-M- — The  first  thing  that  came  into  my  mind  was  a  sponge,  but  I
think  that  was  suggested  by  the  sound  of  water  running  in  the  bath-room,  and
next  I  had  more  distinctly  an  impression  of  a  reddish  nu  t.illic  lustre,  and  I
thought  it  must  be  the  Moorish  brass  tray  on  May's  mantelpiece  ;  but  at  last
I  saw  quite  distinctly  a  small  jug  of  a  brownish  metallic  appearance  below,
with  above  that  a  white  band  with  coloured  flowers,  lilac  and  crimson,  on  it
I  can't  be  sure  what  it  was  like  at  the  top,  for  that  seemed  to  be  in  shadow  and

1  The  diagram  enclosed  is  not  at  all  similar  to  the  agent's  figure.

634  APPENDICES  [634  A

seemed  to  be  darkish, — perhaps  like  the  bottom,  but  I  saw  no  metallic  gleam.
I  don't  remember  anything  like  this  among  May's  things,  but  the  impression
was  so  vivid  I  describe  it.

3oM,  11.15  P-M- — Thought  vaguely  of  a  triangle  and  figure  like  this,  but  no
vivid  impression ;  if  you  were  thinking  of  any  figure  at  all,  were
also  thinking  of  something  else.

3U/. — I  send  you  this  as  far  as  it  goes,  and  shall  be  glad  to
hear  from  you  with  your  accounts. — Yours,

C.  M.  CAMPBELL.
15  Heathcote  Street,  W.C.

[The  post-marks  on  the  envelopes  of  these  letters  proved  that  Miss  Camp-
bell posted  her  letter  before  receiving  Miss  Despard's ;  and  almost  proved —
but  for  an  illegibility  in  a  portion  of  one  post-mark — that  Miss  Despard  posted
hers  before  receiving  Miss  Campbell's.

Five  more  experiments  were  made,  of  which  I  quote  the  first  two,  the
last  three  being  failures.  The  following  is  the  agent's  account: — ]

STRATHMORE,  SURBITON,

January  1st,  1896.     11.40  P.M.

DEAR  K. — Have  thought  of  a  small  dog's  whip  hung  on  M.'s  wall,  but  did
not  see  it  clearly,  kept  thinking  of  it  in  use ;  was  in  E.'s  room,  looking  at  some
dresses,  and  could  not  give  whole  attention  to  it.

January  2nd.  11.15  P.M.— Thought  of  small  almanac  with  a  picture  of  pink
roses  on  it.  ...  R.  C.  DESPARD.

[The  percipient,  Miss  Campbell,  wrote  as  follows.  Her  envelope  was
addressed  to  Miss  Despard  at  Surbiton,  but  apparently  not  posted  for  the
reason  given  in  her  final  sentence.]

15  HEATHCOTE  STREET,  W.C.

January  1st,  1896.  n.io  P.M. — [Sketch  of  a  capital  S,  the  upper  part  slop-
ing to  the  right  and  the  lower  to  the  left.]  First  I  had  inclination  to  let  my
pen  wriggle,  then  saw  large  capital  S,  and  heard  sound  of  letter,  though  this
was  most  probably  imagination.

January  2nd,  1 1.30  P.M. — Had  a  very  vivid  impression  of  your  walking  up
to  the  chest  of  drawers  in  your  room,  opening  the  top  drawer  and  touching
those  velvet  and  lace  straps,  as  if  you  were  meditating  what  you  could  think
of,  and  looking  in  front  of  you  at  the  little  glass-fronted  bookcase ;  then  there
was  a  small  scrimmage  between  the  cat  and  the  dog  from  downstairs  and  I
lost  the  thread ;  but  next  seemed  to  be  touching  a  book — no,  a  single  leaf,  a
sheet  of  writing-paper,  and  then  it  seemed  to  be  pink  and  blotty ;  but  it  all
seemed  very  aimless  and  I  had  a  bad  headache,  so  could  not  concentrate
attention  well.  ...  C.  M.  CAMPBELL.

634  A.  We  have  on  record  a  few  cases  suggestive  of  telepathic  com-
munication between  human  beings  and  animals.  Since,  from  the  nature
of  the  case,  only  the  witnesses  on  one  side  can  be  examined,  any  inter-
pretation of  such  occurrences  must  remain  dubious  at  best.  Apart  from
the  possibility  of  independent  clairvoyance,'  the  supposed  telepathic  im-
pulse might  come  from  some  other  human  being  acquainted  with  the
condition  of  the  animal, — not  from  the  animal  itself.

634A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  635

I  quote  an  instance  from  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xiv.  p.  285.
The  account  was  received  in  December  iSgo,1  from  Mrs.  Bagot,
writing  from  The  Palace,  Hampton  Court.  Both  Mrs.  Bagot  and  her
daughter,  who  confirms  the  account,  are  known  to  me.

In  the  year  1883  we  were  staying  at  the  H6tel  des  Anglais,  at  Mentone.  I
had  left  at  home  (in  Norfolk),  in  the  care  of  our  gardener,  a  very  favourite  little
dog,  a  black  and  tan  terrier,  named  Judy.  I  was  sitting  at  table  d'hdte  and
suddenly  saw  my  dog  run  across  the  room,  and  unthinkingly  exclaimed,  "  Why,
there's  Judy ! "  There  was  no  dog  in  the  hotel,  and  when  I  went  upstairs  I
told  my  daughter,  who  was  ill,  what  I  had  seen.  A  few  days  after  I  got  a  letter
saying  that  Judy  had  gone  out  with  the  gardener  as  usual  in  the  morning  quite
well,  but  when  he  returned  at  breakfast-time  she  was  suddenly  taken  ill,  and
died  in  half-an-hour.  At  this  distance  of  time  I  cannot  distinctly  remember
whether  the  dates  agreed,  but  my  impression  is  that  she  had  died  the  day  I
saw  her.  MARY  BAGOT.

Mrs.  Bagot's  daughter,  Mrs.  Wodehouse,  sent  me  on  February  pth,  1896,
the  following  corroboration,  stating  that  the  quotations  were  an  exact  copy
of  the  references  to  the  dog  in  her  diary  for  March  24th  and  28th,  1883.
It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  no  proof  that  the  dog  was  seen  on  the  day
of  its  death,  but  it  is  clear  that  Mrs.  Bagot  had  not  heard  of  its  death  till
afterwards.

56  CHESTER  SQUARE,  S.  W.

(Copy  of  Diary.)  March  2tfh,  1883.  Easter  Eve  (Mentone).— "  Drove  with
A.  and  picked  anemones.  Lovely  bright  day.  But  my  head  ached  too  much
to  enjoy  it.  Went  to  bed  after  tea  and  read  Hettner's  *  Renaissance.'  Mamma
saw  Judy's  ghost  at  table  d'hdte  !  "

March  28M,  Wednesday  (Monte  Carlo). — "  Mamma  and  A.  came  over  for
the  day.  Judy  dead,  poor  old  dear."

NOTE. — I  distinctly  remember  my  father  and  mother  and  sister  (Mrs.
Algernon  Law)  and  my  cousin  (Miss  Dawnay)  coming  into  my  bedroom  all
laughing  and  telling  me  how  my  mother  had  seen  Judy  (black  and  tan  terrier)
running  across  the  room  whilst  they  were  at  table  d'hdte.  My  mother  was  so
positive  about  it,  that  one  of  the  others  (I  think  my  father)  had  asked  the
waiter  if  there  were  any  dogs  in  the  hotel,  and  he  had  answered  in  the  negative.
I  can  find  no  further  mention  of  the  time  or  day  of  the  dog's  death  in  my
diary.

I  may  also  be  mistaken  in  the  day  on  which  my  mother  saw  Judy,  for
although  I  usually  write  my  diary  every  evening,  I  sometimes  leave  it  for  two
or  three  days  and  then  write  it  in  as  best  I  can  remember.  But  I  distinctly
remember  lying  in  my  bed  at  Mentone  when  they  told  me  the  story,  and
equally  clearly  I  remember  receiving  the  news  of  Judy's  death  at  Monte  Carlo.

AUELA  H.  WODEHOUSE.

i  In  February  1896,  Mrs.  Bagot  wrote  a  second  account  of  the  same  incident,  which
was  printed  in  \btfournal  S.P.R.  for  April  1896  (vol.  vii.  p.  243),  with  her  daughter's
confirmation,  then  obtained  for  the  first  time.  The  earlier  account,  here  given,  is
practically  identical  with  the  later  one,  so  that  Mrs.  Bagot's  recollection  of  the  circum-
stances does  not  seem  to  have  varied.

636  APPENDICES  [642  A

For  another  somewhat  similar  case,  see  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.
p.  289.

642  A.  General  Criticism  of  the  Evidence  for  Telepathy. — Various
possible  sources  of  error  and  the  general  canons  of  evidence  in  the  case
of  spontaneous  telepathy  were  discussed  fully  by  Gurney  in  Phantasms
of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  chap,  iv.,  of  which  the  following  is  a  brief  abstract.

The  most  general  objection  to  the  evidence  is  that  all  manner  of  false
beliefs  have  in  their  day  been  able  to  muster  in  their  support  a  consider-
able amount  of  evidence, — even  educated  evidence, — much  of  which  was
certainly  not  consciously  fraudulent ;  the  belief  in  witchcraft  is  a  favourite
instance.  But  an  enormous  proportion  of  the  witch  evidence  *  consisted
in  confessions  extracted  by  torture  or  intimidation ;  in  many  other  cases,
actual  occurrences  were  attributed,  on  no  grounds  whatever,  to  any
suspicious  persons  who  happened  to  be  in  the  neighbourhood.  In  the
remaining  cases  (i)  the  testimony  on  which  the  alleged  facts  were  believed
came  exclusively  from  the  uneducated  classes ;  and  (2)  the  easy  acceptance
of  this  evidence  by  better-educated  persons  was  due  to  the  then  almost
universal  ignorance  of  the  phenomena  of  hallucination,  hysteria,  trance,
and  hypnotism.  As  a  result  of  this  ignorance,  it  was  thought  that  there
were  only  two  alternative  interpretations  of  the  evidence  :  (a)  that  the  facts
happened  as  alleged,  or  (b)  that  the  witnesses  were  practising  deliberate
fraud.  There  was,  of  course,  some  fraud,  but  the  fact  that  many  of  them
gained  nothing  but  suffering  for  their  statements  showed  that  the  testimony
was  on  the  whole  honestly  given.  Fraud  being  thus  excluded,  the  facts
were  believed  genuine.

The  phenomena  of  witchcraft  which  were  then  put  down  to  "  posses-
sion "  can  now  be  explained  by  hallucination,  since  we  know  that  sub-
jective hallucinations  may  appear  absolutely  real  to  the  percipient,  that
they  may  easily  be  produced  by  hypnotic  suggestion  (which  was  probably
often  used  by  witches) ,  and  that  they  are  also  frequent  in  spontaneous
trance  and  hysteria,  both  which  conditions  are  contagious  and  no  doubt
were  often  present.  With  regard  to  such  marvels  as  aerial  rides  and
transformations  into  animals,  there  is  absolutely  no  first-hand  evidence —
even  from  uneducated  peasants — that  these  were  actually  witnessed.  The
evidence  relied  on  for  transformations  was  usually  that  the  accused  person
proved  to  have  some  bodily  hurt  on  the  day  the  animal  associated  with
her  had  been  wounded.

There  are,  however,  a  few  cases  recorded  on  really  good  authority  of
the  apparent  possession  of  telepathic  powers  by  the  witches  or  their  sub-
jects. No  stress  can,  of  course,  be  laid  on  this,  but  it  is  noteworthy  that
the  only  cases  of  supposed  magic  with  which  persons  of  sense  and  educa-
tion seem  at  the  time  to  have  come  into  close  quarters  were  similar  in

1  See  "Note  on  Witchcraft"  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  172,  for  an,
account,  with  numerous  references,  of  the  historical  evidence  for  witchcraft.

642A]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  637

character  to  cases  for  which  persons  of  sense  and  education  are  still  found
to  offer  their  personal  testimony.

But  in  whatever  light  these  residual  cases  are  regarded,  the  general
conclusion  remains  the  same, — that  the  phenomena  which  were  character-
istic of  witchcraft  and  which  are  an  accepted  type  of  exploded  superstitions
never  rested  on  the  first-hand  testimony  of  educated  and  intelligent  per-
sons ;  and  the  sweeping  assertion  which  is  often  made  that  such  persons
were,  in  their  days,  witnesses  to  the  truth  of  these  absurdities  needs,
therefore,  to  be  carefully  guarded.  What  the  educated  and  intelligent
believers  did  was  to  accept  from  others,  as  evidence  of  objective  facts,
statements  which  were  really  only  evidence  of  subjective  facts,  the  necessary
means  of  correction  not  being  within  their  reach.  Those  who  were  in
any  direct  sense  witnesses  to  the  facts  were  invariably  persons  inclined  to
such  beliefs  to  begin  with, — who  had  been  brought  up  in  them  and  had
accepted  them  as  a  matter  of  course.

When  we  come  to  compare  the  evidence  for  witchcraft  with  the
modern  evidence  for  telepathy,  it  will  be  seen  that  a  very  large  number
of  our  first-hand  witnesses  are  educated  and  intelligent  persons,  by  no
means  generally  inclined  beforehand  to  admit  the  reality  of  the  pheno-
menon, nor  even  interested  in  it  afterwards.  The  facts  alleged  are  not
connected  with  any  special  form  of  received  belief;  for  while  apparitions
of  the  dead  have  been  believed  in  widely  from  the  earliest  ages,  the  idea
of  apparitions  at  the  time  of  death  or  of  serious  crises  in  life  has  no
established  vogue,  though  sporadic  instances  have  often  been  reported.

There  are,  notwithstanding,  several  sources  of  error  which  may  affect
the  testimony  of  honest  and  educated  persons  to  events  that  are  both
unusual  and  of  a  sort  unrecognised  by  contemporary  science.

First,  as  to  errors  of  observation  these  can  only  relate  to  real  objects,
seen  and  misinterpreted,  e.g.  a  real  figure  seen  out  of  doors  and  at  some
distance  may  be  wrongly  recognised,  and  the  person  supposed  to  have  been
seen  may  happen  to  have  died  on  that  day.

In  most  cases,  however,  the  experience  is  clearly  hallucinatory,  and
the  next  class  of  errors — those  of  inference — are  therefore  unimportant.
The  only  question  is, — not,  how  did  the  witness  interpret  his  impression,
but,  what  did  he  seem  to  himself  at  the  time  to  perceive  ?

Errors  of  narration  and  of  memory  may  be  more  serious.  As  to  the
former,  there  is  the  tendency  to  exaggerate, — to  make  the  account  graphic
and  picturesque ;  but  this  would  vitiate  oral  rather  than  written  accounts,
and — as  might  be  expected  from  general  experience — affects  especially
second-hand  accounts.

Errors  of  memory  are  much  more  difficult  for  a  thoroughly  honest
person  to  avoid,  since  very  few  are  aware  of  the  untrustworthiness  of  their
own  memory.  This  ignorance  aids  unconscious  tendencies  to  bring  events
into  harmony  with  one's  own  beliefs  and  opinions — whether  religious  or
scientific — and  with  each  other ;  to  exaggerate  the  clearness  and  precision

638  APPENDICES  [642  A

of  recollections,  and  to  simplify  them,  either  by  bringing  any  group  of
events  into  a  connected  whole  or  merely  by  dropping  some  of  the  details.
The  total  effect  may  be  an  exaggeration  of  the  marvellous  elements  in  a
story,  or  occasionally  the  reverse ;  e.g.  a  waking  hallucination  may  be
remembered  as  a  dream.

Having  reviewed  these  various  possible  sources  of  error,  we  may  now
pass  on  to  consider  the  canons  of  evidence  in  the  case  of  telepathy.  In
a  typical  instance  of  a  telepathic  phenomenon,  there  are  three  points  on
which  indisputable  evidence  is  required :  (i)  that  the  agent  has  had  an
unusual  experience, — say,  has  died ;  (2)  that  the  percipient  has  had  an
unusual  experience,  including  a  certain  impression  of  the  agent, — say,
has,  while  awake,  had  a  vision  of  the  agent  in  the  room ;  (3)  that  the  two
events  coincided1  in  time,  which  implies  that  their  respective  dates  can
be  accurately  fixed.

(i)  Of  the  agent's  experience,  evidence  independent  of  the  percipient's
statements  can  generally  be  obtained,  either  from  printed  notices  if  he  has
died,  or,  if  not,  from  the  man  himself.  (2)  The  percipient's  experience
consists  in  an  impression  affecting  himself  alone,  to  which  therefore  no
one  else  can  bear  direct  witness.  But  if  this  impression  is  made  known
at  once  to  some  other  person,  so  that  the  latter's  confirmation  may  date
from  a  time  before  the  condition  of  the  agent  was  known,  such  confirma-
tion is  valuable  as  being  practically  independent  of  the  percipient.
(3)  Evidence  is  required  that  the  experiences  of  the  agent  and  percipient
happened  on  the  same  day,2  since  the  closeness  of  the  coincidence  may
easily  be  exaggerated  in  memory,  especially  after  the  lapse  of  some  time.

The  worth  of  the  evidence  of  course  varies  greatly  in  different  cases,
and  the  evidential  conditions  may  be  summarised  according  to  their  value
as  follows : —

A.  Where  the  event  which  befell  the  agent,  with  its  date,  is  recorded  in
printed  notices,  or  in  contemporary  documents  which  we  have  examined ;
or  is  reported  to  us  by  the  agent  himself  independently,  or  by  some  in-
dependent witness  or  witnesses ;  and  where

( i )  The  percipient  (a)  made  a  written  record  of  his  experience,  with
its  date,  at  the  time  of  its  occurrence,  which  record  we  have  either  seen  or
otherwise  ascertained  to  be  still  in  existence ;  or  (/?)  before  the  arrival  of
the  news8  mentioned  his  experience  to  one  or  more  persons,  by  whom  the

1  Supposing  the  facts  proved,  we  have  still  to  meet  the  objection  that  the  coincidence
of  events  may  have  been  due  to  chance  and  not  to  telepathy  (see  account  of  the  Report
on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,  612  A,  for  discussion  of  this) ;  but  the  first  step  obviously
is  to  prove  the  facts.

2  Since  numerical  data  are  required  to  estimate  the  argument  for  chance  coincidence,
an  arbitrary  limit  of  time  for  the  coincidence  must  be  fixed,  and  we  include  all  cases  in
which  the  interval  between  the  two  events  is  not  more  than  twelve  hours,  though  it
appears  generally  to  be  much  less  than  this.

8  The  words  "  the  news  "  mean  always  in  this  connection  the  news  of  what  has
befallen  the  supposed  agent.

642A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  639

fact  that  he  so  mentioned  it  is  corroborated ;  or  (y)  immediately  adopted
a  special  course  of  action  on  the  strength  of  his  experience,  as  is  proved
by  external  evidence,  documentary  or  personal.

(2)  The  documentary  evidence  mentioned  in  (ia)  and  (iy)  is  alleged
to  have  existed,  but  has  not  been  accessible  to  our  inspection ;  or  the  ex-
perience is  alleged  to  have  been  mentioned  as  in(i/?),  or  the  action  taken
on  the  strength  of  it  to  have  been  remarked  as  in  (iy),but  owing  to  death
or  other  causes,  the    person  or   persons   to   whom   the    experience   was
mentioned,  or  by  whom  the  action  was  remarked,  can  no  longer  corro-
borate the  fact.

This  second  class  of  cases  is  placed  here  for  convenience,  but  should
probably  rank  below  the  next  class.  At  the  same  time  the  fact  that  the
percipient's  experience  was  noted  in  writing  by  him,  or  was  communicated  to
another  person,  or  was  acted  on,  before  the  arrival  of  the  news,  is  not  one  which
is  at  all  specially  likely  to  be  unconsciously  invented  by  him  afterwards.

(3)  The  percipient  did  not  (a)  make  any  written  record,  nor  (ft)  make
any  verbal  mention  of  his  experience  until  after  the  arrival  of  the  news,
but  then  did  one  or  both ;  of  which  fact  we  have  confirmation.

This  class  is,  of  course,  as  a  rule,  decidedly  inferior  to  the  first  class.  At  the
same  time,  cases  occur  under  it  in  which  the  news  was  so  immediate  that  the
fact  of  the  coincidence  could  only  be  impugned  by  representing  the  whole  story
as  an  invention.

(4)  The  immediate  record  or  mention  on  the  arrival  of  the  news  is
alleged  to  have  been  made,  but  owing  to  loss  of  papers,  death  of  friends,
or  other  causes,  cannot  be  confirmed.

(5)  The  percipient  alleges  that  he  remarked  the  coincidence  when  he
heard  the  news ;  but  no  record  or  mention  of  the  circumstance  was  made
until  some  time  afterwards.

Such  cases,  of  course,  rapidly  lose  any  value  they  may  have  as  the  time
increases  which  separates  the  account  from  the  incident.  Still,  sometimes  we
have  been  able  to  obtain  the  independent  evidence  of  some  one  who  heard
an  account  previous  to  the  present  report  to  us  ;  or  we  have  ourselves  obtained
two  reports  separated  by  a  considerable  interval.  And  where  a  comparison  of
accounts  given  at  different  times  shows  that  they  do  not  vary,  this  is  to  some
extent  an  indication  of  accuracy.

B.  Where  the  percipient  is  our  sole  authority  for  the  nature  and  date
of  the  event  which  he  alleges  to  have  befallen  the  agent.

In  many  of  these  cases,  the  percipient  is  also  our  sole  authority  for  his  own
experience;  and  the  evidence  under  this  head  will  then  be  weaker  than  in  any
of  the  above  classes.  But  where  we  have  independent  testimony  of  the  per-
cipient's mention  of  the  two  events,  and  of  their  coincidence,  soon  after  the  ir
occurence — he  having  been  at  the  time  in  such  circumstances  that  he  would
naturally  know  the  nature  and  date  of  what  had  befallen  the  agent — the  case
may  rank  as  higher  in  value  than  some  of  those  of  Class  A  (5).

64o  APPENDICES  [642  A

The  analysis  just  given  refers  exclusively  to  first-hand  evidence,  that
is,  evidence  in  which  the  main  account  comes  to  us  direct  from  the  per-
cipient. There  is  one,  and  only  one,  sort  of  second-hand  evidence  which
can  on  the  whole  be  placed  on  a  par  with  first-hand  ;  namely,  the  evidence
of  a  person  who  has  been  informed  of  the  experience  of  the  percipient
while  the  latter  was  still  unaware  of  the  corresponding  event ;  and  who
has  had  equal  opportunities  with  the  percipient  for  learning  the  truth  of
that  event,  and  confirming  the  coincidence.  The  second-hand  witness's
testimony  in  such  a  case  is  quite  as  likely  to  be  accurate  as  the  per-
cipient's, for  though  his  impression  of  the  actual  details  will  no  doubt
be  less  vivid,  yet  on  the  other  hand  he  will  not  be  under  the  same
temptation  to  exaggerate  the  force  or  strangeness  of  the  impression  in
subsequent  retrospection.  The  risks  of  error  in  all  other  second-hand
evidence  have  been  so  abundantly  proved  by  experience  (some  illustra-
tions of  this  are  given  in  this  section  of  chapter  iv.  of  Phantasms ,  pp.  149
to  157)  that  it  is  better  to  leave  it  altogether  out  of  consideration,  and
the  great  majority  of  the  cases  given  in  Phantasms  are  first-hand.1

As  regards  the  accuracy  of  the  records,  though  it  has  been  possible
to  draw  up  a  sort  of  table  of  degrees,  such  a  table  affords,  of  course,  no
final  criterion.  Each  case  must  be  judged  on  its  merits  by  reference  to
a  considerable  number  of  points.  It  is  essential  for  judgment  that  the
narrative  should  be  given  in  the  percipient's  own  words, — not  converted
into  second-hand  evidence  by  being  paraphrased.  This  principle  has
been  followed  throughout,  as  well  as  that  of  obtaining,  whenever  possible,
corroborative  evidence  of  all  sorts,  whether  from  private  sources,  public
notices,  or  official  records.

Further,  a  very  large  proportion  of  the  narratives  in  Phantasms  have
stood  the  test  of  cross-examination  of  the  witnesses  in  personal  interviews.
This  part  of  the  investigation  was  carried  out  by  the  authors  of  the  book
and  their  colleagues,  especially  Professor  and  Mrs.  Sidgwick,  and  it  greatly
added  to  their  own  confidence  that  the  testimony  they  published  came
from  trustworthy  and  intelligent  witnesses.  The  practice  of  making  the
personal  acquaintance  of  the  witnesses  has  been  continued  as  far  as
possible  with  all  the  best  evidence  received  since  by  the  Society  for
Psychical  Research.

Another  argument  for  the  general  trustworthiness  of  the  evidence  is
the  fact  that  amid  all  their  differences,  the  cases  present  one  general
characteristic — an  unusual  affection  of  one  person,  having  no  apparent
relation  to  anything  outside  him  except  the  unusual  condition,  otherwise
unknown  to  him,  of  another  person.  This  characteristic  gives  them  the

1  Except  in  the  Supplement,  which  includes  a  good  many  second-hand  accounts,  as
well  as  first-hand  accounts  where  the  evidence,  from  lack  of  corroboration  or  other
causes,  falls  short  of  the  standard  attained  in  the  body  of  the  work.  The  principle  in
selecting  cases  for  the  Supplement  was  to  take  only  those  which — supposing  telepathy  to
be  established  as  a  fact  in  Nature — would  reasonably  be  regarded  as  examples  of  it.

642B]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  641

appearance  of  a  true  natural  group,  and  involves  the  hypothesis  that  the
facts,  if  truly  stated,  are  probably  due  to  a  single  cause.  It  involves
further,  a  very  strong  argument  that  the  facts  are  truly  stated ;  since
it  is  extremely  unlikely — if  all  the  accounts  are  erroneous — that  the
various  supposed  errors  of  inference,  lapses  of  memory,  and  exaggerations
and  perversions  of  narration  should  issue  in  a  consistent  body  of  evidence,
presenting  one  well-defined  type  of  phenomenon,  free  in  every  case  from
excrescences  or  inconsistent  features,  and  explicable  and  completely  expli-
cable by  one  equally  well-defined  hypothesis.  What  is  the  likelihood
that  a  number  of  narratives,  if  we  assume  them  to  have  diverged  in  various
ways  from  the  actual  facts,  should  thus  converge  to  a  single  result  ?  We
find  that  all  of  them  stop  short  at  or  within  a  given  line — the  line  being
the  exact  one  up  to  which  a  particular  explanation,  not  of  the  witnesses
but  of  ours,  can  be  extended,  and  beyond  which  it  could  not  be  extended.
Tempting  marvels  lie  further  on — marvels  which  in  the  popular  view  are
quite  as  likely  to  be  true  as  the  facts  actually  reported,  and  which  the
general  traditions  of  the  subject  would  connect  with  those  facts.  But
our  reporters  one  and  all  eschew  them.  To  take,  for  instance,  he  group
of  cases  which  the  reader  will  probably  find  to  be  the  most  interesting,
as  it  is  also  the  largest,  in  our  collection — apparitions  at  the  time  of
death.  Why  should  not  such  apparitions  hold  prolonged  converse  with
the  waking  friend  ?  Why  should  they  not  produce  physical  effects — shed
tears  on  the  pillow  and  make  it  wet,  open  the  door  and  leave  it  open,  or
leave  some  tangible  token  of  their  presence?  It  is  surely  noteworthy
that  we  have  not  had  to  reject,  on  grounds  like  these,  a  single  narrative
which  on  other  grounds  would  have  been  admitted.

On  the  other  hand,  these  details  are  found  abundantly  in  second-hand
cases,  and  they  are  precisely  of  the  sort  which  the  telepathic  hypothesis
could  by  no  possibility  be  made  to  cover.  The  existence  of  such  features
in  second-hand  narratives  shows  how  wide  is  the  possible  range  of  inci-
dents in  stories  where  ordinary  human  faculties  are  alleged  to  have  been
transcended.  Of  this  wide  field,  the  hypothesis  of  the  action  of  mind  on
mind  covers  only  a  single  well-defined  portion.  We  can  hardly  suppose,
then,  that  if  error  were  widely  at  work  in  the  case  of  our  first-hand
evidence,  its  results  would  always  fall  inside  and  not  outside  this
limited  area — should  all,  that  is,  conform  to  the  purely  telepathic

Meanwhile,  it  is  not,  of  course,  claimed  that  the  evidence  is  such  as

convince  every  candid   inquirer,  and  after  setting  forth  the  sta:
desired,  and  discussing  the  force  of  that  actually  attained,  we  may  pass  on
to  a   consideration   of  some  of  the  principal  criticisms  that    have  been
directed  against  the  latter.

642  B.  Contemporary  Documentary  Evidence. — Some  attacks  were
made  on  the  ground  of  the  scarcity  of  contemporary  documentary  evi-
dence ;  for  instance,  one  by  Mr.  A.  Taylor  Innes,  in  a  paper  entitled
"  The  Psychical  Society's  Ghosts,"  in  the  .\  •/  Century  for  Nov-

voi..   i.  2  s

642  APPENDICES  [642  B

ember  1891.  He  alleged  that  the  natural  thing  to  do  after  witnessing
a  "  wraith  or  other  intimation  "  would  be  at  once  to  post  a  letter  inform-
ing some  one  of  it,  and  observed,  "  In  all  the  most  important  of  the
Psychical  Society  stories  of  1886  we  have  one  such  letter  alleged —
sometimes  even  two."  The  production  of  these  letters  would  prove
the  stories,  and  with  regard  to  some  of  them,  "  if  such  a  letter  exists,
with  contents  and  postmark  undisputed,  it  is  worth  a  thousand
guineas  in  the  market."  But,  he  stated,  there  was  not  one  case  in  which
the  editors  of  Phantasms  had  "  seen  or  ascertained  a  letter  or  document
issued  at  the  time  by  the  narrator,  so  as  to  prove  his  story  to  be  true."
Since,  then,  in  a  large  proportion  of  the  cases,  contemporary  documents
had  been  alleged  to  have  been  written,  the  fact  that  none  of  them  had
been  forthcoming  showed,  he  maintained,  that  the  evidence  was  worthless.

Mr.  Innes's  statements  were  misleading  in  two  respects  : —  ( i )  they  gave
a  very  exaggerated  impression  of  the  proportion  of  cases  in  which  docu-
mentary evidence  was  alleged  to  have  existed;  and  (2)  it  was  incorrect  to
say  that  such  evidence  was  not  forthcoming  in  any  of  them.

The  following  is  a  list  of  some  of  the  cases  authenticated  by  such
evidence  : —

(a)  In  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  93,  Mr.  S.  H.  B. ;  p.  108,  Mr.
S.  H.  B.  (quoted  in  668)  ;  p.  197,  Mr.  Keulemans  (quoted  in  662  A)  ;  p.  199,
Mr.  Wingfield  (quoted  in  429  C)  ;  p.  221,  a  lady,  name  not  given;  p.  324,  Mr.
Sladen;  p.  407,  Mr.  Jukes  ;  p.  425,  Mrs.  T.  (quoted  in  428)  ;  p.  527,  Miss  R.
(quoted  in  667  A).

Ibid.  vol.  ii.  p.  31,  Mr.  Gottschalk  (quoted  in  662  B);  p.  154,  Mr.  W.
(quoted  in  428  D)  ;  p.  693,  Mr.  Teale.

In  all  these  cases,  the  written  note  of  the  percipient's  experience,  made
before  ascertaining  whether  it  was  veridical  or  not,  was  seen  by  one  of  the
authors  of  Phantasms.

(3)  In  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  31,  Mr.  Cameron  Grant  (also  re-
ferred to  in  vol.  viii.  p.  212,  and  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  688)  ;
vol.  xi.  p.  431,  Mr.  Glardon  ;  p.  438,  Mrs.  Chase;  vol.  xii  pp.  268  and  270,
Mrs.  D.

(c)  In  the.  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iii.  p.  265,  Mr.  Boyle  (quoted  in  423)  ;  p.  267,
Mr.  Hamilton  (quoted  in  424) ;  vol.  vii.  p.   239,  Mr.   Nascimento  (quoted  in
421  J) ;  vol.  ix.  p.  134,  Mrs.  Verrall.

(d)  In  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  S.P.R.,  vol.  i.  p.  226,  a  lady,  name
not  given ;  p.  227,  Mrs.  T. ;  p.  395,  Mr.  J.  T.

In  reply  to  Mr.  Innes's  suggestion  of  he  commercial  value  of  docu-
mentary evidence,  Mr.  Podmore  (in  he  National  Review  for  April  1892)
observed  that,  "  although  a  well-attested  ghost  story  may  be,  to  its  pos-
sessor, of  more  value  than  gold,  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  an  investigator
can  afford  to  give  sixpence  for  it.  The  Society  for  Psychical  Research,  at
any  rate,  early  decided  that  it  could  offer  no  remuneration  whatever  to
informants,  holding  it  essential  to  avoid  any  inducement  to  the  production
of  false  or  doctored  evidence."  (It  is  obvious,  of  course,  that  documentary

642B]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  643

evidence  could  easily  be  forged,  and  rests  therefore,  generally  speaking,
on  the  bona  fdes  of  the  witness.  But  supposing  that  the  witness  is  not
accused  of  practising  deliberate  fraud,  but  merely  of  remembering  events
inaccurately,  the  value  of  the  documentary  evidence  simply  lies  in  its
independence  of  his  memory.)

Mr.  Podmore  discusses  various  reasons  why  letters  or  other  notes
of  the  occurrences  should  seldom  be  made,  and  why  only  a  small  pro-
portion of  those  made  should  be  preserved,  and  goes  on  to  give  six  cases
received  during  the  few  years  since  the  publication  of  Phantasms,  in  which
the  original  documents  had  been  preserved  and  seen.

The  question  is  discussed  more  fully  in  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.
(  "  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"  pp.  220-223),  ^rom  which  I
quote  a  short  extract,  as  follows  : —

"The  importance  and  value  of  contemporary  documentary  evidence
for  telepathy  was  first  pointed  out  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living  (Vol.  i.  pp.
134-147),  and  has  been  constantly  and  emphatically  reiterated  by  those
who  are  working  at  psychical  research,  with  the  result  that,  in  addition
to  what  existed  at  the  time  Phantasms  of  the  Living  was  written,  the
amount  of  it  has  since  been  steadily,  though  slowly  accumulating.  Some
of  the  critics  of  the  Society's  work  have  assumed  that  in  a  large  propor-
tion, probably  about  one  in  seven,  of  the  cases  where  a  sensory  hallucina-
tion is  experienced,  the  percipient  would  at  once  write  a  letter  on  the
subject  to  some  friend,  and  that  letters  containing  such  accounts  would,
in  general,  be  carefully  preserved.  They  have  accordingly  maintained  that
the  absence  of  documentary  evidence  in  the  great  majority  of  cases
constitutes  a  positive  argument  against  the  telepathic  explanation.  The
force  of  this  argument  depends,  of  course,  primarily  on  the  frequency
with  which  contemporary  notes  of  possibly  telepathic  incidents  are  made.
We  have  therefore  endeavoured  to  obtain  information  as  to  the  cases  in
which  any  notes  were  taken  at  the  time  of  the  hallucinatory  experience.
From  the  information  received,  it  appears  that  in  49  out  of  the  1942
cases  recorded — that  is,  in  2.5  per  cent. — some  note  was  made,  or  some
letter  mentioning  the  hallucination  written,  within  24  hours  of  the
occurrence,  and  before  knowing  whether  it  was  coincidental  or  not,
either  by  the  percipient  himself,  or  by  some  person  who  was  told  of  it
at  the  time.  We  have  included  in  the  49  some  cases  in  which  it  is  not
quite  certain  from  the  expressions  used  whether  our  informant  meant  that
he  had  made  a  written  or  a  mental  note  of  his  experience,  in  order  to
obtain  an  outside  estimate  of  the  number  of  cases  in  which  contemporary
documentary  evidence  of  any  kind  ever  existed."

[Of  these  49  cases,  8  were  hallucinations  coinciding  with  deaths  (of
which  6  were  recognised  apparitions),  9  were  coincidental  with  other
events,  and  32  were  non-coincidental.  With  regard  to  the  kinds  of  hallu-
cinations, 24  out  of  the  49  were  recognised  apparitions  of  living  persons,
4  of  dead  persons,  and  9  other  visual  hallucinations ;  10  were  auditory

644  APPENDICES  [642  C

hallucinations  and  2  tactile.  The  writers  proceed  to  give  reasons  why
the  amount  of  documentary  evidence  should  be  so  small,  and  continue  : — ]

"  Of  the  1 7  coincidental  cases  which  were  noted  at  the  time,  the  note
has  been  seen  by  us  in  two  cases ;  *  in  the  third  case  a  letter  which  was
written  in  answer  to  one  from  the  percipient  describing  her  experience,  and
which  establishes  the  coincidence,  has  been  seen  by  us ;  in  a  fourth
case  we  have  received  a  copy  of  a  similar  letter ;  and  in  five  other  cases
we  have  evidence — either  from  the  persons  who  received  the  letters,  or
from  those  who  witnessed  the  making  of  the  notes — confirmatory  of
the  percipient's  statement  that  the  letters  or  notes  were  written  at  the
time."

642  C.  Hallucinations  and  Illusions  of  Memory. — Another  important
objection  was  raised  on  the  score  of  possible  hallucinations  of  memory
as  to  the  incidents  alleged.  Now,  illusions  of  memory — inaccurate  re-
collections of  actual  events — are  as  familiar  as  illusions  of  the  senses —
perceptions  based  on  misinterpretations  of  material  objects.  It  is  also
possible  that  there  may  be  hallucinations  of  memory — or  recollections  of
events  that  have  never  really  occurred  at  all — analogous  to  sensory  hallu-
cinations, or  perceptions  based  on  no  material  objects.  In  the  case  of
memory,  it  is  very  difficult  to  draw  the  line  in  any  concrete  instance  be-
tween illusion  and  hallucination  ;  but  it  is  important  to  recognise  the
theoretical  distinction  between  the  two  types  and  not  to  assume  without
proof  that  what  can  be  predicated  of  one  type  necessarily  applies  also  to
the  other.

The  hypothetical  "  pseudo-presentiments  "  by  which  Professor  J.  Royce
attempted  to  explain  a  large  number  of  impressions  reported  as  veridical
belong  to  the  class  of  hallucinations  of  memory.  To  quote  his  own
description  (see  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical  Research,
vol.  i.  p.  366).  :  "This  hypothesis  is  that  in  certain  people,  under  certain
exciting  circumstances,  there  occur  what  I  shall  henceforth  call  pseudo-
presentiments,  i.e.  more  or  less  instantaneous  and  irresistible  hallucinations
of  memory,  which  make  it  seem  to  one  that  something  which  now  excites
or  astonishes  him  has  been  prefigured  in  a  recent  dream,  or  in  the  form  of
some  other  warning,  although  this  seeming  is  wholly  unfounded,  and
although  the  supposed  prophecy  really  succeeds  its  own  fulfilment."
Thus,  on  hearing  of  a  death,  one  might  think  that  one  had  just  dreamt  or
had  a  presentiment  of  it.  "  Members  of  the  same  family  would,"  he  sug-
gests, "  be  especially  apt  to  be  similarly  subject  to  this  form  of  illusion,
and  then  the  same  news  would  show  them  all  the  same  mirage  of  memory,
with  startling  results  in  the  way  of  '  telepathic  '  evidence."  He  compares
this  with  the  familiar  illusion  of  "  double  memory  "  or  the  deja  vu, — the
feeling  that  an  experience  which  is  being  passed  through  is  an  exact
repetition  of  something  that  has  happened  before, — though  he  admits

1  For  exact  references  to  all  these  cases,  see  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,
p.  223.

642C]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  645

that  this  latter  illusion  generally  corrects  itself  at  once.1  The  only
positive  evidence  brought  forward  in  support  of  the  supposed  new  type
of  illusion  is  afforded  by  two  cases  quoted  from  Professor  Emil  Kraepelin
{Archiv  fur  Psychiatric,  vol.  xviii.  p.  397)  of  insane  patients  who,  among
other  delusions,  constantly  fancied  that  whatever  happened  to  them,  or
attracted  their  attention,  had  already  been  predicted  to  them.

In  reply,  Guraey  pointed  out  ( i )  that  in  recent  cases  where  we  have
evidence  that  the  percipient's  experience  was  related  to  some  one  else
before  the  arrival  of  the  news,  the  hypothesis  of  collective  illusion  fails  to
account  for  the  difference  in  the  recollections  of  the  witnesses, — one
remembering  that  he  has  had  a  certain  impression,  and  the  other  that  this
impression  has  been  related  to  him.  (2)  Professor  Royce  omitted  alto-
gether to  consider  the  type  of  case  most  important  evidentially,  namely,
veridical  sensory  hallucinations.  Supposing  that  the  news  of  an  exciting
event  has  some  tendency  to  produce  the  impression  that  one  had  known
of  it  before,  this  would  not  show  that  the  receipt  of  news,  say,  of  the  death
of  a  friend,  had  any  tendency  to  produce  the  impression  of  having  recently
seen  an  apparition  of  the  friend,  which  did  not  announce,  or  even  suggest
his  death.  Further,  the  assignment  of  the  supposed  recollection  to  a
particular  time  constitutes  an  essential  difference  from  the  familiar  illusions
of  "  double  memory,"  which  are  quite  unlocalised  in  time.

Mr.  Hodgson  (see  Proceedings  of  the  American  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  p.  542)  points  out  further  that  the  hypothesis  can  only — with
any  show  of  reason — be  applied  to  cases  of  certain  kinds,  namely,  remote
cases,  and  those  depending  only  on  the  evidence  of  the  percipient,
especially  where  the  experience  is  merely  a  dream  or  mental  impression,
still  more  if  it  is  supposed  to  foreshadow  future  events,  or  if  the  percipient
has  forgotten  it  and  is  only  reminded  of  it  by  receiving  the  news.

The  conception  of  "  pseudo-presentiments  "  has  been  adopted,  greatly
extended,  and  applied  in  a  wholesale  manner  to  the  telepathic  evidence
by  E.  Parish.  a  He  fails  altogether  to  grasp  the  distinction  between
illusions  of  memory,  for  which  there  is  ample  evidence,  and  hallucinations
of  memory,  for  which  the  evidence  is  exceedingly  meagre — resting,  in  fact,
almost  entirely  on  the  rare  morbid  cases  quoted  again  from  Kraepelin.  By
premising  both  positive  and  negative  defects  of  memory,  Parish  disposes
at  one  blow  of  the  argument  that  apparitions  at  the  time  of  death  are  pro-
portionately too  numerous  to  be  attributed  to  chance  ;  he  simply  supposes
that  non-coincidental  apparitions  are  very  frequent,  but  that  almost  all  of
them  are  forgotten  ;  while  coincidental  ones  hardly  ever  really  occur,  but
are  often /alsefy  remembered.

1  For  a  discussion  of  this  phenomenon,  to  which  I  have  given  the  name  Gipromnesia^
see  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  340-347.

*  See  Ueber  die  Trugwahrnehmun^  by  E.  Parish  (Leipzig,  1894),  and  Reviews
in   Proceedings  S.P./t.,  vol.  xi.  p.  162,  and  in  Mr.  A.  Lang's  The  Making  of  Relipon,
P-  337  (Appendix  on  "  Oppositions  of  Science  ").     Also  Zur  Kritik  des  teUpat:.
Bnoeis- Materiel* ,  by  E.  Parish  (Leiprig,  1897),  and  Review  of  it  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  xiii.  p.  589.

646  APPENDICES  [645  A

A  priori  speculations  as  to  the  working  of  memory  will  obviously  lead
to  whatever  conclusion  it  is  desired  to  support.  But  positive  evidence  is
more  worthy  of  serious  consideration,  and  it  is  possible  to  obtain  this  by
comparing  the  recollections  of  the  same  person  at  different  times,  and  also
by  comparing  the  recollections  of  different  persons.  The  great  mass  of
records  collected  by  the  S.  P.  R.  have  been  examined  by  their  investigators
with  this  special  end  in  view.  In  particular,  the  study  of  one  important
type  of  cases  (see  "  The  Possibilities  of  Mai-observation  and  Lapse  of
Memory  from  a  Practical  Point  of  View  :  Introduction,"  by  R.  Hodgson  ;
"  Experimental  Investigation,"  by  S.  J.  Davey ;  Proceedings  S.  P.  R.,  vol.  iv.
pp.  381—495)  has  shown  what  kinds  of  error  occur  in  actual  experience.
Many  events  are  found  to  be  absolutely  forgotten ;  the  blank'  in  memory
may  be  filled  by  conjectured  details,  or  may  close  up,  so  that  events  really
separated  by  an  interval  of  time  may  be  remembered  as  occurring  close
together;  a  detail  afterwards  remembered  may  be  interpolated  in  a
record ;  or  an  event  occurring  at  one  time  may  be  remembered  as
occurring  at  another.  All  these  are  errors  of  omission,  exaggeration,  or
distortion  of  a  generally — though  more  or  less  vaguely — recognised  kind ;
but  few  persons  who  have  not  made  a  special  study  of  the  subject  realise
the  extent  to  which  testimony  is  vitiated  by  them.  Such  false  memories
are  illusions,  which  develop  and  consolidate  gradually  as  time  goes  on.
But  investigation  of  the  experiences  of  sane  persons  has  not  revealed  any
instances  of  Professor  Royce's  hypothetical  hallucinations  of  memory
which  arise  instantaneously  in  a  complex  and  fully  elaborated  form.

Illusions  of  memory  have  also  been  studied  from  the  point  of  view  of
their  bearing  on  the  subject  of  "hypnotic  crimes"  (see  555  A),  stress
having  been  laid  especially  on  the  facility  with  which  hysterical  or  weak-
minded  persons  may  be  made  to  imagine,  or  may  spontaneously  imagine,
that  they  have  witnessed  fictitious  occurrences,  and  may  thus  be  brought
to  bear  false  witness.  Bernheim  also  found  that  by  hypnotic  suggestion
he  could  produce  actual  hallucinations  of  memory  in  a  few  specially
susceptible  subjects.  But  these  cases,  again,  are  obviously  not  compar-
able with  Professor  Royce's  "  pseudo-presentiments,"  which  are  supposed
to  arise  suddenly  and  spontaneously  in  persons  in  a  normal  condition.

645  A.  The  following  case  of  repeated  apparitions  is  taken  from
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  82,  the  account  being  given  by  the
Rev.  T.  L.  Williams,  vicar  of  Porthleven,  near  Helston.

August  ist,  1884.

Some  years  ago  (I  cannot  give  you  any  date,  but  you  may  rely  on  the  facts),
on  one  occasion  when  I  was  absent  from  home,  my  wife  awoke  one  morning,
and  to  her  surprise  and  alarm  saw  my  «$o>Xov  standing  by  the  bedside  looking
at  her.  In  her  fright  she  covered  her  face  with  the  bedclothes,  and  when  she
ventured  to  look  again  the  appearance  was  gone.  On  another  occasion,  when
I  was  not  absent  from  home,  my  wife  went  one  evening  to  week-day  evensong,
and  on  getting  to  the  churchyard  gate,  which  is  about  forty  yards  or  so  from  the

645A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  647

church  door,  she  saw  me,  as  she  supposed,  coming  from  the  church  in  surplice
and  stole.  I  came  a  little  way,  she  says,  and  turned  round  the  corner  of  the
building,  when  she  lost  sight  of  me.  The  idea  suggested  to  her  mind  was  that
I  was  coming  out  of  the  church  to  meet  a  funeral  at  the  gate.  I  was  at  the  time
in  church  in  my  place  in  the  choir,  where  she  was  much  surprised  to  see  me  when
she  entered  the  building.  I  have  often  endeavoured  to  shake  my  wife's  belief
in  the  reality  of  her  having  seen  what  she  thinks  she  saw.  In  the  former  case
I  have  told  her,  "  You  were  only  half  awake  and  perhaps  dreaming."  But  she
always  confidently  asserts  that  she  was  broad  awake,  and  is  quite  certain  that
she  saw  me.  In  the  latter  case  she  is  equally  confident.

My  daughter,  also  has  often  told  me,  and  now  repeats  the  story,  that  one
day,  when  living  at  home  before  her  marriage,  she  was  passing  my  study  door,
which  was  ajar,  and  looked  in  to  see  if  I  was  there.  She  saw  me  sitting  in  my
chair,  and  as  she  caught  sight  of  me  I  stretched  out  my  arms,  and  drew  my
hands  across  my  eyes,  a  familiar  gesture  of  mine,  it  appears.  I  was  not  in  the
house  at  the  time,  but  out  in  the  village.  This  happened  many  years  ago,  but
my  wife  remembers  that  my  daughter  mentioned  the  circumstance  to  her  at  the
time.

Now  nothing  whatever  occurred  at  or  about  the  times  of  these  appearances
to  give  any  meaning  to  them.  I  was  not  ill,  nor  had  anything  unusual  happened
to  me.  I  cannot  pretend  to  offer  any  explanation,  but  simply  state  the  facts  as
told  me  by  persons  on  whose  words  I  can  depend.

There  is  one  other  thing  which  I  may  as  well  mention.  A  good  many  years
ago  there  was  a  very  devout  young  woman  living  in  ray  parish,  who  used  to
spend  much  of  her  spare  time  in  church  in  meditation  and  prayer.  She  used
to  assert  that  she  frequently  saw  me  standing  at  the  altar,  when  I  was  certainly
not  there  in  the  body.  At  first  she  was  alarmed,  but  after  seeing  the  appear-
ance again  and  again  she  ceased  to  feel  anything  of  terror.  She  is  now  a  Sister
of  Mercy  at  Honolulu.  THOMAS  LOCKYER  WILLIAMS.

[The  circumstances,  and  the  frequency,  of  this  third  percipient's  experiences
decidedly  favour  the  view  that  they  were  merely  subjective.]

Mrs.  Williams  writes : —

June  20th ,  1885.

As  requested,  I  write  to  tell  you  what  I  saw  on  two  occasions.  I  am  sorry
that  I  am  unable  to  give  you  the  dates,  even  approximately,  as  many  years  have
passed  since  I  had  the  experiences  referred  to.  On  one  occasion  my  husband
was  absent  in  Somersetshire,  and  on  waking  one  morning  I  distinctly  saw  him
standing  by  my  bedside.  I  was  much  alarmed,  and  instinctively  covered  my
face  with  the  bedclothes.  My  friends  have  often  tried  to  persuade  me  that  I
was  not  broad  awake,  but  I  am  quite  certain  that  I  was,  and  that  I  really  saw
my  husband's  appearance.

The  other  occasion  was  on  a  certain  evening  I  was  going  to  church,  and  on
getting  to  the  churchyard  gate,  which  is  about  twenty  yards  from  the  door  of
the  church,  I  saw  my  husband  come  out  of  the  church  in  his  surplice,  walk  a
little  way  towards  me,  and  then  turn  off  round  the  church.  I  thought  nothing
of  it  until  on  entering  the  church  I  was  startled  at  seeing  him  in  his  place  in  the
choir,  about  to  conduct  the  service.  It  was  then  broad  daylight,  and  I  am  quite
that  I  saw  the  appearance.  Nothing  whatever  occurred  after  either  of
these  appearances,  and,  of  course,  I  can  in  no  way  account  for  them.

EMMA  WILLIAMS.

648  APPENDICES  [645  B

[In  reply  to  the  question  whether  his  wife  or  daughter  had  ever  experienced
any  other  hallucination  of  the  senses,  Mr.  Williams  replies  confidently  in  the
negative.]

See  also  a  case  given  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  83.

645  B.  The  next  account  (quoted  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.
ii.  p.  85)  is  from  Mrs.  Stone,  of  Smite  Haye,  Walditch,  Bridport,  and  was
written  in  1883.

On  three  occasions,  each  time  by  different  persons,  I  have  been  seen  when
not  present  in  the  body.  The  first  instance  that  I  was  thus  seen  was  by  my
sister-in-law,  who  was  sitting  up  with  me,  the  night  after  the  birth  of  my  first
child.  She  looked  towards  the  bed  where  I  was  sleeping,  and  distinctly  saw
me  and  my  double ;  the  first  my  natural  body,  the  second  spiritualised  and
fainter ;  several  times  she  shut  her  eyes,  but  on  opening  them  there  was  still
the  same  appearance,  and  the  vision  only  faded  away  after  some  little  time.
She  thought  it  a  sign  of  my  death.  I  did  not  hear  of  it  for  many  months.

The  second  instance  was  by  my  niece ;  she  was  staying  with  us  at  Dor-
chester. It  was  rather  early  on  a  spring  morning  j  she  opened  her  bedroom
door,  and  saw  me  ascending  the  flight  of  steps  opposite  her  room,  fully  dressed
in  the  mourning  black  gown,  white  collar,  and  cap,  which  I  was  then  wearing
for  my  mother-in-law.  She  did  not  speak,  but  saw  me,  as  she  thought,  go  into
the  nursery.  At  breakfast  she  said  to  her  uncle,  "  My  aunt  was  up  early  this
morning  ;  I  saw  her  go  into  the  nursery."  "  Oh  no,  Jane,"  my  husband  an-
swered, "  she  was  not  very  well,  and  is  going  to  have  her  breakfast  before
coming  down."

The  third  instance  was  the  most  remarkable.  We  had  a  small  house  at
Weymouth,  where  we  occasionally  went  for  the  sea.  A  Mrs.  Samways  waited
on  us  when  there,  and  took  care  of  the  house  in  our  absence ;  she  was  a  nice
quiet  woman,  thoroughly  trustworthy,  the  aunt  of  my  dear  old  servant  Kitty
Balston,  then  living  with  us  at  Dorchester.  She  had  written  to  her  aunt  the
day  before  the  vision  occurred,  telling  her  of  the  birth  of  my  youngest  child,
and  that  I  was  going  on  well.  The  next  night  Mrs.  Samways  went  to  a
meeting-house,  near  Clarence  Buildings;  she  was  a  Baptist.  Before  leaving,
she  locked  an  inner  door  leading  into  a  small  courtyard  behind  the  house,  and
the  street-door  after  her,  carrying  both  keys  in  her  pocket.  On  her  return,
unlocking  the  street-door,  she  perceived  a  light  at  the  end  of  the  passage,  and
on  going  nearer  saw,  as  she  thought,  the  yard-door  open.  The  light  showed
the  yard  and  everything  in  it,  but  in  the  midst  she  clearly  recognised  me,  in
white  garments,  looking  very  pale  and  worn.  She  was  terribly  frightened,
rushed  into  a  neighbour's  house  (Captain  Court's),  and  dropped  in  the  passage.
After  recovering,  Captain  Court  went  with  her  into  the  house,  which  was
exactly  as  she  had  left  it,  and  the  yard-door  securely  locked.  I  was  taken  very
faint  about  the  same  time,  and  lingered  for  many  weeks,  hovering  between  life
and  death.1

1  Taken  in  connection  with  these  instances,  the  following  experience  of  Mrs.  Stone's
own  is  of  considerable  interest : —

"  When  about  nine  or  ten  years  old  I  was  sent  to  a  school  in  Dorchester  as  a  day
boarder  ;  it  was  here  my  first  curious  experience  occurred  that  I  can  clearly  remember..
J  was  in  an  upper  room  in  the  school,  standing  with  some  others,  in  a  class  opposite  our

645  C]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  649

Professor  Sidgwick  visited  Mrs.  Stone,  and  after  thoroughly  questioning
her  on  her  narrative,  he  wrote  (September  23,  1884)  :  —

She  certainly  understands  thoroughly  the  importance  of  accuracy.  She
said  she  had  heard  of  her  apparition  direct  from  the  seers,  in  the  first  two
cases  mentioned.  She  had  never  heard  of  her  sister-in-law  having  had  any
other  hallucination  before  this  time  (1833)  or  afterwards,  until  very  lately,  when
she  has  had  an  apparition  of  a  dead  person.  She  is  old,  and  Mrs.  Stone  is  un-
willing to  trouble  her  on  the  matter.  Nor  does  she  think  that  her  niece,  Jane
Studley  (who  is  dead),  ever  had  any  other  hallucination.  As  regards  the  third
instance,  Mrs.  Stone  only  heard  it  after  her  recovery,  from  Kitty  Balston,  whose
account— as  repeated  by  Mrs.  Stone— was  that  Mrs.  Stone  was  taken  ill  in  the
evening,  or  rather  just  before  the  evening,  and  was  quite  unconscious  at  the
time  when  she  was  seen  by  Mrs.  Samways.

645  C.  Taken  from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  91.  The
account  comes  from  Captain  A.  S.  Beaumont,  of  i  Crescent  Road,  South
Norwood  Park  : —

February  24/A,  1885.

About  September  1873,  when  my  father  was  living  at  57  Inverness  Terrace,
I  was  sitting  one  evening,  about  8.30  P.M.,  in  the  large  dining-room.  At  the
table,  facing  me,  with  their  backs  to  the  door,  were  seated  my  mother,  sister,
and  a  friend,  Mrs.  W.  Suddenly  I  seemed  to  see  my  wife  bustling  in  through
the  door  of  the  back  dining-room,  which  was  in  view  from  my  position.  She
was  in  a  mauve  dress.  I  got  up  to  meet  her,  though  much  astonished,  as  I
believed  her  to  be  at  Tenby.  As  I  rose,  my  mother  said,  "  Who  is  that  ?  "  not
(I  think)  seeing  any  one  herself,  but  seeing  that  I  did.  I  exclaimed,  "  Why,  it's
Carry,"  and  advanced  to  meet  her.  As  I  advanced  the  figure  disappeared.  On
inquiry,  I  found  that  my  wife  was  spending  that  evening  at  a  friend's  house,  in
a  mauve  dress,  which  I  had  most  certainly  never  seen.  I  had  never  seen  her
dressed  in  that  colour.  My  wife  recollected  that  at  that  time  she  was  talking
with  some  friends  about  me,  much  regretting  my  absence,  as  there  was  going
to  be  dancing,  and  I  had  promised  to  play  for  them.  I  had  been  unexpectedly
detained  in  London.  ALEX.  S.  BEAUMONT.

The  following  corroboration  is  from  the  friend  who  was  present : —

ii  GROSVENOR  STREET,  W.,

March  y*,  1885.

As  far  as  I  can  recollect,  Captain  Beaumont  was  sitting  talking,  when  he
looked  up,  and  gave  a  start.  His  mother  asked  him  what  was  the  matter.  He
replied,  '*  I  saw  my  wife  walk  across  the  end  of  the  room,  but  that  is  nothing  ;
she  often  appears  to  people;  her  servants  have  seen  her  several  times."  The
room  we  were  in  was  a  double  dining-room,  one  end  was  lit  with  gas,  and  the

teacher,  Miss  Mary  Lock ;  suddenly  I  found  myself  by  her  side,  and  looking  towards  the
class  saw  myself  distinctly — a  slim,  pale  girl,  in  a  white  frock  and  pinafore.  I  felt  a
strong  anxiety  to  get  back,  as  it  were,  but  it  seemed  a  violent  and  painful  effort,  almost
le,  when  accomplished.  I  was  much  frightened,  but  did  not  mention  it  till  many
years  aft«

I  may  mention  that  Mrs.  Stone's  daughter  has  had  a  similar  experience ;  so  that  here
is  perhaps  another  example  of  hereditary  tendency.

650  APPENDICES  [645  C

other,  where  Mrs.  Beaumont  appeared,  was  comparatively  dark.  No  one  else
saw  her  except  her  husband.  Mrs.  Beaumont  was  at  the  time  in  Wales,  and
this  happened  in  Inverness  Terrace,  Bayswater.  FLORENCE  WHIPHAM.

Mrs.  Beaumont  says  : —

I  distinctly  remember  hearing  from  my  husband,  either  the  next  day  or  the
second  day  after  his  experience ;  and  in  his  letter  he  asked,  "  What  were  you
doing  at  such  an  hour  on  such  a  night  ? "  I  was  able  to  recall  that  I  was
standing  in  a  group  of  friends,  and  that  we  were  regretting  his  absence.  I  was
in  a  mauve  dress,  which  I  am  confident  that  he  could  never  have  seen.

C.  BEAUMONT.

Captain  Beaumont  adds  that  he  has  never  had  any  other  hallucination
of  the  senses  except  on  the  occasion  next  described.  This  other  case,  in
which  the  same  agent  and  percipient  were  concerned,  and  a  third  case
appended  to  it,  would  be  quite  without  evidential  value  if  they  stood
alone ;  but  they  are  of  interest  in  connection  with  the  foregoing  stronger
example.

February  ztfh,  1885.

In  1871  I  was  staying  at  Norton  House,  Tenby,  for  the  first  time,  and  had
just  gone  to  bed,  and  was  wide  awake.  I  had  the  candle  on  my  right  side,  and
was  reading.  At  the  foot  of  the  bed  and  to  the  right  was  a  door,  which  was
locked,  and,  as  I  learnt  afterwards,  pasted  up  on  the  other  side.

Through  this  I  saw  the  figure  of  my  future  wife  (the  lady  of  the  house)
enter,  draped  in  white  from  head  to  foot.  Oddly  enough,  I  was  not  specially
startled.  My  idea  was  that  some  one  was  ill,  and  that  she  had  come  to  get
something  out  of  the  room.  I  averted  my  head,  and  when  I  looked  up  again
the  apparition  was  gone.  I  suppose  that  I  saw  it  for  two  or  three  seconds.

ALEX.  S.  BEAUMONT.

Mrs.  Beaumont  says  : —

February  ztfh,  1885.

In  1872,  two  or  three  months  after  my  marriage,  Captain  Beaumont  and  I
returned  from  London  to  Tenby.  I  went  up  into  my  dressing-room  and  gave
the  keys  of  my  luggage  to  my  servant,  Ellen  Bassett.  I  was  standing  before
the  looking-glass  with  my  back  turned  to  her,  and  I  heard  her  utter  a  little
sharp  cry.  I  turned  round,  saying,  "  What's  the  matter  ?  "  and  saw  her  with
my  nightcap  in  her  hand.  She  said,  "  Oh,  nothing,  nothing,"  and  I  went  down-
stairs. The  day  after,  my  husband  saw  her  taking  off  the  paper  which  pasted
up  the  door  between  my  bedroom  and  the  dressing-room.  He  said,  "  What
are  you  doing  ?  "  She  said  she  was  opening  that  door.  He  said,  "  Why,  the
first  night  that  I  slept  in  this  house,  I  saw  your  mistress  walk  through  that
door."  (I  must  explain  that  Captain  Beaumont  had  been  a  guest  in  this  house
on  a  good  many  occasions  before  our  marriage.  On  the  occasion  mentioned,
he  had  imagined  that  perhaps  some  one  was  ill  in  the  house,  and  that  I  had
entered  his  room  to  get  something,  thinking  him  sure  to  be  asleep.)  Then  the
maid  told  him  that  she  had  seen  me  the  night  before  we  came  home — she  did
not  know  exactly  what  day  we  were  coming,  and  had  been  sleeping  in  the  same
bed  as  he  had  been  in  when  he  saw  me.  She  was  just  going  to  step  into  bed
when  she  saw  me  enter  "  through  the  door,"  with  a  nightcap  on,  and  a  candle

645D]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  651

in  my  hand.  She  was  so  terrified  that  she  rushed  out  of  the  room  by  the  other
door,  and  told  the  other  servants  she  was  sure  I  was  dead.  They  comforted
her  as  well  as  they  could,  but  she  would  not  return  to  the  room.  The  cause
of  her  crying  out,  when  I  heard  her  do  so,  was  that,  in  unpacking,  she  recog-
nised the  identical  nightcap  that  the  apparition  had  worn.  The  curious  point
is  that  the  nightcap  was  one  that  I  had  bought  in  London,  and  had  not  men-
tioned to  her,  and  was  perfectly  unlike  any  that  I  had  ever  worn  before.  It
had  three  frills.  I  had  been  accustomed  to  wear  nightcaps  of  coloured  muslin
without  frills.

The  same  servant,  some  months  after  the  nightcap  incident,  went  into  the
kitchen  and  said  to  the  other  servants,  "  We  shall  have  news  of  missus  to-day;
I've  just  seen  her  standing  in  the  dining-room  door  ;  she  had  on  a  black  velvet
bonnet  and  black  cloak."  (We  had  been  in  London  some  weeks.)  This
occurred  about  9  o'clock  A.M.  About  10.30  she  received  a  telegram  from  us  to
say  we  should  be  home  that  evening ;  the  telegram  was  sent  from  Paddington
Station  as  we  waited  for  our  train.  The  bonnet  and  cloak  had  been  bought
in  town  without  her  knowledge.

The  maid  was  with  me  for  years,  and  was  certainly  not  nervous  or  hysterical.
I  have  now  parted  with  her  for  some  years.  C.  BEAUMONT.

645  D.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vi.  p.  129.  The  case  is
recorded  by  the  Misses  H.  M.  and  L.  Bourne.

Additional  evidence  of  the  hallucinatory  character  of  the  figure  seen
is  afforded  by  the  details  having  been  more  clearly  discernable  than  those
of  a  real  figure  at  the  same  distance  would  have  been,  and  also  by  the
second  appearance,  where  the  percipient  had  the  impression  of  being
transported  to  a  different  scene.

Miss  L.  Bourne  writes  : —

On  February  5th,  1887,  my  father,  sister,  and  I  went  out  hunting.  About
the  middle  of  the  day  my  sister  and  I  decided  to  return  home  with  the  coach-
man, while  my  father  went  on.  Somebody  came  and  spoke  to  us,  and  delayed
us  for  a  few  moments.  As  we  were  turning  to  go  home,  we  distinctly  saw  my
father,  waving  his  hat  to  us  and  signing  us  to  follow  him.  He  was  on  the  side
of  a  small  hill,  and  there  was  a  dip  between  him  and  us.  My  sister,  the  coach-
man, and  myself  all  recognised  my  father,  and  also  the  horse.  The  horse
looked  so  dirty  and  shaken  that  the  coachman  remarked  he  thought  there  had
been  a  nasty  accident  As  my  father  waved  his  hat  I  clearly  saw  the  Lincoln
and  Bennett  mark  inside,  though  from  the  distance  we  were  apart  it  ought  to
have  been  utterly  impossible  for  me  to  have  seen  it.  At  the  time  I  mentioned
seeing  the  mark  in  the  hat,  though  the  strangeness  of  seeing  it  did  not  strike
me  till  afterwards.

Fearing  an  accident,  we  hurried  down  the  hill.  From  the  nature  of  the
ground  we  had  to  lose  sight  of  my  father,  but  it  took  us  very  few  seconds  to
reach  the  place  where  we  had  seen  him.  When  we  got  there,  there  was  no
sign  of  him  anywhere,  nor  could  we  see  any  one  in  sight  at  all.  We  rode
about  for  some  time  looking  for  him,  but  could  not  see  or  hear  anything  of
him.  We  all  reached  home  within  a  quarter  of  an  hour  of  each  other.  My
father  then  told  us  he  had  never  been  in  the  field,  nor  near  the  field,  in  which

652  APPENDICES  [645  D

we  thought  we  saw  him,  the  whole  of  that  day.     He  had  never  waved  to  us,
and  had  met  with  no  accident.

My  father  was  riding  the  only  white  horse  that  was  out  that  day.

LOUISA  BOURNE.

H.  M.  BOURNE.

The  second  signature  was  added  later,  with  the  words :  "  This  was
written  by  my  sister  and  me  together.'1

Miss  H.  M.  Bourne  enclosed  the  above  in  the  following  letter  to  Mrs.
Dent,  to  whom  we  are  indebted  for  the  case  : —

WESTON  SUBEDGE,  BROADWAY,  WORCESTERSHIRE,
May  2ist,  1891.

MY  DEAR  MRS.  DENT, — Louisa  has  asked  me  to  send  you  the  enclosed
account  of  the  impression  she,  the  coachman,  and  I  had  of  seeing  papa  on
Paddy  in  the  hunting-field.  It  was  on  the  5th  February  1887  it  happened,
and  in  March  the  same  year,  when  I  was  out  walking  alone,  I  thought  I  saw
papa  and  Paddy  stop  at  a  little  plantation  of  his  close  to,  and  look  at  the
wall,  which  had  fallen  in  [in]  one  part.  He  then  appeared  to  ride  a  few  yards
towards  me,  but  afterwards  turned  round  and  went  back  past  the  plantation
and  out  of  sight.  When  I  went  in  I  asked  him  if  he  had  not  seen  me,  and
why  he  turned  back,  when  it  transpired  he  had  not  been  past  that  plantation
all  day,  but  had  ridden  home  another  way.  He  said  it  must  have  been  some
one  else  on  a  white  horse,  and  asked  where  I  was  when  I  saw  him,  and  then,
not  before,  it  dawned  on  me  that  it  was  utterly  impossible  to  see  either  planta-
tion or  wall  from  where  I  was.  Since  then  I  have  often  been  along  the  same
road,  and  stood,  and  looked,  and  wondered  how  it  was  I  so  distinctly  saw  the
broken  wall  and  papa  on  the  white  horse ;  a  turn  in  the  road  makes  my  having
really  done  so  quite  impossible.  I  am  sorry  I  cannot  give  you  the  exact  date
of  this :  I  know  it  was  in  March  1887,  but  cannot  remember  the  day,  except
that  it  was  not  on  the  5th.  The  other  "  experience  "  is,  I  always  think,  far
more  interesting,  as  having  been  seen  by  three,  and  also  from  the  fact  that
Paddy  was  the  only  white  or  grey  horse  in  the  hunting-field  that  day ;  so  that
unbelievers  could  not  say  it  was  some  one  else  on  a  white  horse  that  we  had
mistaken.  .  .  .  NINA  M.  BOURNE.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  :  —

February  25^,  1892.

I  saw  Miss  H.  Bourne  and  her  father  this  afternoon.  Miss  Bourne  told
me  the  stories  of  her  seeing  her  father,  first  with  her  sister,  and  later  by  her-
self, and  signed  the  account  which  she  and  her  sister  had,  she  says,  made  out
together  about  it.  The  groom  who  saw  the  figure  at  the  same  time  has  since
been  dismissed,  and  cannot  be  asked  for  his  evidence.  Canon  Bourne  re-
members hearing  of  the  matter  the  day  it  happened.  The  groom  rode  up
to  the  ladies  as  they  were  looking,  and  said :  "  The  Canon  is  beckoning,  Miss,
and  I  think  you  had  better  go  to  him ;  his  horse  looks  as  if  he  had  had  a  fall  "
(that  is,  muddy).  The  figure  was  beckoning  to  them  with  their  father's  usual
(and  peculiar)  gesture.  He  is  a  heavy  man,  and  his  white  horse,  adapted  to
carry  weight,  was  quite  unlike  any  other  horse  in  the  neigbourhood.  Every
one  agrees  as  to  the  impossibility  of  mistaking  the  horse.  The  horses  of  the
neighbourhood  were  well  known  to  the  neighbourhood  in  general  and  to  the

645E]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  653

Miss  Bournes  in  particular,  as  they  were  at  that  time  constantly  out  with  the
hounds.     The  incident  seems  quite  unaccountable.

645  E.  From  the  "Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  275.  This  case  is  particularly  interesting
because  the  agent,  Miss  Maughan  (now  Mrs.  G.  Rayleigh  Vicars),  has
been  successful  in  producing  an  experimental  apparition  of  herself  (see
668  D),  while  one  of  her  sisters  was  the  agent  in  another  case  of
spontaneous  telepathy  (see  "  Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations,"
p.  291).

[Extract  from  letter  received  by  Miss  Maughan  on  March  I2th  from  Miss
Gatty.  The  original  letter  is  in  our  possession.]

HOLBEIN  HOUSE,  SLOANE  SQUARE,  S.W.
Wednesday,  March  II//4,  1891.

I  wonder  whether  you  have  been  experimenting  psychically,  or  if  it  be  a
mere  curious  coincidence  that  I  should  have  had  a  distinct  vision  of  you  last
night.

The  facts  are  these.  Being  very  seedy  yesterday — writing  to  you  probably
tired  me  a  good  deal,  and  feeling  very  helpless  where  you  were  concerned
distressed  me  more  than  a  little — I  went  off  to  [bed]  at  about  8  o'clock.  I  read
for  an  hour  or  thereabouts,  and  then  fell  asleep.  I  woke  again  when  mother
passed  through  to  go  to  her  own  room,  and  several  times  in  the  night  after
dreaming  in  an  unexciting  fashion.  Then  I  lay  awake  for  some  time,  and
thought  about  a  Roman  Catholic  I  know,  &c.

A  little  while  after,  I  don't  know  what  it  was  that  made  me  turn  my  head
towards  one  special  corner  of  the  room,  where  I  saw  you  standing  (in  a  night-
dress trimmed  with  Swiss  embroidery),  in  a  most  ill-balanced  posture
much  did  this  strike  me  that  I  got  out  of  bed  (the  cold  of  the  floor  was  exces-
sive), and  went  to  catch  you,  so  that  you  might  not  fall  over  on  your  face.  You
remained  there  until  I  had  made  the  motion  of  touching,  when  I  found  nothing
there  any  longer.  This  is  all,  except  that  you  looked  as  if  you  had  candlelight
or  some  faintly  perceptible  yellowishness  behind  you.  I  went  back  to  bed,  and,
not  liking  to  disturb  mother  by  asking  her  the  time,  I  listened  for  the  chimes,
and  shortly  after  heard  four  strike.  Of  course  I  didn't  go  to  sleep  again,  but
lighted  my  candle  and  read  until  day  dawned.  At  breakfast  I  told  mother,
who  accounts  for  everything  by  the  word  *' somnambulism,"  but  says  she  heard
me  moving  about.  I  am  perfectly  convinced  of  my  wakefulness,  but  in  any
case,  as  I  am  unused  to  sleep-walking,  that  would  be  strange  enough  in  itself
to  make  me  wonder  if  there  should  be  any  cause  for  it  beyond  my  subjective
reason  of  anxiety  about  you.  The  time  is  the  most  curious  part,  is  it  not?

E.  K.  G.
Miss  Maughan  writes  : —

EAST  KIRKBY  VICARAGE,  SPILSBV,  LINCOLNSHIRE,
May  list,  1891.

I  left  W ,  in  Derbyshire,  on  March  loth,  and  arrived  at  Collingham,  in

Nottinghamshire,  about  3  P.M.  I  was  not  alone,  or  able  in  any  way  to  give
my  attention  to  any  one  subject  until  nearly  midnight,  when  I  went  to  bed.
During  the  whole  evening,  though  I  had  been  busy  hearing  and  giving  news  of

654  APPENDICES  [651  A

mutual  interest,  I  had  experienced  a  sort  of  "  undertone  "  of  thought  about  my
friend  E.  G.  [Miss  Gatty].  I  had  only  once  spoken  of  her  incidentally  during
the  evening,  but  I  felt  my  mind  revert  to  her  in  a  general  way  for  a  few
moments  several  times.  When  I  got  to  bed  I  lay  awake  and  thought  of  her
again.  Why,  I  did  not  really  know.  I  had  heard  from  her  the  day  before,
saying  she  was  not  well,  but  that  was  not  specially  in  my  mind,  as  I  did  not
suppose  she  was  more  than  temporarily  indisposed.  I  remember  wondering  at
the  time  why  she  was  so  present  to  my  mind,  as  I  had  a  great  many  things  to
think  of  that  day  totally  apart  from  any  connection  with  her.

I  fell  asleep  at  last,  to  wake  up  suddenly.  It  must  have  been  after  3  A.M.,
as  the  fire  had  burnt  very  low — almost  out.

During  the  short  time  I  lay  awake  I  remember  clearly  that  the  thought  of
E.  G.  returned  strongly  to  my  mind.  I  felt  an  instinctive  turning  towards  her
for  the  mental  sympathy  certain  circumstances  might  render  me  in  need  of,
and  I  felt  with  a  sort  of  flash  that  she  would  be  better  able  to  understand  what
I  wanted  than  any  friend  I  had.  I  know  I  dwelt  on  this  with  strengthening
confidence  until  I  fell  asleep.

I  had  not  been  dreaming  consciously  of  anything :  I  merely  woke  up,
thought  of  E.  G.,  and  mentally  claimed  her  sympathy,  but  with  no  intention
whatever  of  trying  to  influence  her  in  any  possible  way.  The  whole  attitude  of
my  mind  was  unconscious  and  involuntary,  and,  but  for  the  letter  I  received
from  her  on  the  I2th,  I  should  have  attached  no  importance  to  the  matter.

EDITH  MAUGHAN.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  writes  : —

June  26th,  1891.

I  saw  Miss  Edith  Maughan  .  .  .  this  afternoon.  ...  As  to  the  appear-
ance to  Miss  Gatty,  Miss  Maughan  is  quite  sure  that  she  did  think  of
her  in  a  special  way,  as  the  person  who  would  be  able  to  help  her
in  an  anticipated  difficulty.  This  suddenly  occurred  to  her  in  the  middle  of
the  night.  It  appears  that  Miss  Gatty  was  troubled  about  Miss  Maughan,
wishing  she  could  help  her  in  her  difficulty.  Miss  Maughan  told  me  that  she
had  written  to  Miss  Gatty  about  this  difficulty,  and  begged  her  to  write  to  her
often  while  it  lasted.  Miss  Maughan  is  not  sure  whether  the  embroidery
seen  on  the  apparition  by  Miss  Gatty  was  of  the  kind  that  she  was  wearing
then.

Another  case  of  the  apparition  of  a  person  being  seen  twice  is  given
in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  356.

651  A.     From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  144.

The  following  statement  (which  was  first  published  in  the  Spiritualist}
was  drawn  up  sixteen  days  after  the  incident  occurred,  through  the  prompt
energy  of  Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison,  and  on  the  suggestion  of  the  late  Mr.
Cromwell  F.  Varley,  F.R.S.,  who  had  questioned  Captain  Blacklock  on
the  subject.

The  steamship  Robert  Lowe  returned  to  the  Thames  on  Tuesday,  October
nth,  1870,  from  St.  Pierre,  Newfoundland,  where  she  had  been  repairing  one
of  the  French  Atlantic  Telegraph  Company's  cables.  An  engineer  on  board,
Mr.  W.  H.  Pearce,  of  37  Augusta  Street,  East  India  Road,  Poplar,  was  taken
ill  with  the  typhus  fever,  and  on  the  4th  of  October  last  he  died.  One  of  his
mates,  Mr.  D.  Brown,  of  I  Edward  Street,  Hudson's  Road,  Canning  Town,.

651  A]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  655

Plaistow,  a  strong,  healthy  man,  a  stoker,  not  likely  to  be  led  astray  by  ima-
gination, attended  him  till  the  day  before  he  died.  [Brown,  it  appears,  bore
the  best  of  characters,  and  had  a  strong  friendship  for  Pearce.j  On  the  after-
noon before  his  death,  at  three  o'clock,  in  broad  daylight,  Brown  was  attending
the  sick  man,  who  wanted  to  get  out  of  bed,  but  his  companion  prevented  him.
And  this  is  what  the  witness  says  he  saw : —

"  I  was  standing  on  one  side  of  the  bunk,  and  while  trying  to  prevent
Pearce  from  rising,  I  saw  on  the  other  side  of  the  bunk,  the  wife,  two  children,
and  the  mother  of  the  dying  man,  all  of  whom  I  knew  very  well,  and  they  are
all  still  living.  They  appeared  to  be  very  sorrowful,  but  in  all  other  respects
were  the  same  as  ordinary  human  beings.  I  could  not  see  through  them  ;
they  were  not  at  all  transparent.  They  had  on  their  ordinary  clothes,  and,
perhaps,  looked  rather  paler  than  usual.  The  mother  said  to  me  in  a  clearly
audible  voice,  *  He  will  be  buried  on  Thursday,  at  12  o'clock,  in  about  fourteen
hundred  fathoms  of  water.'  They  all  then  vanished  instantly,  and  I  saw  them
no  more.  Pearce  did  not  see  them,  as  he  was  delirious,  and  had  been  so  for
two  days  previously.  I  ran  out  of  the  berth  in  a  state  of  great  excitement,
and  did  not  enter  it  again  while  he  was  alive.  He  died  on  Tuesday,  not
Thursday,  and  was  buried  at  four  o'clock,  not  twelve.  It  was  a  sudden  surprise
to  me  to  see  the  apparitions.  I  expected  nothing  of  the  kind,  and  when  I  saw
them  I  was  perfectly  cool  and  collected.  I  had  never  before  seen  anything  of
the  kind  in  my  life,  and  my  health  is,  and  always  has  been,  good.  About  fire
minutes  afterwards  I  told  Captain  Blacklock  I  would  stop  with  the  sick  man
no  longer,  but  would  not  tell  him  why,  thinking  that  if  I  did.  nobody  else
would  take  my  place.  About  an  hour  later,  I  told  Captain  Blacklock  and  Mr.
Dunbar,  the  chief  engineer,  whose  address  is  Old  Mill,  near  Port  William,
Wigtownshire,  Scotland."

The  other  sailors  on  board  say  that  they  saw  that  Mr.  Brown  was  greatly
agitated  from  some  cause,  and  they  gradually  drew  this  narrative  out  of  him.
Captain  Blacklock  says  : —

14  Brown  came  down  into  the  cabin,  looking  very  pale  and  frightened,  and
declared  in  a  strong  and  decided  way  that  he  would  not  attend  the  sick  man
any  more  on  any  conditions — not  for  a  thousand  pounds.  I  told  him  that  he
ought  to  attend  a  sick  and  dying  comrade,  especially  as  a  storm  was  raging,
and  he  needed  kind  and  considerate  help,  such  as  any  of  us  might  need  one
day.  I  pressed  him  all  the  more,  as  I  wanted  a  strong,  steady  man  to  attend
the  delirious  invalid ;  besides,  it  being  bad  weather,  the  other  men  were  fagged
and  over-worked.  Brown  would  not  go  back,  and  he  left  the  cabin,  as  I  think,
crying,  so  I  sent  him  out  a  glass  of  brandy.  Shortly  after  that,  I  heard  he  was
very  ill,  and  that  his  mates  had  some  trouble  in  soothing  and  calming  him.

"  We  the  undersigned,  officials  on  board  the  Robert  Lowe,  declare  the  above
statements  to  be  true,  so  far  as  each  of  the  circumstances  came  under  our
personal  notice,  but  we  none  of  us  commit  ourselves  to  any  opinion  as  to  the
cause  of  the  phenomenon.  We  give  the  statement  simply  because  we  have  been
requested  to  do  so,  rumours  of  the  occurrence  having  gone  abroad  and  caused
inquiries  to  be  made.

(Signed)    "J.  P.LACKLOCK,  Commander.

a  ANDREW  DUNBAK,  First  Engineer.

(Signatures  of  six  other  members  of  the  crew.)

•  Witness,  \V   H.  HARRISON.

'ctobtr  2oM,  1870."

656  APPENDICES  [6MA

[Captain  Blacklock  is  dead.  The  Robert  Lowe  was  lost  in  1872,  and  only
one  or  two  of  the  crew  escaped.  The  account  included  a  description  of  some
distressing  experiences  of  Mrs.  Pearce's,  which  had  occurred  in  London  during
the  few  days  before  her  husband's  death,  and  filled  her  with  anxiety  on  his
account;  but  this  anxiety  cannot  be  confidently  assumed  to  have  been  a
condition  of  Brown's  experience.]

654  A.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  97.  The  narrator
is  the  late  Rev.  W.  Mountford,  of  Boston,  U.S.A.,  a  minister  and  author
of  repute.

One  day,  some  fifteen  years  ago,  I  went  from  the  place  of  my  abode  to  see
some  friends  who  resided  in  the  fen  districts  of  Norfolk.  They  were  persons
whom  I  knew,  not  merely  well,  but  intimately.  They  were  two  brothers  who
had  married  two  sisters.  Their  houses  were  a  mile  and  a  quarter  apart,  but
standing  on  the  same  road,  and  with  only  two  or  three  other  habitations  inter-
vening. The  road  was  a  straight,  bare,  open  road,  like  what  is  so  often  to  be
seen  in  the  fens,  and  used  chiefly  and  almost  exclusively  by  the  occupants  of
the  few  farms  alongside  of  it.  The  house  at  which  I  was  visiting  stood  about
ten  yards  from  the  edge  of  the  road.  The  day  was  fine  and  clear — a  day  in
March.  About  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon  I  stood  at  the  window,  and  looking
up  the  road  I  said,  "  Here  is  your  brother  coming."  My  host  advanced  to  the
window  and  said,  "  Oh  yes,  here  he  is  ;  and  see,  Robert  has  got  Dobbin  out  at
last."  Dobbin  was  a  horse  which,  on  account  of  some  accident,  had  not  been
used  for  some  weeks.  The  lady  also  looked  out  of  the  window,  and  said  to
me,  "  And  I  am  so  glad,  too,  that  my  sister  is  with  him.  They  will  be  delighted
to  find  you  here."  I  recognised  distinctly  the  vehicle  in  which  they  rode  as
being  an  open  one,  also  the  lady  and  the  gentleman,  and  both  their  dress  and
their  attitudes.  Our  friends  passed  at  a  gentle  pace  along  the  front  of  the
window,  and  then  turning  with  the  road  round  the  corner  of  the  house,  they
could  not  longer  be  seen.  After  a  minute  my  host  went  to  the  door  and
exclaimed,  "  Why,  what  can  be  the  matter  ?  They  have  gone  on  without  calling,
a  thing  they  never  did  in  their  lives  before.  What  can  be  the  matter  ?  "

Five  minutes  afterwards,  while  we  were  seated  by  the  fireside,  the  parlour
door  opened,  and  there  entered  a  lady  of  about  twenty-five  years  of  age  ;  she  was
in  robust  health  and  in  full  possession  of  all  her  senses,  and  she  was  possessed,
besides,  of  a  strong  common-sense.  She  was  pale  and  much  excited,  and  the
moment  she  opened  the  door  she  exclaimed,  "  Oh,  aunt,  I  have  had  such  a
fright !  Father  and  mother  have  passed  me  on  the  road  without  speaking.  I
looked  up  at  them  as  they  passed  by,  but  they  looked  straight  on  and  never
stopped  nor  said  a  word.  A  quarter  of  an  hour  before,  when  I  started  to  walk
here,  they  were  sitting  by  the  fire;  and  now,  what  can  be  the  matter?  They
never  turned  nor  spoke,  and  yet  I  am  certain  that  they  must  have  seen  me."

Ten  minutes  after  the  arrival  of  this  lady,  I,  looking  through  the  window  up
the  road,  said,  "  But  see,  here  they  are,  coming  down  the  road  again."  My  host
said,  "  No,  that  is  impossible,  because  there  is  no  path  by  which  they  could  get
on  to  this  road,  so  as  to  be  coming  down  it  again.  But  sure  enough,  here  they
are,  and  with  the  same  horse !  How  in  the  world  have  they  got  here  ?"  We
all  stood  at  the  window,  and  saw  pass  before  us  precisely  the  same  appearance
which  we  had  seen  before— lady  and  gentleman,  and  horse  and  carriage.  My

654B]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  657

host  ran  to  the  door  and  exclaimed,  '*  How  did  you  get  here  ?  How  did  you  get
on  to  the  road  to  be  coming  down  here  again  now  ?  "  "I  get  on  the  road  ?  What
do  you  mean?  I  have  just  come  straight  from  home."  "And  did  you  not
come  down  the  road,  and  pass  the  house,  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ago  ?  "
**  No,"  said  the  lady  and  gentleman  both.  "  This  is  the  first  time  that  we  have
comj  down  the  road  to-day."  "Certainly,"  we  all  said,  "you  passed  these
windows  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ago.  And.  besides,  here  is  Mary,  who
was  on  the  road  and  saw  you."  "  Nonsense  !"  was  the  answer.  "We  are
straight  from  home,  as  you  may  be  very  sure.  For  how  could  you  have  seen  us
pass  by  before,  when  you  did  see  us  coming  down  now  ?  "  "  Then  you  mean  to
say  that  really  you  did  not  pass  by  here  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  ago  ?  "  "  Certainly ;
for  at  that  time,  probably,  we  were  just  coming  out  of  the  yard  and  starting  to
come  here."

We  all  of  us  remained  much  amazed  at  this  incident.  There  were  four  of
us  who  had  seen  this  appearance,  and  seen  it  under  such  circumstances  as
apparently  precluded  any  possibility  of  our  having  mistaken  some  casual
passengers  for  our  intimate  friends.  We  were  quite  satisfied  that  we  had  really
not  seen  our  bodily  friends  pass  down  the  road  that  first  time  when  we  thought
that  we  saw  them.  As  for  myself,  I  was  sure  that  it  was  not  they;  and  yet
hardly  could  I  help  feeling  that  it  could  have  been  no  persons  else.

There  is  an  old  saying  about  keeping  a  thing  ten  years,  and  then  finding  a
use  for  it.  This  curious  experience  of  mine  is  as  vivid  in  my  mind  as  though  it
were  of  yesterday.  Is  it  of  use  as  illustrating  mistakes  as  to  identity,  or  is  it
rather  a  singular  instance  of  what  is  called  second-sight  ?  M.

This  account  was  first  published  in  the  Spiritual  Magazine  for  August
1860.  On  our  writing  to  Mr.  Mountford  on  the  subject,  he  replied  : —

BEACON  STREET,  BOSTON,  U.S.A.,
StA  August  1884.

The  narrative  of  which  you  have  sent  me  a  copy  was  written  by  myself,  as
you  had  rightly  supposed.  It  was  carefully  prepared,  and  I  believe  it  to  be  as
exactly  true  as  any  report  ever  made  by  phonograph  or  photograph.  At  the
time  when  the  occurrence  happened,  I  was  simply  amazed  at  it,  and  I  felt  but
just  simply  as  some  untaught  ploughman  might  have  felt  in  the  open  field,  if
an  aerolite  had  fallen  at  his  feet,  hot  from  the  skies.

The  persons  besides  myself,  of  whom  I  wrote  in  that  account,  were  all  of
the  family  name  of  Coe,  and  were  all  of  Islington,  near  King's  Lynn;  and  they
were  all  living  at  the  time  when  I  wrote  about  them,  but  they  have  all  been
carried  away.  I  have  only  to  add  that  Mrs.  Robert  Coe  said  that  she  and  her
husband  knew  of  their  daughter's  having  started  to  see  her  aunt,  but  that  they
had  had  no  intention  of  following  her  till  Mr.  Robert  Coe,  suddenly  starting
from  his  chair  by  the  fireside,  exclaimed  "  Let  us  go  to  Clement's."

654  B.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  194.  Major  W.,
resident  near  Conon  Bridge,  Ross-shire,  writes  : —

February  $tk,  1882.

It  was  the  month  of  August ;  rather  a  dark  night  and  very  still ;  the  hour,
midnight :  when  before  retiring  for  the  nicht  I  went,  as  is  often  my  custom,  to
the  front  door  to  look  at  the  weather.  When  standing  for  a  moment  on  the

VOL.     I.  2    T

658  APPENDICES  [655  A

step,  I  saw,  coming  round  a  turn  in  the  drive,  a  large  close  carriage  and  pair  of
horses,  with  two  men  on  the  box.  It  passed  the  front  of  the  house,  and  was
going  at  a  rapid  rate  towards  a  path  which  leads  to  a  stream,  running,  at  that
point,  between  rather  steep  banks.  There  is  no  carriage-road  on  that  side  of
the  house,  and  I  shouted  to  the  driver  to  stop,  as,  if  he  went  on,  he  must  un-
doubtedly come  to  grief.  The  carriage  stopped  abruptly  when  it  came  to  the
running  water,  turned,  and,  in  doing  so,  drove  over  the  lawn.  I  got  up  to  it ;
and  by  this  time  my  son  had  joined  me  with  a  lantern.  Neither  of  the  men  on
the  box  had  spoken,  and  there  was  no  sound  from  the  inside  of  the  carriage.
My  son  looked  in,  and  all  he  could  discern  was  a  stiff-looking  figure  sitting  up
in  a  corner,  and  draped,  apparently,  from  head  to  foot  in  white.  The  absolute
silence  of  the  men  outside  was  mysterious,  and  the  white  figure  inside,  appar-
ently of  a  female,  not  being  alarmed  or  showing  any  signs  of  life,  was  strange.
Men,  carriage,  and  horses  were  unknown  to  me,  although  I  know  the  country
so  well.  The  carriage  continued  its  way  across  the  lawn,  turning  up  a  road
which  led  past  the  stables,  and  so  into  the  drive  again  and  away.  We  could
see  no  traces  of  it  the  next  morning — no  marks  of  wheels  or  horses'  feet  on  the
soft  grass  or  gravel  road ;  and  we  never  again  heard  of  the  carriage  or  its
occupant,  though  I  caused  careful  inquiries  to  be  made  the  following  day.  I
may  mention  that  my  wife  and  daughter  also  saw  the  carriage,  being  attracted
to  the  window  by  my  shout.  This  happened  on  the  23rd  of  August  1 878.

After  a  visit  to  the  house  in  September  1884,  Mr.  Podmore  wrote  : —

Major  W.,  on  whom  I  called  to-day,  is  practically  satisfied  that  what  he
and  his  family  saw  was  not  a  real  carriage.  He  showed  me  the  whole  scene  of
its  appearance.  The  spot  where  the  carriage  appeared  to  turn  barely  leaves
sufficient  room  for  the  passage  of  an  ordinary  carriage,  and  that  a  carriage
should  turn  round  there  seems  almost  impossible.  The  carriage  went  for  some
distance  across  the  lawn— a  mossy  and  rather  damp  piece  of  grass— and
stopped  in  front  of  the  house  for  more  than  a  minute,  while  Major  W.  spoke
to  the  man,  but  without  receiving  any  reply.  His  wife,  whom  I  also  saw,  was
attracted  to  the  window  by  the  sound  of  the  wheels,  in  the  first  instance,  on  the
gravel.  Major  W.  made  many  inquiries  among  his  neighbours,  but  could  not
find  that  any  one  had  seen  the  carriage  at  all.  The  house  is  situated  on  a
peninsula  stretching  between  the  Cromarty  and  Moray  Firths,  and  some  three
miles  from  the  neck  of  the  peninsula.  The  locality  is  very  lonely,  there  being
no  villages  or  hamlets,  and  but  few  private  residences  of  any  kind ;  and  it  is
difficult  to  imagine  the  errand  which  could  bring  a  strange  carriage  into  such
a  country  at  the  dead  of  night.  Major  W.  has  had  one  other  purely  subjective
hallucination.

655  A.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  1.03.  In  the
following  auditory  case  the  actual  word  used  by  the  agent  was  distin-
guished by  the  percipient.  The  account  is  from  Mr.  R.  Fryer,  of  Bath,
brother  of  our  colleague,  the  Rev.  A.  T.  Fryer,  now  of  13  Dumfries
Place,  Cardiff,  who  tells  us  that  he  "  distinctly  remembers  being  told  of
the  occurrence  within  a  few  weeks  of  its  happening."  He  explains  that
"  Rod  "  was  the  name  by  which  his  brother,  the  percipient,  was  called  in
the  family.

656A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  659

January  1883.

A  strange  experience  occurred  in  the  autumn  of  the  year  1879.  A  brother
of  mine  had  been  from  home  for  three  or  four  days,  when,  one  afternoon,  at
half-past  five  (as  nearly  as  possible),  I  was  astonished  to  hear  my  name  called
out  very  distinctly.  I  so  clearly  recognised  my  brother's  voice  that  I  looked
all  over  the  house  for  him ;  but  not  finding  him,  and  indeed  knowing  that  he
must  be  distant  some  forty  miles,  I  ended  by  attributing  the  incident  to  a
fancied  delusion,  and  thought  no  more  about  the  matter.  On  my  brother's
arrival  home,  however,  on  the  sixth  day,  he  remarked  amongst  other  things
that  he  had  narrowly  escaped  an  ugly  accident.  It  appeared  that,  whilst  getting
out  from  a  railway  carriage,  he  missed  his  footing,  and  fell  along  the  platform  ;
by  putting  out  his  hands  quickly  he  broke  the  fall,  and  only  suffered  a  severe
shaking.  "  Curiously  enough,"  he  said,  "  when  I  found  myself  falling  I  called
out  your  name."  This  did  not  strike  me  for  a  moment,  but  on  my  asking  him
during  what  part  of  the  day  this  happened,  he  gave  me  the  time,  which  I  found
corresponded  exactly  with  the  moment  I  heard  myself  called.

In  answer  to  an  inquiry,  Mr.  R.  Fryer  adds : —

I  do  not  remember  ever  having  a  similar  experience  to  the  one  narrated
to  you  ;  nor  should  I  care  to,  as  the  sensation,  together  with  the  suspense  as  to
the  why  and  wherefore  of  the  event,  is  the  reverse  of  pleasant.

In  conversation,  he  explained  that  he  had  frequently  expostulated  with
his  brother  on  the  latter's  habit  of  alighting  from  trains  in  motion  ;  and  the
automatic  utterance  of  his  name,  on  this  occasion,  might  thus  be  accounted
for  by  association.  The  agent's  account  of  the  matter  is  as  follows  : —

NBWBRIDGK  ROAD,  BATH,
November  \6tA,  1885.

In  the  year  1879  I  was  travelling,  and  in  the  course  of  my  journey  I  had  to
stop  at  Gloucester.  In  getting  out  of  the  train  I  fell,  and  was  assisted  to  rise
by  one  of  the  railway  officials.  He  asked  if  I  was  hurt,  and  asked  if  I  had
any  one  travelling  with  me.  I  replied  "  No  "  to  both  questions,  and  inquired
why  he  asked.  He  replied,  "  Because  you  called  out  Rod."  I  distinctly
recollect  making  use  of  the  word  Rod.

On  arriving  home,  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  I  related  the  circumstance,  and
my  brother  inquired  the  time  and  date.  He  then  told  me  he  had  heard  me
call  at  that  particular  time.  He  was  so  sure  of  its  being  my  voice  that  he  made
inquiries  as  to  whether  I  was  about  or  not.  JOHN  T.  FRYER.

656  A.  This  case  is  taken  from  the  "  Report  on  the  Census  of
Hallucinations  "  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  308.  The  account  was
written  in  1890  by  one  of  the  two  percipients  concerned,  Miss  A.  E.  R.

When  out  in  camp  in  an  Indian  jungle,  my  sister  and  I  were  anxiously
awaiting  the  return  of  her  husband,  who  had  left  in  the  morning  on  a  surveying
expedition,  promising  to  return  early  in  the  afternoon.  Between  six  and  seven
P.M.  we  were  very  uneasy,  and  were  watching  the  line  of  road,  I  should  say,
200  yards  distant  from  where  we  stood.  Simultaneously  we  exclaimed,  "  There
he  is,"  and  I  distinctly  saw  him,  sitting  in  his  dog-cart  driving  his  prey  horse

660  APPENDICES  [656  B

the  syce  occupying  the  seat  behind.  We  at  once  returned  to  the  tents — my
sister  ordering  the  bearer  to  get  the  Sahib's  bath-water  ready,  and  the  butler  to
prepare  dinner— I  running  to  set  my  brother-in-law's  mother's  mind  at  rest  as
to  the  safety  of  her  son.  However,  as  time  passed  on,  and  he  did  not  appear,
our  alarm  returned,  and  was  not  allayed  until  he  arrived  in  safety  at  eight
o'clock.  On  interrogating  him,  we  found  he  was  just  starting  from  the  survey-
ing ground,  about  eight  miles  distant,  at  the  very  time  we  had  the  above  related
experience.  I  should  add,  we  were  both  in  good  health  and  certainly  wide
awake  at  the  time,  and  I  have  never  before  or  since  had  any  experience  of  the
kind.

Miss  R.  was  about  ten  years  old  at  the  time  of  this  incident.  Her
sister,  Mrs.  H.,  writes  : —

December  17  th,  1890.

In  answer  to  your  request,  I  write  to  say  that  I  fully  endorse  the  statement
made  by  my  sister  with  reference  to  our  experience  in  India.  I  was  present  at
the  time.  Also  I  may  state  that  there  was  no  possibility  of  our  mistaking  any
other  person  for  my  husband,  as  the  road  ended  at  our  tents,  and  the  figure  we
saw  must  necessarily  have  driven  straight  to  us.  I  should  also  say  we  were  in
an  isolated  part  of  the  country.

I  called  on  Mrs.  H.  in  December  1891,  and  she  informed  me  that  the
incident  took  place  "about  18  years  ago,"  when  her  son,  who  was  then
twenty,  was  about  two  years  old.  She  explained  to  me  in  conversation
that  a  mistake  of  identity  was  impossible,  both  from  the  lonely  nature  of
the  country  and  from  the  great  height  of  her  husband,  who  is  about  6  ft.
4  in.  tall.

Mrs.  H.  added  a  further  note  to  her  sister's  account,  to  the  following

effect  :—

December  yth,  1891.

I  fully  endorse  all  the  details  of  this  account.  I  may  add  that  the  time  I
saw  my  husband  was  about  the  hour  I  expected  him  home.  He  had  been
detained  later  than  he  expected,  and  I  know  would  be  concerned  as  to  my
anxiety  about  him.  I  have  never  had  any  other  similar  experience.

In  this  case  the  proof  that  the  figure  was  not  real  depends  not  so
much  on  the  recognition— for  the  distance  was  probably  too  great  for
certain  recognition — as  on  the  combination  of  that  with  the  very  great
improbability  that  any  human  being  whatever  was  driving  a  dog-cart  in
the  place  at  that  moment.

656  B.  The  following  case  is  quoted  from  Over  the  Teacups,
by  Oliver  Wendell  Holmes  (3rd  ed.  1891,  p.  12).  We  are  told  in  the
Introduction  that  the  part  of  the  book  containing  these  cases  was  written
in  March  1888.

I  relate  a  singular  coincidence  which  very  lately  occurred  in  my  experience.
...  I  will  first  copy  the  memorandum  made  at  the  time  : —

"  Remarkable  coincidence.  On  Monday,  April  i8th,  being  at  table  from
6.30  P.M.  to  7.30,  with and [the  two  ladies  of  my  household],  I

662A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  66 1

told  them  of  the  case  of  4  trial  by  battel '  offered  by  Abraham  Thornton  in
1817.  I  mentioned  his  throwing  down  his  glove,  which  was  not  taken  up  by
the  brother  of  his  victim,  and  so  he  had  to  be  let  off,  for  the  old  law  was  still
in  force.  I  mentioned  that  Abraham  Thornton  was  said  to  have  come  to  this
country,  'and  [I  added]  he  may  be  living  near  us  for  aught  that  I  know.'  I
rose  from  the  table  and  found  an  English  letter  waiting  for  me,  left  while  I  sat
at  dinner.  I  copy  the  first  portion  of  this  letter  : —

'20  ALFRED  PLACE  WEST  (NEAR  MUSEUM),  SOUTH  KENSINGTON,
LONDON,  S.W.,  April  jtk,  i887.

*  DR.  O.  W.  HOLMES, — DEAR  SIR, — In  travelling  the  other  day  I  met  with
a  reprint  of  the  very  interesting  case  of  Thornton  for  murder,  1817.  The
prisoner  pleaded  successfully  the  old  Wager  of  Battel.  I  thought  you  would
like  to  read  the  account,  and  send  it  with  this  .  .  . — Yours  faithfully,

1  FRED.  RATHBONE.'  "

Mr.  Rathbone  is  a  well-known  dealer  in  old  Wedgwood  and  eighteenth-
century  art.  As  a  friend  of  my  hospitable  entertainer,  M.  Willett,  he  had
shown  me  many  attentions  in  England,  but  I  was  not  expecting  any  com-
munication from  him ;  and  when,  fresh  from  my  conversation,  I  found  this
letter  just  arrived  by  mail  and  left  while  I  was  at  table,  and  on  breaking  the
seal  read  what  I  had  a  few  moments  before  been  telling,  I  was  greatly  surprised,
and  immediately  made  a  note  of  the  occurrence,  as  given  above.

I  had  long  been  familiar  with  all  the  details  of  this  celebrated  case,  but  had
not  referred  to  it,  so  far  as  I  can  remember,  for  months  or  years.  I  know  of
no  train  of  thought  which  led  me  to  speak  of  it  on  that  particular  day.  I  had
never  alluded  to  it  before  in  that  company,  nor  had  I  ever  spoken  of  it  with
Mr.  Rathbone.  .  .  .

The  case  I  have  given  is,  I  am  confident,  absolutely  free  from  every  source
of  error.  I  do  not  remember  that  Mr.  Rathbone  had  communicated  with  me
since  he  sent  me  a  plentiful  supply  of  mistletoe  a  year  ago  last  Christmas.  The
account  I  received  from  him  was  cut  out  of  The  Sporting  Times  of  March  5th,
1 887.  My  own  knowledge  of  the  case  came  from  Kirby's  Wonderful  Museum,
a  work  presented  to  me  at  least  thirty  years  ago.  I  had  not  looked  at  the
account,  spoken  of  it,  nor  thought  of  it  for  a  long  time,  when  it  came  to  me  by
a  kind  of  spontaneous  generation,  as  it  seemed,  having  no  connection  with  any
previous  train  of  thought  that  I  was  aware  of.  I  consider  the  evidence  of
entire  independence,  apart  from  possible  "  telepathic  "  causation,  completely
waterproof,  airtight,  incombustible,  and  unassailable.

662  A.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  196.  In  the
following  case,  the  percipient,  Mr.  J.  G.  Keulemans,  acquires  information
of  what  is  happening  at  a  distance  through  a  mere  mental  impression,
completely  unexternalised,  but  yet  conveying  both  the  abstract  idea  of  an
event  and  the  concrete  picture  of  a  scene.  Mr.  Keulemans'  account,
which  I  quote,  is  prefaced  by  some  remarks  of  Curacy's  on  the  evidential
aspect  of  the  case,  as  follows  : —

It  occasionally  happens  that  a  number  of  occurrences,  perhaps  trivial  in
charactrr.  and  each  <>f  them  likely  enough  to  be  dismissed  as  merely  a  very  odd
coincidence,  fall  to  the  experience  of  one  person ;  and  if  he  is  observant  of  his

662  APPENDICES  [662  A

impressions,  he  may  gradually  become  conscious  of  a  certain  similarity  between
them,  which  leads  him  to  regard  them  as  telepathic,  or  at  any  rate  as  something
more  than  accidental.  Before  it  can  be  worth  while  to  consider  such  evidence,
we  must  have  reason  to  believe  that  the  witness  is  a  good  observer,  and  alive
to  the  very  general  mistake  of  noting  hits  and  not  misses  in  these  matters.
Such  an  observer  we  believe  that  we  have  found  in  Mr.  Keulemans,  of  34  Matilda
Street,  Barnsbury,  N.,  a  well-known  scientific  draughtsman,  of  whose  care  and
accuracy  we  have  had  several  examples.  He  has  experienced  so  many  of  these
coincidences  that,  even  before  our  inquiries  quickened  his  interest  in  the  matter,
he  had  been  accustomed  to  keep  a  record  of  his  impressions — which,  according
to  his  own  account,  were  invariably  justified  by  fact.  Some  more  of  his  cases
will  be  given  in  the  sequel.  The  one  here  quoted  is  trivial  enough  (except  per-
haps to  the  baby  who  fell  out  of  bed),  and  of  little  force  if  it  were  a  single
experience.  Yet  it  will  be  seen  that  the  impression  was  precise  in  character,
was  at  once  written  down,  and  proved  to  be  completely  correct.  We  may  per-
haps assume  Mrs.  Keulemans  to  have  been  the  agent.

Mr.  Keulemans  writes  : —

October  i6tfi,  1883.

My  wife  went  to  reside  at  the  seaside  on  September  3oth  last,  taking  with
her  our  youngest  child,  a  little  boy  thirteen  months  old.

On  Wednesday,  October  3rd,  I  felt  a  strong  impression  that  the  little  fellow
was  worse  (he  was  in  weak  health  on  his  departure).  The  idea  then  prevailed
on  my  mind  that  he  had  met  with  a  slight  accident ;  and  immediately  the  pic-
ture of  the  bedroom,  in  which  he  sleeps,  appeared  in  my  mind's  eye.  It  was
not  the  strong  sensation  of  awe  or  sorrow,  as  I  had  often  experienced  before  on
such  occasions;  but,  anyhow,  I  fancied  he  had  fallen  out  of  the  bed,  upon
chairs,  and  then  rolled  down  upon  the  floor.  This  was  about  n  A.M.,  and  I  at
once  wrote  to  my  wife,  asking  her  to  let  me  know  how  the  little  fellow  was
getting  on.  I  thought  it  rather  bold  to  tell  my  wife  that  the  baby  had,  to  my
conviction,  really  met  with  an  accident,  without  being  able  to  produce  any  con-
firmatory evidence.  Also  I  considered  that  she  would  take  it  as  an  insinuation
of  carelessness  on  her  part ;  therefore  I  purposely  wrote  it  as  a  post  scriptutn.

I  heard  no  more  about  it,  and  even  fancied  that  this  time  my  impression  was
merely  the  consequence  of  anxiety.  But  on  Saturday  last  I  went  to  see  my  wife
and  child,  and  asked  whether  she  had  taken  notice  of  my  advice  to  protect  the
baby  against  such  an  accident.  She  smiled  at  first,  and  then  informed  me  that
he  had  tumbled  out  of  the  bed  upon  the  chairs  placed  at  the  side,  and  then
found  his  way  upon  the  floor,  without  being  hurt.  She  further  remarked,  "  You
must  have  been  thinking  of  that  when  it  was  just  too  late,  because  it  happened
the  same  day  your  letter  came,  some  hours  previously."  I  asked  her  what  time
of  the  day  it  happened.  Answer:  "  About  11  A.M."  She  told  me  that  she
heard  the  baby  fall,  and  at  once  ran  upstairs  to  pick  him  up.

I  am  certain,  without  the  shadow  of  a  doubt,  that  I  wrote  immediately  after
the  impression  ;  and  that  this  was  between  11  and  11.30  in  the  morning.

The  following  note  was  made  by  Gurney : —

I  have  seen  the  letter  which  Mr.  Keulemans  wrote  to  his  wife.  The  enve-
lope bears  the  post-mark  of  Worthing,  October  3rd ;  and  the  postscript  con-
tained the  following  words :  "  Mind  little  Gaston  does  not  fall  out  of  bed.

662  B]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  663

Put  chairs  in  front  of  it.     You  know  accidents  soon  happen.     The  fact  is,  I  am
almost  certain  he  has  met  with  such  a  mishap  this  very  morning."

Mrs.  Keulemans'  aunt  supplied  the  following  testimony,  a  day  or  two
after  Mr.  Keulemans'  letter  of  October  i6th: —

36  TEVILLE  STREET,  WORTHING.

Mrs.  Keulemans  (my  niece)  and  her  baby  are  staying  at  my  house.  The
baby  had  fallen  out  of  bed  the  morning  of  the  day  the  letter  [;>.  Mr.  Keule-
mans' letter]  was  received.  C.  GRAY.

662  B.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  31.  The  following
case,  though  undoubtedly  sensory,  seems  still  to  belong  to  a  somewhat
indescribable  stage  of  visualisation.  If  interpreted  as  telepathic,  it  is
further  of  interest  as  illustrating  that  rarer  type  where  the  phantasm  is  not
merely  representative  of  the  agent,  but  visibly  reproduces  some  actual
percept  or  idea  which  is  prominently  present  at  the  time  to  the  agent's
consciousness.  The  account  is  from  Mr.  F.  Gottschalk,  of  20  Adamson
Road,  Belsize  Park,  N.W.,  and  is  dated  February  12,  1886.

[Mr.  Gottschalk  begins  by  describing  a  friendship  which  he  formed  with
Mr.  Courtenay  Thorpe,  at  the  rooms  of  Dr.  Sylvain  Mayer,  on  the  evening  of
February  2oth,  1885.  On  February  24th,  being  anxious  to  hear  a  particular
recitation  which  Mr.  Thorpe  was  shortly  going  to  give,  Mr.  Gottschalk  wrote
to  him,  at  the  Prince's  Theatre,  to  ask  what  the  hour  of  the  recitation  was  to
be.]  In  the  evening  I  was  going  out  to  see  some  friends,  when  on  the  road
there  seemed  suddenly  to  develop  itself  before  me  a  disc  of  light,  which  appeared
to  be  on  a  different  plane  to  everything  else  in  view.  It  was  not  possible  for  me
to  fix  the  distance  at  which  it  seemed  to  be  from  me.1  Examining  the  illumined
space,  I  found  that  two  hands  were  visible.  They  were  engaged  in  drawing  a
letter  from  an  envelope  which  I  instinctively  felt  to  be  mine  and,  in  consequence,
thought  immediately  that  the  hands  were  those  of  Mr.  Thorpe.  I  had  not
previously  been  thinking  of  him,  but  at  the  moment  the  conviction  came  to  me
with  such  intensity  that  it  was  irresistible.  Not  being  in  any  way  awe-struck
by  the  extraordinary  nature  and  novelty  of  this  incident,  but  in  a  perfectly  calm
frame  of  mind,  I  examined  the  picture,  and  found  that  the  hands  were  very
white,  and  bared  up  to  some  distance  above  the  wrist.  Each  forearm  ter-
minated in  a  ruffle;  beyond  that  nothing  was  to  be  seen.  The  vision  lasted
about  a  minute.  After  its  disappearance  I  determined  to  find  out  what  con-
nection it  may  have  had  with  Mr.  Thorpe's  actual  pursuit  at  the  moment,
and  went  to  the  nearest  lamp-post  and  noted  the  time.

By  the  first  post  the  next  morning,  I  received  an  answer  from  Mr.  Thorpe,
which  began  in  the  following  way:  "Tell  me,  pray  tell  me,  why  did  I,  when  I
saw  your  letter  in  the  rack  at  the  Prince's  Theatre,  know  that  it  was  from  you?"

1  Cf.  a  remark  in  M.  Marillier's  account  of  his  interesting  subjective  experi.
referred  to  in  [Phantasms  of  the  Living]  vol.  i.  p.  521  :  "  Jc  ne  pourrais  indiqucr  ni  la
place  de  1'image  que  j'ai  objective,  ni  la  distance  a  laquelle  elle  se  trouve."  The
indtseribablcness  of  a  certain  sort  of  externalisation  is  well  brought  out  in  the  same
writer's  description  of  his  vision  of  parts  of  his  body  which  could  never  actually  be  seen
by  him — e.g.  the  back  of  his  head.

664  APPENDICES  [662  B

[We  have  seen  this  letter,  which  is  dated  "  Tuesday  night"  ;  and  February  24th,
1885,  fell  on  a  Tuesday.]  Mr.  Thorpe  had  no  expectation  of  receiving  a  letter
from  me,  nor  had  he  ever  seen  my  writing.  Even  had  he  seen  it,  his  know-
ledge of  it  would  not  affect  the  issue  of  the  question,  as  he  assured  me  that  the
impression  arrived  the  moment  he  saw  there  was  a  letter  under  the  "  T  clip,"
before  any  writing  was  visible.  [Mr.  Gottschalk  explains  that  from  the  con-
struction of  the  rack,  which  he  has  examined,  the  address  on  the  envelope
would  be  invisible.]

On  the  evening  of  February  27th,  by  arrangement,  I  again  met  him  at  the
rooms  of  Dr.  Mayer,  and  there  put  questions  to  him  with  a  view  to  eliciting
some  explanation.  As  near  as  possible,  I  give  them  as  they  were  put  at  the
time,  and  add  the  answers.  It  is  necessary  for  me  here  to  state  that  he  and
the  Doctor  were  in  complete  ignorance  of  what  had  happened  to  me.  Having
first  impressed  upon  him  the  necessity  of  answering  in  a  categorical  manner
and  with  the  greatest  possible  accuracy,  I  commenced  : —

"  When  did  you  get  my  Tuesday's  letter  ?  "  "  At  7  in  the  evening,  when  I
arrived  at  the  theatre."  "  Then  what  happened?"  "  I  read  it,  but,  being  very
late,  in  such  a  hurry  that  when  I  had  finished  I  was  as  ignorant  of  its  contents
as  if  I  had  never  seen  it."  "  Then  ?  "  "I  dressed,  went  on  the  stage,  played  my
part,  and  came  off."  "  What  was  the  time  then  ?  "  "  About  20  minutes  past
8."  "  What  happened  then ? "  "I  talked  for  a  time  with  some  of  the  company
in  my  dressing-room."  "For  how  long?"  "Twenty  minutes."  "What  did
you  then  do  ?  "  "  They  having  left  me,  my  first  thought  was  to  find  your  letter.
I  looked  everywhere  for  it,  in  vain.  I  turned  out  the  pockets  of  my  ordinary
clothes,  and  searched  among  the  many  things  that  encumbered  my  dressing-
table.  I  was  annoyed  at  not  finding  it  immediately,  especially  as  I  was  anxious
to  know  what  it  was  about.  Strangely  enough  I  discovered  it  eventually  in  the
coat  which  I  had  just  worn  in  the  piece  'School  for  Scandal.'  I  immediately
read  it  again,  was  delighted  to  receive  it,  and  decided  to  answer  at  once."
"Now  be  very  exact.  What  was  the  time  when  you  read  it  on  the  second
occasion  ?  "  "  As  nearly  as  I  can  say,  10  minutes  to  9."

Thereupon  I  drew  from  my  pocket  a  little  pocket-diary  in  which  I  had
noted  the  time  of  my  vision,  and  asked  Dr.  Mayer  to  read  what  was  written
under  the  date  24th  February.

"  Eight  minutes  to  9."

[Mr.  Gottschalk  has  kindly  allowed  us  to  inspect  his  diary,  which  confirms
all  the  dates  given.]

Having  established  in  this  way,  without  any  assistance,  the  coincidence  of
time  between  his  actually  opening  the  envelope  and  my  seeing  him  do  so,  I
was  satisfied  as  to  the  principal  part,  and  proceeded  to  analyse  the  incident  in
detail.  The  whiteness  of  the  hands  was  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that  actors
invariably  whiten  their  hands  when  playing  a  part  like  the  one  Mr.  Thorpe  was
engaged  in — "  Snake  "  in  the  "  School  for  Scandal."  The  ruffles  also  formed
part  of  the  dress  in  this  piece.  They  were  attached  to  the  short  sleeves  of  the
shirt  which  Mr.  Thorpe  was  actually  wearing  when  he  opened  my  letter.

This  is  the  first  hallucination  I  ever  had.  I  have  had  one  since  of  a  similar
nature,  which  I  will  recount  separately.  FERDINAND  GOTTSCHALK.

Dr.  Mayer,  of  42  Somerset  Street,  Portman  Square,  W.,  corroborates
as  follows : —

662C]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  665

March  1st,  1886.

I  well  remember  having  read  something  [i.e.  in  Mr.  Gottschalk's  diary] — the
exact  words  memory  will  not  allow  me  to  give — which  tallied  almost  exactly
with  the  story  told  by  Courtenay  Thorpe  ;  and  can  bear  positive  testimony  of
the  above  conversation  having  taken  place.  SYLVAIN  MAYER.

We  cannot  lay  any  stress  on  Mr.  Thorpe's  impression  as  to  the  letter
and  its  writer,  since  that  may  easily  have  been  accidental.  But  it  is  a
point  to  be  noticed  that  he  read  the  letter  with  very  decided  pleasure,
after  a  considerable  hunt  for  it — in  other  words,  that  the  reading  of  the
letter  stood  out  rather  distinctly  from  the  general  run  of  such  experiences.
Though  the  incident  is  trivial,  the  close  correspondence  of  time  and  detail
is  strongly  suggestive  of  telepathic  clairvoyance.  In  the  second  case  men-
tioned, an  illuminated  disc  was  again  seen,  which  "  seemed  not  to  belong
to  the  surroundings  " ;  but  the  details  were  not  quite  as  distinctive  as  in
the  above  instance.

662  C.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  35.  In  the  case
just  quoted,  the  vision  hardly  suggested  a  real  external  object,  and  further
stages  remain,  on  the  path  to  the  final  one  of  natural  solid-looking
externality.  In  the  following  case  the  image  appeared  with  a  sort  of
apparent  relief,  but  certainly  not  yet  as  co-ordinate  in  any  natural
fashion  with  the  real  objects  in  view.  The  account  is  from  Mr.  Richard
Searle,  barrister,  of  Home  Lodge,  Herne  Hill,  who  tells  us  that  he  has  had
no  other  experience  of  a  hallucination.

November  2nd,  1883.

One  afternoon,  a  few  years  ago,  I  was  sitting  in  my  chambers  in  the  Temple,
working  at  some  papers.  My  desk  is  between  the  fireplace  and  one  of  the
windows,  the  window  being  two  or  three  yards  on  the  left  side  of  my  chair,  and
looking  out  into  the  Temple.  Suddenly  I  became  aware  that  I  was  looking  at
the  bottom  window-pane,  which  was  about  on  a  level  with  my  eyes,  and  there  I
saw  the  figure  of  the  head  and  face  of  my  wife,  in  a  reclining  position,  with  the
eyes  closed  and  the  face  quite  white  and  bloodless,  as  if  she  were  dead.

I  pulled  myself  together,  and  got  up  and  looked  out  of  the  window,  where  I
saw  nothing  but  the  houses  opposite,  and  I  came  to  the  conclusion  that  I  had
been  drowsy  and  had  fallen  asleep,  and,  after  taking  a  few  turns  about  the
room  to  rouse  myself,  I  sat  down  again  to  my  work  and  thought  no  more  of  the
matter.

nt  home  at  my  usual  time  that  evening,  and  whilst  my  wife  and  I  were
at  dinner,  she  told  me  that  she  had  lunched  with  a  friend  who  lived  in  Gloucester
Gardens,  and  that  she  had  taken  with  her  a  little  child,  one  of  her  nieces,  who
was  staying  with  us  ;  but  during  lunch,  or  just  after  it,  the  child  had  a  fall  and
slightly  cut  her  face  so  that  the  blood  came.  After  telling  the  story,  m\
added  that  she  was  so  alarmed  when  she  saw  the  blood  on  the  child's  far
she  had  fainted.  What  I  had  seen  in  the  window  then  occurred  to  my  mind,
and  I  asked  her  what  time  it  was  when  this  happened.  She  said,  as  far  as  she
remembered,  it  must  have  been  a  few  minutes  after  2  o'clock.  This  was  the
time,  as  nearly  as  I  rould  calculate,  not  having  looked  at  my  watch,  when  I
saw  the  figure  in  the  window-pane.

666  APPENDICES  [662  D

I  have  only  to  add  that  this  is  the  only  occasion  on  which  I  have  known  my
wife  to  have  had  a  fainting-fit.  She  was  in  bad  health  at  the  time,  and  I  did
not  mention  to  her  what  I  had  seen  until  a  few  days  afterwards,  when  she  had
become  stronger.  I  mentioned  the  occurrence  to  several  of  my  friends  at  the
time-  R.  S.

Mr.  Paul  Pierrard,  of  27  Gloucester  Gardens,  W.,  writes  as  follows  :

4//&  December  1883.

It  may  be  interesting  for  special  observers  to  have  a  record  of  an  extra-
ordinary occurrence  which  happened  about  four  years  ago  at  my  residence,  27
Gloucester  Gardens,  W.

At  an  afternoon  party  of  ladies  and  children,  among  whom  were  Mrs.
Searle,  of  Home  Lodge,  Herne  Hill,  and  her  little  niece,  Louise,  there  was  a
rather  noisy,  bustling,  and  amusing  game  round  a  table,  when  little  Louise  fell
from  her  chair  and  hurt  herself  slightly.  The  fear  of  a  grave  accident  caused
Mrs.  Searle  to  be  very  excited,  and  she  fainted.

The  day  after,  we  met  Mr.  Searle,  who  stated  that  in  the  afternoon  of  the
preceding  day  he  had  been  reading  important  cases  in  his  chambers,  No.  6
Pump  Court,  Temple,  when  a  peculiar  feeling  overcame  him,  and  he  distinctly
saw,  as  it  were  in  a  looking-glass,  the  very  image  of  his  wife  leaning  back  in  a
swoon,  which  seemed  very  strange  at  the  moment.

By  comparing  the  time,  it  was  found  that  this  extraordinary  vision  was  pro-
duced at  the  very  same  instant  as  the  related  incident.

We  often  spoke  of  the  case  together,  and  could  not  find  any  explanation  to
completely  satisfy  our  minds ;  but  we  registered  this  rare  fact  for  which  a  name
is  wanted.  PAUL  PIERRARD.

Here  there  was  more  than  the  mere  representation  of  the  agent ;  she
was  represented  apparently  in  the  aspect  which  she  actually  wore,  but  in
which  the  percipient  had  never  seen  her,  and  in  which  she  would  hardly
be  consciously  picturing  herself.  We  are  scarcely  driven,  however,  in  this
case,  to  the  difficult  conception  of  "  telepathic  clairvoyance  " ;  for  it  is
possible  to  suppose  that  the  idea  of  fainting,  impressed  on  Mr.  Searle's
mind,  worked  itself  out  into  perception  in  an  appropriate  fashion.

662  D.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  37.  The  stage  of
visualisation  in  the  next  case  is  particularly  interesting.  The  narrator  is
Mrs.  Taunton,  of  Brook  Vale,  Witton,  Birmingham.

January  i$th,  1884.

On  Thursday  evening,  I4th  November  1867,  I  was  sitting  in  the  Birming-
ham Town  Hall  with  my  husband  at  a  concert,  when  there  came  over  me  the
icy  chill  which  usually  accompanies  these  occurrences. l  Almost  immediately,
I  saw  with  perfect  distinctness,  between  myself  and  the  orchestra,  my  uncle,
Mr.  W.,  lying  in  bed  with  an  appealing  look  on  his  face,  like  one  dying.  I  had
not  heard  anything  of  him  for  several  months,  and  had  no  reason  to  think  he
was  ill.  The  appearance  was  not  transparent  or  filmy,  but  perfectly  solid-

1  This  refers  to  a  few  other  experiences  of  a  different  character,  one  of  which,  how-
ever, involved  a  hallucination  of  sight.

662D]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  667

looking;  and  yet  I  could  somehow  see  the  orchestra,  not  through,  but  behind  it.
I  did  not  try  turning  my  eyes  to  see  whether  the  figure  moved  with  them,  but
looked  at  it  with  a  fascinated  expression  that  made  my  husband  ask  if  I  was
ill.  I  asked  him  not  to  speak  to  me  for  a  minute  or  two ;  the  vision  gradually
disappeared,  and  I  told  my  husband,  after  the  concert  was  over,  what  I  had
seen.  A  letter  came  shortly  after  telling  of  my  uncle's  death.  He  died  at
exactly  the  time  when  I  saw  the  vision.  E.  F.  TAUNTON.

[The  signature  of  Mrs.  Taunton's  husband  is  also  appended.]

RICH.  H.  TAUNTON.

[We  find  from  an  obituary  notice  in  the  Belfast  News-Letter  that  Mr.  W.
died  on  November  i4th,  1867.]

The  phantasm  here  was  perfectly  external,  and  is  described  as  "  per-
fectly solid-looking  "  ;  yet  it  certainly  did  not  hold  to  the  real  objects
around  the  same  relation  as  a  figure  of  flesh  and  blood  would  have  held ;
it  was  in  a  peculiar  way  transparent.  This  feature  is  noticeable,  as  it  is
one  which  occasionally  occurs  also  in  hallucinations  of  the  purely  sub-
jective class.1  It  may  thus  be  taken  as  one  of  the  numerous  minor
indications  of  the  hallucinatory  character  of  telepathic  phantasms  (see
Phantasms,  chap.  xii.  §  10).

The  "Report  on  the  Census  of  Hallucinations"  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,
vol.  x.)  gives  further  examples  of  what  are  there  called  "  incompletely  deve-
loped hallucinations,"  and  discusses  in  chapter  iv.  the  distinction  between
mental  images,  including  what  Kandinsky  a  calls  "  pseudo-hallucinations,"

1  Of  many  subjective  hallucinations,  it  has  been  specially  noticed  that  they  hid  what*
ever  was  behind  the  place  which  they  appeared  to  occupy  ;  and  the  rule  seems  to  be
that  when  the  percept  is  completely  externalised,  it  is  solid-looking.  But  exceptions  are
not  infrequent.  Whitish  transparent  figures  were  a  feature  in  a  pathological  case  first
published  in  the  Phrenological  Journal  and  Miscellany  (Edinburgh),  No.  vi.  p.  290,  &c.,
and  described  in  the  well-known  article  on  "  Spectral  Illusions  "  in  Chambers?!  Miscellany,
Wundt  ( Grundiuge der  physiologischen  Psychologic,  vol.  ii.  p.  357),  records  the  experience
of  an  overseer  of  forests,  who  saw  heaps  of  wood  all  round  him  in  his  house,  but  also
saw  the  furniture  and  carpet  just  as  usual.  (Cf.  case  193.)  Miss  Morse,  of  Vermont,  a
careful  observer,  who  has  had  hallucinations  at  rare  intervals  during  a  good  many  years,
tells  me  that  at  first "  they  seemed  to  be  pictured  just  within  instead  of  before  my
eyes."  Lately,  however,  "they  have  usually  been  projected  into  space;  but  however
real  the  apparitions  at  first  appear,  a  close  inspection  reveals  that  they  have  no  solidity—
that  objects  can  be  seen  through  them."  Another  of  my  informants,  who  on  waking
had  a  hallucination  of  a  tall  female  figure,  noticed  that  he  could  see  a  towel  through
her ;  and  similarly  in  one  of  my  cases  of  persistent  dream-images.  Professor  Goodwin
reports  that  with  him  they  "  retain  an  appearance  of  solidity  for  some  seconds  after
waking,  the  furniture  of  the  room  being  distinctly  recognised  through  these  figures,  like  a
dissolving  view."  Another  correspondent  describes  such  images  as  seen  "as  it  were
with  one  eye  asleep,  the  other  awake."  In  one  of  Paterson's  cases  (Edinburgh  Medical
and  Surgical  Journal  ivr  Jan.  1843),  tne  phantasm  appeared  as  though  seen  through
gauze.  I  may  also  refer  to  the  telepathic  phantasms  which  gave  the  impression  of  being
formed  from  mist  (Phantasms,  chap.  xii.  §  3,  cases  315,  518,  and  Mrs.  Dcane's  experi-
ence, p.  237).  I  have  mentioned  that  the  disappearance  is  occasionally  through  a  stage
of  increased  tenuity  and  transparency. — E.  G.

2  A'rttisfht  und  kltnischt  Betrachtungen  im  Gebiete  dtr  Sinntst&uschungen,  H-
1885

668  APPENDICES  [663  A

and  fully  externalised  sensory  hallucinations.  Examples  of  figures  gradu-
ally developed  out  of  a  mist  or  glow  of  light  are  given  on  pp.  117,  120,
and  293,  and  examples  of  transparent  figures  on  pp.  117,  119,  and  143
of  the  "  Report."

663  A.  In  the  Appendices  to  section  425  I  have  given  some  cases
of  premonitions  occurring  in  dreams.  Other  precognitive  cases  are  given
in  my  article  on  "  The  Subliminal  Self :  the  Relation  of  Supernormal
Phenomena  to  Time "  {Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  pp.  334-593),  and
I  quote  here  one  of  them  (from  p.  573).  The  narrative  comes  from
Dr.  A.  S.  Wiltse,  of  Skiddy,  Kansas,  personally  known  to  Dr.  Hodgson
and  myself  as  a  careful  and  conscientious  witness,  who  writes  : —

This  incident  occurred  in  Morgan  Co.,  Tennessee,  I  think  in  the  spring
of  1878.  Mrs.  Wiltse  and  myself  had  spent  the  day  with  her  mother  and  step-
father, Mr.  and  Mrs.  Todd.  I  had  passed  most  of  the  day  with  Mr.  Todd  in
the  field  where  he  was  planting  corn.  We  retired  early,  and  Mrs.  Wiltse
almost  immediately  fell  asleep.

Mr.  Todd  and  myself  being  wakeful,  lay  and  talked.  There  was  but  one
room,  in  which  there  was  an  open  fireplace  containing  fire  mostly  buried  up
with  ashes,  a  large  pine  knot  having  been  laid  on  top  of  these  embers,  and
so  nearly  buried  in  ashes  as  to  give  about  a  one  candle  power  of  light.  .  .  .

While  we  were  talking,  I  saw  a  picture  slide  on  to  the  wall  at  my  feet,  at
such  a  height  as  to  rest  easily  in  the  line  of  my  vision.  I  called  to  Mr.  and
Mrs.  Todd  to  cease  talking,  and  told  them  what  I  saw.  The  picture  was  some
feet  in  size  each  way,  and  remained  before  me  long  enough  for  me  to  describe
[it]  in  detail  to  them.  It  was  a  landscape,  the  main  features  in  which  were  a
river  with  a  large  creek  emptying  into  it  very  nearly  at  right  angles.  When
I  had  given  a  full  description,  the  picture  disappeared  with  a  quick  movement
like  that  with  which  it  had  appeared,  but  in  the  opposite  direction  from  which
it  came.  Mr.  Todd  said,  "  You  have  described  Emerald  River  and  Rock
Creek  where  it  empties  into  it," — which  I  thought  correct,  as  I  was  familiar
with  the  two  streams.

While  we  were  talking,  another  picture  slid  on  to  the  wall  in  the  same
manner  as  the  first  one.  It  was  the  same  picture  as  the  first,  with  the  addition
of  several  open  fields  and  wooded  lands  along  the  banks.  In  one  of  the  fields
was  a  log-house  with  its  surroundings  which  I  did  not  recognise.  The  picture
remained  stationary  until  I  had  described  it  thoroughly,  when  it  disappeared
similarly  to  the  first.

Both  Todd  and  his  wife  said  I  had  described  the  "  Cass  Davis  House,"
which  was  about  a  mile  distant,  across  the  river.  At  this  another  picture  slid
on  to  the  wall,  the  very  counterpart  of  the  second  one,  except  that  a  good
portion  of  the  landscape  was  left  out,  but  the  house  was  there,  the  door  of
which  was  closed,  and  as  I  announced  its  appearance,  I  heard  the  muffled
report  of  a  gun  on  the  inside  of  the  house,  and  immediately  afterwards  the
door  flew  open  and  a  man  rushed  out  seemingly  in  a  great  fright.

At  this  point  Todd  said,  "See  here,  Doc.,  are  you  seeing  these  things,  or
just  playing  off  a  drive  on  us  ?  "  I  assured  him  that  I  actually  saw,  or  seemed
to  see  the  things  I  described,  although  they  did  not  seem  possessed  of  solidity,
but  were  more  as  if  one  should  breathe  over  a  looking-glass,  then  stand  at
some  distance  from  it  and  observe  his  image  ;  it  would  look  shadowy  and  dim.

663A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  669

In  the  meantime  the  door  of  the  house  in  the  picture  had  been  left  open
so  that  I  could  see  into  the  house,  where  I  saw  a  man  staggering  toward
the  door  with  blood  running  from  his  mouth.  He  reached  the  door,  where
he  supported  himself  by  leaning  against  the  door-facing,  and  steadied  him-
self off  the  doorstep  on  to  the  ground.  In  so  doing  he  left  the  print  of  his
hand  in  blood  upon  the  door-facing.

At  this  point  the  picture  again  disappeared  and  was  immediately  re-
placed by  another  much  the  same  as  the  other,  but  in  it  the  dead  body
of  the  man  was  lying  on  the  ground  some  few  feet  from  the  door,  while
from  the  field  advanced  several  people,  with  hoes  and  mattocks  in  their
hands,  who  gathered  round  the  body  in  apparent  excitement  and  conster-
nation, when  the  picture  vanished  and  I  saw  nothing  more.

I  asked  Todd  if  he  was  sure  of  the  house ;  he  assured  me  that  it  bore
the  exact  description  I  had  given.  I  asked  if  there  was  any  rumour,  or
ever  had  been  to  his  knowledge,  of  a  tragedy  having  occurred  there.  "  Not
that  he  had  ever  heard  of."  I  believe  I  said  that  "something  of  the  kind
has  occurred  there  or  else  will.  If  it  is  past  we  may  never  know  it;  if  it
is  to  come,  we  may  see."

When  the  corn  which  Todd  had  planted  that  day  was  ready  for  hoeing,
I  was  with  him  again  in  the  field  a  portion  of  a  day,  and  together  we  left
the  field  and  started  to  go  to  Wartburg,  the  county  seat  about  two  miles
distant.  On  the  way  we  met  Cass  Davis,  a  quadroon,  who  asked  us  if  we
had  heard  of  Henderson  Whittaker  killing  himself.  We  had  not,  and  he
told  us  that  during  the  (forenoon,  I  think)  Whittaker  went  into  the  house,
where  Mr.  Haun  was  sitting  alone,  and  asked  Haun  to  loan  him  his  rifle  to
go  hunting.  Haun  pointed  to  the  corner  where  the  rifle  stood,  saying,  "  I
don't  know  whether  it  is  loaded  or  not."  Whittaker  put  his  mouth  over  the
muzzle  to  blow  into  the  gun,  pushing  back  the  hammer  with  his  foot.  The
foot  slipped  off  and  the  gun  was  discharged  into  his  mouth.  Haun  ran  out
into  the  field  for  help.  The  hands  came  up  and  I  think  found  the  young
man  dead  in  the  yard.  I  have  also  been  told  that  the  hand-print  of  blood
was  left  upon  the  door-facing,  but  these  lesser  points  can  be  learned  best
from  parties  who  lived  in  the  neighbourhood  at  the  time.  The  main  points
are  absolutely  certain.  The  tragedy  occurred  in  the  house  I  had  described,
and  was  of  substantially  the  nature  I  had  described  from  the  picture-writing
on  the  wall.

We  obtained  the  following  answers  to  questions  sent  to  Mr.  William
Todd,  January  i5th,  1891,  re  Dr.  Wiltse's  Vision.

Q.  i.  "  Did  Dr.  Wiltse  describe  to  you  picture  appearances  which  he  said
he  was  seeing  at  the  time  ?  "

A.    i.    "Yes."

Q.  2.  "  Did  he  describe  particulars  of  what  he  was  seeing,  such  as  the  print
of  a  bloody  hand  upon  the  door-facing  of  the  Cass  Davis  House ;  the  sound
of  a  gun  inside;  one  man  running  out  in  apparent  fright  and  the  other
staggering  out  of  the  doorway  and  dying  upon  the  ground  near  the  door?"

A.  2.  "  He  did  describe  the  place  and  asked  me  if  I  knew  of  such  a
place :  I  told  him  that  it  was  the  Cass  Davis  House."

Q.  3.  "  Do  you  recollect  if  he  told  you  he  believed  something  of  such
nature  had  happened  in  the  Cass  Davis  House,  or  else  would  in  the  future?"

670  APPENDICES  [663  A

A.  3.  "  He  told  me  that  something  had  happened  at  that  place,  or  would
in  the  future."

Q.  4.  "  Did  the  future  events  in  that  house,  in  the  matter  of  the  death  of
H.  Whittaker,  lead  you  to  conclude  that  Dr.  Wiltse  really  saw  that  night
what  he  told  you  he  was  seeing?"

A.  4.  "It  did  as  to  H.  Whittaker,  and  I  do  believe  he  saw  what  he  said
he  saw."  WM.  TODD,  January  26t/i,  1891.

Mr.  M.  Haun  writes  as  follows  to  Dr.  Hodgson  :—

KISMET,  TENN.,  March  2nd,  1891.

Your  request  received,  and  will  say  in  reply,  ist,  that  I  remember  Dr.
A.  S.  Wiltse  having  told  me  of  his  "  prophetic  vision,"  but  whether  it  was
before  or  after  the  fulfilment  I  can't  say.  However,  the  facts  were  about  as
follows :  The  young  man  shot  himself  in  the  mouth  while  attempting  to  blow
in  the  gun ;  ball  passed  out  through  the  back  of  his  neck  just  in  the  edge  of
his  hair,  rupturing  some  large  vein  or  artery.  He  fell  instantly  and  was  un-
able to  utter  a  word  intelligibly.  He  raised  himself  up  on  his  hands  with
his  head  drooping  over,  and  from  his  mouth  the  blood  ran  profusely,  making
a  large  pool  of  blood  upon  the  floor.  I  ran  about  forty  rods  from  the  house
to  call  the  nearest  help,  and  on  returning  found  the  young  man  lying  full
length,  flat  on  his  face,  dead,  his  hat  lying  on  the  doorstep ;  the  print  of  his
hand  made  on  door-casing;  it  seemed  that  he  had  crawled  out  upon  his
hands  and  knees.

Now  the  hand-print  on  the  door ;  the  blood-stained  hat  on  the  doorsteps ;
the  kind  of  house  and  its  location  ;  the  season  of  the  year  when  the  acci-
dent occurred,  correspond  with  the  Dr.'s  vision,  if  I  remember  correctly.

The  tragedy  occurred,  I  think,  in  the  month  of  July,  not  far  from  the
i8th.  As  to  when  the  Dr.  had  this  vision  or  dream  I  don't  remember.

No.  I  don't  remember  thinking  of  his  vision  at  the  time,  for,  as  before
stated,  I  don't  remember  having  heard  it  before,  although  I  might  have
heard  it.  MANIPHEE  HAUN.

Mr.  J.  Bales  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson  : —

WARTBURG,  TENN.,  March  i^th,  1891.

In  reply  to  yours  of  2/27,  will  say  that  I  remember  hearing  Dr.  Wiltse
talk  of  the  occurrence  you  mentioned  in  regard  to  the  tragedy  which  hap-
pened at  the  Cass  Davis  Place.  He  told  me  of  it  before  it  happened,  and
when  it  did  occur  he  came  and  asked  me  if  I  remembered  what  he  had
told  me  about  it  before.  As  to  the  dates,  I  can't  remember  exactly,  but  it
must  have  been  twelve  or  fourteen  years  ago.  There  was  no  newspaper
published  here  at  that  time,  and  there  was  never  any  publication  of  it,  so
far  as  I  am  aware.

I  do  not  remember  the  appearance  of  a  bloody  hand  on  the  door  or
anywhere  else,  but  there  was  blood  on  the  house  in  different  places.

Would  have  answered  you  sooner,  but  I  wanted  to  remember  correctly
before  writing.  Dr.  A.  S.  Wiltse  considered  a  truthful  and  honest  man
here.  JAMES  BALKS.

Mr.  Howard  writes  to  Dr.  Hodgson : —

663  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  671

KISMET,  TKNN.,  March  2yd,  iSgfi].

Your  inquiry  of  recent  date  just  received,  and  will  say  in  reply  that  Dr.
Wiltse  told  his  vision  to  Mr.  William  Todd  and  his  wife,  my  stepfather  and
my  mother,  a  short  time  before  the  occurrence.  I  was  informed  by  Mr.  Todd
that  the  details  in  the  case  were  exactly  similar  to  the  Dr.'s  vision.  My
mother  stated  the  same  fact  in  my  hearing,  but  she  is  now  dead.  I  understand
from  different  parties  that  the  blood-print,  &c.,  were  exactly  as  seen  in  the
vision.  Dr.  Wiltse  was  stopping  at  our  house  (Mr.  Todd's)  at  the  time,  and,
after  relating  his  vision,  my  stepfather  recognised  the  place  described  as  the
**  Cass  Davis  House,"  where  the  tragedy  afterwards  occurred.  I  would  refer
you  to  Mr.  William  Todd  for  further  particulars,  as  he  probably  remembers
the  date  ;  I  do  not.  W.  T.  HOWARD.

I  may  refer  also  to  a  small  group  of  predictions  of  numbers  to  be
drawn  in  the  conscription  for  the  Belgian  army ;  the  report  of  which  was
sent  in  1894  by  Professor  G.  Hulin,  of  the  University  of  Ghent,  to
Professor  Sidgwick,  and  given  by  me  at  length  in  the  paper  already
mentioned  (Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  xi.  p.  545).  Five  cases  of  the  right
numbers  being  predicted  during  the  eight  years,  1886-94,  are  given  on
good  authority;  the  numbers  in  the  first  four  cases  being  respectively,
90,  112,216,  in.  The  first  case  was  an  especially  striking  one  ;  a  clearly
externalised  vision  of  the  number  90  appeared  to  the  percipient,  and
produced  a  strong  impression  on  his  mind,  convincing  him  that  he  would
draw  that  number.  In  the  fifth  case  the  man  who  was  to  draw  first
announced  that  his  number  would  be  116,  and  on  being  told  that  that
was  already  drawn,  said  it  would  be  115,  which  turned  out  correct.  The
report  only  professes  to  give  correct  predictions,  and  we  have  no  means
of  knowing  how  often  predictions  of  these  numbers  are  made  which  turn
out  wrong.  Neither  are  we  told  how  many  numbers  there  were  to  draw
from,  except  in  one  case,  where  it  appears  that  there  were  at  least  150,
the  lowest  of  them  being  46  and  the  highest  223.  In  this  case  the
number  216  was  the  one  rightly  guessed.  We  must  assume,  I  think,  that
these  facts  were  known  to  the  man  who  was  to  draw — the  narrative  cer-
tainly does  not  exclude  this  supposition,  and,  in  fact,  rather  suggests  it —
and,  if  so,  the  chance  of  his  making  a  correct  guess  was,  of  course,  about
i  in  150,  and  the  cases  are  hardly  numerous  enough  to  exclude  the
explanation  of  chance  coincidence.

Dr.  (;.  B.  Ermacora,  in  an  article  published  in  1898  in  the  Rivista  di
Studi  Psichici  (of  which  a  translation,  with  the  title  "  Sur  la  possibility  des
theories  rationnelles  de  la  premonition,"  appeared  in  the  AnnaUs  des
Scifnces  Psychiques,  January-February,  1899,  p.  46),  suggests  that  the  ful-
filment of  premonitions  about  the  results  of  drawing  by  lot — when  the
drawing  is  done  by  the  person  who  experiences  the  premonition — might
be  explained  by  telaesthesia,  as  we  might  suppose  that  in  such  a  case  the
drawing  of  the  number  is  not  accomplished  blindly,  but  is  guided  by  a
normal  perception  which  leads  the  subject  to  select  automatically,
and  probably  unconsciously,  the  particular  number.

672  APPENDICES  [665  A

665  A.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  25.  The  following
case  is  interesting  on  account  of  the  different  stages  through  which  the
impression  passed.  It  will  be  noticed  that  it  began  with  a  vivid  sense
of  presence,  then  took  the  form  of  an  externalised  visual  hallucination,
but  transparent, — thus  being  what  was  called  in  the  Report  on  the  Census
of  Hallucinations  (as  just  mentioned)  an  incompletely  developed  hallucina-
tion,— and  finally  assumed  a  "pseudo-hallucinatory"  form.  The  account
was  received  by  me  from  Mr.  Kearne,  of  37  Avonmore  Gardens,  West
Kensington,  on  December  24th,  1894,  and  the  signatures  of  the  two
other  witnesses  were  added  later.

On  the  evening  of  February  loth,  1894,  I  was  sitting  in  my  room  expecting
the  return  of  two  friends  from  a  concert  in  the  provinces  where  they  had  been
performing.  The  friends  in  question  had  lived  with  me  for  some  years,  and  we
were  more  than  usually  attached  to  one  another.  I  had  no  knowledge  by  what
particular  train  they  intended  returning  to  town,  but  knew  when  the  last  train
they  could  catch  was  due  to  arrive  in  London  (9.5  P.M.)  and  how  long  to  a  few
minutes  they  would  take  from  the  terminus  to  get  home  (about  10  P.M.).  Our
profession  entails  a  great  deal  of  travelling;  my  friends  have  had  plenty  of
experience  in  this  direction,  and  there  was  no  question  of  their  being  well  able
to  look  after  themselves.  I  may  just  add  that  one  of  these  friends  has  made
this  same  journey  weekly  for  the  last  eight  or  nine  years,  so  that  I  knew  quite
well  his  usual  time  of  arrival  at  Liverpool  Street.

On  the  day  mentioned  they  were  performing  at  an  afternoon  concert,  and
I  had  every  reason  to  believe  they  would  be  tired  and  get  home  as  soon  as
possible.  I  allowed  half-an-hour  beyond  the  usual  time  (10.30  P.M.)  of  arrival
to  elapse  before  I  got  at  all  uneasy,  speculating  as  people  will  under  such
circumstances  as  to  what  was  keeping  them,  although  arguing  to  myself  all  the
time  that  there  was  not  the  slightest  occasion  for  alarm.  I  then  took  up  a
book  in  which  I  was  much  interested,  sitting  in  an  easy  chair  before  the  fire
with  a  reading-lamp  close  to  my  right  side,  and  in  such  a  position  that  only  by
deliberately  turning  round  could  I  see  the  window  on  my  left,  before  which
heavy  chenille  curtains  were  drawn.  I  had  read  some  twenty  minutes  or  so,
was  thoroughly  absorbed  in  the  book,  my  mind  was  perfectly  quiet,  and  for  the
time  being  my  friends  were  quite  forgotten,  when  suddenly  without  a  moment's
warning  my  whole  being  seemed  roused  to  the  highest  state  of  tension  or  alive-
ness,  and  I  was  aware,  with  an  intenseness  not  easily  imagined  by  those  who
have  never  experienced  it,  that  another  being  or  presence  was  not  only  in  the
room  but  close  to  me.  I  put  my  book  down,  and  although  my  excitement  was
great,  I  felt  quite  collected  and  not  conscious  of  any  sense  of  fear.  Without
changing  my  position,  and  looking  straight  at  the  fire,  I  knew  somehow  that
my  friend  A.  H.  was  standing  at  my  left  elbow,  but  so  far  behind  me  as  to  be
hidden  by  the  arm-chair  in  which  I  was  leaning  back.  Moving  my  eyes  round
slightly  without  otherwise  changing  my  position,  the  lower  portion  of  one  leg
became  visible,  and  I  instantly  recognised  the  grey-blue  material  of  trousers  he
often  wore,  but  the  stuff  appeared  semi-transparent,  reminding  me  of  tobacco
smoke  in  consistency.1  I  could  have  touched  it  with  my  hand  without  moving

1  The  trousers  of  grey-blue  stuff  proved  to  be  what  A.  H.  wore  the  evening  the
vision  was  seen.

665A]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  673

more  than  my  left  arm.  With  that  curious  instinctive  wish  not  to  see  more  of
such  a  "  figure,"  I  did  no  more  than  glance  once  or  twice  at  the  apparition  and
then  directed  my  gaze  steadily  at  the  fire  in  front  of  me.  An  appreciable  space
of  time  passed, — probably  several  seconds  in  all,  but  seeming  in  reality  much
longer,— when  the  most  curious  thing  happened.  Standing  upright  between
me  and  the  window  on  my  left,  and  at  a  distance  of  about  four  feet  from  me
and  almost  immediately  behind  my  chair,  I  saw  perfectly  distinctly  the  figure
of  my  friend, — the  face  very  pale,  the  head  slightly  thrown  back,  the  eyes  shut,
and  on  one  side  of  the  throat,  just  under  the  jaw,  a  wound  with  blood  on  it-
The  figure  remained  motionless  with  the  arms  close  to  the  sides,  and  for  some
time,  how  long  I  can't  say,  I  looked  steadily  at  it ;  then  all  at  once  roused
myself,  turned  deliberately  round,  the  figure  vanished,  and  I  realised  instantly
that  I  had  seen  the  figure  behind  me  without  moving  from  my  first  position, —
an  impossible  feat  physically.  I  am  perfectly  certain  I  never  moved  my
position  from  the  first  appearance  of  the  figure  as  seen  physically,  until  it
disappeared  on  my  turning  round.

I  should  like  to  state  that  for  the  last  fifteen  years  I  have  been  the  witness
of  psychic  phenomena  of  almost  every  kind,  that  in  consequence  I  am  not
flurried  or  afraid  at  their  appearance  as  one  strange  to  them  would  be ;  but  in
all  that  time  never  once  has  anything  of  a  psychical  nature  happened  to  me
alone  and  unsought  for ;  it  was  in  fact  a  unique  experience  to  me.  I  was  now
of  course  thoroughly  alarmed,  and  as  rapidly  as  possible  considered  what  was
to  be  done.  My  first  thought  was  to  go  to  the  railway  terminus  and  see  if
anything  had  happened.  I,  however,  carefully  noted  the  time  (10.50  P.M.)  by
the  clock  in  front  of  me,  and  reflected  that  if  the  apparition  meant  an  accident
to  my  friend  at  anything  like  the  time  of  its  appearance,  the  last  train  had  been
due  in  London  at  least  i£  hours,  so  that  it  could  not  have  happened  on  the
journey  home.  How  I  got  through  the  next  40  minutes,  with  our  housekeeper
worrying  about  our  missing  friends,  I  don't  know.  At  the  end  of  this  time  I
heard  a  hansom  stop  before  the  door  (11.35  P.M.)-  My  friends  came  in  and
apparently  [did]  not  hurry  themselves  to  come  up  and  see  me,  from  which  fact
I  felt  reassured  that  nothing  very  serious  could  have  happened,  or  I  should
have  been  informed  of  it  at  once.  My  friend  B.  then  came  up,  saying,  "  Come
and  see  A.  H.,  what  a  state  he  is  in."  I  found  him  in  the  bathroom  with  his
collar  and  shirt  torn  open,  the  front  of  the  latter  with  blood  upon  it,  and  bath-
ing a  wound  under  his  jaw  which  was  bleeding.  His  face  was  very  pale,  and
he  was  evidently  suffering  from  a  shock  of  some  kind.  As  soon  as  I  could,
I  got  an  account  of  what  had  happened.

They  had  arrived  in  London  punctually,  and  feeling  tired,  although  in  good
spirits,  drove  with  a  third  gentleman,  who  had  been  performing  with  them,  to
a  restaurant  opposite  King's  Cross  Station  to  have  some  supper.  Before  leaving
the  restaurant,  my  friend,  A.  H.  (whose  apparition  I  saw),  complained  of  feeling
faint  from  the  heat  of  the  place,  went  out  into  the  street  to  get  some  fresh  air,
and  had  hardly  got  into  the  open  when  he  felt  his  senses  leave  him.  and  he  fell
heavily  forward,  striking  his  jaw  on  the  edge  of  the  kerb,  then  rolling  over  on
his  back.  On  recovering  consciousness,  two  policemen  wen  [  over

him,  one  of  whom, — failing  to  unfasten  his  collar  to  give  him  air, — had  cut  both
that  and  his  tic.  After  informing  the  rest  of  the  party  of  what  had  happened,
a  cab  was  called,  and  my  two  friends  were  driven  home  as  quickly  as
possible.  The  exact  time  that  my  friend,  A.  H.,  fainted  was  not  of  course
noted  by  them  -.  but  judging  by  the  average  time  a  cab  takes  to  do  the  distance,
VOL.  i.  2  u

674  APPENDICES  [665  B

cut  rather  short  on  this  occasion  in  the  effort  to  get  Ac  H.  home  quickly,  it
would  correspond  within  three  minutes  to  the  time  when  the  apparition
appeared  to  me.

In  conclusion  it  may  be  of  interest  to  state  that  a  curious  mental  sympathy
seems  to  exist  between  A.  H.  and  myself.  In  addition  to  the  phenomenon  of
saying  the  same  thing  at  the  same  time,  and  being  aware  on  special  occasions
of  one  another's  thoughts,  I  have  on  many  occasions  distinctly  felt  his  approach
before  seeing  him,  and  generally  when  I  have  been  walking  in  the  street  and
he  has  overtaken  me  on  the  top  of  the  'bus.  On  one  occasion  I  was  making  a
purchase  in  a  shop,  and  the  man  took  his  time  wrapping  up  the  article  I  wanted.
Without  any  apparent  reason,  I  began  to  get  uneasy,  and  felt  that  unless  he
quickly  handed  me  my  parcel  and  let  me  go,  I  must  leave  it  and  go  into  the
street.  To  his  astonishment,  I  suddenly  rushed  out  of  the  shop,  saw  my  friend
riding  past  on  a  'bus,  signed  to  him  to  come  down,  and  we  returned  to  the  shop
together.  I  don't  know  which  of  the  three  was  most  surprised.

(  PERCY  KEARNE,  January  qth,  1895.
Signed  \  ALFRED  HOBDAY,  January  gth,  1895.

(  ARTHUR  BENT,  January  gth,  1895.

[I  had  an  interview  with  Mr.  Kearne  and  Mr.  Bent  on  December  29th,  1894,
when  we  went  carefully  over  the  times  of  the  various  incidents  of  the  evening
in  question,  and  were  satisfied  that  the  accident  and  the  apparition  were  prob-
ably simultaneous.  Mr.  A.  H.,  I  understand,  had  no  conscious  thought  or
impression  of  Mr.  Kearne  at  the  time  of  the  accident.]

665  B.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  p.  68.  The  following  is
an  instance  of  a  visual  impression  of  a  communication  which  the  agent
was  at  the  moment  anxious  to  make  to  the  percipient.  It  was  sent  to  us
by  Mr.  Robert  Lodge,  an  Associate  of  the  Society.  The  letters  were
addressed  to  him  by  a  relative.

50  ADELAIDE  SQUARE,  BEDFORD,
February  \"]th,  1891.

In  answer  to  your  request  I  send  you  account  about  the  telegram.

On  the  27th  of  April  1889,  we  were  expecting  my  sister-in-law  and  her
daughter  from  South  America.  My  wife,  being  away  from  home,  was  unable
to  meet  them  at  Southampton,  so  an  intimate  friend  of  the  family,  a  Mr.  P.,
offered  to  do  so.  It  was  between  Derby  and  Leicester  about  3.30  P.M.  My
wife  was  travelling  in  the  train.  She  closed  her  eyes  to  rest,  and  at  the  same
moment  a  telegram  paper  appeared  before  her  with  the  words,  "  Come  at  once,
your  sister  is  dangerously  ill."  During  the  afternoon  I  received  a  telegram
from  Mr.  P.  to  my  wife,  worded  exactly  the  same  and  sent  from  Southampton
3.30  P.M.  to  Bedford.  On  my  wife's  arrival  home  about  9  P.M.,  I  deferred  com-
municating it  until  she  had  some  refreshment,  being  very  tired.  I  afterwards
made  the  remark,  "  I  have  some  news  for  you,"  and  she  answered,  "  Yes,  I
thought  so,  you  have  received  a  telegram  from  Mr.  P. ! "  I  said,  "  How  do  you
know?"  She  then  told  me  the  contents  and  her  strange  experiences  in  the
train,  and  that  it  impressed  her  so  much  that  she  felt  quite  anxious  all  the  rest
of  the  journey.

With  regard  to  the  above,  my  wife  had  no  idea  of  her  sister  being  ill,  and
was  not  even  at  the  time  thinking  about  them,  but  was  thinking  about  her  own
child  she  had  just  left  at  a  boarding  school.  Also  the  handwriting  my  wife

665  C]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  675

saw,  she  recognised  at  once  to  be  Mr.  P.'s.  But  then,  again,  he  would  have
been  writing  on  a  white  paper  form,  and  the  one  she  saw  was  the  usual  brown
coloured  paper.  FREDK.  L.  LODGE.

In  reply  to  inquiries,  Mr.  F.  Lodge  wrote  as  follows : —

The  letter  I  sent  you,  with  account  of  vision,  I  wrote  from  my  wife's  dicta-
tion. After  it  occurred  in  the  train  she  took  notice  of  the  hour,  and  from  the
time  marked  on  the  telegram  of  its  despatch  from  Southampton,  we  at  once
remarked  it  must  have  occurred  as  Mr.  P.  was  filling  in  a  form  at  Southampton.
Mr.  P.  is  now  in  South  America  constructing  a  railway  line,  and  will  not  return
to  England  for  about  a  year.  The  occurrence  was  mentioned  to  him.

Two  years  having  elapsed,  my  wife  could  not  say  the  exact  time  now,  but  it
was  between  3  and  4  P.M.,  although  when  it  happened,  we  did  notice  from  the
telegram  that  the  time  corresponded.  FREDK.  L.  LODGE.

665  C.     From    the  Journal  S.P.R.,   vol.  v.    p.  147.     The    following
account  of  a  very  curious  experience  of  Mr.  Dickinson,  a  photographer,
of  43  Grainger  Street,   Newcastle-on-Tyne,  was  obtained  for  us   by  Mr.
.  Nisbet,  of  Newcastle-on-Tyne.

February  2$tA,  1891.

On  Saturday,  the  3rd  of  January  this  year,  I  arrived  at  my  place  of  business
a  few  minutes  before  8  A.M.  The  outer  door  is  protected  by  an  iron  gate,  in
which  is  a  smaller  lock-up  gate,  through  which  I  passed  into  the  premises.
Having  opened  the  office  and  turned  the  gas  on  at  meter,  and  lit  the  gas-fire,  I
stood  at  the  office  counter  for  a  few  minutes  waiting  for  the  lad  who  takes  down
the  iron  gate  at  the  front  door.  Before  the  lad  came,  however,  a  gentleman
called  to  inquire  if  his  photographs  were  finished  ;  I  asked  him  if  he  had  the
receipt  (which  usually  accompanies  any  inquiry),  and  he  replied  that  he  had  no

receipt,  but  his  photograph  was  taken  on (giving  the  date),  and  that  the

prints  were  promised  to  be  sent  to  him  before  this  call.  Having  got  the  date
and  his  name,  I  referred  to  my  book  and  found  the  order  as  he  stated.  I  read
out  to  him  the  name  and  address,  to  which  he  replied,  "That  is  right/'  In  my
book  I  found  a  date  given  on  which  the  negative  was  ready  to  be  put  into  the
printer's  hands,  and  the  date  being  seventeen  days  previous  I  had  no  hesitation
in  saying,  "  Well,  if  you  call  later  on  you  will  get  some,"  and  I  called  his  atten-
tion to  the  fact  that  it  was  very  early,  and  explained  to  him  that  the  employees
would  not  be  at  work  until  nine  o'clock,  and  if  he  could  call  after  that  time  he
would  be  certain  to  get  some  of  his  photographs.  He  said,  "  I  have  been
travelling  all  night,  and  cannot  call  again."  With  that  he  turned  abruptly,  and
went  out.  Anxious  to  retain  his  good  will,  I  shouted  after  him,  "  Can  I  post
what  may  be  done  ? "  but  I  got  no  answer.  I  turned  once  more  to  the  book,
looked  at  the  number,  and  on  a  slip  of  paper  wrote,  "  No.  7976,  Thompson^
(This  I  wrote  with  pen  and  ink,  and  have  the  paper  yet.)  At  nine
o'clock,  when  Miss  S.  (clerk  and  reception-room  attendant)  came,  I  handed  the
slip  of  paper  to  her  and  asked  her  to  have  it  attended  to,  telling  Ivr  that  the
man  had  called  for  them,  and  seemed  much  disappointed  that  he  had  not
received  them  before.  Miss  S.,  with  considerable  surprise,  exclaimed:  "  Why,
an  old  man  called  about  these  photographs  yesterday  (Friday),  and  I  told  him
they  could  not  be  ready  this  week  owing  to  the  bad  weather,  and  that  we
nearly  three  weeks  behind  with  our  work."  I  suggested  that  it  was  quite  time

676  APPENDICES  [665  C

Mr.  Thompson's  were  ready,  and  inquired  who  was  printing  the  order.  I  was
told  it  was  not  in  print,  and  pointing  to  a  pile  of  negatives  Miss  S.  said,
"  Thompson's  is  amongst  that  lot,  and  they  have  been  waiting  quite  a  fortnight."
I  asked  to  be  shown  the  negative,  and  about  half-an-hour  later  Miss  S.  called
me,  saying,  "  This  is  Thompson's  negative."  I  took  it  in  my  hands  and  looked
at  it  carefully,  remarking,  "  Yes,  that  is  it  ;  that  is  the  chap  who  called  this
morning."  Miss  S.  again  referred  to  the  fact  that  she  had  told  the  man  who
had  called  on  the  previous  day  that  none  were  done,  or  could  be  done  that
week.  "  Well,"  I  said,  "  put  this  to  one  side  and  I  will  see  to  it  myself  on
Monday,  and  endeavour  to  hurry  it  forward."  On  the  Monday  (January  5th).
I  was  in  one  of  the  printing  rooms,  and,  about  10.30  A.M.,  having  one  or  two
printing  frames  empty,  I  thought  of  Thompson's  negative,  and  accordingly
went  down  to  the  office  and  asked  Miss  S.  for  it.  "  Oh  yes,"  she  replied,  "  and
here  are  a  few  more  equally  urgent ;  you  may  take  them  as  well."  I  said,  "That
cannot  be,  as  I  have  only  two  or  three  frames  at  liberty  "  (she  had  about  twenty
negatives  in  her  hand,  holding  them  out  tome)  ;  "  give  me  Thompson's  first  and
let  me  get  my  mind  at  rest  about  it."  To  which  she  answered,  "  His  is  amongst
this  lot ;  I  will  have  to  pick  it  out."  (Each  negative  was  in  a  paper  bag.)  I
offered  to  help  her,  and  she  commenced  at  one  end  of  the  batch  and  I  at  the
other,  and  before  we  got  half-way  through  I  came  across  one  which  I  knew  was
very  urgent,  and  turned  away  to  look  up  the  date  of  taking  it,  when  crash  !
went  part  of  the  negatives  on  the  floor.  This  accident  seemed  so  serious  that
I  was  almost  afraid  to  pick  up  the  fallen  negatives,  but  on  doing  so,  one  by
one,  I  was  greatly  relieved  to  find  only  one  was  broken,  but  judge  of  my  horror
to  find  that  that  one  was  Thompson's  !  I  muttered  something  (not  loud,  but
deep),  and  would  fain  have  relieved  my  feelings,  but  the  presence  of  ladies
restrained  me  (this  accident  being  witnessed  also  by  my  head-printer,  Miss  L.).
I  could  not  honestly  blame  Miss  S.  for  this — each  thought  the  other  was
holding  the  lot,  and  between  us  we  let  them  drop.  The  negative  was  broken
in  two,  right  across  the  forehead  of  figure.  I  put  the  pieces  carefully  away,
and,  taking  out  a  memo,  form,  wrote  to  Mr.  Thompson,  asking  him  to  kindly
give  another  sitting,  and  offering  to  recoup  him  for  his  trouble  and  loss  of  time  ;
this  letter  was  posted  five  minutes  after  the  negative  was  broken,  and  the  affair
was  forgotten  by  me  for  the  time.  However,  on  Friday,  the  Qth  of  January,  I
was  in  the  printing-room  upstairs  when  I  was  signalled  by  the  whistle  which
communicates  with  the  office,  and  Miss  S.  asked  if  I  could  go  down,  as  the
gentleman  had  called  about  the  negative.  I  asked  "  What  negative  ?  "  "  Well,"
she  replied,  "the  one  we  broke,  Mr.  Thompson's."  I  answered,  "  I  am  very
busy,  and  cannot  come  down,  but  you  know  the  terms  I  offered  him  ;  send  him
up  to  be  taken  at  once."  "  But  he  is  dead!  "  said  Miss  S.  "  Dead  ! "  I  ex-
claimed, and  without  another  word  I  hastened  down  the  stairs  to  my  office.
Here  I  saw  an  elderly  gentleman,  who  seemed  in  great  trouble.  "  Surely,"  said
I  to  him,  "you  don't  mean  to  say  that  this  man  is  dead?"  "  It  is  only  too
true,"  he  replied.  "  Well,  it  must  have  been  dreadfully  sudden,"  I  said  sympa-
thetically, "  because  I  saw  him  only  last  Saturday."  The  old  gentleman  shook
his  head  sadly,  and  said,  "You  are  mistaken,  for  he  died  last  Saturday."

"Nay,"  I  returned,  "  I  am  not  mistaken,  for  I  recognised  the  negative  by
him."  However,  the  father  (for  such  was  his  relationship  to  my  sitter)  per-
sisted in  saying  I  was  mistaken,  and  that  it  was  he  who  called  on  the  Friday  and
not  his  son,  and,  he  said,  "  I  saw  that  young  lady  (pointing  to  Miss  S.),  and  she
told  me  the  photographs  would  not  be  ready  that  week."  "  That  is  quite  right,"

665C]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  677

said  Miss  S.,  but  Mr.  D.  also  saw  a  gentleman  on  Saturday  morning,  and
when  I  showed  Mr.  D.  the  negative  he  said,  '  Yes,  that's  the  man  who  called.'
I  told  Mr.  D.  then  of  your  having  called  on  the  Friday."  Still  Mr.  Thompson
sen.  seemed  to  think  that  we  were  wrong,  and  the  many  questions  and  cross-
questions  I  put  to  him  only  served  to  confirm  him  in  his  opinion  that  I  had  got
mixed;  but  this  he  said:  No  one  was  authorised  to  call,  nor  had  they  any
friend  or  relative  who  would  know  of  portraits  being  ordered,  neither  was  there
any  one  likely  to  impersonate  the  man  who  had  sat  for  his  portrait.  I  had  no
further  interview  with  the  old  gentleman  until  a  week  later,  when  he  was  much
calmer  in  his  appearance  and  conversation,  and  at  this  interview  he  told  me
that  his  son  died  on  Saturday,  January  3rd,  at  about  2.30  P.M.;  he  also  stated
that  at  the  time  I  saw  him  (the  sitter)  he  was  unconscious,  and  remained  so  up
to  the  time  of  his  death.  I  have  not  had  any  explanation  of  this  mysterious
visit  up  to  present  date,  February  26th,  1891.

It  is  curious  to  me  that  I  have  no  recollection  of  hearing  the  man  come
upstairs,  or  of  him  going  down.  In  appearance  he  was  pale  and  careworn,  and
looked  as  though  he  had  been  very  ill.  This  thought  occurred  to  me  when  he
said  he  had  been  travelling  all  night.  (Signed)  JAMES  DICKINSON.

43  GRAINGER  STREET,  NEWCASTLE-ON-TYNE.

Miss  S.  signs  the  following  statement : —

I  am  the  Miss  S.  referred  to  in  the  foregoing  narrative.  I  have  read  Mr.
Dickinson's  statement  carefully,  and  I  can  testify  that  everything  in  it  referring
to  me  has  been  correctly  stated.  ETHEL  MAUD  SIMMON.

66  MALCOLM  STREET,  HEATON,  April  ist,  1891.

The  next  statement  was  written  by  Mr.  Nisbet  from  Mr.  Thompson
sen.'s  information,  and  with  a  little  alteration  and  addition  signed  by  him.

March  22tut,  1891.

At  the  beginning  of  December  1890,  my  son,  John  Thompson,  got  photo-
graphed by  Mr.  Dickinson,  of  Grainger  Street,  Newcastle-on-Tyne.  He  was
wishful  to  present  a  photograph  of  himself  to  each  of  his  chief  comrades  on
New  Year's  Day.  During  the  Christmas  week  he  took  typhoid  fever  and  was
very  ill.

On  Friday,  January  2nd,  1891,  I  went  to  Newcastle  to  purchase  certain
articles  for  him,  and  being  in  Newcastle  I  thought  I  would  kill  two  birds  with
one  stone,  so  I  called  at  Dickinson's  to  see  if  h'is  photos  were  ready.  I  called
chiefly  because  he  seemed  anxious  about  them — he  spoke  of  them  when  he  was
delirious.  I  saw  a  young  woman  at  Dickinson's  who  told  me  that  the  photos
were  not  ready.

On  Saturday,  January  3rd,  my  son  died  at  2.5  P.M.

On  Monday,  January  5th,  1891,  I  received  a  letter  addressed  to  my  son
asking  him  to  call  and  sit  again  for  his  photograph  as  the  negative  had  been
broken.  I  still  possess  this  letter  and  envelope J  (dated  January  5th,  1891).

On  Friday,  January  9th,  I  called  at  Mr.  Dickinson's,  when  he  explained
that  he  had  seen  my  son  in  his  place  on  the  previous  Saturday.  I  told  him  he
must  be  mistaken,  as  my  son  was  then  ill  in  bed,  but  I  told  him  that  7  had
called  on  the  Friday  about  the  photographs.  Mr.  Dickinson  persisted  in  I

i   Mr   Xisbcthasscenit.

678  APPENDICES  [666  A

he  had  seen  my  son  on  the  Saturday,  so  I  showed  him  the  "burial  lines  "  to
convince  him.

I  know  of  no  one  who  could  have  called  about  the  photos  on  the  Saturday,
nor  do  I  know  of  any  of  my  son's  friends  who  could  be  mistaken  for  him.  My
son  was  21  years  of  age,  and  was  studying  for  the  Primitive  Methodist  ministry.
There  was  always  strong  sympathy  between  me  and  my  son.  I  had  the  power
of  influencing  him  at  a  distance.  My  son  was  calm  and  steady,  not  easily
excited;  the  joy  of  the  household,  and  a  general  favourite  with  the  public.—
Yours  truly,  THOMPSON.

Mr.  Dickinson  informed  Mr.  Nisbet  that  he  was  perfectly  well  at  the
time  of  this  occurrence.  He  has  never  had  any  other  experience  at  all
resembling  this,  but  he  is  subject  to  nightmare  and  walking  in  his
sleep.

Mr.  Nisbet  learned  that  Mr.  Dickinson  was  not  quite  sure  whether
he  was  present  when  Mr.  Thompson  was  photographed ;  his  assistant  said
he  was,  but  Mr.  Dickinson  could  not  remember.  They  photographed
about  40  people  on  the  day  Mr.  Thompson  sat.  Mr.  Dickinson  was
quite  sure  that  Miss  S.  had  said  nothing  to  him  on  the  Friday  about
Mr.  Thompson,  senior,  calling,  and  Miss  S.  confirmed  this.

Professor  Sidgwick  was  introduced  to  Mr.  Dickinson  in  September
1891,  and  heard  his  story  vividly  and  fully  told  by  himself.  Extracts  only
from  his  notes  need  be  given  here.

D.  did  not  hear  T.  come  in,  but  being  busy  writing  was  not  surprised  at
this,  though  he  was  surprised  that  he  had  come  so  early.  .  .  .

T.  said  that  "  He  could  not  call  later,  he  had  been  travelling  all  night."  He
had  an  overcoat  on,  and  a  careworn  look — looked  ill.  The  thought  passed
through  D.'s  mind,  "Yes,  poor  man,  you  have  been  travelling  all  night,  and  you
are  going  home  to  die."  Meanwhile  T.  turned  and  went  out :  he  had  not  sat
down,  but  stood  all  the  time.  D.  ran  round  the  counter  towards  the  door  and
called  after  him,  "  Can  I  post  them  ?"  but  got  no  answer,  and  did  not  hear  the
visitor  go  down  or  out ;  this  he  would  ordinarily  have  done,  but  the  not  hearing
did  not  surprise  him.  He  thought  the  visitor  was  "  huffed,"  and  turned  to  copy
out  the  number  of  the  order  and  the  name  on  a  piece  of  paper,  on  which  he
wrote  the  word  "post."  (This  paper  Mr.  Nisbet  saw,  and  remembers  reading
the  number  and  name,  but  the  paper  seems  to  be  lost.)  All  this,  according  to
his  recollection,  with  perfect  wakefulness,  and  without  the  least  idea  or  feeling
of  anything  abnormal.

Careful  inquiries  (described  fully  in  the  account  in  the  Journal}  were
made  by  Mr.  Nisbet  to  ascertain  whether  it  could  have  been  possible  for
Mr.  Thompson,  junior,  to  have  actually  called  at  the  photographer's,  un-
known to  his  family,  or  whether  any  one  else  had  called  on  his  behalf ;
with  the  result  that  both  these  hypothetical  explanations  of  the  case
seemed  to  be  excluded.

666  A.  The  following  example  of  a  "  reciprocal "  case  (quoted  from
Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  162)13  from  the  Hon.  Mrs.  Parker,  of
60  Elm  Park  Gardens,  S.W.,  who  wrote  to  us  on  May  24th,  1883:—

666  A]  TO    CHAPTER     VI  679

The  following  experience  happened  in  the  month  of  November  1877,  in
Regency  Square,  Brighton.  My  husband  [since  deceased]  was  undergoing  a
course  of  magnetism  from  Mr.  L.,  an  American.  The  treatment  consisted  of
rubbing  by  mesmeric  passes  down  the  back  and  arms  and  legs,  but  in  all  this
there  was  no  intention  of  putting  my  husband  to  sleep.  The  passes  were
intended  to  give  strength.  Mr.  L.  called  himself,  I  believe,  a  professional
mesmerist,  but  at  the  time  we  employed  him  he  was  not  practising  as  such.
He  had  come  to  Brighton  for  rest.

After  the  treatment  my  husband  was  in  the  habit  of  sitting,  for  some  hours,
in  his  wheel-chair,  at  the  top  of  the  Square  garden,  and  on  the  day  of  which  I
am  writing  he  had  expressed  a  wish  to  stay  out  rather  later  than  usual.  I  went
into  the  house  for  luncheon,  leaving  him  alone,  but  on  looking  out  of  the
window  a  little  later,  at  two  o'clock,  I  saw  a  man  standing  in  front  of  his  chair,
and  apparently  talking  to  him.  I  wondered  who  it  was,  and  concluded  it  must
be  a  stranger,  as  I  did  not  recognise  the  figure,  or  the  wide-awake  hat  and
rather  oddly-cut  Inverness  cape  which  he  wore.  However,  as  it  very  often
happened  that  strangers  did  stop  and  speak  to  him,  I  was  not  surprised.  I
turned  away  my  eyes  for  a  moment,  and  when  I  again  looked  up  the  garden,
the  man  had  disappeared.  I  could  not  see  him  leaving  the  garden  by  any  of
the  numerous  gates,  and  remarked  to  myself  how  very  quickly  he  must  have
walked  to  be  so  soon  out  of  sight.  Regency  Square  does  not  possess  a  tree
and  scarcely  a  shrub,  so  that  there  was  nothing  to  impede  my  view.

When  my  husband  came  in  a  little  later,  I  said  to  him,  carelessly,  "  Oh,  who
was  that  talking  to  you  in  the  square  just  now  ?  "

He  replied, "  No  one  has  spoken  to  me  since  you  left.  No  one  has  even
passed  near  me."

"  But  I  saw  a  man  standing  in  front  of  you  and — as  I  thought — talking  to
you  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour  ago.  His  dress  was  so  odd,  I  couldn't  at  all
tell  who  it  could  be."

At  this  my  husband  laughed,  saying,  "  I  should  think  not,  for  there  was  no
one  to  recognise.  I  assure  you  not  a  soul  has  been  near  me  since  you  left."

"Have  you  been  asleep?"  I  asked,  though  I  did  not  think  it  very  likely.
He  assured  me  he  had  not.  So  the  subject  dropped ;  still  in  my  own  mind  I
knew  I  had  seen  the  mysterious  figure.

Two  days  afterwards,  Mr.  L.,  after  giving  my  husband  his  treatment,  came,
as  was  his  usual  habit,  to  speak  to  me  before  leaving  the  house.  After  a  few
words  and  directions,  he  said,  "It  is  a  very  odd  thing,  but  the  same  experience
has  happened  tome  twice  since  I  have  attended  your  husband,  that,  when  in
quite  another  place,  I  have  suddenly  felt  as  if  I  were  standing  by  his  side,  either
in  your  drawing-room  or  out  there  in  the  garden."

I  looked  at  him,  and  for  the  first  time  noticed  his  overcoat  which  he  had  put
on  before  coming  into  the  room,  and  the  wide-awake  in  his  hand.  It  struck
me  that  these  articles  were  very  similar  to  those  worn  by  the  figure  I  had  seen,
and  that  in  every  way  Mr.  L.  resembled  this  same  figure.  I  asked  him  when.
and  at  what  time,  he  had  had  the  last  experience  spoken  of?  "  The  day  before
yesterday,"  was  the  reply.  "  I  had  just  finished  an  early  dinner,  and  was
sitting  in  front  of  the  fire  with  a  newspaper.  It  was  about  two  o'clock;  I
remember  the  time  perfectly.  Suddenly  I  felt  I  was  no  longer  there,  but
standing  near  your  husband  in  the  Square  garden."

I  then  told  him  of  the  figure  I  had  seen  at  the  same  time  and  place,  and
how  I  now  recognised  it  to  be  his.  Afterwards  I  asked  my  husband  if  he  had

680  APPENDICES  [666  B

mentioned  the  circumstance  to  Mr.  L.,  but  he  had  not  done  so,  and  had  indeed
forgotten  all  about  it.  My  husband  was  the  only  person  to  whom  I  had
mentioned  the  fact  of  my  vision.  It  could  not  by  any  possibility  have  got
round  to  Mr.  L.  AUGUSTA  PARKER.

In  answer  to  the  inquiry  whether  she  had  ever  had  any  other  halluci-
nation of  the  senses,  Mrs.  Parker  replied  that  she  had  had  one  other.  It
seems  likely,  however,  that  this  was  merely  a  case  of  mistaken  identity,
the  figure  being  seen  at  the  end  of  a  long  hotel  passage ;  and  this  was  her
own  impression  at  the  time.

666  B.  The  next  case  (from  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  1 64)
was  one  of  collective  percipience.  The  full  names  of  the  persons  con-
cerned were  given  to  us,  but  not  allowed  to  be  printed.  Mrs.  S.,  one  of
the  percipients,  writes  : —

April  1883.

A  and  B  J  are  two  villages  in  Norfolk,  distant  about  five  miles  from  each
other.  At  the  time  of  the  occurrence  about  to  be  related,  the  clergymen  of
these  parishes  both  bore  the  same  name,  though  there  was  no  relationship
between  them ;  at  the  same  time  there  was  a  great  friendship  between  the  two
families.  On  the  2oth  February  1870  a  daughter,  Constance,  about  fourteen
years  old,  of  the  clergyman  of  A,  was  staying  with  the  other  family — a  daughter,
Margaret,  in  that  family,  being  her  great  friend.  Edward  W.,  the  eldest  son  of
the  Rector  of  A,  was4  at  that  time  lying  dangerously  ill  at  home  with  inflamma-
tion of  the  lungs,  and  was  frequently  delirious.  On  the  day  mentioned,  at
about  noon, Margaret  and  Constance  were  in  the  garden  of  B  Rectory,  running
down  a  path  which  was  separated  by  a  hedge  from  an  orchard  adjoining ;
they  distinctly  heard  themselves  called  twice,  apparently  from  the  orchard,
thus :  "  Connie,  Margaret — Connie,  Margaret."  They  stopped,  but  could  see
no  one,  and  so  went  to  the  house,  a  distance  of  about  forty  yards,  concluding
that  one  of  Margaret's  brothers  had  called  them  from  there.  But  to  their  sur-
prise they  found  that  this  was  not  the  case;  and  Mrs.  W.,  Margaret's  mother,
assured  the  girls  no  one  had  called  them  from  the  house,  and  they  therefore  con-
cluded they  must  have  been  mistaken  in  supposing  they  had  heard  their  names
repeated.  This  appeared  to  be  the  only  explanation  of  the  matter,  and  nothing
more  was  thought  of  it.

That  evening  Constance  returned  to  her  home  at  A.  On  the  following  day
Mrs.  W.  drove  over  to  inquire  for  the  sick  boy  Edward.  In  the  course  of  con-
versation, his  mother  said  that  the  day  before  he  had  been  delirious,  and  had
spoken  of  Constance  and  Margaret,  that  he  called  to  them  in  his  delirium,  and
had  then  said,  "Now  I  see  them  running  along  the  hedge,  but  directly  I  call
them  they  run  towards  the  house."  Mrs.  W.,  of  B,  at  once  called  to  mind  the
mystery  of  the  previous  day,  and  asked,  "  Do  you  know  at  what  time  that
happened  ?  "  Edward's  mother  replied  that  it  was  at  a  few  minutes  past  twelve,
for  she  had  just  given  the  invalid  his  medicine,  twelve  being  his  hour  for  taking
it.  So  these  words  were  spoken  by  Edward  at  the  same  time  at  which  the  two

i  The  letters  are  substituted  for  those  actually  given ,  for  the  sake  of  clearness.  The
names  of  the  villages  were  not  suppressed  in  the  accounts  that  follow;  but  as  they  were
suppressed  in  this  first  one,  it  has  been  thought  right  to  suppress  them  throughout.

666B]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  68 1

girls  had  heard  themselves  called,  and  thus  only  could   the  voice  from  the
orchard  be  accounted  for.  M.  K.  S.

(The  "  Margaret "  of  the  narrative.)

The  following  statement  is  from  Mrs.  R.,  the  "  Constance"  of  the
narrative.

Sept.  1884.

Margaret  and  I  were  walking  in  some  fields  at  B.,  away  from  the  road,  but
not  very  far  from  the  house.  Here  I  heard  a  voice  call  "  Connie  and  Margaret  "
clearly  and  distinctly.  I  should  not  have  identified  it  with  Ted's  voice  (i.e.  her
brother's  at  A),  for  we  thought  it  was  one  of  the  B  brothers  at  the  time,  till  we
found  no  one  had  called  us.  I  remember  that  it  was  before  early  dinner,  and
that  I  was  expecting  to  be  fetched  home  that  same  morning,  because  of  Ted's
illness ;  and  that  Mrs.  W.  thought  of  asking  mother  if  Ted  had  mentioned  our
names  in  any  way,  before  she  told  her  of  what  had  passed  at  B.  I  ought  to  add
that  an  explanation  of  the  story  might  be  found  in  the  conduct  of  some  B
plough-boy,  playing  a  trick  upon  us.  The  situation  was  such  that  he  might
easily  have  kept  out  of  sight  behind  a  hedge.  C.  E.  R.

Mr.  Podmore  says  : —

November  26tA,  1883.

I  saw  Mrs.  R.  yesterday.  She  told  me  that  they  recognised  the  voice
vaguely  as  a  well-known  one  at  the  time.  She  thinks  that  the  coincidence  in
time  was  quite  exact,  because  Mrs.  W.  of  B  made  a  note  of  the  circumstance
immediately.  Her  brother — an  old  school-fellow  of  mine — cannot  recollect  the
incident  at  all.

If  a  written  note  was  made,  the  girls'  experience  must  have  seemed
odder  than  the  "  nothing  more  was  thought  of  it "  in  Mrs.  S.'s  account
would  imply.  Mrs.  W.  of  A  says  : —

My  son  was  about  seventeen  years  old.  He  had  had  fever  and  inflamma-
tion, and  was  weakened  by  illness.  It  was  about  twelve  o'clock.  I  was
sitting  with  him,  after  his  washing  and  dressing,  and  he  seemed  quiet  and
sleepy,  but  not  asleep.  He  suddenly  sprang  forward,  pointed  his  finger,  with
arms  outstretched,  and  called  out  in  a  voice  the  loudness  of  which  astonished
me,  "  Connie  and  Margaret !  "  with  a  stress  on  each  name,  '•  near  the  hedge,"
looked  wildly  at  them,  and  then  sank  down,  tired.  I  thought  it  odd  at  the  time,
but,  considering  it  a  sort  of  dream,  did  not  allude  to  it.  The  next  day,  Mrs.  W.
called  with  Connie  and  Margaret,  and  said  the  girls  had  heard  their  names
called  ;  had  run  home;  were  walking  by  a  hedge  in  their  field,  had  found  no
one  had  called  them  from  B  Rectory.  The  voice  sounded  familiar,  but  as  far
as  I  can  remember — my  daughter  will  say — it  was  not  distinctly  thought  to  be
Edward's.  I  at  once  told  my  story,  as  it  was  too  striking  not  to  be  named.

They  said  it  was  about  twelve  o'clock.  Though  he  was  constantly  delirious  in
the  evening,  when  the  pulse  rose,  he  was  never  so  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  and
there  was  no  appearance  of  his  being  so  at  the  time  this  occurred.

M.  A.  W.

Mrs.  W.  of  B  says:  —

August  1884.

Connie  was  staying  with  us  on  account  of  the  illness  of  her  brother  Edward,
and  had— with  Margaret— been  reading  with  me  one  morning.  At  about  11.30

682  APPENDICES  [666  C

they  went  into  the  garden  to  play  (they  were  girls  of  about  thirteen  and
fourteen),  and  in  half-an-hour  came  up  to  the  window  to  know  what  I  wanted.
I  said  "  Nothing,"  and  that  I  had  not  called  them,  though  they  had  heard  both
their  names  called  repeatedly.  I  asked  them  where  they  were  when  they  heard
it,  and  they  said  in  the  next  walk — which,  you  will  remember,  is  formed  on  one
side  by  the  orchard  hedge.  Margaret  said  directly,  "  There,  Connie ;  I  said  it
was  not  mother's,  but  a  boy's  voice."  Then  I  turned  to  look  at  the  clock — for
we  had  some  boys  as  pupils  then — and  I  said,  "It  would  not  be  one  of  the
boys,  for  they  are  not  out  of  the  study ;  it  is  now  twelve  o'clock,  and  I  hear
them  coming  out."

I  was  to  take  Connie  home  that  afternoon,1  and,  on  arriving,  of  course  my
first  question  was  "  How  was  Edward?"  Mrs.  W.  told  me  that  he  had  not
been  so  well,  and  had  been  very  delirious.  She  said  that  morning  he  had  been
calling,  " Margaret /  Connie!  Margaret !  Connie!  Oh,  they  are  running  by  a
hedge,  and  won't  listen  to  me"  I  did  not  say  what  had  happened  at  home,  but
asked  if  she  knew  at  what  time  this  had  so  distressed  him.  She  said  "  Yes  ;  "  for
she  had  looked  at  the  clock,  hoping  it  was  nearly  time  to  give  him  his  medicine,
which  always  quieted  him,  and  was  thankful  to  find  it  was  just  twelve  o'clock.

666  C.  The  following  case  is  taken  from  Mrs.  Sidgwick's  paper,
"On  the  Evidence  for  Clairvoyance,"  in  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.
p.  41.  The  case  was  sent  to  us  by  Mr.  W.  B.  H.,  who  writes  : —

BRIDGEPORT,  CT.,  December  i8tA,
.  .  .  The  incidents  were  related  to  me  by  Mr.  S.  R.  Wilmot,  a  manufacturer
of  this  city,  several  years  ago,  and  I  wrote  them  down  from  memory,  and  he
afterwards  revised  the  manuscript.  Mr.  Wilmot  and  his  wife  and  sister  are
still  living  here,  and  would,  no  doubt,  be  happy  to  answer  any  questions  about
the  matter.  He  does  not  know  that  I  have  had  his  narrative  compared  with
a  file  of  the  New  York  Herald,  as  per  memorandum  appended.  It  seems  to
stand  the  test  pretty  well,  however.

If  published,  please  do  not  give  my  name,  as  I  have  simply  acted  as  scribe,
and  have  no  personal  knowledge  about  the  incidents.  W.  B.  H.

The  manuscript  account,  in  which  Mr.  Wilmot's  corrections  are  em-
bodied, was  as  follows  : —

On  October  3rd,  1863,  I  sailed  from  Liverpool  for  New  York,  on  the
steamer  City  of  Limerick,  of  the  Inman  line,  Captain  Jones  commanding.  On
the  evening  of  the  second  day  out,  soon  after  leaving  Kinsale  Head,  a  severe
storm  began,  which  lasted  for  nine  days.  During  this  time  we  saw  neither
sun  nor  stars  nor  any  vessel ;  the  bulwarks  on  the  weather  bow  were  carried
away,  one  of  the  anchors  broke  loose  from  its  lashings,  and  did  considerable
damage  before  it  could  be  secured,  and  several  stout  storm  sails,  though
closely  reefed,  were  carried  away,  and  the  booms  broken.

Upon  the  night  following  the  eighth  day  of  the  storm  the  tempest  moderated
a  little,  and  for  the  first  time  since  leaving  port  I  enjoyed  refreshing  sleep.
Toward  morning  I  dreamed  that  I  saw  my  wife,  whom  I  had  left  in  the
United  States,  come  to  the  door  of  my  state-room,  clad  in  her  night-dress.

1  The  other  accounts  make  it  probable  that  it  was  not  till  next  day  that  Mrs.  W.  of
B  went  to  A.

666  C]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  683

At  the  door  she  seemed  to  discover  that  I  was  not  the  only  occupant  of  the
room,  hesitated  a  little,  then  advanced  to  my  side,  stooped  down  and  kissed
me,  and  after  gently  caressing  me  for  a  few  moments,  quietly  withdrew.

Upon  waking  I  was  surprised  to  see  my  fellow-passenger,  whose  berth  was
above  mine,  but  not  directly  over  it— owing  to  the  fact  that  our  room  was  at
the  stern  of  the  vessel— leaning  upon  his  elbow,  and  looking  fixedly  at  me.
41  You  're  a  pretty  fellow,"  said  he  at  length,  "  to  have  a  lady  come  and  visit
you  in  this  way."  I  pressed  him  for  an  explanation,  which  he  at  first  declined
to  give,  but  at  length  related  what  he  had  seen  while  wide  awake,  lying  in  his
berth.  It  exactly  corresponded  with  my  dream.

This  gentleman's  name  was  William  J.  Tait,  and  he  had  been  my  room-
mate in  the  passage  out,  in  the  preceding  July,  on  the  Cunard  steamer
Olympus ;  a  native  of  England,  and  son  of  a  clergyman  of  the  Established
Church.  He  had  for  a  number  of  years  lived  in  Cleveland,  in  the  State  of
Ohio,  where  he  held  the  position  of  librarian  of  the  Associated  Library.  He
was  at  this  time  perhaps  fifty  years  of  age,  by  no  means  in  the  habit  of
practical  joking,  but  a  sedate  and  very  religious  man,  whose  testimony  upon
any  subject  could  be  taken  unhesitatingly.

The  incident  seemed  so  strange  to  me  that  I  questioned  him  about  it,  and
upon  three  separate  occasions,  the  last  one  shortly  before  reaching  port,
Mr.  Tait  repeated  to  me  the  same  account  of  what  he  had  witnessed.  On
reaching  New  York  we  parted,  and  I  never  saw  him  afterward,  but  I  under-
stand that  he  died  a  number  of  years  ago  in  Cleveland.

The  day  after  landing  I  went  by  rail  to  Watertown,  Conn.,  where  my
children  and  my  wife  had  been  for  some  time,  visiting  her  parents.  Almost
her  first  question  when  we  were  alone  together  was,  "  Did  you  receive  a
visit  from  me  a  week  ago  Tuesday  ?"  "  A  visit  from  you  ?  "  said  I,  "  we  were
more  than  a  thousand  miles  at  sea."  "  I  know  it,"  she  replied,  "  but  it  seemed
to  me  that  I  visited  you."  "  It  would  be  impossible,"  said  I.  "  Tell  me  what
makes  you  think  so."

My  wife  then  told  me  that  on  account  of  the  severity  of  the  weather
and  the  reported  loss  of  the  Africa,  which  sailed  for  Boston  on  the  same  day
that  we  left  Liverpool  for  New  York,  and  had  gone  ashore  at  Cape  Race,
she  had  been  extremely  anxious  about  me.  On  the  night  previous,  the  same
night  when,  as  mentioned  above,  the  storm  had  just  begun  to  abate,  she  had
lain  awake  for  a  long  time  thinking  of  me,  and  about  four  o'clock  in  the
morning  it  seemed  to  her  that  she  went  out  to  seek  me.  Crossing  the  wide
and  stormy  sea,  she  came  at  length  to  a  low,  black  steamship,  whose  side  she
went  up,  and  then  descending  into  the  cabin,  passed  through  it  to  the  stern
until  she  came  to  my  state-room.  "Tell  me,"  said  she,  "do  they  ever  have
:  <>oms  like  the  one  I  saw,  where  the  upper  berth  extends  further  back
than  the  under  one  ?  A  man  was  in  the  upper  berth,  looking  right  at  me,
and  for  a  moment  I  was  afraid  to  go  in,  but  soon  I  went  up  to  the  side
of  your  berth,  bent  down  and  kissed  you,  and  embraced  you,  and  then
went  away."

The  description  given  by  my  wife  of  the  steamship  was  correct  in  all
particulars,  though  she  had  never  seen  it.  I  find  by  my  sister's  diary  that  we
sailed  October  4th  ;  the  day  we  reached  New  York,  22nd  ;  home,  23rd.

With  the  above  corrections  I  can  very  willingly  subscribe  my  name.

S.  R.  WILMOT.

684  APPENDICES  [666  C

Mr.  W.  B.  H.  adds  :—

The  files  of  the  Herald  show  that  the  City  of  Limerick  left  Liverpool
October  3rd,  1863,  Queenstown  October  5th,  and  arrived  at  New  York  early
on  the  morning  of  the  22nd  of  October,  1863.  Herald,  October  I4th,  1863,
says : —

"  Steamer  Africa  from  Queenstown  on  the  4th  inst.  put  into  St.  John's
N.F.,  yesterday  afternoon,  on  her  voyage  to  Boston  by  way  of  Halifax.  The
Africa  struck  on  the  rocks  near  Cape  Race  at  ten  o'clock  last  Monday  night
(October  I2th)  during  a  dense  fog.  She  was  put  about  before  she  struck,
but  took  ground,  fore,  aft,  and  amidships.  There  was  considerable  sea
running,  with  a  southerly  wind  at  the  time.  The  steamer's  boats  were  got
ready,  but  not  launched.  The  Africa  floated  off  after  an  hour,  and  was
speedily  cleared  of  water  by  her  pumps.  Captain  Stone  then  headed  her  for
Halifax,  but  soon  deemed  it  prudent  to  put  into  St.  John's,  Newfoundland.
Both  cargo  and  vessel  were  badly  damaged.  When  our  last  despatch  was
forwarded  from  St.  John's,  the  Africa  was  making  a  large  quantity  of  water."

Found  no  report  of  severe  storm.  A.  H.

July  1889.

In  answer  to  inquiries  Mr.  Wilmot  writes  to  Mr.  Hodgson  : —

BRIDGEPORT,  February  2$tA,  1890.

As  to  whether  I  and  my  wife  have  ever  had  any  analogous  experiences,
will  say  for  myself,  Yes,  dreams  revealing  subsequent  events,  but  nothing  of
such  a  joint  nature.

I  only  spoke  of  my  dream  and  Mr.  Tait's  experience  to  my  sister  (who
was  with  me  then,  and  is  now),  as  I  could  not  quite  divest  myself  of  the
.thought  that  Mr.  T.  might  have  invented  his  part  from  witnessing  something
unusual  in  me  while  asleep,  therefore  my  questions  to  him  when  about  to
disembark  at  N.Y.  I  do  not  think  it  likely  that  Mr.  Tait  mentioned  to
others  on  board  ship,  or  if  he  had,  that  it  could  now  be  ascertained.  I  did
not  mention  these  things  to  any  but  my  sister  till  after  reaching  home  and
learning  what  I  did  from  my  wife.  That  astonished  me ;  it  almost  took  my
breath  away.  S.  R.  WILMOT.

Miss  Wilmot  writes  : —

In  regard  to  my  brother's  strange  experience  on  our  homeward  voyage  in
the  Limerick,  I  remember  Mr.  Tait's  asking  me,  one  morning  (when  assist-
ing me  to  the  breakfast  table,  for  the  cyclone  was  raging  fearfully),  if  I  had
been  in  last  night  to  see  my  brother;  and  my  astonishment  at  the  question,
as  he  shared  the  same  state-room.  At  my  " No,  why?"  he  said  he  saw  some
woman,  in  white,  who  went  up  to  my  brother  (who  was  too  seasick  to  leave
his  berth  for  several  days).  I  soon  went  in  to  see  [my  brother],  who  told
me  that  Mr.  Tait  had  wondered  at  my  coming  in  to  see  him,  and  I  think  he
said  he  had  dreamed  of  seeing  his  wife  there,  but  in  the  imminent  danger
that  loomed  over  us,  I  did  not  fix  my  mind  on  their  after  conversations.

I  think  my  brother  must  have  written  to  Mr.  Tait  the  share  my  sister
had  in  the  vision— shall  I  call  it?  When  visiting  at  the  Taits' in  Cleveland,
two  or  three  years  after,  he  spoke  of  the  wonderful  coincidence.  It  evidently
impressed  him.  If  he  were  still  living,  I  would  refer  you  to  to  him.

ELIZA  E.  WILMOT.

667  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  685

Mrs.  Wilraot  says  : —

BRIDGEPORT,  CONN.,  February  2;M,  1890.

...  In  reply  to  the  question,  Did  I  "  notice  any  details  about  the  man  I
saw  in  the  upper  berth  ? "  I  cannot  at  this  late  day  positively  say  that  I  did,
but  I  distinctly  remember  that  I  felt  much  disturbed  at  his  presence,  as  he
leaned  over,  looking  at  us.

I  think  that  I  told  my  mother  the  next  morning  about  my  dream ;  and
I  know  that  I  had  a  very  vivid  sense  all  the  day  of  having  visited  my  hus-
band :  the  impression  was  so  strong  that  I  felt  unusually  happy  and  refreshed,
to  my  surprise.  .  .  .  [Signed]  Mrs.  S.  R.  WILMOT.

In  commenting  on  this  case,  Mrs.  Sidgwick  observes  : —

This  case  differs  from  those  that  precede  it.  In  them  the  clairvoyant
person  was  apparently  a  passive  recipient  of  the  telepathic  impulse
from  the  agent  which  led  to  the  clairvoyant  perception.  But  here
Mrs.  Wilmot  seems,  as  it  were,  to  have  actively  sought  communication
with  her  husband.  I  should  still  hold  with  Mr.  Gurney  that  this  is  no
reason  for  regarding  the  incident  as  other  than  telepathic,  for  there  is  as
little  ground  for  supposing  that  Mrs.  Wilmot  could  have  perceived  psychically
any  cabin  as  there  is  for  thinking  that  Mrs.  Paquet  [see  663]  could  have  had
a  vision  of  any  death  scene.  In  other  words,  it  is  probable  that  the  presence
of  the  husband  and  brother  respectively  were  essential  conditions  of  the
percipience,  which,  therefore,  depended  on  some  unknown  process  of  com-
munication from  mind  to  mind.  The  fact  that  Mr.  Wilmot  at  the  same
time  dreamt  of  his  wife  seems  to  me,  if  anything,  to  strengthen  the  telepathic
hypothesis,  because  it  shows  that  there  was  actually  a  community  of  mental
impressions.

But  it  may  be  said  that  it  is  more  difficult  thus  to  account  for  Mr.  Tait's
seeing  a  figure  at  the  same  time  as  Mr.  Wilmot,  and  that  this  at  least  tends
to  show  that  Mrs.  Wilmot  was  actually  there  in  some  sense  other  than  a
purely  mental  one.  The  question  here  raised  is  the  difficult  one  of  the
significance  of  collective  psychical  experiences.  .  .  .  Briefly,  .  .  .  besides  the
possibility  of  a  direct  telepathic  communication  between  the  primary  agent
and  both  percipients,  there  are  two  hypotheses  to  account  for  collective
hallucinations, — assuming  of  course  that  they  are  not  due  to  suggestion  by
word  or  gesture.  One  is  that  there  is  some  kind  of  objective  presence,  some
centre  of  "  phantasmogenetic  efficacy,"  located  in  space  and  within  range  of
the  operation  of  the  percipient's  senses.  The  other  is  that  the  primary  per-
cipient, B,  whether  his  own  impression  is  due  to  telepathy  or  is  purely  sub-
jective, becomes  an  agent  as  regards  the  secondary  percipient  C,  who  receives
his  impression  by  thought-transference  from  or  through  B.

It  is  this  second  view  which  I  agree  with  Mr.  Gurney  in  thinking  the
most  probable.  .  .  .

667  A.     From  Phantasms  of  th  vol.  i.  p.  527.     The  next

account  was  from  a  lady  known  to  Mr.  Curacy,  whose  only  reason  for
withholding  her  name  and  address  was  her  fear  that  a  near  relation  might
object  to  their  publication.

686  APPENDICES  [667  A

December  ijt/i,  1883.

Years  ago,  a  friend  and  myself  made  the  time-worn  arrangement  that  which-
ever died  first  would  endeavour  to  return  to  visit  the  other.  Some  years  after,
I  asked  this  man's  sister  to  remember  me  to  him  and  say,  did  he  remember  his
promise,  and  having  received  for  answer  "  Perfectly,  and  I  hope  I  shall  appear

to ,  and  not  she  to  me,"  the  whole  matter  passed  out  of  my  mind.  My

friend  was  in  New  Zealand,  his  sister  I  don't  know  where.  One  night  I  awoke
with  a  feeling  some  one  was  in  the  room.  I  must  tell  you  that  I  always  have  a
bright  light  burning  on  a  table,  not  far  from  my  bed.  I  looked  about,  and  pre-
sently saw  something  behind  the  little  table ;  felt  myself  grow  perfectly  cold ;
was  not  in  the  least  frightened,  rubbed  my  eyes  to  be  sure  I  was  quite  awake,
and  looked  at  it  steadfastly.  Gradually  a  man's  head  and  shoulders  were  per-
fectly formed,  but  in  a  sort  of  misty  material,  if  I  may  use  such  a  word.  The
head  and  features  were  distinct,  but  the  whole  appearance  was  not  substantial
and  plain;  in  fact  it  was  like  a  cloud,  formed  as  a  man's  head  and  shoulders.
At  first  I  gazed  and  thought,  who  is  it,  some  one  must  be  here,  but  who  ?  Then
the  formation  of  the  head  and  forehead  (which  are  most  marked  in  my  friend)
made  me  exclaim  to  myself  "  Captain  W ."  The  appearance  faded  away.

I  got  up  and  put  the  date  down ;  and  waited  until  news  from  New  Zealand
was  possible.  I  made  inquiries  about  my  friend,  never  doubting  but  that  he
was  dead.  The  answer  always  came  "  No  news."  At  last  this  also,  "  We  are
so  anxious,  it  is  so  long  since  w6  have  heard.  We  shall  again  wait  another
mail,  and  write  to  so-and-so."  And  then  came  the  news,  a  mere  scrap,  "Have
had  a  severe  fall  off  the  coach  ;  can't  write ;  head  all  wrong  still."  That  was
all,  and  pretty  much  the  exact  words  as  far  as  I  can  remember.  In  due  time
we  heard  more.  He  had  fallen  off  the  coach,  and  was  insensible  for  some  time,
and  then,  as  he  had  said,  his  head  was  not  clear  for  a  while.  I  have  never  had
the  slightest  doubt  but  that,  while  insensible,  his  spirit  came  here.  The  appear-
ance to  me  was  coincident  with  the  time  of  his  insensibility.  I  have  never  had
but  this  one  experience  of  an  apparition.  E.  W.  R.

In  a  subsequent  letter,  Miss  R.  adds : —

January  1st,  1884.

I  put  the  date  down  in  a  book  I  use  daily :  there  is  a  page  for  every  day  in
the  month.  I  mentioned  it  to  several  people — quite  three  or  four.  One  was
extremely  amused  because  my  friend  had  not  died  ;  which  she  always  used  to
assure  me  was — she  was  sure — a  cause  of  sincere  regret  to  me.

"  The  present  writer  (says  Gurney)  has  seen  the  book,  which  is  one  con-
taining reading  for  every  day  of  the  month.  The  words  written  in  pencil,
on  the  page  of  the  i5th  day,  are  :  '  Night  of  this  day,  March,  '74.  "

The  following  corroborative  note  was  obtained  from  Miss  R.'s
sister : —

DlTCHINGHAM,  May  1st,  1884.

As  far  as  I  can  remember,  my  sister  told  me  of  her  vision  soon  after  it
occurred,  and  before  the  news  of  her  friend's  accident  arrived.  It  is  so  many
years  ago  that  I  cannot  speak  more  positively.  MOTHER  C.

In  conversation,  Miss  R.  especially,  and  unasked,  confirmed  the  fact
that  the  feeling  of  a  presence  in  the  room  preceded  the  vision.  She
described  the  formation  of  the  figure  as  like  a  cloud  taking  a  definite  shape.

667  B]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  687

She  further  said  that  the  hair  of  the  head  which  appeared  was  distinctly
grey,  and  that  this  was  the  chief  reason  why  she  did  not  sooner  recognise  the
face.  Her  friend  \w&black  hair  when  she  last  saw  him,  and  she  had  never
thought  of  him  otherwise ;  but  she  found  out  afterwards  that  he  had  be-
come grey,  and  was  so  at  the  time  of  his  accident.  She  also  stated  that
she  had  ascertained  beyond  a  doubt  that  her  vision  fell  during  the  period
of  her  friend's  insensibility.

See  also  another  "compact"  case  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.
P-  253-

667  B.  From  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  ii.  p.  227.  The  next
account  is  from  Commander  T.  W.  Aylesbury  (late  of  the  Indian  Navy),
of  Sutton,  Surrey.  The  case,  at  first  sight,  (says  Gurney)  may  seem  as
if  it  belonged  to  the  reciprocal  class ;  but  Commander  Aylesbury's  vision
did  not  include  enough  detail  to  justify  us  in  regarding  it  as  other  than
subjective,  the  scene  being  apparently  such  as  he  might  naturally  have
conjured  up.

Dectmber  1882.

The  writer,  when  thirteen  years  of  age,  was  capsized  in  a  boat,  when  landing
on  the  island  of  Bally,  east  of  Java,  and  was  nearly  drowned.  On  coming  to
the  surface,  after  being  repeatedly  submerged,  the  boy  called  his  mother.  This
amused  the  boat's  crew,  who  spoke  of  it  afterwards,  and  jeered  him  a  good  deal
about  it.  Months  after,  on  arrival  in  England,  the  boy  went  to  his  home,  and
while  telling  his  mother  of  his  narrow  escape,  he  said,  "  While  I  was  under
water,  I  saw  you  all  sitting  in  this  room ;  you  were  working  something  white.
I  saw  you  all — mother,  Emily,  Eliza,  and  Ellen."  His  mother  at  once  said,
"  Why,  yes,  and  I  heard  you  cry  out  for  me,  and  I  sent  Emily  to  look  out  of  the
window,  for  I  remarked  that  something  had  happened  to  that  poor  boy."  The
time,  owing  to  the  difference  of  E.  longitude,  corresponded  with  the  time  when
the  voice  was  heard.

Commander  Aylesbury  adds  : —

I  saw  their  features  (my  mother's  and  sisters'),  the  room  and  the  furniture,
particularly  the  old-fashioned  Venetian  blinds.  My  eldest  sister  was  seated
next  to  my  mother.

I  think  the  time  must  have  been  very  early  in  the  morning.  I  remember  a
boat  capsized  the  day  before,  and  washed  up.  The  mate  said  we  would  go  and
brini;  her  off  in  the  morning,  but  the  exact  time  I  cannot  remember.  It  was  a
terrible  position,  and  the  surf  was  awful.  We  were  knocked  end  over  end,  and
the  most  narrow  escape  I  ever  had — and  I  have  had  many ;  but  this  one
was  so  impressed  on  my  mind  with  the  circumstances — the  remarks  and  jeers
of  the  men, — "  Boy,  what  was  you  calling  for  your  mother  for?  Do  you  think
she  could  pull  you  out  of  Davy  Jones's  locker,"  &c.,  with  other  language  I
cannot  use.

The  following  is  an  extract  from  a  letter  written  to  Commander  Ayles-
bury by  one  of  his  sisters,  and  forwarded  to  us,  in  1883  : —

I  distinctly  remember  the  incident  you  mention  in  your  letter  (the  voice
calling  "  Mother  ")  :  it  made  such  an  impression  on  my  mind,  I  shall  never

688  APPENDICES  [668  A

forget  it.  We  were  sitting  quietly  at  work  one  evening ;  it  was  about  nine
o'clock.  I  think  it  must  have  been  late  in  the  summer  as  we  had  left  the  street
door  open.  We  first  heard  a  faint  cry  of  "  Mother  "  ;  we  all  looked  up,  and  said
to  one  another,  "  Did  you  hear  that  ?  Some  one  cried  out  *  Mother.' "  We  had
scarcely  finished  speaking,  when  the  voice  again  called,  "  Mother,"  twice  in
quick  succession,  the  last  cry  a  frightened,  agonising  cry.  We  all  started  up,
and  mother  said  to  me,  "  Go  to  the  door  and  see  what  is  the  matter."  I  ran
directly  into  the  street  and  stood  some  few  minutes,  but  all  was  silent  and  not  a
person  to  be  seen ;  it  was  a  lovely  evening,  not  a  breath  of  air.  Mother  was
sadly  upset  about  it.  I  remember  she  paced  the  room,  and  feared  that  some-
thing had  happened  to  you.  She  wrote  down  the  date  the  next  day,  and  when
you  came  home  and  told  us  how  near  you  had  been  drowned,  and  the  time
of  day,  father  said  it  would  be  about  the  time  nine  o'clock  would  be  with  us.  I
know  the  date  and  the  time  corresponded.

The  difference  of  time  at  the  two  places  is  a  little  more  than  seven
hours ;  consequently  nine  in  the  evening  in  England  would  correspond
with  "very  early  in  the  morning"  of  the  next  day  at  the  scene  of  the
accident.  But  the  incident  happened  too  long  ago  for  memory  to  be
trusted  as  to  the  exactitude  of  the  coincidence.

668  A.  From  the  Rev.  Clarence  Godfrey.  This  case  first  ap-
peared in  the  second  edition  of  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.  p.  Ixxxi.,
having  been  sent  to  Mr.  Podmore  by  the  experimenter,  a  friend  of  his.  I
quote  the  somewhat  briefer  account  given  in  Mr.  Podmore's  Apparitions
and  Thought-transference^  pp.  228-230.  Mr.  Godfrey  wrote  to  Mr.  Pod-
more  on  November  i6th,  1886,  as  follows  : —

I  was  so  impressed  by  the  account  on  p.  105  [of  Phantasms  of  the  Living},
that  I  determined  to  put  the  matter  to  an  experiment.

Retiring  at  10.45  (on  the  I5th  November  1886),  I  determined  to  appear,  if
possible,  to  a  friend,  and  accordingly  I  set  myself  to  work  with  all  the  volitional
and  determinative  energy  which  I  possess,  to  stand  at  the  foot  of  her  bed.  I
need  not  say  that  I  never  dropped  the  slightest  hint  beforehand  as  to  my  inten-
tion, such  as  could  mar  the  experiment,  nor  had  I  mentioned  the  subject  to  her.
As  the  "  agent "  I  may  describe  my  own  experiences.

Undoubtedly  the  imaginative  faculty  was*  brought  extensively  into  play,
as  well  as  the  volitional,  for  I  endeavoured  to  translate  myself,  spiritually,  into
her  room,  and  to  attract  her  attention,  as  it  were,  while  standing  there.  My
effort  was  sustained  for  perhaps^eight  minutes,  after  which  I  felt  tired  and  was
soon  asleep.

The  next  thing  I  was  conscious  of  was  meeting  the  lady  next  morning
(i.e.  in  a  dream,  I  suppose  ?)  and  asking  her  at  once  if  she  had  seen  me  last
night.  The  reply  came,  "  Yes."  "  How  ?  "  I  inquired.  Then  in  words  strangely
clear  and  low,  like  a  well-audible  whisper,  came  the  answer,  "  I  was  sitting  be-
side you."  These  words,  so  clear,  awoke  me  instantly,  and  I  felt  I  must  have
been  dreaming;  but  on  reflection  I  remembered  what  I  had  been  "willing"
before  I  fell  asleep,  and  it  struck  me,  •*  This  must  be  a  reflex  action  from  the
percipient."  My  watch  showed  3.40  A.M.  The  following  is  what  I  wrote
immediately  in  pencil,  standing  in  my  night-dress :  "  As  I  reflected  upon  those
clear  words,  they  struck  me  as  being  quite  intuitive  I  mean  subjective,  and  to

668  A]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  689

have  proceeded  from  within,  as  my  (nun  conviction,  rather  than  a  communica-
tion from  any  one  else.  And  yet  I  can't  remember  her  face  at  all,  as  one  can
after  a  vivid  dream."

But  the  words  were  uttered  in  a  clear,  quick  tone,  which  was  most  remark-
able, and  awoke  me  at  once.

My  friend,  in  the  note  with  which  she  sent  me  the  enclosed  account  of  her
own  experience,  says :  "  I  remember  the  man  put  all  the  lamps  out  soon  after
I  came  upstairs,  and  that  is  only  done  about  a  quarter  to  four."

Mr.  Godfrey  received  from  the  percipient  on  the  i6th  November  an
account  of  her  side  of  the  experience,  and  at  his  request  she  wrote  it
down  as  follows  : —

Yesterday— viz.,  the  morning  of  November  i6th,  1886— about  half -past
three  o'clock,  I  woke  up  with  a  start  and  an  idea  that  some  one  had  come  into
the  room.  I  heard  a  curious  sound,  but  fancied  it  might  be  the  birds  in  the  ivy
outside.  Next  I  experienced  a  strange,  restless  longing  to  leave  the  room  and
go  downstairs.  This  feeling  became  so  overpowering  that  at  last  I  rose  and  lit
a  candle,  and  went  down,  thinking  if  I  could  get  some  soda-water  it  might  have
a  quieting  effect.  On  returning  to  my  room  I  saw  Mr.  Godfrey  standing  under
the  large  window  on  the  staircase.  He  was  dressed  in  his  usual  style,  and  with
an  expression  on  his  face  that  I  have  noticed  when  he  has  been  looking  very
earnestly  at  anything.  He  stood  there,  and  I  held  up  the  candle  and  gazed  at
him  for  three  or  four  seconds  in  utter  amazement,  and  then,  as  I  passed  up  the
staircase,  he  disappeared.  The  impression  left  on  my  mind  was  so  vivid  that  I
fully  intended  waking  a  friend  who  occupied  the  same  room  as  myself,  but
remembering  that  I  should  only  be  laughed  at  as  romantic  and  imaginative,
refrained  from  doing  so.

I  was  not  frightened  at  the  appearance  of  Mr.  Godfrey,  but  felt  much
excited,  and  could  not  sleep  afterwards.

On  the  2ist  of  the  same  month  (says  Mr.  Podmore)  I  heard  a  full  account
of  the  incident  given  above  from  Mr.  Godfrey,  and  on  the  day  following  from

Mrs.  .  Mrs.  told  me  that  the  figure  appeared  quite  distinct  and

life-like  at  first,  though  she  could  not  remember  to  have  noticed  more  than  the
upper  part  of  the  body.  As  she  looked  it  grew  more  and  more  shadowy,  and

finally  faded  away.  Mrs.  ,  it  should  be  added,  told  me  that  she  had

previously  seen  two  phantasmal  figures,  representing  a  parent  whom  she  had
recently  lost.1

Mr.  Godfrey  at  our  request  made  two  other  trials,  without,  of  course,  letting
Mrs  — —  know  his  intention.  The  first  of  these  attempts  was  without  result,
owing  perhaps  to  the  date  chosen,  as  he  was  aware  at  the  time,  being  unsuit-
able. But  a  trial  made  on  the  7th  December  1886  succeeded  completely.

,  writing  on  December  8th,  states  that  she  was  awakened  by  hearing  .1

voice  cry,  "  Wake,"  and  by  feeling  a  hand  rest  on  the  left  side  of  her  head.  She
then  saw  stooping  over  her  a  figure  which  she  recognised  as  Mr.  Godfrey's.

In  this  last  case  the  dress  of  the  figure  does  not  seem  to  have  been  seen
distinctly.  But  in  the  apparition  of  the  i6th  November,  it  will  be  observed
that  the  dress  was  that  ordinarily  worn  in  the  day-time  by  Mr.  Godfrey,  and

1  These  details  are  taken  from  notes  made  by  the  writer  immediately  after  the
interview.

VOL.   i  2  X

690  APPENDICES  [668  B

that  in  which  the  percipient  would  be  accustomed  to  see  him,  not  the  dress
which  he  was  actually  wearing  at  the  time.  If  the  apparition  is  in  truth  nothing
more  than  an  expression  of  the  percipient's  thoughts,  this  is  what  we  should
expect  to  find,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  in  the  majority  of  well-evidenced  narra-
tives of  telepathic  hallucination  this  is  what  we  actually  do  find.  The  dress  and
surroundings  of  the  phantasm  represent,  not  the  dress  and  surroundings  of
the  agent  at  the  moment,  but  those  with  which  the  percipient  is  familiar.

668  B.  The  next  case  is  taken  from  the  "  Report  on  the  Census  of
Hallucinations,"  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  270.  It  is  to  be  observed
that  the  agent  in  this  case — Mr.  Kirk — seems  to  possess  an  unusual
capacity  for  impressing  other  minds  telepathically,  as  shown  by  his  ex-
periments in  thought-transference,  some  of  which  are  given  in  630  D.
His  own  account  is  as  follows  : —

2  RIPON  VILLAS,  UPPER  RIPON  ROAD,  PLUMSTEAD,/«/J/  jth,  1890.

I  have  to  inform  you  that  from  the  loth  to  2oth  June  I  tried  a  telepathic
experiment  each  night  upon  Miss  G.  I  did  so,  as  suggested  by  you  in  your  letter
of  June  3rd,  without  her  knowledge,  as  a  preliminary  to  entering  upon  experi-
ments with  her  under  conditions  of  expectancy  and  the  recording  of  dates  and
hours.  Each  trial  had  for  its  object  the  rendering  myself  visible  to  her —
simply  visible.  With  the  exception  of  one — which  was  made  one  afternoon
from  my  office  in  the  Arsenal — each  trial  took  place  at  my  house  between  the
hours  of  1 1  P.M.  and  i  A.M.

Up  to  June  23rd  I  heard  nothing  direct  from  my  "subject."  Indirectly,
however,  I  learnt  that  my  influence  was  acting  rather  strongly.  Each  time
Miss  G.  came  to  my  house,  while  the  experiments  were  in  progress,  she  com-
plained of  being  kept  sleepless  and  restless  from  an  uneasy  feeling  which  she
was  unable  to  describe  or  account  for.  On  one  night  so  strong  was  this  uneasy
feeling,  she  was  compelled  to  get  up,  dress  herself,  and  take  to  some  needle-
work, and  was  unable  to  throw  off  the  sensation  and  return  to  bed  until  two
o'clock.  I  made  no  comments  on  these  complaints — never  dropped  a  hint,
even,  as  to  what  I  was  doing.  Under  these  circumstances  it  seemed  probable
to  me  that,  although  my  influence  was  telling  upon  her,  to  her  discomfort,  I  had
not  succeeded  in  the  object  of  my  experiments.  Supposing  this  to  be  the  case,
and  that  I  was  only  depriving  her  of  rest,  I  thought  it  best  to  discontinue  the
trials  for  a  time.

I  felt  disappointed  at  this  apparently  barren  result.  But,  on  June  23rd,  an
agreeable  surprise  was  sprung  upon  me,  in  that  I  learnt  I  had  most  effectually
succeeded  on  one  occasion — the  very  occasion  on  which  I  had  considered  suc-
cess as  being  highly  improbable — in  presenting  myself  to  Miss  G.  As  you  will
find  in  her  statement,  herewith  enclosed,  the  vision  was  most  complete  and
realistic.  The  trial  which  had  this  fortunate  result  was  that  I  had  made  from
my  office  and  on  the  spur  of  the  moment.  I  had  been  rather  closely  engaged
on  some  auditing  work,  which  had  tired  me,  and  as  near  as  I  can  remember
the  time  was  between  3.30  and  4  P.M.,  that  I  laid  down  my  pencil,  stretched
myself,  and  in  the  act  of  doing  the  latter  I  was  seized  with  the  impulse  to  make
a  trial  on  Miss  G.  I  did  not,  of  course,  know  where  she  was  at  the  moment,
but,  with  a  flash,  as  it  were,  I  transferred  myself  to  her  bedroom.  I  cannot  say
why  I  thought  of  that  spot,  unless  it  was  that  I  did  so  because  my  first  experi-

668B]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  691

ment  had  been  made  there  l  As  it  happened,  it  was  what  I  must  call  a  "lucky
shot "  for  I  caught  her  at  the  moment  she  was  lightly  sleeping  in  her  chair — a
condition  which  seems  to  be  peculiarly  favourable  to  receiving  and  externalising
telepathic  messages.

The  figure  seen  by  Miss  G.  was  clothed  in  a  suit  I  was  at  the  moment
wearing,  and  was  bareheaded*  the  latter  as  would  be  the  case,  of  course,  in  an
office.  This  suit  is  of  a  dark  reddish-brown  check  stuff,  and  it  was  an  unusual
circumstance  for  me  to  have  had  on  the  coat  at  the  time,  as  I  wear,  as  a  rule,
an  office  coat  of  light  material.  But  this  office  coat  I  had,  a  day  or  so  before,
sent  to  a  tailor  to  be  repaired,  and  I  had,  therefore,  to  keep  on  that  belonging
to  the  dark  suit.

I  tested  the  reality  of  the  vision  by  this  dark  suit.  I  asked,  "  How  was  I
dressed  ?"  (not  at  all  a  leading  question).  The  reply  of  Miss  G.  was,  touching
the  sleeve  of  the  coat  I  was  then  wearing  (of  a  light  suit),  "  Not  this  coat,  but
that  dark  suit  you  wear  sometimes.  I  even  saw  clearly  the  small  check  pattern
of  it;  and  I  saw  your  features  as  plainly  as  though  you  had  been  bodily
present.  I  could not 'have  seen  you  more  distinctly."

Miss  G.'s  account  is  : —

June  zStA,  1890.

A  peculiar  occurrence  happened  to  me  on  the  Wednesday  of  the  week
before  last.  In  the  afternoon  (being  tired  by  a  morning  walk),  while  sitting  in
an  easy-chair  near  the  window  of  my  own  room,  I  fell  asleep.  At  any  time  I
happen  to  sleep  during  the  day  (which  is  but  seldom)  I  invariably  awake  with
tired  uncomfortable  sensations,  which  take  some  little  time  to  pass  off;  but
that  afternoon,  on  the  contrary,  I  was  suddenly  quite  wide  awake,  seeing  Mr.
Kirk  standing  near  my  chair,  dressed  in  a  dark-brown  coat,  which  I  had
frequently  seen  him  wear.  His  back  was  towards  the  window,  his  right  hand
towards  me  ;  he  passed  across  the  room  towards  the  door,  which  is  opposite  the
window,  the  space  between  being  15  feet,  the  furniture  so  arranged  as  to  leave
just  that  centre  clear ;  but  when  he  got  about  4  feet  from  the  door,  which  was
closed,  he  disappeared.

My  first  thought  was,  "  had  this  happened  a  few  hours  later  I  should  have
believed  it  telepathic,"  for  I  knew  Mr.  Kirk  had  tried  experimenting  at  different
times,  but  had  no  idea  he  was  doing  so  recently.  Although  I  have  been  much
interested  by  his  conversation  about  psychical  phenomena  at  various  times
during  the  past  year,  I  must  confess  the  element  of  doubt  would  very  forcibly
present  itself  as  to  whether  telepathic  communication  could  be  really  a  fact ;
and  I  then  thought,  knowing  he  must  be  at  the  office  at  the  time  I  saw  him
(which  was  quite  as  distinctly  as  if  he  had  been  really  in  the  room),  that  in  this
instance,  at  least,  it  must  be  purely  imaginary,  and  feeling  so  sure  it  w.is  only
resolved  not  to  mention  it,  and  did  not  do  so  until  this  wrt-k.  when,
almost  involuntarily,  I  told  him  all  about  it.  Much  to  my  astonishment,

1  The  first  experiment  of  this  series  was  on  the  night  of  the  loth,  the  successful

:menton  the  afternoon  of  June  nth  (Wednesday).    Mr.  Kirk  tells  us  that  he  made

the  time  on  his  blotting-paper  of  day  and  hour.     Mr.  Kirk  had  on  four  occa-

lions  during  the  previous  four  years  tried  from  a  distance  to  produce  an  impression  of

presence  on  Miss  G.  with  considerable  success,  but  had  not  tried  to  appear  to  her.

These  experiments  and  others  are  described  in  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  v.  pp.  21-30,  and

briefly  summarised  in  630  D.

692  APPENDICES  [668  C

Mr.  Kirk  was  very  pleased  with  the  account,  and  asked  me  to  write  it,  telling
me  that  on  that  afternoon,  feeling  rather  tired,  he  put  down  his  pen  for  a  few
moments,  and,  to  use  his  own  words,  "  threw  himself  into  this  room."  He  also
told  me  he  had  purposely  avoided  this  subject  in  my  presence  lately,  that  he
might  not  influence  me  but  was  anxiously  hoping  I  would  introduce  it.

I  feel  sure  I  had  not  been  dreaming  of  him,  and  cannot  remember  that
anything  had  happened  to  cause  me  even  to  think  of  him  that  afternoon  before
falling  asleep.

Mr.  Kirk  writes  later  : —

I  have  only  succeeded  once  in  making  myself  visible  to  Miss  G.  since  the
occasion  I  have  already  reported,  and  that  had  the  singularity  of  being  only  my
features — my  face  in  mtMMfurt,  that  is,  about  three  inches  in  diameter.

In  a  letter  dated  January  ipth,  1891,  Mr.  Kirk  says  as  to  this  last
appearance  : —

Miss  G.  did  not  record  this  at  the  time,  as  she  attached  no  importance  to  it,
but  I  noted  the  date  (July  23rd)  on  my  office  blotting-pad,  as  it  was  at  the  office
I  was  thinking  of  her.  I  say  "thinking,"  because  I  was  doing  so  in  connection
with  another  subject,  and  with  no  purpose  of  making  an  experiment.  I  had  a
headache,  and  was  resting  my  head  on  my  left  hand.  Suddenly  it  occurred  to
me  that  my  thinking  about  her  might  probably  influence  her  in  some  way,  and
I  made  the  note  I  have  mentioned.1

Mrs.  Sidgwick  had  a  talk  with  Mr.  Kirk  and  with  Miss  G.  on  April
8th,  1892,  about  the  above  incidents  and  other  experiments  in  thought-
transference  between  them,  and  writes  : —

Mr. Kirk's  appearance  to  Miss  G.  evidently  impressed  her  very  much.  It
was  extremely  realistic.  She  is  quite  sure  she  was  awake.  It  was  as  if  she  had
waked  up  to  see  it,  but  she  had  not  been  dreaming  of  Mr.  Kirk.  The  figure
did  not  look  towards  her  or  appear  to  take  any  interest  in  her.  The  other  time
she  saw  his  face  it  was  like  a  miniature.  She  did  not  think  so  much  of  that
experience.

668  C.  The  following  case  is  quoted  from  an  article  by  Dr.  R.
Hodgson  in  the  Forum  for  March  1900.  He  writes  : —

Dr.  G.,  a  cultured  lady,  an  M.D.,  some  of  whose  experiences  as  percipient
have  been  recorded  in  the  Proceedings  of  the  American  S.P.R.,  drew  my
attention  some  time  ago  to  an  account  which  she  had  given  in  The  Herald
of  Health,  of  an  experience  where  she  herself  was  the  agent,  and  a  friend
of  hers,  whom  I  shall  call  Mrs.  C.,  the  percipient.  According  to  the  account,
which  I  abridge,  Dr.  G.  arranged,  early  in  October  of  1885,  to  try  voluntarily
to  appear  or  cause  a  vision  of  herself  to  appear  to  Mrs.  C.  at  a  distance.
Soon  afterwards  Dr.  G.  went  to  a  city  500  miles  from  where  Mrs.  C.  was
living,  and  at  intervals  endeavoured  (vainly)  to  go  to  her  friend  mentally;
but  no  written  communication  took  place  between  them,  nor  had  any  hour
been  fixed  for  the  experiment.

1  Mr.  Kirk  enclosed  the  piece  of  blotting-paper  with  the  note.

668D]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  693

**  .  .  .  One  night  I  went  to  bed  in  a  high  fever  consequent  upon  a  sudden
but  slight  indisposition.  My  mind  was  idly  but  nervously  occupied  by  a
great  number  of  topics.  Among  other  things  I  thought  of  a  certain  recep-
tion which  I  had  to  attend  in  a  few  days,  of  having  no  dress  suitable  for
the  occasion,  but  of  one  which  I  had  at  home  and  wished  for.  And  then
I  wandered,  by  association  of  ideas,  to  think  of  a  certain  evening  company
which  I  had  attended  with  the  friend  with  whom  I  wished  to  try  my  ex-
periment in  telepathy.  I  thought  of  this  idly,  without  volition,  but  as  in
fever  the  mind  seems  to  cling  to  idle  thoughts  with  great  persistence,  so
these  thoughts  kept  repeating  themselves.  I  became  weary  of  their  persistence,
yet  could  not  escape  them.  I  finally  began  to  wonder  why  I  could  not
appear  to  my  friend,  but  did  not  try— only  kept  thinking  of  it.

"  Suddenly  my  body  became  slightly  numb,  my  head  felt  light,  my  breath-
ing became  slow  and  loud,  as  when  one  goes  to  sleep.  I  had  often  been
in  a  similar  state.  When  I  came  out  of  it  I  lit  the  candle  and  looked  at  my
watch.  The  next  day  I  thought  of  the  experience  of  the  night  as  meaning-
less, and  was  ashamed  of  having  considered  a  change  of  breathing  as  anything
more  than  a  premonition  of  going  to  sleep.

"  A  few  days  after  this  experience  I  received  a  letter  from  my  friend,
forwarded  from  where  she  supposed  I  was,  in  which  she  stated  that  I  had
appeared  to  her  on  a  certain  evening,  giving  the  time;  that  I  wore  a  dress
she  had  never  seen  before,  but  which  she  perfectly  described ;  that  I  stood
with  my  back  to  her  and  remained  but  a  moment  or  two.

"  As  I  had  not  written  to  her  of  my  efforts  to  appear  to  her,  and  as  the
opportunities  of  two  months  for  guess-work  or  deception  had  elapsed,  I  felt
that  my  proof  was  as  positive  as  I  could  desire.  Not  proof,  however,  of
the  outgoing  of  an  astral  body.  Had  I  appeared  to  my  friend  as  I  was  at
the  moment,  in  bed  in  my  night-dress,  the  case  would  have  simply  paralleled
many  of  which  we  have  read;  but  my  appearance  in  a  dress  that  was  200
miles  away,  and  which  had  never  been  seen  by  the  percipient,  forms
proof  of  the  best  theory  that  has  yet  been  propounded  by  students  of
telepathy.  .  .  ."

I  have  received  a  corroborative  account  from  the  lady  who  had  this
vision,  and  her  original  letter  has  also  been  kindly  forwarded  to  me  for
my  inspection.  It  reads  thus  : —

NEW  YORK,  November  2isft  1885.

"  DEAR ,  Did  you  come  to  me  last  evening,  Friday,  November  2oth  ?

Somebody  did,  near  ten  o'clock.  She  wore  a  blue  velvet  dress,  handsomely
draped,  with  white  cuffs  at  the  wrist.  But  I  only  saw  the  figure.  The  face
was  not  revealed  to  me.  I  had  gone  to  bed  and  put  out  the  light.  It  was
with  the  interior  sight  I  saw.  It  was  gone  in  an  instant. — Yours,

668  D.  The  experiment  in  the  following  case  succeeded  on  the
first  trial.  The  agent  was  Miss  Edith  Maughan  (now  Mrs.  G.  Rayleigh
Vicars),  and  the  account  is  taken  from  the  Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.
p.  273.  Miss  Maughan  writes  : —

694  APPENDICES  [668  D

September  1890.

One  night  in  September  1888  I  was  lying  awake  in  bed  reading.  I  forget
what  the  book  was,  but  I  had  recently  been  studying  with  interest  various  cases
of  astral  projection  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  and  I  distinctly  remember
making  up  my  mind  that  night  to  try  whether  I  could  manage  to  accomplish  a
projection  of  myself  by  force  of  will-concentration.

The  room  next  to  mine  was  occupied  by  a  friend  of  mine  [Miss  Ethel
Thompson],  who  was  an  old  acquaintance,  and  not  at  all  of  an  excitable  turn  of
mind.  This  room  had  formerly  been  used  as  a  dressing-room,  and  there  was  a
door  connecting  it  with  mine.  For  some  years,  however,  it  had  been  absolutely
separated  by  the  locked  door,  on  my  side  of  which  stood  a  very  heavy  ward-
robe, which  would  require  two  strong  men  to  move  it  away.  The  only  available
exit  from  my  room  was  the  other  door  which  opened  on  to  the  landing,  as  was
also  the  case  with  the  dressing-room.  That  night  I  perfectly  recall  lying  back
on  my  pillow  with  a  resolute  but  half-doubtful  and  amused  determination  to
make  Miss  Thompson  see  me.  The  candle  was  burning  on  a  chair  at  the  side
of  my  bed,  and  I  heard  only  the  ticking  of  the  clock  in  my  room  as  I  "  willed  "
with  all  my  might  to  appear  to  her.  After  a  few  minutes  I  felt  dizzy  and  only
half-conscious.

I  don't  know  how  long  this  state  may  have  lasted,  but  I  do  remember
emerging  into  a  conscious  state  and  thinking  I  had  better  leave  off,  as  the
strain  had  exhausted  me.

I  gave  up,  and  changing  into  an  easy  position  I  thought  I  had  failed  and
needlessly  fatigued  myself  for  an  impossible  fancy.  I  blew  out  my  candle  ;  at
the  instant  I  was  startled  by  hearing  an  indistinct  sound  from  the  next  room.

It  was  Miss  Thompson's  voice  raised  slightly,  but  I  could  not  distinguish  more
than  the  actual  sound,  which  was  repeated,  and  then  there  was  silence.  I
wondered  whether  she  had  had  a  bad  dream,  and  listened  a  short  time,  but  did
not  seriously  imagine  that  it  was  more  than  an  accidental  coincidence.  Soon
after  my  clock  struck  two  (A.M.),  and  I  fell  asleep.

Next  morning  I  noticed  that  Miss  Thompson  looked  rather  tired  at  break-
fast, but  I  asked  no  questions.  Presently  she  said,  "Had  I  gone  into  her  room
to  frighten  her  during  the  night  ?  "  I  said  I  had  not  left  my  room.  She  de-
clared that  I  seemed  to  her  to  come  in  and  bend  over  her.  From  what  she  said
I  concluded  it  must  have  been  between  I  and  2  A.M.  Her  own  account  is  in
the  possession  of  the  Psychical  Society.  All  I  have  to  add  is,  that  I  was  in  my
ordinary  state  of  health,  and  not  at  all  excited,  but  merely  bent  on  trying  an
experiment.

In  a  letter  accompanying  this,  Miss  Maughan  says  : —

I  can't  find  the  fact  noticed  in  my  diary  for  1888.  I  only  keep  a  very  tiny
one,  just  for  the  sake  of  entering  letters,  &c.,  and  have  no  allusions  to  what
happens  as  a  rule.  I  fancy,  though,  that  it  was  on  the  night  of  September  loth.
Does  Miss  Thompson  give  any  exact  date  ?  for  if  it  approximates  to  that,
it  would  be  the  correct  one.  I  know  it  was  just  at  that  time,  because  it  was
during  her  last  visit  at  this  house.

668E]  TO    CHAPTER    VI  695

Miss  Thompson  writes  : —

THE  CHIMES,  GROVE  PARK,  CHISWICK,  December  y>th,  1889.
During  the  summer  of  1888  (end  of  August)  I  was  staying  with  the  Miss
Maughans  in  Lincolnshire.  We  were  interested  in  Theosophy,  and  had  been
discussing  the  phenomena  of  people  leaving  their  bodies  and  appearing  in  their
astral  forms.  I  am  not  a  good  sleeper,  but  not  at  all  of  a  nervous  temperament.
I  stayed  awake  one  night  until  two  or  three.  I  was  perfectly  wide  awake,  when
suddenly  I  saw  Miss  Edith  Maughan  standing  by  my  bedside  in  her  ordinary
dark  dressing-gown.  The  moonlight  came  in  at  the  window  sufficiently  for  me
to  distinguish  her  face  clearly,  and  her  figure  partially.  I  sat  up  in  bed,  and
said,  rather  crossly,  "  What  do  you  want  here,  Edith  ? "  I  thought  she  had
come  for  some  joke.  As  she  didn't  answer,  I  immediately  struck  a  light,  but
she  was  gone.  It  is  a  mistake  that  I  screamed  out.  I  may  have  spoken  suffi-
ciently loudly  to  be  heard  in  the  next  room.  I  thought  she  had  got  out  of  the
room  with  astonishing  rapidity,  but  I  didn't  trouble  much  about  it  The  next
morning  I  asked  why  she  came  into  my  room.  She  denied  having  done  so,  but
said  she  had  thought  of  coming,  but  that  as  it  might  disturb  me  she  decided
not.  She  said  she  sat  up  in  bed,  and  for  the  sake  of  something  to  do  was
willing  herself  to  go  out  of  her  body  and  come  to  me,  and  mentioned  about  the
time  I  saw  her.  Although  it  is  more  than  a  year  ago,  I  remember  the
incident  clearly,  as  it  made  a  distinct  impression  upon  me.

ETHEL  THOMPSON.

Mrs.  Sidgwick  talked  over  this  experience  with  Miss  Maughan  and
Miss  Thompson  separately,  and  questioned  them  specially  as  to  the  possi-
bility that  Miss  Maughan  had  really  gone  into  Miss  Thompson's  room
unconsciously.  They  were  both  quite  certain  that  she  had  not  done  so,
Miss  Thompson  dwelling  on  the  impossible  rapidity  of  the  disappearance,
and  Miss  Maughan  on  the  fact  that,  when  she  roused  herself,  she  was  lying
in  the  same  position  as  before — hands  clasped  and  feet  crossed  in  a  special
manner,  which,  she  had  been  told,  is  adopted  by  Eastern  people  wishing
to  concentrate  themselves  on  anything,  and  which  she  adopted  deliberately
on  this  account.

In  connection  with  this  incident,  it  is  interesting  that  Miss  Maughan
has  appeared,  but  unintentionally,  on  other  occasions  to  other  percipients
(see  645  E).

668  E.     From    the    "Report    on    the    Census    of    Hallucinations,"
Appendix  G.     "  A  Proposed  Scheme  of  Apparitions,"  by  F.  W.  H.  M
Proceedings  S.P.R.,  vol.  x.  p.  418.

The  following  is  an  account  of  an  experiment  made  between  two  ladies  well
known  to  me,  whom  I  will  call  Miss  Danvers  and  Mrs.  Fleetwood,  which  I
here  quote  as  well  illustrating  some  of  the  points  to  which  I  wish  to  call  atten-
tion. I  asked  Miss  Danvers  to  endeavour  to  appear  to  Mrs.  Fleetwood.  with-
out forewarning  that  lady,  and  to  send  me  a  letter-card  (the  best  vehicle  for  such
communications,  as  it  carries  the  postal  date  impressed  on  what  re
nevertheless,  a  private  letter), — to  tell  me  of  the  attempt  before  she  knew
whether  it  had  succeeded  or  no.

696  APPENDICES  [668  E

On  June  2oth,  1894,  I  received  the  following  letter,  dated  June  iQth,  from
Miss  Danvers,  with  two  enclosures:  —

"On  Sunday  night  at  12  P.M.  I  tried  to  appear  to  Mrs.  Fleetwood  [at  a
distance  of  about  nine  miles]  and  succeeded  in  feeling  as  if  I  were  really  in  her
room.  I  had  previously  written  my  statement,  which  I  enclose,  together  with
Mrs.  Fleetwood's,  which  she  has  just  sent  me.  She  wrote  it  also  at  the  time,
not  knowing  I  was  trying  to  appear.  I  was  lying  down,  not  kneeling,  but  the
other  details  are  correct."

A  memorandum,  signed  by  Miss  Danvers,  was  enclosed,  as  follows  :
"June  1  7th,  1894,  12  P.M.  I  write  this  just  before  trying  to  appear  to  Mrs.
Fleetwood.  My  hair  is  down,  and  I  am  going  to  lie  down  and  try  to  appear
with  my  eyes  closed."

Also  a  memorandum,  signed  by  Mrs.  Fleetwood,  as  follows  :  "  Sunday
night,  June  i;th,  1894.—  I  woke  from  my  first  sleep  to  see  Edith  Danvers
apparently  kneeling  on  an  easy  chair  by  my  bedside,  her  profile  turned  towards
me,  her  hair  flowing,  and  eyes  closed,  or  looking  quite  down.  I  felt  startled  at
first,  as  I  always  do,  on  seeing"visions  in  waking  moments,  but  determined  to
keep  quiet  ;  and  after  I  was  fully  awake  and  able  to  reason  with  myself,  the
figure  still  remained,  and  then  gradually  faded  like  a  dissolving  view.  I  got  up
and  looked  at  the  clock.  It  was  just  twelve.  I  was  alone  in  the  room.  As  I
now  write,  it  is  about  two  minutes  after  twelve."

In  conversation  on  June  23rd  Miss  Danvers  told  me  that  she  had  seen,  in  a
sort  of  flash,  Mrs.  Fleetwood  start  up  in  bed,  rest  on  her  elbow,  and  look
towards  her.  She  had  not  been  clearly  aware  of  her  own  attitude  in  Mrs.  Fleet-
wood's  room,  although  she  seemed  aware  of  her  position,  which  corresponded
to  the  place  towards  which  Mrs.  Fleetwood  gazed.  Miss  Danvers  had  never
previously  made  notes  of  an  experiment,  and  had  not  seen  the  importance  of
writing  down  this  point  at  once,  nor  had  she  felt  confident  that  Mrs.  Fleetwood
really  saw  her.  Mrs.  Fleetwood  also  sent  me  a  letter  of  Miss  Danvers  to  her-
self, dated  June  i8th,  in  which,  among  various  other  matters,  Miss  Danvers
asks,  "Have  I  appeared  to  you  at  all?  I  tried  last  night,  but  you  may  not
have  been  alone."  There  is,  of  course,  therefore,  no  proof  that  Miss  Danvers'
sense  of  invasion  of  the  room  was  more  than  subjective;  but  the  point  is  worth
mention  in  connection  with  the  experiment  presently  to  follow.  As  regards
Mrs.  Fleetwood's  "visions  in  waking  moments,"  that  lady  herself  believes  them
to  have  been  all  in  some  sense  veridical,  but  they  have  not  been  recorded.
They  included  two  visions  of  Miss  Danvers,  at  moments  when  Miss  Danvers
on  her  part  was  strongly  directing  her  attention  to  Mrs.  Fleetwood.  So,  at
least,  both  ladies  believe  ;  but  the  visions  were  not  recorded  at  the  time.

Aiiss  Danvers  then  made  a  second  experiment,  in  which,  through  some
misunderstanding  of  the  due  conditions,  she  informed  Mrs.  Fleetwood  before-
hand of  her  intended  invasion.  It  turned  out,  however,  that  Mrs.  Fleetwood
saw  nothing  whatever;—  so  that  we  have  at  least  the  negative  assurance  that
mere  expectation  on  her  part  does  not  necessarily  produce  a  vision.  Miss
Danvers  then  made  a  third  (unannounced)  experiment  of  a  rather  different
kind,  which  she  describes  to  me  as  follows  in  a  letter  dated  June  27th,  1-94.

"  On  Monday,  June  25th,  at  12.15  A.M.,  I  thought  I  would  try  to  go  to  Mrs.
Fleetwood's  room,  but  did  not  think  she  could  see  me.  I  succeeded  in  seeing
her  room,  and  saw  the  third  volume  of  Marcella,  lying  on  a  chair  by  the  bed'
side.  I  did  not  know  she  was  reading  it,  as  I  thought  she  had  finished  it  long
ago,  so  I  was  surprised.  Mrs.  Fleetwood  did  not  appear  to  see  me,  or  make

668  F]  TO     CHAPTER    VI  697

any  sign.  The  room  was  otherwise  much  as  usual.  On  the  same  day  I  saw
Mrs.  Fleetwood,  and  asked  her  if  what  I  saw  was  correct,  and  she  said  it  was
perfectly  so.  She  also  said  she  was  suffering  from  toothache  and  could  not  see
me,  but  felt  a  presence  in  the  room."

Mrs.  Fleetwood  writes,  June  27th:  "When  Miss  Danvers  came  to  lunch
with  me,  on  Monday  last,  she  asked  me  if  I  had  taken  the  third  volume  of
Marcella  up  to  my  room  the  night  before  (the  24th) :  as  she  had  been  there  in
the  spirit,  and  had  seen  it  lying  on  a  chair  by  my  bed.  This  was  precisely
what  had  happened.  I  had  taken  up  the  book  to  read  in  the  early  morning,
but  I  am  sure  Miss  Danvers  did  not  know  of  my  often  doing  so  \i.e.  taking
a  book  to  her  bedroom],  as  it  is  not  my  usual  habit."  On  June  soth,  Mrs.
Fleetwood  adds :  "  Miss  Danvers  did  know  we  had  had  Marcella  in  the
house,  for  she  read  it  when  here;  but  she  quite  thought  it  had  been  sent  away
long  before  she  saw  it  in  my  room.  She  did  not  know  that  I  had  laid  it  aside,
being  busy,  and  had  kept  back  the  third  volume."

668  F.  From  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  vii.  p.  99.  This  case  is
specially  interesting  in  being  reciprocal,  as  well  as  experimental.  It  must
be  observed,  however,  that  the  attempt  to  produce  an  apparition  of  himself
seems  to  have  been  only  a  secondary  object  on  the  part  of  the  agent ;  his
main  desire  being  to  discover  himself  something  of  the  percipient's
condition.  It  will  be  observed  that  he  did  not  appear  in  the  clothes
which  he  was  actually  wearing  at  the  time,  but  in  a  garb  familiar  to  the
percipient.

The  case  was  sent  to  us  by  Dr.  M.  L.  Holbrook  (an  Associate  of  the
American  Branch  of  the  S.P.R.),  who  writes  concerning  it  to  Dr.
Hodgson  : —

[June  1894.]

I  think  the  enclosed  case  is  a  very  good  one.  I  have  known  of  it  for  years,
and  got  it  written  out  a  day  or  two  ago,  when  in  Lakewood,  N.J.  The  son's
testimony  (Geo.  Sinclair)  was  written  out  without  any  consultation  with  his
parents,  or  knowledge  of  what  they  had  said.  M.  L.  HOLBROOK.

The  following  is  the  account  of  the  agent,  Mr.  B.  F.  Sinclair  :—

LAKEWOOD,/""'  izth,  1894.

On  the  5th  of  July,  1887, 1  left  my  home  in  Lakewood  to  go  to  New  York  to
spend  a  few  days.  My  wife  was  not  feeling  well  when  I  left,  and  after  I  had
started  I  looked  back  and  saw  her  standing  in  the  door  looking  discor
and  sad  at  my  leaving.  The  picture  haunted  me  all  day,  and  at  night,  before  I
went  to  bed,  I  thought  I  would  try  to  find  out  if  possible  her  condition.  I  had
undressed,  and  was  sitting  on  the  edge  of  the  bed,  when  I  covered  my  face  with
my  hands  and  willed  myself  in  Lakewood  at  home  to  see  if  I  could  see  her.  After
a  little,  I  seemed  to  be  standing  in  her  room  before  the  bed,  and  saw  her  lying
there  looking  much  better.  I  felt  satisfied  she  was  better,  and  so  spent  the
week  more  comfortably  regarding  her  condition.  On  Saturday  I  went  home.
When  she  saw  me,  she  remarked,  "  I  don't  know  whether  I  am  glad  to  see  you
or  not,  for  I  thought  something  had  happened  to  you.  I  saw  you  standing  in
front  of  the  bed  the  night  (about  8.30  or  before  9)  you  left,  as  plain  as  could  be,

698  APPENDICES  [6680

and  I  have  been  worrying  myself  about  you  ever  since.  I  sent  to  the  office  and
to  the  depdt  daily  to  get  some  message  from  you."  After  explaining  my  effort
to  find  out  her  condition,  everything  became  plain  to  her.  She  had  seen  me
when  1  was  trying  to  see  her  and  find  out  her  condition.  I  thought  at  the  time
I  was  going  to  see  her  and  make  her  see  me.  B.  F.  SINCLAIR.

Mrs.  Sinclair  writes  : —

I  remember  this  experience  well.  I  saw  him  as  plain  as  if  he  had  been
there  in  person.  I  did  not  see  him  in  his  night-clothes,  but  in  a  suit  that  hung
in  the  closet  at  home.  It  made  me  very  anxious,  for  I  felt  that  some  accident
or  other  had  befallen  him.  I  was  on  the  rack  all  the  time  till  Saturday,  and  if
he  had  not  come  home  then,  I  should  have  sent  to  him  to  find  out  if  anything
was  wrong.  H.  M.  SINCLAIR.

Mr.  George  Sinclair,  in  answer  to  Dr.  Holbrook's  request  for  his  testi-
mony, wrote  to  him  : —

27,  7TH  STREET,  N.  Y.  CITY,  N.  Y.,/««<r  itfh,  1894.

DEAR  SIR, — Yours  of  the  I3th  inst.  at  hand,  and  I  will  with  pleasure  give  you
whatever  information  I  can.  At  the  time  in  question  I  was  living  at  the  Seven
Stars  house  in  Lakewood,  going  to  and  from  my  work  and  stabling  my  horse  at
father's.  I  do  not  remember  the  date,  but  think  it  was  about  the  middle  of  the
week  that  mother  told  me  in  the  morning  that  "she  had  seen  father  the  night
before  just  before  she  retired  for  the  night."  "  His  face  was  drawn  and  set
as  if  he  were  either  dead  or  trying  to  accomplish  something  which  was  beyond
him."  She  watched  very  anxiously  the  balance  of  the  week  for  a  letter  or  tele-
gram, but  none  came,  and  when  no  word  came  on  Saturday  she  was  almost
crazy.  He  unexpectedly  returned  Saturday  night,  saying  that  it  was  just  as
cheap  to  come  home  as  to  stay  in  N.Y.  over  Sunday  at  a  hotel.

When  mother  questioned  him  in  regard  to  the  incident  at  the  middle  of  the
week,  he  said  "  that  he  made  up  his  mind  to  see  her  that  night  if  possible,
and  had  concentrated  his  will  power  on  that  one  object,"  with  the  result  which
you  know.  It  gave  him  pleasure  and  her  a  good  deal  of  uneasiness.

GEO.  SINCLAIR.

668  G.  Experiments  of  H.  M.  Wesermann. — The  following  account
of  Wesermann's  experiments  is  quoted  from  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.  iv.
p.  21 7,  being  there  taken  from  a  book  called  Mesmerism  and  the  Universal
Language*  published  in  1822,  by  H.  M.  Wesermann,  Government  Assessor
and  Chief  Inspector  of  Roads  at  Diisseldorf,  &c.  By  "the  universal
language  "  Wesermann  means  thought-transference  and  clairvoyance,  and
his  book  is  a  review  of  the  German  literature  on  "  Animal  Magnetism,"
mainly  of  the  second  decade  of  this  century,  from  a  psychical  point  of
view,  with  some  experiments  and  observations  of  his  own.  The  book  is
fully  discussed  in  \htjournal,  but  I  have  space  only  to  refer  to  an  experi-
ment of  which  an  account  was  quoted  in  Phantasms  of  the  Living,  vol.  i.
p.  IOT,  and  about  which  we  here  find  some  valuable  additional  evidence.
Mesmer's  opinion  that  all  might  know  what  was  happening  to  a  friend

1  Der  Magnetismus  und  die  allgemeine  Weltsprache.

6680]  TOCHAPTERVI  699

who  was  thinking  of  them,  were  it  not  for  the  stronger  impressions  received
through  the  senses,  suggested  to  Wesermann  to  try  to  transfer  mental
images  to  sleeping  friends  at  a  distance  ;  and  accounts  of  four  experiments
in  which  he  was  successful  in  thus  imposing  dreams  on  his  friends  are
given  in  Phantasms.  His  fifth  experiment,  at  a  distance  of  nine  miles,
is  the  one  about  which  his  book  gives  additional  evidence — in  fact,  a
first-hand  account  from  one  of  the  percipients,  of  which  the  existence  was
not  known  to  Gurney.  The  following  is  the  account  in  full,  translated
from  his  book  (p.  28).

A  lady,  who  had  been  dead  five  years,  was  to  appear  to  Lieutenant n

in  a  dream  at  10.30  P.M.  and  incite  him  to  good  deeds.     At  half-past  ten,  con-

trary  to  expectation,  Herr n  had  not  gone  to  bed,  but  was  discussing  the

French  campaign  with  his  friend  Lieutenant  S in  the  ante-room.  Sud-
denly the  door  of  the  room  opened,  the  lady  entered  dressed  in  white,  with  a

black  kerchief  and  uncovered  head,  greeted  S with  her  hand  three  times  in

a  friendly  manner  ;  then  turned  to n,  nodded  to  him,  and  returned  again

through  the  doorway.

As  this  story,  related  to  me  by  Lieutenant n,  seemed  to  be  too  remark-
able from  a  psychological  point  of  view  for  the  truth  of  it  not  to  be  duly  estab-
lished, I  wrote  to  Lieutenant  S ,  who  was  living  six  miles  away,  and  asked

him  to  give  me  his  account  of  it.     He  sent  me  the  following  reply : —

...  On  the  1 3th  of  March  1817,  Herr n  came  to  pay  me  a  visit  at  my

lodgings  about  a  league  from  A .     He  stayed  the  night  with  me.     After

supper,   and  when  we   were  both  undressed,  I   was  sitting  on  my  bed  and

Herr n  was  standing  by  the  door  of  the  next  room  on  the  point  also  of

going  to  bed.  This  was  about  half-past  ten.  We  were  speaking  partly  about
indifferent  subjects  and  partly  about  the  events  of  the  French  campaign.  Sud-
denly the  door  out  of  the  kitchen  opened  without  a  sound,  and  a  lady  entered,

very  pale,  taller  than  Herr n,  about  five  feet  four  inches  in  height,  strong  and

broad  of  figure,  dressed  in  white,  but  with  a  large  black  kerchief  which  reached
to  below  the  waist.  She  entered  with  bare  head,  greeted  me  with  the  hand
three  times  in  complimentary  fashion,  turned  round  to  the  left  towards  Herr
— n,  and  waved  her  hand  to  him  three  times  ;  after  which  the  figure  quietly,
and  again  without  any  creaking  of  the  door,  went  out.  We  followed  at  once  in
order  to  discover  whether  there  were  any  deception,  but  found  nothing.  The
strangest  thing  was  this,  that  our  night-watch  of  two  men  whom  I  had  shortly
before  found  on  the  watch  were  now  asleep,  though  at  my  first  call  they  were
on  the  alert,  and  that  the  door  of  the  room,  which  always  opens  with  a  good
deal  of  noise,  did  not  make  the  slightest  sound  when  opened  by  the  figure.

S.

D N,  January  utA,  1818.

From  this  story  (Wesermann  continues)  the  following  conclusions
may  be  drawn  : —

I.  That  waking  persons,  as  well  as  sleeping,  are  capable  of  perceiving  the

1  pictures  of  distant  friends  through  the  inner  sense  as  dream   images.

For  not  only  the  opening  and  shutting  of  the  door,  but  the  figure  itself— which,

700  APPENDICES  [6680

moreover,  exactly  resembled  that  of  the  dead  lady — was  incontestably  only  a
dream  in  the  waking  state,  since  the  door  would  have  creaked  as  usual  had  the
figure  really  opened  and  shut  it.

2.  That  many  apparitions  and  supposed  effects  of  witchcraft  were  very
probably  produced  in  the  same  way.  .  .  .

For  other  cases  of  experimental  apparitions,  see  Phantasms  of  the
Living,  vol.  i.  p.  103,  and  vol.  ii.  p.  675  ;  also  the  Journal  S.P.R.,  vol.
iii.  p.  307.

END   OF  VOL.   I.

8221



**********************************************************************
END OF VOLUME I — VOLUME II FOLLOWS
**********************************************************************


« f'. c *

of -the Firm , A*

Bxll No. • • •

vroop-fc

i

HUMAN PERSONALITY

HUMAN PERSONALITY

AND ITS SURVIVAL OF
BODILY DEATH

BT

FREDERIC W. H. MYERS

Cessas in vota precesque^

Tros^ aiiy Aenea, Celias'^ Neque enim ante dehiscent
Adtonit^ magna ora domus,--^ Vikgil.

quoth the Sybils '^Trojan! wilt thou spare
The impassioned effort and the conquering prayer I
Nay! not save thus those doors shall open roll ^ —

That Power within them burst upon the soulT

IN TWO VOLUMES
VOL. II

LONHMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

91 AND 93 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YOilK
LONDON AND BOMBAY

1903

1003 , TS'k'

X^ex>irint:e<Ji, l%TsLrKr.tx^ 100-3

I Oi>-3

CONTENTS

PAGB

SYLLABUSES vii

CM A I*.

VII. PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD . . . , i

VIII. MOTOR AUTOMATISM . . .81

IX. TRANCE. POS.SESSION, AND ECSTASY . . .189

X. EPILOGUE . . . . .278

•

APPENDICES TO CHAPTER VII 315

if

APPENDICES TO CHAPTER VIII 400

APPENDICES TO CHAPTER IX . . . . - 500

INDEX . . 629

SYLLABUSES

CHAPTER VII

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

700. From the actions and perceptions of spirits still in the flesh, and con*
cerned with one another, we must now pass on to inquiry into the actions of
spirits no longer in the flesh, and into the forms of perception with which men
still in the flesh respond to this unfamiliar agency.

701. There has been no clear consensus of opinion as to the kind of evi-
dence which ought to be demanded if human survival is to be proved. My
object is to make that evidence at^ once clear in itself and continuous with
knowledge already acquired.

702. Con.sidering in the first place the vague term “ghost,*' we cannot
accept the popular notion of a ghost as “ a deceased persefh permitted by Pro-
vidence to hold communication with survivors."

703. What we must rather look for is a ** manifestation of persistent per-
sonal energy/* continuing after the shock of death. Such manifestations are
not specially likely to correspond with the romances of popular fancy.

70%. We ought rather to look for possible analogies to such cases as we
already know where communication has been effected between widely different
phases of personality — as between wakers and .somnambulists, &c.

706. And reviewing both our experiments in automatism and our spon-
taneous phenomena, we find in each group three main cla.sses of messages —
namely, sensory hallucinations, emotional and motor impulses, definite intellec-
tual messages.

706. The same three classes meet us again in our analysis of apparently
post-mortem communications also.

707. Vet, though with these analogies in our favour, we need a somewhat
close discussion bf the conditions which a visual or auditory phantasm is bound
to fulfil before it can be regarded as indicating primd facie the influence of a
discarnate mind. Such a discussion, based mainly on the time-relation between
the death and the apparition, is here quoted from Edmund Gurney.

708. Further inquiry into the limits of possible latency in the percipient's
mind of an impression received from a still living agent.

709. Consideration of special cases in which a hallucination occurring
shortly after a death already kndwn might possess evidential validity.

710. Cases of recurrence of a phantasm, first about the time of death (the
death being unknown to the percipient), and then decidedly after iihp death had
occurred.

vii

viii

SYLLABUSES

711. Cases where the phantasm first occurs some houVii after death. Exa-
mination of the hypothesis of latency in these cases. f

712. It will be seen that we have here no simple problem of time-relations
between death and apparition. The ghost is a function of two variables : the
incarnate spirit's sensitivity, and the discarnate spmt’s capacity of selTmani-
festation. The latter of these two factors affords the easier method of
arrangement; and we may arrange our apparitional communications in a
descending series, from cases showing the fullest knowledge or purpose to
cases where the indication of intelligence becomes feeblest.

713. We may begin with a case, anomalous and non-evidential, which
claims to represent the subjective sensations accompanying the transition from
earthly to spiritual life. 713 A. Case of Dr. Wiltse.

714. Repeated apparitions indicating continuous knowledge of the affairs
of earth after the spirit's departure ; case of Mr. Mamtchitch. 714 A. Case
of Miss Adie.

715. Single apparitions indicating knowledge of some post-mortem fact,
such as place of burial, &c.

716. Similar apparitions implying knowledge of the affairs of surviving
friends. Cases of: 716 A. Mrs. P. 716 B. Mr, D. 716 C. Mrs. V.

717. Cases where a departed spirit seems to show knowledge of the im-
pending death of a survivor; case of Mr. G. Case.s of: 717 A. Miss
Pearson. 717 B. Mr. Kingsbury. 717 C. Captain Norton.

718. Peak in Darien ” cases ; where a dying man perceives as spirits

certain persons of ^ whose previous death he was not aware. Cases of:
718 A. Colonel . 718 B. Colonel Hicks.

719. Cases where departed spirits manifest their knowledge that some
friend who survived them has passed into the spirit world; case of Miss
Dodson. Cases of : 719 A. Mrs. Smith. 719 B. Mrs. Palliser. 719 C. Miss
Hawkins-Dempster.

720. Case of Mrs. Bacchus, in which the apparition of a deceased
is seen in the house where the dead body of his wife is lying.

721. Cases where the deceased person manifests knowledge of some fact
connected with his own earth-life, e.specially his death and events connected
therewith; case of Miss Conley.

722. Cases where the deceased person shows knowledge of his previous
relations with a survivor (case of Baron von Drieseii) ; or of intentions not
fulfilled. Cases of : 722 A. Mrs. Nery. 722 B. Dr. Binns.

723. In the case of Mrs. Storie. previously given, there arc indications of
an intelligence other than the decedent’s as concerned in the presentation of
her complex dream.

724. Cases where a compact to appear, if possible, had been made before
death; the compact thus forming a definite fact which the deceased person
remembers. I^ossible mode in which such a compact may tend to fulfil
itself.

725. Instances of such compacts more or less precisely fulfilled. 725 A.

Case of Captain Colt. ^

726. Case of Mr. Reeves, in which the deceased person’s impulse seemed
to be the fulfilment of an immediate engagement.

727. Further cases of engagement or compact fulfilled, although in
a deflected fashion; that is, by an appearance to some one other than the

CHAPTER VII

ix

special person to wjio'm the promise was made ; case of Countess Kapnist.
Cases of: 727 A. Mf. Bellamy. 727 B. Miss Money.

728. Persistence of effort on the part of the deceased person (728 A.
Case of Mr. Cabral) ; and case where the apparition indicates knowledge of
the deceased person’s funeral. 728 B. Case of Mrs. B.

729. Cases where a vision presents to a survivor the aspect of the chamber
of death.

730. Cases where the condition of the deceased person's body is thus
presented ; case of Mr. D.

731. Cases where there are successive phantasmal pictures of a death and
of the subsequent arrangement of the body. 731 A. Case of Miss Hall.

732. Discussion of a case previously given (Mrs. Green's) where there is
apparently a mingled telepathic agency, proceeding both from the departed
and from the living, and presenting the scene of death.

733. Cases where the departed .spirit seems preoccupied with the spot
where his bones arc laid. Cases of : 733 A. Miss Atkinson. 733 B. Mr. Tyre.

734. Case of Mr. Tandy, where the departed spirit seems to be aware of
the arrival at a friend’s house of the news of his own death.

735. In some cases depression is felt by the percipient from the time of his
friend’s death until the news thereof reaches him ; in others a happy vision
preludes the news. 735 A. Case of Mr. King.

736. Further cases indicating some knowledge of this kind on the part
of the departed spirit; ca.se of Miss O. Cases of: 736 A. Mrs. Davies.
736 B. Mr. Cameron Grant. 736 C. Miss M.

737. Apparitions which communicate no definite message. These maybe
subdivided into personal and locals according as they appear to be intended to
impress .speci.al survivors, or, on the other hand, seem mere recurrences to
accustomed haunts.

738. Ca.ses where a spiritual presence appears to seek out a surviving
friend. •

739. Similar ca.ses where the deceased person's phantasm appears in
scenes unfamiliar to him while on earth. Cases of: 739 A. Mr. Klliott.
739 B. Mrs. t.’Iark. 739 C. Mr. Keidcmans.

740. Occasional appearance of phantasms of the dead (of all types) to
several persons collectively. 740 A. Case of Miss W.

741. Cases where the imj)u].so prompting to appearance may have been at
once personal and local; case of Mr. Letts. 741 A. Case of Mrs. Crans.

742. Further cases of appearances to friends in familiar surroundings ; case
of M. (iore Booth. 742 A. Case of Mrs. Judd.

743. A phantSSsmal voice giving the news of death. 743 A. Case of Sister
Bertha.

744. Cases where the phantasmal figure, although sometimes recognised
by acquaintances in a familiar scene, may be thought to have obeyed a local
rather than a personal attraction; case of Mr. Bard. Cases of : 744 A. Miss
Farquharson. 744 B. Mr. J.

745. Apparilions locally conditioned, or hauntings. Cases of: 745 A.
General Becher. 745 B. Mrs. M. 745 C. Mr. Husbands. 745 D. Mrs.
Clerke.

746. Such apparitions may possibly be due to the results of p2it mental
action.

X

SYLLABUSES

747. Phantasmal sounds, non<articulate, but intelligent, apparently ascrib*
able to the agency of deceased persons; case of Mr, L. 747 A. Case of
Mrs. Horne.

748. These sounds, although apparently analogous to Poltergeist pheno-
mena, rarely appear in connection with them. « •

749. Apart, however, both from inarticulate sounds and from Poltergeist
phenomena, there is much evidence to haunting ; — to the fact, that is, that in
many houses several persons have independently seen phantasmal figures more
or less resembling each other. Hypotheses of interpretation, suggested by
Mrs. Sidg^vick.

750. In my own view, the phantasm may imply a local modification, not
of the material, but of the metctherial world.

751. And the apparent influence of certain houses in generating apparitions
may form part of the problem of retrocognition ; -oi phenomena now occurring
which recall and in some unknown way depend upon long-past events; —
whether as their sequel or as their residue. Cases oL 751 A. Miss Morton.
751 B. Miss Scott.

752. We have reached a point where our study of sensory automatisms--
their time coincidences and their significant details—has taught us for the
present nearly all it can; while we crave for some more potent method of
analysis, some wider field of induction, if ^ve are to meet the novel problems
which arise on every side. Such wider^ field is offered to us by the study of
motor automatisms^ to which we must proceed in the next chapter.

753. One lesson of high importance rises so manifestly from the evidence
already studied that it calls for mention here. That w'orld-old conception of
Evil Spirits, of malevolent Powers, which has been the basis of so much
causeless fear, melts from the mind altogether as we study the actual facts.

754. Other ethical indications, of lofty and at the same time evolutionary
type, occur incidentally in the course of our independent demonstration of the
profoundest cosmical thesis which we can conceive as susceptible of 'scientific
proof.

755. Appeal for further collaboration in this absolutely necessary quest.

CHAPTER VIII

(

MOTOR AUTOxMATISM

800. The lines of evidence followed in previous chapters, and here briefly
recapitulated, are in themselves sufBcient to justify the reader in provisional
acceptance of my primary thesis — namely, that the analysis of man’s person-
ality reveals him as a spirit, surviving bodily death. Thii point has been
reached by the discussion of phenomena, such as dreams and ghosts, already
vaguely familiar to the popular mind.

801. • ^'here are still, however, phenomena— less familiar to the ordinary
reader— *which await discussion, and which will add greatly to the evidence for

CHAPTER VIII

Xi

my central contention^ * Prominent among these are motor automatisms ; and
it is important to understand which of such automatisms (after dismissing
morbid varieties) 1 retain here for discussion as evolutive phenomena.

802. Before answering this question in detail, we must realise the pre-
liminary theorem that it may be expected that* supernormal vital phenomena
will manifest themselves as far as possible through the same channels as
abnormal or morbid vital phenomena.

803. To distinguish between the developmental and the degenerative we
must study each psychical phenomenon in turn ; considering whether it indi-
cates mere inhibition, mere perturbation or whether the inhibition involves
latent dynamogeny, and the perturbation masks evolution.

804. Automatic movements may be scientifically more important than
conscious movements ; in fact, they lead up to those trance-utterances which
form in my view our most advanced phenomena.

805. We may begin by pointing out certain main characters which unite
in a true class all the automatisms which we are here considering. They are
idiognomonic and nundative.

806. Example of simple form of nunciative automatism in muscle reading.
The unconscious tremor reveals both my thought and my memory.

807. Case of nunciative or message-bearing automatism in words written
in obedience to post-hypnotic suggestion.

808. Illustration from the dynai^ometer of automatic transformation of
will into motion.

809. Simple motor cxternalisation of subliminal thought in table-tilting.

810. The automatist no doubt unconsciously sets going and stops such
movements; but the word which is thus spelt out is by no means always
what he wished or expected. Other indications that the tilts are subliminally
controlled.

811. A more elaborate form of automatic gesture inspires what are called
^‘spirit-dfawings.’’ 811 A. Mr. Wilkinson on spirit-drawings.

812. Before entering on the impending subject of automatic writing, I inter-
rupt my exposition to introduce two historical ca.ses of automatism, —one of them
inhibitory, one dynamogenic, — which add to my subject the dignity of the great
names of Socrates and Joan of Arc. The automatisms of Socrates are now
capable of coherent explanation.

813. The monitions of the D®mon of Socrates consisted mainly in saga-
cious inhibitions.

814. There is also some slight indication of Socratic telepathy, clairvoyance,
ecstasy.

815. Joan of Arc an example of monitory impulse; her voices (not always
clearly externalised) impel her irresistibly to the noblest doings. 815 A. Mr.
A. Lang on Joan of Arc.

816. These two great historical cases illustrate the furthest extent of the
claim that can be made for the agency of the subliminal self in similar auto-
matisms ; — apart from telepathy or possession.

817. They launch us on our subject with the consciousness of two diffi-
culties. We have to decide for each case— first, whether we are to call it
sensory or motor ; then, whether we are to attribute its origination to the auto-
xnatist’s or to some other mind. It is antecedently likely that the s*ubliminal
self will sometimes express its messages in terms (so to say) of profound

SYLLABUSES

organic modifications. Cases of : 817 A. Dr. N. 817'fB and C. Mrs. Had*
sclle. 817 D. Lady de Vesci. **

818. The inhibitory impulses may sometimes relate to exceedingly trivial
matters. Cases of : 818 A. Mrs. Verrall. 818 B. Mrs. Elliott.

819. Or a sudden inhibition may be combined with a corresponding im-
pulse; case of Dr. Hodgson finding five-leaved clover. 819 A. Case of Dr.
Guebhard finding bifid fern.

820. Sometimes tlie impulse may conceivably be explained by a subcon-
scious perception or interpretation.— Case of Mr. Wyman.

821. A similar case where the sense of smell may have played apart, —
Case of Mr. C. W. Moses. 821 A. Case of Mrs. Gray.

822. ^ Another case, possibly due to smell or sense of varying resistance in
the air.-— Mr. Wait.

823. A similar case, perhaps attributable to excessive tactile sensibility. —
Mr. W.

824. A case of inhibition which seems beyond explanation by hypcra:s-
thesia, and suggests tela;sthesia or spirit guardianship. — Dr. Parsons.

825. We next come to cases involving massive motor impulses to various
actions. Case of Mr. Garrison. 825 A. Case of Mr. .Skirving.

826. Innate predisposition to motor automatisms of various kinds. Scheme
of increasingly specialised motor phenomena. Rise of automatic writing. —
Edmund Gurney and W. Staimon MosciS. My own experience.

827. Automatic writing a mode of experiment harmless in itself.

828. Classification of contents of me.ssages.

829. Most automatic script origin.ites in the automatisms own brain. — Mr.
H. A. Smith’s cases.

830. Reference to anagrams in the “ Clelia ” case. 830 A. The “ Clelia ”
case.

831. Case of Professor Sidgwick*s friend.

832. Mr. Schillers case (832 A) appearance of fictitious personalities,
although neither invited nor credited by the automatist. 832 B. Case of Sceur
Jeanne.

833. Ca.se of Madame X. An unusual combination of various motor
automatisms.

834. The cases just described lead up to Professor Flournoy’s case of
“ H^l^^ne Smith.”

835. Mile. Smith an example of continuous and complex .subliminal menta-
tion going on in a perfectly healthy and normal organism.

836. Her alleged reincarnations.

837. The Martian language.

838. Reversion to previous epochs of life.

839. Possible sport of spirits.

840. Mile. Smith’s “ teleological ” automatisms.

841. Indications of supernormal faculty.

842. Possible telepathy from the dead. The Chessenaz case.

843. We now pass on to cases of phenomena much rrfbre clearly super-
normal. Telepathy obtained through table-tilting. Cases of: 843 A. Pro-
fessor Richet. 843 B. Mr. G. M. Smith.

844. give next cases of automatic writing, the first of which (Mrs.
Moberley’s) shows indications of telepathy.

CHAPTER VIII

xiii

045. Telepathic cases simulatingprophecy ; that of Miss SummerbelL

046. Answers to questions written correctly, although not as the agent
supraliminally intended; case of Mr. Allbright.

847. Another telepathic case, involving the agent^s subliminal thoughts.—
<^ Mr. Riddell.

848. Our most striking case is a long scries of telepathic communications
between Mr. and Mrs. Newnham.

849. Mrs. Newnham writes automatically answers to unspoken questions
by Mr. Newnham. 849 A. Case of Mrs. Newnham.

850. A similar but sliortcr series is given in the next Appendix. 850 A.
Case of Mr. Huttemer.

851. The next case shows occasional telepathy, mingled with fragments of
apparent clairvoyance and premonition. 851 A. Case of Lady Mabel Howard.

852. A case of commiuiication through tabledilting from a distant agent. —
Mrs, Kirby. 852 A. Case of M. A uguez prediction of death. 852 B.
Signor Bonatti’s automatic writing; telepathy from a distant living agent.

853. Transitional cases information purporting to come from deceased
persons, but more probably derived telepathically from the living; case of Mr.
Lewis.

854. Message purporting to come from a deceased person who was found
to be living ; case of Mr. Long.

855. Case of automatic writing reproducing experimentally the thoughts of
the persons present.

856. Statement through table-tilting of incident occurring at the time in a
neighbouring house.— Professor Alexander's case.

857. 'lelepathy may produce erroneous statements through the agent’s
thoughts being reproduced as matters of fact. 857 A. Case of Professor H.

858. Dr. Ermacora’s experiments with a sensitive,— Maria Manziiii. 858 A.
Her automatic writing gives the contents of a letter which reached her next
morning.

859. The information may be derived from discarnate spirits — though not
necessarily from those alleged in the communications. The communicators
may deliberately veil their identity, and may also have access to sources of
knowledge remote even to themselves. 859 A. These problems are exemplified
in the automatic writings of Miss A.

860. In these and other retrocognitivc cases, it is difficult to decide
between the hypothe.ses of “ cryptomnesia " and spirit-control.

861. Mr. Wedgwood’s experiments with Mrs. R. ;— case of communications
purporting tocomejrom Colonel Gurwood (who died in 1845).

862. Another retrocognitivc case of the same kind through Mrs. R.,
namely 862 A. The David Brainerd ” case.

863. But retrocognitivc messages referring to matters easily accessible in
print Mr. Moses’ case of musical composers, giving dates of their lives),
even if genuine, may be attributed to clair\^oyance on the part of the aiitomatist.

864. A resemblance of the handwriting to that of the deceased person is
sometimes alleged^ but must be received with caution. 864 A. Professor Ros.si-
Pagnoni’s experiments at Pesaro.

865. Another case of alleged resemblances of handwriting, w'hicli also
illustrates the .spontaneous recurrence of the same problems with autoraatists
of many different types, namely 865 A. Case of Mrs. Underwood.

xiv

SYLLABUSES

866. Cases where the writing announces a death unknown to the persons
present ; — instance reported by Dr. Li^eault.

867. In anotlier case, partially correct details about the death are added.
867 A. Case of Mdlle. Stramm.

868. Sometimes telekinetic phenomena seem to be associated with the
announcement of a death, 868 A. The Pdrdliguine case. 868 B. Case of
Mr. F. Hodgson. 868 C. Ref. to “ Woodd knockings.”

869. Cases where correct details unknown to the automatist are given
regarding a death which is known to him. 869 A. Case of Mrs. Fitzgerald.
869 B. The Skrytnikoff case.

870. A communication corresponding, not to the knowledge of the sitters^
but to what was known to the alleged communicator before death. 870 A.
Case of Signor Cavalli.

871. Automatic writing by a child, showing faculties superior to those she
normally possessed, with some writing in languages unknown to her. 871 A.
Mr. Junor Browne’s case.

872. Writing by a young child who had no knowledge of her letters.
872 A. Mr. Hempstead’s case.

873. A series of writings by Mr. W., with indications of subliminal telses-
thesia, and telepathy both from the living and from the dead. 873 A. Another
experience of Mr. W.’s.

874. A prediction given through table-tilting of the precise date of a death.
874 A. Dr. Suddick’s case.

875. Example pointing to continued terrene knowledge on the part of a
deceased person ; case of Mrs. von Wiescler.

876. A test message planned before death and communicated afterwards;
case of Mrs. Finney. 876 A. Case of Prince Emile Wittgenstein ; message
about missing will. 876 B. Dr. Knorr’s case : message about missing note.

877. Desirability of planning beforehand communications to be made after
death as a test of personal identity. 877 A. Note on posthumous letters.

878. The evidence as to motor phenomena here set forth confirms and
extends the conceptions to which the cognate sensory phenomena pointed ; —
the expansion of normal leading on to the development of supernormal
faculties. The motor phenomena suggest more strongly than the .sensory the
hypothesis of “ psychical invasion,” which, if sufficiently prolonged, becomes
a persistent “ control ” or “ possession.”

879. When the subliminal self is affected by a telepathic impact which
works itself out by automatic movements, it becomes a question whether the
movements are executed by the subliminal self or by the external agent.

880. This leads us on to the problem to be discussed in the next chapter;
—in what ways may two spirits co-operate in the possession and control of the
same organism ?

CHAPTER IX

TRANCE, POSSESSION, AND ECSTASY

900. , ePossession may he defined as a development of Motor Automatism^
resulting at last in a substitution of personality ; there has recently been a great
advance in the evidence for this theory.

CHAPTER IX

XV

901. Further, itcoheres with modern notions of personality, — of the control
of organism by spirit^^ It implies that the spirit of the entranced automatist
partially quits his organism, and allows an invading spirit to occupy and use it.

902. The conception — similar as it is to primitive beliefs — will be found to
co-ordinate and explain man]^ of our earlier groups of phenomena.

903. First, the alternating use of brain-centrcs by alternate personalities
seems to form a link in the series which ends in possession.

904. Genius suggests a possession of the brain-centres by the subliminal
self.

905. In sleep it appears that the spirit may sometimes travel away from
the body and perceive distant scenes clairvoyantly.

906. In the hypnotic trance or in spontaneous somnambulism, we often find
a quasi-personality occupying the organism, while the sensitive’s own spirit
often claims to have been absent elsewhere, and sometimes exhibits real clair-
voyant power. Telepathic intercourse, if carried far enough, corresponds to
possession or to ecstasy.

907. In telepathy we encounter an influence which suggests an intelligent
and responsive external presence, and telepathy between the living leads on to
telepathy from the dead; which implies that the communication does not
depend on vibrations from a material brain.

908. When motor automatism develops into possession, there is apparently
no communication between the discasnate mind and the tnind of the auto-
matist, but rather with the latter’s brain.

909. Even in ordinary cases of telepathy, the percipient’s brain may some-
times be influenced by his own mind, and sometimes directly by the agent's ;
in the latter case, the influence may be termed telergic* Veridical apparitions
also show traces of the spiritual and the physical elements mingling in various
degrees as we pass from clairvoyant visions to collective apparitions.

910. The same stages are to be seen in tlie case of apparitions of the
dead— leading up to complete possession of the automatist’s brain by an
extraneous spirit.

911. Possession by spirits is difhcult to distinguish from cases of secondary
personality, where the organism is controlled by another synthesis of its own
spirit. We must not ascribe to spirit-control cases where no new knowledge is
shown in the trance state.

912. In reputed savage cases of possession, the hostility of the control to
the automatist is no proof of its being other than a secondary personality.
912 A. Dr. Nevius on demon possession in China.

913. It is son^times claimed that these controls show supernormal know-
ledge, but the cases recorded may generally be explained by heightened
memory, with j) 0 ssible traces of telepathy. In cases where there is good
evidence of supernormal knowledge, the controls have always been both human
and friendly.

914. We should expect spirit-control to be subject to the same limits that
we find in controls by secondary personalities ; e,g; the external spirit is not
likely to be abl# to produce utterance in a language unknown to the
automatist.

915. In both cases, and also in dreams, memory seems to fail and change

in a capricious way. *

916. Again, it is hard to get into continuous colloquy with a somnambulist.

XVI

SYLLABUSES

who generally follows his own train of ideas, and similar difficulties seem to
occur in conversing with spirit-controls.

917. Our expectations will thus be very different from the commonplace or
even the poetic notion of what communication with the dead is likely to be.

918. The actual phenomena fail to comply* either with the orthodox or <
traditional line of expectation, or \vith romantic anticipations, or with the
notion that they should subserve some practical purpose.

919. The problems of possession, on the other hand, form the natural
sequence of our earlier problems; the actions of the possessed organism
show the furthest stage of motor automatism ; the incursion of the possessing
spirit is the completest form of telepathic invasion.

920. We must now briefly consider the relation of spiritual influences to
the world of matter. In some telergic cases, it appears that the agent's spirit
acts directly on the percipient’s brain.

921. In cases of possession, it is possible that the controlling spirit may
impel the organism to more forcible movements than its usual ones.

922. It may also be able to use the organism more skilfully and emit
from it an energy which can move objects not in contact with it ; this pheno-
menon is termed by Aksakoff telekinesis,

923. The interest excited in the ordinary public by the “ physical pheno-
mena of spiritualism,'’ or telekinesis, has, as is well known, fostered much fraud,
to expose and guard against which ha^ been one of the main tasks of the
S.P.R. 923 A. References to exposures of Madame Blavatsky. 923 B.
References to exposures of other spiritualistic frauds.

924. In this work, telekinesis is only dealt with where it appears as an
element in spirit-possession, especially in the cases of D. D. Home and Stainton
Moses.

925. Telekinesis may begin as a form of automatism, initiated by the sub-
liminal self, and there may occasionally, though not provably, be an element of
it in table-tilting or automatic writing. This may develop into raps or into
movements of distant objects. 925 A. Case of Mr. Vaughan.

926. The right comprehension of telekinetic phenomena must depend on
a knowledge greater than we at present possess of the relations between
matter and ether. A tentative sketch of what may be done by future inquiries
is given in a “ Scheme of Vital Faculty” (926 A). 926 B. References to
accounts of telekinetic cases.

927. Sporadic cases of ecstacy or possession seem not infrequent in some

private circles. 927 A. Mr. O.’s case. Cases of: 927 B. Miss White;
927 C. Miss Lottie Fowler. ^

928. All such cases are difficult to classify precisely, but the more de-
veloped forms of possession throw light on the more rudimentary ones.

929. The most rudimentary form seems to be a momentary possession by
the subliminal self : e.g, ca.se of Mrs. Luther.

930. Or there may be a brief psychical excursion in which some know-
ledge is gained and uttered automatically by the subliminal self: eg, case of
Professor Thoulet.

931. The next case — that of Mr. Goodall — suggests a kind of telepathic
conversation between the subliminal self, controlling the utterance of the
sleeper, affd some perhaps discarnate spirit.

932. The next— Mr. Wilkie's— is a miniature case of possession.

CHAPTER IX

XVI I

933. These cates illustrate the developmeat of the incipient stages of
trance into ecstacy or possession, the control in different cases being by the
incarnate or by the discarnate spirit, or by a combination of the two.

934. In one form of trance the automatist is completely controlled by his

own subliminal self or incarnate spirit ; 934 A. case of Mr. Sanders.

935. In the famous case of Swedenborg, on the other hand, direct inter-
course during ecstasy with di.scarnate spirits was claimed.

936. Swedenborg's personal experiences are in accord with those described
—apparently independently — by otlier sensitives since his time ; on the other
hand, his dogmatic writings have been discredited by later knowledge.
936 A. Kant on Swedenborg. 936 B. The Seeressof Prevorst. 936 C. Case
of Mr. Skilton.

937. Cahagnet’s subject, Ad^le Maginot, was also apparently, when in
trance, controlled by her own subliminal self. 937 A. Mr. Podmore’s account
of this case.

938. In the case of D. D. Home telekinetic phenomena are alleged, as
well as trance manifestations. 938 A. References to information about Home.
938 B. Review of Mme. Home’s Life of Home.

939. Home’s trances varied a good deal on different occasions.

940. Comparison of the trance-manifestations of Home with those of

Moses and of Mrs. Piper. ^

941. In the case of Moses, as in that of Home, the telekinetic phenomena
formed an integral part of the general manifestations, but were regarded by
him as merely subsidiary to the religious teachings of his “ controls.”

.942. This ethical preoccupation was natural to his character and time.

943. His relation to the S.P.R. 943 A. References to printed records
of his phenomena, and biography.

944. The two series of phenomena — physical and trance— -were intimately
connected in his case, and purported to be produced by the same .alleged
discarnate spirits.

945. These belonged to three classes: (a) persons recently dead; (p)
distinguished persons of past generations ; (c) more distinguished and more
remote persons, who called themselves by pseudonyms, e.^. “ imperator.”

946. (icncral account of Moses’ automatic writings. 946 A. His descrip-
tion of the process of writing,

947. The evidence for the identity of the remote spirits is very dubious.
947 A. Case of Rector’s copying from a closed book.

948. Possible explanation of some of the cases by subliminal observation
and memory. 94&^A. Cases from “ Spirit Identity.” 948 B. Other cases of
veridical communications.

949. Case of “ Blanche Abercromby,” in which a recent death— unknown
normally to Moses — was announced by his automatic writing, some of which
was alleged to have a close resemblance to hers.

950. Discus.sion of the possible or alleged functions of the remote controls.

951. Classification of messages according to their evidential quality.

952. In some of Moses’ cases, the messages were accompanied by appari-
tions or by telekinetic phenomena.

953. In the case of Mrs. Piper, the verbal messages from persofts recently
dead are of much greater evidential value ; she is also alleged to be controlled
by the “ Imperator ” group.

VOL. II.

XVUl

SYLLABUSES

differs from those of Home and Mcscs in presenting no
teiekinetic phenomena, and in the fact that she shows no supernormal Dowers
except when in trance. f ®

955. Brief history of the case.

956. The hypothesis of fraud. 956 A. Report by Professor James.
956 B. Report by the present writer.

957. Discussion of the personality of “ Phinuit.” 957 A. Description by

Professor Lodge. ^

958. During the dominance of the « Phinuit ” control, the evidence for the
personal identity of the alleged communicators was generally slight.

^ 959. In the next stage that of the “G. P.** control — the evidence greatly

improved. 959 A. Mr. Hart's sitting. 959 B. Mr. and Mrs. Howard’s
sitting. 959 C. Communications from Mr. Hart.

960. Instance of correct information, unknown to the sitter, being given.
960 A. Communications from Elisa Mannors.

961. Case of attempt to write Hawaiian : Mr. Briggs’ sitting.

962. Communications from young children : Mrs. Sutton’s sitting. 962 A.
Dr. and Mrs. Thaw’s sittings.

963. The discarnate spirits seem occasionally to manifest powers of retro-

cognitive telaesthesia and of precognition. 963 A. Predictions given through
Mrs. Piper. r

964. In the last stages of Mrs. Piper’s trance manifestations, the chief
controls purport to be those of Mr. Mo.ses— the Imperator group—but there is
no proof so far of their identity.

965. Trance communications from discarnate spirits must be influenced
both by the subliminal self and by the organism of the medium, and perhaps
may be impaired by limitations in the powers of the spirits.

966. Possession appears to have no injurious effect on the medium, but
rather the reverse.

967. Coming to the part played by the spirit, it seems as far removed from
modern philosophical as from ancient savage conceptions.

968. The personal identity of a spirit must connote memory and character.

969. The communications indicate some cognisance of sp.acc and time,
and some knowledge both of the thoughts and emotions of survivors and of
material facts.

970. Consideration of the possible difiiculties of communicating on the
part of the communicators.

971. They are such as might be inferred from the^ analogies between
possession and alternating personalities, dreams, and somnambulism.

972. The relations between mind and brain may be elucidated by the
difficulties shown by the spirit in using the medium’s brain.

973. The spirits sometimes appear more eager to communicate than the
sitters are to receive communications.

974. Conclu.sions which may be drawn from the phenomena recorded.

975. One obstacle to our inquiry has been the apparAit want of dignity
in this mode of acquiring knowledge ; but the apparently trivial experiments
and oh.se|^ations have led to generalisations of immense importance.

976. Further discussion of ecstasy.

977. It IS a phenomenon common to all religions, and hence of special
importance from a psychological point of view.

978. We must now deal briefly with the subject of retrocognition and

CHAPTER X

xix

precognition ; theses suggest powers even more remote than telepathy or
telsesthesia from ordinary methods of acquiring knowledge.

979. Retrocognition begins with hypermnesia, leading on to cases where
the knowledge seems to come from the memories of other minds, embodied or
disembodied, or from a direct perception of the cosmic record.

980. Precognition, starting from promnesia, leads oh through self-sugges-
tion and organic prevision, gradually involving more and more of the
percipient’s environment, as well as of his own history; but may even then
be regarded as the result of the wider outlook of the subliminal self. 980 A.
Case of Signorina Manzini.

981. Some precognitions, however, may be due to the reasoned foresight of
disembodied spirits; and some may possibly be derived from spirits higher
than human, or from a sphere where our conception of time no longer holds.

982. Discussion of the evolution of retrocognition from memory.

983. The various stages of precognition; hyperaesthesia, peripheral or
central.

984. The wider knowledge of the subliminal self ; sometimes transmitted
tclepathically to others, or itself derived from disembodied spirits.

985. Direct foreknowledge of the future; the relation of this possibility
to the problem of Free Will.

986. The conception of Time, sys has often been suggested, may be purely
subjective.

987. Our evidence seems to indicate that the spiritual world is now just
beginning to act systematically upon the material world.

988. The faintness and incoherence of the messages seem an evidence
of effort on the part of the communicators ; but to solve the mystery fully will
require the labours of many generations.

CHAPTER X

EPILOGUE

1000. Some attempt to place these new discoveries in clearer relation to
existing schemes of civilised thought and belief is needful for the practical
purpose of enlisting help in our inquiry, which has hitherto suffered from
indifference rather than from opposition.

1001. The i|^fluence of the evidence set forth in this book should prompt
towards the ultimate achievement of scientific dominance in every department
of human study, including— as never before — the realm of “ divine things.”

1002. The present age is marked by a deep and widespread dissatisfaction,
by a decline of any real belief in the worth of life. A similar crisis which
passed over Europe once before was dissipated by the rise of Christianity.

1003. In our age the scientific instinct must be satisfied equally with the
religious; any sfeheme of knowledge to commend itself to our descendants
must be one which, while it transcends our present knowledge, steadily continues
it- It is only now that this principle is beginning to be applied to the
spiritual world.

1004. The conception of Telepathy is seen gradually to enlarge and deepen,
proving to us at last that the kinship between souls is more fundamental than
their separation.

XX

SYLLABUSES

1005. Let us suppose that whilst incarnate men hav^ risen from savagery
into intelligence, discarnate men have become more eager and more able to
communicate with earth. Sporadic instances of such communication have
always occurred ; but the newer scientific temper — demanding not miracles,
but a higher law — is not perhaps confined to this earth alone.

1006. Actual increase of our knowledge of the spiritual world, both by
discovery and by revelation, is rendering possible a religious synthesis less
incomplete than any which has been attained until now.

1007. By a religious synthesis 1 mean a co-ordination and development
of all such response of the human spirit to Cosmic Law as has risen above
mere egoism or revolt into co-operation and worship.

1008. I hold that this enthusiasm of response is morally incumbent on us ;
since, even though the Cosmos appears imperfect, it may be destined to attain
perfection partly through our own work and faith.

1009. The response actually made in the past by human spirits of high type
has been, on the whole, concordant in recognising that a spiritual world under-
lies the material. The two leading World- Religions have developed different
sides of this ob.scure philosophic consensus. Eastern contemplation has dwelt
on the vastness of the spirit's ascent up infinite degrees of Being, to be merged
at last in an impersonal All. Western worship has based on Jesus Christ’s
Resurrection the belief that the soul survives bodily death, and on His Revela-
tion the belief that the world is spiritual and is ruled by Love.

1010. This dim and imperfect agreement is now supplemented by nascent
discovery and revelation, f'rom the discovery of telepathy we learn that a
direct communication passes between incarnate spirits, and from di.scarnate
spirits to incarnate. From the revelation contained in these me.ssages from
discarnate spirits, we learn in direct fashion what philosophy had suspected, —
the existence and influence of a spiritual world.

1011. Our new knowledge, confirming ancient streams of thought, corrobo-
rates analogically for Christianity the record of Christ’s appearances after
death, and hints at the possibility of the beneficent incarnation of souls
previously on a level higher than man’s.

1012. Passing on to the further future, it confirms for Buddhism the con-
ception of an endless spiritual evolution, which the whole Cosmos subserves.

1013. And meantime, by its actual and ever-growing reality, the nascent
communion with enfranchised spirits offers both immediate sustenance and
endless development.

1014. That development must be an increase in holiness ; an intensified
interpenetration both of worlds and of souls; an cvolutidb of Energy into
Life, and of Life into the threefold conception of Wisdom, Love, and Joy.

1015. This process, effected for each several soul in different fashion, is
in itself continuous and cosmic ; all Life is developing itself from the primal
Energy, and divinising itself into the ultimate Joy.

Appendix A. The Function of a Society for Psychical Research.

Appendix B. The Decline of Dogmatism. ^

Appendix C. Prayer and Supplication.

700 ]

CHAPTER VII

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

ovKeri Trpdo’o)

d/Sarav aXa Ki6v<av vrrip *H/>ttKXcos vepdv €vpapis»

. . . dvp,€f TLva TTpd? oAAoSaTrav
OLKpav ipLov 7r\6ov rrapap€ip€ai ;

— Pindar.

700. The course of our argument has gradually conducted us to
a point of capital importance. A profound and central question,
approached in irregular fashion from time to time in previous chapters,
must now be directly faced. From the actions and perceptions of
spirits still in the flesh, and concerned with one another, we must pass
on to inquire into the actions of spirits no longer in the flesh, and
into the forms of perception with which men still in the flesh respond
to that unfamiliar and mysterious agency.

There need, I hope, be no real break here in ray previous line of
argument. The subliminal self, which we have already traced through
various phases of growing sensitivity, growing independence of organic
bonds, will now be studied as sensitive to yet remoter influences; — as
maintaining an independent existence even when the organism is de-
stroyed. Our subject will divide itself conveniently under three main heads.
/7n'/, it will be well to discuss briefly the nature of the evidence to man’s
survival of death which may theoretically be obtainable, and its possible
connections with evidence set forth in previous chapters. Secondly, — and
this must form the bulk of the present chapter,-— we need a classified
exposition of the^main evidence to survival thus far obtained; — so far,
that is to say, as sensory automatism — audition or apparition — is con-
cerned ; for motor automatism — automatic writing and trance-utterance —
must be left for later discussion. Thirdly, there will be need of some
consideration of the meaning of this evidence as a whole, and of its
implications alike for the scientific and for the ethical future of mankind.
Much more, indeed, of discussion (as well as of evidence) than I can
furnish will be needed before this great conception can be realised or
argued from with the scientific thoroughness due to its positiQp among
fundamental cosmical law's. Considering how familiar the notion — the
vagvje shadowy notion — of “ immortality ” has always been, it is strange
VOL. n. A

CHAPTER VII

[701

indeed that so little should have been done in tliese modern days to
grasp or to criticise it ; — so little, one might almost s&y, since the Phaedo
of Plato.

701. Beginning, then, with the inquiry as^to what kind of evidence
ought to be demanded for human survival, we are met first by the bluff
statement which is still often uttered even by intelligent men, that no
evidence would convince them of such a fact ; “ neither would they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead.”

Extravagant as such a profession sounds, it has a meaning which
we shall do well to note. These resolute antagonists mean that no new
evidence can carry conviction to them unless it be continuous with old
evidence ; and that they cannot conceive that evidence to a world of
spirit can possibly be continuous with evidence based upon our experi-
ence of a world of matter. I agree with this demand for continuity;
and I agree also that the claims usually advanced for a spiritual world
have not only made no attempt at continuity with known fact, but have
even ostentatiously thrown such continuity to the winds. The popular
mind has expressly desired something startling, something outside Law
and above Nature, It has loved, if not a Credo quia absurdum, at least
a Credo quia non probatunu But Ihe inevitable retribution is a deep
insecurity in the conviction thus attained. Unsupported by the general
fabric of knowledge, the act of faith seems to shrink into the background
as that great fabric stands and grows.

I can hardly too often repeat that my object in these pages is of a
quite opposite character. Believing that all cognisable Mind is as con-
tinuous as all cognisable Matter, my ideal would be to attempt for the
realm of mind what the spectroscope and the law of gravitation have
effected for the realm of matter, and to carry that known cosmic uni-
formity of substance and interaction upwards among the essences and
operations of an unknown spiritual world. And in order to explore
these unreachable altitudes I would not ask to stand with the theologian
on the summit of a “ cloud-capt tower,” but rather on plain earth at the
measured base of a trigonometrical sur\'ey.

702. If we would measure such a base, the jungle, must be cleared
to begin with. Let us move for a while among first definitions ; trying
to make clear to ourselves what kind of thing it is that we are endeavour-
ing to trace or discover. In popular parlance, we are looking out for
ghosts. What connotation, then, are we to give to the word ghost ” — a
word which has embodied so many unfounded theories and causeless
fears? It would be more satisfactory, in the present st|te of our know-
ledge, simply to collect facts without offering speculative comment. But
it seems safer to begin by briefly pointing out the manifest errors of the
tradition!! view; since that tradition, if left unnoticed, would remain
lodged in the background even of many minds which have never really
accepted it.

702] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 3

•

Briefly, then, t^e popular view regards a ghost” as a deceased
person permitted by Providence to hold communication with survivors*
And this short definition contains, I think, at least three unwarrantable
assumptions. •

In the first place, such words as permission and Providence are simply
neither more nor less applicable to this phenomenon than to any other.
We conceive that all phenomena alike take place in accordance with the
laws of the universe, and consequently by permission of the Supreme
Power in the universe. Undoubtedly the phenomena with which we are
dealing are in this sense permitted to occur. But there is no a priori
reason whatever for assuming that they are permitted in any especial sense
of their own, or that they form exceptions to law, instead of being ex-
emplifications of law. Nor is there any a posteriori reason for supposing
any such inference to be deducible from a study of the phenomena
themselves. If we attempt to find in these phenomena any poetical
justice or manifest adaptation to human cravings, we shall be just as
much disappointed as if we endeavoured to find a similar satisfaction in
the ordinary course of terrene history.

In the second place, we have net warrant for the assumption that the
phantom seen, even though it be somehow caused by a deceased person,
is that deceased person, in any ordinary sense of the word. Instead of
appealing to the crude analogy of the living friend who, when he has
walked into the room, is in the room, we shall find for the ghost a much
closer parallel in those hallucinatory figures or phantasms which living
persons can sometimes project at a distance. When Mr. Kirk, for in-
stance, caused by an effort of will an apparition of himself to a waking per-
cipient out of sight (sec 668 B), he was himself awake and conscious in
the place where, not his phantom, but his body, stood. Whatever, then,
that phantom was — however generated or conditioned — we cannot say
that it was himself* And equally unjustifiable must be the common
parlance which speaks of the ghost as though it were the deceased person
himself — a revenant coming back amongst living men.

All this, of course, will be already familiar to most of my readers, and
only needs repetitjpn here because experience shows that when — as with
these post-mortem phantoms — the deceased person has gone well out of
sight or reach there is a fresh tendency, so to say, to anthropomorphose
the apparition ; to suppose that, as the deceased person is not provably
anywhere else, he is probably here ; and that the apparition is bound to
behave accordingly. All such assumptions must be dismissed, and the
phantom must taken on its merits, as indicating merely a certain
connection with the deceased, the precise nature of that connection
being a part of the problem to be solved. ^

And in the third place, just as we must cease to say that the phantom is
the deceased, so also must we cease to ascribe to the phantom the motives
by Which we imagine that the deceased might be swayed. We must

4

CHAPTER VII

[703

therefore exclude from our definition of a ghost any words which assume
its intention to communicate with the living. It may bear such a relation
to the deceased that it can reflect or represent his presumed wish to
communicate, or it may not. If, for instance, its relation to his post-
mortem life be like the relation of my dreams to my earthly life, it may
represent little that is truly his, save such vague memories and instincts
as give a dim individuality to each man's trivial dreams.

703. Let us attempt, then, a truer definition. Instead of describing
a ghost as a dead person permitted to communicate with the living,
let us define it as a manifestation of persistent personal energy^ or as an
indication that some kind of force is being exercised after death which is
in some way connected with a person previously known on earth. In this
definition we have eliminated, as will be seen, a great mass of popular
assumptions. Yet we must introduce a further proviso, lest our definition
still seem to imply an assumption which we have no right to make. It
is theoretically possible that this force or influence, which after a man’s
death creates a phantasmal impression of him, may indicate no con-
tinuing action on his part, but may be some residue of the force or
energy which he generated while yet jlive. There may be veridical after-
images — such as Clurney hints at {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 417)
when in his comments on the recurring figure of an old woman — seen on
the bed where she was murdered — he remarks that this figure suggests
not so much ** any continuing local interest on the part of the deceased
person, as the survival of a mere image, impressed, we cannot guess how,
on we cannot guess what, by that person’s physical organism, and per-
ceptible at times to those endowed with some cognate form of sensitive-
ness,” (I quote the case referred to in 733 B, and a second similar one
in 745 B.)

Strange as this notion may seem, it is strongly suggested by many
of the cases of haunting which are referred to later in this chapter.
We shall presently find (see 745-751) that there is strong evidence
for the recurrence of the same hallucinatory figtires in the same
localities, but weak evidence to indicate any purpose in most of these
figures, or any connection with bygone individuals, or- with such trage-
dies as are popularly supposed to start a ghost on its career. Li
some of these cases of frequent, meaningless recurrence of a figure in a
given spot, we are driven to wonder whether it can be some deceased
person’s past frequentation of that spot, rather than any fresh action of
his after death, which has generated what 1 have termed the veridical
after-image— veridical in the sense that it communicates information,
previously unknown to the percipient, as to a former inhabitant of the
haunted locality.

Suclf are some of the questions which our evidence suggests. And 1
may point out that the very fact that such bizarre problems should present
themselves at every turn does in a certain sense tend to show that these

5

704] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

•

apparitions are not*iturely subjective things, — do not originate merely in
the percipient’s imagination. For they arc not like what any man would
have imagined. What man’s mind does tend to fancy on such topics
may be seen in the endless crop of fictitious ghost stories, which furnish,
indeed, a curious proof of the persistence of preconceived notions. For
they go on being framed according to canons of their own, and deal with
a set of imaginary phenomena quite different from those which actually
occur. 'Fhe actual phenomena, I may add, could scarcely be made
romantic. One true “ ghost story ” is apt to be very like another, and
most of them to be fragmentary and apparently meaningless. Their
meaning, that is to say, lies in their conformity, not to the mythopceic
instinct of mankind, which fabricates and enjoys the fictitious talcs, but
i.j some unknown law, not based on human sentiment or convenience
at all.

And thus, absurdly enough, we sometimes hear men ridicule the
phenomena which actually do happen, simply because those phenomena
ilo not suit their preconceived notions of what ghostly phenomena ought
to be ; — not perceiving that this very divergence, this very unexpectedness,
is in itself no slight indication of an origin outside the minds which
obviously were so far from anticipating anything of the kind.

704. And in fact the very qualities which arc most a])t to raise deri-
sion are such as the evidence set forth in the earlier chapters of this work
might reasonably lead us to expect. For I hold that now for the first time
can we form a conception of ghostly communications which shall in any
^Yay consist or cohere with more established conceptions ; which can be
j'rosented as in any way a development of facts which are already experi-
mentally known. 'Jwo preliminary conceptions were needed — conceptions
m one sense ancient enough ; but yet the first of which has only in this
g'Uicralion found its place in science, while the second is as yet awaiting
iis brevet of orthodoxy. The first conception is that with which hypnotism
rnd various automatisms have familiarised us, — the conception of multiplex
personality, of the potential co-existence of many states and many memories
in the same individual. The second is the conception of telepathy ; of
the action of mind on mind apart from the ordinary organs of sense ; and
especially of its srtion by means of hallucinations ; — by the generation of
^eritlical phantasms which form, as it were, messages from men still in the
Ih sh. Anil I believe that these two conceptions are in this way connected,
that the telepathic message generally starts from, and generally impinges
upon, a subconscious or submerged stratum in both agent and percipient.^
^•Vlierever there is hallucination, whether delusive or veridical, I hold
that a message 8f some sort is forcing its way upwards from one stratum
of personality to another, — a message which may be merely dreamlike and
incoherent, or which may symbolise a fact otherwise unreachajjle by the
percipient personality. And the mechanism seems much the same whether

* ^ See Pkautasins cf the /./V/Vy, vol. i. p. 231.

6 CHAPTER VII [704

I

the message’s path be continued within one individual or pass between
two ; whether A’s own submerged self be signalling lo his emergent self
or B be telepathically stimulating the hidden fountains of perception in A.
If anything like this be true, it seems plainly needful that all that we know
of abnormal or supernormal communications between minds, or states of
the same mind, still embodied in flesh, should be searched for analogies
which may throw light on this strangest mode of intercourse between
embodied and disembodied minds. Our steps on this uncertain ground
must needs be short and wavering. But they may help to mark the right
direction for future inquiry, and to dispel certain vulgar preconceptions
which can only mislead.

A communication (if such a thing exists) from a departed person to a
person still on earth is, at any rate, a communication from a mind in one
state of existence to a mind in a very different state of existence. And it
is, moreover, a communication from one mind to another which passes
through some channel other than the ordinary channels of sense, since
on one side of the gulf no material sense-organs exist. It will apparently
be an extreme instance of both these classes — of communications between
state and state, ^ and of telepathic communications ; and we ought, there-
fore, to approach it by considering the less advanced cases of both these
types.

On what ocensions do we commonly find a mind conversing with
another mind not on the same plane with itself? — with a mind inhabiting
in some sense a different world, and viewing the environment with a
difference of outlook greater than the mere difference of character of the
two personages will account for ?

The first instance of this sort which will occur to us lies in spon-
taneous somnambulism, or colloquy between a person asleep and a
person awake. And observe here how slight an accident allows us to
enter into converse with a state which at first sight seems a type of incom-
municable isolation. Awake, we share our world,” runs the olil saying,
‘^but each dreamer inhabits a world of his own.” Yet the dreamer,
apparently so self-enclosed, may be gently led, or will spontaneously enter,
into converse with waking men.

The somnambulist, or rather the somniloquist — foil it is the talking
rather than the walking which is the gist of the matter — is thus our first
natural type of the revenanL

And observing the habits of somnambulists, we note that the degree in
which they can communicate with other minds varies greatly in different

1 Some word is much needed to express communications between one state and
another, between the somnambulic and the waking state, or, in hypnotism, the
cataleptic ^d the somnambulic, &c. The word ** methectic ** {fitBticTucSs) seems to me
the most suitable, especially since happens to be the word used by Plato (Farm.

133 T).) for participation between ideas and concrete objects. Or the word “ inter-state "
might be pressed into this new duty.

7

705 ] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

cases. One sleep-V&ker will go about his customary avocations without
recognising the presence of any other person whatever; another will
recognise certain persons only, or will answer when addressed, but only
on certain subjects, his mind coming into contact with other minds
only on a very few points'. Rarely or never will a somnambulist spon-
taneously notice what other persons are doing, and adapt his o^ actions
thereto.

Next let us turn from natural to induced sleep-waking, from idiopathic
somnambulism to the hypnotic trance. Here, too, throughout the different
stages of the trance, we find a varying and partial (or elective) power of
communication. Sometimes the entranced subject makes no sign what-
ever ; sometimes he seems able to hear and answer one person, or certain
persons, and not others ; sometimes he will talk freely to all ; but, however
freely he may talk, he is not exactly his waking self, and as a rule he has
no recollection, or a very imperfect recollection, in waking life of what he
has said or done in his trance.

Judging, then, from such analogy as communications from one living
state to another can suggest to us, we shall expect that the communication
of a disembodied or discamate person with an incarnate, if such exist, will
be subject to narrow limitations, and very possibly will not form a part of
the main current of the supposed discamate consciousness.

705. These preliminary considerations are applicable to any kind of
alleged communication from the departed — whether well or ill evidenced ;
whether conveyed in sensory or in motor form.

liCt us next consider what types of communication from the dead our
existing evidence of communications among the living suggests to us
as analogically possible. It appears to me that there is an important
parallelism running through each class of our experiments in automatism
and each class of our spontaneous phenomena. Roughly speaking, we
may say that our experiment and observation up to this point have
comprised five different stages of phenomena, viz., (I.) hypnotic sugges-
tion; (11.) telepathic experiments; (III.) spontaneous telepathy during
life; (IV,) phantasms at death; (V.) phantasms after death. And we
find, I think, that the same types of communication meet us at each
stage ; so that this recurrent similarity of types raises a presumption that
the underlying mechanism of manifestation at each stage may be in some
way similar.

Again using a mere rough form of division, we shall find three main
forms of manifestation at each stage : (i) hallucinations of the senses ; (2)
emotional and motor impulses ; (3) definite intellectual messages.

(I.) And fiift let us start from a class of experiments into which tele-
pathy does not enter, but which exhibit in its simplest form the mechan-
ism of the automatic transfer of messages from one stratum to pother of
the same personality. I speak, of course, of post-hypnotic suggestions.
Here the agent is a living man, operating in an ordinary way, by direct

8 CHAPTER VII [705

r

Speech. The unusual feature lies in the condition dfothe percipient, who
is hypnotised at the time, and is thus undergoing a Idnd of dislocation of
personality, or temporary upheaval of a habitually subjacent stratum of
the self. This hypnotic personality, being for the time at the surface,
receives the agent’s verbal suggestion, of which the percipient’s waking
self is unaware. Then afterwards, when the waking self has resumed its
usual upper position, the hypnotic self carries out at the stated time the
given suggestion, — an act whose origin the upper stratum of consciousness
does not know, but which is in effect a message communicated to the
upper stratum from the now submerged or subconscious stratum on
which the suggestion was originally impressed.

And this message may take any one of the three leading forms men-
tioned above ; — say a hallucinatory image of the hypnotiscr or of some
other person ; or an impulse to perform some action ; or a definite word
or sentence to be written automatically by the waking self, which thus
learns what order has been laid upon the hypnotic self while the waking
consciousness was in abeyance.

(II.) Now turn to our experiments in thought-transference. Here
again the agent is a living man ; but he is no longer operating by ordinary
means, — by spoken words or visible gestures. He is operating on the
percipient’s subconscious self by means of a telepathic impulse, which he
desires, indeed, to project from himself, and which the percipient may
desire to receive, but of whose modus operandi the ordinary waking selves
of agent and percipient alike are entirely unaware.

Here again we may divide the messages sent into the same three main
classes. First come the hallucinator)^ figures — always or almost always of
himself— which the agent causes the percipient to see. Secondly come
impulses to act, telepathically impressed, as when the hypnotiscr desires
his subject to come to him at an hour not previously notified. Ami thirdly,
we have a parallel to the post-hypnotic writing of definite words or
figures in our own experiments on the direct telepathic transmission
of words, figures, cards, &c., from the agent, using no normal means of
communication, to the percipient, either in the hypnotised or in the
waking state.

(III.) We come next to the spontaneous phantasms occurring during
life. Here we find the same three broad classes of messages, with this
difference, that the actual apparitions, which in our telepathic exjicrimen-
tation are thus far unfortunately rare, become now the most important
class. I need not recall the instances given in Chapters IV. and VI.,
&c., where an agent undergoing some sudden crisis seems in some way to
generate an apparition of himself seen by a distant percipient. Important
also in this connection are those apparitions of the double^ where some one
agent (Mrs. Stone, Mrs. Beaumont, &c., see 645 B and C), is seen re-
peatedly in phantasmal form by different percipients at times when that
agent is undergoing no special crisis.

706] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 9

•

Again, among tdur telepathic impressions generated (spontaneously,
not experimentally^ by living agents, we have cases> which I need not
here recapitulate, of pervading sensations of distress ; or impulses to return
home (see, the case of Mr. Skirving in 825 A), which are parallel to
the hypnotised subject’s impulse to approach his distant hypnotiser, at a
moment when that hypnotiser is willing him to do so.

And thirdly, among these telepathic communications from the living
to the living, we have definite sentences automatically written, communi-
cating facts which the distant person knows, but is not consciously
endeavouring to transmit.

(IV.) Passing on to phantasms which cluster about the moment of
death, we find our three main classes of cases still meeting us. Our
readers are familiar with the visual cases, where there is an actual appari-
tion of the dying man, seen by one or more persons ; and also with the
emotional and motor cases, where the impression, although powerful, is
not definitely sensory in character. And various cases also have been
published where the message has consisted of definite words, not always
externalised as an auditory hallucination, but sometimes automatically
uttered or automatically written by the percipient himself, as in the case
communicated by Dr. Li^beault (see section 866), where a girl writes
ilie message announcing her friend’s death at the time when that friend is,
in fact, dying in a distant city.

706. (V.) And now I maintain that in these post-mortem cases also

wc find the same general classes persisting, and in somewhat the same
proportion. Most conspicuous are the actual apparitions^ with which,
indeed, the following pages will mainly deal. It is very rare to find an
jipparition which seems to impart any verbal message; but a case of
this kind has been given in 429 E. As a rule, however, the apparition
is of the apparently automatic, purposeless character, already so fully
<lescribcd. We have also the emotional and motor class of post-mortem
cases (as Mr. Cameron Grant’s, given in 736 B) ; and these may, perhaps,
be more numerous in proportion than our collection would indicate ;
for it is obvious that impressions which are so much less definite than
a visual hallucination (although they may be even more impressive to
the percipient hftnself) can rarely be used as evidence of communication
with the departed.

But now 1 wish to point out that, besides these two classes of post-
mortem manifestations, we have our third class also still persisting ; we
have definite verbal messages which at least purport, and sometimes, I
think, with strong probability, to come from the departed.

I have, inciecd, for the reader’s convenience, postponed these motor
< ases to a subsequent chapter, so that the evidence here and now pre-
sented for survival will be very incomplete. Yet, at any rate, we are
gradually getting before us a fairly definite task. We have in this
chapter to record and analyse such sensory experiences of living men

10

CHAPTER VII

[707

as seem referable to the action of some human individuality persisting
after death. We have also obtained some preliminafy notion as to the
kind of phenomena for which we can hope^ especially as to what their
probable limitations must be, considering how great a gulf between
psychical states any communication must overpass.

707 . Let us now press the actual evidential question somewhat
closer. Let us consider, for it is by no means evident at first sight,
what conditions a visual or auditory phantasm is bound to fulfil before it
can be regarded as indicating prima facie the influence of a discarnate
mind. The discussion may be best introduced by quoting the words in
which Edmund Gurney opened it in 1888.1 The main evidential lines as
there laid down retain their validity, although the years which have since
passed have greatly augmented the testimony, and in so doing have illus-
trated yet other tests of true post-mortem communication, — to which we
shall presently come.

Those who have followed the records and discussions printed in the Pro-
ceedings and the Journal of this Society will not need to be informed how little
the evidence which has not infrequently led even educated persons to believe
in the actual reappearance of dead friends really justifies any such belief. The
reason can be given in a single sentence. In most of the cases where persons
have professed to have seen or to have held communication with deceased
friends and relatives, there is nothing to distinguish the phenomenon which
their senses have encountered from purely subjective hallucination. Simple as
this statement seems, the truth which it embodies remained for centuries un-
guessed. It is only in comparatively modern days that the facts of sensory
hallucination have been at all understood, and that the extreme definiteness
which the delusive object may take has been recognised ; and even now the
truth of the matter has not had time to penetrate to the popular mind. The
reply of average common .sense to any account of an apparition is usually eitlier
that the witness is lying or grossly exaggerating, or that he was mad or drunk
or emotionally excited at the time ; or at the very most tliat his experience was
an illusion— a misinterpretation of some .sight or sound which was of an entirely
objective kind. A very little careful study of the subject will, however, show
that all these hypotheses must often be rejected ; that the witness may be in good
health, and in no exceptional state of nervousness or excitement, and that what
he sees or hears may still be of purely subjective origin — the projection of his
own brain. And among the objects thus fictitiously presented, it is only natural
to expect that a certain percentage will take the form of a human figure or
voice which the percipient recognises as that of a deceased person ; for the
memory of such figures and voices is part of his mental store, and the latent
images are ready to supply the material of waking hallucination, just as they
are ready to supply the material of dream.

It is further evident that in alleged cases of apparitions of the dead, the
pomt which we have held to distinguish certain apparitions 01 living persons
from purely subjective hallucinations is necessarily lacking. That point is
coincidence between the apparition and .some critical or exceptional condition
of the person who seems to appear ; but witli regard to the dead, we have no

1 Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 403-408.

707] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD xi

independent knowl^ge of their, condition, and therefore never have the oppor-
tunity of observing any such coincidences.

There remain three, and I think only three, conditions which might estab-
lish a presumption that an apparition or other immediate manifestation^ of a
dead person is sometliing mpre than a mere subjective hallucination of the per-
cipient’s senses. Either (i) more persons than one might be independently
affected by the phenomenon ; or (2) the phantasm might convey information,
afterwards discovered to be true, of something which the percipient had never
known ; or (3) the appearance might be that of a person whom the percipient
himself had never seen, and of whose aspect he was ignorant, and yet his de-
scription of it might be sufficiently definite for identification. But though one
or more of these conditions would have to be fully satisfied before we could be
convinced that any particular apparition of the dead had some cause external to
the percipient’s own mind, there is one more general characteristic of the class
which is sufficiently suggestive of such a cause to be worth considering. I mean
the disproportionate numl^er of cases which occur shortly after the death of the
person represented. Such a time-relation, if frequently enough encountered,
might enable us to argue for the objective origin of the phenomenon in a manner
analogous to that which leads us to conclude that many phantasms of the living
have an objective (a telepathic) origin. For, according to the doctrines of pro-
babilities, a hallucination representing a known person would not by chance
present a definite time-relation to a special cognate event — viz., the death of
that person — in more than a certain percentage of the whole number of similar
hallucinations that occur; and if that percentage is decidedly exceeded, there
is reason to surmise that some other cause than chance— in other words, some
objective origin for the phantasm— is present.

Supposing the peculiarity which I have mentioned to be established, the
sipiificancc of the time-relation would of course be quite a different question.
The popular mind naturally leaps to explanations of an exciting fact, before
the fact itself is at all established. Thus it is said that the deceased person
comes to say farewell, or to cheer the hearts of mourners while their grief is
fresh ; or that his •‘spirit” is “earth-bound,” and can only gradually free itself.
Or, again, there is the elaborate theory of “shells ” propounded by M. D’Assier,
who holds that, though consciousness and individuality have died, some basis
of physical manifestation is still left, which fades away by slow degrees. I do
not propose now to discuss any of these hypotheses. Our business at present
is wholly with the facts of post-mortem appearances. The question for science
is simply whether those facts point to any external cause at all ; and it is as
bearing on this great primary question that the inquiry as to the relative fre-
quency of the phenomena near the time of death assumes importance.

It was in the formation of a large collection of first-hand testimony on the
subject of sensory hallucination, that I was first struck by the large proportion
of cases where the phantasm represented a friend or relative recently dead.
Out of two hundred and thirty-one hallucinations representing recognised human
beings, twenty-eight, or nearly an eighth part, occurred within a few weeks of
the death of the person represented. There are two reasons, however, why
little weight can^c allowed to this fact. In the first place a phantasm repre-

1 I am not here considering mediate manifestations, as where evidence of “ spirit
identity ” is alleged to have been given through, e.^., the writing of a me^um under
‘’control.”

12

CHAPTER VII

[707

«

senting a person whose death is recent is specially likely excite interest, and
so to be noted and remembered ; and this might easily swMsll the percentage of
this class of cases in such a collection as mine. And in the second place, the
fact of the death was in every instance known to the percipient. It is, there-
fore, natural to conclude that the emotional state of the percipient was the
sufficient cause of the hallucination; and that is the explanation which the
large majority of psychological and medical experts would at once adopt. 1
should myself feel more completely satisfied with it if we had any record of
the phantasmal appearance of a person whom the friend who saw the appear-
ance believed to be dead, but who was really safe and sound. Still, false alarms
of death are not so common as to make it certain, or perhaps even likely, that
we should have encountered such a case. And meanwhile I think that grief,
and the sense of awe commonly connected with death, ought to be held as the
sufficient cause of abnormal sensory experiences connected with persons whose
recent death is being mourned, until the objective reality of phantasms of the
dead in certain cases is established by some independent line of proof.

If, then, we are to draw any probable conclusion as to the objective nature
of post-mortem appearances and communications (or of some of them) from
the fact of their special frequency soon after death, we must confine ourselves
to cases where the fact of death has been unknown to the percipient at the
time of his experience. Now, in these days of letters and telegrams, people
for the most part hear of the deaths of friends and relatives within a very
few days, sometimes within a very few hours, after the death occurs ; so that ap-
pearances of the sort required would, as a rule, have to follow very closely indeed
on the death. Have we evidence of any considerable numlier of such cases .?

Readers of Phantasms of the Living will know that we have. In a number
of cases wliich were treated in that book as examples of telepathic transference
from a dying person, the person was actually dead at the time tluit the perci-
pient’s experience occurred ; and the inclusion of sucli cases under the title of
Phantasms of the Living naturally occasioned a certain amount of adverse
criticism. Their inclusion, it will be remembered, required an assumption
which cannot by any means be regarded ns certain. We had to suppose that ihe
telepathic transfer took place just before, or exactly at, the moment of death ;
but that the impression remained latent in the percipient’s mind, and only after
an interval emerged into his con.sciousnes.s, whether as waking vision or a.s
dream or in some other form. Now, as a provisional hypothesis, I think that
this assumption was justified. For, in the first jilacc, the moment of death is,
in time, the central point of a cluster of abnormal experiences occurring to
percipients at a distance, of which some precede^ while others follow, the death;
it is natural, therefore, to surmise that the same explanation \yill cover the whole
group, and that the motive force in each of its divisions lies in a state of
the “ agent ’* prior to bodily death. In the second place, some of the facts
of experimental thought-transference countenance the view that “ transferred
impressions may be latent for a time before the recipient becomes aware of
them; and recent discoveries with respect to the w'hole subject of automatism
and “ secondary intelligence ” make it seem far less improbable than it would
otherwise have seemed that telepathy may take effect first on tke unconscious ”
part of the mind.^ And in the third place, the period of .supposed latency has

•

^ In some experimental cases, it will be remembered, the impression takes effect
through the motor^ not the sensory, system of the recipient, as by automatic writing, so
that he is never directly aware of it at all.

*3

707] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

in a good many in^ances been a period when the person affected was in
activity, and when hih mind and senses were being solicited by other things ;
and in such cases it is specially easy to suppose that the telepathic impression
did not get the right conditions for rising into consciousness until a season of
silence and recueillement arrived.' But though the theory of latency has thus
a good deal to be said for it, my colleagues and 1 are most anxious not to be
supposed to be putting forward as a dogma what must be regarded at present
merely as a working hypothesis. Psychical research is of all subjects the one
where it is most important to avoid this error, and to keep the mind open for
new interpretations of the facts. And in the present instance there are certain
definite objections which may fairly be made to the hypothesis that a telepathic
impression derived from a dying person may emerge after hours of latency.
The experimental cases to which I have referred as analogous are few and
uncertain, and, moreover, in them the period of latency has been measured by
seconds or minutes, not by hours. And though, as I have said, some of the
instances of apparent delay among the death-cases might be accounted for by
the fact that the percipient’s mind or senses needed to be withdrawn from
other occupations before the manifestation could take place, there are other
instances where this is not so, and where no ground at all appears for con-
necting the delay with the percipient’s condition. On the whole, then, the?
alternative hypothesis— that the condition of the phenomenon on the “ agent’s ”
side (be it psychical or be it physical) is one which only comes into existence
at a distinct interval after death, and that the percipient really is impressed
at the moment, and not before the moment, when he is conscious of the
impression — is one which must be steadily kept in view.

So far I have been speaking of cases where the interval between the death
and the manifestation was so short a.s to make the theory of latency possible.
The rule adopted in Phantasms of the Living was that this interval must not
exceed twelve liours. But we have records of a few cases where this interval
has been greatly exceeded, and yet where the fact of the death was still un-
known to the percipient at the time of his experience. The theory of latency
cannot reasonably be applied to cases where weeks or months divide the vision
(or whatever it may be) from the moment of death, which is the latest at which
an ordinar}- * telepathically transferred idea could have obtained access to the
percipient. And the existence of such cases— so far as it tends to establish
the reality of objectively-caused apparitions of the dead — diminishes the ob-
jection to conceiving that the appearances, &c., which have very shortly
followed death have had a different causation from those which have coincided
with or very preceded \\., For we shall not be inventing a wholly new

class for the former cases, but only provisionally shifting them from one cl.nss
to another — to a much smaller and much less welbevidenced class, it is true,
but one nevertheless for which we have evidence enough to justify us in ex-
pecting more.

' See, for instance, case 500, Phantasms of the Livings vol. ii. p. 462.

* I mean by*“ ordinary " the classes which are recognised and treated of in
Phantasms of the Living’, But if the departed survive, the possibility of thought-
transference between them and those who remain is of course a perfectly tenable
hypothesis. “ As our telepathic theory is a psychical one, and makes go physical
assumptions, it would be perfectly applicable (though the f/ame perhaps would be in-
appropriate) to the conditions of disembodied existence." -^Phantasms, vol. i. p. 512.

CHAPTER VII

H

[706

708. This, as I conceive, is a sound method df proceeding from
ground made secure in Phantasms of the Living — and retraverscd in my
own just previous chapter — to cases closely analogous, save for that little
difference in time-relations y that occurrence ip the hours which follow,
instead of the hours which precede, bodily dissolution, whicli counts for
so much in our insight into cosmic law.^

The hypothesis of latency which thus meets us in limine in this inquiry,
will soon be found inadequate to cover the facts. Yet it will be well to
dwell somewhat more fully upon its possible range.

It might conduce to a clearer view of the facts if we could draw a
curve, showing the proportionate number of apparitions observed at various
periods before and after death. It would then be seen that they increase
very rapidly for the few hours which precede death, and decrease gradu-
ally during the hours and days which follow. In the present state of our
evidence, howe\w, and considering all the problems involved, there
would perhaps be an affectation of more exactness than we can actually
attain, were we to set forth such a curve, embodying the dates, in reference
to death, of all the cases as yet received by us. It may be enough to
say, generally, that if the length of the base-line represents a year, and
the point with the highest ordinate the moment of death, the comparative
frequency of veridical apparitions might be somewhat as follows : —

That is to say, the recognised apparitions decrease rapidly in the few
days after death, then more slowly \ and after about a year's time they
become so sporadic that we can no longer include them in a steadily
descending line.

^ Certain statistics as to these time-relations are given by Edmund Gurney as
follows {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 408) : *‘Thc statistics drawn from the first-hand
records in Phantasms of the Living as to the time-relation of appearances, &c., occurring
in close prciiimity to deaths, are as follows ; — In 134 cases the coincidence is represented
as having been exact, or, when times are specifically stated, close to within an hour.
In 104 cases it is not known whether the percipient’s experience preceded or followed
the death; such cases cannot be taken account of for our present purpose. There

15

708 ] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

Yet one more ^oint must be touched on, to avoid misconception of
the phrase cited above, that “ the moment of death is the centre of a
cluster of abnormal experiences, of which some precede, while others
follow the death.** Gurney, of course, did not mean to assume that the
act of death itself was the cause of all these enperiences. Those which
occur before death may be caused or conditioned, not by the death itself,
but by the abnormal state, as of coma, delirium, &c., which preceded the
death. This we say because we have many instances where veridical
phantasms have coincided with moments of crisis — carriage-accidents and
the like— occurring to distant agents, but not followed by death. Accord-
ingly we find that in almost all cases where a phantasm, apparently veridical,
has preceded the agent’s death, that death was the result of disease and
not of accident. To this rule there are very few exceptions. There is
a case given in Phantasms of the Living (vol. ii. p. 52), where the phan-
tasm seems on the evidence to have preceded by about half-an-hour
(longitude allowed for) a sudden death by drowning. In this case the
percipient was in a Norfolk farmhouse, the drowning man— or agent —
was in a storm off the island of Tristan d’Acunha; and we have sug-
gested that an error of clocks or of observation may account for the
discrepancy. In another case the death was in a sense a violent one,
for it was a suicide ; but the morbidly excited state of the girl a few hours
before death — when her phantasm was seen — was in itself a state of
crisis. But there are also a few recorded cases (none of which were cited
in Phantasms of the Living) where a phantasm or double of some person
has been observed some days previous to that person’s accidental death.
The evidence obtained in the Census of Hallucinations, however, tended
to show that cases of this sort are too few to suggest even primd facie a
causal connection between the death and the apparition (see Proceedings
S.P.R., vol. X. p. 331).

Thus much it has seemed needful to say in order to explain the diffi-
culty of representing by any one curved line the true time-relations in-
volved in this complex matter. I now proceed briefly to review some
of the cases where the interval between death and phantasm has been
measurable by minutes or hours.

It is not easy'to get definite cases where the interval has been measur-
able by minutes ; for if the percipient is at a distance from the agent
we can seldom be sure that the clocks at both places have been correct,
and correctly observed ; while if he is present with the agent we can

remain 78 cases where it appears that there was an interval of more than an hour ; and
of these 38 preceded and 40 followed the death. Of the 38 cases where the percipient’s
experience preceded the death (all of which, of course, took place during a time when
the ‘agent* was seriously ill), 19 fell within twenty-four hours of the death. Of the
40 cases where the percipient’s experience followed the death, all followed within an
interval of twenty-four hours, and in only one (included by mistake) was the twelve hours*
interval certainly exceeded, though there are one or two others where it is possible that
it was slightly exceeded.”

i6

CHAPTER VII

[709

rarely be sure that the phantasm observed is more thai? a mere subjective
hallucination. Thus we have several accounts of a rushing sound heard
by the watcher of a dying man just after his apparent death, or of some
kind of luminosity observed near his person ; ^ut this is just the moment
when we may suppose some subjective hallucination likely to occur, and
if one person's senses alone are affected we cannot allow much evidential
weight to the occurrence. I may add that one of our cases (which I
quote below, in 747) is remarkable in that the auditory hallucina-
tion — a sound as of female voices gently singing — was heard by five per-
sons — by four of them, as it seems, independently — and in two places, on
different sides of the house. At the same time, one person — the Eton
master whose mother had just died, and who was therefore presumably
in a frame of mind more prone to hallucination than the physician,
matron, friend, or servants who actually did hear the singing — himself
heard nothing at all. In this case the physician felt no doubt that
Mrs. L. was actually dead ; and in fact it was during the laying out of
the body that the sounds occurred. In including this case and similar
collective ones in Phantasms of the Livings Gurney expressly stated
(vol. ii. pp. 190-92) that he did so because in his view they involved at
least an element of thought-transference between the living minds of the
percipients, whatever other influence may or may not have proceeded from
the deceased person. But if we are finding reason to suppose that the
deceased person's power of influencing other minds may persist after death,
it seems reasonable to dwell on that aspect of such an incident as this.^

709. There are some other circumstances also in which, in spite of
the fact that the death is already known, a hallucination occurring shortly
afterwards may have some slight evidential value. Thus we have a case
where a lady who knew that her sister had died a few hours previously,
but who was not herself in any morbidly excited condition, seemed to see
some one enter her own dining-room, opening and shutting the door.
The percipient (who had never had any other hallucination) was much
astonished when she found no one in the dining-room ; but it did not till
some time afterwards occur to her that the incident could be in any way
connected with her recent loss. This reminds us of a case (ii, p, 694*^)
where the Rev. R. M. Hill sees a tall figure rush into the room, which
alarms and surprises him, then vanishes before he has time to recognise it.

* The Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research (vol. i. p. 405)
contain a case where a physician and his wife, sleeping in separate but adjoining roon^,
arc both of them awakened by a bright light. The physician secs a figure standing m
the light ; his wife, who gets up to see what the light in her husband’s room may be.
docs not reach that room till the figure has disappeared. The figure is not clearly
identified, but has some resemblance to a patient of the physician’s, who has died sud-
denly (from hemorrhage) about three hours before, calling for her doctor, who did not
anticipate*thi.s sudden end. P>en this resemblance did not strike the percipient until
after he knew of the death, and the defect in recognition has prevented me from quoting
this case at length.

^ The references in this and the two following sections are to Phantasms oj the LHfing^

710] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 17

An uncle, a tall map, dies about that moment, and it is remarked that
although Mr. Hill knew his uncle to be ill, the anxiety which he may
have felt would hardly have given rise to an unrecognised and formidable
apparition.

There are cases also where a percipient who has had an apparition of
a friend shortly after that friend’s known death has had veridical hallucina-
tions at other times, and has never had any hallucination of purely subjective
origin. Such a percipient* may naturally suppose that his apparition of the
departed friend possessed the same veridical character which was common
to the rest, although it was not per se evidential, since the fact of the death
was already known.

For the present, however, it will be better to return to the cases which
are free from this important primd facie drawback — cases where the perci-
pient was, at any rate, unaware that the death, which the phantafin seemed
to indicate, had in fact taken place.

710 . In the first place, there are a few cases where a percipient is
informed of a death by a veridical phantasm, and then some hours after-
wards a similar phantasm, differing perhaps in detail, recurs.

Such was the case of Archdeacon Farler (i. p. 414), who twice during
one night saw the dripping figure of a friend who, as it turned out, had
been drowned during the previous day. Even the first appearance was
several hours after the death, but this we might explain by the latency of
the impression till a season of quiet. The second appearance may have
been a kind of recrudescence of the first ; but if the theory of latency be
discarded, so that the first appearance (if more than a mere chance-
coincidence) is held to depend upon some energy excited by the deceased
person after death, it would afford some ground for regarding the second
appearance as also veridical. The figure in this case was once more seen
a fortnight later, and on this occasion, as Archdeacon Farler informs me,
in ordinary garb, with no special trace of accident.

A similar repetition occurs (as noted by Gurney, vol. ii. p. 237, note)
in the cases of Major Moncrieff (i. p. 415) ; of Mr. Keulemans (i. p. 444),
where the second phantasm was held by the percipient to convey a fresh
veridical picture; of Mr. Hernaman (i. p. 561), where, however, the
agent was alive y though dying, at the time of each appearance ; in the case
of Mrs. Ellis (ii, p. 59) ; in the case of Mrs. D. (ii. p. 467) ; of Mrs.

Fairman (ii. p. 482), and of Mr. F. J. Jones (ii. p. 500), where the death

was again due to drowning, and the act of dying cannot, therefore, have
been very prolonged. We may note also Mrs. Reed’s case (ii. p. 237),
where a phanton^is seen three times, the first two visions being apparently
about the time of death, the third (occurring to a different percipient,
whether independently or not is not clear) a few hours later. And in

Captain Ayre’s case (ii. p. 256), a phantom seen by one percipient at

about the time of the agent’s death is followed by hallucinatory sounds
heard by the same and by another percipient for some three hours longer,
voi.. n.

CHAPTER VII

i8

[711

till the news of the death arrives. In the case of Mfs, Cox, again (ii. p.
235), a child sees a phantom at about 9 p.m., and Mrs. Cox sees the same
figure, but in a different attitude, at about midnight, the exact hour of the
corresponding death being unknown. In the case of Miss Harriss (ii. p.
] 1 7), a hallucinatory voice ^ about the time of the death, but not suggesting
the decedent, is followed by a dream the next night, which presents the
dead person as in the act of dying. One or two other cases might be
added to this list, and it is plain that the matter is one towards which
observation should be specially directed.

711. Turning now to the cases where the phantasm is not repeated,
but occurs some hours after death, let us take a few narratives where the
interval of time is pretty certain, and consider how far the hypothesis of
latency looks probable in each instance.

Wher^ there is no actual hallucination, but only a feeling of unique
malaise or distress following at a few hours’ interval on a friend’s death at
a distance, as in Archdeacon Wilson’s case (i. p. 280), it is very hard
to picture to ourselves what has taken place. Some injurious shock com-
municated to the percipient’s brain at the moment of the agent’s death
may conceivably have slowly worked itself into consciousness. The delay
may have been due, so to say, to physiological rather than to psychical
causes.

Next take a case like that of Mrs. Wheatcroft (i. p. 420), or of Mrs.
Evens (ii. p, 690), or Mr. Wingfield (quoted in 429 C), or Sister Bertha
(quoted below in 743 A), where a definite hallucination of sight or sound
occurs some hours after the death, but in the middle of the night. It is
in a case of this sort that we can most readily suppose that a telepathic
impact” received during the day has Iain dormant until other excitations were
hushed, and has externalised itself as a hallucination after the first sleep,
just as when we wake from a first sleep some subject of interest or anxiety,
which has been thrust out of our thoughts during the day, will often well
upwards into consciousness with quite a new distinctness and force. But
on the other hand, in the case (for instance) of Mrs. Tcale (ii. p. 693),
there is a deferment of some eight hours, and then the hallucination
occurs while the percipient is sitting wide awake in the middle of her
family. And in one of the most remarkable dream-cases in our collection
(given in section 427), Mrs. Stone’s experience does not resemble the
mere emergence of a latent impression. It is long and complex, and
suggests some sort of clairvoyance ; but if it be “ telepathic clair\^oyance,”
that is, a picture transferred from the decedent’s mind, then it almost
requires us to suppose that a post-mortem picture was t^us transferred, a
view of the accident and its consequences fuller than any which could
have flashed through the dying man’s mind during bis moment of sudden
and violent death from the striking off of the top of the skull ” by a
railway train.

If once we assume that the deceased person’s mind could continue to

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

712]

19

act on living person^ after his bodily death, then the confused horror of the
series of pictures which were presented to Mrs. Storie’s view — mixed, it
should be said, with an element of fresh departure which there was nothing
in the accident itself to suggest— would correspond well enough to what one
ran imagine a man’s feelings a few hours after such a death to be. This is
trespassing, no doubt, on hazardous ground ; but if once we admit com-
munication from the other side of death as a working hypothesis, we must
allow ourselves to imagine something as to the attitude of the communi-
cating mind, and the least violent supposition will be that that mind is
still in part at least occupied with the same thoughts which last occupied
it on earth. The case cited below (in 744) of the gardener Bard and Mrs.
dc Fr6ville well illustrates this view. And it is possible that there may be
some interpretation of this kind for some of the cases where a funeral
scene, or a dead body, is what the phantasm presents. In the remarkable
case in 664 where a lady sees the body of a well-known London physician
—about ten hours after death — lying in a bare unfurnished room (a
cottage hospital abroad), the description, as we have it, would certainly
fit best with some kind of telepathic clairvoyance prolonged after death —
some power on the deceased person’s part to cause the percipient to
share the picture which might at that moment be occupying his own mind.

712. It will be seen that these phenomena are not of so simple a
type as to admit of our considering them from the point of view of
iime-relaiions alone. Whatever else, indeed, a “ ghost ” may be, it is
probably one of the most complex phenomena in nature. It is a function
of two unknown variables — the incarnate spirit’s sensitivity and the dis-
carnate spirit’s capacity of self-manifestation. Our attempt, therefore, to
study such intercourse may begin at either end of the communication —
with the percipient or with the agent. We shall have to ask. How does
the incarnate mind receive the message? and we shall have to ask also.
How does the discarnate mind originate and convey it?

Now it is by pressing ihit former of these two questions that we have,
I think, the best chance at present of gaining fresh light. So long as we
are considering the incarnate mind we are, to some extent at least, on
known ground ; and we may hope to discern analogies in some other
among that mind’s operations to that possibly most perplexing of all its
operations which consists in taking cognisance of messages from unem-
boclied minds, and from an unseen world. I think, therefore, that “ the
surest way, though most about,” as Bacon would say, to the comprehension
of this sudden and startling phenomenon lies in the study of other rare
mental phcnomqpa which can be observed more at leisure, just as the
surest way, though most about,” to the comprehension of some blazing
inaccessible star has lain in the patient study of the spectra of the incan-
descence of terrestrial substances which lie about our feet, f am in
hopes that by the study of various forms of subliminal consciousness,
subliminal faculty, subliminal perception, we may ultimately obtain a

20

CHAPTER VII

[713

conception of our own total being and operation whiclli may show us the
incarnate mind’s perception of the discarnate mind’s message as no
isolated anomaly, but an orderly exercise of natural and innate powers,
frequently observed in action in somewhat similar ways.

It is, 1 say, from this human or terrene side that I should prefer, w'ere
it possible, to study in the first instance all our cases. Could we not
only share but interpret the percipient’s subjective feelings, could we
compare those feelings with the feelings evoked by ordinary vision or
telepathy among living men, we might get at a more intimate knowledge
of what is happening than any observation from outside of the details of
an apparition can supply. But this, of course, is not possible in any
systematic way ; occasional glimpses, inferences, comparisons, are all that
we can attain to as yet. On the other hand, it is comparatively easy to
arrange the whole group of our cases in some series depending on their
observed external character and details. They can, indeed, be arranged
in more than one series of this kind — the difficulty is in selecting the most
instnictive. That which I shall here select is in some points arbitrary,
but it has the advantage of bringing out the wide range of variation in the
clearness and content of these apparitional communications, here arranged
mainly in a descending series, beginning with those cases where fullest
knowledge or purpose is shown, and ending with those where the indica-
tion of intelligence becomes feeblest, dying away at last into vague sounds
and sights without recognisable significance.

713. But I shall begin (see 713 A) with a small group of
cases, which I admit to be anomalous and non-evidential — for we
cannot prove that they were more than subjective experiences — yet which
certainly should not be lost, filling as they do, in all their grotesquencss,
a niche in our series otherwise as yet vacant. If man’s spirit is separated
at death from his organism, there must needs be cases where that separa-
tion, although apparently, is not really complete. There must be subjec-
tive sensations corresponding to the objective external facts of apparent
death and subsequent resuscitation. Nor need it surprise those who may
have followed my general argument, if those subjective sensations should
prove to be dreamlike and fantastic. Here, as so often in our inquiries,
the very oddity and unexpectedness of the details — the absence of that
solemnity which one would think the dying man’s own mind would have
infused into the occasion — may point to the existence of some reality
beneath the grotesque symbolism of the transitional dream.

The transitional dream, I call it, for it seems to me not improbable —
remote though such a view may be from current notions-^Jhat the passage
from one state to another may sometimes be accompanied with some
temporary lack of adjustment between experiences taking place in such
different environments — between the systems of symbolism belonging to
the one and to the other state. But the reason why I refer to the
cases in this place is that here we have perhaps our nearest possible

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

21

714]

approach— in M. Bertrand’s case the account, but for remoteness, might
have been evidential enough — to the sensations of the spirit which is
endeavouring to manifest itself ; — an inside view of a would-be apparition.
'Fhe narratives suggest, moreover, that spirits recently freed from the
body may enjoy a fuller perception of earthly scenes than it is afterwards
possible to retain, and that thus the predominance of apparitions of the
recently dead may be to some extent explained.

714. We have, indeed, very few cases where actual apparitions give
evidence of any continuity in the knowledge possessed by a spirit of
friends on earth. Such evidence is, naturally enough, more often fur-
nished by automatic script or utterance. But there is one case where a
spirit is recorded as appearing repeatedly — in guardian angel fashion —
and especially as foreseeing and sympathising with the survivor’s future

marriage.

The account of this case, given by Mr. E. Mamtchitch, is taken from
the “ Report on the Census of Hallucinations ” in the Proceedings S. P. R.,
vol. X. pp. 387-91.

St. Petersburg, April 29/^, 1891.

Comme il s'aglra des apparitions de Palladia, je dois dire auparavant qucl-
que.s mots .sur sa personne. Elle dtait la fille d’lin riche propridtaire russe, mort
un mois avant sa naissance. Sa m6re, dans son d<5sespoir, voua son enfant
futur au couvent. De Ik son nom, usitd parmi Ics religieuses. Deux ans aprks,
sa mhre mourut, et Torplieline, jusqu’k I’kge de 14 ans, fut dlevdc dans un
couvent de Moscou par sa tante, qui en dtait la supdrieurc.

En 1870, dtant encore dtudiant k Puniversitd de Moscou, je fis la connais- *
sance du fr^re de Palladia, dtudiant comme moi, et il fut souvent question entre
nous de rendre k la socidtd la nonne malgrd .soi ; mais cc plan ne fut rdalisd qu’en
1872. J*dtais venu cn dtd k Moscou, pour voir I'cxposition, el j*y rencontrai par
hasard le frdre de Palladia. J’appris qu’il dtait en train de Penvoyer en Crimde
pour cause de santd, et je le secondai dc mon mieux. C’est alors que je vis
Palladia pour la premic^re fois; elle avait 14 ans; quo ique haute de taillc, elle
dtait fort chdtive et ddjk poitrinairc. A la pri^re de son frkre, j’accompagnai
Palladia et sa soeur, Mme. P. S., en Crimde, ou elles rest^rent pour passer Phiver,
et moi, deux semaines aprds, je revins k Kieff.

En dtd 1873 je rencontrai par hasard Palladia et sa sceur k Odessa, ou elles
dtaient venues pour consulter les mddccins, quoique Palladia avait Pair de se
porter assez bien. Le 27 AoOt, pendant que je faisais la lecture aux deux
dames, Palladia mourut subitement d’un andvrisme, k Pkge de 15 ans.

Deux ans aprds la mort dc Palladia, en 1875, me trouvantk Kieff, il m'arriva,
par une soirde du mois de Ddcembre, d’assister pour la premiere fois k une
sdance spiritique ; j’entendis des coups dans la table ; cela ne m’dtonna nulle-
ment, car j*dtait sftr que c’dtait une plaisanterie. De retour chez moi, je voulus
voir si les mdmjh coups se produiraieiit chez moi ; je me mis dans la mdme
pose, les mains sur la table. Bientdt des coups se firent entendre. Imitant
le proeddd dont j'avais dtd le temoin, je commencai k rdciter Palphabet ; le nom
de Pa?’adia me fut indiqud. Je fus dtonnd, presque effrayd ; ne pouvant me
tranquilliser, je me mis de nouveau k la table, et je demandai k Palladia,
qu’avait-elle k me dire? La rdponse fut : Replacer Pange^ il tombel* Je ne

22

CHAPTER VII

[714

compns pas de suite de quoi il s’agissait. Le fait est d^u'elle est cnterrde ^
Kieff, et j’avais entendu dire qu'on voulait mettre un monument sur sa tombe*
mais ]e n’y avais jamais dtt5, et je ne savais pas dc quel genre dtait le monument*
Apres cette r^ponse, je ne me couchai plus, et d^s que le jour parut je me
rendis au cimeti^re. Non sans peine, avec I’aide du gardien, je d<5couvris enfin
la tombe enfouie sous la neige. Je m*arr 6 tai stupdfid : la statue en marbre de
Tange avec une croix dtait tout h fait de cOtd.

Depuis ce moment, il me fut prouvd k Tdvidence qu’il y a un autre monde
avec lequel, je ne sais comment, nous pouvons entrer en rapport, et dont les
habitants peuvent nous donner de telles preuves de leur existence qu’elles
ddsarment le scepticisme le plus tenace.

En Octobre, 1876 , je me trouvais 21 Kieff, et j’dtais en train de m’installer
dans un nouveau logement (rue Prordsnaya) avec mon camarade de service au
Minist^re de la Justice, M. Potolof. On venait de m’apporter un pianino. 11
fut placd dans la sallc, et je me mis k jouer; il dtait k peu prds S h. du soir; la
salle ou je jouais dtait dclairde par une lampe pendue au mur. A c 6 td se trou>
vait mon cabinet dc travail, dclaird aussi par une lampe. Je me rappclle trds
bien que j'dtais de fort bonne humeur. Mon camarade, M. Potolof, etait occupd
k sa table, k Tautre bout du logis. Toutes les portes dtaient ouvertes, et de sa
place il pouvait voir trds bien le cabinet et la salle ou jc jouais.' Jetant un
regard vers la porte de mon cabinet de travail, je vis tout k coup Palladia. Elle
se tenait au milieu de la porte, un peu de cold, avec le visage tournd vers moi.
Elle me regardait tranquillement. Elle avait la meme robe fonede qu’elle por-
tait lorsqu'elle mourut en ma prdsence. Sa main droite pendait librement
Je voyais distinctement ses dpaules et sa taillc, mais ne me rappelle pas du bas
de son habit, et avais-je vu les pieds ? — peut-etre, parce que tout le temps je lui
regardais dans les yeux. En la voyant, j’avais tout k fait oublid que je voyais
devant moi non une personne vivante, mais morte, tellement je la voyais dis-
tinctement ; elle dtait dclairde de deux cdtds ; et d'autant plus j'ai la vue trds
bonne. Ma premidre sensation fut un frisson dans le dos. Je fus comme
pdtrihd et ma respiration fut suspendue ; mais ce n’dtait pas un effet causd par
la frayeur ou Texcitation,— c’dtait quelque chose d’autre. Je puis comparer cela
k la sensation que j’dprouve quand je regarde en bas d’une grande hauteur; je
sens alors une terrible anxidtd et en meme temps je nc |)uis me retenir de re-
garder, quelque chose m’attirc invinciblcment. Combien de temps Palladia
resta devant moi, je ne saurais le dire, mais jc me rappelle qu'clle ht un inouve-
ment k droite et disparut derridre la porte du cabinet du travail. Je me prd-
cipitai vers elle, mais dans la porte je m’arretai, car alors seulcment je me rap-
pelai qu’elle dtait ddjk morte, et je craignai d'entrer, dtant .sdr de la revoir.
Dans ce moment mon camarade vint k moi et me demanda qu’est-ce que
j'avais ? Je lui dis ce qui venait de se passer; alors nous entr^mes au cabinet,
oil nous ne trouv&mes personne. Mon camarade, ayant entendu la brusque in-
terruption de mon jeu, avait levd la tdte et, tant que je me rappelle, disait avoir
vu aussi quelqu'un passer devant la porte de mon cabinet ; mais, voyant mon
excitation, il me dit, pour me tranquilliser, que probablement c'dtait Nikita,
mon domestique, qui dtait venu arranger la lampe. Nous alldmes immddiatc-
ment dans sa chambre, il n’y dtait pas ; il dtait en bas, dans^a cuisine, ou il

' A plan enclosed shows a suite of four rooms, M. Potolof’s study, the ante-room, the
drawing-room, and M. Mamtchitch’s study, all opening into one another, the three doors
between them being in one straight line.

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

714 ]

23

prdparait le samov^. Voilil comment je vis Palladia pour la premiere fois,
trois ans apr^s sa mort.

Apr^s la premiere apparition de Palladia, en Octobre, 1876, et jusqu’Si
pr<5scnt, je la vois souvent. II arrive que je la vois trois fois par semaine, ou
deux fois le meme jour, ou bien un mois se passe sans la voir. En rdsumd,
voilSi les traits principaux de ccs apparitions.

(1) Palladia apparait toujours d’une fa9on inattendue, me prenant comme
par surprise, juste au moment quand j’y pense le moins.

(2) Quand je veux la voir moi-meme, j'ai beau y penser ou le vouloir — elle
n'apparait pas.

(3) rares exceptions, son apparition n’a aucun rapport avec le courant
de ma vie, comme presage ou avertissement de quelqu’ dvdnement insolite.

(4) Jamais je ne la vois en songe.

(5) Jc la vois dgalemcnt quand je suis seul, ou en grande compagnie.

(6) Elle m*apparait toujours avec la meme expression sereine des yeux :
quclques fois avec un faible sourire. Elle ne m*a jamais parld, i Texception de
deux fois, que je vais raconter plus loin.

(7) Je la vois toujours dans larol>e fonede qu’elle portait lorsqu’elle mourut
sous mes yeux. Jc vois distinctement son visage, sa tete, les dpaules et les
bras, mats je ne vois pas ses pieds, ou plutot je n'ai pas le temps de le
examiner.

(8) Chaque fois, en voyant Palladia inopindment, je perds la parole, je sens
du froid dans le dos, je p 41 is, je m’toie faiblement, et ma respiration s’arrete
(e’est cc que me disent ceux qui par hasard m*ont observd pendant ce moment).

(9) L’apparition de Palladia se prolonge une, deux, trois minutes, puis
graducllemcnt elle s’efEace et se dissout dans Pespace.

A present je vais d^crire trois cas d’apparitions de Palladia dont je me
souviens bien,

(1) En 1879, k la fin de Novembre, h. Kieff, j*(?tais assis k mon bureau k

dcrire un actc d'accusation ; il dtait 8^ du soir, la montre dtait devant moi sur
la table. Je me hktais de finir mon travail, car k 9 h. je devais me rendre k une
soirdc. Tout k coup, en face de moi, assise sur un fauteuil, je vis Palladia ; elle
avait le coude du bras droit sur la table ct la tete appuy^e sur la main.
M’dtant remis de mon saisissement, je regardai la montre et je suivis le mouve-
rnent de I’aiguille k seconde, puis je relevai les yeux sur Palladia; je vis qu’elle
n’avait pas changd de pose et son coude se dessinait clairement sur la table.
Ses yeux me regardaient avec joie ct .s^r^nitd ; alors pour la premikre fois je me
ddcidai de lui parler: “Que sentez-vous k present?” lui demandai-je. Son
visage resta impassible, ses Ikvres, tant que je me rappelle, restkrent immobiles,
mais j’entendis distinctement .sa voix prononcer le mot “ Quietude.” “ Je com-
preiids,” lui rdpondis-je, et effectivement, en ce moment, je comprenais toute la
signification qu’elle avait mise dans ce mot. Encore une fois, pour ^tre sur que
je ne revai pas, je regardai de nouveau la montre ct je suivis les mouvements de
Paiguille k seconde; je voyais clairement comme elle se mouvait. Ayant rap-
portd mon regard sur Palladia, je remarquai qu’elle commen^ait d6jk k s’effacer
et disparaitre. Si jc m’dtais avisd dc noter immddiatement la signification du
mot “ Quidtude^’ ma mdraoire aurait retenu tout ce qu’il y avait de nouveau et
d’dtrange. Mais k peine avais-je quittd la table pour monter en haut, chez mon
camarade Apouktine, avec Icquel nous devions aller ensemble, que je ne pus
lui dire autre chose que ce que je viens d’dcrire. •

(2) En 1885, demeurais chez mes parents, k une campagne du gouverne-

24 CHAPTER VII [714

ment de Poltava. *Une dame de notre connaissance venue passer chez
nous quelques jours avec ses deux demoiselles. Quelque temps apr^s leur
arriv^e, m’dtant rdveill^ k Taube du jour, je vis Palladia (je dormais dans une
aile s^par^e ou j’^tais tout seul). £Ile se tenait devant moi, k cinq pas k peu
pr^s, et me regardait avec un sourire joyeux. S|dtant approchde de moi, elle
me dit deux mots ; “ J’ai dt^, j’ai vu,*’ et tout cn souriant disparut. Que vou-
laient dire ces mots, je ne pus 1 e comprendre. Dans ma chambre dormait avec
moi mon setter. Dds que j^aper^us Palladia, le chien hdrissa le poil et avec
glapissement sauta sur mon lit ; se pressant vers moi, il regardait dans la direc-
tion ou je voyais Palladia. Le chien n'aboyait pas, tandis que, ordinairement,
11 ne laissait personne entrer dans la chambrc sans aboyer et grogner. £t
toutes les fois, quand mon chien voyait Palladia, il se pressait auprds de moi,
comme cherchant un refuge. Quand Palladia disparut et je vins dans la
maison, je ne dis rien k personne de cette incident. Le soir du mdme jour, la
fillc ainde de la dame qui se trouvait chez nous me raconta qu’une chose dtrange
lui dtait arrivde ce matin : “ M'dtant rdveillde de grand matin,” me dit-elle, “j’ai
sent! comme si quelqu’un se tenait au chevet de mon lit, et j’entendis distincte-
ment une voix me disant: * Ne me crains pas, je suis bonne et aimante.’ Je
tournai la tete, mais je ne vis rien ; ma mkre et ma soeur dormaient tranquille-
ment; cela m’a fort dtonnde, car jamais rien de pareil ne m’est arrive.” Sur
quoi je rdpondis que bicn des choscs inexplicables nous arrivent; mais je ne lui
dit rien de ce quo j’avais vu le matin. Seulemcnt un an plus tard, quand j’6tais
d^jk son fianc6, je lui As part de I'apparition ct des paroles de Palladia le meme
jour. N*dtait-ce pas elle qui dtait venue la voir aiissi ? Je dois ajouler que
j’avais vu alors cette demoiselle pour la premiere fois et que je ne pensais pas
du tout que j’allais I’dpouser.

(3) En Octobre, 1890, je me trouvais avec ma femme et mon fils, kgd de
deux ans, chez mes anciens amis, Ics Strijewsky, k leur campagne du gouverne-
ment de Woron^je. Un jour, vers les 7 h. du soir, rentrant de la chasse, je
passai dans I’aileque nous habitions pour changer de toilette; j’dtais assis dans
une chambrc dclairde par une grande lampe. La porte s’ouvrii ct mon fils Oleg
accourut; il se tenait auprds de mon fauteuil, quand Palladia apparut tout k
coup devant moi. Jetant sur lui un coup d’ceil, je remarquai qu’il ne ddtachait
pas les yeux de Palladia; se tournant vers moi et montrant Palladia du doigt,
il pronon<^a: “La tante.” Je le pris sur les genoux et jelai un regard sur
Palladia, mais elle n’dtait plus. Le visage d'Oldg dtait tout k fait tranquil ct
joyeux; il commen<^ait sculement k parler, ce qui explique la ddnomination
qu’il donna k Palladia. Elgi^kf. Mamtchitch.

Mrs. Mamtchitch writes ; —

5 Mai, 1S91.

Je me rappelle trds bien que le 10 Juillet 1885, lorsque nou.s dtions en visite
chez les parents de M. E. Mamtchitch, je m’dtais rdveillde k I’aube du jour, car
il avait dtd convenu entre moi et ma soeur que nous irions faire une promenade
malinale. M’dtant soulevde sur le lit, je vis que maman et ma sa^ur dormaient,
et en ce moment je sends comme si quelqu’un sc tenait k mon chevet. M’dtant
tournde k demi-— car je craignais de bien regarder— je ne vis pj^rsonne *, m’dtant
recouchde, j’entendis immddiatement, derridre ct au dessus de ma tete, une
voix de femme me disant doucement, mais distinctement : “Ne me crains pas,
je suis btnne et aimante,” et encore toute une phrase que j’oubliai k Tinstant
meme. Immddiatement apres je m’habillai et j’allai me promcner. C’est

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

25

714 ]

•

estrange que ces paroles ne m’effrayferent pas du tout. De retour, je n’en dis
rien ni k raa m^re, fli h ma soeur, car elles n’aimaient pas de telles choses et
nV croyaient pas ; mais le soir du meme jour, comme la conversation tourna sur
le soiritisme, je racontai M. M. ce qui venait de m’arriver le matin ; il ne me
rdpondit rien de particulier.

Je n’ai jamais eu aucune hallucination, ni avant, ni apr^s cet incident, k
^exception d\m cas tout recent, quand je me suis vue moi-meme, de quoi je
parJerai une autre fois. Sophie Mamtchitch.

Mr. Potolof writes to the collector, Mr. Aksakoff: —

Rue Schpalernaya, 26. S. P^tersbourg, /e 10 Mai , 1891.

Monsieur, — En r^ponse h. votre lettre du 8 Mai et les questions que vous
me poscz rclativement k Tincident avec M. £. Mamtchitch, lorsque dans les
ann^cs 1876-77 nous habitions ensemble Kieff, rue Proresnaya, maison
Barsky, je puis vous communiquer ce qui suit. Effectiveinent, je fus alors
tdmoin comme M. M., pendant qu’il jouait un soir du piano quelque air mdlan-
colique, s’interrompit brusquement (comme si apres avoir fortement attaqu^ le
clavier, ses mains s'dtaient subitement af^aissdes), et lorsque je vins lui demandcr
ce qui lui dtait arrivd, il me rdpondit qu’il venait de voir apparaitre le fantDme
de I’alladia, se tenant derri^re la draperie de la porte de la chambre contigue
a cclle oil se trouvait le piano. Je dois ajoutcr que notre appartement commun
formait une enfilade de trois chambres, sans compter celle de Tentr^e, qui
occup«iit le milieu ; je travaillais dans ma chambre, qui dtait h droite de celle de
I’entr^e, et je pouvais voir toute I’enfilade bien dclairde. Ce qui me regarde
pcrsonnellement, je ne vis en ce moment aucune figure humaine passer par les
chambres de M. M., mais je ne nie pas que pour Ic tranquilliser j essayai
d’expliquer cet incident par I’entr^fe de notre domestique Nikita; il se peut
aussi que, ne Tayant pas trouvd dans nos appartements, nousallamcs le chercher
cn ba.s, dans la cuisine. Voil^ tout ce que je puis vous dire rclativement k cet
incident. W. Potolof.

Note by the collector ; —

S. Pi^TERSBOURG, L < ififzS Mai , 189I.

Traduit des manuscrits russes de M. et Madame Mamtchitch, et de M.
Potolof. La premiere partie du manuscrit de M. Mamtchitch, jusqu^\ la
premiere apparition de Palladia, est abr^gde.

J’avais rencontrd M. Mamtchitch plusieurs fois, mais je n’avais aucune idde
de ces apparitions constantes dc Palladia. M. Mamtchitch a vu aussi d’autres
figures que cclle de Palladia, mais jc n’ai pas eu le temps d’en faire un
mdmorandum circonstantiel. A. Aksakoff.

Among repeated apparitions this case at present stands almost alone ;
its parallels will be found when we come to deal with the persistent
"controls,” or alleged communicating spirits, which influence trance-
utterance or automatic script.

A case bear&g some resemblance to Palladia’s is given in Proceedings
S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 233, the main difference being that the repeated com-
munications are there made in dream. I add in 714 A another case,
where the deceased person seems to make repeated efforts to impress
on survivors a wish prompted by continued affection.

26

CHAPTER VII

[715

t

715. Less uncommon are the cases where an apparition, occurring
singly and not repeated, indicates a continued knowledge of the affairs
of earth. That knowledge, indeed, runs mainly, as we shall presently sec,
in two directions. There is often knowledge of some circumstance con-
nected with the deceased person’s own death, as the appearance of his
body after dissolution, or the place of its temporary deposit or final burial.
And there is often knowledge of the impending or actual death of some
friend of the deceased person’s. On the view here taken of the gradual
passage from the one environment into the other, both these kinds of
knowledge seem probable enough. I think it likely that some part of the
consciousness after death may for some time be dreamily occupied with
the physical scene. And similarly, when some surviving friend is gradu-
ally verging towards the same dissolution, the fact may be readily per-
ceptible in the spiritual world. When the friend has actually died, the
knowledge which his predecessor may have of his transition is knowledge
appertaining to events of the next world as much as of this.

716. But apart from this information, acquired perhaps on the border-
land between two states, apparitions do sometimes imply a perception of
more definitely terrene events, such as the moral crises (as marriage,
grave quvirrels, or impending crimes) of friends left behind on earth. I
quote in 716 A a specimen of this class, — a case of impressive warning,
in which the phantom was seen by two persons, one of whom had already
had a less evidential experience.

A word as to the light thrown on each other by these two successive
experiences of the same percipient. The latter experience, as will have
been seen, is strongly evidential. The nature of the warning given is
such that the case would hardly have been communicated to us, even for
anonymous publication, except under a grave sense of its importance.
The former experience lacks, by its nature, coincidental proof. The
daughter knew of her father’s death; she hoped, although uncertainly,
that all was well with him ; and the vision announcing his bliss might
thus have been the creation of her own mind. It was a “ vision of con-
solation ” of a frequent type — a type excluded from our evidential reckon-
ings. Yet I can hardly suppose that of the two visions thus similar the
one was really due to spiritual agency and the other was not. I regard
each as corroborating and lending weight to the other.

I add in 716 B another case of similar type, the message in which,
while felt by the percipient to be convincing and satisfactory, was
held too private to be communicated in detail. It is plain that just in
the cases where the message is most intimately veracious, the greatest
difficulty is likely to be felt as to making it known to str&gers.

I have already given a case (in 714) where a departed spirit seems to
show sympathetic anticipation of a marriage some time before it is
contemplated. In another case, given in 716 C, the percipient, Mrs. V.,
describes a vision of a mother’s form suspended, as it were, in a church

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

27

717 ]

where her son is tfndergoing the rite of confirmation. That vision,
indeed, might have Been purely subjective, as Mrs. V. was familiar with
the departed mother’s aspect; though value is given to it by the fact
that Mrs. V. has had other experiences which included evidential

coincidences.

717 . From these instances of knowledge shown by the departed of
events which seem wholly terrene, I pass to knowledge of events which
seem in some sense more nearly concerned with the spirit-world. We
have, as already hinted, a considerable group of cases where a spirit seems
to be aware of the impending death of a survivor. In some few of those
cases the foreknowledge is entirely inexplicable by any such foresight as
we mortals can imagine. But those cases I shall not cite here; de-
ferring them until the whole question of the limits of spiritual precogni-
tion comes to be discussed in a later chapter. In the cases to which I
shall now allude the degree of foresight seems not greater than that of
ordinary spectators, except in the case to be first given, where, though
the family did not foresee the death, a physician might, for aught we
know, have been able to anticipate it. However explained, the case is
one of the best-attested, and in itself one of the most remarkable, that
we possess.

The account, which I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 17,
was sent in 1887 to the American Society for Psychical Research by
Mr. F. G., of Boston. Professor Royce and Dr. Hodgson vouch for the
high character and good position of the informants ; and it will be seen
that, besides the percipient himself, his father and brother are first-hand
witnesses as regards the most important point, — ^the effect produced by
a certain symbolic item in the phantom’s aspect. Mr. G. writes : —

January iiM, 1S88.

Sir,— R eplying to the recently published request of your Society for actual
occurrences of psychical phenomena, 1 respectfully submit the following remark-
able occurrence to the consideration of your distinguished Society, with the
assurance that the event made a more powerful impression on my mind than
the combined incidents of my whole life. I have never mentioned it outside of
my family and a few intimate friends, knowing well that few would believe it, or
else ascribe it to some disordered state of my mind at the time; but I well know
I never was in better health or possessed a clearer head and mind than at
the time it occurred.

In 1867 my only sister, a young lady of eighteen years, d»ed suddenly of
cholera in St. Louis, Mo. My attachment for her was very strong, and the
blow a severe one to me. A year or so after her death the writer became a
commercial traveller, and it was in 1876, while on one of my Western trips, that
the event occurred

I had “ drummed ” the city of St Joseph, Mo., and had gone to my room at
the Pacific House to send in my orders, which were unusually large ones, so
that I was in a very happy frame of mind indeed. My thoughts, of course,
were about these orders, knowing how pleased my house would be at my
success. I had not been thinking of my late sister, or in any manner reflecting

28

CHAPTER VII

[717

on the past. The hour was high noon, and the sun was«shining cheerfully into
my room. While busily .smoking a cigar and writing*’out my orders, I sud-
denly became conscious that some one was sitting on my left, with one arm
resting on the table. Quick as a flash I turned and distinctly saw the form of
my dead sister, and for a brief second or so looked her squarely in the face ;
and so sure was I that it was she, that 1 sprang forward in delight, calling her
by name, and, as 1 did so, the apparition instantly vanished. Naturally I was
startled and dumbfounded, almost doubting my senses; but the cigar in my
mouth, and pen in hand, with the ink still moist on my letter, I satisfied myself
I had not been dreaming and was wide awake. 1 was near enough to touch
her, had it been a physical possibility, and noted her features, cxpre.ssion, and
details of dress, &c. She appeared as if alive. Her eyes looked kindly and
perfectly natural into mine. Her skin was so life-like that I could see the glow
or moisture on its surface, and, on the whole, there was no change in her
appearance, otherwise than when alive.

Now comes the most remarkable confirmation oi my statement, which cannot
be doubted by those who know what 1 state actually occurred. This visitation,
or whatever you may call it, so impressed me that I took the next train home,
and in the presence of my parents and others I related what had occurred.
My father, a man of rare good sense and very practical, was inclined to ridicule
me, as he saw how earnestly 1 believed what 1 stated ; but he, too, was amazed
when later on I told them of a bright red line or scratch on the right-hand side
of my sister's face, which I distinctly had seen. When I mentioned this my
mother rose trembling to her feet and nearly fainted away, and as soon as she
sufficiently recovered her self-possession, with tears streaming down her face,
she exclaimed that I had indeed seen my sister, as no living mortal but herself
was aware of that scratch, which she had accidentally made while doing some
little act of kindness after my sister’s death. She said she well remembered how
pained she was to think she should have, unintentionally, marred the features of
her dead daughter, and that unknown to all, how she had carefully obliterated
all traces of the slight scratch with the aid of powder, &c,, and that she had
never mentioned it to a human being from that day to this. In proof, neither
my father nor any of our family had detected it, and positively were unaware of
the incident, yet / sa'iv the scratch as bright as if just made^ So strangely
impressed was my mother, that even after she had retired to rest she got up and
dressed, came to me and told me she knew at least that 1 had seen my sister.
A few weeks later my mother died, happy in her belief she would rejoin her
favourite daughter in a better world.

In a further letter Mr. F. G. adds : —

There was nothing of a spiritual or ghostly nature in either the form or
dress of my sister, she appearing perfectly natural, and dressed in clothing that
she usually wore in life, and wliich was familiar to me. From her position at
the table, I could only see her from the waist up^ and her appearance and
everything she wore is indelibly photographed in my mind. even had time to
notice the collar and little brea.stpin she wore, as well as the comb in her hair,
after the style then worn by young ladies. The dress had no particular associa-
tion foi^ me or ray mother, no more so than others she was in the habit of
wearing; but to-day^ while / have forgotten all her other dresses, pins, and
combsj 1 could go to her trunk (which we have just as she left it) and pick out

717 ] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 29

the very dress and orpaments she wore when she appeared to me, so well do 1

remember it.

You are correct in understanding that 1 returned home earlier than I had
intended, as it had such an effect on me that 1 could hardly think of any
other matter ; in fact, I abandoned a trip that I hiid barely commenced, and,
ordinarily, would have remained on the road a month longer.

Mr. F. G. again writes to Dr. Hodgson, January 23rd, 1888 ; —

As per your request, I enclose a letter from my father which is indorsed by
my brother, confirming the statement I made to them of the apparition 1 had
seen. 1 will add that my father is one of the oldest and most respected citizens

of St. Louis, Mo., a retired merchant, whose winter residence is at , Ills.,

a few miles out by rail. He is now seventy years of age, but a remarkably
well-preserved gentleman in body and mind, and a very learned man as well.
As 1 informed you, he is slow to believe things that reason cannot explain.
My brother, who indorses the statement, has resided in Boston for twelve years,
doing business on — Street, as per letter-head above, and the last man in
the world to take slock in statements without good proof. The others who
were present (including my mother) are now dead, or were then so young as to
now have but a dim remembrance of the matter.

You will note that my father refers to the ** scratch,” and it was this that
puzzled all, even himself, and which we have never been able to account for,
further than that in some mysterious way I had actually seen my sister nine
years after death, and had particularly noticed and described to my parents
and family this bright red scratch, and which, beyond all doubt in our minds,
was unknown to a soul save my mother, who had accidentally caused it.

When I made my statement, all, of course, listened and were interested;
but the matter would probably have passed with comments that it was a freak
of memory had not I asked about the scratch, and the instant 1 mentioned it
my mother was aroused as if she had received an electric shock, as .she had
kept it secret from all, and she alone was able to explain it. My mother was a
sincere Christian lady, who was for twenty-five years superintendent of a large
infant class in her church, the Southern Methodist, and a directress in many
charitable institutions, and was highly educated. No lady at the time stood
higher in the city of St. Louis, and she was, liesides, a woman of rare good
sen.se.

1 mention these points to give you an insight into the character and standing
of those whose testimony, in such a case, is necessary.

(Signed) F. G.

From Mr. H. G.

, llAS.y January 20th, 188S.

Dear F., — Yours of i6th inst. is received. In reply to your questions
relating to your Jiaving seen our Annie, while at St. Joseph, Mo., I will state
that I well remember the statement you made to family on your return home.
1 remember your stating how she looked in ordinary home dress, and parti-
cularly about the scratch (or red spot) on her face, which you could not account
for, but which was fully explained by your mother. The spot was made while
adjusting something about her head while in the casket, and covered with
powder. All who heard you relate the phenomenal sight thought it was

30 CHAPTER VII [717

*

true. You well know how sceptical I am about things Vhich reason cannot
explain.

(Signed) H. G, (father).

1 was present at the time and indorse the above.

(Signed) K. G. (brother).

The apparent redness of the scratch on the face of the apparition goes
naturally enough with the look of life in the face. The phantom did not
appear as a corpse, but as a blooming girl, and the scratch showed as it
would have shown if made during life.

Dr. Hodgson visited Mr. F. G. later, and sent us the following notes
of his interview : —

St. Louis, Mo., April i 6 th, 1890.

In conversation with Mr. F. G., now forty-three years of age, he says that
there was a very special sympathy between his mother, sister, and himself.

When he saw the apparition he was seated at a small table, about two feet
in diameter, and had his left elbow on the table. The scratch which he saw
was on the right side of his sister’s nose, about three-fourths of an inch long,
and was a somewhat ragged mark. His home at the time of the incident was
in St. Louis. His mother died within two weeks after the incident. His sister’s
face was hardly a foot away from his own. The sun was shining upon it through
the open window. The figure disappeared like an instantaneous evaporation.

Mr. G. has had another experience, but of a somewhat different character.
Last fall the impression persisted for some time of a lady friend of his, and he
could not rid himself for some time of thoughts of her. He found afterwards
that she died at the time of the curious persistence of his impression.

Mr. G. appears to be a first-class witness.

R. Hodgson.

I have ranked this case primu facie as a perception by the spirit of her
mother’s approaching death. That coincidence is too marked to be ex-
plained away : the son is brought home in time to see his mother once
more by perhaps the only means which would have succeeded ; and the
mother herself is sustained by the knowledge that her daughter loves and
awaits her. Mr. Podmore ^ has suggested, on the other hand, that the
daughter’s figure was a mere projection from the mother’s mind : a con-
ception which has scarcely any analogy to support it \ for the one ancient
case of Wesermann’s projection of a female figure to a distance (already
recounted in 668 0) remains, 1 think, the sole instance where an agent
has generated a hallucinatory figure or group of figures which did not, at
any rate, include his own. I mean that he may spontaneously project a
picture of himself as he is or dreams himself to be situated, perhaps with
other figures round him, but not, so far as our evidence goes, the single
figure of some one other than himself. Whilst not assuming that this rule
can have no exceptions, 1 see no reason for supposing that it has been
transgressed in the present case. Nay, I think that the very fact that the

^ See ’’Phantasms of the Dead from another point of view," Proceedings S.P.R-#
vol. vi. p. 291.

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

31

719]

figure was not that hf the corpse with the dull mark on which the mother’s
regretful thoughts might dwell, but was that of the girl in health and
happiness, with the symbolic red mark worn simply as a test of identity,
goes far to show that it was not the mother^ s mind from whence that image
came. As to the spirit’s own knowledge of the fate of the body after
death, a subsequent group of cases will, I think, show that this specific
form of post-mortem perception is not unusual (see 730 and 731 A).

I add in Appendices three other cases where the impending death of
a survivor seems to be indicated.' In one of them — the apparition of a
floating female figure to two officers (717 C) — the identification of that
figure as the wife of the dying man is very imperfect. But the appear-
ance of the figure to two persons collectively is well attested, and this is,
at any rate, the explanation most in accordance with analogy.

718. I place next by themselves a small group of cases which have
the interest of uniting the group just recounted, where the spirit anticipates
the friend’s departure, with the group next to be considered, where the
spirit welcomes the friend already departed from earth. This class forms
at the same time a natural extension of the clairvoyance of the dying
exemplified in some reciprocal ” cases (e.g^ in the case of Miss VV., where
a dying aunt has a vision of her little niece who sees an apparition of
her at the same time ; see Phantasms of the Livings vol, ii. p. 253).
Just as the approaching severance of spirit from body there aided the
spirit to project its observation among incarnate spirits at a distance
upon this earth, so here does that same approaching severance enable
the dying person to see spirits who are already in the next world.
It is not very uncommon for dying persons to say, or to indicate when
beyond speech, that they see spirit friends apparently near them. But,
of course, such vision becomes evidential only when the dying person is
unaware that the friend whose spirit he sees has actually departed, or is
just about to depart, from earth. Such a conjuncture must plainly be
rare ; it is even rather surprising that these Peak in Darien ” cases, as
Miss Cobbe has termed them in a small collection which she made
some years ago, should be found at all. We can add to Miss Cobbe’s
cases two of fair attestation, which I give in 718 A and B.

719. From this last group, then, there is scarcely a noticeable transi-
tion to the group where departed spirits manifest their knowledge that
some friend who survived them has now passed on into their world. That
such recognition and welcome does in fact take place, later evidence,
drawn especially from trance-utterances, will give good ground to believe.
Only rarely, however, will such welcome — taking place as it does in the
spiritual world— be reflected by apparitions in this. When so reflected, it
n^ay take different forms, from an actual utterance of sympathy, as from
a known departed friend, down to a mere silent presence, perhaps inex-

' For some curious parallels to these modern cases from savage beliefs, see
Mr. Andrew Lang’s Mythy Kitual, and Religiony vol. i. pp. I05>6«

CHAPTER VII

32

[719

plicable except to those who happen to have known* some long prede-
ceased friend of the decedent’s.

I quote in full one of the most complete cases of this type, which was
brought to us by the Census of Hallucinations {^Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x.
pp. 380-82).

From Miss L. Dodson : —

September i^tk, 1891.

On June 5th, 1887, a Sunday evening,^ between eleven and twelve at night,
being awake, my name was called three times. I answered twice, thinking it
was my uncle, Come in, Uncle George, 1 am awake,” but the third time 1
recognised the voice as that of my mother, who had been dead sixteen years.
I said. “ Mamma ! ” She then came round a screen near my bedside with two
children in her arms, and placed them in ray arms and put the bedclothes over
them and said, “ Lucy, promise me to take care of them, for their mother is
just dead.” I said, “ Yes, mamma.” She repeated, “ me to take care
of them.” I replied, “Yes, I promise you ; ” and I added, “ Oh, mamma, stay
and speak to me, I am so wretched.” She replied, “ Not yet, my child,” then
she seemed to go round the screen again, and 1 remained, feeling the children
to be still in my arms, and fell asleep. When I awoke there was nothing.
Tuesday morning, June 7th, I received the news of my sister-indaw's death.
She had given birth to a child three weeks before, which I did not know till
after her death.

I was in bed, but not asleep, and the room was lighted by a gaslight in the
street outside. I was out of health, and in anxiety about family troubles. My
age was forty-two. I was quite alone. I mentioned the circumstance to my
uncle the next morning. He thought I was sickening for brain fever. [1 have
had other experiences, but] only to the extent of having felt a hand laid on my
head, and sometimes on my hands, at times of great trouble.

Lucy Dodson.

The collector, Mr. C. H. Cope, writes in answer to our questions : —

Brussels, October ijt/t, 1891.

I have received replies from Miss Dodson to your inquiries.

fi) “ Yes [I was] perfectly awake [at the time].”

(2) “Was she in anxiety about her sister-in-law?” “None whatever; 1
did not know a second baby had been born ; in fact, had not the remotest idea
of my sister-in-law’s illness.”

(3) “Did she think at the time that the words about the children's mother
having just died referred to her sister-in-law? Had she two children?” “ No,
1 was at a total loss to imagine whose children they were.”

(4) “ I was living in Albany Street, Regent’s Park, at the time. My sister

in-law, as I heard afterwards, was confined at St. Andrd (near Bruges), and
removed to Bruges three days prior to her death. — She had two

children including the new-born baby.) ” •*

(5) “ My late uncle only saw bu.sincss connections, and having no relations
or personal friends in London, save myself, would not have been likely to
mention the occurrence to any one.”

^ We have ascertained that this date was a Sunday.

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

33

719]

Mr. Cope also Sent us a, copy of the printed announcement of the
deatli, which Miss Dedson had received. It was dated, “ Bruges, June 7th,
1887," and gave the date of death as June 5th. He quotes from Miss
Dodson’s letter to him, enclosing it, as follows : — “ [My friend], Mrs.
(Jrange, tells me she saw [my sister-in-law] a couple of hours prior to her
death, which took place about nine o’clock on the evening of June 5 th,
and it was between eleven and twelve o’clock the same night my mother
brought me the two little children.”

Professor Sidgwick writes : —

t^^ovember 23rd, 1892.

I have just had an interesting conversation with Miss Dodson and her
friend, Mrs. Grange.

Miss Dodson told me that she was not thinking of her brother or his wife
at this time, as her mind was absorbed by certain other matters. But the
brother was an object of special concern to her, as her mother on her death-
bed, in 1871, had specially charged her — and she had promised — to take care
of the other children, especially this brother, who was then five years old. He
had married in April 18S5, and she had not seen him since, though she had
heard of the birth of his first child, a little girl, in January 18S6; and she had
never seen his wife nor heard of the birth of the second child.

She is <ns sure as she can be that she was awake at the time of the expe-
rience. She knew the time by a clock in the room and also a clock outside.
She heard this latter strike twelve afterwards, and the apparition must have
occurred after eleven, because lights were out in front of the public-house.
The children .seemed to be with her a long time ; indeed, they seemed to be
still with her when the clock struck twelve. The room was usually light enough
to sec things in — /r.g. to get a glass of water, &c. — owing to the lamp in the
street, but the distinctness with which the vision was seen is not explicable by
the re.al light. The children were of ages corresponding to those of her sister-
in-law^s children, i.e, they seemed to be a little girl and a baby newly born ;
the sex was not distinguished. She was not at all alarmed.

She heard from Mrs. Grange by letter, and afterwards orally from her
brother, that her sister-in-law died between eight and nine the same night.

She never had any experience of the kind, or any hallucination at all before ;
but since she has occasionally felt a hand on her head in trouble.

Mrs. Grange told me that she was with the sister-in-law about an hour and a
half before her death. She left her about seven o’clock, without any particular
alarm about her; though she was suffering from inflammation after childbirth,
and Mrs. Grange did not quite like her look; .still her state was not considered
alarming by those who were attending on her. Then about 8.30 news came
to Mrs. (Grange in her own house that something had happened at the sister-
in-law’s. As it was only in the next street, Mrs. Grange put on her bonnet and
went round to the house, and found she was dead. She then wrote and told
Miss Dodson,

I quote furthei::.cases more or less analogous to this in the Appendices
to this section. In the first (719 A) the apparition of a dying mother
brings the news of her own death and that her baby is living. ^In the
second (719 B) a mother, sees a vision of her son being drowned and
also an apparition of her own dead mother, who tells her of the drowning.

VOL, n.

CHAPTER VII

34

[7aa

t

In this case, the question may be raised as to whether the second figure
seen may not have been, so to say, substitutive — a Symbol in which the
percipient’s own mind clothed a telepathic impression of the actual
decedent’s passage from earth. Such a view might perhaps be supported
by some anomalous cases where news of the death is brought by the
apparition of a person still living, who, nevertheless, is not by any normal
means aware of the death. (See the case of Mrs. T., already given in
Chapter IV., 428 ; and that of Miss Hawkins-Dempster in 719 0.)

720. I will quote here one case, at any rate, where such an explanation
would be impossible, since both the deceased person and the phantasmal
figure were previously up.known to the percipient. This case — the last
which Edmund Gurney published — comes from an excellent witness.
The psychical incident which it seems to imply, while very remote from
popular notions, would be quite in accordance with the rest of our present
series. A lady dies ; her husband in the spirit-world is moved by her
arrival ; and the direction thus given to his thought projects a picture of
him, clothed as in the days when he lived with her, into visibility in the
house where her body is lying. We have thus a dream-like recurrence to
earthly memories, prompted by a revival of those memories which had
taken place in the spiritual world. The case is midway between a case of
welcome and a case of haufiting.

from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v, pp, 422-26. The account is given by
Mrs. Bacchus, of Sherbournc Villa, Leamington.

August 18S6.

On Saturday, October i8lh [really 24ih], rfi68, we left some friends (the
Marquis and Madame de Lys) with whom we had been staying at Malvern
Wells, and went to Cheltenham, The reason for going to Cheltenham was
that a brother-in-law of my husband, Mr. George Copeland, was living there.
He was a great invalid, suffering from paralysis and quite unable to move, but
in full mental vigour, so his friends were .anxious to see him as often as possible
to relieve the dreariness of liis long illness, and we did not like to be so near
without paying him a visit. We knew that he had friends staying in the house
at the time, so determined to go to Cheltenham without letting him know, to
take lodgings near, and then tell him we had done so, that he might not feel he
ought to invite us to his house. We soon found some rooms in York Terrace,
close to Bay’s Hill, Mr. Copeland's house. After we had taken the rooms—
the usual lodging-house kind - drawing-room and bedroom at the back, and
were going out, we noticed some medicine bottles on the hall table, asked if
any one were ill in the house, and were told that an old lady, a Mrs. R., and
her daughter were in the dining-room, that Mrs. R. had been ill for some time,
that her illness was not serious and that there was no immediate danger of her
dying ; in fact, it was made quite light of, and we thought no more about it.
We just mentioned in the course of the evening the name of tj^e people lodging
in the same house, and Mr. Copeland said he knew who Mrs! R. was ; she was
the widow of a physician who formerly practised in Cheltenham, that one of
her daughters was married to a master of the College, a Mr. N. Then I
remembered having seen .Mrs. N. at a garden-party at Dr. Barry’s the y<?ar
before, and had noticed her talking to Mrs. Barry, and thought her very pretty.
This was all 1 knew or ever heard of the people. On Sunday morning, when

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

720J

35

1 came into the dra^fing-room for breakfast, I thought my husband looked a
little uncomfortable ; ^however, he said nothing till 1 had finished breakfast,
then asked, Did you hear a noise of a chair in the hall a little while ago ?
The old lady downstairs died in her chair last night, and they were wheeling
her into the bedroom at the back.” I was very uncomfortable and frightened ;
1 had never been in a house with any one dead before, and wanted to go, and
several friends who heard of it asked me to stay with them, but my husband
(iid not wish to move. He said it was a great deal of trouble, was really foolish
of me to wish it, that he did not like moving on Sunday, also that he did not
think it right or kind to go away because some one had died, that we should
think it unkind if the case had been our own, and other people had rushed
off in a hurry ; so we decided to stay. I spent the day with my brother-in-law
and nieces, and only returned to the lodgings in time to go to bed. I went to
sleep quickly as usual, but woke, I suppose, in the middle of the night, not
frightened by any noise, and for no reason, and saw distinctly at the foot of the
bed an old gentleman with a round rosy face, smiling, his hat in his hand,
dressed in an old-fashioned coat (blue) with brass buttons, light waistcoat, and
trousers. The longer I looked at him the more distinctly 1 saw every feature
and particular of his dress, c'tc. I did not feel much frightened,- and after a
time shut my eyes for a minute or two, and when I looked again the old gentle-
man was gone. After a time I went to sleep, and in the morning, while
dressing, made up my mind that I would say nothing of what I had seen till I
saw one of my nieces, and would then describe the old gentleman, and ask if
Dr. R. could be like him, although the idea seemed absurd. 1 met my niece,
Mary Copeland (now Mrs. Brandling), coming out of church, and said, “Was
Dr. R. like an old gentleman with a round rosy face,” &c., &c., describing what
1 had seen. She stopped at once on the pavement, looking astonished. “ Who
could have told you, aunt? We always said he looked more like a country
farmer than a doctor, and how odd it was that such a common-looking man
sliould have had such pretty daughters.”

This is an exact account of what I saw. I am quite sure I should know
the old gentleman again, his face is clearly before me when 1 think of it now,
as at the time Miss de Lys had a letter from me with the story, and sent it to
a relation in France; she heard me tell it again some years after, and said
there was no variation whatever in it. My two nieces are still living, and can
remember exactly everything that happened as I told it to them. Of course
I cannot explain it in any way; the old lady who was dead was in the room
directly under the one I was sleeping in. The part of the whole thing that
surprised me the most was, that I was so very little frightened as to be able
to sleep afterwards, and did not wish to disturb any one else.

Mr. Bacchus writes : —

Lfamington. September 2 y(h, i886.

I have read my wife’s account of what happened at Cheltenham when we
were staying there in October i868; it is exactly what she told me at the
time, and I remember it all perfectly, also her telling my niece about it in the
morning. Henry Bacchus.

In answer to further questions, Mrs. Bacchus replied as follows : —

September 4/^1^1886.

(0 I have never seen anything of the kind before or since,
d ^* 1 .^ memory. The day was Saturday, and it was Sun-

ay night, or early on Monday morning, that I saw Dr. R.

36

CHAPTER VII

[721

(3) I do not remember the number in York Terrace; probably the Times
of October 1868 would give Mrs. R.’s death and wherd it took place. [The
Times gives the death at 7 York Terrace, Sunday, October 25th, 1868.]

(4) The letter to Miss de Lys cannot be found; all my letters to her were
burnt after she died in 1S83.

(5) Mr. Bacchus and Mrs. Henry Berkeley have given their account. Mrs.
Brandling has not yet written.

(6) I am quite sure I never saw any picture of any kind of Dr. R.

(7) I do not know when he died ; probably three or four years before I saw
him. His death was spoken of in that way. I can find out if necessary from
an old servant of Mr. Copeland’s who lives at Cheltenham, and who would
remember him, and be able to inquire.

(8) I do not remember anything about the light, if there was a night-light
in the room or not; I think not. When 1 say, *‘do not remember,” I mean
that being asked puzzles me ; my impression of the whole thing is that it was
like a magic lantern, all dark round, and the figure, colour, and clothes quite
light and bright. 1 always see the whole thing when I speak of it.

Isabelle Bacchi^s.

Statements were also obtained from Mrs. Berkeley and Mrs. Brand
ling, nieces of Mrs. Bacchus, confirming her recollection that she had
described the details of the apparition to them the next morning, and
that it closely resembled Dr, R., as they remembered him. These
statements are printed in full in the Proceedings.

Mr. R. died (as Mrs. Bacchus ascertained tor us), August 30th, 1865.

721. I now come to a considerable group of cases where the departed
spirit shows a definite knowledge of some fact connected with his own
earth-life, his death, or subsequent events connected with that death.
The knowledge of subsequent events, as of the spread of the news of his
death, or as to the place of his burial, is, of course, a greater achievement
(so to term it) than a mere recollection of facts known to him in life, and
ought strictly, on the plan of this series, to be first illustrated. But ii
will be seen that all these stages of knowledge cohere together ; and their
connection can better be shown if I begin at the lower stage, — of mere
earth-memory. Now here again, as so often already, we shall have to
wait for automatic script and the like to illustrate the full extent of the
deceased person’s possible memory. Readers of the utterances, for
instance, of ‘‘George Pelham ” (see Chapter IX.), will know how full tind
accurate may be these recollections from beyond the grave. Mere appari-
tions, such as those with which we are now dealing, can rarely give more
than one brief message, probably felt by the deceased to be of urgent
importance.

I will quote at length a well-attested case where tl^g^ information coni’
municated in a vision proved to be definite, accurate, and important to
the sujjvivors. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 200-205,) ^

1 Some of the correspondence about the case given in the Proceedings is omitted here
for want of space.

721] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 37

The first report pf the case appeared in The Herald (Dubuque, Iowa),
Febiuary nth, 1891, as follows : —

It will be remembered that on February 2nd, Michael Conley, a farmer
living near Ionia, Chickasaw County, was found dead in an outhouse at the
Jefferson house. He was carried to Coroner Hoffmann’s morgue, where, after
the inquest, his body was prepared for shipment to his late home. The old
clothes which he wore were covered with filth from the place where he was
found, and they were thrown outside the morgue on the ground.

His son came from Ionia, and took the corpse home. When he reached
there, and one of the daughters was told that her father was dead, she fell into
a swoon, in which she remained for several hours. When at last she was
brought from the swoon, she said, “ Where are father's old clothes ? He has
just appeared to me dressed in a white shirt, black clothes, and felt [mis-reported
for 5atin\ slippers, and told me that after leaving home he sewed a large roll of
bills inside his grey shirt with a piece of my red dress, and the money is still
there.” In a short time she fell into another swoon, and when out of it
demanded that somebody go to Dubuque and get the clothes. She was deathly
sick, and is so yet.

The entire family considered it only a hallucination, but the physician
advised them to get the clothes, as it might set her mind at rest. The son
telephoned Coroner Hoffmann, asking if the clothes were still in his posses-
sion. He looked and found them in the backyard, although he had supposed
they were thrown in the vault, as he had intended. He answered that he still
had them, and on being told that the son would come to get them, they
were wrapped in a bundle.

The young man arrived last Monday afternoon, and told Coroner Hoffmann
what his sister had said. Mr. Hoffmann admitted that the lady had described
the identical burial garb in which her father was clad, even to the slippers,
although she never saw him after death, and none of the family had seen more
than his face through the coffin lid. Curio.sity being fully aroused, they took
the grey shirt from the bundle, and within the bosom found a large roll of bills
.sewed with a piece of red cloth. The young man said his sister had a red dress
exactly like it. The stitches were large and irregular, and looked to be those
of a man. The son wrapped up tlie garments and took them home with him
yesterday morning, filled with wonder at the supernatural revelation made to
his sister, who is at present lingering between life and death.

Dr. Hodgson communicated with the proprietors of The Herald^ and
both they and their reporter who had written the account stated that it
was strictly accurate. The coroner, Mr. Hoffmann, wrote to Dr. Hodgson
on March iSth, 1891, as follows : —

In regard to the statement in the Dubuque Herald^ about February 19th,
about the Conley matter is more than true by my investigation. 1 laughed
and did not beltet^e in the matter when I first heard of it, until 1 satisfied
myself by investigating and seeing what I did.

M. M. Hoffmann, County Coroner.

Further evidence was obtained through Mr. Amos Crum, pastor of a
church at Dubuque. The following statement was made by Mr. Brown,

CHAPTER Vli

38

[721

whom Mr. Crum described as an intelligent and reliable farmer, residing
about one mile from the Conleys.”

Ionia, / tt/v wtK i^9i-

Elizabeth Conley, the subject of so much comment in the various papers,
was bom in Chickasaw township, Chickasaw County, Iowa, in March 1863.
Her mother died the same year. Is of Irish parentage ; brought up, and is, a
Roman Catholic; has been keeping house for her father for ten years.

On the 1st day of February 1891 her father went to Dubuque, Iowa, for
medical treatment, and died on the 3rd of the same month very suddenly.
His son was notified by telegraph the same day, and he and I started
the next morning after the remains, which we found in charge of Coroner
Hoffmann.

He had 9 dollars 75 cents, which he had taken from his pocket-book. I
think it was about two days after our return she had the dream or vision. She
claimed her father had appeared to her, and told her there was a sum of money
in an inside pocket of his undershirt. Her brother started for Dubuque a few
days afterwards, and found the clothes as we had left them, and in the pocket
referred to found 30 dollars in currency. These are the facts of the matter as
near as 1 can give them. George Brown.

Mr. Crura wrote later : —

Dubuque, Iowa, August 15/^, 1891.

Dear Mr. Hodgson, — I send you in another cover a detailed account of
interview with the Conleys. I could not get the doctor.

I have had a long talk with Mr. Hoffmann about the Conley incident, and
think you have all tlie facts — and they are facts*

The girl Lizzie Conley swooned. She saw her dead father; she heard from
him of the money left in his old shirt; she returned to bodily consciousness ;
she described her father’s burial dress, robe, shirt, and .slippers exactly, though
she had never seen them. She described the pocket in the shirt that had been
left for days in the shed at the undertaker’s. It was a ragged-edged piece of
red cloth cium.sily sewn, and in this pocket was found a roll of bills— 35 dollars
in amount — as taken out by Mr. Hoffmann in presence of Pat Conley, son of
the deceased, and brother of the Lizzie Conley whose remarkable dream or
vision is the subject of inquiry. Amos Crum, Past. Univ. Ch.

... I herewith transcribe my questions addressed to Miss Elizabeth
Conley and her replies to the same concerning her alleged dream or vision ....

On July 17th, about noon, I called at the Conley home near Ionia, Chicka-
saw County, Iowa, and inquired for Elizabeth Conley. She was present and
engaged in her domestic labours. When 1 stated the object of my call, she
seemed quite reluctant for a moment to engage in conversation. Then she
directed a lad who was present to leave the room. She said she would converse
with me upon the matter pertaining to her father.

Q. What is your age ? A. Twenty-eight.

Q. What is the state of your health ? A. Not good since my father’s death.

Q. ^yhat was the state of your health previous to his death ? A. It was
good. I was a healthy girl.

Q. Did you have dreams, visions, or swoons previous to your father’s death ?
A. ^y, I had dreams* Everybody has dreams.

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

Wl]

39

Q. Have you e\%r made discoveries or received other information during
vour dreams or visions previous to your father’s death ? A. No.

Q. Had there been anything unusual in your dreams or visions previous to
your father’s death ? A. No, not that I know of.

Q. Was your father in the habit of carrying considerable sums of money
about his person ? A. Not that I knew of.

Q. Did you know before /ns death of the pocket in the breast of the shirt
worn by him to Dubuque ? A. No.

Q. Did you wash or prepare that shirt for him to wear on his trip to
Dubuque? A. No. It was a heavy woollen undershirt, and the pocket was
stitched inside of the breast of it.

Q. Will you recite the circumstances connected with the recovery of
money from clothing worn by your father at the time of his death? A.
(after some hesitation) When they told me that father was dead I felt very
sick and bad ; I did not know anything. Then father came to me. He
had on a white shirt and black clothes and slippers. When I came to, I
told Pat [her brother] I had seen father. I asked him (Pat) if he had
brought back father’s old clothes. He said, “No,” and asked me why I
wanted them. I told him father said to me he had sewed a roll of bills inside

of his grey shirt, in a pocket made of a piece of my old red dress. I v;ent
to sleep, and father came to me again. When I awoke I told Pat he must go
and get the clothes.

Q. While in these swoons did you hear the ordinary conversations or noises
in the house about you ? A. No.

Q, Did you see your father’s body after it w'as placed in its coffin ? A. No ;
I did not see him after he left the house to go to Dubuque.

Q. Have you an education? A. No.

Q. Can you read and write? A. Oh yes, I can read and write; but I’ve
not been to school much.

Q. Are you willing to write out what you have told me of this strange
affair? A. Why, Tve told you all I know about it.

She was averse to writing or to signing a written statement. During the
conversation she was quite emotional, and manifested much effort to
suppress her feelings. She is a little more than medium size, of Irish parent-
age, of Catholic faith, and shows by her conversation that her education is
limited.

Her brother, Pat Conley, corroborates all that she has recited. He is a
sincere and IhlDstantial man, and has no theory upon which to account for the
strange facts that have come to his knowledge. In his presence Coroner
Hoffmann, in Dubuque, found the shirt with its pocket of red cloth stitched on
the inside with long, straggling, and awkward stitches, just as a dim-sighted old
man or an awkward boy might sew it there. The pocket was about 7 [seven]
inches deep, and in the pocket of that dirty old shirt that had lain in Hoff-
mann’s back room was a roll of bills amounting to 35 dollars. When the shirt
was found with the pocket, as described by his sister after her swoon, and the-
money as told her by the old man after /its deatky Pat Conley seemed dazed
and overcome by the mystery. Hoffmann says the girl, after her swoon, de-
scribed exactly the burial suit, shirt, coat or robe, and s.atin slippers in which
the body was prepared for burial. She even described minutely the slippers,
which were of a new pattern that had not been in the market here, Aid which
the girl could never have seen a sample of ; and she had not seen, and never

40 CHAPTER VII [78»

saw, the body of her father after it was placed in the coffin,* and if she had seen
it she could not have seen his feet *Mn the nice black satin slippers ” which she
described. . . . Amos Crum, Pastor Univ. Church.

If we may accept the details of this narrative, which seems to have
been carefully and promptly investigated, we find that the phantasm com-
municates two sets of facts : one of them known only to strangers (the
dress in which he was buried), and one of them known only to himseif
(the existence of the inside pocket and the money therein). In discussing
from what mind these images orignate it is, of course, important to note
whether any living minds, known or unknown to the percipient, v/cre
aware of the facts thus conveyed.

There are few cases where the communication between the percipient
and the deceased seems to have been more direct than here. The hard,
prosaic reality of the details of tlie message need not, of course, surprise
us. On the contrary, the father’s sudden death in the midst of earthly
business would at once retain his attention on money matters and facilitate
his impressing them on the daughter’s mind. One wishes that more
could be learned of the daughter’s condition wdicn receiving the message.
It seems to have resembled trance rather than dream.

722. A dream in which a message of somewhat the same kind is given
is here added in 722 A, after which will also be found (in 722 B) one of
the few old cases whose lineage is sufficiently respectable to allow its
entrance here. The preoccupation in each case turns on the fulfilment of
a small duty. One other case in this group I must quote at length. It
illustrates the fact that the cases of deepest interest arc often the hardest
for the inquirer to get hol<l of.

From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. pp. 305-S6,

The account of the percipient, Baron B. von Driesen, was written in
November 1890, and has been translated from the Russian by Mr. M.
Petrovo-Solovovo, who sent us the case.

[Baron von Driesen begins by saying that he has never beliej;ed and does
not believe in the supernatural, and that he is more inclined to attribute the
apparition he saw to his excited fancy ” than to anything else. After these
preliminary remarks he proceeds as follows: — ]

1 must tell you that my father-indaw, M. N. J. Ponomareff, died in the
country. This did not happen at once, but after a long and painful illnes-s,
whose sharp phases had obliged my wife and myself to join him long before
his death. I had not been on good terms with M. Ponomareff. Different cir-
cumstances, which are out of place in this narrative, had estranged us from
each other, and these relations did not change until his death. He died very
quietly, after having given his blessing to all his family, including myself. A
liturgy for the rest of his soul was to be celebrated on the ninth day. I
member yery well how I went to bed between one and two o’clock on the eve
of that day, and how I read the Gospel before falling asleep. My wife was
sleeping in the same room. It was perfectly quiet. I had just put out the
candle when footsteps were heard in the adjacent room — a sound of slippers

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

41

shufflings I might sav— which ceased before the door of our bedroom. I called
out, “ Who is there ?^’ No answer. I struck one match, then another, and when
after the stifling smell of the sulphur the Are had lighted up the room, I saw M.
Ponomareff standing before the closed door. Yes, it was he, in his blue
dressing-gown, lined with squirrel furs and only half-buttoned, so that I could
see his white waistcoat and his black trousers. It was he undoubtedly. 1 was
not frightened. They say that, as a rule, one is not frightened when seeing a
ghost, as ghosts possess the quality of paralysing fear.

“What do you want?” I asked my father-in-law. M. Ponomareff made
two steps forward, stopped before my bed, and said, “ Basil Feodorovitch, I
have acted wrongly towards you. Forgive me ! Without this I do not feel
at rest there.” He was pointing to the ceiling with his left hand whilst hold-
ing out his right to me. I seized this hand, which was long and cold, shook it,
and answered, Nicholas Ivanovitch, God is my witness that I have never had
anything against you.”

[The ghost of] my father-in-law bowed [or bent down], moved away, and
went through the opposite door into the billiard-room, where he disappeared.
J looked after him for a moment, crossed myself, put out the candle, and fell
asleep with the sen.se of joy which a man who has done his duty must feel,
'fhe morning came. My wife’s brothers, as well as our neighbours and the
peasants, assembled, and the liturgy was celebrated by our confessor, the Rev.
Father Basil. But when all was over, the same Father Basil led me aside, and
said to me mysteriously, “ Basil Feodorovitch, I have got something to say to
you in private.” My wife having come near us at this moment, the clergyman
repeated his wish. I answered, “ Father Ba.sil, I have no secrets from my
wife ; please tell us what you wished to tell me alone.”

Then Father Basil, who is living till now in the Koi parish of the district of
Kashin [Gov. of Tver], said to me in a rather solemn voice, “ This night at
three o’clock Nicholas Ivanovitch [Ponomareff] appeared to me and begged of
me to reconcile him to you.” (Signed) Bakon Basil Dkiesen.

Mr. Solovovo adds : —

The Baroness von Driesen is now dead, so that her evidence cannot be
obtp.ined . . .

I also saw Baron Basil von Driesen himself, and spoke with him about
M . Ponornaneff’s ghost. He .stated to me that if he were going to die to-morrow,
he should still be ready to .swear to the fact of his having seen the apparition,
or something to this effect. I asked him to obtain for me the clergymans
account, to whom 1 had already written before seeing Baron von Driesen
(though not knowing him), but without receiving an answer — which is but
natural, after all. Baron von Driesen kindly promised to procure for me the
account in question, as it was then his intention to visit different estates in
Central Russia, including the one that had belonged to M. Ponomareff.

Baron Nicholas von Driesen — Baron Basils son — called on me a few days
He stated,*, with regard to the case in question, that it was necessary' to
see the clergyman in order to induce him to write an account of what had
happened to him.

t

Baron N. von Driesen afterwards sent a note to Mr. Solovovo, stating
that his grandfather (M. Ponomareff) died on November 21st, i860; and

CHAPTER VII

42

[728

the testimony of the priest was obtained later. Mr. ^‘Solovovo, who had
already ascertained independently that the Rev. Basil Bajenoff had been
a priest at Koi in the year 1861 , and was there still, writes : —

The following is the translation of the Rev. Basil Bajetioff's statement

** Koi, /u/y 2 y‘d [Augtisi 4MJ, 1891.

“ To the account I heard from Baron B. F. Driesen in the presence of his
wife’s brothers, MM. N. N., A. N., and I. N. PonomarefF, as to how M. Nicholas
I. Ponomareff appeared to him in the night of November 29-3oth, 1S60, having
died nine days before, and begged of the Baron to be reconciled to him, I may
add that to me also did he appear at the same time and with the same request,
which fact, before hearing the Baron’s narrative, I communicated to all those
present at the liturgy for the rest of the soul of the late M. N. I. Ponomareff.

“(Signed) Basil Bajenoff,

“ Priest of Trinity Church, at Koi, District of Kashin,
Government of Tver.**

723. In this connection I may refer again to Mrs. Storie’s dream of the
death of her brother in a railway accident, given in Chapter IV. (427).
While I think that Gurney was right — in the state of the evidence at the
time phantasms of the Living was written — in doing his best to bring this
incident under the head of telepathic clairvoyance, I yet feel that the
knowledge since gained makes it impossible for me to adhere to that view.
I cannot regard the visionary scene as wholly reflected from the mind of
the dying man. I cannot think, in the first place, that the vision of Mr.
Johnstone, — interpolated with seeming irrelevance among the details of
the disaster, — did only by accident coincide witli the fact that that gentU*-
man really was in the train, and with the further fact that it was he wlii>
communicated the fact of Mr, Hunter’s deatli to Mr. and Mrs. Stone. 1
must suppose that the communicating intelligence was aware of Mr. John-
stone’s presence, and at least guessed that upon him (as a clergyman) that
task would naturally fall. Nor can 1 pass over as purely symbolic so im-
portant a part of the vision as the second figure, and the scrap of conversa-
tion, which seemed to be half heard. 1 therefore consider that the case
falls among those where a friend recently departed appears in company of
some other friend, dead some time before.

724. We have thus seen the spirit occupied shortly after death with

various duties or engagements, small or great, which it has incurred during
life on earth. Such lies seem to prompt or aid its action upon its old sur-
roundings. And here an important reflection occurs. Can we prepare
such a tie for the departing spirit ? Can we create for it some welcome
and helpful train of association which may facilitate the self-manifestation
which many souls appear to desire ? I believe that we can to some extent
do this. At an early stage of our collection, Edmund Gurney was struck
by the Unexpectedly large proportion of cases where the percipient in-
formed us that there had been a between himself and the deceased

person that whichever passed away first should try to appear to the other.

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

725 ]

43

Considering,” he^adds, ‘*what an extremely small number of persons
make such a compact, compared with those who do not, it is difficult to
resist the conclusion that its existence has a certain efficacy.”

The cases recorded in Phantasms of the Living are such as fell, or may
have fallen, within twelve hours of the death ; otherwise they would not
have been introduced into that work. It will, of course, occur to the reader
that since the especial object of that compact is to assure the surviving
friend that the deceased person has safely traversed the gate of death, its
fulfilment affords some presumption that he is not merely approaching that
gate, but feels that he has passed it. On the other hand, Gurney remarks,
that ” considering how often spontaneous telepathy acts without any con-
scious set of the distant mind towards the person impressed, it is safer to
refer the phenomenon to the same sort of blind movements as seem some-
times at supreme crises to evoke a response out of memories and affinities
that have long lapsed from consciousness ; on which view the efficacy of
the compact may quite as readily be conceived to depend on its latent
place in the percipient’s mind as in the agent’s.”

Since these words were written the general trend of the evidence has
somewhat changed ; and it may be well briefly to refer to the compact-
cases in Phantasms of the Livings considering how far they seem to indicate
ante-mortem or posMpiortem communication.

725 . Taking the cases as they follow each other in that work, the first
(vol. i. p. 395) is the well-knowm incident recorded by Lord Brougham —
his vision, while taking a warm bath in Sweden, of a school friend from
whom he had parted many years before, but with whom he had long ago
“ committed the folly of drawing up an agreement written with our blood,
to the effect that whichever of us died first should appear to the other,
and thus solve any doubts we had entertained of the life after death.”
This incident happened about 2 a.m. apparently on December 19th
(possibly on December 20th), 1799- G. died in India on December
19th, 1799 — place and hour not stated. The time in any part of India is,
of course, several hours ahead of the time in Sweden. In this case the
time-coincidence cannot be clearly determined.

The seco 7 id compact-case in Phantasms of the Living (vol. i, p. 419)
tells definitely against the assumption that the apparent fulfilment of a
compact must needs indicate actual death. Captain P. was washed over-
board at sea ; but though in extreme danger, did not lose consciousness,
caught hold of a rope, and was saved. On the same night, perhaps at the
same moment, a lady with whom Captain P. had made a death-compact,
saw his phantasm in her room. This seems precisely the kind of incident
which Gurney’s last-quoted sentences have in view.

The third case (vol. i. p. 427) is remarkable inasmuch as the phan-
tasmal figure appeared not only to the partner in the compact, buf also to
f child unacquainted with the decedent, but who chanced to be sleeping
in a room near to that occupied by the said partner. It is not known which

CHAPTER VII

44

[725

of the two appearances came first ; but to the child tl)e figure appeared as
though groping its way. The death occurred on the same night, but the
time-coincidence is not more precisely known.

In the fourth case ^ (vol. i. p. 506) the coincidence is said to have
been very close: the mother dying at five minutes to three, and the
son seeing the figure just before the clock struck three. It is, of course,
impossible to say whether the phantasm preceeded or followed actual
death.

The fifth case, again, given in Chapter VI. (667 A), shows us the phan-
tasm, which had been promised at death, appearing when the agent was still
alive, but had been stunned by a fall from a coach, which left for some time
much mental confusion. The case is interesting as showing what may
be called a ready dissociability of spirit and organism, coincident with
complete obscuration of the supraliminal consciousness.

The sixth case is that of Captain Colt of Gartsherrie. I quote this at
length in 725 A, since it is probable — though not certain — that the agent
had been dead for some hours at the time of the apparition. Allowing for
difference of time, he had probably been shot in the temple some fourteen
hours before. He had apparently not moved after he was shot. He had
been previously wounded in several places, and no surgical aid was attain-
able. There is here a curious analogy with the narrative of the red scratch
already given. Captain Colt says, I saw ... a wound on the right
temple with a red stream from it. His face was of a waxy pale tint,” &c.
The red stream ” — the aspect of the body just after death — seems to
have been made prominent for an evidential purpose. On the dead man’s
body was found a letter from his brother, the percipient, which begged
him, if killed in battle, to manifest himself in the very room in which his
phantasm did actually appear.

The seventh case (vol. i. p. 531) is that of a half-caste Indian, called
“Mountain Jim,” over whom the well-known traveller, Mrs. Bishop
(then Miss Bird), had established a great influence. At their last
parting he vowed that he would see her again when he died ; and, in
fact, some hours either before or after his death in Colorado she, being
in Switzerland, saw his phantasm, and heard the words, “ I have come, as
I promised.”

In the eighth case — Chevalier Fenzi’s (vol, ii. p. 63) — the percipient
had a sudden fit of deep depression, and went out to walk on the sea-shore
in the midst of a violent thunderstorm. There he thought he saw his
brother — who was really at Florence, seventy miles off — walking a little
way off over some rocks, behind one of which the figure disappeared.
The brother died at the time. He had not only promised to try to appear
after death, but had at the same time predicted to Chevalier Fenzi that

^ Gurney did not give this case an “ evidential number/' regarding it as ambiguous ”
on account of the anxiety subsisting in the percipient's mind. For the present purpose,
however, it plainly ought to be taken into consideration.

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

45

726 ]

he would die withirPthree months. The prediction was fulfilled. It may,
of course, have had some influence in producing Chevalier Fenzi’s
experience.

In the ninth case (vol. ii, p. 253), already referred to above (in 718 ),
the decedent was still living, but her strong desire had been for a sight
of the percipient before her own death ; and this she appears to have
attained.

In the tenth case (which is given at second-hand in vol. ii. p. 477)
two girl friends exchanged rings, with the promise that the friend who
died first would restore the ring to the survivor. At about the time when
the first friend died the surviving friend saw her standing by her bedside,
and holding out the ring.

In the eleventh case (in vol. ii. p. 489, which is again at second-hand,
and very remote) there w'ere three parties to the compact, and two of these
successively are said to have appeared at about the time of death to the
last survivor.

The tivelfth case (vol. ii. p. 496) although second-hand and remote,
was written down apparently within a year of its occurrence. The time-
coincidence cannot be exactly known, as the decedent was shipwrecked.
His appearance was that of a drowned man.

726 . In three of these twelve cases of fulfilment of compact, then, the
agent whose phantasm appeared was certainly still alive. In most of the
other cases the exact time-relation is obscure ; in a few of them there is
strong probability that the agent was already dead. The inference will
be that the existence of a promise or compact may act effectively both
on the subliminal self before death and also probably on the spirit after
death.

This conclusion is confirmed by the following cases, of which two
must be quoted at length in the text, as specially instructive. I first give
one in which the deceased person’s impulse has been the fulfilment of an
immediate engagement.

From Proceedings S. P.R., vol. viii. p. 214. The following letter was
addressed to the late Professor Adams, Cambridge : —

St. Luke’s Church, Cer Van Ness Avenue, and Clay Street,

San Francisco, California, September iiM, 1890.

• . - [A few weeks ago] my choir-trainer, a man in robust health
and with a predisposition against anything “ Spiritualistic,” saw plainly
the apparition of one of his choir, a man of fifty years old. It happened .
thus:—

Mr. R[ussell],*the bass-singer of the choir, fell in an apoplectic fit upon the
^reet at 10 o’clock on a certain Friday; he died at ii o’clock at his house.
My wife, learning of his death, sent my brother-in-law down to the house of
the choirmaster [Mr. Reeves] to ask him about music for the funefal. The
messenger reached the house of the choirmaster about 1.30 p.m. He was
told that the choirmaster was upstairs, busy looking over some music. He

46 CHAPTER VII [728

(

accordingly sat down in the drawing-room, and, while \i^aiting, began to tell
the ladies (sister and niece of the choirmaster) about Mr. R.’s death. While
they were talking they heard an exclamation in the hall-way. Some one said,
“ My God ! ” They rushed out, and half-way down, sitting on the stairs, saw
the choirmaster in his shirt-sleeves, showing signs of great fright and con-
fusion. As soon as he saw them he exclaimed, “ I have just seen R. ! *’ The
niece at once said, ‘‘ Why, R. is dead ! ” At this the choirmaster without a
word turned back upstairs and went to his room. My brother-in-law followed
him and found him in complete prostration, his face white, &c. He then told
my brother-in-law what he had experienced.

He had been looking over some music ; had just selected a ** Te Deum ”
for the morning service. This Te Deum ’■ closed with a quartette setting for
two bass and two tenor voices. He was wondering where he could get a
second tenor. Finally, he went to the door on his way downstairs to look up
another “ Te Deum.’' At the door he saw Mr. R., who stood with one hand
on his brow, and one hand extended, holding a sheet of music. The choir-
master advanced, extended his hand, and was going to speak, when the
figure vanished. Then it was that he gave the exclamation meniioned
above.

You must remember that he knew nothing of R.*s death until he heard his
niece speak of it as detailed above.

This is the best authenticated ghost story I ever heard. I know all the
parties well, and can vouch for their truthfulness. I have no doubt that the
choirmaster saw something, cither subjectively or objectively. Whatever it
was, the experience was so vivid that it made him sick for days, though he is a
man of exceptional physique.

At fiKst 1 tried to explain this on natural grounds. I thought pos.sibly he
had been in the room overhead, and had overheard, unconsciously, the story
of R.’s death, and by a process of unconscious cerebration summoned up the
image of the dead man. Hut this is impossible, because the house is very
large, the rooms widely apart, &c.

My present conviction is this ; Mr. R. was a man of the utmost regularity
and faithfulness in fulfilling his duties. He has sung for us without pay for
many years. His first thought (or one of the first), after his stroke of apoplexy,
must have been : “ How shall I get word to the choirmaster that I cannot go
to rehearsal to-morrow night?” In an hour he died, without ever having
recovered consciousness. My notion is that in some way he was enabled
to make himself appear to the choirmaster. If you refer to the attitude in
which he appeared, you will see that it answers to my supposition. It indicates
his illness (a pain in the head), and his desire to give up, so to speak, his duty
as singer. . . . Wm. W. Davis, Rector.

Mr. Reeves* own account is reported in the San Francisco Chronicle
(quoted in Lights September 27th, 1890), as follows : —

Early on Friday morning Edwin Russell, an Englishman, well known as a
real estate agent, was walking near the corner of Sutter and Mason Streets
when he sustained an apoplectic stroke, from the effects of which he died
shortly before noon. He had resided in the city ten years, and was well and
favourably known in the commercial world here.

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

726]

47

Mr. Russell wal a member -of tbe Protestant Episcopal Church, and also
the possessor of a rK:h bass voice. This made him a welcome addition to the
choir of St. Luke’s Church, and brought him in immediate contact with the
Rev. W. W. Davis, vicar of the church, and with Harry E. Reeves, the
recently appointed choir leader. Mr. Reeves is a nephew of the distinguished
English tenor of the name, and conducted the musical services at the funeral
of President Chester A. Arthur.

It was to Mr. Reeves that the very sensational and startling revelation
now to be recorded was vouchsafed. Mr. Reeves was found at the residence
of his sister, Mrs. Cavanagh, 2121 California Street, by a Chronicle reporter.
He became evidently agitated when asked if it were true that he had seen the
apparition of Russell before hearing of the latter’s death. [Mr. Reeves stated
that he was not a Spiritualist, and proceeded]: —

“ I last saw Russell alive on the Saturday night previous to his death.
Russell came to the choir rehearsal. I said to him: * Do you know where I
can get a good cigar ? ’ and he recommended a place. I went there with him,
and then took such a fancy to him that I invited him to come to my house, or
rather my sister’s house. We agreed to postpone his visit till the following
Saturday, and he said: ‘Well, I’ll call on you next week anyhow.’ The
matter passed from mv mind until Friday afternoon, about three o’clock. I
always make it a point to look over my music for Sunday a day or two before,
and on this occasion 1 was silting in the parlour and took up two Te Deums
to make a choice. One was Starkvreathcr’s in G, the other a composition of
Kroell’s. Just as I had taken one in my hand and was going upstairs to my
room to look over it I heard the front door bell ring, and recognised that
some visitor whom I did not then know had called. I afterwards learned
that it was young Mr. Sprague, who can tell you his story when you ask
him.

“ I went into my room. I lay down on the lounge for a, moment, then by
an impulse 1 cannot account for, 1 walked to the door. The head of the stair-
way was somewhat dimly lighted, as you see it now, but not so dimly but what
1 could at once see what appeared to be the figure of Russell. It was so real, so
lifelike, that 1 at once stepped forward and stretched out my hand, and was
about to speak some words of welcome.

“The figure seemed to have a roll of music in one hand and the other over
its face, but it was Russell's image. I am quite sure of that. As I advanced
to the head of the stairway the figure seemed to turn, as if about to descend,
and faded into the air.

“ I remember trying to speak to the figure, but the tongue clung to the
roof of my mouth. Then 1 fell agaimst the wall and gasped out. ‘Ah! My
God ! * just like that. My sister and niece, with the other folks, came up.
My niece said, ‘Uncle H^arry, what’s the matter?* I went on to explain
what it was, but was so scared I could hardly speak. My niece said, * Don’t
you know Russell is dead?’ Well, that flabbergasted me; it only made
matters worse, and I nearly fainted. Then they told me that the Rev. Mr.
Davis had sent Mr. Sprague to tell me of the sad news. I was terribly
startled by the affair, and feel shaky even now, but I am not given to super-
stitious fears, and I suppose it can be explained. Mr. Sprague had been
waiting nearly half-an-hour before I saw him and obtained corroboration of
the news of Russell’s death. It is very strange; very strange, indeecf. I saw
that man Russell after he rtiust have been dead three hours at least, as plainly
as I see you in that chair.”

48 CHAPTER VII [727

Mn Reeves confirms this account in a letter to Dr. Hodgson as
follows : —

San Francisco, September 15M, 1890.

Dear Sir,— W ith reference to your favour of the 5th inst., just received, the
full particulars were given in city papers; some things not just exactly as
stated, especially the word *• flabbergasted,” which is foreign to me.

Apart from what you read, there is nothing more to be given.

H. E. Reeves.

Dr. Hodgson received the following independent and corroborative
account from Mr. Sprague : —

Grand Forks, Dak., 29M, 1890,

. . . You probably know ail about Mr. RusselFs death and connection with
St. Lukc's Church, so 1 shall only give you the facts as they came to my
knowledge.

On Friday noon, August 22nd, a young lady friend of the Russells came to
my brother-in-law’s (Mr. Davis’) house and asked to see Mr. Davis. As Mr.
Davis was out, his wife (my sister) saw this young lady. I was not present at
the inter\'iew, but my sister told me shortly afterwards the facts of Mr. Russell’s
death, &c., and said that this young lady had come to ask Mr. Davis if tlic
church choir would be willing to sing at Mr. Russell’s funeral, as Mr. R.’s family
were of limited means and could not afford to pay the choir.

As I was going to Mr. Reeves’ house that afternoon my sister asked me to
tell Mr. Reeves about Russell’s death and ask him about the singing. I called
at 1221 California Street about three o’clock that afternoon, and had been
in the parlour some twenty minutes talking with Miss Kavanagh (Mr.
Reeves’ niece), when we heard Mr. Reeves’ exclamation on the stairs, and I
followed Miss Kavanagh to see what the trouble was. We found Mr. R. sitting
on the stairs in his shirt sleeves and evidently very much frightened. Miss K.
brought him a glass of wine, also a glass of water, but I think he did not touch
either. After a couple of minutes Mr, R. went up to his room, and Miss
Kavanagh asked me to go up and see if he was all right, as she was afraid to
go. I went up and found Mr. Reeves sitting down on a chair near the window
with his legs crossed. He had no coat or vest, collar or necktie on, and the
perspiration seemed to roll off him. He seemed greatly agitated, but in a few
minutes he told me his story, and I left him. In about five minutes he came
downstairs and began to talk about it, and continually said, It is the strange.st
thing; I can’t understand it.” Goldwin S. Sprague.

727. The next case is even more remarkable. It is a deflected fulfil-
ment, occurring two days before death, and probably during sleep ; the
agent has made a promise to one friend, but is only perceptible to
another person who happens to be in that friend’s company. We may
compare a case quoted in our last chapter, where a brother, presumably
wishing to appear to his sister, is perceived only by the sister’s black nurse
(see section 851). The following is quoted from the “Report on the
Census of Hallucinations ” in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 284 .

727]

49

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

\

Fjrom Countess EugAnie Kapnist.

June 24/A, 1891.

A Talta, en Fdvrier, 1889, nous fimes la connaissance dc M. P. et de sa
femmef passant la soiree chez dcs amis communs qui avaient tenu k nous
rdunir. A cette dpoque, M. P. souffrait d^j^ d’une phthisic assez avancde;
il venait de perdre, k Pdtersbourg, son fr^re, atteint de la mSme maladie.
On pria ma soeur de faire un peu de musique, et elle choisit au hasard le
PrSude de Mendelssohn. A mon dtonnemcnt je vis M. P.» que nous ne
connaissions, que de ce soir, aller, trds dmotionnd, prendre place auprds du
piano, et suivrc avec une esp&ce d’anxidtd le jeu de ma soeur, Lorsqu’elle
eut hni, il dit que pour quelques instants elle venait de faire ressusciter son
fr^re, executant absolument dc la mdme manidre ce morceau, qu*il jouait
frdquemment. Depuis, en voyant ma soeur, il aimait particulidrement k causer
avec elle. Jc puis certifier ainsi qu’elle une conversation que nous eumes k
une soirde, au mois de Mars. Nous parlions de la mort, chose frdquentc k
Talta, toujours peuplde de malades : — “ Savez-vous,” disait-il ma soeur, “ il me
semble toujours que mon esprit est trhs prochc du vGtre ; j*ai la certitude de
vous avoir ddj^ connue ; nous avons dans la rdalitd une preuve que ce n’est pas
en ce monde — ce sera que je vous aurais vue durant quelqu’autre vie prdeddente
(il dtait un peu spirite). “ Ainsi done, si je meurs avant vous, ce qui est bien
probable, vu ma maladie, je reviendrai vers vous, si cela m’est possible, et jc
vous apparaitrai de fa^on k ne pas vous effrayer ddsagrdablement.” Ma soeur
lui rdpondit, prenant la chose trds au sdrieux, qu’elle lui rendrait la pareille si
die mourait la premidre, et j’dlais tdmoin de cette promesse mutuelle.

Ndanmoins nous ftmes k peine connaissance de maison; nous nous
rencontrions parfois chez des amis communs, et nous le voyions souvent se
promcner sur le quai dans un paletot couleur noisette qui excitait notre hilaritd
et qui nous resta dans la mdmoirc je nc sais plus pourquoi. Au mois de Mai,
nous pardons de Talta, et depuis nous efimes tant d'impressions di verses, nous
vimes tant dc monde, que jusqu’Ji Thiver suivant nous oubliames compldtement
M. P. et sa femme, qui reprdsentaient pour nous dcs connaissances comme on
en a par centaines dans la vie.

Nous dtions k Pdtersbourg. Le II Mars, c'dtait un lundi de Careme en
1890, nous allamcs au thdatre voir une reprdsentation de la troupe des
Meiningner. Je crois qu*on donnait Le Marchand de Venise. Mile. B. ^tait
avec nous, venue de Tsarsko^ a cette occasion. La pifece termin^e, nous
n-eumos que le temps de rentrer la maison changer de toilette, apros quoi
nous accompagnfimes Mile. B. h la gare. Elle partait avec le dernier train,
qui quitte pour Tsarskod S^lo k i heure dc la nuit. Nous I’installames en
wagon, et ne Ty laissimcs qu’apr^s la seconde cloche de depart.

Notre domestique allait bien en avant de nous, afin de retrouver notre
voiture, de mani^ire que, gagnant le perron, nous la trouvfime.*^ avanc^e qui
nous attendait. Ma soeur s’assit la premiere ; moi je la ns attendre, descen-
dant plus doucement les marches de I’escalier; le domestique tenait la portiere
ouverte. Je montai k demi, sur le marchepied, et soudain je
niarretai dans cettfi pose, tellement surprise que je ne compris plus ce qui
m arrivait. Il faisait sombre dans la voiture, et pourtant en face de ma sa^ur,
la regardant, je vis dans un petit jour gris qu'on efit dit factice, s'dclaircissant
vers le point qui attachait le plus mes yeux, une figure k la silhouette ^ouss^
laphanc, plutdt quMnd^cise. Cette vision dura un instant, pendant lequel,

VOL. ir. ^

CHAPTER VII

50

[727

pourtant, mes yeux prirent connaissance des moindres dj^tails de re visage, qui
me sembla connu : des traits assez pointus, une raie un peu de edt^, un nez
prononed, un menton tres maigre h. barbe rare et d'un blond fonc^. Ce qui me
frappe, lorsque }*y pense k present, c*est d’avoir vu les diffdrentes couleurs,
malgrd que la lueur grisktre, qui ^clairait k peine Tinconnu, eQt dtd insufbsante
pour les distinguer dans un cas normal. II ^tait sans chapeau, ct en m£me
temps dans un paletot comme on en porte au sud^de couleur plutdt claire —
noisette. Toute sa personne avait un cachet de grande fatigue et de maigreur.

Le domestique, tres dtonnd de ne pas me voir monter, arret< 5 e ainsi sur le
marchepied, crut que j’avais marchd dans ma robe ct m’aida k m’asseoir,
pendant que je demandais a ma sa:ur, cn preiiant place k cold d’elle, si c’dtait
bien notre voiture? A tel point j’avais perdu la tete, ayant senti un vrai
engourdissement de cerveau en voyant cet dtranger installd en face d'elle, je
ne m’dtais pas rendu compte que, dans le cas dVne presence rdelle d*un
semblable vis-k-vis, ni ma sceur, ni le valet de pied ne resteraient si calme-
ment k Tenvisager. Lorsque je fus assise, je ne vis plus rien, et je demandais
k ma soeur:— “N’as-tu rien vu en face de loi?*’ “ Rien du tout, et quelle
idde as*tu cue de demandcr, en entrant dans la voiture, si c’dtait bien la
nCtre?'* rdponclit-elle en riant. Alors, je lui raconlais tout ce qui prdcdde,
decrivant minutieusement ma vision. “ Quelle figure connue,'’ disait-elle, et
k paletot noisette, cette raie de cotd, ou done Tavons nous vue ? Pourtant nul
ne ressenible id k ta description ; et nous nous creusions la tete sans rien
trouver, Rentrees k la maison, nous racontkmes ce fait A notre mere ; ma
description la fit aussi souvenir vaguement d’un visage analogue. Le lencle-
main soir (12 Mars) un jcune homme de notre connaissance, M. M. S., vint
nous voir. Je lui rdpdtais aussi Tincident qui nous dtait arrivd. Nous en
parlkmes beaucoup, mais inutilement: je nc pouvais toujours pas appliquer
le nom voulu k la personnalitd de ma vision, tout en me souvenant fort bien
avoir vu un visage tout pared parmi mes nombreuses connaissances ; mais
ou ct k quelle dpoque.^ Je ne me souvenais de rien, avec ma mauvaisc
mdmoire qui me fait .souvent ddfaut, k ce sujet. Quelqucs jours plus t.ard, nous
dtions chez la grandm<l:re de M. M. S. ” Savez vous,” nous dit-clle, “ quelle
triste nouvellc je viens de rccevoir de Talta? M. P. vient de mourir, mais
on ne me donne pas de ddtails.” Ma steur et moi, nous nous regardames.
A ce nom, la figure pointuc et le paletot noisette retrouvkrent leur posscsseur.
Ma soeur reconnut en memc temp.s que moi, grace k ma description prdcist*.
Lorsque M. M. S. entra, je le priai de cliercher dans les vieux journaux la
date exacte de cette mort. Le ddets dtait marqud au 14 du mois de Mars,
done, deux jours a/r^s la vision que j'avais cue. J’dcrivis k Talta pour .avoir
des renseignements. On me rdpondit qu’il gardait le lit depiiis le 2,\
Novembre et qifil avait dtd depuis dans un dtat de faiblesse extrdme, mais le
sommeil ne Pavait point quittd ; il dormait si longlemps et si profonddment,
rndme durant les dernicres nuits de .son existence, que cola faisait espdrer ime
amdlioration. Nous nous dtonnions de ce que j’aie vu M. P., maigre sa
promesse de se montrer k ma sa*ur. Mais jc dois jijoutcr ici qu'avant le fait
dderit ci.de.ssus, j’avais dte voyante un certain nombre de fois, mais ccltc
vision est bien celle que j’ai dislingude le plus nettement, avec clcs details
minutieux, et avec Ics teintes diverses du visage humain, et meme du
vdtemeqt.

COMTESSE EUGftNIE KaPNIST.

COMTESSE InA KaPNIST,

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

The second signature is that of the sister who was present at the time.

Mr. Michael Petrovo-Solovovo, who sent us the case, writes : —

I have much pleasure in certifying that the fact of Countess Kapnist’s
vision was mentioned, among others, to myself before the news of Mr. P.’s
death came to Petersburg. 1 well remember seeing an announcement of his
demise in the papers.

This case suggests an important practical reflection. When a compact
to appear, if possible, after death is made, it should be understood that
the appearance need not be to the special partner in the compact, but to
any one whom the agent can succeed in impressing. It is likely
enough that many such attempts, which have failed on account of the
surviving friend’s lack of appropriate sensitivity, might have succeeded if
the agent had tried to influence some one already known to be capable
of receiving these impressions. I add in 727 A and B two other cases
which may be regarded as deflected fulfilments. See also a case given
in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 440, in which a lady, having made a com-
pact with her husband and also with a friend, her phantom is seen after
her death by her husband and daughter and the latter’s nurse, collec-
tively ; but not by the friend, who was living elsewhere.

728. Again, we cannot tell how long the spirit may continue the
effort, or, so to say, renew the experiment. In a case recorded in Pro-
ceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 378, the compact is fulfilled after a space of
five years. In another case (given in 728 A), there had been no formal
compact; yet the narrative may find place here. There is an attempt
to express gratitude on an anniversary of death ; and this implies the
same kind of mindful effort as the fulfilment of a definite promise.

I conclude this group by quoting in 728 B another compact case
where the apparition coincides with a funeral, and itself indicates that a
luncral is preparing. This forms a transition to the next group.

729. 1 have now traced certain post-mortem manifestations which

reveal a recollection of events known at death, and also a persistence of
purpose in carrying out intentions fijrmed before death. In this next
group I shall trace the knowledge of the departed a little further, and shall
discuss some cases where they appear cognisant of the aspect of their
bodies after death, or of the scenes in which those bodies are temporarily
deposited or finally laid. Such knowledge may appear trivial, — unworthy
the attention of spirits transported into a higher world. But it is in
accordance with the view of a gradual transference of interests and per-
ceptions, — a period of intermediate confusion, such as may follow espe-
cially upon a death of a sudden or violent kind, or perhaps upon a death
which interrupts very strong affections. •

Ihus we have already (in 717) encountered one striking case of this
type,^ the scratch on the cheeky perceived by the departed daughter, as
we may conjecture, by reason of the close sympathy which united her to
c mother who was caring for her remains.

52

CHAPTER VII

[730

There are also two cases closely resembling each other, though from
percipients in widely diflerent parts of the world, where a clairvoyant
vision seems to be presented of a tranquil death-chamber. One of these
has been quoted in Chapter VI., section 664. In the other (that of Mr.
Hector of Valencia, South Australia, see Phantasms of the Livings vol. i.
P* 353 ) percipient sees in a dream his father dying in the room he
usually occupied, with a candle burning on a chair by his bed ; and the
father is found dead in the morning, with a candle by his bedside in the
position seen in the dream. Perhaps in neither of these cases is there
any sure indication that the dead or dying person was cognisant of his
own body’s aspect or surroundings. There may have been a clairvoyant
excursion on the percipient’s part, evoked by some impulse from the
agent which did not itself develop into distinctness.

730. But in certain cases of violent death there seems to have been
an intention on the deceased person’s part to show the condition in which
his body is left. Such was Mrs. Storie’s dream, or rather series of visions,
referred to earlier in this chapter. Such, too, was Mrs. Menneer’s dream
(429 A), where the additional evidence obtained since our first publica-
tion of the case brings out a special meaning in the severed Aeaif^ beyond
the mere fact of decapitation. Such was an equally striking dream, which
I have left for quotation in this place, because it forms a link between this
group — where post-mortem knowledge of the body’s aspect is in ques-
tion — and the next following group, which will deal with the still stranger
phenomenon of post-mortem knowledge of dissemination of the news of
death. The case is taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. ( 1885 ) p. 95.

Mr. D., the narrator, did not wish his name to be published, but
Gurney saw him, and talked over the subject with him. Mr. D. narrates
as follows: —

I am the owner of a very old mechanical business in Glasgow, witii for
twenty years past a branch in London, where I have resided for that period,
and in both of which places my professional reputation is of the highest order.

Some thirty-five years ago I took into my employment a tender, delicate-
looking boy, Robert Mackenzie, who, after some three or four years’ service,
suddenly left, as I found out aftenvards, through the selfish advice of older
hands, who practised this frightening away systematically to keep wages
from being lowered,— a common device, I believe, among workmen in
limited trades. Passing the gale of the great workhouse {Scottish poor-
house) in the Parliamentary Road, a few years afterwards, my eye was
caught by a youth of some eighteen years of age ravenously devouring a
piece of dry bread on the public street, and bearing all the appearance of
being in a chronic state of starvation. Fancying I knew his features, I
asked i£ his name were not Mackenzie. He at once became much excited,
addressed me by name, and informed me that he had no employment ;
that bis father and mother, who formerly supported him, were now boU^
inmates of the “poorhousc,” to which he himself had no claim for admis-
sion, being young and without any bodily disqualification for work, and
that he was literally homeless and starving. The matron, he informed me.

730 ] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 53

gave him daily a piece of dry bread, but durst not, under the rules, give him
regular maintenarf:e. In an agony of grief he deplored his ever leaving me
under evil advice, ^nd on my unexpectedly offering to take him back he burst
into a transport of thanks, such as I cannot describe. Suffice it to say that he
resumed his work, and that, under the circumstances, 1 did everything in my
power to facilitate his progress. All this was mere matter of course ; but the
distinction between it and the common relations of master and servant was this,
that on every occasion of my entering the workshop he never, so far as possible,
took off his eyes from following my movements. Let me look towards him at
any moment, there was the pale, sympathetic face with the large and wistful
eves, literally yearning towards me, as Smike’s did towards Nicholas Nickleby.
1 seemed to be “the polar star of his existence,” and this intensity of gratitude
never appeared to lessen in degree through lapse of time. Beyond this he
never ventured to express his feelings. His manhood, as it were, his indivi-
duality and self-assertion, seemed to have been crushed out of him by priva-
tions. I was apparently his sole thought and consideration, saving the more
common concerns of daily life.

In 1S62 I .settled in London, and have never been in Glasgow since. Robert
Mackenzie, and my workmen generally, gradually lost their individuality in my
recollection. About ten to twelve years ago my employees had their annual
soirtiC and ball. This was always held, year after year, on a Friday evening.
Mackenzie, ever shy and distant as usual, refused to mingle in the festivities,
and begged of my foreman to be permitted to serve at the buffet. All went off
well, and the Saturday was held (wore workmen) as a succeeding day of fes-
tival. All this, however, I only learned after what I am now about to relate.
On the Tuesday morning following, immediately before 8 a.m., in my house
on Campden Hill, I had the following manifestation — I cannot call it a dream ;
hut let me use the common phraseology. I dreamt, but with no vagueness as
in common dreams, no blurring of outline or rapid passages from one thing dis-
connectedly to another, that I was seated at a desk, engaged in a business
conversation witli an unknown gentleman, who stood on my right hand.
Towards me, in front, advanced Robert Mackenzie, and feeling annoyed, I
addressed him with some asperity, asking him if he did not see that I was
engaged. He retired a short distance with exceeding reluctance, turned again
to a])proach me, as if most desirous for an immediate colloquy, when I spoke
to him still more sharply as to his want of manners. On this, the person with
whom I was conversing took his leave, and Mackenzie once more came forward.
“ What is all this, Robert ? ” I asked somewhat angrily. “ Did you not see I
was engaged ? ” “ Yes, sir,” he replied ; “ but I must speak with you at once.”
“What about?” 1 said; “what is it that can be so important?” “ I wish to
tell you, sir,” he answered, “that I am accused of doing a thing I did not
do, and that I want you to know' it, and to tell you so, and that you are to
torgive me for what I am blamed for, because I am innocent.” Then, I did
not do the thing they say I did.” I said, “What?” getting same answer. I
then naturally asked, “ But how can I forgive you if you do not tell me what
you are accused of ? ” I can never forget the emphatic manner of his answer
in the Scottish dialect, “ Ye ll sune ken ” (youll soon know). This question and
the answer were repeated at least twice — I am certain the answer was repealed
thrice, in the most fervid tone. On that I awoke, and was in that state of
surprise and bewilderment which such a remarkable dream, gud mere dream,
®*ght induce, and was wondering what it all meant, when my wifjj burst into

54

CHAPTER VII

[730

my bedroom, much excited, and holding an open letter in her hand, exclaimed,
“ Oh, James, here’s a terrible end to the workmen’s ball — Roficrt Mackenzie has
committed suicide ! With now a full conviction of the meaning of the vision,
I at once quietly and firmly said, “No, he has not committed suicide.”
“How can you possibly know that?” “Because he has just been here to
tell me.”

I have purposely not mentioned in its proper place, so as not to break the
narrative, that on looking at Mackenzie I was struck by the peculiar appear-
ance of his countenance. It was of an indescribable bluish-pale colour, and on
his forehead appeared spots which seemed like blots of sweat. For this I
could not account, but by the following post my manager informed me that he
was wrong in writing me of suicide. That on Saturday night, Mackenzie, on
going home, had lifted a small black bottle containing ar/ua forth (which he
used for staining the wood of birdcages, made for amusement), believing this
to be whisky, and pouring out a wine-glassful, had drunk it off at a gulp, dying
on the Sunday in great agony. Here then, was the solution of his being
innocent of what he was accused of — suicide, seeing that he liad inadvertently
drunk aqua forth, a deadly poison. Still pondering upon the peculiar colour
of his countenance, it struck me to consult some authorities on the symptoms of
poisoning by aqua forth, and in Mr. J. H. Walsh’s “Domestic Medicine and
Surgery,” p. 172 , 1 found these words under symptoms of poisoning by sulphuric
acid. . . . “ The skin covered with a cold sweat ; countenance livid and ex-
pressive of dreadful suffering.” . . . “ Aqua forth produces the same effect as
sulphuric, the only difference being that the external stains, if any, are yellow
instead of brown.” This refers to indication of sulphuric acid, “generally out-
side of the mouth, in the shape of brown spots.” Having no desire to
accommodate my facts to this scientific description, I give the quotations freely,
only at the same time stating that previously to reading the passage in Mr.
Walsh’s book, I had not the slightest knowledge of these symptoms, and I
consider that they agree fairly and sufficiently with what I saw, viz., a livid
face covered with a remarkable sweat, and having spots (particularly on the
forehead), which, in my dream, I thought great blots of perspiration. It seems
not a little striking that I had no previous knowledge of these symptoms, and
yet should take note of them.

I have little remark to make beyond this, that in speaking of this matter,
to me very affecting and solemn, I have been quite disgusted by sceptics
treating it as a hallucination, in so far as that my dream must have been on
the Wednesday morning, being that after tlie receipt of my manager’s letter
informing me of the supposed suicide. This explanation is too absurd to
require a serious answer. My manager first heard of the death on the Monday
— wrote me on that day as above— and on the Tuesday wrote again explaining
the true facts. The dream was on the Tuesday morning, immediately before
the 8 A.M. post delivery, hence the thrice emphatic “ Vc’ll sune ken.” I attribute
the whole to Mackenzie’s yearning gratitude for being rescued from a deplor-
able state of starvation, and his earnest desire to stand well in my opinion. 1
have coloured nothing, and leave my readers to draw their own conclusions.

D

The following is Mrs. D.’s corroboration : —

In regard to the remarkable dream my husband had when Robert
Mackenziej^ death took place through inadvertently drinking some aqua forth,
1 beg to inform you of what took place as far as I am concerned.

PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

733]

55

On the Tuesday Aorning after the occurrence I was downstairs early, and
at 8 o’clock was handed a letter, just received from the postman, and addressed
to Mr. D. Seeing it was from our manner in Glasgow, I opened it, and was
much grieved to find that it was to tell us that Robert Mackenzie had com-
mitted suicide. I ran upstairs to Mr. D.’s bedroom with the letter in my hand,
and in much excitement. I found him apparently just coming out of sleep, and
hastily cried out to him, exactly as he has described to you. I need not go
over the words, which have often been repeated amongst us since, and 1 can
confirm his narrative regarding them, as given to you, in every particular. The
whole affair gave us a great shock, and put an end to the workmen's balls for
some four or five years. Mr. U.’s dream was a frequent subject of conversation
at the time. I knew Mackenzie well. He was a pale, large-eyed, and earnest-
looking young man, with a great regard for Mr. D., through circumstances.
The next day's post brought us the actual facts.

J. D.

731. Here, too, may be placed two cases — those of Dr. Bruce (in
Chapter IV., 426 A) and Miss Hall (see 731 A) — where there are successive
pictures of a death and the subsequent arrangement of the body. The
milieux of the percipients, the nature of the deaths, are here again totally
disparate ; yet we seem to see the same unknown laws producing effects
closely similar.

In Dr. Bruce’s case one might interpret the visions as coming to the
percipient through the mind of his wife, who was present at the scene of
tiie murder. But this explanation would be impossible in Miss Hall’s
case. Rather it seems as though some telepathic link, set up between
the dying brother and the sister, had been maintained after death
until all duties had been fulfilletl to the departed. The case reminds
one of the old Homeric notions of the restless appeal of unburied
comrades.

732. In the case of Mrs. Green, already quoted in Chapter IV., 429 D,
we come across an interesting problem. Two women are drowned under
very peculiar circumstances. A friend has apparently a clairvoyant vision
of the scene, yet not at the moment when it occurred, but many hours
afterwards, and about the time when another person, deeply interested,
heard of the death. It is therefore possible to suppose that the
apparently clairvoyant scene was in reality impressed telepathically on
the percipient by another living mind, I think, how'ever, that both the
nature of the vision and certain analogies, w'hich wdll appear later in our
argument, point to a different view, involving an agency both of the dead
and of the living. I conjecture that a current of influence may be started
hy a deceased person, which, however, only becomes strong enough to be
perceptible to its object w'hen reinforced by some vivid current of emotion
arising in living minds. I do not say that this is yet provable ; yet the

may be of value when the far-reaching interdependencies of telipathy
eiween the two worlds come' to be better understood.

733. Tw'o singular cases in this group remain, where the departed

CHAPTER VII

56

[734

spirit, long after death, seems pre-occupied with the^spot where his bones
are laid. The first of these cases (see 733 A) approaches farce ] the
second (in which the skeleton of a man who had probably been murdered
about forty years before was discovered by means of a dream ; see
Proceedings vol. vi. p, 35) stands alone among our narratives in

the tragedy which follows on the communication. Mr. Podmore in an
article in the same volume (p. 303) suggests other theories to account for
this case without invoking the agency of the dead : but to me the least
impossible explanation is still the notion that the murdered man’s dreams
harked back after all those years to his remote unconsecrated grave. I
may refer further to another case (in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. p, 155,
footnote) where feelings of horror and depression were constantly experi-
enced in a room over which a baby’s body was afterwards found. This
case makes, perhaps, for another explanation — depending not so much on
any continued influence of the departed spirit as on some persistent influ-
ence inhering in the bones themselves — deposited under circumstances of
terror or anguish, and possibly in some way still radiating a malignant
memory. Bizarre as this interpretation looks, we shall find some con-
firmation of such a possibility in our chapter on Possession. Yet another
case belonging to the same group, and given in 733 B, supplies a variant
on this view; suggesting, as Edward Gurney has remarked, the local
imprintatiun of a tragic picture, by whom and upon what we cannot tell.

I think it well to suggest even these wild conjectures ; so long as they
are understood to be conjectures and nothing more. I hold it probable
that those communications, of w'hich telepathy from one spirit to another
forms the most easily traceable variety, are in reality infinitely varied and
complex, and show themselves from time to lime in forms which must for
long remain quite beyond our comprehension.

734. The next class of cases in this series well illustrates this
unexpectedness. It has only been as the result of a gradual accumulation
of concordant cases that I have come to believe there is some reality in
the bizarre supposition that the departed spirit is sometimes specially
aware of the time at which news of his death is about to reach some
given friend. Proof of such knowledge on his part is rendered harder by
the alternative possibility that the friend may by clairvoyance become
aware of a letter in his own proximity. As was shown in Phantasms of
the Livings there is some evidence for such clairvoyance even in cases
where the letter seen is quite unimportant (see also 421 H and J and
656 B). May there be here also some conjuncture of the spheres of
knowledge of the departed and the incarnate spirits, so that a glimpse ob-
tained by the one in some way reinforces a glimpse obtained by the other ?

I quote a typically difficult instance of this coincidence of an
appaAion with the arrival of the news of a death.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 409. The case was sent to us by
the Bishop of Carlisle, the percipient being the Rev. G. M. Tandy, vicar

735] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 57

of West Ward, dbar Wigton,. Cumberland, formerly of Loweswater, who
writes ‘ *

When at Loweswater, I one day called upon a friend, who said, “You do
not see many newspapers; take one of those lying there.” 1 accordingly took
up a newspaper bound with a wrapper, put it into my pocket, and walked home.
In the evening I was writing, and wanting to refer to a book, went into
another room where my books were. I placed the candle on a ledge of the
bookcase, took down a book and found the passage I wanted, when, happening
to look towards the window, wliich was opposite to the bookcase, I saw the face
of an old friend whom I had known well at Cambridge, but had not seen for
ten years or more. Canon Robinson (of the Charity and School Commission).
1 was so sure J saw him that I went out to look for him, but could find no trace
of him. I went back into the house, and thought I would take a look at my news-
paper. I tore off the wrapper, unfolded the paper, and the first piece of news
that I saw was the death of Canon Robinson !

Mr. Tandy further writes : —

In reply to your note, October 6th, I may state, witli regard to the narrative
I detailed to the Bishop of Carlisle, that I saw the face looking through the
window, by the light of a single Ozokerit candle, placed on a ledge of the book-
case, which stood 0])positc the window ; that I was standing, with the candle
by my side, reading from a book to which I had occasion to refer, and raising
my eyes as I read, I saw the face clearly and distinctly, ghastly pale, but with
tlie features so marked and so distinct that I recognised it at once as the face
of my most dear and intimate friend, the late Canon Robinson, who was with
me at school and college, and whom I had not seen for many years past (ten or
eleven at the very least). Almost immediately after, fully persuaded that my
old friend had come to pay me .1 surprise visit, I rushed to the door, but seeing
nothing I called aloud, searched the premises most carefully, and made inquiry
as to whether any stranger had been seen near my house, but no one had been
heard of or seen. When last I saw Canon Robinson he was apparently in
perfect health, much more likely to outlive me than I him, and before I opened
the newspaper announcing his death (which I did about an hour or so after
seeing the face) I had not heard or read of his illness or death, and there was
nothing in the passage of the book I was reading to lead me to think of him.

The time at which I saw the face w^as between ten and eleven p.m., the
night dark, and I was reading in a room where no shutter was closed or blind
drawn.

I may answer in reply to your question — “ whether I have ever had any other
vision or hallucination of any kind ?” — that, though I never saw any apparition,
I have heard mysterious noises which neither my friends nor I were able satis-
factorily to account for.

735. This incident, taken alone and without any apparent connection
with other forms of action of the departed, seems almost too quaint to be
included in a nlore or less coherent series like the present. But a hint

^ The narrative is undated, but the first part of it was printed in the Jotirnal S.P.R.
inr January 1885. ^

" As we do not know what newspai>er this was, it is not possible to ascertain the
precise interval which had elapsed since the death.

CHAPTER VII

S8

[736

towards its comprehension is given by certain other cases where the per-
cipient states that a cloud of unreasonable depression fell upon him about
the time of his friend's death at a distance, and continued until the actual
news arrived ; when, instead of becoming intensified, it lifted suddenly.
In one or two such cases there was an actual presence or apparition, which
seemed to hang about until the news arrived, and then disappeared.
Or, on the other hand, there is sometimes a happy vision of the departed
preluding the news, as though to prepare the percipient's mind for the
shock (735 A) . The suggested inference is that in such cases the spirit’s
attention is more or less continuously directed to the survivor until the
news reaches him. This does not, of course, explain how the spirit learns
as to the arrival of the news ; yet it makes that piece of knowledge seem a
less isolated thing.

736 . And here I will quote a case so divergent from accepted types
that the ordinary retailer of ghost stories might well be tempted to pass it
over in silence as incomprehensibly absurd. As will presently be seen,
however, it fits with singular appropriateness into just this place in my series.

The case was sent to Professor James, and I quote it from Proceedings
S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 2 20.

— Wis., September zznd^ 1890.

A very unusual thing occurred to the writer and one other person— my

sister, Miss Mary Q. — at the city of , Wisconsin, on the 5th day of

November 1885, at 10 o’clock p.m.

Our mother, Mrs. Mary Margaret Q. R., died at our home, in said city of

, Wisconsin, on the above date, at 8.40 p.m., very suddenly, of pneumonia.

Q^r youngest half-brother, Robert B. R., was working at S , N. Dakota, at

that time, about 700 miles distant from , Wisconsin. At 9.45 we retired to

the guests’ chamber, a room over the south parlour, and about the same
dimensions as said parlour, having two windows to the south and one to the
east. There were two beds in this large room, and I lay on one and my sister
on the other, trying to compose our broken hearts, for we loved our mother very
dearly. The night was cold and the windows wdre all closed, except the cast
was down at the top a few inches, when, lo ! we both distinctly heard at the
same instant my brother, Robert B. R., singing, “ Wc had better bide a wee,”
in a clear, deep tenor, accompanied by a high-pitched soprano and an old-
fashioned small melodeon accompaniment, and it sounded as though they were
upon a level with our windows, about 15 feel from the ground; and I arose
and threw up the south-west window, from whence the sounds seemed to
proceed, and then they— the singing— moved to the next, or south-east, window,
and sang another verse. And I threw that up and saw nothing, but still dis-
tinctly heard the words as well as the music, and so round to the east window,
where they sang the last verse, and then the music seemed to float away to the
north. But the queer part of this occurrence is the fact that at the very time

that we heard my brother singing in , Wisconsin, he singing the same

song before an audience, with the identical accompaniment, an old, tiny
melodeon, and a high-pitched soprano young lady — a Miss £., of North
Dakota — as we learned two day.s afterwards, wlieii he came home in response
to our telegram announcing the death of our mother.

Any verification of the above facts will be cheerfully made.

' (.Signed) [Miss Q.]

59

736 ] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

— , WiS., October iitk, 1890.

Deak Sir, — Y ours w the 6th inst. was duly received, and in reply to your
request for corroborativt; testimony relative to the “phenomenal occurrence”
on the night of November sth, 1885, at Janesville, Rock Co., Wisconsin — that
is the hearing music and two human voices, and the words distinctly audible —
one voice perfectly familiar to us as that of our half-brother, Robert B. R.,
then of N. Dakota, and the other voice that of a strange lady— soprano, and
they, luy said brother R. B. R., and Miss Sarah E., of N. Dak., were singing
the same song, “We had better bide a wee,” at an entertainment given by a

church society of S , a printed programme of which my brother afterwards

sent to us.

1 am an exceedingly busy person, but a lover of the truth, and interested in
the progress of the race; but my sister. Miss Mary Q., of this city, is very
conservative and proud, and when I asked her for an affidavit of her experience
on that eventful 5th of November 18S5, she replied, “ I do not wish the world
to think me or you a ‘ crank ’ or Spiritualist, and do not wish our names pub-
lished.” I will add that my sister, who is blind, is very intuitive and clairvoyant,
and there is much in her experience to deeply interest the psychical student. It
seems to me that the loss of her sight has been compensated by another sense
—a super-intuition.

I have written to my brother, R. B. R., to reply to your request, and also to

obtain a programme of the church entertainments at S , N. Dak., on

November 5th, 1885, at which he and Miss Sarah E. sang, “We had better
bide a wee,” and also to slate the exact hour when they were called in the
programme, for as Robert stated to us when he arrived on that sad occasion
—the death of our good mother — he informed us that the telegram was brought
to him, and wzs held by the operator so as not to spoil the entertainment by
lelliug him before he sang, and we — my sister Mary Q- and I — both heard
every note and word of that song sung about seven hundred miles away,
while our mother’s remains w'erc in the parlour under our bedroom.— Cordially
yours, (Signed) [Miss Q.]

Miss Mary Q. writes to Dr. Hodgson as follows : —

— , Wis., A'oiiember 15/’^, 1890.

Dear Sir, — [In reply to] your kind note of inquiry, relative to my experi-
ences on the night of November 5th, 1885, they were such as have been
described by my sister [Miss Q.], who is a lover of scientific research, and is
not so timid as I and my brother ; the latter is very much opposed to either
of us making known our experience on that night, and has urged me not to
tell .any one of the occurrences of that eventful time, and he refuses to furnish
t!ic printed programme of the entertainment, at which he and Miss E. were
singing, ‘‘We had better bide a wee,” insisting that people will believe us all
“luny’" if we make known all the facts; and so in deference to his prejudices I
must respectfully decline to make any further disclosures at present.— Respect-
fully yours, [Miss Marv Q.]

Dr, Hodgson add^: —

*9^^' — A letter of inquiry sent to Mr. Robert B. “ R.,” and an

elope, with official stamp of our Society on the cover, has been returned to

unopened, by Mr. Robert B. “R.,” so that further corroboration is lacking,
f least for the present.— R. H.

6o

CHAPTER VII

[737

It will be observed that Miss Mary Q/s letter is virtually a confirma-
tion of Miss Q.’s account ; and that Mr. Q.*s actjbn is in harmony with
his sister’s belief that he cannot deny, but does not wish to confirm, the
truth of this singular narrative.

Now here the two minds aware of the mother’s death were the mother’s
own mind and the telegraphist’s. The telegraphist was certainly aware
that, when the song came to an end, he should have to communicate to the
singer a painful shock. But, on the other hand, the telegraphist did not
know the senders of the telegram ; had no means of picturing them or
their surroundings. I think, therefore, that it will be more in accordance
with analogy to suppose that the mother’s mind was aware of the impend-
ing communication, and transmitted, perhaps scarce consciously, to her
daughters the sensation of the trivial and tiresome cause of delay. I
give in 736 A an incident equally grotesque, where also the indication
is of impatience on the part of the deceased person, who perceives the
news of his death kept back by vexatious accidents. And I add thereto
Mr. Cameron Grant’s case (736 B), where the date of arrival of the news
of Lord Z.’s death was specially difficult to calculate by ordinary means
— Mr. Grant being in a wild part of Brazil. Mr. Grant’s impulse to
draii* what turned out to be Lord Z.’s death-scene might place this case
among motor automatisms. There is naturally no clear line between
seeing a scene in one’s mind’s eye and feeling an impulse to draw it
on paper. Finally, I quote in 736 C a case where a phantasmal appear-
ance became visible while the percipient actually held in her hand
an unopened letter, announcing, not the decedent’s death, but her
dangerous illness. And on the strength of all these cases, and of some
less striking, I repeat my suggestion that in our ignorance as to the degree
of knowledge of earthly affairs possessed by the departed, and of the causes
which permit or stimulate their apparition, this possibility of their following
the diffusion of news of their own death may be well worth our continued
attention.

737. Having thus discussed a number of cases wdiere the apparition
shows varying degrees of knowledge or memory, I pass on to the some-
what commoner type, where the apparition lacks the power or the impulse
to communicate any message much more definite than that all-important
one — of his own continued life and love. These cases, nevertheless,
might be subdivided on many lines. Each apparition, even though it be
momentary, is a phenomenon complex in more ways than our minds can
follow. We must look for some broad line of demarcation, which may
apply to a great many different incidents, while continuing to some extent
the series which we have already been descending— from knowledge and
purpose on the deceased person’s part down to vagueness and apparent
automatism.*

Such a division — gradual, indeed, but for that very reason the more
instructive — exists between personal and local apparitions ; between mani'

6i

739] PHANjTASMS OF THE DEAD

•

festations plainly intended to impress the minds of certain definite
surv'ivors and manifestations in accustomed haunts, some of which,
indeed, may be destined to impress survivors, but which degenerate and
disintegrate into sights and sounds too meaningless to prove either purpose
or intelligence.

738. Let us look, then, for these characteristics, not expecting, of
course, that our series will be logically simple ; for it must often happen
that the personal and local impulses will be indistinguishable, as when
the desired percipient is inhabiting the familiar home. But we may begin
with some cases where the apparition has shown itself in some scene
altogether strange to the deceased person.

VVe have had, of course, a good many cases of this type already. Such
was the case of the apparition with the red scratch (717) ; such was the
apparition in the Countess Kapnist’s carriage (727), and the apparition
to Mrs. B. at Fiesole (728 B). Such cases, indeed, occur most frequently
— and this fact is itself significant — among the higher and more de-
veloped forms of manifestation. Among the briefer, less-developed appar-
itions with which we have now to deal, these invasions by the phantasm
of quite unknown territory are relatively few. I will begin by referring
to a curious case, where the impression given is that of a spiritual pre-
sence which seeks and finds the percipient, but is itself too confused for
coherent communication (Mrs. Lightfool's case, 429 B). It will be seen
that this narrative is thoroughly in accordance with previous indications
of a state of posthumous bewilderment supervening before the spirit has
a(ljust(?<l its perceptions to the new environment,

739. In cases like Mrs. Lightfoot’s, where the percipient’s surroundings
are unknown to the deceased person, and especially in cases where the
intimation of a death reaches the percipient when at sea (as in 739 A),
there is plainly nothing except the percipient’s own personality to guide
the spirit in his search. We have several narratives of this type. In one
of these — Archdeacon Farler’s, already referred to in 710 — the appari-
tion appears tivice, the second appearance at least being subsequent
to the death. It is plain that if in such a case the second apparition
conveys no fresh intelligence, we cannot prove that it is more than a
subjective recrudescence of the first Yet analogy is in favour of its
veridical character, since we have cases (like Miss Hall’s, cited in 713 A)
where successive manifestations do bring fresh knowledge, and seem to
show a continued effort to communicate. In this connection I may
refer to an experience of a witness who has had many experiences, Mr.
Keulemans (see 662 A, &c.), where his little son appeared to him both
about the time of death and again after death (739 C). In that case the
child, it would appear, sought his father first in familiar, then in uitfamiliar

surroundings.

Then, again, there are auditory cases where the phantasmal peech has
occurred in places not known to the deceased person. One such case
IS that of Mr. Wambey (see 735 AL In 739 B I give a case in which an

CHAPTER VII f

62

[740

apparition was seen several weeks after death, the death being unknown
to the percipient.

740. One specially impressive characteristic of apparitions (as has
been already remarked) is their occasional collectivity — the fact that more
jpercipients than one sometimes see or hear the phantasmal figure or
voice simultaneously. When one is considering the gradual decline in
definiteness and apparent purpose from one group of apparitions to
another, it is natural to ask whether this characteristic — in my view $0
important — is found to accompany especially the higher, more intelligent
manifestations.

I cannot find that this is so. On the contrary, it is, I think, in cases
of mere haunting that we oftenest find that the figure is seen by several
persons at once, or else (a cognate phenomenon) by several persons
successively. I know not how to explain this apparent tendency. Could
we admit the underlying assumptions, it would suit the view that the
haunting ** spirits are ‘‘ earthbound,*' and thus somehow nearer to matter
than spirits more exalted. Yet instances of collectivity are scattered
through all classes of apparitions ; and the irregular appearance of a
characteristic which seems to us so fundamental affords another lesson
how great may be the variety of inward mechanism in cases which to us
might seem constructed on much the same type.^

741, I pass on to a group of cases which are both personal and
local ; although the personal element in most of them — the desire
to manifest to the friend — may seem more important than the local
element — the impulse to revisit some accustomed haunt.

In the first case which I shall cite the deceased person's image is seen
simultaneously by several members of his own household, in his own
house. Note the analogy to a collective crystal vision.

The account is taken from Phantasms of the Livings vol. ii. p. 213.
It is given by Mr. Charles A. W. Lett, of the Military and Royal Naval
Club, Albemarle Street, W.

December yd, 1S85.

On the 5th April 1873 my wife’s father, Captain Towns, died at his
residence, Cranbrook, Rose Day, near Sydney, N. S. Wales. About six weeks
after his death my wife had occasion, one evening about nine o’clock, to go to
one of the bedrooms in the house. She was accompanied by a young lady,
Miss Rerthon, and as they entered the room— the gas was burning all the time
—they were amazed to see, reflected as it were on the polished surface of the
wardrobe, the image of Captain To\vns. It was barely half figure, the head,
shoulders, and part of the arms only showing — in fact, it was like an ordinary
medallion portrait, but life-size. The face appeared wan ‘and pale, as it did
before his death, and he wore a kind of grey flannel jacket, in which he had
been accustomed to sleep Surprised and half alarmed at what they saw, their
first idea was that a portrait had been hung in the room, and that what they
saw was its reflection ; but there was no picture of the kind.

1 Certain appearances, collectively seen, in the actual death-chamber, are discussed
in 740 A.

742 ] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 63

Whilst they wera looking and wondering, my wife's sister, Miss Towns,
came into the room, and before either of the others had time to speak she
exclaimed, “ Good gracious ! Do you see papa ? ” One of the housemaids
happened to be passing downstairs at the moment, and she was called
In, and asked if she saw anything, and her reply was, ** Oh, miss ! the
master.” Graham — Captain Towns’ old body servant— was then sent
for, and he also immediately exclaimed, “Oh, Lord save us! Mrs. Left,
it's the Captain 1 ” The butler was called, and then Mrs. Crane, my wife’s
nurse, and they both said what they saw. Finally, Mrs. Towns was sent for,
and, seeing the apparition, she advanced towards it with her arm extended as
if to touch it, and as she passed her hand over the panel of the wardrobe
the figure gradually faded away, and never again appeared, though the room
was regularly occupied for a long time after.

These are the simple facts of the case, and they admit of no doubt ; no kind
of intimation was given to any of the witnesses ; the same question was put to
each one as they came into the room, and the reply \vas given without
hesitation by each. It was by the merest accident that I did not see the
apparition. I was in the house at the time, but did not hear when I was
called. C. A. W. Lett.

We, the undersigned, having read the above statement, certify that it is
strictly accurate, as we both were witnesses of the apparition.

Sara Lett.

SiisBiE Smyth {n^e Towns).

Gurnev writes : —

Mrs. Lett assures me that neither she nor her sister ever experienced a
hallucination of the senses on any other occasion. She is positive that the
recognition of the appearance on the part of each of the later witnesses was
independenU a^^d not due to any suggestion from the persons already in the
room.

1 add in 741 A another collective case noticeable from the fact that
the departed spirit appears to influence two persons at a distance from
each other in a concordant way, so that one of them becomes conscious
of the appearance to the other. Compare with this the incident given
at the end of 751 A, when Miss Campbell has a vision of her friend
seeing an apparition at a time when this is actually occurring.

742. In the case which I shall next quote, the evidence, though
coming from a young boy, is clear and good, and the incident itself is
thoroughly characteristic. The decedent was satisfying both a local and
a personal attraction.

\Ve owe this case (which I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol.
viii. p. 1^3^ to the kindness of T^ady Gore Booth, from whom I first heard
the account by word of mouth. Her son (then a schoolboy aged 10) was
ihe percipient, and her youngest daughter, then aged 15, also gives a first-
hand account of the incident as follows : —

L1SSADEI.L, Sligo, February 1S91.

On the loth of April 1889, at about half-past nine o’clock a.m., my youngest
rother and I were going down a short flight of stairs leading to the kitchen, to

CHAPTER VII

64

[742

fetch food for my chickens, as usual. We were about half-way down, my
brother a few steps in advance of me, when he suddenly said— “ Why, there’s
John Blaney, I didn’t know he was in the house ! ” John Blaney was a boy
who lived not far from us, and he had been employed in the house as hall-boy
not long before. I said that I was sure it was not he (for I knew he had left
some months previously on account of ill-health), and looked down into the
passage, but saw no one. The passage was a long one, with a rather sharp
turn in it, so we ran quickly down the last few steps, and looked round the
corner, but nobody was there, and the only door he could have gone through
was shut. As we went upstairs my brother said, ** How pale and ill John
looked, and why did he stare so ? ” I asked what he was doing. My brother
answered that he had his sleeves turned up, and was wearing a large green
apron, such as the footmen always wear at their work. An hour or two after-
wards 1 asked my maid how long John Blaney had been back in the house ?
She seemed much surprised, and said, “Didn’t you hear, miss, that he died
this morning ? ” On inquiry we found he had died about two hours before my
brother saw him. My mother did not wish that my brother should be told this,
but he heard of it somehow, and at once declared that he must have seen his
ghost. Mahel Olive Gore Booth.

The actual percipient’s independent account is as follow's : —

March 1891.

We were going downstairs to get food for Mabel’s fowl, when I saw John
Blaney walking round the corner. I said to Mabel, “ That's John Blaney ! ”
but she could not see him. Wlien we came up afterwards we found he was
dead. He seemed to me to look rather ill. He looked yellow ; his eyes looked
hollow, and he had a green apron on. Mordaunt Gore Booth.

We have received the following dbnfirmation of the date of death : —

The Presbytery, Balungal, Sligo,

10/// February 1891.

I certify from the parish register of deaths that John Blaney (Dunfore) was
interred on the 12th day of A])ril 1889, having died on the loth day of April
1889. P. J. Shemaghs, C. C.

Lady Gore Booth writes : —

J/(iv 3i.t/, 1S90.

When my little boy came upstairs and told us he had seen John Blaney, we
thought nothing of it till some hours after, when we heard that he was dead.
Then for fear of frightening the children, I avoided any allusion to what he had
told us, and asked every one else to do the same. Probably by now he has
forgotten all about it, but it certainly was very remarkable, especially as only
one child saw him, and they were standing together. The place where he
seems to have appeared was in the passage outside the pantry door, where
John Blaney’s work always took him. My boy is a very matter-of-fact sort of
boy, and I never heard of his having any other hallucination.

' G. Gore Booth.

Noy this apparition — unless we explain it as a telepathic impression
projected at the moment of death and remaining latent for some hours
before it attained externalisation— may possibly be taken as showing
something of continued memory in the departed bey. Something of him

744] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 6 $

h

or from him, it mij be said, reverted to well-known haunts, and was
discerned in habitual surroundings. But even of this there is no sure
indication. If it be suggested that the dead boy waited to manifest until
bis young master reached a suitable spot, it may be replied that the living
boy*s presence in that spot merely enabled him to discern some influence
which might have been discernible in that spot possibly at any moment
during some hours, if the fitting percipient had been at hand. Or else,
and perhaps more simply, we may suppose that there was a mere
influence transmitted from the departed mind to the living mind, which
influence the living mind discerned when in surroundings in which its
own recollection of the decedent might most readily be evoked.

I add in 742 A a somewhat similar case. The figure of the grand-
mother looking at the clock resembles the figure of the pantry-boy seen in
the offices, but was seen by both persons in a position to see it, instead
of by one only. See also an account given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii.
p. 93, by the Rev. G. Lewis of his seeing an apparition of a young man
who — unknown to him — had died three days before. The young man
had much wished to see Mr. Lewis before he died, but Mr. Lewis, not
having heard of his illness, had not been to visit him. This narrative, if
interpreted in the way which the percipient suggests, might have been
placed among cases where the figure communicates a message ; the re-
proachful expression implying a recollected sense of injury. It is, at any
rate, an example of the class now under discussion.

743. The case given in 743 A — which comes from excellent inform-
ants — is one of those which correspond most nearly to what one wotild
desire in a posthumous message. I may refer also to General Campbeirs
case (in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 476) in which a long-continued
series of unaccountable noises and an apparition twice seen by a child in
the house suggested to the narrator the agency of his dead wife. The
case, which depends for its evidential force on a great mass of detail,
is too long for me to quote ; but it is worth study, as is any case
where there seems evidence of persistent effort to manifest, meeting with
one knows not what difficulty. It may be that in such a story there
is nothing but strange coincidence, or it may be that from records of
partially successful effort, renewed often and in ambiguous ways, we shall
hereafter learn something of the nature of that curtain of obstruction which
now seems so arbitrary in its sudden lifting, its sudden fall.

744. I will conclude this group with three cases closely similar, all
well attested, and all of them capable of explanation either on local or
personal grounds. In the first (see 744 A) an apparition is seen by two
liersons in a house* in Edinburgh, a few hours before the death of a lady
who had lived there, and whose body was to be brought back to it. In
the second (see 744 B) the dead librarian haunts his library, but «in the
library arc members of .his old staff. In the third, the dead wife loiters
round her husband's tomb, but near it passes a gardener who had been

VOL. II. ^ E

66

CHAPTER VII

[744

in her employ. This last — the case of Mrs. de Ir^ville and the gar-
dener Bard— I must insert in the text. As often liappens when (as I
do here) one knows the percipient and his milieu^ even the very plot of
ground on which he dodged about to watch the phantom, one feels a
reality in the incident which the most satisfactory depositions from a
distance will not always bring. The case is quoted from Phantasms of
the Livings vol. i. p. 212. Gurney there remarks of it : —

The next case again exhibits the slight deferment of the percipient’s expe-
rience which I have already mentioned. But its chief interest is as illustrating
what may be called a localy as distinct from a personal^ rapport between the
parties concerned. The percipient, at the moment of his impression, was
contemplating a spot with which the agent was specially connected, and which
may even have bad a very distinct place in her dying thoughts; and it is
natural to find in this fact a main condition why he, of all people, should have
been the one impressed.

The first account of it was sent to us by the Rev. C. T. Forster, Vicar
of Hinxton, Saffron Walden, as follows : —

August 1885.

My late parishioner, Mrs. de Fr< 5 ville, was a somewhat eccentric lady, who
was specially morbid on the subject of tombs, &c.

About two days after her death, which took place in London, May 8th, in
the afternoon, I heard that she hiid been seen that very night by Alfred Bard.
I sent for him, and he gave me a very clear and circumstantial account of what
he had seen.

He is a man of great observation, being a self-taught naturalist, and I am
quite satisfied that he desires to speak the truth without any exaggeration.

I must add that I am absolutely certain that the news of .Mrs. de F'r^ville’s
death did not reach Hinxton till the next morning, May 9th. She was found
dead at 7.30 p.m. She had been left alone in her room, being poorly, but not
considered seriously or dangerously ill. C. T. Fokstkr.

The following is the percipient’s own account : —

July 2ij/, 1S85.

I am a gardener in employment at Sawston. I always go through Hinxton
churchyard on my return home from work. On Friday, May 8th, 1885, I was
walking back as usual. On entering the churchyard, 1 looked rather carefully
at the ground, in order to see a cow and donkey which used to lie just inside
the gate. In so doing, I looked straight at the square stone vault in which the
late Mr. de Frdville was at one time buried. 1 then saw Mrs. de Fr^ville
leaning on the rails, dressed much as 1 had usually seen her, in a coal-scuttle
bonnet, black jacket with deep crape, and black dress. She was looking full
at me. Her face was very white, much whiter than usual. I knew her well,
having at one time been in her employ. I at once supposed that she had come,
as she sometimes did, to the mausoleum in her own park, in order to have it
opened and go in. I supposed that Mr. Wiles, the mason from Cambridge,
was in the tomb doing something. I walked round the lomb, looking carefully
at it, ifi order to see if the gate was open, keeping my eye on her, and never
more than five or six yards from her. Her face turned and followed me. I
passed between the church and the tomb (there are about four yards between

745] PHAJITASMS OF THE DEAD 67

the two), and peered forward to see whether the tomb was open, as she hid the
part of the tomb which opened. I slightly stumbled on a has.sock of grass, and
looked at my feet for a moment only. When I looked up she wa%^onc. She
could not possibly have got out of the churchyard, as in order to reach any of
the exits she must have passed me.^ So I took for granted that she had quickly
Tone into the tomb. I went up to the door, which I expected to find open, but
to my surprise it was shut and had not been opened, as there was no key in
the lock. I rather hoped to have a look into the tomb myself, so I went back
again and shook the gate to make sure, but there was no sign of any one's
having been there. I was then much startled and looked at the clock, which
marked 9.20. When I got home I half thought it must have been my fancy,
but I told my wife that I had seen Mrs. de Frdvillc.

Next day, when my little boy told me that she was dead, I gave a start,
which my companion noticed, I was so much taken aback.

I have never had any other hallucination whatever.

Alfred Bard.

Mrs. Bard’s testimony is as follows : —

July StA, 1885.

When Mr. Bard came home, he said, “I have seen Mrs. de Frdville to-
night, leaning with her elbow on the palisade, looking at me. I turned again
to look at her and she was gone. She had cloak and bonnet on.” He got
home as usual between nine and ten. It was on the 8th of May 1885.

Sarah Bard.

The Tm^s obituary confirms the date of the death.

From information more recently received (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol.
V. p. 415) we learn that the lady was found dead at 2 p.m. — not 7.30 p.m.
as stated above — so that the apparition was seen about seven and a half
hours after the death. This, as Gurney remarked, makes ijt still more
difficult to regard the case as a telepathic impression transmitted at the
moment of death, and remaining latent in the mind of the percipient,
riie incident suggests rather that Bard had come upon Mrs. de
FnSville’s spirit, so to say, unawares. One cannot imagine that she
specially wished him to see her, and to see her engaged in what seems
so needless and undignified a retracing of currents of earthly thought.
Rather this seems a rudimentary haunting — an incipient lapse into those
aimless, perhaps unconscious, reappearances in familiar spots which may
persist (as it would seem) for many years after death.

A somewhat similar case is that of Colonel Crealock (in Proceedings
S.P.R,, vol. V. p. 432) where a soldier who had been dead some hours was
seen by his superior officer in camp at night rolling up and taking away
his bed.

746 . It is, indeed, mainly by dwelling on these intermediate cases,

^ I was conducted over Hinxton churchyard by Mr. Forster, and can attest t^e sub-
stantial accuracy of Mr. Bard’s description of the relative position of the church, the
tomb, and the exits. The words “ must have passed me," however, give a slightly
erroneous impre.ssion ; ** must have come very near me," would be the more correct

description.— F. W. H. M.

68

CHAPTER VII

[745

between a message-bringing apparition and a purposeless haunt, that we
have most hope of understanding the typical haunt which, while it has
been in a sense the most popular of all our phenomena, is yet to the
careful inquirer one of the least satisfactory. One main evidential diffi-
culty generally lies in identifying the haunting figure, in finding anything
to connect the history of the house with the vague and often various
sights and sounds which perplex or terrify its flesh and blood inhabitants.
We must, at any rate, rid ourselves of the notion that some great crime or
catastrophe is always to be sought as the groundwork of a haunt of this
kind. To that negative conclusion the cases now to be described, and
the cases which have just been described, do concordantly point us. Mrs.
de Fr^ville was concerned in no tragedy ; she was merely an elderly lady
with a fancy for sepulchres. And as to the cases to which 1 now pro-
ceed — although in Sir Arthur liecher*s case, for example (see 745 A),
there was at least a rumour of some crime, ^ and in Mrs, M.*s case
(745 B) of past troubles, in which the percipients, of course, were in no
way concerned — yet in Mr. Husbands* and Mrs. Clerke*s cases (745 C
and D), and Mrs. Lewin’s case {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 462), there
was nothing, so far as we know, which could trouble the departed spirit with
importunate memories of his earthly home. Again, Mr. Husbands* case,
Mrs. Lewin*s, Mrs. Clerke’s, have much in common. In each case the
apparition is seen by a stranger, several months after the death, with no
apparent reason for its appearance at that special time. This last point is
of interest in considering the question whether the hallucinatory picture
could have been projected from any still incarnate mind. In another
case — the vision of the Bishop of St. Brieuc (given in Proceedings
vol. v. p. 460), there was such a special reason; — the Bishop’s body,
unknown to the percipient, was at that moment being buried at the
distance of a few miles. Mr. Podmore suggests {op. ciL^ vol. vi. p. 301 )
that it was from the minds of the living mourners that the Bishop’s
phantasm was generated. That hypothesis may have its portion of truth ;
the surrounding emotion may have been one of the factors which made
the apparition possible. But the assumption that it was the only
admissible factor — that the departed Bishop’s own possible agency must
be set aside altogether — lands us, I think, in difficulties greater than
those which we should thus escape. The reader who tries to apply
it to the apparitions quoted in my earlier groups will find himself in
a labyrinth of complexity. Still more will this be the case in dealing with
the far fuller and more explicit motor communications, by automatic
writing or speech, which we shall have to discuss in the two next chapters.
Unless the actual evidence be disallowed in a wholesale manner, wc shall
Be ferced, I think, to admit the continued action of the departed as a
main element in these apparitions.

I do not say as the only element. I myself hold, as already implied,
^ See also the case of Mrs. Penn^'e in Proceedings S. P. R., vol. vi. p. 60.

69

747] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

that the thought ani emotion of living persons does largely intervene, as
aiding or conditioning the independent action of the departed. I even
believe that it is possible that, say, an intense fixation of my own mind on
a departed spirit may aid that spirit to manifest at a special moment — and
not even to me, but to a percipient more sensitive than myself. In the
boundless ocean of mind innumerable currents and tides shift with the
shifting emotion of each several soul.

746. But now we are confronted by another possible element in these
vaguer classes of apparitions, harder to evaluate even than the possible
action of incarnate minds. I mean the possible results of past mental
action, which, for ought we know, may persist in some perceptible manner,
without fresh reinforcement, just as the results of past bodily action per-
sist. This question leads to the still wider question of retroeognition, and
of the relation of psychical phenomena to time generally — a problem
whose discussion cannot be attempted in this chapter. Yet we must
remember that such possibilities exist ; they may explain certain pheno-
mena into which little of fresh intelligence seems to enter, as, for instance,
the alleged persistence, perhaps for years, of meaningless sounds in a
particular room or house.

747. And since we are coming now to cases into which this element
of meaningless sound will enter largely, it seems right to begin their dis-
cussion with a small group of cases where there is evidence for the definite
agency of some dying or deceased person in connection with inarticulate
sounds, or I should rather say of the connection of some deceased person
with the sounds] since the best explanation may perhaps be that they
are sounds of welcome — before or after actual death — corresponding to
those apparitions of welcome of which we have already had specimens. I
give one of these cases in full in the text, and a second in 747 A. A
third has already been cited in the ‘♦Peak in Darien** group (718 A).
The following is taken from Phantasms of the Living^ voK ii. p. 639.

A gentleman who is a master at Eton College wrote to us, on February
3rd, 1884 • —

I enclose a copy of a memorandum made a few days after the event referred
to. My memorandum has been copied for me by Miss H., whose name occurs
in it. She is my matron — a sensible, middle-aged, active, and experienced
woman. None of the people concerned were young, flighty, or fanciful. I
have the doctor*s letter; his name is G., and he still resides here. Miss H.
only wishes to add that it must have occurred from twenty minutes to perhaps
thirty after dissolution, and .she says that she has never heard anything like the
extreme sweetness of the sound. H. E. L.

The memorandum is as follows : —

Eton College, August (3th^\^\.

I wish to write down, before there is time for confusion, the following fact,
occurring on Thursday morning, July 28th, 1881, when my dear mother died,

70

CHAPTER VII

[747

whom God rest ! After all was over, Miss E. L, Eliza V/., Dr. G., and myself
being in the room, Miss L heard a sound of “ very low, sioft music, exceedingly
sweet, as if of three girls’ voices passing by the house.” She described furtl^er
the sound as if girls were going home singing, only strangely low and sweet; it
seemed to come from the street, past the house towards the College buildings
(the road ends there in a cul-tksac)^ and so passed away. She looked to call
my attention, and thought I perceived it. She noticed that the doctor heard
it, and that he went to the window to look out. The window faces S.E. Eliza
W. being in the room at the same time heard a sound of a very low, sweet
singing. She recognised the tune and words of the hymn, “ The strife is o’er,
the battle done.” Miss I. recognised no tune, but felt “that the music sounded,
as it were, familiar.” As a very accomplished musician, especially remarkable
for her quick memory of music, had words or air been those of a well-known
hymn, she would almost certainly have remembered it. These two spoke to
each other when alone about what they had heard. Miss I. gives the time .at
about ten minutes after my dear mother expired. They were then unaware of
this additional circumstance. Miss H. had left the room, and had summoned
Charlotte C., with whom .she had procured something required for laying out
the body. As the two returned upstairs they heard a sound of music, and both
stopped. Charlotte said to Miss H., “ What is this ? ” After a pause she said,
“ It must be Miss I. singing to comfort master.” They afterwards entered the
room, of which the door had been shut all along. Charlotte further described
the sound as very sweet and low, seeming to pass by them. She felt if, had
she only been able to listen, she could have distinguished the words. It did
not occur to her that her description was most incongruous. She could not
listen attentively, but felt “as if rapture were all around her.” It was not
until afterwards, when she mentioned to Eliza having heard Miss I. singing,
and how strangely it sounded, that they found that each had heard the sound.
Miss H. described the sound as very peculiar and sweet, seeming to pass by
them and pass away, as they both stopped on the stairs. All the staircase
windows give north-west. I heard nothing, and I .should have given no weight
to a sound heard or described by these women in the room after communicating
with each other, or by these women out of the room respectively ; but the coin-
cidence of each party hearing it separately and independently without previous
communication, as w^ell as the matter-of-fact explanation .sugge.stcd for it l)v
one of them, seeming to imply that their thoughts were not dwelling on the
supernatural, added so much weiglit to this account that I wrote to the doctor,
who an.swers:— “ I quite remember hearing the singing you mention; it was so
peculiar that I went to the window and looked out, but although quite light I
could see no one, and cannot therefore account for it.” The lime must have
been about 2 a.m. on July 28th, 1881.

Miss I. writes

13 Park .Street, Wr.'^osoR, Fehrttary zzttdy 1884.

I will copy the memorandum which I made in my diary just after the death
of my dear friend and connection, Mrs. L. ,

July 1881.

“ Jus*t after dear Mrs. L.’s death between two and three a.m., I heard a most
sweet and singular strain of singing outside the windows ; it died away after
passing the house. All in the room heard it, and the medical attendant, who

n

747] PHA|JTASMS OF THE DEAD

•

was still with us, went to the window as I did, and looked out, but there was
nobody. It was a bright and beautiful night. It was as if several voices were
singing in perfect unison a most sweet melody, which died away in the distance.
Two persons had gone from the room to fetch something, and were coming up-
stairs at the back of the house, and heard the singing and stopped, saying,
<What is that singing?* They could not fiaturally have heard any sound
outside the windows in the front of the house from where they vrere. I cannot
think that any explanation can be given to this — as I think — supernatural
singing ; but it would be very interesting to me to know what is said by those
who have made such matters a subject of study. £. 1.’’

Dr. G. writes in 1884 : —

Eton, Windsor.

I remember the circumstance perfectly. Poor Mrs. L. died on July 28th,
1881. 1 was sent for at about midnight, and remained until her death at about

2.30 A.M. As there was no qualified nurse present, I remained and assisted the
friends to “ lay out ” the body. Four or five of us assisted, and at my request
the matron of Mr. L.^s house and a servant went to the kitchen department to
find a shutter or flat board upon which to place the body. Soon after their
departure, and whilst we were waiting for their return, we distinctly heard a
few bars of lovely music — not unlike that from an i£olian harp — which seemed
to fill the air for a few seconds. I went to the window and looked out, thinking
there must be some one outside, but could sec no one, although it was quite
light and clear. Strangely enough tho.se who went to the kitchen heard the
same sounds as they were coming upstairs, quite at the other side of the door.
Tlicse arc tlic facts, and I think it right to tell you that I have not the slightest
belief in the supernatural, spiritualism, &c., &c. J. W. G.

The fact that Mr. L. did not share the experience is strong evidence
that the sounds were not objectively caused by persons singing outside
the house ; and this is further confirmed by the slight difference which
there appears to have been between the impressions received.

I have already discussed (Chapter VI., 643 and 655) the nature of
these phantasmal sounds : — nor is it contrary to our analogies that the
person most deeply concerned in the death should in this case fail to
hear them. But the point on which I would here lay stress is that
phantasmal sounds — even non-articulate sounds — may be as clear a mani-
festation of personality as phantasmal figures. Among non-articulate
noises music is, of course, the most pleasing; but sounds, for instance,
which imitate the work of a carpenter's shop, may be equally human
and intelligent. In some of the cases of this class we see apparent
attempts of various kinds to simulate sounds .such as men and women
or manufactured, as opposed to natural, objects — are accustomed to
produce To claim this humanity, to indicate this intelligence, seems tlie
only motive of soun'iis of this kind.^

^ See, however, Mrs. Sidgwick’.s xtxMx\i&(Pro€fedin}^s S.P.R., vol. iii. 79-So).
as to the rarity of any indication of intelligence in such sounds, and the possibility of
reading more intelligence into them than they really possess. There is now, of course,
niore evidence as to these sounds than there was at the date of Mrs. Sidgwick’s paper
(1085).

72

CHAPTER VII

[748

748 . These sounds, in their rudimentary attempt at showing intelli-
gence, are about on a level with the exploits of the “ Poltergeist,” where
coals are thrown about, water spilt, and so forth. Physical phenomena of
that type will fall to be dealt with in a later chapter ; but it is a curious
fact that Poltergeist phenomena should so seldom coincide with the
ordinary phenomena of a haunt. We have one remarkable case — to be
mentioned later — ^where Poltergeist phenomena coincide with a death
(868 B) ; and a few cases where they are supposed to follow on a death ;
but, as a rule, where figures appear there are no movements ; and where
there are movements no apparition is seen. If alleged Poltergeist pheno-
mena are always fraudulent, there would be nothing to be surprised
at here. If, as I suspect, they are sometimes genuine, their dissociation
from visual hallucinations may sometimes afford us a hint of value.

748 . But after Poltergeists have been set aside — after a severe line
has been drawn excluding all those cases (in themselves singular enough)
where the main phenomena observed consist of non-articulate sounds, —
there remains a great mass of evidence to haunting, — that is, broadly
speaking, to the fact that there are many houses in which more than one
person has independently seen phantasmal figures, which usually, though
not always, bear at least some resemblance to each other.^ The facts
thus baldly stated are beyond dispute. Their true interpretation is a
ver}' difficult matter. Mrs. Sidgwick gives four hypotheses, which I must
quote at length as the first serious attempt ever made (so far as 1 know) to
collect and face the difficulties of this problem, so often, but so loosely,
discussed through all historical times. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii.
pp. 146-8.)

** I will, therefore, proceed briefly to state and discuss the only four
theories that have occurred to me.

“ The two which I will take first in order assume that the apparitions
are due to the agency or presence of the spirits of deceased men.

There is first the popular view, that the apparition is something
belonging to the external world — that, like ordinary matter, it occupies and
moves through space, and would be in the room whether the percipient
were there to see it or not. This hypothesis involves us in many diffi-
culties, of which one serious one — that of accounting for the clothes of
the ghost — has often been urged, and never, 1 think, satisfactorily answered.
Nevertheless, I am bound to admit that there is some little evidence

1 Thus Mrs. Sidgwick, even as far back as 1885 [Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 142),
writes . “ I can only say that having made every effort — as my paper will, I hope, have
shown— to exercise a reasonable scepticism, I yet do not feel equal to the degree of
unbelief in human testimony necessary to avoid accepting, at least provisionally, the con-
clusion that there are, in a certain sense, haunted houses, i.e. that there are houses in
which similar quasi-human apparitions have occurred at different times to different
inhabitants, under circumstances which exclude the hypothesis of suggestion or
expectation."

73

749] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

tending to suggest this theory. For instance, in the account,^ of which I
have given an abstract, of the weeping lady who has appeared so frequently
in a certain house, the following passage occurs: — ‘They went after it
(the figure) together into the drawing-room ; it then came out, and went
down the aforesaid passage (leading to the kitchen), but was the next
minute seen by another Miss [M,] . . - come up the outside steps from the
kitchen. On this particular day. Captain [M.*s] married daughter happened
to be at an upstairs window . . . and independently saw the figure con-
tinue her course across the lawn and into the orchard.’ A considerable
amount of clear evidence to the appearance of ghosts to independent
observers in successive points in space would certainly afford a strong
argument for their having a definite relation to space ; but in estimating
evidence of this kind it would be necessary to know how far the observer’s
attention had been drawn to the point in question. If it had been a real
woman whom the Miss [M.’s] were observing, we should have inferred, with
l)erfect certainty, from our knowledge that she could not be in two places
at once, that she had been successively, in a certain order, in the places
where she was seen by the three observers. If they had noted the
moments at which they saw her, and comparing notes afterwards, found
that according to these notes they had all seen her at the same time, or in
some other order to that inferred, we should still feel absolute confidence
in our inference, and should conclude that there must be something wrong
about the watches or the notes. From association of ideas, it would be
perfectly natural to make the same inference in the case of a ghost which
looks exactly like a woman. But in the case of the ghost the inference
would not be legitimate, because, unless the particular theory of ghosts
which we are discussing be true, there is no reason, so far as we know, why
it should not appear in two or more places at once. Hence, in the case
of the ghost, a well-founded assurance that the appearances were successive
would require a careful observation of the times, which, so far as I know,
has never been made. On the whole, therefore, I must dismiss the
popular theory as not having, in my opinion, even a prim& facie ground for
serious consideration.

“ The theory that I will next examine seems to me decidedly more
plausible, from its analogy to the conclusion to which I am brought by the
examination of the evidence for phantasms of the living. This theory is
that the apparition has no real relation to the external world, but is a
hallucination caused in some way by some communication, without the
inter\’ention of the senses, between the disembodied spirit and the per-
cipient, its form, depending on the mind either of the spirit or of the
percipient, or of both. In the case of haunted houses, however, a diffi-
culty meets us that we do not encounter, or at least rarely encounter, in
applying a similar hypothesis to explain phantasms of the living, or phan-
tasms of the dead other than fixed local ghosts. In these cases we have
^ This case is ^ven in 751 A.

74 CHAPTER VII [749

generally to suppose a simple rapport between mind and mind, but in a
haunted bouse we have a rapport complicated by its apparent dependence
on locality. It seems necessary to make the improbable assumption, that
the spirit is interested in an entirely special way in a particular house
(though possibly this interest may be of a subconscious kind), and that his
interest in it puts him into connection with another mind, occupied with
it in the way that that of a living person actually there must consciously
or unconsciously be, while he does not get into similar communication
with the same, or with other persons elsewhere.

‘‘ If, notwithstanding these difficulties, it be true that haunting is due
in any way to the agency of deceased persons, and conveys a definite idea
of them to the percipients through the resemblance to them of the appari-
tion, then, by patiently continuing our investigations, we may expect, sooner
or later, to obtain a sufficient amount of evidence to connect clearly the
commencement of hauntings with the death of particular persons, and to
establish clearly the likeness of the apparition to those persons. The fact
that almost everybody is now photographed ought to be of material assist-
ance in obtaining evidence of this latter kind.

“ My third theory dispenses with the agency of disembodied spirits,
but involves us in other and perhaps equally great improbabilities. It is
that the first appearance is a purely subjective hallucination, and that the
subsequent similar appearances, both to the original percipient and to
others, are the result of the first appearance; unconscious expectancy
causing them in the case of the original percipient, and some sort of tele-
pathic communication from the original percipient in the case of others.
In fact, it assumes that a tendency to a particular hallucination is in a way
infectious. If this theory be true, I should expect to find that the appa-
rently independent appearances after the first depended on the percipient’s
having had some sort of intercourse with some one who had seen the
ghost before, and that any decided discontinuity of occupancy would stop
the haunting. I should also expect to find, as we do in one of the cases
I have quoted, that sometimes the supposed ghost would follow the family
from one abode to another, appearing to haunt them rather than any
particular house.

« The fourth theory that I shall mention i.s one which I can hardly
expect to appear plausible, and which, therefore, I only introduce because
I think that it corresponds best to a certain part of the evidence and, as
I have already said, considering the altogether tentative way in which we
are inevitably dealing with this obscure subject, it is as well to express
definitely every hypothesis which an impartial consideration of the facts
suggests. It is that there is something in the actual building itself— some
subtle pljysical influence-— which produces in the brain that effect which,
in its turn, becomes the cause of a hallucination. It is certainly difficult
on this hypothesis alone to suppose that the hallucinations of different
people would be similar, but we might account for this by a combination

of this hypothesis \.nd the last. The idea is suggested by the case, of
which I have given an abstract, where the haunting continued through
more than one occupancy, but changed its character ; and if there be any
truth in the theory, I should expect in time to obtain a good deal more
evidence of this kind, combined with evidence that the same persons do
not as a rule encounter ghosts elsewhere. I should also expect evidence
to be forthcoming supporting the popular idea that repairs and tUterations
of the building sometimes cause the haunting to cease.” ^

750 . These hypotheses — none of which, as Mrs. Sidgwick expressly
states (cfp, dt^ p, 145 ), seemed to herself satisfactory — did nevertheless, I
think, comprise all the deductions which could reasonably be made from
the evidence as it at that time stood. A few modifications, which the
experience of subsequent years has led me to introduce, can hardly be
said to afford further explanation^ although they state the difficulties in
what now seems to me a more hopeful way.

In the first place then — as already explained in Chapter \T. — I in
some sense fuse into one Mrs. Sidgwick's two first hypotheses by ray own
hyi30thesis of actual presence, actual spatial changes induced in the mete-
therial, but not in the material world. I hold that when the phantasm is
discerned by more than one person at once (and on some other, but not
all other occasions) it is actually effecting a change in that portion of
space where it is perceived, although not, as a rule, in the matter
which occupies that place. It is, therefore, not optically nor acoustically
perceived ; perhaps no rays of light are reflected nor waves of air set in
motion ; but an unknown form of supernormal perception, not necessarily
acting through the sensory end-organs, comes into play. In the next
place, I am inclined to lay stress on the parallel between these narratives
of haunting and those phantasms of the living which I have already
classed as psychorrha^ic. In each case, as it seems to me, there is an in-
voluntary detachment of some element of the spirit, probably with no know-
ledge thereof at the main centre of consciousness. Those “ haunts by the
living,” as they may be called (see Chapter VI., 649) where, for instance,
a man is seen phantasmally standing before his own fireplace — seem to me
to be repeated, perhaps more readily, after the spirit is freed from the flesh.

^ In an earlier part of this paper, I mentioned cases of haunted houses where the
apparitions are various, and might therefore all of them be merely subjective hallucina-
tions, sometimes, perhaps, caused by expectancy. It is, of course, .also possible to
explain these cases by the hypothesis we are now discussing. Another class of cases is,
perhaps, worth mentioning in this connection. We have in the collection two cases of
what was believed by the narrators to be a quite peculiar feeling of discomfort, in houses
wheie concealed and long since decomposed bodies were subsequently found. Such
Gelings are seldom clearly defined enough to have much evidential value, for others, at
any rate, than the percipient ; even though mentioned beforehand, and definflely con-
nected with the place where the skeleton was. But if tliere be really any connection
elween the skeleton and the feeling, it may possibly be a subtle physical influence such
as 1 am suggesting.— E. M. S.

76

CHAPTER VII

[761

761. Again, 1 think that the curious question asato the influence of
certain houses in generating apparitions may be included under the broader
heading of Ketrocognition. That is to say, we are not here dealing with a
special condition of certain houses, but with a branch of the wide problem
as to the relation of supernormal phenomena to time. Manifestations
which occur in haunted houses depend, let us say, on something which
has taken place a long time ago. In what way do they depend on that
past event? Are they a sequel, or only a residue ? Is there fresh opera-
tion going on, or only fresh perception of something already accomplished ?
Or can we in such a case draw any real distinction between a continued
action and a continued perception of a past action? The closest parallel,
as it seems to me, although not at first sight an obvious one, lies between
these phenomena of haunting, these persistent sights and sounds, and
certain phenomena of crystal-vision and of automatic script, which also
seem to depend somehow upon long-past events, — to be their sequel or
their residue. One specimen case I give in an Appendix (751 A), where
the connection of the haunting apparition with a certain person long de-
ceased may be maintained with more than usual plausibility. From that
level the traceable connections get weaker and weaker (see 761 B), until
we come to phantasmal scenes where there is no longer any even apparent
claim to the contemporary agency of human spirits. Such a vision, for
instance, as that of a line of spectral deer crossing a ford, may indeed,
if seen in the same place by several independent obsen^ers, be held to be
something more than a mere subjective fancy ; but what in reality such a
picture signifies is a question which brings us at once to theories of the
permanence or simultaneity of all phenomena in a timeless Universal
Soul.

Such conceptions, however difficult, are among the highest to which
our mind can reach. Could we approach them more nearly, they might
deeply influence our view, even of our own remote individual destiny.
So, perhaps, shall it some day be ; at present we may be well satisfied if we
can push our knowledge of that destiny one step further than of old, even
just behind that veil which has so long hung impenetrably before the eyes
of men.

752. Here, then, is a natural place of pause in our inquiry. We have
worked as far as we can on the data which we have had under our view.
The sensory automatisms with which we have dealt in this and the
preceding chapter have proved to us, in my view, the connection of defi-
nite apparitions with individual men, both during bodily life and after
bodily death. They have, in short, proved by logical reasoning the exist-
ence and the persistence of a spirit in man.

. But great as this achievement is, it opens out more problems than it
solves ; it leaves us even more eager than at first for a fuller insight into
this new dim-lit world. We crave for some wider field of induction, for some
more potent engine of analysis. We feel that, important though the facts

77

753] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD

of phantasmal ap^arances may be, they yet are in a sense somewhat
jejune and external ; we want to get deeper, to reach some psychological
discussion not dependent on time-coincidences nor on the details of some
evanescent observation. We instinctively seek, in short, just that know-
ledge which will now be in some measure afforded to us through the study
of that wide range of phenomena which I have classed together as motor
aiitomatispis.

The line of demarcation indeed between sensory and motor automa-
tisms is by no means distinct. Neither class, to begin with, is more
veridical, more inspired from without than the other. In neither case
have we any clear subjective criterion as to the origin of the message ;
whether it comes merely from the automatist's own mind, or from minds
of the living, or from minds of the departed. Even in mere external form,
again, the two groups are often closely mixed. It makes little difference
whether one sees words written in a crystal, or writes them oneself with
unknowing hand. But nevertheless it must on the whole be admitted
that motor automatisms have thus far been, and seem likely to continue,
the more instructive of the two classes. The suddenness, the brevity of
an apparition may be actually an evidential aid if we are simply estab-
lishing, say, a death coincidence. But when we have proceeded to a
somewhat further stage — when we are looking for information from the
inside as to the nature of spiritual operations — then, as I have said, the
l)ower of question and answer, of prolonged scrutiny, becomes all-important.
We certainly cannot, I repeat, claim any more universal trustworthiness
for motor than for sensory automatisms. The proportion of misleading to
veridical written messages is probably even greater than the proportion of
merely subjective to veridical apparitions. But while the apparition is
gone in a moment, the written or spoken matter may renew itself for
years, allowing us to test both its authenticity and its truthfulness —
two different matters — with every touchstone which our leisure can
devise.

It must be, then, on the study of motor automatisms that our general
view of the metetherial world now opening to us must mainly be based.
Those longer colloquies of automatic speech and script wnll introduce us
to points of philosophy which fleeting apparitions cannot teach.

763. And yet it is by no means needful, it would be by no means wise,
to close even this earlier branch of the inquiry without some few words on
its ethical, its religious aspect. If one hopes to influence opinion, one
must realise where that opinion at present stands which one would fain
lead into further truth. The novelties of this book are intended to work
upon preconceptions which are ethical quite as much as intellectual. It
would be mere pedantry to avoid all mention of ethical implications, when
matters are touched upon which the majority of thinking men ^re agreed
to regard from a point of view which is as yet ethical rather than scientific.
If the new facts, of such far-reaching import, are to enter deeply into

CHAPTER VII

78

[753

the consciousness of our race, they must be seen to morally, as well as
intellectually, coherent and acceptable.

For the most part, indeed, such discussion may be postponed to my
concluding chapter. But one point already stands out from the evidence —
at once so important and so manifest, that it seems well to call attention
to it at once — as a solvent more potent than any Lucretius could apply
to human superstition and human fears.

In this long string of narratives, complex and bizarre though their
details may be, we yet observe that the character of the appearance varies
in a definite manner with their distinctness and individuality. Haunting
phantoms, incoherent and unintelligent, may seem restless and unhappy.
But as they rise into definiteness, intelligence, individuality, the phantoms
rise also into love and joy. I cannot recall one single case of a proved
posthumous combination of intelligence with wickedness. Such evil as
our evidence will show us, — we have as yet hardly come across it in this
book — is scarcely more than monkeyish mischief, childish folly. In deal-
ing with automatic script, for instance, we shall have to wonder whence
come the occasional vulgar jokes or silly mystifications. We shall discuss
whether they are a kind of dream of the automatist*s own, or whether they
indicate the existence of unembodied intelligences on the level of the dog
or the ape. But, on the other hand, all that world-old conception of Evil
Spirits, of malevolent Powers, which has been the basis of so much of
actual devil-worship and of so much more of vague supernatural fear ; — all
this insensibly melts from the mind as we study the evidence before us.

Hunc igitur terrorem animi tenebrasque necesscst
Non radii solis ncque lucida tela diei
Discutiant, sed naturae species ratioque.

Here surely is a fact of no little meaning. Our narratives have been
collected from men and women of many types, holding all varieties of
ordinary opinion. Yet the upshot of all these narratives is to emphasise
a point which profoundly differentiates the scientific from the superstitious
view of spiritual phenomena. The terror which shaped primitive theologies
still tinges for the populace every hint of intercourse with disembodied
souls. The transmutation of savage fear into scientific curiosity is of the
essence of civilisation. Towards that transmutation each separate fragment
of our evidence, with undesigned concordance, indisputably tends. In
that faintly opening world of spirit I can find nothing worse than living
men; I seem to discern not an intensification but a disintegration of
selfishness, malevolence, pride. And is not this a natural result of any
cosmic moral evolution? If the selfish man (as Marcus Antoninus has.
it) ‘Ms a kind of boil or imposthume upon the universe,’* must not his
egoistic impulses suffer in that wider world a sure, even if a painful,
decay; finding no support or sustenance among those permanent forces
which maintain the stream of things?

754] PHANTASMS OF THE DEAD 79

754. I have tl|is indicated one point of primary importance on which
the undesignedly coincident testimony of hundreds of first-hand narratives
supports a conclusion, not yet popularly accepted, but in harmony with
the evolutionary conceptions which rule our modern thought. Nor does
this point stand alone. I can find, indeed, no guarantee of absolute and
idle bliss ; no triumph in any exclusive salvation. But the student of
these narratives will, I think, discover throughout them uncontradicted
indications of the persistence of Love, the growth of Joy, the willing
submission to Law.

These indications, no doubt, may seem weak and scattered in com-
parison with the wholesale, thorough-going assertions of philosophical
or religious creeds. Their advantage is that they occur incidentally in the
course of our independent and cumulative demonstration of the pro-
foiindest cosmical thesis which we can at present conceive as susceptible
of any kind of scientific proof. Cosmical questions, indeed, there may be
which are in themselves of deeper import than our own survival of bodily
death. The nature of the First Cause ; the blind or the providential order-
ing of the sum of things ; — these are problems vaster than any which affect
only the destinies of men. But to whatever moral certainty we may attain
on those mightiest questions, we can devise no way whatever of bringing
them to scientific test. 'Fhey deal with infinity ; and our modes of
investigation have grasp only on finite things.

But the question of man’s survival of death stands in a position
uniquely intermediate between matters capable and matters incapable of
proof. It is in itself a definite problem, admitting of conceivable proof
which, even if not technically rigorous, might amply satisfy the scientific
mind. And at the same time the conception which it involves is in itself
a kind of avenue and inlet into infinity. Could a proof of our survival be
obtained, it would carry us deeper into the true nature of the universe
than we should be carried by an even perfect knowledge of the material
scheme of things. It would carry us deeper both by achievement and by
promise. The discovery that there was a life in man independent of blood
and brain would be a cardinal, a dominating fact in all science and in all
philosophy. And the prospect thus opened to human knowledge, in this
or in other worlds, would be limitless indeed.

I do not venture to suppose that the evidence set forth in these volumes,
even when considered in connection with other evidence now accessible
in our J^oceedings, will at once convince the bulk of my readers that the
momentous, the epoch-making discovery has been already made. Nay,
I cannot even desire that my own belief should at once impose itself upim
the world. Let men’s minds move in their wonted manner : great con-
victions are sounder and firmer when they are of gradual growth. But
I do think that to the candid student it should by this time become
manifest that the worldrold problem can now in reality be hopefully
attacked ; that there is actual and imminent possibility that the all-impor-

8o

CHAPTER VII

[755

taut truth should at last became indisputably known ; find, therefore, that
it befits all “ men of goodwill ** to help toward this knowing with what
zeal they may.

755. And this leads me to conclude this chapter with one urgent
word — at once of gratitude and of appeal. To the informants, to whose
care and kindness we owe the evidence collected in this work, I must
express the cordial acknowledgment of the whole group of inquirers to
whom their indispensable aid has been given. Especial thanks are due
to those exceptionally gifted persons who have permitted us to witness
and to test their supernormal powers. Viewed from the standpoint of
our own personal claim, or absence of claim, upon our informants' time
and attention, the amount of collaboration offered to us has been
generous indeed. ""

But another point of view must be considered. The research on
which my friends and 1 are engaged is not the mere hobby of a few
enthusiasts. Our opinions, of course, are individual and disputable ; but
the facts presented here and in the S.P.R. Proceedings are a very dif-
ferent matter. Neither the religious nor the scientific reader can longer
afford to ignore them, to pass them by. They must be met, they must
be understood, unless Science and Religion alike are to sink into mere
obscurantism. And the one and only way to understand them is to learn
more of them ; to collect more evidence, to try more experiments, to bring
to bear on this study a far more potent effort of the human mind than the
small group who have thus far been at work can possibly furnish. Judged
by this standard, the needed help has still to come. Never was there a
harvest so plenteous with labourers so few.

800 ]

CHAPTER VIII

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

Mi^iccri fiovov ovfiweLV rw vipti^ovn aipi, oAA’ rjSrf Kal <rvp.<l>pov€iv
Tw Tr€pUxpvri vdvra vocp<3.

—Marcus Aurelius.

800. In the pursuit of the vast and inchoate inquiry to which this
work is devoted, we are inevitably driven to push on in several directions
in turn, along an irregular line of advance. And it will be well to look
back for a moment from this point on the paths by which we have thus
far travelled, to realise what we have already achieved, and to make a
preliminary survey of the ground which still lies before us.

Our main theme, I repeat once more, is the analysis of human per-
sonality, undertaken with the object of showing that in its depths there lie
indications of life and faculty not limited to a planetary existence, or to
this material world.

In the firsf chapter this thesis was explained, and each chapter that has
followed has advanced us a step towards its establishment. In the second
chapter we found that the old-fashioned conception of human personality
as a unitary consciousness known with practical completeness to the
waking self needed complete revision. We began by tracing instances in
which that consciousness was disintegrated in various ways; and even
among those morbid cases wc found traces of the action of a profounder
self. In the third chapter, dealing with the phenomena of so-called
genius^ we found further indications of a deeper self possessing habitually
a higher degree of faculty than the superficial self can readily employ. In
the fourth chapter certain phenomena connected with sleep — manifesta-
tions of supernormal faculty both tetesthetic, telepathic, and premonitory
--led us on to the conception of a highly evolved subliminal self operating
with unknown faculty in an unknown environment. Nay, we have thus
been led to think that this subliminal self represents, more fully than the
supraliminal self, our central and abiding being, so that, 'vhen the slumber
the supraliminal self leaves it comparatively free, it performs two
functions of profound importance; in the first place restoring and
rejuvenating the bodily organism by drafts upon the energy of the spiritual
world with which it is in communion, and in the second place itself
voi.. u. 8t V

CHAPTER VIII

82

[800

entering into closer connection with that spiritual w</rld, apart from the
bodily organism.

Our fifth chapter, on Hypnotism, served as an experimental illustration
of this view. We there found that we could, by empirical processes,
deepen the sleeping phase of personality, and thus increase both the
subliminal seifs power of renovating the organism, both in familiar and in
unfamiliar ways, and also its power of operating in a quasi-independent
manner in the spiritual world. In the hypnotic trance, moreover, that
hidden self was able to come to the surface, to speak and to answer ; to
present itself as an independent agent with which we could directly deal.
We seemed to see here an opening which might lead us far, if we could
learn to intensify the trance, and at the same time to keep the subliminal
self suflSciently alert and near to us to be still able to describe its experiences
as they occur. If, then, my evidence had ended at this point, I should
already have ventured to say, not indeed that my far-reaching theses had
received adequate proof, but yet that I had offered an intelligible and
coherent hypothesis which would be found to cover a multitude of pheno-
mena which at present stand in the text-books with no adequate explana-
tion, as well as a multitude of phenomena which the text-books altogether
ignore.

But the evidence has not in fact ended with my fifth chapter. On the
contrary it has from that point taken a fresh start ; has become more
explicitly and manifestly corroborative of my initial thesis. For we have
gone on to find that this subliminal self, whose more remarkable workings
had thus far mainly been apparent in the sleeping phase of our personality,
is active, at any rate at occasional moments, during waking hours as well.
We proceeded in the sixth chapter to the study of automatisms, that is to
say, of manifestations of submerged mental processes, which do not enter
into ordinary consciousness. For convenience’ sake I have divided these
automatisms into sensory and motor: on the one hand, the sights and
sounds which we see and hear through some subliminal faculty rather than
through the ordinary channels of sense ; on the other hand, the motions
which w’e perform, the words which we utter, moved in like manner by
some unknown impulse from the deeps within.

The sensory automatisms with which the sixth chapter dealt might be
regarded, then, as messages transmitted from the subliminal to the supra-
liminal self. Many of those sensory messages seemed plainly to have been
originated in the automatist’s own mind. These illustrated in a new way
the coexistence of different series of thought and expressions of thought in
the same organism, but did not add to the evidence of supernormal
operations. Other sensory messages, however, there were which the
agencjf of a second person also was manifestly needed to explain. Such
were the telepathic or coincidental hallucinations for which so much
evidence has been adduced. These definitely indicate, — I should rather
say that they distinctly prave ^ — a communication between the minds of

801] M^OTOR AUTOMATISM 83

living persons, independently of the action of the recognised organs of
sense.

But this was not all. In the seventh chapter I went on to show that
there was no valid reason to suppose that bodily death put a stop to the
despatch of telepathic messages. By a long series of narratives I endea-
voured to prove that departed spirits, perhaps as frequently as incarnate
spirits, have communicated with incarnate spirits, — with living persons, —
by telepathic sensory messages of the same general type.

Here then we found a class of evidence — the ghost-story of all ages —
which has always hung loosely present in human belief, but which now at
last attains to a real cogency, partly by the improvement in its quality as
well as in its quantity, but largely also by its juxtaposition with all that
other telepathic evidence with which it is in fact of kindred type, — and
which shows the old ghostly stories as no supernatural anomaly, but as
merely an advanced term in a progressive series of incidents dependent on
some coherent, though as yet incomprehensible, law.

At this point, one may broadly say, we reach the end of the pheno-
mena whose existence is vaguely familiar to popular talk. And here, too,
I might fairly claim, the evidence for my primary thesis, — namely, that
the analysis of man*s personality reveals him as a spirit, surviving death, —
has attained an amplitude which would justify the reader in accepting that
view as the provisional hypothesis which comes nearest to a comprehensive
co-ordination of the actual facts. What we have already recounted seems,
indeed, impossible to explain except by supposing that our inner vision
has widened or deepened its purview so far as to attain some glimpses of
a spiritual world in which the individualities of our departed friends still
actually subsist.

801. The reader, however, who has followed me thus far must be
well aware that a large class of phenomena, of high importance, is still
awaiting discussion. Motor automatisms, — though less familiar to the
general public than the phantasms which I have classed as sensory auto-
matisms, — are in fact even commoner, and even more significant.

Motor automatisms, as I define them, are phenomena of very wide
range. We have encountered them already many times in this book. We
met them in the first place in a highly developed form in connection with
multiplex personality in Chapter II. Numerous instances were there
given of motor effects, initiated by secondary selves without the knowledge
of the primary selves, or sometimes in spite of their actual resistance. All
motor action of a secondary self is an automatism in this sense, in relation
to the primary self. And of course we might by analogy extend the use
of the word still further, and might call not only post-epileptic act^ but
^Iso maniacal acts, automatic ; since they are performed without the
mitiation of the presumedly sane- primary personality. Those degenera-
tive phenomena, indeed, are not to be discussed in this chapter. Yet it
'vill be well to pause here long enough to make it clear to the reader just

CHAPTER VIII

84

[802

1

what motor automatisms I am about to discuss as evolutive phenomena,
and as therefore falling within the scope of this treatise; — and what
kind of relation they bear to the dissolutive motor phenomena which
occupy so much larger a place in popular knowledge.

802. In order to meet this last question, I must here give more
distinct formulation to a thesis which has already suggested itself more
than once in dealing with special groups of our phenomena.

It may be expected that supernormal vital phenomena will manifest them-
selves as far as possible through the same channels as abnormal or morbid
vital phenomena^ when the same centres or the same synergies are involved.

To illustrate the meaning of this theorem, I may refer to a remark
long ago made by Edmund Gurney and myself in dealing with Phan-
tasms of the laving,*’ or veridical hallucinations, generated (as we main-
tained), not by a morbid state of the percipient’s brain, but by a telepathic
impact from an agent at a distance. We obser\'ed that if a hallucination
— a subjective image — is to be excited by this distant energy, it will prob-
ably be most readily excited in somewhat the same manner as the morbid
hallucination which follows on a cerebral injury. We urged that this is
likely to be the case — we showed ground for supposing that it is the case —
both as regards the mode of evolution of the phantasm in the percipient's
brain, and the mode in which it seems to present itself to his senses.

And here I should wish to give a much wider generality to this prin-
ciple, and to argue that if there be within us a secondary self aiming at
manifestation by physiological means, it seems probable that its readiest
path of extemalisation — its readiest outlet of visible action, — may often Yn)
along some track w’hich has already been shown to be a line of low
resistance by the disintegrating processes of disease. Or, varying the meta-
phor, we may anticipate that the partition of the primary and the secondary
self will lie along some plane of cleavage which the morbid dissociations of
our psychical synergies have already shown themselves disposed to follow.
If epilepsy, madness, &c., tend to split up our faculties in certain ways,
automatism is likely to split them up in ways somewhat resembling these.

This argument might be illustrated by various physical analogies, bet
us choose as a simple one a musical instrument of limited range. Tiie
consummate musician can get effects out of this instrument which the
ordinary player cannot rival. But he does this at the risk of evoking
occasional sounds such as only the most blundering of beginners is wont
to produce.

Savages take epilepsy for inspiration. They arc thus far right, that
epilepsy is (so to speak) the temporary destruction of the personality in
consequence of its own instability, whereas inspiration was assumed to be
the temporary subjugation of the personality by invasion from without. The
one case (if I may use the metaphor) was a spontaneous combustion ; the
other an enkindlement by heavenly fire. In less metaphorical language,
explosion and exhaustion of the highest nervous centres must have some-

803] IVJOTOR AUTOMATISM 85

what the same look^ whatever may have been the nature of the stimulus
which overcame their stability.

803. But in what way then, it will be asked, do you distinguish the
supernormal from the merely abnormal? Why assume that in these aber-
rant states there is anything besides hysteria, besides epilepsy, besides
insanity?

The answer to this question has virtually been given in previous chap-
ters of this book. The reader is already accustomed to the point of view
which regards all psychical as well as all physiological activities as neces-
sarily either developmental or degenerative, tending to evolution or to dis-
solution. And now, whilst altogether waiving any teleological speculation,
I will ask him hypothetically to suppose that an evolutionary nims, some-
thing which we may represent as an effort towards self-development, self-
adaptation, self-renewal, is discernible especially on the psychical side of
nt any rate the higher forms of life. Our question, Supernormal or abnor-
mal? — may then be phrased, Evolutive or dissolutive? And in studying
each psychical phenomenon in turn we shall have to inquire whether it
indicates a mere degeneration of powers already acquired, or, on the other
hand, the promise and potency,” if not the actual possession, of powers
as yet unrecognised or unknown.

Thus, for instance, Telepathy is surely a step in evolution} To learn
the thoughts of other minds without the mediation of the special senses,
manifestly indicates the possibility of a vast extension of psychical powers.
And any kiunvlcdge which >ve can amass as to the conditions under which
telepathic action takes place, will form a valuable starting-point for an in-
quiry as to the evolutive or dissolutive character of unfamiliar psychical
states.®

For example, we may learn from our knowledge of telepathy that the
superficial aspect of certain stages of psychical evolution, like the super-

^ To avoid misconception, I may point out that this view in no way negatives the
possibility that telepathy (or its correlative telergy) may be in some of its aspects com-
nioncr, or more powerful, among savages than among ourselves. Evolutionary processes
are not necessarily continuous. The acquirement by our lowly-organised ancestors of the
sense ol smell (for instance) was a step in evolution. But the sense of smell probably
reached its highest energy in races earlier than man ; and it has perceptibly declined
even in the short space which separates civilised man from existing savages. Yet if,
with some change in our environment, the sense of smell again became useful, and we
reacquired it, this would be none the less an evolutionary process because the evolution
had been interrupted.

® I do not wish to assert that a// unfamiliar psychical states arc necessarily evolutive
or dissolutive in any assignable manner. I should prefer to suppose that there are states
which may better be styled allotropic ; — modifications of the arrangements of nervous
elements on which our conscious identity depends, but with no more conspicuous
superiority of the one state over the other than (for instance) charcoal possesses over
graphite or graphite over charcoal. But there may also be states in which fhe (meta-
phoricil) carbon becomes diamond so much at least of advance on previous slates
^ IS involved in the substitution of the crystalline for the amorphous structure.

86

CHAPTER VIII

[8M

ficial aspect of certain stages of physiological evolutiory may resemble mere
inhibition^ or mere perturbation. But the inhibition may involve latent
dynamogeny, and the perturbation may mask evolution. The hypnotised
subject may pass through a lethargic stage before he wakes into a state in
which he has gained community of sensation with the operator ; somewhat
as the silkworm (to use the oldest and the most suggestive of all illustni'
tions) passes through the apparent torpor of the cocoon-stage before evolv-
ing into the moth. Again, the automatist’s hand (as we shall presently sec)
is apt to pass through a stage of inco-ordinated movements, which might
almost be taken for choreic, before it acquires the power of ready and in-
telligent writing. Similarly the development, for instance, of a tooth may
be preceded by a stage of indefinite aching, which might be ascribed to
the formation of an abscess, did not the new tooth ultimately show itself.
And still more striking cases of a perturbation luhich masks evoiu/ion might
be drawn from the history of the human organism as it develops into its
own maturity, or prepares for the appearance of the fresh human organism
which is to succeed it.

Analogy, therefore, both physiological and psychical, warns us not to
conclude that any given psychosis is merely degenerative until we have
examined its results closely enough to satisfy ourselves whether they tend
to bring about any enlargement of human powers, to open any new inlet
to the reception of objective truth. If such there prove to be, then, with
whatever morbid activities the psychosis may have been intertwined, it.
contains indications of an evolutionary nisus as well.

804. These remarks, I hope, may have sufficiently cleared the
ground to admit of our starting afresh on the consideration of such motor
automatisms as are at any rate not morbid in their eflbct on the organ-
ism, and which I now have to show to be evolutive in character. 1
maintain that we have no valid ground for assuming that the movements
which are not due to our conscious will must be less important, and
less significant, than those that are. We observe, of course, that in the
organic region the movements which are not due to conscious will are
really the most important of all, though the voluntary movements by
which a man seeks food and protects himself against enemies are also
of great practical importance — he must first live and multiply if he
is to learn and know. But we must guard against confusing import-
ance for immediate practical life with importance for science — on whicli
even practical life ultimately depends. As soon as the task of living and
multiplying is no longer all-engrossing, we begin to change our relative
estimate of values, and to find that it is not the broad and obvious
phenomena, but the residual and elusive phenomena, which are oftencst
likely to introduce us to new avenues of knowledge. I wish to persuatle
my readers that this is quite as truly the case in psychology as in physics.

I may say at once that some of the automatic movements with which
we shall have to deal— certain utterances and writings given in a state of

»^OTOR AUTOMATISM

805]

87

« possession mu|t rank, in ray view, among the most important pheno-
mena yet observed by man. For their proper study we need far more of
introductory matter than in these volumes I can possibly give. I shall at
any rate, therefore, make no apology for the ambages et ionga exorsa — the
long and tortuous approach — through which my reader, I fear, must follow
me, if he is at last to discover any connection and congruity between those
trance-messages and the structure of his own previous knowledge. I shall
at any rate not attempt to conceal my own ignorances and uncertainties ;
but shall grope about, so to say, before my reader’s eyes, indicating again
and again where our insight at present ends, and repeating again and
again, from different points of view, and with fresh illustrations, those im-
perfect, yet important, fragments of knowledge which I hold that we have
in fact attained.

805. As a first step in our analysis, we may point out certain main
characters which unite in a true class all the automatisms which we are
here considering — greatly though these may differ among themselves in
external form.

In the first place, then, our automatisms are independent phenomena ;
they are what the physician calls idiognomonic. That is to say, they are not
merely symptomatic of some other affection, or incidental to some pro-
founder change. The mere fact, for instance, that a man writes messages
which he does not consciously originate will not, when taken alone, prove
anything beyond this fact itself as to the writer’s condition. He may be
perfectly sane, in normal health, and with nothing unusual observable
about him. This characteristic — provable by actual observation and
experiment — distinguishes our automatisms from various seemingly kindred
phenomena. Thus we may have to include in our class the occasional
automatic utterance of words or sentences. But the continuous exhausting
vociferation of acute mania does not fall within our province ; for those
shouts are merely symptomatic ; nor, again, does the cri hydrocephaliqve
(or spontaneous meaningless noise which sometimes accompanies water on
the brain) ; for that, too, is no independent phenomenon, but the direct
consequence of a definite lesion. Furthermore, we shall have to include
in our class certain simple movements of the hands, co-ordinated into the
act of writing. But here, also, our definition will lead us to exclude
choreic movements, which are merely symptomatic of nervous mal-nutri-
tion ; or which we may, if we choose, call idiopathic^ as constituting an
independent malady. But our automatisms are not idiopathic but idio-
gnomonic ; they may indeed be associated with or facilitated by certain
states of the organism, but they are neither a symptom of any other malady,
nor are they a malady in themselves.

Agreeing, then, that our peculiar class consists of automatisms which are
idiognomonic, — ^whose existence does not necessarily imply the Existence
of some profoundcr affection already known as producing them, — ^we have
still to look for some more positive bond of connection between them

88 CHAPTER VIII [806

some quality common to all of them, and which malc*s them worth our
prolonged investigation.

This we shall find in the fact that they are all of them message-bearing
or nunciaiive automatisms. I do not, of course, mean that they all of
them bring messages from sources external to the automatisms own mind.
In some cases they probably do this ; but as a rule the so-called messages
seem more probably to originate within the automatist’s own personality.
Why, then, it may be asked, do 1 call them messages ? We do not usually
speak of a man as sending a message to himself. The answer to this
question involves, as we shall presently see, the profoundest conception
of these automatisms to which we can as yet attain. I'hey present them-
selves to us as messages communicated from one stratum to another
stratum of the same personality. Originating in some deeper zone of a
man’s being, they float up into superficial consciousness as deeds, visions,
words, ready-made and full-blown, without any accompanying i)crception
of the claborative process which has made them what they are.

808. Can we then (we may next ask) in any way predict the possible
range of these motor automatisms? Have we any limit assignable a priori,
outside which it would be useless to look for any externalisation of an
impulse emanating from sub-conscious strata of our being?

The answer to this must be that no such limit can be with any con-
fidence suggested. We have not yet learnt with any distinctness even
how far the wave from a conscioush-\itxz€\\ei(\ stimulus will spread, or what
changes its motion will assume. Still less can wc predict the limitations
which the resistance of the organism will impose on the radiation of a
stimulus originated within itself. We are learning to consider the human
organism as a practically infinite complex of interacting vibrations ; and
each year adds many new facts to our knowledge of the various trans-
formations which these vibrations may undergo, and of the unexpected
artifices by which we may learn to cognise some stimulus which is not
directly felt.

A few concrete instances will make my meaning plainer. And my
first example shall be taken from those experiments in muscle-reading —
less correctly termed mind-reading — with which the readers of those
Proceedings are already familiar. I.et us suppose that I am to hide a pin,
and that some accomplished rnuscle-reader is to take my hand and find
the pin by noting my muscular indications.' I first hide the pin in the
hearth-rug ; then I change my mind and hide it in the bookshelf. I fix
my mind on the bookshelf, but resolve to make no guiding movement.
The muscle-reader takes my hand, leads me first to the rug, then to the
bookshelf, and finds the pin. Now, what has happened in this case?
\Yhat movements have I made?

Firstly, I have made no voluntary movement ; and secondly, I have
made no conscious involuntary movement. But, thirdly, I have made an
' See, ioT instance, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. i. p. 291.

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

89

807 ]

unconscious involunkzry movement which directly depended on conscious
ideation. I strongly thought of the bookshelf, and when the bookshelf
was reached in our vague career about the room I made a movement —
say rather a tremor occurred — in my hand, which, although beyond both
my knowledge and my control, was enough to supply to the muscle-
reader's delicate sensibility all the indication required. All this is now
admitted, and, in a sense, understood ; we formulate it by saying that my
conscious ideation contained a motor clement ; and that this motor
element, though inhibited from any conscious manifestation, did yet
inevitably externalise itself in a peripheral tremor.

But, fourthly, something more than this has clearly taken place.
Before the muscle-reader stopped at the bookshelf he stopped at the rug.

I was no longer consciously thinking of the rug ; but the idea of the pin
in the nig must still have been reverberating, so to say, in my sub-con-
scious region ; and this unconscious memory, this unnoted reverberation,
revealed itself in a peripheral tremor nearly as distinct as that which
(when the bookshelf was reached) corresponded to the strain of conscious
thought.

This tremor, then, was in a certain sense a message-bearing auto-
matism. It was the externalisation of jin idea which, once conscious, had
i)ccome unconscious, though in the slightest conceivable degree — namely,
by a mere slight escape from the field of direct attention.

807. Having, then, considered an instance where the automatic
message passes only between two dosely-adjacent strata of consciousness,
externalising an impulse derived from an idea \vhich has only recently
sunk out of consciousness and which could easily be summoned back
ag;nn; — let us find our next illustration in a case where the line of
demarcation between the strata of consciousness through which the
automatic message pierces is distinct ami impassable by any effort
of will.

1 .ct us take a case of post-hypnotic su^c;cstion — say, for instance, an
cx|xriment of Edmund Gurney's (see S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 319 ).

riie subject had been trained to write with plancliette, after he had been
awakened, the statements which had been made to him when in the
hypnotic trance. He wrote the desired words, or something like them,
Init while he wrote them his waking self was entirely unaware of what his
hand was writing. Thus, having been told in the trance, “ It has begun
snowing again," he wrote after waking, ** It begun snowing," while he read
aloud, with waking intelligence, from a book of stories, and was quite
unconscious of what his hand (placed on a planchettc behind a screen)
was at the same time writing.

Here we have an automatic message of traceable origin ; a message
implanted in the hypnotic stratum of the subject’s self, and crop'^)ing up
- -•like a fault — in the waking stratum, — externalised in automatic move-
ments which the waking self could neither predict nor guide.

90

CHAPTER VIII t

[808

806. Vet once more. In the discussion which jhrill follow we shall
have various instances of the transformation (as I shall regard it) of
psychical shock into definite muscular energy of apparently a quite alien
kind. Such transformations of so-called psychical into physical force —
of will into motion — do of course perpetually occur within us. /But the
nature of these is commonly much obscured by the problem as to the
true efficacy of the 7vill : and it seems desirable to cite one or two
examples of such transmutation where the process is what we call auto-
matic, and we seem to detect the simple muscular correlative — the motor
equivalent — to some emotion or sensation which contains no obvious
motor element at all.

An easy, though a rough, way of testing transmutations of this kind
is afforded by the dynamometer. It is necessary first to discover the
amount of pressure which the subject of experiment can exert on the
dynamometer, by squeezing it with all the force at his command, in his
ordinary condition. After he has had a little practice his highest attain-
able force of squeeze becomes nearly constant ; and it is then possible to
subject him to various stimuli, and to measure the degree of response ;
that is, the degree in which his squeeze becomes either more or less power-
ful while the stimulus is applied. The experiments are, in fcict, a sort ot
elaboration of a familiar phenomenon. 1 take a child to a circus ; he sits
by me holding niy hand; there is a discharge of musketry and his grip
tightens. Now in this case wc should call the chil(l*s tightened gri])
automatic. But suppose that, instead of merely holding my hand, he is
trying with all his might to squeeze the dynamometer, and that the sudden
excitation enables him to squeeze it harder — are we then to describe th«'it
extra squeeze as automatic? or as voluntary?

However phrased, it is the fact (as amply established by M. Fere
and others^) that excitations of almost any kind — whether sudden and
startling or agreeable and prolonged — do tend to increase the subject's
dynamometrical power. In the first place, and this is in itself an impor-
tant fact, the average of squeezing-power is found to be greater among
educated students than among robust labouring men, thus showing that it
is not so much developed muscle as active brain which renders possible a
sudden concentration of muscular force. But more than this; M. F^rc
finds that with himself and his friends the mere listening to an interesting
lecture, or the mere stress of thought in solitude, or still more the act of
writing or of speech, produces a decided increase of strength in the grip,
especially of the right hand. The same effect of dynamogeny is produced
with hypnotic subjects, by musical sounds, by coloured light, especially red
light, and even by a hallucinatory suggestion of red light. All our
sensations,’* says M. F^r^ in conclusion, “are accompanied by a develop-
ment of potential energy, which passes into a kinetic state, and externalises

1 Sensation et Motwemmty par Ch. Fere*. Paris : Alcan, 1887.

91

809] ^OTOK AUTOMATISM

itself in motor maijifestations which even so rough a method as dynamo-
nictry is able to observe and record.”

I would beg the reader to keep these words in mind. We shall pre-
sently find that a method apparently even rougher than dynamographic
tracings may be able to interpret, with far greater delicacy, the automatic
tremors which are coursing to and fro within us. If once we can get a
spy into the citadel of our own being, his rudest signalling will tell ii;s
more than our subtlest inferences from outside of what is being planned
and done within.

809. Further illustrations might easily be here given. But for brevity's
sake 1 pass on to the automatic messages which form our special subject,
trusting that the specimens above given of mofor externaiisatio?is of unex-
pected kinds may have led the reader to feel that experiment alone can
tell us how far such delicate motor indications may in fact be traceable ;
how much of information may pass from one stratum of our consciousness
to another, and in a form how strangely transmuted. And having now to
deal with what I define as messages conveyed by one stratum in man to
another stratum, 1 must first consider in what general ways human mes-
sagt-'S can be conveyed. Writing and speech have become predominant
ill the intercourse of civilised men, and it is to writing and speech that we
look with most interest among the communications of the subliminal
self. But it does not follow that the subliminal self will always have
such complex methods at its command. We have seen already that it
often finds it hard to manage the delicate co-ordinations of muscular move-
ment required for writing, — that the attempt at automatic script ends in a
thump and a scrawl. Does the history of animal communication suggest
to us to try any easier, more rudimentary plan?

The first communications of animals are by gesture ; and even when
sound is added this is at first only a specialised kind of gesture. The
higher animals discriminate their calls j man develops speech ; and the
message-giving impulse parts into the main channels of movement — move-
ment of the throat and movement of the hand. The hand-gestures —
*‘high as heaven,” ^‘horned like a stag,” and so forth — develop in their
turn into the rude drawing of objects ; and this graphic impulse again
divides along two cluannels. On the one hand it develops into the
pictorial and plastic arts, conveying its messages through what may be
termed a direct, as opposed to an arbitrary symbolism. On the other
hand it assimilates itself to the laws of speech, it becomes ideographic ;
and gradually merging direct into arbitrary symbolism it becomes alpha-
betical script, arithmetic, algebra, telegraphy.

But the word telegraphy suggests to us that in recent times a fresh
beginning has had to be made in human communication; modes have
had to be invented by which a civilised man, disposing only of a few
movements, — the deflections of the indicating needle, — might attain
to the precision of grammatical speech. This, as we know, has been easily

92

CHAPTER VIII «

effected; and the mere repetition of one or two sijjnple movements at
varied intervals suffices, to eye or ear, for all the purposes of an alphabet.

Now we shall find, perhaps, among the communications of the sub-
liminal self parallels to all these varying modes of communication. But
since the subliminal self, like the telegraphist, begins its effort with full
knowledge, indeed, of the alphabet, but with only weak and rude command
over our muscular adjustments, it is a [>riori likely that its easiest mode
of communication will be through a repetition of simple movements, so
arranged as to correspond to letters of the alphabet.

And here, I think, we have attained to a conception of the mysterious
and much-derided phenomenon of “ table-tilting which enables us to
correlate it with known phenomena, and to start at least from an intelligible
basis, and on a definite line of inquiry.

A few words are needed to explain what are the verifiable phenomena,
and the less verifiable hypotheses, connoted by such words as table-
turning,** ‘'spirit-rapping,’* and the like.

If one or more persons of a special type, — at present definable only
by the question-begging and barbarous term “ mediumistic,** — remain
quietly for some time with hands in contact with some easily^ movable
object, and desiring its movement, that object will sometimes begin to
move. If, further, they desire it to indicate letters of the alphabet by its
movements, — as by tilting once for a, twice for by &c., it will often do so,
and answers unexpected by any one present will be obtained.

Thus far, whatever our interpretation, wc are in the region of easily
reproducible facts, which many of my readers may confirm for themselves
if they please.

But beyond the simple movements — or table-turning — and the intelli-
gible responses — or table-tilting — both of which are at least prima facie
physically explicable by the sitters’ unconscious pressure, without postu-
lating any unknown physical force at all, — it is alleged by many persons
that further physical phenomena occur ; namely, that the table moves in a
direction, or with a violence, which no unconscious pressure can explain ;
and also that percussive sounds or “ raps ** occur, which no unconscious
action, or indeed no agency known to us, could produce. 'Fhese raps
communicate messages like the tilts, and it is to them that the name of
spirit-rapping ** is properly given. But spiritualists generally draw little
distinction betw^een these four phenomena — mere table-turning, responsive
table-tilting, movements of inexplicable vehemence, and responsive raps— •
attributing all alike to the agency of departed spirits of men and women,
or at any rate to disembodied intelligences of some kind or other.

I am not at present discussing the physical phenomena of Spiritualism^
and I shall therefore leave on one side all the alleged movements and
noises t>f this kind for which unconscious pressure will not account. I do
not prejudge the question as to their real occurrence ; but assuming that
such disturbances of the physical order do occur, there is at least no

93

810] lioTOR AUTOMATISM

Jade need to refe/ them to disembodied spirits. If a table moves when
no one is touching it, this is not obviously more likely to have been
effected by my deceased grandfather than by myself. We cannot tell how
I could move it; but then we cannot tell how Ke could move it cither.
The (question must be argued on its merits in each case ; and our present
argument is not therefore vitiated by our postponement of this further
problem.

810. Before M. Richet ' I believe that no writer, outside the Spiritual-
istic group, so much as showed any practical knowledge of this phenomenon,
— still less endeavoured to explain it. Faraday’s well-known explanation of
table-turning as the result of the summation of many unconscious move-
ments— obviously true as it is for some of the simplest cases of table-
movement — docs not touch this far more difficult question of the
origination of these intelligent messages, conveyed by distinct and repeated
movements of some object admitting of ready displacement. The ordinary
explanation — I am speaking, of course, of cases where fraud is not in
question — is that the sitter unconsciously sets going and stops the move-
ments so as to shape the word in accordance with his expectation. Now
tliat he unconsciously sets going and stops the movements is part of my
own present contention, but that the word is thereby shaped in accordance
witli his ex])cctation is often far indeed from being the case. Several
of the examples in the Appendices to this chapter illustrate the bizarre
capriciousness of these replies — their want of relation to anything antici-
pated or desired by the persons in contact with the tabic. Similar
instances might be indefinitely multiplied ; but any one who is really
willing to take the requisite trouble can satisfy himself on this point by
experiment with a sufficiently varied list of trustworthy friends. To those
indeed who are familiar with automatic written messages, this question as
to the unexpectedness of the tilted messages will present itself in a new
light. If the written messages originate in a source beyond the auto-
matist’s supraliminal self, so too may the tilted messages ; — even though
we admit that the tilts arc caused by his hand’s pressure of the table
just as directly as the script by his hand’s manipulation of the pen.

One piece of evidence which 1 have cited (in 830 A) in order to
show that written messages were not always the mere echo of expectation,
was a case where ana, grants were automatically written, which their writer
was not at once able to decipher. Following this hint, I have occasionally
succeeded in getting anagrams tilted out for myself by movements of a
small table which I alone touched. I should add that although, as I have
elsewhere mentioned, I have never succeeded in writing automatically, I
have nevertheless, after some hundreds of trials, continued over many
years, attained the power of eliciting by unconscious pressure Jtilted re-
sponses which do not emanate from my own conscious self. That they do,

* La StigfftstioH MentaU (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. pp. 239 sqq.).

94

CHAPTER VIII

[811

however, emanate from some stratum of my being — from that fragmentary
and incoherent workshop where dreams are strung together — seems to me,
as already indicated, the most probable hypothesis.

The anagrams — or rather jumbles of letters forming a short word —
which I have myself obtained, have been of the simplest kind. But occa-
sionally I have not at once recognised the word thus given, but have been
aware of a distinct interval before the word which my own unconscious
muscular action had thus confusedly ‘‘ tilted out ** was grasped by my
conscious intelligence. This is a kind of experiment which might with
advantage be oftener repeated ; for the extreme incoherence and silliness
of the responses thus obtained does not prevent the process itself from
being in a high degree instructive. Here, again (as in the automatic
writing of the ''Clelia” case, 830 A), a man may hold colloquy with his
own dream — may note in actual juxtaposition two separate strata of his
own intelligence.

I shall not at present pursue the discussion of these tilted responses
beyond this their very lowest and most rudimentary stage. They almost
immediately suggest another problem, for which our discussion is hardly
ripe, the participation, namely, of several minds in the production of the
same automatic message. There is something of this difficulty, even in
the explanation of messages given when the hands of two persons are
touching a planchette ; but when the instrument of response is large, and
the method of response simple, as with table-tilting, we find this question
of the influence of more minds than one imperatively recurring.

811. Our immediate object, however, is rather to correlate the differ-
ent attainable modes of automatic response in some intelligible scheme
than to pursue any one of them through all its phases. We regarded the
table-tilting process as in one sense the simplest, the least-differentiated
form of motor response. It is a kind of gesture merely, though a gesture
implying knowledge of the alphabet. Let us see in what directions the
movement of response becomes more specialised, — as gesture parts into
pictorial art and articulate speech. We find, in fact, that a just similar
divergence of impulses takes place in automatic response. On the one
hand the motor impulse specialises itself into drawing; on the other hand
it specialises itself into speech. Of automatic drawing I have already said
something (Chapter III. 324). Autpraatic speech will receive detailed
treatment in Chapter IX. At present I shall only briefly indicate the
position of each form of movement among cognate automatisms.

Some of my readers may have seen these so-called spirit-drawings,^*
— designs, sometimes in colour, whose author asserts that he drew them
without any plan, or even knowledge of what his hand was going to do.
This assqftion may be quite true, and the person making it may be per-
fectly sane.* The drawings so made will be found curiously accordant

^ Sec the quotations from Mr. Wilkinson \s book in 811 A. But, of course, like
other automatic impulses, this impulse to decorative or symbolical drawing is sometimes

M^OTOR AUTOMATISM

95

812]

with what the view ^hich I am explaining would lead us to expect. For
they exhibit a fusion of arabesque with ideography ; that is to say^ they
partly resemble the forms of ornamentation into which the artistic hand
strays when, lis it were, dreaming on the paper without definite plan ; and
partly they afford a parallel to the early attempts at symbolic self-expres-
sion of savages who have not yet learnt an alphabet. Like savage writing,
they pass by insensible transitions from direct pictorial symbolism to an
abbreviated ideography, mingled in its turn with writing of a fantastic or
of an ordinary kind.

812. And here, before we enter on the study of automatic writing,
I shall somewhat break the thread of discussion in order to refer at length
to two great historic cases of automatism, which may, perhaps, be most
fitly introduced here as a kind of prologue to what is to follow. One case,
that of Socrates, is a case of monitory inhibition ; the other, that of Jeanne
d^‘\rc, of monitory impulse. Each case, moreover, is instructive as regards
the substance of the messages, and also as regards the character and capac>
ity of the percipient. I begin with that great historical instance, — an
instance well observed and well attested, although remote in date, which
will at once have occurred to every reader.

The Founder of Science himself, — the permanent type of sanity,
shrewdness, physical robustness, and moral balance, — was guided in all
the affairs of life by a monitory Voice, — by the Daemon of Socrates.”
This is a case which can never lose its interest, a case which has been
vouched for by the most practical, and discussed by the loftiest intellect of
(Jreece, — ^both of them intimate friends of the illustrious subject ; — a case,
therefore, which one who endeavours to throw new light on hallucination
and automatism is bound, even at this distance of time, to endeavour to
explain. And this is the more needful, since a treatise was actually
written, a generation ago, as **a specimen of the application of the
science of psychology to the science of history,” arguing from the records
of the Sai/Aoviov in Xenophon and Plato that Socrates was in fact
insane,^

I believe that it is now possible to give a truer explanation ; to place
these old records in Juxtaposition with more instructive parallels; and
to show that the messages which Socrates received were only advanced
examples of a process which, if supernormal, is not abnormal, and which
characterises that form of intelligence which we describe as genius. For
genius (as wc have seen), is best defined— not as "an unlimited capacity

seen at its tnaximum in insane patients. Some drawings of an insane patient, repro-
«cedin the American Journal of Psychology. June i88S, show a noticeable analogy (in
view ^^predictable analogy) with some of the “ spirit-drawings above discussed. See
^ so the Martian landscapes of Hdlene Smith, in Professor Flournoy's Des Aides h la
P Marsy referred to below, sections 834 et seq,

/ Piifnon de Socrates &c., by L. F. Lelut, Membra de ITnstitut. Nouvellc

edition, 1856. '

CHAPTER VIII »

96

[813

of taking pains*' — but rather as a mental constitufcion which allows a
man to draw readily into supraliminal life the products of subliminal
thought.

813. I have already urged that beneath the superficially conscious
stratum of our being there is not only a stratum of dream and confusion,
but a still subjacent stratum of coherent mentation as well. This thesis, 1
think, is strongly supported by the records which have come down to us
as to the Daemon of Socrates. We shall see that the monitions which
Socrates thus received were for the most part such as his own wiser self
might well have given, and that where the limits of knowledge attainable
by his own inmost reflection may possibly have been transcended, they
seem to have been transcended in such direction as a clairvoyant develop'
ment of his own faculties might allow, rather than in such a way as to
suggest the intervention of any external power. Let us try to analyse the
nature of the “divine interventions*' actually recorded by Socrates’ con-
temporaries. The voice, it should be remarked, was always a voice of
restraint; its silence implied approval. In the first place Xenophon’s
testimony completely establishes the fact He desires, in defending his
friend and master from the charge of impiety, to make as little ns
may be of the matter ; but what he says is quite enough to prove — if such
proof were needed — that the ^aifioviov (monitory voice) is no metaphor,
but is to be taken literally as a notorious and repeated incident in Soc-
rates’ life.

“ First then," he says,' “ as to his not worshipping the gods whom the
city worships, what evidence was there of this? He sacrificed constantly,
and obviously used the art of divination; for it was matter of .notoriety
that Socrates said that to SaLfiovtov—thc divine Providence — gave him
indications; and this indeed was the principal reason for accusing him
of introducing new gods."

The instances where such indication was given may be divided into
three heads.

First come the cases where the warning voice— or its equally significant
absence — gives proof of a sagacity at least equal to that of the waking
Socrates, and decides him to action, or to abstention from action, which
he professes always to have recognised as right and wise.

Next come the cases where the monition implies some sort of knowl-
edge not dependent on any external source, yet not attainable by ordinary
means ; — as a knowledge of potential rapport (to use the term of the elder
mesmerists), or special relation between two organisms.

And, lastly, come one or two doubtful cases where, if they be correctly
reported, there was something like clairvoyance, or extension of the
ordinajfy purvdew of sense.

'Fhe first of these classes contains the great majority of the recorded
cases, whether small or great matters are concerned. And it is noticeable

1 Xen. AfemorabilM, i. 1.

Mt)TOR AUTOMATISM

97

813]

that the monition fretjuently occurred in reference to mere trifles, and had
been a habitual phenomenon for Socrates from childhood upwards, both
of which points are eminently in analogy with what we know of other
automatisms.*" Let us take first some trivial cases.

1. In the Euthydemus of Plato, Socrates is about to quit the palaestra ;
the sign detains him ; young men enter, and profitable conversation
ensues.

2. In the Phadms^ Socrates, when leaving his resting-place, is detained
by the sign, which thus leads him to a discourse which he had not intended
to utter — ’Ei/xl S»y /idvri^ /xty — “ I am, it seems, a prophet,** he then remarks,
'<but only just enough for my private use and benefit.*'

3. In the E/rs/ Akibiades tlie sign restrains him from speaking to
Alcibiades until the latter is old enough to understand him aright.

I’here are also various cases where Socrates dissuades his friends from
expeditions which ultimately turn to their harm. None of these are in
our sense evidential ; and in some of them (as in the case of the Athenian
exi>edition against Syracuse) ordinar}^ sagacity might have given the same
wiiruing. The case of Timarchus (Plato, Thea^es) is the most dramatic of
these warnings.

Timarchus was sitting at supper with Socrates, and rose to go out
to a plot of assassination, to which plot only one other man was privy.

say you, Socrates?* said Timarchus, * do you continue drinking?
I must go out somewhither ; but will return in a little, if so I may.’ And
the voice came to me ; and I said to him, * By no means rise from table ;
for the accustomed divine sign has come to me.* And he stayed. And
after a time again he got up to go, and said, * I must be gone, Socrates.*
And the sign came to me again ; and again I made him stay. And the
third time, determining that I should not see, he rose and said naught to
me, when my mind was turned elsewhere ; and thus he went forth, and
was gone, and did that which was to be his doom.**

We cannot now tell what the evidential value of this case may have
been. There may have been that in the countenance of one of then)
who sat at meat, which may have shown to Socrates that the liand of an
assassin was with him on the table.

But, among these monitions of Socrates, a certain silence of the warning
voice on one last occasion was held by Socrates himself, and has since
been reputed, as the most noteworthy of all. This was when Socrates,
accused on a capital charge of imjiiety, from which he might have freed
himself by far less of retractation than has been consented to by many a
refused altogether to retract, to excuse himself, to explain away ;
claiming rather, in one of the first and noblest of all assertions of the law
0 conscience as supreme, that he deserved to be supported at the public
^^^st in the Prytaneum, as a man devoted to the mission of a moral teacher
^ men. The divine sign, as has been said, came only to warn or to re-
strain ; when it was absent, all was well. And throughout the whole series

VOL. II.

98 CHAPTER VIII * [814

of events which led to Socrates' death, the voice intetvened once only, —
to check him from preparing any speech in his own defence. Thereafter,
by an emphatic silence, it approved the various steps by which the philo-
sopher brought on his own head that extreme penalty which, save for
his own inflexible utterances, the Dikastery would not have ventured to
inflict. * •

** There has happened to me, O my judges/' he said in his last speech
after sentence passed,* ** a wonderful thing. For that accustomed divine
intimation in time past came to me very many times, and met me on slight
occasion, if I were about to act in some way not aright ; but now this fate
which ye behold has come upon me, — this which a man might deem, and
w'hich is considered, the very worst of ills. Yet neither when I left my
home this morning was I checked by that accustomed sign ; nor when I
came up hither to the judgment-hall, nor at any point in my speech as I
spoke. And yet in other speeches of mine the sign has often stopped me
in the midst. But now it has not hindered me in any deed or word of
mine connected with this present business. What then do I suppose to
be the reason thereof ? I will tell you. I think it is that what has hap-
pened to me has been a good thing ; and we must have been mistaken
when w'e supposed that death was an evil. Herein is a strong proof to me
of this ; for that accustomed sign would assuredly have checked me, had
I been about to do aught that was evil."

I dwell upon this incident ; for in the history of inward messages no
such scene is likely to recur. We shall never again see such a man at such
a moment drawing strength from the silence of the monitory utterance
which came to him as from without himself, though it were from the depths
of his own soul.

814. The next class of the Socratic monitions can only be briefly
dealt with here. They touch on that singular phenomenon of so-called
rapport which is to us at present and has long been in the eyes of Science
an unexplained and a very disputable thing ; btit on which recent hypnotic
experiments are slowly bringing us to look as in some sense a reality. In
modern terms we should say that the disciples of Socrates were influenced
not so much by his instruction as by his su^cstion ; and that some inward
and perhaps telepathic instinct — expressed by the monitory voice whose
utterances we are analysing — informed him without conscious considera-
tion whether his intending disciples were receptive to his suggestion or no.
It is in the Platonic dialogue Thcages that this aspect of the divine moni-
tion is most insisted on.

" I never learnt from you," says a certain Aristeides to Socrates, “any-
thing at all. You yourself well know’ this. But I always made progress
whenever I was along with you, even if I were in the same house but not
in the same room ; yet most w'hen I was in the same room ; and even in
the same room I got on better if I looked at you when you were speaking
than if I looked anywhere else. But I got on far the best of all when I

Mt>TOR AUTOMATISM

99

814 ]

was sitting near yoif and holding or touching you. But now, said he, all
my then character has dribbled out of me.” NCr 8c, rj 8 09 , vatra cKcimj

^ ?^t9 i$€ppvriK€v,

I would not insist too strongly on an interpretation which may seem
merely fanciful. But nevertheless we should be puzzled to find Greek
%vorcls more expressive of the gradual dissipation and disappearance of a
post-hypnotic suggestion, — the melting away of some imparted energy in
well-doing as the subject is removed from the operator's influence. And
that the possibility of some rapport of this kind should be indicated, not
by conscious thought but by a message emanating from some sub-conscious
phase of a man's being ; — this, too, is a phenomenon to which modern ex-
perience furnishes not nnfrequent analogies.

The third class of Socratic monitions which I have mentioned rests on
very slender evidence. We cannot be sure that the monitory sign ever
warned him of anything which no possible sagacity of the ordinary kind
could have led him to discover. As is natural in the beginning of such
inquiries, the cases cited to illustrate this supposed supernormal knowledge
are mainly interesting and important incidents ; and it is precisely in rela-
tion to such incidents that some unconscious guess is likely to have been
made. What we should like would be just what Plato had omitted ; —
siiocimciis, namely, of the trivial cases where the divine warning saved the
philosopher from some momentary mishap. Of this sort I can find one
only ; and that is merely a tradition, given in Plutarch’s essay De Genio
Socralis, Socrates, according to this story (which Plutarch puts into the
mouth of a siqiposed eye-witness), is walking and talking with Euthyphron,
but stops suddenly, and calls his friends to turn back by another street,
^lost of them follow him, but others keep on their way, and presently meet
a great herd of swine who knock down some of them and befoul the rest.
“Charillus” (who had thus braved Socrates’ warning) “returned home
with legs and clothes all full of mire, — so that we all remembered Socrates*
familiar spirit, with roars of laughter, marvelling how the Divinity had care
of him continually.”

One more remark. Among the most singular incidents in Socrates' life
were those pauses of immobility, frequently lasting for hours, and once, as
rcpt)rted, for a consecutive day and night, when he was inaccessible to any
outward stimulus, and remained fixed as in a deep contemplation. Medical
readers have seen that there must have been more than mere contempla-
tion hero ; and I-,61ut has treated these accesses as a kind of stupor attoni-
to— of bewildered paralysis of all intellectual operation, such as is seen in
winds overbalanced by some terrible shock. I cannot accept the parallel,
nor believe that symptoms so grave can supervene in robust health and
isappear without leaving a trace behind. Nor, again, is there ai^'thing
nch suggests epilepsy. 1 believe the accesses to have been accesses of
reached, as in some rare cases, without any previous hysterical dis-
ance ; and indicating (as I hold) a subliminal self, so powerful and

CHAPTER VIII

100

[815

so near the surface that some slight accident sufficed fo determine its tem-
porary predominance over the whole man.

But I must now leave the story of Socrates, rich in unworked psycho-
logical suggestion, but cited here only as an example of wise automatism ;
of the possibility that the messages which are conveyed to the supra-
liminal mind from subliminal strata of the personality, — whether as
sounds, as sights, or as movements, — may sometimes come from far
beneath the realm of dream and confusion, — from some self whose moni-
tions convey to us a wisdom profounder than we know.

815. The case, assuredly, is a marked one ; but it may be thought
to be too exceptional for the purpose of my argument. Socrates, it may
be said, was too strangely above ordinary men to allow us to draw wider
inferences from this unique example. It might be well if we could add a
case not complicated by such towering genius ; — a case where some one
with no previously manifested gifts of nature, with no incomprehensible
workings of the soul, had, nevertheless, by monitory voices been taught
wisdom and raised to honour, — and wdio, if so it might be, had testified
to the reality of the inward message by some witness which the world
could not gainsay. And such a case there is ; there is a figure in history
unique and marvellous, but marvellous in this point alone. One there
has been who was born with no opportunities of education, and in no
high or powerful place, but to whom voices came from childhood onwards,
and brought at length a strange command ; — one who by mere obedience
to that monitory call rose to be the saviour of a great nation ; — one to
whose lot it fell to push that obedience to its limit, and to pledge life for
truth ] to perish at the stake rather than disown those voices or disobey
that inward law.

I speak, of course, of Joan of Arc, the Maid of Orleans, the nation ii
heroine of France ; whose name crowns the poet’s list of those famous
women of old time who have vanished like the snows of yester-year.”

“ La royne blanche comme ung lys
Qui chantoit a voix de screine.
Berthe au grant pied, Bietris, Aliys,
Ifaremboures qui tint le Maync,

£t Jehaniie la bonne i/>rrainc
Qu' Anglois bruslercnt a Rouen,

Ou sont'ilz, Vierge souverainc ?
Mais oil sont les neiges d’antan ? ”

I must be excused for dwelling on this signal example ; for I believe
that only now, with the comprehension which we are gradually gaining
of the possibility of an impulse from the mind's deei)er strata which is
so far/rom madness that it is wiser than our sanity itself, — only now, I
repeat, can we understand aright that familiar story. I shall not repeat
its incidents in detail ; but shall draw my citations from the most trust-
worthy source, namely, Joan's evidence, given in 1431 , before Cauchoa,

818 ] IVfOTOR AUTOMATISM lOi

Bishop of Beauvais, ^nd the other ecclesiastics who ultimately condemned
her to be burnt alive,^ The condemnation was based on her own admis-
sions ; and the Latin proces-verbal still exists, and was published from the
MS. by M. Quicherat, 1841-9, for the French Historical Society. Joan,
like Socrates, was condemned mainly on the ground, or at least on the
pretext, of her monitory voices : and her Apology remarkably resembles
his, in its resolute insistence on the truth of the very phenomena which
were being used to destroy her. Her answers are clear and self-consistent,
and seem to have been little, if at all, distorted by the recorder. Few
pieces of history so remote as this can be so accurately known.

On the other hand, the Proces de Rehabilitation^ held some twenty
years after Joan’s death, when memories had weakened and legend had
begun to grow, is of little value as evidence. Joan’s credit must rest
entirely on that testimony on the strength of which she was condemned to
death.

Fortunately for our purpose, her inquisitors asked her many questions
as to her voices and visions \ and her answers enable us to give a pretty
fall analysis of the phenomena which concern us.

I. The voices do not begin with the summons to fight for France.
Joan heard them first at thirteen years of age, — as with Socrates also the
voice began in childhood. The first command consisted of nothing more
surprising than that ^'she was to be a good girl, and go often to church.”
After this the voice — as in the case of Socrates — intervened frequently,
ami on trivial occasions.

II. The voice was accompanied at first by a light, and sometimes
afterwards by figures of saints, who appeared to speak, and whom Joan
appears to have both seen and felt as clearly as though they had been
living persons. But here there is some obscurity ; and Michelet thinks
that on one occasion the Maid was tricked by the courtiers for political
ends. For she asserted (apparently without contradiction) that several
persons, including the Archbishop of Rheims, as well as herself, had seen
an angel bringing to the King a material crown.*

III. The voices came mainly when she was awake, but also some-
times roused her from sleep ; a phenomenon often observed in our cases
of “ veridical hallucination.” ‘‘ Ipsa dormiebat, et vox excitabat earn.”
(Quicherat, i., p. 62.)

IV. The voice was not always fully intelligible (especially if she was
half awake) \ — in this respect again resembling some of our recorded cases,
both visual and auditory, where, on the view taken in Phantasms of the

the extcrnalisation has been incomplete. “ Vox dixit aliqua, sed
non omnia intellexit.” (Quicherat, i., p. 62.)

V. The predictions of the voice, so far as stated, were mainly fuelled ;

For other authorities see Mr. Andrew Lang’s paper in Proceedings S.P.R., vol.

*• PP. 198-212, from which I quote in 815 A.

On this point, see Mr. i .ang in 815 A.

102

CHAPTER VIII

[815

viz., that the siege of Orleans would be raised ; that Charles VII. would
be crowned at Rheims ; that she herself would be wounded ; but the pre-
diction that there would be a great victory over the English within seven
years was not fulfilled in any exact way, although the English continued to
lose ground. In short, about so much was fulfilled as an ardent self-
devoted mind might have anticipated ; much indeed that might have
seemed irrational to ordinary observers, but nothing which actually needed
a definite prophetic power. Here, again, we are reminded of the general
character of the monitions of Socrates. And yet in Joan's case, more
probably than in the case of Socrates, there may have been one singular
exception to this general rule. She knew by monition that there was a
sword “ retro altare ” — somewhere behind the altar — in the Church of
St. Catherine of Fierbois. ** Scivit ipsum ibi esse per voces ” : — she sent
for it, nothing doubting, and it was found and given to her. This was
an unique incident in her career. Her judges asked whether she had not
once found a cup, and a missing priest, by help of similar monitions, but
this she denied ; and it is remarkable that no serious attempt was made
either to show that she had claimed this clairvoyant power habitually, or,
on the other hand, to invalidate the one instance of it which she did in
effect claim. It would be absurd to cite the alleged discovery of the
sword as in itself affording a proof of clairvoyance, any more than Socrates’
alleged intimation of the approaching herd of swine. But when we are con-
sidering monitions given in more recent times it will be well to remember
that it is in this direction that some supernormal extension of knowledge
seems J possibly traceable.

And, lastly, it must be observed that among all the messages thus
given to Joan of Arc, there does not seem to have been one which felt
short of the purest heroism. They were such commands as were best
suited to draw forth from her who heard them the extreme of force,
ligence, virtue, of which she had the potency at her birth. What better
can we desire as the guide of life ?

We need not assume that the voices which she heard were the offspring
of any mind but her own, any more than we need assume that the figures
in which her brave and pious impulses sometimes took external form were
veritable saints, — the crowned St. Margaret and the crowned St. Catherine
and Michael in the armoury of Heaven.

Yet, on the other hand, we have no right to class Joan's monitions,
any more than those of Socrates, as an incipient madness. To be sane,
after all, is to be arljusted to our environment, to be capable of coping
with the facts around us. Tried by this test, it is Socrates and Joan who
should be our types of sanity ; their difference from ourselves lying rather
in the^fact that they were better able to employ their own whole being,
and received a clearer inspiration from the monitory soul within.

I have dwelt at some length on these two cases, far more remote in
date than those to which it is our custom to appeal*. But this has been

IVffOTOR AUTOMATISM

103

817]

because 1 held it essential to make my reader understand that the grotesque
and trivial messages or monitions, with which in this inquiry we habitually
deal, are not to be taken as covering the whole field of automatic action.
Before we proceed to consider the question as to the action of minds
external to the automatist's own, we ought at any rate to recognise that
words given in these strange ways may in themselves be worth hearing, —
that not the mechanism only but the content of automatic messages may
sometimes deserve our close and serious attention.

816. The cases of Socrates and of Joan of Arc, on which I have just
dwelt, might (as I have said) with almost equal fitness have been introduced
at certain other points of my discussion. At first sight, at any rate, they
appear rather like sensory than like motor automatisms, — like hallucina-
tions of hearing rather than like the motor impulses which we are now
about to study. Each case, however, approaches motor automatism in a
special way.

In the case of Socrates the “sign** seems to have been not so much
a definite voice as a sense of inhibition. In the case of Joan of Arc the
voices were definite enough, but they were accompanied — as such voices
sometimes are, but sometimes are not — ^with an overmastering impulse to
act in obedience to them. These are, I may say, palmary cases of in-
hibition and of impulse : and inhibition and impulse are at the very root
of motor phenomena.

If to this quality we add their historical priority and their intrinsic
dignity, ennobling in advance the series of petty incidents of similar type
with which we must soon deal, I think that sufficient reason may have
been given for the position assigned to them. P'urthermorc, and partly
by reason of that very dignity, they show at once the furthest extent of
the claim that can be made for the agency of the subliminal self, apart
from any external influence, — apart from telepathy from the living, or
possession by the departed.

Each of those other hypotheses will claim its own group of cases ; but
we must not invoke them until the resources of subliminal wisdom are
manifestly overtaxed.

817. These two famous cases, then, have launched us on our sub-
ject in the stress of a twofold difficulty in logical arrangement. We
cannot always answer these primary questions, Is the subliminal impulse
sensory or motor? is it originated in the automatist’s own mind, or in
some mind external to him?

In the first place, we must reflect that, if the subliminal self really pos-
sesses that profound power over the organism with whicli I have credited
h, we may expect that its “ messages " will sometimes express themselves
hi the form of deep organic modifications— of changes in the vaso-rnotor,
die circulatory, the respiratory systems. Such phenomena are likcSy to be
noted or remembered as coincidentaf, from their very indefiniteness,

compared, for instance, with a phantasmal appearance ; but we have

104 CHAPTER VIII » [818

records of various telepathic cases of deep ccenesthqtic disturbance, of a
profound malaise which must, one would think, have involved some unusud
condition of the viscera. In Gurney’s collection of “ emotional and motor
effects ” {Phantasms of the Livings vol. i. chap, vii.), we find such phrases
as ** a cloud of calamity which was almost a physical feeling,” deep de-
pression,” a dreadful feeling of illness and faintness, and I felt that I was
dying,” dreadful trembling]with prostration,” trembling, with no apparent
cause whatever,” “ conviction that I should die that night,” and so forth.
And we have, moreover, the definite vaso-raotor phenomenon of sudden
weepings which in one case {op, cit.^ p. 275 ) is described as “hysterics ”
by a lady who “ never experienced a similar feeling.” This attack cor-
responded exactly with the sudden death of a father at a distance. We
must hardly press her phrase as implying more than a sudden, uncon-
trollable unmotived fit of weeping, though it would, of course, be specially
interesting if we could find definite hysterical symptoms originated by a
telepathic shock. Another informant (p. 277 ) speaks of an “ extraordi-
nary state of depression and restlessness ; . . . a violent fit of weeping, a
thing absolutely alien to my character,” as coinciding with the sudden
illness and delirium of a distant husband.

In other cases, too, where the telepathic impression has ultimately
assumed a definite sensory form, as in the narratives included in ChajUers
VI, and VIL, some organic or emotional phenomena have been noted,
being perhaps the first effects of the telepathic impact, whether from the
living or from the dead. In the case of Dr. N., for instance, which I give
in 817 A, we have first an emotion, then a sense of locality, and lastly,
an identification with a particular person.

I follow this case with Appendices 817 B and C containing two cases
(Mrs. Hadselle’s) where the motor effect produced was the important part
of the experience, but which show in intimate connection general malaise,
motor impulse, and auditory hallucination. And I add, in 817 D, an
experience of I^dy de Vesci’s, who described to me in conversation a
similar malaise, defining itself into the urgent need of definite action—
namely, the despatch of a telegram to a friend who was in fact then dying
at the other side of the world. Such an impulse had one only parallel in
her experience, which also was telepathic in a similar way.

Similar sensory disturbances are sometimes reported in connection
with an important form of motor automatism, — that of “dowsing” or
discovering water by means of the movement of a rod held in the hands
of the automatist, — already treated of in vol. i., 641 A and B.

818. A small group of cases may naturally be mentioned here.
From two different points of view they stand for the most part at the
entrance of our subject. I speak of motor inhibitions, prompted at first
by sublftninal memory, or by subliminal hypersesthesia, but merging into
telsesthesia or telepathy. Inhibitions — sudden arrests or incapacities of
action— (more or less of the Socratic type) — form a simple, almost nidi-

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

105

819]

mentary, type of jnotor automatisms. And an inhibition — a sudden
check on action of this kind — ^will be a natural way in which a strong but
obscure impression will work itself o\it. Such an impression, for instance,
is that of alarm, suggested by some vague sound or odour which is only
siibliminally perceived. And thus in this series of motor automatisms,
just as in our series of dreams, or in our scries of sensory automatisms, we
shall find ourselves beginning with cases where the subliminal self merely
shows some slight extension of memory or of sensory perception, — and
shall thence pass insensibly to cases where no cryptomnesia ” will explain
the facts known in the past, and no hypersesthesia will explain the facts
discerned in the present.

I will begin with a form of inhibition parallel in its triviality to the pin-
finding or muscle-reading experiments already mentioned. We may most
of us have observed that if we perform any small action to which there are
objections, which we have once known but which have altogether passed
from our minds, we are apt to perform it in a hesitating, inefficient way.
'rhe observer whose account I subjoin in 818 A — a lady specially
susceptible to subliminal impressions, and specially prompt in self-
analysis (Mrs. Verrall) — has observed that the existence of a forgotten
memory (so to term it) may actually neutralise purposive muscular
adjustments.

Parallel to this trivial case of inability to grasp an unneeded envelope
is a case of sudden check from throwing into the fire a bundle of bank-
notes mistaken for useless papers (818 B).

819. Trivial, again, yet so promptly obsen'ed that its very triviality
has significance, is the following experience of sudden inhibition mixed
with corresponding impulse — the walk unconsciously arrested, the eyes
bent on the ground for a reason not at first comprehended by the supra-
liminal self. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol, xi. p. 415.)

Leckhampi'on House, Cambridge,
September 14M, 1895 .

Yesterday morning (September 13th, 1895), just after breakfast, I was
strolling alone along one of the garden paths of Leckhampton House, repeating
aloud to myself the verses of a poem. I became temporarily oblivious to my
giirilen surroundings, and regained my consciousness of them suddenly to find
u'yself brought to a stand, in a stooping position, gazing intently at a five-
leaved clover. On careful examination I found about a dozen specimens of
five-leaved clover as well as several specimens of four-leaved clover, all of
which probably came from the same root. Several years ago I was interested
getting extra-leaved clovers, but 1 have not for years made any active search
for them, though occasionally my conscious attention, as I walked along, has
)een given to appearances of four-leaved clover which proved on examination
to be deceptive. The peculiarity of yesterday’s “ find ” was that I diyovered
^yself, with a sort of shock, standing still and stooping down, and afterwards
ualised that a five-leaved clover was directly under my eyes. I plucked some
^ the specimens, and showed them at once to Mr. and Mrs. Myers, and

io6

CHAPTER VIII *

[820

explained how I had happened to find them. Clover f plants were thickly
clustered in the neighbourhood, but I failed on looking to find any other speci-
mens. The incident naturally suggests the arresting of my subliminal attention.

- R. Hodgson.

Compare with this Dr. Guebhard’s case (see 819 A) of sudden per-
ception of a bifid fern, where the careless sweep of the eye seems to have
been arrested by a similar subliminal call.

820. Similarly there are cases where some sudden muscular impulse
or inhibition has probably depended on a subliminal perception or inter-
pretation of a sound which had not reached the supraliminal attention. For
instance, two friends walking together along a street in a storm just evade
by sudden movements a falling mass of masonry. Each thinks that he
has received some monition of the till ; each asserting that he heard no
noise whatever to warn him. Here is an instance where subliminal per-
ception may have been slightly quicker and more delicate than supra-
liminal ; and may have warned them just in time.

In the next case' (quoted from Proceeding's S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 416 )
there may have been some subliminal hypenesthesia of hearing which dimly
warned Mr. Wyman of the approach of the extra train.

Mr. Wm. H. Wyman writes to the Editor of the Arena as follows ; —

Dunkirk, N.Y., /ttne zCtA, 1S91.

Some years ago my brother was employed and bad charge as conductor
and engineer of a working train on the Lake Shore and Michigan Southern
Railway, running between Buffalo and Erie, which passes througli thi.s city
(Dunkirk, N.Y.). I often went with him to the Grave Bank, where he had his
headquarters, and returned on his train with him. On one occa.sion I was with
him, and after the train of cars was loaded, we went together to the telegrapl*
office to see if there were any orders, and to find out if the trains were on limt:,
as he had to keep out of the way of all regular trains. After looking over iIji:
train reports and finding lliem all on lime, we started for Buffalo. .As wc
approached near Westfield Station, running about I 3 miles per hour, and when
within about one mile of a long curve in the line, rny brother all of a suddfu
shut off the .steam, and quickly stepping over to the fireman’s side of the eiigiiu*,
he looked out of the cab window, and then to the rear of his train to .see ii
there was anything the matter with either. Not discovering anything wrong,
he stopped and put on steam, but almost immediately again .shut it off and gave
the signal for breaks and stopped. After inspecting the engine and train
and finding nothing wrong, he seemed very' much excited, and for a .short
time be acted as if he did not know where he was or what to do. I asked
what was the matter. He replied that he did not know, when, after looking at
his watch and orders, he said that he felt that there was some trouble on the
line of the road. I suggested that he had better run his train to the station
and find out. He then ordered his flagman with his flag to go ahead around
the curve, which was just ahead of us, and he would follow with the train. The

' For a .somewhat similar case. pos.sibly due to hypermsihesia of hearing, see
American Journal of Psychology^ vol. iii. p. 435 (September 1890).

821] IvfOTOR AUTOMATISM 107

fiaf^man started and<had just time to flag an extra express train, with the
General Superintendent and others on board, coming full forty miles per
hour. The Superintendent inquired what he was doing there, and if he did
not receive orders to keep out of the way of the extra. My brother told him
that he had not received orders and did not know of any extra train coming ;
that we had both examined the train reports before leaving the station. The
train then backed to the station, where it was found that no orders had been
given. The train despatcher was at once discharged from the road, and from
that time to this both my brother and myself are unable to account for his
stopping the train as he did. I consider it quite a mystery, and cannot give or
find any intelligent reason for it. Can you suggest any ?

The above is true and correct in every particular.

In subsequent letters to Dr. Hodgson Mr. Wyman writes : —

My brother died some three years ago.

The incident occurred about the year 1873.

I was not connected with the road or train at the time ; I was employed on
the New York, Lake Erie, and Western R. R., at Dunkirk. The flagman is
now, or was a .short time ago, living in Denver, Colorado; his statement can
be oi)tained if desirable.

The Superintendent died in Germany about two years ago.

In a subsequent letter Mr. Wyman adds : I traced Mr. James Con-
way [the flagman] to Colorado, and learned from his son that he died
March 16, 1888. [Letter sent herewith.]**

Mrs. Wyman, widow of the percipient, writes : —

Jersey September 16, 1893.

Mr. Hodgson, — Sir,— I 'received your letter asking me for statements
in regard to Mr. Wyman \s experience. 1 don’t think I could tell any of the
circumstances. I only recollect bearing him .say he was singularly and deeply
impressed that something was wrong, and he obeyed the impulse and stopped
the train just in season of time to prevent an accident, and it left a deep im-
pression on his mind ever after, as he often spoke of it and wondered why and
what it was. — Yours respectfully, L. A. Wyman.

821 . Here, again, is an averted railway accident, where smell may
possibly have played some part.

(From Proceeding's S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 419.) The following letter was
received by Dr. Hodgson in confirmation of an account in a newspaper,
concordant with Mr. Stewarl*s account given later.

Baltimore and Ohio Railroad Company,
Aur^tst 14, 1S93, Garrei't, Fnd.

\ours of August loth received. Must say, the .story as printed in many
0 the newspapers of our country, regarding the train being saved by a pre-
monition, or warning, given me, was true as printed. The fireman I then had,
smee became an engineer, and was killed in an accident on a railroad in Iowa
^wo years since. The conductor who was with me at the time you refer to is
unning passenger train on the Mackinaw road. I do not know his address.

io8 CHAPTER VIII ‘ [822

but his father, a minister of the gospel, and his brother,* Dr. Charles Stewart,
are residents of this city. A letter addressed to Mr. Joseph Stewart, care of
Dr. Charles Stewart, Garrett, Ind., would reach my conductor.

Yes, sir, I have had an experience of similar nature since the occurrence
you refer to. Had a warning from the same source, and by obeying it I saved
what otherwise, without obeying the vrarning, must have been a most dreadful
accident, and must have resulted in the entire destruction of my train, with the
lives of many, if not all the persons on board. 1 am not a Spiritualist, do not
believe in so-called Spiritualism, but do believe that the living are often visited,
often warned of danger, and often comforted in times of atHiction, by the spirits
of departed loved ones- ... C. W. Moses.

Batfle Creek, Mich., August 2$, 1S93.

Richard Hodgson, Esq.,— Dear Sir, —Y our request received, and will,
as far as memory serves, give a correct statement as to the incident referred to.

Train No. 2 of the B. and O. R. R., due in Chicago at 6.20 a.m., Sunday,
in the month of August 1883 (have forgotten exact date), was on time, running
at about thirty-live miles an hour. On approaching Salt Creek Trestle Work,
about forty miles east of Chicago, the engineer, Mr. C. W. Moses, felt that
.something that he could not define compelled him to stop before attempting
to cross over. He applied the air and came to a full stop at the approach. I
occupied front seat in smoker, it being the second car from engine. The time
was about 4.30 a.m. I immediately went forward and joined the engineer
where we found thirty feet of the woodwork burned, the rails being held to
place by charred stringers. We went across, by climbing down and up the
bank on the other side, and woke up the watchman who was employed to
look after the bridge, who, on seeing us and the condition of things in general,
took to his heels and is running still, as far as I know. I would say that in
more than a score of years engaged in railroad work, that was the most
narrow escape I ever experienced ; for undoubtedly, with a fall of thirty feet
and the length of over a hundred, we would not only have been disabled, but
burned.

Now you especially ask as to what impelled Mr. Moses in his action.
He only stated to me at the time that something e.specially pressing on him
told him he .should stop, and he acted on the impulse. There had been fire.s
all along the side of track at other points, but he paid no attention to
them.

In conclusion, I see some newspaper man got hold of the incident as late
as last June, and attempted to make Mr. Moses say that the spirit of a sainted
mother took hold of him. Well, Mr. Moses is an upright and truthful, old,
reliable engineer, and owing to his gp'eat advance in years at this late dale
may have intimated as much, but nothing was said about the old lady at the
time ; that 1 vouch for. . . .

I. J. Stewart, Conductor C. J. and M. R. R*
[Formerly of the B. and O. R. R«]

In smother case again (given in 821 A) some subliminal sense of
smell may be conjectured.

822. In the next case (it comes from a good observer) some warning
may have been received from the closer smell of slimy water ; — or perhaps

lyfOTOR AUTOMATISM

109

from a vague differerice in the look of the darkness, or even in the resist-
ance of the air. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 422,)

5144 Madison Avenue, Hyde Park, Chicago.

October 1892.

Dr. Hodgson,— -Dear Sir,— I send you an account of an Incident in
vvliicli, I think, my life was saved by my obedience to an impulse arising from
nothing within my conscious knowledge or perception.

Some years ago, I landed in Stillwater, Minn., from a steamboat on which
1 had come down the St. Croix River. The boat was a small, local affair, and no
conveyances came to meet it. I was, 1 believe, the only passenger on board
when \\c reached Stillwater, and there I was left to make my way alone to the
hotel. We landed at about 9 p.m. of a starle.ss night, and in the shadow of a
warehouse which cut off the lights of the town ; the hour, the clouded sky, and
the shadow of the >varehouse, uniting to make the dock extremely dark.

I had been in Stillwater once before, and had a general idea of the topo-
grapliy of the town, although some years had passed since my previous visit,
and l am quite certain that I had never pa.s$ed over this particular locality.

As T left the boat I saw the lights of the bridge at some distance on my
left, and knowing the bridge to be at the foot of the principal street, on which
stood the hotel where I intended to put up, I naturally commenced to walk along
the dock in that direction. I had gone but a very short distance, when I sud-
denly felt so strong an impulse to turn and go the other way that I instantly
obeyed. I saw nothing, heard nothing; I did not even have an impression 01
danger, though 1 did have a feeling that it must be in someway better to turn.

I distinctly remember that my rea.son protested, and berated me for a fool
in taking a roundabout way to my destination when the straight way lay before
me, with the added prospect of losing myself in the railway yards, with perhaps
a ton feet fence to climb, I laughed aloud, and articulated, or at least, mentally
formed the words, You fool ! What are you doing this for?” However, my
impulse proved stronger than my reason. I persisted in “ going round Robin
Hood’s barn,” reached my hotel, and there the matter passed from my mind.

The next day I casually came to llie same place, and discovered that I had
turned within a few feet of a spot where the dock was cut away into an incline
for hauling freight up into the warehouse. This incline was so .steep that a per-
son could iiave kept his fooling on it only by great care. If I had unexpectedly
.steppL’d down on to it in the darkness, I should certainly have lost my footing,
and should have slipped into the river ; and as I am but a feeble swimmer under
the most favourable circumstances, and was encumbered with a fall overcoat
and a rather heavy satchel, I should just as certainly liave been drowned.

The value of the incident lies in the fact, for which you must take my word,
that I am not an impulsive and changeable person, but rather logical and per-
sistent. My action was entirely contrary to my nature, and the unavailing pro-
test of my reason against what appeared to me an inconsequent and absurd
proceeding convinces me either that 1 was influenced by some intelligence
entirely without, or that my “ Subliminal Self” perceived and acted upon what
ttty “ Supraliminal Self” could not see.

1 have never had any other supernormal experiences. *

Marshall Wait,

no

CHAPTER VIII

[823

823. Tactile sensibility, again, must be carefully allowed for. The
sense of var>’ing resistance in the air, to which I just now alluded, may
reach in some seeing persons, as well as in the blind, a high degree of
acuteness. It is perhaps possible that even the interposition of a chair in
a narrow passage might thus make itself felt. But Mr. W. (a good witness
and well .known to Dr. Hodgson) has had (as we shall see later on in
873) Other experiences where supernormal influences seemed plainly
indicated. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 423 .)

State of New York, December 28///, 1S93.

Dr. Hodgson,— Dear Sir,— In compliance with your request to write
out an account of my chair experience, which I described to you when here, 1
submit the following : —

My office consists of three rooms, and the library in the back one is
reached by passing through the full length of the other two. The middle room
is rather narrow, and well filled on both sides with furniture, leaving a rather
narrow passage through the room lengthwise, particularly at a point about tlic
middle of the room, where the passage is only three feet wide. 'I'lds passage
was very naturally kept free from obstruction .s, but on the occasion of which I
am about to speak, some one, probably the janitor when he came in to sec to
the fires soon after the office was closed for the day, had placed a chair in this
narrow passage, so that any one who should attempt to pass through the room
would be certain to fall over it, if dark. I think it was about the last days of
December 1892. I recollect the days were very short. 1 had left the office fur
the day with the passage free. Ivi.sit the office occasionally evenings, but mu
often. On this occasion <luring the evening, when it was very dark, 1 visited
the office alone. I unlocked the outside door, walked through the first roon),
stopping at the door that leads to the second or middle room, to get a match
from the safe hanging on the door casing with which to light a lamp in tiic
library, where I wished to get something, I was in a very great hurry, and
walked very rapidly; after taking the match from the safe, I started at a very
rapid pace to go through this narrow passage and into the library. It was very
dark, none of the objects in the room were visible, but .as I was very familiar
with the place, I did not hesitate. I had proceeded six or eight feet in tliLs
rapid manner, when suddenly I saw a bright, yellow light lighting up very
plainly the back of the chair which was in the pa.ssage. The liglit was confined
to the chair, and at the same time I stopped short. The stopping was quite
involuntary on my part. The light lasted for but a second, but it had showed
me the chair distinctly, especially the carving on the back of the chair.

Immediately it occurred to me to discover the origin of the light, if
possible, so, before proceeding to get a light or to leave the room, I approached
the chair again in a similar manner, but no light appeared, and I cxpericnctd
no check. I also looked very carefully for the origin of the light, but could
discover none. There was no light anywhere near, and even had there been, 1
am at a loss to sec how it could have shone into the centre of this room, and
the difficulty is still further increa.sed by the fact that it shone only in one place,
and even there the light was of a somewhat different colour and appearance
from ordinary artificial light.

After satisfying myself that there was no light anywhere that could have
produced it, 1 went into the library and got a lamp and made an examination*

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

III

m]

The chair was in the passage in the most dangerous part; otherwise the room
viras in its usual condition. 1 should also state that at one end of this room
there was a coal stove, with a fire in it of hard coal. It was burning very low,
and was ashed over. I examined it before I got a lamp, and 1 am confident
that no light of any kind proceeded from it.

As to my sudden stop. The stop and the light were simultaneous. I
hardly think the light unaided caused me to stop; it undoubtedly prevented
me from starting after 1 had stopped. 1 fully believe I should have sustained
a heavy fall, but for the light and the stop. W.

p.S . — When I mention that the colour of the light appeared different, I
mean that it did not look as a light reflected from or shining from a distance
on to a spot woukl — // was more like looking directly at a light.

See also a case given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 345 , where a
lady hurrying up to the door of a lift, is stopped by seeing the figure of a
man standing in front of it, and then finds that the door is open, leaving
tlie well exposed, so that she would probably have fallen down it, if she
had not been checked by the apparition.

824. And now 1 give a case of sudden motor inhibition where no
^\arning can well have been received from hyperaesthetic sensation. We
have come, it seems, to tclaesthesia or to spirit guardianship.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 459.)

Four years ago, I made arrangements with my nephew, John W. J’arsons,
to go to my office after supper to investigate a case. We walked along to-
gelhcr, both fully determined to go up into the office, but just as I stepped
upon the door sill of the drug store, in which my office was situated, some
invisible influence stopped me instantly. I was much surprised, felt like I was
almost dazed, the influence was so strong, almost like a blow, I felt like I could
not make another step. I said to my nephew, “John, I do not foci like going
Into the office now; you go and read Flint and Aitken on the subject.” lie
went, lighted the lamp, took off his hat, .and just as he was reaching for a book
the report of a large pistol was heard. The ball entered the window near
where he was standing, passed near to and over his head, struck the wall and
fell to the floor. Had I been standing where he was, I would have been killed,
as f am much taller than lie. The pistol was fired by a man who had an old
grudge against me, and had secreted himself in a vacant house near by to
assassinate me.

'riiis impression was unlike any that I ever had before. All my former
impressions were slow in their development, grew stronger and stronger, until
the maximum was reached. 1 did not feel that I was in any danger, and could

understand what the strong impression meant. The fellow was drunk, had
been drinking for two weeks. If my system had been in a different condition —
1 had just eaten supper — I think I would have received along with the im-
pression some knowledge of the character of the danger, and would have pre-
vented my nephew from going into the office.

I am fully satisfied that the invisible and unknown intelligence did the
est that could have been done, under the circumstances, to save us fr^m harm.

. D. J. Paksons, M.D., Sweet Springs, Mo.

(The above account was received in a letter from Dr. D. J. Parsons, dated
^fccember 15 M, 1 S 91 .)

112

CHAPTER VIII

[825

Statement of Dr. J. W. Parsons. '

About four years ago my uncle, Dr. D. J. Parsons, and I were going to
supper, when a man halted us and expressed a desire for medical advice. My
uncle requested him to call the next morning, and as we walked along he said
the case was a bad one and that we would come back after supper and go to
the office and examine the authorities on the subject. After supper we returned,
walked along together on our way to the office, but just as we reached the door
of the drug store he very une.xpectedly, to me, stopped suddenly, which caused
me to stop too ; we stood there together a few seconds, and he remarked to me
that he did not feel like going into the office then, or words to that effect, and
told me to go and examine Flint and Aitken. I went, lit the lamp, and just as
I was getting a book, a pistol was tired into the office, the ball passing close to
my head, struck the east wall, then the north, and fell to the floor.

This 5th day of July, 1891.

John W. Parsons [Ladonia, Texas],

825. In the next group of cases which I shall cite, we reach a class
of massive motor impulses which are almost entirely free from any sensory
admixture.

In the first of these, Mr. Garrison left a religious meeting in the
evening, and walked eighteen miles under the strong impulse to sec his
mother, and found her dead. The account is taken from the Journal
S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 125.

Mr. Garrison writes : —

Gardner & Garrison, Dealers in Fancy and Family Ciroceries.

OzAKK, Mo.,y«^ 29^//, 1896.

Mr. Richard Hodgson,— Dear Sir,— Answering your letter of July
15th in regard to my e-\perience connected witli the death of my mother, I will
make the following statement. My mother, Nancy J. (iarrison, died on Friday
night, October 4th, 1888, at her home three miles north-east of Ozark, Chris-
tian County, Missouri. She was fifty-eight years old. I was then living at
Fordland, in Webster County, Missouri, about eighteen miles north-east of my
mother’s home. I had not seen my mother for two months at the time of her
death, but had heard from [lier] by letter from week to week.

On the night of my mother’s death thefc was a meeting in Fordland, and
myself and wife attended the preaching. We had then one child, a baby a
year old. The meetings had been going on a week or more. About ten
o’clock, just before the meeting closed, while the congregation was singing,
I felt the first desire to see my mother. The thought of my mother was
suggested by the sight of some of the penitents at the altar, who were very
warm and sweating. My mother was subject to smothering spells, and while
suffering from these attacks she would perspire freely and we had to fan her.
In the faces of the mourners I sec^, 2d to see my mother’s suffering. And then
the impulse to go to her became so strong that I gave the baby to a neighbour-
woman tnd left the church without telling my wife. She was in another part
of the house.

The train going west which would have taken me [to] Rogersville, seven
miles of the distance to my mother’s place, was due at 10.30 P.M., but before

825 ] m6tOR automatism 113

1 got home and changfcd my clothes and returned to the depot, the cars had
It'ft the station. I still felt that I must see my mother, and started down the
railroad track alone, and walked to Rogersville. Here I left the railroad and
walked down the waggon way leading from Marslifield to Ozark, Mo. It was
about three o’clock a.m. when I reached my mother’s house. I knocked at the
door two or three times and got no response. Then I kicked the door, but
still made no one hear me. At last I opened the door with my knife and
walked in and lighted a lamp. Then my sister, Mrs. Billie Gilley, the only
person who had been living with my mother, awoke, and I asked her where
mother wa.s. She replied that she was in bed, and I said, “ She is dead,” for by
that time I felt that she could not be alive. She had never failed to wake before
when I had entered the room at night.

I went to my mother’s bed and put my hand on her forehead. It was cold.
She had been dead about three hours, the neighbours thought, from the con-
dition of lier body. She had gone to bed about ten o’clock at night, feeling better
than usual. She anrl my sister had talked awhile after going to bed. They
were aiming to come to Ozark the next morning, and intended to get up early.

TIk- above facts cover ray experience as fully as I can tell the story. I
have no explanation for the matter. It is as much a mystery to me now as
ever. I could not believe such a strange affair if told by any one else, and yet
I could swear to every fact stated. . . . Thomas B. Garri.sox.

Ozark, Mo., 17M, 1S96.

Mr. Richard Hodoson, — Dear Sir, — I send you a statement made by
my wife about the death of my mother. . . .

I have not yet been able to get my .sister’s statement. She lives a few miles
out 01 town. I will get her to tell about the death of mother and my coming
home til at night when I see her.

After nnding that mother was dead I went to three neighbour families right
away :ind had the women come and stay with us till morning. Mrs. Green,
Mrs. Walker, and Mrs. Gardner wrere the women who first heard of mother’s
death from me. 'fhey still live in that neighbourliood, and would confirm my
story so far as it relates to my coming to my mother’s that night and finding
her (lead.

Would you like a statement from the.se women ? I shall be glad to give you
all the facts connected with the strange occurrence, for it has been to me a
mystery of the greatest perplexity. ... T. B. Garrison.

Corroborative statements are aA follows: —

Ozark, Mo., August 12M, 1896.

Richard Hodgson, — Dear Sir, — We received your letter asking for a
statement from me in regard to the death of my husband’s mother.

I remember the occurrence just as my husband has written it. I was very
much surprised to find him gone from the church, and more so when I got
home to hear he had started seventeen miles after night without saying a word
lo me, as he never left home even for a few hours without telling me where he
was going. My mother (Mrs. Butcher) was at the house. When he started he
e t word with her telling me he had gone to see his mother, but I could 4iardly
Relieve it, it being sucli a strange time to start such a distance. He did not
^‘ty anything about going to any one except my mother. He has always said
e telt as if he must go. . . . Minnie Garui.son.

VOL. IT.

CHAPTER VIII

1 14

[825

Ozark, Mo., September 14M, 1S96.

Mr. R. Hodgson,— Hearing that you were trying to find out the particulars
about the remarkable circumstance of Mr. Garrison’s experience about the time
of his mother’s death, I decided to write to you. I was living about 150 yards
from Mrs, Garrison at the time, and Mr. Garrison came to our house between
three and four that morning to tell us of his mother’s death, and we learned the
matter then just as it was printed in the newspaper. . . .

Mrs. C. C. Green.

Ozark, Mo., September 16M, 1S96.

... I was living with my son-in-law, Thomas B. Garrison, at the time of
his mother’s death on October 3rd, 188S.

Garrison and his wife went to church in Fordland, Mo., and I remained at
home. About ten o’clock that night T. B. Garrison returned home and said
“ Ma^ I have took a notion to go home, in Christian Co., and see mother.” I
was surprised at his starting at that hour of the night. 1 asked him where
Minnie was. He said she was at church, and he told me to tell his wife where
he was gone when she returned. The above is true. . . .

Elvira Butcher.

In another case, that of Major Kobbd (given in Phantasms of the
Living, vol. i. p. 288), the percipient was prompted to visit a distant
cemetery, without any conscious reason, and there found his father, who
had, in fact, for certain unexpected reasons, sent to his son, Major Kobbd,
a request (accidentally not received) to meet him at that place and hour.

In a third case, Mr. Skirving (see 825 A) was irresistibly compelled to
leave his work and go home — ufhy\ he knew not — at the moment when his
wife was in fact calling for him in the distress of a serious accident. See
also a case given in Phantasms of the Living, vol. ii, p. 377, where a brick-
layer has a sudden impulse to run home, and arrives just in time to save
the life of his little boy, who had set himself on fire.

This special sensibility to the motor element in an impulse recalls to us
the special susceptibilities to different forms of hallucination or suggestion
shown by different hypnotic subjects. Some can be made to see, some to
hear, some to act out the conception proposed to them. Dr. B^rillon ‘ has
even shown that certain subjects whofseem at first quite refractory to
hypnotisation are nevertheless at once obedient, even in the waking state,
to a motor suggestion. This was the case both with a very strong man,
with weak men and women, and with at least one subject actually suffering
from locomotor ataxy. Thus the loss of supraliminal motor control over
certain muscular combinations may actually lead to motor suggestibility
as regards those combinations ; just as the loss of supraliminal sensation
in some anaesthetic patch may lead to a special subliminal sensitiveness in
the very directions where the superficial sensibility has sunk away. On
tHe ofcer hand, a specially well-developed motor control may predispose
in a similar way ; — as for instance, the subject who can sing already is

1 Revue de PHypnothme, March 1893, p. 268.

g25] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 115

more easBy made tt) sing by suggestion. We must, then, await further
observations before we can pretend to say beforehand with which auto-
matist the messages will take a sensory, and with which a motor form.

Still less can we explain the special predisposition of each experimenter
to one or more of the common kinds of motor automatism — as automatic
speech, automatic writing, table movements, raps, and so forth. These
fpjips of messages may themselves be variously combined ; and the con-
tents of a message of any one of these kinds may be purely dream-like and
fantastic, or may be veridical in various ways.

l^et us enumerate the modes of subliminal motor message as nearly as
wc can in order of their increasing specialisation.

1. We may place first the massive motor impulses (like Mr. Garrison's)
which mark a kind of transition between coenesthetic affections and
motor impulses proper. There was here no impulse to special movement
of any limb ; but an impulse to reach a certain place by ordinary methods.

2. Next, perhaps, in order of specialisation come the simple subliminal
muscular impulses which give rise to table-tilting and similar phenomena.

3. Musical execution, subliminally initiated, might theoretically be
placed next ; although definite evidence of this is hard to obtain, since
the threshold of consciousness with musical performers is notoriously apt
to be shifting and indefinite. ('* When in doubt, play with your fingers,
and not with your head.*’)

4. Next we may place automatic drawing and painting. This curious
group of messages has but seldom a telepathic content, and, as was sug-
gested in Chapter III. ( 324 ), is more akin to genius and similar non-
telepathic forms of subliminal faculty.'

5. Next comes automatic writing, on which much remains to be said
in this chapter.

6. Automatic speech^ which would not seem to be per se. a more de-
veloped form of motor message than automatic script, is often accom-
panied by profound changes of memory or of personality which raise the
question of “ inspiration ” or possession ” ; — for the two words, however
fiifferent their theological import, mean much the same thing from the
standpoint of experimental psychology.

7* I must conclude my list with a class of motor phenomena which I
shall here merely record in passing, without attempting any explanation.
1 allude to raps, and to those telekinetic movements of objects whose real
existence is still matter of controversy.

Comparing this list of motor automatisms with the sensory automatisms
enumerated in Chapter VI., we shall find a certain general tendency running

th * automatic drawings have any telepathic or other supernormal content,

associated with automatic writing. Compare the case of Mr. Cameron
1 1 experience of Mr. Stainton Moses, that connected

^oll j Abercromby '* (see 949), and the case of the man crushed by a steam-

CHAPTER VIII

ii6

through each alike. The sensory automatisms began with vague un-
specialised sensations. They then passed through a phase of definition,
of specialisation on the lines of the known senses. And finally they
reached a stage beyond these habitual forms of specialisation: beyond
them, as of wider reach, and including in an apparently unanalysable act
of perception a completer truth than any of our specialised forms of per-
ception could by itself convey. With motor messages, too, we begin with
something of similar vagueness. They, too, develop from modifications of
the percipient*s general organic condition, or coenesthesia ; and the first
dim telepathic impulse apparently hesitates between several channels of
expression. They then pass through various definitely specialised forms ;
and finally, as we shall see when automatic script is considered, they, too,
merge into an unanalysable act of cognition in which the motor element of
the message has disappeared.

But these motor messages point also in two other even more perplex
ing directions. They lead, as I have said above, towards the old idea of
possession ; — using the word no longer in an unfavourable sense, but simply
as an expression for some form of temporary manifestation of some veritably
distinct and alien personality through the physical organism of some living
man or woman. And they appear to lead also to another class of
phenomena in which (just as in possession”) the influence at work,
instead of becoming more and more identified with the autoniatist’s con-
scious thought, appears to become more and more markedly distinguished
from it. 1 allude to telekinesis^ or hyperboulia^ or whatever name we may
decide to give to effects apparently exercised in the automatist’s presence,
but not through his normal agency, upon the physical world.

These two last-named topics, so-called “ possession,” and so-called
telekinetic phenomena,” although unavoidably mentioned liere, must bo
reserved for fuller description in my next chapter. It will be enough
for the present to consider motor messages as running parallel to sensory
messages ; — as covering much the same ground, and presenting the olvl
problems as to their source and initiation in an instructively different light.

826. The subject of automatic writing, to which our argument next
leads us, is a creation of the last few decades, and is at present in so
rapidly developing a condition that it is not easy to know at what stage of
proof or explanation it is here best to begin. In calling the subject novel
I do not indeed mean to deny that this and similar practices are traceable
in many lands and in remote antiquity. But among civilised men, in
Europe and America, the phenomenon came first into notice as an
element in so-called modern spiritualism,” about the middle of the
nineteenth century. It then remained for another generation a kind of
"plaything or drawing-room amusement ; — planchette being called upon for
answers to such questions as «VVhat young lady am I thinking of?”
*‘What horse is going to win the Derby?”

It was in the United States that these sporadic messages were first

826 ] IvJoTOR AUTOMATISM 117

developed and systematised. Through the unlettered mind of Andrew Jack-
son Davis a kind of system of philosophy was given. Through Judge
i :dmonds many messages of serious import were given, although, as recorded,
they contain little evidence to the agency of an external intelligence.
The Healing of the Nations was another work of the same general type,
liut the automatic writings of W. Stainton Moses — about 1870-80 — were
perhaps the first continuous series of messages given in England which
lifted the subject into a higher plane.^

These writings marked a new departure of most serious moment. Mr.
;y,[Qscs — a man whose statements could not be lightly set aside — claimed
for them that they were the direct utterances of departed persons, some
of them lately dead, some dead long ago. Such a claim seemed at first
too prodigious for belief; and — as will be seen later — it is in fact still
under discussion. But Mr. Moses* writings — however to be explained —
strongly impressed Edmund Gurney and myself, and added to our desire
to work at the su])ject in as many ways as we could.

It was plain that these writings- which might be of almost immeasur-

able importance— could not be judgcil aright without a wide analysis of
similar scripts, — without an experimental inquiry into what the human mind,
ill slates of somnambulism or the like, could furnish of written messages,
apart from the main stream of consciousness. By his experiments, men-
tioned in a former chapter, on writing obtained in different stages of
hypnotic trance, Gurney acted as the pioneer of a long series of researches
which, independently set on foot by Professor Pierre Janet in France,
have become of high psychological, and even medical, importance. What
is here of prime interest is the indubitable fact that fresh personalities can
i)e artificially and temporarily created, which will write down matter quite
alien from the first pers()nality*s character, and even matter which the
first personality never knew. That matter may consist merely of reminis-
cences of previous periods when the second personality has been in
control. But, nevertheless, if these writings are shown to the primary
personality, he will absolutely repudiate their authorship — alleging not
only tliat he has no recollection of writing them, but also that they
contain allusions to facts which he never knew. Some of these mes-
indeed, although their source is so perfectly well defined — although
we know the very moment when the secondary personality which wrote
them was called into existence — do certainly look more alien from the
automatist in his normal state than many of the messages which claim
to come from spirits of lofty type. It is noticeable, moreover, that these
nianufactured personalities sometimes cling obstinately to their fictitious
names, and refuse to admit that they are in reality only aspects or portions

^ automatic messages collected by “Allan Karclcc” in the Litre jh E sprits
‘^.!j Livre ifes Mtdiums^ although in themselves interesting, were not evidential.

'ey seem to have been arbitrarily selected from writings which supplied no proof of
supernormal origin. b i

Il8

CHAPTER VIII

I

[827

of the aiitomatist himself. This must be remembered when the persistent
claim to some spiritual identity — say Napoleon — is urged as an argument
for attributing a series of messages to that special source. There is much
else which may be learnt from these self-suggested automatisms ; and the
discussions in my earlier chapters refer to several points which should be
familiar to all who would seriously analyse the more advanced, more
difficult, motor phenomena.

827. And here it must be strongly asserted that, however important
it may be to work to the full that preliminary inquiry, it is still more im-
portant to collect the richest possible har\'est of those more advanced
cases. To such collection Mr. Moses’ writings acted as a powerful stimu-
lant ; and ever since my first sight of his MSS. 1 have made it a principal
object to get hold of automatic script from trustworthy sources.

During those twenty-seven years I have personally observed at least
fifty cases where there was every reason to suppose that the writing was
genuinely automatic ; albeit in most of the cases it was uninteresting and
non-evidential.

This number is, at any rate, sufficient to enable me to generalise as to
the effects of this practice on healthy persons rather less inadequately than
writers who generalise from mere hearsay, or from observation of hospital
patients.

In two cases I think that the habit of automatic writing (carried on in
spite of my warning, by persons over whom I had no influence), may have
done some little harm, owing to the obstinate belief of the writers that the
obvious trash which they wrote was necessarily true and authoritative. In
the remaining cases no apparent harm was done ; nor, so far as I know,
was there any ill-health or disturbance in connection with the practice.
Several of the writers were persons both physically and mentally above tlie
average level.

My own conclusion is that when the writing is presumptuous or
nonsensical, or evades test questions, it should be stopped ; since in that
case it is presumably the mere externalisation of a kind, of dream-state of
the automatist’s ; but that when the writing is coherent and straight-
forward, and especially when some facts unknown to the writer are given
as tests of good faith, the practice of automatic writing is harmless, and
may lead at any moment to important truth. The person.s, in short, who
should avoid this experiment are the self-centred and conceited. It i-j
dangerous only to those who are secretly ready — and many are secretly
ready — to regard themselves as superior to the rest of mankind.

828. What has now been said may suffice as regards the varieties of
mechanism — the different forms of motor automatism — which the messvigcs
emplo]j. 1 shall pass on to consider the contents of the messages, and
shall endeavour to classify them according to their apparent sources.

A. In the first place, the message may come from the percipient’s own
mind ; its contents being supplied from the resources of his ordinary

memory, or of his more extensive subliminal memory ; while the drama-
tisation of the message — its assumption of some other mind as its
source — will resemble the dramatisations of dream or of hypnotic trance.

Of course the absence of facts unknown to the writer is not in itself
a proof that the message does not come from some other mind. We
cannot be sure that other minds, if they can communicate, will always be
at the pains to fill their messages with evidential facts. But, equally of
course, a message devoid of such facts must not, on the strength of its
mere assertions, be claimed as the product of any but the writer’s own
mind.

/;. Next above the motor messages whose content the automatist’s own
mental resources might supply, we may place the messages whose content
sefmis to be derived telepathically from the mind of some other person
still living on earth ; that person being either conscious or unconscious of
transmitting the suggestion.

C. Next comes the possibility that the message may emanate from
some unerabfidied intelligence of unknown type — other, at any rale, than
the intelligence of the alleged agent. Under this heading come the views
which ascribe the mc.ssagcs on the one hand to “ elementaries,” or even
devils, and on the other hand to ‘‘ guides ** or “ guardians ” of superhuman
goodness and wisilom.

A Finally we have the possibility that the message may be derived,
in a more or less direct manner, from the mind of the agent — the
departed friend — from whom the communication does actually claim
to come.

My main effort has naturally been thus far directed to the proof that
there are messages which do not fall into the lowest class, A — in which
class most psychologists would still i)lace them all. And I myself —
while reserving a certain small portion of the messages for my other
classes — do not only admit but assert that the great majority of such
communications represent the subliminal workings of the automatist’s
mind alone. It does not, however, follow that such messages have for us
no interest or novelty. On the contrary, they form an instructive, an
indispensable transition from psychological introspection of the old-
fashioned kind to the bolder methods on whose validity 1 am anxious to
insist. The mind’s subliminal action, as thus revealed, differs from the
supraliminal in ways which no one anticipated, and which no one can
c^xplain. There seem to be subliminal tendencies setting steadily in
certain obscure directions, and bearing as little relation to the individual
characteristics of the person to the deeps of whose being we have somc-
ow penetrated as profound ocean-currents bear to waves and winds on
the surface of the sea.^

v.ce Professor James’s Psycholot(y\ vol. i. p. 394 : “ One curious thing about trance
generic similarity in different individitals. ... It seems exactly as if
aut lor composed more than half of the trance messages, no matter by whom they arc

120

CHAPTER VIII

Is this indeed the drift of the Profes-.or James suggests —

steady beneath the tossings and tumblings of individual man ? Or is it
something independent of age or season ? Is there some pattern in the
very fabric of our nature which begins to show whenever we scratch the
glaze off the stuff?

All this may be better considered hereafter, apart from the evidential
discussions with which this chapter must be mainly concerned.

Another point also, of fundamental importance, connected with the
powers of the subliminal self, will be better deferred until a later chapter.
I have said that a message containing only facts normally known to the
automatist must not, on the strength of its mere assertions, be regarded as
proceeding from any mind but his own. This seems evident ; but the
converse proposition is not equally indisputable. We must not take for
granted that a message which i/cfcs contain facts not normally known to
the automatist must therefore come from some mind other than his own.
If the subliminal self can acquire supernormal knowledge at all, it may
obtain such knowledge by means other than telepathic impressions from
other minds. It may assimilate its supernormal nutriment also by a
directer process — it may devour it not only cooked but raw. Parallel
with the possibilities of reception of such knowledge from the inllucnoc
of other embodied or disembodied minds lies the possibility of its own
clairvoyant perception, or active absorption of some kind, of facts lying
indefinitely beyond its supraliminal pimdew.

829, Now, as I have said, the great majority of the nunciative
or message-bearing motor automatisms originate in the automatist*s own
mind, and do not involve the exercise of telepathy or telcesthesia, or any
other supernormal faculty; but they illu.strate in various ways the co-
existence of the subliminal ivith the supraliminal self, its wider memory,
and its independent intelligence.

I need not here multiply instances of the simpler and commoner
forms of this type, and T will merely quote in illustration two short cases
recounted by Mr. H. Arthur Smith (author of 77i€ Principles of Equity,
and a member of the Council of the Society for Psychical Research)
who has had the patience to analyse many conimunication.s througti
Planchette."

(From Proceedings S.P.R.,voLii. p. 233.) Mr. Smith and his nephew
placed their hands on the Planchette, and a purely fantastic name was
given as that of the communicating agency.

uttered. Whether all sub-conscious selves are peculiarly susceptible to a certain stratum
of the Zeitgeist, and get their inspiration from it, I know not.” See the account of auto-
matic and irnpressional script, by Mr. Sidney Dean, which Professor James goes on to
quote, sftid which is closely parallel to (for instance) Miss A.*s case, to be given below,
although the one scrie.s of messages comes from the hand of a late member of Congress,
all his life a robust :.n(l active journalist, author, and man of affairs,” and the other
from a young lady with so different a history and entourage.

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

121

Q. “ Where did^ou live ? ” A. “ Wem.” This name was quite unknown
to any of us. 1 am sure it was to myself, and as sure of the word of the others
as of that of any one I know.

Q, Is it decided who is to be Archbishop of Canterbury ” A. “ Yes.*’

Q. “Who.?” A. “Durham.” As none of us remembered his name, we

asked.

“ What is his name ? *’ A. “ Lightfoot.” Of course, how far the main
statement is correct, I don’t know. 'I'hc curiosity at the time rested in tlie fact
that the name was given which none of us could recall, but was found to be

rii;hl.

Now, this is just one of the cases which a less wary observer might
iuive brought forward as evidence of spirit agency. An identity, it would
be said, manifested itself, and gave an address which none present had
ever heard. But I venture to say that there cannot be any real proof
that an educated person has never heard of Wem. A permanent recorded
like the name of a town which is to be found (for instance) in Brad-
shaw’s (}uidc, may at any moment have been presented to Mr. Smith’s
t yc, and have found a lodgment in his subliminal memory.

Similarly in the answers “ Durham ** and “ Lightfoot ” we are reminded
of cases where in a dream we ask a question with vivid curiosity, and arc
astonished at the reply ; which nevertheless proceeds from {^ursfArs as
undoubtedly as does the inquiry. The prediction in this case was
wrong.

In the next case, although it is possible that the lady’s mental action
may have contributed, as Mr. Smith supposes, to the very result which
she so little desired, the word written may have emanated from the sub-
liminal self of the writer alone.

April 2’;th, 1SS3.

Present — H. A. Smith (A), R. A. H. Bickford-Smith (B), another gentle-
man (C). and two ladies (D and K).

R. A. H. Il.-S. having, on previous occasions, exhibited considerable
aplitiide for automatic writing with a Planchettc, it was designed to apply
this instrument as a means of testing the transference of thoughts. No
exact record having lieeii made at the lime of the whole of the results ob-
tamed, it would be of little service now to record isolated instances of success-
J^onictiines names thought of were correctly reproduced, sometimes not; but
Jh'* proportion of succc.sses to failures cannot now be accurately st ited. The
tollowing incident, however, very much struck us at the time, and seems
wortliy of record.

Our method of procedure at the time was as follows:— C, sitting at one
* »d of the room, wrote down a name of an author, showing it to no one in
room ; li had his hands on the Planchctto, no one else being in contact
'viii him or it. C fixed his attention on the written name, and our design
^jis to see whether that name would be written through the medium of the
ladies were rfieanwhile sewing in silence, and taking no part
- he experiments. It ha])pencd that one of tlie ladies had at the time,
to some painful family circumstances, the name of a gentleman (not

122

CHAPTER VIII

[830

present) painfully impressed on her mind. The name was not a common one,
and though all present knew something of the circumstances, they had not
been mentioned during the evening, and no one had mentioned the name in
question, which we will call Bolton.” C then wrote “ Dickens ” on his
paper, and was “willing” B with all his might to write this, when, to the
surprise of every one, Blanchette rapidly wrote “ Bolton.” This was not only
surprising to us, but painful; and no comments were made at the time, the
subject being changed as rapidly as possible. It would appear from this that
the effect of C’s volitional concentration was overmatched by the intensity of
the lady's thought, though not directed to the same object.

II. Arthur Smith.

830. I quote in 830 A a more complex case (“Clclia”) furnished
by a gentleman whom I there call Mr. A. It is a very good instance of
the capricious half-nonsense which has often been referred to the agency
of spirits. The indisputable evidence for complex subliminal mentation
which this case seems to me to furnish lies in the fact that here Mr. A.*s
pen wrote not only unintelligible abbreviations, but absolute anagrarn.s
of sentences ; anagrams, indeed, of the crudest kind, consisting of mere
transpositions of letters, but still puzzles which the writer had to set him-
self to decipher ab extra. The chances against drawing a group of letters
ai random which will form several definite words and leave no letters over
are, of course, very great.

831. I add another case, precisely parallel with ^^Clelia,” with
which the late Professor Sidgwick furnished me, from his own exporiencr-
with an intimate friend. The account w;is written in 1885.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 25.)

The experiences which I mentioned to you as similar to those doscribcti
in your paper — so far as the mere effects of unconscious cerebration are con
cerned— occurred about twenty years ago. An intimate friend of mine wlio
had interested himself somewhat in Spiritualism, and had read Kardec’s book,
di.scovercd almost by accident that his hand could write, without any conscious
volition on his part, words conveying an intelligible meaning — in fact, what
purported to be communications of departed spirits. He asked me to conie
and stay with him, in order to investigate the phenomenon ; l)c had been ratlier
struck by some things in Kardcc'.s book, and was quite dis]>ose(l to entertain
the hypothesis that the writing might be due to something more than uncon-
scious cerebration, if it should turn out that it could give accurate information
on facts unknown to him. The experiments, however, that we made in order
to test this always failed to show anything in the statements written down that
might not have been due to the working of his own brain ; and at the end ol
my visit we were both agreed that there was no ground for attributing the
phenomenon to any other cause but unconscious cerebration. At the same
time wc were continually surprised by evidences of the extent to which bis
unconscious self was able to puzzle his conscious mind. As a rule, he knew
what he was writing, though he wrote involuntarily; but from time to time
he used to form words or conjundions of letters which we w.erc unable to
make out at first, though they had a meaning which we ultimately discovered.

\

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

123

Thus one evening, ^ust as we were about to break up, the capital letters
KHAIRETE were written; their meaning will not be obscure to you, but
it so happened that it did not at first occur to us that K H represented th-:
Greek x* whzt the letters meant, and tried various

solutions till the true signification (“ Farewell ”) suddenly flashed upon my
mind. On another occasion I asked a question of the supposed communicating
intelligence, and requested that the answer might be given in German, a
language which my friend was unable to read or write, though he had learnt to
speak one or two words while travelling in the country. His hand proceeded
to write what was apparently one long word, which seemed to him absolutely
without meaning; but when I came to read it I could see that it was composed
of a number of German words, though put together without proper gramma-
tical terminations ; and that these words suggested- though they could hardly
be said to convey--wh7it would have been a proper and significant answer to
my question. The words were all common words, such as he might have
heard in conversation ; and when 1 had separated them, and told him their
meaning, he seemed faintly to recognise some of them.

Sometimes, again, when we tried to get correct information as to facts
unknown to either of us, the result was curious as showing an apparently
elaborate attempt on the part of my friend’s unconscious self to deceive his
conscious self. 1 remember (e^g-) that one night we got written down what
purported to be the first sentence in a leading article of the Times that had
just been written and would appear next morning. The sentence was in the
familiar style of Printing House Square; but I need not say that when we
came down to breakfast next morning we did not find it in the printed
columns. My friend immediately placed his hand on a piece of paper; and
there came, involuntarily written in the usual way, a long rigmarole of explana-
tion to the effect that the article originally written, containing the sentence
tiiat wc had got the night before, had been cancelled at the last moment by
the editor in consequence of some unexpected political exigency, and another
article hastily substituted. And similarly in other cases when statements
involuntarily written were ascertained to be false, explanations were written
exhibiting the kind of ingenuity which a fairly inventive hoaxer might show
wl'.cn driven into a corner.

H I had not had absolute reliance on my friend’s dona fides^ I might have
supposed that he was mystifying me ; but I could not doubt that his curiosity
as to the result of the experiments was greater than mine, <and that he had
no conscious desire to make me believe that the phenomenon was anything
more than the result of unconscious cerebration.

I am sorry that the notes I took at the time have been destroyed ; but I
have no doubt that what 1 have just written is accurately remembered.

1 have said that the writer usually knew what he was writing. This was
not the case in his first trials, when the writing came in an abrupt, jerky, and
irregular way, and he rarely knew what he had written till he looked at it.
^ ut after the first few trial.s, the flow of unconscious action became even and
•"•teady, like that of ordinary conscious handwriting ; and then lie generally —
inoiigh not always— -knew just before each word was written what it would be ;
•^0 that when the statements made were entirely contrary to our expectation-—
•IS was often the case— his surprise used to come just before the word was
actually written. H. Sidgwick.

124

CHAPTER VIII

832. The cases of automatic writing thus far given have shown us
an independent activity of the subliminal self holding colloquies with the
supraliminal ; but they have shown us nothing more. Yet we shall
find, if we go on accumulating instances of the same general type, that
traces of telsesthcsia and telepathy begin insensibly to show themselves ;
not at first with a distinctness or a persistence sufficient for actual proof,
but just in the same gradual way in which indications of supernormal
faculty stole in amid the disintegration of split personalities ; or in which
indications of some clairvoyant outlook stole in amid the incoherence of
dream. Many of these faint indications, valueless, as I have said, for purely
evidential purposes, are nevertheless of much theoretical interest, as showing
how near is the subliminal self to that region of supernormal knowledge
which for the supraliminal is so definitely closed.

Mr. Schillers case, given in 832 A, is a good example of these
obscure transitions between normal and supernormal, and introduces u?
to several phenomena which we shall afterwards find recurring again and
again in independent quarters. Dramatisation of fictitious personalities,
for instance, which forms so marked a feature in Professor Flournoy’s cele-
brated case (to be cited later, 834-842) begins in this series of experi-
ments, conducted throughout with a purely scientific aim, and with no
sort of belief in the imaginary ^^Irktomar” and the rest. It seems as
though this “objectivatioii of types’" were part of a romance which some in-
scrutable but childish humorist was bent on making up. I he cryptomne-
sia” shown in this case through the reproduction of scraps of old French
with which the automatist had no conscious acquaintance, reached a
point at which (as again in Professor Flournoy’s case) one is almost driven
to suspect that it was aided by some slight clairvoyance on the part of
the subliminal self.

I subjoin in 832 B a medijeval case where the fictitious per-
sonalities — though rampant as alleged devils, in that rougher age — have
no more reality than the milder Heliod ” or ** Irktomar.”

833. The next case which I shall quote combines various motor
automatisms in a very unusual way. I give it at length in the text, partly
on account of its strangeness and partly in deference to the high scientilic
authority on which I received it.

The account is taken from an article by Dr. A. T. Myers and myself
(already referred to, see 577) in Proceedinj^s S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 182 .

The writer of the following narrative is a physician occupying an im-
portant scientific post on the Continent of Europe. He is known to us
by correspondence and through a common friend — himself a savant oi
European reputation — who has talked the case over with Dr. X. and his
wife, 5Mid has read the statement which we now translate and abbreviate.
We are bound to conceal Dr. X.’s identity, and even his country ; nor is
this unreasonable, since the bizarrerie of the incidents to be recorded
would be felt as greatly out of place in his actual scientific surroundings*

12 $

833] MOTOR AUTOMATISM

The Dr. Z. who h^re appears in the somewhat dubious character of a
mesmerising spirit, was also, as it happens, a savant of European repute,
and a personal friend of Dr. X.'s.

Mme. X. is a lady healtliy in body and mind, well-balanced, of sound
judirment, strong common sense, and a calm and firm character; she is
charitable without excess ; is not susceptible to flattery, nor given to enthusiasm ;
slic detests falsehood and duplicity and abhors inju.^tice. She has never had
any one of lliose serious maladies, such as meningitis, typhoid fever, &c., which
are apt to leave traces on the nervous system. Nor has she suffered from any
nervous complaint. She is the very opposite of what would be termed a nervous
or hysterical subject. She is sensilfly affected by accounts of human woes,
especially among children ; but such sensibility by no means explains the
accesses of violent laughter which I have remarked in her since the commence-
ment of the scries of events to be now related. These accesses, which have
nothing in common with the hysterical crises which they superficially resemble,
are always caused by some extraordinary communication emanating from an
occult intelligence.

In September 1890, while we were staying in the country, Mme. X.
sprained her right foot on a very dark night. A fortnight after our return to

M the foot was almost well; but shortly afterwards I fell ill, and Mme. X.

underwent much fatigue in nursing me. The injured foot then became inflamed
and painful; and the left fool also became painful. For all that winter Mme.
X. was obliged to lie up, the foot being kept from all movement by plaster or
silicate dressings. This treatment was ultimately abandoned ; the foot was
simi)ly bound up and crutches used. There was inflammation of the tissues of
several of the joints of the right foot, and we w'cre seriously alarmed.

At this point certain friends talked to Mme. X. about the alleged facts of
Spiritism, of which until that date she bad had a very vague notion. They
praised the beneficent intervention of spirits in disease ; but had much diffi-
culty in inducing her to admit the mere possibility of facts of this nature. I
can affirm, therefore, that it was only wdth great difficulty that these friends
succeeded in vanquishing Mme. X.’s scepticism — which was moreover sup-
ported by my own objections to Spiritism—and at last persuaded her to submit
herself to the action of the invisibles. The spirit-guide of a group of which one
of our friends was a member advised the interv^ention of the (spirit)-doclor Z.
A (lay was arranged when Dr. Z, was to visit Mme. X., and she was informed of
the date. Owing to other preoccupations we completely forgot this remiezvons.
On the day named — it was in April 1891 — Dr. Z. announced him.self by raps in
the table. Only then did we recollect the refuUzvmis agreed upon, I asked
Dr. Z. his opinion on the nature of the injury to Mme. X.'s foot. By tills of the
table, through Mme. X.’s inediumship, he gave the word tuberculosis.” He
meant that there was tuberculosis of the joints, and of this there had been
some indications. Had Mme. X. been predisposed to tubercle I doubt not that
this would have supervened. Personally, I much feared this complication, and
7 .. s answer (as I at once thought) might well be the mere reflection of my
ears. It left me no more anxious than before. We now know that there was
in fact no tuberculosis. In any case, Dr. Z. ordered a merely soothingpremedy,
snphur ointment. Some days Jatcr, at our request, Dr. Z. reappeared and
promised to undertake the cure of Mme. X.’s feet ; warning us, however, that

126 CHAPTER VIII [883

there would never be a “ restitutio ad integrum,” but that the patient would be
unequal to long walks, and would suffer more or less from her feet in damp
weather — which has proved to be the case.

I come now to the phenomena, mainly subjective, which Mme. X.*s case
began to present. On August 17th, 1891, the patient felt for the first time a
unique sensation, accompanied by formication and sense of weight in the lower
limbs, especially in the feet. This sensation gradually spread over the rest of
the body, and when it reached the arms, the hands and forearms began to
rotate. These phenomena recurred after dinner every evening, as soon as the
patient was quiet in her arm-chair. At this point the X. family w'ent into the

country to R , and at that place the manifestations took place twice daily

for some 15 or 20 minutes. Usually the patient placed her two hands on a
table. The feeling of “magnetisation ” then began in the feet, which began to
rotate, and the upper parts of the body gradually shared in the same move-
ment. At a certain point, the hands automatically detached themselves from
the table by small, gradual shocks, and at the same time the arms assumed
a tetanic rigidity somewhat resembling catalepsy. On one occasion when these
sensations had been strongly marked, and the patient had felt the whole of the
upper part of her body stiffened, she went to bed and saw in the dark an intense
light which lasted for several minutes and then gradually disappeared.

Three weeks after the family’s return to M the phenomena changed

in character, and gained in interest. The patient had begun to be able to walk
without much difficulty ; but all forced and voluntary movement of the foot
was still painful, although when the movement was initiated by the occult
agency no pain whatever was felt. One evening, after the usual sdance, the
patient felt her head move against her will. An intelligent intercourse was
thus set up between the patient and the unseen agent or agents. The head
nodded once for “ Yes,” twice for “ No,” three times for a strong affirmation.
These movements were sometimes sudden and violent enough to cause some-
thing like pain. Words and phrases could, of course, be spelt out in this way.
This form of correspondence has never wholly ceased ; although the intensity
of the phenomenon has now much diminished. The occult agent now im-
presses one or other of Mmc. X.’s hands with movements which trace in the
air the form of letters of the alphabet ; — ^a plan which works well and quickly.

Mme. X. is also a writing medium; and this power first showed itself in a
strange way during the stay in the country of which I have already spoken.
She was writing a letter one day, with no thought of these unseen agencies,
when suddenly she felt her hand checked. Warned by a special sensation, she
still held the pen. Her hand placed itself on a sheet of paper and began
rapidly to write alarming predictions. The writings retained this tone only for
a few hours; and soon the communications became trivial in character, and,
save in some exceptional instances, have since remained so.

Another phenomenon followed shortly afterwards. One day Mme. X. felt
herself lifted with force from her arm-chair and compelled to stand upright.
Her feet and her whole body then executed a systematic calisthenic exercise, in
which all the movements were regulated and made rhythmic with finished art.
This was renewed on following clays, and towards the end of each performance
— sometime.s of an hour’s or two hours* duration — the movements acquired ex-
tfeme energy. Mme. X. has never had the .smallest notion of chamber-gym-
nastics, Swedish or otherwise, and these movements would have been very
painful and fatiguing had she attempted them of her own will. Yet at the end

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

127

833 ]

of each performance ^he was neither fatigued nor out of breath. All was going
well, and Dr. Z. had announced that henceforth his attentions would not be
needed, when next day a singular accident threw everything back. Mme. X.
had mounted with great precaution upon a low chair with four legs and a large
base of support to take an object from a wardrobe. Just as she was about to
descend, the chair was violently snatched from under her feet and pushed to a
distance. Mme. X. fell on the diseased foot, and the cure had to begin again.
[ In a subsequent letter Dr. X. explains that by Mme. X.’s account this move-
ment was distinctly due to an invisible forces no natural slipping of the chair.]

Mme. X. was accustomed to bandage her own foot every morning. One
day she was astonished to feel her hands seized and guided by an occult force,
from that day onwards the bandaging was done according to all the rules of
the art, and with a perfection which would have done credit to the most skilful
.surgeon of either hemisphere. Although very adroit with her hands, Mme. X.
had never had occasion to practise nursing or to study minor surgery, yet the
bandages thus automaiically applied were irreproachable, and were admired by
every one. When Mme. X. wished to renew the bandages, she placed the
strips all rolled up upon a table within reach of her hand, and her hand then
automatically took the bandage which best suited the occult operation.

Mme. X. is accustomed to arrange her own hair. One morning she said
laughingly, “I wish that a Court hairdresser would do my hair for me; my
:irms are tired.” At once she felt her hands acting automatically, and with no
faiigue for her arms, which seemed to be held up ; and the result was a compli-
cated coiffure^ which in no way resembled her usual simple mode of arrangement.

The odde.st of all these aiitomjitic phenomena consisted in extremely grace-
ful gestures which Mme. X. was caused to execute with her arms— gesture.s as
tiiougli of evocation or adoration of some imaginary divinity, or gestures of
ijcnediction. When the occult agent placed her before the portrait of her son
wliom she lost five years ago the .scene became really affecting, and moved
Mme. X, herself to tears. The few persons who witnessed this spectacle are
agreed that it was worthy of the powers of the greatest actress. Of such a gift
Mme. X. has nothing; her nature is simple and frank, but cold rather than
demonstrative.

At the Paris Exhibition of 1889 Mme. X. once saw the Javanese dance,”
consisting of rhythmic motions of the body with contortions of the arms. The
occult agents caused her to repeat this dance several times with perfect exc-
cudon.

[Disliking these phenomena,] Mme. X. has tried very hard to free herself
from tills control, and has to a great extent succeeded, by the use of cold water,
by strongly resisting all communications, and by ** passes of disengagement ”
executed by a hypnotiser. [This has reduced the phenomena almost entirely to
iiutoraatic writing, which, though vague or fantastic when dealing with ordinary
topics, is precise and intelligent on medical questions, j

Thus far the phenomena recorded have been purely subjective ; in those
which follow there is something objective also. When one has the honour to
be treated by a physician of Dr, Z.’s celebrity (!) ordinary kindness bids one
sometimes think of benefiting one’s neighbour. One of the officials of my de-
piirtment had suffered for many years from pleurodynia, which occasionally laid
um up altogether, and also from frequent attacks of sick headache. Qr* Z. was
consulted and prescribed an internal treatment which, to my great surprise, con-
sisted mainly of dosimetric granules ” ; [which this great official surgeon had

128

CHAPTER VIII

[833

not in his lifetime employed]. He also caused Mmc. X. tp perform ** passes of
disengagement '' for ten or fifteen minutes at a time. It was noticeable that
while these passes were made with extreme violence, Mme. X.’s hands were
arrested at the distance of a millimetre at most from the patient’s face, without
ever touching him in the least. Mme. X. could never of herself have given to
her movements such a degree of precision. For two years now the patient has
felt no more of his pleurodynia, and Ins migraine is, if not altogether cured, at
least greatly reduced.

One day— I suppose by way of a joke— Dr. Z., after one of these stances,
pursued the patient with his influence as he walked home, and made him exe-
cute with bis hands various gestures and contortions which drew the attention
of passers-by.

Another time our servant A., whose husband was ill in hospital, came cry-
ing to Mme. X. and told her that she had lost all hope of ever seeing him cured,
&c. Mme. X. asked Dr. Z. to take him in hand. He promised to do so, and
said that he would make him feel his presence. Next morning A. went to the
hospital and found her husband in despair. “ Look here,” he said, ‘‘ besides what
I had already, I am falling into a nervous malady. I have been shaken about
all night — my arms and legs have executed movements which I could not con-
trol.” A. began to laugh, and told her liu.sl)and that Dr. Z. had taken him in
hand, and that he would soon get well. The patient is going about as usual
to-day, and is as well as an incurable pulmonary affection allows him to be.

Under other circumstances I have myself consulted Dr. Z. as to patients
under my professional care. On each occasion he has given a precise diagnosis
and has indicated a treatment, consisting mainly of dosimetric granules, some-
times associated with other treatment. These facts have been repeated many
times, and I owe great gratitude to Dr. Z. for the advice which he has given me.
His prescriptions were always rational; and wdien 1 showed fears as to certain
doses which appeared to me too large, he took pains to reassure me, but stuck
to his prescriptions. 1 have never had to repent having followed the advice tvi
my eminent colleague in the other world ; and I am bound to state cli.stinctly
that every time that a medical question has been submitted to him the replies
and advice of Dr. Z, have been of an astonishing clearne.ss and precision. J
cannot say the same of communications obtained on other subjects, in whidi
he seemed to take a malicious pleasure in leading us wrong. He— or some
one else — has often announced to us, with minute and intimate detail, the
deaths of persons known to us ; who were found on imtuiry to be alive ariu
well. Lastly, I give a detail which tends to prove the reality of this oocuit
magnetisation. Mme. X. has often seen two luminous rays projected ui.-on
her feet during the stances of which I have spoken above. The rays were
invisible in full light, and in complete darkness, but w^re seen in partial
obscurity, and re.sembled rays of the sun passing tlwough small openings into
a dark room. If this was a hallucination, it was shared on two occasions \>\
the hypnotiscr of whom 1 have already spoken. 1 myself never saw the rays,
which may be compared with tho.se .said to have been seen by somnambulists
and other sensitives as emanating under certain circumstances from the human
frame.

In »eply to inquiries Dr. X. adds the following remarks : —

It is not impossible that Mme. X. .should have at some time heard myself
or others pronounce the names of the medicaments prescribed. But when she

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

129

rave me an exact diaghosis, and formulated in detail a rational treatment, I am
sure that this did not come from her own mind. She has never studied any
branch of medicine — neither the therapeutic art itself, nor the minor art of com-
posing formula'. Nor could I have been acting suggestively, since my own
ideas were often quite different from those which the occult agent dictated ;
unless, indeed, my unconscious self acted uiK)n Mine. X.’s consciousness, which
seems to me a somewhat too elaborate view.

The dosimetric granules are a convenient mode of administering alkaloids,
olycosiclcs, and other toxic principles, and I have often been alarmed at the
doses wliicU Dr. Z. prescribed. 1 confess that I was astonished to find that
an occult agent who thus claimed to be a bygone Professor should have
selected a form of medication on which the Faculty look with no approv-
ing eye.

As to Mine. X.\s foot, I have Viftrm conviction that it was healed by the
rhythmical movements imposed, and by the “magnetisation*’ of the occult

ajifut.

\ ou ask me whether I consider these agents as belonging to the human
U|x. Provisionally, Yes; unless we admit that there exists, superposed
upon uur world, another world of beings distinct from humanity, but knowing
it nnn studying it as we study the other regions of nature, and assuming for
tlui sake of amusement or for some other motive the role of our departed
friends.

Dr. X. concludes with warnings against the dangers of such influence
or po.sse.S2)ian ; dangers which he thinks that Mme. X. avoided by her
calmness of temperament and resolute maintenance of self-control.

'Vho savant already mentioned as introducing us to this case sends us
(May, 1893) following corroborative statement. He is, it may be
observed, himself a physician,

I have frequently seen Mine. X. For the last year or two she has had no
inori; phenomena ; l;)ut about two years ago she presented some curious
'iym|>toms. Jn the first place, when she conversed with the late Dr. Z., her
so-callcfl magnetiser, his replies were made by movements of her head. Slie
: "«ndd scut herself in an arm-chair, and according as Dr. Z. wished to say yes
or no, there were either two or three backw;rrd movements of her head. Her
; neiid threw itself backwards with force, and gave a vigorous blow to the chair-
I hark. This movement was sometimes so violent that the shock was painful,
so tnat Mme. X. cried out at the sharpness of the blows. Long sentences could
tinis lx* given, for when the alpliabet was spelt out there were movements and
^lows given with the head, just as in ordinary Spiritistic conversations there
•'^re tills of the table. Often, also, while one was talking Avith Mme. X., there
'vere movements of her head, indicating that the so-called Dr. Z. was taking
Pirt m the discussion, and approving or disapproving such and such a phrase,
a Mme. X. would unconsciously articulate a few words with her lips,

hiu; words were professedly dictated by Dr. Z. As to the other pheno-
twice been present at the ample, semi-ccstatic movements of
scene Player which Mme. X. made against her will. It was a curious
talk v M*ne. X. prc.served her consciousness all the time and continued to
M <^*ccuting this strange and complicated mimicry. It is to be
^ vcc that Mme. X. is a person of calm nature, and rather apathetic than

130 CHAPTER VIII [834

nervous. She has strong common-sense, is healthy, an)d[ reasonable in char-
acter. It seems that she never had any previous hallucination. She is an
excellent mother of a family, and deservedly enjoys general confidence and
esteem.

Dr. X. sent us two of the prescriptions written by Mme. X.^s hand.
We compared them with British Pharmacopccal prescriptions, by the
aid of Biirggraeve's Guide de Midecine Dosimetrique (Paris, 1872). Both
prescriptions are in fair accord with English practice \ the doses of arsenic
in the one case, of strychnia in the other, being rather stronger than
usually given. Each prescription contains several ingredients, in what
seems reasonable proportion.

Finally, we learn that Dr. Z. in life was gay and fond of practical jokes.

834. These last cases have become increasingly complex. One
wonders to what extent this strange manufacture of inward romances can be
carried. There is, I may say, a great deal more of it in the world than is
commonly suspected. I have myself received so many cases of these
dramatised utterances — as though a number of different spirits were
writing in turn through some aiitomatist’s hand — that I have come to
recognise the operation of some law of dreams, so to call it, as yet but
obscurely understood. The alleged personalities are for the most part
not only unidentified, but purposely unidentifiable ; they give themselves
romantic or ludicrous names, and they are produced and disappear as
lightly as puppets on a mimic stage. The main curiosity of such cases
lies in their very persistence an<l complexity ; it would be a waste of space
to quote any of the longer ones in such a way as to do them justice.
And, fortunately, there is no need for me to give any of my own cases ;
since a specially good case has been specially well observed and reported
in a book with which many of my readers are probably already acquainted,
— Professor Flournoy’s Des hides a la planete Mars : Etude sur un cas
de Somnambulisme avec Glossolalie (Paris and Geneva, 1900). I shall
here make some comments on that striking record, which all students
of these subjects ought to study in detail.

835. It happens, no doubt, to any group which pursues for many
years a somewhat unfamiliar line of inquiry that those of their points
which are first assailed get gradually admitted, so that as they become
interested in new points they may scarcely observe what change has taken
place in the reception of the old. The reader of early volumes of the
Proceedings S.P.R. will often observe this kind of progress of opinion.
And now Professor Flournoy’s book indicates in a remarkable way how
things have moved in the psychology of the last twenty years. The book
— a model of fairness throughout — is indeed, for the most part, critically
desihictive in its treatment of the quasi-supernormal phenomena with
which it deals. But what a mass of conceptions a competent psychologist
now takes for granted in this realm, which the official science of twenty
years agoVould scarcely stomach our hinting at I

835 ] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 131

One important point may be noticed at once as decisively corroborating
a contention of my own made long ago, and at a time when it probably
seemed fantastic to many readers. Arguing for the potential continuity of
subliminal mentation (as against those who urged that there were only
occasional flashes of submerged thought, like scattered dreams), I said
that it would soon be found needful to press this notion of a continuous
subliminal self to the utmost, if we were not prepared to admit a con-
tinuous spiritual guidance or possession. Now, in fact, with Professor
t'!ournoy*s subject the whole discussion turns on this very point. There
is unquestionably a continuous and complex series of thoughts and feelings
going on beneath the threshold of consciousness of M*’® “ H61^nc Smith.”
Is this submerged mentation due in any degree or in any manner to the
operation of spirits other than M”"" Smith’s own? That is the broad
question ; but it is complicated here by a subsidiary question : whether,
namely, any previous incarnations of Smith’s — other phases of her

own spiritual history, now involving complex relationship with the past —
have any part in the crowd of personalities which seem stniggling to
express themselves through her quite healthy organism.

M"'*' Smith, I should at once say, is not,^ and never has been, a paid
medium. At the date of M, Flournoy’s book, she occupied a leading post
on the staff of a large maison de commerce at Geneva, and gave stances
to her friends simply because she enjoyed the exercise of her mediumistic
faculties, and was herself interested in their explanation.

Her organism, I repeat, is regarded, both by herself and by others, as
a quite healthy one. Smith, says Professor Flournoy, declares dis-
tinctly that she is perfectly sound in body and mind, — in no way lacking in
equilibrium, — and indignantly repudiates the idea that there is any hurtful
anomaly or the slightest danger in mediumship as she practises it.

” I am so for from being abnormal,” she writes, “ that I have never
been so clear-sighted, so lucid, so capable of judging rapidly on all points,
as since I have been developed as a medium.” No one appears to dispute
this estimate, which the facts of M”*" Smith’s progress in her line of business
distinctly confirm.

“ It is in fact incontestable ” (continues Professor Flournoy, p, 41 ), that
Helene has a head extremely well organised ; and that from a business
point of view she manages admirably the very important and complicated
department of which she is at the head in this large shop where she is
employed ; so that to accuse her of being morbid simply because she is a
medium is to say the least an inadmissible petitio principii so long as the
very nature of mediumship remains a thing so obscure and open to discus-
sion as is still the case. . . .

It is clear that there exist amid the ranks of the learned faculty
certain spirits narrow and limited, strong in their own specialities, but

^ tor M*'® Smith’s later history, see Professor Flournoy's NcuvelUs Observations sur
de Somnambtilisme, Geneva, 1902. — P'nrroRS.

132 CHAPTER VIII [835

ready to cast their anathemas at whatever does not fit in with their
preconceived ideas^ and to treat as morbid, pathological, insane, every-
thing which differs from the normal type of human nature, such as they
have conceived it on the model of their own small personalities. . . .

But in the first place the essential criterion in judging of a human
being's value is not the question whether he is in good or bad health, like
or unlike other people, but whether he fulfils adequately his special task —
how he acquits himself of the functions incumbent on him, and what may
be expected or hoped from him. I am not aware that Miss Smith's
psychical faculties have ever interfered with her accomplishment of any of
her duties ; rather they have helped her therein ; for her normal and con-
scious activity has often found an unexpected assistance — which non-
mediums lack ! — in her subliminal inspirations and her automatisms, which
effect a useful end.

‘‘ In the second place, it is far from being demonstrated that medium-
ship is a pathological phenomenon. It is abnormal, no doubt, in the sense
of being rare^ exceptional ; but rarity is not morbidity. The few years
during which these phenomena have been seriously and scientifically
studied have not been enough to allow us to pronounce on their true
nature. It is interesting to note that in the countries where these studies
have been pushed the furthest, in England and America, the dominant
view among the savants who have gone deepest into the matter is not at
all unfavourable to mediumshipj and that, far from regarding it as a
special case of hysteria, they see in it a faculty superior, advantageous,
healthy, of which hysteria is a form of degenerescence, a pathological
parody, a morbid caricature.”

The phenomena which this sensitive presents (Il^ltnc Smith is Pro-
fessor Flournoy's pseudonym for her) cover a range which looks at
first very wide, although a clearer analysis shows that these varieties are
more apparent than real, and that self-suggestion will perhaps account for
all of them.

There is, to begin with, every kind of automatic irruption of subliminal
into supraliminal life. As Professor Flournoy says (p. 45) : Phenomena
of hypermnesia, divinations, mysterious findings of lost objects, happy
inspirations, exact presentiments, just intuitions, teleological (purposive or
helpful) automatisms, in short, of every kind; she possesses in a high
degree this small change of genius — which constitutes a more than suffi-
cient compensation for the inconvenience resulting from those distractions
and moments of absence of mind which accompany her visions; and
which, moreover, generally pass unobserved.'*

At stances — where the deeper change has no inconveniences—
undergoes a sort of self-hypnotisation which produces various
lethargic and somnambulistic states. And when she is alone and safe
from interruption she has spontaneous visions, during which there may
be some* approach to ecstasy. At the stances she experiences positive

835 ] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 133

hallucinations, and also negative hallucinations, or systematised anaes-
thesiae, so that, for instance, she will cease to see some person present,
especially one who is to be the recipient of messages in the course of the
seance. “It seems as though a dream-like incoherence presided over
this preliminary work of disaggregation, in which the normal perceptions
are arbitrarily split up or absorbed by the subconscious personality —
eager for materials with which to compose the hallucinations which it is
preparing.’* Then, when the stance begins, the main actor is H 61 ene*s
guide Lkopold (a pseudonym for Cagliostro) who speaks and writes through
her, and is, in; fact, either her leading spirit-control or (much more pro-
bably) her most developed form of secondary personality.

Helene, indeed, has sometimes the impression of becoming Leopold
for a moment (p. 117). Professor Flournoy compares this sensation with
the experience of Mr. Hill Tout {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 309), who
feels himself becoming his own father, who is manifesting through him.
Ft should be added that, although somewhat pompous, Leopold always
appears both sensible and dignified. “ Leopold,** says Professor Flournoy
(p. 134) « certainly manifests a very honourable and amiable side of M"®
Smith’s character, and in taking him as her ‘ guide * she has followed
inspirations which are doubtless among the highest in her nature.**

The high moral quality of these automatic communications, on which
Professor Flournoy thus insists, is a phenomenon worth consideration. I
do not mean that it is specially strange in the case of M“® Smith. She
appears to be (if the phrase is thought permissible in describing a medium)
a person of remarkably well-regulated mind. One is not surprised that
her subliminal self should be as blameless a? her supraliminal. But in
reality the remark here made by Professor Flournoy has a much wider
application. The almost universally high moral tone of genuinely auto-
matic utterances — whether claimed as spirit communications or pro-
ceeding obviously from the automatist himself — has not, I think, been
sufficiently noticed, or adequately explained. I will mention two points
which have struck me as specially noticeable. In the first place I have
read many pulpit and other attacks on “ spiritualism,** under which name
all automatic utterance is commonly included, and I cannot remember
any instance in which such an attack has been made effective by the
quotation of passages of immoral tendency — base, cruel, or impure. The
attack, so far as I know, has always been of a kind which, in the eye
of the philosopher, is rather complimentary to the writings attacked. For
It seems (and this is the second point to which I wished to call attention
nere) that no one of the various conflicting Churches has been able to
claim the general drift of automatic messages as making for its special
tenets. The various controversialists, where they have been candid^have
admitted moral elevation, but, — from their various opposing points of
View, have agreed in deploring theological laxity.

I must indeed confess myself unable to explain why it is that beneath

134

CHAPTER VIII

[836

the frequent incoherence, frequent commonplaceness, frequent pomposity
of these messages there should almost always be a substratum of better
sense, of truer catholicity, than is usually to be heard except from the
leading minds of the generation. It is possible that in some hidden way
the Zeit-Geist affects the subliminal strata even of persons superficially
narrow and bigoted by an influence urging them all in somewhat the same
direction ; — so that the best available thought of the age is inspiring the
age more profounclly than we know. And it is possible also that these
utterances may bear in reality some obscure relation to truths profounder
than we have as yet normally acquired. What is omitted, indeed, from
current beliefs is as significant as what is added thereto, and the general
product looks more like a very poor account of something which in itself
is great and new, but dimly apprehended, than like a compromise between
conflicting dogmas, or a selection from familiar hortatory themes.

836. Thus much I think it was fair to say ; — or I may speak more
strongly and maintain that thus much it was a positive duty to insist upon.
It is only right that this mass of communications, taken as a whole,
should be defended from the random accusations of journalist or
pulpiteer.

But, in view of what is to follow, I may here define the limited extent
to which my support of the content of automatic messages goes.

I think, then, that in evidential messages — where there is real reason
to believe that an identified spirit is communicating— there is a marked
and independent consensus on such matters as these spirits profess them-
selves able to discuss. And, again, in non-evidential messages — in com-
munications which probably proceed from the automatist’s subliminal
self — I hold that there is a remarkable and undesigned concordance in
high moral tone, and also in avoidance of certain prevalent tenets, which
many of the automatists do supraliminally hold as true. But I also
insist that these subliminal messages, even when not incoherent, are
generally dream-like, and often involve tenets which (though never ip my
experience base or immoral) are unsupported by evidence, and are probably
to be referred to mere self-suggestion.

Prominent among such tenets is one which forms a large part of M"*
Smith’s communications ; namely, the doctrine of reincarnation^ or of
successive lives spent by each soul upon this planet.

The simple fact that such was probably the opinion both of Plato aud
of Virgil shows that there is nothing here which is alien to the best reason
or to the highest instincts of men. Nor, indeed, is it easy to realise any
theory of the direct creation of spirits at such different stages of advance-
ment as those which enter upon the earth in the guise of mortal man.
There musty one feels, be some kind of continuity— some form of spiritual
Past. Yet for reincarnation there is at present no valid evidence ; and
it must-be my duty to show how its assertion in any given instance— -
Smith’s included — constitutes in itself a strong argument in favour

I3S

836 ] MOTOR AUTOMATISM

of self-suggestion rather than extraneous inspiration as the source of the
messages in which *it appears.

Whenever civilised men have received what they have regarded as a
revelation (which has generally been somewhat fragmentary in its first
delivery) they have naturally endeavoured to complete and systematise
it as well as they could. In so doing they have mostly aimed at three
objects : ( i ) to understand as much as possible of the secrets of the uni-
verse ; (2) to justify as far as possible Heaven’s dealings with men ; and
(3) appropriate as far as possible the favour or benefit which the revela-
tion may show as possibly accruing to believers. For all these purposes
the doctrine of reincarnation has proved useful in many countries and
times. But in no case could it seem more appropriate than in this last
revelation (so to term it) through automatic messages and the like. And
as a matter of history, a certain vigorous preacher of the new faith, known
under the name of Allan Kardec, took up reincamationist tenets, enforced
them (as there is reason to believe) by strong suggestion upon the minds
of various automatic writers, and set them forth in dogmatic works which
have had much influence, especially among Latin nations, from their clarity,
symmetry, and intrinsic reasonableness. Yet the data thus collected were
absolutely insufficient, and the Livre des Esprits must simply rank as the
premature formulation of a new religion — the premature systematisation
of a nascent science.

I follovv Professor Flournoy in believing that the teaching of that work
must have directly or indirectly influenced the mind of M”** Smith, and
is therefore responsible for her claim to these incarnations previous to that
which she now undergoes or enjoys.

On the general scheme here followed, each incarnation, if the last has
been used aright, ought to represent some advance in the scale of being.
If one earth-life has been misused, the next earth-life ought to afford
opportunity for expiation*— or for further practice in the special virtue
which has been imperfectly acquired. Thus M”® Smith’s present life in a
humble position may be thought to atone for her overmuch pride in her
last incarnation — as Marie Antoinette.

But the mention of Marie Antoinette suggests the risk which this
theory fosters — of assuming that one is the issue of a distinguished line
of spiritual progenitors; insomuch that, with whatever temporary sets-
back, one is sure in the end to find oneself in a leading position.

Pythagoras, indeed, was content with the secondary hero Eiiphorbus
as his bygone self. But in our days Dr. Anna Kingsford and Mr. Edward
Maitland must needs have been the Virgin Mary and St. John the Divine.
And Victor Hugo, who was naturally well to the front in these self-multi-
plications, took possession of most of the leading personages of antiquity
whom he could manage to string together in chronological s<!quence.
It is obvious that any number of re-born souls can play at this game ; but
where no one adduces any evidence it seems hardly worth while to go on.

CHAPTER VIII

136

[837

Even Pythagoras does not appear to have adduced any evidence beyond
his ipse dixit for his assertion that the alleged shield of Euphorbus had in
reality been borne by that mythical hero. Meantime the question as to
reincarnation has actually been put to a very few spirits who have given
some real evidence of their identity. So far as I know, no one of these
has claimed to know anything personally of such an incident ; although
all have united in saying that their knowledge was too limited to allow them
to generalise on the matter.

H61^ne’s controls and previous incarnations — to return to our subject
— do perhaps suffer from the general fault of aiming too high. She has
to her credit a control from the planet Mars ; one pre-incarnation as an
Indian Princess ; and a second (as I have said) as Marie Antoinette.

837. In each case there are certain impressive features in the im-
personation j but in each case also careful analysis negatives the idea that
we can be dealing with a personality really revived from a former epoch,
or from a distant planet ; — and leaves us inclined to explain everything by
** cryptomnesia ” (as Professor Flournoy calls submerged memory), and
that subliminal inventiveness of which we already know so much.

The Martian control was naturally the most striking at first
sight. Its reality was supported by a Martian language, written in a
Martian alphabet, spoken with fluency, and sufficiently interpreted into
French to show that such part of it, at any rate, as could be committed to
writing was actually a grammatical and coherent form of speech.

And here I reach an appropriate point at which to remark that this
book of Professor Flournoy's is not the first account which has been
published of M“® Helene. Professor Lemaitrc, of Geneva, printed two
papers about her in the Annales des Sciences Psychigues: first, a long
article in the number for March-April, 1897 — then a reply to M. Lefebure
in the number for May-June, 1897 . In these papers he distinctly claims
supernormal powers for M“' H^l^ne, implying a belief in her genuine
possession by spirits, and even in her previous incarnations, and in
the extra-terrene or ostensibly Martian language. I read these papers
at the time, but put them aside as inconclusive, mainly because that
very language, on which M. Lemaitre seemed most to rely, appeared to
me so obviously factitious as to throw doubt on all the evidence pre-
sented by an observer who could believe ‘that denizens of another planet
talked to each other in a language corresponding in every particular with
simple French idioms, and including such words as quisa for quel, guise for
quelle, veieche for vcfir, veche for vu ; — the fantastic locutions of the nursery.
M. Lemaitre remarks, as a proof of the consistency and reality of the
extra-terrene tongue, ** L'un des premiers mots que nous ayons eus,
mitiche, signifiant monsieur ^ se retrouve plus tard avec le sens de hommeP
T4iat is io say, having transmogrified monsieur into metiche, H^line further
transmutes les messieurs into cee mitiche ; — in naive imitation of ordinary
French usage. And this tongue is supposed to have sprung up indepen-

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

137

837]

dently of all the influences which have shaped terrene grammar in general
or the French idiom in particular ! And even after Professor Flournoy's
analysis of this absurdity I see newspapers speaking of this Martian
language as an impressive phenomenon ! They seem willing to believe
that the evolution of another planet, if it has culminated in conscious life
at all, can have culminated in a conscious life into which we could all of
us enter affably, with a suitable Ollendorff's phrase*book under our arms ;
— eni cie meticheone qudi^^ — ici les hommes (messieurs) sont bons," —
here the men are good ; ” — and the rest of it.

To the student of automatisms, of course, all this irresistibly suggests
the autoraatist's own subliminal handiwork. It is a case of glossolaly,”
or speaking with tongues" ; and we have no modern case — no case later
than the half-mythical Miracles of the Cevennes — where such utterance
has proved to be other than gibberish. I have had various automatic
hieroglyphics shown to me, with the suggestion that they may be cursive
Japanese, or perhaps an old dialect of Northern China ; but I confess
that I have grown tired of showing these fragments to the irresponsive
expert, who suggests that they may also be vague reminiscences of the
scrolls in an Oriental tea-tray.

It seems indeed to be a most difficult thing to get telepathically into
any brain even fragments of a language which it has not learnt. A few
sim])le Italian, and even Hawaiian, words occur in Mrs. Piper's utterances,
coming apparently from departed spirits, [see 960 A and 961), but these,
with some Kaffir and Chinese words given through Miss Browne (871 A),
form, I think, almost the only instances which I know. And, speaking
generally, whatever is elaborate, finished, pretentious, is likely to be of
subliminal facture ; while only things scrappy, perplexed, and tentative
have floated to us veritably from afar.

Analysis of the so-called Martian language proves it to be no exception
to this rule. It is, in fact, a childish, though elaborate, imitation of
French ; — whose true parallel lies in those languages of the nursery which
little brothers and sisters sometimes invent — as a tongue not understanded
of their elders. The outbursts of this Martian speech are noticeable as a
parallel to the “ deific verbiage," which used to throng through the lips of
Mr. le Baron [Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p. 277), and for a long time
impressed itself upon him as having some reality in it somewhere.

The most interesting peculiarity, indeed, in the Martian tongue is its
exclusively French formation \ which would seem to argue its elaboration
in a mind familiar with French alone. Now M“* Smith — who, by the
way, is no linguist * — had some German lessons in her girlhood, and one
js thus led to the curious supposition that the Martian tongue was
invented by some element in her personality which preceded the German
lessons. •

! father, however, was acquainted with some half-dozen European languages
and had besides some knowledge of Latin and Cireek. (See/?^j I tides, p. 15.)

138 CHAPTER VIII [838

I may perhaps recall here, a trivial experience of ray own illustrative of
this ingenious hypothesis of Professor Flournoy’s. 1 once dreamt that
I saw an epitaph in Greek hexameters inscribed on a wall, of which on
waking I remembered only one hue —

Airap 6 p.iv Kara yijv BaXtpov fcvcrc SaKv6p.€vov rrvp,

I could not constnie this line, which is, in fact, nonsense; — till I
remembered in a sudden flash a certain sense of shame felt by me as a
small boy at having thought that Kara meant under — though Kara 70)1/
were yij? Karto,

The line, then, had a meaning : " But he, indeed, beneath the earth,
embraced the strong consuming flame;” — not a well-chosen sentiment for
an epitaph, perhaps, but yet up to the ordinary level of one’s dreaming
self. There must, then, have been some fragment of me yet surviving
from innocent boyhood, and blundering subliminally in the same old style.

838. ''This fact of the primitive nature of Smith’s various
hypnoidal elucubrations, and the different ages of her life to which they
belong, seems to me (says Professor Flournoy, p. 415) to constitute
one of the most interesting psychological points in her mediumship. It
tends to show that her secondary personalities are probably in their origin,
as has sometimes been suggested, phenomena partly of reversion to the
ordinary personality — sundvals or momentary returns of inferior phases,
overpassed for a longer or shorter time, and which should normally have
been absorbed in the development of the individual instead of appearing
externally in strange proliferations. Just as teratology illustrates embry-
ology, which in return explains teratology, and as both of these unite in
throwing light on anatomy, — similarly one may hope that the study of the
facts of mediumship may some day help to furnish us with some just and
fruitful view of normal psychogenesis, — which in return will enable us
better to comprehend the appearance of these singular phenomena;
so that psychology in general may thence acquire a belter and exacter
conception of human personality.”

The faculty here touched upon — the strong reviviscence of long-past
emotional states — seems to me eminently characteristic, at any rate, of
artistic and poetical genius.

The artist must needs desire to have his whole life to draw upon. He
must often wish to live in the past more vividly than in the present, and
to feel again what he has felt, even more than to see again what he has
seen. Visual and auditory memories, pushed to absolute vividness, become
hallucinations of vision or audition ; and this point of absolute hallucina-
tion few artists are able or even desire to reach. But emotional or affective
iHjemory may for some gifted natures be pushed on into all its old actual
vividness with pure gain to art ; nay, if the man himself has grown more
capable of feeling, then the revived emotion (like certain optical memory'
images) may even go beyond the original.

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

139

Thus Sully Pmdhomme says, in speaking of a hidden insurgent
memory of this type : ‘‘ C’est meine cette r<-‘vivisccnce qui seule me per-
mettrait de retoucher les vers que cette petite aventure, si ancienne, m*a
fait commettre, et de faire Wndficier de Texp^rience que j'ai acquise dans
mon art ^expression de mes sentiments d’autrefois.*' And he asks whether
every memory of feeling does not assume a certain character of hallucina-
tion, Wordsworth (as Aubrey de Verc has told us, and as the sonnet
‘‘surprised by joy,** shows) had very much the same experience. And
Littr<^ {Revue Positive^ 1877, p. 660) describes what he calls the '' affective
automnesia’* — or spontaneously arising flow of emotion — with which quite
suddenly, and late in life, he remembered losing a young sister when he
was ton years old : Ce mfime ^venement s*est reproduit avec une peine
non moindre, certes, que celle que j’^prouvais au moment meme, et qui
alia jusqu*a mouiller mes yeux de larmes.** ^

This train of reflections, I think, well illustrates that kinship between
the working of what is admitted as genius and the dreamlike subliminal
mentation with which we are here dealing, of which I have often spoken,
and to which I must again presently recur.

Turning now to the Hindoo pre-incarnation, we observe that it offers a
linguistic problem of a rather different kind. Certain Sanscrit letters
are written, and certain Sanscrit words are uttered — mixed, it is true,
with much quasi-Sanscrit gibberish, and not exceeding what a quick eye
and memory might pick up in a few hours from a Sanscrit grammar.
H^'l^nc, however — whose complete good faith is vouched for on all sides
and who herself undoubtedly believes with her whole heart in the spirit-
hypothesis — denies that she ever consulted or even to her knowledge saw,
a Sanscrit grammar. Again, M. Flournoy’s careful researches have shown
that incidents of the Indian history^ or pseudo-history, on which the narra-
tive of this incarnation turns, are undoubtedly derived from a particular
passage in a rare and antiquated history of India by de Maries — which
IM”" Smith asserts that she never saw, and which it seems very improbable
that she have secn.'*^ This knowledge is worked up in a way indicat-
ing considerable familiarity with the East, and quasi-Indian tunes and
gestures are employed with great verisimilitude.

I need not here go into the details of the more modern and accessible
characterisation of Marie Antoinette.

839 . In the fiicts which I have already given, we have got this

' Sec Ribot, des Sentiments^ p. 152.

® St^e, however, Nouvelles Observations (pp. 2 12-2 13), from which it appears that \
gentleman in whose house Smith used to give seances possessed 11 Sanscrit grammar,
and kept it in the room where the stances were held. In the same book (pp. 206-216),
Professor Flournoy points out several other sources besides Maries* history (itself to be
found in the two principal libraries of Clcncva) from which her knowledge of India
®ight have been derived ; and he shows (pp. 203-206) that the Hindoo romance pre-
sented internal contradictions which made it inconsistent with any hypothesis of re-
uicarnation.— Editors.

140 CHAPTER VIII [840

problem reduced to its narrowest form; and I shall «iset forth, as barely
possible, a theory which Professor Flournoy has not invoked. I agree
with him that the notion of the truth of the Indian romance must be quite
dismissed. But I do not therefore think it certain that M"® Smith must
have unconsciously seen de Martes’ history and a Sanscrit grammar, since
it seems to me just possible that the knowledge of de Marlas and of
Sanscrit may have been clairvoyantly acquired by her subliminal self.

Further, it has sometimes been alleged that discarnate spirits may
be concerned in the composition of such romances, on the hypothesis
that if they do act upon human minds, they probably so act sometimes to
amuse themselves^ as well as to please or inform us. I know of no evidence,
indeed, of their having any power to injure us, but it is thought by some
that there is a good deal of evidence of tricky, playful interference, and
that a kind of literary impulse to write or act out romances^ through the
intermediacy of some human being, may be one form of this mystifying
inter\Tntion. There is, however, no need to postulate the existence of
tricky spirits when the phenomena can be adequately accounted for by the
known tendencies of the subliminal self, as exemplified in such cases as
the '^Clelia” and Newnham writings (830 A and 849 A), and Sally
Beauchamp (234 A).

840. I pass on from these reincarnational romances to certain
minor, but interesting phenomena, which Professor Flournoy calls teleolo-
gical automatisms. These are small acts of helpfulness — beneficen t synergies^
as we might term them, in contrast with the injurious synergies, or com-
bined groups of hurtful actions, with which hysteria has made us familiar.
We have already printed several incidents of this type in our Proceedings
and Journal. (See, for instance, the trivial but instructive case of Mrs.
Verrall and the envelopes, given in 818 A.)

“One day,” says Professor Flournoy (p. 55), “Miss Smith, when
desiring to lift down a large and heavy object which lay on a high shelf,
was prevented from doing so because her raised arm remained for some
seconds as though petrified in the air and incapable of movement. She
took this as a warning, and gave up. the attempt. At a subsequent stance
Leopold stated that it was he who had thus fixed H^l^ne’s arm to prevent
her from grasping this object, which was much too heavy for her, and
would have caused her some accident.

“ Another time, a shopman, who had been looking in vain for a certain
pattern, asked Hdlene if by chance she knew what had become of it.
H 61 ene answered mechanically and without reflection — * Yes, it has been
sent to Mr. J.’ (a client of the house). At the same time she saw before
her the number 18 in large black figures a few feet from the ground, and
added instinctively, * It was sent eighteen days ago.' [This was in the
highest degree improbable, but was found to be absolutely correct.] Leo-
pold had no recollection of this, and does not seem to have been the
author of this cryptomnesic automatism.”

841 ] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 141

A similar phcn9menon has also been noted (p. 87) when warning is
conveyed by an actual phantasmal figure.

M“* Smith has seen an apparition of I-,eopold, barring a particular
road, under circumstances which make it probable that M”*" Smith would
on that day have had cause to regret taking that route. (Compare the
case of an apparition seen by a lady near an open lift, referred to at the
end of 823 ; and the warning to Socrates to change his route, see 814.)

841. The next question is as to whether supernormal faculty of any
kind is manifested in Helene’s phenomena. There does appear to be
some telepathy (see p. 363, &c.), and of telepathy Professor Flournoy
speaks as follows: —

‘‘One may almost say that, if telepathy did not exist, it would be
necessary to invent it. I mean by this that a direct action between living
beings, independently of the organs of sense, is a thing so in accord with
all that we know of nature that it would be difficult not to assume its
existence a priori^ even were no sign of it perceptible. How could one
believe, indeed, that centres of chemical phenomena so complex as the
nervous centres could find themselves in activity without transmitting
various undulations — X, Y, or Z rays — passing through the skull as the
sun passes through glass, and going on to act, at any distance, on their
homologues in other skulls ? It is a mere question of intensity. . . .

“ If telepathy is considered strange, mystic, occult, supernormal, &c.,
it is because this character has been gratuitously conferred on it by making
of this imponderable link between organisms a purely spiritual communica-
tion of soul to soul, independent of matter and of space. That such a
metaphysical union does exist I am ready to believe, but it is to introduce
a gratuitous confusion if one substitutes this problem of high speculation
— which abandons the strictly scientific ground and sets aside the principle
of psycho-physical parallelism — for the empirical problem of telepathy,
which is perfectly concordant with that parallelism and in no way contra-
dicts established science.”

Now, of course, it has been obvious from the outset of our researches
that it would be very desirable if we could trace some relation between
telepathy and ether vibrations. There are doubtless endless vibrations
waiting to be intelligibly appropriated ; — and telepathy is a phenomenon
greatly in need of an explanation. The more complex any object is,
moreover, the more strangely it will vibrate ; and the more sensitive any
object is, the more strangely will it receive and respond to vibrations.

Nevertheless, when we have said this — ^as Sir W. Crookes has said it
with great impressiveness {Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. pp. 348-352) —
we have said nearly all that can be said for the vibration-theory of
telepathy. In Chapter VI. (pp. 245-246), I have attempted to show the
inadequacy of this theory to cover the facts, and have suggested that
telepathic observations niay in time teach us something of the relation of
life to the organism.

142

CHAPTER VIII

[842

842. Most instructive of all will it be if we can obtain telepathy from
discamate spirits, and especially if we can get any glimpse of a rela-
tion between their mode of being and the cosmic ether. On this point
Professor Flournoy writes as follows (p. 394) :

“ It is obvious that the hypothesis of spirits involves no a priori im-
possibility or absurdity. It does not even contradict, as is sometimes
supposed, that fundamental law of physiological psychology — the psycho-
physical parallelism — which insists that every mental phenomenon must
have a physical correlative. For in spite of our habit of considering the
narolecular or atomic phenomena of the brain, the catabolism of the
neurones, as the true concomitant of the conscious processes, it is quite
possible — it is even probable enough — that these molecular movements do
not constitute the ultimate physical term immediately adjoining the mental
world {cotoyanth monde mental')^ but that the true physical or spatial corre-
latives of psychological or non-spatial phenomena ought to be sought in
the vibrations of that imponderable matter, the ether, in which ponderable
atoms and molecules are plunged somewhat after the fashion of grains of
dust in the atmosphere.”

I quote these words because, — obvious though their contention must
seem to all thinking persons, — it is common enough to see phrases used
as though our notions were still bounded by the molecular ; — as though we
did not knowj as certainly as we know anything, that the great mystery of
existence is only just beginning, in that inconceivable world of ether, pre-
cisely where our utmost analysis fails us, and our mathematics are reduced
to a jungle of infinities and of contradictions.

And now as to the question of possible telepathy from the dead in
Helene’s case. The instance with most in its favour is described by
Professor Flournoy as follows (p. 406) : —

In a silting at my house (February 12th, 1899) Smith has a vision of
a village on a height covered with vines; she sees a small old man coming
down thence by a stony road. He looks like a “ demi-monsieur ” buckled
shoes, large soft hat, shirt-collar unstarched, with points rising to his cheeks,
&c. A peasant in a blouse whom he meets bows to him as to a personage of
importance; they talk a patois which H< 51 tine cannot follow. Slie has an
impression that she knows the village; but she cannot identify it. Soon the
land.scape disappears, and the old man, now clothed in v/hitc and seen in a
luminous .space [implying that he is in the next world] seems to come nearer.
At this moment, as she sits with her right arm resting on the table, Leopold
dictates with the forefinger, Lower her arm. I obey ; H^ 16 ne’s arm at first
resists strongly ; then yields at once. She seizes a pencil, and during the
usual struggle as to the way to hold it whether in her own habitual
fashion— between forefinger and middle finger— or in the ordinary way],
“You aae squeezing my hand too hard ! ” she cries to the imagined little old
man who, according to Leopold, wishes to write through her ; — “ You hurt me;
don’t press so hard; what can it matter to you whether it is a pencil or a
pen?” Then she drops the pencil and takes a pen, and holding it between

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

143

thumb and forefingcs writes slowly in an unknown handwriting, Chaumoniet
syndic. Then returns the vision of the village ; — we wish to know its name ;
and she ends by perceiving a guide-post on which she spells out Chessenaz —
a name unknown to us. Finally having, at my desire, asked the old man
the date when he was syndic, she hears him answer, 1839. Nothing more
can be learnt; the vision disappears and gives place to a possession by
Leopold, who in his big Italian voice talks at length about various matters. I
question him on the incident of the unknown village and syndic; his answers,
interrupted by long digressions, are to this effect : “ I am looking — I turn
my thoughts along that great mountain with a tunnel in it whose name I do
not know [Leopold— the soi^isani Cagliostro — who returns from the eighteenth
century, is naturally not well up in modern geographical names; but this
is the hill of Fort de rEcluse]; 1 see the name of Chessenaz — a village on a
height— a road leading up to it. Look in that village ; you will find the
name [Chaumoniet] : try to verify the signature ; you will get a proof that
the signature is really that of this man.”

1 ask him whether he secs all this in Hdl^ne’s memories— “ AT? or
whether she has ever been at Chessenaz : — “ Ask her ; she will know ; I have
not followed her in all her excursions.”

Il^lfene, when awake, could give no information. But next day I found
on the map a little village of Chessenaz in the department of Haute-Savoie,
at twenty-six kilometres from Geneva. . . .

[A fortnight later Helen secs the vision of the other day reappear— the
village, the little old man ; — but accompanied by a curi,, who seems intimate
with him, and whom he calls “ my dear friend Bournier.'* Leopold promises
that this cur^ will write his name for Helen.]

At the next sitting in my house, March 19th, I remind Leopold of this
promise. . . . The curd at last takes her hand as the syndic had done
and writes very slowly the words Burnicr saluU . . .

1 wrote to the Mairie at Chessenaz, and the Mayor, M. Saunier, was good
enough to answer me at once. “ During the years 183S and 1839,” he said, the
syndic of Chessenaz was Jean Chaumontet, whose signature I find in various
documents of that date. We had also for cure M. Andr^ Burnier, from
November 1824 to February 1841, during which period all the actes des
naissancesy &c., bear his signature. But I have found in our archives a
document with both signatures, wd)ich I send you.'’

[Reproductions are given (p. 409) of the actual signatures, and of the signa-
Kires given by M”® Smith. The handwritings were markedly similar.]

Profes.sor Flournoy’s first idea naturally was that M’*® Smith had seen
at some time or other some acts or documents signed by the syndic or the
cure of Chessenaz, and that these visual impressions had reappeared in her
somnambulic state, and had served as internal models for the signatures
which .she traced in trance. She informed him, in fact, that she had
relations in the neighbourhood, with whom she had stayed some dozen
years earlier, but she had no recollection of having ever seen or heard of
Chessenaz, or of the two names given in her trance. Both names are,
However, not uncommon in tliat region, and it seems possible that during
her visit her friends may have shown her some family document bearing

CHAPTER VIII

144

[843

the signatures, which— we must assume — (for her r probity is beyond
question) had faded from her supraliminal memory.^

843. This case of Professor Flournoy's, then — this classical case, as
it may already be fairly termed — may serve here as our culminant example
of the free scope and dominant activity of the unassisted subliminal self.
The telepathic element in this case, if it exists, is relatively small ; what we
are watching in H^tene Smith resembles, as I have said, a kind of
exaggeration of the submerged constructive faculty, — a hypertrophy of
genius — without the innate originality of mind which made even the
dreams of R. I.. Stevenson a source of pleasure to thousands of readers.

In reference to the main purpose of this work, such cases as these,
however curious, can be only introductory to automatisms of deeper
moment. In our attempt to trace an evolutive series of phenomena
indicating ever higher human faculty, the smallest telepathic incident, —
the most trivial proof, if proof it be, of communication received without
sensory intermediation from either an incarnate or a discarnate mind,
outweighs in importance the most complex ramifications and burgeonings
of the automatist's own submerged intelligence.

I pass on, then, to evidence which points, through motor automatisms,
to supernormal faculty ; and I shall begin by citing in 843 A and B certain
experiments (due to Professor Richet and to Mr. G. M. Smith) in the
simplest of all forms of motor automatism, viz., table-tilting, with results
which only telepathy can explain. It will be seen that these experiments
are closely parallel to our simplest sensory experiments in telepathy, as
recorded in Chapter VI, And it may be remembered that the trans-
ferences of diagrams there described sometimes contained a motor as
well as a risual element \ — the percipient not only discerning a " mind’s
eye ” picture of the diagram, but also feeling an impulse to dm 7 e/ it.

Experiments like these should be repealed as often as possible.
Trivial though they seem, they may with a little care be made absolutely
conclusive. Had Professor Richet's friends, for example, been willing to
prolong this series, we might have had a standing demonstration of tele-
pathy, reproducible at will.

844. I pass on to some experiments with Planchctte, in which an
element of telepathy was shown. The account came from Mrs, Alfrejl
Moberly, Tynwald, Hythe, Kent, and was corroborated, with some addi-
tional examples, by two other ladies present at the time.

(From Proceedings S,P.R., vol. ii. p. 235.)

. May 9/^, 1884.

The operators were placed out of sight of the rest of the company, who
selected— in silence— a photograph, one of an albumful, and fixed their
attention on it. We — the operators — ^were requested to keep our minds a
blank aii far as possible and follow the first involuntary motion of the

1 Further considerations supporting this view are given in Nouvelles Observations f
pp, 232-237.— Editors.

\

MOTOR ATUOMATISM

845 ]

MS

planchette. In thr^e out of five cases it wrote the name or initial or some
word descriptive of the selected portrait. We also obtained the signatures
to letters selected in the same manner. We both knew perfectly well that
qve were writing — not the spirits, as the rest of the company persist to this
day in believing — but had only the slightest idea what the words might
prove to be.

We have tried it since, and generally with some curious result. A
crucial lest was offered by two gentlemen in the form of a question to
which we couldn’t pos.sibly guess the answer. “ Where’s Toosey ? The
answer came, “ In Vauxhall Road.” Toosey,” they explained, was a pet
terrier who had disappeared; suspicion attaching to a plumber living in the
road mentioned, who had been working at the house and whose departure
coincided with Toosey’s.

Of course, in the case of the inquiry after the lost dog, we may sup-
pose that the answer given came from the questioner’s own mind. Mrs.
Moberly and her friends seem to have been quite aware of this ; and
were little likely to fall into the not uncommon error of asking Planchette,
for instance, what horse will win the I!)erby, and staking, perhaps, some
pecuniary consideration on the extremely illusory reply.

846 . In the next case there is an apparent element of prophecy ; and
I quote it in order to show how fallacious this appearance is, and how easily
an ordinary mental anticipation of the future, if it in any way becomes
exleniaiiscdf may look like a revelation. Miss Summcrbell is well known
to me as a careful observer.

(From Proceedings S,P.R., voL iii. p. 2 .)

I have used Planchette a great deal, but the result has generally been
noiKScnse ; but I remembered two occasions when it correctly interpreted the
thought of some one in the room, whose hands were not upon it. About a year
ago, we were amusing ourselves by asking it what Christmas presents we should
have. My hands were upon Planchette, and I believe Miss L^ay’s, but in any
case it is quite certain that neither of the persons who were touching it could
possibly know the answer to the qiie.slion I asked. I said, “ What will Miss 1'.
have at Christmas.^ ” Miss T. was in the room, but not near the table. Plan-
chette immediately wrote down a rather large sum of money. I asked, ‘‘ Who
is to give it? ” It wrote “15. and one other.” Some weeks afterwards I met
Miss T., who asked me if 1 remembered what Planchette had written. I re-
membered it perfectly. She said, “ I have received more than that sum, but I
knew about it at the time, though not the exact sum, and I believe that must
have been thought-reading, for I am certain that nobody in the room knew of
it but myself.” The money was given by a relative whose surname begins with
15., and another person.

On another occasion, we asked a friend to dictate a question, the answer
to which we did not know. She said, “Wlio is coming to breakfast to-
morrow ? ” Miss Lay and I placed our hands upon Planchette and asked the
question. It wrote “ Lucas.” Our friend said that was tlie name of the^gentle-
*^an who was coming to breakList. Neither Mi.ss Lay nor I had ever heard
him before. Our friend said, “Ask his Christian name.” We asked; it
wrote “William.” “Is that right?” we asked our friend. “I don’t know,”
VOL. II. K

CHAPTER VIII

146

she answered; never heard his Christian name.” Then somebody else,
who was not touching Planchette, remembered that there was a song by him
somewhere among the music. We looked, and at length found the song by
•* William Lucas of whom we had never heard before, nor have we heard of
him since. L. D. Summerbell.

1 can thoroughly endorse these statements, and could multiply instances
equally curious. — ^J. M. Lay.

The prophecy of the Christmas gift was doubtless a mere reflection of
Miss T.*s anticipation — transferred telepathically to the writer’s subliminal
self, and as regards the Christian name William,” we may assume that
(as in the case of the word Wem in a previous narrative) the name printed
on the song, although no one consciously remembered it, had been vaguely
noticed by Mr. Lucas’ friend at some previous time, and now reappeared
from the stores of unconscious memory.

846. In another case, Mr. Allbright, of Mariemont, Birmingham,
a chemical manufacturer (whose letter to me I abbreviate here), asked
a young lady, of whose complete ignorance of the facts of his business
he felt quite sure, for the name of a waste product occurring on a large
scale in his manufactory. He meant the answer to be ‘‘ gypsum,” but
chloride of calcium ” was written, and this was also true ; although,
had he thought of this substance, he would have thought of it by its trade
name of muriate of lime.” Again, he asked what was his firm’s port of
importation. He meant the answer to be ” Gloucester,” but “ Wales ”
was written; and this again was true at the time, as he was just then
importing through Cardiflf. These answers startled him so disagreeably
that he refused to make further experiments. But I cite the case here for
the express purpose of pointing out that no insuperable difficulty is pre-
sented by the fact that the answers, while substantially known to the
inquirer, were not those on which his supraliminal mind was fixed.

847. In my next case an answer is given which is in fact true,
although the questioner believed it at the time to be false. The account,
which I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 5 , came from Mr. W.
Riddell of Dunster, Somerset.

July 1884 .

The way I became acquainted with “ Planchette ” was as follows A
friend of my wife’s is staying with us, and one day she was talking about
Planchette,” and saying that she had one at her home, in London, and had
seen some remarkable answers given by it when a certain young lady had
her hands on it. Both my wife and I laughed at the idea, saying nothing
would make u.s believe in it. Miss B. (my wife’s friend), to prove herself
right, sent for her “ Planchette.” In the course of a day or two it arrived, and
having put it together Miss B. and I tried it, but without any result beyond
*a few lines up and down the paper. Then my wife put her hands on it with
Miss B., and in a very short time it began to move, and on being asked
answered questions very freely, some rightly and some quite wrongly-
Amongst those answered rightly were the following. (I may here observe that

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

147

not only did my wife and myself not believe in it, but we were antagonistic to
it in feeling.) Our lirsf question was asked by myself, my wife and Miss B.
having their hands on it. I sjiid, “ How many shillings has Miss B. in her
nurse?” Ans. — “Four”; right. I then asked how many coins I had in
mine. Ans.— “ Five ” ; right. I thought I had many more. I then took
a playing card from a pack in a box, looked at it, put it face down on a
tal)le, and asked for its colour. Ans. — “ Red ” ; right. Number — “ Seven ” ;
ri.rlit. Name— “ Hearts”; right. This, I must confess, seemed to me very
wonderful, as neither my wife nor Miss B. could possibly have known any-
thing about the card. I then took a visiting card from the bottom of the
biisket, and having looked at it, placed it face downwards on the table, and
asked “ Planchette ” for the name on it. This it seemed quite unable to give,
b\it after a long time it wrote “ clergyman,” which was a wonderful answer, as

the card was that of a Rev. who was here two winters ago, helping our

rector. After this we did not get anything more satisfactory.

Now, here, as no complete list of the answers has been preserved, we
cannot feel sure that the answer ^'five,” as to the number of coins in
Mi. RiddelPs pocket, may not have been right by mere accident. But my
point is that, even excluding the idea of mere chance coincidence, there
is still nothing in the answer which obliges us to go beyond Mr. RiddelPs
own mind. His subliminal self may well have been aware of the number
of coins in his pocket, although his supraliminal self was not.

848 . 'rhesc few cases may suffice to lead us up to the palmary case
of the late Rev. P. H. Newnham, Vicar of Maker, Devonport, who was
personally known to Edmund Gurney and myself, and was a man in all
ways worthy of high respect. 'Hie long series of communications between
Mr. Newnham and his wife, which <late back to 1871, and whose con-
temporaneous written record is preserved in the archives of the S.P.R.,
mnst, I think, always retain their primacy as early and trustworthy
examples of a telepathic transference where the percipient’s automatic
s(:rii)t answers questions penned by the agent in such a position that the
percipient could not in any normal manner discern what those questions
were. No part of our evidence seems to me more worthy of study
than this. Mr. Newnham had for many years paid careful attention to
psychical phenomena, and especially had been conscious of a frequent
involuntary transmission of thought from himself to Mrs. Newnham. An
instance of “psychical-invasion” in sleep when Mrs. Newnham discerned
his presence is quoted in C. This occurred before their marriage.

849 . Subsequently, Mr. Newnham made many attempts to transmit
thought voluntarily to his wife, but succeeded only in the year 1871,
tiuring a period of about eight months.

^^uring that period he made notes from day to day in a private diary,
which diary he was good enough to place in my hands in 1884. There

40 pages of MS. notes, containing 385 automatically-written replJfes to
n^cstions. Mr. Newnham hiade the experiments purely for his own
satisfaction, and without any idea of submitting them to public inspection,

CHAPTER VIII

148

[850

and consequently the questions include many references to his domestic
affairs at the time, to family jokes, and to other matters which, while illus--
trating the intimate and spontaneous character of the diary, are not suited
for publication. Mr. Newnham, however, kindly made long extracts for
me, some of which I print in 849 A. I carefully compared the extracts
with the original diary, and consider that they give a quite fair impression
of it. Mrs. Newnham independently corroborated her husband's account,^
and I also talked the matter over with both of them.

It must be distinctly understood that Mrs. Newnham did not see or
hear the questions which Mr. Newnham wrote down. The fact, therefore,
that her answers bore any relation to the questions shows that the sense of
the questions was telepathically conveyed to her. This is the leading and
important fact. The substance of the replies written is also interesting,
and Mr. Newnham has some good comments thereon. But even had the
replies contained no facts which Mrs. Newnham could not have known,
this would not detract from the main value of the evidence, which consists
in the fact that Mrs. Newnha7n^s hand wrote replies clearly and repeatedly
answeriny^ questions which she neither heard nor saw.

850. I give in 850 A a series of experiments on a smaller scale,
but analogous to those of Mr. and Mrs. Newnham.

851. In the Newnham case we have the advantage of seeing before
us the entire series of questions and answers, and thus of satisfying our
selves that the misses (which in that case are very few) are marked as well
as the hits, and consequently that the coincidences between question and
answer are at any rate not the result of chance. In several other cases
which I have known, where the good faith of the informants has been
equally above question, the possibility of an explanation by chance alone
has been a more important element in the problem. All our evideiice

1 Mr. Newnham procured for me two autograph letters from eye-witnesses of
some of the experiments, who do not, however, wish their names to be published, on
account of prejudices still existing in certain f|u.arters against the experiments as invoiv
ing questionable agency. One writer says: “You wrote the question on a slip <'f
paper and pul it under one of the ornaments of the chimney-piece — no one seeing wluu
you had written. Mrs. Newnham .sat apart at a small table. I recollect you kept a
book of the questions asked and answers given, as you thought some new power mijzht
be discovered, and you read me from it some of the re.sults, I remember particul irly
questions and answers relating to the selection of a curate for IJ. My wife and her sister
saw experiments conducted in thi.s manner. Mrs. Newnham and you were sitting at
different tables.” Another eye-witness writes : ** I and my sister were staying at — -*•
and were present at many of the Planchette experiments of Mr. and Mrs. Newnham.
Mr. and Mrs. Newnham sat at different tables .some distance apart, and in such a posifina
that it was quite impossible Mrs. Newnham could see what question was written down.
The subject of the questions was never mentioned even in a whisper. Mr. Newnham
• wrote them down in pencil and sometimes passed them to me and my sister to see, hut
not often. Mrs. Newnham immediately answered the questions. Though not always
correct, they (the answers) always referred to the questions. Mr. Newnham copied out
the pencil questions and answers verbalim each day into a diary.”

352] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 149

has tended to show tliat the telepathic power itself is a variable thing ;
that it shows itself in flashes, for the most part spontaneously, and seldom
persists through a series of deliberate experiments. And if an automatist
possessing power of this uncertain kind has exercised it at irregular
moments and with no scientific aim ; — and has kept, moreover, no steady
record of success and failure ; — then it becomes difficult to say that even
some brilliant coincidences afford cogent proof of telepathic action. The
case which is next cited (in 851 A) presents these drawbacks; but
it presents also positive points of interest and corroborations of memory
quite sufficient, I think, to justify me in laying it before my readers as an
example of telepathy acting — not just in the way in which we should like
it to act, but in the way in which it apparently does act ; — and with that
strange intercurrence, moreover, which we so often find of something like
clairvoyance and premonition mingling with the reflection of tlioughts
which pass through minds in rapport with the automatist’s. But I quote
the case as one where telepathy from the living seems to play at least a
considerable part in supplying the contents of the messages.

852. I pass on to a case where an actual conversation goes on
between the distant agent and the automatist, informing the automatist
of matters which the agent— supraliminally or subliminally — wishes him to
know. Evidentially it is not strong, for it depends upon a single memory,
corroborated on one collateral point alone (although not invalidated upon
any point) ; and the writer was not personally known to any of us. The
date is also very remote. On the other hand, the reasons for the absence
of corroboration seem satisfactory ; and in my view at least the narrative
offers internal evidence of honesty and care, while the incident is such as
might stamp itself permanently on the mind.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 48.)

Mrs. Kirby wrote to me from Santa Cruz, California, August 13th, 1886,
as follows : —

In 1850 1 left New York for San F'rancisco. Spiritualism, in the sense in
wliich that word is now used, had no existence. The facts and philosophy it
covers were unknown, except partially to the very few readers of Swedenborg’s
cumbrous and involved theology.

Attention had been c.alled to some rappings which had made themselves
icard in a house in Rochester, N. Y., and there had been some violent
demonstrations (breaking of windows, moving of furniture, and unlocking of
locked drawers and doors) in the house of an orthodox clergyman somewhere
Jn Connecticut.

1^53 1 was living on a ranche three miles from what is now the city
of Santa Cruz. (It was but a village then, though they called it a town.) My
amily consisted of my husband, myself, and, in a certain sense, of a ygung
’'nglish sailor, a healthy, kind-hearted, and very decent, though very ignorant
c ow, whom my husband had employed to work on the ranche during the
previous year. His name was Thomas Travers, and he had just made his
(x) to a written agreement for another year’s service. As it will be seen,

CHAPTER VIII

ISO

1 had no servant, but Tom stood ready to help me in any way he could. For
instance, when, at intervals of weeks, visitors would make their appearance, he
would immediately kill and clean some chickens for me. (If you wanted
beef-steak in those days you could only have it by killing an ox. The nearest
neighbours sometimes combined and took a quarter each.)

On one occasion the two most intelligent men in town came out, a Dr.
McLean and the Rev. — Dryden, and they presently asked me if 1 had a small
table I could let them have (while I was busy, and my husband a mile off at his
tannery), with which they could continue some strange experiments that had
lately been made among our mutual friends in town. Spirits tipped the table,
and they said sentences were spelled by the use of the alphabet. That A\s and
B^s had in this way heard of their long since departed children, &c., &c.

I listened eagerly. I had left a large circle of friends at the East, and hen
was not one of the old kind : Lucretia Mott, Lucy Stone, Garrison, Purvis. A
view of the entire bay of Monterey from my sitting-room window did not pre-
vent me from longing continually for a little of the old sympathy. One of my
most devoted friends had a few years since passed to the other shore ; my
young brother was there too. If I could establish communication with them,
what a relief, what a pleasure it would be to me !

My smallest table was in size 3 ^ ft. by ft. My husband was willing lo
test the matter, and as we were given to understand that three or four persons
together would be more likely to succeed than two (since magnetism or elec-
tricity was drawn from them by the invisibles to help in accomplishing their
object), Mr. K. went out to Tom’s shanty and asked him to come and sit at the
table with us.

We had not held our hands one moment on the table before it tipped very
decidedly, and I forthwith proceeded to repeat the alphabet. The doing .so,
however, struck me as worse than ridiculous ; it was very unpleasant, too, and
I observed that if spirits were present they could hear me say the letters in my
mind as well as if they were uttered from my tongue.

“All right. Go ahead!” my husband replied, “ we will sit and wail for
results.”

I did so, and the table tipped promptly to the letters, spelling out —

Mary Howells.” •

As / knew no such person, I asked if she was a friend of Mr. K.’s?
Answer: “No.” Of Tom’s ? Answer: “Yes.” A relation of his ? Answer:
“Sister.” Are you married ? 1 questioned. Answer: “No.”

“Oh, don’t let us waste any more time!” I exclaimed. “It's all falsehood
and nonsen.se. Here is some one professing to be Tom’s sister who says her
name is Mary Howells, and that she is unmarried. If this were true, of course
her name would be Travers.”

Tom nodded aside to me and said in a low tone —

“ Ye.s, mum. That’s her name. Mary Howells.”

He looked extremely confused and astonished.

“ Why, what do you mean ? ” Mr. K. broke in ; “ your name is Travers, ho'.v
can hers be Howells ? ”

“ No, sir,” Tom replied, looking down, “ my name is Howells.”

‘ But Mr. K. insisted that it could not be. Had he not made his mark aft®*'
the Travers only the other day ? Five minutes were taken up in the attempt to
convince Tom that he did not know his own name.

852 ] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 151

» You see, sir,”«he at length expl^ned, ‘M ran away from a whale ship in
San Francisco, and sailors is so scarce there I iiks afraid they would hunt me
up and take me back, so I just took another name.”

Hardly convinced now, Mr. K. advised him to drop the alias at once,
assuring him that no one would molest him. This he did, and the second year
following married, and he is now the father of twelve girls and three boys who
bear the strangely discovered name.

But to return. Finding that the communication had been so far correct, I
proposed that we should compose ourselves while I repeated the alphabet as
before, still hoping to receive the name of my dear friend. But Tom’s sister
had not accomplished her purpose, and she proceeded to spell the following
words:—

“ I — have — 3. — child — a— girl. — She— is — seven — years — old — and — now —
is—in— a — house— of—ill— fame— in— Cat— Street.— I— want— my — brother —
to— bring — her— away— from— there.”

This was a difficult and painful message to convey, and I told Tom that I
did not like to tell him what was spelt.

*‘She says that she has a little girl seven years old,” I began.

Here he removed his hands quickly from the table, and counting on the
fingers of one hand by those of the other, looked up and observed : —

“ Yes, mum, that’s so. She’s seven now.”

When I gave him the rest of the message he became much excited, and
begged me to assure his sister that he would send home 50 dols. the next month,
and have the child removed to a better place, and that as soon as the crops
were in he would go home and get the child.

1 assured him she could hear all he was saying.

“ But is it true that there is a street called Cat Street?” 1 asked.

“ Yes, mum ; and it is the worst in the city,” he returned.

The following day he acknowledged to me that his sister was a woman of
the town.

I now a.sked my husband to procure me a smaller and lighter table so that
I might sit at it by myself, and in that way be more likely to attract my own
friends. This he did, but to my great annoyance, Mary flowells immediately
presented herself. This time, however, she came to say that her child was ill.
When she left the movements of the table were weak and uncertain.

The following evening, she came to say that the child was much worse,
and she thought it would die. A day or two later she reported it dead. I
asked if the child were now with her, and she replied by very decided move-
ments, that she 7 vas not.

After this, Mary Howells never put in an appearance, and every day I
prayed that some one I loved might speak a word to me. They did not. I
know now that they could not, for want of the honest sailor's electrical help,
which 1 rejected in my ignorance. Seafaring persons are apt 10 possess great
mediuinistic power.

After hearing that the child was dead I wrote a guarded letter to Tom’s
parents, for him, asking how they all were, including the little girl. In due
time I received a reply, or, I should say, Tom did, though he could not read
writing. They said they were all well except Mary’s little girl, who had died.
(They did not say exactly when, but as Tom had not been absent froni*£ngland
much over a year, it must have been within that time, and we had every reason

CHAPTER VIII

152

[852

to believe the mother s statement a true one.) The old people further said that
Mary had married a soldier,

I understood from this that the child’s mother was not wholly depraved,
that she was concerned about the welfare of her little one, and looking about for
help in her destitute circumstances her thoughts had turned to her brother,
most likely persistently turned to him, and this resulted in her leaving her body
temporarily during sleep in search of him. We had assumed that she was, as
we say, “ dead.*’ She had not asserted the fact.

I submit this one experience and will write out another as soon as I can. —
Very truly yours, Georgiana B. Kirby.

A second letter from Mrs. Kirby, dated Santa Cruz, Cal., October
1 2th, 1886, gave further particulars as follows : —

Dear Sir, — Yours of September 9th arrived in due season. My reply
has been delayed by my ineffectual efforts to ascertain the monih when our two
friends, McLean and Dryden, visited us on the rancho, because it was within a
month after this that Mary Howells told me her child was ill, and later that she
was dead, and 1 thought it might not be so difficult to search the death record
of one month for the child under the head of “ Howells.*’ As it is the gentlemen
have proved to me that their visit occurred in 1852, and not in 1853 as I had
supposed, but they could not remember if it were the spring or fall of that year.
This, our ignorance of the date of the death and of the child’s Christian name,
is {the most unsatisfactory part of my record. Neither were mentioned in the
grandfather’s letter, and from Tom never mentioning the name I fancied he did
not know it. I saw him recently, but 1 could not venture to sj)eak to him
of his sister’s illegitimate child. He has twelve living daughters of his own,
and he would be justly offended if I should remind him of how we had
gained a knowledge of his sisters life. He told us that his father wa.s still
alive and living where they always had lived, at Saltash, which he thought
by this time must be a part of Plymouth.

I should explain that neither Dr. McLean nor the Rev. — Dryden were
personally cognisant of our doings, so that they could not act as witnesses in
the case.

You ask if I can point you to any contemporar)' record. Thirty-four years
ago no Spiritualistic paper was piiblislicd in tlie United States, and such a
narration given as true in any ordinary journal would have laid us open to the
charge of lunacy. And had tliis been otherwise, we could not have proclaimed
the fact that the sister of the honest fellow who was working for us was a
disreputable woman.

As to fraud on Tom’s part, he could hardly understand why we wanted
him to sit with his hands on the table. I repeated the letters in my mind
How could he tip the table at the right instant so as to spell words which dis-
closed his sister’s disgrace.^ Then he was in no want of money. He had been
earning 60 dots, a month (and had spent it ail, mostly at Spanish fandangos) ;
and the agreement with my husband, to which he had lately placed his x,
bound him to work for Mr. K. for one year for the sum of 60 dols. a month and
his board and lodging. You, sir, must have read something about the high
price of labour in California in those early years of its settlement.

The sittings w^ere held after supper (or dinner, you would call it), between
seven and nine o’clock.

853 ] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 153

Cat Street was in IMymouth, England. If it has given place to another the
fact of its former existence could be verified. Georgiana B. Kirby.

The actual existence of the “ Cat Street ” of the narrative is shown by
the following letter : —

Post Office, Plymouth, Janmry zyd, 1888.

reply to yours of the 21st instant, I beg to inform you that a few
years ago there was a street named Catte Street, but it is now called Stillman
Street.— I am, sir, yours obediently,

R. A. Leverton (for Postmaster).

The regretted death of Mrs. Kirby soon after the date of her last letter
put an end to this correspondence.

It will be observed that the communications from the woman at Ply-
mouth were received at an hour which, in England, fell in the middle of
the night.

With Mrs. Kirby’s case may compare an old, but carefully evi-
denced, record which 1 give in 852 A.

in that case a warning was received by table- tilting of the approaching
death of a man who (although the experimenter did not know it) was
ying in a state of opium-stupor. The circumstances of his last illness had
Jicvioiisly been predicted by a crystal- vision. It is, of course, conceivable
that, if indeed it was the sick man’s own spirit which gave the message
hroiigh the table, his own spirit also may have inspired tlie crystal-vision,
.’ompare with this case the incident described by Mr. Underwood
865 A) where Mrs. Underwood’s left hand wrote in ^'mirror- writing”
he name of a person two hundred miles off, who was, as was subsequently
earnt, “ in an unconscious state at the time, and very near death, which
occurred two or three days afterwards.” There have been some scattered
ndications, throughout our evidence of automatisms, of a possible pre-
monitory knowledge, or guardian care, possessed and exercised by a man’s
own deeper self, without external spiritual intervention.

1 add in 852 B the case of Signor Bonatti, where, again, some of the
communications through automatic writing are given as coming from
living persons, though the usual communicator frankly styles itself
Secondo,” as being no more than the automatist’s secondary personality.

853. 1 pass on to a small group of cases which form a curious
transition from these communications tnier vivos to communications
wliich I shall class as coining from the dead. These are cases where the
message professes to come from a deceased person, but shows internal
evidence of having come, tclepathically, from the mind of some one
l>resent. I shall begin with a case such as is often cited as proof
(insufficient proof, I think) that a deceased person is communicating.

Our informant, Mr. Lewis, a man of business in Cincinnati, states that

automatist to whom his (Mr. Lewis’s) family were absolutely unknown
'''rote a message, with true name, purporting to come from an infant sister

154 CHAPTER VIII [854

long deceased. Mr. Lewis, naturally enough, accepts this message, as
similar messages have often been accepted, as an indication of his sister's
actual presence.

The account is quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 64.

From Mr. S. Lewis, 347 Baymiller Avenue, Cincinnati.

April 1888.

On January 28th last I called at the house of some friends; and on this
occasion there was some planchette writing. The friends I called on, I believe,
are professed Spiritualists. Some four or five of us (1 also did) sat around a
table in a full and well-lighted room (lighted the entire evening). The operator
of the planchette was a lady; her husband was at the table, also three other
friends, including myself. Different communications (so called) were received
by different ones at the table, from different friends (as the Spiritualists say),
who have passed into the spirit world. 1 can’t give all communications to-day,
but one 1 wish to state. But first let me say that many years since in mj'
father’s family the first little one that came to live— a short time — with them
was a little girl, named Angeline; she lived only about two years and died;
next to this little girl w^as a brother, named Charles (in after life a clergyman
in the Episcopal Chiu'ch) ; and next to Charles was another little sister also
named Angeline, and next to her was another sister named B. Ann; then next
to B. Ann appeared, well, your humble servant, myself^ to behold many of tlu-
beauties of this beautiful world. So that you see that between the two briei.
years of my first little sister, Angeline (ist), and my own coming on this globe
there was born one brother and two sisters; therefore, my first little sister,
Angeline (ist), I never saw; and only heard my mother (in her lifetime) speak
of Angeline (ist), and I have also seen her name in the records, &c., in the
Bible at my old home.

The operator of the planchette, on the evening of which 1 am speaking,
knew nothing of ray father’s family (excepting, of course, myself). I never
had mentioned one word to the operator (of planchette), or any one else in
that little company, anything whatever about iny brothers and sisters or even
about my father’s family in any way or manner ; and besides, we all lived and
grew up in the north part of the State, not far distant from Lake Erie, whilt-
the operator has (I think) lived in the south part of this State not far distant
from the Ohio River ; and there never has been any acquaintance nor any com-
munication between any member of my father’s family (or any one else even) to
give any history or information of any kind to the operator, and I certainly
never gave the operator any information whatever until after the occurrence
and the writing on the planchette, which wrote this evening, January 28th last,
the following, viz. : ** Mr, Lewis ^ / am his sister^ / am glad you came Jure
to-night^ come again (signed) Angeline,^'

Now 1 want to ask, how could originate in the mind of operator any
ideas or thoughts about this little sister Angeline (1st) and myself? I had not
for years past even thought of her until the name was written on the evening
spoken of.

. Tke operator is not, never has been a paid medium. S. Lewis.

854 . Now let us consider a similar message, which might have
produced ‘a similar belief in another informant’s mind. But here it so

854 ] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 155

happened that he tested the alleged fact of death ; and found that the
supposed spirit was still alive at the time of the message. The correspon-
dent, Mr. G. E. Long, is known to Dr. Hodgson.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 65.)

Jersey City, N. J., October zznd^ i888.

... I think I wrote you once that about two years ago I had received what
was said to be a most convincing test of spirit-return, convincing to all except
myself. A young lady, a .Spiritualist and medium, though not a professional,
nor one that ever received one cent in pay, by means of a lettered board and
toy chair, she holding one leg of the chair and I another, while a third leg of
the chair served as a pointer, gave the following by means of the chair : —

First the chair spelt out my name and showed a disposition to get in my
lap; then it spelled out “CARY,” and when I asked for the name of the
“ spirit ” it spelt out *• George (my name), you ought to know me as 1 am Jim.”
But I didn’t, and said so. Then, without my looking at the board, it spelt out
“ Long Island, Jim Rowe,” and “ Don't you remember I used to carry you
when you were a little fellow,” or words to that effect. I had to acknowledge
the truth of it and also to say that as he was an ignorant man he possibly
intended “ CARY ” for carry. I must own I was puzzled for the moment. To
make sure of his power I asked that he count the pickets in the fence outside
of the house and I would go out and confirm his statement. Somehow he
couldn’t agree to this, and even the medium objected. As a last resort I asked
how long he had been in the .spirit land and the answer came, between thirteen
and fourteen years.

Now to the sequel. First it occurred to me a day or two after, that while
all the incidents given were correct, the name should have been given as ROE
instead of ROWE. Second, I w.as upon Long Island this summer, and the
matter coming to my mind I inquired how long Jim Roe had been dead, and
was informed he died last winter ; so when I received this test so convincing
to the believers the man was not dead. — Yours truly,

Geo. E. Long.

On October 26th, 18S8, Mr. Long adds : —

I do not think that the medium was fraudulent. Her family consists of
Mr. S. and three daughters, she being the youngest. I have found all to be
hypnotic subjects, with the exception of the eldest daughter. They are all
believers in Spiritualism, the youngest having been the medium. They do not
sit now, as it is claimed that the sittings, while rich in spiritualistic satisfaction,
were productive of a state of poor health in the medium.

As 1 myself have obtained information supposed to have been impossible
for me to have reached, I cannot .say for certainty that she had not obtained
information about Jim, but I don’t believe she had. As the name Rowe was
being spelled I sat with my eyes turned from the board and had in mind the
name Scudder, and mentally follow'ed the taps of the chair to S C U D — when
the medium said, ** The name Rowe is given,” &c. This would seem to leave
out any involuntary muscular action. Why Rowe should have been given
instead of Roe is still another phase. I wonder whether, if any que^ion of the
Roe family had arisen, I would have had in mind the name of Rowe? If so,
then she produced that which I had long while before been conscious of, but
at the time unconscious of, and had it coupled with an error in spell-

CHAPTER VIII

156

[855

ing that I might have been guilty of had I myself been** called upon at that
moment to spell it. Had she been fraudulent the probability is she would
have spelt it correctly.

It seems to me that the basis of Spiritualism rests mainly upon this phe-
nomenon which men and women in a supernormal condition produce, witliout
understanding it, and credit it to spiritual agencies.

[A general corroboration of Mr. Long's memory of the incident is added
from a lady present at the time, who does not now recall the details.]

855 . The next case was sent to Professor Barrett by a convinced
Spiritualist, as a proof of the reality of intercourse with the departed.
The names were stated, but as 1 am citing the narrative in a sense
differing from that which its writer meant it to bear, I will not now give
them, and will only say that all three persons concerned are of very good
position.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. p. 236.)

One evening, a few years ago, I had with me two young friends,

Mademoiselle de P., now Lady S., and Mademoiselle de P n, her cousin,

who is Grande Gouvernante to the daughters of the Crown Pripce of Germany,
both complete unbelievers in Spiritualism. To amuse them, however, as 1
sometimes write under occult influence, I asked Mademoiselle de P. to fix her
thoughts on some one I did not know, to see whether my hand would write
something true concerning him or her. She did as I requested, and soon my
hand wrote, “ His life has been overshadowed by the act of another.” She
looked astonished and said that the person she was thinking of had had a
brother to whom he was much attached, who had committed suicide.

She then asked if she could be told where she had met him for the first
time. My hand wrote, ‘*It was at the foot of a marble staircase splendidly
illuminated by a July sun ; as you went up he gazed after you as one gazes on
the track of a dazzling meteor.” This was also correct; she had met him, she
said, for the first time at the foot of the staircase of the MinistC^re de la
Guerre; in Paris, and her cousin added that he had been much struck with
her. The only inaccuracies were that the staircase w^as not a marble but a
stone one, and that it was a September sun that shone.

When I write in this way the ideas do not come {consciously at least) from
my mind, and my hand seems to be gently moved by some external infiuence.

Now I confess that this description of the staircase, and the meteor,
and so forth, suggests to me as its source, not so much a male spirit
disembodied as a female spirit still in the flesh, and the romantic tone of
the communication seems to reflect the mood of the persons present.

856 . In the next case the explanation suggested by Professor
Alexander is probably the correct one.

(From the Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 112-115.) The following
account of some experiments in table-tilting was sent to us by Professor
Alexander, of Rio de Janeiro, in March 1892. He writes : —

Rio de Janeiro, March 21st [1892].

Dr. Barcellos is a gentleman who resides at Botafogo, Rio de Janeiro,
where he not only has a considerable practice, but is also generally esteemed

856 ] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 157

as an honourable and sensible man. Having studied hypnotism, he was
desirous of witnessing some of the allied facts to be observed in psychical
research. Towards the middle of last year we agreed to hold formal sittings
at his house with the purpose of eliciting, if it were possible, physical
phenomena. We devoted Monday evenings to our investigations, the circle
being composed, with the exception of myself, of members of the doctor’s
own family. Donna Maria de Villas Boas Barcellos, a school teacher, who
acted as medium, has, if table-tilting be no proof to the contrary, arrived at
years of mature discretion. She is Dr. Barcellos’ sister-in-law, and the mother
of live children. The few sittings held began on the 31st of August 1891, and
were discontinued about the end of October of the same year. They were sulv
ject to much interruption by children and visitors, and were finally stopped
when Donna Maria was appointed to a school at a distance. With the excep-
tion of some slight crepitations, more felt than heard, the stances, so far as
physical phenomena go, were a failure. The lady, doubtless, moved the table
herself, although she did not seem to be aware of it. As for the messages,
they were nearly always of a trivial character, and occasionally they were false.
There seems, however, to have been a noticeable percentage of verifiable truth
in what came through Donna Maria’s automatism. Before our sittings began,
this lady was seated at the meza fallante (speaking-table) with members of
her own family when the presence of her father, then deceased, was announced.
He was asked to give the names of the people present. This he did, including
that of a boy who was not in the room at the lime, with the information that he
had just fallen down in the mud. Immediately afterwards the little fellow came
itUo the room crying and confirmed the statement made through the table.
Tlie sitter.s, who were only seeking for amusement, became frightened and
abandoned all further experiments. At our own sittings, among much that
was wearisome and unprofitable, a few encouraging incidents occurred. On
one occasion (October 26th, 1S91) Dr. Barcellos asked mentally about the state
of a young lady patient who was ill of smallpox. The table replied that she
would die on the following morning at eight o’clock. She did not die, but at
the hour mentioned she bec.imc much worse. On another occasion, after I had
retired, details were given about the private life of an Individual who lived in
V^assouras, up country, which were by no means flattering to him. A Sefthor
Loziuia, the doctor's brolher-in-law, who was standing away from the table,
was the only person present who had previously known of these particulars.
He declared that the information thus obtained was exact.

So much for the general character of our sittings, of which I give an idea,
so tliat the incident I am about to relate may not have more than its due
importance.

On the 2ist September 1891, I was seated at the table with Dr. Barcellos,
his niece Sylvia, and Donna Maria Barcellos, when the words came, “ The vase
is broken.” We asked what vase. “ (The vase) at your house, the vase of
phenic acid.” I demanded the hour, and the reply >vas, “ At eight o’clock.” Of
this an immediate note was taken at my request by one of the children seated
at another table. 1 transferred this note to my pocket-book where it read.s aj
follows : —

2 ist 0/ Sep^em^er, 1891.-— 0 vaso se quebrou— De sua casa— O vaso do
acido phenico — As 8 horas.” *

1 at once looked at my watch. It wanted some four or five minutes to

CHAPTER VIII

158

[856

eight. I knew, however, that it was not going well at the time, and I forgot to
compare it afterwards with the right time. When this message had been given
Sylvia Barcellos rose from her place, and went into the dining-room, where she
told the others what had happened. Some visitors who were there spoke of
retiring ; but they were urged to stay, as it was only eight o'clock—the hour
then marked by the timepiece on the wall. Thus a lucky chance determined
the time of the message, which my carelessness in neglecting to see how much
I was out might have left in doubt.

1 did not at first suppose that the above words had any more importance
than other things that came through the tabic. It was, therefore, an agreeable
surprise when on a subsequent occasion Dr. Barcellos told me that the message
had been confirmed. 1 wrote down a resume of his statement, which I now
copy from my note-book ; —

“ Donna M. on arriving home was being told of fright, when she interrupted
them, telling them what had come through table. They had just remarked
time (eight o’clock) and went to give food to sick child — when noise of break-
age. They exclaimed, ‘O vaso de acido phenico se qucbroii,’ In truth, the
jug had been upset by the dog, and had fallen against the vase of phenic acid,
making the noise.”

Neither the vase in question, which was of porcelain, nor the water-jug was
really broken. The cause of the accident was a dog that had got into the
room where the sick child lay. The animal had, no doubt, endeavoured to
drink out of the jug, which was standing on the floor near a chair.

The house where Donna Maria was then living is situated about a kilometre’s
distance from Dr. Barcellos’ residence, so that the explanation by hyperaesthesia
of the hearing — in a person who could hardly be said to be out of her normal
condition — seems to me to be absurd. Yet the lady was no clairvoyant, for the
vase was not really broken. Even if her character were not above suspicion,
she could not have arranged the incident beforehand, for a dog does not take
part in a plot. The coincidence in time, and the exact mention of what was
supposed to have occurred, renders mere chance an extremely unlikely element.
We are therefore limited to one hypothesis — the emotional impression of the
girls who exclaimed, ** O vaso de acido phenico se quebrou,” influenced their
mother telepathically, and the table was the means of bringing to the surface
the message w^hich her subconsciousness had received.

Alfred Alexander.

The evidence of the other witnesses was given in Portuguese, of which
we print English translations, kindly furnished by Professor Alexander.

It was a little past eight when the visitors who were with me in the dining-
room in the evening of the 21st of September 1891 spoke of retiring.

Luiza Barcellos.

March 21s /, 1S92.

On the 2ist of September 1891, I witnessed a curious fact in telepathy.
At that date, at eight o’clock in the evening, various persons in a house in the
Rua de Donna Marianna heard a strange noise in the room of a smallpox
patient, dnd ran into it, crying out that in all probability the vase of phenic
acid had been broken. Donna Maria Barcellos, my sister-in-law, one of her
daughters, «Sy I via Barcellos, Seahor Alfredo Alexander, and I were at that

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

*59

856]

hour seated at a small round table, when it was announced that in the above-
mentioned house, in tBe Rua de Donna Marianna, a vase of phenic acid had
been broken. Donna Maria Barcellos was much astonished when they told
her on her going home to the Rua de Donna Marianna that they had had a
great fright at eight o’clock in the evening. She replied that she was already
aware that it was a vase of phenic acid which had been broken. Then they
explained to her that such had been the general supposition in the house, that
when they ran into the room they all exclaimed, “ The vase of phenic acid has
liroken,” and that on entering they discovered that a jug of water standing near
a chair had fallen against the vase of phenic acid.

These facts passed in the presence of Professor Alexander, who was also
at the table with my sister-in-law and Sylvia.

(Signed) Dr. Alfredo Barcellos.

Rio de Janeiro, September 22nd , 1891.

When Mariquinhas came home I said to her, “You cannot imagine what
a fright we had to-day,” to which she replied, “ You need not tell me; I know
all about it. It was the vase of phenic acid that broke.” This reply caused us
the greatest surprise, when she added that nobody had told her of it, but
that she heard of it through the intermedium of the tilting table. Our astonish-
ment was still greater when she said that the fact occurred at eight o’clock in
the evening.

Indeed, at that hour, when wew^re in the back part of the house, we heard
a loud noise like that of the fall of some vessel full (of liquid). The door of the
bedroom where the child sick of smallpox lay was closed ; but we heard her
crying out, and ran to sec what was the matter. At the same time the three
girls exclaimed, “ The vase of phenic acid has broken ! ” It was not, however,
this vase that broke, but a jug of water which had fallen down.

This fact happened yesterday, September 21st, 1S91.

(Signed) Amelia A. Cardim.

Maria Cardim.

Paulina Barcellos.

Maria Villas Boas.

Carlota Cardim.

Amelia Cardim.

857. The next case (857 A) is very remote ; and I should not use
it to aid in establishing communication with the dead. But as indicating
a possible source of error, it seems worth quoting in an Appendix, as it
is vouched for by two informants who, although here anonymous, are
distinguished and intelligent men.

858. My next case — ^given in 858 A — comes from the late Dr.
Krmacora, whose untimely death has been a serious loss to our studies.
Professor W. James visited Dr. Ermacora at Padua and told me that his
experiments were seriously and carefully conducted. Dr. Ermacora
himself, for reasons stated in his narrative, regarded this message as
probably coming from a disembodied intelligence. But it seems tb me
that the statement as to the date of the letter’s arrival may have ema-
Tiated from the mind of the Venetian cousin at the time when she

i6o CHAPTER VIII [859

meant to post her letter in the evening. Dr. Ermacora also sent me
a case (not for publication) where a message written by the same auto-
matist predicted some remarkable points with regard to her own future
health. Such a prediction, however — like the frequently recorded pre-
dictions of somnambulists with regard to their own epileptic fits, &c.-^
seems to me to belong to the province of the subliminal self, which J
conceive as more intimately acquainted with the state of the organism
than the supraliminal self can be.

859. Thus much for the present with regard to communications
from the living, and as to the danger that a message purporting to come
from a deceased person may in reality emanate from the mind of one of
the living persons present, or, indeed, from some living person at a dis-
tance. But this, although a real risk, is by no means the only risk of
deception which such messages involve. The communication may con-
ceivably come from some unembodied spirit indeed, but not from the
spirit who is claimed as its author. Have we any way of guarding against
this deception ; — any hints which may even help us to conceive the nature
of a danger which lies so entirely outside our terrene experience ?

The answer to this question cannot be brief, and must for the present
be delayed. I can best, perhaps, introduce the reader to this new rang«.*
of problems by quoting at this point (in 859 A) some extracts from a
record of the varied experiences of automatic writing which have been
intermingled with Miss A.*s crystal-visions, &c., already narrated in
Chapter VI. (625 C). Such account as can here be produced is, from
various causes, very incomplete. It contains, however, specimens of several
of the problems of which mention has already been made. I may remind
the reader that this is a case with which I am intimately acquainte«l,
having carefully watched the progress of the phenomena for some years.
The statements refer largely to facts within my own knowledge, and these
are given without exaggeration.

I should add that the phenomena have continued, whenever invited,
up to the present date (December, 1900), and that they have developed
in the direction of recognised identities. I have myself lately had through
Miss A. what appear to me convincing messages, given by raps, on
private matters from departed friends. That this element exists amid
these confused communications, I feel sure ; but the recognised spirits arc
seldom able to explain much beyond their own actual message, nor to
throw light on the strange anonymity in which most of the writings arc
shrouded. There is now no case that I have watched longer than
A.’s; — none where 1 have more absolute assurance of the scrupulo'^’
probity of the principal sensitive herself and of the group who share
experiments ; — but none also which leaves me more often baffled as to the
unseen source of the information given. There is a knowledge both of
the past and of the future, which seems capriciously limited, and is
mingleii with mistakes, yet on the other hand is of a nature which it

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

i6i

difficult to refer to ^ny individual human mind, incarnate or discarnate.
VVe meet here some of the first indications of a possibility of which more
must be said in a later chapter (IX.), that discarnate spirits communi-
cating with us have occasional access to certain sources of knowledge
which even to themselves are inscrutably remote and obscure.

The command to bring “ C- D.” — ^a command which, as will be seen,
I myself obeyed — was especially remarkable in its apparent futility, yet
it ultimately resulted in developing the phenomena. C. D., indeed, was a
person in whom the soi-disant Chancellor Hardwicke might be expected
to take some interest ; — but one is at a loss to imagine what kind of
perception could pick him out as the one man whose own faculty would
best contribute to Miss A.*s, and would be best developed by hers in
return.

The written diagnoses and prognoses given by the so-called Semirus,'*
often without Miss A.’s even seeing the patient or hearing the nature of
his malady, have become more and more remarkable.' Miss A. and her
friends do not wish these private matters to be printed, and I cannot
therefore insist upon the phenomena here. Yet in view of the amount of
telaesthesia which Miss xA.*s various automatisms reveal, it should first be
noted that human organisms seem especially pervious to such vue a
distance. '' Semirus,** Gelalius,’* &c., are obvious pseudonyms ; and
neither Semirus’ prescriptions nor Gelalius’ cosmogony contain enough of
indication to enable us to grasp their origin.

860. 1 pass on to a series of messages which afford an interesting

field for the discussion of the rival hypotheses of " cryptomnesia and
spirit-control. The automatist, who must here be called Mrs. R., is a
lady well known to me for some years, and to whom I was first introduced
by the late Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood (the cousin and brother-in-law of
Charles Darwin, and himself a well-known savanf)^ who reported certain
messages obtained in his presence, and partly through his co-operation.
Mrs. R., and her sister Mrs. V., now deceased, were for many years
among Mr. Wedgwood's most valued friends. There can be no more
question in my mind as to Mrs. R.'s scrupulous good faith than as to that
of Mr. Wedgwood himself in endeavouring to recall the utmost that they
had ever known of the personages who professed to be writing through
the help of the two human hands. The (luestion is one of subliminal
memory; and as to this it may be remarked that Mr. Wedgwood's
reading was wide, — but that he never, so far as I know, showed any
automatic gift, nor obtained writing except with one of these two ladies.
On the other hand, Mrs. R.’s reacting has not been wide in range ; and
both Mrs. R. and Mrs. V. had many psychical experiences, — most of them

a private nature,* — in which Mr. Wedgwood was not concerned.^ The

Ap ' ^ recent case furnished by Sir LawTence Jones, which I print at the end of the

* See, however, S.P.R., vol, iv. p. 293, for two experiences of Mrs. V.'s.

VOL. IT. r

162 CHAPTER VIII [861

automatic impulse seems to have come from but it may be that

Mr. Wedgwood's presence modified the character of the messages
obtained. I give first a general account by Mr. Wedgwood of the mode
of experiment.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 92.)

My experience in planchette-writing has been mainly acquired in sitting
with two sisters, whom I will call Mrs. R. and Mrs. V., of whom the younger^
Mrs. V., has far the stronger influence in producing the writing. With her the
board in general begins to move much sooner and in a more vivacious way
than with her elder sister. When the two sit together the board moves rapidly
along, like a person writing as fast as he can drive, while with me and one of
the sisters the action is often feeble and labouring. But neither of the sisters
can obtain anything whatever when they sit by themselves. The board re*
mains absolutely motionless under the hands of the solitary operator.

When trying for writing we sit opposite each other at a small table, I with
my right hand, my partner with her left on the planchettc, while the writing
produced is upright to mo, and uj>side down to my partner, from whom, how-
ever, the effective influence seems to proceed. The precise nature of that
influence is not very easy to understand, and is, I think, very commonly mis-
apprehended. Writing by planchettc is often called ‘‘automatic," and the
pencil is conceived as being worked by the muscular action of the sitters, under
the guidance of a blind impulse, as little understood by them as the finished
result is foreseen by a pair of birds instinctively engaged in the construction of
their first nost. But this is directly opposed to the experience of myself and
my partners. When 1 am sitting at planchelte with one of them, 1 know that
I am merely following the movement of the board with my hand, and not in
any way guiding it, my only difficulty being to avoid interfering with it. It
seems to me exactly as if my partner, in whom I have perfect confidence, was
purposely moving the board and I allowing my hand to follow her action,
interfering with it as little as possible. And she gives to me an exactly
corresponding account of her own share in the operation. Thus we give to
the outside world our united testimony of a fact which, as far as each of us
is concerned, lies within our own direct knowledge, viz., that the writing traced
out by the pencil is not produced by the muscular exertion of either of us.

We have, then, in planchette-writing, if our account is to be believed, the
manifestation of an agency invisible to us, yet capable of moving the bodily
pencil either in mere scribbling or in such a way as to fix an intelligent message
on the paper.

861. The first case which I shall give is in the words of Mr. Wedg-
wood, in the Journal for December, 1889 iv. p. 174).

Whenever I have an opportunity, perhaps once or twice a year, I sit at
planchette-writing with my friend, whom I will call Mrs. R., a most observant
witness in whom 1 have entire confidence. We sit opposite each other at a
small table, each resting the fingers of one hand lightly upon the board, and
when^he board begins to move, allow our hand to follow the movement freely
without interfering with it in any way.

The following account of our last sitting, on June 26th, is from the journal
of Mrs. R\, written the same evening, transcribing the part of planchettc from

861] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 163

the actual writing, and*filling in our share of the investigation from immediate
memory.

Extract from journal of Wednesday^ June 2 (>th^ and copy of pianchette-

writing wtk Mr, Wedgwood :

“ A spirit is here to-day who we think will be able to write through the
medium. Hold very steady, and he will try first to draw.”

We turned the page and a sketch was made, rudely enough of course, but
with much apparent care.

“ Very sorry can’t do belter. Was meant for test. Must write for you
instead.— J- G.”

We do not fully understand the first drawing, taking it for two arms and
hands clasped, one coining down from above. Mr. Wedgwood asked the spirit
of J. G. to try again, which he did.

Below the drawing he wrote : “ Now look.” We did, and this time com-
prehended the arm and sword.

“ Now I will write, for you if you like.'*

Mr. W. : “ What did the drawing represent?”

“ Something that was given me.”

I said : “ Are you a man or a woman ? ”

“ Man. John G.”

Mr. W. : How' was it given to you ? ”

“On paper and other things. . . . My head is bad from the old wound I
got there when I try to write through mediums.”

.Mr. W. : •• We don’t know J. G. Have you anything to do with us ? ”

‘‘ No connection.”

Mr. W. said he knew a J. Giffard, and wondered if tl)at was the name.

“ Not (iiffard. Gurwood.”

Mr. W. sugge.sted that he had been killed in .storming some fort.

I killed myself on Christinas Day, years ago. I wish J had died fighting.”

“ Were you a soldier ? ”

“ 1 was in the army.”

“ Can you say what rank ? ”

•‘No. ... It was the pen did for me, .and not the sword.”

The word pen was imperfectly written, and 1 thought it was meant for fall,
I asked if this was right ?

“ No.”

Mr. W. ; “Is the word pen / ”

‘*Yes; pen did for me.”

We suggested that he was an author who had failed, or had been
maligned.

’* I did not fail. I was not slandered. Too much for me after . . . pen
was too much for me after the wound.”

” Where were you wounded, and when did you die ? ”

“ Peninsula to first question.”

We were not sure about the word Peninsula^ and asked him to repeat.

“1 ^yas wounded in the head in Peninsula. It will be forty-four years
Christmas Day since I killed my.self. Oh, my head. ... I killed mvself.

John Gurwood.” ^ ^

I* Where did you die?”

Hr. J^admy wound in 1810. I cannot tell you more about myself. The
drawing was a test.”

[881

i 64 CHAPTER VIII

We asked if the device was intended for his crest.

“ I had it seal.*’

“ Had it anything to do with your wound ? ” (I cannot remember the exact
form of this question.)

“ It came from that and was given me. Power fails to explain. Remember
my name. Stop now.”

The only person besides ourselves present at the sitting was Miss H., an
aunt of Mrs. R.’s, and none of us knew anything of Colonel Gurwood beyond
the fact of his having edited the despatches .of the Duke of Wellington, not
even that his name was John. It is pos.sible that I might have heard of his
suicide at the time that it occurred, without its making any impression on me,
but I am sure I did not read such an obituary notice as would be published in the
Times j and when my attention was directed to his editorial work eighteen or
twenty years afterwards I did not know whether lie was alive or dead, and was
entirely ignorant of his military career. I never read any history of the I'eniu.
sular War, and am perfectly certain that I never had an opportunity of seciiii(
Gurwood’s crest, or knowing anything about it. — H. W.

The following is the account Mr. Wedgwood wrote of the first s6ancc
at the time : —

June zMf iSiSq.

Had a sitting at planchette with Mrs. R. this morning. Planchette said
there was a spirit there who thought he could draw' if we wdshed it. We said
we should be glad if he would try. Accordingly P. made a rude attempt at a
hand and arm proceeding from an embattled wall and holding a sword. .V
second attempt made the subject clearer. P. said it was meant for a test. The
spirit signed it “]• G.,” no connection of any of ours, he said. We gradually
elicited that his name was John Gurwood, who was wounded in the Peninsuhi,
in i8io, and killed himself on Christinas Day, 1845. It was not the wound, but
the pen that did it.

Something like that.

July 18S9.

I made the foregoing memorandum the same day, having very little expec-
tation that there would be any verification. H. Wedgwood.

Further Extracts from Mrs. R.*.s Journal.

j Friday^ September 2^tk,

Mr. Wedgwood came, and we had tw'o sittings in the afternoon and even
ing. 1 think the same spirit wrote throughout, beginning without signatuie »
but wlten we asked the name, writing (after some struggle and illegibib^^) /
“ John Gurwood.”

861 ] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 165

The effort was at first incoherent, but developed into the following sen-
tences : —

“ Sword — when I broke in, on the table with plan of fortress— belonged to
niv prisoner ; 1 will tell you his name to-night. It was on the table when I
broke in. He did not expect me; I took him unawares. He was in his room,
looking at a plan, and the sword was on the table. Will try and let you know
how I took the sword to-night.**

In the evening after dinner : —

“ I fought my way in. His name was Banier ” (three times repeated). “ The
sword was lying on the table by a written scheme of defence. Oh, my head,
l^anier had a plan written out for the defence of the fortress. It was lying on
the table, and his sword was by it.**

To a question : —

“Yes; surprised him.”

Mr. Wedgwood thinks the name of the Governor of the fortress of Ciudad
Rodrigo was Banier; but he says this would not be a test, as he knew //. He
is going to see if he can find anything in Napier s Peninsular War corrobora-
tive of what is said about the sword.

“ Look. 1 have tried to tell you what you can verify.**

Mr. Wedgwood reports his verification as follows : —

When I came to verify the message of planchette I speedily found that
Colonel Gurwood, the editor of the Duke’s despatches, led the forlorn hope at
the storming of Ciudad Rodrigo, in 1812 [note error in date], “and received a
wound in the skull from a musket ball which affected him for the remainder of
his life. ’ — Annual Pt\i^is/e?\ 1S45. In recognition of the bravery shown on that
occa.sion he received a grant of arms in 1812, registered in the College of Arms
as having been passed “ upon the narrative that he (Captain G.) had led the
forlorn hope at Ciudad Rodrigo, and that, after the storming of the fortress, the
Lari of Wellington presented him with the sword of the Governor, who had
been taken jirisoner by Captain Gurwood.*’^

The services thus specified were symbolised in the crest, “ Out of a mural
coronet, a castle ruined in the centre, and therefrom an arm in armour embowed,
holding a scimitar.** -

It is plainly this crest that is aimed at by planchette in his very rude de-
sign, which represents the arm and sword as issuing from the mural coronet
alone, omitting the ruined castle as too complex a subject for the powers of the
designer. The drawing was given merely as a test, and if it pointed unmis-
takably to the Gurwood crest it would fulfil its purpose.

In accordance with the assertion of planchette, Colonel Gurwood killed
himself on Christmas Day, 1845, and the Annual Pej^isler oi that year, after
narrating the suicide, continues ; ** It is thought that this laborious undertaking
(the editing the despatches) produced a relaxation of the nervous system and
consequent depression of spirits. In a fit of despondency the unfortunate gentle-
man terminated his life.” Compare planchette: “ Pen was too much for

me after the wound.**

I continue the quotation from Mrs. R.’s journal : —

Mr. W. ; “ Can you tell me where else to look?’* ^

“ I have no power to direct you. We have exhausted, but I wished to tell

^ Information received from the College of Arms. July 15th, 1889.

* The Book of Family Cresfs, Wash bourne, 1856.

CHAPTER VIII

i66

[861

you about poor Quentain ... to tell you a secret of poor Quintain’s, which is
on my mind. It might once have made a difference ; bu^ not now.”

We had a difficulty in reading the name. Mr. W. thought it Quinlon, and
asked if this was right ?

** Not quite ; a t. . . . Quentain. Not quite [right], but nearer : try
again to*morrow.”

Mr. W. : ** Is power exhausted now, and shall we stop ? **

“Yes.”

* Saturday^ Septemb^ 28M.

Mr. Wedgwood and I sat again this morning. First came some preliminary
scribbling and circling, and then the right spelling of the name at which John
Gurwood was trying last night.

** Quentin. I knew him, and a secret of his that might have made a differ-
ence, but I was pledged.”

Mr. W. : ** Tell us what the secret was ? ”

“ I should like to try.”

Mr. W. : “ What difference would it have made to you ? ”

“ Might have done to him : on my mind.”

Then followed a word here and there among much that was illegible. I

copy what we succeeded in reading. “ in the army scrape the

sake of another very foolish, but nothing wrong for verdict

was unfortunately what there was let me go on, I am trying say that,

but quite mistaken case in all its his commission of second

(company ?) private soldier going out gave to his Colonel very strong feeling
about it all.”

The above filled four pages. We pondered over it, but could not make out
any more. When planchette was put back, the following was volunteered

“ Tell James I remember him quite well. He will recollect about Quentin’s
trial.”

Mr. Wedgwood’s friend, Captain James, of course, was meant. Mr. W.
said he would write and ask him ; but did the writer mean that Captain James
knew the secret ?

‘‘ No one knew it.” (Two lines illegible.) '-James will tell you, I have not
power. He was tried by court-marthaL”

Mr. W. : ** This Quentin was in the army then 1 ”

“ Yes. rest of them would have but I cannot write plainly in

answer, though 1 try. I wanted to tell you alx»ut poor Quentin, but have not
power without further practice. I knew a secret of his at the time of his scrape
conduct offices . The— court-martial 1 did not.”

Mr. Wedgwood here suggested we should stop for a time, to see if rest
would increase the power. We sat again for a few minutes before lunch,
directly after which he left by train ; but the control was then different, and the
few words written did not appear to have any special interest or meaning.

Mr. Wedgwood writes on October 31st, 1S89 : —

I find that there was a famous court-martial on ColoneHQuentin in October
1814, in consequence of a round robin signed by twenty-four of his officers. I had
a vagui recollection of the name of Colonel Q, as a friend of George IV., and
something must have turned up about the court-martial in the early twenties,
when the fpth Hussar*: became notorious, as I found I had heard of the round

863] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 167

robin. The accusati9n, too, was of a want of proper directions to his subor-
dinates in action, so no reticence of anybody could have made any difference,
and he was himself the Colonel of the regiment.

With respect to the capture of Banier, the only chance of verification would
be from the family, and Miss Gurwood has not answered my letter.

Captain James writes to me from lo Hereford Road, London, June
29th, 1891

»

About the year 1830 my regiment was quartered at Portsmouth, and
Colonel Gurwood was then on the staff of the garrison there. The Colonel was
an honorary member of our mess, and dined with us nearly every day. 1
remember 1 used to be very fond of sitting next to him, and conversing with
him about the various events that occurred during the Peninsular War. Of
course the Quentin trial must have taken place when 1 was a mere child, as I
was born in 1804.

862. Mr. Wedgwood gave us also another case of a somewhat
similar character, which I cite in 862 A.

Finally, a few months before his death, I received from him a third
retrocognitive case, which is printed in full in Pnyceedings S.P.R., voL ix.
pp. 99-104. It relates to the execution of Alice Grimbold — a maid-
servant at an inn at Leicester — who was condemned to be burnt alive for
complicity in the murder of her mistress in 1.605. A number of names
and details were given, all of which were afterwards verified in a History
of Leicester. The autoraatists were confident that they had never heard
of any of the facts before.

863. I have given these cases in succession, so that the reader
may see the kind of growing difficulty which the theory of forgotten memo-
ries here involves. It will be seen that with each automatist of good
fiith the question may with patience be capable of definite solution.
^Vere Mrs. R. willing and able — which at present she is not — to find
some other partner with whom she can write, now that Mr. Wedgwood
and her sister have been removed by death, and to record a long series
of communications, we might gradually obtain a conviction that the
matters therein narrated either could or could not all of them have been
previously seen and forgotten. Similar records kept by many other auto-
matists miglit help to some general conclusion as to the source from
which these retrocognitive facts come, if in any cases forgotten memory
ftils to explain them. One of the most important data for such a
decision consists in the account — absolutely tnistwortliy, as I believe —
given by Mr. Stainton Moses in Spirit Identity,” of a series of messages
from musical composers, giving the principal dates of their respective
ives, as they may be found in any Biographical Dictionary, with
lardly anything more. Now were such messages offered to jus as
<'Ommg through an alleged automatist not of known probity or who
J^omd bring no proof of other messziges not capable of being got up

^ orehand, we should naturally set them aside. But with Mr. Moses, as

i68

CHAPTER VIII

[861

with Mrs. R. above — and in a still higher degree-^there was so con-
siderable an independent history of provably supernormal phenomena
that we are bound to consider these musical biographies in their place
as a part of that series. Their peculiar nature excited the surprise of
Mr. Moses and his friends, who were informed by the ^‘guides” that
these were in fact messages from the spirits in question, but that these
spirits had refreshed iheir memory of tlieir earth-lives by consulting
printed sources of information. It is obvious that this is to drop the
supposed proof of identity altogether. If any given spirit can consult
his own printed life, so also presumably can other spirits ; and so per-
haps can the still incarnated spirit of the antomatist himself. This was
of course felt by Mr. Moses, who told me that subjectively also the feeling
which accompanied these biographical writings was very different from
that which came when, as he held, some spirit was entering with him into
real and direct communication.

864. From these remote historical narratives I go on to certain
messages avowedly coming from persons more recently departed, and
into which something more of definite personality seems to enter. One
element of this kind is handwriting ; and in the next case it will be seen
that resemblance of handwriting is one of the evidential points alleged.
Now proof of identity from resemblance of handwriting may conceivably
be very strong. But in estimating it we must bear two points in mind.
The first is that (like the resemblances of so-called ** spirit-photographs ” to
deceased friends) it is often very loosely asserted. One needs, if not an
expert^s opinion, at least a careful personal scrutiny of the three scripts—
the automatist*s voluntaiy and his automatic script, and the deceased
person’s script — before one can feel sure that the resemblance is in mure
than some general scrawliness. This refers to the cases where the
automatist has provably never seen the deceased person’s handwriting.
Where he has seen that handwriting, we have to remember (in the second
place) that a hypnotised subject can frequently imitate any known hand-
writing far more closely than in his w'aking state ; and that con.scquently
we are bound to credit the subliminal self with a mimetic fiicully which
may come out of these messages without any supraliminal guidance what-
ever on the automatist’s part, I give in 864 A an abridged account of a
series of experiments by Professor Rossi- Pagnoni at Fesaro, into which the
question of handwriting enters, 'fhe full account illustrates automatic
utterance as well as other forms of motor automatism, and possibly also
telekinetic phenomena. The critical discussion of the evidence by Mr*
H. Babington Smith, to whom wc are indebted for the account, shows
with what complex considerations we have to deal in* the questions now
befor# us.

865. The case of Mrs. Underwood next to be quoted (in 866 A)
contains, several points of interest besides the alleged resemblance ol
handwriting. It shows once more, for instance, the great similarity c

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

169

ways in which this writing takes its rise with automatists all over
the world, and the recurrence of the same puzzles with observers of many
different types, and may thus serve as an introduction to the groups of
cases which follow.

866. I now cite a few cases where the point of central interest is
the announcement of a death unknown to the sitters.

The first is a case which we received from Dr. Li^beault, of Nancy,
and which was first published in Phantasms of the Living (vol. i. p. 293),
where it was regarded as an example of a spontaneous telepathic
impulse proceeding directly from a dying person. 1 now regard it as
more probably due to the action of the spirit after bodily death. The
translation of Dr. Li( 5 beault*s narrative is as follows ; —

N\Ncy, September 1885.

I hasten to write to you as to that case of thought-transference of which I
spoke to you when you were present at my hypnotic stances at Nancy. The
incident occurred in a French family from New Orleans, who had come to stay
for some time at Nancy for business reasons, I had become acquainted with
this family from the fact that M. G., its head, had brought to me his niece,
M“* B.,to be treated by hypnotism. She suffered from slight ansemia and
from a nervous cough, contracted at Coblentz, in a High School where she was
a teacher. I easily induced somnambulism, and she \v;is cured in two sittings.
The production of this hypnotic state suggested to the G. family (Mrs. G. was
a spirit medium) and to IJ. herself that she might easily become a medium.
She set her.self to the evocation of spirits (in which she firmly believed) by the
aid 01 lier pen, and at the end of two months she had become a remarkable
writing medium. I have myself seen her rapidly writing page after page of
what she called “ messages,"— all in well-chosen language and with no erasures,
—while at the same time slic maintained conversation with the people near
her. An odd thing was that she had no knowledge whatever of what she was
writing. “ It must be a spirit,” she would .say, “ which guide.s my hand; it i.s
certainly not 1.”

One day,— it was, I think, F ebniary 7th, f 868, about 8 A . M., when just about to
seat herself at table for breakfast, she felt a kind of need, an impulse which
prompted her to write it was what she called a //vzwtv,— and she rushed off
at once to her large note-book, where she wrote in pencil, with feverish haste,
certain undecipherable words. She wrote the same word.s again and again on
the pages which followed, and at last, as her agitation climinished, it was
possible to read that a person called Marguerite was thus announcing her
death. The family at once assumed that a young lady of that name, a friend
of M B.’s and her companion and colleague in the Coblentz High School, must
avc just expired. They all came im.mediately to me, B. among them,
‘irid we decided to verify the announcement of death that very day. M”* B.
wrote to a young English lady who was also .a teacher in that same school.

gave some oilier reason for writing; — taking care not to reveal the true
nioUve of the letter. By return of post wc received an answer in Eiiglish, of
wiich they copied for me the essential part. I found this answer in a portfolio
urc ly a fortnight ago, and have mislaid it again. It expressed the surprise of
c -nglish lady at the receipt of M”*" B.’s unexpected and apparently motive-

170

CHAPTER VIII

[867

less letter. But at the same time the English correspondent made haste to
announce to B. that their common friend, Marguerite, had died on
February 7th, at about 8 a.m. Moreover, the letter contained a little square
piece of printed paper ; — the announcement of death sent round to friends.

1 need not say that 1 examined the envelope, and that the letter appeared
to me to have veritably come from Coblentz. Yet 1 have since felt a certain
regret. In the interests of science I ought to have asked the G. family to
allow me to go with them to the telegraph office to inquire whether they had
received a telegram early on February 7th. Science should feel no shame; truth
does not dread exposure. My proof of the fact is ultimately a moral one : the
honour of the G. family, — ^which has always appeared to me to be absolutely
above suspicion. A. A. Li^bbault.

Upon these last sentences Gurney remarks that, apart from the impro-
bability that the whole family would join in a conspiracy to deceive their
friend, the nature of the answer received from Coblentz shows that the
writer of it cannot have been aware that any telegraphic announcement
had been sent. And it is in itself unlikely that the authorities of the
school would have felt it necessary instantly to communicate the news to
Mdlle, B.

867. I shall next give in 867 A a case of curious complexity received
from M. Aksakoff; — an automatic message written by a Mdlle. Stramm,
informing her of the death of a M. Duvanei. The principal incidents
may here be disentangled as follows ; —

Duvanei dies by his own hand on January 15th, 18S7, in a Swiss village,
where he lives alone, having no relations except a brother living at a distarice,
whom Mdlle. Stramm had never seen (as the principal witness, M. Kaigorodoft,
informs us in a letter of .May 1S90).

Mdlle. Stramm's father docs not hear of Duvaners death till two days
later, and sends her the news in a letU.r dated January i8lh, 1887.

Five hours after Duvanel's death an automatic message announcing it is
written at the house of M. Kaigorodoff, at Wilna in Ru.ssia, by Mdlle. Stramm,
who had certainly at that time received no news of the event.

From what mind are wc to suppose that this information came.^

(i) We may lirst attempt to account for Mdlle. Stramm’s message on the
theory of latency. We may suppose that the lelepatiiic message came from
the dying man, but did not rise into consciousness until an opportunity was
afforded by Mdlle. Stramm’s silting down to write automatically.

But to this interpretation there is an objection of a very curious kind-
The message written by Mdlle. Stramm was not precisely accurate. Instead
of ascribing Duvanel’s death to .suicide, it ascribed it to a stoppage of blood,
“ un engorgement de sang.”

And when M. .Stramm, three days after the death, wrote to his daughter
in Russia to tell her of it, he also used the same expression, “ un engorgement
de sang,” thus disguisir.g the actual truth in order to spare the feelings of his
daughter, who had formerly refused to marry Duvanei, and who (as her father
feared) might receive a painful shock if .she learnt the tragic nature of his end.
There was, therefore, a singular coincidence between the automatic and the
normally-written message as to the death; — a coincidence which looks as though

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

871]

171

the same mind had been at work in each instance. But that mind cannot have
been M. Stramm*s 'ordinary mind, as he was not supraliminally aware of
Duvanel’s death at the time when the first message was written. It may,
however, be supposed that his subliminal self had received the information of
the death telepathically, had transmitted it in a deliberately modified form to
his daughter, while it remained latent in himself, and had afterwards influenced
his supraliminal self to modify the information in the same way when writing
to her.

(2) But we must also consider the explanation of the coincidence given by
the intelligence which controlled the automatic writing. That intelligence
asserted itself to be a brother of Mdlle. Stramm’s, who died some years before.
And this “ Louis ” further asserted that he had himself influenced M. Stramm
to make use of the same euphemistic phrase, with the object of avoiding a
shock to Mdlle. Stramm; for which purpose it was needful that the two
messages should agree in ascribing the death to the same form of sudden
illness.

Now if this be true, and the message did indeed come from the deceased
Louis,” we have an indication of continued existence, and continued knowledge
of earthly affairs, on the part of a person long dead.

But if we consider that the case, as presented to us, contains no proof of
Louis* *’ identity, so that “ Louis may be merely one of those arbitrary names
which the automatist’s subliminal intelligence seems so prone to assume;
then we must suppose that Duvanel was actually operative on two occasions
alter death, first inspiring in Mdlle. Stramm the automatic message, and
then modifying in M. Stramm the message which the father might otherwise
have sent.

868. I next give in 868 A and B two cases where certain telekinetic
phenomena seem to have been connected with the announcement of a
recent death, which in the first case was given by raps, and in the second
was accompanied by other physical disturbances. It must be observed,
however, that the evidence for the identity of the spirit who was supposed
to be communicating in this second case is far from complete. I have
already pointed out that the class of motor automatisms seems to lead to
telekinetic phenomena, but I shall postpone any discussion of them till
the following chapter.

869. I next give in 869 A and B two cases where the supposed
communicators had been dead some time, the deaths being known to the
automatists, but certain details of the deaths were correctly given, in
opposition to the beliefs of the automatists.

870. I add to these in 870 A another curious case where various
details known to the alleged communicator were correctly given, although
unknown to the sitters ; yet where other circumstances were described
as they were at the time of the communicator’s death, although the sitters
were aware that these circumstances had since altered.

I know not in what light I should have regarded thft next
case I giyg j ^

somewhat alarming title of TAe Holy Truth (Arthur Hallah, 1876).

1/2

CHAPTER VIII

[872

But the aggressiveness of religious conviction wit^ which Mr. Hugh
Junor Browne's experiences have inspired him does not prevent his being,
as I have heard from the Hon. Sir W. G. Windeyer, Judge of Supreme
Court, Sydney, and have found on personal acquaintance, a man of high
standing as to both character and practical capacity. He is a prosperous
roan of business at Melbourne, and the elder of the two daughters with
whose automatism we have to deal is married to one of the foremost men
of the Colony of Victoria. I regard him, therefore, as a witness whose
strong opinions, indeed, might help a fraudulent medium to deceive him,
but who is fully to be trusted as regards easily observed events occurring
in his own family circle. I discussed this case with him and Mrs. Browne
on October 3rd, 1891. Mrs. Browne seemed tome a good witness, and
corroborated the facts so far as immediately known to her, giving me a
written confirmation of the writing of the young child, who was present
at our inter\dew as a young lady of about twenty. Miss Browne cannot
remember the incident in her fifth year, but told me that she had some-
times written automatically since that date; — her arm used to feel numb
while doing so.

872. I give in 872 A another instance of a little girl, only four
years of age, who had no knowledge of her letters, and who wrote
several significant words — ‘‘Your Aunt Emma.'*

873. I now quote in full a general account of his experiences in
automatic writing by a Mr. \V., from whom I have already cited a minor
experience, also of a motor type, in 823. Dr, Hodgson visited and had
long talks with him, and formed the highest impression of his ability
and care. Some of the automatic messages are perhaps best explicable
on the hypothesis of subliminal telaesthcsia, others by telepathy from
living minds, while others are at least pnmd fade referable to a source
in the mind of a departed person, from whom they profes.sed to come.
Whether there are in reality so many different origins of a series of
messages given to one automatist, or whether any one explanation can be
made to cover them all, is a matter to which we shall have to return in
the next chapter.

(From Proceedings S,P.R., vol, viii. pp. 242-48.)

N.Y., Nffuctnher 15/^, 1891.

Dr. Richard Hodgson,— Dear Sir,— R ecently I learned that you are
the Secretary of the American Branch of the Society for Psychical Research.
Being interested in the subject, I concluded to write to you, offering a state-
ment of my own experience. As so-called spiritual manifestations are viewed
unfavourably heres and as it would be much to my detriment if my connection
with the subject were to become known, I ask that my name be withheld from
the public.

For the past five years I have been a so-called writing medium. 'I
writing is involuntary on my part, and the thoughts expressed are not mine-'
that is, as' far as 1 know they are not mine.

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

m

873 ]

Sometimes, instestd of writing, off-hand pen work will be done, but it is not
of a very high order. In the writing the penmanship is generally very good,
and the thoughts expressed are generally good, and are sometimes valuable.
As you are undoubtedly familiar with this class of writing, I will not go into
details, but will leave you to inquire for such facts as you see fit.

I am anxious to find a satisfactory explanation of this, and I hope the
Society may yet be able to furnish one.

As an indication of the trend of my thoughts, I will add that for the past
thirteen or fourteen years I have been a student of the works of Herbert Spencer
and other great men of liberal views, and that I am an evolutionist, so called.

If you think my experience will be of use, please call for it. You may send
questions, or you may state in a general way the outline of what will be of use.

N.Y., December zznd^ 1891.

Dr. Richard Hodgson, — Sir,—. . . Five years ago I was in Vermont on
business, and while there made a visit at the home of a relative. In the even-
ing, for amusement, a planchette was produced and operated. Pretty soon it
wasS written that I was a writing medium, and I was requested to try with a
pencil. I took a pencil in my hand and to my surprise I found I could write
some in the “automatic” manner. The writing was not very good and was
accompanied with more or less breaks and difficulties. It was written that
practice would make it much freer and better. This I found to be so. Persons
in the room asked as to dates on pieces of money and other similar tests, and
the answers were generally correct. After that I wrote some almost daily for
some time and soon became quite a ready writer in this manner.

On one occasion, not long after, a friend, of whose life I had known nothing
until about that time, proposed to ask some questions mentally and see if the
answers written would be correct. It was written that the .spirit of his wife was
present. I inquired (mentally) for her name. In reply her name was written
out in full, correctly. I did not know her name : I knew that he was a widower,
and I knew no more of his wife or the matters inquired about. My friend then
asked (mentally) where she died and when ? The answers were correct. He
then asked, “ What was the cause of her death ? ” The answer, “ Heart
disease,” was correct. He then asked for the circumstances of her death. It
was written that she died suddenly, at night, by the side of him, in bed, and
that the first thing he knew of herfdcath was when he found her dead in the
morning. This was correct. He asked for her age, size, and for any particular
mark by which she could be identified ? The answer was correct as to age and
size, and as to identification it was written that she had a large scar near the
J«nee, caused by a burn. This was also correct.

Many other questions were asked and answered ; and whether he asked the
questions aloud, or menially to himself, the answers were strictly correct in
almost every in.stance. There was no one but us two present.

On another occasion, about the same time, I made inquiry (I was alone)
touching a case I was then investigating, liriefly, the facts are these: —
A wealthy widow, Mrs. X., had died at her summer cott.age with no one
present save her sister and a neighbour. She left a will : by its terms this
sister was to receive several thousand dollars. Our client, Mrs. Y.,*was also
^ legatee and the executrix of the will ; and as such it was her duty to collect
m all assets. Our client knew it to be a fact that the deceased had in cash
mher possession a short time before her death about S700. After Mrs. X.’s

*74

CHAPTER VIII

[873

death no money was found, and the sister who was with her claimed there
was no money; that Mrs. X. had no money at the time of her death about
her, except some $(5. Our client saw this sister and questioned her closely,
but to no purpose. 1 did not see or know this sister until some time after
the writing I am about to give. The question was, what had become of the
f 700 ? Alone by myself I asked for the facts, which were written out much in
detail, but in substance the facts as written were these : That the deceased had
on her person at the time of her death about $600 ; that she had spent the
other $100 ; that immediately after her death her sister, Mrs. Z., had stolen the
$600 from her dead body ; that she had since spent some of it and deposited
the balance, some $500, in a bank in the village of A. In the course of a few
days we made inquiry, and learned that Mrs. Z. had made the deposit there,
but had recently drawn it out. We then cited her before the Surrogate, and
she swore that just before the death of Mrs. X. (the same night she died) Mrs.
X. gave her the money, $520, to give to a nephew as a present; that there was
only $520; that she had just given it to the nephew. We commenced a suit
against her for the money ($520) and recovered it. The jury did not believe
her defence and made her pay. I have only stated so much of the case as
seems to bear on the “ automatic ” writing. The question is, where did I get
the knowledge of the theft, the amount and the deposit in the bank ? 1 may
add that we afterwards learned she did spend some money about that time
that we always thought was some she took in addition to the $520, and it
would have made the sum stolen about ?6oo.

About four and a half years ago an aunt of mine, Miss T., learned that she
had a cancer growing on her breast. She had it cut out, and soon was
apparently in very fair health. After a few months she began to fail very
much ; was about the house, but was very generally run clown. Cancer did not
reappear. She was not said by her doctors to be in any immediate danger;
but for some reason I made inejuiry, and to my surprise it was written that she
was very badly off, and that she would only live a very short time. I inquired
the cause, &c., and it was written that her system was poisoned through and
through with cancerous matter. I inquired as to when she wouKl die ? The
answer was that it was impossible to tell just when, that the most that
coulrl be said was that she would live about thirty days, judging from a
careful examination of her case made at that time. It was written that she
would certainly die, that she could not possibly get better or live much longer
than thirty days. Within the next week or so I inquired on several occasions
as to the matter, but the answers were always to the same effect and positive.
My aunt declined fast and died at the time set within a day, and I think it was
just thirty days. She was abed only ten days or so. A post-mortem showed
she died from cancerous poisoning.

On many occasions I have made inquiry as to whether certain sick ones
would die or recover ; and if die, when ? Generally the answers proved very
correct.

About a year ago I was writing (for the spirit of deceased friend, Mr. A. so
claimed). After some writing of a friendly nature, it was written substantially
as follows There is one thing that I wish you could do for me, but I don’t
see how ^ou can, and that is, stop my son (name fully given) ** from drinking*'
I answered (by thought), “ Why, I am surprised. He doesn’t drink, does he?
that is, not any to speak of, any way ? ” A. : “ Yes, 1 am sorry to say he drinks

873] MOTOR AUTOMATISM ,175

a ^'ood deal too mucli.” Q. : “ Where does he do his dnnkin;^ mostly?’^ A. :
‘‘At the B. Hotel.” I said I never heard of his drinking. A. : “Well, you
watch and inquire, and you will find out that he does.*’ “ I should be very glad
to be of some service in the matter.” A. : “ Jf I see a chance where you can* I
shall certainly call on you.”

Upon investigation I found this was all true.

In May 1887, while looking for authorities on an obscure point in a case
1 was then preparing for trial, it was written in substance : “ I know where the
authority is that you need.” Q. ; “ Where ? ” A. ; “ In ‘ Wendell’s Reports,’
vol.— 1 Q* • “ ^ A- B-’* volume and

page, as well as the name, were given in full ; the name was that of an old
lawyer that 1 had known well. The case cited was just what I needed. I had
never seen or beard of the case before to my best knowledge. There are
twenty-six volumes of “Wcndeirs Reports,” of about 700 pages each.

1 frequently find as I am examining indexes for judgment-debtors, grantees
or grantors, &c., in clerks’ offices, and elsewhere, that there is the same
manifestation of intelligence in another form. Let me explain : Say I am
searching an index under the head of “ S,” looking for the name of Stearns,
John]. Hyplacing my hand or finger on the book, drawing it along down
over the names, with no thought of the work in hand, as soon as my finger
passes the name desired my finger will stop. My eyes must be directed
towards the book, but no matter how listless or absent-minded I may be, still
at such times my finger will .stop at the name in question. When contrasted
with ordinary searching the uncon.scious intelligence that seems to be behind
this is very marked.

Once, being much in doubt, I asked, “What ails ?” (one of my sons)

‘‘What shall 1 do for him } ” The answer was, “ You had better not try to do
anything for him, hut go and get Dr. T. He will know what to do.” I called
Dr. r. He examined him and immediately gave an emetic. The contents of
the .stomach showed that digestion had been .stopped, or rather, that the food
liad not digested at all. The boy recovered rapidly. Dr. T. said it was well I
called him. The boy had been rather suddenly taken ill a few hours after a
hearty meal and soon after a severe fright or mental strain.

In a contested case over a certain clause or bequest in the will of C. we
had l}ecn defeated and were ,'ibout to appeal to the Court of Appeals, our
highest court. It was niy opinion, also my partner’s, that we would win on
the appeal; but upon inquiry it was written that we should be beaten, and
this opinion was expressed on several occasion.s, with very good reasons
assigned. We were advised not to appeal. We brought the appeal and were
defeated.

i have made many inquiries as to whether certain sick persons would re-
cover or die. The answers have been very correct, generally. Writing touching
the future is generally stated to be but an opinion, based on known facts, and
allibility i.s freely admitted. When opinions are written the reasons assigned
are very frequently not only new to me, or unthoiight of, but are generally good
reasons.

T i, ^ ^ experience and made a good many tests. Those

have given are a fair sample, I think, of the writing that proved to be true,

- any statements made were false and many predictions made proved untrue;
^ these I have given no illustration, but could if necessary. I have done most

CHAPTER VIII

176

[873

of my writing when no one was present. Perhaps I shquid state that it has
been repeatedly written not to believe any writing or statement unless my own
good judgment approved of it. I have written a good deal touching a future
state, political and philosophical matters. Of all this 1 have not spoken, as it
does not seem of much importance for our present purposes. In passing I will
say that much of it was apparently very good, and quite reasonable.

December 28M.

On Christmas Eve there was, as you are probably aware, a railway accident
near Hastings, a little way out from New York City, in which twelve persons
were killed and another has since died from injuries received. This last-men-
tioned person resided near me. The news of the injury to this person reached
me on Christmas Day. Telegrams in the afternoon were favourable, and indi*
cated a recovery. I made inquiry as to the matter, and it was written in
substance that the person would not recover. 1 suggested that telegrams
indicated a recovery. The answer was: ‘‘Yes; but we have made an
examination, and are of opinion that no recovery will take place.” Telegrams
the second day were still more favourable, but my writing did not change
in opinion. The party died at nine o’clock on the evening of the 26th. . .

January 2 gth, 1S92.

Dr. R. Hodgson,— Dear Sir,— I n reply to your inquiry for such facts as I
may be able to give, touching the experiences given you by my husband, as
automatic writer, I will state

Not long after he began to write, some five years ago, I saw a .sheet of paper
upon which was written a full account of the robbing of the body of the dead
sister. I read the account carefully. My husband said that he had written it
automatically ; that he had asked for the facts and that was the answer. The
account of it, as written out for you by my husband, is the same in substance
as what I saw and read, except it is very much shortened. I had the paper for
some time, and, I think, until after the facts as given were proven true ; but it
was destroyed long ago. I attended the trial of the suit brought to recover the
money. His account given you I believe to be correct.

The lady, Miss T., who had a cancer, was my aunt. The account of her
sickness and death are correctly given you by my husband, but I saw no
writing, although ray husband told me at the time he had written something
concerning her, and he stated that it was written that she would die and told
when. I do not recall the time set, but I recollect her death occurred at the
time predicted.

I recollect the time referred to w^lien our son was sick. I saw my

husband doing some writing on that occasion, and it was written to go and get
Dr. T. The account as written out for you by my husband is, as I recollect it,
true in every respect.

Concerning the accident of ClirKstmas Eve, I remember that on Christmas
Day, after we heard of the accident, my husband did some writing. He said
he had inquired as to Mr. E.’s condition, &c., and that it was written that E-
would die, that he was internally and dangerously injured. On the next day
the answers that he received as to Mr. £.’s condition were to the same effect.
The telegrams received during the same time indicated that he would recover—
one reported him out of danger. E. died about nine on the night of the 266 ^-

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

177

873 ]

I have known my husband to write out correctly quite a good many things
that were out of the knowledge of ordinary persons, but of the circumstances
which he has given to you I do not now recall anything further.

[Mrs. W.]

January 29/A, 1892.

Dr. Richard Hodgson,— Dear Sir,— I recollect the occasion referred
to by Mr. W. I think it was about five years ago. We were alone ; he
spoke of the queer writing he was doing. After some talk on the subject
Mr. W. consented to try his skill. I inquired what spirits were present, and
Mr. W.’s hand wrote that my wife was. 1 inquired for her name, and he wrote
Adelia O. H., which was correct. I also inquired [when] she died, and where
and under what circumstances, and I asked for a description of her. Mr. W.
wrote out answers to all the questions as 1 asked them. As I recall it, I
asked most of the questions by thinking. He wrote that she died of heart
disease, and the date of her death was correctly given, as was also her per-
sonal appccarance. And it was written that she died in bed with me ; that the
first I knew of her death was when I awoke in the morning. He also wrote
that there was a large scar near the knee on the left leg.

f recollect that the answers were correct, although I don’t recollect all the
words used, perhaps. 1 am very certain that Mr. VV. did not know anything
about my wife. I had not lived within twenty miles of him, neither had I known
him until several years after the death of my wife. It puzzled me how he was
able to answer as he did, as I have no reason to think he had any knowledge
on the subject. I will add that the height, colour of eyes and hair, and the
entire personal description given were exceedingly exact and correct.

Mr. W. also wrote on that occasion what purported to come from an old
friend of mine — that he went fishing with me to Lake Ontario, that 1 tipped the
bunt over near shore and got him wet. This was true, but I hadn’t thought of
it in a long lime. Mr. W. never heard of it, I am confident, until he wrote
it out. S. H. Britton.

As soon as Mr. Britton called my attention to the tipping over of the boat
1 recalled that I wrote about it at the time. \V,

Mr. W. adds later : —

Nkw York, Febmary 1S92.

I began my automatic writing with my left hand, and have ever since
been able to write in that manner with my left hand, but I am naturally right-
handed, and I can write more rapidly and readily with my right hand,
although the ide.is expressed, &c., are of as high an order, as far as I have
observed, when written with one hand as when written with the other.

In automatic work, when the mechanical ability to form letters is not re-
quired, a.s, for instance, in running the liand down an index, I find my left hand
|s fully the equal of my right. Perhaps I sliould stale that I met witli a serious
^'^jury to my right hand many years ago, by whicli I lost the two first fingers
^ud greatly crippled my hand otherwise,

fhe reason that I did my first automatic writing with my left hand was that

P*^*^c^ctte directed me to do so. I wrote a day or two with my left*hand,
un then I tried my right, and since that I have generally written with my
I can write some slowly in the natural manner with my left hand, but
‘ ve never done so but very little. The special point I wish to call attention to

CHAPTER VIII

178

[87i

is, that the ideas automatically written are of as high an Older, written with one
hand, as with the other. . . .

Another experience of Mr. W/s is given in 873 A.

It is plain that if we admit that departed spirits can still see and judge
of earthly matters, and can impress their knowledge on incarnate minds,
we should have a single explanation which would cover all Mr. W.’s
experiences as here recorded. It is to be noted, moreover, that the
premonitions, of which he gives several instances, are such as might fall
within the scope of a discarnate spirit, with intelligence comparable with
our own, but able to examine certain diseased organisms more thoroughly
than any eartlily physician could do. This, it may be observed, was not
the case with the premonitions given to Lady Mabel Howard (851 A),
which involved a complexity of incident which looks as though it must
lie beyond the calculation of an intelligence like our own, however fully
informed of existing circumstances.

874. Deferring till the next chapter any further discussion of this
problem, I give here in 874 A a well-evidenced case of a prediction by
table- tilting of a precise date of death, at a distance of forty days.

875. I next quote a case which illustrates the continued terrene
knowledge on the part of the dead of which other instances were given in
the last chapter.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 349-53. The narrative is a transla-
tion from an article in Psych ische Siudicn, December 1889, pp. 572-77, by the
Editor, the Hon. Alexander Aksakoff.)

The case belongs not to the category of facts which are known only to the
deceased^ but to the category of those which couid only be imparted by the
deceased^ for it relates to a political secret concerning a living person, which
was revealed by an intimate friend of that living person for the purpose of
saving him. I shall set forth this case in all possible detail, because 1 consider
it a most convincing one in support of the Spiritualistic hypothesis. I will
even express myself still more strongly. I consider that it affords as absolute
a proof of identity as it is possible for evidence of this kind to present.

My readers are already acquainted with my sister-in-law, Mrs. A. von
Wiesler, from the part she took in the family si^ances held with me in tl^e
years 18S0-1883, after the decease of my wife. She has an only daughter.
Sophie, who at the time of those sdances was completing her studies.
had taken no part, either at our stances or at any others, and she had not
read anything about Spiritualism. Her mother also had not joined in any
stances except our own. One evening in October 1884, during the visit of a
distant relative, the conversation turned upon Spiritualism, and in order to
please him a trial with the table was arranged. The sdance, however, gave
no satisfactory result. It only showed that the two ^ ladies were able to gtt
sometlyng. On Tue.sday evening, January ist, 1885, von Wiesler being
alone with her daughter, in order to divert her mind from some matters
which made her anxious, propo.sed to hold a little sdance. An alphabet was
written out on a sheet of paper, a saucer with a black line as pointer served
as a planchette, and, behold, the name Andreas was indicated. This was

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

179

875 ]

quite natural, for Aftdreas was the name of Sophie’s father, the deceased
husband of Mrs. von Wiesler. The communication presented nothing re-
markable, but it was nevertheless resolved to continue the stances once a
week, on every Tuesday. P'or three weeks the character of the communica-
tions remained unchanged. The name Andreas was continually repeated.

But on the fourth Tuesday— January 22nd— in place of the customary
name, Andreas, the name **Schura” was spelt out, to the great astonishment
of both sitters. Then, by quick and precise movements of the pointer, these
words were added : —

“ It is given to thee to save Nikolaus.”

What does this mean ? ” asked the astonished ladies.

“ He is compromised as Michael was, and will like him go to ruin. A band
of good-for-nothing fellows are leading him astray.”

“ What can be done to counteract it ? ”

** Thou must go to the Technological Institute before three o’clock, let Niko-
laus be called out, and make an appointment with him at his house.”

This being all addressed to the young lady, Sophie, she replied that it
would be difficult for her to carry out these directions on account of the slight
acquaintanceship which existed between her and Nikolaus's family.

“Absurd ideas of propriety ! ” was Schura’s” indignant reply.

“ But in what way shall I be able to influence him } ” asked Sophie.

“ Thou wilt speak to him in my name.”

“ Then your convictions no longer remain the same?”

“ Revolting error ! ” was the reply.

I must now explain the meaning of this mysterious communication.
‘•Schura”is the Russian pet name for Alexandrine. Nikolaus and Michael
were her cousins. Michael, quite a young man, had unfortunately ' allowed
himself to become entangled by the revolutionary ideas of our Anarchists or
Socialists. He was arrested, tried, and condemned to imprisonment at a
distance from .St. Petersburg, where he lost his life in an attempt to escape.
“ Schura ” loved him dearly, and fully sympathised with his political convic-
tions, making no secret of it. After his death, which occurred in September
1884, she was discouraged in her revolutionary aspirations, and ended her
life by poison, at the age of seventeen, on the 15th of January 1885, just one week
before the stance above described. Nikolaus, Michael’s brother, was then a
student at the Technological Institute.

Mrs. von Wie.sler and her daughter were aware of these circumstances, for
they had long been acquainted with ‘'Schura’s” parents, and with those of her
cousins, who belong to the best society of St. Petersburg. It will be obvious
that I cannot publish the names of these families. I have also changed those
of the young people. The acquaintanceship was, however, far from being
intimate. They saw each other occasionally, but nothing more. Later 1 will
give further details. We will now continue our narrative.

Naturally, neither Mrs. von Wiesler nor her daughter knew anything as to
t le views or .secret conduct of Nikolaus. The communication was just as
unexpected as it was important. It involved a great responsibility. Sophie’s
position was a very difficult one. The literal carrying out of “ Sc][iura's ”
emancls was, for a young lady, simply impossible, merely from considerations

social propriety. What right could she have, on the ground of simple
cquaintanceship, to interfere in family affairs of so delicate a character ?

i 8 o CHAPTER VIII [875

Besides, it might not be true; or, quite simply and most probably, Nikolaus
might deny it. What position would she then find herself in? Mrs. von
Wiesler knew only too well, from the stances she had taken part in with me,
how little dependence can be placed on Spiritualistic communications. She
counselled her daughter, in the first place, to convince herself of “Schura*s”
identity. This advice was followed without any hesitation as one way out of
the difficulty.

On the following Tuesday “ Schura ” manifested at once, and Sophie asked
for a proof of her identity, to which " Schura ” forthwith replied

“ Invite Nikolaus, arrange a seance, and I will come.”

It will be seen from this reply that “Schura,” who during her life had
learnt to despise the conventionalities of society* as is the custom among the
Socialists, remained true to her character, and again demanded what was an
impossibility. Nikolaus had never been in Mrs. von Wiesler*s house. Sophie
then asked for another proof of her identity, without Nikolaus being brought
in at all, and requested that it might be a convincing one.

“ I will appear to thee,” was the reply.

“ How?”

“Thou wilt see.”

A few days later Sophie was returning home from a soirde ; it was nearly
4 A.M. She was just retiring, and w^as at the door between her bedroom and
the dining-room, there being no lights in the latter, when she saw on the wall
of the dining-room, in sight of the door at which she stood, a luminous round
spot, with, as it were, shoulders. This la.sted for two or three seconds, and dis-
appeared, ascending towards the ceiling. Sophie immediately assured herself
that it was not the reflection of any light coming from the street.

At the sdance on the following Tuesday, an explanation of this appearance
being asked for, “ Schura ” replied : —

“It was the outline of a head with shoulders. 1 cannot appear more dis-
tinctly. I am still weak.”

Many other details, which I have pas.sed over, tended to convince Sophie of
the reality of “Schura’s"’ identity, yet she could not bring herself to carry oei
that which “ Schura” desired her to do. She therefore proposed as a suit
able compromise that she should acquaint Nikolaus's parents with what had
occurred.

This proposal aroused “Schura’s” strongest displeasure, expressed by
violent movements of the saucer, and by the sentence

“ That will lead to nothing;” — after which disparaging epitliets followed,
impos.sible to repeat here, especially applicable to persons of weak and irreso-
lute character, with whom the energetic and decisive “ Schura” had no patience
— epithets which are not found in dictionaries, but which were expressions used
by “Schura” in her lifetime, and characteristic of her. This was confirmed in
the sequel.

Nevertheless Sophie continued to hesitate, .and at each successive sdance
“Schura” insisted more and more imperatively that Sophie must act at once.
This is very important to notice, as we shall see later. This Avant of resolution
on the part of Sophie was ascribed by “ Schura ” to the influence of Mrs. yon
Wiesler. From the beginning “ Schura ” had seemed to bear a grudge against
Mrs. von "Wiesler. From the first sdance she addressed Sophie only- She
never permitted Mrs. von Wiesler to ask a question. Whenever she attempted

875] MOTOR AUTOMATISM i8i

to do so, she met hen with a— “ Be silent— be silent ! ” Whereas in addressing
Sophie she overwhelmed her with the tendcrest expressions.

How great was the astonishment and consternation of the ladies, when at
the sdance on the 26th of February the first words were

“ It is too late. Thou wilt repent it bitterly. The pangs of remorse will
follow thee. Expect his arrest !

These were “ Schura’s '' last words. From this time she was silent. A
seance was attempted on the following Tuesday, but there was no result. The
sdmees of Mrs. von Wiesler and her daughter were from that time entirely
given up.

While these stances were being held, Mrs. von Wiesler naturally kept me
informed of what transpired, and consulted with me as to what was to be done
in view of the extraordinary character of ‘‘Schuras ” requests. Some time
after they had ceased Mrs. von Wiesler, to satisfy her own conscience and to
comfort her daughter, resolved to communicate the whole episode to the parents
of Nikolaus. They paid no attention to it. Nothing was elicited that any fault
could be found with. The family were quite satisfied in regard to Nikolaus’s
conduct. But it is important to bear in mind the fact that these Spiritualistic
communications were made known to the parents before the final issue. When
(luring the remainder of the year everything went on happily, Sophie became
fully convinced that all the communications were only lies, and formed a resolu-
tion that she would never again occupy herself with Spiritualistic stJances.

Another year passtjd without any special event. But on the 9lh of March,
18S7, the secret police suddenly searched Nikolaus’s rooms. He was arrested
In his own house, and within twenty-four hours was exiled from St. Petersburg,
It came out later that his crime was taking part in anarchical assemblies —
assemblies which were lield in the months of January and F'ebruary 1885, exactly
corresponding with the time when “Schura” was insisting that steps should
then be taken to dissuade Nikolaus from taking part in such meetings. Only
now were the communications of “ Schura” estimated at their truevrilue. The
notes which Mrs. von Wiesler had made were read again and again by the
families both of “ Schura ” and of Nikolaus. “ Schiira’s ” identity in all those
manifestations was recognised as incontestably demonstrated, in the first place,
by the main fact in relation to Nikolaus, by other intimate particulars, and also
by the totality of the features which characterised her personality. This
mournful occurrence fell like a fresh thunderclap on Nikolaus’s family, and
they had only to thank God that the errors of the young man were not
followed by more fatal results.

In order to estimate this incident aright, it is of great importance to establish
the relations which existed between the two young ladies. 1 have requested
Madame and Mdlle. von Wiesler to give me on this, as on the previous points,
a written memorandum in full detail ; and from that memorandum I extract
what follows [somewhat abridged here] : —

In December 1880 Madame von Wiesler and her daughter paid a Christ-
mas visit to ** Schura’s ” grandfather, Senator N., where Sophie saw “ Schura*'
for the first time. Sophie was then about thirteen years old, and “ Schura ” even
younger. Sophie was astonished to see Schura’s ” writing-table covered with
books [and had a talk with her about favourite authors]. The two girls often
saw each other at a distance in the recreation-room of their school dift-ing the
v^inter, but “ Schura ” was soon transferred to another school. [They met once

i 82

CHAPTER VIII

[876

at a country-house without exchanging a word, and saw t^ch other once across
a theatre. Sophie, in fact, had had one childish talk with “ Schura ” ; Madame
von Wiesler had never had any real talk with her.] Hence it is clear that the
relations of these ladies with ** Schura " were of the most distant kind, and that
they could not know anything of her political secrets.

876. I now give a case which in one respect stands alone. It
narrates the success of a direct experiment,-^ test-message planned before
death, and communicated after death, by a ‘'m.'in who held that the hope
of an assurance of continued presence was worth at least a resolute effort,
whatever its result might be. His tests, indeed, were two, and both were
successful. One was the revealing of the place where, before death, he
hid a piece of brick marked and broken for special recognition, and the
other was the communication of the contents of a short letter which he
wrote and sealed before death. We may say that the information was
certainly not possessed siipraliminally by any living person. I give tw.)
other cases in 876 A and B where information given through automatisis
may hypothetically be explicable by telepathy from the living, althoug’n,
indeed, in my own view it probably emanated from the deceased as
alleged. In one of these cases the place where a missing will had been
hidden was revealed to the automatist, but it is not clear whether the will
was actually discovered or not before the automatic writing was obtained
(although the automatist was unaware of its discovery), and in any case,
apparently, its whereabouts was known to some living person who had
hidden it, and may not have been known to the deceased before death.

In the other case the whereabouts of a missing note of hand was
revealed to the automatists, and even if this could be regarded as
absolutely unknown supraliminally to any living person, it is not by any
means certain that the fact was known before death to the deceased
person from whom the message purported to come.

These cases, therefore, are not such strong evidence for personal
identity as the one to which I have referred above, and which I now give,
as recording what purports to be the successful accomplishment of an
experiment which every one may make ; — which every one ought to make ;
— for, small as may be the chances of success, a few score of distinct
successes would establish a presumption of man's survival which the
common sense of mankind would refuse to explain away. If accepted,
the incident shows a continued perception on the part of the deceased of
the efforts made by friends to communicate with him.

(From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 24 ! 5 - 3 i.) ^

1 An account of this case appeared in an article by Herman Snow in the
Philoiopkical for January 31st, 1891, and Mr. Snow also sent us an earlier

article 0^ the subject which he had wriuen in 1881, and of which his second account
was a mere repetition. The facts were related to him by the Unitarian minister of the
place where Mrs. Finney lived ; and this third-hand account recorded by Mr. Snow
fifteen years after the event closely coincides with Mrs. Finney*s first-hand one,
recorded twenty-five years after the event.

876 ] MOTOR AUTOMATISM 183

The following ^letters were received from the principal witness, Mrs.
Finney : —

Rockland, Vlxss ,, April 1891.

Mr. Hodgson, — Dear Sir, — S ome weeks ago I received from you a few
lines asking me to give you an account of the commimication received from
Cousin Benja in spirit-life, some twenty-five years ago.

For weeks and months befpre my brother left the form we conversed freely
on the subject of spirit comrl^ioii and such matters, and one morning he
requested me to bring him a small piece of brick, also pen and ink; he then
made two marks on one side, and one on the other with the ink, then breaking
the brick in two, gave me one piece, telling me at the time to take care of it,
and some day he would hide the other piece away where no one but himself
would know, and after leaving the form, if possible, would return in some way
anil tell me where it was. I could then compare them together, and it would
be a test that he could return and communicate, and my mind could not have
any influence over it, as I did not know where lie put it.

After he left the form our anxiety was very great to hear and learn all we
could of communicating with spirits, and for months we got nothing satis-
factory.

We then commenced sitting at the table at home (mother and myself),
which we did for some little time ; at last it commenced tipping, and by calling
the alphabet spelled out where we could find the piece of brick that he put
away,— tliat was the way we got the test. To us that was truth that spirits can
and do communicate tvith us, and nothing but the influence and power of Benja
could tell us that test.— Truly yours, Mrs. Wm. A. Finnev.

Rockland, May yd, 1891.

Mr. R. Hodgson,— Dear Sir,— Yours of April 21st received, and I will
add a few more lines as to statement of brother Benja's communication.

By calling the alphabet we spelled out : —

“ You will find that piece of brick in the cabinet under the tomahawk. —
Benja.”

I went to that room and took the key, unlocked the cabinet, which had not
been touched by any one after he locked it and put away the key. There I
found that piece of brick just as it had spelled out, and it corresponded with the
piece 1 had retained, fitting on exactly where he broke it off the piece I had.
It was wrapped in a bit of paper and lucked into a shell, and placed in the
bottom of the cabinet exactly under the tomahawk, as was spelled out by the
alphabet.

This is truth, and no power but Benja*s could tell that.

Mother is not living; I am the only one of the family that is living. —
Yours respectfully, Mrs. Wm. A. Finnev.

Rockland, May wth, 1891.

Mr. R. Hodgson,— Dear Sir, — Yours of 6th received. I will continue
^0 say, in answer to your questions, that the piece of brick was entirely con-
cealed in the shell, so tluit it could not be seen from outside of cabinet. It
was wrapped in a piece of paper stuck together with mucilage and tucked into
hie end of the shell, then a piece of paper gummed over that, so that nothing
was visible from the shell. The shell was on the lower shelf of the cabinet, and
only the top of the shell was visible outside the cabinet.

184 CHAPTER VIII [876

Oae more little incident I will mention, for to me it js as valuable as the
other. He wrote me a letter (about the time he gave me the piece of brick)
and sealed it, saying at the time it was not to be answered, but the contents of
the letter to be told. I got that in the same way I did the other, by calling the
alphabet and the table tipping. It was these words

“Julia ! do right and be happy. — B enja.”

That was correct. Just the contents of my letter. I have no particular
objection as to giving my name, for I have stated nothing but the truth.

At my home in Kingston I have that little shell with the piece of brick, and
if you would like them I will send them to you. Will place the brick into the
shell as it was when 1 found it. Of course, the paper that was around it then is
worn out years ago. The cabinet is disposed of. Julia A. Fixney.

Mrs. Finney further writes : —

Rockland, /« w 1S91.

I send you by express a box containing the letter and shell with the piece
of brick. I have placed one piece in the shell just as it was when I found it,
so you can see how nicely it was concealed ;n the shell. The papers that were
around it then are worn out. You can retain them if you like, as I do not care
for them now.

To me it is a positive truth that he did communicate to us, and our minds
could have nothing to do with it. J. A. Finney.

Rockland, / w/v 1S91.

. . . The shell was placed on the same shelf with the tomahawk, and
no other shells on that shelf. It was placed with the open side down, and the
tomahawk stood directly over it. I cannot say why he did not tell us to look
inside of the shell. We started to look as soon as he told us. It was in the
cabinet under the tomahawk. We did not wait for any more to be said.

I am not intimately acquainted with many public people. As to my
integrity, will refer you to Rev. C. Y. de Normandie, of Kingston.

J. A. Finney.

Dr, Hodgson writes

The shell is a large Triton, about ten inches long. The piece of brick was
wrapped in folds of soft paper and tucked deeply into the recess. Another
piece of paper was then gummed around the sides of the shell in the interior,
so as absolutely to prevent the piece of brick from falling out. When I
received the shell from Mrs. Finney and looked into the interior and shook the
shell violently, there was nothing to indicate that the shell contained anything
but the piece of gummed paper.

The piece of brick in the shell weighs one and a half ounces, and the piece
of brick retained by Mrs. Finney weighs about two and a quarter ounces. The
shell with the piece of brick and paper wrapping weighs about eleven and a
half ounces.

Mrs. Finney also forwarded me the letter written by her brother. The
shell and the pieces of brick and the letter are now all in my possession.

R. Hodgson.

We have a letter (in original) from the Rev. C. Y. de Normandie, of
Kingston, Canada, to Mrs. Finney. “ I expressed then,” he says, speaking of
a former note to Dr. Hodgson, which accidentally went astray, “that to the best

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

878]

I8S

knowledge I had of you and to my firm belief your word could be implicitly
relied on. I felt confident that you would state a matter as you understood it,
you regarded it, without reference to the consequences ; and that you would
not be any more likely to be misled and deceived about a matter of that kind
tlian others similarly situated.”

877. The experiment which was in this case successful is one (I
repeat) which might be tried by everybody (sec 877 A). And I may add
the remark that it is to experiment with automatic writing, crystal-vision,
&c., rather than to spontaneous apparitions, that we must look for any
real information as to the degree in which departed spirits retain their
knowledge of the things of earth.

Once more I must express my astonishment and regret that amongst
some tens — perhaps huiKlrecls — of thousands of persons, scattered over
many countries, who already believe that the road of communication
between the two worlds is open, there should be so very few who can or
will make any serious effort to obtain fresh evidence of so important a
fact. But, quite apart from the Spiritist camp, there are now many
inquirers who know that automatic writing is a real fact in nature, and
who are willing to discuss with an open mind the origin of any message
which may thus be given. l.ct these set themselves to the task, and the
levalt of organised and intelligent effort will soon, as I believe, be made
plain.

For aught that we can tell, tliere may be — I believe that there are —
collaborators elsewhere w^ho only await our appeal. Why should not
Lvery death-bed be made the starting-point of a long experiment? And
why should not every friend who sails forth Ktouuiv virkp 'Hpa#cA€ 05 — into
the unknown sea — endeavour to send us news from that bourne from
which few travellers, perhaps, have as yet made any adequate or systematic
preparation to return?

878. Here, then, let us pause and consider to what point the
evidence contained in this cliaptcr has gradually led us. W'e shall per-
ceive that the motor phenomena have confirmed, and have also greatly
extended, the results to which the cognate sensory phenomena had
already pointed. We have already noted, in each of the two states of
sleep and of waking, the variously expanding capacities of the subliminal
self. We have watched a hyperaesthelic intensification of ordinary faculty,
—leading up to telsesthesia, and to telepathy from the living and from the
departed. Along with these powers, which, on the hypothesis of the
soul’s independent existence, are at least within our range of analogical
conception, we have noted also a precognitive capacity of a type which no
act as yet known to science will help us to explain.

Proceeding to the study of motor automatisms, we have found \third
group of cases which independently confirm in each of these lines in turn
^ results of our analysis of sensory automatisms both in sleep and

waking. Evidence thus convergent will already need no ordinary

m

CHAPTER VIII

[879

boldness of negative assumption if it is to be set aside. But motor auto-
matisms have taught us much more than this. At once more energetic and
more persistent than the sensory, they oblige us to face certain problems
which the lightness and fugitiveness of sensory impressions allowed us in
some measure to evade. Thus when we discussed the mechanism (so to
call it) of visual and auditory phantasms, two competing conceptions
presented themselves for our choice, — the conception of telepathic impact,
and the conception of psychical invasion. Either (we said) there was an
influence exerted by the agent on the percipient’s mind, which so stimu-
lated the sensory tracts of his brain that he externalised that impression
as a quasi-percept, or else the agent in some way modified an actual
portion of space where (say) an apparition was discerned, perhaps by
several percipients at once.

Phrased in this manner, the telepathic impact seemed the less startling,
the less extreme hypothesis of the two, — mainly, perhaps, because the
picture which it called up was left so vague and obscure. But now
instead of a fleeting hallucination we have to deal with a strong and
lasting impulse — such, for instance, as the girl’s impulse to Kfritc, in
Dr. Li^beault’s case (866) an impulse which seems to come from
the depths of the being, and which (like a post-hypnotic suggestion) may
over-ride even strong disinclination, and keep the automatist uncomfort-
able until it has worked itself out. We may still call this a telepathic
impact^ if we will, but we shall find it hard to distinguish that term from a
psychical invasion. This strong, yet apparently alien, motor innen^ation
corresponds in fact as closely as possible to our idea of an invasion-^dx^
invasion no longer of the room only in which the percipient is sitting,
but of his own body and his own powers. It is an invasion which, if
sufficiently prolonged, would become a possession ; and it both unites and
intensifies those two earlier conjectures ; — of telepathic impact on the per-
cipient’s mind, and of phantasmogenetic presence” in the percipient’s
surroundings. What seemed at first a mere impact is tending to become
a persistent control ; what seemed an incursion merely into the percipient’s
environment has become an incursion into his organism itself.

878. As has been usual in this inquiry', this slight forward step
from vagueness to comparative clearness of conception introduces us at
once to a whole series of novel problems. Yet, as we have also learnt to
expect, some of our earlier phenomena may have to be called in with
advantage to illustrate phenomena more advanced.

In cases of split personality, to begin with, we have seen just the same
phenomena occurring where certainly no personality was concerned save
the percipient’s own. We have seen a section of the subliminal self
partially or temporarily dominating the organism ; perhaps (as in Anna
Winsor’s case, 237 A) controlling permanently one arm alone ; or perhaps
controlling interpjjttently the whole nervous system; — and all this with
varyirtg degrees of displacement of the primary personality.

MOTOR AUTOMATISM

187

Similarly with post-hypnotic suggestion. We have seen the subliminal
self ordered to write (say) “ It has left off raining — and thereupon writing
the words without the conscious will of the automatist — and again with
varying degrees of displacement of the waking self. The step hence to
such a case as Mrs. Newnham's (849 A) is thus nut a very long one.
Mrs. Newnham’s subliminal self, exercising supernormal faculty, and by
some effort of its own, acquires certain facts from Mr. Newnham’s mind,
and uses her hand to write them down automatically. The great problem
here introduced is how the subliminal self acquires the facts, rather than
how it succeeds in writing them down when it has once acquired them.

But as we go further we can no longer limit the problem in this
way,— to the activities of the automatist’s subliminal self. We cannot
always assume that some portion of the automatist’s personality gets at the
supernormal knowledge by some effort of its own. Our evidence, as we
know, has pointed decisively to telepathic impacts or influences from
without. In the Kirby case (852), for instance, wc have supposed that the
spirit of the sleeping sister affected the brother by a telepatliic impact, from
wiihoiity wliich worked itself out by automatic movements just like those
automatic movements which we have already described as originating
wholly from %vithin. What, then, is the mechanism here? Are we still
to suppose that the automatist’s subliminal self executes the movements —
obeying somehow the bidding of the impulse from without? or does the
external agent, who sends the telepathic message, himself execute the
movements also, directly using the automatist’s arm? And if telekinetic
movements accompany the message, (a subject thus far deferred, but of
prime importance), are we to suppose that these also are effected by the
percipient’s subliminal self, under the guidance of some external spirit,
incarnate or discarnate? or are they effected directly by that externa!
spirit?

880. We cannot really say which of these two is the easier
hypothesis.

From one point of view it may seem simpler to keep as long as we
can to that acknowledged vera causa^ the automatist’s subliminal self ; and
to collect such observations as may indicate any power on its part of pro-
ducing physical effects outside the organism. Such scattered observations
occur at every stage, and even Mrs. Newnham, (I may briefly observe in
pissing), thought that her pencil, when writing down the messages tele-
pathically derived from her husband, was moved by something other than
tht: ordinary muscular action of the fingers which held it. On the other
hand, there seems something very forced in attributing to an external
Spirits agency impulses and impressions which seem intimately the auto-
'^atist’s own, and at the same time refusing to ascribe to that o^temal
agency phenomena which take place outside the automatist’s organism,
which present themselves to him as objective facts, as much outside
IS own being as the fall of the apple to the ground.

CHAPTER VIII

1 88

Reflecting on such points — and once admitting ^is kind of interaction
between the automatisms own spirit and an external spirit, incarnate or
discarnate — we find the possible combinations presenting themselves in
perplexing variety ; — a variety both of agencies on the part of the invading
spirit, and of effects on the part of the invaded spirit and organism.

What is that which invades ? and what is that which is displaced or
superseded by this invasion ? In what ways may two spirits co-operate
in the possession and control of the same organism ?

These last words — control and possession — remind us of the great
mass of vague tradition and belief to the effect that spirits of the departed
may exercise such possession or control over the living. To those ancient
and vague beliefs it will be our task in the next chapter to give a form as
exact and stable as we can. And observe with how entirely novel a
preparation of mind we now enter on that task. The examination of
** possession ** is no longer to us, as to the ordinary civilised inquirer, a
merely antiquarian or anthropological research into forms of superstition
lying wholly apart from any valid or systematic thought. On the contrary,
it is an inquiry directly growing out of previous evidence ; directly needed
for the full comprehension of known facts as well as for the discovery of
facts unknown. We need (so to say), to analyse the spectrum of helium,
as detected in the sun, in order to check and correct our spectrum of
helium as detected in the Bath waters. We are obliged to seek for certain
definite phenomena in the spiritual world in order to explain certain
definite phenomena of the world of matter.

900 ]

CHAPTER IX

TRANCE, POSSESSION AND ECSTASY

Vicit iter durum pietas.

—Virgil.

900 . The appearance of this book has been delayed for several years
by several causes^ of which it is to be feared that the chief has been that
cause which the gods call Sheer Indolence, and men the Pressure of
Occupation. What evil may have resulted from the long deferment it is
not for the author to say. What counterbalancing j^ood there may have
accrued ought to be manifest in the following chapter. For it is in this
chapter that the main difference lies between what 1 should have written
ten years ago, and what it seems to me not only permissible, but even
urgently necessary to write to-day. It is in what must needs be said about
Possession that the great change has come.

Possession^ to define it for the moment in the narrowest way, is a more
developed foirn of Motor Automatism. The difference broadly is, that in
Possession the automatist*s own personality does for the time altogether
disappear, while there is a more or less complete substitution of personality ;
writing or speech being given by a spirit through the entranced organism.
The change which has come over this branch of evidence since the present
work was first projected, in i8S8, is most significant. There existed
indeed, at that date, a good deal of evidence which pointed in this
direction,^ but for various reasons most of that evidence was still possibly
explicable in other ways. Even the phenomena of Mr. W. S. Moses left
it possible to argue that the main “controls” under which he wrote or
spoke when entranced were self-suggestions of his own mind, or phases of
his own deeper personality. I had not then had the opportunity, which
the kindness of his executors after his death afforded to me, of studying
the whole series of his original note-books, and forming at first-hand my
present conviction that spiritual agency was an actual and important
element in that long sequence of communications. On the whole, I did
not then anticipate that the theory of possession could be presented as
more than a plausible speculation, or as a supplement to other lines of
proof of man’s survival of death. *

.. exses of Swedenborg, Cahagnet's subject, D. D. Home, and Staintoii Moses
be discussed in the course of this chapter.

190 CHAPTER IX [901

The position of thingSi as the reader of the S.F.R. Proceedings knows,
has in the last decade undergone a complete change. The trance-
phenomena of Mrs. Piper — so long and so carefully watched by Dr.
Hodgson and others — formed, I think, by far the roost remarkable mass
of psychical evidence till then adduced in any quarter. And more
recently other series of trance-phenomena with other ‘^mediums** —
though still incomplete — have added materially to the evidence obtained
through Mrs. Piper. The result broadly is that these phenomena of
possession are now the most amply attested, as well as intrinsically the
most advanced, in our whole repertory.

901. Nor, again, is the mere increment of direct evidence, important
though that is, the sole factor in the changed situation. Not only has
direct evidence grown, but indirect evidence, so to say, has moved to
meet it. The notion of personality, — of the control of organism by spirit,
— has gradually been so modified that Possession, which passed till the
other day as a mere survival of savage thought, is now seen to be the
consummation, the furthest development, of many lines of experiment,
observation, reflection, which the preceding chapters have opened to our
view.

Let us then at once consider what the notion of possession docs
actually claim. It will be better to face that claim in its full extent at
once, as it will be seen that the evidence, while rising through various
stages, does in the end insist on all that the ancient term implies. The
leading modern cases, of which Stainton Moses and Mrs. Piper may
be taken as types, are closely analogous, presenting many undesigned
coincidences, some of which come out only on close examination.

The claim, then, is that the automatist, in the first place, falls into a
trance, during which his spirit partially quits his body : enters at any
rate into a state in which the spiritual world is more or less open to its
perception ; and in which also— and this is the novelty — it so far ceases
to occupy the organism as to leave room for an invading spirit to use it in
somewhat the same fashion as its ovrner is accustomed to use it.

The brain being thus left temporarily and partially uncontrolled, a
disembodied spirit sometimes, but not always, succeeds in occupying it ;
and occupies it with varying degrees of control. In some cases (Mrs.
Piper) two or more spirits may simultaneously control different portions of
the same organism.

The controlling spirit proves his identity mainly by reproducing, in
speech or writing, facts which belong to his memory and not to the
automatist*s memory. He may also give evidence of supernormal per-
ception of other kinds.

His manifestations may differ very considerably from the automatist s
normal personality. Yet in one sense it is a process of selection rather
than of addition ; the spirit selects what parts of the brain-machinery he
will use, but he cannot get out of that machinery more than it is con-

902] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 191

structed to perform.t* The spirit can indeed produce facts and names
unknown to the automatist ; but they must be, as a rule, such facts and
names as the automatist could easily have repeated, had they been known
to him : — not, for instance, mathematical formulae or Chinese sentences, if
the automatist is ignorant of mathematics or of Chinese.

After a time the control gives way, and the automatist*s spirit returns.
The automatist, awaking, may or may not remember his experiences in
the spiritual world during the trance. In some cases (Swedenborg) there
is this memory of the spiritual world, but no possession of the organism
by an external spirit. In others (Cahagnet’s subject) there is utterance
during the trance as to what is being discerned by the automatist, yet no
memory thereof on waking. In others (Mrs. Piper) there is neither utter-
ance as a rule, or at least no prolonged utterance, by the automatisms own
spirit, nor subsequent memory ; but there is writing or utterance during
the trance by controlling spirits.

902. Now this seems a strange doctrine to have reached after so
much disputation. For it simply brings us back to the creeds of the
Slone Age. We have come round again to the primitive practices of the
shaman and the medicine-man; — to a doctrine of spiritual intercourse
which was once oecumenical, but has now taken refuge in African swamps
and Siberian tundras and the snow-clad wastes of the Red Indian and the
Esquimaux. If, as is sometimes advised, we judge of the worth of ideas
by tracing their ori<*inSy no conception could start from a lower level of
humanity. It might be put out of court at once as unworthy of civilised
men.

Fortunately, however, our previous discussions have supplied us with
a somewhat more searching criterion. Instead of asking in what age a
<ioctrine originated — with the implied assumption that the more recent
it is, the belter — we can now ask how far it is in accord or in discord
with a great mass of actual recent evidence which comes into contact,

in one way or another, with nearly every belief as to an unseen world
which has been held at least by western men. Submitted to this test,
tlie theory of possession gives a remarkable result. It cannot be said
to be inconsistent with any of our proved facts. We know absolutely
nothing which negatives its possibility.

Nay, more than this. The theory of possession actually supplies us
with a powerful method of co-ordinating and explaining many earlier

groups of i^henomena, if only we will consent to explain them in a way
which at first sight seemed extreme in its assumptions — seemed unduly
prodigal of the marvellous. Yet as to that difficulty we have learnt by
this time that no explanation of psychical phenomena is really simple, and
that our best clue is to get hold of some group which seems to adpiit of
one interpretation only, and then to use that group as a point dc rephre
rom which to attack more complex problems.

Now I think that the Moses-Piper group of trance-phenomena cannot

192

CHAPTER IX

be intelligently explained on any theory except that, of possession. And
I therefore think it important to consider in what way earlier phenomena
have led up to possession, and in what way the facts of possession, in their
turn, affect our view of these earlier phenomena.

If we analyse our observations of possession, we find two main factors
— the central operation, which is the control by a spirit of the sensitive*s
organism; and the indispensable prerequisite, which is the partial and
temporary desertion of that organism by the percipient’s own spirit.

Let us consider first how far this withdrawal of the living man’s spirit
from his organism has been rendered conceivable by evidence already
obtained.

903. First of all, the splits, and substitutions of phases of personality
with which our second chapter made us familiar have great significance
for possession also.

We have there seen some secondary personality, beginning with slight
and isolated sensory and motor manifestations, yet going on gradually
to complete predominance, — complete control of all supraliminal mani-
festation.

The mere collection and description of such phenomena has up till
now savoured of a certain boldness. The idea of tracing the possible
mechanism involved in these transitions has scarcely arisen.

Yet it is manifest that there must be a complex set of laws concerned
with such alternating use of brain-centres ; — developments, one may
suppose, of those unknown physical laws underlying ordinary memory,
of which no one has formed as yet even a first rough conception.

An ordinary case of eemnesia may present problems as insoluble in
their way as those offered by spirit-possession itself. There may be in
eemnesia periods of life absolutely and permanently extruded from
memory ; and there may be also periods which are only temporarily thus
extruded. Thus on Wednesday and T hursday I may be unaware of
what I learnt and did on Monday and I'uesday ; and then on Friday I
may recover Monday’s and I’uesday’s knowledge, as well as retaining
Wednesday’s and Thursday’s, so that my brain-cells have taken on, so to
say, two separate lines of education since Sunday — that which began on
Monday, and that which began on Wednesday. These intercurrent
educations may have been naturally discordant, and may be fused in all
kinds of ways in the ultimate synthesis.

These processes are completely obscure ; and all that can be said is
that their mechanism probably belongs to the same unknown series of
operations which ultimately lead to that coinpletest break in the history
of the brain-cells which consists in their intercalary occupation by
externjil spirit.

904. Passing on to genius, which I discussed in my third chapter,
it is noticeable that there also there is a certain degree of temporary
substitutiqn of one control for another over important brain-centres.

906] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 193

We must here regard the subliminal self as an entity partially distinct
from the supraliminal, and its occupation of these brain-centres habitually
devoted to supraliminal work is a kind of possession, which illustrates in
yet another way the rapid metastasis of psychical product (so to term it)
of which these highest centres are capable. The highest genius would
thus be the completest self-possession ^ — the occupation and dominance
of the whole organism by those profoundest elements of the self which
act from the fullest knowledge, and in the wisest way.

905. The next main subject which fell under our description was
sleep. And this state — the normal state which most resembles trance —
has long ago suggested the question which first hints at the possibility of
ecstasy, namely. What becomes of the soul during sleep? I think that
our evidence has shown that sometimes during apparent ordinary sleep
the spirit may travel away from the body, and may bring back a memory,
more or less confused, of what it has seen in this clairvoyant excursion.
This may indeed happen for brief flashes during waking moments also.
But ordinary sleep seems to help the process ; and deeper states of sleep
— spontaneous or induced — seem still further to facilitate it. In the
coma preceding death, or during that “ suspended animation ** which is
sometimes taken for death, this travelling faculty has seemed to reach its
highest point.

906. I have spoken of deeper states of sleep, “ spontaneous or in-
duced,** and here the reader will naturally recall much that has been said
of ordinary somnambulism, much that has been said of hypnotic trance.
Hypnotic trance hvas created for us, with perfect facility, situations ex-
ternally indistinguishable from what 1 shall presently claim as true
possession. A quasi-personality, arbitrarily created, may occupy the
organism, responding to speech or sign in some characteristic fashion,
although without producing any fresh verifiable facts as evidence to the
alleged identity. Nay sometimes, as in a few of the Pesaro experiments,
(sec Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 563 - 565 ), there may be indications that
something of a new personality is there. And on the other hand, the
sensitive’s own spirit often claims to have been absent elsewhere, — much
in the fiishion in which it sometimes imagines itself to have been absent
during ordinary sleep, but with greater persistence and lucidity.

Our inquiry into the nature of what is thus alleged to be seen in sleep
and cognate states has proved instructive. Sometimes known earthly
scenes appear to be revisited — with only such alteration as may have
taken pKice since the sleeper last visited them in waking hours. But
sometimes also there is an admixture of an apparently symbolical element.
The earthly scene includes some element of human action, which is pre-
sented in a selected or abbreviated fashion, as though some mind had
een concerned to bring out a special significance from the complex
Sometimes this element becomes quite dominant; phantasmal
pues are seen ; or (as in Dr. Wiltse’s case of apparent death, 713 A) there

CHAPTER IX

194

[906

may be a prolonged symbolical representation of an entry into the spiritual
world.

Cases like these do of course apparently support that primitive doc-
trine of the spirit’s actual wandering in space. On the other hand, this
notion has become unwelcome to modern thought, which is less unwilling
to believe in some telepathic intercourse between mind" and mind in
which space is not involved. For my own part, I have already explained
that I think that the evidence to an at least apparent movement of some
kind in space must outweigh any mere speculative presumption against it.
And I hold that these new experiences of possession fall on this contro-
versy with decisive force. It is so strongly claimedi in every instance of
possession, that the sensitive’s own spirit must in some sense vacate the
organism, in order to allow another spirit to enter, — and the evidence for
the reality of possession is at the same time so strong, — that I think lliat
we must argue back from this spatial change as a relatively certain fiict,
and must place a corresponding interpretation on earlier phenomena.
Siich an interpretation, if once admitted, does certainly meet the phe-
nomena in the way most accordant with the subjective impressions of the
various percipients.

As we have already repeatedly found, it is the bold evolutionary
hypothesis which best fixes and colligates the scattered facts. VVe en-
counter in these studies phenomena of degeneration and phenomena of
evolution. The degenerative phenomena are explicable singly and in
detail as declensions in divergent directions from an existing level. The
evolutive phenomena point, on the other hand, to new generalisations ; —
to powers previously unrecognised towards which our evidence converges
along constantly multiplying lines.

T’his matter of psychical excursion from the organism ultimately in-
volves the extremest claim to novel faculty which has ever been advanced
for men. For it involves, as w^e shall see, the claim to ecstasy : — to a
wandering vision which is not confined to this earth or this material world
alone, but introduces the seer into the spiritual world and among com-
munities higher than any which this planet knovrs. The discussion of this
transportation, however, will be better deferred until after the evidence for
possession has been laid before the reader at some length.

Continuing, then, for the present our analysis of the idea of possession,
we come now to its specific feature, — the occupation by a spiritual agency
of the entranced and partially vacated organism. Here it is that our
previous studies will do most to clear our conceptions. Instead of at
once leaping to the question of what spirits in their essence are, — of what
they can do and cannot do, — of the antecedent possibility of their re-entry
into matter, and the like, — we must begin by simply carrying the idea
of telepathy to its furthest point. We must imagine telepathy becoming
as central and as intense as possible ; — and we shall find that of two
diverging types of telepathic intercourse which will thus present them-

908] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 195

selves, the one will gradually correspond to possession, and the other
to ecstasy.

907. But here let us pause, and consider what is the truest conception
which we are by this time able to form of telepathy. The word has been
a convenient one ; the emtrai notion — of communication beyond this
range of sense — can at any rate thus be expressed in simple terms. But
nevertheless there has been nothing to assure us that our real compre-
hension of telepathic processes has got much deeper than that verbal
definition. Our conception of telepathy, indeed, to say nothing of
telfcsthesia, has needed to be broadened with each fresh stage of our
evidence. That evidence at first revealed to us certain transmissions of
thoughts and images which suggested the passage of actual etherial vibra-
tions from brain to brain. Nor indeed can any one say at any point of
our evidence that etlievial vibrations are demonstrably 7iot concerned in
the phenomena. We cannot tell how fiir from the material world (to use
a crude phrase) some etherial agency may possibly extend. But tele-
pathic phenomena are in fact soon seen to overpass any development
which imaginative analogy can give to the conception of etherial radiation
from one material point to another.

For from the mere transmission of isolated ideas or pictures there is,
as my readers know, a continuous progression to impressions and appari-
tions far more persistent and complex. We encounter an influence which
suggests no mere impact of etherial waves, but an intelligent and respon-
sive presence^ resembling nothing so much as the ordinary human inter-
course of persons in bodily nearness. Such visions or auditions, inward
or externalised, are indeed sometimes felt to involve an even closer
contact of spirits than the common intercourse of earth allows. One
could hardly assign etherial undulations as their cause without assigning
that same mechanism to all our emotions felt towards each other, or
even to our control over our own organisms.

Nay, more. There is — as I have striven to show — a further pro-
gression from these telepathic intercommunications between living men
to intercommunications between living men and discarnate spirits. And
this new thesis, — in every way of vital importance, — while practically
solving one problem on which I have already dwelt, opens also a pos-
sibility of the determination of another problem, nowise accessible until
now. In the first place, we may now rest assured that telepathic com-
munication is not necessarily propagated by vibrations proceeding from
an ordinary material brain. For the discarnate spirit at any rate has
»o such brain from which to start them.

908. So much, in the first place, for the agenfs end of the com-
munication. *

And in the second place, we now discern a possibility of getting
at the percipients end; of determining whether the telepathic im-
pact is received by the brain or by the spirit of the living man,

196 CHAPTER IX [909

or by both inseparably, or sometimes by one and, sometimes by the
other.

On this problem, I say, the phenomena of automatic script, of trance-
utterance, of spirit-possession, throw more of light than we could have
ventured to hope.

Stated broadly, our trance-phenomena show us to begin with that
several currents of communication can pass at once from discarnate
spirits to a living man ; — and can pass in very varying ways. For
clearness* sake I will put aside for the present all cases where the
telepathic impact takes an externalised or sensory form, and will speak
only of intellectual impressions and motor automatisms.

Now these may pass through all grades of apparent centrality. If a
man, awake and in other respects fully self-controlled, feels his hand
impelled to scrawl words on a piece of paper, without consciousness of
motor effort of his own^ the impulse does not seem to him a central one,
although some part of his brain is presumably involved. On the other
hand, a much less conspicuous invasion of his personality may feel much
more central ; as, for instance, a premonition of evil, — an inward heavi-
ness which he can scarcely define. Well, the motor automatism goes on
until it reaches the point of possession ; — that is to say, until the man’s
own consciousness is absolutely in abeyance, and every part of his body is
utilised by the invading spirit or spirits. What happens in such condi-
tions to the man's ruling principle — to his own spirit — we must consider
presently. But so far as his organism is concerned, the invasion seems
complete ; and it indicates a power which is indeed telepathic in a true
sense ; — yet not quite in the sense which we originally attached to the
word. We first thought of telepathy as of a communication between two
minds, whereas what we have here looks more like a communication
between a mind and a body, — an external mind, in place of the mind
which is accustomed to rule that particular body.

There is in such a case no apparent communication between the
discarnate mind and the mimt of the automatist. Rather there is a kind
of contact between the discarnate mind and the brain of the automatist,
in so far that the discarnate mind, pursuing its own ends, is helped up to
a certain point by the accumulated capacities of the automatist’s brain :
— and similarly is hindered by its incapacities.

900. Yet here the most characteristic element of telepathy, I repeat,
seems to have dropped out altogether. There is no perceptible com-
munion between the mind of the entranced person and any other mind
whatever. He is possessed, but is kept in unconsciousness, and never
regains memory of what his lips have uttered during his trance.

But let us see whether we have thus grasped all the trance-phenomena;
— ^whether something else may not be going on, which is more truly, more
centrally telepathic.

To go back to the earliest stage of telepathic experience, we can see

910 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 197

well enough that thb experimental process might quite possibly involve
two different factors. The percipient’s mind must somehow receive the
telepathic impression 3 — and to this reception we can assign no definite
physical correlative ; — and also the percipient’s motor or sensory centres
must receive an excitation ; — which excitation may be communicated, for
aught we know, either by his own mind in the ordinary way, or by the
agent’s mind in some direct way, — which I may call telergic^ thus giving a
more precise sense to a word which I long ago suggested as a kind of
correlative to telepathic. That is to say, there may even in these appa-
rently simple cases be first a transmission from agent to percipient in the
spiritual world, and then an action on the percipient’s physical brain,
of the same type as spirit-possession. This action on the physical brain
may be due either to the percipient’s own spirit, or subliminal self, or
else directly to the agent’s spirit. For I must repeat that the phenomena
of possession seem to indicate that the extraneous spirit acts on a man’s
organism in very much the same way as the man’s own spirit habitually
acts on it. One must thus practically regard the body as an instrument
upon which a spirit plays; — an ancient metaphor which now seems
actually our nearest approximation to truth.

Proceeding to the case of telepathic or veridical apparitions, we see
the same hints of a double nature in the process ; — traces of two elements
mingling in various degrees. At the spiritual end there may be what we
have called “ clairvoyant visions,” — pictures manifestly symbolical, and not
located by the observer in ordinary three-dimensional space. These seem
analogous to the views of the spiritual world which the sensitive enjoys
during entrancement. Then comes that larger class of veridical apparitions
where the figure seems to be externalised from the percipient’s mind,
some stimulus having actually been applied, — ^^vhethe^ by agent’s or
percipient’s spirit, — to the appropriate brain-centre. These cases of
“ sensory automatism ” resemble those experimental transferences of
pictures of cards, &c. And beyond these again, on the physical or rather
the ultra-physical side, come those collective apparitions which in my view
involve some unknown kind of modification of a certain portion of space
not occupied by any organism, — as opposed to a modification of centres
in one special brain. Here comes in, as I hold, the gradual transition
from subjective to objective, as the portion of space in question is modified
tn a manner to affect a larger and larger number of percipient minds.

910. Now when we proceed from these apparitions of the living to
apparitions of the departed, we find very much the same types persisting
still. We find symbolical visions of departed persons, and of scenes
among which they seem to dwell. We find externalised apparitwns or
phantasms of departed persons, — indicating that some point in the per-
cipient’s brain has been stimulated by his own or by some other spirit.

finally, as has already been said, we find that in certain cases of
Possession these two kinds of influence are simultaneously carried to an

CHAPTER IX

198

[911

extreme. The percipient automatist of earlier stages becomes no longer a
percipient but an automatist pure and simple, — so far as his body is
concerned, — for his whole brain — not one point alone — seems now to be
stimulated and controlled by an extraneous spirit, and he is not himself
aware of what his body writes or utters. And meantime his spirit,
partially set free from the body, may be purely percipient; — may be
enjoying that other spiritual form of communication more completely than
in any type of vision which our description had hitherto reached.

911. This point attained, another analogy, already mentioned, will be
at once recalled. There is another class of phenomena, besides telepathy,
of which this definition of possession at once reminds us. We have
dealt much with secondary personalities y — with severances and alternations
affecting a man’s own spirit, in varying relation with his organism.
F^lida X.’s developed secondary personality, for instance (231 A), miglu
be defined as another fragment— or another synthesis — of Felida’s spirit
acting upon her organism in much the same way as the original fragment
— or the primary synthesis — of her spirit was wont to act upon it.

Plainly, this analogy is close enough to be likely to lead to practical
confusion. On what grounds can we base our distinctions? What
justifies us in saying that F^lida X.’s organism was controlled only by
another modification of her own personality, but that Mrs. Piper’s is con
trolled by George Pelham (959) ? May there not be any amount of .^clf-
suggestion, colouring with the fictitious hue of all kinds of identities what
is in reality no more than an allotropic form of the entranced person
himself? Is even the possession by the new personality of some frag*
ments of fresh knowledge any proof of spirit-control? May not that
knowledge be gained (as by Iconic B., see 230 A and 568 A) clairvoyantly
or telepathically, with no intervention of any s])irit other than of living
men?

Yes, indeed, we must reply, there is here a danger of confusion, there
is a lack of any well-defined dividing line. While we must decide on
general rules, wc must also keep our minds open to possible ex-
ceptions.

On the negative side, indeed, general rules will carry us a good way.
We must not allow ourselves to ascribe to spirit-control cases where no
new knowledge is shown in the trance state. And this rule has at once
an important consequence, — a consequence which profoundly modifies the
antique idea of possession. I know of no evidence, — reaching in any
way our habitual standard, — cither for angelic, for diabolical, or for hostile
possession.

9^2. And here comes the question ; What attitude are we to assume
to savage cases of possession ? Are we to accept as genuine the possession
of the Esquimaux, the Chinaman, — nay, of the Hebrew of old days? ^

Chinese possession is a good example, as described in Dr. Nevius
book fan account of which by Professor Newbold I give in 912 A)-

913] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 199

I agree with Profes^r Newbold in holding that no proof has been shown
that there is more in the Chinese cases than that hysterical duplication
of personality with which we are so familiar in France and elsewhere.

A devil is not a creature whose existence is independently known to
science ; and the accounts of the behaviour of ihe invading devils seems
due to mere self-suggestion. With uncivilised races, even more than
among our own friends, we are bound to insist on the rule that there must
be some supernormal knowledge shown before we may assume an
external influence. It may of course be replied that the character shown
by the devils " was fiendish and actually hostiie to the possessed person.
Can we suppose that the tormentor was actually a fraction of the
tormented ?

I reply that such a supposition, so far from being absurd, is supported
by well-known phenomena both in insanity and in mere hysteria.

Especially in the Middle Ages, — amid powerful self-suggestions of evil
and terror,— did these quasi -possessions reach an intensity and violence
which the calm and sceptical atmosphere of the modern hospital checks
and discredits. The devils with terrifying names which possessed Srjeiir
Ang^lique of Loudun (see 832 B) w'ould at the Salpetri^re under Charcot
in our days have figured merely as stages of clounisme ” and attitudes
passionelles.”

And even now these splits of personality seem occasionally to destroy
all sympathy between the normal individual and a divergent fraction. No
great sympathy was felt by L<§onie IL for Iconic I. (230 A). And
Dr. Morton Prince’s case (234 A) shows us the deepest and ablest
of the personalities of his ‘‘Miss Beauchamp,” positively spiteful in its
relation to her main identity.

Bizarre though a house thus divided against itself may seem, the
moral dissidence is merely an exaggeration of the moral discontinuity
already observable in the typical case of Mrs. Newnham (849 A). There
the secondary intelligence was merely tricky, not malevolent. But its
trickiness was wholly alien from Mrs. Newnham’s character, — was some-
thing, indeed, which she would have energetically repudiated.

913. It seems therefore, — and the analogy of dreams points in this
direction also, — that our moral nature is as easily spli| up as our intellec-
tual nature, and that we cannot be any more certain that the minor
current of personality which is diverted into some new channel will
retain moral than that it will retain intelkctital coherence.

To return once more to the Chinese devil-possessions. Dr. Nevius
asserts, though without adducing definite proof, that the possessing devils
sometimes showed supernormal knowledge. This is a better argument
for their separate existence than their fiendish temper is ; but it ij not in
Itself enough. The knowledge does not seem to have been specially
appropriate to the supposed informing spirit. It seems as though it may
ave depended upon heightened memory, with possibly some slight tele-

200

CHAPTER IX

[913

pathic or telaesthetic perception. Heightened memory is thoroughly
characteristic of some hysterical phases ; and even the possible traces of
telepathy (although far the most important feature of the phenomena, if
they really occurred) are, as we have seen, not unknown in trance states
(like I^onie's) where there is no indication of an invading spirit.

Temporary control of the organism by a widely divergent fragment of
the personality, self-suggested in some dream-like manner into hostility to
the main mass of the personality, and perhaps better able than that

normal personality to reach and manipulate certain stored impressions,

or even certain supernormal influences, — such will be the formula to
which we shall reduce the invading Chinese devil, as described by Dr.
Nevius, — and probably the great majority of supposed devil-possessions
of similar type.

The great majority, no doubt, but perhaps not all. It vrould indeed
be matter for surprise if such trance-phenomena as those of Mrs. Piper
and other modern cases had appeared in the world without previous
parallel. Much more probable is it that similar phenomena have
occurred sporadically from the earliest times, — although men have not
had enough of training to analyse them.

And, in fact, among the endless descriptions of trance-phenomena with
which travellers furnish us, there are many which include points so
concordant with our recent observations that we cannot but attach some
weight to coincidences so wholly undesigned.^ But although this may be
admitted, I still maintain that the only invaders of the organism who have
as yet made good their title have been human, and have been friendly.
‘'The devils of Loudun ” and the like have, I repeat, entirely failed to sub-
stantiate their independent existence. The higher influences which inspired
the “ Martyrs of the Cevennes are not at this distance of time clearly separ-
able from the inspirations of genius. The teasing, mystifying “ controls "
whom we have encountered so often in earlier stages of motor automatisms
(deceptive written messages and the like) arc perhaps the most puzzling.
They suggest — nor can we absolutely disprove the suggestion — a type of
intelligences inferior to human, — animal-like, and perhaps parasitic. But
we have seen already that for these cases too a simpler explanation is
forthcoming. There is nothing in the mere fact of the teasing annoyance
to negative the supposition that these controls are also fragments — we may

^ One important point of similarity is the concurrence in some savage cfcremonies
of utterance through an invading spirit and travelling clairvoyance exercised meantime
by the man whose organism is thus invaded. The uncouth spirit shouts and bcllo'^'S,
presumably with the lungs of the mcdicine-man, hidden from view in profound slumber.
Then the medicine-man awakes, — and tells the listening tribe the news which his slcep-
wanderipgs, among gods or men, have won.

If this indeed be thus, it fits in strangely with the experiences of our modern seers, --
with the spiritual interchange which takes place when a discarnate intelligence occupies
the organism and meantime the incarnate intelligence, temporarily freed, awakes to
wider percipience,-— in this or in another world.

915] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 201

call them splinters-i-of the man’s own split personality. His will and
character may divide up in manifestation just as his intellect may do.

914. Thus far, then, our field is clear, and with this clearance, I
think, should vanish the somewhat grim associations which have gathered
around the word possession. In what is now to be described there
may often be cause for perplexity, but I have never seen cause for fear.
Nay, how far remote from fear is the resultant feeling, the sequel will
show.

Assuming then, as I think we at present may assume, that we have to
deal only with spirits who have been men like ourselves, and who are
still animated by much the same motives as those which influence us, we
may briefly consider, on similar analogical grounds, what range of spirits
are likely to be able to affect us, and what difficulties they are likely to
find in doing so. Of course, actual experience alone can decide this;
but nevertheless our expectations may be usefully modified if we reflect
beforehand how far such changes of personality as we already know can
suggest to us the limits of these profounder substitutions.

What, to begin with, do we find to be the case as to addition of
faculty in alternating states ? How far do such changes bring with them
unfamiliar powers?

Reference to the recorded cases will show us that existing faculty may
be greatly quickened and exalted. I'here may be an increase both in
actual perception and in power of remembering or reproducing what has
once been perceived. There may be increased control over muscular
action, — as shown, for instance, in improved billiard-playing, — in the
secondary state. But there is little evidence of the acquisition — telepathy
apart— of any actual mass of fresh knowledge, — such as a new language,
or a stage of mathematical knowledge unrcached before. We shall not
therefore be justified by analogy in expecting that an external spirit con-
trolling an organism will be able easily to modify it in such a way as to
produce speech in a language previously unknown. The brain is used
iis something between a typewriter and a calculating machine. German
words, for instance, are not mere combinations of letters, but specific
formulae ; they can only seldom and with great difi&culty be got out of
It machine which has not been previously fashioned for their production.

915. Consider, again, the analogies as to memory. In the case of
idternations of personality, memory fails and changes in what seems a
quite capricious way. The gaps which then occur recall (as I have said)
the cemnesite or blank unrecoliccted spaces which follow upon accidents
to the head, or upon crises of fever, when all memories that belong to a
particular person or to a particular period of life are clean wiped out,
t>t cr memories remaining intact. Compare, again, the memory of
'va ing life which we retain in dream. This too is absolutely capricious ;

my own name in a dream, and yet remember perfectly
® kind of chairs in my dining-room. Or I may remember the chairs,

CHAPTER IX

202

[916

but locate them in some one else's house. No one can predict the kind
of confusion which may occur.

916 . We have also the parallel of somnambulic utterance. In talking
with a somnambulist, be the somnambulism natural or induced, we find
it hard to get into continuous colloquy on our own subjects. To begin
with, he probably will not speak continuously for long together. He
drops back into a state in which he cannot express himself at all. And
when he does talk, he is apt to talk only on his own subjects ; — to follow
out his own train of ideas, — interrupted rather than influenced by what
we say to him. The difference of state between waking and sleep is in
many ways hard to bridge over.

We have thus three parallelisms which may guide and limit our
expectations. From the parallelism of possession with split personalities
we may infer that a possessing spirit is not likely to be able to inspire
into the recipient brain ideas or words of very unfamiliar type. From
the parallelism of possession with dream we may infer that the memory
of the possessing spirit may be subject to strange omissions and coii'
fusions. From the parallelism with somnambulism w^e may infer that
colloquy between a human observer and the possessing spirit is not
likely to be full or free, but rather to be hampered by difference of state,
and abbreviated by the difficulty of maintaining psychical contact for
long together.

917 . And here observe how different is the form our expectations
will gradually assume from the commonplace — or even from the poetic-
notion of what communication with the dead is likely to be, if it can take
place at all. We now expect to have to do, not with a voice monotonous
and hollow like a ghost’s, denouncing judgment ” ; — but rather with a
voice incoherent and fugitive, like the voice of a sleeper ; — with memories
broken and arbitrary, like the memories of a dream.

And similarly as to what the voice is to tell us. We have no reason
for anticipating either ^‘judgment” or high revelation. We feel pretty
sure, indeed, that there will bo no ideas expressed which much transcend
the automatist’s habitual range. Ancl, moreover, on the principle of
continuity which has guided us throughout this work, we cannot assume
that the departed spirit has already gained any vast increment of know-
ledge.

Whatever his new opportunities, we feci that his own capacity for
learning may not have undergone any sudden change. We can hardly
at first expect from him much more than some such account of his new
state as may be intelligible to our material conceptions.

This, I say, is what we who are prepared by these previous studies
are likely to expect. And 1 shall presently show that this is very
what we actually fin<l. The expectations of the ordinary public, however,
as seen both in fiction, and in the disappointed comments with which our
actual results are greeted, are of very different scope.

919] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 203

918. There are4hree strong currents of expectation of which we find
constant traces, but with which the phenomena do not comply. The
failure of compliance, indeed, leads to indifference or even to ridicule.

(i.) There is the orthodox or traditional line of expectation. This
leads people to expect an immediate vision of Jesus Christ, or of angels
or devils ; or some marked and definite division of good and evil souls ;
—or at least some foresight of the I^st Judgment. There is not, however,
so far as I know, any confirmation at all, from apparitions or messages, of
any of these anticipations.

Perhaps the most striking part of this negative evidence is the absence,
in well-attested cases, of any mention of evil spirits other than human.^
The belief in devils has played an enormous part in almost all human
creeds, and it was undoubtedly strong in the minds of many of the
persons with whom communication has been held. Unhappy figures
have been seen ; regret and remorse have been expressed. But of evil
spirits other than human there is no news whatever.

Here is a definite case in which I venture to hope that theological
dogma will be insensibly modified by fresh information, and that an error
which has caused much misery will cease to trouble mankind.

(2,) The strain of religious anticipation merges gradually into what I
have called the romantic. Men are tempted to think that the apparition
or message of a departed friend is a special privilege ; — directly granted
by Providence, or won in some way by strength of affection. In actual
experience we find that although affection may help by inspiring the wish
10 communicate, the power is something quite independent of affection ; —
something which love may lack and indifference possess. Nay, it is by
no means certain that any act of will need be involved in the apparition,
which may very probably occur in automatic fashion.

This has been made a subject of ridicule, — as though it were a
meaningless thing that B should appear to A who cares nothing about
him. Of course the meaning belongs to the realm of science, not of
romance.

(3.) Again, there seems to be a common notion that messages from
the next world ought to subserve some practical purpose in this. In fact,
such a result seldom occurs : and its absence has been a frequent ground
for doubting or deriding the message. Yet the coarseness of such a view
hardly needs exposition.

919. The foregoing remarks may, I hope, have prepared the reader
to consider the problems of possession with the same open-mindedness
which has been needed for the study of previous problems attacked in the
present work. I have shown indeed that this new problem may be
regarded as the natural sequence or development of the old. \ have
Shown that in the movements or utterances of the possessed organism we
twve motor automatism carried to its furthest stage ; that in the incursion
1 See Chapter VIL, section 763.

204

CHAPTER IX

of the possessing spirit we have telepathic invasion*^ its com-

pletest victory. And I have uttered, too, an initial warning against
certain misconceptions which have in past time deterred men from
serious study of the messages received through such channels.

It is time, then, to proceed to the actual evidence, to detail the
various proofs which we have as yet collected to show that such possession
has in fact occurred. When this shall have been done, we must again
look round us; — and we shall find that in describing this complete or
raediumistic ” form of trance, we have opened up analogies with other
forms of trance also, which will be discerned as elements in a continuous
and mutually corroborative chain of psychological facts.

920. Yet there must needs be one more delay. There is another
aspect of possession which must be explained before we can go further
involving a group of phenomena which have in various ways done much
to confuse and even to retard our main inquiry, but which, when properly
placed and understood, are seen to form an inevitable part of any scheme
which strives to discover the influence of unseen agencies in the world we
know.

In our discussion of all telepathic and other supernormal influence I
have thus far regarded it mainly from the psychological and not from the
physical side. I have spoken as though the field of supernormal action
has been always the metetherial world. Yet true as this dictum may be
in its deepest sense, it cannot represent the luhole truth ‘‘ for beings such
as we are, in a world like the present.” For us every psychological fact
has (so far as we know) a physical side ; and metetherial events, to be
perceptible to us, must somehow affect the world of matter.

In sensory and motor automatisms, then, we see effects, supernormally
initiated, upon the world of matter.

ImprimiSy of course, and in ordinary life our own spirits (their
existence once granted) affect our own bodies and are our standing
examples of spirit affecting matter. Next, if a man receives a telepathic
impact from another incarnate spirit which causes him to see a phantasmal
figure, that man’s brain has, we may suppose, been directly affected by
his own spirit rather than by the spirit of the distant friend. But it may
not always be true even in the case of sensory automatisms that the
distant spirit has made a suggestion merely to the percipient’s spirit which
the percipient’s own spirit carries out ; and in motor automatisms, as they
develop into possession, there are indications, as I have already pointed
out, that the influence of the agent’s spirit is telergic rather than telepathic,
and that we have extraneous spirits influencing the human brain or
organism. That is to say, they are producing movements in matter
even JLhough that matter be organised matter and those movements
molecular.

921. So soon as this fact is grasped, — and it has not always been
grasped by those who have striven to establish a fundamental difference

922] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 205

between spiritQal influence on our spirits and spiritual influence on the
tnaterial world, — we shall naturally be prompted to inquire whether inor-
ganic matter as well as organic ever shows the agency of extraneous spirits
upon it. The reply which first suggests itself is, of course, in the negative.
VVc are constantly dealing with inorganic matter, and no hypothesis of
spiritual influence exerted on such matter is needed to explain our experi-
ments. But this is a rough general statement, hardly likely to cover
phenomena so rare and fugitive as many of those with which in this
inquiry we deal. Let us begin, so to say, at the other end ; not with the
broad experience of life, but with the delicate and exceptional cases of
possession of which we have lately been speaking.

Suppose that a discarnate spirit, in temporary possession of a living
organism, is impelling it to motor automatisms. Can we say a priori
what the limits of such automatic movements of that organism arc likely
to be, in the same way as we can say what the limits of any of its voluntary
movements are likely to be ? May not this extraneous spirit get more
motor power out of the organism than the waking man himself can get'
out of it? It would not surprise us, for example, if the movements in
trance showed increased concentration ; if a dynamometer (for instance)
was more forcibly squeezed by the spirit acting through the man than by
the man himself. Is there any other way in which one would imagine
that a spirit possessing me could use my vital force more skilfully than
I could use it myself?

I do not know how my will moves my arm ; but I know by experience
that my will generally moves only my arm and what my arm can touch ; —
whatever objects are actually in contact wdth the “ protoplasmic skeleton ”
which represents the life of my organism. Yet I can sometimes move
objects not in actual contact, as by melting them with the heat or (in the
dry air of Colorado) kindling them with the electricity, which my
fingers emit. I see no very definite limit to this power. I do not know
all the forms of energy which my fingers might, under suitable training,
emit.

922. And now suppose that a possessing spirit can use my organism
more skilfully than I can. May he not manage to emit from that organism
some energy which can visibly move ponderable objects not actually in
contact with my flesh ? That would be a phenomenon of possession not
very unlike its other phenomena ; — and it would be telekinesis.

By that word (due to M. AksakofT) it is convenient to describe what
have been called the physical phenomena of spiritualism,** as to whose
existence as a reality, and not as a system of fraudulent pretences, fierce
controversy has raged for lialf a century, and is still raging.

My own method of dealing with this thorny subject in this bojk w-ill
be as follows : — I have first indicated, in the pages just preceding, that
telekinetic phenomena can be fitted, with no manifest illogicality, into
at conception of possession whicli forms the most advanced point to

206 CHAPTER IX [923

which our evidence leads us. I shall next feel bound to utter an earnest
warning against the fraud and folly which have gathered with exceptional
thickness round this special group of phenomena. I shall then refer to
certain phenomena of telekinesis, in cases where they are inextricably
mixed up with the psychological phenomena which I consider as my more
especial field. And finally, in a long Appendix (926 A), 1 shall set forth
a “ Scheme of Vital Faculty ” which will suggest some possible parallels
between the operations of the supraliminal self, the subliminal self, and the
possessing spirit.

923. Along this line, as I believe, we reach important truths ; — and
truths entirely concordant with the psychological evidence of preceding
chapters. And yet it is with a half-reluctant feeling that I admit the
topic into this work. So sorely needed here is the word of warning of
which I have spoken ; — so humiliating is the confession which must be
made of the fraud and folly which have made of spiritualism a kind of
by-word in scientific circles ; — which have presented the very men who have
obtained the first inkling of momentous truths in the guise of a credulous
sect, preyed upon by a specially repulsive group of impostors. The fact
is, that just here, and not earlier, we reach the points where the enormous
issues, which have in truth underlain each stage and step in our long
inquiry, become conspicuous to the ordinary mind. We somewhat sud-
denly pass from speculations and experiments on which the public look
with the indifference which they feel for philosophy to speculations and
experiments on which they look w’ith the interest which they feel in the
religious dogmas which are to decide their own future. I do not say
that the public interested has been a very wide one. It has indeed
been wide enough, as I have said, to foster and support a particularly
detestable group of charlatans; but it has not been wide enough, or
earnest enough, to compile any considerable mass of careful experiment.
I conjectured in a previous chapter that not a hundred men, at the
ordinary professional level, had up till now made the study of the
phenomena of hypnotism the main intellectual business of their lives. If
for hypnotism we substitute these phenomena of spiritualism ” the list of
serious students might probably be reduced to fifty.

It is well to point out the scantiness of efficient investigators of these
problems, in view of the objection often made to the lack of progress in
the difficult task. Outside some comparatively small group the number
of spiritists rather resemble that multitude of indiscriminate givers who,
in the days of haphazard charity, encouraged impostors, and brought
philanthropy into contempt.

Confronted with these evils, the early members of the Charity
Organisation Society had a painful and invidious task to perform. They
had to repress where they would fain have stimulated ; to act as detec-
tives where they would fain have acted as benefactors ; to pass judgment
on men whose charitable impulses were as pure and ardent as their own.

925] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 207

Only through the seeming sternness of such training could the public learn
to help the miserable without fostering the impostors.

The parallel at which 1 am pointing here is obvious enough ; but in
the realm of psychical research — as indeed in the realm of almsgiving —
that needed lesson has as yet been very imperfectly acquired. I propose
to indicate in Appendices (923 A and B) some of the work which the
Society for Psychical Research has done in exposing and guarding against
fraud and credulity ; and I further refer my readers to a forthcoming book
by my friend and colleague, Mr. Podmore, in which the imposture which
has dogged so-called ** Modern Spiritualism ** from its inception will be
exposed with a distinctness which needs must be salutary ; — even though
in a history so complex it be always possible that more intimate knowledge
might have modified judgment on one or other detail.^

924. 'Fhis serious warning given, I may pursue my task of describing
that most interesting of supernormal phenomena which we term Pos-
session ; — a phenomenon to which the telekinesis which has often accom-
panied it lends an additional element of attractive mystery. It has, of
course, been that interest, that mystery, which has attracted the fraudulent
imitations of which I have spoken ; — and which it would not have been
worth while to contrive except for some phenomena thus strongly mani-
festing spiritual presence and spiritual power.

This persistent simulation of telekinesis has, naturally enough, in-
spired persistent doubt as to its genuine occurrence even in cases where
simulation has been carefully guarded against, or is antecedently improb-
able. Important though the phenomenon is, it is not so intimately linked
with my own general thesis in this work as to render it needful for me to
review its whole history in detail. I deal with it only where it comes
immediately before me as an element in spirit-possession; — especially
noticeable in the two important cases of I). D. Home and of W.
Staijiton Moses.

And recognising, as I do, that telekinesis — like the simpler motor
automatisms of which it forms the extreme term — reaches in cases of
possession its maximum intensity, I feel bound (if it were only for the
sake of analogical completeness) to show that, like other motor auto-
matisms, telekinesis has appeared occasionally at earlier stages, although
needing the free play of a possessed organism to develop itself to the full.

925. It is not, indeed, necessary to suppose that all telekinesis is
due to spiritual action. Rather we may begin by regarding it as a
form of motor automatism, initiated by the subliminal self. I believe
that there is sometimes an element of telekinesis in such common
phenomena as table-tilting and automatic writing with planchette or even
with pencil {e^, in Mr. Wedgwood’s and Mrs. Newnham’s experijments,
see 861, 862, and 849 A).

/ Spiritualism ; a History and a Criticism^ by Frank Podmore (Methuen

ai'd Co., London, 1902).

208 CHAPTER IX [926

We cannot, of course, expect that any such slight and obscure admix<
ture of telekinesis can be sifted out from an act of motor automatism
in any evidential form. But from my point of view this kind of
evidential difficulty is pretty sure to occur, from the very nature of the
supernormal movement. If that movement could be started with equal
ease from any given point in space, and in any direction, we might fairly
expect that such points would be chosen, and such movements performed,
as gave the best evidence of the movement’s independence of ordinary
human agency. But the telekinetic force, in my view, is generally (I do
not say always) a mere extension to a short distance from the sensitive’s
organism of a small part of his ordinary muscular power. It even seems
tg tend to simulate that ordinary action; — much as other supernormal
exercises of faculty follow, so far as they can, the modes in which normal
faculty operates.

So gradual, so inconspicuous, are the beginnings of telekinesis;—
which presently develop, no doubt, into something which we can no
longer ascribe to any hyperboulic activities of the subliminal self, it
develops, indeed, in two directions, — into messages and into mari'elu
Genuine raps^ or percussive sounds, are rare (see 925 A), nor is it possible
by mere description of the noises to prove their genuineness in any given
case, unmistakable and inimitable though they are when actually heard.
But with one sensitive known intimately to me. — the lady described as
Miss A. (see 859), — raps have occurred (as I know both by actually
hearing them and by abundant attestation) as a means of attracting
attention under many circumstances, and of conveying advice and infor-
mation of all kinds; — from such dicta as subliminal perception might
furnish up to evidential messages ascribed to deceased persons.

Midway between the raps which spell out messages and the sheer
marvels which may be performed “ to show spirit-power ** come the
various displacements of objects, &c., which are attested as coinciding
(like veridical phantasms) with moments of death or crisis (see, e.g.^ case
III. in 716 C), — or merely as testifying to presences ^ — as of a dear friend
recently dead.

926. Thus much it was needful to say in order to make certain
cases of possession soon to be cited intelligible to the reader, but 1
should not have deferred my mention of telekinesis to this point in my
book had I intended to deal with these physical phenomena as fully as
with the psychical phenomena which I endeavour to expound and in
some measure to connect and correlate.

While believing absolutely in the occurrence of telekinetic pheno-
mena, I yet hold that it would be premature to press them upon my
reader’s belief, or to introduce them as an integral part of my general
expository scheme. From one point of view, their detailed establishment,
as against the theory of fraud, demands an expert knowledge of conjuring
and other arts which I cannot claim to possess. From another point of

927] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 209

vievr, their right comprehension must depend upon a knowledge of the
relations between matter and ether such as is now only dimly adum-
brated by the most recent discoveries ; — for instance, discoveries as to
previously unsuspected forms of radiation.

In a long Appendix, viz., “Scheme of Vital Faculty” (926 A) —
originally written with reference to the manifestations through Mr. Stainton
Moses — I have tried to prepare the way for future inquiries ; to indicate in
what directions a better equipped exploration may hereafter reap rich
reward. Even that tentative sketch, perhaps, may have been too am-
bitious for my powers in the present state not only of my own, but of
human knowledge; and in the text of this chapter I shall allude to
telekinetic phenomena only where unavoidable, — owing to their inmixture
into; phenomena more directly psychological, — and in the tone of the
historian rather than of the scientific critic. As a matter of history I
shall give in 926 B references to the best extant accounts of telekinetic
phenomena.

« » « » » * 1

927. The way has now been so far cleared for our cases of Possession
that at least the principal phenomena claimed have been (I hope) made
intelligible, and shown to be concordant with other phenomena already
described and attested. It will be best, however, to consider first some
of tlie more rudimentary cases before going on to our own special instances
of possession, — those of Mr. Stainton Moses or Mrs. Piper.

I have reason to believe, both from what I have witnessed myself and
from the reports of others, that occasional phenomena of ecstasy or posses-
sion are not infrequent in some foinily circles or groups of intimate friends
(SCO, e,g.^ the case of Mr. O. in 927 A).

The persons concerned, however, generally do not realise the import-
ance of accurate records ; in some cases the manifestations are sporadic
in character and scarcely suscciniblc of any detailed investigation ; and
often the very occurrence of the phenomena has been sedulously con-
cealed from all outside the circle. Sometimes the sacredness of the mani-
festations has been pleaded as a sufficient reason for their concealment,
the tendency to trance on the part of the “ sensitive ” has been regarded
as a calamity, to be checked and prohibited as though it were a distressing
disease.

There are further occasional cases of the frankly “mediumistic” type
(of which I give examples in 927 B and C). But the problems involved
are so complicated, and the main question — that of the agency of dis-
carnate spirits in the matter — is so difficult of determination, that no

' 1 he asterisks indicate the end of the part of this Chapter which was consecutively
^oniposed by the author. See Preface. The rest of the Chapter consists chiefiy of
ragments written by him at different times. In putting these together, the Editors felt
of preserve as much as possible of the original form and to present as much

e material as was complete in itself, at the risk of some lack of transition and even
a certain degree of repetition.

VOL. IT. n

210

CHAPTER IX

collection of such fragmentary material could be of much service to us in
our present inquiry unless perhaps to indicate that the fully»developed
cases belongs after all, to a not uncommon type.

928. We have already seen that there is no great gulf between the
sudden incursions, the rapid messages of the dead, with which we are
already familiar, and incursions so intimate, messages so prolonged, as to
lay claim to a name more descriptive than that of motor automatisms.

And similarly no line of absolute separation can be drawn between
the brief psychical excursions previously described, and those more pro-
longed excursions of the spirit which I would group under the name of
ecstasy.

In the earlier part of this book I have naturally dwelt rather on the
evidence for supernormal acquisition of knowledge than on the methods
of such acquisition, and my present discussion must needs be restricted to
a certain extent in the same way. We must, however, attempt some pro-
visional scheme of classification, though recognising that the difficulties of
interpretation which I pointed out in Chapter IV. (section 419), when
endeavouring to distinguish between telepathy and tctesthesia, meet us
again in dealing with possession and ecstasy. We may not, that is, be
able to say, as regards a particular manifestation, whether it is an instance
of incipient possession, or incipient ecstasy, or even whether the organism
is being controlled ” directly by some extraneous spirit or by its own
incarnate spirit. It is from the extreme cases that we form our categories.
But now that we have reached some conception of what is involved in
ecstasy and possession, we can interpret some earlier cases in this new
light. Such experiences, for instance, as those of Mr. Mamtchitch (714),
Miss Conley (721), Madame X. (833), and Miss A. (859 A), suggest a
close kinship to the more developed cases of Mr. Moses and Mrs. Piper.

929. In other cases it may be clear that no control of any dis-
carnate spirit is involved, but there seems to be something like incipient
possession by the subliminal self or incarnate spirit. From this point
of view the following incident — recorded, it will be observed, on the
day of its occurrence — is of undoubted psychological interest. If it is
not a case of thought-transference from Miss C. to Mrs. Luther (possibly
between their subliminal selves during sleep), we must assume that a
very remarkable recrudescence of latent memory occurred to the latter
independently, at the same time that a similar though less remarkable
revival of memory occurred to the former. But I introduce the case here
simply as suggestive of the momentary domination of the subliminal over
the supraliminal self. 'I'he account is quoted from the Journal S.P.R'>

vol. V. p. 253 . Professor Luther writes ; —

«'

Hartford, Conn., March 1892*

. . . Miss C. is often in my study and consults my books freely, so that
her dream was not remarkable. The dream of Mrs. L. (my wife) was a so

930 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 211

ordinary in charact<ft-. The coincidence in time of the dreams may have
been merely a coincidence. But that after these occurrences Mrs. L. should
suddenly, 'without the least premeditation and without hesitation, take the
rifjbt book and open it at the right page with the certainty of a somnambulist,
seems to me strange. . . .

These events took place yesterday, last night, and this morning.

F. S. Luther

(Prof. Math., Trinity College).

Mrs. L. and Miss C. live at the same hotel and meet daily. Miss C. is
engaged in writing an essay upon Emerson, and expresses to Mrs. L. her wish
to obtain some particulars as to Emerson’s private life. Mrs. L. regrets that
she has no book treating of the subject. During the night following this con-
versation Mrs. L. dreams of handing Miss C. a book containing an article such
as is desired, and Miss C. dreams of telling Mrs. L. that she had procured just
the information which she had been looking for. Each lady relates to the other
her dream when they meet at breakfast the next morning. Mrs. L. returns to
her room, and, while certainly not consciously thinking of Emerson, suddenly
finds in her mind the thought, “There is the book which Miss C. needs.” She
goes directly to a bookcase, takes down vol. xvii. of the Century Magazine^ and
opens immediately at the article, “ The Homes and Haunts of Emerson.”
Mrs. L. had undoubtedly read this article in 1S79, but she had never studied
Emerson or his works, nor had she made any special effort to assist Miss C. in
her search, though feeling a friend’s interest in the proposed essay.

After receiving the book and hearing how it was selected, Miss C. relates
her dream more fully, it appearing that she had seemed to be standing in front
of Mrs. L.’s shelves with a large, illustrated book in her hands, and that in the
book was .something about Emerson.

Still later it is found that Miss C. had actually noticed the article in question
while actually in the position reproduced in her dream. This, however, had
happened about a month previous to the events just narrated, and before she
had thought of looking up authorities as to Emerson, so that she had entirely
forgotten the occurrence and the article. Neither did .she, at that time, call
Mrs. L.’s attention to the article, or mention Emerson.

According to the be.st information attainable, Miss C. was not thinking of
her essay at the time when Mrs. Ll felt the sudden impulse to take down a
certain book. And perhaps it should be added that the volume is one of a
complete set of the Century variously disposed upon Mrs. L.’s shelves.

[ This account is signed by Professor Luther, Mrs. L., and Miss C.]

930 . Of special interest are a few cases where the actual mechanism
of some brief communication from the spiritual world seems to suggest and
ead up to the mechanism which we shall afterwards describe either as
ecstasy or as possession.

I give first a case which suggests such knowledge as may be learnt in
ecstasy as though a message had been communicated to a sleeper fluring
some brief excursion into the spiritual world, — which message was remem-
th*^^ 1 ^ moments, in symbolic form, and then rapidly forgotten, as

€ sleeper returned fully into the normal waking state. What is to be

212

CHAPTER IX

[930

noted is that the personality of sleep to which I attribute the spiritual
excursion, seems at first to have been ^‘controlling** the awakened
organism. In other words, Professor Thoulet was partially entranced or
possessed by his own spirit or subliminal self.

I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 503-5, a translation of
the original account of the case in the Annales des Sciences Psychique.%
(September-October 1S91).

Professor Thoulet writes to Professor Richet as follows : —

April vjth, 1891.

. . . During the summer of 1867 , 1 was officially the assistant, but in reality
the friend, in spite of difference in age, of M. F., a former officer in the naw,
who had gone into business. We were trying to set on foot again the ex-
ploitation of an old sulphur mine at Rivanazzaro, near Voghera, in Piedmont,
which had been long abandoned on account of a falling in.

We occupied the same rooms, and our relations were those of father and
son, or of elder and younger brother. . . .

I knew that Madame F., who lived at Toulon, and with whom I was slighllv
acquainted, would soon be confined. I cannot say I was indifferent about this
fact, for it concerned M. F. ; but it certainly caused me no profound emotion ;
it was a second child, all was going well, and M. F. was not anxious. I myself
was well and calm. It is true that a few days before, in linrgundy, my mother
had fallen out of a carriage ; but the fall had no bad consequences, and the
letter which informed me of it also told me there was no harm done.

M. F. and I slept in adjoining rooms, and as it was hot we left the door
between them open. One morning I sprang suddenly out of bed, crossed iny
room, entered that of M. F., and awakened him by crying out, You have just
got a little girl; the telegram .says . . Upon this I began to read tiic
telegram. M. F. sat up and listened ; but all at once I understood that I h-Jul
been asleep, and that consequently my telegram was only a dream, not to Ije
believed ; and then, at the same time, this telegram which was somehow in my
hand and of which I had read about three lines aloud, word for word, scemeii
to withdraw from my eyes as if some one were carrying it off open ; the words
disappeared, though their image still remained ; those which I had pronounced
remained in my memory, while the rest of the telegram was only a form.

I stammered something; M. F. got up and led me into the dining-room,
and made me write down the words I had pronounced ; when I came to li e
lines which, though they had disappeared from my memory, still reinaind
pictured in my eye, I replaced them by dots, making a sort of drawing of them.
Remark that the telegram wa.s not written in common terms; there were about
six lines of it, and I had read more than two of them. Then, becoming aware
of our rather incorrect costume, M. F. and 1 began to laugh, and went back to
our beds.

Two or three days after I left for Torde ; I tried in vain to remember the
rest of the telegram ; I went on to Turin, and eight or ten days after my dream
I receded the following telegram from M. F., ‘‘ Come directly, you were right.

I returned to Rivanazzaro and M. F. showed me a telegram which he Inu
received the evening before; I recognised it as the one I had seen in
dream ; the beginning was exactly wliat I had written, and the end, which wjis
exactly like my drawing, enabled me to read again the words which I saw again

931] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 213

please remark that tiie confinement had taken place the evening before, and
therefore the fact was not that I, being in Italy, had seen a telegram which
already existed in France— this I might with some difficulty have understood —
but that I had seen it ten days before it existed or could have existed ; since
the event it announced had not yet taken place. I h? ve turned this phenomenon
over in my memory and reasoned about it many times, trying to explain it, to
connect it with something, with a previous conversation, with some mental
t;.’nsion, with an analogy, a wish,— and all in vain. M. F. is dead, and the
paper I wrote has disappeared. If I were called before a court of justice about
it, I could not furnish the shadow of a material proof, and again the two
personalities which exist in me, the animal and the savant^ have disputed on
this subject so often that sometimes I doubt it myself. However, the animal,
obstinate as an animal usually is, repeats incessantly that 1 have seen, and 1
have read, and it is useless for me to tell myself that if any one else told me
such a story 1 should not believe it. I am obliged to admit that it happened.

J. Tiioulet,

Professor at the Faciilti ties Sciences at Nancy,

Professor Richet adds: —

M. Thoulet has lately confirmed all the details contained in his letter. He
has no longer any written trace of this old story, but the recollection of it is
perfectly clear. He assured me that he had seen and read the telegram like a
real object. . . .

93 L Next I quote a case where a kind of conversation is indicated
between the sleeper and some communicating spirit ; — recalling the scraps
of conversation sometimes overheard (as it were) between Mrs. Piper and
some ** control when she is in the act of awaking from trance. These
moments ** between two worlds ” are often, as will be seen, of high signi-
ficance. In the case here cited we seem to see Mr. Goodall at first
misapprehending a message, and himself automatically uttering the
misapprehension, and then receiving the needed correction from his
invisible interlocutor.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 453-3. The following narrative
was communicated by Mr. Edward A. Goodall, of the Royal Society
of Painters in Water Colours, London : —

May iSSS.

At Midsummer, 1S69, 1 left London for Naples. The heat being excessive,
people were leaving for Ischia, and I thought it best to go there myself.

Crossing by steamer, 1 slept one night at Casamicciola, on the coast, and
walked next morning into the town of Ischia.

Liking the hotel there better than my quarters of the previous night, I
fetched my small amount of luggage by help of a man, who returned with me
on foot beside an animal which I rode — one of the fine, sure-footed, big
donkeys of the country. Arrived at the hotel, and while sitting perfectly still
|n my saddle talking to the landlady, the donkey went down upon his Knees as
n he had been shot or struck by lightning, throwing me over his head upon the
aya pavement. In endeavouring to save myself my right hand was badly
injured. It soon became much swollen and very painful. A Neapolitan

214

CHAPTER IX

doctor on the spot said no bones were broken, but pe;rfect rest would be
needful, with my arm in a sling. Sketching, of course, was impossible, and
with neither books, newspapers, nor letters I felt my inactivity keenly.

It must have been on my third or fourth night, and about the middle of it,
when I awoke, as it seemed at the sound of my own voice, saying, I know I
have lost my dearest little May.*’ Another voice, which 1 in no way recog-
nised, answered, not May, but yonx youngest boy'^

The distinctness and solemnity of the voice made such a distressing impres-
sion upon me that I slept no more. I got up at daybreak, and went out,
noticing for the first time telegraph-poles and wires.

Without delay I communicated with the postmaster at Naples, and by next
boat received two letters from home. I opened them according to dates out-
side. The first told me that my youngest boy was taken suddenly ill; the
second, that he was dead.

Neither on his account nor on that of any of my family had I any cause for
uneasiness. All w'cre quite well on my taking leave of them so lately. My
impression ever since has been that the time of the Heath coincided as nearly
as we could judge with the time of my accident.'

In writing to Mrs. Goodall, I called the incident of the voice a dream, as
less likely perhaps to disturb her than the details which I gave on reaching
home, and which I have now repeated.

My letters happen to have been preserved.

I have never had any hallucination of any kind, nor am I in the habit of
talking in my sleep. I do remember once waking with some words of mere
nonsense upon my lips, but the experience of the voice speaking to me was
absolutely unique. Edward A. Goodall.

Extracts from letters to Mrs. E, A. Goodall from Ischia : —

Wednesday ^ August lU/t, 1869.

The postman brought me two letters containing sad news indeed. Poor
little Percy. I dreamt some nights since the poor little fellow was taken from
us. . . .

August

I did not tell you, dear, the particulars of my dream about poor little Percy.

I had been for several days very fidgety and wretched at getting no letters
from home, and had gone to bed in worse spirits than usual, and in my dream
I fancied I said : “ I have lost my dearest little May.” A strange voice .seemed
to say: “No, not May, but your youngest boy,” not mentioning his name. . • •

Mr. Goodall gave me verbally a concordant account of the affair,
and several members of his family, who were present at our interview,
recollected the strong impression made on him and them at the time.

932. The next case is precisely a miniature case of possession.
(Compare Mr. Cameron Grant’s experience, in 736 B.)

From the /ourna/ vol. viii, pp. 278 - 280 .

following account” (writes Dr. Hodgson) “was sent to me by
Mr. John E. Wilkie at the suggestion of one of our American members

^ Mr, Goodall thinks that the mule's sudden fall^ otherwise unexplainable^ fuay have
been due to terror at sotne apparition oj the dying child.

932 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 215

who is well known to me, ^nd who speaks in the highest terms of Mr.
Wilkie as a witness :

Washington, D.C., April luh, 1898.

In October 1895, while living in London, England, 1 was attacked by
bronchitis in rather a severe form, and on the advice of my physician, Dr.
Oscar C. De Wolf, went to his residence in 6 Grenville Place, Cromwell Road,
where 1 could be under his immediate care. For two days I was confined to
my bed, and about five o'clock in the afternoon of the third day, feeling some-
what better, I partially dressed myself, slipped on a heavy bath robe, and went
down to the sitting-room on the main floor, where my friend, the doctor,
usually spent a part of the afternoon in reading. A steamer chair was placed
before the fire by one of the servants, and I was made comfortable with pillows.
The doctor was present, and sat immediately behind me reading. I dropped
off into a light doze, and slept for perhaps thirty minutes. Suddenly I became
conscious of the fact that I was about to awaken ; I was in a condition where I
was neither awake nor asleep. I realised fully that I had been asleep, and I
was equally conscious of the fact that I was not wide awake. While in this
peculiar mental condition I suddenly said to myself : “ Wait a minute. Here
is a message for the doctor." At the moment 1 fancied that I had upon my lap
a pad of paper, and I thought I wrote upon this pad with a pencil the following
words : —

“ Dear Doctor,-— Do you remember Katy McGuire, who used to live with
you in Chester? She died in 1872. She hopes you arc having a good time in
London."

Instantly thereafter I found myself wide awake, felt no surprise at not
finding the pad of paper on my knee, because I then realised that that was
but the hallucination of a dream, but impressed with that feature of my thought
which related to the message, I partly turned my head, and, speaking over my
shoulder to the doctor, said : “ Doctor, I have a message for you.”

The doctor looked up from the British Medical Journal which he was read-
ing, and said : “ Whaf s that ? ”

“ I have a message for you," I repeated, " It is this ; ‘ Dear Doctor : Do
you remember Katy McGuire, who used to live with you in Chester ? She died
in 1872. She hopes you are having a good time in London.’ "

The doctor looked at me with amazement written all over his face, and said :
“ Why, what the devil do you mean?"

“ I don’t know anything about it except that just before I woke up I was
impelled to receive this message which I have just delivered to you.’*

“Did you ever hear of Katy McGuire ?” asked the doctor.

“ Never in my life.”

“ Well,” said the doctor, “ that’s one of the most remarkable things I ever
beard of. My father for a great many years lived at Chester, Mass, There
was a neighbouring family named McGuire, and Katy ^McGuire, a daughter of
this neighbour, frequently came over to our house, as the younger people iti a
country village will visit their neighbours, and used to assist my mother in the
lighter duties about the house. I was absent from Chester from about 1869 to
about 1873. I had known Katy, however, as a daughter of our neighbour and
knew that she used to visit the house. She died some time during the absence
speak of, but as to the exact date of her death I am not informed.”

That closed the incident, and although the doctor told me that he would

2I6

CHAPTER IX

write to his old home to ascertain the exact date of Katy’^ death, I have never
heard from him further in the matter. 1 questioned him at the time as to
whether he had recently thought of Katy McGuire, and he told me that her
name had not occurred to him for twenty years, and that he might never have
recalled it had it not been for the rather curious incident which had occurred.
In my own mind I could only explain the occurrence as a rather unusual coin-
cidence. 1 was personally aware of the fact that the doctor’s old home had
been in Chester, Mass., and had frequently talked with him of his earlier ex-
periences in life when he began practice in that city, but never at any time
during these conversations had the name of this neighbour’s daughter been
mentioned, nor had the name of the neighbour been mentioned, our conversa-
tion relating entirely to the immediate members of the family, particularly the
doctor’s father, who was a noted practitioner in that district.

John E. Wilkie.

Dr. De Wolf, in reply to Dr. Hodgson’s first inquiry, wrote : —

6 Grenville Place, Cromwell Road, S.W., April 1898.

Dear Sir,— In reply to your letter of the 27th inst., 1 regret that I cannot
recall with any definite recollection the incident to which Mr. Wilkie refers,

I do remember that he told me one morning he had had a remarkable
dream— or conference with some one who knew me when a young lad.—
Very truly yours, Oscar C. De Wolf.

Dr. Hodgson then sent Mr. Wilkie’s account to Dr. De Wolf, with
further inquiries, to which Dr. De Wolf replied as follows : —

6 Grenville Place, Cro.m\vell Road, S. W., May 4 lh, 1S9S.

Dear Sir,— Mr. Wilkie’s statement is correct except as to unimportant
detail. My father practised his profession of medicine, in Chester, Mass., for
sixty years — dying in 1890. I was born in Chester and lived there until 1857,
when 1 was in Paris studying medicine for four years. In 1861 I 'returned lo
America and immediately entered the army as surgeon and served until the
close of the war in 1865. In 1S66 1 located in Northampton, Mass., where I
practised my profession until 1873, when I removed to Chicago.

Chester is a hill town in Western Mass., and Northampton is seventeen
miles distant. While in Northampton I was often at my father’s house—
probably every week— and during some of the years from 1866 to 1873 I knew
Katy McGuire as a servant assisting my mother.

She was an obliging and pleasant girl and always glad to see me. She
had no family in Chester (as Mr. Wilkie says) and I do not know where she
came from. Neither do I know where or when she died— but I know she is
dead. There is nothing left of my family in Chester. The old homestead still
remains with me, and I visit it every year.

The strange feature (to me) of this incident is the fact that I had not thought
of this girl for many years, and Mr. Wilkie was never within 500 miles of
Chester.*

We had been warm friends since soon after my location in Chicago, where
he was connected with a department of the Chicago Tridune, I came to
I/mdon in 1892 and Mr. Wilkie followed the next year as the manager of Lows

934] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ^ ECSTASY 217

American Exchange^ ^ Northumberland Avenue. His family did not join him
until i 89 Sf which explains his being in my house when ill.

Mr. Wilkie is a very straightforward man and not given to illusions of any
kind. He is now the chief of the Secret Service Department of the U.S-
Government, Washington, D.C.

Neither of us were believers in spiritual manifestations of this character,
and this event so impressed us that we did not like to talk about it, and it has
been very seldom referred to when we met — Very truly yours,

Oscar C. De Wolf.

933. These cases, then, may serve as illustrations both of the
hicipient stages of a trance which may develop into ecstasy on the one
hand or posse.ssion on the other, and of the different aspects of possession
according as it is regarded as a more developed form of motor automatism
or as a special intensification of telepathic action. We have first, in
Mrs. Luther’s case, a partial and temporary control by the subliminal
self, exhibiting probably telepathic influence, but with no indications of
any psychical excursion or invasion ; in Professor Thoulet’s case we
find a fuller control by the subliminal self, with a manifestation of
knowledge suggesting some spiritual excursion ; in Mr. Goodall’s case
there seems to be a telepathic conversation between his subliminal self
controlling his utterance and some perhaps discarnate spirit ; and finally,
in Mr. Wilkie’s case, there is the definite superposition, as it were, of
a discarnate spirit’s message upon the automatist in such a way that we
are led to wonder whether it was the mind or the brain of the automatist
that received the message. 'Hic first step apparently is the abeyance of
the .supraliminal self and the dominance of the subliminal self, which may
lead in rare cases to a form of trance (or of what we have hitherto
called secondary personality) where the whole body of the automatist
is controlled by his own subliminal self, or incarnate spirit, but where
there is no indication of any relation with discarnate spirits. The next
form of trance is where the incarnate spirit, whether or not maintaining
control of the whole body, makes excursions into or holds telepathic
intercourse with the spiritual world. And, lastly, there is the trance of
possession by another, a discarnate spirit. We cannot, of course,
always distinguish between these three main types of trance — which, as
we shall see later, themselves admit of different degrees and varieties.

934. The most striking case known to me of the first form of
trance— possession by the subliminal self — is that of the Rev. C. B.
Sanders, whose trance- personality has always called itself by the name
of “X + Y = Z,” and of whom I give an account in 934 A. The life
of the normal Mr. Sanders has apparently been passed in the environ-

of a special form of Presbyterian doctrine, and there seegis to
nave been a fear on the part of Mr. Sanders himself lest the trance
njanifestations of which he was the subject should conflict with the
theological position which he held as a minister j and indeed for

2X8 CHAPTER IX [935

several years of his early suffering he was inclined to regard his peculiar
case of affliction as the result of Satanic agency." On the part of some
of his friends also there seems to be a special desire to show that
“ X + Y = Z " was not heterodox. Under these circumstances it is perhaps
not surprising that we find so much reticence in “ X + Y = Z " concern^
ing his own relations to the normal Mr. Sanders. What little explanation
is offered seems to be in singular harmony with one of the main tenets
advanced in this book, since the claim made by “ X+ Y = Z " is obviously
that he represents the incarnate spirit of Mr. Sanders exercising the higher
faculties which naturally pertain to it, but which can be manifested to the
full only when it is freed from its fleshly barriers. This frequently occurs,
he says, in dying persons, who describe scenes in the spiritual world, and
in his own experience when “ his casket " is similarly affected, and the
bodily obstructions to spiritual \asion are removed. *

The suggestion w’hich I made in the case of Anna Winsor (see vol. i.,
237 and 237 A) — that the intelligence controlling her sane right arm
was her own subliminal self — may now perhaps appear less strange than
it did at the outset of our inquiry ; but whereas in that case the supra-
liminal self was only partially in abeyance, the supraliminal self of Mr.
Sanders seems to become completely dormant during his trances.

935. In this case then the subliminal self seems to take complete
control of the organism, exercising its own powers of telepathy and
tetesthesia, but showing no evidence of direct communication with
discamate spirits. We must now pass on to the most notable recent
case where such communication has been claimed, — that of Swedenborg,
— ^to whose exceptional trance-history and attempt to give some scientific
system to his experiences of ecstasy I referred in Chapter I. (section 105).

And here I meet with a kind of difficulty which is sure to present itself
sooner or later to all persons who endeavour to present to the world what
they regard as novel and important truths. There is sure to be some
embarrassing likeness or travesty of that truth in the world already.
There are sure to be sects or persons, past or present, holding something
like the same beliefs on different grounds ; — on grounds which one may
find it equally difficult to endorse and to disavow.

I have indeed already been able to admit without reluctance that the
humble thinkers" of the Stone Age, the believers in Witchcraft, in
Shamanism, have been my true precursors in many of the ideas upheld
in this book. But these spiritual ancestors are remote and unobtrusive ;
and it may be easier to admit that one is descended from an ape than
that one is own brother to a madman. Swedenborg is, in fact, a madman
in most men’s view, and this judgment has much to support it. The
great . j)ulk of his teaching, — almost the whole content of Arcana CaiUstia^
— has undergone a singtilarly unfortunate downfall. A seer, a mystic,
cannot often be disprm'ed ; — his visions may fall out of favour, but they
still record one man’s subjective outlook on the universe. Swedenborg’s

936] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 219

wildnesses, on the other hand, were based upon a definite foundation
which has definitely crumbled away. No one now regards the Old
Testament as a homogeneous and verbally inspired whole ; — and unless
it be so, the spiritual meaning which Swedenborg draws from its every
word by his doctrine of Correspondences is not only a futile fancy, but
a tissue of gross and demonstrable errors. And yet, on the face of it, was
not all this error more amply accredited than any of the utterances of
possession or the recollections of ecstasy which I shall be able to cite
from modern sensitives? Swedenborg was one of the leading savants
of Europe ; it would be absurd to place any of our sensitives on the same
intellectual level. If his celestial revelations turn out to have been non-
sense, what are Mrs. Piper’s likely to be?

936 . I might, of course, save myself from this dilemma by re-
pudiating Swedenborg’s seership altogether. The evidential matter
which he has left behind him is singularly scanty in comparison with
his pretensions to a communion of many years with so many spirits
of the departed. I do not, however, accept this means of escape from
the difficulty. I think that the half-dozen ‘‘ evidential cases ” scattered
through the memoirs of Swedenborg are stamped with the impress of
truth,— and I think, also, that without some true experience of the
spiritual world Swedenborg could not have entered into that atmos-
phere of truth in which even his worst errors are held in solution.
Swedenborg’s writings on the world of spirits fall in the main into two
classes, — albeit classes not easily divided. There are experiential wTitings
and there are dogmatic writings. The first of these classes contains ac-
counts of what he saw and felt in that world, and of such inferences
with regard to its laws as his actual experience suggested. Now,
speaking broadly, all this mass of matter, covering some hundreds of
propositions, is in substantial accord with what has been given through
the most trustworthy sensitives since Swedenborg’s time. It is indeed
usual to suppose that they have all been influenced by Swedenborg;
and although I feel sure that this was not so in any direct manner in
the case of the sensitives best known to myself, it is probable that
Swedenborg’s alleged experiences have affected modern thought more
deeply than most modern thinkers know.

On the other hand, the second or purely dogmatic class of Swedenborg’s
writings, — the records of instruction alleged to have been given to him
by spirits on the inner meaning of the Scriptures, &c., — these have more
and more appeared to be mere arbitrary fancies ; — mere projections and
repercussions of his own preconceived ideas.

On the whole, then, — with some stretching, yet no contravention, of
conclusions independently reached, — I may say that Swedenborg’s story,
■^one of the strangest lives yet lived by mortal men, — is corroborative
rather than destructive of the slowly rising fabric of knowledge of which
® was the uniquely gifted, but uniquely dangerous, precursor.

220

CHAPTER IX

[937

It seemed desirable here to refer thus briefly to the doctrinal teachings
of Swedenborg, but I shall deal later with the general question how
much or how little of the statements of “ sensitives ** about the spiritual
world — whether based on their own visions or on the allegations of their
controlling spirits ” — are worthy of credence. In the case of Sweden
borg there was at least some evidence, of the kind to which we can here
appeal, of his actual communication with discarnate spirits (see 936 A) ;
but in most other cases of alleged ecstacy there is little or nothing to
show that the supposed revelations are not purely subjective. (See, e,g,^
the revelations of Alphonse Cahagnet’s sensitives, described in his Af canes
de Iti vie future devoilees and those of the Seeress of Prevorst,’* mentioned
in 936 B.) At most, these visions must be regarded as a kind of
symbolical representation of the unseen world. (See, 936 C.)

937. Among Cahagnet*s subjects, however, there was one young
woman, Adi^le Maginot, who not only saw heavenly visions of the usual
post-Swedenborgian kind, but also obtained evidential communications—
not unlike those of Mrs. Piper — purporting to come from discarnate
spirits. Fortunately these were recorded with unusual care and thorough-
ness by Cahagnet, and the case thus becomes one of considerable
importance for our inquiries. A general account of CahagnePs work
has recently been given in the Proceedings S.P.R. by Mr. Podmore (see
937 A) who, though finding it almost impossible to doubt that Adfele’s
success was due to some kind of supernormiil faculty,'^ thinks it
might be accounted for by telepathy from living ])crsons. It appears
that in all her trances Adele — like Mr. Sanders — was controlled by her
own subliminal self — that is to say, her supraliminal self became dormant,
under '‘magnetism” by Cahagnet, while her subliminal self in trancc-
utterance manifested a knowledge which was, as I incline to think from
its analogies with more developed cases, obtained from the spiritual
world. That this knowledge should be mixed with much that was
erroneous or unverifiable is not surprising.

It is also interesting to note the occurrence in this case of circum-
stances which in their general character have become so habitual in trances
of “ mediumistic ” type that they are not only found in genuine subjects,
but are continually being simulated by the fraudulent. I refer to the so-
called '' taking on of the death conditions ” of a communicating spirit,
who, as Ad^le stated, died of suffocation. “ Adele chokes as this man
choked, and coughed as he did. ... I was obliged to release her
by passes; she suffered terribly.”

I need scarcely say that this suggests incipient possession. There
were occasional analogous instances in the early trances of Mrs. Piper»
whefi Phinuit was the controlling influence (see Proceedings S.P.R>
vol. viii. p. 98 , Professor Barrett Wendell’s account; and vol. xiii.p. 3^4)-
Other points of similarity between the accounts of the entranced Adele
and the utterances of Phinuit will be apparent to the student of the records.

221

939] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY

938. The next case to be considered, and so far one of the most
important, is that of D. D. Home. It may seem a strange descent from
the celestial visions of Swedenborg to the table-tiltings and fragmentary
trance-utterances of modern mediums, but for our present purpose of
finding an empirical basis upon which to establish the existence of a
spiritual world, these later humble manifestations are more potent than
all the pages of the Arcana Ccelestia.

But, although I attribute much value to what evidence exists in the
case of Home, it cannot but be deplored that the inestimable chance
for experiment and record which this case afforded was almost entirely
thrown away by the scientific world. Unfortunately the record is
especially inadequate in reference to Home’s trances and the evidence for
the personal identity of the communicating spirits. His name is known
to the world chiefly in connection with the telekinetic phenomena wdiich
are said to have occurred in his presence, and the best accounts of
which we owe to Sir William Crookes. It is not my intention, as 1
have already explained, to deal with these, but it must be understood
that they form an integral part of the manifestations in this case, as in
the case of Stainton Moses. For detailed accounts of them the reader
should consult the history of Home’s life and experiences, as given in
the works enumerated in 938 A.

In Home’s case it is csi)ecially important to consider the question
of fraud, since various charges of fraud have been brought against him
—some, however, without any evidence at all, and others on second-
hand statements only, while the most serious one — that connected with
the famous Lyon case — related rather to his character than to the real
nature of his powers. A detailed discussion, by Professor Barrett and
myself, of the question of fraud, was printed in the Journal S.P.R.
This article also includes references to the telekinetic phenomena, and
a brief summary (with, in some cases, additional evidence) of the most
important cases suggesting personal communications from deceased
friends of the sitters with Home, and I give an abridgment of it in
938 B. Such cases as received even the share of scattered and scanty
record which Madame Horae’s books indicate, are probably but a small
portion of the evidential communications actually given through Home.

939. As to the nature of Home’s trances, there is not a little obscurity.
Many of the phenomena described as occurring in his presence took place
when he was not in trance at all. Sometimes his body was apparently
possessed by deceased friends of the sitters or other discarnate spirits,
and at other times it was apparently controlled by his own spirit or sub-
iiminal self. According to the account of Viscount A dare, now' Loril
^unraven (see Experiences in Spintualism with Mr, D, D, Hom^ By
Viscount Adare), it was unusual for extraneous physical phenomena, such
as raps and movements and levitation of objects, to occur while Home w'as

entranced.

222

CHAPTER IX

[940

On the other hand. Sir William Crookes states {^Journal S.P.R., vol.
vi. p. 341) : Certainly the two most striking things I ever saw with
him, the fire test and visible forms, were to be observed while he was
entranced, but it was not always easy to tell when he was in that state,
for he spoke and moved about almost as if he were in his norma]
condition; the chief differences being that his actions were more
deliberate, and his manner and expressions more solemn, and he
always spoke of himself in the third person, as ^ Dan.’ ” (Compare
934 A, the case of ‘*X + Y = Z,” who always spoke of his supraliminal
self as my casket.”)

The late Lord Dunraven says, in his introduction (p. ix.) to the book
by Viscount Adare, that the communications at the stances described
in the book came through the alphabet ” (that is, through raps or other
telekinetic signals such as touches), or through '^the medium in a
trance,” and he remarks : When Mr. Home speaks in a trance there is
no certainty whether his utterances are those of a spirit alone, or how far
they may be mixed up with his own ideas or principles. Sometimes the
communications arc striking, at other times vague, sometimes trivial.
Messages through the alphabet, on the other hand, carry at least a strong
probability that they convey the thoughts of a spirit ; although even they
too in some cases exhibit indications of being affected by the medium,
and are therefore not quite reliable.”

The impression produced seems to have been very different from this in
some cases, especially when Home was — as we may suppose — directly
possessed by a discamate spirit. Sec, for example, the case of the
control by Adah Menken {loc. ciL, pp. 35-37), where Viscount Adare
says : I was, to all intents and purposes, actually conversing with the
dead ; listening, talking, answering, and receiving answers from Menken.
Home’s individuality was quite gone ; he spoke as Menken, and we
both spoke of him as a third person at a distance from us.”

940. In brief, the study of such records as arc available of Home’s
psychical phenomena leaves me with the conviction that, — apart altogether
from the telekinetic phenomena with which they were associated,— his
trance-utterances belong to the same natural order as those, for instance,
of Mr. Moses and Mrs. Piper. There are, however, important differences
between these cases,— differences which should be of special instruction
to us in endeavouring to comprehend the possession that completely ex-
cludes the subliminal self, and to appreciate the difficulty of obtaining
this complete possession.

Thus in Home’s case the subliminal self seems, throughout the longest
series of stances of which we have a record, to have been the spirit
chieflj' controlling him during the trance and acting as intermediary
for other spirits, who occasionally, however, took complete possession.

In Mrs, Piper’s case, as we shall see, the subliminal self is very little m
direct evidence ; its manifestations form a fleeting interlude between her

942] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 223

waking state and hex possession by a discarnate spirit. In Mr. Moses’
case the subliminal self was rarely in direct evidence at all when he
was entranced; but we infer from these other cases that it was
probably dominant at some stage of his trance, even if at other times
it was excluded or became completely dormant.

And if, in Home’s case, as there seems reason to suppose, the sub-
liminal self may have participated with discarnate spirits in the production
of telekinetic phenomena, as well as in the communication of tests of
personal identity, it is not improbable that the subliminal self of Mr.
Moses may also have been actively concerned in both these classes of
phenomena.

941 . To the history of William Stainton Moses I now turn. In
his case, as in that of Home, the telekinetic phenomena formed an
integral part of the general manifestations, being so interwoven with
them as to necessitate in my view acceptance or rejection of the whole ;
but the evidence for the telekinetic phenomena in the case of Mr.
Moses is comparatively slight, since they occurred almost exclusively
in the presence of a small group of intimate personal friends, and
were never scrutinised and examined by outside witnesses as were
Home’s manifestations. On the other hand, we have detailed records
of Mr. Moses* whole series of experiences, while in the case of Home,
as I have said, the record is very imperfect. As to the telekinetic
phenomena, Mr. Moses himself regarded them as a mere means to an
end, in accordance with the view urged on him by his “ controls,” — that
they were intended as proofs of the power and authority of these latter,
while the real message lay in the religious teaching imparted to him.

942 . It was on May 9lh, 1874, that Edmund Gurney and I met
Stainton Moses for the first time, through the kindness of Mrs.
Cowper-Temple (afterwards Lady Mount-Temple), who knew that we
had become interested in “psychical” problems, and wished to intro-
duce us to a man of honour who had recently experienced phenomena,
due wholly to some gift of his own, which had profoundly changed his
conception of life.

That evening was epoch-making in Gurney’s life and mine. Standing
as we were in the attitude natural at the commencement of such inquiries,
under such conditions as were then attainable, — an attitude of curiosity
tempered by a vivid perception of difficulty and drawback, — we now met a
man of University education, of manifest sanity and probity, who vouched
to us for a series of phenomena, — occurring to himself, and with no
doubtful or venal aid, — which seemed at least to prove, in confusedly
intermingled form, three main theses unknown to Science. These were
(0 the existence in the human spirit of hidden powers of insight and

communication ; (2) the personal survival and near presence of the
departed; and (3) interference, due to unkno'.vn agencies, with the
ponderable world. He spoke frankly and fully; he showed his note-

224

CHAPTER IX

books ; he referred us to his friends ; he inspired ^ belief which was at
once sufficient, and which is still sufficient, to prompt to action.

The experiences which Stainton Moses had undergone had changed
his views, but not his character. He was already set in the mould of the
hard-working, conscientious, dogmatic clergyman, with a strong desire to
do good, and a strong belief in preaching as the best way to do it. For
himself the essential part of what I have called his message ” lay in the
actual words automatically uttered or written, — not in the accompanying
phenomena which really gave their uniqueness and importance to the
automatic processes. In a book called S/iri/ Teachings he collected
what he regarded as the real fruits of those years of mysterious listening
in the vestibule of a world unknown.

And much as we may regret this too exclusive ethical preoccupation
in a region where the establishment of actual fact is still the one thing
needful, it must be admitted that at that time the scientific importance of
these phenomena had hardly dawned on any mind. Among ali the
witnesses of Home’s marv^-els Sir William Crookes was almost the only
man who made any attempt to treat them as reasonable men treat all the
facts of nature. Most of the witnesses, though fully believing in the
genuineness of the wonders, appear to have regarded them as a kind of
uncanny diversion. The more serious sought for assurance that their
beloved dead were still near them, and straitly charged Home to tell no
man of the proofs which they said had brought to themselves unspeak-
able joy. An attempt made, in 1875, hy Serjeant Cox and a few others
(among whom were Stainton Moses and myself) to get these phenomena
more seriously discussed in a ‘^Psychological Society,” languished fur
want of suitable coadjutors, and on the death of Serjeant Cox (in 1879)
the Society was dissolved. During these important years, therefore, while
his experiences were fresh in Stainton Moses’ mind, and while they were
to some extent still recurring, he had little encouragement to deal with
them from a scientific point of view.

943 . When, however, in 1882, Professor Barrett consulted him as to
the possibility of founding a new society, under better auspices, he warmly
welcomed the plan. Edmunrl Gurney and I were asked to join, but made
it a condition that the consent of Professor Sidgwick (with whom we had
already been working) to act as our President should first be obtained.
Under his guidance the Society for Psychical Research assumed a more
cautious and critical attitude than was cr)ngenial to Stainton Moses’ warm
heart, strong convictions, and impulsive temper, and in 1886 he left the
Society, in consequence of the publication in the Proceedings of certain
comments on phenomena occurring through the agency of the so-called
“ medium ” Eglinton.

From this time he frankly confessed himself disgusted with our
attempts at scientific method, and as main contributor to Lights aud
afterwards editor until his death, he practically reverted to Spiritualism

944] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 225

as a religion,” — as opposed to psychical research as a scientific duty. And
assuredly the religious implications of all these phenomena are worthy of
any man’s most serious thought. But those who most feel the importance
of the ethical superstructure are at the same time most plainly bound to
treat the establishment of the facts at the foundation as no mere personal
search for a faith, to be dropped when private conviction has been
attained, but as a serious, a continuous, a public duty. And the more
convinced they are that their faith is sound, the more ready should
they be to face distrust and aversion, — to lay their account for a long
struggle with the vis inertia of the human spirit.

Stainton Moses was ill-fitted for this patient, uphill toil. In the first
place he lacked, — and he readily and repeatedly admitted to me that he
lacked, — all vestige of scientific, or even of legal instinct. The very words
first-hand evidence,” contemporary record,” corroborative testimony,”
were to him as a weariness to the flesh. His attitude was that of the
preacher who is already so thoroughly persuaded in his own mind that he
treats any alleged fact which falls in with his views as the uncriticised text
for fresh exhortation. And in the second place, — though this was a minor
matter, — his natural sensitiveness was sometimes exaggerated by gout and
other wearing ailments into an irritability which he scarcely felt compelled
to conceal in a journal circulating mainly among attached disciples.

The reason for noticing these defects is that they constitute the only
ground on which Stainton Moses* trustworthiness as a witness to his own
phenomena could possibly be impugned. I mention them in order that I
may say that, having read, I think, all that he has printed, and having
watched his conduct at critical moments, I see much ground for impugning
his judgment, but no ground whatever for doubting that he has narrated
with absolute good faith the story of his own experience. He allowed me,
before he left the Society, to examine almost the whole series of his
automatic writings, — those especially which contain the evidence on which
Spirit Identity is based ; and in no instance did I find that the printed
statement of any case went beyond the warrant of the manuscript.

My original impressions were strengthened by the opportunity which
I had of examining the unpublished MSS. of Mr. Moses after his
death on September 5th, 1892. These consist of thirty-one note-books
—twenty-four of automatic script, four of records of physical pheno-
mena, and three of retrospect and summary. In addition to these, the
material available for a knowledge of Mr. Moses* experiences consists
of his own printed works, and the written and printed statements of wit-
nesses to his phenomena.

Of this available material a more detailed account will be found in
W3 A, together with a brief record of Mr. Moses* life.

944 . With the even tenor of this straightforward and reputable life
inwoven a chain of mysteries which, as I think, in what way soever
they be explained, niake that life one of the most extraordinary which

VOL. II. p

226

CHAPTER IX

our century has seen. For its true history lies in that series of physical
manifestations which began in 1S72 and lasted for some eight years, and
that series of automatic writings and trance-utterances which began in
1873, received a record for some ten years, and did not, as is believed,
cease altogether until the earthly end was near.

These two series were intimately connected ; the physical phenomena
being avowedly designed to give authority to the speeches and writings
which professed to emanate from the same source. There is no ground
for separating the two groups, except the obvious one that the automatic
phenomena are less difficult of credence than the physical; but, for
reasons already stated, it has seemed to me desirable to exclude the latter
from detailed treatment in this work. References to accounts of them
will, however, be found in 943 A. They incliuled the apparent produc-
tion of such phenomena as intelligent raps, movements of objects un-
touched, levitation, disappearance and reappearance of objects, passage
of matter through matter, direct writing, sounds supernormally made
on instruments, direct sounds, scents, lights, objects materialised, hands
materialised (touched or seen). Mr. Moses was sometimes, but not
always, entranced while these physical phenomena were occurring. Some-
times he was entranced and the trance-utterance purported to be that
of a discarnate spirit. At other times, especially when alone, he wrote
automatically, retaining his own ordinary consciousness meanwhile, and
carrying on lengthy discussions with the spirit influence ** controlling
his hand and answering his questions, &c. As a general rule the same
alleged spirits both manifested themselves by raps, &c., at Mr. Moses’
sittings with his friends, and also wrote through his hand when he was
alone. In this, as in other respects, Mr. Moses’ two series of writings—
when alone and in company — were concordant, and, so to say, comple-
mentary ; — explanations being given by the writing of what had happened
at the stances. When “direct writing” was given at the stances the
handwriting of each alleged spirit was the same as that which the same
spirit was in the habit of employing in the automatic script. The claim
to individuality was thus in all cases decisively made.

945 . Now the personages thus claiming to appear may be divided
roughly into three classes : —

A. — First and most important are a group of persons recently deceased,
and sometimes, as will be seen, manifesting themselves at the stances
before their decease was known through any ordinary channel to any of
the persons present. These spirits in many instances give tests of identity,
mentioning facts connected with their earth-lives which are afterwards
found to be correct,

B. — Next comes a group of personages belonging to generations more
remofe, and generally of some distinction in their day. Grocyn, the friend
of Erasmus, may be taken as a type of these. Many of these also con-
tribute facts as a proof of identity, which facts are sometimes more correct

945] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 227

than the conscious ©r admitted knowledge of any of the sitters could
supply* In such cases, however, the difficulty of proving identity is in-
creased by the fact that most of the correct statements are readily accessible
in print, and may conceivably have either been read and forgotten by Mr.
Moses, or have become known to him by some kind of clairvoyance.

C. — A third group consists of spirits who give such names as Rector,
Doctor, 'rheophilus, and, above all, Imperator. These from time to time
reveal the names which they assert to have been theirs in earth-life.
These concealed names arc for the most part both more illustrious, and
more remote, than the names in Class B, — and were withheld by Mr.
Moses himself, who justly felt that the assumption of great names is
likely to diminish rather than to increase the weight of the communication.
He felt this in his own person; and for a long while one of his main
stumbling-blocks lay in these lofty and improvable claims. Ultimately
he came to believe even in these identities, on the general ground that
teachers who had given him so many proofs both of their power and of
their serious interest in his welfare were not likely to have deceived him
on such a point. But he did not count upon a similar belief in others,
and he expressly wished to avoid seeming to claim special authority for
the teachings on the ground of their alleged authorship. It must be
added also tliat some of these teachings themselves asserted that when
the name of some spirit long removed from earth was given, the recipient
must sometimes take this to imply a stream of influence emanating from
that spirit, rather titan his own presence in person.

As to the relation of the spirits to the telekinetic phenomena, it must
be remembered that these phenomena, strange and grotesque as they often

seem, cannot be called mcaftingkss. T he alleged operators are at pains
throughout to describe what they regarded as the enti^ and what merely
•IS the means to that end. Their constantly avowed object wms the
luomulgalion through Mr. Moses of certain religious and philosophical

views; and the physical manifestations are throughout described as
designed merely as a proof of power, and a basis for the authority claimed
for the serious teachings.^

lhat they were not produced fraudulently by Dr. Speer or other
sitters I regard as proved both by moral considerations and by the fact
that they are constantly reported as occurring when Mr. Moses was
•jlone. That Mr. Moses should have himself fraudulently produced them
regard as both morally and physically incredible. That he should have
prepared and produced them in a state of trance I regard both as physi-
ea y incredible and also as entirely inconsistent with the tenor both of his
^|vn reports and of those of his friends. I therefore regard the reported
P nomena as having actually occurred in a genuinely supernormal mantier.

publisl^^?^ which includes many of these communications, has been re-

tions ^ Uharlton Speer, and most of the remaining comniunica-

ave been published in Li^kt by Mrs. Speer since Mr. Moses’ death.

228 CHAPTER IX [946

946. I now pass on to consider briefly the nature of the evidence that
the alleged spirits were what they purported to be, as described, in the first
place, in Mr. Moses’ books of automatic writing, 'fhe contents of these
books consist partly of messages lending to ])rove the identity of com-
municating spirits I jiartly of discussions or explanations of tlie physical
phenomena ; and partly of religious and moral disquisitions.

I'hese automatic messages were almost wholly written by Mr. Moses'
own hand, while he was in a normal waking state. The exceptions are of
two kinds. ( i ) There is one long passage, alleged by Mr. Moses to have
been written by himself while in a state of trance. (2) There are, here
and there, a few words alleged to be in direct writing" ; — written, ihii
is to say, by invisible liands, but in Mr. Moses* presence ; as several times
described in the notes of seance.s where other persons were present.

Putting these exceptional instances aside, we find that the writings
generally take the form of a dialogue, Mr. Moses proposing a question in
his ordinary thick, black handwriting. An answer is tlien generaliy,
though not always, given ; written also by Mr. Moses, ami with the .sani:.'
pen, but in some one of various scripts which differ more or less widely
from his own. Mr. Moses’ own description of the process, as given in lii-
preface to S/fir// Ituc/ari^Sf may be studied with ailvantagc. 1 qurip
this in 946 A.

A prolonged study of the MS. books has revealed nothing inconsistt'nt
with this description. I have myself, of cotir.se, searched them careftilly
for any sign of confusion or alteration, but without finding any; and I
have shown parts of them to various friends, who have seen no points
of suspicion. It seems ]>lain, moreover, that the various entries
were made at or about the dates to which they are ascribed. 'J nev
contain constant references to the seances which went on concurrently,
and whose dates are independently known; and in tiic later books,
records of some of these seances arc interspersed in their due ])laoe.s
amongst other matter. 'Plie MSS. contain also a number of allusions
to other contemporaneous facts, many of which are independently known
to myself.

I think, moreover, that no one who had studied these entries through-
out would doubt the originally private ami intimate character of m.iny 0!
them. The tone of the spirits toward.s Mr. .Moses himself is habitunlly
courteous and respectful. But occasionally they have some criticism
which pierces to the quick, and which goes far to explain to rne Mi-
Moses’ umvillingness to have the books fully inspected during his Jitetiim-
He did, no doubt, contemplate their being at least rea<l by friemls alter
his death ; and there are indications that there may have been a still luore
private book, now doubtless destroyed, to which messages of an intinutc
character were sometimes consigned.

947. 'rhe questions at issue, in short, as to these messages, refer no^
so much to their ^eni(hicnes% as to their atUhentkity, in the proper seu'^e

947] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 229

those words. That ^hey were written down in good faith by Mr. Moses
as proceeding from the personages wJiose names are signed to them, there
can be little doubt, liut as to whether they did really proceed from those
personages or no there may in many cases be very great doubt ; — a doubt
which I, at least, shall be quite unable to remove. By the very condi-
tions of the communication they cannot show commanding intellect, or
teacJi entirely new truths, since their manifestations arc ex hypothed
limited by the capacity — not by the previous knowMge^ but by the pre-
vious capacity — of the medium. And if they give facts not consciously
known to the medium — facts however elaborate — it may, of course, be sug-
gested that these facts have been subliminally acquired by the medium
through some unconscious passage of the eye over a printed page, or
else that they are clain^oyanily ieanity without the agency of any but the
medium’s own mind, though acting in a supernormal fashion.

This is no merely fanciful hypothesis ; nor is it a hypothesis derogatory
to Mr. Moses’ own probity. On the contrary, as will be presently seen,
he himself prominently puts forth the circumstance (Rector’s copying
from a closed book, an account of which 1 give in 947 A), which tells
most strongly for the view that the alleged remote identities may not
really be concerned at all. Nay, the guides themselves expressly state —
a propos of some brief accounts of musicians said to be interested in Mr.
Charlton Speer — that spirits can refer to books, c. their own biographies,
and refresh their memory thereby. I'his admission of course leaves us
with nothing more than the word of Imperator to prove that, say, Robert
of Gloucester, or Geoffrey of Monmouth (who merely give focts about
their own writings), were in reality present. Such guarantee — sometimes
only indirectly implied — was enough fur Mr. Moses at the lime ; especially
since these remoter spirits came in intermixture with nearer spirits, whose
identity he believeil could be belter proved. Bui in a serious talk with
me on the matter in 1886 he withdrew much of this certainty ; — saying
that in the case of some of the musical spirits especially he had had no
inward sensation of a spirit’s presence, — such as he had in some other
cases of “ nearer ” spirits. Me repudiated, however, the idea of sub-
conscious memory on his part of words actually seen by himself ; feeling
sure that some of the facts automatically written had never been beneath
his eyes. This may very well be the case ; as he had not, I think, more
than a mere schoolmaster’s acquaintance with English literature and
history; not, indeed, so much as would nowadays be expected from an
English master in a school as good as that where he held a post. 1 judge
this largely from the “ Notes by the Way,” which he contributed to Lignt
for many years, and in which he was certainly not minimising his actual
store of knowledge. But be this as it may, 1 cannot find in these hi^orical
communications any provable feet which might not have been drawn from
some fairly accessible printed source. There were certain stanzas from
h-ydgate, written by the alleged Zachary Gray [or Grey], which Mr.

230

CHAPTER IX

Percival verified in the Britisli Museum. But these are to be found in
Warton’s English Poetry ; from which they reproduce (as Professor Skeat
has kindly pointed out to me) a philological error of Warton*s own. The
power of reading closed books was expressly attributed to Zachary Grey ;
and if he really possessed it he probably exercised it here ; giving thereby,
of course^ no particular proof that he was Zachary Grey rather than any
other spirit.

948. The evidence for identity obtained by Mr. Moses in the cast*
of spirits recently departed seems at first sight more satisfactory. Some
cases of this class are given in 948 A, and many others are to be
found in the records of his experiences. In these cases, however, as in
the historical ones, it is often difficult to make sure that the facts stated
were not within the subliminal knowledge of the automatist. Sometimes
it seems that they may have been gathered from obituary notices, casually
observed in glancing over newspapers without the cognisance of the supra-
liminal consciousness (eg. in the cases of Emily C. and Rosamira Lancas-
ter) ; or similarly from tomb-stones (eg. in the cases of Emily C. and
Cecilia Fielden) ; or names and facts relating to persons known to the
sitters, but not to Mr. Moses (eg. A. P. Kirkland, Dr. Speer’s sister,
Cecilia Fielden and Marian Timmins), may perhaps have been mentioned
in his hearing and subliminally remembered. ** Fanny Westoby,” again,
reminded him of forgotten facts that had occurred during his own child-
hood. Numerous details relating to Thomas Wilson, Bishop of Socior and
Man at the beginning of the eighteenth century, were given (see Proceed-
ings S.P.R., vol. xi., pp. 74-5 and 88), but are to be found in his
published Life,” which Mr. Moses may possibly have met with ii:irii)"
his curacy in the Isle of Man.' The case of Helene Smith (834 -848 )
has shown us how far-reaching may be the faculties of hyperaesthesi.i
and hypermnesia in the subliminal self ; but in view of the then general
ignorance of the scientific world on this subject, it is not surprising that
both Mr. Moses and his friends absolutely rejected this explanation of his
phenomena, and that the evidence appeared to them more conclusive than
it possibly can to us. Whether or not the alleged spirits were concerned,
—as may sometimes, of course, have been the case, — we can hardly avoid
thinking that the subliminal self of the medium played at least a consider-
able part in the communications.

949. In two cases the announcement of a death was made to 'Mr-
Moses, when the news was apparently not known to him by any normal
means. One of these (the case of President Garfield) is given m
948 B. The other, which I now proceed to recount (from my article
in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 96 et seq.) is in some ways the most
remaAable of all, from the series of chances which have been needful m
order to establish its veracity. The spirit in question is that of a Ifldy

1 The evidential weaknesses of these cases have been analysed by Mr. Podmorc, m
hit Studies in Psychical Research, pp. 1 25-133.

949] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 231

known to me, whonf Mr. Moses had met, I believe, once only, and whom
I shall call Blanche Abercromby. The publication of the true name was
forbidden by the spirit herself, for a reason which was at once obvious to
nie when I read the case, but which was not, so far as 1 can tell, fully
known to Mr. Moses. The lady’s son, whom I have since consulted,
STipports the prohibition ; and I have consequently changed the name
and omitted the dates.

This lady died on a Sunday afternoon, about twenty-five years ago, at
a country house about 200 miles from London. Her death, which was
regarded as an event of public interest, was at once telegraphed to London,
and appeared in Monday’s Times ; but, of course, on Sunday evening no
one in London, save the Press and perhaps the immediate family, was
cognisant of the fact. It will be seen that on that evening, near midnight,
a communication, purporting to come from her, was made to Mr. Moses
at his secluded lodgings in the north of London. The identity was some
days later corroborated by a few lines purporting to come directly from
her, and to be in her handwriting. There is no reason to suppose that
Mr. Moses had ever seen this handwriting. His one known meeting with
this lady and her husband had been at a seance— not, of course, of his
own— where he had been offended by the strongly expressed disbelief of
the husband in the possibility of any such phenomena.

On receiving these messages Mr. Moses seems to have mentioned
them to no one, and simply gummed down the pages in his MS. book,
marking the book outside “ Private Matter.” The book when placed in
my hands was still thus gummed down, although Mrs. Speer was cognisant
of the communication. I opened the pages (as instructed by the executors),
and was surprised to find a brief letter which, though containing no definite
facts, was entirely characteristic of the Blanche Abercromby whom I had
known. But although 1 had received letters from her in life, I had no

recollection of her handwriting. I happened to know a son of hers
sufficiently well to be able to ask his aid, — aid which, I may add, he would
have been most unlikely to afford to a stranger. He lent me a letter for

comparison. The strong resemblance was at once obvious, but the A. of
the surname was made in the letter in a way quite different from that
adopted in the automatic script. The son then allowed me to study a
long series of letters, reaching down till almost the date of her death,
f rohi these it appeared that during the last year of her life she had taken
to writing the A (as her husband had always done) in the way in which it
Was written in the automatic script.

The resemblance of handwriting appeared both to the son and to
®yself to be incontestable ; but as we desired an experienced opinion he
flowed me to submit the note-book and two letters to Dr. Hodgson.
Readers of the Proceedings S.P.R. (vol. hi. pp. 201-401), may remember
^at Dr, Hodgson succeeded in tracing the authorship of the Root
oomi ” letters to Madame Blavatsky and to Damodar, by evidence

232

CHAPTER IX

based on a minute analysis of handwriting. As regards the present matter,
Dr. Hodgson reported as follows : —

5 Boylston Place, Boston, September iiM, 1893,

I have compared the writing numbered 123 in the note- book of Mr. Stainton
Moses, with epistles of January 4th, 18—-, and September 19th, 18—, written
by B. A, The note-book writing bears many minor resemblances to that of the
epistles, and there are also several minor differences in the formations of some
of the letters, judging at least from the two epistles submitted to me ; but the
resemblances are more characteristic than the differences. In addition, there
are several striking peculiarities common to the epistles and the note-book
writing, which appear to be especially emphasised in the latter. The note-book
writing suggests that its author was attempting to reproduce the B. A. writing
by recalling to memory its chief peculiarities, and not by copying from specimens
of the B. A. writing. The signature especially in the note-book writing is
characteristically like an imitation from memory of li. A.’s signature. I have
DO doubt whatever that the person who wrote the note book writing intended
to reproduce the writing of B. A. Richard Hodgson.

The chances necessary to secure a verification of this case were more
complex than can here be fully explained. This lady, vvho was quite alien to
these researches, had been dead about twenty years when her posthumous
letter was discovered in Mr. Moses* private note-book by one of the very
few surviving persons who had both known her well enough to recognise
the characteristic quality of the message, and were also sufficiently inter-
ested in spirit identity to get the hamlwritings compared and the case
recorded.

The entries in the MS. books will now be quoted. Tiie communica-
tions began with some ob.scure drawings, apparently representing the
flight of a bird.

A. “It is spirit who has but just quitted the body. Blanche Abcrcromby
in the flesh, 1 have brought her. No more. M.”

Q. Do you mean ?

No reply. Sunday night about midnight. The information is unknown
to me.

Monday morning.

Q. I wish for information about last night. Is that true? Was it
Mentor ?

A. ** Yes, good friend, it was Mentor, who took pity on a spirit that, was
desirous to reverse former errors. She desires us to say so. She was ever
an enquiring .spirit, and was called suddenly from your earth. She will rest
anon. One more proof has Vjeen now given of continuity of existence.
thankful and meditate with prayer. Seek not more now, but cease. We do
not wish you to ask any questions now.”

« I •• S ; D. X Rector.”

[A week later.]

Q. Can you write for me now ?

A. “Yes, the chief is here.”

948 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 233

Q. How was it Aat spirit [Blanche Abercromby’s] came to me ?

A. “The mind was directed to the subject, and being active, it projected
itself to you. Moreover, we were glad to be able to afford you another proof
of our desire to do what is in our power to bring home to you evidence of the
truth of what we say.”

Q. Is it correct to say that the direction of thought causes the spirit to be
present ?

A. “In some cases it is so. Great activity of spirit, coupled with anxiety
to discover truth and to seek into the hidden causes of things, continue to
make it possible for a spirit to manifest. Moreover, direction of thought
gives what you would call direction or locality to the thought. By that we
mean that the instinctive tendency of the desire or thought causes a
possibility of objective manifestation. Then by the help of those who, like
ourselves, are skilled in managing the elements, manifestation becomes
possible. This would not have been possible in this case, only that we took
advantage of what would have passed unnoticed in order to work out another
proof of the reality of our mission. It is necessary that there should be a com-
bination of circumstances before such a manifestation can be possible. And
that combination is rare. Hence the infrequency of such events, and the diffi-
culty we have in arranging them: especi.ally when anxiety enters into the
matter, as in the case of a friend whose presence is earnestly desired. It
might well be that so ready a proof as this might not occur again.**

Q. Then a combination of favourable circumstances aided you. Will the
spirit rest, or does it not require it

A. “ We do not know the destiny of that spirit. It will pass out of our
control. Circumstances enabled us to use its presence : but that presence
will not be maintained.'’

Q. If direction of thought causes motion, I should have thought it
would be so with our friends and that they would therefore be more likely to
come.

A. “It is not that alone. Nor is it .so with all. All cannot come to earth.
And not in all cases does volition or thought cause union of souls. Many
otlicr adjuncts are necessary before such can be. Material obstacles may
prevent, and the guardians may oppose. We are not able to pursue th.e
subject now, seeing that we write with difficulty. At another time we may
resume. Cease for the present and do not seek further.”

t“ I : S : D. Rector.”

A few days later, Mr. Moses says : —

Q. The .spirit B. A. began by drawing. Was it herself?

A. “ With assistance. She could not write. One day if she is able to
return again, she will be more able to cxpre.ss her thoughts.”

Q. I remember that poor man who was killed by the steam-roller drew.'

A. “ Do not dwell on him lest you be ve.xed. He was not able to expics.s
himself. And even as the undeveloped human mind betakes itself to symbols
to supplement defect of language : so do spirits seek to illustrate that which
ffiey cannot utter. So the Holy Maid [of Kent] drew when she appeared.
She has now progressed, and is progressing, having cast aside the weight that
hindered her.**

1 See 948 A.

234

CHAPTER IX

[950

Q. I am glad. Will she come back ? •*

A. “ It may be, but not now.”

[ A few days later.]

A. “ A spirit who has before communicated will write for you herself. She
will then leave you, having given the evidence that is required.”

“ I should much like to speak more with you, but it is not permitted. You
have sacred truth. I know but little yet. I have much, much to learn.

Blanche Adercromby.

“ It is like my writing as evidence to you.’*

950. The leading personage in the third and most remote group cf
spirits is the one known as ‘^Iniperator.**

This spirit claims responsibility for the whole series of manifestations,
and should therefore be mentioned here, although there is no proof of
his identity with the historical personage whom he asserts himself to
be. His character, however, claimed and obtained Mr. Moses* entire
confidence. He answers for the identity and veracity of spirits intro-
duced I he explains the phenomena, so far as they are explained ; and he
throughout impresses on Mr. Moses his own teaching.

If such high and sweeping claims were made by any ordinary writer,
we should expect to find much in the course of his writings which would
prove their extravagance. If we ask ourselves how to disprove Imperator’s
claims w'e shall find no very definite answer. In the teachings themselves,
however, it is over and over again emphasised that there must be distor-
tion of the messages owing to their passage through the mediumistic
channel, and if, as is possible, there may have been thus an increase of
accuracy in some cases where Mr. Moses had some definite subliminal
knowledge, there may also have been many causes of error due to his
theological and other dogmatic preconceptions. With regard to the
other remote communicators, these, according to the explanations given
by Imperalor, are high spirits, aiming at the advance of knowledge, and
especially of religion, who have been able to discern Mr. Moses* gifts, and
have to some extent themselves trained him for the purpose required.
They have modified his early life : for instance, by prompting him to his
period of retirement on Mount Athos, and by keeping him from wishing to
marry. Some of these spirits, how^ever, stand in very distant relation to
Mr. Moses, and their indications of presence or collaboration are of a
purely arbitrary kind.

There are a group of spirits, it is said, belonging to various ages and
countries, who are united by their desire to inform mankind of their
destiny and duties. F3ach member of this group <lesires to show approval
when 2 i^ attempt is made at such communication. They cannot all take
an active share, but, while some work actively, others express sympathy
by choosing either a signature, or some special physical manifestation, to
be associated with their names, even if not actually produced by them-

951] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 235

selves. This form^ of communication is of course not meant to be in
itself evidential: it depends on the confidence reposed in the control ** in
charge of the manifestations ; — much as when letters of encouragement
are read at a public meeting, their genuineness is taken on trust from the
chairman. Even when the handwriting produced (either automatically
through the medium, or directly^ without the intervention of human
hands), resembles that of the deceased person, this, as elsewhere explained,
does [not in itself prove identity. Well-known signatures especially may
be copied by other spirits.

As soon, however, as it is understood that such messages are not
intended to be evidential, it seems not unnatural that they should be
given thus. It needs no derogation from the dignity of even the highest
spirit to express his sanction of any scheme designed to convey to ‘‘ men
of goodwill,” in fashion however humble and unassuming, some message
of their eternal fate.

But where identity is absolutely unprovable, as in the case of this
group of men of old time,” it would be futile to discuss the probabilities
on either side, I cannot blame Mr. Moses for his injunction to leave
these spirits — eminent but not Divine — under the mask of the symbolic
titles which they chose to assume. His reverence for Imperator was
of a filial type which led him to desire that although there must be
discussion about the doctrines, there should be none about the actual
personality of the teacher to whom he felt that he owed all that was best
in his own inner life.

951. We must now briefly go through the points which make such
messages as were received by Mr. Moses prima facie evidential, which in-
dicate, that is to say, that they actually do come in some way from their
alleged source. A brief recapitulation of the main stages of evidential
quality in messages given by automatic writing or by trance-utterances
is all that will be needed here.

(r) Evidentially lowest comes the class of messages which is by far
Ak' most common ; messages, namely, in which, although some special
identity may be claimed, all the facts given have been consciously known
to the automatist. Here wc may well suppose that his own personality
alone is concerned, and that the messages have a subliminal, but not an
external source.

( 2 ) Next above these come messages containing facts likely to be
nown to the alleged spirit, and not consciously known to the automatist ;
ut which facts may nevertheless have some time been noted by the
automatist, even unwittingly, and may have thus obtained lodgment in
his subliminal memory.

Qf ( 3 ) ^ Next come facts which can be proved, — with such varying (fcgrees
Uncertainty as such negative proof allows, — never to have been in any way
j automatist; but which nevertheless are easily to be found
s ; so that they may have been learnt clairvoyantly by the automa-

236 CHAPTER IX [952

tist himself^ or learnt and communicated to him by sgme mind other tlian
that of the alleged spirit.

(4) Next come facts which can be proved, with similar varying degree s
of certainty according to the circumstances, never to have been knowit
to the automatist, or recorded in print; but which were known to tl^
alleged spirit and can be verified by the memories of living persons.

(5) Above this again would come that class of experimental messages,
or posthumous letters, of which we have as yet very few good examples
(see 876) ; where the departed person has before death arranged some
special test — some fact or sentence known only to himself, which lie is t(»
transmit after death, if possible, as a token of his return.

962. (6) Thus much for the various kinds of verbal messages, wiih h

can be kept and analysed at leisure. We must now turn to evidence <ji
a different and not precisely comparable kind. In point of fact it is nor
these inferences from written matter which have commonly been iiu.>t
efficacious in compelling the survivor’s belief in the reality of the iriciui .-
return. Whether logically or no, it is not so much the written mospgt
that he trusts, but some phantom of face and voice that he knew so
It is this familiar convincing presence , — cikto 8 c tfcViccXov dvrov — on whi-
the percipient has always insisted, since Achilles strove in vain to cmbi.:* t
Patroclus’ shade.

How far such a phantasm is in fact a proof of any real actinr* on i'ik
part of the spirit thus recognised is a problem which has been dc.tii \y\u\
already in Chapter VII. The upshot of our evidence to my minfi i-
although the apparition of a departed person cannot per st rank .k
evidence of his presence, yet this is not a shape which purely h.:l-
lucinatory phantasms seem often to assume ; and if there be any corn-
borative evidence, as, for instance, writing which claims to conn ucim
the same person, the chance that he is really operative is corisuh r;d/io.
In Mr. Moses’ case almost all the figures which he saw brought
them some corroboration by writing, trance-utterance, gesture-
(as where a figure makes signs of assent or dissent), or raps.

(7) And this brings us to a class of cases largely represcntc«i in
Moses* series, where writings professing to come from a certain spirit '!«
supported by physical phenomena of which that spirit claims aisc h*
the author. Whether such a line of proof can ever be made
complete or no, one can imagine many cases where it would be pra*
convincing to almost all minds. Materialisations of hands, 01 dutct
writing in the script of the departed, have much of actual cogency :
and these methods, with others like them, arc employed by Mr,
controls** in their efforts to establish their own identities. Physic;d
phenomena in themselves, however, carry no proof of an inlclligcn* <■
outside that of the sensitive himself, and, as I have said, may in nKin}
cases be a mere extension of his own ordinary muscular powers, aiul t
due to any external agency at all.

9.54] TRANCE, POSSESSION. ECSTASY 237

953. If we confine ourselves to the verbal messages, we find that
111,. c.Lses most fully represented in the records of Mr. Moses are limited
li) tlic first three classes mentioned above, and those which come under
iju* imrih class — verifiable facts of which there is no printed record and
wliirli ii is practically certain that the medium could never have known —
;irc- ( t;mparatively few. This may partly be accounted for by the small
numbr r of sitters with Mr. Moses and the fiict that they were his personal

'i'he records of Mrs. Piper, on the other hand, to which we now
ivirn, '^rc especially rich in incidents that fall under the fourth heading,
;juil tlie evidential value of the verbal messages in this case is, therefore,
iinw ii -jrv'ater than in the case of Mr. Moses. Whereas for Mr. Moses
[Ik i ii'ntity of many of his communicators rested largely upon their being
4::;jr.nt<‘**d by Imj)erator and his group of helpers, — in the case of Mrs.
i’ljji-r liie spirits of some recently-departed friends who have given much
rvsiiiMi'.r ‘if their identity aj^pear to maintain the independent reality and
‘ ontrol over Mrs. l^iper of these same intelligences — Imperator,
i‘)r. Doctor, and others—ihat Mr. Moses claimerl as ruling in his own
We shall then in the case of Mrs. Piper again return to the
.]!! vii.iu «»f the supervision of such alleged spirits.

954 . The case of Mrs. Piper differs in two important respects
UDiu that of W. Stainton Moses or I). I). Home. In the first place
M.; ii'K'kiaetic phenomena have occurred in connection with her trance-

; and in the second place her supraliminal self shows no
f.M* <;s of any supernormal faculty whatsoever. She presents an instance
•! nuomatisrn of the extreme type where the ‘‘ possession is not merely
il or [jartial, but aftects, so to say, the whole psychical area, — where
ii.i- Mipraliminal self is for a time completely displaced, and the whole
porM)!inliiy appears to suffer intermittent change. In other >vords, she
into a trance, during which her organs of speech or writing are
'*• out roiled ” by other personalities than the normal waking one. Oc-
« isioM.illy either just before or just after the trance, the subliminal self
aplu irs to take some control of the organism for a brief interval; but
wiih tills exception the personalities that speak or write during her trance
el.iiiii i,) he discarnate spirits.

Mrs. Piper^s trances may be divided into three stages : (t ) Where the
d»>minam controlling personality was known as ** Dr. Phinuit ” and used
the vocal organs almost exclusively, communicating by trame-uiterance,

I - ) Where the communications were made chiefly by automatic writing
iti th^* trance under the supervision more particularly of the control known
i^Micorge Pelham,” or “ O. J\,” although “Dr. I'hinuit ” usually com -
ated also by speech during this period, 1892-90. %

( .) ) VVhere supervision is alleged to be exercised by Imperator, Doctor,
and others already mentioned in connection with the experiences of
M>)s.-s, and where the communications have been mainly by writing,

CHAPTER IX

238

[955

but occasionally also by speech. This last stage, which began early in
1897 , still continues, and the final outcome remains to be seen.

955. I proceed now to indicate in further detail the nature of the
evidence and the character of the manifestations themselves, and begin by
quoting from Dr. Hodgson (Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 367 - 68 ) a
brief statement of some of the historical facts of the case.

Mrs. Piper has been giving sittings for a period extending over thirteen
[now, 1901, seventeen] years. Very early in her trance history she came under
the attention of Professor James, who sent many persons to her as strangers,
in most cases making the appointments himself, and in no case giving their
names. She came to some extent under my own supervision in 1887, and I
also sent many persons to her, in many cases accompanying them and recording
the statements made at their sittings, and taking all the care that I could to
prevent Mrs. Piper’s obtaining any knowledge beforehand of who the sitters
were to be. In 1889-90 Mrs. Piper gave a series of sittings in England under
the supervision of Dr. Walter Leaf and Mr, Myers and Professor Lodge, where,
also the most careful precautions possible were taken to ensure that the sitters
went as strangers to Mrs. Piper. Further sittings were supervised by myself
in 1890-91 after Mrs. Piper’s return to America. Many persons who had sittings
in the course of these earlier investigations were convinced that tliey were
actually receiving communications from their “deceased” friends through
Mrs. Piper’s trance, but although the special investigators were satisfied, from
their study of the trance-phenomena themselves and a careful analysis of tlie
detailed records of the sittings, that some supernormal power was involved,
there was no definite agreement as to their precise significance. And to myself
it seemed that any hypothesis that was offered presented formidable difficulties
in the way of its acceptance. In the course of these earlier investigations the
communications were given almost entirely through the speech-utterance of the
trance-personality known as Phinuit, and even the best of them were apt to
include much matter that was irrelevant and unlike the alleged communicators,
while there were many indications that Phinuit himself was far from being the
kind of person in whom we should be disposed to place implicit credence.

During the years 1892-96 inclusive, I exercised a yet closer supervision of
Mrs. Piper’s trances than I had done in previous years, continuing to lake
all the precautions that I could as regards the introduction of persons as
strangers. This period was marked by a notable evolution in the quality of the
trance results, beginning early in 1892. The character of the manifestations
changed with the development of automatic writing in the trance, and with
what was alleged to be the continual rendering of active assistance by the
communicator whom I have called G. P. [George Pelham]. As a result of this
it appeared that communicators were able to express their thoughts directly
through the writing by Mrs. Piper’s hand, instead of conveying them more
dimly and partially through Phinuit as intermediary; and the advice and
guidance which they, apparently , received from G. P. enabled them to avoid
much of the confusion and irrelevancy so characteristic of the earlier mani-
festationli.

956. I do not propose here to discuss the hypothesis of fraud in
this case, since it has been fully discussed in the articles referred to m

957] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 239

my Appendices aiyl elsewhere^ by Dr. Hodgson, Professor William
James, Professor Newbold of Pennsylvania University, Dr. Walter l-eaf,
and Sir Oliver Lodge. I merely quote, as a summary of the argument,
a few words of Professor James, from The Psychological Rtinew^ July,

X898, pp. 421-22

Dr. Hodgson considers that the hypothesis of fraud cannot be seriously
maintained. I agree with him absolutely. The medium has been under
observation, much of the time under close observation, as to most of the
conditions of her life, by a large number of persons, eager, many of them, to
pounce upon any suspicious circumstance for [nearly] fifteen years. During
that time, not only lias there not been one single suspicious circumstance
remarked, but not one suggestion has ever been made from any quarter which
might tend positively to explain how the medium, living the apparent life she
leads, could possibly collect information about so many sitters by natural
means. The scientist wlio is confident of ** fraud ” here, must remember that
in science as much as in common life a hypothesis must receive some positive
specification and determination before it can be profitably discussed, and a
fraud which is no assigned kind of fraud, but simply ** fraud ” at large, fraud
in absiracto, can hardly be regarded as a specially scientific explanation of
(Oiicretc facts.

I give some further statements and references on this point in 956 A
an<l B.

957. Nor shall I discuss at any length the character of the Phinuit
personality. An excellent analysis of this, which I quote in 957 A,
wiis given by Sir Oliver I^odge. According to my own experience,
during Mrs. Piper’s visit to Phigland in 1889-90, different trances, and
different parts of the same trance, varied greatly in quality. There were
some interviews throughout which Phinuit hardly asked any question, and
hardly .stated anything which was not true. There were others throughout
which his utterances showed not one glimmer of real knowledge, but con-
sisted wholly of fishing questions and random assertions. The trances
could not always be induced at pleasure. A state of quiet expectancy
would usually bring one on ; but sometimes the attempt altogether failed.
The trance when induced usually lasted about an hour, and there was
often a marked difference between the first few minutes of a trance and
the remaining time. On such occasions almost all that was of value
would be told in the first few minutes \ and the remaining talk would
consist of vague generalities or mere repetitions of what had already been
given. Phinuit always professed himself to be a spirit communicating
with spirits ; and he used to say that he remembered their messages tor a
few minutes after entering into the medium,” and then became confused.
He was not, however, apparently able to depart when his budget o| facts
was empty. There seemed to be some irresponsible letting-off of energy
which must continue until the original impulse was lost in incoherence.
*y own general conclusion at that time was that Phinuit’s utterances

240

CHAPTER IX

[958

must be judged as but one item in the long roll of au(pmatic messages of
many kinds which were only then beginning to be collected and analysed.
I regarded it as proved that these phenomena afforded evidence of large
extensions — telepathic or clairvoyant — of the normal powers of the
human spirit, and thought it possible that Phinuit's knowledge was thus
derived from a telepathic or clairvoyant foculty, latent in Mrs. Piper, and
manifesting itself in ways with which previous experiment had not made
us familiar. On the other hand, the automatic messages which wc
had already studied included phenomena of very various types, some
of which certainly pointed primd facie to the intervention — perhaps the
very indirect intervention — of the surviving personalities of the dead, nnrl
I held that if such instances of communication from extra-terrene minds
should ultimately find acceptance with science, then Phinuit’s messages,
with all their drawbacks and all their inconsistency, would have fair claim
to be added to the number.

I need hardly say that it is this last hypothesis which I have since
adopted, and although it is obvious that the difliculties concerning Phinuit’s
identity have not been solved, it seems possible to regard him as an
intelligence extraneous to Mrs. Piper, — as, in fact, a discarnate spirit. It
must not be forgotten, however, that he entirely failed in his professed
attempts to establish his personal identity, and could not succeed even in
substantiating his claim to be a French doctor. Unfortunately we have
no contemporary records of what occurred during Mrs. Piper’s earliest
trances; nor practically any information as to the first manifestations of
the Phiniiit personality. It seems clear at least that the name Phinuit
was the result of suggestion at these earliest trances (see Procectiings
S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 46 - 58 ), and many may think it most probable that
the Phinuit “ control ” was nothing more than a secondary personality of
Mrs. Piper. But, according to the statements (of which there is of course
no evidence) made by “ imperator,” Phinuit was an “ earth-bound ” or
inferior spirit, who had become confused and bewildered in his first
attempts at communication, and had, as we say, “ lost ins consciousness
of personal identity.” That such an occurrence is not uncommon in this
life is plain from the cases to which 1 have drawn attention in Chapter II.
of this book, and we cannot prove it to be impossible that profound
memory disturbances should be produced in an inexperienced discarnate
spirit when first attempting to communicate with us through a material
organism. Be that as it may, the I^hinuit personality has not manifested
either directly or indirectly since January 1 S 97 , when ‘'Imperator”
claimed the supervision of Mrs. Pipers trances.

958. There were various f:ases of alleged direct control ” by spirits
other ihan Phinuit during the first stage of Mrs. Piper’s trance history-
Two of these, the “ K.” control and the aunt of Professor James, are
referred to in the report by Professor James which 1 have quoted in 956 A.
These and several others are also mentioned by Dr. Hodgson in Proc(ed‘

959] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 241

inn S.P.R*f vol. viift pp. 2S-46 ; but even in the most remarkable of
thdfc earlier cases of apparent ‘^possession” of Mrs. Piper^s organism by
other spirits, the evidence available for publication was scanty, and in one
or two cases there was scarcely anything to indicate that the supposed
communicating personalities were not impersonations by Phinuit.

The most notable case was that of a lady, Miss W., who had forty-five
sittings, at forty-one of which the control was taken for at least part of the
time by a personal friend, who presented marked characteristics of the
friend it purported to be ; showed specific knowledge of private matters
known only to that friend and the sitter ; showed a knowledge of facts
of which he was reminded by the sitter, and in turn reminded the sitter
of facts temporarily forgotten by her ; made some mistakes in matters
once known to the friend, and remembered well by the sitter, and told
the sitter of facts not known to her and afterwards verified {loc, cit, 43).

Usually, as we have seen, Phinuit acted as intermediary, reproducing
the communications made by the “deceased” relatives or friends of the
sitters, and in a favourable series of sittings the impression made was
generally as described in the following case by Sir Oliver Lodge. (From
Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 455.)

One of the best sitters was my next-door neighbour, Isaac C. Thompson,
IM.S., to whose name indeed, before he had been in any way introduced,
Phinuit sent a message purporting to come from his father. Three generations
of his and of his wife’s family living and dead (small and compact Quaker
families) were, in the course of two or three sittings, conspicuously mentioned,
with identifying detail ; the main informant representing himself as his
deceased brother, a young Edinburgh doctor, whose loss had been mourned
some twenty years ago. The familiarity and touchingness of the messages
comraunicaled in this particular instance were very remarkable, and can by no
means be reproduced in any printed report of the sitting. Their case is one in
which very few mistakes were made, the details standing out vividly correct, so
that in fact they found it impossible not to believe that their relatives were
actually speaking to them.

Such cases were not usual, and on the whole, although there seemed
to be in this first stage of Mrs. Piper’s trance history, in 1884-91, abun-
dant proof of some supernormal faculty which demanded at least the
hypothesis of thought-transference from living persons both near and
distant, and suggested occasionally some power of telacsthesia or perhaps
even of premonition, yet the main question with which we are now
concerned, — whether Mrs. Piper’s organism was controlled, directly or
indirectly, by discarnate spirits who could give satisfactory evidence of
tieir identity, — remained undecided.

959 , More important, as regards this question of personal identity, is
^ series of sittings which formed the second stage of Mrs. Piper’s
France history, in the years 1892-96, of which a detailed account is given
in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 284-582 and vol. xiv. pp. 6-49, where
voi... n. o

242

CHAPTER IX

[9S9

the chief communicator or intermediary was G. P.^ This G. P., whose
name (although, of course, well known to many persons) has been altered
for publication into “ George Pelham,” was a young man of great ability,
mainly occupied in literary pursuits. Although born an American citizen,
he was a member of a noble English family. I never met him, but
I have the good fortune to include a number of his friends among niy
own, and with several of these I have been privileged to hold intimate
conversation on the nature of the communications which they received. I
have thus heard of many significant utterances of G. P.*s, which are held
too private for print ; and I have myself been present at sittings where
G. P. manifested. For the full discussion of the evidence tending to
prove the identity of G. P., I refer my readers to the original report in the
Proceedings S.P.R. I give in 959 A and B a detailed account of the
circumstances of the first communications of G. P., and quote here
a general summary, given by Dr. Hodgson several years later, of the
whole series of his manifestations. (From Proceedings S.P.R,, vol. xiii.

pp- 328-330)

On the first appearance of the communicating G. P. to Mr. Hart in March
1892, he gave not only his own name and that of the sitter, but also the names
of several of their most intimate common friends, and referred specifically to
the most important privjite matters connected with them. At the same sitting
reference was made to other incidents unknown to the sitters, such as the
account of Mrs. Pelham's taking the studs from the body of G. P. and giving
them to Mr. Pelham to be sent to Mr. Hart, and the reproduction of a notable
remembrance of a conversation which G. P. living had with Katharine, the
daughter of his most intimate friends, the Howards. These were primary ex-
amples of two kinds of knowledge concerning matters unknown to the sitters,
of which various other instances were afterwards given; knowledge of events
connected with G. P. w'liich had occurred since his death, and knowledge of
special memories pertaining to the G. P. personality before death. A week
later, at the sitting of Mr. Vance, he made an appropriate inquiry after the
sitter’s son, and in reply to inquiries rightly specified that the sitter’s son had
been at college with him, and further correctly gave a correct description of the
sitter’s summer home as the place of a special visit. This, again, was paralleled
by many later instances where appropriate inquiries were made and remcni'
brances recalled concerning other personal friends of G. P. Nearly tw'O weeks
later came his most intimate friends, the Howards, and to these, using the voice
directly, he showed such a fulness of private remembrance and .specific know-
ledge and characteristic intellectual and emotional quality pertaining to G. P-
that, though they had previously taken no interest in any branch of psychical
research, they were unable to resist the conviction that they were actually con-
versing with their old friend G. P. And this conviction was strengthened by
their later experiences. Not least important, at that lime, was his anxiety
about the disposal of a certain book and about certain specified letters wh*c
concern matters too private for publication. He was particularly
of convincing his father, who lived in Washington, that it was indeed G. P* w
was communicating, and be soon afterwards stated that his father had U
his photograph to be copied, as was the case, though Mr. Pelham had n

959] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 243

informed even his wife of this fact. Later on he reproduced a series of
incidents, unknown to the sitters, in which Mrs. Howard had been engaged in
her own home. Later still, at a sitting with his father and mother in New
York, a further intimate knowledge was shown of private family circumstances,
and at the following sitting, at which his father and mother were not present,
he gave the details of certain private actions which they had done in the
interim. At their sitting, and at various sittings of the Howards, appropriate
comments were made concerning different articles presented which had
belonged to G. P. living, or had been familiar to him ; he inquired after
other personal articles which were not presented at the sittings, and showed
Intimate and detailed recollections of incidents in connection with them. In
points connected with the recognition of articles with their related associations
of a personal sort, the (L P. communicating, so far as I know, has never
failed. Nor has he failed in the recognition of personal friends. 1 may say
generally that out of a large number of sitters who went as strangers to Mrs.
Piper, the communicating G. P. has picked out the friends of G. P. living, pre-
cisely as the G. P. living might have been expected to do [thirty cases of
recognition out of at least one hundred and fifty persons who have had sittings
with Mrs. Piper since the first appearance of G. P., and no case of false
recognition], and has exhibited memories in connection with these and other
friends which are such as would naturally he associated as part of the G. P.
personality, which certainly do not suggest in themselves that they originate
otherwise, and which are accompanied by the emotional relations which
wire cpnnected with such friends in the mind ot G. P. living. At one of
his early communications G. P. expressly undertook the task of rendering
all the assistance in his power towards establishing the continued existence
of himself and other communicators, in pursuance of a promise of which
he himself reminded me, made some iw^o years or more before his death,
that if he died before me and found himself “still existing,” he would
devote himself to prove the fact; and in the persistence of his endeavour
to overcome the difficulties in communicating as far as possible, in his con-
stant readiness to act as amanuensis at the sittings, in the effect which he
has produced by his counsels,— to myself as investigator, and to numerous
other sitters and communicators, — he has, in so far as I can form a judg-
ment in a problem so complex and still presenting so much obscurity,
displayed all the keenness and pertinacity wliich were eminently character-
istic of G. P. living.

Finally, the manifestations of this G. P. communicating have not been of a
fitful and spasmodic nature, they have exhibited the marks of a continuous
living and persistent personality, manifesting itself through a course of years,
and showing the same characteristics of an independent intelligence whether
friends of G. P. were present at the sittings or not. I learned of various cases
where in my absence active assistance was rendered by G. P. to sitters who
had never previously heard of him, and from time to time he would make brief
pertinent reference to matters with which G. P. living was acquainted, though
was not, and sometimes in ways which indicated that he could to some extent
see what was happening in our world to persons in whose welfare G. P. living
would have been specially interested. *

The sitter called Mr. Hart, to whom G. P. first manifested, died at
aples three years afterwards, and communicated, with the help of G. P.,

244 CHAPTER IX [960

on the second day after his death. I give an account of his com-
munications in 959 C.

960 . There are numerous instances in the reports in the Proceedings^
(see vol. vi. pp. 64J-50; vol. viii. pp. 15-26; vol. passim ; anti
vol. xvi. pp. 1 3 1-3), of the giving of information unknown to the sitters
and afterwards verified. A striking illustration of this occurred in the
case of the lady called Elisa Manners,” whose near relatives and friends
concerned in the communications were known to myself. I give a brief
account of her first communications in 960 A. On the morning after the
death of her uncle, called F. in the report, she described an incident
in connection with the appearance of herself to her uncle on his death-
bed. I quote Dr. Hodgson’s account of this {Proceedings S.P.R., vol.
xiii. p. 378. Foot-note).

The notice of his [F.’s] death was in a Boston morning paper, and I
happened to see it on my way to the sitting. The first writing of the sillinir
came from Madame Elisa, without my expecting it. She wrote clearly and
strongly, explaining that F. was there with her, but unable to speak directly,
that she wished to give me an account of how she had helped F. to reach her
She said that she had been present at his death-lied, and had spoken to him,
and she repeated what she had said, an unusual form of expression, and in-
dicated that he had heard and recognised Jier. This was confirmed in detail
in the only way possible at that time, by a very intimate friend of Madame
Elisa and myself, and also of the nearest surviving relative of F. I showed my
friend the account of the sitting, and to this friend, a day or two later, the
relative, who was present at the death*bed, stated spontaneously that F. when
dying said that he saw Madame Elisa who was speaking to him, and he re-
peated what she was saying. The expression so repeated, which the relative
quoted to my friend, was that which I had received from Madame Elisa
through Mrs. Piper’s trance, when the death-bed incident was of course cniireiy
unknown to me.

Rare are the “ Peak in Darien ” cases (see section 718 but cases like
this are rarer still.

961 . As will be seen from the account of Elisa Mannors in 960 A,
some attempt was made in her case to speak and write Italian, In the
case which follows there was an attempt to write Haw’uiian. (From Pr0‘
ceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. p. 337.)

This was at a sitting arranged for by Mrs. Howard in October 1893. Mrs
Howard made some notes at the time from which the report was prepared, ancl
I obtained some additional information later from the sitter, Mr. L. Vernon
Briggs. The original writing was apparently lost, and Mr. Briggs never had
the opportunity of .studying it after the sitting. The communication purported
fo c(^e from a Honolulu boy named Kalua, who became much attached to
Mr. Briggs during a six months’ stay of Mr. Briggs in Honolulu in 1881,
who followed Mr. Briggs to Boston under .somewhat romantic circumstances
in 1883. He was soon sent back to his native island, but again returned to
Boston, where he was shot in rS86, in a sailors Bethel, whether inten

962] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 245

lionally or not was unknown. There was some suspicion against a
Swede, who was imprisoned, but there was no evidence against him, and
he was finally discharged. The Swede said that Kalua had accidentally
shot himself with a revolver, and eventually confessed that after the ac-
cident he had himself hidden the revolver behind a flue, w’here, after taking
part of the chimney down, it was found. Mr. Briggs had taken a handker-
ehit-f belonging to Kalua to tlie sitting. Kalua had been shot through
+hc heart, and there was some confusion apparently about the locality
of the suffering, “stomach'* and “side” being mentioned, under what ap-
peared to be the direct control of the voice by “Kalua,” and Mr. Briggs
asked il it was Kalua. Phinuit then spoke for “ Kalua,” who said that he
(lid not kill himself, that he had been gambling with the other man who
disputed with him and shot him, but did not mean to, and who threw the
revolver “ into the hot box where the pepples are ” (meaning “ the furnace ”
and the “coals”), and hid liis pur.se under the steps where he was killed.
“ Kalua ” also said there was shrubbery near it. The cellar of the house was
examined, but no purse was found, and there was no shrubbery in the cellar.

Kalua ” trietl to write Hawaiian, hut the only “ ordinary ” words deciphered
were “lei ” (meaning wreat/is, which he made daily for Mr. Briggs) which was
written clearly and fre(iuently, and an attempt at “aloha** — greeting. Phinuit
liied to get the answer to the question where Kalua’s father was, but could only
succeed in getting “Hiram.” But the writing gave the answer “Hawaiin
Islands. ’’ In reply to the question which one, the answer in writing was
Kaivdi, but I’hinuit said Taru/ir The word is spelt Kawai, but is pronounced
fawai by the natives of the island itself and in the island where Kalua was
l.'orn. The natives ui the other islands call it Kawai.

962 . Not least important as regards the question of identity are some
of ihe communications purporting to come from young children. 1 give in
962 A a synopsis of the chief points in connection with the twin children,
Margaret and Ruthie, of Dr. A. B. Thaw, and quote here an account of
communications coming from the child of Mrs. Katherine Paine Sutton.
(From Proceedhigs S.P.R., vol. xiii, pp. 386-9.)

In the two .sittings which Mrs. Sutton had in December 1893 (p. 484),^
she had articles which had been u.sed by her recently deceased little girl
Katherine. One incident that wa.s characteristic in the case of Ruthie. the
patting of her father's face, was repeated in the ca.se of Katherine when it had
uo special significance. There were only three points that might be described
a.s in part common to the two children, Ruthie and Katherine. Katherine
hid “lovely curl.s,*’ mentioned by Phinuit, and also called for the “tick-tick,”
but Phinuit added correctly that she called it “ the clock,’* and the word babee
'''AS given correctly, as Ruthie also used to pronounce it. Apparently the
«nly incorrect statement purporting to come from the child was that she called
a lady (Mrs. C., a friend of Mrs. Sutton, who purported to be pre.sent in “spirit,”
ringing the child, and whose Christian name and surname were given correctly
y Phinuit) The lady was not her aunt. The statements made came

irough Phinuit. Concerning a silver medal it was said that she wanted to bite
and concerning a string of buttons that she wanted to put them in her
outh, both correct Phinuit' said that she had no sore throat any more, and
'Ihe references in this passage are to the pages of Dr. Hodgson’s Report.

246

CHAPTER IX

that she kept showing him her tongue. Katherine living had sore throat and
her tongue was paralysed. She gave correctly the name by which she called
herself, Kahit^ tlie name Dodo by which she called her brother George, the
name Ba^e by which she called a living sister, Margaret, and the name
Eleanor, of another living sister for whom she called much in her last illness.
She also asked for Dinah, this being the name of an old rag-doll. She said
truly that Dodo used to march with her, “ He put me way up.” She wanted
to go to ‘‘wide horsey” — as the living Katherine had pleaded all through
her illness, and to be taken “ to see the mooley-cow,” the name by which the
living Katherine called the cow, which she was taken almost daily to see.
She said she had “the pretty white flowers you put on me,” and Phinuit
described lilies of the valley, which were the flowers that had been placed
in the casket (see p. 303). She said she was happy with grandma — Mrs.
Sutton’s mother had been dead many years — and later on wanted to send
her love to her grandma and also apparently to her great grandma who wa.s
referred to as Marmie, She had a grandmother and also a great-grandmother
then living, and Marpnie was the name by which Mr. and Mrs. Sutton spoke
of the great-grandmother, but Katherine always called her Gramppiie. She
also referred to two songs she used to sing : “ Dye-bye, O baby bye,” and
“ Row Row, my song.” This “ Row Row ” song was sung frequently by
Katherine during her illness, and was the last sung by her when living, and
she asked Mr. and Mrs. Sutton to sing it at the sitting. They sang the first
four lines, and the voice— presumably still “controlled ” by Phinuit in imitation
of Katherine — sang with them. Phinuit then hushed the sitters, and the voice
sang the remaining four lines [alone]. It is, of course, a familiar child’s song
(p. 486). At the second sitting a fortnight later, the voice sang all eight lines
alone, then asked Mrs. Sutton to sing it with her, as she did, and then at
Mrs. Sutton’s request also sang with her the other song “ Bye-bye,” precisely,
according to Mrs. Sutton, as the living Katherine .sang it. Mr, Sutton, who
was present at the first sitting, did not attend the second sitting, and he was
asked for immediately after this singing, which came at the beginning of the
sitting. “ Kakie wants papa.” This was a very characteristic expression.
There were indications suggesting a knowledge of what was going on in
Mrs. Sutton’s family. At the first sitting Katherine said she went “to see
horsey” ever}' day. The sitters had been staying in the country witli Mr.
Sutton's parents and had been driving frequently. Margaret, a living sister,
was still there, and driving daily. Mrs. Sutton, who has had many psychical
experiences herself in seeing the “apparitions” of “decea.sed ” persons (see p.
484) had “seen Kakie” during that visit to Mr. Sutton’s parents. At the
second sitting Katherine said that she saw Dagie with grandma, and that
she played with Eleanor every day and liked the little bed. A lady had
recently lent Eleanor a doll’s bed, but Mrs. Sutton had not a.ssociated thi.s
with Kakie. There were incidents at both sittings which showed associations
that seemed to be in the mind of the child, which did not awaken the
corresponding associations in the minds of the .sitters even when the con-
temporary notes to the sittings were made. Thus in the first sitting she
asked for “ horsey.” Mrs. Sutton gave a little toy horse with which the child
had pfeyed during her illness. But the child said “ big horsey, not this little
one,” and Mrs. Sutton surmised that she referred to another toy cart-horse thiU
she used to like. At the second sitting came “ Kakie wants the horse,” and
the little horse was again given.

962 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION. ECSTASY 247

“ No, that is not* the one. The big horse— so big. [Phinuit shows how
large.] Eleanor’s horse. Eleanor used to put it in Kakie’s lap. She loved
that horsey.”

These additional particulars, which were true, then reminded Mrs. Sutton
of the horse referred to, which was packed away in another city, and which had
not occurred to the mind of Mrs. Sutton in connection with Kakie. Similarly
at the first sitting she asked two or three limes for “ the little book.” The sitter
noted that she liked a linen- picture-book. But the remarks made at her second
sitting suggest that the little book in the child’s mind was not this one. “ Kakie
wants the little bit of a book mamma read by her bedside, with the pretty
bright things hanging from it— mamma put it in her hands — the last thing she
remembers.” Mrs. Sutton states that this was a little prayer-book with a cross
and other symbols in silver attached to ribbons for marking the places, and
that it was sent to her by a friend after Kakie had ceased to know any one
except perliaps for a passing moment. Mrs. Sutton read it when Kakie seemed
unconscious, and after Kakie^s death ^ placed it in lier hands to prevent the
blood settling in the nails. She adds later that Mrs. Pipers hands, when the
book was asked for at the sitting, were put into the same position as Kakie’s.

Another book was mentioned at the second sitting which apparently was
the one Mrs, Sutton thought of at the first sitting. Kakie wants the book
with red letters and pictures of animals.” Correct description.

At tins second sitting also Katherine again apparently referred to Mrs. C.,
—who was not a relative, — as and to her great-grandmother iis Afannie.

At this sitting Mrs. Sutton twice saw the “ apparition ” of Kakie (and she also
saw the figure of Dr. Clarke, another communicator, just as Phinuit said : “ Here
is an old gentleman who wants to speak to you, Dr. Clarke.” See p. 484).
On one of the.se occasions Mrs. Sutton saw her for a moment standing at the
table trying to reach a spool ** of silk, and at the same moment Phinuit reached
for it, saying : “ She wants that, she and Eleanor used to play with. She calls
it Eleanors.” This was all true, but the sitter ‘‘had not connected it with
Eleanor in her thoughts.” Another incident I quote here just as it is given in
the detailed report of tlie sitting.

[Kakie asks for her ball. I gave it to Phinuit, who tries to find what she
want.s to do with it]

“ Bite it } Toss it ? Roll it 1 Throw it ? ”

[No, she wants a string. Mrs. H. gave him a string. He tries to tie it
around the ball.] [A little red wooden ball with a hole through it. The ball
had a string through it when she used to play with it.]

“ No, that is not right — through it.”

“ There, there, be a good little girl. Don’t cry. Don’t be impatient. You
want your mamma to sec how you do it, so she will know it is you, don’t you,
dear.? Old man will do it for her.”

[He put the string through, held it up, and hit it with the finger, making it
swing.]

“ That is it, is it not, darling? Nice little girl as ever was.”

[While she was sick it was her great delight to have me hold the string and
let her hit the little red ball with her finger or spoon. She made the motions
as if doing it, after she became unconscious.] •

' If the human personality survives death, it may be a difficult question to decide in
individual cases precisely when the consciousness is finally withdrawn from the body.

248 CHAPTER IX [963

963. There are numerous incidents in connection with Mrs. Piper’s
trances, which indicate not only that articles which have been worn by
deceased persons may fcicilitate communications from such persons, but
that articles which have been worn by persons still living may afford clues
to long past events ; but how these objects afford aid in the acquisition
of knowledge of the past events is still entirely obscure. (Sec,
Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 460 ; vol. viii. pp. 15 - 27 .) This faculty of
what I have called rctrocognitive telaesthesia, is, as we have seen, some-
times manifested in cases where there is no reason to ascribe it to any
extraneous spirit. (See 572, 572 A, 672 B.)

The alleged controlling spirits sometimes seem to possess a super-
normal knowledge of the present bodily state of living persons, with
the occasional power of foretelling organic changes, including death, or
of foreseeing the future surroundings of a living person. Here, again,
we have had instances of similar supernormal knowledge on the part of
the subliminal self (see 665 A, 573 F). Some of the most specific
instances of predictions of deaths given tiirough Mrs. Piper are quoted
in 963 A. In one of these cases a death was predicted to occur “ soon,”
and it occurred a little more than a year later. Put in several other cases
where deaths >vere predicietl to occur “soon” or “before very long,”
or where similar expressions were used, the time elnpsing before the
death has extended from about two to not less than six years. 'Phere
is little evidence of any true prevision of other events than cleath through
Mrs. Piper’s trance. In some cases, events seem to have been partially
foreseen, but the predictions made were not completely fulfilled. (See
Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii, p. 124, and compare 425 C.)

Setting aside the instances explicable by some telepathic or teljes-
theiic inference, the discarnatc spirits claim occasionally to see specific
future scenes in connection with particular persons — of the origin of
which scenes they seem unable to offer any explanation. They do not
profess usually to be aware beforehand of the precise time of death of a
dying person, — except perhaps in cases where the death is very near, —
when it is claimed that the approaching death becomes known to the
incarnate spirit (not necessarily to the supraliminal self) as well as to the
discarnate spirit of some near relative, but the real source of the know-
ledge remains, of course, obscure.^

^ On this point see 425 A. 425 B, 425 £. 717, 717 B, 852 A, 865 A (name of
distant dying person written), 874 A and 927 B. Compare the case of “ Elisa Manners ”
in section 9 W, the cases of Mrs. Alger and Mrs. O’Gorraan in Proceedinv S.P.K.»
vol. V. pp. 293-95, and tl»e case from Mrs. Meredith in JourtPil S.P.R., vol. x.
p. 136. in the cases of Mrs. Alger and Mrs. 0 ’Gorm.m the prediction of death seems
to have emanated from the incarnate spirit of the person who died, and the precise date
of the death was given, in the first case four days Ijeforchand — though the evidence
on this point is somewhat doubtful — and in the second case a week beforehand. In the
case quoted in 874 A, the precise date of death was announced forty days beforehand
by the tilts of a table, the communication purporting to come from a discarnate spirit.

965] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 249

964. With regard to the last of the three periods of Mrs. Piper*s
trance-history to which 1 referred in section 954, the only detailed pub-
lished accounts are contained in Professor Hyslop’s report of his sittings in
Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xvi. But neither his records nor the manuscript
records which I have seen contain any proof of the personal identity of
the alleged spirits called Irnperator,*' “ Doctor,” Rector,” &c., or any
proof of the identity of these intelligences with those claimed by Mr.
Moses. (See 945, 950, and Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 408 - 9 .)
Whether any such proof will be forthcoming in the future remains to
be seen, — or indeed, whether proof or disproof for us at present is
even possible.

965. 'I’he accounts here quoted are perhaps sufficient to illustrate that
theory of possession which seems especially to apply to the case of Mrs.
riper, — according to which her bodily organism is controlled by dis-
carnate spirits who attempt to prove their identity by reproducing
recollections of their earthly lives.'

In the case of Mr. Moses the control of the mind or body by dis-
carnate spirits seemed to vary in degree at different times, and the
medium’s own preconceptions seemed to form an important factor in the
cornmiinicvations he received, — and it is obvious that in Mrs. Piper’s case
also the control must be limited by the idiosyncrasies of the medium.
lJut we must continually bear in mind the impossibility of distinguishing
the different elements that may enter into so complex a phenomenon.

1 have sp(;ken of parallel series of manifestations indicating on the one
hand the powers of the subliminal self, which culminate in ecstasy, and
on the other the agency of discarnate spirits, leading on to possession,
liut the phenomena are not, in fact, so simply arranged. It seems pro-
bable that when a sj)irit can control a sensitive’s organism, the sensitive’s
own subliminal self may be able to do the same. The transparency
which renders the one possession possible focilitates also the other. This
may be one reason for the admixture seen in most trance utterances, — of
elements which come from the sensitive’s own mind with elements inspired
from without. 'Fo this source of confusion must be added the influence
of the sensitive’s supraliminal self also, whose habits of thought and turns
of speech must needs appear whenever use is made of the brain-centres
which that supraliminal self habitually controls. Further, we cannot draw
a clear line between the influence of the organism itself, — as already
moulded by its own indwelling spirit, — and the continuing influence of
that spirit, not altogether separated from the organism. That is to say,
the sensitive’s own previous ideas may go on developing themselves during

' Some ingenious experiments designed to test how living persons can be id(|ptifled
on somewhat similar evidence were carried out by Professor Hyslop, as described in
hw report, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xvi. pp. 537-623. In these experiments, series
of telegraphic messages were sent from one person to another, one person knowing who
the other was, but not vice versd.

250

CHAPTER IX

the trance, which may thus be incomplete. The reshlt may be a kind of
mixed telepathy between the sitter, the sensitive’s spirit, and the extraneous
spirit. I believe that sometimes during one and the same access of trance
all these elements are in turn apparent ; and a long familiarity with the
sensitive will be needed if we would disentangle the intermingled threads.
In the case of Mrs. Piper it may be supposed that in the earliest stages
of her trance-history she was not completely controlled by discarnate
spirits, but that her subliminal self was used as an intermediary, — as a
hypnotised subject, so to say, following the suggestions of discarnate
spirits ; that in the next stage the control by discarnate spirits was of the
more direct and complete kind which 1 have specially called possession ;
and that in her last period she has reverted once more to the earlier stage
where her subliminal self, or its influence, is not completely excluded.

Whether this be so or not, the apparent distinction between the
control by her mvn subliminal self and that by the alleged spirits is still
not less marked than in the early stages. Generally it is even more
noticeable, owing to the usual brief intervals of ecstasy (after the control
by the discarnate spirit has ceased), when her own spirit or subliminal self
resumes control, and appears to see and occasionally to describe scenes in
the spiritual world, sometimes transmitting messages of evidential value ;
of all which she retains no recollection on her return to the normal state.

There is much additional evidence yet to be published that has come
through Mrs. Piper during the last few years in support of the claim that
recently deceased persons are communicating, besides instances of failures
and confusion which we must doubtless continue to expect under the
conditions apparently involved in the communications. It seems from
our experience thus far that the most valuable evidence we can hope to
obtain of personal identity is likely to come from spirits who have recently
passed over with all their inexperience of that other world, but it may be
that these are aided in their task by more remote spirits whose identity
we can neither prove nor disprove. It is perhaps more reasonable to
suppose that there is such supervision — if wc are in actual communication
with a spiritual world at all — than to think that the great spirits of the
past take no abiding interest in the communication of that spiritual world
with ours.

966. We must now try to form some more definite idea — based not
on preconceived theories but on our actual observation of tranccs—of
the processes of possession ; though it is hardly necessary to say that the
most adequate conception that we can reach at present must be restricted
and distorted by the limitations of our own material existence, and can
only be expressed by the help of crude analogies. •

Ifeay say at the outset that this singular union between two widely
different human beings — this possession of the organism — has in it
nothing whatever that is weird or alarming. In Mrs. Piper’s case the
processes of entering and leaving the trance, which used to be accom-

967 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 251

panied, in Professor'James' words, by “ a good deal of respiratory dis-
turbance and muscular twitching/’ are now as tranquil as the acts of
going to sleep and awaking; and no result of the trance upon her
waking state is evident, except a passing fatigue if the trance has been
too far prolonged, or, on the other hand, a state of vague diffused hap-
piness such as sometimes follows the awaking from a pleasant dream.
There has been no harmful influence on health — possibly a beneficial
influence. At any rate, after serious injury from a sleigh accident, and
consequent operations, Mrs. Piper is now a thoroughly healthy woman.”
In character she has always belonged to a quiet domestic New England
type, much occupied with her household and her children.^ In Dr.
Hodgson’s view, her control by intelligences above her own has in-
creased her stability and serenity. If we look, in flict, at the flesh-and-
blood side of this strange converse, we seem to watch a process of natural
evolution opening upon us with unexpected ease ; so that our main duty
is carefully to search for and train such other favoured individuals as
already show this form of capacity — always latent, perhaps, and now
gradually emergent in the human race. Die Gehterwelt ist nicht ver-
schlossen; these sensitives have but to sink into a deep recueillement^ a
guarded slumber, and that gate stands manifestly ajar. It is rather on
the other side of the gulf that the difficulties, the perplexities, come
thick and fast.

967. Let us try to realise what kind of feat it is which we are ex-
pecting the disembodied spirit to achieve. Such language, I know, again
suggests the mcdicine-man’s wigwam rather than the study of the w'hite
phiiosopher. Yet can we feel sure that the process in our own minds
which has (as we think) refined and spiritualised man’s early conceptions
of an unseen world has been based upon any observed facts?

In dealing with matters which lie outside human experience, our only
clue is some attempt at continuity with what we already know. We can-
not, for instance, form independently a reliable conception of life in an
unseen world. That conception has never yet been fairly faced from the
standpoint of our modern ideas of continuity, conservation, evolution.
The main notions that have been framed of such survival have been
framed first by savages and then by a priori philosophers. To the man of
science the question has never yet assumed enough of actuality to induce
him to consider it with scientific care. He has contented himself, like
the mass of mankind, with some traditional theory, some emotional
preference for some such picture as seems to him satisfying and exalted.
Yet he knows well that this subjective principle of choice has led in
history to the acceptance of many a dogma which to more civilised per-
ceptions seems in the last degree blasphemous and cruel. •

The savage, I say, made his own picture first. And he at any rate

^ She was married in 18S1 and has two daui^hters. one seventeen, the other eighteen
years old.

252 CHAPTER IX [968

dimly felt after a principle of continuity; although he applied it in
crudest fashion. Yet the happy hunting-ground and the faithful dog
were conceptions not more arbitrary and unscientific than that eternal
and unimaginable worship in vacuo which more accredited teachers have
proclaimed. And, passing on to modern philosophic conceptions, one
may say that where tlie savage assumed too little difference between the
material and the spiritual world the philosopher has assumed too much.
He has regarded the gulf as too unbridgeable ; he has taken for granted
too clean a sweep of earthly modes of thought. 'Frying to shake off time,
space, and definite form, he has attempted to transport himself too magic-
ally to what may be in reality an immensely distant goal.

968. Have we new philosophical conceptions solid enough to with-
stand the impact of even a small mass of actual evidence ? Have our notions
of the dignified and undignified in nature — the steady, circular motion of
the planets, for instance, as opposed to the irregular and elliptical — gui<ied
us in the discovery of truth ? Would not Aristotle, divinising the fixed
stars by reason of their very remoteness, have thought it undignified to
suppose them compacted of the same elements as the stones under his
feet ? May not disembodied souls, like stars, be of a make rather closer
to our own than we have been wont to imagine?

What, then, is to be our conception of identity prolonged beyond the
tomb? In earth-life the actual body, in itself but a subordinate element
in our thought of our friend, did yet by its physical continuity override as
a symbol of identity all lapses of memory, all changes of the character
within. Yet it was memory and character, — the stored impressions upon
which he reacted, and his specific mode of reaction, — which made our
veritable friend. How much of memory, how much of character, must he
preserve for our recognition?

Do we ask that either he or we should remember always, or should
remember all? Do we ask that his memory should be expanded into
omniscience and his character elevated into divinity? And, whatever
heights he may attain, do we demand that he should reveal to us? Are
the limitations of our material world no barrier to him?

969. It is safest to fall back for the present upon the few points which
these communications do seem to indicate. The spirit, then, is holding
converse with a living man, located in a certain place at a certain moment,
and animated by certain thoughts and emotions. The spirit (to which I
must give a neuter pronoun for greater clearness) in some cases can find
and follow the man as it pleases. It is therefore in some way cognizant
of space, although not conditioned by space. Its mastery of space may
perhaps bear somewhat the same relation to our eyesight as our eyesight
bear^to the gropings of the blind. Similarly, the spirit appears to be
partly cognizant of our time, although not wholly conditioned thereby.
It is apt to see as present both certain things which appear to us as past
and certain things which appear to us as future.

970J TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 253

Once more, the spirit is at least partly conscious of the thought and
emotions of its earthly friend, so far as directed towards itself ; and this
not only when the friend is in the presence of the sensitive, but also (as
G. has repeatedly shown) when the friend is at home and living his
ordinary life.

Lastly, it seems as though the spirit had some occasional glimpses of
material fact upon the earth (as the contents of drawers and the like), not
manifestly proceeding through any living mind. I do not, however, recall
any clear evidence of a spirit's perception of material facts which provably
have never been known to any incarnate mind whatever.

970. Accepting this, then, for argument's sake, as the normal con-
dition of a spirit in reference to human things, what process must it
attempt if it wishes to communicate with living men? That it will wish
to communicate seems probable enough, if it retains not only memory of
the loves of earth, but actual fresh consciousness of loving emotion
directed towards it after death.

Seeking then for some open avenue, it discerns something which cor-
responds (in G. P.’s phrase) to a light— 2. glimmer of translucency in the
confused darkness of our material world. This “ light ” indicates a sen-
siiii'e—2. human organism so constituted that a spirit can temporarily
inform or control it, not necessarily interrupting the stream of the sen-
sitive’s ordinary consciousness ; perhaps using a hand only, or perhaps,
as in Mrs. Piper’s case, using voice as well as hand, and occupying
all the sensitive’s channels of self-manifestation. The difficulties which
must be inherent in such an act of control are thus described by Dr.
Hodgson : —

If, indeed, each one of us is a ‘ spirit ’ that survives the death of the
fleshly organism, there are certain suppositions that I think we may not
unreasonably make concerning the ability of the discarnate * spirit ’ to
communicate with those yet incarnate. Even under the best of conditions
for communication — which I am supposing for the nonce to be possible
— it may well be that the aptitude for communicating clearly may be as
rare as the gifts that make a great artist, or a great mathematician, or a great
philosopher. Again, it may well be that, owing to the change connected
with death itself, the * s])irit * may at first be much confused, and such
confusion may last for a long time ; and even after the ‘ spirit ’ has
become accustomed to its new environment, it is not an unreasonable
supposition that if it came into some such relation to another living
human organism as it once maintained with its own former organism, it
would find itself confused by that relation. The state might be like that
of awakening from a prolonged period of unconciousness into strange
surroundings. If my own ordinary body could be preserv^ed in its pfesent
State, and I could absent myself from it for days or months or years, and
continue my existence under another set of conditions altogether, and if I
could then return to my own body, it might well be that I should be very

254 CHAPTER IX [971

confused and incoherent at first in my manifestations by means of it.
How much more would this be the case were I to return to another
human body. I might be troubled with^ various forms of aphasia and
agraphia, might be particularly liable to failures of inhibition, might find
the conditions oppressive and exhausting, and my state of mind would
probably be of an automatic and dreamlike character. Now, the com-
municators through Mrs. Piper’s trance exhibit precisely the kind of
confusion and incoherence which it seems to me we have some reason
a priori to expect if they are actually what they claim to be.'*

971. At the outset of this chapter I compared the phenomena of
possession with those of alternating personalities, of dreams, and of
somnambulism. ^ Now it seems probable that the thesis of multiplex
personality — namely, that no known current of man’s consciousness
exhausts his whole consciousness, and no known self-manifestation
expresses man’s whole potential being— may hold good both for embodied
and for unembodied men, and this would lead us to expect that the
manifestations of the departed, — through the sensory automatisms dealt
with in Chapter VII., and the motor automatisms considered in Chapter
VIII., up to the completer* form of possession illustrated in the present
chapter, — would resemble those fugitive and unstable communications
between widely different strata of personality of which embodied minds
offer us examples. G, P. himself appears to be well aware of the dream-
like character of the communications, which, indeed, his own style often
exemplifies. Thus he wrote on February 15th, 1S94 : —

Remember we share and always shall have our friends in the dream-
life, ue. your life so to speak, which will attract us for ever and ever, and
so long as we have any friends sleeping in the material world ; you to us
are more like as we understand sleep, you look shut up as one in prison,
and in order for us to get into communication with you, we have to enter
into your sphere, as one like yourself, asleep. This is just why we make
mistakes, as you call them, or get confused and muddled.”

972. Yet even this very difficulty and fragmentariness of communica-
tion ought in the end to be for us full of an instruction of its own. We
are here actually witnessing the central mystery of human life, unrolling
itself under novel conditions, and open to closer observation than ever
before. We are seeing a mind use a brain. The human brain is in its
last analysis an arrangement of matter expressly adapted to being acted
upon by a spirit ; but so long as the accustomed spirit acts upon it the
working is generally too smooth to allow us a glimpse of the mechanism.
Now^ however, we can watch an unaccustomed spirit, new to the
instrument, installing itself and feeling its way. The lessons thus learnt
are likely to be more penetrating than any which mere morbid interrup-
tions of the accustomed spirit’s work can teach us. In uphasia, for
instance, we can watch with instruction special difficulties of utterance,
supervening on special injuries to the brain. But in possession we perceive

973] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 255

the controlling spirit actually engaged in overcoming somewhat similar
difficulties— writing or uttering the wrong word, and then getting hold of
the right one — and sometimes^ even finding power to explain to us some-
thing of the minute verbal mechanism (so to term it) through whose
blocking or dislocation the mistake has arisen.

We may hope^ indeed, that as our investigations proceed, and as we
on this side of the fateful gulf, and the discamatc spirits on the other,
learn more of the conditions necessary for perfect control of the brain
and nervous system of intermediaries, — the communications will grow
fuller and more coherent, and reach a higher level of unitary consciousness.
Many the difficulties may be, but is there to be no difficulty in linking
flesh with spirit — in opening to man, from his prisoning planet, a first
glimpse into cosmic things? If in such speech as this there be any
reality, it is not stumblings or stammerings that should stop us. Nay,
already on certain occasions there has been no stumble or stammer —
when some experienced communicator has poured out an intimate message
under strong emotion. Such, for instance, was a private message written
by G. P. to *^Mr. Howard,** who is, by the way, a well-known and able
man of professorial status, and who was a definite disbeliever in a future
life until G. P. convinced him. The holding turn ** to that conviction
was given by the message which Dr. Hodgson thus describes. It was
written in response to a request for some incident, which certainly no one
save G. P. and Mr. Howard, his most intimate elder friend and adviser,
could possibly have known.

I'he transcription here of the w'ords written by G. P. conveys, of
course, no proper impression of the actual circumstances. The inert mass
of the upper part of Mrs. Piper’s body turned away from the right arm,
and sagging down, as it were, limp and lifeless over Mrs. Howard’s
shoulder, but the right arm, and especially hand, mobile, intelligent,
deprecatory, then impatient and fierce in the persistence of the writing
which followed, which contains too much of the personal element in
0. P.*s life to be reproduced here. Several statements were read by me,
ami assented to by Mr. Howard, and then was written * private,’ and the
hand gently pushed me away. I retired to the other side of the room,
and Mr. Howard took my place close to the hand where he could read the
writing. He did not, of course, read it aloud, and it was too private for
uiy perusal. The hand, as it reached the end of each sheet, tore it off
horn the block-book, and thrust it wildly at Mr. Howard, and then
continued writing. The circumstances narrated, Mr. Howard informed

contained precisely the kind of test for which he had asked, and he,
said that he was ‘ perfectly satisfied — perfectly.’ ” {^Proceedings S.P.R.,

VOI. Xiii., p. 322.) ^

W3. Ill this way we may explain certain facts as to the mode of
communication which are likely to be at first misinterpreted, and to create

impression of pain or strangeness where, in my view, there is nothing

256 CHAPTER IX [974

beyond wholesome effort in the normal course of evolution among both
incarnate and discarnate men. One touch of pathos, indeed — though not
of tragedy — stands out to my recollection from the trances which I have
watched — ^a kind of savage and immemorial emotion which takes one
back to many an old-world legend, and to the Odyssey of Homer above all,
Odysseus, at the entrance of the under-world, poured the blood of
victims into a trench, that the dim spirits of the dead might drink of it
and have force to speak and hear. But it was to learn from Teiresias tliat
he came, and until he had spoken with Teiresias he suffered none of tlie
thronging spirits to draw anigh. There sat he— as Polygnotus* picture
showed him— on a heap of stones in the grey light beside the trench, his
drawn sword laid betwixt him and his mother’s soul ; since, “ not even
thus, tho* sick at heart, would I suffer her to come nigh tlie blood, ere I
had heard the tale Teiresias had to tell.*’

aXX* ovd' €10)1^ irpoT€prfv. irvicivov irep ax€v<^v^
mparos iaaov iptv frpiy Tripccrmo irvBitrBai.

Even in such fashion, through Mrs. Piper’s trances, the thronging
multitude of the departed press to the glimpse of light. Eager, bin
untrained, they interject their uncomprehended cries ; vainly they call the
names which no man answers ; like birds that have beaten against a
lighthouse, they pass in disappointment away. At first this confusion
gravely interfered with coherent messages, but through the second anfl
third stages of Mrs. Piper’s trances, under the watchful care apparently of
supervising spirits, it has tended more and more to disappear.

All this must needs be so ; yet I, at least, had not realised beforehand
that the pressure from that side was likely to be more urgent than from
this. Naturally ; since often on this side something of inevitable doubt
— nay, of shuddering prejudice and causeless fear — curdles the stream of
love; while for them the imperishable afleciion flows on unchecked and
full. They yearn to tell of their bliss, to promise their welcome at the
destined hour. A needless scruple, indeed, which dreads to call or to
constrain them 1 We can bind them by no bonds but of love ; they arc
more ready to hear than we to pray ; of their own act and grace they
visit our spirits in prison.

974. We must now remember that this series of inchlents does not
stand alone. This case of Mrs. Piper is, indeed, one of the most in-
structive in our collection, on account of its length and complexity and
the care with which it has been observed. But it is led up to by all our
previous evidences, and I will here briefly state what facts they are which
our recorded apparitions, intimations, messages of the departing and the
departed, have, to my mind, actually proved.

{a) In the first place, they prove survival pure and simply ; the per-
sistence of the spirit’s life as a structural law of the universe; the in-
alienable heritage of each several soul.

975] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 257

(i) In the second place, they prove that between the spiritual and the
material worlds an avenue of communication does in fact exist; that
which we call the despatch and the receipt of telepathic messages, or
the utterance an I the answer of prayer and supplication. (See p. 309.)

(c) In the tnird place, they prove that the surviving spirit retains, at
least in some measure, the memories and the loves of earth. Without
this persistence of love and memory should we be in truth the same ?
To what extent has any philosophy or any revelation assured us hereof
till now?

'Fhe above points, I think, are certain, if the apparitions and messages
proceed in reality from the sources which they claim. On a lower evi-
dential level comes the thesis drawn from the contents of the longer
messages, which contents may of course be influenced in unknown degree
by the expectation of the recipients or by some such infusion of dream-
like matter as I have already mentioned. That thesis is as follows ; 1
offer it for what it may be worth : Every element of individual wisdom,
virtue, love, develops in infinite evolution toward an ever-highering hope ;
toward “ Him who is at once thine innermost Self, and thine ever un-
attainable Desire.”

For my own part, the alleged revelation in its general character, so far
as yet coherent, seems to me so good and right that I mistrust it on that
very ground, fearing lest it be but the reflection of the momentary attitude
of the petty minds of men. Many of the messages, no doubt, have been
delivered to persons whose own preconceptions were at least partly hostile
to the teaching given. But this proves little ; for there may be a kind of
sub-conscious consensus of opinion — a Zeit-Geist — in all contemporary
minds beneath their superficial differences of Church or philosophical
school. We need more tests and more corroborations, a clearer and more
continuous control of the channels of utterance, before we can transmit
with confidence anything beyond the barest provisional sketch of that
Orbis Ignotus. Enough, surely, and more than man had dared to hope,
if now a channel of communication is veritably opened, and if the first
message is one of love. .*\nd I believe that whatever of new revelation
may thus be coming to us comes not to destroy but to fulfil. Is there not
promise of some fulfilment — of some synthesis of those partial glimpses of
the past — even in the few bald phrases in which I have adumbrated what
we are beginning to know? If we define Religion as man’s normal
subjective response to the sum of known cosmic phenomena, taken as an
intelligible whole,” how different will that response become when we know
for certain that no love can die ; when we discern the bewildering Sum oi*
Things — beyond all bounds of sect or system, strcpitinnque Acherontis
avan — broadening and heightening into a moral Cosmos such our
race could scarcely even conceive till now !

There is, however, one feeling which has done much to deter
inquiry in these directions. To many minds there seems to be a want of

CHAPTER IX

258

[975

dignity in this mode of acquiring knowledge of an unseen world. It is felt
that even as there is something grand and noble in the object, there ought
to be something correspondingly exalted in the means employed. This has,
it is thought, been the case with all former revelations which have made any
serious claim on the attention of mankind. Religions have been supported
by tradition, by miracle, by the deep personal emotion which they have
been able to generate. There is something paltry or even repugnant
in the notion of establishing a new faith upon a series of experiments
dealing mainly with certain kinds of physical sensibility which seem at
best to be scattered at random among mankind.

There is real prima Jade force in such an objection. It is not fanciful
to demand something of manifest congruity between means and end;
not fanciful, at any rate, to distrust any powers merely of the flesh as
explaining to us the powers of the spirit.

And yet, on a wider view, we shall perceive that what is missing in
this new inquiry lies merely in such elements of impressiveness as befit
the mere childhood of the world ; while, on the other hand, we are gaining
for the quest of spiritual truth that truer dignity which Science has given
to man’s scattered knowledge the dignity of universal cogency and of
unarrested progressiveness. Science, as we know, will not rest with com-
placency in presence of the exceptional, the catastrophic, the miraculous.
Such qualities constitute for her not a claim to reverence but a challenge
to explanation. She finds a truer grandeur in the colligation of startling
phenomena under some comprehensive generalisation. Her highest ideal
is cosmic law; — and she begins to suspect that any law which is truly
cosmic is also in some sense evolutionary.

Now I repeat, — and in the present stage of human thought it can
scarcely be repeated too often, — that in the law of telepathy, developing
into the law of spiritual intercommunication between incarnate and dis-
camate spirits, we see dimly adumbrated before our eyes the highest Jaw
with which our human science can conceivably have to deal. The
discovery of telepathy opens before us a potential communication between
all life.

And if, as our present evidence indicates, this telepathic intercourse
can subsist between embodied and disembodied souls, that law must
needs lie at the very centre of cosmic evolution. It will be evolutionary,
as depending on a faculty now in actual course of development. It will
be cosmic ; for it may — it almost must — by analogy subsist not on this
planet only, but wherever in the universe discarnate and incarnate spirits
may be intermingled or juxtaposed.

This surely is a generalisation as vast, as impressive, as the human
mindfrcan entertain. Tradition, miracle, personal emotion; — which of
these ancient buttresses is any longer needed for the firmer, the scientific
faith ? And yet, if it be a question of tradition^ what single religion can
unite and harmonise oecumenical tradition like this old-new creed? The

976] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 259

legendary lore of all countries, — the sacred books of all religions, — the
Bible itself included, — are full of psychical phenomena which thus only
are made coherent and intelligible. If there be question of miracle^ what
sacred history can show such strange apparent contraventions of the
physical order, — such victories over the grossness of matter, — as our ob-
servations involve? — or (better still) can reduce all these so convincingly
under the realm of Higher Law? While as for personal emotion what
can there be at once more intimate and more exalting than the waking
reality of converse with beloved and enfranchised souls? So shall a
man feel the ancient fellow-labour deepened, the old kinship closer
still ; the earthly passion sealed and hallowed by the irreversible judg-
ment of the Blest.

976. Among the cases of trance discussed in this chapter, we have
found intimately interwoven with the phenomena of possession many
instances of its correlative, — ecstasy. Mrs. Piper’s fragmentary utterances
and visions during her passage from trance to waking life, — utterances
and visions that fade away and leave no remembrance in her waking self ;
Moses’ occasional visions, his journeys in the “ spirit world ” which he
recorded on returning to his ordinary consciousness ; Home’s entrance-
ment aivl converse with the various controls whose messages he gave ; —
all these suggest actual excursions of the incarnate spirit from its organism.
The theoretical importance of these spiritual excursions is, of course, very
great. It is, indeed, so great that most men will hesitate to accept a
thesis which carries us straight into the inmost sanctuary of mysticism;
which preaches a precursory entrance into the most holy place, as by
divine transportation,”

Yet I think that this belief, although extreme, is not, at the point to
which our evidence has carried us, in any real way improbable. To put
the matter briefly, if a spirit from outside can enter the organism, the
spirit from inside can go out, can change its centre of perception and
action, in a way less complete and irrevocable than the change of death.
Ecstasy would thus be simply the complementary or correlative aspect of
spirit-control. Such a change need not be a spatial change, any more
than there need be any spatial change for the spirit which invades the
deserted organism. Nay, further: if the incarnate spirit can in this
manner change its centre of perception in response (so to say) to a
discarnate spirit’s invasion of the organism, there is no obvious reason
^hy it should not do so on other occasions as well. We are already
amiliar with ‘‘ travelling clairvoyance,” a spirit’s change of centre of
perception among the scenes of the material world. May there not be

extension of travelling clairvoyance to the spiritual world? a sf>on-
aneous transfer of the centre of perception into that region from
^ ^*?^e discarnate spirits seem now to be able, on their side, to cora-
’^'micate with growing freedom?

260 CHAPTER IX [977

The conception of ecstasy^zi once in its most litferal and in its most
lofty sense — has thus developed itself, almost insensibly, from several
concurrent lines of actual modern evidence. It must still, of course, be
long before we can at all adequately separate, — I can hardly say the
objective from the subjective element in the experience, for we have got
beyond the region where the meaning of those words is clear, — but the
element in the experience which is recognised and responded to by spirits
other than the ecstatic’s, from the element which belongs to his own
spirit alone.

In the meantime, however, the fact that this kind of communion of
ecstasy has been, in preliminary fashion, rendered probable is of the
highest importance for our wdiole inquiry. We thus come directly into
relation with the highest form which the various religions known to men
have assumed in the past.

977. It is hardly a paradox to say that the evidence for ecstasy is
stronger than the evidence for any other religious belief. Of all the
subjective experiences of religion, ecstasy is that which has been most
urgently, perhaps to the psychologist most convincingly, asserted ; and it
is not confined to any one religion. From a psychological point of view,
one main indication of the importance of a subjective phenomenon foiiinl
in religious experience will be the fact that it is common to all religions.
I doubt wdiether there is any phenomenon, except ecstasy, of which
this can be said. From the medicine-man of the lowest savages up to
St. John, St. Peter, St. Paul, with Buddha and Mahomet on the way,
we find records which, though morally and intellectually much differing,
are in psychological essence the same.

At all stages alike we find that the spirit is conceived as quitting the
body ; or, if not quitting it, at least as greatly expanding its range of per-
ception in some state resembling trance. Observe, moreover, that on this
view all genuine recorded forms of ecstasy are akin, and all of them
represent a real fact.

We thus show continuity and reality among phenomena which have
seldom been either correlated with each other or even intelligibly conceived
in separation. With our new insight we may correlate the highest and the
lowest ecstatic phenomena with no injury whatever to the highest. I'he
shaman, the medicine-man — when he is not a mere impostor — enters as
truly into the spiritual world as St. Peter or St. Paul. Only he enters a
different region thereof ; a confused and darkened picture terrifies instead
of exalting him. For us, however, the very fact that we believe in
vision gives a new reality to strengthen and aid our belief in the apostle s
vision of the seventh heaven.”

“ Whether in the body or out of the body,” whether the seer’s spirit
be severed for the time from his organism or no, such inlet and intro-
gression does occur.

It is these subjective, feelings of vision or inspiration which have to

977] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 261

many men formed* the most impressive and fruitful moments of life.
While not allowing an objective truth to their revelations, we shall now
be prepared to admit a reality in the subjective experience. There is
no special point at which we must assume a barrier interposed to the
inward withdrawal and onward urgency of man.

We need not deny the transcendental ecstasy to any of the strong
souls who have claimed to feel it ; — to Elijah or to Isaiah, to Plato or to
Plotinus, to St. John or to St. Paul, to Buddha or Mahomet, to Virgil or
Dante, to St. Theresa or to Joan of Arc, to Kant or to Swedenborg, to
Wordsworth or to Tennyson. Through many ages that insight and that
memory have wrought their work in many ways. The remembrance of
ecstasy has inspired religions, has founded philosophies, has lifted into
stainless heroism a simple girl. Yet religions and philosophies — as these
have hitherto been known — are but balloon-flights which have carried
separate groups up to the mountain summit, whither science at last must
make her road for all men clear. It is by breach of continuity ^ by passing
from one element to another, that they have been able to soar so high.
For science, on the other hand, the continuity of the Universe is in fact
its key. The task of our race in its maturity must be to rise to those
same heights with that steady tramp as of legions along a Roman road
which has already gathered in the earthly knowledge of earlier ages
within the pomcerium of scientific law. The continuity of the universe,
that is to say, so far as by us comprehensible, must needs be a con-
tinuity of objective^ and for that very reason of symbolic manifestation.
All the objective is symbolic ; our daily bread is as symbolic as the
furniture of Swedenborg’s heavens and hells. To our embodied souls
the matter round us seems real and self-existent ; to souls emancipated
it is but the sign of the degree which we have reached, and thus the
highest task of science must be to link and co-ordinate the symbols
appropriate to our terrene state with the symbols appropriate to the
state immediately above us. Nay, one might push this tnith to paradox,
and maintain that of all earth’s inspired spirits it has been the least
divinised, the least lovable, who has opened the surest path for men.
Religions have risen and die again ; philosophy, poetry, heroism, answer
only indirectly the prime need of men. Plotinus, “ the eagle soaring
above the tomb of Plato,” is lost to sight in the heavens. Conquering and
to conquer, the Maid rides on through other worlds than ours. Virgil
himself, “ light among the vanished ages, star that gildest yet this earthly
shore,” sustains our spirit, as I have said, but indirectly, by filling still
nur fountain of purest intellectual joy. But the prosaic Swede, — his
stiff mind prickly with dogma, — the opaque cell-walls of his intelligence
flooded cloudily by the irradiant day,— this man as by the very limitations
of his faculty, by the practical humility of a spirit trained to acquire but
not to generate truth,— has awkwardly laid the corner-stone, grotesquely
sketched the elevation of a temple which our remotest posterity will be

262

CHAPTER IX^

[978

apbuilding and adorning still. For he dimly felt that man’s true passage
and intuition from state to state depends not upon individual ecstasy,
but upon comprehensive law; while yet all law is in fact but symbol;
adaptation of truth timeless and infinite to intelligences of lower or higher
range.

978. In the course of this book I have several times touched on
the difficult questions raised by the incidents which have been classed
as retrocognitive and precognitive,^ and which seem to suggest a power
yet more remote than telepathy or telesesthesia from our ordinary
methods of acquiring knowledge. The consideration of the problems
involved was, however, postponed to this chapter, and must now be
dealt with here.

In a universe where instantaneous gravitation operates unexplained—
where a world of ether coexists with a world of matter — men’s minds must
needs have a certain openness to other mysterious transmissions ; must
be ready to conceive other invisible evironments or co-existences, and in
a sense to sit loose to the conception of Space, regarded as an obstacle to
communication or cognition. A similar emancipation from the limita-
tions of Time is more difficult. We can, of course, imagine increased
powers of remembering the Past, of inferring the future. But we can
hardly conceive the Past revived, save in some mind which has directly
observed it. And to imagine the Future as known, except by inference
and contingently, to any mind whatever is to induce at once that iron
collision between Free Will and Fixed Fate, Foreknowledge absolute,”
from which no sparks of light have ever yet been struck. Still more un-
welcome is the further view that the so-called Future actually already
exists ; and that apparent time-progression is a subjective human sensa-
tion, and not inherent in the universe as that exists in an Infinite Mind.

Nor shall we in fact find it necessary to insist upon any very revolu-
tionary line of explanation. There is one analogy which will meet

^ A more complete discussion of these phenomena, with numerous cases illustrating
apparent stages in their evolution, and a description of the faculties they seem to
indicate, summarised in a diagrammatic scheme, are given in my article on *' Rctro-
cognition and Precognition " in the Proceedings S.P.U., vol. xi. pp, 334 - 593 *

For references to retrocognitive cases, see sections 672,. M 8 , 738, 859-863, 963,
also 572 A, 572 B. See also the accounts of retrocognitive scenes quoted in the
record of Miss A.*s crystal visions in 625 C. For cases bearing on precognition see the
case of Anna Winsor (237 A), where there were predictions concerning the course of
her disease; refer to 541 F and 564 A, where the clilhculty of excluding the agency
of self-suggestion is considered ; compare also the cases given in 541 H and 673 F—
where prognoses concerning other persons were made correctly by hypnotised
— ^and tihe prediction of his aunt's death given in Mr. W.'s automatic writing, in 8v3.
See section 425 and the Appendices to that section, also 663 A, the cases in section
717 and 717 B, cases 6 , 7 , ii, and 12 in the experiences of Lady Mabel Ifowan ,
351 A ; also 852 A, 874 A, 927 B, and section 963 with its Appendices. There may
have been something of prevision also in Professor Thoulet's case, in 930.

979] TRANCE, * POSSESSION, ECSTASY 263

most of our evidente (though not all), and to which we must repeatedly
recur as our simplest guide. As is the memory and the foresight of a
child to that of a man, even such, I suggest, is the memory and the
foresight of the man’s supraliminal self as compared to the retro-
cognition and the precognition exercised by an intelligence unrestrained
by sensory limits; — whether that intelligence belong to the man’s own
subliminal self, or to an unembodied human spirit, or possibly to spirits
higher than human. I maintain that in this thesis there is nothing in-
credible ; — nay, that it is the necessary corollary of belief in the existence
anywhere of any extension of the powers which we habitually exercise.

If there is a transcendental world at all, there is a transcendental view
of Past and Future fuller and further-reaching than the empirical ; and in
that view we may ourselves to some extent participate, either directly, as
being ourselves denizens all along of the transcendental world, or indirectly,
as receiving intimations from spirits from whom the shadow in which our
own spirits are “ half lost ” has melted away.

This I believe to be the central reflection to which the study of super-
normal knowledge of Past and Future at present points us ; and I shall
.be well satisfied if the evidence should persuade the reader that in some
undefined fashion we share at moments in this transcendental purview.
As to the precise manner in which we share it, the difficulties arc just
those which meet us ivhen, in any other group of our phenomena, we try
to distinguish between the activity of the automatist’s own spirit, ami of
other spirits, embodied or unembodied, and perhaps also of a World-Soul
or of Intelligences finite, but above anthropomorphic personification.

979. The general characteristic of these occurrences is to show us
fragments of knowledge coming to us in obscure and often symbolical
ways, and extending over a wdder tract of time than any faculty known to
us can be stretched to cover. On the one side there is retroco^nition^ or
knowledge of the past, extending back beyond the reach of our ordinary
memory; on the other side there is precognitiotiy or knowledge of the
future, extending onwards beyond the scope of our ordinary' inference.

In each direction, indeed, there are certain landmarks ; the regression
and the progression alike seem to develop gradually, and to follow lines
which we can learn to recognise. In the direction of the Past w^e begin
with hypermnesia ; — our first step lies in the conception that what has once
been presented to our sensory field, although never gathered into what we
deem our conscious perception, may nevertheless have been perceived
and retained by the subliminal self. It is partly through dream and partly
by automatic artifices that this fact is realised ; and those same dreams,
those same artifices of script or vision, presently carry us a step further,
and reveal a knowledge which must have come from the memories of
other living persons, or (as I hold) of departed spirits. Then in another
direction a less direct source of knowledge opens out ; living organisms,
our own or others*, disclose (in ways unknown to biology) the history

264

CHAPTER IX

implicate in their structure ; objects which have been in contact with
organisms preserve their trace ; and it sometimes seems as though even
inorganic nature could still be made, so to say, luminescent with the age-
long story of its past. Or it may even be that some retrocognitive picture
is presented which we may discover to be veracious, but with which we
can discern no spiritual or material link ; as though a page of the cosmic
record had been opened to us at random, and had closed again without
sign or clue.

980. And next let us look forward into the Future ; — across that im-
palpable, almost imaginary line of the Present Moment, which for us is
the greatest reality of all. Naturally enough, the first time-confusion
which we find is a confusion affecting that present moment itself; namely,
that sensation of already remembering what is happening or is just about
to happen to which some authors have applied the too wide term
paramnesia^ but for which promnesia seems a more exact and distinctive
name.i Next we have the wide range of sug^^estive phenomena, where the
subliminal self possesses knowledge of the future unshared by the supra-
liminal ; since the subliminal self has in fact wound up the organism to
strike a given note at a given hour. Self-suggestion in turn merges into
organic prevision; where the subliminal self foresees what will happen —
not in consequence of any determining effort of its own, but by virtue of
its deeper knowledge of the organism and of the changes which that
organism must by physiological laws undergo. I'his organic prevision may
lead us far ; but as it grows more distant and complex, involving more anti
more of a man’s future etnnronmeni^ as well as of his future organic history^
it merges into a form of precognition which cannot depend on insight
into material bodies alone.

We now proceed, that is to say, along a line which is an extension of
ordinary intellectual inference. First comes hyperaesthetic inference ; —
that enlarged span of anticipation which acuter sensory impressions
permit ; as a sensitive patient will be able to predict her doctor’s visit
when his step is merely heard in the street, although others cannot
recognise that step until it is close to the bedroom door. Then comes an
obscure point where this hyperaesthesia seems to pass into tetesthesia
where sensory perception seems to cease, and supersensory, telepathic, or
clairvoyant perception to begin.

Well then, when we have definitely passed from the sensory to the
transcendental mode of perception, it is probable that our power of infer-
ence as to the future will be greatly enlarged. We cannot, indeed, guess
how far this enlargement will extend. 'Ihere is nothing absolutely to
forbid us to regard all precognitions as the result of this wider outlook of
the subliminal self. (See 980 A.)

^ For a discussion of this subject with illustrative cases, see pp. 34*“347
article on “ The Subliminal Self : Retrocognition and Precognition/’ in Proceedings
S.P.R,, vol. xi.

9S2] trance, possession, ECSTASY 265

981. Nor shalUI attempt to draw the line at which this telaesthetic in-
ference ceases. If 1 do still look further for other sources of precognition,
this is partly because in some cases I think that there is actual evidence
that the precognition comes from a disembodied intelligence ; and partly
also on the wider ground that 1 distrust all explanations which give to
man, embodied or disembodied, any monopoly of the transcendental
world. The simplicity of our instinctive anthropomorphism is not the
simplicity of truth ; — it is no more so, when we are thus dealing with
intelligences which may be far above our ken, than when the savage
ascribes to a man-like demon the movements and influences of gross
inanimate things.

But first, as I have said, I ascribe some precognitions to the reasoned
foresight of disembodied spirits, just as I ascribe some retrocognitions to
their surviving memory. I have tried to show ground for believing that
some spirits have a continued knowledge of some earthly affairs ; and if
they have such knowledge, and can show us that they have it, they may
presumably reveal to us also their not infallible inferences from what they
know.

Thus far I have been indicating roads along which I fancy that believers
in any kind of transcendental faculty will some day be forced to travel.
What follows is a speculation, or suspicion, which no record or experi-
ments of ours can prove, but which seems to me to loom behind them
all. I suspect, then, that it is not by wider purview, wiser inference
alone, that finite minds, in the body or out of it, have attained to
knowledge of what yet must be. I imagine that tlie Continuity of the
Universe is complete j and tliat therefore the hierarchy of intelligences
between our minds and the World-Soul is infinite ; and that somewhere
in that ascent a point is reached where our conception of time loses
its accustomed meaning. To Plato's “ Spectator of all Time and of all
Existence” there may be no barrier between Then and Now. The
idea, of course, is familiar enough to philosophical speculation. The
novelty is that this, with many other ideas which have hitherto floated
gascously inter apices philosophiccy like helium in the atmosphere of the
sun, may now conceivably be tested in earthly laboratories and used
as a working explanation for undeniable facts.

982. Returning now to the question of retrocognition, let us consider
to what extent our knowledge of the Past will sometimes open itself
beyond the familiar bounds. We may begin by inquiring in what ways we
ordinarily and normally acquire our knowledge of the Past. We acquire
such knowledge partly from direct personal memory, and partly from
retrospective inference based on what we see or hear. We might, indeed,
define memory as an acquisition of fresh potential changes of con.s#ious-
liess concomitant with changes in our organism, which imply certain past
events as their cause. But this definition, which sounds natural enough
^ben applied to diffused or organic memories, such as the cricketer’s

266

CHAPTER IX

memory of the feel of the bat, would seem pedantic if applied to the
minute cerebral changes wbiph accompany the learning of a new fact. In
such a case we ignore ia 'c^mon speech the real organic change which
the learning of any fact implies in us, and we merely refer to the specialised
sensory channel through which the information comes to us — as hearing,
reading, and so forth. In a vague but quite intelligible way, we thus mark
off organic memory from definite sensory or intellectual memories.

In our inquiry into retrocognition it will be well to keep roughly to
some division of this sort, and to begin by inquiring into the extensions
which seem to be given to organic memory.

We know, of course, that there is a great difference between our evocabU
memory — that which we can summon up and use at will — and that much
ampler memory which we must suppose to exist, in some potential form
at least, imprinted upon our organism. The faint and crude recollections
of sensations and movements, which are all that we can call into ordinary
consciousness, would be far from enabling us to recognise sensations, or
to repeat movements, as we actually do recognise and repeat them. The
study of hypnotic suggestion, moreover, has shown us how these potential
or latent memories may be grasped and used. The increased power over
the organism which the subject under suggestion shows necessarily implies
an increased memory of the organism’s past ; the hyperboulia, as I have
termed it, is hypermnesia as well. That wider will-power, indeed, is
probably no more aware of the exact mechanism which it employs in its
control of secretions, &c., than I am of the exact mechanism by wliich 1
raise my hand to my head. And, similarly, the hypnotic memory is
probably itself very shallow as compared to what a complete summation of
all the lapsed memories of the organism might be. 13iit already we find
it descending deeply to gland and blood-vessel, implicated as these are in
stigmatisation and similar phenomena, and we can draw no clear line
below which all organic consciousness must cease, and memory must
become no more than a metaphor.

We cannot draw such a line, I say, either on the basis of smallness of
magnitude or of remoteness in lime. We cannot assert that organic
memory may not inhere in a single cell or neuron, or even in a single
living molecule. Neither can we assert that organic memory cannot be
prolonged backwards before birth. Birth, indeed, is but an incident in
each organism’s history ; that organism has an embryonic life before birth,
— and a pre-erabryonic life in countless lines of ancestry. Although we
no longer say with the “ traducianist ” schoolmen that Adam’s body
included not only his own soul but the souls of all his descendants, we
still trace to ancestors more remote than Adam characteristics which even
now influence our psychical life.

It is a moot point how far the life-experiences of each organism modify
hy what wt regard as purely physiological transmission the characteristics
of its descendants. The rude suggestion (so to term it) of the amputated

982 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 267

limb, or other injury, is commonly not accepted by the offspring ; the
embryo develops unaffected by the shock which the parent has undergone
previously to the act of union. But if that %hock fall upon the mother
during the embryo's life, and if it chance — (in post-natal suggestions also
there seems much of what we must needs call chance in this) — if it chance
to reach the mother’s subliminal self in effective fashion, it may then
transfer itself to the embryo, and imprint upon the child the organic
memory of the mother’s emotion of admiration, disgust, or fear. No one
doubts this form of heredity when it is exhibited on a striking scale, — as
with children born during the alarms of a siege, or of the Reign of Terror
in France. And I believe that there is evidence enough to show that
isolated and momentary suggestions — as the sight of a crushed ankle or
missing finger — may produce a definite localised effect on the embryo in
much the same way as a hypnotic suggestion mny produce a localised
congestion or secretion.'

If, then, we thus find imprinted on the child’s organism such a con-
spicuous, specialised memory of perhaps an almost instantaneous emotion
of the mother’s, we must surely suspect that his organism may contain
also some inborn memories less conspicuous and more purely cerebral
than such a gross phenomenon as a mark on the face or a deformed finger.
And by this new route we shall come round again to something like the
innak ideas of certain philosophical systems. Nor can we absolutely
limit such influence to the actual parent organism alone. For aught we
know, the ‘^germ-plasm” — whatsoever may be the continuous link of all
generations — may be capable of reacting to psychical suggestions as sensi-
tively as the embryo. The* shaping forces which have made our bodies
and our minds what they are may always have been partly psychical forces,
—from the first living slime-speck to the complex intelligences of to-day.

This view is not inconsistent with the suggestion which I have made
elsewhere, that the human spirit’s supernormal powers of telepathy and
telaesthcsia are survivals from the powers which that spirit once exercised
in a transcendental world. It may well be that the spirit, already modified
by cosmic experiences dating back to infinity, may inform the body already
modified by terrene experiences dating back to the first appearance of life
on our planet. Both the old traducianist and the old transmigrationist
view would thus possess a share of truth ; and the actual man would be
the resultant not only of intermingling heredities on father’s and mother’s
side, but of intermingling heredities, one of planetary and one of cosmic
scope.

Passing on from hereditary or pre-natal memories, through the various
other types, — e.^. the organic memory of impressions received by each man
during his own past life ; the occasional sudden revival of a series o^ life-
*nemories both swifter and fuller than conscious effort could have supplied ;
oases of eemnesia, where the recent impressions are suppressed in favour
^ See vol. i., 526 and 526 A, B, and C.

268

CHAPTER IX

of the old ; cases where the hysteric under skilful hypnotic treatment can
recall and reveal the long-forgotten incident which started her malady
we may place next cases of clairvoyant insight into the organic condition
of an absent person. Here we come to a definitely supernormal power ■
and it is a power which claims to involve both backward and forward
knowledge such as actual medical examination of the patient could not
attain. There are further cases in which a definite fact in a man’s life has
become known supernormally ; or sometimes a recent event unconnected
with the percipient is revealed ; and there are, of course, numerous trance
communications where knowledge of the past is claimed to proceed from
some more or less definite disembodied intelligence. Supernormal retro-
cognition depends, it appears, on the perception by us of knowledge
contained in other minds, embodied or disembodied, and possibly on the
absorption by us of knowledge afloat, so to say, in the Universe ; — which
may be grasped by our spirit's outreaching, or which may fall on us like
dew.

983. Coming now to precognitions, we must first observe that there
are many where what looks like knowledge of the future can be analysed
into an enlarged knowledge of what actually exists.

There are, indeed, certain phenomena — ** monitions ” as we may term
them— which in common parlance are often spoken of as /^wnonitions, and
used as a type of knowledge of the future, where it is nevertheless plain
that all that is needed is a somewhat extended perception of near facts.

These monitions — of which several instances were given in 818-825,—
range from incidents so trivial and momentary that it would seem absurd
to ascribe them to anything more dignified than a barely subliminal
stratum of the percipient’s own consciousness, up to important warnings
which claim the authority of some departed but still watchful friend.

At the lower end of this series come the obscure intimations which
restrain us from action on grounds which perhaps are only just forgotten
and still by effort recoverable. The chess player, returning after various
trains of calculation to the temptation of a specious move, will dimly feci
a sense of restraint ; — “ I must not do ihaiy though I cannot recollect
Sometimes this subliminal warning presents itself as a physical
hesitation ; — the hand refusing to execute an order which is really un-
reasonable ; — and which is felt to be such so soon as some trivial recent
fact is remembered. (See 818 A.)

One step further, and we have an actual externalised hallucination of
touch checking the inconsiderate action. (See 818 B.)

Next we come to monitions based upon a fact apparently not forgotten
merely, but never known ; a fact lying demonstrably beyond the normal
sensory cognisance of the percipient.

A fact beyond his normal sensory cognisance, I say; but obviously
before we assume that he has perceived that fact in a transcendental or
tetesthetic fashion, we must make the fullest allowance for hyper^s-

983 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 269

thesia,— for an extehsion of the bodily senses which may include this
strange knowledge within its range. Nay, more ; our search for possible
hyperesthesia is bound to be much wider than any search which the
physiologist is likely thus far to have found worth his pains. His interest
has lain in definite measurable extensions of the higher senses, rather
than in obscure and novel sensations which led to no clear end. It is
for these last, on the other hand, that it is our special duty to search.
We have obscure and novel facts to explain, and before we confidently
assign them to psychical and transcendental causes, we must try and
think of everything which the human body might conceivably discern
or discover.

1 say “ the body rather than ‘‘ the senses ” ; for we must go back in our
inquiry (though of course without expectation of immediate success) to an
ancestral condition for anterior to any senses which we now' know. We
must go back to the first germ of life, and in place of merely crediting it
with “ irritability,” which is all the power of reaction which it can actually
show ns, we must credit it with all the potentialities which the history of
its descendants teaches us to infer as already latent in it. We know into
how wide a gamut of feeling the germ*s vague internal sensation, its vague
external sensation, have diffused and specialised themselves in man. We
dimly conjecture into what other rays the spectrum of that dim primal
gleam of consciousness has been fonned out in animals other than man.
And w'e may feel assured also, as I have already pointed out, that all the
known or guessed sensations of men and animals are but a small selection
from the range of sensations potentially cducible from the vague punas-
thesia ^ — so to term it, — of the primal germ. Average experience within
average limits — that is all that our known senses cover. If the stimulus
be too weak, we are liable to mistake the sense through which it comes to
us ; if it be too strong, wc are liable to feel a mere distress or bewilder-
ment, not referred to any definite sense. It is surely conceivable, then,
that all our known sensibilities may form merely a kind of bulfs eye ; —
the place where outer and inner influences oftenest touch our central
sensorium \ — while round this bull’s-eye all kinds of unclassified obscure
sensations probably scatter.

It follows that when we have to explain very strange perceptions we
must be on the look-out, not only for the hypercesthesia of known senses,
but also for that more generalised form of hypersesthesia which may involve
senses (peripheral or central) as yet incipient and unrecognised, although
still depending on the material world, — a wider selection from the potential
panajsthesia of the primal germ. There may — there must — be evolution
still going on in us in relation to our material as well as to our transcen-
dental environment, and we must not claim phenomena for the* latter
without taking account of the former as well.

Once more, we must remember that the assumed new sensitivities,
physical and transcendental, may be linked together in ways quite unknown

270

CHAPTER IX

to us. The synsesthesise, which have only of late years been noted
between the ordinary senses — of which coloured audition,” or sounds
seeing, is the accepted type — may be carried yet further, and may connect
in unlooked-for ways man’s responses to his physical and to his trans-
cendental environments. There will be nothing to surprise us if the same
percipient should receive a number of subliminal intimations, of which
some are to be referred to hypersesthesia and some to telcesthesia, or to
telepathy from the living or from the dead.

I have said that hyperjesthesia may be peripheral or central ; — that is to
say, that it may consist in the heightened perception of sensations coming
from outside our organism, or from within the brain. I have already
given (820-423) some cases of apparent telaesthesia, or of apparent pre-
vision, which may possibly, though by no means certainly, be referable to
an extension of the external senses.

From these cases of possible hypersesthesia of the external senses we
may make our transition to central hypenesthesia, a heightening of inner
sensations to a point where the future history of the organisation can be
guessed or divined with unusual distinctness. This is virtually but another
aspect of the knowledge of intimate processes which self-suggestion has so
often shown. If the subliminal self can induce or arrest changes in the
organism, it may well be able also to foresee such changes when they are
approaching through natural causes. In whatever direction we have seen
suggestion operate, in that direction may we expect to see organic predic-
tion operate also. Thus, for instance, suggestion has produced fainting,
and also bleeding at the nose, and we have cases of precisely similar
predictions (see Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 339 ; and vol. xi. p.
426 ), or even predictions of death (see 425 A).

984. This seems to show that a man’s subliminal self may sometimes
perceive his own approaching death, and may transmit this knowledge to
the empirical self, sometimes by aid of a hallucination. Now we know
that the subliminal self may sometimes communicate to other persons
knowledge which it cannot or does not communicate to its own empirical
self. This is familiar enough in hypnotic experiments, or in spontaneous
automatic script, which script may be (for instance) written in a position
turned away from the automatist, and may remain unknown to him,
although its content must have come from, or passed through, his own
deeper being. We know also that an agent has sometimes succeeded in
transmitting a phantasmal image of himself to a percipient at a distance,
without knowing whether he has, in fact, been successful or no.

It is natural, therefore, to ask whether there is anything to show that
the subliminal self ever reveals the approach of death, not to its own
empirical self, but to other persons ; — showing, perhaps, by a phantasmal
image, the source from which the information comes.

To this question we have some ground for returning an affirmative
answer, for my readers will remember that there are various cases where

985 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 271

the phantom of a person destined soon to die has been seen by a per- •
cipient at a distance ; nor does it seem that such an apparition depends
upon the decedent’s own supraliminal effort. On the contrary, it often
appears while he is asleep or in a comatose condition (see, cases in
Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 440-454)-

While there are thus many precognitions which are in various ways
explicable without postulating any direct knowledge of the future, since
they may be due only to some kind of inference from a knowledge of
existing facts wider than our own, it is possible that other cases may be
due to inference of some supernormal kind, — some perception of the
future more direct than any which our ordinary minds enjoy. Such are
some of the dream-predictions quoted in the Appendices to section 425
(see vol. i, pp. 402 - 413 ). It is conceivable that predictions of these and
other types may be communicated by disembodied spirits, to whom may
also be attributed the cases that suggest an unseen guidance or protection
(see 824 and the cases given at the end of 663 A).

985. Finally, we must admit the possibility of a knowledge which
comes to a man from no individuated, or at least from no human source ;
winch is no longer inference but the reflection of Reality itself ; of the
World-Soul as the Future ; of a pre-existent Cosmorama of infinite fates.

But before turning to this last line of reflection, I must say a few
words as to the reliuion of our evidence to the problem of Free Will.
Here I have a suggestion to make which even in this time-worn con-
troversy is, I think, absolutely novel. It is that w'e have now a possibility
of in iking the question between liberty and determination a matter of
actual experiment.

Let us put that old question in this specific form ; ‘‘ Is there evidence
that any power can show me a picture involving my own (so-called)
voluntary actions in the future, >vhich picture I cannot by any effort in
the smallest degree hinder from becoming actual fact?”

For mere ordinary prevision this would of course be impossible. But
we have here certain foreshadowings which depend on no ordinary pre-
vision, and which are more wholly outside ourselves than any information
of equally definite character which we can otherwise receive. The scenes
or statements thus given in complete detail seem sometimes to be fulfilled
with equal completeness. But must they, or must any of them, inevitably
be thus fulfilled ? Here it is that a possibility of experiment comes in.
The experiment indeed cannot be conclusive either way. But suppose
that— as in some folklore story — wc w-ere to make vigorous effort to avert
some incident, and were yet to find that incident fulfil itself, perhaps by
dint of that very effort, exactly after the dreaded fashion, — should we not
then have some reason to infer that earth-life was not really modifiable by
anything which we feel as free-will ?

Assuming such a result of our experiment, analogy would at once
suggest a further possibility. For our life on earth >vould then be seen to

272

CHAPTER IX

[985

. resemble the experience of the hypnotised subject, fulfilling unwittingly in
waking hours the suggestions previously made to him in the trance. We
should ask whether in our own history some epoch may have existed in
which a self-suggestion may have been given which could similarly domi-
nate our earthly career. Our complex organism, the result of a long pre-
vious history, is felt to restrict our so-called voluntary action within narrow
limits ; and if we possess also a soul independent of the body, it is surely
likely that the soul's previous history also — for some previous history any
entity so highly specialised as a man's soul must have had — may exercise
a determining influence, even more profound than the organism’s influ-
ence, upon the thoughts and actions of this incarnation. There may, in
short, be a kind of alternating personality, expressing itself first in an in-
corporeal and then in a corporeal state, in such a way that the incorporeal
state is the deeper and the more permanent, and that suggestions thence
derived influence corporeal life, although the empirical consciousness
which governs that life may never know it.

This idea, of course, is not new to religion or to philosophy, in East
or West, and it has long since been suggested that our earthly exist-
ence may be the inevitable sequel of our past eternity ; a predestined
pilgrimage on which our true soul looks with calm content, since not one
of earth’s phantom sorrows can find her unwilling or strike her unaware.
The soul foretaught, the body fore wrought, —these will move onwards as
they must and may ; but meanwhile the problem of Liberty and Necessity
will no longer be one for earthly experience to discuss ; it will be lifted
into a pre-natal region, among the secrets of the transcendental world.

All this must be conceived as possible ; yet I do not think that our
evidence thus far collected does in fact make foj^this view of pre-deter-
mined earthly fates. Rather we have seen that "ift many cases monitions
have averted incidents which would doubtless have occurred had the per-
cipient received no warning. And where dangers have been foreshown
and yet not averted, this seems often to have been because no adequate
effort was made to avert them. The problem which our narratives more
urgently suggest is how to reconcile so much foreknowledge with so much
freedom. I have suggested elsewhere that this problem of free human
wills amid the predictable operations of unchanging law may resemble the
problem of molecular motion amid molar calm. Clear and stable is for
us the diamond ; the dewdrop is clear and still ; yet within their tranquil
clarity a myriad molecules jostle in narrow orbits, or speed on an uncora-
puted way. So to the spectator of all Time and of all Existence ”
may the Cosmos be as one entire and perfect chrysolite ” ; and yet
man’s petty hopes and passions may make endless turmoil among its
minittest elements and in its infinitesimal grains. Those movements, too,
must be ruled by unknown law ; yet on a wide view they will average out,
and will admit of predictions fulfilled immutably, and overriding the small
Wills of men.

986 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 273

Once more, and from a different standpoint. Few men have
pondered long on these problems of Past and Future without wondering
whether Past or Future be in very truth more than a name — whether
we may not be apprehending as a stream of sequence that which is an
ocean of co-existence, and slicing our subjective years and centuries
from timeless and absolute things. The precognitions dealt with here,
indeed, hardly overpass the life of the individual percipient. Let us keep
to that small span, and let us imagine that a whole earth-life is in reality
an absolutely instantaneous although an infinitely complex phenomenon.
Let us suppose that my transcendental self discerns with equal directness
and immediacy every element of this phenomenon ; but that my empirical
self receives each element mediately and through media involving dif-
ferent rates of retardation ; just as I receive the lightning more quickly
than the thunder. May not then seventy years intervene between my
perceptions of birth and death as easily as seven seconds between my per-
ceptions of the flash and peal? And may not some inter-communication
of consciousness enable the wider self to call to the narrower, the more
central to the more external, ** At such an hour this shock will reach you !
Listen for the nearing roar 1 **

And thinking thus of the Universe as no mere congeries of individual
experiences, but as a plenum of infinite knowledge of which all souls form
part, we come to count less and less upon having to deal exclusively with
intelligences individualised like our own. Our limitations of personality
may less and less apply to spirits drawing more directly upon the essential
reality of things. The definite intelligences which have crystallised, so to
say, out of the psychical vapour may even for us become again partly sub-
limated, may again be diffused for a moment amid such knowledge as our
organisations cannot receive except in ecstasy and bewilderment, or retain
except in vanishing symbol and obscure and earthly sign.

If then all these phenomena form part of one great effort by which
man’s soul is striving to know his spiritual environment, and his spiritual
environment is striving to become known, how little can it matter what
the special incident foretold or foreshadowed may be ! What signifies
it whether this or that earthly peril be averted, or earthly benefit secured,
— whether through this or that petty channel shall flow some stream of
mortal things? The prime need of man is to know more fully, that he
may obey more unhesitatingly, the laws of the world unseen. And how
can this great end be attained save by the unfoldment from within, in
whatsoever fashion it may be possible, of man’s transcendental faculty ;
— by his recognition of himself as a cosmic being and not a planetary, as
not a body but a soul? Surely even that special premonition which is
sometimes spoken of as a thing of terror, — the warning or the promise of
earthly 4eath, — should to the wise man sound as a friendly summons, and
as a welcome home. Let him remember the Vision which came to Socrates
in the prison-house ; — ^then, and then only, showing in an angel’s simili-
voL. n. ' s

274

CHAPTER IX

tude the Providence which till that hour had been bul; as an impersonal
and invisible Voice ; — but now the “ fair and white-robed woman,’* while
friends offered escape from death, had already spoken of better hope than
this, and had given to Achilles* words a more sacred meaning,— ‘‘ On the
third day hence thou comest to Phthia's fertile shore.**

987. We have reached at last a position very remote from that from
which we started. Yet it will not be easy to say exactly at what point we
could have paused in our gradual sequence of evidence. In the first
place, it now seems clear that a serious inquiry, whenever undertaken,
was destined to afford ample proof of the inadequacy of the current
material synthesis ; to demonstrate the existence of faculties and opera-
tions which imply a spiritual environment, acted upon by a spirit in man.
Telepathy and telaesthesia, as we now see, indisputably imply this enlarged
conception of the universe as intelligible by man ; and so soon as man is
steadily conceived as dwelling in this wider range of powers, his survival
of death becomes an almost inevitable corollary. With this survival his
field of view broadens again. If we once admit discarnate spirits as
actors in human affairs, we must expect them to act in some ways with
greater scope and freedom than is possible to the incarnate spirits which
we already know.

We cannot simply admit the existence of discarnate spirits as inert or
subsidiary phenomena; we must expect to have to deal with them as
agents on their own account — agents in unexpected ways, and with novel
capacities. If they are concerned with us at all, the part which they will
play is not likely to be a subordinate one.

We are standing then, on this view, at a crisis of enormous importance
in the history of life on earth. The spiritual world is just beginning to
act systematically upon the material world. Action of the spiritual world
upon our own there must always have been; action both profound,
universal, and so to say automatic, and very probably also irregular action
with specific moral purport, such as has been assumed to accompany the
rise of religions.

But a change seems to be impending, and the kind of action which
now seems likely to be transmitted from the one world to the other is of
a type which in the natural course of historic evolution has scarcely been
likely to show itself until now. For it depends, as I conceive, on the
attainment of a certain scientific level by spirits incarnate and excarnate
alike.

A few words will suffice to sum up broadly the general situation as it
at pr^isent seems to me to stand. The dwellers on this earth, themselves
spirits, are an object of love and care to spirits higher than they. The
most important boon that can possibly be bestowed on them is know-
ledge as to their position in the universe, ’the assurance that their
existence is a cosmic and not merely a planetary, a spiritual and not

«! 7 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 275

merely a corporeal, phenomenon. I conceive that this knowledge
has in effect been apprehended from time to time by embodied
spirits of high inward perceptive power, and has also been communi-
cated by higher spirits, either affecting individual minds or even (as
is believed especially of Jesus Christ) volunta^-ily incarnating themselves
on earth for the purpose of teaching what they could recollect of that
spiritual world’ from which they came. In those ages it would have been
useless to attempt a scientific basis for such teaching. What could best
be done was to enforce some few great truths — as the soul's long upward
progress, or the Fatherhood of God — in such revelations as East and
West could understand. Gradually Science arose, uniting the beliefs of
all peoples in one scheme of organised truth, and suggesting — as has
been said — that religion must be the spirit’s subjective reaction to all
the truths we know.

But when once this point was reached it must have become plain to
wise spirits that tlie communications from their world which hitherto had
had somewhat the character of inspirations of genius ought now to be
based upon something of organised and definite observation, — something
which would work in with the great structure of Truth which organised
observation has already established. Here, then, new difficulties must
have arisen, just as they arise on earth when we endeavour to reduce to
rules practicable for the many the results achieved by the extraordinary
gifts of the few. Now it is that we are forced on both sides of the gulf to
recognise how rare and specific is that capacity for intercommunication on
which our messages must depend. Now it is that we feel the difficulty of
being definite without being trivial ; how little of earthly memory persists;
how little of heavenly experience can be expressed in terms of earth ; how
long and arduous must be the way, how many must be the experiments,
and how many the tiiliires, before any systematised body of new truth can
be established. But a sound beginning has been made, and whatever
may be possible hereafter need not be wasted on a fresh start ; it may be
added to a growing structure of extra- terrene verities such as our race has
never known till now.

It is not we who are in reality the discoverers here. The experiments
which are being made are not the work of earthly skill. All that we can
contribute to the new result is an attitude of patience, attention, care ;
an honest readiness to receive and weigh whatever may be given into our
keeping by intelligences beyond our own. Experiments, I say, there are,
probably experiments of a complexity and difficulty which surpass our
imagination ; but they are made from the other side of the gulf, by the
efforts of spirits who discern pathways and possibilities which for us are
impenetrably dark. We should not be going beyond the truth •if we
described our sensitives as merely the instruments, our researchers as
merely the registrars, of a movement which we neither initiated nor can
in any degree comprehend.

CHAPTER IX

276

988. The true discoverers, however, show no wish to be thus sharply
distinguished from ourselves. Their aim is a collaboration with us as
close as may be possible. Some of them were on earth our own familiar
friends ; w'e have spoken with them in old days of this great enterprise ;
they have promised that they would call to us, if it were possible, with the
message of their undying love. It may be that the most useful thing that
some of us have done on earth has been to interest in this inquiry some
spirit more potent than himself, who has passed into that wrorld of un-
guessed adventure, not forgetful of his friend.

The very faintness and incoherence of such a spirit’s message, besides
being a kind of indication that we are dealing with the imperfections of
actual reality rather than w^ith the smoothly finished products of mere
imagination, does also in itself constitute a strong appeal to our gratitude
and reverence. Not easily and carelessly do these spirits come to us, but
after strenuous preparation, and with difficult fulfilment of desire. So
came Tennyson’s Persephone : —

“Faint as a climate-changing bird that flies
All night across the darkness, and at dawn
Falls on the threshold of her native land,

And can no more. . .

They commune with us, like Persephone, willing and eager, but
dazed and dumb wdth passing through at once from state to state,”
They cannot satisfy themselves with their trammelled utterance ; they
complain of the strange brain, the alien voice. What they are doing,
indeed, they desire to do — this is their willing contribution to that
universal scheme by wrhich the higher helps the lower, and the stronger
the weaker, through all the ideal relationships of the world of Life. Put
we on our part ought to remember that there may be a dignity in this
very confusion, — a proof of persistent strong affection in the very
hesitancies and bewilderments of some well-loved soul.

“After the tempest a still small voice.” One mcay have listened
perhaps, to the echoing pomp of some (ICcumenical Council, thundering
its damnations Urbi et Orbi from an Infallible Chair ; and yet one may
find a more Christlike sanctity in the fragmentary whisper of one true
soul, descending painfully from unimaginable brightness to bring strength
and hope to kindred souls still prisoned in the flesh.

Vicit iter durum pietas. But here the effort has been, so to say, on
the part of Anchises, not of .Eneas ; the piety of heaven towards earth
rather than of earth towards heaven. It is some enfranchised soul— some
soul, like George Eliot’s, filled to the brim wdth loving pity for struggling
lives 6h “ the dark globe ” — which has penetrated the world-old secret,
and has piloted the innavigable way.

Beyond us still is mystery ; but it is mysteiy lit and mellowed with an
infinite hope. We ride in darkness at the haven’s mouth ; but sometimes

988 ] TRANCE, POSSESSION, ECSTASY 277

through rifted cloftds we see the desires and needs of many generations
floating and melting upwards into a distant glow, up through the light
of the seas by the moon’s long- silvering ray.”

The high possibilities that lie before us, should be grasped once for
all, in order that the dignity of the quest may help to carry the inquirer
through many disappointments, deceptions, delays. But he must re-
member that this inquiry must be extended over many generations ; nor
must he allow himself to be persuaded that there are byways to mastery.
I will not say that there cannot possibly be any such thing as occult
wisdom, or dominion over the secrets of nature cascetically or magically
acquired. But 1 will say that every claim of this kind which my
colleagues or I have been able to examine has proved deserving of
complete mistrust ; and that we have no confidence here any more than
elsewhere in any methods except the open, candid, straightforward
methods which the spirit of modern science demands.

All omens point towards the steady continuance of just such labour
as has already taught us all we know. Perhaps, indeed, in this complex
of interpenetrating spirits our own effort is no individual, no transitory
thing. That which lies at the root of each of us lies at the root of the
Cosmos too. Our struggle is the stniggle of the Universe itself ; and the
very Godhead finds fulfilment through our upward-striving souls.

[1000

CHAPTER X

EPILOGUE

^Soicci ri9 fio( yvi^ wpoa‘€X6ova’a KaXi) Kal cuetSr/?} Xcvica Ifiaria i)^ov(T<iy
KaXitrai fA€ Kal cittcu', i<aKpaT€s, k€v rpirar<p ipi^iaXov

iKOio. — IIA.araii'o^ Kpiroiv^

1000. The task which I proposed to myself at the beginning of this
work is now, after a fashion, accomplished. Following the successive
steps of my programme, I have presented,— not indeed all the evidence
which I possess, and which I would willingly present, — but enough at
least to illustrate a continuous exposition, and as much as can be compressed
into two volumes, with any hope that these volumes will be read at all.
I have indicated also the principal inferences which that evidence
immediately suggests. Such wider generalisations as I may now add
must needs be dangerously speculative ; they must run the risk of
alienating still further from this research many of the scientific minds
which I am most anxious to influence.

This risk, nevertheless, I feel bound to face. For two reasons, — or,
I should perhaps say, for one main reason seen under two aspects,— I
cannot leave this obscure and unfamiliar mass of observation and experi<
ment without some words of wider generalisation, some epilogue wiiich
may place these new discoveries in clearer relation to the existing schemes
of civilised thought and belief.

In the first place, I feel that some such attempt at synthesis is needful
for the practical purpose of enlisting help in our long inquiry. As has
been hinted more than once, the real drag upon its progress has been
not opposition but indifference. Or if indifference be too strong a word,
at any rate the interest evoked has not been such as to inspire to steady
independent work anything like the number of coadjutors who would
have responded to a new departure in one of the sciences which all men
have learnt to respect. The inquiry falls between the two stools of
religion and science ; it cannot claim support either from the ** religious
world” or from the Royal Society. Yet even apart from the instinct
of purw scientific curiosity (which surely has seldom seen such a field
opening before it), the mighty issues depending on these phenomena
ought, I think, to constitute in themselves a strong, an exceptional appeal.

I desire in this book to emphasise that appeal; — not only to produce

278

EPILOGUE

279

1002 ]

conviction, but also to attract co operation. And actual converse
with many persons has led me to believe that in order to attract such
help, even from scientific men, some general view of the moral upshot
of all the phenomena is needed ; — speculative and uncertain though such
a general view must be.

1001. Again, — and here the practical reason already given expands
into a wider scope, — it would be unfair to the evidence itself were I to
close this work without touching more directly than hitherto on some
of the deepest faiths of men. The influence of the evidence set forth
in this book should not be limited to the conclusions, however weighty,
which that evidence may be thought to establish. Rather these dis-
coveries should prompt, as nothing else could have prompted, towards
the ultimate achievement of that programme of scientific dominance
which the InstaitnUio Magna proclaimed for mankind. Bacon foresaw
the gradual victory of observation and experiment — the triumph of actual
analysed fact — iu every department of human study ; — in every department
save one. The realm of Divine things ” he left to Authority and Faith.
I here urge that that great exemption need be no longer made. I claim
that there now exists an incipient method of getting at this Divine know-
ledge also, with the same certainty, the same calm assurance, with which
we make our steady progress in the knowledge of terrene things. The
authority of creeds and Churches will thus be replaced by the authority
of observation and experiment. The impulse of faith will resolve itself
into a reasoned and resolute imagination, bent upon raising even higher
than now the highest ideals of man.

Most readers of the preceding pages will have been prepared for
the point of view thus frankly avowed. Yet to few readers can that point
of view at first present itself otherwise than as alien and repellent. Philo-
sophy and orthodoxy will alike resent it as presumptuous ; nor will science
readily accept the unauthorised transfer to herself of regions of which
she has long been wont either to deny the existence, or at any rate to
disclaim the rule. Nevertheless, I think that it will appear on reflection
that some such change of standpoint as this was urgently needed, — nay,
was ultimately inevitable.

1002. I need not here describe at length the deep disquiet of our
time. Never, perhaps, did man’s spiritual satisfaction bear a smaller
proportion to his needs. The old-world sustenance, however earnestly
administered, is too unsubstantial for the modern cravings. And thus
through our civilised societies two conflicting currents run. On the
one hand health, intelligence, morality, — all such boons as the steady
progress of planetary evolution can win for man, — are being achi'^ved
in increasing measure. On the other hand this very sanity, this very
prosperity, do but bring out in stronger relief the underlying Weli^chmerz^
the decline of any real belief in the dignity, the meaning, the endlessness
of life.

28 o

CHAPTER X

[1003

There are many, of course, who readily accept this limitation of view ;
who are willing to let earthly activities and pleasures gradually dissipate
and obscure the larger hope. But others cannot thus be easily satisfied.
They rather resemble children who are growing too old for their games
whose amusement sinks into an indifference and discontent for which the
fitting remedy is an initiation into the serious work of men.

A similar crisis has passed over Europe once before. There came
a time when the joyful naivete, the unquestioning impulse of the early
world had passed away ; when the worship of Greeks no more was beauty,
nor the religion of Romans Rome. Alexandrian decadence, Byzantine
despair, found utterance in many an epigram which might have been
written to-day. Then came a great uprush or incursion from the spiritual
world, and with new races and new ideals Europe regained its youth.

The unique effect of that great Christian impulse begins, perhaps,
to wear away. But more grace may yet be attainable from the region
whence that grace came. Our age*s restlessness, as 1 believe, is the rest-
lessness not of senility but of adolescence ; it resembles the approach of
puberty rather than the approach of death.

1003. What the age needs is not an abandonment of effort, but an
increase ; the time is ripe for a study of unseen things as strenuous and
sincere as that which Science has made familiar for the problems of earth.
For now the scientific instinct, — so newly developed in mankind, — seems
likely to spread until it becomes as dominant as was in lime past the
religious ; and if there be even the narrowest chink through which man
can look forth from his planetary cage, our descendants will not leave
that chink neglected or unwidened. The scheme of knowledge which
can commend itself to such seekers must be a scheme which, while it
transcends our present knowledge, steadily continues it ; — a scheme not
catastrophic, but evolutionary ; not promulgated and closed in a moment,
but gradually unfolding itself to progressive inquiry.

Must there not also be a continuous change, an unending advance
in the human ideal itself? so that Faith must shift her standpoint from
the brief Past to the endless Future, not so much caring to supply the
lacunae of tradition as to intensify the conviction that there is still a higher
life to work for, a holiness which may be some day reached by grace and
effort as yet unknown.

It may be that for some generations to come the truest faith will lie
in the patient attempt to unravel from confused phenomena some trace
of the supernal world ; — to find thus at last the substance of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seen.” I confess, indeed, that I have
often felt as though this present age were even unduly favoured; — as
though,no future revelation and calm could equal the joy of this great
struggle from doubt into certainty ; — from the materialism or agnosticism
which accompany the first advance of Science into the deeper scientific
conviction that there is a deathless soul in man. 1 can imagine no other

EPILOGUE

281

1004]

crisis of such deep delight. But after all this is but like the starving
child’s inability to imagine anything sweeter than his first bite at the crust.
Give him but ihaty and he can hardly care for the moment whether
he is fated to be Prime Minister or ploughboy.

Equally transitory, equally dependent on our special place in the story
of man’s upward effort, is another shade of feeling which many men have
known. They have felt that uncertainty gave scope to faith and courage
in a way which scientific assurance could never do. There has been a
stern delight in the choice of virtue, — even though virtue might bring no
reward. This joy, like the joy of Columbus sailing westward from Hierro,
can hardly recur in precisely the same form. But neither (to descend to
a humbler comparison) can we grown men again give ourselves up to
learning in the same spirit of pure faith, without prefigurement of result,
as when we learnt the alphabet at our mother’s knees. Have we therefore
relaxed since then our intellectual effort ? Have we felt that there was
no longer need to struggle against idleness when once we knew that
knowledge brought a sure reward ?

Endless are the varieties of lofty joy. In the age of Thales, Greece
knew the delight of the first dim notion of cosmic unity and law. In the
age of Christ, Europe felt the first high authentic message from a world
beyond our own. In our owui age wc reach the perception that such
messages may become continuous and progressive ; — that between seen
and unseen there is a channel and fairway which future generations may
leurn to widen and to clarify. Our own age may seem the best to us;
so will their mightier ages seem to them.

** * Talia saecla' suis dixerunt * currite ’ fusis
Concordes stabili Fatorum numine Parcae.”

Spiritual evolution: — that, then, is our destiny, in this and other
worlds; — an evolution gradual with many gradations, and rising to no
assignable close. And the passion for Life is no selfish weakness, it is
a factor in the universal energy. It should keep its strength unbroken
even when our weariness longs to fold the hands in endless slumber ; it
should outlast and annihilate the “ pangs that conquer trust.” If to the
Greeks it seemed a AtTrora^ta — a desertion of one’s post in battle — to
quit by suicide the life of earth, how much more craven were the desire to
desert the Cosmos, — the despair, not of this planet only, but of the Sum
of Things !

Nay, in the infinite Universe man may now feel, for the first time, at
home. The worst fear is over ; the true security is won. The worst fear
was the fear of spiritual extinction or spiritual solitude ; the true security
is in the telepathic law. •

1004. Let me draw out my meaning at somewhat greater length.

As we have dwelt successively on various aspects of telepathy, we have
gradually felt the conception enlarge and deepen under our study. It

282

CHAPTER X

[lOM

began as a quasi-mechanical transference of ideas anti images from one to
another brain. Presently we found it assuming a more varied and potent
form, as though it were the veritable ingruence or invasion of a distant
mind. Again, its action was traced across a gulf greatei than any space
of earth or ocean, and it bridged the interval between spirits incarnate and
discamate, between the visible and the invisible world. There seemed no
limit to the distance of its operation, or to the intimacy of its appeal.

iv Brjporiv iy PpoTOitTLV iv fleets avia.

This Love, then, whicli (as Sophocles has it) rules beasts and men
and gods” with equal sway, is no matter of carnal impulse or of emotional
caprice. Rather it is now possible to define Love (as we have alreaily
defined Genius) in terms which convey for us some new meaning in con-
nection with phenomena described in this work. Genius, as has been
already said, is a kind of exalted but undeveloped clairvoyance. The sub-
liminal uprush which inspires the poet or the musician, presents to him a
deep, but vague perception of that world unseen, through which the seer
or the sensitive projects a narrower but an exacter gaze. Somewhat simi-
larly, Love is a kind of exalted, but unspecialised telepathy ; — the simplest
and most universal expression of that mutual gravitation or kinship of
spirits which is the foundation of the telepathic law.

This is the answer to the ancient fear ; the fear lest man's fellowships
be the outward and his solitude the inward thing ; the fear lest all close
linking with our fellows be the mere product of the struggle for existence,
— of the tribal need of strength and cohesion ; — the fear that if love and
virtue thus arose, love and virtue may thus likewise perish. It is an
answer to the dread that separate centres of conscious life must be always
strangers, and often foes ; their leagues and fellowships interested and
illusory ; their love the truce of a moment amid infinite inevitable war.

Such fears, I say, vanish when we learn that it is the soul in man
which links him with other souls ; the body which dissevers even while it
seems to unite ; so that no man liveth to himself nor dieth to himself,”
but in a sense which goes deeper than metaphor, “ We are every one
members one of another.” Like atoms, like suns, like galaxies, our spirits
are systems of forces which vibrate continually to each other's attractive
power.

All this as yet is dimly adumbrated ; it is a first hint of a scheme of
thought which it may well take centuries to develop. But can we suppose
that, when once this conception of the bond between all souls has taken
root, men will turn back from it to the old exclusiveness, the old contro-
versy? Will they not see that this world- widening knowledge is both old
and mew, that die Geisterwelt ist nicht verschlossen f that always have such
revelations been given, but develop now into a mightier meaning,— with
the growth of wisdom in those who send them, and in us who receive ?

Surely we have here a conception, at once wider and exacter than ever

EPILOGUE

1006]

283

before, of that “ religftous education of the world ” on which theologians
have been fain to dwell. We need assume no “ supernatural interference,”
00 “ pliui of redemption." We need suppose only that the same process
which we observe to-day has been operating for ages between this world
and the next.

1005. Let us suppose that whilst incarnate men have risen from
savagery into intelligence, discarnate men have made on their part a
like advance. I^et us suppose that they have become more eager and
more able to use, for communication with earth, the standing laws of
relation between the spiritual and the material Universe.

At first, on such a hypothesis, certain automatic phenomena will occur,
but will not be purposely modified by spirit power. Already and always
there must have been points of contact where unseen things impinged
upon the seen. Always there would be clairvoyant wanderings,” where
the spirit of shaman or of medicine-man discerned things distant upon
earth by the spirit's excursive power. Always there would be apparitions
at death, — conscious or unconscious effects of the shock which separated
soul from body \ and always hauntings,” — where the spirit, already dis-
carnate, revisited, as in a dream perceptible by others, the scenes which
once he knew.

From this groundwork of phenomena developed (to take civilised
Europe alone) the oracular religion first, the Christian later. The golden
gifts of Cnjesus to Delphi attested the clairvoyance of the Pythia as
strongly, perhaps, as can be expected of any tradition which comes to us
from the morning of history.

And furthermore, do we not better understand at once the uniqueness
and the reality of the Christian revelation itself, when we regard it as a
culmination rather than an exception, — as destined not to destroy the
cosmic law, but to fulfil it? Then first in human history came from the
unseen a message such as the whole heart desired ; — a message adequate
in its response to fundamental emotional needs not in that age only, but
in all ages that should follow. Inkllectually adequate for all coming ages
that revelation could not be ;--given the laws of mind, incarnate alike and
discarnate, — the evolution, on either side of the gulf of death, of know-
ledge and power.

No one at the date of that revelation suspected that uniformity, that
continuity of the Universe which long experience has now made for us
almost axiomatic. No one foresaw the day when the demand for miracle
would be merged in the demand for higher law.

This newer scientific temper is not confined, as I believe, to the
denizens of this earth alone. The spiritual world meets it, as I thimt
our evidence has shown, with eager and strenuous response. Butfthai
response is made, and must be made, along the lines of our normal
evolution. It must rest upon the education, the disentanglement, of that
within us mortals which exists in the Invisible, a partaker of the undying
World. And on our side and on theirs alike, thte process must be steady

284

CHAPTER X

[1006

and continuous. We have no longer to deal with ^bnie isolated scries of
events in the past, — interpretable this way or that, but in no way renew-
able, — but rather with a world-wide and actual condition of things,
recognisable every year in greater clearness, and changing in directions
which we can better and better foresee. This new aspect of things needs
something of new generalisation, of new forecast, — it points to a pro-
visional synthesis of religious belief which may fitly conclude the present
work.

PROVISIONAL SKETCH OF A RELIGIOUS SYNTHESIS.

oX/3(0( oarif (Kfitfa KotXap

tiaiv V7r6 x66va’ oiStP /jl€p 0iov Kelpof rtXivrdp,

oidtp Si dioaduTOi/ d;jx^p. — PiNDAU.

1006. I see ground for hoping that we are within sight of a religious
synthesis, which, although as yet provisional and rudimentary, may in the
end meet more adequately than any previous synthesis the reasonable
needs of men. Such a synthesis cannot, I think, be reached by a mere
predominance of any one existing creed, nor by any eclectic or syncretic
process. Its prerequisite is the actual acquisition of new knowledge,
whether by discovery or by revelation — knowledge discerned from without
the veil or from within — yet so realised that the main forms of religious
thought, by harmonious expansion and development, shall find place
severally as elements in a more comprehensive whole. And enough of
such knowledge has, I think, been now attained to make it desirable to
submit to ray readers the religious results which seem likely to follow.

1007. With such a purpose, our conception of religion should be
both profound and comprehensive. I will use here the definition already
adopted of religion as the sane and normal response of the human spirit
to all that we know of cosmic law ; that is, to the known phenomena of
the universe, regarded as an intelligible whole. For on the one hand I
cannot confine the term to any single definite view or tradition of things
unseen. On the other hand, I am not content to define religion as “ mor-
ality tinged with emotion," lest morality per se should seem to hang in air,
so that we should be merely gilding the tortoise which supports the earth.
Yet my definition needs some further guarding if it is to correspond
with our habitual use of language. Most men*s subjective response to
their environment falls below the level of tnie religious thought. It is
scattered into cravings, or embittered by resentment, or distorted by
superstitious fear. But of such men I do not speak ; rather of men in
whom the great pageant has inspired at least some vague out-reaching
toward the Source of All; men for whom knowledge has ripened into
meditation, and has prompted high desire. I would have Science first
sublimed into Philosophy, and then kindled by Religion into a burning
flame. For, from my fibint of view, man cannot be too religious. I

EPILOGUE

1009]

285

desire that the environing, the interpenetrating universe,— its energy, its
life its love, — should illume in us, in our low degree, that which we
ascribe to the World-Soul, saying, “ God is Love,” ‘‘ God is Light.” The
World-Soul’s infinite energy of omniscient benevolence should become in
us an enthusiasm of adoring co-operation, — an eager obedience to what-
soever with our best pains we can discern as the justly ruling principle —
rb iyyc/ioviKw— without US and within.

1008. Yet if we form so high an ideal of religion, — raising it so far
above any blind obedience or self-seeking fear that its submission is
wholly willing, and its demand is for spiritual response alone, — we are
bound to ask ourselves whether it is right and reasonable to be religious,
to regard with this full devotion a universe apparently imperfect and
irresponsive, and a Ruling Principle which so many men have doubted
or ignored.

The pessimist holds the view that sentient existence has been a
deplorable blunder in the scheme of things. The egotist at least acts
upon the view that the universe has no moral coherence, and that “ each
for himself” is the only indisputable law. I am sanguine enough to think
that the answer to the pessimist and the egotist has by our new know-
ledge been made complete. There remains, indeed, a difficulty of subtler
type, but instinctive in generous souls. “ The world,” such an one may
say, “ is a mixed place, and I am plainly bound to do my best to improve
it. But am I bound to feel — can any bribe of personal happiness justify
me in feeling — religious enthusiasm for a universe in which even one
being may have been summoned into a sentiency destined to inescapable
pain ? ”

The answer to this ethical scruple must be a matter largely of faith.
If indeed we knew that this earthly life was all, or (far worse) that it was
followed for any one soul by endless pain, we could not without some
moral jugglery ascribe perfection of both power and goodness to a personal
or impersonal First Cause of such a doom. But if we believe that endless
life exists for all, with infinite possibilities of human redress and of divine
justification, then it seems right to assume that the universe is either
already (in some inscrutable fashion) wholly good, or is at least in course
of becoming so \ since it may be becoming so in part through the very
ardour of our own faith and hope.

I do but mention these initial difficulties ; I shall not dwell on them
here. I speak to men who have determined, whether at the bidding of
instinct or of reason, that it is well to be religious ; well to approach in
self-devoted reverence an infinite Power and Love. Our tlesire is simply
to find the least unworthy way of thinking of matters which inevitably
transcend and baffle our finite thought. •

1009. And here, for the broad purpose of our present survey, we may
divide the best religious emotion of the world in triple fashion ; tracing
three main streams of thought, — streams which on the whole run parallel.

CHAPTER X

286

[1009

and which all rise, as I believe, from some source in the reality of
things.

First, then, I place that obscure consensus of independent thinkers in
many ages and countries which, to avoid any disputable title, 1 will here
call simply the Religion of the Ancient Sage. Under that title (though
Iao Tzu is hardly more than a name) it has been set forth to us in brief
summary by the great sage and poet of our own time ; and such words as
Natural Religion, Pantheism, Platonism, Mysticism, do but express or
intensify varying aspects of its main underlying conception. That con-
ception is the co-existence and interpenetration of a real or spiritual with
this material or phenomenal world : a belief driven home to many minds
by experiences both more weighty and more concordant than the per-
cipients themselves have always known. More weighty, I say, for they
have implied the veritable nascency and operation of a last and largest
sense ** ; a faculty for apprehending, not God, indeed (for what finite
faculty can apprehend the Infinite?), but at least some dim and scattered
tokens and prefigurements of a true world of Life and Love. More
concordant also; and this for a reason which till recently would have
seemed a paradox. For the mutual corroboration of these signs and
messages lies not only in their fundamental agreement up to a certain
point, but in their inevitable divergence beyond it as they pass from
things felt into things imagined ; from actual experience into dogmatic creed.

The Religion of the Ancient Sage is of unknown antiquity. Of un-
known antiquity also are various Oriental types of religion, culminating in
historical times in the Religion of Buddha. For Buddhism all inter-
penetrating universes make the steps upon man’s upward way; until
deliverance from illusion leaves the spirit merged ineffably in the imper-
sonal All. But the teaching of Buddha has lost touch with reality ; it
re.*its on no basis of observed or of reproducible fact.

On a basis of observed facts, on the other hand, Christianity, the
youngest of the great types of religion, does assuredly rest. Assuredly
those facts, so far as tradition has made them known to us, do tend to
prove the superhuman character of its Founder, and His triumph over
death ; and thus the existence and influence of a spiritual world, where
men’s true citizenship lies. These ideas, by common consent, lay at the
origin of the Faith. Since those first days, however, Christianity has been
elaborated into codes of ethic and ritual adapted to Western civilisation ;
— has gained (some think) as a rule of life what it has lost as a simplicity
of spirit.

From the unfettered standpoint of the Ancient Sage the deep concord-
ance of these and other schemes of religious thought may well out-
weigh their formal oppositions. And yet I repeat that it is not frorn
any mere welding of these schemes together, nor from any choice of
the best points in existing syntheses, that the new s 3 mthesis for which
I hope must be born. It must be bom from new-dawning knowledge #

EPILOGUE

1010 ]

287

and in that new knowledge I believe that each great form of religious
thought will find its indispensable — I may almost say its predicted—*
development. Our race from its very infancy has stumbled along a
guarded way ; and now the first lessons of its early childhood reveal the
root in reality of much that it has instinctively believed.

1010. What I think I know, therefore, I am bound to tell ; I must
give the religious upshot of observation and experiment in such brief
announcement as an audience like this ^ has a right to hear, even before
our discoveries can be laid in full before the courts of science for definite
approval.

The religious upshot^ I repeat : — for I cannot here reproduce the mass
of evidence which has been published in full elsewhere. Its general
character is by this time widely known. Observation, experiment, infer-
ence, have led many inquirers, of whom I am one, to a belief in direct or
telepathic intercommunication, not only between the minds of men still
on earth, but between minds or spirits still on earth and spirits departed.
Such a discovery opens the door also to revelation. By discovery and by
revelation — by observation from without the veil, and by utterance from
within — certain theses have been provisionally established with regard to
such departed souls as we have been able to encounter. First and chiefly,
I at least see ground to believe that their state is one of endless evolution
in wisdom and in love. I'heir loves of earth persist; and most of all
those highest loves which seek their outlet in adoration and worship. We
do not find, indeed, that support is given by souls in bliss to any special
scheme of terrene theology. Thereon they know less than we mortal men
have often fancied that we knew. Yet from their step of vantage-ground
in the Universe, at least, they see that it is good. I do not mean that
they know either of an end or of an explanation of evil. Yet evil to
them seems less a terrible than a slavish thing. It is embodied in
no mighty Potentate ; rather it forms an isolating madness from which
higher spirits strive to free the distorted soul. There needs no
chastisement of fire ; self-knowledge is man’s punishment and his reward ;
self-knowledge, and the nearness or the aloofness of companion souls.
For in that world love is actually self-preservation ; the Communion of
Saints not only adorns but constitutes the Life Everlasting. Nay, from
the law of telepathy it follows that that communion is valid for us here
and now. Even now the love of souls departed makes answer to our
invocations. Even now our loving memory — love is itself a prayer —
supports and strengthens those delivered spirits upon their upward way.
No wonder ; since we are to them but as fellow-travellers shrouded in a
mist; ‘‘neither death, nor life, nor height, nor depth, nor any other
creature ” can bar us from the hearth-fire, of the universe, or hide for more
than a moment the inconceivable oneness of souls.

^ The Synthetic Society, before which these sections were first read as a paper in
March 1899.— -Editors.

288 CHAPTER X [lOU

1011. And is not this a fresh instalment, or a precursory adumbration,
of that Truth into which the Paraclete should lead? Has any world-
scheme yet been suggested so profoundly corroborative of the very core of
the Christian revelation? Jesus Christ ^‘brought life and immortality to
light,” By His appearance after bodily death He proved the deathless-
ness of the spirit. By His character and His teaching He testified to the
Fatherhood of God. So far, then, as His unique message admitted of
evidential support, it is here supported. So far as He promised things
unprovable, that promise is here renewed.

I venture now on a bold saying ; for I predict that, in consequence of
the new evidence, all reasonable men, a century hence, will believe the
Resurrection of Christ, whereas, in default of the new evidence, no
reasonable men, a century hence, would have believed it. 'Phe ground of
this forecast is plain enough. Our ever-growing recognition of the con-
tinuity, the uniformity of cosmic law has gradually made of the alleged
uniqueness of any incident its almost inevitable refutation. Ever more
clearly must our age of science realise that any relation between a material
and a spiritual world cannot be an ethical or emotional relation alone ;
that it must needs be a great structural fact of the Universe, involving
laws at least as persistent, as identical from age to age, as our known laws
of Energy or of Motion, And especially as to that central claim, of the
souPs life manifested after the body’s death, it is plain that this can less
and less be supported by remote tradition alone ; that it must more and
more be tested by modern experience and inquiry. Suppose, for instance,
that we collect many such histories, recorded on first-hand evidence in our
critical age ; and suppose that all these narratives break down on analysis ;
that they can all be traced to hallucination, misdescription, and other
persistent sources of error ; — can we then expect reasonable men to believe
that this marvellous phenomenon, always vanishing into nothingness when
closely scrutinised in a modern English scene, must yet compel adoring
credence when alleged to have occurred in an Oriental country^ and in a
remote and superstitious age? Had the results (in short) of “psychical
research ” been purely negative, would not Christian evidence — I do not
say Christian emotion^ but Christian evidence — have received an over-
whelming blow ?

As a matter of fact, — or, if you prefer the phrase, in ray own personal
opinion, — our research has led us to results of a quite different type. They
have not been negative only, but largely positive. We have shown that
amid much deception and self-deception, fraud and illusion, veritable
manifestations do reach us from beyond the grave. The central claim
of Christianity is thus confirmed, as never before. If our own friends,
men like ourselves, can sometimes return to tell us of love and hope, a
mightier Spirit may well have used the eternal laws ivith a more com-
manding power. There is nothing to hinder the reverent faith that,
though we be all “the Children of the Most Highest,” He came nearer

EPILOGUE

289

1012 ]

than we, by some sphce by us immeasurable, to That which is infinitely
far. There is nothing to hinder the devout conviction that He of His
own act ** took upon Him the form of a servant,** and was made flesh
for our salvation, foreseeing the earthly travail and the eternal crown.

« Surely before this descent into generation,’* says Plotinus,^ “ we existed
in the intelligible world ; being other men than now we are, and some of
us Gods ; clear souls, and minds immixed with all existence ; parts of the
Intelligible, nor severed thence ; nor are we severed even now.**

1012. It is not thus to less of reverence that man is summoned, but
to more. Let him keep hold of early sanctities ; but let him remember
also that once again “ a great sheet has been let down out of heaven ; **
and lo ! neither Buddha nor Plato is found common or unclean.

Nay, as to our own soul’s future, when that first shock of death is
past, it is in Buddhism that we find the more inspiring, the truer view.
That Western conception of an instant and unchangeable bliss or woe —
a bliss or woe determined largely by a man’s beliefs, in this earthly
ignorance, on matters which the angels desire to look into ” — is the
bequest of a pre-Copernican era of speculative thought. In its
Mahomedan travesty, we see the same scheme with outlines coarsened
into grolesqueness ; — we see it degrade the cosmic march and profluence
into a manner of children’s play.

Meantime the immemorial musings of unnumbered men have dreamt
of a consummation so far removed that he who gazed has scarcely known
whether it were Nothingness or Deity. With profoundest fantasy, the
East has pondered on the vastness of the world that now is, of the worlds
that are to be. What rest or pasture for the mind in the seven days of
Creation, the four rivers of Paradise, the stars ‘‘made also”? The
farther East has reached blindly forth towards astronomical epochs,
sidereal spaces, galactic congregations of inconceivable Being. Pressed
by the incumbency of ancestral gods (as the Chinese legend tells us), it
has “ created by one sweep of the imagination a thousand Universes, to
be the Buddha’s realm.”

The sacted tale of Buddha, developed from its earlier simplicity by
the shaping stress of many generations, opens to us the whole range and
majesty of human fate. “The destined Buddha has desired to be a
Buddha through an almost unimaginable series of worlds.” No soul
need ever be without that hope. “The spirit-worlds are even now
announcing the advent of future Buddhas, in epochs too remote for
the computation of men.” No obstacles without us can arrest our way.
“The rocks that were thrown at Buddha were changed into flowers.”
Not our own worst misdoings need beget despair. “ Buddha, too, had
often been to hell for his sins.” The vast complexity of the Sufti of
Things need not appal us. “Beneath the bottomless whirlpool of
existences, behind the illusion of Form and Name,” we, too, like

^ Enn, vi. 4, 14.

VOL. II.

T

290 CHAPTER X [1013

Buddha, may discover and reveal ** the perfection &f the Eternal Law.”
Us, too, like Buddha, the cosmic welcome may await ; as when Earth
itself and the laws of all worlds ” trembled with joy “ as Buddha attained
the Supreme Intelligence, and entered into the Endless Calm.”

1013. I believe that some of those who once were near to us are
already mounting swiftly upon this heavenly way. And when from that
cloud encompassing of unforgetful souls some voice is heard, — as long
ago, — there needs no heroism, no sanctity, to inspire the apostle’s
^mOviiia CIS to draAvircu, the desire to lift our anchor, and to sail out
beyond the bar. What fitter summons for man than the wish to live in
the memory of the highest soul that he has known, now risen higher ; — to
lift into an immortal security the yearning passion of his love 7 As the
soul basteneth,” says Plotinus,' to the things that are above, she will
ever forget the more ; unless all her life on earth leave a memory of
things done well. For even here may man do well, if he stand clear of
the cares of earth. And he must stand clear of their memories too ; so
that one may rightly speak of a noble soul as forgetting those things that
are behind. And the shade of Herakles, indeed, may talk of his own
valour to the shades, but the true Herakles in the true world will deem
all that of little worth ; being transported into a more sacred place, and
strenuously engaging, even above his strength, in those battles in which
the wise engage.” Can we men now on earth claim more of sustainment
than lies in the incipient communion with those enfranchised souls?
What day of hope, of exaltation, has dawned like this, since the message
of Pentecost?

1014. Yet a durable religious synthesis should do more than satisfy
man’s immediate aspiration. It should be in itself progressive and
evolutionary \ it should bear a promise of ever deeper holiness, to answer
to the long ages of heightening wisdom during which our race may be
destined to inhabit the earth. This condition has never yet been met.
No scheme, indeed, could meet it which was not based upon recurrent
and developing facts. To such facts we now appeal. We look, not
backward to fading tradition, but onward to dawning experience. We
hope that the intercourse, now at last consciously begun—although as
through the mouth of babes and sucklings, and in confused and stammer-
ing speech — between discarnate and incarnate souls, may through long
effort clarify into a director communion, so that they shall teach us all
they will.

Science, then, need be no longer fettered by the limitations of this
planetary standpoint ; nor ethics by the narrow experience of a single life.
Evolution will no longer appear as a tnmeated process, an ever-arrested
movement upon an unknown goal. Rather we may gain a glimpse of
ultimate incandescence where science and religion fuse in one ; a cosmic
evolution of Energy into Life, and of Life into Love, which is Joy.

EPILOGUE

1016]

291

Ix)ve, which is Joy at once and Wisdom we can do no more than ring
the changes on terms like these, whether we imagine the transfigurement
and apotheosis of conquering souls, or the lower, but still sacred, destiny
which may be some day possible for souls still tarrying here. We picture
the perfected soul as the Buddha, the Saviour, the aurai simplicis ignem^
dwelling on one or other aspect of that trinal conception of Wisdom,
Love, and Joy. For souls not yet perfected but still held on earth I have
foretold a growth in holiness. By this I mean no unreal opposition or
forced divorcement of sacred and secular, of flesh and spirit. Rather 1
define holiness as the joy too high as yet for our enjoyment ; the wisdom
just beyond our learning; the rapture of love which we still strive to
attain. Inevitably, as our link with other spirits strengthens, as the life
of the organism pours more fully through the individual cell, we shall feel
love more ardent, wider wisdom, higher joy ; perceiving that this organic
unity of Soul, which forms the inward aspect of the telepathic law, is in
itself the Order of the Cosmos, the Summation of Things. And such
devotion may find its flower in no vain self-martyrdom, no cloistered
resignation, but rather in such pervading ecstasy as already the elect have
known ; the Vision which dissolves for a moment the corporeal prison-
house ; ‘‘ the flight of the One to the One.”

“ So let the soul that is not unworthy of that Vision contemplate the
Great Soul; freed from deceit and every witchery, and collected into
calm. Calmed be the body for her in that hour, and the tumult of the
flesh ; ay, all that is about her, calm ; calm be the earth, the sea, the air,
and let Heaven itself be still. Then let her feel how into that silent
heaven the Great Soul floweth in. . . And so may man’s soul be sure of
Vision, when suddenly she is filled with light ; for this light is from Him
and is He ; and then surely shall one know His presence when, like a
god of old time, He entered into the house of one that calleth Him, and
maketh it full of light.” “ And how,” concludes Plotinus, “ may this
thing be for us? Let all else go.” '

1015. These heights, 1 confess, are above the stature of my spirit.
Yet for each of us is a fit ingress into the Unseen ; and for some lesser
man the memory of one vanished soul may be beatific as of old for
Plotinus the flooding immensity of Heaven. And albeit no historical
religion can persist as a logical halting-place upon the endless mounting
way — that way which leads unbroken from the first germ of love in the
heart to an inconceivable union with the Divine — yet many a creed in
turn may well be close inwrought and inwoven with our eternal hope.
What wonder, if in the soul’s long battle, some Captain of our Salvation
shall sometimes seem to tower unrivalled and alone?— oIos yap cpvcro

^ Enn^ V. 2-3, The World-Soul is supra grammaticam ; and Plotinus sometimes
uses a persona], sometimes an impersonal, locution to express what is infinitely beyond
the conception of personality, as it is infinitely beyond any human conception what-
soever.

292 CHAPTER X [App, A

TAiov ’ExToip. And yet in no single act or passion can that salvation
stand; far hence, beyond Orion and Andromeda, the cosmic process
works and shall work for ever through unbegotten souls. And even as it
was not in truth the great ghost of Hector only, but the whole nascent
race of Rome, which bore from the Trojan altar the hallowing fire, so is it
not one Saviour only, but the whole nascent race of man — nay, all the
immeasurable progeny and population of the heavens — ^which issues
continually from behind the veil of Being, and forth from the Sanctuary
of the Universe carries the ever-burning flame : Aeternumque adytis
ej^ert penetralibus ignenu

APPENDIX A

The Function of a Society for Psychical Research

[The following formed originally a Presidential Address to the Society for
Psychical Research, delivered in May, 1900. Hence the allusion to the per-
sonal position occupied by the author in that Society during that year.—
Editors.]

When I heard, in absence from England, that the Council of this
Society had done me the honour of electing me as its President for
the current year, I felt that a certain definite stage in the Society’s
evolution had been reached at an earlier date than 1 should originally
have expected.

My predecessors in this Chair, I need not say, have, without excep-
tion, been men of the highest distinction. The list has included men
whose leadership would confer honour on any body of men whatever
on such bodies, for instance, as the British Association or the Hou.se of
Commons. We have been grateful to these eminent persons for lending
the sanction of their names to our early beginnings. And we have other
names in reserve of similar distinction destined, I hope, some day to
adorn our list of Presidents. Yet for the current year the Council
have preferred to choose a man who has little claim to such a dis-
tinction, beyond the fact that he has worked for the objects which
our Society seeks, from days even before the Society’s formation;—
and that he is determined to go on thus working so long as his
faculties may allow. So have our friends chosen; and if a man may
speak thus of his own election, I think that the choice is appropriate
enough. For the time has come when we may fairly indicate to the
world that we believe our Society can stand on its own bottom ; that
it cafirries on a branch of scientific work which, although novel and
tentative, is legitimate and honourable; and therefore that we
not need to put forward in its prominent positions only those names
which have been made indepehclently illustrious by good work of other

APPENDIX A

293

ApP - A]

•

kinds performed elsewhere. As representing the principle that the
plain, unadorned Psychical Researcher is just as respectable in his own
way as anybody else, I am proud indeed to see my humbler name
inscribed after the names of Henry Sidgwick, Balfour Stewart, Arthur
Balfour, William James, and William Crookes.

But here one thought must rise — must rise for all who knew the
early days of this research, but most of all for me — Would that
Edmund Gurney were standing where I stand now ! For us who knew
him best the years since he left us have but served to illustrate his
uniqueness and to deepen his memory; have made us feel how much
of the humorous adventure, the sympathetic fellowship, the deep delight
of this research of ours has with him passed irrevocably away. On
the lighter side of things, we can never renew the intellectual enjoy-
ment of those years of our small beginnings spent at his side ; — watch-
ing how his flashing irony, his fearless dialectic, dealt with the attacks
which then poured in from every quarter; — with the floundering plati-
tudes of obscurantist orthodoxy, or with the smug sneers of popular
science, belittling what it will not try to understand. On the graver
side, we shall hardly see another example of just that attitude of mind
with which Gurney entered on this research, — and which made for us
so deep an element in his incomparable charm.

For in that many-chorded nature sympathy was the deepest strain ; —
sympathy which flowed forth indeed to those he loved in such penetrat-
ing and intimate tenderness as few mortals have had the happiness to
know, — but which expended itself more widely in a profound compas-
sion for the multiform sorrows of men. And thus, as needs must
happen in those responsive minds which hear, in the Apostle^s words,
the whole creation groaning and travailing until now, there came to
him the conviction that the question of life after death was the only
test which we could really api)ly to the existence of a Providence ; —
nay, that it was no mere artlcuius siantis aut cadentis Ecclesia^ but in
sombre earnest, for all humankind, the articulus stanHs aut cadentis
Deu Strangely enough, it was for others rather than for himself that
Criirney desired this great possibility; his own mournful and stoic
temper dwelt little on any personal hope. But he felt that if the First
Cause has summoned into life on earth, though it were but one single
man alone, miserable amid all the happy ; — one single soul foredoomed to
eternal protest and inescapable woe ; — then that First Cause is not a God
to whom a good man can offer love, or a just man worship. Alas 1 how .
many theologies does this clear moral axiom shrivel as with burning firr' !
how many philosophies does it scatter to the winds ! — philosophies of
men walking delicately on wordy bridges across the grim abyss of tilings,
'-satisfied that the world is well enough, while round them wronged,
degraded lives by millions are perishing in agony and for ever. It was
m response to such easy optimism that Gurney's logic was the most

294

CHAPTER X

[App. A

intolerably trenchant, his sombre silence the fuflest of sad scorn
for in truth this contented blindness of sealed spirits is in itself the
vilest woe of man. He could not avert his eyes, and disport himself
in a fool’s Paradise. He could not weave a web of words, and stifle
in a philosopher’s dream. Suffer me to apply to my friend for a
moment even those lofty lines in which a great poet has invoked the
greatest ; —

“Thou that seest universal Nature moved by universal Mind ;

Thou, majestic in thy sadness at the doubtful doom of humankind.”

It is well that this noble figure should stand at the entrance of our
research \ — should show how unselfish may be the impulse which has
prompted to eager labour, — eager even beyond the limit which physical
powers allowed. But assuredly the mass of us Psychical Researchers
have no need whatever of heroic virtue. We have enough and to spare
of such motives as appeal to ordinary men. We have the stimulus of
intellectual curiosity, — more richly satisfied, I think, in ours than in any
other quest ; — ^and beyond this most of us, I think, have the healthful,
primary desire for the prolongation — the endless prolongation — of life and
happiness. I know, indeed, that for various reasons some men of strong
and high nature, as well as many men of feebler nature, do fail to feel
this desire ; but on the whole one must regard that form of Welt-Schmen
as Wit a passing mood of our race’s immaturity, — as what physicians
call a neurosis of dei^elopment ; — one must admit that usually when a man
cares little for existence this is because existence cares little for him,
and that it has been doubt as to the value of life and love which has
made the decadence of almost all civilisations. Life is the final aim of
lifej the mission of the highest Teacher was that we might have it
the more abundantly; and the universe strives best towards its ulti-
mate purpose through the nonnal, vigorous spirit to whom to live itself
is joy.

The danger, then, for our research will lie not in lack but in excess of
motive ; our minds may be biassed in their judgment of evidence by a
deep instinctive desire. For my own part, I certainly cannot claim such
impartiality as indifference might bring. P*rom my earliest childhood—
from my very first recollections — the desire for eternal life has immeasur-
ably eclipsed for me every other wish or hope. Yet desire is not neces-
sarily bias ; and vaf personal history has convinced myself— though I
cannot claim that it shall convince others also — that my wishes do not
strongly warp my judgment, — nay, that sometimes the very keenness of
personal anxiety may make one afraid to believe, as readily as other men,
that i^hich one most longs for.

For when, after deriving much happiness from Christian faith, I felt
myself forced by growing knowledge to recognise that the evidence for
that imiminant instance of spirit return was not adequate, as standing

App.A] APPENDIX A 295

alone, to justify conviction, I did honestly surrender that great joy ; although
its loss was more grievous to me than anything else which has happened
to me in life.

Then with little hope — nay, almost with reluctant scorn — but with the
feeling that no last and least chance of the great discovery should be
thrown aside, I turned to such poor efforts at psychical research as were
at that time possible ; and now it is only after thirty years of such study
as I have been able to give that I say to myself at last, Habes iota quod
menu petisii — '*Thou hast what thine whole heart desired;*' — that 1 re-
cognise that for me this fresh evidence, — while raising that great historic
incident of the Resurrection into new credibility, — has also filled me with
a sense of insight and of thankfulness such as even my first ardent
Christianity did not bestow.

Yet if I thus find the happiness which sprang from far-reaching
Tradition and Intuition surpassed by the happiness which springs from
a narrower, but a more stable range of demonstrated fact, I nevertheless
speak in no spirit of reaction or of ingratitude towards traditions and
intuitions which must yet, for many a century, be potent for the salvation
of men. I by no means take for granted that any scientific inquiry, any
induction from empirical facts, can afford to man his only or his deepest
insight into the meaning of the Universe. I have no controversy with
those who say that contemplation, revelation, ecstasy, may carry deep
into certain hearts an even profounder truth. I recognise also that our
Science is a conventional structure ; that it rests on assumptions which
we cannot fully prove ; or which even indicate, by their apparent incon-
sistency, that they can be at best but narrow aspects of some underlying
law imperfectly discerned. All this we may all admit ; just as we admit
the inadequacy, the conventionality, of human speech itself. Speech
cannot match the meaning which looks in an hour of emotion from the
eyes of a friend. But what we learn from that gar.e is indefinable and in-
communicable. Our race needed the spoken and written word, with all its
baldness, if they were to understand each other and to grow to be men.
So with Science as opposed to Intuition. Science forms a language
common to all mankind ; she can explain herself when she is misunder-
stood and right herself when she goes wrong ; nor has humanity yet
found, at any rate, since that great wedding between Reason and Experi-
ence, which immortalises the name of Galileo^ — that the methods of
Science, intelligently and honestly followed, have tied ns in the end
astray.

It is only in the region of inquiry into a spiritual world— I mean a
world of immaterial and yet individual realities— that these truisms are
still in danger of being taken for paradoxes. At once the inornate
interest and the extreme obscurity of that investigation have long pre-
vented it from being kept fully and fairly in that scientific field where
*nan's attempts at all other knowledge are now collected and appraised.

296 CHAPTER X [App. A

In their rude beginnings, no doubt, Religion and Science were indistin.
guishable. The savage observed such scanty facts as he could get at,
and tried to shape both his practical and his spiritual life upon that obser-
vation. But his need of a theory of the unseen world (to put his vague
hopes and terrors into our own phraseology) went far beyond what his
scraps of experience could teach him. ‘‘ What must I do to be saved?
was a question to which he could not find, yet would not wait for an
answer. He fell into grotesque fancies, which his experience did not
really support ; and the divorce of Religion from Science at once began.

The spiritual need which thus acted on the savage continues to act on
the civilised man. He too is impelled to build his faith on grounds out-
side his sphere of observation, to enlarge the safe, general, and permanent
formula for religion in various more or less unsafe, specialised, and tran-
sitory ways. For it is — as already said — a safe, general, and permanent
formula for religion if we regard it as man’s normal stibjective response to
the sum of known cosmic phenomena taken as an intelligible whole.
Under the title of Natural Religion this forms at least an element in all
the higher forms of faith. Nevertheless it is felt to be inadequate ; because
the observable phenomena of the Universe, so far at least as they have yet
been observed, have not been such as to evoke (save in some few minds)
the full hope, the full devotion which our developed nature yearns to feel.
To live by Natural Religion alone has been like living on turnips in the
field. Most men demand their spiritual nutriment in a more assimilable
form. I'he philosophical or the poetical contemplation of Nature has not
satisfied them in the past ; nor can they hope that the scientific contempla-
tion of Nature will satisfy them any better now. They turn aside from
the ambiguous pageant, the circumspect scrutiny ; they specialise the
name of Religion upon some clear, swift, extra-scientific knowledge as to
the dealings of unseen Powers with mankind.

On such knowledge, or supposed knowledge, the peoples of East and
West have stayed in many fashions their soul’s desire ; but, nevertheless,
we all know too well that even yet there Is no spiritual food attainable in
the precise condition in which it will meet all healthy needs. We arc all
forced to feel that in the present divided and unstable condition of beliets
there is plausibility in the Agnostic's appeal to us to halt and mark time ;
in his insistence that we have not really evidence, up to modem standards,
which can support any definite creed in matters remote from ordinary
methods of proof. Some men, indeed, have ventured explicitly to reply
that Christian Faith need not be founded on the same kind of demonstra-
tion as Science ; that Tradition and Intuition can well supply her outward
form and her inward glow. Urged among those who have much of con-
secrated tradition, of noble intuition in common, this high claim may seem
convincing as the gaze of a friend. But it has the inevitable weakness
already indicated. Introduce other persons of different race but equally
sincere, the Buddhist, the Parsee, the Jew — nay, the saint of science, hke

APPENDIX A

297

App- A]

Qaiwin — and you ean meet these men no longer on the ground of
Christian Tradition or Intuition — you can meet them on the ground of
Science alone. Thus even among spiritually-minded men we seem forced
back into the view that Science can be the only world-philosophy or
world-religion ; — the only synthesis of the Universe which, however im-
perfect, is believed in semper^ ubigue^ et ab omnibus^ by all who can under-
stand it.

l"his conclusion, however, as already implied, at present satisfies
nobody. The Christian says that it is mere mockery to pretend that
Science can be the base of Religion ; for it tells us nothing of the spiritual
world. “ Naturally,” replies the Agnostic, hardening into Materialism ;
“since there is no spiritual world of which to tell.” “The Universe,”
cried Clifford triumphantly, “ is made of ether and atoms, and there is
no room for ghosts.”

So soon, however, as the man of science takes this tone — so soon as
he passes, so to say, from Huxley to Clifford — he loses his strong position,
the Agnostic’s raison d'etre, Clifford had not really turned over his atoms
thoroughly enough to make sure that no ghost was hidden among them.
As indisputably as any worshipper of Mumbo- Jumbo had that eager truth-
lover framed an emotional synthesis which outran his Science.

Is, then, the passivity of pure Agnosticism the attitude with which we
ought to be content? Ignoramus et ignorabimus — should this be the
single clause of our creed ? Surely that were too tame a surrender to the
Sphinx and her riddle ; which, in the old story, turned out after all to be
rather easy to guess. Why should we not simply try to find out new facts
here, as we have found out new facts everywhere else where we have
looked for them? Just here we have not looked for them yet, because
neither the priests of our religions nor their critics have till now been dis-
posed for the quest. The priests have thought it safest to defend their
own traditions, their own intuitions, without going afield in search of
independent evidence of a spiritual world. Their assailants have kept
their powder and shot for the orthodox ramparts, ignoring any isolated
strongholds which formed no part of the main line of defence.

This search for new facts is precisely what our Society undertakes.
Starting from various standpoints, we endeavour to carry the newer, the
intellectual virtues into regions where dispassionate tranquillity has
seldom yet been known. As compared with the claims of Theologians,
we set before ourselves a humbler, yet a difficult task. Wo do not seek to
shape the clauses of the great Act of Faith, but merely to prove its pre-
amble. To prove the preamble of all religions; to be able to say to
theologian or to philosopher : “ Thus and thus we demonstrate that a
spiritual world exists — a world of independent and abiding realities, not
a mere ‘ epiphenomenon ’ or transitory effect of the material world — a
world of things, concrete and living, not a mere system of abstract ideas ;
now, therefore, reason on that world or feel towards it as you will.” This

298 CHAPTER X [App. A

would indeed, in my view, be the weightiest service which any research
could render to the deep disquiet of our time ; — nay, to the desiderium
orbis catholici^ the world-old and world-wide desire.

First, then, we adopt the ancient belief — implied in all monotheistic
religion, and conspicuously confirmed by the progress of modern science
— that the world as a whole, spiritual and material together, has in some
way a systematic unity; and on this we base the novel presumption
that there should be a unity of method in the investigation of all fact.
We hold therefore that the attitude, the habits of mind, the methods, by
aid of which physical science has grown deep and wide, should be applied
also to the spiritual world. We endeavour to approach the problems of
that world by careful collection, scrutiny, testing, of particular facts ; and
we account no unexplained fact too trivial for our attention. Seeking
knowledge before edification, we aim not at what we should most like to
learn, but at what we have the best chance of learning ; we dabble among
beggarly elements ; we begin at the beginning.

Into this frame of mind the long habit of our race in matters religious
has made it difficult fully to enter. I have found it helpful to imagine
what would be the procedure of some extraneous inquirer into the nature
and fate of men — some inquirer exempt from their hopes, their fears, their
presuppositions.

Let us suppose, then, that a spectator of all time and all existence,”
a kind of minor Cosmotheorus, as Plato might call him, were speculating
from the standpoint of this planet, as to what was likely to be the true
position of the human race in the scheme of the Universe. Such an
observer would be compelled to start from the facts before him. He
would begin his investigation, therefore, not with God but with man. He
would analyse the faculties of which he found man possessed, and would
infer in what environment they were designed to operate ; — of what system,
that is to say, of cosmic laws, expressing a special modification of the
ultimate energy, the energy contained in the human race formed an
integral element. His first discovery would be that the obvious material
environment, which is all that most men know, does not %xhaust the
faculties nor cover the phenomena of human life. Most of man’s senses,
indeed, he could explain as concerned solely with matter. Sight he could
not thus explain ; and the study of light would lead him to discover the
etherial environment, — a system of laws, that is to say, which, while
fundamentally continuous with the laws of matter, does yet supply a new
conception of the Cosmos, at once more generalised and more profound.
But still the central problem of man’s being would remain unsolved. Life
and thought could not be referred to the working either of aggregated
moleoules or of etherial undulations. To explain Life by these two
environments would be as impossible as it had been to explain Light by
the material environment alone. Might there not be yet another environ-
ment,— spiritual, what you will? Was there any way of

APPENDIX A

299

App. A]

reducing this vast and vague problem of Life to manageable definiteness ?
Were there measurable traces of human faculty working in apparent inde-
pendence of material or etherial law? Such traces, if he sought long
enough, I maintain that he would assuredly find. He would find (as we
have found) instances of lelaesthesia, or perception beyond the sensory
range; instances of telepathy, or direct communication from mind to
mind; — nay, telepathic messages from the so-called dead; — signs and
apparitions by which minds discarnate impressed themselves upon minds
still robed in flesh. How far the ether, in some of its unknown properties,
may be concerned in these operations, our Cosmotheorus might be better
able to guess than we. To him, perhaps, no environment would seem
discontinuous with any other environment. But, at any rate, here would
be definite traces of a new environment of Life and Thought ; traces of
the mutual action of minds, embodied and unembodied, in apparent
independence of matter.

I must not here follow our imagined inquirer further ; but surely we
leave him launched upon a series of observations and experiments which
have no inherent flaw in their basis, and no assignable limit to their
scope.

I have dwelt at some length upon this line of argument, because I
think that, in some form or other, it is our duty to have it always forth-
coming, our duty to set it before the world in varying expression, until our
age is really convinced that this great branch of knowledge, which deals
with things unseen, can form no exception to those rules by which
experience shows us that all valid knowledge has hitherto been won. So
confident, indeed, do I feel in this gradual but certain method of approach
—in this open, unfrequented way — that even if it had thus far failed to
lead us to any discovery, 1 should feel bound to pursue it still. But it
has not failed. This persistent analysis of unexplored faculty has revealed
to us already far more than I, for one, had ever dared to hope. I may
surely say with no more than the licensed exaggeration of epigram, that
our method^has revealed to us a hidden world within us, and that this
hidden world within us has revealed to us an invisible world without.

Within each man, I say, there is a world of thought and of perception
which lies outside the margin, beneath the threshold, deeper than the
surface-tension of his conscious being.

“We were the first that ever burst
Into that silent sea.”

We at any rate were among the earliest to attempt to explore and map
out that strange, submerged region — half lumber-room and half king’s-
treasury — where amid things outworn lie things unborn, and possiWlities
of our unimaginable Future lurk among the exuviae of our immemorable
Past. And yet in this confusion all is implicitly congruous and con-
secutive ; each trace of faculty, whether it lie behind our actual stage of

300

CHAPTER X

[App. A

progress or before^ belongs to a series of developments of personality
whose terms have no assignable limit ; — a series which carries us onward
without a break, from dream and hallucination and bewilderment, up to
the utterances of discarnate spirits and the visions of ecstasy.

For, in truth, from the mind’s inward vision we may learn more than
from the seeing of the eye; from inward audition more than from the
hearing of the ean The automatisms which steal their way upward from
hidden depths to manifestation amid man’s sensory perceptions and
voluntary acts are found on analysis to contain elements of knowledge not
attainable in any normal fashion. Such knowledge is shown in telepathic
messages between living men, and in apparitions which tell of men dying,
and in evidential messages from men whom we call dead. All this— in
Phantasms of the Living and in fourteen volumes of Proceedings — 1 claim
that we have adequately shown. And of late years we have advanced
and consolidated these fragmentary and fugitive indications of the spirit’s
survival by certain records of trance-phenomena and spirit-possession
records as yet inchoate and imperfect, yet which must needs be faced and
dealt with by all serious men.

But here I must needs stay a moment to prevent any misunder-
standing. Throughout this address, of course, I am speaking for myself
alone. I am not giving utterance to any collective view, but to my
own view of the general drift and result of our collective action. But at
this point I know that most even of those who may have gone with me
thus far will — and quite justifiably— suspend their adhesion, f’ew even
of my own colleagues have had full reason to believe that matter of real
importance has yet been received from behind the veil, and in the world
at large the general impression that even those messages which look
evidentially as though they had come from discarnate spirits are yet
practically futile and incoherent is strongly and naturally operative in
checking public interest in what seems so strangely baffling a rosearcli.

I will not now protest, as I might protest, against the accuracy of this
general impression of the actual facts. Accepting it for the |ake of argu-
ment, I will confine myself to one simple line of a priori reasoning, which
seems to me sufficient to show what, in the supposed case, is our plain,
scientific duty. I say, then, that if once it be admitted, — as we are now
assuming, for argument’s sake, that it is admitted, — that it is evidentially
probable that some of these messages do indeed, in however indirect or
confused a manner, emanate from an unseen world, — then it is a
blasphemy against the faith of Science to doubt that they must ulti-
mately prove to be of serious, of supreme importance.

The faith to which Science is sworn is a faith in the uniformity, the
cohefcnee, the intelligibility of, at any rate, the material universe.
Science herself is but the practical development of this mighty postulate.
And if any phenomenon on which she chances on her onward way seems
arbitrary, or incoherent, or unintelligible, she does not therefore suppose

APPENDIX A

301

App. A]

that she has come upon an unravelled end in the texture of things ; but
rather takes for granted that a rational answer to the new problem must
somewhere exists — an answer which will be all the more instructive
because it will involve facts of which that first question must have
failed to take due account.

This faith in the uniformity of material Nature formulates itself in two
great dogmas, — for such they arc ; — the dogma of the Conservation of
Matter, and the dogma of the Conservation of Energy. Of the Con-
servation of Matter, within earthly limits, we are fairly well assured ;
but of the Conservation of Energy the proof is far less complete, simply
because Energy is a conception which does not belong to the material
world alone. Life is to us the most important of all forms of activity ; —
of energy, I would say, — except that we cannot transform other energies
into Life, nor measure in foot-pounds that directive force which has
changed the face of the world. Life comes we know not whence ; it
vanishes we know not whither ; it is interlocked with a moving system
vaster than that we know. To grasp the whole of its manifestation we
should have to follow it into an unseen world. Yet scientific faith bids us
believe that there, too, there is continuity ; and that the past and the future
of that force which we discern for a moment are still subject to universal
Law.

Believing, then, that the whole Cosmos is such as to satisfy the claims
of human Reason, we are irresistibly led to ask whether it satisfies other
claims of our nature which are as imperious as Reason itself. Infinite
Intelligence would see the Cosmos as infinitely intelligent ; but would
infinite Goodness also see it as infinitely good ?

We know too well the standing difficulties in the way of such an
assuinj)tion. They are that which we call Evil, and that which we see
as Death. Now as to Evil, — which for us here and now seems so inefface-
able a blot on the idea of Omnipotence, — we can perhaps nevertheless just
conceive that for the Cosmotheorus all these defects and incompatibilities
of human igipulse and sensibility may seem as relatively infinitesimal in
the unimaginable Sum of Things, as for us are the whirl and clashing of
molecules in the dewdrop, which cannot mar for our vision its crystalline
calm.

Bui deaths as it presents itself to us, cannot be similarly explained
away. If it be really, as it seems, a sheer truncation of moral progress,
absolute alike for the individual and for the race, — then any human
conception of a moral universe must simply be given up. We are shut in
land-locked pools ; why speak to us of an infinite sea?

What, then, should be the impulse, what the faith of Science, if she
finds even the least reason to suspect that this truncation is i» fact
illusory; that on the moral side also there is conservation and persist-
ence ; — conservation not only of such ether-vortices as we assume to
underlie our visible matter, but of the spiritual systems or syntheses

302

CHAPTER X

[App. A

which underlie the personalities of men? — ^persistence not only of crude
transformable energies, but of those specific non-transformable energies
which inform a Plato or a Newton, and which seem the only commen-
surate object towards which the whole process ^of evolution can tend?
Surely in such a case, whatever dreaminess or confusion may mark the
opening of intercourse with worlds indefinitely remote, Science should
summon all her fundamental trust in the coherence, the intelligibility of
things, to assure her that the dreaminess must pass and the confusion
clear, and that the veriest rudiment of communication between world and
world bears yet the promise of completing and consummating her own
mighty dogmas, — of effecting a unification of the universe such as she has
never ventured to hope till now? What are our petty human preconcep.
tions worth in such a case as this? If it was absurd to refuse to listen to
Kepler, because he bade the planets move in no perfect circles, but in
undignified ellipses ; — because he hastened and slackened from hour to
hour what ought to be a heavenly body’s ideal and unwavering speed
is it not absurder still to refuse to listen to these voices from afar, because
they come stammering and wandering as in a dream confusedly, instead
of with a trumpet’s call? because spirits that bend nigh to earth may
undergo, perhaps, an earthly bewilderment, and suffer unknown limita-
tions, and half remember us and half forget?

Nay ! in the end it is not for us to choose ; — we needs must join in
this communion with what grace we may. We cannot, if we would,
transform ourselves into the mere cynical spectators of an irrational
universe. We are part and parcel of these incredible phenomena ; our
own souls shall soon be feeling the same attraction, the same hesitancy,
upon the further shore.

‘‘ I am the doubter and the doubt,

And I the song the Brahman sings.”

Let us do what we can, then, to dignify the situation. Let us try,
then, whether a more serious response on our part may enable the senders
of the messages to speak with clearer voice. To whose care indeed has
such response been hitherto for the most part left? May not the in-
stances where adequate precautions have been taken, adc<iuate record
made, be counted on the fingers of one hand ? Might not our unseen
correspondents turn the tables on us when we complain of their incapacity,
and ask whether it was worth while to do better for the " domestic muffs ”
of Mme. Blavatsky’s far-famed cenacle^ or for the sitters at the materiali-
sation stances ” of the ** Vampires of Onset ” ?

Assuredly we modern men have taken, in other quarters, more trouble
than *here is needed, with far less hope of reward. What has given its
worth to the study of comparative religions except our steady effort to
comprehend and to co-ordinate such childish and stammering utterances
as have marked the rise in one nation after another of those spiritual needs

APPENDIX A

303

Afp, A]

and conceptions wHich make in the end the truest unity of the race of
man? What should we have learnt from the Vedas, from the Book of the
Dead— nay, from the Christian records themselves — had we approached
those sacred texts in the spirit alternately of Simple Simon and of
Voltaire ?

The time, 1 think, is ripe for a generalisation wider than any which
those ancient books contain. For just as a kind of spiritual fusion of
Europe under Roman sway prepared the way for Christianity to become
the European religion, so now also it seems to me that a growing concep-
tion of the unity, the solidarity, of the human race is preparing the way
for a world-religion which expresses and rests upon that solidarity ; —
which conceives it in a fuller, more vital fashion than either Positivist or
Catholic had ever dreamed. For the new conception is neither of bene-
factors dead and done for, inspiring us automatically from their dates in
an almanac, nor, of shadowy saints imagined to intercede for us at
Tribunals more shadowy still ; — but rather of a human unity, — close-linked
beneath an unknown Sway, — wherein every man who hath been or now
is makes a living element ; — inalienably incorporate, and iraperishably co-
operant, and joint-inheritor of one infinite Hope.

Of course, I am not here supposing that any human gaze can pierce
deeply into the world unseen. Such communion as we may hold with
spirits in any degree comparable with ourselves must needs be on a level
far beneath the lowest of ** Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues,
Powers ” I — nay, must be in the very vestibule and antechamber of the
outermost of the courts of Heaven. These souls of ours are but infantum
aninm flentes in limine prime ; — the first and humblest conscious links in
a wonderful order ; — trembling still and half-bewildered at a future vaster
than we know. I do not presume to forecast what we may come in time
to learn ; 1 only say that for the present hour there will be enough of
motive to urge us to utmost effort to rise in the scale of being, if we can
once be certain that such noble spirits as we have known by earthly' inter-
course or earthly record do still concern themselves with our progress, and
still from their higher vantage-ground call to us that all is well.

Men objected of old to Copernicus that if our earth really swept
round the sun in so vast an orbit, there should be an apparent displace-
ment— a parallax — in the position of the fixed stars. Such parallax was
long sought in vain ; till at last advancing skill detected it in some few
stars nearer than the rest ; and our relation to these near luminaries proved
to us our veritable voyage through the star-strewn deep. Perhaps in the
spiritual world as well we have strained our gaze too exclusively on
luminaries that are beyond the parallactic limit ; and eyes turned steadily
on some nearer brightness may teach us at last our kinship and conwnunity
in the firmament of souls.

Not, then, with tears, and lamentations should we think of the blessed
dead. Rather we should rejoice with them in their enfranchisement, and

304 CHAPTER X [App. A

know that they are still minded to keep us as sharer^ in their joy. It is
they, not we, who are working now ; they are more ready to hear than we
to pray ; they guide us as with a cloudy pillar, but it is kindling into
steadfast fire.

Nay, it may be that our response, our devotion, is a needful element
in their ascending joy ; and God may have provided some better thing for
us, that they without us should not be made perfect ; — ut non sine nobis
consummarentur.

To most of my hearers I doubt not that this forecast of a
coming co-operation between incarnate and discarnate spirits will have
seemed speculative and premature. My defence is that I believe that
upon our own attitude towards these nascent communications their
progress and development depend, so that we cannot too soon direct
serious attention to the high responsibilities opening on our view. And
now yet another practical question is ready, I think, for immediate
discussion. All great changes in speculative belief must modify in some
way man’s immediate duty. In what way must our idea of duty be
modified, be expanded, if a religion is offered to us which no longer
depends on tradition and intuition only, but on reason also and on experi-
ment; which is not locked away in an emotional compartment of our
being, nor adapted to the genius of special races alone, but is oecumenical
as Science is oecumenical, is evolutionary as Science is evolutionary, and
rests on a permanent and provable relationship of the whole spiritual to
the whole material world ?

No full answer to such a question can as yet be attempted or divined.
But one point is clear ; — and on that point it is already urgently necessary
to insist. We must maintain, in old theological language, that the intel-
lectual virtues have now become necessary to salvation. Curiosity, candour,
care ; — these are the intellectual virtues ; — disinterested curiosity, unselfish
candour, unremitting care. These virtues have grown up outside the
ecclesiastical pale ; Science, not Religion, has fostered them ; — nay,
Religion has held them scarcely consistent with that pious spirit which
hopes to learn by humility and obedience the secrets of an unseen world.
Here surely our new ideals suggest not opposition but fusion. To us as
truly as to monk or anchorite the spiritual world is an intimate, an inter-
penetrating reality. But its very reality suggests the need of analysis, the
risk of misinterpretation ; the very fact that wc have outgrown our sacer-
dotal swaddling-clothes bids us learn to walk warily among pitfalls which
call for all the precautions that systematic reason can devise.

Upon a new scheme of beliefs, attractive to the popular mind as the
scheme which I prefigure, a swarm of follies and credulities must inevit-
ably perch and settle. Yet let those who mock at the weaknesses of
“ modern Spiritualism ” ask themselves to what extent either orthodox
religion or official science has been at pains to guard the popular mind
against losing balance upon contact with new facts, profoundly but

APPENDIX A

30s

App- A]

obscurely significant! Have the people’s religious instructors trained
them to investigate for themselves? Have their scientific instructors con-
descended to investigate for them ? Who should teach them to apply to
their inspirational speakers ” any test more searching than they have
been accustomed to apply to the sermons of priest or bishop? What
scientific manual has told them enough of the hidden powers within them
to prevent tliem from ascribing to spiritual agency whatever mental action
their ordinary consciousness may fail to recognise as its own?

The rank and file of Spiritists have simply transferred to certain new
dogmas — for most of which they at least have some comprehensible
evidence — the uncritical faith which they were actually commended for
bestowing on certain old dogmas, — for many of which the evidence was
at least beyond their comprehension. In such a case ridicule is no
remedy. The remedy lies, as I have said, in inculcating the intellectual
virtues ; — in teaching the mass of mankind that the maxims of the modern
stminf are at least as necessary to salvation as the maxims of the mediaeval
saint.

Now here, I take it, lies the special, the characteristic duty of the
Society for Psychical Research. It is a duty far wider than the mere
exposure of fraud ; far wider than the mere production of specimens of
patient and intelligent investigation. Our duty is not the founding of a
new sect, nor even the establishment of a new science, but is rather the
expansion of Science herself until she can satisfy those questions which
the human heart will rightly ask, but to which Religion alone has thus far
attempted an answer. Or rather, this is the duty, the mission, of the
coming century's leaders of spiritual thought. Our own more special
duty is to offer through an age of transition more momentous than man-
kind has ever knowm, that help in steadying and stimulating psychical
research all over the world which our collective experience should enable
us richly to bestow. Such function I say, to be ours indeed. We

alone have taken the first steps to deserv^e it. I see our original pro-
gramme completely justified. I see our raison d'etre indisputably estab-
lishcvl. I sec all things coming to pass as we foresaw. What I do not
see, alas ! is an energy and capacity of our own, sufficient for our widening
duty ; — enough of labourers for the vineyard so ripe for harvest. Speaking,
if so I may, for the remnant of that small company of labourers of the
first hour of the day, I must confess that our strength, at least, cannot
suffice for the expanding task ; — nay, could not so suffice, even if Edmund
(jurney were with us still ) — non, si ipse mens nunc adf ore t Hector. Other
workers, good men and true, have joined themselves to us ; — but we have
^<^ed of many more. We invite them from each department of science,
from every school of thought. With equal confidence we appeal for
co-operation to savant and to saint.

To the savant we point out that we are not trying to pick holes in
the order of Nature, but rather, by the scrutiny of residual phenomena,

VOL. II. ' u

CHAPTER X

306

[App.A

to get nearer to the origin and operation of Nature^ s central mystery of
Life. Men who realise that the etherial environment was discovered
yesterday, need not deem it impossible that a metetherial environment—
yet another omnipresent system of cosmic law — should be discovered
to-monow. The only valid a priori presumption in the matter is the
presumption that the Universe is infinite in an infinite number of ways.

To the Christian we can speak with a still more direct appeal. You
believe,” I would say, that a spiritual world exists, and that it acted on
the material world two thousand years ago. Surely it is so acting still !
Nay, you believe that it is so acting still ; for you believe that prayer is
heard and answered. To believe that prayer is heard is to believe in
telepathy, — in the direct influence of mind on mind. To believe that
prayer is answered is to believe that unembodied spirit does actually
modify (even if not storm-cloud or plague-germ) at least the minds, and
therefore the brains, of living men. From that belief the most advanced
‘ psychical * theories are easy corollaries. You may reply, indeed, that the
Church or the Bible has told men all of the unseen world that they need
to know, and that whatsoever is more than this cometh of evil. What
say you to this argument when it is retorted on you by Omar with his
Koran?”

But let us cease to speak as though the infinite Unseen World were a
mere preserve or battleground of theologies. If every dogma ever pro-
mulgated from the Vatican were literal truth, Science would still affirm
that scarcely anything of that world was known. If Religion be more
than the guess of a worm in the dust, and the shadow of its desire,” it
must be (I say once more) the spirit^s normal answer to objective fact.
The Cosmos is what it is, and Revelation can do no more than reveal it.
Holiness itself must be the reflection of a reality behind the veil. If this
be so, then Science has come not to destroy but to fulfil ; Religion must
needs evolve into Knowledge \ for Religion can in no age admit an aim
iiaiTOwer than the prayer of Cleanthes, — the willing response of the soul
to all she knows of cosmic law.

Out of the long Stone Age our race is awakening into consciousness
of itself. We stand in the dawn of history. Behind us lies a vast and
unrecorded waste — the mighty struggle humanam condere gentem. Since
the times of that ignorauce we have not yet gone far; a few thousand
years, a few hundred thinkers, have barely started the human mind upon
the great seons of its onward way. It is not yet the hour to sit down in
our studies and try to eke out Tradition with Intuition — as one might be
forced to do in a planet’s senility, by the glimmer of a fading sun.
Daphni^ quid antiques sipwrum suspicis orius 1 The traditions, the in-
tuifions of our race arc themselves in their infancy; and before we
abandon ourselves to brooding over them let us at least first try the
upshot of a systematic search for actual facts. For what should hinder r
If our inquiry lead us first through a jungle of fraud and folly, need that

APPENDIX B

307

App-B]

alarm us? As welf might Columbus have yielded to the sailors’ panic,
when he was entangled in the Sargasso Sea. If our first clear facts about
the Unseen World seem small and trivial, should that deter us from the
quest? As well might Columbus have sailed home again, with America
in the offing, on the ground that it was not worth while to discover a
continent which manifested itself only by dead logs.

One final word to each main division of our critics ; — to those first who
have been disappointed so often that they refuse to listen to any further
promise of news from the Unseen ; — and then to those who, relying on
some grander revelation, — ^whether received from without them or from
within, — disdain our slow, collective process and comminuted fragments
of truth. I would remind the Agnostic that a pike was once kept in the
same tank with a perch. There was at first a sheet of glass between them,
and the pike bruised his nose so often in snapping at the perch, that in
time he gave up that endeavour, — as the Agnostic his endeavour after
proof of a spiritual world, — with a sigh or a sneer. Then silently the
transparent screen was removed ; but now the pike was so convinced that
his prey was unreachable, that, — like the Agnostic in presence of our new
evidence, — he continued simply to let the perch alone.

For those other men I will resort to a bold metonymy, and will speak
of that great incurrent truth to which each man severally holds under the
figure of the great stone at Ephesus which fell down from Jupiter. The
fiiitliful w'ho proclaimed that wondrous fall were essentially in the right, —
were far more in the right than the freethinkers who (lerided it. But
whence and why that stone had truly fallen, — how vast the significance of
that cosmic trajectory and rushing flame, — this could be known only when
humble labourers had catalogued many a lesser congener of the mighty
mass ; and had gathered the meteoric dust from the ocean’s floor ; and
had learnt that no field of heaven had been found so desolate as not to
carry still the impress of ultimate energy and universal law.

APPENDIX B

The Decline of Dogmatism

For many minds this last century of triumphant Science, of warring
Theology, has acted as a kind of proof and purgation of the human spirit.
It is strange to look back and to observe with how much of dogmatic
rubbish even the strongest minds of earlier centuries were cumbered both
in their belief and in their negation. For it was not only the so-calk d
orthodox who suffered ; but those also who, revolting against arbitrary
doctrine, were yet unable to dissociate such doctrine from any conception
which they could form of a spiritual world. Such men would still speak
as though the spiritual world, if it existed, must needs be a world ruled by
caprice, and overshadowed by fear.

3o8

CHAPTER X

[App.B

But now in the virtual abeyance of formal creeds the reactions of
monks and schoolmen have had time to dissolve and disappear. Vestigial
beliefs which still encumbered the spirit have had time to atrophy.

The prospect on which Science gazed has been by comparison a
narrow one; but Science at least has ‘‘seen it steadily and seen it
whole.” The material world has taught us lessons of which our con-
ception of the spiritual world stood in no less urgent need. The study
of visible Nature has taught us Uniformity, Conservation, Evolution ; and
these transform themselves in their spiritual aspect into an absolute
Catholicity, an inescapable Justice, an ever-ascending Ideal. These
great conceptions, I say, were achieved by Science, with her outlook
temporarily narrowed to planetary life. And now that Science herself
begins to teach us to expand once more the planetary into the cosmic
view, we find that principles built up by minute and persistent observation
of material law will expand and exalt themselves also to spiritual operation,
and will give to the soul's future the stability of their own infinitude, the
buoyancy of their own limitless march and assumption into realms higher
and hopes unknown.

On one great matter the departed spirits utter, not indeed a halting or
a dubious, but yet a somewhat indefinite reply. One and all, so far as I
know them, they affirm that the Universe is good : that there is a supremo
Power to whom all spirits bow, and who orders all things well. But
beyond that they can give no fresh sanction to the tenets of any earthly
creed. Rather they seem for a time perhaps to express their new
convictions in their accustomed formulae, but soon to lose all thought
of creed or formulae in the deep assurance of endless and ever-growing
Love. This avowed limitation of their knowledge lias caused some dis-
appointment, and they have sometimes been fruitlessly pressed to declare
themselves in clearer support of some earthly Church.

Yet must not any elevation of our being imply for us less of claim to
formal knowledge, more of participation in an immanent Spirit?

The idea of Divinity among the human race has risen and widened
from the Fetish of a family to the Champion of a tribe, and from the
Champion of a tribe to the Father of a planet. Must even that be the
fixed and final conception of the Infinite God? Nay, surely that con-
ception should expand so as not to lose but to transcend Person-
ality ; — retaining for us the Love and Mercy which bring the Divine into
fellowship with man, but outgrowing all limiting analogies, all pretence at
human comprehension of the Inconceivable Cause of All.

It is noticeable how with each onward step in our theoretical know-
ledge some false and outworn conception of practical duty tends to melt
away/ We now know (to Swedenborg belongs the credit of the first em-
phatic announcement) that this life and the next are morally con-
tinuous, — with no mere general dependence of the future life upon the
present, — but continuous as though our earthly age melted into the hues

APPENDIX C

A]ip.C]

309

of a happier youth. It follows that the earthly life must ethically de-
velop all its faculties in preparation for the heavenly. There must be
no arbitrary narrowing of earth^s experience under the guise of sanctity ;
no pretence that something is gained in the next world by refusal of any
of the normal duties of this.

There is no place for monasticism in such a scheme as this. There
is no place for the puritanical, the ascetic spirit ; for any belief in merit
attaching to suffering or privation as such. The aim of all will be spiritual,
moral, intellectual efficiency; self-preparation for those higher duties
which shall follow on the accomplishment of lower duties as the just and
inseparable reward.

How far there shall still be place for the priest, for the minister of
religion, it were premature to discuss. Sacerdotalism must disappear;
no body of men will any longer persuade mankind of their exclusive right
to promulgate or to interpret that catholic truth which is bestowed im-
partially upon all.

And note that if such a claim were afterwards to be put forth, not by
priests but by sensitives, — by intermediaries of the new revelation who
might claim to be its guardians also, — that claim would promptly carry
with it its own refutation. We should not long believe in the authority
of communicating spirits who might base their appeal to us on authority,
instead of on evidence and on reason. Communicators and intermediaries
alike are subject to an ordering wiser than our own. By their fruits we
shall know them.

APPENDIX C

Prayer and Supplication

The question now arises : What ought to be our own attitude towards
the spirits with whom we enter into communication?

To begin with, it goes without saying that our attitude should be
at once responsive and serious; — that there should be no frivolity, no
credulity, and, on the other hand, no perverse or stubborn refusal to
recognise the proofs which they offer.

But here a larger question opens out. What ought we to ask from
them? In what way should we ask it? What does experience thus far
show us that we may expect to receive? It is plain that such inquiries
bring us to the threshold of the wider and deeper problem of Prayer and
Supplication generally ; — of our whole appeal to the Unseen.

Approaching Prayer in this generalised manner, we feel the need of a
definition which shall be in some sense spiritual without being definitely
theological. Or let us leave to the solemn word Prayer its highest mean-
mgs;.— let us confine it to our attempts at communion— uttered or un-
expressed — with the Supreme Spirit. Let us next try to define the word

310 CHAPTER X [App, C

Supplication in such a way as to distinguish it from a request made to a
living friend.

For our present purposes, at any rate, it seems best to define supplica-
tion as an attempt to obtain benefits from unseen beings by an inward
disposition of our own minds/* This excludes such attempts as rest on
charms or on sorcery ; and at the same time begs no question as to the
nature of the beings to whom we appeal. They are, at any rate, habitually
unseen ; it remains for us to argue from the nature of the supplication, or
of the answer, who or what the beings who may have sent that answer are
likely to be.

For the sake of clearness, I may observe that in excluding charms, &c.,
from the category of true supplication, I mean to exclude any process
which is supposed to gain the desired benefit by its own virtue without
the operation of our own minds. Charms and incantations may have, as
we shall presently see, another kind of efficiency, as mere self-suggestions.
And experience seems to show (what might antecedently have seemed
improbable) that if we wish to learn something from spirits speaking
through mortal organisms, there may be some gain in our definite
statement, in speech or writing, of the nature of the information
desired.

This, however, is a detail, and I go on to the more important question
of the benefits for which our supplications may rightly be offered up.
What, broadly speaking, arc the benefits which we do actually receive
from other souls? either from the World-Soul, or from human souls still
in the flesh ? We receive Life and Knowledge, which it is our business to
develop into Love and Wisdom and Joy, Our own capacity of such
development may still be classed as Life, — as spiritual lafe, of which our
physical life is but the temporary vehicle. Our spiritual life is fed by the
love which we receive, our physical life by food and material aids of ever>^
kind. Knowledge, of course, is one of the main ways of feeding our
spiritual life, and I have placed it apart here merely because its trace-
ability through particular memories makes it the most convenient subject-
matter for psychical analysis.

A definite fact, an isolable piece of knowledge, will often fulfil a
requirement which we long for in vain in physical experimentation. Wc
should greatly like to be able to follow some individual scrap or parcel of
energy through its successive mutations, — to track exactly the given unit of
heat which is converted into a given unit of motion. Now with definite
facts wc really can do something of this kind. Each piece of knowledge
is more or less distinctly ear-marked, as belonging to one or more assign-
able human memories, each of which memories contains a selection of
facts different from the selection contained in any other memory. Omni-
science of course contains all the facts, but omniscience is not likely to
show in each case the specific limitations.

The upshot of this is tljat there is a certain class of requests made to

APPENDIX C

App. 0]

311

unseen agencieSi the«answers to which carry with them a strong presump-
tive proof of the identity of the minds which send them.

Such, for example, are the ordinary requests made to our discarnate
friends for information on matters connected with their lives on earth, as
illustrated by many cases through Mrs. Piper's trance. In these cases we
have virtually supplicated these persons for certain definite knowledge, and
they, — and so far as I can see, no vaster intelligence than theirs, — have
directly answered our supplications. Such cases belong to the long series
of requests made to the Unseen for knowledge, for truth, for light. Here
is at last a definite avenue for successful supplication, — here are distinct
requests granted by intelligences identifiable, although unseen.

Leaving the question of supplication for knowledge for the present, let
us consider the results which have been found to attend supplications for
mere physical life.

Readers of this work know what a large proportion of psychological
experiment now actually going on falls under the category of supplication
or prayer for life. The pilgrims of Lourdes implore the Virgin for life
and health as the most urgent form of their devotions. Faith-healers
pray to the Divinity for life and health, Christian Scientists meditate on
the goodness of the Universe and on the love of Christ with the same
practical object. And all of these groups, — as abundant testimony shows
us,— are often successful in their prayers and meditations. They attain
such results that (for instance) Charcot, himself no Catholic, used often
to send his patients to Lourdes. Yet, as this juxtaposition of Charcot
with Lourdes suggests, although we note the favourable results, we have
no clear indication as to the source from whence those results come.

For we find that results equally surprising follow upon the suggestions
of hypnotisers ; — and even upon mere self-suggestion. Self-suggestion is
(as I have often insisted) at the core of almost all these healing and
vivifying processes ; — and what is self-suggestion but an at present indefin-
able^ contention or disposition of the mind ?

In ancient and modern times, in East and West, among Pagans,
Buddhists, Brahmins, Mahomedans, Christians, Infidels, — everywhere it has
seemed possible for men and women, by a certain stress of soul, to become
in great measure superior to pain, and often to renew vitality with a success
for which medical science cannot account. The true meaning of this far-
reaching and multiplex power of self-suggestion is one of the standing
puzzles— one of the growing puzzles — alike of biology and of psychology.
Without pretending to solve it, I have nevertheless in an earlier chapter
stated and defined it in a manner which may now serve to bring it into
relation with an even wider range of phenomena. For I have spoken of it
as a fluctuation in the intensity of the draft which each man's life^akes
'^pon the Unseen, I have urged that while our life is maintained by
continual inflow from the World-soul, that inflow may vary in abundance
or energy in correspondence with variations in the attitude of our own

312

CHAPTER X

[App. C

minds. So soon as this definition is made, we see* that every form of
self-suggestion falls within the limits which we have assigned to supplica-
tion. The supplication of the Lourdes pilgrims, the adoring contemplation
of the Christian Scientists, the inward concentration of the self-suggestcrs,
the trustful anticipation of the hypnotised subject, — all these are mere
shades of the same mood of mind, — of the mountain-moving faith which
can in actual fact draw fresh life from the Infinite. Nor is the life thus
indrawn a physical life alone. Even from the physician’s post-hypnotic
suggestion, — which seems the furthest removed of all these channels from
a true spiritual inflow, — both moral and intellectual revivification will
often follow.

But this reflection suggests afresh the question, already discussed in
Chapter V., whether in some such cases of hypnotic suggestion the
resultant inflow of life may not in some mediate fashion at least depend
on and emanate from the physician himself. He, no doubt, must ulti-
mately draw his own life from the Unseen ; but may there not be some
virtue passing from him which vivifies his patient of its own force ? I
have already expressed my belief that in some cases there ts such virtue,
— which would show from our present point of view that it is in some cases
useful to supplicate finite embodied spirits for increase of life.

May it then be desirable to supplicate finite disembodied spirits not
only for knowledge, but for life? Can they also transmit to us, — more
directly, perhaps, than the embodied hypnotist, — some special stream of
the informing energy of the universe?

I believe that there is evidence that they can sometimes produce this
vivifying effect in various ways. Sometimes they seem able to transport
the sensitive’s spirit into their own realm, and to infuse at once a spiritual
and a physical renovation. Sometimes they produce the impression of
material touches or passes, like those employed by the earthly hypnotist.
In that case the removal of pain, or the soothing elfect, may seem to follow
directly on some unseen manifestation. •

And this brings us to one remaining service w'hich we may sometimes,
it seems, successfully ask disembodied spirits to perform, 'i'hey will
occasionally move objects for us ; — thus repeating yet further the services
rendered by embodied friends. Not, of course, that we shall think of
asking them for movements practically useful to us, like those ascribed to
the “ lubber-friends ” of ancient fable. It will be enough if by any dis-
placement of matter, however trivial in itself, they can manifest their
persistent power.

On the whole, then, we see that supplication obtains for us from the
Unseen a certain limited extension of the benefits which we know by
everyday experience that we can obtain from the Universe on the one
hand and from individual spirits on the other.

As regards the human spirits, in the first place, we find that our
successful supplications to them are such as they might be likely to grant.

APPENDIX C

313

AppC]

assuming that they sfill exist, and that they have certain continuing powers
of acting upon embodied minds and upon matter in much the old way.
While they were embodied they gave us knowledge, they gave us material
help by moving objects and the like; they renewed our strength, it may
be by touches or passes which were for us channels of the inflowing
cosmic life. Disembodied now, they operate in the same way. In some
respects the loss of the body is a drawback. They can but slightly and
rarely move ponderable matter. They can but seldom heal or vitalise
with their spirit-touch. They can communicate their knowledge only
through an organism which they invade for the purpose. But on the
other hand their knowledge, when they do communicate it, is of absolutely
priceless worth. Fragmentary and trivial though it may seem, it con-
stitutes the one great assurance of a providential Universe and an eternal
life.

Supplication to these spirits near ourselves has, then, assuredly not
been in vain, — nay, is likely to become more and more fruitful as the con-
ditions are better understood.

At the other end of the scale, again, the prayers addressed to the
Universe, — to God, — or say, rather, to the Supreme which is above person-
ality, are now seen to be the normal development and intensification of
tliat mysterious power of self-suggestion which we witness every day. In
so saying I am far from meaning that we aflect our own spirits only by
our fervent prayer. On the contrary, I have insisted that even the self-
suggestion which refuses to appeal to any higher power, — which believes
that it is only calling up its own private resources into play, — must derive
its ultimate efficacy from the increased inflow from the Infinite life which
the spirit’s powerful effort of attention — the faith of the suppliant — does
in some manner induce. And the more penetrating this faith, the more
striking the results are likely to be. Beyond this point we have no
evidential warrant for going. Wc cannot specify from any real com-
parative experience what particular shade or colour of this saving faith is
most effectual in evoking an answer. The great intermediate names —
between the spirits of our own friends and the Source of All — have not
given recognisable evidence, specific proof, of their recipience and reply.
Such proof might be given, for example, if the cures at Lourdes were
really miraculous” in the sense that they were cures of maladies never
cured elsewhere ; or even if patients at Lourdes were cured in markedly
larger proportion than, say, the patients in a hypnotic clinique. But I
have elsewhere (see 578 and 579) shown strong reasons for believing that,
this is not so nay, that the general evidence offered for the Lourdes
cures needs a strict sifting before the residuum of fact can be separated
from the exaggerations due to strong moral prepossession, — from Vhich
the great pecuniary interests which have grown up around that place of
pilgrimage can hardly be altogether excluded. I will not say more, for

object here is not to disparage any special type of prayer or supplica-

CHAPTER X

314

[Aro. C

tion, but rather to insist on their importance and efficacy in general. l
wish to show that so far from our needing to suppose that an answer to
prayer is an interruption of the natural order of things, many answers to
prayer are, on the contrary, manifest extensions, — ^natural developments,
— of perfectly familiar phenomena. We already have life, and by dis-
posing our spirits rightly, we can get more life ; we already have friends
who help us on earth \ those friends survive bodily death, and are to
some extent able to help us still. It is for us to throw ourselves into the
needed mental state ; — to make the heartfelt and trustful appeal. To the
benefit which we may thus derive no theoretical limit can be assigned.
It must needs grow with man’s evolution; for the central fact of that
condition is the ever-increasing closeness of the soul's communion with
other souls.

APPENDICES

TO

CHAPTER VII

713 A. It is possible that we might learn much were we to question
dying persons, on their awakening from some comatose condition, as to
their memory of any dream or vision during that state. If there has in
fact been any such experience it should be at once recorded, as it will pro-
bably fade rapidly from the patient’s supraliminal memory, even if he does
not die directly afterwards. A curious case was published in Phantasms
of the Living (vol. ii. p. 305), where a dying man returns, as it were, from
the gates of death expressly to announce that he has had a vision, or paid
a visit,” of this kind — which " visit,” however, it was not possible to verify.

A somewhat similar instance, but with ultimate recovery of the patient,
Dr. AViltse, was printed in the SL Louis Medical and Surgical Journal^
November, 1889, and in the Mid- Continental Review^ February, 1890.
Dr. Wiltse has since obtained for us the sworn depositions of the witnesses
of importance. The experience is long, and for the most part of a
thoroughly dreamlike type ; but in any view it is extremely unusual, nor
can it be fairly understood from extracts alone. I quote, therefore, the
essential part of the case in full (from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 180).

[After describing his gradual sinking in the summer of 1S89 under an un<
usual disease — typhoid fever with subnormal temperature and pulse— Dr. Wiltse
(of Skiddy, Kansas) continues as follows:] — I asked if 1 was perfectly in posses-
sion of my mind, so that what I might say should be worthy of being relied
upon, being answered in the decided affirmative, I bade adieu to family and
friends, giving such advice and consolation to each and all as I deemed best,
conversed upon the proofs pro and con of immortality, and called upon each
and all to take testimony for themselves by watching the action of my mind, in
the bodily state in which they saw me, and finally, as my pupils fell open, and
vision began to fail, and my voice to weaken, feeling a sense of drowsiness
come over me, with a strong effort, I straightened my stiffened legs, got mv
arms over the breast, and clasped the fast stiffening fingers, and soon sank into
utter unconsciousness.

I passed about four hours in all without pulse or perceptible heart-beat, as
1 am informed by Dr. S. H. Raynes, who was the only physician present.
During a portion of this time several of the bystanders thought I was dead,
•^nd such a report being carried outside, the village church bell was tolled.

3t6 APPENDICES [713A

Dr. Raynes informs me, however, that by bringing his eyes close to my face
he could perceive an occasional short gasp, so very light as to be barely per-
ceptible, and that he was upon the point, several limes, of saying, “ He is dead ”
when a gasp would occur in time to check him.

He thrust a needle deep into the flesh at different points from the feet to
the hips, but got no response. Although I was pulseless about four hours, this
state of apparent death lasted only about half-an-hour.

I lost, I believe, all power of thought or knowledge of existence in absolute
unconsciousness. Of course, I need not guess at the time so lost, as in such a
state a minute or a thousand years would appear the same. I came again into
a state of conscious existence and discovered that I was still in the body, but
the body and I had no longer any interests in common. I looked in astonish-
ment and joy for the first time upon myself— the me, the real Ego, while the
not me closed it upon all sides like a sepulchre of clay.

With all the interest of a physician, I beheld the wonders of my bodily
anatomy, intimately interwoven with which, even tissue for tissue, was I, the
living soul of that dead body. I learned that the epidermis was the outside
boundary of the ultimate tissues, so to speak, of the soul. I realised my con-
dition and reasoned calmly thus. I have died, as men terra death, and yet I
am as much a man as ever. I am about to get out of the body. I watched
the interesting process of the separation of soul and body. I>y some power,
apparently not my own, the Ego was rocked to and fro, laterally, as a cradle is
rocked, by which process its connection with the tissues of the body was broken
up. After a little time the lateral motion ceased, and along the soles of the
feet beginning at the toes, passing rapidly to the heels, I felt and heard, as it
seemed, the snapping of innumerable small cords. When this was accorn*
plished I began slowly to retreat from the feet, toward the head, as a rubber
cord shortens. I remember reaching the hips and saying to myself, Now,
there i.s no life below the hips.” f can recall no memory of passing through
the abdomen and chest, but recollect distinctly when my whole self was col-
lected into the head, when I reflected thus : 1 am all in the head now, and 1
shall soon be free. I passed around the brain as if 1 were hollow, compressing
it and its membranes, slightly, on all side.s, toward the centre and peeped out
between the sutures of the skull, emerging like the flattened edges of a l)ag of
membranes. 1 recollect distinctly how I appeared to myself something like a
jelly-fish as regards colour and form. As I emerged, I saw two ladies silting
at my head. I measured the distances between the head of my cot and the
knees of the lady opposite the head and concluded there was room for nic to
stand, but felt considerable embarrassment as I reflected that I was about to
emerge naked before her, but comforted myself with the thought that in all
probability she could not see me with her bodily eyes, as 1 was a spirit. As I
emerged from the head I floated up and down and laterally like a soap-l)ubble
attached to the bowl of a pipe until f at last broke loose from the body and fell
lightly to the floor, where I .slowly rose and expanded into the full stature of a
man. I seemed to be translucent, of a bluish cast and perfectly naked. With
a painful sense of embarrassment I fled toward the partially opened door to
escape the eyes of the two ladies whom 1 was facing as well as others who I
knew were about me, but upon reaching the door I found myself clothed, and
satisfied upon that point I turned and faced the company. As I turned, my
left elbow came in contact with the arm of one of two gentlemen, who were

713 A] TO CHAPTER VII 317

standing in the door. *To my surprise, his arm passed through mine without
apparent resistance, the severed parts closing again without pain, as air re<
unites. I looked quickly up at his face to see if he had noticed the contact,
but he gave me no sign,— only stood and gazed toward the couch I had just left,
i directed my gaze in the direction of his, and saw my own dead body. It
was lying just as I had taken so much pains to place it, partially upon the
rigid side, the feet close together and the hands clasped across the breast. I
was surprised at the paleness of the face. I had not looked in a glass for some
(lays and had imagined that I was not as pale as most very sick people are. I
congratulated myself upon the decency with which I had composed the body
and thought my friends would have little trouble on that score.

i saw a number of persons sitting and standing about the body% and parti-
cularly noticed two women apparently kneeling by my left side, and I knew
that they were weeping. I have since learned that they were my wife and my
sister, but I had no conception of individuality. Wife, sister or friend were as
one to me. I did not remember any conditions of relationship ; at least I did
not think of any. I could distinguish sex, but nothing further.

I now attempted to gain the attention of the people with the object of
comforting them as well as assuring them of their own immortality. I bowed
to them playfully and saluted with my right hand. I passed about among
them also, but found that they gave me no heed. Then the situation struck
me as humorous and I laughed outright.

They certainly must have heard that, I thought, but it seemed otherwise,
for not one lifted their eyes from my body. It did not once occur to me to
speak and I concluded the matter by saying to myself : “ They see only with
the eyes of the body. They cannot see spirits. Tliey are watching what they
think i.s I, but they are mistaken. That is not I. This is I and I am as much
alive as ever.**

I turned and pa.sscd out at the open door, inclining my head and watching
where I .set my feet as I stepped down on to the porch.

1 crossed the porch, descended the steps, walked down the path and into
the .street. There 1 stopped and looked about me. 1 never saw that street
more distinctly than I saw it then. I took note of the redness of the soil and
of the washes the rain had made. I took a rather pathetic look about me,
like one who is about to leave his home for a long time. Then I discovered
that 1 had become larger than I was in earth life and congratulated myself
thereupon. I was somewhat smaller in the body than I just liked to be, but in
the next life, I thought, I am to be as I de.sired.

My clothes, 1 noticed, had accommodated themselves to my increased
stature, and 1 fell to wondering where they came from and how they got on to
me so quickly and without my knowledge. I examined the fabric and judged
it to be of some kind of Scotch material, a good suit. 1 thought, but not hand-
some ; still, neat and good enough. The coat fits loosely too, and that is
well for summer. “ How well J feel,” I thought. “ Only a fcwminute.s ago I
was horribly sick and distressed. Then came that change, called death, which
I have so much dreaded. It is past now, and here am I still a man, alive and
thinking, yes, thinking as clearly as ever, and how well I feel ; I shall never be
sick again. I have no more to die ” And in sheer exuberance of spisits I
danced a figure, and fell again to looking at my form and clothes.

Suddenly I discovered that I was looking at the straight scam down the

APPENDICES

318

[713 A

back of my coat. How is this, I thought, how do I see my back? and I looked
again, to reassure myself, down the back of the coat, or down the back of my
legs to the very heels. I put my hand to my face and felt for my eyes. They
are where they should be, 1 thought. Am I like an owl that 1 can turn my
head half-way round ? I tried the experiment and failed.

No ! Then it must be that having been out of the body, but a few moments
1 have yet the power to use the eyes of my body, and 1 turned about and looked
back in at the open door, where I could see the head of my body in a line with
me. I discovered then a small cord, like a spider’s web, running from my
shoulders back to my body and attaching to it at the base of the neck in
front.

1 was satisfied with the conclusion that by means of that cord I was using
the eyes of my body, and turning, walked down the street.

1 had walked but a few steps when 1 again lost my consciousness, and when
I again awoke found myself in the air, where I was upheld by a pair of hands,
which I could feel pressing lightly against my sides. The owner of the hands,
if they had one, was behind me, and was shoving me through the air at a swift
but a pleasant rate of speed. By the time I fairly realised the situation I was
pitched away and floated easily down a few feet, alighting gently upon the
beginning of a narrow, but well-built roadway, inclined upward at an angle of
something less than 45 degrees.

1 looked up and could sec sky and clouds above me at the usual height. I
looked down and saw the tops of green trees and thought : It is as far down to
the tree tops as it is high to the clouds.

As I walked up the road, I seemed to face nearly north. I looked over the
right side of the road and under it could see the forest, but discovered naught
to support the roadway, yet 1 felt no fear of its falling. I examined the material
of which it was built. It was built of milky quartz and fine sand. I picked up
one of the gravels and looked at it particularly. I distinctly remember that it
had a dark speck in the centre. 1 brought it close to the eye and so discovered
that it was a small hole apparently caused by chemical action of some metal.
There had been a recent rain, and the coolness was refreshing to me. I
noticed that, although the grade was steep, I felt no fatigue in walking, but my
feet seemed light, and my step buoyant as the step of childhood, and as I
walked I again reverted to my late condition of illness and rejoiced in my
perfect health and strength. Then a sense of great loneliness came over me
and I greatly desired company, so I reasoned thus : Some one dies every
minute. If I wait twenty minutes the chances are great that some one in the
mountains will die, and thus I shall have company. I waited, and while so
doing surveyed the scenery about me. To the e.ist was a long line of moun-
tains, and the forest underneath me extended to the mountains, up their sides
and out on to the mountain top. Underneath me lay a forest-clad valley, through
which ran a beautiful river full of shoals, which caused the water to ripple in
white sprays. 1 thought the river looked much like the Emerald River, and
the mountains, I thought, as strongly resembled Waldron’s Ridge. On the left
of the road was a high bluff of black stone, and it reminded me of Lookout
Mountain, where the railroad passes between it and the Tennessee River.
ThuS-^memory, judgment and imagination, the three great faculties of the mind,
were intact and active.

I waited for company, what I judged to be twenty minutes; but no one

713 A] TO CHAPTER VII 319

came. Then 1 reasoned thus : It is probable that when a man dies he has his
individual road to travel and must travel it alone. As no two men are exactly
alike, so, most likely, no two travel the same road into the other world. I
reflected that as eternal existence was now assured, 1 had no need to hurry, and
so walked very leisurely along, now stopping and looking at the scenery, or
looking back over the road, if, perchance, some one might come along, and
occasionally turning and walking backward, and thus watching the road behind
me for company I so strongly desired. I thought certainly sontt one from the
other world would be out to meet me, though, strangely enough, 1 thought of no
person whom above others I desired to see. Angels or fiends, one, I said, will
come out to meet me— I wonder which it will be ? I reflected that I had not
believed all the Church tenets, but had written and taught verbally a new and,
J believed, a better faith. But, I reasoned, I knew nothing, and where there is
room for doubt there is room for mistake. I may, therefore, be on my way to
a terrible doom. And here occurred a thing hard to describe. At different
points about me I was aware of the expressed thought, “ Fear not, you are
safe ! ” I heard no voice, I saw no person, yet I was perfectly aware that at
different points, at varying distances from me, some one was thinking that
thought for my benefit, but how I was made aware of it was so great a mystery
that it staggered my faith in its reality. A great fear and doubt came over me
and 1 was beginning to be very miserable, when a face so full of ineffable love
and tenderness appeared to me for an instant as set me to rights upon that score.

Suddenly I saw at some distance ahead of me three prodigious rocks block-
ing the road, at which sight I stopped, wondering why so fair a road should be
thus blockaded, and while I considered what I was to do, a great and dark
cloud, which I compared to a cubic acre in size, stood over my head. Quickly
it became filled with living, moving bolts of fire, which darted hither and thither
through the cloud. They were not extinguished by contact with the cloud, for
I could see them in the cloud as one sees fish in deep water.

The cloud became concave on the under surface like a great tent and began
slowly to revolve upon its perpendicular axis. When it had turned three times,
I was aware of a presence, which I could not see, but which I knew was enter-
ing into the cloud from the southern side. The presence did not seem, to my
mind, as a form, because it filled the cloud like some vast intelligence. He is
not as I, I reasoned : I fill a little space with my form, and when I move the
space is left void, but he may fill immensity at his will, even as he fills this
cloud. Then from the right side and from the left of the cloud a tongue of
black vapour shot forth and rested lightly upon either side of my head, and as
they touched me thoughts not my own entered into my brain.

These, I said, are his thoughts and not mine; they might be in Greek or
Hebrew for all power I have over them. But how kindly am I addressed in my
mother tongue that so 1 may understand all his will.

Vet, although the language was English, it was so eminently above my
power to reproduce that my rendition of it is as far short of the original as any
translation of a dead language is weaker than the original; for instance, the
expression, “This is the road to the eternal world,” did not contain over four
words, neither did any sentence in the whole harangue, and every sentence,
had it been written, must have closed with a period, so complete was th» sense.
The following is as near as I can render it : —

“ This is the road to the eternal world. Yonder rocks are the boundary

320 APPENDICES [713A

between the two worlds and the two lives. Once you pass the«n, you can no
more return into the body. If your work was to write the things that have
been taught you, waiting for mere chance to publish them', if your work was
to talk to private individuals in the privacy of friendship — if this was all, it
done, and you may pass beyond the rocks. If, however, upon consideration
you conclude that it shall be to publish as well as to write what you are taught
if it shall be to call together the multitudes and teach them, it is not done and
you can returojinto the body.”

The thou^s ceased and the cloud passed away, moving slowly toward the
mountain in the east. I turned and watched it for some time, when suddenly,
and without having felt myself moved, I stood close to and in front of the three
rocks. I was seized with a strong curiosity then to look into the next world.

There were four entrances, one very dark, at the left between the wall of
black rock and the left hand one of the three rocks, a low archway between
the left hand and the middle rock, and a similar one between that and the
right hand rock, and a very narrow pathway running around the right hand
rock at the edge of the roadway.

I did not examine the opening at the left— I know not why, unless it was
because it appeared dark, but I knelt at each of the low archways and lookefl
through. The atmosphere was green and everything seemed cool and quiet
and beautiful. Beyond the rocks, the roadway, the valley, and the mountain
range curved gently to the left, thus shutting off the view at a short distance.
If I were only around there, I thought, I should soon see angels or devils or
both, and as I thought this, I saw the forms of both as I had often pictured
them* in my mind. I looked at them closely and discovered that they were
not realities, but the mere shadowy forms in my thoughts, and that any form
might be brought up in the .same way. What a wonderful world, I exclaimed,
mentally, where thought is .so intensified as to take visible form. How happy
shall I be in such a realm of thought as that.

I listened at the archways for any sound of voice or of mu.sic, l)ut could
hear nothing. Solid substances, I thought, are better media of sound than
air, I will use the rock.s as media, and I rose and placed my left ear to first
one rock and then the other throughout, but could hear nothing.

Then suddenly I was tempted to cross the boundary line. I hesitated
and reasoned thu.s : “ I have died once and if I go back, soon or late, I must
die again. If I .stay some one else will do my work, and so the end will be
as well and as surely accomplish ecT, and shall I die again ? I will not, but now
that I am so near I will cross the line and stay.” So determining I moved
cautiously along the rocks. There was danger of falling over the side of the
road, for the pathway around was but narrow. I thought not of the archways,
I placed my back against the rock and walked sidewjiys.

I reached the exact centre of the rock, which I knew by a carved knob in
the rock marking the exact boundary. Here, like Ca;sar at the Rubicon, I
halted and parleyed with conscience. It seemed like taking a good deal of
responsibility, but I determined to do it, and advanced the left foot across the
line. As I did so, a small, densely black cloud appeared in front of me and
ad\^nced toward my face. I knew that I was to be stopped. 1 felt the power
to mcf9t or to think leaving me. My hands fell powerless at my side, my
shoulders and head dropped forward, the cloud touched my face and I knew
no more.

TO CHAPTER VII

321

713 A]

Without previous thought and without apparent effort on my part, my
eyc^ opened. I looked at my hands and then at the little white cot upon
which I was lying,' and realising that I was in the body, in astonishment and
disappointment, I exclaimed : What in the world has happened to me ? Must
I die again ? ”

I was extremely weak, but strong enough to relate the above experience
despite all injunctions to quiet. Soon afterward I was seized with vomiting,
severe and uncontrollable. About this time Dr. J. H. Scwel^f Rockwood,
Teiin., called upon a friendly visit, not knowing I was sick. I hiccoughing
terribly, and in consultation he said, “ Nothing short of a miracle, I fear, can
save him.”

After many days, it seemed to me, the temperature began to creep up and
soon ran above normal, but only a little, wavered back and forth for a few
days, and settled at a half degree below, where it remained during the greater
part of convalescence, when it mounted to normal, the pulse mounted to above
fifty for keeps, as boys say at marbles, then went to seventy-six, and I made a
rapid and good recovery, for having travelled some hundreds of miles during
the interval, as I close this paper my pulse stands at eighty-four and is strong,
just eight weeks from “ the day I died,” as some of my neighbours speak of it-

There are plenty of witne.sses to the truth of the above statements, in so
far as my physical condition was concerned. Also to the fact that just as I
described the conditions about my body and in the room, so they actually were.
I must, therefore, have seen these things by some means.

The following are questions addressed to Dr. Wiltse about his ex-
perience, and his answers : —

1. Q. You perceived two gentlemen standing in the door. Were they
actually standing in the door? A. They were.

2. Q. Was your face as pale as you perceived it to be ? A. It was much
paler as compared with some days before, but one witness states that, as com-
pared with only a short time before becoming unconscious, the face appeared of
a dark purple hue.

3. Q. Did you not recognise any person at all among those whom you per-
ceived in the room ? A. I had no thought of names nor ideas of relationship.
I had a strong sense of good fellowship, if I may so term it, but my interest
in each seemed alike. I must have forgotten all personalities.

4. Q. Did the washes which you perceived the rain to have made actually
exist ? A. They did to a marked degree, there having been heavy rains for
many days consecutively.

5. Q- the fabric in which you seemed to be clothed resemble any which

you had ever worn ? A. It did not, and I distinctly recollect thinking that I
had no such clothing in the house, although it did not then occur to me that I
had never possessed such a suit. I think, however, that my brother who \vas
visiting me had on something such a suit, but cannot be certain, as I cannot
learn that I made any reference to any suit in the room as being like it while
rehearsing my experience after awaking. If I could see a suit like it I should
recognise it at once. ^

6. Q. Were you previously familiar with the notion that a delicate thread, in
cases of trance, connects the ^ethereal organism with the ordinary body? A.
Yes, and this will seem to you a case of expectancy. I deem it fair to your

VOL. II. X

322 APPENDICES [713A

Society to state, however, that so far from believing the theory was 1 that in a
volume of Action upon which 1 am engaged I had set down an entirely difEerent
theory as emanating from one of the characters who is made to teach my own
private views strongly enough. When I discovered the thread my mind did
not go back to any previous recollections or ideas upon the subject, as 1
should suppose would naturally be the case.

Dr. Wilts^ narrative is followed by corroborative statements from five
persons who Were present in the sick-room, viz., his wife and sister, the
physician in attendance, and two friends. These statements are given in
full in the Proceedhigs^ and show that the description of his experience
given by Dr. Wiltse immediately after recovering consciousness was in all
essential details the same as the account printed above. They also
confirm what he reports of the actual external facts of the case, the illness
and attendant circumstances.

Here, at any rate, whatever view we take as to the source or the
oontent of Dr. Wiltse’s vision, the fact remains that the patient, while in a
comatose state, almost pulseless, and at a temperature much below the
normal, did, nevertheless, undergo a remarkably vivid series of mental
impressions. It is plain, therefore, that we may err in other cases by
assuming prematurely that all power of perception or inference has
ceased.

Setting aside the manifestly dream-like or symbolical element of the
vision, we observe that Dr, Wiltse believes that his perception of the
people in the room, and of the rain-washed streets outside, was of a clair-
voyant type. But this cannot be proved ; for the picture of the streets
might be due to unconscious inference ; and some acuteness of perception,
like that of the lethargic hypnotised subject, might account for his know-
ledge of movements in the room made after his eyes were closed. How-
ever this may be, it is probable that if he had actually died, and if some
kind of message from him had been subsequently received, that message
might have included facts as to the scene of death which the survivors
would have believed to have been unknown to him while still living, but
which he did in fact acquire during his comatose condition.

I may add that since the first publication of Dr. Wiltse’s narrative
both Dr. Hodgson and 1 have made his personal acquaintance, and have
further corresponded with him on psychical experiments, with the result
that the experience just cited, though it cannot, of course, be made
evidential^ has risen in importance in our eyes. See also another ex-
perience of Dr. Wiltse's in 663 A.

A case similar in many respects to the one just quoted is that of the
Rev. L. J. Bertrand, given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii, p. 194. During
a dangerous ascent of the Titlis, Mr. Bertrand separated from his com-
panions, sat down to rest, and became paralysed by the cold. His head,
however, remained clear, and he experienced the sensation described by
Dr. Wiltse of passing out of his body and remaining attached to it by “ a

714 A] TO CHAPTER VII 323

#

kind of elastic string.” While in this condition, he had clairvoyant im-
pressions about his absent companions, and much astonished them on
their return by describing their doings to them. The case, which I have
not space here to quote, is very remote and therefore probably contains
errors of detail ; but it is most likely that some genuine clairvoyance was
exhibited.

714 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 450. The ^xt case— I
have given the percipients the name of Adie — is a curiously complicated
one ; but its evidential value rests mainly on the similarity between a
recognised phantom seen by a mourner (and therefore not in itself
evidential) and an unrecognisable appearance observed at about the same
time by a near relation, also aware of the death.

This latter phenomenon — a segment of illumination in a room other-
wise dark, and closed against light — is undoubtedly rare. Retinal
hyperaesthesia will sometimes make a room look light for a moment or
two when the eyes are first opened, but the limitation of area seems to
make this explanation improbable here.

Miss C. A. writes : —

July I2th, 1888.

About two months before the death of my dear father, which occurred on
December loth, 1887, one night about from 12 to i a.m., when I was in bed in
a perfectly waking condition, he came to my bedside, and led me right through
the cemetery at Kcnsal Green, stopping at the spot where his grave was after-
wards made.

lie was very ill at that time and in a helpless condition— so far as his ability
to walk up three flights of stairs to my room was concerned. I had at that time
never been in that cemetery, but when I went there after his interment the
scene was perfectly familiar to me.

He led me beyond his grave to a large iron gate, but my recollection of this
part is confused. 1 there lost sight of him.

In a later letter Miss C, A. adds : —

It was just like a panorama. I cannot say if my eyes were closed or open.

Again, a day or two before his death, somewhere between the 4th and
the loth of December (the day of his decease), when he was lying in an
unconscious state in a ipom on the ground floor, and I sleeping on the second
oor, I was awoke suddenly by seeing a bright light in my bedroom— the whole
roonn was flooded with a radiance quite indescribable— and my father was
standing by my bedside, an etherealised semi-transparent figure, but yet his
voice and his aspect were normal. His voice seemed a far-off sound, and yet
11s same voice as in life. All he said was, “Take care of mother.”

. “'^^PP^^red, floating in the air as it were, and the light also vani.shed.

Dec"^ h ® afterwards, that is to say, between the 12th and the 17th of
word”' apparition came to me again, and repeated the aame

th It * n whom I related these three experiences, suggested to me

shoi something was troubling his spirit, and I then promised her that

short father visit me again I would answer him. This occurred a

*me afterwards. On this, the fourth, occasion he Repeated the same

APPENDICES

324

[7UA

words, and I replied, “Yes, father.” He then adde&, “I am in perfect
peace.”

Apparently he was satisfied with this my assurance. Since that time 1
have neither seen nor heard any more.

1 have never before or since had any such experience.

(Signed) C. A.

Mrs. Adie writes : —

Afarck, 1889.

Towards the middle of the month of October 1887 [since fixed by letters of
that year as Sunday, October 23rd, 1S87], »» lact, as nearly as I can recall,
about the time when C.’s father first appeared to her in a spiritualised form, I
had a singular and most vivid impression that the post would bring me bud
news. We were tlien in Switzerland. I could daily from my window, at 1 1.20
A.M. to a moment, see the train arrive which brought our English letters. Those
were taken to the post-office close by and sorted ; and about twenty minutes
after the train came in my letters (if any) were placed upon my table. On Sun-
day mornings the English Church service began at 10.30, so that by 1 1.40 the
chaplain was well advanced in his sermon. On that one particular Sunday it
was, as nearly as I can tell, exactly at that moment of time I suddenly felt
much distressed and mentally disturbed, feeling convinced that bad news was
awaiting me on my return to the hotel. 1 had to put considerable force upon
myself to refrain from rising from my scat and leaving the church.

My presentiment was only too true ; on my writing-table I found a most
agonising letter from T. (C.’s elder sister) telling me that their father had had
a most alarming attack of illness (this was the first of the three seizures which
resulted in his decease on December loth). One point I would especially
notice ; apparently this letter conveyed no impression to my mind so long as
it was in the train or at the post-office, but took effect upon me so soon as it
was put upon my writing-table— came within my surroundings, as it were.

We returned to England on December ist. After C.’s father’s death—
during the night of December I2th-I3th — I was sleeping in a small back room
on the ground floor of a lodging in London, a room which had only one window,
closed by shutters and a thick curtain. The gas in the passage was put out
when 1 went to bed, so that, after I had extinguished my candle, the room was
shrouded in impenetrable darkness — darkness that could be felt. About 3 a.m.
on the morning of the 13th I awoke en sursaui, as the French expression has it
(that is to say, 1 was wide awake, not in a half-dreamy condition), to see the
room up to the ceiling, for about the width of my bed, and extending to the
flreplace opposite, flooded with a pale golden radiance, an unearthly light—
quite unlike any we are acquainted with ; it seemed to come from behind the
bed ; so bright was it that I could distinctly see the design on the wall-paper
opposite me, and over the fireplace. This paper was a very pale French
grey, of two tints, outlined here and there with a thin line of colour. This
effect lasted, as nearly as T can tell, about five minutes, during which I opened
and shut my eyes several times, clasped and unclasped my handsj and hit my-
self to be certain that I was not dreaming. When the light went I was m
totak darkness as before.

That same day I confided the circumstance to T. (Clara’s sister), Degg»ng
her not to tell her about it, since C. was feeling her father’s death roost acute ) ?
but when a day or two later C. told me of his three appearances to her, aiu
this same remarkable golden light which accompanied them, I related to ic

714A] TO CHAPTER VII 325

what 1 had myself seen, expressing my regret that awe or astonishment had
prevented me from speaking or making some sign ; though, unlike herself, I
had seen no shadowy form approach me. The thought then occurred to me
that there might be something regarding which the deceased wished to be
satisfied— something which prevented his spirit from obtaining perfect rest,
and 1 suggested to her that should this experience be repeated to either of
us we should answer him. The result is stated in C.’s account.

My own impression is that his spirit tried to communicates with me, but
in my great amazement at the vision 1 was unable to receive his message.
C. was prepared.

Later on— viz., in a letter, dated February 27th, 1888, C., when writing to
me, says : When 1 told you in my last letter, dear auntie, that I had spoken^
it was from your advice, for you told me to do so. Now, I must try and explain
to you just what happened. It was about four o'clock in the morning, or even
earlier. A bright light suddenly came into my room — not a light like from a
fire or a candle, but a glow of golden light* Then 1 saw a form, quite white,
bend over me, and in my darling father's voice I heard these words : ‘ Take
care of mother — I am in perfect peace.' I said : ‘Yes, father.’ And then the
light by degrees disappeared. Since this, I have not seen or heard anything
more, and I have a feeling that I shall never again, as I feel sure that all he
wanted to say he has said, and is at rest since I answered him. What you tell
me as having happened to you on the night of December 12th is, indeed,
passing strange. I should so like to know what was meant to tell you. Have
you any idea? It is strange that both you and I should see the same light.
You see 1 told you first, so it could not have been a dream, as 1 might possibly
have fancied if you had told of your strange light (for I do sometimes dream of
things which I hear and read of). If anything should happen again I will write
it down, and let you know at once; but, somehow, I feel I shall not.”

In further letters Mrs, Adie says : —

April ij/, 1889.

I must now add to my statement in my last (so positively put), as to only a
segment of my room being illumined, what I then omitted, viz., that what made
me so certain of this fact was — that neither the white muslin-covered dressing-
table on my right hand, nor the wardrobe standing against the wall on my left
hand, were visible to me on that occasion ! No ; when I saw this luminosity
1 had heard nothing of my niece’s experiences up to that date.

I have occupied the same room again in the interval which has since
elapsed, and found that the room was so obscure that even in winter day-
light (no fog) when lying on the bed I could not make out the design on the
wall-paper opposite me, although on the occasion I there mention every little
detail of form and colour was sharply defined.

My husband had to pass through my room to get to his, and when he left
our sitting-room the whole house was in bed. It was his business to extinguish
the feeble little gas-jet which was left burning. Had he forgotten to do this,
the light from the burner could not have resembled what 1 saw. My niece has
tnore than once assured me positively “th.'it she at no other time has ever had
any hallucination of the senses.” I cannot recall ever having had any halfucina-
hons which did not mean anything, or rather, which have not come true,— if I
except [a vision which may or may not have corresponded to reality, but which
cannot at present be tested].

326 APPENDICES [716A

716 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., voL vi. p. 25 / Mrs. P. writes .

June 1885 .

Our mother died while we were all very young ; and as I, the fourth child
of seven, was the eldest living daughter, I became early acquainted (from my
eighth year) with sorrow of various kinds and degrees, principally caused, how-
ever, by the harshness and frequent neglect of housekeeper and servants
towards my baby brother and sister. The two eldest boys — between whom and
myself was a gap of some years— were almost always away from home, and
ultimately went abroad, so that from the time I was quite a little child I was
continually with my father, who made much of me, and at last I became his
constant companion. He never married again, and our love was probably,
therefore, a closer union even than commonly exists between a father and
daughter while the latter is of tender years. It was a great pain to me ever to
be away from him, especially after my fourteenth year, at which time he began
to make me his confidante as well as companion ; and we had frequent earnest
talks and discussions on many subjects. At length, when I was about eighteen
years old, a terrible grief befell us, viz., the death of my two elder brothers
within a few weeks of each other, while they were still abroad.

My father’s sorrow was great ; and at the same time he became seriously
troubled with many doubts regarding various points of Christian faith, and so
gradually lost nearly all his buoyancy of spirit, and became sadly depressed and
worn-looking, though only forty-eight years old. For a year he thus suffered,
when it was arranged that, so soon as he could plan to leave home, he should
go to some seaside place, and try what new scenes would effect. He also per-
suaded — nay, insisted — that I should go away for awhile, without waiting for
him, and accompany some friends to South Devonshire.

The wriler then narrates how' a sudden summons brought her back to
find her father dead.

I went early to bed, to escape the presence and sympathetic ministrations
of the many in that kind household who gathered around me ; and by my own
choice I shared the room of a motherly-looking personage, whom 1 supposed to
be my cousin’s nurse. .She occupied the larger bed in the room, and I a smaller
one placed at some distance from hers. She was soon asleep and breathing
heavily ; but I was lying in deepest anguish, beset not only with the grief of
the sudden loss sustained, but with the wretched fear that my beloved father
had died too suddenly to find peace with God, regarding those miserable doubts
that had so troubled him. As the night wore on, the pain of heart and thought
grew worse and worse, and at length I knelt in prayer, earnestly pleading that
my distressful thoughts might be taken away, and an assurance of my father’s
peace be given me by God's Most Holy Spirit. No immediate relief came,
however, and it was early dawn when I rose from my knees, and felt that I must
be patient and wait for the answer of my prayer.

Now a longing suddenly seized me to creep into that kind-faced woman’s
bed, and to feel perhaps less lonely there. Her bed was opposite a window,
over ^hich a white blind was drawn, and as 1 softly lifted the bedclothi^ and
sat for a moment after drawing my feet up into the bed, 1 noticed the
feebly lighting up the window, and the movement of a little bird on the 9'*^'
side; but the room itself was as yet almost dark.

716A] TO CHAPTER VII 327

1 was just about* to slip quietly down into the bed, when on the opposite
side of it (that on which the nurse was sleeping) the room became suddenly
full of beautiful light, in the midst of which stood my father absolutely trans-
figured, clothed with brightness. He slowly moved towards the bed, raising his
hands, as 1 thought, to clasp me in his arms; and I ejaculated: “Father!”
He replied, “ Blessed for ever, my child ! For ever blessed ! ” I moved to
climb over nurse and kiss him, reaching out my arms to him ; but with a look
of mingled sadness and love he appeared to float back with the' light towards
the wall and was gone ! The vision occupied so short a time that, glancing
involuntarily at the window again, I saw the morning dawn and the little bird
just as they had looked a few minutes before. I felt sure that God had vouch-
safed to me a wonderful vision, and was not in the least afraid, but, on the
contrary, full of a joy that brought floods of grateful tears, and completely
removed all anguish except that of having lost my father from earth. I offer no
explanation, and can only say most simply and truthfully that it all happened
just as 1 have related.

You may find a solution to the occurrence in the sympathy which had
existed between my dear father and myself ; or, as friends have often insisted,
in the condition of excitement and exhaustion which 1 was suffering at the time ;
but after all these years of life and experience, the memory of that wonderful
morning is ever vividly fresh, and realy and trtie.

The writer’s husband adds, under date June 17th, 1885 : —

The narrative, as related above, is substantially the same given to me by
Mrs. P. as early as 1865, and at subsequent periods. W. B. P.

And Dr. and Mrs. C., referred to above, write, June i6th, 1885 : —

The preceding narrative was related to us by Mrs. P., substantially as here
rtcorded, some four or five years ago. James C.

Ellen H. C.

Now comes the case which has evidential importance.

In the year 1867 I was married, and my husband took a house at S ,

quite a new one, just built in what was, and still is probably, called “ Cliff
Town,” as being at a greater elevation than the older part of the town. Our life
was exceedingly bright and happy there until towards the end of 1869, when
my husband’s health appeared to be failing, and he grew dejected and moody.
Trying in vain to ascertain the cause for this, and being repeatedly assured l^y
bim that I was “too fanciful,” and that there was “nothing the matter with
him,” I ceased to vex him with questions, and the time passed quietly away till
Christmas Eve of that year (1869).

An uncle and aunt lived in the neighbourhood, and they invited us to spend
Christmas Day with them — to go quite early in the morning to breakfast,
accompanied by the whole of our small household.

We arranged therefore to go to bed at an early hour on the night of the 24th,
so as to be up betimes for our morning walk. Consequently at 9 o’cl<>ck, we
weot upstairs, having as usual carefully attended to bars and bolts of doors,
and at about 9.30 were ready to extinguish the lamp; but our little girl — a
baby of fifteen months — ^generally woke up at that time, and after drinking some

328 APPENDICES [716a

warm milk would sleep again for the rest of the night ; and» as she had not
yet awakened, I begged my husband to leave the lamp burning and get into
bed, while I, wrapped in a dressing-gown, lay on the outside of the bed with
the cot on my right hand. The bedstead faced the fireplace, and nothing stood
between but a settee at the foot of the bed. On either side of the chimney was
a large recess, -—the one to the left (as we faced in that direction) having a chest
of drawers, on which the lamp was standing. The entrance door was on the
same side of the room as the head of the bed and to the left facing, there-
fore, the recess of which I speak. The door was locked ; and on that same
side (to my left) my husband was lying, with the curtain drawn, towards which
his face was turned.

[Plan of room given, omitted here.]

As the bed had curtains only at the head, all before us was open and dimly-
lighted, the lamp being turned down.

This takes some time to describe, but it was still just about 9.30, Gertrude
not yet awake, and I just pulling myself into a half-sitting posture against the
pillows, thinking of nothing but the arrangements for the following day, when
to my great astonishment I saw a gentleman standing at the foot of the bed.
dressed as a naval officer, and with a cap on his head having a projecting peak!
The light being in the position which I have indicated, the face was in shadow
to mej and the more so that the visitor was leaning upon his arms which rested
on the foot-rail of the bedstead. I was too astonished to be afraid, but simply
wondered who it could be; and, instantly touching my husband’s shoulder
(whose face was turned from me), I said, “ Willie, who is this? ” My husband
turned, and for a second or two lay looking in intense astonishment at the
intruder ; then lifting himself a little, he shouted « What on earth are you doing
here, sir?” Meanwhile the form, slowly drawing himself into an upright posi-
tion, now said in a commanding, yet reproachful voice, “ Willie! Willie ! ”

I looked at my husband and saw that his face was white and agitated. As
I turned towards him he sprang out of bed as though to attack the man, but
stood by the bedside as if afraid, or in great perplexity, while the figure calmly
and slowly moved towards the wall at right angles with the lamp in the direc-
tion of the dotted line [shown in the plan]. As it passed the lamp, a deep
shadow fell upon the room as of a material person shutting out the light from
us by his intervening body, and he disappeared, as it were, into the wall.
My husband now, in a very agitated manner, caught up the lamp, and turning
to me said, “ I mean to look all over the house, and see where he is gone.”

I was by this time exceedingly agitated too, but remembering that the door
was locked, and that the mysterious visitor had not gone towards it at all,
remarked, “ He has not gone out by the door I ” But without pausing, my
husband unlocked the door^ hastened out of the room, and was soon searching
the whole house. Sitting there in the dark, 1 thought to myself, ** We have
surely .seen an apparition! Whatever can it indicate? — perhaps my brother
Arthur (he was in the navy, and at that time on a voyage to India) is in trouble :
such things have been told of as occurring.” In some such way I pondered
with an anxious heart, holding the child, who just then awakened, in my arms,
until my husband came back looking very white and miserable.

Sitting upon the bedside, he put his arm about me and said, “ Do you know
what we have seen?’^ And I said, “Yes, it was a spirit. I am afraid it was

716B] TO CHAPTER VII 329

Arthur, but could not 'see his face” — and he exclaimed, “ Oh ! no, it was my
father!”

My husband’s father had been dead fourteen years : he had been a naval
ofhccr in his young life ; but, through ill-health, had left the service before my
husband was born, and the latter had only once or twice seen him in uniform,
/had never seen him at all. My husband and I related the occurrence to my
uncle and aunt, and we all noticed that my husband’s agitation and anxiety
were very great: whereas his usual manner was calm and reserved in the
extreme, and he was a thorough and avowed sceptic in all— so-called — super-
natural events.

As the weeks passed on my husband became very ill, and then gradually
disclosed to me that he had been in great financial difficulties ; and that, at
the time his father was thus sent to us, he was inclining to take the advice
of a man who would certainly — had my husband yielded to him (as he had
intended before hearing the warning voice)— have led him to ruin, perhaps
worse. It is this fact which makes us most reticent in speaking of the event ;
in addition to which, my husband had already been led to speculate upon
certain chances which resulted in failure and infinite sorrow to us both, as

well as to others, and was indeed the cause of our coming to , after a year

of much trouble, in the January of 1871.

None of us were particularly ready to believe in such evidences, notwith-
standing my experience at my father’s death, because we had regarded that as
a special answer to prayer ; so that no condition of “ over-wrought nerves,” or
“superstitious fears,” could have been the cause of the manifestation, but only,
so far as we have been able to judge by subsequent events, a direct warning
to my husband in the voice and appearance of the one that he had most
reverenced in all his life, and was the most likely to obey.

Dr. and Mrs. C., friends of Mrs. and Mr. P., add the following note : —

June i 6 tA, 1885.

This narrative was told us by Mrs. P., as here recorded, some years ago.

J. C.

Ellen H. C.

Mr. P. confirms as follows, June 17th, 1885 - —

Without wishing to add more to the incidents recorded herein by my wife,
I would simply note that the details of No. 2 are quite correct, and that the
occurrence took place as stated. ... W. B. P.

716 B. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 236. In the narrative
next to be cited, there is a record of prolonged speech^ but in such cases,
especially when few or no actual words are quoted, we can hardly be sure
as to the degree of exiemalisation which the voice assumes. The appari-
tion here seems to have at least comprehended the percipient’s inward
situation, although it is not clear that any prediction requiring super-
normal insight was actually made. I owe the narrative to the kindnSss of
Mr. Morell Theobald, who printed it first in Light for March 5th, 1892.
It is written on an old piece, of paper (sent to me) and marked “For Mr.

s private perusal.” The history of the paper is as follows : — Mr. C.

APPENDICES

330 *

[716 B

(I must not give the names), well known to Mr. Theobald, and holding a
good position in one of the Australian colonies, discovered it among the
private papers of his uncle, Mr. B., who died twelve years ago. The
apparition, as will be seen, occurred on October 24th, i860, and the
account is endorsed on November 9th by the percipient’s father. Further
particulars, sent to Mr. B. by the percipient (who is here called Mr. D.)
are dated November 13th, i860. The first account seems to have been
sent by the percipient to his father, and by the father to Mr. B.

The percipient has been identified, and confirms, as will be seen, this
early narrative, which is as follows : —

On the evening of Wednesday, October 24th, i860, having retired to bed
about nine o’clock, I had slept, I conclude, about two hours, making it then
about eleven o’clock p.m, I was awoke from my sleep by a hand touching my
forehead, and the well-known voice of Mrs. lb pronouncing my name, E. J
started up, and sat in bed, rubbed my eyes, and then saw Mrs. B. From the
head to the waist the figure was distinct, clear, and well-defined : but from the
waist downwards it was all misty and the lower part transparent. She appeared
to be dressed in black silk. Her countenance was grave and rather sad, but
not unhappy.

The words she first uttered were : “I have left dear John;” what followed
related entirely to myself, and she was permitted by a most kind Providence to
speak words of mercy, promise, and comfort, and assurance that what 1 mo.st
wished would come to pass. She came to me in an hour of bitter mental
agony, and was sent as a messenger of mercy.

1 would have spoken more to her, but the form faded, and in answer to an
earnest appeal, a voice came to me which, though apparently hundreds of miles
away, was distinct and clear, saying, ** Only believe,” and she was gone.

Throughout the interview I felt no fear, but an inward, heavenly peace. It
was new moon, but the room was as light as day !

Our next information consists of a statement of Mr. D.’s, written in
reply to Mr. B.’s questions, November 13th, 1869, found (in Mr. B.'s
handwriting) among Mr. B.’s papers, and now summarised for us by
Mr. C.

Mr. D. had been asleep, but could not say how long. Had not seen Mrs. B.
for several months. Can’t recollect what dress she had on then. Was not
in bad health. Was alone in the house. The subject of his anxiety was not
known to Mrs. B. nor connected with her. The apparition seemed to wait for
questions, and when put they were answered. The subject of the communica-
tion was one greatly influencing his thoughts and feelings, and had been deeply
agitating him before he went to bed. It was not a religious matter; bat
Scriptural language was used; Mark xi. 23, 24 were quoted— a passage well
known to the writer, and often dwelt upon by him. The window faces north.
The ^ight was wet and cloudy. The writer did not put it down at the time,
believing it too real ever to be forgotten. He had not* mentioned it to any one
but his father and [Mr.] B. He saw the notice of the death for the first time
on Saturday In the Observer, Resided about ten miles from Gawler, which is
twenty-five miles from Adelaide.

716 B] TO CHAPTER VII 331

•

Mr. C. has forwarded to us a printed extract from the South Australian
Register of October 25th, i860, which includes a notice of the death of
Mrs. B. on October 24th, at Bank Street, Adelaide. The hour of the death
is fixed by Mr. C.'s own recollection, depending on his own fixed habits
at the time. He writes to Mr. Theobald under date May 3rd, 1892 : —

I was at that time a clerk in my uncle’s office, which was at his house in
Bank Street, Adelaide; but was staying just then at Glenelly. I left the office
at 4 r.M- on the 23rd after saying good-bye to Mrs. B., leaving her in her usual
state of health. She was taken ill about ii p.m., and a.sked frequently for me,
expressing a strong desire not to die before I arrived ; but when I got to the
house at the usual time, about 10 A. m. next morning, I was met with the news
that she had been dead about two hours.

The death, therefore, had taken place more than twelve hours before
the apparition was seen.

Mr. D. makes a slight mistake in his original account, in saying that it
was new moon, whereas the moon was then ten days old. But as it was a
cloudy night, and his window faced north, the light by which the figure
was seen was doubtless, as in so many of these cases, itself a part of the
apparition.

At Mr. Theobald's request Mr. C. communicated with Mr. D,, who is
still living ; and we have therefore the opportunity of comparing a thirty
years’ old recollection with the same person's contemporary statement.
The comparison shows that, — ^as I believe to be often the case, — the
memory of the supernormal incident had not groia/i, but dwindled.

Reminded in a general way, but without detail, of the occurrence,
Mr. D. writes (in a letter seen by me), April 2i.st, 1892

There was no conversation. She only said to me, “ E., I have left dear
John.” I cannot remember whether it was wet or not ; but as to the moon, it
was not at all like that light. It was more like an electric light; — a subdued
brilliancy. . . . “ How long did the spirit remain in conversation with me ? ”
Certainly not more than five minutes, if so long. ... I sent the account to my
father, who probably handed it to [Mr.] B,

Further reminded of his contemporary account, Mr. D. writes, May ist,
1892 : — ‘‘I appear to have spoken, but have no distinct recollection of
doing so. What she did say was entirely personal." It related to the
removal of a painful misunderstanding with a friend. So far as I know
she had never seen, or even heard of, the friend alluded to." Mr. D.
declines to give further detail ; but he still considers that the communica-
tion showed “ a plenary knowledge " of facts personal to himself. His
hesitation of memory seems to have been on the point whether the hope
and consolation were conveyed by spoken words, or in some directer
fashion. The confidence inspired by the message was, he tells us, justified
hy the result. The supposed conversation in this case may have been
more dream-like than the percipient imagined. It may have taken place,
so to say, in his own mind, without definite auditory externalisation.

APPENDICES

332

[716 C

716 0 . From the Journal S.P.R., voL v. p. 10. The four incidents
which follow were written out for me in 1888 by a lady whom I will term
Mrs. V,, who has had other experiences somewhat similar, which, for
private reasons, she does not wish to give. I am well acquainted with
Mrs. V., and with her husband, who has held an important position in
India.

I. In r874 1 was in India, at a hill station. On the 7th June, between one
and three o’clock in the morning, I woke with the sensation that half my life
had been taken from me (I can only describe the feeling in this vague way).
I sat up and pressed my side in wonder at what was happening. 1 then saw
most beautiful lights at the end of the room ; these lights gave place to a cloud,
and after a few moments the face of a dear sister, then living (as I believed),
appeared in the cloud, which remained a little while and then gradually faded
away. I became much alarmed and at once felt I should hear bad news of my
sister, who was living in London and had been very ill, though the last accounts
we had received had been better. I told my husband what had happened, and
when a telegram was brought by a friend at eight o'clock that morning I knew
what its contents must be. The telegram contained the news of my sister’s
death during the previous night.

II. In 1885 I was present in church at the confirmation of my sister’s
youngest boy. I was in the left-hand gallery of the church, the boy in the
body of the church, on the right side. As I was kneeling, I looked towards
the opposite gallery, which was of dark wood. There I saw the half figure ot
my sister; the head and arms outstretched high above the boy, as if blessing
him. For the moment I thought it was impossible, and closed my eyes for a
few seconds. Opening them again 1 saw the same beautiful form, which
almost immediately vanished.

III. In India, in the winter of 1881, the husband of an acquaintance was
lying dangerously ill at a hotel about five miles from us. Knowing this, 1
went frequently to inquire after him. One particular evening I remained with
his wife some time, as the doctor thought his condition most critical. When 1
returned home, about ten o’clock that night, I ordered beef essences and jellies
to be made to send early the next morning.

The night was perfectly calm and sultry, not a leaf stirring. About twelve
o’clock the Venetians in my bedroom suddenly began to shake and knockings
were heard, which seemed to proceed from a box under my writing-table. The
knocking and shaking of the Venetians went on for half-an-hour or niore> off
and on.

During this time I heard a name whispered, A B ^ of which the

Christian name was unknown to me, the surname being the maiden name of
the sick man’s wife. I felt so certain that I was wanted at the hotel that I
wished to start at once, but I was advised not to do so at that hour of the
night. Early the next morning a messenger arrived with a note begging me
to go at once to the hotel, as my friend’s husband had died at one o’clock.
Whe|^ I reached the hotel, she told me how she had wished to send for me
during the night whilst his death was impending. I went at once to stay with
her till after the funeral, and found that the Christian name I had heard
whispered was the name of her brother who had died seven years previously-

IV. In 1884 we were staying in a villa in the south of France. One night,

TO CHAPTER VII

333

717 A]

soon after we arrived; 1 went from my room upstairs to fetch something in the
drawing-room (which was on the ground floor), and saw a slight figure going
down the stairs before me in a white garb with a blue sash and long golden
hair. She glided on into a room near the hall door. This startled and im-
pressed me so much that 1 afterwards went to the house-agent and asked if
any one had lately died in that house with long golden hair. He replied that
an American lady, young and slight, with golden hair, had died there a few
months before — in the very room into which I had seen the figure gliding.

1 talked over the cases with Mr. V., and noted his remarks.

In Case I. he remembers being told in the morning of Mrs. V.’s vision,
though at this distance of time he cannot state whether the telegram
announcing the death had arrived before he was told.

In Case II. he was told at once of the incident.

On Case III. he has made and signed the following remarks : —

This noise resembled the shaking of the lid of the tin box. I got up and
went to the box, which continued making the noise, to see if there were rats,
but there were none. I’here were no rats in the house, and there was nothing
in the box. A night-light was burning in the room. The rattling was con-
tinuous— not like what a rat could produce. It went on again after 1 had in-
vestigated it in vain. This incident was unique in my experience.

Mrs. V. added in conversation : The Christian name whispered was
Henry. This brother was not an Indian official, and I had never heard of
him.*’ Mrs. V.’s acquaintance with the lady whose husband was dying
was not an intimate one.

In Case IV. Mr. V. again informs me that he was told at once of the
incident. The name of the villa was La Baronne, of the house-agent,
Mr. Taylor.

717 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 20 . The following account
was received from Miss Pearson, 15 Fitzroy Square, London, W.C.

April 188S.

The house, 19 St. James’s Place, Green Park, had been taken on a very
long lease by my grandfather, a solicitor, in large county practice, having his
offices in Essex Street, Strand. There my father was born and his two sisters,
Ann and Harriet. Aunt Ann died in 1858, leaving all she possessed to Aunt
Harriet, who remained in the house. They had been devotedly attached to
each other. In November 1864 I was summoned to Brighton. My Aunt
Harriet was then very ill there. Mrs. Coppinger, the daughter of Mr. Thomas
Pearson, my father’s brother, was there, and her son, Mr. George James, by
her first husband, came up and down. Eliza Quinton was nursing her. She
only craved to go back to the old house where she was born, and I made
arrangements with the railway company and took her home.

This was in the second week in December. She became worse and worse.
Eliza continued to nurse her, and Mrs. Coppinger, Mrs. John Pears«n, the
wife of a nephew, and myself helped with the night work.

Miss Harriet Pearson slept in a large three-windowed bedroom over the
drawing-room. The room behind was occupied by Mrs. Coppinger and myself,

334

APPENDICES

[7178

though one of us was generally in the patient’s room at night. On the night
of December 22nd, 1864, Mrs. John Pearson was in the room, Mrs. Coppinger
and myself in the back room ; the house lighted- up on the landings and stair-
cases, our door wide open.

About I or 2 A.M. on the morning of December 23rd, both Mrs. Coppinger
and myself started up in bed ; we were neither of us sleeping, as we were
watching every sound from the next room.

We saw some one pass the door, short, wrapped up in an old shawl, a wig
with three curls each side and an old black cap. Mrs. Coppinger called out
“ Emma, get up, it is old Aunt Ann.” I said, “ So it is, then Aunt Harriet will
die to-day.” We jumped up, and Mrs. John Pearson came rushing out of the
room and said, That was old Aunt Ann. Where is she gone to ? ” I said to
soothe her, “Perhaps it was Eliza come down to see how her mistress is/’
Mrs. Coppinger ran upstairs and found Eliza sleeping in the servants’ room.
She was very awe-struck but calm, dressed and came down. Every room was
searched, no one was there, and from that day to this no explanation has ever
been given of this appearance, except that it was old Aunt Ann come to call her
sister, and she died at 6 p.m. that day. Emma M. Pearson.

The housekeeper, who is still with Miss Pearson, writes as follows

Apn/ yd, 1888.

I was living with Miss Ann and Miss Harriet Pearson, in 19 St. James’s
Place. After the death of Miss Ann I remained with her sister, and when she
became very ill and was ordered change of air, I went with her as nurse to
Brighton. Mrs. Coppinger was there and Mr. George James now and then.
Miss Emma Pearson was sent for and came down. She brought her aunt back
to London, I continued to nurse her, I remember on the early morning of
December 23rd being called up by Mrs. Coppinger, who said that she, .Miss
Emma, and Mrs. John Pearson had seen some one come upstairs and pass
into the patient’s room. Was it I ? I said, no. Mrs. Coppinger said, “ They
said it was old Aunt Ann.” We searched the house and could find no one.
Miss Hcarriet died in the evening of that day, but before that told all of us that
she had seen her sister and knew it was her, and she had come to call her.

Eliza Quinton.

In a separate letter of the same date Miss Pearson adds : —

I now remember my aunt saying “ her sister had come for her, for she had
seen her.”

717 B. In the following case, a child, while apparently quite well, feels
the impression of approaching death, and ascribes it to his dead brother’s
call. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 429.)

This case was first printed in the Religio- Philosophical Journal^ May 5th,
1894. Mr. B. B. Kingsbury, who contributed it, states that the informant
is a niember of the Presbyterian Church, and her husband has confirmed
her as to the statement of voices heard by the little boy calling him.
Mr. Kingsbury adds that both are worthy of the highest credit. The
father is somewhat of a “ sensitive ” and the mother has had two or threo

TO CHAPTER VII

717 B]

335

clairvoyant experiences herself. The statement just as it was given by the
mother runs as follows : —

Is there a life beyond the grave ? Had I ever doubted that there is a life
beyond (which I never for a moment did), my doubt would have been removed
by what I call a vision. In 1883 I was the mother of two strong healthy boys.
The eldest was a bright boy of two years and seven months. The other, a
darling baby boy of eight months. August 6th, 1883, my baby died. Ray,
my little son, was then in perfect health. Every day after baby’s death (and 1
may safely say every hour in the day) he would say to me, “ Mamma, baby
calls Ray.” He would often leave his play and come running to me, saying,
“Mamma, baby calls Ray all the time.” Every night he would waken me out
of my sleep, and say, “ Mamma, baby calls Ray all the time. He wants Ray to
come where he is ; you must not cry when Ray goes, mamma, you must not
cry, for baby wants Ray.” One day I was sweeping the sitting-room floor, and
he came running as fast as he could run, through the dining-room where stood
the table with baby’s high chair (which Ray now used) at the side. I never saw
him so excited, and he grabbed my dress and pulled me to the dining-room
door, jerked it open, saying, “Oh, mamma, mamma, come quick; baby is
sitting in his high chair.” As soon as he opened the door and looked at the
chair he said, “ Oh, mamma, why didn’t you hurry; now he’s gone; he laughed
at Ray when he passed the chair; oh, he laughed at Ray so nice. Ray is
going with baby, but you must not cry, mamma.” Ray soon became very sick.
Nursing and medicine were of no avail. He died October 13th, 1883, two
months and .seven days after baby’s death. He was a child of high intelligence
and matured far beyond his years. Whether it is possible for the dead to
return, and whether my baby came back and was seen by his little brother or
not, we leave for others to judge.

In reply to Dr. Hodgson’s inquiries, Mrs. H. wrote : —

Dei’IANCF, Ohio, December lyA, 1894.

In reply will say that Mr. Kingsbury’s account in the Reli^o-Philosophical
Journal for May 5th last of my little boy’s clairvoyance shortly before his death
is correct in every detail. When the child ran to me telling me the baby was
sitting in his chair at the tabic, there was no one in the house but the servant
girl, little Ray, and myself. I told the girl nothing about it and she did not
hear the child; but as soon as my husband came to dinner I told him. After
that we talked freely of the matter to several of our friends. Little Ray knew
nothing of death, we had never spoken of it to him in any way; the last time
1 took him to the baby’s grave shortly before he was taken sick we were sitting
by the grave, and I thought, “ Oh I if I could only take baby up and look at it
for just one minute, I would feel so glad.” Instantly Ray said to me, “ Mamina,
let us take baby up and look at it just one minute; then we will feel better.”
Just as we were leaving the grave he smoothed it with Iris little hand, and said,
“ Ray is going to lie down and sleep right here beside little brother, but you
must not cry, mamma.” He is now lying just where he said he would. *

1 wish to say that I have never known much of what is called modern
Spiritualism, but was born a^nd reared a Presbyterian and still belong to that
Church, of which I am an active member. F. H.

336

APPENDICES

[me

Mr. H. wrote as follows -

Fehruarj^ 1895.

Mr. R. Hodgson,— Dear Sir,— In regard to B. B. Kingsbuiy’s statement
in the Religio-Philosophical Journal oi May 5th, 1894, I can truly say that my
wife related it to me the day it occurred when I came to dinner. I frequently
heard our little boy tell his mamma that the baby called him all the time.—
Yours respectfully, W. H. H.

The following corroboration was also received : —

116 Summit Street, Defiance, February 1895.

R. Hodgson, — Dear Sir, — I can truly say that Mrs. and Mr. H. often
spoke to me of Ray seeing the baby in the chair before he look sick. Tht^y
told me the next day after it happened. Mrs. J. H. Shulters.

717 C. The next case appeared originally in Phantasms of the Livings
vol. ii. p. 208. It came from Captain Cecil Norton, late of the 5th
Lancers, who wrote as follows : —

5 Queen's Gate, S.W., December 20th, 1885.

About Christmas time, 1875 or 1876, being officer on duty, I was seated at
the mess-table of the 5th Lancers in the West Cavalry Barracks at Aldershot.
There were ten or twelve other officers present, and amongst them Mr.
John Atkinson (now of Erchfont Manor, near Devizes, Wilts), the Surgeon-
Major of the regiment, who sat on my right, but at the end of the table
furthest from me and next to Mr. Russell. [Captain Norton was sitting at the
end of the table and directly facing the window.] At about 8.45 p.m. Atkinson
suddenly glared at the window to his right, thereby attracting the notice of
Russell, who seizing his arm, said, “Good gracious, Doctor, what’s the matter
with you?” This caused me to look in the direction in which I saw Atkinson
looking, viz., at the window opposite, and I there saw (for the curtails were
looped up, although the room was lighted by a powerful central gas light in tlie
roof and by candles on the table) a young woman, in what appeared a soiled or
somewhat worn bridal dress, walk or glide slowly past the window from east to
west. She was about at the centre of the window when I observed her, and out-
side the window. No person could have actually been in the position where
she appeared, as the window in question is about 30 feet above the ground.

The nearest buildings to the window referred to are the Infantry Barracks
opposite, about 300 yards distant. Behind where I sat is a conservatory, which
was examined by me, as well as the front window, immediately after the occur-
rence. There was no person in the conservatory. [It was unused in the
winter.] The nearest buildings to it are the officers’ stables, over which are
the staff-sergeants’ quarters, about 50 yards distant.

The occurrence made little if any impression upon me, though it impre.ssea
others who were in the room. All present had been drinking very little wine ;
and tlJe dinner had been very quiet.

It has just occurred to me that I may be wrong as to the time of the yean
and that the occurrence may have taken place about 15th October or about ijt
March. Cecil Norton.

TO CHAPTER VII

337

W7 C]

' •

jlr. Atkinson wrote : —

Erchfont Manor, Devizes, August 1885.

The appArance of a woman which 1 saw pass the mess-room window at
Aldershot seemed to be outside, and it passed from east to west. The mess-
room is on the first floor, so the woman would have been walking in the air.
There has been a very nice story made out of it— like most other ghost-stories,
founded on an optical illusion.

Mr. Gurney added : —

Captain Norton’s 7nva voce account made it tolerably clear, in my opinion,
that the case was one of hallucination^ not illusion. He further mentions that
both Mr. Atkinson and he were “satisfied that the face and form of the woman
seen were familiar,*’ though they could not at the moment identify the person.
Captain Norton afterwards felt sure that the likeness was to a photograph
which he was in the habit of seeing in the room of the veterinary surgeon of
the regiment, representing the surgeon’s deceased wife in bridal dress. Oddly
enough, this man was at the time, unknown to his friends, actually dying, or
within a day or two of death, in the same building. But Mr. Atkinson recalls
nothing about the photograph ; and the coincidence is not one to which we can
attach weight.

Since the publication of the account in Phantasms we obtained from
two of the officers who were present at the time their recollections of the
incident. The letters relating to this were printed in the
vol. viii. p. 76, from which I proceed to quote. Lieutenant Beaumont, in
answer to a written request for his recollection of the alleged apparition in
the 5th Lancers* mess-room at Aldershot, writes : —

Hillside, Burgess Hill, Sussex, Jfarch loth, 1S97.

1 well remember the incident you refer to, and shall be pleased to tell you
the circumstances as I recollect them.

U must liave been in 1876, and in October, I fancy. It so happened that
on the night in question there were very few officers present at the mess
dinner— so far as I can recollect only Norton, E. the veterinary surgeon. Dr.
Atkinson and myself, who, being orderly officer, sat at the end of the table. It
was, I think, towards the close of the dinner, the servants having retired and
we were smoking and chatting, when I was much struck witli the expression
on the faces of my brother officers, who appeared to be gazing in amazement
at something behind me. At first I thought it was some joke, but they each of
them seriously described what they had seen, viz., a figure of a woman in white,
who passed silently through the room, coming, as it were, from the ante-room
and going behind me through the door opposite. It was impossible to doubt,
from their faces at the time, that there was something extraordinary happening.
1 afterwards asked them seriously about it, and Surgeon-. Major Atkinson, who
was a long way the senior, and a hard-headed man, assured me that he had
certainly seen the apparition, and he seemed much impressed. The withers
were equally confident, and assured me there was no chaff about it. It was
frequently alluded to afterwards in a joking way, but I believe that all those
present thought it “ uncanny.’*

VOL. TI.

Y

338 APPENDICES [717c

I must tell you that none of us had imbibed more than a glass or two of
claret, and it was a most exceptionally quiet evening at mess.

I think £. died not long after. . . . Montmorency Beaumont.

This letter having been shown to Captain Norton, he wrote that
Lieutenant Beaumont was mistaken in supposing that Mr. E. was present
on the occasion. He also sent us a sketch (reproduced in the Journal) of
the position of the officers, which agrees with his own earlier account, but
not with the present recollections of Lieutenant Beaumont. The dis-
crepancy, however, is of comparatively slight importance.

The second officer whose testimony has been obtained, Lieutenant-
Colonel Williams, writes : —

Rockfields, Hereford, March 1897.

I am afraid I can give you very little information on the subject ; it is so
many years since the affair took place that I liave nearly forgotten all about it.
All that I remember is that one night when we were a very small party at mess,
some time during the dinner, 1 think just before beginning dessert, I noticed
Dr. Atkinson looking in rather a peculiar way at the window at the top of the
room, and I think my brother-in-law [Captain Norton] said to him or he said
to Captain Norton, “ Did you see it ? ” There was some little joking about it at
the time, and on asking my brother-in-law after dinner what he really had seen,
he told me that he had seen a lady in a white dress and dark hair cross the
window on the outside. Hugh P. Williams.

Mrs. Atkinson, the widow of Surgeon-Major Atkinson, in answer to a
letter asking if her late husband had ever spoken to her on the sub-
ject of the apparition at the mess- table of the 5 th lancers at Aldershot,
writes : —

Erchfont Manor, Devizes, March nth [1897].

It is quite true that my husband .saw the appearance at Aldershot in 1877 ;
he often told me about it. They were in the North Cavalry Barracks [Captain
Norton states that there were no North Cavalry Barracks at Aldershot, but
that it was in the West Cavalry Barracks] at Aldershot, and were at mess in
the mess-room, which is on the first floor, a great distance from the ground.
There is no balcony outside or even a ledge (I believe). My husband and
Captain Norton were the only two sitting facing the window, when they saw
the figure of a woman go slowly by. They were much astonished and told the
others, and there was much excitement about it. Shortly after the veterinary
surgeon died, and on going through his papers either my husband or Captain
Norton found the photograph of the woman they had seen from the mess-room
window. I think they both recognised it. It was not known that the veterinary
surgeon was married. The appearance was never in any way explained.

M. A. Atkinson.

\ tablet in All Saints’ Church, Aldershot, gives the date of death of
Mr. E., veterinary surgeon, 5th Lancers, as January 3rd, 1876. 'Ihis
shows that the date when the apparition was seen was probably about
Christmas time, 1875, both Lieutenant Beaumont and Mrs. Atkinson

718 A] TO CHAPTER VII 339

confirm Captain Norton’s impression that the incident occurred shortly
before Mr. E. died.

718 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 92. The writer of the

following account is Colonel ^ a well-known Irish gentleman, but

we are not allowed to publish his name. He writes from Arthur’s on
March ist, 1885 : —

Some sixteen years since Mrs. said to me, “ We have some people staying

here all next week. Do you know any person I could get to sing with the
girls?’’ I suggested that my gunmakcr, Mr. X., had a daughter with a fine

voice, who was training as a public singer, and that if she, Mrs. , liked I

would write to X. and ask if he would allow her to come down and spend a
week with us. On my wife’s approval I wrote, and Miss X. came down for a

week, and then left. As far as I know, Mrs. never saw her again. Shortly

after I called on X., thanked him for allowing his daughter to come to us, and
said we were all much pleased with her. X. replied : “ I fear you have spoilt
her, for she says .she never passed so happy a week in her life.” Miss X. did
not come out as a singer, but shortly after married Mr. Z., and none of us ever
saw her again.

Six or seven years passed away, and Mrs. , who had been long ill, was

dying, in fact she did die the following day. I was sitting at the foot of her
bed talking over some business matters that she was anxious to arrange, being
perfectly composed and in thorough possession of her senses ; in fact she was
right, and ray solicitor, who advised that the step she wanted to be taken was
not necessary, was wrong. She changed the subject, and said, “ Do you hear
those voices singing? I replied that I did not; and she said, “ I have heard
them several limes to-day, and I am sure they are the angels welcoming me to
Ifcavcn; but,” she added, “it is .strange, there is one voice amongst them I am
sure I know, and cannot remember whose voice it is.” Suddenly she stopped
and said, pointing straight over my head, “ Why, there she is in the corner of
the room; it is Julia X. ; she is coming on; she is leaning over you ; she has
her hands up ; she is praying ; do look ; she is going.” I turned but could see

nothing. Mrs. then said, ‘‘She is gone.” All these things I imagined to

l)e the phantasies of a dying person.

Two days afterward.s, taking up the Times newspaper, I saw recorded the
death of Julia Z., wife of Mr. Z. I was so astounded that in a day or so after

the funeral 1 went up to and asked Mr. X. if Mrs. Z., his daughter, was

dead. He said, “ Yes, poor thing, she died of puerperal fever. On the day she
died she began singing in the morning, and sang and sang until she died.”

bast year I saw mentioned that some person or persons were collecting
remarkable ghost stories, and I wrote to Mr. Z. telling him shortly what I
have now written at length. Mr. Z.’s answer was that I had described . . .
accurately the scene of his wife’s death. . . .

Colonel adds later : —

Mrs. Z. died on February 2nd at six or thereabout in the morning, 1874.

Mrs February T3th, 1874, at about four in the evening. I saw

notice of Mrs. Z.’s death on February 14th. Mrs. never was subject to

Hallucinations of any sort.

340 APPENDICES [718B

We received later the following letter from Mr. Webley, called above
-‘Mr. Zr \—

84 Wenman Street, Birmingham, May 18M, 1885.

In reply to your letter, I shall be happy to give you the information asked
for. My wife died on 2nd February 1884 [1874], about 5.30 a.m. The last
hours of her life were spent in singing. I may say notes came from her within
ten minutes of her decease; and beautiful as her voice was, it never appeared
so exquisitely beautiful as this. Henry Webley.

718 B. In the next case (quoted from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiv.
p. 28 S) a dying mother had an apparently telepathic vision of an absent
son who happened to be dying at the same time. The account comes
from Colonel C. F. Hicks.

46 Valplaisant, St. Heuers, Jersey, December 2yd , 1889.

Agreeably to my promise I now give you a statement of my late wife’s
last moments. Some days beforehand I was informed she would not last long ;
and it was in the evening about 5 or 6 o’clock p.m., on 3rd October 1887 , 1
went into her bedroom. There was the nurse, my second and third daughters
in the room with me. The door was a little ajar. She was looking at it very
earnestly when she said to my second daughter, Flo, “ There is some one out-
side, let Aim in.” Flo answered and said, Oh no, mamma ; there is no one
— look,” and she opened the door wider. We then talked to her gently for
some little time. After a pause she said, *• Poor Eddie (my second son who
had gone out to Australia) ; oh, he is looking very ill— he has had a fall— broken
his leg — poor Eddie.” When we all assured her such was not the case— that
the last news we had heard from him was that he was quite well — she became
more pacified, although restless and doubtful, as she continued to say now and
then, “Poor Eddie!” She died at about twenty minutes to 2 a.m., early on
the 4th October. We little thought that her words would be verified, with the
exception of the broken leg.

Some time afterwards I received a letter from Mr. Thomas Williams
announcing my poor son’s death. For he left a place called Wyndham on the
Cambridge Gulf, N.W. of Australia, on the 4th [evidently meaning 3rd, see
below] October 1887, with a young man of the name of Russell. He suddenly
felt ill, and called for some water. The latter went off to a spring to get it, but
coming back he found that he bad fallen from his horse and was lying qniu*
dead. So his poor mother’s vision turned out to be quite true, excepting his
leg being broken.

Now, the only question is about the time. Did the .son die before the
mother or after the mother? as, taking the longitude of W’yndham N.W. of
Australia, so far to the east of us, there must be a good eight or ten hours
difference, and a ship going round the world making east all the way would
gain a day, and by westing would lose one.

I give you a few extracts from letters I have received. The one from Mr.
Thtmas Williams, with whom my son left a letter to be sent on to me. M*'*
T. W.’s letter is dated the sth October 1887 : “ Your son left Wyndham to go
to Durack station on the 3rd October, in company with Louis Smith and
Russell. They had to go over a very rough country, and your poor bo>
succumbed to the pangs of thirst, suffering at the same time with fever. I am

TO CHAPTER VII

341

718 B]

glad to inform you that his sufferings were short, and that the great God was
pleased to take him away quickly. He spoke very affectionately of his mother,
and what he would do if he could only get back to Jersey, for he was heartsick
when he was here.”

I give you another extract from his employer, a Mr. Durack, a gentleman
who dealt largely in horses, and had a great number of horse stations in
Australia

When I left your son at Wyndham on 27th September last, 1887, he was
to start back to the station, as he had a horse, bridle, and saddle to ride.”

In conclusion, 1 have now given you as succinctly as I can the death of the
mother and son, the one having taken place here and the other at our Anti-
podes, both on the same day and date, and as far as I know about the same
time. It is more than a coincidence — it is very mysterious.

(Signed) C. F. Hicks.

Colonel Hicks writes later : —

February 22nd, 1890.

. . . The witnesses in my wife’s late case are none of them present here.
My second daughter, whom I was expecting from Bombay when I received
your letter, has arrived here. Her statement I enclose. My third daughter,
another witness, is at present at Brisbane, in Australia. . . .

Discrepancy in dates: my late wife died at about forty minutes to z a.m.
on 4th October 1887— that is, taking the time from 12 a.m. on the 3rd to
12 r.M., after which it becomes the 4th. So all the conversation that took
place with the above-named witnesses, viz., the nurse, Miss £. Fenn, two
daughters and self, took place in the evening of the 3rd, about 5 or 6 p.m.,
as she died the same night, or more correctly speaking, being after 12 p.m.,
it was early in the morning of the 4th.

Now for my son’s death. Mr. Thomas Williams’ letter is dated the 5th
October 1887. He says my son left Wyndham, on the Gulf of Cambridge, on
the 4tli [the date given in Mr. Williams’ letter is 3rd, see below] October 1887,
but he does not mention at what time. But being within the tropics, where
people generally travel as early as they can to escape the heat of the sun, it is
presumed that he and his friend, Mr. Russell, must have started early, and it
is certain that they could not have gone far before he met his end, and most
probably Mr. T, Williams must have heard of it the same day, as his letter is
dated the sth October 1887. . . . (Signed) C. F. Hicks.

The following letter from Miss Hicks was enclosed : —

February zytkt 1S90.

1 was in my late mother’s bedroom between the hours of five and six in the
evening, on the 3rd of October 1887, when she asked me to open the door, as
some one was outside and wanted to come in. I answered and said, “ Oh,
another, the door is open, and there is no one outside,” and then I opened the
door wider. Then I shut the door. She then said, “ Poor Eddie, he looks
ycry ill; had a fall.” I said to her, “ Oh, mother, how you go on; he

IS all right the last time we heard.” She said, “ Oh, he is looking veVy ill.”
The next morning, at about forty minutes to 2 a.m., she died. I heard from
•fitters received that my poor- brother Eddie died in Australia on the same day
and about the same time. F. Hicks.

342 APPENDICES [ 719 A

Colonel Hicks also sent us the letter from Mr. Williams giving an
account of his son’s death. The exact time is^ as Colonel Hicks says, not
stated, but the letter is dated October 5th, 1887, and states that Mr. E.
Hicks started on his journey on October 3rd. It seems probable that the
death took place on the same day.

For some other cases of this type see Proceet/ings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 45 q^
footnote.

719 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 214. The account is
written by Mrs. J. P. Smith.

Amble, Northumberland, January 17M, 1891.

In June 1879, I was a teacher in Macclesfield. A friend, Mrs. , was

near her confinement. She told me she was afraid she would die. I went inio
the county of Durham for a holiday. While there I was roused from sleep In-
Mrs. — as I supposed. She was shaking me, and saying, “ I have passed
away, but the baby will live.” Then the figure left the room by the door, i
got out of bed and went to my sister and related the incident. We agreed
make a note of it. Next day I received a letter from a friend in Macclesfield
saying that Mrs. was dead but the baby was alive.

[I was] in the best of health and about twenty-nine years of age.

No other persons were present.

Mrs. Smith, who is the mistress of the Infants’ School at Amble, in-
forms us that this is the only experience of the kind she has ever had, and
that to the best of her recollection the apparition was seen about an hoUr
or two after the death.

Unfortunately, neither the note made at the time nor the letter
announcing the death has been preserved, but we have received the follow-
ing letter of corroboration from Mrs. Smith’s sister : —

* 203 Elswick Street, Leichhardt, Sydney, Au-stralia,
Nwember znd ^ 1891.

I distinctly remember my sister coming into my room and waking me up to
tell me of her dream, which was as follows : —

That she had dreamt that a lady friend of hers some miles away had
appeared to her and said she was dead ; but that her baby would live. The
dream had evidently impressed my sister very much, as she seemed quite
agitated, and we said we would note it down, and to our utter astonishment
the next morning my sister received a letter to say that her friend had passed
away that same night. Annie Brown.

It will be observed that Mrs. Smith’s experience is here referred to as
a dream. That this is not her own view of it appears from the following
account given by Professor and Mrs, Sidgwick of an interview which they
had with her on September i6th, 1891. The account was written within
two hours of their seeing Mrs. Smith, from notes made at the time.

The figure appeared twice on the same night. The first time was in the
breaking dawn of a June morning, before there was any sun. It woke her, and

719B] TO CHAPTER VII 343

she heard the words she mentions,, but she did not get out of bed, and was pro-
bably only half awake. The second time the same thing happened, but she is
quite sure she was awake. It appeared at the left-hand side of her bed, and,
after speaking, it moved very quickly round the bed and apparently through
the door, which was at the right-hand side of the bed parallel to the head and
hidden by the curtains, so that she did not sec it go out. The figure went as
if in a great hurry. It seemed to be dressed in drab; the face was seen— it
seemed exactly as in life. She felt no fear, nor sense of the supernatural— only
anxiety to question further — and regarded it as real until, running after the
fijrurc downstairs, she became convinced that it was a vision. She felt as she
ran as though she would have caught it up, had she not had to open the door.
It was about five o’clock when she went to her sister, which she did at once after

l!ie second vision. Mrs. had told her she thought she should not live, but

Mrs. Smith had thought little of this, and it had quite passed out of her mind.

She was in no anxiety. Mrs. was no special friend of hers. Her children

came to Mrs. Smith’s school, and she was interested in them. She did not

know why ^Irs. should have told her of her expectation of dying ; but she

said at the same time, “ If 1 go, you will be very kind to my children.”

I'he friend who wrote telling her of the death mentioned it casually —
as especially sad because of the young children. She mentioned the time as
in the early hours of the morning, and it struck Mrs. Smith when she got the
letter that the vision had been coincident with the death, but she did not verify
this by ascertaining the exact time of the death.

Mrs. Smith told us that when she communicated what she had seen to her
sister, the latter said it must have been just a very vivid dream, to which she
replied, “ Well, it was a very vivid one, then,” or words to that effect.

719 B. The following case, taken from Phantasms of the Livih^^
vol. i. p. 449, was received through the Rev. J. Barmby, of Pittington
Vicarage, Durham, who obtained it from the Rev. J. T, Fowler, Librarian
and Hebrew Lecturer in the University of Durham, in October 1S72.
The events related had occurred about four years earlier. I omit Mr.
Barmby’s account (given in Phantasms of the Living) which is practically a
repetition of Mr. Clarke’s, given below.

The Rev. J. T. Fowler, of Bishop Hatfield’s Hall, Durham, writes:—

November z 6 th, 1SS4.

I know nothing about the case I mentioned to Mr. Barmby beyond what
I gave him in writing, Mr. Clarke, a tradesman in Hull, told me of the case
of Mrs. Palliser, and got her to come to his office, in Queen Street, Hull, for
me to take down from her own lips the notes I gave to Mr. Barmby. I took
great pains to get the whole of the story correctly. J. T. Fowler.

Mr. Clarke writes : —

WiNTKRTON Hall, Donxaster, January 20 t/i^ 1S85.

Widow Palliser was a woman who had seen better days, and worked for
my firm, Clarke & Son, Clothiers, Queen Street, Hull. She had an only
son, Matthew. I assisted her in getting him to sea. One morning she came
tome with tears rolling down her checks, and said, “Mat’s dead; I saw him
drowned! Poor Mat, the last words he said were, ‘Oh! my dear mother.’

344

APPENDICES

[719 c

He threw up his hands and sank tc rise no more.'’ I asked how she knew.
She said, “ I saw him going on board his ship, and the plank that he walked
upon slipped on one side, and he fell overboard between the quay and the ship
and was drowned. My own mother, who had been dead many years, came to
the foot of my bed and said, ‘ Poor Mat’s gone ; he’s drowned.’ ” I then said,
“Why, Mat’s in New York” (I always felt interested in this woman and her
son). “ Yes,” she said, “ he was drowned last night at New York ; I saw him.’»

Mrs. p.’s object in coming to me was to ask if I would write to the agent
in New York to ascertain the facts. 1 said I would, and wrote stating that a
poor widow had an only son on board such a ship, and she had a vision that
an accident (1 said nothing about drowning) had happened to her son, and 1
would take it as a great favour if he would ascertain and tell me all particulars.
In about three to five weeks (she came day by day to ask if we had received a
reply, always saying that she knew what the answer would be), at length, the
letter arrived. We sent for Mrs. P., and before the letter was opened by my
son, I said to her, “ What will be its contents She at once and decidedly
said that “ Mat was drowned on the very night that she saw him, and in going
on board the ship the plank slipped, and he fell overboard between the quay
and the ship.” So it was. Mrs. P. was then wearing mourning for Mat.

My son and half-a-dozen young men can verify this if needful.

Mrs. P. died soon after. M. W. Clarke.

Reproduction of the letter received from the agent of the ship, as nearly
as I and my son can remember : —

“ Nfav York, date unknown.

“ I have made inquiries of Matthew Palliser, age about twenty, and learn
that he fell off a plank in going on board his ship, and got drowned on . . .”
The date was the same as Mrs. Palliser said. . . .

In answer to inquiries, Mr. Clarke adds : —

April Gth, 1885.

We have no copy of the agent’s letter, but both my son and myself and
others are certain that Mrs. P.’s vision and the agent’s account of the accident
were the same^ both as to the time and cause, viz., that Mrs. P. saw her son
slip off the plank in going on board his ship, and that he was drowned lietwecn
the quay and the ship; agent’s account that he fell off the plank and was
drowned, at the time mentioned, between the ship and the quay. Mrs. P. died
soon after the event, which in my opinion shortened her life.

[In the absence of a written note, we cannot of course be perfectly certain
that Mrs. Palliser did not read back the details of the plank and the quay into
her vision after the arrival of the news, and that Mr. Clarke is right in his
recollection of having heard these details from the first. But there can hardly
be a doubt that the vision was described as a very impressive one before the
arrival of the news; and Mr, Clarke’s interest in the matter may fairly be sup-
posed to have made him careful in his scrutiny of the dates.]

719 C. The following case of an apparition coinciding with a death,
but representing a near relative of the dying person, instead of the dying
person herself, is taken from the “ Report on the Census of Halluci-
nations,” Proceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 261. There were four cases of

7190] TO CHAPTER VII 345

this type in the Census, of which one had already been published in
Phantasms of the Livings voL i. p. 357 (No. 124), and two others are given
in the Report.” I quote the preliminary comments of the writers of the
Report ” on these cases.

«Such cases need present no difficulty on the telepathic theory.
Indeed, it may be rather said that the absence of any cases of the kind
would render the theory improbable. They raise the question, however,
who the ‘agent* — the person, that is, from whom the telepathic com-
munication comes — is, in hallucinations coinciding with a death. Usually
it seems natural to assume that it is the dying person, and in some cases —
as we have seen in Chapter XII. — this view is supported by evidence
that the dying person’s thoughts were specially directed to the percipient.
The mere fact, however, that the apparition represents a particular person
does not prove that that person was the agent. It is possible for an agent
to transfer to a percipient an image of some third person, and it is possible
for a percipient to embody an impression telepathically received in a form
suggested by his own mind and not by the agent’s. As an instance
where it seems improbable that the person whose figure was seen was the
agent, see Mrs. McAIpinc’s vision of her baby nephew at the time of its
death (printed at p. 281). It seems more likely in this case that the
agent was some one with the child, than the child itself, aged six months.
In one of the death coincidences quoted in Chapter XII. (No. 579.24,
p. 223), there is some reason for thinking that the agent was the sister
who telegraphed the news rather than the decedent \ because ( i ) the
hallucination nearly coincided in time with the despatch of the telegram,
while it occurred some hours after the death, and (2) it foretold the arrival
of the telegram. These cases, of course, differ from those we are about to
quote, in that the apparition is of the dying person, but they should be
kept in view in interpreting them.”

[In the first case, omitted here, the apparition represented a man who
was at the time at the deathbed of his mother.]

” In the next case the fact that the person whose figure was seen can
hardly by any normal means have known of his mother’s death at the
time of the hallucination makes it difficult to suppose that he was the
agent, without a telepathic hypothesis so complicated as to be extremely
improbable.”

The account came from Miss C. L. Hawkins-Dempster, having been
written in 1890.

24 PORTMAN SqUARK, \V.

I ran downstairs and entered the drawing-room at 7.30 p m., believing I had
kept my two sisters waiting for dinner. They had gone to dinner, thf room
was empty. Behind a long sofa I saw Mr. H. standing. He moved three steps
Dearer. I heard nothing. I was not at all afraid or surprised, only felt concern
as [to] what he wanted, as He was in South America. I learnt next morning
that at that moment his mother was breathing her last. I went and arranged

346 APPENDICES [ 72 aA

her for burial, my picture still hanging above the bed, between the portraits of
her two absent sons.

I was in the habit of hearing often from [Mr. H.], and was not at that
moment anxious about Mrs, H.’s health, though she was aged.

I had had twenty-five days before the grief of losing an only brother. No
[other persons were present at the time]. C. L. H. Dempster.

In answer to further inquiries, we learnt from Miss Hawkins- Dempster
that the above incident occurred on New Year's Eve, 1876-77 ; the room
was lighted by “ one bright lamp and a fire," and the figure did not seem
to go away, she merely ^‘ceased to see it.” She used to see Mrs. H.
often, and was in no anxiety as to her health at the time. Mrs. H. wns
very old, but not definitely ill. Miss Hawkins- Dempster corrected her
first statement as to the exactness of the coincidence by informing us tluu
Mrs. H. died in the morning of the same day on which the apparition
was seen.

Miss Hawkins-Dempster mentioned what she had seen to her sister,
who thus corroborates : —

July 15M, 1S92.

I heard of my sister Miss C L Hawkins-Dempster's vision of Mr. H. in tiie
drawing-room at 7.30 p.m. on New Year's Eve, 1876-77, immediately after it
happened, and before hearing that Mrs. H. died the same day, the news nf
which reached us later that evening. H. H, Dempster.

We have verified the date of death at Somerset House.

I had an interview with the Misses Hawkins-Dempster on July i6th,
1892, and wrote the following account of it the next day : —

Miss C. HaAvkins-Dempster's veridical experience is well remembererl by
both sisters. The decedent was a very old lady, who was on very intimate
terms with them, and had special reasons for thinking of Miss C. Hawkins-
Dempster in connection with the son whose figure appeared. He was at the
other side of the world, and almost certainly had not heard of his mother’s
death at the time.

The figure was absolutely life-like. Miss Hawkins-Dempster noticed the
slight cast of the eye and the delicate hands. The figure rested one hand on
the back of a chair and held the other out. Miss Hawkins-Dempster called
out, “What can I do for you?” forgetting for the moment the impossibility
that it could be the real man. Then she simply ceased to see the figure.

She was in good health at the time, and her thoughts were occupied with
business matters.

“ Here writers of the " Report ”) the apparition followed the

death by some hours, so that, if Mrs. H. was the agent, the telepathic im-
pression must either have remained latent for some time, or have been
produced by the agent after death.”

722 A. From the Journal S.P.R,, vol. vii. p. 188. The following
case was sent to us from Brazil by Professor A. Alexander, the witnesses
being persons well known to him. He informs us that the incident is
"of a type rather frequent among Brazilian Catholics,” and the votive

7i8A] TO CHAPTER VII 347

candle seems indeed a natural thing to dream of under the circumstances
described, but the exact place where the candle was to be found and
the fact of its having been already partly burnt were not likely to be
guessed. The account of the dreamer, Donna Nery, is as follows : —

Baruacena, March 26M, 1895.

In January 1894, the decease occurred of Fdlicitd G., a young Belgian lady,
who was married to a nephew of mine. After the death of his wife, the latter
came to our house at Barbacena, bringing with him much luggage belong-
ing to the deceased, and he stayed here with his children for some days.

Some two months afterwards — I have no means of ascertaining the exact
datC'-I went to a soMe and returned home about two o’clock in the morning,
having passed some pleasant hours in which all thoughts of sadness were tem-
porarily swept from my memory. On that very night, however, I had a vivid
dream of F^licitd. It seemed to me that she entered the room where I really
lay asleep, and, sitting down on the bedside, asked me, as a favour, to look
into an old tin box under the staircase for a certain wax candle, which had
been already lighted, and which she had promised to Our Lady. On my
consenting to do so, she took leave of me, saying, “ At <5 o outro mundo (Till
the other world).” ^ I awoke from the dream much impressed. It was still
dark, but I could no longer sleep.

On that day, the others having gone out, I called a servant and ordered her
to search in the tin box, which had, in fact, been placed under the staircase,
and which had belonged to Fdlicitd. No one had opened the box before. It
was full of old clothes and cuttings, among which it w^as by no means probable
that we should find a wax candle. The servant turned over these clothes at
first without result, and I was already beginning to think that my dream was of
no importance, when, on straightening out the clothes so that the box might be
closed, I saw the end of a candle, which I at once ordered her to take out. It
was of wax — of the kind used for promises [to saints] — and, what was a still
more singular coincidence, it had already been lighted.

We delivered the candle to Monsenhor Josd Augusto, of Barbacena, in
performance of my niece’s pious vow thus curiously revealed in a dream.

(Signed) Guilhermina Nery.

Senhor Nery writes: —

Barbacena, March 26th, 1895.

I recollect that, on the occasion, my wife told me of the dream, much
impressed by it. It is exactly what is written.

(Signed) Domingos Nery.

Professor Alexander adds : —

At my request, Catharina, the servant referred to in the above account, was
called to be examined. I found that she was a mere child. On being ques-
tioned she confirmed the narrative of her mistress, and recollected the cir-
cumstance of finding the wax candle in the tin box.

Josd, a black boy, declared that he carried the candle to Monsenho^ Jos^
Augusto, who told him to give it to the sacristan.

A. Alexander.

^ ” Till soon,” " Till to-morrow,” ” Till the return," &c., are the expressions
generally used in Brazilian leave-taking. — A. A.

348 APPENDICES [722B

722 B. Dn Binns, an author of some scientific repute in his day, gives
the following narrative in his Anatomy of Sleepy p. 462, adding that
'' perhaps there is not a better authenticated case on record.” It consists
of a letter written, October 21st, 1842, by the Rev. Charles M'Kay, a
Catholic priest, to the Countess of Shrewsbury. The Earl of Shrewsbury
sent on the letter to Dr. Binns. It is quoted by Dale Owen {Footfalls^
p. 294). I abbreviate it here: —

In July, 1838, I left Edinburgh to take charge of the Perthshire missions.
On my arrival in Perth I was called upon by a Presbyterian woman, Anne
Simpson, who for more than a week had been in the utmost anxiety to see a
priest. [This woman stated that a woman lately dead (date not given) named
Maloy, slightly known to Anne Simpson, had “ appeared to her during the
night for several nights” urging her to go to the priest, who would pay a
sum of money, three and tenpence, which the deceased owed to a person not
specified.]

I made inquiry, and found that a woman of that name had died, who had
acted as washerwoman and followed the regiment. Following up the inquirj^ I
found a grocer with whom she had dealt, and on asking him if a female named
Maloy owed him anything, he turned up his books, and told me she did owt
him three and tenpence. I paid the sum. Subsequently the Presbyterian
woman came to me, saying that she was no more troubled.

725 A. From Phantasms of the Living, vol. i. p. 556. The account
was received in 1882, from Captain G. F. Russell Colt, of Gartsherrie,
Coatbridge, N.B.

I was at home for my holidays, and residing with my father and mother,
not here, but at another old family place in Mid-Lothian, built by an ancestor
in Mary Queen of Scots’ time, called Inveresk House. My bedroom was a
curious old room, long and narrow, with a window at one end of the room and
a door at the other. My bed was on the right of the window, looking towards
the door. 1 had a very dear brother (my eldest brother), Oliver, lieutenant in
the 7th Royal Fusiliers. He was about nineteen years old, and had at that
time been some months before Sebastopol. I corresponded frequently with
him ; and once when he wrote in low spirits, not being well, 1 said in answer
that he was to cheer up, but that if an^'thing did happen to him, he must let me
know by appearing to me in my room, where we had often as boys together sat
at night and indulged in a surreptitious pipe and chat. This letter (I found
subsequently) he received as he was starting to receive the Sacrament from a
clergyman who has since related the fact to me. Having done this, he went to
the entrenchments and never returnc‘d, as in a few hours afterwards the storm-
ing of the Redan commenced. He, on the captain of his company falling, took
his place, and led his men bravely on. He had just led them within the walls,
though already wounded in several places, when a bullet struck him on the
right temple and he fell amongst heaps of others, where he was found in a sort
of kneeling posture (being propped up by other dead bodies) thirty-six hours
afterwards. His death took place, or rather he fell, though he may not have
died immediately, on the 8th September 1855.

TO CHAPTER VII

349

725 A]

That night 1 awoke suddenly, and saw facing the window of my room, by
my bedside, surrounded by a light sort of phosphorescent mist, as it were, my
brother kneeling. I tried to speak but could not. I buried my head in the
bedclothes, not at all afraid (because we had all been brought up not to believe
in ghosts or apparitions), but simply to collect ray ideas, because 1 had not
been thinking or dreaming of him, and, indeed, had forgotten all about what 1
had written to him a fortnight before. 1 decided that it must be fancy, and
the moonlight playing on a towel, or something out of place. But on looking
up, there he was again, looking lovingly, imploringly, and sadly at me. I tried
again to speak, but found myself tongue4icd. I could not utter a sound. 1
sprang out of bed, glanced through the window, and saw that there was no
moon, but it was very dark and raining hard, by the sound against the panes.
I turned, and still saw poor Oliver. 1 shut my eyes, walked through it, and
reached the door of the room. As I turned the handle, before leaving the
room. I looked once more back. The apparition turned round his head slowly
and again looked anxiously and lovingly at me, and I saw then for the first
time a wound on the right temple with a red stream from it. His face was of a
waxy pale tint, but transparent-looking, and so was the reddish mark. But it
i.s almost impossible to describe his appearance. I only know I shall never
forget it. I left the room and went into a friend’s room, and lay on the sofa
the rest of the night. I told him why. I told others in the house, but when I
told my father, he ordered me not to repeat such nonsense, and especially not
to let my mother know.

On the Monday following ' he received a note from Sir Alexander Milne to
say that the Redan was stormed, but no particulars. I told my friend to let me
know if he saw the name among the killed and wounded before me. About
a fortnight later he came to my bedroom in his mothers house in Athole
Crescent, in Edinburgh, with a very grave face. I said, “ I suppose it is to
tell me the sad news I expect ; ” and he said “Yes.” Both tlie colonel of the
regiment and one or two officers who saw the body confirmed the fact that the
appearance was much according to my description, and the death-wound was
exactly where I had seen it. But none could say whether he actually died at
the moment. His appearance, if so, must have been some hours after death, as
he appeared to me a few minutes after two in the morning. Months later, a
small prayer-book and the letter I had written to him were returned to inveresk,
found in the inner breast pocket of his tunic which he wore at his death. 1 have
them now.

The account in the London Gazette Extraordinary of September 22ncl,
shows that the storming of the Redan began shortly after noon on
September 8th, and lasted upwards of an hour and a half. We learn from
Russell’s account that ‘‘ the dead, the dying, and the uninjured were all
lying in piles together ” ; and it would seem that the search for the
wounded was still continuing on the morning of the 9th. The exact time
of Lieutenant Oliver Colt’s death is uncertain.

Captain Colt mentioned several persons who could corroborate this

^ Communication with the Crimea was then conducted by telegraph for only part of
the way.

APPENDICES

350

P27 A

nanative. We received the following letter from his sister, Mrs. Hope, of
Fermoy : —

December 12th, 1883.

On the morning of September 8th, 1855, my brother, Mr. Colt, told myseJf,
Captain Ferguson of the 42nd regiment, since dead, and Major Borthwick of
the Rifle Brigade (who is living), and others, that he had during the night
awakened from sleep and seen, as he thought, my eldest brother. Lieutenant Oliver
Colt of the Royal Fusiliers (who was in the Crimea), standing between Ins bed
and the door ; that he saw he was wounded in more than one place— I remember
he named the temple as one place — by bullet-wounds ; that he aroused himself,
rushed to the door with closed eyes and looked back at the apparition, which
stood between him and the bed. My father enjoined silence, lest my motlier
should be made uneasy ; but shortly afterwards came the news of the fall of the
Redan and my brother’s death. Two years afterwards, my husband, Colonel
Hope, invited my brother to dine with him ; the former being still a lieutenant
in the Royal Fusiliers, the latter an ensign in the Royal Welsh Fusiliers.
While dining they were talking of my eldest brother. My husband was about
to describe his appearance when found, when my brother described what lie
had seen, and to the astonishment of all present, the description of the wounds
tallied with the facts. My husband was my eldest brother’s greatest friend, and
was among those who saw the body as soon as it was found.

It will be seen that this corroboration varies from the previous account
in two points, which, however, do not greatly affect its value. Die date
was really September 9th, not the 8th — but it is very natural that the
vision should have become associated with the memorable date, which was
of course the 8th ; and the figure was kneeling, not standing.

727 A. The following case (quoted from Phantasms of the Living,
vol. ii. p. 216, foot-note) was received from the Rev. Arthur Bellamy, of
Publow Vicarage, Bristol, in February 1886; but the particulars were first
published in 1878.

When a girl at school my wife made an agreement with a fellow pupil. Miss
W., that the one of them who died first should, if Divinely permitted, appear
after her decease to the survivor. In 1874 my wife, who had not seen or heard
anything of her former school-friend for some years, casually heard of her
death. The news reminded her of her former agreement, and then, becoming
nervous, she told me of it. I knew of my wife’s compact, but I had never seen
a photograph of her friend, or heard any description of her. [Mr. Bellamy told
Gurney, in conversation, that his mind had not been in the least dwelling on
the compact.]

A night or two afterwards as I was sleeping with my wife, a fire brightly
burning in the room and a candle alight, 1 suddenly awoke, and saw a lady
sitting by the side of the bed where my wife was .sleeping soundly. At once I
sat up in the bed, and gazed so intently that even now I can recall her form
and features. Had I the pencil and the brush of a Millais, I could transfer to
canvas lin exact likeness of the ghostly visitant. I remember that I was much
struck, as I looked intently at her, with the careful arrangement of her coiffure,
every single hair being most carefully brushed down. How long I sat and
gaz^ I cannot say, but directly the apparition ceased to be, I got out of bed to

TO CHAPTER VII

351

W7B]

see if ^^y garments had by any means optically deluded me. I

found nothing in the line of vision but a bare wall. Hallucination on my part
1 rejected as out of the question, and I doubted not that I had really seen an
apparition. Returning to bed, 1 lay till my wife some hours after awoke and
[hen 1 gave her an account of her friend's appearance. I described her colour,
form, &c., all of which exactly tallied with my wife’s recollection of Miss W.
Finally 1 asked, “ But was there any special point to strike one in her appear-
ance ? ” “ Yes,” my wife promptly replied ; “ we girls used to tease her at school
for devoting so much time to the arrangement of her hair.” This was the very
thin'^ which I have said so much struck me. Such are the simple facts.

fwill only add that till 1874 I had never seen an apparition, and that 1 have
not seen one since. Arthur Bellamv.

We have also seen an account written by Mrs. Bellamy in May 1879,
which entirely agrees with the above, except that she “ thinks it was a
fortnight after the death ” that the vision occurred, and that the light was
the dim light of a night-lamp.” She says, “ The description accorded
in all points with my deceased friend.” In conversation, Mr. Bellamy
described the form as seen in a very clear light ; and this may account
for his idea that the room itself was lighted by fire and candle.
Gurney adds : —

This experience, as I have said, may have been purely subjective ; and
identification of a person’s appearance by mere description is generally to be
regarded with great doubt. But in view of the circumstances, and e.specially
of the fact that Mr. Bellamy has never had any other hallucination, two
alternative hypotheses seem at least worth suggesting, (i) Believers in
telepathic phantasms may suspect Mr. Bellamy's experience to have been
conditioned by his wife’s state of mind — possibly even by a dream, forgotten on
vy-aking, in which her friend figured. (2) Believers in the pos.sibility of post-
iviortem communications, if they believe that this was one of them, might
Uirther suppose that Mr. Bellamy's experience depended on a psychical in-
fluence exercised in the first instance on Mrs. Bellamy, though acting below the
ievel of her normal consciousness. To me, I confess, this appears a more
reasonable supposition than that a direct influence (so to speak) missed its
mark, and was exercised on Mr. Bellamy by a stranger who cared nothing
about him.

727 B. The following is another case which seems analogous to a
deflected fulfilment of a compact, though we do not know that any compact
to appear had been made, but only that the dying person had had a strong
ilesire to see her niece before she died. The case is taken from the
‘'Report on the Census of Hallucinations,” Proceedings S.T.R., vol. x.
P* 263. The account, given by Miss S. Money, was written in 1890.

47 Uppkr Baker Street, Regent’s Park, NiW.

At Redhill on Thanksgiving Day, between eight and nine in the evening,
when I was taking charge of the little daughter of a friend, during [my] friend’s
absence for that evening, I left the child sleeping in the bedroom, and went

352

APPENDICES

[727 b

to drop the blinds in two neighbouring rooms, being absent about three minutes.
On returning to the child’s room, in the full light of the gas-burner from above
1 distinctly saw, coming from the child’s cot, a white figure, which figure turned
looked me full in the face, and passed down the staircase. 1 instantly followed*
leaned over the banisters in astonishment, and saw the glistening of the white
drapery as the figure passed down the staircase, through the lighted hall, and
silently through the hall door itself, which was barred, chained, and locked. I
felt for the moment perfectly staggered, went back to the bedroom, and found
the child peacefully sleeping. I related the circumstance to the mother im-
mediately on her return late that night. She was incredulous, but said that my
description of the figure answered to that of an invalid aunt of the child’s. '11 k*
next morning came a telegram to say that this relative, who had greatly wished
to see her niece, had died between eight and nine the previous evening.

I had just put down the Pickwick Papers with which I had been whiling
the time, was free from trouble, and in good health.

No one was in the house but myself, the child, and one servant, who, at the
time, was in the kitchen, dressed in black.

This is the only experience of this nature I have ever had.

-The writer cannot give the date in figures without reference to an
almanac of that year, but is certain that this occurred on the evening of
Thanksgiving Day for the recovery of the Prince of Wales [i,e., February
27th, 1872.] S. Money.

In answer to our inquiries, the collector, Miss B. Garnett, writes : —

Highlands, Clarendon Road, Lewisham, S.E.,
December 20M, 1890.

I obtained lately an interview with Miss Money, and wrote down her replies
to the four questions enclosed. This was all the information she was able to
give. I should state that Miss Money’s rather interesting experience was told
me long before I was asked to collect answers for the Society, and then merely
was told by her in the course of conversation, when I had been expressing my
scepticism about all so-called spiritual manifestations. She then said she had
been utterly sceptical until she herself met with this experience.

The replies enclosed were : —

r. Tlie child’s mother died about ten or eleven years ago.

2. Miss Money did not even know of the existence of the aunt at the time
of [her] experience.

3. Miss Money has scruples about giving the name without permission.
She states that the aunt was a single woman, and a step-sister of the father of
the child, and that the aunt was not living near.

4. As the lady (the aunt) was no acquaintance of Miss Money’s, and as she
heard no further details, she knows of no further way of proving the fact. Mis.s
Money lost sight of the parents, having been abroad herself for many years
afterwards.

Miss Garnett says further, in speaking of the original account, which
was first given to her verbally by Miss Money, " It was clearly and re-
peatedly given, amid many critical suggestions on my part, I may add
that Miss Money’s testimony on any subject is one that I have always

TO CHAPTER VII

353

728 A]

found reliable. I merely add this because there are so many people who
deem scarcely able to help exaggerating in the direction of the particular
bias of their minds.”

Mr. Podmore called on Miss Money on February 2nd, 1892, and
heard full particulars of the incident from her. He further ascertained
that no corroboration is now obtainable, and that Miss Money has failed
to obtain permission to give the name of the lady who died. We have
therefore been unable to verify the date of the death.

728 A. From the Report on the Census of Hallucinations,” Pto-
ceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 383. “ In the case we have next to quote ”

(say the writers of the “Report”), “unless we accept the hypothesis of
chance-coincidence — the evidence for the agency of the dead is certainly
strong, because any other explanation compatible with the veracity of
the narrators requires a very complicated and improbable hypothesis as
regards the sub-conscious action of Senhor Cabral’s mind. The case
came into our collection merely as a tactile hallucination : but the main
interest of it depends on the coincident experience of Donna Feliciana
Fortes. It seems doubtful from the account given whether she had a
hallucinatory vision, or merely a mental vision, but for our present pur-
pose this is unimportant.”

From Senhor Ulysses J. C. Carral.

Ru A Escobar 48, Rro df. Janeiro, March i2tk, 1892.

[After relating his first meeting in June 1886, with “ Deolinda,” a child
whom he had found in great poverty and had taken charge of, and her death
from consumption shortly afterwards, Senhor Cabral continues ; — ]

Some months passed, and my family (which now included my wife’s other
sister, Amelia) went to stay at a plantation belonging to friends. I escorted
them thither, and returned to attend to my obligations in the city. In order
not to be alone, I accepted the invitation of my friend, Barboza de Andrade,
and went to live with him in S. Christovam. One month afterwards, a sister
of liarboza’s, who was ill, came into his house. She grew daily worse, and
after the lapse of a few months had sunk so low that we had to sit up with her
at night.

One night, when I had taken my turn at nursing, I felt sleepy, and went
to lie down. Two sisters, Donnas Anna Ignez Dias Fortes and Feliciana Dias
(now deceased), took my place. I had made their acquaintance but a few
days before. After stretching myself on the bed, I was filled with a feeling of
unbounded joy. I was happy, and could not imagine what was the cause of
my happiness. I had a sensation as if some one were holding my head and
placing something round it.

Astonished at my experience, I called to the ladies who were watching in
the next room, and Donna Feliciana, though from the place where she wls
seated she could not sec me, answered me back, “ I see at your bedside a
spirit child clothed in white. She places on your head a crown of roses.'^ She
says her name is Deolinda, and she comes to thank you for the kindness and
charity with which you behaved to her.” I was amazed at such a declaration,
lor that very day was the anniversary of Deolinda’s death, and neither I nor
VOL. ir. , z

354 APPENDICES [728A

any other person m the house had recollected this.^ Besides, I had never
spoken on the subject. /

The two ladies were worthy of the highest respect. As for Donna Anna
Fprtes, who is still alive, our friendship is now of long standing, and I render
her all the homage which her virtue and goodness merit.

Ulysses Cabral,

^Director of the A iheneu Brazildro ”).

The following corroborative statements were obtained by Professor
Alexander

Rio DE Janeiro, March i6M, 1S92.

The part of the above narrative which respects me is exact. I am sure that
neither my sister nor I knew of the story of Dcolinda before she was seen by
the side of Senhor Ulysses Cabral on the night mentioned.

Anna Ignez Dias Fortes.

Rio be Janeiro, March lyth , 1892.

The above narrative coincides with our recollection of what happened in
our house.® We are certain that our friend, Senhor Ulysses Cabral, told us
the story of Deolinda only after the latter had been seen by Donna Feliciana
Fortes. Manuel Jm, Barboza de Andrade.

Emilia Barboza de Andrade.

Professor Alexander writes : —

Rio de Janeiro, March 17M, 1892.

In reply to further questions, Senhor Ulysses Cabral said the sensation on
the head was that of a slight but distinct compression. He supposed at first
that a towel had in some way wound itself round his head. He did not speak
of this sensation to the ladies in the next room. The ecstatic feeling would
not allow him to sleep when he lay down. It was on the ni^ht of the anni-
versary of the child’s death, about twelve o’clock, that this occurred. Senhor
Cabral believed that he had not spoken of Deolinda to the people of the house,
and this is confirmed, if there .are no lapses of memory, by the statements of
the other persons concerned. He thought that the lustre of his deed of charity
would be somewhat tarnished if told even to friends. Though at my request
he has made the whole incident public, he docs so, I am well a.ssured, with the
intention of helping us in a quest which he holds to be all-important. Both
he and Donna Anna Fortes affirm that they came together in that house for
the first time on that night, although they had met once or twice before at
Spiritist sittings. The lady says they were conversing about Spiritism at the
time of Senhor Cabral’s experience.

Donna Feliciana Fortes, now dead, was a remarkable sensitive, according
to the accounts I have received of her by surviving friends.

The witnesses to the above case are all Spiritists ; but they are people in
whose veracity I can trust implicitly. Alfred Alexander.

If” (say the writers of the ** Report ”) “ we are to exclude Deolinda*s
agency here, we must suppose that Senhor Cabral was sub-consciously
m

* Note by the collector, Professor Alexander “ According to the other state-
ments, no other person in the house knew anything about Deolinda. — A. A.”

* “ They were sleeping at the time, and only heard of it the next day. — A. A."

TO CHAPTER VII

355

aware that it was the anniversary of her death, and that this sub-conscious
recollection produced by association the feeling of happiness and the
tactile hallucination, without even then influencing his conscious memory ;
and, further, that the other witnesses were affected by telepathic influence
from his unconscious memory. This is certainly a highly strained hypo-
thesis, and a few more well-evidenced cases of this sort would go far to
establish the agency of the dead.”

728 B. From the Report on the Census of Hallucinations,” Pro-
ceedings S.P.R., vol. x. p. 371. Mrs. B. writes as follows : —

April 1892.

At Fiesole, on March iith, 1869 , 1 was giving my little children their dinner
at half-past one o’clock. It was a fine hot day. As I was in the act of serving
macaroni and milk from a high tureen, so that I had to stand to reach it, and
give my attention to what I was doing — on raising my head (as much from
fatigue as for any purpose), the wall opposite me seemed to open, and I saw my

mother lying dead on her bed in her little house at . Some flowers were

at her side and on her breast ; she looked calm, but unmistakably dead, and the
coffin was there.

It was so real that I could scarcely believe that the wall was really brick
and mortar, and not a transparent window — in fact, it was a wall dividing the
hotel in which we were living from the Carabinieri.

I was in very weak health — suffering intensely with neuralgia — having gone
through a bad confinement, brought on by travelling — the baby was almost
still-born, on January 31st.

Owing to a family quarrel, I had left England without telling my people
where I was going; but 1 was so fond of my mother that, when in Paris, I
made an excuse to write to an old servant, who lived with my mother, to ask
her for a toy which we had left with her, the object being to get news of my
mother. Reply came that for years she had not been so well and strong ; thus
I had no reason for imagining her to be dead.

1 was so distressed at the vision that I wrote to her (my mother) to give her
my address, and entreat her to let me know how she w^as. By return of post
came the statement that she had died on March 5th, and was buried on the
nth. At the hour I saw her she w'as removed from her home to Kensal Green
Cemetery. She had wished to see me so much that letters had been sent to a
great many continental cities, hoping I might be found ; but 1 never got a letter
from my sister till long after I had received the news of my mother’s death.

When I was married my mother made me promise as I was leaving home
to be sure to let her know in any way God permitted if I died, and she would
try to find some way of communicating to me the fact of her death, supposing
that circumstances prevented the usual methods of writing or telegraphing. I
considered the vision a fulfilment of this promise, for my mind was engrossed
with my own grief and pain — the loss of baby, and my neuralgia, and the
anxieties of starting a new life.

My youngest sister, since dead, was called to my mother, and left Devon-
shire, where she was staying with friends, to come home. When she arrived at
Jiome, she entered the drawing-room, but rushed out terrified, exclaiming that
had seen godmamma, who was seated by the fire in my mother’s chair.
Godmamma had been dead since 1852. She had been my mother’s governess

APPENDICES

356

[ 731 A

— almost foster-mother ; had lived with her during her married life, been god-
mother to her eldest girl, and when my father died, had accepted the duty of
taking his place as far as possible in the family, to shield her from trouble and
protect her — a duty which she fulfilled nobly.

My other sister went into the drawing-room to see what had scared K

and saw the figure of godmamma just as K had. Later in the day the

same figure stood by, then sat on the edge of my mother’s bed, and was seen
by both my sisters and the old servant, looking just as she had when alive,
except that she wore a grey dress, and, as far as we could remember, she had
always worn black. My mother saw her, for she turned towards her and said,
“ Mary ” — her name.

We have verified the date of death through the Register at Somerset
House.

Mrs. B. has had several other hallucinatory experiences, in 1876,
in an Italian church, she saw an apparition of a child, urhich had been
pointed out to her by her little daughter, then aged three, but was invisible
to a friend who accompanied her. It disappeared, and immediately after-
wards the body of a dead child, resembling the figure they had seen, was
brought into the church. The friend who was with Mrs. B. is now dead,
so that no corroboration can be obtained, her daughter not being able to
remember the incident. Most of Mrs. B.’s other experiences were, so far
as can be ascertained, purely subjective.

Mr. Podraore, who visited Mr. and Mrs. B. on April 8th, 1893,
writes : —

April loM, 1893.

Mrs. B. gave me a full account of her vision of her mother. She had
absolutely no cause for anxiety, the last news being that her mother was better
than she had been for years. There was a chronic ailment, but no reason to
anticipate death soon. The children were too young to remember it, but
Mr. B. told me that he came in a few minutes later and comforted his wife,
whilst she was crying on the sofa. A written note of the date was taken and
compared with the date given in the letter afterwards received, but all
memoranda and letters of that time were lost. Both Mr. and Mrs. B. are
satisfied of the coincidence of the vision with the day of the funeral.

731 A. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 173. The following
case was sent to us by Mrs. Browne, of Bidston, Alleyn Road, West Dul-
wich. The first narrative is extracted from an account privately printed
a few months after the events occurred.

IIayleti’ House, SuRmTON,/«(y 1S91.

Newbray Hall was drowned off Start Point, Devon, during the great storm
of March 9th, 1891, his vessel, the Afarana, being one of the many which were
lostut that spot.

He had had the offer of two or three vessels, including the Marana, and
came home on the 28th February, to consider what he should do, and discussed
the matter at considerable length on Tuesday evening, the 3rd March, with his
father and Captain Byng, an old naval friend. The deceased slept at home on

731A] TO CHAPTER VII 357

Wednesday and Friday, and stated that he would return to dinner on the
Saturday, but he did not do so, and on Monday morning his mother received a
letter from him stating that he had sailed the previous day in the Marana,

On Monday evening the storm took place, and on the Tuesday or Wednes-
day night following, Miss Annie Hall, aged twenty-seven, the sister of the
deceased, dreamt that she saw her brother on a raft apparently composed of
loose planks of wood, and he appeared to be swimming. On the same or sub-
sequent nights she had other dreams, in which she saw her brother lying in a
room, but she was unable to say whether alive or dead. This all took place
before any news had been received of the loss of the Marana^ and Miss Hall
related her dreams immediately to Mrs. Syms, aged forty, who had lived with
the family as cook for about ten years. On Friday night a telegram was re-
ceived at Surbiton from the owners stating that the Marana had been wrecked,
and on the Saturday morning Mr. Wood, who was in the employ of the de-
ceased’s father, went down to Devonshire, and having ascertained that the body
of the deceased had been recovered, and was lying in a house at Prawle, South
Devon, he idcntihecl it, and brought it to Brook wood for l^urial.

Matters remained in this position until the i6th June, when Mrs. Hall and
her daughter went to the house at Prawle in which the body had been placed,
and Miss Hall at once positively identified the room as the one she had seen in
her dreams. Upon going to the spot also where the body had been found, a
large number of railway sleepers were observed, which had been washed up
from the wreck, and, as can be seen from a photograph, have very much the
appearance of a raft such as that described in the first dream.

The sister’s dreams, so far as can be ascertained, accurately represented the
events which took place in connection with the death of her brother.

Miss Hall wrote to Mrs. Browne : —

Bi.enhetm Lodge, Suriuton,///^' 4///, 1S95.

My brother Newbray sailed on .Sunday. March 8th, i89[, in the Marana^ a
small steamer, as he had to fill up six months before he could pass as captain ;
then he was going in the P. & O. I had no idea Newbray was going to sail so
soon, but we were to meet him in London on .Saturday, March 7th, but he
difhvt come. On Sunday mother had a letter to say they were sailing that
morning and he couldn’t get away. I wrote him a long letter on Monday [the]
9th, and in the afternoon went to see a girl friend in Kingston, but I felt so ill
and depressed that 1 didn’t stay very late. It was about 4.30 when I went into
the market-place to lake the omnibus home. When 1 was standing waiting, a
fearful gust of wind and snow seemed to blow, especially round me,-— that was
about the time the ship struck,— though the storm was getting very bad indeed.
Newbray and I were so devoted that I felt he was in some awful trouble. When
1 got home I gave up a concert I was going to, as I felt so ill and anxious. I
didn t dream anything on the Monday, but on Tuesday I dreamt that I saw him
f>n a raft made up of loose planks of wood, and he appeared to be swimming.
On the same and following nights I had other dreams, and in one particula."
one I saw him lying on the floor in a room with a slanting roof ; he looked very
stdl and white, but I couldn’t tell if he were alive or dead. I could Wll the
r^m was in the country somewhere, as I could sec it was whitewashed and
they had red flowers in the >vindows. I told our old cook, Mrs. Syms, who had
een with us ten years, when she came up with my tea. On Friday we got a

APPENDICES

358

[733 a

telegram to say the Marana was wrecked. On June i6th mother and I went
to the house at Prawle where they had taken his poor body. As soon as I got
in I went upstairs to the room, as I knew it at once from my dream, and
pointed out to mother the spot where he lay. The woman in the house couldn't
understand it, as I had never been there. My dream was accurate in eveiy
detail, even to the low long windows, and the most wonderful thing was that I
dreamt the dream the night he was taken to the cottage. His body was found
amongst railway sleepers that looked just the same as 1 saw them in my first
dream, so in every respect my dreams represented accurately the events which
took place in connection with my brother’s death. I had never been to South
Devon, and never heard of Prawle. He was twenty-five and I twenty-seven
when he died. We were most devoted. Annie Hall.

The following note was written by the servant to whom Miss Hall
related her dreams at the time ; —

Blenheim Lodge, Surditon.

Miss Hall told me about her dreams when 1 took her bedroom tea in before
she was up. Mary Syms.

Mrs. Hall writes : —

Blenheim Lodge, Surbiton, izfh.

I beg to say that my daughter, Annie Hall, described the room at Prawle to
me before we visited the place, in fact so distinctly that on entering the room I
was struck with the resemblance and turned to my daughter for confirmation.

£. O. Hall.

Miss Hall writes further : — ^

Blenheim I-odge, Surbiton, July \2th, 1895.

The dreams were of conditions actually existing^ just as it was happening
to my brother Newbray, mt prophetic. I have never had any other dreams in
my life. And I can only conclude that I had these because my brother and I
were so devoted.

See also a case given in the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 239, where a
man while boating sees in the water a vision of the soles of two stockinged
feet, which he recognises as those of a friend. The friend is drowning
three miles off at the time.

733 A. From the Journal S.P.R., vol vi. p. 230. The following
account was sent to Mr. Podmore, by Miss F. Atkin.son, of 25 Aldershot
Road, Willesden Lane, N.W., enclosed in a letter dated November 5th,
1893. Mr. Podmore had received a verbal account of the incident from
Miss Atkinson on the previous day.

On Saturday, July ist, 1893 , 1 was in L for the purpose of looking over

the old churches with a friend with whom I was staying. Among others wc

went to St. M ’s. My friend had lx*en telling me of a very dear old friend

of th# family who was buried in that church, and who had left a sum of money
to have a window put in to his memory, and had even had the window prepared
for the glass to be put in, but that the person who had inherited his' fortune
neglected his wish. ^ (I don’t know how many years he had been dead.)

TO CHAPTER VII

359

733 A]

After we had looked over the church, and among other things seen the
brass over this gentleman’s vault, we came to the window which ought to have
been filled in. 1 remember that the neglect of his wish quite made me angry,

and I said, looking at the window, “ If I was Dr. I should come back and

throw stones at it.”

Just then I saw an old gentleman behind us, but thinking he was looking
over the church took no notice. Hut my friend got very white and said, “ Come

away, there /s Dr. ! ” Not being a believer in apparitions, I simply for the

moment thought she was crazy, though I knew they were a ghost-seeing family.
But, when I moved, still looking at him, and the figure before my very eyes
vanished, I had to give in. Then it dawned upon me that nobody could have
been looking over the church but ourselves.

First, the church had been empty when we went in, and nobody could have
come in without their footsteps being heard, and secondly, the part where we
were standing ended in a “ ^u/ de sac^^ and the person to get there would have
been obliged to ask us to move, as we entirely blocked up the narrow aisle.
For the few moments he was visible 1 saw him distinctly ; he was short and
broad, and wore an old-fashioned tie, and a waistcoat cut low and showing a
great deal of shirt-front One hand was resting on a pew, and one down at his
side holding his very tall hat. But the thing that struck me most was the sun
shining on his white hair, and making it look like silver ; even now I can see
him distinctly in my mind’s eye. It certainly surprised me to see what was
apparently “ too solid flesh ” disappear before my very eyes, and when we got
outside my friend told me that his was the figure which came to different
members of their family so often, and, indeed, had been the cause of their
leaving one house. One of her sisters had been so affected by it, that she will
never sleep alone, Or go upstairs alone. When we got home I easily recognised
the doctor by his photograph. F. Atkinson.

In reply to Mr. Podmore’s further inquiries, Miss Atkinson writes : —

25 Aldershot Road, Willesden Lane, N.W., November 1S93.

I have not heard from Miss yet, but am writing to answer your

questions.

No. 1. I heard no noise whatever, not the slightest sound. But I had a
feeling that I cannot describe that somebody was behind us. So I turned
round.

No. 2. As far as I can now remember we both turned at precisely the same
moment. My friend naturally recognised him. I did not think anything of it,
until I saw her face when I turned back again to look at the window.

No. 3. Long before we went into L , my friend told me they had

been haunted to a dreadful extent at their old house. But beyond saying that
It was a man and an old friend of her mother’s, [she] did not describe it, and I
did not [pay any attention to it] — knowing them to be a highly nervous,
hysterical family. We otherwise never talked about it, as she can't bear the

subject. Afterwards she told me it was Dr. , the figure we saw in the

church, who haunted them.

No. 4. The photograph was in a frame and Mrs. said : “ Was*it any-

thing fike this ? ” And it was exactly like the figure. I forgot to tell you that
afterwards my friend told, me that on going into the church she had felt
as though she could mt go in, as if something wa.s there, but did not like to

APPENDICES

360

[733 B

say so to me, as she knew I very much wished to go over it She also thought
it might frighten me.

My only other experience was when I was a baby of about two or three,
when my little brother, who died, came to my mother, and then to me : I don’t
remember it, but my mother says I cried out that he had come back again, and
she herself had just seen him. F. Atkinson.

Miss Atkinson asked her friend to give an account of her share in the
experience, but she declined to do so, alleging as a reason her strong dis-
like of the whole subject. We have, therefore, been unable to obtain any
further evidence in the matter.

783 B. The next case is remarkable for the frequent repetition of the
percipient’s experience. It is one of those that suggest, as we have said
(see 703 and 733), a kind of local imprint left by past events, and
perceptible at times to persons endowed with some special form of
sensitiveness. I quote from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 41S, the
account, given by Mr. D. M. Tyre, 157 St. Andrew’s Road, Pollokshields,
Glasgow-

Octoher 9///, 1885.

In the summer of 1874 my sister and I went during our holidays to stay
with a gardener and his wife in a house which was built far up, fully three-
quarters of a mile, on the face of a hill overlooking one of the most beautiful
lochs in Dumbartonshire, just on the boundary of the Highlands. A charming
spot indeed, although far off the main roadway. We never wearied, and so
delighted were we with the place that my people took a leaSe of the house for
the following three years. P'rom this point my narrative begins. Being con-
nected in business with the city, we could not get down to Glen M. all together,
so that my two sisters and myself were sent away early in May to liave the
house put in order and attend to the garden, See, t^c., for the. coming holidays,
when we would be all down together. We had lots of work to do, and as the
nearest village was live miles distant, and our nearest neighbours, the people
at the shore, nearly a mile away, we were pretty quiet on the hill and left to our
own resources.

One day my elder sister J. required to go to the village for something or
other, leaving us alone ; and as the afternoon came on I went part of the way
to meet her, leaving my other sister L. all alone. When we returned, about
6 P.M., we found L. down the hill to meet us in a rather excited state, saying
that an old woman had taken up her quarters in the kitchen and was lying in
the bed. We asked if she knew who she was. She said no, that the old
wife was lying on the bed with her clothes on, and that po.ssibly she was a
tinker body (a gipsy), therefore she was afraid to go in without us. We went
up to the house with L. ; my younger sister L. going in first said, on going into
the kitchen, “ There she is,” pointing to the bed, and turning to us expecting
that we would wake her up and ask what she was there for. I looked in the
bed and so did my elder sister, but the clothes were flat and unruffled, and
when '^c said that there was nothing there she was quite surprised, and point-
ing with her finger, said, “ Look, why there’s the old wife with her clothes on
and lying with her head towards the window ; ” but we could not see anything.
Then for the first time it seemed to dawn upon her that she was seeing some-

TO CHAPTER VII

361

733 B]

thing that was not natural to us all, and she became very much afraid, and we
took her to the other room and' tried to soothe her, for she was trembling all
over. Ghost ! why, the thought never entered our minds for a second ; but we
started chopping wood and making a fire for the evening meal. The very idea
of any one being in the bed was ridiculous, so we attributed it to imagination,
and life at the house went on as usual for about two days, when one afternoon,
as we were sitting in the kitchen round the fire, it being a cold, wet day outside,
L. startled us by exclaiming, “ There is the old woman again, and lying the
same way.” L. did not seem to be so much afraid this time, so we asked her
to describe the figure ; and with her eyes fixed on the bed and with motion of
the finger, she went on to tell us how that the old wife was not lying under the
blankets, but on top, with her clothes and boots on, and her legs drawn up as
though she were cold ; her face was turned to the wall, and she had on what is
known in the Highlands as a “ sow-backed mutch, that is, a white cap which
only old women wear; it has a frill round the front and sticks out at the back,
thus.^ She also wore a drab-coloured petticoat, and a checked shawl round her
shoulders, drawn tight. Such was the description given ; she could not see her
face, but her right hand was liugging her left arm, and she saw that the hand
was yellow and thin, and wrinkled like the hands of old people who have done
a lot of hard work in their day.

Wc sat looking at the bed for a long time, with an occasional bit of informa-
tion from L., who was the only one who .saw the figure.

This happened often — very often, indeed so frequently that we got used to
it, and used to talk about it among ourselves as “ L.’s old woman.”

Midsummer came, and the rest of our people from the city, and then for the
first time we became intimate with our neighbours and two or three families at
the shore. On one occasion my elder sister brought up the subject before a
Mrs. M*P., our nearest neighbour, and when she described the figure to her,
.Mrs. M‘P. well-nigh swooned away, and said that it really was the case; the
description was the same as the first wife of the man who lived in the house
before us, and that he cruelly ill-used his wife, to the extent that the last
beating she never recovered from. The story Mrs. M‘P. told runs somewhat
like this, of which I can only give you the gist : —

Malcolm, the man of the house, and his wife Kate (the old woman), lived a
cal and dog life ; she was hard-working, and he got tipsy whenever he could.
They went one day to market with some fowls and pigs, &c., and on their way
back he purchased a half-gallon of whisky. He carried it part of the way, and
when he got tired gave it to her ; while he took frequent rests by the wayside.
She managed to get home before him, and when he came home late he accused
her of drinking the contents of the jar. He gave her such a beating that he
was afraid, and went down to this Mrs. M*P., saying that his wife was very ill.
When Mrs. M‘J^. went up to the house she found Kate, as my sister described,
with her clothes on, and lying with her face to the wall for the purpose, as Mrs,
said, of concealing her face, which was very badly coloured by the ill-treat-
nient of her husband. The finish-up was her death, she having never recovered.

The foregoing is as nearly a complete compendium of the facts as I, with thrr
^elp of my sister J., can remember.

My sister L. is now dead, but we often go back to the house when vie are
any way near the locality, because it is a bright spot in our memory.

(Signed) D. M. Tyre.

1 A sketch of the profile was here given.

362 APPENDICES [7854

Mn Tyre adds, in a letter to Mr. David Stewart, of Kincaid House,
Milton of Campsie, N.B., who procured this account for us : —

1 was at the house last month; there is no one in it just now; the last
tenant has gone abroad, and the house is somewhat dilapidated, and the
garden a ruin. We had a look through the window at the old kitchen and saw
our own grate still remaining.

Mr. Stewart wrote to us on August 13th, 1885 : —

I know how valuable the actual names and localities would be, as well as
Mrs. M'P.’s independent account, but 1 have asked so repeatedly, and been
told that Mrs. M‘P. had great objections to publicity, in case it would rake up
old stories connected with the case, that 1 do not like to ask again.

735 A. In a case published in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. 90, Mr.
Wanibey heard a phantasmal voice as though in colloquy with his own
thought. He was planning a congratulatory letter to a friend, when the
words "What! write to a dead man? write to a dead man?*^ sounded
clearly in his ears. The friend had been dead for some days. I add
here a case where a message seemed to be given by the decedent’s voice
in a dream. (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v, p. 455.)

Mr. George King, of 12 Sunderland Terrace, Westbourne Park, W.,
writes : —

November StAf 1885.

The following is a brief account of an occurrence that took place eleven
years ago. I repeat the facts exactly as they happened, and make no attempt
at comment or explanation. It is necessary to give a few words of prefatory
narrative.

My brother D., a few years my junior, was a handsome, powerful young
man, twenty-one years of age at the time of his death, and he was an unusually
vigorous swimmer. He hiad greatly distinguished himself at school and college,
and he was enthusiastically devoted to scientific pursuits. On leaving the
Scottish University where he had studied, he adopted telegraphic engineering
for a profession, and as all his tastes were in that direction his progress was
rapid. His more especial department was the construction and laying of deep-
sea cables, and when only twenty years of age he was appointed to the respon-
sible post of superintendent of the scientific department in laying a cable for
the Brazilian Government. In the performance of his duties on the stormy
Atlantic coast of .South America he had to encounter many perils ; and finally
the steamer Gornos, on which he was, was totally wrecked, and the cable was
lost. All lives were saved, though for many hours the danger had been
extreme. My brother returned immediately by mail to London, and throughout
the summer months of 1874 was engaged in superintending the manufacture
of fresh cable to replace that which had become lost in the Gornos, During
these few months D. and I had much affectionate intercourse, and the bonds
between us (he was my only brother) were drawn even closer than before.

Irf November 1874 the cable was finished and shipped on board the
La Plata^ a magnificent steamship, carrying with her every appliance that
could be required to render the expedition safe. By the wreck of the Gornos
much valuable time had been lost, and for six months a huge sum of capital

735 A] TO CHAPTER VII 363

had been lying idle. Only a small section of cable was required to complete
the line, and the contractors, Siemens Brothers, spared no expense to make
certain of success on the second attempt. While, therefore, we might fear for
my brother the unhealthy climate of some parts of the coast of Brazil, we had
no anxiety as regards the perils of the sea.

I bid D. farewell on Wednesday, November 2nd [evidently meaning 25th,
sec below], 1874. I had a lecture to deliver that afternoon, and 1 could
not go to see him off, and we parted at the door of my office. He was the
picture of health and strength, and we spoke cheerfully of meeting again in
a few months’ time, when his work should be completed. The next morning
I had a line from him, written at the docks, and on Saturday a happy little
letter, which was posted by the pilot when he landed at the Isle of Wight.
Everything tended to reassure me, and 1 had no sense of impending calamity.

Next Wednesday evening, December 2nd, I attended a conversazione
at King’s College, given by Sir W. Thomson, President of the Society of
Telegraphic Engineers, and, taking myself a keen interest in science, my
mind was intensely occupied with all that I saw and heard. While examining
the beautiful instruments exhibited, I often wished that my brother had been
there to explain them to me, and the many friends that I met spoke to me of
him. He was thus pleasantly in my thoughts, but my mind was not brooding
or concentrated on him. On the contrary, it was disturbed by the multitude
of objects, and only casual glances were cast towards D. Rather excited, I
went home to my solitary chambers, and retired to bed shortly after mid-
night. I was soon asleep, but how long I remained so I know not. So far
as recollection goes, I had not been dreaming, but suddenly I found myself
in the midst of a brilliant assembly, such as that 1 had recently left at King’s
College. I stood in evening dress on the steps at the entrance to a great and
crowded hall. I was looking towards the garden, brightly lighted with a
multitude of lamps. Illuminated fountains were playing in front of me, and
groups of gentlemen and ladies sauntered up and down the paths. The cool
night air was blowing on my face, and I had a delicious feeling of pleasure
and peace. Two gentlemen, strangers to me, stood talking on the gravel a
few paces from me. I heard their voices, and could almost catch their conver-
sation. Suddenly my brother stepped out from behind them, and advanced
towards me. He was in evening dress, like all the rest, and was the very
image of buoyant health. I was much surprised to see him, and, going
forward to meet him, I said: “Hallo! D., how arc you here?” He shook
me warmly by the hand, and replied : Did you not know I have been
wrecked again ? ” At these words a deadly faintness came over me. I seemed
to swim away and sink to the ground. After momentary unconsciousness
I awoke, and found myself in my bed. I was in a cold perspiration, and
had paroxysms of trembling, which would not be controlled. I argued with
myself on the absurdity of getting into a panic over a dream, but all to no
purpose, and for long I could not sleep. Towards morning I again slumbered,
and the fear passed off from me. On Thursday, December 3rd, I was to
breakfast with a friend, at his hotel, before he started for Scotland, and !
went to Euston by the Metropolitan Railway. The bookstalls on my side of
the station were not yet opened, but across the line the boys were arranging
the papers, and they spread out the placard of the Tclei^raph, In large
letters on it were the words ; “ Terrible disaster at sea. Loss of a .steamship

364 APPENDICES [735A

and sixty lives/’ 1 felt as if iced water had been poured over me, and the
dread of the night before returned; but my train glided up to the platform
and I could not get a paper. The gentleman next me in the carriage was
reading the Dazfy Telegraphy and I looked over his shoulder, and saw, under
a sensational heading, the words : “ By the arrival in the Thames, yesterday
of the An/enor, &c.”; but the motion of the train prevented me from reading
properly, and 1 thought the sentence ran : By the arrival of the Thames!
news of the Antcnory &c. &c." I therefore gathered that the AHtenor\{l^
been lost. On arriving at my destination I got the Times, and looked it over
from the beginning to the end, but it contained no mention of the shipwreck.
Later on 1 went to my office and began my work, but presently one of the
messengers, with a strange look in his face, came to me and said : “ Is it true,
sir, that your brother has been lost in the La Plata I started up and ran
to the Marine Company next door, and there the very worst fears were con-
firmed. The La Plata foundered in the Bay of Biscay at about noon on Sunday,
November 24th [evidently a slip for 29th, see below], 1874, after being exposed
for only a few hours to a terrific gale. No sati.sfactory reason for the
catastrophe was ever forthcoming. Why a well-found and powerful steamer
should have gone down in open sea, when a common rowing-boat should have
survived, is a mystery which remains unsolved. The event created a great
sensation at the time, and a long Board of Trade inquiry was held, but the
riddle was never answered.

I saw some of the survivors of the crew, and learned from them about my
brother. Although the weather had been rough, danger was not feared until
Sunday morning, when water began to rush into the engine-room, and quickly
put out the fires. My brother toiled with the sailors to get steam up in the
donkey-engine on deck so as to work the pumps, and he nobly encouraged
the men. This, however, proved useless, and when the boat pushed off from
the ship, the last seen of my brother was that he was helping to launch the
life-raft.

The La Plata foundered at about noon on Sunday, November 29th, and
possibly D. perished then and there. But he may possibly have survived for
several days. He was of strong constitution; he was a powerful swimmer ; he
had on an air-belt, and he was beside the life-raft when the ship went down.
On December 2nd, two sailors were picked up alive. Half-immersed in the ice-
cold water, they had clung to the life-raft and drifted about the Atlantic for
three whole days. I add this last note to show that it is just possible that I had
the vision of my brother near the morning of his death, although more probably
he died three days before.

In conclusion, I must say that I speak of a “vision ” because the whole of
my sensations while the scene was passing before me, and subsequently, were
quite different from those that accompany an ordinary dream. Also I can see
everything now in my mind as clearly as at the moment when I awoke, whereas
with me even the most vivid dreams always gradually fade away.

In answer to inquiries, Mr. King says : —

Navembtr 15M, 1885.

TIic vision of my brother was quite unique. I never before or since had a
vision of a person whom I believed to be in the flesh, and never had an extern.^
event such as the shipwreck thus conveyed to me. Much less have I ever had

736A] TO CHAPTER VII 365

a vision which was falsified by the event. Also never before or since have I
had sensations similar to those that accompanied the vision of my brother.

George King.

The first announcement of the wreck of the La Plata appeared in the
Daily Telegraphy December 3rd, 1874, and in the same issue an account
appears of a conversazione given the night before at King's College,
Strand, by Sir Wm. Thomson, President of the Society of Telegraph
Engineers.

On December loth, in the same paper, a telegram is printed giving an
account of the rescue of the boatswain and quartermaster of the La Plata^
who were found clinging to some wreckage by a Dutch cutter. It is stated
that the steamer foundered on November 29th, and that those two men
clung to the wreckage until picked up at 10 a.m. on December 2nd.

The La Plata left Gravesend for Rio Janeiro on November 26th,
1 8 74, and foundered in the Bay of Biscay, as we learn from the Marine
Department, Board of 1 rade, on the 29th. The survivors were picked
up by the Gare Lochy and transferred to the homeward-bound ss.
AntenoTy which arrived with them and the first news in the Thames on
December 2nd.

736 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 218. The following
account was written out by me on December 22nd, 1888, from notes
taken during an interview with Mrs. Davies the same day ; and was after-
wards revised and signed by Mrs. Davies.

About twenty years ago I was living with my mother and brother at Islington.
Near us lived a family whose name is not important to the narrative. One of
their daughters married a Mr. J. W., who went to India. Mrs. J. W. continued
living at her father’s house. Her father, however, changed his residence, and
as Mr. J. W.’s address in India was not known at the time, Mrs. J. W. could
not inform him of the change of address. The house where she was living with
her father when her husband left home passed to a family whom I will call
Brown, with whom I was acquainted, as I also was with Mrs. J. W. and her
family.

One evening I paid a visit to Mrs. Brown, and she gave me an Indian letter
which had arrived for Mrs. J. W. at the house now occupied by the Browns.
Mrs. Brown asked me to transmit this letter to Mrs. J. W. through my brother,
who frequently saw a brother of Mrs. J. W.’s. There had thus been some little
delay, and perhaps slackness in getting the letter sent on to Mrs. J. W. 1 pro-
mised to give it to my brother, and took it home. It was a dirty-looking letter,
addressed in an uneducated handwriting, and of ordinary bulk. I placed it on
the chimney-piece in our sitting-room, and sat down alone. I expected my
brother home in an hour or two. The letter, of course, in no way interested
In a minute or two I heard a ticking on the chimney-piece, and it struck
me that an old-fashioned watch which my mother always had standing m her
bedroom must have been brought downstairs. I went to the chimney-piece,
but there was no watch or clock there or elsewhere in the room. The ticking,
which was loud and sharp, seemed to proceed from the letter itself. Greatly

APPENDICES

366

[736 4

surprised, I removed the letter and put it on a sideboard, and then in one or t^o
other places; but the ticking continued, proceeding undoubtedly from where
the letter was each time. After an hour or so of this I could bear the thing no
longer, and vrent out and sat in the hall to await my brother. When he came
in I simply took him into the sitting-room and asked him if he heard anything.
He said at once, ** 1 hear a watch or clock ticking.” There was no watch or
clock, as 1 have said, in the room. He went to where the letter was and
exclaimed, ** Why, the letter is ticking.” We then listened to it together,
moved it about, and satisfied ourselves that the ticking proceeded from the
letter, which, however, plainly contained nothing but a sheet of paper. The
impression which the ticking made was that of an urgent call for attention.
My brother took the letter to Mrs. J. W. either that night (it was very late) or
next morning. On opening it, she found that her husband had suddenly died
of sunstroke, and the letter was written by some servant or companion to
inform her of his death. The ticking no doubt made my brother and myself
hand on the letter more promptly than we might otherwise have done.

I have never experienced any other hallucination of the senses. I once
heard a strong push at the street-door at the minute (for I looked at my watch)
that my father died at a distance ; but, though I went to the door at once and
saw no one, I cannot, of course, be sure that some passer-by might not have
pushed the door and got out of sight ; for the house was in a street with many
passers. I have also heard ticks before a death ; but these may very likely
have been caused by the death-watch insect ; which certainly was not the case
with the ticks which came from the letter. The incident of the letter made a
deep impression on me. (Signed) Anna Davies.

Mr. Davies, brother to Mrs. Davies (who married a gentleman of the
same name), gives his independent recollection as follows : —

64 Church Road, Southgate Road, N., February 13M, 1889.

I am afraid my recollection of the details after so long a time has elapsed
is rather limited and somewhat hazy, so that if my sister has expanded
into details, and her version should slightly differ from mine, please consider that
I bow to her superior memory, and accept her account as correct. The main
features of the incident are, however, as nearly as I can recollect, as follows
One night, it must be nearly, if not quite, thirty years ago, I returned home
between ten and eleven o’clock, and my sister told me that she had brought
home from the house of a friend of hers a letter from India, addressed to a
Mrs. Walker, who had formerly lived at the house the letter was directed to,
and being acquainted with Mrs. Walker (who.se brother was an intimate friend
of mine), I was asked to be the bearer of the letter to her. I found it on the
mantelshelf, and my sister and myself heard very distinctly a clear ticking
noise, as loud a.s, and similar to, that of a small clock, which we spent some
time in trying to account for, and which we could so clearly trace to the vicinity
of the letter that it seemed to proceed from the letter itself, but we could find
nothing which would in any way account for what we heard. I delivered the
letter to my friend the following day to hand to his sister, Mrs. Walker, and
afterwards heard that it conUined the news of the decease of her husband in
India. 1 am not quite sure but almost $ 0 , that on hearing the mysterious noise
we remarked on the probable contents of the letter, but we were certainly

736B] TO CHAPTER VII 367

struck with the coincidence of the noise being heard whilst the letter was on tlie
shelf (and apparently proceeding from it) and discontinuing on its removal.

I have no means of fixing the date, or even the year, as Mrs. Walker and
her brother have both been dead for some years. L. A. Daviks.

736 B. I give next an account of a case briefly mentioned by Gurney
in Phantasms of the Living^ vol. ii. p. 690, about which we afterwards
obtained further evidence. After mentioning two other cases in which
entries in the diary of the percipient — Mr. Cameron Grant — confirmed
his recollection of strong impressions nearly coincident with deaths,
Gurney continues : —

I have studied in Mr. Grant’s diary the full record of a third case which
was even more remarkable than the first, as it included the peculiarity that,
for some time after his first impression, he felt forcibly impelled to draw the
figure of the person who died. The case was made the more striking to me by
the fact that Mr. Grant was so certain that the death (the time of which he had
only very vaguely learnt) must have coincided in date with his impression, that
he had actually not taken the trouble to verify the coincidence. He left it to
me to find in the Times obituary — as he confidently foretold that I should — that
ihe death (which was quite unexpected) occurred, thousands of miles from the
place where he was, on the day preceding that on which the entry in his diary,
relating his impression of the previous night, was written. The impression of
that night did not, however, bear distinct reference to the particular person
who died, but was a more genera'll sense of calamity. Certain reasons which at
present make it desirable not to publish the details of this case may in time
cease to exist.

Now, on a fuller inspection of Mr. Grant’s voluminous journal (largely
a business record), which he has kindly permitted me to make, it appeared
that the impulse to draw the dying man was the most marked feature in
the whole incident, and furthermore that this impulse came on some
months after the death — but on the night previous to the day on which
Mr. Grant saw, in a casual newspaper received in Brazil, the announce-
ment of his friend’s demise in Scotland.^

The possibility of a telepathic impulse from the surviving members of
the family of course suggests itself : but Mr. Grant was in a wild up-country
station in Brazil ; and it seems impossible that any one could guess at
what date the news would reach him. The rough sketch which Mr. Grant
was impelled to make contained two figures (of which the second was a
servant) and a window ; and it truly represented, as he afterwards learnt,
the circumstances of the death.

The case has been further strengthened by permission to print the
passages from Mr. Grant’s diary, and by interviews of ray own with the
Widow and daughter of the deceased person, Lord Z. (not the tnie inhial),
who were present at the time of the death.

to ^ ^ many hours the impulse lasted, Mr. Grant having been obliged

return to Brazil before sending me a copy of the passage in his journal.

368 APPENDICES [736B

The following is Mr. Grant’s statement, made to me, July 28th, 1889
(which I quote from Proceedifigs S.P.R., voL viii. p. 212).

The hrst form in which this impression came to me was that of deep
sympathy for [a member of Lord Z.*s family]. After this had lasted for some
time I found myself rudely drawing a tall man stooping forwards on to another
man. I had a conviction that Lord Z. was dead — that the falling forward
indicated death. I also dimly perceived the position of windows behind the
falling hgure, though I did not draw these. 1 wrote to my mother at once to
say that I knew that Lord Z. was dead. [Letter not preserved.] I was then
up the country in Brazil, and saw few papers. I heard from England that
Lord Z. w'as dead ; but (as I told Mr. Gurney) did not look for date in papers,
and did not, so far as 1 know, hear the date in any letter.

On reaching England 1 was partially hypnotised by a physician of niy
acquaintance [name given] ; but did not lose consciousness. During my
scmi-trance I became aware that I was seeing the room and windows and the
falling figure more clearly than ever before. I ^talked of this scene to the
physician. Afterwards he invited me to look in a crystal. I did so; and saw
the same room, the windows, bed, and figure, more distinctly.

I afterwards went to stay in the house where Lord Z. died. As soon as I
entered I asked Lady Z. to allow me to describe to her the room where I hail
seemed to see Lord Z. dying. Lady Z. was at first incredulous ; but on my
describing the position of bed and windows she admitted that it was correct.
Lord Z. had died in a dressing-room adjacent to his bedroom. The temporary
bed and windows were exactly as I had seen them. He had fallen forwards
into the arms of a male attendant, dying suddenly.

The first impression of the death, which was nearly coincident^ was on
December 24th, 1885 (date verified by Mr. Gurney). Entry in diary
December 25th, 1885 : “There was something upon my mind all day from
yesterday — a sense of a death or loss of some one dear to me. I spoke
to E. C. [Mr. Gatlin, the manager, who wrote in corroboration] about it ;
and I don’t know how it is, but as I wrote the above [a member of Lord
Z.*s family] has been constantly in my thoughts.”

Then on Tuesday, January 26th, 1886, is an entry — read by me in
Mr. Grant’s journal, and copied for me by him — as follows : —

“ Impression at about one o’clock and drawing and reasoning therefrom on
death.”

Jamtary “ Very tired, but did not .sleep a wink all night. I am sure

that something has happened to [a member of Lord Z.’s family]. I heard
every hour strike, and kept thinking of [all the members of the family] but not
of the dear old gentleman \t.e., imagining them in sorrow, but not Lord Z. him-
self]. I got up and wanted to draw him. His features seemed before me. I
had before shown Mr. Gatlin a face in the Graphic that was like him, also that
of a dead man. I had the greatest difficulty not to draw his portrait with his
head |orward and sunk on his breast, as if he had been sitting in a room with a
window on his right hand and an old man-servant ; and then his head just
went forward, and he fell asleep. Weeks ago December 25th] I thought
of him — some time about Christmas; and ever .since I have been feeling [pdy»
&c., for members of family].”

TO CHAPTER VII

736 C]

369

On the next day, Thursday, January 28th, 1886, Mr. Grant received
by accident a Scotch paper in which Lord Z.*s death was mentioned, but
apparently without the precise date,

1 have received a letter (which I have unfortunately mislaid) from Mr.
Catlin corroborating Mr. Grant’s statements as to his having shown him
drawings and spoken of the death of a friend at home.

Lady Z. and Miss Z. gave me in April 1892 the following corrobora-
tion ; —

Lord Z. died December 24th, 1885, in a dressing-room adjoining his own
larger room. The dressing-room was narrow, with a window at one end, and a
small bed, then occupied by a man-servant who attended on him. Lord Z. had
entered this room to speak to the servant, when he fell forward, the servant
catching him in his arms, and shortly afterwards breathed his last. His death
was unexpected, although he had long been ill. I remember that Mr. Cameron
Grant visited our country seat— where this occurred — for the first time some
months after Lord Z.’s death ; and that he said something to me as to his
having known of it, or recognised the scene ; but 1 cannot now remember the
details. (Signed) [Lady Z.]

I remember that Mr. Cameron Grant, before going upstairs, when he
arrived on the visit referred to, asked whether my father had not fallen for-
wards into the arms of a man in a long room with a window at one end of it.

(Signed) [Miss Z.]

This case should be studied along with Mr. Cameron Grant’s other
records of experiences {Phantasms of the Livings voL ii. pp. 688-690) .

It would in a certain way explain these intimations if we could suppose
that Lord Z. (who was, and who knew Mr. Grant to be, much interested
in such phenomena) first impressed Mr. Grant at the time of his own
death, and then renewed the impression when he knew, in some incon-
ceivable manner, that Mr. Grant was about to receive, quite casually, a
newspaper announcement of the decease. On that occasion the deceased
person seems to have been able to impress a picture of the scene of
death on Mr. Grant’s subliminal mind ; an impression which worked
itself out in the rude drawings, as a motor message, and afterwards re-
turned both as a vision in hypnotic trance, and as a crystal-vision in
the waking state. Here, however, as in all similar cases, we cannot ex-
clude the possibility of a wide clairvoyance on the percipient’s own part.

736 C. From the Report on the Census of Hallucinations,” Pro-
ceedin^s S.P.R., vol. x. p. 373, In the following case the hallucination
occurred shortly after the death, — perhaps within twenty-four hours of it,
-^and the apparition indicated leave-taking. It is an interesting example
(the only one in the Census) of a primd facie veridical hallucination
coinciding with the arrival of a letter bearing on the subject. Another
^•markable feature in the case is the persistent repetition of the percept.
The account was written by Miss E. L. M. in 1889.

On the morning of January 14th, 1876 , 1 was in the 11. schoolroom, a small
VOL. u. 2 A

370

APPENDICES

[739 a

village near to A. in Hants, when I saw what appeared to me to be a favourite
cousin. She was close beside me, and appeared in good health, as I had every
reason to suppose her to be. I should here explain that I held in my hand a
letter which had just been brought to mejand which / had not yet opened^
telling me ;that my cousin was seriously ill with scarlet fever. The fact was
that at the time she was actually dead, her death having occurred after the
posting of the letter. 1 was waiting for children to assemble in school,
and was in good health and in no grief or anxiety. I knew immediately that
it was my cousin whom I saw, and believed her to be at the - time at her
own home. I could not understand what she meant by saying Good-bye,”
which I cannot say I heard, but saw by the movement of her lips.

The village children and my sister [were present} The former I have no
reason to think saw an||hing, and my sister only laughed at me. I continued
to see her all day, and when indoors my sister would persist in strumming on
the piano, although I remonstrated with her, — “ How can you keep on with
that noise when Jessie is dead? ” 1 received a letter the next morning inform-

ing me that she was dead, after which I saw her only at intervals that day and
part of the next, when the appearances ceased.

Miss M. had had previously another veridical experience, described in
the “ Report,” relating to the death of an aunt.

Miss M.’s sister writes : —

November eyh, iSSg.

I distinctly remember the circumstances respecting my cousin Jessie. All
one day my sister was telling me she saw her, and that she knew she was
dead, and we had a letter next morning with the news, so that we knew
before the letter arrived.

I have asked my mother about it, and she remembers my sister telling her
at the time.

739 A. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. vii. p, 175. The following is
a case which was noted at the time, before it was known to be veridical.
It occurred to the Rev. E. K, Elliott, Rector of Worthing, who was
formerly in the navy, and who made the entry in his diary as quoted
when he was cruising in the Atlantic out of reach of post or telegraph.
The diary was still in his possession when we received the account, in
August 1895.

Extract from diary written out in Atlantic, January 14th, 1847

Dreamt last night I received a letter from my uncle, H. E., dated Janu-
ary 3rd, in which news of my dear brother’s death was given. It greatly
struck me.”

My brother had been ill in Switzerland, but the last news I received on
leaving England was that he was better.

yhe “ January 3rd ” was very black, as if intended to catch my eye.

On my return to England I found, as I quite expected, a letter awaiting me
saying my brother had died on the above date. E. K. Elliott.

Worthing.

TO CHAPTER VII

371

739 B]

739 B. In the next case, 7»hich I quote from Proceedings S.P.R.,
Yol. V. p. 409, the apparition was seen several weeks after the death.
The account came from Mrs. Clark, 8 South View, Forest Hall, Newcastle-
on-Tyne.

Jantiary 1885.

1 send you a short account, describing what I experienced at the time of the
apparition of my friend, who was a young gentleman much attached to myself,
and who would willingly (had I loved him well enough) have made me his wife.
I became engaged to be married, and did not see my h’iend (Mr. Akhurst) for
some months, until within a week of my marriage (June 1878), wlien in the
presence of my husband he wished me every happiness, and regretted he had
not been able to win me.

Time passed on, I had been married about two years and had never seen
Mr. Akhurst, when one day my husband told me he (Mr. Akhurst) was in New-
castle and was coming to supper and was going to stay the night. When my
husband and he were talking, he said my husband had been the more fortunate
of the two, but he tiddecl if anything happened to my husband he could leave
his money to whom he liked and his widow to him, and he would be quite
content. I mention this to show he was still interested in me.

Tlirce months passed and baby was born. When she was about a week
old, very early one morning I was feeding her, when I felt a cold waft of air
through the room and a feeling as though some one touched my shoulder ; my
hair seemed to bristle all over my head and I shuddered. Raising my eyes to
the door (which faced me), I .saw Akhurst standing in his shirt and trousers
looking at me, when he seemed to pass through the door. In the morning I
mentioned it to my husband. I did not hear of Mr. Akhurst’s death for some
weeks after, when I found it corresponded with that of the apparition, and
though my father knew of it before, he thought in my weak state of health it
were better I should not be told.

He was found lying on the bed with his shirt and trousers on, just as he
had thrown himself down after taking a sleeping draught.^

1 myself am quite convinced that Mr. Akhurst's thoughts had been so con-
centrated upon me, before the draught proved fatal, that his spirit visited
me on its way to that glorious land where it shall dwell i.*: the presence of
Him who said, “ Come unto Me all yc that labour and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest.”

To me the memory of Mr. Akhurst will always be as of a dear brother
greatly esteemed and deeply regretted. Emily Clark.

Mrs. Clark adds later : —

A/ay 13M, 1 885.

My husband will certify as to my mentioning to him seeing the apparition
before I heard of Mr. Akhurst’s death, but I am sorry I cannot tell you where
It happened, nor the exact date of the death, but I remember when we heard
about it my husband and I traced it to about the lime of my “vision.” . . .

July zyrd^ 1885.

I never experienced anything of the kind before. I think Mr. AkhursVs
<jeath happened somewhere in Yorkshire. What makes me think the time

^ This, as will be seen, was probably a mistake, and it seem.s possible that the
•'eminiscence of the Corsican Brothers may have helped to shape the hallucination.

372

APPENDICES

[739 C

corresponded with his death, was, my asking how long ago it was from my
hearing of his death, and the actual occurrence ; and then knowing the time of
my little girl’s birth, I came to the conclusion it was about the same time. 1
think this is all the information 1 can give you. I shall ask my husband to
send you a few lines to-morrow.

Mr. Edward Clark, solicitor, County Chambers, Newcastle-on-Tyne,
writes : —

July 24^^, 1885.

At the request of my wife, Mrs. Clark, of 9 South View, Forest Hall, I beg
to inform you of my knowledge of the supposed apparition of Mr. Akhurst.
Shortly after my wife had been confined of my second daughter, about the end
of September, 1880, my wife one morning informed me she had seen Akhurst
about one o’clock that morning. I of course told her it was nonsense, but she
persisted, and said he appeared to her with only his trousers and a shirt on,
and the remark she made was that he was dressed just as she had seen him
in the Corsican Brothers (he was an actor). She also described her feelings
at the time. 1 tried to persuade her it was a dream, but she insisted tha*. it
was an apparition.

As near as I can remember, about six months after, I met a mutual friend
of Akhurst’s and my own, and in conversation I inquired after Akhurst. He
said, “ Don’t you know he is dead?” I said, “ No, when did he die? ” He
said, ** I don’t know the exact date, but it was about six months ago;” and
further informed me that he died about one o’clock in the morning in the dress
as my wife described him, from an overdose of chloral. I have endeavoured
to see my friend to find out the place (Bradford, 1 think), but he is now in
America. His name is John Brown, and he is the son of the leader-writer lo
the Chronicle here. If I meet him again I will try to get accurate particulars
and forward them to you.

Auj^ist 2ij/, 1885.

. . . My wife has, I find, no reason to think she has been mistaken as to the
time when she supposed she saw W. J. Akhurst, as the date is fixed by the
birth of my second little girl, which took place in September 1880.

In the Era Almanac for 1881, the obituary for 1880, p. 93, gives the
entry, ** Akhurst, Walter James, actor, aged twenty- four, July 12th.”

The Era newspaper of July i8th, 1880, gives an account of the
inquest. Mr. H. W. Akhurst gave evidence to the effect that he and
his deceased brother went to the chemist’s on Saturday (/>. loth), and
procured a sleeping draught. Deceased complained of pains in his
body and of feeling lonely. The next day (Sunday) he only got up to
have his bed made ; Monday he died. W. H. Cope, surgeon, attributed
death to suffocation caused by heart disease. The verdict returned was
“ Death from natural causes.”

739 C. The next case, which I quote from Phantasms of the
L^ing, voL i. p. 444, was received towards the end of 1882 from Mr. J.
G. Keuleraans, who has already been mentioned in 662 A.

In December 1S80 Mr. Kculemans was living, he tells us, with his
family in Paris. The outbreak of an epidemic of small-pox caused him to

TO CHAPTER VII

373

740 A]

remove three of his children, including a favourite little boy of five, to
London, whence he received, in the course of the ensuing month, several
letters giving an excellent account of their health.

On the 24th of January 1881, at half-past seven in the morning, I was
suddenly awoke by hearing his voice, as I fancied, very near me. I saw a
bright, opaque, white mass before my eyes, and in the centre of this light I saw
the face of my little darling, his eyes bright, his mouth smiling. The appari-
tion, accompanied by the sound of his voice, was too short and too sudden to
be called a dream : it was too clear, too decided, to be called an effect of
imagination. So distinctly did I hear his voice that I looked round the room
to see whether he was actually there. The sound I heard was that of extreme
delight, such as only f. happy child can utter. I thought it was the moment he
woke up in London, happy and thinking of me. 1 said to myself, Thank God,
little Isidore is happy as always.”

Mr. Keulemans describes the ensuing day as one of peculiar bright-
ness and cheerfulness. He took a long walk with a friend, with whom
he dined ; and was afterwards playing a game of billiards, when he again
saw the apparition of his child. This made him seriously uneasy, and in
spite of having received within three days the assurance of the child’s
perfect health, he expressed to his wife a conviction that he was dead.
Next day a letter arrived saying that the child was ill ; but the father
was convinced that this was only an attempt to break the news ; and, in
fact, the child had died, after a few hours’ illness, at the exact time of the
first apparition.

Mrs. Keulemans says : —

May 29^4, 1885.

I remember that, the day when little Isidore died, my husband said that he
felt strongly impressed that there was something wrong with the little boy in
London. It was in the evening that he asked me whether I had received any
news from my mother about Isidore. I replied that no letter had come, and
asked him why he wanted to know. He made the same remark as before, but
would not further explain himself. I tried to dispel his gloomy forebodings by
referring to a letter we had from my mother, stating that Isidore was very
happy, and was singing all day long. My husband did not seem pacified.
When the letter mentioning his illness came, my husband was very much
dejected, and told me that it was no use trying to make a secret of it, as he
knew the worst had happened. He said afterwards that he had seen a
vision. A. Keulemans.

740 A. The following case is printed in full in the Journal S.P. R.,
vol. iv. p. 68 (May 1889). I give an abstract only of it here. The
narrative comes from a lady known to me. Miss W. begins by describing
the death of her father on November i6th, 1862, at about midnight, in
the presence of his family. She says : — *

The fire (which faced the foot of the bed) gave a steady and subdued light,
and there was only one lighted candle in the room. [A few minutes ^ter

374 APPENDICES [741a

he died,] while we were looking on, scarcely realising what had occurred,
suddenly I and my youngest brother simultaneously whispered, “ Look
we both beheld distinctly a vaporous luminosity quivering in a circle over mv
father head. It was as if the breath itself had become radiant and hovered
over the prostrate form. , . . None of the others saw it. . . . A night or two
after I was lying awake, when all at once I saw above me a light, similar to the
one just described, only larger and brighter. [It] did not last more than a
brief minute, and then vanished as suddenly as it appeared. I sat up in bod
and tried to discover some rational cause for it, but could not. [Details aro
given, showing that the light was almost certainly hallucinatory.]

Miss W.’s brother and sister signed a corroboratory note, stating that
they well remembered the mention of the incidents at the time of their
occurrence.

This impression has a certain analogy with that of Dr. Wiltse in 713 A,
It cannot, of course, be maintained that an experience occurring under
such circumstances, in spite of its collective nature, has any evidential
force ; but though not evidential, it may yet represent a reality, clothed
in a symbolism which is obviously derived from tradition.

741 A. From the Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical
Research, vol. i. p. 446. This is a case of two apparently synchronous
"visions of consolation’* representing the same deceased person. The
percipients were the mother and husband of a lady who had been dead
live months. She died in December, 1879, and the incidents occurred
about the end of April 1880, Mrs. Crans, the mother, was then residing
in New York, and her son-in-law, Mr. C. A. Kernochan, in Central City,
Dakota. Mrs. Crans writes to Dr. Hodgson as follows ; —

.345 West 34TH Street, New York,//#/^ 14/^, 1888.

. . . After lying down to rest, I remember feeling a drifting sensation, of
seeming almost as if I was going out of the body. My eyes were closed ; soon
I realised that I was, or seemed to be, going fast somewhere. All seemed dark
to me ; suddenly I realised that I was in a room ; then I saw Charley lying in
a bed asleep; then I took a look at the furniture of the room, and distinctly saw
every article — even to a chair at the head of the bed, which had one of the
pieces broken in the back, ... In a moment the door opened and my spirit-
daughter Allie came into the room and stepped up to the bed and stooped
down and kissed Charley. He seemed to at once reali.se her presence, and
tried to hold her, but she passed right out of the room about like a feather blowj*
by the wind ; and then, after a moment, she came back again [several further
incidents are here described]. Then I thought I would open my eyes, and mih
difficulty I got my eyes open. They seemed so heavy to me, but when 1 suc-
ceeded in opening them I received a sudden shock, such as if I had fallen from
the ceiling to the floor. It frightened and woke up both Mrs. B. and my
daughter [but Mrs. B. has been lost sight of, and the daughter was a child at
the time], who asked what was the matter. Of course I told them my experi-
ence, and the following Sunday I wrote, as was always my custom, to my sou-in-
law, Charley, telling him of all my experience, describing the room as I saw it
furnished.

TO CHAPTER VII

375

742 A]

It took a letter six days to go from here to Dakota, and the same length
of time, of course, to come from there here ; and at the end of six days judge of
mv surprise to receive a letter from Charley telling me thus : “ Oh, my darling
mamma Crans ! My God I I dreamed I saw Allie last Friday night I ” He then
described just as I saw her; how she came into the room and he cried and
tried to hold her, but she vanished [with other details, similar to those of Mrs.
Crans' dream]. Then at the end of six days, when my letter reached him, and
he read of my similar experience, he at once wrote me that all I had seen was
correct, even to every article of furniture in the room, also as his dream had
appeared to him. . . . Mrs. N. J. Crans.

The letters referred to, which were written at the time of the ex-
periences, had unfortunately not been preserved ; but Mr. Kernochan
wrote to Dr. Hodgson as follows : —

New YoRK,////y 4/?^, 1888.

The facts written you this day by Mrs. N. J. Crans in regard to a letter
written to me one Sunday morning in the year 1880, and one written by me on
the same date to her, are correct in every particular. I was then living in
Central City, Dakota, boarding at the American house. It is impossible to
give the exact date, as 1 have destroyed the letter, for which I regret. I
think it was about the last of April 1880. ... C. A. Krrnocuan.

742 A. ¥rom Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 437 . The account is
given by Mrs. Judd.

Augiist 6//#, 1885.

My grandmother was a tall, stately, and handsome woman, even at an
advanced age. She was one of the Gastrells, an old and aristocratic family.
Her latter years were spent with my mother (her daughter), and in her eighty-
fourth year she died. She had suffered long ; she had attained a great age ;
therefore, though we missed her, our grief was not of that poignant and
excessive kind which produces hallucination.

My sister and myself had always slept in a room adjoining hers, and — for
want of space in her apartment— there stood by our bedside a large old-
fashioned clock, which had been presented to our grandmother on her wedding-
day. More precious than gold was this old clock to her heart; “by it,*’ she
often said, “ have I hundreds of times watched the slow hours pass in my
early married days when ray husband had to leave me ; by it have I timed the
children’s return from school”; and she begged us, her grandchildren, to
leave our bedroom door unlocked at night that she might consult the old clock
when she rose each morning. We have often opened our sleepy eye.s at four
on a summer morning and smiled to see the stately figure already there. For
up to the last illnes.s she retained the habits of her youth, and rose at what we
deemed fearfully primitive hours.

About three weeks after her death I awoke one morning in October, and
saw distinctly the well-known tall figure, the calm old face, the large dar’-
eyes uplifted as usual to the face of the old clock. I closed my eyes for some
seconds, and then slowly reopened them. She stood there still. A second
time I closed my eyes, a second time opened them. She was gone.

I was looked upon by my family in those days, and particularly by the
sister wl)o shared my room,’ as romantic. Therefore I carefully kept to myself
the vision of the morning and pondered over it alone.

376 APPENDICES [748A

At night, however, when we were once more preparing {sfr rest, my sister-,
my eminently practical and unromantic sister — ^spoke to me. 1 cannot go to
bed without telling you something, only don’t laugh, for I am really frightened ;
I saw grandmamma this morning!’* 1 was amazed. 1 inquired of her the
hour, what the vision was like, where it stood, what it was doing, &c., and I
found that in every respect her experience was similar to mine. She had
preserved silence all day for fear of ridicule.

I may add that we even now speak of this incident with awe, though twenty
long years have since passed over our heads, and we invariably end by saying,
each of us, “It was very strange; it is impossible to understand it.’*

Caroline Judd.

In reply to our retiuest for an account of the incident from the other
percipient, Mrs. Judd wrote : —

72 Upper Gloucester Place, Dorset Square.

I send you herewith all that ray sister, Mrs. Dear, recalls of the vision,
doubly seen, of our late grandmother. She objects to the weariness of com-
position, therefore 1 took clown her reminiscences, and she signed it as true.

Caroline Judd.

Some years ago, a few months after the death of my grandmother, I awoke
in the dim light just before dawn, to sec an appearance exactly like her standing
in the old accustomed place from whence, when alive, she was wont to consult
an old clock, her own propert}', at very early hours. I said nothing to any one
till we retired again for the night, when I found to my surprise, my sister, who
slept with me, had seen the same appearance at the same time.

Mary Dear.

Mrs. Judd’s sister, Miss Harris, confirms the above account as
follows : —

Bewel, Alfrick, near Worcester, August 20/A [1885].

Both sisters mentioned seeing my grandmother the day of the apparition
before father and mother, then alive, and myself. 1 think she must have died
about 1866, but I was then very young, and can’t remember exactly. I will find
out if it is important, but my sisters have often mentioned it since.

Annie Harris.

743 A. From Phantasms of the Livings vol. i. p. 522 , footnote. The
account was written down, a few months after the occurrence, from the
dictation of the percipient — Sister Bertha, Superior of the House of Mercy
at Bovey Tracy, Newton Abbot — who read it through on December 29 th,
1885 , pronounced it correct, and signed it.

On the night of the loth of November, 1861 (I do not know the exact hour),
I was up in my bed watching, because there was a person not quite well in the
next rpom. I heard a voice, which I recognised at once as familiar to me, and
at first thought of my sister. It said, in the brightest and most cheerful tone,
“lam here with you.” I answered, looking and seeing nothing, “ Who are
you ? ” The voice said, “ You must n’t know yet.” I heard nothing more, and
saw nothing, and am certain that the door was not opened or shut. I was not

744A] TO CHAPTER VII 377

in the least frighteiiid, and felt convinced that it was Lucy’s [Miss Lucy Gambier
parry’s] voice. I have never doubted it from that moment. I had not heard
of her being worse; the last account had been good, and I was expecting to
hear that she was at Torquay. In the course of the next day (the i ith), mother
told me that she had died on the morning of the loth, rather more than twelve
hours before I heard her voice.

The narrator informs us that she has never in her life experienced any
other hallucination of the senses. Mrs. Gambier Parry, of Highnam Court,
Gloucester, step-mother and cousin of the Lucy ” of the narrative,
writes : —

Sister Bertha (her name is Bertha Foertsch) had been living for many years
as German governess to Lucy Anna Gambier Parry, and was her dearest friend.
She came to us at once on hearing of Lucy’s death, and told me of the mysterious
occurrence of the night before.

744 A. From Phantasms of the Livings vol. ii. p. 619. This case, if
telepathically originated, is an interesting instance of the appearance of a
phantasm to certain percipients on local, not personal, grounds. The
account comes from Miss Edith Farquharson, who writes : —

June 1885.

In the year 1868, No. 9 Drummond Place, Edinburgh, was in the occupa-
tion of Mr. Farquharson, formerly a Judge of the High Court of Jamaica. On
the night of Good Friday in that year, two of his daughters, Miss Edith Far-
quharson, her sister Marianne [now Mrs. Henry Murray], and a little cousin,
Agnes Spalding, aged six years, were sleeping in a room at the top of the
house. About 11.45 p.m., the two sisters were awakened by hearing loud
screams from the child, who was sleeping on a mattress placed on the floor
beside their bed. The mattress was against the door leading into a dressing-
room ; this door was locked and sealed with white tapes and black wax ; it had
been thus closed by a member of the family to whom the house belonged
before Mr. Farquharson entered upon his tenancy. The death of the head
of the family, and the delicacy of health of one of the daughters, had caused
them to wish to leave Edinburgh and spend the winter in Torquay.

On hearing the child’s screams of terror, Miss M. F. touched her sister and
said, “Do you hear the child screaming?” Miss E. F. replied that she did,
and turned her head round to listen better. When the child was asked what
she was screaming about, she said, “I am wide awake, and I have seen a
figure which was leaning over me,” and when further questioned where the
figure went to, said, “Round the side of your bed.”

Miss E. F., when she turned round, saw a figure slide from near the child’s
bed and pass along the foot of the bed whereon she and her sister were. (At
the first moment she thought it was a thief.) The latter, on hearing her say ir
French, y a quelqtiuHy' was so terrified that she hid her head under the
bed-clothes. ^

Miss E. F. describes the figure as being dressed in a rough brown shawl
held tightly round the bust, a wide-brimmed hat, and a veil. When the child
was questioned afterwards she gave the same account of the costume. Miss

F. says that after passing along the foot of the bed with a noiseless gliding

APPENDICES

378

[744 A

motion, the iigure disappeared into the darkness. Excepyhe door which was
locked and sealed, the only door of exit to the room was one which was quite
close to the bed ; at right angles with the door and with the head of the bed
was a large hanging cupboard.

Both the ladies got up instantly. They found the door of their room closed
as they had left it. Their brother’s room was next to theirs ; they knocked at
his door to rouse him, at the same time keeping a sharp look-out on the door
of their own room to see that no one escaped. The whole party then inaclt* a
thorough search in the room and cupboard, found nothing disturbed, and once
more retired to rest. The next morning the page-boy said that he had been
unable to sleep all night on account of the sounds he heard of some one
scratching at his window. He declared that he had shied all his boots and
everything he could lay hold of in the direction whence the noise came, but
without effect. He could stand it no longer, and went to the room where some
of the women servants slept, begging to be let in. They had heard nothing,
however, though they, like himself, slept in the basement of the house.

The whole family were hardly assembled on the Saturday morning, when
the son-in-law of the late owner of the house arrived, and asked to see
Farquharson. He wished particularly to know exactly what day this gentle-
man and his family intended leaving the house (their term would expire the
following week), for he had just received a telegram informing him that hii>
sister-in-law had died that night, and they were anxious to bring her body there
immediately for burial.

With respect to this last paragraph, the narrator’s father writes

The above is a correct statement of the occurrence.

C. M. Farquharson.

Miss Farquharson continues :

The possible solution of what we presume to have been an apparition of
this lady is, that the bedroom occupied by the Misses Farquharson being the
one she habitually used, in her dying moments she desired to visit it once
more, or else that there was something in the dressing-room vrhich she
particularly wished for. Edith A. Farquharson.

The following independent account is from Mrs. Murray : —

CoBO, Gukrnsky, June 2^hy 1885.

Our home was in Perthshire; but in the winter of 1868 my father took a
house for four mouths in Drummond Place, No. 8 [? 9] in Edinburgh, in order
to give us a change. The house belonged to General Stewart, who had a
delicate daughter, and he let it, to take the daughter to Torquay for the winter.
We did not know the Stewarts, so our imagination could not have assisted in
any way to account for the curious apparition that was seen. I myself did not
see it, but I was in the room with my sister and little cousin, who both did.
My belief is that Providence prevented my seeing it, as 1 am of a very nervous
tempierament, and it might have had a very bad effect on me if I had. Well,
the apparition took place on Good Friday night at about twelve o’clock. 1
little cousin, who was only about .six years old, had come into town from the
country, and as our house was very full she had a shake-down beside our bed
on my side. I was the first to be awakened by hearing her calling out in ^

TO CHAPTER VII

379

744 A]

frightened way. So I said, “What is the matter, Addie?” “Oh,” she said,
“Cousin Marianne,^! am so frightened. A figure has been leaning over me,
and whenever 1 put out my hands to push it off it leant back on your bed ! ”
At this I was alarmed and awoke my sister, who lifted her head from her pillow
and looked up, when she saw a figure gliding across the foot of our bed
wrapped in a shawl, with a hat and veil on. She whispered to me in French,
“ // y a quclqu^un^"^ thinking it was a thief, whereat we both jumped out of bed
together and went to the next room to get our brother, Captain Farquharson.
His bedroom door had a shaky lock which made a noise, so he had barricaded it
witli a portmanteau. While he was coming to our help, we kept our eyes fixed
on our door in case any one should have escaped, but we saw nothing, and after
our all searching every corner of the bedroom we came to the conclusion that
no one had been there, for everything was intact. We then questioned little
Addie as to what she had seen, and what the figure was like. She described it
as that of a lady with a shawl on and a hat, and a veil over her face, and said
that as I spoke she had gone across the foot of the bed in the same direction
that my sister had seen her go. This child, I must tell you, had been most
carefully brought up by her mother, and was not allowed to read even fairy
tales for fear of having foolish ideas in her head, which makes the thing more
remarkable, for she had certainly never heard of a ghost. . . .

Then the next morning we were relating our adventures, when a ring came
to the door, and the servant said a gentleman wanted to speak to my father.
This gentleman was a Mr. Findlay, who had married a Miss Stewart. He
came to ask when we were to leave, for he knew it was about the time, as he
had received a telegram that morning to say that Miss Stewart had died in
Torquay during the night, and they wanted to bring her body to Edinburgh.
We heard afterwards from friends of the Stewarts that the bedroom wc had
had been hers. I forgot to mention that the child’s bed lay across the door
of a small room which had been locked up by the Stewarts, and they had put
tapes across and sealed them with black wax.

\Ve have none of us ever had any hallucinations either before or after this
strange affair. Marianne Murray.

We find from the Scotsman and the Edinburgh Courant that Miss
Stewart died on April ii, i868, the day following Good Friday. If the
death took place in the course of a few hours after midnight, “ during the
night ” would of course be the natural expression.

The above account was first printed in the Journal S.P.R., soon after
which wc received a letter from a lady who stated that she had heard of
the incident '^just as related in the Journal*^ within a few days of its
occurrence from some cousins of the Miss Farquharsons, who had been
told by the house-agent that the description of the lady in the large hat
and veil exactly resembled Miss Stewart. Mrs. Murray, however, says :
“ I do not think any of us mentioned it to Mr. Boyd [the agent]. I hav^-
no reason to believe that the dress of the figure was in any way char-
acteristic of Miss Stewart.*’ 'Fhus it appears that the resemblance of the
figure seen to the lady who died is entirely problematic. Its association
'vith her depends only on the coincidence of its appearance in her old
home on the night of her death. It must also be observed that in this

APPENDICES

380

[744 B

case the apparition was seen shortly before the death, though it seems to
belong to the same general category as the other cases in this section.

744 B. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 57. The following in<
cident occurred to a gentleman personally known to me. The initials here
given are not the true ones. On October 12th, 1888, Mr. J. gave mtvivd
voce the following account of his experience in the X. Library, in 1884,
which I took down from memory next day, and which he revised and
corrected : —

In 1880 1 succeeded a Mr. Q. as librarian of the X. Library. 1 had never
seen Mr. Q., nor any photograph or likeness of him, when the following in-
cidents occurred. I may, of course, have heard the library assistants describe
his appearance, though 1 have no recollection of this. 1 was sitting alone in
the library one evening late in March, 1884, finishing some work after hours,
when it suddenly occurred to me that I should miss the last train to PI., where
I was then living, if I did not make haste. It was then 10.55, ^h^ l^-^t train

left X. at n.5. I gathered up some books in one hand, took the lamp in the
other, and prepared to leave the librarian’s room, which communicated by a
passage with the main room of the library. As my lamp illumined this passage,
I saw apparently at the further end of it a man’s face- I instantly thought a
thief had got into the library. This was by no means impossible, and the
probability of it had occurred to me before. I turned back into my room, put
down the books, and took a revolver from the safe, and, holding the lamp
cautiously behind me, I made my way along the passage — which had a corner,
behind which I thought my thief might be lying in wait— into the main room.
Here I saw no one, but the room was large and encumbered with bookcases.
I called out loudly to the intruder to show himself several times, more with the
hope of attracting a passing policeman than of drawing the intruder. Tlien I
saw a face looking round one of the bookcases. 1 say looking rounds but it
had an odd appearance as if the body were in the bookcase, as the face came
so closely to the edge and I could see no body. The face was pallid and
hairless, and the orbits of the eyes were very deep. I advanced towards it, and
as I did so 1 saw an old man with high shoulders seem to rotate out of the end
of the bookcase, .and with his back towards me and with a shuffling gait walk
rather quickly from the bookcase to the door of a small lavatory, which opened
from the library and had no other access. I heard no noise. I followed the
man at once into the lavatory ; and to my extreme surprise found no one there.
I examined the window (about 14 in. X 12 in.), and found it clo.sed and fastened.
I opened it and looked out. It opened into a well, the bottom of which, ten
feet below, was a sky-light, and the top open to the sky some twenty feet above.
It was in the middle of the building, and no one could have dropped into it
without smashing the glass nor climbed out of it without a ladder — but no one
was there. Nor had there been anything like time for a man to get out of the
window, as I followed the intruder instantly. Completely mystified, I even
looked into the little cupboard under the fixed basin. There was nowhere
hidixig for a child, and I confess I began to experience for the first time what
novelists describe as an eerie ’* feeling.

I left the library, and found 1 had missed my train.

Next morning I mentioned what I had seen to a local clergyman, who on
hearing my description, said, Why, that’s old Q.I ” Soon after I saw a photo-

TO CHAPTER VII

381

745 A]

graph (from a drawing) of Q., and the resemblance was certainly striking. Q.
had lost all his hair, eyebrows and all, from (I believe) a gunpowder accident.
His walk was a peculiar, rapid, high-shouldered shuffle. Later inquiry proved
he had died at about the time of year at which I saw the figure.

I have no theory as to this occurrence, and have never given special atten-
tion to such matters. I have only on one other occasion seen a phantasmal
figure [that of his mother, seen when he was a boy of ten].

When 1 saw the figure of [Q.] 1 was in good health and spirits.

The evidential value of the above account is enhanced by the fact that
the principal assistant in the library, Mr. R., and a junior clerk, Mr. P.,
independently witnessed a singular phenomenon, thus described by Mr. R.
in 1889 : —

A few years ago I was engaged in a large building in the , and during

the busy times was often there till late in the evening. On one particular
night I was at work along with a junior clerk till about ii p.m,, in the room
marked A on the annexed sketch [sketch omitted]. All the lights in the place
had been out for hours except those in the room which we occupied. Before
leaving we turned out the gas. We then looked into the fireplace, but not a
spark was to be seen. The night was very dark, but being thoroughly accus-
tomed to the place we carried no light. On reaching the bottom of the stair-
case (B), I happened to look up ; when, to my surprise, the room which we had
just left appeared to be lighted. 1 turned to my companion and pointed out
the light, and sent him back to see what was wrong. He went at once and I
stood looking through the open door, but I was not a little astonished to see
that as soon as he got within a few yards of the room the light went out quite
suddenly. My companion, from the position he was in at the moment, could not
see the light go out, but on his reaching the door everything was in total dark-
ness. He entered, however, and when he returned, reported that both gas and
fire were completely out. The light in the daytime was got by means of a glass
roof, there being no windows on the sides of the room, and the night in ques-
tion was so dark that the moon shining through the roof was out of the ques-
tion. Although I have often been in the same room till long after dark, both
before and since, I have never seen anything unusual at any other time-

Mr. P. endorses this : ‘‘ 1 confirm the foregoing statement.**

Mr. R. states that he has never had any other hallucination. The
light was seen after the phantom ; but those who .saw' the light were not
aware that the phantom had been seen, for Mr. J. mentioned the circum-
stance only to his wife and to one other friend (who has confirmed to us
the fact that it was mentioned to him), and he was naturally particularly
careful to give no hint of the matter to his assistants in the library.

745 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. p. no. The narrative is
written by General Sir Arthur Becher, of St. Faith’s Mede, Winchester.

*

April wth, 1884.

General Sir A. Becher, who held a high appointment on the Staff in India,
went, accompanied by his son and A.D.C., to the Hill Station of Ku.ssowlie,

383

APPENDICES

[745 A

about March 1867, to examine a house he had secured for his family to reside
in during the approaching hot season. They both slept in the house that night.
During the night the General awoke suddenly and saw the figure of a native
woman standing near his bed, and close to an open door which led into a bath-
room. He called out, “ Who are you ? ” and jumped out of bed, when the
figure retreated into the bath-room, and in following it the General found the
outer door locked and the figure had disappeared.

He went to bed again, and in the morning he wrote in pencil on a door-post,
“ Saw a ghost,” but he did not mention the circumstance to his wife.

A few days after, the General and his family took possession of the house
for the season, and Lady Becher used the room the General had slept in for her
dressing-room. About 7 p.m. on the first evening of their arrival. Lady Becher
was dressing for dinner, and on going to a wardrobe (near the bath-room door)
to take out a dress, she saw, standing close by and within the bath-room, a
native woman, and, for the moment thinking it was her own ayah, asked her
“ what she wanted,” as Lady Becher never allowed a servant in her room while
dressing. The figure then disappeared by the same door as on the former
occasion, which, as before, was found locked! Lady Becher was not much
alarmed, but felt that something unusual had occurred, and at dinner mentioned
the event to the General and his son, when the General repeated what had
occurred to him on the former occasion. That same night their youngest son,
a boy about eight years of age, was sleeping in the same room as his father
and mother, his bed facing an open door leading into the dressing-room and
bath-room, before mentioned, and in the middle of the night the boy started up
in his bed in a frightened attitude and called out, “ What do you want, ayah?
what do you want?” in Hindustani, evidently seeing a female figure in the
dressing-room near his bed. His mother quieted him and he fell asleep, and
the figure was not seen by us on that occasion, nor was it ever again seen,
though we lived for months in the house. But it confirmed our feeling that
the same woman had appeared to us all three, and on inquiry from other occu-
pants we learned that it was a frequent apparition on the first night or so of the
house being occupied.

A native Hill, or Cashmere woman, very fair and handsome, had been
murdered some years before in a hut a few yards below the house, and
immediately under the door leading into the bath and dressing-room, through
which, on all three occasions, the figure had entered and disappeared. My son
sleeping in another side of the house never saw it.

I could give the names of some other subsequent occupants who have told
us much the same story.

Subsequently Sir Arthur Becher writes : —

Winchester, Afay 14M, 1884.

T write to say Lady Becher does not desire to write anything more person-
ally on the subject of the “ Ghost Story ” I before detailed, as she says my
account of it was given in connection with and entirely in accordance with her
recollection of the circumstances. The woman appeared to me in the night,
and in jhe ordinary light of a room without any blinds or shutters.

In answer to inquiries, he further tells us that the bath-room door was
locked on the inside ; that the rooms were on the ground floor ; but that

745B] ^ TO CHAPTER VII 383

there was no exit but by the doors referred to. Also that the child had
certainly not heard of the ghost before he saw it.

745 B. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol, viii. p. 178. The following
narrative was sent to us with the true names, but with a request to conceal
them, and some local details, on account of the painful nature of the
incident described. Our informant, whom I will call Mrs. M., writes
under date December 15th, 1891.

Before relating my experience of having seen a ghost, I should like my
readers thoroughly to understand that I had not the slightest idea that the
house in which my husband and I were living was haunted, or that the family
residing there for many years before us had had any family troubles. The
Jiouse was delightfully situated [t&c.]. The house being partly new and partly
old, we occupied the old part for our sleeping apartments. There were two
staircases leading to them, with a landing and window, adjoining a morning
sitting-room. One night on retiring to my bedroom about 11 o’clock, I thought
I heard a peculiar moaning sound, and some one sobbing as if in great distress
of mind. 1 listened very attentively, and still it continued ; so I raised the gas
in my bedroom, and then went to the landing window of which I have spoken,
drew the blind aside ; and there on the grass was a very beautiful young girl in
a kneeling posture before a soldier, in a general’s uniform, sobbing, and clasp-
ing her hands together, entreating for pardon; but, alas ! he only waved her
away from him. So much did I feel for the girl, that without a moment’s
hesitation I ran down the staircase to the door opening upon the lawn, and
begged her to come in and tell me her sorrow. The figures then disappeared !
Xot in the least nervous did 1 feel then ; — went again to my bedroom, took a
sheet of writing-paper and wrote down what I had seen. [Mrs. M. has found
and sent us this paper. The following words are written in pencil on a half
sheet of notepaper: “March 13th, 1886. Have just seen visions on lawn: — a
soldier in general’s uniform, — a young lady kneeling to liini. 11.40 p.m.”]
My Jiiisband was away from home when this event occurred, but a lady friend
was staying with me, so I went to her bedroom and told her that I had been
ratlier frightened with some noises -could I stay with her a little while ? A few
days afterwards I found myself in a very nervous state ; but it seemed so
.strange that I was not frightened at the time.

It appears the story is only too true. The youngest daughter of this very
old, proud family had had an illegitimate child; and her parents and relatives
would not recognise her again, and she died broken-hearted. The soldier was
a near relative (also a connection of my husband’s) ; and it was in vain she
tried to gain his — the soldier’s — forgiveness. [ Tn a subsequent letter Sir X. Y.’s
career is described. He was a distinguished officer.]

So vivid was my remembrance of the features of the soldier that some
months after the occurrence, when I happened to be calling with my husband at
a house where there was a portrait of him, I stepped before it and said : “ Why,
look ! There is the General ! ” And sure enough it was.

In a subsequent letter Mrs. M. writes : —

I did see the figures on the lawn after opening the door leading on to the
lawn; and they by no means disappeared instantly, but more like a dissolving
view, viz., gradually ; and I did not leave the door until they had passed away.

384

APPENDICES

[T46C

It wasr impossible for any real persons to act such a scene. . . . The General
was born and died in [the house where I saw him]. ... I was not aware that the
portrait of the General was in that room [where 1 saw it] ; it was the first time
I had been in tliat room. The misfortune to the poor girl happened in 1847
or 1848.

Mrs. M. then mentions that a respectable local tradesman, hearing of
the incident, remarked : That is not an uncommon thing to see Aer
about the place, poor soul ! She was a badly used girl.”

Mr, M. writes as follows, under date December 23rd, 1891 : —

1 have seen my wife’s letter in regard to the recognition of Sir X. Y.’s picture

at . Nothing was said by me to her on the subject; but knowing the

portrait to be a remarkably good likeness 1 proposed calling at the house
[which was that of a nephew of Sir X. Y.’s], being anxious to see what effect it
would have on my wife. Immediately on entering the room she almost
staggered back, and turned pale, saying— looking hard at the picture—** Why,
there’s the General ! ” . . . Being a connection of the family, I knew all about
the people, but my wife was then a stranger, and 1 had never mentioned such
things to her; in fact, they had been almost forgotten.

This case may remind us of Gurney’s description of a somewhat similar
vision (that quoted in 733 B), a suggesting the survival of a mere image,
— ^what I have termed a veridical a/ter-ima^e, — of past events or emotions
with no active counterpart in the present. We are, indeed, always un-
certain as to the degree of the deceased person’s active participation in
post-mortem phantasms, — as to the relation of such manifestations to the
central current of his continuing individuality. But it is in dealing with
these persistent pictures of a bygone earth-scene that this perplexity
reaches its climax. They may, as I have already said, be the mere
dreams of the dead ; — affording no true indication of the point which
the deceased person’s knowledge or emotion has really reached.

74SC. In each of the two next cases the interval after death was
considerable, and the percipient was an absolute stranger to the deceased.
This condition must, of course, usually involve the disadvantage that the
identification of the appearance with a particular person can be based
only on the percipient’s subsequent description of what he had seen.
But in the case which I shall quote first, this sort of identification was
reinforced by the percipient’s recognition of a photograph of the deceased.
The account, taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 416, comes from
Mr. John E, Husbands, of Melbourne House, Town Hall Square,
Grimsby.

September 15/A, 18S6.

Dear Sir, — The facts are simply these. I was sleeping in a hotel in
Madeira in January 1885. It was a bright moonlight night. The windows
were open and the blinds up. I felt some one was in my room. On opening
my eyes, 1 saw a young fellow about twenty-five, dressed in flannels, standing
at the side of my bed and pointing with the first finger of his right hand to the

TO CHAPTER VII

385

745 C]

place I was lying. I lay for some seconds to convince myself of some one
being really there. 1 then sat up and looked at him. 1 saw his features so
plainly that I recognised them in a photograph which was shown me some
davs after. I asked him what he wanted ; he did not speak, but his eyes and
hand seemed to tell me 1 was in his place. As he did not answer, I struck out
at him with my hst as 1 sat up, but did not reach him, and as I was going
to spring out of bed he slowly vanished through the door, whicli was shut,
keeping his eyes upon me all the time.

Upon inquiry I found that the young fellow who appeared to me died in
that room I was occupying. . . . John E. Husuands.

The following letters are from Miss Falkner, of Church Terrace,
Wisbecli, who was resident at the hotel when the above incident
happened.

October Wiy 1886.

The figure that Mr. Husbands saw while in Madeira was that of a young
(ellow who died unexpectedly months previously, in the room which Mr.
Husbands was occupying. Curiously enough, Mr. H. had never heard of him
or his death. He told me the story the morning after he had seen the figure,
and I recognised the young fellow from the description. It impressed me
very much, but I did not mention it to him or any one. I loitered about until
I heard Mr. Husbands tell the same tale to my brother; we left Mr. H. and
said .simultaneously, “ He has seen Mr. D.”

No more was said on the subject for days; then I abruptly showed the
pliotograph. Mr. Husbands said at once, “ That is the young fellow who
appeared to me the other night, but he was dressed differently "—describing a
dress he often wore — “ cricket suit (or tennis) fastened at the neck with sailor
knot.” I must say that Mr. Husbands is a most practical man, and the very
last one would expect “ a spirit " to visit. K. Falkner.

October 2Qth, 18S6.

I enclose you photograph and an extract from my sister-in-law’s letter,
which I received this morning, as it will verify my statement. Mr. Husbands
.saw the figure either the 3rd or 4th of February 18S5.

The people who had occupied the rooms had never told us if they had seen
anything, so we may conclude they had not. K. Falknek.

The following is Miss Falkner’s copy of the passage in the letter: —

“You wdll sec at back of Mr. du F ’s photo the date of his decease

[January 29th, 18S4]; and if you recollect ‘the Motta Marques ’ had his rooms
from the February till the May or June of 1884, then Major Money at the
conunencement of 1S85 season. Mr. Husbands had to take the room on
February 2nd, 1885, as his was wanted. I am clear on all this, and remember
his telling me the incident when lie came to see my baby."

Gurney acids : —

I have received a full account of this case, vivd voce, from both^ Mr.
Husbands and Miss Falkner. They are both thoroughly practical, and as far
removed as possible from a superstitious love of marvels ; nor had they any
previous interest in this or any other class of abnormal experiences. So far

VOL. lu , 2 IJ

APPENDICES

386

[745 »

as I could judge, Mr. Husbands’ view of himself is entirely correct— that he
is the last person to give a spurious importance to anything that might befall
him, or to allow facts to be distorted by imagination. As will be seen, his
account of his vision preceded any knowledge on his part of the death which
had occurred in the room. He has never had any other hallucination of the
senses.

Another case much resembling this, but in which the evidence for
identification of the figure is weaker, is that of Mrs. Lewin, in Proceedings
S.P.R., voL V. p. 462.

745 D. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 466. In the following
case it is possible that a real person may have been mistaken for an
apparition, but the details, as reported, tell strongly against this view..
The account is given by Mrs. Clerke, 68 Redcliffe Square, S.W.

1S84.

In the autumn of 1872, I stayed at Sorrento with my two daughters, and
established myself for some months at the Hotel Columella, which stands on
the high road, within half a mile of the town. My suite of apartments con-
sisted of a large drawing-room, ante-room, and three bedrooms ; it was shaped
like the letter U, and each end opened on a large terrace. The hotel was
kept by two men, Rafaelle and Angelo, and the service of the rooms was con-
ducted by their wives, a family arrangement which worked harmoniously for
the guests.

On the evening in question we left the dining-room before the tea was
finished, anxious, after the heat of the day, to enjoy the freshness and beauty
of the terrace. After a few moments, I returned to my bedroom to fetch a
candlestick and a shawl, and so much disliked going that I loitered un-
reasonably after I said I would go. I entered the ante-room and passed
through the long drawing-room, its porcelain tiling echoing my steps with a
sharp creak, till I reached my bedroom door. One side of the door stood open ;
it was a doorway divided in two, or as the French say. h deux battants, and I
resolved not to close it, as I perceived everything had been put in order for
the night.

1 got my shawl and my candlestick, and was preparing to return through
the drawing-room, when, on turning towards the half-open door, I saw it filled
by the figure of an old woman. She stood motionless, silent, immovable,
framed by the doorway, with an expression of despairing sadness, such as I
had never seen before. I don’t know why I was frightened, but some idea of
its being an imbecile or mad woman flashed through my mind, and in :m
unreasoning panic I turned from the drawing-room door, with its melancholy
figure, and fled through the bedrooms to the terrace. My daughter, on hearing
of my fright, returned to the rooms, but all was in its wonted stillness; nothing
was to be seen.

The next morning I spoke to the women of the house of the old woman
who had come to my room, as I thought she might be in some way connected
with the establishment, and they were dismayed at my account of her, and
assured me that there was no one answering the description in the house. 1
perceived there was much consternation caused by my narration, but paid littler
attention to it at the time.

TO CHAPTER VII

387

745 D]

A fortnight afterwards we had a' visit from the parish priest, a friend of our
landlord, and the spiritual adviser of the family. At a loss for conversation, I
told him of my visitor, who arrived punctually at 8 o’clock, “ Vora dei defuntiP
The padre listened to me with the greatest gravity, and said, after a pause : —
** Madam, you have accurately described the old mistress of this house, who
died, six months before you came, in the room over yours. The people of the
hotel have been already with me about it ; it has caused them much anxiety
lest you should leave, and they recognised in your description the old padrona,
as she was called.”

This explained to me various presents of fruit and special attentions I had
received. Nothing more came of it, and I saw the apparition no more. In
our walks we looked for even some semblance of the dress in which the woman
appeared, but never saw it. Short as my glance towards her was, I could have
painted her likeness had I been an artist. She was pale, of the thick pallor of
age, cold grey eyes, straight nose, thick bands of yellowish grey hair crossing
lie.r forehead. She wore a lace cap with the border closely quilted all round, a
white handkerchief crossed over her chest, and a long white apron. Her face
was expressionless, but fixed and sad. I could not think she had any know-
ledge of where she was, or who stood before her, and certainly, for breaking
through the barrier of the uniseen, it was a most objectless visit.

I ought to mention that I had no knowledge of there having been such a
person in existence until her likeness stood at my bedroom door.

Kate M. Clerke.

In another letter Mrs. Clcrkc states that as far as she knew, the appari-
tion had not been seen again, but that the women of the house were afraid
afterwards of entering her room alone. She adds : —

The peculiarity of it is my literally describing a person whom I had never
seen or known about. Every one was overwhelmed by the portraiture, even a
lady who had seen the old mistress.

Mr. Podmore adds the following notes of an interview with Mrs.
Clerke.

AuQusf 15 /^, 1884 .

Called on Mrs. Clerke to-day. She told me that she had never believed in
ghosts before, and now believed in very few besides her own. She was quite
sure that the description she gave of the figure was detailed enough to be
recognised. Indeed, the dress as she saw it, though like that actually worn
by the old mistress, was not a common one in the district. Mrs. Clerke never
saw one at all like it in Italy. When she saw the figure, the dress struck her
as being like that of an old Irish nurse of hers, and she told her daughter so,
when she rejoined them, adding that the face was quite unlike the nurse's.
Miss Clerke confirmed this statement to me.

Mrs. Clerke admitted that it would have been quite possible for the figure
which she saw, had it been that of a real woman, to have escaped. She is,
however, quite convinced that she saw a ghost ; partly because of the re-
semblance, partly because of the unreasonable terror which seized her ^hen
she saw the figure, for she is not a nervous woman naturally.

There were no noises or other disturbances in the house during their stay.

F. P.

APPENDICES

388

[747 A

747 A. The next case (taken from the S.P.R., vol. vi. p, 27)
is an instance of a kind of auditory hallucination, the hearing of musk:,
that seems to occur much more rarely than the hearing of voices. Some
similar cases — also associated with deaths — were published in Phantasms
of the Living, (See vol. ii. pp. 221 and 223.) The fact that the sounds
were heard collectively suggests at first sight that they may have been
real — an explanation which it is always more difficult to exclude in auditory
than in visual cases. But the whole circumstances, when closely examined,
make this explanation an extremely unlikely one.

The following account was given by Miss Horne, daughter of the
percipient, in a letter to which Mrs. Horne's signature was afterwards
added, so that the account, though written in the third person, is really
a first-hand one.

508 Union Strket, Aberdeen, Nm/ember 25M, 1S90.

It is nearly thirty years ago now, but it is as vividly impressed on her
memory, as if it had happened yesterday.

She was sitting in the dining-room (in a self-contained house), which w.is
behind the drawing-room, with Jamie, my eldest brother, on her knee, who
was then a baby scarcely two years old. The nurse had gone out for tho
afternoon, and there was no one in the house except the maid downstairs.
The doors of the dining-room and drawing-room both liappencd to be oi>en
at the time. All at once she heard the most divine music, very sad and sweet,
which lasted for about two minutes, then gradually died away. My brother
jumped from mamma's knee, exclaiming “ Papa ! papa,” and ran through to
the drawing-room. Mamma felt as if she could not move and rang the bell
for the servant, whom she told to go and see who was in the drawing-room.
When she went into the room, she found my brother standing beside the piano
and saying “No papa!'* Why the child should have exclaimed these words
was that papa was very musical, and used often to go straight to the |)iano
when became home. Such w^as the impression on mamma that she noted the
time to a minute^ and six weeks after she received a letter saying her si.stcr had
died at the Cape, and the time corresponded exactly to the minute that .she
had heard the music. I may tell you that my aunt was a very fine musician.

[.Miss] Emily M. Horne.

(Signed) December nth, 1S90. [Mrs.] Eliza Horne.

In answer to further inquiries. Miss Horne wrote : —

December wth^

I am sorry to say the note, which mamma took at the time, ha.s been lo.st,
though she had it for more than twenty years after the event occurred.

The name of my aunt was Mary Sophia Ingles, she died on the 20tli
February 1861, at Durban, Natal. . . . Mamma bids me say that her note
corresponded not only to the hour but to the minute of her sisters death.

TJhis account is followed in the same Journal by another case of a
collective hallucination of music heard a few hours after the funeral of
a musician.

751 A. The following case is in some respects one of the most remark-

751 A] TO CHAPTER VII 389

able and best authenticated instances of ‘‘ haunting” on record, although,
as will be seen, the evidence for the identity of the apparition is incon-
clusive. The case was fully described in a paper entitled “ Record of a
Haunted House,” by Miss R. C. Morton, in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii.
pp. 31 1-332* Besides the account of the principal percipient, Miss R. C.
Morton, the paper contains independent first-hand statements from six
other witnesses, — a friend. Miss Campbell, a sister and brother of Miss
Morton’s who lived in the house, and a married sister who visited there,
and two former servants \ also plans of the whole house. For the full
details I must refer the reader to the original paper ; I have space here
only for abbreviated extracts from Miss Morton’s account.

An account of the case first came into my hands in December 1884,
and this with Miss Morton’s letters to her friend. Miss Campbell, are
the earliest written records. On May 1st, 1886, I called upon Captain
Morton at the ‘‘ haunted house,” and afterwards visited him at intervals,
and took notes of what he told me. 1 also saw Miss Morton and Miss
E. Morton, and the two former servants whose accounts are given in
Miss Morton’s paper. The phenomena as seen or heard by all the
witnesses were very uniform in character, even in the numerous instances
where there had been no previous communication between the percipients.
Miss Morton is a lady of scientific training, and was at the time her
account was written (in April, 1S92) preparing to be a physician. The
name ^‘Morton” is substituted for the real family name. With that
exception the names and initials are the true ones.

After describing the house and garden, Miss Morton proceeds : —

It was built about the year 1S60; the first occupant was Mr. S., an Anglo-
Indian, who lived in it for about sixteen ye.irs. During this time, in the month
of August, year uncertain, he lost his wife, to whom he was passionately
attached, and to drown his grief took to drinking. About two years later, Mr.
S. married again. His second wife, a Miss I. H,, was in hopes of curing him
of his intemperate habits, but instead she also took to drinking, and their
married life was embittered by constant quarrels, freciuently resulting in violent
scenes. The chief subjects of dispute were the management of the children
(two girls, and either one or two boys, all quite young) of the first Mrs. S., and
the possession of her jewellery, to preserve which for her children, Mr. S. had
some of the boards in the small front sitting-room taken up by a local carpenter
and the jewels inserted in the receptacle so formed. Finally, a few months
before Mr. S.’s death, on July i4tb, 1876, his wife separated from him and
went to live in Clifton. She was not present at the time of his death, nor,
as far as is known, was she ever at the house afterwards. She died on
September 23rd, 187k

After Mr. S.’s death the house was bought by Mr. L., an elderly gentleman,
who died rather suddenly within six months of going into it. The house then
remained empty for some yeans — probably four.

During this time there is no direct evidence of haunting, but when inquiiy
was made later on much hearsay evidence was brought forward. In April
^882, the house was let by the representatives of the late Mr. L. to Captain

APPENDICES

390

[751a

Morton, and it is during his tenancy (not yet terminated) that the appearances
recorded have taken place.

The family consists of Captain M. himself ; his wife, who is a great invalid ;
neither of whom saw anything; a married daughter, Mrs. K., then about
twenty-six, who was only a visitor from time to time, sometimes with, but more
often without, her husband; four unmarried daughters, myself, then aged
nineteen, who \vas the chief percipient and now give the chief account of the
apparition; E. Morton, then aged eighteen; L. and M. Morton, then fifteen
and thirteen ; two sons, one of sixteen, who was absent during the greater part
of the time when the apparition was seen ; tlie other, then six years old.

My father took the house in March 1S82, none of us having then heard of
anything unusual about the house. We moved in towards the end of April,
and it was not until the following June that I first saw the apparition.

I had gone up to my room, but was not yet in bed, when I heard some one
at the door, and w'ent to it, thinking it might be my mother. On opening the
door, 1 saw no one; but on going a few steps along the passage, 1 saw the
figure of a tall lady, dressed in black, standing at the head of the stairs. After
a few moments she descended the stairs, and I followed for a short distance,
feeling curious what it could be. I had only a small piece of candle, and it
suddenly burnt itself out; and being unable to sec more, I went back to
my room.

The figure was that of a tall lady, dressed in black of a soft woollen material,
judging from the slight sound in moving. The face was hidden in a hand-
kerchief held in the right hand. This is all I noticed then : but on further
occasions, when I was able to observe her more closely, I saw the upper part
of the left side of the forehead, and a little of the hair above. Her left hand
was nearly hidden by her sleeve and a fold of her dress. As she held it down
a portion of a widow’s cuff was visible on both wrists, so that the whole im-
pression was that of a lady in widow’s weeds. There was no cap on tlic liead
but a general effect of blackness suggests a bonnet, with long veil or a hood.

During the next two years—from 1SS2 to 1884— I saw the figure alx)ut
half-a-dozen times ; at first at long intervals, and afterwards .it shorter, but I
only mentioned these appearances to one friend, who did not speak of them to
any one. During this period, as far as we know, there were only three appear-
ances to any one else.

1. In the summer of 1882 to my sister, Mrs. K., when the figure was thought
to be that of a Sister of Mercy who had called at the house, and no further
curiosity was aroused. She was coming down the stairs rather late for dinner
at 6.30, it being then quite light, when she saw the figure cross the hall in front
of her, and pass into the dra\ving-room. She then asked the rest of us, already
seated at dinner, “Who was that Sister of Mercy whom I have just seen going
into the drawing-room?” She was told there was no such person, and a
servant was sent to look ; but the drawing-room was empty, and she was .sure
no one had come in. Mrs. K. persisted that she had seen a tall figure in black,
with some white about it; but nothing further was thought of the matter.

2. In the autumn of 1883 it was seen by the housemaid about lo p . m ., sh^
declaring that some one had got into the house, her description agreeing fairly
with what I had seen ; but as on searching no one was found, her story received
no credit.

3. On or about December i8th, 1883, it was seen in the drawing-room by

TO CHAPTER VII

391

751 A]

my brother and another little boy. They were playing outside on the terrace
when they saw the figure in the drawing-room close to the window, and ran in
to see who it could be that was crying so bitterly. They found no one in
the drawing-room, and the parlour-maid told them that no one had come into
the house.

After the first time, 1 followed the figure several times downstairs into the
drawing-room, where she remained a variable time, generally standing to the
right ’hand side of the bow window. From the drawing-room she went along
the passage towards the garden door, where she always disappeared.

The first time I spoke to her was on January 29th, 1884. “ 1 opened the

drawing-room door softly and went in, standing just by it. She came in past
me and walked to the sofa and stood still there, so I went up to her and asked
her if I could help her. She moved, and I thought she was going to speak,
but she only gave a slight gasp and moved towards the door. Just by the door
I spoke to her again, but she seemed as if she were quite unable to speak. She
walked into the hall, then by the side door she seemed to disappear as before.”
(Quoted from a letter written on January 31st.) In May and June, 1884, I
tried some experiments, fastening strings with marine glue across the stairs at
different heights from the ground— of which I give a more detailed account
later on.

I also attempted to touch her, but she always eluded me. It was not that
there was nothing there to touch, but that she always seemed to be beyond
me, and if followed into a corner, simply disappeared.

During these two years the only noises I heard were those of slight pushes
against my bedroom door, accompanied by footsteps ; and if I looked out on
hearing these sounds, I invariably saw the figure. Her footstep is very light,
you can hardly hear it, except on the linoleum, and then only like a person
walking softly with thin boots on.” (Letter on January 3 r st, 1 884. ) The appear-
ances during the next two months — July and August, 1884 — became much more
frequent; indeed they were then at their maximum, from which time they seem
gradually to have decreased, until now they seem to have ceased.

Of these two months I have a short record in a set of journal letters written
at the time to a friend. On July 21st I find the following account. “ I went
into tlie drawing-room, where my father and sisters were sitting, about nine in
the evening, and sat down on a couch close to the bow window. A few minutes
after, as I sat reading, I saw the figure come in at the open door, cross the
room and take up a position close behind the couch where I was. I was
astonislied that no one else in the room saw her, as she wrns so very distinct to
me. My youngest brother, who had before seen her, was not in the room.
Slie stood behind the couch for about half-an-hour, and then as usual walked
to the door. I went after her, on the excuse of getting a book, and saw her
pass along the hall, until she came to the garden door, where she disappeared.
I spoke to her as she passed the foot of the stairs, but she did not answer,
although as before she stopped and seemed as though about to speak.” On
July 31st, some time after I had gone up to bed, my second sister E., who had
remained downstairs talking in another sister’s room, came to me saying ti.at
some one had passed her on the stairs. I tried then to persuade her that it
was one of the servants, but next morning found it could not have beeft so, as
none of them had been out of their rooms at that hour, and E.’s more detailed
description tallied with what I had already seen.

392 APPENDICES [751 A

On the night of August ist, I again saw the figure. 1 heard the footsteps
outside on the landing about 2 a.m. 1 got up at once, and went outside.
She was then at the end of the landing at the top of the stairs, with her side
view towards me. She stood there some minutes, then went downstairs,
stopping again when she reached the hall below. 1 opened the drawing-room
door and she went in, walked across the room to the couch in the bow window,
stayed there a little, then came out of the room, went along the passage,
and disappeared by the garden door. 1 spoke to her again, but she did not
answer.

On the night of August 2 nd the footsteps were heard by my three sisters
and by the cook, all of whom slept on the top landing—also by my married
sister, Mrs. K., who was sleeping on the door below. They all said the next
morning that they had heard them very plainly pass and repass their doors.
The cook was a middle-aged and very sensible person ; on my asking her the
following morning if any of the servants had been out of their rooms the night
before, after coming up to bed, she told me that she had heard these footsteps
before, and that she had seen the figure on the stairs one night when going
down to the kitchen to fetch hot water after the servants had come up to bed.
She described it as a lady in widow’s dress, tall and slight, with her face hidden
in a handkerchief held in her right hand. Unfortunately we have since lost
sight of this servant ; she left us about a year afterwards on her mother’s death,
and we cannot now trace her. She also saw the figure outside the kitchen
windows on the terrace-walk, she herself being in the kitchen; it was then
about eleven in the morning, but having no note of the occurrence, I cannot
now remember whether this appearance was subsequent to the one above
mentioned.

These footsteps are very characteristic, and are not at all like those of any
of the people in the house ; they are soft and rather slow, though decided and
even. My sisters would not go out on the landing after hearing them ]jass,
nor would the servants, but each time when 1 have gone out after hearing them,
I have seen the figure there.

On August fth I told my father about her and what we bad seen and heard.
He was much astonished, not having seen or heard anything himself at that
time— neither then bad my mother, but she is slightly deaf, and is an invalid.
He made inquiries of the landlord (who then lived close by) as to whether he
knew of anything unusual about the house, as he had himself lived in it for a
short time, but he replied that he had only been there for three months, and
had never seen anything unusual, . . .

On the evening of August nth we were sitting in the drawing-room with
the gas lit but the shutters not shut, the light outside getting dusk, my brothers
and a friend having just given up tenni.s, finding it too dark ; my eldest sister,
Mrs. K., and myself both saw the figure on the balcony outside, looking in at
the window. She .stood there some minutes, then walked to the end and back
again, after which she seemed to disappear. She soon after came into the
drawing-room, when I saw her, but my sister did not. The same evening
my sister E. saw her on the stairs as she came out of a room on the upper
landing.

Th^ following evening, Augu.st I2th, while coming up the garden, I walked
towards the orchard, when I saw the figure cross the orchard, go along the
carriage drive in front of the house, and in at the open side door, across the

761 A] TO CHAPTER VII 393

hall and into the drawing-room, I following. She crossed the drawing-room
and took up her usual position' behind the couch in the bow window. My
father came in soon after, and I told him she was there. He could not see the
figure, but went up to where 1 showed him she was. She then went swiftly
round behind him, across the room, out of the door, and along the hall,
disappearing as usual near the garden door, we both following her. We
looked out into the garden, having first to unlock the garden door, which my
father had locked as he came through, but saw nothing of her.

On August 1 2th, about 8 P.M., and still quite light, my sister E. was singing
in the back drawing-room. I heard her stop abruptly, come out into the hall,
and call me. She said she had seen the figure in the drawing-room close
behind her .as she sat at the piano. I went back into the room with her and
saw the figure in the bow window in her usual place. I spoke to her several
limes, but had no answer. She stood there for about ten minutes or a quarter
of an hour; then went across the room to the door, and along the passage,
disappearing in the same place by the garden door.

My sister M. then came in from the garden, saying she had seen her
coming up the kitchen steps outside. We all three then went out into the
garden, when Mrs. K. called out from a window on the first storey that she had
just seen licr pass across the lawn in front and along the carriage drive towards
the orchard. This evening, then, altogether four people saw her. My father
was then away, and my youngest brother was out.

On the morning of August 14th the parlour-maid saw her in the dining-
room, about 8.30 A.M., having gone into the room to open the shutters. The
room is very sunny, anti even with all the shutters closed it is quite light, the
shutters not fitting well, and letting sunlight through the cracks. She had
opened one shutter, when, on turning round, she saw the figure cross the room.
We were all on the look-out for her that evening, but saw nothing: in fact,
whenever we had made arrangements to watch, and were especially expecting
her, we never saw anything. This servant, who afterwards married, was inter-
vieweil by Mr. Myers at her own house. . . .

On August 19th we all went to the seaside, and were away a month, leaving
three servants in the house.

< When we came back they said that they h,ad heard footsteps and noises
frequently, but as the stair-carpets were up part of the time and the house was
empty, many of these noises \vere doubtless due to natural causes, though by
them attributed to the figure.

The cook also spoke of seeing the figure in the garden, standing by a stone
vase on the lawn behind the house.

During the rest of that year and the following, 1885, the apparition was
frequently seen through each year, especially during July, August, and
September. In these months the three deaths took place, viz. : — Mr. S., on
July 14th, 1876; the first Mrs. S. in August, and the second Mrs. S. on
September 23rd.

The apparitions were of exactly the same type, seen in the same places and
by the same people, at varying intervals.

The footsteps continued, and were heard by several visitors and new
servants who had taken the places of those who had left, as well as by myself,
foui’ sisters and brother; in all by about twenty people, many of them not
having previously heard of the apparition or sounds.

394 APPENDICES [751a

Other sounds were also heard in addition which seemed gradually to increase
in intensity. They consisted of walking up and down on the second-floor
landing, of bumps against the doors of the bedrooms, and of the handles of the
doors turning. . . .

During this year, at Mr. Myers’s suggestion, 1 kept a photographic camera
constantly ready to try to photograph the figure, but on the few occasions i
was able to do so, I got no result ; at night, usually only by candle-light, a
long exposure would be necessary for so dark a figure, and this 1 could not
obtain. 1 also tried to communicate with the figure, constantly speaking to
it and asking it to make signs, if not able to speak, but with no result. I also
tried especially to touch her, but did not succeed. On cornering her, as I aid
once or twice, she disappeared.

Some time in the summer of this year (i886), Mrs. Twining, our regular
charwoman, saw the figure, while waiting in the hall at the door leading to the
kitchen stairs, for her payment. Until it suddenly vanished from her sight,
as no real figure could have done, she thought it was a lady visitor who had
mistaken her way. Mr. Myers interviewed her on December 29th, 1889, and
has her separate account.

On one night in July 18S6 (my father and I being away from home), my
mother and her maid heard a loud noise in an unoccupied room over their
heads. They went up, but seeing nothing and the noise ceasing, they went
back to my mother’s room on the first storey. They then heard loud noises from
the morning-room on the ground floor. They then went half-way downstairs,
when they saw a briglit light in the hall beneath, being alarmed, they went
up to my sister E., who then came down, and they all three examined the
doors, windows, &c., and found them all fastened as usual. My mother and
her maid then went to bed. My sister E. went up to her room on the second
storey, but as she passed the room where my two sisters L. and M. were
sleeping, they opened their door to say that they had heard noises, and also
seen what they de.scribed as the Jlame of a candle, wdthout candle or hand
visible, cross the room diagonally from corner to door. Two of the maids
opened the doors of their two bedrooms, and said that they had also heard
noises; they all five stood at their doors with their lighted canales for some
little time. They all heard steps walking up and down the lanaing between
them: as they passed they felt a sensation which they described as “a cold
wind,” though their candles were not blown about. They saw nothing. The
steps then de.scended the stairs, re-ascended, again descended, and did not
return.

In the course of the following autumn we heard traditions of earlier
haunting, though, unfortunately, in no case were wc able to get a first-hand
account. ...

We also now heard from a carpenter who had done jobs in the house in
Mrs. S.’s time, that Mrs. S. had wished to po.sscss herself of the first Mrs. S.’s
jew'els. Her husband had called him in to make a receptacle under the boartls
in the morning-room on the ground-floor, in which receptacle he placed the
jewels, and then had it nailed down and the carpet replaced. The carpenter
showed us the place. My father made him take up the boards ; the receptacle
was fliere, but empty. . - .

During the next two years, 1887 to 1889, the figure was very seldom seen,
though footsteps were heard ; the louder noises had gradually ceased. From

751 A] TO CHAPTER VII 395

1S89 to the present, 1892, so far as I know, the figure has not been seen at all ;
the lighter footsteps lasted a little longer, but even they have now ceased. The
figure became much less substantial on its later appearances. Up to about
j886 it was so solid and life-like that it was often mistaken for a real person.
It gradually became less distinct. At all times it intercepted the light ; we •
have not been able to ascertain if it cast a shadow.

Proofs of Immateriality.

1. I have several times fastened fine strings across the stairs at various
heights before going to bed, but after all others have gone up to their rooms.
These were fastened in the following way : I made small pellets of marine glue,
into which I inserted the ends of the cord, then stuck one pellet lightly against
the wall and the other to the banister, the string being thus stretched across
the stairs. They were knocked down by a very slight touch, and yet would
not be felt by any one passing up or down the stairs, and by candle-light could
not be seen from below. They were put at various heights from the ground
from six inches to the height of the banisters, about three feet. I have twice
at least seen the figure pass through the cords, leaving them intact.

2. The sudden and complete disappearance of the figure, while still in full
view.

3. The impossibility of touching the figure. I have repeatedly followed it
into a corner, when it disappeared, and have tried to suddenly pounce upon it,
but have never succeeded in touching it or getting my hand up to it, the figure
eluding my touch.

4. It has appctired in a room witli the doors shut.

On the other hand, the figure was not called up by a desire to see it, for
on every occasion when we had made special arrangements to watch for it,
we never saw it. On several occasions we have sat up at night hoping to see
it, but in vain, — my father, with my brother-in-law, myself with a friend three
or four times, an aunt and myself twice, and my sisters ivith friends more than
once; but on none of these occasions was anything seen. Nor have the
appearances been seen after wc have been talking or thinking much of the
figure.

The figure has been connected with the second Mrs. S. ; the grounds for
which are : —

1. The complete history of the house is known, and if we are to connect
the figure wdth any of the previous occupants, she is the only person who in
any way resembled the figure.

2. The widow’s garb excludes the first Mrs. S.

3. Although none of us had ever seen the second Mrs. S., several people
who had known her identified her from our description. On being shown a
photo-album containing a number of portraits, I picked out one of her sister
as being most like that of the figure, and was afterwards told ihat the sisters
were much alike.

4 - Her step-daughter and others told us that she especially used the front
drawing-room in which she continually appeared, and that her habitual seai
'vas on a couch placed in a similar position to ours.

5 * The figure is undoubtedly connected with the house, none of the perci-
pients having seen it anywhere else, nor had any other hallucination.

In writing the above account, my memory of the occurrences has been

APPENDICES

396

[WlB

largely assisted by reference to a set of journal letters written [to
Campbell] at the time, and by notes of interviews held by Mr. Myers with my
father and various members of our family. R. C. Morton.

Of the accounts given by the other witnesses, I quote only part of
* Miss Campbell’s statement, as follows ; —

77 Chesterton Road, North Kensington, W.,
March 31J/, 1892.

... On the night on which Miss Morton first spoke to the figure, as stated
in her account, I myself saw her telepathically. I was in my room (I was then
residing in the North of England, quite one hundred miles away from Miss
Morton’s home), preparing for bed, between twelve and half-past, when I
seemed suddenly to be standing close by the door of the housemaid’s cupboard,
so facing the short fiight of stairs leading to the top landing. Coming down
these stairs, 1 saw the figure, exactly as described, and about two steps behind
Miss Morton herself, with a dressing-gown thrown loosely round her, and
carrying a candle in her hand. A loud noise in the room overhead recalled
me to my surroundings, and although I tried for some time I could not resume
the impression. The black dress, dark head-gear, widow’s cuffs and hand-
kerchief were plainly visible, though the details of them were not given me by
Miss Morton till afterwards, when I asked her whether she had not seen the
apparition on that night. (Signed) Catherine M. Campbell.

To this account Miss Morton adds : —

Miss Campbell was the friend to whom I first spoke of the apparition. She
suggested to me that when next I saw her I should speak ; but of course she
had no idea when this would be. She wTOte an account to me the next day of
what she had seen, and asked me if I had not seen the figure that night ; but
naturally did not know that I /laei done so, until she received my reply. Miss
Campbell asks me to say that this is tlic only vision she has had, veridical or
otherwise.

751 B. In the Journal S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 146, November 1893, an
account was given by Miss M. W. Scott, of Lessudclen House, St.
Boswell’s, Roxburghshire, of an apparition seen several times by herself,
and occasionally by others, on a country road near her home. Her first
experience was in May 1892, when, walking down a short incline on her
way home, she saw a tall man dressed in black a few yards in front of her.
He turned a corner of the road, being still in view of her, and there
suddenly disappeared. On following him round the corner, Miss Scott
found a sister of hers, also on her way home, who had just seen a tall man
dressed in black, whom she took for a clergyman, coming to meet her on
the road. She looked away for a moment, and on looking towards him
again could see no one anywhere near. Miss Scott on overtaking her
found her looking up and down the road and into the fields in much
bewilderment. It appeared that they had not seen the man at exactly
the same moment nor in exactly the same place, but from their description
of the surroundings it seems impossible that it could have been a real
person, who had contrived to get away unnoticed.

751 B] TO CHAPTER VII 397

In July of the same year at about the same place, Miss Scott, walking
with another of her sisters, saw a dark figure approaching them, dressed in
black, with a long coat, gaiters- and knee-breeches, a wide white cravat
and low-crowned hat; the sister also saw the upper part of the figure,
which seemed to fade away into the bank by the side of the road as they
looked at it.

Again, in June 1893, walking alone on the road in the morning, Miss
Scott saw a dark figure some way in front, which she recognised as the
apparition when she got nearer to it. She made a determined effort
to overtake it, but could not get nearer than a few yards, as it then
seemed to float or skim away. At length, however, it stopped, turned
round and faced her ; then moved on a few steps, and turned and looked
back again, finally fading from her view by a hedge. She was able to
notice fully the details of the dress, — knee-breeches, l)lack silk stock-
ings and shoe-buckles, — like the dress of Scottish clergymen about a
century ago.

The apparition was also said to have been seen at different times by
some children and other persons in the neighbourhood ; but of this no
first-hand accounts were forthcoming. There was also a legend that a
child had been murdered close by ; “ but,'* Miss Scott wrote, this fact is
quite beyond the recollection of the oldest inhabitant of the neighbourhood,**
and it seems not unlikely that it was invented to account for the ghost.

We received later several other accounts of a similar apparition having
been seen by various persons at different times in the same place ; and in
the Journal S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 299-306, all the further evidence on the
subject that had reached us up to that date (October 1900) was printed.
I proceed to quote some of this.

Miss Louisa Scott — the sister who shared Miss M. W. Scott's first
experience — wrote as follows : —

Lessuddf.x House, St. Boswf.u/s, August \\th^ 1894.

... A young lady, wlio is a governess in this neighbourhood, told me this
afternoon of a meeting she had had with [the ghost] this spring. She was
returning home along the haunted road at about a quarter-past four in the
afternoon, when she was attracted by seeing in front of her a ratlier tall old
man, dressed in a long black cloak, with one cape which came to a little
below his shoulders ; his hat, as on the occasions when my sisters and I saw
bim, was low-crowned, and the brim slouched over his eyes. My informant
was much interested in this peculiar-looking person, and did not take her
eyes off him, whilst she watched him walk backward and forward between
the turn of the road and a heap of stones about a hundred yards lower
down; he repeated this six times, the last time stopping as if he wer
speaking to a man who was cutting the hedge at the time. What struck
Miss Irvine as peculiar was that the man who was hedge-cutting did not
look round, and seemed quite unconscious of the other's presence. Miss
ifvine walked on, and was going to pass the old man, when, to her astonish-
he vanished when she was only about three yards from him. . • ,

398 APPENDICES [ 751 B

Miss Irvine sent soon after her own account of her experience. By an
unfortunate accident, the first sheet of her letter was lost ; but the latter
part is as follows : —

Greycrook, St. Boswell’s, Roxburghshire.

This seemed to me stranger than ever and I wondered what I had seen, for
he was nowhere in the field. On returning home I described the old gentle-
man to some friends who were likely to know if a person answering my descrip-
tion lived in the neighbourhood, but was told, ** No.” He w^as dressed rather
like a clergyman, wore a long black cloak with cape and slouched hat, his
hands in his coat pockets. I had never seen anything of the kind before,
though 1 had frequently walked the same road and at all hours. This happened
about four o’clock in the afternoon. I have not again seen him. . . .

aMARY Blamire Irvine.

In August 1898, Miss M. W. Scott wrote that about a fortnight earlier,
when coming down the ** haunted road in the dusk, she had heard foot-
steps walking beside her, but could see nothing. She had also seen the
apparition again in the spring of 1897. She described this in December
1899, as follow's : —

. . , My sister and myself were paying an afternoon visit at a friend’s house
situated near the haunted road, and having rather overstayed our time, the
dusk was just beginning to fall . . . ; it being then suggested that we should
take a shorter cut home, we gladly availed ourselves of the permission to walk
through the park and wood which open out of and enter the evil-reputed road.
Upon coming to the end of the park, there is a small gate and narrow
pathway, separated from the road by a hedge and some trees; the space
between being only a few yards, a pedestrian on the other side is distinctly
visible. At the other end of the wood, again, there is another gate, which
[leads to] the small incline and angle of the road, and, looking either way,
the whole expanse is clearly defined. Just about this time we had nothing
supernatural in our thoughts and were talking and laughing gaily together.
Suddenly ... our conversation seemed gradually to cease, for when we were
quite half-way down the wood, I noticed a man’s figure walking alongside
of me between the hedge on the other side, which, either real or unreal, I was
determined not to lose sight of. ... In a moment I recognised the ghastly
features of the apparition. I cannot tell how he was clothed, or if he wore a
hat; my eyes seemed fixed only on the profile from just below the forehead.
Instinctively I felt he moved beside me, but heard no sound or footsteps of
any kind. My sister saw nothing, and not being equal to the occasion, 1
made no remark, until we had almost reached the end of the boundary, then
exclaimed in French, At that moment the ghost must have

vanished, for when we opened the gate to pass through not a living soul
was there ; had it been a person of either sex, we were perfectly certain to
have met. It was very strange my companion should perceive nothing
unusual, though she remarked about me “ staring into space.” It is quite
impossible to account for this phantom — it is no illusion formed by a dis-
ordered brain or based upon imagination or defective light ; the sun had
certainly set, the dusk slightly fallen, but giving quite sufficient power for mutual
recognitions. The man had walked calmly on, looking straight in front of him,
never appearing to notice anything, as though engaged in deep meditation.

751 B] TO CHAPTER VII 399

On August 17 th, 1900, Miss Scott wrote to say that she had recently
seen the apparition twice, the 'most recent occasion having been only
last night.*’ She describes it as follows : —

July 24///, 1900. — I am writing to let you know the dates that I have again
seen tlie apparition. ... On the evening of July 24th I was standing speaking
to a friend, exactly upon the part known as the property of that “ mysterious he.”

1 had forgotten the very existence of our supernatural neighbour, and while we
conversed upon indifferent subjects, I inadvertently glanced carelessly down
the expanse beyond, when I perceived the tall black figure walking on in
advance with his back towards us. How he came to be there I had not the
faintest idea, not having remarked his advent. I made no comment to my
companion, but, wishing her a hasty adieu, hurried away as quickly as possible
to try and make up upon him, but he instantly vanished — there was no one to
be seen either high or low. It was just eight o’clock in the evening, as I heard
the hour chime in the village almost at the same time. He was dressed in the
same way, namely, all in black, and was only proceeding about twenty yards
away. . . .

My second illustration of last night, August i6th, 1900, can tell you some-
thing more definite than the previous one, for I certainly believe the man to be
a clergyman of the ancient school, but why this “Father of the Church”
frequents that road is an unexplained mystery. On this occasion the outline of
his head and shoulders were completely visible — all black, with a wide white
muffler-looking thing wound round his throat; his hair seems light, face clean-
shaven and very pale, but he was not quite near enough for the features to
become clearly dcfineil ; the hat looked like an ordinary clerical wide-awake,
only the crown seemed much higher than those used in the present day. The
lower part of his body [was] overshadowed, as he was advancing towards me
up the incline, while I was on the level above.

'I’here was a man witli a pony and trap cutting grass by the roadside
within a few feet of where I saw the apparition appear, who had his back to
the worker ; yet the most wonderful part of it all is that when I questioned the
man he declared he had seen “no one.'’ “But,” I said, “he was close beside
you.” He still declared he saw “no person there,” so I let the matter end,
though 1 expect that he, like the whole village, knows well the reputation of
the road, for he looked slightly nervous and remarked, “ It was not a safe place
to come down alone. ...” M. W. Scott.

In the above case it will be seen that there is no evidence whatever
for the identity of the apparition ; the whole force of the case rests on the
repetition of the appearance, and its being seen independently by several
different persons. A good many other cases of the same general type
have appeared in the Proceedings and Journal S.P.R. I may refer as an
example to that recorded by Mr. and Mrs. Dauntesey in the Journal^
vol, vii. p, 329, Another very complete and typical instance of what is
commonly called “ haunting,” — consisting of unexplained noises, generally
heard by all within earshot and continued at intervals through a serjes of
years, in Ithe course of which various visual phantasms were seen by
<Jifferent people, — ^was the Willington Mill case, an account of which was
given by Mr. Procter in the Journal^ vol. v. pp. 331-352.

[ 811 a

APPENDICES

TO

CHAPTER VIII

811 A. The following is a typical case of automatic drawing, recorded
at a time when the subject of automatism was almost unknown, not
only to the educated layman but also to psychologists and physiologists.
I quote the account from Spirit Drawings: a Personal Narrative^ by
W. M. Wilkinson. Second edition (1864), pp. 9-11.

In August, 1856, a heavy and sudden affliction came upon us, in the
removal of a dear boy — our second son — into the spiritual world. He had
passed about eleven years in this world of ours, and was taken from us in the
midst of the rudest health, to commence his spirit-life under the loving care of
his Heavenly Father.

Some weeks afterwards his brother, then about twelve years old, went on a
short visit to Reading, and whilst there, amu.sed himself as boys of his age are
used to do. One morning he had a piece of paper before him, and a pencil in
his hand, with which he was about to draw some child’s picture; when
gradually he found his hand filling with some feeling before unknown to him,
and then it began to move involuntarily upon the paper, and to form letters,
words, and sentences. The feeling he described as of a pleasing kind, entirely
new to him, and as if some power was within him apart from his own mind,
and making use of his hand. The handwriting was different to his own, and
the subject-matter of the waiting was unknown to him till he read it with
curiosity as it w'as being written.

On frequent occasions, whilst on this visit, his hand was similarly moved in
writing ; and afterwards he went to stay with some other friends in Bucking-
hamshire, with whom he did not make a trial of this new power ; but on his
return home, after some weeks’ absence, we, for about two months, watched,
with deep emotion, the movement of his band in writing; for sometimes, when
he wished to write, his hand moved in drawing small flowers, such as exist not
here; and sometimes, when he expected to draw a flower, the hand moved
into writing. The movement was, in general, most rapid, and unlike his own
mode of writing or drawing ; and he had no idea of what was being produced,
until it was in process of being done. Often, in the middle of writing a
sentence, a flower or diagram would be drawn, and then suddenly the hand
would go off in writing again.

I have not mentioned the nature, or subject-matter of the words thus
written ; nor is it in this place necessary to do so, further than this, that the)
purported to be chiefly communications from his brother, our dear departe

815A] TO CHAPTER VIII 401

child, and were all of a religious character, speaking of his own happy state,
and of the means by which similar happiness is alone to be attained by those
who remained here to fight out their longer battle of life.

A few weeks later the boy’s mother, who had never learnt to draw,
found that she possessed the same faculty, and by devoting about an hour
a day to the practice, produced a large series of drawings of flowers,
geometrical forms, and various objects which her family regarded as
symbolical. They often obtained also automatic writing purporting to
come from the dead child and to explain the meaning of the drawings.
The latter developed into architectural sketches and landscapes, and Mrs.
Wilkinson gradually began to paint, as well as draw, automatically. Mr.
Wilkinson also developed the faculty of automatic writing and drawing.

815 A. The following account is extracted from Mr. Andrew Lang’s
“The Voices of Jeanne d’Arc” in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi.
pp. 198-212.

Mr. Lang gives evidence taken from the Proces of her trial at Rouen
and other original sources which he mentions. Her own account given
at her trial was that her “ voices ” were first heard when she was about
thirteen — telling her to behave well and go to church, and afterwards
they used to tell her to go into France to her mission, Jeanne kept
objecting that she was a poor girl who could not ride, or lead in war, and
resisted the voices with all her energy.

Turning to the Maid’s own evidence in court, we must remember that she
was most averse to speaking at all, that she often asked leave to wait for advice
and permission from her voices before replying, that on one point she con-
stantly declared that, if compelled to speak, she would not speak the truth. This
point was the King’s secret. There is absolutely contemporary evidence, from
Alain Cliartier, that, before she was accepted, she told Charles which

filled him with surprise, joy, and belief. {Proces V., 131 . Letter of July, 1429.)
Tlje secret was connected with Charles’s doubts of his own legitimacy, and
Jeanne at her trial was driven to obscure the truth in a mist of allegory, as,
indeed, she confessed. [The] tale of an angel and a crown was mere allegory.
Jeanne’s extreme reluctance to adopt even this loyal and laudable evasion is
the measure of her truthfulness in general. Still, she did say some words
wlu'ch, as they stand, it is difficult to believe, to explain, or to account for.
She asserted that she knew the Dauphin, on their first meeting, by aid of her
voices. ( 1 . 56,) She declared that the Dauphin himself “multas habuit
revelationes et apparitiones pulchras.” In its literal sense, there is no evidence
for this, but rather the reverse. She may mean, “ revelations ” through herself,
or may refer to some circum.stance unknown. “ Those of my party saw and
knew that voice,” she said, but later would only accept them as witnesses if
they were allowed to come and see her. (I. 57.)

This is the most puzzling point in Jeanne’s confession. She had no motive
for telling an untruth, unless she hoped that these remarks would establiaJh the
objectivity of her visions. Of course, one of her strange experiences may have
occurred in the presence of .Charles and his court, and she may have believed
tl^at they shared in it.

VOt.. IT. 2 c

402 APPENDICES [815 a

She said that she heard the voice daily in prison, “ and stood in sore need
of it.'* The voice bade her remain at St. Denis (after the repulse from Paris, in
September 1429), but she was not allowed to remain.

On the next day (the third of the trial) she told Beaup^re that she was
fasting since yesterday afternoon. o^“>yestcrday she had heard the voices in the
morning, at vespers, and at the late ringing for A7fg Afaria, and she heard
them much more frequently than a^e mentioned.*’ “Yesterday she had been
asleep when the voice aroused her. Sh^ sat up and clasped her hands, and
the voice bade her answer boldly. words she half heard before she was

quite awake, but failed to iindcrstand.]ipfi

She denied that the voices ever contradicted themselves. On this occasion,
as not having received leave from her voices, she refused to say anything as to
her visions.

At the next meeting she admitted having heard the voices in court, but in
court she could not distinguish ‘the words, owing to the tumult. She had now,
however, leave to speak more fully. The voices were those of St. Catherine
and St. Margaret. They were crowned with fair crowns, as she had said at
Poictiers two years before. Seven years ago (that is, wlien she was twelve)
she first saw the saints. On the attire of the saints she had not leave to speak.
They were preceded by St. Michael “ with the angels of Heaven.” “ I saw
them as clearly as I see you, and I used to weep when they departed, and
would fain that they should have taken me with them.”

As to the famous sword at Fierbois, she averred that she had been in the
church there, on her way to Chinon, that the voices later bade her use a sword
which was hidden under earth,— she thinks behind, but possibly in front of the
altar,— at Fierbois. A man unknown to her was sent from Tours to fetch the
sword, which after search ^vas found, and she wore it.

Asked whether she had prophesied her wound by an arrow at Orleans, and
her recovery, she said “Yes.”

This prediction is singular in that it was recorded before the event. The
record was copied into the regutre of Brabant, from a letter written on April
22nd, 14129, by a Flembhi diplomatist, De Rotselaer, then at Lyons. ^ De
Rotselaer bad the prophecy from an officer of the court of the Dauphin. The
prediction was thus noted on April 22nd, the event occurred on May 7th. On
the fifth day of the trial Jeanne announced that, before seven years were gone,
the English would lose a dearer gage than Orleans ; “ this I know by revelation,
and am wroth that it is to be so long deferred.” As prophecies go, their loss
of Paris (1436) corresponds very well to the Maid’s announcement. Asked, on
March ist, whether her liberation was promised, she said, “ Ask me in three
months, and I will tell you.” In three months exactly her stainless soul
was free.

She had once disobeyed her voices, when they forbade her to leap from the
towcF of Beaurevoir. She leaped, but they forgave her, and told her that
Compifegne (where she was captured on May 23rd, 1430) would be relieved
“before Martinmas.” It was relieved on October 26th, after a siege of five
months. She told the touching story of how, at Melun, on April 1430. the
voices had warned her that she would be taken pri.soner before midsummer;
how she had prayed for death, or for tidings as to the day and hour. But no
tidings were, given to her, and her old belief, often expressed, that she “ should

1 Proch, IV., 425.

815 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 403

last but one year or little more,” was confirmed. The Due d'Alen^on had
heard her say this several times ; for the prophecy at Melun we have only her
own word.

She was now led into the allegory about the Angel (herself) and the Crown
(the coronation at Rheims). This allegor^ #as fatal, but does not bear on her
real belief about her experiences. She averred, returning to genuine con-
fessions, that her voices often came ilpohtaneously ; if they did not, she
summoned them by a simple prayer toiGod. She had seen the angelic figures
moving, invisible save to her, among mdfk The voices had promised her the
release of Charles d'Orleans, but time him failed her. This was as near a con-
fession of failure as she ever made, tilt the day of her burning ; if she really
made one then. But here, as always, she had predicted that she would do this
or that if she were sans empeschemenU She had no revelation bidding her
attack Paris when she did, and after the day at Melun, she submitted to the
advice of the other captains. By the way, if this be so, not she, but the
captains, displayed the strategy admired by Captain Marin in the Oise cam-
paign of 1430. As to her release, she was only bidden “to bear all cheerfully;
be not vexed with thy martyrdom, thence shall thou come at last into the
kingdom of Paradise.”

For the rest, Jeanne recanted her so-called recantation, averring that she
was unaware of the contents or full significance of the document. Her voices
recalled her to her duty, for them she went to the stake, and, as I have shown,
if there was a moment of wavering on the day of her doom, her belief in the
objective reality of the phenomena remained firm, and she recovered her faith
in the agony of her death.

Of external evidence as to these experiences, the best is probably that of
d’Aulon, the Maitrc cPHdtel of the Maid, and her companion through her
whole career. He and she were reposing in the same room at Orleans, her
hostess being in the cliamber (May 1429), and d’Aulon had just fallen asleep,
when the Maid awoke him with a cry. Her voices bade her go against the
English, but in what direction slie knew not. In fact, the French leaders had
begun, without her knowledge, an attack on St. Loup, whither she galloped
and took the fort III. 212). It is, of course, very possible that the din of

onset, which pre.sently became audible, had vaguely reached the senses of the
Maid. Her page confirms d’Aulon's testimony.

D’Aulon states that when the Maid had any martial adventure in prospect,
she told him that her “ counsel ” had given her this or that advice. He ques-
tioned her as to the nature of this “counsel.” She said “she had three
councillors, of whom one was always with her, a second went and came to her,
and the third was he with whom the others deliberated.” D’Aulon “was not
worthy to see this counsel.” F rom the moment when he heard this, d’Aulon
asked no more questions. Dunois also gave .some evidence as to the “ counsel.”
At Loches, when Jeanne was urging the journey to Rheims, Harcourt asked
^er, before the King, what the nature {fnodus) of the council was ; how it com-
numicaled with her. She replied that when she was met with incredulity, she
went apart and prayed to God. Then she heard a voice say, Fille Di^ va^

va^je serai d tan aide^ va ! “ And when she heard that voice s^e was ^ght
glad, and would fain be ever in that state.” “ As she spoke thus, ipsa miro
exsultabaU levando suos oculos ad coslum'^'' (IIL? *2). Finally, that
Jeanne maintained her belief* to the moment of her death, we learn from the

404

APPENDICES

[817 A

priest, Martin Ladvenu, who was with her to the last (III., 170). There is
no sign anywhere that at the moment of an “ experience,” the Maid’s aspect
seemed unusual, or uncanny, or abnormal, m the eyes of those who were m
her company.

These depositions were given 'twenty years later (1452-56), and, of course
allowance must be made for weakness of memory and desire to glorify the
Maid. But there is really nothing of a suspicious character about them, in
fact the ‘-growth of legend” was very slight, and is mainly confined to the
events of the martyrdom, the White Dove, the Name of Christ blazoned in
flame, and so forth. It should also have been mentioned that at the taking 0;
St. Pierre de Mousticr (November 1429), Jeanne, when deserted by her forces,
declared to d’AuIon that she was “ not alone, but surrounded by fihy thousaii.i
of her own.” The men therefore rallied and stormed the place.

This is the sum of the external evidence as to the phenomena. I have already
indicated what is known as to the mental and physical characteristics of the
Maid. Her extreme temperance should also perhaps be remembered.

As to the contents of the communications to Jeanne, they were certainly
sane, judicious, and heroic. M. Quicherat (A/n:r(/is Nouveaux^ p. 61) distiii*
guishes three classes of abnormally conveyed knowledge, all on unimpeachable
evidence.

(0 Tkought-readinj^, as in the case of the King’s secret; she repeated to
him the words of a prayer which he had made mentally.

(2) Clain*oyanc€^ as exhibited in the affair ot the sword of Fierbois.

(3) Prescience^ as in the prophecy of her arrow-wound at Orleans. Accord-
ing to her confessor, Pasquerel, .she repeated the prophecy and indicaieil
the spot in which she w'ould be wounded (under the right shoulder) on the night
of May 6th. But this is later evidence given in the Trial of Rehabilitation.

To these we might add the view, from Vaucouleurs, a hundred leagues
away, of the defeat at Rouvray ; the prophecy that she “ would last but a year
or little more;” the prophecy, at Melun, of her capture: the prophecy of the
relief of Compi6gne; and the strange affair of the bon conduit at the battle of
Pathay.' For several of these predictions we have only the Maid’s word, but,
to be plain, we can scarcely have more unimpeachable testimony.

817 A. From the Proceedings of the American vol. i. p. 397 -

Mr. M. writes to Professor Royce as follows : —

BosTY>iV, Nov. i 6 di, 18S6.

Some years ago, perhaps eight or nine, while in a city of Rhode Island on
business, my house being then, as now, in Boston, I received news which was
most unexpected and distressing to me, affecting me so seriously that 1 retired
to my room at the hotel, a large square room, and threw myself upon my
face downward, remaining there a long time in great mental distress. The
acuteness of the feeling after a time abating, I left the room. I returned next
day to Boston and the day after that received a short letter from the person
whose statement I enclose lierewith, and dated at the town in western New
Yorjc from* which her enclosed letter comes. The note begged me to
her without delay what was the matter with me “on Friday at two o’clock,
the very day and hour when I was affected as I have described.

1 IV., 37 T, 372. Here the authority is Monstrelet, a lUirgundian.

TO CHAPTER VIII

405

817 B]

This lady was a somewhat familiar acquaintance and friend, but I had not
heard from her for many months previous to this note and 1 do not know
that any thought of her had come into my mind for a long time. I should
still further add that the news which had so distressed me had not the slightest
connection with her.

I wrote at once, stating that she was right as to her impression (she said in
her letter that she was sure I was in very great troul^le at the time mentioned)
and expressed my surprise at the whole affair. . . . (Signed) M.

The accompanying statement from N., who is a physician by profession
and writes from New York State, is as follows : —

[Postmarked^ Aug. 16/A, 1886.]

In the convalescence from a malarial fever during which great hyperaesthesia
of brain had obtained, but no htallucinations or false perceptions, I was sitting
alone in my room looking out of the window. My thoughts were of indifferent
trivialities; after a time my mind seemed to become absolutely vacant; my
eyes fell fixed, the air seemed to grow wliite. I could see objects about me,
but it was a terrible effort of will to perceive anything. I then felt great and
painful sense as of sympathy with some one suffering, who or where I did not
know. After a little time I knew with whom, but how I knew I cannot tell ;
for it seemed some time after this knowledge of personality that I saw distinctly
in my brain, not before my eyes, a large square room, evidently in a hotel, and
saw the person of whom I had been conscious, lying face downward on the bed
in the throes of mental and physical anguish. 1 felt rather than heard sobs
and grieving, and felt conscious of the nature of the grief subjectively ; its
objective cause was not transmitted to me. Extreme exhaustion followed the
experience, which lasted forty minutes intensely and then very slowly wore
away. Let me note: (i) I had not thought of the person for some time and
there was no reminder in the room : (2) tlie experience was remembered with
more vividness than that seen in the normal way, while the contrary is true
of dreams; (3) the natural order of perception was reversed; i.c. the emotion
came first, the sense of a personality second, the vision or perception of the
person tiiird. . . . (Signed) N.

Mr. M. was unfortunately not able to find the letters that passed
between him and his friend at the time.

817 B. From the Ppoccedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 33 .

In this case the conscious desire of the agent seems to have been the
predetermining cause of the percipient’s impression.

The percipient, Mrs. Hadselle, writes to Dr. Hodgson as follows : —

28 Bradford Street, Pittsfiet-d, Mass., May 28/A, 18S8.

Less that two years ago a curious thing happened to me. I had been in
Wash. Co., N.Y., giving half a dozen readings, and was on my way to Williams*
town, where I had spent a part of the .summer, and where much of my worldly
goods, in the shape of wearing apparel, was safely stowed in my room at the
“Mansion House.” With ticket purchased, I was serenely seated in the car,
box, bundle, and bag beside me, the conductor’s All aboard ” was at that
instant in my ears, when I sprang to my feet with the force of an inward com-

APPENDICES

406

[817 C

roand, “ Change your ticket and go to Elizabeth (N.J.). Change your ticket

and go to Elisabeth. Change your " Here a gentleman in the opposite

seat— an utter stranger — rose and said: “ Madam, have you forgotten some-
thing, can I help you?” I said: “Do you think the train will wait for me to
change my ticket?” For there appeared to be no alternative. As I spoke I
moved towards the platform ; he followed, and seeing that the office was but a
few steps distant said : “ Go, I‘ll see that you are not left.” I did go, and in a
moment more was on my w'ay to Elizabeth, though / had not before even thought
of such a thing. Next morning, on reaching my friend’s house, she threw her
arms about me and sobbed out : “ Oh, I have wanted you so.” Then she led
me to a room where an only and beloved sister lay in life’s last battle. In an
hour it was ended.

My poor grief-stricken friend declared then— declares now — that my sudden
change of purpose was a direct answer to her repeated though unspoken de-
mand for my presence. And who shall say it was not? I wish to add that
while I had learned by letter of the sister’s illness of a chronic disorder, 1 did
not suppose her case hopeless; indeed, from the fact that no tidings had
reached me lately, was hoping that she was on the road to recovery, and had I
been questioned concerning her that loth of November 1886, should have re-
plied confidently, “ She will without doubt last through the winter.” My friend,
by the way, is, much more than 1, a believer in psychical phenomena.

(Signed) C. A. C. Hajdselle.

Dr. Hodgson writes : —

Mrs. G.— the friend referred to— has sent me her corroboration, dated
March 5th, 1S90. The date of the incident, she states, was November nth,
1886. She says : —

I had not expected Mrs. H. ; did not at that time know where she was,
so could not have summoned her had I wished to do so, — but in my trouble
there grew upon me a great desire for her presence, and 1 said many times, ' If
she would only come. If she were only here.’

“ My sister’s failure at the last was somewhat rapid, but of this Mrs. H. knew
nothing, and when she told me of her sudden change of purpose, hundreds of
miles away, I said : ‘ The impulse was sent you in answer to my wish,’ or words
to that effect.”

The gentleman who helped Mrs. Hadselle to change her ticket, the
Rev. James Wilson, then of Greenwich, N.Y., writes in answer to Dr.
Hodgson's inquiries : —

March 20tki 1890.

I recollect the circumstance of “ assisting a lady ” at Greenwich ticket office,
who exchanged her ticket at the last moment, because of a change of purpose;
and it was in November 1886. She sent me a few lines afterwards, detailing
certain facts touching a sick friend at the point of her destination— not clearly
recalled at this moment. J. T. Wilson.

817 C. From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 35.

Mrs. Hadselle sent at the same time as the above another narrative, of
which she said : —

I send you with this a bit of experience which I had years ago — so long
indeed, SIS the time Dr, Holland edited the .Springfield Republican. He wrote

8170] TO CHAPTER VIII 407

tne that the “ Warning ” was copied from Maine to California, and that he re-
ceived many letters asking if it was authentic. To this he could safely reply, as
1 was an old-time contributor to that and other leading journals. A local paper
lately copied it. Many of the then witnesses have, with Dr. Holland and my
darling Eddie (Kleber Loomis Hadselle), gone over to the “ great majority,”
but there are several still living who remember the episode, and no one of my
acquaintances doubts or thinks the sketch overdrawn.

[Tlie account is taken from the Berkshire County Eagle^ May loth, 1888,
rittsfteld, Mass., and is there headed “The Unspoken Warning— A Mother’s
Experience.” As above implied, the account itself is nearly contemporary with
the incident, being here quoted from a reprint^ which the author accepts as
correct ]

One Ijitter cold day in winter a merry party of us, nestled down under furry
robes, went to meet an appointment with a friend living a few miles distant,
with whom we were to spend the afternoon and in the evening attend a concert
to be held near by. The sleighing was delightful, the air keen and inspiriting,
the host and hostess genial as the crackling fires in the grates, and the invited
gue.st.s, of whom there were many besides ourselves, in tliat peculiar visiting
trim which only old-time friends, long parted, can enjoy. Restraint was thrown
aside; we cracked jokes; we chattered like magpies, and not a little of the
coming concert, which promi.sed a rare treat to our unsophisticated ears. All
went merry as a marriage bell, and merrier than some;, till just before tea, when
I was seized with a sudden and unaccountable desire to go home, accompanied
by a dread or fear of something, I knew not what, which made the return ai>
pear, not a matter of choice, but a thing imperative. I tried to reason it away,
to revive anticipations of the concert ; I thought of the disappointment it would
be to those who came with me to give it up, and running over in my mind tbe
condition in which things were left at home, could find no ground for alarm.

For many years a part of the house had been rented to a trusty family; our
children were often rocked in the same cradle, and half of the time ate at the
same table; locks and bolts were things unused, and in deed as in word we
were neighbours. In their care had been left a boy of ten years, the only one
of the family remaining at home, who knew that when he returned from school
he was expected to bring in wood and kindlings for the morning fire, take supper
alone, or with little Clara E., as he chose, and otherwise pass the time as he
pleased, only that he must not go into the street to play, or on to the pond to
.skate. He had been left many times in this way, and had never given occasion
for the slightest uneasiness; still, as this nameless fear grew upon me, it took
the form of a conviction that danger of some sort threatened this beloved child.

I was rising to go and ask Mr. A. to take me home, when some one said,
“ You are very pale ; are you ill ? ” “ No,” I answered, and dropping back in the
chair, told them how strangely I had been exercised for the last few minutes ;
adding, *• I really must go home.” There was a perfect chorus of voices against
It, and for a little time I was silenced, though not convinced. Some one laid the
matter before Mr. A., who replied, “ Nonsense; Eddie is a good boy to mind,
will do nothing in our absence that he would not do if wc were there, and
enjoying himself well at this moment, I’ll warrant.” This answer was brought
to me in triumph, and I resolved to do as they said, “ not to think about it.”
but at tea my trembling hand almost refused to carry food to mv lips, and I
found it utterly impossible to swallow a mouthful. A death-like chill crept over

408 APPENDICES [817C

me, and I knew that every eye was on me as I left the room. Mr. A. rose, sav>
3ng in a changed voice and without ceremony, “ Make haste ; bring the horse
round, we must go right away. I never saw her in such a state before ; there
Is something in it.^’ He followed me to the parlour, but before he could speak
I was pleading as for dear life that not a moment be lost in starting for honif.
“ I know,” said I, it is not all imagination, and whether it is or not I shall
certainly die if this dreadful incubus is not removed shortly.”

All was now confusion ; the tea-table deserted, the meal scarce tasted ; and
my friends, alarmed as much at my looks as at my words, were as anxious to
hurry me off as they had been before to detain me. To me those terrible
moments seemed hours, yet 1 am assured that not more than half-an-hour
elapsed from the time my fears first found expression before we were on the
road toward home. A horse somewhat noted for fleetness was before us, and
with only two in the cutter — the rest stayed to concert, and made Mr. A. promise
that if nothing had happened we would return — went over the road at a rapid
pace. I knew from the frequent repetition of a peculiar signal that the beast
was being urged to his best, yet I grew sick with impatience at the restraint.
I wanted to fly. All this while my fears had taken no definite shape. 1 only
knew that the child was in danger, and felt impelled to hurry to the rescue.
Only once was the silence broken in that three-mile journey, and that was when
the house was in full view. 1 said, “Thank God, the house is not on fire.”
“ That was my own thought,” said Mr. A., but there was no slackening of speed.

On nearing home a cheerful light was glimmering from Mrs, E.'s window ;
before the vehicle had fairly stopped w-e were clear of it, and opening the door,
said in the same breath, “ Where’s Eddie ? ” “ Eddie ? why, he was here a little
while ago,” answered Mrs. E., pleasantly striving to dissipate the alarm she saw
written on our countenances. “ He ate su]>per with the children, and played
awhile at marbles; then spoke of Libby Rose having a new picture book, and
that he wanted to see it. You’ll find him over tliere.” With swift step.s Mr. A.
crossed the street to the place mentioned, but returned with “ He has not been
there.” Eddie was remarkably fond of skating, and my next thought was that
he had been tempted to disobedience. I said calmly, “ We will go to the pond.”
I was perfectly collected ; I could have worked all night without fatigue with
the nerves in that state of tension ; but Mr. A. said, “ No, you must go in and
lie down. Eddie is safe enough, somewhere about the village. Til go and find
him.” But there was nothing in the tone as in the words to reassure me.

As he spoke he crossed the hall to our own room and turned the knob.
The door was locked. What could that mean ? Eddie was either on the
inside or had taken the key away with him. Mr. A. ran round to a window
with a broken spring which could be opened from the outsjjle. It went up
with a clang, but a dense volume of smoke drove him back. After an instant
another attempt was made, and this lime, on a lounge directly under the
window, he stumbled on the insensible form of little Eddie, smothered in
smoke. Limp and apparently lifeless, he was borne into the fresh cold air, and
after some rough handling was restored to consciousness.

Eddie said, on returning from school he made a good fire, and as the wood
was. snowy thought he would put it in the oven to dry; .something he had
never done before. Then on leaving Mrs. E.’s room he went in for an apple
before going to see Libby Rose’s picture book, and it seemed so nice and warm
he thought he would lie down awhile. He could give no explanation as to

TO CHAPTER VIII

409

817 D]

what prompted him to turn the key : it was the first and last time ; but this
could have made no difference in the result, for no one would have discovered
the smoke in time to save his life. The wood in the oven was burned to ashes,
but as the doors were clo.sed there was no danger of falling embers setting the
house on fire ; and had we stayed to the concert everything would have been
as when we left, except that little Eddie’s voice would never more have made
music for our ears. Every one said that with a delay of five or even three
minutes we should have been too late.

(Signed) Mrs. C. A. C. Hadselle.

In reply to inquiries, Mrs. Hadselle informed Dr. Hodgson that the
event took place about 1854, Eddie being then nine or ten years old.
Mr. A. is no longer living, but the lady at whose house the party met, on
being asked by Mrs. Hadselle what she could remember of the circum-
stances, wrote : —

Albany, N. \ January 6ifi, 1891.

I remember distinctly the incident descrilied by Mrs. Hadselle in her .sketch,
“An Unspoken Warning.” It was at my house that the little party gathered
for the old-fashioned afternoon visit and tea. I remember well her strange con-
dition, ari.sing from anxiety over the child, which had been left at home. The
statement made by her 1 believe to be true. M. W. Rogers.

817 D. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. 136. The following
account was sent to me by Lady tic Vesci in May 1891. Whether
the impulse to telegraph was really connected with the dying lady's
condition we cannot, of course, say, but the coincidence was cer-
tainly remarkable.

May 24 /> 5 , 1891.

Madame X. was a very remarkable woman, and I was most deeply
attached to her. .She had had great troubles and difficulties in her life, an
unhappy marriage, and two sons who were entirely educated by lier. When
they came to London as clerks in the city she followed them to make a home
tor them there ; but as one was soon sent out to work at Hong- Kong and the
other to a business at Bahia, she sought employment for herself in London and
came to us as governess in 1S64. In 1869 she became ill, and spent the winter
alone at Bournemouth. She and I wrote constantly to each other, and when
she moved to Norwood for the summer of 1870 my eldest brother and I went
often to spent long afternoons with her. He died that summer, and although
she had not left j;ier sofa for months she came at once to see me when she
heard of our great sorrow ; the doctor said he had never seen such an indomit-
able spirit as she showed through her illness, and when in the spring of 1871
Sir J. Burrows told her that she had not many months to live .ihc resolved to
go out to Hong-Kong and see her eldest son once more. It was not thought
d>at she would survive the voyage. Our deep love for each other was un-
changeable, and this final farewell was a great grief to us both. She reached
Hong^Kong and spent the last eighteen months of her life with her son there.
I heard from her by every mail. •

In 1872 I married, and shortly afterwards we were quartered at the Curragh.
It was from there that I sent the telegram which she received less than twenty-
four hours before her death. Until two years ago I had in my possession a

410

APPENDICES •

[818 a

few faint lines written by her on blue foreign paper, saying she had received my
message and that her “fever dreams” were filled with memories of our happ^
days together at Cannes and elsewhere. Her son is now dead. He came to
see me in ’76, and told me that my telegram had made his mother very happy.

The impulse that made me communicate with her on that particular day
was a very strong one. It came to me suddenly and not in consequence of any
increased anxiety from news received. On the contrary, the accounts were
quite satisfactory. I had heard from her by the mail a few days before. i
asked my husband to go with me to the Curragh Post-Office as I wished to find
out the cost of a telegram to China, and he accompanied me to the Post-Ofiice,
and we were told it would cost jCs to send twelve words or so, I think. 1 nt
once wrote and sent the message containing a few words of loving greeting.
These words she received and acknowledged only a few hours before her death

Evelyn de Vesci.

Ix>rd de Vesci adds : —

I certify that the account given by Lady de Vesci is correct and accurate

De Vesct.

indy 1S91.

818 A. From a paper by Mrs. Verrall, entitled Some Experiments
on the Supernormal Acquisition of Knowledge,” in the Proceedings
S.P.R., vol. XL p. 19 1.

In these cases a piece of information not consciously possessed at the
moment i.s conveyed to the conscious intelligence by means of an apparent
mechanical difficulty, which on examination turns out not to exist The in-
formation thus obtained is usually negative ; that is, this apparent mechanical
difficulty prevents my doing something unnecessary or undesirable, which I
should know to be such if 1 thought about it, but which from thoughtlessness I
am on the point of doing. An illustration will make my meaning clearer.

Constantly, when using my typewriter, it has happened to me to find a diffi-
culty in pressing a key, so great a difficulty as to oblige me to look to see what
is wrong. I then see that what is wrong is that my finger was on the wrong
Jcey, but there is, in fact, no difficulty whatever in depressing the key if I deter-
mine to do so. The effect of this apparent mechanical difficulty is to draw my
attention in time to the mistake I am on the point of making. . . .

[Again,] I wrote, in the afternoon, five letters, and then stretched out my left
hand to the stationery case to take the necessary envelopes. I wanted five,
and as I can usually take a small number without error expected to take
five. But 1 did not get enough ; I found that I only had 4hrec, and tried to
take a couple more. But one of these two slipped through my fingers, and 1
only held one. I was quite vexed at my maladroitness, gave up a further
attempt for the present and proceeded to fold niy letters, put them irito
envelopes, and address them. When I came to the fifth letter, I remembered
that I had an envelope ready addressed for this letter, as I had written the
night before, but torn up the letter after receiving a letter by the late post,
which decided me to wait for fuller information. I had kept the envelope,
and^t was actually lying on my table while I was trying to take the five
envelopes. I may have seen it, but if I did, it was unconsciously ; it J

when I found that I could not get five envelopes that I discovered that I di
not require more than four.

TO CHAPTER VIII-

411

819 A]

818 B. From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 344.

The following is a case in which^ as I conceive^ the subliminal self
has observed what the supraliminal has failed to notice, and has gene-
rated a hallucination, in order to check the mistaken action to which that
inadvertence w'as leading. In this case, all that needs correction is a
mere act of distraction — a failure to look carefully at an object fully in

sight.

From Mrs. E. K. Elliott, wufe of the Rev. E. K. Elliott.

About twenty years ago I received some letters by post, one of which con-
tained £1$ in bank notes. After reading the letters 1 went into the kitchen
with them in my hands. I was alone at the time, no one being near me, except
the cook, and she was in the scullery. Having clone with the letters, I made a
motion to throw them into the fire, when 1 distinctly felt my hand arrested in
the act. It was as though another hand were gently laid upon my own, press-
ing it back. Much surprised, I looked at my hand, and then saw that it con-
tained not the letters I liad intended to destroy, but the bank notes, and that
the letters were in the other hand. I was so surprised that I called out, ‘‘ Who
is here ? ” 1 called the cook and told her, and also told my husband on the first
opportunity. I never had any similar experience before or since.

Statement by Rev. E. K. Elliott.

I remember my wife describing the above adventure to me at the time, and
also that she was nearly fainting from the excitement caused by it.

E. K. Elliott.

819 A. In the following case the hypothesis of a subliminal

hyperaesthetic discernment of the bifid fern by ordinary eyesight is pos-
sibly applicable. 'I'lie account is a translation of that given in the
Anna/es des Sciences Psychiques (May-June, 1S95), Adrien Gueb-

hard, Professeur agr<^g<S i la Faculty de Mddecine.

On the 30th May 1893, I w'as on a geological excursion in the environs of
Nice. After a very uneasy night, passed in the village of Contes, I set out in a
rather bad humour in the direction of Escarene by an old road, where my dis-
gust was heightened by seeing on my right a long mound of absolutely no
interest, cither palaeontological or stmtigraphical. In vain I tried to console
myself by seeking in the crevices of the moist, dripping stone, or under the
tufts of green mai^lenhair, some rare snail-shell for a collection belonging to my
friends. I had already resigned my^self to the uninteresting walk of the ordinary
tourist, when suddenly a flash of recollection arrested my wandering attention
—a memory dating from my old passion of long ago for botany, revived for a
short time in 1889 by the publication of a work on the abnormal partitions of
ferns, but certainly long since abandoned. Promptly, and with all the intensity
of an old longing never satisfied, I conceived a great ambition for an objec.
which, having been vainly sought, had almost passed into a myth, namely, the
AspUnium Trichonianes, or Common Maidenhair Spleen wort abnoiinally
bifurcated, which I had often seen mentioned in a book, but which I had never
once, during thirty years, been able to discover, in spite of the great abundance
of the normal species.

412

APPENDICES

[819 A

Hardly was this mental picture evoked, before my eyes* as if drawn by the
real image, were arrested by one amongst all the green tufts which surrounded
me, and amongst all the fronds which composed it, —by one alone, which, two
yards off, had the exact appearance of a bifurcation.

Purely appearance, I said to myself, drawing near. Simply the juxtaposi-
tion of two neighbouring fronds, which I have so often mistaken for it.

Sceptical even while gathering it, I could not believe my eyes. But the
evidence was undeniable, and when, much astonished but highly deliglited, I
had plucked the fern, I said to myself half-aloud, as though uttering a chal-
lenge, “ Well, I only w’-ant now to find the Cfr/— I had not finished my
sentence when my gaze, leaving the high wall on the right where it was still
mechanically searching, fell below the footpath on the left, at the foot of the
buttress, on a poor sickly plant of Ceterai^i Officinarum (Common Scale-Fern
or Scaly Spleenwort) crowded into the midst of the Aspimium (Spleenworts)
as if dejected at finding itself in this damp shady corner instead of a crevice
in a dry and sunny wall, which is the usual abode of this species.

And this plant, which ordinarily I slioukl never have dreamed of seeking in
such a spot, this fern of quite simple venation, edges very slightly divided, and
under surfaces all scaly, in fact with an appearance so opposed to the idea of
partition that (never having come across a specimen either in my youthful re-
searches, in the splendid collections of the Museum, or in any herbal or rare
book) I had concluded it to be non-cxistent—an impossible anomaly— it was, I
say, a frond of this fern that appeared before me to-day at my bidding, as in
Perraiilt’s stories, as clearly bipartite as the Asplcnium close by had been.

Being at once led on, and covetously pushing my reasoning straight to the
principal conclusion of my old observations on the somewhat epidemic and at
the same time local character of these freaks of nature. I argued: “ff I have
found one, and even two bifurcated fronds, certainly the third is not far to
seek.” And in less time than it had taken to announce this decision, without
any hesitation, amongst all the attractive groups of fern, I distinguished im-
mediately one frond of maidenhair showing two clearly-marked points.

I should never have made up my mind to put this incident in writing, at the
risk of occasioning the reader’s sceptical smile, if the recurrence of the same
adventure twice in the course of this same year had not confirmed the reality
and demonstrated the importance of the psycliological problem.

On the 8th August 1893, Lausanne (Switzerland) I had just accompanied
some friends returning to the country, whose gay conversation was anything
rather than botanical, and the last good-byes were hardly said, when all at
once, as I walked along the path we had taken a minute or two earlier, there
shot into my head, without rhyme or reason, the idea of a divided maidenhair,
and immediately I put my hand on a frond, then further on on a second, and
again on another, always making my choice at once without groping in the
long green mantle of the great wall. Afterwards I in vain retraced my steps
to explore conscientiously, with attention, and at length, the fifty yards of
pathway; there was nothing more, or I could see no more.

Ten days later I was visiting near Chambdry with a gay and numerous
party the celebrated country house Charmettes, still alive with memories of
Jean* Jacques Rousseau. As I crossed the threshold, the thanks of the care-
taker still in my ears, and before my eyes the pictures of the Confessions,^ I
instinctively felt my gaze drawn towards the little wall of the terrace, where,

819A] TO CHAPTER VIII 413

at the first glance amongst several stunted tufts, which were afterwards to
furnish me with several similar specimens, I discovered an extremely curious
plant of maidenhair, such as I did not yet possess, with fronds not merely
bifurcated, but really ramified;

Was it this lime a reminiscence of “ Lettres sur la botanique which had
given the suggestion? Was it not, as well as the time before, simply an echo
at a relatively shorter distance of the exciting experience in the month of
May? I do not think so, for with regard to the latter nothing of the sort
could be argued, and it seems, on the contrary, that it was precisely the
absence of all appreciable cause, the apparently complete spontaneity of the
first vision, to which was due the intensity of the second— a real second sight
^hich leads infallibly straight to the mark. That mark is evidently pre-
existent, of a real kind, and perhaps— one might defend this view!— is
itself by its simple presence, and by a sort of self-discharge at a distance,
the unsuspected and unpcrceived cause of the sudden internal revival of a
similar image, stored-up long ago ; — the spontaneous exteriorisation of which,
and the placing of it in coincidence with the corresponding object, would
constitute precisely the fact of the discovery— that is to say, simply the proof of
the existence— of that object. Whatever may be the cause, it seems certain
that only the abruptness, the suddenness of the cerebral awakening is capable
of giving momentarily to the sensorial faculties that acuteness in some sort
prophetic, which automatically attracts the material object of the mental
evocation, not out of nothing, as a superstitious mind might believe, but simply
out of the relative obscurity in which it would have remained uiuler other
circumstances.

No normal tension of the mind, no effort of will, no abilities exercised at
their best could attain to the results of these rapid moments of temporary
hyper-stimulation. Never, except on the tlirec occasions I have recorded,
have I been able to find the abnormal AspUnium^ still less the abnormal
Ceterach^ although every year, sooner or later, thousands of specimens have
passed before my eyes, amongst which I have often tried on solitary walks
in the most varied localities, with all the concentration of attention of which
I am capable, and the fullest use of a faculty of discovery developed by old
naturalistic habit, to discover the rare object, the eternal ambition of the
collector. I often found other things, but never that. . . .

Adrien Guebhakd.

[In answer to the following question by the Editor of the Annates^ As to
the fact of finding three [abnormal ferns] in a small space, is it possible
that this monstrosity may be determined by certain local causes in such a
manner that in a very limited area many may occur, whilst for several hundreds
of yards not one may be met with ? [Professor Guebhard replied ;]

I can reply at once “Yes,” for such was exactly the conclusion I came
to on my first study of this subject, confirmed by my last find at Contes-
les-Pins,

These abnormal growths arc almost always in little groups, forming wel*
defined islands, as it were, in the mid.st of normal plants, proving the external,
local, and non-individual character of the original causal lesion, which •might
be due, as I think, to some micro-organism, either vegetable or animal, a
parasite fungoid or gnawing insect. . . .

414

APPENDICES

821 A. In the following case^ as in that of Mr. C. W. Moses, quoted
in the text, some subliminal sense of smell may be conjectured. It is
taken from the Pioceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 421.

23 St. Andrew’s Drive, Pollokshields, Glasgow,
March 311/, 1893.

Fifteen or sixteen years have elapsed since I had the following clairvoyant
experience, but at the time I was much struck by it, and described it minutely
to several of my friends, so that I feel sure I can remember the facts accurately.
The circumstances were most prosaic, and 1 a matter-of-fact individual, with
little interest and less faith in psychical phenomena. 1 was about eighteen
years of age, at home for my winter holiday, but taking no interest in household
matters, and 1 question whether on that particular evening I knew that it had
been the washing-day.

I had gone upstairs to look for a mis.sing knitting needle, and was returning
to the parlour wondering whether I had dropped it there, when suddenly I was
arrested by a strange feeling, and saw before me a vision of flames, and felt
irresistibly impelled to go through a door at the end of the passage and down
some steps into the kitchen. There all was quiet, and I came partially out of
the trance-like state, and found myself thinking, “Why am I here.^ I’ll go
upstairs.” But again 1 saw the Are, and felt I must go into the adjoining
laundry. On opening the door, I was in no way surprised to see just such a
scene as had during the preceding moments been distinctly before my mental
vision. A jointed gas bracket had just fallen on to a dry heap of sheets and
towels, which were blazing almo.st to the ceiling. With a little difficulty I
extinguished the flames, and went to tell the rest of the household what had
occurred. 1 remember I had a strange feeling in my head, as if 1 had just
awakened out of an unnatural state.

No other person was near at the time, the washerwoman having gone home,
and the servants being upstairs. Nor could I even unconsciously have smelled
burning, as two doors were closed between, and the gas-pipe had evidently
fallen only a few moments before I entered, or the flames would have .spread
further. The laundry was situated just under a wooden staircase in the middle
of a very dry house, so if the fire had been undiscovered for even a few minutes
the consequences must have been disastrous to the house.

Several members of the family remember the occurrence, and I have still an
old servant of the family who distinctly remembers it. I have never had any
recurrence of such a phenomenon, and was at the time much surprised that I
should have been the subject of an experience so strange and so real.

M. H. Gray.

The gentleman who sends this case writes that he has received orally
the confirmatory testimony of Jessie, the old servant, and encloses the cor-
roborative statement of Mrs. Elizabeth White, stepmother of the percipient.

Mrs. Elizabeth White does not remember that she was told at the time
of the fire part of the vision. She writes : —

t

My daughter, at home from school, not naturally domesticated, seldom went
near the kitchen, which was shut off from the hall by a swing-door. On the
night above mentioned she came into the parlour looking so pale and agitated-^

825A] TO CHAPTER VIII 415

being naturally nervous— that I at once asked what was the matter, and when
she could speak she said, ** Mamma, it is a wonder the house was not on fire,’*
and then told of having the strong impression that she must go down to the
laundry,' that there was fire. She had to go through two closed doors to get
there, and was not aware that no one was in the laundry at the time. Her
promptitude in stamping out the fire of the burning sheets no doubt saved the
house, and accounted for her pallid look on returning to the parlour. This
occurred about fifteen years ago. Elizabeth White.

Norwood, Thirm.

825 A. From Phantasms of the Livings vol. i. p. 285.

Cathedral Yard, Winchester, 31 j/, 1884.

I respectfully beg to offer you a short statement of my experience on a
subject which 1 do not understand. Let me premise that I am not a scholar,
as 1 left school when twelve years of age in 1827, and I therefore hope you will
forgive all sins against composition and grammar. I am a working foreman of
masons at Winchester Cathedral, and h.ive been for the last nine years a
resident in this city. I am a native of Edinburgh.

It is now more than thirty years ago that I was living in London, very near
where the (Jreat Western Railway now stands, but which was not then built.
J was working in the Regent’s Park for Messrs. Movvlem, Burt, & Freeman,
who at that time had the Covernment contract for three years for the masons’
work of the capital, and who yet carry on a mighty business at Millbank,
Westminster. I think it was GloucesteV Gate, if I mistake not. At all events,
it wa.s that gate of Regent’s Park to the eastward of the Zoological Gardens, at
the north-east corner of the park. The distance from my home was too great
for me to get home to meals, so I carried my food with me, and therefore had
no call to leave the work all day. On a certain day, however, I suddenly felt
an intense desire to go home, but as I had no business there I tried to suppress
il,— but it was not possible to do so. Every minute the desire to go home
increased. It was ten in tlic morning, and 1 could not think of anything to
call me away from the work at such a time. I got fidgety and uneasy, and felt
as if I must go, even at the risk of being ridiculed by my wife, as I could give
no reason why I should leave my work and lose 6d. an hour for nonsense.
However, I could not stay, and I set off for home under an impulse which I
could not resist.

When I reached my own door and knocked, the door was opened by
my wife’s sister, a married woman, who lived a few streets off. She looked
surprised, and said, “Why, Skirving, how did you know?” “ Know what?”
1 said. “ Why, about Mary Ann.” I said, “ I don’t know anything about
Mary Ann” (ray wife). “Then what brought you home at present?” I
said, “ 1 can hardly tell you. I seemed to want to come home. But what
is wrong ? ” I asked. She told me that my wife had been run over by a cab
and been most seriously injured about an hour ago, and she had called for
me ever since, but was now in fits, and had several in succession. I went
upstairs, and though very ill she recognised me, and stretched forth her
arms and took me round the neck and pulled my head down into her boSom.
The fits passed away directly, and my presence seemed to tranquillise her,
so that she got into sleep, and did well. Her sister told me that she had

APPENDICES

416

[830 A

uttered the most piteous cries for me to come to her, althougli there was not
the least likelihood of my coming. This short narrative has only one merit *
it is strictly true. Alexander Skirving.

In answer to the question whether the time of the accident corre-
sponded with the time when he felt a desire to go home, Mr. Skirving
says : —

I asked my wife’s sister what time the accident occurred, and she said
♦‘An hour and a half ago”— that is, from the time I came home. Now, that
was exactly coincident with the time I wanted to leave work. It took me an
hour to walk home ; and I was quite half-an-hour struggling in my mind to
overcome the wish to leave work before I did so.

[He adds :] You ask me if I ever had a similar impression on any other
occasion. I never had. It was quite a single and unique experience.

Mr. Skirving’s wife is dead. His sister-in-law, Mrs. Vye, is in New
Zealand. Her husband, writing from Otago on July xst, 1885, says thiU
she cannot now give particulars of the occurrence, though she remembeis
the accident very well,

830 A. From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. pp. 226-31. In this
case, anagrams were written automatically by Mr. A., who describes his
experience as follows : —

Clelia, or Unxonscious Cerebration.

The experiment was made Easter 1883, upon one clay, and, after an interval
of a week, continued upon three consecutive days; upon four days in a!!.
Upon the first day I became seriously interested ; on the second puzzled ; on
the third I seemed to be entering upon entirely novel experiences, half awful
and half romantic; upon the fourth the sublime ended very painfully in the
ridiculous.

First Day.

Q. T. Upon what conditions may I learn from the unseen ?

My hand immediately moved, though not to a very .satisfying issue. But,
as my expectation of the answer had been that the condition was a strict
adherence to the absolute rule of right, holiness in short, 1 took this answer to
be at any rate consistent with my expectation, and continued :

Q. 2. What is it that 7 iow 7 noves my pen ? A. 2. Religion. Q. 3. What
moves my pen to write that answer? A. 3. Conscience. Q. 4. What is
religion? A. 4. Worship.

Here arose a difficulty. Although I did not expect either of these three
answers, yet when the first few letters had been Written I expected the remain-
der of the w'ord. This might vitiate the result. ... As if to meet the diffi-
culty, ... my next question received a .singular reply.

Q. 5. Worship of what? A. 5. wbwbwbwbwb Q. 6. What is the

meaning of wb? A. 6. Win, buy. Q. 7. What? A. 7. Know(ledge).

3 jjere I knew the letters which were to follow, and the pen made a sudden
jerk, as if it were useless to continue.

Q. 8. How?

Here I was referred to the first aaswer. . . .

830 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 417

Second Day.

Q. I. What is man? (*>. What is the nature of his being?) A. i. Flise.

My pen was at first very violently agitated, which had not been the case
upon the first day. It was quite a minute before it wrote as above. Upon the
analogy of wb^ I proceeded .

Q. 2. What docs F stand for ? A. 2. Fesi. Q. 3 . 1 ? A. 3. le. Q. 4. i ? A. 4.

i V y. Q- 5- s? A. 5. sir. Q. 6. e? A. 6. eye. Fesi le ivy sir eye.

"q. 7. Is this an anagram ? A. 7. Yes. Q. 8. How many words in the
answer? A. 8. Four.

I tried for a few minutes to solve it without success. Not caring to spend
much time in trying to solve what might have no solution, I gave it up.

Third Day.

Q. I. (rep.) What is man? A. i. Tefi Has! Ksble Lies.

This answer was written right off.

Q. 2. Is this an anagram? A. 2. Yes. Q. 3. How many words in the

answer ? A. 3. V (/.t*., five). Q. 4. What is the first word? A. 4. See. Q. 5.

What is the second word ? A. 5. Eccece . Q. 6. See ? Must I interpret

it myself? A. 6. Try.

Presently I got out, “ Life is the less able.” Next I tried the anagram given
upon the previous day, and at la.st obtained, “Every life is yes.” But my pen
signified that it preferred the following order of words, “ Every life yes is.” . . .

I do not know whether any other interpretations can be given to the letters.
But these fulfil the requirements as to the number of words ; and the action of
the pen, as.sisting in the process of interpretation, pointing to the letters,
accepting these and rejecting those combinations, left no doubt in my mind
that I had hit the meaning.

But now I was so astoni.shed at the apparently independent will and in-
tellect manifested in forming the above anagrams that, for the nonce, I became
a complete convert to Spiritualism ; and it was not without something of awe,
that 1 put : —

Q. 7. Who art thou ? A. 7. Clelia / .' Q. 8. Thou art a woman ? A. 8. Yes.
Q. 9. Hast thou ever lived upon the earth? A. 9. No. Q. 10. Wilt thou?
A. 10. Yes. Q. II. When? A. ii. Six years. Q. 12. Wherefore do.st thou
speak with me ? A. 12. E if Clelia e 1 .

It has been already said that when I experimented I had a certain fever of
speculative pessimism upon me. It was, therefore, with increasing excitement
that I perceived as an interpretation, “ 1 Clelia feel.” But upon my asking
whether this was right, “ Clelia ” wrote again thus : E if Clelia e 1 . 20.

Q. 13. Is 20 your age? A. 13. cc . (She was eternal.) Q. 14. Then 20
what? A. 14. Words. . . .

Fourth Day.

I began my questioning in the same exalted mood, but, to my surprise, did
not get the same answer.

Q. I. Wherefore dost thou speak with me ? A. i. [Wavy line. Repetition
and emphasis : Wherefore dost thou speak with .?]

However, I thought this “ a solemn and piercing rejoinder,” and proce<?ded
to consider my motives, and purify them from all earthlv and unspiritual alloy.
Then—

Q. 2. Wherefore dost thou answer me ? A. 2. [Wavy line. Wherefore dost

VOL. IT. 2 I)

4i8

APPENDICES

thou answer mef\ Q. 3. Do I answer myself? A. 3, Yes. Q. 4. Is Clelia
here? A. 4. No. Q. 5. Who is it, then, now here? A. 5. Nobody. Q. (5^
Does Clelia exist? A. 6. No. Q. 7. With whom did I speak yesterday?
A. 7. No one. Q. 8. Why didst thou lie? A. 8. [Wavy line. Why didst thou
lie?] Q. 9. Do souls exist in another world? A. 9. m b. Q. 10. What does
m b mean? A. 10. May be. Q. ii. What was that last answer of yesterday
again? A. ii. Eif Clelia o el, I feel no Clelia; or, the original may
have been “I Clelia flee.” And the 20 meant no^ negativing my inter-
pretation.

My pen now became altogether wild, .sometimes affirming and sometimes
denying the existence of Clelia. . . . Almost the last anagram I received was ;
Wvfs yoitet — testify, vow. . . .

Note . — I simply took a pen into my hand. Since, I have tried with the
planchette, but without any success.

I have never known any one named Clelia.

I have not been in the habit of writing anagrams, though I have done so in
boyhood.

To the anagrams cited above two others should be added, which Mr.
A. obtained at about the same time. These were ieb iotf ogf wU (I go,
vow belief), and neb 16 vbliyev 86 e earf ee (Believe by fear even ! 1866).
This last was an anstver to the question, “How shall I believe?” and
seems quite to negative the hypothesis that the anagrams were mere
chance combinations of letters, which happened to be susceptible of
arrangement in sentences. It should be mentioned, however, that there
was an i too much in one of the anagrams previously cited.

832 A. From the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. 216-24.

This is a case typical at least in its main features, and specially suit-
able for record on account of the care with which the phenomena were
noted down as they occurred. The case was sent to us by Mr. F. C. S.
Schiller, now Fellow of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, and I have myself
been present at one of the experiments where Mr. F. C. S. Schiller and
his brother, Mr. F. N. Schiller, of St. John’s College, Cambridge, obtained
some of the old French writing. Some experiments in telepathy and
clairvoyance were also tried, but with no great success, and the description
of these is omitted here.

In the following account it must not be supposed that in speaking of the
“spirits” of planchette under their soi-disant names, I intend to endorse the
Spiritualist explanation, any more than I consider the reproductions of the
“ mediums’” latent knowledge to be conclusive in favour of any form of “un-
conscious-self ” theory.

The experiments in question were conducted during a great part of the Long
Vacation, with my brother, whom I will call F., and my sister L., as “mediums,
writing conjointly at first, but afterwards separately. Of course, there could
thusjbe no doubt as to the good faith of the “ mediums,” even if the course
of the experiments had not afforded convincing proof that the phenomena were
independent of their conscious mind. There appeared at different times no less
than nine “spirits,” of whom four wrote exclusively with F. and one mainly }

TO CHAPTER VIII

419

832 A]

another freely with cither or both but chiefly with L., and three exclusively
with L. or with F.and L. conjointly. Theyall wrote with a more or less distinc-
tive style of their own, and, as far as I could judge, there was not any marked
difference of style when the same spirit wrote with different mediums. Nor,
on the other hand, was there sufficient evidence to justify the assertion that the
style was so unmistakably similar that it must have proceeded from the same
intelligence. But although the evidence was not conclusive in establishing the
identity of the various “ spirit personages, there could be no doubt of their
complete independence of the mediums* conscious will. Both F. and L. were
at first entirely ignorant of what planchette was writing, and F. remained so to
the end, nor did the occupations of his conscious self appear in the least to
affect the progress of the writing. I have seen planchette write in the same
slow and deliberate way both while he was telling an amusing anecdote in
an animated way and while he vras absorbed in an interesting novel ; and fre-
(juently whole series of questions would be asked and answered without his
knowing what had been written or thinking that anything else than unmeaning
scrawls had been produced.

In L.’s case it is true that after some time she came to know what letters
were being formed and was able to interpret the movements of her hand. This,
of course, made it difficult to avoid, at times, a certain half-conscious influence
on the writing, and makes it necessary to allow for the personal equation. But
it is clear that this influence must tend to harmonise the answers of planchette
with the opinions and will of the medium, and as a matter of fact I observed
frequent cases, especially with L., of a conflict between her will and opinions
and those of planchette. ...

The spirit of a “ careless rhymer,” after writing verses in English, French,
and German, professed its ability to do so in the classical languages. And
as F. said he had never read the Iliads we asked the rhymer for a quotation.
This he was at first unable to do, but, some hours after, he, unasked, produced
the following : “ Eratimoi kekaloseiai ” and “ Kouridioii potheoumenos posin.”
These extraordinary tags were found to be derived from the fifth book of the
Iliad (421, 4 H)» represent ^ /Sd ri fwi K€xo\<o<Ttiu and Kovpihiov noOtovaa

TToaip. F. then remembered that he had read this very book, and this alone, a
long time ago. This was certainly the incident pointing most directly at uncon-
scious cerebration, and may, perhaps, help to explain the occurrence of an
entirely unknown language, namely Hindustani. A “ spirit ” gave his name as
“ Lokenadrath,” and wrote in an extraordinary Oriental style, rather resembling
some of Marion Crawford's rhapsodies. On introducing the words “Allah il
Allah,” he was asked whether he was a Mohammedan. “ Hindi apkahai.” I
have since been informed ^ that [“ apkahai ” means] “ I am yours,” “ At your
service,” and that “ Lokenadrath ” should he “ Lokendranath,” and means “lord
of princes ” ; and one or two other fragments of Hindustani were similarly
inaccurate.* Now, as F. left India as a baby of eight months, and has never
since, to the best of my belief, heard any Hindustani spoken, this is surely a
most curious case of unconscious memory, if such it was. . . .

^ On the authority of (i) an Anglo-Indian lady ; (2) aBalliol Brahmin of Bombay.
[The whole phrase means “ A Hindu is at your service.” The Oriental rhapsodies were
found to be mainly centoes of Mr. Isaacs, worked together so as to make sense.],

* I have now found out (December 18S6) that Lokenadrath’s ‘description of his
nationality is not as totally unintelligible as I had hitherto thought it. He called him-
self a “ Jude poerano/* and I have been told that ** poerano” is Romany for^/^jy.

420 APPENDICES [832a

Of the nine “ spirits,” six wrote only in English, and several of them failed
ignominiously with all other languages. The Hindustani of ** Lokenadrath I
have already mentioned. “ Irktomar,” the French Positivist, gave us specimens
of English, French, and Latin. Lastly, the poet “ Closcar ” rhymed in English,
French and German, Latin and Greek, and even sometimes wrote the last of
these with Greek letters. But with this exception, planchette never wrote any
German, though both the mediums are perfectly familiar with it, and in their
childhood probably knew it far better than English. If, then, these phenomena
are a dream-like recrudescence of long-forgotten thouglits, this absence of Gcr
man seems to require some explanation.^ As regards the mode of writing, wo
were unable to distinguish any differences of handwriting between the various
“ spirits,” except that one of F.’s wrote from right to left, mirror-writing, whether
or no the left hand was used. . . .

(Signed) F. C. S. Schiller.

Balliol College. Oxford, October , i8S6.

Appendix.

Since writing the preceding paper the experiments have been continued w'ivh
F., and I will give a short sketch of the results subsequently obtained. The
first thing to be noted is that F.^s power of writing seems to have diminished
sensibly, so that whereas he would formerly write on three out of every four
occasions he can now' only do so about once out of every three. . . .
An interesting experiment was tried of writing with two planchettes, V.
having one hand on each. I suggested this in order to elucidate the con-
nection betw’cen left-hand writing and “ mirror-writing,” and fully expected that
the two hands would WTite the same communications. To my astonishment,
how'ever, the communications, though written simultaneously, were different
and proceeded from different “ spirits.” I regard this as conclusive proof th.ii
the phenomena have nothing to do witlj the medium\s con.sciousness, for, as
every' one can easily experience for himself, it is quite impossible, at least with-
out long practice, to write two different words at the same time.

Whenever F. wTote with two planchettes, the left hand wrote mirror-writing,
which w'as often very hard to decipher, but Ave did not observe anything like a
fixed rule in this respect on other occasions. For though planchette generally
wrote in the ordinary way even when the left hand was used, it sometimes pro-
duced mirror- writing with the right hand also. We have also had some in-
structive experiments in what I may call conjoint writing. I must begin by
saying that ordinarily I am quite unable to make planchette move at all. But
one night I put my hand also on, after F. had failed, as on several preceding
days, to make it write. Planchette soon began to move and to write intelligibly.
I repeatedly took my hand off and the writing slopped at once. Similarly,
whenever F. took his hand off, the writing also ceased, except that on one occa-
sion, when he did so without my knowledge, it appears to have written two or
three letters before stopping. I am inclined, therefore, to regard the pheno-
menon of conjoint writing, whatever may be its explanation, as genuine, t.c-
that the second operator really contributes to the result.

passing from the method to the matter of the communications, I should note
that “ Heliod ” has shown a knowledge of German and alluded to Goethe s

1 Since this was written " Heliod ” has shown a knowledge of German and Latin.

TO CHAPTER VIII

832 A]

421

Ewig Wtihliche^ but that the bulk of the communications were in French and
produced by “ Irktomar.*’

In addition to some dialectical variations which appear to be Provencal
(eg. Irktomar n*a pas loii terns, Pour vous faire des coumplimens), he produced
an extraordinary jargon which he called “ Romaunce and ascribed to the time
of “ Roland ” and of “ Charlemagne.”

Afterwards it was found to be old Norman French, and mostly quoted from
the Chanson de Roland of the twelfth century, as will appear from the following
comparison : —

“Chanson de Roland.”

1. Carles li reis, nostrc emperere
magnes.

Set anz tuz pleins ad estet en
Espaigne. (C. de R. 1-2.)

2. Ne reverrunt lor mires ne lor
fannies,

Ne cels de France ki as porz les
atendent. (C. de R. 1402-3.) ^

3. Jo vus ai mult servit. (C. de
R, 3492.)

4. l^asset li jurz si turnet h la
vespree. (C. de R. 3560.)

Planchette.

(isttimc.) Car[l]es li reis magnes
empere [re] set anz ut plein estet en
Espaigne.

(2nfl time.) Carles li reis magnes
empere [re] set anz lutans estet en
Espaigne.

2 . N e reverrunt ne percs ne parenz
ne Charlemagne^ ki as porz les atent.

3. Jo vous ai mult hien servit.

4. S'enfuit li jourz de bleneut la
vesprdc.

F, does not know old French at all, and cannot remember to have ever read
or heard any, but, being strongly inclined towards the unconscious self theory,
suggests that the passages produced may have been quoted in some magazine
article, and thus met his cye.^ In any case, however, these quotations throw
an interesting light on the mode of thinking of the intelligence that dictated
them. It will be seen that they are evidently quoted from memory, and by no
means accurate. And in No. i the first version was nearer the original than
the second ; but, as quoted, the w’ords “ ut plein ” made no sense, and hence
“ lutans,” a word which does not, I believe, occur in the Roland, was substi-
tuted for them to complete the sense. That is to say, the second version is no
mere reproduction of an impression in the memory, but has been subjected to
^ process of emendation which by us would be held to imply the action of
conscious thought. Yet during this time F.'s conscious mind was entirely void
of any knowledge of the dialect, and a fortiori could not possibly have corrected
what appeared to him quite meaningless. . . .

Lastly, planchette volunteered the information that “ Caries fu carles il

caux ’ (Charles was Charles the Ilalcl), which is certainly wrong, and as cer-
tainly could not be derived from the Roland or any similar poem, while it is
nevertheless linguistically correct. It must, therefore, I think, be admitted
that the intelligence which produced it must have possessed a considerable

^ Two lines have since been found which arc almost identical with the planchette
writing, viz.;— “ Ne reverrunt lor p6res ne lor parenz, Ne Charle Magne ki as porz les
"tent.” (C.dcR. 1420-21.)

* Neither had Mr. F, C. S. Schiller read any old French.

422 APPENDICES [832 B

amount of what we should call conscious knowledge of old French, and such a$
F. certainly does not possess.

To sum up then 1 will only say that the matter of the various communica-
tions (i.^. excluding the card and alphabet experiments, &c.) does not seem to
me to afford absolute proof that the knowledge displayed could not possibly
have been latent in the writer’s mind, while at the same time this is extremely
improbable in a large number of cases. Moreover, both the matter and the
manner of the communications display powers beyond any at present recog-
nised as normal. (Signed) F. C. S. Schiller.

January zznd^ 1887.

832 B. Other cases of imaginary personalities are to be found in
the accounts of possession which have come down to us from the
“Ages of Faith.” I take as an example the autobiography of Soeur
Jeanne des Anges.' Sceur Jeanne was the Superior of the Ursulines
of Loudun, about 1630-1665, and was one of the most ardent
admirers, afterwards one of the fiercest enemies, of the unfortunate
Urbain Grandier, who was burnt alive in 1634, on the charge of having
bewitched the Ursuline nuns. Her manuscript autobiography has fallen
into the hands of editors of a type which she can hardly have fore-
seen, Drs. Gabriel Legu6 and Gilles de la Tourette. These physicians
have carefully analysed the symptoms which she narrates, and have shown
that her affliction may be classed as a well-developed case of hystero-
epilepsy, of the kind now so often described by the Salpetrifere school.

Our present interest lies in the personalities which she gives to the
demons whom she supposes to possess her, — who are in reality mere
objectifications of different series of hysterical attacks.

Just as the automatic writer has a group of soi-disant guides or “ con-
trols,” who take it in turns to direct his hand, and each of whom main-
tains a specific character of his own, — even so does Sceur Jeanne describe
Asmocleus, Leviathan, Behemoth, Isacaaron, Balaam, Gresil, and Aman,
whose diverse presence she apparently recognised mainly by the special
train of undesirable emotion which each inspired, but partly also by their
words and writings. A facsimile of a letter of Asmodeus is given by the
learned editors, but the writing does not perceptibly differ froni Sceur
Jeanne’s own script.

And Dr. Gilles de la Tourette informs me that there are letters, also in
Soeur Jeanne’s own handwriting, which profess to come from the other
demons too — such letters being habitually written by the Sister during the
process of exorcism, which usually brought on a hystero-epileptic attack.
The substance of the letters reflected, no doubt, the foulness and malig-
nity of the Sister’s own mind ; but, nevertheless, the modern hysteriolo-
gistsVho have discussed the whole affair do not suppose that the Sister
consciously simulated the writing or speech of devils through herself. Her

* Bibliothique DiaMiqm{Co\itci\Qiti Bourneville). Paris : Aux Bureaux du Progrts
Midkdl, 1886.

TO CHAPTER VIII

843 A]

423

diabolic script and utterance were probably (though not certainly) purely

automatic,^

It must be remembered that Soeur Jeanne was perfectly sane during
these years of possession, sane at least in the sense that she governed her
community, plotted savagely against her enemies, and made religious
capital out of her real or fictitious stigmata ; but that, nevertheless, there
is no doubt whatever that she believed in these possessing demons, who,
as I say, were in reality the incarnations of hystero-epileptic attacks.

Now, I certainly do not mean to trace any moral analogy between
these distressing products of Soeur Jeanne's imagination and the “ guides ”
of the planchette-writer — which, as I have said, so far as I have seen, are
almost always harmless, generally even sermonising entities. So far as ray
experience goes I do not see that planchette-writlng has any connec-
tion with disease of mind or body, or any tendency to evil of any kind,
except in a few cases of great credulity on the writer's part, a credulity
which — it is to be hoped — is now becoming somewhat less common.
Rather is Soeur Jeanne's case parallel in another way; as showing the
tendency of the individuality to split itself up into various co-ordinate and
alternating trains of personality, each of which may seem for a time to be
dominant and obsessing, while yet the habitual sense of the ordinary self
may persist through all these invasions.

843 A. Some early experiments in thought-transference through table-
tilting were published by Professor Richet in the Revue Philosophique
for December 1884. A critical discussion of these by Gurney appeared
in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. pp. 239-64, and a briefer report in
Phantasms of the Livings vol. i. pp. 72-81. I quote from the latter
a description of the method used ; —

The place of a planchette was taken by a table, and M. Richet prefaces his
account by a succinct statement of the orthodox view as to “ table-turning."
Rejecting altogether the three theories which attribute the phenomena to
wholesale fraud, to spirits, and to an unknown force, he regards the gyrations
and oscillations of stance-tables as due wholly to the unconscious muscular
contractions of the sitters. It thus occurred to him to employ a table as an
indicator of the movements that might be produced by “mental suggestion."
The plan of the experiments was as follows. Three persons (C, D, and E),
took their seats in a semi-circle, at a little table on which their hands rested.
One of these three was always a “ medium ” — a term used by M. Richet to
denote a person liable to exhibit intelligent movements in which consciousness
and will apparently take no part. Attached to the table was a simple electrical
apparatus, the effect of which was to ring a bell whenever the current was
broken by the tilting of the table. Behind the backs of the sitters at the table
was another tabic, on which was a large alphabet, completely screened from
the view of C, D, and E, even had they turned round and endeavoured ^to see
*t. In front of this alphabet sat A, whose duty was to follow the letters slowly
and steadily with a pen, returning at once to the beginning as soon as he

^ See Dr. Legu^'s Urhain Grandier et Us PossedUs de Loudun. Paris : Baschet.

424 APPENDICES [843 A

arrived at the end. At A’s side sat B, with a note-book ; his duty was to write
down the letter at which A's pen happened to be pointing whenever the bell
rang. This happened whenever one of the sitters at the table made the simple
movement necessary to tilt it. Under these conditions, A and B are apparently
mere automata. C, D, and £ are little more, being unconscious of tilting the
table, which appears to them to tilt itself; but even if they tilted it consciously,
and with a conscious desire to dictate words, they have no means of ascertain-
ing at what letter A's pen is pointing at any particular moment; and they
might tilt for ever without producing more than an endless series of incoherent
letters. Things being arranged thus, a sixth operator, F, stationed himself
apart both from the tilting table and from the alphabet, and concentrated his
thought on some word of his own choosing, which he had not communicated
to the others. The three sitters at the first table engaged in conversation,
sang, or told stories ; but at intervals the table tilted, the bell rang, and B
wrote down the letter which As pen was opposite to at that moment. Now,
to the astonishment of all concerned, these letters, when arranged in a scries,
turned out to produce a more or less close approximation to the word of whicli
F was thinking.

The general result— of which full details are given in the original
articles referred to — was that the amount of coincidence between the
letters of the words chosen by F and those tilted out by the table was
considerably greater than would most probably have been produced by
chance. Gurney continues ; —

[These experiments] seem to exhibit telepathic production of movements
by what is at most an idea, and not a volition, on the agent's part. This,
indeed, is a hypothesis which seems justified even by M. Richet’s less excep-
tional results. For we must remember that in a sense A is throughout more
immediately the agent than F ; it is what A’s mind contributes, not what F’s
mind contributes, that produces the tilts at the right moments.^ But this is
of course through no will of A’s; he is ignorant of the required word, and has
absolutely no opportunity of bringing his volition into play. His “agency” is
of a wholly passive sort; and his mind, as it follows the course of his pen, is a
mere conduit-pipe, whereby knowledge of a certain kind obtains access to the
“unconscious intelligence ” which evokes the tilts. If, then, the knowledge
manifests itself as impulse, can we avoid the conclusion that in this particular
mode of access — in “mental suggestion •’ or telepathy as such— -a certain
impulsive quality is involved ? . . .

But of course the relation between F and the “ medium ” plays also a
necessary part in the result; the impulse to tilt when a particular letter is
reached only takes effect when it falls ^so to speak) on ground prepared by

1 When A, in pointing, began at the beginning of the alphabet, the sense of time
might conceivably have led to an unconscious judgment as to the point arrived at. This
idea had occurred to M. Richet. It seems, however, an unnecessary multiplication of
hypotheses ; for we learn from him that in some trials A began at uncertain places, and
that under these conditions coherent words were obtained. The fact that so often the
approAnate letter was given, instead of the exact one, might seem at first sight to favour
the hypothesis of unconscious reckoning ; but it will be observed that exactly the same
approximations took place in our own experiment (Phantasms^ vol. i. pp. 77^)» where
the alphabet was in the “ medium’s ” sight.

843 B] TO CHAPTER VIII 425

** mental suggestion” from F— on a mind in which the word imagined by
him has obtained an unconscious lodgment. The unconscious part of the
percipient’s mind would thus be the scene of confluence of two separate tele-
pathic streams, which proceed to combine there in an intelligent way — one
proceeding from F’s mind, which produces, unconscious knowledge of the word,
and the other proceeding from A’s mind, which produces an unconscious image
of the successive letters. Another possible supposition would be that F’s
iliou.L^ht affects, not the “ medium,” but A ; or conversely, that A’s thought
atfects, not the “ medium,” but F that A obtains unconscious knowledge
of the word, or that F* obtains unconscious knowledge of the letter, and
so is enabled to communicate an impulse to the “ medium ” at the right
moment. And we should then have to suppose a secret understanding be-
tween two parts of A’s or F’s mind, the part which takes account of the letters
of the alphabet, and the part which takes account of the letters of the word —
the former being conscious and the latter unconscious, or vice vcrsdy according
as A or F is the party affected.

843 B. A somewhat similar but less complex set of experiments
by Mr. G. M. Smith was given in the Journal S.P.R., vol. v. pp. 318-20,
as follows : —

Custom House, Amble, Northumberland, October i ^ tk , 1892.

I have for many years been familiar with the usual modus operandi and
results in table-tilling, but I have no sympathy with so-called Spiritualists as
such. Reccntlvi when reading Phantasms of the Livin^^ I was struck with
the experiment in table-lilting recorded there, vol. i. pp. 77-81,^ and I made
airaiigcments with a few friends to meet in my house to experiment in table-
tilting (a thing which none of them had ever seen) with the view of adding
some of the novel features of the case referred to in Phantasms of the Living,

(.)n September 9th last Mrs. Smith (my wife), three young men, and myself
sat down with the palms of our hands on a small deal table in my house. In
a few minutes the table commenced to tilt. What follows is copied from a
note written immediately after the experiment and read over to all present
at the sitting. I asked the questions, and in doing so, merely for conveni-
ence, used the language and phraseology peculiar among Spiritualists 011 such
occasions.

Q. Will the influence which is controlling this table please tilt it once
when ** No ” is meant and twice when “ Yes” is meant? A. Yes (two tilts or
raps), Q. Is it a spirit that is controlling this table? A. Yes. Q. Is it
the spirit of a friend of any one at the Uble ? A. Yes.

After a few more such questions and answers — Q. Will you please rap
(lilt) the table when the letters of the alphabet arc pointed to which spell out
your name? A. Yes.

I then asked Mrs. Smith to withdraw from the table and sit in a corner of the
room about six feet from the table, anti to take a small book with the alphabet
in it, and commencing to point at “ A ” to move slowly towards the end ana
back to “ A ” again, and so on, observing at what letters the table tilted.
Although she was visible to all at the table, yet she was so placed that n(/one
could form any idea of what letters were being pointed to. These preparations,
which only took about a minute, being finished, we then continued.

' The reference is to the experiments by Professor Richet, just quoted.

APPENDICES

426

Almost at once the table commenced to tilt at irregular short intervals, and
when it had tilted seven or eight times, I, being anxious to know whether any-
thing coherent was being spelled out, asked Mrs. Smith what were the results,
and she answered that the table had tilted at the letters H-o-w-e-y J-a. The
name of a young man a few years deceased, and known by name at any rate
to all at the table, was at once recognised, his name being James Howey. 1
then asked: Q. Is It the spirit of James Howey? A. Yes. Q. Have you
met your mother since she passed out? A. Yes. Q. Is she with you now?
A. Yes. Q. Does she wish to communicate? A. Yes. Q. With any one
at the table ? A. No. Q. With any of her family ? A. Yes. Q. With
Miss Howey ? A. Yes. Q. Will she rap (tilt) the table when the letters of
the alphabet are pointed to which spell out her communication ? A. Yes.
The table commenced to tilt again as before, but it was not interrupted, and
when it had stopped I asked what had been spelled out, and Mrs. Smith
replied : ** Good and faithful had been spelled. Q. Do you mean tliat Miss
Howey is good and faithful? A. No. Q- I^o you mean it as an injunction
to her to be good and faithful ? A. Yes. Q. Do you wish to communicate
further ? A. Yes. Proceeding as before, the table at once commenced tilting,
and when it had ceased Mrs. Smith said it had spelled out : “ Mind father, and
be sure of that.'* The experiment here ended, and the striking aptness of the
latter communications was much spoken of by the sitters.

I should not have thought this worth writing out, hut for the fact that Mrs.
Smith, while pointing out the letters, sat away from the table and in such a
position that no one at the tabic could form the faintest idea of what letters
were being pointed to. These circumstances remove the case from the ordinary
run of table-tilting experiments.

Of course I was aware of the imperfection of the arrangements, but they
could not be improved at the time, and I at once arranged for a further and
more testing experiment for the evening of September 13th. For this occasion
I secured the assistance of two more young men, one of whom I intended
should write down the letters rapped or tilted out, and the other to witness that
such was done correctly. 1 also arranged for the sitters at the table to be in the
room, and those with the alphabet just outside the door (which was almost shut)
of such room. But I regret to say that, though the table tilted quite briskly, and
though we made several changes of persons from the table to the alphabet,
and tried for about an hour, yet there could not be found the least trace of
coherence or intelligibility in the series of letters taken down as rapped out,
although we tried them by inversion, anagrammatically, and by substituting
neighbouring letters, as is done in the case referred to in Phantasms of the
Living. I have not further experimented iu this way.

George Main Smith.

849 A. I quote below part of Mr. Newnham's account of his experi-
ments in thought-transference through automatic writing, the whole of
which is given in the Proceedings S.P.R., vol. iii. pp. 8-23.

Extracts from Mr. Newnham*s Diary.

{t was in January iS/r that I was first led to think of making an attempt
to investigate the alleged phenomena of planchette-writing. Having procured
an instrument, I consulted carefully with my wife, as to forming a code of
conditions which we would agree to bind ourselves rigidly to observCf in case
she was found capable of writing.

TO CHAPTER VIII

427

MSA]

I copy from my note-book, the following preliminary statement and con-
ditions agreed upon, which were put down in writing before any experiment had
been made : —

« Being desirous of investigating accurately the phenomena of planchette,
myself and my wife have agreed to carry out a series of systematic experiments
in order to ascertain the conditions under which the instrument is able to work.
To this end the following rules are strictly observed : —

1. The question to be asked is written down before the planchette is set

in motion. This question, as a rule, is never known to the operator.

2. Whenever an evasive or other answer is returned, necessitating one or

more new questions to be put before a clear answer can be obtained,
the operator is not to be made aware of any of these questions, or
even of the general subject to which they allude, until the final answer
has been obtained.

3. In all cases where the operator has asked the question, or is aware of its

terms or general tenor, the question will be distinguished by pre-
fixing an asterisk, and leaving a space between it and the marginal
line. [None of these questions are quoted here.]

4. Where no operator is mentioned, my wife is always meant.

5. Where no questioner is mentioned, myself is always meant.'*

Although not provided for in writing (as our mutual bona Jides was, of

course, taken for granted), I may add that my wife always sat at a small low
table, in a low chair, leaning backwards. I sat about eight feet distant, at a
rather high table, and with my back towards her while writing down the
questions. It was absolutely impossible that any gesture, or play of features,
on my part, could have been visible or intelligible to her. As a rule, she kept
her eyes shut; but never became in the slightest degree hypnotic, or even
naturally drowsy.

Under these conditions we carried on experiments for about eight months,
and I have 309 questions and answers recorded in my note-book, spread over
this time.^ But the experiments were found very exhaustive of nerve-power,
and as my wife's health was delicate, and the fact of thought-transmission had
been abundantly proved, W'C thought it best to abandon the pursuit.

I now proceed to give a sample of some of these questions and answers.
The numbers prefixed are those in my note-book.

I may mention that the planchette began to move instantly with my wife.
The answer was often half written before I had completed the question.

^ On first finding that it would write easily, I asked three simple questions
which were known to the operator ; then three others, unknown to her, relating
to my own private concerns. All six having been instantly answered in a
manner to show complete intelligence, I proceeded to ask —

7- Write down the lowest temperature here this winter. A. S.

Now, this reply at once arrested my interest. The actual lowest tempera-
ture had been 7.6° so that 8 was the nearest whole degree ; but my wife said at
once that, if she had been asked the question, she would have written 7, ar l

8; as she had forgotten the decimal, but remembered my having said that
the temperature had been down to 7 something, ^

I simply quote this, as a good instance, at the very outset, of perfect trans-

^ The remainder of the 385 questions and answers in this book belong to a different
series, where the question was known to the operator.

428

APPENDICES

[849 A

mission of thought, coupled with a perfectly independent reply ; the answer being
correct in itself, but different from the impression on the conscious intelligenct
of both parties.

Naturally our first desire was to see if we could obtain any information
concerning the nature of the intelligence which was operating through the
planchette, and of the method by which it produced the written results. We
repeated questions on this subject again and again ; and I will copy down the
principal questions and answers in the connection.

January 2f)th. 13. Is it the operator’s brain, or some external force, that
moves the planchette ? Answer “ brain ” or “ force.” A. Will.

14. Is it the will of a living person, or of an immaterial spirit, distinct from
that person ^ Answer “ person ” or “ spirit.” A. Wife.

15. Give first the wife's Christian name; then my favourite name for her.
(This was accurately done.)

27. What is your own name ? A. Only you.

28. We are not quite sure of the meaning of the answer. Explain. A.
Wife.

Failing to get more than this, at the outset, we returned to the same thought
after question 114; when, having been closely pressed on another subject, we
received the curt reply — “ Told all 1 know.”

February 18/A. 1 17. Who are you that write.s, and has told all you know ?

A. Wife.

1 18. But does no one tell wife what to write ? If so, who? A. Spirit.

119. Whose spirit? A. Wife s brain,

120. But how does wife’s brain know [Masonic] secrets ? A. Wife’s spirit
unconsciously guides.

1 21. But how does wife's spirit know things it has never been told ? A. No
external influence.

122. But by what internal influence does it know [Masonic] secrets ? A.
You cannot know.

March \ith, 132. Who, then, makes the impressions upon her? A. Many
strange things.

133. What sort of strange things ? A. Things beyond your knowledge.

1 34. Do, then, things beyond our knowledge make impressions upon wife ?
A. Influences which no man understands or knows.

136. Arc these influences which we cannot understand external to wife ? A.
External — invisible.

137. Does a spirit, or do spirits, exercise those influences ? A. No, never
(written very large and emphatically).

135. Then from whom, or from whence, do the external influences come ?
A. Yes: you will never know.

139. What do you mean by wTiting “ yes” in the Iasi answer ? A. That I
really meant never.

March \c)th. 142. By what means are [Masonic] secrets conveyed to wife^s
brain? A. What you call mesmeric influence.

144. What do you mean by “ what you call ” ? What do you call it? A.
Electro-biology.

145. By whom, or by what, is the electro-biologic force set in motion? A.

I told you you could not know more than you did.

146. Can wife answer a question the reply to which I do not know ? A. Why
do you try to make me say what I won’t ?

TO CHAPTER VIII

849 A]

429

147. Simply because I desire knowledge. Why will not you tell ? A. Wife
could tell if some one else, with a very strong will, in the room knew.

March 26th, 179. Can you foresee the future ? A. No.

April 10///. C90. Why are you not always .... influenced by what I

think A, Wife knows sometimes what you think.

191. How does wife know it? A. When her brain is excited and has not
been much tried before.

[92. But by what means are my thoughts conveyed to her brain? A.
Electro-biology.

193. What is electro-biology ? A. No one knows,

194. But do not you know ? A. No. Wife does not know.

195. What makes you always call her “ wife ” ? A. You always think of wife.

196. But I never call her “ wife.” Why do you ? A. I am nothing with-
out wife.

200. That is no answer. Why do you call her so? A. Because she is all
a wife.

My object in quoting this large number of questions and replies has not been
merely to show the instantaneous and unfailing transmission of thought from
questioner to operator ; but, more especially, to call attention to a remarkable
cliaractcristic of the answers given. The.se answers, consistent and invariable
in th.eir tenor from first to last, tiid not correspond with the opinions or expecta-
tions of either myself or my wife. . . . For such answers as those numbered 14,
27. 137» i44i 1921 and 194, we were both of us totally unprepared; and I may
add that, so far as we were prepossessed by any opinions whatever, these replies
were distinctly opposed to such opinions. In a word, it is simply impossible that
these replies should have been either suggested or composed by the conscious
intelligence of either of us.

One isolated but very interesting experiment deserves to be recorded here.

I had a young man reading with me as a private pupil at this time. On Feb-
ruary 1 2th he returned from his vacation ; and, on being told of our experiments,
expressed his incredulity very strongly. I offered any proof that he liked to
insi.st upon, only stipulating that 1 should see the question asked. Accordingly,
iMrs. Newnham took her accustomed chair in my study, while we went out into
the hall, and shut the door behind us. He then wrote down on a piece of paper :
87. What is the Christian name of my eldest sister?

We at once returned to the study, and found the answer already waiting for
us: A. Mina.

(This name was the family abbreviation of Wilhelmina : and I should add
that it was unknown to myself.) . . ,

We soon found that my wife was perfectly unable to follow the motions of
the planchelte. Often she only touched it with a single linger; but even with
all her fingers resting on the board she never had the .slightest idea of wdiat words
were being traced out. This is important to remember, in view of the fact that
questions were often asked consecutively without her being told of
the subject that was being pursued. (Rule 2.)

It struck me that it would be a good thing to take advantage of this pecu-
larity on her part, to ask questions upon subjects that it was impossible for

to know anything about. ... I had taken a deep interest in Masonic
aichaeology, and 1 now questioned planchette on some subjects connicted
therewith.

430

APPENDICES

[849 A

February 14/A. 92. What is the English of the Great Word of the R.A. ?
(After an interruption, of which I shall speak hereafter, one great word of the
Degree, but not the one 1 meant, was written, very slowly and clearly.)

97. Is the word truly genuine, or is it a made-up one ? A. Tried to tell ;
can't.

98. By whom was the word first used ? A. Too hard work for wife.

February 18/A. 112. What is the translation of the Great Triple Word?

A. (The first syllable of the word in question was written correctly, and then
it proceeded.) The end unknown. Three languages. Greece. Egypt. Syriac.

1 1 3. What part of the word is Greek? A. Meaning unknown.

114. When was the word first invented? A. Told all I know.

1 15. Who are you that know? (Answer scrawled and illegible.)

1 16. Please repeat same answer legibly ? A. Manifestation triune person.

(Here follow questions 117-22, as above.)

March is/A. 125, 126. What are the three languages of which the Great
R.A. Word is composed ? A. Answered all I could before.

127. You said one part of the word was Greek. Which is it? A. Greek, I
think.

128. W’hich syllable do you think is Greek ? A. The last.

129. What is the English translation of it ? A. Can't explain it.

130. If the last syllable be Greek, which is Egyptian, as you said? A. I
cannot tell you more than you know.

131. But why, then, do you say that that syllable is Greek which / think
Egyptian? A. Wife can’t always receive impressions.

(Here follow 132-39, as above.)

March 26th, r66. Of what language is the first syllable of the Great Triple

R.A. Word ? A. Don’t know.

167. Yes, you do. What are the three languages of which the word is com-
posed? A. Greek, Egypt, Syriac first syllable {correctly givcn)y rest unknown.

168. Write the syllable which is Syriac. A. (First syllable correctly written.)

169. Write the syllable which is Egyptian. A. Second.

170. Can you not write the syllable itself? A. Third Greek.

174. Write down the word itself. A. (First three and last two letters were
written correctly, but four incorrect letters, partly borrowed from another word
of the same degree^ came in the middle.)

1 76. Why do you write a word of which I know nothing ? A. Wife tried
hard to tell the word, but could not quite catch it.

177. Catch it from whom ? A. Not quite sure.

1 78. Not quite sure of what ? A. I know nothing. Wife doesn’t quite know.

182. Write out the prayer used at the advancement of a Mark Master Mason.

A. Almighty Ruler of the Universe and Architect of all worlds, we beseech
Thee to accept this, our brother, whom we have this day received into our most
honourable Company of Mark Master Masons. Grant him to be a worthy
member of our brotherhood ; and may he be in his own person a perfect mirror
of all Masonic virtues. Grant that all our doings may be to Thy honour and
glory, and to the welfare of all mankind.

This prayer was written off instantaneously and very rapidly. It is a very
rems^kable production indeed. For the benefit of those who are not members
of the craft, I may say that no prayer in the slightest degree resembling it
made use of in the Ritual of any Masonic degree ; and yet it contains more

TO CHAPTER VIII

431

850 A]

than one strictly accurate technicality connected with the degree of Mark
Mason. My wife has never seen any Masonic prayers, whether in “ Carlile,”
or any other real or spurious Ritual of the Masonic Order.

Here, then, assuredly, was a formula composed by some intelligence totally
distinct from the conscious intelligence of either of the persons engaged in the

experiment.

I proceeded to inquire as follows : —

183. I do not know this prayer. Where is it to be found ? A. Old American
Ritual.

184. Where can I get one ? A. Most likely none in England.

185. Can you not write the prayer that I make use of in my own Lodge?
A. No, I don't know it.

In these la.st answers we see a new moral element introduced. There is
evasion, or subterfuge, of a more or less ingenious kind ; and totally foreign
to the whole character and natural disposition of the operator. A similar
attempt at deliberate invention, rather than plead guilty to total ignorance*
is contained in the following answers: —

May yih. 255. In what Masonic degree was the Triple Word first used?
A. Wife does not know.

256. Cannot you tell her ? A. How can wife know what no one else does ?

257. Docs no one, then, know the answer to this ? A. No one knows now.

258. What do you mean by “ now' ” ? Did any one once know? A. The
last one who knew died at least twenty years ago.

259. What was his name ? A. In America; don’t know name.

And again, May 2\st, 280. Can you write the Triple R.A. Word to-night?
A. Abracadabra.

281. Wrong word. Try again. A. Wife can’t write secret words.

2S2. Then why did you profess to write it the other day } A. I only wrote
what wife knew.

283. But if she knows it why do you not w'rite it to-night ? A. You told her.

284. What did I tell her.? A. One day when your influence over her was
very strong.

{N,B, The answer to 284 is a case of “arrested'’ reply; i.e, it is a con-
tinuation of the reply to 283, without reference to question 284 at all.)

285. Then why does she not write it now ? A. Wife can’t understand.

286. Is it my question, or the answer to it, that she can’t understand?
A. Don’t know.

2S7. What is the matter with you to-night .? A. You are tired and so is wife.
I will conclude with a very pretty instance of a mistake instantly corrected.
It was on the same evening, May loth; I had to preach on the following Whit*
Monday, on the occasion of laying a foundation stone with Masonic ceremonial,
so I asked :■ —

275. Give me a text for Whit-Monday’s sermon. A. If I go not away, the
Comforter will not conic to you.

The selection of a subject suitable for W/iitsuntide is plainly the first idea
caught by the intelligence ; so T proceeded : —

276. That will not do for my subject. I want a text for the Mondays ser-
mon. A. Let brotherly love continue.

850 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. (1893), pp. 61-64.

I had often urged thdt attempts should be made to imitate Mr. and

432 APPENDICES [860A

Mrs, Newnham's series of experiments in the transference of an unseen
question through an automatisms subliminal self to his pencil ; and I was at
length fortunate enough to find a friend — Mr, R. H. Buttemer, of Em*
manuel College, Cambridge, a graduate in honours in Natural Science —
willing to make a serious endeavour of this kind. Some perseverance was
required ; but a friend of Mr. Buttemer’s, Mr. H. T. Green, having first
been several times lightly hypnotised by Mr. Buttemer, showed during
some months unmistakable power as a percipient. I was cognisant of the
experiments throughout ; although on the only occasion on which I was
myself present Mr. Green’s mind was distracted by a theological examina-
tion which he was to pass next day, and his pencil would write little but
names of kings of Israel and Judah. The conditions were throughout good ;
the question being written down out of Mr. Green's sight, and indications
carefully avoided, in the last sitting Mr. Green had his back to all the
other persons present — urhich is, of course, the right plan ; — and that sitting
was, as will be seen, the best of all. But considering the nature of tlie
questions asked, there was, I think, little opportunity for unconscious
indications, even when some of the persons who knew the question were
within sight of Mr. Green. There was never any contact. The selection
of questions and answers given below is a nearly average sample ; — those
which are omitted being mainly questions on private affairs, where the
answers were necessarily less definite than numbers or letters^ and where
their degree of correctness would need cumbrous explanation. I'he best
answer is certainly the spelling out of John Bou — from the unseen card.

The answers here classed as irrelevant " were sometimes a reproduc-
tion of thoughts likely to be in the operator’s mind (persons like Jeroboam
and Omri frequently turning up) ; and sometimes, I think, represented im-
perfect efforts of the subliminal self to get at the unseen question. In this
and other points these experiments resemble the much more completely
successful Newnham series. There was no apparent reason for the cessation
of Mr. Green's power. He was a healthy man, but had one or two trifling
ailments during the experiments, wrhich seemed to check the faculty for
the time. Mr. Green, Mr. W., and Mr. S. are known to me ; and all, I
think, have pursued the inquiry in a scientific spirit. The frivolous and
roundabout style of the replies is very characteristic of automatic messages
in their earlier stages. I now give Mr. F»uttemer's account.

Automatic Writing Experiments with Planchette.

The following series of experiments were conducted at Cambridge, the
operator being Mr. Green, of P-minanuei College. The agents (present during
all the experiments described) were Mr. W. and Mr. Buttemer. The series of
experiments commenced on November 12th, 1892 : prior to this Mr. Green had
madeiK»ne or tw'O more or less successful attempts at automatic writing, ^it the
obvious difficulty of avoiding the chance of conscious interference where the
questions put were asked aloud had prevented the following up of these till the
suggestion, was made that the questions should be written down and concealed

TO CHAPTER VIII

433

850 A]

from the operator. Under these conditions a trial was made on the above
(late, time 2 p.m.» the questions being known only to the two agents. No one
else was present.

Q. What is number on machine ? (an automatic dice-box, none of the three
having seen the numbers on it). A. Give another.

Q. Who is ill on this staircase ? A. Kc pike pike. (A man of that name,
Pike, was ill, as all were aware ; but Mr. Green had not seen the question.)
All then (Mr. Green included) looked at the dice-box, and saw the number—
seven — on it.

Q. Why would you not answer first question ? A. Seven.

Another question was then correctly answered.

Q. What is the matter with H. T. Green? Answer referred to previous
question.

Question was put again, still without Mr. Green seeing it. A. A bad cold.
(Correct.)

Q. Why cannot (Mr. W.) write with planchette ? A. W , you mean.

There is nothing in good health. Liver is not in good condition.

Q. Whose liver is not right ? A. i. (Irrelevant.) ii. Nobody particularly.

Q. (ily Mr. Buttemer.) Where am I going this afternoon ? After waiting
some time the answer was written rapidly. A. Away, away, away.

Mr. Green knew where I was going, but did not write a more definite
answer automatically.

Eight questions were put in all, of which four were answered immediately
and correctly, and two after a sentence referring to the previous question had
l>een written. The first and third were not answered, the answer to the first
being unknown to the agents, while at the third Mr. Green's subliminal con-
sciousness appeared to seize the opportunity of showing its just-acquired know-
le<lge of the first, [When two answers are given, the operator was simply told
to write again, after the first irrelevant answer, without being shown the
que.stion ; except where otherwise stated,]

At the next sitting, on the 14th November, Mes.srs. W., S., and Buttemer
were present, while Mr. Green operated planchette. as before. Six questions
[the answers to which were known to the agents] were put in the same way,
two being answered directly and unmistakably, while one was answered after
.some irrelevant writing, two incorrectly, and the last was not answered, the
operator appearing tired.

November 20th. Agents and percipient as before. 4 p.m.

'Fhe questions were put in the same way.

Q. Who is J. O. F. M. ? (The initials being given in the question, we
wished the name to be written.) A. i. Man. Dean. (Rather illegible.) ii.
Murray. (Right. Dean of Emmanuel.)

Q* Who is G. R. S. ? (Only S. knew who was meant.) A. Not S .

(Here S. told the other agents the name — Smith.) Mr. Green wrote Sleep,”
and became drowsy. He was spoken to, to rouse him, and the question was
written.

Q. Why did you become drowsy and write “Sleep”? A. H. T. Green
(pause) cannot help himself.

Q. Why? A. He is tired, he is tired, he is tired. (Written very fast^)

January 31J/, 1893. 4 p.m. Agents as before, with the addition of Mrs. H.
and Miss B.

434 APPENDICES [851 A

Q. How many cups of tea did Miss B. have ? A. i. Cannot be ascertained,
ii. It was in all two— 2 2 2. (Correct.)

(When a second answer was waited for, care was taken that the writer
should glean no idea of the question in the interval.)

Q. What engraving is on the wall over the piano? (It was one of the
Queen soon after her marriage.) A. i. You may perceive it was so. (Ap-
parently referring to previous question.) ii. It is a girl, the daughter of a man.

Q. Who was playing the piano when the ladies came in ? A. i. The clock
hath stricken five. (The clock struck just as Mr. Green began to write.) ii.
Mr. S. (This was correct.)

Q. What was it ? A. i. The one that was asked first, ii. Something, iii.
Explain yourself more clearly.

Q. What was S. playing when we came in ? A. i. The original one of all.
ii. All I can say is “ La Cigale.” (Correct.)

Two more questions were answered correctly, and then the writer began
writing on a subject in his mind at the time, and four more questions that were
put received no direct answers.

February 18/A 8 p.m. Mrs. H., Miss B., Mr. and Miss M. present, in
addition to Mr. Green, and Messrs. S., W., and Buttemer.

Mr. Green, as usual, operated planchette, and on this occasion sat with his
back to all the other persons present.

Q. (from Mr. M.) What was I doing this afternoon? A. i. the sun

(all else illegible), ii. Enjoying the fresh air of heaven.

Q. What was Mr. Rogers doing in Cambridge? A. i. (Irrelevant, or pos*
sibly connected vaguely with the question.) ii. Ask another, but Mr. Rogers
came up on important business connected with the Lodge. (Correct.)

Q. Where has Mrs. M. gone ? A. i. (Irrelevant.) ii. Far, far away, but
more next time. iii. Her mother has gone to — oh, what a happy place is
London ! iv. All change here for Bletchley. (Mrs. M. had possibly passed
this station on her journey.)

Q. Who has won the Association Match to-day? A. i. (Illegible.) ii. Oh,
ye simple ones, how long will ye love simplicity? Why, Oxford, of course.
[This fact was known to some persons in the room, but not to Mr. Green.]

One of the company then suggested the attempt to get the name on a visiting
card transmitted, and the question was written, “ Write name on card.*’ Mr.
Green did not know that this experiment was about to be tried, and the card
was picked from a pile at random. The name was John B. Bourne. A sen-
tence was written by Mr. Green, which proved to be, “ Think of one letter at a
time and then see what will happen.” We did .so. A, i. J for Jerusalem, O
for Omri, H for Honey, and N for Nothing, ii. B for Benjamin, O for Olive,
U for Unicorn. (The remaining letters were given incorrectly.)

Q. How many of the Society’s books are here ? (There were two volumes
of Proceedings on the table.) A, i. (Irrelevant.) ii. The answer is 100-98.

Q. What is 2 X 3 ? Two irrelevant answers were given, possibly owing to a
slight disturbance in the room. The third answer was — ** When that noise has
ceased and S. has finished knocking the lamp over I say 6.”

.A trial shortly after this, February 19th, gave no results, and the power of
automatic writing appears to have entirely left Mr. Green for the present.

851 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 44-48.

The following account, ' dated Thornes House, Wakefield, January

851 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 435

30th, 1893, is signed by Lady Mabel Howard ; her husband, Mr. Henry
Howard, of Greystoke Castle, Westmoreland, attesting the facts which lie
within his cognisance. Some corroborations, and some comments of my
own, are added in brackets.

1. I began to write automatically every now and then when a young girl,
as some relations of mine were in the habit of doing so. 1 do not, however,
remember any of the messages until I was eighteen, when one day a girl friend
asked me as a joke, “ Who wished to marry her ? My pencil wrote two
initials which had no meaning for me. The girl was very angry, as though the
writing implied that she was fated to marry this man. She told me nothing ;
but some years afterwards a man with these initials told me that he had wished
to marry this lady at just that time. [The transference of an idea ia/ent in the
agent^s mind— to the exclusion of the idea which he wishes to have transferred
—is, of course, a frequent phenomenon in these experiments.]

2. Some time after my marriage (1885) there was a burglary at Netherby
Hall, in Cumberland, a few valuable jewels being stolen. The robbers were
caught three or four days later, but the jewels were not found. Next Sunday
[apparently November ist, 1885, see below], I was asked by some friends to
write where the jewels were. I wrote, “ In the river, under the bridge at
Tebay.” This was very unlikely, and had never been suggested, so far as 1
know, by any one. Every one laughed at this ; but the jewels were found there.
[The Hon. Mrs. C. J. Cropper, of Tolson Hall, Kendal, corroborates as follows,
in February 1893: “We were staying at Greystoke just after the capture of
the Netherby burglars, and some que.stions about the burglary were answered
by Lady MabeFs pencil. I am absolutely certain that in answer to the question
‘ Where are the jewels ? * the pencil wrote ‘ In the river.’ I think that in answer
to a further question it added ‘ Under the bridge,' but I am not so certain of
this. 1 am perfectly certain that it went on to say that the fourth man, who
never was caught, was then ‘in Carlisle.' and that it also gave his name. (The
fourth man was some time after suspected to have been a local man, — M. H.)
My husband, who was also present, is quite sure about the words * under the
bridge.’— Edith E. Cropter.”]

[P'rom the Carlisle Express and Examiner^ October 3rst, 1885, it appears
that two of the burglars were captured at Tebay Station. The guard saw them
conceal themselves in a truck, and telegraplied in advance for assistance. The
third man escaped, but seems to have crept back to the train, for he was sub-
sequently cjiught at Lancaster, as he was quickly making for a London train.
It was not in the least known where the jewels were (a fourth man having got
away), and the finding of the first jewel near Tebay Station, close to the water
side (reported in same paper November 7th), was accidental. This discovery,
of course, caused search to be made in the river, where the jewels were found
“near the railway bridge,” more than a month later. (Same paper, December
19th.) There can, I think, be no doubt that the writing was on November ist.
Lady Mabel Howard, writing from Lyulph’s Tower, Penrith, May 5th, 1893,
*s quite certain of this: “It was immediately after the men were caught, and
before any jewel at all was found. This all will assert — the Bullers, CroppAers,

brother and husband— for all five of us were local people, and looking out
for every fresh detail about it, and only the capture had taken place when the
pencil wrote.”]

APPENDICES

436

[85U

3. On the same night I wrote that my sister would be engaged to be
married in September 1887. At the end of September 1887 she became
engaged to a gentleman of whom there had been no idea at the time. [It is, of
course, conceivable that the prediction, known to this lady, may have influenced
the date of the event.]

4. At nearly the same date some connections of mine who had let a house,
the lease of which was expiring, were expecting to hear whether any damage
had been done, but did not speak of any particular possibility. I wrote that
nothing was injured except a particular table in a particular spot. Next day
they heard that this particular table, and this alone, had been injured.

[Miss liuller corroborates and expands this statement as follows: —

36 Green Street, Park Lane, W., Apnl 1893.

The following incident happened when I wms staying at Greystoke more
than a dozen years ago [discrepancy as to date], but I have often told the
story since, and to the best of my recollection the f.Tcts were these : —

On being asked what damage our tenants had done, Lady Mabel Howard’s
pencil replied: ‘‘They have broken the table and a chair,” and added,
•‘the table has been mended.” On reaching our house and asking the same
question of our housemaid, she replied that a table in the drawing-room (the
only one of its kind) had been broken, but had been mended, and one of the
kitchen chairs had been broken. Nothing else in the way of furniture had
been injured. Henrietta J. Duller.]

5. Shortly afterwards I went for some winter months to St. Moritz. For
some reason or other the answers were particularly good there. One day a
ladv living in quite a different part of the hugei hotel, and on the fourth floor,
while we were on the first floor, missed a valuable object which she had
bought as a prize for tobogganing. I knew nothing of the circumstances, but
my hand wTOte that the object had been taken by a light-haired young waiter
called Richard. I knew of no such waiter, as he had nothing to do with our
part of the hotel. But on mentioning this answer to the lady in question .she
said that there was in fact a young light-haired waiter called Richard who
waited on her floor; and that she had suspected him. My hand had written
where the object was hidden; but the lady would not have searcli made.

6. A Mr. Huth, who was staying at our hotel, was leaving the next day for
Paris, and had arranged to dine the day after with a friend, a young doctor
attached to the Embassy in Paris, from whom he had just received an invita-
tion. He asked me to predict .something about his journey. My hand wrote
words to this effect: “You will have an accident on your journey; and you
will not see your friend, and you cannot see him.” He derided this, as the
arrangement with the friend had just been made. As he went to Chur next
day by sleigh his sleigh was overturned, and his journey was thus delayed for
a day. When be got to Paris he found that his friend was dead.

[.Mr. Huth independently corroborates and adds to this account iis
follows : —

Garfield Lodge, Huddersfield, April x6^/i, 1S93.

Tin March 1889 I was staying at St. Moritz (Engadine), where I met with
a very serious accident tobogganing. Although still crippled, I decided to
return home, and on the morning of my departure the weather was brilliant y
fine. I asked Lady Mabel Howard s pencil, more in joke than anything else,

TO CHAPTER VIII

437

851 A]

what sort of a journey I should have. The pencil promptly replied that I
should have an awful journey and meet with an accident. I then asked
whether 1 should meet and dine with any friend in Paris. 1 cusked this
question because I had arranged to dine with a friend of mine, a Dr. Davies,
who was living there, to talk over some theatricals he was to get up at the
British Embassy. The pencil at once replied that I should neither meet nor
dine with any one I knew. Knowing of my arrangement and incredulous as
to this reply, I repeated my question, with the same result. I then asked
what day I should get back to England, having decided in my own mind to
return on the Friday. The pencil at once answered “ On Thursday.”

On the summit of the Julier Pass the weather suddenly changed from
bright sunshine to a perfect hurricane of wind, snow, and sleet, which com-
pletely blinded us, anil the snow was so thick we could not see ten 3rards in
front of us. Our driver missed the track, the sleigh upset, and we were all
thrown out on to the snow, and it was three hours before we were in compara-
tive safety. On my arrival in Paris 1 found no word from my friend Dr.
Davies, and on inquiry at his rooms I learnt that he had died from typhoid
fever ten days previously. I neither dined with nor met any one I knew whilst
in Paris, and 1 returned to England a day sooner than I had intended in con-
sequence of my friend’s death, and it was only upon my arrival in London that
I remembered it was Thursday, the day foretold by the pencil.

Harry Huth.]

7. In 1888 another girl friend of mine asked when she was to be engaged
to be married. My hand wrote: “In March 1890.” She became engaged in
that month to a man of whom there had been no idea at the time. [The lady
in question, Mrs. Lawson, writing from Greystoke Castle, February 1893, con-
tinns and enl.arges this statement as follows: “ 1 was at Greystoke in February
1888, and Lady Mabel Howard was writing with her pencil, which said that I
should be engaged to be married in March itSpo, and it also said that I should
not bo married until the following year. I 'ti’as engaged to be married on
March 27th, 1890, and it was all settled that I should be married within six
weeks; but mo.st unforeseen circumstances arose, and my marriage did not
take place until April 1S91. -Camilla Lawson.”]

8. I have never tried experiments in thought-transference, such as those
recorded in tiie S.P.R. Proceetiings. But I have no doubt that words and
iileas do pass without .speech from my husbaners mind into mine. I have
specially remarked this h propos of bye-elections, when I feel certain that I
have never consciously known the names of the candidates. Many times my
hand has written tho.se names (when known to him) truly, and sometimes it has
predicted results of elections with an accuracy which seemed to both of us not
to be the result of chance. In one case, where a gentleman named Nanney
was standing, of whom I was quite sure that I had never heard, my hand kept
writing “ Goat, Goat.’' In this case my husband was not present, but some one
else who was present knew the name.

Mabel Howard.

“Correct, as far as I am concerned.-— Henry Howard.”

•

[These last instances must, according to our canons of evidence, be reckoned
''aerely as revivals of subliminal memory. Names which have been printed in
newspapers which have been lying about must be taken as having possibly

APPENDICES

438

[851 A

fallen within the field of at least unconscious vision. The emergence of an
unconsciously observed name Nanney in the grotesque form Goat would thus
be parallel to the emergence of the unconsciously observed word Bottillon in
the grotesque form Verbasaim Thapsus^ mentioned in Proceedings^ vol. viii.

P*4SS-] . .

Writing later, from P Park, April tSth, 1S93, Lady Mabel adds: —

9. The H. girls asked what entertainment they should go to directly on
arriving in London. The pencil answered, “ Lady C.” This puzzled us all, as no
one knew of an entertainment to be given next week. At last, as it continuctl
writing Lady C.,” we gave it up, thinking it must mean dining at home, Lady
C. meaning [their mother]. That very evening, eight hours after, a letter
arrived from [Lady W. G.J saying Lady Carrington wished to know if the M.\s
could dance the minuet at her house on the 27th. They will arrive in London
on the 25th. [From a later letter it appears that the Ladies H. knew that this
engagement impended, but believed that it would be much later in the season,
“and were much surprised them.selves at receiving the letter.”]

10. I have myself [F. W.H.M. j succeeded in getting two correct answers to
questions absolutely beyond Lady Mabel’s knowledge. From Thornes House
1 was asked to luncheon at the house of a gentleman whom I knew only by
correspondence, and of whose home and entourage the rest of the party knew
absolutely nothing. On my return 1 asked, How many people sat down to
luncheon ? ” The answer was “ Six,” which was right. “ What was the name
of the gentleman, not my host, with whom 1 sat and talked after luncheon ? ’■
The pencil wrote MO, and then began to scrawl. The name was Moultrie.
It w’as impossible that Lady Mabel should have had any kind of notion that
a gentleman of that name would have been present in a group of which she
knew nothing whatever. But here the impulse to write seemed spent, and
a few further questions were answered by erroneous words or mere scrawls.

11. The following statement, dated Downes, Crediton, Devonshire, April
8th, 1893, is signed by Sir Redvers Duller, K.C.B., and by Miss Dorothy
Howard (daughter of Lady Audrey Duller)

“ Lady Mabel Howard was stopping with us this week. She was writing with
her pencil just after arriving. Some one asked : ‘ Where is Don } ’ The pencil
immediately answered, ‘ He is dead.’ Lady Mabel then asked who Don was,
and was told that he was a dog. No one in the room knew that he was dead ;
but on inquiry the next day, it was found that it was so. One of the party then
asked how many fish would be caught in the river the next day. The pencil
at once wrote three^ which was the number obtained the next day.

“A little girl in the house, who attends a .school in London, asked who
was her greatest friend at this school. The pencil answered Mary^ which
was again a fact absolutely unknown to Lady Mabel.

“Dorothy E. Ho\vard.

“Redvers Duller.*^

The following is another case which I quote from the Proceedings
S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 395. I^dy Vane writes : —

, HUTTON-IN-TI£E-FoP.KSr, April 8 M, 1894-

About a month ago T lost a book, a manuscript one, relating to this house-
I thought I had left it in my writing-table in my sitting-room, and intended
to add a note about some alterations just completed — but next day the boo

851 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 439

had vanished. I looked through every drawer and cupboard in my room and
then asked Sir Henry to do the same, which he did twice. 1 also made the
head housemaid turn everything out of them and helped her to do so-so that
four thorough searches were made ; but in vain. We also looked in the gallery
and library (the only other rooms to which the book had been taken) and could
not find it. On March 28th I asked Lady Mabel Howard to write about it.
She wrote, “ It is in the locked cupboard in the bookcase— hidden behind
the books.”

I said, “ Then it must be in the librarj', because the bookcases are locked,”
and Lady Mabel wrote, “Not in the library.” I said, “Then it must be in
the ante-room in the cupboard,” and asked if / should find it. Lady Mabel
wrote, “No, send Sir Henry.” I asked, “Will he find it?” and she wrote,
“ Of course.”

Still thinking it could only be the ante-room or the library — on account of
the locked cupboard and bookcase, I asked, “ Which end of the room ? ”

Lady Mabel wrote, “ The tapestry end.” I asked, “Is it on the window
side of the room or on the other ? ” and she wrote, “ The other.” A friend
staying in the house looked in the bookcases in the library at the tapestry end,
and in the cupboard in the ante-room (1 had met with an accident and could
not go myself) and could not find the book, so we gave it up.

On April 5th Sir Henry was in my sitting-room and suddenly said, “ I have
an idea ! Lady Mabel meant this room. There is the bookcase and the locked
cupboard in it — and the wall outside the door is covered with tapestry.” I
said, “ You have looked in that cupboard twice, and so have I and the house-
maid, and the book is not there— but look again if you like.” Sir Henry un-
locked the door of the cupboard and took out all the books (there were not
more than half-a-dozen) and put them on the door. The last he put back into
the cupboard was a scrap-book for newspaper cuttings, and as it w^as rather
dark at 6.30 P.M. he could not see the name on the back and therefore opened
it to see what it was, and the lost manuscript book fell out.

Having searched this very small cupboard four times previously, either of us
would have been ready to sw'ear that this book was not in it.

(Signed) Margaret Vane.

Henry Vane.

Writing to me about this case on April loth, from Greystoke Castle,
Penrith, Lady Mabel Howard says : —

The day I got your letter I got a special letter sent over from Hutton to say
my pencil had found a valuable book that Lady Vane had lost. We therefore
walked over there on Sunday and I asked her to write it out. It is so very
curious, quite the best thing I think the pencil ever has done — as it said, “in
the cupboard in the bookcase,” and they couldn’t think where it meant— a
cupboard in a bookcase — and this little cupboard is a cupboard in the middle
let into glass bookcases on either side. I had no idea of the cupboards .ir
tapestries there, and the pencil wrote all this in the sandwich paper at luncheon
on the Point-to-Point racecourse. *

So curious, too, the pencil said, “ Send Sir Henry,” twice. It was the
merest chance finding it, as it fell out of this scrap-book, and was hidden
behind the other books.

APPENDICES

440

[852 a

In another letter, dated April 14th, Lady Mabel Howard writes : —

I saw Lady Vane on February 24th, when the book had not been lost. I
did not see her again till Easter Monday. The moment I got upstairs she
exclaimed, “I want you to find a book for me that is lost.” No pencil nor
paper was forthcoming, so she said, “ Never mind, write when you get
home,” but I forgot, and it was two days after at the Point- to- Point race
that she asked me again, and we wrote it in the paper the sandwiches had
been in.

1 was abroad all this March and it was then that there were repairs being
done in the house, and Lady Vane took the book down from where she kept
it (I don’t know where) and having entered the repairs into it, put it down,
and from that moment it was never seen again. I must have been at Florence
when the book was lost. Mauel Howard.

Are we to describe this as a knowledge of past, of present, or of
future ? Or may we say that a telresthetic perception of this kind is not
strictly conditioned by time, but includes some retrogressive knowledge
as to how things reached their present condition, and also some pre-
gressive inference as to their coming development? The element of
forecast in the present case, — the indication that it would be Sir

Henry Vane who would find the book, — is in itself very slight ; but it
cannot be ignored when we compare other messages of Lady Mabel
Howard’s. See, for instance, the messages to Mr. Hulh, where the

element of precognition was strongly marked. In this present case, the
whereabouts of the book can hardly have been supraliminally known to
any human being ; since the workman or servant whose hands may have
slipped it into the larger book was probably unaware of what it was,
or even of his own unthinking action itself. If, however, it were Sir
Henry or Lady Vane who unthinkingly placed the small book in the
larger one — and this does not seem quite impossible — Lady Mabel's
knowledge might have been drawn telepathically from their subliminal
memory.

852 A. From the /ouma/ vol. ix. pp. 15-16.

The following incident seems to have been carefully watched and

recorded, and was published, with names of guarantors, immediately
after the event. It is extracted from a pamphlet, entitled SpiriUialismc :
Faits Curieux^ par Paul Auguez (Dentu, Paris, 1858) : —

On December loth, 1857, we addressed the following letter to M. Morin,
vice-president of the Societ <5 du Mesm^risme, asking him to keep the letter
sealed until the complete fulfilment of the sad event of which we related the
prediction. The said prediction was as clearly expressed as it was wonderful
in the extraordinary method of production. We retained a copy of this letter
word for word. The original, stamped with the postmark, has been returned
to us, after the verification of its date and contents, under the following cir-
cumstances : —

TO CHAPTER VIII

441

853A]

Paris, December \oth^ 1S57,

‘‘ Sir, — A bout a year ago, after a fruitless experiment in hydromancy,^ a
young lady, who was with us making these experiments, suddenly saw a very
strange scene reflected on the polished surface of a glass into which she had
been looking a few minutes before. . . .

“ She saw, she said, a room containing two beds. In one of these she saw
quite distinctly a sick person, whose distorted features betokened the approach
of death.

“ Around this bed were standing several people, amongst whom she could
distinguish a young woman and two children, all three dressed in black.

“ Being much astonished at this vision, and not knowing with what to
connect it, we asked the experimenter if these persons were known to her.
She replied at once that the dying man seemed to her to be a friend of ours,
M. X., an employ'd in a government office, and that the three persons dressed
in black must be his wife and his two sons.

“ Although this appeared very strange, we did not attach much importance
to the matter, for M. X. had a strong constitution, and at that time was in
good health.

However, about three months ago — that is to say, about nine months after
ih:* vision of which we have given an account — M. X. was suddenly attacked
by acute bronchitis and congestion of the lungs ; but although his illness was
pronounced by the doctor to be rather serious, it did not cause any great
uneasiness.

“ Then the fatal prediction came into our minds, and we were very anxious
about the condition of our friend, which became more and more distressing.

“ A few weeks ago the disease assumed a more serious character, and as
the arrangement of the apartments in which he was living made it impossible
to nurse him efficiently, he determined to take advantage of the privilege
attached to his position as government ofiicial, and was moved to Val-de-
Grk:e.

“ At the time of writing this letter, the invalid, finding himself somewhat
better, has just been taken to the house of a relation, where he hopes to stay
during his convalescence.

At the same time, the disease has not diminished in severity, although it
is stationary. This is how matters stand to-day, December loth, 1857.

“ As far as we are concerned, however, the prediction is in some measure
fulfilled. Indeed, who would ever have thought that a young man, in full
strength, would, in such a short time, be in such a state as he is to-day ? Who
would have supposed that any one who lived in such comfortable circumstances
as our unfortunate friend would be obliged by the force of circumstances to
have himself taken to a hospital ? Who could have foreseen that his family,
who had been seen dressed in black, should happen just at that time to be in
mourning for a relation who had died a short time previously ?

“We must add further that since M. X. was moved to the house of his re-
lation, after attempts to obtain communications by means of a table, for severa*
evenings, a message, 'giving the name of M. X., appeared spontaneously.
Among other things said, in reply to questions asked, were the wqrds:
‘Death warning! . . .’

^ Divination by means of pictures, which are delineated in the water before the eyes
of the seer [/.r. a species of crystal-gazing].

442

APPENDICES

[ 852 B

We heard later on that at the time when these manifestations occurred,
M. X. was lying in a state of lethargic stupor, in consequence of the doses of
opium given him to induce sleep.”

M. X. died a month after this letter was sent. It was read by us in the
presence of MM. le Baron du Potet, Petit d’Ormoy, and Morin, who, after
having considered all the circumstances, and having verified the date of the
postmark, December nth, certitied that the details therein contained were
absolutely accurate.

852 B. The following are extracts from a translation ^ of a paper
on Telepathic Perceptions by Means of Automatic Writing,” by
M. Bonatti, which appeared in the Rivista tfi Sfuiii Fsichid, July 1895.

I began to write automatically with the hand of a medium resting on mine,
but soon 1 was able to write alone. The communications were at first of a
spiritualistic character, and the writing was a fair imitation of that of the
defunct who appeared to be present, and whom I had known in life. However,
I was acquainted with their writing. I was generally advised to work and
study much ; my counsellor was interested in my moral life, and was a more
attentive friend than any 1 have found in flesh and blood. Soon after I was
obsessed by a lying and frivolous, but not wicked, personality, who displayed a
great passion for art. This personality was only useful to me on that point*
giving me advice, and, by means of automatic drawing, greatly developing my
memory of drawing and powers of conception. I did not write for several
months, in order to free myself of this obsession. Meanwhile I enlarged my
knowledge of psychical matters; and when I began to write again I succeeded
in convincing the communicating personality that it might be an emanation
from my own subconscious self. After this it called itself my Secondo,

I examined this Secondo to see if it possessed any supernormal powers, and
discovered some. It continued to give me useful advice, and strengthened my
love of art.

When 1 write automatically I do not know what the communication will be;
sometimes 1 guess after a few w^ords, but I often guess wrongly, and write
something altogether unlike my guess.

1 enjoy perfectly good health, and am able to endure constant outdoor
exercise without fatigue. As far as I know, I am psychically normal. I retain
all my normal faculties when writing automatically.

The following are cases of telepathy from persons sleeping or dreaming
at a greater or less distance, their impressions being revealed to me by
automatic writing. The first of these cases was a great surprise to me, as I had
never heard of similar ones. Up to February lytli, 1893, I have had very few
failures, and these took place when I eagerly desired the phenomenon ; whilst
the successes happened spontaneously. Every time that I tried to receive a
telepathic communication, it was false. The following are cases of the com-
munication of dreams, and it must not be forgotten that dreams are sometimes
not remembered at all, and often remembered only in part.

October ^th, 1892, ii p.m.— I wrote automatically, “Go Ang

Gooflbye.” “ The man who has been my murderer will not fare well.*’ The
next day “ Go Ang ” told me that during the past night she had

^ The greater part of this translation appeared in full in the Proceedings S.P-R*»
vol xi. pp. 477-481.

TO CHAPTER VIII

443

852 B]

dreamt of me and of a man who had, in truth, been for her a very murderer.

In her dream she intended to revenge herself on him. Ang Go lived

about three kilometres from where I was writing.

October Sth, 9.30 p.m.— I wrote, “ Hugo, 1 am speaking with you.” And
then a dream not worth reporting. « I also am speaking—I am Guido. I am

speaking with my grandmother.” And then another dream. “ Go Ang ,

I am speaking to G . I am telling him that I wish him to pay me ; but I

don’t ask for money, but for clothes.”

Hugo and Guido are my two nephews, who live in a village five kilometres
from me. The first is ten and the other twelve years old. When asked the
next day, with the greatest care not to suggest anything to them, of what they
had dreamt the previous night, the first answered that he had dreamt that
people were trying to kill me, and that he remembered nothing else ; the other
told me that he had dreamt of me, but remembered nothing more of his dream.
Both had gone to bed at 8.15.

Go — - Ang , when questioned with great caution, told me that on the

night of the 8th she had dreamt of G . She remembered quite well that he

was talking to her about a new suit of his which was barely begun, but did not
remember if she had been paid by him.

On the same evening on which I had written down the dreams of my two
nephews, I made automatically a very childish drawing, and in a moment per-
ceived that it represented them and their brothers, who were in the country.
But I observed that one of them was missing, because there are four of them,
and in my drawing there were only three. I did not know the reason of this.
The next morning I had an explanation, discovering in my house, w'herc he had
passed the night, that very nephew who was missing in my picture. He had
come up on the evening of the 8th, a few hours before I received the telepathic
message, and after 1 had gone from my house to my studio, where I am accus-
tomed to pass the evening. His arrival had not been pre-arranged, and I
could not have seen him arrive, even unconsciously, as the street 1 went
through to go to my studio was in a totally different direction from the street
he traversed to get to my house.

The following is copied from my journal

October zu/, 7.30 P.M. — I write, “ M. O. is now mentioning your name to
Sig“ R,” Two hours after I meet M. O., who says he spoke of me to Sig“ R.
about 7.30, h propos of a letter which he had received that evening, and which
contained a reference to me. I had not seen him all the day, knew nothing of
the letter, nor that he was with Sig“ R. when I was writing.

February 26th^ i p.m. — I write, I am poisoning myself. Think of me.”
The writing begins with a name I cannot decipher, but which I guess.

March 19///.— To-day a friend of the person whose name I guessed told me
spontaneously that that person had attempted to poison herself several days ago.
On the 26th, when I had the communication, she was at Bologna, and made the
attempt later at Rovigo. I do not know if it was the first attempt, nor, if it
was so, whether she had decided to do it when I wrote. I had no reason to
suppose that A. G. would wish to take her own life. Unfortunately I have had
no more communications from her which might have given me more details.

March i^jth, — I write, “Run to the Club. Go.” I have not been to the
Club for more than a month, and intended to go to bed at once. My friend,
A. L., who rarely goes to the Club, had this evening assisted at a conference

444 APPENDICES [858B

on Guido Bonatti. Association of ideas made him think of me, and he went
to the Club believing he would find me there. I obeyed the telepathic order,
and thus discovered what had caused it.

May %th. Morning , — A communication partly illegible. “ You will re-
ceive • . . Ang Go to-day, which will tell you about M., because she

has been talking to him.'’

Ang Go is at Venice. Many days ago I had charged her to say

certain things to M. if she met him. He lives at Venice. On this evening

(the Sth) I received a card from Ang Go , relating her conversation

with M., whom she had met by chance. After the “ You will receive to-day ” in
the automatic writing, there are several attempts at a word. Now I know all
about it, 1 can see that the word is meant for postcard.”

[The postcard was kept and reads : —

“ Ve.vick, May ytk, 1893.”

(Postmark, VENICE, May SM.)

“ I found M. and told him what you charged me to say. He told me he
had written to you before leaving, and that he would write again and send you
his portrait— Yours, Angelina.”]

February 1894. Venice. lived at Padua while receiving the previous
communications.) The automatic writing informs me that my mother at
Padua has had something the matter with her hand. [About twenty days later
I verified this. No one had told me of it.]

Unfortunately I have not kept all the original writings before January 1893,
I have preserv’ed only those which were verified. This is due to my then inex-
perience, for I thought it useless to preserve unverifiable communications. I
remember that till January 1893 false communications were rare, and the
unverifiable ones were numerous.

From the beginning of 1893 till February 5th, 1894, against twenty-seven
communications verified, I have recorded eight false ones, eighteen which 1
could not verify, five which were wholly or partly correct, but where I am
not certain that the information may not have reached me in some normal
but unnoticed manner, and two which were correct but not exact.

I reckon that from October 1892 till January 1893 there may have been
five false announcements. Thus there may have been altogether thirteen false
communications.

I conclude from my personal experiences that the principal cause of failure
is the intervention of the normal consciousness, which occurs most easily when
the writing is slow and illegible, or when the communication is desired. I do
not remember ever having received a truthful message when I wished for it.
The true telepathic cases were always spontaneous, and improved by the exer-
cise of the faculty. A true me.ssage was nearly always followed by other true
ones ; then came a false one, which caused discouragement, and initiated an
annoying series of falsehoods, till another success restored confidence.

I have observed that confidence is the best condition for obtaining psychical
phenomena.

I^^ignor Bonatti is a friend of Dr. Ermacora, who has been sometimes present
when he was writing automatically; on one or two occasions when the writing
was of telepathic origin. Signor Bonatti cannot obtain much confirmation,
partly on account of the lapse of time, and partly because the supposed agents
are persons whom he has lost sight of.]

857 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 445

857 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 67-8.

Professor H. writes to Dr, Hodgson in 1889 : —

I write you the details of another matter told me by a friend, Hon. Z., of

He is one of the leading members of the Bar, has represented

his State several times in the National Congress, and has a very clear, dis-
criminating, and vigorous intellect. He does not believe in Spiritualism, but
regards its phenomena as illusions or hallucinations. In his youth, in 1854,

he had taught a winter’s term in his native town of P , and in the spring

returned to Q to complete his fit for college in the Academy in that

place. One evening after his return to Q , a party of young people to the

number of eight were gathered about a table to witness the trance-writing
of one of their number, a Miss A., a very beautiful girl of eighteen years
of age, and the music teacher of the Academy. She wrote the name of Mr.

Z.’s father, , who had died in 1845, and whom no one in the room

save his son could have known. I may add that none of the party save

my friend knew anything about P or its inhabitants. Mr. Z. declared

that he did not believe his father had anything to do with the writing. At
this Miss A., who .sat on the opposite side of the table from Mr. Z., arose,
came about to his side, drew her pencil several limes rapidly across the two
middle fingers of his left hand, returned to her seat, and wrote quickly,
“Does this convince you?” Mr. Z. said that those two fingers were gone
from his father’s left hand, having been cut off in his boyhood. Mr. Z. was
startled, but still expressed his di.sbelicf. Miss A. then wrote H. T. Y.’s

name, and continued; “Killed on day of , sliding down M

Hill, running off embankment, broke his neck; Rev. Mr. \V. attended

funeral; text: book , chap. , verse Both date and text

were given with particularity. Mr. W. was a Congregationalist clergyman

of P , and Mr. Y.’s family w'cre active and leading members of his

cliurch. Mr. Y. had been one of Mr. Z.’s pupils that winter in P , and with

the other boys had coursed M Hill, a very sleep hill near the school-

house, and covered with glare ice from summit to foot. Near the foot was
an embankment wharfed up to sustain the road-bed, and that was a very
dangerous i)lace to slide by, Mr, Z. had repeatedly uarned the boys of the
danger, but had not deemed it best to forbid their sliding. He had worried
over the matter a great deal, and was exceedingly relieved when school closed
without any accident having happened. Mr. Z. looked up the text and
found it entirely inappropriate to a funeral occasion, H. T. Y. is living

to-day, and is the head of the K School of Technology. This fact made

Mr. Z. scout the whole affair as unworthy of his notice ; but to me it seems
to indicate a telepathic explanation of both occurrences. I asked Mr. Z. if
cither his father or Mr. Y. were in his mind at the time. He replied, “ No,”
they came into his mind with a shock of surprise when their names were
written. We must .so suppose the telci^athic communication to be without
consciousness on the part of the agent.

The Hon. Z. of this case writes as follows ; —

’ •

This statement by Professor H. is correct, and I cannot improve it, or make
It more correct by re-writing. Now you may use these facts, but I earnestly
desire you not to make use of any names or places.

446 APPENDICES [858 A

868 A. My next case comes from Dr. Ermacora^ of Padua. 1 quote
it from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 68-70.

YKVnk^June 17M, 1892.

. . . Signora Maria Manzini, residing here in Padua, has been for a few
months experimenting with automatic writing, and is habitually controlled by
a personality which announces itself under the name of Elvira.

On April 21st, 1892, Signora Maria Manzini received a letter from Venice
informing her that her cousin, Maria Alzetta, was seriously ill with phthisis.
It was long since Signora Manzini had heard news of this cousin, and she
only knew that, having been left a childless widow, she had remarried and
had two children by her second husband. On the evening of the same day
Signora M. was writing in my presence, under the control of Elvira, and asked
questions as follows : —

Q. Can you tell me if my cousin's illness is really serious ? After a pause
of about a minute and a half the ansvrer came. A. She has a very short time
to live, and she leaves three lovely children.

Q. Did you first know this when 1 received news of the illness } A. No,
I have known it for many days, but did not mention it for fear of paining Maria
[the medium].

Q. Why, then, were you so slow just now in answering my question? A.
I went to see how she was, so as to be able to tell you precisely.

Next day Signora M. wrote to Venice offering to go and see the invalid.
On the 24th she received an answer expressing a desire for her arrival, and
stating that the invalid was at the hospital. She wrote again to ask on what
days it was allowed to visit the hospital patients. Before an answer arrived
Signora M. wrote in my presence (April 28th) under Elvira’s control, and we
put the following questions : —

Q. How is the invalid at Venice ? Do you know why the answer to my
letter has not arrived? and do you know on what day it is allowed to visit the
hospital ? A. The invalid’s condition is the same. There is little hope. She
has undergone a serious operation; there is danger. To-morrow morning
Maria will receive a letter. Visitors such as she are received every day at
the hospital.

Q. Do you mean because Maria is a relation of the invalid’s ? A. No, but
because she comes from a distance.

Failing to see what connection there could be between pulmonary disease
and a surgical operation, we asked : —

Q. If the patient is in a consumption, what operation can she have under-
gone ? A. She is in a consumption ; but the operation was necessitated by
the birth of her last little girl.

Next morning Signora M. received a postcard from Venice contoining
these words: “ Amalia inquired at the hospital and was told that you and your
mother would be received on any day, as strangers from another city, if you
will come when it suits you.”

The date of the letter’s arrival and the news contained in it thus corre-
sponded with the prediction. But an embarrassing circumstance remained.
Wheif the postman delivered this letter he said that he had in fact brought
it to the house on the previous evening, but finding no one at home he had
taken it away with him again till the following morning. Thus the messages
from Elvira had been received after the postman had endeavoured to deliver

TO CHAPTER VIII

447

859 A]

the letter. Had, then, the fact that the letter was already in Padua deter-
mined the communication which announced its approaching delivery and part
of its content?

On April 30th Signora M. went to Venice and found that her cousin had
really had a third child a few months previously, and after its birth had been
ill in a way which had ultimately needed a surgical operation. Another small
detail previously communicated to Signora Manzini by Elvira was likewise
found to be true. Signora Manzini made no mention whatever of her own
experiments, and her cousin at Venice continued entirely ignorant of them.

On that same evening, April 30th, on Signora Manzini's return from Venice
to Padua, 1 was anxious to inquire from the control ” as to the effect of the
presence in Padua of the letter which had been announced on the evening of
the 28th for the following morning. Under the control of Elvira, Signora M,
wrote the following answer ; “I did not know that the letter had arrived; but
I was sure that Maria would receive it next morning, because those who wrote
it had intended that it should reach her in the morning. They had intended
to post it in the evening, but instead of that they posted it directly it was
written. I was, in fact, mistaken ; for it was a mere chance that it was actually
received in the morning.”

I then requested Signora M. to write to her friends at Venice in the fol-
lowing terms : “ I would beg you to satisfy a feeling of curiosity on my part
with regard to a presentiment which I had about your last letter. 1 should
like to know whether it was posted at the hour which you originally intended,
or whether you changed your intention and posted it at a different hour. Will
you pJea.se tell me all you remember about this? ”

The following answer was received on May 2nd : —

“ I had meant to post my last letter to you in the evening, but, fearing to
forget it, 1 posted it at mid-day, when 2 had occasion to go out.”

To resume the facts. Automatic writing informed us of facts entirely
unknown to our ordinary consciousness ; namely, the fact tliat the invalid had
three children, and the fact that she had undergone an operation. Thus far
we might invoke telepathy and clairvoyance as the explanation. Then there
was a true prediction of the arrival of a letter, and of part of its content. But
although the letter was delivered on the morning specified, it had, in fact,
already arrived in Padua when the communication was made, and its non-
(ielivery in the evening was due to accident. Clairvoyance would not explain
this incident, as that power might have been expected to reveal the presence of
the letter in Padua. Neither was there an indication of so-called psychometry —
an influence from the nearne.ss of the letter itself. But, lastly, an automatic
message explains the incident in the simplest manner, and that explanation
turns out to be the true one. Dr. G. B. Ermacora.

859 A, The following account of Miss A.’s experiences is quoted from
Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. (1S93) pp. 73-92.

Statement of Miss A. as to her Automatic Writing,

I. Origin of the Writing,— About eight years ago we first heard that people
could sometimes write without knowing what they wrote ; and that it was
supposed that departed friends could communicate in this way. We deter-
mined to try whether any of us could write thus. We tried first with a

448 APPENDICES [869A

planchette, and when my mother's hand and my hand were upon it we got
writing easily. We did not at first get any message professing to come from
any spirit known to us.

2. Mode of Writing . — We soon ceased to use the planchette, and I was abh*.
to write alone. I can now generally, but not always, write when I sit quiet
with a pencil in my hand. I'he writing often comes extremely fast; at a much
faster rate than I could keep up by voluntary effort for so long a time. I have
to turn over the pages of the large paper w'hich I generally use, and to guard
the lines of writing from running into each other, but except for this there is no
need for me to look at the paper, as 1 can talk on other subjects while the
writing is going on. I can always stop the writing by a distinct effort of will.
One curious thing is that my hand is never In the least tired by automatic
writing.

3. Character of the Script —I get various handwritings; I may have had a
dozen altogether. I may divide these simply into two classes.

A* Large and scrawly hands, which seem to aim at case of writing, rather
than at indivuality, and do not divide their words, but run on without a break.
Such are the hands of the so-called “guides” and of other “spirits ” who write
frequently. (Whatever the sources of this writing may be, I must use the terms
which the writing uses in order to avoid con.stant roundabout phrases.) Those
large running handwritings do differ somewhat both from my own handwritin;^
and from each other; but they most of them have a general resemblance to a
large, rapid scrawl of my own, with an alteration in the shape of some letters so
as to avoid breaks in the continuous scrawl. I can almost alw^ays tell who is
writing ; but there are dif£orence.s in energy, in little details of management of
the paper, &c., which help me to distinguish, even before the end of the mc.s-
sage comes, when the signature shows me who has been writing. When the
pronoun “we” is used there is no signature, as that represents “ the guides.’’

B. There are also several liandwritings which keep a strongly individual
character, sometimes plainly of an assumed kind ; I mean writing in a way in
which no one would have written in life. Thus John Longland wrote in an odn.
twisted, serpentine way and very small. We unluckily burnt all his writings
except one scrap, as we did not believe that he was a real person, A spirit
calling himself Detomo make.s nil the letters s(]uare.

Then, again, when the guides arc writing in reply to a private question i?iit
by some friend of mine they write wrong side up. so that the friend sittir.g
opposite to me can read the writing and I cannot. They seem to write iliis
way just as easily as the other. Sometimes there is mirror^writing. Some-
times each word in a sentence is written backwards, and sometimes the whole
sentence is written backwards, beginning with the last letter of the last word.
In a few cases only have we thought that the handwriting resembled what the
supposed spirit wrote in life. Tins was especially so in the case of a communi-
cation claiming to come from my grandfather, whose handwriting I had never
seen. My mother produced an old signature of his, and certainly it was like ;
but there was not enough of the automatic writing to make us quite sure.
When the “ spirit ” or “ control,” or whatever it is, leaves me I cannot make it
come again, and writing from spirits known to us on earth is rare in comparison
witl^ writing from the guides, or from quite unknown spirits giving fantastic
names. Sometimes they give what they say were their real earth-names ; and
then we can sometimes identify them ; although there is, of course, this diffi-

TO CHAPTER VIII

449

859A]

culty, that if they are obscure we cannot find them, or if they are well known,
people who give me credit for more knowledge of history than I possess may
think that 1 knew all about them, and that the messages come from my own
mind.

[The Countess of Radnor adds : —

I think Miss A. has considerably understated the number of distinctly and
remarkably different types of handwriting that have come through her hand.
I enclose a list of thirteen names of guides,’’ each one of whom has a charac-
teristic handwriting, invariably the same, however great the length of time
that elapses between the communications. In addition to these there have
been many instances where personalities — the so-called dead, or occasionally
the living— have written in distinct handwrittings. H. M. Radnor.]

4. Sometimes my hand is moved to draw instead of to write.
The impulse in such cases is quite equally distinct. I never know what I am
going to draw till the picture is half finished. My hand begins at odd, un-
expected places; for instance, with shading in a corner, or at the ear of a
profile; and approaches the principal lines in a way which no artist would
choose. There is no rubbing out or alteration of what is once done, but if
whatever moves my hand docs not like the picture, it suddenly scrawls it all
over and begins again on another piece of paper. Sometimes twenty or thirty
pieces of paper have been spoilt in this way, even when the picture was all
but finished ; so that if 1 think that a picture is pretty I sometimes beg some
one to take it away from under my hand for fear it should be scrawled on. I
have no natural gift for drawing, and have only received a few lessons as a
child. I could not even copy some of these automatic drawings. I have never
*)f myself painted in oils, but sometimes I am moved to paint automatically in
water-colour or oils. I put out a number of oil colours in a row, and my brush
goes to them automatically and dabs one wet colour on the top of another,
making a picture which is odd enough, but much less muddled than might be
supposed ; in fact, artists have said that it was curious that a distinct picture
could be produced in that way. When I paint thus there is no drawing or
outline, only the brush-work. These drawings and pictures have a certain
boldness and strangeness about them, but they are certainly not like the work
of a regular artist,

5 . Connection of Written with other Messages , — The writing sometimes
explains or completes other phenomena, as, for inst.ince, figures seen, or
sentences begun by raps. Sometimes, on the other hand, raps will come when
I wish to have writing. But the writing will hardly ever explain or in any way
allude to what really most needs e.xplanation, namely, the crystal-visions. The
guides who write seem to know nothing about these visions.

6. Subject of the Writing , — The great mass of the writing consists of
teachings as to religion and philosophy. This is what my guides seem to wish
to give, and it is strange that it should be so, as my own thoughts have not
been much directed to such matters.

Another large part of the writing consists in a kind of fantastic description
of the way in which a world was made. The name given with these writings
Oelalius. I suppose that this is a kind of romance. It is very different
from anything that I should myself ever write or dream of, nor am I at all fond
of reading romances of that kind. The writing professes to be copied from a
hook open at that particular chapter, and sometimes a passage will be con-
VOL. ir. . 3 F

450 APPENDICES [859a

tinued weeks or months after the first part of it was written, as if the book had
chanced to be open again at that same place.

Some of the messages, however, deal with earthly matters. Some give
general advice, some give medical advice, and some show a knowledge of
things in the past or present which I do not possess. Some of these messages
have been curiously right; some have been partly right, but confused or inter,
rupted; and some have been wrong altogether. The sense of time seems
confused, so that it is hard to say whether the incidents are meant to have
happened long ago, or lately, or to be still in the future. Many of the messages
we have not tested, as they were about things which did not interest us. Often,
for instance, there would be messages about events in the newspapers winch I
had not thought or cared about.

As to what I have called “ general advice,” I think that this has always
been good when it related to the conduct of the automatic writing itself. ]
should be told, I mean, when to write and when not to write, and what people’s
presence was desirable, and so forth. The advice is often quite different from
what we w/j//;— forbidding us to ask people whom we had desired to ask.
There has been one very curious case where we were repeatedly told [by a de-
ceased relative of his] to “ send for ” a gentleman whom I will call Mr. C. D., of
whom we knew nothing, except that we had seen his name in the papers in quite
a different connection. It so chanced that a friend of ours knew Mr. C. D.
and brought him to see us, but for some years there seemed to be no particular
result. Lately, however, Mr. C. D.’s presence has very greatly helped the phe-
nomena; and the advice given so long ago has turned out important in a way
which we could not possibly have foreseen.

On matters not connected with these phenomena I should always carefully
read what the writing told me, but I should not go by it unless it seemed
sensible. It does not always advise either what I wish or what 1 think wise;
but generally it is wiser than I.

7. Medical Advice has often been given by a control calling himself
“ Semirus,” and this has been often successful ; which is strange, since I am
quite ignorant of medicine, and often do not know the names eitlier of
diseases or of drugs mentioned. Of course 1 cannot be quite sure that 1
have never read the words, but certainly when I have written them I have
often not known what they meant.

At other times the facts relating to the illness have been quite outside
my knowledge. One friend has given an instance of this kind [printed later j;
but I have not liked to ask others, as what Semirus says is generally meant
for the questioner alone.

8, Thought-tramferefue^’—'l\\i^ writing occa.sionally, but not often, tells me
of thoughts in the minds of persons present. One day a lady handed me a
letter, in a handwriting which I did not know. I held the letter in one hand,
and the other hand wrote, “ Bright metal and brown earth.” The letter was
from a gentleman whom I had never seen, and who committed suicide by
throwing himself on the rails in front of a railway engine. I think that this
message came from thought-transference, as I do not find that merely holding
letters in my hand tells me anything about their writers unless some one is
theri® who knows the content ; and even then 1 so seldom succeed that I do
not care to try experiments of this kind.

[Lady Brooke (the Ranee of Sardwak), who was present at the time, has

859 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 451

given me a written confirmation of this (quite recent) incident, for which I
have not pressed the owner of the letter, on account of tlie painful nature of
the circumstance. F. W. H. M.]

9. Clainmance- — I sometimes get messages which perhaps may be called
clairvoyant, telling me, for instance, where lost objects are, or warning me of
some danger at hand. Thus about September 20th. 1888 [this incident was
written down October 21st, 1889], my sister M. and 1 had just finished dressing
for dinner in the dressing-rooms leading from a large bedroom. The maid
had left the room. M. had left her dressing-room, and was standing in the
bedroom, when suddenly she called to me: “Get a bit of paper; there are
some raps.” I came in and took an envelope and pencil, and at once the
words came, by raps : “ Look to the candle or the house will be on fire.” We
saw that it was not the candle in the bedroom, so we went into M.’s dressing-
room, and found that her candle was so close to a cardboard pocket depending
from the looking-glass that it v/ould have been on fire in a moment. It was
already smoking. No servant would have come in for some time. [Mrs. A.
confirms as follows : “ I heard of the incident in my daughter's next letter,”]

Again, I was descending a dark corkscrew staircase at Longford, in August
or September 1S89 [account written October 1889], when 1 heard a tapping on
the stair. It was persistent, and drew* my attention. I looked about with a
candle, and at last saw a gold pencihease of Lady Radnor's, with which I was
accustomed to write automatically, lying on a dark little lauding of the stair. I
did not know that the pencil had been lost.

10. Hut the most puzzling cases are those where the message professes to
be from some departed person, and tells some true things, but perhaps mixes
up some mist2ikes with them. . . . But .sometimes I do think that the mes-
sage really comes from the person who professes to communicate.

Another frequent writer is a strange person to have come to us, as I knew
nothing about him, and should not have thought that we had anything in
common. That is Lord Chancellor Hardwicke. He — or whatever it is that
takes that name -—has become a .sort of family friend. He has a distinct
character of his own, which is not quite what I should have expected in a Lord
Chancellor, for he is full of jokes and very bluff and outspoken. He has given
a number of facts about himself, names of friends, and laws about marriage
that he had made.

One reason which makes me think that the messages come from outside
myself is the feeling which I have sometimes of rivalry or even conflict
between ^them. When I am writing there will occasionally be sudden changes,
as if some new personality had been able to get hold of the pencil. . . .

Again, if I see figures and then have writing which professes to come from
those figures, it seems to me natural to suppose that it does so come.

I will now give some examples of motor messages, by writing and raps,
given through Miss A. Here, as in the case of Miss A.'s crystal-visions
(see vol. i. 625 C), I am obliged to confine myself mainly to cases cor-
roborated by the few friends who have felt in the messages more than a
merely personal interest. It must, of course, be remembered, in justice
to other friends (who have often carried off messages without even show-
mg them to the writer), that much of what has been thus written has dealt
'vith very private matters.

45^ APPENDICES [859 A

The first message which I shall quote is evidentially interesting, on
account of the mere chance by which its truth was verified. It should be
premised that Miss A. has never been to Blankney, and is not acquainted
with the Chaplin family.

I. Lady Radnor writes under date January 15th, 1893 • —

The following case has always struck me as particularly curious.

About eight years ago, when Miss A.’s powers had only quite recently shown
themselves, her automatic writing told me that I had t^o guidesy Estelle ” and
“ Silvo ” — spirits who accompanied me and took an interest in my \velfare. I
did not think of this at first ;is a thing which could be cither proved or dis-
proved. But one day, when a question was mooted as to whether “ spirit
guides ” had ever lived on earth, I asked whether mine had done so, and was
told that Estelle had. I asked for her earth-name ; and as we were then getting
answers by raps (through Miss A.’s power) it was rapped out “ Loved voices
called me Anne.” I asked for the surname. C — H— A was rapped out. As
my maiden name was Chaplin I at once jumped to the conclusion that that was
the name meant. But the raps said decidedly No, and rapped out Chambers.

1 had no associations with this name. I asked if connected with my family 1
“ Yes.” Any portrait? “ Yes.” At Blankney ? (my brother’s place). “ Yes.’-

Now I had spent much of my childhood at Blankney, and I had been par-
ticularly fond of one picture there, representing a lady whose name I did not
know. It used to hang in the morning room, and then on the staircase, and
represented a lady in a red velvet gown with a basket of cherries in her hand.
As a child I used to sit and talk to this picture, and make a friend of the lady
with the cherries.

So when I heard that the picture of my “ guide ” was at Blankney, I hoped
it might be this lady, and asked, ‘‘ Is it the lady with the cherries? ” “ Yes, ’
was eagerly rapped out. I at once wrote to my old nurse who was still at
Blankney, and who knew a good deal about the pictures, and asked her to get
the picture examined for any name which might be on it. She got the picture
taken down and carefully examined, but there was no clue. She told me, how-
ever, that she thought she had heard a Mrs. S.— a connection of the family, who
knew the pictures better than any one — say that the lady with the cherries was
a Miss Taylor. This disheartened me ; but I wrote to a friend at the College
of Heralds to ask whether the name Chambers occurred anywhere in the Chaplin
pedigree. He wrote back that there was no such name in the pedigree.

The same day that I got his letter I happened to meet Mrs. S. (whom I had
not seen for many years) in a shop in London. I knew that she had once made
a catalogue (which I had never seen) of the Blankney pictures ; so I felt that
here was my last chance. I asked her if she knew who the lady with the cher-
ries was. “ Oh, that is Lady Exeter,” she said, “ whose daughter, Lady Betty
Chaplin, married an ancestor of yours.” “Do you know what Lady Exeter’s
maiden name was ? ” “ It was Mellish.” I now lost all hope, but I just asked •

“ Has the name Chambers any association for you ? ” “ How stupid I am !
she exclaimed, “ Lady Exeter was a Miss Chambers, of Mellish ! ” My friend
at tj)e Heralds’ College tlien looked in the Exeter pedigree, and, sure enouglif
the lady with the cherries was Hannah Chambers. H. M. R.^dnor*

I was cognisant of all this, and attest the accuracy of the account.

Radnor.

859 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 453

In a later letter I^dy Radnor adds : —

Personally I had always believed “ the lady with the cherries ” to be some
one (name unknown) who had married a Chaplin ancestor. There was no
Chaplin pedigree, and it was 1 who suggested to my brother that he should ask
“York Herald” (Mr. Gatty) to draw one up; and I therefore applied to Mr.
Catty as being the only person who would know the names of the families con-
nected by marriage with the Chaplins. I knew that the great-grandmother
was Lady Betty,” nie Cecil : but as in those days pedigrees and family history
did not interest me, I had never —and up to the present time never seen

the Chaplin pedigree. In any case the name Chambers would not appear
in it.

II. The next case is typical of many similar trifling incidents.

January 15/^, 1893.

1 have several times had reason to think that some intelligence writing
through Miss A. was aware of trifling circumstances happening to myself. A
good instance occurred the other day. I came back from hunting and joined in
a stance, where my so-called “guide” was communicating. I asked, “Well,
have you been with me in my run to-day ? ”

“ Yes,” was the answer, “ but you should have gone up the hill instead of
down.” “Was Nancy right, then ? ” “ Y'es.” Now, in point of fact we had
changed foxes that day by going down a hill instead of up, one hound alone,
Nancy, running up hill on what was doubtless the original scent.

Radnor.

January 1893.

III. The following writing was given at Longford, February 27th, 1890,
avowedly by “ Estelle ” : —

“ You ask me whom I see in this habitation. I sec so many shades and several
spirits. 1 see also a good many reflections. Can you tell me if there was a
child died upstairs 1 Was there an infant who died rather suddenly ? [Why ?]
Because I continually see the shadow of an infant upstairs, near to the room
where you dress. [A shadow f\ Yes, it is only a shadow. [What do you
mean ?] A shadow is when any one thinks so continually of a person that they
imprint jheir shadow or memory on the surrounding atmosphere. In fact they
make a form ; and I myself am inclined to think that so-called ghosts, of those
who have been murdered, or who have died suddenly, are more often shadows
than earthbound spirits ; for the reason that they are ever in the thoughts of
the murderer, and so he creates, as it were, their shadow or image ; for it would
be sad if the poor souls suffered, being killed through no fault of their own, —
that they should be earthbound; though, remember, they very often arc earth-
bound too.”

With reference to the above communication I may say that an infant brother
of mine died of convulsions in a nursery which then occupied the part of the
house where the figure of the baby was said to have appeared. I do noj see

way in which Miss A. could have known either of the death of my infant
brother or of the fact that that part of the house had previously been a nursery.

Radnor.

454 APPENDICES [869a

VII. The following statement is from the Ranee of Sardwak : —

January ^ ^893*

In September 1892 my maid, who was not known to Miss A., complained
of persistent pain in the neck and arm. She told me afterwards that she liad
been afraid of paralysis. I asked Miss A. to let “ Semirus ” write what was ihe
matter with her. The maid came into the room. No one said a word as to htr
symptoms, but Miss A.’s hand at once wrote in “ Semirus' ” handwriting: “ ]i
is not paralysis, as you fear; it is rheumatism; your bed ought to be moved
from the window,’* or words to that effect. I went into the maid’s room, which
it so happened that 1 had never seen, as it was in a house which I had only
rented for a short time, and I found in fact that the bed was exposed to a severe
draught. It was placed against the window. 1 had it moved, and the rheu-
matic pain disappeared. Margaret Brooke.

[See another case connected with “Semirus" and reported by Sir
Lawrence Jones, which I give at the end of this Appendix.]

VIII. I give here an incident of which I was myself witness, and which
seems to me typical of a class of communications of which I have already said
something, — where information unknown to the automatist is given, on the
soi~disant authority of some departed spirit ; but yet this information, $0 far
as true, is known to some person present, and when anything which goes
beyond the knowledge of persons present is asked for, the answer goes off into
mere guessing and vagueness. Note also the fact that these messages were
given by a distinct rapping sound in the table. This phenomenon is often
spoken of in spiritist journals as a very common one. For myself 1 may say
that having sat at tables many hundred times, in readiness to welcome raps if-
they appeared, I have frequently heard raps in the presence of paid medium.s,
and I have frequently heard creaks of the table in the presence of my own
friends ; but only in the presence of some four or five non-professional and
trustworthy persons have I heard unmistakable raps, answering questions, and
producing upon my mind the conviction that no known agency was concerned
in producing them.

On this occasion the messages given were private enough to need an
alteration in the initials of the friends present. Besides Miss A., a sister,
and myself, there sat at the table Lady B. and the Hon. C. D. A Christian
name was clearly rapped out, which was recognised by Mr. C. D. as that of
his mother, not consciously known to any of the rest of us. Since, however,
the name was in the Peerage, it was of little evidential value. A message then
came as to Mr. C. D.’s efforts on behalf of a friend, for whom he was then
trying to get a post. “What kind of employment shall I get for him.^”
“ Island.” “ What island ? ” “ Jersey.” “ Can you mention any one who will
help in this ? ” “ Lang ” was rapped out, and then came many confused raps
and the message ceased.

Now Mr. D. was in reality trying privately to get a post in Jersey for his
friend, — about whom none of us knew anything. How easy, therefore,
woufd be to report this sitting as follows: “ Mr. D.’s mother announced her-
self by raps, and gave advice on a private matter.”

But now compare the classical case, if I may so term it, of Mr. and Mrs.
Newnham (849 A), and consider how these replies might be explained on

TO CHAPTER VIII

455

859 A]

the theory of mere thought-transference between living persons. In Mr.
Ps^ewnham's case we found that the automatic writing got at the questioner’s
ideas gradually and imperfectly, and filled up gaps by random answers made
to look as interesting as possible. So here, in my view, some intelligence
not necessarily other than some part of Miss A.’s subliminal self readily
discerns in Mr. D.’s mind an idea so firmly fixed as his mother’s name, and
takes that as an interesting source to which to ascribe the replies. It next
gels easily at the idea of helping the friend ; but the definite name Jersey is
harder to come at, and is preceded by island^ a reply which could hardly
have been given save by some one groping for the clearer notion. Then
when the name of some helpful resident in Jersey is asked for — Mr. D. him-
self now not knowing any such name — an attempt is made to rap out the
name which is in most minds the first which the idea of Jersey would call
up. Sen.seless as this guess was (for Mr. D. certainly did not expect Mrs.
Langtry to find posts for his friends), it was quite analogous to the random,
dreamlike associations and plays upon words which arc characteristic of sub-
liminal messages of all kinds.

The next question, again, received an answer which might have been
credited to clairvoyance. Mr. C. D. handed Miss A. a ring (not that I see
reason to suppose that the ring made any difference) and simply said, “ Tell
me about my friend now at a hotel in Paris, with whom this ring is con-
nected.” Immediately raps spelt out the sentence, “Case for operation.”
A few details of the disease were then given, which corresponded with what
Mr. C. D. knew, and which, where they went beyond his knowledge, admitted
of no proof.

I can hardly myself doubt that this knowledge also came from Mr. C. D.’s
mind, and not (as is usually professed in such cases) from actual inspection of
the patient.

It may, of course, be asked why e.xperiments like thi.s, which, even if they
prove nothing more than thought-transference, do at least seem to prove that
so definitely, are not constantly repeated. The answer is that there are
very few persons with whom they can be repeated; and that Mr. C. D.’s
personality was in this case probably as essential as Miss A.’s. Mr. D.,
though he cannot by himself obtain raps, has marked power of a psychical
kind, and is in fact the gentleman to whom Miss A. has above alluded as
having been demanded by her guides before she or her family knew any-
thing of him beyond official mentions of his name in the papers. I can myself
vouch for the recurring scrawls, “ Bring C. D.” — Bring C. D.” which puzzled
the A. family some six years ago, when they certainly were not aware of
Mr. D.’s gift (then very slightly developed), and when it had not consciously
occurred to myself that good might result from the collocation of the two
sources of power.

IX. The next case which I shall give is a curious one, as in\oIving (i) raps,
(2) a crystal-vision, (3) an apparition seen by two persons, viz. Miss A. herself
and Mr. Harry de Windt (brother of the Ranee), well known as a traveller in
Russia. Unfortunately no notes were taken, but I heard of the incident a few
weeks afterwards from Lady Brooke (the Ranee), Mr. C. D., Mrs. A., and
Miss A. (all present at the time), and a letter from Mr. de Windt confirms two
of the main points.

In September 1892, on. the occasion of the first meeting of Mr. de Windt

APPENDICES

456

[869 A

and Miss A., the latter wrote the word Doishowalinksky, which at first
was thought to be a sentence, but turned out to be a name well known to
Mr. de Windt.

On the same day a face appeared near Mr. C. D. which was clearly seen
by Miss A. and Mr. de Windt, and recognised by the latter, as stated in a
letter to me, dated October 5th, 1892: “ I can only tell you that I distinctly
saw the face of an exile 1 am acquainted with, one Dombrowski, who is
(or was) located at Tomsk, in Western Siberia. A message was also sent me ”
[from a Russian source ; but Mr. de Windt explains the inexpedience of print-
ing further particulars of this].

Miss A., on being afterwards shown a photograph of Dombrowski (not,
however, mixed with other photographs, as it should have been), recognised it,
but said that the face as seen by her looked older and more worn ; in which
Mr. de Windt concurred. It is not known whether Dombrowski is dead
or alive.

On the same day Miss A., looking in the crystal, saw a small man with
bright red hair and red face, a big stick, a long petticoat, and a fur cap, walk-
ing in front of a little hut. Mr. de Windt recognised this figure as resembling
a hill-man set to watch an isolated prisoner. These stunted hill-men dye their
hair with red clay.

A few days later (September 15th, 1892) a message was given by raps to
Lady Brooke (the Ranee) : “ Tell your brother (Mr. de Windt) that Shiskine
is the man to help him.” Neither Miss A. nor Mr. de Windt had ever con-
sciously heard of Sliiskine, but in the St, James's Gazette of September 24th
they observed that M. Shiskine had received a certain high appointment, which
explained the message. His appointment had also been mentioned in the
Times of August 31st. It is, of course, possible that subliminal memory may
externalise itself by raps, as by other means.

X. Among the habitual “controls,’* “ Lord Chancellor Hardwicke ” is almost
the only one of sufficient historical mark to admit of our testing the truth of
his statements. He gave a list of the surnames of sixteen of his friends. . . .
Most of the names (though not all) appear in Harris’s “ Life of Lord Hardwicke ” ;
but in several cases there are rea.sons, not apparent in the Life, which make it
probable that there was more intimacy than the incidental mention in the Life
would imply. The case resembles the biographies of musicians written auto-
matically by Mr. Stainton .Moses (see 947 ). The tone of boisterous humour
which runs through these messages is unlike Mi.ss A., but it must be re-
membered that in the “ objectivation of types ” so often obtained by hypnotic
suggestion, a part quite alien to the hypnotised subject's character is often
surprisingly well maintained.

In a more recent case connected with the control known as “ Semirus,’"
through whom medical advice has often been conveyed to Miss A., a
boy’s career was saved by the advice thus given. The documents re-
lating to this case were shown to me by Sir Lawrence Jones, who was
personally acquainted with all the circumstances.

The boy was at school, preparing for a profession which involved a
severe medical examination. In May, 1900, about a year before the
examination, a serious physical defect was discovered, and a well-known
medical authority advised that the defect could not be sufficiently

TO CHAPTER VIII

457

remedied to enable the boy to pass. Arrangements had actually been
made for changing his career when it was suggested that his parents, who
were then abroad, should consult ** Semirus.” They wrote to Miss A.,
with whom they were slightly acquainted, but who had never seen the
boy, and begged her to ask “Semirus” to go to the school — distant
about thirty miles from where she was living — look at the affected limb,
and give an opinion on the case. Semirus ” insisted that " some really
good surgeon could set it right.*’ A specialist was then consulted, and a
delicate operation was successfully performed. The boy has since passed
his examination without any difficulty.

862 A. The following is another case of planchette-writing communi-
cated by Mr. Hensleigh Wedgwood, the operators being himself and
Mrs, R. The account is quoted from the Journal S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 319
{November^ 1890).

Extract from Mrs» R!*s Journal.

October 10th, [1890,] Friday, at , Mr. Wedgwood and I sitting. The

board moved after a short pause and one preliminary circling.

“ David — David — David — dead 143 years.”

The butler at this moment announced lunch, and Mr. Wedgwood said to the
spirit, ** Will you go on for us afterwards, as we must break off now ? ”

“ I will try.”

During lunch Mr. Wedgwood was reckoning up the date indicated as 1747,
and conjecturing that the control was perhaps David Hume, who he thought
had died about then. On our beginning again to sit, the following was
.volunteered : —

“ I am not Hume. I have come with [Mrs. V., Mrs. R.’s sister]. I was
attracted to her during her life in America. My work was in that land, and
my earthly toil was cut short early, as hers has been. I died at thirty years
old. I toiled five years, carrying forward the lamp of God's truth as I knew it.”

Mr. Wedgwood remarked that he mu.st have been a missionary.

“ VeSf in Susquehannah and other places.”

“ Can you give any name besides David ? ”

“David Bra — David Bra — David Brain — David Braine—David Brain.**

Mr. W. ; “ Do you mean that your name is Braine?”

“ Very nearly right.”

Mr. W. : “ Try again.”

“ David Braine. Not quite all the name ; right so far as it goes ... 1 was
born in 1717.*’

Mr. W. : “ Were you a native of America ? ”

“ (Illegible) My native land. The Indians knew many things. They heard
*ne, and my work prospered. In some things they were wise.**

Mr. W. : “ Are you an American ? ”

“America I hold to be my country as we consider things. I worked
—— ’* (sentence ends with a line of D.’s).

Here Mr. Wedgwood felt tired, and Miss Hughes proposed that she and I
should go for a walk while he rested. When we came in Mr. Wedgwood said
be thought it had come into his head who our control was. He had some
recollection that in the eighteenth century a man named David Brainard was

458 APPENDICES [864a

missionary to the North American Indians. We sat again, and the following
was written ; —

** I am glad you know me. I had not power to complete name or give more
details. I knew that secret of the district. It was guarded by the Indians,
and was made known to two independent circles. Neither of them succeeded,
but the day will come that will uncover the gold.**

It was suggested that this meant Heavenly truth.

“ I spoke of earthly gold.’*

Mr. Wedgwood said the writing was so faint he thought power was
failing.

“ Yes, nearly gone. I wrote during my five years of work. It kept my
heart alive.**

Mr. Wedgwood writes : —

I could not think at first where I had ever heard of Brainard, but I learn
from my daughter in London that my sister-in-law, who lived with me forty or
fifty years ago, was a great admirer of Brainard, and seemed to have an account
of his life, but I am quite certain that I never opened the book and knew
nothing of the dates, which are all correct, as well as his having been a mis-
sionary to the Susquehannahs.

In another letter Mr. Wedgwood writes : —

I see the name is Brain^^rd, not ard, as I had supposed, and this removes a
difficulty in the writing. Planchettc had written Braine, and said that was
right as far as it went, which it would not have been if the name had been
Brainard. My daughter has sent me* extracts from his life, stating tliat he was
born in 1718, and not 1717 as planchette wrote. But Mrs. R.’s Biographical
Dictionary says that he died in 1747, aged 30.

Mrs. R. wTites that she had no knowledge whatever of David Brainerd
before this.

Extract from Biographical Dictionary sent by Mr. Wedgwood : —

Brainerd, David. A celebrated American missionary, who signalised him-
self by his successful endeavours to convert the Indians on the Susquehanna,
Delaware, &c. Died, aged 30, 1747.

It is perhaps noteworthy in connection with the last sentence of the
planchette-writing that in the life of Brainerd by Jonathan Edwards
extracts given from his journal show that he wrote a good deal,

** Feb. 3, 1744. Could not but write as well as meditate/* &c. Feb. i 5 »
1745. Was engaged in writing almost all the day.*’ He invariably speaks
of comfort in connection with writing.

864 A. Experiments by Professor Rossi-Pagnoni. I give extracts
from the report on these experiments by Mr. H. Babington Smith, C.S.L,—
a rni^mber of the Council of the S.P.R. — published in Proceedings S.P.Rv
vol. V. pp. 549-65*

Professor Rossi-Pagnoni is Director of the Ginnasio or Public School
at Pesaro, a small town on the east coast of Italy, a little to the north

864A] TO CHAPTER VIII 459

of Ancona. In the year 1871 he was led to take an interest in Spiritualism,
and began daily to practise automatic writing under the advice and direc-
tion of a friend who had frequently obtained communications from spirits,
as he believed, by that means. He held a lead pencil in his hand, allow-
ing its point to rest on a sheet of paper, but not touching the table with
his arm, and waited for results. For the first forty-three days the move-
ments of the pencil were incoherent and unintelligible. On the forty-
fourth a name was written ; and from that time onwards the facility and
distinctness of the writing increased, and communications of considerable
length were often obtained.

These experiments, and also experiments in table-rapping, which had
been tried by Professor Rossi and a small circle of friends, were discon-
tinued in the year 1877, owing to the increased claims of scholastic duties
upon the Professor's time. In 1886 he found leisure to resume them and
was then joined by Dr. Moroni, Municipal doctor at Pesaro, who brought
to the sittings a hypnotic subject of his, named Isabella Carzetti. The
sittings gradually developed into spiritualistic seances, with Carzetti in the
hypnotic state as speaking medium, purporting to be controlled by the
spirits of deceased persons. Mr. Smith, however, after examining the
evidence, concluded that the medium showed no proof of any super-
normal powers.

In the year 1877 Professor Rossi published a pamphlet entitled,
Intonw at Fenomeni Spiriiiciy Lettera alP Onorando Signor Conte Terenzio
Mamiani, This contains, besides other matter, reports of the more
.striking results obtained in the earlier series of experiments, which were
concerned chiefly with automatic writing.

In November, 1888, Mr. Smith paid a short visit to Pesaro and had
the opportunity of seeing and making extracts from the records of the
sittings and other documents. Among these were the original automatic
manuscripts, which have been preserved from the beginning.

The following are some of the cases of automatic writing : —

In April 1872 a friend asked Rossi to evoke the spirit of a relation, formerly
living near Modena, who had been dead about two years. “ 1 had never known
her,” says Rossi, ** and my friend told me what I was to ask her on his account.
1 did as I was asked, and after the answer was obtained, to my great astonish-
ment (for a similar thing had never happened before) I felt my hand impelled
to draw, one after the other, two flowers, with their little leaves. After this
addio was written, and the movement ceased. The following day I took the
answer to my friend and told him of the curious drawings. ‘ Do not be sur-
prised,’ said he. ‘ Know that she was very fond of drawing, and also ever\
time that she writes by my hand, she makes me draw something.' "

This account is confirmed by a document dated December 28th, i888^and
signed by Cesare Perseguiti, barrister, who states that he is the friend men-
tioned by Rossi, and that the account of the incident is perfectly true in all
particulars.

460 APPENDICES [864a

With regard to the character of the writing produced, Rossi say$
{Letter to Mamiani^ p. 133) : —

It is not necessary for me to say that my ordinary handwriting is Uj/]y
and always of one pattern. Nevertheless, when writing as a medium, 1 have
had very various forms of caligraphy according as various beings made com-
munication. When these beings presented themselves again, often unex>
pectedly and after a long interval, they reproduced their former handwriting.
Moreover, in that uncomfortable position of hand and arm 1 have had cali-
graphic forms $0 perfect that 1 could not reproduce them when writing at
ease.

This statement by itself is too vague to be of much value as evidence ;
but the following documents confirm it, and give more precise informa-
tion as to the persons whose writing was reproduced, and as to the degree
of likeness obtained : —

VjL^klkOt January u/, 1889.

1 have a lively recollection of having come sometimes to your house in
1^^731 to take part in spiritualistic experiments with the table and with writing.
One evening, after some experiments with the table, I asked you to summon
my dear writing-master, Luigi Bnmetti, to write. He had at that time been
dead for some years. . . . You set yourself to try the experiment, the pencil
resting vertically upon the paper, and your wrist and elbow raised. When the
motion of the hand, which you assured us was spontaneous, began, there
appeared, after the signature of Brunetti, some lines of writing of various sizes.
The first was extremely small — so that a magnifying glass was necessary to
read it and to see its great precision. The following lines were of middle size, •
and the last large. This, I recollect, was a beautiful verse. I remember that
I immediately bore witness to those present — in accordance with the truth—
that, specially in the larger character, the manner of writing and the hand of
my dear master were clearly to be seen.

So much for the truth, which now, also, I willingly confirm.

(Signed) CLriTO Masini,
Professor of Writing and Book-keeping at the Royal
Technical School of Pesaro.

When Mr. Smith was at Pesaro he saw the original MS. here referred
to, and states that the writing was pretty and regular, and entirely different
from Professor Rossi’s usual hand.

Pesaro, January ind^ 1889.

I comply with your wish and willingly declare, as I have a lively recol-
lection of the fact, that towards the end of 1873 ^ occasion to go to your
house. . . . You showed me certain communications, written in pencil, which
you said you had received from the spirit of the lamented Signor Alessandro
Paterni, uncle of my wife. I said that the writing of the name and surname
seeifted to me very like the real signature of ray deceased connection. You
asserted that you had never seen his signature, and, in fact, it was very pro-
bable that it was entirely unknown to you.

I’lETRO Bonini, Captain.

865 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 461

In the following case a message, apparently telepathic, was received
by means of raps and automatic writing.

{Letter to Mamiani^ p. 143)

On November 21st, 1873, about half-past ten in the evening, Rossi was in his
study. He had been correcting proofs for more than an hour, and was tired
and rather cold. In consequence he intended, when his work was finished, not
to go to the cafi^ as was then his custom almost every evening about eleven, but
to warm himself a little with a walk through the streets. He then perceived two
slight but very distinct raps close to him on a side door opening into an inner
room in which there was no one. He paid no attention to these, trying to
persuade himself that they were due to natural causes. Half-an-hour after-
wards he had finished his work and was going out ; but at the moment when
he had his hand upon the door of his rooms, to shut it after him, he heard a
loud knock upon it as if given with the fist. He had no doubt that this was
spiritualistic in character, and returning at once to his room, sat down to write.
He fully expected to receive a warning against going out that evening for fear
of some dangerous encounter. Instead, however, of any such warning the
following message appeared : “ My sincere friendship leads me to warn you
that you are desired by S.^ {i.e. Stanislao Cecchi) : go, therefore, to see him.”
This message was signed with the name of a dead person in whose name
messages had been obtained on other occasions. Rossi considered it extremely
improbable that Cecchi (an acquaintance with whom he was not then intimate)
would wish to see him ; but went at once to the cafe where he was generally to
be found at that hour. As he approached, he saw Stanislao and some friends
coming out of the cafi, He had no sooner seen me,” continues Rossi, “ than
he came to meet me, and said he had need of a certain favour from me.
'Knowing from some conversations which I had had with him that he was a
disbeliever (in Spiritualism), I caught at the opportunity and answered that I
would willingly do him the service, on condition that he would at once accom-
pany me to my house. . . . We went to my house together, we entered into the
room together, and I showed him on my table the message which had caused
me to go in search of him. ... He subsequently gave an account of the
occurrence to some friends, though without adopting my explanation, and, so
far as he was able, loyally bore witness to its truth.’*

Stanislao Cecchi is now dead, and therefore direct confirmation of this
account cannot be obtained ; but in a letter written in 1889, a friend of
his — Carlo Cinelli — at Professor Rossi’s request gives his recollections
of what he had heard from Cecchi at the time, and these correspond with
Professor Rossi’s account.

865 A. The next case is taken from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix.
P- 107, being there quoted from an article in the Arena for August 1891,
entitled Psychic Experiences,” by Sara A. Underwood ; ^ with In

^ I believe that the name, and not merely the iiiiti.al, w.is written. The initial only
'8 given in the printed account, because at that time Professor Rossi was not at liberty
to publish the name.— H. B. S.

See also Automatic or Spirit Writing, with other Psychic Experiences, by Sara
A. Underwood (Chicago, 1896).

APPENDICES

462

[865 4

troductoiy Remarks by B, F. Underwood (known to me), who writes
thus :

The statements in this paper as to what was written in my presence pur-
porting to be communications from ** spirits,” and as to the circumstances
under which it was written, are scrupulously correct. The “ communications,'’
it is certain, are from an intelligent source. Mrs. Underwood is the person bv
whose hand they are put in form. That she is not labouring under a mistake
in thinking that she is unconscious of the thought expressed until she has read
the writing, — if, indeed, such a mistake in a sane mind is possible, — I am cer-
tain. Sometimes, owing to the illegibility of the writing, she has to study out
sentences. The writing varies in style, not only on different evenings, but on
the same evening ; it is apparently the writing of not fewer than twenty per-
sons, and generally bearing no resemblance whatever, so far as 1 can judge, to
Mrs. Underwood's handwriting, which is remarkably uniform. The communi-
cations are unlike in the degrees of intelligence, in the quality of thought, and in
the disposition which they show. Detailed statements of facts unknown to
either of us, but which, weeks afterwards, were learned to be correct, have
been written, and repeated again and again, when disbelieved and contradicted
by us. All the writing has been done in my presence, but most of it while I
have been busily occupied with work which demanded my undivided attention.
The views expressed are often different from my own, and quite as frequently,
perhaps, opposed to Mrs. Underwood’s views.

Mrs. Underwood writes as follows ; —

The modus operandi\^ the simplest possible. As I remembered that Mr.
Underwood was rather averse to the planchette e.xperiments of former years,
thinking them unwholesome and deteriorating in their tendency, I at first said
nothing to him of my new psychical experiments, though these were made
oftenest in his presence in the evening when we both sat at one writing table,
near each other, busied with our individual literary work. As I experimented
in his absence as well as in his presence, I soon found that I got the most
coherent writings when he was present. Indeed I could get nothing coherent,
and very frequently nothing at all, when he was away, but when he was present
the communications began to grow strangely interesting, and as he was called
upon repeatedly, I felt obliged to invite his attention, when the most surprising
answers were given, which roused his curiosity and interest. It has been ex-
plained that his presence is necessary for me to obtain writing, as “ blended
power is best.” Two or three times, at the suggestion of this intelligence, we
have asked two of our intimate literary friendls— non-Spiritualists — to be pre-
sent, but each time with comparative failure ; afterwards we were informed
that the cause of failure was the introduction of persons unused to the condi-
tions, who broke up the harmonious relations necessary to communication; in
time they could be of help.

It would take a volume to present all the interesting statements as to an
advanced stage of existence, only hidden from us because of the inadequacy
of our sense perceptions, and by the conditions imposed upon us at this stage
of Ottr progress, which have been given from this source. Explanations have
been made why communication through the agency of certain persons, though
not through all, is possible. The conditions, it is alleged, are not entirely de-
pendent upon the superior intelligence or morality of the persons with whom

TO CHAPTER VIII

865 A]

463

the intelligences can become cn rapport. These invisibles declare that they are
as seriously and anxiously experimenting on their side to discover modes of
untrammelled communication with us, as we on our side ought to be, if what
they write be true, and if such a thing is possible. “ Spirits ” they persistently
insist upon being called. In this paper I can give only a statement of
some things which do not seem explicable on the hypothesis of mind-
reaiiing, thought-transference, hypnotism, or subconsciousness. In all these
experiments I have been in a perfectly normal state. The only physical
indication of any outside influence is an occasional slight thrill as of an
electric current from my shoulder to the hand which holds the waiting
pen. Step by step I have been taught a series of .signals to aid me in
correctly reading the communications. I have no power to summon at will
any individual I wish. I have repeatedly, but in vain, tried to get messages
from some near and dear friends. It has been explained that on their side,
as on ours, certain “ conditions ” must exist in order to get in “control.”
When “ eh ? is written I know that the operator at the other end of the line
is ready to communicate. When in the middle of a sentence or a word
'‘gone” or “change” is written, I understand that the connection is broken,
and I must not expect the completion of that message. When a line like this

is drawn, it is a sign that that sentence is completed or the communication

ended. So with other things. Rhymes are often unexpectedly written, especially
if the “ control ” professes to be a poet, and they are dashed off so rapidly that
I do not understand their import until the close, when I can read them over.
Impromptu rhyming is a feat utterly impossible to either Mr. Underwood or
myself. Names persistently recur which are unknown to us. Many different
handwritings appear, some of them far superior to my own. When I first
began to get communications I destroyed, in a day or two after they were
written, the slips of paper containing the writing, but as the developments
became more interesting, Mr. Underwood suggested that they be preserved
for reference. I acted on this suggestion, and thus in the instances of facts
given outside our ovvn knowledge, I am enabled to give the exact wording of
each communication. Our questions were asked viva voce, and as they were
often sugge.sted by what had been previously written, 1 either at the time or
soon afterwards wrote them just above the reply. I am not, therefore, trust-
ing at all to memory in the statements I shall make.

A gentleman of this city (whom I will call John Smith, but whose real
name was a more uncommon one) with whom Mr. Underwood had been
acquainted many years, but of whose family relations he knew little, died
here more than a year ago. Afr. Underwood had met him but once in the
year previous to his death, he having been away on account of failing health,
staying, we understood, with a daughter recently married, whose home was
in Florida. The first name of this married daughter, or of any of Mr.
Smith’s daughters except one, was unknown to Mr. Underwood. I had met
one of his daughters whose name I knew to be Jennie. 1 also knew that
there was another named Violet. I was not sure, however, whether this was
the name of the married one, or of another unmarried, but had the impres
Sion that Violet was unmarried. One evening, while waiting for automatic
writing with no thought of Mr. Smith in my mind, and Mr. Underwood siting
near me at the table with his thoughts concentrated on an article he was
preparing, this was written : “John Smith will now enter into conversation with

APPENDICES

464

[865 4

B. F. Underwood.*’ I read this to Mr. Underwood, who laid aside his pen,
and in order to test the matter, asked if Mr. Smith remembered the last time
they met, soon after his return from the South, and a short time previous to
his death. There was some delay in the answer, but soon reply came, “ On
Madison Street.” “ Whereabouts on Madison was asked. “ Near Washing-
ton.” “ At what hour ? ” “ About 10 A.M., raining.” As it was rarely that Mr.
Underwood was in that part of the city at so early an hour, and especially on a
rainy day, I doubted the correctness of this reply, but Mr. Underwood recalled
to my mind the unusual circumstance which made it necessary for him to be in
that vicinity on the day and at the hour named, on which he and Mr. Smith,
he distinctly remembered, last met. Only a few words passed between them on
account of the rain. After this, writing, purporting to be from Mr. Smith,
came frequently. Very soon something was written which induced Mr.
Underwood half sportively to inquire whether there was anything which
troubled Mr. Smith, anything which he wished he had done, but had omitted,
before his death. The answer came, “ One thing— change deeds on Violet’s
account. None of my wife’s are at my daughter’s disposal. All in her own
disposal.” Mr. Underwood asked if it was meant that he had not left his
property— for he was a man of some wealth— as he now wished he had. “ You
are right,” was written, “ want all my girls to share alike.” “ Which daughter
do you refer to ^ ” was asked. “Went away from her in Florida — Violet,” was
the answer. I remarked, “ Why, I thought Violet was one of the unmarried
girls, but it must be that that is the name of the married daughter.” Then Mr.
Underwood was strongly urged to call on Mr. Smith’s married son, James, with
whom Mr. Underwood had a slight acquaintance, and tell him of this com-
munication. “ Clearly state my desire that my daughter Violet share equally
with her sisters.” Of course this was utterly out of the question. At that time
we had no intention of informing any one of our psychic experience, and if
we had, Mr. James Smith would have thought us insane or impertinent to come
to him with so ridiculous a story, the truth of which we ourselves strongly
doubted. Pages were, however, written concerning the matter in so earnest
and pleading a manner that 1 came to feel conscience-stricken at refusing to
do what was asked, and to shrink from seeing Mr. Smith’s name appear.
Once was written, “ Say to James that in my new position, and with my new
views of life, I feel that I did wrong to treat his sister Violet as I did. She
was not to blame for following out her own convictions, when I had incub
cated independent thought and action for all.” This and other sentences of
the kind seemed to convey the idea that Violet had in some way incurred his
displeasure by doing according to her own will in opposition to his. This
was puzzling to us, as we knew that in her marriage, at least, the daughter we
thought to be Violet had followed her father’s wishes.

A few weeks later, however, came an unlooked-for verification of Mr.
Smith’s messages. In a conversation between Mr. Underwood and a business
friend of Mr. Smith, who was well acquainted with all his affairs, regret was
expressed that so wealthy a man had left so little for a certain purpose. Mr.
Underwood then inquired as to what disposition had been made of his property,
and was told that he had left it mainly to his wife and children — so much to this
one, jnd that. “ But Violet,” continued Mr, Underwood’s informant, “was left
only a small amount, as Mr. Smith was angry because she married against his
wishes.” “ Why,” remarked Mr. Underwood, “ I understood that he approved

TO CHAPTER VIII

865 A]

465

of the match, and the fact that he accompanied herself and husband to
Florida, and remained with them some time, would seem to indicate that/’
Oh, you are thinking of Lucy, the eldest girl ; her marriage was all right, but
Violet, one of the younger daughters, going to Florida with her [Lucy’s] hus-
band, fell in love with a young man of whom her father did not approve,
so she made a runaway marriage, and on account of his displeasure, Mr.
Smith left her only a small sum.” The intelligence writing was aware of facts
unknown to either Mr. Underwood or myself, and no other persons were in the
room when these communications were given.

In the Arena for June 1892 Mr. Underwood continues : —

My presence has been and is now one of the conditions of Mrs. Underwood’s
getting connected and coherent writing. Only a few words and a sentence or
two have been written occasionally in my absence. Once when I was absent
from home the peculiar sensation which had always been felt in Mrs. Under-
wood s right hand before the writing began, was felt in the left hand, with
which a name was written with letters reversed, and she could read it only
when impressed to do so. She held it before the mirror. It was the name of
a person two hundred miles distant, who was still alive, but, as was subse-
quently learned, in an unconscious state at the time, and very near death,
which occurred two or three days afterwards.

The word “ death ” is never used except with ” so-called ” before it, or
‘•which is a new birth,” or some other explanatory or qualifying expression.
The writing purports to be from extra-mediumistic and extra-mundane sources
—from invisible human beings who once inhabited this earth. The writing
always, whether purporting to be from a person of high or low degree, claims
that the controlling intelligence is a spirit — a discarnate human being. Any
intimation that the communicating intelligence may be the medium’s sub-
" conscious ego, a fraction of which only rises to the level of conscious knowledge,
is met with responses to the effect that it is strange anybody can believe such
a vagary. One claim, to which there has never been exception in any writing
purporting to be a message, is that a “ spirit,” a discarnate human being, moves
the hand that holds the pen. Generally names and dates arc not given ; and
when they are, they are as liable to be wrong as correct. In answer to questions
as to the reason of this, it has been said substantially that memories and
reminiscences are only gathered up as the departed are able to come in contact
with persons and objects of earth. Strange as it may seem, I get tired and
nervous when* this writing is prolonged; it exhausts me much more than it
does Mrs. Underwood, on whom it never leaves any depressing influence.

The intelligence which seems to be extraneous, which invariably claims
to be a departed spirit, now one, now another, is sometimes inferior intellec-
tually to the medium ; at other times, in certain lines of thought, in the use
of words, and in the statement of facts, the intelligence that directs the pen
evinces larger knowledge than Mrs. Underwood consciously possesses. The
spelling is sometimes different from her own, and the style is often stilted, and
even grandiose, while her style is simple and natural. In some cases the
writing relates to what is entirely unknown to the writer— to her ordinary
consciousness — though in some of these cases I can conceive it as possible,
and deem it probable, that the writing relates to what has been noted or
learned by the passive consciousness, and is evoked therefrom even though
there is no recognition of its having been included in the person’s experience.

VOL. 11. 2 (;

466 APPENDICES [867A

But in other cases the writing has contained evidence of knowledge that Mrs.
Underwood never could have obtained in any known way. She gave one or
two instances in the August Arena. 1 will relate another of her experiences
which, in my opinion, proves that there are supernormal methods of obtaining
knowledge.

One morning a message purporting to be from a young man recently
deceased was received. Neither Mrs. Underwood nor 1 had ever seen his
handwriting. We knew his name only as William S. The message was
signed **Z. W. S.” At the time I remarked that I did not believe there was
any Z in his name, and in this opinion Mrs. Underwood concurred. A few
days afterwards we met the father and the mother of the young man, who were
so impressed with the resemblance between the handwriting and that of their
son that they wished to take the writing with them. There was a Z in the
name, but it was the initial of his second name, and not of the first, as it was
written. In the presence of the young man’s mother, Mrs. Underwood’s hand
was moved to write, and the lady asked if her father would give a test by
writing his name. The first name, Solomon, was written slowly ; and after a
pause, the surname was written very quickly. Mrs. Underwood did not know
and never had known the name, which was written correctly; and Mr. S.,
who is a lawyer and a man of critical and discriminating mind, and his wife
both declared that the signature closely resembled that of the old gentleman.
Some days ago I wrote to Mr. S., asking him whether, after further reflection,
he could suggest a possible explanation of what Mrs. Underwood wrote without
recourse to any occult theory. He replied and referred to the message pur.
porting to be from his son, thus : ** 1 liave compared it with signatures of our
boy. As I told you in Chicago at the time, the writing bears a %fefy strong
resemblance to his writing. Mrs. Underwood did not, in my opinion, either
consciously or unconsciously, have any knowledge of Will’s full name. The
writing, while quite similar to Will’s, is very different from Mrs. Underwood’s.
My wife’s father’s name had not been mentioned at all. Never had been in
Mrs. Underwood’s presence. I don’t think she had ever met a member of Mrs.
S.’s family by that name, yet she certainly wrote the name of Mrs. S.’s father,
Solomon M., very plainly, when asked to write the name of the person who had
just written that he had something to say. This writing was also very^ very
similar to the handwriting of the old gentleman.”

Fully aware that incidents long forgotten may be recalled, that possibly
no lapse of memory is irrevocable, and that under certain conditions from the
submerged self may be .sent up memories which cannot be distinguished from
newly-acquired knowledge, still, I am confident that Mrs. Underwood’s hand
has written names and statements of facts not only once, but several times,
which were not and never had been any part of her conscious knowledge.

867 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 343-48,

In Proceedings, vol. v. p. 434, is given a case translated from Psychische
StudieHf February 1889, pp. 67-9, which describes a communication
made to Mdlle. Emma Stramm concerning the death of a M. August
Duvanel. M. Aksakoff has kindly sent me additional matter of high
interest bearing on this case, which I here translate from his letter dated
May 9th, 1889 (new style). It will be well first to reprint the case as it
sto^ in Psychische Stndien.

867 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 467

On January I9tby 1887 (says M. Aksakoff)^ I received a visit from the engineer
Kaigorodoff, who resides in Wilna. He narrated to me the following circum-
stances. He had as governess for his children Mdlle. Emma Stramm, a Swiss,
from the town of Neufch^tel, who possessed the gift of automatic writing. At
a stance held at nine o’clock on the evening of January 15th, at the house of
Herr Kaigorodoff, at Wilna, the following communication was given in French
in his presence. I have been shown the original, and quote this from a copy
of it. The medium, who was in her normal state, asked: —

“ Is Lydia here ?” (This was a personality which had manifested itself at
previous sittings.)

“No, Louis 1 is here, and wishes to impart a piece of news (une nouvelle) to
his sister.”

“What is it.?”

“ A person of thy acquaintance passed away i^estpartie) about three o’clock
to-day.”

“ What am I to understand by this ? ”

“ That is to say, — he is dead.”

“Who?”

“August I'luvanel.”

“ What was his illness ? ”

“ The formation of a clot of blood {jVun engorgement de sang). Pray for the
redemption of his soul.”

Two weeks later Herr Kaigorodoff, who was again in St. Petersburg, showed
me a letter from David Stramm, the father of the medium, dated from Neuf-
chatcl, on January i8th, 1887 (new style) ; thus written three days after the
death of Duvanel. This letter was received at Wilna on January 23rd. In it
her father informs her of the event in the following words. I copy them liter-
ally from the original : —

“ My much loved daughter. ... I will now tell thee a great piece of news
{une grande nouvellc). August Duvanel died on J anuary 1 5th, about three o’clock
in the afternoon. It was, so to speak, a sudden death, for he had only been ill
a few hours. He was attacked by blood-clotting {engorgement de sang) when
he was at the bank. He spoke very little, and everything that he said was for
thee. ... He commended himself to thy prayers. These were his last words.”

The difference in time between Wilna and Switzerland is about an hour. It
would thus be four o’clock in Wilna when Duvanel’s deajth occurred, and five
hours later this piece of news was communicated by automatic writing.

But who was Duvanel ? And why should his death be “ a great piece of
news ” for Mdlle. Emma Slraram ? In reply to questions which I put to him
in writing, Herr Kaigorodoff gave me the following explanation : “ When
Mdlle. Emma Stramm lived with her parents in Neufchiltel, this Herr Duvanel
wanted to marry her. But he was met with a decided refiKsal on the part of the
young lady. As her parents, on the other hand, were in favour of the marriage,
and endeavoured to persuade her to consent to it, she resolved to leave her
fatherland and take a situation as a governess. The last communication she
had with Duvanel was some time before her departure, in the year 1881. She

* The name of a deceased brother of the medium, who usually manifests at ’her
seances. Louis died in 1869, aged eleven months. At the beginning of the stances, ,
about the end of 1886, he was the first to communicate, announcing himself as his sister’s
“spirit protector.”— A. A.

APPENDICES

468

[867 a

did not keep up any correspondence with him. She had seen Duvanel's family
only two or three times in all. A year after her departure he left Neufchatel
and remained in Canton Zurich until his death.”

To this M. Aksakoff adds, in a letter to rne (May 9th, 1889) : —

I have delayed answering your letter of April ist, because on receiving it I
wrote to Colonel Kaigorodoff and to Mdlle. Emma Strainm for further details,
which seemed to me needful for the completion of our critical judgment on t!)e
Duvancl case. I have just received their letters, dated April 16th and April i8ih.

I will begin answering your questions.

(1) This case was published in Psychhche Sludien for February 1889, but
it had been written by me in February 188S, which c.\plains my saying that I
had lately received it.

(2) i find in my book of memoranda a notice dated January yih (19th) of
M. Kaigorodoff’s visit and his communication concerning the death of Duvanel.

(3) M. Kaigorodoff is a military engineer, living at present at Grodno, a seat
of provincial Government in West Russia. In the autumn of 1S86 M. Kaigoro-
doff endeavoured to hypnotise Mdlle. Emma, but soon .she began to speak and
write in mediumistic fashion. (M. Kaigorodoff was not wholly a novice in
Spiritualism, having been present, some ten years earlier, at a very elementary
series of stances.) Automatic writing, however, seemed to fatigue the medium,
and the method of trance-uttc ranee was usually preferred. The medium saw
and described the [deceased] persons in whose name she spoke. M. Kai^oro-
doff asked questions in Russian, and the medium answered in German ur
French. M. Kaigorodoff, who was a widower, naturally desired a personal and
absolutely conclusive mes.sage from hi.s wife. She (the infiucnce speaking
through E. S. as Madame Kaigorodoff) replied that she could give such a
message only by impressing the medium during her ordinary sleep : and she
effected her purpose by causing the medium to see, in a dream, a series of four
scenes [tableaux] ; which Mdlle. Emma described to M. Kaigorodoff and in
which he recognised the perfect representation of an episode in his married
life. These dream-communications form a special feature in the mediumship
of Mdlle. Stramm ; the same subject being sometimes thus treated for a week
continuously.

[On this point M. Aksakoff adds. February 15th, 1890: “M. Kaigorodoff
informs me of the following peculiarity of his wife’s (he married Mdlle, btramm
as his second wife in 1889) During her ordinary .sleep one can enter into
conversation with her. She continues to sleep, answering question.^, and
describing the fantastic dreams which she sees. In her replies she generally
uses the third person. On awaking, she remembers nothing. If during her
sleep M. Kaigorodoff makes some pas.ses over her face she immediately passes
into magnetic (somnambulic) sleep; and the character of her conversation
entirely changes. In her ordinary .sleep ‘spirits’ ^ever appear on the scene;
in the secondary form of sleep, always > A few reverse passes, and the mag-
netic sleep gives place, with a sigh, to the ordinary .sleep.”]

(4) As to your question whether the communications have or have nut
induded “ many definite statements found to be untrue,” [as is the case with
so many similar series,] M. Kaigorodoff cannot recollect any such statements.
As an instance to the contrary, he reminded me of a prediction made March
2nd, 1887, of which he informed me in his letter of August 25th, 1887 (still in

TO CHAPTER VIII

469

867 A]

niy hands). It was announced to Mdlle. E. that her sister (who is in Switzer-
land) would be delivered in five months of a boy, who would not live more than
three or four years. Mdlle. Emma did not even know at the time that her
sister was expecting a baby. In fact the sister was delivered of a boy at the
end of July, 1887.^

I pass on to the case of Duvanel, which needs some details to complete it.

The first question which presents itself to the mind is as follows : “ What
proof have we that Mdlle. Emma had not received a telegranj announcing
DuvancFs death I asked this question of M. Kaigorodoff by letter; 1 give
an abstract of his reply.

(1) The death of Duvanel took place (by Wilna time) at about 4.30 p.m.
On that day, from 7 p.m. till the beginning of the sdance, M. Kaigorodoff, as
he positively remembers, was constantly with Mdlle. E. ; and even supposing
that the telegram had been despatched half-an-hour after A. D.’s death (!),
nevertheless it would have been impossible for a telegrain sent from Switzer-
land to have been received and delivered at Wilna in the short interval between
5 and 7 P.M. On that day, moreover, Mdlle. E. did not leave the hou.se after
3

(2) All Mdlle. E.’s correspondence was addressed, care of Colonel Kaigoro-
doff.

(3) The telegram could not have been received without the knowledge of
the servants and the children. There would have been no reason for keeping
it secret.

(4) 'rhe relations of Mdlle. E. are poor persons, and there was not sufficient
motive for the immediate communication of this piece of news.

But might not a telegram have been sent by the friends or family of
Duvanel? Considering that all relations between Duvanel and Mdlle. K. had
been broken off in 1881, such a telegram would have had no reasonable object.
’Moreover, in my letter to Mdlle. E., I had begged her to tell me what was the
exact place of D.'s death and whether those who lived with him could have
known her address. To this she replied in her letter of April i6th, 1889. “ D.
died in a little hamlet of the Canton of Zurich, called, I think, Hirchd, but I
am not sure, for my brother [from whom I inquired] had himself forgotten the
name. D. lived alone, and had only one brother, who lived in another town.”
Impossible, therefore, that atelegnim should have been despatched immediately
from that quarter.

When M. Kaigorodoff came to see me the second time, in January 18S7,
with the letter of Mdlle. fl. s father, I was struck with the identity of the ex-
pression, “ un engorgement de sang,” employed in the trance-message, which
was in French, and also in the father’s letter, which was likewise in French, to
explain the cause of D.’s death. This identity of phrase appeared very strange,
not to say suspicious. I drew M. Kaigorodoff’s attention to it, and begged him
to ask the medium about jt, as .soon a.s a stance gave the opportunity. This
identity of expression suggested a curious action of telepathy.

This is what M. Kaigorodoff’s letter, just received, says on the subject : —

“On the day after the .sdance of January 3rd (15th), 18S7, Mdlle. E., nol
expecting to receive a letter from her father with the confirmation of the fact
of D.’s death, wrote to her sister in Switzerland, stating that she had had a

^ One prediction has since proved erroneous ; viz., that Madame Kaigorodoff her-
self would have a boy ; — whereas her child is a girl.

470

APPENDICES

vision as though D. were dead, and asking whether this was really the case.
The dream was an expedient used because Emma's relations had no knowledge
of Spiritualism, still less of £/s personal proceedings in that direction. Tli^:
letter of Mdlle. E.*s sister arrived ten days after her father’s letter. The sister,
not knowing that their father had already announced D.’s death, desired to hide
the fact from her [for a reason presently to be shown] and answered that D.
was not dead, but gone to America.**

M. Kaigorodoff, after a six weeks’ absence, returned to Wilna at the be-
ginning of March 1887. At the first sdance held, early in March, he begged
of Louis (the controlling spirit) to explain the contradiction between the letters
of the father and the sister of Mdlle. E. touching the death of Duvanel. The
medium was entranced, and spoke in the name of Louis. M. Kaigorodoff took
notes, and this is word for word the answer which was given

“ He is dead; only [lier] sister does not wish that she should know of his
death, because it was not of a stoppage of blood {engorgement) as I had written.”
(The message of January 3rd (15th) 18S7, had been given by automatic writing,
in French.) “ I could not tell the truth frankly (directement\ for her health
would have been affected by it.”

“ Where and how, then, did he die ? *’

** He died in the Canton of Zurich ; but he killed iiimself, and she must not
know it. She must remain ignorant of this, for if she learns, even indirectly,
of his selMnflicted death, her health may suffer. You must not speak to her
of the matter, for she suspects the truth.*’

“How does it happen, then, that the identical expression, stoppage of bloody
is found both in your message and in the father’s letter? ”

“It is I who inspired him with that expression,”

As you perceive, the case becomes increasingly complicated and interesting.
In point of fact, Mdlle. E., some days after the message of January 3rd (istli)
did in fact see in a dream Duvanel covered with blood {ensanglanUy The con *
tradictory statements in the letters (of her father and sister) led her to suspect
that the truth was being concealed from her, and that there had really been a
suicide. It was only in the autumn of 1887, when Mdlle. £. made a journey to
Switzerland to see her relations, that she learnt ail the truth, confirming the
second message.

The fears of Louis and of her relations as to the bad effect which the news
of the suicide might have upon Mdlle. £. were in fact exaggerated. For
Mdlle. £. had left Switzerland in 1881, and up till the message of January
3rd (isth), 1887, had received no news of Duvanel. Some time after Mdlle.
E.'s departure Duvanel left Neufch^tel for Geneva, where he was employed at
a bank; — which explains the phrase in the father’s letter, saying that D. had
died of a stoppage of blood “while he was at the bank.” But of late he had
lived in a little hamlet of the Canton of Zurich. All this Mdlle. Emma learnt
on her visit to her relations.

After all these facts, however, the problem as to the possibility of a tele-
pathic influence from the parents of Mdlle. E. is not yet decided. To clear
up this point we must know the exact day when the father of Mdlle. E. learnt
the death of Duvanel, and we must know the details he then heard. H
MdHe. E.’s relations had heard the news of D.’s suicide on the very day of his
death; and if it had been decided in family discussion that they would conceal
from her the manner of his death, and adopt the expression “ stoppage of

868A] TO CHAPTER VIII 471

blood ” ;7-then one might still conjecture that there had been a telepathic
transmission of thought.

But the father’s letter was written January i8th, and, as Mdlle. £. says
[in her letter of April i6tb, 1889], probable that the meeting in the train
[when the father heard of DuvaneFs death from DuvaneFs brother] took
place on the 17th, and thus after sitting of Januarj^ 3rd (isth). In that
case, if telepathy there were, it would be needful to seek the inspirer (the
agent provocateur/'') in some factor outside the minds of Mdlle. E. or her
relations.

But this probability is not enough ; and the essential question as to the day
when Mdlle. E.’s relations learnt the death of Duvanel is not yet determined.
I will write again on this point to the ci-devant Mdlle. Stramm, who is now
Madame Kaigorodoff ; for the Colonel in his last letter to me announces his mar-
riage with Mdlle. Emma Stramm. I will beg her to ask her father to fix as
precisely as possible the day of his meeting with DuvaneFs brother. The reply
shall be sent to you at once.

Thus, then, we have in this case of spiritualistic communication ; (i) the
news of a death at a distance ; (2) the manner of death ; (3) the place of death ;
all unknown to the medium.

On June 24th (July 6th) 1889, M. Aksakoff again wrote to me as
follows : —

M. Kaigorodoff has had the kindness to send me in original the letter of
Madame Kaigorodoff's sister. I enclose a copy. As you perceive, the father
learnt the news of DuvancFs death on January lyth, two days, therefore, after
the death itself, and two days after the news of the death was received at
Wilna in Russia. The circumstance that this new's was heard by M. Stramm
in a merely accidental way, and only on the day of the funeral, proves that in
fact all relations between Duvanel and the Stramm family had been suspended.
The letter of Mdlle. Bertha is dated from Rochefort ; that is a small town, at
twenty minutes’ railway journey from Ncufchatel; and it is there, strictly
speaking, and not at Neufchatel, that the Stramm family reside.

Copy of part of Mdlle. Bertha Stramm's letter to her sister, Madame
Kaigorodoff, dated Rochefort, June 16th, 1S89.

Duvanel died January 15th, and papa learnt the news on the 17th, for he
met DuvaneFs brother, who was setting out for the funeral. The brother was
to leave for America a few days later. It is I who have recollected this, by
searching my memory, for papa is old and feeble and does not now remember
anything of the matter. I cannot tell you the name of the village where the
death occurred.”

868 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi, pp. 355-57. For the follow-
ing case also I am indebted to M. Aksakoff.

The Pereliguine Case.

Document I. — Copy of report of sdance held November i8th, 1887, ^ the
house of M. Nartzeff, at Tambof, Russia.

Present: M. A. Nartzeff [landed proprietor, belonging to the Russian
nobility, in the Government of Tambof] ; Madame A. Slepzof [aunt of M.

472

APPENDICES

Nartzeff]; Madame Ivanof[M. Nartzeff’s housekeeper]; M* N. Toulouchtif
[official physician of the municipality of Tambof].

The sitting began at lo p.m. at a table placed in the middle of the room, by
the light of a night-light placed on the mantelpiece. All doors closed. The
left hand of each was placed on the right hand of his neighbour, and each foot
touched the neighbour's foot, so that during the whole of the sitting all hands
and feet were under control. Sharp raps were heard in the floor, and after-
wards in the wall and the ceiling, after which the blows sounded immediately
in the middle of the table, as if some one had struck it from above with his fist :
and with such violence, and so often, that the table trembled the whole time.

M. Nartzeff asked : “ Can you answer rationally, giving three raps for yes,
one for no?” “Yes.” Do you wish to answer by using the alphabet?”
“ Yes.” “ Spell your name.” The alphabet was repeated, and the letters in-
dicated by three raps — ‘‘ Anastasie P^rdliguine.” ** I beg you to say now why
you have come and what you desire.” “ I am a wretched woman. Pray for
me. Yesterday, during the day, I died .at the hospital. The day before
yesterday I poisoned myself with matches.” “ Give us some details about
yourself. How old were you? Give a rap for each year.” Seventeen raps.
** Who were you ? ” *• I was housemaid. I poisoned myself with matches.”
“ Why did you poison yourself ? ” “ I will not say. I will say nothing more.”

After this a heavy table which was near the wall, outside the chain of hands,
came up rapidly three times, towards the table round which the chain was
made, and each time it was pushed backwards, no one knew by what means.
Seven raps (the signal agreed upon for the close of the sitting) were now heard
in the wall; and at n.20 p.m. the s^ince came to an end.

(Signed) A. Slepzof, N. Touloucheff, A. Nartzeff, A. Ivanof.

I certify that this copy is in complete accordance with the original.

A. Nartzeff.

Document II. — The undersigned, having been present at the stance of
November i8tb, 18S7, at the house of M. A. N. Nartzeff, hereby certify that they
had no previous knowledge of the existence or the death of Anastasie Per^-
liguine, and that they heard her name for the first time at the above-mentioned
stance.

N. P. Touloucheff, Alexis Nartzeff, A. Slepzof, A. Ivanof.

Tambof, April 61^, 1890.

Document III.— Letter of Dr. Touloucheff to M. A. Aksakoff.

Tambof, du Siminaire^ April 15/A, 1S90.

Sir, — A t the sitting held at M. Nartzeffs house, November 18th, 1887, we
received a communication from an intelligence giving the name of Anastasie
P^r^liguine. She asked us to pray for her; and said that she had poisoned
herself with lucifer matches, and had died on the 17th of that month. At the
first moment 1 did not believe this; for in my capacity as physician of the
municipality I am at once informed by the police of all ca.ses of suicide. But
since^Pdrdliguine had added that her death had taken place at the hospital ;
and since at Tambof we have only one hospital, that of the “Institutions de
Bienfaisance,” which is in no way within my official survey, and whose autho-
rities, in such cases as this, themselves send for the police or the magistrate ; —

TO CHAPTER VIII

473

868 B]

I sent a letter to my colleague, Dr. Sundblatt, the head physician of this
hospital. Without explaining my reason, I simply asked him to inform me
whether there had been any recent case of suicide at the hospital, and, if so,
to give me the name and particulars. I have already sent you a copy of
his reply, certified by Dr. Sundblatt’s own signature. The original is at
M. Narlzeff’s house, with the protocols of the stances.

N. Toulouchekf.

Document IV. — Copy of Dr. Th. Sundblatt*s letter to Dr. Touloucheff.

Narvember 19^//, 1887.

My dear Colleague, —On the 16th of this month I was on duty; and on
that day two patients were admitted to the hospital, who had poisoned them-
selves with phosphorus. The first, Vera Kosovitch, aged thirty-eight, wife of a
clerk in the public service . . . was taken in at 8 p.m. ; the second, a servant in
the insane ward [a part of the hospital], Anastasic Pdrdliguinc, aged seventeen,
was taken in at 10 p.m. This second patient had swallowed, besides an in-
fusion of boxes of matches, a glass of kerosine, and at the time of her admission
was already very ill. She died at i p.m. on the 17th, and the post-mortem
examination has been made to-day. Kosovitch died yesterday, and the post-
mortem is fixed for to-morrow. Kosovitch said that she had taken the phos-
phorus in an excess of melancholy, but PiSrdliguine did not state her reason for
poisoning herself. Th. Sundblatt.

Copy of letter certified by Th. Sundldatt and Alexis Nartzeff.

Documents . — Letter of M. A. Nartzeff to M. Aksakoff, May i6th, 1890.

[M. Nartzeff writes a letter in English and one in French, which I abridge
and combine.]

In answer to your letter I inform you that my aunt’s housekeeper is not a
housekeeper strictly speaking, but rather a friend of the family, having been
nearly fifteen years with us, and possessing our entire confidence. She could
not have already learnt the fact of the suicide, as she has no relations or friends
in Tambof, and never leaves the house.

The hospital in question is situated at the other end of the town, about
five versts from my house. Dr. Sundblatt informs me, on the authority of
the Prods verbal of the inquest, that Per^liguine was able to read .and write.
[This in answer to M. Aksakoff 's inquiry whether the deceased could have
understood alphabetic communication.]

Sittings were held at Tambof, April 1885-October 1889, but in no other
instance were irrefutable proofs obtained. Generally the manifestations were
of a trivial character. Twice or thrice we received communications apparently
serious, but on inquiry these were found to be untrue.

It is remarkable that this veridical message should have stood alone,
but its correctness obviously was not due to chance.

868 B. From the Journal S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 280-84.

The following case was sent to us by Dr. H. D. R. Kingston, of
Macra, Eltham, Kent, an Associate of the S.P.R. Of the narrsftor,
Mr. F. Hodgson, he says : —

Mr. F. Hodgson was then (1S89) a photographer at Wynberg. He had

one time been employed as photographer to the Challenger expedition

474

APPENDICES

during part of the voyage, and he had also gone in the same capacity with
Mr. Palgrave on a Commission to Great Namaqualand and to Damaraland.

I have copies of many of the photographs he then took, the negatives of
which are the property of the Colonial Government. I found him a careful
and competent man in developing some scientific photographs of my own, and
also particularly intelligent, and 1 should say perfectly trustworthy as a witness.
You will see that he has made up the case with some care . . .

Henry D. R. Kingston, M.D.

The narrative was enclosed in a letter to Dr. Kingston, dated Wynberg,
July 1890, and is as follows : —

Statement re curious manifestations in house of Mrs. Kamp, beginning on
night of June 14th, and still continuing, though greatly diminished in power.

On Saturday night, June 14th, 1890, Alida Sophia Kamp, widow, residing
in Wolfe Street, Wynberg, her daughter, Sophia Alida Kamp, and Catherine
Mahoney, who resides in the same house, retired to rest at a little before

II P.M., and, from the time of retiring to rest until that of rising, were
unable to sleep on account of strange and unearthly noises, for whicli they
could find no explanation, although they instituted a rigorous search for the
cause. The noises, as they described them to me next morning, resembled the
dragging about of chairs in their bedrooms and the dragging about of heavy
boxes over an uneven floor in the loft over their heads. This loft, which I
know, having been in it, contains absolutely nothing which could account for
the noises, even had there been any one upstairs to drag anything it contained
about ; but owing to the way in which this loft is fastened up, it would have
been quite impossible for any one to enter it. I could not on the Sunday
morning, from their description of what they had heard, find any rational^
solution of the mystery, and, at their request, consented to occupy one of the
bedrooms that night {Sunday^ 15M).

Before retiring, however, I suggested that we should hold a sdance in the
room in which 1 was about to sleep. This was agreed to, and we formed a
circle consisting of Christian Kamp (son of Alida Sophia Kamp), Alida Sophia
Kamp, Catherine Mahoney, and myself, and Janet Kamp, wife of Christian
Kamp (seating ourselves around a small table). The table very shortly showed
an inclination to move about, and in fact did sway about considerably, but this
was all we could obtain, so we dropped the sitting.

We, however, decided after deliberation to hold a sdance in the adjoining
bedroom, but this time Catherine Mahoney declined to sit, so that we had only
[four] out of the former [five] sitters. The results wrere, however, better, as we
soon had distinct raps and at once asked the communicating influence to rap
three times if it could communicate its name to us if we established an easy
code. The three raps came at once, and 1 (who acted as conductor) then
asked it to give one rap at each letter forming its name on my going audibly
through the alphabet. The result was LEWIS, which caused Mrs. A. S.
Kamp to think it was her departed husband, whose name had been Louis.
This hypothesis, however, I was not inclined to accept, as I thought her
hust>and, if present, would not have wrongly spelt his name. We, however,
could not get the influence to change his orthography, so we had to proceed to
ask if it would spell out any message by the same code, to which three raps
responded, and we again proceeded. The result was TO W A R N, at

TO CHAPTER VIII

475

868 B]

which stage o£ the proceedings Mrs. Kamp showed signs of great uneasiness,
thinking the message was a warning of her coining death, and being still
persuaded that her late husband was communicating. As 1 did not know
positively to the contrary, and was afraid some unpleasant communication was
about to. be given, we dropped the sdance, 1 intending to resume it at some
future time with sitters not related to the family.

Shortly after we all retired to our beds, and 1 kept a candle burning in
my room until past midnight, as I had an interesting novel to read. I then
blew it out and was asleep in a few minutes. Shortly after 2 a.m. (Monday)
1 was awakened by the sound of a chair being dragged over the floor of
the room in which I slept, followed almost immediately by a sound as of
some very heavy body being dragged about in a room overhead (a very loud
noise which would have awakened anybody). Miss Kamp then called out
from the adjoining room, which was only divided from mine by a wooden
partition, “Do you hear the noise? What can it be?” Just after she had
spoken I heard a sound like a half full box of matches falling on the floor.
I decided it was about time to get up and investigate, so sprung out of bed
and felt for the matchbox in the candlestick and [found] it was not there.
I had carefully placed it there on going to bed and was at a loss to account
for its disappearance. I had some others, however, in the pocket of my
waistcoat, and knowing where 1 had hung this garment 1 went to it, and
taking the matches out of the pocket, struck a light and lighted the candle.
I then found the other box of matches lying on the floor about tw'o feet
from the candlestick. It seemed to me also that a chair in the room
occupied a somewhat different position to what it had done when I fell
asleep, but of this I could not be sure: but, to be sure whether it moved
again, I placed some empty scent bottles, which I found on a shelf, one
against each leg of the chair. I then went to sleep again, and on again
waking found the chair had been moved quite four inches to the N.W., as
all die legs were away from the bottles 1 had placed against them. Of course,
as regards the falling of the matchbox and the actual change of position of
the chair, 1 can only give you ray unsupported testimony, but those who slept
in the next room will be able to testify to having heard the apparent moving of
the chair in my room before they heard me jump up to investigate. This
occurred on Sunday night, June isth.

Now comes the strangest part of the affair. Up to this time none of us
could make out why any one of the name of Lewis should disturb our rest,
as none of us were or had been intimately acquainted with any one of that
name, unless we were prepared to accept the very hypothetical idea that it
was the late Mr. Kamp, who had’ forgotten how to spell his name properly
(a theory which would not have said much for the educational establishments
of the shadowy land).

On Monday morning, June i 6 th. I got my copy of the Cape Times as
usual, and, among other items of news, found an account of the death of a
man, name unknown, who had been killed by an engine, on the night of the
Hth, near Woodstock, at about 8.45 p.m. None of us at the lime in any way
connected this with the noises which had disturbed us, as there was no
apparent connection. •

In Tuesday’s issue of the same paper there was the account of the inquest
On this man {still name unknown)^ On Tuesday evening I was sitting in Mrs.
Kamp’s shop, when a coloured woman came in and in the course of conversa-

APPENDICES

476

tion said, “ Did Mrs. Kamp hear of the man that was killed on the railway on
Saturday night? ” “Yes ! ” said Mrs. Kamp, “ I see they don’t know who he
was.” “ Oh yes ! ” said the coloured woman, “ his name is Jim Lewis. I know
him, because he lived with my sister.” This set us all on quite a new track,
and we began to wonder what connection there might be between the events.
In favour thereof the facts were these: —

1. This man had been killed at 8.45 p.m. on the night of the 14///.

2. Mrs. Kamp did not close her shop till ten that night, and retired to rest
about eleven, and from that hour the noises commenced.

3. None of us heard of the accident until we read of it on the 16///.

4. Never until the night of the 14th had any nocturnal disturbances occurred
in the house.

5. The disturbing spirit on the evening of the 1 5/// gave the name of Lewis.

I should have mentioned, perhaps, that on Tuesday night, 17th inst., we

held another stance, at which Christian Kamp, Mr. Hay, and myself sat. On
this night also we got the name of Lewis spelt out, and the message, “ I aw
unhappy because they do not know who / am."* On being interrogated further,
he said that he was the spirit of the man Lewis killed on the railway. At the
time 1 did not attach much importance to this sdance, as we got scarcely any-
thing fresh, but it is as well to mention it.

Thursday's (19th) issue of Cape Times contained the completion of the
inquest on this man, and stated that his name was Richard Yocng. Mrs.
Kamp then had another interview with the woman (his sister-in-law) who had
told her (Mrs. Kamp) previously that the man’s name was Jim Lewis, and
asked her why she had said his name was Lewis^ when it turned out his name
was Young. On this the woman got quite indignant, and declared positively
that his name was Jim Lewis, no matter what name the paper might give him ;
that she had known him a long time, as he was her brother-in-law.

I am finishing this on July 24th, 1890, and the nocturnal disturbances still
continue in the house of Mrs. Kamp, and no amount of investigation can assign
any but a spiritual origin to them.

We, the undersigned, having read the above, declare it to be a true account
of the occurrences therein described.

Frkderick Hodgson.

Sophia Alida Ka-mp.

Aliua Sophia Kamp.

Kate Maho.nev.

We, the undersigned, declare that we sat at a sdance in the house of Mrs.
Kamp (Alida Sophia Kamp) on the night of June 15th, 1890, and that we heard
raps which spelt out the name of Lewis and the words TO WARN.

F. Hodgson.

Alida Sophia Kamp.

C. F. Kamp.

J. S. Kamp.

We, the undersigned, sat at a sdance in the house of Mrs. Kamp (Alida
Sophia Kamp) on the night of Tuesday (June 17th), and the name of Leuns
was^ then spelt out by raps, and the message, “ I am unhappy because they
don’t know who I am,” and the communicating influence further stated that he
had been killed by an engine on the night of the 14th.

Frederick Hodgson.

C. F. Kamp.

869 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 477

We, the undersigned, sat at a sdance on the night of Wednesday, June 18th,
in the house of Alida Sophia Kamp, and the communicating influence rapped
out the name of Lewis, and stated that it was the spirit of a man of that name
wiio had been killed by an engine on the night of June 14th.

Frederick Hodgson.

J. P. Cruse.

C. A. Liethar.

C. F. Kamp.

868 C. I may here briefly refer to the case of the “ Woodd knock-
ings,*’ given in full in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi, pp. 538-42. In
several families there is a tradition that some special sign precedes or
accompanies the transition of the head of the house, or of certain of its
members ; and in the case of the Woodd family I have received evidence
of the persistence of the same type of ‘‘ warning — which took the form
of knocks — during a period of three centuries. Seven cases were
recorded in detail respectively in about 1661, 1664, 1674, 1784, 1872,
1893, and 1895. Of the three most recent instances circumstantial
and corroborative evidence is given, which seems to make it clear that
the knocks were not ordinary sounds misinterpreted. Such cases sug-
gest that there may be in some families a hereditary aptitude for the
same type of percipience.

869 A. The following is part of an account which was printed in the
Journa/ S.P.R., vol. iii. pp. 216-19 (February 1888), having been fur-
nished to me at that time by Mrs. FitzGerald of 19 Cambridge Street,
Hyde Park Stiuare, London, W., and her son Mr. Desmond FitzGerald,
at one time a member of the Council of the S.P.R. Mrs. FitzGerald
revised the abstract of her papers before they were printed in the JournaL

Mrs. FitzGerald and her daughter-in-law, Mrs. Desmond FitzGerald, have
been for some years in the habit of sitting quietly together to receive messages
by slight tilts of a table. Mr. FitzGerald has occasionally joined the group,
but strangers have rarely been admitted, and tlie communications have been
throughout of a very private kind. . . .

I cite a case in connection with a Mr. E., — an intimate friend of
Mrs. FitzGerald’s, — whose true name has been communicated to me.

Mr. E., when on his deathbed, sent for Mrs. FitzGerald to come and see
him. She visited him in his chambers in the Albany and said farewell, he
being then past hope, and his death expected at any moment. He blessed her
and promised to watch over her. Afterwards his spirit was one of the habitual
and most trusted communicants, and Mrs. F. believed herself able to feel sure
of his identity when he came. After many such messages, she alluded one day
to his death in the Albany. “ I did not die in the Albany,” was tilted out.
Shocked at what seemed the intrusion of some lying spirit in the friend's name,
Mrs. F. solemnly repeated the question, “ You died in the Albany, did you
not?” The answer was an emphatic No. This was repeated several times,
and then Mrs. F. was so pained and bewildered at the breakdown of her
cherished belief in this spirit’s identity and trustworthiness that for a con-

APPENDICES

478

siderable time she sought no further communication. She had no thought
of testing the truth of the message, as she considered that she absolutely knew
that Mr. £. had died in his chambers. It was not till some months later
that a common friend accidentally mentioned that Mr. £. had been removed
from the Albany at his own wish, when almost at the point of death, with the
idea that he would be better nursed in a private house.

It is deeply to be regretted that Mrs. F. did not inquire from the communi-
cating spirit Tvkere he had died. If the address had been given the test would
have been excellent. No further facts, it appears, can now be got from Mr.
£.’s spirit. The coincidence is therefore reduced to a single fact; but that one
fact is a striking one, and cannot be said to have been in Mrs. FitzGerald's
mind.

869 B. The following case was printed in the Journal S.P.R., for
May 1899 (^ 0 ^* PP* having been sent to us by Mr. Michael
Petrovo-&lovovo, of St. Petersburg, now Hon. Secretary for Russia to
the S.P.R.

Mr. Solovovo writes : —

In the following pages 1 have endeavoured to present all the evidence
obtainable concerning an instance of an automatic message, which appears at
first sight to be due to some other cause than ** unconscious cerebration.”

The amount of information unknown contained in the following message is
certainly very slight, but still the unexpectedness of the fact that it was in the
sea and not in a river that the soldier was drowned may be considered entitled
to some weight. The most interesting feature of the case, however, appears to
me to have been the circumstance that the mediums did not see the letters of
the alphabet. This is stated by both of them as well as by the third person
present at the sitting. . . .

Now, a message obtained under such conditions would involve at the very
least telepathy in a strangely continuous form from M. Starck [to his wife
and daughter]; and makes it increasingly possible that the “veridical” part of
the communication may have sprung from a supernormal source too; whilst
otherwise we might have put it down with more plausibility either to uncon-
scious reasoning or to chance coincidence.

Most of the “ Skrytnikoff case ” as presented here appeared in No. 48 of the
Rebus (a Russian Spiritistic paper, the editor of which is well known to me), in
1898. . . .

Document I.

Extract from a letter by Lieut-CoU Starck to Baron N, Rausch von Tran-
henberg. Rebus, No. 48, 1898, p. 417.

On January 22nd, 1898, I madeZ and J ^ sit down at a table. I

wrote down the alphabet, placed upon it a saucer with a pointer and their
hands upon it— and the writing began. Though a firm believer, from what I
had read, in mediumistic phenomena, I was still amazed. I bandaged their
eyes with the same result; the letters are pointed out exactly and correctly ; the
menthl contents are present. No trance. All the writers are in a perfectly
normal state. They are keeping their hands on the saucer with eyes blind-

1 M. Starck’s daughter and wife.

869 B] TO CHAPTER VIII 479

folded ; I read and write down. I put down questions aloud or in writing, and
get answers which I do not expect, and the contents of which do not correspond
to either Z.’s or J.’s mental level. 1 am looking upon it as a mystification—
by whom, 1 do not know;— then suddenly we get: “ I have the honour to
present myself, Your High Nobility,^— Skrytnikoff.” This appeared so unex-
pectedly and had such a meaning that I had to get up from [sheer] emotion
and to suspend the sitting for about five minutes. Skrytnikoff was a soldier
who had served in my regiment here, in Caucasia, and was drowned in Pzezu-
appe river in June or July of last year when I was no more on active service ; I
had learnt about this event by accident, and had only once spoken about it in
the autumn. We sit down at the saucer again and get ; “ I was drowned in
the sea, far away.*' I feel perplexed. From what had been communicated to
me at the time of the occurrence I thought he had been drowned in the river.
Then I get: “ Doubovik (the local chief of district, ue.pristav). Go to him.”
In the morning I go to Doubovik, and without saying what the matter was,
I ask whether he knows anything about Skrytnikoff who was drowned — and
receive, as 1 expected, a negative answer, because in such cases inquests, &c.,
are lield by the military authorities themselves. During our conversation in
the office the secretary interferes and says: “No, I think there is something
about Skrytnikoff in the papers.” A search is made in the papers and ^ proems
verbal found by the bailiff or desiatnik of Lazarevskoe village, of no special
importance, but in which the sentence occurred : “ The horse swam out, but he
[Skrytnikoff] was carried into the .sea.” Now this is very natural: the river,
which is generally shallow, but swift and deep during high water, must have
carried him into the sea.

Document II.

Extract from Lieut, '‘Col. StarcEs letter to .!/. Aksakoff^ dated Sept, ^th
[»7///], 1898. So tell i [Black Sea province — Tchernomorskaya Youbernia\
Rebus ^ No. 48, 1898, p. 417.

Sir,— My relative, Baron N. A. Rausch von Traubenberg, has informed me
of your wish to print the contents of my lotter to him concerning the soldier
Skrytnikoff who was drowned, and has asked me to send you my consent.
This I do at present with, of course, my whole signature ; and beg you — ^should
it be of interest — to append to my letter: (i) An attestation by Doubovik, the
then chief of the Sotchi district : (2) a copy of the proces verbal j and (3) the
original leaf of paper with the notes of the sitting. ... In the original [account]
of the sitting the signature [S.’s] is unfinished because I got up from the table in
great excitement ; I was struck by the unexpectedness and the reality of the
message, though I had read almost everything on the subject and felt quite
sure of the possibility of such phenomena. The following words were obtained
after I had sat down at the table again ; my wife and daughter having not left
the table at all. I only told them there was something convincing in the mes-
sage. Then I was extremely astonished by the information as to his having
been drowned in the sea, whilst I was quite .sure this had occurred in the river
as the only information I had accidentally had on the subject from a former
colleague of mine was to the effect that Skrytnikoff was drowned in Pzezuappe
river, his chiefs being convinced of it till now. I knew no details whatever
about . . . Skrytnikoff, and only the idea as to his having been drowned in a

^ A Russian military formula.

48 o

APPENDICES

[870 A

river could have originated in my head and among my household— and this
only as a transitory long since forgotten impression ; it was once mentioned
in the autumn, and I am not even quite sure of it.

The proch verbal gave me but little that was new, but the wwds he was
carried away by the water into the sea,” gave my thoughts an impulse [in tlie
direction] that it had actually been so, Le. that he was drowned in the sea :
there is not more than half a verst from the spot where the river is crossed to
the sea, it being a mountain stream and in high water. Of course he was
quickly carried into the sea ; his weapon (a sabre, 1 think) being found cast
ashore on the sea coast, not far from the river. A year before I had been liis
chief, and am sure he felt kindly towards me as the other soldiers did.

The present message was, I think, obtained at the third seance. The condi-
tions were as follows: the alphabet written, not in order, on a leaf of paper,
and a saucer with a pointer upon it ; my wife and daughter, with eyes blind-
folded, kept their hands upon the saucer, and I wrote down the letters. . . .

[M. Starck further states that his daughter is now sixteen and in good
health.] [Signed] N. Starck.

M. Starck’s letter was follow*ed in the Rebus by a copy of the proch verbal
drawn up by MouhortoiT, a police official, which states that in the night of
September 7th (19th) Peter Skrytnikoff, a soldier of the Vardony railitar\>^ posi,
when crossing Pzezuappe river, was carried away by the water together with
the horse, which, however, escaped and was taken charge of by soldiers of the
Lazarevskee post ; as for S., *• he was carried away by the water into the sea,”
and his body never found, though carefully searched for.

l*he Rebus also gave a statement by M. Doubovik confirmatory of M.
Starck's account of his visit to him the day after the .sitting : proch verbal of
SkrytnikofPs death found, &c.

lu reply to Mr. Solovovo's questions, M. Starck informed him that
his wife and daughter knew Skrytnikoff, having seen him several times ;
also that he himself did not touch* the saucer during the communication.
Mme. and Mdlle. Starck also sent Mr. Solovovo statements which he
combined into one as follows : —

January 12/24, 1S99. SoTCHl.

We find M. Starck’s account concerning a communication from the soldier
Skrytnikoff who was drowned, printed in Rebus, No. 48, 1898, to be correct.
During the incident described our eyes were bandaged and we positively could
not see the alphabet.

< Jeaxnrttp: Starck.
[S.gned] ^

870 A. The following account (taken from the Journal vol. ix.

p. 284) is translated and abridged from the Vessillo Spiritisla for June
1900, where it appeared under the title of “A Good Proof of Spirit
Identity.'*

Naples, [1900].

On the evctting of January 12th, 1900, during the usual weekly sitting, in
the presence of Sig. G. V. de Simone, his wife and two young daughters, C.

TO CHAPTER VIII

870 A]

481

Orsini and the present writer, a good proof of identity which had been asked for
was received from the spirit of Arturo de Capua. It had been asked for under
conditions which excluded every possibility of voluntary or involuntary, con-
scious or unconscious suggestion, as it was impossible that what was unknown
and always had been unknown to all present should be suggested, and this
makes it of more value than a volunteered proof, which might have been
prepared beforehand by the medium.

This spirit of Arturo has given in many sittings many moral and intellectual
proofs of his personality which were recognised by his mother and brother Avo.
G. de Capua. The Neapolitan verses which he improvised (and 1 say impro-
vised, because the suggestion was made at the moment), written with extreme
rapidity through the medium Signorina O. de S., resemble closely in form and
matter those written by him during his life on earth.

Proofs of this sort, however, although perhaps convincing to those present
are of little value to strangers, who want records of facts which exclude any
such hypothesis as telepathy or self-suggestion on the part of the medium.
Therefore on this evening I asked the spirit of Arturo if he had any precise
recollections of his earthly existence, and if he could give me some fact, of his
own choice.

He answered me by automatic writing thus : ** My dear Cavalli, I have,
it is true, advanced; but 1 recognise you, in a state of calm which I have
acquired, and which formerly 1 did not possess ; as for my remembrances,
know that not only does it give me great fatigue to recall them, but it also
causes me great pain; and it is for this reason that 1 rarely seek to revive
them.”

Then I replied that I did not wish to cause him pain, and would content
myself with asking him to give the names he remembered of his dearest*
friends.

* None of those present had known Arturo when living, much less the persons
or names of persons with whom he was acquainted. So this would be a good
proof. The spirit willingly assented. After a short time he wrote with his
accustomed rapidity : “ Emilia, Paolo, Elena, Annina, and the lady who gave
me the cigarette, and whose name I canndt recall. Those are the people of
whom I was very fond, after my intimate friends, and who are still dear to me.”
“ So far good, but the best part is still wanting,” — I observed — “ the surnames.
Do you remember them ” ** Yes.” “ Can you and will you give them ? ” “I
cannot.” “At lea.st tell me if the four names have different surnames.” He
answered that the two first had different surnames, and the two last the same.
Immediately afterwards he expressed a desire to write again and wrote, “ I
add to these Carlo Ricci, whom I still love so much ; do not be so exacting, do
you understand 1 ” The spirit insisted that all this was correct and expressed
anger when I doubted it.

As soon as I saw his brother, Guglielmo, I showed him t!ie communica-
tions. They were all absolutely correct^ the names given, and the lady of the
cigarette, but Carlo Ricci struck him above everything ! “ He was Arturo's
dearest friend,” his brother told me.

Although older than Arturo, Carlo Ricci and his father had always had the
greatest consideration for him, and Arturo was devoted to them both and pre-
ferred their company to any other.

Arturo’s mother, whom, I also questioned, confirmed everything that her
son Guglielmo had said. . . .

VOL. n. 2 H

482

APPENDICES

[871 A

But to return to the communication given by the spirit of Arturo on the
evening of the 12 th, we can add another valuable particular. He gave the
names of four persons, as we have said; among these was one Paolo. When
asked about him at a following sitting he answered by automatic writing;
“ Paolo is the father of the lovely Nanninella.’^ This was correct, and when
asked for some further particulars of the lady who gave him the cigarettes—
amongst other things, whether there were dear friends of the lady’s living in the
same place with her, — he answered : “ The lady has dear friends near her, and
they are of my family.” Both these facts had been absolutely correct at the
time of his death. But the interesting point is this— that when asked to name
friends living in the same place as the lady, he named his family. Those pre-
sent at the sitting, and all who knew Arturo's family, knew that for some months
they had changed their home. The spirit, however, apparently judging from
the past, did not think of their present changed habitation, and concluded that
they were still living near the lady. V. Cavalli.

As witness of the facts narrated above, I affirm that they are perfectly
true. C. Orsiki.

Similar testimonies are given by Vincenzo de Simone and Guglielmo de
Capua.

871 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 124-27, quoted from
The Holy Truths by Hugh Junor Browne, pp. 63-71.

In this [automatic writing] we were unsuccessful, until it came to the turn
of my eldest daughter, a girl of eleven years of age, to take the pencil in hand.
Immediately on her doing so her hand was influenced to write, causing her to
be considerably alarmed. She called out, Oh, mamma ! 1 am .so frightened,
my hand is moving.” We all pacified her as much as possible, and on taking
up the paper we found her hand had written on it quite legibly, though in
rather tremulous characters, quite different from her ordinary writing, the
following sentence : “ Helen, Grace, Browne, 1 am come to see you. Your
beloved aunt. You will,” &c., &c. The remainder of the writing was too faint
to decipher. The name written above is that of my second daughter, between
five and six years of age, who is called after two of her aunts, my sisters; one
of whom, the wife of an officer in the Indian army, passed away many years
ago, having died on her passage home from India, and whose spirit we after-
wards ascertained influenced the girl's hand to write this message to her little
niece and namesake. We had a number of communications through the same
source that evening from different spirit-friends, and since that time, except on
two occasions, when she said she felt no influence (a reason for which after-
wards was given), whenever my eldest girl sits down for the purpose of com-
municating with our spirit-friends, her hand is almost immediately influenced
to write. Her hand has written as many as forty pages of large notepaper
within half-an-hour, which in her ordinary handwriting would take her several
hours to copy.

My daughter is quite unaware of what she is writing and describes the
sensation of the influence as though electricity were running down her arm
frc>m the shoulder. This is what is termed mechanical writing mediumship.
She often writes far beyond her own powers of comprehension on subjects of
which she has not the least conception, spelling words correctly which she does

TO CHAPTER VIII

483

871 A]

not understand, and of which, when read over, she inquires the meaning — such
words as clairvoyantly, physically, &c. At other times she spells small words
incorrectly which in her ordinary writing she would spell correctly. She has
written in French, of which language she knows but the rudiments ; she has
written in Chinese characters, and also in the Kaffir language, of neither of
which does she understand a word. She has written in blank verse, which,
though it would not stand the scrutiny of a critic, is decidedly beyond her
powers in this line, she being more of a romp than a student.

My daughter has frequently been influenced to write messages to strangers
from their spirit-friends, giving them particulars about things of which she
could not possibly know anything, and signing correctly the names of their
spirit-friends in spirit-life of whom she had never before heard. Her mother
and 1 have thought of a question to put to one of our spirit-friends when she
was not present, and calling her into the room have given her a pencil and
paper, and she has written a correct reply to the question mentally asked, and
signed the name of the spirit-friend of whom we thought. She can write either
looking away from or on to the paper. A difference can be seen in the writing
from each of our spirit-friends. If I see even the word “yes ” written through
her, I can generally tell what spirit is influencing the medium’s hand. I have
seen her write the letters upside down, backwards, left-handed, and in various
ways quite impossible for the child to do herself, and sometimes so fast you
can hardly see her hand join the letters, and at other times slow ; sometimes
in a very small hand, at others in bold text-writing.

On one occasion it was written through my daughter’s hand that I was to
take a bottle of a specific 1 have for rheumatism to a Mr. Reed, directing me
to inquire at a .shop in the next street to where he used to live and I would be
directed to where he then resided. I had formerly given a man of this name
some of this mixture, which had relieved him of the pain, but had not seen or
heard of him for months, and I was not awafe that he had removed from where
he then lived. On calling at his former residence 1 found he had removed,
and on calling as instructed at the shop indicated 1 was told where Reed then
lived. 1 found him confined to his bed, suffering acutely from rheumatism,
and gave him the specific.

I may mention another incident which occurred. One day when out walk-
ing with my wife I met a black man whom I had never seen before, but whom I
recognised as a Kaffir from large holes made in his ears peculiar to that race.
1 accosted him in his native tongue, at which he seemed rather surprised, and
I gave him my address, telling him to call on me. This he did just as we
were sitting down to investigate this subject. I told the servant to show him
into the room, and on asking if any of his spirit-friends were present, my
daughter’s hand wrote out several Kaffir names, which on my reading out to
him he recognised, and which evidently caused him great astoni.shment. On
asking if they had any message for him, a sentence was written in the Kaffir
language, some of the words of which were beyond my comprehension. On
my reading the message out to the Kaffir he understood every word of it except
one. This I pronounced in various ways to try to make him comprehend, bui
all to no purpose, when my daughter’s hand was influenced to write, “ Click
with the mouth.” This reminded me of a peculiar click which frequently^ ac-
companies the sounding of the letter “ T ” in the Kaffir language, and on my
pronouncing this word he understood the meaning of it at once. 1 may state

484 APPENDICES [871 A

my daughter does not know a word of Kaffir, having been born several years
after I was last in that country. I inquired who influenced her hand to write,
as the art of writing is generally unknown to Kaffirs, and was informed my old
friend H. S., whose native name was “ Nonquambeen,” had written the
message at the request of the Kaffir’s spirit-friends. I may add H. S. was a
w*ell-educated man, whose memory 1 hold in regard, and who when in this life
could talk the Kaffir language fairly, having been an old settler in Natal. ]
explained to my Kaffir visitor that the Insleseea, or souls of his friends, were
present, at which he seemed rather terrified. I assured him there were
numbers of my spirit-friends present also, and that my children frequently
described both the spirits of iny friends and of some of his countrymen who
were in my employ, and others whom I knew many years ago. This only
seemed to increase his fear. I think I have referred to Chinese having been
written through my daughter’s hand imperfectly, and on my remarking that I
did not think it was like the Chinese characters, I was informed by one of my
Anglican spirit-friends that it was the first time the Chinese spirit had in-
fluenced a medium to write, and that he would improve by practice. On show-
ing it to a Chinese (there were thirteen or fourteen pages of it) he could not
make out many of the characters, but here and there he said, That means
sound,” “That means twenty,” and so on, and remarked, “This like little
China boy’s writing, not know write good.”

One day, while receiving communications through my daughter’s hand, I
observed written, “ Put down that balloon.” I remarked to my wife, “ What
on earth have they to do with balloons in spirit-life ? ” She smiled, and told
me that our daughter had in her left hand one of those pink india-rubber toy
balloons, which she, childlike, had been trying to inflate with her breath
whilst her right hand was writing the communications. I was sitting on the
medium’s right-hand side, and was so interested in the communications as
written that 1 had not taken notice what she was doing with her left hand,^
on which side my wife sat. At another time, in reply to a query by me on
some deep theological matter, through my daughter’s hand it was written,
“ How can you expect an answer to such a question through a child's
organisation.^” I have several reams of paper filled with communications
received through my daughter’s hand.

The incident of the young child’s writing is given in the same book
(p. 71), being then of quite recent date. I will, however, give here the
account, of course much later, but concordant, and in some points fuller,
which was given to me at the interview mentioned in section 871 .

October 1891.

When our daughter Nelly was nearly five years old, she had not learned
a single letter of her alphabet. She had certainly received no in.struction
whatever. One day her elder sister was writing automatically. To please the
child, we put a pencil in her hand. Presently we observed that she had written
some words, and on looking we saw that the words were, “1 am a mesmeric
me<^um.” [Words “ I am a ” not present in earlier account.] She had been
under our eyes all the time. The words were written in a small angular lady’s
handwriting. I then asked my elder daughter’s “ guide,” the late Dr. Godfrey
Howitt, to explain this. Instead of the accustomed writing, a message came

TO CHAPTER VIII

485

872 A]

in the writing of my elder sister, the late Mrs. Colonel Kelso, to the effect :
[here I give the correct wording as in earlier record] “ She will be very
mediumistic, but is too young to be influenced; do not let her sit until she is
older, or you will injure her health.” We did not let her write automatically
for some years afterwards ; then she did write for some little time, and then
the power left her. HuciH Junor Browne.

Elizabeth Browne.

872 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. pp. 122-24.

'rhe following case came to Dr. Hodgson from a group of persons who
may not be very critical, but who are plainly sincere. The phenomenon
alleged, however surprising, involves but a simple act of observation, and
should have been easy to note and remember.

Flushing, 19M, 1890.

Mr. Richard Hodgson, — Dear Sir, — It affords me pleasure to respond
to your inquiry concerning the item of spirit writing through the hand of a
little child just four years of age who had no knowledge of its letters, unaided
and untaught.

My wife had a niece who passed to spirit-life twenty years ago, who was in
lilc strongly attached to her, and whenever we come in contact with a medium-
istic person she invariably makes her presence known to us. My daughter,
fifteen years of age, and another young lady of the same age, opened a school
tor small children in a little room used for a Sunday School by the Baptist
society, where the event took place. It was approaching Easter, and to add to
the coming excrci.ses, the little girl was especially invited to join them in re-
hearsing their pieces, as most all the pupils were members of the Mission
Sunday School The first morning of her attendance a slate and pencil were
given her to keep her quiet ; slie scribbled awhile, when it w^as noticed that she
had written very distinctly the name Emma. As it was known that the child
had never been inside of a school before, and that she knew no single letter of
the alphabet, it was a great surprise. The slate belonged to .some of the pupils,
hence was not preserved by the young ladies. I regretted the loss of such a
rare test of spirit control, and urged them, should such a thing ever occur again,
to preserve it. The child attended the day following, and instead of slate a
leaf from a tablet and lead pencil were given her. After she had amused her-
self awhile she returned the paper, and it was seen that a number of attempts to
write the name Emma had been made. As she handed in the paper she said,
“Nozer,” and another sheet was given, with an improvement; the third was
given, when upon either side was written with bold running hand, “ your aunt
Kmma,” quite as large and perfect as the above.

True, she was aunt to the little one whose little hand she was holding.
The pressure upon the paper of the first two sheets was uneven, and it
requires close attention to follow some portions of the first attempt, but in
the last she seems to have overcome all difficulties and accomplished her pur*
pose of giving us a fact of spirit control.

Little Etta has passed on to the higher life within a year of this event. ^

It is fair to say her parents were not Spiritualists. They took the child and
gave her paper and pencil, but failed to get satisfactory results.

That little circle of innocent children singing their songs had created an
atmosiphere of harmony favourable for that .sensitive little child to receive

APPENDICES

486

[872 a

the impress or control of a decarnate spirit. Those familiar with pheno-
mena of this kind will readily appreciate the difference in conditions. — Yours
truly, A. E. Hempstead.

This is to certify that we were present and witnessed the writing of little
Etta, as described in the foregoing statement, and know that neither Etta nor
any other pupil present at the time could have written the messages of their
own abilities. [Signed] Laura Hempstead.

L. A. K.

I am the mother of little Etta, and know she had not been taught the
alphabet, or how to hold her pencil. [Signed] Mrs. B. W. Terry.

Jn another letter Mr. Hempstead adds : —

Newtown, N.Y., October tCtA, 1890.

In reply to your last inquiry 1 will say Etta’s message was written just
before Easter.

The messages we still have, although somewhat difficult to read, as tliey
were in pencil, and the uneven pressure upon the paper requires close atten-
tion. We did not ink it over, as we wished to preserve its purity. Remem-
ber she held the pencil between the middle Ungers of her left hand, as she was
not taught the art of holding her pencil. 1 have written in ink upon their
margins in the order that she wrote them.

Will gladly loan them to you, trusting they will be duly returned.

Newtown, November 19M, 1890.

Dear Sir,— By a strange grouping of circumstances your letter, little
Etta’s mother, the young lady who witnessed the writing, all came into our
home here in Newtown together, bringing the mail with them, as if uncoii*
sciously directed, so I am prepared to return your paper promptly. They all
read it, and without hesitation gave their signatures. In the case of Miss
K., she said she would rather not hjive her name mentioned publicly on account
of her connection with the church, &c., which you may readily understand.

The mother explained that the child was left-handed, and L. did not remem-
ber about the manner in which she (Etta) held the pencil. But my daughter is
positive, and one not likely to forget so novel a feature. Hoping the above will
suffice, I remain, very truly yours for humanity, A. E. Hempstead.

Dr. Hodgson adds

October 1890.

Mr. Hempstead has kindly sent me the writings by the little girl Etta for
my inspection. There are three small sheets of paper with several attempts at
writing on both sides of each sheet. There are indications of Aunt” and
•* Emma ” on the first and second sheets ; Emma being written tolerably well
on the second sheet. The enclosed tracing is of the last attempt.

An account (seen by me and concordant with the above) had been sent
b/ Mr. Hempstead to the Banner immediately after the incident,

and was printed May 4th, 1889. I have seen the tracing of the last- written
phrase, " your aunt Emma.” It is a free scrawl, resembling the planchette-
writing of an adult rather than the first effort of a child.

873A] TO CHAPTER VIII 487

873 A. The following experience of Mr. W.’s is quoted from Pro-
ceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 463 ': —

October 26/^, 1S94.

. . . The following is an account of an experience I had last April.

In the afternoon, I was riding eastward towards Schenectady, N.Y., on
the N.Y.C. and H.R. road. 1 intended to get ofE at Schenectady, and take
a train from there to Troy, and at Troy get a train on the Fitchburgh and
Hoosac Tunnel Road. I asked the conductor whether I would be able to
make good connections at Schenectady, also at Troy. He informed me that
I would at Schenectady, but at Troy 1 would not, for the reason that I would
not arrive in Troy until five minutes after the departure of the train on the
F. and H. T. He told me that I would not arrive in Troy until 5 . 5 , and
my train departed at just five o’clock, and that it was the last one foy the
week. This was Saturday. I asked him if he could suggest any way for
me to get my train or reach my desired place of destination, but he said he
could not. It seemed certain that I must lay off in Troy over Sunday.
The conductor passed on, and I meditated, but to no purpose. After some
time I took a pencil and paper, and thought, but did not write, “ Well, I
think I shall not get through to-night, I am very sorry.” Instantly the

pencil wrote, “ You will r.each to-night,” naming the place I was bound

for. I replied, by thought, “ Why, it’s impossible, how can I ?— the train
out of Troy leaves five minutes before my train arrives.” The answer was,

** Yes, but you will get to to-night,” again naming my place of destination.

Again 1 thought, “ Pray, tell me how I am to do so.” The answer was, “ Oh,

never mind how, I tell you you will arrive in all right to-night.” I urged

the impo.ssibility of the matter, but that was stoutly denied. I pleaded for
an explanation, but it was written that I needed none, and that none would
• be given me. I asked for instruction and it was written that they had none
to give. I insisted on the fact that I could not get the train, but this was not
conceded.

On arriving at Schenectady I found my train for Troy, and as I boarded
it, I asked the trainman if we would arrive in Troy in time for me to get a
train on the Fitchburgh and Hoosac Tunnel Road. He replied, “No,” very
promptly, and added, “it leaves five minutes before we arrive.” I took my
seat. When the conductor came along I tried hard to appear innocent, and
asked him if I would get to Troy in time to get a train out on the Fitchburgh
and Hoosac Tunnel Road. I said I hoped to, for I was very anxious to
arrive at — that night. His reply was, “ We do not arrive in Troy until
five minutes after five, and the train on that road pulls out at just five, and
it’s the last train.” He passed on picking up tickets, and I settled back into
my seat. It seemed as if the last chance was gone, and I could not help but
wonder what would be written, so I observed mentally, “ Well, you see your
prediction is wrong, do you not ? ” And then came to me what seemed to
be the height of foolishness, “ Why, you will get there all right, just as
I told you.” No explanation being vouchsafed, I fell to planning what
I would do in the city of Troy over Sunday, for I had no hope of
getting otit.

After a while the conductor came back and took a seat just behind me,
and leaning over towards me he said, “ So you would very much like to get
that train, would you?” “Yes, sir,” I said. “Well,” continued he, “there

488 APPENDICES [873A

is just one way that is possible for you to do it, ii you are a good runner and
willing to take chances.” Of course I asked how. Said he, " I don’t advise
any one to do it, but it is possible to jump off this train, for we stop before we
reach the Troy Depdt, and run and jump on to that train while it is going out.”
And he took a pencil and drew the railroads and the depdt (a Union one)
about like this [diagram omitted here].

And then he went on to explain : ” IVe are not allowed to run into the
depdt until the train for Saratoga and the one on the Fitchburgh and H. T. F,
have both pulled out^ which they both do at just five o’clock. We should
arrive at our stopping place X at about five. You could get off there and run
across the Saratoga track and over to Z [a point on the Fitchburgh line] and
jump on to that train. There is a street from a point near X to Z.”

At X, as our train stopped, I jumped from it and ran to point Z and caught
my train which was passing at that point.

When seated in the car I gave the pencil one more chance, and it was
written : “ I see you are on board all right; don’t you think I knew what I was
telling you ? ”

I had no further trouble in reaching the desired place that night.

1 will say that I was not aware of any of the material facts prior to their
appearing as I have stated them. I had not consulted any time-table or
otherwise learned as to the times on which these trains were to arrive or
depart : and I knew nothing of the train stopping outside the Troy Depdt or of
the possibility of getting from it and running up the street and catching the
train I wished to take. I never had the slightest idea of such a thing until
the conductor laid the plan before me just as I have .stated it. I was travelling
alone. I did not know the conductor or anybody that I saw.

I had no occasion to look up or inform myself as to trains at Troy for the
reason that I expected to travel on the West Shore Road instead of the N.Y.C.
and fI.R.R. ; but I missed the train on the West Shore Road and so took the*
N.Y.C. and H.R.R. as the best thing possible under the circumstances. On
the West Shore Road my journey would not have been through Schenectady
and Troy, but would have been to Rotterdam Junction on the West Shore
Road, and there I would have connected with a train on the Fitchburgh and
Hoosac Tunnel Road, all very nicely.

I think this experience is quite unique. Perhaps some one can explain it.

W.

N. Y., Nevemher S/'A, 1894.

In accordance with your suggestion, I send you herewith a further state-
ment that you may subjoin. I think it covers your inquiry.

C W .

About two years prior to that 1 had travelled from Schenectady to Troy,
and out of Troy on F. and H. T. R. ; but at that time the train did not stop
outside of Troy Depdt. I had travelled in years previous, that is, from five
to twenty years ago, several times on trains between Schenectady and Troy,
but none of them ever stopped outside of Troy Depdt. 1 had not been in

since the trip of two years before. Prior to that I had been in that place

perh!kp$ once in two years, for a day.

It might be well to add that no friend of mine at or elsewhere knew

any of these facts, to the best of my knowledge and belief. After arriving at

874 A] TO CHAPTER VIII 489

I told my friends, but none of them had known of the matters. I feel

confident that no friend or acquaintance of mine knew I was to travel from
Schenectady to Troy, and that none of them had made or heard of a connection
in that way. From talks with them I know they did not.

874 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 432-37.

The following appeared in the Religio^Philosophical Journal for
November ist, 1890 : —

Statement of Dr. Suddick.

For some time past we have been holding spiritual stances, or circles,
regularly every Tue.sday and Friday evening at our home in Cuba, Mo., and
have gotten and are getting many messages, truthful and otherwise, although
the untruthful ones are few comparatively and are generally so from known
causes, such as misunderstanding of question asked, inharmony in circle, &c.,
&c. Most remarkable was a “ Prophecy and its Fulfilment,” a hurried state-
ment of which appeared in the Better IVay of October r8th. Two friends had
called in, namely, Charles H. Cottnam, bookkeeper for the firm of Newman
and Jones, general merchants, and James E. Hollow, jun., of the firm of
Hollow & Son, dealers in stoves, hardware, and furniture, both doing business
at this place. Then my wife and I sat around a small walnut centre table,
placing our hands on its top surface in the usual manner, and in about ten or
fifteen minutes the table began to move, indicating the presence of our spirit
friends, or some intelligence with the power to move it, and answer questions
intelligently, as we found by asking. The lamp was sitting on a piano in the
corner of the room, turned down so as to make a subdued or mellow light, but
not so low but that we could see what time it was by our watches as we sat at
the table, or jot down the communications as they were spelled out.

Mr. Cottnam had a friend, Mr, Chris. Varis, a prominent hotel-keeper of
St. James, Phelps County, Mo., and a former resident of this place. His
disease was a chronic affection of the throat. Mr. C. had called on him a few
days previous and found him very weak and sinking fast. He could take no
solid food, and all the nourishment he got was by painful swallowing a little
or milk. His attendant physician, Dr. Hcadlee, of St. James, told
Mr. Cottnam that he thought Mr. Varis could live but a few days at most,
and from his appearance Mr. Cottnam was of the same opinion. After many
questions were asked and answered, the table answering by tipping two
of its feet two or three inches off the floor, and then striking it again, once
lor no, twice for don’t know, and three times for yes, Mr. C. asked, Do
you know my friend Chris. Varis, of St. James, Mo. *‘Yes.” ‘‘Is he
any better than when I was with him last?” “No.” “Is he w'orse?”
“Yes.” “ Will I have time to get to him before he passes out if I take the
next train?” “Yes.” “Will he live over to-morrow?” “Yes.” “Do you
know when he will pass out?” “Yes,” Then the table rocked back and
forth slowly, the feet striking the floor forty times, making forty distim t
raps, much to the surprise of all present, as we were expecting him to pass
out much sooner. We counted, and found that the time indicated would .be
October 8th ; so to make sure we were right we asked, “ Will he pass out on
October 8th ? ” “ Yes.” “ In the forenoon ? ” “ Yes.” “ Will a telegram be
sent to me on the morning of the 8th to that effect? ” “ Yes.”

490

APPENDICES

[874 a

A night or two after the above-described stance Mr. Cottnam sat at another
house with different sitters, and received the following confirmation of the
above. He says : “ We had been sitting only a few minutes when the table
began to move. I asked, ‘ Is the spirit demonstrating a friend of mine ? ’
* Yes.* (Indicated by three distinct tips of the table.) ‘ Will you spell your
name.^’ ‘Yes.’ The alphabet was called in the usual way, and the letters
signalled by tips spelled Ben Walker. ‘ Are you my friend, Ben Walker, of
St. Louis ? ’ ‘ Yes.’ ‘ I was not aware of your demise ; when did you pass
out ? * Three distinct tips. ‘ Does that mean that it has been three days

since you passed out ? * ‘ Yes.* ‘ Is your body buried ? * ‘ No.’ ‘ Will it be

buried to-morrow ? ’ ‘ Yes.’ ‘ Do you know my friend Chris. Vans ? ’ ‘ Yes.'
‘ Will he pass out on October 8th ? * ‘ Yes.’ ‘ Are you sure of this ? ’ ‘ Yes.’ ”

Mr. Cottnam was not aware of the death of Mr. Walker, and rather
doubted the truth of the message about him. The Globe Democrat of the
next day, however, confirmed the truth of his death, and stated that the inter-
ment was deferred until his son arrived from a distant city.

The prediction about Mr. Varis became an open secret, and was talked of
freely through the town from the morning of August 30th until October 8th,

when a telegram came over the wires informing Mr. C. that Mr. Varis died

that morning at six o’clock.

I append a letter from Dr. Headlee, the physician who attended Mr. Varis,
which corroborates the account just given. 1 also send the signatures of
twelve of our best citizens in further confirmation, and the signatures of the
sitters. Many more names could be obtained, but I judge the following to be
sufficient. S. t. Suodick, M.D.

Cuba, Mo.

St. James, Mo., Oct<Aer 18M, 1890.

Dear Doctor, — About a week previous to the death of Mr. Chris. Varis
1 was in Cuba, and a friend was inquiring about him. I told him that on the
evening before I did not think he would survive the night, but on that
morning he had rallied a little, that the chances all were that he would not
last twenty-four hours. He then told me that he (Mr. V.) would live until
the eighth day of October, and that he would die on that day ; this he did,
dying at 6 A..M.

Mr. Varis was sick about seven or eight months, and for the last three was
expected to die at any time. — Respectfully yours, S. H. Headlee.

Cuba, Mo., October 15M, 1890.

To ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN This is to certify that we, the under-
signed citizens of Cuba, Mo., did, prior to the death of Mr. Chris. Varis, of
St. James, Mo., which occurred on the morning of the 8th of October 1890,
hear a prophecy to the effect that he would die on the morning of that day.

We heard that his death was foretold at a sdance, at the house of Dr.
S. T. Suddick, in the town of Cuba, Mo., on the night of August the 29th,
or forty days prior to that event.

S. T. Suddick, M.D.

I received message for Cottnam October 8th, from St. James.

« Chas. C. Kent,

Telegraph Operator at Cuba.

Jas. £. Hollow', Jun., one of the circle of August 29th.
Longstreet Simpson, Clerk in Store.

874 A]

TO CHAPTER VIII

491

I. P. Brickey, Proprietor, Cuba Hotel.

£. A. Evans, Real Estate Agent.

F. R. Hardesty, Druggist.

W- T. Hunter, Blacksmith.

C. H. Cottnam, one of the circle of August 29th.

Dr. V. L. Shelp, Dentist.

Dr. J. H. Martyn, Physician and Surgeon.

Geo. Askins, Hotel Clerk.

Mrs. Louise Farley Suddick, one of the circle of August 29th.

}. A. Rost, Shoemaker.

J. A. Caims, Clerk in Store.

B. F. Johnson, Notary Public.

The letter from which the following is an extract, and of which the
original was sent to Dr. Hodgson by Dr. Suddick, fixes the date of the
stance.

CuHA. Mo., August 29/A, 1890.

D. E. Perryman, Bonne Terre, Mo.

Dear Friend, — . . . 30th. We had a nice little circle last night, in
our parlour, and good phenomena, so far as table-tipping goes. Myself, wife,
and two neighbours composed the circle. There were about a hundred ques-
tions asked, and all were answered correctly, so far as we know.

One gentleman was requested to go to a sick friend, and was told the
number of days he would live, &c. &c. S. T. Suddick.

(This extract appeared in the Religio- Philosophical Journal^ Dr.
Suddick says that the letter was returned to him at his own request, and
* writes : —

You will find that the first seven or eight lines were written August 29th
and the remainder of the letter on the 30th, or part before and part after the
sitting.

Mrs. Suddick sends the following account of the sitting : —

Cuba, Mo., November 1890.

Replying to your favour of the 5th inst., requesting my confirmation of the
“ prophecy ’* of which my husband wrote, I can say that I was one of the
sitters: the stance having taken place at our house. There were two other
sitters besides my husband (Dr. Suddick) and self, namely, J. E. Hollow,
jun., and C. H. Cottnam. The message was given in answer to questions
put by Mr. Cottnam concerning his friend Mr. Varis. He did not call the
name of the latter at the time of the sitting, but only spoke of him as “ my
friend,” and I, for one, did not know at the time to whom he referred. (I think
perhaps the other sitters did.) I heard casually the next day through a neigh-
bour lady that Mr. Varis, of St. James, was expected to die at any time, and
associating the two incidents, I concluded he was the sick friend of whose
demise Mr. C. had been questioning the ** spirits,” and on inquiring found? that
I had surmised correctly.

At the sitting Mr. Cottnam asked a number of questions about his sick
friend, among which were, “ Will he be alive when I arrive there } ” “ Will he

492 APPENDICES [874A

die to-morrow?” “Will he die the day after?” &c. After receiving negative
answers to the last two — and perhaps the question whether he would live a
week was asked, — I do not distinctly remember— he requested the controlling
power to rap once for every day that his friend would yet live, and the table
rapped forty times: each of the sitters counted the raps as they were given
distinctly by the table rising on one side off the floor and striking down again.
On counting the forty days from that date we found that the time of his death
as prophesied would fall on the 8th of October. (The date of the prophecy
was August 29th.) Mr. C. asked if the 8th of October was the day on which he
would die, and the table rapped three times, the conventional .signal for “ Yes.’’
He then asked if the demise would take place in daytime or at night ; in the
forenoon or afternoon, &c., and received answers that it would be in the day-
time, and in the forenoon.

At several other stances, held at the home of Mr. Brickey and other places,
these questions were again asked, and the answers repeated that Mr. Varis
would die on the morning of October 8th, as at the first sitting. Of these dates
I am perfectly confident.

It may, and it may not, be superfluous to add, that, unlike my husband, I
am not a confirmed believer in the spiritual origin of those phenomena which
we have from time to time witnessed, such as movements of the table by some
unknown power ; intelligent answers to questions ; messages given through the
alphabet, &c., but have been undecided whether to attribute them to telepathy,
thought-transference, or some other unknown mental or magnetic quality rc-
.siding in the sitters themselves, or whether, as so many believe, it is really
through the direct agency of the disembodied.

Wishing your Society much success In its rational and most scientific way
of dealing with these occult prol)lems, — I am, very truly,

Louise F. Suddick.

Dr. Hodgson has also received letters from Mr. I. P. Brickey, Mr. E.
A. Evans, and Mr, J. A. Rost, confirming the authenticity of their testi-
mony quoted above. Mr. Brickey states that it was at his house that the
stance at which the prophecy was confirmed was held.

Mr. Evans writes : —

CuwA, Mo., Nevember SM, 1890.

Touching the matter cited in yours of the 4th inst., I desire to .say that my
signature subscribed to the publi.shed statement of Dr. Suddick, relative to the
prophesied death of Chris. Varis, of St. James, Mo., is authentic. Further, in
this connection I desire to say that 1 never attended a sdance, as it is called, 1
believe, in my life, have no experience in that line, and have no personal know-
ledge upon which to base belief nor unbelief of Spiritualism. But I was told
by parties that met at Dr. Suddick's residence, some weeks before the demise
of Chris. Varis, that by raps with, or on a table, I do not know which, they
were told that Varis would die in forty days, or October Sth, and he did die on
the date as given. Eugene A. Evans.

There remained an important question to determine : whether Mr.
Varis had known of the prophecy, making it possible that it had brought

TO CHAPTER VIII

876 A]

493

about its own fulfilment. The following letter and statement give the
result of Dr. Suddick’s inquiries on this point: —

Cuba, Mo., December lyrd, 1890.

I received your recent letter several days ago, but thought it would perhaps
be more satisfactory to you and your Society for me to go and see Mrs. Varis,
widow of Mr. Chris. Varis, myself. So yesterday (Sunday) I boarded the noon
train, and on arriving found Mrs. Varis and her two daughters, young ladies,
very intelligent and clever people. On introducing the subject, just a shade of
vexation passed over Mrs. V.*s face, and she made haste to say, “ Wc are not
Spiritualists, and knew nothing of the prophecy until we saw it in the Crawford
Minor, at least two weeks after Mr. Varis’ death. 1 was very much vexed, a.s
wc believe nothing in such foolishness. . .

I explained that the parties who had signed their names to the paper had
not intended it to appear in the local press. Mrs. V. said she had felt very
badly about having her husband’s name bandied about in that way in a news-
paper, but when Mr. Cottnam explained the matter, and Dr. Headlee said he
knew of the prophecy, and that tlie morning of the 8th of October had been
specified as the time in which he should die, a week or more before his death
occurred, she felt that there must be some truth in it, as she could not doubt
Dr. Headlee.

** Mrs. Varis, did your husband know anything about the prophecy before
his death ? ”

“ No, indeed,” she said, “ none of us knew anything about it until two weeks
after his death.”

“ Might not Dr. Headlee have said something to him about it during one of
his visits, without your knowing it?”

“ Oh dear no,” she said, “ I was always present at these visits, and know no
such talk occurred at any of them. No, I am positive Dr. Headlee never
mentioned it, and that Mr. V, never knew it.”

I then wrote up the little memorandum enclosed, and she signed it, or rather
her daughter did, at her request, in my presence. . . .

I then went out and found Dr. Headlee, and he said in answer to my
questions ; —

“No, I know positively that Mr. V. knew nothing of the prophecy; no one
in St. James knew anything of it but myself, and I did not want him to find it
out.” S. T. SUDDICK.

To ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN This is to Certify that I am positive
that my husband knew nothing whatever of the prophecy of his death, made at
a spiritual circle held at the home of Dr. S. T, Suddick, in Cuba, Mo., on
August 29th last. We did not hear of it for about two weeks after his death.
We are not Spiritualists. [Signed] Mrs. A. Varis.

878 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 353-55.

In an article in Psychische Stndien^ March (p. 131), the ediUr
(Mr. Alexander Alcsakoflf), writes : —

I am personally acquainted with the following case : — My friend and fellow-
student at the Lyceum, Privy Councillor (Geheimrath) Baron Konstantin K.,
told me, twenty years ago, that at the time of the death of his uncle, Baron

494 APPENDICES [876 A

Paul K., at Warschau, his will could not be found, though it was thoroughly
searched for ; and that it was discovered in a secret drawer (Fache), entirely
in consequence of a communication received by Prince Emile Wittgenstein,
in which the place was described.

In Psychische Studien for December 1889 (pp. 568-69), M. Aksakoff
gives further particulars as follows : —

Since the previous notice of this case, 1 have made the acquaintance of Paul
von Korf, a son of Baron von Korf, who resides in the Port Strasse, St. Peters-
burg. He has given me the following account of the circumstances : —

His father, General Paul von Korf, died at Warschau on April 7th, 1867.
It was known that he had made a will, but after his death it could not be found.
In the month of July 1867 his sister, the Baroness Charlotte von Wrangel, was
living with her sister-in-law, Madame D. von Obuchow, in the town of Plock
(pronounced Plozk), not far from Warschau. Her mother, the widow of
General von Korf, was travelling abroad ; and in her mother’s absence she was
entrusted with the opening of her correspondence. Among the letters thus
received and opened was one from Prince Emile von Wittgenstein (also abroad)
addressed to the widow of General von Korf, in which he informed her that a
spiritualistic communication had been received by him in the name of her de-
ceased husband, indicating the place where his will would be found. The
Baroness von Wrangel, who knew how much trouble the absence of this will
had given to her elder brother [Baron Joseph Korf] who was engaged in the
administration of the property, and who was at that time in Warschau, went at
once, with her sister-in-law, to Warschau, to inform him of the important con-
tents of the letter of Prince von Wittgenstein. Her brother’s first words were
that he had just found the will ; and when the letter of Prince von Wittgensteiir
was read, it was apparent, to the astonishment of those present, that the place
indicated in the spiritualistic communication where the will would be found was
precisely that in which the Baron had at last found it.

Baron Paul von Korf promised me that he would look for this letter of Prince
von Wittgenstein’s, which he had in his hand less than two years ago, when
arranging the family papers. But up to the present time he has not been able
again to find it. He fears it may have been unintentionally destroyed with
useless correspondence.

In a letter dated St, Petersburg, February 26th, 1890, M. Aksakoff adds
the following particulars, with two letters, of which translations are here
given : —

I. Original letter from Baron Paul Korf (son of the Baron Korf whose will
is concerned) to M. Aksakoff, countersigned by Baron Paul’s sister. Baroness
Charlotte Wrangel, and testifying to the exactness of the fact as stated in
Psychische Studien^ 1888, p. 5^.

^ Petersburg, 29M, 1890.

SiR,--I have read with great interest your communication, inserted in
Psychische Studien (p. 568), concerning the will of my late father. The facts
are there related with perfect accuracy. I am afraid that 1 burnt the letter of

TO CHAPTER VIII

876 B]

495

Prince Emile Wittgenstein about a year ago, when I was arranging the papers
of my late father, which were at his country seat. — Accept, &c.,

(Baron) Paul Korf.

I add my signature to that of my brother, to confirm the contents of his
letter. Baroness C. Wrangel, Baroness Korf.

II. Copy of a letter from Prince Emile de Sayn-Wittgenstein, published in
the work, Souvenirs et Correspondance du Prince Emile de Sayn-Wittgenstein-
Bcrlebourg (Paris, 1889), vol. ii. p. 365.

Warsaw, July 17M, 1867.

It seems an age, my dear parents, since I have had any news of you ; my
mother’s last letter was dated June 5th. I have occupied myself much with
Spiritualism of late, and my mediumistic faculties have developed themselves
in an astonishing way. I write often with great facility in various kinds of
writing; 1 have had direct communications from the spirit which haunts Berle-
bourg, a woman of our family who killed herself 102 years ago. I have, more-
over, obtained a very singular result. One of my friends, Licut.-General Baron
de Korf, deceased some months since, manifested himself to me (without my
having thought of him the least in the world), to enjoin upon me to indicate to
his family the place where his will had been maliciously hidden ; that is to say,
in a chest of drawers in the house where he died. I did not know that the
family were looking for this will, and had not found it. Well, they found it in
the very place which the spirit had indicated to me. It is a document of great
importance for the management of his property, and for the settlement of ques-
tions which will arise when his children attain their majority. Here are kets
which can stand criticism. Emile Wittgenstein.

III. Prince Emile Wittgenstein died in 1878, at Tegemsee, in Bavaria.

IV. As to the date of the letter of Prince Sayn-Wittgenstein to the widow
of Baron Korf. Here is what I have been able to learn in a last interview with
his son, Baron Paul Korf. The marriage of his daughter, Baroness Charlotte
Korf, with Baron Wrangel took place at*Warsaw, June 17th, 1867. A week
after that event the Baroness Wrangel left, with her sister-in-law, Madame
Obuchow, for the town of Plock, and her mother went abroad. At that date
the will had not been found. And since the letter of Prince Emile Wittgen-
stein to his parents, in which he informs them of the finding of the will by
spiritual communication, is dated July 17th, 1S67, it follows that the letter of
Prince Emile Wittgenstein to the widow of Baron Korf, enclosing that com-
munication, and consequently the communication itself, must have been re-
ceived between June 17th and July 17th, 1867.

V. As to the place where the will was found. I asked Baron Paul Korf :

Is it a fact that the will was found ‘m a chest of drawers ’ (armoire) as was

predicted in the communication ? '* He answered : That is what both my
sister and I heard.”

VI. The elder son of Baron Korf, who busieif himself at Warsaw w'»h

the affairs of the inheritance, was named Baron Joseph Korf, and has since
died. *

876 B. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. pp. 238 - 42 .

The following case of a communication indicating the whereabouts

APPENDICES

496

[876 B

of a missing note of hand was sent to Dr. Hodgson by Judge W. D.
Harden, of Savannah, Georgia, who is well known to him : —

345 W. Thirty-fourth Street, New York,
October yd, 1888.

Dr. Richard Hodgson, —My dear Sir,— Thinking that you may pos-
sibly be back from your vacation, I send you with this the account of the
finding of the note by Mrs. B. and the letter to me from Dr. Knorr.

W. D. Harden.

Savannah, Ga., September \(yth, 1S88.

Judge W. D. Harden,

Dear Friend, — This morning, when I paid a professional visit to Mrs.
B.\s sick son, she showed me a rough draft of the statement she intended to
send to you. . . .

I think I need to add very little to Mrs. B.'s statements. You are
acquainted with the modus operandi of the communications with the sliding
rod, the rod and the alphabet board being at B.’s house, the same you saw at
Miss Maggie R.’s. In order to facilitate your description for Dr. H. I send
you a paper model of the rod and a printed alphabet (with other convenient
inscriptions), that is to be pasted near the two (right and left) edges, leaving
a space between of .sufficient width for the points of the rod to point out the
desired letters.

I have to remark that a couple of days after the death of Miss Nina B.'s
fianci (Mr. N. H.; I assisted her to get into communication with him. We
succeeded, Miss Nina turning out to be feebly mcdiumistic, and many com-
munications were received from him.

This attracted Major B.’s attention. He tried then with me (the major
was then an agnostic), and found that he also was mediumistic, and he got
communications from his father and his uncle that were so characteristic that
he became convinced of the reality of spirit communion. So when the major
departed, last spring or summer, he was well acquainted with the modus
operandi of spirit communion ; and therefore the very day after his departure
we could receive a few words from him. Later on we received many messages
from him.

1 think 1 was present at the sdance when he stated that the note was
deposited somewhere, but could not tell where. It looks as if at that time
he had not yet discovered the whereabouts of the note, but continued hunting
for it, and at last discovered it.

L. Knorr, Savannah.

Judge Harden, — In compliance with your request I will state: After my
honoured husband Major Lucius B.’s departure from this life, 1 was in distress
of mind that none could understand but one surrounded by similar circum-
stances. Of his business transactions I knew but little. After a week or
two of stunning agony, I aroused myself to look' into our financial condition.
I was aware that he had in his keeping a note given by Judge H. W. Hopkins
to .some several hundred which was due, and I searched all the nooks and
comers of his secretaire, manuscript, letters, memorandum-books, read .several
hundred letters ; but all for naught. For two months I spent most of the time
going over and over, but with the same result. I finally asked him at a stance
about the note.

TO CHAPTER VIII

497

876 B]

Q, “ Have you deposited the note anywhere ? ” A. “ I have.”

Q. “ Where ? ” No answer.

Finally I wrote to Judge H. (who had written me about it): “I had as
well tell you the note has not been found. I cannot imagine where it is.”
This was on Friday. The following Sunday, about four o’clock, my daughter
Nina, who possesses some singular power, proposed we try if we could not
get a communication from our loved ones. While she went to get a little
arrangement (a rod that worked on a board upon which the letters of the
alphabet were printed) I sat in my room alone, thinking, if it were possible
for Major B, to see the heart filled to overflowing with anguish, and added to
this the mind distressed by business cares, would he not communicate with me
and try to give some consolation or assistance.

But 1 did not express my thoughts to any one. Nina returned, and after
a little conversation we put our hands on the rod and it promptly spelt
“ Look in my long drawer and find Willie.” I became excited, ran to the
bureau and pulled out the bottom drawer, turned the contents upon the floor,
arfd commenced to search. Under all the things was a vest; in its little
breast pocket was the note.

Major B. was in the habit of calling the bottom drawer, where only his
under-garments were kept, “ My long drawer,” to designate it from several
small drawers set aside for his use. The vest was the only garment, other
than underwear, in the drawer. The vest was the one taken off l\im when
he first became ill. He was unconscious during the first day of his illness.
The vest was put in the drawer after or during his illness by my friend, I
think, who assisted in caring for him while sick.

The drawer had not been opened that we knew of after he left us until
the note was discovered. Altliough I had moved to another room, I gave
instructions that the bottom drawer was not to be disturbed.

As .soon as the rod spelt “ Look in my long drawer and find Willie,” I was
perfectly electrified with the knowledge that Willie H.’s note was in that
drawer, although 1 never would have thought of looking in such a place for a
valuable paper.

Major B. and myself always spoke to and of Judge H. as “Willie,” he
being a relation of mine and a favourite of Major B. from Willie’s childhood.

I have just read the above to my daughter, and she says she will endorse
the statement as being correct. — I am, very respectfully,

Mrs. E. F. B. B., widow of the
late Major Lucius C. B.

N. H. B.

Savannah, Ga., September i6tA, t888.

The two signatures have been made in my presence, and I corroborate
*nany of the facts and circumstances mentioned in the above report. I am
now requested by the ladies to say that they do not wish their names to appear
In public. Knorr, M.D.

Savannah, October rjth, i888.

Judge W. D. Harden, ^

My dear Friend, — The delay in answering yours of the qth inst. was
caused by Mrs. B., who sent me her answer only an hour ago, notwithstanding
*ny having reminded her a dozen times.

VOL. IL 2 I

APPENDICES

498

[876 B

As you see from her statement, the exact date of the memorable stance
cannot be given by her. But some coincidental occurrences [mentioned in
detail, show that it was most likely] the 13th or the 20th of May last. It is
certain that it was a Sunday, as Mrs. B. states, for 1 remember that, when I
returned from Wilmington Island that Sunday, Mrs. K. told me that Miss
Nina B. had been here and had told her to inform me that something impor-
tant had happened that afternoon, and she had pleasant news to communi.
cate to me. 1 guessed at once what it referred to ; for they had all along
been so anxious to get some information about that note, and 1 was present
at the several previous stances, when ineffectual attempts had been made to
get that information. . . .

I see Mrs. B. does not answer No. 2 of Dr. H.'s questions (date of sitting
where question about the note was first asked) at all ; so I will do so as far as
I can. It was about a week after Major B.'s demise that the question was put
in my presence, and further at several subsequent stances at which 1 was pre-
sent ; but no exact dates could be given, further than that it occurred, say,
between the 6th of April and the 13th of May, on several occasions in my
presence, and in the presence of Mrs. B., Miss Nina B., and .sometimes of the
youngest child (Lettie, eight or nine years).

In answer to No. 5 of Dr. H.^s questions (“ Is Mrs. B. certain that neither
she nor her daughter put the vest away ? ”) I have to state that I have the
repeated assurance of both the ladies that they feel sure that they did not put
the vest away, nor that they had the least suspicion that there could have been
$0 valuable a paper in that vest-pocket, or else they would have hunted for the
vest in that drawer, among others where clothing might have been stowed
away, and thus should have discovered what they hunted for.

And as to question No. 4 (**Can any more definite statement be obtained
concerning the putting away of the vest?*’) I have to state that Mrs. B. and
Miss B. always thought that their cousin (Miss Mel Thomas), who had with
the most self-sacrificing devotion nursed the major during his sickness and
had the entire management of the sick room, had put it away. But on ques-
tioning her she said she had no recollection of so trifling an occurrence.

In answer to question No. 6 (“Who were present ? ’*) Mrs. B. says, “ Pos*
sibly one of the children.” I have to explain this answer. She ought to have
answered, “ Possibly my youngest child, Lettie.” For of her children, besides
Miss Nina, it is only Lettie who has something to do with the.se stances— she
being a far stronger medium than Mrs. B. or Miss B.— but at the same time
does not feel the least interest in the matter ; on the contrary, hates to be called
away from her dolls, puts her hands on the sliding-rod with a great deal of
grumbling, and is always very glad to get off, the sooner the better.

Miss Nina reported to me that that Sunday she and her sister Lettie were
first holding communication with their father and received some pleasant and
convincing messages from their father; then Lettie would not continue any
longer. It was then that Miss N. called her mother to take Lettie’s place,
and the result was the getting of that message in regard to the note. So, you
see, it may have been* possible that Lettie had not left the room yet at
the time. Louis Knork.

October vjth , 1888.

Mr. Richard Hodgson, — Dear Sir,— In answer to your questions I wHl
say: 1. Major B. died just at sunrise (Easter morning), first day of April,

TO CHAPTER VIII

499

877 A]

2. I told all I know about putting away the vest. 3. About three o’clock,
Sunday, the first or second week in May. Myself and daughter were the only
ones present that I remember — possibly one of the children. It happened just
as I stated. To me there is but one solution. — In great haste, very respectfully,

[Signed] E. F. B.

877 A. Note „ — I think it very desirable that as many persons as
possible should provide a decisive test of their own identity, in case they
should find themselves able to communicate through any sensitive after
their bodily death. The simplest plan is to write down some sentence
embodying an idea or a name which you feel it probable that you will
remember, if you remember anything, and then to seal this sentence up
in an envelope, without communicating it to any person whatever. Then
label the envelope “ Posthumous letter,** and send it, accompanied by a
letter giving name and address, to the Secretary, Society for Psychical
Research, 20, Hanover Square, London, W. The Secretary will acknow-
ledge receipt, and store the letter safely, with others of the kind. If,
then, the writer (it may be many years afterwards) finds himself capable
of sending a message from the other world, let him mention this test
sentence, and try to reproduce it. The sealed envelope can then be
opened ; and if the spirit’s message should be found to coincide with the
words therein written, there will be as good a proof as we can get that that
message has at any rate not emanated from any living mind ; and has
emanated, therefore, from some unlimited source of knowledge, or — which
will seem to most persons more probable — from the surviving mind of the
driginal writer.

[912 A

APPENDICES

TO

CHAPTER IX

912 A. The following account of Dr. John L. Nevius’s book on
Demon Possession and Allied Themes (and Edition. Fleming H. Revell
Co., Chicago, New York, Toronto, 1896) is taken from a review fcy
Professor W. Romaine Newbold in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. p. 602.

Dr. Nevius was for forty years a missionary in China. Early in his
ministry he found that demon possession is a common occurrence among the
Chinese, and although he was able to observe in person one case only, he suc-
ceeded in collecting a large amount of information about the phenomena and
the construction put upon them by the natives. This material forms the basis
of his book.

A few illustrations will serve to give a conception of its general character.
The second case is that of a mountaineer, Kwo by name, who gives an account
of his own experiences. He had been arranging for the household worship of
the Goddess Wang-Muniang, when one night he dreamed that the goddess
appeared to him and announced that she had taken up her abode in his house.
This was followed after the lapse of a few days by a feeling of restlessness
coupled with an irrational impulse to gamble; his mind became confused,
memory was impaired. He was then seized by an epileptiform attack, to which
succeeded mania with homicidal impulses. The “demon” proclaimed its
presence, demanded worship. Upon compliance with its demands it departed.
For some months the “demon” reappeared at intervals, promised to heal
disease. Kw'o notes that “many diseases were not under its control, and it
seemed as if it could perfectly cure only such as were indicted by spirits ” — a
significant remark. When the sufferer became a Christian, the “ demon ” dis-
appeared, saying “ This is no place for me.”

Case 3 is narrated by a native Christian. He described the patient as
“sitting up, her eyes closed, with a fluttering motion of the eyelids, her
countenance like one weeping and the fingers of both hands tightly clenched.
She would allow no one to straighten her closed fingers. I then, hardly expect-
ing an answer, as the wo.nan had hitherto been speechless, said to the demon :
* Have you no fear of God ? Why do you come here to afflict this woman ? '
T^ this I received instantly the following reply: ‘God and Christ will not
interfere. I have been here seven or eight years; and I claim this as my
resting-place. You cannot get rid of me.’” This patient was relieved by
prayer.

In several instances the “ demon ” claims identity with the spirit of some

500

TO CHAPTER IX

923 A]

SOI

deceased human being. Thus in case 24 a bride on her yredding night was
seized by what purported to be the spirit of a girl to whom her husband had
been engaged, and who had drowned herself on account of the ill-treatment of
her future mother-in-law. In other cases the “ demon ” claims to be one of the
lower animals— in one which occurred in Japan (page 105) it professed
itself a fox.

The entire collection gives a most interesting glimpse of Chinese spiritism.
We find the cult of spirits a recognised institution. “ Physical phenomena
are alleged to be matters of daily occurrence. Every village has its medium.^’
The “ developing sdance ” has its counterpart (page 67). The medium some-
times goes into ** quiet trance,” and sometimes communication with the unseen
world is effected by means of an instrument essentially identical with plan-
chette (pages 48, 69).

Evidence of this sort is not without its value as going to show that spiritism
is a growth indigenous to many countries, that it is a plausible interpretation of
phenomena which occur spontaneously among all races, and is not merely a
mass of imposture based upon the ** Rochester knockings ” and peculiar to the
last half of the nineteenth century. But if one asks what Dr. Nevius has done
towards vindicating the popular interpretation of these phenomena, the reply
cannot but be unfavourable.

Every page bears witness to the author’s desire to be exact in description,
unbiassed in interpretation, and just in criticism; it is rather his misfortune
than his fault that he has fallen so far short of the mark in all three respects.
Practically all his material rests upon the evidence of native— Chinese or Mon-
golian— witnesses. All are fully convinced of the diabolical origin of the pheno-
mena, and Dr. Nevius himself takes the same view, so that we can scarcely
accept the accounts as literally true and uncoloured by preconceptions. Such
evidence can scarcely do more than supply illustrations of facts already inde-
•pendently established.

Of alleged supernormal phenomena the book is almost barren. One case
of a “ Poltergeist ” rests solely upon the evidence of Mongolians, whom the
missionary transmitting the account stigmatises as “ so imbued, one and all,
with the spirit of lying that 1 have found it useless to repeat what the most
respectable say.” In a few other cases it is claimed that the demoniac was
possessed of supernormal knowledge and of the gift of healing, but no definite
facts are given.

923 A. For accounts of the impostures of Madame Blavatsky and
other members of the Theosophical Society, see ; —

( I ) “ Report of the Committee appointed to Investigate Phenomena
connected with the Theosophical Society,” in /Proceedings S.P.R. (vol. iii.
pp. 201-400). This Committee was appointed in 1884 by the Council
of the Society for Psychical Research. It consisted of the following
members : Messrs. E. Gurney, R. Hodgson, F, W. H. Myers, F. Podmore,
Professor and Mrs. H. Sidgwick, and Mr. J. H. Stack. The report is
prefaced by the “ Statement and Conclusions of the Committee ” ; next
comes Dr. Hodgson’s “ Account of Personal Investigations in India, *and
discussion of the authorship of the * Koot Hoomi ’ letters ” ; numerous
facsimiles of the letters are given, together with a report by the expert,

502

APPENDICES

Mr. F. G. Netherclift, on the character of the handwritings. An account
of some other phenomena— four cases of letters received in a mysterious
manner, and four cases of supposed “ astral ** apparitions— was contributed
by Mrs. Sidgwick.

(2) ‘‘’Fhe Defence of the Theosophists,” by Dr. R. Hodgson, in
Proceedings S.P.R. (voL ix. pp. 129-159). This consists of replies to
attacks on the above Report.

(3) A Modern Priestess of Isis: abridged and translated on behalf of
the Society for Psychical Research from the Russian of V. S. SolovyofF,
by Walter Leaf, Litt. D. (Longmans, Green & Co., London, 1895). "^'0
Mr, Solovyo/Ts narrative are added in appendices a defence of Madame
Blavatsky by her sister, Madame Jelihovsky, and Mr. SolovyofPs reply to
the latter.

(4) Isis very much Unveiled: being the Story of the great Mahatma
Hoax, by Edmund Garrett; reprinted from the Westminster Gazette,
1895.

(5) The chapter on Madame Blavatsky and Theosophy,** in Mr.
F. Podraore*s Studies in Psychical Research (Kegan Paul, Trench,
Triibner & Co., London, 1897).

See also, for reviews of (3) and (4), Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi, pp.

923 B. The following articles in the Proceedings S.P.R. relate to
work done by members of the Society in exposing fraud in connection
with some alleged physical phenomena ** of spiritualism, and in showing
what conditions are necessary in order to guard against it.

Results of a Personal Investigation into the Physical Phenomena of
Spiritualism, with some critical remarks on the evidence for the genuine-
ness of such Phenomena,** by Mrs. H. Sidgwick ' (vol. iv. p. 45),

Accounts of some so-called»^ Spiritualistic * Stances,** by Professor
H. Carvill Lewis and others (vol. iv, p. 338).

** The Possibilities of Mal-observation and I^pse of Memory from a
practical point of view,** by R. Hodgson and S. J. Davey (vol. iv. p. 381).

The two last-named articles relate chiefly to the ‘‘ slate-writing ** per-
formances of the medium Eglinton, and Mr. Davey’s successful imitation
of them by conjuring. Numerous discussions on the same subject
appeared in the fournal during 1886 and 1887 (vols. ii. and iii.).

"On Spirit Photographs,'* by Mrs. H. Sidgwick (vol. vii. p. 268).

"Mr. Davey's Imitations by Conjuring of Phenomena sometimes
attributed to Spirit Agency,** by R. Hodgson (vol. viii. p. 253).

" Indian Magic and the Testimony of Conjurers,** by R. Hodgson
(vol. ix. p. 354).

"Resolute Credulity,” by F. W. H. Myers (voU xi. p. 213).

Eusapia Paladino,” an account by Professor Sidgwick of sittings held
with her at Cambridge in 1895, in the Journal S.P.R. (vol. vii. p. 14^)-
^ See also Mrs. Sidgwick’s article on " Spiritualism ” in the Etuychpitdia Britannka.

925 A] TO CHAPTER IX 503

I may further refer my readers to the following books : — .

Studies in Psychical Research^ by Frank Podmore (Kegan Paul, Trench,
Triibner & Co., London, 1897).

Modern Spiritualism : a History and a Criticism^ by Frank Podmore
(Methuen & Co., I^ndon, 1902).

Preliminary Report of the Commission appointed by the University of
Pennsylvania to investigate Modern Spiritualism^ in accordance with the
request of the late Henry Seybert (J. B. Lippincott Company, Philadelphia,
1887).

The Death-Blow to Spiritualism : being the true story of the Fox
Sisters, as revealed by authority of Margaret Fox Kane and Catherine
Fox Jencken, by Reuben Briggs Davenport (New York : J. W. Dillingham
Co., 1888; also 1897).

Revelations of a Spirit Medium ; or Spiritualistic Mysteries Exposed:
a* detailed explanation of the methods used by fraudulent mediums. By
a Medium (St. Paul, Minn. : Farrington & Co., 1891).

The Bottom Facts concerning the Science of Spiritualism derived from
careful investigations covering a period of twenty-five years^ by John W.
Truesdell. With many descriptive illustrations (New York : G. W. Carle-
ton & Co. \ London : S. Low & Co., 1884).

Confessions of a Medium (Griffith & Farran, London, 1882).

Spirit Slate-writing and Kindred Phenomena^ by William E. Robinson
(New York : Munn & Co., 1898 \ London : Sampson Low, Marston & Co.) .
This contains a good account by a professional conjurer of various methods
,of producing slate-writing by trickery.

Some Account of the Vampires of Onsets Past and Present (S. Wood-
berry & Co., Boston, 1892).

Modern Spiritualism^ by J. N. Maskelyne (London : F. Wame & Co.).

925 A. An instance of a supposed telekinetic phenomenon which
was probably to be attributed to motor automatism is that mentioned in
the case of Mme. X. (see 833) when, as she was standing on a chair,
the chair was violently snatched from under her feet and pushed to a
distance by — as she believed — some “ invisible force.” Some incidents
of a similar kind are described in Professor Flournoy’s history of Mdlle.
Smith (but not referred to in my account of this sensitive in 834-842).

Raps are mentioned in the case of Professor Rossi-Pagnoni (864 A) ;
in the P^rdliguine case (868 A) raps and the movement of a heavy un-
touched table are described ; and in the case of Mr. F. Hodgson (868 B)
there seem to have been various telekinetic movements besides raps. In
these last two cases the telekinetic phenomena yjere apparently connected
with a recent death, and it will be remembered that many of the better
evidenced groups of supernormal phenomena seemed to cluster about the
point of death, some occurring shortly before and some shortly after it,
while others more closely coincide with the death itself. I quote here a
simple case of an isolated movement, occurring shortly before a death

APPENDICES

S 04

under circumstances which seem to give it a kind of coincidental or pur-
posive character. The reader should compare with this the account of the
" Woodd knockings ” to which I have briefly referred in 868 C.

From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vii. p. 154. The account is given by the
Rev. Edward T. Vaughan, of Langleybury Vicarage, King's Langley, who
writes : —

August 2^/1^ 1884.

Some three or four years back, I had occasion to visit a parishioner who
was seriously ill, one afternoon in the winter time as it was growing dark. I
had seen him several times before since his illness commenced, and had always
found him in the same bedroom. On this occasion I had been praying with
him, and his wife was kneeling at the opposite side of the bed to myself. As I
was saying the last words of the prayer, we (the woman and myself) distinctly
saw a small table, which stood about a yard from the foot of the bed, rise two
or three inches from the ground and come down with a violent thump upon the
floor, so loudly that the man, who was lying with his eyes closed, started up and
asked, with some terror, what had occasioned it. On examining the table, I
found that a glass with medicine in it, which stood upon the table with several
other articles, had been so shaken that some of the contents were spilt. My
first idea was that something had been thrown down in the room belong where
my wife, a sister of the woman’s, and an aged uncle were sitting. On going
downstairs and inquiring, 1 found that this was not so ; that they had been all
sitting perfectly quiet in the room, and thought we had thrown down something
in the bedroom. There was no one else in the house. The man died about a
week after this took place.

E. T. Vaughan, Vicar of Langleybury.

Mr. Vaughan writes later ; —

June 27^/4, 1888.

I enclose according to your wish a statement from Mrs. Vaughan of what
she remembers of the curious incident. I am sorry to say the widow, though
she still lives in this village, is not capable of writing down a statement of what
she saw and heard that evening, though she can give a very clear account of
the circumstances to any one who examines her orally. The man’s name was
John Wilson, a bricklayer in the employ of the Earl of Clarendon. He died
on December 7th, 1881, about a week after the strange occurrence. I have
never since experienced any similar phenomenon.

Edward T. Vaughan.

Mrs. Vaughan writes under the same date as follows ; —

In confirmation of the story of Wilson’s deathbed, I can say I was sitting in
the room below the sick man’s with two other people (his sister-in-law and
uncle), in perfect silence, as every word read in the room above could be dis-
tinctly heard by us. Just as the last words of the prayer were l}eing said, we
were startled by a loud and sudden noise, as if some heavy piece of furniture
had fallen in the room above. My first impression was that the man was taken
worse, and that his wife, moving hastily to him, had knocked over a table.
None of us spoke, though we started and looked at each other, and expected
to hear some one called; but almost the next minute I heard Mr. Vaughan
address the man on leaving, and come downstairs with the wife. I went to

TO CHAPTER IX

505

928 A]

meet them with her sister, and though nothing more was said by any of us than
« good-bye,’’ I saw by all the faces that something unusual had happened. As
soon as we were out of the house I said to Mr. Vaughan, “What was thzt
noise just as you were reading the prayers ? ” and he told me the story you
have heard, and it formed the principal topic of our long walk home, won-
dering what it was, and trying to explain it, without in the least coming to
any conclusion but greater wonder. £. L. Vaughan.

This is a brief and simple incident; but it is particularly hard to
explain by ordinary causes — such as an earthquake or a mistaken
memory.

926 A. Scheme of Vital Faculty.

The following scheme is not put forth as expressing deliberate con-
victions, supported by adequate evidence. Its speculative character has,
in fact, excluded it from my text, yet I hope that it may not be without
it^ use. For many men the difficulty of belief is not so much in defect of
trustworthy evidence as in the unintelligibility, the incoherence of the
phenomena described, which prevents them from being retained in the
mind or assimilated with previous knowledge.

I have myself felt the full force of this objection, and I believe that
some effort to meet it has become absolutely needful. Undoubtedly a
record of facts without theories is the first essential. But the facts in-
dividually are like “ stones that fall down from Jupiter,” — isolated marvels,
each of which seems incredible until we have made shift to colligate
them all.

“Truth,” as we have in this research constant need to remember,
“ emerges more readily from error than from confusion ;” and it is in the
place of absolute confusion — wandering as we are per incertam Ittnam^ sub
luce malignd — that I point to pathways which may lead somewhither,
though it be with much of error by the way.

With this apology, made once for all, I enter upon a task whose pro-
visional and hazardous character no one can feel more strongly than
myself.

Let us begin, then, by taking the most generalised view possible of all
these phenomena. They appear, at any rate, to depend upon the presence
of living human beings ; and they are therefore in some sense phenomena
of life. If, then, they are phenomena of life, they must be in some way
derived from, or must bear some analogy to, the vital phenomena, the
faculties and functions with which we are familiar in the experience of
every day. Yet to say this brings us little nearer to our aim. Spirits
may have ruled Mr. Moses’ mind and body jqst as tnily as our own
conscious will rules our mind and body.' But the results which they pro-
duced were so different from any results which we can produce that it is
hard to know where to begin the comparison. Is there not some mifidle

' This Appendix was written originally with a special view to the phenomena alleged
to occur in the case of Mr. W. Stainton Moses. — Editors.

APPENDICES

506

teriiii some intermediate series^ with which both these extreme series may
have points of resemblance?

It is here that we ought to feel the advantage of previous discussions
on man*s own supernormal faculties, — on the powers of the Self below
the threshold of ordinary consciousness. We have traced these powers in
detail ; we have noted the extension of the normal spectrum of con-
sciousness beyond both red and violet ends, in response to subliminal
control. Perhaps the profounder conception of the Self thus gained may
help us to bridge over that gulf between the performances of the ordinary
man and those of the so-called medium which heretofore has involved so
difficult a leap. We may find that the spirit’s power over the organism
which it controls or “ possesses,” — awhile possibly going much further than
any subliminal power in the organism itself, as known to us, — may yet
advance along similar lines, and receive explanation from hypnotic or
telepathic phenomena. I will endeavour, then, to set side by side, in
tabular form, the main heads of vital process or faculty as exercised (i)
under normal or supraliminal control; (2) under subliminal and telepathic
control ; (3) under what is claimed as disembodied or spiritual control.

In arranging this scheme my first object is to bring all such phenomena
as we actually have before us into intelligible connection ; introducing by
the way a few of the explanations given to Mr. Moses by his guides.
Those explanations, however, are for the most part slight and vague,
and our experimental knowledge of the phenomena is, of course, merely
nascent and fragmentary. My scheme, therefore, cannot aim at complete
logical arrangement. It must involve both repetitions and lacunae;
nor can it be such as the physiologist would care to sanction. But it
will, at least, be a first attempt at a connected schedule or rational index
of phenomena apparently so disparate that the very possibility of their
interdependence is even now constantly denied.

SYNOPSIS OF VrrAL FACULTY.

I.

First Series : — Phenomena Suprauminally Controlled, or
Occurring in Ordinary Life.

1. Supraliminal or empirical consciousness; aware only of the

material world through sensory impressions.

2. Physical nutrition, including respiration.

(a) Physiological and pathological processes and products.

3. Physical expenditure ; action on material and etherial environment.

(a) Mechanical work done at the expense of food assimilated.

• (^) Production of heat, odour, sound, chemical changes, as the

result of protoplasmic metabolism.

(c) Production of etherial disturbances ; as emission of light
and generation of electrical energy.

TO CHAPTER IX

507

4. Action on the incarnation of life on the planet.

(a) Reproduction, as physiological division.

5. Mental nutrition ; sensory receptivity.

(a) Ordinary sense-perception.

(t) Memory.

6. Mental expenditure ; response to stimuli.

(a) Intra-cerebral response ; ideation.

(d) Emotion j will ; voluntary innervation.

7* Modifications of supraliminal personality.

(<r) Birth ; as physiological individuation.

(^) Sleep ; with dreams, as oscillations of the conscious threshold.
(c) Metamorphoses ; as of insects and amphibians ; and poly-
morphism, as of hydrozoa ; multiplex personality.

{d) Death ; as physiological dissolution.

II.

Second Series: — Phenomena Subltminally Controlled.

1. Subliminal consciousness; obscurely aware of the transcendental

world, through telepathic and telsesthetic impressions.

2. Physical nutrition modified by subliminal control.

(a) Suggestion, self-suggestion, psycho-therapeutics.

(^) Stigmatisiition.

3. Physical expenditure modified by subliminal control.

(tf) Mechanical work modified by psychical integration or dis-
integration ; hysteria.

(i) Production of heat, and other specific effects upon matter,
subliminally modified.

(r) Emission of light, and ‘generation of electrical energy
modified.

4. Action on the incarnation of life on the planet.

(a) Prenatal suggestion through intermediate organism of
parent.

5. Mental nutrition (sensory and supersensory receptivity) subliminally

controlled.

(a) Hyperaesthesia ; anaesthesia; analgesia.

(d) Hypermnesia ; manifested in dreams or automatisms.

(^) Telepathy ; veridical hallucinations ; sensory automatism.
{d) Telaesthesia or clairvoyance ; perception of distant scenes ;
retrocognition ; precognition.

6. Mental expenditure; response to stimuli* modified by subliminal

control.

(a) Subliminal ideation ; the inspirations of genius. *

(b) Motor automatism ; concurrent consciousness ; hyperboulia.

(c) Extradition of will-power beyond the organism; telergy;

self-projection.

508

APPENDICES

[9S6A

7. Modifications of subliminal personality.

(a) Birth ; as spiritual individuation.

(^) Sleep and trance ; self-suggested or telepathically suggested ;

with clairvoyant visions.

{c) Ecstasy.

Death ; as irrevocable self-projection of the spirit.

III.

Third Series; — Phenomena claimed as Spiritually Controlled.

1. Subliminal consciousness, discerning and influenced by dis-

embodied spirits in a spiritual world, who co-operate in pro-
ducing objective phenomena.

2. Physical nutrition modified by spirit-control.

(ir) Spirit-suggestion; psycho- therapeutics.

{l>) Stigmatisation.

(c) Novel and purposive metastasis of secretion.

3. Physical expenditure modified by spirit-control.

(a) Mechanical efficiency increased and fulcrum displaced.

{i) Control over individual material molecules; resulting in
abrogation of ordinary thermal laws, and in aggregation
and disaggregation of matter.

(r) Control over etherial manifestations ; with possible effects in
the domains of light, electricity, gravitation, and cohesion.
4* Action on the incarnation of life on the planet.

(a) Pre-conceptual suggestion or self-suggestion.

(^) Ectoplasy or Materialisation ; temporary extradition or con-
centration of vital energy.

5. Mental nutrition modified by spirit-control.

(a) Ordinary sensory perception spiritually controlled.

(i) Memory controlled ; retrocognition spiritually given.

(c) Sensory automatism spiritually controlled ; phantasms of the
dead, &c.

(rf) Telaesthesia developed into perception of spiritual environ-
ment; precognition.

6. Response to stimuli spiritually controlled.

(а) Ideation inspired by spirits.

( б ) Motor automatism spiritually controlled ; possession.

(c) Extension of will-power into the spiritual world ; prayer.

7. Modifications of personality from spiritual standpoint.

(a) Birth ; asMescent into generation.

(d) Sleep and trance induced, and visions inspired, by spirits.

* {c) Precursory emergence into completer personality; ecstasy

with perception of spiritual world.

(ii) Death ; as birth into completer personality.

(r) Vital faculty fully exercised in spiritual world.

TO CHAPTER IX

509

986 A]

1. First Series: — ^Phenomena Sutraliminally Controlled, or
Occurring in Ordinary Life.

( I ) Supraliminal or Empirical Consciousness; aware only of the Mate-
rial World through Sensory Impressions. — Beginning with the series of
manifestations of supraliminal or normal ** faculty — normal merely in
the sense that it is more habitually observed than the subliminal — I must
needs make my first heading simply Consciousness. We must assume
this starting-point from which to work, and we must briefly point out the
limits within which this supraliminal consciousness is circumscribed. It
is, as I hold, largely an outcome of the struggle for existence \ a fraction
of the potential consciousness of each individual life, selected and developed
by planetary evolution and earthly needs. 1 am conscious of some of
my points of relation to this material world, because without such aware-
ness my ancestors could never have subsisted here. I am unconscious
of my profounder, my cosmic relations, if such there be, because while my
ancestors were struggling upwards from the brute such knowledge would
have been to them a bewilderment rather than a help. Nay, even the
spectrum of ordinary consciousness, as I have termed it, extending from
where it fades at the red end into unconscious organic processes to where
it fades at the violet end among psychical hints and indications which
we can no longer follow, — even that habitual range of perception is in-
terspersed with many dark belts and lines. For that range of perception
has been contrived by Nature, so to say, on no scientific principle, but
.merely so as to give, at the least physiological expense, a rough notion of
some superficial features of a molar w'orld. We gradually learn, indeed,
by reason and calculation, that this apparently molar world consists (for
our intelligence) of at least two interpenetrating environments, molecular
and etherial ; but to the supraliminal Consciousness all that lies beyond
the range of eye and ear is matter of inference and artifice, not of direct
apprehension.

(2) Physical Nutrition, Including Respiration.

(a) Physiological and Pathological Processes and Products. — In an en-
vironment thus conceived we have to build up and to expand the energies
of body and mind, apparently inseparably united to form a personality
which we have as yet no reason to suppose to be of more than earthly
scope. The nutrition of the body is the first necessity, but most of the
mechanism of this nutrition lies now beneath the conscious threshold —
beyond the red end of our imaginary spectrum. Even upon the body
with which it popularly identifies itself the supraliminal consciousness
gazes as a mere outsider. We can do no more than register our ©wn
idiosyncrasies, and employ observed tendencies of our inward mechanism
to repair its own aberrations. We become familiar with certain processes
End reactions, physiological and pathological ; but why the elements of

510

APPENDICES

our body are thus associated and dissociated we know not ; nor can we
(speaking broadly) produce any reaction by means other than those
which the organism itself habitually employs.

(3) Physical Expenditure; Action on Material and
Etherial Environment.

(a) Mechanical Work Done at the Expense of Food Assimilated,—
body, thus built up by nutrition (including respiration) from its original
germ, has acquired energy which it can expend on its environment, both
molecular and etherial ; as weU as exerting an obscurer form of action, of
which we shall speak later, on the world of life to which the germ belongs.
The most fully conscious and purposive form which the I^y’s energy
takes is that of mechanical work upon molar masses. Here we can, to a
great extent, compute its work like an artificial engine’s ; noting that the
relation between food absorbed and work done is never such as to threaten
disturbance of the general law of Conservation of Energy.

(h) Production of Heat, Odour, Sound, Chemical Changes, as the Eesult
of Protoplasmic Metabolism. — ^'Fhe animal body exerts s«ivsv& effects, other
than mechanical, upon different kinds of living and lifeless matter. It
generates and imparts heat both by conduction and by radiation; it
propagates sound*waves and odours which specifically affect certain
prepared surfaces ; it may generate electric charges and electric currents ;
both in its higher and lower forms it effects, without as well as within its
own periphery, certain chemical associations and dissociations whose range
is unknown.

(c) Production of Etherial Disturbances ; as Emission of Light and
GeneraHon of Electrical Energy. — One of these specific effects, exerted
not on the molecular but on the etherial world — the production of light—
is important enough, in view of what is to follow, to be placed under a
heading by itself. It will be convenient, however, to defer dealing with
this topic until a later stage in our discussion. The development of
electro-motive force of considerable magnitude, as for instance, in some
species of fishes, is a rare phenomenon ; but electrical manifestations of
a feeble kind occur in the muscles and nerves of all animals, and even in
the tissues of some plants.

(4) Action on the Incarnation of Life on the Planet.

(a) Reproduction as Physiolo^cal Division. — ^The living organism has
one further power ; — of all its powers at once the most complex and the
most subliminal. It can influence by reproduction the incarnation of life
upon this planet. From the supraliminal standpoint we can speak of re-
production only as of an elaborate process of physiological division. But
the distinction between supraliminal and subliminal knowledge and pur-
pose,— where the subliminal purpose has sometimes been held to be no

TO CHAPTER IX

926A]

511

merely individual aim, — has here been guessed by philosophers in the
illusion which Nature, for her own ends, throws around her children ; —
leading them by roads which they blindly follow towards an end which,
for aught she cares, they may even desire to shun.

(5) Menial Nuitution; Sensory RECEFnviiY.

(<z) Ordinary Sense Perception. — From the nutrition and expenditure
of the bodily organism let us turn to the nutrition and expenditure of the
mindy which, however inseparable its connection with the body may be
deemed, — even if we regard it merely as a concatenation of highest-level
brain-centres — must yet, for clearness’ sake, be treated separately in any
scheme of vital function. The nourishment of the mind (or highest-level
centres) is through sensory impressions, which reach it from without through
definite channels so soon as they attain a definite intensity.

{V) Memory. — ^The residual changes which these impressions leave
constitute the physical basis of memory; and supraliminal memory
normally contains the residue only of supraliminal impressions.

(6) Mental Expenditure ; Response to Stimuli.

p

(rt) Intra-cerebral Response; Ideation. — ^To these stimuli, freshly
impinging, or become in a sense fixed and inherent, we find the mind
or highest centres reacting, first in ideation, or intra-cerebral re-
adjustments.

(Jf) Emotion; Will; Voluntary Innervation, — Next we find them
reacting in emotion and in will, — or motor innervation, which energises
beyond the brain, and gives orders to voluntary muscles, — to eyes and
tongue and hands and limbs, — which express the intelligent personality
within. These orders are supraliminafiy conceived in molar terms, but
they receive a molecular obedience. We say to the hand. Write ! But
the answer is not a mere puppet-like movement of such molar mechanism
as we could ourselves conceive, but — like the inward ideation itself —
depends upon a rearrangement of molecules such as no science can at
present trace or explain.

(7) Modifications of Supraliminal Personality.

{a) Birth ; as Physiological Individuation. — And, finally, both body
and mind may pass through we know not how many phases without losing
what we regard as the identity of either. Birth in this scheme we must
regard as physiological individuation, obliging the new animal to seek
food for itself, and thus compelling, in higher animals, a rhythmically
recurring increase of alertness which we term the waking state.

(<5) Sleep; with Dreams as Oscillations of the Conscious Threshold . —
But an abeyance in sleep of the supraliminal control perpetually recurs.

512

APPENDICES

and is needful to the organism’s preservation. And in the temporary
obliteration of the conscious threshold thus induced, the fragmentary
ideation immediately below the waking level makes itself manifest in
dream (and the subliminal control becomes dominant in various ways and
in var}'ing degrees).

(c) Metamorphoses^ as of Insects and Amphibia^ and Polymorphism^ as
of Hydrozoa : Multiplex Personality, — Even profounder changes occur in
animal metamorphoses, where the struggle for existence brings to the
surface at different stages of life different selections from the potential
syntheses of faculty included in the original germ, — those, namely, which
are adapted to the environment in which the particular stage is passed.
In the higher animals the variations that occur as the infant progresses
through youth to maturity are much less marked and more gradual. In
some few abnormal men, however, cerebral rearrangements may some-
times bring about sudden and complete changes in the superficial
character and memory. These differ from the metamorphoses of the
lower animals in having, as a rule, no relation to different stages of life,
and remind us rather of the polymorphism of a colonial Hydrozoon, in
which the different attributes and characteristics of a single complete
organism are distributed among the various individuals of the colony.
The man with a multiplex personality is like a single individual of such
a colony, in that only certain elements of his ordinary self are manifest
at once, the rest being for the time submerged.

{ft) Death; as Physiological Dissolution, — And ultimately the indi-
vidual organism loses the power of self-adaptation to its environment
physiological dissolution ensues; and from the supraliminal standpoint
we discern no energy which is not dispersed in lower forms at death.

Of thus much, then, and of thus much only of ourselves, the struggle
for earthly existence has coinpelle’d us to be aware. It is an empirical
or superficial cognisance ; and here, as truly as anywhere in nature, “ all
that we know is phenomenal of the unknown.”

II. SEcmD Series:— Phenomena Si/bliminau.y Controlled.

( I ) Subliminal Consciousness; obscurely aware of the Transcendental
World, through Telepathic and Telcesthetic Impressions, — Let us turn now
to our second scheme ; that which is to represent for us vital function
under the nascent control of a subliminal consciousness, and amid the
dimly-guessed operations of a transcendental world. The subliminal
faculties whose existence,! infer from our evidence will be traced in detail
as we proceed. Here at the beginning I must merely explain on what
pri^jiciple I have assigned to some of these faculties and not to others
a source in the subliminal self, or in telepathic action from other embodied
minds, rather than in any extrarterrene or spiritual intervention. This
distinction is often obscure ; but I have here drawn the line so as to avoid

TO CHAPTER IX

513

unduly favouring my own argument. I am endeavouring to show that
certain subliminal processes which I hold to be going on in each of us do
form a real intermediate class between the processes of normal life and
those attributed to spirit-control. I have, therefore, here left to the
account of spirit-control all that can be at all plausibly claimed for it
believing that the remaining phenomena, those which seem almost indis-
putably referable to a source within ourselves, will be enough to carry us
lialf-way across the apparently impassable gulf which separates Mr. Moses*
and similar experiences from the experiences of tlie mass of mankind.

For these phenomena will not only in themselves show great accessions
of power, but also will give plain indication of still more marked develop-
ment to come. We shall not only see the spectrum of supraliminal
consciousness largely extended in both directions, but shall also realise
that this extension implies a new environment — an environment whose
IjLWS we have yet to learn, and whose denizens to encounter.

Let us discuss, then, the subliminally guided faculties in the same
order in which we have just discusseil the faculties of common life.

(2) Physical Nutrition Modified by Subliminal Control.

{a) Self-suggestion^ Psycho- therapeutics, — And first as to the

influence of subliminal control on l>odily nutrition. We have here, as it
happens, the most conspicuous and popular group in our whole range of
unfamiliar phenomena. The experimental study of the subliminal self
was virtually originated by the empirical discovery that mesmeric passes,**
*and afterwards that hypnotic suggestion in general, had power to alter the
condition of the nervous system ; — to induce sleep, to relieve pain, to re-
establish arrested secretion, and to restore morbid secretion to healthy
normality. I have already discussed (in Sections 568-570) the part which
an actual effluence, or a telepathic impact, may play in such operations
as these, and will take here the only remaining logical view, which assumes
that suggestion from a hypnotiser is virtually self-suggestion ; the hypno-
tiser*s order having merely the power of reaching in some unexplained
way the subject*s subliminal self, and setting in action that hyperboulia^
so to term it, — that extension of will-power over parts of the organism
unreachable by supraliminal will, — which enables the hidden self to
achieve the marvellous restorations of “ psycho-therapeutics.** For this
submerged and intimate will can wield, as it w'ere, the very vis medicairix
natura, and chase back the runaway molecules into a road made familiar
to them by long memories of healthy action.

(b) Stigmatisation, — ^Yet this, though the eas'iest, is not the only road
down which the dominated molecules can be driven. The various pheno-

■j.

^ The reader must observe that the standpoint adopted for the purpose of this special
argument differs from that of the book as a whole, in which the onus prohandi is laid on
the spiritistic theory.— Editors.

VOL. ir.

2 K

514

APPENDICES

mena of modified secretion to which the conventional name of stigmatisa-
tion has been given consist in a selective direction of cells or of even
minuter bodily elements away from their settled customary performance,
through changes which the predecessors of these cells have indeed
traversed before, — but never without specific objective cause — never on
so impalpable an invitation. The serum which rises in the suggested ’*
blisters is in itself no novel product ; but its evocation without mechanical
irritation shows (as I have urged elsewhere, see 543) a quite novel power
to play upon the organism as with purposive manipulation from within.

(3) Physical Expenditure MoDinED by Subliminal Control.

(a) Mechanical Work Modified by Psychical Integration or Disin-
tegration ; Hysteria. — And next as to the effect of subliminal control upon
the organism’s expenditure ; in the first place upon its expenditure in
muscular energy. The amount of muscular energy which the supra-
liminal self can control may at first sight be regarded as a compromise,,
achieved in the struggle for existence, between present and future con-
venience. It can put forth, that is to say, just so much energy as
is generally compatible with avoiding any serious risk of injury to the
organism. But this explanation will not take into account all the elements
of the problem. The human organism is an imperfectly unified colony
of cells; and there is nothing to show us that the precise degree of
integration to which we attain in ordinary life is such as to enable our
organism to exert its maximum of energy without risk of injury.

We find, in fact, that a capacity of greater effort may be the result or*
the concomitant either of disintegration or of further integration. The
great increase of muscular power which sometimes accompanies mania
is an instance of the first, and the .manner in which the increased energy
in such cases becomes apparent throws some light on subliminal operation
generally. ITiis subject has been fully discussed in Chapters II. and III.

I have shown that the same increase of energy may follow on increased
integration, of which I regard Genius as the palmary instance. In short,
and as might have been expected, the katabolic as well as the anabolic
forces, the output as well as the intake of the bodily frame, are amenable,
in more ways than we can suppose ourselves to have yet discovered, to
subliminal control.

{b) Production of Heat, and other Specific Effects upon Matter^ Sub-
iiminally Modified. — ^'Fuming now to effects other than mechanical
produced upon the material world, we find rather suggestions for experi-
mentation than records of experiment adequately performed. The
subjective sensation of heat can, of course, readily be produced by
hypViotic suggestion, and in a sensitive subject perspiration may follow, —
si dixeris^ Aestuo, sudat: — but I. know of no experiment which has com-
pared the total heat emitted by the organism in a normal state and under

TO CHAPTER IX

926 A]

SIS

suggestion. Suggestions involving bodily odour and chemical conditions
have thus far been confined to psycho-therapeutics, although here also
there might well be experiments with a purely scientific aim. But the
most important effect of a supernormal kind alleged to have been pro-
duced upon matter in the course of experiment on subliminal faculty is
the old-fashioned mesmeric effluence, which, in the opinion of Elliotson,
Esdaile, &c., was proved to affect not only the human organism, but
water and other inanimate matter (see 541 E and K). This view is
entirely out of fashion now, and we ourselves have wholly failed to con-
firm it by experiment; but the history of hypnotism has consisted so
largely in the confident disavowal, followed by the gradual re-discovery, —
though often with a new interpretation, — of phenomena alleged by the
earlier mesmerists, that it would, I think, hardly be safe to set aside this
mesmerisation of objects *’ as due merely to suggestion, until it shall
have been tested by many more experiments, performed with modern
exactitude and care.

(f) Emission of Lights and Generation of Electrical Energy Modified , —
A like need for experiment exists with regard to phenomena of luminosity^
alleged from time to time to accompany abnormal conditions of the
human frame. “ Some startling but apparently well-authenticated cases,”
says the writer of the article on Phosphorescence ” in the Encyclopaedia
Britannica^ are on record of human beings having been luminous owing
to certain states of disease.” Of such cases I shall have more to say
presently. This phenomenon has been frequently noted both in and by
persons in a trance condition ; but usually under circumstances where one
cannot be sure that the effect was not a merely subjective one. With Mr.
Moses, however, it was repeatedly observed during stances, being generally
visible to Mrs. Speer, and sometimes to all the sitters. Mrs. Speer writes :
** I have often seen Mr. Moses enveloped in a luminous cloud or white
mist, and when he rubbed his hands phosphorescent light seemed to be
emitted from his fingers. This light enabled him to see his own hands in
the dark.” I find an entry in Mr. Moses* notebooks to the effect that on
one occasion at least he saw his hands luminous when he had returned to
his own rooms after a s^*ance. I shall return to this subject hereafter
when dealing with “ Spirit- Lights ** ; but this phosphorescence of the
sensitive himself seems to belong rather to the category of subliminal
control. It seems not improbable that such manifestations may be made
more intelligible by further discoveries on the lines of those recently made
by physicists as to the luminescent effects produced by obscure radia-
tions whose existence was previously unsuspected*

(4) Action on the Incarnation of Life on the PcANErr. •

(a) Prenatal Suggestion through Intermediate Organism of Parent,-^
We come next to the problem of the influence of subliminal control on
the realm of life^ — on the manner in which the sum of life on earth is

APPENDICES

Si6

supplied by fresh incarnations from the unknown environing energy.
The first question will be as to the power of suggestion, by influencing the
mother, to influence the unborn child. And so large a coUection has
now been made of cases where an impression, produced (more often, of
course, by accident than by design) upon the mother has been reflected
by the offspring (see 526) that I feel entitled to assume such influence as
highly probable, if not established.* This fact, if fact it be, is of an im-
portance greater than has yet been realised. We cannot fix a terminus a
quo before which such influence is impossible; and the much-needed
science of “ eugenics *’ seems likely to depend largely upon a psychical
factor.

(5) Mental NurarriON (Sensory and Supersensory Receptivity)

SUBLIMINALLY CONTROLLED.

{a) Hyperasthesia ; Atuesihesia ; Ana/^esia, — We have now dealt with
the influence of the subliminal self in upbuilding the organism, and in
modifying the organism’s effect upon its environment. With the dis-
cussion of its effect upon the world of /ife we have reached as it were the
watershed of physical and psychical determination ; and we proceed now
to the region of intellectual effects ; — of influence sublirninally exercised,
first upon sensory receptivity, and then upon motor response.

Subliminal modifications of sensory receptivity, important as they arc.
have been already so fully discussed in Chapter V. that we need here do
no more than recapitulate them, thus preparing the reader for the still
more potent sway which we shall find ascribed to spirits over the per--
ception of men. Briefly, then, the senses can be either stimulated or
suspended to an extent hardly yet fathomed. Cases of hyperasthesia are
recorded which seem scarcely compatible with that we know of the
structure of the sensory end -organs themselves.

So profound an atiasthesia, on the other hand, may be produced that
prolonged and painful operations can be undergone without evoking a
murmur. Nay, what is even more remarkable, the sense of pain may be
abrogated while other sensations remain intact, and an analgesia produced
which is no result of disease or disintegration, but apparently the highest
— the most serviceable— condition to which the organism has yet been
raised.

(i) Hypermnesia^ Manifested in Dreams or Automatisms. — ^The sub-
liminal control of memory — of the stored-up knowledge derived from past
sensation — shows a similar advance upon the supraliminal. To retain in
supraliminal memory— ot sufficiently near the threshold to be summoned
at will — even facts or scenes ui)on which we have deliberately fixed atten-

i The best list of references is to be found in a book otherwise of little value,
“ iBdoeology,” by S. B. Elliott, M.D., Boston, U.S.A., 1893. See also Professor
Macalister on Stigmatisation {ad pn.) in Encyclopedia Britannka, The list of cases
has been much extended since Professor Macalister wrote.

TO CHAPTER IX

926 A]

S17

tion is a task which often exceeds our powers. But some reason has been
shown for believing that in the subliminal memory we possess at least a
much fuller, if not a complete, record of all that has passed, even, as we
say, “ unnoticed,” across our visual or auditory field ; and in hypermnesic
dreams and crystal vision we seem to peep for the moment into a treasure-
house whose existence was not suspected till now.

There seem, moreover, to be various influences, as yet hardly realised
or defined, which should rather rank as sensory than under any other
heading, namely, the hetemsthesiiR discussed in 541.

(r) Telepathy; Veridical Uallucinadotis ; Sensory Automatism, — And
here we reach a critical point in our series; the introduction, namely,
among phenomena which may be regarded as merely extending powers
already known, of those newly recognised and manifestly supernormal
faculties of telepathy and telxsthesia (or clairvoyance) with which so much
•of our work in psychical research has been concerned. Can we still
regard ourselves as passing only from one to another degree of faculty
exercised in the already known environment? or are we beginning to
observe human faculty operating in an environment new to science? At
first sight, the least inconceivable explanation of telepathy might seem to
lie in assuming a fresh form of ether-waves which should carry the vibra-
tions of one brain and imprint them on another.

I have already shown (632-634) the inadecpiacy of this theory to ex-
plain even many simple experimental cases — still more cases of collective
percipience, of telepathy from the dead, and of the faculties analogous to
* telepathy to be discussed immediately, — tetesthesia and clairvoyance, pre-
cognition and retrocognition. VVe may still, however, find some points of
transition between at least the supraliminal manifestations of telepathy and
phenomena already known. And telepathy is thus linked with the sefise-
perception and the memofy which we Have just been discussing ; — even as
we shall presently find it linked with emotion and will. In the first place,
the hyperasthesia which I have claimed for the subliminal self seems some-
times to pass gradually beyond the point which any sensory influence can
be stretched to cover. We must then assume at least a mingling of
some form of supernormal acquisition of knowledge ; — telepathy if we
have an agent’s mind already possessed of that knowledge, telaesthesia
if no such agent can be suggested.

'Fhe hypermnesia, again, of which we were but now speaking seems often
to act as a kind of nidus for germs of knowledge borne home from some
other quarter. In itself this extension of subliminal memory is most
significant of hidden faculty. For the extended memory itself implies
intellectual operation ; it is not a mere indiscriminating photograph, but
an impressionist or sometimes even a symbolical picture, where fact^ sub-
jectively important are brought into intentional prominence. And that
picture— let us take for example an actual picture seen in a crystal — is
selected from amongst a presumable multitude of its congeners, and pre-

APPENDICES

518

[926A

sented to supraliminal view at the useful moment. And often, as I have
said, among the contents of this subliminal memory unexpected items
float up into cognisance ; crystal-vision or hallucination turns out to be
veridical— to tell truly of a fact which no actual observation, however
acute, can ever have stored up in the subliminal memory. We And, in
short, that the subliminal consciousness does not only acquire and retain
a fuller picture of its material surroundings than the every day waking man
can boast, but also acquires knowledge by means of its own, and especially'
by telepathic impression from other minds.

(^d) Telasthesia or Clairvoyance ; Perception of Distant Scenes ; Retro*
cognition^ Precognition . — ^"Fhe knowledge which is received by telepathy
is knowledge which has been already worked up, so to say, into manage-
able form in another mind. Is it possible that this power of spiritual
perception can be still further extended? that the human spirit can
absorb knowledge without the aid either of its own bodily senses or of
other minds?

I believe that our answer must be affirmative, and indeed that this
power of telasthesia is a faculty perhaps of wider range than telepathy
itself. Naturally, we cannot always distinguish such a phenomenon from
telepathy ; and in many cases of ‘‘ telepathic clairvoyance ” both powers
seem to have been at work ; — the agent’s crisis summoning the percipient’s
subliminal attention, and the percipient then discerning details of which
the agent was not himself directly conscious. Such scenes seem to come
midway between telepathy proper and the teljcsthetic perception of quite
indifferent scenes, presented to the percipient in waking vision or crystal- .
picture or dream, as it were at random ; — as though the casual slipping
of a shutter in some vast camera obscura had thrown upon the mind's
receptive surface a remote and irrelevant segment of the reflected totality
of things.

Nor is this all. For it is, perhaps, under this wide heading of
telsesthesia that mention should be made of a still more surprising ex-
tension of view, from things distant in space to things distant in time also.

I need not here repeat the arguments which indicate that these percep-
tions, although partly due to spiritual communications, seem also partly
due to faculties of the subliminal self.

(6) Mental Expenditure; Response to Stimuu Modified bv
SUBUMINAL CON'rROL.

(a) Subliminal Ideation ; the Inspirations of Genius . — From this brief
review of the influence oi the subliminal self on mental nutrition, let us
turn to consider its influence on mental expenditure. There is, of course,
no Hard and fast line between the two, ’Ecr/xiv cVc/ryeiAi, and all our con-
sciousness is Will in the making, All cerebration, in other words, is
probably at once sensory and motor ; and at any rate when we are
dealing with subliminal messages ” it must seem a matter almost of

TO CHAPTER IX

519

9S6A]

chance whether the message shall take the sensory form of hallucination,
visual or auditory, or the motor form of an impulse to write or speak.
But first we have to deal, under this heading, with something which is not
for us in common parlance either sensory or motor; — namely, ideation;
or such intra-cerebral readjustments as involve only images which fall
short of hallucination and impulses which have not yet set the muscles in
action.

I have urged elsewhere (in Chapter III.) that even our habitual
current of thought bears abundant testimony to cerebration beneath
the ordinary threshold of consciousness.^ With all of us there are
subliminal uprushes — incursions of ideas and images ready-made and
vivid into the superficial stratum of more continuous, but less ardent, less
flashing thought. Such uprushes, although alike in mechanism^ leave
products of very different worth. For most men nothing better than dust
and scoriae is flung up from the subterranean chambers ; for few only do
the rock-fragments bear in their cavities the precious crystals which have
gathered in hidden laboratories into the emerald’s or the ruby’s glow.

(^) Motor Automatism ; Concurrent Consciousness ; Hyperboulia. — So
long as we confine ourselves to these intra-cerebral responses to external
stimuli, we have no obvious line to draw between the ideas which we
manufacture piecemeal above the threshold and those which come to us
ready-made from below. Even here, no doubt, there are physiological
effects already indicating an extension of mental influence over the bodily
frame. When, in the poet’s words, ‘‘a great thought strikes along the
.brain, and flushes all the cheek,” the sudden uprush of ideation has affected
the vaso-motor system in a way which we cannot deliberately rival. But.
yet this glowing thought has come mixed with cooler thoughts ; it runs,
so to say, into the amalgam of common life. We have now to note that
a point may be reached, in some men’if not in all, where the two streams
of faculty are nut conjoint but concurrent; the subliminal faculty using the
organism in a separate and definite manner, in writing, namely, or speech,
which in reference to the man’s habitual processes seems automatic or
even quasi-external, and which suggests to him that some intelligence
other than his own must be moving his hand or speaking through his
mouth. Sometimes, as I believe, such an external intelligence is indeed
at work ; oftener the man’s own deeper self is thus acting on his empirical
self, and writing its own messages with the hand to which it has, after all,
an equal claim.

^ It may be worth while to remind the reader that the first important statement it
English of the Leibnitzian view of “latent modificatiotA of minds occurs in Sir W.
Hamilton’s '* Lectures on Metaphysics” (Lect. XVIII.). Dr. ('arpenter, to whom the
theory is sometimes popularly ascribed, added little except the term ” unconscious
cerebration.” But in reality Leibnitz, with his ” insensible perceptions,” was nearer the
truth (as I conceive it) than either Hamilton or Carpenter; for he did not explicitly
deny accompanying consciousness ; and that there /r a subliminal consciousness I regard
(as my readers know) as certain.

520

APPENDICES

From many points of view these automatic motor messages form for
us a central and instructive phenomenon. In the first place it is obvious
that they are closely allied with — sometimes interchangeable with — sensory
hallucinations. They thus materially support the view that these phantoms
also are in the same sense automatic;, that is, that they are for the most
part at least shaped by the percipient’s own subliminal self, and presented
to his supraliminal perception as a method of informing or influencing
him from the depths of his own being. In the second place, they enable
us to set out a continuous series from the transitory phenomena of hyp-
notic suggestion at the one end to changes of personality and spirit-pos-
session” at the other end. We start, say, from Edmund Gurney’s post-
hypnotic experiment, where you tell a man a fact in the trance which on
waking he forgets, — but which he can nevertheless write out automatically
with no recognition of its source. Here we know perfectly whence the
fact originally came ; we can feel sure that no telepathic, no disembodied
influence has been brought to bear. Then come tlie ordinary mass of
spontaneous automatic messages, presumably self-originated, since they
contain no fact which the automatist may not have learnt by ordinary
sensory means. And from this point the automatisms may diverge in
several directions. They may, as I have already said, begin to show
knowledge which, cannot have been acquired by normal means ; — which
seems as if it must have come telepathically from living men ; — or even
knowledge which, alike in its substance and in its lacunae, seems coin-
cident with the presumable knowledge and ignorance of some departed
spirit.

This is of course the most interesting form of development. But the
automatisms may also become markedly impressive in a different way.
While still showing no actual knowledge beyond the automatist’s normal
reach, they may nevertheless assufne a character so distinct, — a mode of
self-expression so deeply involving the entire organism, — that they come
to rank as new phases of personality, representing fresh positions of rela-
tive stability into which the man’s psychical being may be thrown.

And here again, while thus led forward to our impending notice of
Modifications of Personality, we are also led backward to our previous
account of psycho-therapeutics and self-suggestion, of the modification of
physical nutrition by subliminal control. What we there described, so to
say, from the outside, we are now regarding from the inward or subjective
point of view. For these motor automatisms pass insensibly into hyper-
boulia* that is to say, the same subliminal motor response to stimuli
which guides the automa,ti$t’s hand in this strange fashion is not limited
in power to mere writing or vocal utterance ; it can work upon stomach or
liver as well as upon hand or tongue. It has overpassed the traditional
bounds in one direction; it shows next that it can overpass them in
another ; it leaves us asking what bounds it may not overpass. Much
in the same way did Frenchmen once speculate as to what causes in a

TO CHAPTER IX

521

926A]

paper constitution the First Consul was likely to respect. The nerve-
system is a kind of traditional Constitution ; the Will is a force whose
strength, whose very nature, is all unknown. The Will, we say, acts
directly on striped muscle and not on unstriped. What is this but a
convention which wills obey because, they have always obeyed it? What
boundary line can the physiologist draw through the phenomena of
man’s bodily life, assuring us that here the purposive must necessarily end,
and the unpurposed, the inevitable begin? If Will does anything, why
should it not do all ?

(c) Extradition of Will-power beyond the Organism ; Telergy ; Self-
projection. — And if the despot chooses to ignore his own country’s Con-
stitution, what guarantee have we that he will respect treaty-obligations
abroad ? The access of one man to another, the power of one man over
another is limited, so to say, by international laws so ancient that no one
dfeams of infringing them. Then suddenly — to take the best-known case
of hypnotisation at a distance — Dr. Gibert throws the absent Ix‘onie into
a trance, and impels her to hasten through Havre to his house. 'Fhis is
an invasion of an independent kingdom, against all rules of war. And yet
it finds, as Napoleon’s invasions often found, a party in the invaded realm
itself which supports the invader; the impulse given from a distance to
Leonie’s subliminal self finds something in that self not only competent
to discern it but willing to obey.

Mere metaphor, however, cannot satisfy us here. We have reached
a point where it is indispensable that we should form at least some
provisional working conception not only of what telepathy is not — but
of what it possibly may be. Its laws, we have concluded, are not cognate
to the known laws of the material world. It is a transference, not of a
pattern of vibrations, but of a knowledge, an impulse, which seems to
implant itself in the percipient’s mind like a living thing. The “ telepathic
impact,” as we have sometimes called it, is no blunt shock. It may be
sudden ; but it may also be persistent ; it may sometimes be overwhelming,
but it can be insinuating too. It is not a bolt discharged and done with ;
it is a vital influence at work on the percipient’s subliminal self.

No argument has been as yet urged in this discussion to show that
man possesses a spirit which preceded birth or which survives death.
The question of individual pre-existence, individual survival, belongs to
a later stage of our review of vital fiiculty. But, nevertheless, I think
that those who have been willing to go even thus far with the general
scheme here set forth will feel that the subliminal self whose influence
over the organism seems to be at once so latent and so profound must be
regarded as something other than a mere ccenesthetic focus. It must (so
to express it) be at least an earthly soul, a provisional spirit. ^

We have, then, to imagine this spirit or quasi-spirit as acting first
normally upon Us own organism and then telepathically upon the
organisms of others. How are we to conceive it at work? In its own

522

APPENDICES

organism, to begin with, it acts, I suppose, especially upon the nervous
system ; — primarily on the brain. To act on the brain — to direct its
thought and volition — the spirit must, 1 again suppose, be able to modify
in countless ways each individual cell. And must not such a selective or
directive influence be intimate enough to afiect severally each molecule
of which each cell is composed? Something must so affect them ; and to
stop short of this power for the spirit would simply be to postulate some
other intelligence engaged in preparing the spirit's work. Assuredly
neither the molecule nor the atom is the last word of analysis, as even the
ordinary physicist would now agree. The whole process may be some-
thing far subtler than an action on molecules ; but thus much of subtlety
there needs must be. Selecth^e guidance of each individual molecule ; —
let us at least, then, use this formula as a compendious expression for the
entirely interpenetrating control which we must assume that a man's own
spirit exercises over his brain.

And next, in a case of telepathy, the agent is somehow the cause that
the percipient’s brain shall be influenced in this same delicate, penetrating
way. How shall we imagine the mechanism of such influence? Shall
we say that the spirit of the agent affects the spirit of the percipient, and
thus the spirit of the percipient influences his own brain ? Or shall we
say that the agent's spirit directly influences the percipient's brain in like
manner as it influences his own ? There may seem little to choose between
two such unprovable conceptions. Yet, looking forward to evidence
which we shall presently have to meet, I think that the second alternative
should provisionally not be excluded. For we shall have cases whete
inanimate matter outside an organism is, as I believe, directly affected by
some spirit ; and the question will arise whether the spirit so acting must
necessarily be a spirit discarnate, and outside the medium, or may also
possibly be the medium's own. *1 do not wish to prejudge this question,
as against the possibility that the medium's own spirit may be the agency
which, in such a case, directly affects the external world ; but if such is
ever to be our explanation, it is certainly simpler to suppose that here also
the agent's spirit is directly affecting the percipient’s brain, — not needing,
so to say, to invite the percipient's own spirit to accomplish that task.

On this view we shall have an intelligible series — ^though a series
advancing by leaps and bounds — to represent the achievements of Will,
as it shakes itself free from the limitations which are but shadows as
contrasted with its own reality. In the first place we have hyperboulia ; —
the extension of the Will's power over tissues in the organism which its
mandates have ordinarily failed to reach. In the second place, we have
telergy extension of its power over the brain molecules of an

oiganism other than that with which it is primarily in connection. And
in the third place we shall have telekinesis ” and the like ; — a group of
phenomena involving control over inorganic matter, and over organic
matter both within and without its own organism.

TO CHAPTER IX

523

W6A]

This last extension, however, will lead to our third category, — the
category of phenomena claimed as controlled by spirits external to the
agent or medium himself. Before passing on to such matters we must
briefly review the phases of personality which subliminal influence creates
or reveals in the living or dying man. We must thus lead up to some
comprehension of the nature of Death, before we deal with spirits whom
we assume to have passed through that crisis undestroyed.

(7) Modifications of Subliminal Personality.

(a) Birth; as Spiritual Individuation , — With the profounder con-
ception of the Self which our inclusion of its subliminal elements implies,
we find associated profounder severances and rc-arrangements in its
constituent elements ; — more significant changes, so to say, in its internal
coijfiguration. I desire to compare these with the modifications of per-
sonality which occur in ordinary life ; to compare them, of course, with
the purpose of ultimately showing that here also we are making a forward
step in precisely that path of which spirit-control is in some sense the
goal. The first modification of personality of which we have cognisance,
the first on our former list of supraliminal changes, was the crisis of
birth. From our former point of view that crisis was one of physiological
individuation only. Regarding the organism now as in truth an organon
—as an instrument through which a spirit essentially distinct therefrom
exercises the faculties which subserve its self-expression — we shall ask
ourselves what else has occurred at birth, besides the separation of a new
bud from the genealogical tree which is rooted in earth’s prehistoric past.
At present we have seen reason for conjecturing that this at least has
occurred ; — the individuation, in connection with the organism, of some
form of spiritual faculty ; — of faculty, that’is to say, which must have been
called into being in some other environment, since the struggle for
existence in this material world could not have originated or developed
it. Such, as I have elsewhere urged, are the faculties concerned in tele-
pathy and clairvoyance ; they are modes of perception which the cor-
poreal organism may restrict but can hardly in any conceivable way have
evolved. Yet although we may trace this one side of our lineage to
a spiritual or metetherial world, it does not follow that we can therefore
claim that our personalities now incarnated in these bodies are the
continued manifestation of personalities which have already lived as
distinctive entities elsewhere, or which can survive as personalities that
other crisis of bodily death to which the fact of incarnation necessarily
exposes them. Let us see whether other phases of terrene personality
throw any light upon this problem. ,

{V) Sleep and Trance ; Self suggested or Telepathically-suggested ; with
Clairvoyant Visions . — Parallel with our heading of sleep in the column
of supraliminal faculties we have the heading of ** trance '* in the sub-

524

APPENDICES

liminal. And in its first and simplest aspect trance is su^ested sleep, ^
sleep imitated by the subliminal self from the familiat spontaneous
pattern^ but often improved in the imitation, both in restorative efficacy
and in fitness for ends other than physical recuperation. From the
thought-transference experiment with lightly hypnotised subjects to the
sommeil a distance inspired by Dr. Gibert or Dr. Janet in '' L^onie ** ; —
from the hypersesthesia of some of M. Binet’s subjects to the “ travelling
clairvoyance” of “Jane” (573 B) we find each supernormal faculty in
turn facilitated by the abeyance of man’s habitual attention to the stimuli
of the material world. The degree to which this protection from intrusive
thought, or intrusive pain, may be carried is hardly yet explored ; but the
same abstraction which is enough to induce in many subjects a complete
indifference to severe surgical operations, may perhaps hereafter be
utilised to assist in securing undisturbed intensity of thought.

And in the meantime most of these states of sleep or trance present
an unsolicited crop of ideas and pictures of their own. All dreams,
indeed, according to my definition, are properly subliminal ; they do not
belong to the superficial memory, although they lie so close to it that
they may get included in it by a sort of accident. They are bubbles
breaking upon that surface from the deep below. It is natural, therefore,
that this easiest method of communication should be taken advantage of
by the subliminal self to send upward messages of deeper import. All
the newly-noted forms of faculty which we have already touched upon
find expression either in dreams or in the sleep-waking intervals which are
a kind of transitory emergences into a condition on the other side
sleep. Hypermnesia is oftenest shown in dreams, and clairvoyance in
the sleep-waking or somnambulic stage of hypnotic trance. In dreams
also retrocognition and precognition are manifested ; faculties which,
since their origin is obscure, I am now claiming solely for the unaided
subliminal self.

(r) Ecstasy . — Under this heading I include experiences where the
subliminal self in trance changes its environment and passes for a time
into the spiritual world, retaining such relations to the organism as enable
it to return to its ordinary condition.

(d) Death ; as Irrevocable Self-projection of the Spirit , — Then when the
last change comes, and we ask ourselves with what added ground for
speculation we now strain our gaze beyond that obscurest crisis, we find,
I think, two considerations which the study of subliminal powers has
suggested ; one of them in harmony with the highest thought of philo-
sopher and poet; the other, not indeed positively inconsistent there-
with, but still recalling us to the psychology of the Stone Age, and the
orude animism of hardly human men.

For first we shall say that in estimating what there is in our being
which may conceivably survive the tomb, we can now claim to have dis-
cerned something within us which belongs to an environment which is

TO CHAPTER IX

525

exempt from earthly conditions, and which may antecede at once and
interpenetrate our material scheme of things. Those ancient views, there-
fore, which represent the soul’s immortality as determined by its very
nature and origin find themselves now as never before supported and rein-
forced.

I refer especially to such cases as those described in Chapter VI. of
« projection of thought,” or — as I there called it — psychical invasion,”
which show some kind of energy or perception exercised by the spirit at
a distance from its physical base of operation, — tclcpathically upon other
minds, telaesthetically in other parts of space. In “ telepathic clairvoyance,”
the percipient seems to himself to be present in the scene where the so-
called agent actually is at the time. And in reciprocal cases, not only is
the percipient conscious of invading the agent’s presence, but the latter is
in some way aware of the invasion. Further, the descriptions of several
cases of experimental self-projection concur in the impression felt of
spiritual transportation, of tethering connection with the body, of return
thereinto with a shock.^ And two narratives of animation suspended to
the verge of death (Dr. VViltse and M. Bertrand, see 713 A), have dwelt
on that crisis as an apparent escape of the spirit from the body, to which
it is ultimately retracted by a remaining psychical link of attachment.
These cases begin like some of the cases which we class as hallucinations
experimentally produced ” ; they remind us, as they proceed, of narratives
of “ travelling clairvoyance ” ; and they reach a point where the new
centre of perception seems within an ace of altogether superseding the
old.

'L'hese singular and possibly purely subjective cases are no actual proof
of anything whatever. But they deserve notice here, where we are taking
stock of any such indications of the true nature of death as can be
gathered from evidence which does nbt even pretend to come from
departed spirits, or to rest on anything beyond the personal experience
of living men.

"'Ecro'VT* €Tr€iy ofiivrj — “ with a rush it hurried forth ” — says Homer of the
issuing spirit, — whose significance for him still hung between 6rea//i and
sou/. Homer may be too old a witness, and Dr. Wiltse too new ; but,
indeed, what other intelligible conception can we find in the ages between
them? What, save the ghastly monkish dream — ghastly though enshrined,
this also, in world-shaking verse — of the sleep in the charnel-house, and
the trump that echoes per sepulcra regionum and summons into a new
concretion the dust of the dead ?

At least we have done with that ; and, pausing here before we review
such evidence as may seem to have come to us from behind the veil, we
may at least feel that it is a spiritual entity and not a re-integrated
skeleton, which we now follow with dim anticipation upon its unknown
solitary way,

^ See Proceedings S.P.K., vol. x. p. 29, and pp. 270 sqq.

526

APPENDICES

III. Third Series: — Phenomena Claimed as Spiritually Controlled.

( 1 ) Subliminal Consciousness ^ Discerning and Influenced by Disem^
bodied Spirits in a Spiritual World ; who Co-operate in Producing Objective
Phenomena. — And here at last we have reached the point where we should
begin to reap the benefit of this long introduction. In entering on the
third of our parallel series — that to which the other two have been intended
to lead up, — our scheme, that is to say, of vital faculty as observed under
the control of some spiritual agency, we are not now plunging into a chaos
of entirely new problems. Most of those problems, although of course not
solved, have at least been already stated^ in some similar form ; and at
each point we shall be taking up a line of thought on which we have made
some beginning.

We have, then, to deal with the human spirit under new conditions ;
as brought into immediate relations with the spiritual world. We shallT)e
concerned primarily with the subliminal consciousness ; for it is in that
region that the link of union lies ; and many of the phenomena are dis-
cernible to the “purged eye’* of so-called clairvoyance alone. But
nevertheless this commerce with disembodied spirits, like commerce
with embodied spirits, affects man’s whole being ; and we shall have to
discuss many phenomena of an absolutely objective kind.

In one way, indeed, to get on to direct spirit-intercourse from the
obscure subliminal phenomena which we have till now been discussing is
a sort of emergence into a clearer air. What we have dimly inferred is
now plainly asserted ; what we have conjectured among contending possi-
bilities is now set plainly before us. We are in the position in which a
tadpole would be who had learned theoretically that what he w'as breath-
ing in his pond was not the wate,r but the oxygen dissolved therein ; and
who then should have it granted to him to raise his head above water, and
to perceive frogs and other animals respiring the translucid air. So, for
us too, the metetherial clement has thus far been dissolved amid material
things ; we are now to come in contact with beings for whom that hypo-
thetical environment is the natural and predestined home.

Before we go into detail, let us reflect for a moment on the fact that
such intercourse should be possible. Given the fact of telepathy, need
this be a surprise? We have seen that the existence of such a form of
metetherial energy involved in human life, though it cannot actually prove
the spirit’s survival, yet suggests it so strongly that evidence to survival
from other quarters need no longer seem hard to reconcile with the known
scheme of things. And if survival there be, then the fact that spirits
should influence men will certainly not in itself be surprising. It will
setm now no isolated or unique phenomenon, but the inevitable deduction
from a universal law. That law is the direct transmission of thought and
emotion from mind to mind, and the tebrrgy — to use here a word more
active in its connotation than telepathy — the telergy by ^hich this trans-

926A] TO CHAPTER IX 527

mission is effected may be as universally diffused in the metetherial world
as heat in the material.

(2) Physical Nutrition Modified by Spirit-Control.

{a) Spifit-suggesHon ; Psycho- therapeutics , — ^To the limiting conditions
under which this energy reaches the chosen sensitive among the mass of
men, we shall have to return hereafter. It will be well to proceed first to
trace some of the effects of that control,” or intercourse, under the same
scries of headings which we have now twice already pursued.

First, then, as to the effects of spirit-control on bodily nutrition.
Obviously if we are agreed in thinking that the suggestion of a living
hypnotiser is virtually nothing more than a hint somehow conveyed to the
j^?^-siiggestive powers of the patient, it will not be easy to be sure that a
spirits alleged command or benediction, or promise of cure, is really
operating otherwise than as a similar stimulus to something which is really
done by the patient himself. In Mr. Moses* case there were assurances
given that his physical condition was often benefited by spirit- power ; but
in the few definite instances which he records of a healing effect, it is to
actual touches and strokings — like mesmeric passes — that the benefit is
ascribed. Similar experiences arc attributed to D. D. Home. We shall
have something more to say of this mesmerisation later on ; and also of
that form of psycho- therapeutic which consists in a clairvoyant diagnosis
alleged to be given by a spirit, and followed perhaps by advice avowedly
based upon a recollection of earthly learning.

(h) Stigmatisation, — ^I'he agency of spirits in the production of stigfna-
tisation is open to the same kind of doubt. Religious stigmata, indeed, as
following upon more intense feeling than mere experimental stigmata (such
as suggested blisters resembling some letter of the alphabet) seem even
more manifestly connected with the workings of the addolorata^ s own
spirit. Mr, Moses has three curious cases. In one of them the mere
written suggestion of a spirit is followed by the appearance of letters on
his arm, — resembling, apparently, the linear wheals which follow a line
drawn with the finger-nail in some cases of nettlerash, and which depend
on a slight diffusion of serum beneath the skin. In another case an
erythematous patch on the forehead follows on a perhaps imaginary touch
during a dream or vision. In a third case what seems to have been a
real touch at a stance breaks the skin, and leaves an inflamed wound.

It is noticeable, with regard to what will follow later, that something
like actual material contact should sometimes be insisted upon, as appears
from Mr. Moses' records, in the production by spirits of a phenomenon
which we have seen the subliminal self produce with no material inter-
vention, ♦

{c) Navel and Purposive Metastasis of Except, however,

for this insistence on actual touch, the stigmatic phenomena have thus
far followed the now well-known type. Yet it may occur to us to ask

APPENDICES

528

whether spirits acting thus on the organism, and endowed with the more
intimate insight into the molecular constitution of things with which
I have credited them, could not go further still, and split up the proteids
of the body in some unfamiliar way. These are, of course, complex
enough to be split up, not only into the various proximate elements,
normal or pathological, which have already been detected in the body,
but into an indefinite number of other compounds as well. It may be
said, indeed, that novel products of proteid decomposition, even if they
could be produced, would escape recognition save by the accomplished
chemist. There is, however, one of our senses which in certain directions
can even outmatch in delicacy the chemist’s skill. -And there is in
animal bodies an unexhausted reservoir of potential odours capable
of stimulating this sense to the full. Where the skunk is possible, all
is possible ; and it need not be a hopeless task to draw from the human
organism fragrances which may bear to skunk or musk-rat the relat^pn
which the most delicate tint of mauve bears to the original tar. On one
secretion in particular Professor Ramsay, F.R.S., has favoured me with
the following remarks : Perspiration consists of caproate of glyceryl,
mixed with the free acid, I believe. It does not smell nice ; but pure
caproates are very fragrant if the right alcoholic base is combined. I fancy
that woodrufTe and verbena are of the nature of turpentine, and have
probably the same percentage composition. However, so far as I know,
they have not been investigated.”

Bearing all this in mind, let us return to certain passages which have
perhaps hitherto seemed among the most grotesque and incredible which
the records of Mr. Moses’ stances contain. I refer to the frequently
attested welling or stillation of various ** liquid scents,” mainly verbena
and woodruffe, and on one occasion at least altering on request, from
a circumscribed patch on the -top of Mr. Moses’ head. The guides
affirm that this secretion is restorative ; and on one occasion especially,
when Mr. Moses is tried and depressed by sitting long amidst a rough
crowd, it is stated that the scent is produced and evaporated in un-
usual quantities in order to protect him from the exhausting influence of
his surroundings.*

1 I may give here another instance of this phenomenon, contributed by Mr. J. F.
Collingwood to Lif[ht of November 2nd, 1892. '* I was one evening sitting with him,"
says Mr. Collingwood, when he complained of not feeling well. 1 perceived a very
sweet perfume, and remarked, as it increased, ' What a delicious scent I Where does
it come from } * * From me, the top of my head,* he replied. I felt the crown, which
was wet with a pleasant odorous substance. I dipped the corner of my handkerchief
in it, and kept it for monthh hardly diminished in potency. Mr. Stainton Moses told
me that the development of these perfumes was intended as a healing process, and he
w|s often relieved in that way." It may be observed that circumscribed patches of
hyperidrosis occasionally occur on the scalp ; so that we have here, in my view, an
evolutive phenomenon taking the same form as a morbid or dissolutive one. It should
l>e added that in bromidrosis the odour has been in various cases compared to that of
various flowers and fruits. — (Myde's Diseases 0/ the Skin^ p. 102.)

TO CHAPTER IX

529

926 A]

The reader will readily see the interpretation which, in my view,
these facts must receive. I regard the disembodied spirit’s influence
on the organism as more instructed, so to say, than the influence of
the subliminal self; — ^just as the influence of the subliminal self is
more instructed than that of the supraliminal. Where the one can
adapt, the other can originate ; where the subliminal self can reproduce
by a novel method the secretion which the organism has already learnt
to form, the other can compose a fresh secretion, with a definite aim,

A definite aim, 1 say, speaking at present of the odoriferous and
recognisable character alone. But it is not impossible that the secre-
tion may have haid a therapeutic value as well. It may conceivably have
carried off waste products more effectively than the ordinary perspiration
of which it seems to have been a modified form.

However this may be, the above brief discussion may have suggested
tOwUS that it is by the comparative method here adopted that we have the
best chance of bringing these grotesque marvels into some true analogy
with experiments already known to science.

(3) Physical Expenditure Modified by Spirit-Control.

(a) Mechanical Efficiency Increased and Fulcrum Displaced . — Having
thus dealt briefly with spirit-influence as exercised upon the processes of
nutrition, let us go on to consider in what w\ay this influence seems to
affect the output of energy, — streaming from the organism into the
molecular or the etherial world. And, first, let us consider mechanical
^wrk done in simple, molar form — the movements of heavy untouched
objects which recur so habitually in records such as these. When we
hear of such a movement we ask ourselves whether it can be shown to be
consistent with the ordinary mechanical law of action and reaction, and
with the wider generalisation of the conservation of energy. Where is the
fulcrum? How great, and whence derived, is the energy employed?
d'he question of the fulcrum might conceivably be settled by actual
experiment. In its present condition it forms part of the more general
problem of so-called “ ectoplasy,” or extrusion from the organism of vital
energy, which will be considered under a later heading. As to the source
of the energy, we must needs suppose that to be in the organism of the
medium, unless it should be shown to exceed any amount of which we
can suppose his organism capable. At first sight it has sometimes seemed
(as with D. D. Home) to exceed this amount. But in our estimation we
must bear in mind that (as was said above) an increase of at least
momentary muscular power may come from onetof two causes — may be
either the result of integration or the concomitant of disintegration. As
the concomitant of disintegration, in hysteria or mania, the symptom, is
a familiar one, and indicates the unequal conservation of efferent and
inhibitory stimuli. A reckless order — as for a Balaclava charge — is given to
the muscles, and there is no wise superior officer to countermand or restrain.

VOL. II. ' 2 L

530

APPENDICES

[926A

But, on the other hand, the weakness of the general, while it permits
of rashness in the army which has got out of hand, may also fail to utilise
the healthy ardour of an obedient host. The strong-willed, educated
savant can sometimes compress the dynamometer more forcibly than the
robust ploughman ; — not because his hands are stronger, but because he
can at a given moment throw a greater proportion of his total energy into
them. How far such increase of power might go we know not. The
limit of the force which human muscles could theoretically exert is far
from being reached in common life.

If, then, it is asked whether these phenomena appear to transgress the
law of Conservation of Energy, we can affirm that they do /w/, — in the
sense that the work done, so far as measurable in foot-pounds, does not
manifestly exceed the work which the sensitive’s organism, could we
suppose it handled as a familiar instrument by a mind completely under-
standing it, could probably accomplish without permanent injury.
we may add that, according to statements made by the controls in Mr.
Moses’ and other cases, some of the force thus used is taken from other
persons present ; in which case there would probably be an ample surplus,
after all the recorded feats had been performed.

But the possible satisfaction — in some obscure manner — of the law of
Conservation of Energy brings us but little nearer to a justification of the
alleged phenomena. We do not know, in fact, how much energy such
phenomena wmld need, for no amount of energy, applied in any way
known to ourselves, could possibly produce them.

(^) Control (n^er IndiiMual Material Mole€i4le$ i Resulting in Abroga-
tion of Ordinary Thermal Laws, and in Aggregation and Disaggregation
of Matter. — ^These novel dealings with matter, while very various in char-
acter, are all of them such as to suggest that here also the agent ( though
perhaps not consciously) is acting upon molecules and not upon masses ;
here, also, in the inanimate and inorganic world, just as it seemed to me
might be the case in spirit-action upon a living brain.

Let us consider for a moment the advance in power over nature which
such a mode of action would imply.

Habitually we deal with matter in a molar manner ; taking little or no
account of the molecular changes involved in the execution of our molar
designs. Since the rise of the kinetic theory of gases — say for this last
half-century — we have also been able to deal with matter molecularly, but
merely (as Maxwell expresses it) in statistical fashion; — dealing with
molecules in immense numbers, and achieving results which, though far
more delicate and peijetrating than any molar results could be, must
nevertheless seem rude and wholesale to any intelligence which can
actually discern the molecules which we merely infer. “ Our actual
knowledge of concrete things,” says Maxwell,^ ‘^is of an essentially
statistical nature, because no one has yet discovered any practical

*

* Theory of Heat. chap. xxii.

TO CHAPTER IX

926 A]

531

method of tracing the path of a molecule, or of identifying it at different
times.”

The mathematical physicist and the chemist, in fact, have somewhat
the same sort of knowledge of their molecules that the Registrar-General
has of the population. So much hydrogen combining with so much
oxygen will make water ; explode them together and you get your drop ;
but who can say which hydrogen-atom will combine with a given atom of
oxygen? There will be about so many marriages next year,*' says the
Registrar-General ; but he perforce leaves the individual brides and bride-
grooms to sort themselves. To foresee or to guide the affinities of each
several molecule would be for the physicist as great a step in advance as
it would be for the Registrar-General could he foresee or guide every
impulse to wedlock in the United Kingdom.

Assume, then, for the sake of argument, a power like this. Assume
that we can distinctly see and easily deal with each of the countless
millions of molecules contained in a single room. We see them dis-
tinguished one from another by speed, by direction of movement, by size,
by complexity, by intrinsic vibration ; — this last difference corresponding
to what we deem difference of elemental constitution. We can therefore
direct or combine all these as we will. We can, for instance, to take one
of the phenomena here recorded, disequalise the temperature of two parts
of a closed chamber by directing the swiftly- moving molecules to one side
of an imaginary partition, the more slowly-moving to the other, and thus
making the belts of cooler and >varmer air of which Mr. Moses tells us.
fiut here I pause ; for the argument has reached a point where it is liable
to attack on two opposite sides. On the one side it will be regarded as
intolerably novel and extravagant ; while on the other side it will be set
down as the mere plagiarism of a familiar physical speculation. It was,
in fact, at about this point of an argument which, as the reader has seen,
had led me by a vital or psychological rather than by a physical road to
this conception of selective molecular action, that it became plain to me
that Professor Clerk . Maxwell’s Sorting Demons had been already trained
— if I may so say — to the very performances which I was now ascribing to
spirit-power. The reader has probably already recollected these imaginary
creatures ; invented by the great physicist to illustrate a process by which
it would be theoretically possible to arrest the dissipation of energy and
to disequalise anew the temperature of the Universe. I turned to Lord
Kelvin’s Popular Lectures and Addresses, vol. i. p. 144, for the fullest
description of the natural history of this minutest species of Chimoera, —
hombitam in vacuo to some purpose now I I found what virtually amounts
to an explanation, on this hypothesis, of most of the phenomena of Mr.
Moses* stances, so far as concerned with inanimate matter. •

He is a being (says Lord Kelvin, of Maxwell’s Demon) with no preter-
natural qualities, and differs from real living animals only in extreme smallness
and agility. He can at pleasure stop, or strike, or push, or pull any single

532 APPENDICES [926A

atom of matter, and so moderate its natural course of motion. Endowed
ideally with arms and hands and fingers— >two hands and ten fingers
suffice — he can do as much for atoms as a pianoforte player can do for
the keys of tht piano— just a little more, he can push and pull each atom in
any direction.

He cannot create or annul energy: but just cis a living animal does, he can
store up limited quantities of energy, and reproduce them at will. By operating
selectively on individual atoms he can reverse the natural dissipation of energy,
can cause one half of a closed jar of air, or of a bar of iron, to become glowing
hot, and the other ice-cold ; can direct the energy of the moving molecules of
a basin of water to throw the water up to a height, and leave it there pro-
portionately cooled (i deg. Fahrenheit for 772 ft. of ascent); can “sort” the
molecules in a solution of salt or in a mixture of two gases, so as to reverse the
natural process of diffusion, and produce concentration of the solution in one
portion of the water, leaving pure water in the remainder of the space occupied ;
or in the other case separate the gases into different parts of the containing
vessel. The classification, according to which the ideal demon is to sort th«in,
may be according to the essential character of the atom ; for instance, all
atoms of hydrogen to be let go to the left, or stopped from crossing to the right,
across an ideal boundary ; or it may be according to the velocity each atom
chances to have when it approaches the boundary — if greater than a certain
stated amount it is to go to the right ; if less, to the left. This latter rule of
assortment, carried into execution by the demon, discqualises temperature an«i
undoes the natural diffusion of heat— the former undoes the natural diffusion
of matter. By a combination of the two processes the demon can decompose
water or carbonic acid, first raising a portion of the compound to dissociational
temperature (that is, temperature so high that the collisions shatter the conv
pound molecules to atoms), and then sending the oxygen atoms this way, and
the hydrogen or carbon that way; or he may affect decomposition against
chemical affinity otherwise thus ; Let him take in a small store of energy by
resisting the mutual approach of two compound molecules, letting them press
as it were on his two hands, and ^tore up energy as in a bent spring ; then let
him apply the two hands between the oxygen and the double hydrogen
constituents of a compound molecule of vapour of water, and tear them
asunder. He may repeat this proce.ss until a considerable proportion of the
whole number of compound molecules in a given quantity of vapour of water,
given in a fixed closed vessel, are separated into oxygen and hydrogen at the
expense of energy taken from translational motions.'

Let us then consider with what degree of success a well -trained demon

' Having appealed to I.ord Kelvin’s authority in the above discussion, I feel bound
at once to add that no one would probably be less willing than the illustrious author
himself to sanction the use which I proceed to make of his brilliant conceptions. In a
lecture, delivered *883, and republished 1891, in the second edition oi Popular Lectures
and Addresses (Nature Senes), vol. i. p. 265, Lord Kelvin gives his view on our whole
range of subjects with perfect clearness.

• “Now I have hinted at a possible seventh sense— a magnetic sense— and though
out of the line 1 propose to follow, and although time is precious, and does not permit
much of digression, I wish just to remove the idea that I am in any way suggesting any-
thing towards that wretched superstition of animal magnetism, and table-turning, and
spiritualism, and mesmerism, and clairvoyance, and spirit-rapping, of which we have

926 A] TO CHAPTER IX 533

from Lord Kelvin’s laboratory could have acquitted himself at a stance
of Mr. Moses’ or of D. D. Home's.

He can cause one half of a closed jar of air or of a bar of iron to
become glowing hot^ and the other ice-cold.

Here at once he scores a success which will make him an almost
unique ‘‘ mediiimistic ” reputation. Among modern civilised mediums at
any rate — whatever may be the case in savage countries — Home is the
only one who has obtained the fire-test under good observation. When
he put his own head in the glowing fire, or handed blazing coals to the
company in a lady’s pocket handkerchief, as described by Sir William
Crookes, Lord Crawford, and others, all he needed was the familiar
(lemon who took care that between the glow and the handkerchief there
should always be a layer of slowly-moving, cool, fresh, carbon-molecules,
while the frenzied spinning carbon-molecules at a red heat were kept
easily and completely within their imaginary wall. Having accomplished
this, it would be mere child’s play for our demon to disequalise the
temperature of Dr. Speer’s study, and to produce the alternate belts of
cold and warm air of which Mr. Moses has told us above. The recorded
fall of six degrees in the minimum thermometer, and the cold winds over
heads and hands, would be trifling examples of the same power.

He can direct the energy of the moving molecules of a basin of water to
throw the water up to a height and leave it there proportionately cooled.

(}rant him liquid scent, then, of which more presently, and he can
make it fall in cool dew from the ceiling as easily as not. Or he may
Ixive been at work when the following incident, testified to by Lord
Dunraven, occurred with Home. {^Experiences in Spiritualism^ p. 77.)
** He then again raised the glass [of brandy] over his head, and the liquid
was withdrawn. He then told me to come and hold my hand above the
glass ; I did so, and the liquid fell over and through my fingers into the
glass, dropping from the air above me.”

He can sort the molecules in a solution of salty so as to reverse the natural
process of diffusioHy and produce concentration of the solution in one portion
(f the watery leaving pure water in the remainder of the space occupied.

He could, then, have continued the little experiment described above.

heard so much. There is no seventh sense of the mystic kind. Clairvoyance, and the
like, are the result of bad o])scrvation chiefly, somewhat mixed up, however, with the
effects of wilful imposture, acting on an innocent, trusting mind.”

If, as to my innocent, trusting mind seems not impossible, the time should some day
come when critics shall say of these Proceedings that they have merely brought out as
novelties things which every one already knew, it may be of interest to refer to this
utterance of the President of the Royal Society, and forenlost savant of Great llritain.
And if, as I also conjecture, Lord Kelvin’s own speculations on matter and energy
should find both confirmation and development in a better understanding of th(se
telekinetic phenomena— we shall have a palmary example of the historic truth that a
leader of thought in one age often prepare.s, while he protests against, the thought of the
next; — may be at once its most contemptuous opponent and its most illuminating
precursor.

534

APPENDICES

[Home] then said, * I am going to take the strength from the brandy,'
and he began making passes over the glass and flipping his fingers, send-
ing a strong smell of spirit through the room. In about five minutes he
had made the brandy as weak as very weak brandy and water ; it scarcely
tasted at all of spirit. Both Lindsay [now Lord Crawford] and I tasted
it at the moment, and also some after the stance was over.”

A little practice would have enabled our demon to carry this trick a
step further, as follows : —

Home then made some very curious experiments with flowers ; he
separated the scent into two portions, one odour smelling exactly like
earth, the other being very sweet.” And so a fresh lemon with its acid
removed, the flavour being a sort of mawkish alkali ; some describing
it as like magnesia, others as like washing soda.”

Visiting, we will suppose, Mr. Moses* stances after these exploits, our
demon would very easily have drawn the scent from the flowers, as de-
scribed below.

The classification according to which the ideal demon is to sort them [the
atoms'\ may be according to the essential character of the atom ; for instance^
aU atoms of hydrogen to be let go to the left^ &^c.

This looks promising for that manufacture of liquid scents, pearls, and
imitation gems which went on briskly at Dr. Speer’s. Only our demon
may be puzzled to get at his hydrogen, for instance, which he may not find
lying about loose in a gentleman’s study. Water and coal gas, however,
he will probably find there ; will these do?

The demon can decompose water or carbonic acid^ first raising a portion
of the compound to dissociational temperaturCy and then sending the oxygen
atoms this way and the hydrogen or carbon that way.

He has really now, I think, gone through all that is necessary, and wc
need hardly trouble him to keep his little hands uncomfortably strained,
in order to store up energy ; unless, indeed, this be needed for a feat which
he cannot well have practised in outl)dng space ; namely, that triumph over
the force of cohesion which is necessary to get a handbell through a party
wall, or an orange through the keyhole.

In some such half-ironical fashion, as it seems to me, can we best deal
at present with these mysteries of the constitution of matter, which are in
resJity as yet almost equally beyond the grasp of sage or of simpleton. I
have shown that the things which Mr. Moses* guides are said to do are
things of which great minds have loved to fancy the doing. I have shown
that since in their view there was not a spirit to do them, they have found
it necessary to invent one. “ Whom therefore they ignorantly worship ”
— the being whom they conceive as moving at ease and naturally in a
clearly seen molecular world — him do these records declare to them as
the operative agency amid marvels which once again contempt prior to
examination ” has led most of our best minds to neglect and ignore.

I shall not venture further in proprid persond upon this dangerous

TO CHAPTER IX

535

926 A]

ground. But I will quote here one of the answers of Mr. Moses* guides
when appealed to on these points, that the reader may, at any rate, judge
how far what they say is in accordance with speculations of which it is
not likely that either they or their medium had ever heard. In fairness
to them and to him I quote first (from Mr. Moses* note-books, see
943 A), one of their emphatic declarations that in his case all physical
phenomena were absolutely subsidiary to the spiritual development which
was their central aim : —

April } 6 lkt 1876.— No good end was to be got by lingering on the plane
where everything is more or less vague and shifting ; and where whatever truth
may be gained is only an elementary enlightenment of material ignorance. It
is not for you to deal with the plane of Physics ; come upward to the realm
of Spirit. For others it may be well to investigate the lines of contact between
Matter and Spirit. It is not your work. Leave it. For others it may be well
tt develop the tentative attempts of spirit to project itself on the plane of matter.
Leave it. It is not your work. Your organism is unfitted for it, and you could
not attempt it without risk.

I will now quote a few words on the removal of scent from a flower : —

1 want to ask how my flower came to be so dead ?

“The odour was all drawn from it. Hence the perfumes that you had
during the stance. The vital principle of the flower was gone. Hence it was
dead ; and the decay was owing to that fact. The principle was abstracted,
even as the vital force is drawn from you.”

Then was the strain on it mere decay ?

“ Yes, it withered and died because its spirit was gone ; even as your earth
body will wither and die when the spirit leaves it. You saw much of this before,
when Odorifer scented flowers for you, and drew the perfume from them. It
is not new. ^ + Rector.”

We have now considered both some apparently molar displacements
of matter, and some that must needs have involved molecular rearrange-
ment. And it will probably be admitted that even the coarser phenomena
—movements of tables and the like — must have involved some molecular
process to get the requisite power from the medium’s organism to operate
at the new fulcrum. We have, therefore, a mixture of processes resem-
bling the way in which we ourselves work with processes quite strange to
us. It seems as though these might often be interchanged at pleasure ;
and there are passages which describe two cameos — one of them as having
been actually cut and chipped in the stance-room by invisible hands, and
the other as having been shaped directly by ‘^will-power,” with no carving
process. A third way of effecting the same end is also mentioned ; — that
of suggesting the work to a mortal artist. ,

One of the most interesting of all modifications of matter presumably
contained in the room consists in “direct writing,” — the disposition of
coloured matter in a form simulating the handwriting of some identified

536 APPENDICES [926A

spirit. This phenomenon occurred at an early date in the experiences
of Mr. Moses.

In such cases the content as well as the method of the writing is
naturally important, in so far as it may throw light upon the identities
concerned. There are here two separate questions. Firstly : Are the
spirits who thus write directly the same as those who write through the
medium’s hand ? Secondly : Are they the spirits who they profess to
be ? The first of these questions must, 1 think, be answered in the affir-
mative. The direct signatures closely resemble the automatic signatures,
and the two forms of writing are intimately intermixed. Sometimes, for
instance, letters were formed under the shadow of Mr. Moses’ hand, while
he himself wrote as usual ; or the letters were even formed under his gaze
(when he was alone) in the light. The authors of the automatic script
always claimed authorship of the direct script also.

But on the other hand, I do not see that the direct writing adds to
the evidence for identity supplied by the automatic writing, except in so
far as it shows that the claim to identity pervades every manifestation.
Beings who can make pearls and carve cameos can presumably deposit
chalk and arrange patterns thereof just as they choose, imitating any
signature known to them with none of that special difficulty in the imi-
tation of characteristics of handwriting which is felt on earth. Direct
writings in short, seems to be conditioned in much the same way as other
phenomena by the mind of the medium.

The colouring matter used might either be apparently derived from
some chalk pencil already in the room, or might have no obvious source#

And it may here be obsen'ed that, just as in the phenomena which
looked the most crude and massive we seemed to discern on closer
scrutiny an element of molecular guidance, so also even in phenomena
on a physically small scale, like these directly-written signatures, we have
constantly to face the question — Has matter been rearranged in the room
itself? — e,g. disaggregated and reaggregated into what seems like green
chalk when there was no green chalk in the room before ? Or has it, on
the other hand, been brought from outside the room by ‘‘passage of
matter through matter,” as the phrase goes ? In reality I think that we
have not knowledge enough to make a broad distinction between seem-
ingly different operations of this transcendental kind. D. I). Home’s
guides denied the possibility of the passage of matter through matter ;
but Sir William Crookes has narrated how in Horae’s presence a thick
stalk passed uninjured through a chink in the table, through which
no human power could /.hus have pushed it. Again, when, as quoted
a few pages above, Home’s guides withdrew the brandy from the brandy-
an(],-water, was not that a passage of the material alcohol through the
material water? To suppose that the special form of cohesion which
we call solidity is alone insuperable by such powers as these does not
seem to me a specially plausible view. Even in our own world we could

TO CHAPTER IX

537

926 A]

hardly have guessed, a priori^ that a bullet would sink, or a floating cork
rise through apparently solid cold pitch by the slow force of gravity forcing
asunder the tenacious mass, or that a copper wire could be passed in>
sensibly through a block of ice by melting and regelation. Or let me,
on the other hand, suppose a man who had never seen anything but
explosions of dynamite. To him it would seem easy to shatter rocks
with gases, but almost impossible to lift or pierce the vast superincumbent
weight of air. We should have to explain to him that it was really easier
to shoot through air than through rock, if you only propelled your rifle
bullet slowly enough to allow the air to get out of the way. Or to get
matter through matter may be like the puzzles which consist in getting
linked rings through linked rings; there is plenty of space if you can
only circumvent the attachments. I do not think then that we need
either postulate a fourth dimension to explain Mr. Moses’ apports, or
e^en adopt the more anthropomorphic conception that they were taken
up one chimney and down another. At the same time, there are few of
the incidents recorded which this last supposition might not be pressed
to cover.

(r) Control over Etherial Manifestations : with Possible Effects in the
Domains of Lights Electricity^ Gravitation^ and Cohesion, — Our next topic,
could we deal with it with fuller knowledge, must needs be one of
far- reaching significance. The influence of spiritual control upon etherial
phenomena, if once understood, might bring us nearer than any other
line of inquiry to a comprehension of the mode of interpenetration of
the metetherial world with our own. Unfortunately, while our observed
facts are rare and difficult, the explanations professing to come from the
other side are far from clear. It is sometimes said, for example, that raps
—the percussive sounds which occur so frequently in all series of these
psycho-physical phenomena — are of electrical origin. But no attempt
is made to work this out, and in themselves the raps suggest rather a
suspension and re-establishment of the force of cohesion than any form
of electric discharge. Again, the alteration of the weights of objects,
frequently recorded both with D. D. Home and with Mr. Moses, may
conceivably be the manifestation of some control over gravitation^
otherwise than by the opposition of another force, such as living men
can apply; but no information, so far as I know, has been oflfered on
this point.

The only etherial phenomenon of which, as spiritually controlled,
we have clear and frequent instances is light. And this indeed is oflere .1
to us in many forms, and needs our careful study. We must needs begin
by an enumeration of the known sources of terrestrial light, to some
of the less familiar, among which we shall, if I mistake not, trace a cerfain
affinity in some of the luminous phenomena recorded.

Light, as we know, is a term somewhat vaguely given to two pheno-

APPENDICES

538

mena habitually concurrent, but essentially distinct ; namely, to a certain
type of etherial undulation, and to a certain sensation experienced by
such animated beings as possess visual organs, and evoked as a rule by
the aforesaid type of undulation.

Let us take first objective light, as it is called, or the light-waves
themselves, and consider the various sources from which they are derived.
They may be generated by special forms of etherial disturbance, or they
may be originated by molecular or by vital activity. Without aiming
at a precision of phraseology not here essential, let us take light in
relation to the worlds of matter, ether, and life, in the order in which we
have touched upon those worlds in previous discussions.

(L. I.) Light accompanving Inanimate Molecular Motion.

(a.) — Incandescence. When matter is raised to a certain temperature,
as by arrest of motion, chemical action, combustion following minute sub^
division, &c., light-waves are generated, among waves of many other
amplitudes.

(j8.) — Phosphorescence. Phosphorus and some of its compounds
during the process of slow oxidation emit light-waves either solely, or at
least in far greater proportion to heat-waves than is the case in ordinary
oxidation, which is generally non-luminous until it gives rise to incan-
descence. To this head belongs the phosphorescence of decaying matter,
when not due to luminous microbes.

(y.) — Luminescence and Fluorescence. Many bodies after insolation,
or after exposure to dim light, or sometimes even to ultra-violet rays,
(perhaps j// bodies if their temperature is sufficiently reduced), have the
power of re-radiating a part of the incident energy in the form of light.
Some so-called phosphorescences <due to heat (short of incandescence) , to
cleavage, to crystallisation, &c., probably fall under this category, for
which one may propose the name of luminescence^ since there is a practical
inconvenience in extending the term phosphorescence to phenomena in
which phosphorus is not concerned.

(L. 2.) — Light accompanying Special Forms of
Etherial Disturbance.

I introduce this heading rather for the sake of completeness, than as
venturing to affirm that light could accompany electric or magnetic
oscillations in a hypothetical absence of matter. If a magnetic field has
really been seen as lumjjuous, it is perhaps here that such a phenomenon
should be placed.

^ (L. 3.) — Light accompanying VrrAL Action.

(a.) — Vital Secretory Phosphorescence. Under secretory phosphores-
cence I include all cases where animal luminosity appears due to the

TO CHAPTER IX

539

926 A]

secretion by the animal of a substance capable of emitting lights pre-
sumably (though not certainly) due to slow oxidation. The glow-worm
{Lampyris noctiluca) and the firefly {Elater nocHiucus) are the stock
examples of this. It is an interesting but uncertain question how far the
light of these and other luminous animals is under their own control.
Professor Herdman, F.R.S., kindly writing to me on the subject of
animal luminosity, says : — “ In many cases there is probably a connection
with the nervous system {e.g.y Nyctiphanes and other Schizopoda), and
the luminosity is the result of a reflex, if not of a voluntary action ; and
so possibly might be regarded as a direct transmutation of nerve energy
into an ethereal disturbance visible as light.”

In many species, however, the luminous substance retains luminosity
after the death of the animal.

(^.) — Excretory Phosphorescence. Under this term I include the
various forms of elimination of phosphorescent matter, as a waste product
from the system. This last phenomenon, as will be seen, is of much
importance for our present purpose. It is at present the only unquestioned
form of emission of light from the human subject. It is well known that
in phthisis, cancer, and other diseases where much phosphorus has been
administered by the mouth, the breath, the perspiration, and other ex-
cretions and secretions, are frequently observed to be slightly luminous.
The perspiration in subjects of miliaria is also said to be sometimes
luminous, although the phosphorus thus excreted must come from the
ordinary stock contained in the body.*

* (y.) — Vital Luminescence, Some experiments cited by Dr. T. L.
Phipson, whose little work on Phosphorescence (1870) is still the best
collection known to me of the rarer phenomena, suggest to him that the
light emitted by a mushroom {Agaricus o/earius), and perhaps that emitted
by a centipede {Scolopendra Electrical y and a firefly {^Lampyris italicd)^
may be a luminescent phenomenon, and depend at least partially on
previous absorption of light. There seems no a pnori reason against
this view, which, if proved true for these organisms, would probably apply
to others as well.

(8.) — Vital Fulguration. Certain phanerogamous plants have occa-
sionally been seen to emit positive flashes of light. The daughter of
Linnaeus had the good fortune to make the first and classical observation
on the garden nasturtium in 1 762, and the phenomenon has since been
witnessed in sunflowers, marigolds, and orange lilies by other observers.
This light appears to be truly electric, and not to be merely the result of
a cunent passing through the organism (as when a man lights the gas with
his fingers) , but to imply a generation of electricity within the organism itself.

The diffused electric luminosity, which has sometimes been seeni»(as
by Dr. Kane, the explorer, cited by Phipson, p. 16 1) to illuminate the
human skin, may be in some sense a vital phenomenon, or may be due

* See (for instance) Diseases of the Skin, by Dr. H. Radcliffe Crocker (i888),p. 160, &c.

540

APPENDICES

to friction ; but in any case belongs rather to the surface of the skin itself
than to the vital processes going on underneath.

(€.) — Vt/ai Photogeny, By this name I designate the direct production
of light by living organisms^ as a result or bye-product of their own meta-
bolism. Such, I cannot but think, is the explanation of the widespread
luminosity of low marine forms, especially when transparent : — a source of
light, in comparison with which the greasy organs of glow-worm and firefly
sink into insignificance. NocHluca mi/iaris, to take one species alone,
offers,’* in the lofty language of Humboldt, the magnificent spectacle
of a starry firmament reflected in the sea.” On these primitive forms
Professor Herdman writes : “ It is in these cases of simple, undifferentiated
protoplasm that I fancy the luminosity might be an exaggeration of some
necessary accompaniment of metabolism, or practically of life, of the
functions of the living protoplasm. It would then be a katabolic action
or molecular disturbance which might be supposed to affect the sur-
rounding ether so as to produce light. We might imagine that this kata-
bolic action goes on always in living protoplasm, but so slightly as not to
produce visible light, while in some cases (cells, tissues, or organisms) it
has become emphasised, and then < seized upon ’ by natural selection as
serving some useful purpose (which may be a very different purpose in
different cases), and so perfected.” ** This,” adds Professor Herdman, is
speculation,” and it is only as such that I venture to print it here. As
will be presently seen, it is precisely the conclusion to which observations
of a very different kind had already pointed me.

4*

A few words only need be added here as to subjective or phantasmal
luminosity. The immediate link between objective and subjective light
may be said to be the intra-cerebral flash, seen when the optic nerve is
pressed or cut, or the brain concus*sed.

Then come the whole series of illuminated phantasms ; either simply
phantasmal lights, diffused or definite, or figures seen in darkness, or
otherwise more highly illuminated than the objects around them. All
these sensations of light, like other phantasms, are primd facie subjective ;
but as with other phantasms, we have the difficulty of collective halluci*
nations, and the gradual merging of these phantasms into the physical
phenomena with which I am here dealing.

Turning back to the luminous phenomena recorded in Mr. Moses’
stances, have we now any clue as to the mechanism of their production,
or as to the headings in our scheme of luminosities under which they most
fitly fall ? I will at once .say, that at least two of the less familiar of these
headings do appear to me to be applicable to lights produced under spirit
coi)frol. I mean Excretory Phosphorescence and Vital Photogeny.

Excretory Phosphorescence undet Spirit Control, — I have already noted,
under subliminal phenomena (II. 3. c,), the luminous appearance of
Mr. Moses* hands, which he records as persisting after a stance. We

TO CHAPTER IX

541

926 A]

have also seen reason to suppose that the emanation of scent from Mr.
Moses’ head was a form of hyperidrosis purposely modified by spirit
control. May not the appearance of his hands also have been due to the
phosphorescent perspiration of which we have just heard as a symptom
after much phosphorus has been taken into the system? The ‘‘guides ”
themselves alleged that many of the lights depended upon phosphorus
extracted from the medium’s organism. May not the glow on the hands
represent an after-elTect of this extraction? The sweat glands are, as we
know, readily responsive in common life to psychical stimuli, and Dr.
Milne Bramwell has found that hyperidroses which have obstinately
resisted medication will sometimes yield at once to hypnotic suggestion.
We have often observed that supernormal agencies are wont to follow as
closely as possible processes familiar to the organisation, whether in health
or in disease.

• Nor was this glow confined to the hands alone. A kind of luminous
cloud, which might be due either to breath or to some subtle cutaneous
transpiration, was often observed round Mr. Moses’ head and shoulders at
sfeances. And on one marked occasion the phosphoric smoke was dense
enough seriously to alarm Mr. Moses himself and Dr. Speer.

The luminosities which we have thus far been discussing have been of
the apparent nature of cloudy emanations from the medium or similar
collections of cloudy light in his near vicinity. Or if they have shown a
tendency to concentration^ it has been in the form of “ spirit-lights,” or
apparently solid receptacles of quasi-phosphoric brightness — brightness,
.however, so steady and permanent as, by Sir William Crookes’ own ac-
count, to have baffled his skill in imitation.^ Their general appearance
has been not inconsistent with the proffered explanation — that they are
made from phosphorus extracted from the medium, and perhaps from other
members of the circle, and mingled o^ prepared in some manner beyond
our earthly skill.

Vital Pkotogeny under Spiritual Control, — But we have next to deal
with a class of lights whose nature and behaviour seem markedly different.
These are lights which are not widely diffused but small and more or less
definite, and w'hich concentrate not into solid inert masses, but into hands.
Of this ectoplastic formation of hands we must speak in the next section.
For the moment I will only point out that these lights seem to be a directly
vital phenomenon.

It is, perhaps, “ this muddy vesture of decay ” which hides from us in
common life the glow which is an inseparable attribute of that life itself;
and the radiance which at the outset of evolution the ocean-organisms
attain in their primitive simplicity is achieved once more when intermediate
stages have been passed through, and life and matter are manipulated;svith
the freedom and mastery of the spirit-world.

I trust that as our knowledge increases there may prove to be some

^ Crookes’ Pesearckes in Spiritualism ^ p. 91.

542

APPENDICES

usefulness, some reality, in the analogies between normal and supernormal
modes of light-prodiiction on which 1 have here dwelt — but I am far
from supposing that these analogies cover the whole ground. On the
contrary, we see throughout these luminous phenomena a constant ten-
dency towards a transition from objective to subjective light — from the
luminosity of excreted phosphorus, or of vital metabolism, to light
which never was on sea or land,” and whose discernment seems no
longer to depend on earthly vision, nor its source to be akin to any
earthly glow. We are introduced, as discussion under a future heading
will show, to a metetherial, which is also a luminous state of being-- to
spirits who are independent of our earthly sources of brightness, solemquc
suum, sua sidera norunL If we endeavour to class their fulgent aspect
among the headings which our scheme has offered, we should have to
speak, I suppose, of metetherial luminescence^ and to assume that they re-
radiate the incident energy of some supernal world.

Here it is plain that all attempt at terrestrial analogy must cease ; and
in passing from the discussion of spirit-control over matter and ether to
spirit-control over life itself, it seems fitting to remind the reader in clearest
terms that no analogies can here be more than suggestive ; that no exal-
tation or sublimation of forces already familiar will really explain the
modus operandi of these intimate dealings with seen and unseen things.
Even though known laws be at work they must be working in subjection
to laws unknown. For the very assumption of a metetherial world, as
natural and as uniform as our own, implies that our widest material gene-
ralisations can be no more than formulae for special cases— declucible from
laws still more fundamental, which must hold good whether matter and
ether exist or no. Our world of matter is but a flocculence held in critical
suspension, which a touch may dissolve or a touch precipitate. We can-
not distinguish among metetherial energies ; we can but say that ‘‘ psychic
force,” — if that be the least question-begging title that we can find for those
energies as they affect mankind, — can form no true part of any mechanical
synthesis of the universe which our science knows, and thus if we are
asked if psychic force implies any disturbance of our law of the conserva-
tion of energy, we must reply that we have no reason to suppose that it
does so ; but that even this question can scarcely be so expressed as to be
capable of definite answer. If life be regarded, as for example, by Prof.
Lodge' as merely a “ directive and guiding force exercised upon matter,”
and “ not affecting the amount of energy in the slightest degree ” ; then a
like predication may be made as to the manifestations of psychic force, —
all of them ultimately vital in character, — which we here encounter. But
at the same time it is conceivable that energy might be so defined as to
show that the production of these phenomena requires the expenditure, in
a metetherial world, of some form of energy akin to the so-called "will-
power ** which we at least appear to ourselves to exercise here on earth,

1 Nature^ vol, xliv. p. 292.

TO CHAPTER IX

926 A]

543

although its true nature^ or even its actual existence, is matter of con-
troversy.

It is to will-power ** that the communicating spirits themselves ascribe
their achievements ; to some mode of operation quite unexplained, — but
even more direct, more fundamental than those imagined molecular powers
which I cited to show how men who believed that no “ demon *’ existed
found it necessar}' to invent one.

(4) Action on the Incarnation of Life on the Planet.

(a) Pre-conceptual Suggestion or Self-Suggestion . — And if this has been
already perceived in tracing spirit-influence on the material and etherial
worlds, much more will it be manifest when we come to our next heading,
— the influence, namely, of spirits upon the incarnation of life; upon its
derivation from its unknown reservoir and its distribution into organic
matter upon this planet. What have we noted thus far as to human influ-
ence on the incarnation of life, — either under supraliminal or subliminal
guidance ?

Under supraliminal control we find life incarnated for the most part
with no conscious forethought, and when incarnated following certain laws
of heredity apparently determined by terrene conditions in the remote
past. And when we do set ourselves to influence the processes of incar-
nation our results appear slight and external. We can perpetuate some
spontaneous variation; we can select parents; we can surround with
helpful conditions the new-born offspring. But in our attempts at
“.eugenics** in the higher races — in the human race, — we tinker from
without, we cannot mould from within.

And yet, if we stoop low enough, we can mould life more profoundly
than we have yet realised. T.et us go down to the very dust or spray of
animated being, to that myriad life which even on this planet is in a true
sense interpenetrant with our own, and we find the multitude of species as
flexible beneath our rapid hands as our own ancestors have been beneath
the slow choice of Nature and from the dawn of planetary time. Let
us get beneath the line of definite birth, among the protean forms of
“ protoplasmic rejuvenescence,** and wc can alter almost every apparent
character of the micro-organism, — ^inward to the very mode of reproduction
itself. The smaller the parcels in which life descends into generation, the
more modifiable is it in the terrene laboratory; the cell is waiting for
its cue, and a day of our treatment is for it as a thousand years.

Under subliminal control, on the other hand, it is with the highest
creature that we must begin. If we wish not to manipulate from without,
but to suggest from within, we must approach the strongly centralised
organism through “the ruling part** — ro ^yc/Aow#coV— its legitimate gnd
subliminal king.

And in which direction then do we find that the disembodied spirit
claims to extend his control over incarnate being? He sometimes claims

APPENDICES

544

in the first place, — and it is a claim which we can neither confirm nor
refute, — that he can push back pre-natal into pre-conceptual suggestion, and
can so influence men and women already on earth, that they will give
opportunity for the incarnation of some waiting spirit, who through such
special access only can enter on the material world. And he claims too,
with Plato, interpreter to men of the spiritual world, — that, as by a pre-
conceptual self-suggestion^ the descending spirit may choose and determine
its earthly lot, somewhat as in the hypnotic trance a man may choose and
suggest to himself the sensations and actions of subsequent waking hours.
This may not mean more than that, in some few rare cases, a pre-existing
spirit may have left the spiritual world to become a “ missionary *’ to our
planet.

(^) Ectoplasy or Materialisation ; Temporary Extradition or Con-
centration of Vital Energy. — But, leaving such speculations to derive else-
where from cases of precognition what support they may, wc must pj^s
on to a spiritual influence on incarnation to which some records have
actually testified, an influence which in a sense combines the supraliminal
and subliminal types. For it implies a command of the central authority
so complete as to Jidniit with safety of extreme, though transitory, de-
centralisations of a manipulation of component parts of complex or-
ganisms freer than any with which we ourselves have influenced the
attractions, the division, the rejuvenescence, of a simple and indepen-
dent cell.

But first let us consider the different ways in which the material
organisms of our planet may be regarded according as they are seen from
a material or from a metetherial standpoint.

To our ordinary view each of the higher organisms appears a definitely
coherent mass of matter, from which no important part can be separatetl
or withdrawn without injury. There is nothing to prove to us that the
life w’hich animates each organism can exist separately from the organism.
One organism can communicate with another only through certain definite
channels ; and each organism must run its separate course from birth to
decay.

When, however, some glimpse of the subliminal working of these
organisms has been attained, our relative conception of organism and
informing spirit rapidly changes. We have now to recognise an informing
life which, even if not yet proved capable of permanent existence apart
from the body, does nevertheless act within the body as though with a
separate initiative, controlling and modifying the organism in other than
purely physiological ways. We find, moreover, that each individual
organism is not so completely a closed system as at first appeared. Tele-
pathic influences pass from one to another; and sometimes the spirit
seems in some sense to leave the body, on some clairvoyant excursion,
or when death is imminent, and to return to it again as though to a
tabernacle from which it is itself detachable and distinct.

TO CHAPTER IX

545

926 A]

And now imagine the disembodied spirit as he regards this solid planet
and the organisms which inhabit it. To him the metetherial world is clear
and real ; the material world is unstable, shadowjr, chaotic. Definite and
permanent he sees the spirits that are lodged therein ; arresting each some
transitory group out of the hurricane of molecules by a cogency that is all
its own. The organism for him is the mere cloud of matter through which
the spirit works; its apparent periphery is no real boundary- wall. He
sees one incarnate spirit telergically affecting another incarnate spirit’s
brain ; and to him that extra-peripheral, ultra-organic influence is the
natural, the inevitable mode of communion.

He finds himself able to influence some of these organisms ; to rule
them as their own indwelling spirit rules them, only with more knowledge
of the possibilities of such control. He knows, let us say, the very' way
in which unbegotten life descended into generation ; he can see beyond
the narrow portal of the omne vivum ex ovo ; behind the first quiver of the
first slime-speck — the prince ps -which entangled in carbon-com-

pounds the Promethean fire. And thus he can push the vital force
through and past the illusory integument ; he can act— with more or less
of apparent likeness to fleshly, to organic action — ^upon external matter
which the medium’s ignorantly-guided body could not, without such
training, have contrived to reach.

This is the phenomenon which (using a term adapted for the purpose
by Professor Ochorowicz) I shall here call ectoplasy — the power of forming,
outside some special organism, a collection or reservoir of vital force or of
vitalised matter, which may or may not be visible, may or may not be
tangible, but which operates in like fashion as the visible and tangible
body from whence it is drawn.

Nay, more. To the disembodied spirit the organisms which he sees
accreted about his incarnate fellows afle no isolated, encapsuled things.
The identity, the unbridgeable separation is for him— if it is anywhere — in
the spirit-world. These protoplasmic clouds can mix, in his view, as
easily as the tails of comets ; or say as though from the tidal afflux
of half-colliding vaporous suns some glowing prominence shot forth, to
fall back presently, again divided, and a part attracted into each parent
mass. Only by some such metaphor, perhaps, can we picture the spirit’s
next achievement, and the fusion of portions of the vital force of several
persons into an agency which he wields in independence of them all ;

drawing power,” as the phrase goes, from the circle as well as from the
medium, and accomplishing mechanical work by tlic aid of their bodies,
but at a distance from each. ,

All the energy that he exerts, then, is vital energy ; it is drawn from the
organisms of the persons present, even when the eflect achieved (as JJie
production of a cold wind) is unlike the effects to which living organisms
commonly give rise. But, for the most part, the effects which he pro-
duces do resemble the organism’s natural action ; and hence, indeed, the

VOL. If, • 2 M

APPENDICES

546

objections of triviality and uselessness largely arise. The “telekinetic
movements ” (to use Mr. AksakofF’s term) which it is easiest to produce
seem to differ from 'movements which the medium himself could have made
only by starting from a point in space at some little distance outside his
apparent periphery. The movements are interesting, not as spectacles in
themselves, but as indications that life can act at some distance from a
living organism ; just as the movement of a half-drowned man’s finger is
interesting to the friend who knows not whether there still be life in that
organism at all.

The condition of the medium from whom this vital force is being drawn
seems to vary from complete tranquillity to extreme agitation, according to
the ease or difficulty of the process. With Mr. Moses there were some-
times agitated movements during some difficult manifestation (as the giving
of minute direct writing) ; but generally he was tranquilly entranced, with
his arms resting on the table in front of him. .

Let us now survey the various grades of these ectoplastic phenomena.

We will begin with the phenomena which keep closest to the medium’s
person, and in that sense prepare the way for the production of visible
hands, &c., acting at a distance of some feet.

(o) And first I may mention a mode of dealing with the medium's body
which involves no actual extradition of any part of its substance, but which,
nevertheless, seems to imply a molecular manipulation (so to say) of its
soft tissues. 1 refer to the elongations noticed with Mr. D. D. Home.
In these cases — if, provisionally, they can be contemplated as actual ob-
jective occunences — the intercostal regions seemed to be the especial sedt
of the extension, which is described as rapid and painless, although some-
times followed by vomiting.

(/5) Another and apparently more developed form of prolongation has
been observed with Mr. Moses. These are phantom arms and hands, re-
producing the arms of the medium, coat-sleeves, shirt-cuffs, and all ; and
extended generally from the shoulder, straight out, and above the true
arms. These supplemetnary or “ counterpartal ’’ arms (suspicious objects
enough, until observed under good conditions) seem never to have been
actually touched, but are swiftly retracted into the medium, or simply
vanish, if an attempt is made to grasp them. Nevertheless, the hands in
which they terminate do appear to move objects.

Odd and unexpected as these phantasmal arms are, they are instructive
in more than one respect. In the first place they supply in a certain way
a missing link between mere phantasms and ectoplastic phenomena. We
know that as a rule phantasmal appearances exert no objective effect upon
the material world ; — and we know also that to this rule there seem to be
stJbe few exceptitms. It is through these shadowy, yet materially active,
prolongations,— collective hallucinations which yet can affect the solid
world,— that the line of continuity, if such there be, between purely sub-

TO CHAPTER IX

926 A]

547

jective phantasm and firmly materialised hand or body may have to be
drawn.

In the second place, these reproduced coat-sleeves stand apparently
midway between two phenomena not obviously allied ; — ^viz., the appear-
ance of dying persons as though draped in their habitual clothing, — and
the greater facility (attested by Mr. Moses’ guides) of manufacturing a
duplicate of some object already existing on earth, rather than a new and
original object of their own devising.

Perhaps we may link the two by saying that everything which is not
a purely earthy phenomenon must be for us mortals to some extent
symbolical; and that the simplest form of symbolism depends on mere
reminiscence; that thus the line of least resistance for the psychic force
or telergic impulse leads to the upbuilding of the ectoplastic fabric upon
the basis of thoughts and images which are already fashioned and stored
ii) the human spirit.

(y) In the classes of ectoplasms already enumerated, there has been at
least an apparent continuous connection with the body of the sensitive ; —
although, in the last-mentioned case especially, that connection is of a very
shadowy kind.

We now come to ectoplasms without apparent connection with the
organism from which we still must suppose them to be in some way
derived. Two incomplete forms of such isolated ectoplasm first present
themselves ; the one manifesting, so to say, definition without visibility ;
the other, visibility without definition.

As examples of a certain amount of definition without visibility, I take
lonches and imprints. Slight but unmistakable touches are often observed
even when the ectoplastic process never gets any further, nor is identified
with any one spirit. Imprints are more rarely recorded.

(8) A commoner way in which the detached ectoplasm begins its
development is with an appearance of cloud, or light, or luminous mist,
surrounding some object which is presently moved, — the stem of a flower
broken, or a bell carried about the room. Such appearances, already
mentioned under the heading of vital photogeny^ are frequently recorded
both with D. D. Home and with Mr. Moses. Their connection with
ectoplasms is shown by the fact that sometimes some of those present
have perceived a hand, while others have seen only a cloud or a light ;
and sometimes all present have seen the cloud or light change into a hand.
The hand seems to oscillate about the limits of definite visibility, like
vapour which in a changing temperature condenses and re-expands.

Two short passages (quoted from Mr. Moses’ note-books) will illus-
trate this semi-materialisation.

Q. The beads that came in the light seemed to be projected from behind
me ; in the dark they seemed to fall.

A. ** It is necessary to use the force or power emanating from your body
more carefully in light. It is far more difficult to regulate it. The objects

548 APPENDICES [926 A

were thrown near you gently. At other times they were allowed to fall as
might chance.’’

Q. One seemed to come out of the letter 1 was handing to Mrs. G.

A. “ No, but the movement of your hand threw off force, as in darkness you
may see luminous vapour proceeding from the fingers. The force is given off
at the fingers and head most, hence objects are brought or moved more readily
near your head or hands. Hence the movement of objects over your head and
the production of the scent. Hence, too, rubbing the hands is useful, and
placing the fingers on the table charges the wood. So when you moved your
hand it gave the opportunity which was used.”

Q. That scent from my head is very curious. Is it put on, or drawn out ?

A. “ Drawn out, but 1 cannot tell you of that.”

Monday^ March zyd^ 1874.

Q. Can I have any information about that extraordinary writing.^

(We held a stance last night at which some very minute direct writing was
given by Doctor and Prudens.)

A. It was done with great pains and care as an experiment. We can do
more than that.*’

Q. It is the most curious piece I ever saw. Who wrote it ?

A. “The spirits who signed, aided by many others. We were assisted last
night by a powerful band who were able to overcome unfavourable conditions.
We have said before that no such manifestation is ever done by us alone, but
by many assistants.**

Q. The writing is so minute and clear.

A. “ We could do more minute writing and will endeavour so to do. Much
power was used in endeavouring to complete the manifestation with care. To
that reason is due the physical contortion which attends the manifestation. It
is more difficult to write with minute care. We will show you what we can do
one day.” •

Q. Doctor and Prudens were the actual amanuenses ?

A. “ Yes, they actually wrote, as you would see from the character of the
writing. It is always so.”

Q. I thought Prudens* writing was not his, but an imitation.

A. “ That would not be allowed.”

Q. Was the pencil actually used ?

A. “Oh, yes.’*

Q. Was a hand materialised ?

A. “ Not as you understand it, but sufficiently so to use the instrument. It
would not have been visible to the natural eye.”

Q. The pencil would have seemed to move alone.

A. “ Yes, to the natural eye.”

(c) In describing these imperfectly aggregated ectoplasms we have
already touched on the next class, that of quasi -organic detached ecto-
plasms. These are especially hands, sometimes with wrists or arms
attached, but now with no mere shadowy or duplicated drapery, but a
drapery which is their own, and for the time being is as tangible as them-
selves. Such hands are reported in the cases of D. D. Home and Mr.
Moses.

These ectoplasms, moreover, when developed, may be recognisable ;

TO CHAPTER IX

549

926 A]

they may serve as indications of identity. With D. D. Home this seems
frequently to have been the case ; and the special shape and character of
hands seen formed one of the most generally impressive points in his
phenomena. In Mr. Moses’ case the hands (except once in a photo-
graph) were not claimed as belonging to personal friends; but the lean
brown hand and wrist which usually appeared (Mr. Moses’ own hand
being thick, plump, and white) seemed appropriate to the Arabian
philosopher to whom it was asserted to belong.

Amongst these detached ectoplasms must be reckoned the pheno-
menon of “ the direct voice.” Utterance may be referable to an ecloplastic
throat as distinctly as grip to ectoplastic fingers ; — and may form of course
an even higher manifestation, — capable of manifesting more intelligence
and of giving more convincing indications of identity. But this pheno-
menon (which I believe myself to have observed elsewhere) has been
ohly imperfectly shown in the cases on which this present survey is based.

(i) Nor is it desirable here to dwell at length upon the most advanced
type of ectoplasy ; — when an apparently complete form seems to live for
the time an independent life. This never occurred through Mr. Moses.
Something like it occurred through I). I). Home several times; though
the solidity of the form was not tested. No more, therefore, need here be
said than that this completer development of the isolated or independent
ectoplasm differs in no fundamental way from the types which we have
already discussed. On the frequent fraudulent simulations of this
phenomenon, there is no need here to dwell. But for those who admit
that a hand can be temporarily thrown off in this strange kind of asexual
gemmation, it would be illogical to deny the possibility of a whole apparent
human form thus originated, and thus re-absorbed or disappearing.

At whatever point, indeed, among the phenomena of ectoplasy we may
draw our evidential line, it seems to me probable that we have here got at
the root of most of the physical phenomena assignable to external control.
It is this power of using the vital force of men which brings unembodied
beings into relation with the material world. It is this power, too, which
links the physical with the mental phenomena of spirit-control ; — enabling
the unseen guide to use the machinery of thought as well as of motion, in
ways which the unaided organism could never have devised. To some of
these intellectual phenomena we must now turn.

(5) Mental Nutrition Mooified by Spirit Control.

(rti) Ordinary Sensory Perception Spiritually Controlled. — The next
heading in our previous series was sensory receptivity. In the scheme
of supraliminal faculty this included the ordinary action of the senise-
organs, whose limits so largely determine our intellectual life. In the
subliminal scheme, we found that the action of these senses was some-
times heightened in hypersesthesia, and sometimes deadened in anaesthesia

5S0

APPENDICES

more or less complete. We found also, — and this was the most significant
extension of faculty, — that under certain circumstances the sensation of
pain could be voluntarily inhibited, and the organism thus devoted with-
out interruption to those higher purposes, with which pain, — an ancient
form of warning, now often worse than useless, — too frequently interferes.

Passing on to the effects on sensory receptivity produced by spiritual
control, we find, as under previous headings, that the effects which self-
suggestion can produce on the organism are produced also, and with
apparently greater facility, by spirit power; and moreover that a new
delicacy of directive or selective action is observable under the more
skilful manipulations (so to say) of disembodied intelligence. Such at
least is the claim advanced ; although naturally it is often only by the
analogy of other phenomena occurring in connection that one can be
guided in attributing these intellectual results to an external rather than a
merely subliminal influence. The hypenesthesia, ansesthesia, or analgesia 6f
trance^ for example, does not in itself indicate whether a spirit external to
the subject has been at the work or no. If however during a trance
D. D. Home places his head without pain or injury amid glowing coals,
and if we there admit a spirit’s action (although perhaps on the environ-
ment rather than on the organism), we may consequently attribute to
similarly external influence other forms of insensibility shown during the
same or similar trances. And in connection with trance^ when we reach
that topic, there will be further instances of the abeyance in which ordinary
sensation can be held by spirit-control.

(h) Memory Controlled; Retrocognition Spiritually Given. — ^And some-
what similarly, just as the subliminal control over memory is greater than
the supraliminal, so it is claimed by spirits also that they can influence
the sensitive’s memory; can make him recall things forgotten or never
noticed, and on the other hand, can obliterate from his recollection things
previously known. This claim — thoroughly concordant with our scheme
— is hardly capable of objective proof.

(r) Sensory Automatism Spiritually Controlled; Phantasms of the
Deadf — This parallelism of action continues under our next heading

of sensory automatism.” Even as the subliminal self can present visual
or auditory phantasms for supraliminal observation ; even as the human
agent, acting telepathically, can present — still through subliminal agency —
his own phantasmal appearance for the percipient to recognise, so can the
spirit. The ghost ” of common parlance — the ** phantasm of the dead”
— may often seem but. a dreamy and purposeless reflection of some
portion only of the departed spirit’s being; but, nevertheless, it comes
from that spirit, I believe, as truly as the still living agent’s phantasm
comes from Mm^ in his dying or his critical hour. The spirit here is
acting concurrently with the supraliminal intelligence, just as the sub-
liminal intelligence has already done.

TO CHAPTER IX

926 A]

551

(rf) Telasihesia Developed into Perception of Spiritual Environment ;
Precognition, — But this series of spiritual modifications of sensory recep-
tivity which has thus far seemed merely to run parallel with the similar
modifications introduced by subliminal control^ takes here a great, a
significant extension. We have come to the heading of telcesthesia — to
the point where the man’s unaided spirit has seemed already, though still
acting in the physical, the planetary, environment — to transcend the
bounds of space. Whether and how far at the same time it has learnt
to transcend the bounds of time — in retrocognition or precognition — is a
point which we have not here felt it needful to discuss at length. But
now, when we consider the scope of clairvoyance under spiritual guidance,
we find that the word must assume a strange and novel meaning. There
are, indeed, some instances of spiritually-guided clairvoyance of the
terrestrial type. It was clairvoyance of that kind, one may say, when,
under spiritual control, Mr. Moses felt himself present — though rather as
by translation than by clairvoyant vision — at the distant funeral of his
friend.

But the form of clairvoyance characteristic of spirit-guidance is that
which enables the sensitive to perceive the spiritual environment inter-
penetrating the environment which we know.

To perceive it how? with what senses? with what standard of inter-
pretation or faculty of control? W’e cannot say. We know that even
our perception of this common world is in a sense symbolical ; that the
whirling molecules are translated for us by our narrow senses into patterns
•ivhich our minds can comprehend. Still more strangely symbolical must
be man’s perception of those things which come to him through channels
which he knows not, and on a tide of life which he can neither sound nor
stem. When hues beyond his spectrum are revealed to him, with what
words shall he describe the broadening ray? We have seen the single
phantasm presented as by a special subliminal effort to the still dominant
supraliminal view; we have seen the ghost stand in detachment and
incommensurable amid a scene of common day. But at the farther stage
at which we have now arrived there is for the percipient a fusion of
subliminal and supraliminal outlook ; he sees the terrene perspective still,
but the cloud qua nunc obducta tuenti Mortalis hebetat visus has been
caught away, and he sees moving through the familiar outlook the
visitants of an interwoven world.

Such a condition— varying in degree and duration — has been described
in various places as coming upon Mr. Moses during or after a stance..
The habit of double perception grew on him, as time went on, and is
described in the latter paragraph of a letter which I print as given in
Lights January 20th, 1894.^ 4

^ The letter is quoted hy Light from Col. Olcott, to whom it was written September
4th, 1876. I have not seen the original MS., but the internal evidence of genuineness
is convincing.

552 APPENDICES [826A

I have followed out the train of thought myself of late. Myself, what is it?
I do things one day, and especially say things, of which 1 have no remem-
brance. I find myself absorbed in thought in the evening, and go to bed with
no lecture for the morrow prepared. In the morning I get up, go about my
work as usual, lecture a little more fluently than usual, do all my business,
converse with my friends, and yet know absolutely nothing of what 1 have
done. One person alone, who knows me very intimately, can tell by a far-off
look in the eyes that 1 am in an abnormal state. The notes of my lectures so
delivered — as I read them in the hooks of those who attend my lectures— read
to me precise, accurate, clear, and fit into their place exactly. My friends find
me absent, short in manner, brusque and rude of speech. Else there is no
difference. When I **come to myself’^ I know nothing of what has taken
place, but sometimes memory recurs to me, and I gradually recollect. This is
becoming a very much more frequent thing with me, so that I hardly know*
when I am (what 1 call) my proper self, and when I am the vehicle of another
intelligence. My spirit friends hints^ but do not say much. I am begin-
ning, however, to realise far more than I once could, how completely a maq
may be a “gas-pipe ” — a mere vehicle for another spirit. Is it possible a man
may lead the life I do, and have no Individuality at all? I lead three distinct
lives, and 1 often think that each is separate. Is it possible for a man, to
ordinary eyes a common human being, to be a vehicle for Intelligences from
above, and to have no separate personality ? Can it be that my spirit may be
away, learning perhaps, leading a separate spiritual life, whilst my body is
going about and is animated by other Intelligences ? Can it be that instruction
is so administered to my soul, and that growth in knowledge becomes manifest
to me as now and again I return from my spirit life and occupy my body
again? And is it possible that I may one day become conscious of these
wanderings, and lead a conscious spiritual existence alongside of my corporeal
exi.stence ?

Once or twice— once very lately in the Isle of Weight — my interior dormant
faculties awoke, and I lost the external altogether. For a day and a night I
lived in another world, while dimly conscious of material surroundings. I saw
my friends, the house, the room, the landscape, but dimly. I talked, and

walked, and went about as usual, but through all, and far more clearly, I saw

my spiritual surroundings, the friends I know so well, and many I had never
seen before. The scene w'as clearer than the material ]and.scape, yet blended

with it in a certain way. I did not wish to talk. I was content to look and

live among such surroundings. It was as I have heard Swedenborg's visions
described.

(6) Response to Stimuli Spirffually Controlled.

{a) Ideation Inspired by Spirits . — We enter in this section 6 upon a
group of phenomena of great interest and importance, but not of a type
on which objective evidence can easily be forthcoming.

'Fhe belief that unseen 'powers inspire men — not merely by prompting
their hands to automatic writing, but by ** putting thoughts into their
hearts ” — is one of the most deeply-rooted, the most widespread, and the
most encouraging to which the higher races of man have clung. It is
strongly insisted upon by Mr. Moses’ guides ; and will be found repeated

TO CHAPTER IX

553

926A]

in various forms in his book* ** Spirit Teachings.” What are held as
inspirations of this type, however, deal mainly with religious and moral
conceptions, or if unknown and verifiable earthly facts are included, they
are usually such as might with equal plausibility be deemed to arise from
the thinker’s subliminal self. The strong assertions made by spirits
who show themselves able to operate powerfully in other ways may feirly,
I think, be taken as carrying weight. They represent the fusion of the
spirit’s thought with the man’s as sometimes becoming indescribably close
and intimate. When we have compared the inspirations of a man’s own
genius ” to subliminal up rushes^ or eniptions from a volcano, we might
better compare the combination of spiritual and human thought to one
of those cases where crystals of two totally different substances have
developed within the space bounded by the same planes ; and, intergrown
as they are and interpenetrant, still testify by the optical characters of
th^ir minutest parts that here is no congeries of fragments, but two
crystals made inextricably one.

(b) Motor Automatism Spiritually Controlled; Possession. — I have
spoken of the difficulty of proving or tracing spiritual influence so long
as its manifestations are purely intra-cerebral, are conflned to infusing into
the mind of the sensitive ideas which he cannot distinguish from his
own.

But, as we know, there are various methods by which the authorship
of certain ideas can be claimed by the inspiring intelligence. A distinctive
mark can be affixed to them by the mode of their promulgation — by
g^iving them expression concurrently with the expression of the sensitive’s
normal thouglUs, or even while the sensitive’s ordinary personality is
plunged in trance. In the one case there may be automatic writing while
the sensitive is reading or talking on other matters. In the other case
there may be “ trance-utterances ” — replies to questions, or long addresses,
given while the medium is unaware of what is going on around him, and
of the words which issue from his lips. In each case, of course, the proof
of spirit-influence depends not merely on the manner of the message, but
on the facts which it contains, or on the supernormal phenomena with
which it is in other ways associated. There is no need here to re-dlscuss
these automatisms at length. They form, as the reader will see, a large
part of Mr. Moses* phenomena, and almost the whole of those discussed
in Mrs. Piper’s case ; and indeed in their various forms they supply the
bulk of the evidence to the very existence of spirit control, which physical
movements by themselves could never demonstrate.

One addition to previous descriptions, however, must be made, if w^*
are to realise the extent to which these automatisms may be carried.
The control may be pushed beyond the point at which our analyses of
evidence generally stop. Consider, for instance, the scene (948 A),
where Mr. Moses is entranced by the spirit of a suicide. Here we
have evidential writing and utterance, — agitated words uttered in a

554

APPENDICES

trance^ — rude drawings made. But we have also more than this. We
have an apparent possession ; a temporary occupation of the medium’s
whole personality by the spirit which is finding utterance through him.
This possession is not, indeed, a matter of evidence in the same sense
that messages containing facts unknown to the writer may be evidence
of external control Yet we can hardly dissociate the two parts of the
phenomenon ; and if in such a case as this we believe that the message
really came from the suicide, we shall probably feel also that the distress,
the agitation, the bewilderment, which did not leave the medium for
many hours, were due also to the influence or possession of the same
unhappy soul.

The possibility of being thus dominated by some unwelcome spirit
was naturally regarded by Mr. Moses with fear and dislike. His guides
admitted it as a real, but not as an alarming, danger. Such spiritual
infections, they said in effect, take root only in a congenial soil The
healthy spirit can repel their attack, much as the healthy organism
destroys the germs which are perpetually seeking lodgment within it.

(r) Extension of Will-power into the Spiritual World; Prayer. — The
next heading in the scheme of sublimiiially guided faculty for which
we are now seeking parallels under spirit-control includes will-power
extended beyond the organism, and affecting telepathically other incarnate
minds. The parallel to this would be some influence exerted by in-
carnate men upon disembodied spirits. The exercise of such an in-
fluence must necessarily be almost impossible to prove ; nor is it at first
easy to imagine in what way it could plausibly be represented as taking
place. At this point in our argument, however, we have become familiar
with conceptions which, when looked at from both sides, do apparently
imply some reciprocal action between spirits and incarnate men. But
what further I have to say of prayer has been said in the final chapter of
this book. And as to the last heading in my “ Scheme of Vital Faculty,*’
namely, Modifications of Spiritual Personality,** the reader who
studies its projected headings will see at once how needful their dis-
cussion will some day be, and how far w'e are as yet from being able to
undertake it. That must be the task of a later age. My own discussion,
already so highly speculative, could hardly be pressed further without
overstepping the limits of all legitimate speculation.

926 B. The following are references to the chief accounts of tele-
kinetic phenomena in the Proceedings S.P.R. : —

“ On some Physical Phenomena, commonly called Spiritualistic, wit-
nessed by the Author,’* by Professor W. F. Barrett (vol. iv. p. 25).

Notes of Stances with D. D. Home,” by William Crookes (vol vi.

p.98).

“ On Alleged Movements of Objects, without contact, occurring not in
the presence of a paid Medium,” by F. W. H. Myers (vol. vii. p. 146, and
P- 383)*

TO CHAPTER IX

W7A]

5SS

^^The Experiences of W. Stainton Moses,” by F. W. H. Myers (vol. ix.
p. 245, and vol. xi. p. 24).

Poltergeists,” by Frank Podmore (vol. xii. p. 45).

'^The Fire Walk,” by Andrew Lang (vol. xv. p. 2). This gives
instances of an alleged capacity on the part of certain persons under
certain circumstances of resistance to the normal effects of fire on the
human organism. The phenomenon, if genuine, is not exactly tele-
kinetic, but may rather be regarded as an extended form of motor auto-
matism. Some mediums, especially D. D. Home, are said to have had
the same power.

Other works dealing with telekinetic phenomena to which I may refer
the reader are : —

Report on Spiritualism of the Committee of the London Dialectical
Society (I^ndon : Ix)ngmans, Green, Reader & Dyer, 1871).

• Zes Tables TournanteSy par le Comte Ag. de Gasparin (Paris : CaU
mann L6vy ; 4th edition, 1889). A pamphlet describing some of de Gas-
parin’s experiments was published by Professor Thury under the title
of Les Tables Tournantes^ considirees au point de vue de la question de
physique generate qui s'y rattache (Geneva, 1885). This is now out of
print and rare. It contains various cases of movements obtained without
contact, by seemingly careful observers.

Expenmental Investigation of the Spirit Manifestations ^ by Robert
Hare, M.D., Emeritus Professor of Chemistry in the University of Penn-
sylvania (New York, 1855).

- Researches in the Phenomena of Spiritualism^ by William Crookes ;
reprinted from The Quarterly fournal of Science (London: J. Burns,
1874).

Animismus und Spiriiismus^ von Alexander N. Aksakoff. 2 vols.
(I^ipzig: Oswald Mutze, 1890.) An account of this book, which deals
chiefly with the theoretical side of the subject, in opposition to the views of
von Hartmann, was given in a review by the present writer in Proceedings
S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 665.

The Precursors of Spiritism for the last 250 years ^ by A. N. Aksakoff
(in Russian, St. Petersburg, 1895); reviewed by Dr. Walter Leaf in
Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xii. p. 319.

The Scientific Investigation of Physical Phenomena with Mediums j by
M. M. Petrovo-Solovovo (in Russian, St. Petersburg, 1900) ; reviewed by
Dr. Walter Leaf in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xv. p. 416.

For the physical phenomena connected with D. D. Home, see the
references given in 938 A. * •

For the so-called “ Reichenbach ” phenomena, see the brief discussion
given in vol. i., 541 D.

927 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ix. p. 119. In the follow-
ing case the phenomena described were various, but consisted mainly of
automatic writing and speech. Some of the writings evinced a knowledge

APPENDICES

556

greater than the automatist possessed. Especially two lines from Homer
were correctly written in response to a request for some Greek, although
the writer was certainly quite ignorant even of the Greek alphabet. Some
indications of identity were also given.

Certain physical phenomena (the most important of which occurred
in my informant’s absence) were interpolated, as it were, at random among
Che intellectual phenomena, and carried with them no clear indication of
their source ; except that they occurred only in the presence of the sitter
here styled Mr. Andrew.

For my introduction to Mr. O. (as I shall call him), the narrator of
these incidents, I am indebted to the kindness of Mr. Andrew Lang. I
first heard Mr. O.’s narrative from himself by word of mouth on November
20th, 1889, while the events were still fresh in his memory. I regard him
as an excellent witness. The delay in producing the evidence has been
partly caused by Mr. O.’s persistent but unavailing efforts to induce
the survivors among his fellow-sitters to add their testimony to his own.
I have reason to believe that their refusal is in no way due to any dis-
agreement with Mr. O.’s account, but mainly to scruples of a quasi-religious
nature. Such scruples have repeatedly baulked our inquiries ; but I hope
that they may gradually die out among our informants, as the inno-
cence and the importance of experiments of this kintl come to be better
understood. In Mr. O.’s own case there are, I think, amply sufficient
reasons why liis anonymity should be preserved. His brother — in defer-
ence to whose serious wish during dangerous illness the sittings were
undertaken — is now dead.

I will add that the intimacy among the members of the circle was such
that I cannot doubt that Mr. O. heard, without delay, from his brother and
others, of the physical phenomena which had occurred during his own
absence from the circle. Mr. O. writes in 1 890 : —

In the winter of ’88-9 I began, along with a few intimate friends, to investi-
gate the phenomena commonly called Spiritualistic. None of the company was
at all anxious for any specific communication from another sphere, but partly
for the gratification of an invalid brother, and partly for the sake of satisfying
ourselves as to the possibility of some things we had read, we attempted a
sitting. The results far exceeded our expectation. We were favoured with
phenomena somewhat startling to novices in the art — phenomena styled in
Scotland uncaft/ij/— hut their interesting nature soon overcame our natural
diffidence, and before the end of the winter we were on quite familiar terms
with our unsubstantial vi.stants.

As a rule the circle consisted of two of nty brothers, two personal friends,
and myself, though occasionally we admitted other members of the family, and
once or twice an acquaintance. We were not Spiritualists, nor had we any
desire to be known as such ; all we did was done solely by way of experiment
and amusement. The opportunity was the best possible; we had all our
sittings in our own home, the circle was confined to personal friends in whom
we had full confidence, so that there w'as neither motive nor opportunity for

TO CHAPTER IX

S57

927 A]

deception. We usually met twice a week when my invalid brother was able
for company, but during the winter months relapses of his illness caused inter-
ruptions ; and indeed, 1 often thought the excitement of our sittings did not
affect him beneficially.

Our sittings were all in the dark. Our medium was, in most cases, Mr.

Andrew, though we had also a less efficient medium in the case of Mr. S .

The performances of the latter were mostly of a somnambulistic kind, and do
not call for special notice.

With Andrew, however, phenomena assumed quite another aspect. He
would play charming music on the violin, or produce beautiful pencil sketches
of city and rural scenes. Sometimes the locus of these scenes was named,
oftener not, but they were invariably unknown to any member of the com-
pany.

For a time I failed to see anything very unaccountable in Andrew^s trance
productions. I knew him to be an accomplished violinist and a fairly good
sketcher, and I naturally put everything down to an unconscious exercise of
his own skill. One little thing did perplex me, namely, the very different styles
of handwriting he seemed to accomplish with equal facility.

I mentioned an invalid brother. He suffered from a heart affection known
as presystolic murmur. At one sitting wc consulted a medical man, who
called hinivself Dr. Snobinski of Russia. This gentleman not only prescribed
for my brother, but also furnished us with a diagram of the human heart, and
put a special mark to indicate the valve diseased in my brother’s case. How
this diagram was actually drawn by a person ignorant of human physiology,
and how the diseased valve was shown and explained by one ignorant of path-
ology, was more than I could account for.

On another occasion another doctor, calling himself Arnold, confirmed the
diagnosis of Dr. Snobinski, and rated my brother for having neglected to follow
the regimen recommended by the famous Russian. On this occasion, during
examination of the chest, when the patient chanced to laugh, the doctor [in the
person of Mr. Andrew] suddenly gave him a mild box on the ear wdth his open
palm. This, I understood, was to rebuke his laughter, which, as is well known,
is a dangerous luxury to one suffering from valvular disease.

At times we were entertained by a negro, who gave us no little fun. His
effort to speak English was mo.st amusing, and presented just those difficulties
which perplex the negro in this more matter-of-fact sphere.

These phenomena had led me to perplexing thoughts, and, though unable
to explain them on purely psychological grounds, I was slow to admit that the
medium was not also the cause of the effects he produced. I had so far
accounted for the music and the sketches ; the varieties of the handwriting were
a little puzzling, the diagram and the prescription a little more so, but 1 was
still inclined to suspend judgment till I should acquire more facts. With a
view to this, I one evening interrogated: “Where are you?’ Answer: “In
the sphere next the earth.'’ “ Could you tell anything of the future ? ” Answer :
“ We are as ignorant of the future as you are.” This I thought was at least
honest, and very probable, but too general to be of Service to me in arriving .it
any decision. I resolved to put what seemed to me a searching test. None
of the others knew Latin or Greek, so 1 asked an answer in Latin. This was
readily given, but so badly spelt that I failed to fully translate it. Not yet
satisfied, I asked any quotation from a Greek author— so that by comparison

APPENDICES

SS8

[927 A

with the original, identity or variation might be satisfactorily apparent. This
resulted in a quotation from the Odyssey, Bk. xi., lines 57-8

’EXfnjpop, irm vno C6<l>ov ^fpocvra ;

€^6ri£ vt(6s €utp fj iyli vvv vr{i fifXaitnj,

These lines were beautifully written in cursive characters, and minute even to
the accents. As a student 1 had read Odyssey XL, but could not have
given the lines from memory, or written them out with correct accents. On
comparing the lines with the Greek text I found them to be without flaw.
My puzzle was now twofold: ( 1 ) That 1 was not able to read the Latin proved
that what was given was not anything I had previously been revolving
in my own mind, but had come from an independent intelligence; ( 2 ) The
medium was not acquainted with cither Latin or Greek — did not know one
from the other. Clearly 1 must now quit the hypothesis that the medium was
the author of his own message, as not adequate to account for all the facts.

The Greek and the Latin [Mr. O. adds in a later letter] were both obtained
at the same sitting. I asked for the Greek because the Latin was so badly
written that I could not fully make it out. The medium that evening was
Andrew^ who, 1 am fully convinced, could not possibly have any knowledge
that Greek would be asked for— and even if he had known, he could not have
given it, since he did not know the Greek when it was given. The controlling
spirit was unknown to any of the company. In reply to my questions he
described himself as a youth of nineteen, according to their reckoning, but was
only twelve years of age when he died. When I asked how he was occupied
he told us he was .still at school. This information led me to ask for the Latin
and subsequently for the Greek.

Still more inexplicable was the evidential sign given to a doubting acquaint-
ance. This gentleman requested permission to be present at one of the sittings,
but his general behaviour there indicated that he regarded a sitting as a kind
of farce. He brought with him another gentleman of equally sceptical temper.
The first remark from the medium that evening was, “There are strangers
present to-night.” This remark sepmed to our friend so commonplace that he
requested evidence of the presence of a spirit. On being asked what evidence
he would like, he jokingly said, “ Bring a candle ! ’’—an idea probably suggested
by sitting in the dark. The wish had scarcely been expressed when a candle
was placed on the table before him, with the request that he should immediately
quit the company. The candle was found to be warm, a circumstance explained
by the fact that it had been used in the next room only a few minutes before.
My brother immediately went to the next room and asked for a candle. The
good lady was much surprised to find that while the candlestick was still stand-
ing where she had placed it shortly before, the candle itself was gone. My
brother then showed her the candle which he held in his hand, and this she
identified as the one she had used a few minutes before— indeed there could not
be two opinions, as there was only one candle in the house. This was regarded
by the circle as the most wonderful result yet obtained. Here was proof amount-
ing to a demonstration th&t a material object had been passed through matter ;
the candle had been brought from one room to another, though both doors
(there were two doors in the room in which the sittings were held) were locked
before the sitting was commenced.

This candle incident I give on the testimony of the others, as 1 myself was

TO CHAPTER IX

927 B]

559

not present that evening, a circumstance which 1 afterwards regretted. Person-
ally 1 have not seen a case of matter through matter.

During that winter we obtained many interesting phenomena. The
spirits (?) would strike any note we asked on a violin or harmonium which
stood by. The notes requested would sound forth distinctly, though no visible
hand was near ; and this was done both in the dark and in the light, though
more often in the dark.

One evening a visitant addressed one of my brothers as an old schoolfellow,
and in proof of his identity he reminded my brother of a poem they had once
learnt together as boys, namely, one by “ Surfaceman ” ( Alexander Anderson),
entitled “ The blood on the wheel'’* My brother perfectly recollected the exercise,
and had no doubt as to the identity of the speaker. The wonderful thing here
was that the medium had become acquainted with my brother later in life and
had no knowledge of his schooldays.

Of the scientific value of these results 1 was not aware till I had the pleasure
of meeting yourself, and if we had met some months earlier 1 should certainly
have preserved the legible results of our sittings. They were destroyed in
ignorance of their scientific worth, and chiefly because associated with a
departed brother whose early death we still lament. Though our sittings are
long past their results still dwell with me in all but their first freshness. Cir-
cumstances conspired to break up our little company. Of our circle of five two
have since married, one has left the district, and another has departed this life.
The death of our most spirited member was the end of our meetings.

927 B. The experiences described in connection with Miss White and
Miss Lottie Fowler (both of whom are now dead) seem analogous to ex-
periences with Mrs. Piper. The case of Miss White comes from America^
and is specially interesting both in the apparent fulfilment of the promise
made by the alleged discarnate spirit control to appear to the narrator’s
sick wife, and in the apparent knowledge shown of the immediate approach
of death.

From Proceedings S.P.R., voL viii. p. 227 .

January 28a5, 1891 .

About eleven years ago I was much distressed owing to the illness of my
wife, who suffered from cancer in the stomach. I heard about a medium, Miss
Susie Nickerson White, who was said to have given some remarkable tests, and
1 called on her as a stranger and requested a sitting. My wife’s sister pur-
ported to “control,” giving her name, Maria, and mentioning facts about my
family which were correct. She also called my wife by her name, Eliza Anne,
described her sickness, and said that she would pass over, but not for some
months. I said, “ What do you call this ? Is it psychology, or mesmerism, or
what?” Maria said, “I knew you were going to ask that; 1 saw it in your
mind.” I said, “ Do you get all the things out of my mind ? ” She replied,
“ No. Pll tell you some thingr that arc not in your mind. Within three days
Eliza Anne will say that she has seeq me and mother, too, if I can get mother
to come along.” (My wife’s mother had died about forty-five years previously,
and my wife’s sister had been dead from six to eight years.)

I kept these circumstances to myself, but within three days the nurse who was
in attendance upon my wife came running to me and said that my wife was
worse, and was going out of her mind ; that she had called upon Maria and

APPENDICES

560

[927 C

mother^ and had sprung out of bed and ran towards the door crying, ** Stop,
Maria ! Stop, mother ! Don’t go yet ! ”

I soon consulted Miss White again, and Maria again purported to control.
My wife had been unable for some days to retain any food in her stomach,
could not keep even water or milk, and was very weak and also unable to sleep.

Maria told me to give her some hot, very strong coffee, with plenty of cream
and sugar and some cream toast. This prescription amazed me, but it was
prepared. My wife ate and drank with relish, and slept soundly afterwards.
She lived upon this food for some days, but gradually became unable even
to take this.

1 consulted Miss Wliite again, and Maria told me to get some limes, and
to give my wife some pure juice of the lime several times a day ; she said that
this would give her an appetite and enable her to retain food. The pre-
scription was a success; but gradually my wife failed, and I consulted Miss
White again, and asked Maria how long my wife would continue to suffer. - She
said she could not tell exactly wdicn she would pass away, but would give me a
warning—** The next time she says she has seen me, don’t leave her afterwards.”

Some days later, as 1 was relieving the nurse about three or four in the
morning, the nurse said, ** Mammie ” (meaning my wife) “ says she has seen
Maria again.” In a few minutes my wife said, “ I must go.” * And she expired.

(Signed) E. Paigk, Mary A. Paige.

[Formerly Mary A. Dockerty, the nurse.]

[I have had long interviews with Mr. Paige. He seems to be a shrewd and
careful witness.— Richard Hodgsok.]

927 C. Concerning Miss Lottie Fowler, I quote accounts of two
incidents, one recorded by Mr. W. Stainton Moses and the other by dr.
C. C. Massey. Mr. Moses* account is given in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. 'ti.
p. 78 , as follows : —

Perhaps one of the most striking cases I can present is the first experience
that occurred to me. (See Spirit Identity^ pp. 124-126, Appendix V.) ; —

1 inquired where I could see for myself these new phenomena, and was in-
formed that Miss Lottie Fowler [a well-known professional medium] was about
to hold a seance that very evening (April 2nd, 1872), at 15 Southampton Row.
I went, and was greatly astonished at what I saw and heard. I need not take
up time by detailing the occurrences of the first part of the sitting; most
Spiritualists are familiar with the usual routine of Miss Fowler’s stances.
Much hazy nonsense was talked, and many vague statements made, which
seemed to me to be of no use whatever as tests of spirit identity. 1 was rapidly
becoming nauseated. I craved for something more clear, something on which
I could rest as a staple piece of evidence. I inquired, therefore, whether I might
endeavour to obtain .some such proof for myself. Leave was at once given by
the director of the circle, and I addressed the spirit who controlled the medium.

** You are tiring your medium, and making fun of us. Go and send some
one who is serious.”

The medium shivered and turned away, and the voice came as though
troubled.

“ You’ve nothing to do with me. I won’t go. Me no go.”

“ Yes, you will. You’ll go and send some one else.”

After more colloquy the medium shivered again, seemed to be in pain, and
stOQ^ rooted to t,he spot, crouching as if in dread.

TO CHAPTER IX

561

927 CJ

After a time the voice came again, but utterly changed ; the voice, this time
of a man, very calm and unimpassioned, instead of the child-voice speaking
baby jargon.

“ You want me ? ”

“ Yes. What is your name ? ”

“ rd rather not tell you. You can ask me any questions.”

“ No. Tell me what you see, or describe any one whom you see near me.
I will answer yes or no ; no more.”

“ I see a man, very old, tall, with a long white beard, and long hair.”

“ Yes.”

“ The beard is very white indeed.”

“No. Goon.”

“ He has a very high, broad forehead, and his eyes are drawn down. Why,
he’s blind! ”

“ Yes.”

“ And his face is black and blue. And ” (here the medium shuddered
violently) — “oh! what’s that in his mouth.? It’s like slime — and mud — and
oh ! blood.”

“ Yes?”

“ And— it’s dark. I can’t see.”

“ Go on. How is he dressed ? ”

“ He has a long blue coat. No, not exactly a coat— something long. I
can’t see his feet.”

“ Where does he stand ? ”

“ Right oppo.sitc ; close by you.”

“ Can you see his name ? ”

“ No. He seems in trouble. I think it’s money. He looks so horrible.
Let me go. Why do you keep me here.”

• “ Go, then. Do you know me ? ”

“ No.” (This very emphatically.)

I shall not attempt to describe the scene during the time that this conversa-
tion was held. I have quoted from a full and careful record written at the
time, and the whole scene is photographed indelibly on my mind. Every
one seemed petrified and astonished. They would have been still more
.so had they known with what photographic accuracy a scene in my own
private experience was being re-enacted before my eyes. It was, 1 am
sure, as unknown as 1 was myself. It was a scene that passed in a very
distant part of Great llritain, and it was reproduced with a realistic power
that bore down before it, as with torrent force, all doubt and hesitation. I
felt that the man was there before me; himself reproducing the story of his
death for my conviction.

Here we have the case of a man who went to a sdance with absolutely no
expectations in his mind ; he did not know what to expect ; he did not expect
anything ; and he got what in any police-court would be considered perfect
evidence of life beyond the grave*

I quote Mr. Massey’s account frdm Journal S.P.R., vol. v. p. $.

January 18/^, 1890.

On April 7th, 1883, died ah old and dear friend of mine, by name Francis
Paynton Pigott-Carleton (his patronymic w'as Pigott — he took the name of

VOL. 11. . 2 .

APPENDICES

562

[931 A

Carleton on his marriage). On April 27th in the same year I took an old
glove of his, given to me for the purpose by his widow, to Lottie Fowler,
putting it into her hand when she was apparently into trance, and was
‘‘controlled,** and requesting the “control** to get into rapport with the
owner of the glove, and give me any particulars concerning that person. The
“ control ” gave me a description of the person of my friend which I thought
remarkably good. I then asked for the name. She, or the “ control,'* seemed
to listen for it, and then said, with apparent vexation, “ Oh, it is all nonsense,
I can make nothing of it. 1 hear only * Pig — Pig ’—that is not a name ; what
do they (r/V ) mean by ‘ Pig ’ ? ’*

It is obvious that the first syllable of the name “Pigott” is that which
would be accentuated most strongly, and the sound dropping (we may
suppose), the latter half of the name would not be caught by an ear unfamiliar
with it.

I had given her not the slightest clue, except the glove, which was not
marked with the name, and she had never seen or heard of my friend, who
lived in the country and was not interested in “Spiritualism,” and was quite
unknown to “mediums”; though his wife had on more than one occasion
been with me to stances. (Not, however, to Lottie Fowler, to the best of my
present memory and belief.) And I had not mentioned my friend s death
among my spiritualistic friends, nor my intention to visit her to any one who
might, intentionally or otherwise, prepare her.

C. C Massey.

934 A. An account of the experiences of the Rev. C. B. Sanders was
published in a book entitled X-\- Y^Z; of\ The Sleeping Preacher 0/
North Alabama, Containing an account of most wonderful mysterious
mental phenomena^ fully authenticated by living witnesses. By Rev. G. W.
Mitchell. (New York: VV. C, Smith, 65 John Street. 1876.) The book
includes statements by numerous witnesses of the supernormal manifesta-
tions of Mr. Sanders, and additional corroborations were obtained by
Professor James and Dr. Hodgson in reply to inquiries about the case.
From these sources of information the following brief sketch is made.

Mr. F. G. Bromberg, of Mobile, Ala., a friend of Professor James,
wrote to the latter in i 3 S 6 : —

The book has only recently been called to my attention by Chief-Justice
Stone, of this State, and a copy was sent to me by late Chief-Justice Brickell,
whose home is at Huntsville, Ala., and amongst the witnesses cited in the book.
In a letter which accompanied the book he writes as follows ; “ I have fre-
quently seen Mr. Sanders, the subject of the book, and of many of the incidents
related I heard .soon after their occurrence. The witnesses or contributors
referred to are of the most unquestionable, unjmpeachable character. Two of
them, Dr. Ros.s and Dr. Shelby, were of very considerable learning, and of very
high character ; the first as a theologian, the other as a physician.” . . .

Judge Brickcll’s assurances put at rest all doubts as to the absolute integrity
of all parties named therein, either as observers or observed. The elements of
fraud, collusion, or fabrication are entirely eliminated from the problem to be
solved.

TO CHAPTER IX

9MA]

563

Constantine Blackmon Sanders was bom in ^1831^ near Huntsville^
Alabama, the seventh child in a family of ten children. His father died
when he was in his sixth year.

Constantine lived with his mother, and laboured on the farm until he was a
full-grown man. From his mother, and others who knew him during the days
of his youth, we learn that he was dutiful to his mother, kind to his sisters, moral
in his habits, and avoided association with the vicious. His temperament was
cheerful, and he had considerable fondness for music. From his early child-
hood his mind was much interested on the subject of preaching the gospel.
And he was in the habit of preaching juvenile funeral sermons over dead
chickens, pigs, &c., and baptizing the boys, both black and white; and, on this
account, was often familiarily called “ The Preacher.”

When he was twenty years old he attended a revival meeting, and
became deeply interested in religious matters ; presented himself as a can-
didate for the ministry under the care of the Presbytery of Tennessee ;
was licensed to preach in 1855, and ordained in 1862. At the time he
joined Presbytery in 1852, when he was twenty-one years old, he could
scarcely read and write. In the spring of 1854, when studying at school
in Elkton, Tenn., he had attacks of sickness, described by Mrs. Harlow,
in whose family he was living, as follows. Until then his health is de-
scribed as having always been good.

Though at times he had spells of mental trouble, yet, in the main, he was
quite cheerful. When he had bt:en with us alx)ut three months, he was taken
quite sick of a flux. And when he had so far recovered as to be able to begin
to walk, he was taken down with typhoid fever, and confined to bed again for
several weeks. During this confinement he was seized with occasional con-
vulsions, affecting at times his whole system, but especially his arms, chest,
throat, and tongue. He also complained terribly of his head. Often would he
exclaim : —

“ It surely will kill me.” On one occasion he said :

“ My head feels like it has opened.”

Taking my hand with his, he placed it on his head, when, to my astonish-
ment, I found what appeared to be a separation of the bone, nearly wide enough
to bury my little finger, ranging from alK)ve bis eyes near the centre of his
forehead to the top of his head, and from the top down towards and near to
each ear. The opening increased in width as it reached the top of the head.
This condition of his head I saw frequently. When the paroxysms would sub-
side, the openings would nearly close up.

He had many similar atta<;ks of these paroxysms during the next five
years, accompanied by much physical suffering; In the meantime, in
1856, he married, and his family consisted in 1876 of six healthy chil-
dren, of more than ordinary promise.” After recovering from an unusually
violent convulsive cramp. in 1859, he declared that it had been ** shown to
him that he would never have another spell of cramping.” , But although

564 APPENDICES. [934A

the violent convulsions apparently did not recur, he still suffered much, as
appears from the following statement made by Dr. W. T. Thach in 1876.

I have been acquainted with him about sixteen years. He has complained
ever since my acquaintance with him, and he says, for a number of years
previous, with a continuous headache, though differing in severity at different
times, often becoming excruciating; and until a year or two since attended
with violent lancinating pains in the chest, accompanied with great difficulty of
respiration, which indeed I have often seen suspended for such a length of time
as to induce me to believe it impossible that it could ever be restored ; at length
returning with a gurgling sound in the upper portion of the trachea. In these
extreme cases the pulse is very feeble, and in frequency from 120 to such a
celerity as to render it impossible to count it. Extremities cold, temples throlv
bing violently, eyes surcharged with blood to siicli an extent that frequently the
blood would trickle down the cheeks in drops. These paroxysms are attended
with very great ner\'ous excitement, so that he cannot bear to l)e touched by
any one without producing a shock to the system (very similar to that felt by
one who comes in contact with a galvanic battery with considerable charge),
which seems to increase the already excruciating pain.

With these paroxysms of suffering there is almost always a peculiar condi-
tion, to me inexplicable, and wliich I know not what to denominate, which those
acquainted with him generally call “ sleep,” merely from the fact that, when
recovered from this condition, he is totally ignorant of any and everything that
has occurred while in this state (even the length of time that has elapsed, not
knowing whether an hour or a week). Hence the name of the “ Sleeping
Preacher.’' And yet, at the time, he seems conscious of everything that is going
on around him; and not only so, but of what is transpiring at any point 10
which his attention is directed, regardless of distance. The length of these
paroxysms is quite variable, extending from a moment to hours and days,
during which time he gets no natural sleep; the mind to all appearance being
much more active than when in a normal condition ; being all the time engaged
in conversation or writing (of which he does a great deal), or some other active
mental exercise. In this condition he frequently complains of hunger, and
partakes of food as at other times. Except in cases of protracted spells of
nervous sleep (when he gets none), he usually averages about three hours in
twenty-four of natural .sleep; yet the physical man does not seem to suffer
from loss of sleep. He looks as hearty as any man, and weighs about 195
pounds.

This condition is not always attended with an unusual amount of pain,
being often very cheerful; at which limes he is more than ordinarily com-
municative.

In all of his notes, letters, and writing of every kind, while in this condition,
he ignores the name of “ Sanders.” His signature is “ X 4- Y = Z.”

While in these sleeps, if left to himself, his thoughts arc confined mostly to
theology or medicine. And though never having studied medicine, he seems,
while in this mental states to be very conversant with it ; using the technical
names, giving the properties, uses, &c., thereof. He always examines the sick
who may happen to be about him when in this state, without coming in contact
with the patient ; making in writing a diagnosis and prescription, which he
will usually give, if requested. And I could mention a great many who have
been relieved by his directions. I have frequently had him to give me the

TO CHAPTER IX

56S

934 A]

exact condition of patients whom he had never seen, and who were miles
distant. His prescriptions frequently contain medicines which cannot be pro-
cured in this country ; which he makes arrangements to import ; showing his
comprehensive view of Materia Medica in this preternatural way.

Mr. Mitchell writes : —

This peculiar state, which is involuntary in its recurrence, is not usually
heralded by any premonitions visible to those who may be present. He may
be taking part in social conversation, when all at once, if looking at him, you
will sec his eyelids fall and his head droop ; at the same time making a slight
but audible noise through his nose, which may be called a grunt, usually
repeated in quick succession two or three times, and he is asleep. The spell
may continue for a few moments ; a quarter, a half-hour, or an hour, or a num-
ber of hours ; a day, or a night ; or a day and night ; or several days and nights ;
or a week, or even several weeks, witliout an interval of consciousness.

When in ordinary health, without bodily fatigue, or any strong or exhaust-
ing mental excitement, he can be easily aroused to consciousness, when he first
goes into this state, by giving him a shake or by slapping him with the hand.
In coming to consciousness, he seems to be momentarily surprised; and his
body is slightly affected, as if lightly shocked by a galvanic battery.

When under the nu)re favourable conditions of body and mind, upon his
going to sleep, by immediately waking him up, he has been enabled to keep
awake for many hours in succession, though there was a constant inclination to
go to sleep. As a general rule, the longer the spells are protracted, the more
intense arc his .sufferings. . . .

In these sleeps his eyes are generally closed, but there are instances in
which they are as wide open as when awake. In this case, if he is free com-
paratively from suffering, one not acquainted with his peculiarities would not
likely suspect that there was anything unusual in his condition.

The ** sleeping personality ” of Mr. Sanders, calling himself “ X + Y = Z,”
“ never betrays any scepticism nor the slightest taint of heresy,** and seems
to have held the ordinary chief orthodox doctrines of the church to which
Mr. Sanders belonged. He apparently wrote a good deal — including
letters to other persons, and instructions to his own normal self (to
whom he invariably referred as ‘‘my casket,**) and various books and
papers which have not been published, and which he enjoined Mr. Sanders
“ on no account to exhibit till I come.” This injunction appears in a
message from “X+Y = Z*s Valedictory to His Casket’* in May 1S76,
when he took leave of his “ casket,” but indicated that at a later period
he would return. In reply to inquiries in July 1890, Mr. Mitchell stated
that the peculiar mental indications had recurred several times during the
previous eighteen months. •

The separation of the cranial bgnes referred tb by several witnesses is
a curious feature of the case, and in reply to a special inquiry, Mr.
Mitchell states that “ when the patient’s head was greatly affected with
pain the sutures would separate, but in some instances, when the suffering
was slight while he was in one of his peculiar' states, the sutures were not
visibly separated.” ^

APPENDICES

566

The normal Mr. Sanders had no recollection of anything occurring in
his sleep” state, '^but X + Y = Z seems to have had entire conscious^
ness of Mr. Sanders, or of his ^ casket/ as he always called him/’

Hypenesthesia might be invoked as an explanation to account for a
few of the apparently supernonnal incidents recorded, such as shooting a
rifle ball through a hat very near the centre ” at the distance of forty
yards at night when Dr. Thach, who describes the incident, could not
even see the sights of the gun. Such an explanation might also be
stretched to cover the cases of reading books and writing on paper
under cover, allowing for a margin of malobservation or misdescription
by the witnesses. It would, however, be quite inadequate to account
for the bulk of the manifestations recorded. The cases on the whole
suggest the action of telcesthesia rather than telepathy, although telepathy
might be extended to apply to most of them, as, for example, his oc-
casional knowledge of conversations and scenes occurring elsewhere, br
of letters written or sermons preached at a distance.^ He himself, how-
ever, described such matters as if seeing or hearing them directly. I now
quote the details of a few cases in illustration of the supernormal powers
of«X-f.Y = Z.”

Mr. John W. Pruit gives the following account.

Meridianvuxe, Ai.a., May 7M, 1876.

1 certify that one day about the middle of the month of February 1866,
while Brother Sanders was confined to his bed from his dislocated thigh, I was
at his house, and he was lying in his bed and in one of his so-called sleeps.”
He attracted my attention by a hearty laugh. '

I asked him the cause of his amusement.

He replied, ** I was laughing at De Witt.”

I asked what De Witt was doing.

He said, “ He was having a hard scuffle to keep from falling o£E the fence,
for the top rail was turning with him and he was trying to keep from falling
over it.”

Nothing more was said on the subject until De Witt arrived, which was in
ten or fifteen minutes.

The fence where the difficulty occurred w'as from three-fourths to a mile
distant, on the other side of a thick grove of timber and underbrush, and of an
intervening hill.

And I further certify that no communication from any person or source was
received in reference to De Witt until he arrived and confirmed what S. said.

J. W. Pruit.

Mr. De Witt gives a concordant accoun^, explaining the trouble he had
in getting over the fence* with a sack of pease in one hand and a bowl of
custard in the other, and referring to the knowledge of the incident shown
on bis arrival by Mr. Sanders.

Various cases are described of Mr. Sanders’ finding lost articles, — such

i Some of these cases resemble those given in Dr. J. W. Haddock's Somnolism and
Psycheim^ referred to in vol. i. p. 556.

TO CHAPTER IX

934 A]

567

as dollar-bills, coins, a watch chain, a bunch of keys, — or specifying
correctly where they would be found. I give an instance. Mr. Bentley
writes : —

State of Ala., Madison Co.,

Meridianville, May lot ^, 1876.

In 1867, 1 lived two and a half miles east of this village, on what is known
as the Harris place, on the other side of Brier Fork Creek ; and was engaged
in selling goods in this place, spending the nights at home.

Some time during the summer a bunch of keys, among which was my
wheat-garner key, was lost. After a lapse of about one week I requested
Mr. William White, who was employed in the store and boarded at Rev. C. B.
Sanders* in the village, on going to his dinner, to ask him to tell me where my
keys were. On his return Mr. White said he made the request, but Mr.
Sanders paid no attention to what he said, he being in one of his spells.
However, during the same afternoon, while my younger sister, in company
with other persons, was at his house, he told her that my keys were under the
steps at the west door of my dwelling. In consequence of this information
I returned home earlier than usual. As soon as I arrived I told my wife what
1 had heard. She ran immediately and found the keys under the door-step,
just as Mr. Sanders had said, and somewhat rusty. They must have been
thrown there a week before by a little child that played about the house.

I add that I know Mr. Sanders had not been in my house nor on the place
for at least twelve months before that time.

A. J. Bentley.

We, the undersigned, certify that the above statements are true as far as
they relate to us personally, and that we heard all the particulars, as above
jnentioned, at the time they occurred.

Mrs. Josephine E. Bentley.

Miss Mary A. Bentley.

Several cases are given of his supernormal knowledge of accidents
occurring to distant persons, such as th*e stumbling of a lady carrying some
boiling-hot water, and the scalding of her arm in consequence (the inci-
dent occurring in another State) ; he also gave a description of injuries
to another lady (thirty-five miles distant) from a lightning stroke, at the
time of the occurrence. His account of a fire in Salisbury, N.C., with a
description of " the tin-shop in which it broke out, and the extent of its
ravages,*’ reminds one of the incident of Swedenborg’s description of the
fire at Stockholm when he was at Gottenburg (see 936 A).

Several cases are also recorded of his knowledge that a distant person
was just dying or dead. I quote one of these ; —

On the same night he revealed the place of the lost gold coin, as before
related, and perhaps about one hopr afterwards, Dr. Blair, my wife, and my-
self being present, Mr, Sanders took his seat at the front window of the par-
lour. Our attention was attracted by manifestations of sympathy, sadness, and
distress from him, accompanied by such expressions as “ Poor fellow ! What
a pity ! ’* He continued to repeat them, alternated with inarticulate expres-
sions of intense emotion for a short time — I would say from one to several

APPENDICES

S68

[9MA

minutes. Then he said, as well as I remember, “ He is gone ! gone ! gone ! ”
closing in a solemn whisper. There was for a short time a silence and still-
ness, such as usually is witnessed at the closing scene of a dying friend, which
was broken by my asking him the cause of these manifestations. We were
quite shocked on hearing his reply that “ Lieutenant McClure has just died
suddenly from an internal haemorrhage, near Clarkesville, Tennessee.”

We append the following facts: Lieutenant Robert McClure some few
months previous had married Miss Pattie, daughter of R. W. Vasser, deceased
(long a prominent citizen and merchant in this place), and had, a few days
before this, gone on a visit to his father, whose residence was then, and still is,
in the immediate vicinity of Clarkesville, Tennessee, about forty miles below
Nashville, having left his wife at her mother*s, as he expected to make a flying
trip. On the next morning after Mr. Sanders* development, above written, a
telegram was received from Clarkesville bringing to his young bride the unex-
pected and melancholy news of her husband's sudden death. And it confirmed,
in every circumstance, what Mr. Sanders had stated the night before. Clarkes-
ville, Tennessee, vid Nashville, is nearly one hundred and fifty miles distant
from Athens, Ala.

A recent letter, from a lady who was present, states that Lieutenant McClure
died on Wednesday night, between eight and nine o’clock, the 2nd of November
1866. He was sitting in her room, reading aloud a book; had a paroxysm of
coughing, and remarked to her that it was blood that he spit out. She put her
babe down, which she was nursing, and assisted him in sitting down, for he
had arisen to his feet. She thinks he did not breathe after being seated.

After writing these last two cases, I received the following testimony from
J. S. Blair, M.D. G. W. Mitchell.

Mr. Mitchell adds the corroborative testimony of Dr. Blair.

The last account which I quote is of an incident which occurred much
later than those recorded in the book by Mr. Mitchell. An account of it
was sent to Dr. Hodgson by Mr. Mitchell, in a letter of February 1891,
which agrees with what follows from the witnesses themselves : —

Bodenham, Giles Co.. Tenn., May 27, 1891.

We, the undersigned, certify that on Saturday night, August the [24th], iSSo.
Rev. C. B. Sanders, who was holding a protracted meeting with our pastor,
Rev. G. W. Mitchell, at Mt. Moriah Church, repaired to our house, where they
(the preachers) lodged. Mr. Sanders was suffering considerable pain in his
head and chest, and lying upon a bed, and after hours spent in conversation
and singing religious songs, and while Mr. Mitchell was temporarily absent—
we think it was about eleven o’clock, or later— he said, with evident amusement,
“ Humph ! Brother Forsythe, like a child, knelt down to pray and has gone to
sleep.” Mrs. Wheeler said to him, “ How do you know ? He replied, “ Child,
you ask too many questions.” r

On that night, before Mr. Sanders dismj.ssed the congregation, he proposed
that all who would join in praying for the penitents until midnight to make it
known by rising to their feet. To which Deacon Forsythe was a respondent
Mr. Forsythe lived about two miles on an air line from our home. . . .

Geo. E. Wheeler.

Mrs. Geo. K. Wheeler.

936 A]

TO CHAPTER IX

569

Wales, Tenn., May 28, 1891.

I, the undersigned, hereby certify that on the night of the [24th] of August
1S89, I did kneel at my chair for prayer, in my own house, between the hours of
eleven and twelve o*clock, and having been labouring day and night for a week
past, and being quite weary, in a short time I went to sleep. I went to church
next morning, and Deacon Long and myself were asked by a brother if we com-
plied with our pledge last night. T replied that I did not fully, as I went to
sleep on my knees a short time before the time expired. . . .

I had not heard then what Mr. Sanders had said about me at Mr. Wheeler’s.
When we got to the church door, Mr. Wheeler was telling the incident that took
place at his house on the night before, as having occurred about the time I went
to sleep. R. H. Forsythe.

Mr. Mitchell writes in July 1902, that he has not been notified that
Mr. Sanders has had any recent communications from X + Y = Z.”

• 936 A. For Kant’s evidence in regard to the supernormal powers of
Swedenborg, see Dreams of a Spirit Seer, by Immanuel Kant, translated
by E. F. Goerwitz; edited by Frank Sewall ([/)ndon: Swan Sonnen-
schein & Co. ; New York : The Macmillan Company, 1900).

The three most famous cases are : (i) Swedenborg’s communication
to the Queen of Sweden of some secret information, which she had asked
him for, and believed that no living human being could have told him.
(2) The widow of the Dutch Ambassador at Stockholm was called upon
by a goldsmith to pay for a silver service which her husband had pur-
chased. She believed that it had been paid for, but could not find the
receipt ; so she begged Swedenborg to ask Iier husband where it was.
Three days later he came to her house and informed her in the presence
of some visitors that he had conversed with her husband, and had learnt
from him that the debt had been paid, and the receipt was in a bureau in
an upstairs room. The spirit had said that after pulling out the left-hand
drawer a board would appear, and on drawing out this a secret compart-
ment would be disclosed, containing his private Dutch correspondence
and the receipt. The whole company went upstairs and the papers were
found, as described, in the secret compartment, of which no one had
known before.

(3) In September, 1759, at four o’clock on a Saturday afternoon,
Swedenborg arrived at Gottenburg from England, and was invited by a
friend to his house. Two hours after he went out and then came back
and informed the company that a dangerous fire had just broken out in
Stockholm (which is about fifty German miles from Gottenburg), and
that it was spreading fast. !He was restless aijd went out often. He
said that the house of one of his friends, whom he named, was already
in ashes, and that his own was in danger. At eight o’clock, after he had
been out again, he declared that the fire was extinguished at the third
door from his house. This news occasioned great commotion throughout
the whole city, and was announced to the Governor the same evening.

570

APPENDICES

On Sunday morning Swedenborg was summoned to the Governor, who
questioned him about the disaster. He described the fire precisely, how
it had begun and in what manner it had ceased, and how long it had
continued. On Monday evening a messenger arrived at Gottenburg,
who had been despatched by the Board of Trade during the time of the
fire. In the letters brought by him, the fire was described precisely as
stated by Swedenborg, and next morning the news was further confirmed
by information brought to the Governor by the Royal Courier. As
Swedenborg had said, the fire had been extinguished at eight o’clock.

These cases are given in Kant’s letter to Fraulein Charlotte von
Knobloch, which is quoted in Appendix II. of Dreams of a Spirit Seer,
the original letter being contained in Borowsky’s Darsteilung des Lebens
und Charakters Immanuels Kant, Kdnigsberg, 1804, pp. 21 1 to 225.

See also Documents concerning Swedenborg, by R. L. Tafel.

936 B. Frau Frederica Hauffe, better known as the Seeress of
Prevorst,” was one of the most noted of the group of somnambules who
flourished in Germany in the early part of the nineteenth century. A
history of her trances was published soon after her death by Justinus
Kemer, — a well-known poet and physician to whom she had come for
magnetic” treatment, — under the title of Die Seherin vonPrevorst: Eroff-
nungen uber das innere Leben des Menschen und uber das Hereinragen einer
Geisterwelt in die (Stuttgart und Tubingen, 1829),^ It was claimed

that the Seeress possessed supernormal powers of vision, both of distant
scenes and of the future ; she was supposed to see and converse with
discamate spirits, who gave her information on their affairs and family
history, and physical phenomena were observed in her presence. The
evidence, however, for her supernormal powers was what would now be
considered quite inadequate. She excited even greater interest by her
supposed revelations of things spiritual. These revelations formed the
study of Gorres, Eschenmayer, and other members of a circle of mystics,
and were expounded by them in the Blatter aus Prevorst, of which
several volumes appeared from 1831 onwards. Besides the doctrine —
more or less common to all the mystics of the time— of the threefold
nature of man, the revelations of the Seeress included descriptions of
certain intricate systems of circles — designated respectively Sun-Circles
and Life -Circles — which represented symbolically spiritual conditions and
the passage of time. Diagrams of these are given in Kerner’s work.
Their interpretation was furnished partly by cyphers, partly by words of
the supposed primitive universal language written in the primitive ideo-
graphs. These have soine resemblance to Hebrew characters, and the
•

^ A second edition was published in 1832, and later ones in 1S38 and 1846. An
English translation, greatly abridged, by Mrs. Crowe, was published in I.ondon in 1845.
See also The Pioneers of the Spiritual Reformation: Life and Works of Dr.fustinus
Kemer: William HowUt and his work for Spiritualism ^ by Anna Mary Howitt Watts
(London: The Psychological Press Association and £. W. Allen, 1883).

TO CHAPTER IX

571

936 G]

Seeress herself compared the language to Hebrew, and maintained that it
resembled the language actually spoken in the time of Jacob, and that it
was the common language of the inner life. She frequently spoke it in
her trances, and it is asserted that she was quite consistent in her use of
the words. It was supposed to be the primitive Nature-speech, which was
lost and forgotten with the coming of sin, but something of which can be
recovered in rare states of exaltation. There are, of course, many other
instances of this type of supposed languages, — e.g. the unknown tongues
spoken in Edward Irving’s church,^ and the Martian and other languages
of M"* Helene Smith (see 837 ).

936 C. The following is another case of ecstasy, which was reported
to us along with a series of incidents suggesting an unseen protection
or guidance. The narrator, Mr. J. W. Skilton, was a railway engineer,
residing at Jacksonville, Florida, U.S.A., who had several times had
veridical dreams or impressions, which in some cases saved himself and
his train from serious accidents. One of these — a premonition of an
accident — was published in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. v. p. 333, and further
cases in vol. xi. pp. 559-567. I quote from vol. xi. p. 560. Mr. Skilton’s
narrative is dated November loth, 1890.

I would say that I have been engaged a great part of my life as a loco-
motive engineer, and this happened while engaged in that business. I was
engaged with two other men one day about two o’clock p.m. in taking out some
evergreen trees from a box car to take home and set out ; they were large and
heavy ; I had to run the car up on the switch rails to get them out ; but as
tliere was no train due till forty minutes 1 would have plenty of time to get
them out, and push the car back out of the way. There had been a great deal
of other freight put in the car after mine was, so it was necessary to take out
some of it before I could get at mine. 1 opened the car door, and a barrel of
eggs fell out on the ground, and just at* that instant I saw a medium-sized
person standing at my right hand clothed in white with a bright countenance,
beaming with intelligence. I knew what he wanted in an instant, although he
put his hand on my shoulder and said, “ Come with me.” We moved upward,
and a little to the south-east, with the speed of lightning, as it were ; I could see
the hills, trees, buildings, and roads as we went up side by side till they
vanished out of our sight. As we passed on, this glorious being that was with
me told me he was going to show me that bright heavenly world. We soon
came to a world of light and beauty, many thousand times larger than this
earth, with at least four times as much light. The beauties of this place were
beyond any human being to describe. I was seated by the tree of life on a
square bunch of what appeared to be a green velvet moss, about eighteen inches,
high ; there I saw many thousand spirits clothed in white, and .singing fhe
heavenly songs, and I could think of, but one verse that I had ever heard that
would do justice to this heavenly music, and that is this ; “ Hark ! what sweet
music, what a song Sounds from the bright, celestial throng ! ” for it was the
sweetest song I have ever heard. 1 here told my attendant that it was the first

1 For a description of these, see The Life of Edward /rviug, by Mrs. Oliphant
(Hurst & Blackett, 1862).

572

APPENDICES

time I had ever been perfectly at rest in my life. They did not converse by
sound, but each knew the other's thoughts at the instant, and conversation was
carried on in that way, and also with me.

After viewing the wonderful beauties of the place for some time, and the
thousands of spirits, robed in spotless white, passing through the air, for they
did not coniine themselves to the surface, but went every direction as they
pleased, I wanted to see my dear mother, two sisters, and a child of mine that
had died some time before this. The request was gninted at once, but I was
not allowed to converse with them. They were standing in a row in front of
me, and I looked at them and coolly estimated the distance wc were apart at
thirty feet, and wondered how these things could be. They seemed very much
pleased to see me, and I shall never forget how they welcomed me when I first
saw them, although no conversation passed. About this time my attendant told
me we must go back ; I wished to stay, but he told me my time had not come
yet, but would in due time, and that 1 should wait with patience. At this we
started back, and were soon out of sight of that heavenly land. When wc came
in sight of this world, 1 saw everything as it looked from a great height, such
as trees, buildings, hills, roads, and streams, as natural as could be, till we came
to the car that I had opened the door of, and 1 found myself there in the body,
and he vanished out of my sight. 1 spoke then (just as I opened my watch and
found it had been just twenty-six minutes that I had been engaged with that
mysterious one), and said I thought 1 had left this world for good. One of the
men said, There is something the matter with you ever since you opened the
car door; we have not been able to get a word out of you,” and that I had done
all the work of taking out everything and putting it back into the car, and one
item was eight barrels of flour I had taken off the ground alone and put them
back in the car, three feet and a half high, with all the ease of a giant. I told
them where I had been and what I had seon, but they had seen no one. •

This I count the brightest day of my life, and what I saw is worth a life-
time of hardship and toil. Being in good health, and in my right mind in
mid-day. while busy about rny work, and my mind not more than ordinarily en-
gaged on the great sulqcct oi eternal life, 1 consider this a most extraordinary
incident. I was told by this mysterious person that if we are counted worthy
at death, we shall be accompanied to that bright world by one of those glorious
beings, and this is my firm belief.

Mr. Skilton writes to me that he has never had any trance save this —
which he regards as “ worth a lifetime of hardship and toil.”

As I have elsewhere said, I incline to believe that ecstasy is the highest
condition into which a spirit still incarnate can pass. The so-called
ecstasy of hysteria I regard as merely an instance of the imperfect simula-
tions of various psychical states which the disintegrated personality of the
hysteric readily affords. True ecstasy I regard as a condition where the
centre of consciousness changes from the supraliminal to the subliminal
self, and realises the transcendental environment in place of the material.
The reminiscence of such a momentary enlightenment I regard as in-
evitably confiised and coloured by pre-existing supraliminal notions. I no
more accept Mr. Skilton’s picture of the unseen world as exact than I
accept Swedenborg's ; but I incline to believe that both alike were in truth

TO CHAPTER IX

S73

937 A]

exalted into an “ interior condition,” where their perception of the Cosmos,
though less distinct and intelligible, was wider and profounder than
our own.

937 A. [The first volume of Alphonse Cahagnct’s Arcanes de la vie
future devoiles was published at Paris in 1848, and the second, reporting
his sittings with Adele Maginot, in 1849. This medium had been long
known to him ; she had been a natural somnambulist from her childhood,
and he had magnetised ” her to put a stop to the spontaneous attacks
which were impairing her health. He found her an excellent clairvoyant,
especially for the diagnosis and cure of diseases. Later, she was chiefly
consulted by persons who wished for interviews with deceased friends. It
appears that Cahagnet took great care to report the communications, and
to obtain signed attestations from witnesses, so that the case stands on a
much higher evidential level than most early records of clairvoyants. An
account of Cahagnet*s work, quoting the records of some of the best cases,
i^ given in an article by Mr. F. Podmore (in which he compares the
trance performances of Adele with those of Mrs. Piper) in Proceedings
S.P.R., vol. xiv. p. 50, and I give below some extracts from this
article.]

The following (says Mr. Podmore) are a few representative records ; —

No. 1 29. — M. Petiet asks for M. J« 5 rome F^etiet. Ad6Ie sees a young man, about
twenty-four or twenty-six years of age (he was thirty), not so tall as his brother
now present ; auburn hair, rather long ; open forehead, arched and very pro-
nounced eyebrows ; brown and rather sunken eyes ; nose rather long, pretty well
(ormed ; complexion fresh, skin very white and delicate ; medium-sized mouth,
round dimpled chin. “ He was weak in the chest ; he would have been very
strong had it not been for this. He wears a rough grey vest, buttons with a
shank and eye such as are no longer worn. I do not think they are brass ones,
nor of the same stuff as the vest They. don’t look to me very bright. His
pantaloons are of a dark colour, and he wears low quartered shoes without any
instep.

“ This man was of a stubborn disposition, selfish, without any fine feelings,
had a sinister look, was not very communicative, devoid of candour, and had
but little affection for any one. He had suffered with his heart. His death was
natural, but sudden. He died of suffocation.” Addle chokes as this man choked,
and coughed as he did. .She says that “ he must have had moxas or a plaster
applied to his back, and this accounts for the sore I see there. He had no
disease, however, in that part. The spine was sound. Those who applied this
remedy did not know the seat of the disease. He holds himself badly. His
back is round without being humped.”

M. Petiet finds nothing to alter in these details, which are very exact, and
confirm him in his belief that tfie application of this plaster, advised by a man
who was not a doctor, brought on* his brother’s death, which was almost
sudden.

“ Signed the present report as very exact.

Pl'TIKT,

19 Rue Neuve-Coquenard.”

APPENDICES

574

[937 A

AV/^.—The buttons that Ad^le was unable to describe were of metal, a dirty
white ground, and surrounded by a blue circle. In this apparition there is a
remarkable fact to be noted— viz., that Ad61e experienced the same kind of
illness as this man. I was obliged to release her by passes; she sulEered
terribly.

No. 117 . — M. du Potet [a well-known writer on Animal Magnetism] wishes
to call up M. Dubois, a doctor, a friend of his who had been dead about fifteen
months.

AdNe said : “ I see a grey-headed man, he has very little hair on the front
of his head; his forehead is bare and prominent at the temples, making his
head appear square. He may be about sixty years of age. He has two wrinkles
on either side of his cheeks, a crease under his chin, making it look double ; he
is short-necked and stumpy ; has small eyes, a thick nose, a rather large mouth,
a flat chin, and small thin hands. He does not look to me quite so tall as M.
du Potet; if he is not stouter, he is more broad-shouldered. He wears a brown
frock-coat with side pockets. 1 see him draw a snuff-box out of one of them
and take a pinch. He has a very funny walk, he does not carry himself wdl,
and has weak legs ; he must have suffered from them. He has rather short
trousers. Ah ! he does not clean his shoes every day, for they are covered with
mud. Taking it altogether, he is not well dressed. He has asthma, for he
breathes w'ith difficulty. I see, too, that he has a swelling in the abdomen, he
has something to support it. I have told him that it is M. du Potet who asked
for him. He talks to me of magnetism with incredible volubility; he talks of
everything at once; he mixes everything up: I cannot understand any of it; it
makes him sputter saliva.”

M. du Potet asks that the apparition may be asked why he has not appeared
to him before as he had promised ? He an.swers : “ Wait till I find out my
whereabouts; I have only just arrived, I am studying everything I see. I
want to tell you all about it when I appear, and I shall have many things to tell
you.”

“ Which day did you promise me you would do so ? ” “ On a Wednesday.”
Adele adds : ** This man must be forgetful ; I am sure that he was very absent-
minded.” M. du Potet asks further : “ When will you appear to me ? ” “ I
cannot fix the time ; I shall try to do so in six weeks.” Ask him if he was
fond of the Jesuits.” At this name he gives such a leap in the air, stretching
out his arms, and crying “ The Jesuits,” that Adiile draws back quickly, and is
so startled that she does not venture to speak to him again.

M. du Potet declares that all these details are very accurate, that he cannot
alter a syllable. He says that this man’s powers of conversation were inexhaus-
tible ; he mixed up all the sciences to which he was devoted, and spoke with
such volubility that, as the clairvoyante says, he sputtered in consequence. He
took little pains with his appearance ; he was so absent-minded that he some-
times forgot to eat. When any one mentioned the Jesuits to him he jumped as
AdHe has described* He was always covered with mud like a spaniel. It is
not surprising that the clairvoyante should soe him with muddy shoes. He
had, in fact, promised M. du Potet that l]e would appear to him on a Wednes-
day or a Saturday. M. du Potet has acknowledged the accuracy of this apparition
in No. 75 of Journal du Magnitisme.

In effect, in the Journal of August loth of the same year, in reviewing

TO CHAPTER IX

575

937 A] .

the first volume, Du Potet .gives handsome testimony to the striking
nature of the impersonation, si bien que je croyais le voir moi-meme,
tant le tableau en ^tait saisissant. Bientot cette ombre s’est enfuie en
effrayant la somnambule ; un seul mot avait caus^ cette disparition subite,
et mon ^tonnement en fut port^ k son comble, car ce m^me mot le mettait
toujours en fureur.*’ But Du Potet, for all that, is inclined to attribute
the phenomenon to transmission of thought from his own mind;^ and a
few months later,® in reviewing the second volume, he takes occasion to
give the result of his further inquiries on this stance. Generally, the
minute description of the personal appearance and other particulars which
were prominent in Du Potet’s own mind at the time were correct ; and
other details were correctly given which Du Potet might have heard, but
had certainly not remembered at the time. He had ascertained, however,
from the widow and children, that Dr. Dubois took no tobacco ; never
had a redingote of the colour described ; had no hernia, and consequently
wore no bandage. Moreover, the apparition predicted never came off.
Du Potet, however, adds expressly that Dr. Dubois was unknown in life
to Cahagnet and his somnambule.

In some cases, with the express object of excluding thought-transference,
the sitter came armed with the name of some dead person of whom he
knew nothing — as in the following case. M. TAbb^ A - — , mentioned at
the beginning of the record, had had a successful experiment of the same
kind at a previous sitting (No. 112 ).

No. 122 .— Pastor Kostan, who is referred to in the preceding stance in con-

^nection with the conversion of M. I’Abb^ A , desired in his turn to obtain an

apparition. He asked for a person unknown to him, whose name had been
given to him ; but there had been a mistake made in giving him this name ; in
consequence a person appeared whose description we took, but who could not
be recognised. At least, such is this gentleman’s version, and I do not imagine
that I was imposed upon. 1 suggested a .second stance to him, especially as
he persisted in asking for a person entirely unknown to 1dm, to such an extent
had he been influenced by M. Hubert's arguments. He then asked his maid-
servant to give him a name of one of her acquaintances who had been dead
some time ; he came armed with this name, and asked for Jeannette Jex.
Ad61e replied : “ I see a woman who is not tall, she may be between thirty and
forty years of age ; if she is not hump-backed she must be crook-backed, for
she carries herself very badly. I cannot make her turn round. Her hair is
auburn, approaching to red; she has small grey eyes, a thick nose. She is not
good-looking. She has a prominent chin, a receding mouth, thin lips; her
dress is countrified. I see that she has a c.ap with two flat bands, rounded over
the ears. She must have suffered from a flow of blood to the head, she has had
indigestion. 1 see she has a swelling in the abdomen on the left side and in
the glands of one breast. She has been ill a long tftne.”

M. Rostan handed over the report to his servant, and gave it back to me
after adding his signature and the following remarks

** This is correct as regards stature, age, dres.s, carriage, the disease and
deformed figure. (Signed) J. J. Rostan.”

^ Journal du Magnitisme^ vol. vii. p. 89. * Journal du Magni^tisme, vol. viii. p. 24.

APPENDICES

576

[937 A

But if M. Rostan was staggered by the result of his test, his friends
apparently still ascribed the results to thought-transference, which gives
Cahagnet occasion for some argument on the subject.

There are, indeed, indications that some at least of the alleged appari-
tions were subjective — inspired, that is, by the imagination of the medium,
supplemented occasionally by telepathic drafts from the sitter. We should
probably be justified in assuming — in default of any corroborative evidence
as to their reality — that the accounts of heaven and of the occupations of
the spirits therein, given in the first volume [of the Arcanes’], had no more
remote origin than the medium’s own mind, whose workings were no
doubt directed, now by memories of lessons learnt in childhood, now by
hints of the Swedenborgian philosophy received from Cahagnet himself.

[Descriptions of various visions of heaven, quoted by Mr. Podraore,
are here omitted.]

But there are other accounts which, while they point to the action of
telepathy, are extremely difficult to reconcile with the theory of spirit-
intercourse held by the recorder.

On two occasions Adele was asked to search for a long-lost relative of
the sitter. On each occasion she found the man a/ive, and conversed
with his spirit.

M. Lucas, a carrier (m^ssa^er), of Rarabouillet, came to inquire after
the fate of his brother-in-law, who had disappeared after a quarrel some
twelve years previously. Adele in the trance found the man at once, said
that he was alive, and that she saw him in a foreign country, where there
were trees like those in America, and that he was busy gathering seeds
from small shrubs, about 3 feet high. He would not answer her question,*
and she asked to be awoke, as she was afraid of wild beasts. M. Lucas
returned a few days afterwards, bringing with him the mother of the
missing man. ,

No. 99. — Ad^Ie, as soon as she was asleep, said “ I see him.*’ “ Where
do you see him ? ” “ Here.” “ Give us a description of him again and also of
the place where he is.” “ He is a fair man, tanned by the heat of the sun ; he
is very stout, his features are fairly regular ; brown eyes, large mouth ; he
appears gloomy and meditative. He is dressed as a workman, in a sort of short
blouse. He is occupied at present, as he was last time, in gathering seed,
which resembles pepper-corns, but I do not think it is pepper; it is larger.
This seed grows on small shrubs about one m^tre high. There is a little negro
with him occupied in the same way.” “ Try to obtain some answer to-day.
Get him to tell you the name of the country where you see him.” “ He will not
answer.” “ Tell him that his good mother, for whom he had a great affection,
is with you, and asks for n^s of him.” Oh ! at the mention of his mother he
turned round and said to me, ^ My mother^: I shall not die without seeing her
again. Comfort her, and tell her that I always think of her. I am not dead ! ’ ”
Why does he not write to her.?” ** He has written to her, but the vessel has
no doubt been wrecked — ^at least he supposes this to be so, since he has received
no answer. He tells me that he is in Mexico. He has followed the emperor,

TO CHAPTER IX

577

937 A]

Don Pedro; he has been imprisoned for five years, he has suffered a great deal,
and will use every effort to return to France ; they will see him again.” “ Can
he name the place in which he is living? ” “ No; it is very far inland, those
countries have no names.” “ Is he living with a European ? ” ** No, with a
coloured man. ” “ Why does he not write to his mother ? ” “ Because no vessels
come to the place where he is. He does not know to whom to turn. Besides,
he only knew how to write a very little, and has almost forgotten. There is no
one with him who can render him this service ; no one speaks his language ; he
makes himself understood with great difficulty. Besides that, he has never been
of a communicative disposition or a talker. He seems to be rather a surly
fellow. It is very difficult to get these few words out of him. One would think
he were dumb.” “In short, how can one manage to write to him or hear news
of him ? ” “ He knows nothing about it. He can only say these three things :
I am in Mexico, I am not dead, they will see me again.” “ Why did he leave
his parents in this manner, without saying anything to them, as he was happy
at home ? ” “ This man was very reserved ; he hardly ever spoke. He loved
his mother very much, but he had not the same affection for his father, who
was a passionate, surly man, and often treated him brutally. The cup had long
since been full. It was not the trifling dispute that he had had with his father
the day before his departure that made him decide to go away ; it had been his
fixed determination for some time past. He told no one of it. He went away
on the sly. Having kissed them all the evening before, he made good his
escape next day, without another word. Do not be uneasy, madam ; you will
see him again ! ” This good woman burst into tears, because she recognised
the truth of every detail given her by Ad61c. She did not find anything at fault
in the description. The disposition, the education, and the departure of her
son were as Ad^le said ; but a greater semblance of probability is given to the
clairvoyante’s account by the fact that his relations had an idea that he had
enlisted in Don Pedro^s army, and at one time took some steps to ascertain the
truth of it. M. Lucas told me of this detail on a journey which he afterwards
made to Paris. No information was, however, obtainable. What no less con-
tributed to the astonishment of this good ^oraan, of M. Lucas, and the other
people present at this curious sdance, was to sec Adtlc put up her hand to the
left side of her face to keep off the fiery rays of the sun in those countries, and
appear to be suffocated with heat ; but the most extraordinary part of this scene
was that she had a severe sunstroke which turned the whole of that side of her
face, from forehead to shoulder, bluish red, whilst the other side remained
dead white. This dark colour did not begin to disappear till twenty-four hours
later. At the time the heat of it was so great that one could not hold one's
hand on it.

This simulation, by the subliminal consciousness, of the effects of
severe sunburn is no doubt not more incredible than the production in
hypnosis of mimic stigmata. Such physical effects of the imagination, if
rare, are well authenticated, fiut if Cahagnet’s last sentence refers to the
heat of the medium’s skin, I am afraid we must admit that the imagination
of the recorder possibly played as prominent a part in the marvel as that
of the patient.

[On another occasion, inquiry being made for a missing man, believed
by his relatives to be dead, Adile described him as alive, and gave many
vou II. *20

APPENDICES

578

details of his personal appearance, which were recognised as correct, and
of his then whereabouts and occupations, which could not be verified.
Full details are given by Mr. Podmore.]

We have, unfortunately (Mr. Podmore continues^), no corroboration
of the truth of the statements made about those two persons. It follows,
then, that in the two stances all that we are entitled to say is that Adele
was able to divine with, it may be admitted, singular accuracy the ideas
present in the minds of her interlocutors. It was a striking example of
telepathy ; but we have no kind of proof that it was anything more, and
from internal evidence it seems very unlikely that it was anything more.

It appears, in fact, that no evidence is forthcoming of Addle’s power
of conversing with the living at a distance, since the only two cases in
which she professed to do so could not be verified, and this affords, I
submit, a strong presumption that she did not possess that power, and
that the conversations here detailed were purely imaginary, the authentic
or plausible details which they contained being filched telepathically from
the minds of those present. The curious similarity of the two accounts
also points in the same direction. Both men profess to have written
home, but the letters must have miscarried. Neither can write now, be-
cause they are far from the sea, in the interior. Both have suffered much ;
both have been prisoners ; both protest that their relations will see them
before they die; neither, however, is in a hurry to come back; and
neither is willing to discover the name of his present place of abiding.

To suppose, as the recorder supposes, that these narratives are
authentic revelations obtained from actual conversations with the spirits
of men living in unnamed, and — as Cahagnet explains at length —
probably nameless localities in the interior of Mexico or Asiatic Russia,
is to strain credulity to the breaking- point. But if these two narratives
are not what they seem to be, what are we to say of the other narratives
in the book, which are cast in the same dramatic form, and contain
similar details harmonising with the expectations or memories of the
interlocutors? If those are not authentic messages from the distant living,
we require some further warrant for the assumption that these are
authentic messages from the spirits of the dead. Considered in conjunc-
tion with the almost certainly subjective visions of Heaven and dead
playmates which characterised the earlier trances, these later stances
certainly point to an exclusively mundane origin.

We must, however, at least note that all the witnesses cited by
Cahagnet seem to have been satisfied that nothing less than thought-
transference would explain the revelations, and that any candid reader
now must find it hard to resist the same conviction.

938 A. The chief sources of information as to D. D. Home’s life and
experiences are the following works : —

Incidents in my Life^ by D, U. Home (1st edition, London, 1863 ; and
edition, 1864; second scries, 1872).

^ Mr. Podmore's argument is here abbreviated.

TO CHAPTER IX

938 B]

579

D. D. Home : His Life and Mission^ by Madame Dunglas Home
(I^ndon, 1888).

The Gift of D. D. Home^ by Madame Dunglas Home (London, 1890).

Report on Spirituaiism of the Committee of the London Dialectical
Society (London, 1871). This contains the evidence of the Master of
1 Jndsay, — now Earl of Crawford and Balcarres, — and others.

Experiences in Spiritualism with Mr. D. D. Home^ by Viscount Adare
(now Lord Dunraven; privately printed).

Researches in the Phenomena of Spiritualism^ by William Crookes, F.R.S.
Reprinted from the Quarterly Journal of Science (I^ndon, 1874).

Notes of Stances with D. D. Home^ by William Crookes, F.R.S. {Pro-
ceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. p. 98,)

See also a review by Professor Barrett and the present writer of
Madame Homers first book, D. D. Home : His Life and Mission, in the
Jkfurnal S.P.R., vol. iv. pp. roi-136 ; a briefer review of her second book,
The Gift of D. D. Home, in the Journal S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 249 ; and a
note on **The Character of D. D. Home ** in the Joumal%,Y.^,, vol. vi.
p. 176; also an article by Mr. Hamilton Aid^, “Was I hypnotised?** in
the Nineteenth Century for April 1890.

938 B. I give here a brief summary of the review by Professor
Barrett and myself of D. D, Home : His Life and Mission, just re-
ferred to.

Shortly after the book was published I met Madame Home in Paris,
and she allowed me to examine the original letters of more than a
hundred of her correspondents and compare them with the extracts and
translations printed in the book, where T found that they were correctly
reproduced. Our second aim was to acquire further evidence, either for
or against the validity of Home’s claims. Several fresh cases confirma-
tory of those given by Madame Home*were obtained and printed in full
in our review (pp. i22-*i36). 'Phe evidential value of Home’s own narra-
tive, Incidents in my Life, was much increased by a letter written to me
by Mr. W. M. Wilkinson, the well-known solicitor, of 44 Lincoln’s Tnn
Fields, stating that he had written nearly the whole of the book, — Home
staying with him in his house, producing all the letters and documents,
and giving him the necessary information; while the preface to the
second series of Incidents, dealing with Sir David Brewster, was written
by Mr. Wilkinson from information given him by Dr. Robert Chambers,
to whom the proofs of the whole work were submitted. Dr. Chambers
also wrote the introduction and concluding chapter of the first series.

There is thus a considerable body of evid^jnee as to Home, which
enables us to discuss the three questions : ( i ) Was he ever convicted of
fraud? (2) Did he satisfy any trained observer in a series of experiments
selected by the observer. and not by himself? (3) Were the phenomena
entirely beyond the known scope of the conjurer’s art?

With regard to (i), Mr. Robert Browning told us the circumstances

APPENDICES

580

which mainly led to the opinion of Home which he expressed in Mr.
Sludge the Medium. A lady had repeated to him a statement made to her
by a lady and gentleman that they had found Home experimenting with
phosphorus on the production of “ spirit-lights.” This evidence, then,
came to us at third-hand ; the incident had occurred nearly forty years
before, and it was impossible to learn more of it, since all the witnesses
were dead and had left no written record.

We received one first-hand account, from a gentleman of character
and ability, of a stance given in very poor light, where a small ** spirit
hand ” — visible to all the sitters — appeared, and moved about. It seemed
to him that he could see slight movements in the shoulder or upper part
of Home’s arm corresponding with the movements of the spirit hand.”
Afterwards, “ the movements of both plainly corresponded, and at length
... 1 saw continuous connection in the upper outline of Home’s arm
and the thing, whatever it was, that supported the ^ spirit hand.’ ” The
sitting took place in 1855, but the account was not written until 1889.
It is printed in full in our review (^op. cit. p. 120).

There is also a frequently repeated story that Home was found in
France to be using a stufl'ed hand ; our inquiries into this tended to
show that the story was a fabrication.

The most serious blot on Home’s character was that revealed by the
Lyon case. He had sittings with Mrs. Lyon, at which communications
were given purporting to come from her deceased husband, and urging her
to adopt Home as her son and give him ;^7oo a year. An admitted
letter from her to Home, in which she said that she presented him with
;;^24,ooo ‘‘ as an entirely free gift,” was stated by her at the trial to have
been written at Home’s dictation and under “ magnetic influence.” The
strongest evidence against Home was furnished by memorandum books,
in his own writing, containing accounts of his experiences with her, and
communications in the form of a dialogue between her and her husband,
in which Home was alluded to as ^*our beloved son.” Of Mrs. Lyon,
the judge observed that ** Reliance cannot be placed on her testimony ; ”
but there was much evidence besides hers to show that Home worked on
her mind by spiritualistic devices, especially by suggesting communica-
tions from her husband, and the Court held that such transactions as
those in question could not be upheld “unless the Court is quite
satisfied that they are acts of pure volition uninfluenced.” Such proof
not being forthcoming, the case was decided against Home. (A review
of the evidence in this case was furnished us by Mr. H. Arthur Smith,
and is printed in our ar^cle, p. 117.)

We must observe, however, that the Lyon case, however discredit-
able to Home personally, has no clear bearing on the reality of his
powers, since there seems to have been no assertion that any of the
phenomena were produced by fraudulent means.

(2) With regard to our second question, — whether his powers were

TO CHAPTER IX

938 B]

S8i

tested by competent observers,— Home in this respect stands pre-eminent ;
since we have the evidence of Sir William Crookes (already referred to in
938 A) corroborated by the testimony of the Master of Lindsay (now
Earl of Crawford and Balcarres) himself a savant of some distinction, and
the privately printed series of careful observations by the present and the
late lx)rds Dunraven.

(3) As to our third question — whether the phenomena could have
been produced by conjuring — many of them, especially the “ fire tests ”
and the movements of large untouched objects in good light, seem in-
explicable by this supposition. The hypothesis of collective hallucination
on the part of the sitters seems very improbable, because in most cases
all those present saw the same thing ; ^ and often without receiving from
Home any audible suggestion as to what was about to happen.

The telekinetic phenomena observed in Home's case were those
wliich attracted most attention; but the communications given at his
sittings purporting to come from deceased persons are also noteworthy,
though the records of them are unfortunately very inadequate. In our
article {pp. ciu pp. 1 10-114) we give a brief abstract of thirty-five cases of
“ recognition " taken from Madame Home's work, omitting those which
rest on Home's uncorroborated testimony.®

These cases are of very different evidential value. But many are first-
hand accounts, volunteered by independent witnesses, of messages closely
affecting themselves, and sometimes involving incidents which can hardly
have been known to servants or dependants.

• I conclude with some extracts from the list just referred to, which
follows the paging of Madame Home's book : —

I. p. 15. — Mr. S. B. Brittan’s testimony. Home suddenly becomes
entranced ; says “ Hannah Brittan is here,” — a relative long since dead, and
whose existence, as Mr. Brittan believes, was not known to any one in all
that region.” Home, entranced, acts as though a melancholic in terror of hell;
Hannah Brittan ** became insane from believing in the doctrine of endless
punishment.”

12. p. 153. — Mrs. Senior’s evidence. At their first meeting Mr. Home
describes Mr. Senior and adds, ** You forgot to wind his watch, and how miser-
able it made you.” “ Now this was a fact known to no living being but myself.
I had wound the watch the night 1 lost my husband and resolved never to let

^ The famous case of Home floating out at one window and in at another, related by
Lords IJndsay and Adare, as witnessed by them, was quoted by Dr. Carpenter in the
Contemporary Riview for January 1S76, as an instance of believers affirming that they-
saw the phenomenon, “ while a single honest sceptic declares that Mr. Home was sitting
in his chair all the time.” In reply to this, the only other person who was present at the
time. Captain Wynne, wrote a letter (see'n by the present writer and printed in Home’s
tJfe) stating that he also on that occasion had seen Home go out of one window and in
at the other.

® A further list of cases where there is some first-hand evidence for the identity of an
alleged communicating spirit is given in my review of The Gift of D. D, Home in the
fournal S.P.R., vol. iv. p. 251.

APPENDICES

582

[MSA

it go down again. I forgot to wind it one night, and my agony was great when
1 discovered it in the morning, but I never mentioned it even to my husband’s
sister, who was in the house with me.” Home also mentions Mary,” Mr.
Senior’s mother.

13. p. 154.— Mrs. Senior narrates how at another stance Home, entranced,
recalls private conversation (date, positions, and other details given) between
herself and her husband.

16. p. 177.— Mr. B. Coleman’s evidence. At his first sdance messages are
given by raps as from his aunts Elizabeth and Hannah. I did not recognise
the names. 1 had never known of any aunts of those names,” but he learns
that sisters of his father, thus named, died before he was born.

17. p. 196. — Mrs. S. C. Hall’s testimony. Raps from deceased Madame
Home to Mr. Durham, sculptor, saying, “Thanks for your early morning
labour ; I have often been near you.” Mr. Durham had been rising early to
work at a bust of Madame Home intended as a present to Mr. Home; *‘this
fact was not even known in his own household.”

18. p. 206.— Mrs. S. C. Hall’s evidence. “Your father, Colonel Hall,” is
announced ; test asked for, “ The last time we met in Cork you pulled my tail.”
Colonel Hall had worn a queue^ and this fact was correct.

20. p. 278.— Mrs. Hennings* testimony. Home says, “ George is here ” —
nephew of Mrs. Hennings, recently deceased ; mentions accident from bite of
dog when a boy at Dulwich— correct. One of us has seen Mrs. Hennings, who,
although very old, retains a singularly bright intelligence. She confirmed this
statement, and added several details.

21. p. 278. — Mrs. Hennings’ testimony. Home speaks in trance as from
her father ; “ The night before your father passed away you played whist with
him,” some details, and explanation as to provisions of will. “ Mr. Home had
never seen my father, nor heard anything about him ; and most wonderful to
me was this detail of such long-past events, known only to myself.”

22. p. 288.— Lord Lindsay’s testimony (now Lord Crawford). Lord Lindsay
misses train at Norwood, sleeps on sofa in Home’s room; sees female figure
standing near Home’s bed, which fades away ; recognises face among other
photographs next morning; it was Home’s deceased wife. Lord Adare (now
Lord Dunraven) and two others, in Lord Adare’s rooms, see (February 1S69)
a shadowy figure resembling this form, but cannot distinguish features.

26. p. 377. -Mrs. Peck’s testimony. “ By permission I put several mental
questions, each of which was promptly and correctly answered, with the full
names of friends and relatives decea.sed, and circumstances which could Miot
have been known to any of those present ; all, as 1 have stated, having been
previous to the past twenty-four hours strangers to me.” (Mrs. Peck was an
American, staying at a hotel in Geneva.)

27. p. 378.— Mrs. Peck’s testimony. Home, entranced, says : “ There is a
portrait of his mother.” “ I made no reply; but my thought wa.s, ‘There is no
portrait of her.’ ” Home insists that there is, “ with an open Bible upon her
knee.” There was, in fact, a daguerreotype thirty years old, which Mrs. Peck
had forgotten, in attitude described- -with indistinct book on knee, which was,
in fact, a Bible.

M3 A. A general account of “ The Experiences of W. Stainton
Moses” was given by me in Proceedings S.P.R. vol. ix. pp. 245-352, and
vol. xi. pp. 24-1 13. The following extract is from vol ix. pp. 245-252.

943A] TO CHAPTER IX 583

I. Among his printed worjcs the most important for our present pur-
pose are —

1. Researches in Spiritualism, This unfinished work was published in

Human Nature~^z periodical now extinct— in 1874-5, not re-
printed. It is now difficult of access.

2. Spirit Identity, published in 1879. This work also has been for some

years out of print.

3. Spirit Teachings, published in 1883; [reprinted after his death in a

Memorial Edition (London, 1894) with a short biographical notice
by Mr. Charlton Speer.]

Two other volumes, Psychography and Higher Aspects of Spiritualism,
contain little which bears on our present theme.

Besides these books, Mr. Moses wrote much in the weekly periodical
Light, of which he was for some years the editor.

II. Mr. Moses’ MSS. entrusted to me, and of which 1 have made use,
consists of thirty-one note-books, ranging from September 1872 to March 1883,
and various letters.

The note-books may be divided as follows

Twenty-four books of automatic script, numbered 1-24, and extending from
March 1873 to March 1883.

Four books of records of physical phenomena, September 1872-January 1875.
These books run concurrently with the books of automatic script. The first
book of this series (April-September 1872) is missing. Those which remain I
have numbered 2 B, 3 B, 4 B, and 5 B.

Three books of retro.spect and summary, which I number 25, 26, 27. Books
25 and 26 recapitulate physical phenomena, with reflections. Book 27 is
entitled The Identity of Spirit, and contains, in briefer lorm, much of the evi-
dence first printed in Spirit Identity j which work, indeed, this later tractate
may have been intended to supersede. Some of the letters also arc of value,
but mainly as adding contemporary confirmation to facts already to be found
in the note-books.

in. Among the records made by friends the most important are Mrs.
Stanhope Speer’s “ Records of Private Stances, from notes taken at the time
of each sitting.” Over sixty instalments of these records have now (October
1893) been published in Light, They begin in 1872 and go down to 1881 —
considerably beyond the date (1875) which Mr. Moses’ extant records of
physical phenomena obtained in his stances cease. As will be seen later on,
these independent and contemporary records are evidentially of capital import-
ance. Dr. and Mrs. Stanhope Speer were Mr. Moses’ most intimate friends ;
and they, often with another intimate friend, Mr. F. W. Pcrcival (Barrister-at-
Law and Examiner in the Education Department), were the habitual members,
and generally the only members, of the small group who witnessed the pheno-
mena about to be described.

Mr. percival, the late Dr. Speer, Mr. W. H. Harri.son, Dr. Thomson, and
the late Mr. Serjeant Cox have at different tim^es printed short first-hand
records of certain of Mr. Moses’ phenomena, and Mrs. Garratt and Miss
Birkett took some contemporary notes of sittings at which they were present.

Two note-books and other MSS. by Dr. Speer have been placed in my
liands, and contain independent contemporary records of much evidential value.

APPENDICES

584

[943 A

[Many additional records of the automatic script from Mr. Moses* note-books
have been published in Light during the last few years.]

IV. In estimating the evidential value of oral intercourse as to Mr. Moses’
phenomena, the character of my own friendship for him is an item on which I
am bound to be explicit. Friendship it might truly be called, for it was based
upon a consciousness of common pursuits of great moment, and I felt for him
much both of gratitude and of esteem. He responded to my unfeigned
interest with a straighforward intimacy of conversation on the experiences of
which 1 cared so much to learn. But there was no such close personal attrac-
tion as is likely to prompt me to partiality as a biographer ; and indeed both
Edmund Gurney and I were conscious in him of something like the impatience
of a schoolmaster towards slow students natural enough in a man whose
inborn gifts have carried him irresistibly to a conviction, on the edge of which
less favoured persons must needs pause and ponder long. I am bound to add
that the study of his note-books, by making him more intimately known to me
as he was in his best days, has brought me nearer to the warm and even enthu-
siastic estimate implied in the letters of various more intimate friends of bis
which lie before me.

More important, however, than the precise degree of attractiveness, or of*
spiritual refinement, in Mr. Moses’ personal demeanour are the fundamental
questions of sanity and probity. On these points neither I myself, nor, so far as 1
know, any person acquainted with Mr. Moses, has ever entertained any doubt.
“However perplexed for an explanation,” says Mr. Massey, “the crassest
prejudice has recoiled from ever suggesting a doubt of the truth and honesty
of Stainton Moses.” “ I believe that he was wholly incapable of deceit,” write.s
Mr. H. J. Hood, barrister-at-law, who knew him for many years. The people
who assumed that he must somehow have performed the phenomena of his
dark sdances himself—who asked triumphantly, “ Where was Moses when the
candle went out ? ” — even these never, so far as I know, suggested anything
beyond unconscious fraud in a trance-condition.

A brief record of Mr. Moses’ life, with some estimates of the work done by
him in ordinary professional capacities, will help the reader to form something
of a personal judgment on his character.

On the events of his life the Speer family, who were his most intimate
friends, and are well acquainted wdth his nearest surviving relatives, are my
main authority. Their importance as witnesses of the phenomena is so great
that 1 must be pardoned for inserting a “ testimonial ” to the late Dr. Speer
(M.D, Edinburgh), which shall not, however, be in my own words, but in those
of Dr. Marshall Hall, F.R.S., one of the best known physicians of the middle
of this century. Writing on March i8tb, 1849, Dr. Marshall Hall says (in a
printed collection of similar testimonials now before me): “ 1 have great satis-
faction in bearing my testimony to the talents and acquirements of Dr. Stanhope
Templeman Speer. Dr. Speer has had unusual advantages in having been at
the Medical Schools, not only of London and Edinburgh, but of Paris and
Montpellier, and he has availed himself of these advantages with extra-
ordinary diligence and talent. He ranks among our most distinguished rising
physicians.” •

Dr. Speer held at different times various hospital posts of credit, and was
much valued as a practising physician at Cheltenham and in London. The
work of a physician, however, was rendered somewhat trying to him by an

TO CHAPTER IX

943 A]

58s

over-anxious temperament; and as he possessed private means, and had
strong scientific and artistic tastes, he quitted his profession at thirty-four,
and preferred to spend the latter part of his life in studious retirement. Dr.
Speer’s cast of mind was strongly materialistic, and it is remarkable that his
interest in Mr. Moses’ phenomena was from first to last of a purely scientific,
as contrasted with an emotional or a religious, nature.

I regret that I never met Dr. Speer, who died in 1889. His widow, Mrs.
Stanhope Speer, is well known tome ; and I regard her as an excellent witness.
Her son, Mr. Charlton T. Speer (also an excellent witness), is an Associate of
the Royal Academy of Music, and is well known in musical circles as a success-
ful composer and performer.

With these words of preface I pass on to the facts — simple and ordinary
enough in their external aspect— of Mr. Moses’ life.

William Stainton Moses was born in Lincolnshire, November 5th, 1S39.
His father had been headmaster of a grammar-school at Donington, near
Lincoln. His mother’s family name was Stainton. Mr. Stainton Moses
believed that the name Moses had been originally Mostyn, but that an
ancestor had changed it in order to avoid some peril in the time of the
Commonwealth. There seems no reason to suppose that the family, which
had been for some time settled in Lincolnshire, was of Jewish descent. Mrs.
Moses— still living and vigorous (1893) at the age of ninety-one — was a
serious and intelligent woman, and brought up her only son with pious care.
He showed ability; and the family moved to Bedford, about 1852, that he
might have the advantage of education at Bedford College. There he did
well, and in due time gained a scholarship at Exeter College, Oxford. In his
school days he occasionally walked in his sleep, and on one occasion his
mother saw him go down into the .sitting-room and write an essay on a
subject which had puzzled him on the previous evening, and return to bed
without awaking. The essay thus written was the best of those sent up by
the class that day (Mr, Moses tells us), and was fully up to the level of his
waking performances. This is the only incident of which I have heard which
in any way foreshadowed his future gift. He is not recorded as having been
a specially nervous or excitable child; and he was at this time strong and
healthy. In after life hig health was bad; but his troubles were mainly
respiratory— constantly recurring catarrh and bronchitis— until near the end
of his life, when he was attacked by Bright’s disease, which ultimately caused
his death. His phenomena, it may be observed, were at their best when he
was in his best health, and declined or disappeared altogether when he was ill.

To return to his Oxford career. At Oxford he was an ambitious and hard-
working, but not in other ways a very noticeable, undergraduate. His health
broke down from overwork, and he left Oxford without taking a degree, and
spent some considerable time in travel, mainly with friends, but in part alone.
He was already much interested in theology, and he lived for some six months
(none of these dates are very precise) in a monastery on Mount Athos. Beyond
the mere fact of his residence on^Mount Athos, to which his .surviving friends
testify, all that is known of this period of seclusion consists of allusions made
by his “ spirit guides,” who say that fliey directed him thither that he might
study the Eastern Church, and be prepared by a comparison of theologies for
the reception of a wider truth. Be this as it may, he recovered his liealth,
returned to Oxford, took his degree, was ordained by Bishop Wilberforce, and

APPENDICES

586

[MSA

accepted a curacy at Kirk Maughold, near Ramsey, in the Isle of Man, at
the age of twenty-four. He was an active parish clergyman, liked by his
parishioners, and holding Anglican views of an ordinary type. On the
occasion of an outbreak of small-pox he distinguished himself by his zeal
and kindness; and it is recorded that in one case he helped to nurse and
to bury a man whose malady was so violent that it was hard to get any one
to approach him. During this period also lie began to write for periodicals,
Punch and the Saturday Review being specially mentioned. The memorial
verses to the Rev. F. D. Maurice which appeared in Punch have since been
quoted as of Mr. Moses* writing; and I should conceive that his other con-
tributions were probably in this serious strain. He continued to write much,
anonymously, for various periodicals during many years of his life, and showed
an easy style and a good deal of miscellaneous knowledge.

After some four years of residence near Ramsey, he accepted the curacy of
St. George's, Douglas, Isle of Man. Here also he was esteemed as an active
clergyman, and admired as a preacher. In April 1869 he had a serious illness,
and hearing that Dr. Speer, whom he knew slightly, was in the island on^ a
holiday, he called in his medical aid. Dr. Speer brought him successfully
through his illness, and invited him as a convalescent to the house which he
was renting in the island. The foundations of a lifelong friendship with Dr.
and Mrs. Speer were then laid.

In 1870 he took a curacy somewhere in Dorsetshire, where also he was
liked, and was appointed “ Lent preacher ” for the county. A very severe
attack of whooping-cough obliged him to interrupt his parish work, which, in
fact, he never resumed. Dr. Speer invited him to become his son's tutor, and
for seven years he filled that office in a way that attached to him both parents
and pupil more closely than ever. In 1871 he was offered a mastership in
University College School ; and this post he held until failing health compelled
him to resign it some three years before his death. The physical phenomeifii
about to be described began in 1S72, and continued with gradually lessening
frequency until 1881. The automatic script began in 1873, finally died out,
so far as we know, in 1883. During these later years Mr. Moses was active in
contributing to, and afterwards in Editing, the weekly newspaper Light; and
be took a leading part in several spiritistic organisations. Of one of these—
the London Spiritualist Alliance— he was president at the time of his death.
In 1882 he aided in the foundation of the Society for Psychical Research; but
he left that body in 1886, on account of its attitude towards Spiritualism, which
he regarded as unduly critical. It is worth remarking that although, as the
fact of his withdrawal show.s, many members of the Society held an intel-
lectual position widely differing from that of Mr. Moses, and although his own
published records were of a kind not easily credible, no suspicion as to his
personal probity and veracity was ever, so far as I know, either expressed or
entertained.

Mr. Moses’ health became steadily weaker. He suffered greatly from sup-
pressed gout, in addition to other ailments. A serious fall from the top of an
omnibus made matters worse. In 1890 he was attacked by influenza in the
severest form, and was reckoned, 1 l^elieve, to have had twelve separate
relapses or recurrences of that complaint. An accident to his eyes also gave
him much trouble. He worked on, as best he could, to the last ; but the period
of decline was tedious and distressing; and it would be very unfair to judge

TO CHAPTER IX

943 A]

587

him from the utterances of these last years. When in September 1892 he
passed from earth, we may surely trust that his achievements here had won
their way to promotion, and his sufferings to repose.

Mr. Moses never married, and went very little into general society. His
personal appearance offered no indication of his peculiar gift. He was of
middle stature, strongly made, with somewhat heavy features, and thick
<lark hair and beard. His expression of countenance was honest, manly,
and resolute. Many testimonies of affection and esteem appeared in Light
and elsewhere after his decease ; especially, of course, from those to whom his
experiences and teachings had brought a convincing hope. I subjoin a few
letters from friends who had good opportunities of estimating his value in the
common duties and intercourse of life.

Dr. Johnson, of Bedford, writes to me as follows :

“68 High Street, Bedford,
March 24tk^ 1893.

, “Dear Sir,— As the intimate friend and medical adviser of the late
Stainton Moses 1 have had ample opportunities of thoroughly knowing his
character and his mental state.

“ He was a man even in temper, painstaking and methodical, of exceptional
ability, and utterly free from any hallucination or anything to indicate other
than a well-ordered brain.

“ He was a firm believer in all that he uttered or wrote about matters of a
spiritual nature, and he impressed me — and, I believe, most others he came in
contact with— with the genuineness of his convictions, and a firm belief not only
that he believed in the statements he had made and written, but that they
were the outcome of a mind which had given itself up entirely to the study of
a subject which he considered of essential value and importance to the welfare
of bis fellow men.

“ I have attended him in several very severe illnesses, but never, in sickness
or at other times, has his brain shown the slightest cloudiness or suffered from
any delusion. I not only consider that he believed what he stated, but I think
that those who knew him best would not for an instant doubt that all he stated
were facts and words of tryth. — Sincerely yours, Wm. G. Johnson.”

In another letter Dr. Johnson says:—

“He was a most lovable character; kind and generous in his every action ;
and with a fund of information on most subjects which made him a most
welcome guest.”

Dr. Eve, headmaster of University College School, writes as follows to
Professor Sidgwick: —

“University College School, Gower Street,
London, W.C., March iS/h, 1893.

“My dear Sidgwick, — Stainton Moses was an excellent colleague. He
confined himself entirely to English ; in that subject he took classes in all
parts of the school, and his wbrk was always well and methodically done.
He taught essay-writing well, and was very' skilful iif appreciating the relative
value of boys* essays, which is not easy. He was much looked up to by boys,
and had considerable influence over them. On general points connected with
the management of the school he was one of the colleagues to whom I most
naturally turned for advice, and I have every reason to be grateful to him. —
Yours very sincerely, * H. W. Eve.”

APPENDICES

S88

Mr. F. W. Levander, a master at University College School, writes to
me thus : —

“University College School, Gower Street,
London, W.C., May itth, 1893.

“ Dear Sir, — My acquaintance with the late W. Stainton Moses com-
menced in the year 1871, when he first became one of the masters here.
This acquaintance soon extended beyond the nature of that generally met
with between colleagues; it ripened into a constantly increasing friendship,
which continued unbroken until his death. During the whole of this long
period he always impressed me with the idea that he was thoroughly
earnest and conscientious, and 1 believe that perfect reliance can be placed
on all his statements. — Yours faithfully, F. W. Levander/*

I have often heard Mr. Moses discussed by persons of opinions opposed
to bis own ; and since I owe it to my readers to make the present paper not
merely eulogistic, but as accurately descriptive as my materials allow, I feel
bound to reproduce adverse criticisms. I have, then, heard him, in his laf.er
years, characterised as an obstinate, confused, and irritable controversialist.
1 have heard him described as lacking in the grace of humility, and in that
spirituality of tastes and character which should seem appropriate to one living
much in the commerce of the Unseen. But I have never heard any one who
had even the slightest acquaintance with Mr. Moses impugn his sanity or his
sincerity, his veracity or his honour.

946 A. From the preface to Spirit T cachings ^ by W. Stainton Moses.

The communications which form the bulk of this volume were received
by the process known as automatic or passive writing. This is to be distin-
guished from Ps}xhography. In the former case the psychic holds the pgn
or pencil, or places his hand upon the planchette, and the message is
written without the conscious intervention of his mind. In the latter case the
writing is direct, or is obtained without the use of the hand of the psychic, and
sometimes without the aid of pen or pencil.

Automatic writing is a well-known method of communication with the
invisible world of what we loosely call Spirit. I dse that word as the most
intelligible to my readers, though 1 am well aware that 1 shall be told that I
ought not to apply any such terra to many of the unseen beings who com-
municate with earth, of whom wc hear much and often as being the rcliquia
of humanity, the shells of what were once men. It is no part of my business
to enter into this ghost question. My interlocutors call themselves spirits,
perhaps because I so call them, and spirits they are to me for my present
purposes.

These messages began to be written through my hand just ten years since
—March 30th, 1873— about ^ year after my first introduction to Spiritualism.
I had had many communications before, and this method was adopted for the
purpose of convenience, and also to preserve what was intended to be a
connected body of teachii^. The laborious method of rapping out messages
was manifestly unfitted for communications such as those which I here print.
If spoken through the lips of the medium in trance they were partially lost,
and it was moreover impossible at first to rely upon such a measure of mental
passivity as would preserve them from admixture with his ideas. I procured
a pocket-book which I habitually carried about with me. I soon found that

TO CHAPTER IX

946 A]

589

writing flowed more easily when I used a book that was permeated with the
psychic aura ; just as raps come more easily on a table that has been fre-
quently used for the purpose, and as phenomena occur most readily in the
medium’s own room.

At first the writing was very small and irregular, and it was necessary
for me to write slowly and cautiously, and to watch the hand, following the
lines with my eye; otherwise the message soon became incoherent, and the
result was mere scribble. In a short time, however, 1 found that 1 could dis-
pense with these precautions. The writing, while becoming more and more
minute, became at the same time very regular and beautifully formed. As
a specimen of caligraphy some of the pages are exceedingly beautiful. The
answers to my questions (written at the top of the page) were paragraphed
and arranged as if for the press, and the name of God was always written in
capitals and slowly, and, as it seemed, reverentially. The subject matter
was always of a pure and elevated character, much of it being of personal
application, intended for my own guidance and direction. I may say that
thfougliout the whole of these written communications, extending in unbroken
continuity to the year 1880, there is no flippant message, no attempt at jest,
no vulgarity or incongruity, no false or misleading statement, so far as I know
or could discover; nothing incompatible with the avowed object, again and
again repeated, of instruction, enlightenment, and guidance by spirits fitted
for the task. Judged as I should wish to be judged myself, they were what
they pretended to be. Their words were words of sincerity, and of sober,
serious purpose.

The earliest communications were all written in the minute characters that
I have described, and were uniform in .style and in the signature, “ Doctor, the
Teacher," nor have his messages ever varied during all the years that he has
written. Whenever and wherever he wrote, his handwriting was unchanged,
silo wing indeed less change than my own does during the last decade. The
tricks of style remained the same, and there was, in short, a .sustained indi-
viduality throughout his messages. He is to me an entity, a personality, a
being with his own idiosyncrasies and characteristics quite as clearly defined
as the human beings with whom I come in contact, if indeed I do not do him
injustice by the broad comparison.

After a time, communication.s came from other sources, and these were
distinguished each by its own handwriting, and by its own peculiarities of style
and expression. These, once assumed, were equally invariable. I could tell at
once who was writing by the mere characteristics of the caligraphy.

By degree.s, 1 found that many spirits who were unable to influence my
hand themselves sought the aid of a spirit “ Rector,” who was apparently able
to write more freely and with less strain on me ; for writing by a spirit un.^c-
customed to the work was often incoherent, and always resulted in a serious
drain upon my vital powers. They did not know how easily the reserve of
force was exhausted, and I suffered proportionately.

Moreover, the writing of th^ spirit who thus became a sort of amanuensi.s
was fluent and easy to decipher, whereas that of \pany spirits was cramped,
archaic in form, and frequently executed with difficulty, and almost illegible.
So it came to pass, as a matter of ordinary course, “ Rector ” wrote, but when
a spirit came for the first time, or when it was desired to emphasise a communi-
cation, the spirit responsible for the message wrote for himself.

590 APPENDICES [M6A

It must not be assumed, however, that all messages proceeded from one
solitary inspiration. In the case of the majority of the communications printed
in this volume this is so. The volume is a record during which “ Impera-
tor” was alone concerned with me, though, as he never attempted writing,
Rector ’’ acted as his amanuensis. At other times, and especially since that
time, communications have apparently proceeded from a company of asso-
ciate spirits, who have used their amanuensis for the purpose of their mes-
sage. This was increasingly the case during the last five years that I received
these communications.

The circumstances under which the messages were written were infinitely
varied. As a rule it was necessary that 1 should be isolated, and the more
passive my mind the more easy the communications. But 1 have received
messages under all sorts of conditions. At first they came with difficulty, but
soon the mechanical method appeared to be mastered, and page after page was
covered with matter of which the specimens contained in this book will enable
the public to judge.

What is now printed has been subjected to revision by a method similap>to
that by which it was first written. Originally published in the Spiritualist
newspaper, the messages have been revised, but not substantially altered by
those who first wrote them. When the publication in the Spiritualist was
commenced, 1 had no sort of idea of doing what is now being done. Friends
desired specimens to be published, and the selection was made without any
regard to continuity. I was governed only by a desire to avoid the publication
of what was of personal interest only, and I, perforce, excluded much that
involved allusion to those still living, whom I had no right to drag into print.
1 disliked printing personal matter relating to myself; I had, obviously, no
right to print that which concerned others. Some of the most striking and
impressive communications have thus been excluded, and what is printed
must be regarded as a mere sample of what cannot see the light now, aild
which must be reserved for consideration at a remote period, when I and those
concerned can no longer be aggrieved by its publication.

It is an interesting subject for speculation whether my own thoughts
entered into the subject-matter of the communications. 1 took extraordinary
pains to prevent any such admixture. At first the writing was slow, and it was
necessary for me to follow it with my eye, but even then the thoughts were not
my thoughts. Very soon the messages assumed a character of which I had no
doubt whatever that the thought was opposed to my own. But I cultivated
the power of occupying my mind with other things during the time that the
writing was going on, and was able to read an abstruse book, and follow out a
line of close reasoning while the message was written with unbroken regu-
larity. Messages so written extended over many pages, and in their course
there is no correction, no fault in composition, and often a sustained vigour
and beauty of style.

I am not, however, concerned to contend that my own mind w^as not
utilised, or that what was thus written did pot depend for its form on the
mental qualifications of the medium through whom it was given. So far as I
know it is always the case that the idiosyncrasies of the medium are traceable
in such communications. It is not conceivable that it should be otherwise.
But it is certain that the mass of ideas conveyed to me were alien to my own
opinions, were, in the main, opposed to my settled convictions, and, moreover,

TO CHAPTER IX

591

947 A]

that in several cases information, of which 1 was assuredly ignorant, clear,
precise, and definite in form, susceptible of verification, and always exact, was
thus conveyed to me. As, at many of the sdances, spirits came and rapped
out on the table clear and precise information about themselves, which we
afterwards verified, so, on repeated occasions, was such information conveyed
to me by this method of automatic writing.

I argue from the one case to others. In one I can positively assert and
prove the conveyance of information new to me. In others I equally believe
that 1 was in communication with an external intelligence which conveyed to
me thoughts other than my own. Indeed, the subject-matter of many of the
communications printed in this volume will, by its own inherent quality, pro-
bably lead to the same conclusion.

1 never could command the writing. It came unsought usually, and when
I did seek it, as often as not I was unable to obtain it. A sudden impulse,
coming I know not how, led me to sit down and prepare to write. Where the
messages were in regular course I was accustomed to devote the first hour of
each day to sitting for their reception. I rose early, and the beginning of the
day was spent, in a room that I used for no other purpose, in what was to all
intents and purposes a religious service. These writings frequently came then,
but 1 could by no means reckon upon them. Other forms of spirit-manifesta-
tion came too; 1 was rarely without some unless ill-health intervened, as it
often did of late years, until the messages ceased.

The particular communications which I received from the spirit known to
me as “ Imperator mark a distinct epoch in my life.

1 have noted in the course of my remarks the intense exaltation of spirit, the
strenuous conflict, the intervals of peace, that 1 have since longed for, but have
seldom attained, which marked their transmission. It was a period of educa-
tion in which I underwent a spiritual development that was in its outcome a
very regeneration. I cannot hope, I do not try, to convey to others w'hat 1
then experienced. But it may possibly be borne in upon the minds of some
who are not ignorant of the dispensation of the spirit in their own inner selves,
that for me the question of the beneficent action of external spirit on my own
self was then finally settled. 1 have neve!- since, even in the vagaries of an ex-
tremely sceptical mind, Mid amid much cause for questioning, ever seriously
entertained a doubt.

947 A. From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 106-7.

1 will now give the account of Rector” — one of the alleged remoter
spirits — as to a quotation from a closed and unknown book. This spirit
was, as described above, very intimately associated with Mr. Moses, and
habitually wrote for Imperator,” and for the group of guides generally.
His handwriting came more and more to resemble that of Mr. Moses
himself. To him, moreover, was attributed the power of reading in.
books unknown to Mr. Moijes, and of writing out matter there found
through Mr. Moses’ hand. ^ #

Q, Can you read ?

A, “ No, friend, I cannot, but Zachary Gray can, and Rector. I am not
able to materialise myself, or to command the elements.”

g. Arc either of those spirits here ?

592 APPENDICES [948 A

<< 4 . “ I will bring one by-and-by. I will send . , . Rector is here.”

Q. I am told you can read. Is that so? Can you read a book ?

A- [Spirit handwTiting changed.] “ Yes, friend, with difficulty.”

Q. Will you write for me the last line of the first book of the yEneid ?

A. “ Wait Omnibus erranteni terris et Jluctibus (es/as.*'

[This was right.]

Q. Quite so. But I might have known it. Can you go to the book-case,
take the last book but one on the second shelf, and read me the last para-
graph of the ninety-fourth page ? I have not seen it, and do not even know
its name.

A. “ I will curtly prove by a short historical narrative, that Popery is a
novelty, and has gradually arisen or grown up since the primitive and pure
time of Christianity, not only since the apostolic age, but even since the
lamentable union of kirk and the state by Constantine.”

[The book on examination proved to be a queer one called Roger" s
Antipopopriestian^ an attempt to liberate and purify Christianity from Popery,
Politikirkality, and Priestrule.” The extract given above was accurate, but
the word “ narrative ” substituted for “account.”]

g. How came I to pitch upon so appropriate a sentence ?
i 4 . “ 1 know not, my friend. It was by coincidence The word was
changed by error. I knew it when it was done, but would not change.”
g. How do you read? You wrote more slowly, and by fits and starts.

>4. “ I wrote what I remembered, and then I went for more. It is a special
effort to read, and useful only as a test. Your friend was right last night ; we
can read, but only when conditions are very good. We will read once again,
and write and then impress you of the book * Pope is the last great writer
of that school of poetr}', the poetry of the intellect, or rather of the intellect
mingled with the fancy.* That is truly written. Go and take the eleventh
book on the same shelf. [I took a book called Poetry^ Romance^ and Rhefari?,\
It will open at the page for you. Take it and read, and recogni.se our power,
and the permission which the great and good God gives us, to show you of our
power over matter. To Him be glory. Amen.’*

[The book opened at page 145, dnd there was the quotation perfectly true.
I had not seen the book before : certainly had no idea of its contents.] [These
books were in Dr. Speer’s library. — F. W. H. M.]

It is plain that a power such as this of acquiring and reproducing
fresh knowledge interposes much difficulty in the way of identifying any
alleged spirit by means of his knowledge of the facts of his earth-life.

948 A. [Abridged from Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. pp. 69-93.]

In his little book on “ Spirit Identity ” (1879), Mr. Moses had collected
some of the most impressive of these cases of identity, and added some
interesting matter as to the subjective side of his experiences. The
book was never widely known ; and when the small edition was exhausted
Mr. Moses postponed tfte republication, on the ground that the book
was imperfect, and that he had no time to improve it. I repeatedly
pressed him on the subject ; and when last we spoke of it (October 15th,
1886), he said that he would, some time re-write the book, and would
consult me as to farther passage^ of MS. to be published. The book

TO CHAPTER IX

593

948 A]

was never re-written ; but an eSsay called The Identity of Spirit,” found
among Mr. Moses* papers, and apparently intended to be read to the
London Spiritualist Alliance, in some degree fulfils his expressed intention.
I communicated this paper first to Light, the newspaper of which Mr.
Moses was Editor until his death. I have carefully compared it with
the MSS. on which it rests, and have found it accurate. I have also
discussed it with Mrs. Speer, who helped Mr. Moses in its compilation
and vouches for facts of verification, &c., not recorded in the MS. From
this paper I cite the following instances. I add in square brackets a few
notes where I have been able to bring some independent corroboration.

(1) It was in August 1S72, that 1 first became acquainted with evidence of
Spirit Identity. Dr. and Mrs. Speer and I were then sitting regularly almost
every evening. A friend of Mrs. Speer*s, of whom I had never heard, came
and wrote through my hand her name, “A. P. Kirkland.” Dr. Speer said, “ Is
th^t our old friend ? ” Then I wrote. “ Yes. I came to tell you that I am
happy, but I can’t impress our friend to-night.'* The handwriting then
changed, and there came communications from Mr. Callister (a friend of mine);
and from my cousin, T. J. S. ; and from another spirit, which I do not think it
of importance to mention here.

With regard to these communications, they were distinct in style, and it i.s
of importance to notice that the handwriting of Miss Kirkland was very similar
to her own, which I had never seen, and that of Mr. Callister, on being ques-
tioned as to his identity, recalled to my memory a fact which had escaped it,
and referred to a conversation, the last I had had with him on earth. This I do
not adduce as evidence of identity, nor do I withdraw it as such.

This was on August 21st, 1872, and on .September 4th in the same year
there came a little sister of Dr. Speer's, particulars re.specting which case are
printed in “Spirit Identity,” p. 59, as follows: —

(2) “I pass to a case in which a spirit who first manifested her presence on
September 4th, 1872, has remained in permanent communication with us ever
since. I note this case because we have 'the advantage of prolonged inter-
course to aid us in forming,an opinion as to identity, and because the spirit has
not only given an unequivocal proof of her characteristic individuality, but has
evidenced her presence in various ways. This is a remarkable case, too, as
tending to prove that life once given is indestructible, and that the spirit which
has once animated a human body, however brief its tenure, lives on with unim-
paired identity.

“The spirit in question announced herself by raps, giving a message in
French. She said she was a sister of Dr. Speer’s, and had passed away at
Tours, an infant of seven months old. I had never heard her mentioned, and
her brother had forgotten her existence, for she lived and died before his birth.
Clairvoyants had always described a child as being in my company, and I had
wondered at this, seeing that I Jiad no trace of any such relation or friend.
Here was the explanation. From the time of herrfrst appearance she had
remained attached to the family, and her clear, joyous little rap, perfectly indi-
vidual in its nature, is never-failing evidence of her presence. It never varies,
and we all know it at once as surely as we should know the tone of a friend’s
voice. She gave particulars of herself, and also her four names in full. One
(Stanhope) was new to her brother, and he verified it only by reference to
VOL. II. • 2 F

594

APPENDICES

[948 A

another member of the family (Mrs. Denis). Names, and dates, and facts were
alike unknown to me. I was absolutely ignorant of the fact of the existence of
any such person.”

(3) On an evening in the month of January 1874, I repeatedly said to Mrs.

Speer, “Who is Emily C .? Her name keeps sounding in my ear.’' Mrs.

Speer replied that she did not know any one of that name. “ Yes,” 1 said very
emphatically, “ there is some one of that name passed over to the world of
spirit.” She could give me no information, and I vras disturbed, in the way in
which 1 always am when such things take place. This is one of the many
cases occurring about this time. When the evening paper came in we looked
(as we frequently did) at the obituary. I may say that our minds were .set on
tills subject of identity. At our daily sittings fact on fact was given to prove it
and to remove any doubts. It became a regular thing for us to receive a
message giving such facts as an obituary notice would contain. We therefore
looked for them, and we found an announcement of the death of “ Emily,

widow of the late Captain C— C On a subsequent evening in the

following year, the date of which I can produce, but which I have not by m^ at
the moment, she returned again. Dr. Speer and I had gone out for a walk in
the afternoon— I was then staying with him at Dudley Villa, Shanklin, Isle

of Wight— and at our stance in the evening came “ Emily C C I

inquired what brought her, and her answer was rapped out on the table, “ You
passed my grave.” Here I should explain that at this time T never went near
a graveyard but 1 attracted some spirit, identified afterwards as one whose
body lay there. I said, “ No, that is impossible; we have been near no grave-
yard,” and Dr. Speer confirmed my Impression. The communication, however,
was persistent, and we agreed that we would lake the same walk the next day.
We did so, and at a certain place I had an impulse to climb up and look over
a wall, which quite shut out from the view of the ordinary passer-by what was
behind it. I climbed up and looked over, and my eye fell at once on the gr 5 ve

of “ Emily C C ,” and on the dates and particulars given to us, all

exactly accurate.

(4) Another instance similar in kind— though this is of a personal friend
of Mrs. Speer's — is the case of Cecilia Feildcn. (See “Spirit Identity,” p. 58.)
We were then at Shanklin, sitting regularly every evening, when on January
I. St, 1874, there came a fresh sound, a little ticking sound in the air, close to
Mrs. Speer. We inquired what it might repre.sent, and were told that it
indicated the presence of Cecilia Feilden, who had died 17 years ago. We
asked why she came, and were told that she had been attracted to her old
friend, Mrs. Speer, through me, and in consequence of Dr. Speer’s and my
presence at her grave at Bonchurch that afternoon. She answered many
questions, and finally rapped out, “ I must now depart. Adieu.” This word
.Miss Feilden always used at the end of her letters. Mrs. Speer tells me that
she seldom concluded a letter otherwise. I had never known her, or heard of
her until Dr. Speer pointed out her grave. When we rose from the table we
found that a piece of marked paper, which ve had put down under the table,
had written upon it the v.rords, “pas.scdj7 years.”

(5) Again, there is the case of Henry Spratley. We were then the same

circle, sitting in the same way, on January 2nd, 1874, ^^^d I can aver that not
one of us had ever heard of this person. He had lately departed (December
1873), alleged that he had been brought by the controlling spirit,

TO CHAPTER IX

S9S

948A]

Imperator/’ for purposes of evidence, and in pursuance of a plan intended
to break down my persistent scepticism. We had from him messages of the
usual type, saying simply who be was, when he was born, and w^hen he died.
We found it difficult, 1 remember, to verify the facts, but in the end Mrs. Speer
succeeded in doing so by writing (i) to the Post Office, making a general in-
quiry, to which no answer came ; (2) to the vicar of Maidenhead, with no
reply (we afterwards discovered that he was on his holiday) ; (3) to the

present occupant of Moor Cottage,” the address given to us by the spirit ;
(4) to his nearest surviving representative, who wrote back with some surprise
to say that all things were quite true. “ My father lived here till he died on
December 24th.”

(6) Another account to which I should like to refer is that of Kosamira
Lancaster

“ On February 28th, 1874, and following evening a spirit came by raps, and
gave the name of * Rosamira.' She said that she died at Torquay on January
loth, 1874, and that she had lived at Kilburn. She stated that her husband's
name was * Lancaster.' At this time I was troubled about details, and so I
asked her husband’s Christian name, and I got *Ben,* and then the power
failed. (The obituary showed that the full name was Benjamin.) I then
passed under the control of ‘ Imperator,’ and he said that he had tried as far as
he could to bring this spirit to us. Afterwards the truth of the statements was
verified by me, and they were found to be absolutely exact ; and it is, perhaps,
important to say in this connection that not only were they the facts)
literally true, but that nothing was said that was not true ; nor was there any
surplusage of detail— only plain, definite, positive facts.”

[We have verified this death from an announcement in the Daily Telegraph
of January 15th, 1874, of course published long before the name was given by
raps at the stance. It is therefore quite possible that the name should have
be£n unwittingly seen by Mr, Mose.s, and here reproduced from his subliminal
memory. — F. W. H. M.]

(7) I will now quote the case given in ‘‘Spirit Identity,” p. 193 (Appendix
III.), of a “ Man Crushed by a Steam-roller,” as contributed by an eye-witness
of the sdance [F. W. Percival] to the Spirithalist of March 27th, 1874.

“ On the evening of Satjarday, February 21st, a few friends met together at
the house of Mrs. Makdougall Gregory, 21 Green Street, Grosvenor Square, W.
The party numbered six in all, and included the Baron Du Potet, and
the gentleman to whose mediumship we are indebted for the ‘ Spirit Teachings '
which have appeared from lime to time in your columns. There was no
intention of having a stance, and ordinary topics were the subject of conversa-
tion, when suddenly, in the middle of dinner, this gentleman surprised us by
saying that he felt a spirit standing near him between himself and the Baron
(who sat on his right); whether good or bad he could not tell, but the influence
was by no means pleasant. The spirit was also perceived by the Baron,
to whom it conveyed the impression that it was in a state of great distress,
and that it was the spirit of a 4)erson then alive. Nothing more was said
at the time, but the medium continued to feel a disagreeable influence
near him, and spoke of it to me wlien dinner was over. As soon as we
reached the drawing-room he was impelled to sit down and write ; and
when a pencil and paper had l>ccn brought, his hand was moved backwards
and forwards with great rapidity, and an object was roughly drawn on the paper

APPENDICES

596

[948 A

which resembled a horse fastened to a kind of cart or truck. Several attempts
were made to depict it more clearly, and then the following sentences were
written: — ‘I killed myself— I killed myself to-day— Baker Street — medium
passed.’ Here the writing became unintelligible, as the medium grew more
and more agitated, until at length he rose from his seat in a state of trance,
and exclaimed in broken sentences; ‘Yes, yes. Killed myself to-day, under
a steam-roller. Yes, yes. Killed myself— blood, blood, blood.' The control
then ceased, but the medium felt the same unpleasant influence for some
hours afterwards, and could not entirely shake it off for some days. In
reference to the communication, I may state that, although the medium had
passed through Baker Street in the afternoon, neither he nor any one present
was aware that a man had committed suicide there in the morning by throwing
himself under a steam-roller. A brief notice of the occurrence appeared in the
Pall Mall Gazette in the evening, but none of the party liad seen that paper.
It is worth remarking tliat on the front of the steam-roller which was used
in Baker Street a horse is represented in brass, and this, perhaps, may serve
to account for its appearance in the medium’s drawing where we shcviild
certainly not expect to find it.'’

[It appears that the deceased was a cab-driver, and the drawing more
probably had reference to this, as Mr. Podmore suggests in Studies in
Psychical Research^ p. 131, footnote. See also the reference to this case in
the entry connected with Blanche Abercromby, section 949. — F. W. H. M.]

(8) Out of a profusion of cases here is one of a different kind. In the year
1880, one Thursday afternoon (date unknown), Dr. and Mrs. Speer and I had
dined together, and the party included a lady who had been visiting a con-
nection of Dr. Speer’s family in that spring. There she had seen, and been
much attracted to, a lovely little girl about seven months old. The child used
to be brought in after dinner, and the lady in question grew very fond of her.
Between the time of leaving her friends and coming to London the child
passed away. It is important to notice that none of these points had ever
been mentioned to, or were known by, myself. On the occasion to which I
refer, this lady had risen from her seat and was about to place herself in
another chair, when I suddenly ckllcd out, “ Don’t sit down on it, don’t sit
down on it. Little Baby Timmins.” None of us Ifnew' its first name, and they
asked me. I said “ Marian ; the grandmother has brought it.” 1 then sud-
denly came out of the trance in which I had been, and in my own natural
voice — so different to the voice in which I had been speaking — said, ‘‘ Mrs.
Speer, will you have some coffee ? ” quite ignorant of all that had passed. We
wrote, and then found out a fact unknown to any of us, — that the child’s
name was Marian. I do not put this forth as a complete piece of evidence, for
the lady may have heard and forgotten the name.

[Mrs. Speer has described to me this incident, which is remarkable as the
only observed case where Mr. Moses had a sudden access of unconsciousness
during ordinary life, although he himself mentions others.— F. W. H. M.J

As evidence from another point of vievj, I may mention that 1 have had
repeated cases of signatures which are veritable fac-similes of those used by
the persons in life ; such, for example, ire the signatures of Beethoven, Mozart,
and of Swedenborg, in connection with Judge Edmonds. It is remarkable
that bis signature, or rather initials, in my book are those which he used, and
that Swedenborg’s signature, a very peculiar one, is a fac-simileof his known
handwriting ; quite unknown, however, to me. ^

TO CHAPTER IX

597

948 B]

948 B. I add two other cases not included by Mr. Moses in his paper
on “The Identity of Spirit." (From Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. loo.)

(i) Fanny Westoby. — This case was described by Mr. Moses to
Edmund Gurney and myself, while it was still fresh, on our first meeting
with him. May 9th, 1874.

On the evening of April 8th, 1874, while at Bedford with his father and
mother, Mr. Moses, who had been receiving messages about ancient religions
during the day, began to ask a question, “ I should 1 —,” when a meaningless
drawing was made in place of intended words.

Q. What is all that 1 And why was 1 stopped }

A. “ A spirit wishes to communicate, and we are commanded to permit her.
She is not able to write with case, but will communicate through us. Her name
is Fanny Westoby. Do you know the name "

Q. I do not remember.

• .< 4 . “ Your mother knows her well. She is a cousin of hers. She passed
from your earth May isth last.

Q, Was she married ?

“ Yes, her maiden name was Kirkham.”

Q. Fanny Kirkham. Yes, I have a dim remembrance. She used to live
at Markby.

A, ** She says that she was born in Alford, in the house now occupied by
Sam Stevenson. She then lived at Markby, and, having married, at Belchford.
.She passed away at Horncastle, at 63 years of age. You do not remember
her, when, in the year 1845, you went to see her at Markby. Her mother,
Elizabeth Kirkham, was then just released from a lingering illness, and your
mother had gone to condole with her cousin. You were taken round the farm,
anB rode on a goat (she is anxious on this point), and she threw you in sport
into a heap of wheat which was being threshed. The result was that you
were severely bitten by the harvest bug. She is very anxious that you should
recall this to your mother.”

2 * I will. But is it wise? •

A. “ You will not be aljle to induce her to search into this matter, but you
may satisfy yourself that what is said is true.”

Q. Has she any message ?

A. “She says, ‘ I lost much of my opportunity for progress through the
gratification of bodily appetite, which cast me back. My course of progress is
yet to come. I find my present life not very different from yours. I am nearly
the same. 1 wish I could influence Mary, but I can’t get near her.* ”

Q. Can she assure me that she is F. W. ?

A. “She can give you no further evidence. Slay, ask your father about
Donnington and the trap-door.”

Q, I have not the least idea what she means. All the better. I will ask.
Any more ? Is she happy ? ,

A, “ She is as happy as may be in her present state.”

Q, How did she find me out ?

A. “She came by chance, hovering near her friend [i.r. Mrs. Moses], and
discovered that she could communicate. She will return now.”

Q, Can I help her ?

598 APPENDICES [MSB

A. “ Yes, pray. She and all of us are helped wlien you devote your talents
willingly to aid us.”

Q. What do you mean?

A- In advocating and advancing our mission with care and judgment.
Then we are permeated with joy. May the Supreme bless you.” [Book VI II.
pp. 78-83.]

« X Rector.”

[I have inquired of my mother and find the particulars given are exactly
true. She wonders how 1 remember things that occurred when 1 was only
5 years old ! 1 have not ventured to say how I got the information, believing
that it would be unwise and useless. My father I can get nothing out of about
the trap-door. He either docs not remember or will not say.]

[Apri/ gtAy 1874. My father has remembered this incident. A trap-door
led on to the roof in the house he occupied at Donnington. The house was
double roofed, and a good view could be had from it. F. K. on a visit wanted
to go there, and got fixed half-way amid great laughter. ^

\ \ Elevation of double roof.]

[We have verified Mrs. Westoby’s death in the Register of Deaths.—
F. W. H. M.]

(2) President Garfield . — ^This is a communication made, not by the
departed spirit itself, but by friends.

30 St. Peter’s, Hedforh.

September 20///, iSSi, fo a.m. — This morning, on w.iking at 5.54 a.m., I
was aware of a spirit who desired to communicate. It turned out to 4 >e
Mentor, with him B. Franklin, [Epes] Sargent and others. They told me
in effect The President is gone. We were with him to the last. He died
suddenly, and all our efforts to keep him were unavailing. We laboured hard,
for bis life was of incalculable value to our country. He would have done
more to rescue it from shame than any one now Jeft.” I asked why it had
been deemed necessary to come to me with the news. It was replied that a
period of great activity in the spirit world was now being renewed, and that
my sympathies with him and with his work, and their own knowledge of me,
had inclined them to bring the news. The Daily News contained no tidings,
though the bulletins were bad. It seemed, on the contrary, that the news of the
previous night which they contained was a little more favourable. I walked
down to the station feeling convinced that the new.s would come, but up to
ti.30 A.M. could not hear of it. About 12.37 I again went and found that a
rumour had reached Bedford. The evening papers— and Echo — ^which
I purchased at 4.30 p.m. gave me the first mundane information of the event.
It is now stated that he died at 10.50 p.m. on the rpth (yesterday). That in
English time is 3.50 A..M.jof this day (20th) or two hours before 1 woke and got
the message. *

I have since learned that the death was sudden, and the remarkable
fluctuations are not inconsistent with efforts such as described.

September zxst — The latest reports fix io.3j, not 10.50 p.m. [or 3.35 a.m-
English time] as the exact time of death.

TO CHAPTER IX

599

956 A]

956 A. Reports and discussions on the case of Mrs. Piper have
been published in Proceedings S.P.R., voL vi. pp. 436-659 ,* vol. viii.
pp. 1-167 ; vol. xiii. pp. 284-582 ; vol. xiv. pp. 6-78 ; vol. xv. pp. 16-52 ;
vol. xvi. pp. 1-649.

The following passages are quoted from the report by Professor
William James, Proceedings .S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 651-59 : —

1 made Mrs. Piper’s acquaintance in the autumn of 1885. My wife’s
mother, Mrs. Gibbens, had been told of her by a friend, during the previous
summer, and never having seen a medium before, had paid her a visit out of
curiosity. She returned with the statement that Mrs. P. had given her a long
string of names of members of the family, mostly Christian names, together
with facts about the persons mentioiicd and their relations to each other, the
knowledge of which on her part was incomprehensible without supernormal
pow'ers. My sister-in-law went the next day, with still better results, as she
related them. Amongst other things, the medium had accurately described
the circumstances of the writer of a letter which she held against her forehead,
after Miss C. had given it to her. The letter was in Italian, and its writer was
known to but two persons in this country.

[I may add that on a later occasion my wife and I took another letter from
this same person to Mrs. P., who went on to speak of him in a way which
identified him unmistakably again. On a third occasion, two years later, my
sister-in-law and I being again with Mrs. P., she reverted in hicr trance to
these letters, and then gave us the writer’s name, which she said she had no:
been able to get on the former occasion.]

Put to revert to the beginning. I remember playing the esprit fort on that
occasion before my feminine relatives, and seeking to explain by simple con-
siderations the marvellous character of the facts which they brought back.
This did not, however, prevent me from going my.self a few days later, in
company with my wife, to get a direct personal impression. The names of
none of u.s up to this meeting had been announced to Mrs. P., and Mrs. J. and
I wfire, of course, careful to make no Tcference to our relatives who had
preceded. The medium, however, when entranced, repeated most of the names
of “ spirits ” whom she had announced on the two former occasions and added
others. The names came with difticiilty, and were only gradually made perfect.
My wife’s father’s name of Gibbens was announced first as Niblin, then as
Giblin. A child Herman (whom we had lost the previous year) had his name
spelt out as Herrin. I think that in no case were both Christian and surnames
given on this visit. But the facts predicated of the persons named made it in
many instances impossible not to recognise the particular individuals who were
talked about. We took particular pains on this occasion to give the Phinuit
control no help over Ins difficulties and to ask no leading questions. In the
light of subsequent experience I believe this not to be the best policy. For it
often happens, if you give this trance-personage a name or some small fact for
the lack of which he is brought to a standstill, that he will then start off with
a copious flow of additional talk, corftaining in itself an abundance of tests.”

My impression after this first visit was, that Mrs. P. was either possessed of
supernormal powers, or knew the members of my wife’s family by sight and had
by some lucky coincidence become acquainted with such a multitude of their
domestic circumstances as ^ produce tiie startling impression which she did.

600 APPENDICES [956A

My later knowledge of her sittings and personal acquaintance with her has led
me absolutely to reject the latter explanation, and to believe that she has
supernormal powers.

1 visited her a dozen times that winter, sometimes alone, sometimes with
my wife, once in company with the Rev. M. J. Savage. I sent a large num-
ber of persons to her, wishing to get the result of as many first sittings as
possible. 1 made appointments myself for most of these people, whose names
were in no instance announced to the medium. In the spring of i886 I
published a brief Report of the Committee on Mediumistic Phenomena” in
the Proceedings of the American Society for Psychical Research, of which the
following is an extract

1 have myself witnessed a dozen of her trances, and have testimony at first
hand from twenty-five sitters, all but one of whom were virtually introduced to
Mrs. P. by myself. Of five of the sittings we have verbatim stenographic
reports. Twelve of the sitters, wlio in most cases sat singly, got nothing from
the medium but unknown names or trivial talk. Pour of these were members
of the Society, and of their sittings verbatim reports were taken. Fifteen
the sitters were surprised at the communications they received, names and facts
being mentioned at the first interview which it seemed improbable should have
been known to the medium in a normal way. The probability that she pos-
sessed no clue to the sitter's identity was, 1 believe, in each and all of these
fifteen cases, sufficient. But of only one of them is there a stenographic
report ; so that, unfortunately for the medium, the evidence in her favour is,
although more abundant, less exact in quality than some of that which will be
counted against her. Of these fifteen sitters, five, all ladies, were blood relatives,
and two (I myself being one) were men connected by marriage with the family
to which they belonged. Two other connections of this family are included in
the twelve who got nothing. The medium showed a most startling intimacy
with this family’s affairs, talking of many matters known to no one outside, and
which gossip could not possibly have conveyed to her ears. The details would
prove nothing to the reader, unless printed in extenso^ with full notes by the
sitters. It reverts, after all, to personal conviction. My own conviction is not
evidence, but it seems fitting to record it. I am persuaded of the medium’s
honesty, and of the genuineness of her trance ; and although at first disposed
to think that the ‘hits’ she made were eitlier lucky coincidences, or the result
of knowledge on her part of who the .sitter was and of his or her family affairs,

I now believe her to be in possession of a power as yet unexplained.”

... As for the explanation of her trance-phenomena, I have none to
offer. The primd facie theory, which is that of spirit-control, is hard to
reconcile with the extreme triviality of most of the communications. What
real spirit, at last able to revisit his wife on this earth, but would find some-
thing better to say than that she had changed the place of his photograph
And yet that is the sort of remark to which the spirits introduced by the
mysterious Phinuit are apt to confine themselves. I must admit, however,
that Phinuit has other moods. He has several Jimes, when my wife and myself
were sitting together with^him, suddenly started off on long lectures to us
about our inward defects and outward shbrtcomings, which were very earnest,
as well as subtile morally and psychologically, and impressive in a high
degree. These discourses, though given in Phinuit’s own person, were very
different in style from his more usual talk, and probably superior to anything

956A] TO CHAPTER IX 6oi

that the medium could produce in the same line in her natural state-
Phinuit himself, however, bears every appearance of being a fictitious being.
His French, so far as he has been able to display it to me, has been limited
to a few phrases of salutation, which may easily have had their rise in the
medium's “unconscious” memory; he has never been able to understand
my French ; and the crumbs of information which he gives about his earthly
career are, as you know, so few, vague, and unlikely sounding, as to suggest
the romancing of one whose stock of materials for invention is excessively
reduced. He is, however, as he actually shows himself, a definite human
individual, with immense tact and patience, and great desire to please and
be regarded as infallible. With respect to the rough and slangy style which
he so often affects, it should be said that the Spiritualistic tradition here in
America is all in favour of the “ spirit>control ” being a grotesque and some-
what saucy personage. The Zeitgeist has always much to do with shaping
trance-phenomena, so that a “control” of that temperament is what one
would naturally expect. Mr. Hodgson will already have informed you of
the similarity between Phinuit's name and that of the “control” of the
medium at whose house Mrs. Piper was first entranced. The most remark-
able thing about the Phinuit personality seems to me the extraordinary
tenacity and minuteness of his memory. The medium has been visited
by many hundreds of sitters, half of them, perhaps, being strangers who
have come but once. To each Phinuit gives an hourful of disconnected
fragments of talk about persons living, dead, or imaginary, and events past,
future, or unreal. What normal waking memory could keep this chaotic mass
of stuff together } Yet Phinuit does so ; for the chances seem to be, that if a
sitter should go back after years of interval, the medium, when once entranced,
would recall the minutest incidents of the earlier interview, and begin by
recapitulating much of what had then been said. So far as I can discover,
.Mrs. Piper’s waking memory is not remarkable, and the whole constitution of
her trance-memory is something which 1 am at a loss to understand. But I
will say nothing more of Phinuit, because, aided by our friends in France, you
are i^lready systematically seeking to establish or disprove him as a former
native of this world.

Phinuit is generally the medium of communication between other spirits
and the sitter. But two other sohdisant spirits have, in my presence, assumed
direct “control” of .Mrs. Piper. One purported to be the late Mr. E. The
other was an aunt of mine who died last year in New York. I have already
sent you the only account I can give of my earliest experiences with the
“ E. control.” The first messages came through Phinuit, about a year ago,
when, after two years of non-intercourse with Mrs. Piper, she lunched one day
at our house and gave my wife and myself a sitting afterwards. It was bad
enough; and I confess that the human being in me was so much stronger
than the man of science that I was too disgusted with Phinuit’s tiresome
twaddle even to note it down. When later the phenomenon developed inta
pretended direct speech from li. himself I regretted this, for a complete record
would have been useful. I can no^ merely say that neither then, nor at any
other time, was there to my mind the slightest inner verisimilitude in the per-
sonation. But the failure to produce a more plausible E. speaks directly in
favour of the non-participation of the medium’s conscious mind in the perform-
ance. She could so easily have coached herself to be more effective. . . •

602 APPENDICES [956B

The aunt who purported to ‘‘take control ” directly was a much better
personation, having a good deal of the cheery strenuousness of speech of the
original. She spoke, by the way, on this occasion, of the condition of health
of two members of the family in New York, of which we knew nothing at the
time, and which was afterwards corroborated by letter. We have repeatedly
heard from Mrs. Piper in trance things of which we were not at the moment
aware. If the supernormal element in the phenomenon be thought-transfer-
ence it is certainly not that of the sitter’s conscious thought. It is rather the
reservoir of his potential knowledge which is tapped ; and not always that^ but
the knowledge of some distant living person, as in the incident last quoted.
It has sometimes even seemed to me that too much intentness on the sitter’s
part to have Phinuit say a certain thing acts as a hindrance. . . .

956 B. The next passage I quote from the Introduction by myself—
Proceedings S.P.R., voL vi. pp, 436-442, — to the records of sittings given
by Mrs. Piper in England, 1889-90 : —

«

Mrs. Piper’s case has been more or less continuously observed by Professor
James and others almost from the date of the first sudden inception of the
trance, some five years ago. Mr. Hodgson has been in the habit of bringing
acquaintances of his own to Mrs. Piper, without giving their names ; and many
of these have heard from the trance-utterance facts about their dead relations,
&c., which they feel sure that Mrs. Piper could not have known. Mr. Hodgson
also had Mr. and Mrs. Piper watched or “ shadowed ” by private detectives for
some weeks, with the view of discovering whether Mr. Piper (who is employed
in a large store in Boston, U.S.A.) went about inquiring into the affairs of
possible “sitters,” or whether Mrs. Piper received letters from friends or
agents conveying information. This inquiry was pushed pretty closely, but
absolutely nothing was discovered which could throw suspicion on Mrs. Pipe?,
— who is now aware of the procedure, but has the good sense to recognise
the legitimacy— I may say the scientific necessity— of this kind of probation.

It was thus shown that Mrs. Piper made no discoverable attempt to acquire
knowledge even about persons whose coming she had reason to expect. Still
less could she have been aware of the private concerns of persons brought
anonymously to her house at Mr. Hodgson’s choice. And a yet further obstacle
to such clandestine knowledge was introduced by her removal to England — at
our request— in November 1889. Professor Lodge met her on the Liverpool
landing-stage, November 19th, and conducted her to a hotel, where I joined
her on November 20th, and escorted her and her children to Cambridge. She
stayed first in my bouse ; and I am convinced that she brought with her a very
slender knowledge of English affairs or English people. The servant who
attended on her and on her two young children was chosen by myself, and was
a young woman from a country village whom I had full reason to believe to be
both trustworthy and also quite ignorant of my own or my friends’ affairs.
For the most part I had myself not determined upon the persons whom I
would invite to sit with her.* I chose thesje sitters in great measure by chance;
several of them were not resident in Cambridge ; and (except in one or two
cases where anonymity would have been hard to preserve) I brought them
to her under false names,— sometimes introducing them only when the trance
had already begun.

In one sitting, for instance, which will be cited below, 1 learnt by accident

TO CHAPTER IX

956 B]

603

that a certain lady, here styled Mrs. A., was in Cambridge;— a private lady, not
a member of the Society for Psychical Research, who had never before visited
my house, and whose name had certainly never been mentioned before Mrs.
Piper. I introduced this lady as Mrs. Smith; — and I think that when the
reader is estimating the correct facts which were told to her, he may at any
rate dismiss from his mind the notion that Mrs. Piper had been able cither to
divine that these facts would be wanted, — or to get at them even if she had
known that her success depended on their production on that day.

Mrs. Piper while in England was twice in Cambridge, twice in London, and
twice in Liverpool, at dates arranged by ourselves ; her sitters (almost always
introduced under false names) belonged to several quite different social groups,
and were frequently unacquainted with each other. Her correspondence was
addressed to my care, and I believe that almost every letter which she received
was shown to one or other of us. When in London she stayed in lodgings
which we selected ; when at Liverpool, in Professor Lodgers house ; and when
at Cambridge, in Professor Sidgvvick’s or my own. No one of her hosts, or of
her hosts’ wives, detected any suspicious act or word.

We took great pains to avoid giving information in talk ; and a more com-
plete security is to be found in the fact that we were ourselves ignorant of many
of the facts given as to our friends’ relations, &c. In the case of Mrs.Verrall,
for instance [cited in the Report^ p. 584], no one in Cambridge except Mrs.
Verrall herself could have supplied the bulk of the information given; and
some of the facts given (as will be seen) Mrs. Verrall herself did not know.
As regards my own affairs, I have not thought it worth while to cite in extenso
such statements as might possibly have been got up beforehand ; since Mrs.
Piper of course knew that 1 should be one of her sitters. Such facts as that
I once had an aunt, “Cordelia Marshall, more commonly called Corrie,”
qjight have been learnt,— though I do not think that they were learnt, — from
printed or other sources. But I do not think that any larger proportion of
such accessible facts was given to me than to an average sitter, previously
unknown ; nor were there any of those subtler points which could so easily
have been made by dint of scrutiny of my books or papers. On the other
hand, in my case, as in the case of several other sitters, there were messages
purporting to come from a friend who had been dead many years, and men-
tioning circumstances which I believe that it would have been quite impossible
for Mrs. Piper to have discovered.

I am also acquainted with some of the facts given to other sitters, and
suppressed as too intimate, or as involving secrets not the property of the sitter
alone. I may say that, so far as my own personal conviction goes, the utterance
of one or two of these facts is even more conclusive of supernormal knowledge
than the correct statement of dozens of names of relations, &c., which the sitter
had no personal motive for concealing.

On the whole, 1 believe that all observers, both in America and in England,
who have seen enough of Mrs. Piper in both states to be able to form a judg-
ment, will agree in affirming (1) that many of the facts given could not have
been learnt even by a skilled detqctive; (2) that to learn others of them,
although possible, would have needed an expenditure of money as w’ell as of
time which it seems impossible to suppose that Mrs. Piper could have met ;
and (3) that her conduct has never given any ground whatever for supposing
her capable of fraud or trickery. Few persons have been so long and so

APPENDICES

604

[957 A

carefully observed; and she has left on all observers the impression of
thorough uprightness, candour, and honesty.

On the question of fraud, see also the statements of Professor Lodge,
Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi. pp. 443-7 ; of Dr. Walter I^af, pp. 558-9 of
the same Proceedings; pp. 1-9 of the report by Dr. Hodgson in Pro-
ceedings S.P.R., vol. viii.; pp. 6-1 1 of the report by Professor Newbold
in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiv. ; and pp. 5-9 of the report by Professor
Hyslop in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xvi.

957 A. From the report by Professor Lodge, Proceedings S.P.R.,
vol. vi. pp. 443 - 53 -

The personality active and speaking in the trance is apparently so distinct
from the personality of Mrs. Piper that it is permissible and convenient to call
it by another name. It does not differ from her as Hyde did from Jekyll, by
being a personification of the vicious portion of the same individual. There is
no special contrast, any more than there is any special similarity. It strikes
one as a different personality altogether, and the name by which it introduces
itself when asked, viz., Dr. Phinuit,’* is as convenient as any other, and can be
used wholly irrespective of hypothesis.

1 would not in using this name be understood as thereby committing myself
to any hypothesis regarding the nature of this apparently distinct and individual
mind. At the same time the name is useful as expressing compactly what is
naturally prominent to the feeling of any sitter, that he is not talking to Mrs.
Piper at all. The manner, mode of thought, tone, trains of idea, are all
different. You are speaking no longer to a lady, but to a man, an old man, a
medical man. All this cannot but be vividly felt even by one who considerej^
the impersonation a consummate piece of acting.

Whether such a man as Dr. Phinuit ever existed I do not know, nor from
the evidential point of view do I greatly care. It will be interesting to have
the fact ascertained if possible; but J cannot see that it will much affect, the
question of genuineness. For that he did not ever exist is a thing practically
impossible to prove. While, if he did exist, it can be vasily supposed that Mrs.
Piper took care enough that her impersonation should have so much rational
basis.

It can be objected, why, if he was a French doctor, has he so entirely for*'
gotten his French ? For though he speaks in a Frenchified manner, I am told
that he cannot sustain a conversation in that language. I am unable to meet
this objection by anything beyond the obvious suggestion that Mrs. Piper’s
brain is the medium utilised, and that she is likewise ignorant. But one would
think that it would be a sufficiently patent objection to deter an impersonator
from assuming a rdle of purely unnecessary difficulty, and one which it was
impossible satisfactorily to maintain.

Admitting, however, that “ Dr, Phinuit ” is probably a mere name for Mrs.
Piper’s secondary consciousness, one cannot help being struck by the singular
correctness of his medical diagnoses. In fact, the medical statements, coincid-
ing as they do with truth just as well as those of a regular physician, but given
without any '’ordinary examination and sometimes without even seeing the
patient, must be held as part of the evidence establishing a strong primd facie
case for the existence of some abnormal means of Acquiring information. Not

967A] TO CHAPTER IX 605

that it is to be supposed that he is more infallible than another. 1 have one
definite case of distinct error in a diagnosis (Report, p. 547 ).

Proceeding now on the assumption that I may speak henceforth of Dr.
Phinuit as of a genuine individual intelligence, whether it be a usually latent
portion of Mrs. Piper’s intelligence, or whether it be something distinct from
her mind and the education to which it has been subjected, I go on to consider
the hypotheses which still remain unexamined.

And first we have the hypothesis of fishery on the part of Dr. Phinuit, as
distinguished from trickery on the part of Mrs. Piper. 1 mean a system of
ingenious fishing: the utilisation of trivial indications, of every intimation,
audible, tactile, muscular, and of little shades of manner too indefinable to
name ; all these excited in the sitter by skilful guesses and well-directed shots,
and their nutriment extracted with superhuman cunning.

Now this hypothesis is not one to be lightly regarded, or ever wholly set
aside. 1 regard it as, to a certain extent, a vera causa. At times Dr. Phinuit
does fish. Occasionally he guesses ; and sometimes he ekes out the scantiness
gf his information from the resources of a lively imagination.

Whenever his supply of information is abundant there is no sign of the fish-
ing process.

At other times it is as if he were in a difficult position — only able to gain
information from very indistinct or inaudible sources, and yet wishful to convey
as much information as possible. The attitude is then as of one straining after
every clue, and making use of the slightest indication, whether received in
normal or abnormal ways : not indeed obviously distinguishing between in-
formation received from the sitter and information received from other
sources.

The fishing process is most marked when Mrs. Piper herself either is not
feeling well or is tired. Dr. Phinuit seems to experience more difficulty then
M obtaining information; and when he docs not fish he simply draws upon his
memory and retails old facts which he has told before, occasionally with addi-
tions of his own which do not improve them. His memory seems to be one of
extraordinary tenacity and exactness, but not of infallibility ; and its lapses do
intibduce error, both of defect and cxcesu.

He seems to be un^jer some compulsion not to be silent. Possibly the
trance would cease if he did not exert himself. At any rate he chatters on,
and one has to discount a good deal of conversation which is obviously, and
sometimes confessedly, introduced as a stop-gap.

He is rather proud of his skill, and does not like to be told he is wrong ;
but when he waxes confidential he admits that he is not infallible : he does
the best he can,’* he says, but sometimes “everything seems dark to him,” and
then he flounders and gropes, and makes mistakes.

It is not to be supposed that this floundering is always most conspicuous in
presence of a stranger. On the contrary, if he is in good form he will rattle off
a stranger’s connections pretty glibly, being indeed sometimes oppressed with
the rush and volume of the information available ; while, if he is in bad trim,
he will flsh and retail stale news (especially the jatter) to quite an old h:.''.d,
and one who does not scruple to adcuse him of his delinquencies when they
become conspicuous.

This fallibility is unfortunate, but 1 don’t know that we should expect any-
thing else ; anyhow it is not a question of what we expect, but of what we get.

6o6 APPENDICES [957A

If it were a question of what I for one had expected^ the statement of it would
not be worth the writing.

Personally I feel sure that Phinuit can hardly help this fishing process at
times. He does the best he can, but it would be a great improvement if, when
he realises that conditions are unfavourable, he would say so and hold his
peace. I have tried to impress this upon him, with the effect that he is some*
times confidential, and says that he is having a bad time; but after all he
probably knows his own business best, because it has several times happened
that after half-an-hour of more or less worthless padding, a few minutes of
valuable lucidity have been attained.

1 have laid much stress upon this fishery hypothesis because it is a fact to
be taken into consideration, because it is occasionally an unfortunately con-
.spicuous fact, and because of its deterrent effect on a novice to whom that
aspect is first exposed.

But in thus laying stress 1 feel that I am producing an erroneous and mis-
leading impression of proportion. I have spoken of a few minutes’ lucidity to
an intolerable deal of padding as an occasional experience, but in the majority
of the sittings held in my presence the converse proportion better represents
the facts.

1 am familiar with muscle-reading and other simulated thought-trans-
ference ” methods, and prefer to avoid contact whenever it is possible to get
rid of it without too much fuss. Although Mrs. Piper always held somebody's
hand while preparing to go into the trance, she did not always continue to hold
it when speaking as Phinuit. She did usually hold the hand of the person she
was speaking to, but was often sati.slied for a time with some other person’s,
sometimes talking right across a room to and about a stranger, but preferring
them to come near. On several occasions she let go of everybody, for half-
hours together, especially when fluent and kept well supplied with “ relics.”

1 have now to assert with entire confidence that, pressing the ingenious
guessing and unconscious-indication hypothesis to its utmost limit, it can only
be held to account for a very few of Dr. Phinuit’s statements.

It cannot in all cases be held to account for medical diagnoses, afterwards
confirmed by the regular practitioner.

It cannot account for minute and full details of names, circumstances, and
events, given to a cautious and almost silent sitter, sometimes without contact.
And, to take the strongest case at once, it cannot account for the narration of
facts outside the conscious knowledge of the sitter or of any person present.

Rejecting the fishery hypothesis, then, as insufficient to account for many
of the facts, we arc driven to the only remaining known cause in order to
account for them: — viz., thought-transference, or the action of mind on mind
independently of the ordinary channels of communication. Whether thought-
transference ” be a correct term to apply to the process I do not pretend to
decide. That is a question for psychologists.

It may be within the reader’s knowledge that I regard the fact of genuine
** thought-transference ” between persons in immediate proximity (not neces-
sarily in contact) as having ];»een established by direct and simple experiment;
and, except by reason of paucity of instance, I consider it as firmly grounded
as any of the less familiar facts of nature such as one deals with in a laboratory.
(Proceedings S.P.R., vol. ii. p. 1 S 9 .)

1 speak of it therefore as a known cause, 1 .^., one to which there need be

957A] TO CHAPTER IX 607

no hesitation in appealing in order to explain facts which without it would be
inexplicable.

The Phinuit facts are most of them of this nature, and I do not hesitate to
assert confidently that thought-transference is the most commonplace explana-
tion to which it is possible to appeal,

I regard it as having been rigorously proved before, and as therefore re-
quiring no fresh bolstering up ; but to the many who have not made experi-
ments on the subject, and are therefore naturally sceptical concerning even
thought-transference, the record of the Phinuit sittings will afford, I think, a
secure basis for faith in this immaterial mode of communication, — this appa-
rently direct action of mind on mind.

But, whereas the kind of thought-transference which had been to my own
knowledge experimentally proved was a hazy and difficult recognition by one
person of objects kept as vividly as possible in the consciousness of another
person, the kind of thought-transference necessary to explain these sittings
is of an altogether freer and higher order,— a kind which has not yet been
experimentally proved at all. Facts are related which are not in the least
l)^resent to the consciousness of the sitter, and they are often detailed glibly
and vividly without delay; in very different style from the tedious and
hesitating dimness of the percipients in the old thought-transference ex-
periments.

But that is natural enough, when we consider that the percipient in those
experiments had to preserve a mind as vacant as possible. For no process of
inducing mental vacancy can be so perfect as that of going into a trance,
whether hypnotic or other.

Moreover, although it was considered desirable to maintain the object
contemptated in the consciousness of the agent, a shrewd suspicion was even
then entertained that the unconscious part of the agent’s brain might be
prt^rhaps equally effective.

Hence one is at liberty to apply to these Phinuit records the hypothesis of
thought-transference in its most developed state : absolute vacuity on the part
of the percipient, acted on by an entirely sub-conscious or unconscious portion
of the sitter’s brain.

In this form one feels that much can be explained. If Dr. Phinuit tells
one how many children, or brothers, or sisters one has, and their names ; the
names of father and mother and grandmother, of cousins and of aunts; if
he brings appropriate and characteristic messages from well-known relatives
deceased ; all this is explicable on the hypothesis of free and easy thought-
transference from the sub-consciousness of the sitter to the sensitive medium
of the trance personality,^

So .strongly was I impressed with this view, that after some haU-dozen
sittings 1 ceased to feel much interest in being told things, however minute,
obscure, and inaccessible they might be, so long as they were, or had been,
within the knowledge either of myself or of the sitter for the time being.

^ For instance, in the course <A my interviews, all my six brothers (adult and scat-
tered) and one sister living were correctly named (two with some help), and the existence
of the one deceased was mentioned. My father and his father were likewise named,
with several uncles and aunts. My wife’s father and stepfather were named in full, both
Christian and surname, with full identifying detail. I only quote these as examples ; it
is quite unnecessary as well as unwise to attach any evidential weight to statements of
iliis sort made during a sojourn. ii\. one’s house.

6 o8 APPENDICES [M 9 A

At the same time it ought to be constantly borne. in mind that this kind of
thought-transference without consciously active agency has never been experi-
mentally proved. Certain facts not otherwise apparently explicable, such as
those chronicled in Phantasms of the Livings have suggested it, but it is really
only a possible hypothesis to which appeal has been made whenever any other
explanation seems out of the question. But until it is actually established by
experiment in the same way that conscious mind action has been established,
it cannot be regarded as either safe or satisfactory ; and in pursuing it we may
be turning our backs on some truer but as yet perhaps unsuggested clue. I
feel as if this caution were necessary for myself as well as for other members
of the Society.

On reading the record it will be apparent that while “ Phinuit frequently
speaks in his own person, relating things which he himself discovers by what I
suppose we must call ostensible clairvoyance, sometimes he represents himself
as in communication — not always quite easy and distinct communication,
especially at first, but in communication — with one’s relatives and friends who
have departed this life. •

The messages and communications from these persons are usually given
through Phinuit as a reporter. And he reports sometimes in the third person,
sometimes in the first. Occasionally, but very seldom, Phinuit seems to give
up his place altogether to the other personality, friend or relative, who then
communicates with something of his old manner and individuality ; becoming
often impressive and realistic.

This last, I say, is rare, but with one or two personages it occurs, subject to
reservations to be mentioned directly; and when it does, Phinuit does not
appear to know what has been said. It is quite as if he in his turn eva-
cuated the body, just as Mrs. Piper had done, while a third personality
utilises it for a time. The voice and mode of address are once more changed,
and more or less recall the voice and manner of the person represented
communicating.

The communications thus obtained, though they show traces of the indi-
viduality of the person represented as speaking, are frequently vulgarised ; and
the speeches are more commonplace, and so to say cheaper, than what one
would suppose likely from the person himself. It can, of course, be suggested
that the necessity of working through the brain of a person not highly educated
may easily be supposed capable of dulling the edge of refinement, and of
rendering messages on abstruse subjects impossible.

Sec also the report by Dr. Walter Leaf in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. vi.
PP* 559“68 ; and the report by Dr. Hodgson in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii.
pp. 46-58.

959 A. [The following account is quoted from the beginning of the
‘'History of the G. P. Communications,** given by Dr. Hodgson in
Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 295-335.]

G. P. met his death accidentally, and probably instantaneous!^, by a fail
in New York in February 1892, at the age of thirty-two years* He was
a lawyer by training, but had devoted himself chiefly to literature and
philosophy, and had published two books which received the highest
praise from competent authorities. He had -resided for many years in

959A] TO CHAPTER IX 609

Boston or its vicinity, but for three years preceding his death had been
living in New York in bachelor apartments. He was an Associate of
our Society, his interest in which was explicable rather by an intellectual
openness and fearlessness characteristic of him than by any tendency
to believe in supernormal phenomena. He was m a sense well known
to me personally, but chiefly on this intellectual side ; the bond between
us was not that of an old, intimate, and if I may so speak, emotional
friendship. We had several long talks together on philosophic subjects,
and one very long discussion, probably at least two years before his
death, on the possibility of a future life.” In this he maintained that
in accordance with a fundamental philosophic theory which we both
accepted, a ‘‘ future life ” was not only incredible, but inconceivable ; and
I maintained that it was at least conceivable. At the conclusion of the
discussion he admitted that a future life was conceivable, but he did not
accept its credibility, and vowed that if he should die before I did, and
found himself still existing,” he would “make things lively” in the
effort to reveal the fact of his continued existence.

On March 7th, 1888, he had a sitting with Mrs. Piper, one of a series
arranged by the Committee on Mediumistic Phenomena connected with
the American S.P.R- (See Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 2.) The names
of the sitters in this series were very carefully guarded by the Committee,
and I may add ray own opinion that Mrs. Piper never knew until re-
cently that she had ever seen G. P. At the sitting which G. P. attended,
thc^ Kev. Minot J. Savage acted as the supervising member of the Com-
rapittee, and G. P. was a stranger to him. (See vol. xiii. p. 326.)

G. P.*s conclusion was, briefly, that the results of this sitting did not
establish any more than hyperseslhesia on the part of the medium.

\ knew of G. P.’s death within a day or two of its occurrence, and was
present at several sittings with Mrs. Piper in the course of the following
few weeks, but no allusion was made to G. P. On March 22nd, 1S92,
between four and five weeks after G. P.^s death, 1 accompanied Mr. John
Hart [not the real name], who had been an old intimate friend of his, to
a sitting.^ I understood from Mr. Hart that he had some articles with
him to be used as tests, but he gave me no further information than this,
though I surmised that the articles might have belonged to G. P. TIic

^ I must mention here that towards the end of 18S7, at a time when Mrs. Piper's
.sittings were given in a very much more haphaj^ard way than at present, I had taken
Mr. Hart to Mrs. Piper on the chance of getting a sitting. Mrs. Piper wa.s just about
to give a sitting to a lady, so that o^ir visit was futile. In my own opinion this circum-
stance i.s irrelevant, hut as Mrs. Piper saw Mr. Hart at^that time for a few minutca,
although his name was not mentioned, it hiight he regarded hv some persons as im-
portant. Further, Mrs. Piper was staying in New York with one of our members, Dr.
Anna Luken.s (who knew nothing of G. P.), at the time when G. ?. met his death. She
went to New York February 8th, 1892, and returned to Boston February 20th, 1892, as
T learned from Dr. Lukens, staying with Dr. Lukens all the time, and giving a series of
sittings. Mrs. Piper independently gave me a concordant account.

VOL. II. * 2 Q

6io

APPENDICES

[959 A

appointment for the sitting was made by myself, and of course Mr. Hart’s
real name was not mentioned to Mrs* Piper. I abridge from the notes
of the sitting made by myself at the time, and substitute, in part, other
names for those actually used.^

The sitting began by some remarks of Phinuit concerning the sitter,
followed by an incorrect statement about a cousin said to have died
some years before with some heart trouble. Mr. Hart presented a pmcil?

Phinuit : Cousin. Heart, through here [clutches throat and about breast
and lower] something like pneumonia. Do you know that's a brother.^
(Sometimes he used to call me brother.) He's very close to you. (He isn't
my brother, though we used to say it of each other.) [The pencil had been
worn by an uncle of mine who died of inflammation of the bladder.—J. H.]
[Phinuit here calls out a name that suggests an attempt at Howards. See
later.— R. H.] (I don't know any one of that name.)

[Sitter gives locket, saying, “ He also wore this.*'] *

Phinuit [fingering locket hard]: It has hair in it. It is the hair of his
father . . . George . • . and of another,' his mother, too. (Yes, that's right.)
The influences are confusing. (I have something else here) [giving watch].
Yes. George. Ha . . . Har . . . Hart. [All correct. The name of my
uncle George is in the back of the watch. When he died, my uncle Albert
wore it. 1 did not remember that the name was engraved on the inner case of
the watch.— J. H.]

Lai . • . lal . « . Albert ... is that the way you pronounce it? He
is very fond of you. He says he is not ded ... dead. He will see you
again. He is glad to see you. He is very fond of you. [Lal was a pet ftjime
my father sometimes called my uncle Albert. — H.] ^

Who is James . . . Jim? (Yes, I know, but he is not dead.) There is

1 Owing to the personal character of many of the incidents referred to in the G. P.
communications, 1 have in nearly all erses substituted other names for the real 'ones.
It has been suggested that the important witnesses in connection with the G. P.
evidence may have been in collusion with Mrs. Piper. Tne absurdity of this suggestion
would be at once apparent if their real names were given, but since the only real full
names given of actual sitters with G. P. are those of Professors C. Eliot Norton and James
M. Peirce, of Harvard University, who are referred to chiefly as cases of being recog-
nised by the communicating G. P. as personally known to him, 1 state concerning the
others that I know personally all but two of the G. P. sitters, and most of them
intimately, that they belong to the most cultivated and responsible class in the United
States, and that it would be ns absurd to suppose any collusion between them and Mrs.
Piper as to suppose that the members of the Council of the S.P.R. were in collusion
with her. Many of them are also known personally to Mr. Myers, who adds the
following statement. — R. H.

I am well acquainted with fourteen of the principal persons cited in the sittings
recorded in connection with ** George Pelham." .Several of these, indeed, are among
my most valued friends. Not only would the idea of their deliberate collusion with
Mrs. Piper be absurd, but I also regard them as very unlikely, from their previous
opinions and their character, to supply the unconscious collusion-- if I may so teim it—
of prepossessed credulity.-— Frederic W. H. Myers.

^ In the accounts of sittings, the sitter's remarks are throughout given in round
brackets, and explanatory notes in square brackets.

959A] TO CHAPTER IX 6ii

another George who wants to speak to you. How many Georges are there
about you any way ?

The rest of the sitting, until almost the close, was occupied by state-
ments from G. P., Phinuit acting as intermediary. George Pelham's real
name was given in full, also the names, both Christian and surname, of
several of his most intimate friends, including the name of the sitter.

Moreover, incidents were referred to which were unknown to the sitter
or myself.

One of the pair of studs which J. H. was wearing was given to Phinuit.
. . . (Who gave them to me?) That's mine. I gave you that part of
it. I sent that to you. (When?) Before I came here. That's mine.
Mother gave you that. (No.) Well, father then, father and mother
together. You got those after I passed out. Mother took them. Gave
them to father, and father gave them to you. I want you to keep them.
I will them to you.” Mr. Hart notes : The studs were sent to me by
Mr. Pelham as a remembrance of his son. I knew at the time that they
had been taken from G.'s body, and afterwards ascertained that his step-
mother had taken them from the body and suggested that they would do
to send to me, I having previously written to ask that some little memento
be sent to me.”

James and Mary [Mr. and Mrs.] Howard were mentioned with strongly
personal specific references, and in connection with Mrs. Howard came
the name Klatharine. ** Tell her, she'll know. I will solve the problems,
Kjftfiarine.” Mr. Hart notes : This had no special significance for me
at the time, though I was aware that Katharine, the daughter of Jim
Howard, was known to George, who used to live with the Howards. On
the day following the sitting 1 gave Mr. Howard a detailed account of the
sitting. These words, ‘ I will solve the problems, Katharine,' impressed
him more than anythingnelse, and at the close of my account he related
that George, when he had last stayed with them, had talked frequently
with Katharine (a girl of fifteen years of age) upon such subjects as
Time, Space, God, Eternity, and pointed out to her how unsatisfactory
the commonly accepted solutions were. He added that some time he
would solve the problems, and let her know, using almost the very words
of the communication made at the sitting.” Mr. Hart added that he was
entirely unaware of these circumstances. I was myself unaware of them,
and was not at that time acquainted with the Howards, and in fact nearly
every statement made at the sitting, during which I was the note-taker,
concerned matters of which I was absolutely ignorant.

Meredith, an intimate friend of* Mr. Hart and G. P., was mentioned.
”Iient a book to Meredith. Tell him to keep it for me. Go to my room
where my desk is.” In reply to inquiries (April 1892), Meredith stated
that the last time he saw Pelham was in Pelham’s own room several months
before the latter’s death. •They had spent the greater part of the day
together, and Pelham had pressed Meredith to take away some of his

6i2 APPENDICES [859 A

manuscripts and books. Thus far the reference to Meredith seems to have
been correct. But Meredith was unable to remember definitely that he
took any manuscript or book away.

The only references coming from G. P. that were apparently confused
or without special significance were the remarks towards the end of the
sitting : Give me a powder ; my tongue is wet ” — which had no meaning

for the sitter (but which the Howards thought might have reference to a
time when G. P. was ill in their house) — and the statements below about
the handkerchief and perhaps the Uncle Will.” He did leave his papers,
letters, &c., mixed up.”

John, if that is you, speak to me. Tell Jim I want to see him. He will
hardly believe me, believe that I am here. I want him to know where 1 am.
. . . O good fellow. All got dark, then it grew light. Where is Uncle Will ?
I met Uncle Willie, William. (I don’t know what you mean.) Ask Mother,
She’ll know. [G. P. had no Uncle AVilliam deceased. He had a deceased
great-uncle William, on his mother’s side, who was thus the uncle of his
mother deceased and his stepmother living, who are sisters.]

Go up to my room. (Which room?) Up to my room, where I write. I’ll
come. Speak to me, John. (What room?) Study. (You said something about
a desk just now.) 1 left things all mixed up. I wish you’d go up and straighten
them out for me. Lot of names. Lot of letters. I left things mixed up. You
answer them for me. Wish I could remember more, but I’m confused.
CLUB. Went to the Club. Two things at the Club to make right. (Wliat
Club?) His hand-er— (handkerchief). Handkerchief. (What does he want
with his handkerchief ?) I left it at the Club. (What Club i’) O U R .
did you find it ? (Yes, no, you haven’t told me at what Club.) I saw you those.
It isn’t like you, John. [The last time I saw G. was at the Players’ Club in
New York.— J. H.]

Who’s Rogets? [Phinuit tries to spell the real name.] (Spell that again.)
[At the first attempt afterwards Phinuit leaves out a letter, then speMs it
correctly.] Rogers. (What do you want Rogers to get?) I want you to tell
Rogers to get my handkerchief. 1 left it. He found it. Rogers has got a
book of mine. (What is he going to do with it ?)

[Both Hart and G. P. knew Rogers, who at that time had a certain MS.
book of G. P. in his possession. The book was found after G. P.’s death and
given to Rogers to be edited. G. P. had promised during his lifetime that a
particular disposition should be made of this book after his death. This action
which G. P. living had contemplated with regard to the book was here, and in
subsequent utterances which from their private nature I cannot quote, enjoined
emphatically and repeatedly, and had it been at once carried out, as desired by
G. P., much subsequent unhappiness and confusion might have been avoided.

Neither Hart nor Rogers knows anything of the handkerchief incident.]

«

During the latter part'of the sitting, and without any relevance to the
remarks immediately before and after, which were quite clear as expressions
from G. P., came the words, ** Who’s James? Will — ^William.” [It must
be remembered that Phinuit was talking throughout.] This was apparently
explained by Phinuit’s farther remarks at the dose of the sittmg.

TO CHAPTER IX

959 B]

613

Phinuit : Who’s Alice ? (What do you want me to say to her ?) [To R. H.]
Alice in spirit. Alice in spirit says it’s all over now, and tell Alice in the
body all is well. Tell Will I’ll explain things later on. He [George] calls
Alice, too, in the body. I want her to know me, too, Alice and Katharine.
. . . Speak to him. He won’t go till you say good-bye. [The hand then
wrote : George Pelham. Good day (?) John.]

[Phinuit’s reference seemed to be quite clear at the time to Professor
William James, and the three Alices were discriminated. It seemed as though
Phinuit’s mention of the other Alices had reminded G. P. of the one well
known to him. Alice James, the sister of Professor William James, had
recently died in England. The first name of Mrs. James is also Alice.
Alice, the sister of Katharine, is the youngest daughter of Mr. Howard and
was very fond of G. P.]

As 1 have already said, the most personal references made at the
sitting cannot be quoted; they were regarded by J. H. as profoundly
characteristic of Pelham, and in minor matters, where my notes were
specially inadequate, such as in the words of greeting and occasional
remarks to the sitter, the manner of reference to his mother with him
** spiritually,” and to his father and [step] mother living, &c., the sitter
was strongly impressed with the vraisemblance of the personality of
Pelham.

959 B. [Dr. Hodgson’s Report continues as follows : —

It so happened that appointments had been made for other sitters, and
it was nearly three weeks before a special opportunity was given for further
cominunication from G. P., at a sitting when Mr. and Mrs. James Howard
were present alone. In the interim I accompanied several different
persons to their sittings, and at each of these Phinuit represented G. P. as
anxious to sec his friends, using some remark as George says, when are
you going to bring Jim?” or ‘‘ George says he wants to tell you about the
philosophy of this life.” One only of fhese sitters, Mr. Vance, had been
known to G. P,, and at tlie beginning of his sitting, which was on March
30th, 1892, G. P. first wrote a few words to myself expressing a wish to see
his father (Mr. P.) about some private matters; then Phinuit spoke for
him, saying, ‘‘ I want to tell you where I am and what I am doing and
what this life consists of.” Then references were made to two other
friends of G. P., who had also been mentioned at John Hart’s sitting, and
then for, the first time the sitter was noticed. " How is your son? I want
to see him some time.” “ Where did he know my son? ” “In studies,
in college.” This was correct : Mr. Vance had a son who was class-mate
of G. P. Mr. Vance then asked : “ Where did George stay with us?” and
received a correct answer, a description of his c^ountry house being given.
(See Report, pp. 4S7“8.)

At the Howards’ first sitting, on April nth, 1892, for which I made
the appointment, of course without giving names, Phinuit said very little.
After a few words at the beginning he gave way for what purported to be
G. P. using the voice, and during nearly the whole of the time of trance

6i4

APPENDICES

B

apparently G. F. controlled the voice directly. The statements made were
intimately personal and characteristic. Common friends were referred to
by name, inquiries were made about private matters, and the Howards,
who were not predisposed to take any interest in psychical research, but
who had been induced by the account of Mr. Hart to have a sitting with
Mrs. Piper, were profoundly impressed with the feeling that they were in
truth holding a conversation with the personality of the friend whom they
had known so many years. The following passages are from Mr. Howard’s
notes taken during the sitting, and may serve to suggest to some extent
the freedom with which the conversation was carried on. All the refer-
ences to persons and [incidents] are correct.

G. P. : Jim, is that you ? Speak to me quick. I am not dead. Don’t think
me dead. I’m awfully glad to see you. Can’t you see me? Don’t you hear
me ? Give my love to my father and tell him I want to see him. I am happy
here, and more so since 1 find I can communicate with you. I pity those peo|^e
who can’t speak ... 1 want you to know I think of you still. 1 spoke to John
about some letters. I left things terribly mixed, my books and my papers ; you
will forgive me for this, won’t you ? . . .

(What do you do, George, where you are ?)

I am scarcely able to do anything yet; I am just awakened to the reality of
life after death. It was like darkness, 1 could not distinguish anything at first.
Darkest hours just before dawn, you know that, Jim. 1 was puzzled, confused.
Shall have an occupation soon. Now 1 can see you, my friends. 1 can hear
you speak. Your voice, Jim, 1 can distinguish with your accent and articula-
tion, but it sounds like a big bass drum. Mine would sound to you like the
faintest whisper.

(Our conversation then is something like telephoning?)

Yes.

(By long distance telephone. )

[G. P. laughs.]

(Were you not surprised to find yourself living ?)

Perfectly so. Greatly surprised. 1 did not believe in a future life. It was
beyond my reasoning powers. Now it is as clear to me as daylight. We
have an astral fac-simile of the material body. . . . Jim, what are you writing
now?

[G. P. when living would probably have jeered at the associations of the
word “ astral,”— R. H.]

(Nothing of any importance.)

Why don’t you write about this ?

(I should like to, but the expression of my opinions would be nothing. 1
roust have facts.)

These I will give to you and to Hodgson if he is still interested in these
things. •

(Will people know about this possibility of communication?)

They are sure to in the end. It is only a question of time when people in
the material body will^ know all about it, and every one will be able to com-
municate. ... 1 wanf all the fellows to know about me. . . . What is Rogers
writing ?

(A novel.) •

TO CHAPTER IX

615

959 B]

No, not that. Is he not writing something about me ?

(Yes, he is preparing a memorial of you.)

That is nice ; it is pleasant to be remembered. It is very kind of him. He
was always kind to me when I was alive. Martha Rogers [deceased daughter]
is here. I have talked with her several times. She reflects too much on her
last illness, on being fed with a tube. We tell her she ought to forget it, and
she has done so in good measure, but she was ill a long time. She is a dear
little creature when you know her, but she is hard to know. She is a beautiful
little soul. She sends her love to her father. . . .

Berwick, how is he? Give him my love. He is a good fellow; he is what
I always thought him in life, trustworthy and honourable. How is Orenberg?
He has some of my letters. Give him my warmest love. He was always very
fond of me, though he understood me least of all my friends. We fellows
who are eccentric are always misunderstood in life. 1 used to have fits of
depression. I have none now. I am happy now. 1 want my father to know
about this. Wc used to talk about spiritual things, but he will be hard to
convince. My mother will be easier. . . .

[As stated above, all the references to persons, incidents, characters, &c., so
far as they are known to living persons, are correct.]

Among the private matters referred to was the disposition of the book,
concerning which G. P. expressed orally the same desire as before. (See
above, p. 612.) The only writing produced at this sitting moreover was
confined to this matter, and was a message to his father repeating his
wish.

He referred to a tin box of German manufacture which he said was

either in New York or Z [giving the name, a very peculiar one, of the

locality of his father’s country residence]. He said that it contained letters
from three persons whom he specified. He wished the Howards to have
this box. They replied that the letters were all burned.

G. P. : I think not. I want you to have them. I want you to tell my
father about this.

(Can^t you give us soifiething that will convince him? something we don’t
know and he does ?)

1 understand, a test. You can tell him about this tin box that I left in my
room. I know they have taken the chest, but this tin box they have not.
[The box was found at Z— , but there were no letters in it.— R. H.]

[Mr. Vance, the sitter of March 30th, 1892, had sent me two questions for
G. P., which I requested the Howards to put at their sitting. The questions
were — *'•1. What was the purpose of the association you formed two years ago
with Miss Helen Vance and two other ladies? 2. Give the names of the two
other ladies.” My impression is that I gave Mr. Howard my recollection of
these questions without having the original letter of Mr. Vance at hand, and
probably Mr. Howard put the tjucstions as I gave them to him. His account
is as follows :— ] • *

Then we put two test questions, by request of Mr. Hodgson : ist. What was
the nature of the Society formed by you and some other young people ? He
was obviously confused, and in trying to answer said “ development.” We told
him not to bother about it gow, but to tell us at next sitting, a proposal which

6i6 APPENDICES [959C

Phinuit recommended, but he himself in his gruff voice suggested “Theo-
sophtc.” I told him no. He made a try at question 2nd. Names of members
of Society, “ Helen Dering — Derrich, or Herrick.” [The questions were ap-
parently not asked until towards the end of the sitting, and Phinuit had
evidently taken control of the voice and was acting as intermediary. The
answer must be called wrong, although Helen was the first name of one of the
members. — R. H.]

959 C. [The following is from Dr. Hodgson’s report in Proceedings
S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 353-57.]

I close this section of my Report by a brief account of the case of the
friend whom I have called Mr. Hart, to whom in the first instance G. P.
manifested (see 959 A), and who himself died in Naples on May 2nd, 1895.
As in G. P.’s case, I substitute other names for the real ones. I had not
been having regular series of sittings at this time, and heard incidentally
on May 3rd that a cablegram had been received by a relative announcing
the death of Hart. My assistant, Miss Edmunds, went out to Mrs. Piper
at my request to arrange a sitting for me for the next day, May 4th, and
to say that it was extremely important* that I must have the sitting. I
did not tell Miss Edmunds the reason, and she made a totally erroneous
conjecture concerning it. The announcement of the death, however,
with the place and cause of death (inflammation of the heart), appeared
in a Boston evening paper on May 3rd. At the sitting on May 4th, after
a few words from Phinuit, G. P. wrote and gave several messages from
friends, and then asked what he could do for me. I replied that 1 had
something for him to do, but could not tell him what it was. He a
brief reference to his father and mother, and then to a friend of my own,
and then came the following : —

Hold, H. See all of these people bringing a gentleman. [K. H. thinks this
is unintentionally written, and doesn>. repeat the words aloud.]

Read ... do you see them, H..^ (No.) He is coming here. 1 think I
knew him. [R. H. can't decipher after think. J That I knew him. Come here
and listen, H. He has been here before and I have seen him since I passed
out. (Who is it?) John. “ Do you see me, H. ? ” He says this. (No.) “What
about my health ? Oh, George, I am here, do not go away from me,” ... not
10 you, H., to me. (Yes, I understand.) “ I thought I should see you once
more before I came here.” (What is the full name ?) John H. (Give me the
second name in full.) Did you speak ? (Write the second name in full.) Hart.
(That’s right, Hart, old fellow.) “Will you listen to me, Hodg . . [Much
excitement in hand, and letters jumbled over. G. P. writing tl^oughout, but
at times apparently much perturbation introduced.] George knew I was here
and met me, but I was too weak to come here and talk, H . Yes, H.,
but the dear old fellow is short-breathed. . . “ I expected to see you before

I came here, H. (Yes, 1 hoped to have met you in the body again) but you
see I was failing. How are you ? ”

What [apparently from G. P. to Hart.]

“ I brought Ge here first.” (Yes, you did.)

Yes, I do [from G. P- to Hart.] [More probably from Hart to G. P., in

9 »C] TO CHAPTER IX 617

answer to some such question, as “Do you mean me?” from G. P. to Hart.
1898.]

Oh, what about me, H. ?

(He means your first messages came to him.)

Oh, I see ! but I was . . . but (you were out of the body) yes. . . . “ I am
a little dull, H., in my head.” (Isn’t the light gooA to-day.^) Yes, but it is I,
H., my (you mean you are not in good trim, George?) No no 1 Hart no,
H. I Hart (I see, Hart is dull. Hart can’t do so well.) [H. is the initial of
Hart’s real name. 1898.] [Thump with fist. Much thumping with fist during
sitting, indicative of assent at different times.]

The above is transcribed from the type-written copy of the record of
the sitting, and the quotation marks were doubtless inserted by myself to
make the record clearer. There was much confusion in the rest of the
sitting. The cause of death he stated to be inflammation of the stomach,
which was not correct, though he had suffered much from this for a year
before his death. I may have known of this, but was not consciously
aware of it. 1 knew that he had been ill in Europe, but when 1 last heard
from him several months previously, I understood that he had recovered.
There were confused references to the Howards. He referred to two
other friends in Europe (whose names had been given in previous sittings
by G. P.), mentioned several names unknown to me, and referred to
incidents in connection with them, as well as other matters, none of
which, for family reasons, I have yet been able to verify. I think it
l)robable that they will be partially, but only partially correct. There
seemed to be glimpses here and there of a clear consciousness. He
wa^ited to know if it was Paris (where he had stayed some time while in
Europe). I said it was Arlington Heights.

“ Arlington, I remember Arlington —did you not take me here? (Yes, thi.s
is th£ very room where George came to >yu.) Oh yes, I had his [article of
G. P. specifically mentioned] and ray watch. . . . Will they send my body on
to New York? (I don’t know.) I hope they will. They are now talking
about it.” [I learned later that the desirability of taking the body to America
was discussed.]

When I asked, ‘'Why didn’t George tell me to begin with?” he
replied, “ Because I told him to let me come and tell myself.” This was
like Hart, and so was the statement quoted above that it was he who
brought G. P. first.

At this sitting, and several also in the following week, during which
the confusion continued, a knowledge was shown of various matters known
to me which were specially suggestive of Hart, references to friends and
relatives, presents which he had given to me, jokes about cigars, magazines
which he had entrusted to me just before he went to Europe three years
previously, &c., but of course I was anxious to obtain information con-
cerning events in Europe of which I was entirely ignorant, especially any
that occurred just before hi| death ; and I have such on record, but have

6i8

APPENDICES

[959 C

not yet succeeded in discovering how much correct statement they
include. Between the first and second sitting it occurred to me that the
announcement of his being there to communicate was ** led up to ” by
G. P., and at the second sitting, when Hart wrote part of the time
himself, I said, ** I suppose last time you thought I took your coming very
coolly.” The hand wrote excitedly : You seemed very inconsiderate to
what you used to do.” I explained that I had heard of his death by a
cablegram which had been received by his “ brother-in-law.” He then
wrote the name of the brother of his sister s husband. I said no, ** your
wife’s brother.”

Another incident at the same sitting showed a curious remembrance.

. . . Ask for my cigar case ... am I dreaming ... I think I know
that once I sat in this corner [hand points to other side of the room,
to place where Mrs. Piper sat at time when Hart attended his sitting on
March 22nd, 1892.] (You mean you sat there .?) Yes I did (yes, I remember)
I know where 1 am now.

As I recall this incident, I did not understand what was meant at
first when the hand pointed, as it was more than three years since
Mrs. Piper had sat there. That position in the room was not associated
specially in my mind with Hart, as various other persons whom I had
accompanied to sittings had sat in the same position, both before and
after Hart’s sitting, and it was only after April 29th, 1892 (see Report
p. 292), when I succeeded in getting the hand to write with the block-
book on the table instead of on the top of Mrs. Piper’s head, •Hiat
I requested Mrs. Piper to change her position, so that there might *be
plenty of room for the table and for a sitter on the other side of it.
But the occasion was a very memorable one to Harty and if he was
communicating and waking to a consciousness of his surroundingtf, it
was a natural observation for him to make.

In June and July a friend of mine was having a series of sittings,
and Hart sent a message to me through him ; he was becoming clearer,
and wished to communicate. There were no opportunities for any
further series of sittings, however, and Mrs. Piper stopped sitting for
her summer rest, and I visited England later. Few sittings were given
in the winter of 1895-6 owing to Mrs, Piper’s ill-health. Hart gave
brief messages on several occasions; said that he wanted to fbilow in
“ G. P.’s tracks,” and seemed somewhat aggrieved, so to speak, because
he did not have the same opportunity as had been afforded to G. P.
Thus, on January 22nd, 1896 : — ,

« *1

. . . What in the world is the re&son you never call for me? I am
not sleeping. I wish to help you in identifying myself, ... I am a
good deal better now. (You were confused at first.) Very, but 1 did not
really understand how confu.sed I was. It is more so, 1 am more so when I
try to speak to you. I understand now why George spelled his words 10

959C] TO CHAPTER IX 619

me. [Several sentences, even of ordinary words, were spelt out by Phinuit
from G. P. at his first appearance, to Hart.]

He became clearer later on, and purported to take part in an inquiry
I was making concerning a person’s whereabouts in Mexico. It was
during this time that Miss Warner {Report^ p. 324) had her two sittings,
January 6th and 7th, 1897. She remarked to me during the sitting of
January 7th, 1897, that Hart knew one of her brothers, Charlie, and
that they virent to the Azores together. I asked Phinuit if he or G. P.
could get Hart. Shortly afterwards G. P. wrote, and after a short con-
versation with the sitter came the following : —

Did you have a brother Jack, Hart asks. (Yes.)

[For Hart.] 1 am here. George, tell her I see her and I long to ask her
brother if he recalls the storm we experienced.

(I know he does. I’ve heard him speak of it.)

• Good, and ask him if he still has the stick like mine. Take the pipe, old
chap, I do not wish it. Hear you? (R. H. : Yes, it may be the one he
gave me) and I have it in my mind. A memento. He ought to have it.
[Hart gave me a pipe. It is not clear whether the reference is to this, or
to one connected with sitter’s brother.— R. H.]

We went to a queer little hotel, at a little hotel together, Charlie had
a headache from hunger. We were almost starved when we got there, the
food was bad, the food w.as so bad, poor. 1 am content here, quite. Do you
ever see me as I really am ? (No. I don’t see you at all.) Not at all. 1 do,
H. Hear Hart say have a smoke, anything for relief. Ask him [Charlie]
about this for me. Hungry. (R. H. : He’s still talking about Charlie and
th^ir experiences together?) Yes, H. He is.

(Tell some more.) We went up to the hotel and ask him if he recalls
the laugh we had after we got to our room. Give him my love.

(What did you laugh about ?) because of the dirt, &c. . . . very amusing.
He Jias not been well but he is going to be. [Disturbance in hand.] Hold
on, old man, I cannot hear if you grab me *in this way.

Did you ever have a fever ?

(R. H. : Who says that?) I, J. H.

(Do you mean me ?) Yes. (Yes. I had a fever. Pneumonia, and typhoid
fever.) Never have another. Going to be well now. I said it. (Do you
mean me?) Yes, Charles too. Give him my love and do not forget about
the stick. . . .

Miss Warner wrote : —

«

I had known that Charley and Hart took a trip in a sailing vessel to the
Azores, but absolutely no details, except that the boat was driven on the rocks
and they watched her break up.

•

This was all*^he could recollect in connection with the statements
made by Hart about her brother. I remembered also about the ship-
wreck at the Azores, but had no recollections of any sort connecting
Hart with Charley Warner, or about any of the other incidents referred
to. I think, however, that as Hart himself told me of the shipwreck

620 APPENDICES [960A

at the Azores, he probably mentioned Warner in connection with it.
He may possibly also have spoken of some of the other incidents. But
I am unable to recall the vaguest memory of any sort about them.
Charley Warner was then in California, and in reply to inquiries he
wrote on F’ebruaiy 2nd, 1897 : —

J. H. and myself once were hove to on the North Atlantic for about three
days during a severe storm. At another time we were at Horta, Fayal
Island, and watched our vessel drag ashore and break up on account of
a very bad storm, or hurricane. J. H. had a very serviceable stick. As I
remember it, a stout little blade dropped out of the ferrule. 1 never had one
like it that I can remember. He thought highly of it and advised me to get
one like it. I don’t remember anything about a pipe. W'hat he says about
the queer little hotel is all true ; I don’t remember that I had a headache,
but we were hungry. J. H. was extremely amused about something at that
hotel and we had a hearty laugh. It was connected with dirt.

r

960 A. From Dr. Hodgson’s Report in Proceedings S.P.R,, vol. xiii.
PP- 335 - 6 -

I pass on now to consider brieAy the results obtained from some other
communicators, and begin with the case of the lady whom 1 have called
Madame Elisa Manners. Other names are substituted for the real ones.
She was known to G. P., and her first appearance was to her sister,
Madame Frederica, on May 17th, 1892 (Report^ p. 471). She had died the
previous summer. The cause of her death was designated by Phinuit, who
also described correctly, purporting to repeat what she was telling him, some
incidents which had occurred at her death-bed. The sitter inquired about
a watch which had belonged to Madame Elisa, but the statements made
at this sitting, and to myself at subsequent sittings, did not lead to its recovery.
.Some Italian was written by request, the lady being as familiar with Italian
as with English, but only two or three common words were decipherable.
The first names of sitter and communicator were given, and the last name' was
both written and afterwards given by G. P. to Phipuit. Some of the writing
was of a personal character, and .some about the watch, and G. P. stated
correctly, inter alia^ that the sitter’s mother was present (in “ spirit ”) with the
communicator, and that he himself did not know her. The real names are
very uncommon. The Italian for “ It is well. Patience,” was whispered at the
end of the sitting as though by direct control of the voice by Madame Elisa.
Both the sitter and her sister were well known to me, and also to the Howards,
and Madame Elisa made several personal communications in the course of the
sittings recorded in Appendix I. (see Report^ 417-19, 423), where further
attempts, only partially successful, were made to write Italian clearly, and also
to speak it, but not much was said.

.She communicated by writing later to tbrcje or four other friends or rehi-
tives, always in a strongly personal way, and very clearly.M In her statements
to one very personal friend, at sittings Vhen I was present, she showed on
several occasions an intimate private knowledge of her sister and her sister’s
family in connection with events that were occurring, and also of other relatives
to whom she was deeply attached. She also had several “ written talks ” with
myself alone, referred to incidents with which we were both familiar when

TO CHAPTER IX

621

962 A]

guests at the same house in another part of the country, and appreciated
properly other references which I made myself. It always seemed like the
woman I knew.

As I have mentioned elsewhere (Report^ pp. 393, 332), the intelligence
communicating by writing is not conscious of the act of writing. The chief
difficulty apparently in getting another language written by the hand is that
strange words tend to be written phonetically unless they are thought out
slowly letter by letter. The writing is usually much more legible now than
it was during the period of the records from which 1 am quoting, when there
was frequently much difficulty in deciphering even the simplest English
words. It was therefore not surprising that so little of tlie “ Italian” written
by Madame Elisa was decipherable.

962 A. From Dr. Hodgson’s report in Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii.
pp. 384-5.

• There are various references in the records given in Appendix IV. to the
twin children of Dr. and Mrs. A. B. Thaw. One of these, Margaret, died a
year before their first sitting at the age of six months, and the other, Ruthie,
died three months before their first sitting at the age of fifteen months. The
communications concerning these children were given almost entirely by
Phinuit, who had, however, some difficulty with the names. At the first sitting
several attempts were made before the name Margaret was given clearly.
Trouble with teeth was mentioned in connection with the children, apparently
as the first impression on the appearance of Margaret, but not actually specified
as Margaret’s. Margaret was teething when she died. Phinuit also said that
one of the children wanted baby’s beads. Margaret used to play with a neck-
lace of beads belonging to her older sister living. And referring to Margaret,
Phinuit .said that she had some fiowers in her hand, that she liked them and
took them with her.” Mrs. Thaw had placed three little flowers in Margaret’s
hand after her death. Phinuit got much more in connection with Ruthie,
whgsc first appearance seemed to be accompanied by a recurrence of associa-
tions connected with the trouble that caused her death, dysentery and sore
throat. Phinuit indicated Hhe locality and the distress, and Ruthie’s dislike of
“ the powder.” Bismuth was given through the entire illness of two weeks and
was always given with trouble. Phinuit spoke of Ruthie as having light golden
hair, afterwards adding curly; — correct— but called her a boy. The living
Ruthie was very generally mistaken for a boy, but not, of course, by the Thaws.
Yet Phinuit had much difficulty in getting the name, and failed to get nearer
than Ethie, and the sitters told him it began with R. Phinuit said that
she had. not learned to talk, but later on he got the name Ruth-ie correctly.
He remarked that she only said papa and mamma. Other words that the
living Ruthie said were given in later sittings. Phinuit described her as
wanting to see the stars. For two or three months before her death Ruthie
was fond of pointing at the i?lars through the window. At the beginning
of the sitting PtfPhuit said she pqt her hand *00 Dr. Thaw’s head, and
afterwards described her as wanting to pat his face, actions which were
characteristic of the living Ruthie towards Dr. Thaw. Similarly .she wanted
to hear the tick tick (watch) in connection with her uncle Aleck, and it
was he who chiefly used to hold the watch for her to hear it. And another
characteristic action was reproduced in connection with Mr. Melvin W. ;

622 APPENDICES [96SA

Phinuit said she wanted him to wave the hand in a certain way to Mr.
W., and the living Ruthie waved her hand in that way to Mr. W., and
to him only. Reference was also made to her picture, and Mrs. Thaw was
painting a picture of Ruthie when she was taken ill. In later sittings Phinuit
described her as saying other words, baby pretty ^ Bettie^ and pussie^ with the
accent used by Ruthie when living. These were the only words besides the
papa and mamma mentioned before, used by Ruthie when living. The first
time Mrs. Thaw wore fur at a sitting, the hand stroked it, and Phinuit whispered
pussie *’ as Ruthie living used to do. But Ruthie had whispered pussie ’* at
a previous sitting. Two or three times there seemed to be a direct control of
the voice by Ruthie who took the place of Phinuit (Beportt pp. 564, 576, 578).
The first time she whispered pttee and pssee (pretty and pussie) and the second
time pttee only, the words being many times repeated. This second occasion
was connected with rather a striking incident. Mrs. Piper was visiting the
Thaws in New York, and they took her up the river Hudson to their country
house and had a sitting on the afternoon of the day of their arrival. I was
taking notes, sitting slightly to one side and partly behind Mrs. Piper, while Dr.
and Mrs. Thaw were sitting in front of her, with their beads somewhat bowed.
Phinuit apparently “left” and his place was taken by Ruthie, who began
whispering pttee pttee. The hand rose and turned somewhat diagonally and
extended the forefinger and pointed towards a picture on the far side of the
room. The Thaws did not see this action until I drew their attention to it,
when they looked up, and followed the direction of the pointing. The hand
then trembled and sank. Dr. Thaw noted : “ During the last month of
Ruthie’s life it was a regular morning custom to bring her to the room in
which this sitting was held — our bedroom — and she would alway.s point, as
hand did in sitting, with one finger (unusual with a baby) and say *pt-tee,
pt-tee,' just as in sitting. This little incident had not been in either siT^r's
conscious mind since baby’s death six months before. Mrs. Piper had never
been in that room until the actual time of sitting. Many other pictures in the
room, two of which Mrs. Piper’s hand could have pointed at more easily
than the particular one always noticed by the baby.” ,

963 A. I now cite a few instances of prophecies given through Mrs.
Piper.

(j) The following account is from Miss W.’s report (made from con-
temporary notes) of sittings with Mrs. Piper, Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii.
P- 34-

In the spring of 1888, an acquaintance, S., was suffering torturing disease.
There was no hope of relief, and only distant prospect of reletise. A consulta-
tion of physicians predicted continued physical suffering and probably mental
decay, continuing perhaps through a .series of years. S.’s daughter, worn with
anxiety and care, was in danger of breaking in health. “ How can I get her
away for a little rest?” I a.sked Dr. Phinuit,* May 24, 1888. “She will not
leave her father,” was his reply, “ but his suffering is not for long. The doctors
are wrong about that. There will be a change soon, and he will pass out of the
body before the summer is over.” His death occurred in June 1888.

E. G. W.

{b) 'I'he next incident is from Mr. “ M. N.*S ” account of Mrs. Piper in

963A] TO CHAPTER IX 623

Proceedings S.P.R., vol. viii. p. 12O1 which was corroborated by Mrs.
“M. N.»

April yk [ 1889 .].

. . . About end March of last year I made her a visit (having been in the
habit of doing so, since early in February, about once a fortnight). She told
me that a death of a near relative of mine would occur in about six weeks,
from which 1 should realise some pecuniary advantages. I naturally thought
of my father, who was advanced in years, and whose description Mrs. Piper
had given me very accurately some week or two previously. She had not
spoken of him as my father, but merely as a person nearly connected with
me. 1 asked her at that sitting whether this person was the one who would
die, but she declined to state anything more clearly to me. My wife, to whom
I was then engaged, went to see Mrs. Piper a few days afterwards, and she
told her (my wife) that my father would die in a few weeks.

About the middle of May my father died very suddenly in London from
heart failure, when he was recovering from a very slight attack of bronchitis,
and the very day that his doctor had pronounced him out of danger. Previous
to this Mrs. Piper (as Dr. Phinuit) had told me that she would endeavour to
influence my father about certain matters connected with his will before he
died. Two days after 1 received the cable announcing his death my wife and
I went to see Mrs. Piper, and she [Phinuit] spoke of his presence, and his
sudden arrival in the spirit-world, and said that he (Dr. Phinuit) had en-
deavoured to persuade him in those matters while my father was sick. Dr.
Phinuit told me the state of the will, and described the principal executor, and
said that he (the executor) would make a certain di.sposition in my favour,
subject to the consent of the two other executors, when I got to London,
Lngkind. Three weeks afterwards I arrived in London ; found the principal
executor to be the man Dr. Phinuit had described. The will went materi^ly
as he had stated. The disposition was made in my favour, and my sister, who
was chiefly at my father’s bedside the last three days of his life, told me that
he had repeatedly complained of the presence of an old man at the foot of
hisil>ed, who annoyed him by discussing Ivs private affairs. . . .

[“ M. N.”]

(c) Sec Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xiii. pp. 447-449.

At a sitting with Mrs. Piper on March 7, 1892, the death of her uncle
David was foretold to Miss Macleod. Her contemporary note of the
statement was : David will die soon.”

She wrote on March 27, 1893 :

uncle David, whose death Mrs, Piper predicted at the sitting
which I had with her on March 7, 1892, died at Chicago on last Tuesday,
the 21st of March. As far as I know, his health was perfectly good at
the time of the sitting.”

(d) From Dr. Hodgson’sPaccount of the sittings of Dr. A. B. Thaw with
Mrs. Piper, Proceedings S.P.R., vo>. xiii. p. 352*.

Several minor prophecies proved correct ; one important prophecy concern-
ing the success of certain machines was wrong as to time, as well as other
circumstances connected with them ; but another concerning the death of a
brother, who was never preSent at a sitting, was right. This brother was a

APPENDICES

624

[980 A

chronic invalid with asthma. At the sitting of May loth, 1892, Phinuit said
that his kidneys were out of order, and it was discovered for the first time that
he had kidney disease on a careful medical examination made two weeks later.
At the same sitting Phinuit said that he would die “ within six months or a
year,” and, in reply to the question how, said, “ He’s going to sleep, and when
he wakes he'll be in the spirit. Heart will stop.” On May 22nd, the time was
given as “ six months or a little less.” He died in sleep, of heart failure, on the
3rd of the following September.

980 A. I cited in 858 A a case, communicated by Dr. Ermacora,
of Padua, of foreknowledge of a letter's arrival on the part of a sensitive
well knowm to him, Signorina Maria Manzini, the knowledge purporting
to come from her control, ‘‘Elvira.” An article by Dr. Ermacora in
Proceedings S.P.R., vol. xi. p. 235, records a long series of observations
made by him with the same sensitive, and two other precognitive cases of
hers — of which I quote one below — are given in vol. xi. pp, 466-476.
Dr. Ermacora was not able to decide whether “Elvira” is a separate
entity, or merely a modification of the medium’s own mind. There is,
in fact, much the same perplexity as in the case of Phinuit and Mrs.
Piper.

Whatever Elvira may be, she possesses certain supernormal powers
which for us are perhaps the more instructive in that their scope is some-
what narrowly limited. Among these powers Filvira claims precognition ;
admittedly on what may be termed a puny scale, and dealing with trivial
matters, but nevertheless involving some real knowledge of the coming
course of events, and of the part which human actions, apparentiyTree,
will play therein. The question now before us is whether Elvira’s ap-
parent foreknowledge may not be explained as inference from a slightly
wider knowledge of the present, combined with a power of suggestion
exercised not only upon Maria Manzini herself (which on any hypothesis
is obviously probable), but even upon strangers.^^ Dr. Ermacora, as may
be seen from his full report, kept these points in mind ; and his con-
clusion was that Elvira had shown some foreknowledge of events, paltry
indeed in themselves, but yet such as suggestion can hardly be pressed
to cover. (See the incident of sale of pawn-tickets, and others, in RivisUi
di Studi Psichici^ 1S95.) question will then be, — and these trivial

incidents may help us quite as well as more important ones towards
its solution, — whether that supernormal knowledge of actually 'existing
thoughts and things with which Elvira must at any rate be credited (see
858 A) may be enough to suggest by mere forward-looking inference, —
itself perhaps supernorrnally acute, — the evfnts foretold in the following
and some similar cases. * . • '

1 Dr. Ermacora once informed me that Elvira had made a prediction involving a
mi.stake to be made by Marla in cutting out some garments, and then withdrew it, as
not wishing that Maria .should thus waste the stuff, and resolving to inthience her not to
make the mistake. Elvira herself, therefore, admits th^t she can influence the so-called
predictions by suggestions of her own.

TO CHAPTER IX

625

980A]

Dr. Ermacora writes : —

Signorina Maria Manzini, at my request, kept an account of the dreams
which occurred in her ordinary sleep. Some were remembered spontaneously
in the morning and some in her next somnambulic state. In the latter case I
suggested to her that she should remember and record them after waking.

I think the following case was remembered in somnambulism, but this is
of no consequence, because Signorina Maria, following my advice, recorded not
only the date of dreams, but also the date and the hour when she wrote
them down. In any case the present dream was recorded before its fulfil-
ment.

This is i#hat I find in the record of Signorina Maria’s dreams : —

March rjth, 1894, ii P.M.

“Night of March adth-ayih, 1894.

“ I dreamt that the door bell rang on the S. Pietro side of the house. ^ I
n/cnt to open and found a tall man about forty years old, with greyish
trousers and a darker overcoat. He was very polite, and asked if I would
subscribe to the issue of a novel, saying that afterwards 1 should have a
pair of earrings as a prize. I said no, because 1 thought it was an impos-
ture.”

I did not read the account of this dream till after its realisation, but am
perfectly certain that Signorina Maria told it to me directly, and I also distinctly
recollect that when Signorina Maria related the realisation a few days later, she
said I ought to remember her preceding dream ; and I remember also that 1
not only recalled it, but that I looked at once at the record to .see if it had been
writtfp down according to rule. I found that it was correct, and that it agreed
with the viva voce story. Besides, though Signorina Maria may not always be
diligent in recording dreams she hardly remembers, she is very careful to put
the exact date, and is therefore quite certain that the dream occurred either in
the night of March 26th-27th, or at most (supposing the case to have been
complicated by a paramnesia which displaced the dream in time) on March
27th, at 9 P.M. ; about which time, as can be seen from my journal of the
somnambulic experiments, * Signorina Maria was in somnambulism in my
presence.

On the evening of March 31st, i.e. four days after the dream, Signorina M.
told me that on that day about 3 p.m. the visit of which she had dreamed had
taken place. Everything coincided; the entrance of the person by the door
towards S. Pietro, his age, his insinuating manners, the colour of his trousers
and overcoat, and the object of his visit.

I called her mother, and asked her to describe the visit with all possible
details ; meanwhile I took the following notes : “ The person came twice ; the
first time about 11 a.m., when Maria was out. Signora Annetta (her mother)
was alone in the house. The visitor had very plea.sant manners, and was abo^^i
thirty-five years old^ ^Signorina Maria thought forty). He had a box covered
with black cloth wTth him, such as is dsed by commercial travellers. He said
he came to show them a novelty. In order to get rid of him, Signora Annetta
said that Signorina Maria was not at home ; he replied that he would return,

^ Signorina Maria’s house two doors, one in the Via S. Pietro, and the other
turned towards the river Racchiglione.

VOL. II. • 2 R

626

APPENDICES

and Signora Annetta told him to come at 2 p.m. At 2 p.m. he returned and
rang at the door on the S. Pietro side. Signora Annetta opened to him, and
says that when he entered the room Maria seemed much astonished (Maria
said at once that she was astonished at recognising him). He proposed that
they should subscribe to the issue of a novel; there were to be prizes when the
issue was finished ; two pictures, or a small organ, or a pair of earrings. In
his box were the organ and an alarum, as samples, and he had with him, but
not in the box, samples of the earrings, of the frames, and two oleographs
between pasteboards.

Luigia Monti and Linda Bigoni were also present. Maria refused the
offers. When they and the man were gone, Maria remarked witli .surprise
that she had already dreamt of the scene with all its details, />.^as far as the
man was concerned. Signora Annetta added that from girlhood she also had
frequently dreamed of coming events.

March 31 j/, 1894,9.30 p.m. (written in the presence of Annetta and Maria).
It was necessary to prove two things, before the case could be supposed to be
evidential. First, that the vi.sit was real, and not an odd hallucination of the
senses or memory, and secondly, that the man had not made the tour of Padua
offering his merchandise, many days before the dream ; in which case Signorina
Maria might have become aware of it in some way or other, and thus have
originated the dream herself.

In order to clear up the first |3oint, I went on the following day (April ist,
about 6.30) to see Signorina Linda Bigoni, and asked her to tell me all about
the visit at which she had been present. She replied that she had gone to see
Maria the day before, about 2.30, while the man was there, and she confirmed
all the details about the object of his visit, his remarks, the things he had with
him, his politeness, his age, and the colour of his clothe.s. He had made the
same proposition to her as to Maria. As she had arrived after him, she^ould
not say by which door he had entered ; but she said he had left before her,*and
had gone out by the kitchen door, towards the river. On being questioned,
she replied that she had not seen Signorina Maria since the visit. Before leaving
her, I requested her, if the man .should come to her house, or if .she shouhl
meet him in the street, to ask him bn what day he had come to Padua; which
she promised to do. •

The same evening I went back to Signorina Maria, and before telling her
of my talk with Signorina Linda, I questioned her and her mother again.
.Signorina Maria said she did not remember by which door the man had
gone out, or rather, she had paid no attention; but her mother said she was
certain that he had gone out by the kitchen door, because he had seen some
one enter that way, and on leaving had said that as there was a door there
also he would go out by it. The mother did not know, however, whether iie
or Signorina Linda B. had left first, but Signorina Maria was sure he had
gone away first, because afterwards she had continued her conversation with
Signorina Linda about their own affairs, and this conversation, begun before
he left, had prevented her noticing by which 4oor he quitted the house.

Both then said they remembered ^ignorina Linda B.Is coming at about
2.30 while the man was there, and that he had come before 2 and stayed nearly
an hour.

Thus all the testimony is in accordance, and no doubt remains that the
event with all its details really happened.

TO CHAPTER IX

980 A]

627

On the evening of April i8th, Signorina Maria told me that her friend,
Signorina Linda B., had something to tell me, but in order to keep her promise
she would tell it only to me. Signorina Maria said that Linda B. was coming
to see her on the morrow, when I could meet her.

The following day (April 19th) 1 went to see Signorina Maria at the time
fixed, and found Linda B. at the house. The latter told me she had met the
man in the street ; that he had recognised her and had renewed his offer. She
took advantage of this to ask him when he had arrived in Padua, and he said
he had come on March 29th, and that he had not visited Padua before for
several years.

This proves that the dream occurred two days before the arrival of the
person implicated, and that consequently it could not have resulted from a
mere sensorial impression of Signorina Maria’s.

Of such a type as this — gradually evolved, slightly inexact, and
altogether trivial — are all the predictions given through Elvira. I do
ndt think, however, that their triviality affords in itself any clear in-
dication as to their origin. They are the attempts of an intelligence
which, whether embodied or unembodied, is not much above a child’s
level, to prove a fact of the highest importance — namely, the possibility
of foreseeing future events. In comparison with the value of the result
thus aimed at, the actual incidents by which it may be attained matter
little. It is of greater interest to have a pedlar’s visit foretold, if only
that visit could not have been foreseen by any ordinary intelligence, than
to have, say, a death foretold, if we suspect that that more impressive
prophecy may have helped to work its own fulfilment.

INDEX

By Miss E. M. SAMSON

A.f Miss, automatic writing of, ii. i6o>i, 447-
^57; crystal-visions of, i. 2^7, 588-95,
iK 210, 262 Hoie^ 449; raps in presence
of, ii. 160, 208.

— , Miss (Dr. Bramwcll's patient), case of,
i. 506-9, 513.

— , Miss (Prof. H.’s case), automatic writing

. by, ii. 445.

Miss (Kev. J. Peed’s patient), clairvoy-
ance of, i. $58 -<i.

Mr., automatic writing by, ii* 122, 416-18.

— , Jeanne, case of, i. 460.

Abaoniinai pains, hypnotic cure of, i. 470.

Abercromby, Blanche,” case of, ii. 115 notCf
23 >-- 4 -

Abnormal and supernormal contrasted, ii. 85.

Aboulia, i. 345, 347, 350 *

Accident, apparitions at time of, i. 253, il.
43 - 4 '

Accouchement, see Childbirth.

.\chille, ca.se of, i. 303-5.

“Across the Plains,” quoted, i. gi; cited,

,ii. 126.

Prof., experiments by, i, 532-3; case
sent to, ii. 45-8.

Adare, Lord (Lord Dunraven), cited, ii. 221,

533-4. 579. jS*. , ..

Adie, Miss C., apparition seen by, 11. 323-5.

, Mrs., apparition seen by, ii. 324-5.

“ Adrienne ” ( Lucie 3)^ case of, i. 328-30.

*■ A£d(Cology,” cited^ ii. 576 note,

Aeschylus, works of, i. 98. .»

After-images—

Ghosts possibly explicable as, ii. 4.

Memory-images distinguished from,

Natiire^ofl’i. 225.

Recall of, by tuning-fork, i. 587 note^.

Veridical, ii. 384.

Agassix, case of, i. 134.

Agnosticism regarding survival, i. i ; ii. 296-7,
3 <V-

Agoraphobia, i. 42, 177, 466.

Aide, iJamilton, cited, ii. 570.

Akhurst, W. J., phantasm of, ii. 371-2.

AksakofT, Hon. Alexander N., cases reported
by, ii. *5, 170-1, 466773. 493-5:
rpioted, ii. 178-82; cited, ii. 2(^, 555.

Albert, case of, i. 370. ,

Alcoholism, see Dipsomania.

Alexander, Helen, case of, i. 266-8.

, Prof. Alfred, cases reported by, i. 393-

394 i il- >56^. 346-7. 353-4

Al^er, Mrs., case of, cited, ii. 248 fute.

Alice, clairvoyant diagnosis by, i. 486-7.
Allbright, Mr., planchette experiments by,
ii. 1 46.

“ Alma,” case of, i. 296.

“ Alterations de la Personalite,” quoted,
i. 333.

Alternating personalities—

Change of faculty in, ii. 201.

Corporeal and incorporeal state of, ii.
272.

Memory in, ii. aoi.

Ambidexterity in relation to subliminal men-
tation, i. 82, 84-5.

** American Journal of Psycholopjy,” cited,
i. 79 notef 576 anii note ; ii. 95
106.

Amnesia, i. 61.

Ampere, cise of, i. 80.

Anaesthesia-

Hypnotic, i. 470-1, 533-9; systematised
(negative hallucinations), i. 190.
Hysteric,— unperceived by patient, i. 44,
299 ; injury not resultant from, i. 44, 47 ;
fanciful areas of, i. 45-6, 164; organic
disease unnoticed in, i. 48; nature of,
i. 65 ; in a case of “fugues,” i. 299.
Self-suggested, i. 533.

Subliminal control of, i. a6; ii. 516.
Anaesthetic spots in witchcraft, occurrence of,
i. 4.

Anaesthetics—

Hypnotism contrasted with, i. 179.

Pain suppressed by, afterwa^ felt,
i- 472 - 3 *

Anagrams by table-tilting, ii. 93-4.

Analgesi.'i—

Hypnotic, i. 179-82, 470-4.

Hysteric,!. 65.

Subliminal control of, ii. ^16.

“ Anatomy of Sleep,” cited, li. 348.

Andrew, Mr., case of, li. 556-8.

Ang 61 iquc, Sceur, case of, cited, ii. 199.
Aftgsineurose^ i. 465.

Angus, Miss, crystal-Wsions of, i. 237, 595-8.
Animals —

Apparition perhaps seen ii. 2x4 ^tote.
Hypnotic experiments on, i. 163, 441 ^ 3 -
PhanChsm of, i. 635.

Proximity of, sensibility to, i. 483-4.
Senseorgans of, i. 479-80.

Telepathy between, possibility of, i. 246
fu>ie.

631

632

INDEX

'' Animismus und Spiritismus/* cited, ii.

Aonales des Sciences Psychiques,*’ cited,
“• *36, 531 » 671 ; quot^ ii. 4 ii“* 3 *

** Annales Medico-Pyschologiques,** cited,
i. ^9 note, 51$ note,

** Ann^ePsychol^ique, L’,” cited, i. 106*
Anthropomorphism, ii. 265.

Aphasia, i. 53, 65.

Apparitions, see Hallucinations.

Apparitions and Thought-Transference,**
cited, i. 224 notSf 619 note; quot^,
i. 619-22, 688-90.

Apparitions de Lourdes, Les,** cited, i. 564.
Arago, quoted, i. 89.

Arcanes de la vie future devoil6$/’ cited,
ii- 573 -

Archives de M6decine,*’ cited, i. 127 note^;
quoted, i. 369-70.

“ Archives de Nevrologie,** cited, i. 339 note,

“ Archives des Sciences Physiques ct Natur-
elles,*’ cited, i. ^65 note.

“ Archiv fiir Kriminal-Anthropologie und
Kriminalistik, cited, i. 513.

“ Archiv fiir Psychiatrie,’* cited, L 645.
Arithmetical prodigies, i. 79-85, 116, 227.
Arnold, J. N., cited, i. 313.

Arrival, hallucinations regarding, i. 255-7,
272-4.

Art-

Emotional memory desirable for, ii.

138-9.

Symbolic communication by, i. 101.
Artigalas, Prof., asc reported by, i. 498.
Ascetism, ii. 291, 309.

Ashburner, Dr., quoted, i. 557-8.

Assier, M. D*, dted, ii. 11.

Atkinson, Miss F., apparitions seen by, ii.

359-60-

f Surg.-Maj, John, apparition seen by,

ii. 336-8.

Attention-

Central organic perceptivity stimulated
by concentration of, i. 480.

Deafness affected by, i. 474.

Hypnotic influence on, i. 179, 192-6I
469-70, 5 * 3 -

Life maintained by subliminal, i. 217-18.
Training of, i. 174, 183.

Aubrey, A., case of, i. 474.

Audition-

Colour^, i. 225, 566-7: ii. 270.
Hallucinations involving visual faculty
stronger evidentially than those in-
volving auditory, i. 254 note.
Hyperssthesia of, ii. 106.

Hypnotic influence on, i. 1S4, 474-6.
Inward, motor element in, i. 102.
Non-acoustical, i. 223, 274.

Shell-hearing, i. 275.

Stimulation of, by lights, i. 387 neic^*
Transportation of sense of, 1. 500.

Auguez, Paul, cited, ii. 440.

Aura, i. 485; ii. 589. .

** Australian Medical Gazette, The,” dted,

*• SM*

Authority, claims of, ii. 309.

Automatic or Spirit Writing,** dted, ii. 461
noie^.

Automatic vrriting. See under Motor Auto*
matism.

** Autoiiiatisme Psychologique, L*,** cited, i.

322 and note; quoted, i. 496-7.
Automatisms—

Highest-level and other centres active in,

i. 74.

Motor, see Motor Automatisms.

Sensory, see Sensory Automatisms.
Aylesbury, Com. T. W., apparition seen by,
i. 291, 687-8.

Ayre, Capt., case of, dted, ii. 17.

Azam, Dr., case of patient of, i. 333.

I B, case of, i. 501-2.

I — , Mme., case of, see L6onie.

I — , Mile., case of, i. 510-11 ; ii. 169-70.

I — , Major Lucius, alleged communications
from, ii. 49(^9.

— , Miss, planchette experiments by, ii. 146-7.
— , Miss (Dr. BramwelPs patient), case of,
i. 491.

— , Miss f Mr. Kawson*s subject), experiments
with, i. 614 sea, •

— , Miss (Mrs. Siagwick's subject), experi-
ments with, i. 499, sjg-j, 547, 549-5*.
— , Mrs., apparitions seen by, li. 355-6.

— . Mrs., phantasm of, ii. 61, 330-1.

— , Mrs. (Mr. Rawson’s subject), experiments
i. 614 se^.

— , A., clairvoyance of, i. 556-S.

— , S. H., apparition of, i. 292-6.

Babylonian inscription, dream regarding, i.
375 “ 9 *

Bacchus, Mrs., apparition seen by, ii. 34-6.
Backman, Dr. Alfred, cases recorded by, i.

197 and note, 296, 497 and note\
« 554 - 5 * ..

Bacon, cited, 11. 279. •

** Bad tricks,** cure of, i. 173, 175. •

Badaire, M., case reported by, i. 521-3.

Bagot, Mrs.j dog vision of, i. 635.

Baillarger, cited, i. I2i, 569.

Baker, Rachel, case of, i. 204, 319 and notes,,

, Winj|[field, case of, cited, ii. 18.

Banshees, 1. 405-6. *

Barcellos. Dr. Alfredo, case of, ii. 156-9.

Bard, Alfred, apparition seen by, ii. 19, 66-7.
Barmby, Rev. j., case sent by, ii. 343.

Barnby, Sir )os^h, crystal-vision cases re-
ported by, i. 590-1.

Baron, Mr. le, case of, cited, ii. 137.

Barrett, Prof. W. F., cited, i. 237, 480, 483,
600; ii. 554, 579; experiments by, t.
539; case sent to, ii. 156; founder of
S.P.R., ii. 224.

Barrington, Hon. Eric, case reported by, i.
594 -

Barrows, C. M., cited, i. 471.

, Dr. Ira, quoted, i. 354-60.

Barth, £. H., case reported by, i. 546.
Beauchamp, Miss, case of, i. 62-3, 341, 344-
352; ii. 140, 109.

Beaunis, Prof., cited, i. 476, 491 and note\

9 497, 502 ani/ffjRr?

Beaumont, Mrs., apparition of, t. 263) 640-
651.

Becher, Gen. Sir Arthur, apparition seen by,
ii. 68, 381-2,

INDEX

633

Bedeutung narcotischer Mittel . fur den
Hypnotismus, Die/’ cited, i. 441.
Beetles, hypnotic experiments on, i. 163.
fielden, L. W., cited, i. 524.

Bellamy, Rev. Arthur, apparition seen by, ii.

Benedict, Prof., i. 490; cited, i. 514.
Bcntivegni, V., cited, i. 514.

Bentley, A. }., case recorded by, ii. 567.
Berchtold case, i. 514.

Beresford, J. It. de la Peer, apparition of, i.
268-9.

Bergson, M., case reported by, i. 477**9.
B6rillon, Dr. Edgar, hypnotic results ob-
tained by, i. 4t9, 459; quoted, i. 458;
cited, i. 459.460, 465 note\^^2, 513;
ii. 114.

Berjon, Dr., cited, L 339 mtte,

Bernadette, case of, i. $61-4.

Bemheim, Dr., hypnotic results obtained by,

i. 156, 161-2, 206, 438, 491 ; cited, i.
161-2, 170, 207, 439, 443, 459, 460,
462, 465.468, 5M, 5*6, 540; quoted, i.

• 218.

Bertha, .Sister (Bertha Foertsch), apparition
seen by, ii. 18, 376-7.

Bertrand, Dr., cited, T. 159, 486.

, Kev. L. J., trance vision of, ii. 21,

322-3, 525.

Bibliotheca Zoological ’ cited, i. 479 noU,
Bickford-! 5 mith, Mrs., dreams of, i. 370-1.

, K, A. H., planchette experiments wit-
nessed by, ii. 121-2.

Bidder, case of, i. 80-t, 84, 117.

Bigge, Col., case of, i. 255-7.

Biggs, I'lr., e.Kperinients %, i. 193, 493-6.
Rilocation, i. 230, 251, 263, 276.

Binet, Prof., cited, i. 79 mte^ 106-7, 477,
‘*569 1 ; quoted, i. 329-30.

Bimss, Dr., case reported by, ii. 348.

Biology, experimental, .'tnalogy from, i, 36.
Birchall, James, experiments by, i, 602
613.

Bird, Miss (Mrs. Bishop), apparition seen by,

ii. 44.

Birth, as physiological individuation, ii. 511;

as spiritual individuation, ii. 523.

Bishop, Mrs. (Miss Bird), appaittion seen by,
ii. 44.

Blake, Gorham, ca.se of, cited, i. 260.

, William, work of, criticised, i. 73.

Blaney, John, apparition of, ii. 64-5.

Blavatsky, Mme., ii. 302; letters to, ii. 231;

inquiry regarding, ii. 501-2.

Blisters, hypnotic production of, i. 188, i 93 - 4 >
491, 493-9-

Blue cedema experiment, i. 188, 498,

Biytb, Benjamin Hall, case of, i. 81, 117.

, Edward L. J., case of. i. 81-3, 117.

Boetcau, M., case reported oy, i. 61, 31S-9,
Boissarie, Dr., cited, i. 562-4.

Bonatti, Signor, automatic writing by, ii.
153, 442-4.

Booth, Mordaunt Gore, apparition »en by,
ii. 63-5. * "• »

“ Borderland,” cited, i. 578.

Botanical student, case of^ i. 277.

^'Bottom Facts concerning the Science of
Spiritualism, The,” cited, ii. 503.

Boufi6, cited, i. 459.

Bourdon, Dr., cited, i. 459, 460, 472; case
reported by, i. 518.

Bourne, Ansel, case of, i. 60, 309-17.

, Canon, apj^ition of, i. 260, 264.

^ Miss I^uisa, apparition seen by, i.

651-3*

^ Miss Nina M., appantion seen by, i.

651-3.

Bourru, Prof., cited, i. 339 noU^ 341. 491,
497 note 2.

Boyle, Miss, case reported by, i. 546.

, R. Vicary, case of, i. 138-40.

Braid, work of, i. 160 and n<fte% 1C5, 48S-90;
cited, i. 438, 46S, 471, 515 and note^
540.

Brain —

Concurrent streams of intelligence func-
tioning through, i. 250-1.
Dextro-cerebral capacity, i. 84-5.
Highest-level centres in, i. 74, 193-4,
198; ii. 511.

Possession, function in cases of, ii. 201,

^5.4. .

Spmt's action on, 11. 522.

Substitution of functions of, i. 103.
Telepathic communication not necessarily
transmitted by, ii. 195-6.

Unconscious cerebration, ii. ^19 note;
Pierce’s explanation of subliminal self
theory by, i. 12 note'^*

Waves, theory of, i. 245-6.

“Brain,” cited, i. 127 notc^^ 171 noie^ 440,
467; quoted, i. 506-9, 513.

Btainerd, David, allegM communication from,
ii. 457-8.

Bramwell, Dr. J. Milne, quoted, i. 56, 166,
'♦37-40. 44«-*. 444-5. 463. 467-70,
473-6, 488-9, 511, 512-13, 515-17, 540;
Cited, 1. 160 note'^y 171 note, 178, 196,
198, 338 note, 440, 462, 471; il 541;
work of, i. 165, 194-5, 506-10.

Breuer, Dr., cited, i. 40, 50, 53-5, 299.

Brian, Duppa, vision of induction of, i.

592-3-

Briggs, L. Vernon, communications to, ii.

Brighten,^\^illiam £., case of, i. 386-7.
“British Medical Journal,” cited, i. 472;
quoted, i. 491.

Brook, Lady, cases recorded by, ii. 454-6.
Brooke, Sir James, cited, i. 426.

Brooks, Christopher, case of, i. 402.

Brougham, Lord, apparition seen by, ii. 43.
Brown, A. J., case of, i. 309, 311-16.

, D., apparition seen by, j. 655.

Browne, Miss, case of, cited, ii. 137.

— , Mrs., case sent by, ii. 356-8.

yHugh Jimor, case reported by, ii. 172,

Browning, ?<obert, cited, ii. 579-So.

Buttemer, R. H., experiments of, ii. 432-4.
Bruce, Dr. Walter, dream of, i. i 43 - 4 » 113-
4*5 >•*** 55 *

Buckley, Major, experiments by, i. 210,
556-8.

Buddhism, ii. 286, 289-91.

“ Bulletin de PInstitut Psychologique Inter-
national,” cited, i. 474*

634 INDEX

Bulletins de la Soci 4 t 4 de Psychologie Phy-
siologique,” quoted, i. 524-5; cited, i.

Bundy Col. J. C., cited, i. 360, 3S2-3.
Burguet, Agnes, case of, i. 485.

Burnier, M. Andre, alleged communications
from, ii. 143.

Bums, hypnotic enect on, i. 470.

Burot, Prof., cited, i, 339 and note, 341, 491,
497 naie*^.

Burq, i. 490.

Buxton, case of, i. 80, 83.

C., Mnie., case of, i. 531-2.

— , Miss, case of, ii. 210-11.

— , Mr., case reported by, ii. 329-31.

Mrs., apparition seen by, 1. ^2-3.

— , Mrs. (Dr. Brainwcll's subject), case of,

i. 463.

— , Mother, case attested by, i. 686.

— , Charlotte, auditory hallucination of, ii.
70-1.

— , Emily, case of, cited, ii. ajo.

Cabral, Ulysses J. C., hallucination of, ii.

^ , 353 " 5 - , , . , .

Caedmon, work of, cited, 1. 135 note.

Cafe au iaity dipsomania of, i. 461-2.
Cagliostro, ii. 133.

Cahagnet, case of subjects of, t. 278; ii.
ipi, 220. 573-s.

Calculating boys, i. 79-85, 116, 227.
Calculations involved In post-hypnotic sug-
gestions, i. 502-10.

Campbell, (General, case of, cited, ii. 65.

— , Hon. Dr., case of, i. 543-6.

, Miss Catherine M., apparition seen l^,

ii. 396; experiments by, i. 632-4; li.
63.

Camuset, Dr., cited, i. 339 note.

Cancer, phobie of, i, 467.

Capua, Arturo de, communications from, ii.
481-2.

Carlisle, Bishop of, case reported by, ii.
56-7.

Carpenter, Dr., cited, ii. 519 noie^ 581 noieK
Carroll, James, apparition seen by, i. 272-3.
Carzetti, Isabella, li. 459.

Cass Davis House, visions regarding, i.

668-71.

Catalepsy-

Secondary personality in connection with,
Shoc^ inducing, i. 163.

^*Cataplcxie und der thicrische Hypnotismus,
Die,*’ cited, i. 442.

Cavalli, V., communications to, ii. 482.
C 61 estine, case of, i. 49.

Cellular focus, i. 35 and note.

Central organs of perception—

Education of, i. 188-92.

Potential sensibility of, i. 482.

Cerebration, see under Brain.

Cervcllo, Dr. Niccolo, case of patient of, L
500 and notiy 520. «

Cevennes, martyrs of the, ii. 200.

Chabaneix, Dr. Paul, citM, i. 89 and note.
Chambers, Dr. Robert, cited, ii. 579.

Character, hypnotic influence on, i. 192,
198-202.

Charcot, Prof., case of patient of, i. 130-1,
331; three stages theory of, i. 161, 197,
437» 439» 447-8; methods of, i. 172
note^ 490; ii. 311 ; experiment by, i.

Chanty Organisation Society, analogy fmm,
ii. 206-7.

Charms,!. 211, 559-61; ii. 310.

ChattiKk, Dr. C. G., cited, 1. 460,

Chaumontet, Jean, alleged communication
from. ii. 143.

Chemical reactions, sensibility to, i. 483.

Chess, analogy from, i. 93-4, 96.

Childbirth, liypnotism during, i. 324, 472;

subsequent recollection, i. 181.
Childhood, i. 119.

Children—

Communications from, ii. 245-7, 593,
621-2.

l^lypnotic susceptibility of, i. 439, 443-4,
458.

Phantasms of, ii. 335, 373.

Terrors of, i. 41.

China, beliefs regarding demon possession
in, ii. 198-200, 500-1.

Christian Science, i. 167, 212-n; ii. 311-12.
Christianity, i. 2, 280-3, ^86, 288, 294-7.

“ Christlichc Mystik,” cited, i. 493.

Ciliary spasm, effects of, i, 133, 479.

Circles, system of, ii. 570.

Clairvoyance {see also Telacsthesia)—

A., Miss, ca.se of, ii. 151.

Automatic messages due to, ii. 235.

Cases of so-called, otherwise explained, i,

477 - 8 .

Children, in, ii. 335-6.

Comca*rcading versus, i. 185.

Dixon, Miss Eliza, case of, i. 543-6.
Dowsers, of, i. 481. •

Dying, of the, ii. 31. •

Fits, after, i. 362.

Genius a kind of, ii. 282.

Grant, Cameron, case of, ii. 369.

Hypnotic production of, i. 555-6.

Hysteria, in, i. 353-4, 357 - 9 -
Inadcquac)’ of term, 1. 136.

i oan of Arc, case of, ii. 102, 404.
ledical—

Automatic script communicating, ii.

450, 454, 457.

Mode of, 1. 484-7 ; ii. 268.

Spirits, by, ii. 174-6 (premonitory),
604, 610, 622, 624.

Trance, in, ii. 564.

Paralysis from cold, during, ii. 323.
Socrates, case of, ii. 96, 99.
Somnambulism, during, i. 520-4.
Telepathic, ii. 197, 518, 525. •

Travelling—

Cases of, i. 197, 553 - 9 * **• *' 7 * 55 *'
Dreams, likeness to, i. 274^.

Ecstasy an extension of, 11. 210, 259.
Hypnotic suggestion starting, i. 278.
Nature of, i. ^0^, 250, 275, 278-9.

* Savages, amof^, a. 200 notey 283.
Sleep, during, ii. 193.

Clark, Mrs., apparition seen by, ii. 371-2. ,

Clarke, Dr., phantasm of, ii, 247.

— , M. W., case sent b>', ii. 343-4.

INDEX 635

Claustrophobia, i. 177.

*^Clelia” case, ii. 122, 140, 416-18.

Clerkc, Mrs., apparition seen by, i. 268,
269 ; ii. 68, 386-7.

Clifford, Quoted, ii. 297.

Cobbe, Miss, cited, ii. 31.

Coe, Mr. and Mrs., apparition of, i. 656-7.
Colburn, case of, i. 80, 83, 84.

Coleman, W. £., cited, i. 632.

Coleridge, Hartley, genius of, i. 75.

, S. T., case ofi i. 135.

Collingwood, J. F., quoted, ii, 528 note.
Colonial animals, analogy from, i. 38.

Colt, Capt. G. F. Russell, apparition seen
by, ii.^ 348-50.

, Lieut. Oliver, phantasm of, u. 349-'5o.

Compact-cases of post-mortem appearance, i.
291 ; ii. 42-5, 49-51, 350.

Comptes Rendus de la Soci6t6 de
Biologic,** cited, i. 497
Condillac, cited, i. 89.

** Confessions of a Medium,** cited, ii. 303.
Confinements, ue Childbirth.

Congenital moral deficiency, hypnotic in-
fluence on, i. 199-200.

irradiations of sensitivity, i. 225.

Conley, Elizabeth, vision seen by, ii. 37-*,o,
210.

Consciousness-

Central, different from minor conscious-
nesses, i. 37-8.

Complexity and memory characteristic
of, i. 36-y.

Concurrent, ii. 519.

Dogs, of, discussed, i. 36-7.

Double, see Secondary personality.

Ethical and legal view of, i. 37.

Hysteria a contraction of, i. 19, 22, 44.
Mind, relation to, i. 37.

^'■Specialisation of, ii. 509.

Spectrum of —

Nature of, ii. 509.

Sleep an intensiner of, 1 . 21.

Solar s])ectruni, analogous to, i. 17-18,
76, 7S ; ii. 506.

* Unfamiliar cerebral combinations
attended by, i. 39.

Unity of, i. 58. «

Unreliability of, i. 13.

Will in the making, ii. 518.

Continuity—

Subliminal mentation, oC ii. 131.

Theories, in, necessity of, ii. 2, 2ji, 281.
Universe, of the, i. 231, 242; Hierarchy
of intelligences inferred from, ii. 265.
Conversions, i. 56, 126-7, i 75 f 202, 310.
Conway, experiments on, i. 541.

Coomes,*Dr. M. F., cited, i. 495.

Cooper, Alfred, case reported by, i. 142-3.

, Job, case of, i. 519.

Cope, C. H., case reported by, ii. 32-j,
Coppinger, Mrs.^ apparition seen by, li. 334.
Comea>reading, 1. 185, 477.

Cosmic phenomena, continuity in,**!. 2^1,
242 ; hierarcliy "*of intelligences la-
ferreid from, ii. 265.

Cosmical, as distinct from planetary—
Evolution, i. 94-6 ; ii. 279.

Heredity, ii. 267.

Cosmical, as distinct from planetary—
tinueii.

Life coexistent, i, 151, 153.

Science, ii. 308.

Self, ii. 273.

Cosmical faculties, terrene faculties derived
from, i. 488.

Cosmotheorus, assumptions regarding, ii.

298, 301.

Cox, Mrs.j case of, cited, ii. 18.

, Serjeant, ii. 224 ; cited, i, 323 ; ii.

Cranial^ bones, separation of, ii. 563, 565.

Crans. Mrs. N. J., vision of, ii. 374-5*

Crawford, Earl of (Lord Lindsay), cited, ii.

^ . 5,33-4* 579, S**- ^ ,

Crealock, Col., case of, cited, 11. 67.

Creed, Dr. J. M., cited, i. 514.

Crewdson, Edward, case reported by, i.

397-8*

Crimes, hypnotic, question of, i. 198, 513'17-
Crises (other than death)—

Hallucinations in connection with, i.

253, 270-1, 279, 281, 287, 291; ii.
43 - 4 '

Subliminal uprush in cases of, i. 77.

Crocker, Dr. H. Radcliffe, cited, ii. 529
note.

Crookes, Sir William, fiioneer work of, i. 6 ;
ii. 224; observations of, i. 32; cited,
i. 245; ii. 141, 221-2, 533, 536, 541
a»rf no/e, 554-5, 579, 581.

**Crooman I.ectures on Evolution and Dis-
solution of the Nervous System, Tiie/*
cited, i. 317 note.

Cryptomnesia, li. 124, 136, 140, r6i.

Crystal visions —

A., Miss, case of, ii. 449.

Appropriateness of, ii. 517-18.

Brightness of light in, i. 589.

Content of, i. 241

Distortion, reflection, &c., in, i. 576.

Extended range of ordinary sight in, i.

Goo<frich«Frccr, Miss, case of, i. 134,

^ 57^8, 586—8.

(irant, Cameron, case of, ii. 368^^.

Haunting phenomena analogous to, ii.

76.

Hypnotism, in, i. 578-84 ; post-hyp-
notic, i. 240.

Magnifying glass in, results of, i. 576,

589-

Method and nature of, i. 230, 237-<).

276.

Prec<)gnitive, i. 591.

Retrocognitivc, 1. 592-8.

Subliminal memory evinced in, i. 132.
Symbolic character of, i. 276.

Synxsthesia in, i. 379.

Telxsthesia in, i. 275.

Time-relations in, i. 246.

Universality of, i. 574-5-
Veridiplity of, i. 340.

Vcrrall, Mrs., case of, i. 584-6,

Visualisation in, i. 5S8.

Crystals, analogy from, i. 235 note.

Cnllerrc, Dr., quoted, i. 476. •

Curel, M. de, method of, cited, i. 106-7.

636

INDEX

Cutaneous sensibility, hypnotic effect on, i.

Cuvier^ 206.

Cyanosis, hypnotic production of, i. 498.

D., Mme., case of, i. 130 and ncte^t 529-30.
— f Mr., apparition seen by, ii. 53-'5, 330-1.

— ^ Mr., phantasm of, ii. 384-5.

— , Mrs., case of, cit^, ii. 17.

C., communications to, ii. 450, 454-6.
Dailey, Judge Abram H., case recorded by,

Damodar, Wers to, ii. 231.
l^anvers, Miss, apparitions of, i. 695-6.

Dariex, Dr., cited, i. 533.

Darkness, visions in, 1. 239, 28 1.

Dase (Dahse), case of, i. So, 83, 117-19.
Dauiner, Prof., case reported by, i. 524.
Dauntesey, Mr. and Mrs., case of, dted, ii.

399 *

Davenport, Reuben Briggs, cited, ii. 503.

Davey, Dr., case reported by, i. 134, 372-3.

, S. J., cited, i. 646; ii. 502.

Davies, Mrs., auditory Iiaflucination of, ii.
365-6.

Davis, Andrew Jackson, case of, cited, ii. 117.

, William W., case reported by, ii. 46-8.

Dawson, Ellen, case of, i. 546.

Day-dreaming habit, i. 100.

Dazzling, hypnotisation by means of, i. 165.

Dead, the, see Discamate spirits.

Deafness, hypnotic influence on, i. 1S4, 474.

Dear. Mrs., apparition seen by, ii. 376.

Death-

Apparitions at or near time of, i. 252-3,
268-9, 283-6, 572-4, 643-5,

675-8 ; ii. 271, 283, 358 ; statistics of
time-relations in, ii. 14 and note; com-
pact cases, i. 291 ; ii. 42-5, 49-51,

35 <»-

Automatic wntmg announcing, li. 169-

171, 230-

Averted by hypnotic change of person-
ality, i. 331.

Clairvoyance at the time of, ii. 31.

Conditions of, taken on in inediumistit
trance, ii. 220.

Dream of, ii. 18.

Nature of, ii. 512, 524.

Phantasms after, see Discamate spirits—
Apparitions.

Prevision of, i. 400-5, 410-13; ii. 153,
248 and note, 270, 334-6, 441,622-4;
by discamate spirits, ii. 26-7, 30-1,
174, 176, 489 - 93 » 559--60.

Telekinetic phenomena in connection
with, ii. 503.

TranFitional state of consciousness im-
mediately after, ii. 20, 51, 61.

Visions of^ clairvoyantly perceived in
dream or waking state, 1. 137, 139,
143, 401, 410-15, 425.

** Death-Blow to Spiritualism,” cited, ii. 503.

” De la suggestion et de ses applications a la
pedagogie,” cited, i. 459.

”De la suggestion et du somnambulisme
dansleurs Rapports avec la Jurisprud-
ence et la Medecine L6gale,” citkl, i.
5 * 3 -

‘^De la suggestion mentale,” cited, i. 339
note.

PAutomati.sme de la M6moire,” quoted,

i. 306-7.

De 1 ’ Intelligence,” cited, i. 127 noteX
Dee, Dr. John, shew-stone of, i. 237, 575.
Delbceuf, Prof., dream of, i. 132; cases of
patients of, i. 182, 470-1, 506; cited.
I. 472, 514.

” Delire du touclter,'* i. 467-8.

Delirium tremens, suggestibility developed
during recovery from, i. 162.

“Demon Possession and Allied Themes,”
cited, ii. 500-1.

Demoniacal possession, i. 303-5 ; Chinese,

ii. 198-200, 500 1.

Demons, Sorting, of Prof. Maxwell, ii.

Dent, ]^rs.,^casc reported by, i. 6;2.
Dentistry-

Hypnotic analgesia, under, i* 47 **

Pain of, suppressed by gas and felt later,
j* 473 -

Dcolinda, phantasm of, ii. 353-4. •

“ Des Etats Seconds,” cited' i. 473.

” Des Indes k la planMe Mars,” ii. 130 seg,;
cited, ii. 95 note.

Despard, Miss R. C., experiments by, i.
632-4.

Despine, Dr., cited, i. 445, 485, 500.

, Dr. Prosper, case reported by, i. 192.

Dessoir, Max, cited, i. 601 note.

Devan, Dr., cited, i. 305.

Devils, belief in possession by, i. 303-5; ii.

198-200 ; non-existence of, ii. 203.
Dextro<erebral capacity, i. 84-5.
Diagram-transference, cases of, i. 602-12,
614-18, 622-8, 633-4 ; motor and
sensory elements in, li. 144. •

Diamanti, case of, i. 79 note. «

Dickens, Miss, apparition seen by, i. 25 8-9.

, Charles, work of, cited, i. zo6,

Dickinson, James, i. 675-8.

Dignity, demand for, li. 25S; possibility of,
in confusion of discamate spirits, ii.
276.

Dignowity, Karl, dream and vision of, i.
433 - 4 . '

Diplopia resulting from ciliary spasm, i. 474.
Dipsomania—

Cafe au lait, of, i. 461-2.

Fraud contra.sted with, i. 201.
Hallucinations of, i. 228, 232, 235.
Hypnotic cures of, i. 176, 462-3.
Discamate spirits—

Activities of, ii. 274,

Apparitions of—

Animals perhaps influenced* by, ii.
214 note.

Cases of, i. 286, 424-36; ii. 60-76,
3*3-39. 34 *- 4 . 348-56, 359-61.

375 - 6 , 380-7, 389-99*

Collective, ii. 62-3, 69-71.
Compact-cases, i. 291 ; ii. 42-5, 49-5 14

• 35 ®. ^

Continuous series, in, from those of
the living, i. 9.

Evidential tests of, ii. 10-13.

Local and personal, ii. 60-76, 384.

INDEX

637

Discarnate &\nni%^coHtiHued.

Nature of, ii. 107.

News of deatn, coincident with, ii.
56-8.

R^ated appearances, ii. 17, 21-5,
Attitude towards, suggested, ii. 303-4,

309.

Rooks accessible to, ii. 591-2.
Communications from, i. 246, 248; ii.
119, 142 - 3 , 153-84-

Confused state of, following death, ii.
29, 51,61.

Corpse, knowledge of state of, in-
dicated by, ii. 27-31, 51-6.

Death |conditions of, reproduced in
mediiimistic trance, ii. 220.

Ghost, definitions of, ii. 2-4.

Group of, desiring enlightenment of
mankind, ii. 234-5.

Literary impulse possibly displayed by,
ii 140,

, Memory of terrene affairs indicated by,
ii. 36-42, continued knowledge

of terrene affairs indicated by, ii. 26.
Spirit-world knowledge indicated by,

Supplications to, u. 311-13.

Telepathy from, i. 25-6, 246, 248; ii.
142-3.

Theology and religion, attitude towards,

ii. 78-9, 133* 2 ^ 7 , 308-

** Diseases of the .Skin *’ (Crocker), cited, ii.
539 note,

“Diseases of the Skin** (Hyde), cited, ii.
528 note.

Dissolution and Evolution contrasted, ii. 85.
Divirjaig rod, i. 4S0-1.

W, A., experiments by, i. 577-8.
Dixon, Miss Eliza, case of, i. 543-6.

, Miss Martha, case of, i. 543-6.

Dobbic, W., case of clairvoyant patients
of, i. 27S, 543-6.

Dodson, Miss L., apparition seen by, ii.

• 32 - 3 -

Dogmatism, decline of, ii. 307-9.

Dolbear, A. £., dream of, 1. 43476*

Dorez, Dr., cited, i. 518.

Double consciousness, see Secondary per-
sonality.

Dowsers, i. 480- 1.

Dozous, Dr., cited, i. 563-4.

Dramatic creation, hysterical idee chsidanU
analogous to, i. 107.

Dramatic faculty, hypnotic improvement of,
i. 510-11.

Dreams also Sleep)—

Acuteness of senses in, i. 125-6.

Apparition seen in, i. 682-5.

Control of, i. 125, 126.

Consciousness caused by, i. 126-7.

Death, of, ii. 18.

Hallucination reached by, i. 226-7.
Hypermnesia, if iyir2 ; ii. 524. ^

H^notic suggestions remembered in,
i. 129-30.

Insane fit started by, i. 127.

Letters, contents of, apprehended in, i.
392 - 4 •

Dresasa-^onfinued.

Lost objects, of, i, 370-2, 379-81.

Manzini, Signora Maria, case of, ii.

Memory in —

Capricious nature of, ii. 201.
Circrmspcctive, i. 131-2.

Ecmnesic periods, of, i. 130-1.

Hypnotic memory, relation to, i.
128-30.

Pain, of, after operation under chloro-
form, i. 181, 472-3.

Primary personality, of, in cases of
secondary, i. 338.

Supraliminally known but forgotten
tacts, of, i. 132.

Supraliminally unapprehended facts,
of, i. 132-3.

Memory of, under hypnotism, i. 37, 512.
Music, of. i. 369.

Nature ot, i. 58, 66; ii. 512, 524.
Objectivation of types in, i. 126.

Pierce*s identification of dream-con-
sciousness with primary conscious-
ness, i. 12 note'K

Precf>gnitivc, i. 142-3, 400-13 ; ii. 271,

Problems solved in, i. 372-5.

Request received in, ii, 347.

Recriprocal, i. ^17,419-21.

Self-suggestion in, i. 127-8, 369.
Somnambulisms starting from, i. 203-4.
Stevenson, R. L., case of, i. 91, 303 ; ii.
144.

Storie, Mrs., case of, see Storie.
Supernormal, i. 135-50.

Surprising answers in, ii. 121.

Telxsthcsia in, i. 275, 279.

Transitional, following death, ii. 20.
Veridical, ii, 356-8, 370.

Vision ot, non-optical, I. 223.

Visualisation in, i. 229.

Visualised forms of, persisting, i. 125,
Waking (imagination images), i. 226.
“Dreams of a Spirit Seer,*’ cited, ii. 569-70.
Drewry, Dr. William F., case of patient of,
i. 61, 319-21.

Dricsen, Baron Basil von, apparition seen
by, ii. 40-2.

Drink, case of incapacity to, i. 55.

Drugs—

Sealed tubes, in, effect of, i. 4S8-9.
Sensibility to certain kinds of, i. 483.
Drunkenness, see Dipsomania.

“ Du D6mon dc Socratc,** cited, ii. 95 note 1.
“Du Magn6tisnie Animale,** cited, i. 159
note,

“ Du Magn6tismc en France,” cited, i. 486.

Du Porcl, cited, i. 58 note,

“ Du Sommeil et des Etats Analogues,'*
died, i. 513.

“ Du Sommeil, des r8vcs, et du somnam-
bulisme,” cited, i. 522 note l.

Dufay, !>., case of patients of, 1. 133, 195,
476, 510-12, 531-2; cases reportM
by, i. 204, 521.

Dufour, M., quoted, i. 518 and note,
Dumontpallier, cited, i. 472.

Dunn, Edmund, apparition of, i. 282-4.

INDEX

638

Dunraven, Lord* cited, ii. 222. 579.

, (Lord Adarc), cited, ii. 221, 533-4*

57a 581 »<*!.

Dupotet, Baron, 1. 546.

Durand, cited, 1 . 47a, 500.

Dusart, Dr., experiments by, i. 530.

Dussand, cited, i. 474.

Duty, conceptions of, ii. 304, 3o8>9.

Duvanel, M., case of, ii. 170-1, 467-71.

Dyce, Dr., case of patients of, i. 305-^.

Dyne, J. B., case reported by, i. 285.
Dynamogeny—

Hypnotic, su under Hypnotism.

Inhibition involving, ii. 86.

Nature of, i. 587 note'^.

Supernormal faculty following on sug-
gested, i. 487.

Dynamometer, experiments with, i. 49; ii. 90,

205* 530-

Dysphagia, hysterical, i, 331-3.

" E.,** control by, ii. 240, 477, 601.

£., Mile. A., case of, i. 497.

C.J., CMC of, i. 372-3- . , .

— , Miss C. J. £., apparition seen 1.
261-2.

— , Miss K., apparition of, i. 261-2.

— , Mrs., phantasm of, ii. 336-8.

— , Mrs. (Dr. Fahncstock*s subject), clair-
voyance of, i. 556.

Eat, hysterical inability to, i. 331-3.
Ecchymosis, hypnotic production of, i. 491.
Ecmnesla—

Dream memory of periods of, i. 130.
Nature of, ii. 201, 267.

Temporary and permanent, ii. 192.

Viv6, Louis, case of, i. 62-3, 338-43.
Ecstasy—

Alleged, ii. 220.

Family circles, in, ii. 209, 524.

L6onorc, case of, i. 326.

Nature of, ii. 194-5, 2159-62, 524, 572.
Piper, Mrs., case of, 11. 250.

Possession sometimes indistinguishable
from, ii. 210. ^

Skilton, J. W., case of, ii. 571-2.

Socrates, case of, ii. 99.

Ectoplasia, ii. 529, 541, 544-9.

Eczema, hypnotic cure of, i. 470, 471.

** Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal,”
cited, i. 667 note \

” Edinburgh Philosophical Transactions ”
(1882), quoted, i. 305-6.

Edmonds, Judge, case of, cited, ii. 117.
Education —

Aim of, i. 183.

Check and stimulus in, i. 173*5.
Hypnotism and aid to, i. 183, 196, 458-9.
Edwards, Miss, experiments with, I 542, 603
seq,

Eedcn, van, cited, i. 439, 459, 460, 462, 464*
463, 471 -

%linton, case of, cited, ii. 224.

, Mr., experiment by, i. 553-4. •'

** Eimgc therapeutische Versuche mit dem
Hypnotismus be! Geisterkrankeo,”
cited, i. 462.

'<Electridte Animale,” cited, i. 485, 500,
523, 539 ttoie'i.

Electricity-

Flowers emitting light of the nature of,
iif 539 -

Raps explained as produced by, ii. 537.

Hlgee, Mrs., apparition seen by, i. 289-90
and note,

Elliotson, Dr., case recorded by, lu; mes-
meric hospital of, i. 157; cited, i. 207,
309. 37*. 477 . 489, 543. “• 5«5 i quoted,

305-6. 308.

Ellis, Mrs., case of, cited, ii. 17.

Elliott, Mrs. E. K., case of, ii. 411.

, Rev. £. K., veridical dream of, ii.

370 -

^ S. B., cited, ii. 516 noU,

Elvira control, ii. 446-7, 624-7,

Emergency, see Crises.

Emotion, mental reaction in, ii. 511.

Energy-

Conservation oL ii. 301, 510, 530, 542.

Environment of, i. 215.

Ghost defined as manifestation of per-
sistent personal, ii. 4. ^

Mania, in, ii. 529.

Spirit manipulation of, ii. 542, 545-9.

Supraliminal output of, ii. 514.

‘ Ultimate source of, problem of, i.
216-18.

Entenc^halic sensitivity, i. 124, 225.

Enthusiasts, i. 56-7.

Enuresis nocturna cured by hypnotism, i.

Environment, materia), etheric, spiritual, i.
95-6, 21 5-1 y.

Ephesus, stone at, analogy from, ii. 307.
Epilepsy-

Automatism likely to resemble effects of,

ii. 84. •

Criminal propensities of post-epilej^tic
states, i. 308-9.

Hallucination in, i. 228.

Hystero-epilepsy, ii. 422-3.

Multiplex personality in connection with,

Post-epileptic states, i. 60-1, 73, 308-15.
Epistaxis, hypnotic production of. i. 491.

** Erfolge des« therapeutischen Hypnotismus
in der Landpraxis,” cited, i. 462, 465.

Ermacora, Dr. G. B., cited, i, 671 ; cases
reported by, ii. 159-60. 446-7, 624-7.
Esdaile, cited, i. 65-6, 470, 484, 543; ii.
515 ; quoted, i. 438; work of, i. 160,

177 * 207 - „

, W. E., dream regarding, 1. 382-5.

Espie, Mr., apparition of, i. 270-f.

“ Essay on the Intellectual Towers of Man,”

quoted, i. 10. «

Estelle (Dr. Despine’s patient), case of, i.

445 ; control, ii. 452-3.

Estradc, J, B., cited, 1.364.

” VEtat Mental ties Ifysteriques*' quoted, i.

Ether {set also Light)—

Discamate spirit^ in velation to, ii. 142,
* 299.

Environment of, i. 215; ii. 298.

Matter in relation to, ii. 209.

Telepathy perhaps transmitted by, u
245-6; ii. 141, 195.

INDEX

639

Ethical aspect of fost^mortim evidence, ii.

Etude Scientifique sur Somnaxnbulismc,”
cited, i. 500.

Eugenics, i. 235 ; ii. 516, 543.

ICugdnie, clairvoyant diagnosis by, i. 486.
Evens, Mrs., case of, cited, ii. 18.

Evidence—

Falsification of, attributable to sugges-
tion, i. 514.

Telepathy, for, criticism of, i. 636-46.
Evidential quality of automatic messages, ii.
235-6.

Evil. ii. 287, 301.

Evolution —

By-products of, so^alled, i. 94-7.

Cosmical v* planetary, i. 94-6.

Dissolutive and evolutive contrasted,
ii. 85.

Human and other, contrasted, i. 76.
Material and transcendental environment,
in relation to, ii. 269.

Ordinary view of, i. 118.

• Perturbation masking, i. 21, 36, 93; ii.

86 .

Religion, of, ii. 306.

Spiritual, ii. 281, 290.

Thesis of, drawn from spirit communi-
cations, ii. 257.

Exeter, l^dy (** Estelle*’), alleged control

by, ii. 45*-3- , ^

Experience, accumulated, a hindrance to
action, i. 17$.

“ Experiences in Spiritualism with Mr. D. D.

Home,” cited, ii. 221-2, 533,
Experiment —

Elementary and advanced, i. 235 note*
Importance of, ii. 182, 185.

“ Experimental Investigation,” cited, i. 646.

” Experimental Study in Hypnotism, An,”
quoted, i. 127 and note*\ cited, i. 460,
493 note.

Exteriorisation of sensibility, i. 500-1.

F— (Dr. Mesnet’s patient), case of, i. 306-7.
F.,*Dr,, case reported by, i. 278-9, 553-4.

— , Miss, case of, i. 515.

Faculty, substitutions of, i. 477. '

Fahnestock, Dr., experiments by, i. 278,

cited {see also “Statu-
volisni”) i. i6o-i, 471-2, 485, 500;
quoted, i. 444-'5.

Fairman, Mrs., case of, cited, ii. 17.

Faith, i. 218-19; ii. 280-1, 285, 312-13.
Faith-healers, ii. 311.

“ Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects,”
quoted, i. 87-8.

rancher, Molly, case of, i. 64, 204, 352-4.
Fanton, cited, i. 472.

Faraday, cited, ii. 93.

Fares, Paul, cited, i. 459.

Farlcr, Arcndeacon, apparition seen by, ii.

J^arquharsoD, Miss Editil, apparition seen by,
ii.* 377 - 8 o.

Faure, Dr., cited, i. 127 ; quoted, i. 369-70.
Fenzi, Chevalier, , apparition seen by, ii.
44 - 5 -

Fdrd, Dr,, cited, i. 127 note \ 587 noie"^ \

quoted,!. 329-30; ii. 90.

Feuerbach, Ans^ Ritter von, cited, i. 308
and note*

Fielden, Cecilia, case of, cited, ii. 230.
Fillmore, i;)r. C. W., cited, i. 354.

Finger* sucking cured by hypnotism, i. 458.
Finney, Mrs. Wm. A., case of, ii, 183-5.
Fitzgerald, Mrs., communication to, ii. 477-8.
Fleetwood, Mrs., apparitions seen by, i.
695-6.

Flournoy, Prof., case reported by, i. 565-6, ii.
124, 305, 503; cited, i. 566 note^ 568,
ii. 95 note^ 130 seq*

Fluorescence, ii. 538,

Focachon, M., experiments by, i. 491.
Foertsch, Bertha (Sister Bertha), apparition
seen by, ii. 18, 376-7.

Foissac, cited, i. 500.

Polie du doniCf i. 467, 468.

Fontan, Prof., experiments by, i. 192^ 501.
Food, sensibility to certain kinds of, 1. 483*

” Footfalls,” cited, ii. 348.

Forel, Prof. Auguste, cited, i. 438, 4^5, 462,
491 and note^j 514; quoted, 1. 439;
case of warders employed by, quoted, i.
196, 512.

Forster, Kcv. C. T., case reported by, ii.
66-7.

Fortes, Donna Anna Ignez Dias, apparition
seen by, ii, 353-4.

Fourth dimension, theory of, i. 277.

Fowler, Rev, J. T., case sent by, ii. 343,

, Miss Ixittie, case of, ii. 560-2.

Fraud-

Dipsomania contrasted with, i. 201.
Spiritualistic, ii. 206-7
Vague charges of, regarding psychic
phenomena, ii. 239.

Free will, ii. 271-2.

Fr6mont, General, case of^ i. 291.

French, old, automatic writing in, ii. 420-1.
Freud, Or., ca.se of patient of, cited, i. 50-2.
Fr6ville, Mrs. de, apparition of, ii. 19, 66-7.
Frogs, hypnotic experiments on, i. 163.

Fryer, John T., case of, i. 659.

, K., auditory hallucination of, i. 658-9.

Fuchs, cited, i. ^14.

Fuller, case of, 1. 80.

Function—

Exercise of, two-fold character of, i. 39.
Restitution of, i. 476-7.

Future-

Existence of, already, theory of, ii.

271.

Faith, standpoint for, ii. 280.

G., Dr., apparition of, i. 692-3.

— , Dr., auditory hallucination of, ii. 69-71.

— , Miss, apparitions seen by, i. 690-2; ex-
periments with, i. 244, 619-22.

— , Mr., case of, i. 467-8, 515.

— , F.. case reported by, ii. 27-31.

— , Feliciti, dream regarding, ii. 347.

Galton, Francis, cited, i. 80, 124, 565, 567;

case recorded by, i. 177, 455-6.

Garfield, President, announcement of death of,
ii. 230.

Garrett, Edmund, cited, ii. 502.

640

INDEX

Garrison, Thomas B., case of, ii. 112-14.

Gas, pain suppressed under, felt afterwards,
>• 473 -

Gasparin, le Comte Ag. de, cited, li. 555.
Gatty, Miss £., apparition seen by, i. 653-4.
Gauss, case of, i. 80, 117, 17$.

Gelalius ’’ control, ii. i6x, 449.

Gelineau, cited, i. 465 nat€% 466.

Genius—

Daemon of Socrates explained as, ii.

De^nition of, i. 20, 96.

Emotional memory in, ii. 138-9.

Ethical realm, in, i. up.

Growth, analogy with, 1. 105.

Hallucinatory vividness of, 1. 22^, 234.
Hypnotism and automatism in relation
to, i. 22, 104.

Hysteria in relation to, i. 56, 66,
Irregularities of, i. 97.

IJmits of, i. 78.

I^mbroso’s view of, i. jfi, 91-2.
Middle-level centres active in, i. 73.

Nature of, i. 20, 71-2, 104-5, 107 ; ii. 81,
193, 282.

Normal best represented by. i. 72, 77, 78.
Origin of, four theories for, i. 116^17.
Possession theory in the light of, ii. 192-3.
Psychological test of. i. 75.

Scope of term, i. 71-2.

Sleep compared with, i. 135.
Somnambulism comparedT with, i. 124,
203.

Speech in relation to, i. 9$.

Telepathy and telssthesia, relation to, i.
108, 280.

Visual images of, i. 227.

Geometrical patterns, subliminal visualisa-
tion of, 1. 88.

Germ, primal, modifiability of, i. 224.

Gesture as means of communication, i. 99;
ii. 91.

Ghosts, see Discamate spirits and Haunting.
Gibert, Dr., experiments by, i. 207, 244,
524-9; ii. J21, 524 ; |x>rtniit of, pro-
ducing catalepsy, i. 323.

Giddtngs, Miss Laura E., c^uoted, i. 423-4.
Glardon, Rev. A., experiments by, i. 244,
622— 8.

Gley, Dr. E., case reported by, i. 530.

Godfrey, Rev. Clarence, apparition of, i. 296,
6S8-90.

Godorichze, cited, i. 466.

Goethe, cited, i. 102.

Gold, sensitiveness to, i. 482.

Goodall, Edward A., case of, ii. 213-14, 217.
Goodrich-Freer, Miss A., crystal-visions of,
i- O** 237i 57^; cited, i. 237 note,
574, 629.

Goodwin, Prof., died, i. 667 note 1.

Gorres, cited, i. 493.

Gottschalk, Ferdinand, apparition seen by, i.
281, 663-5.

Gourmont, Remy de, quoted, i. 89.*

Grande Hyst 4 rie chez P Homme, La,’' cited,

Grant, Cameron, case of, ii. 60, 115 note,

Grasset, cited, 1 . 490.

Gravitation-

Control over, ii. 537.

Telepathy analogous to law of, i. 38.

Gray, Mrs., case of, ii. 414-15.

— , Zachary, alleged communications from,
ii. 229-30.

Greek, automatic writing in, ii. 419, 556-8.

Gregory, Prof., cited, i. 543.

Green, Mrs., dream of, i. 431-3; ii. 55.

, Dr. C. Theodore, quoted,!. 472-3.

, H. T., planchette writing of, ii. 432-4.

Greves, Dr. Hyla, experiments by, i. 613.

Griesingcr, cit^, i. 124.

Grimbold, Alice, case of, dted, ii. 167.

Grocyn, communications from, ii. 226.

Grossmann, cited, i. 438.

Gruber, I*rofessor, cited, i. 566-7.

‘^Grundziige der physiologischen Psycho-
loeie,” cited, i. 667 note^.

Guebhara, Prof. Adrien, case of, ii. 106, 411.

Gurney, Edmund —

Appreciation of, ii. 293-4.

Case investigated by, ii. 385.

Cited (see also “ Phantasms of tlfe

Living •»), i. 4, 8, 24, 124. 125, 138,
144, 164, 171, 205, 207, 228, 248, 252-
253, 266, 275, 281, 416, 469, 505, 535,
and note, 536, 570, 636 i«y., 645, 685;
ii. 4, 14 note, 15, 42-4 note, 56, 84,

J 7 o» 423* 50 »» 5 ^ 4 '

Expenments by, i. 240, 497, 541-2, 600.

Moses case, view of, ii. 223.

Quoted (see also *• Phantasms of the

Living”), i. 420 note, 425, 428, 44S-52,
494 . 5 C*-?. 529. 533 - 5 » ^^0** 661-2,
667 note; 11. 10-13, 140, 141, 147, 149,
285, 295.

Work of, i. 194, 243; ii. 117. ^

Giirwood, Col. John, communications ^om,
ii. 163-7.

Guthrie, M., experiments by, i, 542-3, 601-14.

H., Miss, auditor hallucination of, ii. 69-71.

— , Mrs., apparition seen by, i. 659^0.

— , Mrs., case of young sons of, li. 335-6. .

— , Mrs., phantasm at time of death of, ii.
345 - 6 .,

— , W. B., case rerorted by, i. 682-5.

Hack, William, dream r^arding death of,
i. 139-40.

Haddock, Dr. Joseph W., cited, i. 556.

Hadselle, Mrs., case of, ii. 104, 405-9.

Hxmorrhagy, fiypnotic cure of, i. 490, 498.

Haggard, Mr., dream of, i. 208-10.

Hale, Bishop, case reported by, i. 387-90.

Halin, Prof. G., cases rimortraby, i. 671.

Hall, Mrs., apparition ot, i. 262.

, Miss Annie, dream visions of, li. 55, 61,

, J^rof. Stanley, dted, i. 41 and note*

Hallucinations (see also Phantasms)—

Accident, at time of, i. 686-7.

Arvval, cases of, i. 2^5-71 272-4.

Auditory, cases /if, «, 428; ii. f6-x8, 24.
' 58-61, 69-71, 362, 365-7, J76-7»

(music).

Bystander the percipient, i. 266-9.

Collective, i. 62-3, 6^71, 246, 2 ^ 7 >
260-5, 273, 292-3, 680-2; ii. 197, 38®-

INDEX

641

Hallucinations — continued.

Compact cases, i. 219, 686-7; ii. 42-5,
49-51, 350.

Crises other than death, connection with,

I. *53, *70-1, *7<), *81, 287, 291.
Crystal-vision, in, 1. 23^.

Discai'nate spirits, of, li. 15 seg, {see also
Discarnate spirits— Apparitions of).
Death, at or near time of {see Death-
Apparitions).

Death, of, i. 572-^.

Dreams reaching, i. 226-7.

Excursive theory of, i. 232.

Genius, vividness of, similar to, i. 227, 234.
Hearing, of, see above^ Auditory.
Hyperxsthesia, dehned as, i. 227.

Hypnotic production of, i. 233-

235 ; persistence of hypnotic, i. 252.
Imagination-images reaching, i. 227.

Light, of, ii, 374, 381.

Living, of the —

Cases of, ii. 323, 345-6.

Continuous series, in, to those of the
• departed, i. o.

Local, cases of, ii. 377-8.

Memory, of, i. 644-^

Morbid, i. 228, 232, 234-5.

Optical laws apparently followed by, t.
578.

Premonitory, 1. 668-71.

Reciprocal, i. 678-So, 687-S, 697-S.

Report on the Census of —

Cited, i. 57S, 667-8, 672 ; ii. 15.

Quoted, i. 643-4, 653-4, 659-60, 690-2,
695-7; ii. *1-5, 3*-3, 49-30, 344-6.

Summary of, 1. 570-4.

Smell, affecting sense of^ i. 51-2.

Smidity of, degrees in, 1. 667 note^,
ahbjective, i. 24.

Tactile, ii. 353-4-
Time, of, i. 54.

Veridical-

Distinction of, from falsidical, difficulty
, of, i. 252.

Evidence for, i. 247 -9.

Limit of, i. 235. «

Nature of, i. "229-32, 240.

Visual, i. 421-3, 426-f;.

Waking, on, i. 373-5.

Hallucinations Tclepathiques, Les,** cited,
i. 244 note,

Hamilton, Duchess of, vision and dreams of,
i. 142-3.

, Sir Edward, case of, i, 140-2.

, Sir W., cited, ii. ^19 note.

Hands, m>pcarances of, at stances, ii. 541,
S 4 *~ 9 -

Hands, W., case of patient of, i. 546.
Handwriting of telepathic messages, see
Motor automatism — writing.

Hanna, Kev. Thomas C., case of, i. 61.
ftarden, Judge W. D., case sent* by, it.

496^. # 4 , ,

Hardwicke, Lord Chancellor, alleged com-
mtiftications from, ii. 451, 456.

Hare, Dr. Robert, cited, ii. 555.

Harrison, W. H., case reports by, i. 654-6;
cited, ii. 5S3.

VOL. II.

Harriss, Miss, case of, cited, ii. 18.

Hart, Mr., communications to, ii. 242-3.

, Ernest, cited, i. 441.

, John, communications from, ii. 616-

617.

Hauffe, Frau Frederica (secress of Prevost),
ii. 570-1.

Haun, Maniphcc, apparition of, i. 668-70.
Haunting —

Cases of, ii. 67, 359, 389-99.

Cases resembling, ii.

Collectivity in cases of, it. 62.
Psychorrhagic diathesis evidenced by, i.
264.

Theories as to, ii. 4, 72 and note^ 76;

“ Estelle's " explanation of, ii. 453.
Universality of, ii. 2S3.

Veridical after-images, ii. 4.

Hauser, Caspar, case of, i. 524.

Hawaiian communications, ii. 244-5.

Hawkins, Mrs., apparitions of, i. 257-60.
Hawkins-Dempster, Miss C. L., apparition
seen by, ii. 34, 345-6.

Hay, Right Hon. Sir John Drummond,
dream of, i. 396.

Hayarth, Dr., i. 489.

Haydon, genius of, i. 75.

Head, separation of bones in, ii. 563, 565.
Headaclie, hypnotic cure of, i. 470.

^nicaling of the Nations, The" cited, ii.
117.

Hearing, see Audition,

Heat-

Emission of, ii. 514.

Sense of, distinguished from pain sense,
i. 65-6; hypnotic effect on, i. 475.
“Thcfiry of Heat," cited, ii. 530 note.
Hector, Mr., case of, cited, ii. 52,*'

Helena, clairvoyant diagnosis by, i. 486.
Hempstead, A. case sent by, ii. 4S5-6.
Hendrickson, Mr., vision of, i. 421-3.

Uerdman, Prof., experiments by, i. 613;

quoted, ii. 539-40,

Heredity—

% Cosmic and planetary, ii. 267.

Percipience, aptitude for special forms of,
perhaps transmitted by, ii. 477.

Terror, tendencies to, transmitted by,

i. 41.

Hericourt, Dr. J., experiments of, i. 529-30.
Hcrnaman, Mr., case of, cited, ii. 17.

Herrero, cited, i. 440.

Herschel, Sir John, quoted, i. 87-8.
Heterxsthesia —

Hypnotic indication of, i. 233.

Indefinite nature of, i. 18;: li. 517.

Organic substances, evoked by, i. 4S3.
Hewetson, H. Bendelach, i. 471; cited, f. 475.
Hicks, Dr., exfieriments by, i. 613.

, Eddie, phantom of, ii. 340-2.

Hierarchy of intelligences, inference regard-
ing, ii. 265.

Highest-levgl nerve centres —

Activities of, i. 72-4.

Hypnotism, in, i. 193*4; powers of, in
control of lower centres if needful,
I i. 198.

Nourishment of, ii. 511.

I Higton, Mr. W., case of, i. 86-7.

2 .S

642

INDEX

Hill, Dr., quoted, i. 178.

, Rev. R. M., apparition seen fay, ii.

16-17.

Hilprecbt, Prof. Herman V., case of, i. 134,
375 " 9 «

Hinsda'le, Dr., cited, i. 316.

** History of Rationalism,’* cited, i. 4.

Hobday. Alfred, apparition of, i. 672-4.
Hodgson, Frederick, case recorded by, ii.

, Dr?Rl<lari-

Cases under the notice of— attested by,
ii. 27, 30; investigated by, i. 495;
ii. 37» 59, *07, 172, 190, 322, 560;
reported by, i. 369, 692-3; sent to, i.
421-3, 434-6 ; ii. 107-14, 183-5, 405-9,
485-6, 491-3, 496.
i. 23S, 478, 645-6; ii. 251, 501-2,
604, 608.

Handwritings submitted to, ii. 231-2.
Motor inhibition of, ii. 105-^.

Music dream of, i. 126, 369.

Quoted, i. 309-17, 360, 366-S; ii. 238,
212-4, 253, 608-22.

Holbrook, Dr. M. JL, cases reported by, i.

370, 697-8.

Holiness, ii. 290-1.

Holmes, Dr. O. W., cases reported by, I,
274, 660-1.

** Holy Truth, The,” quoted, ii. 171, 482-5.
Home, D. D.—

Books regarding, ii. 578-9.

Case of, i. 32, 205, 563; ii. 221-3, 527,
5 * 9 i 533 - 4 » 536-7, 546-50, 553; «iti.
a.sms on, 11. 57^02.

Homer, cited, i. 124 ; ii. 525.

Hood, H. J., quoted, ii. 584.

Horse-asthma, i. 4S3.

Horne, Mrs., auditory hallucination of, ii.
388.

Howard, Mr., communications to, ii. 242-3,
2J5, 61 1, 613-20.

— Mrs., communications to, ii. 242-4,
611, 613-20.

, Lady Mabel, automatic writing by, is.

178, 262 rto/ff 435'-40.

Howe, W. W., dream of, li. 385-6.

Howells, Mary, case of, ii. 150-j.

, Thomas (Travers), case of, ii. 149-53.

Hugenschmidt, Dr., cited, i. 464.

Hughes, Mr., experiments by, i. 603
Hugo, Victor, case of, cited, ii. 135.

Humboldt, quoted, ii« 540.

Hunter, William, dream regarding death of,
i. 144-6: ii. 42.

Husbands, John E., apparition seen by, ii.

68, 3S4-6.

Hyde, cited, li. 528
Hydroznon, analogy from, i. 38.

Hyperemia, hypnotic production of, i. 491.
Hyperaesthesia—

Auditory, ii. 106.

Cases of, i. 524 ; ii. 230. ^

Hallucination defined as, i. 227.

Hypnotic production of, i. 184-7.

Hysteric, 1. 66.

Peripheral and central, ii. 269-70.

Sleep, in, i. 1.4-5, 369-
Smell, of, ii. 414.

Hyperaesthesia-^Mfiwitfaf.

Telsesthesia an extension of, i. 191-2,
*75; ii. .64,517.

Tel^thy an extension of, ii. 517.

Various uses of term, i. 478.

Hyperboulia also Telekinesis), ii. 116,

„ *66. S> 3 > 5 *®' Saa-

Hyperhydrosis, 1. 491.

Hyperidrosis, ii. 541.

Hypermetre^ia, i. 475-6.

Hypermnesia—

Dreams in, ii. 263, 516, 524.

Hypnotic, ii. 266.

Intellectual element in, ii. 517.

Scope of, ii. 263, 516-17.

Smith, H 61 ^e, case of, ii. 230.

Hypnagogic pictures, i. 124-5.

Hypnopompic pictures, i. 124-5.

“Hypnose und ihre civilrechtliche Bedeut-
ung, Die,” cited, i. 514.

Hypnosis-

Analogy from trance of, for post-mortem
communications, ii. 7.

Automatic writing in, i. 328-31.

Depth of, tested by memory, i, 171,
450 - 5 -

Diseases prescribed for during, i. 520.

Elective power displayed in, ii. 7.

Genius— compared to trance of, i. 22;
relation to, and automatism, i. 104.

Highest-level centres in. i. 193-4: lower
centres under control of, if needful, i.
198.

Memory continuous from trance to
trance in, i. 36.

Middle-level centres active in, i. 73, tqo,
194; under control of higher centres
if needful, i. 108. ^

Mono-ideism, defined as, i. 469-70. ^

Poly-ideism, defined as, i. 470.

Possession and trance in the light ol, ii.
193 -

Precognition in, i. 210.

Prolongation of, i. 464-5.

Kcstfulness of, i. 513. ,

Surgical operations under, i. 160.

Hypnotism—^

Agoraphobia cured by. i. 466.

Amnesia cured by, i. 6t.

Anaesthesia of, i. 470-1.

Ana-sthetics contrasted with, i. 179.

Analgesia induced by, i. 179-82, 470-4.

Animals affected by, 1. 163, 441-3.

Attention, effect on, i. 192-6, 513.

Blistering produce! by, 1, 493-9.

Bums, effect on, i. i7o.

Capricious nature of results in, i^ 169.

Children susceptible to, i. 439, 443-4, 45 ^-

Community of sensation between hypno-
tiser and subject, i. 209.

Confession unaer, 1 . 55.

Connection of, with other infiucnces,
f. 201.

, Consciousness ♦ evhSenced by subjects
under, i. 13 note, ^

Crimes committed under, no evidence
for, i. 45, 198; question of,
illusions of memory in connection
with, i. 646.

INDEX

643

Crystal-vision in. i. 23S, 578-84.

Cures effected by, i. 61, 174-82, 184,
199-201, 232, 330-3, «9-4o, 458-60,
462-8, 476, 490-8. 5>8i «•
classes of derangements where pos-
sible, i. 458.

Dazzling, by, i. 165.

Death averted by change of personality
under, i. 331.

Dednition of, as suggestion and self-
suggestion, i. 153.

Delirium tremens, suggestibility deve-
loped during recovery from, i. 162.
Dipsomania, effect on, i. 232, 462-3.
Discoverers and leaders in the practice of,
i. 159-62.

Distance, from a, i. 524-33.

Dramatic faculty improvSl by, i. 510-11.
Dreams rememlxred under, i. 37, 512.
Dreams reproducing suggestions of,
i. 129-30.

Drugs in relation to, i. 162, 440-1.
Dynamogeny by, i. 173-5, 179; results
of, on perception, i. 184-7; on imagi-
nation, i. 18S-92; on attention and
character, i. 192-202.

Education, effect on, i. 196, 458-9, ’513.
Effluence theory of (see also belaw^
Passes), i. 205-8 ; ii. 312.

Empirical method of, i, 22.

Experimental nature of, realised by
subjects, i. 196.

Future of, i. 211.

Grant, Cameron, case of, ii. 368-9.
Hxmorrhage cured by, i. 498.
Haemorrhagy cured by, i. 490.
Hallucinations produced by, i. 189-91,
•* *33“5 i persistence of, i. 252.
Heteracsthesia produced by, i. 185-7,
533 » 482-4*

Hyp^aesthesia produced by, i. 184-5.
Hyperhydrosis cured by, i. 491.
Hypermnesia under, ii. 266.

• Hysteria, effect on, i. 55, 330-3, 448; by
ressure on hypnogenous zones of
ystcrics, i. 163-4, 4V7; alleged by
SalpStribe school to be induced by,
i* 437'8', hysterics more difficult to
influence by, than healthy subjects,
i; 438.

Idees fixes cured by, i, 41-2, 176-9, 200,
298-9.

Imagination, effect on, i. 188-92.

Improper suggestions under, resisted,
i. 514-15.

Incarnation compared to state of. ii.
272.

Inhibition by—

Analgesia resulting from, i. 179.

Choice in exercise of faculty made
possible by, i. 182.

Dynamogenv involved in, ii. 80.
Educative and Veformatory force of,
.1.173-6.178,197,517-18.

Jealousy, influence on, f. 178, 200, 578.
Kleptomania produced by, i. 514.
Localised stimulus, by, i: 163-4.

Lunatics, effect on, i, 165, 440-1, 517-18.

Hypnotism-HTtfiifmi^A/.

Memory in—

Improvement of, i. 196, 511-12; ii.
266.

Purgation of, i. 178.

Se'Tondary restored, i. 6r, 196, 309,
^ 3*3-i5» 3i7ji9-
Somnambulistic a part of, 1. 203.

Test by, for depth of hypnosis, i. 171,

Microiesf relation to, i. iSo.

Monotonous stimulation by, i. 164-^.

Moral reform by, i. 173-6, 178, 197,
517-18.

Moral training, some loss of, in cures
effected by, i. 175.

Morphinomania cured by, i. 464.

Music used in, ii. 510.

Nancy, school of, i. 161, 166, 206, 219^
437 ) 439 -

Nature of, i. 66-7 ; ii. 82.

Nervous change requisite for, i. 159,
165.

Neuro-muscular phenomena produced
by, i. 187, 197.

Nicotinism cured by, i. 463-4.

Objectivation of types aided by, i. 195,
Organic effects of, i. 476-7.

Passes, by, i. 159, 160, 165, 171, 206,
208; ii, 312.

Perceptive faculties, effect on, i. 184-7.
Phobies cured by, i. 465-8.

Post-epilcptic states treated by, i. 61,
309 »

Post-hypnotic state—

Automatic writing in, ii. 89, 520.
Crystal-vision in, i. 240.

Post-hypnotic suggestions—

Calculations involved in, i. 194-5,
502-10.

Moral and intellectual value of, iL
312.

Three-fold classification of, ii. 7-8.
Rapport in, i. 209, 540.

^ Rarity of serious study of, ii. 206.

Red light used in, ii. 90.

Reint^ration of multiplex personality
by, 1.352.

Resistance to, case of, 1. 440.

Salpetri^re school, i. 437-40, 489-90.
Scope of term, 66-7; scope of treatment
of subject, i. 153-4.

Secondary personality in, i. 322-33, 352.
Self-projection suggested under, 1. 29b. *
Self-suggestion in (see also Self-sugges-
tion) —

Braid’s discovery of, i. 160.
Fahnestock’s results in, i. 161.

Nature of, i. 233.

Neuro-muscular changes produced by,
i. 168, 444-7.

Schemes of. i. 167-8.

Sex immaterial to success in, i. 43 H-
Sight .ffeettd by, i. 184-5. 475 -J* , , .

Sleep, functions of, accomplished by, i.
90, 202; natural, contrasted with, i.
122, 170, 172.

Somnambulism contrasted with, i. 178,
>93. >98-

644

INDEX

Hypnotism — continued.

Squint employed in, i. i6o, 165.

Stages of depth in, i. r7i*-2, 450-5 ;
Charcot’s three stages, i. 16 1, 197,
437* 439* 447-S; Gurney’s two stages,
i. 448-50.

Stratum affecteil by, i. 43, 45.

Suggestion in—

Definition of, i. 169.

Efficacy of, i. 160-2, 165, 166.

Mode of, still unknown, i. 206.

Nature of (Bramwell quoted}, i. 166-7.
Summarised education, defined as, i.
i/l-

Tclae.stnesia in, i. 275 ; travelling clair-
voyance in, i. 210, 278.

Telepathic, i. 207, 209-10, 484, 555-6.
Terrors, forgotten, effect on, i. 299.
Vaso-motor system, effect on, i. 187-^,

191, 490-5.

Waking from trance induced by one
hypnotiser effected by another, i. 524.
Watching of patients by warders under,
i. 196, 5x2.

Will-power, effect on, i. 197-8.

** Hypnotism ” (Moll), cited, i. 514.

“ Hypnotisme;^ Suggestion; Psycho-th^-
rapie,” cited, i. 465.

** Hypnotisme et les Etats Analogues au
point de vue m^dico-legal, L*,” cited,
1. 514.

“ Hypnotisme et I’Orthopcdie morale. I-’,”
i. 459.

“ Hypnotismus und seine Anwendung in
der praktischen Medicin, Der,” cited,
i. 462, 465.

Hyslop, Prof,, cited, ii. 249 and note^ 604,
Hysteria—

Aboulia of, i. 134.

Anaesthesia in —

Fanciful areas of, i. 45-6, 164.

** Fugues,” in a case of, i. 299.

Injury not resultant from, i. 44, 47.
Nature of, i. 65.

Organic disease unnoticed in, i. 48. %

Unconscious nature of, i. 44, 299.
Witches, of, i. 4.

Aphasiain, i. 53, 65.

Consciousness contracted by, i. 19, 22.
Crystal-vision in, i. 238.

Dramatic creation analogous to, i. 107.
Ecstasy of, so<alled, ii. 572,

Genius in relation to, i. 56, 66.
t Hypersesthesia in, i. 66.

Hypnogenous zones of, i, 163-4.

Hypnotic influence on, see under Hyp-
notism.

Memory in, ii. 200.

Metallotherapy in, i. 3^8.

Muscular sense absent in, i. 326, 330.
Nature of, i. 42-50.

Nightmare compared with, i. 124.
Paraphasia in, i. 53.

Predisposition to, from sensioility not
enfeoilement, i. jo.

Secondary personality in, i. 317-19* 335*
Sight affected in, i. 47 ; totally lost, i. 353.
Somnambulism compared to, i. 22, 123,
*« 3 -

Hysteria—

Taste and smell stimulated in, by red
light, i. 5S7 note

Terrors, forgotten, a cause of attacks, i.
40, 50, 298-9.

Universal, supposed case of, i. 67-8.

Value of observations from, i. 65-6.
Vomiting in, i. 331.

Willqiower in, i, 197.

Witchcraft explained by, i. 4.
Hystero-epiiepsy, i. 447-8; ii. 422-3; secon-
dary personality in, i. 352-^0.

I., Miss, auditory hallucination of, ii. 70-1.
Ideation, ii. 519; spiritually inspired, ii.

Idees fixes —

Cases of, i. 51, 216, 218.

Disaggregation, first symptom of, i.
40.

Enthusiasts, of, i. 56-7.

Epileptic, i. 60.

Hypnotic cure of, i. 41-2, 176-9, 200,,
29S-9.

Identity—

Discarnate spirits, of — test of, ii. 499 ;

conceptions of, ii. 252.

Living, of the, ex(>eriments regarding,
ii. 249 note.

Illness, predictions as to, see Medical clair-
voyance.

Illusions hyfmtgo^iqueSy i. 236, 239, 568-9.
Imagiiuition —

Hypnotic stiniul.'ition of, i. 188-92.

Power of, i. 4S.S-9.

Imagination-images, i. 226-7.

Improvisation, i. 104-5.

Inaudi, Jacquc.s, case of, i. 79 note. «
Incandescence, ii. 538. ^

Incantations, ii. 310.

Incarnation, conditioning forces of, ii. 272.

Indy. V’incent d’, cited, i. 89.

Inebriety, see Dipsomania.

InHamnialion, hypnotic cure of, i. 470.

Ingles, Mary .Sophia, case oi death of, <i,
388.

Inhibition— .

Hypni>tic, see under Hypnotism.

Modern instances of, ii. 104-12.

Socrates, case of, ii. 95-100, 103.

Innate ideas, ii. 267.

Innes, A. Taylor, cited, i. 641-2.

“ Inquiry into Human Faculty,” cited, i.

124.

Insanity—

Drawings made diu-ing, ii. 95 note.

Dreams causing fit of, i. 127. ,

Hypnotism in ; cases of, i. 165, 44'>“*»
517 ; moral, i. 199-200.

Illusion of predicted events in, i. 645.
Moral, hypnotic influence on, i. 199-
200.

Musoalar energy in, ii. 51^, 529.

Itviensible spots, see Auajstiwtic spots.
Inspiration, “Possession ” identical jvith, ii.
115.

Instinct, automatism of. i. 193,

Integration of personality the human object,
i. 216.

INDEX

645

'introduction of Mesmerism with Sanction
of Government into the Public Hos-
pitals of India, The,” cited, i. 470.
Intuition, ii. 29J-7.

Irvine, Miss Mary Blamire, apparition seen
by, u. 397-8.

Irving, Edward, ii. 571 and note.

Isolation of elements of personality, i. 57.
Italian communications, i. 620-1.

Ivey, T. F., case of, i. 402-5.

J., (DclboeiiPs subject), i. 470, 472, ^06.

— , Mr. (Delbmuf's patient), case of, i. 471.

— , Mr. (librarian), apparition seen by, ii.
380-1.

— , Jules, case of, i. 466.

Jackson, Dr. J, llughlings, cited, i. 72, 317
note.

James, Capt., cited, ii. 167.

, Prof. William-

Cases under notice of— investigated by,
ii. 159; sent to, i. 379-81, 385-6,
402-6, 435; ii. 58-60; Vejxirled 'by, i.
417-18.

Cited, i. 88 noie, 313, 354, 569 noU^,
587 noie'^.

Experiments by, ii. 238.

Quoted, i. 336; H. \io, 239, 251, 599-
602. •

Jane, case of, i. 279, 553-4; ii. 524.

Janet, Dr. Jules, cases' of patients of, i. 44,
171, 447-8; cited, i. 331-3; experi-
ments watched by, i. 525.

— Prof. Paul, i. 525.

Prof. Pierre—

Cases of patients of, cited, i. 56, 298,
300, 303-5, 496-7. 5*1-9-
Cited, I. 40, 43-4, 46, 62, 162, 29S-300,
. , 303 -; 5 . 460. .

Experiments of. 1. 47.

Pioneer work of, i. 62; ii. 117.

Quoted, i. 48-9, 112. 298, 322-30, 461,
406-7.

J anicaud, Th6ophiIe, case of, i. 521-3.
ealousy, hypnotic influence on, i. 178, 200,
• 518.

i eanne, Soeur, case of, i. 305: ii. 422-3.
endrassik, Dr., i. 495-6. «

Joan of Arc, case of, i. loS ; ii. 100-3, 401-4.
Johnson, iMiss Alice —

Census of Hallucinations, on committee
of, i. 570.

Experiments by, i. 453-5, 535-9, 552.
Quoted, i. 499.

, R. C., experiments by, i. 613.

i ohnstone, Rev, J. C., letters of, quoted, i. 146.
oirc, cited, i. 472, joi.
ones^F. J., case or, cited, ii. 17,

, Sir l.awrence, dream of, i. 274, 392 ;

ii. i6t

Jong, de, cited, i. 439, 460, 490.

" Journal of the American Medical Associa-
tion,” quoted, i. 63-4,

"Journal of Mental Science, The,” cited,
i. 34*. ^ * •

Judd, }lr8., apparition seen by, ii. 375-6.

K., Mr., case of, i. 319-21.

KaJfir communications, ii. 483-4.

Kaigorodoff, Mme. (Mile. Emma Stramra),
communications to, ii. 170-1, 466-71.

Kalua, communications from, ii. 244-5.

Kandinsky, cited, i. 667.

Kane, Dr., cited, ii. 539.

Kant, Immanuel, cited, ii. ^69-70.

Kapnist, Comtesse Eugenic, apparition seen
by, ii. 49-51.

Kardec, Allan, cited, ii. 117 note, 135.

Kate, phantasm of, ii. 360-1.

Keame, Percy, apparition seen by, i. 281,
672-4.

Kelly, case of, i. 575.

Kelso, Mrs. Colonel, alleged communication
from, ii. 4S5.

Kelvin, Lord, quoted, ii. 531-2 and noie,

Kepler, ii. 302.

Kemer, Justinus, cited, ii. 570 and note,

Kemochan, C. A., vision of, ii. 375.

Keulemans, Mr. J. G., case of crystal vision
states of, i. 238; telaesthcsia of, i.
661-3; apparition seen by, ii. 61,

King, ?ieorge, dream vision of, ii. 362-5,
lliingsbury, B. B., case sent by, ii. 334-i.

Kingsford, Dr. Anna, case of, cited, ii. 135.
Kingston, Dr. Henry D. K., case sent by,

n. 473-7.

Kirby, Mrs., case of, ii. 149-53, *^ 7 -
Kirk, Joseph, experiments by, i. 244, 619-22,

690-2,

Kirkland, .\. P., case of, cited, ii. 230.
Kjellman, Dr., experiments by, i. 554-5.
Kleptomania —

Hypnotic cure of, i. 460; production
of, i. 514.

Nature of, i. 175-6.

Self, thefts from, i. 461.

Knorr, Dr. Louis, case recorded by, ii.

496-9.

Knowledge, communicability of, ii. 310.
Kobb6, .Major, case of, cited, ii. 114'.

Knot Hoomi letters, ii. 231, 501.

Korf, (len. Paul von, alleged communication

from, ii. 494-5.

Kra^elin^ Prof. Emil, cited, i. 645.
Krant-Kbmg, Dr., case of patient of, i. 460;
cited, i. 491 and note*, 495 and note;
quot^, i. 127.

*'Kritischc und klinische Bctrachtungen im

Gebiete der Sinnestiiuschungen,”

cited, i. 667 note^,

Krohn, Dr., ca.se cited by, i. 567 noie,
Kropotkin, Prince, quoted, i. 479-80.
Kubla Khan,” cited, i. 135.

L., Earl of, vision regarding, i. 142-3.

— , Mr., phantasm of, at death, i. 2^5.

— , Mr. (mesmerist), apparition of, i. 679-80.
— , Mrs., auditory hallucination connected
with, ii. 16, 69-71.

— , Mrs., experiments by, i. 614 seg,

— , Mrs. (Li 4 beault’s patient), case of, i. 455.

E., clairvoyance of, i. 556-8.

— , Mdllc. K., case of, i. 133-4, 476.

— , Victor, case of, i. 466.

Ladame, cited, i. 460, 462. g

Ladd, IW., cited, i. 88.

INDEX

Lamarckian theotT) i. 11^17.

Lamartine, quoted, i. 8q.

tambertOQ, Prof. William A., case of, i.

lancasttf,’ ^osamira, case of, cited, ii. 230.

** Lancet,’’ cited, i. 491 note*,

Lang, Andrew, dted, i. 237 noU , 574-5,
645 nate^] ii. 31 notg^ 101 futes^ 555;
quoted, L 595-8 ; ii. 401-4.

Langley, Dr. J. N., cited, i. 442, 477.
Language-

Automatic messages, in, i. too.
Limitations of, i. 98, 100.

Primitive universal, ii. 570-1.

Lao Tzu, religion of, ii. 2S6.

Lapsed intelligence, possibility of increasing
range of action performed by, i. 195.
Larva, ansuogy from, i. 97, 201, 217.

Lateau, Louise, case of, i. 492-3.

Latency of perception, U. 12-13, 346*

Laurent, cited, i. 473.

Lay, Miss J. M., planchette experiments by,
ii. 145-6.

Le Gros, Durand, quoted, i. 516.

Leaf, Dr. Walter, experiments by, ii. 238;

cited, ii. 502, 604, 608.

Lebeuf, F., cited, i. 522 noie^.
l^ky, Mr., cite^ i. 4.

Lefebvre, Dr., cited, i. 492-3.

Legeu, Dr. Gabriel, cited, ii. 422-3 note,
Leibnitz, cited, ii. 519 note,

Leigh, Dr. H. G., case reported by, 1 . 319
note,

Lelt, Sara, apparition seen by, ii. 62-3.
lilut, L. F., cited, ii. 95 note \ 99.

Leniattre, Prof., cited, ii. 136.

Lionie (Mme. B.), case of, i. 322-6, 496-7,
5 * 4 - 9 : “• i 9 »-*oo. 5 **. 5 * 9 -
Lepsius, case of, 1. 567.

Letters—

Dreams of contents of, i. 392-4.
Telsesthetic perception ot contents of,

i. 274-5 » »• 324-

Levillain, Dr., quoted, i. 497-3.

Lewin, Mrs., case of, cited, ii. 68.

Lewis, Prof. Carvill, dted, ii. 502.

, Rev. G., apparition seen by, ii, 65.

, Herbert T., quoted, i. 133.

— , Jim, alleged communication from,

U. 474-7;

, S., case of, ii. 153-4.

Librarian, phantasm of, ii. 380-1.

Lie, case ot, i. 299-300.

Lidbeault, Dr. A. A.—

Case reported by, ii. 9, 169-70.

Cases of patients of, 1. 474, 513.

Cited, i. 438. 439» 459 , 462, 514, 5 * 6 , S40.
Quoted, i. 455.

Work of, i. 161, 443-4.

Li6geois, Dr., case of patients of, i. 513;
dted, i. 514.

Life-

Aim of, ii. 294.

Attention, subliminal, the condition of,
i. 217-18. •

Cosmic and planetary, coexistent, i. 151,
* 55 *

Materialistic assumption of planetary
origin of, i. 95.

Vii^-^continued,

Nature of, unknown, i. 97, 246.
Self-adapting power of, 1. 216.
Supplications for, ii. 311-12.

Ught-

Hallucinations of, ii. 323-5, 374, 381.
Magnetic, i. 4S3.

Objective, ii. 538-40.

Red, stimulation of faculty by, i. 587
note^\ ii. 90.

Subjective, ii. 540-2.

Vital photogeny, ii. 540-1, 547.

“Light,” cited, ii. 229; quoted, ii. 329-30,
528 n(de^ 551 and note, 552.

Lightfoot, Mrs., vision seen by, i. 426-49;
ii. 61.

Literature, improvisation in, L 105.

Liitr6, quoted, ii. 139.

“ Livre des Esprits,” cited, ii. 117 note^ 135.

” Livre des Mediums,” cited, ii. 117 note.
Locomotor ataxy, motor suggestibility of,
ii. 114.

Lodge, Mrs., hallucination of, i. 674-5.

l.odge, Mrs., hallucination ot, 1. 674-5.

Frederick L., case reported by, i.

s 1 r‘*< 5 liyer, experiments by, i. 612; ii.
23S; cited, i. 60X note; ii. 239, 542,
'604; quoted, ii. 241, 604-8.

Lombrr.so, Prut., cited, i* 71, 91-2.

Long, Geo. E., case of, ii. 155 -6,

Lots, drawing of, premonitions regarding,
i. 671.

l^udun, so-called devils of, ii. 199-200,
422-3.

Lou6, C., case of, i. 184, 474.

“Louis,** alleged communications from, ii.

171.

Lourdes—

Charcot’s patients sent to, ii. 3x1* ,

L^cnd of, i. 561-4. ^

Miracles of, i. 167, 2x2-15; ii. 313.

Love-

Definition of, ii. 282.

Planetary or materialistic theory of, i.
112-13.

I Platonic, i. 11 2-1 5. 4

Lowest-level centres, i. 72-3.

Lozada, Senhor,/:ited, ii. 157.

Lucic, case of, i. 326-31.

Luke, Miss Mary, dreams of, i. 279, 390-2.
Luminescence, ii. 53S-9; metethcrial, ii. '
542 -

Luminosity, phenomena of, ii. 515.

Lunacy, see insanity.

“Lunatic Asylum Reports (The West Rid-
ing),” cited, i. 317 note,

Luther, Mrs., case of, ii. 210-11, 217.

Luys, Dr., i. 489-90; cited, i. 439. ^

Lyon, Mrs., Home’s case against, ii. 580.

M. (Delbceuf’s subject), experiments witli,
i. 506.

— , (Janet’s patient), case of, i. 48-
■ — , Colonel^ case of, i. 456.

— , Mme., case of, i. 529-1. %

— , Miss, apparition seen by, ii. 73. ^

— , Mr., case of, ii. 404-5.

— , Mrs., experiments by, i. 244, 622-8.

— , Mrs., case reported by, i. 546.

INDEX

647

M., Mrs., vision of, ii. 3SJ-4.

— , Miss £. L., apparition seen by, ii.
369-70.

Marie, case of, i. 318-19.

Mabille, Or,, i. 339, 491 ; cited, i. 497 note^.
Mabire, Etienne, cited, i. 601 ?iote.

Macalister, Prof., cited, ii. ^16 note,

M* Alpine, Mrs., ap^ritions seen by, i.
270-1 ; ii. 345.

Macario, Dr., cited, i. 522 note
McGuire, Katy, cominunicatioiis from, ii.
215-17.

M‘Kay, Rev. Charles, case reported by, ii.

348.

M^Kendrick, Prof., criticised, i. 164 note.
Mackenzie, Robert, .apparition of, ii. ^2-5.
MT., Mrs., cited, ii. 361-2.

Macropy, i. ^74.

Maginot, Adele, case of, ii. 220, 5 7 3-8.
Magnetic fields, hypiiutic perception of, i.
2 . 33 -

Magnetic sense, 1. 4S2-3.

^‘Magnetisme Animal, Le, *’ quoted, i. 329-

330*

• ** Magnctismiis und die allgcmeine Wclt-
sprache, Her,** cited, i. 698 note.
Magneto-therapy, i. 159.

Magnets, sensibility to, i. 488, 490.

M.aitland, Edward^ case of, cited, ii. 13^,

** Making of Religion,” cited, i. 237 note^
574-5. 645 note'^x quoted, i. 595-8.
'•Maladies de la Pcrsonnalitc, Les,’”' quoted,

t. 10.

Malaise, psycho-physiological, 1 . 481 ; ii. xS,
104.

Malcolm. Mrs., apparition seen by, t. 258-9.
Maloy, phantasm of, ii. 348.

Mamtchitch, Eugene, apparitions seen by,
ii. 21-5, 210.

M^ngiamele, Vito, case of, i. 80, S3-4,
• 116-17.

Mania, sec Insanity.

Manning, Mrs., dream of, i. 147, 417.

” Manners, Elisa,” control by. ii. 244, 24S
natty 620-1.

V Manuel Pratique dii Magn6tisme Animal,”
quoted, i. 520.

Manzini, Si^ora Maria, automatic writing
by, ii. 446-7, 624-7.

Marguerite case, ii. 69-70.

Maria, case of, i. 48-9, 463.

MarilUer, M., experiments watched by, i.

525 ; quoted, i. 663 note,

Marot, Dr., case of patient of, i. 464.

Mars, alleged communications from, ii. 130
seq,

Martian language, ii. 136-7.

Martin, Mrs., case sent by, i. 26O.

Martibcau, Harriet, case of cow of, i.
442.

Massey, C. C., case sent by, ii. 561-2;
quoted, it. 5S4.

Mason, Dr. R. Osgood, cases reported by, i.

. 63-4, 390-2. ^ ,

Massive motor imuls^, ti. 112-15.

Maston, Dr. Claudius Henry, quoted*, i.
•456-8.

Materialisation (ectoplasy), ii. 529, 541,
544 - 9 -

Materialism, view of, regarding evolution,
i. 94; r^arding love, i. 112-13; \
regvding will-power, i. 218.

Mathematical prodigies, i. 79-85.

Matter-

Conservation of, ii. 301.

Ether in relation to, ii. 209.

Law: of, an incidental case of laws of
spirit, i. 4S8.

Passage of, through matter, ii. 536.

Reality of, discussed, i. 277-S.

Spirit's influence on, i, 32 ; ii. 204-5.
Maugnan, Miss Edith (Mrs. G. Rayleigh
Vicars), apparitions of, i. 653-4, 693-

Maury, i^lfred, cited, i. 124-3.

Mavroukakis, Dr., case reported by, i.
466.

Maxwell, Prof. Clerk, cited, ii. 530-1.

*• Mechanism of Man,” cited, i. 523.

Medical clairvoyance, see under Clairvoy-
ance.

“Medical Xews, The” (U.S.A.), cited, i.

300; quoted, i. 436-8.

Medicinc-mcn, ii. 200 notty 2S3.

“ Medico-Legal Journal ” (U.S.A.), quoted,

i. 319-21.

Mediuinship—

Communications affected by nature of,

ii. 229, 590.

Effect of, on medium, ii. 131 -2.

Physical sufferings reproduced in, ii.
220, 573-4.

Study of, valuable, ii. 138.

“ M6raoires de St. Simon,” cited, i. 92.
“Memoires pour seivir \ PHistoire et k
TEtablissement du Magn6tisme Ani-
mal,” cited, i. 159 note.

Memorability a test of consciousness, i.

Memory —

Alternating personalities, in, i. 341, 344,
346-53; ii. 201.

Complete conspectus of various streams
of, not possible to present conscious-
ness, i. 1S2.

^ Crystal-vision reproducing subliminal, i.
132.

Dehnition of, ii. 265.

Double (promnesia), i. 644-5 and note;
ii. 264,

Dreams, recovered in, i. 33S ; ordinary,
in dreams, ii. 201.

Eciimesia, sec that title.

Emotional or affective, ii. 138-9.

Errors of, in recounting telepathic im-
pressions, i. 637, 644.

Hypermnesia. see that title.

Hypnotism in relation to, see under
Hypnotism.

Hysteria, in, ii. 200.

Illusions of, i. 637, 644-6.

Multiplex personality, in, i. 311, 344,
34(i-53 ; ii. 201.

Or^nic, ii. 266-7.

Pain, of, i. 472-4.

Paramnesia (promnesia), i. 644-5
note 1 ; ii. 264.

Physical basis of, ii. 511. •

648

INDEX

'iAe:moTy continued.

Post - epileptic states, of, i. 6 i, 309,

Pre-nat^, ii. 266-7.

Promnesia (paramnesia), i. 644-5 and
no/e^; ii. 264.

Purgation of, i. 17S.

Secondary personality, in, nature of, i.
6a, 1 2$, 306; ii. 192.

Secondary personality, of— lost to prim-
ary, i. 332, 333, 336; recalled by hypno-
tism, i. 61, 196, 309, 313-15, 3*7"*9;
not recovered, i. 320,322.

Selective nature of, i. 12S.

Self-projection, of, 1. 296.

Sleep, in, see under Dreams.
Somnambulistic, i. 203.

Spirit control of, ii. 550.

Subliminal continuity of, i. 128.
Memory-images —

After-images distinguished from, i. 567-

Nature of, i. 226, 236.

Mcnncer, Mrs., dream of, i. 425-6 ; ii. 52.
Menken, Adah, control by, ii. 222.

Meredith, Mrs., case of, cited, ii. 248 ncie,
Mesner, work of, i. 5, 157, 159; cited, i.
698.

Mesmerism—

Effluence thcr»ry of, i. 484-5 ; ii. 515.
Objects treated by, i. 4S4.

Rejection of, i. 600.

Spirits, by, ii. 527.

Mesmerism and the Universal Language,**
quoted, i. 69S-700.

“ Mesmerism in India,** cited, 1. 470.

Mesnet. Dr., case recorded by, i. 181, 306;

cited, i. 472.

Metallssthesia, i. 482.

Mctallotherapy, i. 159, 338.

M etamorphoses, ii. 512.

Metaphysical Magazine, The," quoted, i.
423,

Metetherial environment, i. 95-6, 215-9.
Methectic, explanation of term, ii. 6 note^
Microbes, hypnotism in relation to, i. 180.
Microscopic perception under hypnotism, ^
case of, i. 47^.

Middle-level centres—

Functions of, i. 72-4.

Hypnotism, in, i. 157, 190, 194; under
control of higher centres if needful, i.

Mill, Jo^ Stuart, abstraction of, i. 90.

Miller, Mrs., vision of, i. 423-4.
b(ind—

Habits of, 59S-600.

Nutrition and expenditure of, ii. 511.
Persi.sting results of action of, ii. 60.
Phenomena of, not to be explained in
terms of physical, i. 13 note.

Relation of consciousness to, i. 37.
Tclaesthctic vision, evident in, i, 276.

“ Mind,** died, i. 88 ; quoted, i. 477.

Mind-Cure, Faith-Cure, and the Afirades
of Lourdes,** cited, i. 213 note\
Mind-healing, !. 212.

Minot. Prof. C. S., cited, i. 598 note^,

^irades of Lourdes, 167, 212-15; ii. 313.

Mitchell, Rev. G. W., cited, ii. 562-5, 56S-9.
Dr. Weir, cited, i. 3 ii-r 3 ; quoted, i,

336.

Mixed sense organs, theory of, i. 186 note,
Moberley, Mrs. Alfred, planchette experi-
ments by, ii. i44-5<

1 Isis, A,’* cited, ii. 502.

(Maskelyne), cited,
(Podmore), cited, ii.

ii.

** Modern Priestess ot

** Modern Spiritualism
ii. 503.

“ Modern Spiritualism **

207 and note, 503.

Molecules—

Selective guidance of, individually,

522.

Statistical method of dealing with,
530 -

Moll, cited, i. 438, 439, 514, 540.

Monasticism, ii. 291, 309.

Moncrieff, Major, case of, cited, ii. 17.

Mondeux, case of, i. 80, S3, 84.

Money, Miss S., apparition seen by, ii.
35 *-' 2 .

Monitions, ii. 26S, 272.

Mono-idcism, i. 178, 189, 469; dowsers, of,
i. 4S1.

Moral character of automatic messages, ii.

* 33 -' 4 *

fau

influence on, i.

176,

Moral faults, hypnotic
199-201.

Morin,' M., prediction sent to, ii. 440.

Mbrl, Mtaria, case of, i. 493.

Morphinomania cured by hypnotism, i.

199, 464.

Morse, Miss, hallucinations of, i. 667 note L
Morton, Miss R. C., apparition seen by, ii.
389-96.

Moses, Rev. William Stainton—

Books by, ii. 5S3,

Career of, ii. 585-7.

Case of, ii. 223-37; cited, i. 29, 32,^05 ;
ii, 115 note, 117, 189, 249, 505 Ond
note, 506, 513, 5 > 5 » 527-30, 533 - 7 ,
540-1, 546^ 551-4
Case recorded by, 11. 560-1.

Letter of, quoted, ii. 552.

Musicians* messages to, ii. 167-8. ^

- — , C. W., case of, ii. 107-8.

Motor automatism—

Dissolution* and evolution contrasted,
ii, 83-4.

Dowsers, of, i. 481.

Drawing, ii. 400-1, 442-3, 440.

Genius and hypnotism, relation to, i.

, . ..

Hyperiesthetic, ii. 104-11.

Hysterical defects supplied by, i. 48-9.
Idiognomonic nature of, ii. 87.

Inhibitions, see that title.

Instinctive, i. 195. *

Modes of. enumerated, ii. 115.

Nature of, i. 222.

Possession, see that title.

Scope of subject, i. 27.

Sensory automatisms, compared with, ii.

77, *15-16; connect^ with, ii. 103,.
♦ 520. *

Somnambulism, in, i. 306-7. *

Speech, as, moral character of, ii. I33'*4.
Spiritually controlled, ii. 553.

INDEX 649

Motor automatism*—

Table-tilting, ii. 92-4, 144, IS0-3, 156-K;,
207, 248 note, 423-6, 477, 4S9-9»-
Table-turning, ii. 92-4; books on, ii.
555 ‘

Writing (hand**) —

Cases of, ii. 142-3, 147-8, 153, J60-1,
169-70, 172-8, 400, 416-18, 422,
435--‘lo, 442 " 57 » 4 p 9 - 7 i, 482-9, 495.
Demoniacal possession, in, i. 304.
Evidential quality in, stages of, ii.
235-f>.

Hypnotic, i, 328-31.
Hystcro-epilepsy,"in, i. 355-60.

Moses, W. .S., case of, see Moses.
^Similarity of, to hand-writing of alleged
agent, ii. 168.

Somnambulism, in, i. 306-7.

Telekinesis in, ii. 207.

Test of, ii. 231-2, 235.

Varieties of, li. 44S, 46c, 466, 483, 589,
596 (signatures).

Writing (planchclte-)—

Cases of, ii. 144-7, 154-6, 161-7, *73,
* 418-22, 426-34, 44S, 437-82, 496.

Vlarmlessness of, ii. 423.
l*ost-hypnotic, ii. 89.

Telekinesis in, ii. 207.

Writing (hand- and plancliette-)— \
Anagrams, ii. 416-18.

Early condition of subject, li. 116-17.
Effect of, on automatic writers, ii.
n8.

Evil evidenced in, merely mischievous,
ii. 78.

Hypnotic, i. 328-31; post-hypnotic, ii.
*89, 320.

Importance of, ii. 1S5.
lingua;:. 2 of, 1. 100.

.Secondary persc»nality, by, i. 355-60.
tsources of, enumerated, ii. iiK-19.
Spontaneity of, ii. 442, 444, 591.

Motor defects, automatic substitutions for, i.

Mountain Iini, apparition of, 11. 44.

Moimtfurd, Rev. Mr., apparition seen by, i.
656-7.

Multiplex personality— cases of,, i. 338-54;
tendency towards, ii. 423; nature of,
ii. 512; automatisms with character of,
ii. 520.

Muscle-reading, analogy from, ii. SS-q.
Muscular sense, hypnotic effect on, i. 475;
rigidity produced by suggestion, i.

Dream of, i. 369.
iiallqcinatioii of, ii. 388.

Hypnotic subjects, effect on, ii. 90.

Nature of, i. 101-3.

Musicophobia, i. 466.

Musset, De, quoted, i. 89.

Mustard poultices, imaginary, i. 496-7.

Myers, Dr. A. T., cited, i. 213 andknote^,
391 ; experiments 'vatched by, i. J23
exneriments by, i. ^541; on committee
of (jen.sus of liallucmations, i. 570.
Mysophobia, i. 177.

Mysticism, ii. 286.

“ Mystique Divine, naturellc et diabolique,
La,” cited, i. 493.

” Myth, Ritual, and Religion,” cited, ii, 31
note.

N., vision of, ii. 405.

— , Dr., case of, ii. 104,

— , M., case recorded by, ii. 622-3.

Nagel, cited, i. 186 note, 479 and note,
480.

Nail-biting cured by hypnotism, 1. 450.

Nancy School of Hypnotism, see under Hyp-
notism.

Narcotics—

Impulse to, cured by hypnotism, i.
176.

Suggestibility, relation to, 1. 162, 440-1.
Nascimento, Jose Ciistodio Fernandez do, case

of. 303-4- ,

Nasse, cited. 160 note^.

“ Natural and Mesmeric Clairvoyance,” cited,
i. 207 note, 470.

Nature-speech, ii. 571.

‘‘Nature,” quoted, 1. 455-6; cited, ii. 542
note.

Neilson, cited, i. 462.

Nervous development, modem rapidity of, i.
92-3.

Nervous disorders cured by hypnotism, i.

460.

Ncry, Donna, dream of, ii. 347.

Nethcrdift, F. G., cited, ii. 502.

Neuralgia, hypnotic cure of, 1. 470-1.
Neurasthenia, i. 465.

Neiiro-musciilar changes produced— by self-
suggestion, i. 168, 444-7; by hypnotism,
i. 187, 197.

Nevius, Dr. John, cited, ii. 198-200, 500-1.
Nevroses et idees Fixes,” cited, i. 298, 460,

461, 463; quoted, i. 303-5, 461.
Newbold, Prof. Romainc, cases recordetl by,

373 - 9 ; cited, i. 314; ii. 19S-9,
239, 604; quoted, i. 352-4; ii. 500-1.
Newnham, Mrs., telepathic impression of, i.

418-19; ii. 187; planchette writing by,
• ii. 199, 207, 426-31.

, Rev. P, H,, dream of, i. 147, 418-19;

telepathic experiments by, ii. 140,
147-8, 187, 426-31.

Newton, case of, i. 569.

Nicotinism, hypnotic cure of, i. 463-4.
**Niederen Sinne dcr Insekten, Die,” cited, i.
479 note.

Nightmare, i. 123-4.

Ninis, F. A., case reported by, i. 282.

Nislxjt, E. T., case reported by, i. 675-8.
Nordau, Dr. Max, cited, i. 71,

Normal—

Genius bc.st type of, i. 72, 77, 78.

Misuse of term, i. 333.

Scope of term, i. 20, 76-7.

Normandie, Rev. C. Y, de. quoted, ii. 1S4-5.

“ Northern Journal of Medicine,” quoted, i.
321-2.

Norton, Ca^, Cecil, apparition seen by, ii.

336*8.

** Nouvelles Observations sur iin cas de Som-
nambulisme,” cited, ii. 131 note, 139
note^f 144 note^.

INDEX

650

Number 4 orms» i. 565, 59S-600.

Nut-shells, clairvoyant reading of mottoes in, i.
557 -«-

O. y Mr., case sent by, ii. 209, 556-9.

— , Friiulcin Anna, case of, i. 51, 53-4.
Objectivation of ty|)es—

Dreams, in, t. 126.

Hypnotic influence on, i. 195.

Observations dc M6decine Pratique,*' dted,
i. 445, 500; quoted, i. 4S5.

Occult wisdom, ii. 277.

Ocliorowicz, Prof., cited, ii. 545 ; experiments
watched by, i. 525.

O’Gorman, Mrs., case of, cited, ii. 24S tiafe,
Oliphant, Mrs., cited, ii. 5 71 noie,

** On the So<alled Divining Rod,” cited, i.
4S0-1.

Ophthalmology and Diseases of the Nervous
System,” cited, i. 317 note,

Osgood, Dr. Hamilton, cited, i. 471.

'•Over the Teacups,” quoted, i. 66o-i.

P. , experiments with, i. 499, 538-9. 547-53.

„ 5 ??- 84 - , .

— , Captain, case of, 11. 43.

— , Mile, de, case of, ii. 156.

— , Mr., liallucination of, ii. 381.

— , Mrs., apparitions seen by, ii. 326-9.

, G.” (George Pelham), control by, ii.
36, 198, 237-8, 241-3, 253-3, 608-20.
Pk., case of, i. 300.

P— 11 , case of, i. 503-5.

Ft., Mine., case of, i. 461.

Paige, £., case sent by, ii. 559-60.

Pain (w afsa Analgesia)—

Aoiesthetic suppression of, not perma-
nent, i. 472-3.

Dream memory of, t. 181.

Hy^otism in relation to, i. 23, 470.
Inhibition of, ii. 550.

Memory of, i. 472-4.

Mind-healing of, i. 212.

Nature of, i. 17^1.

Self-.suggestion effective in removal of, i.

471. ♦

Sense of, distinguished from temperature-
sense, i. 65-6,

Transference of sensation of, i. 540-f,
543. 6 i 3 ~I 4 '

Palajolithic psychology, i. 247, 249.

Palladia, apparitions of, ii. 21-3.

Palliser, Matthew, phantasm of, ii. 543''4>
Panaesthesia in primal germ, i. 186 ; ii. 269.
Paquet, Mrs. Agnes, vision seen by, i. 282-4.
Paramnesia, ii. 264.

Paraphasia in hysteria, i. 53.

Parish, E., cited, i. 645 and note
Parker, Hon. Mrs., apparition seen by, i.
678-80,

Parry, Miss I.ucy Gambler, phantasm of, ii.
3 / 6 - 7 .

Parsons, Dr. D. J., case of, i. 441 ; ii. 111-112.
Pascal, case of, cited, i. 117. ,

Passion, analysis of, i. 1 12-13.

‘'Pathologic des Emotions,” cited, i. $87
note\

Payne, Joseph, case oC cited, i. 519,

Pearce, \V. H., case of, i. 654-^.

Pearson, Miss Ann, phantasm of, ii. 334.
Pedrono, case of, i. 567 note.

Peed, Kev. J., case reported by, i. 558-9.

” Pelham, George ” (” G. P.”), control by, ii.
36, 19S, 237-8, 241-3, 253-5, 608'
620.

Penn6c, Mrs., case of, cited, ii. 68 note*

Hypnotic influence on, i. 1S4-7.
Independent of .sense-organs, i. 191.
Per 61 igainc, Anastasia, alleged communica-
tion from, ii. 47I-J-
Perkins, Dr. Eli.sha, i. 489.

Personality —

Common-sense view of, i. 10-13, 17, 222.
“Co-ordination” view, i. lo-ii.
Dissociation of, i. 249-51, 263, 297.
Infinite God transcending, ii. 30S, 313.
Integration of, the human object, i. 216.
Isolation of elements of, i. 57.

Modihable nature of complex forces in,
i. 68.

Multiplex — cases of, i. 338-54 ; tendency
towards, ii. 423; nature of, ii. 512:
automatisms with character of, 11.
520.

Psychological view of, i. lo-n.

Secondary, see Secondary personality.

* Splinters of, perhaps evidenced in teasing
“controls,*' ii. 200-1.

Supraliminal life a privileged case of, i.
223.

Perspiration, excessive, hypnotic influence on,

i. 491.

Perturbation masking evolution, i. 21, 56, 93;

ii. 86.

Pesaro experiments, cited, ii. 193.

Peterson, Dr. F., cited, i. 490.

P6t6tin, cited, i. 485-6, 500, 523, 539
Pctrovu-Solovovo, Michael, cases sen^by, ii.

40-2, 478-So; cited, ii. 51, 555.
Phantasmogenetic centres, i. 232, 247, 264-5,
273“4i 685 ; ii. 186, I94» 685.
Phantasms—

Death, about moment of, ii. 271, 283.
Discarnate spirits, of, see Discanate
spirits— A pparitions.

Living, of the, i. 225-7, 272-4, 281, 287,
291 ; ii. 323, 345-6.

“ Phantasms of the Living

Cited, i. 4, 8, 24-5, 124, 125, 207 note*
228, 245, 247-8, 254, 280, 284, 286,
*91, 416-17, 523, 529, 533. 539 w
notes^ 543, 570, 636 seq*^ 642-3, 088 ,
699-700; il 31, 42-5, $2, loi, 114,
.•^00, 345t 3?9| 388.

Production of, 1. 243.

Quoted, i. 137-8, 144, 148-9^ 255-61,
269, 272, 280, 287-290, 292-6, 394,
398, 413-16, 418-20, 424-33. 542 ,
613-14, 646-51, 654-9, 66i- 7, 678-82,
686-8; ii. 62-3, 66-7, 69-71, 169-70,
336-7. 343 - 4 . 348-5 L 367, 372-3. 376-9.
415-16, 423-5.

•Phillips, R. C., quoted, if 559-61.

“ Philosophy of Mysticism,” cited, j. 58 note.
Phinuil, Dr., control by, ii. 220, 237-41.
245-7, 600-1, 604-8, 610-13, 616, 619*
624.

INDEX

6s I

Phipson, Dr. T. L., cited, ii. 539.

Phobies, i. 465-8.

Phosphorescence, ii. 515, 538-40.

“ Phosphorescence,** cited, li. 539.

Photogeny, vital, ii. 540-1, 547.

“Phrenological Journal and Miscellany,**
cited, i. 667 note K

Physical phenomena, mental phenomena not
to be explained in terms of, i. 13 note.

Pierce, A. H., cited, i. 12 note

Pike, J ., dream of, i. 147, 415-16.

Piper, Mrs., case of, ii. 237-56 ; case cited, i.
29, 205; ii. 137, 190-1, 198, 200, 213,
31 1 ; reports on, ii. 599-624.

Pitres, Dr,, case of patient of, i. 47, 164, 512.

Planchcttc, see Motor automatisms— Writ-
ing.

Planetary and cosmic, see Cosmic.

Plasticity —

Hypnotic somnambulism productive of
greater, i. 217.

Primitive, recovery of, i. 193-4.

Reason, of, combined with stability of

^ instinct, i. 195.

Plato-

Love as depicted by (quotation from
“Symposium**), i. 112-15.

Reminiscence theory of, i. 117-19.

Socrates, incidents regarding, described
by, ii. 97-9.

Plotinus, quoted, 11. 2S9-91 ana note,

Plummer, Rev. W. S,, cited, i. 33S.

Plutarch, cited, ii. 99.

Podmore, PVank—

Cases under notice of — attested by, i.
65S: investigated by, i. 681; ii. 353,
33<j- 35S-9< 3^*7; reported by, 1. 381-2.

Census of llallucinatioos, on committee
of,i. 570.

Cit2(^ i. 244, 219 note; ii. 30 and note,
56, 68, 207 and note, 220, 230 note,

„ 5 oi- 3 .. 355 . 573 . 578.

Quoted, 1. 6ifh22, 642, 688-90.

Poetry, nature of, i. 101-2.

Points de rep^re, i. 185, 190, 23S, 375, 499 p
*578.

Polarisation of light, analogy from, i. 235
note, •

Pole, Mr. W., quoted, i. Si.

Poltergeists, ii. 72, 501, 555.

Poiy-idcism, i. 470.

Ponomareff, N. j., apparition of, ii. 40-2.

Possession-

Analogies for, ii. 192-4, 201-2, 254.

Angelic or diabolic, not found, ii. 198-9.

Brain function in cases of, ii. 201, 204,
254.

Chine<^, ii. 198-9, 500-1.

Definition of, ii. 1S9.

Diabolic, not found, ii. 198-9; so-called.

J. 303-5.

Ecstasy sometimes indistinguishable
from, ii. 210.

Family circles or groups, in, ii, 209.4
Home case, see H«mc. «

Hostile not found, ii. 198.

Importance of theory of, ii. 191.

** Inspiration** identical with, ii. 115.
Mischievous “controls,** ii. 200.

i

1

i

I

i

Possession— ued,

Moses case, see Moses.

Motor automatism, extreme case of, ii.

1 89.

Nature of, ii. 190- 1, 196-7, 203-5.

Piper, Mrs,, case of, ii. 237-56,

Popular expectations regarding, ii. 203.
Processes of, ii. 250-5.

So-called, i, 65, 305, 360-8; ii, 422-3.
Spirit-possession —

Break in series of psychological
ciianges possibly effected by, i. 70.
Cases of, i. 203.

Evidence for, 1, 28-9.

Split personality, risk of confusion with,
ii. 198.

Telekinesis in relation to, ii. 205-8.
Telepathy, development of, i. 250.

Two or more spirits, by, ii. 190.
Undesirable spirits, by, ii. 554.

X., Mme., case of, ii. 125-30.
“Possibilities of Mal-Observation and Lapse
of Memory, The,’* cited, i. 646.
Poiichet, case of, i. 569.

Powilewicz, Ur., hypnotic cure by, i. 326.

Practitioner,” cited, i. 498 note,

Pratt, Thomas, dream of, i. 400-2.

Prayer-

Belief in, i. 242.

Natureof. ii. 3 ' 3 >. 534 - ^

Telepathy in relation to, 11. 306.
Theological connotation of, ii. 309.
Precognition—

Cases of, i. 55S-0; ii. 262 nott\ 435-40.
Complexity involved in, i. 136.

Deatn, of, see under Death.

Discussion of, i. 246, 24S; ii. 262-4,

Dreams, in, 1. 142-3, 400-13; 11. 271,
524.

Hallucination, in, i. 668-71.

Hypnotic trance, in, i. 210.

Joan of Arc, case of, ii. 404.

Monitions classed as, ii. 26$.
Somnambuli.sm, in, i. 204.

“ P.^^lude, The,’* cited, i. 109-11.

Premonition, vague, of evil (see also Precog-
nition), ii. 196.

Prenatal suggestion, i. 177, 455-S; ii. 515-16.
Prevision, see Precognition.

Prevorst, Sccress of, ii. 570-1.

Preyer, W., cited, i. 442.

Prince, Dr. Morton, case of subject of, i. 63,
3H. 344-52? ii. 190.

“Principles of Psychology,'* cited, i. SS
nofe^, 569 Hote'^\ quoted, i, 336.
Proctor, Mr., cited, ii. 390.

“ Progr6s Medical.” cited, i. 497 notes'^,
Prolnngcau, case of, i. $0, $3.

Promnesia (double memory), i. 644-5
note 1 ; ii. 264.

Protoplasm-

Genius, origin of, referred to, i. 117.
Pana?sthesia of, i. 1S6; ii. 269.
Prophylactic Ihcasures, analogy from, i. 36.
Proust, Dr., case of patient of, i, 61, 317-18,
Proximity, sensibility to —

Animals, of, i. 483-4.

Persons, of, i. 487.

652

INDEX

T'rudhoinme, Sully, quoted, i. S9; ii. 139.
Pruit, J. W., case recorded by, ii. 566.
Pseudo-possession, see Possession— So-called.
Pseudo-presentiments, i. 644-6, 667.

Psychical invasion—

Cases of, i. 263«9, 64^50, 653-6, 675-
700; by spirits of the living, i. 147-S;
j 3 y spirits of the dying or dead, i. 150;
where only percipient retains memory
of circumstance, i. 286-01 ; where
agent and percipient retain memory
of circumstance, i. 291, 41S-21; ii.
147 -

Continuity of dream-life suggested by,
i. 263.

Dreams, in, i. 147, 41;, 423.

Nature of, ii. 525.

Series cf cases in, i. 254.

Space conceptions involved in, i. 231,
247 -

Telepathic impact merging into. ii. 1S6.
Uncertainty of experiment in, i. 292
and note*

Psychical Research Society, see Society for
Psychical Research.

“ Psychischc Bchandlung der Neurasthenie,
Die,*’ cited, i. 465.

“Psychischc Studicn,” quoted, ii. 178-S2,
493-4.

rsycho-thera|3cutics, 11. 51;, 527.

“ Psycho-Therapic,” cited, i. 459, 462, 465,

471.

“Psychological Review, The,” quoted, ii.
239.

“Psychologic der Suggestic.n,” cited, i.

“Psychologic des Sentiments,” cited, ii.
139 note^.

“Psychologic du Raisonnement, La,” cited,

i. 569 fiofe L
Psychology-

Experimental stage of, i. 235 noie»
Palxolithic, i. 247, 249.

“Psychology” (James), cited, i. 5S7 nofe^,
•‘Psychology of Suggestion, The,” cited, i.

61 noie» •

Psychorrhagy —

Cases of, i. 264-5.

Ilanntings perhaps due to, ii. 75.

Scope of term, i, 264.

Puysegur, Marquis de, cited, i. 485-6, 539
note^; work of, i. 159.

Pulse, hypnotic effect on, f. 475, 491.
Pythagoras, cited, ii. 135-6.

Q. , phantasm of, ii.

— , Lady, dream of, 1. 410-13.

— , Miss Mary, auditory tkallucination heard
by, ii. 58-60.

Quentin, Col., communication regarding,

ii. 166-7.

Quicherat, M., cited, ii. 101-2, 404.

R. , Dr., apparition of, ii. 35. ^

— , Mile., case of, i. 533.

— , Mr., hallucination of, ii. 381.

— , Mr, Van, case of, i. 80, Sz,

— , Mrs., planchette writing by, ii. 161-7,
457-8.

R., Mrs. Constance, auditory h.illucination
of, i. 680-2.

— , Miss A. £., apparition seen by, i.
639-60,

— , Miss £. W., apparition seen by, i.
686-7.

— , Miss Lucy, case of, i. 51-3.

— j Marceline, case of, i. 331-3.

Uadberg, Alma, case of, iT 497, 554-5.

Radnor, J-ady, case recorded by, ii. 452-3.
Ralph, Miss, experiments with, i. 542,
603 seg.f 613-14.

Ramadief, Dr., i. 491.

Ramsay, Mrs., apparition seen by, i. 2S9-90
and note*

, Prof., quoted, ii. 528.

Rappirt —

Experiments for, i. 185.

Nature of, i. 209.

Socrates, case of, ii. 96, 98-9.
Thought-transference formerly held to
depend on, i. 600.

Various opinions on, i. 540.

“ Rapport in der flypnose, Der,” cited, i.

Cases of, ii. 160, 171, 20S, 449, 4J4-5,
461, 472, 474-7, 402, 503-4, 588-9,

* 59 '. 59 > 595 -

Nature of, ii, 92, 537.

Rarcy method, i. 163. Voo.

Rawson, Henry G., e.xpcriments by, i.
614-19.

Raymond, Dr., cited, i. 298.

Kayncs, Dr. S. H., ii. 315.

Read, Stirg.-Genl. L. 1 ^., cited, i, 311-12.
Reading with sole of foot, i. 500.

Reality, symbolism and, comp.ired, i. 277.

“ Recherches Exi>6riinen tales,” W;ited, i.

497 - *

‘•Recherches Physiologitpies sur rjlomme,”
cited, i. 1 59 note.

“ Recherclie.s siir T Homme dans le Som-
nambulisnic,” cited, i. 4S5,

Recollection, eee Memory.

Red light, stimulation of faculty by, L 587
notc'^\ ii. 90.

Reddcll, Hrances, apparition seen by, i. 266,
268.

Redmond, Miss, experiments by, i. 613.

Reed, JJcut.-Col., apparition of, i. 255-7.

, Mrs,, case of, cited, ii. 17.

, Mrs., vision of, i. 426-Hj.

Reeves, Henry E., apparition seen by, ii.
46—8.

K6gis, cited, i. 460.

Keichenbach, Baron, cited, 1 . 483.

Kcid, quoted, i. 10. •

Reincarnation {see also Transmigration), ii.
L14-5i iZ9afulnoie^.

Relationship in regard to telepathy, i. 272
and noie,

“ RcUgio-Philosophic Journal,” cited, i. 360;
• quoted, i. 382-3, 4*3-* 5 » “• 334’5»

, 489^*- • •

Religion— «

Ancient Sage (Lao Tzu), of the, ii. 286.
Buddhi.sm, ii. 286, 289-91.

' Christianity, il 280-3, 294 ‘~ 7 *

INDEX

6S3

Religion — continued*

Conversion, see that title*

Defimtion of, i. 115; ii. 257, 2S5, 306.
Evolution of, ii. 306.

Materialism concordant with view of, as
to will-power, i. 218.

Methods of, ii. 305.

Natural, ii. 286, 296.

Oracular, ii. 283.

Platonic love, relation to, i. 115.
Post-mortem evidence in relation to, ii.

rS-?. 1.33. 308-

Postulates of, 1. 1 19.

Proof of preamble of, the task of the
S.P.R., ii. 297.

Science— complementary to, i. 33; ap-
plied to, ii. 275; developed into, ii.
284, 290, 297; originally one with, ii.
29C.

Synthesis of, provisional sketch of, ii.
284-92.

Reminiscence thcorV of Plato, i. 1 17-19.
Kentcrghcm, Dr. Van —

•Cited, i. 459, 460, 462, 464, 465, 471.

Work of, 1. 1 56.

‘^Kejiort of the Jiiteriiational Congress of
Experimen tal Psychology ( 1 892 ),* *

cited, i. 566 ‘i. ^

*• Report on the Census of Hallucinations,**
iec under Hallucinations.

Kcpressiiin, early need of, i. 173.

Reptiles, hypnotic e.Kperituents on, i. 163,
441-2.

“ Researches in Spiritualism,** cited, ii. 541
note^ 583.

^•Researches in the Phenomena of Spiritual-
ism,” cited, ii. 579.

Restitution of function, i. 476-7.

Rctrocogi^ition —

Ca‘s«a of, ii. 262 ivyte.

Discussion of, i. 11, 69, 262-8.

Dreams, in, ii. 524.

Hauntings in relation to, ii. 76.

Spiritually given, ii. 550.

J elaisthctic, ii. 24$.

. cited, i. 89.

Revelation-

Civilisation *s attitude towards, *ii. 135,
Nature of, ii. 2S7.

Revelations of a Spirit Medium,’* cited, ii.

** Reves, Les,” cited, i. 130 note 1, 370 and
note*

Revue de PHypnotisme”—

Cited, i. i8t, 331 440, 445, 459-60,

462, 464, 463' notes^ 466, 471, 472,
486,490-1 and notes'^, 497 and nofe^j
498; $12-14, 51S, 566 nnfe^] ii. 114
note*

Quoted, i. 317, 455, 458-60, 463, 464,
466, 471, 476.

“ Revue de M6decinc,** quoted, i. 130-1.

*' Revue des Etudes Psychiques,** quoted, i.
520.

“ Revue Philosophique **— '*

Cited,»i. 79 n(at, 470, 477, 510, 533; ii.

.

Quoted, I, 3*2-10, 501-2, 521, 524-5
“Revue Positive,** ii, 139.

Revue Scientifique,** cited, i. 331, 512;
mioted, i. 133-4.

Reynolds, Mary, case of, i. 62, 336, 338.
Rheumatism, hypnotic cure of, i. 470.

Kibot, quoted, i. 10, 90; cited, ii. 139 note K
Richardson, Miss, case reported by, i. 431-
433-

, Mrs., case of, 1. 398-9.

Richet, Prof. Charles—

Case sent by, ii. 212-13.

Cited, i. 195, 533, 601 note; ii. 93.
Experiments by, i. 52S ; ii. 144, 423-4.
Quoted, i. 4S6-7.

Work of, i. 161.

Riddell, W., planchcttc experimenls by, ii.
146-7.

Rider, Jane, case of, i. 524.

Rifat, cited, i. 440.

Kinkier, Georg, cited, i. 462, 4.''i.|, .^.6^.

” Rivista di Studi P.sichici,” cited, i. 671 ;
quoted, ii. 442-4.

Robert Loive, case of the, i. 65 j-6.

Robinet, cited, i. 477.

Robinson, William K., cited, ii. 503.

Rochas, De, cited, i. 500.

Rocking, soporific effect of, i. 165.

Koff, Mary, case of, i. 361^).

Romances possibly suggested by discarnate
spirits, ii, 140.

Romanes, G. J., case reported by, i. 419-21.
Ktise, case of, i. .^06-7.

Rose-asthma, i. 483.

Rosse, quoted, i. 321.

Rossi-Pagnoni, Prof. —

Cited, ii. 168. 5:',.

Experiments by, il. 458-61.

” Rou,” case of, i. 209.

Rowe, Jim, alleged communications from,
ii. 155-6.

Royce, Prof.-

Case attested by, ii. 27.

Case sent by, ii. 404.

Cited, i. 371-2, 644-6,

Quoted, i. 86.

Kumi>ur, (’Ji eek theory of, i. 243.

Ri^sell, Edwin, apparition of, ii. 45-8.

Russen, Thomas, care of, i, 309.

S., Dr. and Mrs., case of, i. 244.

— , I.ieut., apparition seen by, i. 609.

— ’ Miss, planchette writing of, ii. 155-6.

— , Mrs., auditory hallucination of, i. 6S0-2.

— , Col. A. V., case reported by, i. 371-2.

— , lima, case of, i. 194, 460, 495-f'.

— , Dr. J., experiments by, i. 629-32.

— , Mr. N. J„ case of, i. 245.

S— t, case of, i. 451-2.

Sacerdotalism, ii. 309.

Safford, Prof., case of, i. So, 82.

St, Tlrieuc, case of Bishop of, cited, ii. 68.

“St. Louis Medical and Surgical Journal,”
cited, ii. 315.

Saint-Saens, cited, i. 90.

St. Theresa, ^trances of, i. 5.

Saints, i. 56, 119-20.

Sali>ctrifere School of Hypnotism, see under
Hypnotism.

Samways, Mrs., apparition seen by, i. 648-9.
Sand, George, work of, cited, i. 105-6.

6S4 INDEX

Sanders, Rev. Const. Blackmon (X + Y = Z),
case of, ii. 217-18, 222, 562-9.

Sanity, definition of, ii. 102.

Saunier, M., case investigated by, ii. 143.

Sauter case, 514.

Sch— , leanncj case of, i. 517-18.

Scented secretions, ii. 528^.

Schiller, F. C. S., experiments by, ii. 124,
41S-22.

Schmidkunz, Dr., cited, i. 533.

Schnioll. Anton, cited, i. 601 note,

Schneller, Fraulein, case reported by, i. 433-4.

Schrenck-Notzing, Von—

Cited, i. 177 note, 459, 465, 498, 513-14.
601 note.

Hypnotic results obtained by, i. 43S.

Schumann, quoted, i. 103 note.

“Schiira,** alleged communications from,
ii. 179-82.

Science-

Achievements of, ii. 30S.

Development of, into philosophy and
religion, ii. 284, 290, 297,

Ideals of, ii. 238.

Language of, i.

Methods ol, ii. 300-1 ; applied to
psychology, i. 1-2? to religion, ii. 275,
279-81, 298,

Nature of, ii. 295.

Religion— complementary to, i. 33; de-
fined by, ii. 275; developed out of,
ii. 2S4, 290, 297; originally one with,
ii. 296.

Synthesis of the Universe, ii. 297.

Scott, Capt. Daniel, case of dream of, i.
3S7-90.

, Miss Louisa, apparition seen by,

ii. 396-7.

— Miss M. W., apparition seen by,
ii. 396-9.

Script {see Motor automatisms — Writing).

Saipture, Prof., cited, i. 79 notCy 80; quoted,

i. 82-4.

Scryers, see Crystal-vision.

Searle, Mrs. Richard, apparition of, i. ^j,
665-6. *

Seconda^ personality—

Accident a cause off i. 61.

Dyspepsia, following on, i. 321-2,
Emotionally selected, i. 57.

Epilepsy^ following on, i. 308-17.
Exhaustion of vitality a cause of, i. 61.
Hypnotism, under, i. 322-3.

Hysteria, in, i. 317-19.

Improvement on primary, i. 62-4, 333,
Memory in, i. 128, ii. 192; hypnotic
memory analogous to, 1. 171-2; hyp-
notic influence on, i. 196; hypnotic
stages resembling, i. 450.

Memory of, lost to primary, i. 772. 33?.

336 ; not recovered, i, 320, 322,

Memory of primary recovered in dreams
during, i. 338.

Multiplex personality, see tka^ title.
Possession theory in the light of, i. 65 ;

ii. 192, 198.

Primary suoerseded by, i. 331-5 ;
memory of primary recovered during,
i. 338.

Secondary personality—

Rudimentary form of, i. 299.

Sleep, of, i. 66, 151-a, 155; b^nnine
in sleep,!. 333, 336.

Somnambulism developing into, i. 6o
203, 305-6. ’

Telssthesia analogous to phenomena of
i. 250. '

*^Sehcrin von Prevorst, Die,'* cited, ii. 570
and note.

Self-consciousness, hypnotic cute of, i. 467.
Self-projection,!. 251.

Self-suggestion —

Anaesthesia and rigidity produced bv,
i. 533.

Charms and incantations as, ii. 310.
Curative power of, ii. 311, 513.

Dreams, in, i. 369.

Increasing imi^rtance of, i. 198.

Narcotic influence on, i. 441.

Nature of, ii. 311-13.

Pain suppressed by, i. 471.

Schemes of, i. 198, 211-14.

“Scminis" control, ii. 161,450, 454, 457/
Sensation, community of, i. 487, 540-3.

Sense organs —

* Mixed, theory of, i. 186 note, 479-80.

, Perceptive power independent of, i. 191.

Specialisation of, i. 224, 479-80,

Sensitives, perception of, by spirits, ii. 253.
Sensibility, Sensitivity-

Central sensory perception, stimulation
of, i. 188-92, 234; symbolic character
of, i. 276; j^tcntiality of, i. 482.
Concomitances of, i. 224-5.

Confusion in, ii. 269.

Drugs and food, to, i. 483.

Exteriorisation of, i. 500-^1. •

Heat, to— distinguished from pain-sense,
i. 65-6 ; hypnotic effect on, i. 475.
Internal and external character of, i.
223.

Irregularity of distribution of, i. 482.
Magnets, to, i. 482-3, 488.

Specialisation of undifferentiated, u 224,
478.

Transposition of senses, i. 191-2, 500-2.
Sensory automatism—

Genius and hypnotism, relation to, i.
104.

Hallucinations, see that title.

Healthy subjects of, i. 228.

Moral predisposing causes for, i. 229.
Motor automatisms, compared with, ii.
77, 115-16; closely allied with, ii. 103,
520.

Nature of, i. 222. ^

ScojMi of subject, i. 23-j.

Spirit, existence and persistence of,
proved by, ii, 76.

Spiritually controlled, ii. 5C0.

Telepathy a prerequisite of, i. 241.
ScwcLDr. J., ii, 321.

Sexual passion, dijir^rdcaa of, cured by hypnot-
• ism, i. 176-7.

Seybert, Henry, cited, ii. 503.

Shagren, Mrs., vision seen 421-3.

Shcll-hearing, i 275.

Shells, theory of, ii, ii.

INDEX

655

Shelley criticised, i. 97.

Shock, catalepsy, &c., induced by, i. 163.
Shyness, hypnotic influence on, i. 178, 179.
Sidgwick, Mrs.—

Case attested by, i. 654.

Case investigated by, ii. 342.

Case reported by, i. 5^3-6.

Census of Hallucinations, on committee
of, i. 570.

Cited, i. 402, 406, 599 n<fte; ii. 71
501-2 and note.

Cross-examination of witnesses by, i.
640.

Exj^iments by, i. 171, 190, 208, 240,
452-5. 535 - 9 - ^ ^ ^ .

Experiments watched by, 1. 547, 55 **
Quoted, i. 282-4, 682-5; ii. 72 and noie^
75 and note,

SidgwicK, Prof.-

Cases attested by, i. 649; ii. 33.

Cases investi^ted by, i. 678; li. 342.

Case reported by, ii. 122-3.

Census of Hallucinations under direc-
• tion of, i. 570.

Cited, i. 144, 146. 599 note : ii. 501-2.
Cross-examination of witnesses by, i.
640.

Experiments by, i. 499, 600.

Experiments watched by, i. 547. •

Presidency of S.l'.K. first held by, ii,
224.

Sidis, Dr. Boris, cited, i. 61 and note.

Sight, see Visual faculty.

Silent willing, i. 208, 539-40-

Simpson, Anne, apparition seen by, ii. 348.

Sinclair, B. F., apparition of, i. O97-8.

Skae, Dr. David, case reported by, i. 321-2.
Skeat, Prof., cited, ii. 230.

Skiltoii,*]. W., case of, li. 571-2.

Skirvirig, Alexander, case of, ii. 1x4, 415-16.
Sleep {see also Dream)—

“ Anatomy of Sleep," cited, ii. 348.

Break in series of psychologiial changes
possibly at the point of. i. 39.

Genius compared with, i. 135.

• Hyperxsthesia uf, i. 124- 5, 3 ^ 9 -
Hypnotism, a dcvclojjed form of, i. 90,

202; contra>.ted with, ). 17c, 172;
applied to, restricting causes of wak-
ing, i. 196.

Incantation compared to, by spirits, ii.
2 > 4 -

Maximum of, not discovered, i. 152.
Mentation during, i. 89-90.

Nature of, i. 122, 150, 221.

Preaching during, i. 51Q and notes.
Recuperative power 01. i. 123, 126, 150,
2a2; ii. 81.

Reversion and preversion in, i. 21.

Rocking to induce, i. 165.

* Secondary personality of, i. 66; begin-

ning in, i. 333, 336.

Self-projection during, i. 295,
Somnambulism, relation to, i. 123!
Subliminal selr.’icti\¥ in, i. 155, 220-14
iinSi.

Trance replacing, i. 353.

Travelling clairvoyance in, ii. 193.
Sleep-waking, see Somnambulism.

Smell, sense of—

Analog from, ii. 85 note 1.

Divisibility of, theoretically possible, i.

484.

Hallucination of, i. 31-2, 86-7.

Hyperesthesia of, ii. 414.

Motor inhibition possibly due to, ii. X07,

109.

Transference of, i. 613.

Smith, Mile., case of, ii. 503.

^ Mrs., ditaan of, i. 41O-17.

, G. A., experimente by, i. 451-5, 499,

534 - 4 *. 547 - 53 » 578 -? 4 :

, George Mam, taole-tilting experiments

by, ii. 144, 425-6.

, H. Arthur, planchette experiences of,

ii. 120-2.

, H. Babbington, cited, ii. 168, 458-60.

, H 61 ^ne, Mile., case of, ii. 131-44 ;

case cited, i. 305 ; ii. 95 notoi 230.

, Mrs. J. P., apparition seen by, ii. 342-

-.A , cited, i. 601 note.

Smoking, hypnotic cure of, i. 463-4.^

Smyth, Sibbie {nee Towns), apparition seen
by, ii. 62-3.

Society for Psychical Research-
Founding of, i. 8 note^ ; ii. 224.

Function of, ii, 292-307.

Methods of, i. 7-8.

Test letters to be sent to, suggestions,
regarding, ii. 499.

Socrates—

Clairvoyance of, ii. 141.

Daemon of, i. 108; ii. 95-100, 103.

Vision of, ii. 273-4.

* Sogenannte Hypnose der Tierc, Die,**"

cited, i. 442.

Solovyoff, V. S,, cited, ii. 502.

** Some Account of the Vampires of Onset,
cited, ii. 503.

“ Sommeil et les Keves, I-es," cited, i. 132,
Somnambulism-

Accidents rare in, i. 198.

Analogy from, for post-mortem communi-

• cations, ii. 6.

Cases of, i. 204-5, 5 * 9 ” 2 o-
Diseises prescribe for during, i. 520.

Genius compared with, i. 124.

Hypnotic trance of wider range than, i»
178, 193 ; compared with, i. 198.

Hysteria compared with, i. 22.

Nature of, i. 203.

Fhobie of, i. ^67.

Precognition in, i. 204. •

Secondary personality starting from, i.

305-6. ^

Self-absorption in. li. 202.

Sleep, relation to, i. 123.

“ Somnambulisme Provoque, Le," cited, i.

476, 491 note \ 502 noteX
** Somnolism and Psycheism," cited, i. 556.
Sbrgcl, case of, i. 308-9.

Soul, see .^irit.

Sound-seers, i. 224-5.

Space-

Ecstasy not necessarily involving change
of, ii. 239. ^

Intermediate conception of, i. 231.

656

INDEX

Space — coniinuid.

Spirit cognizance of, i. 231 ; ii. 252.
Spiritual phenomena in relation to, i. 30.
Telepathy, relation to, i. 30, 274-5.
Spalding, Miss Agnes, apparition seen by,
ii. 377-So.

Speech-

Hysteric disturbances of, i. 53, 65.
Limitations of, i. 98, 100.

Recovery of, by suggestion, i. 476.

Speer, Charlion, cited, ii. 227 note.

, Dr. Stanhope Tcmpleman, observa-
tions of, i. 32 ; ii. 541 ; qiialitications
of, as a witness, ii. 5S4-5.

^ Mrs. Stanhope, ii. 227 ncte^ 231, 515,

. . 5^3*5*

Spirit-

Existence of, postulated, i. 74, 119, 151,
217 -10, 231, 251; proved by sensory
automatisms, ii. 76.

Laws of matter an incidental case of
laws of, i. 4SS.

Material organisms controlled by, i.
217; ii. 204-5, 521-2, 545; as viewed
by, ii. 545.

Persistence of, admissible of proof, ii.
79; proved by sensory automatisms,
ii. 76.

Spirit-drawings, symbolic character of, i. 100.

** Spirit Drawings,” cited, i. too ; quoted,
ii. 400-].

Spirit -healing, theory of, i. 213, 213.

*• Spirit Identity,” cited, ii. 167, 225, 583,

Spirit-^ghtl ii. 541.

Spirit-posse.s.si()n, see Possession.
Spirit-rapping, see K.ips.

** Spirit Slate-writing and Kindred Pheno-
mena,” cited, ii. 503.

Spirit Teachings

Cited, ii. 224, 227 note^ 228, 553, 583.
Preface quoted, ii. 588-91.

Spirits, disembodied, see Discarnatc spirits.
Spiritual environment, i. 95-6, 215-19.

** Spiritual Magazine,” quoted, i. 656-7.
Spiritualism-

Books on {see also ** Spirit Teachings ”),
ii. 207 and note^ 503, 541 note^ 555,
579? 583.

Fraud m connection with, ii. 206-7
note.

Home, D. D., ca.se of, ii. 221-3.

Methods of, i. 7; ii. 304-5.

Moses, Rev. W. S., case of, ii. 223-37.
Phenomena of, ii. 92-3.

Piper, Mrs., case of, ii. 237-56.

Pulpit attacks on, ii. 1 33-4.

Support of, by subliminal self theory,

i. 16.

Spiritualisme : Faits Curieux,” cited, ii.

'' Si>intualist,” quoted, i. 654-5.

Squires, Mr., case of, i. 137.

, Jesse L., dream of, 1. 379-81*

Squirrell, Elizabeth, case of, i. 520, 523-4.
Stack, j. H., cited, ii. 501.

Stage-fright, h>'pnatic indiience on, i. 795.

. Starck, Lieut. -Col. N., communications to,

ii. 478-80.

“ Statuvolism,” cited, i. i6o, 4S5, 500;
quoted, i. 555-6.

Stealing, see Klciitomania.

Steel, Mr., experiments by, i. 603 seq,

Stevens, Dr. E. W., cited, i. 33S ; quoted, 1.
360-5.

Stevenson, J,, auditory hallucination of, i.
274.

, R. I.., dre.'ims of, i. 91, 126, 303 ;

ii. 144 ; delirious illusions of, i. 300-3.

Stewart, Miss, phantasm of, ii. 377-80.

, f'rof. Balfr)iir, experiments by, i. 600.

, David, case sent by, ii. 362.

Stigmatisation, i. 1S8, 492-5!; 497; ii. 513-14,
527-

Stimulants, impulse to, cured by hypnotism,
i. 176.

Stimulus and check in education and hypno-
tism, i. 173-5.

Stoicism, i. 212.

Stone, Mrs., apparitions of, i. 648-9.

*• Storia di un Caso d’lsterismo con Sogna-
zione Spontanea,” cited, i. 500 noie^
520.

Storie. Mrs., apparition soun by. i. 144-7;
caseof, cited, i. 284 ; ii. iS-io, 42, 52.

Straniin. Mile. (Mme. Kaigorod(»ff), com-
riumications to, ii. 170-1, 406-71.

Stubbing, Mrs., dream of. i. 415.

Stuckenborg, Mrs., case of, i. 405.

•* Studien Uber Hysteric,” ciled, i. 51, 299.

Studies in Psychical Research,” cUed. li. 230
note^ 502-3.

“ Study of Fears',” cited, i. 4! note.

Stupor attonitus, i. 163.

Sturgis, Dr. Russell, cited, i. 40 note,

“ Subconsdent chez Ics Artistes, les Savants,
et les Ecrivains, Le,” quoted, i. 89.

.SubUmin.il, deHnitiun of term, i. 14.

Subliminal Self or Unconscious Cerebra-
tion,” cited, i, 12 note'^.

.Substitutions of f.aculty, i. 477.

Suddick, Dr. S. T., case recorded by, ii.
489-93.

Suggc.'tior. {see also Hypnotism) — >

Cures effected by, i. 69.

PrC’Conccptual, ii. 5.1.V-4.

Pre-natal, i. 455-8 ; ii. 515-16.
Self-suggestion' started by,'i. 154.

“ Suggestion H spnotique dans ses Rapports
avee le Droit Civil et le Droit CrimincI,
La,” cited, i. 513.

Suggestions - Thcrapic bci krankhaften

Erscheinungen des Geschlechts-Le-
bens. Die,” cit«^, i. 177 note.

” Suggestions - I’herapie bei krankhaften

Erscheinungen Ucschlech^sinnes,
Die.” cited, i. 459.

Suicide, phantoms hi connection with, i.
271-2.

SummerbelJ, Mi.ss L. D., planchette experi-
ments by. ii. 143-6.

Sun-circles, ii. 570.

Supernormal— ^ c

Abnormal contrasted with, ii. $5.
Definition of term, i« 5 note.

Supervision by subliminal self, i. 45.

Sup{)lication. definition of, ii. 3x0.

Surgical operations under hypnotism, i. 160.

INDEX

657

Surin, P^e, case of, cited, i. 30^

Survival —

Agnosticism regarding, i. 1; ii. 2«j6-7,

307-

Pi^ of— conceivable, ii. 79; furnished
by sensory automatisms, ii. ^6.

Sutton, Mrs., communications to, ii. 245-7. .
Swedenborg, Emmanuel—

Caseolyi. 5 ; ii. 191, 218-20, $69-70.
Cited, ii. 308.

Communications from, ii. 596.

Sycosis menti, cure of, by suggestion, i. 472.
Symbolism-

Art, in, i. loi.

Communication by means of, i. 100-1.
Reality compared with, i. 277.

Telssthetic vision, in, i. 276-7.

** Symposium," quoted, i. 1 13-13.

Synaesthesia, i. 224-5, 279; ii. 270.

Synthetic Society, The, paper read before,
ii. 287 note*

Syringomyeiitis, anaesthesia of, i. 44.

T. (Dufouris’ patient), case of, i. 518.

Mr., experiments with, i. 453-5, S 47 ~ 5 <»

„ 579-83- , . ,

— , Mrs., case of, 1. 148-50; 11. 34.

Tabes dorsalis, i. 44.

Table-tilting, ii. 92-4,

248 note^ 423-6,

Table-turning, li. 92-4;

Tabour, Mrs., case repc
Tactile sensibility, a motor inhibition possibly
due to, ii. 110-11.

Taine, cited, i. 127.

Tait, William J., apparition seen by, i. 683-5.
Tandy, Rev. G. M., apparition seen by,

*Coioured, i. 566 note

Ccmmunlty of. i. 541-2.

Stimulation of, in hysteria by red light,
i. 587 note 2.

Transference of, i. 613.

Taunton, Mrs., apparition seen by, i. 281,

, 666-7.

Taylor, Col. G. L. le M., experiments by,
i. 598-9.

Teale, Dr., case of {ntient of, i. {91 note^,

— Mrs., case of, cited, ii. iS.

Telssthesia—

Case of, ii. x 11-14; where agent retains
memory of circumstance, i. 279-86;
where agent and percipient retain
memory of circumstance, i. 291 ; where
only percipient retains memory of
circumstance, i. 286-91; where know-
ledge not supraliminally remembered,
if 270-5.

Crystal-vision and shell-hearing, in,
i. 275.

* Dream, in, 1. 37$.

Excitement, scenes of. attracting clair-
voyant, i. 379, 281.

Genius, relation to, i. 108. *

Hyperassthesia— merging into, i. 191 -j,
295 ; ii, 264 ; possibly the explanation
of some apparent cases of, ii. 370.

Implications of, ii. 274.

VOL. 11 .

Telassthesia—

LotKlrawing, in, i. 671.

Methods of, i. 275.

Reciprocal, i. 291-6.

Retrocognitive, i. 31 ; ii. 248.

Scope of term, i. 136.

Somnambulism, in, i. 204.

Space ar.d time problems of, i. 137.
Spiritually guided, ii. 551.

Split personality phenomena analogous
to, i. 250.

Swedenborg, of, see Swedenborg.

Symbolic character of visions in, i. 276-7.
Telepathy— compared with, i. 111; in
relation to, i. 246, 278; sometimes in-
distinguishable from, ii. $18. ^

Terrene evolution not accountable for,

i. it8.

Time-relations in, i. 276, 282, 284, 385 -
Uncertainty of experiment in, i. 292 and
note.

Telekinesis {see also Raps)—

Hooks on, ii. 554.

Cases of, ii. 503-4.

Direct writing, ii. 535-6, 548.

Energy in, ii. 529-30, 535.

Experiments in, i. 197.

Hyperboulia, relation to, ii. 522.

Home, case of, see Home.

Messages accompanied by, ii. 171, 187.
Moses, W. S., case of, see Moses.

Nature of, ii. 116, 205, 207-8.

Phenomena of, ii. S45-'8.

Teleological automatisms, ii. 132, 140-1.
Telepathy —

Agency, joint, in, i. 612-13; question of
agency in death phantasms, ii. 345.
Anaesthesia and rigidit)^ whether prO'
duced by, i. 535-9.

Animals, between, possibility of, i. 246
note i from, i. 634-6.

Brain not necessary to transmission of,

ii. 195-6.

Cases of, i. 547-53* 6 o‘>- 34 » 649 - 67 i 672-
700; ii. 144-53,450.

Clairvoyant visions in, ii. 197.

^ Collective, i. 246, 248.

C^tal-vision in relation to, i. 238.
Discarnatc spirits, from, i. 246, 248 ; ii.
142-3.

Distance, from, i. 619-34.

Dream evincing, i. 147.

Etherial transmission of, ii. 195.

Evidence for, criticism of, i. 636-46.
Evolutive nature of, ii. 85 ana note L
Expansion of idea of, it. 281-2.
Experiments in (early), i. 243.

Flournoy on, ii. 141.

Genius, relation to, i. loS.

Ghosts in relation to, i. 25.

Gravitation, law of, analogous to, i. 38.
Hyperaesthesia merging into, ii. 517.
Hypnosis induced Iqr, i. 20;^, 209, 484*
570 ; productive of, i. 310 ; ii. 8.
Imptotions of. ii. 274.

Importance of law of, i. 95-6 ; ii. 258.
Inadequacy of term, i. 136.

Intermediate position of, i. 231.

Malaise caused by, ii. 104.

2 T

144, 150-3, ' 36 - 9 . P 7 .
477i489-9I.
books on, ii. 555.

>rted by. i. 421-2.

INDEX

Telepathyw<wf/m»A/.

Mental habits in relation to, i. 598^00.
Messages by, experiments in, cited, i.
62^32.

Mind to mind theory of, untenable in
cases of possession, ii. 1^.

Mixed, ii. 250.

Modification of pictures by percipient, i.
24 5 -

Nature of, ii. 52i>2.

Phinuit control in the light of, ii. 606-7.
Possession an extreme case of, ii. 194-5.
Prayer in relation to, ii. 306.

Presumptive evidence for, i, 241-2.
Prevalent as law in spiritual as well as
material world, i. 26.

Phaimity in relation to, i. 244.

Psychical invasion perhaps indistinguish-
able from, in motor automatism, ii.
186.

Reciprocal, i. 248.

Savages, frequent among, ii. 85
Scope of term, i. 136.

Self-projection in, 1. 251.

Sensory automatism, prerequisite of, i.
241.

Somnambulism, in, i. 204.

Spatial link in. i. 274-3.

Spontaneity ot, ii. 149.

Telaesthesia compart with, i. 111; in
relation to, i. 246, 278; sometimes
indistinguishable from, ii. 518.

Telergy correlative to, ii. 197.

Tenene evolution not accountable for,
i. 118.

Threefold classification of, ii. 8.

Twinship in relation to, i* 272 and ncte.
Variability of, ii. 149.

TderRr, il. 197, *04, 522, 526.

Temperature-

Hypnotic influence on, i. 401 and not€ 4 .
Pain-sense distinguished from sense of,
i. 63-6.

Tennyson quoted, ii. 276.

Terrors—

Agoraphobia, i. 42.

Hystero-epileptic attacks, in, i. 328-9.
Hypnotic effect on, i. 299.

Instinctive, i. 41.

Terry, Etta, automatic writing by, ii. 485-6.
Tertiary personality, i. 324-31.

Test of post-mortem identity, ii. 499.

Teste, Dr. Alphonse, cited, i. 485, 520.

Thach, Dr. W. T., quoted, ii. 564. 566.
Thames Tunnel accident, dream of, 1. 280-1.
Thaw, Dr. A. Blair, cited, i. 601 nfde,

, Margaret and Kuthie, communications

from, ii. 621-2.

Theobald, Morell, quoted, ii. 329-31.

Theology, discamate spirits’ messages not
concerned with, ii. 78-9, 133, 287, 308.
Theory of Heat ” cited, ii. 530 note,
Theosophica) Society, inquiry regarding, U.
501-2.

** Th6rapeutique Suggestive,” quotrd, i. 47^.
Thermal sensibility-^tinguished from pain-
sense, i. 65-6; hypnotic effect on, i.
475 -

Thompson, .Mrs., case of, i. 29.

Thomson, M^s Ethel, apparition seen hy, i,
694-5.

, H. S., case of mesmeric efficacy of, i.

208, 309, 44»-3* . .

, Isaac C — , communications to, li. 241.

Thornton, Abraham, telepathic case in r^ard
to, i. 661.

Thorpe, Courtenay, apparition of, i. 281,
663-5.

Thought-transference, see Telepathy.

Thoulet, Prof., case of, ii. 212-13, ^^ 7 * ^62
note.

Thury, Prof., cited, ii. 555.

Tk convulsi/f hypnotic cure of, i. ^60.

Tic douloureux^ hypnotic cure of, 1. 470.
Time-

Calculation of, involved in post-hypnotic
suggestions, t. 502-10.

Crystal-visions, in, i. 246.

HaHudnation of, i. 54.

Hauntings in relation to, ii. 76.
Precognition, see that title*

Retrocognition, see that title*

Spirit cognisance of, ii. 252.

Spiritual phenomena in relation
i. 31.

Subliminal sense of, i. S5-6.

• Telaesthesia, in, i. 276, 282, 2S4, 285-
Timmin, Marian, case of, cited, ii. 230.

TisSi6, Dr., case of patient of,i. 129-30, 370.
Tobacco-smoking, hypnotic cure of, i. 463-
464.

Tolosa-Latour, Dr., experiment by, i. 533.
Tourette, Gilles de la, cited, i. 514 ; ii. 422.
Tout, Hill, case of, cited, ii. 133.

Towns, Capt., apparition of, ii. 62-3.
Townshend, Rev. C. H., cited, i. 543.
Traducianist Theory, ii. 266-7.

Trance—

Bertrand, Rev. L. J., case of, ii. 3"i2-3.
^reak in series of psychological changes
possibly at the point of, i. 39.

Death conditions of communicating
spirit reproduced in, ii. 220.

Home, D. D., case of, ii. 221-3.

Kinds of, ii. 191, 204.

Luminosity in, ii. 515.

Moses, VV. S., case of, ii. 226-7.

Nature cA', ii. 196-8, 205, 324.

Piper, Mrs., case of, ii. 237-56.

Skilton, J. W., case of, it. 571-2.

Sleep replaced by, i. 353; resembled
by, ii. 193.

Swedenborg, of, see Swedenborg.

Three main types of, ii. 21;.

Varying quality of, ii. 239.

Wiltse, Dr., case of, ii. 315-22.
Trance-speakers, professional, self-hypnotisa-
tion of, i. 195.

Transactions of the College of Surgeons of
Philadelphia,” quoted, i. 336.
Transmigration (see also Reincarnation), li.
267.

Transposition of senses, i. 191-2, 500-2.
Travers, Thomas (Howdls), ca.se of, ii«

” Tribunri{^6dicale,” quoted, i. 530.
Trowbridge, Dr. G. R., cited, i. 309.

Truesdell, John W., cited, ii. 503.

INDEX

659

Tuckey, Lloyd, cited, i. 462.

Tudor, William, dream of, i. 3^4oa
'i'umours, analogy from, for iafesfixeSy i. 40.
Twinship in relation to telepathy, i. 272 and
note.

Tyre, Miss L., apparition seen by, ii. 360-1.

“ Ueber die Tnigwahmehmung,” dted, i.
note^.

Unconscious cerebration theory, ii. 319 note,
Unconsdons simulation, i. 477.

Underwood, B. F., communications to, ii.
462--6*

, Mrs., automatic writing by, ii. 168,

461 and note'^^isfi.

Uniformity of material Nature, ii. 300-1.
Unity-

Consciousness, of, dreams subversive of,
i. 58.

Cosmic, ii. 298.

Human, ii. 282, 287, 303.

** Urbain Grandier et les Poss6d6es de
Loudiin,*' cited, ii. 423
Urbantschisch, cited, i. 387 note‘^,

*** Use of Hypnotism m the First Degree,
The,** ated, i. 40 neie.

Useless, anti-sdentiiic nature of term, t. 150.

V., Mrs., apparitions seen by, ii, 26-7,
33 *- 3 -

— , Mrs., planchette writing by, ii. 161-2;
spirit reference to, ii.

Value of human being, test of, li. 132.

Vane, l^dy, case reported by, ii. 438-40.

Vans, Chris., prophecy regarding, li. 489-93.

V'arley, Cromwell P., case reported by, i.

65,.

Vaso-motor system—

Hypnotic influence on, i. 187-8, 191,

V^e^thic influence on, ii. 103-4.4

Vaughan, Kev. Edward T., case recorded
by, ii. W4-5.

Vennum, Mary Lurancy ( “ Watseka
Wonder "), case of, i. 360-8.

'N^enter, Mrs. (Miss Mabel Jenness), dream
of, i. 423-4.

Verity family, apparition seen by, i. 292-6.

Verrall, Mrs. —

Case of crystal-visions of, i. 238, 584-6.

Experiments by, i. 378.

Motor inhibition of, ii. 105, 140, 268,
410.

Musical dream of, i. 126.

Quoted, i. 569-70.

Verworn, cited, i. 442.

Vesci, Lady de, case of, ii. 104, 409-10.

Vesication, hypnotic production of, i. 188,
^93*4. 493-9-

Vesillo Spiritista,** quoted, ii. 4S0-2.

Vibrations—

* Human organism a complex of, ii. 88.

Telepathy 'in relation to, i. 245-6 ; ii.
141. ,

Vicars, Mrs. Raleigh (Miss Edith
Maughan), apparitions of, i. 653-4,
^ 3 “ 5 *

Violence, tendency to, cured by hypnotism,
i. 176.

Virgil, cited, i. 124.

Vis medicatrix Naturx, i. 216.

Visual faculty—

After-images, i. 225.

Entoptic, 1. 225.

Etherial environment assumed for, ii.
298.

Genius, of, i. 227.

Hallucinations involving, stronger evi-
dentially than those involving audi-
tory, i. 254 note.

Hallucinatory figures behind himself
seen by percipient, i. 281.

Hypnagogic pictures, in, i. 125.

Hypnotic influence on, i. 184-5, 475 '~ 9 *
Hysteric effect on, i. 47, 353.
Imagination-images, i. 226-7.

Inward, i. 103; ii. 300; imperfect co-
ordination of inward with outward, i.
277, 281.

Memory-images, i. 226.

Non-optical, 1. 223-4, 229, 264.

Other impressions expressed by means
of, i. 570.

Specialisation of, 1. 224.

Stimulation of, by tuning-fork, i. 5S7
note

Theoretical possibilities of, i. 230, 231.
Transposition of, i. 500-2.

Virions—

CUin-oyant, i. 137, 139, 143 ; ii. 441.
Consolatory, ii. 26. 374.

Crystal, see Crystal-vision.

Smith, H 61 ^ne, case of, ii. X42-3.

Vital Phenomena, scheme of, ii. 505-54.
Vlavianos, Dr., case reported by, i. 460;
cited, i. 462, 464.

Viv6, Louis, case of, i. 62-4, 193-4, 338-43,
482, 407.

Voisin, Dr. .Auguste—

Cases of patients of, i. 129, 463, 517-18.
Cited, i. 459, 460, 462.

Metliods of, i. 65, 172 note^ 440-1.

, Dr. Jules, i. 339 ; cited, i. 339 note,

Voltaire, genius of, i, 75.

'\V., Major, apparition seen by, i. 657-S.

— , Miss, case of, cited, ii. 31.

— , Miss, communications to, ii. 241.

— , Miss, hallucination of, ii. 373-4.

— , Miss (Kev. A. Bellamy’s case), phantasm
of, ii. 350-1.

— , Mr., apparition of, i. 666-7.

— , Mr., experiments with, i. 547, 551.

— , Mr., haJlucination of, ii. 116-11; auto-
matic writing by, ii. 172-^, 262

— , Mislf^G case recorded by, ii. 622.

— , Eliza, auditory hallucination of, ii. 70-1.

— , J. H., dream of, i, 419-21.

W— s, case of, i. 503-4.

Wait, Marshall, case of, ii. T09.

Waklcy, cited, i. 489.

Waldegrave, Lady, case of maid of, i. 266-

26>.

Walker, Mrs. J., ticking of letter to, ii. 365-

367*

Wallace, Alfred Kus^el, cited, i. 6 and
notey 15. •

66o

IN^mX

Waxnby, Mr., case of, cited, ii. 6x, 362^
Warburton, Canon, case of, i. i 37 ' 4 > 287.
Warloxnont, Pr.. i. 492-3.

« Warton*s Engush iWry,” cited, ii. 230.
Water—

Mesmerist, i. 484.

Running, xnetiKod of finding, i'. 480-1;
Watseka Wonder,** *case of, i. 65, 53^
360-8.

Watt, internal visualisation of, i. 226.

Watts, Anna Mary Hovitt cited, ii. 570 nfe.

, J. Hunter, dream ol, i. 137, 279, 381-

38a.

Wedgwood, Hensleigh, automatic writing
1^, ii. i6i-7. 207, 457-8.

Weight, subliminal sense of^ i. 85, 87.
Wellin^on, Mr^, vision of, 1. 424-6.

Wells, ex^iments on, i. 534, 540.

Wendell, Prof.. Barrett, citM, ii. 220.
Wesermann, H. M., »ptriments of, i. 698-
700 ; ii. 30.

West, Mrs., case of, i. 286, 394~5*

Westoby, Fanny,” case of, ii. 230, 59778. .
Wetterstrand, Dr. Otto-

Cited, i. 122, 462, 464, 465, 533.

Hypnotic results obtained by, 1. 438-9.

” What is Hypnotism ? ** <^uoted, I. 166.
Whately^rArchop., case of, 1. 80, 82.
Wheatcroft, Mrs., case of, cited, ii. 18.
Whipple, G. M., cited, i. 567.

White, Miss Susie l^ickerson, case of, ii.
559-60.

White webs, vision of, i. 593.

Whittaker, Henderson, apparition of, i. 669-
670.

Wiesler, Mrs. A. vop, case of, ii. 178-82.
Wilcox, Dr., cited, i. 334.

Wilkie Mrs., dream of, i. 382-5.

— — , John E., case of, ii. 214-17.

Wilkinson, W. M., i. 100; ii. 94 400-t,

wm-*”-

Complex ol^ience to, ii. 511.

Extension of power of, into the spiritual
worl^ a, 54 *- 3 . 534 - . _

Hypnotic influence on, 1. 192, 196-8^
2o8.

Possibilities of, ii. 521-2, 542-3.

Self-projection effected by, i. 2^.

Silent willing, i. 208, 33^40.

Williams, Rev. Thomas Lockyer, appari-
tions of, i, 264, 646-8.

Willing game, the^ i. 539. 600.

Willington Mill case cited, ii. 399.

Willis, Dr. J. L. M., cited, i. 436.

Wilmot, Mrs., apparition of. i. 232, 682^.

Wilson, Archdeacon, case of, dM, ii. 18.

, Dr. Albert, case reported by, i. 171 note.

— , Thomas (Bp. of Sodor and Man), com*
munications regarding, ii. 230.

WiItSd» Dr. A. S^/ ^ *

Premonitory visuma of, 1. 668-71.

.. Trance vision of* ii. 103, 315-22, 525.

* Windt, Harry case of. iC 45576-'

Wingfleljd, Prederich, dream of, i. 429-31
ana note K
, H. E., i. 477-

Dr. ' Hugh, hypnotic results obtained

by, L 168, 189, 438, 439. 445-7
*•

Wittsor, Miss Anna, case

cited, i. 64, 520; ii,
note.

4-60; case
ai8; 262

Witchcraft, i. 4, 171,' 636-7.

WittgensteiD, Prince Emile . von, communi-
cation to, ii. 494-5,

Wittmann, Blanche, case of, i. 331, 447-8-
Wood, A. B., case reported by, £ 282.

Woodd knockings, ii. 477.

Wordsworth, cit^ i. 104, 10^1 1 ; ii. 139.
Writing, direct, ii. 535-6. 54 ® («« und^r
Motor automatism).

Wiincher, Herr, vision of, L 433-4.

'Wundt, dted, i. 667 noU t.

Wyman, William H., case of, ii. 106-7.
Wynne, Cap!., dted, ii. 581 note K

X., Dr., case reported by, ii. 124-30.

— J Mme., case of, ii. 125-30, 210, 50,^

— , I^me. (Dr. Cnllerre’s patient), case of,
i. 476.

— , Mme. (Dr. Bourdon’s patient), case of,
i. 518-19.

— , Mr., case of, i. 463-4.

Mrs., case of, ii. 173-4.

— f Eniile, case of, i. 317-18.

— , F 61 ida, case of, i. 62, 64, 333-5 ; ii. 198.

” X -f Y = Z,** case, ii. 217-18, 22a, 562-9.
Xenophon, quoted, ii. 96.

y., Mrs., case of, i. 456-8.

Vowaj^itch, M., case of, i. 565-6. ^

Z., Dr., case of, ii. 125-30.

— , Hon., case of, li. 445.

— y Lady, dreams of, i. 406-8.

— , Lord, case of death of, ii. 60, 367-9.

— , Mrs., phantasin of, ii. 339.

— , Alma, case^of, i. 63-4.

Zeitgeist theory, ii. 120 and note^ 134, 257.

** Zeitschrift fur Hypnotismus,** cit^, i. 160
note 1, 498.

“Zoist**— ^

Cited, i: 134, 163, 207, ao8, 276, 309,
44*-3» 470, 472» 484-6, 532, 539 and
nete^.W, 546, 5S8.

Quoted, r, 305-6, 321-2, 372-3. 5J7-8.

Zones anaigestfueSj occurrence of, in witchr
craft, I. 4.

” Zur kritik des telepathisdien Beweis*
Materiels,** dted, i. 645 nete^.

S (ElasSifi# dataloguc

' . OF WORKS IN

G E N E R A L L 1 1 E R AT U R E

PUBLISHED BY

LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO.

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.C.

91 AND 93 FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK, and 32 HORNBY ROAD, BOMBAY

CONTENTS.

n ADM WTON LIBRARY (THE). -
BIOGRAPHY, PERSONAL ME-
MOIRS, &c. .....

CHILDREN'S BOOKS ^ .

CLASSICAL LITERATURE, TRANS-
LATIONS, ETC. ....
COOKERY, DOMESTIC MANAGE-

MJiNT, &c.

EVOLUTION, ANTHROPOLOGY,
&c. -

PICTION. HUMOUR, &c. . - !

I'lNK AR^rS (THi:) AND MUSIC -
FEATHBR AND h'lN SHRJRS
HISTORY, POLITICS, POLITY,
POLITICAL MEMOIRS, &c. -
LANGUAGE, HISTORY AND
SCIENCE OF - - .

LOGIC, RHETORIC, PSVCHOLaGV,

kc.

12 I MENTAL, MORAL, AND POLITICAL
I PHILOSOPHY

9 I MISCELLANEOUS AND CRITICAL
32 ! WORKS ......

j POETRY AND THE DRAMA -

! POLITICAL ECONOMY AND ECO-

361 NOMICS -

I POPULAR SCIENCE - - -

{ RELIGION, THE SCIENCE OF
36 SILVER LIBRARY (THE)

15 SPORT AND PASTIME *

STONYHURSr PHILOSOPHICAL
3 SERIES - - - . .

i,. TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE, THE
COLONIES, &c. . - . .

17 WORKS OF REFERENCE r

INDEX OF authors AND EDITORS.

Page . Vtifii • Pafii ,

Abboit (Evelyn^ 3, k), >3 = B.'inks (M. M r- • 2^ Burns iC. L ) - - 36 Dallinger (F. W.) . 5

(J. H. M.) \ Baring-Ciould (Rev. Burrows (MoniaKu) 6 Hanglisli (M. G.) - 9

(T. K.) - -17,16. S.)- - - - 31,38 i Biuler (E. A.) - - 30 Davenport (A,r - 25

— — (E. A.) - r 17 ■ Barnett (S. A. and H.) C".ir>phcll (Rev. I.cwis) Davids-on (.‘X. M. C.» 22

■Xcland (A. H. D.y - 3 Baynes (T. S.) - > 38 ; 21, 38 (SV. L.» - 17,30,31

Acton I Eliza) • - ,ifi BeaconstieM (Earl of) 35 CheaneytSirG.) - 3 Davies (J.F.) - - 12

Adelborg{0.) • - 32 Beaufort iDoke 0012,13, h i Chilfie-Hcmbertnu(\V.S.) g Dont (C. T.) - . (4

Aischyins - 2: Becker (W. .\.) - n Chtsbolm (G. C ) - 31 , Dc Salts (Mrs.) - 36

Albemarle (Earl of) - i; Betaly (A. H.) - - 9 Cholmonddcy- Fennell De Tocqucvnie(A.)« 4

Alcocli (C. W.) - 15 BelUMrs. HuKh) - 13: (H.) - - - Devas (C. S.) - • 19, 20

Allen (Grant) - - yi Hem (J. Tlieodore) - xi ' Christie (R. C.) - 38 Dickinson (G. L.) ■ 4

Allgootl (G.) - - 3 Itcs.-iiit (Sir VV .liter)- 3 Churchill (Winston S.) 1,23 ' jW. 11.) - - 3R

Alverstonc (Lord) - i*i Bickerdykc(J.) - 14, 15 . Cicero - • - 22 : Dpuprall (L.) - - 25

Angivin (M. C.) - 36 Bird (G.) - - - 33 • Clarke (Rev. R. F.) - 19 Dbwden (E.) - - 40

Anstey (F.) • - 25 Blackburne (J. H.) • 15 ;■ Climenson (1% J.) - 10 Doyle (Sir A. Conan): 25

.Aristopliunea » - 22 Bland (Mrs. Hubert) 24 i Clodd (Edward) • 21,50 ; Du Boi.s (W. E. BD* 5

Aristotle - - - 17 . Blount (Sir K.) - 9 ' Clutietbuck (W. J.) - 1.1 ‘ Dunbar. (Mary F.) * 25

Arnold (Sir I^dwin)- tr, 33 . Boase (Rev. C, W.) - (» j Colenso (R, I.) .ifi ;’<>*> (i*- ) • - 26

— (Dr. T.) - . 3 ; B.jcdiler (Rev. B.) - 19 \ Coninaton ijohu) 33 Ellis (J. H.) • - 15

Ashlrourne (Lord) - 3 ; Bounell iH. H.) - 5b Convbvatc(Rev.W.j.> (R. L.) - . 17

Ashby (H.) - - 36 Booth (A. J.) - '381 it How son (Dean) 33 ;. Eraarau:i - - -• 9

\shle>*'(W. J.)- . 3, ‘20 ' Botlome (P.i • - 33 I CoolidRC (W. A. B.) ir ; Evans (Sir John) - 38

Avebury (Lord) • 21 ; Bowen (W. E.) - 9 Corbett (Julian S.) - 4 Falkiner (C. !..) - 4

Ayre (Rev. J.) • - 31 ^ Brasscy (Lady) - li CouttstVv.) • - 22 | Farrar (Dean) • * 30, aft

Bacon - • - 9, 17 Bright (Rev. J. H) - 3 Cox (Hardiiv:) - 23 ! Fitzmaurtce (Lord E.) 4

Bagehot (W.) • 0, so, 3J ^ Brohdfoot (Major W.) *=3 Crake (Rev. A. D.) * 32 ; Folkard (H. C.) - 25

Bagtvell (R,). - 3 Bronks (11. J.) - - 17 Crawford (J. H.) - 23 EorddL)- - - 16

Bailey (H.c?| - 2*5 Brown (A. F.i - - 32 Cre.*d(S.) - - 25 : Fountain (P - . ii

Baillie (A- F.) - - 3 i Bruce (R. T.) - - 3 Creiehion (Bishop) -4, ft, 9 ; Fowler (Edith H.) -

Hain (Alexander) - i'? i Buckiaml (las.) 52 j Cross (A. L.) - ‘ 5 : Francis (Francis) - .if)

Baker (J. H.) - 38 ; Buckle (U. T.) - • 3 : Ctozier (J, B.) - • 9i ^7 (M. F..) - - 26

(Sir S. W.) - ii. 12 Bull (T.) -. - 36 i Cutts (Rev. K. L.) - ft . Freeman (Edward A.) 6

Malfour (A. J.) 13, 21 i Burke (U. RA - • 3 j Daboey (J. P.) - ■ 23 : Fremantle (T. F.) - ift

Ball (John) • - II : Burne-Jones (Sir K.) 3(1 ! Dale (L.) • - 4 Frost (G.)- - - 38

INDEX OF AUTHORS AND EDlTORS-coitHnued.

Pagi

Froude names A.) 4,9,

Fuller iF. W.) - - 5

Furneaux (W.) - 30

Gardiner (Samuel R.) 5

Gathorne'Hardy (Hoo-
A. E.) - -*5. »6l

Geilcie (Rev. Cunning-
ham) - - - 38 *

Gibson (C. H.)- • 17 \

GieiK (Rev. G. R.) - 10

Graham (A.) • - 5 1

— - (P. A.) - - 15, 16 i

(G.F.) - - ao*

Granby (Marquess of) 15 \
Grant (Sir A.) - • 17

Graves (R. P.) - - 9

Green (T. Hill) - 17, 18
Greene (E. B.)- - 5

Greville (C. C. F.) - s

Grose (T. H.) - - 18 j

Gross (C.) • - S ;

Grove (Lady) - - 11 i

(Mrs. Lilly) - ij ■

Guiney (L- 1.) - - 9 ;

Gordon (Lady Camilla) 26
GumhilMj.) • - 18

Gwiltd.)- -V • 3*

Haggard (H. Rider)

II, 26, 27, 38
Halliwell-Phillipps(|.) jo
Hamilton (Col. H. B.) 5

Hamlin (A. D. F.)
Harding (S. B.)

Ha mswortli (A. C.) 13, 14
Harte (Bret) - 27

Harting(J. E.)- 15

Hartwig (G.) - - 30

Hassall (A.) • - 8

Haweis (H. R.) • <j, 36

Head (Mrs.) - 37

Heath (D. D.) - 17

Heathcote (j. M.) - 14

(C. G.) • - 14

(N.) - - - 11;

Helmholtx (Hermann

von) - - • 3" I

Henderson (Lieut- 1

Col. G. F. R.) - 9 i

Henry (W.) - • 14

Henty (G. .A.) - - 32

Higgins (Mrs. N.) - 9

Hill (Mabel) - - 5

Hiltiei (G. Lacy) 13

Hime (H. W. L.) - 22 j

Hodgson (Shadvvorih> J

HocrniglF.) - jS;

Hogan (j.F.) - 9;

Holmes (R. R.) iu '

Homer - - - 22

Hope (Anthony) 27

Horace - - • 22

Houston (D. P.) - 5

How.ird (Lady Mabel) 27
How'itt (W.) - - n

Hudson (W. H.) 30

Huish i.M. B.) - - 37

HuIi.tIi (/.) • 37

Hume (David) - 18

(M. A. S.) - 3

Hunt (Rev. W.) 6

Hunter (Sir W.) - 0

Hutchinson (Horace G.)

13. 27, 3^ .

Intic low (lean) • 23.

Ingram (T. D.) - 6 i

lames (W.) - -18,21!

Jameson (Mrs. Anna) 37 I

'efferiea (Richard) - 38 j

leky 11 (Gertrude) • 38!

’ lerf me ( I erome K.) - 27 j

lohnson (J- & J. H. ) 39 1

[ones (H. Bence) • 31 1

ioyce (P. W.) - 6,27,39;

i nstiptsn - - - 18 i

[ant (1.) • • • . 18 <

Pagi

Kaye (Sir L W.) 6

Kcary (C. F.) - - 23

Kelly (E.)- - - 18

Kent (C. B. R.) 6

Kielinansegge (F.) - 9

Killick (Rev. A. H.) - 18

Kitchin (Dr. G. W.) 6

Knight (£. F.) • - ti, 14

KostliniJ.) • • 10

Krtsteller (P.) - 37

Ladd(G. T.) - 18

Lang (Andrew) 6 ,13. 14, 16,
21.22, 23. 27. 32, 39
Lapsley (G. T.) - 5

Laurie (S. S.) - - 6

Lawrence (F. W.) - 20.

Lear ( H . L. Sidney) - 36

Leek)' (W. E. H.) 6. i8. 23 i
Lees (J. A.) - - la !

Leighton (J. A.) • 21 1

Leslie (T. E. ClifTe) - 20 1

Lieven (Princess) -
Lillie (A.) -
Lindley (] .)

Locock (C. D.)

Lodge (H. C.) -
Loftic (Rev. W. J.) -

(Q. H.) - -

(Mrs. C, J.)

Lowell (A. L.) -
Lucian -
Lutoslawski (W.) •

Lyall (Edna) -
Lynch (G.)

(H. F.B.)- -

L\tton (Karl nt i

16 1
31!

16 1
12, x6 !

16 1
»3- 15 :
57 i
6>
22 j
18:

Nichols (F. M.)
Oakesmith (J.) <
Ogilvie (K.) .

Oldfield (Hon. Mrs,
Osbourne (L.) ■
Packard (A. S.)
Paget (Sir J .) ■

Park (W.)

Parker (B.) •

Payne>Gallwey
R.) - -

Pearse (H. H. S.)
Peek (Hedley) -
Pemberton (W. S
Childe)

Penrose (H. H.)
Phillipps* Wolley (C,
Pierce (A. H.) -
Pole (W.)

Page Page

9 Steel (A. Q.) - - 13

22 Stephen (Leslie) - la
22 Stephens (H. Morse) I
.) 9 Sternberg (Count

28 Adalbert) • - I

. 40

IQ ; Stevenson (R. L.) 23.28,33

(Sir

I Stevens (R. W.)

; Stevenson (R. L
‘,Jiatorr(F.). . - 17

.Q ; Stuart-Wortley(A.J.) 14,15
^lStubb»(J. W.) - - I

u 16 ‘ 'W.)- - - t

5 ! Suffolk & Berkshire
(Earl of) -
* . Sullivan (Sir E.)

Q j Sully (James) -
,1 . Suthcrland(A.andG.)
.)i2.2B!3:}Ale*.)

: Suttner (B. von)

Pollock (W. H.) - 13, 40 i Swan (M.) - -

Poole (W.H. and Mrs.) 36 I J** '

Poore (G.V.) - - 40 j Symes (J. E.) - -

=*?iTait(J.) - - -

7 j Tallent^e (S. G.) -

i Tappau (E. M.)

33 ! Tavlor (Col. Meadows)
Thomas (J.W.) -

35 I Thomson ( H. C.)

24

Macaulay (l.otd) 6,7, 10,24
Macdonald (Dr. G.) - 24 1

Macfarren (Sir G. A.) 37 j

MackaiKL W.) - 10.23

Mackenzie (C. G.) • 16 I

Mackinnon (J.) - 71

Macleod (H. D.) 20 1

M.icp}u:rson (Rev.H.A.) 15!
Madden (D. H.)

Magnusson (£.)

Maher (Rev. M.)

Mallet (B.)

Malleson (Col. G. B.|

Marbot (Haron del -
Marcnment (A. W.)
Mar:>hmau (j. C.)

Maryon <M.) -
Ma.son (A. E. W.) -

t6 j
281
19-

V

10 i

27 ;

391

,

39 i

3* I

Ma.skclyne (<{. N.)

Matthews (B.)

Maunder (S.) ■

Max Mullei (F.)

10. 18, 20. 21, 22, 27. 39 '
Mav (Sir T. Erskiiie) 7 '

Meade (L. T.) • 32

Melville (G . j . Whyte) 27 ;
Mcrivale (D^n) - 7 !

Mernmi.i H. S.) • 27!

Mill (John Sliia.'iJ • 18. 30 !

Millatr (1. G.) - • 16, 30 '■

G.) -

Portman (L.)

Powell (E.)

Powys (Mrs. P, L.)
Praeger (S. Rosamond)
Pritchett (K. T.)
Proctor (k. A.) 17,

Kaine (Rev. Jamea)
Ramal (W.) -

Randolph (C. F.)
Rankip (R.)

Ransotne (Cyril)
Reidt^.J.i .
Rhoades ( f.) •

Rice (S. P.) -

Rich (A.) -
Richmond (Ennis)
Kickahy (Rev. John)

(Rev. Joseph)

Ridley (Laoy Alice)
Riley (J.W.) -
Roberts (E. P.)
Robertson (W. G.)
Kogei (Peter M.)
Romanes (G

(Mrs. G

Ronalds (A.)

Roosevelt (T.) -
Ross (Martin) -
Rossetti (Maria Fran'
cesca) -
Rotheram (M. A.)
Rowe )R. P. P )

Russell (Lady)-
Sandars (T. C.) '
Sanders (K. K.)

A.I - 17 ' "P' - - ■

Milner (1

Monck(W, H. S.) - 19;

Mont.2gue (F, C.) - 7 ■

Moore (T.) - 3c

(Rev, Edward) - 17 =

Mor^n (C. Lloyd) - 21 |

Morris (W.) 22, 23,24, ■

27i 28. 37. 40 •:
Mulhall (M. O.) . 20 j

Murray (Hilda) • 33 ;

Myers (F. W. H.) - 19 !

Nnn.sen (F.) - - 12 i

Nash(V*)- - - 7 1

Nesbit (E.) - - 24 ;

Nettleship (R. L.) • 17 1

Newman (Cardinal) - 28 !

Senior (W.)

Scion- Karr (Sir H.)
Sewell (P^lizabeth M,
Shadw'ell (A.) -
.Shakespeare •
Shaw (W. A.) -
Shearman (M.)
Sheehan (P. A.)
Sheppard (E ) -
Sinclair (A.) -

Skriric iF. H.) -
Smith (C. Fell)

(R. PoBworth)

(T. C.) -

— (W. P, Haskett)
Somerville (E.)
Sophocles
Soulsby (Lucy H.)
Southey (K.) -
Spedding (J.) -
Spender (A. E.)
Stanley (BishLp)
Stebbing (W.) •

*4
»4

*1

>9i40

4®

29

29

«9

20

1

6 j Thornhill (W. J.) - 23

24 ' Thornton (T. H.) • 10

7 ; Thuillicr (H. F.) * 40

t. 25 i Todd (A.) ... B

3. 8 i Tout (T. F.) - - 7

9 j Toynbee (A.) - ao

23 Trevelyan (Sir G. O.)

12 i ^ _ 6,7.8.9,10

23 ‘ (G. M.) • • 7. 8

19 j Trollope (Anthony)- 29

19 ) Turner (H. G.) 40

19 : T>’ndall (J.) - - 9, 12

28 I Tyrrell (K. V.) - - n, 23

» ! Unwin (R.) • - 40

37 ! Upton(F.K.aDd Bertha) 33

3 ^ ; Van Dvlra II . G.) . 37

37

t3

Savage Arnr:strong(G.F.)a5 ’ Ward (Sirs. W.)
Scott (F.J.) ' - 37

Seebohm (IM - - 8, 10

Selous (K. C.) ' - 12, 17

13.15

6 Wagner (R.) - 25

28 I Wakeman (H. O.) - 8

; Waifoid (L. 13.) • 29

4® : Wallas (Ciraham) • 10

30 i (Mrs. Graham)- 32

'4 . Walpole (Sir S]>encer) 8, 10
10 , (Horace) - • 10

18 i Walrond (Col. H.) • 12

u : Walsingharn(Lord)- 14

' Ward (Mrs. W.) - 29

Warwick (Countess of) 40

Watson (A. K. T.) iz, 13, 14

Weathers (J.) •
Webb (Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney)

28 i - (Judge T.t

40 I (T. 1’..)

25 I Weber (A.)

8 I Weir (Capt. Rj)

>2, It ! Wellington (Dochets of) 37
28 i Wemyss (M. C, E.)-
8 ' Weymaii (Stanley) -
14 ; WbatelyfArchbislioM
0 1 Whitelaw (R.) -
loj WhittalKSirJ. W.p
“ ' Wilkins (G.) -
-^-(W.H.) -
Willich (C. M.)

__ Wood (Rev. JbG.)

23 . Wo^-Martin (W. G.)

45 ; Wyatt (A. L) -
40 Wylie (J.H.) -

II i Yeats (S. Levett)

Yoxall (J. H.) .

28 teller <£.}

8 ■
. 5 t
12 :

4*'

20

4*'

19

ly

u

33

2S

17.1&

23

40

23

.1

*31

22

29

29

3

MESSRS. LONGMANS ft CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

History, Polities, Polity, Political Memoirs, &e.

Abbott.— History of Greece.
By Evelyn Abbott, M.A., LL.D.

Part I.— From the Earliest Times to the
Ionian Revolt. Crown 8vo., los. td.

Part II.— 300-445 B.c. Crown 8vo., 105. td.

Part III. — From the Peace of 445 u.c. to
the Fall of the Thirty at Athens in 403
B.c. Crown 8vo.. lor. 6<f.

Abbott. — Tommy Cornstalk : bein^

Some Account of the LeSwS Notable
Features of the South African War from
the Point of View of the Australian Rank.s.
By J. H. M. Abbott. Crown 8vo., 55. net.

Adand and Ransome.— ^ Hakd-

BOOK IN Outline of the Political His-
tory op England TO 1 89O. Chronologically
Arranged. By the Right Hon. A. H. Dyke
Aclano, and Cyhil Ransomr, M.A. Crown
8vo.. f)5.

Allgood. China War, i860 : 1
Letters and Jouknau. By Major - 1
General G. Allgood, C.B., formerly Lieut, j
G. Allgood, ist Division China Field
Force. With Maps, Plans, and illustra- j
don.^. . Demy 4to. 125. 6 //. net. j

Annual Reg^ister (The). A Review

of Public Events at Home and Abroad, for
the year 1901. 8vo., 183.

Volumes of the Annual Register lor the I
years 1863- igor> can still be had. 185. each. |

i

Arnold . — iNTRoovcnyRY Lfxturks !
ON Modern History. By Thomas Ar- 1
MOLD, D.D., formerly Head Master of Rugby |
School. 8vo., 71. fid. I

Ashbourne. — P/rr: Some Chapters j

o.v H/s Life and Times. Bj' the Right I
Hon. EAwaki) Gibson, Lord Ashbourne, !
Lord Chancellor ol Ireland. W'ith ii Por- !
traits. 8vo., gilt top, 2is.

Ashley.— . SV /^ fp / Tj ^ vV , H/s7VRiX; and :
Economic : a Volume of Essay.s. By VV. :
J. Asjili»y, M.A. SvOm 9^*

Bagwell. — Ireland under the \

Tudors. By Richard Bagwell, LL.D.;
(3 voU.) Vols. L and II. Fr^mi the first i
invasion of the Northmen to the year 1578 . 1
8vo., 325. Vol. III. 1578-1603. 8vo., i8r. J

Baillie. — The Oriental Cluh^ and
Hanover Square. By Alexander F.
Baillie. With 6 Photogravure Portraits
and 8 Full-page Illustrations. Crown 410.,
253. net.

Besant — The History of London.
By Sir Walter Besant. With 74 Illus-
trations. Crown 8vo., is. gd. Or bound
as a School Prize Book, gilt edges, 2s. 6 d.

Bright. — A History of England.
By the Rev. J. Franck Bright, D.D.

Period I. Medieval Monarchy', a.d.
449-1485. Crown 8vo., 45. fid.

Period II. Personal Monarchy. 1485-
1688. Crown 8vo., 53.

Period III. Constitutional Monarchy-
1689-1837. Crown 8vo., 7s. fid.

Period IV. 7 >/Js Growth op Democracy.
1837-1880. Crown 8vo., 61.

Bruce. — The Forward Policy and
frs Results; or, Thirty-five Year** Work
amongst the Tribes on our North-Western
Frontier of India. By Richard Isaac
Bruce, C.I.E. With 28 Illustrations and
a Map. 8vo., 153. net.

Buckle. — History of Civilisation
m E ngland. By Henry Thomas Buckle.

Cabinet Edition. 3 vols. Crown 8vo., 243.

' ' Silver Library ' Eiiition. 3 vols. Crown

8 vo., 103. fid.

«

Burke. — A History of Spain,
From the Earliest Times to the
Death of Ferdinand the Catholic.
By Click Ralph Burke, M.A. Edited
by Martin A, S. Hume. With 6 M.^ps,
2 voKs. Crown 8 vo., 163. net.

Caroline, Queen.— Ca koi. ink the

I Ll. ( S TEWL-Sy Q UEEN-CONSORT OF 0 EOEGii
II. AND SOMETIME QCEE.N REGENT: a
Study of Her Life and Time. By W. H,
Wilkins, M.A.. F.S.A., Author of ' The
Love (Ji an Uncrowned Queen 2 vols..
8vo., 363.

Chesney. — IndjanPolity: aVieVbf
the System of Administration in India. By
General Sir George Chesnky, K.C.B.
With Map showing all the Administrative
Divisions of Brilisl) India. 8 vo., 215.

4 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.‘S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

History, Polities, Polity, Political Memoirs, Sun. —continued.

Churchill (Winston Spencer, M.P.). Dickinson.— DsysLOPMsifT of

The JUn'EK JVar : an Historical

Account of the Reconquest of the Soudan.
Edited by Colonel F. Rhodes, 1 ).S. 0 .
With Photogravure Portrait of Viscount
Kitchener of Khartoum, and 22 Maps and
Plans. 8vo., lor. 6rf. net.

The SroEy of the Malakand
Field Force^ 1897. With 6 Maps and
Plans. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d.

London toLadysmj th viiPRE tori a .

Crown 8vo., 6j.

Ian Hamilton's March. With
Portrait of Major-General Sir Ian
Hamilton, and 10 Maps and Plans. .
Crown 8vo., 6s.

Corbett (Juua.v S.).

Drake ako the Tudor Navy,
with a History of the Rise of England
as a Maritime Power. With Portraits, •
Illustrations and Maps. 2 vols. Crown
8vo., i6j.

The Successors of Drake. With
4 Portraits (2 Photogravures) and 12
Maps and Plans. 8 vo., 215.

Creighton (M., D.D., Late Lord

Bishop of London). ^

A History of the Papacy from
THE Great Schism to the Sack of
Roms^ 1378-1527, 6 vols. Cr. 8vo.,

55. net each.

Queen Elizabeth. With Portrait.

^ Crown 8vo., 55. net.

Historical Essays and Eef/ehs.

Edited by Lol'1.se Creichto.v. Crown
. 8vo., 5r. net.

Dale. — The Principles of English
C oNsrnvTiOKAL History. *By Ltxv
Dale, late Scholar of Somerville College,
Oxford. Crown 8 vd., 65.

C'

De Tocqtieville.—DsMocRAcr /v
America. By Alexis de Tocqueville.
Translated by Henry Reeve, C.B., D.C.L.
2 veils. Crown 8vo., 265.

Parliambat during the Nineteenth
CsNTURY^ By G. Lowes Dickinson, M.A.
8vo., 75. 6<f.

Falkiner. — Studies in Irish His-
tory .iND Biography, Mainly of the
Eighteenth Century. By C. Litton
Falkiner. 8 vo., 125. 6ci. net.

Fitzmaurice. — Charles IVilliam
Ferdinand, Duke of Brunshtick: an
Historical Study. By Lord Edmund
F iTZ,MAi;RtcF.. With Map and 2 Portraits.
Svo., hi. net.

Froude (James A.).

7 ^r History ofEngi.and, from the
Fall of Wolsey to the Defeat of the
Spanish Armada, ta vols. Crown 8vo.,
35. Gd. each.

The Divorce of Catherine of
Aragon. Crown 8vo., 35. 6<f.

The Spanish Story of the Ar-
mada, and other Essays. Cr. 8V0., 3s. 6d.

The English in Ireland in the
Eighteenth Century. 3 vols. Cr.Svo.,
lof. 6f/.

English Seamen in the Sixteenth
Century.

Cabinet Editian. Crown 8vo., 6i(.
Illustrated Edition. With 5 Photo
gravure Plate.s and 16 other lllustM
tions. Large Cr. 8vo., gilt top, 6 j. net.

‘ Silver Library * Edition. Cr. 8vo., 35. Od,

The Council of Trent. Crown
8vo., 3s. 6d. *

Shoe r Studies onGrea tSub/^cts.
Cabiw t Edition. 4 vols. 24J.

‘ Stiver Library * Edition. 4 vols. Crown
8vo., 35. 6d. each. ,

Cassar : a Sketch. Cr. Svo, 35 . 6f /.

Selecthons from the Writings o."
Jambs Anthony Froude. Edited by
P. S. Allen, M.A. Crown 8vo., 3i. 61/

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANPARO AND GENERAL WORKS.

History, Polities, Polity, Political Memoirs, kQ— continued.

Fuller.-£( 'rVPT AND THE HiNTER- \ GfOSS. — ThE SOURCES AND LiTERA-
LAND, By Frederic W. Fuller. With i turb of English History^ from the
Frontispiece and Map of Kgypt and the | Earliesi TmBS TO about 1485. By
Sudan. Crown 8vo., 65. net. ! Charles Gross, Ph.D. 8vo., 185. net.

Gardiner (Samuel Rawson, D.C.L.,
LL.D.).

History of England^ from the Ac-
cession of James I. to the Outbreak of the
Civil War, 1603-1642. W’ith 7 Maps.
10 vols. Crown 8vo., 55. net each.

: Hamilton. — Historical Record oj>
I THE 1477/ (King's) H ussars, from a.d. 1715

; to A.D. igoo. By Colonel Henry Black-
nuKNK Hamilton, M.A., Christ Church,
Oxford; late Commanding the Regiment.
With 15 Coloured Plates, 35 Portraits, etc.,
in Photogravure, and 10 Maps and Plans.
Crown 4to., gilt edges, 42s, net.

A History of the Great Civil' HARVARD HISTORICAL STUDIES.

WaR^ 1642-1649. With 54 Maps and

Plans. 4 vols. Cr. 8vo., 51. net each. ; The SUPPRESSION OF THE African

j Slave Trade to the United States op

A History of THE Commonwealth America^ 1638-1870. By W. E. B. Du
AAD the Protectorate. 1649-1656. Bois, Ph.D. 8vo., 7s. 6<L

Library Eihiton. 3 vols, «vo.,^jr3 35. . CONTEST OYER THE RaTIFICATON

CabinH Eiiitiou . 4 vols. Crown 8vo., : OF the Federal Constitution IN Massa-
5i. nete,ich. [/» course of publication. | CHUSETTS. By S. B. Hari>ino.A.M. 8vo.,65.

The Student's History of Eng- • ^ Critical Study of Nullification
LAND. With 378 Illustrations. Crowm ; av South Carolina. Jiy D. F. Houston,
8vo., gilt top, I2S, ' A.M. 8vo., 6s.

Also in Three Volumes, price 4s. each.

IVhUt Gunpowder Plot IVas.
Wfth 8 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 5s.

Cro.mwell\s Place in History, ''
Founded on Six Lectures delivered in the
. University of Oxford. Cr. 8vo., 3s. 6rf. ^

Oliver Cromwell. With Frontis- .

piece. Crown Svo., 5s. net.

Nominations for Elective Office
IN THE United States. By Frederick
W. Dallinoer, A.M. 8vo., 7s, td,

A Bibliography of British Muni-
cipal History, including Gilds and
Parliamentary Representation. By
CHARLE.S Gross, Ph.D. 8vo., 125.

The Liberty and Free Soil Parties
IN th^Horth ITfis/'. By Theodore C.
Smith, Ph.D. Svo, 7s. 6rf.

German Empire (The) of To-day : j The Peoviscial Governor in the

Outlines of its Formation and Development, ; English Colonies of S-orth America.
By ‘ Veritas Crown Svo., 65. net.

Graham. — Roman Africa : an Out- ;

. line of the Hi.slory of the Roman Occupa- :
tion of North Africa, based chiefly upon .
Xnscriptions and Monumental Remains in !
that Country. By Alexander Graham, ,
F.S.A., F.R.l.B.A. With 30 reproductions I
of Original Dra>ving.^ by the A^ithor, and j
2 MaQ^. 8vo., i 6 s, net.

"’TJ

• I

Greville.— Journal of the Reigns !
OF King George IV., King H^illiam IV., j
AND Queen Victoria. By CiHarles C. F.* |
Grrville, formerly Clerk of the Council. ;
8 vols. Crown 8 vo., 35. (A, each.

By Evarts Boui ell Greene. Svo., 7s. 6rf,

The County Pala tine of Durham:
a Study in Constitutional History. By Gail-
i.ARD T iio.m.-\s Lapsley, Ph.D. 8vo., los. 6rf.

7 'he Anglican Episcopate and the
American Colonies. By Arti i r Lyon
Cross, Ph.D., Instructor in History in the
Univirsity of Michigan. 8vo., 10s. 6d,

Hill. — Liberty Documents. With
Contemporary Exposition and CriticalCom-
ments drawn from various Writers. Selected
and Prepared by Mabel Hill. Edited with
an Introduction by Albert Bushnkll Hart,
Ph.D. Large Cfown Svo., 74. 6d. net.

S MESSRS. LONGMANS ft CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

History, Polities, Polity, Political Memoirs, continued.

Historic Towns.— Edited by E. A.

Freeman, D.C.L.,an<l Rev. William Hunt^ ;
M. A. With Maps and Plans. Crown 8vo., |
31. 6d. each.

BristoL By Rev. W. Hunt. Oxford. By Rev. G. W.

Carlisle. By MandeU ‘

Creighton, D.D. Winchester. By G. W.

Cinque Ports. By Mon* Kitchin, D.D.

Ugu llurrows, York. By Rev. James

Colchester. By Rev. E. L. . Raine.

Ctttts. York. By Tneodore

Exeter. By E. A. Freeman. Roosevelt.

London. By Rev. W. J. Boston (U.S.) By Henry
Loftie. Cabot Lodge.

Hunter. — A History of British
India. By Sir W!ll?.\m Wil.son Hunter,
K.C.S.I., M.A., LL.D. Vol. 1 . -Introduc-
tory to the Overthrow of the English in the
Spice Archipelago, 1623. With 4 Maps.
8vo., i8s. Vol. II. — To the Union of the
Old and New Companies under the Earl of
Godolphin's Award, 1708. 8vo., i6s.

Ingram. — .4 CxtncAi. ExAMtNA-

TiON OF iRiSH^IIisroRV. From the Eliza-
bethan Conquest to the Legislative Union
of 1800. By T. Dunbar Ingram, LL.D.

2 vols. 8vo., 245.

Joyce. - A Short History of /re- j

LAND^ from the Earliest Times to 1603. By 1
P. W. Joyce, LL.D. Crown 8vo., los. 6<f. |

Kaye and Malleson.~A7.'fTO;?K op

TUB iKDtAN MuTr.\r, 1857-1858. By SA
John W, Kayk and Colonel G. B. Mallb-
SON. With Analytical Index arfti Maps and
Plans. 6 vols. Crown 8vo„ 35. 6rf. each.

Kent. — The English Hadicals : an
Historical .Sketch. By C. B. RoylancE
Kent. Crown 8vo., 74.

Lang (Andrew).

Thk Myutkry op Mary Stuart.
With 6 Photogravure Plates (4 Portraits)
and 15 other Illustrations. 8vo., j8j. nut.

James the Sixth and riiA Gowrie
M YSiRRY. With Gowrie's Coat of Arms
in colour, 2 Photogravure Portraits and
other llluKtrations. 8vo., i2.t. Ctd. net.

Historical Suryey oP
Prb-Christian Eiwcation. By S. S.
Laurie. A.M., LL. Da Crown Svo., 75. 6d.

Lecky (The Rt. Hon. William E. H.)
History of England in the Eigh-

TBBNTH CS\TURY.

Library Edition. 8 vois. 8vo. Vols. 1 .
and 11 ., 1700-1760, 36s. ; Vols. III. and
IV., 1760-1784, 365. ; Vols. V. and VI.,
1784-1793, 36s.; Vols. VI 1 . and VIIL,
1793-1800, 36s. ,

Cabinet Edit ion. England. 7 vols. Crown
8vo., 3J. net each. Ireland. 5 vols.
Crown 8vo., 5s. net each.

History of Ehrofean Morals
FROM Augustus to Charlemagne. 2
vols. Crown 8vo., ws. net.

History of the Rise and Influ-
ence OF THE Spirit of RATioNiLism in
Europe. 2 vols. Crown 8vo.. los. net.

Democracy and Liberty.

Library Edition. 2 vols. 8vo., 365.
Cabinet Edition. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., los. net.

TIBS IN Continental Europe. By A.
Lawrence Lowei.l. 2 vols. 8vo., 21s.

■e .1

Lumsden’s Horse, Records of.—

Edited by H. H. S. Pearse, With a Map,
and numerous Portraits and Illustrations in
the Text. 4to., 215. net.

Lynch.- War of the Civili-
sations: bEiNu A Record of ‘ A Forbjg.v
Dby/Cs' E.vpekiences with the Allies
IN China. By George Lynch, Specioi
Correspondenl of the ‘ Sphere,’ etc. Witli
Portrait and 21 Illustrations. Crown 8vu..
6.?. net.

Macaulay (Lord). ‘

The Life axh Works of Lost
Macaulay.

'^Edinburgh' Edition. 10 vols. 8vo.,6r.cacIi.
Vol^. I.-IV. History of Engla.w.

. Vols. V.-VH;* e:ssay 5 . Biographies,
Indian Penal Code, Comfributions
to KnigiWs 'Quarterly Mag All SB ^
Vol. VllL Speeches, Lays opAncjeni
Rome, M iscellansous Poems.

Vols. vlX. and X. 7 ' HE Life and
Lbiters or Lord Macaulay. By
Sir O. b, Trevelyan, Bart.

1 'LovutW.— ‘Governments and Par-

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

History, Polities, Polity, Political Memoirs, —continued.

Macaulay {hoxCi)~-continii€iL

The Works.

‘Albany* Edition, With 12 Portraits.

12 vols. Large Crown 8vo., y, 6 d, each.
Vols. I. VI. History of Exglamd,
FROM TUB Accession OF J AMES the
Secoxd.

Vols. VII.-X. Essa ys and Biografhies.
Vols. Xl.-XII. Speeches, Lays of
Ancient Rome, etc., and Index.

Cabinet Edition. 16 vols. Post 8vo.,

Library Edition. 5 vols. 8vo.,

/History oi' England from the
Accession of Jambs the Second.
Popular Edition, 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., 5^.
Student's Edition. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., ■

People's Edition. 4 vols. Cr. 8vo., i6i. j

* Albany * Edition. With 6 Portraits. 61

vols. Large Crown 8vo., y, bd. each. '
Cnbinei Edition. 8 vols. Post 8vo., 485. \
‘ Edinburgh * Edition, 4 vols. 8vo., 6s. ;
each, !

Critical and //istorical £ssAySt {

tv/ril /.AYS OF .ANCIENT RoME, etc., in 1 I
voloinj. I

Popular Edition. Crown 8vo.. 2s. td. j

' Silver Library ' Edition. With Portrait i
and 4 Illustrations to the ' Lays’. Cr
8vo., 3i. bd.

Critical a.\d HisroRiCAL E.ssavs. ;
StudcnVs Edition. 1 vol. Cr.r'ivo., 6s I

• Treifelyim ' Edition. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., gs. J
Cabinet Edition. 4 vols. Post 8 vo,, 24s.

‘ Edinburgh ’ Edition. 3 vols. Svo., 6s. I
each. \

Library Edition. 3 vols. 8vo., 3OS.

£s.^'a ys, which may behad .separately,

bd. each cloth, is. each.

AddiRfjn and \Valpole. j Frederick the Great,

< broker's HoswcU s Johnson, i Ranke and Gladstone. \

ilallfkn's CoiiBtttutional ! Lord llacon. j

History. j Lor4 Clive. |

Warren* Hastings. ! Lord Byron, and The >

The Lari of Chatham (Two I Comic Dramatists of j
Essays). I the Restoration. •

f

M/SCEL la N/’OV.^ * Wr / T/NGSf*\

.S'FEBCHttS AND POEMS.

Popular Edition, Crown 8vrv, . bd.
Cabinet Edition, 4 vol';. 8vo., 24s.

Se/^ECT/ONS FRCW THE WRI TINGS OF
Lord Macaulay. Edited, wfth Occa-
sional Noten, by the Right Hon. Sir G. O.
Trevklvan, Bart. Crown 8vo., 6s.

Mackinnon {Ja.mes, Ph.D.).

The HisTORy of Edward the
Third. 8vo., 18s.

The Growth and Decline of the
French Monarchy. 8vo., 21s. net.

Mallet • — Mallet nu Pan and the
French Revolution. By Bernard
Mai.let. With Photogravure Portrait.
8vo., 1 25 . bd. net.

May. — The Constitutional His-
tory of England since the Accession
of George 11 1 . 1760-1870. By Sir Thomas
Ekskine May, K.C.B. (Lord P'arnborough).
3 vols. Cr. 8vo., 185.

Merivale (Charles, D.D.).

History OF the Homans under the
E.MTIRB. 8 vols. Crown 8vo., 35. bd. each.

The Fall of the Roman Republic:
a Sliort History of the Lartt Century of the
Commonwealth, lamo., 7s. 6d. •

General Hisjorv of Rome, from
the Foundation of the City to the Fall of
Augustulus, B.c. 753-A.D. 476. With 5
Maps. Crown 8vo,, 75. bd.

Montague. — 'rni: Elements of
English Constitutional //istory. By
C. Mo.ntaguk, M.A. Crown 8vo., 35. td.

Nash . — IdiH Great Famine and
ITS Causes. By Vaughan Nash. With
8 Illustrations from Photographs by the
Author, and a Map of India showing the
Famine Area. Crown Svo., bs.

Owens College Essays.— Editifd

by T. F. 'I'ouT, Profes.sor of History

in the Owens College. Victoria Univcrsily,
and James Tait, M.A., Assistant Lecturer
in History. With 4 Maps. 8vo., \ 2s. bd, net.

Powell and Trevelyan. — The

PsASA.vTf* Rising and the Lollards:
a Collection of Unpublished Documents.
Edited by Edgar Powell and G. M.
Trevelyan. Svo., 65. net.

•

Randolph. — The L.uv and Policf
H)F Annexation, with Speci.al Reference to
the Philippines ; together with Observations
on the Status of Cuba. By Carman F,
Randolph. 8vu., gs. net.

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

History, Polities, Polity, Political Memoirs, ka.- cmtitumt

Rankin (Reginald).

The Marqlhs d'Argehsoh : ahd
Richaiw the Second. Svo., los. 6 , 1 . net.

A Sc/BA L etters to His
Wife. (The Boer War.) Crown Svo.,

3i. 6i/.

Ransome. — The Rise of Consti-
rurjo.\AL GovER.yMEM' IN England.
By Cyril Ransomk, M.A. Crown bvo., 6s.

Seebohm (Fredkkic, LL.D.,RS.A.).

The English Village Com/TXirw
With 13 Maps and Plates. Svo.. i6s.

Tribal Cusro.\f in Anglo-Saxon
Laiv ; beinw an Essay supplemental lo

(1) ‘ 'I'he Enjjlish Village Community,’

(2) ‘The 'rribal System in Wales'.
8 vo., i6j.

Seton-Karr.— 7>//; CUi/. ro .Is-.vs,

i9(K>-i90t ; or a Review of the Imperial
Yeomanry Movement, and some subjects
connected therewith. By Si v H i-: n k y Si . ton -
K.^rk, M.P. With a Erontispicce by R.
C.^ToN-WooDviLi.i*. Crown 8vo.. 5>-. net.

Shaw. — A History OB the English
Church during the Civil and

UNDER THE CohWONWEALTH, .l640-l6Cfe>.
By WiLLi.AM A. Sh.^w, Litt.D. 2 vuls.
Svo., 365. ,

Sheppard. - The Old Royal
Palace of \V HrrEHAtj.. By Kiki.'.k
SnKPiMRO, D.D., Sub-Dean of } 1 .M.
Chapels Royal, Sub-Almoner to the King,
\Vith 6 Photogravure Plates and .33 other
Illustrations. Medium Svo., 21. s. net.

Svaxi)x. — Carthage AND the Carth-
aginians. By R. } 5 oswokth .S.MiTn. .M.A.
With Maps, Plan.s, etc. Cr. 8vo., 35. 6</.

Stephens. — A History * oe the
French Revolution. By H. Morse
Stephens. 8 vo. Vol«. Land II. 183. each.

f

Sternberg. — Mv Exteriences of
THE Boer War. By Adalhekt Count
STEKsinRRG. With Preface by Lieut.>Col.
0 . 1 ‘. B, IlEXDERSo.'?. Crown 8vo., 5s. net.

StubbS.“-^/.V 7 V^>' OE THE Un/YER’
S/TV OF Dublin. By J. W. Stubbs. Svo.,

I 123 . 6d.

I Stubbs. — Historical Introduc-
tions TO THF. * Rolls Ser/es\ By
I W1LLIA.M Stubbs, D.L>., formerly Bishop
of Oxford, Regius Professor of Modern
History in the University. Collected and
Edited by Arthur Hassai.i,, M.A. Svo.,
123 . 6 ( 1 . net.

‘ Sutherland. — Hl'H'ory of Aus-

tralia AND New ZBALAEDy from 1606-
1900. By Alexander Sutherland, M.A.
and GeorciE Sutherland, M.A. Crown
I 8vo., 23 . 6 ( 1 .

i »

I Taylor.— Af Student's Manual of

I THE f/iSTORY OF INDIA. By Colonel Mea-
I BOWS Tavi.ok, C.S.I. Cr, 8vo., 73. 6 d.

j Thomson. China and the Towers :

a Narrative of the Outbreak of 1900. By
11 . C. Tho.mso.n. With 2 Maps and 29
; Illustrations. «8vo., 103. 6 d. net.

I

iTodd. - Pa RLIA .\IENTA R 1 ’ 7i A-A"-

; MEST IN THE HRJTISH COLOMHS. By
; Alpheus Todd, LL.D. 8vo., 3ctf. pel.

I w

j Trevelyan.- -7V/A- American Reyo-
! LVrioN. Parti. 1706-1776. By Sir G. O.
; Trevelyan, Bart. 8vo., 163.

: Trevelyan. - ix this Age

OF WycLiFFF. By George Macaulay

: TrevllyXn. Svo., 153,

:Wakeman and HassalL—

/Nriioin'croHY ro the Study of Fnousu
Const I TV T ION A I. Hisivky. Edited by
. Henry Oi-tley Wake.man, M.A., and
; Arthur Ha.ssall, M.A. Crown 8vo., 63.

, Walpole. - -///vyy’A'}' or ExclanT’
FROM THE Conclusion of the Okcat
\ War in 1815 lio 1858. By Sir Spenlkk
■! Walpoi.e, K.C.B. 6 vols. Cr. 8vo., 63? each.

i Wylie (James Hamilton, M.A.).

I History 01 England under
1 Henry IV. 4 vols. Crown Rvo. Vol.

I !•. i399-U04> Vol. U., I4‘>5'

1406 , 15 s. (out of print). Vol. III.,

; 1411,^153. Vol.* IV., 1411-1+13, 213 .

j The Council of Constance to tih-
Dea TH of y OHN ii us. Cr. 8 vo. , 6s. ncL

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Biography, Personal Memoirs, &e.

Bacon. — The Letters and Lire of \
Francis Bacon^ including all ins Oc - !
CASIONAL Works. Edited by Jamks Sped-
DiNG. 7 vols. Svo., £4

"Biographic A i. Studies.
By Walter Bagf.hot. Crown 8vo., 35. 6r/,

Bernards (The) of Abington and

Nether Winchendon: A Family [fistory.
By Mrs. Napikk IIkkiINs. 2 V^ols. Svo.

Blount. — 7 'he Memoirs of Sir
E invARD Bloi'NT, K.C.B., etc. Edited
fa by Stuart J. Reid, Author of ‘The Life
and Times of Sydney Sn}ilh,‘ etc. With 3
^Photogravure Plate.s. 8vo., los. 6ii. net.

Bowen. — Edivard Bo hen: a Me.-'

MOIR. By the Rev. the Hon. W. E. Bowe.v.
Witli Appendices, 3 l^hotogravure Portraits
and 2 other Illustrations. iSvo.. 12.L ftf. net.

Carlyle.— Carlvi.k: A His-
tory of his Life. By James Anthony
Froude.

1795-1835. 2 vols. Crown 8vo., 75.
1834-18181. 2 vols. Crown Svo., 75.

Crozier. — My Inner Life : being a

CliAptir in Personal Evolution and Auto-
biogrifphy. By John Beattie Crozier,
LL.D. 8vo., i |.L

Dante. — The Life and JVores of

TE Allig/iieri ; being an Introduction ^
10 the Sliidv of the ‘ Divina Commedia’.
By the Rev. J. V. Hogan, P.H. With
Portrait. .''VO., 12s. (ul.

Danton. — Life of Danton, By A.

H. Bkesly. With Poriniiis. Cr. 8vo., 6s.

De Bode. -The Baroness dk Bode,

1775-1803. By W11.1.1.AM S. Childe-Pi'.xM-
BKRTON. Witl\ 4 Photogravure Portraits
and other Illustrations. Svo., gilt top,
12s. 6r/. net.

Erasmus.

4

Life and Letters of Brasmus.
By James Anthony Froude^ Crown
8vo., 3s. 6rf. * ,

The •Epistles of Erasmus, from
his Earliest I-etters to his Fifty-first Year, '
arranged in Order of Time. English .
Translations, with a Commentary. By i
Francis Morgan Nichols, ^vo., 181. net.*;

Faraday. as a Dis-\
COVBRER, By John Tyndali.. Crown i
8 v0m 3f. 6<f.

Fenelon ; his Friends and his
Enemijs, 1651-1715. By E. K. Sanders.
With Portrait. 8vo., Kj.v:. fid.

Fox. - 7 'he Early History of
Charles James Fo.w By the Right Hon.
Sir G. 0 . TkevpiLYAN, Bart. Crown Svo.,
3s. bd.

Froude. — J/urrei.l Froude : Some

Reprints .and Reprinted Comment.';. With
a Biographical Preface by the Editor,
L. I. Guinkv. With Illustrations. 8vo.

Granville. — Some Records of the
Later Life (?/•■ Harriet, Countess
( i RANVJLUi. By her Granddaughter, the.
Hon. Mrs. Oldi if.ld. With 17 Portraits.
8vo., gilt top, 16.L net.

Grey. — Memoir of Sir George
VtKEY, Bart, G.C.B., I7rjg-i882. By
Mandkll Creighton, D.I)., late Lord
Bishop of London. With 3 Portraits.
Crown 8\o., 6s. net. •

Hamilton.— Z / AiS - oj^- S/x William
Hamilton. By R. P. Graves. Svo. 3 vols.
15s. each. Addendum. Svo., 6d. sewed.

Harrow School Register (The),

iSoi-1900. Second Edition, 1901. Edited
by M. (i. DaiciI.jsh. Barrister-at-La\v.
Svo. 15.V. net.

Havelock. — Memoirs of Sir Henry
Havf.l 9 ck, K.C.B. By John Clark
Mar.shman. Crown 8vo., 31. 6d.

Ha.'weis.— M y Music Ai. Life. By the
Rcv.H.K.Haweis. With Portrait of Richard
Wagner and 3 Illustration.s. Cr. Svo., 6s. net.

•

Hunter. — 7"he Life of Sir Wu Lia.^i
Wilson Hunter K.C.S.L, M.A., LL.D.
Author of ' A History of British India.' etc.
By Francis Henry Skkine, F.S.S. . With
6 Porlrait.s (2 Photogr.'ivures) and 4 other
Illustration.*;. Svo., i6s. net.

Jackson. —Stoneiyall Jackson and
THE A MERIC AN Cl viL Wa r. By Lieut.-CoL
G. F. R. Henderson. With 2 Portraits and
33 Maps and Plans. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., 16^ net.

Kielmansegge.— Z>/wjrK 0^ /I /ouk-
NEY TO England in the Years 1761-
1762. By Count Frederick Kielman-
sEGGK. With 4 tllustrations. Crown 8vp.
5s.net., -

10 MESSRS. LONGMANS A CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Biography, Personal Memoirs, —continued.

Lieven. — Ljsrrsns of Dorothea, \

PHiNCESS L/EI'EH, DORIXG i/EE RESIDENCE [
IN London^ 1812-1834. Edited by Lionel i
G. Robinson. With 2 Photogravure Por-
traits. 8vo., 145. net. '

Luther. — L/fe of Luther, By |
Julius Kostlin. With 62 Illustrations !
and 4 Facsimilies of MSS. Cr. Svo., 31. 6d. 1

Macaulay. — The Lite and Letters |
OF Lord Macaulay. By the Right Hon. ;
Sir G. O. Trevelyan, Bart.

Passages FROM theDiaribs
OF Mrs. Philip Lybbe Powys, of Hard-
WICK House, OxON. i756-i8t)8. Edited by
Emily j. Climenson. 8 vo., gilt top, i6s.

R&makr/shiia : If/s Life and

Sayings. By the Right Hon. F. Max
Muller. Crown 8vo„ 55.

Rich.— P/CH, Countess of

Warwick (1625-1678) : Her Family and
Friends. By C. Fell Smith. With 7
Photogravure Portraits and 9 other Illustra
tions. Svo., gilt top, tS^. net.

popular BSUon. i voi. Cr. 8vo., a. w. j Rochcstcf, and Other Literal^

StudenT 5 Edition i vol. Cr. Svo., 6j.
Cabinet Edition. 2 vols. Post 8vo., 125.
‘ Edinburgh ’ Edition. 2 vols. 8vo.,6s. each.
Library Edition. 2 vols. Svo., 365.

Rakes of the Court of Charles II., wita
some Account of their Surrounding^s. By
the Author of ' The Life of Sir Kciidlm
Dighy,' 'I'he Life of a Prig,’ etc. Witli 15
Portraits. 8vo., i6j.

Roiqanes . — 7'he Life and Letter.s
OF George yoHi\ Romanes. M.A., l.L.t .;
F.R.S. Written and Edited by his Wife.
With Portrait and 2 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo.,
5s. net.

Russell. AND ITS

Owners. By Constance Lahy Russell,
of Swallowlielil Park. With 15 Photogravure
Portraits and 36 other Illustrations. 410.,
gilt edges, 42.S. net. *

Seebohm. — TheOxford Reformers
— John Colet, Hr asm us, and 7 homas
More : 21 History of their Fellow Work.
By Fkbdkkic Skkbohm. .svo., 14s.

Chips rRo.M a German IVornshop.i ^

Vol.U. BiographicalEssavs. Cr. 8vo.. 55.'' Shakespeare. — C>J//-A/.V£.S- OH IHk

Life OF .Shakespeare. By J. O. Halli

Marbot. — The Memoirs of the

Baron DE MarBOT. 2 vols. Crown 8vo.,
75.

Max Muller (F.)

The Life and Letters of the
Right Hon.^Frjedr/ch Maa Muller.
Edited by his W’ife. W'ith Photogravure
Portraits and other Illustrations. 2 vols.,
8vo., 325. net.

Afy Autobiography : a P'ra^^MTient.

With 6 Portraits. 8vo., 125. 6^/.

Auld Lang Syne, Second Series.
8vo., 105. 6rf.

Meade. — General Sir Richard
Meade and the Feudatory St apes of
Central and Southern India. By
Thomas Henry Thornton. With Portrait,
Map and Illustrations. Svo., 105. bd. net.

Morris. — Tub Lihe of IVieliam
Morris, By J. W. Mackail. With 2 Por-
traits and Bother illustrations by £. H. New,
etc. 2 vols. Large Crown 8vo., 105. net.

On the Banks of the Seine. By

A. M. F., Author of ‘Foreign Courts and
Foreign Homes*. Crown 8vo., 65.*

P^et. — Memoirs and Letters of
Sir James Paget, Edited by Stephen
PXget, one of hi.s sons. W'ith Portrait.
8vo,, 65. net.

Place.— T/Ziff Life OF Francis Place,
1771^1854. By Grahim Wallar, M.A.
Wuh a P^traits. 8vo., 12s.

well-Phillipps. W'ith Illustrations and
Facsimiles. 2 vols. Royal 8vo., 21s.

Tales of ray Father.— By A. M. F.,

Author of ‘ Foreign Courts and Foreign
Homes,’ and ' On the Banks of the Seine’.
Crown 8 VO., 6s.

Tallentyre. — 7 We IVomen of the

Salons, and other French Portraits. By
S. G. Tallentyre. W'ith 11 i^hotogravu/-;.
Poitraits. 8vo., los. 6d. net.

Victoria, Queen, 1819-1901. l 3 y

Richabu R. lioLMES, M.V.O., F.S.A,, Lib-
rarian fo the Queen. ^With Photogravure
Portrait. Crown &vo., gilt top, 55^ net.

Walpole.— Unpublished
Letters of Horace Walpole, Edited
* by Sir Spencer Walpole, K.C.B. With
w 2 Portraits^ Crown 8vo., 45. 6d. net.

Wellington.— of the Dvkm
! OP Wellington. By the Rev. O. R*
Gleio, M.A. Crown 8vo., 31. 6d.

II

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Travel and Adventure, the Colonies, &e.

Arnold. — S£as and Lands, By Sir j

Edwin Arnold. With 71 Illustrations, i
Crown 8vo., 3s. 6<i. j

Baker (Sir S. W.).

Eight Veahs in Ceylon, With 6 |

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. td.

The Rifle and the Hound in ;
Ckyidn. With 6 lllusts. Cr. hvo., 35. 6rf. j

Bali (JoHxN).

JThe Alpine Guide. Reconstructed j
and Revised on behalf of the Alpine Club, j
b)' W. A. E. CooLinoE. |

Vol. I., The Western Alps : the .Alpine i
Region, South of the Rhone Valley, .
from the Col de I'enda to the Simplon
Pass. W'ith t} New and Revised Maps.
Crown hvo., 12s. net.

Hints and Notes, Practical and
Scientific, for Travellers in the
Alps: being a Revision of the General .
Introduction to the ' Alpine Guide ’.

Crown 8vo., 3.?. net.

# *

»*

Bent. — The Ruined Cities of Ma- ;
SHON aland : being a Record of Excavation
and Exploration in 1891. By J. Theodore
l\iiNT. With 1 17 Illustrations. Crown i
8vo., 35. 6rf. ^

Brassey (The Late Lady).

A Voyage IN THE ^ Sunbeam' ; Our
Home on the Ocean for Eleven
Months. !

Cabinet Editio^i. With Map and 66 Illus-
trations. Cr. 4SV0., gilt edges, 71. 6d.

‘ Library * Edition. With 66 Illus-
^ trations. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.

^ Popular Edition. With 60 Illustrations.
4to., 6(/. sewed, is. cloth.

School Edition, With 37 Illustrations.
Fcp., 25. cloth, or 35. white {^chinent. ;
• ■ •

. Sunshine and Storat in the East.

Popular Edition. With 103 Illustrations. '
4to., 6d, sewed, 15. cloth.

/n the Trades, the Tr^op/cs, and*
TUB ‘ Roaring Forties \

Cabinet Edition. With Map and 220 Ulus- !
trations. Cr. 8vo., gilt edges, 75. 6d.

Fountain (Paul).

IWe Grea t jCej^er ts and Forests
OF North A meric a. With a Preface by
W. H. Hud-son, Author of* The Naturalist
in L.a Plata,’ etc. 8vo., gs. id. net.

The Great Mountains and
Forests of South America. With
Portrait and 7 Illustrations. Svo., 10s. 6d.
net.

Froude (James A.).

OcfiA/fA ; or England and her Col-

onies. With 9 Illustrations. Cr. Svo., 3s. 6r/.

The English in the IVest Indies :
or, the Bow of Ulys.ses. W'ith 9 Illustra-
tions. Crown 8vo., 25. boards, 25. 6d. cloth.

Grove. — Se / enty-one Da vs* Camp-
ing IN Morocco. By Lady Grovf.. With
Photogravure Portrait and 32 Illustrations
from Photographs. 8vo., 75. fyd. net.

Haggard. — A IV/nte'r P/lgri.hage :

Being an Account of Travels through
Palestine, Italy and the* Island of Cyprus,
undertaken in the year igoo. By H. Rider
Haggard. W'ith 31 Illustrations from Photo-
graphs. Cr. Kvo., gilt top, 125. 6d. net.

Heathcote.-'4SA Hilda. By Nor-
man Heathcote. W^ith 80 Illustrations
from Sketches and Photographs of the
People, Scenery and Birds by the .Author.
Svo., IO.S. 6fL net.

Howitt. — Visits to Remarkable
Places. Old Halls, Battle-Fields, Scenes,
illustrative of Striking Passages in English
History and Poetry. By W'ilham Howitt.
With 80 Illustrations. Crown bvo., 35. 6rf.

Knight (K. K.)*

With the Royal Tour : a Narra-
tive of the Recent Tour of the Dukp and
Duchess of Cornwall and York through
Greater Britain. W'ith 16 Illustiations
and a Map. Crown 8vo., 55. net.

The Cruise of the ‘ Alerts ’ ; the
Narrative of a Search for Treasure'on the
Desert Island of Trinidad. W'itVi 2 Maps
and 23 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. td.

Where Three Empires Meet: a
Narrative of Recent Travel in Kashmir,
Western Tibet, Baltistan, Ladak, Gilgit,
and the adjoining Countries. With a
Map and 54 Illustrations. Cr. Svo., 35. 6ii.

The * Falcon' on the Baltic: a
Voyage from London to Copenhagen in
a Three-Tonner. With 10 Full-page
Illustrations. Crown 8Vo., 35. Ed.

-A

12 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Travel and Adventure, the Colonies, &.Q.—confinued.

Lees. — Peaks and Pines: another

Norway Book. By J. A. Lees. With 63 :
Illustrations and Photographs. Cr. 8vo., 65.

Lees and Clutterbuck.— B.C. 1887:;
A Ramble IN British Columbia. By J. A. i
Lees and W. J. Clutterbuck. With Map ^
and 75 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d.

Lynch. — Armenia : Travels and
Studies. By H. F. B. Lynch. With 197 •
Illustrations (some in tints) reproduced j
from Photographs and Sketches by the ;
Author, 16 Maps and Plans, a Bibliography, ;
and a Map of Armenia and adjacent i
countries. 2 vols. Medium 8vo., gilt top, ,
42r. net.

Nansen. — Tne^ First Crossing of \
Greenland. By Fridtjof Nanse.n. With
143 Illustrations and a Map. Crown 8vo., I
3r, 6d.

Rice. — Occasional Essays on Na-
tive South Indian Life. By Stanley
P. Rice, Indian Civil Service. 8vo., i 05 . 6d.

Smiths — Climbing in the British
Isles. By W. P. Haskett Smith. With
Illustrations and Numerous Plans.

Part I. England. i6mo., 3s. net.

Part II. IVales and Ireland. i6mo.,
3S. net.

Spender . — Two Winters in Nor-
way: being an Account of Two Holidays
spent on Snow-shoes and in Sleigh Driving,
and including an Expedition to the Lapps.
By A. Edmund Spender. With 40 Illustra-
tions from Photographs. 8 vo., 105. td. net.

Stephen. — The Play-Ground oV
Europe (The Alps). By Sir Leslie
Stephen, K.C.B. W'ith 4 Illustrations.
Cro\vn 8vo., 35. td.

Three in Norway. By Two of

Them. With a Map and 59 Illustrations.
Crown 8vo., 25. boards, 25. td. cloth.

Tyndall.— (John).

The Glacjers of the Alps. 'With
61 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6 j.^. net.

Hours of Exercise in the Alps.
With 7 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 6s. 6</. net.

r •

Sport and Pastimer.

THE BADMINTON LIBRARY.

Edited by HIS GRACE THE (EIGHTH) DUKE OF BEAUFORT, K.G.,
and A. E. T. WATSON.

ARCHERY. By C. J. Longman and : GAME SHOQTING- By

Col. H. Walrond. With Contributions by ; Clive Phii.lipps- Woolley.

Miss Legh. Viscount Dillon, etc. With ' *

2 Maps, 23 Plates and 172 Illustrations in |
the Text. Crown 8vo., cloth, 6s. net; half- '
bound, with gilt top, 95. net.

e

A THLE TICS. By Montague :

Shearman. With Chapters on Athletics ;
at^chool by W. Beacher Thomas; Ath- ’
letic Sports in America by C. H. Sherrill ; ;
a Contribution on Paper-chasing by W. Rye, ! ,
and an Introduction by Sir Richard Web- i
STBR (Lord Alverstone). With 12 Plates .
and 37 niustraiiohs in Rie Text. Cr. 8vo., '
cloth, 65. net; half-bound, with gilt top, 9s.net. ;

Vol. I. AFRICA AND AMERICA!
With Contributions by Sir Samuel iV.
Baker, W. C. Oswell, F. C. Selous,
etc. With 20 Plates and 57 Illustrations
in the*Text. C^own ^vo., cloth, 6s. net;
*ha1f-bound, with gilt top, gs. net^

Vol. II. EUROPE, ASIA, ANIT THE
ARCTIC REGIONS. With Contribu-
tions by Lieut.-Colonel R. Hbber
Percy, ^ajor Algernon C. Heber
Percy, etc. With 17 Plates and 56 Illus-
trations in the Text, Crown 8vo., cloth,
6s, net ; half-bound, with gilt top, gs. net.

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.*S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

13

Sport and Pastime— conitnued.

THE BADMINTON

Edited by HIS GRACE THE (EIGH
and A. E. T.

BILLIARDS, By Major W. Broad- j

FOOT, R.E. With Contributions by A. H. ;
Bovd, Sydenham Dixon, W. J. Ford, etc.
With iz Plates, 19 Illustrations in the Text,
and numerous Diagrams. Crown Hvo., cloth,
Af. net ; half-bound, with gilt top, gs. net. |

i

I

COURSING AND RALCONRY.]

By Harding Cox, Charles Richardson, |
the Hon. Gerald Lascell£.s. With !
20 Plates and 55 Illustrations in the Text, j
Crown 8vo., cloth, 6s. net ; half- bound, with j
gilt top, gs. net. , I

CRICKET. By A. G. wStef.l and |

the Hon. R. H. Lyttelton. With Con- j
tributions by Andrew Lang, W. G. Grace, '
F. Gale, etc. With 13 Plate.s and 52 Ulus- !
trations in the Text. Crown 8vo., cloth, 6s. ;
net ; half-bound, with gilt top, gs. net.

CYdLWG. By the Karl of Albe-
marle and G. Lacy Hii.lier. With 19
Plates and 44 Illustrations in the Text.
Crown 8 VO., cloth, 6s. net ; half-bound, with
gilt top, gs. net.

DANCING. By 'Mrs. Lilly Grove.

With Contributions by Miss Middleton,
The Hon. Mrs. Akmytaqe, etc. With
Musical Examples, and 38 Full- page Plates
and 93 Illustrations in the Text. Crown
8vo., cloth, 6s. net ; half-bound, with gilt
top, 95. net.

JIVING. ByHisGracethe(Kighth)
UUKE of Beaufort, K.G. With Contribu-
tipns by A. E. T. WXtson the Karl op
Onslow, etc. With 12 Plates and 54 Illus-
trations in the Text. Crown 8vo., cloth, 6s.
net ; half-bound, ^'ith gjlt top, gs. ^et.

«

FENCING, BOXING, AND

WRESTLim. By Walter H. Pollock,
F. C. Grove, C. Prevost, E, B. Mitchell,
and Walter Armstrong. With 18 Plates
and 24 Illustrations in the Text. Crown
8vo., cloth, 6s. net; half-bound, with gilt
top, 95. net.

•a -

LIBRARY — continued .

TH) DUKE OF BEAUFORT, K.G.,
WATSON.

FISHING. By H. Cholmondeley-
Pennell.

Vol. 1 . SALMON AND TROUT. With
Contributions by H. R. Francis, Major
John P. Traherne, etc. With 9 Plates
and numerous Illustrations of Tackle, etc.
Crown 8vo., cloth, 65. net ; half-bound,
with gilt top, 9.<;. net.

Vol. 11 . PIKE AND OTHER COARSE
FISH. With Contributions by the
Marquis ok Exeter, William Senior,
G. Christopher Davts, etc. With
7 Plates and numerous Illustrations ot
Tackle, etc. Crown 8vo., cloth, 6s. net ;
half-bound, with gilt top, gs. net.

FOOTBALL. History, by Mon-
tague Shearman ; The Associaiion
Game, by W. J. Oakley and G. O. Smith ;
The Rugby Union Game, by Frank
Mitchell. With other Contributions by
R. E. Macnaghten, M. C. Kemp, J. E.
Vincent, Walter Camp and A. Suther-
land. With 19 Plates and 35 Illustrations
in the Text. Crown 8vo., cloth, 6s. net ;

I half-bound, with gilt top, 95. net.

.^OLF By Horace G. Hutchinson.

With Contributions by the Rt. Hon. A. J.
i Balfour, M.P., Sir Walter Simpson, Bart.,
i Andrew Lang. etc. With 34 Plates and 56
Illustrations in the Text. Crown 8vo., cloth,
65. net ; half-bound, with gilt top, 95. net.

HUNTING. By His Grace the
(Eighth) Duke of Beaufort, K.G.,*and
; Mowbray Morris. With Contributions by
the Earl of Suffolk and Berkshire,
Rev. E. W. L. Davies, G. H. Longman,
etc. With 5 Plates and 54 Illustrations in
the Text. Crown 8vo., cloth, 6s. net ; h.!!!-
bound, with gilt top, gs. net.

MOTORS AND MOTOR-DRIV-
ING. By Alfred C. Harmsworth, the
i Marquis ' de Chasseloup-Laubat, the
I Hon. John Scott-Montagu, R. J. Wk-
CREDY, the Hon. C. S. Rolls, Sir David
Salomons, Bart., etc. With 13 Flates and
136 Illustrations in the Text. Crown 8vo.,
cloth, gs. net ; half-bound, 12s. net.

A Cloth Box for use when Motoring, 2s. net.

» f

14 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Sport and Pastime— caniinued.

THE BADMINTON LlBRARY-conlintwi.

Edited by HIS GRACE THE (EIGHTH) DUKE OF BEAUFORT, K.G.,
and A. E. T. WATSON.

MOUNTAINEER/ NG, By C. T.

Dent. With Contributions by the Right
Hon. J, Bryce, M.P., Sir Martin Conway,
D. W. Fkeshfiei.d, C. E. Matthews, etc.
W'ith 13 Plates and 91 Illustrations in the
Text. Crown 8vo., cloth, 6 a'. net ; half-
bound, with gilt top, gs. net.

l^OETRY OF SPORT {THE\-~^

Selected by Hedley Peek. With a
Chapter on Classical Allusions to Sport by
Andrew Lang, and a Special Preface to
the BADMINTON LIBRARY by A. E. T.
Watson. With 32 Plates and 74 Illustra-
tions in the Text. Crown Svo., cloth, 6s.
net: half-bound, with gilt top, gs. net.

RAC/NO AND STEEPLE C/fAS^

ING. By the Karl of Suffolk and
Berkshire, W. G. Craven, the Hon. F.
Lawley, Arthur Coventry, and A. E. T.
Wat.son. Wilh Frontispiece and 56 Illus-
trations in the Text. Crown 8vo., cloth, 6i.
net ; half-bound, with gilt top, gj. net.

RIDING AND POLO, 13y Captain

Robert Weir, j. Moray Brown, T, F.
Dale, The Late Duke ok Beaufort, The
Earl of Suffolk and Bekk.shir£, etc.
With 18 Plates and 41 lllusts. in the Text.
Crown 8vo., cloth, 65. net: half-bound,
with gilt top, 9.-5. net. ^

ROWING, By R. P, P. Rowr and

C. M. Pitman. With Chapters on Steering
by C. P. Sekocold and F. C. Beoo ; Met-
ropolitan Rowing bv S. Le Blanc Smith ;
and on PUNTING by P. W. Squire. Wiih
75 Illustrations, Crown 8vo., cloth, fw. net :
half-bound, urith gilt top, 95. net.

SHOOTING.

Vol. J. FIELD AND COVERT. By Lord
Wai.singham and Sir Ralfk "Payne-
Gallwey, Ban. With Contributions by
the Hon. Gerald Lascelles and A. J.
Stuart-Wortley. With 11 Plates and
95 Illustrations in the Text. Crown 8vo.,
cloth, 65. net; half-bound, with gilt top,
95. net.

Vol. 11 . MOOR AND MARSH. By
^ Lor dWalsinoh AM and Sir Ralph Payne-
Gallwey, Bart. With Contributions by
Lord Lovat and Lord Charler Lennox*
Kbkn. With 8 Plates and 57 Illustrations
in the Text. Crotvi^ Hvo., cloth, 6s, net ;
half-hound, with gilt top, 9s. net.

SEA FISHING. By John Bickir-

DYKE, Sir H. W. Gore-Booth, Alprbb
C. Harmsworth, and W. Senior. With 22
Full-page Plate.s and 175 lllusts. in the Text.
Crown Svo., cloth, 6s. net ; half-bound, wkh
gilt top, qs. net.

SKATING, CURLING, TOBOG-
GANING. By J. M. Heathcote, C. G.
Tebhutt, T. Maxwell Witham, Rex.
John Kerr, Ormond Hake, Henry A.
Buck, etc. With 12 Plate.s and 272 IRus-
trations in the Text. Crown 8vo., cloth, 6s.
net ; half-bound, with gilt tup, qs. net.

SWIMMING. By Archibald Sin-
clair and William HENKY,Hon.Secs.ofthe
Life-Saving Society. With 13 Plates and 112
Illustrations in the Text. Crown 8vo., cloth,
65. net ; half-bound, with gilt top, 9s. net.

TENNIS, LAWN ‘ TENNIS,

RACKETS AND FIVES, By 1 . M. and
C. G. Heathcote, E. O. Pleydell-Bou-
VEKiK,and A, C. Aingek. With Contributions
by the lion. A. Lyttelton, \V. C. Mar-
shall, Miss L. Doi>,etc. With 14 Plates and
65 Illustrations in the Text. Crown 8yo.,
cloth, 6s. net ; half-bound, with gilf lop,
QS. net.

YACHTING.

Vol. I. CRUISING, CONSTRUCTION
OF YACHTS, YACHT RACING
RULES. FITTING-OUT, etc. By Sir
Edward Sullivan, ^ art., The Earl of
Pembroke, Lord Brassey, K.C.B., C.
E. Seth -Smith, C.B., G. L. \Vatson, R.
T. Pritchett, E. F. Knight, etc. Win
21 Plates an^ 93 Illustrations ii^ the
Text. Crown 8vo., cloth, 6s. netj half-
bound, with gilt top, 95. net,

•

•Vol. II. YACHT 'CLUBS, YACHT-
ING IN AMERICA AND THE
COLONIES, YACHT RACING, etc.
By K. T. Pritchett, The Marquis of
Dupfrrin and Ava, K.P., The Earl of
Onslcqv, James McFerran, etc. With
35 Plates and 160 Illustrations in the
Text. Crown 8vo., cloth, gr. netj half-
bound, with gilt top, gs. net.

« '

f

15

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S SI'ANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Sport and ^sstimo—continued.

FUR, FEATHER, AND FIN SERIES.

Edited by A. E. T. Watson.

Crown 8vo., price 5s. each Volume, cloth.

The Volumes are also issued half -hound in Leather, with gilt top. Price 75. 6d. net each.

THE PARTRIDGE, Natural His-

tory, by the Rev. H. A. Macpherson;
Shooting, by A. J. Stuart- Woktley ;
Cookery, by George Saintsuury. With
11 Illustrations and v.'trious Diagrams.
Crown 8 VO., 5s.

THE GROUSE, Natural History, by
Rev. H. A. Macfherson; Siiooting,
V, A. J. Stuart-Woktley ; Cookery, by
George Saintsuury. With 13 Illustrations
and various Diagrams. Crown 8vo., 5.$.

THEPHEASANT. Natural History, |

by the Rev. H. A. Macpherson ; Shooting, j
by A. J. Stuart-Worti.ey : Cookery, by 1
Alexander Innes Shano. With ro IIlus- |
trations and various Diagrams. Crown !
8 vo., 55. • I

i

THE HARE. Natural History, by |

the Rev. H. A. Macpherson ; Shooting, i
by the Hon. CiEKAi.n I.aschlles ; Cour'^ing. j
by Charles Richardson ; Hunting, by J. i
s’. Gibbons and G. H. Longman; Cookery, j
by Col. Kenney Herbert. With g j
Illustration.^. Crown «Svo., 55.

RED DEER. — Natural History, by
the Rev. H. A. Macpherson ; Deer Stalk-
ing, by Cameron of Lochiel ; Stag
Hunting, by Viscount Ebrington ;
Cookery, by Alexander Innes Shand.
With 10 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 5s.

2HE SALMON, By the Hon. A. E.

Gathornk-IIahdy. With Chapters on the
Law of Salmon Fishing by Claud Douglas
Pennant; Cookery, by Alexander Innes
Shand. With 8 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 55.

THE TROUT, By the Marquess
OK Granby. W'ith Chapters on the Breed-
ing of Trout by Col. H. Custance ; and
Cookery, by Alexander Innes Shand.
With 12 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., jr.

THE RABBIT By Jamks Edmund

Harting. Cookery, by Alexander Innes
Shand. With 10 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 5.L

PIKE AND PERCH, By William
Senior I‘ Rcdspinner,’ Editor of the
‘ Field With Chapters by John Bicker-
dyke and W. H. Pope; Cookery, by
^ Alexa.nder Innes Shand. With 12 11 -
Uistrations. Crown Svo,, 5s.

Alverstone and Aicock. — Surrey

Cricket: its History and Associations.
Edited by the Right Hon. Lord Alvek-
STone, L.C.J., President, and C.W. Alcock,
Secretary, of the Surrey County Cricket
Club. With 48 IMustrations. iSvo., i6ji. net.

I

^Sekerdyke. — Dav^ of My Ijfe on
Water, Fresh .iav* Salt; and other
Papers. By John Bickerdyke, With
Photo-etching Frontispiece and 8 pull-page
niustrations. Crown Svo., 3s. 6il. ^

Blackburne. — Mr, Blackbi/rnks

Games at Chess, Selected, Annotated
and Arranged by Himself. Edited, with a
Biographical Sketch and a bri^ Hi.story of
Blindfold Chess, by P. Anderson Graham.
Witfi Portrait of Mr. Blackburne. 8vo.,
y$. 6d, net.

Dead Shot (The) : or. Sportsman’s
Complete Guide. Being a Treatise on the Use
of the Gun, w'ith Rudimentary and Finishing
Lessons in the Art of Shooting Game of aU
kinds. Also Game-driving, WildfoM t and
Pigeon-shooting, Dog- breaking, etc. By
Marksman. With numerous Illustrations.
Crown 8vo., itw. 6(/.

Ellis.— Sparks ; or, Short and
Bright Games of Chess. Collected and
Arranged by J. H. Ellis, M.A. Svo., 6d.

Folkard. — TV/a Wilo-Fowler : A
Treatise on Fowling, Ancient and Modern,
descriptive also of Decoys and Flight-p^ds,
Wild-fowl Shooting, Gunning-punts, Snoot-
ing-yachts, etc. Also Fowling in the Fens
and in Foreign Countries, Rock-fowling,
etc., etc., by H. C. Folkard. With 13 En-
gravings on Steel, and several W'oodcuts.
Svo., 125 . 6 d,

i6 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Sport and Pastime — continued.

Ford .-- Theory and Practice ;

OF Archery. By Horace Ford. New i
Edition, thoroughly Revised and Ke-written :
by W. Butt, M.A. With a Preface by C. i
J. LoNtiMAN, M.A. Svo., 14s.

I

Francis." Book on Angling: or, ,

Treatise on the Art of Fi.shing in every I
Branch; including full Illustrated ListofSal* •
mon Flies. By Francis Francis. With Por- ■
trait and Coloured Plates. Crown Svo., ;

Fremantle. — Tm< Book of the :
Rifle. By the Hon. T. F. Frem.antle, i
V.D.. Major, ist Bucks V,R.C. With 54 !
Plates and 107 Diagrams in the I'ext. .Svo.,
125 . (it/, net.

Gathorne - Hardy. -- Autumns in j

ArCYLFSHIRR lYlTIi ROD .iXD (iUN By ;
the Hon. A. P!. Gatiior\i;-Harl>v. With ;
S Photogravure IIlusiration.s hv Akchibai.d ,
Thoruurn. VO., 65. net. ' I

Graham .— Ctv - A ' Pasi/mes for :
Hoys. By P. Anderson Uraiiam. With I
252 Illustrations from Drawings and ;
Photographs. Cr. 8vo., gilt edge.s, 35. net. ;

Hutchinson.-— Book of Golf '.

AND OOLFKRS. By HORACK G. IlUTCHIN* \
So.v. With Contributions by Miss Amy I
Pascoe, H. H. HiJ/roN, J. H, Tavi.uk, H .'
J. Whigham, and Mes.^is. Suiton & Sons, j
With 71 Portraits from Photograph.s. Largeji
crown 8vo., gilt top. 75. net. i

Lang .— vi . v 67 ./ A ‘(; Sketches. J 3 y |

Andrew I..ang. With 20 Illustrations, j
Crown 8vo., 35. Gti. j

Lillie. Croouet up to Da te. Con- 1

taining the Ideas and Teachings pf the ;
Leading Players and Champions. BvAk- i
T iiUR I.ii.i.FE. With Contributions by ;
Lieut. -Col. the Hon. H. .N’ekdham, C. D. |
Locock, etc. U'itli ig Illustrations 115 ;
Portraits!, and numerous Diagram.^, 8va., j
los. 6r/. net. !

!

Locock. — Side and Screw > being .
Notes on the Theory and Practice of the ;
Game of Billiards. By C. 1). Locock.
W'ith Diagrams. Crown 8 vo., 55. net.

Longman .— O / iT-w Openings. By i

FREDERfcK W. Longman. Pep. 8 vo., 25. bd. '

Mackenzie . — NoTEii for Hunting '

Men, By Captain Cortj.andt Gordon ;
• Mackenzie. Crown Svo., 25. net. . !

Madden. — The Diary of Af aster
IV iLLiAM Silence a Study of Shakespeare
and of Ii)li2abethan S)>ort. By the Right
Hon. D. H, Madden, Vice-Chancellor of the
University of Dublin. 8vo., gilt top, 16s.

Maskelyne.— kS'//wa’as' and Flats: a
Complete Revelation of the Secrets ot
Cheating at Games of Chance and Skill. By
John Nevu. Maskelynk, of the Egyptian
Hall. With 62 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6.5.

Millais (JoH.\ GuiiJ.i ).

'The ITiLn-Fon ler in Scotland.
With a Fi ontispiece in Photogravure by
Sir J. E. Millais, Bart., P.R.A., 8 Phobu
griivnie Plates, 2 Coloured Plates and 50
illustrations from the Author's Drawings
and from Photographs. Royal 410., gilt
305. net.

The Aatural History of the

PtEinsii Screace • Ducks.

With f) Photogriivurcs and 66 Plates (41
in Colour.sf from Dravvings by the Author,
Archibald Thoriu kn, and from Photo-
graphs. Koval I to., cloth, gilt top, £6 6s.
net. »

Modern Bridge. — By ‘Slam’. With

a Reprint of the Laws of Bridge, a.siadoptcd
by the Portland and Turf Clubs. i8mo.,
gill edges. 35. f)d. net.

Park.- 'The Ga.me of Golf. By
W'lLLiAM Park, Jun., Champion Golfer,
1887-89. With 17 Plates and 26 Illustra-
tions in the*rext. Crown 8vo., ys. 6 <i.

Payne-Gallwey (Sir Ralph, Bart.).

The Csoss-Boif : its Hi.story,
Construction and Management. With
numerous Illustrations. Medium ^to.

Letters to Young Shooters (First
Series). On the ('hotce and use of a Gun.
With 41 Illustrations. Crown 8v6., 7s. 6rf.

Letters to Young SH ooTERsS{':Atco\'\^
Series). On the Production, Preservatfon,
and Killing of Game. With Directions
in Slv>oting Wood-Pigeons and Breaking'
, in Retrievers. • With Portrait and 103
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., e2j. liff.

Letters to Young Shoote:rs*
(Third Seriejs.) Comprising a Short
Natural History of the Wildfowl that
are Ra«e or Common to the British
Islands, with complete directions
Shooting Wildfowl on the Coast and
Inland. With 200 Illustrations. Crown
8vo., ^8 j.

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 17

Sport and J*astime—conitnuecl.

Pole .— TflEORYOF THE MODERN RonaldS. — InE FlY-FiSHER' S EnTO-
Scientific Game of IViust. By William mology. By Alfred Ronalds. With 20
Pole, F.R.S. Fcp. 8 vo., gilt edges, 25. net. coloured Plates. 8 vo., 14s.

Proctor. — How to Play Whist: Selous. — Sport and Travel^ East
WITH THE Laws and Etiquette of and West. By Frederick Courteney
Whist. By Richard A. Proctor. Crown Selou.s. With 18 Plates and 35 Illustra-
8 vo., gill edges, 35. net. * tions in the Text. Medium 8 vo., I2J. net.

Mental, Moral, and Political Philosophy.

LOOK, RHETORIC, PSYCHOLOGY, SK.

Abbott.— r///; Elements of Logic. I
By T. K. AniJOTT, B.D. lamo., 3s. ■

Aristotle. j

Tne. Ethics: Greek Text, Illustrated |
with Fssay and Notes. By Sir Alex an- \
DER Grant, Bart. 2 vols. 8vo.,^25. j

An iNTKOnUCTKUV TO AiaSTOTLIis]
Ethics. Books I.-IV. (Book X. c.vi.-ix. j
in an Appendix). With a continuous j
Analysis and Notes. By the Rev. E.
Moore, D.D. Crown Svo., loj. 6c/.

• I

Bacon (Tra.ncis). j

CoHPi.nTh: Works. Ivdited by R. L. |
Ellis, James Svkddino and D. D. |
Heath. 7 vols. .Svo., £3 13^. 6</. j

Letjers and Life, including all his
• occasional Works. Edited by Jamesl
Si'EDDING. 7 vols. Svo., ^4 45. *

7'he Essa ys : with Annotations. By
Richard Whately, D.D. 8vo., 10s. 6d.

7Vie E.ssAys : with Notes, By F.

Stork and C. H. Gihson. Cr. 8vo., 3J. 6c/.

The Essav::: with Introduction,
Notes, and Iddex. By E. A. Ahbott, D.D.

2 Vols. Fcp. 8 VO., f)S. The Text and Index
* only, without Introduction and Notes, in
^ One Volume. Fo^i. 8vo., zs. 6c/.

Bain (Alexander).

Mental Asfo Moral Science : a
Compendium of Psychology and Ethics.
Crown 8vo., los. 6c/.

Or separately,

Part 1 . Psychology and History of
Philosophy. Crown 6s. 6c/.

Part 1 1 . Thbor y of E thics and E nircAL
Systems, Crown 8vo., 45. 6c/.

Bain (Alkxand er)—

Logic. Part I. Deduction. Cr. 8vo.,
4J. Part II. Induction. Cr. 8vo., 65. 6d,

The Senses and the Intellect.

8vo., 155.

The Emotions and the Will..
8vo., 15s.

Practical Essa ys. Cr. 8 vo., 25.

«

Brooks. — The Elements of Mind :

being an Examination into the Nature of
the First Division of the Elementary Sub-
stances of Life. By H. Jamyn Brooks.
Svo., 105 . 6cf, net.

Crozier (John Beattie).

C/YiL/sATiON AND PROGRESS: being
the Outlines of a New System of Political,
Religious and Social Philosophy. 8vo.,i45.

ffi.STORV OF Intellectual Devel-
opment; on theLines of ModernE volution .

Vol. I. 8vo., 14.9.

Vol. 11 . [In preJ>aration.)

Vol. III. 8vo., 105 . 6 d.

Davidson. — The Logic of Defini-
tion, Explained and Applied. By William
L. Davidson, M.A. Crown 8vo., 65.

Green (Thomas Hill). — The Works
oif. Edited by R. L. Nettleship.

Vols. 1 . and II. Philosophical Works. Svo.
165. each.

Vol. 111 . Miscellanies. With Inde^tothe
three Volumes, and Memoir. 8vo., 21s.

Lectures on the Principles of
Political Obugat/on. With Pre&ce
by B£rnard>Bosanqu£T. 8 vo., 55.

id M&SSftS. LONGMANS it C6/S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Mental, Moral and Politieal Philosophy—

LOGIC, RHETORIC,

GurnhilL — The Morals of SurcivE.
By the Rev. J. Gurnhill. B.A. Vol. I.,
Crown 8vo., 55. net. Vol. 11 ., Crown 8vo.,
5s. net.

Hodgson (Shadworth H.).

Time and Space: A Metaphysical
Essay. 8vo., 165.

The Theory of Practice: an
Ethical Inquiry. 2 vols. 8vo., 245. j

The Philosophy of Reflection, |

2 vols. 8V0., 215 . I

The Metaphysic of Experience,
Book I. General Analysis of Experience ;
Book II. Positive Science; Book III.
Analysis of Conscious Action ; Book IV.
The Real Universe. 4 vols. 8vo., 365. net.

Hutne. — The Philosophica l Works
OF David Hume, Edited by T. H. Green
and T. H. Grose. 4 vols. 8vo., 285. Or :
separately, Essays. 2 vols. 145. Treatise:
OF Human Nature. 2 vols. 145.

Tames (William, M.D., LL.D.).

The Will to Beuf.ve^ and Other :
Essays in Popular Philosophy. Crown ;
8vo., 75. 6rf.

The Varieties of Religious Ex- ’
PSRIBXCB: a Study in Human Nature. ■
Being the Gifford Lectures on Natural
Religion delivered at Edinburgh in igot>
ig02. Svo., Via. net. ^

Justinian. — The Institutes of.
Justinian : Latin Text, chiefly that ol ;
Huschke, with English Introduction, Trans- i
lation, Notes, and Summary. By Thomas ;
C. Sandars, M.A. 8vo., 185.

i

Kant (Immanuel).

Critique of Practical Reason^ i
AND Other PVorks on the theory of \
Ethics. Translated by T. K. Abbott, .
B.D. With Memoir. 8vo., 125. 6d.

Fundamental Principles of the |
Metaphvs/c OF Ethics. Translated b> :
T. K. Abbott, B.D. Crown Svo, 35.

Introduction to LociCy and his !
Essay on the Mistaken Subultyoi j
THE Four Figures, Translated by T. j
K. Abbott. 8vo., 65

Kelly. — Government or Human !
Evolution, By Edmond Kelly, M.A., j
F.G.S. Vol. 1 . Justice. Crown 8vo., 75. 6</. j
net. Vol. 11 . Collectivism and Individualism. >
Crown Svo., 10s. 6 d. net '

PSYCHOLOGY, 6»C.

K i i 1 i c k. — Handbook to Mill's
System of Logic. By Rev. A. H.
Killick, M.A. Crown 8vo., 35* 6d.

Ladd (George Trumbull).

Philosophy of Conduct: a Treatise
of the Facts, Principles and Ideals of
Ethics. 8vo., 215 .

Elements of Physiological Psy-

CHOIXIGY. 8vo., 215 .

Outlines of Descriptive Psycho-
logy: a Text- Book of Mental Science for
Colleges and Normal Schools. 8vo., tSs.

Outlines of Physiological Psy-
chology. 8 V 0 ., 125 .

PrImer of Psychology, Cr. 8 vo.,

$5. 6d.

Lccky.— Map of Life: Con-
duct and Character. By William Edward
Hahtpole Lkcky. Crown 8vo., 55. net.

Lutoslawski.— 7 >/a: Origii^ *and
Growth of Plato's Logic, •With an
Account of Plato's Style and of the Chrono-
logy of his Writings. By Wincenty
Lutuslawski. 8 vo., 215.

Max M oiler (F.).

TheScienceofThought, 8vo., 21s.

The Six Systems of Indian Phil-
osophy. 8vo., 185.

Three Lectures on the Vedanta
Philosophy, Crown 8vo., 55.

•

Mill (John Stuart). *

A System of Logic. Cr. 8 vo.,

On LtRERTY, Crown 8 vo.,. 14*. 4 ^.

Considerations ojn Representa-
tive Govrrnm&et, Crown Svt*., 21.

Utilitarianism. 8vo., 2s. 6 r/.

Examinatio*n of Sir William
* H AM iLwiVs Philosophy. Svo., 165.

Nature^ the Utility of Religion^
AND Thhism, Three Essays. 8vo., 31*

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. <9

Mental, Mor i, and Political Philosophy—

LOGIC, RHETOKIC, PSYCHOLOGY, SC.

Mo nek. — Ajv Introduction to
Logic. My Wili.iam Hknry S. Monck,
M.A. Crown 8 vo., 55.

yiytTS. Human PuRsoxALr/r and

ITS SURlIVAt. OF JiODlI.V DKATH. Bv
F’rbdbkic W. H. Mybrs. > vols. 8vo.,
42$. net.

Pierce. — Studies in Avditorv and
Visual Space Perception: PZssays on
Experimental Psychology. By A. H.
Pierce. Crown 8vo., 65. td. net.

Richmond. — Tuf. Mind of a Child.

By Ennis Richmond. Cr. 8 vo., 3s. 6 (i. net.

Romanes. — Mind and Motion and
Monism. By Grokge John Romanes,
Cr. 8vo., 4s. td.

»

Sully *

/Lv Essay ox Laugh tfk : its
Forms, its Cause, it.s Development and \
its Value. Svo., 12s. f)d. net. j

I/fE Human Mind : a Text- book of ;

Psychology. 2 vols, 8vo., 215. i

Outlines^ OE PsiTi/owcy. Crown 1
8vo,, 95.

TNK*TEAC/iER\*i Handbook 6 f Psy-
chology. Crown 8 VO., 6 s. 6 d. i

Studies of Childhood. Svo. , 1 05.6d.
Children's Wavs: being Selections •
from the Author’s ‘ Studies of Childhood !

^ With 25 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 45. 6d. :

Sutherland. -- Thk Origin axl^.
Growth of the Moral Instinct. By ;
Alexander Sutherland, M.A. 2 vols. |
Svo., 281. j

Swinburne. — Picture Logic : an
Attempt to Popularise the Science of ;
Reasoning. By Alfred James Swinburne, j
M.A. With 23 Woodcuts. Cr. Svo., 25 . 6(/. I

Thomas. — Intuitive Suggestion.

By J. W. Thomas, Author of ‘ Spiritual Daw
in the Natural World,' etc. Crown 8vo.,
35. tnl. net.

Webb. —The Veil of Isis ; a Series

of Essays on Idealism. By Thomas E.
Webb, Ll. I)., Q.C. 8vo., los. 6 d.

Weber. — History of Philosophy.
By Alfred Weber. Professor in the Uni •
versity of Strasburg. Translated by Fran K
Thilly, Ph.D. 8vo., i 6 s.

Whately (Archbishop).

Bacon's Essays. With Annotations.
8vo., 105 . 6 d.

Elements of Logic. Cr. 8vo., 4s. 6(1.

. Elements of Rhetoric. Cr. 8vo.,

45. 6 d.

Zeller (Dr. Edward),

The Sro/esy EpiVUREANSy and
Sceptics. Translated by the Rev. O. J.
Rrichel, .M.A. Crown 8vo., 155.

Outlines of the History oe
Greek Philosophy. Translated by
Sarah F. Ali.ryne and Evelyn Abbott,
M.A., I.T.. 1 ). Crown 8vo., 105. 6 d.

Plato and the Older Academy.
Translated by Sarah F. Alleyns and
Alfred Goodwin, B.A. Crown 8vo., 185.

Socrates and the Socratk
Schools. Translated by the Rev. O.
J. Reichel, M.A. Crown 8vo., los. 6 d.

Aristotle AND the Earlier Peri*
patetics. Translated by B. F. C. Cos-
telloe, M.A., and J. H. Muirhkad,
M.A. 2 vols. Crown 8vo., 245.

STONYIIURST PHILOSOPHICAL SERIES.

A * Manual of Political Economy.
By C. S. Devas, M.A. Crown 8vo., 75. 6A.

First ^Principles ^of Knowledge.
JBy^OHN Rickaby, S.J. Crown 8vo., 55.

General METAniyiPics. By John
Rickaby, S.J. Crown 8vo., 55. ,

$ •

Logic. By Richard F. Clarke, S.J,
Crown 8vo.,

Moral Philosophy {Ethics .iNi)
Haturai. Law). By Jo.sf.ph Rickaby, S.J.
CrowA 8vo., 55.

Natural Theology. By Bernard
Boeddkr, S.J. Crown 8vo., 6s. 6 d. ^

Psychology. By Michael Maher,
S.J., D.Litt., M.A. (Lend.). Cr. 8vo., 65. 6 d.

M MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

History and Seienoe of Language, &6.

Davidson.— and Import-
ant English Words ; Explained and Ex-
emplified. By William L. Davidson,
M.A. Fcp. Svo., 35. 6(/.

Farrar. — Language andLaa^guages.

By F. W. Farrar, D.D., Dean of Canter-
bury. Crown 8vo., 6j.

Graham.— £ngl/sh Svnonvms,
Classified and Explained: with Practical
Exercises. By G, F, Graham. Fcp. 8vo., 6 s,

Max Mtiller (F.).

T//£ Sc/£XCJ! of LaUGVACR. 2 VOls. !
Crown 8 VO., loi.

Max Muller (F.) — contiuued
Biographies oh IVords^ and the
Home of thf. Crowm 8vo., 5s.
Chips from a German' Workshop,
Vol. HI. Essavs ox Language and
Literatukh. Crown Svo., 5s.

Last Essays, First Series. Essays
on I,anj;u:.ij^e, Folk-lore and other Sub-
jects. Crown .Svo.. 5s.

'^Ogtt.— THESAIRVS OF ENGLISH
IFoa’A'? axd Phrases. Cl.is.sified and
Arranged so as to Facilitate the Expression
of Idea.s and assist in Eiterarv Composition.

! By Pkikk Mark Rogki^'M.T:)., F.R.S.
With full Index. Crown .Svc., rji. net.

Political Economy and Economics.

Ashley (W. J.). I Ma^eod (Hi.nry Di nning ) — ionfiL

i:£( 7 !.is/f JEco.yom/c N/sroxy A.vi>\ Thk Thkorv of Crf.dii\ 8vo.

In 1 Vol., 30.S. net; or separately, Vol.
I., T£w. net. 11 ., Part I., io.v. net.

Vol II., Part II. IO.S. net.

Indian Currency. -Svo., is, 6 ii. net.

Theory. Crown 8vo., Part I., 55,
II., 105 . 6 d,

Part

SURPEVSt IffSTOR/C AND EcONO.yiC. |
Crown Svo., 95. net. j

BaKthot.—EcoKOMic Studies. % 1 Mill.— /' o /./ ac '.!/. £co.\om\ , By
WALTER Bag E HOT. Crown Svo., 35, 6£/. John Sti akt Mri.r.. Popidar KdUhn. Cr.

Svo.,35.f«/. Library EdUion. :i vols. 8vo.,305.

Barnett.— SoctAUSAf: Mulhall.— /v/’rs 7 /,'//;A and Whalth
Essays on Social Reform. By Samuui. A. ; of Natiors. By Mii.haki, G. Mumiam.,
and Henkietta Barnett. Crown Svo., p.S.s. V\ iih 5:; Diagrams, Cr. Svo., Sj’. 6rf.

Devas. — A Manual of Political
Economy, By C. S. Devas, M.A. Cr. Svo.,
75. 6 d. (Stonyhurst Philosophical Strics,)

Laurence. — Luca l V a ria tions in \
Wages, By F. W. Lawkexck, M.A. With
Index and i8 Maps and Diagrams. 410., 85,6//. |

i

I

Leslie.— -£55*^ F 5 ON Political Eco- \
NOMY, By T, E. Cliffe Lesli}?,, Hon. :
LL.D., Dubl. 8 vo., 105. 6 d, \

Macleod (Henry Dunning). i

BitMKTALLtSM, 8vO., 5.S. net, I

The Elements of Banking, Cr. i,

8vo., 3s. 6rf.

The Theory and Practice of
BANE iNG. Vol. 1 . Svo., 125 . Vol. II. I45.

•

I Symes. — I'o/.itical Economy : a

I Short Text-book of Political Economy.
; With Problems for Solution, Hints for
I Supplementary Reading, and a Supple-
ment.Try Chapter on Socialism. By j. E.
Symks, M.A. Crown 8vo., 25. 6</.

Toynbee. — Lectures on t{ie In
DUSTRfAL Revolution of the ISth Cb^
TURY /.V Exgla.wd^, By Arnold Toynbee.
8vo., 105 . 6 d. •

Webb ^Sidney and Beatrice).

The History of Trade Ui^ionism.
With Map and Bibliography. 8vo., 75. 6 A,
net.

t

Industrial Democracy i a Study
in Trad§ Unionism. 2 vols. 8vo., I 3 S. net.

Problems of Modern Industry

8vo., 35. net.

21

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.*S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Evolution, Anthropology, &e.

Avebury. — TV/ a* Origin of C utilisa-
tion^ and the Primitive Condition of Man.
By the Right Hon. Lord Avehurv. With
f) Plates and 20 Illustrations. 8vo., iHs.

Clodd (EnwAKD).

The Story of Creation: a Plain :
Account of Evolution. With 77 Illustra*
tions. Crown 8vo., 31. 6d.

A Primer of Evolution : being a
Popular Abridged Edition of ‘ The Story
of Creation With Illustrations. Fcp. !
8vo., li. bd.

Packard.-'-//! the Pounder
OF Efolution: his Life and Work, with •
« 1 ranslations of his Writings on Organic'
Evolution. By Alphkl’s S. Packarij,
M.I)., l.L.D. With 10 Portrait and other
n lustrations. I.argc Crown 8vo., 9s. net.

The Scieiice of

Balfour. — The Pound at ions of
HeurF : being Notes Introductory to the
Study of Theology. By the Right Hon.
Arthur James Bai.four. Cr. Svo., 6.«. net.

Baring-Gould. — The Or/gin and
DEVELormNi of Rrugiovs Hhuef,
B^' file Rev. S. BAKiNCi-Govi.n. •» vols.
Croi^n Svo., 35. bd, each.

Campbell. — Peligion in Greek Li

TERaTURE. By the Rev. Lkw is Camphki.i,,
M.A., LL.l), 8vo., 13s.

Daividson. -TV/a/am/, as Grounded ir^
Human Nature, Historically and Critically
Handled. Being the Burnett Lectures
lor 1892 and 1893, delivered at Alierdeen.
By W. L, Davidson, M.A., LL.D, Svo., 15s,

James.— V// A- VAKiHrms w A'a-

UGIOUS lixPEKfF.Ki li : a Study in Human
Nature. Being the Gifford I.ectures on
Natural Religion delivered at Edinburgh in
1901- J902. By Wn.i.iAM Jamks, LL.l).,
etc.* 8vo., I2S. net.

Lang (Andrew). ^

Magic AND Religion, Svo., io.s. fvf. !

Custom and Myth: Studies of
Early jLJsag«, and Belief.* W’ith 15
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 31. bd*

Mvth^ Ritual^ and Religion, 2

vols. Crown 8 vo., ^5:

Modern Mythology ; a Reply to
Professor Max Miiller. 8fo., 9s.

The Making OF Religion, Cr.Svo., •

net, !

Romanes (George John).

Essays, l^d. by C. Lloyd Morgan*.
Cro.vn 8vo., 5s. net.

An Examination of Weismann-
ism. Crown 8vo., 6s.

Darwin, and after Darwin: an
Hxpo.sition of the Darwinian Theory, and a
Discussion on Post- Darwinian Questions.
Part L The Darwinian Theory. With
Portrait ol Darwin and 125 Illustrations.
Crown 8vo., lor. bd.

Part IL Post- Darwinian Questions:
Heredity and Utility. With Portrait of
the Author and 5 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo.,
10s. bd.

Part III. Post-Darwinian Questions!
Isolation and Physiological Selection.
Crown 8vo,, 5s.

Religion, &c.

Leighton. — Tyfd ai. Modern Con-

r.KrnoNS OF Cl on; or, Tlu; Absolute of
(icitnan Koinanlic Idcali.sni .ind of English
Evolutionary y\gnosticIsm. By Joseph
.Xi i XANDER LrioHTON, ProffSsor of Philo-
sophy in Hobart College, L’.S. Crown Svo.,
js. bd. net.

Max Muller (The Right Hon. F.).

Cinrs FROM A German Works hop.
Vol. IV. E.ssays on Mythology and Folk-
lore. Crown Svo., 3s.

The* Sl\ .Systems of Jnd/an

PUILOSOFUV. Svo., r8s.

CoNTRIBUnONS H) THE SCIENCE OF

MvTf/ni.OGy. 2 vols. Svo., 32^.

TV/a Origin and Growth ofJ^eu
aios, as illustrated by the Religions of
India. The Hibbert Lectures, delivered
at the Chapter House, Westminster
.'\bbey, in 187 8. Crown 8vo., 55.

Introduction to the S ience of
Kkugiok : Four Lectures delivered at the
Royal Institution. Crown 8vo., 35.

Natural Religion. The Gifford
Lectures, delivered before the University
of Glasgow in i8j8S. Crown 8vo.f5i.

Physical Religion, The Gifford
Lectures, delivered before the University
of Glasgow it) 1890. Crown 8vo., 5$.

2 » MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.-

The Soienoe of Religion, &e. —continued.

Max Muller (The Right Hon. K.)— . Oakesmith. — The Religion of

continued, |

Anthropological Religion, The j
Gi(Tord Lectures, delivered before the Uni-
versity of Glasgow in 1891. Cr. 8vo., 55.

Theosophy, or Psychoijxhcal Re-
ligion. The Gifford Lectures, delivered
before the University of Glasgow in 1892.
Crown 8vo., 55.

Three Lectures on the VedAnta
Philosophy, delivered at the Royal I
Institution in March, 1894. Cr. 8vo., 55.

Last Essays. Second Series —

Essays on the Science ol Religion.
Crown 8vo., 5s.

Plutarch: a Pagan Creed of Apostolic
Time.s. An Essay, By John Oakickmtth ,
D.Litt., M.A. Crown 8vo., 55. net.

Wood-Martin (W. G.).

Traces op the Elder Fah'hs oe
Ireland : a Folk-lore Sketch. A Hand-
book of Irish Pre-Christian Traditions.
With 192 Illustrations. 2 vols. 8vo.,
301. net.

Pagan Ireland : an Archseological
I Sketch. A Handbook of Irish Pre-

i Christian Antiquities. With 312 Ulus-

! tratioAs. 8vo., 15s.

Classical Literature, Translations, &e.

Abbott.— /r^//A’A7C4. A Collection

of Essays on Greek Poetry, Philosophy,
History, and Religion. Edited by Evelyn
Abkott, M.A., LL.I). Crown Svo., 7J. 6<f.

iGsehylus. — Eumenides of /Eschy'

lus. With Metrical English Translation.

By J. F. Davies. 8vo., yi.

Aristophanes. — The A cha rnia ns

op ARtsroPHANES, translated into English

Verse. By R. Y. T ykkki.l. Crown Svo., is.

Becker (W. A.), Translated ^by the

Rev. F. Metcalfe, B.D.

Gallus : or, Roman Scenes in the
Time of Augustus. With Notes and Ex-
cursuses. With 26 Illustrations. Crown
8vp., 35. 6d.

Charjcles: or, Illustrations ot the
Private Life of the Ancient Greeks.
With Notes and Excursuses. With 26
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. fid.

Campbell. — Religion in Gref^k Li-

TERATURE. By the Rev. Lewis Campbell,
M.A., LL.D., Emeritus Professor of Greek,
University of St. Andrews. 8vo., 15J.

%

Cicero. — CicERds Correspondence,
By R. Y. Tvrrell. Vols. L, IL, III., 8vo.,
each i2s. Vol. IV., 154. Vol. V., 145.
Voh VI., 125 . Vol. vnr index, 75. 6rf.

Harvard Studies in Classical

Philology. Edited by Comniittec of the
Classical Instructors of I harvard University.
Vols. .\I., 1900; Xll., iqoi ; XflL, 1902.
Svo., 6s, 6ii. net each.

Hime* — Li-cian, the Syria.n SA^
TiRJsr. By Lieul.-Col. Hbnrv W. L?H3me,
(late) Royal Ariillerv. Svo., 55. net,*

Homer.— 7 >/a Ody.ssev op Hompr.

Done into English Verse. By William
/ Morris. Crow'n 8vo., 5s. net.

Horace. — The IVorrs of Horace,

RENDERED INTO ENGLISH PROSE. With
Life, Introduction and Notes. By William
C ouTTS, M.A. Crown 8vo., 55. net.

Homer AND PUR Epic, By
Andrew Lano. Crow-n 8vo,, 95. net.

Lucian. — Translations frOm
Lucian. By Augusta M. Campbell
Davidso#!. M.A. Edin. Crown Svo., 55. net.

a • .* .

t

Ogilvie. — Horae Latinae: Studies

m Synonyms and Syntax. By the late
Rr>BERT OfiiLViE,*M.A., LL.I)., H.M. Chid
• Inspector oL Schools for Scotland. MUed
by Alexander Souter, M.A. With a
Memoir by Joseph Ogilvie, M.A., LL.Di
8vo., 125 . 6d, net.

MESSRS.. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 43

Clftssioftl LitoF&turo, Trftnsl&tions, &c. — continued.

Virgil — continued.

Rich. — A Dictionary OF Roman ATfD
Grbrk Antiquitirs- By A. Rich, B.A.
With 2000 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo., 65. net. .

Sophocles. — Translated into English ;

Verse. By Rob£kt Whitelaw, M.A.,
Assistant Master in Rugby School. Cr. 8vo.,
8s. 6d,

Tyrrell. — Dublin Transla tions ■
INTO Greek and Latin Verse. Edited
by R. Y. Tyrrell. 8vo., 6j.

Virgil. •

• The Poems of Virgil. I'ranslatcil
into English Prose by John Conington.
Crown 8vo., 6s.

The /Eneid of Virgil, Translated
into English Verse by John Conington.
Crown 8vo., 6s.

The ALneids of Virgil. Done into
English Verse. By William Morris.
Crown 8 VO., 5s. net.

The Anew of Virgil^ freely trans-
lated into English Blank Verse. By
W. J. Thornhill. Crown 8vo., 6s. net.

The Anew of Virgil. Translated
into English Verse by James Rhoades.
Books I. -VI. Crown 8vo., 5s.

Books VII.-XII. Crown 8vo., 5s.

The Eclogues and Gkorgics of
Virgil. Translated into English Prose
by J. W. Mackail, Pellow of Balliol
College, Oxford. i6mo., 5s.

‘ Wilkins. — The Growth of the
Homeric Poems. By G. Wilkins. 8 vo.,6i.

Poetry and the Drama,

tvciioXA, — The Light OF the World:
or, I'he Great Consummation. By Sir
Edwin Arnold. With 14 Illustrations
after Holman Hunt. Crown 8vo., 5s. net.

Bell (Mrs. Hugh).

Chamber Comedies : a Collection !
of Plays and Monologues for the Drawing i
Room. Crown 8vo., 51. net. j

. i

Fairy Talf* Plays, and How to\
AtT Them. With gi Diagrams and 52 I
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. net. 2
•

Rumpelstjlt/kin : a FairyJjPlay in I
Five Scenes (Characters, 7 Male; 1 Fe- ’
male). .Fro|a ‘ F^iry Tale ‘^Plays and
Hjjw to *Act Them *. With Illustratfons,
Diagrams and Music. Cr. 8vo., sewed, 6<t,

Bird. ^Ronalds Farhwell, anil
other Verses. By George Bird, M.A.,
Vicar of Bradwell, Derbyshire. Fcp. 8vo.,
4S« Od. net.

Dabney. — The Musical Basis of
Verse: a Scientific Study of the Prin-
ciples of Poetic Composition. By J. P.
Dabney. Crown 8vo., 6j. 6d. net.

Ingelow Oean).

PoF.TicAt. Works. Complete in
One Volume. Crown 8vo., gilt top, 6s. net.

Lyrical and other Poems. Selec-
ted from the Writings of Jean Ingelow.
Fcp. 8vo., 2s. 6d, cloth plain, 35. clqjth gilt.

Keary. — The Brothers: a Fairy
Masque. By C. V. Kearv. Cr. 8vo., net.

Lang (Andrew).

Grass of Parna,ssus. Fcp, 8vo.,

25 . 6 d . net.

The Blue Poetry Boon. Edited
by Andrew Lang, With 100 Illustrations.
Crown 8vo., gilt edges, 65.

Lecky. -PoEJ^s. I3y the Right Hon,

W. E. H. Leuky. Fcp. 8vo., 55.

as MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS

Poetiy juid the

Lytton (The Earl of), (Owen j

Meredith). 1

j

TV//-: Wanderer. Cr. 8vo., ioj. 6(/. [

i

Lucile. Crown Svo,, lo.^. bd. I

!

Selecj'ed roEAfs* Cr. 8vo., i05. 6d. I

Macaulay. - - )'.v orAsW/en r a*ome, !

iv/rH * I VRV' AND ‘ Thu sArmada By j
Lord Macaulay.

Illustrated by G. Schaki'. Fcp. 410.. icat. 6rf.

Bijou Iiditton.

z8ino., 2s. 6^/. gilt top.

— Popular Ldition. j

Fcp. .|lo., fid. bcwed, is. cloth.

Illustrated by J. R. Weguklln. Crown 1
8vo.. 3J. net. ;

« !
Annotated Edition. Fcp. 8vo., is. sewed, j
IS. 6d. cloth. I

MacDonald. — A BooRtiE Str/ee, in ■

THE FORM OF THE U/AKY OF AN OlD \
Soul: Poems. By GEORCii: M.xcUonald,
LL.I). iSnio., 6s.

Morris (Wu-uam). .

POETICAL WORKS -Library Kditiu.n. :
CompIeTe in ii volumes. Crown 8vo.,
price 55. net each.

f/iE Earthly PARAimK. 4 vols.
Crown 8vo., 5s. net each.

The Lift: and Dea th of Jason, j
Crown 8vo., 55. net. |

The Deeenue of GuKNEviiRE^ and i
other Poems. Crown 8vo., 55. net.

The Story OF Sigurd THE Volsung., •
^ AND The Fall qp the Niblungs. Cr. ■
8vo., 5s. net.

i

PoEm BY THE li'AYy AND LOEE IS ;
BnoVOH. Crown 8vo., 5s. net.

c

Drama — continued.

Morris (William) — continued.

The Odyssey of Homer. Done
into English Verse. Crown 8vo., 55. net.

The /Eneids of Virgil, Done
into English Verse. Crown 8vo., 5s, net

The Tale of Beowulf^ sometime
King of tub Folk of the W bdergbai's.
Translated by Wili.iam Mokrks and A.
J. Wyatt. Crown 8vo., 5s. net.

Certain of the Poetical Works may also be
had in the following Editions : —

The ^Earthly Paradise.

Popular PMition, 5 vols. i2mo., 255. ;
or 55. each, sold separately.

The same in Ten Parts, 255.; or 2s. 6</*
* each, sold separately.

Cheap Edition, in i vol. Crown Hvo.,
bs. net.

Poems by the Way, Square crown
8vo., 6 j.

*** For Mr. William Mdrris's other
Works, .see pp. 27, 28, 37 an^

Morte Arthur: an Alliterative Poem

of the F'ourtcenth Century. Edited from
the Thornton .MS., with Introduction,
Notes and Glossary, By Mary MacLeod
Banks. Fcp. 8vo., 3^. bd.

Nesbit. — La ys and Legends. By E.
Nesbit (Mrs. Hubert Bland), First
Series. Crown 8vo., 35. bd. Second Series.
With Poruait. Crown 8vo., 55.

Ramal.— .!>’aw.v of K'hildhood. By
Wai.ter Ramal. With a Frontispiece
from a Drawing by Richard Doyle, Fepi*
8vo., 35. bd. net. t

*

Rileyr — Old Fashioned Roses:
♦Poems. By James .•Wur/LOiMB Riley.
i2mo., gilt top, 5s. t

Romanes.—/^ Selection from the
Poems op George you.w Romanes^
LL.D.a F.K*E. With an Introduction by
T. Herbert Warren, President of Mag
dalen College, Oxford. Crown 8vo., 41. 6d.

f

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 25

Poetry and the Drama—

Savage-Armstrong.— ov?

DOJVX. liy G. 1 '. SAVAGE-ARMSTKtJNG,
M.A., D.Litt. Crown 8vo., 7s. 6//.

^Shakespeare.

Bowdler’s Family Shaeespearb.

Willi 36 Woodcuts. I vol. 8vo., 14s.
Or in 6 vols. Fcp. 8vo., 21s.

The Sit a keseea kr Bir tiida v Book.
By Mary F. Uunbar. 32100., is. 6rf.

I

Stevenson. — 4 Child's Gardek of
Versus. By Robert Lt)uis Stevenson.
Vcp. 8vo., gilt top, 35, ^

Wagner. NlBIiLu^r;E^^ Ring.

Done into Bnglish Verse by Reginald
Rankin, B.A., of the Inner Temple, Barris-
ter-at-Law.

Vol. 1 . Rhine Gold, The Valkyrie. Fcp.
8vo., gilt top, 4.?. (ui.

Vol. II. Sicgfiied, The Twilight of th
(iods. h'cp. 8vo., gill top, 4s. 6rf.

Fiction, Humour, &6.

Anstey (F.). *

Foces PoruLt. (Reprinted from

‘Punch ’.)

First Series. With 20 Illustrations by J.
Bernard Paktridok. Cr. 8vo., gilt
top, 3s. net.

Second Series. With 23 Illustrations by J.

, liERNARD P.VRTKIDGE. Cr. 8vo., gill top,
.«• «et.

The Man erom Blanklev's^ and

other Sketches. (Reprinted from ‘ Punch *.)
With 25 Illustraiions by J. Bernard
Partridge. Cr. 8vo., gilt top, 35. net.

Bailey . — Mv Lady oe ^Orange : a

Romance of the Netherlands in the Days of
.\lva. By H. C. Baii.lv. With 8 Illustra-
tions. Crown 8vo.. 65.

Beaconsfield (The Earl of).

Novels anh Tales. Complete

in *11 vols. Crown Svo., is. 6d. each, or
* in .sets, 11 vols., gilt top, 155. net.

Vivian Grey. 'Sybil.

The Young Duke, etc. Henrietta Temple.
Alroy, Ixion, etc. Venetia.

Oontarini Fleimng, Cooingsbyl
etc. * ' Lothair. •

Tancred. Endymion,

A^oi'els and Tales. T'he HugH'-
ENPK.y Edition. With 2 Portraits and
II Vignettes, n vols. Crpvvn 8vo., ^24. '■

Bottome.' ~Liee^ the Interpreter. ;
By Phvllis B0TT0.ME. Crown Svo., fw.

4

Churchill. —.V WROLA : a Tale of the

Revolution in Laurania. By Winston
Spencer Chuhchili., M.P. Cr. 8vo.. fir.

Crawford. — The AuroniocRAPHY of
A Thamf. By J. n. Crawford. With a
Photogravure Frontispiece ‘ The Vagrants,’
by Fred. Walker, and 8 other lilustra-
tion.*;. Crown 8vo., 5s, net.

Creed. — The ricAR of St.

By Sibyl Creed. Crown 8vo., 65.

Davenport. — Jyy the Ramparts oe

JE^RF^:L : a Romance of Jehu, King of
Israel. By .\kx()Ld Davenport. VViih
Frontispiece by 1 -.v\cei.()t Speed. Crown
Svo., 65.

Dougall. — Beggars All. By L.

Dodgall. Crown Svo., 3.5. fir/. •

Doyle (Sir A. Conan).

Micah Clarke: A Tale ol Mon-
mouth’s Rebellion. With lo Illustra-
tions. Cr. Svo., 3s. 6rf.

•

The Reevgees: A Tale of the
Huguenots. With 25 Illustrations. Cr.
8vo., 3J. 6</.

■9

The Stark MifNRO Letters. Cr .

8vo., 3i. td.

The CAPTAi^t OF the Polrstar^

and other Tales. Cr- 8vo,, 35, 6rf.

a 6 MEiSSKS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Fiction, Humour, &Q.-^oniinueei.

Dyson. — Gold Stealeks : a

Story of Waddy. By Edward Dvson,
Author of ‘Rhymes from the Mines,’ etc.
Crown 8vo., 6 s.

Farrar (F. W\, Dean of Canter-
bury).

Darkness and Dawn: or, Scenes !
in the Days of Nero. An Historic Tale.
Cr. 8vo., gilt top, 6 s. net.

Gathering Clouds ; a Tale of the
Days of St. Chrysostom. Cr. 8vo., gilt
top, 65. net. i

Fowler (Edith H.). '

The KiJi'.vc Pretesders. A Story
of Child Life. With 12 Illustrations by ;
Sir PHiLTf BuiJNE-JoNF.s, Bart. Crown
8vo., fw.

The Professor's Children. With .
24 Illustrations by Ethf.i. Kate Burgess. •
Crown Bvo., 65.

Francis (M. K.).

Fiander s Widow. Cr. 8vo,, 6.^.

«

Yeoman Fleetwood. With Fron- ■
tispiece. Crown 8vo., 3s. net.

Pastorals of Dorset With 8 •

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 65.

The Manor Farm. With Frontis- .
piece by Claud C. di.j Prh Coofer,
Crown 8vo., 6s.

Froude. — The Two Chiefs of Dun- \

BOY: an Irish Komanceofthe Last Century. ;
By James A. Froude. Ct. 8vo., 55. 6 tl. |

s

G}xrAor\,—MEMOR/Es and Fancles : i
Suffolk Talcs and other Stories ; Fairy
Legends; Poems; Miscellaneous Articles.
By the late Lady Cam 11.1/ Gurdon. Cr.
8vo., 55. r

.■ t... '

: Haggard (H. Rider).

Allan Quatermain. With 3*
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., jr. 6 d.

Allan's W/fr. With 34 Illustra-
tions. Crown 8vo., 35. 6 d.

Beatrice. With Frontispiece and
Vignette. Crown 8vo., 35. 6 d.

Black Heart and White Heart^

AND OTHRR Si OKIES . W’ith 33 Illustra-
tions. Crown 8vo., 35. 6 d.

\

Cleoi\<tra. With 29 Illustrationa.
Crowm 8vo., 35. 6 d.

Colonel Quaritch^ V.C. With

Frontispiece and Vignette. Cr. 8vo., 3*. 6 d..

Dawn. With 16 Illustrations. Cr.
8vo., 3s. 6 d.

Dr. Therne. Crown 8vo., 35. bd..

Eric Brightryes. With 51 Illus-
tration*^. Crown 8vo., 35. 6 d. * ,

Heart of the World. With 15
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. 6 d.

Joan Haste. With 20 Illustrations.
Crown 8vo., 35. 6 d. ,

Lyst.eth. With 26 Illustrations^

Crown 8 VO., 6s.

Maiwa's Revenge^ Cr. 8vo., 15.

Montezuma's Daughter. With 24
Illustrations. Crown 8vo. , 35. 6 d.

Mr. Merson's Wiel. With 16

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6 d. «

Nada thk Lily.^ With 23 Illustra- ^
tions. Crown 8vo., y. 6 d. •

.She. With 32 Illustrations. Crown

8vo., 3/ 6 d. r , V. ,

Swallow : a Taleof the Great ‘frek.
With 8 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. 6 d^

The People of the Mist. With
* 16 lllustraiions. Crown 8vo.', 35.

The Witch's Head. With 16

niUBtrations. Crown 8vo.^ 35. tkf.

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. a?

Fietion. Humour. &r.— continued.

Haggard and l.aiXig.—THsWoRi.ds

Desire. 13 y H. Rider Haggard and
Andrew Lang. With 27 lllastrations.
Crown 8vo., 3s. 6(/.

Harte. — the Carqvinez Woods.
By Bret Harte. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6t{

Hope. — The Heart of Princess

OsRA. By Anthonv Hope. With g Illus-
trations. Crown Svo., 35. 6r/.

Howard. — The Failure of Success.

By Ladv Mahel Howard. ClDwn 8vo.,

,6r.

Marchmont. — In the Name of a

Woman: a Romance. By Arthur W.
Marchmont. With 8 Illustrations. Crown
8vo., 6s.

Mason and Lang. - Parson Kelly.

By A. E. W. Mason and Andrew Lang.
Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.

Max Muller. — Deutsche Liebe

\fjERMAN l.oi'E) : Fragments from the
Papers of an Alien. Collected by F. Max
Muller. Translated from the German by
G. A. M. Crown 8vo., gilt top, 5s.

Hutchinson. — A Friend op Nelson. \

Bv Hou.\ck G. Hutchinson. Cr. 8\o., 6s. j

i

itxomt,— S ketches in Lavender :\
Hlub and Green. By Jerome K . Jerome, 1
Author of ‘ Three Men in a Boat,’ etc. i
Crown 8vo., 3s. 6rf. j

Joyce.— Celtic Romances, j

'I^vt^ve of the most beautiful of the Ancient i
Irish Romantic Tales. Translated from the ;
‘Gaelic. By P. W. Joyce, LL.D. Crown j
8vo., 35. (>t1. !

Melville (G. J. Whyte).

The Gladiators.

The Interpreter.
Good for Nothing.
The Queen’s Maries.

Crown 8vo., i

Holmby Plouse.
Kate Coventry.
Digby Grand.
General Bounce.

1. each.

Merriman.— /xoy'AVjjf •• A Story of
the Indian Mutiny. By Henry Seton
Merriman. With Frontispiece and Vig-
nette by H. G. Mas.se Y. Cr. 8vo., 3J. 6</.

Lang (Andrhw). *

Ji Monk of Fife ; a Story of thA;
Days of Joan of Arc. '^'ith 13 illustra- •
tions by Selwyn Image. Crown 8vo.,
3s. 6J.

Morris (William).

The ^Sundering Flood. Cr. 8vo.,
75 . hii.

The Disentanglers. With 7
Full'page Illustrations by H. J. Ford,
Crown 8vo., 6s,

Lyall (Edna).*

• The Hinderers. Crown 8 vo., 25. 6 f /. .

* The Autobiography OF A Slander. :
Fcp. 8 vom is. sewed.

Presentation Edition. With, ao Illustra- ;
tionp> byH..ANC2i-OT Speed. Qrown i
*8vo., 2s. 6(i. net.

Dorsen. llic Story of a Singer, i
Crown 8vo., 6 j. |

Wayfaring Men. Crpwn 8vo,, 6 s . ;

{

Hope the Hermit : a Romance of i

filorrowdale. Crown 8vo., 61. !

The Water of the Wondrous
Isles. Crown 8vo., 7s. 6<f.

The Well .at the IVoRLp.i End.
2 vols. 8vo., 28s.

The Wood PEri>ND the World.

Crown 8\'0., 6.v.*net.

The Story of the Glittering
Plain, which has been also called The
Land of the Living Men, or The Acre of
the Undying. Square post 8vo., 55. net.

The Roots of the MouN^AiNSy
wherein is told siomewhat of th^ Lives of
the Men of Burgdale, their Friends, their
Neighbours, their Foemen, and their
Fellows-in-Arms. Written in Prose and
Verse. Square crown 8vo., 8s.

38 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Fiction, Humour, continued.
Morris (William) — continued, . Sewell (Elizabeth M.).

A Tale of the House of the \
WoLFlKGS^ and all the Kindreds of the !
Mark. Written in Prose and Verse. ;
Square crown Svo., 6j.

A Dream of John Ball^ and a ■
A’/a'c’s Lesson. i6mo., 2s. net.

A Glimpse of the World.

Laneton Parsonage.

Margaret Percival.

Katharine Ashton.

The Earl’s Daughter.

The Experience of Life.

Cr. Svo., cloth plain, is. 6d. each. Cloth'
extra, gilt edges, 25. 6d. each.

Amy Herbert
Cleve Hall. ^
Gertrude,
Home Life.
Alter Life.
Ursula. Ivors.

Neu's from Nowhere ; or, An

Epoch of Rest. Being some Chapters ; SheotlAn. — LUKE DelmKOE. By
from an Utopian Romance. Post Svo., : the Rev. P. A. Shkkhan, P.P., Author of

iJ. ‘ My ^’e\v Curate'. Crown 8vo., §J.

Somerville (K. Oi.) and Ross

The STosyoi-GRETTiR the Strohg.
Translated from the Icelandic by Hirikr •
Macnusson and Wii.liam Morris. Cr.
Svo., 5f. net.

Three Northern Love B/vr/es,
AND Other Tales. Translated from the
Icelandic by IEirikr Magnvsson and
William Morris. Crown Svo., 6s. net. •

*** For Mr. William Morris's other
Works, see pp. 24, 37 and 40.

Newman (Cardinal).

Loss AND Ga/n:
Convert.

(Martin).

f

Some Enterjences of an iMiSH
R.M. With 31 Illustrations by E, (FL
SoMF.RViLLK. Crovvn Svo,, 6r.

The Real Charlotte. Crowa
Svo., 35. 6(i. ^

The Silver Fox. Cr. 8vo., '35.*

I.

Stebbing. — Rachel IVulfstan, and
other Stories. By W, Stkubing, author of
‘ Probable Tales’. Crown Svo.. 45. 6(i.^ ,

The Story of a . .

Crown Svo., 35. 6d . ' : Stcvcnson (Robert Louis).

Callista : A Tale of the Third
Century. Crown Svo., 35. 6d.

Phillipps-Wolley. — Snap: a Legend

of the Lone Mountain. By C. Phillipps- =
WoLLEY. With i3«lllustrations. Crown •
8 vo., 35. 6rf.

c

Portman. — Sr a tion Studies : being I

the Jottings of an African Ofliciat. By I
Lionel Port.man. Crown Svo., 54. net.

I

* ■

Ridley, — Anne Mainwarino. By |
Aucb Ridley, Author of ' The Story of
Altue Crown 8vo., 61. •

The Strange Case of Dr.Jmkyll
AND Mr. Hyde. Fcp. 8vo., u. sewed.
Tj. 6d. cloth.

The Strange CtiSE of ‘ Dr.
Jekyll AND Mr. Hyde; with mother
Fables. Crown Svo., bound in buckram^
with gilt top, 5s. ivet.

* Silver Library ’ Edition. Crown Svo.r
31. 6rf.

«

More New Arabian Nightsv-The
Dynamiter. By Robert Louis Steven-
son and Fanny van de Grift Steven-
son. Crown Svo., 35. 6d.

The Wrong Box. By Robert
Louis Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne.
Crown 8 VO., 3s. 6d.

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.‘S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Fiction, Humour, &.Q.— continued.

Suttnen— Down Your Arms ■ Walford (L. B.)—continmd,

{Die Waffen Nieder) : The Autobiography
of Martha von Tilling. By Bertha von ; /y,

SuTTNBR. Translated by T. Holmes, i MiscHtJiF of Monica. Cr.

Cr.‘8yo., u. 6rf. : 8vo., 2 s. 6d.

\

I T//£ Onr Good Guest, Cr. 8vo..

I 25. 6d.

j ‘ Plough RDy and other Stories.

I Crown 8vo., 2s. 6i/.

j

I The Ma tchma ker. Cr. 8vo. , 2s. 6d^

S'waxi.-r-BALLAS7\ By Myra Swan.
Crown 8vo., 65.

Trollope (Anthony).

The Warden. Cr. 8vo., is. 6 d.

1

Barchester Towers. Cr.8vo.,is.6^/.

Walford (L. B.).

Charlotte. Crown 8vo., 6.s.

One of Ourseh es. Cr. 8vo., 6 s.

jWard.- -One Poor Scruple. By
I Mrs, Wilfrid Ward. Crown 8vo., 65.

I Weyman (Stanley).

The iNTRUtDERS. Crown8vo., 25.6r/. ;

Leddx Marget. Crown 8vo. , 25. 6 d.

The House of the Wolf. With.
Frontispiece and Vignette. Crown 8vo.,
IS. ^d.

A Gentleman of France. With
Frontispiece and VMgnette. Cr. 8vo., 65.

IvA Kildare : a Matrimonial Pro- j
blem. Crown 8vo., 25. 6rf. i

,, 1 The Red Cockade. WithFrontis-

Mr. Smith : a Part of his Life. ! ^ piece and Vignette. Crown 8vo., 65.
Crown 8vo., 25. 6d. , j

Shrewsbury With 24 Illustra-
tions by Claude A. Sheppekson. Cr.
8vo., 65.

Sophia. With Frontispiece. Crown
8vo., 65, •

The Baby's Grandmother. Cr.

8vO., 25. 6</.

Cousins. Crown 8vo., 25. 6 d.
Troublesome* Daughter.s.

^ 8vO.! 25. 6rf.

Pauline. Crown *8vo., 25. 6 d.

Cr.

Dick Netherby. Cr. 8vo.j 2s. 6 d,

t **■** *

The ^fisTORY of a Week. Cr.

8vo. 25. 6d.

A Stiff-necked Geiger a tion. Cr.

8vo. 25. 6d.

Nan, and other Stories. Cr. 8vo.,

25. 6d,

Yeats (S. Levktt).

The (^HEVALiER D'Auriac. Crown
8vo., 35. 6^/.

Tnf 7'FAiroJt’s Wai'. Cr. 8vo.. 6.?.

Yoxall. — The Rommany Stone. ] 3 y
J. H. Yoxall, M,*P. Crown 8vo,, 65.

30 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Popular Seienoe (Natural History, &e.).

Butler. — Our Household Ihsects,
An Account of the Insect- Pests found in
Dwelling-Houses. By Edward A. Butler,
B.A., B.Sc. (Lond.). With X13 Illustra-
tions. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d.

Furneaux (VV.).

Tji£ OvTDOOK World; or The
Young Collector's Handbook. With 18
Plates (t6 of which are coloured), and 549
Illustrations in the Text. Crown 8vo.,
gilt edges, 6j. net.

Bt- TTERFLiES AAD (British), i

>Vlih 12 coloured Plates and 241 lUus - 1
trittions in the Text. Crown 8vo., gilt j
cdge.s. 6i. net.

Life /y Pohds and Streams,
With 8 coloul'ed Plates and 331 Illustra-
tions in the Text, Crown 8vo., gill
edges, 65. net.

Hartwig (George).

Tj/£ Sra Aj\i) /rs Living Wonders.^,
With 12 Plates and 303 Woodcuts. 8vo.* ’
gilt top, 75. net. t

i

The Tropical World, With 8 i
Plates and Z72 Woodcuts. Svo., gilt ;
top, 75. net.

• I

The Polar World. With 3 Maps, ;
8 Plates and 85 Woodcuts. 8vo., gilt |
top, ys. net.

The Subterranean World, With j
3 Maps and 80 Woodcuts, ^vo., gilt j
top, 75. net, ;

i

I

r

Popular Lectures on
S cigNTiFJC Subjects* By Hermann von
Helmholtz. With 68 , Woodcuts, a vols
Cr. Svip., 3s. 6d. each.

Hudson (W. H.).

Birds and aMan. Large crown
Svo., 6i. nt;t.

Nature in Downland, With 12

Plates and 14 Illustrations in the Text by
A. D. McCormick. 8vo., loi. 6</. net.

British Birds. With a Chapter
on Structure and Classitication by Frank
E. Beddakd, F.R.S. With 16 Plates (8
ofv^ich are Coloured), and over 100 lUus-
tracions in the Text. Crown 8vo., lilt
edges, 65. net.

Milfais. — The Natural History ol
THE British Surface Feeoing-Ducrs.
By John Ouillk Millais, F.Z.S., etc.
With 6 Photogravures and 66 Plates (41 in
Colours) from Drawings by the Author,
Arciiiuald Tiiorhurn, and from Photo
graphs. Royal 410., £6 ()Sj»

*■ 4

Proctor (Richard A.).

Light Science for Leisure Hours.
Familiar Essays on Scientihe Subjects.
Crown 8vo., 3J. td,

t.

Rough Wa vs made Smooth. Fami-
liar Essays on Scientific Subjects. Crown
8vo., 35. 6r/.

Pleasant Wa »'.y in Science. Crown
8vo., 35. 6 d. ^

• i

Nature Studi^:s. By R. A. Pi^oc

TOR, Grant Allen, A. Wilson, T.
Foster and E. Clodp. Cr. 8vo., 31. W.

f

f ' •

Leisure Readings. By R. A. Proc
TOR, E. Clopd, A. Wilson, T. Foster
and A. C. Ranyarp. Cr. 8vo., 31. 6</.

*,• For Mr. Proctor's other books see pP. r 7
and 35, and Messrs. Longmans & Co. 's Cata-
logue of Scientifie Works.

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

3 ‘

Populap Seienee (Natural History, &c.) — continued.

Stanley. — .<4 Familiar History ot i Wood (Rev. J. G.) — continued.

Birds. By E. Stanley, D.D., formerly I

Bishop of Norwich. With i6o Illustrations ! /ms£CTS Abroad : A Popular Ac-
er, 8vo., 3s. 6rf. count of Foreign In.scct.s, their Structure,

Mabits and Transformations. With 600

Wood (Rev. J. G.).

j

Homes without Hands : A Descrip
tion of the Habitations of Animals, classed '
according to their Principle of Construe- ;
tion. With 140 Illustrations. 8vo., gilt i
lop, 75. net. ^

* Insects at Home ; A Popular Ac- ,

count of British Insects, their Structure, ;
Habits and Transformations. W'ith 700 ’
Illustrations. 8vo., gilt top, 7s. net*.

Illustrations. 8vo., 7s. net.

Out of Doors ; a Selection of
Original Articles on Practical Natural
History. With 1 1 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo.,
3s. 6d.

Petland Revisited. With 33
Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 35. td.

Strange Dwellings : a Description
of the Habitations of Animals, abridged
from ‘ Homes without Hands’. With 6a
Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 35. firf.

Works of Referenee.

Gwilt.— Encyclop/Kdia of Ar- MSLUhdeT continued.

CHiTEcn RE. By Joseph Gwilt, F.S.A.

With 17CX) Engravings. Revised {1888), .

with Alterations and Considerable Addi- ; The Treasury OF Botany. Edited
dohs by WvATT Papworth. 8vo., 21s. \ by J. Lindi ey, F.R.S., and T. Moore,
net. F.L.S. With 274 Woodcuts and 20 Rte6l

* Platea 2 vols. Fcp. 8vo., i2i.

Longmans’ G.\/f.tteer of the \
World. Edited by George G. Cifis- •
HOLM, M.A., B.Sc. Imperial 8vo., 185. net; ;
cloth, 2is. half- morocco.

Maunder (Samvei.).

• •

Biographical Treasury. With ;
* Supplement brought down to 1889. By !
Rev. James Wood. Fcp. 8vo., 64. |

Roget, -- Thesaurus of English
Words and Fhr.ises. Classified arvl Ar-
ranged so as to Facilitate, the Expres? 'on of
Ideas and assist in Literary Composition.
By Peter Mark Roget, M.D., F.R.S.
Recomposed throughout, enlarged and im-
proved, partly from the Author’s Notes, and
with a full Index, by the Author’s Son,.
John Lewis Roget. Crown 8vo., gs. net.

. • • ■ • i

The^ Treasury of Bible Know- !

LEDGE. By the Rev. J, Ay he, M.A. With }

5 Maps, 15 Plates, afd 300 Woodcuts. | for giving

Fcp. 8vo., 6s. information for-asedirtaining the value of

• *1 Lifehold, Leasehold, and Church Property,

j the Public Funds, etc. Bv Charles M.
TVtEASURV OF Knowledge AND L/b- \ *Wiluch. Edited by H.' Bence Jones.
RARr OF Nsfbrsncs. Fcp. 8v0m 6s. Crown 8vo., xos. 6d.

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Children’s Books.

Adelborg.— 64/^.4.v/’A'-rA'A’ axd the j Lang (Andrew).— Edurd by.

Children of UKrEnyLBA. ay uttxlia
Adelborg. Translated from the Swedish |
by Mrs. Graham Wai.las. With 23 ;
Coloured Plates. Oblong 410., boards. ;
35. 6 d. net.

Alick’s Adventures. — liy G. R. :

With 8 llli!.‘<iraiions by John Hassali..
Crown Svo., 35. 6</.

Brown. — The Book of Sa/nts and ;
Fribndlv Beasts. By Abbtk Farwl-ll ,
Brown. With S Illustrations by Fanny Y. .
Cory. Crown 8vo., 4.?. tki. net.

Buckland. — T nv LittlkRuna if a ys.

Adapted from the French of Louis 1)es-
noyers. By James Buckland. With no
Illustrations by Cecil Aldin. Cr. 8vo., 6s.

Crake (Rev. A. D.).

Emvv THE Fair; or. The First;
Chronicle of i^tscendune. Cr. Svo. . .silver
top, 25 . net,

Alfgak the Dane ; or, The Second
Chronicle of .(^iscendune. Cr. 8vo,, .silver
top, 25 . net.

The Rifal Hejks : being the Third^'
and La.st Chronicle of A£scen/lune. Cr.
Svo., silver top, 25 , net.

The House of Walderne. A Tale
of the Cloister and the Forest in the Days
of the Barons’ Wars. Crown Svo., silver
\op, 25 . net.

Brian Fitz-Count. A Story of
Wallingford Castle and Dorchester
Abbey. Cr. 8vo., .silver top, 25. net.

Henty (G. A.). Kdited by. ^

Yule Logs : A Story-Book for Boys.
By Various Authors. With 61 Illu.s-
p-ations. Crown 8vo., gilt edges, 35. net. ;

Yule Tide Yarns : a Story-Book ;
for Boys. By Various Authors. With
45 Illustrations. Cr..8vo., gilt edges, 35. •
n<fl.

The Blue Fairy Book. With 138
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., gilt edges, 65.

ThE Red Fairy Book. With too
Illustr4ations. Crown 8vo., gilt edges, 65.
The Green Fairy Book. With-gg
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., gilt edges, 6s.

The Grey Fairy Book. With 65

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., gilt edges, 65.

The Yellow Fairy Book. With
104 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., gilt edges, 65.
The Fink Fairy Book. With 67

IlluJ*rations. Crown 8vo., gilt edges, 65.

The Violet Fairy Book. With* 8
Coloured Plates and 54 other Illustrations.
Crown 8 %'Om gilt edges, 65.

Ti(e Blue Poetry Book. With lOo
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., gilt edges, 65.
The True Story Book. With 66

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., gilt edges, 65.

The Red True Story Book. With
100 Illustrations. Cr. Svo., gilt edges, 6s.

The Animal Story Rook. With
67 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., gilt pd^es, 65.

The Red Book of Animal Stories.

With 65 llhistralions, Crow'n 8vo., gilt
edges, 65.

The Arabian Nights Enter tain-
MRNTS. With 66 Illustrations. Cr. 8yo.,
gill edges, O5.

The Book of Romance. With 8

Coloured Plates and 44 other Illustrations.
Crown 8 VO., gilt edges, 65.

Lyall. — The Burges Letters; a
Record of Child Life in the Sixties. By
liDNA Lyalj.. With C^doured Frothispiece
and 8 other Full-page lllustrat,ions by
Walter S. Staci-y, Crown 8vo., 25.

Meade (L. T.).

DadijVs Boy.' Widi 8 Illustrations.

Crown 8vo., gilt edge-s, 35. net. ’

Deb and the Duchess. With 7
Illustrations. oCr. 8vo., gilt edges, 3s. net.

The Beresford Prize. With 7
Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., gilt edges, 35. net.
The House of Surprises. With 6
lliuKtrations. Cr. 8 vo., gilt edges, 35. net*

33

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Children's Books— -coft&tued

Murray. — Flower Legends for i Upton (Florence K. and Bertha).
Chjldren. By Hilda Mukkay (the Hon.

Mrs_^ Murhay of Elibank). Pictured by J.

S. Eland. With numerous Coloured and
other Illustrations. Oblong 4to., 6^.

Penrose. — CuuRBy : a Nuisance.

gy Mrs. PicNRosE. Witli 8. Illustrations
by G. G. Manton. Crown Svo., 3s. 6d.

Praeger (Rosamond).

The ADyENTUKKs oe thk Three
Hold Habes : Hector, Honor 1 a and
Alisander. a Story in Pictures. With
24 Coloured Plates and 24 Outline Pic*
lures. Oblong 410., 3s. fid. ^

• The Fur thek Doincs of the Three
Hold Babes. With 24 Coloured Pictures
and 24 Outline Pictures. Oblong 4to.,3S.6rf.

Roberts. - The Aduenturf^ of

Cattain John S\rrnf ; Captain of Two
Hundred and Fifty Horse, and sninctime
President of Virginia. By E. P. RojUiKTs.
With 17 Illustrations and \ Maps. Crown
8 VO., 5J, net. «

Stevenson . — A Ch/lFs Garden or

Verses. By Roukrt Lotus Stevenson.

Fd)p. •Svo., gilt top, 5J.

•

Tappan. — Old Baih.ads in Prose.

By J‘^ A M.xKcit 'I'.vpiMN. With 4 Illus-
trations by F.xnnv Y. Coky, Crown 8vo..
gilt top, 45. 67. net.

1 The Adventures of Two Dutch
i Dolls and a " Golliivogg\ With 31
Coloured Plates and numerous Illustra-
; tions in the Text. Oblong 410., 65.

The Golltwogg's Bicycle Club.
W^ith 31 Coloured Plates and numerous
Illustrations in the Text. Oblong 410., 65.

The Golliwogg at the Seaside.
With 31 Coloured Plates and numerous
Illustrations in the Text. Oblong 410. , 6s.

The Golliwogg in War. With 31

Coloured Plates. Oblong 4to., 6s.

The Gollhvocus Polar Adven-
ruRRS. With 31 Coloured Plates. Ob-
long 4to., 6s.

The Goljjwogus Auto-go-cart.
With 31 Coloured Plates and numerous
Illustrations in the Text. Oblong 410., 6s.

The Golluvogg s Air-Ship. With

30 Coloured Pictures and numerous lllus-
tration.s in the re.xt. Oblong 4to., bs.

The V eg k- Men's /Revenge. With

31 Coloured Plate.s and numerous Illus-
trations in the Text. Oblong 410., 6s.

Wemyss. — ‘ yj/iNos \Vf. Thought

OF*: Told from a Child’s Point of View.
By Mary C. E. Wemyss, Author of ‘.Vll
About AU of Us’. With 8 lllustralions in
Colour by S. K, Pkakco k. Crown Svo..
3s. 67.

.The Silver Library.

Crown Svo. 3s. 67 . e.ach Volume.

Arnold's (Sir Edwin) Seal and Lands. With
71 Illu.striilitiii.s. 3 j, iy,L

Bagehot's (W.) Biographical Studies, y. 67.

BailbhoC's (W.) F^onomlc Studies. 3.;. d/.

Badehot's (W.) Literary Studies. With Portrait.
3 vols., 3.1. tix/. each.

<Baker’e (Sir S. W.) *Eight Years In Ceylon.

With 6 Illustrations. 3.V. 6 d,

Baker's (Sir S. W.) RIfte and Hou%d In Ceylon.

VViih 6 Plusft'mirm.s.* 35. 6 J. ,

Barlng-Qould'e (Bey. B.) Curious Myths of the
Middle Agee. 3V. 6 d. ,

Barin^-Gould's (Bev. S.) Origin and Develop-
ment of Relidtous Belief. 2v^l$. 3 s. 67 .ca«lt.

Beoker’i(W.A.)Qantts I or, Roman Scene.s in the
Time of Augustus With a6 lUus. y. 67.

Becker's (W. A.) Charicles: or, IDustmtions of
the PrivjiU; Life of the .AmHenl (iretks.
With 26 Illu.slr;Uion.s- .^j. 6./.

Bent's (J. T.) The Ruined Cities of Mashona-
land. With 117 Jilustra tions. 3\. (id.

Brassey's (Lady) A Voyage In the * Sunbeam *.

With 66 lllu.suvtion.'s. y.

Buckle's (H. T.) History of Civilisation in
England. 3 vo!s. .10*. 67.

Churchill’s /Winston S.) The Story of the
Malakaiid Field Force, 1897. With 6 Maps

jlTWl PliUi'i. 3.r. (ytf.

Clodd's (E.) Story of Creation: a PLun Account
of Evolution. W’iih 77 IliiLSlrations. 3^. 67 .

Cony bears (Rev. W. J.) and Howson's (Very
Rev. J. S.) Life and Epistles of CM. Paul.

With 46 Illustrations, y. (jd.

DondalPs (L.) Beggars Alt: a Novel. 3.1. 67.
Doyle's (Sir A. Conan) MIcah Clarke. 'I'ale of
Momnoutti's ^elxdlion. With xo lUusts. 3s. 67.

34

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS,

The Silver L\bTB.vj— continued.

Doyle’s ^8ir A. Conao) Tha Captain of the

Polostar, and other Tales. 35. 6</.

Doylo’a (Sir A. Conan) The RefuAeoa: A laid of '
the Huguenots. With 2 ^ Illustrations. 3 j6</.

Doyle’s (Sir A. Conan) The Stark Munro Letters.

Sf. 6</.

Proude’s (J; A.) The History of England, from
the Fall of Wolsey to the Defeat of tile ;
Spanish Armada. 12 vols. 3;. 6e/. each.

Fronde’s (J. A.) The English in Ireland. 3 vols.
tw. 61/.

Fronde’s (J. A.) The Divorce of Catherine of
Aragon. 3j:. 6if.

Fronde’s {J. A.) The Spanish Story of the
Armada, and otlier Kssay.s. y. 6 t/.

Froude’s(J. A.) English Seamen in the Sixteenth
Century, y, 6 ti.

Fronde’s (J. A.) Short Studies on Great Sub-
Jeets. 4 vols. 3^. 6 J. each.

Fronde’s (J. A.) Oceana, or England and HeY
Colonies. With 9 lilastrations. y. 6 ii.

Froude’s (J. A.) The Council of Trent, y. tn/.

Froude’s (J. A.) The Life and Letters of i
Erasmus. 3.f. 6(/.

Fronde’s (J. A.) Thomas Carlyle: a Ht^tory o( '
his Life.

1795-1835. .2 vols. y. 1834-1881. 2 vols. 7J. =
Froude’s (J. A.) Caesar : a .sketch, y. (n/.

Froude’s (3. A.) The Two Chiefs of Ounboy : an .

Irish Romance of the Lust ( icnmry. y. 6 ii.

t

Froude’i (J. A.) Writings, Selections from.

3^ 6.f.

Oielg’s (Rev. 0. R.) Life of the Duke of
Wellington. With Portrait, y. 6 d.

Greville’e (G. C. F.; Journal of the Reigns of
Klig George IV., King William (V., and
Queen Victoria. 8 vols., y, (yd. <Mch.

Maggard’e (H. R.) She: A Hist>xy of Vlventurr.
With 32 llIu.str:ilioiis. 35. (ni.

Haggard’S (H. R.) Allan Quatermain. With
20 Illustrations, y. (ui,

*

Haggard’s (H. R.) Colonel Qiuurltch, V.L. : a
lale of Country Lift. With Frontispiece
and Vignette, y. 6 d.

Haggd.’d’s (H. R.)iCl6opatra. With 29 illustra-
tions. 3.r. 6f/.

Maggarii’s (H. R.) Erie Rrightoyos. W'ith 5*
Illustrations. 31. (yd.

Haggard’s (H* R.) Beatrice. W’ith Frontispiece
and Vignette. 3^. M.

Haggard’s (H. R.) Black Heart and White Heart.

With 33 [llnstration.s, ^v,

Haggard’e (H. R.) Allan’e Wife. W^ith 34 Ilhis
trillions, y. 61/.

Haggard (H. R.) Heart of the World. With

15 I lhistr.it ions. 3;. 6<f.

Haggard's (H. R.) Montezuma’s Daughter. With
25 Illustrations. 3.*. 64/.

Haggard’s (H. R.) Swallow : a Tale of the Great
Trek. With 8 Illustrations, y. 6d.

Hagga^s (H. R.) The Witch’s Head. With

16 lilLaration.s. 3^. 6d.

Haggard’s <H. R.) Hr. Msoson’s Will. With

16 llliistratioiis. y. 6 d.

Haggard’s (H. R.) Nada the Lily. With 23
Illustrations. y. 6 d,

Haggard’s (H.R.) Dawn. With i 61 Uusis. y.6d.

Haggard’s (H. R.) The People of the Mist. Wit h

16 Illusiration.s. y. (nf.

Haggard’s (H: R.) Joan Haste. W'ith 20 Illus-
trations. y. 6 d.

Haggard (H. R.) and Lang’s (A.) The World’s

Desire. With 27 Illustrations. 35. f Y. •

Harte’e (Bret) In the Carqulnei Wo^ds and
other Stories. 3^. 6d.

Helmholtz’s (Hermann von) Popular Lectures
on Sclontlflo Suhleots. W'ith 68 111 ii.stration.s
2 vols. 3-1. 6d. each. , ,

Hope's (Anthony) The Heart of Princess Osra.

With 9 llhisftr.iiions. 3y. 6f/.

Howltt’s (W.) Visits to Remarkable Places.

WitJ) 80 llhLstrations. 3r. 6if.

Jefferlee’ (R.) The Story of My Heart: M)

Autobiography. W'ith Portrait. 3J. 6t/,

Jefferlee’ (R.) Field and Hedgsrew. ^W’ith
Portrait. 31. 6t/. «•

Jefferies’ (R.) Red Deer. W^iih 17 llhisis. ’34.0./.^

Jefferies* iR.i Wood flaglc: a Fable. With
Froiiti.spiw',e and V'igneite by E. V. B y.

Jefferies (R.) The Toilers of Che Field. With
l*ortralt/rom the Bust in tialisburv t athcflrah
31. 6 d. • «

Kaye (Sir J.) and Malleson’s (Colonel) History
of the Indian Mutiny of 1887-8. 6 vols.

y, 6 d. each. ^

flnlghi’s (B. F.) Tho Cruiso of the ’ Al«ri«*t

the Narrati<.iR of a .Search for Treasure en
the Desert Inland of Trinidad. With a
Maps and 23 Illustrations, y. 6d. .

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 35

The Silver library — contintteiL

F.) Whm Thrta SnuplMa liMt: a

Narrative of Recent Travel in Kashmir,
Western Tibet, Baltistan, Gilgit. With a Map
and 54 Illustrations. 35. bd.

Rni^t'a (B. F.) The ' Faloon ' on the Baltic : a

Coasting Voyage from Hammersmith to
Copenhnj^n m a Three-Ton Yacht. With
Map and 11 Illustrations, y. 6d.

•

Kostlln*t (J.) Life of Lather. With 6a Illustra-
tions and 4 Facsimiles of MSS. y. 6d.

Lnnd'e (A.) Angling Sketches. With 20 Illustra-
tions. y.

Proctor's (R. A.) The Orbs Around Us. y. 6d.

Proctor's (R. A.) The Bapanse of Heaven, y. bd.

Proctor's (B. A.) Light Science for Lelsnve
Hours, y. 6d.

Proctor's (R. A.) The Moon. 3^. 6d.

Proctor's (R. A.) Other Worlds than Ours. 35.61/.

Proctor's (R. A.) Our Place among InSnltfes :

a Series of Essays contrasting our Little
Aljode in Space and Time with the Infinities
around us. 3^. 6d.

Lang's (A.) Custom and Myth : Studies of Karl)
Usage and Belief, y. 6d.

l|ang'tfA.)CoeliLaneandCommon-8eJie. y.6d.

Lang's (A.) The Book of Dreams and Ghosts. .

y. 6d.

Proctor's (R. A.) Other Suns than Ours. y. 6d.

Proctor's (R. A.) Rough Ways made Smooth.

35. 6d.

Proetor'B(R.A.)PlcasantWaysln Solence. y.6d.

Lang's (A.) A Monk of Fife: a Story the
Days of Joan of Arc. With 13 Illasti ations. .
y. 6d.

Lang's (A.) Myth, Ritual, and Religion. 2 vols. 7.5.

UfS (J. A.) and Cluttcrbuck'r} (W. J.) B.O.
18S7, A Ramhio In British Columbia. With
Maps and 1$ l)lu.<«trations. 35. 6d

Proctor's (R. A.) Myths and Marvels of As-
tronomy. 35. 6d.

Proctor's (R. A.) Nature Studies. 35. 6«/.

Proctor's (R. A.) Leisure Readings. By R. A.

PROcrok. Edward Cujdd, Andrew
Wilson, Tiioma.s FasTER, and A. C.
Ranyari). With Illustration.s. 35. 6d.

Uvett-.yeats' (8.) The Chevalier D’Aurlac.

Macaulay’c (Lord) Complete Works. ' Albany '
Edition. With la Portraits, t 2 vols. 3^. 6*/.
each.

Ilmaalay's (Lord) Essays and Lays of Ancient .

Rome, etc. With Portrait and 4 Illustrations A
to the ‘ Lays ’. 35 6d. ^

Maeleod'g (H. D.) Elements of Banking. 35. 6d.

Marihman’s (J. C.) Memoirs of Sir Henry
Haveloek. 35. 6d.

Mason (A. E. W.) and Lang's id.) Parson Kelly.

y. bd,

•

Nerivale'e (DeanjT History of the Romans
under the Bmplre. 8 vols. y. bd. f^ch.

s

Merriman's <H. S. Flotsam : A T ale of the
^ Indian Mutiny, ^v, ot/.

Mill's (J. S^ Political Boonomy. y. 6f/.

MIU'I (J. SO f ystfth} of Lfglc. 3^. 6^.

Mtliie^s (Oco.) Country Pleasuree : thcCJhroni-
cIl* of a Year chiefly in a Garden, y. bJ.

Mansen'e (P.) The First Ordkslng of Ovecnland.

With 142 Illustrations and a Map. 35. bd, ,

Phttltppe-Wolley'e (C.) Snap*, a l>*gend of the ;
Ixme Mountain With 13 Illustrations. y,bd.

Rossetti's (Maria F.) A Shadow of Dante. 35. bii.

Smith’s (R. Bosworth) Carthage and the Cartha-
ginians. With M»ps, Plans, etc. 35. bd.

Stanley's (Bishop) Familiar History of Birds.

WTth tte Illustrations. 35. bd.

Stephen's (Sir Leslie) The Playground of Europe
(The A][ps). Witit 4 Illustrations, 3.5. 6./.

Stevenson's (R. L.) The Strange Case of Dr.
JekyU and Mr. Hyde: with other Fables, y.bd.

Sievenson (R. L.) and Osbourne’s (U.) The
Wrong Box. 35. bd.

Stevenson (Robert Louis) and Stevenson's
(Fanny van de Grift) Hore New Arabian
Nights.- -The Dynaiuitcr. y. bd.

Trevelyan's (Sir 0 . 0 .) The Early History of
Charles James Fox. 3.'-. 6i/.

Weyman's (Stanley J.) The House of the
Wolf : a Romance. 3^.61/.

Wood'i (Rev. J. 0 .) Petland iStvlsIted. With
33 Illustrations 35. 6«f.

Wood'! (Rev. J. 0.) Stjrange Dwellings. ^Witb
60 Illustrations, y. bd.

Wood's (Rev. J. 0 .) Out of Deere. With it
Illustrations, ^.bd.

jfi MESSRS. LONGMANS & CU.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS.

Cookery, Domestic Management, &g.

Acton. — CooA'sxr, By

Eliza Acton. With 150 Woodcuts. Fcp.
8vo., 45. 6rf.

Angwin. — S/MrL/c Hiyrs on Choice

OF Foilo, with TcwSted and Economical
Recipes. For Schools, Homes, and Classes
.for Technical Instruction. By M. C. Angwin,
Diploniate (First Class) of the National
Union for the Technical I’raining of Women,
etc. Crown 8vo., i.v.

Ashby. — Health in the Nueserv.
By Henry Ashby, M.D., F.R.C.P., Physi-
cian to the Manchester Children's Hospital.
With 25 Illustrations. Crown Svo., jj. net.

Bull (Thomas, aM.D.).

Hints to Mothers on the Man-

AGBMSS T OF THEIR II BA LTH DURING THB
Period of Pregnancy. Fcp. Svo. , sewed,
IS. td. *, cloth, gilt edges, as. net.

The Maternal Management of
Children in Health and Disease^
Fcp. Svo., sewed, is. Gd. ; cloth, gill
edges, as. lict.

Dc Sails (Mr.s.).

A LA Mode Cookekv : Up-to-

date Recipes. With 24 Plate.s (16 in
Colour). Crown Svo. , 5s. net.

Cakes and Confections i la
Mode^ Fcp. Svo., IS. 6d.

Docs: A Manual for Amateur/B.

Fcp. Svo., IS. bd.

Dressed Game and Poultry ^ la
Mode. Fcp. Svo., is. bd.

Dressed Vegetables a la Mode,
Fcp. Svo., IS 6d.

Drinks 2 la Mode. Fcp.8vo.,i.s.6rf. ^

De Sails (Mrs.)—

Entries ^ la Mode, Fcp. 8vo.,

IS. td.

Floral Decorations^ Fcp* 8vo.,

IS. bd.

Gardening a la Mode. Fcp. Svo.
Part I., Vegetable.^, is. 6 d. Part II.,
Fruits, IS,

Haivonal V/ANDSA LA Mode, Fcp.

8 vo., IS. 6t/.

New-laid Eggs. Fcp. 8vo., is. bd.

Oysters ^ la Mode. Fcp. 8vo.,
11 / 6,/.

PUKDINGS AND PaSTRY A LA MqDE.
Fcp. 8vo., IS. 6 d.

Saivuries X LA Mode. Fcp. 8vo.,

• is.6*f.

Soups and Dressed Fish A la
Mode. Fcp. Svo., is. td.

Sweets and Supper Dishes a la
Mode. Fci>. Svo., is." td.

TempAng Dishes for Small Jn

COMES. Fcp, Svo., rs. fyi.

Wrinkles and NoTii\Ns^ for
Eybry Household. Crown ^vo., is. td.

Lear. — Maicre Cookery. By H. L.
Sidney Lear. i6mo., 2s.

Poole. — Cookery FOR the Diabktic,
By W. 11 . and Mr.s. Poole. With Preface
by Dr. Pavy. Fcp. Svo., as, td,

Rotheram. — Household Cookery
Recipes. By M. A. Rotheram, First Class
Diplomne, National Training School of
Cookery, London ; Instructress to the Bed-
fordshire County Council. Crown Svo., as.

The Fine Arts and Music.

Burne-Jones. — The Beginning of

THE World: Twenty-five PictiircR by
Sir Edward Burne-Jones, Bart. Medium
4to., Boards, 7s. td. net. *

Burns and Colensa— Z/p'/ivc Aka-

roMY. By Cecil L. Burn.s, R.B.A., and
Robert J. Colenso, M.A., M.D. 40 Plates,
iij by Si ins., each Plate containing Two/
Figure^(n) A Natural Male or Female
Figure; |i^) The same Figure An atomatised.
In a Portfolio, 7s. td. pet.

Hamlin.— 2^ Text-Book of ^the
History op ARCHiTEcruRBJt By A. D. F.
Hamli.n, A.M. With aag Illustrations.
Crowfi Svo., 7s, ^

Haweis (Kev. H. R.).

Music and Morals. With Portrait
of the Authbr. Crown 8vo., 64 . net.

My Musical Lips. With Portrait
of Richard Wagner and 3 Illustrations.
Crown 8vo., 64. net.

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 37

The Fine Arts and fAnsio—couhnuenl.

Huish, Head, and Long^man.— i

Samplers and Tapestry EMBRoroERtES, •
Hy Marcus Huish, LL.B. ; also *The|
Stitchery of the Same,' by Mrs. Head; j
and * Foreign Samplers,’ by Mrs. C. J. j
Longman. With 30 Reproductions in j
Colour, and 40 Illustrations in Mono- i
chrome. 410., £2 2s. net. i

i» !

Hullah.— The His'roRv of Modern |
Music. By John Hullah. 8vo., 8s. 6//. ;

Jameson (Mrs. Anna). |

Sacred and Legendary A ri\ con- '.
taining Legends of the Angels Arch- i
angels, the Evangelists, the Apostles, the I
* Doctors of the Church, St. Mary Mag- I
dalene, the Patron Saints, the Martyrs, j
l^e Early Bishops, the Fiermits, and the I
Warrior-Saints of Christendom, as repre- j
sented in the Fine Arts. W'ith 19 K^hings
and 187 Woodcuts, 2vols. Svo., 20s.net.

Legends of the Monastic Orders^
iia represented in the Fine Arts, com-
prising the Benedictines aid Aiigustines,
and Orders derived from their Rules, the
Meiidicanf Orders, the Jesuits, and the
Order of the VivSitanon of St. Mary, With
- It Etchings and 8« Woodcuts, i vol.
8ro.* loi. net.

Legends of the Madonna, or
Blessed Virgin Marv. Devotional with
^ and without the Inliint Jesus, Historical
from the Annunciation to the Assumption,
as represented in Sacred and Lcgend.'iry
Christian Art. With .jy* Etchings and
165 Woodcuts. 1 vol. 8vo., 10.S. net.

The ///story of Our Lord, as ex-
emplified in Works of Art, with that of
Hi.s Types, St. John the Baptist, and
other persons of the Old and New Testa-
*mau. Comn^nced by the late Mrs,
Jameson; continued and completed by
, Lady Eastlakk. With 31 Etchings

* and 281 Woodcuts. 2vols. 8 vo., 205. net.

Kristeller. — Andrea Ma n tegna .

By Paul Kristkller. English fdition by
S. Arthuk^Sti^Vo, M.A., Librarian to«the
Housf of Lords, and at Chatsworth. With
t6 Photogravure Plates and 162 Illustrations
in tile Text. 410., gilt top,';f3 los. net.

Macfarren. Lectures , on JTar-

HONT , By Sir Georob A. Macfarren.

8V0.» E2I.

Morris (William).

Architecture, Industry and
Wealth. Collected Papers. Crown
8vo., 6s. net.

Hopes and Fears for Art. Five
Lectures delivered in Birmingham, Lon-
don, etc., in 1878-1881. Cr 8vo., 4s. 6d.

An Address delivered at the
Distribution op Prizes to Students
OF THE Birmingham Municipal School
of Art 0N21ST February, 1894; Svo.,
2s. 6rf. net. [Printed in ‘ Golden ’ Type.)

Some Hints on Pa ttern- Design-
ing : a Lecture delivered at the Working
Men’s College, London, on 10th Decem-
ber, 1881. 8vo., 2s. 6^/. net. (Printed in
Golden* Type.)

Arts and its Producers (1888)
.iND THE Arts and Crafts of To-day
(1889). Svo., 25. 6rf. net. (Printed in
‘ Golden * Type.)

Architecture and History, and
Westminster Abbey. Two Papers
read before the Society for the Protection
of Ancient Buildings. * 8vo., 2s. td. net.
(Printed in ' Golden ’ Type.)

Arts and Crafts Fssavs. By
Members of the Arts and Crafts Exhibition
Society. With a Preface by William
Morris. Crown 8 vo., 25. 6d. net.

For Mr. W’illiam Morris’s other
Works, see pp. 24, 27, 28 and 40.

Robertson. Old Engl ish Songs

i AND Dances.* Decorated in Colour by W.
Graham Komerison. Royal 410., 42s. net.

Scott. — The Portraiturfs of
y ULH s C.^ 5 ^ A! : a Monograph. By Frank
J. Scr)Tr. With ni:my Full-page Plates
and Illustrations in the Text. Small 410.

Vanderpoel. Colour PROBLiiius :

a Practical Manual for the Lay Studeii. of
Colour. By Emily Noyes Vandkruoki..
With 117 Plates in Colour. Square Svo.,
2 IS, net.

Van Dyke. — A 2 ^e.\t-Book on the

j History of Painting. By John C. Van

1 Dykr. With 110 Illustrations. Cr. Svo.,6i.

j Wellington.—^i Descriptive and
Historical Catalogcm^ of the Collec-
tions OF Pictures and Sculpture at
Afsley House, London. By Evti-yx,
Duchess of Wellington. Illustrated by 52
Photo- Engravings, specially executed by
Braun, Clument, & Co., of Paris. 2 vols!,
royal 4to., £6 6s^net.

38 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORjiCS. ;

Miscellaneous and Critieal Works.

Annals of Mathematics (under the

Auspices of Harvard University). Issued
Quarterly. 410.. 2r. net each number.

Auto da Fi and other Essays:

some being Essays in Fiction. By the
Author of * Essays in Paradox ’ and ‘ Ex-
ploded Ideas Crown 8vo.. 55.

Bagehot. — L /rsxA s r Sri/r/£s, By

Walter Bagehot. With Portrait. 3 vols.
Crown Svo.. 35. 6f/. each.

Baker. — Eiwcation and Life :

Papers and Addresses. By James H.
Baker, M.A., LL.D. Crown 8vo., 4s. dtl.

Baring'Gould.- Curious Myths of
THE Middle Aces. By Rev. S. Baring-
Gould. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.

Baynes. — Shanesfeare Studies,

and other Essays. By the late Thomas
Spencer Baynes, LL.B., LL.D. With a
Biographical Preface by Professor Lewis
Camprbll. Crown 8vo., yr. 6d.

fl

Bonnell. — Charlotte Bront^,
George EuoTs J axe Avstex : Studies in
their Works. By Henry H. Bo.vxhll.
Crown Svo.

Booth. — The Discoyery and Dk-

CITIIERMEXT OF THE TkIUXGCAL CUNEF
FORhJ iNSGRirnoNS. By Arthur John
Booth, M.A. With a Plan of Persepolis.
Svo. 1^5. net.

Charities Register, The Annual,

AND Digest ', being a Classified Register
of Charities in or available in the Metropolis.
8vo., 5s. net.

Christie. — Selected Essa ys. Hy
Ric'hard Copley Chkl^tir, M..\., Oxon.
Hon. LL.D., Viet. With 2 Portraits and 3
other Illustrations. 8vo,, 12s. net.

Dickinson. — AV av; /Ir thur in Corn-
wall. By W. H0W.SHIF DrcKiNSO.v, .M.D.
With 5 Illustration.s. Crown Svo., 4^. 6(1.

Essays in Paradox. Uy the Author

of * Exploded Ideas ’ and Al ime-s and
Days'. Cfowjp-Svo., 55?

ErstaS*‘-^T//E Ancient Stone Im-
plements, Weapons and Ornameets op
Great Hritain, By Sir John Evans,
K.C.B. With 537 Illustrations. Svo.,
lOi. Srf. net. /

Exploded Ideas, Other Essays.

By the Author of * Times and Days *. Cr.

Svo., 5s.

Frost. — A Medley Book. By

George Frost. Crown 8vo,, 35. 6d, net.

Geikie. — The Vicar and his Frirni^s.

Reported by Cunningham Geikie, D.D.,

LL.D. Crown 8vo., 55. net.

Haggard (H. Rider).

A Farmer's Vear: being his Com-
monplace Book for 1898. With 36 JUus-
trati^is. Crown 8vo., 7s. 6t/. net.

Bur All England. With 23 AgA-
cuUural Maps and 36 Illustrations from
Photographs. 2 voU., Svo., 365. net.

Hoehig. •— /n(?uiries concerning

THE Tactics of the Future. By Fritz

Hoenig. With I Sketch in the Text and 5

Maps. Translated by Captain H. M. Bower.

8vo., 15s. n^t.

Hutchinson . — DREAAfs kand their

Meanings. By Horace G. Hutchinson.

8vo., gilt top, gs. 6(/. net, ' '

t

Jefferies (Richard).

Field and Hedgerow: With For-
trait. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d. *

The Stoi^y of My Heart: my
Autobiography. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.

Bed Deer. With 17 Illustrations.
Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d.

The Toilers of the Field. Crown
8vo., 3s. 61/.

Wood Magic : a Fable. .Crown

8vo.,3s.6fI. • .<

u

Jekyll (Gkrtrlue). ^ ^

Homkx AND Garden : Notes and
Thoughts, Practical ^dhd Critical . of a
Worker in both. With 53 IlltAtratJOhs
from Photographs. 8vo., icw, 6rf. net,

Wood and ^Garden:. Note*- and

' Thoughte, Practical and Criiicalt; of ^
Working Amateur. With 7 1 Wiotographs*
Hvo., 105 . 6rf. net.

MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.’S STANDARD AND OENERAL WORKS. 39

Miscellaneous atnd Critieal Works-~conitn«e<i.

Johnson a-&J- H.).

The Patentees Manual : a
Treatise on the Law and Practice of
Letters Patent. 8vo., xos. td.

An Epitome of the Law and
^Practice connected w/th Patents
FOR Im'ENTIONS^ with a reprint of the
Patents Acts of 1883, 1885, 18S6 and
1888. Crown 8vo., 2S. 6rf.

Joyce. — The ORiciN and JIistorvi
OP Irish Names op Places. Ty P. W, j
Joyce, LL.I). avols. Crown 8voy 54. each. ;

i

t !

L.ang (Andrkw). !

i

Letters to Dead Authors. ' Fcp . ;
8vo.y 25 . 6d. net.

Boons and Bookmen ^ With 2
Coloured ^Plates and 17 Illustrations, i
Fcp. 8vo., 25 . 6d. net. ;

* i

Old Priends. Fcp . iSvo ., 2s . 6 </. net :

I

Letters on Literature. Fcp . ■

,8yo., 25 . 6rf. net. i

\\

Essavs in Little. With Portrait ;
of the Author. Crown 8vo., 2s. 6d. 1

CocN Lane and Common-Sense. I
Crown 8vo*., 35. bd. |

Thj^Book OF FMeams and Ghosts, j
Crown 8vo., 3s. (?</.

M aiyon. -*•//£> the Garde.y Grew. I
By Maud Makvon. With 4 llli^tratiohs. I
Crown 8vo., 1.55. ?iGt. !

1

I

!

Matthews. — Notbs "oh Spsbch- |

Marino. By Bkandek Matymkws. Fcp. j
8 vo., If. 6 rf. net. !

Max Mliller (The Right Hon. F.).

Collected Works. iSvols. Crown
8 vo., 55. each.

Vol. I. Natural Religion: the Gifford
Lectures, 1888.

Vol. n. Physical Religion: the Gifford
Lectures, 1890.

Vol. III. Anthropological Religion:
the Gifford Lectures, i8gi.

Vol. IV. Theosophy; or. Psychological
Religion : the Giilbrd Lectures, 1892.

Chips from a German Workshop.

Vol. V. Recent Essays and Addresses.

Vol. VI. Biographical Essays.

Vol. VII. Essays on Language and Litera-
ture.

Vol. VIII. Essays ori Mythology and
Folk-lore.

Vol. IX. The Origin and Growth of
Religion^ as Illustrated by the Re-
ligions of India: the Hibberi Lectures,
1878.

Vol. X. Biographies of WordSj and
7 HE HOMtf OF THE ArYAS.

Vols. XL, XU. The Science of
Lai^u age : rounded on Lectures de-
livered at the Royal institution in 1861
and 1863. 2 vols. 105.

Vol. Xill. India: What can it Teach
Us?

Vol. XIV. I ntro:.hx no.\ to the
Science of Religion’. Four Lectures,
1870,

Vol. XV. RAMAmsn^iA : his Lifh and
Sayings.

Vul.« XVl. Three Lectures on the
Vedant'a Philosophy, J894,

Vol, XV 1 1 . Last Essa rs. First Series.
Essays on Language. Folk-lore, etf.

Vol. XVIU. LastEssays. Second Series.
Essays on the Science of Religion.

[j^^Ua^irotiis and Critio^l Worfesr^i^div/^^

the , Soiilsby fi-WcY H. M.>ic^«a!^^

.Chronj^^ of ^ Year chiefly in a Garden. ! ^ . ^ , : - : '

”* DBMitNER. Crown 8vo., 3r. 6rf. j OT/TAy Thoi/GHTS

i6mo., 25. net. i- V

Stray Tnogg//ts or^. CHARUi^fii
Fcp. 8 VO., 25. 6 (L net.

Moms^ — S^Gi^s OR CffAycR, Seven
- Lectures delivered on various Occasions.
By WiM-iAM Morris. Post 8vo., 4s. 6d.

Pvker and Unwin.— 7>/£ Akt or

Ui/tlDiNC A Homb : a Collection of
Lectures and Illustrations. By Harry
' Parker and Raymono Unwin. With 68 I
Pull-page Plates. 8vo., los. 6rf. net.

Southey. — T/ts CoRRMSPONnsifCM t,

ROBBRTSourHBYWITflCAROBiNRBol^B
Edited by Edward Dowden. 8vo„ 14s.

Stevens . — tme SrvtYAGJs orSAu

AXD TfiBiR Cargoes, With Information t*
garding Freights, Charter-Parties, etc. £
Robert White Stevens. 8vo., 215!

Poi\oc]iL,~/ANBr Austex : her Con-

temporaries and Herself. By Walter i Suthc land. — TiYENTiETH CextURV
Hekries Pollock. Cr. 8vo., 3s. 6<?. net. | IxvEhrtoxs: a Forecast. By Geo«g

I Sutherland, M. A. Crown 8vo., 4$. 6(/. net

Poore (George Vivian, M.D.).

Essays ox Rural Hygiene, With
13 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6i. 6rf.

The Diyeluxg House, With 36

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d.

The Earth in Relation to the

PrBSKRYATJOX Axn DES'/RUCTtOX OF
COXTAGJA : being the Milroy I.ectures
delivered at the Royal College of Physi-
cians in 1899, together with other Pa pers-
on Sanitation. With ty Illustration.^.
Crown 8vd., 5s.

Rosstttl A Shapojy of^. Dante:
being an Es.say towards studying Himself,
his World and his Pilgrimage. By Maria
Francesca Rossetti. Crown 8vd.. 3s. 6d.

Stfadwell. — Drink : Temperance
AND Leg IS LA rioN. By Au'in u r Sh a d wel i ,
M.A., M.O. Crown 8vo., 5s. net.

Soulsby (Ci-'CY H. M.).

Si'KAr Thoughts on Rf.AViNG.
*

: Stray T novGHTS FOR Girls, 161110.,

net.- '

Stra y Thoughts for Mothers and'
Fcp. 8yoM 25. net

j(o,poo/i/02^

• Thuillier. — The Principles ofLanj
Defence, axd their Afplica tion to tW
Coxninoxs OF To-nAV. By Captain H
F. Thi’ii.mek, R.E. With Maps and Plan.«
.8vo., T35, fjrf. net. ‘ . ,

i Turner and Sutherland .— Dis

i VBlOPmNT OF Aistsaua^^ Litbratvsh
By Henry Gy LES Tuk.ner and Alexande
Sutherland. With Portraits arid Elustr;
lions. Crown 8vo., 55.

: Warwick. — Progress in IVomen^:
Educa t/ox IX thr Brj tjsh Empire : beii^
the Report of Conferences and a C^in^es
held in connection with the Educatiotfa
.Sectum, Vii;tonan Era Exhibition. Edited
by the Co u n i i. ss of Wa r wick. Cr. 8vo. 6i

Weathers.-^-/ Practical Guide T(
Oarpex Plants. By John WjKATjHjeRS

1 F.K.H.S. With 159 Hiagranis. ^8vo,, 2is
net.

Webb, — The Mystery of Williap
Ehakrsfrare : a Summary of Evide^cj^
By his Honour Judge T. Wekbi SDihetittic
Regius Piotessor f>f Lawa and
Orator id the Uinyersity of f’?uT>lin. Svff

■ 105 . 6 </. net. - ■ ■

^.0N krxGCRAir, from ihc QHjgfihapMaiw^
script; with Jieminlscenccs and; Tu)fW«h
Stories. By Sir ,WitLiAM ^

President^? the BritUh Chiuiifef of
merce of Turkey, 8vo,,7f. 6d*
