ARYAN MYTHOLOGY.


vol. I.


xorpow: warerzp =r
SPOTTISWOOPE aD CO., WEW-sTErFRT SQUARE
AND PAEUIAMENT STEEKT


THE MYTHOLOGY


or


THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BY


EORGE W. COX, M.A.


LATR POHOLAR OF TROTTY COLLEGE,
oxronp.


IN TWO VOLUMES.


VOL. I.


LONDON:
LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.
1870.


AN rights reserves,


PREFACE.


oo


Wirs a deep consciousness of its shortcomings, but
with a confidence not less deep in the security of the
foundations laid by the Science of Comparative Mytho-
logy, I submit to the judgment of all whose desire it is
to ascertain the truth of facts in every field of inquiry
a work on a subject as vast as it is important. The
history of mythology is, in a sense far beyond that
in which we may apply the words to the later de-
velopements of religious systems, the history of the
human mind; and the analysis which lays bare the
origin and nature of Iranian dualism, and traces the
influence of that dualism on the thought and phi-
losophy of other lands, must indefinitely affect our
conclusions on many subjects which may not appear to
be directly connected with it.

For myself I confess candidly, and with a feeling of
gratitude whitch lapse of time certainly has not weak-
ened, that Professor Max Miiller’s Essay on Com-
parative Mythology first opened to me thirteen -years
ago a path through a labyrinth which, up to that time,
had seemed as repulsive as it wag intricate. I well
vemember the feeling of delight awakened by his
analysis of the myths examined in that essay, of which


vi PREFACE,


it is but bare justice to say that by it the ground
which it traversed was for the first time effectually
broken for English scholars, and the fact established
that the myths of a nation are as legitimate a subject
for scientific investigation as any other phenomena.
The delight which this investigation has never ceased
to impart is strictly the satisfaction which the astro-
nomer or the geologist feels in the ascertainment of
new facts: and I have written throughout under a con-
stant sense of the paramount duty of simply and
plainly speaking the truth.

Of one fact, the importance of which if it be well
ascertained can scarcely be exaggerated, I venture to
claim the discovery. I am not aware that the great
write 3 who have traced the wonderful parallelisms in
the myths of the Aryan world have asserted that the
epic poems of the Aryan nations are simply different
versions of one and the same story, and that this story
has its origin in the phenomena of the natural world,
and the course of the day and the year. This po-
sition is, in my belief, established by an amount of
evidence which not long hence will probably be re-
garded as excessive, At the least I have no fear that
it will fail to carry conviction to all who will weigh the
facts without prejudice or partiality, who will carefully
survey the whole evidence produced before they form
a definite judgment, and who will fairly estimate the
cumulative proof of the fact that the mythology of the
Vedic and Homeric poets contains the germs, and in
most instances more than the germs, of almost all the
stories of Teutonic, Scandinavian, and Celtic folk-lore.
This common stock of materials, which supplements the


PREFACE. vii


evidence of language for the ultimate affinity of all the
Aryan nations, has been moulded into an infinite variety
of shapes by the story-tellers of Greeks and Latins, of
Persians and Englishmen, of the ancient and modern
Hindus, of Germans and Norwegians, Icelanders, Danes,
Frenchmen, and Spaniards. On this common foundation
the epic: poets of these scattered and long-separated
children of one primitive family have raised their mag-
nificent fabrics or their cumbrous structures. Nay,
from this common source they have derived even the
most subtle distinctions of feature and character for
their portraits of the actors in the great drama which
in some one or more of its many scenes is the theme
of all Aryan national poetry.

Momentous as this conclusion must be, it is one
which seems to me to be strictly involved in the facts
registered by all comparative mythologists ; and while
I wish to claim for myself no more than the honesty
which refuses to adopt the statements of others without
testing their accuracy, I may feel a legitimate con-
fidence in the assurance that in all important points I
am supported by the authority of such writers as
Grimm, Max Miiller, Bréal, Kuhn, Preller, Welcker,
H. H. Wilson, Cornewall Lewis, Grote, and Thirlwall.

If in the task of establishing the physical origin of
Aryan myths "the same facts have been in some in-
stances adduced more than once, I must plead not
merely the necessity of the case, but the reiterated
assertions of writers who seem to regard the pro-
clamation of their views as of itself conclusive. The
broad statement, for example, that Hermes is primarily
and strictly a god of commerce, and of the subtlety and


vill PREFACE.


trickery which commerce is on this hypothesis supposed
to require, makes it necessary at every step, and at the
cost of repetitions which would otherwise be needless,
to point out the true character of this divine harper.

In the wide field of inquiry on which I have entered
in these volumes, I need scarcely say that I have very
much more to learn, and that I shall receive with
gratitude the suggestions of those who may wish to aid
me in the task. Many portions of the subject are at
present little more than sketched out: and of these I
hope that I may be enabled to supply the details here-
after. The evidence thus far examined justifies the
assurance that these details will not affect the main
conclusions already arrived at.

Some of the pages in the First Book have appeared
in articles contributed by me to the ‘Edinburgh,’ the
‘Fortnightly,’ and the ‘ Saturday’ Reviews ; and I have
to thank the editors for the permission to make use of
them.

The Greek names in this work are given as nearly as
possible in their Greek forms. On this point I need
only say that Mr. Gladstone, who, standing even then
almost alone, retained in his earlier work on ‘Homer
and the Homeric Age ’ their Latin equivalents, has in his
‘ Juventus Mundi’ adopted the method which may now
be regarded as universally accepted.

I have retained the word Aryan as a name for the
tribes or races akin to Greeks and Teutons in Europe
and in Asia. Objections have been lately urged
against ita use, op the ground that only Hindus and
Persians spoke of themselves as Aryas : and the tracing
of this name to Ireland Mr. Peile regards as very un-


PREFACE. ix


certain. To him the word appears also to mean not
‘ploughmen,’ but ‘fitting, worthy, noble.’ If it be so,
the title becomes the more suitable as a designation for
the peoples who certainly have never called themselves
Indo-Germanic.

But however sure may be the foundations of the
science of Comparative Mythology, and however sound
its framework, the measure in which its conclusions
are received must depend largely on the accept-
ance or rejection of its method in the philological
works chiefly used in our schools and universities.
Hence, in acknowledging thankfully the great improve-
ment of the last over the previous editions of the Greek
Lexicon of Dr. Liddell and Dr. Scott in the etymology
of mythological names, I express a feeling shared
doubtless by all who wish to see a wide and fertile field
thoroughly explored. The recognition of the principle
that Greek names must be interpreted either by cognate
forms in kindred languages, or by reference to the
common source from which all these forms spring, is
the one condition without which it is useless to look
for any real progress in this branch of philology ; and
this principle is here fully recognised. The student is
tow told that he must compare the Greek Charites
with ‘the Sanskrit Haritas, the coursers of the sun,
and that both received their name from a root ghar, to
shine, or glisten. Zeus is referred to the Sanskrit
Dyaus, the brilliant being, Ouranos to Varuna, and
Erinys to Saranyf. It is only to be regretted that the
method has not been carried out tnore systematically.
In all doubtful cases a Lexicographer is fully justified in
keeping silence: but the affinity of Arés and the Latin


x PREFACE,


Mars with the Sanskrit Maruts, the Greek Moli6n, the
Teutonic Midlnir, and of Athéné with the Sanskrit
Ahan and Dahand and the Greek Daphné, is ay wel
established as that of Erinys and Saranyfi, of Ouranos
and Varuna, Yet under Arés we read that it is ‘akin
to appny, &pany, as Lat. Mars to mas, perhaps also to
fjpws, Lat. vir ;’ under Athéné we are referred to dvééw,
where it is said that ‘av8 is the root of dvbog, perhaps
also of Aéjvy and dyqvode.’? But to the Comparative
Mythologist the acceptance of his method will more
than atone for the few blemishes still remaining in a
great work, which must determine the character of
English scholarship.

I have said that the task of analysing and comparing
the m,ths of the Aryan nations has opened to me a
source of unqualified delight. I feel bound to avow
the conviction that it has done more. It has removed
not 2 few perplexities ; it has solved not a few diffi-
culties which press hard on many thinkers. It has
raised and strengthened my faith in the goodness of
God ; it has justified the wisdom which has chosen to
educate mankind through impressions produced by the
phenomena of the outward world.


March 8, 1870.


CONTENTS


THE FIRST VOLUME.


BOOK |.


CHAPTER I.
POPULAR THEORIES ON THE ORIGIN AND GROWTR
OF MYTHOLOGY.
Method of Inquiry. e . : :


‘The Nature of the Problem to bo solved . . . .
Condition of Society in the Greek Heroic Age :
Character of ‘Homeric’ mythology . - *
Conteast betwoen Mythological and Religious Belief” : é
The Lyric and Tragic poets conscious of the Contrast :
Historical Signification of Greek Mythology « ‘ ‘

Conflicting Views as to its Origin. . y
Hypothesis of an Original Revelation . . . -


Extent of Original Rerelation ‘
Its alleged Perversion by the Grecks, as shown ft in the Attributes ‘of their


Goda . . . . . . .
System of Secondaries . . 5
Inventive, as distinguished from traditive, Deities i ‘

Nature of the Doctrines perverted in Greck Mythology 7
Attributes of Athéné and Apollin : . 3 : 2
Relations of will between Zeus and Athénd . . + . .
Peculiar forms of Greek Mythology . ; 3
Consequences involvell in the Perversion of an original Revelation, .
Comparison of the Homeric with the Vedie Mythology i
‘Methods of determining the Exteat of Primitive Revelation .
Evidence of the Book of Genesis . . . .
Limita of this Evidence =, . :
Course of Revelation in the Old Testument és
Necessity of accounting for the Character of Greek Mythology
Conditiona of the Inquiry 2 2 :
Allegorical interpretation of Myths * . . .
Lard Bacon's Method + . + . . . .
Its consequences . . -


Unscientific character of such Interpretations =» == ;


xii CONTENTS OF


CHAPTER II.
THE RELATION OF MYTHOLOGY TO LANGUAGE,


Origin of abstract Words. . . ‘ * .
Pexpanaie’ power of sensuiin Wood ; 4 : ry
Origin of Language . : : i

Immobility of Savage Races .

Historical Results of the Anslysia of Language

Earliest Conditions of Thought . k


CHAPTER III.
THE SOURCE OF MYTHICAL SPEECH.


The Infancy of Mankind =. ei e
‘Primary Myths a ; i _ : : é :
Secondary Myths : : : é
Polyonymy, as affecting the Growth of Mythology ; . .
‘Use of abstract and concrete Names . . : : : .
‘Myths ..rising from the Use of equivocal Words :
Disintegration of Myths . . : .


CHAPTER Iv.
THE DEVELOPEMENT OF MYTHS,


Elasticity of Mythical Speech

Resulte of Mythical Language é ‘

Bridence of this Developement furniched by ‘the Rig Veda .

Relative Age of Greek Myhe F

Solar Myths . . A

Changeful Action of the Sun . ‘ t

Repulsive Developements of aolar Legends

Origin of these Developements =. * d ;

Tendency to localize Mythical Incidents. ; ¢

Vitality of the Mythopaic Faculty \

Constant Demand for new Mythical Narratives :

Groundwork of the Mythology of Northern Europe . :

Groundwork of the ‘Homeric’ Mythology : :

Compariton of Greck and Norse Mythology .

Special Characteristics of Greek Mythology . ; :

Full Developement of Greék Mythology ‘ 5 :
Axrested Growth of Northern Mythology i ; : ;
Light thrown on both by the Vedic Hymns . :
Stages in the Growth of Mythical Systems.


wcr


89
a2
42
48
45
47
49


al


55


THE FIRST VOLUME.


CHAPTER V.
GREEK CONCEPTIONS OF MYTHICAL TRADITION.


Grettual Assignment of an historical Character to Mythical Beings
Each Glan or Tribe regarded ita own Traditions as
This Belief wholly without Foundation :
Connection between the legends of Argos, Thebes, and Athens

The Imagery of these Legends.

Significance of the Names employed in Gresk Legends. .
Opinions of Greek Writers, and their Value . A : i


CHAPTER VI.


GREEK NOTIONS RESPECTING THE MORAL ASPECT OF


MYTHOLOGY.


Coarse Developement of certain Mythical Phrases

Protests of Greek Writers. . . . :
Limits of their Knowledge .
Explanations of the seeming Immorality of Aryan Mytholey :
The Morality of the Hesiodic Pooms . .


CHAPTER VII.


84
84
85
86
88


THEORY OF GREEK MYTHOLOGY AS AN ECLECTIC SYSTEM.


Reproduction of the same Myth under different Forms . ry
No historical Conclusions to be drawn from the Complications 0 caused
Conclusions drawn from a Comparison of Greek with Teutonic Legends
‘Theory of Dr. Dallinger on the Origin of Greek Mythology . ‘
This Theory starts on an Assumption for which there is no Evidence
Historicel Speculations of Dr. Déllinger :
‘They leave the real Dificulties of Greek Mythology unexplained


CHAPTER VIII.
THE DIFFUSION OF MYTHS.


‘The common Element in Aryan Mythology «

The Greck Mythology of itself explains this common Element
The Teutonic Mythology points in precisely the same direction
‘The missing Link supplied in the older Vedic Poems


‘The Key to all Aryan Mythology 2 ”
Germs of mythic] Tales =. ss
Groundwork of Aryan Mythology . . 3
Greek dynastic Legends. re ia Ot


Growth of popular Traditions i


90
9
93
4
96
98
98


99
102
102
102
103
105
106
108
108


aly UANTENS UF


vagus
Legends not resolvable into Phrases relating to pane Phenomena - 110
‘The Brahman and the Goat . . . . papeey
‘The Master Thief - : : 4 : : rire
‘The Legend of Rhampsinitos . 7 “ is : ‘ . 1g
The Story of the Poor Mason, . . + alld
‘The Story of Karpara and Gata. . : . + 16
‘The Story of Trophonios and Agamedes o 16
‘The Shifty Lad . . . . 116
Point and Drift of these Storiea . 118
The Hellenic Master Thief . . . . . 19
‘The Origin of the Story ‘ ; 3 : é : 120
‘Limits to the Hypothesis of Conscious sa) . . . . 1a
‘Framework of Popular Stories E 4 : : + 128
‘The Dog and the Sparrow. ei ‘ - ‘ ‘: . 1
The Nautch Girl and the Parrot . . . . . « 1
Origin and Growth of these Stories . 7 . ‘ ; - 198
‘The Stories of Vicram and Hermotimos . . . A + 129
‘The Table, the Ass, and the Stick . 3 ° é H 181
‘The Brahman, tho Jackal, and the Barber. : a ‘i + 183
The Lad who went to the North Wind . . : i + 185
The Story of Punchkin : : : 3 j : . 185
The Giant who had no Heart in His Body . . . » 188
Mythical Repetitions and Combinations =. i F . 140
Agency of Beasts in those Stories. : : : . 140
The Two Brothers. . . . . . 142
Infuence of written Literature on Folk lore . + + a
‘The Stories of King Putraka and the Three Princeanoe of Whiteland + ltt
Faithful Jobn . . . . . . . «145
Rama and Luxman . . . . . . - 148
‘Mythical Imagery of these Stories . . « . . . 146
The Pilgrim of Love . . . . . . . » 161
‘The Spell of Midday, . * 2 ‘ . «158
‘The Sleep or Death of Summer % . 154
Origin of ali Myths relating to the Charmed Sleep of beautiful Maidens . 156
Charms und Spells in the Odyssey and in Hindu Stories. . 188
‘The Snake Leaves. : ; ‘ - 160
Myths of the Night, the Moon, and the Stare 5 : 7 164
‘The Battle of Light and Darkness. ; : . . - 165
Character of Aryan Folk-lore . ; 2 . 166
Historical Value of Aryan popular Traditions : ae, ge . 168
CHAPTER Ix.
MODERN EVEMEBRISM,
The Method of Entmoros , . se 10
‘Ite Antagonism with the Sdened of Tanguage ‘i . . - '71
Fee ne Thee ene on Miers . . . 1m
‘The Wolflan Theory . i : z _ . 174


‘The real Question at Issue. . . . : . + 176


THE FIEST VOLUME. xv


racn
Residuum of historical Fact in the isd ‘i ¢ 5 . 176
‘The Test of Homeric Credibility 2. i. x . 17
Laws of Byidence i , . 8 18
Their Application in English Courts of Justion a ees
Application to Homeric History =. z : : ~ 180
Value of the historical Residuum in the Tiad 9» : + 182
Diffigulties involved in the traditional View. +e BR
Evemeristie Methods of Deeling with the Homerie Narra : 185
Their irreconcilable Results cite ot oi ‘ i + 185
Value of traditional Impressions. : 7 : + 186
The Legend of Roland and the Nibelongeaio : : i + 188
Principles of Evidence ; : is . ; . 1
‘Tho Homeric Controversy. " 3 é 3 . » 194
‘The Return of the Herukleids ; ae Fy ; 199
The Horakleid Conquests not historical. : 5 + 200
The Origin of the Traditions of the Herakleid Conquests ; 208
‘Materials of Epical Tradition : en. 2. 007
‘Materials of the Poems commonly called Homeric + 208


‘Attemptod Distinetion between the Sciences of Language and Mythology | 200


Assumed early Popularity of our Iliad and Odyssey . . ae

The Evidence of the Caso. crn Oe Ra = gts

‘The Homer of the Greck Tragic Posts | wo + 26

Results of the Inquiry a ey Pe TRIG
CHAPTER X.


THE CHARACTER OF GREEK DYNASTIC AND POPULAR LEGENDS
EN RELATION TO TRIBAL AND NATIONAL NAMES.


Fertility of mythical Phrases , : F : F : . 218
Legends of rival Greek Cities. : . : . 220
‘The Argive Story. ‘i : a x i 220
The Theban Story . . . . . > 221
The Megariun Story . : : E ‘ 228
The Athenian Story . . . . . + 224
The Story of the Pelopids : . 224
Connexion of these Stories with the Tribal or : National Name . 226
The Athenians . + . . . . 227
Tonians and Pheniqians : ‘ F ‘ ‘ . 229
Argives and Arkadiang . . . . . . 230
Deliang and Lykians . . . . . . . + 282
Ethiopians. ‘ a‘ i E 5 : + 284
Danasus and ‘Achoisas . . . . . . + 934
Hellénes and Aiolinus . . . . . « 236
Grecks and Herperisns : : eo : é . 287
Italian and Teutonic tribal Names . . . . . - 238
Ethnological Inferences ° . : 2 ‘ . 240


avi GUNTEN LL UF


CHAPTER XI.

MYTHICAL PHRASES FURNISHING THR MATERIALS OF THE

HOMERIC POEMS, .
Page
Extent of the old Homeric Literature < we wv > -@ 245
Yxtent of Homeric Mythology =. swt . . 242
The Tule of the Achilléis . az . . ~ 245
‘Tho Close of the Achilléis . . - . . + 2
The whole Achilléis a Solar Epic an rr)
The Trojan War only one Scene of wlongDrama | | . 284
The Ilias as contrasted with the Achilléis  . . a . « 264
266


Groundwork of the Odyssey
How much of the Iliad or the Odyssey belongs to the Invention of the Post 258
‘The Portraits of the wrester Chisftains and Heroes not true to national


Character ‘ . . 261

The Character of Odysseus + 264

How far was the Character of Odysseus 6 Creation of the Homeric Post | 268

The Character of Odysseus not Achaian =. oe ean
CHAPTER XII.


MYTHICAL PHRASES FURNISHING MATERIALS FOR THE TEU-
TONIC EPIC POEMS, AND THE LEGENDS OF ARTHUR AND


ROLAND,


Points of likeness between the Greck and Teutonic Epics . z 272
Tho Voloung Tale : . é j a . 978
The Story of Sigurd. ‘ : ‘ : : - - 276
The Story of Gudrun . ‘ ‘ ‘ ; é ‘ . 288
Helgi Sagas. ‘ . : “ ji + 285
‘The first Helgi e . 2 i . ‘ + 286
The second Helgi. : 3 % i‘ . F 286
The third Helgi. ‘ : ; ‘ ‘ . 287
Sigurd, Siegfried, and Baldur : ; : : + 291
The Story of Hagen . : ‘ : ; ! : + 296
The Vengeance of Kriemhild . : : , : ; . 207
Historical Element in the Nibelungenlied A ae, . 301
The Story of Walthar of Aquitaine if . : . . 302
Dietrich of Bern . . . . . « 806
‘The Great Rose Garden . . . . 307
The Romance of Roland =. ‘ ; 207
‘The Story of King Arthur. 7 & 5 ‘ 308
‘The Birth and Youth of Arthur . . . + 309
‘The Round Table and the San Greal 5 . 5 ai
Axthor’s Knights. %: 2 ; » 2 : . 812
Lancelot and Guinevere. 4 : ¢ a ‘ 1 314

. . i » » 315


The Death of Arthur . . .


re


THE FIRST VOLUME.


Guinevere and Diarmaid .

Later Medieval Epics and Romances =.
Literature of Europe. ‘ z

The Grettir Saga. é : 4 :

The Character of Grettir 7 ‘ 7

‘Materials of the Saga : - ‘ :

Grettir and Boots

Purnllelisms betwoen the Grettir Saga and other Mite

The Ayenging of Grettir : a


BOOK IL


CHAPTER I.
THE ETHEREAL HEAVENS,


Sxerion L—DYAUS,


Idensof Heaven. ee
The glistening Ether. =. we
Dyaue and Prithist - We ia of
Ldeas doncted by thetameDys |


Szcrion IL—VARUNA AND MITRA.


‘The solid Heaven. . . . .
Moral Aspects of Varupa W . .
Aryan Monotheism . a 7 as .
Aditi and the Adityas : : :
"he physical and gpiritual Varuna. .


Szcrtox LII—INDRA.


‘The primary Conception of Indra purely physical
Action of the Vediotand Achuian Deities . :
Indra» God of the bright Heaven . : .
Meaning of the Name . :
‘The Might and Majesty of Indra
Indra the Rain-bringer

Physiesl Confiet between Light and Darkness =.
The WifeofIndm . . 0. ee


Secrtox 1V.—BRAHMA,


Place of Brahma in the Hindu te heogoty ‘ 7 :
Prajdpati és . . +
Visvakarman , : : . i : .


VOL. IL. a


xvii
rage
316
816
318
B19
320
321
322
322
325


326
327
328
328


330
Bak
332
333
334


336
337
338
389
330
340
Sat
343


B44
346
346


xviii CONTENTS OF


Sucrtox V.~-ZEUS.


‘The Dwelling of Zousin Ether 9. : Pek
The unchanging Light =. ; :
‘The Idea of Zeus peapeiel by pial Phenomons . :
The Latin Jupiter.

‘Zeus Ouranion :
The mythical and spiritual Zeos | :
‘The Zeus of the Tragic Posts : é ; . :
The name Zeus, and its Transformations : he URE
‘The Zeus of local Traditions. : : :
The Birth of Zeus. : y : :
‘The Iniquities of Kronos, ols
‘The War of the Titans Me :

Other Forms of this Struggle be as

The Loves of Zeus. ‘ i, :

‘The twelve Olympian Deities ar

‘The Cretan and Arkedian Zeus. 3

Bykocoura and Lykaén : . : :
‘The Dodonsian and Olympian Zous. : ‘
Limite to the Power of Zeus . : ; :
‘The Moescuiggrs of Zeus. : 2 .
luton


Secriox VI.—ODIN, WODEN, WUOTAN.


Charactoristica of Teutonic Mythology : ‘
Teutonic Thoogonies . é : : ,
Genealogy of Odin. - ‘ F : 2
Odin as the Creator of Man - . . . :
‘The End of the Asas or Hsir S

The Name Wuotan

"The one-eyed Wuotan

Odin the Rain-giver ‘

Odin the All-futher . : : is

‘Tyr and Odin . 7 i .


Secriox VII.—THUNDER, DONAR, THOR,


‘The Name Donar é : , 5 ee


Thor the All-father . % . .
His triple Functions . : er


Szcrion VIIL—FRO.


Relations of Fro to Freya
Sxerion IX.—HEIMDALL, BRAGI, AND OEGIR.


‘The Lord of Himinbiorg é 5
Bragi, the Lord of Dey : * 3 3
Ongir the Sea-god : : e : :


gar


PAGM
347


368
870
871
372
372
878
376
376
377
377


878
378
379


381


3ar
382
382


THE FIEST VOLUME.


CHAPTER II.
THE LIGHT.


Srcriox L—SURYA AND SAVITAR.


Strys, the pervading irresistible luminary 2
'The one-handed Savitar . % « "
The Power of Savitar . r %


Szcrion IJ,—SOMA,


Tho physical and spiritual Soma 5 ww,
Powers of Soma .


Suction II—CORRELATIVE DEITIES.


Complementary Deities - 4 Sg ,
The Dualism of Nature : aan :


Functions of the Aevins =. : om. ;
Parentage of the Asvins =. 3. “ : .
The Twins. 1a, Ge ae
Soma and Sirs. - : ne ;


Section IV.—THE DAWN.


The lonely Wanderer : Scat, ele: ot
Developement of the Myth Boge wk. the
‘The Story of Urvast . o Ste em 4
Germs of tho Story of Revelopb = 5 ws
‘The Dawn andthe Waters. 6 we
Erés and Psychd :


‘The Soarch of the Dawn for the Sun . : :

‘The Search of the Sun for tho Dawn . ‘ ‘
Origin of these Myths ; \ 4
Best of tho Sun and West of the Moon ‘ :
The Wanderers in the Forest 3 : 3

The Spell of Moonlight —. ‘ i :

The Seven Rishis ©

The Arkshas or Shiners : é

The Rishis and Manu : ‘ ‘


Sscrrox V.—_DAWN GODDESSES.


‘Ushas and Eba . . « * - .
Ushas the broad- repending ; oe ae Spee
Ahoo& : ; ‘ sw s
Saremi : : : oie oe
Tho Cows of Indra. : eee :
The Fidelity of Sarem& ee
Saranyh : S ay fa es


rage
aga
385
386


386
389


389
389
390
391
391
393


ale


415
417
418
419
420
421
422


xx CONTENTS OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


The Harpies . : . :
Axjunt : 7


The HorsesoftheSun sss;


Arushi ; * i “
Buakes and Dragons . A 3 :
Sorvery and Witchcraft. Q
‘The Story of Med
‘The Myth of Prokris
Eée and Tithénos : : :
‘Hébé and Ganyméda . : . s
The Story of Didoand Anna.


‘Héré aud Leiandros . . . ‘s .


The Brides of the San R 2 s
The Arkadian Auge . : : ‘
Eurbpé and the Bull . a : .
‘Althaia wud the Burning Brand


Section VIL—ATHENE,


The original Idea of Athéné purely Beal:
Athénd Tritogencia . ‘


Birth api Parentage of Athius | |


Athéné Mother of Phoibos and Lycbnos .


Epithets of Athéné e.g : :


Athéné the Guardian of Heroes: . .
‘The Latin Minerva . . : 7


APPENDICES.


The Antiquity of Written Poems

Tho historical Authority of Homer -
‘The Myth of Oiipom « i: :
Swan-maidens . .

The name Helent

VI. Lykanthropy


<38RH


PACE
423
423
424,
425
426
428
428
429
430
431
432,
482
435
435
437
437
438


439
440
44)
442
443,
444
445,


447
449
404
466
458
469


THE MYTHOLOGY


oF


THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK Tf.


oe


CHAPTER I.


POPULAR THEORIES ON THE ORIGIN AND GROWTH
OP MYTHOLOGY.


We cannot examine the words by which we express our
thoughts and our wants, or compare the stories which En-
glish children hear in their nurseries with the folk-talk of
Germany and Norway, without speedily becoming aware that
the inquiry on which we have entered must carry us back to
the very infancy of mankind. We have undertaken the
investigation of fact, and we must follow the track into which
the search for ficts has brought us. If we have been accus-
tomed to think that the race of men started in their great
career with matured powers and with a speech capable of
expressing high spiritual conceptions, we cannot deny the
gravity of the issue, when a science which professes to resolve
this language into ita ultimate elements, asserts that for a
period of indefinite length human speech expressed mere
bodily sensations, and that it was confined to such expres-
sions, because no higher thoughts had yet been awakened in
the mind, But unless we choose to take refuge in assump-
tions, we must regard the question as strictly and simply a
matter of fact: and all that we have to do, is to examine
VOL, 1. B


ons:
“~~
Method of
inguiry.


2


BOOK
ae ee


‘The nature
of the
problem to
Be solved,


Condition
of society


Greek
heroic age*


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


impartially the conditions of the problem, with the determi-
nation of evading no conclusion to which the evidence of
fact may lead us.

This problem is sufficiently startling, on whatever portion
of the subject we may first fix our minds. The earliest lite-
rature, whether of the Hindu or the Greek, point& in the
direction to which the analysis of language seema to guide
us. In both alike we finda genuine belief in a living Power,
to whom men stand in the relation of children to a father ;
but in both, this faith struggles to find utterance in names
denoting purely sensuous objects, and thus furnishing the
germ of a sensuous mythology. Hence the developement of
religious faith and of a true theology would go on side by
side with the growth of an indiscriminate anthropomorphiem,
until the contrast became so violent 2s to call forth the in-
dignant protests of men like Sokrates and Pindar, Euripides
and Plato. Yet this contrast, as throwing us back upon the
analysis of words, has enabled us to unlock the doors before
which the most earnest seekers of ancient times groped in
vain, and to trace almost from their very source all the
streams of human thought.

This antagonism reached its highest point among the
Bellenic tribes. From this point therefure we may most
reasonably work back to that indefinitely earlier condition
of thought in which ‘the first attempts only were being
made at expressing the simplest conceptions by means of a
language most simple, most sensuous, and most unwieldy,’!
The Tiad and Odyssey exhibit a state of sctiety which has
long since emerged from mere bratishness and barbarism.
It has its fixed order and its recognised gradations, a system
of law with judges to administer it, and a public opinion
which sets itself against some faults and vices not amenable
to legal penalties. It brings before us men who, if they
retain, in their occasional ferocity, treachery, and malice,
characteristics which belong to the savage, yet recognise the
majesty of law and submit themselves to its government—
who are obedient, yet not servile—who care for other than
mere brate forces, who recognise the value of wise words and

} Max Miller, Chips from a German Workshop, vol. i. p. 354.


SOCIETY OF THE GREEK HEROIC AGE.


prudent counsels, and in the right of uttering them give the
earnest of a yet higher and more developed freedom.’
ahows to us men who, if they regard all as enemies until by
an oufward covenant they have been made their friends, yet
own the sanctity of an oath and acknowledge the duty of
executing true judgment between man and man; who, if
they are fierce in fight, yet abhor mutilation, torture, and
unseemly insult, and are willing to recognise merit in an
enemy not less readily than in a friend. Above all, it tells
us of men who in their home life are honest and truthful,
who make no pretension of despising human sympathy and
setting lightly by kindness, gentleness, and love. If here
and there we get glimpses of a charity which seeks a wider
range,? yet the love of wife and children and brethren is the

» role and not the exception ; and everywhere, in striking con-
trast with Athenian society in the days of Perikles and
Aspasia, we see mén and women mingling together in equal
and pure companionship, free alike from the arrogance and
servility of Oriental empires, and from the horrible vices
which, if even then in germ, were not matured till the so-
called heroic ages had long passed away.?

But these epic poems tell us also of gods, some of whom
at least had all the vices and few of the virtues of their
worshippers. They tell us of a supreme ruler and father

1 Tt cannot, of course, be maintained
that this freedam was more than in its


gm. | The king kas his Boule. or
‘ouncil, where he listens to the chief-


of the Homeric society both in dis-
cussion and in the administration
of justice (History of ite
90-101), Mr. Gladstone presenta the


tains whose judgment novertheless he
can override. There is also the Agora,
where the people hear the decisions of
their rulera on questions of state, and
in which justice is adminjstered. The
case of Therait ‘barely consistent
with sn acknowledged right of oppo-
sition, while the complaints of the
Hesiodic poet show that an unjust
verdict could easily be obtained. But


it was everything that a people should
acknowledge Zeus to be the author of
7
Suaowdda . . . Cduioras
pds bids elpbarat. Zi. 238


and allow the superiority of mind over
matter oven in their chisftains, Mr.
Grote haw brought out the imperfections


icture in & more favourable light
Homer and the Homeric Age, ii.
122, &e.).

2'It ig the praise of the wealthy
Azylos (who ia slain by Diombits) that


thes Fr dxbpdmoweur*
bagi we pidterxey ae tx oixia
. vi, 14,

a“ 3 “big more than to any other
cause, were owing even the political
disasters of later Greek history. It
may, perhaps, be,said with truth that
the evil did not ‘exist in the Homeric
age, but the canker had eaten very
deeply into the heart of society bofore
tho days of Thucydides and Sakrates,
For its resulta see Thirwall’s History of
Greece, Vili. ch. Ixvi.

Bz


8


oe


Tr 2


Character
of ' Ho-
meric’ my-
thology.


4


300K
—


Contrast.
between
mytholo-
gical abd
religious
belief,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. |


of gods and men who had not always sat upon his throne,
of other gods deposed and smitten down to dark and desolate
Tegions, of feuds and factions, of lying and perjury, of fero-
cious ctuelty and unmeasured revenge. They tell us of gods
who delight in sensual enjoyments and care for little more
than the fat of rams and goats, of gods who own no check to
their pdssions, and recognise no law against impurity and
lust. And even those gods who rise to a far higher ideal
exhibit characters the most variable and actions the most
inconsistent. The same being is at different times, nay,
almost at the same time, just and iniquitous, truthful and
false, temperate ind debauched.

As describing the origin and attributes of the gods, the
whole series of Greek myths-may be said to form a theology ;
and with the character of the people, this theology stands
out in marked contrast. It is impossible for us to determine
precisely the extent to which this mythical theology was
believed, because it is not in ou power to throw ourselves
back wholly into their condition of thought; but if the ab-
sence of all doubt or reflection constitute faith, then their
faith was given to the whole cycle of fables which make up
the chronicles of their gods. But if we look to its influence
on their thoughts at times when the human heart is stirred
to its depths, we can scarcely say that this huge fabric of
mythology challenged any belief at all: and thus we must
draw a sharp line of severance between their theology and
their religion, if we use religion in the sense attached to the
word by Locke or Newton, Milton or Butler. If the poet
recounts the loves of Zeus, the jealousies of Héré, the fends
and the factions in Olympos, it is equally certain that
Achilleus does not pray to a sensual and lying god who owns
no law for himself and cannot be a law for man, The con-
trast is heightened if we turn to the poems known as the
Hesiodic. If the poet narrates a theogony which incurred
the detestation or disgust of Pindar and of Plato, he telle us
also of a Divine’ King who is a perfectly upright judge, and
loves those who are clear of hand and pure of heart.' If he


1 Zee identity of authorship for the Daye is very doubt: but the question
Hasiodio Theegony and the Works and in immaterial. Both poemo exiabit the


DISTINCTION BETWEEN MYTHOLOGY AND RELIGION.


tells of horrible banquets to which the more fastidious faith
of the lyric poet refuses to give credence,’ he bida all to
follow after justice, because the gods spend their time, not
in feadting, but in watching the ways and works of men.’
If schylos in one drama depicts the arrogant tyranny of
Zeus as a usurper and an upstart, if the reiterated conviction
of the prophetic Titan is that the new god shall fall, yet in
others he looks up to the same Zeus (if indeed it be the
same),’ as the avenger of successful wrong, the vindicator of a
righteous law whose power and goodness are alike eternal.
If for Sophokles the old mythology had not lost its charm,
if be too might tell of the lawless loves and the wild licence
of Zeus and other gods, yet his heart is fixed on higher
realities, on that purity of word and deed which has its
birth, not on earth, but in heaven, and of which the im-
perishable law is realised and consummated in a God as holy


and everlasting.‘


sentiment of the same age, or of times
separated by no long interval; and in
the latter posm the sction of Zeus in
the degond ‘of Pandora, (which is also
related in the Throgony) is utterly
unlike that of the Zeus who figures in
all the didactic portions of the work.


1 duct 8 Bxopa yarrpluap-
‘yor waxdpay ra? dxely: dplorapat.
Prypar, Olymp. i. 82.


Pindar’s objection is » moral one;
‘but Herodotos proceeded to reject on
physical grounds the legend which told
of the founding of the Dodonaian oracle,
Gi. 67), as well as some of the exploits
of Herakles (ii. 45.) It was, however,
a moral reason which led him practi-
cally to disbelieve the ghole story of
Helon’s sojourn at Tro 120). “See
also Grote, History of Greece, part i,
ch. xv,

3 Works and Days, 247-258,

4 Zebs boris wor’ erly.

Agamemnon, 160.

* Oid. Tyr. 863-871. The objection
that comparative mythology, while it
explains the Greek myths, fails ‘to
explain the Greek religion, or to explain
how the mythology and the religion got
mixed up together,’ turns on the meaning
of words, Inonesente, their mythology
wan at once their theology and their
seligion; but if we regard religion aso


tule of life based on a conscious sub-
mission to Divine Will and Lew as
Heing absolutely righteous, aud if we
ask how far the Greek had such a rule,
we enter on a question of the gravest
moment, Picea it is too mut the
practice of the present dey summaril
B diemise, Tho acknowledged. dislike
which some felt for ut lenst part of their
theology, can be explained oniy by their
knowledge of a higher law. But if it
be maintained that the sense or the
sentiment, which lay at the root of this
dislike, is either some relic of earlier
and purer knowledge—in other words,
of an original common revelation—‘or
else a wonderful exercise of man's own
reflective power,’ we may reply that this
is not the only alternative Te open to
us, When St. Psal speaks of Gentiles
as being by nature a lew to themsclres,
he wes the word ne ee
which implicitly denies that they ob-
tained A Taowiedge of this law by a
mere exercise of their reflective ers,
and which implies thet God had in all
countries and ages left a witness of
himself in the héarts of men as well as
in the outward world. Surely we who
acknowledge thet all holy desires, all
Bont corners and all just works proceed
ireetly from God, may well believe that
the religious sense which led Pindar to
reject some mythical tales, and Sokrates


CHAP.


6


BOOK


and tragic
pots were
con:

of thie
contrast,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN "NATIONS. °


It would be difficult to discover # more marvellous com-
- 1 _. bination of seemingly inexplicable contradictions, of beliefin
The lyric the history of gods utterly distinct from the faith which
guided the practice of men, of an immoral and {mpure
theology with a condition of society which it would be
monstrous to regard as utterly and brutally depraved. Yet,
in some way or other, this repulsive system, from which
heathen poets and philosophers learnt gradually to shrink
scarcely less than ourselves, had come into being, had been
systematized into a scheme more or less coherent, and im-
posed upon the people as so much genuine history. What
this origin and growth was, is (strange as it may appear) one
of the most momentous questions which we can -put to our-
selves, for on its answer must depend our conclusions on the


to insist one moral standard of which
cur common practice fale evdly short,
was the direct work of the Spirit of


Gol Languoge is as much the gi of

Gud, whether according to the popular
notion man spoke articulately from the
first, or, as the analysis of language
seus to show, acquired the power of
speech through a clow and painful


dieciptine; nor would many venture to
say that we learnt to walk or to judge
by sight or touch through powers origin-
ally ‘acquired by
whatever of tru poets pos
sessed came from God, that truth would
continue to grow, even while they spoke
of the Divine Being under a name which
had originally. signified the oky. If
Comparative Mythology brings befure us
4 time during which men appear at first
to have little consciousness of 8 personal
‘Maker of the Visible World, it may aleo
show us how out of the darkness of their


earlier thoughts they were led to fe
that there was a ower ine
of alt thin,


with whi they" hed hed ee and thet
thie Power was righteous snd good.
But the Greek who like 7 omen


(Max Miller, Chips a
Workshop, \. 366), bad this fog and
‘was conscious of it, would stil] of


Sot Power ae Zeus; nor hea Christi-
anity itvelf banished from its language
pames which come from the myth-mak-
ing ages. The Romance and Teutonic


* names for God remain what they were


‘before the growth of Christianity; they


have merely acquired guother conno-
tation,

If, then, we wish to have a trae idea
of Greek religion in the highest sense
of the word, we must patiently gather
all the detached sentences bearing on
the subject which are scattered through-
out. the wide field of their literature ;
but without going over the ground
traversed by M. Maury, (Les Religions
de la Grice antique), the inquiry may
practically be brought into @ narrow
compass, We have abundant evidence
that the religion of the Greeks, like our
own, was a trust ‘in an all-wise, all-
powerful, eternal Being, the Ruler of
‘the world, whom we approach in prayer
and meditation, to whom we commit all
our cares, and whose presence we frel
not only in the outward world, but also
in the warning voice within our hearts,”
It is in this sense that Augustino 9
of the Christian religion es existing
among the ancients; but Professor Max
Miller, who rightly lays great stress on
this remark (Chips from a German
Workshop, i. hes aleo pointed out
the little regard vate Angee paid
to his own doctrine, ‘hrough the
whole of St, Augustine's work, and
through all the works of earlier Christian
divines, as far av I can judge, there runs
the same spitit of hostility, blinding
them to ali that may be good and true
and ancred, and magnifying all that ie
bad, false, and corrupt in the ancient
religions of mankind’ ‘ures om
Lavgwage, second series. x. 421.)


ALLEGORY IN MYTHOLOGY.
conditions of human life during the infancy of mankind, If


1
CHAP.


the fragmentary narratives, which were gradually arranged ‘ aes


into one gigantic system, were the work of a single age or of
several generations who devoted themselves to their fabrica-
tion, then never has there been seen in the annals of
mankind an impurity more loathsome, an appetite more
thoroughly depraved, 2 moral sense more hopelessly blunted,
than in those who framed the mythology of the Greek or the
Hindu. Of the answers which have been given to this
question, it can be no light matter to determine which fur-
nishes the most adequate solution.

The method which Mr. Grote, in his ‘ History of Greece,’?
has adopted for the examination of Greek legend, appears
rather to avoid the difficulty than to grapple with it. There


is unquestionably much personification in their mythology ; ‘ogy


there is also undoubtedly a good deal of allegory; but
* neither allegory nor personification will furnish s real ex-
planation of the whole. It may be true to say that Ouranos,
Nyx, Hypnos, and Oneiros are persons in the Hesiodic
Theogony, although it is probably erroneous to say that they
are just as much persons as Zeus or Apollén; and the suppo-
sition is certainly inadmissible ‘ that these legends could all
be traced by means of allegory into a coherent body of phy-
sical doctrine.’* But there are beyond doubt many things
even in the Hesiodic Theogony which have at least no human
personality ;* nor does the assertion of personality, whether
of Zeus or Herakles or Apollén, in the least degree account
for the shape which the narrative of their deeds easumes, or
for the contradictory aspects in which they are brought
before us. It dogs not in any way explain why Zeus and
Herakles should have so many earthly loves, end why in
every land there should be those who claim descent from
them, or why there should be so much of resemblance and of
difference between Phoibos and ‘Helios, Gaia and Démétér,
Nereus and Poseidén. But Mr. Grote was examining the
mythology of Greece as an historian of outward facts, not as


4 Part i. ch. i.-xvi, History of Christianity, i. 13, &e.
* 3 Grote, History of Greese, part i. ° For instance, elpta paxpd.—
ch. i. See also Mure, Oritical History 129


of Greek ‘Literature, i 104; Milman,


tion of
Grevk
mytho-


8


BOOK


Rey


Conflicting
views as
to ite


origin,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. ~


one who is tracing out the history of the human mind ;° and
from this point of view he is justified in simply examining
the legends, and then dismissing them as the picture ‘of a
past which never was present.’ To this expression Profestor
-Max Miiller takes great exception, and especially protests
against Mr. Grote’s assertion of ‘the uselessness of digging
for a supposed basis of truth’ in the myths of the Greek
world.’ But although it appears certain that the Greek
mythology points to an actual and not an imaginary past, a
past which must have for us a deep and abiding interost, it
would yet seem that Professor Miiller has misinterpreted the
words of Mr. Grote, who by ‘truth’ means the verification of
actual occurrences, and by a real past means a past of whose
events we can give an authentic narrative." In this sense,
to assert the truth of the lives and adventures of Zeus and
Herakles, after stripping away from them the clothing of the
supernatural, is to fall back on the system of Euémeros, and
to raise a building without foundation. But it is obvious
that this method leaves the origin of this theology and the
question of its contradictions, and still more of its im-
purity and grossness, just where it found them. It carries
us no further back than the legends themselves, while it
fails to remove the reproach which heathen apologists
and Christian controversialists alike assumed or admitted
to be true.?

Two theories only appear to attempt a philosophical
analysis of this vast system. While one repudiates the im-
putation of a deliberate fabrication of impurities, the other
asserts as strongly the wilful moral corruption exhibited in
the theogonic narratives of the Greeks. In the inconsistent


* ‘Comparative Mythology,’
Pa ee:
* From this point of vi


that having thus swept away its historical
|. character, he should ‘not have soen that


possible to deny the truth of Mr. Grote's
statement, when, speaking of the North-

ern Eddas, he says that ‘the more
thoroughly this oa ‘Teytonic story has
been traced and com in ite various
transformations iments,
the Jess can any well- ay
‘nection be made out for it with authentic
historical names or events.’ History of
‘Greece, part i, ch. xviii. It is strange


there must be some reason for that
Lee Jar agreement between Teutonic
Grock mythology, which, at the

Teast, he partially discems, and that the
paaueiseey  revented bythe

Bleunga. ‘with many pointe
Grecian mythical narrative’ is e fact to
‘be accounted for,

* Grote, History of Grecoe, part i.
ch, xvii.


THE RELIGIOUS SENSE.


9


and repulsive adventures of Zeus or Herakles, it sees the CHAP.
perversion of high and mysterious doctrines originally im- whe


parted to man, and discerns in the gradations of the Olym-
pian hierarchy vestiges of the most mysterious doctrines
embraged in the whole compass of Christian teaching. By
this theory all that is contradictory, immoral, or disgusting
in Greek mythology is the direct result of human sinfulness
and rebellion, and resolves itself into the distortion of a
divine revelation imparted to Adam immediately after the
Fall.


There are few subjects on which it would be more rash to Hypothe-


give or withhold assent to any statement without the clearest “®


ofan
inal


definition of terms. We may admit the truth of Bishop revelation.


Butler’s assertion that the analogy of nature furnishes no
presumption against a revelation when man was first placed
upon the earth;' but it is obvious that they who agree in
asserting the fact of such a revelation may yet have widely
different conceptions of its nature and extent. And although
it is easy to see the place which Butler’s statement holds in
the general connection of his argument, it is not so easy to
ascertain what on this point hia own judgment may have
been. Human feeling recoils instinctively from any notion
that the Being who placed man in the world ever left him
wholly to himself; but the repudiation of such an idea in
no way determines the amount of knowledge imparted to
him at the first. Nations have been found, and still exist,
whose languages contain not a single word expressive of
divinity, and into whose mind the idea of God or of any
religion seems never to have entered.? If it be hard to
measure the depth of degradation to which the Abipones,
the Bushman, and the Australian may have fallen, it is im-
possible to believe that the struggles of men like Sokrates
and Plato after truth had no connection with a guiding and
controlling power. If in the former we discern the evidence


Analogy, part ii, ch. ti. § 2. Miller, History of Banskrit Literature,
2 “Penskcl’e Jesuit theologian, de- B38. It ina miserable fact that this
clared that there were many Indians, condition of thought fads a parallel
who, on being asked whether during the mong certain sections of Englishmen.
whole course of their lives they ever See also Farrar, Chapters om Language,
thought of God, replied No, never.’ Max iv. 46,


10


bas


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


of wilfal corruption, we must recognise in the latter the


oy vigorous growth of a mind and spirit which ‘seeks to obey


Extent of
original
revelation, Vit


the law of its constitution.'’ In Bishop Butler's philosophy,
the reason of man is the Divine Reason dwelling in him! the
voice of hia conscience is the word of God, That, these,
gifts involved a revelation of divine truth, it is impossible
to deny; but whether this is all that he meant by the asser-
tion of an original revelation, the Analogy does not enable
us to determine with precision. He does, however, assert
that the question of the extent of that revelation is to be
considered ‘as a common question of fact;’ and too great a
atress cannot be laid on these words.?

No such charge of ambiguity can be brought against the

view which Mr, Gladstone has maintained in his elaborate
work on ‘Homer and the Homeric Age.’ In his judgment,
all that is evil in Greek mythology is the result not of a
natural and inevitable process, when words used originally
in «ne sense came unconsciously to be employed in an-
other, but of a systematic corruption of very sacred and
very mysterious doctrines. These corruptions have, in his
opinion, grown up not around what are generally called
the first principles of natural religion, but around dogmas
of which the images, so youchsafed, were realised in a long
eubsequent dispensation. In the mythology of the Hellenic
race he sees a vast fabric, wonderfully systematized, yet in
some parts ill-cemented and incongruous, on the composition
of which his theory seems to throw a full and unexpected
light. In it he hears the key-note of a strain whose music
had been long forgotten and misunderstood, but whose
harmony would never of itself have entered into mortal
wind. It could not be supplied by invention, for ‘ invention
cannot absolutely create, it can only work on what it finds
already provided to hand.’* Rejecting altogether the position
that ‘the basis of the Greek mythology is laid in the deifica-
tion of the powers of nature,’ he holds that ander corrupted
forms it presents the old Theistic and Messianic traditions,>


1 Butler, Sermons, ii. ‘On Human + Homer and the Homeric i ge
Nature.’ 4 Ibid. 10.


THEORY OF DEGRADATION.


11


that by a primitive tradition, if not by 2 direct command, it CHAP.
upheld the ordinance of sacrifice ;! thet ita course was from io


light to darkness, from purity to uncleanness.’? Its atarting
point wes ‘the idea of a Being infinite in power and intelli-

#gences and though perfectly good, yet good by an unchange-
able internal determination of character, and not by the
constraint of an external law.’* But the idea of goodness
can be retained only by a sound moral sense; the notion of
power is substituted when that sense is corrupted by ain.‘
But sin has no such immediate action on the intellect.
Hence the power and wisdom of the Homeric Gods is great
and lofty, while their moral standard is indefinitely low.*
But the knowledge of the Divine Existence roused the desire
to know also where He dwelt; and, in the mighty agencies
and sublime objects of creation in which they fancied that they
saw Him, Mr. Gladstone discerns the germs of that nature-
worship which was ingrafted on the true religion originally
imparted to mankind.’ This religion involved (i), the Unity
and Supremacy of the Godhead ; (ii), a combination with this
Unity, of a Trinity in which the several persons are in some
way of coequal honour; {iii), 2 Redeemer from the curse of
death, invested with full humanity, who should finally
establish the divine kingdom; (iv), a Wisdom, personal and
divine, which founded and sustains the world; (v), the con-
nection of the Redeemer with man by descent from the
woman. With this was joined the revelation of the Evil
One, as a tempting power among men, and the leader of
rebellious angels who had for disobedience been hurled from
their thrones in heaven."


Gladstane has propounded it again in his


.
1 Homer and the Homeric Age, ii, 15.
ing address to the University of Ed-


* Ibid. 17: ‘The stream darkened


more and more sa it got further from
the vource.’

* Tind. 18. * Ibid. 19. © Ibid. 20.

* Tbid. 31.

' [oid. 42. This theory, put forth ten
years ago, has been received with no
greut favour; but nothing less than the
, Tepudiation of it by Mr. Gladstone him-
“gelf could justify our passing it by in
silence, when our purpose is to show that
the problem ean be solved only by the
method of comparative mythology.
far from retracting this hypothesis, un


Pugh (1865), and more recently with
certain modifications in his volume en-
titled Juventus Mundi (1868). Theso
‘modifications will be noticed in their sev-
eral places; but es his last work is in-
tended toembply the greater part of the
results at whieh he: arrived in hie Homeric
Studies, axd as his theory of the origin
of Greek myth remains substanti-
ally what it was before, I have not
thet it mecesssry to alter the text
waa written long before the pub-
lication of Juventus Mundi Indeed,


12-
- BOOK


iS


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


Putting aside the question how far these ideas may reflect
the thought of later ages, we must admit with Mr. Gladatone


Ite alleged that from this shadowing forth of the great dogmas of the


Fy the
roa,


Trinity the next step might be into Polytheism, and from
that of the Incarnation into anthropomorphism or the re-»
flection of humanity upon the supernatural world.' This
true theology, in the hands of the Greeks, was perverted into
a Trinity of the three sons of Kronos: Zeus, Hades, and
Poseidén. The tradition of the Redeemer is represented by
Apollén; the Divine Wisdom is embodied in Athéné ;? and
Lété, their mother, stands in the place of the woman from
whom the Deliverer was to descend. The traditions of the
Evil One were still further obscured. Evil, as acting by


_ Violence, was represented most conspicuously in the Titans and


as shown
in the at-
tributes of
their Gods.


giants—as tempting by deceit, in the Até of Homer, while
lastly, the covenant of the rainbow reappears in Iris.’

- For these primitive traditions, which are delivered to us
‘either in the ancient or the more recent books of the


. Bible,’ 4 Mr. Gladstone alleges the corroborative evidence


farnished by the Jewish illustrative writings during or after
the captivity in Babylon.’ These writings bear witness to
the extraordinary elevation of the Messiah, and to the intro-
duction of the female principle into Deity, which the Greeks
adopted not as a metaphysical conception, but with a view
to the family order among immortals. Thus in the Greek
Athéné and Apollén respectively he distinguishes the attri-
butes assigned by the Jews to the Messiah and to Wisdom—
the attributes of sonship and primogeniture, of light, of
mediation, of miraculous operation, of conquest over the
Evil One, and of the liberation of the deads from the power
of hell, together with ‘an assemblage of the most winning
and endearing moral qualities.’?

This theory Mr. Gladstone has traced with great minute-
ness and ingenuity through the tangled skein of Greek
mythology. The original idea he finds disintegrated, and a
the slightnees of the modification which its logical results.

theory has undergone, renders it  ' Homer and the Homeric Age, ii, 43.
Perhaps even More necessary to exhibit * Ibid. 44. * Ibid. 45. ¢ Ibid. 48,


clearly the dilemmas and difficaltics * Wid. 50. © Did. 51. * Thid. 53.
involved in this theory, if carried out to


IDEA OF SECONDARY DEITIES.


system of secondaries is the necessary consequence. Far
above all are exalted Apollén and Athéné, in their personal
purity! yet more than in their power, in their immediate
action,” in their harmony with the will of the Supreme
King, and in the fact that they alone, among the deities of
‘a second generation, are admitted to equal honour with the
Kronid brothers, if not even to higher. But some of their
attributes are transferred to other beings, who are simply
embodiments of the attribute so transferred and of no other.
Thus Athéné is attended by Hermes, Ares, Themis, and
Hephaistos; Apollén by Paiéén and the Muses; ‘ as, simi-
larly, we have in Gaia a weaker impersonation of Démétér,
and Nereus as representing simply the watery realm of
Poseiddn, In Lété, their mother, is shadowed forth the
woman whose seed was to bruise the head of the serpent;
for Lété herself has scarcely any definite office in the Homeric
theology, and she remains, from any view except this one, an
anomaly in mythological belief.» But the traditions which
relate to the under-world, which is the realm of Hades, are
not less full than those which tell us of the heavenly order
of Olympos. Amidst some little confusion, Mr. Gladstone
discerns a substantial correspondence with divine revelation,
and finds in the Homeric poems the place of bliss destined
finally for the good, the place of torment inhabited by the
Evil One and his comrades, and the intermediate abode for
departed spirits, whether of the good or the evil. But while
the prevalence of sacrifice attests the strength of primitive
tradition, of the Sabbatical institution there is no trace.’ It
was an ordinance ‘too highly spiritual to survive the rude
shocks and necessities of earthly life.’

Of the other deities some owe their existence to invention,
which has been busy in depraving and debasing the idea
even of those which are traditive.* Thus Héré was invented
because Zeus must not live alone, and Rhea because he must
have a mother; and whole mass of human adventure and
of human passion without human recognition of law is


1 Homer and the Homeric Age, ii 4 Ibid. 62. ® Ibid. 152.
87-107. * Bid. 170. ? Bid. 171, 172.
4 Ibid. 89-93, * Bid. 57. = © Bid. 178,


13


seg
aS


Taventive,
49 distin-
guished
from tra-
ditive,
deition,


az


Oe
—


Nature of
the doc-


verted in
Greck my-
thology.


MiTHULUG. Uz ‘itia ARIAN NATIVAS,


heaped up round almost every deity {except the two who
stand out unsullied in their purity and goodness), not, how-
ever, without occasional protests from the poet who had not
yet become familiar with the deification of vicious passion.'
Thus, on the hypothesis of Mr. Gladstone, Greek mythology
is no distortion of primary truths which first dawn on the
mind of a child or are imparted to it, and which, it might
have been supposed, would form the substance of divine
truth granted to man during the infancy of his race. It is
the corruption of recondite and mysterious dogmas which
were not to become facts for hundreds or thousands of years,
of doctrines which: the speculations of Jewish rabbis may
have drawn into greater prominence, but which form the
groundwork of Christian theology. Zeus, the licentious


- tyrant, the perjured deceiver, the fierce hater, the lover of


revelry and banqueting, who boaste of his immunity from all
restraint and law, is the representative of the Infinite and
Eternal Father. He with Hades and Poseidén represents
the Christian Trinity; but Hades represents also the power
of darkness, and Poseidén shares the attributes of God with
those of the devil," while all are children of the dethroned
Kronos, in whom again the evil power finds an impersonation.*
‘When we survey the whole mass of mythological legend,
when we spread out before us the lives of Zeus and his
attendant gods (scarcely excepting even Athéné and Apollén),
we stand aghast at the boldness of an impiety which has
perhaps never had its parallel. The antediluvian records of
the Old Testament bring before us a horrible picture of brute
violence, resulting possibly from a deification of human will,
which, it would seem, left no room for any theology whatever ;
bat this is an astounding parody which Would seem to be


1 Homer and the Homeric Age, ii. 270.
3 Mid. 164; see also National Review,
Tuly 1858, 53, &e.


* Tid. 207. Writing some months
before the publication of Mr. Gladstone's
work ou Homer, Professor Max Miller
had remarked that ‘amoug the lowest
tribes of Africa and America we hardly
find anything more hideous and revolt-
ing’ than the stories told of Kronos and
his offspring. ‘It serms y" be
adds, ‘to consider these fables of the


heathen world as corrapted and mise
interpreted fragments of 8 divine re-
velation once granted to the whole
race of mankind.’ ‘Comparative Mytho-
logy:’ Chips from a German Workshop,
Hi. 13. Bat the disposition #o frequentl;
shown at present to explain the growt!
of mythology by bold assumptions
renders it necessary to examine angu-
ments which might otherwise be passed
by in silence.


THE INQUIRY STRICTLY HISTORICAL.


founded not on dim foreshadowings of a true revelation, but
on the dogmatic statements of the Athanasian Creed. Thet
a theology thue wilfully falsified should be fourid with a
people not utterly demoralised, but exhibiting on the whole
@ social condition of great promise and a moral standard
rising constantly higher, is a phenomenon, if possible, still
more astonishing. On the supposition that Greek mythology
‘was @ corrupted religious system, it must, to whatever extent,
have supplied a role of faith and practice, and the actions
and character of the gods must have furnished a justification
for the excesses of human passion. That no such justification
is alleged, and that the whole system seems to exercise no
influence either on their standard of morality or their common
practice, are signs which might appear to warrant the pre-
sumption that this mythology was not the object of a moral
belief, The whole question, viewed in this light, is so utterly
perplexing, and apparently so much at variance with the
conditions of Homeric society, that we are driven to examine
more strictly the evidence on which the hypothesis reste.
We remember that we are dealing not with a theme for
philosophical gpeculation, but with a common question of
fact,! and that Mr. Gladstone assumes not only that there
was a primitive revelation, but that it set forth certain
dogmas. With these assumptions the phenomena of my-
thology must be made to fit: a genuine historical method
excludes all assumptions whatsoever.

If, however, hypothesis is to be admitted, then it must be
granted that the attributes and functions of the Hellenic
gods have seldom been analysed with greater force, clearness,
and skill; nor can it be denied that Mr. Gladstone's hypo-
thesis, as in the case of Lété, furnishes a plausible explanation,
of some things which appear anomalous.* But it introduces
the necessity of interpreting mythology so as to square with
@ preconceived system, and involves a temptation to lessen

1 See p. 10. But this is precisely the relation in

4 Mr, Gladstone (Homer, ge. ii. 155), which the mytifical Night stood to the
dwells much on the indistinet culouring Day which was to be born of her. It
which is thrown over Lét6, and which was impossible that the original idea
leaves her ‘wholly functionless, wholly could be developed into a much more


inective, and‘ without a purpose,’ except definite personality.
‘in ao far as aheis the mother of Phoibos.


15


UR. .
——


Attributes
of Athéné
and
Apollén,


du
BOOK
L
—e


M.1HVIGY UF TH ABYAN NALIUNS.


or to pass over difficulties which appear to militate against
it, The Homeric legends are not so consistent as for such a
purpose would seem desirable, and there are the gravest
reasons for not inferring from the silence of the poet that he
was ignorant of other versions than those which he has
chosen to adopt.' On the supposition that Athéné and
Apoll6n represent severally the Divine Redeemer and the
Divine Wisdom, their relation of will to the Supreme Father
becomes a point of cardinal interest and importance. But
when Mr. Gladstone asserts that, ‘although Athéné goes all
lengths in thwarting Jupiter’ in the Iliad,’ ‘yet her aim is
to give effect to a design so unequivocally approved in
Olympus, that Jupiter himself has been constrained to give
way to it,’ he places too far in the background certain other
Homeric incidents which imply a direct contrariety of will.
No weaker term can rightly characterise that abortive con-
spiracy to bind Zeus, in which she is the accomplice of Héré
and Poseidén, In this plot, the deliverance comes not from
Apolién, whose office it is to be ‘ the defender and deliverer
of heaven and the other immortals,’ but from Thetis, the
silver-footed nymph of the sea;* and by her wise counsels
Zeus wins the victory over one who is with himself amember
of the traditive Trinity. The same legend qualifies another
statement, that Athéné and Apollén are never foiled, defeated,


1 See Chapter IX. of this book.
* Gladstone’s Homer, $c. ii. 70.
* Ibid, 72. ‘This conspiracy iv men-


we have not the slightest warrant for


regarding aa the growth of ages Jater
than those in which our Thad and


tioned more than once by Mr. Glad-
stone, (75, 182): but he mentions it,
not as a drawback on the traditive
character of Athéné, but as showing
first that Zeus himself might be as
sailed, and secondly that his majesty
remained nevertheless substantially un-
impsired. Yet a reference to it, as
Dearing on the moral conception of
Athén€, would seem to be indispen-
sable; and this reference Mr. Gladstone
has supplied in Juventus Mundi, p. 273.
He here states thet ‘we bave in the
case of Apollo an uniform identity of
will with the chief god, and in the ease
of Athénd only an exceptional departure

it? ‘The admission is i 3
and with it we must couple tra
ditions, to be noticed hereafter, which


Odyseey assumed their present form.
Tn fact, the admission seeme fatal to
the theory; nor can it be said that ‘the
ease of Apollo stands alone as an ex-
hibition of exire unbroken harmony
with the will of Zeus, which in all things
he regards'—P. 272. In the mythe of
Aaklépios and Admétos he draws on
himself the wrath and the vengeance of
Zeus for slaying the Kyklépos as a
Tequital for the death of his von, the
Healer; and we are fally justifed in
laying stress on this fact, until it can
be proved that any one myth must
necessarily be regarded as of earlier

than another, merely because it

s to be found in our Wiad and


MYTHICAL BNOWLEDGE OF THE HOMERIC POETS.


or outwitted by any other of the gods;! for Athéné here is
foiled by Thetis. Elsewhere we have Apollén,” like Poseidén,
cheated by Laomedén whom he had served, and finding
more congenial master, but yet a master, in Admétos ;7 while
the parentage of the'three Kronid brothers‘ and the double
character of Poseidén® stand forth as the most astounding
contradictions of all.

There are other legends which represent Athéné in a light
inconsistent with the personification of the Divine Wisdom.
In the tale of Pandora, at the instigation of Zeus she takes
part in the plot which results in the increased wickedness
and misery of man ;° in that of Prometheus, she aids in the
theft of fire from heaven against the will of Zeus, while one
version represents her as acting thus, not from feelings of
friendship, but from the passion of love. These legends are
not found in our Homer, but it is impossible to prove that
the poet waa unacquainted with them. He makes no refer-
ence ‘to some myths, which are at once among the oldest
and the most beautiful; and he certainly knew of the de-
thronement of Kronos, as well as of factions in the new
dynasty of the gods.”

But if the theory of religious perversion, apart from its
moral difficulties, involves some serious contradictions, it
altogether fails to explain why the mythology of the Greeks
assumed many of its peculiar and perhaps most striking
features. It does not show us why some of the gods should

4 Gladstone, Homer, ge., ii. 74.


2 Did. 75.

* Ibid, 81. If these legends are strictly
dovelopements fram old mythical phrases,
the meaning of which was only in part re-
membered, there remainseno difficulty
whatever in stich statements. In these
thereigreflected upon Apollén an idea de-
rived from the toiling sun, which is
‘brought out in its fulness in the adven-
tures of Herakles and Bellerophin.
‘Mr. Gladstone lays stress on the
relation of Apollén and Artemis to
Death (p. 103), and holds that here we
are on very secred ground (p. 10$) the
traces, namely. ‘of One who, a6 an all-
conquering “King, wae to be terrible
and destructive to his enemies, but who
‘was algo, on behalf of mankind, to take
away the sting from desth, and to

VOL. I.


change its iron band for a thread of
silken slumber,’ The question is furthor
examined p. 123 etc.: but the mytha
developed from phrases which spoke
originally of the beneficent and destruc
tive power of the sun's reys and heat
perfectly explain every such attribute,
‘whether in Apollén or Artemis.

* Gladstone, Homer, 3. 162.

4 Toid, 208,

® Hesiod, Theogon., 673; Works and

63.

Similarly, the iad says nothing
sbout the death of Achilleus: yet the
poet i aware that his life is to be short.
Mirrep, ted yi Erands ye purorbddidy

irra ”
is the frequent reproach of Achilleus to
his mother Thetis,
0


17


CHAP.


——


Relations
of will be-
tween Zous
and
Athénd,


Peculiar
forms of
Greek my-
thology.


18


BOOK
—


Conse-
quences
involved in,
the
‘version of
an original
revelation,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


be represented pure, others as in part or altogether immoral :
it does not tell us why Zeus and Herakles should be coarse
and sensual, rather than Athéné and Apollén; it does not
explain why Apollén is made to serve Admétos, why Herakles
bears the yoke of Hurystheus, and Bellerophén that of the
Kilikian king. It fails to show why Herakles should appear
as the type of self-restraint and sensuality, of labour and
sluggishness, why names so similar in meaning as Lykdén,
Helios and Phaethén, should be attached to beings whose
mythical history is so different. If for these and other
anomalies there is a method of interpretation which gives a
clear and simple explanation, which shows how such anoma-
lies crept into being, and why their growth was inevitable—
if this method serves also as a key, not merely to the mytho-
logy of Greece, but to that of the whole Aryan race, nay,
even to a wider system still, a presumption at least is fur-
nished, that the simpler method may after all be the truest.
Yet more, the hypothesis of a corrupted revelation involves
some further consequences, which have a material bearing
on the question. That which is so perverted cannot become
clearer and more definite in the very process of corrupt
developement. Not only must the positive truths, imparted
at the first, undergo distortion, but the ideas involved in
them must become weaker and weaker, If the Unity of God
formed one of those primitive truths, then the personality
and the power of Zeus would be more distinct and real in
the earliest times than in the later. The ideas of the Tri-
nity, of the Redeemer, and of the Divine Wisdom, would be
more prominent in those first stages of belief in the case of a
people who confessedly were not sustained by new or con-
tinued revelations. The personality of a Divine Wisdom is
not a dogma which men in a thoroughly rude society could
reason out for themselves; and if it formed part of an original
revelation, the lapse of time would tend to weaken, not to
atrengthen it. If, again, this corrupting process had for its
cause a moral corruption going on in the hearts and lives of
men, then this corruption would be intensified in proportion
to the degree in which the original revelation was overlaid.)


1 ‘The came argument seems to be of zevelation so extensive as that asmnmed
force against the supposition that s by Mr. Gladstone preceded the age


MORALITY OF THE HESIODIC POEMS,


19


In the Hellenic mythology, this process is reversed. Even CHAP.
as it appeara in the poems which we call Homeric, it must wes


have undergone a developement of centuries ; but if it is im-
possible to measure, by any reference to an older Greek lite-
rature, the personality and attributes of each god as com-
pared with the conceptions of a previous age, it is obvious
that the general tone of feeling and action, and the popular
standard of morality had not been debased with the growth
of their mythology. Whether the Hesiodic poems belong to
a later period than our Died and Odyssey is a question into
which it is unnecessary here to enter: but it must be ad-
mitted that if their theology is more systematised, and
their theogony more repulsive, their morality and philo-
sophy is immeasurably higher and more true. The latter
“may not exhibit the eame heroic strength, they may betray
a querulous spirit not unlike that of the Jewish preacher;
but they display a conviction of the perfect justice and
equity of the Divine Being, and an appreciation of good-
ness, as being equally the duty and the interest of man-
kind,' which we could scarcely desire to have strengthened.”
With the growth of a mythology and its more systematic
arrangement the perception of moral truth has become
more keen and intense; and the same age which listened
to the book of the generations of Zeus, Kronos, and
Aphrodité, learnt wisdom from the pensive precepts of the
* Works and Days.’


hose Janguage gave birth to the later that this morality, many of the precepts
Aryun mythology. For « revelation vo of which seew almost echoes from the


corrupted implies a gradual degeneration
into coarseness, sensuality, even brutish-
nese; but the mind of thut garly time,
as exhibited to us in their langunge, ia
childish or infantile, but not brutish;
and it is not easy to seo how from a
period in which they had sensualised
and debsecd a high revelation men
could emerge into a state of simple and
childish wonder, altogether distinct from
either idolatry or impurity, and in which
their notions ag to the life of nature
were us indefinite and unformed es their
idess respecting their own pursonality.

) See especially the striking analogy of
the broad and narrow ways leading re-
spectively to ruin und happiness (Works
and Days, 285-290), Itienot pretended


Sermon on the Mount, was handed down
from an original revelation, If then,
in this res] the eourse wee from the
lesser to the greater, the ss could
be the work only of the Spirit of God;
and the downward course of their my-

from @ positive revelation

therefore the more mysterious


xing.

+ Wine Hestodic Works and Days seem
to exhibit, along with some decline of
physical energy, & sensitivences of
tempersment to whish the idea of over-
Dearing arrogance and wanton insult
threw a dark colouring over the whole
course of uman lie, “With such »feal-
ing the mind may easily pass into &


20


BOOK
L

es
Compari-
ton of the
Homeric
with the
Vedie my-
the a


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AEYAN NATIONS. ~


Tt is perhaps difficult to determine how far the characters
of Phoibos and Athéné have been drawn out and syatematised
by the genins and moral instinct of the poet himself, We
have no evidence, in any extant literature, of the precise
state in which he found the national mythology; but it seems
unlikely that he had what may be termed a theological
authority for every statement which he makes and every
attribute which he assigns to the one or the other. It is
certain that Athéné once conspired against the freedom of
Zeus ;' but we cannot tell how far the poet himself intensified
the general harmony of her will to that of the King of gods


* and men, nor can we forget that Ushas is as dear to gods and


men as Athéné herself, and that Ushas is undeniably nothing
but the morning. But language has furnished evidence, which
it is impossible to resist, of the gradual process which im-
parted to these mythical deities both their personality and
theirattributes, The literature of another branch of the same
Aryan race exhibits 2 mythology whose substantial identity
with that of the Greeks it is impossible to dispute; but in
that mythology beings, whose personality in the Homeric
poems is sharply drawn and whose attributes are strictly
defined, are still dim and shadowy. Even the great Olym-
pian king has not received the passions and appetites, and
certainly not the form of man, Nay, in that older mythology
their persons and their attributes are alike interchangeable.
That which among the Greeke we find as a highly developed
and complicated system, is eleewhere a mere mass of floating
legend, nay, almost of mere mythica] phrases, without plan
or cohesion. This difference, at first sight so perplexing,
may itself enable us to discover the great secret of the origin
and growth of all mythology: but the fact remains indis-
putable that in the Veda, to use the words of Professor Max
Miiller, ‘the whole nature of these so-called gods is still
transparent, their first conception in many cases clearly
perceptible. There are as yet no genealogies, no settled
marriages between gods and goddesses. The father is some-
times the son, the brother is the husband, and she who in
one hymn is the mother is in another the wife. As the
+ Hiad, i. 400.


EARLIER VEDIC LITERATURE.


9


2.


conceptions of the poet vary, so varies the nature of these CHAP.
gods. Nowhere is the wide distance which separates the ~ L


ancient poems of India from the most ancient, literature of
Greece more clearly felt than when we compare the growing
myths of the Veda with the full-grown and decayed myths
on, which the poetry of Homer is founded.’! But the un-
formed mythology of the Veda followed in its own land a
course analogous to that of the mythology of Greece. There
was, the same systematic developement, with this difference,
that in India the process was urged on by a powerful sacerdotal
order who found their interest in the expansion of the old
belief. In the earlier Vedas there is no predominant priest-
hood, and only the faintest indications of caste; there are no
temples, no public worship, and, as it would seem, no images
of the gods; and (what is of immeasurably greater importance
in reference to the mythological creed of the Homeric poets)
there are, in the words of Horace Wilson, ‘ no indications of
a triad, the creating, preserving, and destroying power.
Brahma does not appear as a deity, and Vishnu, although
named, has nothing in common with the Vishnu of the
Puranas: no allusion occurs to his Avataras,.... These
differences are palpable, and so far from the Vedas being the


‘ Comparative Mythology, Chips
from a German Workahop, ii. 78. This
flexible nature of the earliest myths ex-

jlaing some apparent contradictions inthe

lomeric mythology. To my conclusion
that some of the most striking features
in the character of Paris arv reproduced
in Meleagroa and Achilleus, Professor
‘Mox Miillor hua taken exception on the
ground that ‘if the gorm of the JJiad is
the battle between the solr and noc-
turnal power, Parie surely belongs to
the lutter’—Lectures on Language,
second series, xi. I venture to think
that in thie instance Professor Max
‘Miller has answered his own objection.
As the seducer of Helen, Paris repre-
sents the treacherous night; but he is
ulso the fated hero doomed to bring
ruin on his kinsfolk, while he is further
known ag Alexandros, the helper of men.
Hence in this spect of hie character, 8
number of images which describe the
solar heroes have been grouped around.
luis person, while the leading ides em-


bodied in him is that of the dark thief
which steals away the twilight. It may
be added that the very words which
Professor Max Miiller quotes to show
that ‘he whose destiny it is to kill
Achilles in the Western Gates could
hardly have been himeelf of solar or
‘vernal lineage,’ would also prove that
Phoibos Apoilén belonged to the ranke
of the powers of night, for the death of
Achilleus is brought about by him no less
than by Paris. Paris, however, is not
‘of solar or vernal lineage. He is essen-
tially the deceiver who draws away the
golden-huired Helen to his dueky dwell-
Ing; and all that I would urge is that
‘when the poet described him as ¢ warrior,
he naturally employed im with
which the solae berdes had fondle. hiss
familiar, and wove into the tale the
incidents which make up the myth of
Onto ake hich recur in the stories
an eB shalos
and of Herskles. The wee Cah be
further treated in its proper placs.


1


22


BOOK


eos


‘Methods of
determin-
ing the
extent of
primitive


revelation, -


‘Evidence
of the
Back of
Genesie,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. -


basis of the existing system, they completely overturn it.’!
The ‘comparison is scarcely less fatal to the mythological
Trinity of the Greeks.

We come at length to the question of fact. What was the
measure of divine truth imparted to man on his creation, or
immediately after the fall, and under what forms was it can-
veyed? If, when stated thus, the question should be one
which we cannot absolutely determine, we may yet ask, was
it a revelation as explicit and extensive as Mr. Gladstone
represents it to have been? To allege the rabbinical tradi-
tions and speculations of comparatively recent times? as
evidence for the latent meaning of Greek mythology, is to
treat the subject in a way which would simply make any
solution of the problem impossible. The force of a current,
when its stream has been divided, will not tell us much about
the course or depth of kindred streams which have branched
off in other directions, Accordingly, although later traditions
ap>ear to be blended in his idea of the primitive belief,? Mr.
Gladstone rightly insists that the Homeric mythology must,
if his hypothesis be correct, show the vestiges of a traditional
knowledge ‘derived from the epoch when the covenant of
God with man, and the promise of a Messiah, had not yet
fallen within the contracted forms of Judaism for shelter,’
and that these traditions must ‘carry upon them the mark
of belonging to the religion which the Book of Genesis
represents as brought by our first parents from Paradise and
as delivered by them to their immediate descendants in
general.’* Thus the era of the division of races is the latest
limit to which we can bring down a common tradition for all
mankind; and for that tradition we are gonfined to the first
eleven chapters of the book of Genesis.

From these chapters we must derive our proof that our
first parents and their immediate descendants possessed the
idea of an Infinite Being whose perfect goodness arose, not


* Professor H. Hi" Wilson, in the cheracterof the Vedicreligion deserve the
Edinburgh Review for October 1860, deepest attention, They seem entirely
No. CCKXVIIL p. 382; und Vishnu to subvert the hypothesis which Mr.
Purana, p. ii, where he’ emphatically Giadetone has muintained.
denies that the old Vedic religion was * Gladstone, Homer, nee. 60.
idolatrous, His remarks on the general * Jdid, 48. * id. 4.


PRIMEVAL REVELATION.


from external restraints, but from an unchangeable internal
determination of character '—of a Trinity of Co-equal Per-
sons in the Divine Unity—of a Redeemer who should here-
efter assume their nature and deliver from death and sin—of
a Divine Wisdom which was with God from the beginning,
and of au Evil One, who, having fallen from his throne in
heaven, had now become an antagonistic power, tempting
men to their destruction.*

Whether these early chapters may contain this theological
scheme by just and legitimate inference, whether the words
there written may contain the earnest and the warrant of the
full Christian revelation, are questions with which we are not
here concerned. It is not a question of doctrine or belief or
theological analysis. It is a simple question of fact which
must determine whether various races of mankind were or
were not guilty of wilful perversion of high and mysterious
doctrines. Here, if anywhere, that purification of the in-
tellect would seem to be-needed, the lack of which tends to
a substitution of traditional teaching or association for an
impartial sifting of evidence. There was a time when these
early records formed the whole literature of the people; and,
to adopt Mr, Gladstone’s expression, it would not be ‘safe to
make any large assumption respecting a traditional know-
ledge of any parts of early revelation’ beyond what those
records actually contain.‘ Taken wholly by themselves, and
not interpreted by the light thrown on them by the thought
and belief of later ages, these records tell us of man as being
(in soine sense not explicitly defined) made in the Divine
image and likeness—of one positive prohibition, the violation
of which was to be | followed by immediate death—of a subtle
beast which tempts the woman to disobey the command, and
of a sense of shame which follows the transgression. They
tell us of flight and hiding when the man hears the voice of
God walking in the garden in the cool of the day—of an at-
tempt to transfer the blame from the man to the woman,


. ira Homer, &c. ii, 18. fall strictly under this class, See Grote,
1 Thid. Sante W , Growets: pact tL eh dail
’ The necenity of ch & process in vol vil. p. 617, &e

all questions of fact will scarcely be  ¢ Gladstone, Homer, $e. i ii, 40,


disputed, and the present would seem to


23


CHAP!


—S


Its charac-


ms


ca ta


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


from the woman to the serpent—of a sentence of humiliation


sas passed upon the latter, with the warning that its head should


Limits of
that evi-
denee.


be bruised by the woman’s seed—of a life of toil and labour

for the former, ending with a return to the dust from which

he had been made, Besides this, they tell us briefly that

after some generations men began to call upon the name of

the Lord; that in the course of time they sank (with but one
* exception) into brute lust and violence; and that on the
renovation of the earth men were made answerable for each
other’s blood, and received the token of the rainbow as a
warrant for the future permanence of the course of nature.
But of any revelation before the fall, beyond a command to
till the garden -and to abstain from the fruit of a particular
tree, these records give not the slightest indication.

If the doctrines which, in Mr. Gladstone’s belief, made
‘up the primitive revelation, are contained in these chapters,
it is, he admits, by a dim and feeble foreshadowing.’ They
tel! us nothing of God in the perfection of His nature, or of
a Unity of Three Persons in the Godhead. They tell us of a
subtle serpent, not of a fallen angel, of the seed of the woman
as bruising that serpent’s head, not of a Divine Redeemer
delivering from sin and spiritual death. Still less do they
tell us of a Divine Wisdom, of an institution of sucrifice,* or
of a spiritual communion in prayer as existing from the first
between man and God, All these doctrines may be legiti-
mate deductions; but if to us the record itself gives only
mysterious glimpses of a future fuller revelation, if to us
these inferences from its contents are the result of careful
comparison with the later books of the Old Testament, if
even to ua their harmony with the belief of prophets and
righteous men of later ages seems clear only because we have
been taught to regard it as clear, then what evidence have
we that in the time of which the third chapter of Genesis
speaks to us, our parents had @ full apprehension of what


2


* Gladstone, Homer, sfc. ii. 89. offering of Cain was rejected because it
* The fact of offerings is obviously was er one of Wlood; ity rejection ie

very different from sn ordinance com- made to depend, not on the suality. of of

manding such offerings. The former the oblation, but on the mora condi

aay exist without the latter. Nor is of him who brings it.

there the slightest intimation thet the


ALLEGED CORRUPTION OF REVELATION.


even to us apart from later associations would be faint and
shadowy? For if on the revelation made to them the vast
mass of Greek mythology grew up as a corrupt incrustation,
they must have received these truths not in their germ but
in fall dogmatic statement. It is difficult to understand
how such a statement would have been to them anything
more than a dead unmeaning formula, waiting to be quick-
ened into life by the breath of a later revelation or by the
evidence of later facta.

If, again, there is any one lesson which may be drawn
before others from the character of the Old Testament
records, it is that ideas, dim and feeble at first, acquire
gradually strength and consistency, that the clearness of
revelation is increased as the stream widens, and that all
positive belief is the result of years and generations of disci.
pline, But in some mysterious way, while the course of the
Jewish people was from the lesser to the greater, they in
whose hands the Homeric theology was moulded started with
a fulness of doctrinal knowledge which was not attained by
the former until a long series of centuries had passed away.

If, further, an acceptance of the records of the book of
Genesis involves no assumption of the previous existence of
traditions or doctrines not mentioned in those records, it
frees us not less from the necessity of supposing that in all
but the Jewish world a process was going on directly con-
trary to that under which the Israelites were being trained.
Eut while we assent to Mr. Gladstone’s remark on the ease
with which these foreshadowings of the Trinity and of
Redemption might pass into polytheism and anthropo-
morphism, it would scarcely argue a spirit of irreverence if
we asked why doctrinal statements should have been given
which the receivers could not understand, and which under
these conditions rendered such a, transition not merely likely
but inevitable.

There is an instinctive reluctance to accept any theory
which heightens human depravity and corruption, unless
there are weighty reasons for doing so.' And, unquestion~


1 For the mass of facta which seom tion see Sir J, Lubbock's Prehistoric
to negative the hypothesis of degenora- Times, second edition, 1860.


25


OHAP.


——


Course of

revelation
in the Old
‘Testament.


Greek cor-
ruption of
revelation,


Necessity
of account
ing for the
character ,
of Greok®
mythology.


4


MYTHOLOGY OF TEE ARYAN NATIONS,


BOOK ably, on the hypothesis which has just been examined, the


—_——


Conditions


of the
inquiry.


mythology of the Greeks exhibits an instance of wilful and
profane perversion, to which perhaps we can find no parallel.
But the character of that mythology still remains when we
have rejected this supposition. We have still before us the
chronicles or legends of gods who not merely eat and drink
and sleep, but display the working of the vilest of human
passions, Some process, therefore, either conscious or un-
conscious, must have brought about a result so perplexing ;
and if even for conscious invention there must have been
some groundwork, much more must this be the case if we
take up an alternative which even less admits the exercise
of 2 creative faculty.

If then, apart from the controversies which have gathered.
round the documents which compose the book of Genesis,
we gain from the earliest Jewish records no knowledge of the
mode in which mythology was developed, it is clear that, if
the question is ever to be answered, we must seek the evi-
dence in the history of language and of ancient civilisation.
If both alike seem to carry us back to a time in which the
condition of man resembled most nearly that of an infant,
‘we can but accept the evidence of facts, so fur as those facts
are ascertained and understood. The results of archmological
researches may not be flattering to human vanity. They
may reveal a coarse brutality from which during a long series
of ages man rose in the struggle for existence to some notion
of order and law. They may disclose a state of society in
which a hard apathy and a stupid terror seemed to render all
intellectual growth impoasible, and in which a religion of fear
found its universal expression in human sgcrifices.! Yet the


1 If the theories which make language
the necessary adjunct and outcome of
thought must be abandoned as incon-
sistent with known facts, if we must
face the conclusion that man speaks not
Deeause ie thinks, but because he wishes
to share his thoughts with others, and
hence that ‘words nelly arbitrary
and conventional signe without the
slightest essential relation to the things
fignified, no reason for surprise remains
if buman ideas of God and of the service
due to him should be found to exhibit


the same process of slow and painfal
developement from the first faint dawn
of intelligence. The conclusion must,
indeed, be proved: but ita eatublish-
ment no more culls into question the
Divine Education of the world, than the
slowness with which infante learn to
walk proves that our powers of motion
ofiginste in ourselves; und certain
the evidence ‘both of rchmology and
langauge, 20 far as it has gone, tends
more and more to exhibit mankind in
their primeval condition aa passing


COMPARISON OF LEGENDS.


picture, if it be gloomy, introduces no new difficulties beside
those with which philosophers or theologians have to contend
already in their attempts to explain the phenomena of the
material or moral world. The fact that there has been
growth, the fact that out of such poor elements there has been
developed a knowledge of the relations in which men stand
to each other and of the consequences which flow from these
relations, is of itself the evidence that at all times and in all
places the Divine Spirit has been teaching and educating
the children of men, that always and everywhere God has
been doing the work of which we now see darkly but a very
small part, and of which hereafter we shall better understand
the nature and purpose.

If then the mythology of the Aryan nations is to be
studied to good purpose, the process applied to their
legends must be strictly scientific. In every Aryan land
we have a vast mass of stories, some preserved in great epic
poems, some in the pages of mythographers or historians,
some in tragic, lyric, or comic poetry, and some again only
in the oral tradition or folklore of the people. All these, it
is clear, must be submitted to that method of comparison
and differences by which inductive science has achieved its
greatest triumphs. Not a step must be taken on mere con-
jecture: not a single result must be anticipated by ingenious
hypothesis. For the reason of their existence we must
search, not in our own mural convictions, or in those of
ancient Greeks or Romans, but in the substance and mate-
rials of the myths themselves. We must deal with their
incidents and their names. We must group the former ac-
cording to their ppints of likeness and difference; we must
seek to interpret the latter by the principles which have
been established and accepted as the laws of philological
analysis. It becomes therefore unnecessary to notice at


through forma and stages of thought in his masterly eketch. ‘The developement
which the adoption of human sacrifices of the doctring of sacrifice has been
universally would inevitably mark an traced with singular clesrness and force
important stege. This eubject hhas been by Dr. Kalisch, Historical and Critical
trented by Mr. E.B. Tylor inhis History Commentary on the Old Testament,
of Barly Civilisation, with a vigour and Leviticus, part i, See ales the article
impurtiality which justify the hope that ‘Sacrifice’ in the Dictionary of Science,
he may hereafter fill up the outlines of Literature and Art.


27


CHAP.
_—~


Allogorical
inte

tation of
mythe,


28


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


noe: Jength any of those hypotheses or assumptions which resolve
—t the Aryan myths into allegories, or explain them as expres-


Bacon's
method,


sions of high trath in theology, morality, or art. It would
scarcely be necessary to notice such theories at all, were it
not that they are from time to time revived by writers who
from their manifest earnestness and sincerity, and from the
great good which they have done, may fairly claim to be
heard. It may, however, be enough to take some of these
theories, and to show that they are not true to the features
of the myths which they profess to explain, and that inter-
pretations which twist some of the incidents and names of a
story and ignore others, while they treat each tale as stand-
ing by itself, cannot be regarded as trustworthy.

In the opinion of Lord Bacon, the story of the Sphinx was


~ San elegant and instructive fable,’ ‘invented to represent


acience, especially as joined with practice.’ His reason for
so thinking was that ‘science may without absurdity be
ealle1 a monster, being strangely gazed at and admired by
the ignorant and unskilfal.’ The composite figure of the
Sphinx indicates ‘the vast variety of subjects that science
considers’; the female countenance attributed to her denotes
the ‘gay appearance’ of science and her ‘volubility of
speech.” Her wings show that ‘the sciences and their in-
ventions must fly about in a moment, for knowledge, like
light communicated from one torch to another, is presently
caught and copiously diffused.’ Her sharp and hooked
talons are ‘the axioms and arguments of science,’ which
‘enter the mind, lay hold of it, fix it down, and keep it from
moving and slipping away.’ She is placed on a crag over-
looking the Theban city, because ‘all scienpe seems placed on
high, as it were on the tops of mountains that are hard to
climb.’ Like her, ‘science is said to beset the highways,
because, through all the journey and peregrination of human
life, there is matter and occasion offered of contemplation.’
If the riddles which the Sphinx receives from the Muses
bring with them trouble and disaster, it is because ‘ practice
urges and impels to action, choice, and determination,’ and
thus questions of science ‘become torturing, severe, and
trying, and unless solved and interpreted, strangely perplex


LORD BACON'S METHOD OF DEALING WITH MYTHS.


and haraes the human mind, rend’it every way, and perfectly
tear it to pieces.’ The fable, in Bacon’s judgment, adds with
the ‘utmost elegance,’ ‘that, when Sphinx was conquered,
her carcass was laid upon an ass; for there is nothing so
subtle and abstruse but, after being once made plain, intelli-
gible, and common, it may be received by the lowest capa-
city.’ But he feels himself bound not to omit that ‘ Sphinx
‘was’ conquered by a lame man and impotent in his feet, for
men usually make too much haste to the solution of Sphinx’s
riddles; whence it happens that, she prevailing, their minds
are rather racked and torn by disputes than invested with
command by works and effects.’

A large number of the Greek myths are made by Lord
Bacon to yield ‘wisdom’ of this kind, and it is quite pos-
sible that the same process might be applied with equal
success to all Greek, or even all Aryan myths. Such inter-
pretations certainly tend -to show how great our debt of
gratitude must be to a set of mysterious philosophers, pro-
phets, or politicians, who, living before there were any con-
stitutions, alliances, confederacies, and diplomacy, furnished
in the form of amusing stories a complete code for the
guidance of kings, members of parliament, cabinet ministers,
and ambassadors, It would be unfair to gradge to these
interpretations the praise of cleverness and ingenuity; but
the happy turns which they sometimes exhibit are more than
counterbalanced by misrepresentations of the myths them-
selves, The comparison of the claws and talons of the
Sphinx to the axioms and arguments of science may be both
amusing and instructive; but the ass which carries her
carcass is seemiygly a creature of his own imagining, and
Oidipous was neither lame nor impotent in his feet when he
came to the final conflict. The reason, also, by which Bacon
accounts for this fact, would be an argument for making
Oidipous not the conqueror, but only another of the victims
of the Sphinx.

But, ingenious as Bacon’s interpretatiovia may have been,
they were emphatically unscientific. To him these Greek
stories were isolated or detached fables, whose growth it was
superfluous to trace, and to each of which he might attach


29


CHAP.


Tts conse-


Such inter-


pretations.
‘unscieng
tiflo,


30


MYTHOLOGY OF a ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK any explanation which might seem best to fit or to give most’
ee significance to its leading incidente. In short, they were


things with regard to which he saw no need of following
rales which in all the processes of science and in all matters
of fact he would have held to be indispensable. Had he
followed these rules, he might, even without # knowledge of
the language or the myths of other cognate tribes, have seen
that the Hellenic legénd of Oidipous and the Sphinx could
not be judged of rightly apart from a comparison with other
tales. He would have seen that Oidipous was not the only
child exposed on a mountain side, or rescued by a shepherd,
or doomed to slay his father or grandsire, and to conquer 4
snake, dragon, or other monster. He would have seen that
these beings, with features more or Jess resembling each other


“in all the stories, were yet each spoken of under a different


name, that the Sphinx of the Theban myth became the
Python or Echidna, the Gorgon or Minotaur or Chimaira or
Hyd: of another, and that these names must be accounted
for not less than the incidents of the tale. He might have
perceived that the names in some or many of these legends
bore a certain analogy to each other, and that as the names
could not be the result of accident, the explanation which
would account for the myth must account also for them, and
that short of this result no interpretation could be accepted
as adequate, The discovery that Bacon’s mode of extracting
from myths the ‘ wisdom of the ancients’ is thoroughly un-
acientifie, releases us from any further duty of examining in
detail either his explanations or even others, urged by more
recent writers, which may resemble them in theory or
method,


81


CHAPTER I.


THE RELATION OF MYTHOLOGY TO LANGUAGE.


‘Tae analysis of language has fully justified the anticipation
of Locke, that ‘if we could trace them to their sources, we
should find in all languages the names which stand for
things that fall not under our senses to have had their’ first
rise from sensible ideas,’ So thoroughly, indeed, has this
conjecture been verified, that the assertion is fast passing
into the number of trite and hackneyed sayings; and though
the interest and vast importance of the fact remains, few are
now tempted to question the conclusion that every word
employed to express the highest theological or metaphysical
conceptions at first denoted mere sensuous perception.
‘ Spiritus, says Professor Max Miiller ‘is certainly derived
from a verb spirare, which means to draw breath. The same
applies to animus. Animus, the mind, as Cicero says, is so
called from anima, air. The root is an, which in Sanskrit
means to blow, and which has given rise to the Sanskrit and
Greek worda for wind an-ila and dn-emos. Thus the Greek
thymos, the soul, comes from thyein, to rush, to move violently,
the Sanskrit diu, to shake. From dhu, we have in Sanskrit,
divili, dust, which comes from the same root, and ‘dhima,’
smoke, the Latin fumus. In Greek the same root supplied
thgella, storm-wind, and thymée, the soul, as the seat of the
passions. Plato guesses correctly when he says (Crat. p.
419) that thymée, soul, is so called dmd ris Sicews xal orws
tis yuyis.’ It is the same with the word soul. ‘Soul is
the Gothic saivala, and this is clearly related to another
Gothic word, saivs, which means the sea, The sea was
called saivs from a root si or siv, the Greek sefé, to shake ; it


» Lectures on Language, 2nd series, viii. $48,


CHAP.


Origin of
abatract
words,


Ba
BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. -
meant the tossed-about water in contradistinction to stag-


—— nant or running water. The soul being called saivala, we


see that it was originally conceived by the Teutonic nations
as a sea within, heaving up and down with every breath,
and reflecting heaven and earth on the mirror of the deep.’!

If to these primmval sensuous words we are indebted for
all the wealth of human language, these words must neces-
sarily have possessed an almost boundless power of expansion.
A single instance will amply suffice to prove this fact. The
old root which expressed the idea of crushing, grinding, or
pounding has given birth not only to its direct representatives
the Greek uvAn, the Latin mola, the Irish meile, and the
English mill and meal; but it may be traced through a vast
number of words between the meaning of which there is no
obvious connection. In the Greek pdpvayat, to fight, the
root has acquired that metaphorical meaning which is
brought out more clearly in its intransitive forms. In these
i embodies naturally the ideas of decay, softening, or de-
struction; and so it furnished a name for man, as subject tc
disease and death, the morbus and mors of the Latins, If
again man was pods or mortal, the gods were auSporo:, and
drank of the amrita cup of immortality. The grinding away
of time was expressed in the Latin mora, and in the French
demeurer, while the idea of dead water is perhaps seen in
mare, mer, the sea. The root was fruitful in proper names.
The Greeks had their gigantic Moliones, or Pounders, while
the Norseman spoke of the hammer of Thor Miélnir. So,
again, the huge Aloadai derived their name from ddw7, the
threshing-floor, a word belonging to the same root, as ddeupov,
corn, existed in the form pddevpor. From the same source
eame the Sanskrit Maruts, or Storms, the Latin Mars, the
Slavonic Morana, and the Greek dpys and dperj. But the
root paases into other shades of meaning. Under the for
marj or mraj, it gave birth to the Greek yéxyw, the Latir
mulgeo and mulceo, the English milk (all meaning, originally.
to stroke); and in these words, as well as in the Greek Brat
Hadaxds, podBdcow, the Latin marcidus and mollis, the Greek


} Lectures on Language, 2nd ecties ix. See also Dictionary of Science, &e.
ax, Boul. # Southey, Cures 7 Ehone, xxiv. 10,


STAGES IN THE GROWTH OF LANGUAGE.


wis, and Latin mel, it passed into the ideas of softness,
sweetness, languor, and decay. From the notion of melting
the transition was easy to that of desiring or yearning, and
wo find it, accordingly, in this sense, in the Greek ysrsdovy
and #Soyat (which may on good ground be traced to an
older wésSouar), and finally, in aris, hope. Not less strange,
yet not less evident, is the passage of the root jan from its
original force of making or producing (as shown in the San-
akrit janas, the Greek yéivos, yovets, and -yords, the English
kin; in the Sanskrit janaka, the Teutonic kinig, the English
king, in yun}, and queen, and gquean) to the abstract idea of
knowing, as seen in the Sanskrit jnd, the Greek evar, the
Latin gnosco, the English know. The close relationship of
the two ideas is best seen in the Teutonic kann (can) and
Kenne (ken)."

The facts which the growth of these words bring before us
are in the strictest sense historical. The later meanings
presuppose the earlier significations, and the stages are
reached in a chronological as well as a philosophical order,
while the several developements mark an advance of human
thought, and a change in the conditions of human society.
From the highest conceptions of the profoundest thinkers,
we are carried back step by atep to the rudest notions of an
intellect slowly and painfully awakening into consciousness;
and we realise the several phases of primeval life, as vividly
ae if they had been recorded by contemporary chroniclers.
But if the process invests the study of words with a sig-
nificance which it is impossible to overrate, it completely
strips the subject of its mystery. No room is left for theories
which traced the origin of speech to a faculty no longer
posseased by mankind,’ when the analysis of words exhibits
from the beginning the working of the same unvarying laws."
If the words denoting purely spiritual ideas are all evolved
from roots expressing mere sensuous perceptions, if these


\ Max Meller, Letures on Language, ney bas cared tc ita logical renults
péecond series, vii. thst man was born, not


* Mux Miller, Lectures on Language, wae speech, but simply with | the
fist series, 870, ef capacity for speech. His whole book is
su te ‘On and_the an carnest and able defence of all the


ly of Language, passim. Mz. Whit- conclusions involved in this proposition.
fin
L D


33°


CHAP,


pa
——


Origin of
language.


“ge


~~


Tamo-
bility of
savage
maces.


MrrwUlves UF THE AB.AN NATIUND.


words are thus confessedly accidental or arbitrary or con-
ventional signs, without any essential or necessary relation to
the notions signified, although they are a necessary growth
from the original verbal stem, the real question at issue is
set at rest. The sensations expressed in these primary words
are felt by infants, by the deaf and dumb, by brate animals,
as well as by speaking men; they might therefore, rather
they must, have been felt by man before he made the first
attempt to acquaint his comrade with the thoughts which
were passing in his own mind. The word was needed not to
enable him to realise the perception for himself; but to give
him the power of awakening the same idea in another. It
mattered not, therefore, what sound conveyed the thought,
80 long as the signal or message was understood; and thus,
where at the outset all was arbitrary, there might be many
signs for the same object or the same ides. The notions
which, as we have seen, found expression in words derived.
from the roots MR or ML, might have been denoted as
easily by words derived from the stem GR. And in fact the
latter has been scarcely less fertile than the former. To it
we owe the words which denote the grating and grinding
sound of things rubbed forcibly against each other, the grain
which serves as grist for the mill, the gravel which the digger
scrapes up as he delves his grave, the groan of pain, the
grunt of indolence, the scribbling of the child and the deli-
cate engraving of a Bewick or an Albert Durer.' We see,
farther, that words drawn from imitations of natural sounds
have furnished names for impressions made on other senses
besides that of hearing, and that a presumption is thus
furnished for the similar origin of all yords whatsoever.

It may seem a poor foundation for a fabric so magnificent
as the language of civilised mankind ;? but whatever belief
may be entertained of the first beginnings of articulate

1 To this list may be added the that mean? Neither more nor less than


name for com as ground or crushed, in that in speaking as we do, we are usin,
ihe Scottish girs, the Lithuanien the same materiale, however broken up


iraéa, the Gothic quaireus, our crushed, and put together anew, whicl#
Sfx Mller, * omgarative. 7) were handled by the first speaker, Le.
Chips from a German Workshop, ii. 48. the first real ancestor of ‘our tace.—


* Never in the history of man has Max Miller, Chips, ii. 265.
there been a new language. What does :


MANUUAUE AND BAUR.


speech, the gradual growth of language from ite earliest
elements is disputed by none; and the examination of our
own language carries us back to a condition of thought not
meny degrees higher than that of tribes which we regard as
sunk in hopeless barbarism. Yet that this difference of
degree involved in this instance « difference of kind is proved
by the very fact that the one class of men has risen inde-
finitely in the scale of being, while the other exhibits no
power whether of self-culture or of imitation. These are facts
which, like other physical facts, we cannot gainsay, although
wo may not be called on to determine the further question of
the unity or plurality of the human race.’ The point with


which we are more immediately concerned, is the light’


thrown by the history of words on the social and political
history of the race, and on the consequences which followed
the disruption or separation of tribes speaking dialects more


or less closely akin.


» Mr, Farrar, Chapters on
iv, 42, &c., lays great etresa on the
immobility of savage races and their
inherent and insuperable incapacity for
education. As di against the
notion that the creation of man in s
state of infancy is inconsistent with the
soto of God, his argument seems to

unanewermble. It is surely not more
difficult to believe that the first stage of
hhuman existence exhibited the closest
analogy to that of childhood, than it is
to believe that God would now ‘suffer
the existence of thousands who are
doomed shout life to helpless and
hopeless imbecility, and that for no fuult
of their own.’ Nor can we well misappre-
hend Mr. Farrar’s meaning when, after
mentioning the Yamparico, ‘who speaks.
Baort of gibberish lke the growling of
a dog, and lives on roots, crickets, and
veveral buglike insecta;” the Veddahs
of Ceylon, ‘who huve gutturals and
grimacos instead of language, who have
no God, no idea of time and distance,
Ro name for hours, days, months and
Years, and who cannot count beyond five
‘on thelr fingers,’ he adda, ‘ These beings,
We presume, no one will deny, are men
with ordinary human eouls:’ p.45. The
primeval man wae certainly not in &
worse condition than these miserable
raced; yet Mr, Farrar ends his chapter
with the assertion ‘that Man is a very


much nobler and more exalted animal
than the shivering and naked ssvuge
whose squalid and ghastly relics ure
exbumed from Danish kjékken-méd-
dings, and glacial deposits, and the
stalactite of freshly opened
coves,’ B 56. In other words, these
pri Deings were not men with
ordinsry human souls; and hence the
Veddahs, the Banaks, Dokos and the
rest, are likewise not men with ordinary
human souls, There could not well be
@ more complete contradiction. We
may the more regret this inaccurate

Decause it tends to keep up
mischievous distinctions on grounds
which may tarn out to be purely fic-
titious, while the real question whether
these primeval races were direct an-
cestors of the Aryan and Semitic nations,
is really unaffected by such suppositions.
The question of affinity, like thet of an
original revelation, is ‘simply one of
fact, and cannot be determined by our
belief. So fur as the evidence carries
him, Mr, Farrar is quite justified in
avowing bis opinion that the men who
have left their ghastly relics in kitehen-
middens were not our ancestors, but he
is not justified in denying to than the
title of men and the possession of ordi-
nary human souls, unfess be denies it to
existing races of savages, and to idiota,


bo


CHAP,


eS


86 .
BOOK
L
SS
‘Historical
results of


the ans-
lysis of


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. —


‘Tt can never be too often repeated that the facta Inid bare
in the course of philological inquiry are as strictly historical
as any which are recorded of the campaigns of Hannibal,
Wellington, or Napoleon. The words possessed in common
by different Aryan languages point to the fact that these
now separated tribes once dwelt together as a single people,
while a comparison of these common words with others
peculiar to the several dialects furnishes evidence of the
material condition of the yet undivided race. Thus, from
the identity of words connected with peaceful occupations a8
contrasted with the varying terms for war and hunting, Pro-
fessor Max Miiller gathers ‘that all the Aryan nations
had led a long life of peace before they separated, and that
their language acquired individuality and nationality as each
colony started in search of new homes, new generations
forming new terms connected with the warlike and adventu-
rous life of their onward migrations.’' But theae new terms
were evolved from the common stock of verbal stems, and
the readiness with which these roots lent themselves to new
shades of meaning would not only render it easier to express
thoughts already needing utterance, but would itself be a
fruitful source of new ideas and notions. This process would
be, in fact, a multiplication of living images and objects, for
all names in the earliest stages of language were either
masculine or feminine, ‘neuters being of later growth, and
distinguishable chiefly in the nominative.’ Thus the forma
of language would tend to keep up a condition of thought
analogous to that of infants; and the conscious life of all
natural objects, inferred at first from the consciousness of
personality in the speaker or thinker, would become an
article of belief sanctioned by the paramount authority of
names, and all descriptions of phenomena would bring before
them the actions of conscious beings. Man would thus be


‘So again from the fact that in us lessons more important then all the
eae and Gothic, ‘Z now’ ia traditions put. , which the in-
exprees a perfect, meaning origin- habitants of India, Greoce and Gar-
ally ‘Ihave perceived,’ Professor Max many, have preserved of their earliest
‘Muller infers that ‘this fashion or idiom migrations, and of the foundati of
had become permanent before the Greeka their empires, ascribed to their gods,
eeparated from the Hindus, before the orto the sons of their gods and heroines,”
Hindus became unintelligible to the ~Chips, ii. 252,

Germans.’ Such facts, he insists, teach


SHE INFANCY OF THE ARYAN RACE.


living in a magic circle, in which words would strengthen an
illusion inseparable from the intellectual condition of child-
hood. Yet we can scarcely fail to see the necessity of his
being left to ascertain the truth or falsehood of his im-
pressions by the patient observation of facts, if he was ever
to attain to a real kmowledge and a true method for its
attainment—if, in other words, he was to have an education,
such as the wisest teacher would bestow upon a child. Ages
may have been needed to carry him forward a single step in
the upward course; but the question of time can throw no
doubt on the source from which the impulse came. The
advance made, whether quick or slow, would be as much the
work of God as the existence of man in the class of mam-
malia. Until it can be shown that our powers of sensation
and motion are self-originated, the developement of a higher
idea from a sensuous conception must be ascribed to the
Divine Spirit, as truly as the noblest thought which can be
embraced by the human mind. Hence each stage in the
growth of language marks the formation of new wants, new
ideas, and new relations. ‘It was an event in the history of
man,’ says Professor Max Miiller, ‘ when the ideas of father,
mother, brother, sister, husband, wife, were first conceived
and first uttered. It was a new era when the numerals from
one to ten had been framed, and when words like law, right,
duty, generosity, love, had been added to the dictionary of
man, If was a revelation, the greatest of all revelations,
when the conception of a Creator, a Ruler, a Father of man,
when the name of God was for the first time uttered in this
world.’ !

In that primeval ¢ime, therefore, after he had learnt to
expres his bodily feelings in articulate sounds, but before he


* Max Miiller, Lectures om
second series, vil. 308; History of Sans
Jrrit Literature, 528, ef seg. After tracit
the evolution of « moral and pir
meaning from myths originally purely
Bhyaiel, He Boudry ‘omeudear Le
sentiment moral ot religieux n'existait
qUimplicitement dens le naturalieme

rimitif. Lridée du Diew eréateur, pére

les hommes, aimant le bien et menant
la eréation vers ce but final, n'apparalt
pus nettement dans Is mythologie origin-


aire et ne s'en dégagea que pou-d-peu.
Gaoiqne Unde it Hh plus tard Le pays
excellence de Ia théologie, le Rig-
‘dda ne contient de théologie que dane
see parties les moins unciennes. Tl en
faut prendre gon pafti; la métaphysique,
Ja morale elle-méme en tant qu'elle
azrive & se formuler, sont des fruita du
ment intellectual ot non dee

souvenirs d'une antique sagesse,'=,

PlInterpritation que, 3


Ezrlicet,
conditions
of thought.


38


BOOK
L


—_——


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. -


had risen to any definite conception of a Divine Being, man
could interpret the world around him through the medium
of bis own sensations. It was thus impossible that he could
fail to attribute sensations like his own to every object on
which his eyes rested in the material universe. His notions
about things external to himself would be the direct result
of his psychological condition ; and for their utterance he
would have in language an instrument of boundless power.


39


CHAPTER III.


THE SOURCE OF MYTHICAL SPEECH.


Ir the analysis of language and the researches of antiquarians
bring before us, in the earliest annals of mankind, a state of
society which bears to our own a resemblance not greater
than that of infancy to mature manhood, we shall scarcely
realise that primssval condition of thought except by studying
closely the mind of children. Stubborn facts disclose as the
prominent cheracteristics of that early time the selfishness
and violence, the cruelty and slavishness of savages; yet the
mode in which they regarded the external world became a
source of inexhaustible beauty, a fountain of the most ex-
quisite and touching poetry. So true to nature and so lovely
are the forms into which their language passed, as they spoke
of the manifold phases of the changing year; so deep is the
tenderness with which they describe the death of the sun-
stricken dew, the brief career of the short-lived sun, and
the agony of the earth-mother mourning for her summer-
child, that we are tempted to reflect back upon the speakers
the purity and truthfulness of their words. If the theory of
@ corrupted revelation as the origin of mythology imputes to
whole nations a gross and wilful profanity which consciously
trayesties the holiest things, the simplicity of thought which
belongs to the earliest myths presents, as some have urged,
@ picture of primsval-humanity too fair and flattering.

No deep insight into the language and ways of children is
needed to dispel such a fancy as this. Tha child who will
speak of the dawn and the twilight as the Achaian spoke of
Prokris and Eés will also be crue) or false or cunning.
There is no reason why man in his earliest state should not
express his sorrow when the bright being who had gladdened


CHAP.
Ul.


——_
‘The in-


fancy of
mankind.


Earliest
condition
of thought
and its
conse-
quencems


wu


¥.
"oe
=


MaTHULVUS Us the AmsAN NALLUND, |


him with his radiance dies in the evening, or feel a real joy
when he rises again in the morning, and yet be selfish or
oppreasive or cruel in his dealings with his fellows. His
mental condition determined the character of his language,
and that condition exhibits in him, as in children now, the
working of a feeling which endows all outward things with a
life not unlike his own. Of the several objects which met
his eye he had no positive knowledge, whether of their
origin, their nature, or their properties. But he had life,
and therefore all things else must have life also. He was
under no necessity of personifying them, for he had for him-
self no distinctions between consciousness and personality.
He knew nothing of the conditions of his own life or of any
other, and therefore all things on the earth or in the heavens
were invested with the same vague idea of existence. The
sun, the moon, the stars, the ground on which he trod, the
clouds, storms, and lightnings were all living beings; could
he help thinking that, like himself, they were conscious
beings also?! His very words would, by an inevitable ne-
cessity, express this conviction. His language would admit
no single expression from which the attribute of life was
excluded, while it would vary the forms of that life with
unerring instinct. Every object would be a living reality,


+ In his most able and i
preface to the edition of Warton’s
History of Beglish Poetry, 1824, Mr.
Richard Price lays great stress on this
tendency, from which he holds that
even advanced forms of society are by
no means free. ‘Jt is difficult,’ be
remarka ‘to conceive any period of
‘human existence, where the disposition
to indulge ix these illusions of fancy
has not been 6 leading characteristic of
the mind. The infancy of society, a8
the first in the order of time, also affords
some circumstances highly favoursble to
the developement of this faculty. In
such a state, the secret and invisible
‘ands which connect the human raco
‘with the animal and cegetable creation,
are either felt more forcibly in an age
‘af conventional refinement, or are more
frequently ited to the imagination.
‘Man regards himself then but es the fret.
Tink inthe chain of snimateand inanimate
nature, 2a the associate and fellow of all


that exists around him, rather than as
a separate being of a distinet und wupe-
rior order. His attention is arrested by
the lifeless or breathing objects of his
daily intercourse, not merely as they
contribute to his numerous wante ant
pleasures, but as they exhibit any
affinity or more remote analogy with
the mysterious properties of hie being,
Subject to the same laws of life and
desth, of peceatioh end deooy, or
partially endowed with thesame passions,
sympathies, and propensitica, the speech-
Tess companion of his toil and amuse-
ment, the forest iu which he resides,
or the plant which flourishes beneath
his care, are to him but varied types of
his own intricate organisation, “In the
exterior form of these, the faithfal record
of his senses forbids any material
change ‘but the internal structure,
which is wholly removed from the view,
may be fashioned and constituted
pleasure.’ —26, 3


THE MYTHOP@IC STAGE OF LANGUAGE.


and every word a speaking picture. For him there.would be
no bare recurrence of days and seasons, but each morning
the dawn would drive her bright fiocks to the blue pastures
of heaven before the birth of the lord of day from the toiling
womh of night, Round the living progress of the new-born
sun there would be grouped a lavish imagery, expressive of
the most intense sympathy with what we term the operation
of material forces, and not less expreasive of the utter absence
of even the faintest knowledge. Life would be an alternation
of joy and sorrow, of terror and relief; for every evening the
dawn would return leading her bright flocks, and the short-
lived sun would die. Years might pass, or ages, before his
rising again would establish even the weakest analogy ; but
in the meanwhile man would mourn for his death, as for the
loss of one who might never return. For every aspect of the
material world he would have ready some life-giving ex-
pression; and those aspects would be scarcely less varied
than his words. The same object would at different times,
or under different conditions, awaken the most opposite or in-
consistent conceptions. But these conceptions and the words
which expressed them would exist side by side without pro-
ducing the slightest consciousness of their incongruity; nor
is it easy to determine the exact order in which they might
arise. The sun would awaken both mournful and inspiriting
ideas, ideas of victory and defeat, of toil and premature death.
He would be the Titan, strangling the serpents of the night
before he drove his chariot up the sky; and he would also be
the being who, worn down by unwilling labour undergone
for men, sinks wearied into the arms of the mother who bare
him in the morning Other images would not be wanting;
the dawn and the dew and the violet clouds would be not
less real and living than the sun. In his rising from the
east he would quit the fair dawn, whom he should see no more
till his labour drew towards its close. And not less would he
love and be loved by the dew and by the morning herself,
while to both his life would be fatal as his fiery car rose
higher in the sky. So would man speak of all other things
aldo; of the thunder and the earthquake and the storm, not
less than of summer and winter. But it would be no per-


41.


CHaP.
It.


a5


MeH010G1 Or THe ANYAN NATIONS.


BOOK sonification, and still less would it be an allegory or metaphor.
~—-— It would be to him a veritable reality, which he examined


Primaty
myths,


and analysed as little as be reflected on himself. It would
be a sentiment and a belief, but in no sense a religion.

In these spontaneous utterances of thoughts awakened by
outward phenomena, we have the source of the myths which
must be regarded as primary.’ But it is obvious that such
myths would be produced only so Jong as the words em-
ployed were used in their original meaning. While men
were conscious of describing only the departure of the sun
when they said ‘Endymion sleeps,’ the myth had not passed
beyond its first stage; but if once the meaning of the word
were either in part or wholly forgotten, the creation of a
mew personality under this name would become inevitable,
and the change would be rendered both more certain and
more rapid by the very wealth of words which they lavished
on the sights and objects which most impressed their imagi~-’
nation. A thousand phrases would be used to describe the
action of the beneficent or consuming sun, of the gentle or
awful night, of the playful or furious wind: and every word
or phrase became the germ of a new story, a8 soon as the
ind lost its hold on the original force of the name."

Thus in the Polyonymy which was the result of the earliest
form of human thought, we have the germ of the great epics
of later times, and of the countless legends which make up
the rich stores of mythical tradition. There was no bound
or limit to the images suggested by the sun in his ever
varying aspects; and for every one of these aspects they
would have a fitting expression, nor could human memory
retain the exact meaning of all these plrrases when the men
who used them had been scattered from their original home.
Old epithets would now become the names of new beings,
and the legends so framed would constitute the class of
secondary myths. But in all this there would be no disease

) «That Titanic adsurance with which servitude, chained for 6 time, and bound
poeienwame: mente teeny en
‘Guay cies tated the seeclaciey end of their Inboure’ a Midler,
‘with which the sun and the other stars‘ Comparstive ydogys Chips, gc,


[saceereed their a labour, they still 11. 96.
oetmgs kept in temporary


THE FREROMENS: OF THE DAY. $3


of language. The failure would be that of memory aiing= onaP.
a failure inevitable, yet not to be regretted, when we think
of the rich harvest of beauty which the poets of many ages

and many lands have reaped from these half-remembered

words.’

It mattered little, then, of what object or phenomenon they Polyono-
might happen to speak. It might be the soft morning light PY.6 4",
or the fearfal storm-cloud, the wind or the thunder. In ry
each case there would be Polyonymy, the employment of nad
meny names to denote the same thing. In each case, their
words would express truthfully the impressions which the
phenomena left on their senses, and their truthfulness would
impart to their language an undying beauty; but the most
fruitful source of mythical phrases would be found un-
doubtedly in the daily or yearly course of the lord of day.

In the thought of these early ages the sun was the child of
night, or darkness; the dawn came before he was born, and
died as he rose in the heavens. He strangled the serpents
of the night; he went forth like a bridegroom out of his
chamber, and like a giant to run his course. He hed to do
battle with clouds and storms. Sometimes his light grew
dim under their gloomy veil, and the children of men shud-
dered at the wrath of the hidden sun. Sometimes his ray
broke forth only, after brief splendour, to sink beneath a
deeper darkness ; sometimes he burst forth at the end of his
course, trampling on the clouds which had dimmed his


1 In hia Lectures om second.
seven 856, Dates Max Mlle assert
that ‘whenever any word, that was at
first new metaphorically, ig new without
a clear conception of the steps that led
to its original metaphorical meaning,
there is danger of mythology ; whenever
tose steps are forgotten and artificial

it in their places, we have
ytholog , or, if I may 60, wo havo
diseased language, whether that lan-
refers_to religious or secular
Interests.’ The mythology thus pro-
duced he terms the bane of antiquity,
This view is ed by M.
in his able paper, Ds Cinterpréta-
tion Mythologigue. After quoting the


fort injustement & notre avis, car Ja
faute n'est quiaux défaillances de la
mémoire, qui & gardé le mot mais ouklié
Je sens. ‘Ge mal srrive tantét pour un
mot, tantét pour une figure sae
dont on a perdo le clef.
une représentation mal pied
fa Se betas debout devant des catéchu-
dans la cuve baptismale a
Freer lieu & lalégende de saint Nicholas
ressuscitant les enfants, en faut-il con-
cluresussi que la sculpture était malade
‘But efter all there is uo zeal antagonism
‘betwoen the view taken
‘Max Miller and that of M. Baudry.
With the former, mythology arises when
the steps which led to » metaphor aro


sentence just cited, he adds “Vol Je forgotten ; in other words, from a fuilare


Jangege accusé de maladie et de révolte,


‘of memory, not from diseuse in language.


. Mriz0LOu. Ur THE ANYAN NATIUNS.


nor, brilliance and bathing his pathway with blood. Sometimes,
~—~—~- beneath mountains of clouds and vapours, he plunged into
the leaden sea. Sometimes he looked benignly on the face
of his mother or his bride who came to greet him at his
journey’s end. Sometimes he was the lord of heaven and
of light, irresistible in his divine strength; sometimes he
toiled for others, not for himself, ina hard, unwilling servi-
tude. His light and heat might give life or destroy it. His
chariot might scorch the regions over which it passed; his
flaming fire might burn up all who dared to look with prying
eyes into his dazzling treasure-house. He might be the
child destined to slay his parents, or to be united at the last
in an unspeakable peace to the bright dawn who for brief
space had gladdened his path in the morning. He might
- be the friend of the children of men, and the remorseless foe
of those powers of darkness who had stolen away his bride.
He might be a warrior whose eye strikes terror into his
enemies, or a wise chieftain skilled in deep and hidden know-
ledge. Sometimes he might appear as a glorious being
doomed to an early death, which no power could avert or
delay. Sometimes grievous hardships and desperate con-
flicts might be followed by a longer season of serene repose.
Wherever he went, men might welcome him in love, or
shrink from him in fear and anguish, He would have many
brides in many lands, and his offspring would assume aspects
beautiful, strange, or horrible. His course might be brilliant
and beneficent, or gloomy, sullen, and capricious. As com-
pelled to toil for others, he would be said to fight in quarrels
not his own; or he might for a time withhold the aid of an
arm which no enemy could withstand. «He might be the
destroyer of all whom he loved, he might slay the dawn with
his kindling rays, he might scorch the fruits who were his
children; he might woo the deep blue sky, the bride of
‘heaven itself, and an inevitable doom might bind his limbs
on the blazing wheel for ever and ever. Nor in this crowd
of phrases, all of which have borne their part in the forma-
tion of mythology, is there one which could not be used
naturally by ourselves to describe the phenomena of the ont-
. ward world, and there is scarcely one perhaps, which has


UEBMS Ur EFIL PUSTKi.


not thns been nsed by our own poets. There is a beauty in
them, which can never grow old or lose its charm. Poets
of all ages recur to them instinctively in times of the deepest
grief or the greatest joy; but, in the words of Professor Max
Miiller, ¢ it is impossible to enter fully into the thoughts and
feelings which passed through the minds of the early pocts
when they formed names for that far east from whence even
the early dawn, the sun, the day, their own life seemed to
spring. A new life flashed up every morning before their
eyes, and the fresh breezes of the dawn reached them like
greetings wafted across the golden threshold of the aky from
the distant lands beyond the mountains, beyond the clouds,
beyond the dawn, beyond the immortal sea which brought
us hither! The dawn seemed to them to open golden gates
for the sun to pass in triumph; and while those gates were
open, their eyes and their minds strove, in their childish
way, to pierce beyond the limits of this finite world, That
silent aspect wakened in the human mind the conception of
the Infinite, the Immortal, the Divine; and the names of
dawn became naturally the names of higher powers. ’!

But in truth we need not go back to that early time for
evidence of the fact that language such as this comes natu-
rally to mankind. Abstract names are the result of long
thought and effort, and they are never congenial to the
mass of men. They belong toa dialect which can never be
ipoken by poets, for on such unsubstantial food poetry must
starve and die. Some of us may know now that there is
aothing in natural phenomena which has any positive re-
ation with the impressions produced on our minds, that
she difference between the temperatures of Bais and Nova
Zembla is simply the difference of a few degrees more or leas
of solar heat, as indicated by Reaumur or Fahrenheit; that
the beantiful tints of morning and evening are being pro-
duced every moment, and that they are mere results of the
nelination which the earth at « particular moment may
aave to the sun. We may know that the whispering breeze
ind the roaring storm are merely air moving with different
legrees of force, that there is no generic difference between ice

1 Lectures om Language, secoua series, p. 600.


4.


CHAP.


——


Vee of


and con
crete
pames.


‘=? MiTHULUY.. Us Tua AmsAi LALIUND.


BOOK. and water, between fluids and solide, between heat and cold.
pani Sa ‘What if this knowledge were extended to all? Would it be
a gain if the language of men and women, boys and girls,
were brought into strict agreement with scientific facta, and
exhibit the exactness of technical definitions? The question
is superfluous, for so long as mankind remain whet they are,
auch things are impossible. In one sense, the glorious hues
which spread over the heavens at sunrise and sundown, the
breeze and the hurricane, are to us nothing. The phenomena
of the outward world take no notice of us. Shall it then be
said that there is not One who does take note of the im-
pressions which the sights or the sounds of nature make
‘upon our minds?. Must we not recognise the feelings which
those phenomena irresistibly evoke in us as not less facts
- than the phenomena themselves? We cannot rid ourselves
of these impressions. They are part of us; they grow with
our growth, and it is best for us if they receive a wholesome
culture. Modern science may show that our feelings are
merely relative; but there is still that within us which
answers to the mental condition from which the mythical
language of our forefathers sprang. It is impossible for us to
look on the changes of day and night, of light and darkness,
of summer and winter, with the passionless equanimity
which our philosophy requires ; and he who from 2 mountain
summit looks down in solitude on the long shadows as they
ereep over the earth, while the sun sinks down into the
purple mists which deaden and enshroud his splendours, can-
not shake off the feeling that he is looking on the conscious
struggle of departing life. He is wiser if he does not
attempt to shake it off. The peasant who still thinks that
he hears the soft music of the piper of Hameln, as the leaves
of the wood rustle in the summer air, will be none the better
if he parts with this feeling for some cold technical expres-
sion. The result of real science is to enable us to distinguish
between our impressions and the facts or phenomena which
produce them, whenever if may be necessary to do 80; but
beyond this, science will never need to make any trespass on
the domain of the poet and the condition of thought which


THR BsvbN BiAHS AND HE SEyan BAIS.


finds its natural expression in the phrases that once grew up
into a mythology,'

To the primary myths which spring from phrases em-
ployed in their original meaning to express the phenomena
of the outward world, and to the secondary myths which
arose from a partial or complete forgetfulness of that mean-
ing, must be added a third clase, which came into existence
from the use of equivocal words. If, as the tribes and
families of men diverged from common centres, there was
always a danger that words expressing sensuous ideas might
be petrified into personal appellatives, there was also the
more imminent danger that they might be confounded with
other words most nearly resembling them in sound. The
result would be, in grammatical phrase, false etymology :
the practical consequence would be the growth of a my-
thology. Many of the tales belonging to the most compli-
cated mythical systems arose simply from the misinterpre-
tation of common words. From a root which meant to shine,
the Seven Shiners received their name ; possibly or probably
to the same roots belongs the name of the Golden Bear
(depros and ursa), as the Germans gave to the lion the title
of Goldfusz; and thus, when the epithet had, by some
tribes, been confined to the Bear, the Seven Shiners were
transformed first into seven bears, then into one with
Arktouros (Arcturus) for their bearward. In India, too, the
meaning of riksha was forgotten; but instead of referring
the word to bears, they confounded it with rishi, and the
Seven Stars became the abode of the Seven Poets or Sages,
who enter the ark with Menu (Minos), and reappear as the
Seven Wise Men of Hellas, and the Seven Champions of
Christendom. Thé same lot, it would seem, befell another
name for this constellation. They who spoke of the seven
triones had long forgotten that their fathers spoke of the
stare as farae (staras) or strewers of light, and converted the
bearward into Bodtes, the ploughman, while the Teutonic
nations, unconscious that they had retained the old root in
their word stern or starglikewiae embodied a false etymology


1 Seo ‘farther Max Miller, ‘Compa- __* Lectures on Language, second series,
tative Mythology,” Chips, ii. 96. 308.


“2°
BOOK


urre®Loer OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. .
in wagons or wains. But when we tum to the Arksdian


—t— tale, that Kallisté, the mother of the eponymous hero Arkas,


was changed into a bear by the jealousy of Héré, and im-
prisoned in the constellation, we find ourselves in that
boundless region of mythology, the scenes of which are
sometimes s0 exquisitely fair, sometimes so gloomy, hideous,
and repulsive. The root vah, to convey (the Latin veho), gave
aname to the horse, to the flame of fire, and to the rays of
the sun, The magic wand of metaphor, without which
there can be no growth or expansion of language, soon
changed the rays of the sun into horses. But these horses,
vahni, had yet another epithet, Hartt, which signified at first
the brilliance produced by fat and ointment. Like the Greek
words cvyadéas and \vrapés, applied to things anointed with
lard or oil, ghritd-prishthéh (glittering with fat) furnished
@ title for the horses (or flames) of Agni, ignis, the fire.
Thus the Harits became the immortal steeds who bear the
chariot of Indra across the sky and the car of Achilleus over
the p'ains of Ilion. The Greek carried away the name at an
earlier stage; and the Charites, retaining simply the quali-
ties of grace and brightness, became the lovely beings who,
with Himeros and the Muses, charm earth and heaven with
their song. But before the Hesiodic theogony had defined
their numbers and fixed their attributes, Charis remained a
mere name of Aphrodité, the radiant dawn who springs from
the sea before the rising of the sun. Still, though even at
that early time Aphrodité was the goddess of sensuous
beauty and love, she was yet, with a strange adherence to
the old meaning of her name, known as Enalia and Pontia,
the child of the sea foam. For yet another title which she
bore they could but frame a tale that Argynnis, the beloved
of Agamemnon, had died at Kephisos. Yet that title,
identified with the Sanskrit arjunt, spoke simply of dazzling
loveliness. By a similar process of metaphor, the rays of
the sun were changed into golden hair, into spears and
lances, and roles of light. From the shoulders of Phoibos
Lykégenés, the light-born, flow the sacred locks over which
no razor might pass. On the head of Nisos, as on that of
1 See further Max Miller, Rig Veda Sankité, vol. i. p. 26.


MULTIPLICITY OF NAMES,


Samson,! they become @ Palladion invested with a myste-
rious power. From Helios, the sun, who can scorch as well
ea warm, comes the robe of Medeia, which reappears in the
poisoned garments of Deianeira. Under the form of spears
and arrows the rays of the sun are seen in almost every page
of all Aryan mythology. They are the invincible darts of
Phoibos, Achilleus, and Meleagros, of Heraklés and Theseus,
of Artemis, Perseus, and Bellerophén, the poisoned arrows
which Philoktétés and Odysseus, the model, aa some will
have it, of Hellenic character, scruple not to use.

Thus the disintegration of the primary myths would be
insured by the wealth of synonyms which the earliest form
of human thought had brought into existence. If the Greek
mythographers had been conscious that Kephalos and Prokris
meant only the sun and the dew, the legend would have con-
tinued to belong to the same class with the myths of Indra
and his cloud-enemy Vritra. As it is,.it stands midway
between these primary legends and the later tales which
aprung up when the meaning of such names as Lyk&én,


49


GHAF.


eae
’


Disinte- ¢
gration of
myths,


Kor‘nis, and Sarpédén had been wholly forgotten. The form -


of thought which looked on all sensible phenomena as en-
dowed with a conscious life, found utterance in a multi-
plicity of names for the same object, and each of these names
became or might become the groundwork of a new myth, as
in process of time they were confounded with words which
most nearly resembled them in sound.


+ Dean Btanley (Lectures om the likeness between the features of Samson
Jewish Church, i,” 368} points out the and thuge of
hls.


var. 1, E


BOOK
se
EHhasticity
of mythi-
eal speech,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


CHAPTER IV.


THE DEVELOPEMENT OF MYTHOLOGY.


‘Wuenx in the Vedic songs we read of Indra, the sun-god, as
fighting with Vritra, the dark power who ,imprisons the rain
in the storm cloud, or with Ahi, the throttling snake, or as
pursuing the beautiful Dahand, of the dawn as the mother
or the bride of the sun, or of the sun as slaying the dark
parent from whom he has sprung, we feel at once, that in
such language we have an instrument of wonderful elasticity,
that the form of thought which finds its natural utterance in
sa:h expressions must be capable of accommodating iteelf
to every place and every climate, and that it would have as
much room for its exercise among the frozen mountains of
the North, as under the most smiling sky and genial sun.
But the time during which this mythical speech was the
common language of mankind, would be a period of transition,
in which the idea of existence would be sooner or later
expanded into that of personality. Probably before this
change had taken place, the yet unbroken Aryan family
would be scattered to seek new homes in distant lands; and
the gradual change of language, which that dispersion ren-
dered inevitable, would involve a more momentous change in
their belief. They would carry awey with them the old
worda and expressions ; but these would now be associated
with new ideas, or else be imperfectly or wrongly understood.
Henceforth, the words which had denoted the sun and moon
would denote not merely living things but living persons,
From personification to deification the steps would be but
few; and the process of disintegration would at once furnish
the materials for a vast’ fabric of mythology. All the ex-
pressions which had attached a living force to natural objects
would remain as the description of personal and anthropo-


LOCALISATION OF MYTHS.


morphous gods. Every word would become an attribute,
and all ideas once grouped round a single object would
branch off into distinct personifications. The sun had been
the lord of light, the driver of the chariot of the day; he
had toiled and laboured for the sons of men, and sunk down
to reat, after a hard battle, in the evening. But now the
lord of light would be Phoibos Apollén, while Helios would
remain enthroned in his fiery chariot, and hia toila and labours
and death-struggles would be transferred to Heraklés. The
violet clouds which greet his rising and hie setting would
now be represented by herds of cows which feed in earthly
pastures. There would be other expressions which would
still remain as floating phrases, not attached to any definite
deities. These would gradually be converted into incidents
in the life of heroes, and be woven at length into systematic
narratives. Yinally; these gods or heroes, and the incidenta
of their mythical career, would receive each ‘a local habi-
tation anda name.’ These would remain as genuine history,


51


CHAP.


iv.
——


” when the origin and meaning of the words had been either


wholly or in part forgotten.

But in such a process as this, it is manifest that the men
amongst whom it sprang up would not be responsible for the
form which it might assume. Words, applied at first simply
to outward objects or phenomena, would become the names
of personal gods; and the phrases which described those
objects would then be transferred to what were now deities
to be adored. But it would not follow that a form of thought
which might apply, not only without harm but with a mar-
vellous beauty, to things if living yet not personal, would
bear translation into the conditions of human life. , If in the
older speech, the heaven was wedded to the earth, which
returned his love with a prodigal fertility, iu the later tims
the name of the heaven would be the name of a god, and
that god would necessarily be earthly and sensual. But this
developement of a mythology, much of which wonld inevitably
be immoral and even repulsive; would not necessarily exercise
8 similar debasing influence on the morality and practice of
the people. It had started with being a sentiment, not a
religion,—a personal conviction, but not a moral belief;

Ea


Results of
mythical
Ianguage.


52 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


a ra and the real object of the heart’s adoration would remain
—~—~ not less distinct from the creations of mythology than it had
been before. Nay, it might be that, with any given people,
the tone of thought and the character of society might be more
and more raised, even while the incongruous mythological
fabric assumed more stupendous proportions. But the first
condition of thought, which regarded every object in creation,
would have in itself only two possible developements. It
must issue either in an anthropomorphous polytheism, or in
a degrading fetish worship.! The character of the people
would in each case determine whether the result for them
should be an idolatrous terror of inanimate things, or the
multiplication of deities with human forms and human
passions, mingling with men, and sharing their partialities

and their fends, ;
Evidence For the proofs of these assertions, we shall look in vain to
ofthis the earliest Hellenic literature. But the Vedic poems furnish
ment fur- inuisputable evidence, that such as this was the origin and
uubed by growth of Greek and Teutonic mythology. In these poems,
Yoda. the names of many, perhaps of most, of the Greek gods,
indicate natural objects which, if endued with life, have not
been reduced to human personality. In them Daphné is
still simply the morning twilight ushering in the splendour
of the new-born sun; the cattle of Hélios there are still the
light-coloured clouds which the dawn leads out into the fields
of the sky. There the idea of Heraklés has not been sepa-
rated from the image of the toiling and struggling sun, and
the glory of the life-giving Hélios has not been transferred
to the god of Delos and Pytho. In the Vedas the myths of
Endymion, of Kephalos and Prokris, Orpheus and Eurydiké,
are exhibited in the form of detached mythical phrases,
which farnished for each their germ.” The analysis may be
extended indefinitely: but the conclusion can only be, that in
the Vedic language we have the foundation, not only of the
glowing legends of Hellas, but of the dark and sombre
a pore wong bythe cto uad eepteProticr Maz Millers wy’ on” Cour
of the popular mythology, we can see parative Mythology, Chips from a


only the operation of the Divine Spirit German Workshop,
i the nind and beart of man, ne


DEGERES IN THE DEVELOPEMENT OF MYTHS. 53


mythology of the Scandinavian and the Teuton. Both alike cwHap.
have grown up chiefly from names which have been grouped —¥-_
around the sun; but the former has been grounded on those
expressions which describe the recurrence of day and night,

the latter on the great tragedy of nature in the alternation

of summer and winter.

Of this vast mass of solar myths, some have emerged into Relative
independent legends, others have furnished the groundwork (yj
of whole epics, others have remained simply as floating tales myths.

- whose intrinsic beauty no poet has wedded to his verse.
Whether the whole may be classified in order of priority,
may be doubtful ; but the strong presumption would be, that
those which have not been systematised into coherent narra-
tives are the oldest, as not having sufficiently lost their original
meaning. At the least, they exhibit to us the substance of
mythology in its earliest form. Thus the legends of Kephalos
and Prokris, of Daphné, Narkissos, and Endymién, have
come down to us in a less artificial form than that of
Heraklés, while the myth of Heraklés has been arrested
at a less advanced stage than those of Zeus and Apollén.
But all alike can be translated back into mythical expressions,
and most of these expressions are found in the Vedas with
their strict mythical meaning. ‘The marvellous exuberance
of this early language, and the wealth of its synonyms, may
well excite astonishment as we watch its divergence into
such myths as those of Kephalos and Endymién, Heraklés,
Dapbné, the Pythian and Delian Apollén, Phaethén and
Meleagros, Memnén and Belletophén.

That the form of thought which found utterance in myth- Solar
ical language would -lead to the accumulation of a vast my‘
number of names for the same object, we have already seen ;
and so clearly does the mythology of the Aryan nationa
exhibit the working of this process, that the task of tracing
it through the several legends of which it is composed
becomes almost a superfluous work. It seems impossible
not to see that when the language of mythology was the
ordinary speech of daily life, the night laboured and heaved
with the birth of the coming day, and that his toil and labour
is reproduced in the Homeric hymn, in which Lét6, the power


. 34


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK of forgetfulness and sleep, gives birth to the lord of light in
ws Delos. His coming waa preceded by the pale twilight, who,


in mythical times, drove his cows to their pastures; but in
the Odyssey his herds feed at Tainaron or in Thrinakia far
away, where Phaethousa and Lampetié, the bright and gleam-
ing daughters of Neaira, the early morning, tend them at the
rising and the setting of the sun. The old mythical feeling
is strikingly manifest throughout the whole legend, not
merely in the names and office of the wife and children of
Helios, but in the delight with which he gazes on his cattle
at the beginning and the close of his daily course, and in
the indignation which prompts him, when they are slain, to
hide his light in the regions of the dead. But the sun loves
not only the clouds, but the dawn who is their leader; and
80 the dawn comes before us as followed by him, and flying
from his love, or else as returning it. The former phrase
(‘the dawn flies from the sun’) is embodied in the legend of
Duphné, who flies from her lover and vanishes away as he
seeks to embrace her. In the tale of Orpheus she appears,
under the name of Eurydiké, as the bride of the sun, loved
by him and returning his love, yet falling a victim to it, for
whether to Daphné or Eurydiké the brightness of his glance
is fatal as he rises higher in the heaven. The same feeling
is manifest under a form, if possible, more intense, in the
tale of Kephalos and Prokris. ‘The sun loves the dew,’ was
the old mythical phrase; and it is reproduced in the love of
Kephalos (the head of the sun) for Prokris, the glittering
dewdrop. But ‘the morning loves the sun.’ Eés seeka to
win Kephalos for herself; and her jealousy of Prokris is at
once explained. But again the dewdrops each reflect the
aun, and Prokris becomes faithless to her lover, while she
grants him her love under a new disguise; and finally, when
her fault has been atoned, she dies by the spear of Artemis
(the fiery ray), with which the sun unwittingly strikes her
down. It is the old tale of Daphné and Eurydiké: and
Kephalos goes mourning on his solitary journey, labouring
not for himself, but for men who’ need his help,' until he
sinks to sleep beneath the western sea.


1 In this legend he goes to the aid of of course, be varied at will, ao long as
Ampbitryon ; but details might, the movements are still to westward


MYTHS OF WANDERERS AND BONDMEN.


55


But, as we have seen, the sun may be spoken of as either CHAP. ‘
beneficent or destructive, ag toiling for the good of men or ee,
4s slaying them. Sometimes he may sink to rest in quietness Change-
and peace, while the moon comes to give him her greeting ‘#tion


of love; or he may die after a battle with the struggling
clouds, leaving a solitary line of blood-red light behind him,
So in the Hellenic legend, Phoibos cannot rest in hia birth-
place of Lykia or Delos; he must wander far westwards over
many lands, through the fair vale of Telphoussa, to his
western home in Delphi. There the mighty power of his
rays is shown in the death of the great dragon, whose body
is left to rot at Pytho.’ Yet it was strange that the sun,
whose influence was commonly for life and gladness, should
sometimes vex and slay the sons of men; and so the tale
went that plague and pestilence came when Phaethon had
taken the place of Helios, and vainly sought to guide aright
his fire-breathing horses. So again the legend of Meleagros
exhibits only the capricious action of the sun, and the alter-
nations of light and shade are expressed in the sudden
exploits and moody sullenness of the hero; but his life is
bound up with the torch of day, the burning brand, and
when its last spark flickers out the life of the hero is ended.
More commonly, however, he is the mighty one labouring on
and finally worn out by an unselfish toil, struggling in his
hard task for a being who is not worthy of the great and
costly sacrifice. So Phoibos Apollén, with his kinsman
Heraklés, serves the Trojan Laomedén ; and so he dwells as
a bondman in the house of Admétos, So likewise, as Belle-
rophontes, he encounters fearful peril at the bidding of a
treacherous host, ang dies, like Sarpédén and Memnén, in a
quarrel which is nothis own. But nowhere is his unutterable
toil and scanty reward brought out so prominently as in the
whole legend, or rather the mass of unconnected legend,
which is gathered round the person of Heraklés. Doomed
before his birth to be the slave of a weak and cruel master,
he strangles, while yet in his cradle, the serperits of the night,
ef homake wich an ely Hes thclhg make; woe at Votn, 'e


Klbs, end the serpent which stings Eury- smitten by tho spear of Indra,
4iké. It reappears in Norse myths as


36.


» ROOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.
which stung to death the fair Eurydiké. His toils begin.


eu His limbs are endued with an irresistible power, and he haa


vrigin of
evelope-


a soul which knows no fear. He may use this power for
good or for evil, and his choice for good furnishes the
groundwork for the apologue of Prodikos. Other legends
there were which perverted this idea; and in these he is
exhibited under gross, uncouth, or repulsive forms. But he
goes upon his way, and is hurried on through many lands.
In all he has mighty works to do, and he fails in none. The
remembrance of Iolé may linger in his memory, but there
are others who claim his love in the days of his strength and
power, and it would seem as though he had forgotten the
daughter of Eurytos. But his time draws towards ita close:
the beautiful maiden, whose face had gladdened him long ago,
returns to cheer him in the evening of his life. With her
comes the poisoned robe (the mantle of clond), which he
strives in vain to tear away from his bleeding limbs. In a
de-per and redder stream flows the life-blood, till, after a
convulsive struggle, the strife is closed in the dead silence of
night.

But it is in the case of Heraklés that the perfect truth of
the old mythical language gave rise more especially to that
apparently strange and perplexing meaning which repelled
and disgusted even the poeta and philosophers of Greece.
Pindar refuses to believe that any god could be a sensualist
or a cannibal; he might in the same spirit have rejected the
tales which impute something of meanness or cowardice to
the brave and high-souled Heraklés. For Heraklés fights
with poisoned arrows, and leaves them as his bequest to
Philoktétés. But the poisoned arrowsare the piercing rays
which burn in the tropical noon-day, and they reappear 28
well in the poisoned robe of Deianeira as in that which the
Kolchian Medeia professes to have received from her kinsman
Hélios.

A deeper mythical meaning, however, underlies and ac-
counts for the immorality and licence which was introduced
into the transmuted legend of Heraklés. The sun looka
down on the earth, and the earth answers to his loving
glance by her teeming and inexhaustible fertility. In every


REPULSIVE ASPECTS OF MYTHS.


Jand she yields her special harvest of fraita and flowers, of
corn and wine and oil. Her children are countless, but all
spring up under the eye of the sun as he journeys through
the wide heaven. It is easy to see what must be the result
when the sun is transmuted into the human, yet god-like,
Heraklés, and how repulsive that myth must become which,
in its primitive form, only told how

‘Mifad the mooebouue ln te sa?
The same explanation removes the mystery of the even
greater degradation tv which the Hellenic mythology reduces
Zeus himeelf, the supreme father of gods and men. He who
should be the very type of all purity and goodness becomes
the very embodiment of headstrong lust and passion, while
the holiness of the lord of life and light is transferred to
Apollén and his virgin sister, Athéné. The difficulty is but
slight. Zeus, the Vedic Dyaus, is but another form of
Ouranos, the veiling heaven or sky; and again, as in the
words of our own poet, who sings how

Nothing in the world is single,

at Reg
and how

The mountains kiss high heaven,
so Ouranos looked down on Gaia, and brooded over her in
his deep, unfailing, life-giving love. But these are phrases
which will not bear translation into the conditions of human
life, without degrading the spiritual god into a being who
boasts of his unbounded and shameless licence, --

The same process which insured this degradation insured at
the same time the local boundaries which were assigned to
mythical heroes or their mythical exploits. When the ad-
ventures of Zeus assumed something like consistency, the
original meaning of his name was less and less remembered,
until his birthplace was fixed in a Cretan cave, and his
throne raised on @ Thessalian hill. So Apollén was born
in Lykia or in Delos, and dwelt at Patara or Pytho. So
Endymi6n had his tomb in Elis, or slept his long sleep on


2 Shelley, Low's Philovophy.


57


CHAP.
3¥..
—S


Tendency
to locatine
roythienl

incidents,


a MITHOLUG. UF 25 AKTAN NATLOND.


BOOK the hill of Latmos. So Kephalos first met Prokris on the

—1_. Hymettian heights, and fell from the Leukadian cape into

the Western Sea. So, as she wandered westward in search

of her lost child, Télephassa {a name which, like those of

Phaethousa, Lampetié, and Brynhild, tells its own tale), sank

to aleep on the Thessalian plain in the evening.

Vitality of Yet although much was forgotten, and much also, it may

themytho- be, lost for ever, the form of thought which produced the old

Beaty. inythical language had not altogether died away. Showing

itself sometimes in directly allegorical statement of historical

fact, sometimes in similar descriptions of vatural objects or

of the incidents of common life, it still threw the halo of a

living reality over everything of which it spoke. So the

flight of Kaunos from Miletos to Lykia, and the sorrow of the

- sister whom he had left behind, figured the migration of

colonists from the one land to the other. So in the Hesiodic

Theogony, Nyx (night) is the mother of Hypnos, (sleep,) and

One'ros, (dream,) of Eris, (strife,) and Apaté, (deceit,) and

Mémos, (blame,) where we speak merely of sleeping and
dreaming, and of evil deeds wrought in secrecy and darkness.' *

Constant If again, the mythology of the Homeric poets, as handed

demand down to us, puinta to an age long anterior to their own, yet

mythical the mythopoic faculty still exerted itself, if not in the

nareutives: sovention of myths altogether new, yet in the embellishment

and expansion of the old. It was not easy to satisfy the

appetite of an imaginative age which had no canon of

historical criticism, and which constantly craved its fitting

food. It was not easy to exhaust the vein opened in almost

every mythical theme. The sun as toiling and suffering, the

sky as brooding over and cherishing the earth, the light as

gladdening and purifying all visible things, would suggest

an infinity of details illustrating each original idea, The

multiplication of miracles and marvels stimulated the desire

for more; and new labours were invented for Heraklés, new

loves for Zeus, as easily as their forefathers uttered the words

to which the’myths of Zeus and Heraklés owed their

existence. The mere fact of their human personification


» Max Miller, ‘Comparative Mythology,’ Chips from @ German Workskop,
ii, 64, ef 40g.


ARTIFICIAL MYTHS.


insured the growth of innumerable fictions. If Zens had
the form and the passions of men, then the conditions of his
life must be assimilated to theirs. He must have wife and
children, he must have father and mother. The latter must
pe no less divine than himself; but as he is enthroned above
them, they must belong to a dynasty which he has over-
thrown. Their defeat must have’ been preceded by a long
and fierce struggle. Mighty beings of gigantic force must
have fought on each side in that tremendous conflict; but
the victory must belong to the side which, to brute force,
added wise forethought and prudent counsel.! Here there
would be the foundation for that marvellous supernatural
machinery of which we have some indications in the Iliad,
and which is drawn out with such careful detail in the
Hesiodic Theogony. But Zeus, to whom there were children
born in every land, must have his queen; and the jealousy
of Héré against I6, or Semelé, or Alkméné would follow aa @
necessary consequence. The subject might be indefinitely
expanded, and each subject would of itself suggest others;
but there was no fear that the poet should weary the


59


CHAP.
Iv.
—


patience of his hearers, if only his additions, whether of ,


incident or detail, did not violate the laws of mythological
eredibility. Nothing must be related of Heraklés which was
repugnant to the fundamental idea of his toil and suffering
for a master weaker than himself; nothing must be told
of Athéné which would rather call up associations of the
laughter-loving Aphrodité.

And, finally, there would be a constant and irresistible
temptation to sever historical incidents and characters from
the world of reality,.and bear them into the cloudland of my-
thology. Round every hero who, after great promise, died
in the spring-time of his life, or on whom the yoke of an
unworthy tyrant Iay heavy, would be grouped words and ex-
pressions which belonged to the myth of the brilliant yet
quickly dying sun. The tale of Achilleus and Meleagros may
be entirely mythical; but even if it be in part the story of
men who really lived and suffered, that story has been ao inter-
woven with images borrowed from the myths of a bygone age,


1 Hence the mythical Prometheus.


Transmu-
tation of
names
really
historical.


ou


HOOK
—


the mytho-
logy of
Northern


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


aa to conceal for ever any fragments of history which may lie
beneath them. Names apparently historical have been intro-
duced into the Nibelungen Lied which are not to be found
in the Edda. The great Theodoric et Verona is transmuted
into Dietrich of Bern; while Siegbert, the Austrasian king,
and the infamous Brunehault! have taken the place of Sigurd
and Brynhild.

But if the mythical phrases which gave birth to the legends
of Heraklés, Endymion, and Orpheus, of Phaethén, Meleagros,
and Bellerophontes, spoke of the daily course of the sun,
there were others which told of alternating seasons. For
the character of mythical speech must necessarily be modified,
and its very phrases suggested by the outward features and
phenomena of the country. The speech of the tropics, and
still more, of the happy zone which lies beyond its scorching
heat, would tell rather of brilliance than of gloom, of life
rather than decay, of constant renovation rather than pro-
longed lethargy. But in the frost-bound regions of the
North, the speech of the people would, with a peculiar
intensity of feeling, dwell on the tragedy of nature. It
would speak not so much of the daily death of the sun (for
the recurrence of day and night in other lands would bring
no darkness to these), but of the deadly sleep of the earth,
when the powers of frost and snow had vanquished the
brilliant king. It would speak, not of Eés rising from the
Titan’s couch, or of Hélios sinking wearied into his golden
eup behind the sea, but of treasures stolen from the earth
and buried in her hidden depths beyond the sight and reach
of man. It would tell of a fair maiden, wrapped in a dream-
Jeas slamber, from which the touch of one brave knight alone
could rouse her; it would sing of her rescue, her betrothal,


welt ota ‘the coincidence
eet 1 story is 60 great
that it has induced ome fi Teuhemesetie
«ities to derive the whole legend of the
‘Nibelunge from Austensian history, and
to make the murder of

Branchsult the basis of the murder of
,Sifritor Sigard by Brynhild. Fortunate-
By perry ‘to answer these German

eck Euhemerista, for we

find in contemporsry history that Jor


nandee, who wrote his history at least
twenty’ years before the death of the
See ae ast warts Bi oe f the
ter of the mythic Sigurd, Swan-
ae who was born, according to the
Edda, after the murder of his father,
and afterwards killed by Jérmunrek,
sehom the bes again isorcned
ia Hormanieus » Gothic king of
fourth centary/—Max Miller,‘ Gimp,
ative Mythology,’ Chips, ge, vol. ii, 132,


MYTHS OF SUMMER AND WINTER.
and her desertion, as the sun, who brought back the spring,


“61


CHAP,


forsook her for the gay and wanton summer. It would go elle


on to frame tales of strife and jealousy, ending in the death
of the bright hero; it would speak of the bride whom he has
forsaken as going up to die upon his funeral pile. This
woful tragedy, whose long sorrow called forth a deep and
intense sympathy which we, perhaps, can scarcely realise, is
faintly indicated in the beautiful hyma to Démétér; but
winter, in the bright Hellenic land, assumed a form too fair
to leave any deep impression of gloom and death on the
popular mythology. ‘The face of nature suggested there the
simple tale which speaks of Persephoné as stolen away, but
brought back to her mother by a covenant insuring to her
a longer sojourn on the bright earth than in the shadowy
kingdom of Hades. But how completely the tragedy, to
which this hymn points, forms the groundwork of the Volsung
myth and of the Edda into which it was expanded, to what
an extent it has suggested the most minute details of the
great epics of the North, Professor Max Miller has shown,
with a force and clearness which leaves no room for doubt.!
Like Achilleus, Sifrit or Sigurd can be wounded only in one
spot, aa the bright sun of summer cannot grow dim till it is
pierced by the thorn of winter. Like Phoibos, who amites
the dragon at Pytho, the Northern hero slays the serpent


Mythology, vol. i. pp. 108, 118. Mr.
Thorpe is aware of the resemblance of
the Northern mythology to that of the
Greeks, but he seems scarcely to hare


' ‘Comparative Mythology,’ p. 108,
&e. The story of Sigurd and Brynbild
comes upagain in the legends of Ragnar
and Thora, and again of Ragnar and


Aslauga. Like Brynhild, Thora with
the earth's treasure is guarded by a
dragon whose cuils encircle her castle ;
and only the man who slays the dragon
can win her for his bride. But Ragnar
Lodbrog, who so wina her, is etill the
von of Bigurd. Thora dies, and Ragnar
at length woos the beautiful Kraka,
whom, however, he is on the point of
deserting for the daughter of Ovten,
when Kraka reveals herself as the
ebild of Sigurd and Brynhild. The
Myth has been weakened in ite ex-
tension; but the half conseiousness of
ita origin is betrayed in the very
names and incidents of the story, even
be, in the Iiad, the teara which Eds
sheds on the death of Memnén are
“morning dew.’ See Thorpo's Northern


understood its extent. In his explana-
tions he inclines (rol. i. p. 122, &¢.) to
the opinion that real historical eventa
have given rive to myths, © conclusion
which Mr. Grote refuses to admit. But
his method throws no light on the cowo
of these resemblances between the my~
thological systems of nations utterly
from one another; still leas
does it show why they should in each
case assume their particular form, and
why it is that they could have assumed
no other, In this Teutoniestory Si
and Ragnar are ench unfaithful to their
betrothed brides: in the Weleh legend
the faithlesanese of Guenevere to Arthur


reproduces the desertion of Menclaoe
dy Helen, who finds her Lancelot in


a 4


BOOE


ee he rouses Brynhild from her long slumber."


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


Rafnir, and wine back the treasure of the Niflungar, while
This treasure
is the power of vegetation, which has been lulled to sleep by
the mists and clouds of winter; the seeds which refuse to
grow while Démétér sorrows for her child Persephoné. The
desertion of Brynhild is the advance of spring into summer ;
and from it follows of necessity the hatred of Brynhild for
Gudrun, who has stolen away the love of Sigurd." A dark
doom presses heavily on him, darker and more woful than
that which weighed down the toiling Heraklés; for the
labour of Heraklés issued always in victory, but Sigurd must
win his own wife Brynhild only to hand her over to Gunnar.
The sun must deliver the bright spring, whom he had wooed
and won, to the gloomy powers of coldand darkness. Gudrun
only remains; but though outwardly she is fair and bright,
she is of kin to the wintry beings, for the late summer is
more closely allied to death than to life. Yet Gunnar, her


* prother, cannot rest; the wrath of the cold has been roused,


and he resolves to slay the bright and beautiful Sigurd. The
deed is done by Gunnar’s brethren—the cloud, the wind, and
the storm; and Brynhild, filled again with her early love,
lies down to die with him who had forsaken her.*


' The same myth, as we might ex-
pect, forms the subject of several of the
‘Sculptured Stones’ of Scotland. ‘The
legond of dragon holding a maiden in
thrall until he is elain by a valiant
knight, occurs more than once,’—Burton,


scarcely in point. ‘The manifestations
of Moloch, Chemosh, and Milcom, may
originate in such a feeling; but wo
cannot at once assign 2 moral and a
mythological origin to those of Zeus and
Odin, Thor and Vishnu. If Zeus and


History of Scotland, vol. i. p. 150.

3 Itia but another form of the jealousy
of Es and Prokris. Jt finds its most
tender expression in the grief of Oindné
for the treachery of Pazis.

+ Mr. Dasent, who has very ably
‘traced the intimate connection of the
mythological systems of the Aryan rice,
seems, like Mr, Gladstone, to attribute
their repulsive aspects to a moral cause.
Bis reasons, however, arn very different.
‘The incessant display of the Hellenic
and Teatonie gods be attributes to «
consciousness on the part of their
worshippers that were subjective,
and hence noa-substantial, He coo
trusts rightly the ‘restlessness’ of a false
religion, ‘ when brought face to face with
the quiet dignity and majesty of the’
true; bat his instances appesr to be


Odin were once the beaven or the sky,
then their human personification must,
as we have seen, be followed by the
developement of their special mythical
attributes and history, and could have
been followed by no others. The idea
of the mighty sun toiling for weak and
worthless men would inevitably be de-
veloped into the strong Horaklée, brave
of course, grave of even comic, virtuous
or immoral, The adventures of Zeus
mey be ‘tinged with all the lust and
guile whieh the wickedness of the
natural mun, planted on a hot-bed of
iniquity, is capable of eonceiving;" but
we shill scarcely trace them to a re-
Tigious perversion, if we accept the
conclusions which @ comparison of
Greck mythology with the earliest Vedie
literature forces upon us The main


HOMERIC MYTHOLOGY.


Phrases similar to those which gave birth to the legends
of the Voleungs and the Nibelungs lie at the root of the
epics to which Greek genius has imparted such wonderful
consistency and beauty. Yet it can scarcely be too often
repeated, that these poets adopted as much of the popular


_inythology ss suited their purpose, and no more, If casual


expressions throughout these poems leave no room to doubt
that they knew of wars among the heavenly beings, of the
dethronement of Kronos, the good service and the hard
recompense of Prométheus, and the early death of Achilleus,
it appears not less manifest, that the idea of Oinéné and of her
relations to Paris could not have dawned for the first time
on the mind of a later age. It was not part of the poet’s
design to furnish a complete mythology; and the Tliad ex-
hibits only that process of disintegration which was per-


difference between the adventures of
Qdin and Zeus is that, while those of
the latter are chiefly erotic, the former
jnvolve the exhibition of gigantic phy-
sical strength,—s distinction at once
accounted for by differences of soil and
climate—Seo Dasent, Popular Tale
Srom the Norse, Introduction, p. lix.
Whether the Beast epic of the North
had, or bad not, its origin in a Natare-
‘worship, Mr, Dasent appears to include
in the various Besst epics of the Aryan
races some instancos which seem not to
Delong to thom. Thus, as illustrating
the transformltion of men into beasts,
ho mentions Eurépé and her bull, Leda
and her ewan—(Popular Tales, p. cxix).
¥f it be an illustration, it accounts for
all gueh transformations; bat it docs #0
in a way which ia completely subversive
of any hypothesis of Nature-worship.
Such mytha may all be traced to mere
forgotfulnesa of the original meaning of
words. In the Vedas tho image of 3
dull is very commonly employed as ex+
proseing the power und speed of the
sun, and thie image reappears in the
bull which bears Eurdpé, the broad
Spreading light, to the Western lund.
Thus also, as we bave seen, the seven
shinera become seven bears, and the
seven stars are converted into wains.
A similar confusion between words
newly alike in sound and origin as
Aeuids, shining, und Adeos, @ wolf, 80
named from the glossiness of its cost,
produced the myth that Lykaon and


his children were turned into wolves,
and probably laid the foundations of #
superstition which has, from time to
time, with disastrous fury. Seo
Lecky, History of the Rise and Influence
of Rationalism tn Europe, vol. i. ch. i.,
and the article ‘ Witcheraft,’ in the

iota of Science, Litrature, ond
Art, But if the terrible delusion of
Lpkaothropy ‘arose from the mere uso
of an word, we cannot cite
such legends as evidence in favour of
Dr. Dasent's hypothesis of a primerul
belief that ‘men under certain conditions
could take the shape of animals,” That
this belief prevailed in the time of
Herodotos, cannot be denied ; but in the
‘Tiiad and Odyssey the power of assum-
jing different forms is reserved to the
gods only. A distinction may, however,
be fairly drawn between the involuntary
transformtions of men in Norse mytho-
Beast epic, which
ibes the relations of
Drute a Js with one another, and of
which Dr. Dasent speuks as ‘full of the
liveliest traits of natare.’ But this very
fact seems to prove conclusively, that
this Boust epic never bad anything to
do with Nuture-worship. The Egyptian
who worshipped Apis was not likely
touppreciate must keenly the character
of the animal whom he reverenced.
Had Norsemen ever worshipped bolls,
‘bears, and wolves, they wonld not have
drawn their portraita with such nica
‘Gocriestmati


63


CHAP.
Iv,


Ground-
work of
the ' Ho-
meric’ my-


“6


‘MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK petually multiplying new tales and new beings from the old
wae mythical language. In no instance, perhaps, is this process


brought ont with greater clearness than in that of Paris.
This son of Priam, as leading away the beautiful Helen from
the far west and hiding her through ten long years in his
secret chambers, represents the dark power which steals the
light from the western sky, and sustains a ten-hours’ conflict
before he will yield her up again. Paris thus is Pani, the
dark thief of the Vedic songs, who hides the bright cattle of
Indra in his dismal caves; in other words, he is Vritra, the
veiling enemy, and Ahi, the throttling serpent of night.
Such is he in his relations to Menelaos and the children of
the Sun, who come to reclaim the lost Helen. But among


-his own people Paris is the most prominent actor in the great


drama which ends in the fall of Dion. He is beautiful, he
is brave, and he is fated to bring ruin on his parents. In
these characteristics he resembled Perseus, Télephos, Oidi-
pous, and Theseus; and at once the mass of floating phrases,
which were always at hand to furnish germs for new myths,
fastened on Paris until the idea which had called him into
being is well nigh lost to sight. It is impossible to read the
story of Paris as given by Apollodoros without perceiving the ,
double character thus assigned to the seducer of Helen, His
name, Alexandros, may certainly have borne at firsta meaning
quite opposite to that which it afterwards assumed ; but the
modification of his character had already been effected when
Paris was described as the helper of men.' Henceforth the
atory assigns to him attributes which cannot be explained by
the idea of Night. Doomed to destroy his parents, the babe
is exposed on the slopes of Ida, like Oidipous on the slopes
of Kithairén, aa the rays of the newly risen sun rest level on
the mountain side. The child is nourished by a bear, but
the bear carries us at once to the legend of the Seven Stars,
and to the confusion of the name of the sun-god with that of
the wolf. He grows up beautifal in form; and if his love is
1 According to Apollodoros, vol. iii. to describe him as the enemy of men,
11, 6, be is so named as siding the se ddctlxaxos denotes one whe keeps off
herdsmen, or more strictly, the flocks, evil, and aap poe signifies one who


against robbers. But it is poble shuns or keeps off marriage.
that word iteclf might have been need.


PARIS AND OINONE.
sensual, so also in, many myths is that of Herakles.’ If, again,


65°


CHAP.
Iv.


after the seduction of Helen, his former bravery gives placeto ——,_-


sullen or effeminate inaction, this feature only marks more
curiously the affinity between the later conception of Paris,
and the original idea of Meleagros and Achilleus. If he is
capricious, so are they ; and each sits burnishing his golden
armour in his tent or his secret. chamber, making ready for
the fight, yet doing nothing. If, again, it is by the weapon
of Paris that Achilleus is to full in the western gates,? the
arrow which slays Paris is drawn from the quiver of Herakles.
But with the fatal wound comes back the love of Paris for
the lost Oinéné; and not less forgiving than Prokris to the
faithless Kephalos, Oinéné stands before him. With a soft
and tender grief she gazes on the face which had once filled
the whole earth for her with beauty. She sees his life-blood
flowing away ; but though she is of the bright race of the gods,
and though she has the power of the soft evening time to
soothe the woes of mortal men, she cannot heal the poisoned
wound which is slaying Paris as the deadly mistletoe slew
the bright and beautiful Baldur.” But with the death of him
who once was called Alexandros, the light of her life is
gone. Paris rests in the sleep of death, and Oinéné lies
down to die by his side.*

i The term yvramarhs, as applied to


Piri, only translutes in a somewhat
strengthened form a common epithet of


guage, second series, ch, xi. But this
passage af the Ziad would, if taken with
this strictness, reduce Phoibos himyelf


Indra aud Krishna, who, like the son of
Priam, are ‘the lovers of the girls,’ ‘the
husbands of the brides.’ The idea
would not fuil to assume a sensual
aspect when the actors of the tale were
invested with human. personality.

* Professor Max Miiller, under the
impression that I had sought ‘to show
that Paris belonge to the class of bright
‘aolur heroes,’ lays etre on this fact, us
Pointing to un opposite conclusion.
the germ of the Jiad,’ he adda ‘is the
‘battle between the solar and nocturnal

rere, Paris surely belongs to the
utter, und he whose destiny it ia to
Kill Achilles in the western gates,
Huan: TG Bre néy os Tidpis eal doiPos
*ARdAAa
iothdv dévr’ indwow bt Exaiior eOARTW,
could hardly have been himself of solar
or“ vernal Tneage.” *— Lectures om Lan-
vou. 1,


to the ranks of the dark powers; nor
must it be forgotten that in the great
conflict the lord of life and light takes
part with Hektor and bis followers
against the bright and ehort-lived Achil-
lens. The original idea of Paris is
certainly not solar: but as he comes
before us in the Miad. he exhibits many
features which belong to purely solar
heroes, and which went far to trunsmute


If his character in later mythulogy.


2 The parallelism scemas complete,
while, if we bear in mind the flexible
character of the earliest mythical gods,
ou which Mr. H. Hy Wilaon and Mr,
‘Max Miller have both laid great stress,
there is very little to perplex us in this


modification in the character of the.


seducer, This process, which must
inevitably follow the disintegration of
amyths, ia geen in the germ in the double


‘68
BOOK
Com-


Norse


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 7


‘The Hind is, in short, the Volsung tale, as wrought out by
~—L__. thie posts of a bright and fertile land.' Yet, if the harsh
t climate of the north modified the Norse mythology, it also
pee moulded indefinitely the national character, and the two
acted and reacted on each other. Bred up to fight with
roythology. nature in a constant battle for existence, the Northman


became fearless, honest, and


truthful, ready to smite and


ready to forgive, shrinking not from pain himself and care-
leas of inflicting it on others. Witnessing everywhere the
struggle of conflicting forces, he was tempted to look on life
as a field for warfare, and to own no law for those who were


meaning attached to the name of Orthros,
who, as representing Vritrs, would be
the enomy of gods and men, while, as
‘embodying the idea of daybreak, ho
might readily assume the benignant
aspect of solar heroes. And, finally,
the idea of treachery is as natural!
auggested Mi the course of thr sun,
tho ide: of his beneficence, his toil, hie
conflicts, and his early death.
mun forsakes the dawn for the glare of
* noonday, or the fair and Duehing ing
for the more brilliant and flaunting
summer: and thas fur the Trojan Paris
is simply the counterpart of Si, or


‘heeeus.

' The Hellenic myths can no longer
‘be regurded as exponents of abstract
shysical truths or theories. There ean
Be'no doubt that (whatever appearance
of such a system may have been imparted
to it by the priests), the supposition
does not apply with moze force even to
Egyptian mythology. In Egypt, as well
‘a in Greece and Northern Europe, we
have again the solar legend. ‘The xpring
‘was the time of festival, the autumn of
fast and mourning. It would almost
seem as though the Egyptian myths
were in thie respect more closely akin
to those of Northern then of Southern
Enurope.—Seo Milman, History of
Christianity, vol. i. p. 13. Compare
also the Surtr of the Icelandic mytho-
Jogy, Dasent's ‘Norsemen in Iceland,’
Ozford Exsays for 1858, p. 198.

The groundwork of the Volsunga
Baga, of the tales of Helen, Alkestis,
Sarpédén, and Memnon. in

+ the legends and the worship Ff adonia,
The origin of the myth is in this case
self-evident, while the grousness of the
forma which it has assumed, shows the


degree to which such legends may either
influence or be modified by national
characteristics or the physical conditions
of 8 country. Even in their worst
aspects, Zeus and Odin retuin some
majesty and manly power; but in the
legend of Adonis, the idea of the aun a8

ling the earth back to life has been
vensuulised to a degree far beyond the
sensuousness of Greek ot Teutonic my-
logy. In fact, the image of Démétér
has passed by a very easy transmutation
into that of Aphrodité: but there not
only remains the early death of Adonis,
‘but it is assigned to the very cause
which cuts short the life of Achilleus,
Sig Baldur, and Meleagros, The
bour’s tusk, which reappears in the
myth of Odysseus, is but the thorn of
winter and the poisoned robe of
Herakles; and sccordingly there were
versions which affirmed that it was
Apollén who, in the form of » boar,
killed the darling of Aphrodita, The
division of time also varies. In some
legends the covenant ia the aame as
that which is made with Démétér for
Persephoné. _In others, he remains four
months with Hades, four with Aphrodité,
while the remaining four, being’at hia
own disposal, he chooses to spend with
the lutter. But the myth had been not
merely corrupted: it wus pvisoned by
the touch of oriental senmality, In
the Volsung tale, Sigurd dies aa pure as
lives the Hellenie Phoibos: in the
eaatern’ myth, from Adonis springs
Priapos. Themourning of the women for
Tammuz might well rouse the rightoous
indignation (of, the Hebrew prophet.
The hymn of Démétér would have called
from fim a rebuke less severe,


TRADITIONS OF NORTHERN EUROPE.


67. °


not bound with him in ties of blood and friendship. Hence CHAP.
there was impressed on him a stern and fierce character, ex- pay


aggerated not unfrequently into a gross and brutal cruelty ;
and his national songs reflected the repulsive not Jess than the
fairer aspect of his disposition. In the Volsung tale, as in the
later epics, there is much of feud, jealousy, and bloodshed,
much which to the mind of a less tumultuous age must be
simply distasteful or even horrible. To what extent this may
be owing to their own character it may perhaps be difficult
to determine with precision; yet it would seem rash to lay
to their charge the special kinds of evil dealing of which we
read in their great national legends. Mr. Dasent, who
‘accounts for the immoral or repulsive details of Greek
mythology entirely on moral and religious grounds, has
consistently assigned a purpose not less didactic to the
mythology of the North. In the Volsung tale he sees simply
men and women, whose history had never grown out of con-
ditions not belonging to human life. It speaks to him of
love and hate, of ‘ali that can foster passion or beget revenge.
Tll-assorted marriages . . . ‘envyings, jealousies, hatreds,
murders, all the works of the natural man, combine together
to form that marvellous story which begins with a curse, the
curse of ill-gotten gold; and ends with a curse, a widow’s
curse, which drags down all on whom it falls, and even her
own flesh and blood, to a certain doom.’' This picture of
mythology, the composition of which has been so strangely
and fully laid bare by comparative mythologists, is no fair
representation of the Northman. It is not easy to believe
that the relations between Sigurd and Gunnar were (even
rarely) realised in the actual life of the Norwegian or the Ice-
lander. But, in his eagerness to defend their domestic
morality, Mr. Dasent appears to be hurried into something
like injustice to the society of the Greek heroic ages. These
ages, to him, are polished and fualse,* a period in which
woman was a toy, whereas she was a helpmeet to the
Teuton, a time in which men lacked in general the feelings
of natural affection. If the words refer to a later age, the


» Populer Tales from the Nores, introduction, xi ® Bid. Inxiv.
re .-


“88 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATION. = -


BOOK comparison is scarcely relevant; and of the Homeric sociéty
sors the picture is scarcely true. The feelings of friendship are
» even exaggerated in Achilleus; the pure freedom of domestic
equality is brought ont with winning lustre in Nausiked and
Penelopé. But whether with the Greek or the Northman,

all judgment is premature until we have decided whether we

are or are not dealing with legends which, whether in whole

or in part, have sprung from the mythical expressions of a
forgotten language. We can draw no inference from the

actions of Zeus or Herakles as to the character of the Greeks;

we caunot take the fatal quarrels of Brynhild, Gunnar, and

Sigurd, as any evidence of the character of the Northman.

‘Special Living in a land of icebound fjords and desolate fells,
istice of -hearing the mournful wail of the waving pine-branches,
Grek, looking on the stern strife of frost and fire, witnessing year
: by year the death of the short-lived summer, the Northman
was inured to sombre if not gloomy thought, to the rugged
independence of the country as opposed to the artificial

society of a town. His own sternness was but the reflection

of the land in which he lived; and it was reflected, in its

turn, in the tales which he told, whether of the heroes or the

gods. The Greek, dwelling in sunnier regions, where the
interchange of summer and winter brought with it no feelings

of overpowering gloom, exhibited in his words and songs the
happiness which he experienced in himeelf. Caring less,
perbapa, to hold communion with the silent mountains and

the heaving sea, he was drawn to the life of cities, where he

vould share his joys and sorrows with his kinsmen, The

earth was his mother: the gods who dwelt on Olympos had

the likeness of men without their pains or their doom of

death. There Zeus sat on his golden throne, and beside him

was the glorious Apollén, not the deified man,' but the sun-

god invested with a human personality, But (with whatever


> The common mythology of the moral and intellectual greatness. The
whole Aryan race’ goes against the. absence or deterioration of the former
supposition that Apoilim and Athtnb converts Athin’ into the Kolcbian
‘ove their existence to taas-worthip apd ‘Meieia, The latter type, when stil}
‘oman-worship respectively. Athént, further degraded, becomes the Latin
originally nothing more than the dawn, Canidia, » close approximation to the
war to the Greek an embodiment of ordinary witch of modem supenttition.


69
miodifications caused by climate and circumstances) both CHAF.
were inheritors of a common mythology, which with much ie
that was beautiful and good united also much that was
repulsive and immoral.! Both, from the ordinary speech of |

their common forefatherd had framed a number of legends

which had their gross and impure aspects, but for the groas-

ness of which they were not (us we have seen), and they could

not be, responsible.

But if the mythology of the Greeks is in substance and in Full de-
developement the same as that of the North, they differed welope
widely in their later history. That of the Greeks passed of Greck
through the stages of growth, maturity, and decay, without ites
any violent external repreesion*® The mythical language of
the earliest age had supplied them with an inexhaustible
fountain of legendary narrative; and the tules so framed
had received an implicit belief, which, though intense and
unquestioning, could scarcely be called religious, and in no
sense could be regarded as moral. And just because the
belief accorded to it was not moral, the time came gradually
when thoughtful men rose through earnest effort (rather, we
would say, through Divine gyidance) to the conviction
of higher and clearer truth. If even the Greek of the
Heroic age found in his mythology neither a rule of life


COMMON ARYAN TRADITIONS.


nor the ideal of that Deity


) In his analysis of the Voleung tale,
Mr. Dasent very ably traces the marks
left by the national character on the
Norse mythology ; but he searcely brings
into sufficient prominence the fact that
after all it was only modification, not
invention. Sigurd is the very reverse
of the orientalived Adonis; but the in-
termediate link is supplied by the
Hellenic Phoibos, In describing Sigurd,
‘Mr. Dasent, perhape unconsciously, falls
into the Homeric phrases which speak
of the glorious sun-god. His beautiful
limbs, bis golden buir, the piercing eye
of which none dared to meet the guze,
are all characteristics of the Homeric
Apollén, To these are undoubtedly
added the hardier virtues of the North,
which may to us moke the pictare
more attractive, and which appear in
rome de to soften in Mr. Dasent’s
eyes the hurehness and extreme intricacy
of the Northern mythology. The


whom in his heart he really


sequence of motives and incidents is
such as might well perplex or even
‘baffle the reader. It is impossible to
know what is coming, The ordiaury
conditions of society wholly fail fo
explain the actions and purposes of the
chief actors in the story, and we are
left at 8 loss to know how such »
tangled web of inscrutable adventures
could ever have been woren by the
fancy of man. The.key to the mytho-
Jogy of Greece also unlocks that of the
North. The mystery is substantially
explained; but the discovery involves
the conclusion that the groundwork of
the story is not peculiar to the Norse,
and that its special, forms of cause and.
effect do not therefore sent the
ordinary motives and conditions of their
‘social life.

* Grote, History of Greece, part i,


1%


BOOK
L
—_——


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. 7


‘worshipped, still Jess would thia be the case with the poets
and philosophere of later times. To Aischylos, Zeus was
the mere name? of a god whose actions were not those of the
son of Kronos; to Sephokles it made no difference whether
he were called Zeus or by any other name, as long as he
might retain the conviction of His eternity and His righteous-
ness.’ If from his own moral perception Pindar refused to
credit charges of gluttony or uunatural crime against the
gods, no violent shock was given to the popular belief; and
even Sokrates might teach the strictest responsibility of
man toa perfectly impartial judge, even while he spoke of
the mythical tribunal of Minos, Rhadamanthys, and Aiakos.*
He was accused indeed of introducing new gods. This


__ charge he denied, and with truth: but in no sense whatever


Arrested
wth of
forthern,


logy.


was he a worshipper of the Olympian Zeus, or of the Phoibos
who smote the Pythian dragon,

As compared with the Greek, the mythology of Northern
Eurcpe was arrested almost in its middle growth. After a
fierce struggle, Christianity was forced upon the reluctant
Northmen long before poets could rise among them to whom
the sensuality or ferocity of their mythology would be re-
pulsive or revolting, long before philosophers could have
evolved a body of moral belief, by the side of which the
popular mythology might continue peacefully to exist. By a
sudden revolution, Odin and the Bsir, the deities of the North,
were hurled from their ancient thrones, before the dread
Twilight of the Gods‘ had come. Henceforth they could
only be regarded either as men or as devils. The former
alternative made Odin a descendant of Nosh ;* by the latter,
the celestial hierarchy became malignant spirits riding on
the stormcloud and the whirlwind. If these gode had some-
times been beneficent before, they were never beneficent now.
All that was beautiful and good in the older belief had been


1 Agamemnon, 180. Jt seems to be eanbodied in the Eachy-
2 Gid. Tyr. 903. Jean legend of Prometheus, although
* Plato, Gergian, other versions secounted for his deliver-


lnxz.
‘ Thia ‘idea Mz. Dasent seems to ance without the deposition of Zens.
wd exclusively az a characteristic  * Grate, History af Greece, vol. i.
of Teutonic mythology. ( Tales p. 264.
Of the Norse, introduction, lvii, lxxv.)


DEGRADATION OF MYTHICAL BEINGS.


transferred to the Christian ideas of chivalry and saivtliness,
which furnished a boundless field and inexhaustible nourish-
ment for the most exuberant inventive faculty.! The demons
of Hesiod were the spirits of the good who had died the
painless death of the Golden Age; but even in heathen times
they were gradually invested with a malignant character.*
With Thor and Odin the transmutation was more rapid and
complete ; and Frigga and Freya became beings full of a
wisdom and power which they used only for evil. The same
cherecter passed to those who were, or professed to be, their
votaries; and the assumption of an unlawful knowledge
paved the way for that persecution of a fictitious witchcraft
which has stamped an indelible disgrace on medimval
Christendom?

So marvellous is that chronicle of heathen mythology, as
it lies spread out before us in the light of the ancient speech,
marvellous not only as showing how nations, utterly severed
from each other, preserved their common inheritance, but as
laying bare that early condition of thought without which
mythology could never have had a being. Yet, if it has
much to astonish us, it has nothing to bewilder or even to
perplex, for the simultaneous developement of the same
anyths by countless tribes unknown to each other would be a
marvel too vast even for the greediest credulity to swallow—
a standing miracle without purpose and without meaning.
To the earliest records of Aryan literature is due the dis-
covery that the vehement accusations of Christian contro-
versialista and the timid explanations of heathen spolo-


) Grote, History of Greece, vol. i. p.
628. M. de Montalembert’s History,
Les Moines d' Oocident, is « storehouse
of legends belonging to the ideal of
suintlinesa. He appears, however, to
‘treat some of them rather in the spirit of
Entmeroe, See Edinburgh Review, No.
coxxxt., Oct, 1861, p. 399,

2 Grote, History of Greece, i. 96,

* See Mr. Dasent's sketch of the
otigin and developement of the modern
ideas of witchcraft, Popular Tals from
the Norse, introduction, p. evii., &e, and
the more detailed account of Mr. Lecky,
in his History of the Ruse and Influence
of Rationaliem in Europe, vol. i., ch. ik


Some valuable remarks on this subject
may be found in Mr, Price's preface to
Warton’s History of English Poetry.
(B. 57). Itwas this idea of a knowledge
guined unlawfully from evil spirits which,
fur more perhaps than a bubit of sub
mission to church authority, impeded or

all researches in physical
science, Gerbert of Ravenna (Syl-
vester Ii.) and Roger Bacon alike
acquired the reputation of dabbling in
diabolical lore. In the time of Galileo,
the accusers confined themselves to the
simple charge of an unlawful use of
‘human intellect.


vel


CHAP


ight
tibeen on
the Vedic
hymns.


fa


BOOK
Paki


thegrowth
fmy-
thieal


wysteras.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. -


gista were alike unfounded,' that the impersonations of the
old mythology had no substantial existence, and that the
mythical narratives which grew up around them were not
wrought out by a vile and corrupt imagination deliberately
profaning the deposit of a revealed truth which it was hope-
Jess that they should understand. To the language of. the
early Vedic hymns we owe our knowledge that the develope-
ment of such a mythology was inevitable, and that the
phrases of that early speech, when their original meaning
was once forgotten or misapprehended, would give rise to
just those coarse, sensual, and immoral images, from which
the purer feeling of later times would instinctively recoil.
Step by step this analysis of mythology leads us back to
what would seem to be the earliest condition of the human


“ mind, and from that onwards through the mythopaic age to


the philosophy of historical Greece. On the general cha-
racter of its course there can be no doubt, nor is the question
materially affected by the hypothesis that a period of pure
monotheism intervened between the earliest time and that
which multiplied the mythical inhabitanta of Asgard or
Olympos.’ In one sense the supposition may be true: in
another it might be truer to say that the monotheism so
attained never died away. It was impossible that any real
fetish worship could arise while man hed not arranged his
first conceptions with regard to the nature of all material
things, or even to his own. If from the consciousness of his
own existence he attributed the same existence to all out-
ward objects, he did so, as we have seen, without drawing
any distinctions between consciousness and personality. The
idea of their divinity in any sense would be an inference, not
a sensation; and the analysis of language, which shows that
all predicative words are the expression of general ideas, does
not show us that the human mind was immediately exercised
by any train of connected reasoning. If, however, this
earliest state was not followed by one which invested
outward things with a personal life, if in some way men


"Grote, Htory fF Gree, part i, p.Inrii, Max Miller, Semitic Monothe
ehip bay Ie ipa roma Geran Works,
haat, Nore Tales, introduction,


FETISH-WORSHIP.


could believe in a malignant yet unconscious and nonsentient
power residing in stones and rocks, there would at once be
developed 2 fetish worship, the most degrading and the most
hopeless, which, if expanded at all, could issue only in a
polytheism of devils. Yet even here some faint perceptions
might remain of moral qualities, unless we believe that the
Divine likeness might be wholly blotted ont; but is it pos-
sible to account for the loathsome earthliness of some forms
of heathenism, except by the hypothesis that on them the
idea of Deity has never dawned? If, however, when grad-
ually awakened, the consciousness of their own personality
might lead others to attribute the same personal life to
outward objects, the deification of these objects or powers
would not follow as an immediate or even as a necessary
consequence. For a long time they might scarcely be
conscious of the degree to which they personified them ;
or they might continue to look upon them as beings con-
demned to the same life of toil and trouble with themselves,
Such a thought, it is obvious, might lead at once to the
idea of One (distinct from all that they saw or heard),
who ordained this life of labour; and the conviction of a
Supreme God, the Maker of all things, might take posses-
sion of the mind.' But it is not less clear that such a con-
viction would not necessarily affect their ideas as to what
they saw in the world around them. The Sun in all his
various aspects, the Morning, the Evening, and the Night,
* might become more and more personal, even while the belief
in a God exalted high above all might continue to gain
strength. In other words, the foundation of their moral
belief would at once be distinct from the foundation of their
future mythology. Still, except to the thoughtful few, the
personality of the great objects of the natural world would
be more and more exalted, even while it assumed more and
more a strictly human form. The result would be a poly-
theism of anthropomorphous gods, in which the chief divini-


1 This atate might also easily pass For the parallel growth of Hebrew
into Eastern dusliom. Thedevelopement idolatry with thut othe oe pares, rl religion
of the Helleme mind was more whole of Jehovah, sce Kalisch,
some, The prevalence of evil never led it Critical Commentary on the Old oes
to regard evil as co-ordinate with good. meAt, ‘ Leviticus,’ parti. ch, xxiii. p. $80,


78


CHAP.


—_—


74 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. -


nooK. ties would be the heaven and the sun.’ To the former, as
—~— covering and shielding all things, would be assigned those
attributes which almost make us look on the Olympian Zeus
and the Teutonic Alfadir as faint reflections of him who has
mede and loves mankind.’ But neither for the majesty of
Zeus or Odin, nor for the unsuilied purity of Phoibos
Apollén, of Athéné, or of Artemis, need we look further than
to mythical phrases, which spoke once of Dyans, Varuna, or

Indra.
‘Mytho- 80 might a mythology the most intricate and a moral
wa belief entirely independent of it, go on side by side. For
religious the former had not sprung up from, any repigious conviction ;
and the latter might advance beyond the stage of infancy,
before the corruption of the true mythical speech led to the
multiplication of mythological narratives. In the absence
of any historical sense or any written literature, these tales
would be eagerly welcomed and disseminated without a doubt
of their truth. But the national character might exhibit
nany good and noble qualities, even while that of its
greatest mythical heroes stood indefinitely lower. The
noody sullenness, the implacable passion, and the ferocious
sruelty of Achilleus; the capricious jealousy, idleness, and
activity of Meleagros, are well-nigh incredible; nor is there
my evidence either that those qualities were common
umongst the Greeks in the heroic age, or that they attracted
wy great admiration or esteem. It can be no subject of
egret to learn that they were as little responsible for the
noral standard of Achilleus and Meleagros as for that of
teus and Herakles, and that the idea of each originated as
ittle with them as the conception of Odin and Baldur, of
Sigurd and Gunnar, originated in the mind of the Teuton.
3o might the Spirit of God work in the human heart, even
vhile @ vast fabric of mythology was assuming proportions
nore and more colossal and systematic; so, in spite of
sensual gods, the thought of whom made the poet shudder,


1 It js easy also to see how a sub- belief founded on the sun aa the all-
tantial convietion of the Divine Unity seeing eye of day.
night co-exist with the worship of his? t, ‘Norsemen in Toeland,’ Ox
nabifestation under the image of fire, ford Essays for 1858, p. 187.
che Vedie Agni, Ign, This is again & %


, CHARACTER OF MYTHICAL HEROES.


might the real faith both of the post and his hearers in an
unseen Father continue substantially unshaken. So, while
he cared not to avow any disbelief in mythical stories of
Wiobé or Prométheue, Sokrates might tell of One who made
men and watches over them for their good, and by the aid of
that unseen God strive to keep his hands clean and his heart
pure.


eS


CHAP.
Iv.
SS


16


BOOK
SYS
Gradual


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


CHAPTER V.


GREEK CONCEPTIONS OF MYTHICAL TRADITION.


Tue exuberant growth of myths from a few roots ex-
pressing originally mere bodily sensations or wants is
almost less astonishing than the inability of the several
Aryan nations to see through the thin disguise which dif-
ferences of name and local colouring had thrown over
legends identical in alt essential characteristics. In India,
the old phrases retained in a high degree their primitive
significance ; but then these phrases remained comparatively
barren stocks, In the West, where their meaning was more
or less forgotten, the several sayings gave birth to indepen-
dent legends which were all regarded as genuine and


-veracious history. The names Theseus, Perseus, Oidipous,


had all been mere epithets of one and the same being; but
when they ceased to be mere appellatives, these creations of
mythical speech were regarded not only as different persons,
but as beings in no way connected with each other. Poli-
tical alliances were made, and nationals quarrels excited or
appeased, by appeals to the exploits or the crimes of mythical.
heroes. The Persian King, before setting foot on European
soil, secured, it is said, the neutrality of Argos by claiming
a national affinity with the son of Danaé,' On the eve of
the fight at Plataiai, the Tegeatans did not scruple to waste
precious moments in support of a claim founded on the
exploits of the fabulous Echemos, while the Athenians held
that they rebutted this claim by bringing up their ancient
kindness to the banished Herakleidai* The tale of Othryades
waa regarded by Sparta and Argos as a sufficient ground for


+ Herod. vii. 150. * Did. ix. 26, 27.


TRIBAL LEGENDS.


inserting @ special article into a treaty made during the
Peloponnesian war.'

But if they were thus convinced of their historical truth,

they felt still more certain that the legends of one state or

city were essentially distinct from those of another. The
Athenian was sure that the tales which he had heard of
Erechtheus or Theseus had nothing in common with the
legends of Argos, Thebes, or Pherai, beyond those incidents ”
of Jocal intercourse which were acknowledged by the narra-
tive. The Arkadian, when he told the tale of Zeus and Kallisté,
never supposed that it was repeated by the Thessalian in the
story of Phoibos and Korénis. Perseus, Kadmos, Ias6n,
Achilleus, moved each in their own circle, and had left
behind them a history seemingly as distinct as that of
Athens and Sparta from the days of Pansanias and Themia~
tocles.

This conviction was a dream. But it has its parallel in
the scornful assurance with which the British soldier would
even now repudiate all affinity with the Hindu whom he
holds in subjection. They who can see a little further know
that this kindred is a fact too stubborn to be denied, while
they perceive also that the national traditions of Hellénes,
of Dorians and Ionians, with the political legends of
Athenians, Thebans, Thessalians, Spartans, Argives, move in
the same charmed circle, and revolve more or less closely
round the same magic point. The great family legend of
the Perseids is as magnificent a subject for an epic as that
of the wrongs and woes of Helen. Its incidents are not less
marvellous, its action is scarcely less complicated. Like the
tale of Troy, it forms a coherent whole, and exhibits an
equal freshness of local life and colouring. It serves, there-
fore, the more completely to prove the extent to which the
Hellenic local legends sprung up from a common source, and
to furnish the means of detecting the common element in
isolated traditions with which they may seem to be not even
remotely connected.

To the citizen of the Peloponnesian Argos the mere name


+ Thueyd. y. 41. Sir GC. Lewis as historical. Oredibitity of early Ro-
sccepte the groundwork of the legend man History, ii, 615,


qT


—


a
Each clan
or tribe
regarded
its own
tradition

ba distinct
fom rom any


This beliof
was wholly
without


founds-


Connection
between


18


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


BOOK of Perseus sufficed as a conclusive mark, separating him
ran a from all who traced their origin to Theseus or to Kadmos.
the legends Yet his designation as a destroyer of noxious thinge linked
Tete the son of Danaé at once with other heroes of Greek mytho-


hens,


logy. If Perseus won or deserved his name because he slew
the deadly Gorgon or the Libyan sea-monster, Phoibos
Apolién had also killed the mighty serpent Python, and
Hipponods received his title Bellerophontes as the slayer of
the fearful Belleros. It was the arbitrary sentence of the
eruel and cowardly Polydektes which sent Perseus on his
weary errand to the caves of the Graiai and the Gorgons;
but it was no less the relentless hatred of the mean and false
Eurystheus which made the life of the high-souled Herakles
@ long series of unrequited labours. Nay, Apollén himeelf
was driven forth to serve 23 a bondman in the house of the
Kindly Admétos, and, with Herakles, to look in vain for a
recompense from the treacherous Laomedén, If, in doing
the bidding of the Seriphian king, Perseus encountered
overwhelming dangers, Theseus surmounted perils not less
appalling for the same reason and from the same motives,
while hia victory over the Minotauros only repeats the
slaughter of the Libyan dragon by Perseus. Thus, then, as
unwilling workers, as destroyers of unclean or hurtful things,
Perseus, Theseus, Hipponods and Herakles ‘are expressiona
of the same idea. If, again, his name as the child of the
golden shower points to the splendour of his birth, so also
Phoibos springs to light, in Delos or in Lykia, while the
gloomy prison-house or cave in which, like Zeus or Krishna,
he is born, has its parallel in the sleep or death of Night,
which is the parent of the Delphian god. If it is the hope
and the boast of Perseus that before his life’s labour is dune.
he will bring back Danaé to the home which she had left
when he was a babe, so also Herakles meets at the close of
his toils the maiden whom he had wooed while his life was in
its morning. | From the island in the Eastern sea Perseus
journeys through many lands to the dark home of the Graiai
in the far west; but Herakles also wanders from Argos to
the distant gardens of the Hesperides, Hipponods is driven
from Lykia, the land of light, and dies on the shore of the


MYTHICAL HEROES.


western sea, while Kephalos seeks in the Leukadian gulf the
Jove which he had lost in Attica. In his attack on the
Gorgon maiden, Perseus is armed with the sword which slays
everything on which it falls; but Apollén is also the in-
yincible Chryetér, and Artomis carries the unerring spear
which is fatal to the guileless Prokris and the leas innocent
Korénis or Kallisté. On the golden sandals Perseus moves
through the air quicker than a dream; but the golden
chariot also bears Helios and Phaethon acrogs the blue vault
of heaven, and when Achilleus tries his armour, it bears him
aloft like a bird upon the wing.' After slaying the sea-
dragon, Perseus wins Andromeda; after killing the Mino-
tauros Theseus wins Ariadné. In unselfishness of character,
and in the determination to face rather than to shrink from
danger, there is no difference between Perseus and Theseus,
unti] the latter returns from Crete; or again between Perseus
and Bellerophontés. Perseus is the strongest and the most
active among the people in all manly exercises. So, too,
none can vie with Apollén in the use of the bow, and the
children of Niobé fall not less surely than the Pythian
dragon. If, again, Perseus is the child of a mother of whom
we know little more than the name, gentle, patient, and
long-enduring, the same neutral colouring is seen in Iokasté
in the Theban legend of Oidipous; in Lété, who gives birth
to Apollén in Delos; and in Alkméné, from whom is born
the mightiest of heroes, Herakles. The life of Perseua
closes in darkness. He has slain his grandfather, and he
has not the heart to remain in his ancient home; but
Kephalos also cannot abide at Athens after he has un-
wittingly slain Prokris, or Herakles in Kalydén after slaying
the boy Eunomos, and each departs to die elsewhere.
Without going further, we have here no very insufficient
evidence, if we sought to prove a close connection, or even
@ complete identity, between Perseus, Bellerophén, Theseus,
Kephalos, Herakles, and Apollén. If we cease to confine
ourselves to a single legend, the coincidences wnight be inde-
finitely multiplied, while any other legend may be submitted
to the same treatment which has just been applied to that of
1 Hiad. xix. 386.


79


CHAP.


%
—_—


Identity of
the tribal
legends.


80


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK Perseus. If Kepbalos, having won the love of Prokris, ia


L


~—— obliged to leave her for a time, Apollén in like manner is


constrained to desert Korénis. If Prokris yields her affec-
tion to one whom she almost believes to be Kephalos, the
guilt of Korénis is not many shades deeper; while both are
alike smitten by the fatal spear of Artemis. Th the legends
of Thebes, Athens, Argos, and other cities, we find the
strange yet common dread of parents who look on their
children as their future destroyers. Thus Oidipous is cast
forth to die on the slopes of Kithairén, as Paris is abandoned
on those of Ida or Arthur to the mysterious Merlin, while
Perseus is entrusted to the mercy of the deep sea. Nay, the
legends-interchange the method by which the parents seek
the death of their children; for there were talea which
narrated that Oidipous was shut up in an ark which waa
washed ashore at Sikyén.! In every case the child grows
up beautiful, brave, and strong. Like Apollén, Bellerophén,
and Herakles, they are all slayers of monsters. The son of
the gloomy Laios returns to destroy the dreaded Sphinx, as
Perseus slays the Gorgon, and the Minotauros falls by the
sword of Theseus. They have other features in common.
The fears of their parents are in all cases‘realised. Akri-
sios and Laios are killed by Perseus and Oidipous, ag
Romulus and Cyrus bring ruin on Amulius and Astyages,’
All of them love fair maidens and are somewhat prone to
forsake them ; and after doing marvellous things, they return
to the maiden whom they loved at the beginning of their
career, or to the mother from whom they had been parted
long ago. Herakles finds Iolé by his funeral pile on Oita,
while in the myth which has invested his character with a
solar colouring Oinéné cheers Paris in his last hour on Ida.
von of Eunhlcis «sume winch belongs fae domelo of myliology eldwugh st
to the same class with eis, seems sufficiently to prove that to the
ey Ditnyws whos it ise Tuclea Bf Chale tho Grea, a om of Boating
legend, was born amid the blaze of the mythology has attached itself, and that,
lightning which destroyed his mother, is from such traditions we cannot bo nsid
in dhe Lakonian story placed in a cheat to derive any part of our historical
with his mother and carried to Brasiai, knowledge. The conclusions which
where Semlé was found dead. Puus. these facts seem to foreo upon us ura
Hi. 24, § 3. given elsewhere, (Ch. ix.)
* This illustration must not be re-


SNAKES IN MYTHOLOGY.


81


Still more significantly, Oidipous marries Iokasté (the con- CHAP.


nection of the name with that
unwitting sin thus committed |


of Iolé is manifest),! and the
becomes the starting-point of


a more highly-complicated history.
Wonderful, again, as is the seeming variety of action and The ima-


incident in these legends, the


recurrence of the same im-


¥v.
—


gery of
these


agery, freahened by ingenious modificationg, is not leas re- legends.
markable. If Heraklés begins his career of marvels by
atrangling the serpents who have twined round his limbs,
the youthful Apollén slays the huge enake Pytho, and Perseus
smites the snaky haired Medouga. The serpents, in their
turn, win the victory when Eurydiké falls a victim on the
banks of the Hebros, or assume a more kindly form in the


legends of Iamos and Melampous.* The former they shelter


in the thickets, because, as with Perseus, Oidipous, Romulus,
and Cyrus, his kinsfolk seek his death, while to Melampous,


' The violet or purple colour can be
‘truced through alarge number of Greek
ical names. Tolaos is the son of
Iphikles, the twin-brother of Heraklés,
Sowt. Her, 74). Through Epuphos and
anaes, the line of Heraklés is traced
‘back to J, in whose story is brought
out the favourite image of the bull, es
@ figure of Indra or the sun, The
names of Lusion, whom Démétér Joved,
and Zeus slew, of Iasd, the daughter of
Asklépios, und Yason, were referred to
the idea of healing (tags); but Aschylos
derived Lykios, s8an epithet of Apolién,
from the destruction of wolves,


Abeet Kya, Adxetes yevod
erparg balg. heb. 146,


and thus unconsciously explained not
only the transformation of Lykadn into
‘a wolf, but the origin of the superstition
of Lykanthropy. See note 3, p. 62. In
short, the Greek posts were far more
‘frequently wrong than right in account-
ing for mythical names; and thus the
numes Iuson, Ioleoe, snd the rest, may,
20 far as their belief is concerned, have
had the same origin with that of Iamos,
which is directly referred to the violet
beds under which he was hidden by the
Drakontes, who, in the myth of Iason bear
the chariot of Medeis. ‘There remain
some epithets, as Icios, and ‘Iecchos,
‘both of which are commonly referred to
the cry 4, an explanation supported by


VOL, I. &


the known connection of words denoting
sound and colour. About these it may

‘be rash to speak positively, althoug!

the opinion of Greek writers is not
worth much, and Incchos may be
another form of Bacchus, which Dr.
Latham connects with the Slavonic bog,
‘our bogy and Puck, the Welsh Pwees,
&c.—Jobnson, English Dictionary, av,


‘In the Gaelic story of Fearachus
Leigh (Cumpbell, Toles of the West
Highlands, ii, 362) the snake is boiled
ina pot, round which paper ia wrapped
to prevent the eteam from escaping.
* But be had not made all straight when
the water begun to boil, and the steam
began to come out at one place,

* Well, Farquhar saw this, and thought
he would push the paper down round
the thing: 60 be put finger to the
Dit, and then his finger into his mouth,
for it was wet with the bree.

*So be knew everything, and the eyes
of his mind were opened.”

Farquhar now sets up for a doctor;
but the old myth of ios must still
be fulfilled in him. ¢ juhar the

yhysician never care to be Farquhar
the ing, for he had an illswisher that

isoned him, and ho died’ ‘The poison
representa the thunder-bolt of Zeus ia
the Greck story, und the ill-wisher jx
Zeus himself.


“$2


BOOK


Seo ay may understand the voices and the song of birds.


Signié-
‘tho names
employ

in ae
legends,


Opinions
of Greek


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


by cleansing his ears, they impart a new power, so that he
The
apotless white bull bears Eurépé across the waters of the
sea: the glistening ram soars through the eir with the
children of Nephelé, or the mist. Phaethousa and Lampetié
drive the cattle of Helios to their pastures, and Hermes
steals the herds of Apollén when he is scarce an hour old.
The cattle in their turn assume an unkindly aspect. The
Minotauros plagues the Cretans, the Marathonian bull ravages
the fields of Attica. The former is killed by the child of the
golden shower, the latter by the son of Aithra, the pure air.

The very names occurring in these tribal legends have
@ significance which the Greek language itself interprets,
whenever they tell us of the great heroes whose lives run so
strangely in the same magic groove. Oidipous loves Iokasté,
as Heraklés loves Iolé ; but he is also the husband of Eury-
ganeia who spreads the light over the broad sky. The names
of Phacthon, of Phaethousa and Lampetié, the children of
Neaira, tell their own tales. In the obscure mythology of
Tegea, when the name of Heraklés is introduced, the maiden
whom he chooses is Augé, the brilliant! She too, like
Danaé, is driven away by the terror of her father, and in the
far eastern land becomes the mother of Télephos, who, like
Oidipous and Paris, is exposed on the rough hill-side, and
whose office as the bringer of light is seen again in the name
of Télephasea, the mother of Eurdpé. So, again, when the -
genealogy of Phthia is to be mingled with that of Elis, it is
Protogeneia (the earliest dawn) who becomes the mother of
Aethlios (the toiling and struggling sun), who is the father
of Endymidn, the tired sun at his setting, in whose child
Eurydiké we see again the morrow’s light restored to its
former brightness.? .

Thus in the marvellous tales which recounted the mighty


1 Pans, viii, 4,6; Grete, History of distinction without o difference. Mr.


Greece, vol. i. p. 249.

* Paus, v. 12, Aethlion is the
husbund of Kalyké, the night, By some
canon of probability, beter known to


Dimeeif to others, Pausanias
chooses to marry Endymi6n to Asterodia,
rather then to Sel aathe mother of


his fifty children, He was making «


Grote gives the several versiona of the
myth (History of Greece, i, 188 &e.):
‘bat he is probably mistaken in auppos-
ing that the names Aethlios and Endy-
niga are of late introdustion, although
their connection with the Olympic games
undoubtedly was, ®


VALUE OF POPULAR TRADITIONS.


deeds of Perseus and Heraklés the people of Argos saw 2
coherent whole,—the chronicle of the great actions which
distinguished the founders of their state from those of any
other. Yet the tale of Persens, and still more that of
Heraklés, is re-echoed in the Attic legends of Theseus; and
even more significant is the fact of their utter unconscious-
ness that the life of Perseus is, in all its essential features,
repeated in that of his great descendant Heraklés, through
whose career the epos of Argos is twisted into a complicated
chain with that of Attica. The conclusion is forced upon
us that the Greeks knew no more about the historical facte
possibly underlying these traditions than they knew about
the names which occurred in them. We see at once that
Athenians, Thebans, Argives, Spartans, regarded as inde-
pendent narratives tales which are merely modified versions
of the same story. Hence their convictions furnish not
even the faintest presumption that the actors in the great
dynastic legends ever had any historical existence, or that
the myths themselves point to any historical facts,


83


CHAP,
v.
—
writers,
and their
value,


BOOK


a
Coarse
develope-
ment of
certain
mythical
phrases,


‘Protests of
Greek
writers.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


CHAPTER VI.


GREEK KOTIONS RESPECTING THE MORAL ASPROT OF
MYTHOLOGY.


Tue method, which has enabled us to compare the story of
the Iliad with the Volsung Tale or the epic of Firdusi, tends


_ to show that, in many instances at least, even the grossest


myths arose from phrases which were truthful and therefore
beautiful descriptions of phenomena. But it has also shown
‘us that these phrases, when translated into the conditions of
hum iw life and morality, would inevitably give rise to pre-
cisely those tales which, related boldly and nakedly, must
appear coarse, repulsive, or disgusting. Nor can it be
denied, that if children or grown men are only to cram
their memories with a thousand tales which speak of Oidi--
pous as marrying his mother, of Tantalos as roasting his own
sop, of Lykaén as placing a meal of human flesh before Zeus,
of Hephaistos as defiling Athéné, of Heraklés as a creature of
unbounded and indiscriminate lust, it must be in every way
better.to remain ignorant of such things in spite of all the
allusions of poets and the suggestions of painters and sculp-
tors. If we are to know only these incidents or details, (and
the works which do not avowedly adopt the method of com-
parative mythology attempt nothing more,) the knowledge
must be simply unwholesome.

It is no wonder that a mythology which still drives some
critics to desperate shifts in their efforts to account for such
strange developements, and which the Greek shared with
barbarians, whose minds he despised and whose language he
could not understand, should perplex and baffle the poeta
and philosophers of Hellas. Some little suspicion they had
of the meaning of a few mythical names and phrases: how


PROTESTS OF PHILOSOPHERS AND POETS.


the vast majority of them had come into being, they could
have no idea, Still less, therefore, could they surmise that
these names themselves had given rise to the tales which
charmed, bewildered, or horrified them. They knew that
Zeus sometimes meant the sky; they knew that Seléné must
be the moon ; they half fancied that Endymion must be the
sleeping sun: but they did not know why Zeus and Heraklés
must have many loves in many lands, why Kronos should
maim his father Ouranos and swallow his own children,
why Tantalos should place the limbs of his son on the
banquet table of the gods, why Oidipons should marry his
mother and bring unimaginable woes on her, on himself, and
on his children. From all these horrors their moral sense
shrank with an instinctive aversion. The Zeus whom they
worshipped was the all-seeing ruler and the all-righteous
judge. In him there was no passion and no shadow of
turning. He was the fountain of all truth and goodness,
from which could flow nothing impure or foul. How then
should he be envious or jealous, capricious, lustful, and
treacherous? The contradiction was glaring, and some
among them had trenchant methods of dealing with it,
Later philosophers condemned in a mass the glorious epics
which bear the name of Homer: later poets contented them-
selves with rejecting every legend which was distasteful to
their moral sense. Plato would give no place to Homer in
his ideal commonwealth: Euripides, like Homeric heroes,
could tell Zeus to his face, that he and his kinsfojk had
done fearful things, or when he cast aside his mythological
faith, could assert unequivocally,
If the gods do aught unseemly,
‘Then they are not gods at all?

The power of resting content without seeking to account

for this portentous growth of an immoral theology eeems


1 Fragm,, Belleroph. 300. It can either as true descrigtions of eit
scarcely be'denied that, from his owa as examples of human conduct!
point of view, 'Plato was right in warn- remarks on the connection of this subject


ang the ns of his ideal polity with that of modern education may be
against the danger to youth, if at thay found in Mr. H. B. Wilson's Introduction
‘were permitted to receive the Homeric to the Examination of


Prevalent
tales concerning the gode and Theroas af Znspiration (1861), p. =~


85


CHAP.


——


Limits of
cir
knowledge.


Explana-
tuon of the
semi

‘ arity
of Aryan
mytho-
logy.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. -


to be reserved for modern minds. Examining thia subject
at greater length, Mr. Max Miiller remarks that the Greeks
“would not have been Greeks, if they had not perceived that
the whole of their mythology presented a problem that re-
quired a solution at the hand of a philosopher.’ But, how-
ever great their efforta might be to explain its origin, the
game causes which prevented them from discovering the
affinity of their own language with that of Persians, Thra-
Kiang, or Italians, must have placed insuperable barriers in
their way; and thus they were the more tempted to accept
@ compromise, which saved them from antagonism with
*some of the most venerable institutions ’ of their country.’
But if the examination of the most complicated epic
poetry discloses precisely the frame-work which we find even
im the most fragmentary legends, if Theseus and Sigurd,


= Lectures on Language, second series,


* it is impossible to determine the
sid which Comparative Mythology
might have received from the lost
Feome of the so-called ig cycle.

‘hers cup, however, be little doubt,
that they would have made still more
evident the truth of facts which, even
without them, seem to be indisputably
established. We might also, with their
‘aid, have been better able to measure
exactly the knowledge which the poets
of the Jliad and Odyssey had of legends
which they have not meotioned or have
treated only incidentally. The epic
poem, which had for ita subject simply
the capture of Oichalia by Heraklés,
the Dansis, the Eurdpia, might have
added to our knowledge of the materials
with which sll these poems were built
up. The Miad and Odysery have as-
sumed in our eyes more than their
fair proportions, from the mere fact that
they alone have survived unhurt the
Tad ood Gages art reall tho poem

iad ani jseey are t
which were ‘form ‘under’ those titles
to the Attic historians end trage-
disus ig a graver question, which these
lost epic poems would have sided us
in answering, and which must be ex-
amined by the sid of such is
and evidence as we have atour disposal.
~— the fact of their transmission to

2 it day is not to be explained
on the ground of their manifest supe-


riority to the lost poems, is at onco
clear, when we remember that the great
Athenian posts deliberately drew the
characters and incidents of their dramas
from poems which we called cyclic, in
preference to those which we regard as
alone deserving to ke culled Homeric.
Tho so-called Orphic hymne consist
almost entirely of invocations to tho
various beings with whiclt the old
mythical language peopled the visible
world, followed by a string of all the
epithets which were held to be applic-
uble to them, Almost erery one of
these epithets may be mado the germ
of mythical tale. Thus the bymn to
Protogonos (whose counterpart is Pro-
togeneia) bails him as born from the
egg (of night), and having the face of a
dull (Indra), as Phaney tho brilliant,
and Antauges (Antigoné), reflecting the
light of the Sun (vi.). Helios (viii.) ia
Pain, the healer, merging into the idea
of Asklépion ; he is also Zeus, a relic of
the interchangeable character of tho
earlier Vedic gods, the moon being also
still male and female (ix.). Heraklés
(zii.) is the father of Time, beniguant
and everlasting, producing and devour-
ing all thinge, yet helping all, wearing
the dawn and ‘the night round his head.
Adonis (Ivi.) dwelle partly in Tartaros
‘and partly on Olympos, The mays of
the sun and moon cannot come without
the Charites, the Harits or glistening
horses of Indra (Ix.), Asklépios ie Paian
the healer s¢ well as Heliog, and he has


MEANING OF REPULSIVE LEGENDS.


aT


Phoiboa and Achilleus, Odysseus, Oidipous, and Perseus cHaP
are, though different, yet the same,—if their adventures or ae


their times of inaction are simply the froit of an inevitable
process going on in all kindred languages, all charges of
immorality founded on the character of these adventures fall
completely to the ground. It is simply impossible to believe
that the great Athenian poets were descended from a people
who, some centuries earlier, had deliberately sat down to
invent loathsome or ridiculous fictions about the gods whom
they worshipped and the heroes whom they revered. To the
mind of Aischylos there was a depth of almost inexpiable guilt
in the sacrifice of Iphigeneia. The imagination of Sopho-
kJes was oppressed by the unconscious incest of Oidipous
and all its frightful consequences, while Pindar turned aside
with contemptuous indignation from the stories which told
of gods devouring their own offspring. But we, to whom the
tale of Kronos points to the Time which consumes the years
to which it has given birth,—we, for whom the early doom of
the virgin Iphigeneia, caused by the wrath of Artemis, is a
mere reflection of the lot which pressed alike on Dahand and
Daphné, on Iolé, and Brynhild; and Oinéné,—we, who can
read in the woeful tale of Tokasté the return of the lord of
day, the slayer of the Sphinx and of the Python, to the
mother who had borne him in the morning, must feel, that
if Greeks or Northmen who told of such things are to’ be
condemned, they must be condemned on other grounds and
not because in Achillens or Sigurd or Odysseus they have
given us pictures of obstinate inaction or brutal revenge.
Possibly, to some among those old poets, the real nature of
the tales which they were telling was not so completely hidden
as we may deem. It is not eusy to think that the writer of
the Hymn to Hermes knew nothing of the key which was
to unlock all its secrets. The very form of their language
would warrant us in saying much more. But the words of
Kumfrila prove, that among the Eastern Aryans the real
character of their mythology had not been forgotten. He,


Health as his spotless bride. The date belong, they lay bare not a few of the
of these hymus is a matter of little stages in the mythopaic poema,
moment. To whatever age they may %


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. -


00K too, had to listen to complaints like those which Pindar and
—L— Plato bring against the follies or the vices of the gods. His


The mo-
rality of
Hesiod.


answer is ready.

*It is fabled that Prajapati, the Lord of Creation, did tio-
lence to hia daughter. But what does it mean? Prajd-
pati, the Lord of Creation, is a name of the sun; and he is
called so because he protects all creatures. His daughter
Ushas is the dawn. And when it is said that he was in
love with her, this only means that, at sunrise, the sun
runs after the dawn, the dawn being at the same time
called the daughter of the sun, becauses she rises when he
approaches. ‘ In the same manner, if it is said that Indra
was the seducer of Ahaly4, this does not imply that the god
Indra committed such a crime; but Indra means the sim,
and Ahalyé the night; and as the night is seduced and ruined
by the sun of the morning, therefore is Indra called the
paramour of Ahalyé.’?

T- is the legend of Oidipous and Iokasté, one of the most
awful and, in some aspects, the most repulsive in the wide
range of Greek mythology.’ If the real nature of this tale
is laid bare before us, we may at once assure ourselves that
these stories are not the fruit of depraved imaginations and
brutal lives. There is no longer any mystery in the strange
combination of repulsive legends with a sensitive morality in
the Hesiodic poems of the ‘Works and Days.’ We cease to
wonder, that the same poet who has recounted the tale of
Pandora should tell us that the eye of God is in every place,
watching the evil and the good;* that the duty of man is to


4 Max Miiller, History of Sanskrit
Literature, p.530. Muir, Sexskrit Tezta,
part iv. ch. i, eect, 2.

* Nothing ean exceed the coarseness


The Dawn flies from the Sun, and a

soft shower fulls on the Eurth as his
jercing rays shoot acrous the uky after

ae departing form. #


of the legend of Erichthonios as given
‘by Apollodoros, iii. 14,6, It is, how-
over, Rothing | more tl a strange
jantle of imagee which are found
‘scat rough « hundred legends,
and which may bg translated into the
following phrases :—

The Dawn stands before the Sun, and
esks him for his armour,

The face of the Dawn charros the
San, who seeks to embrace her.


‘From the soft shower springs the
Summer with its fruits.

The Dawn would make the Summer
immortal, and entrusts the Summer to
the care of the Dew.

The serpents of night lie coiled round
the Bummer in the morning.

The sisters of the Dew are slain by
the Dawn.

* Works and Days, 262, 263, 265,


HESIODIC THEOLOGY. 89


‘avoid. the smooth road to evil,' and to choose the strait path cHaP.
of good, which, rough at the first, p besomnen easy to those who ee
walk in it.*


1 Works and Days, 286.
a waxpds BE eal Sptios oluor dx’ ebrhy
al rpuybs 1d wpiiroy. dnyy 2 els Gxpor Tena,
rit Uh Erevan vin, xodort rep teive.—I, 288.


BOOK.


—S
‘Reproduc-
tion of the


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


CHAPTER VI.


THEORY OF GREEK MYTHOLOGY 48 AN ECLECTIC SYSTEM.


Fsw who have considered the subject at all will be disposed
to deny that’ the Argive legenda which relate the exploits of
Perseus might well be expanded into a longer poem than the
Iliad. We have, therefore, the less reason to be surprised if
the Iliad itself, on examination, is found to relate part only
of a more extended legend, or to exhibit under a different
colouring modified versions of a single story. If in the
mythology of Argos alone we have the ideal of Perseus
recurring in the tale of Heraklés, there is the less reason for
wonder if the Hellenic Achillens is but the counterpart of
the Lykian Sarpédén and Memnén, the son of Eés,—nay, if
the character of Achilleus recurs in that of other Achaian
heroes. The Iliad, or rather, as Mr. Grote would say, the
Achilléis,' sings of the wrath of the Phthiotic chieftain, who
is also the child of the sea-goddess Thetis, and this wrath
is followed by a time of gloomy and sullen inaction. The
glorious hero, the lightning of whose countenance struck
terror into his enemies, hangs up his weapons and hides his
face. The sun has passed behind the veil of the storm-clond.
The expression is literally forced from us: we cannot withhold
the metaphor. But so was it with the men of Kalydén while
Meleagros lay sullen and angry in his secret chamber with his
beautiful wife Kleopatra. So complete is the identity of the
two characters, so thoroughly does it rebuke his moody anger,
that the episode of Meleagros is recited at length by Phoinix,
in the hope that it may appease the fury of Achilleus.* But
the issue with both isthesame. Meleagros comes forth at last


» History of Greeoe, ti, 236, * Hiiad, ix. 529-599.


MYTHICAL COMPLICATIONS.


to the aid of his people, and Achilleus, after a long struggle,
makes up his quarrel with Agamemnon to avenge the death
of Patroklos. Both again are doomet after their time of
obstinate inaction, to an early and violent death, preceded by
a brief outburst of their former splendour. That such was
to be the lot of his great hero, the Homeric poet knew well ;
but, ignorant though he may have been of the source of the
materials of which he made such splendid use, he chose,
with a pooctical instinct rarely surpassed, to close his tale
when Achilleus grants the prayer of Priam, and yields to
him the body of his dead son, Hektor.

If, however, resemblances of detail are not wanting to
show that Eastern and Western legends have in the Iliad
been blended together, it would follow that such a blending
of the mythology of different cities or countries must issue
in a highly complicated story. But it is obvious, at the
same time, that no historical inferences can be drawn from
the mere fact of such a complication. Rightly convinced
that the tale of Troy, with its marvellously vivid details and
astonishing incidents, must have some foundation, Bishop
Thirlwall is disposed to refer it to some great expedition in
which the chieftains of Western Hellas were combined against
an Asiatic power ruling in Tlion.' The evidence of such a
fact may possibly be found in isolated statements contained
in the Iliad, but scarcely in the plot of the story. If it may
be assumed, from the form of the prophecy of Poseidén, that
They can do nothing, therefore, in spite
of their numbers, until at the fated
hour Achillous comes forth to help them.
Such, at lesat, is the burden of the


Achiléis, ‘The interpolated /liad was the
result of a patriotic feeling struggling


' History of Greece, vol. i.ch. v. Dr.
Thielwall is struck by the contrast of
the futile efforts of Agamemnon und his
host with the success of Heraklés in his
attack ou Troy during the reign of
Iaomedon, He makes some plausible


historieul conjectures to account for this
difference, But the tate explains itself.
Hersklés is a transformation of the in-
Yineible sun-god, and his might there-
fore beats down erary enemy, when the
‘ectual moment for conflict has come.
But Agumemnon and his host must
wait ton youre before they can be per
mitted to storm the citadel of Ilion.
‘They are the children of the sun, seeking
through the weary hours of darkness
the benutiful light, which after sundown
‘was taken away from the western sky.


agaivst the laws of mythical speech. Dr.
‘Thirlwall sees clearly that the abduction
of Helen may have been ‘a theme for
poetry originally independent of the
gjun war,’ and he rightly insists that
the tule of the war, ‘even if unfounded,
must stilt have had some adequate
cecasion and motive’ | This is indie
le: but eses connecting it

Fith, Greek. colonien in Avia poove
Dothing; the comparioon of Creek
‘among themselves and with the


systema of mythology explaina all.


$1


CHAP.
vit.


——


No his
torical
conclu-
gions can
be drawn
from the
complica
tions #0
caused.


BOOK
1


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. .


princes claiming descent from Aineias ruled in the poet's


~———. time in the Troad,’ no light is thrown by it on the existence


Bubstan-
tial iden-
tity of
Greek and
Norse my-


of that chief, or on the reality of the Trojan war. The
ruins of Tiryns attest to a certain extent the truthfulness of
Homeric description in the catalogue of the contending
forces ;* the walls of Mykénai bear out the statement that
it was once the seat of a powerful dynasty, but archmolo-
gical evidence tells us nothing of Perseids or of Pelopids..
But if we can trace this recurrence of the same ideal in


“different. heroes and of the same imagery in the recital of


their adventures in Hellenic mythology alone, the marvel is
intensified a thousandfold when we compare this mythology
with the ancient legends of Northern Europe or of the far-
distant East. There is scarcely an incident in the lives of
the great Greek heroes which cannot be traced out in the
wide field of Teutonic or Scandinavian tradition; and the
complicated action of the Iliad, or rather of the whole legend
of wich the Liad forms a part, is reproduced in the Edda
and the lays of the Volsungs and the Nibelungs. It may
seem almost superfinous, and yet the persistency of traditional
opinion makes it necessary, to repeat, that if the Greek tales
tell us of serpent-slayers and of destroyers of noxious monsters,
the legends of the ice-bound North also sing of heroes who
slay the dragons that lie coiled round sleeping maidens. If
the former recite the labours of Heraklés and speak of the
bondage of Apollén, Sifrit and Sigurd are not less doomed
to a life of labour for others, not for themselves. If Heraklée
alone can rescue Hesioné from a like doom with Andromeda,
or bring back Alkéstis from the land of Hades, it is Sigurd
only who can slay the serpent Fafnir, and Ragnar Lodbrog
alone who can deliver Thora from the Dragon’s grasp. If,
at the end of his course, Heraklés once more sees his early
love; if Oinéné comes again to Paris in his death hour, so


» Hiad, xx. 307, 308. It is, after all, cloudland of mythology, The supposed
the merest inference—Grote, History canal of Xerxes, at the base of mount


of Greece, i. 428,

* It mast, however, be remembered,
thet alleged archeological evidence must
pot be accepted in every case without

yuestion, It is now asserted that ‘Offa's
iyke’ is. natural work, and Off bim-
self is thus carried suspiciously near the


‘Athos, bas shared the same fate; and
the suspicion of Juvenal, x. 74, thet the
story was a myth has thus boon unex-
pectedly verified. Offa's dyke and the
canal of Xerzes are, in short, not mere
srtiftcial than Fingal’s Cave or the
Giant's Cansewey.


BESULTS OF MYTHICAL PHRASEOLOGY.


Brynhild lies down to die with Sigurd who had forsaken her.
If Achilleus and Baldur can only be wounded in a single
apot, Isfondiyar in the Persian epic can be killed only by the
thorn thrown into his eye by Rustem. If the tale of Perseus
is repeated in the career of Herakles, the legend of Ragnar
Lodbrog is also a mere echo of the nobler story which told
of the sun-bright Sigurd. It is scarcely necessary to enter
into more minute detail. The chief features of Hellenic
mythology may be traced in the mythical syatem of all the
Aryan nations.

But at this point we encounter a difficulty which, if not
removed, must prove fatal to the method which Comparative
Mythology applies to the legends of the East and West. If
that science has guided us to any measure of the truth, it
has taught us something not merely of the growth of tales
which recount the actions of deified heroes, but of the con-
ceptions from which sprang the highest deities of Olympos—
Artemis, Démétér, Apollén, and Zeus himself. It has iden-
tified Phoibos with Helios, Herakles, Perseus, Theseus, Oidi-
pous, and many others. It has traced the several aspects of
his character through the phases presented in the legends of
‘Theseus, Kephalos, Daphné, Endymién, Bellerophontes, and
Meleagros. It has taught us that he is the child of Zeus
and Lété, while the maiden Persephoné is sprung from Zeus
and Démétér. It tells us of Ouranos looking down on Gaia,
and of Gaia returning the love of Ouranos by her unbounded
fertility. It speaks of the toiling sun, visiting all the regions
of the earth as he ascends or goes down the slope of heaven,
and of earth as yielding to him her fruits wherever his light
may exercise its beneficent power. It speaks of Zeus as the
son or the husband of Gaia, and of the tears which fell in rain-
drops from the sky when he mourned for the death of his son
Sarpédén. It seems to tell us, then, of a mythological or
religious system which, simple at the first, became at the last
excessively complicated, and further that this gystem was the
result not of philosophical generalisations, but of the con-
sciousness of an exuberant life which was extended from
man to every object which he beheld in the visible creation.
Tt seems to show that once upon a time, while the ancestors


Coneln-
fiona
drawn
from a
comparison
of Greek
with Norwe


legends.


94
BOOK
L


eS


Theory of
Dailin
on ‘he
origin of


Greck my-
thology.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


of European nations and tribes were still comparatively
united, man had uttered as the simple phrases of every day
speech sayings which became afterwards the groundwork of
elaborate religious systems; that once upon a time they
spoke of the dawn coming from the chambers of the night,
while the night herself was struggling with the birth of the
brilliant san; that the new-born sun saw and loved and
pursued the dawn, which vanished at his touch. It seems
to teach us that from such phrases, which, slightly varied,
were expanded into the tales of Kephalos and Prokris, of
Korénis and. Apollén, grew finally the more definite person-
alities of Zeus and Phoibos, of Lété and Daphné, of Arte-
mis and Herakles. Hence, whatever in the Greek religious
systems there was of direct anthropomorphiem or of a fetish
nature-worship would be the result of later thought and of
attempts to arrive at philosophical abstractions, and not the
mained and distorted relics of a higher knowledge once
possessed but now only not forgotten.

If the theory which makes the growth of Greek mythology
from the first a philosophical process can be established, then
the results of Comparative Mythology must be abandoned as
of no value, and we must be content to look on the points of
resemblance between Greek, Teutonic, Scandinavian, and
Eastern legends as a problem utterly beyond our powers to
solve or even to grapple with. In any case it is a question
of evidence; and the objections, which seem to be conclusive
against the hypothesis of an original dogmatic revelation, of
such a kind at least as that of which Mr. Gladstone speaks,
have been considered already. But Dr. Déllinger’s position’
lies open to no charges of fanciful extravagance; it needa,
therefore, to be the more carefully examined, as professing
to be a legitimate deduction from the state of religion, or
rather of religious cwlivs, among the Greeks in historical
times. This state was, in the opinion of Dr. Ddllinger, the
result of an attempt to reduce a variety of conflicting systems
and notions into one harmonious whole. In it were mingled

the mysticism of Egypt and the orgiastic ritualism of the
East, with the rude nature-worship of the older and Jess
+ The Gentile and the Jew in the Courts of the Temple of Christ, book ii,


ECLECTIC THEORIES.


civilised ages; and his purpose is to trace the several ideas
ao amalgdmated to their original sources. With this view
he is obliged to assume that in his primeval innocence man
was enabled ‘to conceive of the Divinity as a pure, spiritual,
supernatural, and infinite being, distinct from the world and
exalted above it.’ The loss of this conception, and the
yearning for something in its place, led to the deification of
material nature, which ‘ unfolded herself to man’s nature as
a boundless demesne, wherein was confined an unfathomable
plenitude of powers, incommensurable and incalculable, and
of energies not to be overcome.’ With this was developed a
sympathy for naturalism, «and thus man, deeper and deeper
in the spells of his enchantress, and drawn downwards by
their weight, had his moral consciousness overcast in pro-
portion, and gave the fuller rein to impulses which were
merely physical.’' This deification of natural powers led,
as Dr, Dillinger believes, firat of all to the worship of the
elements—of ether as the vault of heaven; of the earth as its
opposite; of fire as the warming and nourishing, the con-
suming and destroying power; of water as the element of
moisture separated from that of earth. To this succeeded
astrolatry in the East, and geolatry in the West, where the
idea of the earth as a susceptible and productive agent led
to the distinction of male and female divinities. But the
actual Greek religion of the heroic and later ages was a
blending of the several notions derived from supplanted
races—Leleges and Kariaus, Thrakians and Pelesgians—
together with importations from Asia and Egypt? Thus
Gaia and Helios, Zeus and Héré, belong to the Pelasgic
stock, while Poseidon was introduced by Karian and Pho-
nician visitors of the coasts of Hellas.* Pallas Athéné was
also Pelasgian, 2s a goddess of nature and the elements.
Apollén, likewise Pelasgian, ‘has so many features in common
with Athéné, that in many respects one might call him an
Athéné of the male species.’ Artemis was in continental
Greece Pelasgian, while at Ephesos she exhibits an Asiatic
character, and becomes ‘a sort of Pantheistic deity.” From


1 The Gentile and the Jew in the Courts of the Temple of Christ, vol. i. p. 66.
* Bid. p. 68, * Bid. p. 80,


95


CHAP.
Vi.
—,


96


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK the Pélaagians also came Hestia, Hermes, and Aphrodité;
~—~— but Arés was the god of the Thrakian race, ‘which, having


This
theory
saris on


penetrated into Buotia and the Peloponnese, tock his wor-
ship along with them.’ Of the reat, Démétér was Pelagic,
Hephaistos came from the Thrakians of Lemnos, and Dionysos
from the more distant East; while Hades was almost an
afterthought, not much worshipped, and not greatly cared
for by the people.'

The picture drawn by Dr. Dillinger of the great Olympian
deities may in all its particulars be strictly true. It is pos-


anassump- sible or probable that ideas utterly foreign to the Greek


tion
which


mind may have been imported from Phrygia, Phoonicia, or


there is no _Epypt, and that the worship so developed may have embodied


philosophical conceptions of nature and of the powers at work
in it. But the question which calls for an answer cannot be
determined by the most masterly portraiture of the great
gods of Olympos: and Dr, Déllinger’s hypothesis does not
enable us to answer it. It starts on an assumption for which
we have no evidence; and all the evidence furnished by the
book of Genesis and still more all that is furnished by the
study of language, militates against the idea that man
started originally with a conception of God, ‘as a pure,
spiritual, supernatural, and infinite being, distinct from the
world, and exalted above it.’ How soon he might have risen
to this conception, had his lot been different from what it has
been, it is impossible to say: but if we are to argue simply
from statements before us, we may affirm that men were
from the first conscious of the existence of a Being more
powerful than themselves, whom they were bound to obey,
but we can scarcely maintain more. This sense of duty, and
atill more the sense of shame following on the violation of it,
would show that the groundwork of that relation was the
goodness and justice of the Being with whom they had to do.
But in this conviction there was nothing to determine their
ideas in the, objects and phenomena of the natural world.
Feeling a conscious life in himself, man would, until cor-
rected by experience, attribute the same conscious life to
everything he saw or felt. The sun and moon, the cloud and
1 The Gentile and the Jew in the Courts of the Temple of Christ, 92,


ARYAN AND SEMITIC MONOTHEISM.


the wind, would be living beings not less than himself; but

he could not embody them in anthropomorphic forms so long
as the names by which he spoke of them retained their
real meaning. Still less could he start with a primary wor-
ship of the elements until he had learnt to regard as abstrac-
tions the objects or powers which, it would seem, he looked
upon only aa living beings. Three ways lay before him.
He might, like Abraham in the old Arabian legend,' be led
by the rising and setting of the sun and stars to the convic-
tion that they were simply passive instruments in the hands
of an ulmighty and righteous God; or he might, as he forgot
his old language, invest with an anthropomorphic life the
deities with which he peopled the whole visible creation ; or,
lastly, he might bow down crushed beneath the dead weight
of nature, and yield himself a living slave to a louthsome
and degrading fetishism. Of these three courses the first
was chosen by the Hebrew people, and even by them feebly
and fitfully ;? the second was followed by the tribes of the
Hellenic stock ; the third has been rejected by every portion
of the great Aryan family of nations. These, as they journeyed
from their ancient home, carried with them the old language
and the old morality; but the measure in which they forgot
the meaning of proper names would determine the extent to
which new gods would be called into existence. This de-
yelopement, as the result, primarily, of a corruption of Ian-
guage, would not be in the strictest sense, a religion, and the
moral sense of the worshipper would not be darkened in pro-
portion to the number of the gods whom he venerated. Dr.
Déllinger’s hypothesis, not less than the theory of Mr. Glad-
stone, would require a continually increasing degradation ;
but the history of language, apart from the growth of Aryan
epic poetry, furnishes conclusive evidence against any such
idea. There is no evidence that the Greeks of the seventh
or sixth centuries before the Christian era bad their ‘moral

eigen, History

_ truth, when we spesk of the


monotheistic faith of the Jewish people,
‘Wo speak of their faith of their teachers.


of the Jews, of the Rabylonish captivity the main

body of the people wis Sncurably poly-
theistic. ‘The history oven of the
Jews,’ says Professor Mux Miller ‘is


nade up of an almost uninterrupted


All the evidence ot our command seems
to chow that at leust down to the time


VOL. I.


of relapses into polytheism.’
"Semitic Monotheiam,” Chipe, Fe. i. 365.


7


cHaP.”
Vi.
—


-B8 METIOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. ‘


nog ‘consciousness more overcast’ than the Greeks of the tenth

RE or twelfth; there is much to lead us to the contrary con-
clusion.

Historical «© But. Dr, Déllinger’s theory requires him to deal with

tpecale, _, Warians, Leleges, and Pelasgians; and the chain of his ar-

Dillinger. gument becomes weakest where it should have the greatest
strength. His speculations may be masterly, and his con-
oasions forcible; but we lack the means of determining
their trath. Mr. Grote, in his History of Greece, hesitates
to speak of any events as historical facta before the first
recorded Olympiad, ie. 776 3.c. Sir Cornewall Lewis regards
the researches of scholars respecting the primitive history of
the Hellenic or Italian tribes as ‘not less unreal than the
speculations concerning judicial astrology, or the discovery
of the philosopher’s stone and the elixir of life.’? Dr. Dél-
linger must have evidence not acceasible to either of these
writers, to warrant the assertion that the chief seats of the
Pelasgians were Arkadia, Argolis, and Perrhoibia, and that
the immigration of the Doric and Aiolic races took place
precisely in the year 1104 8.0."

They leave = His analysis thus leaves the Greek mythology, as he found

it, a strange and perplexing riddle. It omits all notice of

of Greek the marvellous likeness between Greek and Scandinavian

nex- legends ; it does not even attempt to explain why each

plained. Greek god should have certain special attributes and not
others. It does not tell us why Herakles, and Perseus, and
Bellerophén, and Apolién should ail be made to serve crea-
‘tures meaner and weaker than themeelves,—why Herakles
and Zeus should have a thousand earthly loves, and Artemis
and Athéné, according to some legends, have none. Still lesa
does it explain why the character of Herakles and Hermes
should sometimes assume a comic aspect, which is never
allowed to weaken the serious majesty of Athéné, Démétér,
or Apollén.


« ) Credibility of Early Roman History, i. 297.
* Jew and Gentile, §e., val. i. pp. 68, 74.


99


CHAPTER VIII.


DIFFUSION OF MYTHS.


Ir in the legends of any people we find a number of names
which explain themselves, if further the exploite of the gods
or heroes who bear these names are in strict accordance with
those meanings, then at once we are warranted in conjectur-
ing that other names in the same legends not yet interpreted
may be of the same nature, while at the same time a basis is
fornished for classifying the several stories. If further we
find that in the traditions of different Aryan tribes, or even
of the same tribe, the same characters reappear with no
other difference than that of title and local colouring, the
inference is justified that a search into the mythical stores
of all the Aryan tribes would disclose the same phenomenon.
If here too our conjectures are verified, it will be impossible
to withstand the conclusion that these tribes must ,have
started from a common centre, and that from their ancient
home they must have carried away, if not the developed
niyth, yet the quickened germ from which might spring
Jeaves and fruits varying in form and hue according to the
soil to which it should be committed, and the climate under
which the plant might reach maturity. These variations in
the names, it may be, of all the actors, as well as in the
minor details of their career, would prove, in exact propor-
tion to the fidelity with which the essential type was pre-
served, that this germ was furnished by the every day speech
of the people, or, in other words, by their way of regarding
the phenomena of the outward world. If these facts are
established, two important consequences follow: L The hypo-
thesis of any conscious borrowing or adaptation of myths on
a large scale by one tribe from another after their separation
au?


CHAP.
VI.


The com-
mon ele-
mont in
‘Aryan my-
thology.


100


BOOK
—eS


The Greek


the pature
of this
common
element,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.”


from the common home becomes untenable, unless we aasum
an amount of intercourse between them far in excess of an
for which we have the evidence of history; and the cleares
proof of direct importation in the case of any given story 0
fable which does not belong to the genuine mythology of
people fails to throw any suspicion on the latter. II. Th
process of analysis and comparison will have deprived thes
legends of all claim to the character of historical traditions
and even if it were maintained in the last resort that th
myth as brought from the common home grew up from som
historical fact or facts, still no such title can be made out fo
the same incidents when we find them repeated in the sam
order and with the same issue in different ages and differen
lands. If in the primeval home there was a war brough
about by the carrying off of a beautiful woman, a strife be
tween two chieftains, and a time of inaction for the hero ¢
the story followed by his signal victory and his early deatk
then unquestionably these incidents, with a hundred other
common to the background of these legends, did not repea
themselves at Ilion and Delphoi, in Ithaka and Norway, i
Lykia and Iran.

This is the goal to which we must be brought if the trac.
be of this kind; and the matter may perhaps be soones
brought to an issue if we take the most complicated myth
of the Hellenic tribes as our starting point. We can scarcel
read the legends of Herakles and Démétér, of Theseus
Kadmos, Persens, and a host of other mythical hero
without feeling that a few simple phrases might well hav

upplied the germ for the most intricate of these tradition:
ivery incident in the myth of the Eleusinian Démétér ma,
e accounted for, if only men once said (with the convictio
hat the things of which they spoke had a conscious life’
The earth mourns for the dead summer. The summer lie
hat up in the prieon of Hades, the unseen ’—or, as in th
anguage of the Northman, ‘She sleeps in the land of th
Viflungs, the cold mists, guarded by the serpent Fafnir
ind the dwarf Andvari keeps watch over her buried trea
ures.’ The tale of Endymion seems to speak for itself
The moon comes to gaze on her beloved, the sun, as he lie


COMMON ELEMENTS OF SOLAR MYTHS.


down to sleep in the evening.’ In the story of Niobé, we
seem to see the sun in his scorching power, consuming those
who dare to face his dazzling brightness; in that of Orpheus,
we seem to hear his lamentation for the beautiful evening
which has been stung by the serpent of the night, and which
he brings back to life only to lose her at the gates of day.
In the myth of Eurdpé we have the journey of the aun from
the far Hast to the Western land, until Télephassa, the far-
shining, sinks down wearied on the Thessalian plain. Still
more transparent appear the tales of Kephalos and Daphné.
Prokris, eyen in the mouth of the Greek, is still the child of
Hersé, the dew: Hés is still the morning, Kephalos still the
head of the bright sun. In Daphné we seem to behold the
dawn flying from her lover and shrinking before his splen-
dour. In the Homeric Hymn, Lété, the night, dark and
still as death, promises that Phoibos shall long abide in
Delos, the bright land. Doubtless she made the same
promise to Lykians, Argives, Arkadians, Athenians, and all
others who called themselves the children of the light; but
the sun cannot tarry, and in spite of her plighted word he
hastens onward to slay the serpent of darkness. In Herakles
we see the sun in other guise, loving and beloved wherever
he goes, seeking to benefit the sons of men, yet sometimes
harming them in the exuberance of his boisterous strength.
Tn the tale of Altbaia we read the sentence that the bright
sun must die when the torch of day is burnt out. In
Phaethon we seem to see the plague of drought which made
men say ‘Surely another, who cannot guide the horses, is
driving the chariot of the sun.’ The beautiful herds, which
the bright and glistening daughters of early morning feed in
the pastures of Thrinakia, seem to tell us of the violet-
coloured clouds which the dawn spreads over the fields of the
bine sky. In Bellerophon, as in Perseus, Theseus, Phoibos,
ond Herakles, we find again the burden laid on the sun, who
must toil for othera, although the forms of that toil may
vary. Perseus goes to the dwelling of the Graiai, as men
might have said, ‘The sun has departed to the land of the
Pale glosming.’ When Perseus slays Medousa, the sun
has killed the night in its solemn and death-like beauty,


101


CHAP,
VILL
—e


102
BOOK
1


—


The Norse
mythalogy
points in
precisely
the same
direction.


Tho mis-
sing link in
supplied in
the older
Vedic
pooms.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


while the wild pursuit of the immortal Gorgons seems to be
the chase of Darkness after the bright Sun who, with his
golden sandals, just escapes their graep as he soara into the
peaceful morning sky, the Hyperborean gardens, which
sorrow, strife, and death can never enter. In the death of
Akrisios we have the old tale which comes up in many
another legend, where Oidipous and Theseus mourn that
they have unwittingly slain their fathers.

If the Greek legends by themselves thus exhibit, or seem
to exhibit, their ancient framework, the Norse tradition
points with at the least equal clearness in the same direction.
If any now can be found to assert that the one set of legends
were copied from the other, he not only maintains a theory
which, in Dr. Dasent’s words, ‘hangs on a single thread,’!
but he displays a credulity which needs not to shrink from
the avowal that the whole of the Arabian Nights’ Entertain-
menta is a genuine and veracious history. The wildest pre-
jndice can scarcely shelter itself behind these treacherous
and crumbling barriers, although it may urge that, whether in
Teutonic or in Greek mythology, the dawn, the evening, and
the night, the toiling and capricious sun, are already persons
with human forms and a fixed local habitation. But even
this position would be greatly strained: Mr. Grote himself
allows that what he terms allegory is one of the constituent
elements of Greek mythology. But even if we admit the
objection in its full force, we lack but a single link to com-
plete the chain of evidence and turn an overwhelming pro-
bability into fact. Have we any records of that old time in
which men spoke as Greek and Norse myths Seem to tell ua
that they spoke? Have we any actual relics of that speech
in which men talked of Daphné as chased by Phoibos, even
while Daphné was still a common name of the dawn, and
Phoibos meant simply the sun ?

‘The Vedic hymns of the Mantra period stand forth to give
us the answer, but they do so only to exhibit a fresh marvel.
While they show to us the speech which was afterwards
petrified into the forms of Greek and Norse mythology, they


» Popular Tales from the Noree, infeoduction, p. xliii.
# History of Greece, vol. i. p. 2.


" MYTHICAL PHRASES.


point to a atill earlier time, of which no record has come
down, end of which we can have no further evidence than
that which is furnished by the laws which determine the
growth of language. Even in the Mantra period, the earliest
in all Sanskrit, and therefore (as exhibiting the earliest form
of thought) the oldest in all human literature,! the whole
grammar is definitely fixed, and religious belief has assumed
the character of a creed. And if in them man has not lived
long enough to trace analogies and arrive at some idea of an
order of nature, he has grown into the strongest conviction
that behind all the forms which come before his eyes there
is a Being, unseen and all-powerful, whose bidding is done
throughout the wide creation, and to whom men may draw
nigh as children to a father.

When, therefore, in these hymns, Kephalos, Prokris,
Hermes, Daphné, Zeus, Ouranos, stand forth as simple
names for the sun, the dew, the wind, the dawn, the heaven
and the sky, each recognised as such, yet each endowed with
the most perfect consciousness, we feel that the great riddle
of mythology is solved, and that we no longer lack the key
which shall disclose its most hidden treasures. When we
hear the people saying, ‘Our friend the sun is dead. Will
he rise? Will the dawn come back again?’ we see the
death of Herakles, and the weary waiting while Lété strug-
gles with the birth of Phoibos. When on the return of day
we hear the cry—

‘Rise! our life, our spirit is come back, the darkness is
gone, the light draws near!’
we are carried at once to the Homeric hymn, and we
hear the joyous shout of all the gods when Phoibos springs
to life and light on Delos.?. The tale of Urvasi and Puri-
ravas* (these are stillsthe morning and the sun) is the tale
of Orpheus and Eurydiké. Purdraves, in his dreary search,


) Max Miller, Histor of Sanskrit but a minute analysis of the ploy of
526, 557. Kalidasa on this subjest. This poem is


‘iterature,
‘* de 8 Hope xpd géwote- Oral 8 very instructive, ns showing that the
badrugar &wacai. character of the Homeric Achilleus ad-


Hyman to Apollo, 118, heres us closely to the original ideu as
In theeseay on Comparative Mytho- do those of Urvast und Purbravas in the
ogy, Professor Max Miller has ivea later poetry of Kulidésa.
ot only the older forms of this myth,


103
cuab.


Viti.
Se


The key to
all Aryan
raytho-
logy.


4104


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


shox. hears the voive of Urvast seying ‘I am gone like the first o.
pas Ss the dawns; Iam hard to be canght, like the wind.’ Ye


she will come back to him at the close of the night, and
son, bright and beaming, shall be born to them. Varune it
still the wide heaven, the god ‘ who can be seen by all;’ the
lord of the whole earth: but in him we recognise at once
the Greek Ouranos, who looks lovingly on Gaia from hit
throne in the sky. Yet more, we read the praises of Indra
and his great exploit is that

“He has struck the daughter of Dyans (Zeus), a womar
difficult to vanquish—

“Yes, even the daughter of Dyaus, the magnified, the
Dawn, thou, O Indra, a great hero hast ground to pieces,

‘The Dawn rushed off from her crushed car, fearing tha
Indra, the bull, might strike her.

‘This her car lay there, well ground to pieces: she wen
far away.’

The treatment is rude, but we have here not merely the
whole story of Daphné, but the germ of that of Eurépé borne
by the same bull across the sea. More commonly, however
the dawn is spoken of as bright, fair, and loving, the joy o
all who behold her.

‘She shines upon us like a young wife, rousing ever,
living being to go to his work.

“She rose up, spreading far and wide (Euryganeia, Eury-
diké), and moving towards every one. She grew in brightness,
wearing her brilliant garment. The mother of the cows (the
morning clouds, the Homeric herds of the sun), the leader
of the days, she shone gold-coloured, lovely to behold.

‘She, the fortunate, who brings the eye of the go¢
(Kephalos, or the one-eyed Odin), who leads the white anc
lovely steed (of the sun), the Dawn wassseen revealed by he
rays; with brilliant treasures she follows every one.

‘Shine for us with thy best rays, thou bright Dawn, thot
who lengthenest oar life, thou the love of all, who givest u
food, who givest us wealth in cows, horses, and chariots.

‘Thou, daughter of the sky (Dyaus, Zeus), thou high-borr
Dawn, give us richea high and widg’'

> Max Miiller, History of Sanakrif Literatere, p. 551.


GERMS OF DAWN MYTHS. .


Still more remarkable, 2s exhibiting the germs of the
ideas which find their embodiment in the Hellenic Athéné
and the Latin Minerva, is the following bymn.

«The wise priesta celebrate with hymns the divine, bright-
charioted expanded Dawn; worshipped with holy worship,
purple-tinted, radiant, leading on the sun.

‘The lovely Dawn, arousing man, goes before the Sun,
preparing practicable paths, riding in a spacious chariot;
expanding everywhere she diffuses light at the commence-
ment of the days.

‘Harnessing the purple oxen to her car, unwearied sho
renders riches perpetual; a goddess praised of many, and
cherished by all, she shines manifesting the patha that lead
to good.

‘Lucidly white is she, occupying the two (regions, the
upper and middle firmament), and manifesting her person
from the East: she traverses the path of the sun, as if
knowing (his course), and harms not the quarters of the
horizon.

‘Exhibiting her person like a well-attired female, she
stands before our eyes (gracefully) inclining like (a woman
who has been) bathing (Aphrodité Anadyomené). Dispersing
the hostile glooms, Ushas, the daughter of heaven, comes
with radiance.

‘Ushas, the daughter of heaven, tending to the West,
puts forth her beauty like a (well-dressed) woman ; bestowing
precious treasures on the offerer of adoration, she, ever
youthful, brings back the light as of old.’!

We can but wonder at the marvellous exuberance of
language, almost every expression of which may manifestly
serve as the germ of a mythical tale. We say, ‘The fire
burns, the wood crackles and smokes.’ They said,

‘Neighing like a horse that is greedy for food, it steps out
from the strong prison: then the wind blows after his blast:
thy path, O Agni (Ignis), is dark at once.”

The Latin carried with him the name of the Hindu Fire-
god to little purpose. In the hands of the Greek similar
phrases on the searchigg breath of the wind grew up into

) H. H. Wilson, Rig Veda Sanhita, vol. iii. p. 369.


105


omar.


Pear


Germs of
mythical
tales.


‘Truthfal-
nese of my-
thieal de-
scription.


106


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOE the legend of Hermes. Nor can it be eaid that the instinct
——-— of the Greek was less true than that of the old Vedic poet to


Ground-
work of


Aryan 1;


thology.


iv


the sights of the natural world. If we recur with feelings of
undiminished pleasure to the touching truthfulness of the
language which tells of the Dawn as the bright being whom
age cannot touch, although she makes men old, who thinks
on the dwellings of men and shines on the small and great,
we feel also that the ‘Homeric’ poet, even while he spoke of
a god in human form born in Delos, was not less true to the
original character of the being of whom he sang. He thought
of the sun rising in a cloudless heaven, and he told how the
nymphs bathed the lord of the golden sword in pure water,
and wrapped him in a spotless robe.' Still, although the
stresa of the hymn lies wholly on the promise of Leto that
her child shall have his chief home in Delos, the poet feels
that Delos alone can never be his home, and so he sang how
Apollén went from island to island, watching the ways and
works of men; how he loved the tall sea-cliffs, and every
jutting headland, and the rivers which hasten to the broad
sea, even though he came back with ever fresh delight to his
native Delos.*

Thus the great mystery of Greek as of other mythology is
dispelled like mist from the mountain-side at the rising of
the sun. All that is beautiful in it is invested with a purer
radiance, while much, if not all, that is gross and coarse in
it is refined, or else its grossness is traced to an origin which
reflects no disgrace on those who framed or handed down
the tale. Thus, with the keynote ringing in our ears, we
can catch at once every strain that belongs to the ancient
harmony, although it may be heard amid the din of many
discordant voices. The groundwork of Greek mythology was


1 Sra ce, ie Gcifie, Gea) Rober Bars EaRore uly 7 del Kivbov eBfex


me raraddevros, Sus
dyvis nad xaapos- oxdptar B ev Barore 8 ad rhoovs ve at dvdpas
dpe Nerng trdonater-
Aexrg wryerég. . . - . . . .
Hymn to Apollo, 120. wage: 3% cxowel te gla: ral
This is the white and glistening robe poves bupas
im which Cyrus and Arthur are wrapped, tynday bpluv, sorauol & Grade
when they are carried sway from the spophovres*


house in which they were born. “ . . fs +
© Abrds 3, pins Haars deers’ tarot Atre, doiBe, udror drerip
“AxoNor, op. Hytan ta Apollo, 140,


GROUNDWORK OF ALL MYTHOLOGY.
she ordinary speech which told of the interchange of day and


107


CHAP.
VIL.


right, of summer and winter; but into the superstructure _""_,


shere may have been introduced any amount of local or
personal detail, any number of ideas and notions imported
from foreign philosophical or religious systems. The extent
of such importations is probably far less than is generally
imagined; but however this may be, the original matter
nay still be traced, even where it exists only in isolated
‘ragments. The bull which beara Eurdpé away from Kadmos
‘Kedem, the East),’ is the same from which the dawn
ies in the Vedic hymn. The robe with which Medeia
ooisons the daughter of Kreén was a gift from Hetios,
she burning sun, and is seen again as the poisoned robe
which Deianeira sends to the absent Herakles, as the deadly
urow by which Philoktetes mortally wounds the Trojan
Paris, as the golden fleece taken from the ram which
bears away the children of (Nephelé) the mist, as the sword
which Aigeus leaves under the stone for Theseus, the son of
Aithra, the pure airy as the spear of Artemis which never
tnisses its mark; as the sword of Persens which slays all on
whom it may fall; ag the unerring weapons of Meleagros ;
as the fatal lance which Achilleus alone can wield. The
serpents of night or of winter occur in almost every tale,
under aspects friendly or unkind. The dragon sleeps coiled
round Brynhild or Aslauga, as the snakes seek to strangle
the infant Herakles or sting the beautiful Eurydiké. If the
power of the sun’s rays is set forth under such different forms,
their beauty is signified by the golden locks of Phoibos, over
which no razor has ever passed ;* by the flowing hair which
streams from the head of Kephalos, and falls over the shoulders
of Perseus and Bellerophon. * They serve also sometimes as a
sort of Palladion, and the shearing of the single golden lock
which grew on the top of his head leaves Nisos, the Megarian


" Niebuhr, (in bis Lectures om Ancient the Syrian Melkarth and Moloch, ean
History, vol. i. p. 239) sera that the acarcely be questioned.
tale pointe to the Eust; but from tho * @viBos dwepoaxduns (Hiad, xx. 89),
words Kadmoe and Banna as occurring a significant epithet, which of iteclf
in the Boiotian dialect only he is per would suffica to give birth to such a
fectly convinced of the‘ Phenician origin legend us thatof Nisos and Skylla, The
of Thebes.’ The identity of thaname of the locks of the sun must be
Melikertes (in the myth of In6) with by darkness and rain,


108


poor.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


King, powerless as the shorn Samson in the arms of the


ote, Philistines. In many of the legends these images are mingled


Greek
dynastic


Growth of
popular
traditions.


together, or recur under modified forms. In the tale of
Althaia there is not only the torch of day which measures
the life of Meleagros, but the weapons of the chieftain which
no enemy may withstand. In that of Bellerophén there are
the same invincible weapons, while the horrible Chimaira
answers to the boar of Kalydon, or to that of Erymanthos
which fell by the arm of Herakles.

If the greater number of Greek legends have thus been
reduced to their primitive elements, the touch of the same
wand will lay open others which may seem to have been
fashioned on quite another model. Even the dynastic legends
of Thebes will not resist the method which has disclosed so
many secrets. For most other tales the work isdone. There
is absolutely nothing left for further analysia in the stories
of Orpheus and Eurydiké, of Kephalos and Prokris, of Seléné
and Endymion, Niobé and Lété, Démétér and Peraephoné,
Kadmos and Eurdpé, Daphné and Apollén. Not an incident
remains unexplained in the legends of Herakles, of Althaia
and the burning brand, df Phaethén, Memnén, and Belle-
rophén. If there are bypaths in the stories of Ariadné
Medeia, Semelé, Prometheus, or of the cows of the Sun ir
the Odyssey, they have been followed up to the point from
which they all diverge.

If then in the vast mass of stories which make up the
mythology of the Aryan nations there seems to be evidence
showing that in some cases the legend has been brought by
direct importation from the East to the West or from Wes
to East, the presumption of conscious borrowing cannot witk
any fairness be extended to any tales for which such evidence
is not forthcoming. The great epic poems of the Aryan race
sprung into existence in the ages which followed the dis-
persion of the tribes, and during which all intercourse betweer
them was an, impossibility ; yet these epic poems exhibit ar
identical framework, with resemblances in detail] which eve.
defy the influences of climate and scenery. But many of th
actors in these great dramas reappear in the popular storie
of the Aryan tribes, with subtle points of likeness and dif


THEORY OF THE IMPORTATION OF MYTHS.


ference, which can be accounted for by conscious borrowing
only on the supposition that the traditions of one country
were a8 intimately known to the people of another country
as the traditions of many, ifnot most, of the Aryan nations are
now known +o us through the long toil and vast researches of
comparative mythologists, aided by the mighty machinery of
the printing press. In truth, the more that we examine this
hypothesis of importation as affecting the general stock of
mythical tradition in any country, the more scanty and lesa
conclusive will the evidence appear; and in the issue we
shall find ourselves driven practically to reject it altogether,
or to suppose that the impulse of borrowing amounted to a
universal and irresistible mania. The dynastic legends of
Thebes do but reproduce those of Argos; the legends of both
alike do but repeat the career of Achilleus or of Sigurd ; and
the great heroes of these tales reappear as the Boots and the
disguised beggar of Teutonic and Hindu folklore. The sup-
position of any deliberate borrowing attributes to Greeks,
Teutons, Scandinavians, and Hindus, a poverty of invention
not lesa amazing than their skill in destroying the evidence
of the theft, and wearing borrowed plumage as with an
inborn grace. Unless we are prepared to say that the
borrowing was wholesale, and to determine the source of
this exhaustless store of wealth, it is more prudent and
nore philosophical to adinit that in every country the myths
which have their roots in phrases relating to physical phe-
nomena have been kept alive by independent tradition from
the times of the first dispersion.

But if the story of Achilleus, as told in‘ the Iliad, is only
another form of the legend which relates the career of the
Ithakan chief in the Odyssey; if this tale reappears in the
Saga of the Volsungs and the Nibelungen Lied, in the epical
eyeles of Arthur and Charlemagne, in the lay of Beowulf and
the Shahnameh of Firdusi, and if further ail these streams
of popular poetry can be traced back to a common source in
phrases which described the sights and sounds bf the outward
world, the resemblances thus traced are nevertheless by no
means so astonishing as the likeness which runs through a
vast number of the popular tales of Germany and Scandinavia,


109.


CHAP.
Vur.


—


Aryan
folklore.


210
BOOK
L
as


Legends
not resolv-
able into


re
ting to


pheno-
mena.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


of Greece and Rome, of Persia and Hindustan. On the
hypothesia of a form of thought which attributed conscious
life to all physical objects, we must at once admit that the
growth of a vast number of cognate legends was inevitable.
Nor is there anything bewildering in the fact, that phrases
which denoted at first the death of the dawn, or her desertion
by the sun as he rose in the heavens, or the atealing away of
the evening light by the powers of darkness, should give
birth to the legends of Helen and Guenevere,’of Brynhild
and Gudrun, of Paris and of Lancelot, of Achilleus and
Sigurd. All that this theory involves is that certain races
of mankind, or certain tribes of the same race, were separated.
from each other while their language still invested all sensible
things with a personal life, and that when the meaning of
the old words was either wholly or in part forgotten, the
phenomena of the earth and the heavens reappeared as beings
human or divine, and the Pani, or Night, which sought to
lure Saramé, the Dawn, into his dismal cave, became the
Paris who beguiled Helen to Troy, and the Lancelot who
corrupted the faith of ¢he wife of Arthur.

The wonder becomes greater when from the necessary
outgrowth of certain conditions of thought and speech we
turn to popular stories which cannot be brought within this
class of epical legends, and which yet exhibit, in apite of
differences of detail and local colouring, a closeness of re-
semblance which establishes their substantial identity. If,
umong the stories which Hindu, Persian, Greek, or Teutonic
mothers recounted to their children, we find tales which turn
on the same incidents, and in their most delicate touches
betray the influence of precisely the same feelings, we must
conclude either that these legends were passed from the one
tribe or clan to the other, or that before these tribes separated
from their common home they not only possessed in mythical
phrases relating to physical phenomena the germs of the
future epics of Europe and .Asia, but had framed a number
of stories which cannot be traced back to such phrases, which
seem to point rather to a storehouse of moral proverbs, and
which cannot be accounted for on any hypothesis of conscious
borrowing by one distinct people from another. It would,


STORIES OF THE MASTER THIEF.


indeed, be safer to affirm of any given story that it has not
been thus borrowed than to say that it cannot be traced back
to the one source from which have sprung the great epic
poems of the world. The story of the Master Thief is a case
in point. It looks at first sight as though it had nothing to
do with the legends of the great Norse or Hellenic heroes,
and the resemblance of some of its incidents to those of a
story told in the Hitopadesa suggests the conclusion that it
found its way into Europe through the Arabic translation
known es the Kalila and Dimna. Professor Max Miiller
plainly avowing this belief, says that ‘the story of the
Master Thief is told in the Hitopadesa.’' The Sanskrit tale
is that of the Brahman who, on hearing from three thieves
in succession that the goat which he carried on his back was
a dog, throws the animal down and leaves it as a booty for
the rogues who had hit upon this mode of cheating him,
‘The gist of the story,’ adds Professor Miiller, ‘is that a
man will believe almost anything, if he is told the same by
three different people.’ But, while a far greater resemblance
to the Egyptian tale is exhibited by the Hindu version of the
Master Thief as told by Somadeva Bhatta, presently to be
noticed, it may fairly be asked whether this is either the
story or the moral of the European ‘ Master Thief.’ In the
Teutonic version we find no incidents resembling those of
the Sanskrit tale. The Norse story exhibits some points of
likeness, together with differences which rather force us to
think that it cannot have been suggested by the Eastern
fable. In the latter the Brahman is directly deceived by
others; in the Norse legend the peasant deceives himself,
and the moral seems to be, not that a man can be brought to
believe anything if he hears it asserted by several seemingly
independent witnesses, but that experience is thrown away
on one who will put his hand into the fire after he has been
burnt. In the Norse tale, the farmer intends to drive one of
his three oxen to market, and the youth, who is a postulant
for the novitiate in the worshipful order of thieves, is told
that his desire shall be granted if he can steal this ox on the
road, without the owner’s knowledge and without doing him


3 Chips from a German Workshop, ii. 220.


Wi


cCHar.
vit,
oS


The
Brahman
and the
goat,


The
‘Master
Thief, .


2


MYTHOLOGY OF THE, ARYAN NATIONS.


* Boor any harm, The lad accordingly pute a silver-buckled shoe
oe in the way. The man admires it, but passes on without


picking it up, as an odd shoe would be of little use. Presently
he sees before him the same shoe, which the thief, having
ron by another way, has again cast on the road, and tying
up his ox hastens back to pick up the fellow, while the lad
goes away with the beast. Determined to test him further, the
fraternity tell the boy that he shall be as good as any one of
them if, under the same conditions, he can steal the second
ox, which the man was now driving to market, As he goes
along, the peasant sees a lad hung under the armpits toa
tree, but passes on with little concern until he sees as he
supposes another Jad in the same position on another tree.
Still not caring to give any help, he plods onwards until the
thief hangs himself up for the third time on his road. The
man, thinking that he is bewitched, resolves to go back and
see whether the other two still hang where he saw them, and
the ox which he leaves tied up is the second sacrifice. The
thieves now tell the youth that if he can steal the third ox
he shall be their master. So he places himself in a thicket,
and as the man draws near with his last beast, imitates the
bellowing of cattle; and the peasant, his wits even more
flustered than before, hurries away to catch the lost oxen,
Jeaving his third animal a prey to the thief.' At this point
the resemblance of the Norse to the Brahman story ceases;
but the career of the Master Thief is as yet scarcely begun.
He has yet to overreach the society over which he now
presides. The thieves set out to see whether they cannot do
something surpassing all that he had done; and the lad,
taking advantage of their absence to drive the three oxen
into the road to the great delight of their owner, who sees
them return to the farm, carries off all the precious things
which formed the common store of the robbers. Thus far
the Norse story agrees in its main features with the Scottish
tale of the Shifty Lad,’ although even here the points of
difference aré so great as to preclude the idea that the one
was derived from the other. The sequel of the Norse tale ia


> Dasent, Norse Tales, ‘The Master * maa ybell, Popular Tales of the West
‘Thief,’ 268. fdands, vol. ip. $20,


BHAMPSINITOS AND THE MASTER THIEF.


substantially the same as the Teutonic story of the Master


113


cuits


Thief. This story has, therefore, really nothing to do with Lares


the fable of the Brahman and the goat, and it may fairly be
doubted whether, on the supposition that the idea was gained
from the Hitopadesa, ‘ nothing was easier than to invent the
three variations which we find in the Norse Master Thief’
and the Shifty Lad of Highland tradition. Professor Max
Miiller adds that ‘the case would be different if the same
story occurred in Herodotos.’

‘ At the time of Herodotos,’ he continues, ¢ the translations
of the Hitopadesa had not yet reached Europe, and we should
be obliged to include the Master Thief within the most pri-
mitive stock of Aryanlore. But there is nothing in the story
of the two sons of the architect who robbed the treasury of
Rhampsinitos which turns on the trick of the Master Thief.
There were thieves, more or less clever, in Egypt as well as
in India, and some of their stratagems were possibly the
same at all times. But there is a keen and well-defined
bumour in the story of the Brahman and his deference to
public opinion. Of this there is no trace in the anecdote
told by Herodotos. That anecdote deals with mere matter
of fact, whether imaginary or historical. The story of
Rhampsinitos did enter into the popular literature of
Europe, but through a different channel. We find it in the
“Gesta Romanorum,’ where Octavianus has taken the place
of Rhampsinitos, and we can hardly doubt that there it came
originally from Herodotos.’! But what are really the facts
of the case ? The evidence which proves that the Herodotean
story was reproduced in the ‘Gesta Romanorum ’ cannot be
taken as of itself establishing the same origin for the Norse,
the Teutonic, and the Irish legend. The incident of the
Brahman and the goat may be left on one side, as only
distantly resembling a very subordinate part of the Norse
version; but the real story of the Master Thief’s career is
precisely the story of the architect’s son in the legend of
Rhampsinitos. The possible affinity of thievish stratagems
in all countries can scarcely account for a series of extraor-
" Chips from a German Workshop, ii. 281.

1


VOL. 1.


The legend
of Rham-
prinitos.


ile MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK dinary incidents and astounding tricks following each other
pate in the same order, although utterly different in their out-
ward garb and colouring. Strangely enough, the Highland
yersion, which agrees with the Norse tale in making the
young thief cheat his master, agrees most closely with the
Egyptian myth.’ In the latter, the younger of the two sous
who have learnt from their father the secret of entering the
treagure-house is caught in a trap placed there by the
king, when he found his gold and jewels dwindling away.
At his own request the elder brother cuts off his head, and
the king, astounded at finding a headless body, bids his
guards to impale it on a wall, with strict charge to bring
before him anyone whom they might hear mourning for
the dead man. The mother, seeing her son’s body thus
exposed, threatens to tell the king everything unless the
body is brought safely home to her. Loading some asses
with skins full of wine, the elder son, as he approaches the
guard, loosens the string of two or three wine skins, and
the soldiers, rushing up at the sight of wine trickling on
the ground, try to soothe the seemingly distracted owner,
while they solace themselves by the liquor which they catch
in their cups, until at length, overcoming the young man’s
reluctance, they sit down with him, and drink themselves to
sleep. The dead body is then taken away by the brother,
who, hearing of the new device by which the king pro-
posed to catch him, crowns his exploits by cheating the
king’s daughter, and leaving a dead man’s hand in hers.
His marriage with the princess follows, and he is held in


' The groundwork of the Arabian
Nights! story of the Forty Thieves ia
manifestly the same, but the likencss
to the legend of Rhampsinitos is not
nearly 20 close, Here, however, as in
the Egyptian tale, we have two brothers,
who become possessed of the eecret of a
treasure-house. The king is replaced
by the forty thieves; but it may be
noted that Herodotos speaks of the
wealth of Rhampsinitos aa amassed by
extortion if not by direct robbery. Here
also one of the brothers is unlacky;
‘bat although be is found alive in
eave, the thieves are none the wiser,
ax he ia immediately killed. Here too
the body is nailed up against the wall,


but it is within the cave; and it ie
taken away by the other brother, who is
impelled to this task, not by the mother
of the dead mun, but by his wife. The
thieves are not lesa perplexed than
Bhampsinitos when they find that the
body hasbeen removed, and that thus
some one else is possessed of their secret,
The spell which opens the cave connects
the Arabian story witb the vast muss
of legends turning on substances which
have the power of splitting rocks, and
which Mr. Gould hus resolved into
hrases descriptive of the action of
ightning.—Curtous Myths of the Middle
(Ages, second weries, * Schamin,’


HINDU VERSION OF THE MASTER THIKF.


honour as the cleverest man of the eleverest people in the
world.’

This story in some of its leading features agrees closely with
the Adventure of the Mason, related by Washington Tring {,
in his ‘ Tales of the Alhambra.’ Probably Irving himself knew
nothing of the story of Rhampsinitos, and certainly was un-
acquainted with the Tales of the Master Thief and his fol-
lowers. Still a Spanish legend must be regarded with some
suspicion. In this case it must at least be admitted that the
traces of direct borrowing have been as skilfully hidden as if
the changes in the story had been the work of Hermes or
the Master Thief himself. Here the king is turned into
priest, who is so far wiser than Rhampsinitos that he guards
against the knowledge of the mason by keeping him blind-
folded from the time of his leaving home to his return,
except while he is actually at work preparing the treasure-
chamber. In this case, then, the mason knows the secret
of the hidden wealth, but cannot tell in what house it is
stored up. The priest dies: but not only have his riches
vanished, but his ghost haunts the house, and no one will
become its tenant till the landlord chances to betake himself
to the poor mason, who declares that he is ‘not to be
frightened by the devil himself, even though he chould come
in the shape of a big bag of money.’ When he is led to the
house, he finds that it is the very one in which he had worked
for the priest, and discreetly keeps the secret to himself, till,
like the Egyptian architect, he reveals it on his deathbed to
his son.

The Hindu version of the story of Rhampsinitos is lesa in-
genious than this Spanish story, and is in every way inferior
to the well-pointed legend of Herodotos. It is related by
Somadeva Bhatta of Cashmir in his ‘Ocean of the Streams of
Narrative, aprofessed abridgement of the still older collection
called the Vrihat Kathi. In this tale the elder of the two
thieves simply makes a hole through the wall {which would
at once betray their mode of entrance) in order to reach the


115


CHAP.
VIIL.


pentecatey

The story

of the Poor
Mason,


The story
of Karpars
and Gata,


chamber in which the king has placed not only his treasures .


but his daughter. He remains with her too jong, and being
\ Herodotos, ii. 121, &e.; Tales of Ancient Greece, 385,
12


116


BOOK


a)


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


caught in the morning, is hanged, but not before he has by
signs bidden his brother Gata to carry off and save the prin-
cess. Gata therefore on the next night enters the chamber of
the princess, who readily agrees to fly with him. The body
of Karpara is then exposed, in order to catch the surviving
malefactor, who tricke them much after the fashion of the
Egyptian story, the chief difference being that Gata burns
the body of his brother Karpara, for whom he contrives to
perform the necessary amount of mourning by dashing on
the ground a karpara, or pot of rice, and then bewailing his
losa by the words, ‘Alas for my precious Karpara,’—words
which the guards of course apply to the broken pipkin, and


. not to the dead thief. The story winds up with a proclama-


The at
ofr
phonios


and Aga
madts.


The
Shifty Lad.


tion from the king, promising half his realm to the magician
who has done all this: but the princess bids him beware,
and Gata goes away with her to another country.’

The mason’s secret is much more closely reproduced in the
story which Pausanias tells of Trophonios and Agamédés,
the builders of the temple of Phoibos, after he had slain
the dragon at Delphoi. These two builders also raise the
treasury of Hyrieus, placing one of the stones so that they
could remove it from the outside. Hyrieus, astonished at
the lessening of his wealth, sets a snare, in which Agamédés
is caught, and Trophonios cuts off his head to save him from
torture and himself from discovery. The latter precaution
seems unnecessary, since Pausanias adds that the earth
opened and received Trophonios as in the myth of Am-
phiaraos.

In the Scottish story the Shifty Lad goes through his ap-
prenticeship not among a company of thieves, but under the
sole charge of the Black Rogue, of whom he rids himself by
getting him to try the pleasant sensation of being hung by
the neck, The trick answers to that of the Norse thief, but


} See Mr, Cowell's Paper ‘On the
Hindu Version of the Story of Rham-

init in the Journal of Philology,

'o, I. p. 66. The imprisonment of the
king’s ughter in the treasure-chamber
can scarcely fail to remind us of Bryn-
hild within her flaming walls; and thus
the myth seems to exhibit en affinity to


The legends which tall of unsuccessfol
attempts to rescue the imprisoned
maiden, who is finally won only by the
peerless knight or irresistible warrior
who can Tenp the hedge of spears or
eross the fiery barrier, Bee alo book ii,
ch, viii. eect. 2.


STORY OF THE SHIFTY LAD.


Wi


the mode of effecting it differs widely. Having disposed of CHAP.
his master, he engages himself to a carpenter whom he per- ee


suades to break into the king’s storehouse. The advice of the
Seanagal whom the king consults is that a hogshead of soft
pitch should be placed near the entrance. The wright, again
making the venture, sinks into the pitch, and the Shifty Lad,
stepping in on his shoulders, takes as much as he can carry,
and then sweeping off his master’s head, leaves the body in
the hogsheed. Again the Seanagal is consulted, and his
answer is ‘ that they should set the trunk aloft on the points
of the spears of the soldiers, to be carried from town to town,
to see if they could find any one at all that would take sorrow
for it.’ . As they pass by the wright’s house, his wife screams,
but the Shifty Lad cutting himself with an adze leads the
captain of the guard to think that the cry was caused by
sorrow at his own hurt. The body is then by the king’s
order hung on a, tree, the guard being ordered to seize any
one who should venture to take it down. The lad, driving
before him a horse loaded with two kegs of whisky, ap-
proaches the soldiers as though be wished to pass them
stealthily, and when they catch the horse’s bridle, he rung
off, leaving the men to drink themselves to sleep, and then
returning takes away the wright’s body. This exploit is fol-
lowed by others which occur in no other version: but the final
scene is a feast, at which, according to the Seanagal's predic-
tion, the Shifty Lad asks the king’s daughter to dance. The
Seanagal upon this puts a black mark upon him, but the lad,
like Morgiana, in the story of ‘Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,’
discovering the mark, puts another on the Seanagal, and
on twenty other men besides him, The king is then advised
to say that the man who had done every trick that had been
done must be exceedingly clever, and that if he would come
forward and give himself up, he should have the princess for
his wife. All the marked men accordingly claim the prize;
and the craft of the Shifty Lad is once more called into practice,
to secure the maiden for himself.! Mr. Campbell, who relates

"The thoft of treasure by a clever stories of ‘ The Four Accomplished
Togue oceurs in the story of the Travels Brothers,’ ‘The Rogue and hie Master,”


of Dummling, who is Boots under an- and of the ‘Young Giant’ In the
other name. Compare also Grimm's latter tale Hormes takes more the form


118


‘BOOK
1.


MYTHOLOGY .OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


this story, gives fall weight to the suggestion that the inei-


—~— dents in which it resembles the version of Herodotos may


Point and
drift of
those

stories,


‘have been spread amongst the people by those members of
their families who study the classics at the Scotch Universi-
ties,’ but he adds with good reason, that if the resemblances
to other stories not classical are to be accounted for in the
same way, it must be supposed ‘that these books have all
been read at some time so widely in Scotland as to have
become known to the labouring population who speak Gaelic,
and 80 long ugo as to have been forgotten by the instructed
who speak. English and study foreign languages,”!

In the Norse and Teutonic versions it seems impossible


, not to see the most striking incident of the Egyptian tale in


& connection and under forms which force on us the conclu-
sion that they are not related to each other in any other way
than by their growth from a common root. In these versions
the king is represented by a goodhumoured squire who
makes himself merry over the successful devices of the
Master Thief, as he accomplishes the several tasks imposed
upon him. These tasks taken separately are much the same
in each, but the difforence of order indicates that no one
was regarded at the first as essentially more difficult than
another. In none of them, however, does the humour
of the story turn on the force of public opinion. The whole
pcint lies in the utter inability of any one to guard against
the thief, even when they know that they are going to be
robbed and have themselves pointed out the object to be
stolen. Here, as in the stories of Rhampsinitos and the
Shifty Lad, the means for achieving one of the tasks is wine:
but the thief has to take away not the dead body of a man,
but a living horse, on which sits a groom, or, as in the Norse
tale, twelve horses, each with a rider guarding them. The
disguise assumed by the thief is the dress of a beggar-
woman, and her wine, which ‘in the German story is power-
of the Maruts, or Crushera; and the description which reminds us of the
tayth of the Mofionide in re-ouncted Hesiodie narrative of the toil of Hermes
‘With singular exactness. ‘The young the whole night through, The only
Giant brings up from the water a buge reward which he usks ie the plenaure c.


millstone which he places round his kicking his master, who ix sent spinnin


Pagid fo Korps watch all pnighe into the air and is never more sora,
le evi it 1 Ta i i
ne eae oT amon bat he Tales of the Weat Highlands, i. 852,


TRE THEFTS OF HERMES.


fully drugged, soon puts the guards to sleep as soundly as
the soldiers of the Egyptian king. In this version the thief
swings the rider, saddle and all, in the air by ropes.tied to
the rafters of the stable; in the Norse tale, the twelve
grooms find themselves astride the beams in the morning,
The theft of the sheet and ring from the persons of the squire
and his wife is an incident not found in either the Egyptian
or the Scottish stories; but the trick practised on the priest
occurs again in the Hindu tale of the nautch-girl Champa
Ranee, under a disguise which cannot hide the common
source from which the stories have come down to us, while it
leaves no room for the notion that the one version has been
suggested by the other.

But in truth the supposition is in this case wholly un-
called for. The story of the Master Thief was told in Europe,
probably ages before the Homeric poems were put together,
certainly ages before Herodotos heard the story of the
Egyptian treasure-house. In all the versions of the tale
the thief is a young and slender youth, despised sometimes
for his seeming weakness, never credited with his full craft
andstrength. No power can withhold him from doing aught
on which he has set his mind: no human eye can trace the
path by which he conveys away his booty. It is the story of
the child Hermes, and even under the most uncouth disguise
it has lost but little either of its truthfulness or its humour.
Bolts and bars are no defence against him; yet the babe
whom Phoibos can shake in his arms is the mighty marander
who has driven off all his oxen from Pieria. When his work
is done, he looks not much like one who necds to be dreaded ;
and the soft whistling sound which closes his defence wakes
a smile on the face of Phoibos,'as the Teutonic squire
laughs on finding himself tricked in the northern story. In
each case the robber is exalted to the same high dignity.

‘Well, friend,” said Apollén with a smile, ‘thou wilt
break into many a house, I see, and thy followers after thee;
Horn in higUlcowsole math ex Pre dol emotes fers mia
incident which ia not mentioned in the Voce dom terret, viduua pharetra

Risit Apollo.


Homeric hymn, but is in c'ove agree Carm. i. x.
ment with the spirit of the Norse tale;


ily


CHAP.
VOL
——


The
Hellenic
Master
Thief.


220


BOOK


The origin


of the
the


‘Thief.


ter


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


and thy fancy for beef will set many a herdsman grieving.
But come down from the cradle, or this sleep will be thy
last. Only this honour can I promise thee, to be called the
Master Thief for ever.’!

The thief in the northern stories marries the squire’s
daughter, as the architect’s son marries the daughter of
Rhampsinitos. The marriage represents the compact made
between Phoibos the all-seeing and Hermes the sweet singer.
In this peaceful alliance with the squire the Teutonic tale
leaves him; but there are other sides to the character of the
“Master Thief, and each of these describes with singular fidelity
the action and power of air in motion. He is the child
breathing softly in the cradle, he is the giant rooting up trees
in his fury. No living thing can resist the witchery of his
harping. As he draws nigh, life is wakened where before he
came there had been stillness as of the dead. With him
comes joy or sorrow, health or the pestilence. His lyre is
the narp of Orpheus, and it discourses the music of the
Vedic Ribhus, or of the Finnic Wiiniméinen, the son of
Dmatar, the daughter of the Air,? whose singing draws the
sun and moon from heaven. The beasts of the field come to
hear him, like the clouds which gather in the sky when the
wind blows; the trees move along his track when he comes
in hig sterner moods. Nothing can remain still when he
pipes. The leaf must wave on the hill-side, the Jew must
dance in the thorn-bush, while the music lasts. He is the


1 roBr0 yp ofy xe) Ereira per? BBavd=
ois ~yépas fers,
APXOZ $HAHTEON retAfioeas fuera
rdvra.—Hynn to Hermes, 292,
This may, I think, be considered de-
monstrable evidence that the story of
the Master ‘Thief belongs to the class
of myths which Professor Max Miller
calls organic, as being legends ‘ which
were known to the primeval Aryan
race, before it broke up into Hindus,
Greeks, Romans, Germans, and Celts,”
all stories imported in later times fom
one literatare into another being se-
condary or inorganic. The number of
stories belonging to the latter class is
probably much smaller then is generally
supposed.
* As Hermes is one of the fire-


making or fire bringing gods, so Wi
‘némbinen catches the fish that has swal-
lowed the fire, which, struck by Ukko,
the lord of the air, from the new «un
and moon, hes fallen into the sea.

* This story of ‘The Jew among the
Thorns,’ in Grimm's Household Thies, is
reproduced under a ‘hundred forms; but
in few or none of these can it be main
tained with any show of reason that one
hus been deliberstely adapted from
another, The fiddie which makes the
‘Jew dunce is reproduced in the form of
a stick in ‘The Lad who wont to the
North Wind,’ (Dazent, Norse Tales, 263),
The stick is of course the gift of the
wind, just as Hermes gives the harp to
Phoibos. In the German story the Jew
is made to yield up his purse tu tho


‘
PAUL PRY AND PEEPING TOM.


Erlking, whose mysterious harmony is heard by the child
nestled in his father’s arms.! He is the piper of Hameln, 2
who drives away the noisome rats, but who also draws the
children of the town happy and joyous to the blue river,
where they leave all griefs behind them, as gently as the
Homeric Psychopompos guides the souls across the waters
of Lethe. But in all his offices he retains his character of
searching subtlety. The barred gates of the unseen land
cannot stay the harping breeze, whether he comesas Orpheus
or Wiiniméinen : and his curious searching into every nook
and cranny, his mocking laugh at those who come to see the
mischief wrought by him, are reproduced under a strange
disguise in Paul Pry and peeping Tom of Coventry. Nay,
the Hindu deity Rudra, the ‘ bountiful,’ the ‘ gracious,’ the
god ‘with braided hair’ (the streaming vapours), the ‘thou-
sand quivered,’ appears sometimes in an aspect scarcely more
dignified. Like Hermes and the Shifty Lad, he too is ‘the
lord of thieves, the robber, the cheater, the deceiver, the lord
of pilferers and robbers.’ *

Thus, then, in the story of the Master Thief, the idea of any
lateral transmission becomes inadmissible. But as this tale
in all its modifications can be traced back to phrases denot-
ing physical phenomena, we have yet to see whether there
are other tales which apparently cannot‘ be resolved into
such expressions, and for which the idea of any such borrow-
ing is equally untenable or superfluous. If any such
stories are forthcoming, we cannot avoid the conclusion that
before the several branches of the Aryan race separated from
their common home, they not only had in their language the
germe of all future mythological systems, but carried with
them as nursery tales a number of stories not evolved from


fiddler, who, when brought to trial,

excuses himself Ly 4 quibble like that

of Hermes. He had not robbed any

one: the Jew gave the money of his

own free will, Hermes is u very truthful
Person and knows not how to tell » lie.

‘Horest du nicht

‘Was Exlenkinig mir leis vorepricht P*
joethe,

? The magic or Tyre reappears

in the vegend EP ithe ‘Rose of the


Alhambra, where it is applied with
great humour to cure the mud freak of
Philip V.—Irving’s Alhambra.

* Muir, it Texts, part iy.
ch, iii, section vii. sSlightly altered,
the story of Godiva in Coventry is told
again in the tale of Allah-ud-deen, who
veos through a crevice the king’s
daughter on her way to the bath, when
it is desth for any one to be seen
ubroad or to be found looking on her.


121


eae


Limits to
the hypo-
thesis of
conscious
borrowing,


122


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK phrases descriptive of natural phenomena, the ideas of which
eae were impressed cn their minds not less firmly than the more


strictly mythical words and phrases were impressed on their
memories. These stories were, however, little more than
outlines, for if cannot be too often repeated that even in
the tales which exhibit the closest likeness in their most
developed forms, the points of difference in detail and colour-
ing are so striking as to leave no room for doubt that the
Aryan tribes carried away with them for these stories no
rigid types to which they were compelled té adhere with
Egyptian slavishness, but living ideas which each tribe
might from time to time clothe ina different garb. How
these ideas were farnished is # question which it may be by
no means as easy to answer as it is to resolve the life of
Achilleus and Meleagros into the daily course of the sun
through the heavens. 1t becomes therefore of the utmost
importance in such an inquiry as this, to bring together and
compare the popular traditions of nations whose geographical
positions show that their parting when they left the common
home was for them a final separation. No one could have
the hardihood'to maintain that the countrymen of Herman
had access to the pages of Pausanias, or that the soldiers of
Varus had in their childhood listened to stories borrowed
from the epic of Wiiniiméinen. Yet the children’s tales
gathered during the last hal{-century have established the
general affinity of the folk-lore of Greeks, Romans, Germans
and Scandinavians, and a likeness not less astonishing runs
through the popular tales of these races and those of the
Hindo,' In India, as in Germany, old women, who doubtless
thought themselves fit for nothing, have preserved to us a
series of exquisite legends which pour a flood of light on
the early history of the human mind. The Hindu child is
still roused and soothed by the stories of the sweet Star-
Lady and the lovely Queen of the Five Flowers, just as the
young German and Norseman used to listen to the tale of


1 Old Deccan Days, a series of tules finitely enhanced if, as the translator
taken down from the dictution of Anna assures us, they are given precisely as
Liberata de Souzz, and translated Ly came from the lips of the narrator,
‘Mis Frore. The stories are of greut vidoat additions or embellishments,
importance; but their value is inde-


TRANSMISSION OF POPULAR TALES.


the beautiful Briar-rose sleeping in death-like stillness until
the kiss of the pure Knight rouses her from her slumber.
‘We are clearly debtors to the old women for the preservation
of thousands of lovely and touching legends which have
never found their way into epic poetry. Had it not been for
the grandmothers of Hellas, we should in all likelihood never
have heard of the grief of Démétér, as she sank down by the
fountain in Eleusis, or of the woe of Telephassa, which ended
as she sank to rest on the Thessalian plain in the evening.
Schools in Athens, Thebes, or Argos, doubtless did their in-
evitable destructive work; but we can as little doubt that
many an Athenian mother pointed on the slopes of Hymettos
to the spot where the glistening form of Prokris first met
the eye of Kephalos as he stepped forth on the shore, and
the young Delian learnt to be proud of the rugged island,
where the nymphs bathed the infant Phoibos in pure water
and swathed him in broad golden bands, Clearly we have
to thank old crones for the story of Narkissos who died for
love of his own fair face, and of Seléné gazing on Endymion
as he slept on the hill of Latmos.

Among these Hindu tales we find a large class of stories
which have little or nothing in common with the epic poems
of the Aryan nations, but which exhibit a series of incidents
in striking parallelism with those of the corresponding
Teutonic versions. These incidents are in themselves so
strange, and the result is brought about by turns so unex~
pected, that the idea of their independent developement
among separated tribes who had carried away with them
nothing but some proverbial sayings as the groundwork of
these stories becomes a wild extravagance. Whatever the
consequences may be, the conclusion seems irresistible that
these stories had been wrought out into some detail, while
these tribes or nations still continued to form a single
people ; aud if these tales can scarcely be resolved into phrases
denoting physical phenomena, they are perhaps more won-
derful even than the epic poems, the growth of which from
common germs would be inevitable if the theory of compara-
tive mythologists be regarded as established. The resem-
Dlances between these stories may perhaps bring down the


128


CHAP.
vu.
ies


Frame-
work of
popular
stories.


124


BOOK


——


Tho story
of the Dog
and the
Sparrow.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


time of separation to a comparatively late period; but the
geographical position of Hindu and German tribes must still
throw that time back to an indefinitely distant past; and
close as the parallelism may be, the differences of detail and
colouring are such that we cannot suppose these Aryan
emigrants to have carried away with them to their new
abodes more than the leading incidents grafted on the lead-
ing idea. The fidelity with which the Hindu and the Ger-
man tales adhere to this framework is-indeed astonishing.

One of the most remarkable of these coincidences is fur-
nished by the story of the‘ Dog and the Sparrow,’ in Grimm’s
collection, as compared with an episode in the ‘ Wanderings
of Vicram Maharajah.’ In both a bird vows to bring about
the ruin of a human being; in both the bird is the helper
and avenger of the innocent against wanton injury, and in
both the destruction of the guilty is the result of their own
voluntary acts. There are other points of likeness, the sig-
niticance of which is heightened by points of singularly
subtle difference. In the German story, the sparrow is
offended because a carter, not heeding the warning which
she had given him, drove his waggon over a dog which she
had saved from starving.

*You have killed my brother, the dog,’ she said, ‘and
that shall cost you your horses and your cart.’

“Horses and cart, indeed,’ said the carrier. ‘What harm
can you do to me?’ and he drove on.

But presently the sparrow contrived to force out the cork
from the bunghole of one of the casks in the waggon, and all
the wine ran out on the ground. ‘Ah me! I am a poor
man now,’ cried the carter, when he saw it. ‘Not poor
enough yet,’ said the sparrow, as she perched on the head of
one of the horses, and picked out his eye. The carter in his
rage took up his hatchet to kill the bird, but instead of it, he
hit his horse, which fell down dead. So it fared with the
second cask and the two remaining horses. Leaving his
waggon on the road, the carter found his way home, and
bemoaned to his wife the loss of his wine and his beasts,

‘Ah my husband,’ she replied, ‘and what a wicked
bird has come to this house; she has brought with her all


GERMAN AND HINDU STORIES.


the birds in the world, and there they sit among our corn,
and are eating every ear of it.”

‘Ah me, I am poorer than ever,’ said the man, as he
beheld the havoc. ‘Still not poor enough, carrier; it shall
cost you your life,’ said the bird as she flew away. By and
by the sparrow appeared at the window-sill, and uttered the
same words, and the carrier, hurling his axe at it, broke the
window-frame in two. Every other piece of furniture in the
house was demolished as he vainly attempted to hit the bird.
At length he caught her, and his wife asked if she should kill
her.

‘No,’ said he, ‘ that were too merciful; she shall die much
more horribly, for I will eat her alive,’ So saying, he
swallowed her whole; but she began to flutter about in
his stomach, and presently came again into his mouth, and
cried out, ‘Carrier, it shall cost you your life.’

Thereupon the man handed the axe to his wife, saying,
‘Kill me the wretch dead in my mouth.’ His wife took it,
and aimed a blow, but missing her mark struck her husband
on the head and killed him. Then the sparrow flew away
and was never seen there again.’

In the Hindoo story the bird is a parrot, and the dog’s


place is taken by a poor woodeutter, from whom e dancing- ¥,


girl attempts to extort a large sum of money by deliberate
falsehood. The girl thus represents the carter, and at once
the framework of the tale is provided; but the method by
which the sparrow wreaks her vengeance on the man is
thoroughly awkward and unartistic when compared with the
simple scheme which brings about the ruin of the nautcb-
woman. She, like the carrier, is rich; but she cannot resist
the temptation of making more money by charging the wood-
cutter with the dowry which she said that he had promised
to pay on marrying her, the promise and the marriage being


} This Iast incident is clearly the
same as that which brings about the
death of the bald carpenter, who being
attacked by a mosquito called his son
to drive it away. The son aiming e
blow at the insect, splits his futher's
head with the axe, “This atory from
the Pankstantra Professor Max Miller


Chips de. ii, 292) identifies with the
Si > Bhanieas, of the bald man who,
trying to kill a gnat, gives himself a
severe blow in the face, und he ettri-
‘utes it, therefore, to some old Aryan
proverb. The German story of the
‘earter has certninly all the appearance
of a more independent growth.


125


VuL


The stor
of the ui


126


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. ,


BOOK. alike purely imaginary. The rajah, being called to give
~—L__ judgement in the case, determines to abide by the decision of


@ parrot famed for his wiadom, and belonging to a merchant
in the town. When the woodcutter had given his version of
the matter, the parrot bade Champa Ranee, the nautch-girl,
tell her story. After hearing it, he asked where the house
was to which her husband had taken her. ‘Far away in the
jungles,’ was the reply. ‘And how long ago?’ The day
was named, and twenty witnesses proved that Champa was at
the time in the city. The parrot then gave judgement for the
woodcutter against the nautch-girl, as the sparrow had
befriended the dog against the carter. Great was the praise
‘bestowed on the wise parrot, but the incensed nautch-girl
said, ‘ Be assured 1 will get you in my power, and when I do,
I will bite off your head.’

Then follows the vow of the parrot, answering to the oath
of the sparrow; but he has no need to repeat it,

‘Try your worst, madam,’ said he, ‘but in return I tell
you this; I will live to make youa beggar. Your house
shall be by your own orders laid even with the ground, and
you for grief and rage shall kill yourself.” 4

Time’ goes on, and the nautch-girl, summoned to the
merchant’s house, dances so well that he asks her to name
her own reward; and the price which she demands is the
parrot. Taking the bird home, she ordered her servants to
cook it for her supper, first cutting off its head and bringing it
to be grilled, that she might eat it before tasting any other
dish. The parrot is accordingly plucked, but while the
servant goes to fetch water wherein to boil him, the bird,
who had pretended to be dead and thus escaped having his
neck wrung, slipped into a hole Jet into the wall for carrying
off the kitchen sewage. In this dilemma the maid grilled a
chicken’s head, and placed it before Champa Ranee, who, as
she eat it, said,

“Ah! pretty Polly, so here is the end of you. This is the
brain that thought so cunningly and devised my overthrow ;
this the tongue that spoke against me; this is the throat
through which came the threatening words. Ha! ha! who
is right now, I wonder ?”


THE STORY OF CHAMPA RANEE.


With some little fear the parrot heard her words, for the
loss of his wing feathers had left him unable to fly; but at
length he contrived to find his way to a neighbouring temple,
and to perch behind the idol. It was the favourite god of
Champa Ranee, who, in her abject fear of death, had Jong
besought him to translate her to heaven without the process
of dying. So when she next came to offer her wonted sup-
plication, the parrot spoke, and the nautch-girl at once took
its words for the utterances of the god.

«Champa Ranee, nautch-girl, your prayer is heard, this is
what you must do; sell all you possess, and give the money
to the poor, ‘and you inust also give money to all your ser-
vants and dismiss them. Level also your house to the
ground, that you may be wholly separated from earth. Then
you will be fit for heaven, and you may come, having done
all I command you, on this day week to this place, and you
shall be transported thither body and soul.’!

The infatuated woman does as she is bidden, and after
destroying her house and giving away all her goods, she
returns to the temple, attended by a vast train of men and


+ This incident recurs in the Norse
version of the Master Thief. Here,
however, there is no real bird, but only
the thief disguised us a bird, nor are
the victims of the trick sctuully killed,
but they are grievously mauled, and
ero robbed as effectually us the nautch-
gil. What is more to the point is, that
the property ich cage abandoned
by an xct of their’own free will. Hav-
ing undertukon to cheat the priest and
his clerk, the thief ‘dressed himself up
like a bird, threw a great white shvet
over his body, took the wings uf » goase
and tieg them to his back, and so
climbed’ “p into a great maple which
stood in the priest's garden, und when
the priest came home in the evening
the youth begun to buwl out, ‘Father
Lawrence, father Lawrener,'—for that
was the priest's namo, ‘Who is that
calling me,’ said the priest, ‘lam an
angel,’ said the Master Thief, ‘sent
from God to let you know that you
shall be taken up alive into heaven for
your piety'a sake, Next Monday night
You must hold yourself ready for the
Journey, for I shall come then to fetch


you in a sack; and oll your gold and
Your silver and all that you have of
this world's goode you snust lay to-

ether in n heap in your dining-room,?

ell, Father Lawrence fell on ins knees
Uefore the angel und thanked him; and
the very next day he prenched w faro-
well sermon and gave it out how there
had come down un angel unto the big
maple in his garden, who had told him
that he was to be tuken up alive into
heaven for his picty’s suke, and he
preached and made such touching dis-
course thut all who wereat church weph
both young and old'—Dusent, Norse
Tales, ‘Muster Thief’ Hore, as in the
‘Hindu story, the time is fixed, and the
furewell sermonanswersto the invitations
sent out by Champa Ranee to all her
friends that they should come and witness
herascension. Another priest is deceived
in the admirable Guelic story of the
“Son of the Scottish Yooman who stole
the Bishop's Horse and Dunghter, and
the Bishop Himself” See also Mr.
Campbell's excellent remarks on this
story, Tales of the West Highlands,
Hi, 263.


127


CHAP,
VII.


128
BOOK
L


—_———


Origin ‘a
and grow!
of these
stories.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


women whom she had invited to be witnesses of her glori-
fication.

As they waited, a fluttering of little wings was heard, and
@ parrot flew over Champa Ranee’s head, calling. ont,
‘ Nautch-girl, nautch-girl, what have you done?’ Champa
Ranee recognised the voice as Vicram’s: he went on, ‘ Will
you go body and soul to heaven? Have you forgotten Polly’s
words? ”

Champa Ranee rushed into the temple, and falling on her
knees before the idol, cried out, ‘Gracious Power, I have
done a as you commanded; let your words come true;
save me, take me to heaven.’

But the parrot above her cried, ‘Good bye, Champa
Ranee, good bye; you ate a chicken’s head, not mine,
‘Where is your house now? Where are your servants and
all your possessions? Have my words come true, think you,
or yours?’

Then the woman saw all, and in her rage and despair,
cursing her own folly, she fell violently down on the floor of
the temple, and, dashing her head against the stone, killed
herself.

It is impossible to question the real identity of these two
stories, and incredible that the one could have been invented.
apart from the other, or that the German and the Hindu
tale are respectively develoyements merely from the same
leading idea. This idea is that beings of no repute may be
avengers of successful wrongdoers, or to put jt in the lan-
guage of St. Paul, that the weak things of the earth may be
chosen to confound the strong, and foolish things to confound
the wise. But it was impossible that this leading idea
should of itself suggest to a Hindu and a Teuton thet the
avenger should be a bird, that the wrongdoer should punish
himself, and should seal his doom by swallowing his per-
secutor or by at least thinking that he was devouring him.
There is no room here for the argument which Professor
Max Miiller characterises as sneaking when applied even to
fables which are common to all the members of the Aryan


1 Frere, Old Decean Days, p. 127.


IMPORTATION OF MYTHS.


family.! A series of incidents such as these could never have
been thought out by two brains working apart from each
other; and we are driven to admit that at least the
machinery by which the result was to be brought about had
been devised before the separation, or to maintain that the
story has in the one case or in the other been imported
bodily, Probably no instance could be adduced in which a
borrowed story differs so widely from the original. In all
cases of adaptation the borrower either improves upon the
idea or weakens it. Here both the stories exhibit equally
clear tokens of vigorous and independent growth.?

But the story of the nautch-girl is only one incident in a
larger drama. The bird of the German tale is a common
sparrow ; the parrot which brings about the death of Champa
Ranee is nothing less than the Maharajah Vicram, who has


1 Chips from a German Workshop,
ii, 233.

2Tt ie scarcely un exaggeration to
any that there is xeareely one important
feature of the Hindu popular stories
which are not to be found in thow of
Germany and Scandinavia, and which
ure uot repeated in Celtic, traditions,
In euch case the story is the sume. yet
not the same, and the main question
‘becomes one rather of historical than of
philological ovidence, ‘The substantial
identity of the tales is indisputable ;
and if th fact be that these stories
wero in the possession of Germans and
Norwegians, Irishmen «nd Scottish
Highlanders, long before any systematic
attempt was made to commit to writing
and publish the folklore of Europe, the
further conclusion is also involved that
‘those stories do not owe their diffusion
to book-learning; and assurediy the
commercial intercourse which would ac-
count for them implies an amouat und
@ frequency of communication beyond
that of the most stirring and enter-
prising nationy of the prevent day. Mz.
Campbell, in his invalusble collection
of Popwlar Tales of the West High-
Jands, dismisses the hypothesis as
wholly untenable, Of the notion that
theso Highland traditions
vprung up since the public’
Grimm's and Dasent’s collections of
German and Norse tales, he asserts
that 4 manuscript lent to him by the
translator proves that the stories were


VOL. 1.


known in Scotland before these transla-
tiuns wore mude publie (vol. i. p. xlvi),
and adds, reasonably enough, that
‘whon all the narmitors agroe in sayin,
that they have known these storica all
their lives, and wheo the variation is no
marked, the reremblance is rather to be
attributed to common origin than to
books’ (ib. xIviii) More definitely he
asseita, ‘ Aftor working for a year and
weighing all the evidence that has come
in my wor, I have come to agree with
thowe who hold that popular talos are
generally pure traditions’ (id, 227),
‘Tho care with which he hus examined
the lunge body of Celtic traditions,
gives his judgement the greatest weight,
and fully justifies his conclusion that
‘popular tales are woven together in &
network which seems to pervade the
world, and to be fastened to everythin
in it. Tradition, books, history, an
mythology hung together; no sooner
ins the net Leen freed frum one snag,
and a mevb guined, than another mos
is discovered; and so, unless many
hnnds combina, the net and the con-
tents will never be brought to shore’
(i 229), It is not w little startling to
find that the so-called classical mytho-
logy of the Grocks, in which the myth
of Paychd was supposed to be almost
the only popular tale accidentally pee-
served to us, contains the germs, and
more than the germs, of nearly every
story in the popular traditions of Ger-
many, Norway, India, and Scotland,


129


{CHAP.
Vill.
—


The stories
of Vicrum
and Her-
motimos.


130


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK received from the god of wisdom the power of transporting
ak his soul into any other body, while by an antidote he keeps


his own body from corruption. And here we are brought to
@ parallelism which cannot be accounted for on any theory
of medigval importation. The story of Vicram is essentially
the story of Hermotimos of Klazomenai, whose soul wanders
at will through space, while his body remains undecayed at
home, until his wife, tired out by his repeated desertions,
burns his body while he is away, and thus effectually prevents
his resuming his proper form. A popular Deccan tale, which
is also told by Pliny and Lucian, must have existed, if only in
@ rudimentary state, while Greeks and Hindus still lived as
asingle people. Buta genuine humour, of which we have
little more than a: faint germ in the Greek legend, runs
through the Hindu story. In both the wife is vexed by the
frequent absence of her husband: but the real fun of the
Deccan tale rises from the complications produced by the
carpenter’s son, who overhears the god Gunputti as he
teaches Vicram the mystic words which enable him to pass
from his own body into another ; but as he could not see
the antidote which Vicram received to keep his tenantless
body from decay, the carpenter’s son was but half enlightened.
No sooner, however, had Vicram transferred his soul to the
parrot’s body, than the carpenter’s son entered they body of
Vicram, and the work of corruption began in his own. The
pseudo-rajah is at once detected by the Wuzeer Butti, who
stands to Vicram in the relation of Patroklos to Achilleus,
or of Theseus to Peirithods, and who recommends the whole
court to show a cold shoulder to the impostor, and make his
sojourn in Vicram’s body as unpleasant as possible. Worn
out at last with waiting, Butti sets off to search for his friend,
and by good luck is one of the throng assembled to witness
the ascension of Champa Ranee. Butti recognises his friend,
and at once puts him into safe keeping in a cage. On
reaching home it became necessary to get the carpenter’s
son out of Vicram’s body, and the Wuzeer, foreseeing that
this would be no easy task, proposes a butting match between
two rams, the one belonging to himself, the other to the
psendo-rajah. Butti accordingly submits his own ram to w


MYTHS OF THE WINTER. 131


training, which greatly hardens his horns; and so when the CHAP.
fight began, the pretended rajah, seeing to his veration that a,
his favourite was getting the worst in the battle, transported
his soul into the ram’s body, to add to its strength and reso-
Tation. No sooner was this done, than Vicram left the
parrot’a body and re-entered his own, and Butti, slaying the
defeated ram, put an end to the life of the carpenter’s son,
py leaving him no body in which to take up his abode. But
fresh troubles were in store for Butti; and these troubles
take us back to the legends of Brynhild and Persephoné, of
Tammuz, Adonis, and Osiris. Not yet cured of his wandering
propensities, Vicram goes to sleep in a jungle with his mouth
open, into which creeps a cobra who refuses to be dislodged
—the deadly snake of winter and darkness, which stings the
peantiful Eurydiké, and lies coiled around the maiden on the
glistening heath. The rajah, in his intolerable misery, leaves
his home, just as Persephoné is taken away from Démétér,
and Butti seeks him in vain for twelve years (the ten years
of the struggle at Ilion), as he roams in the disguise of a
fakeer. Meanwhile, the beautiful Buccoulee, who had recog-
nised her destined husband under his squalid rags as Kury-
kleia recognises Odysseus, had succeeded in freeing Vieram
from his tormentor, and thus all three returned to the long
forsakep Anar Ranee. But before we examine incidents
which take us into the more strictly mythical regions of
Aryan folk-lore, it is necessary to show how large is that
class of stories to which the tale of the Dancing Girl and the
‘Woodeutter belongs. There are some which are even more
remarkable for their agreement in the general scheme with
thorough divergence in detail.

In the story entitled, ‘ The Table, the Ass, and the Stick’ The Tal.c,
in Grimm’s collection, a goat, whose appetite cannot be bere
satisfied, brings a tailor into grievous trouble by leading him stick.
to drive his"three sons away from their home on groundless
charges, At last, finding that he had been cheated, he
scourges the goat, which makes the best of ite way from his
dwelling. Meanwhile, the three sons had each been learning

, & trade, and each received his reward. To the eldest son was
given a table, which at the words ‘Cover thyself,’ at once
x2


132 MYTHOLOGY OF THR ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK presented a magnificent banquet; the second received
pa donkey, which on hearing the word ‘Bricklebrit’ rainec

down gold pieces,! and both were deprived of their gifta by
thievish innkeeper, to whom they had in auccession revealec
their secret. On reaching home, the eldest son, boasting t
his father of his inexhaustible table, was discomfited b,
finding that some common table had been put in its place
and the second in like manner, in making trial of his ass
found himself in possession of a very ordinary donkey. Bu
the youngest son had not yet returned, and to him they sen
word of the seurvy behaviour of the innkeeper. When the
time of the third son’s departure came, his master gave him
” a sack, adding ‘dn it there lies a stick.” The young man
took the sack as a thing that might do him good service,
but asked why he should take the stick, as it only made the
sack heavier to carry. The stick, however, was endowed
with the power of jumping out of the sack and belabouring
any one against whom its owner had a grudge. Thus armed,
the youth went cheerfully to the house of the innkeeper, who,
thinking that the sack must certainly contain treasure, tried
to take it from the young man’s pillow while he slept. But
he had reckoned without his host. The stick heara the fatal
word, and at once falls without mercy on the thief, who
roars out that he will surrender the table and the ass. Thus


1 This donkey is, in fact, Midas, at
whose touch everything turns.to gold ~
a myth which reappears ip the Irish
tradition of Lavra Loingeech, who ‘had
horse's ears, an Midas had those of an
uss, The reeds betrayed the secret in
the ease of Midas ; the barber of Lavra
whispered the secret in the Irish etory
to a willow; the willow was cut down,
and the harp made of the wood mur-
wured 'Lurra Loin, has horse's
cars’ (Fergusson, The Irish before the
Congursi.) ‘The horve and the ass
doubtless represent the Harits of Hinds
mythology ; the production of gold (the
yplden light) by the sun or the dawn
‘Teeora again “and again im Aryan

legends, "In Grimm's story of the

“Three Little Men in the Wood,’ the

kindly dawn-child shares her bread

with the dwarfs, who, as in the Vol-
sur~ tale, guard the treasures of the
eat‘, and im return they grant to her


‘the power of becoming more heautifal
every day, and that a pivce of gold shal)
fall ‘out of her mouth every word that
she speaks, But rho has a stepsister,
the winter, who, not having her kindly
foclings, refuses to share her bread with
the dwerfs, who decree that she shall
grow more ugly every duy, and that
toads shall epring from her mouth
whevever she speaks, This is the
story of ‘Bushy Bride’ in Dasent'x
Norse Talis, he dawn-children re-
appear in the story of Hansel and
Grethel, who, wanderigg into the forest
(of night or winter}, come upon a house
with windows made of clear sugar (ice),
where they fall into the power of a
witch (Hates), who, Wke the dwarts
guards the hoard of treasure. The olt
witch is destroyed by Grethel after th.
fashion of the cannibal in the Zul
tale. (Max Miiller, Chips, ii, 214.)


GERMAN AND HINDU TALES.


the three gifts reach the tailor’s house.’ As for the goat,
whose head the tailor had shaven, it ran into a fox’s house,
where a bee stung its bald pate, and it rushed out, never to
be heard of again.

In the Deccan tale we have a jackal and a barber in the
place of the goat and the tailor: and the mischief is done,
not by leading the barber to expel his children, but by cheat-
ing him of the fruits of his garden. The parallel, however,
is not confined to the fact of the false pretences; the barber
retaliates, like the tailor, and inflicts a severe wound on the
jackal. As before, in the German story, the goat is a goat;
but the jackal is a transformed rajah, none other in short
than the Beast who is wedded to Beauty and the monster
who becomes the husband of Psyche, and thas even this
story lies within the magic circle of strictly mythical tradi-
tion. But before he wins his bride, the jackal-rajah is
reduced to ‘sore straits, and his adventures give occasion
for some sharp satire on Hindu popular theology. Coming
across a bullock’s carcass, the jackal eats his way into it,
while the sun so contracts the hide. that he finds himself
unable to get out. Fearing to be killed if discovered, or
to be buried alive if he escaped notice, the jackal, on the
approach of the scavengers, cries out, ‘Take care, good
people, how you touch me, for I am a great saint.’ The
mahars in terror ask him who he is, and what he want:.
‘I,’ answered the jackal, ‘am a very holy saint. I am also
the god of your village, and I am very angry with you,
because you never worship me nor bring me offerings.’ ‘O
my lord,’ they cried, ‘what offerings will please you? Tell
‘us only, and we will bring you whutever you like.’ ‘ Good,’
said the jackal; ‘then you must fetch hither plenty of rice,
plenty of flowers, and a nice fat chicken: place them as an
offering beside me, and pour a great deal of water over them,
as you do at your most solemn feasts, and then I will forgive
you your sins’ The wetting, of course, splits the dry
bullock’s skin, and the jackal, jumping out, runs with the
chicken in his mouth to the jungle. When again he was


) The Norse story of ‘The Lad who went to the North Wind’ turns on the
same machinery.


188


CHAP.
Vit.
lL


The
Brahwan,
the Jackal
and the
Barber,


"4, 134
q


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


nearly starved, he heard a Brahman bewailing his poverty,


pesca and declaring that if a dog or a jackal were to offer to marry


one of his daughters, he should have her—an eagerness in
complete contrast with the reluctance of the merchant who
ig obliged to surrender his child to the beast, The jeckal
takes him at bis word, and leads his wife away to a splendid
subterranean palace, where she finds that each night the
jackal lays aside his skin, and becomes a beautiful young
man. Soon the Brahman comes to the jackal’s cave to see
how his child gets on; but just as he is about to enter, the
jackal stops him, and, learning his wants, gives him a melon,
the seeds of which will bring him some money. A neighbour,
admiring the fruit produced from these seeds, buys some from
the Brahman’s wife, and finding that they are full of diamonds,
pearls and rubies, purchases the whole stock, until the Brah-
man himself opens a small withered melon, and learns how
he} as been overreached. In vain he asks restitution from
the woman who has bought them; she knows nothing of
any miraculous melons, and a jeweller to whom he takes the
jewels from the withered melon, accuses him of having stolen
the gems from his shop, and impounds them all, Again
the Brahman betakes himself to the jackal, who, seeing the
uselessness of giving him geld or jewels, brings him out a jar
which is always full of good things.’ The Brahman now
lived in luxury; but another Brahman informed the rajah of
the royal style in which his once poorer neighbour feasted,
and the rajah appropriated the jar for his own special use.
‘When onee again he carried this story of his wrongs to his
‘son-in-law, the jackal gave him another jar, within which
‘was a rope and a stick, which would perform their work of
-chastisement as soon as the jar was opened. Uncovering
‘the jar while he was alone, the Brahman had cauee to repent
his rashness, for every bone in his body was left aching.
With this personal experience of the powers of the stick, the
Brahman generously invited the rajah and’ his brother


) This jar is, of course, the horn of serves asthe source of life and wealth
Amaltbeia, the napkin of Rhydderch, will be more fitly extmined when wo
The never-failing table of the Ruhiopi ‘come to analyze he myth of the divine

the cup of the Malee's wife in the ship Argo, See the section on the

‘Hindu legend ; but the countless forms Vivifying Sun. Book 11. eh. ii.

assumed by the mysterious vessel which


WISH.


Brahman to come and test the virtues of his new gift; anda
belabouring as hearty as that which the wicked innkeeper
received in the German tale made them yield up the dinner-
making jar. The same wholesome measure led to the re-
covery of the precious atones from the jeweller, and the
melons from the woman who kad bought them. It only
remained now, by burning the enchanted rajah’s jackal-skin,
the lion-skin of Herakles, to transform him permanently into
the most splendid prince ever seen on earth.'

The independent growth of these tales from a common
framework is still more conclusively proved by the fact that
the agreement of the Norse with the Hindu legend is far
more close and striking than the likeness which it bears to
the German story. In the Norse version we have not three
brothers, but one lad, who represents the Brahman; and in
the Norse and Hindu stories alike, the being who does the
wrong is the one who bestows the three mysterious gifts.
The goat in the German version is simply mischievous: in
the Norse tale, the North Wind, which blows away the poor
woman's meal, bestows on her son the banquet-making cloth,
the money-coining ram, and the magic stick.* The jackal
and the cloth are thus alike endowed with the mysterious
power of the Teutonic Wish. This power is exhibited under
a thousand forms, among which cups, horns, jars, and basins
hold ihe most conspicuous place, and point to the earliest
symbol used for the expression of the idea.

The points of likeness and difference between the Hindu
story of Punchkin and the Norse tale of the ‘Giant who had
no Heart in his Body’ are perhaps still more striking. In the
former a rajah has seven daughters, whose mother dies while
they are still children, and a stepmother so persecutes them


1 Jn the mythology of Northern
Europe the lion-skin becomes a bear-
sack, and thus, according to the story
of Porphyry, Zalmoxis, the mythical
loginlutor of the Getai, was a Bersorkr,
as having been.clothed in a boarskin as
soon as he was burn. Probably the
explanation is about as trustworthy as
That which traces the name Tritogeneia,
to @ Cretan word trite, meaning head.
‘The other form of ths name, Zamolxis,


has been supposed (Nork, Keal-Wor-
terbuch, s.v.) to point to muigeo, muleeo,
and thus to denote the wizard or the
sorcerer, The story of bis remaining
hidden for yours in & cave, and then
reappearing among the Getai, ie merely
snother form of the myths of Perse.
é, Adonis, Beldur, Osiris, and other

jries of the waxing and waning year.


> Dasent, Tales from the Norse, xciv.


cali, 266.


135
oHAP.


paca


The

Lad who
‘went

w the
North
Wind.


The stor
of Punch
kin,


“ys6


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


. BOOK that they make their escape. In the jungle they are found
ot by the seven sons of a neighbouring king, who are hunting ;


and each takes one of the princesses aa a wife, the handsomest
of course marrying the youngest. After a brief time of
happiness, the eldest prince sets off on a journey, and does
not return. His six brothers follow him, and are seen no
more. After this, as Balna, the youngest princess, rocks her
babe in his cradle, a fakeer makes his appearance, and having
vainly asked her to marry him, transforms her into a dog,
and leads her away. As he grows older, Balna’s son learns
how his parents and uncles have disappeared, and resolves to
go in search of them. His aunts beseech him not to do so;


* but the youth feels sure that he will bring them all back, and


at length he finds his way to the house of a gardener, whose
wife, on hearing his story, tells him that bis father and uncles
have all been turned into stone by the great magician
Puncakin, who keeps Balna herself imprisoned in a high
tower because she will not marry him. To aid him in his
task, the gardener's wife disguises him in her daughter’s
dress, and gives him a basket of flowers as a present for the
captive princess. Thus arrayed, the youth is admitted to
her presence, and while none are looking, he makes himself
known to his mother by means of a ring which she had left
on his finger before the sorcerer stole her away. But the
rescue of the seven princes seemed to be as far off as ever,
and the young man suggests that Balna should now change
her tactics, and by playing the part of Delilah to Samson,
find out where his power lies, and whether he is subject to
death. The device is successful, and the sorcerer betrays the
secret.

‘Far away, far away, hundreds of thousands of miles away
from this, there lies a desolate country covered with thick
jungle. In the midst of the jungle grows a circle of palm
trees, and in the centre of the jungle stand six jers full of
water, piled one above another; below the sixth jar is a small
cage which contains a little green parrot; on the life of the
parrot depends my life, and if the parrot is killed I must die.”!


1 Im the Gaclie story of the ‘Young thi story, this pnecle is thus put,
King of Easaidh Ruadh,' which contains ‘There is great flagstone under the


HINDU AND ARABIAN STORIES,


But this keep is guarded by myriads of evil demons, and
Balna tries hard to dissuade her son from the venture. He
is resolute, and he finds true helpers in some eagles whose
young he saves by killing a large serpent which was making
its way to their nest. The parent birds give him their young
to be his servants, and the eaglets, crossing their wings,
bear him through the air to the spot where the six water
jars are standing. In an instant he upsets the jar, and
snatching the parrot from his cage, rolls him up in his
cloak. The magician in his dismay at seeing the parrot in
the youth’s hands yields to every demand made by him, and:
not only the seven princes but all his other victims are
restored to life—a magnificent array of kings, courtiers,
officers, and servants.' Still the magician prayed to have
his parrot given to him.

‘Then the boy took hold of the parrot, and tore off one of
his wings, and when he did so, the magician’s right arm fell
off,

‘Punchkin then stretched out his left arm, erying, “ Give
me my parrot.” The prince pulled off the parrot’s second
wing and the magician’s left arm tumbled off.

« “Give me my parrot,” cried he, and fell on his knees. The
prince pulled off the parrot’s right leg, the magician’s right
leg fell off ; the prince pulled off the parrot’s left leg, down
fell the magician’s left.

‘Nothing remained of him save the limbless body and the
head; but still he rolled his eyes, and cried, “Give me my
parrot!” ‘Take your parrot then,” cried the boy; and
with that he wrung the bird’s neck, and threw it at the
magician, and as he did so, Punchkin twisted round, and
with a fearful groan he died.’


guard it are represented by dismal cries
and jeering voices which nssail all who


threshold, There is a wether under
the flag. There is a duck in the


wether's belly, and un egg in the belly
of the duck, and it is in the egg that
may soul i
_ "This portion of the story is found
in the Arabian Nights’ tule of “Lhe wo
Sistore who were jealous of thuir Younger
Sister’ Here also the enchnntments
are overcome by guining possession of a
Tord, and the ‘malignant demons who


uttempt the task. The bird, as in the
Hindu tule, is won by the youngest of
the family, but it ix thy prineoss Parizade
disguised ‘as a man who performa the
exploit, having, like Odysseus, an he
approached the Seiren's lund, filled her
ears with cloth. Nor is the bird leas
mighty than the magician, although he
is not killed off in the same way.


137


CHAP.
Vi.


188


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


In its key-note and ita leeding incidents this story is pre-


eee cisely parallel to the Norse tale of the ‘Giant who bad no
aera Heart in his Body.” Here, as in the Deccan legend, there is
noHeartin @ king who has seven sons, but instead of all seven being


his Body.


“ who are opposed to him.


sent to hunt or woo, the youngest is left at home; and the
vajah whose children they marry: has six daughters, not
seven. This younger brother who stays at home is the
Boota of European folk-lore, a being of infinitely varied
character, and a subject of the highest interest for all who
wish to know whence the Aryan nations obtained the mate-
rials for their epic poems. Seemingly weak and often
despised, he has keener wit and more resolute will than all
Slander and obloquy are to him as
nothing, for he knows that in the end his truth shall be made
clear in the sight of all men. In Dr. Dasent’s words, ‘There
he sits idle whilst all work; there he lies with that deep
irony of conscious power which knows its time must one day
come, and meantime can afford to wait, When that time
comes, he girds himself to the feat amidst the scoff and scorn
of his flesh and blood ; but even then, after he has done some
great deed, he conceals it, returns to his ashes, and again
sits idly by the kitchen fire, dirty, lazy, despised, until the
time for final recognition comes, and then bis dirt and rags
fall off—he stands out in all the majesty of his royal robes,
and is acknowledged once for all a king.’' We see him ina
thousand forms. He is the Herakles on whom the mean


1 Dasent, Norse Tales, cliv. Some of
the stories told of Boots ure very rigni-
ficant, Among the most noteworthy is
Grimm's story of ‘One who travelled to


who tames the pride of the princess as
Indra subdues Duhand; or he is the
countryman who cleste the Jew in the
story of the ‘Guod Burguin’ Ho is the


Jearn what shivoring meant. The stupid
Boy in thie tele shows marvellous
atrength of arm, but he is no more able
to shiver than the sun. At midnight
he ie still quick with the heat of fire,
‘which cannot be cooled even by contact
with thedead. Like Sigurd. he recovers
the treasures in the robber’s keepit

and he learns to shiver only when his
bride pours over im at night » pail of
water full of fish—in other wordy, when
Firlios plunges into the sea us Endym'on.
Elewhere, he in uot only the wanderer
‘or vagabond, but the dischanged soldier,
‘or the stroliing player, who is really the
King Thrushbesrd in the German story,


young king of Easaidh Ruadh in tho
Scottish story, who gete for the giant
the Glaive of Light (Excalibur, or the
spear of Achillens), and who rides a dun
filly, gifted like the hore Xanthos with
the [power of speech, He is the ‘ bald
rough-skinned gillie’ of the amithy in the
Highland tale of "The Brown Bear of
the Green Glen” on whowe head the
mysterious bird alights to point hig out
as the futher of the dawn-child. In the
story of the ‘Three Soldiers' in the ame
collection, be ia the poor soldier who is
wheedied of his three wish-gifta, but
recovering them in the end is seen in his
native majesty.


BOOTS AND CINDERELLA.


39


Burystheus delights to pour contempt; he is Cinderella sit- cHaP.


ting in the dust, while her sisters flaunt their finery abroad
he is the Oidipous who knows nothing,’ yet reads the myste-
rious riddle of the Sphinx; he-is the Phoibos who serves in
the honse of Admétos and the palace of Laomedon; he isthe
Psyche who seeks her lost love almost in despair, and yet
with the hope still living in her that her search shall not be
unsuccessful; above all, he is the Ithakan chief, clothed in
beggar’s rags, flouted by the suitors, putting forth hia strength
for one moment to crush the insolent Arnaios, then sitting
down humbly on the threshold,” recognised only by an old
nurse and his dog, waiting patiently till the time comes that
he shall bend the unerring bow and having slain his enemies
appear once more in glorious garb by the side of a wife as
radiant in beauty as when he left her years ago for a long
and a hard warfare far away. Nay, he even becomes an
idiot, but even in this his greatest humiliation the memory
of his true greatness is never forgotten. Thus the Gaelic
“Lay of the Great Fool’ relates the


Tule of wonder. that was heard without lie,
Of the idivt to whom hosts yield,

A buughty on who yields hot to arms,
Whose name was the mighty fool.


The might of the world he hua seized

In his hands, und it was no rude deod ;

Jt was not the strength of his blude or shield,
Bat that tho mightiest was in his grasp.”


He becomes, of course, the husband of Helen,
The mighty fool is his name,
And his wife is the youog Fairfine ;
The men of the world ure at bis beck,
And the yielding to him was mine;
and the Helen of the story has, of course, her Paris. The
fool goes to sleep, and as he slumbers a Gruagach gives her a
kiss, and like Helen‘ the lady was not ill-pleased that he
came.’ But his coming is for evil Iuck, and the deceiver shall
be well repaid when the fool comes to take vengeance.
Still will I give my vows, .
‘Though thou thiukest mush of thy speech ;


‘When comes the Grueguch of the tissue cloak,
He will repay thee for his wife's kiss.


1 8 yntdy alte Oi8lrous. * Campbell, Tales of the Weat High-
Sophokies, Oid. Tyr. 897. land, ili. 154.


9AM ee In


Vil.


7


140


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


Boots then acts the part of Balna’s son in the Hindu story,


ay while the sorcerer reappears in the Norse tale as a giant, who


Mythical


‘repetitions
and com-


binations.


Agency of
‘bessts in
these


turna the six princes and their wives into stone. The inci-
dent is by no means peculiar to this tale, and the examples
already adduced would alone warrant the assertion that the
whole mass of folk-lore in every country may be resolved into
an endless series of repetitions, combinations, and adapta-
tions of a few leading ideas or of their developements, all
sufficiently resembling each other to leave no doubts of their
fundamental identity, yet so unlike in outward garb and
colouring, so thoroughly natural and vigorous under all their
changes, as to leave no room for any other supposition than
that of a perfectly independent growth from one common
stem. If speaking cf the marvels wrought by musical genius,
Dr. Newman could say, ‘There are seven notes in the scale;
make them thirteen, yet how slender an outfit for so vast an
enterprise,’ ' we may well feel the same astonishment as we
see the mighty harvest of mythical lore which a few seeds
have yielded, and begin to understand how it is that ideas so
repeated, disguised, or travestied never lost their charm, but
find us as ready to listen when they are brought before us for
the hundredth time in a new dress, as when we first made
acquaintance with them.

In the modified machinery of the Norse tale, the remon-
strances addressed to Balna’s son in the Hindu story are
here addressed to Boots, whose kindness to the brute crea~-
tures who become his friends is drawn out in the more full
detail characteristic of Western legends. The Hindu hero
helps eagles only; Boots succours a raven, a salmon, and a
wolf, and the latter having devoured his horse bears him on


1 University Sermons, p. 348. In youthful son of Balna in his disguise is


thece two etrwries the Magician Punchkin
and the Heartiras Giant are manifestly
cooly other forms of the dark beings,
the Panis, who steal away the bright
treasures, whether cows. maidens, or
youths, from the egleaming west. In
each case there is « long for
them ; and us Troy cxnnot fall without
Achilleus, «0 here there is only one who
tan achieve the expluit of reueuing the
beings who have been turned into stone,
86 Niobé is hardened into rock. The


the womanlike Thesens, Dionysus, or
Achilleus. Balun hereo'f imprisoned in
the tower with the soreerer whom she
hetes is Helen shut up in Ilion with
the sedacer whom she loathes: and aa
Helen calle herself the dog-faced, so
Balna is transformed into a dog when
Punehkin leads her away. The oagies
whose young he «aves, like the hemes of
40 many popular tales, are the bright
clouds who bear off litile Surya Bai to
the nest on the tree top.


AGENCY OF BEASTS IN MYTHOLOGY, |


ita back with the speed of light to the house of the giant
who has turned his brothers into stone. Then he finds, not
his mother, like Balna’s son, but the beautiful princess who
is to be his bride, and who promises to find out, if she can,
where the giant keeps his heart, for, wherever it be, it is not
in his body. The colloquies which lead at length to the true
answer exhibit the giant in the more kindly and rollicking
character frequently bestowed on trolls, dwarfs, elves, and
demons, in the mythology of the Western Aryans. The
final anawer corresponds precisely to thatof Punchkin. ‘Far,
far away in a lake lies an island; on that island stands a
church; in that church is a well; in that well swims a duck;
in that duck there is an egg; and in that egg there lies
my heart, you darling.’ His darling takes a tender farewell
of Boots, who sets off on the wolf’s back, to solve, aa in the
Eastern tale, the mystery of the water and the bird. The
wolf takes him to the island ; but the church keys hang high
on the steeple, and the raven is now brought in to perform
an office analogous to that of the young eaglets in the Deccan
legend. At last, by the salmon’s help, the egg is brought
from the bottom of the well where the duck had dropped it.

‘Then the wolf told him to squeeze the egg, and as soon
as ever he squeezed it, the giant screamed out.

* “ Squeeze it again,” said the wolf; and when the prince
did so, the giant screamed still more piteously, and begged
and prayed go prettily to be spared, saying he would do all


1 The constant agency of wolves and
foxes in the German stories at once
suggests a comparison with the Myrmi-
dons whom the Homeri: post so elabo-
rately likens to wolves, with Phoibos
himself as the wolf-god of Zéschylos,
and with the juckal princes of eastern
xtory. In Grimm's story of ‘The Two
Brothers,’ the animals suecoured are
the bure, fox, wolf, and lion, and they
each, asin the Hindn tale, offer their
young as ministers to the hero who has
spared their lives, In the beautiful
legend of the Golden Bird, the youngest
brother and the fox whom by his kind-
nes he secures as his tly, alike repre-
went the disguised chieftain of Trhaka,
and the rajahs of the Hindu stories.
‘The disguise in which the youngest


brother returns home is put on by him-
self, He has exchanged clothes with
Ddeggar; the fox is of course enchanted,
and can only be freed by destroying the
body in which he is imprisoned. Bat
this idea of enchantment would iuevi-
tably be suggested by the magic power
of Athéné in seaming the fuee of Odys-
seus with the wrinkles of a squalid
old age, while the Christianised North-
man would convert Athéné herself into
awitch. In this story the mere preeence
of the dieguised youth, who was supposed
to be murdered, just &e the suitors sup-
posed O:lysseus to be dead, makes the
golden bird begin to sing, the golden
horse begin to eat, and the beaulifal
maiden to cease weeping, The it

opie ping. meaning


141


CHAP.
VILL.


1a


BOOK
L


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


‘that the prince wished if he would only not squeeze his heart


— ~~ in two.


The Two
Brothers.


* “Tell him if he will restore to life again your six brothers
and their brides, you will spare his life,” said the wolf.
Yes, the giant was ready to do that, and he turned the six
brothers into king’s sons again, and their brides into king’s
daughters. «

*« “Now squeeze the egg in two,” said the wolf. So Boots
squeezed the egg to pieces, and the giant burst at once.’

Ifthe morality of myths be a fair matter for compatison,
the Eastern story has here the advantage. Balna’s son
makes no definite promise to the magician ; but a parallel to


” +Punchkin, almost closer than that of the giant, is furnished


Influence
of written
literature
on Folk-
lore,


in Grimm’s story of the Two Brothers, where a witch is
forced to restore all her victims to life. ‘The old witch took
a twig' and changed the stones back to what they were, and
imme‘iately his brother and the beasts stood before the
huntsman, as well as many merchants, workpeople and shep-
herds, who, delighted with their freedom, returned home;
but the twin brothers,’ when they saw each other again,
kissed and embraced and were very glad.’*

‘ The supposition that these stories have been transmitted
laterally is tenable only on the further hypothesis, that, in
every Aryan land, from Eastern India to the Highlands of
Scotland, the folk-lore of the country has had its character
determined by the literature of written books, that in every
land men have handled the stories introduced from other
countries with the deliberate purpose of modifying and adapt-
ing them, and that they have done their work in such a way
as sometimes to leave scarcely a resemblance, at other times
scarcely to effect the smallest change. In no other range of
literature has any such result ever been achieved. In these
stories we have narratives which have confessedly been re-
ceived in the crudest form, if the fable of the Brahman and
the goat is to be taken as the original of the Master Thief,
and which hate been worked up with marvellous vigour and-


"The rod of Kirké. The persons allurements or temptations of the place,
changed into stones represent the com-  * The Dioskouroi, or the Aevins,
jions of Eurylochos. They are petri- _* Gre olso Campbell's Zules of the
ied only because they cannot resist tha Wert Highlands, i. 103.


THEORY OF BORROWED MYTHS.


143


under indefinitely varied forms, not by the scholars who im- OMAP.
ported the volumes of the Kalila and Dimna, or the Exploits ey


of the Romans, but by unknown men among the people.
The tales have been circulated for the most part only among
those who have no books, and many if not most of them have
been made known only of late years for the first time to the
antiquarians and philologists who have devoted their lives
to hunting them out. How then do we find in Teutonic or
Hindu stories not merely incidents which specially charac-
terise the story of Odysseus, but almost the very words in
which they are related in the Odyssey? The task of analys-
ing and comparing these legends is not a light one even for
those who have all the appliances of books and the aid of a
body of men working with them for the same end. Yet old
men and old women reproduce in India and Germany, in Nor-
way, in Scotland, and in Ireland, the most subtle turns of
thought and expression, and an endless series of complicated
narratives, in which the order of incidents and the words of
the speakers are preserved with a fidelity nowhere paral-
leled in the oral tradition of historical events. It may
safely be said that no series of stories introduced in the form
of translations from other languages could ever thus have
filtered down into the lowest strata of society, and thence
have sprung up again, like Antaios, with greater energy and
heightened beauty, and ‘ nursery tales are generally the last
things to be adopted by one nation from auother.’! But it
is not safe to assume on the part of Highland peasants or
Hindu nurses a familiarity with the epical literature of the
Homeric or Vedic poets; and hence the production of actual
evidence in any given race for the independent growth of
popular stories may be received as throwing fresh light on
questions already practically solved, but can scarcely be re-
garded as indispensable. It can scarcely be necessary to
prove that the tale of the Three Snake Leaves was not
derived by the old German storytellers from the pages of
Pausanias, or that Beauty and the Beast was not suggested by
Appuleius. There is nothing therefore which needs to
surprise us in the fact that stories already familiar to the
> Max Miiller, Chips, ii. 216.


iad MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOK weetern Aryans have been brought to us in their eastern
eee versions only as yesterday.
Dees Among such tales is the story, cited by Dr. Dasent, of
Fons, King Putraka, who wandering among the Vindhya moun-


andthe tains finds two men quarreling for the possession of a bowl,
Princesses ‘a staff, and a pair of shoes, and induces them to determine by
eye: running a race whose these things shall be. No sooner have


they started than Putraka puts on the shoes, which give the
power of flight, and vanishes with the staff and bow! also.
The story, which in this form has only recently been made
known im Europe through the translation of the tales of
Somadeva, is merely another version of the old Norse legend.
- of the Three Princesses of Whiteland, in which three brothers
fight for a hundred years about a hat, a cloak, and a pair of
boots, until a king, passing by, prevails on them to let him
try the things, and putting them on, wishes himself away.
The incident, Dr. Dasent adds, is found in Wallachian and
Tartar stories,) while the three gifts come again in the
stories already cited, of the Table, the Ass, and the Stick,
the Lad that went to the North Wind, and the Hindu tale
of the Brahman, the Jackal, and the Barber. But the gifts
themselves are found everywhere. The. shoes are the
sandals of Hermes, the seven-leagued boots of Jack the
Giant Killer ;* the hat is the helmet of Hudes, the Tarn-
Kappe of the Nibelungen Licd;? in the staff we have the
rod of Kirké, and in the bowl that emblem of fertility and
life which meets us at every turn, from the holy vessel


"2c occurs also in the German
legend of ‘The King of the Golden
Mountain.’ In the story of Gyges
(Pinto, Pol. 360), this power of making
the wonrer inviaible residen in # ring,
which he discovers far beneath the sur-
face of the earth. This ring enables
him to corrupt the wife of Kandaules,
and eo te become master of the Lydian
Kingdom ; and thus it belongs to the
number ‘of mysterious rings which
represent the Hindu Yoni, See also
the Gnelic tale ‘of ‘Conal Crovi.'
Compbell, i. 133. The triple power of
-wivh is invested in the stone given by
he dwaef fo Thorstor.  Keightley,
Fairy Mythology, 7).

2 The ladder by which Jack asconds


to heaven is not peculiar to this story.
It is possibly only another form of the
of Heimdall, ‘Mr. Tylor’
says Professor Max Miller, ‘ aptly
compares the [Mandun] fuble of the vine
and the fat woman with the story of
Jack and the Bean Stalk, and he
brings other stories from Malay and
Polynesinn districts embodying the same
idea, Among the different ways by
which it was thought possible to ascend
from earth to heaven, Mr, Tylor men-
tions the rank wpenrgrass, @ rope o
thong. a spider's web,  Indder of iron
or guia, column of smoke, or the rain-
‘Chips, ii. 268.
ay "Hv, B45.


IMPORTATION OF MYTHS.


139


family.! A series of incidents such as these could never have (CHAP.
been thought out by two brains working apart from each


other; and we are driven


to admit that at least the


machinery by which the result was to be brought about had
een devised before the separation, or to maintain that the
story has in the one case or in the other been imported
bodily. Probably no instance could be adduced in which a
borrowed story differs so widely from the original. In all
cases of adaptation the borrower either improves upon the
idea or weakens it. Here both the stories exhibit equally
clear tokens of vigorous and independent growth.?

But the story of the nautch-girl is only one incident in a


larger drama.
sparrow ; the parrot which bri


The bird of the German tale is a common


ings about the death of Champa


Ranee is nothing less than the Maharajah Vicram, who has


i \ gine from a German Workshop,

* It ia acarcely an exaggeration to
say that there is scarcely one important
feature of the Hindu popular stories
which are not to be found in thove of
Germany and Scandinavia, and which
are not repeated in Celtic traditions.
Tn each caso the story is the same, yet
not the same, and the main question
‘becomes one rather of historical than of
philological evidence. ‘he substantrl
adentity of the tales is indisputable ;
and if the fact be thet these stories
were in the possession of Germans and
Norwegians, Irishmen and Scottish
Highlanders, long before any systematic
attempt was made to commit to writing
and publish the folklore of Europe, the
further conclusion is also involved that
these stories do not owe their diffusion
to book-learning; and assuredly the
commercial intercourse which would ac-
count for them implies an amount and
4 frequency of communication beyond
that of the most stirring und enter-
prising nations of the presoat day. “Mr.
ampbell, in his invaluable collection
of Popwar Tales of the West High-
lands, divmiseos the hypothesis as
wholly untenable. Of the notion that
theso Highland traditions may hare
Sprung up sinca the publication of
Grimm's and Dasent’s evilections of
German and Norse tales, he asserts
that & manuecript lent to him by the
tranalator proves that the stories were


VOL. 1.


known in Scotland before these transla
tiona were made public (vol. i. p. xlvi),
nod adds, reasonably enough, that
* when all the narrators agree in
that they have Known these
their lives, and when the variation is 80
marked, the resemblance iv rather to be
attributed to common ot than to
books’ (id. rlviii) More definitely he
asserts, * After working for @ year and
weighing all the evidence that has come
in my wav, I have come to agree with
those who hold that popular tales are
genersliy pure traditions’ (ib. 227).
The care with which he examined
the large body of Celtic traditions,
gives his judgement the greatest weight,
and fully justifies bis conclusion that
“popular tales are woven together 12 &
petwork which seems to pervade the
world, and to be fastened 10 everything
in it. Tradition, buoks, history, an
mythology lung together; no ‘sooner
has the net been freed from one snag,
and 2 me-h gamed, than another mesh
is discovered; und 0, unless many
bands combine, the met und the con-
tents will never be brought to shore”
(ib 229). It is not a little startling to
find that. the so-called classica! mytho-
logy of the Greeks, in which the myth
of Paychd was supposed to be almost
the only popular tale accidentally pre-
to us, contains the germs, and
more than the germs, of nearly every
story in the popular traditions of Ger
many, Norway, India, and Sootland,


x


VHI.
—


‘The stories
of Vicram
and Her-
motimos,


130


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


Book received from the god of wisdom the power of transporting
pea ee his soul into any other body, while by an antidote he keeps


his own body from corraption. And here we are brought to
® parallelism which cannot be accounted for on any theory
of medieval importation. The story of Vicram is essentially
the story of Hermotimos of Klazomenai, whose soul wanders
at will through space, while his body remains undecayed at
home, until his wife, tired out by his repeated desertions,
burns his body while he is away, and thus effectually prevents
his resuming his proper form. A popular Deccan tale, which
is also told by Pliny and Lucian, must have existed, if only in


, & rudimentary state, while Greeks and Hindus still lived as


a single people. Buta genuine humour, of which we have
little more than a faint germ in the Greek legend, rune
through the Hindu story. In both the wife is vexed by the
frequent absence of her husband: but the real fun of the
Deccan tale rises from the complications produced by the
carpenter’s son, who overhears the god Gunputti as he
teaches Vicram the mystic words which enable him to pass
from his own body into another; but as he could not see
the antidote which Vicram received to keep his tenantless
body from decay, the carpenter’s son was but half enlightened,
No sooner, however, had Vicram transferred his soul to the
parrot’s body, than the carpeuter’s son entered the body of
Vicram, and the work of corruption began in his own, The
pseudo-rajah is at once detected by the Wuzeer Butti, who
stands to Vicram in the relation of Patroklos to Achilleus,
or of Theseus to Peirithods, and who recommends the whole
court to show a cold shoulder to the impostor, and make his
sojourn in Vicram’s body as unpleasant as possible. Worn
out at last with waiting, Butti sets off to search for hia friend,
and by good luck is one of the throng assembled to witness
the ascension of Champa Ranee. Butti recognises his friend,
and at once puta him into safe keeping in a cage. On
reaching home it became necessary to get the carpenter’s
son out of Vicram’s body, and the Wuzeer, foreseeing that
this would be no easy task, proposes a butting match between
two rams, the one belonging to himself, the other to the
pseudo-rajah. Butti accordingly submits his own ram to a


MYTHS OF THE WINTER.


training, which greatly hardens his horns; and so when the
fight began, the pretended rajah, seeing to his wexation that
his fevourite was getting the worst in the battle, transported
his soul into the ram’s body, to add to its strength and reso-
Tntion. No sooner was this done, than Vicram left the
parrot’s body and re-entered his own, and Butti, slaying the
defeated ram, put an end to the life of the carpenter’s son,
by leaving him no body in which to take up his-abode. But
fresh troubles were in store for Butti; and these troubles:
take us back to: the legends of Brynhild and Persephoné, of
Tammuz, Adonis, and Osiris. Not yet cured of his wandering
propensities, Vicram goes to sleep in 2 jungle with his mouth
open, into which creeps a cobra who refuses to be dislodged
~—the deadly snake of winter and darkness, which stings the
beautifal Eurydiké, and lies coiled around the maiden on the
glistening heath, The rajah, in his intolerable misery, leaves:
his home, just as Persephoné is taken away from Démétér,
and Butti seeka him in vain for twelve years (the ten years
of the ‘struggle at Lion), as he roams in the disguise of a
fakeer. Meanwhile, the beautiful Buccoulee, who had recog-
nised her destined husband under his squalid rags as Eury-
Keia recognises Odysseus, had succeeded in freeing Vicram
from his tormentor, and thus all three returned to the long
forsaken Anar Ranee. But before we examine incidents
which take us into the more strictly mythical regions of
Aryan folk-lore, it is necessary to show how large is that
class of stories to which the tale of the Dancing Girl and the
‘Woodeutter belongs. There are some which are even more
remarkable for their agreement in the general acheme with
thorough divergence in detail.

In the story entitled, ‘The Table, the Ass, and the Stick’
in Grimm’s collection, a goat, whose appetite cannot be
satisfied, brings e tailor into grievous trouble by leading him
to drive his three sons away from their home on groundless.
charges, At last, finding that he had been cheated, he
scourges the goat, which makes the beat of its way from his
dwelling. Meanwhile, the three sons had each been learning
a@ trade, and each received his reward. To the eldest son was
given a table, which at the words ‘Cover thyself,’ at once


181


one


LS


‘The Table,
the Ase,
wand the
Stick.


"182


MYTHOLOGY OF THR ABYAN NATIONS.


BOOK ‘presented a magnificent banquet; the second received a
er a donkey, which on hearing the word ‘Bricklebrit’ rained


down geld pieces, and- both were deprived of their gifts by a
thievich innkeeper, to whom they had in succession revealed
their secret. On reaching home, the eldest son, boasting to
his father of his inexhaustible teble, waa discomfited by
finding that some common table had been put in its place;
and the second in like manner, in making trial of his ass,
found himself in possession of a very ordinary donkey. But
the youngest son had not yet returned, and to him they sent
word ef the scurvy behaviour of the innkeeper. When the
time of the third son’s departure came, his master gave him
@ sack, adding“ In it there lies a stick.” The young man.
took the sack as a thing that might do him good service,
but asked why he should take the stick, as it only made the
sack heavier to carry. The stick, however, was endowed
with the power of jumping out of the sack and belabouring
any one against whom its owner had a grudge. Thus armed,
the youth went cheerfully to the house of the innkeeper, who,
thinking that the sack must certainly contain treasure, tried
to'take it from the young man’s pillow while be slept. But
he had reckoned without his host. The stick hears the fatal
word, and at once falls without mercy on the thief, who
roars out that he will surrender the table and the ass. Thus


the power of becoming more beautiful


1 This donkey is, in fact, Midas, at
whose touch everything turns to gold —
a myth which reappears in the Irish
tradition of Lavra Tomarech who had
horse's ears, as Midas had those of an
‘ass. ‘Tho reeds betrayed the secret in
the case of Midas ; the barber of Lavra
whispered the secret in the Irish story
to a willow; the willow was cut down,
and the harp made of the wood mer-
mured ‘Lavra Loin, has horse's
cars’ (Fergusson, The irish defore the
Conquest.) The horse and the ass
donttless represent the Harits of Hindu
mythology ; the production of gold (the
golden light) by the eun or the dawn
recurs again and again in Aryan
legends. In Grimm's story of the
‘Three Little Men in the Wood,’ the
kindly dawn-child abares her bread
with ‘the dwarfs, who, as in the Vol-
gung tale, guard the treasures of the
earth, and in return they grant to her


every day, and that u piece of guid shall
fall out of her mouth every word that
sho spenks. But the has a stepsister,
the winter, who, not having her kindly
feelings, refuses to share her bread with
the dwarfs, who decree that she shall
grow more ugly every duy, aud that
toads sbull spring from her mouth
whenever sho speaks, Thia is tho
story of ‘Bushy Bride’ in Dacent’s
Borte Talce. The dawn-children re-
appear io the story of Hanee! and
Grethel, who, wandering into the forest
(of night or winter}, come upon a house
with windows made of clesr sugor (ice),
where they fall into the power of «
witeh (Havien), who, like the dwarfs,
guards the hoard of trensure. The old
‘witch is destroyed by Grethel after the
fashion of the cannibal in the Zulu
tale, (Max Miller, Chips, ii. 214.)


GERMAN AND HINDU TALES. : : 138


the three gifts reach the teilor’s house.' As for the goat, CHAP.
whose head the tailor had shaven, it ran into a fox’s house, ——-~_
where « bee stung its bald pate, and it rushed out, never to

be heard of again.

In the Deccan tale we have a jackal and a barber in the The
place of the goat and the tailor: and the mischief is done, Batman
not by leading the barber to expel: his children, but by cheat- ed tbe
ing him of the fruits of bis garden. The parallel, however,
is not confined to the fact of the false pretences; the barber
retaliates, like the tailor, and inflicts a severe wound on the
jackal. As before, in the German story, the goat is a goat;
but the jackal is a transformed rajah, none other in short
than the Beast who is wedded to Beauty and the monster
who becomes the husband of Psyche, and thus even this
story lies within the magie circle of strictly mythical tradi-
tion. But before he wins his bride, the jackal-rajah is
reduced to sore straits, and his adventures give occasion
tor some sharp satire on Hindu popular theology. Coming
across a bullock’s carcass, the jackal eats his way into it,
while the sun so contracts the hide that he finds himself
unable to get out. Fearing to be killed if discovered, or
to be buried alive if he escaped notice, the jackal, on the
approach of the scavengers, cries out, ‘Take care, good
people, how you touch me, for I am a great saint.’ The
mahars in terror ask him who he is, and what he wants.

‘I, answered the jackal, ‘am a very holy saint. I am also
the god of your village, and I am very angry with you,
because you never worship me nor bring me offerings.’ ‘O
ay lord,’ they cried, ‘what offerings will please you? Tell
us only, and we will bring you whatever you like.’ “Good,”
said the jackal; ‘then you must fetch hither plenty of rice,
plenty of fiowers, and a nice fat chicken: place them as an
offering beside me, and pour a great deal of water over them,
as you do at your most solemn feasts, and then I will forgive
you your sins.” The wetting, of course, splits the dry
bullock’s skin, and the jackal, jumping out, runs with the
chicken in his mouth to the jungle. When again he was


» The Norse atory of ‘The Lad who went to the North Wind’ turns on the
same machinery,


134


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK nearly starved, he heard a Brahman bewailing his poverty,
—~—~ and declaring that if a dog or a jackal were to offer to marry


one of his daughters, he should have her—an eagerness in
complete contrast with the reluctance of the merchant who
is obliged to surrender his child to the beast, The jackal
takes him at his word, and leads his wife away to a splendid
subterranean palace, where she finds that each night the
jackal lays aside his skin, and becomes a beautiful young
man. Soon the Brahman comes to the jackal’s cave to see
how his child gets on; but just as he is about to enter, the
jackal stops him, and, learning his wants, gives him a melon,
the‘ seeds of which will bring him some money. A neighbour,
admiring the fruit produced from these seeds, buys some from
the Brahman’s wife, and finding that they are full of diamonds,
pearls and rubies, purchases the whole stock, until the Brah-
man himself opens a small withered melon, and learns how
he kas been overreached. In vain he asks restitution from
the woman who has bought them; she knows nothing of
any miraculous melons, and a jeweller to whom he takes the
jewels from the withered melon, accuses him of having stolen
the gems from his shop, and impounds them all. Again
the Brahman betakes himself to the jackal, who, seeing the
uselessness of giving him gold or jewels, brings him out a jar
which is always full of good things.' The Brahman now
lived in luxury; but another Brahman informed the rajah of
the royal style in which his once poorer neighbour feasted,
and the rajah appropriated the jar for his own special use.
‘When once again he carried this story of his wrongs to his


sson-in-law, the jackal gave him another jar, within which


was a rope and a stick, which would perform their work of
chastisement as soon as the jar was opened. Uncovering


the jar while he was alone, the Brahman had cause to repent


his rashness, for every bone in his body was left aching.
With this personal experience of the powers of the stick, the
Brahman generously invited the rajah and his brother


\ This jer is, of conrse, the horn of eerves an the source of life and wealth
Amaltheia, the nupkin of Rhydderch, will ba more fiily examined when we


the never-failing table of the Ethiopi ivi

the cep of the Mees wile Th ths Giip Argo,” Bos the’ section oa the
Hinde legend; Lut the countless forms
aseumed by the mysterious vessel which


ap the section on the
‘Vivifying Sun. Book 1, ch. ji,


Wish.


Brahman to come and test the virtues of his new gift; and a
belabouring as hearty as that which the wicked innkeeper
received in the German tale made them yield up the dinner-
making jar. The same wholesome measure Jed to the re-
covery of the precious stones from the jeweller, and the
melons from the woman who had bought them. It only
remained now, by burning the enchanted rajah’s jackal-skin,
the lion-skin of Herakles, to transform him permanently into
the most splendid prince ever seen on eartb.'

The independent growth of these tales from a common
framework is still more conclusively proved by the fact that
the agreement of the Norse with the Hindu legend is far
more close and striking than the likeness which it bears to
the German story. In the Norse version we have not three
brothers, but one lad, who represents the Brahman; and in
the Norse and Hindu stories alike, the being who does the
wrong is the one who bestows the three mysterious gifts.
The goat in the German version is simply mischievous: in
the Norse tale, the North Wind, which blows away the poor
woman's meal, bestows on her sou the banquet-making cloth,
the money-coining ram, and the magic stick.* ‘he jackal
and the cloth are thus alike endowed with the mysterious
power of the Teutonic Wish. This power is exhibited under
a thousand forms, among which cups, horns, jars, and basins
hold the most conspicuous place, and point to the earliest
symbol used for the expression of the idea.

The points of likeness and difference between the Hindu


story of Punchkin and the Norse tale of the ‘Giant who had 7:


no Heart in his Body’ are perhaps still more striking. In the
former a rajah has seven daughters, whose mother dies while
they are still children, and a stepmother so persecutes them


‘Yn the mythology of Northern hax been supposed (Nork, Aeal-Wor-
Burope the lion-skin becomes a bear der/uch, wv.) to point to mulgeo, muleeo,
sack, und thus, necording to the story and thus to denote the wizend or the
of Porphyry, Zulmoxis, the mythical sorverer. The story of his remaining
legislator of the Getsi, was 3 Berserkr, e, and then
as having been clothed in a bearvkin us
soon as he was born. Probably the . mn th
explinotion is whost a2 trustworthy as phové, Adonis, Buldor, Osiris, and other
that which traces the name Tritogencia “ deities of tho waxing and waning year.
to ® Cretan word trito, mesning head. —* Dasent, Zales from the Noree, xciv.
‘The other form of the name, Zamolsis, exli, 266,


135


CHAP,


‘Lad who
went
to the


Wind.


The etory
of Puneh-


186


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


ROOK that they make their escape. In the jungle they are found


ee


by the seven sons of a neighbouring king, who are hunting ;
and each takes one of the princesses as a wife, the handsomest


‘of course marrying the youngest. After a brief time of


happiness, the eldest prince sets off on a journey, and does
not return. His six brothers follow him, and are seen no
more. After this, as Balna, the youngest princess, rocks her
babe in his cradle, a fakeer makes his appearance, and having
vainly asked ber to marry him, transforms her into a dog,
and leads her away. As he grows older, Balna’s son learns
how his parents and uncles have disappeared, and resolves to
go in search of them. His aunts beseech him not to do so;
but the youth feels sure that he will bring them all back, and
at length he finds his way to the house of a gardener, whose
wife, on hearing his story, tells him that his futher and uncles
have all been turned into stone by the great magician
Punchkin, who keeps Balna herself imprisoned in a high
tower because she will not marry him. To aid him in his
task, the gardener’s wife disguises him in her daughtery’s
dress, and gives him a basket of flowers as a present for the
eaptive princess. Thus arrayed, the youth is admitted to
her presence, and while none are looking, he makes himself
known to his mother by means of a ring which she had left
on his finger before the sorcerer stole her away. But the
rescue of the seven princes seemed to be as far off as ever,
and the young man suggests that Balna should now change
her tactics, and by playing the part of Delilah to Samson,
find out where his power lies, and whether he is subject to
death. The device is successful, and the sorcerer betrays the
secret.

‘Far away, far away, hundreds of thousands of miles away
from this, there lies a desolate country covered with thick
jungle. In the midst of the jungle grows a circle of palm
trees, and in the centre of the jungle stand six jars full of
water, piled one above another; below the sixth jar isa small
cage which contains a little green parrot; on the life of the
parrot depends my life, and if the parrot is killed I must die.’!


| In the Gaelic story of the ‘Young this story, thie puzsle is thus put,
King of Exsaidh Ruadb,’ which contains ‘There is great dugatone under the


HANDU AND ARABIAN STORIES. 187


But this keep is guarded by myriads of evil demons, and CRAP.
Balna tries hard to dissuade her son from the yenture. He peal
is resolute, and he finds true helpers in some eagles whose
young he saves by killing a large serpent which was making
its way to their nest. The parent birds give him their young
to be his servants, and the eaglets, crossing their wings,
bear him through the air to the spot where the six water
jars are standing. In an instant he upsets the jar, and
snatching the parrot from his cage, rolls him up in his
cloak. The magician in his dismay at seeing the parrot in
the youth’s hands yields to every demand made by him, and
not only the seven princes but all his other victims are
restored to life—a magnificent array of kings, courtiers,
officers, and servants.! Still the magician prayed to have
his parrot given to him.

‘Then the boy took hold of the parrot, and tore off one of
his wings, and when he did so, the magician’s right arm fell
off.
*Punchkin then stretched out his left arm, erying, “ Give

me my parrot.” The prince pulled off the parrot’s second

wing and the magician’s left arm tumbled off.

* “Give me my parrot,” cried he, and fell on his knees. The
prince pulled off the parrot’s right leg, the magician’s right
leg fell off; the prince pulled off the parrot’s left leg, down
fell the magician’s left.

‘Nothing remained of him save the limbless body and the
head; but still he rolled his eyes, and cried, “Give me my
parrot!” ‘Take your parrot then,” cried the boy; and

. With that he wrung the bird’s neck, and threw it at the
magician, and as he did so, Punchkin twisted round, and
with a fearful groan he died.’
threshold, There is a wether under


the fag. ‘There is a duck in the
wether'y belly, und an ogg in the belly


guard it are represented by dismal eries
and jeering votes which assuil ull who
attempt the toxk. ‘The bird, as in the


of the duck, and it ia in the egg that
my soul is."

\ 'Thia portion of the story ie found
in the Arabian Nights’ tale of ‘The two
Sistors who were jealous of their Younger
Sister,’ Hore also the enchammeuts
are otercome by guining possession of a
bird, and the malignant demons who


‘Hindu tale, is won by the youngest of
the family, but itis the princess Purizade
disguised as a man Sho performs the
explort, having, like Odysaens, as he
approached the Seiren’s lund, filled her
eara with cloth. Nor is the bird leas
mighty than the magician, although he
is not killed off in the eame way.


188 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


moe Tn its key-note and its leading incidents this story is pre-
—~— cisely parallel to the Norse tale of the ‘Giant who had no
feed ed Heart in his Body. Here, as in the Deccan legend, there is
noHeartin @ king who has seven sons, but instead of all seven being
his Body. gent to hunt or woo, the youngest is left at home; and the
rajah whose children they marry has six daughters, not

seven. This younger brother who stays at home is the

Boots of European folk-lore, a being of infinitely varied
character, and a subject of the highest interest for all who

wish to know whence the Aryan nations obtained the mate-

rials for their epic poems. © Seemingly weak and often

_ despised, he has keener wit and more resolute will than all

who are opposed to him. Slander and obloquy are to him as
nothing, for he knows that in the end his truth shall be made

clear in the sight of all men. In Dr. Dasent’s words, ‘ There

he sits idle whilst all work; there he lies with that deep

irony of conscious power which knows its time must one day

come, and meantime can afford to wait. When that time

comes, he girds himself to the feat amidst the scoff and scorn

of his flesh and blood ; but even then, after he has done some

great deed, he conceals it, returns to his asbes, and again

site idly by the kitchen fire, dirty, lazy, despised, until the

time for final recognition comes, and then his dirt and rags

fall off—he stands out in all the majesty of his royal robes,

and is acknowledged once for all a king.’! We see him ina
thousand forms. He is the Herakles on whom the mean


" Dasent, Norse Tales, cliv. Some of
‘the stories told of Boots ure very signi-
ficant. Among the most noteworthy is
Grimm's story of ‘One who travelled to


who tames the pride of the princess as
Indra wubdoes Duhan&; or he is the
countryman who cheats the Jew in the
story of the ‘Good Burgnin’ He is the ,


Joarn what shivering raeant. The stupid
boy in this tale shows murvellous
strength of urm, bot he is no more able
to shiver than the eun. At midnight
he is still quick with the heat of fire,
which cannot be cooled even by contact
with thedead. Like Sigurd, he recovers
the treasures in the robber’s keeping,
and be learns to shiver only when his
bride pours overehim at night a pail of
water full of fi-h—in other words, when
Helios plunges into the seu ax Endym on.
Elsewhere, be is not only the wanderer
or vagabond, bot the discharged soldier,
or the strolling player, who is reully the
king Thrushbeatd in the German story,


young king of Eassidh Ruadh in the
Scottish story, who gets for the giant
the Glaive of Light (Excalibur, or the
spear of Achilleus), and who rides a dun
filly, gifted like the horse Xunthos with
the ‘power of speech. Ho is the ‘bald
Tough-skinned gillie’ of the smithy in the
Highland tale of ‘The Brown Hear of
the Green Glen, on whose head the
mysterivus bird alights to point. him out
as the father of the dawn-child. Inthe
story of the ‘Three Soldiers’ in the same
collection, he is the poor soldier who ia
wheedied of his three wikh-gifte, but
recovering them in the end is seen ia hiv
native majesty.


BOOTS AND CINDERELLA.


139


Burystheus delights to pour contempt; he is Cinderella sit- CHAP.


ting in the dust, while her sisters flaunt their finery abroad ;
he is the Oidipous who knows nothing,’ yet reada the myste-
rious riddle of the Sphinx; he is the Phoibos who serves in
the house of Admétos and the palace of Laomedon; he isthe
Psyche who seeks her lost love almost in despair, and yet
with the hope still living in her that her search shall not be
unsuccessful; above all, he is the Ithakan chief, clothed in
beggar’s rags, flouted by the suitors, putting forth his strength
for one moment to crush the, insolent Arnaios, then sitting
down humbly on the threshold, recognised only by an old
nurse and his dog, waiting patiently till the time comes that
he shall bend the unerring bow and having slain his enemies
appear once more in glorious garb by the side of a wife as
radiant in beauty as when he left her years ago for a long
and a hard warfare far away. Nay, he even becomes an
idiot, but even in this his greatest humiliation the memory
of his true greatness is never forgotten. Thus the Gaelic
‘Lay of the Great Fool’ relates the


Talo of wonder. that was heard without lie,
Of the idiot to whom hoste yield,

A haughty aon who yields not to arma,
‘Whose name was the mighty fool.


‘Tho might of the world he had seized

In his hands, and it was no rude deed ;

It was not the strength uf hix blade or shield,
But that the mightiest was in his grasp.”


He becomes, of course, the husband of Helen,
The mighty fool is his name,
And his wife is tho young Fairfine;
‘The men of the world ure ut his beck,
‘And the yielding to him was mine;
and the Helen of the story has, of course, her Paris. The
fool goes to sleep, and as he sJumbers a Graagach gives her
kiss, and like Helen‘ the lady was not ill-pleased that he
came.’ But hie coming is for evil luck, and the deceiver shall
be well repaid when the fool comes to take vengeance.


Still will I give my vows, .
Though thon thivkest much of thy speech ;
‘When comes the Gruagach of the tissue cloak,
He will repay thee for bis wife's kiss.


2 8 pm liv eldds OWBlrovs. * Campbell, Talee of the West High-
Sophokles, Gid. Tyr. 397. lands, iii, 154.


VIii.


i


140


BOOK
L
aati
Mythical
repetitions
and com-
binations.


Agency of
beaste in


stories.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


Boots then acts the part of Balna’s son in the Hindu story,
while the sorcerer reappears in the Norse tale as a giant, who
turne the six princes and their wives into stone. The inci-
dent is by no means peculiar to this tale, and the examples
already adduced would alone warrant the assertion that the
whole mass of folk-lore in every country may be resolved into
an endless series of repetitions, combinations, and adapta-
tions of a few leading ideas or of their developements, all
sufficiently resembling each other to leave no doubts of their
fondamental identity, yet 20 unlike in outward garb and
colouring, so thoroughly natural and vigorous under all their
changes, as to leave no room for any other supposition than
that of a perfectly independent growth from one common
stem. If speaking of the marvels wrought by musical geniua,
Dr. Newman could say, ‘There are seven notes in the scale;
make them thirteen, yet how slender an outfit for ao vast an
enterprise,’ we may well feel the same astonishment as we
see the mighty harvest of mythical lore which a few seeds
have yielded, and begin to understand how it is that ideas so
repeated, disguised, or travestied never lost their charm, but
find us as ready to listen when they are brought before us for
the hundredth time in a new dress, as when we first made
acqnaintance with them.

Tn the modified machinery of the Norse tale, the remon-
strances addressed to Balna’s son in the Hindu story are
here addressed to Boots, whose kindness to the brute crea-
tures who become his friends is drawn out in the more full
detail characteristic of Western legends. The Hindu hero
helps eagles only; Boots succours a raven, a salmon, and a
wolf, and the latter having devoured his horse bears him on


+ University Sermons, p. 348, In youthful son of Balna in his disguise is


these two storien the Magician Punchkin
and the Heartless Giant are manifestly
only other forms of the dark beings,
the Pagie, who etral away the bright
treasures, whether cows, maidens, ot
youths, from the gleaming west. In
fench case there is a Jong search for
them ; and us Troy cxnnot fill without
Achilleus, so here there is only one who
ean achieve the expluit of reacuing the
beings who huve been turned into stone,
as Niob& ia hardened into rock. The


the womanlike Theseus, Dionysus, or
Achilleus. Balna herself imprisoned in
the tower with the sorcerer whom she
hates is Helen shut up in Lion with
the seducer whom she loatles; and aa
Helen calle herself the dog-facet, so
Balna is transformed into a dog when
Punchkin leads her away. The eagles
whose young he saves, like the heroes of
so many popular tales, are the hright
clouds who bear off little Surya Bai to
the nest on the tree top.


AGENCY OF BEASTS IN MYTHOLOGY.


ite back with the speed of light to the house of the giant *
who bas turned his brothers into stone.'
his mother, like Balna’s son, but the beautiful princess who
is to be his bride, and who promises to find out, if she can,
where the giant keeps his heart, for, wherever it be, it is not
in his body. The colloquies which lead at length te the true
answer exhibit the giant in the more kindly and rollicking
character frequently bestowed on trolls, dwarfs, elves, and
demons, in the mythology of the Western Aryans. The
final answer corresponds precisely to that of Punchkin. ‘Far,
far away in a lake lies an island; on that island stands a
church; in that church is a well; in that well swims aduack;
in that duck there is an egg; and in that egg there lies
my heart, you darling.’ His darling takes a tender farewell
of Boots, who sets off on the wolf’s back, to solve, as in the
Eastern tale, the mystery of the water and the bird. The
wolf takes him to the island; but the church keys hang high
on the steeple, and the raven is now brought in to perform
an office analogous to that of the young eaglets in the Deccan
legend. At last, by the salmon’s help, the egg is brought
from the bottom of the well where the duck had dropped it.

‘Then the wolf told him to squeeze the egg, and as soon
as ever he squeezed it, the giant screamed out.

¢ & Squeeze it again,” said the wolf; and when the prince
did so, the giant screamed still more piteously, and begged
and prayed so prettily to be spared, saying he would do all


brother returns home is put on by him-


1 ‘The constant agency of wolves and
self. He has exchanged clothes with »


foxes in the German storics at once


suggests @ comparison with the Myrmi-
dons whom the Homerie poet so elato-
rately likens to wolves, with Phoibos
himself as the wolf-god of Exchyloe,
and with the jackal prioces of cater
story. In Grimm's story of “The Two
Brothers,’ the animals succoured ore
the hare, fox, wolf, and lion, and they
each, asin the Hindn tele, offer their
young as ministers to the hero who has
apared their lives. In the beautiful
legend of the Golden Bird, the youngest
brother and the fox whom by his kind-
neas he secures a4 hi@ ally, alike repre-
sent the disguised chieftain of Ithaka,
aid the rajaba of the Hindu stories,
The disguice in which the youngest


beggar; the fox is of course enchanted,
and can only be freed by destroying the
body in which he is imprisuned. “But
this idea of enchantment would inevi-
tably be suggested by the magic power
of Athéné in seaming the face of Odys-
seus with the wrinkles of a squalid
old age, while the Cliristianised North-
‘man would convert Athénd herself into
awiteh, {n this etory the mere presence
of the disguised youth, ho was supposed
to be murdered, just a8 the suitors
posed Oulyssous'to be dead, Tnakee the
golden bird begin to sing, the golden
horse begin to eat, and the beantifal
maiden to cease weeping, ‘Phe mesning
is obvious.


“ir


CHAP.
VIEL


Then he finds, nob —_—_


142


BOOK”


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


that the prince wished if he would only not squeeze his heart


—~— in two.


‘The Two
Brothers.


Influence
of written
literature
on Folk-


* «Tell him if he will restore to life again your six brothers |
and their brides, you will spare his life,” said the wolf.
Yes, the giant was ready to do that, and he turned the six
brothers into king’s sons again, and their brides into king’s
daughters.

* “Now squeeze the egg in two,” said the wolf. So Boots
squeezed the egg to pieces, and the giant burst at once.’

If the morality of myths be a fair matter for comparison,
the Eastern story has here the advantage. Balna’s son
makes no definite promise to the magician ; but a parallel to


“Panchkin, almost closer than that of the giant, is furnished


in Grimm’s story of the Two Brothers, where a witch is
forced to restore all her victims to life. ‘The old witch took
a twig! and changed the stones back to whet they were, and
immediately his brother and the beasts atood before the
hunteman, as well as many merchants, workpeople and shep-
herds, who, delighted with their freedom, returned home;
but the twin brothers,’ when they saw each other again,
kissed and embraced and were very glad.’*

The supposition that these stories have been transmitted
laterally is tenable only on the further hypothesis, that in
every Aryan land, from Eastern India to the Highlands of
Scotland, the folk-lore of the country has had its character
determined by the literature of written books, that in every
Jand men have handled the stories introduced from other
countries with the deliberate purpose of modifying and adapt-
ing them, and that they have done their work in such a way
as sometimes to leave scarcely a resemblance, at other times
scarcely to effect the smallest change. In no other range of
literature has any such result ever been achieved. In these
stories we have narratives which have confessedly been re-
ceived in the crudest form, if the fable of the Brahman and
the goat is to be taken as the original of the Master Thief,
and which have been worked up with marvellous vigour and


} Tho rod of Kirk&, The allurements or temptations of the place.
changed into stones represent the com- —? The Dioskouroi, or the Asvins,
anions of Enrylochos. ‘They are petri _* Bee also Campbell's ules of the

only because they cannot resist the West Highlands, i. 103.


THEORY OF BORROWED MYTHS.


143


under indefinitely varied forms, not by the scholars who im- CHAR,
ported the volumes of the Kalila and Dimna, or the Exploits Palais


of the Romans, but by unknown men among the people.

The tales have been circulated for the most part only among
those who have no books, and many if not most of them have
been made known only of late years for the first time to the
antiquarians end philologists who have devoted their lives
to hunting them out. How then do we find in Teutonic or
Hindu stories vot merely incidents which specially charac-
terise the story of Odysseus, but almost the very words in
which they are related in the Odyssey? The task of analys-
ing and comparing these legends is not a light one even for
those who have all the appliances of books and the aid of a
body of men working with them for the same end. Yet old
men and old women reproduce in India and Germany, in Nor-
way, in Scotland, and in Ireland, the most subtle turns of
thought and expression, and an endless series of complicated
narratives, in which the order of incidents and the words of
the apeakers are preserved with a fidelity nowhere paral-
leled in the oral tradition of historical events. It may
safely be said that no series of stories introduced in the form
of translations from other languages could ever thus have
filtered down into the lowest strata of society, and thence
have sprung up again, like Antaios, with greater energy and
heightened beauty, and ‘ nursery tales are generally the last
things to be adopted by one nation from another.’’ But it
is not safe to assume on the part of Highland peasants or
Hindu nurses a familiarity with the epical literature of the
Homeric or Vedic poets ; and hence the production of actual
evidence in any given race for the independent growth of
popular stories may be received as throwing fresh light on
questions already practically solved, but can scarcely be re-
garded as indispensable. It can scarcely be necessary to
prove that the tale of the Three Snake Leaves was not
derived by the old German storytellers from the pages of
Pausaniaa, or that Beauty and the Beast was not tuggested by
Appuleius. There is nothing therefore which needs to
surprise us in the fact that stories already familiar to the

1 Max Miller, Chips, ii. 216.


Yas
BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


western Aryans have been brought to us in their eastern


—~— versions only as yesterday.
The stories Among auch tales is the story, cited by Dr. Dasent, of ,


of King
Patraka,
and the
Three
Princesses
of White-
dond.


King Putrake, who wandering among the Vindhya moun-
tains finds two men quarreling for the possession of a bowl,
astaff, and a pair of shoes, and induces them to determine by
running a race whose these things shall be. No sooner have
they started than Putraka puts on the shoes, which give the
power of flight, and vanishes with the staff and bowl also.
The story, which in this form has only recently been made
‘known in Europe through the translation of the tales of
‘Somadeva, is merely another version of the old Norse legend
of the Three Princesses of Whiteland, in which three brothers
fight for a hundred years about a hat, a cloak, and a pair of
boots, until a king, passing by, prevails on them to let him
try the things, and putting them on, wishes himself away.
The inc.dent, Dr. Dasent adds, is found in Wallachian and
Tartar stories,’ while the three gifts come again in the
stories already cited, of the Table, the Ass, and the Stick,
the Lad that went to the North Wind, and the Hindu tale
of the Brahman, the Jackal, and the Barber. But the gifts
themselves are found everywhere. The shoes are the
sandals of Hermes, the seven-leagued boots of Jack the
Giant Killer ;* the hat is the -helmet of Hudes, the Tdrn-
Kappe of the Nibelungen Lied;? in the staff we have the
rod of Kirké, and in the bowl that emblem of fertility and
life which meets us at every turn, from the holy vessel


1 Ie occurs also in the German
Tegend of ‘The King of the Golden
Mountain.’ In the story of Gyges
(Plato, Pol. 360), this power of making
the wearer invisible resides in a ring,
which he discovers far beneath the sur-

of the earth, This ring enables
him to corrupt the wife of Kandaules,
and 60 te become master of the Lydian
kingdom; and thus it belongs to the
number ‘of mysterious rings which
represent the Hindn Yoni. See also
the Gaelic tale “of ‘Conal Crovi.'
Campbell, i. 138. ‘The triple power of
‘wish is invested in the atone given by
the dwarf to Thorton. Keightley,

Fairy Mythology, 71.
* The ladder by which Jack ssceude


to heaven is not peculier to this story.
It is possibly only another form of the
Bridge of Heimdall, ‘Mr, Tylor,’
says Professor Mux Miller, ‘aptly
compares the [Mandan] fable of the vine
and the fat woman with the story of
Tuck avd the Bean Stalk, and he
brings other stories from Malay and
Polynesian districts embodying the same
ides, Among the different ways by
which it was thought possible to ascend
from earth to heaven, Mr. Tylor men-
tions the rank spexr-grase, @ Tope or
thong. a spider's web, @ indder of iron
or gold, a oulumn of smoke, or the rain-
bow. Chips, ii, 268.
* Hy, 846.


QUESTION OF ADAPTATION.


which only the pure knight or the innocent maiden may
touch, to the horseshoe which is nailed for good luck’s sake
to the wall. These things have not been imported into
‘Western mythology by any translations of the folk-lore of the
East, for they were as well known in the days of Perikles as
they are in our own; and thus in cases where there appears
to be evidence of conscious adaptation the borrowing must
be regarded rather as an exceptional] fact than as farnish-
ing any presumption against stories for which no such
evidence is forthcoming. It will never be supposed that
the imagery and even the language of the old Greek epics
could be as familiarly known to the Hindu peasantry as to
the countrymen of Herodotos: and hence the greater the
resemblance between the popular stories of Greeks, Germans,
and Hindus, the less room is there for any hypothesis of
direct borrowing or adaptation. Such theories do but create
and multiply difficulties; the real evidence points only to
that fountain of mythical language from which have flowed
all the streams of Aryan epic poetry, streams so varied in
their character, yet agreeing so closely in their elements.
The substantial identity of stories told in Italy, Norway,
and India can but prove that the treasure-house of my-
’ thology was more abundantly filled before the dispersion of
the Aryan tribes than we had taken it to be.
Probably no two stories furnish more convincing evidence


of the extent to which the folk-lore of the Aryan tribes was 7


developed, while they still lived as a single people, than that
which we find in the German legend of Faithful John and
the Deccan story of Rama and Luxman, who reflect the
Bama and Laxmana of Purana legends. A comparison of
these legends clearly shows that at least the following
framework must have been devised before Hindus and Ger-
mang started on the long migration which was to lead the
oue to the regions of the Ganges and the Indus, and the
other to the countries watered by the Rhine apd the Elbe.
Even in those early days the story must have run that a
king had seen the likeness of a maiden whose beauty made
him faint with love; that he could not be withheld from
seeking her; that his faithful friend went with him and’


145


CHAP.


VELL
es,


Faithful
john.


146


BOOK


——


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


helped him to win his bride; that certain wise birds pre-
dicted that the trusty friend should save his master from three
great dangers, but that his mode of rescuing him should
seem to show that he loved his master’s wife; that for his
self-sacrifice he should be turned into a stone, and should be
restored to life only by the agency of an innocent child.
That two men in two distant countries knowing nothing of
each other could hit upon such a series of incidents as these,
none probably will have the hardihood to maintain. Still
Jess can any dream of urging that Hindus and Germans
agreed together to adopt each the specific differences of


. their respective versions. In the German story the prince’s


passion for the beautiful maiden is caused by the sight of
her portrait in a gallery of his father’s palace, into which
the trusty John had been strictly charged not to-let the
young man enter.' Having once seen it, he cannot be with-
held arom going to seek her, and with his friend he embarks
as a merchant in a ship laden with all manner of costly
goods which may tempt the maiden’s taste or curiosity.
The scheme succeeds; but while the princess is making ber
purchases the Faithful John orders all sail to be set, and
the ship is far at sea when the maiden turns to go home.
At once we recognise the form in which Herodotos at the
outset of his history has recorded the story of I6, and are
tempted to think that Herodotos did not in this instance
invent his own rationalistic explanation of # miraculous
story, but has adopted a version of the myth current in his
own day. The comparative freedom from supernatural in-


) ‘This is substantially the Rabbinical
story of ‘The Broken Outh,’ the differ-
ence being that. the young man is
already in Fairy Lana, and finds in the
forbidden chamber, not the picture, but
the maiden herself. The sequel of this
story exhibits the maiden ae the Fairy
Queen, who lays the man under &
pledze to remain with her. After a
while he feels a yearning to retam to

hie earthly home. He is suffered to do
xo on pledging hie word that he will


come beck. But the pledge redeemed
without “murmuring by ‘Thomas of
Freildoune is sot at nought by the hero
of this tale, The f fairy carries


the case before the Rabbis, who decide
that he must go back; but on his per-
sistent refusnl, she beseeches him to
suffer her to take leave of him and to
embrace him. ‘He replied that she
might, and as soon as he embraced
him, she drew out his soul, end he
died’ ‘Thus far the story runs like
‘that of Fouqué’s Undine; but in the
sequel the insensibility of the Jew to
the ludicrous is shown in the words put
into the mouth of the fairy, who leaves
her eon Solomon in the Keeping of the
Rabbis, assuring them that he will pass
examinations satisfactorily. Keightley, .
Fairy Mythology, 605.


THE STORY OF FAITHFUL JOHN.


cidents would of course determine his choice. The next
scene in the drama is a colloquy between three crows, whose
language Faithful John understands, and who foretell three
great dangers impending over the prince, who can be saved
only at the cost of his preserver. On his reaching shore a
fox-coloured horse would spring towards him, which, on his
mounting it, would carry him off for ever from his bride.
No one can save him except by shooting the horse, but if
any one does itand tells the king, he will be turned into stone
from the toe to the knee. If the horse be killed, the prince
will none the more keep his bride, for a bridal shirt will lie
on a dish, woven seemingly of gold and silver, but composed
really of sulphur and pitch, and if he puts it on it will barn
him to his bones and marrow. Whoever takes the shirt


i?
cha?


vu.
—s


with his gloved hand and casts it into the fire may save the ,


prince ; but if he knows and tells him, he will be turned to
stone from his knee to his heart. Nor is the prince more
safe even if the shirt be burnt, for during the dance which
follows the wedding the queen will suddenly turn pale and
fall as if dead, and unless some one takes three drops of
blood from her right breast she will die. But whoever
knows and tells it shall be turned to stone from the crown
of his head to the toes of his feet. The friend resolves to be
faithful at all hazards, and all things turn out as the crows
had foretold; but the king, misconstrning the act of his
friend in taking blood from his wife, orders him to be led to
prison, At the scaffold he explains his motives, but the act
of revelation seals his doom; and while the king intreats
for forgiveness the trusty servant is turned into stone. In
an agony of grief the king has the figure placed near his bed,
and vainly prays for the power of restoring him to life.
Years pass on; twin sons are born to him, and one day, as
he gives utterance to the longing of his heart, the statue
saya that it can be brought back to life if the king will cut
off the heads of the twins and sprinkle the statug with their
blood. The servant is restored to life, and when he places
the children’s heads on their bodies they spring up and play
ag merrily as ever.
12


148
BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.
In truth and tenderness of feeling this story'falls far short


—*_ of the Deccan tale, in which the prince Rama secs the


Rama
od
Lunman,


image of his future bride, not in a picture, but in a dream.
Having won her by the aid of Luxman, he is soon after
attacked by the home-sickness which is common to the
heroes of most of these tales, and which finds its highest
expression in the history of Odysseus. During the journey,
which answers to the voyage of the king with Faithful John,
Luxman, who, like John, understands the speech of birde,
hears two owls talking in a tree overhead, and learns from
them that three great perils await his master and his bride.
The first will be from a rotten branch of a banyan-tree, from
the fall of which Luxman will just save them by dragging
them forcibly away; the next will be from an insecure arch,
and the third from a cobra. This serpent, they said, Luxsman
would kill with his sword.

‘But a drop of the cobra’s blood shall fall on her forehead.
The wuzeer will not care to wipe off the blood with his
hands, but shall instead cover his face with a cloth, that he
may lick it off with his tongue; but for this the rajah will
be angry with him, and his reproaches will turn this poor
wuzeer into stone.

<« Will he always remain stone?” asked the Jedy owl.
“Not for ever,” answered the husband, “ but for eight long
years he will remain so.” “And what then?” demanded
she. “Then,” answered the other, “ when the young rajah
and ranee have a baby, it shall come to pass that one day
the child shall be playing on the floor, and, to help itself along,
shali clasp hold of the stony figure, and at that baby’s touch
the wuzeer will come to life again.” ”

As in the German tale, everything turns out in accordance
with the predictions of the birds. When, therefore, Luxman
saw the cobra creep towards the queen, he knew that his life
must be forfeited for his devotion, and so he took from the
folds of his dress the record of the owl’s talk and of his
former life, and, having laid it beside the sleeping king, killed
the cobra. The rajah, of course, starts up just as his friend
is licking the blood from his wife’s forehead, and, drawing


’ HISTORY OF RAMA AND LUXMAN.


the same inference with the German prince, overwhelms him
with reproaches,
«The rajah had buried his face in his hands: he looked


149


CHAP,
VUL
—


ap, he turned to the wuzeer; but from him came neither —


answer nor reply. He had become a senseless stone. Then
Rama for the first time perceived the roll of paper which
Lurman had laid beside him; and when he read in it of
what Luxman had been to him from boyhood, and of the
end, his bitter grief broke through all bounds, and falling at
the feet of the statue, he clasped its stony knees and wept
aloud.’

Eight years passed on, and at length the child was born.
A few months more, and in trying to walk, it ‘stretched out
its tiny hands and caught hold of the foot of the statue.
The wuzeer instantly came back to life, and stooping down
seized the’ little baby, who had rescued him, in his arms and
kissed it.’?

There is something more quiet and touching in the silent
record of Luxman which stands in the place of Faithful
John’s confession at the scaffold, as well as in the doom
which is made to depend on the reproaches of his friend
rather than on the mere mechanical act of giving utterance
to certain words. But the Hindu legend and the German
story alike possess a higher interest in the links which
connect them, like most of the popular stories already noticed,
with the magnificent epic to which we give the name of
Homer, with the songs of the Volsungs and Nibelungs, with
the mythical cycle of Arthur and Charlemagne, and the
Persian Rustem. The bridal shirt of sulphur and pitch,
which outwardly seemed a tissue of gold and silver, carries
us at once from the story of Faithful John to the myth of


1 The calamity which overtakes
Luxman and Faithful Jobo is seen in
‘an earlier and les« developed furm in
the German story of the Frog Prines.
Here the faithful friend is overwhelmed
with grief because his master is turned
into a frog. But this tranaformation is
merely the sinking of the sun into the
‘western waters (see note 3, p. 165), and
the time of his absence answers to the
charmed sleep of Endymion, Trusty


Henry is 80 grieved at the loss that he
binds three iron bands round his heart
for fear it should break with grief and
sorrow. Whenthe Frog Prince sets out
with hia bride in the morning, the iron
bends break and Trusty Henry in set
free. This ie the stony sleep of
Luxmen, brought on by grief, a
broken only by the Jight touch of early
morning, there represented by the
innocent child of Rama.


‘Mythical
imagery
of there
stories.


isp MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


00k Deianeira and the poisoned coat which put an end to the
i career of Herakles. We enter again the charmed circle,
where one and the same idea assumes a thousand different

forms, where we can trace clearly the process by which one

change led to another, but where any one disregarding the

points of connection must fail to discern their sequence,

origin, and meaning. In the legend of Deianeira, as in that

of Iasén and Glauké, the coat or shirt is laden with destruc-

tion even for Herakles. It represents, in fact, ‘the clouds

which rise from the waters and surround the sun like a dark
raiment.’ ‘ This robe Herakles tries to tear off, but the ‘fiery

mists embrace him, and are mingled with the parting raya of

“the sun, and the dying hero is seen through the scattered

clouds of the sky, tearing his own body to pieces, till at last

his bright form is consumed in a general conflagration.’!

In the story of Medeia this robe is the gift of Helios, which

impar‘s a marvellous wisdom to the daughter of the Kolchian

: king. It is the gleaming dress which reappears in story
‘after story of Hindu folk-lore. ‘That young rajah’s wife,’
people said, ‘has the most beautiful saree we ever saw: it
shines like the sun, and dazzles our eyes. We have no saree
half so beautiful.’ It is the golden fleece of the ram which
bears away the children of the Mist (Nephelé) to the Eastern
land. In other words, it is the light of Phoibos, the splendour
of Helios, the rays or spears of the gleaming Sun. As such,
it is identified with the sword of Apollo the Chrysdér, with
the sword which Aigeus leaves to be discovered by Theseus
under the broad stone, with the good sword Gram which
Odin left in the tree trunk for Volsung to draw out and
wield, with the lion’s skin of Herakles, with the jackal’s
skin worn by the enchanted rajahs of Hindu story, with the
spear of Achilleus and the deadly arrows of Philoktétés, with
the invincible sword of Perseus and the sandals which bear
him through the air like a dream, with the magic shoes in
the story of King Patraka and of the Lad who went to the
North Wind, with the spear of Artemis and the unerring
Garts of Meleagros. Whether under the guise of spears or
fleece or arrows, it is the golden hair on the head of Phoibos

* Max Miller, Chips from @ German Workshop, ii. 89.


THE STORY OF PRINCE AHMED.


Akersekomés, which no razor has ever touched, It is the
wonderful carpet of Solomon, which figures in the Arabian
Nights as the vehicle for relieving distressed lovers from
their difficulties,’ and bears away the Princess Aldegonda by
the aide of the Pilgrim of Love in the exquisite legend of the
Albambra.

This story is, indeed, only a more beautiful form of the
German and Hindu tales. Here, as in the other legends,
special care is taken to guard the young prince against the
dangers of love, and the lad grows up contentedly under the
care of the sage Eben Bonabben, until he discovers that he
wants something which speaks more to the heart than algebra.
Like Balna in the tower or Helen in Ilion, he is prisoned in
a palace from which he cannot get forth ; but the sage Bon-
abben has taught him the language of birds, and when the
joyous time of spring comes round, he learns from a dove
that love is ‘the torment of one, the felicity of two, the strife
and enmity of three.’ The dove does more. She tells him
of a beautiful maiden, far away in a delightful garden by the
banks of the stream from which Arethousa, Daphné, Athéné,
Aphrodité, all are born; but the garden is surrounded
by high walls, within which none were permitted to enter.
Here the dove’s story, which answers to the picture seen in
the German tale and the dream of Rama, connects the
legends with the myths of Brynhild, Surya Bai, and other
imprisoned damsels, whom one brave knight alone is destined
to rescue. Once again the dove returns, but it is only to die
at the feet of Ahmed, who finds under her wing the picture
seen by the prince in the German story. Where to seek the
maiden he knows not; but the arrow of love is within his
heart, and he cannot tarry. The princess too, to whom the
dove had carried the message of Ahmed, is yearning to see
him; but she is surrounded by a troop of suitors as numerous
as those which gather round Penelopé, and she must appear at
a great tournament (the fight at Ilion} which is to decide who
shall be her husband. But Ahmed, like Achilleus after the
death of Patroklos, is-unarmed; how then can he think of
encountering the valiant warriors who are hastening to the

1 The story of Prince Ahmed and Pari Banou,


151


CHAP,
VL


‘The Pil-
grim of
Love.


“482 ‘MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK contest? In this dilemma he is aided by an owl (the white
ae bird of Athéné), who tells him of a cavern (the cave in which
Zeus, Mithra, and Krishna alike are born) ‘in one of the wildest
recesses of those rocky cliffs which rise around Toledo; none
but the mousing eye of an owl or an antiquary could have
Giscovered the entrance to it. A sepulchral lamp of ever-
lasting oil shed a soleinn light through the place. On an
iron table in the centre of the cavern lay the magic armour ;
against it leaned the lance, and beside it stood an Arabian
steed, caparisoned for the field, but motionless as a statue.
The armour was bright and unsullied as it had gleamed in
days of old; the steed in as good condition as if just from
“the pasture, and when Ahmed laid his hand upon his neck,
he pawed the ground and gave a loud neigh of joy that
shook the walls of the cavern.’ Here we have not only the
magic armour and weapons of Achilleus, but the steed which
never grows old, and against which no human power can
stand. Probably Washington Irving, as he told the story
with infinite zest, thought little of the stories of Boots or of
Odysseus: but although Ahmed appears in splendid panoply
and mounted on a magnificent war-horse, yet he is as inso-
lently scouted by the suitors of Aldegonda as the Ithakan
chieftain in his beggar’s dress was reviled by the suitors of
Penelopé. But the same retribution is in store for both.
Ahmed bears the irresistible weapons of Odysseus. Nosooner
is the first blow struck against the Pilgrim of Love (for
Ahmed again like Odysseus and Herakles must be a wan-
derer) than the marvellous powers of the steed are seen.
‘At the first touch of the magic lance the brawny scoffer
was tilted from his saddle. Here the prince would have
paused; but, alas! he had to deal with a demoniac horse
and armour—once in action nothing could control them.
The Arabian steed charged into the thickest of the throng ;
the lance overturned everything that presented; the gentle
prince was carried pell-mell about the field, strewing it with
high and low, gentle and simple, and grieving at his own
involuntary exploits. The king stormed and raged at this
outrage on his subjects and his guests. He ordered out all
hhis guards—they were unhorsed as fast as they came up,


MYTHS OF THE NOON-DAY.


158


The king threw off his robes, grasped buckler end lance, and CHAP.
rode forth to awe the stranger with the presence of majesty LO


itaelf. Alas! majesty fared no better than the vulgar—the
steed and lance were no respecters of persons: to the dismay
of Ahmed, he was borne full tilt against the king, and in a
moment the royal heels were in the air, and the crown was
rolling in the dust.’ It could not be‘otherwise. Theeuitora
must all fall when once the arrow has sped from the bow of
Odysseus; but although the Ithakan chief was earnest in
his revenge, the involuntary exploits of Ahmed are matched
by many an involuntary deed of Herakles or Oidipous or
Perseus. That the horse of Ahmed belongs to the same
stock with the steeds of Indra it is impossible to doubt as
we read the words of the Vedic poet :—

«These thy horses, excellent Vayu, strong of limb, youthful
and full of vigour, bear thee through the space between
heaven and earth, growing in bulk, strong as oxen; they are
not lost in the firmament, but hold on their speed, unretarded
by reviling ; difficult are they to be arrested as the beams of
the Sun,’ *

The incidents which follow present the same astonishing
accordance with old Greek or Hindu traditions. No sooner
has the sun reached the meridian than ‘the magic spell
resumed its power; the Arabian steed scoured across the
plain, leaped the barrier, plunged into the Tagus, swam its
raging current, bore the prince breathless and amazed to the
cavern, and resumed his station like a statue beside the iron
table.’ The spell is, in fact, none other than that which
sends the stone of Sisyphos rolling down the hill as soon as
it has reached the summit; the Tagus is the old ocean stream
into which Helios sinks at eventide, and the cave is the dark
abode from which the wandering Sun had started in the
morning, and to which he must come back at night. But
further, Ahmed appears in the sequel as Paiédn, the healer.
Aldegonda is sick with love for the beautiful prince who has
gladdened her eyes but for « few brief moments. In vain do
hosts of physicians seek to cure her. The power to do so
rests with Ahmed only, and the owl, coming to his aid as


1 Rig Yoda Sanhita, H. H. Wilson, vol. ii. p. 51,


The a


of mid-day,


154 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


BOOK ealously as Athéné Glaukopis (the owl-eyed or bright-
wee faced) to that of Odysseus, advises him to ask as his reward
the carpet of Solomon, on which he soars away with Alde-
gonda, like the children of Nephelé on the Golden Fleece.
The force of these astonishing parallelisms is certainly not
weakened by any suggestion that some of these incidents
may be found in legends of the Arabian Nights. The en-
chanted horse reappears in the Dapplegrim of Grimm’s
German stories, in the steed which carries the Widow’s Son
in the Norse tales, and the marvellous horse of Highland
tradition.! In a burlesque aspect, it is the astonishing horse
_ in the Spanish story of Governor Manco,’ who is outwitted
by the old soldier precisely as the Sultan of Cashmere is
outwitted by the possessor of the Enchanted Horse in the

Arabian Nights story.
The sleep In the Hindu story, as in the Spanish tale, the bride of
cedeeih Bama is won after an exploit which in its turn carries us
mer, away to the deeds of Hellenic or Teutonic heroes. When
the prince tells Luxman of the peerless beauty whom he has
seen in his dream, his friend tells him that the princess lives
far away in 2 glass palace.’ ‘ Round this palace runs a large
river, and round the river is @ garden of flowers. Round
the garden are four thick groves of trees. The princess is
twenty-four years old, but she is not married, for she has
determined only to marry whoever can jump across the river
and greet her in her crystal palace; and though many
thousand kings have assayed to do so, they have all perished
miserably in the attempt, having either been drowned in the
river or broken their necks by falling.’ The frequent recur-
rence of this idea in these Hindu tales might of itself lead
any one who knew nothing of the subject previously to doubt
whether such images could refer to any actual facts in the
history of any given man or woman. In the story of Rama
it has lost much of its old significance. The death-like cold
of a northery winter gives place to the mere notion of solitude
and seclusion. Running streams and luxuriant gardens show.

* Campbell, 7
lands, The "Yor Bing nats otis laws or marble of the Hindu
oe ‘ tale answers to the ice of the Norse
3 Washington Irving, Tales of the legends.


THE QUEEN OF THE FIVE FLOWERS.


that the myth has been long transferred to @ more genial
climate; but it is scarcely necessary to say that the changes
in the story indefinitely enhance its value, so long as the
idea remains the same. In some formor other this idea may
be said torun through almostall these legends. In the story
of ‘Brave Seventee Bai’ it assumes a form more closely akin
to the imagery of Teutonic mythology; and there we find a
princess who declares that she will murry no one who has not
leaped over her bath, which ‘has high marble walls all round,
with a hedge of spikes at the top of the walls.’ In the story
of Vicram Maharajah the parents of Anar Ranee ‘had caused
her garden to be hedged round with seven hedges made of
bayonets, so that none could go in nor out; and they had
published a decree that none should marry her bat he who
could enter the garden and gather the three pomegranates
on which she and her maids slept.’ So, too, Panch Phul
Ranee, the lovely Queen of the Five Flowers, ‘dwelt in a
little house, round which were seven wide ditches, and seven.
great hedges made of spears.’ The seven hedges are, how-
ever, nothing more than the sevenfold coils of the dragon of
the Glistening Heath, who lies twined round the beautiful
Brynhild. But the maiden of the Teutonic tale is sunk in
sleep which rather resembles death than life, just as Démétér
mourned as if for the death of Persephoné while her child
sojourned in the dark kingdom of Hades. This idea is
reproduced with wonderful fidelity in the story of Little
Surya Bai, and the cause of her death is modified in a
hundred legends both of the East and the West. The little
maiden is high up in the eagle’s nest fast asleep, when an
evil demon or Rakshas seeks to gain admission to her, and
while vainly striving to force an entrance leaves one of his
finger-nails sticking in the crack of the door. When on the
following morning the maiden opened the doors of her
dwelling to look down on the world below, the sharp claw
ran into her hand, and immediately she fell dead. The
powers of winter, which had thus far sought in vain to
wound her, have at length won the victory; and at once we
pass to other versions of the same myth, which tell us of
Eurydiké stung to death by the hidden serpent, of Sifrit


155
CHAP.


vill.
_——


156


monk


pare


Origin of
all myths
relating to
i
sleep
beautiful
maidens.


METROLOGY: OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


smitten by Hagene (the Thorn), of Isfendiyar slain by the
‘thorn or arrow of Rustem, of Achilleus vulnerable only in
his heel, of Brynhild enfolded within the dragon’s coils, of
Meleagros dying as the torch of doom is burnt out, of Buldur
the brave and pure smitten by the fatal mistletoe, of the
sweet Briar Rose plunged in her slumber of a hundred years.

The idea that all these myths have been deliberately
transferred from Hindus or Persians to Greeks, Germans,
and Norsemen may be dismissed as a wild dream.’ Yet of
their substantial identity in spite of all points of difference
and under all the disguises thrown over them by individual


- fancies and loca] influences, there can be no question. The


keynote of any one of the Deccan stories is the keynote
of almost all; and this keynote runs practically through the
great body of tales gathered from Germany, Scandinavia,
Treland, and Scotland. It is found again everywhere in the
mytuology of the Greeks, whether in the legends which have
furnished the materials for their magnificent epics, or have
‘been immortalised in the dramas of their great tragedians,
or have remained buried in the pages of mythographers like
Pausanias or Diodoros. If then all these tales have some
historical foundation, they must relate to events which took
place before the dispersion of the Aryan tribes from their
original home. If the war at Troy took place at all, as the
Homeric poets have narrated it, it is, to say the least,
strange that precisely the same struggle, for precisely the
same reasons, and with the same results, should have been
waged in Norway and Germany, in Wales and Persia, The
question must be more fully examined presently ; but unless
we are to adopt the hypothesis of conscious borrowing in its
most exaggerated form, the dream of a historical Ilion and a
historical Carduel must fade away before the astonishing
multitude of legends which comparative mythologista have


1 Of thede stories, taken as a class, dawn, and their belief in the bright
Professor Mas Miiller seys ‘that the gods of heaven, possessed in their very
elemente or seeda of thete fairy tales language, in their mythological anil
Delong to the period that the proverbs phraseology, the moro ot les
dispersion of the Aryan race; that the Fersloped germe, that were sure to
tame people who, in their migrations to up into the same or Very simiise. plesta
the north and the south, earried along on every soil and under every sky'—
‘with them the names of the gun und the Chips, il. 226.


:
DRAGONS AND SLEEPING MAIDENS.


oan)
traced to phrases descriptive of physical phenomena. At
the least it must be admitted that the evidence seems to
point in this direction, To take these stories after any
aystem, and arrange their materials methodically, is almost
an impossible task. The expressions or incidenta worked into
these legends are like the few notes of the scale from which
great musicians have created each his own world, or like the
few roots of language which denoted at first only the moat
prominent objects and processes of nature and the merest
bodily wants, but out of which has grown the wealth of
words which feed the countless streams of human thought.
In one story we may find a series of incidents briefly touched,
which elsewhere have been expanded into a hundred tales,
while the incidents themselves are presented in the countless
combinations suggested by an exuberant fancy. The outlines
of the tales, when these have been carefully analysed, are
simple enough; but they are certainly not outlines which
could have been suggested by incidents in the common life
of mankind. Maidens do not fall for months or years into
deathlike trances, from which the touch of one brave man
alone can rouse thefh. Dragons are not coiled round golden
treasures or beautiful women on glistening heaths. Princes
do not everywhere abandon their wives as soon as they have
married them, to return at length in squalid disguise and
smite their foes with invincible weapons, Steeds which
speak and which cannot die do not draw the chariots of
mortal chiefs, nor do the lives of human kings exhibit every-
where the same incidents in the seme sequence. Yet every
fresh addition made to our stores of popular tradition does
but bring before us new phases of those old forms of which
mankind, we may boldly say, will never grow weary. The
golden slipper of Cinderella is the slipper of Rhodépis, which
an eagle carries off and drops into the lap of the Egyptian
king as he sits on his seat of judgement at Memphis.’ This
slipper reappears in the beautiful Deccan story of Sodewa
Bai, and leads of course to the same issue as in “the legends
of Cinderella and Rhod6pis. The dragon of the Glistening
Heath represents the seven-headed cobre of the Hindu story,
+ Bilian, V. H. xiii. 88; Strabo, xvii. p. 808,


187


cHar.
val
—


158


.
MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOe and in the legend of “Brave Seventee Bai the beautiful Bryn-
——— hild becomes his daughter, just as the bright Phoibos is the


or apelly


Odyssey
and in
Hindu
Horie.


child of the sombre Leto. In the Greek myth dragons of
another kind draw the chariot of Medeia, the child of the
sun, or impart mysterious wisdom to Iamos and Melampous,
as the cobras do to Muchie Lal. That the heroes of Greek and
Teutonic legends in almost every case are separated from, or
abandon, the women whom they have wooed or loved is well
known; and the rajahs and princes of these Hindu stories
are subjected to the same lot with Herakles and Odysseus,
Oidipous and Sigurd, Kephalos and Prokris, Paris and Oinéné.
Generally the newly-martied prince feels a yearning to see
his father and his mother once more, and, like Odysseus,
pines until he can set his face homewards. Sometimes he
takes his wife, sometimes he goes alone ; but in one way or
another he is kept away from her for years, and reappeara
like Cdysseus in the squalid garb of a beggar.

Curiously enough, in these Hindu stories the detention of
the wandering prince or king is caused by one of those
charms or spells which Odysseus in his wanderings dis-
creetly avoids. The Lotos-eaters and*their magic fruit
reappear in the nautch-people or conjurors, whom the rajah
who has married Panch Phul Ranee, the Lady of the Five
Flowers, asks for rice and fire. The woman whom he ad-
dresses immediately brings them. ‘But before she gave
them to him, she and her companions threw on them a
certain powder, containing a very potent charm; and no
sooner did the rajah receive them than he forgot about his
wife and little child, his journey and all that had ever hap-
pened to him in his life before: such was the peculiar
property of the powder. And when the conjuror said to
him, “ Why should you go away? Stay with us and be one
of us,” he willingly consented.’! Unless the translator hag
designedly modified the language of the Deccan tale-teller
(and in the absence of any admission to this effect we cannot


* This forgetfulness of bis first love the Grelic story of the Buttle of the
on the part of the solar bero is brought Birds neither man nor other creature is
about in many of the German stories Ly to kiss him, and the mischief is done by
his allowing his purents to kiss him on hia greyhound, who recogaises him ay
one side of bis face, or on his lips. In Argos knows Odysseus. Campbell, i. 34,


THE HOD AND THE LOTOS. '


suppose this), we may fairly quote the words as almost a
paraphrase from the Odyssey :—

Sin te kenyytin olny fore oh eda

BAX’ abrot BovAoero yer" n Aerogdyoiow

Aurdy dperrbuerot partner re Aabtoba,?
The nautch-woman here has also the character of Kirké,
and the charm represents the ¢dpyaxa dXvypa which turn the
companions of Eurylochos into swine, while Kirké’s wand is
wielded by the sorcerers who are compelled to restore to life
the victims whom they had turned into stone, and by the
Rakshas from whom Ramchundra, in the story of Truth’s
Triumph, seeks to learn its uses. ‘The rod,’ she replies,
‘has many supernatural powers; for instance, by simply
uttering your wish, and waving it in the air, you can conjure
up a mountain, a river, or a forest, in a moment of time.’ At
length the wanderer is found; but Panch Phul Ranee and
Seventee Bai have the insight of Eurykleia, and discern his
true majesty beneath the fakeer’s garb.? ‘The rajah came


2 Thisgiert of bumil
4 This garment of humiliation appears
in almost inumersble legends. In the


German story of the Golden Bird the

tince puts it on when, ob approaching
Nis father's house, he is told that his
Uvothers are plotting his death. In the
tule of the Knapsack, the Hat, and the
Norn, the wanderer who comes in with
4 coat torn to rags has a knaprack from
whieh he can produce apy number of
men, and shorn (the horn of the Ma-
Tuts) ut whose blast the strongest walls
Tull down, He thus takes on his enemies
8 vongeunce precisely like that of Odys-
sous, and for the sane reason. In the
story of the Golden Goone, Dummling,
the hero who never fails in any exploit,
in despised for bia wretched appearance.
Jn that of the Gold Child the brilliant
hero comes before the king in the guive
of a humble bear-hunter, The tule of
the King of the Golden Mountain re-
pests the story of King Putraka; and
shows the Guid Child in a shepherd's
tugged frock, Eluewhere he is seen as
the poor miller’s son (the Milier's Son
and the Cut), and he becomes ® dis-
charged soldier‘ in the story of ‘The
Boots made of Buffalo Leather.’ The
beggar reappears in the Morse tale of


Hacon Grizzlebeard, the Throshbeard of
Grimm's collection, while Buots, who
grovels in the asbes, is the royal youth
who rides up the mountain of ice in the
story of the Princess on the Gliss Hill.
Iu another, Shortshaoks, who by himself
destroys ull the Trolls opposed to him,
iva reflection of Odyssous, not only in
bis vengeance, but in his bodily form,
Odysseus is Shortalianks when compared
with Metelaos (/éied iii. 210-11). In
the tale of the Best Wish (Dasent), Boots
carries with him in the magic tap the
horn of Amalcheia, and is seen again as
a tattered leggar in the story of the
Widow's Sin. In the legend of Big
Bird ban he is the wandering sailor,
who, like Odyseens, is tossed, worn and,
naked, on the Pluiakian shore; in that
of Suria Moria Castle (a tale in which
the Sun seeks fur the Dawn, the reverse
of the Pysché story) he is Halvor who
grubs among the axhes—the counection
Sith fire and light being never forgotten.
jin these stories, for theeg ashes are al-
ways living embers. The adventure of
Halvor is for the recovery of a Helen,
who hue been stolen away by « Troll;
‘but no sooner is the Ilion or stronghold
of the robber demolished thas, like: ose
seus, he begins to feel an izresiatil


159


CHAP.


166 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NatiONs.


ber towards them so changed that not even his own mother
~——~— Imew him; no one recognised him but his wife. For
eighteen years he had been among the nautch-people; his
hair was rough, his beard untrimmed, his face thin and worn,
sunburnt, and wrinkled, and his dress was a rough common
blanket.” Can we possibly help thinking of the wanderer,
who in his beggar’s dress reveals himself to the swineherd—

Erber pie 3) 88 abrds dyb, xavd woAdd poyhees,

Prev elxoory Eret és werplba yolny.?


or of his disguise, when Athéné
Earths dn wepariis Breve relxas, dug) Bb Bépun


Picreren wanleen rarme’ Fine riporety
feaer Bé of bace wdpos repnaddt’ Uérre-
duel B4 piv fdcos BAX0 waxdy Bdner HB xerive


peryorsa purberra, xaxg pewopvyntra xanvg.t


and lastly of his recognition by his old nurse when she saw
the wound made by the bite of the boar who slew Adonis?
So in the Vengeance of Chandra we see the punishment of
the suitors by Odysseus, an incident still further travestied
in Grimm’s legend of the King of the Golden Mountain. So
too as we read of the body of Chundun Rajah, which re-
mained undecayed though he had been dead many months,
or of Sodewa Bai, who a month after her death looked as
lovely as on the night on which she died, we are reminded of
the bodies of Patroklos* and of Hektor‘ which Aphrodité or
Apollén anointed with ambrosial oil, and guarded day and
night from all unseemly things.

The Snake But though the doom of which Achilleus mournfully com-

aren: plained to Thetis lies on all or almost all of these bright
beings, they cannot be held in the grasp of the dark power
which has laid them low. Briar-Rose and Surya Bai start
from their slumbers at: the magic touch of the lover’s hand,
and even when all hope seemed to be lost, wise beasts pro-
vide an antidote which will bring back life to the dead. In the
story of Panch Phul Ranee these beneficent physicians are
juckals, whé converse together like the owls of Luxman or


longing to see his father end his home Campbell, 101.

ence more. Od, xvi. 207, xxi. 208.
The story of Shortshanks is told in
| Gadie tle ef fh 9 OM td,


THE SNAKE LEAVES..


the crows in the tele of Faithful John. ‘Do you see this
tree?’ says the jackal to his wife. ‘ Well, if ite leaves were
crushed, and a little of the juice put into the rajah’s two ears
and upon his upper lip, and some upon his temples also, and
some upon the spear-wound in his side, he would come to
life again, and be as well as ever.’ These leaves reappear in
Grimm’s story of the Three Snake Leaves, in which the
snakes play the part of the jackals. In this tale a prince is
buried alive with his dead wife, and seeing a snake approach-
ing her body, he cuts it in three pieces. Presently another
snake, crawling from the corner, saw the other lying dead,
and going away soon returned with three green leaves in its
mouth; then, laying the parts of the body together, so as to
join, it put one leaf on each wound, and the dead snake was
alive again, The prince applying the leaves to his wife’s
body restores her also to life. The following are the words
of Apollodoros in relating the story, also told by Hlian, of
Glaukos and Polyidos:—‘ When Minos said that he must
bring Glaukos to life, Polyidos was shut up with the dead
body ; and, being sorely perplexed, he saw a dragon approach
the corpse. This he killed with a stone, and another dragon
came, and, seeing the first one dead, went away, and brought
some grass, which it placed on the body of the other, which
immediately rose up. Polyidos, having beheld this with
astonishment, put the same grass on the body of Glaukos,
and restored him to life.’

These magic leaves become a root in the German story of
the Two Brothers, a tale in which a vast number of solar
myths have been rolled together. The two brothers, ‘as like
one another as two drops of water,’ are the Dioskouroi and
the Asvins, or the other twin deities which run through so
large a portion of the Aryan mythology. They are also the


1 Apollodoros, 1. Mr. Gould, cave, and finally the vulgar hand of


referring to thie etory we intrudueed in
Fougué's ‘Sir Elidoe,’ places these
flowers or leaves in the lurge class of
things which have the power of reatoring
fe, or splitting rocks, or opening the
earth and revealing hidden treasures.
snake leaves reprosant. in short the
Worms or stonea which shatter rocks,
the secame which opens the robbers’


glory, which, when set on fire, aids the
‘trensute-seeker in his search. All these
fables Mr. Gould refers tp one and tho
same object—lightning; and thus
multitude of popular stories agein
resolve themselves into phrases origin-
ally denoting merely physical pheno-
mena. Cxrious Myths of the Middle
Ages, second series, p. 145, &o.


161


CHaP.


——_


The Two
Brothers.


162


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


BOOK. Babes in the Wood, although it is their father himself who,
Ji. at the bidding of his rich brother, thrusts them forth from


their home, because a piece of gold falls from the mouth of
each every morning. They are saved by a huntsman, who
makes them marksmen as expert as Kastor and Polydeukes.
When at length they set out on their adventures, the hunts-
man gives them a knife, telling them that if, in cage of sepa-
ration, they would stick it into a tree by the wayside, he who
came back to it might learn from the brightness or the rusting
of the blade whether the other is alive and well. Ifthe tale
thus leads us to the innumerable stories which turn on sym-
pathetic trees, gems, and stones, it is not less noteworthy as


’ bringing before us almost all the brute animals, whose names


were once used ag names of the sun. The two brothers lift
their weapons to shoot a hare, which, begging for life,
promises to give up two leverets. The hare is suffered to go
free, and the huntsmen also spare the leverets, which follow
them. The same thing happens with a fox, wolf, bear, and
lion, and thus the youths journey, attended each by five
beasta, until they part, having fixed the knife into the tronk
ofatree. The younger, like Perseus, comes to a town where
all is grief and sorrow because the king’s daughter is to be
given up on the morrow to be devoured’ by a dragon on the
summit of the dragon’s mountain. Like Theseus and Sigurd,
the young mai becomes possessed of a sword buried beneath
a great stone, and, like Perseus, he delivers the maiden by
slaying the dragon. Then on the mountain-top the youth
rests with the princess, having charged his beasts to keep
watch, lest any one should surprise them. But the victory
of the sun is followed by the sleep of winter, and the lion,
overcome with drowsiness, hands over his charge to the bear,
the bear to the wolf, the wolf to the fox, the fox to the hare,
until all are still. The Marshal of the kingdom, who here
plays the part of Paris, now ascends the mountain, and,
cutting off the young man’s head, leads away the princess,
whom, as the dragon-slayer, he claims as his bride. At
length the sleep of the lion is broken by the sting of a bee,
and the beast rousing the bear asks the reason of his failing
to keep watch. The charge is passed from one beast to the


THE TWO BROTHERS.


other, until the hare, unable to utter a word in its defence,
begs for mercy, as knowing where to find a root which, like
the snake leaves, shall restore their master to life. A year has
passed away, and the young man, again approaching the town
where the princess lived, finds it full of merriment, because
she is going on the morrow to be married to the Marshal.
But the time of his humiliation is now past. The huntsman
in his humble hostel declares to the landlord that he will
this day eat of the king’s bread, meat, vegetables, and
eweetmeats, and drink of his finest wine. These are seve-
rally brought to him by the five beasts, and the princess, thus
learning that her lover is not dead, advises the king to send
for the master of these animals, _ The youth refuses to come
unless ‘the king sends for him a royal.equipage, and then,
arrayed in royal robes, he goes to the palace, where he convicts
the Marshal of his treachery by exhibiting the dragon’s tongues
which he had cut off and preserved in a handkerchief be-
stowed on him by the princess, and by showing the necklace, of
which she had given a portion to each of his beasts, and
which is, in fact, the necklace of Freya and the Kestos or
cestus of Aphrodite. But the tale is not told out yet, and it
enters on another cycle of the sun’s career. The youth is no
sooner married to the princess than, like Odysseus or Sigurd,
he is separated from her. Following a white doe into a forest,
he is there deceived by a witch, at whose bidding he touches
his beasts with a twig, and turns them into stones, and is then
changed into a stone himself. Just at this time the younger
brother returns to the place where the knife, now partially
covered with rust, remained fixed in the tree. He becomes,
of course, as in the myth of Baldur, the avenger of his
brother, and the witch undergoes the doom of Punchkin or of
the Giant who had no heart in his body ; but when he tells the
younger brother that even his wife had taken him to be her
husband, and admitted him into her chamber, the latter cuts
off the elder’s head. The magic root is again brought into
nse, and he learns how faithful his brother had Been when
his wife asks him why, on the two previous nights, he had
placed a sword in the bed between them. Thestory thus, in
un?


163


CHAP.
VIn.


164
BOOK


Myths of
the Night,
the Moon,
and the
Stare.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


ite last incident, runa into the tales of Sigurd and the Arabiar
Allah-ud-deen.'

If we sought to prove the absolute identity of the great
mass of Hindu, Greek, Norse, and German legends, we surely
need go no further. Yet there are other points of likeness,
at least as striking as any that have been already noticed.
between the stories which in the East and West alike relate
to the phenomena of night. In the Hindu tale the disgnisec
wife of Logedas Rajah finds Tara Bai on a gold and ivory
throne. ‘She was tall and of a commanding aspect. Her
black hair was bound by long strings of pearls, her dress war
of fine-spun gold, and round her waist was clasped a zone o
restless, throbbing, light-giving diamonds. Her neck anc
her arms were covered with a profusion of costly jewels, but
brighter than all shone her bright eyes, which looked full o
gentle majesty.” But Tara Bai is the star (boy) child, or
riaiden, the Asteropaios of the Iliad, of whom the Greek
myth said only that he was the tallest of all their men, anc
that he was slain after fierce fight by Achilleus, whom he hac
wounded.? Elsewhere she reappears as Polydeukes, the glit-
tering twin brother of Kastor, and more particularly as the
fairy Melusina, who is married to Raymond of Toulouse.
This beautiful being, who has a fish’s tail, as representing
the’ moon which rises and sets in the sea, vanishes away
when her full form is seen by her husband. In anothe:
phase she is Kalypsd, the beautiful night which veils the
sun from mortal eyes in her chamber flashing with a thousan¢
stars, and lulls to sleep the man of many griefs and wander-
ings.‘ Lastly, she is St. Ursula, with her eleven thousané
virgins (the myriad stars), whom Cardinal Wiseman, in <
spirit worthy of Herodotos, transforms into a company, o


) The Norse tale of Shortshunks
(Dasext) is msde up in great part of


* the materials of this story.


* H, xxi, 166, &.

* The name Melesina is identified by
‘Mr. Gould with that of the Babylonion
Mylitta, the’ Syrian moon-goddesn —
Garious Myths of the Middle Ages, second
series, ‘ Melusina,”

‘Mr. Gould, in his delightful chapter
an this subject, connects Malorne, ne
first seen close to s fountain, with the


Vedie Apsarse, or wnter-maidens, o
Vedie mythology, and the ewan maiden
of Teutonic legend. She thua belong.
to the race of Naiuds, Nixies, anc
Elves, the latter namo denoting |
Tunning stream, sa the Elbo; th
Alphoics. The fish’s or serpent’s tai
ia vot peculiar to Melusinn, und he
attributes are also shared with th
Assyrian fish-gods, and the Holleni
Proteus.

4 Od. ¥: 60, &e.


MYTHS OF THE NIGHT.


rather two companies, of English ladies, martyred by the
Huns at Cologne, but whose mythical home is on Horsel-
berg, where the faithful Eckhart is doomed to keep hia weary
watch. Labouriag on in his painful rationalism, Cardinal
Wiseman tells us of one form of the legend which mentions
amarriage-contract, made with the father of St. Ursula, a very
powerful king, how it was arranged that she should have
eleven companions, and each of these a thousand followers.’!
There are thus twelve, in addition to the eleven thousand
attendants, and these twelve reappear in the Hindu tales,
sometimes in dark, sometimes in lustrous forms, as the
twelve hours of the day or night, or the twelve moons of the
lunar year. Thus in the story of Truth’s Triumph a rajah
has twelve wives, but no children. At length he marries
Guzra Bai, the flower girl, who bears him a hundred sons
and one daughter; and the sequel of the tale relates the
result of their jealousy against these children and their
mother. Their treacherous dealing is at last exposed, and
they suffer the fate of all like personages in the German and
Norse tales.

There is, in fact, no end to the many phases assumed by
the struggle of these fairy beings, which is the warfare
between light and darkness. But the bright beings always
conquer in the end, and return like Persephoné from the
abode of Hades to gladden the heart of the Mater Dolorosa.”
The child in the Deccan stories appears not only as Guzra
Bai, but as Panch Phul Ranee, as Surya Bai, as the wife of
Muchie Lal, the fish or frog-sun.? All these women are the
the horizon in ‘the morning,”he is


* Exsays om Religion and Literature,
Apollén swathed by the water-maidena


edited by Abp. Manning (1865), p. 252.


? Grote, History of Greece, i. 55. im gulden bands, or the wounded and
* The frog prince or princess is only forsaken Oidipous; as lingering again
‘one of the thousand jonifications of on the water's edge before he vanishes


names denoting originally the pheno-
mens of duy and night, As carrying the
Morning light front the east to the west,
the sua is the bull bearing Eur6pé from
the purple land (Phoinikia); and the
same changes which converted the Seven
Shiners into the Seven Sages, or the
Keven Sleepers of Ephesus, or the Seven.
Champions of Christendom, or the Seven
Bears, trensformed the sun into a wolf,
4 boar, a tion, a swan. As resting on


from sight, he is the frog squatting on
the water, u homely image of Endymion
and Narkiseos. In this aepect the sun
ia himsolf sn apsara, or water-maiden ;
and thus the Sanskrit Bbek! is a beauti-
fol girl, whom a king wins to be his
wife on the condition that he is not
to let her seo a drop of water, Of
course the king one day forgets hin
promise, shows her water, and Bhekt
vanishes. This is the


counterpart ta:


CHAP,
VI.


The

battle of
Tight and
darkness,


166 MYTHOLOGY OF THR ARYAN NATIONS.


moor. daughters of a gardener ora milkwoman, in whom we see
~—— the image of Démétér, the bountiful earth, who lavishes on


her children her treasures of fruita, milk, and flowers. In
her hand she holds her mystic cup, into which falls the ripe
mango, which is her child transformed, as the ripe fruit falls
on the earth. This cup, again, is the horn of Amaltheia, the
table of the Ethiopians, of which Herodotos speaks as laden
continually with all good things, the cup into which Helios
sinks each night when his course is run, the modios of
Serapis, the ivory ewer containing the book of Solomon’s
occult knowledge, which Rehoboam placed in his father’s
tomb, the magic oil-bowl or lamp of Allah-ud-deen, and
finally the San-Greal which furnishes to the knights of
Arthur’s round table as splendid a banquet as their hearts
can desire,


Character [tis scarcely necessary to go further. If we do, we shall
aie ouly be confronted by the same astonishing perallelism which


is exhibited by the several versions of the stories already
cited. The hypothesis of conscious borrowing is either
superfluous or dangerous. It is unnecessary, if adduced to


the legend of Melusina, who also dies the fairest of all the hours, the hour of
if'seen in the water, Thesun andmoon the dawn, which alone can bring the
must alike eink when they reach the frog prince out of the pond. In the
wostern sea. ‘This story,’ says Pro- German story the enchantment can be
fessor Max Miler, ‘was known at the ended only by the death of the frog;
time when Kapila wrote his philo- but this answers to the burning of the
sophical aphorisms in Indie, for it is enchanted rajnh's jackal ekin in the
there quoted as an illustration. But Hindu tale. The sun leaping fully
Youg before Kapils, the story of Bheki armed into the heaven as Chrystir
amust havegrown ap gradually, beginning might well be another being from the
with a shortasying about the sun—ench infant whom the nymphs swathe with
as that Wheki, the wan, will die st the gaden ‘pands in his gleaming cradle,
ight of water, on we should say thatthe The warrior comes tu life on the death of
sun will set when it approaches the water the child, and the frog on being dashed
from which it rove in the moraing’— against the wall becomes a beautiful
Chaps from @ German Workshop, ii. 348. Prince, OF course be takes away hie
In the Teutonic vervion, the change of bride, ‘early in the morning ## soon us
the sun into the form of a frog isthe the sun rose, in a cartinge drawn by
remilt of enchantment ; but the atory of eight white horses with ostrich feathurs
the Frog Prince hes more than ‘one on their heads, and goldea bridles, the
point of interest. The frogis compelled Harita who draw the cur of Indra, the
to jump into the fountain, out of which istening steeds of Helios, the undying
uly the youngest gt king who are yoked to the chariot of
the power of drawing him. These Achillews Bat’ with Achilleus comes


aekten sare mcmpasions of Pasrokloe; aad as Lazoen attends on
the


%
E


ania, Trusty Henry who comes
t with the earriuge of t! Prince,
jane of the night, sombre in their Tepreventa the Faithful Jobe’ of the

nty, and envious of the youngest and Teutozie legend. (See note !,.p. 149.)


GROWTH OF POPULAR STORIES.


167,


explain the distant or vague resemblances in one story, while CHAP


VIN.


they who so apply it admit that it cannot account for the far —--_-


more striking points of likeness seen in many others. It is
dangerous because it may lead us to infer an amount of
intercourse between the separated Aryan tribes for which
we shall vainly seek any actual evidence. It is inadequate,
because in a vast number of instances the point to be ex-
plained is not o similarity of ideas, but a substantial identity
in the method of working them out, extending to the most
unexpected devices and the subtlest turns of thought and
expression. That the great mass of popular tradition has
yeen thus imported from the East into the West, or from
the West into the East, has never been maintained; and
any such theory would rest on the assumption that the folk-
lore of a country may be created by a few scholars sitting
over their books, and deliberately determining the form in
which their stories shall be presented to the people. It
would be safer to affirm, and easier to prove, that no popular
stories have thus found their way from learned men to the
common people. The ear of the people has in all ages been
dead to the charming of the scholars, charm they never so
wisely. Bookmen way, if they please, take up and adapt
the stories of the people; but the legend of ‘ the Carter, the
Dog, and the Sparrow’ would never have found its way into
the nurseries of German peasants if written by Grimm
himself in imitation of some other Aryan tale. The im-
portation of one or two stories by means of written books is
therefore a matter of very slight moment, so long as it is
admitted that legends, displaying the most astonishing
parallelism in the most distant countries of Europe and
’ Asia, cannot be traced to any intercourse of the tribes sub-
sequent to their dispersion from a common home. We thus
have before us a vast mass of myths, fables, legertds, stories,
or by whatever name they are to be called, some in a form
not much advanced beyond the proverbial saying which was
their kernel, others existing apparently only as nursery talea,
others containing the germs of the great epics of the Eastern
and the Western world. All these may be placed
in one class, as springing from phrases which at first denoted


168
BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF ABYAN NATIONS.


physical phenomena; and enough has perhaps been already


he said to show that this class includes a very large proportion


Historical
value of


of strictly popular stories which seem at firat sight to be in
no way connected with epical mythology. There remain
the comparatively few stories which seem to have had their
origin in proverbs or adages; and it is, of course, possible
that some or all of these may belong to those more recent
times when men had attained to some notion of the order of
a, moral world, to some idea of law and duty. But it is im-
possible not to see that some at least of these stories turn on
notions suggested by the older mythical speech. The dog
and the parrot in the stories of the Carter and the .Nautch-
girl are weak things which bring down the pride of those
who oppress the helpless; but this is simply the character
and the office of Boots in Teutonic stories, and Boots and
Cinderella, Oidipous and Herakles, alike represent the sun,
wo, weak and powerless as he starts on his course, is at
length victorious over all his enemies. The phenomena of
nature present analogies to the order of the moral world,
which are perhaps closer than theologians have imagined.
If the words which we use to denote the most abstract ideas
were at first mere names of sensible things,’ the phrases
which described the processes of nature must be capable of
receiving a moral meaning. The story of the sun starting
in weakness and ending in victory, waging a long warfare
against darkness, clouds, and storms, and scattering them all
in the end, is the story of all heroism, of all patient self-
sacrifice, of all Christian devotion. There is, therefore,
nothing to surprise us if the phrases which we use with a
spiritual meaning, and the proverbs in which we sum up
our spiritual experience, should have been suggested by the
very phenomena which furnished the groundwork of Aryan
epic poetry. The tendency of physical science is to resolve
complex agencies into 2 single force: the science of language
seems to be doing the same work for the words and the
thoughts of men,

But the story of the heroes of Teutonic and Hindu folk-
lore, the stories of Boots and Cinderella, of Logedas Rajah,

4 Seo p. 81, &e.


THE WAR OF ILION:


and Surya Bai, are the story also of Achilleus and Oidipous,
of Perseus and Theseus, of Helen and Odysseus, of Baldur
and Rustem and Sigurd. Everywhere there is the search
for the bright maiden who has been stolen away, everywhere
the long struggle to recover her. The war of Ilion has been
fought out in every Aryan land, Either, then, the historical
facts which lie at the root of the narrative of the Tliad took
place before the dispersion of the Aryan tribes from their
common home, or they are facts which belong to the beau-
tiful cloudland, where the misty Ilion ‘ rises into towers’ at
early dawn. In either case the attempts recently made to


exhibit the war in’ the plains of Troy to the south of the-


Hellespont as an historical reality are rendered plausible
ouly by ignoring the real point at iesue.


‘169


CHAP
VI

eS

Aryan


popular
traditions,


170


The
‘Method of
Euémeros. *


Its results.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


CHAPTER IX.


MODERN EUEMERISM.


‘Waarever may have been the sins of Euémeros against
truth and honesty, his method aimed simply at the extraction
of historical facts from the legends of his country by stripping
them altogether of their supernatural character, and rejecting
all the impossible or improbable incidents related in them.
Making no pretence of access to documents more trustworthy
than the sources from which the poets had drawn their
inspiration, he claimed to be regarded as a historian, merely
because, after depriving him of all divine powers, he left Zeus
a mortal man, who, for benefits done to his fellows, was
worshipped as a god.’

Although in more recent times this system has been
eagerly adopted and obstinately maintained, Huémeros was
not popular among his countrymen, To them the process
which reduced the gods to the level of mankind seemed to
resolve itself into mere atheism. Still, except 2s applying
his method to the stories of the gods as well as to the legends


made their way into Greece’ There


they introduc:


duced jn all ite completeness or naked-
nesa in the article on Mythology inserted
inthe. Hia Britannica. Having
told us that ‘the adventures of Jupiter,
Juno, Mercury, Apollo, Diana, Minerva
or Pallas, Venus, Bacchus, Ceres, Pro-


ambitious family of the Titane,
by far the greatest part of the
logy of Greece” the writer
digious aseurance adds, ‘


furaish


art, religion, Saw, cus
tom, polity, and good onder; but, oddly
in spite of all these wholesome

ig influences, the Greeks ro-

mained a ‘deluded rabble, who insisted
on paying them divine honoure.’ The
mere enunciation of such absurdities is
diegraceful in avy work which professes
to speak to educated readers, and would
deserve even a severer condemnation if
addressed to the unlearned, But it is
altogether inexcusable, in an article to
which are affixed references to the works
of Grimm, K. 0. Miller, Max Miller,
‘Hermann, snd others. Forthe amusing
Euemeriem of the Abbé Banier, seo
‘Max Miller, Lectures, second series, 400,


EVEMERISM AND PHILOLOGY.


of the epical heroes, he gave no cause of offence which had
not already been given by Herodotos and Thucydides. To
the historian of the Persian war the legends of 16 and
Eurépé, of Medeia and Helen, were valuable simply as
supplying links in the chain of human causes which led to
that great struggle. For this purpose he either availed
himself of the least improbable versions of these myths
current in his own day, or he placed the myths, full as they
were of dragons and speaking heifers, into the crucible of
probabilities, and was rewarded with a residuum of plausible
fiction which would have gladdened the heart of De Foe.
This method, as applied by Thucydides to the story of the
Trojan war, produces results which make it difficult to believe
that his knowledge of that strife was obtained only from the
poems which told of the wrongs and woes of Helen. Yet so
it is. Although in these poems their career was inwoven
into the whole fabric of the narrative, Helen is gone, and
Paris and Achilleus; Hektor and Sarpédén have vanished,

. With Memnén and Athéné and Aphrodité ; and there remains
only a chieftain who undertakes the expedition not at all to
rescue 2 woman who may never have existed, and a war
which lasted ten years, not because Zeus so willed it,' but
because want of men made it necessary that part of the
forces should betake themselves to tilling the ground and
raising crops on the Thrakian Chersonesos, while the rest
carried on the siege.”

That such a method should find favour at the present day
with writers who have made themselves in any degree ac-
quainted with the results of comparative grammar is indeed
astonishing. Argynnis and Phoronens, Briséis and Achilleus,
Paris and Helen, names of persons in Hellenic legend, are in
the earliest songs of the Aryan family found still in their
original application as names of the morning, of the sun, or
‘of darkness; and as it is with these, so is it also with Ker-
beros and the Charites, with Orthros, with Varuna, and Zeus
himself. That these names and these tales could have over-
ran the world from chance, or that the incidents which they
telate could have a distinct historical foundation in a series

1 Mind $i 898 2 Vhveyd. i G17


171


CHAP,


——


Ita ante
gonise |
with the
science of


172


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


ba ta of i incidents occurring in the same sequence and with the
ate same results in every Aryan land, are positions which few


would now venture to maintain; yet such were the theories
which attempted, with some show of reagon, to account for
their origin and diffusion before the sciences of comparative
grammar and mythology came into being. There can scarcely
be 2 greater extravagance of credulity than that which frames
an infinite series of the most astounding miracles in the vain
effort to solve mysteries which must all be opened by one and
the same key, or by none. No absurdity needs to startle us
if we are ready to believe that four or five independent writers
could describe a series of events in exactly the same words ;'
itis, if possible, even more absurd to suppose that tribes, savage
and civilised, many of them utterly unknown to each other,
should hit upon the same stories, should disfigure them by
the same indecencies, should atone for these blots by the
same images of touching pathos and grace and beauty. Yet
some such demand is made on our powers of belief by a writer
who holds that ‘they who literally accept Scripture cannot
afford to ridicule mythology,’ and who, looking about for
traces of an historical character in Greek mythical tradition,
concludes that ‘there are the fairest reasons for supposing
that Hercules was not an allegorical hero, typical of ideal
prowess, endurance, and physical strength; but a real man,
who, living in very remote times, and in some part of the
world where the land was infested with savage beasts and
perhaps the sea with pirates, eurned the gratitude of a
defenceless people by clearing earth and sea of monsters, as a
remarkably uniform tradition ascribes to him. The Cyclopes
were probably a race of pastoral and metal-working people
from the Hast, characterised by their rounder faces, whence —


\ In the supposed case of 6 number
ial correspondents sending home
igh joaroale sccounts of « battle
or cree nsrrative of which
was in early word for word tho
same in several 4} Mr. Froude
says that, ‘were ‘he ween writers themselves,
with their closest friends and com-
panions, to swear that there had been no
Intercommunicstion, and no sory pre pre
existing of which they had
end thateach had written bond fide froma


hie own original observation, an English
jury would sooner believe the whole
party perjured than persuade themselves

thet so extraordinary a coincidence
could have occurred.’—Short Studies on
Great Subjects, i. 246.

Ibis enough to say that the appli-
cation of any such hypothesis of inde.
pendent origination to the mytholo,
the ations involves di Ree,
if possible, atill more stupendous.


GREEK MYTHICAL NAMES.


arose the story of their one eye.’ In the myth of Atlas, the
same writer thinks it ‘impossible to doubt that we have a
tradition of the Garden of Eden.’ If it be said that these


173


CHAP.!
KK.
—


traditions are common to many nations, he ia ready with the ,


reply that the real Herakles or the real, Theseus lived very
long ago, and that the other nations got these, as they got
most of their mythical heroes, from the Etruseans. We find
‘ Adrastus, Tydeus, Odysseus, Meleagros, Polydeuces, written
Atresthe, Tute, Utwye, Melacre, Pultuke; and similarly Aga-
memnon, Thetis, Perseus, Polynices, Telephus, represented by
Achmien, Thethis, Pharse, Phulnike, Thelaphe. So Apollo
js Apulu, Hercules is Ercule, Alexander is Elchentre.’ It
might as well be said that English names are French in
their origin because London and Dover are written Londres
and Douvres, and Sir Humphry Davy has been designated
‘Sromfredévé.’ It can scarcely be maintained with serious-
ness that that which is only in part obscure, and elsewhere
is wonderfully luminous, can be illustrated by what is utterly
dark. Thése names in their Etruscan dress have absolutely
no meaning; in their Greek form most of them are trans-
parent. But when Achilleus is found in Greek and Aharyu in
Sanskrit tradition, when Briséis reappears as the child of Bri-
saya, Helen as Saram4, Ouranos as Varuna, Orthros as Vritra,
and when the meaning of these names is perfectly plain, we
are forced to the conclusion that no explanation can be
received which does not apply to Greek, Sanskrit, and Teu-
tonic names alike. It would be more reasonable, failing this,

+ to fall back upon the ingenious theory by which Lord Bacon,
in his ‘ Wisdom of the Ancients,’ converted the whole cycle
of Greek legend into wholesome advice for princes, cabinet
ministers, and heads of families.’


» Home and Foreign Review, No. VII.
2 11, 1864. It js possible, and even
likely, that the distinguished critic whose
well-known initials appended to this
article make it unnecessary to keep up
suy disguise may have modified or
rejected these conclusions. It is un-
necessary to say that among modern
thinkers none can be found actuated by
amore earnest and single-minded desire
to ascertain the truth of facts without
regard to any secondary considerstions


than Mr. Paley. Hf he bas examined
the question since the time when his
oe yg peered in oe and

‘oreign Review, ho wil ‘bly have
soon, with Professor “Max Miller
(Lectures on the Science of Language,
second series, ix.), “that we caunot

ept any etymology for a Greek name
which is not equally applicable to the
soreeponding terms in Sanskrit and


174


BOOK

a
The
science of
inits


on history.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


But the science which traces both the names of Greek
mythical heroes gud the incidents in their career to the
earlier forms in which their original signification becomes
apparent, completely strips of all historical character the
localised wars of Troy or Thebes, and the traditions which
speak of Kolchis as the scene of the exploits of Iasén. It is
possible that there may have been a war undertaken to avenge
the wrongs of an earthly Helen; that this war lasted ten
years, and that ten yeara more were spent by the chiefs in
their return homewards; that the chief incident in this war
was the quarrel of the greatest of all the heroes with a mean-


, Spirited king, a quarrel in which a truce of gloomy inaction


The Wol-
Theory.


is followed by the magnificent victory and early death of the
hero. But if such a war took place, it must be carried back
to a time preceding the dispersion of the Aryan tribes from
their original home, and its scene can be placed neither in
the lind of the Five Streams, nor on the plains of the Asiatic
Troy, not in Germany or Norway or Wales. The comparison
of the Aryan languages sufficiently establishes these con-
clusions; but the denial of any historical character to the
general narrative of the Trojan war, as given whether by the
Attic tragedians or by our so-called Homeric poems (be these
earlier or later than the days of Hschylos and Sophokles),
makes it a matter of justice to examine patiently and im-
partially the arguments and alleged facts adduced by those
who stil] maintain the positions of Euémeros with regard to
the story told in all its supernatural detail in the Iliad, and
pared down to the plausible prosiness of Robinson Crusoe by
Thucydides.

At the outset if may be safely affirmed that undue stress
has been laid on the Wolfian theory respecting the origin and
structure of the Iliad as affecting the attitude of historical
critics at the present day towards the momentous topic of
Homeric credibility. There is really no ground for the notion
that doubts as to the historical credibility of the poems to-
which we give the name of Homer can be entertained only
by thosé who accept the position of Wolf and his followers.
The Wolfian theory, to speak briefly, maintains that the
Iliad is made up of a number of songs which existed at first


THE THEORY OF WOLF.


ag detached poems, and which were handed down from gene-
ration to generation by a school of rhapsodiste or professional
minstrels, It was not, therefore, the work of any one man,
and possibly not even of any one age. This conclusion is
grounded partly on the absence of writing at and long after
the time when these poems first came into existence, and in
part on the incoherence and contradictions which an exami-
nation of the poems brings prominently into view. It follows
that there was no one author of the Iliad, or in other words,
that Homer is a neme, not a person. This hypothesis has
found its extreme expression in the ‘ Klein-lieder Theorie’ of
Kéchly.

But if this notion were exploded utterly,’ the real question
at issue would probably be in no degree affected. Thus,
although Mr. Grote may have affirmed that ‘Homer is no
individual man, but the divine or heroic father of the gentle
Homerids,’* he nowhere argues from this statement as a pre-
miss, while he is careful to add that the Odyssey is indubi-
tably one poem written by one man, and that the Diad in its
present form, although it contains an Dias and an Achilléis
combined, is probably the work of one and the same poet,
who pieced together two compositions which he had wrought
out for two different purposes. If we further take his con-
clusion, that the Odyssey in all likelihood was not composed
by the author of the Iliad, even then we have only two, or
at the utmost only three poets, to whom we are indebted for
the great Greek epics which have been handed down to us.
‘Whether these conclusions are hasty or extravagant, whether


either not recognised or not promnl-
gated was, the essentially rhapsodic
chunicter of al! known poeme belonging


} At present it cannot be regarded as
exploded at all. Dr. Latham's words
have here great weight :—‘ The Wolfisn


doctrine of the rhapsodic ebaracter of
the Homeric poems, hed the existing
state of knowledge been sufficient for
the criticism, would scarcely have been
paradox. As it wus, it dealt with the
dliad and Odyseey os ordinary epics,
comparing them only with those of
‘Virgil, Tasno, Ariouto, Cumoens, Er-
cills, ‘and Milton: epics of which the
single-handed authorship was 8 patent
historical event, aa clear as that of the
authorship of Faleoner's Shipwreck or
Glover's ides. The fuct thet wae


to that stage of civilisation to which the
Homeric compositions are referred.
‘With the recognition of this, the mo-
thod, as the details, of the criticiem
wants changing; and it is not 80 much
a suaion rete fot facta in the
structure of two wont poems justi
the hy jia that they“arose. parr
agglutination of rhapeodies, but whether
there is even presumption against their

wing doneso.—Nationalitios of Europe,
207.


* History of Greece, part i. ch, xxi,


i


175


CHAP.
I.
—S


The real
question at
iseue.


16 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


ee they run counter to the evidence of facts or are opposed to
—“— common sense, it is clear that the poems are not invested
with more of a historical character because we hold that they
are the work of three or two authors, or of one. Such a
result is impossible, unless we can prove that the poet (or
poets) lived in or near to the time of which the history is
professedly narrated, and if his (or their) statements are
borne out by other contemporary writers. If the story which
the poet relates had come down from a period remote even in
his day—if its general character, both in the causes and the
sequence of incidents, exhibits a close resemblance to the
traditions of distant countries with which the Hellenic tribes
could not possibly have had any intercourse—if the very
names of the actors and the deeds #ttributed to them are
found in the legends of other lands or other ages—we are
obviously just where we were before, so far as the attainment
of historical fact is concerned, even when we have succeeded
in proving that there was only one Homer, and that he was
born at Smyrna. Whether we believe in twenty Homers or
in one is, in one sense, a matter of supreme indifference in
comparison with the inquiry which is to determine whether
the events recorded in the poems are to be considered his-

torical.
Residuum On such a subject as this all reference to consequences is
eee out of place, and of itself suffices to show that we are not
the Iliad. actuated wholly and solely by a disinterested and unswerving
resolution to reach, so far as may be in our power, the truth
of facts. The question must be treated altogether as one a
evidence only, and no pain which we may feel at: the possible
necessity of parting with old associations should have the
slightest weight with us. Even if we had to abandon a rich
inheritance of poetical beauty, the sacrifice ought to be
cheerfully made. The fear that any such sacrifice will be de-
manded of us is idle and groundless; but for those who deny
the historical credibility of the Iliad or Odyssey it is neces-
sary to know how much of real history their opponenta sup-
pose these poems to contain. Happily, this question is
answered with most satisfactory clearness by the latest and
the most strenuous of the champions of the traditional theory.


HISTORICAL RESIDUUM OF THE ILIAD.


In the belief of Mr. Blackie, the residuum of fact is, it seems,
this: ‘That there was a kingdom of Priam, wealthy and
powerful, on the coast of the Dardanelles; that there was a
great naval expedition undertaken against this Asiatic
dynasty by the combined forces of the European Greeks and
some of the Asiatic islanders, under the leadership of Aga-
memnon, king of Mycenz; that there was a real Achilles,
chief of a warlike clan in the Thessalian Phthiotis, and a
real quarrel betwixt him and the general-in-chief of the
Hellenic armament; that this quarrel brought about the
most disastrous results to the Greek host, in the firat place,
and had nearly caused the failure of the expedition ; but that
afterwards, a reconciliation having been effected, a series of
brilliant achievements followed, which issued soon after in
the capture of the great Asiatic capital.’ !

If this outline of Homeric history were placed before one
who had never heard of Homer, and if he were further told
that the outline is the picture, what would be his reply ? Muat
he not say, ‘ You do not ask me to believe much, and indeed
you have only sketched out some incidents of not uncommon
occurrence; I suppose, however, that you have obtained
them from some narrative which gives no ground for calling
its trustworthiness into question, and which is corroborated
by the testimony of competent witnesses. In other words,
you have doubtless gained this knowledge precisely in the
same way as I have learnt that some eight hundred years
ago there was a great struggle which ended in the death of
the English king at Hastings, and the forced election of
William the Norman in his place?’

The admission that he must look for nothing of the kind,
and that the process by which these historical results are
obtained is of a wholly different nature, would probably
cause him some perplexity, and might possibly waken in him
a vague feeling of distrust. If he were possessed of the
critical faculty, and still more, if he had any acquaintance
with the applications of the laws of evidence to alleged facta


1 Blackie, Homer and the Tiiad. Mr. residuum of the Odyssey, although that
Blackie does not point out with the poem has an important bearing on the
same clerrness the nrecise historical theory which be so gealoualy mnhatie


U7
CHAP.


IX.
Se


‘The teat of
Homeric
credibility.


Results of
this test.


178


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


of the present day, he would naturally begin to examine with


—-—~ some care the statements brought before him, and the grounds


Taws of
evidence.


on which they rest, The examination would be followed by
unfeigned astonishment, for he would find himself asked to
believe in political struggles between conflicting empires on
the authority of a narrative in which from first to last there
is not a semblance of political motive, and where, instead of
a chain of causation like that which obtains in ordinary life,
there is throughout a thaumaturgic plot in which gods and
men art inextricably mingled together. He is introduced to
a struggle which lasts ten years, because so it had been
ordained of Zeus according to the sign of the snake and the
sparrows, and which is brought about and turns solely on the
theft of the Spartan Helen by Paris, once or otherwise called


“Alexandros. Apart from this, there is absolutely no motive


for the war, nor without it is there anything left of the story.
It is of the very essence of the narrative that Paris, who has
deserted Oindné, the child of the stream Kebrén, and before
whom Héré, Athéné, and Aphrodité had appeared as
claimants for the golden apple, steals from Sparta the
beautiful sister of the Dioskouroi; that the chiefs are sum-
moned together for no other purpose than to avenge her woes
and wrongs; that Achilleus, the son of the sea-nymph Thetis,
the wielder of invincible weapons and the lord of undying
horses, goes to fight in a quarrel which is not his own; that
his wrath is roused because he is robbed of the maiden
Briséis, and that thenceforth he takes no part in the strife
until his friend Patroklos has been slain; that then he puts
on the new armour which Thetis brings to him from the
anvil of Hephaistos, and goes forth to win the victory. The
details are throughout of the same nature; Achilleus sees
and converses with Athéné; Aphrodité is wounded by Dio-
médés, and Sleep and Death bear away the lifeless Sarpédén
on their noiseless wings to the far-off land of light.'

By what standard, then, or by what tests is this story to


1 "The contents of the two great lying part from this connection: these
of Homer are... of anentirely series are, moreover, so handled as to
suythie character. They treat divers form each a rounded-off aud com
series of legends which stand in close whole—K. 0. Miller, Introduction to
‘uninterrupted concatenation, snd only a Scientific Mythology, p. 24.
here and there take notice of others


JUDICIAL TESTIMONY. 179


be jndged, and how are we to measure its historical value? cHaP.
Mr. Blackie pauses in some vehement denunciations of _%_
modern sceptical tendencies, to refer us to Sir Cornewall
Lewis’s volumes on the Credibility of Early Roman History,
“a work distinguished by all that comprebensiveness of plan,
massive architecture, and substantial workmanship, so cha-
racteristic of its author.’ The reader who is unacquainted
with the book might well suppose, from the absence of all
other reference to it, that on the whole it bears out Mr.
Blackie’s method of dealing with the Homeric poems. He
would again be perplexed at finding there a merciless de-
molition of all his theories and all his conclusions. But at
the least he would be under no doubt as to Sir Cornewall
Lewis’s meaning, and he would find principles laid down
which claim to be of universal application, and which must
be false if exceptions are to be admitted. ‘It seems to be
often believed,’ says Sir G. C. Lewis, ‘and at all events it is
perpetually assumed in practice, that historical evidence is
different in its nature from other sorts of evidence. Until
this error is effectually extirpated, all historical researches
must lead to uncertain results. Historical evidence, like
judicial evidence, is founded on the testimony of credible
witnesses. Unless, therefore, a historical account can be
traced by probable proof to the testimony of contemporaries,
the first condition of historical credibility fails.’

How then would a British jury deal with a charge brought Their ap-
against the chief of one Scottish clan of murdering the chief erie
of another clan, in feuds which, if now unknown, were courts of
familiar enough not many generations ago? What if the dontiie:
witnesses came forward to say that even before his birth the
slain chief had been marked as the future destroyer of his
Kinsfolk; that deserting his own wife, he had requited the
hospitality of the accused by earrying off his young bride;
that thence had sprung a feud between their clans, which
the seanagals or soothsayers lad said should last for ten
years; that before the final conflict, in which the aggressor
was slain, strange sights were seen in the heavens, and
strange sounds were heard in the air; that in the battle
itself the progenitors of the clans had been seen ‘fighting


180


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK ‘with the warriors of flesh and blood, and that by the death
wastes of the betrayer, according to the ancient tokens, the wrong


Applica
tion to
Homeric
history.


“all what they had been represented to be.


had been at length atoned? According to the theory which
finds a real historical residuum in the Jliad, the verdict
onght to be one of guilty; for, although certain parts, nay,
indeed all parts, of the story were in one sense incredible,
yet ‘the materials, so far as they assume the human and
narrative form, are in their root and scope historical mate-
rials;’! and therefore as there must be some foundation for


* the tale, it may be fairly concluded that the one chief had


Killed the other, although there was strong reason for think-
ing that the cause and duration of the quarrel were not at
This, however,
could make no difference, for so long as the existence of a
feud had been shown, it really mattered very little how it
had been brought about, or whether either chief had a wife
at al’.

This process, which we langh at as midsummer madness
when applied to recent incidents, becomes, it seems, not
only legitimate but indispensable, when we have to deal
with legends which have flowed down the sea of tradition
through centuries or even millenniums. No injustice is done
to Mr. Blackie in thus putting the matter.* It is his own


) Blackie, Homer and the Iliad.


1 Tt can searcely be necessary to say
that the arguments of the Edinburgh
Professor of Greek are here cited, only
‘because they are the most recent, and
probably the most able, exposition of
‘ibe traditional theories.

The Euemeristic method, for #0 it
may be most conveniently termed, has
‘been applied to the unwieldy Hindu
epic, the Mah&bbérata, by Professor
‘Lassen and Mr. Wheeler. The results
obtained are sufficiently contradictory.
‘The poem, or collection of poems, is a6
full of supernatural or impossible in-
cidents sa the Jiad or the Odyssey, or
any other Aryan epic; but the main
sory turns oa a Detween the
Kauraves and the Phndavas, as flerce
und protracted as the warfare between
the Tmjans and Achsiana, while the
return of the PAndavas to the inheritance


of which they had been deprived :
into of to incidenta eiolerly done


parallel to the return of the Herakleids.
‘Many of the marvels in the paem are
met with aleo in Greek and Teutonic
tradition. Arjuna, the child of the sun,
je wedded to a serpent princess, as in
the story of Herakles and Echidna, or
of Raymond of Toulouse and Melusina,
To get at the caput mortuum of history
supposed to be contained in the poem,
all these wonders are of course to be
Rijested. Thus fer both critis are
agreed: but for all practical puxpoves
here the agreement ends, Broforeor
‘Lassen looks on the chief actors in the
drama not as real persous, but only aa
symbolical representations of conditions
and events in the early history of India,
‘Thus the polyandric mezriege of Drau-
padt would point to the five tribes of
the people of: Pinchila, and the whole
poem would exhibit the subjugation of
‘the aboriginal inbebitante by the Aryan
invaders. Accepting this view of the
purport of the poem, Mr. Wheeler, in


EUVEMERISM OF HERODOTUS.


assertion that ‘ whether the treacherous abduction of the fair
Helen was the real cause of the Trojan War or not, is a
matter of the smallest moment. That there were such
abductions in those times, and in those parts of the world,
is only too certain.’ It might well be thought that the
writer of these words had before him some irrefragable
evidence of this fact; but the reader who is here referred
‘particularly (to) what Herodotus says in the well-known
Introduction to his History,’ is doomed to a fresh surprise. If
he is approaching the subject for the first time, he will read a
perfectly probable, although somewhat dull, story of a young
lady of Argos who went down to buy wares from a Phenician
merchant-ship, and either with or against her own will was
carried off by the captain. The refusal of the Phenicians
to make reparation leads to retaliation, and the Argive chiefs
steal away Eurdpé, the daughter of the Tyrian king, Thus
far the game was equal, for neither side would make amends;
but some time afterwards the quarrel was renewed by the
Greeks who took Medeia from Kolchis, and thus led to the
seduction of Helen by Paris. Thus was brought about the
expedition of Troy, in requital of which Xerxes invaded
Europe, leaving it to Alexander the Great to clear off old
scores at Issos and Arbela. On turning to what are called
the original authorities for these events, the much-suffering
reader would find that the young Argive lady was one of the
many loves of Zeus, who changed her into a heifer; that in
this form, chased by the gad-fly of Héré, she wandered over
mountains and deserts, until she came to the desolate crags
where Prometheus was paying the penalty for his love of
man; that the Phenician maiden is the sister of Kadmos
the dragon-slayer, and is borne on the back of the white bull
across the western waters ; that the daughter of the Kolchian


his History of India, looks on the five say that the gleanings of Professor
husbands of Draupadi as contemporary Lassen aud Mr. Wheeler are no more
princes, and regards her polyandric the story of the Mubdbhirata than the
Tmarriage as a historical incident in the jan war of the Euemerists is the
lives of these five men. It iv obvious Trojan war of our Miad and Odyssey, or
that both these conclusions cannot be of the great die and tragic poeta of
accepted, and as no valid reasons can Greece, Sce Westminster Reviw,
Ye given for preferring either, we are April, 1868, p. 408, &.; Max Miller,
ound to rejert bath Tt is enouch to Sanskrit Tuterature, p. 46, &e.


181


CHAP,


» 182


BOOK
IL


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


king is the wise woman, who enables Iaséu to overcome the


~—+— fire-breathing balls after destroying the offepring of the


The valoe
of the
historical
residuum
in the
iad.


‘Difficulties


involved
ip the


* dragon’s teeth, who is carried through the air in her dragon
chariot, and who possesses the death-dealing robe of Helios.
If on being thus brought into the regions of cloudland, the
reader asks whether Herodotos had not before him some
evidence different in kind from that which has come down
to us, or from that which is given in his Introduction, the
answer is that he obtained his very prosaic and likely story
from precisely those legends and those legends only, with

, Which we are scarcely less familiar than he was.

The result then is briefly this, that Mr. Blackie has before
him a singularly circumstantial and complicated narrative,
in which the motives of the actors and their exploits are
detailed with the most minute care, and in which no dis-
tinct‘on whatever is drawn between one kind of causation
and another. This narrative he reduces to the merest caput
mortuwm, The causes of the war, the general character of
the struggle, the plans and objects of the combatants, all
vanish. Nothing remains but the bare fact that there was
a quarrel of some kind or other; and the conclusion forced
upon us is this,—that in all traditional narratives which in-
volve thaumaturgic action, or which exhibit a causation dif-
ferent from that which we see at work in the world around
us, the historical residuum, according to Mr. Blackie, must,
be sought by rejecting all motives and incidents which tran-
scend the course of ordinary experience. All such things
are the mere husk or shell, of no consequence whatever,
as long as we admit the naked fact which is supposed to lie
beneath. This is, in truth, to lay down a canon in com-
parison with which the Wolfian hypothesis becomes weak
and almost pointless; and they who commit themselves
to this position must take the consequences which cannot
fail to follow the application of these principles to all records
whataoevers


At once, then, two questions may be asked: (1) Why, if


ations we are thus to pick and choose, should we accept precisely
view.


the fare which Mr. Blackie puts before us, neither more nor
Jess? (2) Why -honld wa affirm the hictarice] ra: lity af th-


THE PRESENCE OF HELEN AT ILION.


residuum, merely because we decline formally to deny its
existence? If the story of Jack the Giant-Killer be clipped
and pared as the traditionalists have pared down the ‘tale of
‘Troy divine,’ the beanstalk-ladder to heaven, the giant, and
the giant’s wife, all go into thin air together, and there re-
mains only some valiant John who overcomes and punishes
some tyrant or oppressor. Giants do not exist, and bean-
stalk-ladders to the moon conflict with the theory of gravi-
tation. Yet it is not eaay to see why out of such wealth
of materials we should retain so little, or why, in the latter
case, we should not say boldly and candidly that we do not
believe any part of the story. This was the straightfor-
ward and manly course adopted by the poet when he said
emphatically,

odx tor’ Erupos Adyos obras,

088" EBas &y rpucly eberéruoss,

088° reo wépyaya Tpoias.
That whole nations should fight year after year for the sake
of one woman, and that the Trojaus should allow their city
to be beleaguered when her surrender would have set every-
thing straight at once, was to Herodotos simply incredible,
and therefore he caught eagerly at the version which said
that Helen, instead of being at Troy, was detained at the
court of Proteus, King of Egypt.! The same disbelief of the
Homeric legend led Thucydides quietly to ignore Helen, to
substitute a political for a personal motive in the case of
Agamemnon, and tv account for the length of the war by
the alleged fact that from Jack of numbers the Achaians
were driven to divide their forces, some betaking themselves
to agriculture in the Chersonesos, and others to piracy, while
the rest maintained the siege of Ilion. All that can be
said on this point is, that the scepticism of Thucydides is
far less than that of the modern Euemerists. ‘If the great
historian,’ says Mr. Grote, ‘could permit himself thus to
amend the legend in so many points, we might have ima~


' Herodotos, i. 112. This Proteus, Lewis remarks that ‘much of what is
however, is simply the wise man of the called Egyptian history has evidently
gyn, the Sah-god of Ninevites aa bein bocromal fre Greek mythology.’

‘lintines. —Od. iv. $85, &. Onthie —. jenta, ch. vi.
narrative in Herodotos Sir Comewail we ia


183
CHAP.


Ix.
—_


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


gined that a simpler course would have been to include the
duration of the siege among the list of poetical exaggera-
tions, and to affirm that the real siege had lasted only one
year instead of ten. But it seems that the ten years’
duration was so capital a feature in the ancient tale, that
no critic ventured to meddle with it.’! If with Mr. Blackie
we set aside even the abduction of Helen as a matter of not
the slightest importance, we may very reasonably set aside
the period aasigned to the war ; but having gone so far, why
should .we not at once adopt the version of Dion Chryso-
stom, which gives an account of the war diametrically op-
posed to that of the Iliad, representing Paris as the lawful
husband of Helen, and Achilleus as slain by Hektér, while
the Greeks retire, disgraced and baffled, without taking Troy?
It is hard to see why the residuum of modern Euemerists
should be preferred to that of a Greek writer certainly much
nearir to the time when the events took place, if they
ever took place at all. The ruins of Mykénai and Tiryns,
even if they attest the fidelity of Homeric epithets, and the
existence of an ancient and powerful state in the Pelopon-
nesos,? cannot of themselves prove that the kings or chiefs
of those cities were successful in all their expeditions, and


' History of Greece, part i. ch. xv.

2 With the geographical accuracy of
the Homeric posta of the Iliad and
Odyssey we are only indirectly concerned.
If the epithets #0 freely inserted in the
Catalogue and elsewhere themselves
point to poems of which portions have
‘been absorbed into our Homer, the com-
‘posite character of these poems is still
further established, and a fresh diffi-
culty placed in the way of those who
claim for them a definite historical
value, And it may be fuirly urged that
a grat deal too much has been made of
this supposed exactness of description.
‘The reviewer of Mr, Gladatonee Homeric
‘Studies, in the Edinburgh Review for
Octuber 1858, p. 611, boldly avers that
of any personal acquaintance on the
att of the poet with the interior of
Northern Greece,‘or the Peloponnesos,
or many even of the principal islands,
there is no evidence beyond that of the
epithets by which places are described,
and especially in the Catalogue; and in
support of this position quotes the words


of Mr. Clark, who, in his Peloponnese,
p. 206, auserts that ‘Sometimes the
‘story and the language are in strict se-
cordunoe with the observed facts of geo-
graphy and topography; sometimes in
striking contradiction.” Mr. Clark adds
the explanation of this fact. ‘uch city
has its own heroes and legends, and its
own bards to celebrate them. A multi-
tude of smaller epics have been absorbed
in the Ziad and the Odyssey, und the
epithets attached inulisnably to this
city und that, are among the relics of
those perished songs: and the audience
required no more,” This is as fur ud-
vanced as the scepticium of Kéchly,
while the reviewer's conclusiun (that the
author of the Jiad was well acquainted
with the region round Troy and with
parte of the Egean coast, and that the
author of the Odyssey was personally
familiar with the western side) implicitly
denies the common authorship of the
two poems which seems to be conceded
‘by Mr. Grote.


AGAMEMNON AND ACHILLEUS.


therefore that they did not fail at Tlion, The reality of
the struggle is unaffected by the victory or the defeat of
Agamemnon. If it be urged that the West ultimately
achieved a supremacy, it does not follow that the fall of
Tlion was the beginning, any more than that it was the
consummation of their triumphs.

But not only does Mr. Blackie (and here it must be re-
peated that his arguments are cited only as the latest
and perhaps the most able defence of the conservative
theory) misrepresent or keep out of sight the real position
taken upon such subjects by the most rigorous historical
critics in this country: he also uses ambiguous words in
defining his own conclusions, or substitutes in later passages
expressions which alter or take away the force of statements
previously made. In one page we are told that the Homeric
narrative sets forth some historical facts, as in the passage
already quoted,' one of these facts being that Achilleus had
a real quarrel with the general-in-chief of the Hellenic
armaments.? In another, the facts resolve themselves into
impressions which the facts may have left on the minds of
the poets, but which, fur from being in accordance with the
incidents as they actually occurred, may, he admits, be
altogether at variance with them.’ In another, the quarrel
itself of Achilleus fades away like every other feature of the
story, for ‘whether we suppose Agamemnon and Achilles,
the representatives of southern and northern Greece, to have
actually set out together in the same expedition, or to be
the distinct captains of two separate armaments confounded
in the popular imagination, so far as the essentials of history
are concerned, both the men and the facts remain.’*

Can anything be more amazing? We are told first that
the quarrel and the subsequent reconciliation of the two
chiefa form an essential part of the history of the Tliad, and
next, that it really makes no difference if we suppose that
the king and the hero never met at all. This is, in truth,
to blow hot and to blow cold from the same mouth; and all
that we can do is to oppose a determined front to such


" Hemer and the Niad, vol. i. p. 177. * Bid. i, 81.
* Did. i, 38. + Tid. i. 79.


185


CHaP.
i.
SS


Their irre-
concilable
resulta,


186


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


arbitrary demands on our credulity, or to surrender ourselves


~—-__. bound hand and foot to a despot who is to dictate to us from


Value of
traditional
impree-
sions.


moment to moment the essentials, 2s he is pleased to term
them, of historical tradition. We have a right to ask not
only what we are to receive as facts of history, but also by
what method these facts are ascertained. If the method be
worth anything, its working must be regular, and its appli-
cation ought to yield the same results in every hand; but
we have already seen that the system (if it can be called
such) ‘followed by the Euemerista has produced one version
of the Trojan war by Thucydides, another by Stesichoros
and Herodotos, another by Dion Chrysostom, and two more
by Mr. Blackie; every one of these being irreconcilable with
the rest. If we choose anyone of these summaries of his-
torical residues at the expense of the others, what is this
but to cheat ourselves with the conceit of knowledge without
the reality ?

But although it is impossible to grapple with canons of
interpretation so supple and elastic, it is possible to show
that they cannot be applied except on the basis of pure
assumption. The broad statement that the Tliad gives us an
account of certain incidents which really took place, resolves
itself in other passages into the assertion that the oral tradi-
tion of a people may, after hundreds or even thousands of
years, ‘be more true to the real character of the fact than
the written testimony of this or that contemporary witness.’
But a fact is one thing, and the impression produced by a
fact ia another; and if the impression leads to the ascription
of an historical character to incidents which confessedly
never took place, then it is certain that we cannot from this
impression derive any historical knowledge. We can only
suppose that the impression was caused by something we
know not what, and cannot say when or how, unless we have
authentic contemporary narratives to explain it; buteven in
this our knowledge is derived {and too great a stress cannot
be laid on this fact) wholly from the historical document,
and not from the floating popular tradition. That this is so
will be made clear by examining those very instances which
Mr, Blackie brings forward in support of a different con-


VALUE OF POPULAR TRADITIONS. 187


clusion. The first is the tradition which points ont the CHAP.
summit of a flat-topped conical hill near Scarborough as the —_-
spot where Cromwell encamped during the siege of the castle
in the great rebellion. ‘This,’ he tells us, ‘is the tradition
of the place. But on looking at the topographical autho-
rities, we learn from Parliamentary papers that Cromwell
was not there at the period implied, and in fact never could
have been there, as at that time he was conducting military
operations in another part of thé country. Here is a plain
case of local and oral tradition at issue with authentic
written evidence; but what points does the issue touch?
Only this, that at the siege of a particular castle, at 2 certain
date in the great civil war, the future head of the great
English commonwealth aud virtual king of the British em-
pire was not bodily present. This, however, is a compara-
tively small matter; the triple fact remains, that there was a
great civil war in England between the Crown and the Com-
mons at the time specified; that in this war the castle of
Scarborough was an object of contention between the parties ;
and that in the same war a man called Oliver Cromwell was
one of the principal generals of the popular party.’' Here
the tradition relates to a time for which we have confessedly
the most ample and minute contemporary information in
written documents: but we must suppose that our whole
knowledge of the great struggle in the time of Charles I. is
derived from the Scarborough tradition, before we can have
the slightest warrant for comparing it with the Homeric
story, How would the case stand then? It would simply
assert an incident to be a fact which, as it so happens, we
know to be not a fact, and we should have a vague idea of
some contest without knowing anything about its causes, its
character, or its issue. All that can be said is that, as it so
happens, the known history of the time enables us to account
for the impression, but that from the impression itself we
derive no historical knowledge whatever. It ip the same
with the next alleged instance of the two women, M‘Lachlan
and Wilson, who are said to have been exposed on the beach,
and drowned at the mouth of the Bladnoch water.’ In this


oes tame ars


188-


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


case Mr. Blackie thinks it more likely that certain legal


—t_ documents may have been lost than that the sentence was


The
legend of
Roland,

and the


Nibelun-
gen Lied.


not carried out; but even admitting that the women were
reprieved, he thinks that nothing more is disproved than the
fact that they were drowned, ‘ not that there was no inten-
tion to drown them, not that the act of drowning them, if
carried out, was not in harmony with the whole character of
the government by whose minions they had been condemned.’
Here again we are thoroughly acquainted with the character
of the government from other sources; but if we were con-
fined to the tradition or to others like it, we should have
before us only a string of incidents, none of which took place,
while we should be left to guess the causes which led to such
false impressions. But history is not a field for conjecture,
however ingenious.

Nor is it more reasonable to dismiss the Carolingian epic
eyc.e as worth little, because in its ultimate form we see
‘that wanton play of fancy, and that intentional defiance of
all probability’ which makes Ariosto useful to the student of
Homer only ‘as presenting the greatest possible contrast.’!
The reality of this contrast is a mere assumption which, as
we have seen, was denied by Stesichoros, Herodotos, and
Dion Chrysostom. The very pith and marrow of the Hiad
lies in the detention of Helen at Troy while the ten years’
siege went on; and so great, and so thoroughly intentional
in their eyes was this defiance of probability, that they
altogether denied the fact. But the Carolingian legends,
like the Scarborough tradition, relate to a time for which we
have contemporary historical information ; and in support of
the story of Roland, who fell at Roncesvalles, the statement
of Eginhard has been adduced that in a battle with the
Basques there was slain, along with others, ‘ Hruodlandus
Britannici limitis preefectus.’ It is therefore argued that we
may expect to find in the Trojan legend about the same
amount of truth which the Carolingian myth is supposed to
contain. The answer to this is, that apart from the words
of Eginhard we could not affirm the death of Roland as a
fact, although we could not in terms deny it. But the slender

+ Homer and the iad, i. 55,


THE LEGEND OF ROLAND.


trust to be reposed even in the names preserved by popular
tradition is brought out prominently by the remarkable song
of Attabiscar.! In this song (which seems to relate to the
fight at Roncesvalles, although the place is named Ibaiieta),
the Frank king mentioned in it is called Carloman.

Fly, ye who hare the strength: fly, ye who have horses :

Fly, King Carloman, with thy sable plumes and scarlet mantle.

This, as Grimm and Michelet have supposed, was the real
name of Charles during his lifetime, Carolus Magnus being
merely the Latinised form of Carloman. But as Charles had
a brother named Carloman, who survived his father Pippin
three years, it is possible that the Basque poet may have
confused the names of the two brothers, although Carloman
died seven years before the fight of Ronceavalles. But for
the crucial instance of the fallacious nature of popular tra-
dition we are forced back upon the Nibelungen Lied, which
tells us of Gunther, the Burgundian king, conquered by the
Huna of Attila, and relates the murder of Siegbert, king of
Austrasia, who defeated the Huns. From independent con-
temporary historians we know that these persons actually
lived, and these deeds were actually done. The conclusion,
that here we may really separate the historical element from
the fictitious, seems at first sight irresistible, Yet every one
of these incidents and almost all the names are found, as we
have already seen, in the older Saga of the Volsungs. We
can measure, therefore, the value to be assigned to the state-
ment that‘ the general character of this Teutonic epic is dis-
tinctly historical.’* The true facts are these. We have in
the later poem the names which are supposed to denote
Siegbert, Brunhilt, Attila, Gunther, Swanhild, while in the
older lay we have Sigurd, Brynhild, Atli, Gunnar, Swanhild ;
the incidents recorded of each being in both cases the same.
It is unnecessary here to urge that the Volsung story of
Sigurd, Brynhild, and Gudrun is precisely the same as the
story of Paris, Helen, and Oinéné, and many others in the
Greek eycle, for even without this parallelism, élose as it
seems to be, we see beyond all possibility of doubt that our


1 Michel, Le Pays Basque, p. 288. * See page 60,
© Ricchie, Homer and the Tiad,


189


CHAP.


190


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


nex knowledge of the supposed Austrasian actors in the Nibelung
cee ee gong is in no way derived from that poem, and that in at-


tempting to separate the historical from the mythical ele-
ments we are only following a will of the wisp. Far, there-
fore, from furnishing any warrant for the conclusion that
there was a real Agamemnon and a real Achilleus, the great
German epic justifies a strong suspicion even of the names
which are embodied in the oral traditions of a people. Far
from being able to extract any history from the Nibelung
tale, we should even: be wrong in thinking that the legend
reflected the history of the age of ‘Attila, Theodoric, and
Gundicar. The names and incidents alike recede into the
beautiful cloudland, where they mingle with the parallel
legends of Agamemnon and Odysseus, of Isfendiyar and
Feridun; and the distinction which some have sought to
establish between quasi-historical myths, as those of the
‘Trcjan and Carolingian cycle, and those which, like those
of Herakles and Perseus, are termed quasi-theological, falls
to the ground, or at the least, becomes for all practical pur-
poses worthless.' If we know that Hruodland died at Ron-
ceavalles, it is only because we happen to have for that fact
the testimony of the contemporary Eginhard ; and the same
contemporary evidence shows that the popular tradition is’
wrong in the very substance of the story which takes the
great Karl himself as a crusader to the Holy Land. But the
more ancient epics of the Aryan nations cannot be checked
by sny such contemporary history; and the results as ap-
plied to the Carolingian myths is not sufficiently encourag-
ing to justify our regretting that the process is in the case
of the Trojan legends impossible. AN the stories stand, in
short, on the same level.* The myth of Herakles enters into
the so-called history of Laomedontian Troy as much as that
of Agamemnon into the annals of the Troy of Priam; and
there is no reason why the capture of the city by Herakles
should not be as historical as its overthrow by the confede-
rated Achnians. The quasi-theological myth of Herakles is


) Fortnightly Review, No, XXIV. Max Miller, Lectures on Language,
May 1, bd secund series, 399.
rote, History of Greece, i. 636.


LAWS OF EVIDENCE.


thus also quasi-historical ; and from both alike it is impossible
to reap any harvest of historical facts,


“191


CHAE.


cee


In reality, we have to go back to first principles. Sir Principles


Cornewall Lewis has laid down certain canons of credibility
which are at the least intelligible, and which are exclusively
acted on in English courts.! The modern Euemerist lays
down none: and even in cases where he abandons existing
incidents as given in the popular tradition, even where he
admits that the legends contradict each other or themselves,
even where he puts aside, as matters of no importance, the
cardinal facts on which they turn, he yet insists on retaining
what he calls the central fact, and on maintaining the gene-
ral truth of popular impressions, while be imparte to that
fact and to those impressions the particular form which may
best suit his present purpose. All that can be said is, that
the application of such principles to alleged facts of the
present day would issue in the total collapse of justice, and
set up a reign of universal terror. Where narratives or
chronological schemes, of whatever kind, or of whatever age,
coutradict themselves or each other, we are bound, according
to Sir Cornewall Lewis,* to reject them all, unless we have
good grounds for adopting one to the exclusion of the rest. A
mere isolated name, and a bare fact, can be of no use to us.
If the Homeric poems (and to this, after all, even Mr. Blackie
finds himself reduced) tell us no more than that there was a
king named Agamemnon, and a chief called Achilleus, who
may never have been at Troy, (for Cromwell was not at Sear-
borough), and that there was also a struggle of some sort,
although we know not what, at Ilion, we have before us a
barren statement of which we can make nothing. Such a
war may be matched with that Arabian invasion which, ac-
cording to Assyrian tradition, cut short the so-called Chal-
dean empire. Of this invasion Mr. Rawlinson admits that
he can say but little. ‘Indeed, we do not possess any dis-
tinct statement that it was by force of arms the Arabians
amposed their yoke on the Chaldean people. “The brief


+ redblty of Barly Roman History, tories} Credibility
vol. i, ch. iv, Seo alo Dictionary of iy of te
Beience, i


the Ancients, p. 348,
Literature, and Art, article


of eri-


dence,


192


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


n0OK summary of Berosus’s narrative preserved to us in Eusebius
—-— does but say that after the Chaldean dynasty which héld the


throne for 458 years, there followed a dynasty of nine Arab
kings, who ruled for 245 years, Still, as we can scarcely
suppose that the proud and high-spirited Chaldeans would
have submitted to a yoke so entirely foreign as that of Arabs
raust have been, without a struggle, it seems necessary to
presume a contest wherein the native Hamitic race was at-
tacked by a foreign Semitic stock, and overpowered, so as to
be forced to accept a change of rulers, Thus, then, the
Chaldean kingdom perished.’! Certainly, if ever there was
such a kingdom, it may have so fallen; but to say that it
did so, is the purest guess-work; and it may be enough to
quote the words of the ‘Edinburgh Review,’ on a like re-
construction of English history, after the narrative has been
lost. ‘The dynasty of the Stuarts,’ it may then be said,
*seeris to have given four kings to England, and many more
to Scotland, when it was expelled by Dutch invaders. Of
this invasion we have no details. Indeed, it is not distinctly’
stated that the Dutch yoke was imposed by force of arms
upon the English people. Still, we can scarcely think that
proud and high-spirited Englishmen would submit to so
foreign a nation as the Dutch without a struggle, especially
when we have reason for thinking that a rebellion, headed
by one who called himself Duke of Monmouth, was vigor-
ously put down not long before. It seems necessary, then,
to presume a contest in which the native English population
was attacked and overpowered by the men of Holland. Thus,
then, the Stuart dynasty perished.’ The conjecture would in
this instance be utterly false, although no objection on the
score of improbability could be urged against it. In such a
cage, a genuine historian would simply suspend his judgment.
He would not deny that there was a Stuart dynasty, or that
it was expelled: he would only decline to lay down any con-
clusions on the subject, adding that the alleged facts, thus
standing Bare and isolated, could have for him no use. This
is all that the most sceptical of critics have affirmed in the


* Rawlinson, Ancient Ezatern Monarchies, vol. i. p. 228,
* January 1867, p. 140.


THE TROJAN WAR. |


198


case of the Homeric and early Roman traditions; and it is CHAP.
a mere misrepresentation to speak of them as denying the ees


possible occurrence of some contest on the plains of the Helles-
pontian Troy. Like them, the modern Euemerista reject all
the marvellous and supernatural incidents, and the mingling
of gods and men. The cause and character of the war, its
duration, and the mode in which it was carried on, they regard
as points of veryslight consequence; and having thus destroyed
the whole story, they come forward with surprising assurance
to demand our acceptance of a residue of fact which by some
divining process they have discovered to be historical. When
Sir Cornewall Lewis dismisses the accounts of the Decemviral
legislation at Rome as involved in inextricable confusion, he
does not deny the existence of Decemvirs ; he merely says that
the narratives which have come down to us are self-contra-
dictory from beginning to end, and untrustworthy in all
their particulars. In like manner, of such a Trojan war as
that in which the Euemerists would have us believe, ‘with-
out Helen, without Amazons, without Ethiopians under the
beautiful son of Eos, without the wooden horse,’ nay, as they
admit, perhaps without a quarrel between Agamemnon and
Achilleus, and possibly without even their presence in the
Argive camp, Mr. Grote only says that ‘as the possibility of
it cannot be denied, so neither can the reality of it be
affirmed.’ One step further we may, however, take. What-
ever atruggle may have taken place within fifty miles of the
southern shores of the Sea of Marmora, that struggle is not
the subject of the Homeric poems. History does not repeat
itself with monotonous uniformity in every country; and
the story of Helen and Achilleus is the subject of the popular
traditions in every Aryan land. If then the conflict, a few
scenes of which are described in our Iliad, belongs to the
history of men and women of like passions with ourselves,
this conflict arose out of events which happened before the
separation of the Aryan nations from their common home,
To convert a bare possibility of this sort into ap historical
fact is indeed to build a house on sand; and while we are
wasting time on this worthless task, the early language of the
Aryan peoples points to that real conflict in the daily and


war + a


194


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


yearly drama of the outward world which must strike the


seth deepest chords of the human heart, so long as men continue


‘The
Homeric
contro-
‘vorey.


to be what they are.

But the question must be carried still further into that
domain of Hellenic tradition which is supposed to be the
border land between mythology and history, and to exhibit a
larger amount of fact then of fiction. The inquiry may not
be wholly new: but if, in spite of all that has been said by
those who maintain the unity of the Iliad and the Odyssey
and attribute to their narratives a historical character, their
opponents are not satisfied, it is clear that the question can-
not be regarded as settled, unless dogmatic assertion on the
one side is to overbear the patient statement of facts on the
other. Ifthe conclusions of the modern Euemerists are to
be received, then, on the faith of a supposed general consent
of critics through a long series of centuries, we are bound to
vel.eve that the events of which the Homeric poets sang were
historical incidents which materially affected the later his-
tory of the Greeks, in spite of all contradictions in the narra-
tive, and in spite of all other difficulties which the literature
whether of the Greeks or of any other people may force on
our attention. If we are not as yet told that, the historical
foundation of the legends being established, we are bound to
receive all the marvellous details of the picture with a ready
acquiescence, still the method by which the upholders of
the so-called Homeric history seek to sustain these conclu-
sions may well appal the sober seekers after truth, who see
the havoc thus made in those canons of evidence which
should guide the statesman and the judge not less than the
scholar. When we have before us narratives full of extra-
ordinary incidents and exhibiting throughout a super-
natural machinery, when we see further that these narra-
tives contradict themselves on vital points, it is our duty, it
seems, not to reject those narratives, but to pare away all
that is miraculous or hard to believe, and then to regard the
naked outline as fact. It cannot be too often or too carnestly
repeated, that by any such method the ascertainment of the
truth of facts becomes impossible. The Euemerists charge
their opponents with robbing us of large treasures of in-


HOMERIC CRITICISM.


195


herited belief:' but it is not too much to say that their own CHA,
criticism is far more unsettling and destructive, and that it Se


tends to blunt that instinct of- truthfulness, and that im-
partial determination to seek truth only, without which all
criticism is worse than worthless. If we are to hold with
Mr. Blackie in one place that ‘ there was a real kingdom of
Priam on the coast of the Dardanelles, and a real expedition of
the western Greeks against this kingdom,’ with a real Achil-
leus,and ‘a real quarrel between him and the general-in-chief of
the Hellenic armament,’ and in another, that the impressions
left by the facts on the minds of the poets might be ‘alto-
gether at variance with the incidents as they occurred,’ while
in a third we are to admit that the historical character of
the legend is not affected, even thongh Agamemnon and
Achilleus may never have met at all, and no Helen may have
existed to give cause to the war, then it is clear that all free-
dom of judgment is gone. But no one can submit to be thus
bound, who believes that his powers of thought are given to
him as a sacred trust, and that, unless he seeks to know facts
as they are, he is chargeable with the guilt of wilfully blind-
ing himself. It matters not how great may be the array of
authorities on the other side; he dares not to give his assent
to these conclusions, if facts in his judgment contradict or
appear to contradict them. To profess a belief in the pro-
position that the Iliad and Odyssey moulded the intellectual
life of the Greeks from a time long preceding that of Hero-
dotos and Thucydides, would be to him an act of sheer dis-
honesty, if he is not convinced that the proposition is true;
and if, after 2 careful survey of the field, he still retains his
doubts, he is bound to state his reasons, and thus to do what he
can towards solving the problem. The attitude of all critics
towards this subject ought to be that of patient seekers after
truth, who are quite prepared to receive any conclusions to
which the evidence may lead them. It we wish only to
ascertain facts, we shall be ready to believe indifferently that
the Iliad and Odyssey were composed by one poet or by
twenty; that they were written within a few years or many
centuries after the incidents which they profess to record ;
> Bluckie, Ziad. i


196


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK that their narratives are partly historical or wholly mythical,


if only the propositions are irrefragably established. But
whatever be the result, the statement of the grounds of
doubt calls for gratitude rather than blame, and the tone
adopted by some who have lately taken part in these dis-
cussions is a matter, to say the least, of very grave regret.
Thus in the book which he is pleased to call the ‘Life of
Homer,’ Mr. Valetta has ridiculed those who range them-
selves on the side of Lachman, Kichly, or Mr. Grote, as
overshooting their mark, one condemning one third, another
anothers, and a third the remaining third of the twenty-four
books of the Iliad. Such assertions can gain at best but a
temporary advantage. None who go beneath the surface of
the question can fail to see that the critics thus censured do
not reject each a different portion of the Iliad; that the at-
tribution of the first book of the Iliad to one poet, and of the
second book to another, is really no condemnation whatever,
and that Mr. Grote at all.events regards the Tiad as made
up of only two poems, both of which he believes to be the
work of the same poet. In fact, the points on which these
eritics fasten are not in each case different. The same
difficulties have forced themselves on the attention of all,
and some of the most strenuous esserters of Homeric unity
are not slow in acknowledging their force. Even Mr.
Blackie admits that Homer composed the Iliad ‘in piece-
meal,’ and strung his songs together ‘with a distinct know-
ledge that they would be used only in separate parts,’ and
that ‘not only the separate materials, but the general scheme
of the Iliad existed in the Hellenic mind before Homer.’! It
is hard to see how this position differs materially from that of
the writer in the Edinburgh Review, who, while maintaining
the unitarian hypothesis, asserts that ‘the text was handed
down in fragments from remote antiquity, that those frag-
ments were cast and recast, stitched together, unstitched
again, handled by uncritical and unscrupulous compilers in
every possible way.’? Like Mr. Blackie, Colonel Mure allows

1 Blackie, Wiad. i. 206, 222. Odyssey. As Mr. Grote insists, it in

* No, coxx. October 1868, p. 503. impousible to shut our eyes to the unity


It iw unnecessary to enter at length into of plan which pervades this poom. In
the question relating to the unity of the the'Zhid'we look in vain for any euch


HOMERIC HISTORY.


that ‘the circumstances under which the texte were trans-
mitted, render it next to impossible but that their original
purity must have suffered,’? and that Homer wag probably
“indebted to previous traditions for the original sketches of
his principal heroes.’? Bishop Thirlwall, while he refused to
commit himself to any positive conclusion on the subject,
saw long ago, with his usual sagacity, that the unity of
Homer, even if universally conceded, would add little or
nothing to the value of the Iliad or Odyssey as historical
records. In his words, ‘ the kind of history for which Homer
invoked the aid of the Muses to strengthen his memory was
not chiefly valued as a recital of real events,’ and ‘if in de-
tached passages the poet sometimes appears to be relating
with the naked simplicity of truth, we cannot ascribe any
higher authority to these episodes than to the rest of the
poem.’ With a singular anticipation of the course into which
the discussion has now drifted, he adds that ‘the campaigns
of Nestor, the wars of Calydon, the expeditions of Achilles,
probably appear less poetical than the battles before Troy,
only because they stand in the background of the picture,
and were perhaps transferred to it from other legends in
which, occupying a different pluce, they were exhibited in a
more marvellous and poetical shape."4 Thus, in Bishop
‘Thirlwall’a judgment, every incident nakedly recorded in the
Tiiad received its full clothing of the supernatural in other
epic poems now lost; and since to incidents so clothed no
credit is to be given, the tissue of wonders in which all are
involved puts completely out of sight any possibly historical
incidents on which they may have been founded, and makes
them for us as though they had never been. This emphatic
verdict scatters to the wind all inferences respecting the age
of Homer drawn from the silence of the Homeric poems as
to the return of the Herakleids. These inferences involve the


lay of Demodokos and of the episode of


unity, and are foreed to strange shifts
tlie solar herds in Thripakin, ag well as


in order to establih a continuous uutty


of way kind, But on the other hand it
is impossible to prave that no parts of
the Odyssey ever existed in the form of
weparace lays, ‘The tale of the death of
Achilleus points to adifforent conclusion,


of many other incidents of the poem.

> Critical History of Greek Litera
ture, book ii, ch. iv. § 4.

© {bid. book ii. ch. iv. § 4.

+ History of Greve, vol. i. che,


197


CHAP.
Ix.
—_—


198


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK assumption that the return of the Herakleids was a cause of
pbes such thorough change in the Greek dynasties as well as in


Asia Minor, that if the poet had written after that event, his
language must have exhibited some knowledge of ita results.
The argument is commonly urged by writers who further
assume that Homer wrote within a generation or two of the
Trojan war,' and that Thucydides has assigned the right date
for the conquest of Peloponnesos by the Herakleids. Thus
the whole Iliad, as we have it now, was composed within
eighty years at furthest from the fall of Dion, and perhaps
much earlier. Here then we are enabled to measure at once
the value of that ancient tradition which, it is said, no Greek
author of note has disputed or doubted, when it is submitted
to the fast and loose method of critics who maintain the
unity of Homer. The whole character of the tradition is
ease tially changed, if in one statement the poet is a con-
temporary writer, and in another is separated by a vast
interval of time from the events which he professes to
describe. In the one view, the composition of the Iliad
within eighty years after the recovery of Helen is indispens-
able to the historical authority of Homer. According to the
other, which is adopted by Thucydides, Homer lived ‘a very
long time’ after the Trojan war;? while the poet, who may
surely be allowed to tell his own tale, clearly speaks of the
actors in his great drama as belonging to an order of men
no longer seen upon the earth. The special pleading of Mr.
Gladstone limits the meaning of the phrase to a period of at
most forty or fifty years. Few, probably, will attach much
weight tothe argument. All that Nestor says in the passage
on which Mr, Gladstone‘ relies for the truth of his interpre-
tation, is that none then living could fight as Perithoés and
other heroes had fought in the days of his youth.’ In all


1 Gladetone, Hoiner and the Homeric
Age, i. 87.

* Thue. i. 3. The contradict
not be [aid to the charge of Thucy
who clearly regirded Homer as living
at atime long subsequent to the return
ofthe Herakleids, A statement so clear
can scarcely be sot aside with con-
sistency by critics who sre eager on all
possible oceasions to shelter themselves
under ‘the authority of the ancients.’


To Thucydides the ubsence of all
reference tothe Heraklcid conquests in
our Hiad and Odyssey (if be ever saw
those pooms), involved no scrt of
neerssity for supposing that the post
lived before the so-called Doriun settle-
ment of the Peloponnesos.

Hx, 304.

Homer and the Homeric Age, i. 37.
© Hi, 272,


VALUE OF HOMERIC TRADITION.


the other passages where a like phrase occurs, the poet in
his own person ascribes to Aias, or Hektor, or Aineias the
power of hurling boulders, scarcely to be lifted by two men,
as easily as a child might throw a pebble. The change of
which Nestor speaks is only one of degree. The poet, had
he lived in times so close to the events which he relates,
would rather have gloried in the exploits of his own kinemen,
and allowed their fame to shed some portion of its lustre on his
living countrymen.

But if the alleged event which is called the return of the
Herakleids led, as we are told, to such thorongh changes in
the (historical) dynasties of Eastern and Western Greece,
and if this event, the belief of Thucydides to the contrary
notwithstanding, occurred within a century after the fall of
Troy, and if the Iliad and Odyssey, as we now have them,
were composed in the interval between these two events, the
upholders of Homeric unity have fairly established their
position. Whut then is the value of the traditions which
relate this so-called historical event? In plain speech, they
are narratives which exhibit a singular parallelism with
other incidents in the mythical history of Hellas, and from
which the residuum of historical fact, if it can be extracted
at all, must be extracted by the same method which Thucy-
dides, Herodotos, Dion Chrysostom and themodern Euemerists
apply to the story of Troy, namely, by stripping off the whole
clothing of the supernatural which hus been thrown around
them, and by ingenious conjectural arrangement of the little
that then remains. In truth, argument here becomes really
superfluous. It may be fairly said, and it should be said at
once, that the most vehement defenders of the historical
character of the Iliad have themselves acknowledged that


we can get nothing out of it which deserves the name of"


history. The whole thaumaturgy of the poem they shatter

at a blow: and although we are told in one breath that there

waa a real expedition from Mykénai to Troy, with a real

Achilleus and a real Agamemnon, whose quérrel was an

actual fact, we are told in another that Agamemnon and

Achilleus may have been leaders of successive expeditions
. 2 A xii, 385, 448; xx. 287.


199
CHAP,
IX,


oe


The rewrn
of the
Hera.


200


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


and may never have met at all, and that there may, there-


aes fore, have been no quarrel and no Helen to give cause for


The Hera-
kleid con-
questa not
historical.


the war. This, according to their own admissions, is no
caricature, and hence it may be said that the critics who
are represented by Mr. Blackie have torn to shreds the
historical character of the Iliad. Bishop Thirlwall, while
he accepts the fact of some war as the basis of the atory,
has dealt not less cruelly with the narrative. He has swept
away all belief in the detailed narratives of the Iliad and the
Odyssey, while his statements that the incidents cursorily
noticed in these poems were exhibited in full mythical garb
in other epics destroy all belief in the remainder. It must
therefore be emphatically repeated that on the historical
character of the Trojan war, the unitariang are in substan-
tial agreement with their antagonists. There may have been
a wa~ at Ilion on the Propontis: but as we cannot deny, so
we cannot say that there was, and about it we know nothing.
Do we know anything more about the return of the Hera-
kleids? Mr. Grote, it is true, asserts that at this point we
pass, aa if touched by the wand of a magician, from mythical
to historical Greece.! But he connects the myth with the -
subsequent historical distribution of the Greek states, only
because it happens to come latest in order of sequence, and
the story itself he at once banishes to the region of myths,
The traditions again are contradictory, and Bishop Thirlwall
eapecially notes that, while one version represents Pamphylos
and Dymas as falling in the expedition by which their
countrymen made themselves masters of the Peloponnesos,
another speaks of Pamphylos as still living in the second
generation after the conquest. If then we say that in
Greece, when it becomes historical, we find a certain ar-
rangement of Dorian, Jonian, and other tribes, but that we
know nothing of the events which led to it, our conelusion is
simply that of Dr. Thirlwall, and Dr. Thirlwall is commonly
regarded as free from the scepticism of Mr. Grote. ‘It is
much less probable,’ in his judgment, ‘ that the origin of the
Dorian tribes, ag of all similar political forms which a nation
has assumed in the earliest period of existence, should have
' History of Greece, part i. ch. xviii. § 1.


THE RETURN OF THE HERAKLEIDS,


been distinctly remembered, than that it should have been
forgotten, and have then been attributed to imaginary
persons.’? Have we then any adequate grounds for be-
lieving that there was any historical reconquest of the
Peloponnesos by the Herakleids? Mr. Grote, who accepts
the fact, although he rejects the legends which profess to
account for it, urges that nu doubt is expressed about it
even by the best historians of antiquity, and that ‘Thucy-
dides accepts it as a single and literal event, having its
assignable date, and carrying at one blow the acquisition of
Peloponnesos.’? But no one has shown more forcibly than
Mr. Grote himself the utter worthlessness of the method of
Thucydides when applied to the Trojun war, which also has
its assignable date, for Thucydides marks it as preceding
the return of the Herakleids by eighty years. When, again,
Thucydides sets down the expulsion of the Boiotians from the
Thessalian Arné as an event occurring sixty years after the
war at Troy, Mr. Grote rejects his statement summarily, on
the ground that he ‘ only followed one amongst a variety of
discrepant legends, noue of which there were any means of
verifying.’? But this remark applies with equal force to the
traditions of the return of the Herakleids, and it has been
well said that ‘the tendency of the Greeks in the historic
age to assign detinite dates to uncertain events was very
likely to lead them into statements not chronologically
correct,’4 and that the dates assigned by Thucydides, for
example, to the various immigrations into Sicily ‘ must surely
be received with great caution.’ They are, at the least, as
trustworthy as the tabulated results of Chaldwan and As-
syrian chronology by M. Gutschmid and Mr, Rawlinson;
and they all rest alike on the shifting sands of ingenious
conjecture.’ The last argument of Mr. Grote for the his-
torical return of the Herakleids has been refuted by Sir
Cornewall Lewis. This event, if it be an event, does not lead
us at once from mythical to historical Greece. The whole
history of Athens for many centuries later either is a blank,


) Thirlwall, Greoce, i. 257. 4 T.A. Paley, ‘The Iied of Homer;
® History of Greece, past i. ch xviii. (in the Bildiotheca Classica), introd. xix.
1


* Edinburgh Review, January 1867,


* Rid. § 2, p. 128.


CHAP.
IX.


202


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


BOOK or exhibits a series of fables; and the conclusion is that ‘it
ae AR seems quite impossible to fix any one period for the com-


mencement of authentic history in all the different Greek
states.’ Of the string of dates assigned to the various
alleged immigrations from Western Hellas, some may pos-
sibly be correct ; but ‘how far these dates are authentic, we
have little means of judging, but the colonial legends con-
nected with the early foundations are for the most part
fabulous.’ It follows that ‘a connected account of the affairs
of the principal Greek States begins about a century before
the birth of Herodotus, and that a continuous narrative of
the principal transactions is carried on from the time of
Creesus and Cyrus, when the Tonic Greeks first became
subject to the Lydian and Persian kings, As soon as we
ascend beyond the memory of the generation which preceded.
Hervdotus and his contemporaries, we find the chronology
uncertain, the order of events confused, and the narrative
interspersed with legend and fable. As we mount higher
the uncertainty increases, until at lust the light of history is
almost quenched, and we find ourselves in nearly total dark-
ness.”' To this region of the Graiai and the Gorgona we
must, therefore, assign the return of the Herakleids, with all
the incidents which are said to have preceded it, and not
a few which are said to have followed it. If any real facts
underlie the tradition—if any names of rea] Achaian or
Hellenic chieftains have been preserved in it, we cannot
separate them from the fictions beneath which they are
buried. To us they are lost beyond recall: and for us,
therefore, the tales of Troy and of the return of the Hera-
Kleids are not history, and cannot possess any historical
value.’


’ Credibility of Early Roman History, 0s o son of Hippotns, d
ch, xiv. § 18. land Aiolia (Odyes'y, x. 2). Henee Mr.

* Uni Grote (History of part, i. ch. vi.)
infers that Aiolos is older in the legend
migration than we have for than Hellén and the rest. Yet Hellas


Hing in the ine


the Herakleid"conquests, the Aiolie mi-
‘ration ceases to be for ws e fact from
‘which we esp reason to any conclusions
respecting the fliad or the Odyaay.
Thee poems know nothing of indi-


idual i
‘ideal sronrmoi, named Hell, Ton, or


in these poems ins well-defined though
emall district, while of Aivlians and Io-
Bians it can scarcely be suid thet they
have any local habitation. It js, there-
fore, mere labour lost to make attempts
to determine whetler these two poems
are to be regarded as Tonic or Aioliec.


NEGATIVE RESULTS.


Here, then, the inquiry ends so far aa it belongs to the
province of historical credibility;-and it must never be
forgotten that the negative conclusions thua reached are
the result of mere historical criticism, and that they can in
no way be affected by the failure of any theories which may


‘We bave no more means for ascertuining
thie point than we have for writing the
History of the imbabitants of Jupiter;
and to ask with the writer in the Quer
terly Review (October 1868, p. 445), how
the sume body of poems cau be Aiolie in
ity original materials, the theatre of its
action, and the interesta to which it was
first addresson, and Ionic in ita ultimate
form and language, is to entangle our-
aelvos in difficulties which exist ouly in
our own imnginutions.

‘It may Vo remarked that the Quarterly
reviewer, who proferses to take the cun-
servutive position, is quite as destructive
in his criticism as Mr. Blackie, With
him the name Humeros cun hardly mean
anything but ‘fitted together, barmu-
nious” and Homer, like Eumolpos or
Daidalos, is ‘the personification of an
art, and the eponymous ancestor of
an hereditury guild.’ The reviewer,
having thus destroyed the personality of
Homer, nssumes that the Mad and
Odyssey ure the first of 4 lung series of
once familiar poems (ibd. p, 460), the
luttor being the co-called eyclic poems,
which are extensions from the dia, und
took that porm ux their basis and model.
‘This priority of the Mad and Odyssey
in point of time to the other pootns of
the epic cyclo 1s nsserted repeatedly, It
is enough to say that there is no sort of
Proof thie these poems ure later than
our Homer, or that they were in any
senso extensions of it, The fact, ad-
mitted by the reviewer, that the trugic
poets followed the eyclic storien, is proof
of their wide difforence from the legends
of the fliad or the Odyssry. But accord-
ing to Colonel Mure all these poema
were immeasurably inferior to the
Odyssey; why then did Aechytov and
Sophokles always follow them? The re-
viewer adupta the answer of Ariatotle,
‘that the Jliad end Odyssey posavened too
wpuch unity and completeness in them-
selves, that they were, in short, already
too dramatic to be made « quarry of eub-
jects for the stuge (ibid. p. 468). What-
ever authority the Judgment of Aristotle
may carry with it on facts which he had
himeolf ascertained, it would be « plain


Dreach of truthfulness to refraia from
saying that these assertions ure both
false and abvurd, The J/ied and the
Odymey ere very mines of tragic sub-
jects, and we might as reasonably ac-
cept his monstrous dictum dividing all
mankind into @bae: Epyovres and pore:
BoiAo: ax justifying the perpetuation of
slavery. Ty Mr. Paley's conclusion that
the tragedians followed ‘ the more suvage
old ep hich had none of the virtue,
the chastity, tho gentle humanity that
have made our /iad aud Oger tho
admired of all subscquent ages,’ the re-
viewer replies by saying that ‘scholars
have usually attributed this difference
tu the exigencies of the stage” It is
well, perbups, to kaow that a certai
amount of savagery, bratality, and im-
purity are nocessary requirements of the
stage: but unfortunately this theory,
while at might exphun the populanty of
the drama ot Caries the Secoud’s time,
fails to account for the greater purity of
the drama of Shukspeare. But in. fact
it is impossible to ninintain that truge-
diane m any age could be driven to
choose anything lower than the highest
models, or thet povts like Aisehylos
aud Suphokles would of ther own will
select the coarser-grained and ruder
material. The very thought is @ slunder
on our common humanity; and we can
but wonder at the shifts to which critics
are driven who will not put aside old
prejudices and usoeiations, and confine
theinselves resolutely to the exominution
of fuets, With the Quarterly reviewer
the wonder becomes the greater, bi cause
he maintains that ‘the Jad represents
not the beginning, but the culmination
of m great shoul of poetry’ (ibid. p.
471). It was, thorefors, in hie power to
say that the tragic poets drew their ma~
terials from these earlier poems ; but it
is unfortunate that no such earlier
poems are anywhere epuken of or re-
forred to, and the so-called cyclice can-
not be both older and later than the
diad and the . If thix is all that


ean be said, the battle of the Euemeriate
and traditionists is Lost,


203


CHAP.
1x.
SS
The origin

of the
traditions
of the
Herakleid
conquests.


204.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK profess to account for the origin and growth of these tradi-
es tions, although the fact that their historical character has


been disproved already must tend to strengthen any theory
which gives a consistent explanation of the whole, and which
reste on a comparison of these traditions with the myths of
other countries. ‘The siege of Troy is,’ in Professor Max
Miiller’s words, ‘a repetition of the daily siege of the East by
the solar powers that eyery evening are robbed of their
brightest treasures in the West.’! Few—probably none—
will venture to deny that the stealing of the bright clouds of
evening by the dark powers, the weary search for them
through the long night, the battle with the robbers as the
darkness is driven away by the advancing chariot of the lord
of light, are favourite subjects with the poets to whom we
owe the earliest Vedic songs. How far the names occurring
in tl.is most ancient Hindu literature are found in Hellenic
legends, how far the incidents connected with these names
are reproduced in the so-called Homeric poems, may be
gathered in some measure from what has been said already.
But whether the old Vedic hymns contain the germ of the
Iliad and Odyssey, or whether they do not, it seems im-
possible to shut our eyes to the fact that the whole mythical
history of Hellas exhibits an alternation of movements from
the West to the East, and from the East back to the West,
again, as regular as the swayings of a pendulum. In each
case either something bright is taken away, and the heroes
who have been robbed, return with the prize which, after a
long struggle, they have regained; or the heroes themselves
are driven from their home eastward, and thence return to
claim their rightful heritage. The first loss is that of the
Golden Fleece; and the chieftains led by Iason set forth in
the speaking ship on their perilous voyage to the shores of
Kolchis. Before the fleece can be regained there are fearful
taska to be done: but the aid of the wise Medeia enables
Tasén to tame the fire-breathing bulls, and to turn against
each other the children of the dragon’s teeth. Then follows
the journey homeward, in which Medeia again saves them
from the vengeance of Aiétés, and Iasén reigns gloriously in
' Lectures on the Science of Language, second series, p. 471.


HELEN AND PENELOPE.


Tolkos after his long wanderings are ended. This tale is CHAP.


repeated again in the story of the wrongs and woes of Helen.
She, too, is stolen, like the Goldén Fleece, from the western
land, and carried far away towards the gates of the morning,
and a second time the Achaian heroes are gathered together
to avenge the disgrace, and to bring back the peerless queen
whom they have lost. Here again is the weary voyage,
lengthened by the wrath of the gods, and the perilous war-
fare which must precede the ruin of Ilion. But the aid of
Athéné, answering to that of Medeia, wins the victory at
last for Achilleus, and then follow again the wanderings of
the heroes as they return each to his home in the far west.
Here, too, the help of Athéné, when her first anger has
passed away, supports Odysseus on his toilsome pilgrimage,
and beats down his enemies beneath his feet. With the
scene in which Odysseus and Penelope appear in all the
splendour of their youthful beauty after the fall of the
suitors, the second westward movement comes to an end.
But the enmity which darkened the life of Herakles con-
tinued to cast its shadow over his children; and if we follow
the mythographers, we have before us, in a series many
times repeated, the expulsion of the Herakleids and their
attempts to return and take possession of their inheritance.'


' The writer in the Quarter’y Remew
(October, 1868), whee arguments on
the uge of the Tied and Odyssry have
been already noticed (note 2. p. 202), ud-
mits that Comparative Mythology nay
perhupe furnixh 8 complete apswer to
tho question, Whatare the germs or out-
Tines out of which the Trojan story wes
formud? (p. 453). Declining to enter in-
to thie subject generally, he asserts that,
“Even without going out of the narrower
circle of Greek tradition we may derive
valuable suggestions from the compara
tive method and adds that ‘the main
incidents of the Ziad—the abduction of
Helen, the angor of Achilles, the taking
of Troy—are found repented, with slight
modifications, in the mythology of ather
parts of Greece. Theseus, like Puris,
carried off Helen, and the Dioscuri led
an expedition into Attica for her reco-
very, which exhibits on @ smaller scale


the essential features of the expedition.


of Amom mnen ‘math w tr dition an


parently Messenian, represented her as
catried off by the twin herocs Tdas and
Lynkeus. Again, the anger of Achilles
finds an almost perfect parallel in that
of Meleager,as told in the ninth book of
the Hind, Finally, the taking of Troy
is an exploit of Hereules as well as uf
Agameninon.’ The inference from these
coincidences is that ‘the incidenta of the
iad are not a mere distortion of actual
events, but originally and properly my-
thical: that the myth ia the primary and
the history only the secondary
and sccidental ingredient’ Unfortn-
nately thene secondary ingredients (if
there were any such} are eo buried be-
neath the former aa to be lost beyond
recovery. The reviewer hus, therefore,
only to account for the'shupe assumed
by the Ziad story, and his anewer is,
«First, the pereonality of Achilles, as it
‘was conceived by the primitive tradition,
must have exerted in itaelf an over:
rawerine -ttrastinn an th tare 9


205


Ix.


206


a OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


POOR The e0-called Dorian migration is the last in the long series
rales of movements from east to west. The legends which


profess to relate its history have doubtless lost in great
degree the freshness and charm of the myths which had
gathered round the fair-haired Helen and the wise Medeia.
This poverty may arise from their comparative nearness to
an historical age, and from the intermixture of real incidents
on which the floating myths of earlier times had fastened
themselves. That this may have occurred again and again
is a matter not of mere conjecture, but of certainty, although


, the fact of the intermixture farnishes, as we have seen, no


ground of hope for those who seek for history in mythology.
Unless they are known to us from contemporary writers, the
real events, whatever they may have been, are disguised,
distorted, and blotted out as effectually as the stoutest trees
in American forests are killed by the parasitical plants
which clamber up their sides. But, meagre as these later
myths may be, the ideas and ircidents of the older legends
not unfrequently reappear in them. The disasters which
befalt the Herakleid leaders befure they gain a footing in
the Peloponnesos answer to the troubles and losses which
Odysseus undergoes on his homeward voyage. The story
of the soothsayer Karnos, whose death draws down on them
the wrath of Apollén, carries us to the legend of Chryses in
the tale of Troy: and the three sons of Hy|yg answer to the
three sons of Arkas in the Arkadin stories, ‘and to the three
sons of Mannus in the mythology of the Teutonic tribes.
Whether the eastward migrations, ,which are described as
the consequences of the return of the Herakleids, represent


condly, the incident of a wrathful inac-
tivity must have been felt to be pecu-
linrly fit to be the turning-point of =
Jong poem. This fitness appears to
consist in the facility which it rite
for the addition of episudes, cele!

the other national heroes of the dient
Greek states’ (ib. p. 454). But to the
first of these points the reviewer has
himself re lid that Achillens in the
earlier tradition is Meleagros, that the
wrath of the one is the wrath of the
other, The second assertion assumes


that one sud the same poet sate down.


and composed the Ziad as we have it,


from one end to theother. If the books
to which Mr. Grote gives the distin-
guishing name of Ziias were inserted in-
to an older or an independent Achilldis,
thie prior fitness ia converted into @
mere necident, In any cuse we cannot
assume in such an inquiry ax this that
the poem was composed at the frat in
ite procent. form, ¢.2, with a book re-
counting the causes of the wrath of
Achilleus, followed by others relating
the exploits of various heroes who sland
forth in his place, and by a aequel which
narrates the reconciliation and vietory
of the Phthiotie chieftain.


RECURRING LEGENDS. 207


any real events, we cannot tell, although we cannot in terms CHAR.
deny it; but the fact remains that they are movements —_,
eastward, corresponding in many of their features to other
movements which are said to have preceded them. All that

can be said further about these legends as a whole is that
‘matter of fact (if any there be), is eo intimately combined

with its accompaniments of fiction as to be undistinguishable
without the aid of extrinsic evidence ;’' and no such evidence

is forthcoming. The pendulum which had marked the lapse

of the mythoposic ages is here arrested in its even beat. The
mnighty stream, which had brought down on its waters the

great epical inheritance of mankind, is lost in the sands of

the barren centuries which intervene between the legend-
making age and the period of genuine contemporary history.

Thus, then, we have before us a cycle of legends many Materisls
times recurring, with differences of local colouring, bat with of pict)
a general agreement in essential features. The séarch for a
stolen treasure, and the homeward return either of the con-
guerors who have smitten the robbers, or of the heroes who
come to claim their rightful kingdom, form the burden of all.

In other words, we are brought back to the favourite theme
of the Vedic poets—to the hymns which tell us of the Sun-
god robbed of his cows in the west, of the mission of Saram4,
to discover the fastnesses where the thieves have hidden
them, of their,gesistance until Indra draws nigh with his
irresistible spall, of his great vengeance and his beneficent
victory. Carrying us back yet one step further, these legends,
it must be repeated, resolve themselves into phrases which
once described, with a force and vividness never surpassed,
the several phenomena of the earth and the heavens. The
stream is thus traced to its fountain-head, and at once we
ure enabled to account for the beauty and majesty, the gross-
ness and unseemliness, of the great body of legends which
make up the genuine mythology of the world. The charge
of monotony which has by some been adduced in summary
condemnation of the method and results of comparative my
thology, may be urged with as much and as little reason
against the life of man. If there is monotony in the thought


1 Grate Histoen of Greece, nart ich wyiii 89


208


BOOK


MPTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


of the daily toil of the sun for beings weaker than himself—


— 1 _. of his wrath as he hides his face behind the dark cloud, of


Materials
of the
poems
commonly
ealled


Homeric.


his vengeance as he tramples on the vapours which crowd
around him at his setting, of the doom which severs him
from the dawn at the beginning of his journey to restore her
at its close—there is monotony also in the bare record of
birth and love and toil and death, to which all human life
may be pared down. But where there are eyes to see and
hearta to feel, there is equally life in both; and we are
driven to admit that the real marvel would be, not the
multiplication of magnificent epics, but the absence of these
epics from a soil on which the seeds had been so lavishly
scattered ; not the production of characters differing from and
resembling each other—as those of Meleagros and Achilleus,
of Hektor and Paris, of Herakles and Theseus, of Perseus
and Apollén, of Athéné and Danaé, of Helen and I6 and
Medeia—but the absence of such beings from the common
stories of the people.

The historical character of the Argonautic, the Trojan,
and the Herakleid legends has been swept away ; and Com-
parative Mythology steps in to account for the nature, growth,
and extent of the materials which the Homeric or other poets
found ready to their hands. That they worked on some
materials provided by ancient ,tradition, is allowed by all ;1
and the admission involves momentous consequences. The
earliest mythical phrases tell us of a hero whose chariot is
drawn by undying horses, and who is armed with an unerring
spear; who is doomed to toil for beings meaner than himeelf,
or to die an early death after fighting in a quarrel which is
not his own; who must be parted from the woman to whom
he has given his heart, to be united to her again only when
his days are drawing to an end; in whom may be seen
strange alternations of energy and inaction, of vindictiveness
and generosity ; who, after a long struggle, and just when he
seemed to be finally conquered, scatters his enemies on every
side, and sinks, when the battle is ended, into a serene and
deep repose. The outline ie but vague, but it involves all the
essential features in the careers of Achilleus and Odysseus,

+ Gladstone, Homer and the Homeric Age, ii. 9


" ARYAN EPIC POEMS,


of Meleagros and Herakles, of Perseus, Theseus, and Belle-
rophén; and not only of these, but of the great heroes of the
laya of the Volsungs and the Nibelungs, of the romance of
Arthur, and the epic of Firdusi. In some cases the very
names are the same, as well as the incidents; in others they
translate each other. There is thus the closest parallelism
‘petween the great epics of the Hellenic and Teutonic tribes,
of the Persians and the Hindus; and thus also the narrative
of the Trojan war is not only divested of all local historical
character, but finds its place as one among the many versions
of the tale which relates the career of the great mythical
heroes of all lands. At once, then, we are brought round to
the conclusion (which Dr. Thirlwall had reached by another
path) that # source so rich in mythical elements must yield
an abundant harvest of great epic poems, and that our liad
and Odyssey must be but a very small part of the inheritance
left by the mythopeic ages, even if this conclusion were not
supported by the general testimony of ancient writers and
the phenomena of Greek literature. These great epics, at
whatever time they may have been brought into their present
shape, are but two epica which were not the most popular
(even if they were known) during the most flourishing period
of Greek literature. They are but varying forms of the wide-
spread tradition which has come down from asource common
to all the tribes of the Aryan race. A purely historical
inquiry stripped them of all historical character; a philo-
sophical analysis has resolved their materials into the earliest
utterances of human thought, when man first became capable
of putting into words the impressions made on his mind by
the phenomena of the outward world.

The method by which these results have been obtained


must be either wholly rejected, or carefully followed without } it.


the slightest regard to consequences, unless it can be shown
in special instances and by tangible evidence to be unsound.
‘The expression of vague fears either is thrown away or does
mischief, by encouraging an unscientific fashion ef looking
at & subject which must be handled systematically or not at
all, Nothing can be clearer than that if the name Zeus is
confessedly another form of Dyaus, Ouranos of Varuna, Azi-
VOL. P


209


CHAP.
mx,
eS


Attempted
distinction
ween
the science

of lan-
guage and
mytho-
logy.


“410


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


ROOK dahaka of Zohik, the method which has yielded these results
poe oe asast be applied to all names, nay, to all words; and that, in


all instances where the laws which govern the method are
not violated, the result must be admitted as established.
The child who can swim may dread to plunge into a stream,
because he thinks that the water may be beyond his depth;
the dogmatist may hesitate to admit conclusions which he
cannot refute, because he fears that they may lead to other con-
clusions subversive of his traditional belief; but such evasiona
are unworthy of men who seek only to know the truth of facts.
It is no longer possible for any who allow that Dyaus must
be Zeus and Ouranos must be Varuna, to ask with any con-
sistency why the Greek Charites should be the Vedic Harits, or
Eros the Sanskrit Arvat. In either case it is a mere question
of fact, and the answer is that the words are etymologically
identical, and that Charis and Erinys can no more be ex-
plained by any Greek word than can Zeus or Ouranos. No
room is left for captious questions which ask why, though
Apollén be certainly the sun, all other mythical heroes should
represent the sun also, It has probably never been thought,
and certainly never been said, that all the actors in the great
epic dramas of the Hellenic and Teutonic tribes, of the
Persians and Hindoos, are solar heroes. Such a statement
would strike at the very root of Comparative Mythology,
which teaches that the mythical treasures of the Aryan race
have been derived from phrases expressing the genuine feelings
of mankind about all that they saw, felt, or heard in the world
around them. Assuredly neither Odysseus, Herakles, Oidi-
pous, nor any other can be the sun, unless their names, their
general character, and their special features, carry us to this
conclusion. Whether they do so or not can be determined
only by the analysis and comparison of the legends. To
those who hold that the Greek yévos and the old English eyn
are the same, the identity of Aeshma-Daéva and Asmodeus,
of Ormuzd and Ahura-mazdio, of Arbhu and Orpheus, of
Orthros and Vritra, cannot possibly be a matter of faith.
The identification must stand or full, as it fulfils or violates
the canons which determine that the Greek Suydrap and the
German tochter represent the English daughter, the Sanskrit


LANGUAGE AND MYTHOLOGY.


dubitar, and the Persian doché. It is absurd to make ex-
ceptions unless some philological law has been broken. It
is not less unreasonable to draw distinctions between the
sciences of Comparative Philology and Comparative Mytho-
logy on the ground that in the one case the phenomena of
language are made to explain themselves, in the other case
they are made to explain something quite different. The
meaning of this objection is that Comparative Mythology
brings before us a struggle between Phoibos and Python,
Indra and Vritra, Sigurd and Fafnir, Achilleus and Paris,
Oidipous and the Sphinx, Ormuzd and Abriman, and from
the churacter of the struggle between Indra and Vritra, and
again between Ormuzd and Ahriman, infers that a myth,
purely physical in the land of the Five Streams, assumed a
moral and spiritual meaning in Persia, and, as indicating the
fight between the co-ordinate powers of good and evil, gave
birth to the dualism which from that time to the present
has exercised so mighty an influence throughout the East
and the West, Language has thus been made to explain a
very difficult problem in moral philosophy, which is some-


thing quite different from language; and such an office as this .


is never, it is urged, discharged by Comparative Philology.
The former, therefore, must be regarded with greater eus-
picion than the latter, Here again we ere dealing with a
mere matter of fact, and we find at once that the objection
brought against the one science applies with equal force to-
the other. Words cognate to our ear are found in the Greek,
Teutonic, and Indian dialects, the inference being that the
plough was known to the ancestors of Hindus, Greeks, and
Teutons, while they still lived together as a single people.
Here, then, language is made to throw light on the history
of agriculture ; and we must therefore infer either that agri-
culture is the same thing as language, or that the distinction
is wholly baseless. In the Aryan names for father, brother,
sister, daughter, we have the proof that the words existed
for an indefinite length of time before they essnmed the
meanings which we now assign to them, and we are forced
to conclude that the recognition of family relations was not
the first step in the history of mankind. Here, then, lan-


21k
CHAP. °
Ix.


SS


212


BOOK,
TE


Angumed
early
popularity
Iliad and
Odyssey.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


guage is made to throw light on the growth of morality;
and unless we say that morality and language are the same
thing, it follows that in both these sciences language is made
to explain something different from itself, and that no dis-
tinction can on this ground be drawn between them.’

There is more of plausibility than of truth in the words
of Mr. Gladstone, that ‘he who seems to impeach the know-
ledge and judgment of all former ages, himself runs but an
evil chance, and is likely to be found guilty of ignorance and
folly’? Verdicts unanimously given and obstinately upheld
are not always just; and in the great battle for the ascer-
tainment of fact, and more especially in the struggle against
false methods, one man is not unfrequently called upon to
face the world, unsupported by any of his ownage. For hun-
dreds if not for thousands of years, the world was convinced
of the reality of witchcraft; the belief is now denounced
on all sides as a gross and deadly delusion. Aristarchos of
Samos opposed his heliocentric theory of the universe to all
others ;? but many a century had yet to pass before that
theory superseded the Ptolemaic. In truth, nothing is
gained by appeals to majorities or to parties, or by hyper-
polical laudation of poems ancient or modern, Whatever
may be the beauty or the magnificence of Homeric or any


had beon fixed, and were handed down
perhaps two thousand years before the
title of Cesar was heard of’ Even
more remarkable is the certainty with
which the difference of Aryan names for
wild beasts and weapons of wor, con-


+ ‘The romark
able to the scien
that of language.
wonderful light on the first thoughts
awakened by all sensible objects in the
Human mind; but this ie only one fact,


, in fact, lose applic:
‘of mythology than to
The former throws »


however astonishing may be the results
obtained bere The me anelyeit of
Is ields a rast residuum of hi

torical facts Known with as much car
tainty os if they hud come down to us
‘on the clearest contemporaneous teati-
all portion of Professor
thology ts occupied with nach
tive Mythology is occupied with such il-
fees end the facta 80 discovered
are of the greatest moment. Thus the
comparison of the Lithuanian witss
patis, a lord,with the Sanskrit vis-patis,
shows that before the dispersion of the
Aryen tribes there was ‘not only a
nicely-organised family life, but the
family began to be absorbed by the
state, and here avsin conventional titles


trasted with the similarity of their
peaceful names, shows that the preat
Aryan family ‘had ied a long life of
peace before they separated.’ A similar
analyeis proves that although they were

Il acquainted with river navigation,
d Aryun tribes had not


determine; but the interval which separ-

‘ates the dispersion of these tribes from

the dawn of contemporary history iv

far greater than we are gene-
‘to imagine,

Homer, ge. i, 2.

‘Lewis, Astronomy of the

Ancients, ch. iii, sect. xii; Edinburgh

Beview, July 1862, p. 94,


FORM OF THE HOMERIC POEMS.


other poetry, this beauty and magnificence will still remain,
whether it be the work of one man or of a hundred men, of
one age or of many. Exaggerated theories, springing from
exaggerated praises, have wrapped the whole field of Homeric
inquiry in mista, out of which we cannot easily find our way;
and statements are boldly made, and unhesitatingly accepted,
without the faintest misgiving that, after all, facts may
point in quite another direction. In Colonel Mure’s opinion,
the poems known to us as the Iliad and Odyssey were ‘ the
acknowledged standard or digest, as it were, of early
national history, geography, and mythology’! With a
generalisation still more sweeping, Baron Bunsen assures
us that ‘the Iliad and Odyssey, especially the former, are
the canon regulating the Hellenic mental developement in
all things spiritual, in faith and custom, worehip and re-
ligion, civil and domestic life, poetry, art, science. Homer
is not only the earliest poet, but the father of all succeeding
poets, The Iliad is the sacred groundwork of lyrical poetry
no less than of the drama.’ ?

These are.either very important facts or very great delu-
sions; and to accept them without rigid scrutiny must lead
to widespread and fatal mischief. Our business is simply
with the evidence on which these conclusions are said to be
based, and all impartial and unprejudiced thinkers owe a
debt of gratitude to Mr. Paley for his masterly analysis of
this evidence, and for the single-minded honesty which has
Jed him to discuss this question in a book intended especially

, for young scholars.* The cry raised against the unsettlement


' History of Greek Literature, bookii.
cb. ii, § 5.
® Gud in History, book iv. ch. viii.
**The Lliad of Homer,’ Bibtiothece
Classica, introduction; see also Mr.
Paley’s paper on +The Comparatively
late date ard the Composite Character
+ of our Iliad and Odyssey,’ in the Trans-
actions of the Cambridge Philosophical
Society, vol. xi. part ii, For our present
Purpose, the inquiry as to the dato and
composition of our Mad and Odyssey
nist be confined to its negative results,
‘Tf it be ahown that these poems were
not known or not popular emong the
Greeks of the age of Herodotos and


Thucydides, the positive assertions of

jonel Mure und Baron Bunsen fall to
the ground; and it follows that these
poems, as we have them, were not the
work of a poet earlier than Pindar—in
other ‘words, ot of the Pindaric or
Fachylean Homer, Who the author or
rather compiler of our Hiad and Odyssey
may have been, we are not concerned to
inquire. The task of Bentley was done
when he had proved that the epistles of
Phalaris were not written by Phalaris,
fo the comparative mythologist the
ascertainment of this point is a matter
of indifference, The materials of the
Hiad and thu Odyssey were 10 more


218


CHAP.


——


The evi-
dence of
the case.


214


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


*BOOK of their minds is both disingenuous and irrelevant. If the
1 Iliad and Odyssey really moulded the mental life of Greek


lyric and dramatic poets, the fact must be as clear aa the
aun at noonday; and counter-statements can but serve to
eatablish that fact more firmly. But, in the first place, the
composers of our Dliad and Odyssey do not speak of them-
selves as the first poets. Not only do they tell us of bards
who had won their fame at an earlier time, but the Odyssey!
shows that an account of the wrath of Achilleus, wholly
different from that which we have in the Jliad, was both
current and popular. ‘If it does not show this,’ adds Mr,
Paley, ‘it at least shows that there were other ballads on
‘Trojan affairs in existence before the Odyssey was composed
or compiled.’* Colonel Mure naturally lays great stresa on
the alleged familiarity of later poets with our Iliad and
Odyssey ;* and if Baron Bunsen’s statement has any measure
of truth, the Attic drama must be steeped in the sentiment,
if not in the language, of our Diad and Odyssey. But in
fact, ‘although two Greek plays, and two only, are taken
directly,—the one from our Iliad, the other from our Odyssey
—the allusions to these poems are singularly few, and those
few often uncertain, in the writers previous to the time of
Plato.* Nay, although these earlier writers speak not un-
frequently of Homeric poems and Homeric subjects, we find
in far the larger number of instances, that the epithet is
applied to poems which no longer exist, or to subjects which
are not treated in our Iliad or Odyssey.® ‘Out of at least


invented by any compiler of these
poems after the close of the Pelopon-
nesian war, than they were invented
by oor Homer four hundred years
before Herodotos. The only sacrifice
to be mete that of the ingenious
reesoning which pretends to account
for the alleged degradation of Homeric
characters as shown the contrast
between the Helen and Odysseus of our
Hiad and Odyssey and the same person-
ages as psinted by Hachylos and
Sophokles. (Gladstone, Homer and the
Homeric Age, iii. 655). no grest
Togrot needs’ to. be felt. at giving Up
an asomsly which would be


strange
id ing i and
and perpleziog in ony Dterstare, sod


the history of Athenian thought and
feeling.

" Odyss. viii. 72, &e.

2 Paley, iad of Homer, introduetion,


xxx.

* History of Greek Literature, book ii.
oh. ii. $4.

« Paley, Hiad of Homer, introd. xxvi.

* avail myself without scruple of the
results of Mr, Paley’s laboura on a field
which is whofly his owo—the evidence,
nemely, that our Homer was not the
Homer of the grest Attic tragedians. In
this portion of bis task hehus demolished
the verbal fallsey which lies et the root
of all the ents of Mure and
‘Bunsen; and the whole burden of proof
Ties on those who maintain them. ‘As


AGE OF THE HOMERIC POEMS.


thirty-five such references in Pindar, only about seven have
a digtinct reference to our present Iliad or Odyssey:’' and
even in some of these the reference is very vague, while the
lyric poet speaks of the madness of Aias, his midnight
attack on the herds, and his snicide, as Homeric subjects.
A line, perbaps two or three lines, in the Hesiodic Theogony
and the Works and Days may point to our Homer; but of
the Trojan legend generally ‘ very scant mention is made in
the poeta preceding Pindar and the Tragic writers.’? One
of the three passages in Theognis cannot be referred to our
Tiiad, and a fragment of Simonides speaks of Homer ‘as
describing Meleager in terms not now occurring in the
Tliad.”* Of the Homeric or Trojan subjects carved on
the chest of Kypselos,‘ five are not in the Iliad, and some
refer to versions wholly different from our Homeric story.
Colonel Mure will have it that Tyrtaios was familiar with
our Homer.’ In the only passage which can be cited in
proof of this assertion it is most difficult to discover even
a distant allusion. Twice only does Herodotos name the


it is certain’ says Mr. Paley ‘that by
the epies of Homer the ancients mean a
gt deal more than we understand
Le Alcea ud in mn that they attri-
rated to that vague and misty personage
all the muss of ballad lit ee on the
sieges of Troy and Thebes which, we
can hardly be wrong in saying, wax the
accumulated product of the genius of
thapsodista extending over sume four
centuries at least—it ix incumbent on
those who rely on the use of the name
Homer in such writers ux Pindar and
Herodotos, to show that they meant by
it the same as we do. If this cannot be
shown, still more, if the contrary can
be shown, the ease of these apologista
entirely fails.’ The same verbal fallacy
has led these apologists to urge that our
Homer could not re succeeded the
old Homer ‘silently, almost fraudulently,
and without protest.’ To this difficulty
Mr. Paley attributes rery little weight,
‘first, because Homer was @ vagus term
that included all epie literature;
secondly, because the remodelling and
reducing any important part of that
vast mass of Homeric literature would
necessarily leave the stamp of the old
authorship upon it, and so would remain


“Homer,” still: ‘thirdly, because it


must have been open to individual
rhaptodiste to take any denite portion
of the Trojan story, and to treat it in
theie own way. Yet every such part,
however varied or combined, would still
have been “Homer.” The above ob-
jection, therefore, is based on a mis-
‘conception as to what “Homer” meant.
in ancient times.’ The discussion as to.
the materials on which our Homer,
whoever he may have been, worked, is
not affected by Mr. Paley’s conclusions.
He its unreservedly that these
austerials ‘were certainly existing ready
for any poet who chose to give them a
new treatment, or exhibit them in a
more popular and dramatic form at a
comparatively late date—On the late
Date and composite Character of our
iad and Odyssey, p. 8, &e.

1 Paley, Hiad of Homer, introduction,
xxvii.

1 Jb, xxx.

* Tb, xxxi.

Boe St i

© History 0} iterature, book ii.
ch. ii. § 3. That this series of facts
should be assumed on such scanty
evidence or in the teeth of eridence to
the contrary, is indeed astonishing.


215


Ix.


a6


MYTHOLOGY OF FHE ARYAN NATIONS.


Boox. Iliad; and although the former of these two passages
i wae may be set aside as ambiguous, in the second he distinctly


The
Homer of
the Greek
tragic
poets,


rejects the Homeric authorship of the Kyprian verses on
the ground that the latter speak of Paris as reaching Troy
on the third day after leaving Sparta, while the Tiad
describes his long wanderings to Sidon, Egypt and other
places, for which in our Iliad we look in vain. The reason
given by Kleisthenes for the stopping of the rhapsodists
at Sikyén Mr. Blakesley regards as ‘quite inapplicable to
the Lliad or the Odyssey.’ Equally inconclusive are the few
teferences in Thucydides for any evidence in favour of
the identity of our Iliad and Odyssey with the Iliad and
Odyssey of the age of Perikles. The references of Aristo-
phanes are of the same kind, sometimes tending to prove
that passages in our Iliad have been altered since his time,
sometimes ascribing to Homer passages which we do not
find in our texts.

The case, then, may be stated thus:—A vast number of
incidenta belonging to 7a Tpoxxd, not mentioned or barely
noticed in our Iliad and Odyssey, were treated of in epic
poems current in the days of the great Attic tragedians,
All these epic poems, Colonel Mure emphatically asserts,
were ‘vastly inferior, both in design and execution, to their
two prototypes.’! Nevertheless from this vastly inferior
literature Zischylos, Sophokles, and Euripides ‘drew so
largely, that at least sixty of their known plays are taken
directly from it, while only two are taken from the iad and
Odyssey.’* We are left to wonder with Mr. Paley ‘ how it
came to pass that the Greeks, in the best ages of their poetic
genius, preferred to take their themes from the inferior and
secondary, to the neglect of the superior and primary,’ and
‘that the authors of the Cypria, the Little Iliad, the Nosti,
should have won all the credit, and left little or none for
their great master and predecessor, Homer.’ Our Iliad and
Odyssey then (even if they were in existence), bad not in
the days ofe Hschylos and Sophokles the popularity which
they have since attained; and the theories of Baron Bunsen,


3 History of Greak Literature, b. ii. ch. ii. §3.
* Paley, Itiad, introd. sxxvii.


WRITTEN POEMS.


Colonel Mure, and Mr. Gladstone fall to the ground. These
poems did not ‘regulate the mental developement of the
Greeks,’ nor were they ‘the acknowledged standard of early
national history, geography, and mythology.’ The historical
character of these poems being, therefore, definitely dis-
proved, the time of their composition and the method of
their transmission, although they remain subjects of great
interest, become points of secondary importance. The
knowledge of writing (if the fact be proved) even from an
age earlier than that which has been assigned to the Homeric
poets, will explain but very few of the difficulties which
surround the question. A few words scratched on stone
and wood furnish slender grounds indeed for assuming the
existence of voluminous manuscripts during centuries pre-
ceding the dawn of contemporary history.'

The conclusion, put briefly and nakedly, is this—that if
any real facts underlie the narrative of the Iliad and Odys-
sey, they are so completely buried beneath the mythical
overgrowth as to make the task of separation impossible ;
that the legend “of the Trojan war is unhistorical; that we
have no grounds for asserting that Agamemnon, Achilleus,
or any other of the actors in the tale were real persons ;
that the story of the return of the Herakleids is as mythical
as that of the war of Troy; that the sequence of these myths
throws no light on the time of the composition of our Hiad
and Odyssey; that no historical knowledge can be gained
from the legends of Hellenic colonisation in Asia Minor:
that the mythical history of Greece exhibits a succession of


movements from west to east, and from the east back to-


the west again; that these movements are for the purpose
of recovering a stolen treasure or a rightful inheritance ;
that this heritage is the bright land where the sun sinks
to rest after his journey through the heaven; that the stolen
treasure is the light of day carried off by the powers of
darkness, and brought back again, after a hard battle, in
the morning; that the materials of the Iliad afd Odyssey
are taken from the vast stores of mythical tradition common
to all the Aryan nations; that these traditions can be traced


1 Paley, Itied. xli. &e. See Appendix A.


217


CHAP.
ix.
aS


Reanlts of
the in-
quiry.


218


MYTHOLOGY OF THE- ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK back to phrases indicating physical phenomena of whatever
1. kind; that these phrases furnish an inexhaustible supply of


themes for epic poetry; that the growth of a vast epical
literature waa as inevitable ag the multiplication of myths,
when the original meaning of the phrases which gave birth
to them was either in part or wholly forgotten; that the
substance of the Iliad and the Odyssey existed from an
indefinitely early time ; that these poems were not composed.
at once, and as a coherent whole; that they exercised little
infinence on the mental developement of the Greek lyric and


tragic poets; and that their present form cannot be traced


to any age much earlier than that of Plato.! But these
conclusions give us far more than they take away. If the
fabric of the so-called Homeric history has been shattered,
its ruin must be laid to the charge of the Euemerista not
jess than to the assaults of Comparative Mythologists. The
former have left us nothing. but the barest outline of possible
incidents, for which no evidence can be adduced, and which
can have for us no interest. The latter, if they have dealt
rudely with some arbitrary assumptions and scattered some
dearly cherished but unreasonable fancies, have at least
made ample compensation. No charm which might have
attached to the human characters of Helen and Hektor,
Paris and Achilleus (bad the Euemerista spared us the old
story of their lives),—no pathos which lay in the tale of
Sarpédén’s early death or of the heart-piercing grief of
Priam can equal that infinitely higher charm which takes
ita place, when we see in these legends the hidden thoughts
of our forefathers during those distant ages when they knew
nothing of an order of nature, and the fading twilight of
every evening marked the death of the toiling and short-
lived sun. We can well afford to part with the poor resi-
daum of historical tradition which possibly underlies the
story of the expedition from Mykénai to Dion, when we
find that the myth reveals to us a momentous chapter in the
history of the human mind, and tells ua what in that olden
time men thought of God, of the world, and of themselves,*


! The limit may be sasigned as 5.c. 450 at the earliest.
4 Beo Appendix B,


219


CHAPTER X.


THE CHARACTER OF GREEK DYNASTIC AND POPULAR LEGENDS
IN RELATION TO THEIR TRIBAL AND NATIONAL NAMES.


Ir the Homeric poets wrote as historians, they might well
have prayed to be saved from their friends, had they foreseen
the way in which their poems were to be treated by the
modern Euemerists. After the hard blows dealt by these
professed champions of Homeric unity and credibility, it is
clear that nothing can restore to the stories of the Argonautic
voyage, of the sieges of Ilion and Thebes, and the return of,
the Herakleids, any measure of their supposed historical
character, unless some contemporary evidence can be forth-
coming, apart from the poems which contain the mythical
narratives of those events. But for such evidence we must
look in vain; and the inquiry which has proved that if any
real strife between mortal men lay at the root of the legends
which relate the story of Achilleus or Sigurd, it must be a
strife preceding the first separation of the Aryan tribes, would
of itself suffice to take away all interest fromthe search. But
the process of analysing and comparing the stories common
to all the Aryan nations has exhibited to us a form of
thought resulting in phrases which could not fail to become
an inexhaustible source of mythical narratives. We have
seen that from this fountain-head might flow a thousand
streams, while they who drank of their waters might be quite
unconscious of the spring from which they came. We have
seen that the simple elements of which these stories were
composed were, like the few notes of the mtsical scale,
capable of endless combination ; that the polyonymy result-
ing from this early phase of language yielded a vast number


1 Newman, University Sermons, p. 348.


CHAP.
x.


Fertility of
mythical
phrases,


#20


BOOK


—_—


‘The Ar-
give etory.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


of names for the same object, and that each of these names
might become, and in most cases actually became, the names
of anthropomorphosed gods or heroic men. Round each of
these beings a number of mythical legends would, as we have
seen, group themselves, and impart to each actor a marvel-
lous individuality. Yet all these beings, at first glance so
different, would be really the same ; and the keenest political
rivalry and even animosity might be fed on the merest fancy.

If then the several Hellenic cities, like other Aryan folk,
took pride in their own peculiar legends, and were obstinately
convinced that these legends had an existence wholly inde-
pendent of the traditions of other cities or states, this is only
what we might expect. If, again, these stories, when resolved.
into their simplest forms, impress us with a feeling of some-
thing like monotonous repetition, we have here no cause for
perplexity or surprise. The form of thought which attri-
buted « conscious life to all sensible objects would find expres-
sion in phrases denoting all kinds of phenomena. It would
exhibit no narrowness and no partiality; but regarded as a
whole, the phenomena of day and night and of the changing
seasons would assume the form of great struggles, in which a
bright hero strove for the mastery of the dark beings opposed
to him, and achieved in the end adearly bought victory. This
hero would naturally be the favourite subject of national song
in every country, and in this beneficent conqueror we have,
it needs scarcely to be said, the sun. The dynastic legends
of the Greek cities precisely answer to this expectation. All
without exception exhibit under forms the most varied that
daily and yearly struggle between Indra and Vritra which
assumed a moral aspect in the Iranian land.

The national story of the Argives is made up, we may
now fairly say, of a solar myth, which is recounted at length
in the adventares of Perseus, and repeated in the career of
Herakles without the slightest consciousness that the two
stories are but versions of one and the same myth. Perseus
is the child'of the Golden Shower, and of Danaé, Daphné,
Dahan’, the dawn, and he is doomed, like other solar
children, to be the slayer of the sire to whom he owes his life.
His weapons are those of Apollén and Hermes. The sword


MYTHS OF THE DAY AND NIGHT.


of Chrysdér is in his hand, the golden sandals of the Nympha
are on his feet. His journey to the land of the Graiai, the
dim twilight, is only another form of the journey of Herakles
to the garden of the Hesperides. When from the home of
the Graiai he went to the cave of the Gorgon, the story
sprang from the mythical phrase, ‘The Sun has gone from
the twilight land to fight with the powers of darkness.’ But
night has a twofold meaning or aspect. There is the dark-
ness which must yield to the morning light and die, and
there is the absolute darkness which the sun can never
penetrate. The former is the mortal Medousa, the latter
her deathless sisters. The story ran that Medousa compared
her own beauty with that of Athéné, but the starlit night in its
solemn grandeur could be no rival for the radiant goddess on
whom rested the full glory of Zeus and Phoibos. When from
the Gorgon land Perseus wandered to the shores of Libya,
the story introduced an adventure which recurs in a hundred
forms, Andromeda, Ariadné, Brynhild, Aslauga, Hesioné,
Déianeira, Philonoé, Medeia, Augé, Iokasté, were all won
after the slaughter of monsters or serpents, while the trium-
phant return of Danaé with her son to Argos, after his toil
is ended, is but the meeting of Herakles with Iolé, the return
of the sun in the evening to the mother that bore him in the
morning.

In the Theban legend the solar character of the hero is none


22t


CHAE:


pub aaee


The The-


the less apparent for the ethical tone which, as in the story of ban story.


Croesus and in the great trilogy of Hischylos, has converted
the myth into something like a philosophy of life. When


once the results of old mythical phrases were submitted to a .


woral criticism, the new turn so given to the tale could not
fail to give birth to an entirely new narrative ; but the earlier
part of the legend exhibits the framework of many another
tale of Aryan mythology. Oidipous is the son of Tokasté,
whose name suggests those of Iolé, Iamos, or Iobates. Laios,
like Akrisios, Priam, and Aleos, dreads his own child,
exposes him on the rough hill side,! while his gloomy and


1 As the tale of Paris went, on Ida, us the mythical phrase, ‘The sun at
But the Sunekrit Idé ie the Kurth, the -its birth rests on the earth or on the
wite of Dyaus; and so we have befure hill side.’


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


brits negative character is in complete accord with that of Hekabé
~——— or Lété. But the prophecy of Apollén must be fulfilled.


Oidipous, like Télephos or Perseus, Romulus or Cyrus, grows
up far away from his home, and like them, remarkable for
strength, beauty, and vigour. The suspicion that he is not
the child of his supposed mother, Meropé, sends him forth to
Delphoi, and the homicide of Laios is the death of the parent
of the sun, as the latter starte in his career. Then, like
Perseus, Theseus, and Bellerophén, Gidipous in hie turn
must destroy a monster which vexes the land of Kadmos;
but with the strength of Herekles he unites the wisdom of
Medeia and Asklepios, and the Sphinx, baffied by the solution
of her riddle, leaps from the rock, and dies. This monster
belongs, beyond doubt, to the class of which Python, Typhon,
Vritra, Zohak, Fafnir, Cacus are examples. Few of these,
however, represent precisely the same impressions. Fafnir
is the dragon of winter, who guards the treasures of the
earth within his pitiless folda. The Sphinx is the dark and
lowering cloud, striking terror into the hearts of men and
heightening the agonies of a time of drought, until Oidipous,
who knows her mysterious speech—as the sun was said, in a
still earlier age, to understand the mutterings of the grum-
bling thunder—unfolds her dark sayings, and drives her from
her throne, just as the cloud, smitten by the sun, breaks
into rain, and then vanishes away. His victory is won. The
bright being has reached his goal, and the fair Iokasté
becomes his bride.' This point marks the close of the ori-
ginal myth; but Iokasté, his wife, is also his mother, and
the morality of Greeks could not recognise a form of speech
in which the same person might at once be the son and the
husband of another. The relations of antbropomorphous
gods were no longer interchangeable, as they appear in
Vedic Hymns. From the union of a mother with her son,


' This incident slope is enough to just entering into manhood. But
determine the origin of the myth. Toknsté belongs to that class of mythi-
Qidipous has rpached maturity before cal beings whose boauty time cannot
he leaves Cunnth for Delphoi; and, due touch. When the eitors are slain,
account being taken of the youthfol Penelopé is aa radidut as when Odys-
looks of the Theban queen, 2 woman seus had left her twenty years before,
of Tokasté'a years would scarcely be Each morning the Dawn renews her
‘Drought forward a a prize for s youth everlasting youth. See Appendix C.


OIDIPOUS AND IOKASTR.


the moral eense of the Greek would turn with horror,!
and unconscious of the real nature of the incident so related,
he would look at once for an awful recompense from the
sleepless Erinys of the murdered Laios. Tokasté dies in
her marriage-chamber, and in something of the spirit of the
old tale, Oidipous must tear out his own eyes, as the light of
the setting sun is blotted out by the dark storm-clond.
Henceforth the story is the expression of Greek ethics, until
in the last scene (in the company of Theseus, the solar hero
of Attica) he goes forth to die amid the blaze of the lightning
in the sacred grove of the Eumenides. The blinded Oidipous
dies unseen; but in his last hours he has been cheered by
the presence of Antigone, the fair and tender light which
sheds its soft hue over the Eastern heaven as the sun sinks
in death beneath the western waters, Throughout the tale,
whether in the slaughter of his father, or in his marriage
with Iokasté, Oidipous was but fulfilling his doom. These
things must be so. Herakles must see Iolé in the evening,
Odysseus must journey homeward, Bellerophén must wander
westward to the Aleian plain, Kephalos must meet his doom
at the Leukadian cape, us surely as the sun, once risen, must
go across the sky, and then sink down into his bed beneath
the earth or sea. It was an iron fate from which there was
no escaping, and this teaching of the outer world evoked the
awful ’Avdy«n, the invincible necessity, which urges on the
wretched Oidipous, and explains the origin of that theological
belief which finds its mightiest expression in the dramas
which tell us of the sin of Agamemnon and the vengeance of
KDytaimnéstra.

The Megarian stories, like those of Attica, form a tangled


) The morality of Asayrians was not
#o enily shocked. The marriage of
mothera with sons is one of the institu-
tions ascribed to Semiramis; but in the
myth of Semiramis wo have precisely
the same elements which we find in the
stories of Cyrus, Romulus, Oidipous,
Telephos, and others. Like them she
is exposed in her infancy, saved

doves, and brought up by a shepherd,
Like Tokestl, she iv the wife of two
husbande; and there is no reason why
the Tegend should not bate made her


the mother as well as the wife of Ninos,
Semiramis ix simply the dawn goddess,
the daughter of the fish-god Derketo,
the lover of Tammuz, the counterpart
of Aphrodité with the boy Adonis,
‘We muy therefore safely say that the

‘ian tradition of the marriage in-
stitutions of Semiramis is only another
form, of the myth which made Iokesté
the wife and the mother of Oidipous,
and with it we may compere the
of the Hindu rite of Suttee. Sea ~
tionary of Literature, Science and Art, 0.¥.


223
CHAP.
x.


——


The
Megarian


i


oad


Boor


MYTHOLOGY OF TUE ARYAN NATIONS,
akein in which several threads of solar legend have been


~H_ mingled. Minos is himself a son of Zeus, and the husband


The Athe- |


nian story.


‘The story
Pelopids,


of Pasiphaé, whose name speaks of ber at once as the daughter
of Helios, The daughter of Nisos is smitten’ with the
glorious beanly of hie countenance, as is Echidna with that
of Herakles; but the golden lock of her father, while it
remains unshorn, is an invincible safeguard to the city
against the assaults of the Cretan king. The love of Skylla
is not thus to be disappointed. The lock ia shorn; and the
name of the maiden {as the rending monster) shows how well
she has served the enemy of her father and her kinefolk.

In the Athenian story the eame elements of solar legend
are conspicuous. The myth of Kephalos is reproduced in
that of Theseus, as the career of the Argive Herakles repeats
that of his ancestor Perseus. Like these, Theseus is a slayer
of monsters, and more especially of robbers and evildoers,
while, like Herakles, he forsakes those whom he loves, and
has many loves in many lands.’ Armed with a sword
(Sigurd’s good sword Gram) welded of the same metal with
the sword of Apollén and the spear of Achillens, he, like
Skythes, in the tale of Echidna,? wins the inheritance of his
fathera, and becomes companion of Meleagros, whose life is
bound up with the burning brand. His descent to Hades is
indeed disastrous; but the mishap is repaired by another
solar legend. It is Herakles who delivers the wooer of
Persephoné.

A atill more transparent solar tale is brought before us in
the myth of the hero who gave his name to the Peloponnesos;
but it tells us not so much of the might and exploits of the
being who represents the sun-god, as of his wealth and his
wisdom and the fearful doom inflicted for his sin. The
palace of the Phrygian king is but the golden house of
Helios, from which Phaethén went forth on his ill-starred
journey. His wisdom is that keen insight into the counsels
of Zeus which Phoibos cannot impart even to Hermes, the
er es
Heel ig fe ems fey a oot mt


without reason that Theseus was said to Hercules was to the oast of Gresco.’
have given rise to the proverb anuther — * Herodotos, iv. 9, 10,


STORY OF THE PELOPIDS.


messenger of the gods. His frequent converse with the king
of gods and men is an image of the daily visit of Helios to
the dizzy heights of heaven. The theft of nectar and am-
brosia! finds its parallel in the stealing of the fire by Pro-
metheus; and the gift thus bestowed on his people is but
the wealth which the sun brings from the sky, and bestows
lavishly on the children of men. The slaughter of Pelopa,
and the serving up of his limbs to Zeus at the banquet, is as
horrible as the tale which relates the birth of Erichthonios,*
but its meaning is as clear and as innocent. The genial
warmth of the aun brings to light and life the fruits of the
earth, which is his bride; his raging heat kills the very off-
spring in which he had delighted, and offers it up a scorched
and withered sacrifice in the eyes of Zeus, the sky. The
sentence passed upon him is in still closer accordance with
the old mythical language. When Hermes first kindled a
fire by rubbing together the dried branches of the forest,
and slew one of the oxen of Phoibos in solemn sacrifice, he
appeased not his hunger,’ for the wind may kindle the fire,
but it cannot eat of that which the fire devours. So, too,
Tantalos may gaze on sparkling waters and golden fruits;
but if he stoops to drink, or puts forth his hand to the laden
branches, the water is dried up as by the scorching wind of
the desert, and in the words of the poet,‘ only black mud
and gaping clay remain in place of flowing streams, and the
leaves wither away beneath the fierce glare of tropical noon-
day. In the rock which threatens to crush him, we see
again only the Sphinx brooding over the devoted city, or the
misshapen Polyphémos hurling down huge crags on the ships
of Odysseus—the unsightly offspring of the stormy sea, the
huge cumulus cloud whose awful blackness oppresses both
eye and heart as an omen of impending doom.

The Attic legend of Theseus is connected with the story
of Ixién through his son Peirithoés, but this myth brings
before us only the action of the sun under another phase.
It belongs perhaps to the least attractive classeof Hellenic
stories ; but its origin is as simple as that of the repulsive

) Bind. Oh i 100, * Hymn to Hermes, 130-185,

7 Apollod. iii. 14, 6. * Odyssry, xi. 187.


war + a


225


CHAP.
x.
Sa


Tho si
ita


226


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.
legend of Erichthonios. The wheel of the sun is mentioned


ate in many of the Vedic hymns, which speak of the battle waged


Connection
of these
stories
with the
tribal or
netional
memes.


by Dyaus, the heaven, to snatch it from the grasp of night.
So Ixién loves Héré, the queen of the ether, the pure heaven,
because Indra loves the Dawn and Phoibos longs for Daphné.
But he is also wedded to the mist, and becomes the father of
the Kentaurs, perhaps the Sanskrit Gandharvas, the bright
clouds in whose arms the sun reposes as he journeys through
the sky. And so the tale went that in the clouds he saw the
image of the lady Héré, and paid the penalty of his unlawful
love. The idea of toil unwillingly borne, as by Herakles or
Apollén, again comes in; for the wheel of Ixién can never
rest, any more than the sun can pause in his daily career.
The legend is almost transparent throughout. As the wealth
of Tantalos was the frait which the genial sunshine calls up
from the earth, the treasure-house of Ixién is the blazing
orb of Helios, the abyss of consuming fire which devours the
body of Hesioneus.' The darkness and gloom which follow
the treacherous deed of Ixién represent a time of plague and
drought, during which the hidden sun was thought to bow
himself before the throne of Zeus. But even yet the doom
pursues him. He has scarcely sought pardon for one offence
before he suffers himself to be hurried into another. Héré,
the queen whose placid majesty reflects the solemn stillness
of the blue heaven, fills with a new love the heart which had
once beaten only for Dia. Each day his love grows warmer,
as the summer sun gains a greater power. But the time of
vengeance is at hand. As he goes on his way, he sees a
form as of Héré, reposing in the arms of the cloude; but
when he draws nigh to embrace her she vanishes, like
Daphné from the gaze of Phoibos, or Eurydiké from that of
Orpheus; and he shares the doom of the Phrygian Tantalos
and his counterpart, the crafty Sisyphos, in the traditional
stories of Corinth.

In all these legends and tales of cities and states whose
rivalry wae not always friendly, we trace precisely the same
elements. The Argives and Athenians each regarded their
own traditions as of independent growth; we have eeen that

* ele Béépor wvpbs perréy—Diod. iv. 69.


TRIBAL AND NATIONAL NAMES.


their belief was groundless. Differences of names and of
local colouring prevented their eyes from discerning the sub-
stantial identity of stories in which the very names, when
they do not translate each other, have received their ex-
planation from languages not known to Greeks or Romans.
At once then we are driven to ask whether the same process
which has explained the legends may not also throw light on
the names of the cities or states themselves. . If the former
have been divested of all historical character, is it not possible
that the latter may be really destitute of either historical or
geographical value? The Ionians looked on the Dorians as
on men of an antagonistic race; the Argives who fought
with Agamemnon were arrayed against the Lykians who
were ranged on the side of Hektor. But did their names in
themselves betoken or warrant the feuds which had sprung
up among them? The question is one in which it is im-
possible to do more than argue from the known to the un-
known; and something is gained if facts which all would
allow to be fairly ascertained justify the suspicion that the
tribal or national names of the Aryan peoples have, in very
few instances, any geographical significance, or furnish any
grounds for drawing distinctions of blood between one tribe
or clan and another. The few names belonging to the former
class refer to the most prominent physical features of the
country, or to the position of one part as distinguished from
another. The Thrakians are plainly the inhabitants of a
rough and rugged country. They are the Highlanders of
the Greek regions, and may be ranged with the Albanians or
dwellers among the Alps and hills; and their name falls into
the same class with the names of certain Attic divisions, as
of the Mesogaian and Diakrian tribes ascribed to the times
of King Kranaos, and of the Pediaioi, Paraloi, and Hyper-
akrioi, the men of the plains, the sea-coast, and the hills,
But if some of the local tribes had names generally de-
scribing the nature of their position, the name of the whole
Athenian people had no such geographical meaning. Their
title can be explained only through the meaning of that of
Athéné; and the process which has stripped of all historical
value the traditions of the Argonautic expedition, of the tale


227


CHAP,
x


eile


The
Athenians,


228


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK of Troy, the Aiolic migrations, the Herakleid conquests,
—=_ leaves the origin of this name, and of all similar titles, if


there should be any such, a purely philological question.
Few probably will be unwilling to allow that this question
may be regarded as settled. The name Athéné, in ita Doric
form Athind, is the name also of the Sanskrit Ahand and
Dahand, the morning, and of the Greek Daphné, who flies
from the pursuit of the sun-god Phoibos.! With scarcely an
exception, all the names by which the virgin goddess of the
Alropolis was known point to this mythology of the Dawn.
The morning flashes up in full splendour from the eastern
sky; and the phrase not only grew up into the story that
Athéné sprang fully armed from the head of Zeus (Dyaus,
the sky), but was represented by many epithets of which her
worshippers had forgotten the meaning. Her name Trito-
geneia was referred by grammarians to an Aiolic word, trito,
denoting a head; but the myth is in no way affected if the
name is to be referred to a Vedic god of the waters and the
air.* Athéné thus is but Aphrodité Anadyomené, the dawn
springing from the sky and the sea; and we see her at once
ag the Argive Akria, the Messenian Koryphasia, the Roman
Capta, the goddess of the heights of heaven. The same
idea is embodied in the name Kranaai, and in the eponymos
Kranaos, who was invented to explain it. But the strength
of the mythical tradition is shown most clearly in the feelings
which centred in another epithet throughout probably the
whole history of the Athenian people. It was hard for
Athenians to turn a deaf ear to any one who spoke of them
as the men of the bright and glistering city. When the
comic poet twitted his countrymen with taking pleasure in a


x Max’ Miller, Lectures om the Science de Bacchus. Quand le dieu Tritos cessa
of Laxguage, second series, xi, The d’étre connu, le mot Tprroyéveia devint


origin and meanings of the name Danaé
inust be trested separately.

2“ Athéné @appelle aussi Tprreyéveia,
cest-i-dire Ja fille de Tritos. Ce dieu
u disparu de 1a mythologic precque:
meis il se retmuve dans les Vedas, ob
Trita régne mur les eaux et sur
Yatmosphére, Son nom s'est conservé
dons les mots grecs Triton, Amphitrite,
‘Tritopator, (eurnom des vente) et dens
Je nom du feuye Triton qui entoure
cette fle enchantée of ve passe I'enfance


une énigme, et les éoliens, qui dans leur
disleete appelaient zpsré la této, comme
Tattestent le scoliaste d’Aristophane et
Hésychius, n'bésitérent pas A reronnaitre
dans Athéné la déesse sortie de la tite
de Zeus'—Bréal, Hercule et Cacus, 17.
2 ek 36 vis Onas dxobemeioas Ainapas
radlaciew "Shas,
élpero wav fy Bid ras Auwnpas
dpody ryhy wepidyas.
Arist, Acharn, 606.


ATHENIANS, IONIANS, AND PHENICLANS.


name fit enough for marking the shining of fish preserved in
oil, he was unconsciously going back to the root which has
supplied a name for the most beautiful beings of his own
mythology. According to the old Vedic phrase, the horses
of the Sun and the fire alike glisten with oil or are covered
with fat; and the root har, modified from ghar, is seen in
the Sanskrit Harits, the Greek Charites, und the Latin
Gratie.' The common origin of these names would be
enough to show how Athens came to be so called, and why
the epithet took so strong a hold on Athenian sentiment.
But if the Athenian name thus proclaimed them simply

the children of the morning or the dawn, another epithet to
which they clung with a jealous tenacity carries us to the
title which, as they supposed, marked a generic distinction
between themselves and the Spartans.

Heretofore when the States’ commissioners

Came with an cye to hamboozle the town,
Did they ever fail to uddress you
As the men ‘of the riolet crown’?

Straight at the word you were up in your seats?
But to call the Athenians Iostephanoi was but to call them
Tonians; and we cannot refuse to connect this name with
the names of I6, Iolé, Iolios, Iobates, Iokasté, Iasén, Jamos,
and others—names which without exception belong to legends
which are more or less transparent. In Ié, the mother of
the sacred bull, the mother also of Perseus and of Herakles ;
in Iolé, the last comforter of the greatest of all the solar
heroes; in Iokasté, the mother and the bride of Oidipous,
we see the violet-tinted morning from which the sun is born,
and who may be said either to fly from, or to be slain by, or
wedded to her child. In Iolios we have only a faint image
of his kinsman Herakles ; in Iobates we see the king of the
far-off eastern land, at whose bidding Hipponods goes forth
to do battle with the monsters of darkness. Iasdn again is
the husband of Medeia, the daughter of the Sun, endowed
with the sun’s mysterious wisdom and magic robe.’ In the


.
1 Bee p. 48, ot seq. ‘myth to suggest the notion, The powers
* Ariet: doh. 609; translated by LH. healing ‘and destruction are exercised
Budd, not by him but by Medsia; and the ex-
* The Greek explanation made Tesén planetion is worth as much or aa little
the healer; but tere is nothing in the as the attempts to account for euch


229


CHAP.


x.
——


The
Tonians
and Phe
vicians,


230


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


_— story of Iamos, the violet crown of Athens has become @ bed
—_~— of violet flowers; but Iamos is himself the child of the sun-


ives
and Ar-
kadians,


god Phoibos, and he receives his wisdom from the keen-
sighted beings who draw the chariot of Medeia.! In the
name Jonians we have, then, a word strictly denoting colour
and nothing more; and the colour is the tint which over-
spreads the sky before the rising of the sun. The word is
thus identical in meaning with the name Phoiniké (Phe-
nicia), and Phenicia is accordingly the purple or blood-red.
land, where Eurépé is born, and whence she is borne on the
back of the snow-white bull westwards to Delphoi. The
name is purely Greek, and exhibits its full meaning when
taken along with that of Telephassa, the mother of the broad
day, who dies in the far west weary with searching for her
child. The same purple colour is embodied in Phoinix, the
early teacher of Achilleus, who recites to the wayward chief
the st ry of the short-lived hero whose life is bound up with
the torch of day. No distinction of race is therefore denoted
by the names whether of Ionians or Phenicians.

In historical Hellas the Argives were a people inhabiting
about a fifth part of the Peloponnesos. If the Iliad is to be
regarded as throwing any light on the conditions of an
earlier time, the name Argos had a far more extensive
application. It was a territory rather than a city or a state,
and with the exception of the islands over which he ruled,
it formed the whole of the dominion of Agamemnon. But
the name itself was not confined to the Peloponnesos; and
whatever be the explanation to be given of it, it must be
applicable to every extra~Peloponnesian Argos, and to the
ship which carried the Achaian chieftains on the quest of the
Golden Fleece. The word reappears in the title of Aphro-
dité Argynnis, and in Argennos the supposed favourite of


names as Odysseus and Oidipous, A
similar confusion between ds an arrow,
‘nd Pr poison, fatened on Herakls and

thilokuetes the practice of using poisoned
arrows (Max Halles, Lecturesy second
series, 292), It is, therefore, quite
Yikely that ‘the worship of Iaso, ae the
daughter of Asklepios, may be the result
of the same forgetfulness of the meaning


‘of words which turned Lykaon into a
wolf or Kallisté into a bear. Another
form of the name appears in Jasion, the
beloved of Démétér.

i When the word Dragon, which is
only another form of Dorkes, the clesr-
eyed gazelle, became the name for ser-
pents, these mythical beings were ne-
‘cessatily transformed into unakes,


ARGIVES AND ARKADIANS.


Agamemnon, and this epithet has been identified with the
Sanskrit Arjuni, the brilliant, a name for the morning.'
Here again, then, we have a name denoting brilliancy, and
we see at once that Argos Panoptes, the guardian of Io, is
with hia thousand eyes only another image of St. Ursula
and her eleven thousand maidens, or of Tara Bai in the
folk-lore of southern India,? while the word itself carries us
to the shining metal, the Greek argyros and the Latin
argentum, silver. Whatever then the Argo may be, it is
clearly the bright vessel in which the children of the sun go
to seek the lost light of day, and in which they return
possessed of the golden robe in the morning. It is in short,
the Sanskrit archi, light, and arkah, the sun himself;? and
thus the process which has explained the name of the Argive
people explains also that of the Arkadians, whose mythology
runs riot in the equivocal uses of words all originally de-
noting brilliancy. The eponym Arkas, is like Argos, a son
of Zeus, Kallisté being the mother of the former, Niobé of
the latter. But in the story of Kallisté we have precisely
that same confusion of thought which in India converted
the seven shiners, or strewers of light, into seven sages, and
in the West changed them into bears or waggons. The root,
in short, furnished a name for stars, bears, and poets alike ;
and when its first meaning faded from the mind, the myth
took the forms with which we are now familiar.‘ In the
west, the old word arksha as a name for star became con-
fused with the Greek arktos, the Latin Ursa, the name for
the golden bear, (the names Argos and Ursula being thus
etymologically the same), and the story went that Kallisté,
the most brilliant of all the daughters of Zeus, was changed
into a bear by Héré, as she changed I6 into a heifer. The
version given by Hyginus brings before us another trans-
formation ; in it Arkas is the son of Lykaon, and Lykaon is
1 Max Miller, Lectures on Language, independent bestowal of tho same root


second series, viii. on two distinct ideas, sun and
* Seo page 164. Syms, wee eae, there was danger
* Max Miller, Lect, second series, 360. of mythology; and we getually fad in


‘The same name, Profeseor Miiller goeson India that a myth sprang up, aod that
to sey, was bestowed independently on 3 hymna of praise were fabled to have
hymn of praise, as gladdening tho heart from or to have originally
and brightening the countenances of the” ‘revealed by the sun.’

Gods, and he adds, ‘If the reason of tho © * Max Miller, Zect. necond series, 363.


281


bos eet


ae


232


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK changed into a wolf for his impiety in offering human flesh
at, as food to Zeus. The story is simply another version of the


Delisne
and Ly-
kiuns.


myth of Tantalos and Pelops, and the solar character of the
one must be extended to the other. The confusion between
Leukos, brilliant, and Lukos, a wolf was as natural and
inevitable as between arksha and arktos, and the readiness
with which the one name would suggest the other is shown
in the passage where Mschylos makes the Theban maidens
pray that the Lykian or bright god might become a very
Lykeian or wolf to their enemies.’

, We come to a class of names, the original significance of
which is even less disguised. Unless we are prepared to
maintain that Phoibos received his name Delios because he
was born in Delos, we are compelled to account for the
name of the island from the myth of the god for whom it is
said to have furnished a birth-place. But this myth is s0
indispuiably solar that all further discussion on the character
of the legend becomes superfluous. The word itself denotes
the kindling of the heaven which goes before the sunrise ;
and although it is possible that the coincidence betweén the
local name and the myth may in any one given case be
accidental, such a supposition becomes desperate when wo
find the same coincidence running through many myths in
many countries. If the lord of light is born in Delos, he is
born also in the Lykian land. Phoibos is Lykégenés, light-
born, not less than Delian: and through that far off-eastern
land flows the golden stream of Xanthos, watering the realm
in which Sarpédén and Glaukos bare rule. But Sarpéddn is
a name which has been traced to the same root with the
names of Hermes and Helen, of Saramé, Saranyd and Erinys,
and it expresses the flushing of the heaven after dawn, as
the name of his friend Glaukos also denotes the brightening
light of Athéné Glauképis.? Another chieftain of this morn-

1 Koch. Sept. c. Thebas, 45, stamping the myth with a distinctively

# It in scarcely necessary to trace the solar character. They move through the
roota through the several Greek forms dark hours, like the Achsian chieftain
Ade, Aeucés, Aedeow, Adawe, yAfrn,and in aearch of the Golden Fleece, or like
others, and the Latin lux, Inceo, lumen, Helios himself in bie golden cup: they
Tucina, luena, hima. ‘The silent journey reach Lykia early in the morning, and
in which Hypnos and Thanatos, there were versions which brought Sar-


and Death, bear the dead body of Sarp8- ee. to life sgain when he reached the
dén to his home, is but another incident ykisy shore. The myth of Sarpédén


DELIANS AND “LYKIANS,


ing-land is Iobates, whose name, as we have seen, has the
same meaning as that of Phoinix; and Phenicians and
Lykians alike existed only in the terminology of the Greeks.
If we are to follow Herodotos,! the people of the country to
which he gave the name of Lykia, called themselves Termilai,
and the name of the Athenian Lykos the son of Pandion was
drawn in to explain the origin of the new title, as the name
of the Arkadian Lykion might have been used, had the
Attic mythical genealogy failed to supply one. Thus Delians
and Lykians are also, like the Athenians and the Lucanians
of aouthern Italy, the people of the dawn land; but the ver-
sions of the myth are countless, and they all carry us back to
mythical phrases of the like kind. According to one story,
Artemis, like Phoibos, is born in Delos ; according to another,
in Asteria the starland; in others Asteria and Ortygia are
other names for Delos itself. But the name Ortygia points
in Greek to the word Ortyx, a quail, and there was no lack
of myths to be localised, whether in the Egean island or in
the islet off the eastern shore of Sicily near to Syracuse.
In one Zeus changes Létd into a quail, from the same motive
which Jed him to transform I6 into a heifer: in another he
himself becomes a quail in order to approach the goddess, as
for the same reason he assumes the form of a golden shower
in the story of Danaé. In yet another, the children are
born in Asteria, and Lét6 tukes them thence into Lykia,
where she vainly tries to bathe them in the fountain of
Melité: but by the same confusion which produces the myth
of Lykfon and possibly all the modern superstitions of
Lykanthropy, wolves come to the aid of the goddess, and
carry her to the stream of Xanthos? In all these legends
the only name which calls for any comment is that of
Ortygia, and Ortygia itself is only the dawn-land. ‘The
quail in Sanskrit is called Vartika, i. the returning
bird, one of the first birds that return with the return of
spring.’® The name, it is obvious, might be applied to
the dawn, as naturally us the setting sun might become
thns resolves itself into that of Memnén, 7 Jacobi, Mythologie, s. v. Laté.


and Memnén is the child of the dawn, * Max Miiller, Zcctures, second ssriea,
Liz. 506.


238


234


BOOK,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


in the Sanskrit Bheki and the frog-princess of the German


—t_ tale!


Bihio-
pians,


Danaans


and Acha!-


The myth of the Lykian Sarpédén has a close affinity with
that of the Ethiopian Memnén; and in the Ethiopians
who fight at Troy we have another people for whom it
becomes impossible to find a local earthly habitation. The
story explains itself. The tears which Eds sheds on the
death of her child are morning dew. The men who follow
him are, according to the Herodotean story, exempt from
the ills of humanity; and their tables are always loaded
with banquets which no labour of theirs has provided, It
may amuse historians to regard this mysterious people as the
invaders and conquerors of the so-called Chaldean empire;
but no historical inference can be drawn from any mention
of them in the [liad or Odyssey. The name itself is as purely
Greek as are the names of the Phenicians and the Lykians,
and a2 y explanation given of it must also explain the names
Aithon, Aithylla, Aithra, Aithrios, Aithousa. But when
we have done this, we shall find the Ethiopians dwelling,
not as Mr. Rawlinson believes, on the south coast both of
Asia and Africa, and as divided by the Arabian Gulf into
Eastern and Western, Asiatic and African,? but in the bright
Aithér, the ethereal home of Zeus himself, far above the
murky air of our lower world.

There remain yet two names, which, according to Thucy-


1 Seo page 165. ‘The story of the
Frog Prince is singularly significant.
The dawa-maiden ie here playiog with
@ golden ball, which, like Endymion,
plunges into the water. This bull can


exult when they look on the new born
Apollén. This ball is the red-hot egg
the bird droy


¥ in the story of the
Ball of Crystal. The Frog reuppeurs in
other stories. In the legend of Brinr


be bronght to her again only by the
Frog~-the returning Sun The Frog re-
appears uga Toad in Grimm's story of
the Iron Store. Tn the Nix of the Mill-
id the man and his wife ure ¢}

Toto a toad anda frog, as the son and
‘the twilight fude beneath the waters.
Inthe Man of Iron the golden ball with
which the king’s son is playing rolls, not
inte the water but into the cage in which
the wild man (the Winter) is confined ;
the king's aon here being Phoibos of the
golden jocks. In the story of the Old
eamn the ball takes the form se:
spples, which instantaneously restore

daughter to health, as Hons


Rose it is he who promises the queen
that she shall have a daughter. In that.
of the Three Feathers, Dummling, whose
exploits reveal him like Theseus as an-
other Herakles, receives the beautiful
curpet (of clouds—the web of Penelope)
from the Frog who is now underground,
in other words, after sundown. In the
Faithful Bests it ie again the Frog who
brings up from the water the wonderful
stone (the orb of the Sun), the owner of
which can wish himself in whatever
place he desires to be.

3 Ezatern Munarchice, i. 60. In reply
to Mr. Rawlivaon it hae been urged
that the post of the Odyeaey could not


DANAANS AND ACHAIANS.


235


dides,! were applied in the time of the Homeric poeta to the CHAP, :
tribes afterwards known collectively as Hellenic. In Mr, wees


Gladstone’s jadgment, the followers of Agamemnon were
called Danaans in their military capacity, the name Argive
being used as & geographical designation, while that of
Achaians was confined to the ruling tribe? How vague the
name Argive is as # local term, we have already seen; and
even if the other two names are used in these senses, we are
obviously no nearer to their original meaning. The quantity
of the first syllable is urged as a reason for not identifying
the term Danaans with Ahan4, Dahané, and Daphné, names
of the dawn. At the least, it must be admitted that the
word must be taken along with the stories of Danaé the
mother of Perseus, and of Danaos with his fifty daughters.
Of these the former is throughout strictly solar? If, how-
ever, Niebuhr be right, the one reason for not holding
Danaé and Daphné to be different forms of the same name
loses its force, for in his judgment the word reappears in
Italy under a form more closely allied to Daphné than to
Danaé, and the Latins who regarded themselves as if coming
of the pure Trojan stock, bore precisely the same name with
the enemies of Priam and of Hektor.‘ So unsubstantial, in
all that relates to names, are the bases on which distinctions
of race and political attractions and animosities have been
made to depend, that we might well look with patience on
the arguments by which Mr. Gladstone * seeks to connect the
names of the Western Achaians and the Persian Achaimeni-
dai, if the names were not adduced as the evidence of ethno-


possibly have mcant what he je thos Tyrrhenian Ardea, and on the other
suppoved to mean, ‘Whether the expla- hand the father of Tyzrhenus (=Turnus)
nations of comparative mythologists be wre, according to come, called Daunua
right or wrong, it is certain that the poet and his mother Dazaé. Dannus and


cannot mean a people who wero neither
toward the rising nor the sotting sun
Telatively to himself'—Fdinburgh He-
barat January 1867, p. 117.


2 Hamer and the Homeric Age, Vl. i.
P. 846, &e.

* Soe page 227, é:c.

* “Danai and Daunii are anquestion-
ably the same, and the Daunii are clearly
allied to the Tyreheniun race. Dansé is
said to have founded the Pelasgico-


Lannus again aro the same, d and Zin
Latin and in the ao-called Holic dialect
being always exchanged for one another,
as in Bixpuey and leoryma, Ducetiua and
Levoetins, Leura, Lavinia, and Lavi-
pium are the same as the different
numes of the Latins, Lacjni, Lakini, La~
tint, and all these names are identical
with Danai’—Niebuhr, Lectures on An~
cient History, xxii.

* Homer and the Homeric Age, i. 559,
&e. :


230


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


logical affinity. Certainly it is not much more surprising


eb that Persian and Hellenic tribes should bear the same name,


‘The Hel-
énes and
Aiolians.


than that the Hindu of the Vedic age and the Persian of
our own day should both speak of themselves as Aryans.'
But the Achaian name is too manifestly linked with that of
Achilleus to allow any explanation to pass unchallenged
which does not apply alike to both. It is enough to say
that, so far as we may form a judgment, it must be placed
in the class of tribal names which had originally the same
meaning with those of Phenicians, Lykians, Delians, Arka-
diana, Athenians, and Jonians,?

We reach at last the great name which imparted some-
thing like a national character to the centrifugal tribes
known to us as Greek: and at once it may be said that the
name Hellénes was no more distinctive than that of Ionian
or Dorians, Delians and Ortygians, Arkadians and Lykians.
Under another form it expresses only the same idea of
brightuess, with a reservation which limits it to the bright-
ness of the sun. Whether there be, as Mr. Gladstone sup-
poses,’ the same ethnical connection between the Hellenes of
the West and the Eelliats of Persia, which, following the
popular Argive tradition,‘ he assumes between the men of
Argos as descended from Perseus and the people of the Eteo-
Persian province of Fars, is a question with which we need
not concern ourselves. Although the possibility of such a
connection cannot be denied, the reality of it cannot be
inferred from names which carry us into the regions of
cloudland. But of the philological identity of the names
Hellén, Hellas, Hellé, Helloi and Selloi,5 Selléeis, and


+ With the Persians the name is em-
ployed as constituting with the correla-
tive An-iran, or non-Aryans, an exhuns-
tive division of mankind: but in this di-
vision the Persians alone are Aryans.
Max Miiller, Lectures on Language, first
series, lecture vi.

? Professor Max Miiller is inclined to
think that Achilleus is the mortal solar
hero Aharyn. According to Kumarila,
AhulyA (in whdee name the change from
r tol begins) ia the goddess of night;
put ‘Inches is called ahalydsai jarah ; it
is most likely that che was meant for
the dawn.’—Lectures, second series, 502.


* The Persians of the Persians beur,
Mr. Gladstone remarks, ‘the name
Eelliat, which at least prosents @
striking resemblance to that of the
Helli. The aspirate would pass into
the doubled ¢ like “Haus into éAs0s, or
‘va into febva.'—Homer and the Homeric
i. 672

* Pbid. i, 587. Herod. vii. 61,150.

* The reading of the text in J. xvi. 234
igs mutter of indifference. As the name
Hellas points tothe collective nameHelloi,
80 the Selléeis, Zi, ii. 659, &c., points to
the Selloi; and the change of the aspi-
Tate into s is one of the commonest,


COLLECTIVE NAMES OF THE GREEK TRIBES.


Hellétis as a name of Athéné, or again of these names with
Helios, Eélios, and the Latin Sol, there can be no question.
Here then we have another group of names, every one of
which resolves itself into the idea of solar brightness,
for the root eur, to glitter, furnished the special Sanskrit
name for the Sun whether male or female.' Hence, as we
might expect, the mythical genealogy of the Hellénes playa
throughout on the ideas of light and darkness. For Hellén
himself is in one form of the legend the son of Deukalion
and Pyrrha, names which connect themselves with such words
as Polydeukes, Phoinix, and Ion; in another, he is the child
of Zeus, the gleaming heaven, and Dorippé. Of his children
one is the dusky Xouthos, another the flashing Aiolos, a
name which must be traced seemingly to the same root with
the Aithér of Zeus and the Aithiopians (Ethiopians) of the
Odyssey. The two sons of the dark Xouthos are the epo-
nyme of the Jonian and Achaian clans; but Ién shares his
name with other violet-coloured mythical creations, and
Achaios with Achilleus must, it would seem, be referred to
the Vedic solar hero Aharyu. Thus, with the Delians,
Lykians, and Ortygians, the Hellénes are, like the people of
Khorassan, simply the children of the light and the sun, and
the Hellespont marks their pathway.?

By this name all the tribes and clans who traced their
descent from Hellén and Deukalion acknowledged the bonds
of affinity which, as they supposed, connected them with
each other. A strictly local or geographical name it never
became. Wherever the Hellénes went, they carried Hellas
with them. It might be scattered among the islands of the
Egean ; it might be fixed on the mainland between that sea
and the Hadriatic; it might be transferred to the soil of
Italy; but the dwelling-place of the children of the Sun
retained everywhere the same name.’ As Hellénes they


1 Stryf ig ‘a female Sirya, i.e. the 8ér6os : Bdées—Max Miller, Compara-
Sun ax a feminine, or, according to the tive Mythology, 47. The word is thus
commentator, the Duwn ngain under @ the precise equivalent of Lykabas, the
different name. In the Rig-Veda, too, path of Light trodden by #he Sun-god.
the Dawn ia called the wife of Sirya, — * “EAAds omopadixf, "EAAds ouvexts.
and the Asving are sometimes called the With the Latina it was long before
husbands of Strya.’—Max Miiller, Zec- Southern Italy ceased to be commonly
tures, second series, Xi. spoken of as Magna Grecia.

 mdstos : wdros = méybos : wdfor =


287


OHAP,
x
—


Greeks
and Hespe-
Tians.


238


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


had a bond of union, which was the nearest Greek approach


pase ate to the modern idea of nationality, and which in greater or


Ttalian
and Teu-
tonic
tribal


less degree counteracted or softened the animosities of
Dorians and Jonians, of Athenians and Spartans, of Argivea
and Achaians. And yet the name which thus served to link
them together with some sort of friendly or even national
feeling was a word of precisely the same meaning with the
tribal or local names which were supposed to denote some
real distinctions of blood. But this was not the title by
which they were known in Western Europe. It never came
into common use among the Latins, who spoke of them as


(Graii, and Greci or Greeks. Of any such people to the east


of the Hadriatic the earliest notice is in the statement of
Aristotle, that the people dwelling round the Thesprotian
Dodona were called Graikoi before they were called Hel-
lénes.'! Following the path in which the names thus far
examined assuredly lead us, we should expect to find in
‘Wes:ern Hellas some names denoting the gloaming or doubt-
ful light of eventide. As Perseus journeyed westward, he
came to the land of the Graiai, or gray beings, before he
reached the gloomy dwelling of the Gorgons. To the in-
habitants of Thessaly, Epeiros was the gray land of the
setting sun, and here accordingly we find the Graioi. But
this name, it would seem, must have been accepted as a local
name for the country to the west of mount Pindos, before
the Latin tribes had any knowledge of their Eastern neigh-
bours. The name Hesperia, which the Hellénes applied
to Italy, the Latins never acknowledged for themselves ;
and with Virgil the use of it is due merely to the poet's
fancy. Graians and Hesperians are thus alike the people of
the dusky land, the Epeirot tribes acknowledging the name
because it was applied to them by their immediate kinsfolk,
the Italians ignoring it, or possibly not knowing it as a word
belonging to another language.”

But if the Latin name has any connection with that of


” the Danasi, it becomes at the least possible that other tribal


* Grote, History of Greece, ii every instance, one simple, aa Graii, and
ch. if, v Pe one derivative, ax Grech, story of
* ‘Niebuhr remarks that in old Latin Home, i. 46.
two names of nations were in use in


ITALIAN AND TEUTONIC TRIBAL NAMES.


names of the countries east of the Hadriatic may be found
on the great Italian peninsula: and thus, following the law
which modifies the Sanskrit apa, water, into the Greek
Acheléos, Acheron, and Axios, and the Latin aqua, we should
expect that the name of the Achaians, if it reappeared at all,
would undergo a similar change. Apulians and Aiquians we
do find; and it remains to be proved whether the coincidence
be or be not accidental. That the same names should be
used in common by tribes whose dialects are so closely akin
as those of the Greeks and Latins, is assuredly not ante-
cedemtly improbable: and thus some colour is furnished for
the inferences of Niebubr, who traces to these two forma a
very large proportion of the tribal names of the Italian
peninsula.' Such a name as that of the Rutulians forces
on us @ comparison with that of Argives, Arkedians, and
Phenicians: and the mythology of Virgil points in the same
direction.? Whether this identity be established or not, the
instances already adduced suffice to show that, with scarcely
an exception, the Greek tribal names are merely words
denoting colour, and all pointing in the same direction of
mythopaic or radical metaphor. That the same process
should go on among all peoples speaking kindred dialects, is
no more than we should expect; and the expectation will be
fully justified. The English Baldringas are children of the
Sun not less than the Hellenes, the Athenians, and the Lyki-
ans, and they still have their home at Baldringham. An-
other Teutonic Sun-god, the Eddic Tyr, the English Tiw,
had his dwelling and his children at Tewing and Tewesley.
The sons of Thunder and grinding War gave their names to


‘It must be remembered that the the intermediate forms Oren Opscus,
Italian dislects exhibited differencoa as Oscus, Olsue. History of Rome, vol. i.


great. ax those which separated them
from the Greek, or the Greck dialects
from each other; and thus the Latin
equivalents of Greek words would chow
changes analogous to the Greck equiva-
lente of Latin words. Thus, in Niebuhr’s
ndgment, the Latin form of the name
of the Apulian or Opiean people would
be Aqui. Other forms of these names
‘would be Opscus, Oscus, Ausones, Au-
runci, Sabini, Savnis, Semnis, Lapy-
gians. Niebuir soems inclined to iden-
tify the names Equi and Voleci through


“Ancient Italy,”

* We know that the name Tyrrheous
was not an Etruscan word, and hence
there is perhaps some reason for con-
necting Tyrrhenus, Turnus, Téphos, Tip.
os, turris, and for regarding the name
as the equivalent of the Greek Laris-
suioi. Turaus is a son of Danaus, and of
Venilia (Venus) 6 sister of Amata, In
the Hne'd Jnturns is his faithful sister;
but the resemblance of the two names is
probably the result of accident,


Qiu


ois
ak


Ethno-
logical
inferences.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE AKYAN NATIOXS.


‘Thorington and Eormington. Nay, the very names of Yng
and Isco, the two sons of Man the son of Tiw, are merely
words denoting the ash tree, from which, according to both
German and Hellenic notions, some of the human races had
sprung.'

From all these names no further ethnological conclusion
can be drawn than that all the nations and tribes speaking
Aryan dialects are sprung from ancestors who once dwelt
somewhere as a single people. As evidence for narrower
distinctions they are worthless. Argives and Athenians,
Tonians‘and Arkadians, may have regarded each other as
aliens, but their names have all the same meaning; and all


‘their legends of prehistoric migrations and conquests resolve


themselves into the great journey and the mighty battle
which is repeated every morning and evening through all the
seasons of the rolling year. We can no longer look to move~
ments of Aiolians, Argives, or Herakleids as throwing light
on tl 2 distribution of the Hellenic tribes in historical times.?
The facts of that distribution must be received as they are
given to us by the most trustworthy contemporary histo~
rians: to reason back from history into the regions of myth
ig an occupation not more profitable than the attempt to fill
a sieve with water.


1 gis apracentl the eponsmos of


very little even then, ... Even the
Angeln and the English. Max Miller,


traditions of the migrations of the Chi-


Lecturis, second series, x.

® On this point Professor Mx Miller
speake with sifficient emphasis: It
may be diffcult to confess that. with all
the traditions of the early migrations
of Cecrops and Danaus into Greece,
writh the Homeric poems of the Trojan
war, and the genealogies of the ancient
dynusties of Greece, we know nothing of
Greck history before the Olympiads, and


chimces, Colhuas, and Nahuas, which
form the staple of all American anti+
quariank, are no better than the Greck
traditions nbout Pelasgians, olians,
and Ionians, and it would be a mere
waste of time to construct out of such
elements a systematic history, only to
be destroyed again sooner or later ly
some Nivbukz, Grote, or Lewis.’ —Chips,
i, 831,


241


CHAPTER XI.


MYTHICAL PHRASES FURNISHING THE MATERIALS OF THE
HOMERIO POEMS.


Ir the history of Greek literature to the close of the
Peloponnesian War shows that the poems to which we give
the name of Homer did not constitute the Homer of the
lyric, tragic, or comic poets, and that our Iliad and Odyssey
were, in the precise form transmitted to us, either unknown
to them, or (what is altogether improbable), unpopular if
known, these conclusions, it must not be forgotten, are only
negative. The most zealous Euemerists of the present day
admit that ‘the general scheme of the Iliad existed before
the days of Homer;’ the most advanced sceptics have never
supposed that the later poets of the Iliad and the Odyssey
invented the materials of which they have made use. It is
even likely that large portions of our Lliad and Odyssey may
have existed substantially in their present shape long before
the days of Aischylos and Sophokles; and even if we say
that these two poems were thrown into their final form not
Yong before the time of Plato, we do but say that from the
vast mass of Homeric literature the poets chose those por-
tions which from their general tone of thought and feeling
were most congenial to the sentiment of the age in which
they lived, that from the stories so chosen they removed
unpleasant roughnesses and archaisms, and kept as much
in the background as they could the ruder and more savage
features of the traditions followed by the great tragic poets.'

1 Mr. Paley, in his paper on the literature would necessarily leave the
comparatively late date of our Homerie stamp of the vld authorship pon it, sod
poems, asserts distinctly that ‘the so it would remain “Homer”


Femodelling aid reducing any important Not only, therefore, are the Cheetos
part of? the ‘rast mass of “Homeric” groundless which urge ‘ thatuo historical


VOL. I. Ez


CHAP.
Extent of
the old.


Homeric
literature,


242 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK In short, as scon as we have dismissed all speculations on
tes possible historical quarrels fought out on the shores of the
Propontis, as soon as we allow that if the Homeric poems
turn on any historical quarrel at all, that quarrel must be
carried back to an age indefinitely preceding the first dis-
persion of the Aryan tribes, we are at once left free to account
for the origin and the growth of Homeric materials; and
the shutting up of all other pathways shows, that if the ques-
tion is ever to he answered, it can be answered only by follow-
ing the track of Comparative Mythology.
Extent of But the evidence which disproves the assertion of Bunsen,


— that our Iliad is ‘the sacred ground-work of lyrical poetry
Jogy. no less than of the drama,”' invalidates at the same time all


those arguments from the silence of our Homeric poems, on
which some recent writers have been disposed to lay much
_ stress, These arguments at best cannot reach very far. The
epithet which speaks of Zeus as a son of Kronos implies a
knowledge of dynasties among the gods; and the weight of
proof lies therefore with those who maintain that the framer
of the Iliad had never heard the story of Prometheus. An-
other epithet implies the knowledge that Achilleus was to
die young, even if we put aside the passage which speaks of |
his death in the Odyssey. The poet of our Hiad knew that
Paris was called Alexandros; and it is impossible to show
that he was unacquainted with the myths which professed to
explain the origin of this name. He also knew that the
whole expedition of the Achaians against Troy was but an
ineident in the epical history of Paris, for the very cause of
the war is that Paris came and stole Helen from the house
of Menelaos. He knew farther, for he tells us plainly, that
the inaction of Achilleus had its counterpart in the inaction
of Paris; and if he tells us how, after his long fit of sullen
anger, Achilleus came forth in all his old energy, he also
knew that Paris was not to be always idle, and that from him
Achilleus himself was to receive hisdeath-wound.? Nothing


evidences existe of sny newHomer having) God in History, book iv. ch. viii,
superseded the old Homer, but itfollows —? fuars 19 Sre név oe Mdpis nel Soifes
that the poets would ‘ retsin the general *ARdARaY


archaic type of the heroic manners and def aby dévr? BAdawow Wl Arasfior
dialogue. wingow, Hh, xxii. 858.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE HOMERIC POETS.


Jess than the clearest proof that our Homer was the Homer


243


CHAP,


of Pindar, Zschylos, and Sophokles, can weaken the conclu- _*_


sion that our poems are compilations, made for a purpose,
from the yast existing mass of Homeric literature. If this
purpose was to supply, ‘in a convenient and symmetrical
form, the most celebrated and most engrossing incidents of
the war,’! it is unreasonable to look to the Iliad for notices
of myths which lay beyond the region of the poet’s immedi-
ate subject, and it clearly did not concern him to go through
the genealogies of the Hesiodic theogony even if he knew
them. His task was to exhibit a few incidents in the special
career of Paris on the one side and of Achilleus on the
other; and if he knew that these incidents were linked with
others of which he does not speak, it only remains to point
out resemblances which probably escaped his notice, and to
account for their occurrence. It is of the very essence of
mythology that the original signification of the names which
serve as the groundwork of its narratives should be only in
part remembered. The author of the hymn to Hermes had
at best only an intermittent consciousness that he was simply
relating the rivalry of the wind and the sun; but he knew
enough of the attributes of Hermeias to write a poem,
almost every line of which points to the mythical speech of
which the tale is a petrifaction. The author of the Iliad
may not have felt that Achilleus was but a reflection of
Tantalos and Ixion, Sisyphos and Lykaén: but his language
throughout the poem harmonises strangely with the mythical
phrases which speak of the lord of day when he hides away
his face behind the clouds. He could not know that the
Northman, even then wandering in regions which for the
Achaian had no existence, was framing the tale which grew
up into the epic of the Volsungs and the Nibelungs, and that
in that tale Achilleus and his mother Thetis were repre-
sented by Sigurd and his mother Hjordis. With the cause
of the expedition to Troy he had no immediate concern. He
tells us, in passing, the cause of the war; but hts theme is
the wrath of the great chieftain from Phthia, and he has
kept to that theme with wonderful fidelity, if not to the


1 Paley, On the late Date of our Itiad and Odyssey, 8.
E2


44


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


Greek nature, yet to the old mythical speech. Yor after the
admission of critics opposed to the hypothesis of Wolf, that
the fragments in which the Homeric text was handed down
from remote antiquity ‘were cast and recast, stitched to-
gether, unstitched again, handled by uncritical and un-


scrupulous compilers in every possible way,’? it is impossible
to dispute the conclusion that those portions of the poem
which relate exclusively to the independent exploits of the
other chiefs were at some later time embodied into a poem
which may conveniently be termed an Achilléis.? Nor, if it
be necessary to account for this insertion, have we far to go
for a reason. The theme chosen by the author of the
Achilléis confined him to a period of comparative inaction.
The valour of the Achaians could only be asserted by an
independent poem which showed that they were not helpless?
even without the aid of the great son of Peleus. It is not
surprising that the two poems should, with others which
fitted in with the general plan, have been gradually blended
together.‘


1 Edinburgh Review, October, 1858,
. 503,
PP The downfall of the Enemeristic or
conservative hypotheses make it really
unnecessary tu examine the mode in
which the several portions of the iad
have been pieced together. Itix enough
to say thut, when the whole narrative of
the Hiad has been proved to be un-
historical, and when the narratives of
Yater alleged events have aleo been
shown to possess no historical value, the
burden of proof resis with those who
affirm, not with thoye who deny, the
original unity of a poem which, it ix
admitted on all sides, was in existence
before the use of writing became general
or adequate to the production of long
manuscripts. Jt may be udded, how-
ever, that the arguments of Colonel
Mure (History of Greek Litirature,
book ii. ch. xvi.) and Mr. Gladstone
(Homer and the Homeric Age,‘ Avidus'),
fuil altogether to meet the objections
urged by Mr. Grote against the origivul
continuity of the porm in its present
furm, Mr. Grote’s remurke (History of
Greece, part i, ch. xxi.) on the embassy
to Achilleus divpose conclusively of
every attempt to maintain the uniterian


theory on the ground of a supposed moral
corsitency in the character of Achilleus,
while it also shows that the writer of
the Achilléis knew nothing of the first
effort for reconciliation, See Muir,
Sanskrit Tezts, part iv. ch, ii. sect. 3,
where the like reasons are urged for
regarding certain passages in the Muh&-
Uhdrata as interpolations,

* Colonel Mure, strangely enough,
sera in J/, ii.-vii. nothing but a catalogue
of disasters, bringing misery and dig
on the Argive hoste, Crit. Hist. Gr.
Lit. vol. tp. 266, Mr. Grote, far
more truly, says that the great chiefs
fare ‘in full force at the beginning of the
eloventh book.’ —Hestory of Grecee,
parti. ch. xxi,

* It would seem that: the chief error
of Wolf and hie followers was the
attempt to fix the date of this combing»
tion, which they attributed to Peisistra-
tos,” The ackuuwledged antiquity of the
muterials Jed them naturally to throw
back, us far as possible, their work of
bringing them into their present shape.
‘The question loses much of the factitious:
importance given to it by anti-Wolfian
critics, when the unhistorical character
ef the whole narrative of the iad has


THE ACHILLEIS.


Thus was produced an epic as magnificent as it is com-
plicated; but through all its intricacy may be traced the
thread of the original myth: and the fact that it may be so
traced becomes the more remarkable as we realise the extent
to which the process of disintegration has been carried on.
If the poem does not exhibit the systematised theogony of
Hesiod, still Phoibos is in it a person distinct from Helios,
Artemis, or Athéné. Hekabé is no longer identified with
Seléné or Lét6: Zeus is no longer one with Ouranos. Only
a few signs remain of that interchangeable character which
isso prominent in the gods of the earlier Vedic poems. And
further, the Diad, by the admission alike of those who uphold
and of those who reject the Wolfian theory, necessarily
exhibits the later elements which must spring up with the
growth of a definite religion, and the developement of some-
thing like civil government. Still, on the Trojan shore,
facing the island of Tenedos, the old tale is repeated, which
assumes a gloomier form in the mythology of the North. The
mighty Achilleus, over whose childhood had watched Phoinix
(the purple cloud), is there to fight, but, like Bellerophon, as
he insists emphatically, in no quarrel of his own.’ A hard
toil is before him, bnt, as with Herakles, the honour which
he wins is not to be his own.? Like Herakles, again, and
Persens and Theseus, his limbs are strong, and his heart
knows no fear. In place of the sword of Apollén, the
Chrysdér, or the Teutonic Sigurd, he has the unerring spear
which no mortal can wield but himself? Still, like Herakles
and Apollén and Perseus and Bellerophén, he is practically
the servant of one on whom he looks down with a deserved
contempt.‘ On him falls all the labour of war, but the spoil
which he wins with his bow and spear must pase into the


‘been clearly shown on grounds quite ' ab yap dpb Tpdwy Even’ Hrvsor
unconnected with the timo of their alxunrdur


composition, The real facts of Greek Beipo paxnasperes: éxel ors jor
Hiterary history lead Mr, Paley to the eircoi eo. Jtiad, i. 163,
conclusion ‘that there is not one shadow = * tushy the dpriucras Meveady, cot re,
or tittle of proof that the Homer which 4b, i. 159,
we have wna the Homer thut Peisistra- wT} ui ob Bova? Bader » "Axatay
tos is said, whether truly or not, to dane, Band pv oles erlovero what
have collected and introduced into *AysaAes. Jb, xvi, 142.


Athens.’ The late Dote uf vur Iiad and = _‘ Thie contempt is fully expressed—~
Odyasey, 7, Wii, 225-231.


245


OHAP.
x.
aS

The tale
of the
Achilibis,


246


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK hands of Agamemnon,' as those of Herakles fall to the lot of


~~ Hurystheus. Still he has his consolation.


He is cheered by
the love of Hippodameia* (the tamer of the horses of the
Sun). But even Briséis he must now give up, as Herakles
was compelled to part from Iolé. At the very thought of
losing her, his passion overleaps all barriers; but his rage is
subdued by the touch of Athéné, the daughter of Zeus, the
sky. He must yield, but with Briséis vanishes the light of
his life, and he vows a solemn vow that henceforth in the
war the Achaians shall look in vain for his aid.‘ He hangs
up his sword and spear in his tent, takes off his glittering
armour, and the Argive warriors see the face of the bright
hero no more. Yet even the fierceness of his wrath cannot
avail to keep entirely in the background another feature in
which he resembles Herakles, Sigurd, Theseus, and Iasdn.
Briséis is gone, but Diomédé, the daughter of Phorbas, sup-
plies her place, as Oindné gives way to Helen, and the wise
Medeia to the daughter of the Argive Kreén. But the mind
of Acbilleas remains unchanged. His wrath is terrible as
the wrath of the angry sun, and he bids Thetis, his mother,
go to the throne of Zeus, who dwells in the bright ether, and
pray him to send such a storm as may well make the
Achaians rate their king at his true value.® The darkness
thickens, but at first the Achaians care not. Zeus alone
knows and proclaims that the fortunes of the Argives them-
selves must remain under the cloud until Achilleus again
goes forth to battle.© His words are soon accomplished.
The knowledge that the great champion of the Argives no
longer takes part in the war inspires the Trojans with fresh
strength. The storm-clouds rise with greater volume when


> 7d piv wAciov wodvdinos rodépoio Diomédt, who takes her place, belongs


xtiges dual Biérove™ drap Hy more
Baods Tenras,


pa
‘The father of Brinéis is the
Vedie Brisnya. ‘Destroy, Saraswati,
the revilers of the gods, the offspring
of the universal deluder, Brisaya’—
H.H. Wileon, 2. W. 8. sii. 615.

* It is at the least worthy of note
that, while Brisdis comes from Lyrnessos,


to the th-western Lesbos. Z/, ix. 658.
So Oindné lives on Ida, but Helen in the
far west. Told is the daughter of Eu-
rytos (another name of the class Eury-
ganeis, &.), in the eustero islaud of
Enboia; Déiancira lives in the western
Kalydon.

+H. 240.

* ti, 407-412.

# Xi viii, 47.


THE DEATH OF PATROKLOS.


the light of the sun is blotted out of the sky. Still the great
chiefs of the Argives stand forth in unabated confidence ;!
but Agamemnon, Odysseus, and Diomédes are soon wounded
in the fight, and the Achaians begin to realise their grievous
Joss. Their misery excites the compassion of Patroklos, in
whom the character of Achilleus is reflected, as is that of
Helios in Phaéthén, or that of Odysseus in Telemachos.?
Melted by the tears of his friend, Achilleus givea him his own
armour, and bids him go forth to aid the Argives. But with
this charge he joins a caution. Phaéthén must not touch
with his whip the horses of Helios? Patroklos must not
drive the chariot of Achilleus on any other path than that
which has been pointed out to him.* But although Patroklos
can wear the armour of Achilleus, he cannot wield his spear.®
The sword and lance of Apollén and Perseus, of Theseus and
Artemis, may be touched by no other hands than their own.
Patroklos is ready for the fight, and yoked to the car of
Achilleus stand the immortal horses Xanthos and Balios
(golden and speckled as a summer sky), which Podargé, the
glistening-footed, bare to Zephyros, the strong west wind,
near the shore of the Ocean stream.’ The sun is breaking
out for a moment through the mist. Like hungry wolves,
the Myrmidons (the streaming rays) stand forth to arm
themselves at the bidding of their chieftain.’ For a time
the strength of Achilleus nerves the arm of Patroklos, so that


"Hix. 65.

2 Mr. Grote has remarked this. ‘Pa-
troklos has no substantive position; he is
the attached friend and recond of Achil-
Jeus, but nothing else.’ ~Hestory of
Greree, ii, 288. Colonel Mure, howev
discerns in the contrast between the two
strong evidence of Homer's * knowledge
of human nature’—Orit. Hist, Gr. Lit.


which may well mourn for the hero who
took him from king Hialprek’s stall and
rode on him throngh the flames when he
went to recover the stolen treasures.
This horse, Grimm remarks, appears
fo the Swedish and Danish folk-lore
under tho name Black, « word which, it
can searvely bo necessary to say, may


i, 285,

* These heavenly steeds of Achilleus
and Indra are not lesa prominent in the
myths of Northern Europe; and some
of them are endowed with that gift of
speech which Xanthos possesses as the
golden or gleaming horse of the sun
itself, while it is denied to Balios, the
mottled or speckled steed which repre-
sents the sunlit clouds. Thus the horse
of Sktrnir speaks to its muster in the
‘Edda, and Gade, after the desth of
Sigurd, talke with Gran, the noble steed,


signify whiteness and light not less than
gloom and durkneas. The same power
‘of speech belongs in tho Servian legend
to Scheratz, who xpeuks to Marko
shortly befure his death, as Xanthos
warns Achilleus of his impending doom.
For other instances see Grimm's Deuteche
Mythologie, 365.

% uh ob 7 Krevder dueio AuralevBor

iG. 8 A xvi, 89.


Ge.
2 Hyyes 8 ob Eder lov dubuavor
‘AlaxiBao, #70. IB. xvi. 140,
* f. xvi. 151.
7 4b. xvi. 166.


247


OHAP.
Xi.


afu


MITHOLUGL UF TH AKIAN NALIUNS,


BOOK he can smite Sarp&dén, the great chief of the Lykians, in
et whose veins runs the blood of Bellerophén, and for whom


the bitter tears of Zeus fall in big drops of rain from the sky.’
But the transient splendour is soon dimmed. It was but the
semblance of the sun looking out from the dark cloud; and
Patroklos, therefore, meets his doom. But the poet recurs
unconsciously to the old myth, and it is Apollén who disarma
Patroklos,* although it is Hektor who slays him. The im-
mortal horses weep for his death and the fall of their
charioteer Automedon, while Zeus mourns that ever he
bestowed them as a gift on so mean and wretched a thing
as man.*” In the fearful struggle which follows for the body
of Patroklos, the clouds are seen fighting a fierce battle over
the sun, whose splendour they have for a time extinguished.
The razged and streaming vapours which rush across the
eky have their counterpart in the throng of Trojans who
fling themselves like hounds on the wounded boar.t But a
fiercer storm is raging behind the dark veil. Beneath the
‘black cloud of his sorrow’ the anguish of Achilleus is pre-
paring an awful vengeance.’ The beauty of his countenance
is marred, but the nymphs rise from the sea to comfort him,®
as folk still say, «the sun drinks,’ when the long rays stream
slantwise from the clouds to the waters beneath. One desire
alone fills his heart, the burning thirst for vengeance; but
when Thetis warns him that the death of Hektor must soon
be followed by his own,’ his answer is that the destruction
of bis great enemy will be ample recompense for his own
early doom. Even Herakles, the dearest uf the sons of Zeus,


1 alperéervas 82 yddar xaréxever


* It, xviii. 36. These nymphs aro
fpate. Ht xvi. 459.


only half anthropomorphised. ‘Their


*R. xvi. 790, «7.0. This was a
atrict mythical necessity ; yet Colunel
‘Mure lays grest stress on it'as showing
the cowardice and brutality of Hektor.
Grit, Hist, vol, i. p. 281. The result of
his metbod is, that he finds himself
Billed on every oerasion to wil

ajuna for the exaltation of their
enemies, In a leas dezree, Mr. Glud-
stone's eriticismelies open to the same
remark. g

* Hexvii. 444, 4 1B. xvii. 725.

9 bs gdre- rv B Eyeos vepian tad

Auje pidawa, Lb. xviis, 22.


naines still express their own meaning.

7 Ib. xviii. 96, The real naturo of
this myth becomes «ill mora npparent
when looked at through the bald state-
ments of Apollodoray, iii. 13. 8. Troy.
be says, euunot be taken without Achil-
Tous: the san alunecun subdue ube dark
clouds, But Thetis knows that, after
Troy is taken, Achilleus must die, The
sun must set after his victory over the
mista. So she diaguisce Achilleus in
woman's garb, as the light clouds half
veil the early risen sun.


THE VOW OF ACHILLEUS,


had submitted to the same hard lot.1 His mind is made up.
He retains still the unerring spear. It remains only that he
should wait for the glistening armour wrought on the anvil
of the fire-god Hephaistos. But, although the hour of his
vengeance is not yet come, his countenance still has its
terrors, and the very sight of his form? fills the Trojans with
dismay, as they hear his well-known war-cry. His work is
in part done. The body of Patroklos is recovered as the sun
goes down unwillingly into the stream of ocean.* Then fol-
lows the awful vow of Achilleus, There shall be a goodly
mourning for Patroklos. The life-blood of twelve Trojans
shall gush in twelve streams on the altar of sacrifice,‘ like
the torn and crimsoned clouds which stream up into the
purple heaven when the angry sun has sunk beneath the sea.
But the old phrases, which spoke of Helios or Herakles
as subject to death, still spoke of both as coming forth eon-
querors of the power which had seemed to subdue them;
and, true to the ancient speech, the poet makes Thetir
agsure her gon that no hurtful thing shall touch the body
of Patroklos, and that, though it should lie untended the
whole year round, his face should wear at its close a more
glorious and touching beauty.’ The end draws nigh. The
very helmsmen leave the ships as they hear the ery of
Achilleus calling them once again to battle.* His wrongs


round him even in the hours of dark-
ness. It is the same with Chundun


unclouded. So Achilleus bas about his
head a golden cloud (xpiceor végos), and
the glory streams from him like smoke
i lwaven. Tho rays of the
tinge from the cloud.
. 240.
4 2b, xviii, 386.
§ fivwep yap xiral ye rereopdpor els
dnaurdy,
G3 Loran xpbs EuweBos, } wal
elon, H, xix. 33.
'y of the bodies of
solar heroes is atrikingly Drought out
in modern Hindu Jegonds, which are,
as we might expect, even more trans-
Parent than those of the Teutonic
Tations, Thus, when the destined
husband of Punch Phul Ranee dies
on the peventh hedge of spears, her
father seky, ‘How is it that he thus
dazzles our eyea?’ and the glory shines


Rajah, whose tomb the peaple came
and near to visit, ‘and gen the
racle how the body of him who
Jiu been dead «0 many months remained
perfect and undecayed” So, too, the
body of Sodewa Bai, the Hindu Cin-
derella or Rhoddpis, cannot decay, nor
e colour of her face change, ‘A.
th afterwards, when her husband
returned home, she looked as fair and
Jovely as on the night on which she
died."—Frere, Ofd Deccan Days.
these beings die, or seem to die, becnuse
they are deprived of that in which their
strength lies, as in the golden locks of
Nisos, who becomes pawerlene as Samson
when they are taken from his head ; but
over these bright beings death can have
no real dominion, and they all rise to
more than their former splendour.
© Hi, xix, 44,


249 |


CHAP.


- Sod


ROOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


shall be redressed. Agamemnon, the king, will yield to him


—b_ the maiden whom he hed taken away, and with her shall


come other maidens not less fair, and gifts of priceless beauty.’
But, with a persistency which, except by a reference to the
sources of the myth, is at best a dark riddle, Agamemnon
asserts his own innocence. ‘I am not guilty,’ he said.
«The blame rests with Zeus and Moira (who fixes the lot of
man), and Erinys, who wanders in the air,’ So the old wrong
is atoned. The gifts are placed before him. The fair
maidens come forth from the tent, but, with a singular
fidelity to the old legend, Briséis comes last of all,? beautiful
and pure as in the hour when he parted from her,’ even as
Oinéné in her unsullied loveliness appears by the side of the
dying Paris, or Iolé by the pyre of Herakles. Then it is that
Achilleus forgives the wrong done to him, but repeats the
riddle which lurked in the words of Agamemnon. It was
not anything in the son of Atrens that could really call forth
his w-ath. ‘He could never, in his utter helplessness, have
taken the maiden from me against my will; but so Zeus would
have it, that the doom of many Achaians might be accom-
plished.’* So he bids them go and eat, and make ready for
the fight ; but when Agamemnon would have Achilleus him-
self feast with them, the answer is that the time for the
banquet is not yet come. His friend lies unavenged, und of
neither meat nor drink will he taste till his last fight is
fought and won.’ The same truthfulness to the old idea
runs through the magnificent passage which tells of the
arming of Achilleus. The helmets of the humbler warriors
are like the cold snow-flakes which gather in the north.’
But when Achilleus dons his armour, a glorious light flashes
up to heaven, and the earth laughs ut its dazzling radiance.’


* He xix. 140, This is the first sub- * Exr', drip dyBodray BpiontBa KadAr
mission made by Agamemnon in the hopoy. Ut, xix. 245,
Ackiliéie. Yt may be noted that here 261,
he not only acquits himself of guilt (86), 274.
but, in order to fix the blame on Zeus, . 210.
recites w tale which is essentially a e- —* ds 8° Bre rapperal mpddes Bids dumo-
parate poem, and may have existed long réovras
tars, or apart from, the /ias or the woxpal, ixd pew lopnyerios Bopéas.

is, nS may have been the caso » Kix. B58.


win oh laya as those of Phoiniz,
Hix, 528, and Demodokos, Od, viii.
266.


1 ayia & olparby he yéraoae Bb
wéaa wepl xiv


xarxod bxd oreporss. I, xix. 363.


THE VICTORY OF ACHILLEUS.


His shield gleams like the blood-red moon, as it rises from
the sea.' His helmet glitters like a star, and each hair in
the plume glistens like burnished gold. When he tries the
armour to see whether it fits his limbs, it bears him like a
bird upon the wing.’ Last of all, he takes down his spear,
which none but himself can handle, while Alkimos and
Automedon (the strong and the mighty) harness his immor-
tal horses. As he mounts the chariot, he bids them bear
him safe through the battle, and not leave him to die as they
had left Patroklos. Then the horse Xanthos bows his head,
and warns him of the coming doom. Their force is not
abated. They can still run swifter than the awiftest wind,
and their will is only to save the lord whom they serve and
love. But the will of Zeus is stronger still, and Achilleus
too must die.? It is a kindly warning, and the hero takes it
in good part, ‘I know,’ he says, ‘ that I shall sce my father
and my mother again no more; but the work of vengeance
must be accomplished.’ Then, before the great strife begins,
Zeus bids all the gods (the powers of heaven) tuke each his
side, He alone will look down serenely on the struggle as
it rages beneath him. Many a Trojan warrior falls by the
spear of Achilleus, and the battle waxes fiercer, until all the
powers of heaven and earth seem mingled in one wild turmoil.
The river Skamandros is indignant that the dead body of
Lyk4én, the (bright) son of Priam, should be cast into its
waters, and complains to Achilleus that his course to the sea
is clogged by the blood which is poured into it.) But
Achilleus leaps fearlessly into the stream, and Skamandros
ealls for aid to Simoeis. The two rivers swell, and Achilleus
is alunost overborne.® It is a war of elements. The sun is
almost conquered by the raging rain. But andther power
comes upon the scene, and the flood yields to Hephaistos,
the might of the fiery lightning.’ Fiercer yet grows the


1B xix. 874, cannot. be conceived as taking part in
* Tb, xix. 386. the contest, slthongh the clouls and
* Pb. xix. 987-417. Tightnings, the winds ang vapours, be-


4 2, xx. 22, Tho sky itself, regarded neath it may.
as the pure ether in which Zeus dwolls, —* 22. xxi. 219.
far sbove the murky air brenthed by © JB. xxi. 325.
mortal men (xeravepés, aifip: vale), 7 JD. xxi. 345.


251


CHAP.
xi


252


BOOK


~L_. while Zeus laughs at the sight.


Achilléis.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.
atrife. The gods themselves struggle wildly in the fray,
Artemis falls, emitten by
Héré, and her arrows (the sun’s rays) are gathered up by
Lété6 and carried to the throne of Zeus.? But through all
the wild confusion of the strife Achilleus hastens surely to
his victory. Before him stands his enemy; but the spell
which guarded the life of Hektor is broken, for Phoibos has
forsaken him.* In vain he hurls his spear at Achilleus, in
vain he draws his sword. Still Achilleus cannot reach him
through the armour of Patroklos,‘ and the death wound is
given where an opening in the plates left his neck bare.
The prayer of Hektor for mercy is dismissed with contempt,
and, in his boundless rage, Achilleus tramples on the body,
as the blazing sun seems to trample on the darkness into
which it is sinking.

At this point, in the belief of Mr. Grote, the original
Achilléis ended. ‘The death of Hektor satisfies the exi-
gencies of a coherent scheme, and we are not entitled to
extend the oldest poem beyond the limit which such necessity
preseribes.’* The force of the objection depends on the idea
by which the poet, either consciously or unconsciously, was
guided in his design. The sudden plunge of the sun into
the darkness which he has for a moment dispelled would be
well represented by an. abrupt ending with the death of
Hektor. The ‘more merciful temper’ which Achilleus dis-
plays in the last book would not only be necessary ‘to create
proper sympathy with his triumph,’ but it would be strictly
in accordance with the idea of the sun setting in a broad
blaze of generous splendour after his victory over the black
mists, even though these are again to close in fierce strife


a dydraaee 8é of Gidov Frop Patroklos to be on the part of Hektor,


synbootry, 50 dpiiro Geabs tpiB: Buri
dyrat, UL, xxi, 390.
The ether louks down in grim serenity
‘on the wild Lattle in the aur

* dL. xxi. 490-506.

" Ib. xxii, 213: Aiwer 8¢ 2 d0iBor
“aréanay, Tug much streas can scarcely
be Iuid on these word. In the first
Place, they make the slaying of Hektor

ite ae Tauch un act of butehery as

‘olone] Mure represents the death of


In the second plies, they remove both
incidents out of the reuch of all ethical


322,
305, w7.A. This is a trait
of brutaliry seareely to be explained by
a reference to the manners of the heroie
age. The mystery is volved when we
compare it with the mythical language
of the earlier Vedie hymas.
* History of Greece, vol. ii. p. 266.


INCORRUPTIBLE BODIES.


when he is dead.! It is this transient gleam of more serene
splendour which is signified by the games over which Achil-
Teus presides genially after the slaughter of the Trojan
captives, whose blood reddens the ground, just as the torn
streamers rush in crimsoned bands across the sky after a
storm. Yet it is not easy to suppose with Mr. Grote that
the Achilléis ended with the twenty-second book as it now
stands, for that book closes with the mourning of Andro~
maché for Hektor, which, even in the eyes of a Greek, would
hardly heighten the glory of the conqueror; and the author
of it certainly knew of the visit of Priam which is related in
the last book, for he makes the old man express his intention
of going to Achilleus when he first learns that his son is
dead.? But the feeling of the old solar myth is once more
brought ont prominently in the case of Hektor. With the
aid of Apollén he had been the great champion of his country.
The desertion of the sun-god left him at the mercy of his
enemy. But his body, like the body of Patroklos, must be
preserved from all corruption. The ravenous dogs and birds
are chased away by Aphrodité,’ and Apollén himself wraps
it in mist and covers it with a golden shield.‘ From the
Odyssey we learn that the idea underlying the story of the
death of Achilleus was that of an expiring blaze of splendour,
followed by the darkness of the storm. Over his body the
Achaians and Trojans struggle in mortal conflict, like the
clouds fighting over the dead sun; and only the might of
Zeus puts an end to the strife, for the winds alone can drive
away the clouds. Then the sea-nymphs rise, fair as the
skies of tranquil night, and wrap the form of the dead hero
in a spotless shroud.

Thus the whole Achilléis is a magnificent solar epic, telling
us of a sun rising in radiant majesty, soon hidden by the
clouds, yet abiding his time of vengeance, when from the
dark veil he breaks forth at last in more than his early
strength, scattering the mists and kindling the ragged clouds
which form his faneral pyre, nor caring whethor his brief
splendour shall be succeeded by 2 darker battle as the vapours


, iv. $1, 42. © Hind, xxiii. 185.
saan + Bh xziv. 26,


253


CHAP.
x1.
aS


The whole
Achilléia is
& magaifi-
cont solar
epic.


284


BOOK
—S—


The
Trojan
war is
eimply one
ucene of &
Jong
drama.


‘The Ilias
4s cou-
trnated
with the
Achilléia,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


close again over his dying glory. The feeling of the old tale
is scarcely weakened when the poet tells us of the great
cairn which the mariner shall see from afar on the shore of
the broad Hellespontos.'

If this then be the common groundwork of the Achilléia
and the epics of Northern Europe, the arguments of Mr.
Grote against the original continuity of the Iliad in its
present form are indefinitely strengthened. The Trojan war
itself becomes simply a scene in a long drama,? of the other
acts of which the poet incidentally betrays his knowledge.
The life of Achilleus runs in the same groove with that of
Odysseus and Bellerophon; the personality of Patroklos
dimly reflects that of Achilleus, while the tale of Meleagros
is simply an echu of the legend which, in its more expanded
form and with heightened colours, relates the expluits of the
son of Peleus.

With this groundwork, the original Achilléis may have
ende« with the twenty-second book of our Iliad, or have been
extended to the twenty-fourth. Apart from considerations
of style, there is nothing in the story to militate against
either supposition. If it ended with the earlier book, the
poet closed his narrative with the triumphant outburst of the
sun from the clouds which had hidden his glory. The poet
who added the last two books was inspired by the old phrases
which spoke of a time of serene though short-lived splendour
after the sun’s great victory. But with this tale of the
Achilléis, whatever may be its close, the books which relate
the independent exploits of Agamemnon and his attendant
chiefs cannot possibly be made to fit. They are the expression
of an almost unconscious feeling that a son of Peleus and
Thetis was a being not sufficiently akin to Achaians to satisfy
the instincts of national pride and patriotism.? It is of


? Od, xxiv. 82.

+ Much blame, perhaps not altogether
undeserved, has been bestowed on the
critics who formed the so-called epic
cyele and sought to find the sequence cc of
sie seveosl legend on stick the posmia
included in that eyele were founded. So
far as they sought an historical sequence,
they were wrong. Yet their feeling
that there was sequence in these tales
‘waa not without foundstion. But the


sequence is one of phenomena, not of
facts in human history.

+ Both Colonel Mure and Mr. Glad-
stone search viporouely for every vestige
of patriotiam in the character of Achiileus,
Ik is very hard to find any, and harder
stil] to gee any in the parsages which
they adduce, It does exist in Hektor,
and the reacon why it should exist in
him iv manifest,


THE ILIAD.


course possible—in the opinion of Mr. Grote, it may be even
probable—that the same poet who sang the wrath of Achil-
leus afterwards recounted the exploits of Odysseus, Aiaa, and
Diomédes. The question is, after all, not material. If Mr.
Grote ie right in thinking that the last two books are an
addition,’ then the closing scene, which exhibits Achillens in
his more genial aspect, existed as a distinct poem, and the
final complement of this lay is found far apart in the closing
book of the Odyssey. The perfect harmony of that picture
of the hero’s death with the spirit and language of the
Achilléis may possibly be adduced as an argument for as-
eribing both Iliad and Odyssey to the same author; but it
furnishes a much stronger warrant for asserting that more
than one poet derived his inspiration from the mythical
speech, which, even in the Greek heroic age, still retained
more than half ite life. Nay, in the Ilias itself, the legend
of Meleagros, recited (it must be remembered) by the same
Phoinix who guarded Achilleus in his earlier years, exhibits
still more forcibly the method in which phrases but partially
understood, and incidents which had each received a local
colouring and name, were wrought into the tales, whether of
the Kalydonian chieftain, or Perseus, or Achilleus. In times
which even then were old, such phrases formed the common
speech of the people, such incidents expressed the phenomena
of their daily life ; and this language was strictly the language
of poetry, literally revelling in its boundJess powers of creation
and developement. In almost every word lay the germ of an
epic poem ora romance.? It is the less wonderful, therefore,
if each incident was embodied in a separate legend, or even
reproduced in the independent tales of separate tribes. A


} History of Greece, ii, 266.

3 T cannot refrain from quoting the
words of Mr. Price, in his Introduction
to Wurton’s History of English Poetry:
“Po tuke one example out of many, the
life of Perseus might Le made to pass
for the outline of an old romanre, or the
story of same genuine chevalier preux.
‘Let the reader only remember the ille-
gitimate but royal descent of the hero,
‘his exposure to almost certain death in
infancy, his providential exeape, the hos-
pitwity of Dictys, the criminal artifices


of Palrdeetes, the gallant vow by which
the unsuspecting stranger hopes to lessen
Ins obligation to the royal house of Se-
ripbas, the consoquences of that vow,
the aid he receives from n god and god-
dess, the stratagem by which he grins a
power over the monstrous daughter of
Phoreys, &e. &e. &e.—Jet the reader
only recall theee circumstances to bis
memory, and ho will instantly recognise
the common deteils of early European
romance’—{P, 120.)


255


CHAP.
XI.
—


256
BOOK


———


@round-
work of the
Odyssey.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


hundred Homers may well have lit their torch from this
living fire.

Nor can we well shut our eyes to the fact that in the main
story of the Odyssey the poet has set the same solar strain
in another key. When Odysseus goes to Troy, he is simply
a chieftain in the great host which went to recover the
treasure taken from the West, like the Argonauts in their
search for the Golden Fleece, But all these eastward ex-
peditions are successful. The robber or seducer is despoiled
of his prey, and the victors must journey back to their distant
home. Thus, round the chieftain of each tribe would gather
again all the ideas suggested by the ancient myths; and the
light reflected from the glory of the great Phthiotic hero
might well rest on the head of Odysseus as he turns to go
from Ilion. Thus would begin a new career, not unlike that
of Herakles or Perseus in all its essential features. Through-
out the whole poem the one absorbing desire which fills the
heart of Odysseus is to reach his home once more and see
the wife whom, like most other mythical heroes, he had been
obliged to leave in the spring-time of his career. There are
grievous toils and many hindrances on his way, but nothing
can turn him from his course. He has to fight, like Herakles
and Perseys, Theseus and Bellerophén, with more than mortal
beings and more than earthly powers, but he has the strength
which they had to overcome or to evade them. It is true
that he conquers chiefly by strength of will and sagacity of
mind; but this again is the phase which the idea of Helios,
the great eye of day, as surveying and scanning everything,
assumes in Medeia, Prometheus, Asklépios, Oidipous, Iamos,
and Melampous. The other phase, however, is not wanting.
He, too, has a bow which none but he can wield,’ and he
wields it to terrible purpose, when, like Achilleus, after his
time of disguise, he bursts on the astonished suitors, as the
and tho sound of the string is like the


whizzing of a swallow in its flight. In
an instant every heart is filled with


1 Odquscy, xxi, 405, x.7.a. Tho
phraseology of the poet here assumes,
perhaps without his being fully aware


of it, the same tone with the narrative
which tells of the arming of Achilleus.
Others bave tried with all their might
to bend the bow. Odysseus stretches it
without the lesst effort (rep oxoviis),


dread, and every cheek turns pule (wate
xpes epdrera), avd, to complete the
imagery, they hear at the same moment
‘the crash of the thunder in the sky.


THE ODYSSEY,


gun breaks from the stormcloud before he sinks to rest. So,


257


CHAP.


again, in his westward wanderings (for this is the common eos


path of the children of Zeus or Helios), he must encounter
fearful dangers. It is no unclouded sky which looks down
on him as he journeys towards rocky Ithaka. He has to
fight with Kyklépes and Laistrygouians; he has to shun the
snares of the Seirens and the jaws of Skylla and Charybdis,
as Perseus had to overcome the Gorgons, and Theseus to do
battle with the Minotauros. Yet there are times of rest for
him, as for Herakles and Bellerophén, He yearns for the
love of Penelopé, but his grief can be soothed for awhile by
the affection of Kirké and Kalypso, as Achilleus found solace
in that of Diomédé, and Herakles awhile in that of Déianeira.
Nay, wherever he goes, mortal kings and chiefs and undying


goddesses seek to make him tarry by their side, as Menelaos .


sought to retain Paris in his home by the side of the Spartan
Helen, and as Gunnar strove to win Sigurd to be the husband
of his sister. So is it with Alkinots; but, in spite of the
loveliness and purity of Nausikaa, Odysseus may not tarry in
the huppy land of the Phaiukians, even as he might not tarry
in the palace of the wise Kirké or the sparkling cave of the
gentle Kalypso. At last he approaches his home; but he
returns to it unknown and friendless. The sky is as dark as
when Achilleus lay nursing his great wrath behind the veil
of his sorrow. Still he too, like Achilleus, knows how to
take vengeance on his enemies ; and in stillness and silence
he makes ready for the mortal conflict in which he knows
that in the end he must be victorious. His foes are many
and strong; and, like Patroklos against Hektor, Telemachos'
can do but little aguinst the suitors, in whom are reflected
the Trojan enemies of the Achaians. But for him also,
as for Achilleus, there is aid from the gods. Athéné, the
daughter of the sky, cheers him on, and restores him to the
glorious beauty of his youth, as Thetis clothed her child in
the armour of Hephaistos, and Apollén directed his spear
against Hektor. Still in bis ragged beggar’s dress; like the
sun behind the rent and tattered clouds, he appears in his
own hall on the day of doom. The old bow is taken down
1 Grote, History of Greece, vol. ii. p. 238.
Vor. 8


258 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK from the wall, and none but he can be found to stretch
eS it. His enemies begin to fear that the chief has indeed
returned tq his home, and they crouch in terror before the
atranger, as the Trojans quailed at the mere sight and war-
ery of Achilleus. But their cry for mercy falls as vain as
that of Lykfén or of Hektor, who must die to avenge the
dead Patroklos; for the doom of the suitors is come for the
wrongs which they had done to Penelopé. The fatal bow is
stretched. The arrows fly deadly and unerring as the spear
of Artemis, and the hall is bathed in blood. There is nothing
to stay his arm till all are dead. The sun-god is taking
vengeance on the clouds, and trampling them down in his
fary. The work is done; and Penelopé sees in Odysseus the
husband who had left her long ago to face his toils, like
Herakles and Perseus. But she will try himstill. If indeed
he be the same, he will know his bridal chamber and the
cunningly carved couch which his own hands had wrought.
Tolé vill try whether Herakles remembers the beautiful net-
work of violet clouds which he spread as her couch in the
morning. The sun is setting in peace. Penelopé, fair as
Oindéné and as pure (for no touch of defilement must pass on
her, or on Iolé or Daphné or Briséis), is once again by his
side. The darkness is utterly scattered; the corpses of the
suitors and of the handmaidens who ministered to them
cumber the hall no more. A few flying vapours rush at
random across the sky, as the men of Ithaka raise a feeble
elamour in behalf of the slain chieftains. Soon these, too,
are gone. Penelopé and Odysseus are within their bridal
chamber. Oinéné has gone to rest with Paris by her side;
but there is no gloom in the house of Odysseus, and the hero
lives still, strong and beautiful as in the early days. The
battle is over. The one yearning of his heart has been ful-
filled. The sun has laid him down to rest
In one unclouded blaze of living light.


aoe no But unless the marvellous resemblance (may it not be said,
the identity?) of the Greek, the Trojan' and the Teutonic
‘The stories of Paris, Hektor, epics, ‘The extent to which solar


Sarpidén, Memnén ere all subjects imagery is introduced into theso tales
which might be expanded into separate is very remarkable. Paris as the reducer


HOMERIC MATERIALS.


epics can be explained away, it follows that in Achilleus and
in Paris, in Meleagros and Sigurd, in Ragnar Lodbrog and
Theseus, in Telephos, Perseus, Kephalos, Herakles, Bellero-
phén and Odysseus, we have pictures drawn from the same
ideal as regarded under its several aspects. It mattered not
which of these aspects the poet might choose for his theme.
In each case he had much more than the framework of his
story made ready to his hand. The departure of Achilleus
from his own land to fight in a quarrel which was not his
own—the transfer of the spoils won by him to a chief of
meaner spirit than his own—his unerring spear and im-
mortal horses-——the robbery of Briséis or Hippodameia—
the fierce wrath of Achilleus which yet could leave room
for the love of another in her place—the sullen inaction
from which he refuses to be roused—the dismay of the
Achaians and the exaltation of the Trojans at his absence
from the fight—the partial glory spread over the scene
by the appearance of Patroklos, only to close in the deeper
gloom which followed his overthrow—the fury of Achilleus
behind the dark cloud of his sorrow—the sudden outburst of
the hero, armed with his irresistible spear and clad in armour
more dazzling than that which he had lost—the invincible
might which deals death to Hektor and his comrades—the
blood which streams from the human victims on his altar of
sacrifice—his forgiveness of Agamemnon for that which
Agamemnon of himself would have been powerless to do—


of Helen is indubitably the dark robber
who steals away the treasure of light
from tho sky; but it is difficult to
deny that Paris, es fighting for his


ofthe Lykians, and Glaukos, his friend,
who also comes from the golden atream
of Xanthos, and Memnén the son of
Eés, who lends the glittering band of the


country, or in the beneticence of hig
early career, hus all the features of
Persour, Oidipous and Teléphos, The
same blending of two different ideas
rune through all the Aryan mythology,
and is a necessary result when

myths of two or more different countries
are brought, together in the same narra-
tive. Inthe great struggle between the
Achaians and Trojans, Agamemnon and
‘Achilieas are ranged on the side of
Helen, or Sarami, the dawn; and ell
the Trojan champions, from this point
of view, are in league with the dark
powers of night, But among these
champions are Sarptdén, the great chief


Aithiopians (Ethiopians). The names of
these heroes are as transparent as the
stories which have gathered round them.
Sarpédén more particulurly in a counter-
part of Achilleus, destined to exbibit
the exe magnificent qualities, and
doomed tothe same early death, but
more equable and beneficent snd there-
fore aleo happier. It is the same with
the Argives. Ae fighting againet Puris,

an is the adversary of the
Gurk powers: but to Achflleus he stands
precisely in the relation of Eurystheus
to Jes, or of Laios to Oidipous, or
of Akrisioa to Perséus.


259


or the


the in-
vention of


the poet.


26U


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK the warning of his own early death which he receives from
—1_. the horse Xanthos—the battle of the gods, es they take part


in tke storm which rages in the heavens and on the earth—
the swelling of the waters, their brief mastery over the hero,
their conquest by fire—the generous splendour which follows
the accomplishment of his vengeance—the sudden close of his
brilliant but brief career—the fierce battle fought over his
dead body—the beauty which cannot be marred or dimmed
by death—are incidents which the poet might introduce or
omit at will, but the spirit of which he was not free to alter.
The character of Achilleus was no more his own creation
than were the shifting scenes in the great drama of his life.
The idea of his picture no more originated in himself than
the idea of Sigurd in the mind of the more rugged poet of
the north. The materials were not of his own making; and
the words of Mr. Gladstone acquire a stronger meaning,
though not the meaning which he designed to convey, when,
insistir.x that there must be a foundation for the Homerie
theology and for the chief incidents in the war of Troy, he
suid that poets may embellish, but cannot invent.' Their
course was marked out for them, but the swiftness with


Korfnis, So, spin, the war with
Turnus for the possession of Lavinia


1 OF the
sary to pay mich.


werd of Vireil it is nunecen-
Epic postry, com


powed in a time of highly artificint
civilisation, stands on a wholly different
ground from the trne epic of a simpler
ayge, the growth of generations from the
myth-making talk of the people. The
traditi
was not of Virgil
taking, him for hus
telf to give the sey
Lclonged in itt eacher stages to Greck
mythology. Hence we bave naturally
ju the story of Zneas nothing more
than one mor version of the old mythieal
history, AEneas, like Odyrseue, moves
from east to west, seeking a home. as
Phoiles on a like errant journeyed to
Pytho, His viat to the shades may
have been directly suggested by the
Grek pocms which Virgil had before
him ag bis model; and these were
asenredly not cdafined to our Miad and
Odyswey. Bat it must bave bern a
genuine tradition which led Virgil. to
tell how he left Crewe, as Theseus
deserted Ariadné and Apollén forsuok


reflects the war at. Troy fur Helen and
the contest in the Odyssey with the
enemies wha strivo to win the rightfut
lide of Odysseus, In this war ASnens,
like other solur heroes, is xuevessful, and,
like them, after his vietory, which is
followed by 4 time of tranquil happiness,
he plunges into the Numician stream
and ix seem no more, wa Kephatos and
Bellerophén aink to sleep in the wostorn
waters of the Lenkidian gnlf,

‘The sume type reappvars in Remules,
whose story” Nicbubr supposed that
Livy obtained from a great epic now
lost” (Cornewall. Lewis, Gredibitty. of
Enrly Roman Lhstory, vol. i, eh. ti
sect, 5); and the key ix found to this
legendary narrative as well as to that of
Cyrus, of Chandragupta, and of the
progenitor of tho Turks, All these
tales repeat the exposure of the infant
Oidipuus, or Teleyhos, or Tatnos, or
Alexandros, The same myth is seen
under another aspect in (ho legend of
Servius Tullius.


HOMERIC CHARACTERS.


which each ran his race depended on his own power.
The genius of the Homeric poets was shown, not in the
creation of their materiais, but in the truthful and mag-
nificent colouring which they threw over a legend which in
weaker hands might exhibit but a tinsel glitter.

But if there is this affinity between the character of the
Achaian and the Teutonic heroes, it follows that the cha-


racter is neither strictly Achaian nor strictly Teutonic.


It


cannot be regarded as expressing the real morality either of


the one or of the other.


Any attempt to criticise these as


genuine pictures of national character! must be followed by


* The wish to buao his criticism on this
foundation hax led Mr, Gladstone to as-
sume without evidence, that the cause of
Achilleus was substantially that of ryght
und justice, und that the apology made
by Agamemnon in J2, xix. 67, is eseen-
tiully different from the apology made
in ix. 120, But, in the first place,
difficult to see that ‘justice is’ more
“outraged in the persun nf Achilles?
(Homer, §¢. vol. iit. p, 370), than it is
in the peron of Agameinuon, If the
former in compelled to part with Briss,
the latter ns also been obliged to gi
up the daughter of Chryses, for whom,
with a pluinness of speech not used
either by Achilleus or even by Paris in
deyerting Oindné, he ayown his pre
ference over his wedded wife Klytaim-
néstra (22. i110), Moreover, the taking
away of Brivis is the sole act of
Agamempon, in which his counsellors
and the peuple take no part. Yet Mr.
Gladstone holde it to he a ‘dendly
wrong,' justifying Achilleus in vis'
hig wrath on aa army which hud nothing
whatever to do with it. The truth is,
that by an anulynis of this kind we may
prove that Achilieus was mad, but wo
can never show that bis character was
either common, or even known among
the Achuians, We have no right to
say that the sufferings af Agamemnon
wore not ut the least equal to those of
Achilleus, and we are surely tr
him most uufairly if we say that
apology ‘comes first in his faltering
speech’ given in . xix. 67. If there
he says—


Ey Wee Spices Bhuevals’ drepela? rows,
he had said precisely the same thing


in Zi, ix, 120, &. and there also con-
feswes that he had been infutuated. In


fact, Mr. Gladstone is furnishing con-
clusive evidence in proof of the assertion
that the writer of the nineteenth bouk
kuew nothing of the ninth, But it is
hinrd to yield  velf-chosen position ; and
Mr. Gladstone therefore holds that the
apology of the nineteenth buok isa valid,
atonement, although it is, word for


word, the same as that which is con-
tuined in the niath. The faet that
Achilleus is go ready, und even enger,
to visit. on the whole army the sin of


the individual Ayamenmon, shows how
utterly destitute his character is of real
patriotiem. If unythmg more were
needed to exhibit the falvity of wuch
critical methods, it would be furnished
by Colonel Mure’s remarks that the aim
of Homer ix not to shuw, with Mr.
Gladatoue, the justice of the cuuse of
Achilleus, but t prove that both he and

erly me the wrong
Hist, Gr, Lit. vol, ip.
Both sides in his judgment are equally


(Cri


deserving of blime: the one must
be wished, the other convinved
of folly, ‘This is the result


of taking Homer to Le a mora) philo-
gopher or teacher who, to adopt Mr
Ghulstone's favourite Horatian motto,
tells ax all about human life and duty
much better thas Chrysippos and Kran-
tor. Indeed, there sceme to be no limit,
to tivlent interpretations of the text of
Homer, if any such hypothesis is to be
entertained. “It is Mr. Ghulstans's be-
lief that the last book of the déiad was
ailded to show that Aphilleus ‘must
surrender the darling “object of his
desire, the wreaking of his vengeance
on an inanimate corpse’ (Homer, §

395). His ambition might, perhaps,
have been more dignified; but such ms
it wax, it bad surely been gratified


261


CHAP,
XI


‘The por
traits of
the greater
chieftaing
and herves
are not
true to
national
character,


262


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK tuat feeling of repulsion which Mr. Dasent openly avows for
tea the Greek mythology, and which he also feels in part for the


Teutonic.' In either case, this moral indignation is thrown
away. There was doubtless quite enough evil in the cha-
racter of the Northman and the Greek; but it never would
have assumed that aspect which is common to the heroes of
their epic poetry. We look in vain in the pages of ac-
knowledged contemporary writers for an instance of the
same unbounded wrath arising from a cause which the
Achaian would be rather disposed to treat too lightly, of an
inaction which cares not though all around him die, of a
bloody vengeance.on meaner enemies when his great foe has
been vanquished, of the awful sacrifice of human victims,—a
sacrifice completely alien to the general character of the
Achaians, so far as they are known to us historically. But
every one of these characteristics is at once exhaustively
explaived, when they are compared with those of all the
other great legendary heroes. The grave attempt to judge
them by a reference to the ordinary standard of Greek, or
rather of Christian and modern morality, has imparted to the
criticism of Colonel Mure an air almost of burlesque. In
his analysis of the Iliad, the motives which sway Achilleus
are taken to pieces as seriously as if he were examining the
conduct of Themistokles or Archidamos. It might be well
to speak of the ‘defective principles of heroic morality,’* of
the sarcasms of Achilleus against Agamemnon in the first
book as ‘unwarranted at this stage of the discussion,’? of
the ‘respectful deference to the sovereign will of Agamem-
non’ as a duty ‘inculeated by the poet’ and ‘scrupulously
fulfilled by the other chiefs,’ ‘ if the poet were telling us of a
already. Ifhe was not contented with phaistos, wields a spear (guaranteed


tying the body to his chariot wheels and
iragging it about till every feature was
disfigured, what more did he want?
The whole of this moral criticism of
epical characters is altogether out of
place ; and auch criticism can be applied
Teust of all ss @ means of determining
national character to the hero who
(in order to beat Hektor, in every re-
spect, as Mr. Gladstone asserts, his in-
ferior) is made invulnerable like Baldur
and Rustem in all parts but the heel,
and, clad in armour wrought by He-


never to mies its mark) aguinst an
enemy who, acknowledging his inferio-
rity, yet faces him from the high motive
of patriotism and duty, and whom he is
‘unable to overcome except by the aid of
Athéné and after he hes been deserted
by Apoilén, Such a condition of things
Lies ‘altogether beyond the range of
Ethio. ‘
e page 62.

+ One Wet, Gr. Lit, voli. p. 26.

° Jb, p. 277.

+ Top. 275,


HOMERIC CHARACTERS.


struggle not with gods and heroes, Amazons and Aithiopians,
but carried on after the sober and prosy fashion of the Trojan
war of Thucydides, Colonel Mure lays great streas on the
‘ethic unity’ with which the incidental references to the
early death of Achilleus invest the whole poem, and he finds
a deep ‘knowledge of human nature’ ‘in the adaptation to
each other of the characters of the hero and his friend,
where Mr. Grote sees little more than a reflection.'! But his
anxiety to exalt the character of Achilleus has led him, in
one instance of no slight moment, to vilify unduly that of
his antagonist. ‘The proudest exploit of Hektor, his
slaughter and apoliation of Patroklos, is so described as to
be conspicuous only for its ferocity. The Greek hero, after
being disabled by Apollén, is mortally wounded by another
Trojan, when Hektor steps in with the finishing blow, as his
butcher rather than conqueror.’? The remark is simply dis-
ingenuous. The incidents of the slaughter of Patroklos by
Hektor are essentially identical with incidents attending the
death of Hektor by the hands of Achilleus, and where there
is any difference, it lies in the additional ferocity and bru-
tality of the latter. If it be to the disparagement of Hektor
that he should have the aid of a god, the poet is not less
careful in saying that Achilleus could not slay Hektor until
Phoibos Apollén had deserted him. But if Colonel Mure
anxiously seeks out apologies for the wrath,’ the inaction,
and the furious revenge of the hero, his criticism utterly fails
to explain the very incidents which seem most deeply to have
impressed him. It does not explain why he should choose
inaction as the particular mode of avenging himself against
Agamemnon.‘ It does not show why during his absence
‘the gods had, at his own request, decreed victory to Hektor,
rout and slaughter to the Greeks,’® why in him ‘no affection


\ History of Greece, vol. ii, p.238, actual dweller in the visible aun, He
2 Ont. Hist. Gr, Lit, vol. i. p. 282. could uot well apply such » phrase even
4 Tb. p. 284. to Phoibos, and with Achilleus, Odys-


‘ When Helios complains to Zeus
(Gd, xii, 383) of the slaughter of his
dered cattle by Eurylochos and his
comrades, hia threat is that if justice is
not done to him, he will leave his place

* in heaven and go and shine among the
dead. But Helios was to the poet the


seus, Perseus, Meleagros, and other
heroes, the memory ofthe old phrases
has been still further weakened; but the
voluntary and sullen insction of such
heroes enswers precisely to the hiding
of Helios in the durk land of Hades,

© Gris, Hiat, Gr. Lit, vol. i. p. 288,


263


CHAP.
aL


264


BOOK


‘The chu:
ractor of
Odyssuns.


; MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


amiable or the reverse’ should ‘exist but in overpowering
excess,'—why he should be ‘ soothed by the fulfilment of his
duties as mourner,’ why the games should ‘usher in an
agreeable change,’ or why ‘ we should part with Achilleus at
the moment best calculated to exalt and purify our impres-
sion of his character.’* Still less does it explain why, before
the final struggle, the gods should be let loose to take which-
ever side they might prefer. Colonel Mare seems to imply
that they were all sent to take the part of the Trojans. Mr.
Grote, with a far keener discernment of the character of this
part of the poem, insists that ‘that which chiefly distin-
guishes these books is the direct, incessant, and manual
intervention of the gods and goddesses, formally permitted
by Zeus, and the repetition of vast and fantastic conceptions
to which each superhuman agency gives occasion, not omit-
ting the battle of Achilles against Skamander and Simois,
and the burning up of these rivers by Hephestus,’ In his
judgm nt this interference mars the poem and ‘ somewhat
vulgarises’ the gods. But while he thinks that the poet
has failed in a task where success was impossible, he has not
explained why the poet should feel himself compelled to un-
dertake it.

But if Mr. Gladstone strains every nerve to save the cha-
racter of Achilleus, Colonel Mure is not less zealous in behalf
of the chieftain of Ithaka. If Achilleus ‘represents the
grandeur of the heroic character as reflected in the very
excess of its noblest attributes,’ Odysseus, in his belief, re-
presents its virtue, possessing as he does, in greater number
and in higher degree than any other chief, the qualities
which in that age constituted the accomplished king and
citizen.’> The matter is brought to a plain issue. The
Odyssey is ‘a rich picture-gallery of human life as it existed
in that age and country,’® and we are to see in Odysseus a
favourable specimen of the manners and habits of bis people.
It is quite possible, by Colonel Mure’s method, so to repre-
sent him. But if we speak of him as one whose ‘habitual


) Grit. Hist. Gr. Lit, vol. i. p. 289. 4 History of Greer, vol. ii. p. 264.
* Bp. 21. * Crit, Hist. Gr. Lit. vol. i, p. 391.
* 1b. p. 287. * ZU, p. 389.


ODYSSEUS.


prudence was modified, or even at times overcome, by his
thirst for glory, and by an eager pursuit of the marvellous,’!
—if we say that he never uttered an untruth or practised a
manceuvre for a base object,2—if we speak of him as incul-
cating in his adventures ‘the duty incumbent on the most
vigorous minds not only to resist but to avoid temptation,’*
are we really speaking of the Odysseus of the Homeric poet?
If such a method may account for some features in his
character, will it in the least explain his character as bound
up with the whole structure of the poem? Will it not leave
the groundwork of the tale and its issue a greater mystery
than ever? Will it explain why Odysseus, like Herakles
and Philoktetés, should use poisoned arrows‘—why, without
scruple, he should tell lies while he desires to remain un-
recognised, why he should never depart from the truth when
speaking in his own character—why he hesitates not to lurk
in ambush for an unarmed man‘ and stab him behind his
back and speak of the deed without shame—why he should
wish to pry into everything in heaven or on earth, or
in the dark land beneath the earth—why nothing less than
the slaughter of all his enemies will satiate a wrath not
much more reasonable than that of Achilleus? Still more
will it explain why Penelope weaves and unweaves her web,*


1 Onit. Hist, Gr, Lit, vol. i. p. 398,

* Dh. p. 895.

* Db, 408,

* Odyssey, i Dr.
(History of Greece, vol. i. p. 182) refers
to this passage us showing the‘ miuifest
disapprolution’ of the pact. Tt is, at
the last, very faintly expressed. 7
possibly ax boing above lew,
poikon, and Athénd wees no harm in his
6 doing.

* Odyssey, xiii. 260.

The Duwn as weaving or pinning
is tho suljrct. of many Teutonic Jegents,
Jn the story of Rumprlstiltskia, the
Poor miller hrs a daughter who eau spin
straw intu gold, and the equel of the
tale makes ber, of course, the king's
brids. ‘The idea ance auggested was
Daturally xpplivd also to the sun, who,
as weaving his robe of clouds, becomes
the Valnt ‘Tuilor who, in the story of
the Glaes Coffin, finds tho Tenutiful
maiden sleeping like the dead in her


Thirlwall


glarsy ense (of ice), and whose touch at
once calls her hack to Jite, as the prince's
kiss awakens Dornmschen. ‘Thiv glass


coffin answers tu the hammer of Thor,
like wi


h, when pliced on the magic
isea thr ugh the tours to the
upper xir; and the cuxe, when opened,
expauds iuto a magnifieent castle. Iu
the story of the Spindle, the Shuttle, and
the Necdle, these instruments of the
eraft of Penclope bring » wouer home
for the orphan maiden, who, like Cin-
derella, becor It
ix almost uunocessery to sity that ina
vust number of stories in which the
princesses are confessedly Dawn-mai-
dens, they are known expecially as the
wearers, aud weavers, like Pouelopé,
of surks for their father or their bro-
thers Thus Snow White and Rosy
Red, in the story of the Twelro Wild
Ducks (Dasent), ig always sewing at the
shirts for her twelve brothers (the
months), who have been thus trans


265


CHAP.
xL


266


BOOK
.


How

far was
the charac-
ter of
Odysseus
@ creation
of the
Homeric
post,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


—why, when Odysseus returns, she is restored by Athéné
(the daughter of the Sky, the Dawn who makes the world
young), to all her early loveliness,' while on him rests once
more all the splendour of his ancient majesty,—why the
nurse who recognises him should be Eurykleia,?and the maiden
who reviles him should be Melantho,?—why his dog Argos,
although forsaken and untended, still retains something of his
noble qualities and at once recognises his old master‘—why,
when Penelopé wishes to speak with him on his return, she is
charged to wait until the evening ‘—why, in his wanderings
he should fight not so much with human enemies as with
mighty beings and monsters of the earth and sea-—why his
long voyage and the time of gloomy disguise should be fol-
lowed by a triumph so full of blood, ending with a picture of
such serene repose ?

In truth, the character of Odysseus was not, in any greater
degree than that of Achilleus, an original creation of the
Homeric poet. In all its main features it came down ready
to his hand. His wisdom is the wisdom of Athéné, and
Prometheus, and Medeia, of Iamos and Asklépios and
Melampous: his craft is the craft of Hermes, his keen
sagacity is the piercing eye of Helios or of Odin, and
from Hermes comes the strange inquisitiveness which must
pry into everything that he comes across in his path. If
he uses poisoned arrows, it is not because Achaian chieftains
were in the habit of using them, but because the weapons


1 Od. xviii. 192,
2 Jb. xvii. 81.


formed. The princess rescued by Short-


shanks also sits and sews, In the story In the name of her


of the Best Wish, the instruments for
performing her work are supplied by
Boots, whove scissors, plied in the air,
Dring to light ull Kinde of beautiful
shapes, as the clouds and the earth are lit
up by the rising sun. Nor is the Doll in
the Grass (Dasent) less expert, though
the sark which she wexves and sews ie
“so tiny tiny little,’ Most or ull of these
stories have their counterpart in the
German and Celtic folklore, The ex-
ploits of the Valiant Tailor of the
Gorman stories are in the


‘ repeated
Gaelic story of Mac-a-Rusgaich (Camp-


ball, i. 307) which reproduces the Norse
tale’ of Boots who ates match with the
Troll. (Dasent.)


father Autolykos we have ugain the
eame word which gave rise to the ator
of Lykdén, and to the moaning which
los attached to the name of
Phoibox Lykeios, or Lykégents, the
child of light,

* Jb, xmii. 321. ‘We see the process
Ly which the force of the old mythical
language was weakened and lost, when
the poet speaks of Melantho aa xaNii-
sdggos.


sitivenoas is specially seen
w of the Kyklops aud the


THE CHARACTER OF ODYSSEUS.


267


of Herakles were steeped in venom and the robe of Medeia CHar,
scorched the body of Glauké: if he submits té be the lover of ee


Kirké and Kalypso, it is because Achilleus solaced himeelf
with Diomédé for the loss of Briséis, and Herakles awhile
forgot his sorrows in the house of Déianeira. If he can be
a secret stabber, it is not because the heroic ideal could stoop
to such baseness, but because Phoibos can smite secretly as
well as slay openly, and because it matters not whether the
victim be but one man or the fifty who fall by the spear of
Bellerophén. If at the end he smites all his enemies, it is
not because they have committed an offence which, according
to the standard of the age, would deserve such punishment,
but because the wrath of Achillens could be appeased only
by the blood of his enemies, as the blazing sun tramples on
the dark clouds beneath his feet. We may be well assured
that such as these were not the habits of the men who dwelt
at Tiryns or in Ithaka—that such as these were not the
characteristics of the chieftains who dwelt in Mykénai. But
if the character of Odysseus is not strictly Achaian, so, like
that of Achilleus, it is not, in strictness of speech, human.
Mr. Grote has truly said that the aim of the poet is not ethical
or didactic either in the Iliad or in the Odyssey ;! and an
examination of the latter poem scatters to the winds all
fancies which see in Odysseus an image of the Christian
warrior fighting the good fight of faith, yet yearning for his
rest in heaven.? The ideal is indeed magnificent, and it
has never been more magnificently realised, but it is not
the ideal either of Christianity or even of humanity; it is
the life of the sun. At the outset of his return from the
east, Odysseus has to encounter superhuman foes; and
the discomfiture of the Kyklops rouses the wrath of the
sea-god Poseidén, as the clouds rise from the waters and
curl round the rising sun. Still Zeus is on his side, and


' History of Greece, vol. ii, p. 278. thology, The wrath of beings like
Horace draws but a feeble esl “when Achilleus and Odyxsous*must be wide-


he says of the Jtiad—
Quicguid delirant reges, plectuntur
Achivi. ‘Hp. i. 2, 14.
But that thia should be the case is por-
fectly expluined by the growth of my-


spreading and indiscriminate. The
clouds and winds take no heed of man,

* For e minute working out of this
view soo Isaac Williams, Christian
Schular, p. 115,


268


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


Poseid6n himself shall not be able to cut short his course,’
though all his comrades should fall by the way, as the
morning clouds may be scattered before the noonday. But
while he moves steadily towards his home, that home is
dark and gloomy. From it the sun is still far distant, and
only from time to time a faint reflected light is shed upon
it as Telemachos strives to maintain the honour of his
father’s house.?- So Penelopé remains quiet in her home.
Forbidding forms crowd around her, but her purity remains
unsullied. The web begun is never ended; the fairy tracery
of cirri clouds is blotted out from the eky every night, and
must be wrought again during the coming day. There are
others too who have not forgotten the hero, and Eurykleia
strives to retain Telemachos, when he would go forth to
seek his father.2 But he cannot stay. The slant rays
vanish from the sky, and the house of Laertes is shadowed
with deeper gloom. Meanwhile Odysseus is hastening on.
For awhile he tarries with Kirké and Kalyps6, and makes
a longer sojourn in the house of Alkinoés, even as Sigurd


abode long time in the house of Gunnar.
chieftain would have him stay for ever.


* The influence of Polyphémos on the
fortunes of Odysseus strangely perpl
Colonel Mure, who sees in it the chief
defect of the Odyssey, us interfering with
the ‘retributive equity’ which he fancies
that he finds in the Ziad. ‘No reader
of taste or judgment,’ he thiuks, ‘enn
fail to experience in its perusal a certain
fevling of impatience, not only that the
destinies of a blameless her aud an in-
nocent woman, Lut that any important
teainu of events, should hinge on #0 of-
fensive a mechanism as the Llind affec-
tion of @ mighty deity for 40 odious a
monster as Polypliemus.’—Crit. Hist.
Gr. Lit, vol.ii. p15). The real gues-
tion tu be answered wax how the mighty
deity came to be the father of the odions
monster. As, according to the myth, he
was his father, there was nothing un-
natural jn attributing to Poscidén the
affection of a parent for hia ing.
But, in truth, aothing could show more
clearly than these words Colonel Mure's
inability to enter fuirly into the spirit of
Greek mythology. It was simply im-
porible that the poet could make use of
auy other mechunisa. The train of


The Phaiakian
His land is as fair


events which he reconnts is not the c=
quence of any huwwn Life, hur the ewrecr
of Phoibos “and Daphné, Perseus and
Andromeda. In short, the Kyklops is
the son of Poswidén, originally « gud of
the eir—in other words, the exhalations
which form themclvex into the hideous
storm-clouds, through which the san
tometinies glares down like a huge eye
in the midst of the blick forchend of the
giant. Mr, Kelly, therfore, mmtakes
the eye which really belongs to the sun
for the Kyklops himself, when he says,
“The Greek mythology shows usa whole
people of suns in the Cyclops, giants
with one eye round wx a wheel in their
forebeuds.” He is right in adding that
“they were ukin to the heaveuly giants,
and dwelt with the Pheucians, the mas
vigetory of the cloud sea in the broud
Hyperia, the upper land, i.e, heaven,
until the legend transplanted them both
to the Western horizon! ~ dndo-Etropean
Folk-lore, p. 32.

7 ‘fhe merely secondary character of
‘Telemachos has been already noticed,

247.

# Oa. ii, 865,


THE RETURN OF ODYSSEUS.


269


as summer : but the sun may not tarry, and Odysseus cannot CHAP.
rbide there, even with Nausikad, So he hastens home, —**_


wmetimes showing his might, as the sun breaks for a
moment through a rift in the clouds; but the darkness is
yreatest when he lands on his own shores. He is sur-
sounded by enemies and spies, and he takes refuge in craft
and falsehood.! The darkness itself must aid him to win
the victory, and Athéné takes all beauty from his face, and
all brightness from his golden hair. These ideas, with
all the others which had come down to him as a fruitful
heritage from the language of his remote forefathers, the
Homeric poet might recombine or develope ; but if he brought
him to Ithaka under a cloud, he could not but say that
Athéné took away his glory, while yet his dog Argos, the
same hound who couches at the feet of Artemis or drives the
herds of the sun to their pastures, knows his old master
in all his squalid raiment, and dies for joy at seeing him.
When on his return Telemachos asks whether the bridal
souch of Odysseus is covered with spiders’ webs, he could
not but say in reply that Penelopé still remained faithful to
her early love;* and when Telemachos is once more to see
his father, he could not but make Athéné restore him to
more than his ancient beauty.’ So the man of many toils
and wanderings returns to his home,® only to find that his
son ig unable to rule his house,’ as Phaéthén and Patroklos
were alike unable to guide the horses of Helios. Still
Penelopé is fair as Artemis or Aphrodité,® although Melun-
tho and Melanthios,” the black children of the crafty (Dolios)
Night, strive to dash her life with gloom, and Odysseus
stands a squalid beggar in his own hall.'’ Thenceforth the
poet’s path was still more distinctly marked. He must
make the arm of Odysseus irresistible," he must make
id him in storing up weapons for the conflict,!? as


25H, era,

~The language adheres
wely to the myth. His
locks are uctually destroyed,


favs de kepadis Uaeve cplxas-


4 Bid, xvi. 35,


of

9 Bid. xvii. 87.
212; xviii, 340.
Those which she gave him when she Bid. xviii. 95,
Testored his beauty would be strictly


the new raya bursting from bebind the


270


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK Thetis brought the armour of Hephaistos to Achilleus, and
5 __ Hiordis that of Regin to Sigurd. He must make Penelopé


tell how often she had woven and undone her web while he
tarried so long away.' When Penelopé asks tidings of
Odysseus, the poet could not but give an anewer in which the
flash of gold and blaze of purple carries us directly to the
arming of Achilleus.* | As Eurykleia, the old nurse, tends
him at the bath, he must make her recognise the wound
made by the wild boar,’ who wrought the death of the fair
Adonis, and tell how her foster-child came to be called
Odysaens.! Then, as the day of doom is ushered in, he
must relate how as the lightning flashed from the sky®
the rumour went abroad that the chieftain was come again
to his home. So Penelopé takes down the bow which
Iphitos, the mighty, had given to Odysseus,‘ and bids the
suitors stretch it; but they cannot, and there is no need that
Telemachos should waste his strength now that his father has
come }:ome.’ Then follows the awful tragedy. Zeus must
thunder as the beggar seizes the bow. The suitors begin to
fall beneath the unerring arrows ; but the victory is not to be
won without a struggle. Telemachos has left the chamber
door ajar and the enemy arm themselves with the weapons
which they find there.® It is but another version of the
battle which Achilleus fought with Skamandros and Simoeis
in the war of elements; and as then the heart of Achilleus
almost failed him, so wavers now the courage of Odysseus.'
For a moment the dark clouds seem to be gaining mastery over


" Od. xix. 140,


Penelop§ is the
weaver of the web (wfvm) of cirri clouds


more images or figments of the mind,
‘They were downright realities, for they


‘Mr. Kelly, summing up the general
characteristies of Aryan mythology,
says ‘Light clouds were webs spun and
woven by celestial woraen, who also
drew water from the fountains on high
and poured it down as rain. The
yellow light gleaming through the clouds
Sas their golden hair, A fnst-scudding
cloud was a horse flying from its
pursuers. . . In all this and much more
‘of the seme kind, there was not yet an
atom of thet apmboliem which has com-
monly been assumed ss the starting-
point of all mythology. The mythic
animale, for example, were, for those
who first gave them their names, no


were seen by men who were quick to
see, and who had not yet leaned to
suspect any collusion between their eyen
and their fancy.'—Curiosities of Indo-
European Tradition and Folk-lore, p. 8.
® Od, xix, 22:
4 Thid, xix, 393.

: . The origin of this
name, as of 60 many others, ia wrongly
accounted for, The sume confusion
wos at work here, which changed
Lpkton into» wolf, and Kallisto into


Od. xx.105.  * Dbid. xxi. 6.
* Bid. xxi. 180, © Did. xxi, 413.
© Did. xxii. 141, Ibid, xxii. 147,


THE CONFLICT WITH THE SUITORS.


the sun. But Athéné comes to his aid,' as before she had
come to help Achilleus, and the arrows of the suitors are in
vain aimed at the hero,” although Telemachos is wounded,’
though not to the death, like Patroklos. Yet more, Athéné
must show her Aigis,‘ dazzling as the face of the unclouded
sun; and when the victory is won, the corpses of the slain
must be thrust away,’ like the black vapours driven from
the sky. Only for Melanthios he reserves the full measure
of indignity which Achilleus wreaked on the body of the
dead Hektor. Then follows the recognition in which,
under another form, Prokris again meets Kephalos, and Iolé
once more rejoices the heart of Herakles. For a little while
the brightness rests on Laertes, and the old man’s limbs
again grow strong ; but the strength comes from Athéné.’
Whatever light the progress of Comparative Mythology
may hereafter throw on the growth of Aryan epic poetry,
one conclusion, at the least, is forced upon us by this
analysis, and Odysseus is found to be as much and as little
an Achaian chieftain as Achilleus or Meleagros. The poems
may remain a mine of wealth for all who seek to find in
them pictures and manners of the social life of a pre-historic
age; but all the great chiefs are removed beyond a criticism,
which starts with attributing to them the motives which
influence mankind under any circumstances whatsoever.


\ Odyss. xxii. 205, * Ibid. xxii. 257. + Thid. xxii, 277. * Bid, xxii, 297.
* Hid, xxii, 460. * Ibid, xxii. 475. 1 Did. xxiv. 367.


271


CHAP.


—~


The cha-
Taster of
Odynveus
not


Achaian.


272


Oe:
———
Points of
likencas
detween
the Greek
and Teu-


tonic epics.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


CHAPTER XII.


MYTHICAL PHRASES AS FURNISHING MATERIALS FOR THE TEU-
TONIC EPIC POEMS, AND THE LEGENDS OF ARTHUR AND
ROLAND,


Tue results obtained from an examination of Greek epic
poetry, so far as it has come down to us, have a direct and
important bearing on the mythology of northern Europe,
and on the estimate which we must take of it. Of the general
character of the Hellenic tribes we can form a notion more
or Jess exact from the evidence of contemporary documents,
as soon as we reach the historical age; but, whatever may
be its defects or its vices, we are fully justified in saying
that it is not the character of the great Achaian chieftains
as exhibited either in the Iliad or the Odyssey. We have
absolutely no warrant for the belief that the ancestors of
Perikles or Themistokles, within ten or even more generations,
were men who would approve the stabbing of enemies behind
their backs, the use of poisoned arrows, and the butchery of
captives deliberately set apart to grace the funeral sacrifices
of a slain chief. Nuy, more, we shall look in vain in any
historical record for any portrait which will justify the belief
that the picture of Achilleus in the Tliad is the Jikeness
of an actual Achaian chieftain, while on any psychological
analysis we seem to be driven to the conclusion that the
character is one removed altogether from the bounds of
humanity. If the analysis already made of the character of
Odysseus and Achilleus shows that almost every feature is
traditional,,and that the portraits, as a whole, are not of the
poet’s making, that the wisdom and the falsehood, the truth-
fulness and the sullenness, whether of the one hero or the
other, were impressed upon each by a necessity which no


LIKENESS BETWEEN GREEK AND TEUTONIC EPICS.


poet could resist, and that these conclusions are proved by
the evidence, overwhelming in its amount, which shows that
Achilleus and Odysseus are reflections of Perseus, Theseus,
Herakles, and these, again, of Phoibos and Helios, or of other
deities who share their attributes—if the whole story which
has gathered round the names of these great national heroes
resolves itself into the cloudland of heaven with its never
ceasing changes, we are at once justified in thinking that
the history of the Teutonic heroes may be of much the same
kind; and if on examining it we not only find this suspicion
borne out, but discern in it some of the most important
incidents and sequences which mark the Greek legends, the
conclusion is forced upon us that the Teutonic epics, like
the Hellenic, are the fruit of one and the same tree which
has spread its branches over all the Aryan lands, and that
the heroes of these epics no more exhibit the actual character
of Northmen and Germans than the portraits of the heroes
in the Iliad and Odyssey are pictures of actual Achaian chief-
tains, When we find further that the action in each case
turns on the possession of a beautiful woman and the trea-
sures which make up her dowry, that this woman is in each
case seduced or betrayed, while the hero with his invincible
weapons is doomed to an early death after the same stormy
and vehement career, we see that we are dealing with mate-
rials which under different forms are essentially the same;
and our task becomes at each stage shorter and simpler.
Hence as we begin the story of Volsung (who is Diogenes
or the son of Odin, his father Rerir and his grandfather
Sigi being the only intermediate links), we suspect at once
that we are carried ‘away from the world of mortal men,
when we find that he is one of those mysterious children
whose birth from a mother destined never to see them ' por-
tends their future greatness and their early end ; and as we
read further of the sword which is left for the strongest in


1 So in the Hindu popular story, not be born, upon whicls hie mother
Viizamaditya thechildof Aditi Kronos, stabbed herself. But che tragic event
or the Dawn-land of the Rast), is tho duly happening during the ninth month,
son of Gandharba-sens. When his Vikromaditys came into the world by
sire died, his grandfuther, tho doity himeelf’—Burton, Tales of Indian
Indra, resolved that ‘the babe should Devilry, preface, p. xv.


wat ¥ m


The Vol.
sung Tale.


274


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK the rooftree of Volsung’s hall, no room is left for doubt that
pas ae we have before us the story of Theseus in another dreas. The


one-eyed guest with the great striped cloak and broad flapping
hat, who buries the sword up to its hilt in the huge oak stem,'
is Odin, the lord of the air, who in Teutonic mythology is like
the Kyklops, one-eyed, as Indra Savitar isone-handed. But
Aigeus in the Argive story is but one of the many names of
Zeus Poseidén, and as the husband of Aithra, the ether, he
also is lord of the air. In vain, when Odin has departed, do
Siggeir, the husband of Volsung’s daughter Signy, and the
other guests at her marriage-feast, strive to draw the sword.
It remains motionless in the trunk until it is touched by
Sigmund,” the youngest and bravest of Volsung’s sons—a
reproduction in part of Volsung himself, as Odysseus is of
Autolykos. To Sigmund’s hand, as to Arthur, the sword
yields itself at once, without an effort. Theseus lifts the
hug» stone beneath which Aigeus had placed his magic sword
and sandals. The weapon of the Greek story is the sword of
Chrysiér ; that of the Teutonic legend is the famous Gram,
the Excalibur of Arthur and the Durandal of Roland, and
Sigmund thus becomes, like Achilleus, the possessor of an
irresistible arm. In truth, the whole myth of Volsung and
his children is but a repetition, in all its phases, of that
great drama of Greek mythology which begins with the loss
of the golden fleece and ends with the return of the Hera-
kleidai. This drama represents the course or history of the
sun in all its different aspects, as ever young or growing old,
as dying or immortal, as shooting with poisoned weapons or
as hating a lie like death, as conquering the powers of dark-
ness or as smitten by their deadly weapons; and thus in the
defeat of Sigmund we have an incident belonging as strictly


* This tree grows through the roof of heroes are taught Cheiron, He
the hall and spreads its branches farend wears the invisible Wosnet and like


wide in the upper air. It is manifestly
the counterpart of Yj

+ The Sigmund of Beowulf and the
‘Volaung Tale bears a name which is an
Been Oy tage Sm a tk


many oF most mythical champions, can
be wounded only in oa» part of hia
body. If again Fafuir, when dying by

his hana, tells him of the things whicl

shail happen hereafter, we must remem-

ber that the Pythian dragon Jed
the oracle of Delphi—Grimm, Deuteche
Mythologie, 348.


THE SAGA OF THE VOLSUNGS.


to the solar myth as the victory of Achilleus over Hektor,
or the slaughter of the Sphinx by Oidipous. It could not be
otherwise. Odin and Phoibos live while Baldur and Askle-
pios die, but these rise again themselves or live in their
children. So, too, there must be a struggle between Siggeir
and Sigmund for the possession of Gram, for Siggeir stands
to Sigmund in the relation of Polydektés to Perseus, or of
Paris to Menelaos. But he is the dark being regarded for
the present as the conqueror, and Sigmund and his ten
brothers, the hours of the sunlit day, are taken and bound.
The ten brothers are slain; Sigmund himself is saved by his
sister Signy, and with his son Sinfiétli, now runs as a were-
wolf through the forest, the Lykeian or wolf-god wandering
through the dark forest of the night—a dreary picture which
the mythology of sunnier lands represented under the softer
image of the sleeping Helios sailing in his golden cup from
the western to the eastern ocean, But the beautiful Signy
is no other than Penelopé, and Siggeir’s followers are the
suitors who eat up the substance of Sigmund, as they had
deprived him of his armour. There remains therefore to be
wrought again a vengeance like that of Odysseus: and when
Sinfidtli is, like Telemachos, strong enongh to help his
father, the two, like the Ithekan chieftains, burn up Siggeir
and all his followers, the mode in which they are slain
pointing to the scorching heat of the sun not less clearly
than the deadly aryows which stream from the bow of
Odysseus. Sigmund now reguins his heritage, and for him, as
for Odysseus, there follows atimeofserenerepose. Like Nestor,
who is exaggerated in Tithonos, he reaches a good old age:
but as Odysseus must yet go through the valley of death, so
Sigmund has to fight the old battle over again, and is slain
in a war with the sons of King Hunding, in whom are
reflected the followers of Siggeir. But Achilleus is alain
only when Apollén guides the spear of Paris; and so when
Sigmund’s hour is come, the one-eyed man with the flapping
hat and the blue garment (of ether) is seen again. As he
stretches out this spear, Sigmund strikes against it his good
sword Gram, and the blade is shivered in twain. The hero
at once knows that Odin stands before him, and prepares to


275


CHAP.
xIL
Sa


276 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK die on the battle-field. But Iolé stood by the funeral pile

of Herakles, and Sigmund dies in the arms of his young

wife Hjordis, youthful as Daphné or Arethousa, ‘ refusing all

leechcraft and bowing his head to Odin’s will,’ as in the

Trojan myth Paris cannot be healed even though Oinéné
would gladly save him.

Ths Story So ends the first act of the great drama; but the wheel

sh has only to make another turn, and bring back the same

series of events with slight differences of names and colour-

ing. Sigmund leaves Hjordis the mother of an unborn babe,

the Phoibos who is the child of Lété, and of the Sun who

sank yestereve beneath the western waters. This child,

who receives the name of Sigurd, is born in the house of

Hialprek, who is localised as King of Denmark, but who

represents Laios or Akrisios in the Theban and Argive

Jegends ; and these, we need not say, are simply reflections of

Vritra, the being who wraps all things in the veil of dark-

ness. Sigurd himself is the favourite hero of northern tra—

dition. Like Achilleus, he is the destined knight who

succeeds where all others have failed before him. Troy

cannot fall if the son of Peleus be absent; Fafnir cannot be

slain, nor Brynhild rescued, except by the son of Sigmund,

Physically, there is no difference between them. Both have

the keen blue eyes, and golden locks, and invincible weapons

of Phoibos and Athéné; on both alike rests the glory of a

‘perfect beauty ; and to both their weapons and their armour

come from the god of fire. But in the Norse story there is

a connection between Regin, the mysterious smith of King

Hialprek, and the dragon Fafnir, which cannot be traced

between Hephaistos and the Delphian Python, but which is

folly explained by the differences of a northern and a medi-

terranean climate. In the Norse story, there is enmity

between Fafnir and Regin, between the serpent who has

coiled round the treasure of Brynhild (as the Panis hide the

cows of Indra), and the faculties of life and growth repre-

sented by the dwarfs to whose race Regin belongs.' Regin,

\ <Tho darts of Teutonic mythology bat the contrivance aud wonderful pro-

are distinguished from its giants, because ies present in the mineral and


they do not, Hike the latter, represent Lickin kingdoms, and shown in form.
the wild and lewlese energies of nature, and shape, in colour and growth, in


L
——


REGIN AND FAFNIR.


277


‘in short, is one of that class of beings who supply warmth CHAP.
and vigour to all living things; Fafnir is the simple darkness = _


or cold, which is the mere negation of life and light. Hence
from Regin comes the bidding which charges Sigurd to slay
Fafnir; but the mode in which this enmity is said to have
been excited is singularly significant. In their wanderings,
Odin, Loki, and Hahnir, the gods of the glistening heavens,
come to a river where, nigh to a ford, an otter is eating a
salmon with its eyes shut. Loki, slaying the beast with a
stone, boasts that at one throw he has got both fish and flesh.
This is the first blow dealt by the lords of light to the powers
of cold and darkness: but the way is as yet by no means
open before them. Many a day has yet to pass, and many a
hero yet to fall, before the beautiful summer can be brought
out from the prison-house hedged in by its outwork of spears
orice. The slain otter is a brother of Fafnir and Regin,
and a son of Reidmar, in whose house the three gods ask
shelter, showing at the same time their spoil. At Reidmar’s
bidding his two surviving sons bind Loki, Odin, and Hahnir,
who are not set free until they promise to fill the otter’s
skin with gold, and so to cover it that not a white hair shall
be seen—in other words, the powers of the bright heaven are
pledged to loosen the ice-fetters of the earth, and destroy
every sign of its long bondage. But the gold is the glisten-
ing treasure which has been taken away when Persephoné
was stolen from her mother Démétér and Brynhild left to
sleep within the walls of flame. Hence Loki must discharge
the office of Hermes when he goes to reclaim the maiden
from the rugged lord of Hades; and thus Odin sends Loki
to the dwelling of the dark elves, where he compels the
dwarf Andvari to give up the golden treasures which he” had
hoarded in the stony caves, whose ice-like walls answer to
the dismal den of the Vedic Panis. One ring alone Andvari
seeks to keep. It is the source of all his wealth, and ring
after ring drops from it. He wishes, in other words, to keep
various hurtful or useful qualities.’ ficance in our word Zirerch, as equivalent
Bunsen (God in History, il. 484), to quer, wicked or cross, the intellectual
rightly adds, ‘The word must be 4 application of which hes survived


‘simple Toutonic ono, and we most likely in the English queer.
como on the traces of its primary signi-


278


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK his hold of the summer itself as represented by the symbol of
‘ao the reproductive power in nature. The ring is the magic neck-


lace of Harmonia and Eriphyle, the kestos of Aphrodité, the
ehip of Isis and Athéné, the Yoni of Vishnu, the Argo which
bears within itself all the chieftains of the Achaian lands.
Andvari prays in vain, but before he surrenders the ring, he
lays on it a curse, which is to make it the bane of every man
who owns it. It is, in short, to be the cause of more than
one Trojan war,’ the Helen who is to bring ruin to the
hosts who seek to rescue her from thraldom. The beauty
of the ring tempts Odin to keep it, but the gold he yields
to Reidmar. It is, however, not enough to hide all the
white hairs of the otter’s skin. One yet remains visible,
and this can be hidden only by the ring which Odin is thus
compelled to lay upon it, as the ice cannot be wholly melted
till the full warmth of summer has come back to the earth,
Thus the three Msir go free, but Loki lays again on the ring
the curse of the dwarf Andvari. The working of this curse
is seen first in the death of Reidmar, who is slain by Regin
and Fafnir, because he refuses to share with them the gold
which he had received from the Hsir. The same cause
makes Regin and Fafnir enemies. Fafnir will not yield up
the treasure, and taking 2 dragon’s form he folds his coils
around the golden heaps upon the glistening heath, as the
Python imprisons the fertilising streams at Delphoi. Thus
foiled, Regin beseeches Sigurd to smite the dragon; but
even Sigurd cannot do this without a sword of sufficient
temper. Regin forges two, but the blades of both are
shivered at the first stroke. Sigurd exclaims bitterly that
the weapons are untrue, like Regin and all his race,—a phrase
which points with singular clearness to the difference between
the subterranean fires and the life-giving rays of the sun,
which alone can scatter the shades of night or conquer the
winter's cold. It is clear that the victory cannot be won
without the sword which Odin drove into the oak trunk, and
which had been broken in the hands of Sigmund. But the


) This ring reappears with precisely Farope; and it is absurd to suppose
the name qualities and consequences that such a series of incidents wus con-
in many of the sagas of Northern stantly recwrring in netuel history.


SIGURD’S VICTORIES.


279


pieces remain in the keeping of Hjordis, the mother of cHaP.
Sigurd, and thus the wife of Sigmund plays here precisely a


the part of Thetis. In each case the weapons with which
the hero is to win his victory come through the mother, and
in each case they are forged or welded by the swarthy fire-
god; but the Norse tale is even more true than the Homeric
legend, for the sword which smites the darkness to-day is
the same blade which the enemies of the sun yestereve
snapped in twain, With the sword thus forged from the
shattered pieces of Gram Regin bids Sigurd smite the
Dragon: but the hero must first avenge his father’s death,
and King Hunding, his sons, and all his host are slain,
like the suitors by the arrows of Odysseus, before Sigurd
goes forth on his good steed Gran, which Odin had brought
to him as Athéné brought Pegasos to Bellerophén, to en-
counter the guardian of the earth’s treasures. But no
sooner is the Dragon slain than Regin in his turn feels the
desire of vengeance for the very deed which he had urged
Sigurd to do, and he insists that the hero shall bring him
his brother’s heart roasted. Then filling himself with Faf-
nir’s blood, Regin lies down to sleep, and Sigurd, as he
roasts the heart, wonders whether it be soft, and putting a
portion to his lips, finds that he understands the voices of
the birds, who, singing over his head, bid him eat it all and
become the wisest of men, and then, cutting off Regin’s head,
take possession of all his gold. This is manifestly the legend
of Iamos and Melampous, while the wisdom obtained by eat-
ing the heart of Fafnir has a further connection with the
Python as the guardian of the Delphic oracle.’


1 Grimm regards tho words Python
and Fafnir os stonding to each other in
tho relation of @hp and gfp. ‘Die
Enlegung des Drachen Fafuir gemahnt
an Wééwy, den Apollo besiegte, und wie
Python das delfische Orakel hiitete,
Woissugtdersterbonde Fafnir’— Deutsche
Mythologie, 345. In tho lay of Boowult
thle serpent or dragon appears under tho
name Grendel; and, in fact, the whole
story of Sigurd is in that poem related
substantially, although not with the
same fulness of detail, of Sigmund the
father of Beowulf, the Waelsing, who,
having slain the’ worm, becomes the


possessor of the ring hoard which he
may enjoy at pleasure. Like the Norse
Sigurd, Sigmund is ‘of wanderers by
far the greatest throughout the human
mace:” he is, in short, the Odysseus who
wanders very fnr over many lands, after
the fall of Ilion, which again answers
to the slaying of the dragon, The
Fitele of Beowulf is clearly the SinfiStli
of the Volsung tale. For some remarks
on the compurntive antiquity of these
two legends seo Lu ow, Popular ice
of the Middle Ages, i. 41. The Ee
stantial identity of the two myths
renders the question of date of com-


280
‘BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.
With this exploit begins the career of Sigurd as Chrystér.


~E_ As Achilleus is taught by Cheiron, so is Sigurd instructed
The reecne by Gripir, the wise man, and thus in the fulness of wisdom
ofBrya- and strength, with his golden hair flowing over his shoulders,


and an eye whose glance dazzled all who faced it, he rides over
the desolate heath, until he comes to the circle of flame
within which sleeps the Valkyrie Brynhild.' No other horse
but Gran can leap that wall of fire, no knight but Sigurd
ean guide him across that awful barrier: but at his touch
the maiden is roused from the slumber which had lasted
since Odin thrust the thorn of sleep or winter into her cloak,
like the Rakshas’ claw which threw the little sun-girl of the
Hindu tale into her magic trance. At once she knows that
before her stands the only man who never knew fear, the
only man who should ever have her as his bride. But.
Brynhild also has the gift of, marvellous wisdom, and as
the Teutonic Alrune,’ she reflects the knowledge of the
Gree’. Athéné and the Latin Minerva. From her Sigurd
receives all the runes, but these scarcely reveal to him so
much of the future as had been laid bare for him in the
prophecies of Gripir.? By the latter he had been told that


hero, Sigurd is the thome of the story
of tho “Prince who was afraid of
Nothing’ and whose fortune are


paratively little importance. The real
point for consideration is that these
stories ure further identical with tho


eagas of the three Helgis, and of Baldur,
and thus also with the myths of Adonis,
Dionysos, Sarpédén, Memnén, and other
gods and heroes of Hellenic tradition.

In one version, Fafair predicts that
Sigurd will die drowned. brad pes rad
‘is not fulfilled, but it points clearly to
the myth of Endymion. —Ludlow, Popu-
lar pica, i. 70.

+ Brynhild, a8 we might suppose,
reappears in many Teutonic stories, In
the story of Strong Hans (Grimm), sho
is the chained maiden who is guarded
by the dwarf (Andvari). When
Hans (Sigurd) slays the dwarf, the
chains immediately fall off her hands.
In the story of the True Bride, the
prince is as faithless as Sigurd, but
the princess recovers him in the end
with the happie lot of Penelopé. In
the story of the Woodcutter’s Child the


‘Knight bas to cut his
: :
Pha aly prs


much like those of the deliverer of
Brynhild.

3 Tho Aurinia of Taci
Bunsen, God in History, :

+ With the runes he also receives 8
great deal of good advice, pointing pre-
Gsely to thoar fontures in the myths of
Phoibos, Helior, Hermes, and Herakles,
which, when tranelated into the condi-
tions of human morality, become fants
or vices; Helios may bura his enemies
without ‘scruple or shame, but Sigurd
must not do this, nor must he be, like
Indra and Paris, yurawarts, nor a liar
like Odysseus. The warnings which she
adda are much of the sume sort.

‘The winter sleep of Brynhild i
vestied inthe Tater ee a
Sigenot , r i, 268.
Dietrich is here the Sigurd or bright hero,
who wears the helmet of Grein whom
Reha alain, and ho is the nephew of

giaut Sigenot. Sigenot now curries
off Dietrich and shuts him up in « hollow


is, Germ, B—
54,


BRYNBILD AND GUNNAR.


281


Brynhild (like Helen) would work him much woe: but CHAP,
Brynhild doubtless knew not, as Sigurd rode on to the hall oe


of Giuki the Niflung, that her place was now to be taken by
another, and that her own lot was to be that of Ariadné,
‘Aithra, or Oinéné. It is the old tale, repeated under a
thousand different forms. The bright dawn who greeted
the newly risen sun cannot be with him as he journeys
through the heaven; and the bride whom he weds in her
stead is nearer and more akin to the mists of evening or the
cold of winter, Thus Gudrun, loving and beautiful as she
is, is still the daughter of the Nifiung, the child of the mist,
and stands to Sigurd precisely in the relation of Déianeira
to Herakles, as the unwitting cause of her husband’s ruin,
But Brynhild yet lives, and Gunnar, who, like Hogni or
Hagene, is a son of the Niftung and brother of Gudrun, seeks
to have her as his wife. His desire can be satisfied only
through Sigurd, who by the arts and philtres of Grimhild
has been made to forget his first love and betroth himself to
Gudrun. In vain Gunnar! strives to ride through the
flames that encircle Brynhild, until at last, by the arts of
Grimhild, Sigurd is made to change shapes and arms with
Gunnar, and, mounting on Gran, to force Brynhild to yield.
Thus Sigurd weds the Valkyrie in Gunnar’s form, and lies
down by her side with the unsheathed blade of Gram between
them.? In the morning he gives to Brynhild the ring which


stono or tower, where, like Regnar Lod-
‘Drog, he is attacked hy many a strong
worm or ecrpent—the snukes of night.
One of his followers trics to raise him
‘by a rope, which breaks, and Dietrich
tells him that the wounds which he has
received cannot be healed. Things,
however, turn out better then he ex-
pects; Lut the one night which he spent
in the house seemed to him ae thirty
ens.

1 «Gunner Gjukason seems to signify
darknese, and thus wo seo that the
awakening and ludding spring is gone,
carried away by Gunnar, like Proserpine
‘by Pluto; like Sité by Ravana. Gud-
von, the doughter of Grimhild, and
sometimes herself called Grimhild,
whether the latter name meant summer
(cf. Gharma in Sanskrit), or the earth
and nature in the latter part of the


year, is a sister of the derk Gunnar, and
though now murried to the bright
Sigurd, she Uelongs herself to the
nebulous reginns,"—Max Miller, Chips,
ii, Mo,

* This incident recurs in Grimm's
story of the Two Brothers. In the
Norse legend of the Big Bird Dan, who
js no other than the Arabian Rue, the
princess lays the Ire sword between
her and Ritter Red. Dr, Dusent adds
many more instances, as the story of
‘Hrolf and Ingegerd, of Tristan ‘and
Teolt, and he rightly insists that
“these mythical deep-rooted germs,
throwing out fresh shoots from aga to
age in the popular literature of the race,
are far more convincing proofs of the
early existence of their traditions than
any mere external evidence. — Norse
Tales, intzoduction, exlii. It is certainly


282


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


Book was under the double curse of Andyari and Loki, receiving
— from her another ring in return. This ring is necessarily


connected with the catastrophe; but in the mode by which
it is brought about, the Northern poets were left free to
follow their fancy. In the Volsung tale, Gudrun and Bryn-
hild are washing their hair in the same stream, when Bryn-
hild says that no water from Gudrun’s head shall fall upon
her own, as her husband is braver than Gudrun’s. When
Gudrun replies that Sigurd, to whom she was wedded, had
slain Fafnir and Regin and seized the hoard, Brynhild
answers that Gunnar had done yet a braver deed in riding
through the flames which surrounded her. A few words
from Gudrun show her how things really are, and that the
seeming Gunnar who had placed on her finger the ring won
from the spoils of Andvari was really Sigurd who had trans-
ferred to Gudrun the ring which he had received from
Brynhild, Thus her old love is re-awakened, only to be
merged in the stinging sense of injustice which makes
Oinéné in one version of the myth refase to heal the wounded.
Paris, and leads Déianeira to resolve on the death of Hera-
Kles. The three instances are precisely the same, although
Oindné is of the three the most gentle and the most merciful.
But in all there is the consciousness of betrayal and the
determination to punish it, and the feeling which animates
them is reflected again in the hate of Helen for Paris after
he has shut her up in Ilion. Thus Brynhild urges Gunnar
to avenge her on Sigurd, like the evening twilight allying
itself with the darkness of night to blot out the glory of the
sun from the heavens. But Gunnar and his brothers cannot
accomplish her will themselves: they have made a compact
of friendship with Sigurd, and they must not break their
oath. But Guttorm their half-brother is under no such
covenant, and so this being, who represents the cold of
winter, plunges a sword into the breast of Sigurd, who is
sleeping in the arms of Gudrun. This weapon is the thorn
which is fatal to the Persian Rustem and the gentle Surya
Bai of modern Hindu folk-lore.’ But Sigurd is mighty even


worth noting that the incident is related aleo of Allab-nd-deen in the Arabian
Nights legend.


THE DEATH OF SIGURD.


in death, and the blade Gram, hurled by his dying hand,
cleaves Gutiorm asunder, so that the upper part of his body
fell out of the chamber, while the lower limbs remained in
the room. The change which his death causes in the mind
of Brynhild answers precisely to the pity which Oinéné feels
when her refusal to heal Paris has brought about his death.
Like Helen, who hates herself, or is hated, for bringing ruin
on ships, men, and cities, she bewails the doom which
brought her into the world for everlasting damage and grief
of soul to many men, Like Déianeira, and Oinéné, and
Kleopatra, she feela that without the man whom she loves
life is not worth living for, and thus she lies down to die on
the funeral pile of Sigurd.

The sequel reproduces the same incidents under other
names, and with different colours. As Sigurd, like Theseus
and Herzkles, first woos the Dawn, and thus has to dwell
with the maiden who represents the broad and open day, so
Gudrun, the loving companion of the Sun in his middle
journey, has to mourn his early death, and in her widowhood
to become the bride, first of the gloaming, then of the dark-
ness. Between these there is a necessary enmity, but their
hatred only serves the more thoroughly to avenge the death
of Sigurd. Atli, the second husband of Gudrun, claims all
the gold which Sigurd had won from the dragon, but which
the chieftains of Niflheim had seized when he died. In fair
fight he could never hope to match them; so Atli invites
Hogni (Haugn or Hagen) and Gunnar to a feast, in which he
overpowers them. Hogni’s heart is then cut out, an incident
which answers to the roasting of the heart of Fafnir; and as
the latter is associated with the recovery of the golden
treasure, so the former is connected with the subsequent loss
which answers to the coming on of the night when the sun
has reached the end of his glorious course. When Sigurd
died, Gunnar and his brothers had thrown the hoard into
the Rhine—the water which receives Endymién as he plunges
into his dreamless sleep; and the secret of it is lost when
they in their turn are cast into a pit full of snakes, all of
whom, like Orpheus, Gunuar lulls to sleep by his harping,
except one which flies at his heart, and kills him—a tale told


283


CHAP.


~~


The Sto:
of Gudren.


284


200K:
ae


Buco


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


over again in the transparent myth of Thora, Aslauga, and

x Lodbrog. Thus the beings who, though they might
be akin to the mist and cold of night, had made a covenant
of peace and friendship with Sigurd, are all gone, and to
Gudrun remains the task of avenging them. The story of
her vengeance is practically a repetition of the legend of
Medeia. Like the Kolchian woman, she slays the two sons
whom she had borne to Atli; but the ferocity of the North-
ern sentiment colours the sequel in which we see a sunset as
blood-red and stormy as that in which Herakles rose from
earth to the mansions of the undying gods. Gudrun makes
Atli eat the flesh and ‘drink the blood of his sons; and then,
having slain him as he sleeps, by the aid of the son of her
brother Hogni, she sets fire to the hall, and consumes every
thing within it. The shades of evening or of autumn are
now fast closing in, and Gudrun, weary of her life, hastens
to tle sea shore to end her woes by plunging into the deep.
But the waters carry her over to the land of King Jonalr,
who makes her his bride, and she now becomes the mother of
three sons, Saurli, Hamdir, and Erp, whose raven black hair
marks them as the children of clouds and darkness. Once more
the magic wheel revolves, and in the fortunes of Svanhild,
the daughter of Sigurd and Gunnar we see the destiny of
the fateful Helen. Like her, Svanhild is the most beau-
tiful of women, and Hermanric, the Gothic king, sends his
son Randver to woo her for him; but the young man is
advised by the treacherous Bikki to woo her for himself, and
he follows the counsel which chimes in only too well with
his own inclinations, as with those of Svanhild. Her-
manric orders that his son shall be hanged. Presently he
receives a plucked hawk which Randver had sent to show
him the weakness of parents who deprive themselves of the
support of their children, and he gives orders to stop the
execution. The messenger comes too late, Randver is already
slain; and Svanhild is trampled to death by the steeds of
Hermanrie’s horsemen as she combs out her golden locks,
But Hermanric must pay the penalty for his ill-doing not
less than Sigurd or Atli..%Gunnar’s command goes forth to
her three Niflung sons, Saurli, Hamdir and Erp, to avenge


STORY OF GUDRUN.


Svanhild; and thus, armed with helmets and cased in mail
which no weapons can pierce, they take the way to the house
of Hermanric. As they go, the Niflungs quarrel among
themselves, and Saurli and Hamdir slay Erp, because he is
his mother’s darling.! But Hermanric, although he may be
mutilated, cannot be slain. The two brothers cut off his
hands and feet; but Erp is not there to smite off his head,
and Hermanriec has strength to call out to his men, who
bind the Niflungs and stone them to death, by the advice of
a one-eyed man who tells them that no steel can pierce their
panoply. Here the one-eyed man is again the stranger who
had left the sword in the oak tree of Volsung’s hall, and
the men of Hermanric answer to the Achaians in their
struggle with the robbers of Tlion. It was time, however,
that the tale should end, and it is brought to a close with
the death of Gudrun, for no other reason probably than that
the revolutions of the mythic wheel must be arrested some-
where. The difference between the climates of northern and
southern Europe is of itself enough to account for the more
cheerful ending of the Hellenic story in the triumphant
restoration of the Herakleidai.

The very fact that in all this story there is, as we have
seen, scarcely an incident which we do not find in the tradi-
tions of other Aryan nations or tribes, renders it impossible
to judge of the character of Northmen or Germans from the
legends themselves. It is possible, of course, and even likely


' The story of this murdor hus worked
ita -wny into the traditional bistory of
Astheletan and Godwine. At the least,
it seems impossible to shut our eyes 10
the striking similarity of these stories ;
and as their non-historical character in
the case of Aithelstan and Godwine has
‘Leen placed beyond reach of questioning,
we are the more justified in saying that
the old myth hns served as the founde-
tion of the later legend. The Volsung
atory, in Dr, Dasent’s words, rung as
followa:—‘ As the three went along, the
two asked Erp what help he would give
them wher thoy got to Hormanric.
“Such ag hand lends to foot,” be said.
“(No help at all,” they cried; and pnse-
ing from words to blows, aud because
their mother loved Exp best, they slew


him, A little further on Saurli stumbled
and fell forward, but saved himself with
one hand, and scid, “Hero hand helps
foot ; better were it that Erp lived.”
So they camo on Hermanrie as he slept,
and Saurli hewod off his hands, und
Tamdir bis fect, but he awoke and
called for bis men, Then nid Hamdir,
“Wore Emp alive, the head would be off,
and he couldn't call out." In the story
of Ktholstan andof Godwinewe havothe
same phrases about the hands and feet ;
in exch case a brother is slain, and in
each caso the loss of this brother is sub-
sequently felt as a source’ of weakness,
For tho several shapea assumed by the
legend see Freeman, Norman Conquest,
ii. 611-12, ".


285


CHAP.
xXIL
oS


Helgi
Sants.


286


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


nQOK that the poets or narrators have in each case thrown over
se the characters and events of their tale a colouring borrowed.


‘Tho first
Helgi.


The
Second
Helgi.


from the society of the time ; but that as portraits of actual
manners they are gross and impossible exaggerations we are
justified in concluding not only from the story itself, but from
the recurrence of the myth in many lands unchanged in its
easence, and even in its most prominent features. It is thrice
repeated in the legends of the three Helgis, who, itis scarcely
necessary to say, are mere reflections, the one of the others.
These are the holy ones, or saviours, who make whole or restore
life, like the Paiedn or Asklepios of Greek mythology.'

Of these Helgis, the first is called the son of Hiorvardur,
and he is loved by Swava, the daughter of King Eilimir,
But his brother Hedin makes a vow on the yule eve that
Swava shall be his wife, not the bride of Helgi. He has been
misled by the sorceress Hrimgerda, who seeks to make him
her .wn, as Kirké and Kelypso use all their arts to detain
Odysseus; but the northern hero is more scrupulous than
the Ithakan chieftain, and he not only rejects her love, but
compels her to prophesy till the day dawns and her power is
at an end,—a sufficiently clear token of her nature. Soon,
however, he repents him of the oath which the sorceress had
led him to take, and he confesses his guilt to Helgi, who,
foreboding his own death in the coming struggle with Alfur,
the son of Hrodmar, promises that when he is slain Swava
shall be Hedin’s. When he has received the death-wound,
he tells Swava of this promise; but she refuses to abide by it
or to have any other husband but Helgi, and Helgi in his
turn declares that though he must now die, he will come
back again when his death has been avenged. This is mani-
festly the avenging of Baldur, and Helgi is thus another form
of Adonis, or Memnén, or Dionysos. The younger brother is
the waning autumn sun, who thinks to obtain his brother’s
wife when the sun of summer has lost its power.

At the birth of the second Helgi, known as Hundingsbana,


1 ‘They ayo the Aleis mentioned by for the Joss of the aspirate in the name
Tacitus, Germ. 43, as worshipped by the as given by Tacitus, Bunsen cites the
Nabarvali, and es answering to the analogous forms Irmin and Hermun,
Roman Castor and Pollux. They are aco and Hisicion.—God in History, ii.
the Teutonic Dioskouroi or Aeving; and 470.


THE HELGI SaGAs.


the Nornas came and fixed the lot of the babe, like the
Moirai in the legend of Meleagros.1 When fifteen years
old, he slays King Hunding and his sons, and afterwards
wins the love of Sigrun, daughter of Hogni, who, like Swava,
is a Valkyrie and a sister of Bragi and Dag, the brilliant hea-
ven and the day. She promises Helgi that she will be his
wife if he will vanquish the sons of Granmar, the bearded
spirit, to one of whom she had been betrothed. Thus again
we have the woman whom two heroes seek to obtain, the
Helen for whom Meuelaos and Paris contend together. In the
battle which follows, Sigrun, as a Valkyrie, cheers him on,
and Dag alone is spared of all the sons of Granmar. But
although Dag swears allegiance to the Volsungs, he yet trea-
cherously stabs Helgi (another of the many forms of Baldur’s
death), and tells Sigrun that he is dead. The sequel,
although essentially the same, shows the working of a new
vein of thought. Sigrun curses Dag as one who had broken
his oath, and refuses to live


‘Unless 0 glory should break from the prince's grave,

And Vigblar the horse should speed thither with him ;

‘The gold-bridled steed becumes Lim whom I fuin would embrace,
Her tears disturb the repose of Helgi in his grave, and he
rebukes her as making his wounds burst open afresh. But
Sigrun is not to be scared or driven away. She prepares a
common resting-place for him and for herself, a couch free
from all care, and enters of her own free will the land of the
dead.


“Nothing I now deeluro Unlocked for,

‘At SefafiolL Late or early,
Since in a corpac’s ‘Arms thou sleepest,
Hagni’s fair daughter, In a mound,

‘And tho art living, Daughter of kings,


‘Time 'tis for me to ride On the reddening ways;


Lot the pale horse ‘Tread the aerial path ;
I toward the west must go Over Vindhidlm’s bridge,
Ere Lalgofair A heroes."*


The third Helgi, Haddingaheld, is but a reproduction of


} He is also identified as Hermodhur,
‘Heermuth, the son of Odin, who is sent
to fetch ‘up Baldur from the under
World and is thus the returning or con-
quering sun who comes back after the
winter solstice.—Bunsen, God in His-
tory, ii, 471.


7 Second Lay of Helgi Hundings-
bana, 46, 47. ‘This is the legend of Le-
nore, of which Buneen a3 i
caught the soul of the a
the point of extinction, an


it anew
and immortal life among the German
people.’—God in History, ii. 466.


CHAP.


‘The Third
Helgi.


288


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


bie the second Helgi, while Kara, the daughter of Halfdan, takes
pie oe the place of Swava or Sigrun. In all these tales the heroes


and the heroines stand in precisely the same relations to
each other ;' and thus, having seen that the myths of these
heroes merely reproduce the legends of Baldur and of Sigurd
the Volsung, we are prepared for the conclusion that the story
of Siegfried, in the Lay of the Nibelungs, is only another
form of the oft-repeated tale. For the most part the names
are the same, as well as the incidents. The second Helgi is
a son of Sigmund, his mother also being called Sigurlin ; and
so Sigurd of the Volsung and Siegfried of the Nibelung Saga
are each the son of Sigmund. The slaying of Hunding by
Helgi answers to the slaughter of Fafnir and Regin by
Sigurd, Siegfried being also a dragon-slayer like Phoibos, or
Oidipous, or Herakies. So too, as Sigurd first won the love of
Brynhild and then marries Gudrun, for whose brother he
finally wins Brynhild as a wife, so Siegfried in his turn marries
Kriemhild, sister of the Burgundian Gunther, having wooed
Brynhild for his brother-in-law. If, again, Brynhild causes
the death of Sigurd, the man in whom she has garnered up
her soul, so Siegfried is murdered at Brynhild’s instigation.
Tf in the Helgi Saga the son of Hogni bears the news of
Helgi’s death to Sigurd, so in the Volsung tale Hogni informs
Gudrun of Sigurd’s death, and in the Nibelung song Hagen
brings to Kriemhild the tidings of the death of Siegfried.
Like Swava and Sigrun, Brynhild kills herself that her body
may be burnt with that of Sigurd; and as in the story of
the Volsungs, Atli (who appears as the comrade of the first
Helgi) gets possession of Gunnar and Hogni and has them
put to death, so Kriemhild in the Nibelungenlied marries
Etzel, who catches Gunther and his brothers in the same trap
in which Gunnar and Hogni had been caught by Atli.”


1 Fora tabular view of these paral- bya younger brother... . . This ele-


leliams see Bunsen, #5. 470, &c.
7 On the historical residuum which
may possibly Le contained in the ister
forms of these myths it is really unne-
ceseary to say anything. In Bansen's
words, ‘The fundamental element com-
mon tu them all is purely
namely, the combat of the Sun-God,
who is alain by bis brother and avenged


‘ment constitutes the basis of the Sigard
Sega, and the substance of the Helgi
Saga, with the exception of some later
additions ; it is the oldest form of the
Germon myth of Herakles’—God in
History, ii. 474. Nevertheless, Bunsen
thinks it worth while to make an attempt
to determine the amount of historical
matter wrapped up in it. He finds the


THE NIBELUNGEN LAY.


That the later forms into which the Volsung story has
been thrown may contain some incidents which may be either
truly told or else travestied from real history, it is impossible
todeny. When at the best they who insist most on the histo-
rical character of these poems can but trace a name here and
there, or perhaps see in the account of some fight a reference
to some actual battle with which it has no likeness beyond
the fact that men fought and were killed in both, as the
fishes swim in the streams of Macedon and Monmouth, it
seems useless to affirm it. When the motives are alike in all,
when in each case there is a wealthily dowered maiden whose
hoard is stolen, a robber who refuses to disclose the secret of
the lost treasure, and bloody vengeance by those who lay
claim to this wealth, when thousands are murdered in a
single hall, and men lie down contentedly in faming cham-
bers floating in blood, treading out the falling brands in the
gore and recruiting their strength by sucking the veins of
the dead, we can scarcely regard it as a profitable task to
search amidst such a mass of impossibilities the materials
for a picture of society as existing whether amongst Northmen
or amongst Greeks. That the colouring thrown over them
is in part reflected from the manners of the age, there is no
room to doubt; but when the groundwork of the story has
been shown to be purely mythical, this fact will not carry us


namo Atli or Etzel, and this represents
the historical Attila, o conclusion which
is strengthened Ly the mention of Bludi
ug the father of Attila, wherras history
speaks of Bleda as his brother. Ile
finds uleo Gunnar, the brother of Gud-
run, and Gunther the king of the Bur-
gundians, Beyond this, seemingly, it i
Impossible to advance. ‘It is cert
difficult to make an expedition by Attila
himself to the Rhine fit in with what we
know of the history of these years.
“This, no more and no less, is the histo-
rieu! element in that great tragedy of
the woes of the Nibelungs.’—Gad in
History, ji, 478, If any can bo satisfied
with chiming for this belief a historical
sanction on such exidence as this, it may
‘perhaps be a pity to break in upon their
selfcomplaceaces ‘but on the other side
it may fairly be asserted that two or
threo “names, with which not a single


VOL. I.


uv


known historical ovent is associated, and
of which the stories told cannot be re-
conciled with anything which comes
down to us on genuine historieal testi-
mony, furnish 8 miserably insecure
foundation for auy historical inferences.
If this js all that we learn from the po-
pular tradition, can we be said to learn
anything? In the one Bleds is the
brother of Attila, in the other heis not :
it seems rash, then, to speak of Bludi as
a ‘perfectly historical person.’ To ws
they must remain mero names; and
while we turn aside from the task of
measuring the historical authority of
these Sagas as a mere waste of time, wa
cannot on the same plea refuse consi-
deration to evidence whigh may seem to
truce such names as Atli, Bleda, and
Gunnar to a time long preceding the
days of Attila, Biudi, and Gunther.


289


CHAP,
xu.
aS
‘The Nibe-


Tungen
lay.


290


BOOK
I


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


far. We are confined to mere names or mere customs; and.


~—~— the attempt to advence further lands us in the region of


‘Baldur.


guesswork. Thus to Mr. Kemble’s assertion that Attila
¢ drew into his traditional history the exploits of others, and
more particularly those of Chlodowic and his sons in the
matter of the Burgandian kingdom,’ and that this fact will
be patent to any one who will look over the accounts of the
Burgundian war in Gregory of Tours, Mr. Ludlow replies
that the search yields only two names, Godegiselus namely,
and Theudericus, answering to the Giselher and Dietrich of
the Nibelungen Lay.' Nor do we gain much if we find
Gundicar, the Burgundian king, as one of the sovereigns
conquered by Attila, if the Atli of the Volsung story be-
longed to the myth long before the days of the Hunnish
devastator. The name of the Bishop Pilgrim seems to be
more genuinely historical; but even if he can be identified
ag a prelate who filled the see of Passau in the tenth century,
we know no more about him from the poem than we learn
of Hruodlandus from the myth of the Roland who fell at
Boncesvalles.

The points of difference between the Norse and the German
traditions are simply such as the comparison of one Greek
myth with another would lead us to expect. Phoitbos may
be called the child of the darkness, as strictly as he may be
said to be born in Delos or Ortygia. The offspring of Chry-
siér, the lord of the golden sword of day, is the three-headed
Geryoneus ; and Echidna, the throttling snake, who is united
with Herakles, is the daughter of Kallirhoé, the fair-flowing
stream of the ocean. Hence there is nothing surprising in
the fact that in the one set of myths Sigurd fights with, or is
slain by, the Niflungs, while in the other he is said to be a
Niflung himself? The real difference between the Teutonic
and the Greek epics lies, not so much in the fact that a
complex poem exhibits a being like Paris, sometimes in the
garb of the Panis, sometimes with all the attributes of Helios,
as in the greater compass of the northern poems, The Iliad
relates the ‘incidents only of a portion of a single year in the


' Ladlow, Popular Epics of the Middle Agea, i. 180.
= Bid, i. 187.


SIGURD AND SIEGFRIED.


Trojan war; the Nibelung lay adds two or three complete
histories to the already completed history of Siegfried. The
antiquity of these several portions of a poem, which by the con-
fession of ali has certainly been pieced together, is a question
into which we need not enter. It is possible, as Mr. Ludlow
thinks, that the portion which relates to Siegfried was added
at a later time to explain the intense hatred of Kriemhild for
her brothers, and that this may be the most modern addition
to the Nibelungenlied; but it is not less certain that the
myth of Siegfried is the myth of Baldur, and has existed in
many shapes in every Aryan land. The Volsung story may
represent the rougher songs of Norse sea-rovers, while the
Nibelung song may introduce us to the more stately life and
elaborate pageants of German kings and princes; but the
heroes have changed simply their conditions, not their mind
and temper, by crossing the sea or passing into another Jand.
The doom of perpetual pilgrimage is laid on Perseus, Theseus,
Bellerophén, Herakles, Odysseus; and Sigurd and Siegfried
are not more exempt from it.’ In their golden locks and
godlike countenances, in their flashing swords and unerring
spears, there is no difference between them; and every
additional point of likeness adds to the weight of proof that
these epic poems represent neither the history nor the na-
tional character of Northmen, Greeks, or Germans. In each
case the spirit of the tradition has been carefully preserved,
but there is no servile adherence. In the Volsung story,
Gudrun becomes the wife of Siegfried ; in the Nibelung song,
her mother Kriemhild takes her place. The Hogui of the


‘This doom is brought out with
singular clearness in the Guolie story,
where the Dame of the Fine Green
Kirtle lays tho Fair Gruaguch under
hor spell, that ho shall not rest by
night pr by day (Ixlén, Sisiphos).
+“ Where thou tnkest thy breakfast that
thou take not thy dinner, and whero
thou takest thy dinner that thou take
not thy supper, in whatsoever place
thou be, until thon findest out in what
place I may be under the four brown
quarters of the world.”

“So it was in the morning of the
mozrow's day he went away without dog,
without man, withoutealf, without child.


“He was going sn@ going and jour-
neying; there was blackening on his
soles, and holes in his shoes; the
black clouds of night coming, and the
dwight quiet clouds of the day going
away, and without his finding a place
of staying or rest for him.’ He is, in
short, the wandering Wuotan (Wegtam),
Buvitar, Odysseus, Bellerophoa, Phoi-
bos, Dionysos, Herakles, Perseus, Sigurd,
Indra, Oidipous, Theseus ; and it is un-
necessary to say that in the end he
‘becomes the husband *of the Dame of
the Fine Green Kirtle, who is none
other than Medeia with the magic robe
of Helios. (Campbell, ii. 435).


v2


292


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK former tale becomes in the latter the Hagen of Tronege,


—


against whom Siegfried is warned when he desires to marry
Kriemhild, the sister of Gunther, Gernot, and Giselher, and
who recognises Siegfried as the slayer of the Niblungs, the
conqueror of their magic sword, Balmung, and of all their
treasures, and the possessor of the tarnkappe, or cape of
darkness—all of them features with which the earlier legend
has made us familiar. The story of Thetis or Démétér
plunging Achilleus and Triptolemos into the bath of fire is
here represented by the myth that Siegfried cannot be
wounded, because he had bathed himself in the blood of a
dragon whom he had slain—the Fafnir or Python of the
Norse and Delphic legends.! At the first glance Kriemhild
is filled with love for Siegfried, but the latter cannot see her
until he has sojourned for a year in the country of King
Gunther—a condition which answers to that under which
Hades suffered Orpheus to lead away Eurydiké. Here, like
Sigard in the Volsung myth, Siegfried wins Brynhild for
Gunther or Gunnar; but though there is here not the same
complication, the narrative scarcely becomes on this account
the more human. Like Perseus with the helmet of Hades,
Siegfried can make himself invisible at will, and like Apollén
Delphinios, he pushes a ship through the sea—a myth in
which we recognise also the Wish breeze? Here also, as in
the Norse story, the ring and girdle of Brynhild come through
Siegfried into the possession of Kriemhild; and at this point
the myth assumes a form which reminds us of the relations of


1 Mr. Indlow here remarks: ‘The
incidents differ greatly. Sigurd drinks
the blood and learns mysteries; Sifrit
bathes in it and becomes invulnerable.”
‘The differences sre simply such as must
arise in myths developed independently
from s common source. Tho essential
part of it is the connection between the
dragon and the power derived from it:
and this connexion is manifest in the
anyths of Iamos, Medeis, and Phoibos.

3 The power of the Fieh Sun is
strikingly shown in the German etories
of the Gold Chilgren and of the Fisher-
man and his Wife. In the former a
‘poor man catches the Golden Fish which
makes him the possessor of the palace of
‘Helios, and bids the man divide him into


six pieces; two to bo given to his wife,
two to his mare, and two to be put into
theground. The necresary consequence
is that the woman has two golden
children who, mounting on the two
golden foals of the mure, represent the
Asvins and the Dioskourei, the pisces

t into the ground producing two golden
ilies on which the lives of the children
depend. In the tale of the Fisherman
and his Wife, tho fish accomplishes the
wishes of the woman, who chooses to
‘become first a Jady, then queen, then
pope; but when she wishes to become
‘the ruler of the universe, the flounder
sends her back to her old hovel,—an
incident reflecting the fall of Tantalos,
Sisyphos, and Ixfén.


ERIEMHILD AND BRYNHILD.


Herakles with Eurystheus. Like Héré in the Greek tale,


298


CHAP,


Brynhild holds that Siegfried ought to do service to Gunther, _


as Herakles did to his lord, and thus urges him to summon
Siegfried to Worms. The hero, who is found in the Niflung’s
castle on the Norwegian border, loads the messengers with
treasures, and Hagen cannot suppress the longing that ell
this wealth may yet come into the hands of the Burgundians.!
No sooner has Siegfried, with his father Sigmund and his
wife Kriemhild, reached Worms, than Brynhild hastens to
impress on Kriemhild that Siegfried is Gunther's man, and
that, like Theseus to Minos, he must pay tribute. In deep
anger Kriemhild resolves to insult her adversary, and when
they go to church, she presses on before Brynhild, who bids
her as a vassal stand back, and taunting her as having been
won by Siegfried, shows him her girdle and ring as the
evidence of her words. Gunther, urged by his wife, rebukes
Siegfried for betraying the secret, but his anger is soon
appeased. It is otherwise with Hogni, or Hagen, who here
plays the part of Paris, by whose spear Achilleus is to fall.
He sees his sister weeping, and, swearing to revenge her,
spreads false tidings of the approach of an enemy, and when
he knows that Siegfried is ready to set out against them, he
asks Kriemhild how he may best insure her husband’s safety.
Not knowing to whom she spake, she tells him that when
Siegfried bathed himself in the dragon’s blood a broad
linden leaf stuck between his shoulders, and there left him
vulnerable, this place between the shoulders answering to
the vulnerable heel of Achilleus. To make still more sure,
Hagen asks Kriemhild to mark the spot, and the wife of the
hero thus seals his doom. The narrative at this point be-
comes filled with all the tenderness and beauty of the Odyssey.
Kriemhild is awakened to her folly in betraying Siegfried’s
secret to Hagen. Still, in vain she prays him not to go. He
is the knight who knows no fear, and without fear he accom-
panies Hagen, doing marvellous things, until one day he

‘ These Burgundians in the later present state is put together out of two
Ea aatdining senate ares s


are, The fact evidently shows, in Mr. would be but one of two versions of
Tadlaw's oninion ‘th: f tha noam in ite tha lemand


294 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


aed aske Hagen why he has brought no wine to drink, when
Spt Hagen offers to show him the way to a good spring. Sieg-
fried hastens thither with him, and as he stoops to drink
Hagen shoots him through the back on the spot marked by
the silver cross. It is scarcely necessary to compare this with
the vast number of myths in which the death of the sun is
connected with water, whether of the ocean or the sea. In
the spirting out of Siegfried’s blood on Hagen, in the wonder-
fal stroke with which he almost smites his betrayer dead, in
the death wrestle which covers the flowers all around with
blood and gore, we have the chief features of the blood-stained
sunset which looms out in the legend of the death of Herakles.
The body of Siegfried, placed on a golden shield, is borne to
the chamber of Kriemhild, who feels, before she is told, that
it is the corpse of her murdered husband. ‘ This is Brynhild’s
cour sel,’ she said, ‘this is Hagen’s deed ;’ and she swears to
avenge his death by a vengeance as fearful as that of Achilleus,
As Siegfried had spoken, so should Hagen assuredly rue the
day of his death hereafter. She gives orders to awaken
Siegfried’s men and his father Sigmund; but Sigmund has
not slept, for, like Peleus, he has felt that he should see his
son again no more. Then follows the burial of Siegfried,
when Gunther swears that no harm has come to the hero
either from himself or from his men: but the lie is given to
his words when the wounds bleed as Hagen passes before the
dead body. When ail is over, Sigmund says that they must
return to their own land; but Kriemhild is at last persuaded
to remain at Worms, where she sojourns for more than three
years in bitter grief, seeing neither Gunther nor Hagen.
The latter now makes Gernot press Kriemhild to have her
hoard brought from the Niblung land, and thus at length
gaining possession of it, he sinks it all in the Rhine. In
other words, Adonis is dead, and the women are left mourning
and wailing for him; or the maiden is stolen away from
Démétér, and her wealth is carried to the house of Hades;
or again, as in the Norse tale, the dwarf Andvari is keeping
watch over the treasures of Brynhild: and thus ends the
first of the series of mythical histories embodied in the
Nihelnne Tay Whether thia nortion of the creat Ten-


HAGER.


tonic epic be, or be not, older than the parts which follow it,
it is indubitably an integral narrative in itself, and by no
means indispensable to the general plan of the poem, except
in so far as it accounts for the implacable hatred of Kriem-
hild for her brothers.

The second part of the drama begins with the death of
Helche, the wife of Etzel or Atli, who longs to marry
Kriemhild, and who is restrained only by the recollection
that he is a heathen while the widow of Siegfried is a Chris-
tian. This objection, however, is overruled by the whole
council, who, with the one exception of Hagen, decide that
Etzel shall marry Kriemhild. Hagen is opposed to it,
because Siegfried swore that he should rue the day on
which he touched him, and on account of the prophecy that
if ever Kriemheld took the place of Helche, she would bring
harm to the Burgundians, as Helen did to the fleet, the
armies, and the cities of Hellas. But as the forsaken Ariadné
was wedded to Dionysos, so the messengers of Etzel tell
Kriemhild that she shall be the lady of twelve rich crowns,
and rule the lands of thirty princes. Kriemhild refuses to
give an immediate answer; and the great struggle which
goes on within her answers to the grief and sickness of soul
which makes the mind of Helen oscillate between her affec-
tion for her husband Menelaos and the unhallowed fascina-
tions of the Trojan Paris. So is brought about the second
marriage of the bride of Siegfried, a marriage the sole in-
terest of which lies in the means which it affords to her of
avenging the death of Hagen’s victim. This vengeance is
now the one yearning of her heart, although outwardly she
may be the contented wife of Etzel, just as Odysseus longed
only to be once more at home with Penelopé even while he
was compelled to sojourn in the house of Kirké or the cave of
Kalyps6; and if the parallel between Etzel and Paris is not
close, yet it is closer than the likeness between the Etzel of
the Niblungs’ Lay and the Attila ofhistory. The poet declares
that her deadly wrath is roused by the reflectién that at
Hagen’s instigation she has given herself to a heathen; but
throughout it is clear that her heart and her thoughts are
far away in the grave of the golden-haired youth who had


295


The Ste
of Hageo.


296 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK wooed and won her in the beautiful spring-time, and that of
eed Etzel she took heed only so far as it might suit her purpose
to do so. Her object now is to get Hagen into her power,
and she sends messengers to Gunther bidding him bring all
his best friends, whom Hagen can guide, as from his childhood
he has known the way to the Huns’ land.' All are ready
to go except Hagen, and he is loth to put his foot into the
trap which he sees that Kriemhild is setting for him; but he
cannot bear the taunts of his brother Gunther, who tells him
that if he feels guilty on the score of Siegfried’s death he had
better stay at home. Still he advises that if they go they
should go in force. So Gunther sets out with three thousand
men, Hagen, and Dankwart, his brother, and other chiefs with
such as they can muster; and with them goes Volker, the
renowned musician, who can fight as well as he can play.?
Hagen necessarily discerns evil omens as they journey on.
The waters of the Danube are swollen, and as he searches
along the banks for a ferryman, he seizes the wondrous ap-
parel of two wise women who are bathing, one of whom pro-
mises that if he will give them their raiment, they will tell
how he may journey to the Huns’ Jand. Floating like
birds before him on the flood, they lure him with hopes
of the great honours which are in store for him, and thus
they recover their clothes—a myth which feebly reflects the
beautiful legends of the Swan maidens and their knights. No
sooner, however, are they again clothed, than the wise woman.
who has not yet spoken tells him that her sister has lied, and.
that from the Huns’ land not one shall return alive, except
the king’s chaplain. To test her words, Hagen, as they are


) Mr. Ludlow here remarks that ‘this of material which the poote of the
is one of the passnges which imply the Nibelung song, like those of the Miad
legend contained in “Walthar of and Odysery, found ready to their hand.
Aquitaine,” where Hugen is mmted The close agreement of tho framework
us a fellow hostage with Walthar at of the poem with that of the Volsunj
Eftzel’s court'—Popular Epics, i. 130. story and the legends of the Helgia, an
It msy be 20; yet the phrase resolvcs the identity of all these with the myth
itself into the simple atatement that of Baldur, has been alresdy shown, Tt
the Panis kiow their way to the land is, therefore, quite unnecesssry to give


whence they steal the cattle of Ind. un abstract of tho poem throughout,
I must confine te those task which los boon performed nlready

portions of the epic, which call for « by many writers, and, among them by

Gomperison with thor Ingends, and Mr. Ludlow, Popular Epic, i

which,


‘taken together, show the amount


THE GRIEF AND VENGEANCE OF KRIEMHILD.


crossing the river, throws the priest into the stream; but
although he tries to push him down under the water, yet the
chaplain, although unable to swim, is carried by Divine aid
to the shore, and the doomed Burgundians go onwards to
meet their fate. In the house of Rudiger they receive a genial
welcome; but when Rudiger’s daughter approaches at his
bidding to kiss Hagen, his countenance seemed to her so
fearful that she would gladly have foregone the duty. On
their departure Rudiger loads them with gifts. To Gernot
he gives a sword which afterwards deals the death-blow to
Rudiger himself, who resolves to accompany them; while
Hagen receives the magnificent shield of Nuodung, whom
Witege slew. The ominous note is again sounded when
Dietrich, who is sent to meet the Burgundians, tells Hagen
that Kriembild still weeps sore for the hero of the Niblung
land ; and Hagen can but say that her duty now is to Etzel,
as Siegfried is buried and comes again no more. It is the
story of the Odyssey. When Dietrich is asked how he knows
the mind of Kriemhild, ‘What shall I say?’ he answers;
‘every morning early 1 hear her, Etzel's wife, weep and wail
full sadly to the God of heaven for strong Siegfried’s body.’!
It is the sorrow of Penelopé, who mourns for the absence of
Odysseus during twenty weary years, though the suitors, like
Etzel, are by her side, or though, as other versions went, she
became a mother while the wise chief was far away fighting
at Tlion or wandering over the wine-faced sea.

At length Hagen and Kriemhild stand face to face: but
when the wife of Etzel asks what gifts he has brought,
Hagen answers that one so wealthy needs no gifts. The
question is then put plainly, ‘ Where is the Niblungs’ hoard ?
It was my own, as ye well know.’ Hagen answers that at
his master’s bidding it has been sunk in the Rhine, and
there it must remain till the day of judgment. But when
Kriemhild tells the Burgundians that they must give up
their arms before going into the hall, Hagen begs to be

1 Compare the Gaelic story of the the gold and silver obs as Peneloy
Rider of Grinnaig (Campbell, iii. 18), is delivered from her suitors
where the dawn-maidens mourn a whe! ‘wrought the bed in her Tidal


cause they have to mi the ioe
Hint ara ne ened by tha tmrn who mean


297


CHAP,
XII.
SS


The ren-
geance of


'» Kriem-


hild.


9!


2


98


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK excused. The honour is greater than he deserves, and he
en ae will himself be chamberman. Kriemhild sees that he has


been warned, and learns to her grief and rage that the
warning has come through Dietrich.’ But the time for
the avenging of Siegfried draws nigh. Etzel’s men see
Kriemhild weeping as through a window she looks down on
Hagen and Volker, and when they assure her that the man
who has called forth her tears shall pay for his offence with
his blood, she bids them avenge her of Hagen, so that he
may lose his life. Sixty men are ready to slay them, but
Kriemhild says that so small a troop can never suffice to
slay two heroes so powerful as Hagen and the still more
mighty Volker who sits by his side,—-words which at once
show that we have before us no beings of human race, and
that Hagen is akin to the Panis, while Volker is the
whispering breeze or the strong wind of the night, whose
harping, like that of Orpheus, few or none may withstand.
Kriemhild herself goes down to them: but Hagen will not
rise to greet her. On his knees she sees the gleaming sword
which he had taken from Sigfried, the good blade Gram,
which Odin left in the house of Volsung. The words
which burst from her bespeak the grief of a Penelopé who
nurses her sorrow in a harsher clime than that of Ithaka,
She usks Hagen how he could venture into the lion’s den,
and who had sent for him to the Huns’ country. To his
reply that he had come only by constraint of the masters
whose man he was, she rejoins by asking why he did the
deed for which she bears hate to him. He has slain her be-
loved Siegfried, for whom if she weeps all her life long she
could never weep enough. It is useless to deny the deed,
and Hagen does not care to disown it. He tells the queen
that he is in truth the man who slew Siegfried and has
done to her great wrong; and the preparations for the last
struggle go on with more speed and certainty. It is im-
possible not to think of the suitors in the house of Odysseus,
although the bearing of Hagen and his men is altogether


1 It is at this point that the paseige in our prosont inquiry than as showing
is inserted which connects the Nilo- the composite character of the great
lungenlied with the story of Waltbnr Teutonic epie-—Ludlow, Popular Epics,
of Aquitaine. Itisof nofurther intorest i. 146.


THE HALL OF SLAUGHTER.


more dignified. The very weakening of the myth, which
was too strong to allow the Homeric poet ao to paint them,
has enabled the Teutonic bard to ascribe to the slayers of
Siegfried a character of real heroism. But here, as in the
Odyssey, the scene of vengeance is the great hall; and we
have to ask where the roof has ever been raised under
which thousands have fought until scarcely one has been
left to tell the tale of slaughter. In this hall the Burgun-
dians are left to sleep on beds and couches covered with silks,
ermine, and sable. But they are full of misgivings, and
Hagen undertakes with Volker to keep watch before the
door. Volker, the Phemios of the Odyssey, does more. With
the soft and lulling tones of the harp of Hermes or of Pan,
he lulls to sleep the sorrows of the men who are soon to die.
Through all the house the sweet sounds find their way, until
all the warriors are asleep; aud then Volker takes his
shield and goes out to guard his comrades against any
sudden onslaught of the Huns. The tragedy begins on the
morrow with the accidental slaying of a Hun by Volker at
the jousts which follow the morning mass; and the fight
grows hot when Dankwart smites off the head of Blédel,
whom Kriemhild had sent to slay him because he was
Hagen’s brother. But Hagen survives to do the queen more
mischief. Her son Ortlieb is being carried from table to
table in the banqueting hal], and Hagen strikes off the boy’s
head which leaps into Kriemhild’s lap. The hall runs with
blood. Seven thousand bodies are flung down the steps;
but Hagen is still unconquered, and Irinc who had charged
himself with the office of Blédel, and succeeded in wounding
him in the face, falls in his turn a victim to his zeal. A
fresh thousand are poured in to avenge his death: the
Burgundians slay them all, and then sit down to keep
watch with the dead bodies as their seats. The tale goes
on with increasing defiance of likelihood and possibility.
Kriemhild and Etzel gather before the hall twenty-thousand
men; but still the Burgundians maintain the strife deep
into the night. When at length they ask for a truce, and
Giselher tells his sister that he has never done her harm,
her ancwar is that he ig the hrother of Siecfried’s mnrderr


299


CHAP.
XIL.
—


300


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK and therefore he and all must die unless they will yield up
ee Hagen into her hands. This they refuse, and Kriewhild


sets fire to the hall, an incident which occurs in other sages,
as those of Njal and Grettir. Drink there is none, unless
it be human blood, which is gushing forth in rivers; but with
this they slake their thirst and nerve their arms, while the
burning rafters fall crashing around them, until the fire is
extinguished in the horrid streams which gush from human,
bodies. Thousands have been slain within this fated hall;
six, hundred yet remain; the Huns attack them two to one.
The fight is desperate. Rudiger, compelled to take part in
it sorely against his will, is slain with his own sword by
Gernot; and at length Volker the minstrel is killed by
Hildebrand, who strives in vain to wound Hagen, for he is
the master of Balmung, Siegfried’s sword, the Gram of the
Volsung story. Dietrich is at length more successful, and
the slayer of Siegfried is at last brought bound into the
presence of the woman who lives only to avenge him, With
him comes Gunther, the last of the Burgundian chiefs who is
left alive. Once more, in this last dread hour, the story
reverts to the ancient myth. Kriemhild places them apart,
and then coming to Hagen, tells him that even now he may
go free if he will yield up the treasure which he stole from
Siegfried. Hagen’s answer is that he cannot say where
the hoard is as long as any of his masters remain alive.
Kriemhild now takes to him the head of Gunther, the last
of his liege lords, and Hagen prepares to die triumphantly.
She has slain the last man who knew the secret besides
himeelf, and from Hagen she shall never learn it. Frantic
in her sorrow, Kriemhild cries that she will at least have
the sword which her sweet love bore when the murderer
smote him treacherously. She grasps it in her hand, she
draws the blade from its sheath, she whirls it in the air, and
the victory of Achilleus is accomplished. Hagen is slain
like Hektor. Her heart’s desire is attained. What matters
it, if death is to follow her act of dread revenge, as Thetis
told the chieftain of Phthia that his death must follow
800n when he has slain Hektor? The night is not far off
when the sun appears like a conqueror near the horizon


THE FACTS OF THE NIBELUNG STORY.


after hia long battle with the clouds. The sight of the
dead Hagen rouses the grief of Etzel and the fury of Hilde-
brand who smites Kriemhild and hews her in pieces.

If we put aside the two or three names which may belong
to persons of whose existence we have other evidence, the
idea that this story of ferocious and impossible vengeance
represents in any degree the history of the age of Attila
becomes one of the wildest of dreams. Etzel himself is no
more like the real Attila that the Alexandros of the Iliad is
like the great son of the Macedonian Philip. The tale is,
throughout, the story told, in every Aryan land, of the death
of the short-lived sun, or the stealing of the dawn and her
treasures, and of the vengeance which is taken for these
deeds. Itis but one of the many narratives of the great drama
enacted before our eyes every year and every day, one of the
many versions of the discomfiture of the thieves who seek to
deceive the beautiful Saramé. But if this great epic poem
contains no history, it is remarkable as showing the extent
to which the myth has been modified by the influence of
Christianity and the growth of an historical sense in the
treatment of national traditions. There is a certain awk-
wardness in the part played by Etzel, a part ludicrously
unlike the action of the historical Attila; and the pitiable
weakness or inconsistency which leads him throughout to
favour the schemes of his wife, and then, when Hagen is
slain, to mourn for him us the bravest and best of heroes,
serves only to bring out more prominently the fact that it is
Kriemhild who fights single-handed against all her enemies,
and that she is in truth a Penelopé who trusts only to her-
self to deal with the ruffians who have dashed the cup of
joy from her lips and stolen away her beautiful treasures.
But the religious belief of the poets would not allow them to
make use of any other method for bringing about the terri-
dle issue, The bards who recounted the myths of the three
Helgis would have brought back Siegfried from the grave,
and added another to the heroes who represent the slain and
risen gods, Baldur, Dionysos, and Adonis or Osiris. In
no other way could Siegfried have been brought back to the
aid of hia wife, unleas like Odysseus he had been represented


301


CHAP.
XH,
—


Historical
element in
the Nibe-
Tungen
Lied,


802


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


not as slain, but as fulfilling the doom which compelled him


fee ae to fight or to wander far away from his home for twenty


The Stoi
of Wale s
thar of
Aquitaine.


years, The closeness with which the bards of the Niblung
legend followed the Saga of Sigurd rendered this alternative
impossible, and it remained only to leave Kriemhild to ac-
complish that which no one else had the strength or the will
to achieve on her behalf. But the myth had been further
weakened in other directions. The slayer of Sigurd in the
Voleung tale and his kindred alike belong with sufficient
clearness to the dark powers who steal the cattle of Indra
or Herakles, and thus they attract to themselves but little
sympathy and no love: but the Christian feeling which
could brand Hagen as a murderer refused to make his
brothers or his kinsfolk or his liege lords partakers of his
guilt, and thus the cowards of the first part of the story
become the dauntless heroes of the second.’ But when Mr.
Luclow goes on to remark that ‘Kriembild’s preferring to
reside in the neighbourhood of her husband’s murderers
remains perfectly unaccountable,’ we can but say that the
difficulty is confined to the hypothesis which would regard
the story as a picture of human character and human.
society. Kriemhild was under the same necessity which
kept Penelopé in Ithaka, and the length of time during
which the vengeance was delayed is due to the same cause.
The sword which slays the darkness cannot fall until the
ten long hours of the night have come to an end. Hence
the many years during which Kriemhild makes ready for
the last dread act, and the many years which go before the
fall of Ilion. Nor can we well say that the prominence
given to Kriemhild’s love for Siegfried as the motive for
vengeance over and above the desire to recover the hoard is
‘the refinement of a later age.’? The Odyssey ahows precisely
the same connection between the desire to avenge Penelopé
and the wish to save the substance wasted by the suitors ;
and we have more than faint signs of the same mingled
feeling in the Saga of the Voleungs.

The &tory of Walthar of Aquitaine, a version of the
same myth given by a monk of the eighth or ninth century,

* Ludlow, Popular Epica, i. 172. + Bid. i. 176.


WALTHAR OF AQUITAINE.


is noteworthy chiefly as making the hero bear away both
the bride and her hoard, and giving him a tranquil and a
happy close to hia troubled and stormy life. Here also we
have the names of Gibicho, Guntber, Etzel: but the Sigurd
of this version is Walthar, while the part of Brynhild is
played by Hildegund, who declares her readiness to obey her
lover’s bidding, when he charges her, as the guardian of the
treasure, to take out for him a helmet, a coat of mail, and a
breastplate, and to fill two chests with Hunnish rings or
money. Thus we have the same magic armour and weapous
which we find in all such legends, while the war horse, ap-
pearing here under the name Lion, bears away the hero and
his love. The king pursues with Hagen, who is by no
means 80 doughty as in the Niblung Song, and who is not
reassured when he finds Walthar performing a series of
exploits which reproduce those of Herakles, Perseus, and
Theseus. In the end he decides that he can have a chance
of grappling successfully with Walthar only if he pretends
to withdraw. His plan succeeds, and he is enabled to come
up with Walthar as he is journeying on with Hildegund.
In the fight which follows, Walthar smites off a portion of
Hagen’s armour, and brings Gunther to his knees with a
stroke of his sword; but just as he is about to deal him the
death-blow, Hagen interposes his helmeted head and the
blade is shivered in pieces. Walthar in his impatience and
anger throws away the hilt, and Hagen avails himself of the
time to smite off Walthar’s right hand, the right hand so
fearful to princes and people. Here again it is the cap of
darkness which is fatal to the gleaming sword, while the loss
of Walthar’s right hand carries us to the myth of Indra
Savitar. The closing scene curiously reflects the death of
Sigurd. With failing breath, Walthar deals a blow which
strikes out Hagen’s right eye; but whereas in the genuine
myth Walthar’s death ought here to follow, to be avenged
afterwards by that of Hagen, here the two heroes, thus
sorely bested, make up their quarrel, and Walther bids
Hildegund bring wine and offer the cup to Hagen, who
will not drink first, because Walthar is the better man. In
short, the story ends with an interchange of courtesies,


303


CHAP.
XI.
—


304


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


which haye an air of burlesque not unlike that which Euri-
pides has thrown over the Herakles of his Alkéstis, and the
bridal of Hildegund hes all the joy and brightness which
mark the reunion of Penelopé with Odyaseus.!


* The Inter lay of Gudrun, of which
Mr. Ludlow has given a summary,
(Popular Epice, i. 198, &e.) hus muny
of the features of the Nibelungen Lie!
and the story of Walthar of Aquitei
Te is seareely necessary to note the end-
less modifications of myths, with which
the poets of successive ages allowed
themselves to deal as frecly as they
pleuseg; but'we ure fully justified in
yeferring to the old myth incidents
whieh ure found in a hundred mythical
traditions, Lut which never happen in
the life of man. Thus, ia the Lay of
Gudrun, the child who is carried away
tu the griffin's or eagle's nest, whither
three daughters of “kin havo been
taken before, must re us of the
story of Surya Bui, although the child
thn ti ken is Hagen, who grows spe
mighty that he becomes eclebrated as
the Wayland of all King u title whieh
sufficiently shows his realnatare. ‘Thus,
although he is invested with all the
splendour of the Trojan Paris, Hagen
slays all the messengers sent by prince
to sue fur the Land of his wutiful
daughter, nor can any suecocd until
Hettel comes—tho mighty king at
Hegelingen ; n tale which merely repeats
the story of Brynhild, Dornrusehen, and
all the onchanied maidens whom many
suitors court to thoir own death, The
wonderful ship which Hettol builds to
fetch Hilda, capable of holding three
thousand warriors, with its golden
rudder and anchor of silver, is the
counterpart of the Argo, which goes to
bring buck the wise und fair Medeia,
The good knight Horant, at whose
singing ‘the beasts in the wood let their
food stand, and the worms that should
go in the grass, the fish that should
swim in the wave, leave their purpose,’
is the fiddler of the Nibclung the
Orpheus of the Hellenic legend. Of
this feature in the story Mr, Ludlow
says, ‘The quaintly poetical incident of
Horant’s singing is perhaps the gem of
the earlier portion,’ 2 phrase to which
objection cay be taken only af it seems
to look upon the incident as an original
conception of the poets of the Gudrun
Lay. From Mr. Ludlow’s words no one
‘would necessarily gather that the myth


is simply that of Orpheus und nothing
more, while the old tradition is further
marked Ly the words put into the mouth
of Hilda, that she would willingly
Icom king Hettel's wife, if Horant
could eing to her every day at mor and
even, like the Lrecze of the dawn and
the twilight in the myth of Hermes.
Here also we bare tho ‘magic girdle of
Brynhild, Harmonia, and Eriphyle, the
Ceatus of Freya and Aphrodité; while
in the stealing of Hilda, who is no un-
willing captive, and the fury of Hagen,
as he sces the ship carry her away


beyond the reach of pursuit, wo have
precisely the fory of Aiétés and bis
vain chaso after the which is
bearing away Medoin, Here ends the


first part of the tale ; Imt it starts afresh
and runs into greater cunpllestions
after the birth of Ortwoin aud Gudrun,
the son and daughtor of Hettel and
Hilda. Like her mother, Gudran is
‘carried away by Hartmut and his father,
und a great struggle is the consequence.
‘Tho Lay of King Kother (Ludlow, ibid
i. 317), is in great Be mado up of the
same muterials. Hero also we have
the beautiful maiden whose suitors woo
her to their own destruction —the
wonderful ship which Rother luilda to
Dring away the daughter of King Con-
stantine of Constantinople ; the sending
of the messengers to the dungeon, where
they remain until Rother comes to
deliver them, But Rother, who wishes
while on hia expedition to be called
Thiderich or Dietrich, is the splendid
Prince of the Cinderella story, and he
obtains his wife Ly meaus of a gold and
silver shoe which he alone is able to fit
on her foot. But the princess is stolen
away again from the homo of king
Rother, and brought back to Constanti-
nople ; and thus wo have a repetition of
the old story in another dress, It is
unnecessary to say thet although we
hear much of Constantinople and
Babylon, not e grain of genuine history
is to be gleaned amidst this confused
tangle of popular traditions and fancies.

‘The form in which these myths ars
exhibited in the Danish balluds, agrees
wo closely with the general character of
the Voleung and Nibelung legends, that


DIETRICH OF BERN.


305


As we approach the later legends or romances, we find, aa OBAP.


we might expect, a strange ontgrowth of fancies often utterly as


incongruous, and phrases which show that the meaning of
the old myths was fast fading from men’s minds. Still we
cannot fail to see that the stories, while they cannot by any
process be reduced into harmony with the real history of any
age, are built up with the materials which the bards of the
Volsungs and the Nibelungs found ready to their hand. Thus
in the story of Dietrich and Ecke, the latter, who plays a part
something like that of Hagen or Paris, is exhibited in more
lustrous colours than the Trojan Alexandros in the Tliad,
although his nature and his doom are those of the Vedic
Panis. Three knights, discoursing at Kéln of brave war-
riors, give the palm to Dietrich of Bern, and Ecke who hears
his praise swears that he must search through all lands till
he finds him, and that Dietrich must slay him or lose all his
praise. The incidents which follow are a strange travesty of
the Volsung myth. Three queens hear the three knights talk-
ing, and the beautiful Seburk is immediately smitten with a
love as vehement and lasting as that of Kriemhild in the Ni-
belung Song. Her one longing is to see Dietrich of Bern
and to have him as her husband; but the means which she
adopts to gain this end is to send Ecke in search of him,
armed with a breastplate, which answers to the coat of mail
wrought for Achilleus by Hephaistos. This breastplate had
belonged to the Lombard king Otnit, to whom it had been a
fatal possession, for as he slept before a stone wall (the wall
of glass in the Hindu fairy tale) a worm found him and
carried him into the hollow mountain—the tower in which
Dietrich is confined, in the story of the giant Sigenot. This
breastplate was recovered by Wcelfdietrich of Greece, in
whom it is hard not to see a reflection of the Lykeian god of
Delos, the Lupercus of Latin mythology; and it is now
given by Seburk to Ecke on the condition that if he finds
Dietrich he will let him live. It is the Dawn pleading for
the life of the Sun. ‘Could I but see the hero, ‘no greater
boon could be bestowed upon me. His high name kills me.
i.e eanenmry het pak of howe See Me Tao's Peer Bi
VOL. L. x


Bern.


306


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK I know not what he hath done to me, that my heart so longs
a ao after him.’ It is the language of Seléné and Echo as they


look upon Endymién and Narkissos ; and all that is said of
Dietrich recalls the picture of the youthful Herakles as given
in the apologue of Prodikos. He is the father of the afflicted ;
what he wins he shares; all that is good he loves. Where-
ever he goes, Ecke hears the people recount the exploits and
dwell on the beauty and the goodness of Dietrich. Under a
linden tree he finds a wounded man, and looking at his
wounds, he cries out that he had never seen any so deep, and
that nothing remained whole to him under helmet or shield.
© No sword can have done this; it must be the wild thunder-
stroke from heaven.’ Ecke is soon to see the hero who smote
down the wounded man; but no sooner is he confronted with
the valiant knight, than he forgets the part which he ought
to play if he means to appear as a messenger of Seburk and
to do her bidding. He now speaks in his own character, as
the Pani who bears an irrepressible hate for his adversary,
while Dietrich is as passive in the matter as Achilleus when
he declared that the Trojans had never done him any mis-
chief. ‘I will not strive with thee,’ he says, ‘thou hast done
me no harm ; give my service to thy lady, and tell her I will
always be her knight.’ But Ecke is bent only upon fighting,
and while he refuses to be the bearer of any message, he calls
Dietrich a coward and dares him to the contest. Nor can we
avoid noting that although Dietrich prays him to wait till
the sun shines if fight they must, Ecke by his intolerable
scoffs brings on the battle while it is yet night, and the strife
between the powers of light and darkness is carried on
amidst a storm of thunder and lightning until the day
breaks, Ecke then thinks that he has won the victory; but
just as he is boasting of his success, Dietrich is filled with
new strength, and when Ecke refuses to yield up his sword,
he runs him through. But he himself is sorely wounded,
and as he wanders on he finds a fair maiden sleeping by a
spring, as Daphné, Arethousa, Melusina, and the nymphs are
all found near the running waters. The being whom Die-
trich finds is gifted with the powers which Oinoné cannot or
will not exercise for the benefit of Paris. She heals him with


THE GREAT ROSE GARDEN.


a wonderful salve, and tells him that she is a wise woman,
like Brynhild and Medeia, knowing the evil and the good,
and dwelling in a fair land beyond the sea. But the story
has been awkwardly put together, and of the fair Seburk we
hear no more. This, however, is but further evidence of the
mythical character of the materials with which the poeta of
the early and middle ages for the most part had to deal.

The poem of the Great Rose Garden is a still more clumsy
travesty of the myth of the Phaiakian or Hyperborean
gardens. The birds are there, singing so sweetly that no
mournful heart could refuse to be solaced by them; but the
cold touch of the north is on the poet, and his seat under
the linden tree is covered with furs and samite, while the
wind which whispers through the branches comes from
bellows black as a coal. In this garden is waged the same
furious fight which fills Etzel’s slaughter hall with blood in
the Nibelung Lay: but the battle assumes here a form so
horrible and so wantonly disgusting that we need only mark
the more modern vein of satire which has used the myth for
the purpose of pointing a jest against the monastic orders.
The monk Ilsan, who, putting aside his friar’s cloak, stands
forth clad in impenetrable armour and wielding an unerring
sword, is Odysseus standing in beggar’s garb among the
suitors; but the spirit of the ancient legend is gone, and
Ilsan appears on the whole in a character not much more
dignified than that of Friar Tuck in Ivanhoe.

The same wonderful armour is seen again in the beautiful
romance of Roland. How thoronghly devoid this romance is
of any materials of which the historian may make use, has
perhups already been shown; that many incidents in the
legend may have been suggested by actual facts in the life-
time of Charles the Great, is an admission which may be
readily made. When Charles the Great is made to complain
on the death of Roland that now the Saxons, Bulgarians,
and many other nations, as those of Palermo and Africa, will
rebel against him, it is possible that the story may point te
some redoubtable leader whose loss left the empire vulnerable
in many quarters: but we do not learn this fact, if it be a
fact, from the romance, and the impenetrable disguise

x2


307


CHAP.
XI.


‘The Great
Rose Gar-
den.


The ro-
mance of


Toland,


308


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


which popular fancy has thrown over every incident makes


oobi the idea of verifying any of them an absurdity. What-


The ro-
mance of
Arthur.


ever may have been the cause of the war, Roland plays in
it the part of Achilleus. The quarrel was none of his
making, but he is ready to fight in his sovereign’s cause ;
and the sword Durandal which he wields is manifestly the
sword of Chrysiér. When his strength is failing, a Saracen
tries to wrest the blade from his hand, but with his ivory
horn Roland strikes the infidel dead. The horn is split with
the ‘stroke, and all the crystal and gold fall from it. The
night is at hand, but Roland raises himself on his feet, and
strikes the recovered sword against a rock. ‘Ha! Durandal,’
he cries, ‘ how bright thou art and white! how thou shinest
and flamest against the sun! Charles was in the vale of
Mauricane when God from heaven commanded him by his
ang | that he should give thee to a captain; wherefore the
gentle king, the great, did gird thee on me.’! This is the
pedigree of no earthly weapon, and to the list of conquests
wrought by it in the hands of Roland we may add the
exploits of the good brands Excalibur, and Gram, and Bal-
mung, and in short, the swords of all the Hellenic and
Teutonic heroes. We are thus prepared for the issue when
Alda (Hilda), to whom he has been betrothed, falls dead
when she hears that Roland is slain. Fleopatra and Bryn-
hild cannot survive Meleagros and Sigurd.*

As useless for all historical purposes, and as valuable to
the comparative mythologist, is the magnificent romance of
King Arthur. Probably in no other series of legends is
there a more manifest recurrence of the same myth under
different forms. The structure of the tale is simple enough.
Arthur himself is simply a reproduction of Sigurd or Per-
seus. Round him are other brave knights, and these, not
less than himself, must have their adventures; and thus
Arthur and Balin answer respectively to Achilleus and
Odysseus in the Achaian hosts. A new element is brought
‘nto the stpry with the Round Table, which forms part of the

4 The address of Roland to hissword _* This ir the of Lord Nenn and


‘more magniloquently given in the the Korrigen, Kei ”
“cltcaae & Nap given inthe the Korrigea, they, Fairy Mytho-


THE ROMANCE OF ARTHUR.


dowry of Guinevere; and the institution of the Knights
furnishes the starting-point for a series of exploits on the
part of each knight, which are little more than a clog to the
narrative, and may easily be detached from the main thread
of it, They answer in fact to those books in our Jliad which
relate the fortunes of the Achaian chieftains during the
inaction of Achilleus. A third series of narratives, rising
gradually to a strain of surpassing beauty and grandeur,
begins with the manifestation of the Round Table in the form
of the holy Grail; and the legend of the quest for the sacred
vessel, while it is really an independent story, is in its essen-
tial features a mere repetition of some which have preceded
it. In short, the original meaning of these myths bad been
completely forgotten by the medieval romaneers; but, like
the Homeric poets, they have felt the irresistible spell, and
have adhered to the traditional types with marvellous
fidelity.

Stripped thus of its adventitious matter, the poem assumes
a form common to the traditions and folk-lore of all the
Teutonic or even all the Aryan nations. Not only is the
wonderful sword of Roland seen again in the first blade
granted to King Arthur, but the story of the mode in which
Arthur becomes master of it is precisely the story of the
Teutonic Sigurd and the Greek Theseus. We might almost
say with truth that there is not a single incident with which
we are not familiar in the earlier legends. The fortunes of
Igraine, Arthur’s mother, are precisely those of Alkméné,
Uther playing the part of Zeus, while Gorlois takes the place
of Amphitryon,.! As soon as he is born, Arthur is wrapped in
a cloth of gold, the same glittering raiment which in the
Homeric hymn the nymphs wrap round the new-born Phoi-
bos, and like the infant Cyrus, who is arrayed in the same
splendid garb, is placed in the hands of a poor man whom the
persons charged with him, like Harpagos, meet at the postern-
gate of the castle. In his house the child grows like Cyrus


4 The scenein which Sigurd personates romance. This power oftransformation
Gunnar in order to win Brynhild forthe is s special attribute of the gode of the
latter ie but slightly different from the heaven and the light, and aa such is
story of Uther as told by Jeffrey of exercised by Phoibos the fish god, and
Monmouth or in the more detailed Dionysos the lion aud bear.


309


CHAP.


The birth
and youth
of Arthur,


310


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK | and Romulus and others, a mode) of human beauty, and like
aden them he cannot long abide in his lowly station. Some one


must be chosen king, and the trial is to be that which Odin
appointed for the recovery of the sword Gram, which he had
thrust up to the hilt in the great rooftree of Volsung’s hall.
‘There was seen in the churchyard, at the east end by the
high altar, a great stone formed square, and in the midst
thereof was like an anvil of steel a foot high, and therein
stuck a fair sword naked by the point, and letters of gold were
written about the sword that said thus, ‘“ Whoso pulleth out
thig sword out of this stone and anvil is rightwise born king
of England.” ’ The incident by which Arthur’s title is made
known answers to the similar attempts made in Teutonic
folk-lore to cheat Boots, the younger son, of his lawful
inheritance. Sir Kay, leaving his sword at home, sends
Arthur for it, and Arthur not being able to find it, draws
the weapon imbedded in the stone as easily as Theseus per-
formed the same exploit. Sir Kay, receiving it, forthwith
claims the kingdom. Sir Ector, much doubting his tale,
drives him to confess that it was Arthur who gave him the
sword, and then bids Arthur replace it in the solid block.
None now can draw it forth but Arthur, to whose touch it
yields without force or pressure. Sir Ector then kneela to
Arthur, who, supposing him to be his futher, shrinks from
the honour; but Ector, like the shepherds in the myths of
Oidipous, Romulus, or Cyrus, replies, ‘I was never your
father nor of your blood, but I wote well ye are of an higher
blood than I weened ye were.’ But although like the play-
mates of Cyrus, the knights scorn to be governed by a boy
whom they hold to be baseborn, yet they are compelled to
yield to the ordeal of the stone, and Arthur, being made
king, forgives them all, The sword thus gained is in Arthur’s
first war so bright in his enemies’ eyes that it gives light like
thirty torches, as the glorious radiance flashes up to heaven
when Achilleus dons his armour. But this weapon is not to
be the blade with which Arthur is to perform his greatest
exploits, Like the sword of Odin in the Volsung story, it is
snapped in twain in the conflict with Pellinore ; but it is of
course brought back to him in the form of Excalibur, by a


THE ROUND TABLE.


maiden who answers to Thetis or to Hjordis.! Arthur, riding
with Merlin along a lake, becomes ‘ware of an arm clothed in
white samite that held a fair sword in the hand.’ This is the
fatal weapon, whose scabbard answers precisely to the panoply
of Achilleus, for while he wears it Arthur cannot shed blood,
even though he be wounded. Like all the other sons of
Helios, Arthur has his enemies, and King Rience demands
as w sign of homage the beard of Arthur, which gleams with
the splendour of the golden Jocks or rays of Phoibos Akerse-
komes. The demand is refused, but in the medieval romance
there is room for others who reflect the glory of Arthur, while
his own splendour is for the time obscured. At Camelot
they see a maiden with a sword attached to her body, which
Arthur himself cannot draw. In the knight Balin, who
draws it, and who ‘because he was poorly arrayed put him
not far in the press,’ we see not merely the humble Arthur
who gives his sword to Sir Kay, but Odysseus, who in his
beggar’s dress shrinks from the brilliant throng which crowds
his ancestral hall.*

On the significance of the Round Table we must speak
elsewhere. It is enough for the present to note that it
comes to Arthur with the bride whose dowry is to be to him
as fatal as the treasures of the Argive Helen to Menelaos, In
the warning of Merlin that Guinevere ‘is not wholesome for
him’ we see that earlier conception of Helen in which the Attic
tragedians differ so pointedly from the poets of the Iliad and
the Odyssey. As Helen is to be the ruin of cities, of men,
and of ships, so is Guinevere to bring misery on herself and
on all around her. Dangers thicken round Arthur, and he
is assailed by enemies as dangerous as Kirké and Kalypso to
Odysseus. The Fay Morgan seeks to steal Excalibur, and
succeeds in getting the scabbard, which she throws into a
lake, and Arthur now may both bleed and die® At the


1 «The Manks hero, Olave of Norway,
hd a sword with a Celtic name, Maca-
bbuin’—Campbell, Talee of the West
Highlands, i. txxii, It reappears as the
sword Tirfing in the fairy tale. Keight-
ley, Fairy Mythology, 73.

* The invisible knight who st this
stage of the narrative smmites Sir Herlous


weare the helmet of Hudes, and his
action is that of the Erinys who
wanders in the air.

* Morgan has the power of truns-
formation possessed “by all the fish
and water-gods, Proteus, Onnes, Thetis,
&e.


$11


CHAP.
XII.
panier


The Round
Table aad
tho San
Greal,


12


moe
—~


Arthur's
Knights.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


hands of another maiden he narrowly escapes the doom
which Medeia and Déianeira brought upon Glauké and on
Herakles. The Lady of the Lake warns him not to put on
this vesture until he has first seen the bringer wear it.
This accordingly he makes the maiden do, ‘and forthwith
she fell down, and was brent to coals.’?

The story now ceases practically to be the romance of
Arthur, until it once more exhibits him in all the majesty of
Christian long-suffering and holiness; but, as we might
expect, those portions of the romance which less immediately
relate to Arthur are founded on old Teutonic or Hellenic
myths, In the three sisters which meet Sir Marhaus, Sir
Gawain, and Sir Ewain by the fountain, we can scarcely fail
to recognise the three weird sisters, whose office, as belong-
ing to the past, the present, and the future, seems to be
betokened by their age and the garb which distinguish them
from each other. The eldest has a garland of gold about
her j:air, which is white with the sorrows of threescore
winters; the second, thirty years of age, with more brilliant
ornaments, marks the middle stage in which the main action
of life lies; while in the younger sister of fifteen summers,
crowned with luxuriant flowers, we have the Norn whose
business is only with the time to come.’ In the good
knight Tristram we have another of those fatal children
whose mother's eyes may not be long gladdened with the
sight of their babes. Like Asklepios and Dionysos, like
Macduff and Sigurd, Tristram is the son of sorrow; nor
did he fail to justify the popular conviction that all such
children are born to do great things.? In the madness which
comes upon Lancelot when Guinevere rebukes him for the love
of Elaine we see the frenzy of Herakles and other heroes, a
frenzy which is naturally healed by the San Greal.‘ In the
story of the Perilous Seat we have simply another form of a
myth already twice given in this romance. ‘Then the king
went forth and all the knights unto the river, and there they
found a stone floating, as if it had been of red marble, and
therein stuck a fair and a rich sword, and in the pommel

) La Morte d drthure, ed. Coneybeare, * Seo p. 278,


‘book iti. ch, v. * Coneybeare, La Morte d Arthure,
+ Jb, book iv. ch. iii, book x.


THE HOLY GRAIL,


318


thereof were precious stonea wrought with subtle letters of CHAP,
gold, which said, “Never shall man take me hence but he by —~—_


whom I ought to hang; and he shall be the best knight of
the world ” ’—bravery and goodness being thus made the prize
instead of an earthly kingdom as in the case of Arthur. The
king tells Lancelot that this sword ought to be his, but it is
the prize which, like the princess for whom the unsuccessful
suitors venture their bodies, brings ruin on those who fail to
seize it. The hero who is to take it is revealed, when an old
man coming in lifts up the cover that ia on the Siege Peri-
lous, and discloses the words, ‘ This is the siege of Sir Galahad
the good knight.’ The story of this peerless hero is intro-
duced with an incident which is manifestly suggested by the
narrative of Pentecost. As the Knights of the Round Table
sat at supper in Camelot, ‘they heard cracking and crying
of thunder, that they thought the place should all-to rive.
And in the midst of the blast entered a sunbeam more clear
by seven times than ever they saw day, and all they were
alighted by the grace of the Holy Ghost. Then began every
knight to behold other; and each saw other by their seeming
fairer than ever they saw afore. Then there entered into
the hall the holy Grail covered with white samite, and there
was none that might see it nor who bear it. And then was
all the hall full filled with great odours, and every knight
had such meat and drink as he best loved in the world.’
The wonderful vessel is suddenly borne away, and the
knights depart on a search which answers precisely to the
quest of the Golden Fleece or the treasures of Helen the
fair, The myth of the sword, already thrice given, is pre-
sented to us once more on board the ship Faith, on which
there was ‘a fair bed, and at the foot was a sword, fair
and rich; and it was drawn out of the scabbard half a foot
or more.’ ‘Wot ye well,’ says 2 maiden to Sir Galahad,
‘that the drawing of this sword is warned unto all men
save unto you.’ This ship is the same vessel which carries
Helios round the stream of Ocean during the hours of dark-
ness. In other words, it becomes the ship of the dead,
the bark which carries the souls to the land of light which
lies beyond the grave. This ship carries to the Spiritual


314


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARY4N NATIONS.


Place the body of Sir Percival’s sister, who dies to save


—_. the lady of the castle by giving her a dish full of her owr


Lancelot.
and Gui-
nevere,


blood—a myth which reflects the story of Iphigeneia whe
dies that Helen, the lady of the castle of Menelacs, may
be rescued, and of Polyxena, whose blood is shed that
Achilleus may repose in the unseen land. From the quest
of the Grail: Lancelot comes back ennobled and exalted.
Arthur longs for the return of the good knight Galahad,
of Percival, and Bors; but the fuce of the purest of all
men he may never see again. When at length the eyes
of Galahad rest on the mystic vessel, he utters the Nune
Dimittis, and Joseph of Arimathwa says to him, ‘Thou hast
resembled me in two things; one is, that thou hast seen the
San Greal, and the other is that thou art a clean maiden as I
am.’ Then follows the farewell of Galahad to his comrades,
as he charges Sir Bors to salute his father Sir Lancelot and
bit him remember this unstable world. ‘ And therewith he
kneeled down before the table and made his prayers, and
then suddenly his soul departed unto Jesus Christ. And a
great multitude of angels bare his soul up to heaven that his
two fellows might, behold it; also they saw come down from
heaven a hand, but they saw not the body, and then it came
right to the vessel and took it and the spear,’ and so bare it
up into heaven, Sithence was there never a man so hardy as
to say that he had seen the San Greal.’

The sequel which tells the story of the final fortunes of
Lancelot and Guinevere presents perhaps the most wonderful
instance of the degree to which a myth may be modified,
and in this case the modifying influence is strictly and
purely Christian. In the Trojan legend, Paris, who plays
the part of Lancelot in the seduction of Helen, is invested
with some of the qualities of Achilleus, and with many of
the attributes of Phoibos; but Lancelot is Paris purified of
his sensuality, his cruelty, and his cowardice. It is true that
he estranges the love of Guinevere from her lord Arthur,
and that even the sanctifying influence of the holy Grail,
which mikes him proof against the heart-rending sorrow of
Elaine, cannot avail to repress his unconquerable affection

} ee book ii, cbup. ii., sect. 12.


LANCBLOT AND GUINEVERE.


for the brightest and the fairest of women. But although
the romance throughout speaks of it as his great sin, the
love is one which asks only for her heart as its recompence,
and enables him to say even at the last, that Guinevere is
worthy of the love of Arthur. But the same Christian
influence which makes Arthur slow to believe any evil of his
dear friend Lancelot, could not allow Guinevere to end her
days in peace with Arthur, as Helen returns to live and die
in the house of Menelaos. Like Paris, whom Menelaos ad-
mitted to an equally trustful friendship, Lancelot had done a
great wrong; aud even when Arthur has closed his brief but
splendid career, Guinevere tells Lancelot that all love on
earth is over between them. Their lips may uot meet even
in the last kiss which should seal the death-warrant of their
old affection. Arthur is gone. When he will come back
again, no man may tell; but Guinevere is more faithful now
to the word which she had pledged to him than she had
been while his glorious form rose pre-eminent among the
bravest knights of Christendom. Yet in spite of all that
Christian influence has done to modify and ennoble the
atory, the myth required that Guinevere should be separated
from Lancelot, as Helen is torn away from Paris; and the
narrative presents us from time to time with touches which
vividly recall the old Greek and Teutonic myths. Thus Sir
Urre of Hungary has wounds which only Lancelot can heal,
ts Oindné alone can heal Paris; and the last battle with
Modred is begun when a knight draws his sword on an
adder that has stung him in the foot, like the snake which
bit Eurydiké, So again, Excalibur is, by the hands of the
reluctant Sir Bedivere, thrown into the lake from which it
had been drawn, as the light of Helios is quenched in the
waters from which he sprung in the morning; and the barge,
which hed borne away the fair maid of Astolat and the
sister of Sir Percival, brings the three queens (seemingly the
weird sisters who have already been seen in another form) to
carry off the wounded Arthur.

But even at the last the story exhibits the influence of the
old myth. Neither Arthur himself nor any others think


that he is really dying. His own words are, ‘I will unto


315


CHAP.
XI,


The death
of Arthar,


316
BOOK


Guinevere
and Diar-
maid.


Later

medieval
epics and
romances,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


the vale of Avilion, to heal me of my grievous wound.’
There, in the shadowy valley in which Endymion sinks to
sleep, the thought of the renewed life in store for Memnén
or Sarpédén or Adonis showed itself in the epitaph

« Hic jacet Arthurus, rex quondam rexque faturus,’

Of the story of Arthur and Guinevere, Mr. Campbell says
that, ‘when stripped to the bones,’ it ‘is almost identical
with the love story of the history of the Feinne,’ the tradition
embodied in the poems which bear the name of Ossian, with
not less justice perhaps than the Hiad and Odyssey bear the
name of Homer, and the Finnish epic Kalewala that of
Wiiniméinen. To Grainne, the wife of Fionn, Diarmaid
stands in the relation of Lancelot to Guinevere, or of Paris
to Helen. Guinevere loves Lancelot at first sight: Diar-
maid, when first he meets Grainne, ‘shows a spot on his
forehead, which no woman can see without loving him.’ But
if Lancelot follows Guinevere willingly, Grainne compels
Diarmaid to run away with her. In the sequel the conduct
of Fionn precisely matches that of Arthur, and Diarmaid is
as fearless a knight as Lancelot—the conclusion being that
“here are the same traditions worked up into wholly different
stories, and differently put upon the stage, according to the
manners of the age in which romances are written, but the
people go on telling their own story in their own way,!

It is unnecessary to examine the poems or romances which
some writers are fond of arranging under sub-cycles of the
main cycle of the Carolingian epics. These epics Mr.
Ludlow? pronounces ‘historical.’ Te sort of history con-


' Into the question of the authenti-
city of Macpherson's Ossian it is alto-
gether unneccsmary to enter. The
matter has been admirably and con-
clusively treated by Mr. Campbell in
the fourth volume of his Talee of the
West Highlands, and no one probably
would for an instant suppose that Mac-
pherson invented the tradition—in other
words, the framework of the myth: and
with this only we are here concerned.
The story of Sr Bevis of Hampton, Mr.
Campbell remarke, reflects the same
mythology, iv. 267. I must content
myself with calling attention to Mr.
Cumpbell’s very valuable section on the


‘Welsh stories, iv. 270-299. Taken as
a whole, they run precisely parallel to
the streams of German, Scandinavian,
and Hindu folk-lore, and bring Mr,
Campbell to the conclusion that the
are ‘all founded upon incidents whi
have been woren into popular tales
almost ever since men hegan to speak;
that they are Celtic only because Colts
are men, and only peculiarly Celtic be-
cause Celts are admitted by all ta be a
very ancient offshoot from the common
root.’


* Popular Epics of the Middle Agea,
vol ii. p. 18.


GARIN AND BERTHA.


tained in them we may take at his own estimate of it, ‘The
history of them is popular history, utterly unchronological,
attributing to one age or hero the events and deeds of quite
another.’ In other words, it’ is a history from which, if we
had no other sources of evidence, we could not by any possi-
bility learn anything. Possessing the genuine contemporary
history of the time, the critic has a clue which may here and
there furnish sume guidance through the labyrinth; bat it
is the genuine history which enables him in whatever mea-
sure to account for the perversions of the poems, not the
perversions which add a jot to our knowledge of the facts.
But it is more important to remember that these poems' are
of a quite different claes from the general epics of the Aryan
nations, They are the result of book-work, or, as Professor
Max Miiller has expressed it, they are not organic; and to
the stories spun by men sitting down at their desks, and
mingling mythical or historical traditions at their will,
there is literally no end. Yet even in these poems it
is remarkuble that some of the most prominent or mo-
mentous incidents belong to the common inheritance of the
Aryan nations. The story of Garin the Lorrainer repeats in
great part the story of Odysseus. Thierry’s daughter, the
White Flower (Blanche Flor), is the Argive Helen. ‘That
maiden,’ ays the poet, ‘in an evil hour was born, for many
a worthy man shall yet die through her.’ The death of Bego,
after the slaying of the boar, is the death of Achilleus after
the fall of Hektor. But whatever travesty of real history
there may be in parts of this poem, or in the epics of William
of Orange and Ogier the Dane, there is next to none in the
story of Bertha Largefoot, which simply reflects the myth of
Cinderella, Penelopé, Punchkin, and perhaps one or two
more.’ In short, it is mere patchwork. As in the case of
Cinderella and Rhodépis, the true queen is made known by
her feet ;? the only difference being that with Bertha it is the

1 Bortha is in name the Teutonic to marry his Daughter’ Mr. Campbell
goddess, who in another form appears (Tales of the Wet Highlands, i. 227),
aa Frou Holle or Holds, the benignant mentions other instances; and remarks
earth, and who, like Penelopé, has mar that ‘those who hold that popular tales
yellous skill in spinning. are preserved in all countries and in all


* This myth occurs again in the alike, will hold that tho
Gaelic story of ‘The King who_wishod ‘German, French, Norse, English,


317


CHAP.
XI.


——


318


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


great size of her feet which determines the issue, not their


eetess smallness. To coin a word, she is Eurypous, instead of


Sage Lite-
rature of
Europe.


Eurépé; and there was a version which spoke of her as -
Queen Goosefoot, a personage over whom Mr. Ludlow thinks
it impossible that a poet could become sentimental. Yet the
goose-footed queen is simply 2 swan-maiden, one of the most
beautiful creatures of Aryan mythology. Mr. Ludlow seldom
or never speaks as if he knew that the substance of these
later poems has been given again and again in earlier myths.
Thus he does not pause to notice that in the ‘ sub-cycle of
William of Orange,’ Renouart, the king’s son, who ‘ must
keep the kitchen, make the fire, skim the meat,’ while he
should be heading a host of a hundred thousand men, is
only the Teutonic Boots, grown bulky and clumsy, like the
Herakles of the ‘ Alkéstis.” And yet these parallelisms must
be noted, if the mythical or historical value of these romances
is 1) be accurately measured. With the character of the
men and women portrayed in the medieval epics, Mr.
Ludlow is seemingly much perplexed. The type especially
which is seen in Brynhild, Gudrun, or Kriemhild, he regards
as ‘foreign to the truth of woman’s nature.’! It is so, and
it must be so; and it is better to avow it than to twist such
stories as the legends of Helen and Achilleus in the despe-
rate attempt to judge by human standards the inhabitants
of the Cloudland.

The same materials will probably be found to have fur-
nished the framework of at least the greater part of the
Saga literature of Northern Europe. If here and there a
name or an incident belonging to real history be introduced
into them, this cannot of itself raise the story above the level
of plausible fiction. Far too much, probably, has been said
of these Sagas as a true picture of society and manners.
That the writers would throw over their narrative a colour-
ing borrowed from the ways and customs of their own time
is certain; but the acts which they record are not proved to
be deeds which were constantly or even rarely occurring, if
and Gaelic are all versions of the same the ‘Sharp Grey Sheop,’ Campbell, ii,
story, and that it js as old as the 289,


common stock from which all these  ' Popular Epics, xi. 986.
Tacos sprang.” See ulao the story of


THE GRETTIR SAGA. 319


they involve either a direct contradiction or a physical im- CHAP.
possibility. To say that all incidents involving such diffi- _—~_
culties are to be at once rejected, while we are yet to give

faith to the residue, is to lay ourselves as bondmen at the

feet of Euémeros and his followers, and to bid farewell to

truth and honesty. Even in pictures of life and manners

there is a certain limit beyond which we refuse to credit tales

of cruelty, villainy, and treachery, when they are related of

whole tribes who are not represented as mere savages and
ruffians ; and unless we are prepared to disregard these limits,

the history of many of these Sagas becomes at once, as a

whole, incredible, although some of the incidents recorded in

them may have occurred.

This is especially the case with the Grettir Saga, for The _
which a high historical character has been claimed by the Sen
translators.' Yet the tale from beginning to end is full of
impossibilities. In his early youth Grettir, being set by his
father to watch his horses, gets on the back of one named
Keingala, and drawing a sharp knife across her shoulders
and then all along both sides of the back, flays off the whole
strip from the flank to the loins. When Asmund next strokes
the horse, the hide to his surprise comes off in his hands, the
animal being seemingly very little the worse for the loss.
After this impossible result of his exploit, Grettir, having
lost a mealbag, finds Skeggi in the same predicament, and
joins him in a common search. Skeggi comes across Grettir’s
bag and tries to hide it, When Grettir complains, Skeggi
throws his axe at him and is slain in requital. It can
scarcely be pretended that we are reading the true story of
“an interesting race of men near akin to ourselves,’ when
instead of a fair field and no favour we find that six men do
not hesitate to fall upon one.* Thorfin, walking away from
his boat with a leather bottle full of drink on his back, is
assaulted from behind by Thorgeir, who thinks that he has
slain him when he has only cut the bottle. He is jeered at
next day for his blunder; but the act is no more blamed for
ite treachery than is the same base deed when Odysseus


+ Eirikr Magnisson and William Morzis.
2 Prefuee, pp. i. and 94.


320


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


Boom boastingly relates it of himself. Thorgeir Bottle-jack is
—b_L alain soon afterwards in a bloody fight over the carcass of a


The cha-
ractet of
Grettir,


whale, in which half the population of the village seems to be
elaughtered. Thorbiorn Oxmain thinks it a goodly exploit
to knock at # man’s door and then to thrust him through
with a spear when he comes to open it. The same honour-
able champion, wishing to slay Grettir, discourses thus to
his comrades :—

‘I will go against him in front, and take thou heed how
matters go betwixt us, for I will trust myself against any
man; if I have one alone to meet; but do thou go behind
him, and drive the axe into him with both hands atwixt
his shoulders; thou needest not fear that he will do thee
hurt, as his back will be turned to thee.’!

When at a later time Grettir had slain Thorir Redbeard,
Thorir of Garth assails the solitary outlaw with eighty men.
Gr-ttir slays eighteen and wounds many more, and the rest
take to flight.*

This last incident brings us to the main question. It is,
of course, a sheer impossibility: and if, as such, it is to be
regarded as lying beyond the pale of human history, we are
at once driven to ask wherein lies the real value of a narra-
tive in which such incidents form the staple of the story.
The translators tell us that throughout the tale ‘the Saga-
man never relaxes his grasp of Grettir’s character, that he is
the same man from beginning to end, thrust this way and
that by circumstances, but little altered by them; unlucky in
all things, yet made strong to bear all ill-luck; scornful of
the world, yet capable of enjoyment and determined to make
the most of it; not deceived by men’s specious ways, but
disdaining to ery out because he must needs bear with them ;
scorning men, yet helping them when called on, and desirous
of fame; prudent in theory, and wise in foreseeing the in-
evitable sequence of events, but reckless even beyond the
recklessness of that time and people, and finally capable of
inspiring in others strong affection and devotion to him in
spite of his rugged self-sufficing temper.’* It is one thing
if this is to be regarded as the portrait of a man who really
lived and died on this earth, or as the picture of some in-


shai +7 300 2D? wie


MATERIALS OF THE GRETTIR SAGA.


habitant of the Phaiakian cloudland. The translators rajse
® vital issue when they say that ‘to us moderns the real
interest in these records of a past state of life lies principally
in seeing events true in the main treated vividly and dra-
matically by people who completely understood the manners,
life, and above all the turn of mind of the actors in them.’!
If we have any honest anxiety to ascertain facts, and if we
are prepared to give credit to a narrative only when the facts
have been so ascertained, then everything is involved in the
question whether the events here related are true in the
main or not. The genealogies given in the earlier part of
the Saga agree, we are told, with those of the Landnima-bék
and of the other most trustworthy Sagas; yet such names
tell us as much and as little as the names in the genealogy
of the tale-maker Hekataios. A catalogue of names belong-
ing to real persons cannot impart authority to a narrative of
fictitious events, if they are fictitious; and when we have put
aside these genealogies and the names of one or two kings,
as of Olaf, Hacon, and Harold Fairhair, we have numbered
all the historical elements in the book: nor is it necessary
to say that some safeguard is wanted when we remember
that the Carolingian romances take the great Karl to
Jerusalem.

If then we have before us a story, some of the incidents of
which are munifestly impossible or absurd, we are scarcely
justified in accepting, on the mere authority of the Saga,
other portions which involve no such difficulties. We have
the alternative of rejecting the whole story without troubling
ourselves to examine it further, or we may take it to pieces,
reducing it to its constituent elements, and then seeing
whether these elements are to be found in any other narra-
tives. If this should be the case, the character of the narra-
tives in which these common elements are seen will go far
towards determining the credibility of the story. Clearly
the latter course is the more philosophical and the more
honest, That the translators had the clue in their own hands,
is clear from the sentence in which, speaking of the events
which followed Grettir’s death, they tell us that ‘the Saga-


2B. xiii,


wert v


321


CHAP.
XI.
—


Materia’
of the
Saga.


822


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


man here has taken an incident, with little or no change,


a Se from the romance of Tristram and Iseult.’! If, as they


Grettir
and Boots.


Parallel-
isms be-
tween the
Grettir
Saga and
other
myths,


think, the chapters in which this incident is related were
added to the tale, and if this part of the story be substan-
tially the same as that of a romance which is known to be
mythical; if further, as they say, the whole Saga, ‘has nc
doubt gone through the stages which mark the growth of
the Sagas in general, that is, it was for long handed about
from mouth to mouth until it took a definite shape in men’s
minds,’* a presumption, to say the least, is furnished that
other incidents in the Saga may be found to be of a like
nature,

If we take the sentences which tell us of Grettir’s child-
hood, how he had scant love from his father who set him to
watch his home-geese, how he was fair to look on, red-haired
and much freckled, how he would do no work or spoilt all
thit he did; how, when placed on board a boat, he ‘ would
move for nought, neither for baling, nor to do aught for the
sail, nor to work at what he was bound to work at in the
ship in even share with the other men, neither would he buy
himself off from the work,’* how, when he does some great
thing, the remark is ‘we wotted not that thou wert a man of
such powers as we have now proved thee,’‘ how he goes dis-
guised to the wrestling match, and when Thorbiorn Angle
pushes and tugs hard at him, moves not a whit but sits
quiet, yet wins the victory,—we have before us the Goose-
girl and the Boots of Teutonic story, the Boots who sits
among the ashes in the ‘irony of greatness,’ biding his time,
—the disguised Odysseus, patiently enduring the gibes of the
suitors and the beggar Arnaios.

When the Saga tells us that on coming back from a
Thing, ‘ Grettir lifted a stone which now lies there in the
grass and is called Grettir’s heave,’ and how ‘many men
came up to see the stone and found it a great wonder that
go young a m heave aloft such a huge rock,’ it
relates a well-known legend in the myths of Theseus and of
Sigurd in the Volsung tale. When Grettir is driven forth
from his home without arms and his mother draws forth

2 P. xii. Pix. * P41, +P. 58,


THE MIGHT AND EXPLOITS OF GRETTIR.


from her cloak the fair sword which has gained many a day, we
see before us Thetis and Hjordis bestowing on their chiidren
the magic weapons which reappear in the hands of Arthur
and of Roland. In the horrible smiting of bearsarks,
who are shut up in a barn, we have the awfal hall of
slaughter in the Odyssey and the Nibelung Lay. In the
marvellous story of the demon who is vainly assailed first by
Glam who becomes a demon himself, then by Thorgaut,
but is finally slain by Grettir, we see the common type of the
popular story in which the youngest son, or Boots, wins the ,
day, when his two brothers or comrades fail, In the beaks
of the ship which is so full of weather-wisdom that the one
whistles before a south wind and the othet before a north
wind, we have a reminiscence of the divine Argo.! In the
errand on which, when his companions have no fire, Grettir
is sent to bring fire from a distant cliff, although ‘his mind
bids him hope to get nought of good thereby,’ we see the
myth of Prometheus and his recompense. The conflict of
Grettir and Suekoll is related in words so nearly resembling
those of the narrative of David’s fight with Goliath, that
it is hard to resist the suspicion that we may have here an
instance of mere copying,’ or that we have a travesty of the
story of Samson, as we read that ‘on a day as Grettir lay
sleeping, the bonders came upon him, and when they saw
him they took counsel how they should take him at the
least cost of life, and settled so that ten men should leap on
him while some laid bonds on his feet; and thus they did,
and threw themselves on him; but Grettir broke forth so
mightily that they fell from off him.’* In his enormous
strength, in his fitful action, which is as often mischievous
as it is beneficent, in the lot which makes him a servant of
beings meaner than himself, which stirs up enemies against
him in men whom he has never injured, in the doom which
he foresees and which he has not the power, and indeed
takes no pains, to avert, he is the very counterpart of
Herakles and Achilleus. When he slays afresh Glam who
has been long dead, the demon tells him ‘ Hitherto thou
hast earned fame by thy deeds, but henceforth will wrongs
VP 115, =P. 123. *P. 153,


323


CHAP,
xIL
——


324


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK and manslayings fall upon thee, and the most part of thy
pets, doings will turn to thy woe and illhap; an outlaw shalt thou


be made, and ever shall it be thy lot to dwell alone abroad.’
Henceforth he is ‘the traveller,’ who can know no rest, whc
seeku shelter of many great men ; ‘ but something ever came
to pass whereby none of them would harbour him,’ This,
however, is the doom of Indra and Savitar in many Vedic
hymns, of Wuotan Wegtam in Teutonic mythology, of
Sigurd, Perseus, Bellerophon, Oidipous, Odysseus, Phoibos,
and Dionysos. These are all wanderers and outlaws like
Grettir, and there is scarcely an incident in the life of
Grettir which is not found in the legends of one or more of
the mythical beings just named. The overthrow of the
eighty assassins led on by Thorir of Garth is the defeat of
the Lykian anibuscade by Bellerophontes. After this the
wounded hero goes to a cave under Balljékul, where the
daaghter of Hallmund heals his wound, and treats him well.
‘Grettir dwelt long there that summer,’ like Odysseus in
the cave of Kalypsé, or Tanhaiiser in the Venusberg, or
True Thomas in the coverts of Ercildoune; but we look to
find him chafing, as these did, at the enforced rest. We
turn over the page and we read, ‘Now as the summer wore,
Grettir yearned for the peopled country, to see his friends
and kin’! It is Odysseus longing to see Penelopé once
more. Buthe is under a doom. As Olaf says, ‘If ever a
man has been cursed, of all men must thou have been.’*? It
is the curse which is laid on Ixién and Sisyphos, and
singularly enough his father Asmund says of his son, ‘ Me-
thinks over much on a whirling wheel his life turns.’ Hence
also he dreads the darkness like a child, for Herakles, Helios,
and Achilleus can do nothing when the sun has gone down.
Herce too, the old mother of Thorbiorn lays on him the
fate ‘that thou be left of all health, wealth, and good hap,
all good heed and wisdom,’ the very fate of which Achilleue
complains again and again to Thetis in the very bitterness
of his heart. If again Grettir has his brother Dlugi in
whom be has garnered up his soul, this is the story of
Achillens and Patroklos, of Peirithods and Theseus, o
P17) *P. 12 +P. 126,


GRETTIB AND ODYSSEUS.


Herakles and Iphitos, of the Dioskouroi, and a host of
others. Nineteen years he is an outlaw. ‘Then said the
lawman that no one should be longer in outlawing than
twenty winters in all,’ and so Grettir was set free, as
Odysseus returns home in the twentieth year. The incident
which led to the death of Grettir is simply the myth of
Philoktétés and of Rustem. The cutting off of Grettir’s
hand is an incident in the myth of Indra Savitar and of
Walthar of Aquitaine. When again it is said of him that
‘he is right-well ribbed about the chest, but few might
think he would be so small of growth below,’' we cannot
avoid a comparison with the story of Shortshanks in
Grimm’s collection, or of Odysseus who, when sitting, is
far more majestic than Menelaos who, when standing,
towers above him by head and shoulders.

In short, the Saga, as a whole, ceases practically to have
any distinctive features, and even in the sequel which relates
the story of Thorstein, Dromund, and Spes, the incident
which the translators compare with the romance of Tris-
tram is not the only point of likeness with other legends,
The closing scenes in the lives of the two lovers precisely
reproduce the last incidents in the myth of Lancelot and
Guinevere. Of the avenging of Grettir by Thorstein we
need only say that the same issue belongs to the stories of
Sigurd and the Three Helgis, and that all these have their
type and find their explanation in the avenging of Baldur.


1 P. 232.


325


CHAP,


1.


The
avenging
of Grotuir,


326


BOOK
m.


Ideas of
the hearen.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK II.


CHAPTER I.


THE ETHEREAL HEAVENS,


Secrion I—DYAUS.


The ancient Vedic mythology exhibits in a state of fusion
the elements which the Hellenic legends present to us in
forms more or less crystallised; and precisely on this account
it has for us an inestimable value as throwing light on the
process by which the treasure-house of Aryan mythology
was filled, The myths of Achilleus and Sigurd point clearly
enough to the idea of the sun as doomed to an early death:
but the Vedic hymns bring before us a people to whom the
death of the sun is a present reality, for whom no analogy
has suggested the idea of a continuous alternation of day
and night, and who know not, as the fiery chariot of the sur
sinks down in the west, whether they shall ever see agait
the bright face of him who was their friend,! All their
utterances were thus the utterances of children who knev
little of themselves and nothing of the world without them,
and thus also they could not fail to apply to the same objects
names denoting very different relations or characteristics. The
heaven might be the father of the dawn, or he might be the
child of the earth. The morning might be the parent of the
sun, or she might be his sister, or his bride; and we shoulc
expect (as we find), that, if the names denoting these ideas
came to be employed as names of deities, the characters anc


1 Bee p. 41, et aeg.


DYAUS AND ZEUS.


powers of these gods would show @ constant tendency to run
into each other.

But the attribution to all sensible objects of a life as per-
sonal and conscious as their own would lead to the thought
of one common source or origin of the life of all; and this
source could be found only in the broad bright heaven which
brooded over the wide earth and across which the sun made
his daily journey to cheer the children of men. Thus Dyaus,
the glistening ether,' became to the Hindu, as Zeus was to
the Greek, a name for the supreme God; but although some
mythical features entered gradually into the conception of
this deity, the name retained its original significance too
clearly to hold its ground in Hindu theology. Dyaus, like
the Hellenic Ouranos and Kronos, must be displaced by his
child, who at the first had brought out more prominently
the supremacy of his father; and thus Indra became to the
Hindu what Zeus was to the Hellenic tribes, while the Vedic
Varuna retained in the east a spiritual character which


Ouranos never acquired in the west.?


1 Thus Dyaus, Zeus, Divus, Thoos,
Deus, Juno, Dians, Dianus or Janus,
with many others, are outgrowthe frot
the wame Toot, dyu to shine. But in
Introduction to Greck and Latin Fty-


in tear, but dog, while in Latin it is
seen in tigris; tiger, which approaches
nearly to the English ‘tyke’ as 4 name
for the dog. In the same way # in the
Greek wéros ought to be represented by


‘mology, Mr. Peile, while fully allowing f in English; but it wppears as * path’


that tho Sanskrit name Dyuus is ropre-
vented by the Greek Zeus and by the
Lutin divus and dous, yet denies thit
there is any relution between tho Latin
deus and the Greek Ges, By the laws
of phonetic chango, he insists, the Latin
d must answer to a Grock 3, as in Béyos,
domus: hence some other root must be
sought for 6eds, perhaps @E, a secund-
ary form of @E, the root of rf@mu,
though this is rejected by Professor
Cartins, Gr. Et, pp. 230, 404, in favour
of a distinct root thes or fes (meaning
to pray), which he traces in feséus

in @és0a@u, (Pind, N. v. 18.) F
venture to think that too great a stress
is bere laid on laws which undoubtedly
apply generally to the Aryan languages,
bat to which there are yet some instances:
of apparent and some even of real ex-
ception, The Greek Sdxpv is rightly
represented by the English car, while
dees, the biting beust, reappears in its
legitimute dress in the German Toggen-
burg; bat in English we bave not ¢ as


The connectiva of the two words cin
scarcely be doubted, for if Profewsor
Curtius may give the equation sdros:
wévros =wdfos : wévOas = Ad6os : Bévbos,
we may ulso add xdros: mévros = path :
pond, Hence the fuct that the Greek
form uf Dyaus is 666s, not Beds, scarcely
warrants cur severing the two words,
If the Vedic adeva is the Greck K0cos,
the relationship of @eds with the Latin
‘deus’ is established. In this conclu-
sion I am following Professor Max
Milller, Lectures on Language, second
series, 425-455.

* Heaven and carth, it would seem,
are in the earliest hymns alike self
existent; but Dr. Muir (‘Principal
Deities of the Rig Vedu,’ Transactions
of the Royal Society of Hiinburgh,
vol. xxiii. part iii.) remarks that we are
not told, as in the Hesialie Theogony,
which of the two is the older. ‘On the
contrary, one of the ancient poets seems
to have been perplexed by the difficulty
of this question, as at the beginning af


827


CHAP,


The
Glistening
Ether.


828


BOOK
I
——
Dyas s _

Prithivt.


Tdeas
dunowd by
the name
Dyu,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


Dya, then, in the land of the five streams was at once @
name for the sky and a name for God, Dyaus pitér, Dyaus
the Father, answering to the Zeus Patér of the Greeks and
the Jupiter and Janus Pater of the Latins. As such, he was
Visvakarman, the great architect of the universe, who knows
all spheres and worlds,' janita (yeverjp), the parent of all
things, Prithivi, the broad earth, being the mother of his
children.? As, again, with the Greeks Zeus is both the god of
rain and the being to whom all who are in pain and sorrow
address their prayer, so the Maruts or storms go about in
dyu, the sky, while their worshippers ou earth invoke the
mercy of Dyaus, Prithivi, and Agni. But the Indian land
under its scorching sun depends wholly on the bounty of the
benignant rain god; and hence Indra, who is the child of
Dyu, and who from Dyu receives his might, becomes more
immediately the fertiliser of the earth and is regarded as
more powerful than his father. But Dyu, although his
grzatness is obscured by that of his son, still wields the
thunderbolt; and the original meaning of the name reap-
pears in the myth which represents bim as the father of
the dawn who is invincible by all but Indra.

Thus Dyaus is to Prithivi what Ouranos is to Gaia in the
Hesiodie theogony, the Greek myth differing from the
former only in deciding that Gaia herself produced Ouranos
to be coextensive with herself. The Hindu had not so far
solved the difficulty ; and the doubt expressed on this subject
shows the peculiar attitude of the Indian mind to the pro-
blema of the sensible universe. The Greek was at once con-
tented with answers suggested by the old mythical phrases,
or by the phenomena which he might be describing. The
Hindu, ever dwelling on the thought of an unseen world,


one of thé hymns, (J. 185), he exclaims,
“Which of yon twain was the first, and
which the last? How wore they pro-
duced? Snges, who knuws?” His
power and wisdom are shown most of
all in the creation or evocation of his
son Indra. Thus of Indra it is said,
“Thy father was the parent of a most
heroic con: the maker of Indra, he who
Produced the slestial and. invincible
thunderer, was & most, skilful work
‘R. 7. iv. 17, 4. But it was


obvious that the abstract conception of
Dyn as the father of Indra could not
stand ugainst the overwhelming weight
of the myths which were continually
springing up from phrases not originally
antagonistic with the monotheistic be-
lief or conviction.

4 Muir, Principal Deities of BV. 563.

* This name is not found in any
Greek myth au the designation: of
person; butitis represented by wAardu,
the feminine of Aarts, broad,


HINDU AND GREEK THOUGHT.


329


strove to gain some insight into the nature of things, and to GAR:
unlock secrets for which the material world could never far- ee


nish a key. Hence Dyu was for him sometimes the supreme
God, sometimes the heaven which with the earth had been
fashioned by the gods and strengthened with undecaying
supports, and which trembled and bowed down in the pre-
sence of the deities. Sometimes he was the all-pervading
spirit, sometimes a material and tangible firmament; and
thus again the question arose of the origin of matter. Of his
own ignorance the Hindu was perfectly conscious, and he had
slready begun to think that this ignorance extended even to
the gods themselves, ‘Who can tell whence this creation
arose? The gods are subsequent to its production, Who
then knows whence it sprung? He who in the highest
heaven is its ruler, he knows, or perhaps not even he.’ So
far as this question was answered at all, it was answered, as
Dr. Muir has well remarked, by Greek and Hindu in the
same way. In the Hesiodic theogony, Chaos, Gaia, and
Tartaros are beings apparently self-existent; or at the least
the scheme begins with Chaos, and no parents are assigned
to Gaia and Tartaros, or to Eros, who immediately follows,
and precedes the birth of Erebos and Nyx, of Aithér and
Hemera. The Hellenic poet had brought with him from
his primeval home the tradition which he shared with the
Hindu: but having given utterance to it, he bestowed no
farther thought upon it. With the latter the position of
Kama, the representative of the Hesiodic Eros, determines
the character of his philosophy. The desire (épefis), which
in the Aristotelian Ethics must precede all moral action, is
as essential to the divine as to the human mind, and thus
Kama is the being through whom the world is fashioned,
when as yet there existed only the one.* The Wish of Teu-
tonic mythology answers more closely to the Hesiodic Eros
than to the Vedic Kama. The Homeric poet knew that men
always have a need of the gods;* but he was not, like the
Hindu, always conscious of the need, always striving to know
1 R. V.x, 129; Muir, i. 653. + wdvrer Gedx xaréove? Svfparroi


* Muir, &. Max Miiller, Sanskrit Od. ii, 48.
Literatwre, 559, et seg.


330


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


more of that mysterious power, always yearning for the time


ee when he should no more see through the glass darkly,


‘Tha solid
Heaven,


Szetton I.—VARUNA ann MITRA.


As Dyaus is the god of heaven in its dazzling purity and
brightness, so is Varuna also the heaven as serving, like the
Hellenic Ouranos, to veil or cover the earth. It is true that
in the Hesiodic theogony Ouranos is united with Gaia,
whereas it is not Varana but Dyaus who in the Vedic
hymis is mentioned as having Prithivi for the mother of his
children. The difference is, perhaps, only in appearance.
Gaia is really wedded to Zeus not less than to Ouranos, if
Démétér be but Gaia viewed as the mother of all living
things. Varuna, then, as the solid heaven, which is spread
over the earth, is strictly a creation of mythical speech and
is embodied in a visible form. He sits on his throne, clothed
in golden armour, and along with Mitra dwells in a palace
which, like that of Helios, is supported by a thousand
columns, while his messengers stand around to do his bid-
ding. But his mythical characteristics are in the Rig Veda
perpetually suggesting the idea of an unseen and almighty
Being who has made all things and upholds them by his
will. In many of the Vedic hymns we are carried altogether
out of the region of mythology, and we see only the man
communing directly with his Maker. In these hymns
Varuna, in the words of Dr. Muir, ‘ dwells in all worlds as
sovereign; indeed, the three worlds are embraced within
him. The wind which resounds through the firmament is
his breath. He has placed the sun in the heaven, and
opened up a boundless path for it to traverse. He has hol-
lowed out the channels of the rivers. It is by his wise con-
trivance that, though all the rivers pour out their waters
into the sea, the sea is never filled. By his ordinance the
moon shines in the sky, and the stars which ere visible by
night disappear on the approach of daylight. Neither the
birds flying in the air, nor the rivers in their sleepless flow,
can attain a knowledge of his power or his wrath. His spies
(or angels) behold both worlds. He himself has a thousand


VARUNA THE ALL-SEEING.


381


eyes. He knows the flight of birds in the sky, the path of CHAP,
ships on the sea, the course of the far-sweeping wind, and et,


perceives all the hidden things that have been or shall be
done.”!


All these are phrases which may be suggested directly by Moral
the phenomena of the heaven; but the churiot in which YP" at


Varuna is borne over the earth,? is, like the eye of Zeus, lost
in the purely spiritual thought of One who has no body and
no passions, who, as seeing all things, sees also that which is
evil, and who, as having nothing that is evil in himself,
must punish and finally destroy it in the sinner. In some
hymns, however, the two lines of thought seem to be blended
strangely together; in other words, we see in them the
process by which men rose from the lower conception to the
higher. That sense of sin, which, as distinguished from the
transgression of a positive law, can scarcely be said to have
been present to the Greek mind, weighs heavy on the spirit
of the Hindu, even while his conception of the Deity whom
he addresses may be almost coarse in its familiarity, Va-
yuna has received in the sacrifice the choice portions which
please him most, and the worshipper may fairly demand
that the question between them may be discussed reasonably
as between friends.* But whatever may be said of the theory
of the nature of sin, a pure monotheistic conviction is pre-
eminently seen in the following prayer.

* Let me not yet, O Varuna, enter into the house of clay;
have mercy, almighty, have mercy.

«If I go along trembling like a cloud driven by the wind,
have mercy, almighty, have mercy.

‘Through want of strength, thou strong and bright god,


‘ Principal Deities of R.¥. 568. In de CAntiguité:—\Ta Religion des
a passage from the Atharva Veda, quoted Aryus’
by Dr, Muir, iid. und Professor Max * This chariot ‘shines with a golden
‘Miller, Chips, i. 42, the sume thought radiance at the break of day, aud at
js worked out in language which is sunset assumes the colour of iron.’—
wrecisely reproduced in the 139th Muir, ¢. 657.
Prelm, and ‘which also curios us to _ * Max Miller, History of Sanskrit
expressions and sentences in the Sermon Literature, 637. Tt ia scarcely necessary
on the Mount, and in other perta of the to compare this Iangvage with the
New Testament. The purallelism be- similar tone of familiar crpostiltion
tween the expressions of Aryan and which runs through many of
Semitic monotheism is further traced Psalms.
out by M. Maury, Croyancee et Ligendes


332


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


have I gone to the wrong shore: have mercy, almighty, have


~~~ mercy.


Aryan mo-


otheism,


‘Thirst came upon the worshipper, though he stood ir
the midst of the waters: have mercy, almighty, have mercy

«Whenever we men, O Varuna, commit an offence before
the heavenly host, whenever we break thy law througt
thoughtlessness, have mercy, almighty, have mercy.’!

If the singular purity and unselfishness of the Hesiodic
morality, as compared with that of the poems to which we
give the name of Homer, suffice of themselves to prove the
essential distinction between mythology and religion, these
simple utterances of the Vedic poets show even more forcibly
that the genuine belief in one almighty Being who is at once
our Father, our Teacher, and our Judge, had its home firs
in the ancient Aryan land. It was a conviction to whick
they were guided by all that they saw or could apprehend o
outward phenomena as well as by the irrepressible yearnings
which stirred their hearts. For such yearnings and for sucl
& consciousness in the Hebrew tribes we look in vain, before
the Babylonish captivity. Among them we have at bes’
only the warnings of a few isolated teachers, who saw thing:
hidden from other eyes, and whose words, although they
sounded in the ears of their countrymen like parables, woul
have conveyed a familiar meaning to the Aryans of northerr
India.? It matters little then whether Varuna be in these
hymns mentioned almost invariably in conjunction witk
Mitra and sometimes with other gods. Like these, he is
Aditya, Kronion, if Aditi be time; but the mythical notior


+ Max Miller, Hist.of Sansk.Lit. 540,
? These words were written before
the appearance of Professor Max


many nsmes for one and the same
Being; but of course ‘every new nam
threatened,’ to use Professor Miller’,


Miiller’s article on Semitie Monotheiam
in his volumes of collected essays. Few
probsbly will read that paper without
feeling that on the main question very
little room is left for doubt. Polytheism
ig to be found in both the Semitic and
the Aryan races, but it was more
ingrained in tho former. The very
interehangeableness of the attributes of
the Vedic gods was, to a certain extent,
3 safeguard against any conscious and
systematic polytheism. So long as this
— matted Sole ae continued, Dyaus,


words, ‘to obscure more and more the
primitive intuition of God.’—Ghéps, ii
358. With the Jews the names unde
which they worshipped » multitude o-
gods were manifestly mere appellative:
which never underwent any phonetic
corruption, and thus the tendency tc
polytheism became the more inveterate
It is, howevor, scarcely necessary to 8a,
more than that ‘if there had been ir
the Semitic race a truly monotheistic
instinct, the history oe those, uation
would become perfectly unintelligble,
—f. 365.


TRE SPIRITUAL VARUNA.


thus introduced sate so loosely on those who held it, that
their language ceased to show any sign of its influence in
times of real anguich and sorrow.' It was enough that they
could realise at once the righteousness of God, and Hia
readiness to forgive those who disobeyed his laws so soon as
they repented them of their sin.?

The process which converted the physical Varuna into a
spiritual God is carried to its extreme results in the concep-
tion of Aditi, ‘the unbound, the unbounded,’ or even, as
being expressed by the negation of diti, a bond, ‘the Abso-
lute.’ This indefinite term was naturally used to denote the
source from which all life, even the life of the gods, springs;
and thus Aditi, the Infinite, became the mother of all the
gods, The fact is startling; but, in Professor Muller’s
words, ‘the thoughts of primitive humanity were not only
different from our thoughts, but different also from what we
think their thoughts ought to have been. The poets of the
Veda indulged freely in theogonic speculations without being
frightened by any contradictions. They knew of Indra as
the greatest of gods, they knew of Agni as the god of gods,
they knew of Varuna as the ruler ofall; but they were by
no means startled at the idea, that their Indra had a mother,
or that their Agni was born like a babe from the friction of
two fire-sticks, or that Varuna and his brother Mitra were
nursed in the lap of Aditi” Hence Aditi was contrasted


1 «Every god is conceived as suprome,
or at least as inferior to no other god,
at the time that he is praised or invoked
dy the Vedie pacts; und the fecting that
the various deities are but different
numes, different conceptions of that in-
comprehensible Being which no thought
can reach and no language express, is
not yet quite extinct in the minds of
some of the more thoughtful Rishis.’—
Max Miller, Lectures on Language,
second series, 412, It might be udded
that the interpretations of Liter theolo-
giuns cannot be accounted for exeept. by
the fact that this conviction never be-
came totally extinct. Even when the
whole Hindu Pantheon has attained ite
final dimensivns, the myths sre a0
treated a6 to leave little doubt of the
real meuning in the writer's mind. The
outward respect puid to the popular


legends thinly disguises that monothe-
istic conviction, which accouuts for
nyuch that would otherwise bo perplex-
ing in the writings of Roman Catholic
and other theologians,

* The distinction between the old
Vedic theory of sin and the forms of
Delief still prevalent on the subject can-
not always bo very broudly drawn,

‘I ask, O Varuna, wishing to know
this my sin. I go fo usk the wise. The
Sages all tell me the same, Varuna it
is who is angry with me.

“Was it an old sin, O Varuna, that
thou wishest to destroy thy friend, who
alwuys prtives thee? ‘Tell me, thon une
conquerable lord, and [’ will quickly
turn to thee with praise freed from sin,

<Absolve ua from the sins of our
futhera and from those which we com-
mitted with our own bodies.’


333


CHAP,


Adit] and
the Adi-
tyne.


334


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


with Diti, the unbounded with the definite, while it became


——— more and more a name for the distant east from which all


The phy-

sical and

spiritual
‘arupe.


the bright gods seem to come, and for the boundless space
beyond the east, drawing a sharp distinction between ‘what
is yonder, and what is here.’ But the process could not be
atopped at this point. The gods had been called déksha-
pitar, the fathers of strength, the mighty; and the same
eyuivocation which made Odysseus spring from Autolykoa
converted the epithet Daksha into the father of the gods.
It followed that Aditi was sprung from Daksha, or Daksha
from Aditi, who also owed his existence to Bhu, being, and
the conclusion was reached that ‘Not-being and Being are
in the higher heaven, in the birth-place of Daksha, in the
lap of Aditi.’ But more especially Aditi became the mother
of the bright gods, of Varuna, Mitra, Aryaman, and, in fact,
of the seven Adityas, although their names are not definitely
given in the hymns of the Rig Veda.' On the one side,
then, Diti was growing into ‘a definite person, one of the
daughters of Daksha, the wife of Kasyapa, the mother of
the enemies of the gods, the Daityas’ (such, Professor
Miller remarks, being ‘the growth of legend, mythology,
and religion),’ while on the other, Aditi herself was fast
becoming ‘one of those deitics, who would best remove
the bonds of sin or misery.’ Thus the poet prays to Agni,—

‘ Whatever, O youthful god, we have committed against
thee, men as we are, whatever sin through thoughtlessness,
make us guiltless of Aditi, loosen the sins on all sides.’

All this, however, simply reproduces the Hesiodic theo-
gony, in which Eros precedes Ouranos, to be represented
again in Himeros.

Some light is thrown on the relations of Varuna with
Mitra by the Hesiodic description of Ouranos as the lover of
the earth over which he broods each night ;? and thus Va-


1 Why the Adityas should be reven
or eight in number, is a question of
which Professor Max Miller, whom hore


of the lunsr month as a possible proto-
type of the Adityns,’ adding that ‘ this
might cven, explain the destruction of


I uve eimply to follow, admits the dif-
ficulty. Tha umber seven, though a
sacred number, is not more sacred than
other numbers in the Rig Veda, and he
costents himself with suggesting ‘the
seven days or tithie of the fcur parvanas


the eighth Aditya, considering that the
eighth day of euch parvun, owing to its
uncertainty, might be represented us
exposed to decay and destruction’ —Rig
Veda Sanita, i. 241,

2 Theog. 176.


LATER NOTIONS OF VARUNA.


runa, like Ouranos, is specially the veiling heaven whose
presence is most felt at nightfall, when the sky seems to
descend nearest to the earth, while Mitra, like Dyu and
Zeus, represents the firmament glistening with the splendour
of noon-day. But although the same root which furnished
the names of Varuna and Ouranos yielded a name also for
the evil power, first of physical, and afterwards of moral
darkness, still the idea of Varuna has nothing in common
with that of Vritra. His destructive nooses are prepared
for the wicked only. They ensnare the man who speaks lies’
and pass by the man who speaks truth,’ Like the Greek
Poseidén Pylaochos, he holds the unrighteous fast in prison :
but it is as the punisher of iniquity which cannot be hidden
from his piercing eye,? and not as the gloomy and inflexible
Hades of the nether world. He is the omniscient Asura or
spirit who props up the sky,? and this epithet may almost
suffice to identify him with the Zendic Ahura who appears
commonly in conjunction with Mithras, as Varuna is linked
with Mitra.‘ From the simple germ thus afforded by
mythical phrases which described the various changes of the
heaven, sprung the metaphysical refinements of later Hindu
philosophers, and the wild and cumbrous developements of
later Hindu mythology. The true greatness of Varuna be-
longs to the earliest phase of Hindu thought. He is eclipsed
first by Indra, and at length is overthrown by Krishna
beneath the waters of the ocean,’


1 Atharva Veda, iv. 16, 6. Muir, cally identiex] with Ahura, is a common
Principal Drities of R. ¥., 558. epithet of. Varuna:(2) the class of
++ King Varuna pereoives all that is Indian gods called Adityss, of whom


Varuna is the highest, bears a certain
analogy to the Zendic Amehaspands, of
whom Abura-Mazddo is the highest ; (3)
a close connection exists between Varuna
and Mitra, just as Ahura and Mithra are
frequently associnted in the Zenduvestu,
though the position of the two has other-
wise become altered, and Mithra, who is
‘not even reckoned among the Amshas-
pands, is placed between the two powers
of good and evil. ‘Zwischen Ormuzd
(Licht) und Ariman (Finsternias) steht
Mithras mitten inne, eisst darum


within and all that is beyond heaten
and earth, ‘The winkings of men’s
eyes are numbered by him.’ Cf. ‘the
very sind of your head ave all mum.
bered


wire Ihoy Aids bp 8aduds nal edvra
vohoas- Hes. Op. et Dirs, 265.
"The eyes of the Lord are in ‘every
pigeo, behing the evil end the gor
* RV. viii, 42, 1. Muir, Sanskrit
Teats, part iv. chap. ii, rect. 2, Tho
name Asura belongs to the snme root
with that of tha Teutonic Asen, or sir,


“The reasons urged in support of
this conclusion are given by Dr. Muir,
Principal Deities of B. V. 556, as fol-
iowa, (1) the name Asura, etymologi-


Mittler, weofrne, Plut. de Is—Nork,
Beal Worterbuck, e. 2. Mithrasentt.

* Muir, Senshrit Teate, part iv. ch.
ii, section 5.


335
cHaP.
I


— tS


336


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


Sscrion JIT.—INDRA.
If Dyaus and Varuna, were alike doomed to lose their an-


Es cient majesty, a brighter lot was in store for Indra; and the


‘The pri-


picture which the oldest Vedic hymns present to us of this


exit of or god has # special value as enabling us to determine the


purely
physical.


measure in which religion and mythology affected each
other. That a moral or spiritual element may be discerned
in some of the characteristics of this deity, is beyond ques-
tion: that the whole idea of the god can be traced to the
religious instinct of mankind, the boldest champions of the
theory which ascribes the growth of all mythology to the
direct action of religious impulse or revelation will scarcely
venture to affirm. The true religious instinct must point to
the absolute rule of one righteous God, and cannot itself
originate the idea of many independent centres of action.
If this instinct furnished the true germ of all mythology,
then the mythology of the Iliad and Odyssey is far older
than that of the Veda; in other words, the crystallised
granite is older than the ingredients of which it is composed.
In our Homeric poems, in the midst of abundant signs indi-
cating the later growth of the notion, we have an acknow-
ledged King of heaven, from whom all the Olympian gods
derive their power, or whose will they are at least bound to
perform, and who alone retains unimpaired his full charac-
teristics as lord of the bright heaven. Although Phoibos
still bears his unerring weapons, yet his arrows lie within
the quiver until some wickedness of man compels him to
draw them forth. The superhuman action of the Iliad and
Odyssey, in short, has reference strictly to the deeds and
fortunes of men; the age of conflicts between the gods has
almost passed away. The conspiracy of Héré, Poseidén and
Athéné to bind Zeus, is amongst the latest of those struggles
which had culminated in the wars of the Titans, for when in
the last great battle of Achilleus the gods turn against each
other in the fray, there is still no thought of assailing the
great King who site in his serene ether far above the turmoil
raging beneath him.)

* *LOlympe, dans Homére, ressemble of chaque personnege @, par droit de
dune monarehie établie de longue date, naissance, son emplci, ses titres invari-


THE WARS OF THE GODS.


The true mythical action of the Achsian deities is thus
intermittent. In the hymns of the Rig Veda it is continuous,
and their action is but remotely concerned with human
interests. Like the Hesiodic Zeus, they love the savour of
burnt-offerings, and hasten to receive their share of the
sacrifice: but as soon as the rites are over, they return to

. their own proper work as wielding the forces which are
manifested in the changing heavens. The Vedic gods are
thus, pre-eminently, transparent. Instead of one acknow-
ledged king, each is lord in his own domain; each is ad-
dressed as the maker of all visible things, while. their
features and characteristics are in almost all cases inter-
changeable, Dyaus and Indra, Varuna and Agni are each
in his turn spoken of as knowing no superior, and the objects
of their chief care are not the children of men, but the winds,
the storms, the clouds, and the thunder, which are constantly
rising in rebellion against them. No sooner is one conflict
ended than another is begun, or rather the same conflict is
repeated as the days and seasons come round. Whenever
the rain is‘shut up in the clouds, the dark power is in revolt
against Dyaus and Indra. In the rumblings of the thunder,
while the drought still sucks out the life of the earth, are
heard the mutterings of their hateful enemy. In the light-
ning flashes which precede the outburst of the pent-up
watera are seen the irresistible spears of the god, who is
attacking the throttling serpent in his den; and in the
serene heaven which shone out when the deluging clouds
had passed away, men beheld the face of the mighty deity


ables, et son rang dont il ne songe pas d
se départir. Dans cette sorte de cour
quo les dieux tiennent autour de Jupiter,
ils se sont dépouillés de leur caractére
propre et de leur originalité native .
Comme ces dignitaires des anciennes
monarchies qui continuent & porter des
titres depuis longtemps vides de sens,
ils ont des surnoms dont ils semblent
jgnorer la valeur.’—Bréal, Heroule et
Cacus, $1. The very fact that the
mythical attributes of these gods be-
come less and lees defined, while their
subordination to Zeus becomes more and
more marked, is the strongest evidence
of the mythological origin of the whole.
Their names are, in short, mere


VOL. I.


signe for one and tho same conception.
‘He who knows Bruhma knows PrujApati;
they who know Brahma know Skumbha,
the eupporter of the world, who, lke
anc


‘breathes und winks’ Again, thin office
of supporting the universe is fuldlied by
YVarupe, Tndre, Savitri, and Vishou. So,
too, Prajapati is Mahadeva, the great
god, and Bhava (probably Phoibos) the
supreme lord. He ie alsa, Deksbs, and
the year, the ender of all fhings, as the
days bring the life of man to a close—
Muir, Sanskrit Tests, part iv. pp. 17,
18, 24, 49, 156, &e.


337


Action of
the Vedie
and
Achaian
deities.


838


BOOK


oy


Indra, a
fod of the
bright
heaven.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


who was their friend. So completely does the older mytho-
logy of the Veda carry us away from the one idea which
must be first awakened by the genuine religious instinct of
mankind.

No stronger evidence than that which is furnished by this
contrast could be adduced to show that in no single feature
is the mythology of our Homeric poems borrowed from the
people who betook themselves to the banks of the Indus and
the Ganges. The Vedic Dyaus may in all essential features
be reproduced in the Hellenic Zeus, Like Phoibos Chry-
sdér, Indra may bear a lance or an arrow, which can never
miss its mark: but in the one case we have a mere sketch,
in the other a finished picture; and the differences in the
character of the detail preclude all idea that for either Zeus
or Hermes, Helen or Paris, Erinys or Achilleus, the Achaian
poets were indebted to the Vedic Dyaus or Sarameya, to
Pani or Sarama, to Saranyd or Aharyu. To one common
source they do indeed point; and the several stages of
developement which mark the early mythologies of India
and Hellas leave us in no doubt of the nature of the germ
from which they spring.

At once, then, we turn away from the cumbrous and com-
plicated mythology of the later Vedic literature,’ as from
the uncouth outgrowths of the Orphic theogony we turn to
the earlier phases in which the Greek epic and lyric poets
exhibit their ancestral deities. We are not concerned with
the later conflicts of Indra, which end in his being bound
by Indragit,? while we have before us a series of songs
which speak of him simply as the invincible god of the
bright heaven. Yet, although there still remains a large
difference between Indra and Apollén, too great stress can
scarcely be laid on the fact that as we trace the Vedic gods
as far back as the Veda itself will carry us, the essential
likeness between the Hindu and the Hellenic deities becomes
more and more striking. If further we find that, when thus
examined, their functions become, if the expression may be


* Ree the remarks quoted by Professor © * A summary of the story of Indra
Max Miller from Professor Both (Sane- and Indragit is given by Dr. Muir,
krit Thterature 60). Sanskrit Texts, iv. p. 422.


INDRA THE RAIN-GIVER.


used, more and more atmospheric,—if they become the CHAP.


powers which produce the sights of the changing sky,—if
their great wars are waged in regions far above the abodes of
men, the last blow is given to the theory which by the most
arbitrary of assumptions finds the root of all mythology in
the religious instincts of mankind.


——


In the Vedic Indra there is this further peculiarity, that, Meaving
although his name ceased, like that of Dyaus, to be chiefly ate


a name for the sky, and although the struggle in which he
is constantly engaged has indefinitely affected the faith of
Christendom, yet the deity himself has but little of a purely
moral or spiritual element in his character. It is true that
he is sometimes invoked as witnessing all the deeds of men
and thus as taking cognisance of their sins ; but the warfare
which he has to wage is purely a physical conflict, and it is
chiefly in the phrases by which his adversary is described,
that we find the germs of the dualistic creed which bears
the name of Zoroaster. Nowhere then, in the oldest monu-
ments of Hindu thought, is the real character of Indra lost
sight of. His home is in the bright heaven; but, as his
name denotes,’ he is specially the bringer of the most
precious of all boons to a thirsty and gaping land. He is
the giver of the rain which falls on the earth when the
tyranny of the scorching wind is overpast.

In vain is Indra assailed in his career by the same enemies
which seek to destroy the infant Herakles. The Rakshasa
fares no better than the snakes. ’

‘Vyansa, exulting and striking hard blows, smote thee,
Maghavan, upon the jaw; whereupon, being so smitten,
thou provedst the stronger and didst crush the head of the
slave with the thunderbolt.’?

Like Herakles and Phoibos again, he has to go in search
of lost or stolen cattle. With the conveying Maruts, ‘the
traversers of places difficult of access,’ he discovers the cows
hidden in their caves.

‘Great is thy prowess, Indra, we are thine, Satisfy,

‘ +Indra, a name peculiar to India, yielded indy, drop, sap’—Max Miller,
admita of but one etymology, Le. it Lectures on Language, second series, 430.


rmust be derived from the same root,  * Hig Feda Sanukita, H. H. Wilsun,
whatever that may Le, which inSanckrit vol. ii, p. 156.


The might


al


ud ite


jeas of


dra.


339


©


340 -


2 POOR


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


Maghavan, the desires of thy worshipper. The vast heave


ay has acknowledged thy might; this earth has been bowe


Indra the
rain-
bringer.


down through thy vigour.

‘Thon, thunderer, hast shattered with thy bolt the bror
and massive cloud into fragments, and hast sent down tl
waters that were confined in it, to flow at will: verily the
alone possessest all power.’!

So, again, addressing Indra as Parjanya the rain-bringe:
the poet says,

‘The winds blow strong, the lightnings flash, the plant
spring up, the firmament dissolves; earth becomes fit fc
ail creatures, when Parjanya fertilises the soil with showers.’

‘Master of tawny steeds, the remotest regions are nc
remote for thee.’?

“At the birth of thee who art resplendent, trembled th
heaven and trembled the earth through fear of thy wrath
the mighty clouds were confined: they destroyed (the dis
tress of drought), spreading the waters over the dry places.’
Lastly, as the solar god, he is the Wanderer, like the Teutoni
Wegtam, like Odysseus, Sigurd, Dionysos, Phoibos, Theseut
Bellerophén, Oidipous, Herakles and Savitar.

* Wonderful Indra, wanderer at times, thou art verily th
granter of our desires.’*

Indra then is the lord of the heaven, omnipotent and all.
seeing: but so had been, or rather was, his father Dyu
and thus some epithets which in the west are reserved fo
Zeus are in the east transferred to Indra, and the Jupite
Stator of the Latins reappears as the Indra athatar of the
Hindu. The rain-bringer must be younger than the sk>
in which the clouds have their birthplace; but howeve
sharply his personality may be defined, the meaning of the
name is never forgotten. As the Maruts, or winds, are sai¢


1 BBV. Sankita, HH. Wilson, 154. Aarindm, ce qui détermine le vbritabl


2 Db. ii. 378. 2. iii. 87. sens de cette épithéte, qui rignifie, celu
* Of. Judges, v. 4. qui se tient debout eur son cher, sur
* BR. V. Sanhita, H. H. Wileon, ses coureiers. Quel est co char?’ Or
vol. iil. p. 187. ne peut douter qu'il ne soit questior


©The Latins, it would seem, mis- du soleil, qui est souvent représenté
understood the name, Livy, i. 22. ‘Le dans les Vedas comme une rous d'or
motsthAtarestordinairementcomplétéen roulant dans ie firmament.’— Bréai.
Sanscrit par un génitif, tel que ruthasya, Hercule et Cacue, 103.


INDRA AND THE HARITS.


sometimes to course through Dyaus (the heaven), so the
clouds sometimes move in Indra (the sky). In all the phrases
which describe this god, the local colouring arising from
the climate of northern India may be plainly discerned.
Although the Delian Phoibos soon belts his golden sword
to his side, yet for sometime after his birth he lies in the
white and spotless robe in which the nymphs had wrapped
him. The Vedic Indra awakes sooner to the consciousness
of his power, and as soon as be is born, the slayer of Vritra
asks his mother, ‘ Who are they that are renowned as fierce
warriors?’! Like the Hellenic Apollién, he has golden locks
and a quiver of irresistible arrows; but the arrows have a
hundred points and are winged with a thousand feathers.
In his hand he holds the golden whip which Phoibos gives
to Hermes as the guardian of his cattle; and like Helios, he
is borne across the heavens in a flaming chariot drawn by
the tawny or glistening steeds called the Harits, whose
name and whose brightness alone reappear in the Charites
of the Hellenic land, but who still retain the form most
familiar to the Hindu in the Xanthos and Balios who are
yoked to the car of Achilleus. Like the streaming locks from
the head of Phoibos, so the beard of Indra flashes like light~
ning, as he speeds on his journey through the heaven. As
looking down on the wide earth spread beneath, he is
possessed, like Apollén, of an inscrutable wisdom. Like
him also, he chases the Dawn, Dahan4 or Daphné, of whom
he is said to be sometimes the father, sometimes the son,
and sometimes the husband; and as Phoibos causes the
death of Daphné, so Indra is said to shatter the chariot of
Dahand.?

The prayers addressed to this god show that the chief
idea associated with him was that of an irresistible material
power. The Hindu, as he comes before the deity to whom
he looks for his yearly harvest, assumes unconsciously the


however, on the banks of the Vipar


1 Main, Principal Deities of B. V. 660.
(river or water), an incident which re


+ In this myth Dahand is regarded as
hostile to Indra and as meditating
mischief, a thought which might essily
‘be suggested by the legends of Arethous
and Duphné, Her shattered car reposes,


calls the disappearance of Arethouss or
Daphné in the waters from which
‘Aphrodit8 rises. H. H. Wilson, RV.
‘Sanita, vo. i. p. 278,


341


* CHAP,


Physical
conflict
between
light and
darkness.


342 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.
BOOK attlinde of the Baal-worshipper of Syria! But the real
—~— prayer of the heart is addressed to Varuna, as the Greek in
his hour of need prays always to Zeus. The cry for mercy
from those who through thoughtlessness have broken the
law of God is never sent up to Indra, although, like Hera-
Kles, ‘he engages in many conflicts for the good of man
with overwhelming power.? Jt was impossible that it
should be so, while the great work for which Indra might
be said to exist was the battle for life or death with the
hateful monster who imprisons the rain-clouds in his dun-
geons. This battle is brought before us under o thousand
forms. His great enemy Vritra, the hiding thief, is also
Ahi, the strangling snake, or Pani the marauder.

* Ahi has been prostrated beneath the feet of the waters
which the Vritra by his might had obstructed.’#

He appears again as Atri, a name which may perhaps be
the same as the Ath of the Volsung tale and the Etzel of
tLe Nibelung song.

‘Thou, Indra, hast opened the cloud for the Angirasas:
thon hast shown the way to Atri who vexes his adversaries
by a hundred doors.’*

He is also Namuki (the Greek Amykos), and Sambara,

‘Thou, Indra, with thy bolt didst slay afar off the deceiver
Namuki.’*

‘ Thou hast slain Sambara by thy resolute eelf.’


‘The power of Indra is the one


‘The stam known as the Hansaysti
theme of the pmise accorded to him in


A, P, vii, 32.” The worshipper cals on
him who holds the thunderbolt with
his arm, whom no one can check if he
‘Wishes to give, who makes mortal men
obtain spoil in fighting, who is the
benefactor of everyone, whatever battles
there be, who is the rich of old and to
‘be called in every battle. Mux Muller,
Sanskrit Literature, 543,

«This contest with the clouds,’ says
Professor H. H. Wilson (Jntroduction
to R, V. Sankita, xxx.) ‘seems to have
suggested to the authors of the Siktas
the martial character of Indra on other
oecasions, und he is especially described
as the god of battles, the giver of victory
to his worshippers, the destroyer of the
enemies of religious rites, the subyerter
of the cities of the Asuras.”


Rich is noteworthy ag exhibiting the
germs of more than‘one myth. Indra
Fis Hansa (the sun) dwelling in light:
Vasu (the wind) dwelling in the firma-
ment: the invoker of the gods (Agni)
dwelling on the altar: the guest (of the
worshipper) dwelling in the house (as
the culinary fire): the dweller amongst
men (68 consciousness): the dweller in
the most excellent (orb, the sun): the
dweller in truth, the dweller in the sky
(the air), born in the waters, in the
rays of light, in the verity (of manifos-
tation), in the (Eastern) mountain, the

self)’—H. H. Wilson, #. V.


if 99,
*H.'H. Wilson, 8. V. Sanbita, i.
il.
* 7b. i, 87, + Ib, i. 186,
* Zi. 147. * 7b, i. 148.


INDRA AND HIS ENEMIES.


“Verily thou hast made me, Indra, thy associate, when
grinding the head of the slave Namuki like a sounding and
rolling cloud.’

Tn the same way Indra is the slayer of Bala, of Chumuri,
Dhuni, Pipon, Sushna, and many others,? and against him
the strength of the Rakshasas is concentrated in vain, for
Indra scatters them ‘with his friend the thunderbolt.’ On
the issue of this conflict depends, it is true, the welfare
of all human creatures, The victory of Indra brings with
it wealth of corn and wine and oil, but the struggle and its
issue are alike external to the human spirit. In other words,


3.


CHAP,


—


the religions instinct found little scope in the phrases which —


described the offices of Indra, and most assuredly had nothing
to do with suggesting them. It was not on the soil of
Hindustan that the momentous physical struggle between
Indra and his enemy was to become a spiritual struggle of
still more fearful proportions.

The wife of Indra is Indrani, who alone of the goddegses
who bear the names of the gods is associated with her
husband. Like the rest, she has but a vague and shadowy
personality. But although the goddesses who are not thus
simply developed from the names of their consorts are far
more prominent, yet even these are spoken of in terms little
resembling the language addressed to the supreme god
under hig many names. Ahand is a daughter of Dyaus,
and her might is great, but Indra is mightier still. Ushas
is hard to vanquish; but Indra shatters her chariot, while
Saranyt, the Harits, and the Rohits are rather beings who
do his will than deities possessed of any independent power.
In this respect a vast gulf separates the later from the early
mythology of the Hindus; and although Mahadeva retains
a nominal supremacy, yet the popular mind dwells less on
the god than on the awful terrors of his wife, whether
known as Uma, Durga, or Kali.# In an inguiry designed
chiefly to bring out the points of resemblance and difference
between cognate mythological systems, we are not called
upon to enter the unwholesome labyrinth in whjch a morbid


1H. H. Wilson, 2. V. Sanhita, i. 279.
© 2, ii, 418, 419. " Muir, Principal Deities of BR. V.577.


The wife
of Indra.


344


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


philosophy has bewildered and oppressed a race once more


eee eimple and perhaps more trathfal in their faith than the fore-


Place of
Brahma
in the
Hindu


theogouy.


fathers of the Hellenic and even of the Teutonic nations.
The more modern Hindu traditions may have an interest for
the theologian or the philosopher, while the ingenious sym-
bolical interpretations which make anything mean anything
may be as noteworthy in the pages of Brahmanic commen-
tators as in those of Chrysostom, Gregory, or Augustine.
But they lead-us away into a world of their own, where it
becomes scarcely worth while to trace the faint vestiges of
earlier thought which may be here and there discerned in
the rank crop of cumbrous and repulsive fancies. Nor is
there much profit in lists even of earlier deities in whom we
have little more than a name or an epithet. If the earth
is called Nishtigri, we have only another word denoting
Prithivi the wife of Dyaus. In Sarasvati, the watery, we
have, first, a name given to the river which with the Indus
and the waters of the Penjab made up the seven streams of
the ancient Hindu home, and then to a goddess who, as
inspiring the hymns composed in her honour, became identi-
fied with Vach,' Voice, and was invoked as the muse of
eloquence. As such, she is produced on the mountain-top,
as Athéné Akria springs from the forehead of Zeus.?- Much
in the same way, Nirriti,? the western land, to which Yama
had first crossed the rapid waters, became first the land of
death, and afterwards a personification of evil. In Sraddh&
we have nothing more than a name for religious faith."


Secrion 1V.—BRAHMA.


If an examination of the Vedic theology tends to prove that
it was wholly one of words and names, the impression is not
weakened as we survey the ponderous fancies of later times.
The fabric of Brahmanic sacerdotalism may have reached
gigantic proportions, and may exhibit a wonderful ingenuity

2 Gr. ros, efray, decode, Latin vox, connected with that of the Ithakan
‘Yocare. Neritos and the Lenkadian Nerikos?

2 Muir, SanSkrit Texts, part iv,  * ‘Tho Latin word credo, "I believe,”
P. 360, note. ig the same as the Sanskrit Saddha.'—


* Mux Miller, Lectures om » Max Miller, Chips, 1. 42.
second series, 515. Is the name Nicriti


FLEXIBLE CHARACTER OF BRAHMA.


345


in the piecing together of its several parts, but it cannot be CHAP.
regarded as the result of a logical system. The properties of


Vishnu are those of Agni, Vayu, and Sarya; and as Agni is
all the deities, so also is Vishnu. The character of Brahma
is not less flexible. At first the word is but a name for the
self-existent principle, and the various mythical acts recorded
of him are not only susceptible of a spiritual or metaphysical
interpretation, but are actually so interpreted in all the Hindu
comments on the sacred literature of the country. Asin the
Orphic theogony, the generation of Brahma begins sometimes
with the great mundane egg; but it is Brahma who therein
produces himself. The self-existent lord, ‘desiring to pro-
duce various creatures from his own body, first, with a
thought, created the waters, and deposited in them a seed.
This seed became a golden egg, resplendent as the sun, in
which he bimself was born as Brahma, the progenitor of all
worlds.’' He is the first god of a later Indian Trimiurtti;
but the threefold deity of Yaska is Agni, Vayu, and Sirya,
and thus Dr. Muir concludes that the conjunction of Brahma,
Vishnu, and Rudra (? Siva) was unknown to that ancient
commentator.? Even in the Mahfbharata, Brahma is both
ereated and uncreated. In that poem Mahadeva (uéyas Osos,
the great god), is the creator of Brahma, Vishnu, and Indra,
‘From his right side he produced Brahma, the originator of
the worlds, and from his left side Vishnu, for the preserva-
tion of the universe, and when the end of the age had


) Muir, SanokriteTeats, part iv.p.27, Texts, part iv. pp, 134-6. To the ob-


2 ‘The three names given by Yaska
are with him inere namey for ono object.
“These deities,’ he snys, ‘receive many
designations in consequence of their
groatness, or from the diversity of their
fauctions, as (the appellations of) hotri,
adhvaryo, brabman, and udgatri are
applied to one und the same person’
The functions connected with these
names carry us back to the old mythical
phrases. ‘ Indra’s function is to bestow
moisture, to slay Vritra; and all exer-
tions of force are,the work of Indra’
‘The function of Aditya (the sun) is to
draw up moisture and to retain it by
his raya: end whatever is mysterious ia
the work of Aditya’—Muix, Sanskrit


jection that the Puranic mythology,
of which the Trimirtti of Brahma,
Vishgu and Siva ia @ part, might bare
grown up along with the Vedic, Dr.
Muir answers that ‘if Yarku had been
cognisant of any other than the Vedic
mythology (at least, if he had attached
any unthority to any other), he would
not have failed to make some reference
to the latter, and would have endea-
voured to blend and reconcile it with
the former, As we find no attempt of
the kind in his work, we must conclude
either that the Puranic mythology had
no existence in hia day, or that he

it as undeserving of any atten-
tion’ —JB, 187.


Padea .


346


BOOK
IL


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


arrived, the mighty god created Rudra.’! But Mahfdeva is


+ Ja’ identified by the poeta of the Mahabharata with Rudra,


Projapati.


Visva-
Kerman.


Siva, Agni, Sirya, Varuna, the Asvins, and a host of othe
deities, and, as the originator of all life, even assumes the
forms and functions of the Hellenic Priapos.?  Mahddeva.
again, is himself also the destroyer Siva, and like Vishnu he
wields a dreadful bow made by Visvakarman, These bowr
are used by the two gods in a terrible battle, the resul
being that the bow of Mahfdeva is relaxed and Vishnu ir
esteemed the superior.’ Elsewhere it is said that Brahms
and Mahfdeva are both sprung from Krishna, the one from
the’lotus issuing from his navel, the other from his forehead
like Dahand and Athéné from the head of Dyaus or Zeus.‘

As Prajapati, Brahma offers violence to his own daughter
and from this myth of Indra and Ahbalya a story is produce¢
much resembling that of the Hellenic Erichthonios.’ He i
also a worshipper of the Linga, and acts as the charioteer o
Mahfdeva or of Rudra, who springs from his forehead (as h
does also from that of Krishna), glorious as the noon-da;
sun.°

Like Brahma, Visvakarman, the Creator, is one of th
many names which may be applied to almost any of th
gods at the will of the worshipper. Wise and mighty i
act, Visvakarman orders all things, and men desire the at
tainment of good in the world where ‘he, the One Being
dwells beyond the seven Rishis.’? He is the maker of th
region Sutala, where by his will, as in the Greek Elysior
‘neither mental nor bodily pains, nor fatigue,nor wearinese
nor discomfiture, nor diseases afflict the inhabitants.’® H
is also the son of Bhuvana, the first of all beings who spran,
into existence from the earth.’


+ Muir, Sanskrit Texte, pp. 156, 162.

2 7b, 160. * Th. 146, 147.

« Tb. 193. * Ib, 39,

* 7. 190. Athéné in like manner
springs fully armed from the head
of Zeus; bat in. the story
Vishnu Pussna (Muir, i. $81), Rudra
is both gun and moon, as dividing his
body into two parts, male and female,
like the Greek Hermapbroditos. The
portions into which his male form is


further divided seom to point to tt
month of the year which is represente
by Rudra himself, as by Aditi.

* Muir, Sanskrit Texts, part iv. p. 7

5 1B. 129.

* The name Bhnvana itself is fro
the same root with the Greek péeis ar
our own words Be and Being. It hy
been urged with at least some pleut
bility that the Latin Consua is a nar
of the samo kind, snd that it is not


THE DWELLING OF ZEUS.


Szctiox V.—ZEUS.


In the conception of the poets known to us by the name of
Homer, the earth on which we tread is covered with a gross
and thick air, through which course the clouds, and in which 7
the winds work their will. Above this air rises the serene
Aithér or Ether, the abode of Zeus, never sullied by mists or
vexed with storms. Here he dwells, surrounded by the gods
of Olympos; but while these can visit the earth and take
part in the quarrels of mortal men, Zeus alone may not
descend for this purpose from the clear heaven whence he
looks down on all that is being done beneath him. Itis true
that there are on the earth some whom he loves, and others
whom he hates; and when his son Sarpédén is amitten by


347


cHaP.
ee
dwelling of


Zeus in
Ether.


the spear of Patroklos, the tears of Zeus fall in large rain- -


drops from the sky. But that which he wills must be done
by others, and in their toils he can have no share. So when
the hour for the battle between Achilleus and Hektor is
come, Zeus tells the gods, the streams, and the nymphs,
who sit around his throne, that they may go down and
choose each his side, while for himself, though he cares for
the mortals whose death-struggle is at hand, the sight of all
that is done on the plains of Ilion will none the less gladden
his eyes as he looks down from Olympos. When, after the
conflict of Achilleus with the burning river, the gods turn
their weapons on each other, the mind of Zeus remains un-
ruffled, and be listens in silence to the charge brought against
Héré by Lété, as she lays before his feet the arrows of her
child Artemis.’

Thus for the poets of the Iliad and the Odyssey, Zeus,
though he might be called the gatherer of the dark clouds,?


‘be referred to the verb Consulere. It
is by no meens likely that even the title
of the Dii Consentes can be taken as
indicating & divine council: and the
coincidence is Dosewarthy between the
‘Latin Consus and the Hindu Ganesa,
the lord of life and of the reproductive
powers of nature, the name reoppeuring
In the Greek yévos and our Ain. Hence
it is that when Romulus is in need of


women for hie new city, it is to Consus
that be makes bis vows and prayers,
‘The Consualia would thus precisely
correspond. with the Eleusinien festival


ot eat 388, .

2 eis Alyloxos. ‘Le verbo
dteow, qui signife # lancer, a fait d'une
part le substantif of, chévre (4 cause de
Is nature bondissante de Tanitual), et de


The un-
changing
light.


348


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


‘was pre-eminently the lord of the bright heaven, and the


— thought most closely associated with the name was that of a


The idea
of Zeus
magerted
hy-
teal phe-
nomena.


serene and unchangeable splendour. As the heavy masses
of vapour were cloyen by the rays of the sun, the blue heaven
was seen smiling on the havoe wrought by storms and tem-
pest, itself undimmed by the years which devoured the
generations of men, From the face of this heaven the
morning sprang to scatter the shades of night. Beneath
it the lightning flashed, the rain fell, the winds blew; but
above them all shone still the light which can know no
change.

Without referring, therefore, to the legends of other na-
tions, we are brought at once by the language even of our
Homeric poets to that earliest form of thought in which
words now used to denote spiritual conceptions conveyed
only the impression left on the human mind by the pheno-
mena of the outward world. As man awoke gradually to a
conscious perception of the things around him, the sensation
most comforting in the alternations of a day and night alike
uncomprehended would be that of the pure and bright heaven
which broods over the earth as the sun speeds on his journey
across the sky. If, then, in the names which were afterwards
used to denote the supreme God we haye words which in all
Aryan dialects convey this primary idea of brightness, a, clear
light is at once shed on the first stages in the mental and
moral education of mankind. The profound splendour of the
unclouded heaven must mark the abode of the Being who
made and sustains all things; and thus names denoting at
first only the sky became in the West as in the East names
of God, the Zeus Patér (the Father) of the Greeks corres-
ponding to the Dyauspitar of the Hindu. If even in the
Vedic hymns the most prominent deity is Indra, still Indra
was himself worshipped as the god of the bright sky, and as


autre lee mote ordi, kareeis, tee primitf etic): plus tard, on tradusit 2
péte, De ld une nouvelle série d'images dieu qui porte Pigide. Homére. semble
et de fables og Ja chévre joue le role se souvenir de Ix premiére eignification,
principal. Légide, avant d’étre un quand il nous montre, au seul mouve-
bouclier fait on peau de chévre, était ment du bouclier, le tonnerro qui éclate,
le ciel au moment de Torage; Jupiter [Ida qui se couvre de muagea, et Jes
alyloxos était le dieu qui envoie Ie tem- hommes frappés de terreur.—Bréal,
péte (il faut entendre fxw duns son sens Hercule et Cacus, 116.


ZRUS A NAME FOR THE SUPREME GOD.


the son of the brilliant Dyn. As in the Hellenic land Kronos
was displaced by Zeus, so in the country of the seven rivers,
Dya gave way to the lord of the wealth-bringing rain clouds.
The process (even if we assign a very late origin to the
mythical Kronos) was in both cases the same. The epithet
could not become or be long retained as a personal name
until its original meaning had been obscured or forgotten.
The Greek had his Aér, his Aithér, and his Ouranos to express
the visible heavens, and Zeus became to him more and more
the personal God whose hand is seen in hie worke. In India
the name Dyaus retained, as we have seen, its appellative
force, and as a designation for the supreme God, was sup-
planted by the less significant Indra.

But in the West, as in the East, the original character of
the god is in close accordance with the etymology of the
word. The Athenians called on Zeus to rain on their land;
the Latin poet spoke of the glistening heaven which by all
is named Jove, while the phrases ‘sub dio vivere,’ ‘sub Jove
frigido,’ and even ‘malus Jupiter’ remained common expres-
sions in every day speech.!

The idea of brightness was, however, not the only one
suggested by the sight of the clear heaven. If the sky beams
with light, it is also spread as a covering over the earth
which lies beneath it, and Zeus was thus Ouranion who
spread his veil over his bride; but before he came to be
spoken of as son of Kronos, the attribute had suggested the
idea of a person, and the Western Ouranos corresponded
with the Vedic Varuna. In this case the name remained
more transparent in the West than in the East. The Vedic
‘Varuna becomes the moral ruler of the universe, and the
Father and friend of man; but in the Hellenic land the
starry Ouranos is the son to whom Gaia gives birth in order
that he may cover everything and be a steadfast seat
for the blessed gods,’ and we look in vain for the spiritual
attributes which belong to Varuna in the hymns of the Rig
Veda.


1 Boor, & gine Zed, ward rit dpoipas The word Hier has the sume trans-
‘raav 'ACnvaluy. pret a meaning.—Max Miller, Lectures
Aspice hoe sublime candens quod on Panguage, sreond seriee, 434,
invocant omnes Jovem. * Hesiod, Theog. 122.


349


OHA P.
weit


The Latin


Jupiter.


Zous Ou-
ranion.


350
BOOK
iL
SS

The my-

thical and

spiritual
us.


Influence
of mytho-
logy on
religion,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


But the developement of a personal Zeus was followeé
necessarily by two results, which long continued astonish-
ingly distinct the one from the other. The thought of Zeur
aa the one God and Father gave birth to a religion, The
many names employed to denote the varying phases of the
sky became each the germ of a myth, and every one of these
myths, when translated into the conditions of human life
tended to degrade the idea of the god as much as the idea o1
his changeless perfection, rising more and more in the mind
tended to raise it. According to the latter, he would be the
righteous Judge, seen by none, yet beholding all, looking
down from heaven on the children of men to see if they wil
understand and seek after God, appointing to them a life of
labour for their highest good, and finally recompensing tc
all men after their works. By the other process he would
become all that names applied to outward phenomena must
denote when used to signify the actions of a personal and
conscious being. As in every land the dews of heaven fer-
tilise the earth, Zeus must be the husband of many brides,
the father of countless children in every country. As looking
down on the havoc caused by drought or pestilence, storm or
war, he would be a god of merciless indifference and disinte-
rested cruelty. He must smile alike over the wealth of a
teeming harvest or the withered fruits of a sun-scorched
land. But the blighting of a spring-tide fair in its promise
is his work, and he would thus become capricious as well
as treacherous, while the interchangeable characteristics
of the. earliest gods would heighten still mdre the repul-
sive features of the anthropomorphised Zeus. If the old
hymn had praised Aditi as ‘mother, father, and son,’
Zeus must become at once the brother and the husband,
and his own daughters through many generations would
become the mothers of his children. The transference of
these phrases to the relations of human life has its neces-
sary result in the fearful horrors of the tale of Oidipous and
Tokasté. .

That the two streams of religion and mythology ran on
side by side, or rather that the same words are used to ex-
press two wholly different lines of thought, is abundantly


HESIODIC MORALITY AND THEOLOGY.


proved by Greek not less than by Hindu literature. The
result was that the same man might seem to speak two
languages, and perhaps delude himself into the notion that
under the name of Zeus he spoke of one person, and of one
person only. This would be the case especially with the
classes, which, although familiar, or because they were fami-
liar, with the complicated mythical lore of their country,
might not care to analyse their own thoughts, or fairly to
face the difficulties involved in many or most of these ancient
stories. But there would be a lower class who, as being
perhaps practically ignorant of these narratives, would be
saved in great measure from this traditional influence.’
However imperfect his conceptions may have been, it is
certain that the swineherd Eumaios did not derive his
religious convictions from mythical phrases, when he told
Odysseus that God gives and withholds according to his
pleasure and in the plenitude of his power. Nor can too
great a stress be laid on the fact that, as the mythology
grew more complicated and more repulsive, ideas of morality
and religion became more reasonable and more pure. No-
where is this conclusion so clearly forced upon us as in the
Hesiodic Works and Days. In this poem the teacher
who bids his friend to deal with all men after the rule of
righteousness which comes from Zeus,’ who tells that justice
and truth shall in the end prevail,? and that they who do
evil to others inflict evil on themselves,‘ who is sure that
the eyes of God are in every place, that the way of evil is
broad and snfooth, and the path of good rough and narrow
at the first, tells us also how Zeus bade the gods to make
Pandéra fair to look upon but all evil within, and langhed
at the thought of the miseries which should overtake man-
kind when all the evils should be let loose from her box,
while, to crush them utterly, Lope should remain a prisoner

1 What, asks Professor Max Miller,
‘aid the swineherd Eumaios know of
the intrieate Olympian theogony? Had


he ever heard the name of the Charitos
or the Harpyias? Could he have told


higher powers that rule it, Eumsaios
knows only of just gods, “who hate
erael deeds, but honour justice and the
righteous works of men.’’—Lectures on


who was the father of Aphrodité, who
were her husbands and her children?
T doubt it; and when Homer introduers
him tous, speaking of this life end the


Language, second serie, 453.


7216,
#263,


351


CHaP,


352


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


within it. So conscious apparently is the poet that the


poalbcstee Zeus who thus cheats mankind is not the Zeus who com-


The Zeus
of the
Tragic
poote.


mands them ‘to do justice and mercy, that he can use the
same name without a thought that he is dishonouring the
just and holy God whom he reverences. It seems impos-
sible to ignore a distinction without which the Hesiodic
poem becomes unintelligible. With our Homeric poets the
contrast is not so marked, simply because their thoughts
were not so earnest and their hearts were not so wakened
by the sterner experiences of human life. With these
moral indifference would naturally find expression in con-
fusion of language, and they might lead others to think,
as they themselves may have fancied, that the Zeus to whom
they prayed in moments of real anguish was the Zeus who
laughed at the wretcheduess and the ruin of mankind,
Still less can it be said that the mythology of India choked
the growth of a right faith. The Hindu might in his prayer
employ the names of Varuna or Dyaus, but he knew well
that these were only names for One whose nature, infinite,
and incomprehensible, yet corresponded with his own, and of
whose aid he felt himself to stand in the deepest and most
constant need.

But if it be true generally that the Greek, especially in
the prehistoric ages, ‘was not aware that there were dif-
ferent tributaries which entered from different points into
the central idea of Zeus,’) it was far otherwise with the few
to whom a belief in the righteousness of God was no empty
phrase but a profound and practical convictibn. The fact
that national and political institutions were intertwined
inextricably with the old mythology, if they were not actually
based upon it, only brought out its repulsive features more
prominently before all who could not bring themselves to
believe that the righteous God could issue to men immoral
commands or himself do the things which he condemned in
them. Whether the difficulties thus involved in the tra-
ditional creed should lead them to covert opposition or to
open antagonism, would depend much on the temper and
the circumstances of those who felt them. There are some

1 Max Miller, Lectures on Language, second series, £42.


IDEAS OF THE POETS.


who, like Sophokles, are well content if they can express
their own convictions without assailing popular ideas; there
are others who, like Euripides, cannot rest until they bring
others to see inconsistencies which to themselves are palpable
and glaring. Yet it cannot be denied that the thoughts of
Sophokles are as true and high as those of the younger
poet. There is nothing in the latter more outspoken than
the words in which Sophokles tells us that the laws of
righteousness are established in heaven and that in them
God is great and cannot grow old. But where there is an
earnest yearning for truth, this happy condition of mind will
not probably last long. The thought of the mischief which
the popular creeds inflict on ordinary minds will lead them
openly to condemn a system which they might otherwise
treat with indifference or contempt; and to this sense we
may ascribe the protests of Kenophanes and Protagoras, of
Anaxagoras and Herakleitos, of Pindar and of Plato. The
controversy was brought to an issue, when Euripides said
plainly that if the gods are righteous, the stories of the poets
are wretched falsehoods, and that if they do the things which
the poets ascribe to them, then they are not gods at all: and
this issue was anticipated by the conviction of Aischylos that
Zeus was a mere name, one of many names, for the One true
God, which might serve to convey some faint notion and in-
adequate idea of his goodness and his greatness.

Hindu and Greek, then, alike worshipped the same God,
of whom they also spoke sometimes under other names. But
these names Were in no case borrowed the one from the other.
The analysis of language has proved that in some instances
Greeks, Latins, or Lithuanians have preserved older forms
than any which are exhibited in Sanskrit, while the varia-
tions in the incidents and local colouring of the myths carry
us back to one common source for all in the home of the yet
undivided Aryan tribes. The seed, however, could not ger-
minate while as yet there was no failure of memory ; and if,
when the meaning of words was in part or wholly forgotten,
expressions not less graceful once than true became coarse
and mischievous, we may learn to curb our indignation when

+ On this subject see further, Muir, Sanskrit Tests, part iv. p. 41.
vou. L. aA


858


CHAP,


—


The nnme


Zeus,


354


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


we find that both the process and the result were alike in-


—~— evitable.


Its trans-


But the name Zeus is not confined to Greeks and Hindus,


formations. Te Zeus Patér of the former and the Dyaus-pitar of the


latter represent the Jupiter of the Latins, and the Tuisco,
Zio, Tyr and Tiw of the German nations. The etymological
changes of the word are indeed almost numberless. The
brightness of the heaven reappears in the Latin dies, the
Sanskrit dyu, and our day: and from the same root spring
the Greek Theos, the Latin Deus, and the Lithuanian
Diewas. These changes have been fully traced by Professor
Max Miiller;! but we must here note that the Greek Zen,
Zenos answers to the Latin Janus, Januspater; that Janus
again, resolved into Dianus and Diana, carries us to the
Greek digammated forms As és, A‘Fa, and appears again in
the word divine. With these may be taken the forms con-
nected with Zeus by the transition of dy (Dyaus) into j
(Jupiter, Janus, Juno), or dj, as in the Djovis of Oscan in-
scriptions and the old Italian deity Vedjovis (Vejovis). Akin
to all these is the Sanskrit deva, a word which like Dyaus
denoted only splendour, but was afterwards as a name for the
gods; but although it had thus acquired the general notion
of deity, it was never applied to any-but the bright gods who
were the companions of Indra. The evil powers of night or
darkness are Adcva, atheists, or enemies of the devas; and
thus even on Indian soil we find the germ of that moral and
spiritual meaning which was imported into a myth purely
physical in its origin. While the adeva grew, like Asmo-
deus,” into malignant demons, Vritra the cloud enemy of
Indra was gradually passing into the evil god of Iranian
theology. If the Diabolos of the New Testament, a word
not found in the Septuagint, is to be referred to forms like
Dyavan and Diovis, the name deva had lost in the West the
meaning of brightness which it retained in the East,* though
the evil spirit was still regarded as the prince of the powers
of the air. The Teutonic devil is thus traced to that Iranian

1 Lectures om Language, second series, _ * Eshem-dey, atshma-daéra, ‘le démon
453. For Mr. Peile’s remarks on the de 2a concupiscence,'-—Bréul, Hercule et


connection of Theos and Deus vee note Cacus, 136.
p- 327 * Grimm, Deuteche Mythologie, 939.


LOCAL TRADITIONS.


source from which the Jews derived their later complicated
demonology. That the term Diabolos, as applied to Satan,
should be regarded as identical with the Greek word denoting
a slanderer, is a confusion precisely similar to that which
turned Lyk&én and his sons into wolves and the seven
arkshas or shiners into bears.

If from the Greek conceptions of Zeus we separate all
those which, springing from the idea of his relations to men
as a Father, grew up into a moral and religious faith, the
rest may all be traced to mythical phrases which describe
the varying appearances of the heavens and the manifold
influence of the atmosphere on the earth and ita fruits. Of
the countless names thus employed the most transparent
would remain as attributes, while the greater number would be
localised either as places or as persons. Hence would spring
up distinctions between the Zeus of Arkadia, Dodona, Olym-
pos and Crete, distinctions arising wholly from a forgetful-
ness of the original meaning of words, but fixed irrevocably
by the real or apparent identity of the mythical epithets
with any mythical names which had become geographical.'
The sun as Endymién plunges into Latmos, the land of
sleep; but the presence of the Latmian hill was a conclusive
answer to any who might dare to call in question the veracity
of the local legend. The old mythical speech had its Phaia-
kian or cloudland geography. It had its Arkadia and Delos,
the birthplace of the light, its Phoinikia and Ortygia, the
purple land of the quail and the dawn, its bright Lykian
regions with ‘its golden stream of Xanthos, its Idi or earth
on which rest the rays of the newly risen sun, its Graian or
Hesperian lands where the light dies out in the evening.
Carrying with them the treasures of their common inherit-
ance, the Aryan tribes could not fail to give to the hills and
streams of their new homes the names which had once de-
scribed only the morning, the heaven, or the sun. The lord
of day sinks to sleep in the glowing west: and the tomb of
Endymién could therefore be only in Elis. The god of the
plue ether is throned in light: so also must the seat of the
anthropomorphised Zeus be on some hill whose name, like

3 See Book i. ch. x
A ag


353


CHAP.
L
—


The Zeus
of local
traditions,


356


B00K


qth


‘The birth
of Zeus,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


the Delos of Apollén and the Athens of his virgin sister,
expresses the one idea of splendour; and thus he was made
to dwell on the summit of the Arkadian Lykaios and the
Olympian heights of Mysia and Thessaly. As the veil of
night is slowly withdrawn, the clear heaven is first seen in
the east, and thus Zeus must be born in Lyktos or in Dikté;
but the Cretan who could point to a Diktaian cave in his
own land clung tenaciously to the notion that the child who
was there nourished by Amaltheia was not the Zeus of
Arkadia and Olympos.

The story of his birth and exploits is to be gathered not
so much from the Iliad and Odyssey as from the Hesiodic
and Orphic theogonies; but unless we find manifest contra-
dictions between the accounts which they set before us, it is
unsafe to infer that the poets whom we style Homeric were
unacquainted with details or incidents about which they are
silent, even if it be assumed that their poems in their present
shape are more ancient than those which bear the names of
Hesiod or Orpheus. That the theogony of the former was
far less complicated and retrospective than that of the latter,
there can scarcely be a doubt. The prison to which they
assign Kronos is proof that they looked on Zeus as one who
bad not always been supreme in power; but the names with
which their theogony begins are not those of Chaos and
Gaia, but those of Téthys and Okeanos.' The struggle be-
tween Zeus and the Titans may be inferred from the fact
that Héré and Hephaistos speak of them as thrust away
under Tartaros ;* but the Polyphémos of the’ Odyssey who
feeds his flocks in broad pastures has nothing but his size
and his one eye in common with the Hesiodic Kyklépes who
forge the thunderbolts of Zeus.?


> Ht, xiv, 202.

* Bid. 279.

* In the Guelie story of Osgar, the
aon of Oisein, the monster appears with
two eyes; but he ia blinded, av in all
other forms of the myth, and for the
same reason.—Campbell, Tules of the
West Highlands, ii, 207. Still, it is
significant that ‘ not a bit of him was to
be seer but his eyes with blue-green
scales of hardening upon him,’ the livid
garment of «tarm-cloud. Bnt in another
legend we bave the genuine Kyklops.


‘There was seen nearing us

A big man upon one foot,

With his black, dusky bluck-skin mantle,

With his haromering tovls and his ateol
lathe,

“One shagey eye in his forehead ;

He net off like the wind of the spring
time

Out to the dark mountains of the high
grounds,

He would take but a single leap

O'er each single cold glen of the desert.’

Campbell, 2, 392.


THE VORACITY OF KRONOS.


The lateness of many at least among the Hesiodic ideas
seems to be manifested not so much in the allegorical
elements introduced, as in the transparent meaning of the


names. Zeus and Hades, Phoibos and Lété already denoted iru:


the conflicting powers of light and darkness, of day and
night; but these words had in great part lost their original
force, and the poet who wished to frame a systematic
theogony felt constrained to speak of Aitbér (ether) and
Hémera as children of Nyx and Erebos. In some important
points the story of Ouranos is told over again in the myths
of Kronos and Zeus. From Ouranos and Gaia, according
to the Hesiodic theogony, spring Koios and Krios, Hyperién
and Tapetos, the Kyklépes and other monstrous beings,
together with Rhea the mother of Zeus. All these Ouranos
hid away in the secret places of Gaia who called on Kronos
to avenge her wrongs and his own. From the blood of the
mutilated Ouranos which fell on the broad sea was born the
Jaughter-loving Aphrodité.? Thus the goddess of love and
beauty is, like the Kyklépes, older than the Father of
gods and men; nor can anything show more clearly how
thoroughly the mythology of the Aryan world was in con-
flict with its religion. Kronos and Rhea, then, became the
parents of Hestia, Damétér, Héré and Hades; but these are
all swallowed by Kronos, who knows that some day he will
be dethroned by some child of his own. In grief of heart,
Rhea, shortly before the birth of Zeus, betakes herself to
Ouranos and Gaia, who send her to the Cretan Lyktos, and
there Zeus, fike Mithras and Krishna, was born in a cave
which Apollodoros calls the cave of Dikté. A stone wrapped
in swaddling-clothes was presented to Kronos, who, taking


All this oxplains itself. The hammer-
ing tools and steel latho are the thunder
and lightning; and tho thundercloud
strides across whole valleys at each step,
and clings to the high grounds aud the
mountain sides.

"It is, in Professor Max Miller's
belief, manifest allegory when the ‘long
Billa,” ‘the pleasant dwellings of the
gods,’ are reckoned among the children
of Guia, —Chips, 8. 66.

# This ja probably the only meaning
which the word prAqunedhs conveyed to


the pocta of the /Hiad and Odyssey. But
tho whole mythology of Aphrodité ren-
ders it fur more likely that we have
here w confusion similar to that which.
turned Lykéén into a wolf, and that the
epithet was originally gcouen'ts, nob
perlups, as in the line (200) marked ae
spurious in the Hesiodie Theogony, &rt
sndter ieGadsOn, but from the attri-
butes which made her the vehement
lover of Adonis. With this epithot we
may compare that of Pallas (the Phailie)
Athéns.


357


CHAP.
L


‘The ini-
quities of
08,


358


BOOK


—~


‘The war of
the Titans.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


it for the new-born babe, swallowed it as he had swallowed.
the others. Deceived at length by Gaia, Kronos disgorged
them all, the stone first and the living children afterwards.’
The stone was set up by Zeus for 1 memorial in Pytho.
But Zeus, when he became the husband of Métis, felt the
same strange desire which had Jed Ouranos and Kronos to
consume their children; and thus, by the advice again of
Ouranos ‘and Gaia, he swallowed Métis before she became
the mother of Athéné. In these exaggerations of a late
age we trace the same thought which made the Vedic poet
spegk of the Dawn as making men old, yet as ever young
herself. The light of the heaven calls all things into life;
but the heaven retains its unchangeable beauty while gene-
rations spring up on the earth and pass away. The
children swallowed are thus produced again; and ao the
Heaven or the Dawn, regarded as Time, might be spoken
of as relentless and cruel, and as rightly punished by their
injured children.?

A hard fight now awaited Zeus, who, by delivering the
children of Ouranos, had been armed for the struggle with
thunder and lightning.* On his side against the Titans and
the offspring of Kronos were ranged Kottos, Gyas, and
Briare6s, who cast the Titans into Tartaros and there left
them chained. The struggle itself is described in language
which shows how little the poet cared about the subject.
Thunders, lightning, and earthquake attest the majesty of


* With this myth Grimm's story of
the Wolf and the Seven Little Goats

sente a striking parallel. The wolf
is here the night or the darkness which
tries to swallow up the seven days of
the week, und actually swallows six.
The erventh, the youngest, escapes by
hiding herself in the clockease; in other
words, the week is not quite run out, and
‘before it comes to an end the mother of
the goats unrips the wolf's ntomach and
places stones in it in place of the little
goats who come trooping ont, as the days
of the week begin again to run their
course, °

+ Kronos himself is indeed simply
produced from the epithet Kronidés us
applied to Zeus in « sense corresponding
to the Hebrew phrase‘ Ancient of Days


When this fact was forgotten, the word
was regarded as meuning ‘son of
Kronos:” end then it became necessary
‘to assign Kronos a place in the Theu-
gony and provide him with a wife
and children. Seo further, Mux Muller,
Chips, ii, 162. The name Métis ie
closely connected with Medeia, and do-
notes the wisdom which stands out with
special clearncss in the Latin Minerva.
‘Thus the phrase would ron that the
Dawn was the daughter of Wisdom :
but aa the older myth ayoke of the dawn
ts springing from’ the farchead of the
aky, there was no help for the later my-
thopejste but to make Zeus swallow
‘Métis.


® Hesiod, Theog. 504.


THE TITANS AND THEIR KINSFOLE.


Zeus, by whose thunderbolts land and ocean are wrapped in
seething fire ; the din of the conflict is as though the earth
and the solid heavens were crashing together; and nine
days would pass before a brazen anvil (Akmén) let down
from the earth could fathom the depths of Tartaros.!
Above this gloomy prison-house are the roots of the earth
and the barren sea, and there within walls and gates built
by Poseidén dwell the three sons of Ouranos who befriended
Zeus in his hour of need.

Yet this struggle which, like that between Zeus and
Typhéeus the latest-born child of Gaia and Tartaros, is
related with so much pomp of high sounding but empty
words, is the conflict which runs through all mythology and
which, in its more human forms, has a singular and unfailing
interest, It is the battle of Phoibos with the Pythian
monster, of Indra with the throttling snake Vritra, of Sigurd
with the dragon of the Glistening Heath, of Oidipous with
‘the Sphinx, and in the earlier phase of the legend, of
Achilleus and Agamemnén with Paris.

Having related the story of Typhéeus, the Hesiodic
Theogony recounts the loves of Zeus with Métis, Themis,
Eurynomé, Démétér, Mnémosyné, Lété, and with Héré, who
in this scheme is the latest of his brides and has fallen far
below the majesty with which she is invested in the Iliad
and the Odyssey. Of these names some are the growth of
a comparatively late age. The dawn-goddess of the fur east
is described as waking all men and receiving praise from
every thinler; and the character here faintly attributed to
her is brought out more clearly in the Hellenic Athéné,
and finds its utmost developement in the Latin Minerva.
Atbéné, then, as the goddess of the morning, must have a
mother with qualities corresponding to her own, and this

‘ ‘This is indubitably tho hammer of and the Sk. acman, each of which means
‘Thor, which is sunk eight rasks beneath ‘a stone,” and the latter also “m thun-
the surfuce of the earth and which takes derbolt;” and with the Greek txysv
nine months to rise again to Asgard. which commonly moans an anvil, but
In fact the Greek word translated by which in Hesiod, They. 722, where he
‘anvil’ is etymologically identical with speaks of the ydaxeay &xpar olpavééer
the Teutonic ‘hammer’ ‘Professor xarlev, can mean nothing but the thun-
Curtius,’ mys Mr. Peile, ‘seems to be derbolt.—Introduction to Greek ond


Fight in combining the 0. H.G.hamar, Latin Etymology, 87.
Ser Aammer, with the Lithuasieo altman


859


CHAP,


Other
forms of
thie
struggle.


‘The loves
of Zeus.


360


BOOK


———


The twelve
Olympian
deities.


The in-
fancy uf
Zous,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


parent was found in the Wisdom which is wedded to Zeus.
To this class of invented names belong those of the Hérai,
or Hours, and their mother Themis; but the name cf
Eurynomé, the mother of the Charites, is more true to the
original character of these beautiful maidens. The broad
spreading light is the parent of the glistening beings who in
the form of horses draw the chariot of Indra, and in the
west are the maidens who attend on Aphrodité, But as the
dawn may be regarded as springing from the face-of the
sky, so in another and an earlier myth Athéné springs
armed from the forehead of Zeus, and the dark powers of
night at once retreat before her. The same idea rendered
it necessary to assign to Héré some offspring of her own
unaided power whether in the person of Typhéeus,' or, as
the Hesiodic theogony relates, of Héphaistos also.

Thus the number of the kinsfolk and the children of Zeua
is already large; but of the class of deities specially known
at Athens in the days of Thucydides as the twelve Olympian
gods neither our Homeric poems nor the Hesiodie theogony
know anything. In the latter, Zeus and Poseidén are the
shakers of the earth and sea, while Hades dwells in the
regions under the earth; but of a threefold partition of the
Kosmos between the three Kronid brothers we have no
formal mention. Of Poseidén the Theogony tella us only
that he built the walls within which Briareds guards the
Titans: nor is there any difference of rank between Arés
and his sisters Hébé and Eileithyia, or again between
Démétér and Eurynomé. From the number of tne so-called
twelve, Hades is excluded; but in the Iliad and Odyssey he
appears at will in the Olympian home of Zeus, and moves as
an equal among the gods who are there assembled.

The myth as related by Apollodoros has received some
amplifications. The child Zeus in the Diktaian cave is
nourished by the nymphs Adrasteia and Ida with the milk
of Amaltheia, and the armed Kourétes clash their shields
and spears lest the cry of the babe should reach the ear of his

\ eTyphéeus, the whitlwind or Ty- Ho belches fre, that is, lightnings iseue
phoen, has a hundred drugon or serpent from the clouds, and his roaring is like


ends, the long writhing striz of the howling of wild dogs.’ —8. B. Gould,
which ron before the hurrieane-cloud. The Were Wolf, p. 116


THE ARKADIAN LYKOSOURA,


father Kronos. In the war with the Titans the Kyklépes
give to Zeus their thunder and lightning, to Hades the
helmet which in the Iliad renders the wearer invisible, and
to Poseidén a trident. The struggle is followed by the
casting of lots between the three Kronid brothers for the
partition of the heaven above, of the earth beneath, and of
the hidden regions under the earth. There was no need of
any such method. The old mythical phrase rendered it
impossible that any but Zeus could be the lord of the bright
heaven. In other points also the account of the mytho-
grapher is at variance with that of the Hesiodic poet.
According to the latter Aphrodité is the offspring of Oura-
nos; the former represents her as the child of Zeus and
Didné, and makes the scheme of things begin with Ouranos
himself instead of Chaos,

That Zeus should be nursed by Ida is an incident for
which we are at once prepared when in the Eastern myth
we find that Ida is a name of the earth, and that she is
assigned as a wife to Dyaus. That he should have a
sanctuary specially sacred on the Lykaian heights in Arka-
dia was, as we have seen, as indispensable as the birth of
Phoibos in Delos. But the Arkadian legend is noteworthy
as showing the fantastic forms which spring up m rank
luxuriance from mythical phrases when either wholly or
partially misunderstood, The blue heaven is seen first in
the morning against the highest mountain tops, and on these
the rays of the sun rest before they light up the regions
beneath ; and’as it had been said that Zeus dwelt on high
Olympos and that his palace was the first building which
the sun ever saw, so in strict fidelity to the old phrases the
Arkadians insisted that their own Lykosoura was the most
ancient of all cities, and the first which Helios had ever be-
held, and that Zeus had been nourished by the nymphs
Theisoa, Neda, and Hagno on'the Lykaian hill hard by the
temple of our Lady (Despoina). Nay, as Pausanias tells
‘us,!' the hill was also called Olympos, and in it there was a
spot named Kretea, and hence, as some would have it,
here Zeus was born, and not in Crete, the island of the

+ viii. 88, 1.


361


CHAP,


——


The

Arkadian
and Cre-
ten Zeus


362 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK Egean sea. Cretans and Arkadians were doubtless alike
1. sincere in their convictions; but, had they remembered the
meaning of the words which they used, they would have
known that Zeus had his Olympian and Lykaian hills, his
Crete, his Dikté, his Arkadia, his Phoinikian home wher-
ever the sun sent forth his long train of light’ across the
sky. But in the minds of Achaians and Hellenes the old
phrase hed associated with the abode of Zeus the idea of
an ineffable splendour; and the tenacity with which they
clung to this idea is singularly exhibited in the strange
superstition which made the Lykeian sanctuary au object of
wondering dread. As the Hebrew of old said that none
might look on the face of God and live, so the Aryan held
that the doom of death was on the man who dared to look
on the unveiled splendour of Zeus. The Arkadian localised
this faith in his Lykaian Temenos, and averred not only
that all living things which might enter it would die within
the year, but that nota single object within it ever cast a
shadow. The idea, being once suggested, ran out into the
wildest fancies, and the hunstman, who drew back at the
inclosure when a hunted beast entered it, failed not to see
that its body no longer cast a shadow after it had entered
the charmed circle. The science of the geographer does
but heighten his faith in the local tradition. When the
sun is in the sign of the Crab, he knows that at the
Ethiopian Syéné there are no shadows at midday ; but the
marvel was that in this Arkadian sanctuary there was never
any shadow the whole year round. Pausanias admitted the
fact as readily as the Royal Society set to work, it is said,
to explain why a vessel of water with a fish in it was no
heavier than it would have been without the fish: but he
could not know that in the real Lykosoura there could be no
shade, although this Lykosoura was not to be sought in
Peloponnesos or in any land of human habitation. In the
bright heaven, through which travels the unclouded sun,
there cay be no darkness at all.?


2 Auebooupe. of the golden race, he was simply saying
* When Pausaniss, v. 7, 4, says that that it wae built, as it must nevossarily
the Olympisa temple was built by men be, by Lykians or men of light.


LYKAON AND TANTALOS.


But the word which supplied the name of the shadowless
Lykaian sanctuary was confused in their mind with the
name of the wolf, so called for the same reason which led the
German to speak of the bear as Goldfuss: and at once it
became necessary to show how the idea of wolves was linked
with the fortunes of Lykfén. This son of Pelasgos was the
builder of Lykosoura, and he called Zeus Lykaios,' after his
own name, instituting in his honour the Lykaian festival
which answered to the Dawn festival in the city of the
Athenians. But his wisdom, as Pausanias testifies, was not
equal to that of his contemporary Kekrops, who felt that
no living thing should be offered up to the Zeus whom he
reverenced as the most high. The zeal of Lykién was more
vehement, and the blood of an infant, or, as some said, of
his own child, flowed on the altar of sacrifice. At once the
human form of Lyk4én was changed into that of a wolf. It
was the just recompense of his iniquity in a time when men
were linked in a close intercourse with the gods; but to the
grief of Pausanias the increasing wickedness of mankind had
put an end to the age of miracles, and the true story of
Lykéén had been overlaid by miserable falsehoods, which
affirmed that men turned into wolves at the Lykaian sacrifice
were restored to their old shape after ten years, if they
abstained from human flesh, but that, if they tasted it, then
they remained wolves for ever.

‘We have here more than the germ of medimval Lykan-
thropy, and little more is needed to bring before us the
Were-wolf of Vampire superstition in its full deformity.
That superstition has been amongst the most fearful scourges
of mankind ; but here, as elsewhere, it is something to learn
that a confusion between two words identical in sound, and
springing from the same root, laid the foundations of this
frightful delusion. The myth of Lyk&én is in this incident
nothing more than a repetition of the story of Tantalos.
His name is but one of a thousand epithets for the sun, who
in times of drought offers up on the altar of Zeus (the
heaven) the scorched and withered fruits which owed their
life to his own vivifying heat; and for him, as for the


+ Paus. viii. 2, 1,


363


CHAP.
—
Lykosours
and Ly-
kéén,


Lykan-
thropy.


364 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK Phrygian king, the sin and its punishment inevitably fol-

eee lowed the translation of mythical phrases into the conditions
of human life.

The Dedo- Like the god of Arkadia, the Zeus of Dodona is nourished


Ohne by nymphs, who in this instance are called Hyades, the
Zeus, bringers of moisture from the blue heights of heaven. That


the Cretan story is but another version of the Arkadian, the
identity of names alone sufficiently proves. The Lykaian hill
had its Crete, and the Eleutherai, to which unintentional
trespassers into the Temenos of Zeus were conveyed, re-
appears in the mythical geography of the Egean island.'
But although Zens must be wherever there is an Olympian
city, yet the greatness of the Eleian Zeus overshadowed the
majesty of the Zeus who abode in Crete, Lykosoura, or
Dodona, when his temple at Olympia became the sanctuury
of the great Panhellenic festival. But here, too, the local
legend gives names with which the Cretan and Arkadiun
myths have already made us familiar. Here, too, it was
said that Rhea entrusted the infant Zeus to the care of the
Idaian Daktyloi. If the name given to these mysterious
beings be akin to the Dikté and Lyktos of the Cretan tale,
to Artemis Diktynna and Diktys of Seriphos, we have in it
only a general designation which applies to each of the
Daktyloi, Heraklés, Paionios, Iasio3 and Idas. This Idus is
but the counterpart of the nymph Ida, the companion of
Adrasteia ; and Ida, as we have seen, is but the earth, which
may be regarded as either the nurse, or, as in the Vedic
hymns, the bride of Zeus. The name of Herafiles, like that
of Héré, indicates simply the splendour of the risen sun, and
in Iasios, as in Iasién, Iamos, Iolé and others, we have the
violet tint with which the heaven is flushed in early morning.
The olive branch, which Herakles made the prize of victory,
itself came from the Hyperboreans, whence Achaia, the
mother of the Zeus-born Achaians, journeyed to Délos.

Limita to That the relations of Zeus to other mythical beings were

reeer® very variogsly described, 2 comparison of our Hesiodic and
Homeric narratives has already shown us. In the latter, he
is the father not only of Aphrodité, who in the former is his

} Hesiod, Theog. 54, 4 Paus. ¥.7, 4


THE POWER OF ZEUS.


sister, but of Arés and Hephaistos, who, according to another
legend, were like Typhéeus the children of Héré only. In
one story he is the father also of Phoibos, who in another is
the son of Athéné. The power with which he is invested
varies in like manner according to the point of view from
which he is regarded. The Zeus who is the father of all
living things, knows neither weakness, change, nor passion ;
the Zeus who is the growth of mythical phrases, is beneficent
or treacherous, just or capricious, pure or lustful, according
to the character of the phenomena to be described. By
himself he is styled all-powerful: but Héré too, as the
sovereign queen of heaven, can know no higher authority,
and thus they are represented as acting sometimes with and
sometimes against each other. Nay, even Athéné, the
maiden who stands by his side to do his will, is sometimes
an accomplice with Héré and Poseidén in plots to circum-
scribe his power. But although he can do much, he cannot
arrest the course of the sun, he cannot lighten his toils for
beings meaner than himself, he cannot avert the early doom
which awaits him when his short career across the heaven is
ended. Hence he can but bring up to Olympos from the
dead the beautiful Memnén for whom the tears of Eés fall
in dewdrops from the sky; he can but rescue the body of
the brave Sarpédén, and give it to Phoibos to bathe in
Simoeis, and to the powers of sleep and death to bear it to
the glistening home which they cannot reach until the
morning.’ Heraklés may toil for Eurystheus and have no
profit at all éf his labour; but Zeus can only look down on
his brave son until the flames ascend to heaven from his
funeral pile on Oita. There is, in short, no one phrase
which might be said to describe the varying aspects of the
sky, which is not petrified into some myth characteristic of
the Kronid Zeus; and the smile of the blue heaven, when all


1 Tn some other respects the Homeric
Zeus is greater than the Zeus of histo-
tical Hellas. ‘The awful Até whom tho
Jatter cannot torn aside, und who
‘broods over a house until tho penalty
far the shedding of innocent ‘blood has
‘beon fully paid is in the Iliad only the
spirit of mischievous folly. 80 too, the
Moirai, who, Uke At, had been only


his ministers, become possessed, like the
Norus, of un irresponsible authority,
while finally the force of destiny attuihs
its most overpowering proportions iu the
Apanké whom, according the theology
of Enripides, not even the futher of
pods and men is sble to withstand or
‘control,


365


CHAP,


as


366


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


the brightness of day bursts upon it, becomes the rapture of


py Zeus when Héré comes to him armed with the kestos


The mes-
sengers of
Zous,


(cestus) of Aphrodité, and the lulling spells of Hypnos.'
Thus also the serene height in which Zeus dwells, and from
which he cannot descend, explains his indifference and
seeming immorality in the great conflict at Dion, At the
prayer of Thetis he may be induced to help the Trojans until
Agamemnon has repaired the wrong done to Achilleus, or
his inaction may be secured by the devices of Héré; but
with Héré herself there can be no such uncertainty or
vacillation, Her name is but one of many names for the
sun, and she must take part steadily with the Argives and
Danaans, the children of the Dawn. To her Paris, the
seducer of the fair Helen, is strictly the evil Pani who
tempts Saram4 to betray the trust reposed in her by Indra;
and hence she may employ without scruple the power of her
be>uty, aided by the magic girdle of Aphrodité, to turn the
scale in favour of Agamemnon and his Achaian warriors,
But if Zeus cannot himself descend to the regions of the
murky air, he has messengers who do his bidding. Foremost
among these is Hermes, the god who flies on the breezes
and the storm; but Iris of the flashing feet is more truly
the minister who joins the ether to the lower atmosphere of
the earth. Whatever be the origin of the name Iris, the
word was used by the poets of the Iliad to denote not only
the divine messenger, but the rainbow itself. Thus the
dragons on the breastplate of Agamemnon are likened to
the Irises which Zeus has set in the heavens a$ a marvel to
mortal men;* and more plainly Iris is the purple arch or
bow which Zeus stretches from one end of heaven to the
other, to give warning of war or deadly drought. She is a
daughter of Thaumas and Elektra, the wonderful amber tints,
and a sister of the Harpyiai, the rent and ragged clouds
against which those tints are seen; and she would be the
golden-winged messenger, not only because the rainbow can
come and vanish with the speed of lightning, but because its
arch seenis to join the heaven and the earth, as a ladder by
which the angels may descend and rise up again into their
" B. xiv. 210, &e. 1 20, xi. 27. * JB, xviii. 649,


THE TRIBUNAL OF ZEUS.


home above. Hence the phrase was that the rainbow spread
its glorious path across the sky, whenever the gods wished
to send their messenger to do their bidding. In this office
Tris carries out the behests sometimes of Zeus, sometimes of
Héré or of Phoibos, while sometimes she comes of her own
free act. She is, in short, the counterpart of Hermes, whose
ataff she bears in her hand.’ If, again, in some myths she
may be spoken of as always a maiden, it may not less truly
be said that the winds love her exqnisite tints, while the
earth lies enraptured at her feet; and this accordingly is the
tale which makes her the bride of Zephyros and the mother
of Eros, the darling of the gods. But the name of this
lovely being soon became a mere general title of messengers
or errand-carriers, and reappears in Iros the beggar of the
Odyssey, who resembles her in no other way.

Lastly, as seeing from his throne in heaven all that is
done on earth, Zeus must be the punisher of all iniquity.
But the judgments of a god, whose characteristics depend on
half-forgotten mythical phrases, or on words wholly mis-
understood, will not be always equitable. The sentences
passed will have reference often to his mythical rights, while
they may be designed generally to redress wrongs between man
and man, The punishments of Tantalos and Ixién, of Lykdén
and Sisyphos are involved in the very idea of these beings.
The sun, who woos the dawn, yet drives her from him as he
rises in the sky. He loves the dew which his rays burn up ;
and if he shine on the earth too fiercely, its harvests must
be withered. sIf his face approaches the stream too closely,
the water-courses will soon be beds of gaping slime. The
penalty paid by Tantalos is bound up with the phrases which
described the action of the sun, while that of Lykién sprung,
as we have seen, from a confusion between two words derived
from the same source. If, again, the sun, as rising into the
dizzy heights of heaven, might be said to gaze too boldly
on the bride of Zeus, his downward course is not less certain
than his ascent, and at midday he must revolve like Ixién on
his blazing wheel; while the stone which Sisyphos has with
huge toil rolled to the mountain summit (the zenith) must

1 “Der weibliche Hermes.'—Preller, Griechische Mythologie, i. 390.


367


CHAP.


Zeus the


Judi


ge.


368


.BOOK


——


Character-
istics of
‘Teutonic
mytho-


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


slip from his grasp and dash down again into the valley
below. Still more must Zeus punish the insults done to him .
as lord of the fire-laden thunder-clonds ; and Prométheus, as
teaching men how to kindle a flame and cheat the gods with
offerings of fat and bone, is an offender less easily pardoned
than chiefa who sacrifice their children on his altars. In
this Promethean legend alone we seem to have a glimpse of
that future twilight of the gods which is so prominent a
characteristic of Northern mythology. But it is only in the
tragedy of Aischylos that the liberation of Prométheus in-
volves the humiliation of Zeus. In the summary of Apollo-
doros, it is mentioned only as one among the countless
exploits of Herakles; and we may owe to the mind of
Zischylos alone a notion which we are perhaps not justified
in connecting with the idea developed by the Northmen into
a common doom awaiting Odin and all the Mair,


Sscriox VI—ODIN, WODEN, WUOTAN,


The Teutonic belief in the twilight or final extinction of
the gods is of itself evidence that the mythology of the
German and Scandinavian nations belongs to an earlier form
of thought than that of the Hindu or the Greek.! The gods
of the latter are essentially free from decay and death.
They live for ever in Olympos, eating ambrosia] food and
drinking the nectar of immortality, while in their veins flows
not mortal blood, but the imperishable ichor. Nor can it be
said that even the myth of Prométhens points to any com-
plete suppression of the present order of things. It does
but say that Zeus should be put down, and a more righteous
ruler set up in his place. But in the Teutonic legends
Odin himself falls and Thor dies, and the body of the


* Bunsen aseerte this fact when he
says ‘that the old Teutonic mythology
of Germany and Scandinavia doce not

sess the grace of the Hellenic fictions.

the Muees und Graces have not smiled
on her birth, as on that of her Greek
sister. Nor hai
the munay skies of Ionia, but amid
constant strife with an austere clime


and rugged nature. Consequently this


mythology has not, like the former,
reecived such an organic elaboration us
to impart to it an undying influence
upon the course of human history.
Christianity did not blight it in its bloom,
but put an end to the progressive
decay thet bad begun before ita bude
had come to their full flowers,’—God in
History, ii, 406.


LIFE OF THE TEUTONIC SODS.


beautiful Baldur is consumed in the flames. In other words,
these deities answer not to the Olympian gods, but to the
mortal Herakles or Perseus or Asklépios. But the linka
which connect the belief of the one race with that of the
others may be traced readily enough. The Vedic gods, like
the Hellenic, live for ever. The Soma inspires them with
fresh vigour, as the soul of Zeus is refreshed and strength-
ened by heavenly banquets; but the draughts, which only
add to their inherent force, give to the Teutonic deities a
‘new lease of life! Thus the Soma draught becomes in
northern Europe the cup of honey mingled with the blood of
Qvasir, the wisest of all beings, who during his life had gone
about the world doing the work of Prométheus for the
wretched children of men. His wisdom, however, could not
save him from the dwarfs Fialar and Galar, who, mingling
his blood with honey, made a costly mead, the taste of which
imparted the eloquence of the bard and the wisdom of the
sage.’ In other respects the Teutonic deities exhibit the
closest likeness to the Greek. The rapidly acquired strength
and might of Zeus, Phoibos, and Hermes simply express the
brief period needed to fill the heaven with light, to give to the
sun its scorching heat, to the wind its irresistible force ; and
the same idea is expressed by the myth of Vali, the aon of
‘Wuotan and Rind, who, when only a night old, comes with
his hair untouched by a comb, like Phoibos Akersekomés, to
take vengeance on Hédr for the death of Baldur, and again
in the story of Magni, the son of Iarnsaxa, who, when three
days old, regcued his father Thor as he lay crushed beneath
the foot of the gigantic Hrungnir.2 There is the same
agreement in the size of their bodies and in the power of
their voices. The roaring of the waves and the crash of the
thunder are louder than any din of mortal warfare or the
cries of any earthly monsters ; and thus at once we have the
gigantic size of Arés, and the roar of Poseidén louder than
the noise of a myriad warriors in close conflict. Thus, also,
as Héré lays one hand on the earth and the other on the sea,
so Thor drinks up no small part of the ocean with his horn
which reaches from heaven to its surface—a ponderous
1 Grimm, Deateche Mythologie, 295. * Bid, 855. » [bid, 208,
VOL. 1 BB


369


CHAP.
L.
—


is 370


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


Book image for the clouds or the rays of the sun as they drink
Pee from the sea. But neither the Greek nor the Teutonic


Teutonic
theogo-
nies,


deities have the monstrous forms of the four-armed Vishnu

or the four-headed Brahma—these fearful combinations

being confined to beings like Briareds and Geryén and the’
giants of northern mythology, unless an exception is to be

made of the three-handed Hekaté, who, however, can scarcely

be reckoned among the Olympian gods, and the four-armed

Lakedaimonian Apollén.? The two-headed Janus is a Latin

deity. But if the Teutonic gods are never monstrous, they

are sémetimes maimed; and in the one-eyed Odin we have

the idea which called the Hellenic Kyklops into existence ;

while in the one-handed Tyr we see Indra Savitar; and in

the limping Loki, the lame Hephaistos. But whatever may

be their office, these are all bright and radiant deities; Hel

alone, like the rugged king of Hellenic mythology, has a

dark and repulsive aspect.2 The very expressions used in

speaking of them are transparent, The flowing locks of the

Wish-god and of Baldur are those of Zeus and Phoibos ; the

fair-haired Démétér of the Greek becomes the fair-haired Lif
of the Teuton.’ The power of Zeus is seen again in that of
Thor, and the golden glory which surrounded the head of
Phoibos or Asklépios, and became the aureole of Christian

saints, is not less a mark of the German deities, and ap-

pears on the head of Thor as a circlet of stars.‘

But when we turn to the theogony set forth in the
Voluspa Saga, we can as little doubt that it marks a com-
paratively late stage of thought, as we can suppose that the
Hesiodic theogony is older than the simple and transparent
myths which tell us of Prokris or Tithénos or Endymidn.
The myth of Baldur, at least in its cruder forms, must be far
more ancient than any classification resembling that of the
Hesiodic ages. Such a classification we find in the relations
of the Jétun or giants, who are conquered by Odin as the

1 Grimm, Deutsche Myti 298. Grimm, D. M289. | She is the hungry

* Hel, the daughter of and insatiable goddess, the greedy
sister of the Wolf Fenris and the horrible Pelyackese and Polydegmén of Greek
worm or serpent, is half black and half myths (Grimm, 48. 291), the black
human in appearance. Her dwelling is Kall of modern Hindu theology.


in Niftheim, fardown inthedopths of the * Grimm, i. 634,
earth, beneath the roots of -Yggdrasil: - + 2. 300,


ODIN’S RUNE SONG.


Titans are overthrown by Zeus; and this sequence forms
part of a theogony which, like that of Hesiod, begins with
chaos. From this chaos the earth emerged, made by the
gods out of the blood and bones of the giant Ymir, whose
name denotes the dead and barren sea. This being is sprung
from the contact of the frozen with the heated waters, the
former coming from Niflheim, the region of deadly cold at
the northern end of the chaotic world, the latter from
Muspelbeim, the domain of the devouring fire, The Kosmos
so called into existence is called the ‘Bearer of God ’—a
phrase which finds its explanation in the world-tree Ygg-
drasil, on which Odin himself hangs, like the Helené
Dendritis of the Cretan legend :—


know that I hung


On a wind-rocked tree


Nino whole nights, With a spear wounded,
And to Odin offered, Myself to myself, ry
On that tree, oF which no one knows


From what root it springs?


This mighty tree, which in Odin’s Rune Song becomes a
veritable tree of knowledge, and whose roots are undermined
by Hel or death and by the Hrimthursen or frost-giants,
rises into Asgard, the highest heavens where the gods dwell,
while men have their abode in Midgard, the middle garden
or earth, embraced by its branches.

The giant Ymir was nourished by the four streams which
flowed from the treasure of moisture, the cow Audhumla,?
which belongs to Zoroastrian not less than to Teutonic
mythology, and is there found with the meaning both of
eow and earth This earth afforded salt, without which no
life can be vigorous, and from Audhumla, as she fed on the
salt of the blocks of ice, there came forth a perfect man,
Buri, the fashioner of the world, whose son, Bor,* had as his
wife Besla, or Bettla,® the daughter of the giant Bélthorn,


1 «Odin’s Rune Song, Thorpe's Trans-
lation of Semund's Edda, p. 340. We
may compare with the ‘ Bearer of God,’
the names Atlus and Christophoros.

* This is the cow beneath whose
udder tho Dawn maiden hides herself
in the Norse story of the Two Step-
Sistera.—Dasent.

3 Bunsen, God in History, ii. 483.

‘The two names would answer to


the active and passive meanings of the
Greek gopos in compound words.

* Bunsen thinks thet the original
form of this name was Beidsla, a word
pethaps denoting desire or longing, and.
‘thus answering to the Kama of Vedic
and the Eros of the Hesiodie theogony,
while it is reflected also in the Teutonic
‘Wunsch or Wish.


BB?


yee


CHAP.
—


Genealogy
of Odin,


372
BOOK


——


Odin as
the Creator
of Man.


The end of
the Asus
or Deir.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


the root or kernel of the earth. From Buri proceeded ap-
parently Odin himself, and also the race of the gods or
Asas, the sélf-existent beings,! who dwell in Asgard or
Aithér, while the middle air, between the upper and under
worlds, the djp of the Greeks on which Zeus looks down, is
‘anaheim, the home of the Vanen, or spirits of the bfeath-
ing wind.’ To this race belong Freyr and Freya, the deities
of ‘beauty and love, ‘the children of Mérdur, the sea-god
who dwells in the sea-city (Noatun), and whose spouse,
Skadi (Elster?) is the daughter of the giant Thiassi, for he
is indeed himself the shore.’

The idea of the composite nature of man must have pre-
ceded the rise of the myth which assigns the creation of the
soul to Odin, of the mind to Hahnir, of the blood and outward
complexion to Lodur. This Habnir is probably the same
word as hahn, the cock, ‘in its wider import the bird, the
aniv:al belonging to the air;’* and thus possibly the framers
of this theogony may have intended to set forth their belief
that a Trinity, consisting of Ether, Air, and Fire, was con-
cerned in the creation of man, Lodur being certainly fire,
and in fact only another form of Loki, the shining god.
But we approach the regions of pure mythology when we
read that when Odur sets forth on his wanderings, his bride,
the beautiful Freya,* sheds gold-gleaming tears—‘an image
of the bright gleams shooting across the rugged morning
eky.’* From these parents springs Hnossa, the jewel, the
world under the aspect of beauty, while Frigga, as the wife
of Odin, doubtless only another form of Odur, is the mother
of Jérd, the earth, in the character of the nourishing
Démétér.

But all this visible Kosmos is doomed to undergo a cata-
strophe, the results of which will be not its destruction but
its renovation. The whole world will be consumed by fire,
kindled by Lodur, (der Lodernde, the glowing god), the Loki

3 From the root as, to be; the word © Bunsen, God im History, ii. 487.
is thus simply another form of Wesen. * Ibid.

The origital form of the word + For the several changes through
Asen connects it immedistely with which the names Freyr and Fi 0
Atman aaa name of Brahman, and the |, see Grimm, D. M. 276,


Latin enimus, &e.—Bunsen, God in * Bunsen, God in’ Hist
Bistory, ii. 486.


IDEAS OF THE DIVINE WILL.


who bronght about the death of Baldur. The life or, the
reign of the Asas themselves will come to an end, but a new
earth rising from this second chaos will resemble that of the
golden age in the Hesiodic tradition. Of this Teutonic
theogony we may say without the least misgiving that it
exhibits not the slightest sign of any Christian influence.
It would be almost as reasonable to trace such an influence
in the Hesiodic poems, where, if we could get over the in-
surmountable difficulties of chronology, such an attempt
might be made with far greater plausibility. Nor can we
charge Bunsen with speaking too strongly, when he says
that we muat be brought to this negative conclusion, unless
‘we are to set above facts a preconceived opinion, taken up
at random on the slightest grounds, or indolently to decline
scrutiny of those facts, or profound reflections on what they
indicate,”!

The idea which the Aryans of India sought to express
under the names Brahman and Atman, the Aryans of Europe
strove to signify by the name Wuotan. That idea centred in
the conception of Will as a power which brought all things
into being and preserves them in it, of a will which followed
man wherever he could go and from which there was no
escape, which was present alike in the heavens above and in
the depths beneath, an energy incessantly operating and
making itself felt in the multiplication as well as in the
sustaining of life. Obviously there was no one thing in the
physical world which more vividly answered to such a con-
ception thah the wind, as the breath of the great Ether, the
moving power which purifies the air. Thus the Hindu
Brahman denoted originally the active and propulsive force
in creation, and this conception was still more strictly set
forth under the name Atmaua, the breath or spirit which
becomes the atmosphere of the Greeks and the athem of
the Germans. Atman is thus the breathing, in other words,
the self-existent being,—the actual self of the universe ; and
the meuning thus assigned to the word was 80 impressed
upon the minds of the Aryans of India that nd mythology
ever grew up round it. In Professor Miiller’s words ‘the

» God in History, ii. 409.


373


CHAP.
—_


The namo
‘Wuotan,


374


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS...


idea of the Atman or self, like a pure crystal, was too trans-


ah parent for poetry, and therefore was handed down to phi-


losophy, which afterwards polished, and turned, and watched
it as the medium through which all is seen and in which all
is reflected and known.’! The conception of the Teutonic
Wuotan was at first not less exalted. Like Brahman and
Atman, it is the moving strength and power of creation, and
the word in Grimm’s belief carries us to the Latin vad-ere,
to go or move, the Bavarian wueteln, to stir or grow. Thus
Grimm remarks that of Wuotan it may be said as Lucan says


of Jupiter—
Eat quodcunque vides, quocunque moreris,


the pure spiritual deity, The word itself is therefore a par-
ticiple of the old verb watan, whose cognate forms vata, 6d,
account for the dialectical variations which converted it into
the axon Wuodan, Wodan, Woden, Odin, the Frisian Wéda,
the Norse O%¥inn; and its meaning is in perfect analogy with
that of the Latin Minerva as connected with mens and the
Greek yévos, spirit or strength.? But the ideas thus ex-
pressed by the name were necessarily lost when the Christian
missionaries taught the people to look on Wuotan or Odin
as the archfiend ruling over troops of malignant demons;
nor is it improbable that the process may have begun at an
earlier period. The name is connected closely with the
German wuth, in which the notion of energy has been ex-
aggerated into that of impulse uncontrolled by will. Such
a limitation of meaning was quite in harmony with the ten-
dency of all the German tribes to identify energy with ve-
hement strife, and thus Wuotan became essentially the armed
deity, the god of war and of battles, the father of victory.*
As such, he looks down on the earth from his heavenly home
through a window, sitting on his throne with Freya by his
side, as Héré sits by Zeus in Olympos. In the strange
story which is to account for the change which converted
the Winili into the Lombards, this attribute of Wuotan is

1 eae aunt sn, St ane Oe A ce

* Bigindn, Siogfater, Grimm, 38.122. of men piper ae geen Te Odin. beomne


‘Hence the phrases, Zu O8iun fahren, maledictions, consigning them to per-
OSinnsheim suchen, denated’ simnly dition,


WISH.


connected with the rising of the sun, the great eye of day.
As the giver of victory, the greatest of all blessings in Teu-
tonic eyes, he was necessarily the giver of all other good
things, like the Hermes of the Greeks with whose name his
own is identical in meaning.’ As such, he is Osci, Oski, the
power of Wish or Will, so often exhibited in the mythology
of northern Europe, the Wunsch to whom the poets of the
thirteenth century? assign hands, eyes, knowledge, blood,
with all the appetites and passions of humanity. This power
of Wuotan is seen in the oska-stein, or wishing stone,? which
the Irish localisein Blarney and which Grimm connects with
the wishing-rod or staff of Hermes,‘ in the Oskmeyjar or
Wishmaidens or Valkyries who guide to Valhalla all heroes
slain in battle, and who are the wish or choice children of
‘Wuotan, and more especially in the Oska-byrr, or Wish-wind,
in which we recognise both in name and in the thing the
Ucyevos odpos of our Iliad.’ It is this power doubtless which
is denoted by the Sanskrit Kama, as the force which first
brought the visible Kosmos into being,’ and by the Eros
of the Hesiodic theogony.


+ Thie attribute of Wuotan, which Frog Prince or Fish Sun) brings up
Grimm discovers in the titles Gibicho, from the waters, In the tale of the


Kipicho, makes him 8érup édev, i.n.
Hermes, whose name denotes simply the
motion of the air,

* For a long series of passages in
which Wunsch is clearly both a power
and a person, see Grimm, D.M. 126-8.

* The instraments of Wish generally
run in triplets, as in the story of King
Putraka (pp. 144, 159). In that of Cin-
derella, they are throo nuts, containing
each n splendid robe, In the story of
The Pink, Wish assumes the Protean
powor of transformation; in that of
Brother Lustig, it is a bag in which the
Poseessor may’ seo anything that ho
wishes to shut up in it, and by means
of which he contrives, like the Master
Smith, to find his way into heaven. Ia
the tale of the Poor Man end the Rich
Man, the three wishes which bring
happiness here and hereafter to the
former, bring only 'vexation, troubling,
scolding, and the loss of a horse”
the latter, In the story of the Faithful
Beasts, it is a wonderful stone (the orb
of the sun) which s fat old frog (the


Donkey Cabbages it is a wishing-cloak,
and thus we are brovght back to
Solomon's carpet, which in the story of
the Knapsack, the Hat, and the Hora,
‘appears as a cloth, capuble, like the
Sangreal, of providing unlimited supplies
of food and drink, and es a beautiful
carpet in the story of the Three Feathers,
In that of the Drummer, it is a ring in
the hand of the Dawn Muiden, who
‘Lecomes his bride, The three posses-
sions of King Putraka are the three
wikhes which assume many forms it
folk-lore.’ Compare the story of the
‘Boat Wish with the wishes of the Master
Smith in the Norse Tales. Dasent,

* Grimm, D, M. 131.

* There is really nothing to support
the explanation which refers teyevos to
Txvéoua. The word stands to Oski, or
‘wish, precisely in the relation of ie to
Tega ta ie to lei.

A translation of the very remark-
able hymn in which this ward occurs
is gives in Professor Max Miller's
History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 561,


3875 .


CHAP.


876°
Bdox


nes,
The one-
eyed Wuc-
tan or
Odin,


Odin the
raingiver.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


The single eye of Odin points beyond all doubt to the
gun, the one eye which all day long looks down from heaven
upon the earth. But when he was figured as an old
man with a broad hood and a wide-flowing robe, the myth
necessarily sprung up that he had lost an eye, a story which
answers precisely to the myth of Indra Savitar, while it also
throws further light, if any such were needed, on that of the
Kyklépes.! But as the sun is his eye, so his mantle is the
vapour which like the cloud-gathering Zeus Odin wraps
around himself, and thus becomes Hakolberend, the wearer of
the yeil, or Harbard, the bearded god. In his hand he bears
the marvellous spear Gungnir, in which we see the lance of
Phoibos or Artemis. By his side are the two wolves Gari
and Freki, with whom he hunts down his victims, wolves like
the Myrmidons whom Achilleus Jets loose upon the Trojans,
wolves like those from which Phoibos was supposed to derive
his name Lykeiog. On his shoulders sit the two ravens,
Hugion and Muninn, who whisper into his ears all that
they see or hear, 29 the serpents by their mysterious whisper-
ings impart more than human wisdom to the infant Iamos.?
They are the ravens who bring to Apollén the tidings of the
faithlessness of Kordnis, as in the shape of a raven Aristeas
tells the Metapontines that he followed Phoibos when he
came to their country.*

As the bearded god, Odin becomes the giver of the rain,
the Zeus Ombrios of the Greeks, the Jupiter Pluvius or
flowing Jupiter of the Latins, as well as their Neptunus or


Tho first sentence shows the train of

thought in the mind of the post:

«Darkness thero was: and all at first
was veiled

lb loom profound, an ocean without


Tight:
The germ that stil lay covered in the
But rth oo tre the fret


Ther rst came love upon it!


On this Profesor H. H.
‘Wilson remarka:' The term “love” here
appears to us to convey p notion too
transcendental to have had a place in
the conception of the original aathor.
The > which scarcely


indicates love in the senso in which it
may here be understood, although not
absolutely indefensible: but Kamameans
desire, wish, and it expresses here the
wish, synonymous with the will, of the
sole-existing Being to create. *_ Kain.
burgh Review, Oct, 1860, p. 384.

‘Thus in Saxo he is ‘ aevus al-
tero orbus oculo,’ and again‘ Armipotens
uno semper contentus ocello,’ The rea-
son assigned by the myth is that he was
obliged to Jeave one eye in pledge when
he wished to drink at the well of Mimir.

* Grmm, D. M. 184, traces the names
to hugr, thought, and mur, mind, as in
Minerva, &c.

* Herod. iv. 15.


ODIN AND TYR.


cloud-deity. As such, he is Hnikar, the Anglo-Saxon Nicor
or water-god, whose offspring are the Nixies or water-sprites,
as the Hellenic Naiads are the children of Zeus.! In this
character he is the Biblindi, or drinker (the Latin bib-ere)

eof the Eddas. Like Phoibos again, or Asklépios, he is the
healer, who alone can restore strength and vigour to the
maimed horses of Baldur; and as the Muses are the daugh-
ters of Zeus, 80 is Saga the daughter of Wuotan, the source
of all poetry, the inspirer of all bards, In his hunte he rides
the eight-footed horse Sleipnir, the white steed which beara
him also through the thick of battle, like the rudderless and
oarless ships which carry the Phaiakians across the blue
seas of heaven.

‘Whotan, the Allfather? and the Psychompompos, who
takes all souls to himself when their earthly journey is done,
has become for the nations of northern Europe a mere name;
but the mark of his name he has impressed on many places.
If our Wednesdays remind us of him, he has also left his
relics in Onslew,’ in the island Odinse, in Odinfors, Oden-
skilla and Wednesbury.

The close connection of the name Tyr with the several
forms developed from the root dyu, to shine, would of itself
lead us to expect that the word would remain practically a
mere appellative for gods whose names might again betray a
relation to the same root. Accordingly we meet with Sigtyr,
the victorious god, as a name for Wuotan, and Reidartyr or
Reidityr, the riding or driving Tyr, as a name for Thor.
Nor can if be said that any real mythology has gathered
round this word, for the Stauros which is specially connected
with his name belongs rather to the region of symbolism

y than of mythology, although the conjunction of this emblem

- with the circle (the kestos of Aphrodité and the necklace of
Harmonia and Eriphylé) is in itself 2 subject of some in-
terest. Hence we should further be led to expect that the


1 All these names come from the same
root with tho Sunskrit sna, the Greek
yiyw, the Latin nare, to flost or swim.
‘With them we must link the common
term ‘Old Nick, ee a name for the
devil. “4

* Professor Max Miller seems in-


clined to trace Christian influence in
the description of Odin Allfadir as
given, for instance, dn the dialogue
called Gylé’s Mocking,

* Othanslef, Othini religuim, Grimm,
D, M. 144, acids many other instances.


S17


CHAP.


Odin the
Allfather,


Tyr and
Odin.


378


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


special emblem under which Tyr would be worshipped would


panes be the sword: and te this fact Grimm traces the names, not


The name
Donar.


‘Thor the
Allfather,


only of the Saxons, but of the Cherusci as pointing to the
old Cheru, Hera—a sword.


Sgcrioy VII—THUNDER, DONAR, THOR.


Englishmen may not unnaturally be tempted to think
that our word Thunder is the older and more genuine form
of the name given to the god who wields the lightnings, and
that this name was chosen to express the loud crash which
echoes across the heaven. Yet the word in its first meaning
has no reference to noise and din. The root denotes simply
extension as applied whether to sound or to any other ob-
jects, and from it we have the Greek and Latin words ted
and tendo, to stretch, tovos, tone, ie. the stretching and
vibration of chords, tonitru, thunder, as well as tener and
tenuis, the Sanskrit tanu, answering to our tender and thin,
Hence the dental letter which has led to the popular miscon-
ception of the word is found to be no essential part of it;
and the same process which presents the English tender and
the French tendre as an equivalent for the Latin tener, hag
with us substituted thunder for the Latin tonitru.! Thas the
several forms Donar, Thunor, and perhaps Thor are really
earlier than the shape which the word has assumed in our
English dialect.

As the lord of the lightning, the thunder, and the rain,
Donar is as closely allied, and, indeed, as easily identified
with Wuotan, as Vishnu with Indra, or Indra with Agni.
But although most of their characteristics are as inter-
changeable as those of the Vedic gods generally, each has
some features peculiar to himself. Thus, although Thor is
sometimes said to move in a chariot like other deities, yet
he is never represented as riding like Odin. He is essen-
tially, like Vishnu, the walking or striding god, who moves
amidst the lightnings like Hephaistos in his workshop of

* Profuseor Miller, having traced the if the original conception of thunder had
connection between these words, adda been its rumbling noise’—Lecturee on


‘The relations betwixt tender, thin, and = Lai ¢, Hirst series, 350.
thunder would be hard to be established, eae


THE THUNDER-GOD.


subterraneous fires, But in his power of penetrating and
piercing the heavens or the earth, and in his ceaseless and
+ irresistible energy, he is simply Wuotan in another form, and
the conception of the deity has varied but little among the
Aryan nations. The name itself is found in the name of the
Gallic thunder-god Taranis, preserved to us by Lucan, and
more nearly in its other form Tanarus, while the idea is
expressed in the Jupiter Tonans of the Latins, and the Zeus
Kerauneios of the Greeks. He is, in short, the great lord of
heaven in his most awful manifestation, but he is, neverthe-
Jess, the maker and the father of mankind. Hence, like
Odin, he is the Allfather, a title which Procopius tells us
that the Slavonic nations gave only to the creator of the
lightnings.’ The deity thus worshipped was named Perkunas
or Pehrkons by the Lithuanian tribes, and by the Slaves
Perun, Piorun, and Peraun, a form which Grimm is in-
clined to connect with the Greek xépavvos,? and more con-
fidently with the Sanskrit Parjanya, a name of Indra as the
bringer of the fertilising rain* If, again, Sophokles speaks
of Gé or Gaia as the mother of Zeus.‘ so is the earth the
parent of Donar; and as Zeus and Wuotan are severally
enthroned on Olympos and Wuotansberg, so has Thor or
Donar his Donersperch, Thunresberg or Donnersberg, and
Donnerskaute, while the oak, the special tree of the Thun-
dering Jupiter of the Latins, is not less sacred to the
Teutonic deity. Like Dyaus or Jupiter, Thor is bearded,
but his beard is fiery red, like the lightnings which fash
across the Heaven.
But his appearance varied with his functions, which were
concerned with three things—-the lightning flash, the thun-


derclap, and the thunderbolt.


* Grimm, D. If, 156.

* By a change analogous to that
which makes the Latin sequor and
oquus answer to the Greek frowas and
irwos.

3 The connection of the name Perku-
mas with the Greck péprur, géprvvos,
seams scarcely lesa obvious, and the
Hollesic deity haa as much to do with
water asthe Vedie Parjanya, Thename


As using the first, he always


with Perkunas, hav assumed a strange
form in English folk-lore. Inthe Platt-
Deutsch of Prussia it appears as Pakkels
=Puekle and Pickle: and thus he ap-
pears as e demon in the phruse ‘pretty
Pickle?

+ Philokt. 389. *

4 ‘Rothbirtig, wae suf die feuri
Lafterscheizting” See. Blitaes  besogen
werden musc’—Grimm, D. M, 161.


379


CHAP,


His triple
functions,


380


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


walks or strides ; as producing the thunderpeal, he is borne


sting
joes along in his chariot; as wielding the bolts, he is, like


‘Wuotan, the armed god who hurls his irresistible weapons.
These are sometimes called his spears and arrows; but more
especially the thunderbolt is his hammer, the mighty club
which, when hurled from his hand, comes back to him again
after doing its deadly errand. As wielding this weapon, he
is Midlnir or Tydeus, the pounder and crusher, the father of
the Aloadai and the Molionids: but the word hamar meant
not only a mallet, but a rock, and thus carries us to the
weapons employed by the giants and the Titans.1 When
this hammer is stolen, Loki, in the Lay of Thrym, asks
Freyja if she will lend him her feather-garment, that he may
go and find it. With this dress Loki, as the god of light,
flies to the abode of Thrym the giant, who has hidden the
weapon in the depths of the earth, and will not give it up
unless, like Hades, he has the maiden as his wife. When
Loki returns to Asgard with this message, Freyja refuses to


go.


‘Then said Heimdall Of Ksir brightest,


He well foresaw, Like other Vani
«Lot ue clothe Thor With bridal raiment,

Let him have the famed -_Brisinga necklace,
“Lot by his side Keys jingle

And woman's weeds Fall down his knees ;

But on bis heart Place precious stones,


And a neat coif Set on his head.’


He is now Dionysos, Achilleus, or Theseus in their woman-
ly forms; and like Theseus, he speedily avenges himself on
those who take liberties with him. Having come to Jétun-
heim, he astonishes Thrym by devouring an ox and eight
salmons, but the serving-maid lulls his fears.


‘Then said Thrym,
“Bring the hammer ix,


‘The Tharsar's lord,
The Bride to consecrate :


+ Bee note 6, p. 265. This hammer is
said to have been stolen by giant who
hid it eight miles benesth the surface of
the earth. In as many years it ascended
into heaven again, accomplishing one
mile in each year; and thus it was re-
stored to Thor by Thrym, which however
is only another name for thunder, and
answers to Thrumketill, the proper
nate, as Tharketyll, Thutke, answers
to Thor. It is scarcely necessary to say


that the thunder god has given his name
to avast number of places, the forma
Doonersberg, Thorssbery, and Torslundo
representing the three varieties under
which they may be cluased, Our Thars-
day is an abbreviation of Thunresdiig ;
but we hare to remember the identity of
Thunor, Donar, and Thor. A long list
itis names is given by Grimm, J. Mf.


FRO AND FREYA.


Lay Midloir On the maiden’s knee,
‘Unite us with each other By the hand of Vér’
Lavghed Hlérridi’s Soul in ber breast,
‘hen the flercehearted ‘His hammer recognised,
He first slew Thrym ‘The Thursar’s lord,
And the Jétuns ran All crashed,
And so got Odin’s son His hammer back."


Sxction VIII—FRO.
In the oldest Teutonic mythology we find a god Fro or


Friuja, which is worshipped as the lord of all created things. fre,


If we may judge from the name, the conception of this deity
was probably far above the ideas formed of any of the Vedic
or Olympian gods. If the word is connected with the
modern German froh, it expresses an idea which is the very
opposite of the Hebrew tendency to worship mere strength
and power. For Fro is no harsh taskmaster, but the
merciful and eternal god. He is, in short, the beneficence
and long-suffering of nature. Fro is thus the power which
imparts to human life all its strength and sweetness, and
which consecrates all righteous efforts and sanctions ell
righteous motives. Nor can we doubt that Freya stands to
Fro in precisely the relation of Liber and Libera in the
cultus of Ceres, the connection between these deities being
precisely that of Fro and Freya with the goddess whom Tacitus
call Nerthus, the Teutonic Niérdr. In this aspect Freya is
the bringer of rain and sunshine for the fruits of the earth,
while the worship of Fro runs parallel with that of Priapos.
To this deity belongs the wonderful ship Skidbladnir, which
can be folded up like a cloth,—in fact, a vessel much like
the magic barks of the Phaiakians. But though this ship
could carry all the Asas, yet these beings do not belong to
their exalted race. They are Vanir, whose abode is in
Vanaheim, as the Alfar or Elves live in Alfheim or Elfland
and the Jotnar in Jétunheim.


Szcerion IX.~HEIMDALL, BRAGI, axp ONGIR.


Relations
to


The Hellenic Iris is represented by Heimdall in the my- The Lord
thology of northern Europe. This deity, who like Baldur of Bile


» Lay of Thrym, 18, 17,31, 32. Thorpe's Translation of Senund's Hida.


- $82


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


is a white or light-giving god, ia the guardian of the bridge


~—+— which joins heaven and earth (bif-rost, the waving resting-


Bragi, the
ford of
day.


Ocgir, the
w0a-god.


place),! and his abode is in Himinbiorg, the hill of heaven,
the Latin Mons Corlius, the first syllable of his name being,
like himin, only another form of himmel. In other respects
he resembles Argos Panoptes. Like him, he needs less sleep
than a bird; by night as by day he can see a hundred miles,
and so’keen are his senses that he can hear the corn grow-
ing on the earth and the wool lengthening on the sheep’s
back.*. As the watcher and warder of the gods, he carries
a horn, the point of which sticks in Niflheim at the root of
Yggdrasil ; and it was easy to add that he rode a horse with
a golden mane and that his own teeth were of gold. He
speaks of himself as the son of nine mothers, a phrase which
in Bunsen’s opinion has nothing to do with the watches of
the night, and must be referred to the nine mythological
words of the Véluspa Saga, of which Niflheim is the ninth
and the lowest; and thus the myth would mean that ‘ the
sun-light is the common divine child of all these worlds.’?

Another god of the gleaming heaven is Bragi, the brilliant,
while, like Donar or Baldur, he is a son of Odin. As the
god of poetry and eloquence, he is the guardian and patron
of bards and orators, and his name, like that of Vach or
Saga, passes from the signification of light to that of fluent
and bonied speech. Thus bragr Karla was simply an
eloquent man, and a further step degraded the name of dsa
bragr, the chief among the gods, and left it as an epithet of
vain boasters. «

The name of the god Oegir, with whom Bragi is some-
times associated in the Edda, has shared a similar fate.
Used first as a name for the sea, it has come to denote the
Ogres with which nurses frighten children. If, as Grimm
supposes, the word belongs to the same root with the


1 Bebende Ristiitte, Bunsen, God in
History, ii, 412.
* These qualities reappear in the story


hear everything, even to the growing of
the grass. Theso ministers of the solar
hero are again séen in Grimm's story,


of the Six Seryants, Grimm. Of these,
one has to keep a bandage over his eyes,
for his sight is go keen that whatever
he looks at splits in two; snother can
see all round the world; and s third can


How Six travelled through the World,

and in the Gaelic tale of The King of

Lochlin’s Three Daughters, Campbell,

Talee of the West Highlonds, i, 236, 250.
1 God in History, ii. 412, 490,


OEGIR.


Gothic agas and ég, the Anglo-Saxon ege, egesa, Old High
German aki, eki, fear, dread, horror, the later meaning is
quite in accordance with its original form. But however
this may be, the word Oegir as a name for the sea carries
us to the Greek stream which surrounds the earth. The
phrase 861 gengr i oeginn simply spoke of the sun going
down into the sea, as Helios sinks into the ocean. The
other forms Ogen, Ogyges, approach still more closely to the
Teutonic Oegir. We find the idea of fear as attached to the
name more fully developed when we come to the Oegishialmr,
or helmet of dread, which the dragon Fafnir wears as he lies
on the golden treasures, to strike terror into those who
may dare to gaze on him, and again in the Eckesax or
Uokeaahs, the fearful sword tempered by the dwarfs in the
Vilkina Saga,—weapons which, although there may be no
affinity between the names, must remind us of the Aigis of
Athéné and the helmet of Hades. Oegir’s wife Ran is the
mother of nine children, who become the eponymoi of foun-
tains and streams,


383


CHAP,
L


384 MYTIOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


CHAPTER Ii.


THE LIGHT.


Sscnos I—SURYA axp SAVITRI.


BOOK WNerrasz Dyaus nor Varuna, Indra nor Agni, occupies that
es precise place which is filled by Helios in Greek mythology
Bt, the as the dweller in the globe of the sun, or by Nereus as the
pevedig actual inhabitant of the sea. This place in the Veda is
luminary. reserved for Sirya or Savitri, the former name being ety-

mologically identical with that of Helios or Héré. Like
Helios and Heimdall, Sirya sees all things and hears all
things, noting the good and evil deeds of men. Like Indra
and Agni, he is sometimes independent, sometimes the ser-
yant of others; but he is never, like Dyaus, without a
parent. His light is his own, and yet it has been given to
him by Indra or by Soma, who is often spoken of as his
father. He is the husband of the Dawn, but the Dawn is
also his mother, as Iokasté is both mother and wife of
Oidipous. In all sach phrases it was impossible to lose
sight of his real character. He is the most active of all
the active gods, he is the third in the earlier trimirtti in
which he is associated with Agni and Vayu, he has measured
the worlds with their undecaying supports, he is the divine
leader of all the gods ; but as such, he is still ‘ the pervading
irresistible luminary.' His chariot is drawn by seven
mares, and he ‘comes with them self-harnessed.’ Like
Ixién, Tantalos, and Sisyphos, he is the ‘lord of all trea-
sures.” He is the eye of Mitra, Varuna and Agni.* Some-
times again he is ‘without steeds, without stay, borne


* Mui, Sanakrit Teed, parti. p. 96. 7 RIL, Wileon, Rs i. 180,
B. |. 90, 12. ni, B04,


ONE-BANDED GODS.


swift-moving and loud-sounding, he travels ascending higher
and higher,' and when his daily course is run, he sinks, like
Endymién or Kephalog, into the waters.

‘L have beheld the permanent orb of the sun, your dwell-
ing-place, concealed by water where (the hymns of the pious)
liberate his steeds.’? .

Savitar, the inspirer, from the root sv, to drive or stimu-
late, is especially the glistening or golden god: he is golden-
eyed, golden-tongued, and golden-handed ; and in the later
Brahmanic mythology such epithets might furnish a ground-
work for strange and uncouth fancies, Thus the story,
(which probably started as the myth of Midas and ended
with the ass which poured out gold from its mouth on hear-
ing the word Bricklebrit) went that once when Savitar cut
off his hand at a sacrifice, the priests gave him instead a
hand of gold; and in the same spirit the commentators in-
terpreted the epithet as denoting not the splendour of the
sun but the gold which he carried in his hand to lavish on
his worshippers.? The Teutonic god Tyr is also said to have
Jost one hand; but the German story ran that Tyr placed
his Land as a pledge in the mouth of the wolf and that the
wolf bit it off! In the latter tale we have an instance of
that confusion of homonyms which converted Lykdén into a
wolf, Kallisté into a bear, and the Seven Arkshas into seven
sages.

The power and strength of Savitar are naturally repre-
sented as irresistible. Not even Indra, or Varuna, or any
other being can resist his will; and the verse which is re-
garded as the holiest in the Veda is addressed to Savitar.?
He is a Tithénos who waxes not old.


1H. H. Wilson, B. ¥. ii, 91.

"Cf Eurip. Al 591, augt deAfov
avepalay ixxdorace.

* Professor Max Miiller, speaking of
this myth, compares it with the German
proverb, ‘Morgenstunde het Gold im
Munde” a8 enforcing the some moral
with the prosuic English adage which
promises health, werlth, and wisdom to
thosa who go to sleep early and rise
early. Lectures, second series, 378.
There was another version of the myth
of Savitar, which made him love both hie


hands. H. H. Wilson, R. 7” i. 51.

* Compare the story of Nuad of the
Silver Hand (Fergueson, /rish dcfore the
Conguest) and Grimm's tale of the
Handles Maiden, for whom the king,
when he takes ber us his wife, orders
silver hands to be mads. But she
taken from him, like Urvast from Puri-
Taras, and when, after grtevous suffer
ings, she is restored to him, her hands
have grown again as beautifal as ever.
ee tuir, Principal Deities of R.¥. p.


385
CHAP.
IL.


—


The one-
handed
Savitar.


The power
of Saritar.


386 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS. .


BOOK * Shining forth, he rises from the lap of the Dawn, praise
wae 2 by singers; he, my ‘god Savitar, stepped forth, who neve
misses the same place.

‘He steps forth, the splendour of the sky, the wide-seeing
the far-shining, the shining wanderer; surely, enlivened b,
the sun, do men go to their tasks and do their work.’!

* May the golden-eyed Savitri come hither.

«May the golden-handed, life-bestowing, well-guarding
exhilarating, and affluent Savitri be present at the sacrifice.

These phrases which seem to have no reference to the
later myth, carry us to the myth of the one-eyed Odin
who like Savitar, is also Wegtain, or the wanderer, the broa¢
heaven looking down on the earth with its one gleaming
eye, the sun.” Like Indra, Varuna, and Vishnu, he ic
Skambha, the supporter.

‘ Savitri has established the earth by supports; Savitri has
fixed the sky in unsupported space;* he has milked the
atmosphere, restless (or noisy) as a horse; Savitri, the sor
of the waters, knows the place where the ocean, supported,
issued forth.’*


Srcrnon IL.—SOMA.


The phy- The ninth book of the Rig Veda consists wholly of hymne
fprtteal written in praise of Soma, who is lauded as the source of life
Soma, and vigour, of mental power and bodily strength both tc


gods and men, the generator or parent of Agni, Sarya,
Indra, and Vishnu. Of the phrases employed, in describing


posed to remain from its own inherent
power, then why may nut the samo
power bo supposed to exist in the first
—that is, in tho earth?’ Dr. Muir
adds that Aryya Bhatta, one of the most


* Dr. Muir pointe out the inconsis-
tency of this phrase with the later my-


thology, which spoke of the earth as
resting on the head of the serpent
S'esha, or on other supports, and re-
marks that the Siddbuntas, or scientific
astronomical works of India, maintain
thot the earth is unsupported. In these
it is aid plainly thet, ‘tf the earth were
supported ‘by any material substance or
living ereature, then that would require
® second mupporter, and for that second
& third would be required. Here we
have the absurdity of an interminable
series. Lf the lust of the series be sup-


ancient of Indian scientific uatronomert,
even maintained that the alternation of
day and night is produced by the rota-
tion of the earth on its own axis. Sans-
&rit Texts, past iv. p. 97. It ie remark-
able that the Copernican system shoul’
thus have been anticipated in the Enst,
as by Aristarchos of Samos in the West,
without making any impression on tho
thought of the age.

4B. Vx, 149, 1
Tests, part iv. p. 97.


Muir, Sanskrit


THE VIVIFYING SOMA.


the nature and functions of Soma, many relate exclusively to
the juice of the Soma plant, and to the process by which
that juice is converted into an intoxicating drink. These
phrases are often curiously blended with expressions which
speak of a god exalted higher even than Varuna or Indra,
while others show clearly that, like almost all other names
of Hindu mythology, Soma was a word which might be
applied alike to the gladdening power of wine and to the
life-giving force from which the sky and sun derive their
strength and brilliance. In the latter sense, Soma imparts
to Indra the power which enables him to overcome Vritra,
and, like Indra, is the conqueror of demons and the de-
stroyer of cities. All things are in his hand, for Soma rules
over gods and men, and, like the other deities known as
Skambha, supports the heaven and earth in his hands. In
short, there are no powers attributed to Varuna, Indra, or
Vishnu, which are not, if it be possible, exceeded by those
which are inherent in Soma. Yet Soma is also the drink of
the gods, the Olympian nectar, the beverage which gives im-
mortality. Soma is Indu, the sap which flows for Indra—
the stream which is purity itself, and the cleanser of all de-
filement. In the symbolical interpretations of later times
Soma is a mere name, which may denote physical, moral, or
spiritual life, a name strictly of the one everlasting God.

‘Soma purifies, [he who is] the generator of hymns, the
generator of the sky, the generator of the earth, the generator
of Agni, the generator of Sirya, the generator of Indra, and
the generater of Vishnu.’ !

Soma is the Beatific Vision to which the pilgrims of this
earth aspire.

‘Where there is eternal light, in the world where the sun


1 ‘Phe explanation of this verse given
in the Nirukte-parisishta shows that the
commentator was perfectly aware of the
real nature of the myth. ‘Soma, he
says, ‘is the generator of hymns (or
thought), i.e. of those solar rays whose
function it is to reveal ; of the sky, i.e.
of those solar raye whose function it is
to shine; of the earth, i.e. of those solar
raye whose function it is to spread; of
Agni, i.e. of those solar rays whose


function it is to move; of Stirya, i.o. of
those solar rays whose function it is to
appropriate; of Indra, i.e. of those
sola rays whose function is sovereignty :
of Vishnu, i.. of those solar raya whos
function is diffusion.'—Muir, Sanskrit
Texts, part iv. p.81. Imthese comments
all tho deitioe disappeer together, leaving
Soma as the representative of the onv
great Cause of all things,


cod


387


CHAP.
iL.


388


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK is placed, in that immortal imperishable world place me, O


a Bomar os.


‘Where life is free, in the third heaven of heavens, where
the worlds are radiant, there make me immortal. .

‘Where there is happiness and delight, where joy and
pleasure reside, where the desires of our desire are attained,
there make me immortal.’! .

In some hymns of the Rig Veda, all creatures are said to
spring from the divine seed of Soma. All things are under
his control, and he is, like Varuna and other deities, the
divine sustainer (Skambha) of the world. He is an omni-
scient ocean, and his are the stars and the sun. He too,
like Indra, is the slayer of Vritra.

«This divine Soma, with Indra for its ally, crushed, as
soon as generated, Pani by force: thou, Soma, didst baffle
the devices and weapons of the malignant secreter of the
(stolen) wealth (the cattle).’*

But at once the poet recurs to metaphors suggested by the
process of preparing the Soma juice.

‘In the filter, which is the support of the world, thou,
pure Soma, art purified for the gods. The Usijas first
gathered thee. In thee all these worlds are contained,’ #

‘The Soma flowed into the vessel for Indra, for Vishnu;
may it be honied for Vayu.’ ‘

‘Pouring forth streams, the Soma hastens to Indra, Vayu,
Varuna, the Maruts, and to Vishnu.’ ®

‘Indu, do thou flow sweet to Indra, to Vishnu. Preserve
from sin the men who praise thee.’ ® ‘

‘Soma, Indu, purified, thou exhilaratest Varuna, thou
exhilaratest Mitra, thou exhilaratest Indra, thou exhilaratest
Vishnu, thou exhilaratest the troop of the Maruts, thou
exhilaratest the gods and the great Indra that they may be
merry.’?

When in the later mythology, Mahadeva had thrown the

‘RV. ix 113, 7; Max Miller, * R. V7 ix, = 20; Mais, Sonekrit
Chips, i. 47. Texts, pa

? HH. Wileon, B. V. &. iii, 461. "RV. ix. we Muir, Sanskrit

LBV. ix. 865 Muir, Sanskrit Texts, part iv. p. 80.

Tests, , part iv. p. 91 7B. VY. ix. 90, 5; Muir, Sanskrit


Vix"), 8; Moir, Sonsbrit Tozie past iv: p- 80.
aoe "eet i iv p 80


IDEAS OF DUALISM.


older deities into the shade; Vishnu, Soma, and Agni became
different parts of his bow and arrow; ‘ for all the world,’ we
are told, ‘is formed of Agni and Soma, and is said to be
composed of Vishnu, and Vishnu is the soul of Mahadeva of
boundless power.’! So with Uma, as divine knowledge,
Soma, as the supreme spirit, falls into the ranks of correla-
tive deities.*

‘With the change which came over later Hindu thought
the popularity of Soma passed away; but the hymns of tle
Rig Veda suffice to show how great a charm the Soma drink
had possessed for the people. It was to them life in health,
strength in weakness, medicine in sickness, the restoration
of youth in old age; and the vigour which it imparted to
human beings was imparted with unstinting lavishness to
the gods. The exultation of Indra is the exultation of
Polyphemés when he has drunk the wine given to him by
Odysseus,


Sxctiox II.—CORRELATIVE DEITIES.


A very slight acquaintance with the language of the Vedic
hymns will suffice to show that the idea of any one deity
rarely failed to suggest to the mind of the worshipper the
idea of another god, whose attributes answered to, or were
contrasted with, his own. The thought of Dyaus, the sky,
was bound up with that of Prithivi, the earth, who was his
bride; and their very numes, blended into one word Dyava-
prithivi, defoted their inseparable union. The idea of Va-
tuna, the veiling heaven, brought up that of Mitra, the light-
illumined sky.

The connection was forced upon them by the phenomena
of the outward world. We cannot sever in our minds the
thought of day from that of night, of morning from evening,

1 Muir, Sanskrit Texts, part iv. divine knowledge; thou who oxistest
g 189, Uma is also the wife of Muha- with her, O Soma, supreme spirit, &e-

eva, i. 227. For further detila Hence her attributes are plastic enough,
respecting Uma, see Muir, i6. p. 357, and thus she becomes identified with


et seg. OF genuine mythology the story Ambika, the sister of Rudra, a being
of Uma, if it can bo called a story, not much more clearly defined than


exhibits very little. It has been drawn Uma herself.
out to suit an idea, but the idea has not * Max Miller, Lectures on Language,


389
CHAP.
IL
ST


Powara
Sona,


Complo-
menuary
deities,


The dnal-
ism of
Nature.


390


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


of light from darkness ; and ‘ this palpable dualism of nature ’}


— has left its most marked impression on the mythology of the


Functions
of the
Asvins.


Veda. The dawn and the gloaming, the summer and the
winter may, it is obvious, be described as twins or as sisters,
standing side by side or dwelling in the same house. Thus,
not only are Dyava-prithivi, heaven and earth, described as
twins, but Indra and Agni are spoken of in the dual as the
two Indras, Indragni, not only ushasanakta, the dawn and
the night, but ushasau, the two dawns,’ and the two
Varunas. Like Indragni again, the twin Asvins, or horse-
men, are called Vritrahana, destroyers of Vritra.

These Asvins have been madc the subject of a somewhat
lengthened controversy. Their features are not very definite,
but in the oldest hymns they are worshipped with a peculiar
reverence, as able not merely to heal sicknesses but to restore
the aged to youth. Their relations to each other and to
their worshippers are placed in a clearer light by a reference
to Greek mythical phraseology. Speaking of these beings,
the commentator Yaska says that their sphere is the heaven,
and remarks that some regard them as heaven and earth, as
day and night, or as sun and moon, while they who antici-
pated the method of Euémeros affirmed that they were two
deified kings. But when he adds that their time is after
midnight, whilst the break of day is yet delayed, all room for
doubt seems taken away. The two Ahans, or Dawns, Day
and Night, are born, it is said, when the Asvins yoke their
horses to their car. The twins are born ‘when the Night
leaves her sister, the Dawn, when the dark one gives way
to the bright.’ After them comes Ushaa, the Greek Hés,
who is followed first by Sirya, a feminine, or sister of Sarya,
the sun, then by Vrishakapayi, then by Saranyi,* and lastly
by Savitar. They are thehajdte, born here and there, either
as appearing in the East and in the West, or as springing
up on the earth and in the air; and this epithet may explair
the alternate manifestations of the Dioskouroi, who stand tc
Helen in the same relation which the Asvins bear to Saramt
or Ushas.


\ Max Miiller, Zectures on Le % 4 5» 486.
y Max Miller, anguage, nocon series,


THE TWIN DEITIES.


The Asvins are thus the conquerors of darkness, the lords
of light: ever youthful, swift as thought, and possessed, like
Indra, Agni, and Phoibos, of a profound wisdom. If the
poet needs to give them a father, he must assign them a
parent in the clear heaven, or say that they are the children
of Prajfpati, Tvashtar, or Savitar, names for the Creator.
Their mother must be the East or West, from which they
spring, regarded not as a place, but as the being who
imparts to them their mysterious life! As ushering in the
healthful light of the sun, they are, like Asklépios and his
children, healers and physicians, and their power of restoring
the aged to youth reappears in Medeia, the daughter of the
Sun, They are adored at morning and evening tide as
Rudrau, the terrible lords of wealth, and are thus identified
or connected with another deity who became of supreme
importance in the later Hindu mythology? Like the Kou-
rétes and Telchines, like Proteus, Thetis, and the other fish-
gods, they have the power of changing their shape at will.

‘The twin pair adopt various forms; one of them shines
brightly, the other is black; twin sisters are they, the one
black, the other white,’ ®—phrases which bring before us the
rivalry not only of the Dioskouroi, but of the Theban Eteokles
and Polyneikes, and perhaps the black and white eagles in
the Agamemnon of Hischylos.‘ Like Phoibos the healer,
and like Asklépios and his sons Podaleirios and Machién,
the Aavins are ‘ physicians conversant with all medicaments.’®
In the Norse tale of Dapplegrim we have the Asvins in their
original fora as horses ; for when the lad, who, having won
on his wonderful steed the victories of Indra, Herakles, and
Bellerophén, is told that he must produce ite match or die,
complains to the horse that the task is not easy, ‘ for your
match is not tobe found in the wide world,’ the steed replies
that he has a match, although it is hard to get at him, for
he abides in Hell.

In Indra and in Agni, Mitra and Varuna, and in the
Asvins we have three sets of twins, Yaman, Gemini, each

1 Max Miller, Lectures on Language, A. H. Wilson, 2. cA &. iii, 97.
second series, 498. « B. 108,


* Muir, Sanekrit Texte, part iv. ch, 3, + 7,101,
vent Ion O85,


391


CHAP,
I,
YS


Parentage
of the
Aaving.


The Twits,


392


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


biaettas being spoken of as Yame or Yami, the twin brother or the
—T- twin sister. These Yaman are the children of Vivasvat, who is


wedded both to the morning and to the evening; and their
sister, the night, prays her brother to become her husband.
In this Yama we have probably the Hindu god of the dead,
whose two dogs with four eyes and wide nostrils go about.
among men as his messengers. As both are children of Vi-
vasvat, Professor Max Miiller thinks it unnecessary to assume
that two Vivasvats were each the father of Yama, The twin
who represented the evening would naturally become the lord
or judge or guide of the departed. As from the East came all
life, 0 in the West lay the land of the dead, the Elysian
fields, the region of Sutala; and thither the sun hustens as
he sinks down from the heights of heaven. Thus ‘Yama is
said to have crossed the rapid waters, to have shown the way
to many, to have first known the path on which our fathers
erased over ;' and the gulf is not wide which separates the
functions of the Psychopompos from those of Hades, Like
Varuna, Yama has his nooses, and he sends a bird as a token
to those who are about to die. But although a darker side
is not wanting to bis character, Yama remains in the Veda
chiefly the god of the blessed in the paradise where he dwells
with Varuna, This Yama reappears in the Yima of the
Avesta, his father Vivasvat being reproduced as Vivanghvat ;*
and in Yima we have an embodiment of the Hesiodic golden
age free from heat and cold, from sickness and death, an
image of the happy region to which Krishna consigns his
conquered enemy. In a grotesque myth of the later Yamen,
the death of men in youth as well as in old age is accounted
for by a mistake made by the herald of Yamen after the
latter had been restored to life by Siva who had put him to
death. While Yamen lay dead, mankind multiplied so that
the earth could scarcely contain them. Yamen on returning
to life sent his herald to summon at once all the old men, for
none others had ever been called away before. The herald,
getting drunk, proclaimed instead that henceforth all leaves,


1’ Max Miller, Lectures, second series, 515; Muir, Principal Deities of R. V. 576.
* Max Miiller, Lectures, wecond series, 522.


EROS AND ANTEROS.


fruits, and flowers, should fall to the ground, and thus men of
all ages began to yield to the power of death.

The connection of Soma with Uma has been already
noticed. Another couplet of deities is found in Soma and
Sarya, the daughter of Sirya the Sun; and here the twin
Asvina stand by the side of Soma az the friends of the bride-
groom. <A later version, which says that, although Savitar
had destined his daughter Siry4 to be the wife of Soma, she
was nevertheless won by the Asvins,' repeats the story of
Pelops and Hippodameia, which represents the maiden as
becoming the prize of the hero who can overtake her in a
foot race. So again, Arjuna, the Argennos of the myth of
Agamemnon, stands to Krishna, who is represented as de-
claring him to be his own half, in that dual relation which
links Phaéthén with Helios, Patroklos with Acbilleus, Theseus
with Peirithods, Telemachos with Odysseus, and which is
seen again in the stories of Pelias and Neleus, Romulus and
Remus, Prometheus and Epimetheus, Hengest and Horsa,
and in the Teutonic tales of the Two Brothers and of the
Faithful John who guards his prince as carefully as the Lux-
man of Hindu folk-lore guards Rama. This dualism we find
again in the Hellenic Eros and Anteros, and still more plainly
in the myth of Hermaphroditos.? The tale which describes
Arjuna as receiving from Mahfdeva the Pasupata (or sceptre
which guides the cows) under a strict charge not to use it
rashly as it might destroy the whole world,’ carries us to the
ill-omened gifts which brought destruction to Phaéthén and
Patroklos. In the same way Rama is linked with his brother
Laxmana, and one myth which regards Rama as a mortal
hero speaks of both as wounded and rendered senseless by
a cloud of serpents transformed into arrows.‘

" Muir, Contributions to a Knowlaige rejects her lore, until the nymph lays
of Vedic Theogony, 3. hands on him as Aphrodité doos on

2 This story is after all only a coun- Adonis.
torpart of the legends of Echo and — * Muir, Sanskrit Tozte, iv. 196, 225.
Selénd, whose partis bore played bythe 4 Z4, 384. The modern version of


nymph of the well, Salmakis, Like the story has beon ulready given, book i.
EndymiGa and Narkiseos, the youth ch, viii. 4


893


CHAP.
IL
—
Soma and

Saryd.


394


BOOK
IL
sS


The lonely
wanderer.


MYTHOLOGY OF THR ARYAN NATIONS.


Szcrox [V.—THE DAWN.


To the poets of all ages and countries the phenomena of
morning and evening are fall of pathos and sadness. The
course of the day itself is but brief, and the career of the
bright being who bears it across the heaven may be little
more than a series of struggles with the vapours which strive
to dim his splendours. All his life long he must toil for the
benefit of the mean thing called man, and look on clear
streams and luscious fruits without daring to quench his
thirst or appease his hunger. He may be armed with in-
vincible weapons; he may be the conqueror of all his
enemies: but the doom is upon him; he must die in the
flower of his age. Still there is for him a grief yet more
bitter than this. Throughout almost the whole of his long
journey he must go alone. The beautiful being who cheered
him when his heart beat high and his limbs were fresh was
parted from him almost as soon as he had found her, and
there remains of her grace and loveliness only a consoling
memory. He has hard toils before him, and there are
grievous perils to be encountered. Still for him, as for the
sons of men,

"Tis better to have Jored and lost,

Than never to have loved at all,
But although he cannot go back to the bright land where he
saw his early love, she may yet be restored to him when the
hour of his death has come. The sight of that beautiful
form, the tender glance of that loving countenance, will be
more than a compensation for his long toil and his early
death. He will die looking on her face. But in the mean-
while his heart is filled with an irrepressible yearning. He
must hasten on until his eye has seen its desire, even though
the shadow of death must immediately fall upon him. He
may have been early severed from her; but she is his bride,
pure and incorruptible, though the mightiest of the land
seek to taint her faith and lead her aside into a new love.
Her dwelling is his home, and to it he must hasten across the
blue seas of heaven, although monsters may seek to scare him,


DISGUISED HEROES.


and beautiful beings may beseech him to tarry awhile with
them in their luxurivus chambers.

Under this thin disguise we see at once the story of
Odysseus and Penelopé; but this is, after all, one only of
almost a thousand forms which the legenda of Phvibos and
Dionysos, of Perseus and Bellerophontes, may assume. The
doom of the Dawn is as woeful as that of the Sun who has
Joved her. The glance of both is fatal. The Sun looks upon
the tender dew, and under his rays the sparkling drops vanish
away. The evening turns to gaze upon the setting sun, and
the being on whom her life depends is snatched from her
sight. They can remain together only on the condition that
the one shall not see the form and face of the other; and so
when, after the rising of the sun, the violet hues of morning
faded from the sky, the phrase would run that Indra, or
Phoibos, or Orpheus had fixed their eyes on Dahand, or
Daphné, or Eurydiké, and their love had passed away from
them like the fleeting colours of a dream. But the myth
itself might be developed in many ways. The disappearance
or death of Daphné, or Prokris, or Arethousa would mark
the moment of the great catastrophe ; but the disaster was
only the interruption of a union which had been continued
during the long hours of the night, and at once we have in
this fact the suggestion of disguise. If the being whose
glance scorched even the object of his love could keep her
near him without doing her hurt, this could only be because
he had shrouded his splendour in darkness, or because he
had assumed some other form. Either he might hide his
limbs behind the skin of a lion, as in Greek stories, or of a
fox or a jackal in Hindu folk-lore, or he might himself assume
their form. Such an idea would prompt the tale that the
beautiful Dawn had been given by her father in marriage to
a hideous monster; or that she, the youngest and loveliest of
his daughters, had been frightened by her gloomy sisters, the
earlier hours of the night, into the belief that she was
wedded to a loathsome being. The natural growth of the
story would frame the more minute details, that before this
terrible union the mother of the Dawn was dead; that the
beautiful maiden was sacrificed by a new bride, who took
nart with her elder sisters ; and that, as she sought to verify


395


CHAR:


A ee
Develope-
ment of
the myth.


396 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


BOOK their words, she discovered the beauty and majesty of her
—_. husband only to see it vanish from her sight. Then over the
heart of the forsaken Dawn would come that irrepressible
yearning which filled the soul of Odysseus. For her life
would now have nothing worth living for but the hope that
one day she should be reunited to him whom she had lost;
and until she should so recover him, she could know no rest
or peace. She must follow him through all lands, she must.
seek him at all costs and at every sacrifice. To the utter-
most bounds of the earth, and far beyond the clouds which
veil the distant mountains, beyond the mists which brood on
the restless sea, she must journey on, buoyed up by the ever
undying longing to see his face once more. There are fearful
dangers to be encountered and overcome. She is surrounded
by awful shapes, who blot out all brightness from the sky ;
but the powers of light are on her side. The beautiful clouds
which sail on the pure ether will bear her up above the
murky vapours, and carry her, as on swan’s wings, across the
mysterious vaults of heaven. Her heart is full of sadness ;
but the tenderness of her beauty is not lessened, and as she
moves on her weary way, helpless creatures feel her kindness,
and declare that their gratitude shall not end in words. She
may be doomed to scale a mountain of ice, or remove heaps
of enormous stones; but the winds are content to be her
ministers, and their warm breath melts the ice, and drives
away the massy storm-clouds, Still the malignant influence
of one powerful enemy rests upon her, the inflyence of that
witching sorceress who seeks to win for herself the love
which Odysseus bears to Penelopé. But the tasks imposed
upon her by her unpitying rival are at last accomplished ;
and as the clouds break away from the heaven, the Dawn,
or the Eés, who closes the day in our Homeric poems, sees
before her the form of him whom she has sought with un-
daunted and untiring devotion.

The story In these simple phrases relating to a drama acted before
of Ursasl. uy every day, we have the framework of a vast number of
stories, some of which have furnished subjects for epic
poems, while others have assumed strange and grotesque
forms in the homely lore of popular tradition. One of the


URVAS! AND PURURAVAS.


simplest versions of the myth is found in the story of Urvasi,'
although even here the artificial influence of a growing cere-
monial system is manifest. The personification of Urvasi
herself is as thin as that of Eés or Seléné. Her name is
often found in the Veda as a mere name for the morning,
and in the plural number it is used to denote the dawns
which passing over men bring them to old age and death.
Urvaai is the bright flush of light overspreading the heaven
before the sun rises, and is but another form of the many
mythical beings of Greek mythology whose names take us
back to the same idea or the same root. As the dawn in the
Vedic hymns is called Uriki, the far-going (Télephassa,
Télephos), so is she also Uruasi, the wide-existing or wide-
spreading; as are Eurdpé, Euryanassa, Euryphassa, and
many more of the sisters of Athéné and Aphrodité. As such
she is the mother of Vasishtha, the bright being, as Oidipous
is the son of Iokasté ; and although Vasishtha, like Oidipous,
has become a mortal bard or sage, he is still the son of
Mitra and Varuna, of night and day. Her lover, Purdravas,
is the counterpart of the Hellenic Polydeukés;? but the
continuance of her union with him depends on the condition
that she never sees him unclothed. But the Gandharvas,
impatient of her long sojourn among mortal men, resolved to
bring her back to their bright home; and PurGravas is thus
led unwittingly to disregard her warning. A ewe with two
lambs was tied to her couch, and the Gandharvas stole one
of them. ‘ Urvasi said, “They take away my darling, as if
I lived in a lend where there is no hero and no man.” They
stole the second, and she upbraided her husband again.
Then Purtravas looked and said, “ How can that be a land
without heroes or men where Iam?” And naked he sprang
up; he thought it was too long to put on his dress. Then
the Gandharvas sent a flash of lightning, and Urvast saw
her husband naked as by daylight. Then she vanished.


1 Mux Miller, Chips, ge. ii. 99, ef srg.

2 'Though rave ip generally used of
wound, yot the root ra, which means
originally t0 cry, is also applied to
colour in the sonso of « loud or erying
colour, Besides, Purtiravas calls im-
self Vasishtha, which, as we know, is


aname of the sun; and if he is called
Aida, the son of IdA, the same name is
elsewhere (R. Fiji. 29, 3) given to
Agni, the Fire’—Max Miler, i. 101,
This son of Ida rewppears perhaps as
Idas, the father of Kleopatra,


397


CHAP
tL


398


BOOK.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


“T come back,” she said, and went. Then he bewailed his


1. vanished love in bitter grief.’ Her promise to return was


Gorm of
the story
of Pene-
lope.


fulfilled, but for a moment only, at the Lotos-lake, and
Pordravas in vain beseeches her to tarry longer. ‘What
shall I do with thy speech?’ is the answer of Urvasl. ‘I
am gone like the first of the dawns. Purdravas, go home
again. I am hard to be caught like the winds.’ Her lover
is in utter despair; but when he lies down to die, the heart
of Urvasi was melted, and she bids him come to her on the
last night of the year. For that night only he might be
with her; but a son should be born to him,’ On that day
he went up to the golden seats, and there Urvasi told him
that the Gandbarvus would grant him one wish, and that
he must make his choice. ‘Choose thou for me,’ he said ;
and she answered, ‘Say to them, Let me be one of you.’ So
the Gandharvas initiated Puriravas into their mysteries, and
he became one of the Gandhurvas,

Iu the story thus related in the Brihmana of the Yagur-
Veda we have a maiden wedded to a being on whose form
her eyes may not rest, although she dwells in his house;
and the terms of the compact are broken practically by
herself, for although itis Puriravas who springs up, still it is
Urvasi who provokes him to do so. Finally, she is impelled
80 to tempt him by beings who wish to obtain her treasures ;
and thus the element of jealousy enters into the legend.
These leading ideas, of a broken pledge or violated secret,
of beings jealous of her purity and happiness, and of imme-
diate separation to be followed by reunion in tke end, furnish
the groundwork of a large group of stories belonging chiefly
to the common lore of the people. They resolve themselves
into the yet more simple notion of brief union broken by an


+ This child may be the Gret sun of
the new year; but whether the myth he
taken of ‘that or any other sunrive, it is
equally true that the mother must
Nec ia after ee child bas been

oro. Hence in the play of Kalidasa,
after Urvuai has been reunited to ber
lover, she tells him,


When for your love I gladly left the
courts
Of heaven, the monarch thus declared


«his will,


“Go and be happy with the prince, my
friend:

But when he views the son thxt thou
shalt lear him,

Then hitherward ‘dircet thy prompt
rotura,

‘The fated term expjree

His father for my loss,

I mss po longer tarry.”

Seo the analysis of this play by Professor

Max Miller, ‘Comparative Mythology,’

Chips, ii. 128,


nd to cousole
8 restored.


ODYSSEUS AND PENELOPE.


early parting and a long absence, and this notion is the germ


399


CHAP.


of the Odyssey. In the very spring-time of their joy the eS


chieftain of Ithaka is parted from his bride. While he is
away, she has to undergo hard trial at the hands of men
who seek rather her riches than herself; and even when the
twenty years are over, and Odysseus sees Penelopé once
taore, the poet still speaks of a time soon coming when they
must again be parted. Here also the myth of Purfiravas is
in close agreement with that of Odysseus, for he too must
be again parted from his love. She who, ever young, yet
making men old, can know neither age nor change, cannot
avert the doom which falls alike on Phaéthén, Memnén, and
Sarpédén, on Achilleus, Baldur, and Sigurd, But all have
the same work to do; and if the dawn cannot save them
from death, she can restore them to life, and thus through
her they become immortal. Thus Purtravas, who was
created especially to do battle with and to conquer the
powers of darkness, addresses Urvasi as the immortal among
the mortals; and says of himself that he, as the brightest
sun, holds her who spreads the sky and fills the air with
light. The very rite for the sake of which the Brahmans
converted the simple myth into an institutional legend,
points to the true nature of Purtravas. He can become
immortal only by devising the mode of kindling fire by
friction ; and thus like Bhuranyu and Phoréneus, Hermes and
Prometheus, he falls into the ranks of those who are the
first to bestow the boon of fire on man. Nor is it without
significance ¢hat in the play of Kalidasa Purdiravas, when
first he rescues Urvasi from the beings who have carried her
away, has already a wife, who, seeing her husband wasting
away with love for another, mukes a vow to treat with
kindness the object of his love, whoever she may be.
Puriravas has not indeed for his first wife the love which
Kephalos is said to bear to Prokris; but here Urvasi, who
hesitates not to take her rival’s place, is so far the exact
counterpart of Eés, while in the first wife we have all the
aelf-devotion which marks the beautiful daughter*of Hersé.
In most of these legends the meeting and the severance
of these lovers take place by the side of the stream or


The Dawn
and the
Waters.


400


BOOK the water from which Aphrodité rises, and in which the
eos nymphs bathe the newly-born Apollén. It is on the
river's bank that Eurydiké is bitten by the fatal snake,

and Orpheus is doomed to the same weary search as Purd-

ravas, for the love which has been lost. On the heights

which overhang Peneios, Phoibos sees and chases the beauti-

ful Daphné, and into the blue stream the maiden plunges

when she almost feels the breath of her pursner. So again
Arethousa commits herself to the waters as she flies from

the huntsman Alpheios, who wins her love only when they

meet again upon the shore of Ortygia, the dawn-land. The

Greek river is but the Teutonic Elbe, the running stream,

and in the huntsman of Mainalos we see only an image of

the sun as he rests on the waters in the morning or the
evening, in other words, the Frog-prince of the German
legend.! In the Sanskrit story Bheki, the frog, is a maiden

who consents to marry a king on condition thai he never

shows her a drop of water. ‘One day being tired, she asked

the king for water; the king forgot his promise, brought

water, and Bheki disappeared.’* As in the story of Urvast


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


"In the mythology of Assyria, Bhekt,
or the phat i represented by the
fish-sun, who, as Berusus suys, rose wy
from the sea each morning, and plunge
into it every evening. Mr. Gould
remarks (Curious Myths, second series,
231) that ‘his semipiscine form was an
expression of the idea, that half his time
‘was spent abore ground, and half below
thewaves.’ Thisfish-god is, like theAryan
Protons, or Helios, the possessor of amys-
terions wisdom of which, under cert,
conditions, be will make human ee
partakers. As Qunnes, or Dag-on, tho
fish On, he ie the great teacher of the
Babylonians, and his name is seen in
the Hebrew Bethaon (Bethaven}, which
is translated by Bethshemesh, the house
of the Sun, He is horned as Mr.
Gould remarks, like all other sun and
moon deities, the moon of tho
Syriana being Derketo, Atergatis, the
mother of Semiramis, in whose story
again we have the elements of many
Aryan myths, See note 1, p. 223.
Like Cyrus and Romulus, Semiramis
ja brought up by # sbepherd, snd
her beauty attracts the attention of a
general, whose name is, of course,


Onnes, But she ig wooed also by
Ninos, and therenpon Onnes sleys bim-
self. After a life full of marvois sho
wings her way to heaven in the form of
a dove, as Romulus vanishes in the
storm cloud, and Aineias disappears in
the waters of the Numician stream.

The fish-gun is sven in that portion of
the sa-called Humeric hymn which
speaks of Apolién us plunging into the
sea, and in the form of a dolphin
guiding the ship of thé Kretan mariners
to Kriss. On coming out of the water,
ho reassumes, like Proteus, a human
form. Mr, Gould states that, among
North American Indians, a story is told
thet they were guided to their Western
home by a man or fish who kept close
to the boat, until it rowched the American
coast.

* Max Miiller, Chips, ii. 248. This
is the germ of the beautiful story of
Undine, as told by Fouqué. Sho, like
Daphné, is the dauggter of the stream;
and the condition impored upon her
husband is, that he is never to speak
angrily to her when on or near any
water. ‘If you should, my kinsfolk
would regaia their right cver me, They


UNDINE AND MELUSINA.


the husband is the actual delinquent, but he is hurried into
the fatal act by the words of his wife. If instead of the
promise not to show her water we substitute a pledge that
the lover shall not look upon his bride while she is bathing,
the myth remains essentially the same; and in this form
we see at once the germ of the story of Melusina. If Mr.
Gould is right in connecting this name with that of the
Babylonian moon-goddess Mylitta, we have an instance
of an imported title parallel to those of the Semitic Mel-
karth and Adonai, the Hellenised Melikertes and Adonis.
Melusina is found by Count Raymund, as Daphné is found
by Apollén, near running water, and like Bheki or Urvasi,
she readily consents to marry her human lover on the con-
dition that he shall never attempt to see her on one day of
each week. When at length the promise is broken, Ray-
mund sees his beautiful wife in the water, the lower portion
of her body being now in the form of a fish. But Melusina
did not know that her husband had thus seen her, and, as
in Fouqné’s story of Undine, the catastrophe comes only
when Raymund calls her a serpent and bids her depart from
his house.


would tear me from you in their fury, held and loved her, He took her to


iecause thoy would conceive that one of
their race was injured; and I should be
compelled, a long as I lived, to dwell
‘low in the erystal palnces und never
Gare ascend to you again: or should
they send me up to you, that would be
far worse still.’ If he is false te her,
sho can reappear only to kiss him to
death, Seléné cunock upon Endy
only when he ix just plugging into bis
dreamless sleep. “The tale so exquisitely
told by Fouqué was derived by him from
the Treative of Elemental Spirits by
Theophrastus Paracelsus. ‘The leading
fenturo of his story is the acquisition of
ahumun soul by Undine on her marriage
with the knight Huldbrand. Mz. Gould
cites a Caundinn story of an Ottawa
« chief, who, whilst sitting hy the wuter-
side, sees arising from the flood a beauti-
ful woman, who pray him to euffer her
to live on ourth, as she sought to win &
Taman soul, end coutd do this only by
smarriage with a mortul. ‘He consented
nnd took her to his own house, where
sho wag to bim as a daughter, Seven
years after, un Andirondak youth Le-


wife, and sho obtained that which she
had desired, @ human soul’ — Curious
Myths, second series, 238. It is possible
that this story may be an importation
from Europe: but we may ask for some
conclusive evidence of the fact, when we
find the legend of Pandora's box among
the Indians of Labrador. Jeeuit mis-
sionaries. may huve imparted much to
their converts, but it is not Jikely that
they instructed their hearers in the
mythical fancies of pagan Grecks—
Hinds, Explorations in Labrador, i, 61.

* For other versions and variations of
this story see Gould, Curious Myths,
<Melusina.” The same myth is intro-
duced by Sir Walter Scott in his ro-
mance of Anne of Geierstein (ch. xi.),
whose mother's life depends on a bril-
liant opal which must not be touched
with water, This gem, J
others, is aympathetic. It,
the fatal brand of Mcleugros. See also
Scott, Border Minstrelsy, introduction
to Ballad of Tamiane,

‘The iden of ugliness or unseemliness
would naturally come to be connected


nn


401


CHAP.
IL


402


BOOK
iL.
sentees
Erte and

Paycht.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


‘The idea, common to all these tales, of beings who though
united in the closest love may not look upon each other, is
but little modified in the story of Erés and Psyché. The
version given by Appuleius is commonly spoken of as an
allegory. It deserves the name as much and as little as the
Odyssey. Here, as in the tales already referred ‘to, no
liquid must come near the mysterious being to whom the
love of the mortal husband or wife is given. The old phrase
that the sun must die at the sight of water,! has retained its
hold on the storytellers of all the Aryan nations; but the
version of Appuleius assigns reasons where the earlier
Sanskrit myth is content to relate incidents, If like Urvast
Psyché brings about her own punishment, she does so
because she is under a doom laid on her by Venus. But
Venus is Aphrodité Anadyomené, the mother, the wife, or
the child of the sun; and the notion that the love of the sun
for another must excite her jealousy and anger was one
which must sooner or later be imported into the myth,
With its introduction the framework of the story was com-
pleted ; and so the tale ran that Venus charged her son to
fill Psyché with the madness which made Titania fall in love
with the enchanted Bottom. But Psyché, the dawn with its
soft breath, is so beautiful that Erés (Amor, Cupido) falls in
love with her himself and taking her to a secret cave (the
eave of Dikté or of Lyktos), visits her as Purdravas comes to
Urvasi. Stirred up by Venus, her sisters tell Psyché that
she is wedded to a hideous monster, and at length her


with Bheki or the Frog. Hence the
‘ong’s daughter in the German story of
the Frog Prince shows no «pecial faney
for the little ereature which brings up
for her the golden tall (the sun's orls)
trom the bottom of the well. The ugli-
nese of Bheki serres to give point to the
leautiful Gaelic legend of Nighran Righ
Fo Thuina, Campbell, Tales of the West
Highlands, iii, 404, ‘The maiden (Aph-

ite) in not, indeed, bere described as
# frog; but she is a ‘strange looking
ugly creature’ with her hair down to
her heels, who in vain intreats Fionn
and Oivean (Finn and Ossian) to let
hor coms to their fire. Diarmaid,
who seruples not to sey how hidsous


he thinks her, i more merciful: but
the Leathly Lady (for it is the same
myth) becomes as exacting as the littl
Frog in Grim: Sho haa 20
been long at the insieteo
coming under Diarmid’s plaid. He
turos« fold of it between them; sn
resently he finds by his side ‘the mos
utifol women that man ever Siw.
She is the Dawn-maidon, and ehe raivet
for his dwelling that palace of the an
which the Arabian feller delight
to describe in the tale Allahvad-doon
same beiug appears as the *
wight" in Chaucer'e tale of tho Wife 0
Bath, Keightley, Fairy Mythology, 823.
* Max Miller, Chipa, ii. 268.


EROS AND PSYCHE,


curiosity ia so roused that, taking a lamp, she gazes upon
her lover and beholds before her the perfection of beauty.
But a drop of oil falls from her lamp on the sleeping
god, and the brief happiness of Psyché ig ended. She is
left desolate like Purtravas, end like him she must go in
search of her lost love. Eés has looked on Helios, and he
has plunged beneath the sea. If she seek him, it must be
through the weary hours of the night, amidst many perils
and at the cost of vast labour. In every temple Psyché
looks for her lover until at last she reaches the dwelling of
Venus, under whose spell he lies like Odysseus in the home
of Kirké or Kalypsd. At her bidding she accomplishes
some hard and degrading tasks, ander which she must have
died but for the love of Erés, who, though invisible, still
consoled and cheered her. By his aid she at last made her
peace with Venus, and becoming immortal, was united with
her lover for ever. Of all these incidents not one has been
invented by Appuleius; and all that can be said is that he
has weakened rather than strengthened the beauty of the
myth by adapting it to the taste of a thoroughly artificial age.
Having taken up a story which had not yet been brought
within the charmed circle of epic or lyric poetry, he has
received credit for an originality to which the familiar tale
of Beauty and the Beast, with which it is substantially
identical, may lay an equal claim."

The idea which underlies these tales runs through a large
class of legends, which carry us into almost every Aryan
Jand and make the hypothesis of conscious borrowing or
importation as perilous as we have seen it to be in the story

1 In Hindu folk-lore thin ia the story


of Gandharba-sena. Of this being Cap-
tain Burton (Tales of Indian Devilry,


The hypothesis is scarcely necessary,
unless it is to be maintained thet the
whole folk-lore of Greece, Germany,
Scandinavia, and other countries has


rrefuce xiii.) anya thut be ‘is a quasi-
Fistorical pereonage who lived a century
preceding the Christian era’ Even
granting the fact, we have hero only 3
name belonging to the same clase with
Roland, Arthur, Dietrich of Bern, or
others for whom sn ‘historical existence
thas been claimed. The name clearly
auggests 8 comparison with Gandharva
Purtravas, ‘The etory of Gandharbe-
vena, Cuptain Burton regards as the ori-
ginal of the Golden Asa of Appuleius.


been bodily imported from India. The
story of Gandharbe-sana in, howerer

of Midas, of the Itish Lavra
Loingyech, and of the Titile ‘Age Ze
Grimm's collection; and it may be
noted that the being formed into
un ass in the romance of Appuleiue is
Lucius of Corinth (Phoibos Lykeios).
The story of Peychd ie also tld in
the Gaelic Tale of the Deughter of the


403


CHAP.
I.


‘The wearch
of the
‘Dawa for
the Sun,


404


BOOK
pie


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


of the Master Thief. In almost all these legends the youngest
and most beautiful of three (sometimes of twelve) daughters
is married or given up to some unsightly being or monster,
or to some one whom she is led to suppose hideous or re-
pulsive. In some instances, as in the common English nursery
tale, the enchantment is ended when the maiden confesses
her love for the disguised being in his unsightly shape:! in
the version which Appuleius followed, the maiden has a lover
who is marvellously beautiful, but whose beauty she has
never seen. In all cases, however, there are jealous sisters
or & jealous mother who insist that the lover is hideous, and
incite her to look upon him while he is asleep. Thus goaded
on, she disregards the warnings in each case given that such
curiosity cannot be indulged without causing grievous dis-
aster, and in each case the sleeping lover is awakened by a
drop of oil or tallow from the torch or lamp in the maiden’s
han, and instantly vanishes or is transformed, generally
into a bird which tells her that she must wander in search.
of him through many weary years, and do the bidding of
some harsh mistress into whose power her fatal curiosity has
brought her. In some versions, as in that of Appuleius, this
nnistress is the mother of the lost lover.? Then follow the
years of wandering and toil, which can be brought to an end
only by the achievement of tasks, generally three in number,
each utterly beyond human powers. In these tasks the
maiden is aided by brute creatures whom she has befriended
in their moment of need, and who perform for her that
which she could not possibly accomplish hersek’. The com-
pletion of the ordeal is followed by the happy union of the
maiden with her lover.

It is scarcely necessary to say that there is perhaps no


1 The converse of thie incident is
found in the legend of the Loathly Lady.


The Search
of the Sun
for the
Daven.


are seen again in the story of Hunsel
and Grothel. These two cume in the


See also Fougué’s Sintra,

In Grimm's Story of the Twelve
Brothers she is the mothor of the king
who marries the duwn-maiden, i.e. she
ia Venus, She reappears as his second
wife in the tales of The Little Brother
and Sister, of the Six Swans, who fly
away like the children of Nephelé, and
of Little Snow White. The Little
Brother end Sister (Phrixos and Hellé)


end toa pond (Hellespontos); but the
muiden who represents Hellé ig more
fortunate than the duvghter of Athamas,
In the Gaelic story of The Chest, Camp-
bell, ii, 4, she digguises herself as a
gillie in_ order to search for her lost
lover. Thie story contains also the
myth of the judgment of Portia in the
Merchant of Venice, ib, 6, 13.


THE MINISTERS OF EROS AND PSYCHE.


one feature in these stories which does not reappear in the
tales told of Boots, or the youngest son, in his search for the
enchanted princess who has been torn away from him, or
whom after a long toil he is to win as his bride. It could
not be otherwise, when the stories turn in the one case on
the search of the dawn for the sun, in the other on the
search of the sun for the dawn. As we might expect in
popular tales, the images drawn from myths of the day and
night are mingled with notions supplied by myths of summer
and winter. The search is always in comparative gloom or
in darkness! Hither it is Odysseus journeying homeward
among grievous perils, clad in beggar’s raiment, or it is
Orpheus seeking Eurydiké in the awful regions of Hades.
The toil or the battle which precedes the victory is common
to all the traditions, whether epical or popular; but in the
wildest forms of Aryan folk-lore the machinery of the most
complicated tales can be broken up into its original parts.
In northern countries espccially, the powers of frost, snow,
and cold, must be conquered before Phoibos can really win
Daphné, or Psyché recover Erés. Hence there are moun-
tains of glass (glaciers) to be scaled, luge castles of ice to be
thrown down, or myriads of icebergs or boulders to be re-
moved, In these tasks the youth or the maiden is aided by
bears, wolves, or foxes, by ducks, swans, eagles, or by ants,
the Myrmidons of Achilleus; but all these are names under
which the old mythicul language spoke of the clouds or the
winds, or of the light which conquers the darkness, The
bear appears in the myth of the seven shiners as well
as in that of Arkas and Kallisté, the wolf in the stories of
Phoibos Lykeios, of Lykién, and the Myrmidons. The
clouds assume the forms of eagles and swans alike in Eastern
or Western traditions, The eagles bear Siirya Bai on their


1 This search is well described in the
Gaelic story of Nighean Righ Fo
Thuina, where the hero Diurmuid loses
hie wife, aa Raylound of Touknuse ix
separated from Meluaina, beeause he
}reake the comprct made with her.
The seareh gors as in the other stories,
but an odd turn is given to it at the
end by making Diarmaid take a dislike


to the maiden whom he rescues in the
Realm Underwaves (where Herakles
regains Alkéstis), and thus he leaves
her to go to his own hume. After all it
is but Ozpheus, whoehere abandons
Enrydiké, inetead of Eurydiké fading
from the eyes of Orpheus. The one
myth is_as forcible and true as the
other. Carpbell, iii. 419.


405


CHAP.
ag.


406


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


wings through the heaven, and the swans, or white cirri


es clouds, are seen in all the stories which tell of Swan maidens


Origin of
these
rayth,


and the knights who woo and win them.! These creatures,
who are as devoted to the youth or the maiden as the
Myrmidons are to Achilleus, speedily remove the mighty
heaps of grain, stones, or ice, and leave the battle-ground
clear for their joyous meeting. In the German story of the
White Snake, the flesh of which, like the serpents of Iamos
and the heart of Hogni in the Volsung tale, imparts to him
who eats it a knowledge of the language of birds, the labour
fall4 on the lover, while the maiden plays the part of Aphro-
dité in the legend of Psyché. The animals here befriended
by the trusty servant, who is Erés, or Boots, or Odysseus, or
a thousand others, are fishes, ants, and ravens—names which
carry us to the fish or frog sun, to the Myrmidons and
the clouds; and the tasks are the recovery of a ring,? the
pick 'ng-up of some bags of millet seed, and the finding of
the apple of life (the sun’s orb). The first is accomplished
by the fishes, one of which, as in the story of Polykrates,
brings the ring in its mouth, the second by the ants, and
the third by the ravens,

That these tales, of which the most familiar type for
English children is that of Beauty and the Beast, have been
borrowed directly from the apologue of Appuleins, no one
probably will venture to maintain. With as little likelihood
can it be said that they were suggested by the Vedic myth
of Urvasi and Puriravas. Their relationship to the latter is
precisely that of the Latin and Greek dialects to*the ancient
Sanskrit; and thus they must be placed in the class of
organic myths. They spring up on all soils from the seed
which the Aryan tribes carried away with them when they
left their common home, and every variation may therefore
be noted as exhibiting the power of growth inherent in the
old mythical ideas. In few cases is there even a plausible
ground for saying that any one tale is copied or consciously
adopted from another; in none is there any ‘necessity for
the assumption. The Teutonic nurse was as little conscious


* Soe Appendix D. Mac Inin Direach, Campbell, Thles of
2 Compare alo the Gaslie story of the West Highlands, ii. 369.


THE DAWN AND HER LOVER.


that the Frog Prince and Boots were one and the same per-
son, as the grandams of the Punjib were that Bheki was
but another form of Urvasi. As an example of the measure
in which the myth, retaining still the essential idea, may
become modified, we may take the tale of the Soaring Lark.'
In this story, the maiden knows that the being who, like
Herakles with the lion’s skin on his back, is during the day
a lion is at night a man, but no ray of light must fall upon
him while he is in his human shape. At her entreaty, how-
ever, he goes to the bridal feast of the elder sister, where a
single ray of light streams in upon him through a chink in
a door made of unseasoned wood, and the maiden entering
the room finds a dove, which says that for seven years he
must fly about in the world, but that at every seventh mile
he will let fall a drop of blood and a feather, to guide her in
her quest of him.? At last this guidance fails her, and she
asks the sun and moon to tell her whither the dove had
gone. As in the tale of Démétér and Persephoné, they are
unable to say: but they give her a casket and an egg which
may one day be of use. She then asks aid of the North
Wind, who bears her over the world until she rescues her
lover, who has resumed his lion’s shape, from a caterpillar
who is an enchanted princess. But the latter, when disen-
chanted, seizes on the maiden’s lover, and bears him away.
The maiden follows to the place in which she hears that
the wedding is to be celebrated, and then opening the
casket, finds a dress which glistens like the sun and
which the princess seeks to buy. But it can be given
only for flesh and blood, and the maiden demands access
to the bridegroom’s chamber as her recompense. During
the first night her lover sleeps by force of a potion, but
her voice sounds in his eara like the murmuring of the
wind through the firtrees. On the next day, learning
the trick, he refuses the draught, and the maiden, availing


‘Grimm. With these legends may the Prntameron of Basil, 15, 19, 44;
be compared the story of Tulisa (a tale and Habns Greek and Albanian Tales,
which in Professor "Bentey's opinion is A complete anslysis éf the fable of
very ancient), obtained from s washer- Apuleius is given in Friedlaiiter's Sit
womsn at Benares, aud published in the tengeachichte Koms.

Asiatic Journal, See also the tales in ¥ Frore, Deccan Tales, 221.


407


CHAP.


408 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK herself of the gift bestowed by the moon, is reunited to him
—— at last! :


‘East of The Norse tale ‘ East of the Sun and West of the Moon,’
sala approaches more nearly to the form of Beauty and the Beast.
at the. A white bear (we are at once reminded of the process which


converted the seven shiners into seven bears) taps at a poor
man’s window on a cold winter night, and promises him
boundless wealth, on condition that he receives his daughter
as his wife. The man is willing, but the maiden flatly says
nay, until, overcome by the thought of her father’s poverty,
she agrees to live with the beast. The bear takes her to a
palace in which the rooms gleam with silver and gold; but
the being who comes to her at night is a beautiful youth
who never allows her to see him. The woman who acts the
part of Venus in this tale is the mother, not of the lover, but
of the maiden, and as she could scarcely be represented as
jealous of her daughter’s happiness, we are told that, while
suggesting the same doubts which brought Psyché to her
trouble, she warned her child not to let a drop of oil fall on
her husband while she stooped to look upon him. The
sequel of the story presents no features materially different
from that of the Soaring Lark, except that the oil dropped
from the maiden’s lamp is made to bring about the cata-
strophe. The prince is, of course, under the power of the
sorceress, who wishes to marry him, like Odysseus in the
house of Kirké or the cave of Kalypsd; but when on the
wedding morning he displays a fine shirt with three drops of
tallow on it, aud declares that he will marry onl} the woman
who can wash them out, the Trolls, vainly attempting the
task, see the prize snatched from their hand by the maiden
whom they had despised as a stranger and a beggar.’


"In the German etory of the Iron
Stove (Grimm), the part of Erés is
played by a king’s son, who is compelled
by u witch to sit in a great iron store
which stood in a wok: This is mani-
festly a reversing of the myth of Bryn-
BMY in which tho fame muroundl
the ‘maiden op, the Glistening Heat!
answers to the flery stove in which the
prince ia imprisoned, In the tale of
Btrong Hans (Grimm), it is Payeh8 who
ia reecued from e tower or well in which


she is confined like the Argive Danné,
In the legends of tho True Bride and of
the Drummer the maiden recovers her
lover as in the story of the Soaring
Lark. See also ch. viii. sect, 2 of this
book.

= In the German Aory of Bearskin,
the soldier is not turned into a beast,
but is under compact with the evil one
not to comb bis hair or wueh his face
for seven years, but to woat a bear sark
or cloak. "In this disguise he compels


THE DARK FOREST.


The myth passed into other forms. In every case the
bonds of true love were severed ; but the persons thus sepa-
rated were sometimes brothers and sisters, sometimes parents
and children. In the German story of the Twelve Brothers,
the sister goes forth to search for the lost children in that
great forest which reappears in almost all tales of Teutonic
folk-lore, the forest of the night or the winter, in which the
huntsman or the king’s daughter, or the two babes, or
Tonhaiiser or True Thomas, the prince, the tailor, or the
soldier, lose their way, to fall in every instance into the
hands of witches, or robbers, or magicians, sometimes malig-
nant, sometimes merciful and almost genial. It is perhaps
no exaggeration to say that under this type of solar legend
(for, as turning on the presence or the absence of light and
warmth, these are all solar legends), four-fifths of the folk-
lore of northern Europe may be ranged. The inhubitants of
this dark forest are the Panis, by whom the wanderers are
sometimes welcomed, sometimes slain. These wanderers, or
stolen youths or maidens, can be recovered only through
much suffering on the part of those who seek them. In the
tales of the Twelve Brothers and the Six Swans, the sister
must not utter a word for seven or for six years, an incident
which, in the story of the Woodcutter’s Child, is changed
into loss of voice, inflicted as a punishment by the angel who
has charged her not to look into the thirteenth door of the
palace in the land of Happiness, or in other words, into the
treasure-house of Ixién or Tantalos. But the appetite for
mythical nafratives was easily gratified. Incidents repeated
a thousand times, with different names and slight differences
in their sequence or arrangement, never palled upon it. If
Psyché has hard tasks to perform before recovering Erds,
the Greek was as well content to listen to the story of the
same tasks as they are performed by Erés before he can
recover Psyché. Thus the part of the latter in the legend of
Appuleius is played by the former in the German stories of

.
the king to give him one of hisdanghters the story of Hans the Hedgehog, whose
jn marriage, and the youngest consents enchantment is Lrought to an end by
to We the victim, saying that a promise burning hiv skin, aa in the Deccan story


which has been made must be kept. of the enchanted rajah.
The transformation is more complete in


409


CHAP.
w.
SS
The Wan-

derers in
the Forest,


410


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


the White Snake and the Golden Bird, the Queen Bee,


Maes Strong Hans, the Drummer, and many others.'
‘The epelt The common element of all these stories is the separation


of moon-
Tight,


of two lovers by the intervention of a third person, who is
represented sometimes as the mother, more often as another
lover of the youth whose heart is given to the maiden from
whom he is to be parted. In the latter case, her great object
is to prolong the separation for her own benefit; and we
have at once the framework of the tales which relate the
sojourn of Odysseus in the abodes of Kirké and Kalyps6.
Penelopé, like Psyché, is far away, and though Odysseus has
not forgotten her and longs to be with her, still he cannot
escape from his irksome bondage. While the time of slum-
ber lasts, he must tarry with the beautiful women who seek
to wean him from his early love. The myth is but the fruit
of phrases which spoke of the sun as sojourning in the land
of s.eep, freed from all woes and cares,* and but dimly re-
membering the beautiful hues of morning under the magic
charm of night. Thus in Kirké and Kalypsé alike we have
the moon-goddess beneath whose spell the sun may be said
to slumber, and in the palace of the one and the flashing
cave of the other we see the wonderful home of Tara Bai,
the Star-maiden, the Uraula or Seléné of the modern Indian
tale. Girt with her zone of stars, the beautiful being who
ean neither grow old nor die sings the lulling song whose
witching power no mortal may withstand. If she seeks for
sensuous enjoyment, still her desire is not for the brutal
pleasures which turn men into swine ;* but to sée before her


* Thi myth reeppearain & very thin
disguixe in the ballad of Exlinton, Scott's
order Minstrelay. Here wo have the


devoured, and the youngest goat in
Grimm's story of the Wolf and the
Seven Little Goats escapes the fate of


forest, the maiden and her lover, while
the robbers are a troop of knights
headed by an old und grey-haired
warrior, Winter himself. The knight,
of eourge, fights with and slays all, ex-
cept the grey-haired chief, who is ‘suf-
fered to go home to tell the tale; in
other words, the mortal Medouss is slain,
but the powersof cold iteclf (ber im-
mortal sisters) cannot be

‘With this we may compare the death of
Hoellé while Phrixos lives on. So, too,
the youngest child of Kronos is not


the six others.
“pas! divas aBais Ove 8 dAydav.
Soph. Phil. 827.

2 The turning of the companions of
Odysseus into swine is only another
form of the more common transforma-
tion into birds which the witches of
Teutonic and Arabfin folk-lore keep
hung up im cages round their walle.
Compare the story of Jorinde und
Joringel (Grimm) with that of Punchkin
in the Deccan Tales, and of the Two
Sisters in the Arabian Nights,


THE FAIRY QUEEN.


the wise chief whose glory is in all lands is a happiness for


411


CHAP.


which she is ready to sacrifice all her wealth and splendour. ee


Still her abode is full of a strange mystery. Ita magnificence
is not the magnificence of the open sunshine, its pleasures
are not the wholesome pleasures of the outer air. If then
the sun tarries in her chambers, it is because he is under a
spell, because Seléné has cast her deep sleep upon Endy-
midn, and Zeus has not yet sent Hermes to bid Kalypsé let
Odysseus go. Thus in these Greek myths we have the
germ and the groundwork of all those countless stories
which speak of mortal men carried away from their homes
to dwell with unseen beings beneath the earth. These beings
are in each story headed by a beautiful queen, whose will it
is impossible to resist. This power is prominent in the myth
which tells us that Thomas the Rhymer was carried off in
his youth to Fairyland, where he became possessed of vast
and mysterious knowledge. At the end of seven years he
was suffered to go back to the upper earth on condition of
obeying the summons to return to Elfland whenever it might
be given, The bidding came while Thomas was making
merry with some friends in the Tower of Ercildoune, A hart
and a hind, it was said, had come from the neighbouring
forest and were slowly moving up the street of the village.
Thomas immediately rose, left the house, and following the
animals to the wood was never seen again.! The story of
Thomas is substantially identical with Chaucer’s Rhyme of
Sir Thopas, in whom the beauty of the Fairy Queen excites
the same desite which the sight of Helen awakened in the
Athenian Peirithoés.? This fairy queen sometimes assumes
the form of the Echidna who for a time made Herakles


1 Scott, Border Minstrelsy, iv. 114.
‘Mr. Gould, in his chapter on the Moun-
tuin of Venus, notices among other
atories that of the Norse Helgi, Thorir’s
gon, who is invited by Ingebjorg the
Troll queen to come and live with her,
His absonce, however, is confined to
three days, at the ef of which he re-
turns home laden with tressure, His
second visit was extended over many
errs, und from this he returned blind.
The story told by Gervase of Tilbury,
the acene of which is the mountain of


Cavargum in Catalonia, is cited by Sir
‘Walter Seott in his introduction to the
Ballad of Tamlane, Border Minst fs
? Mr. Price (introduction to War-
ton’s Hie Baglish Poetry, 49)
compares the journey of Thomas to Elf-
Jend inthe Scottish ballad, with Zlian's
story (Var. Hist. iii, 18) respecting
reales ‘the bouros He) whet Te
traveller returns,’ and remarks that the
etic power uoquired by the Rhymer
during his sojourn with the Fuiry Queen
is no novel festure in the history of


412


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


sojourn in her dwelling: but the Tailor’s son of Basle in the
medieval story had the courage neither of Herakles nor of
Sir Gawain, and he was so terrified by the writhing of her
tail that in spite of the beauty of her face he fied after giving
her only two of the three kisses which she had bargained
for! Such a myth as this, it is obvious, would, if subjected
to Christian infiuence, exhibit the fairy queen as a malignant
demon who takes delight in corrupting the faith of true
believers by plunging them into a horrible sensuality. Thus
modified, the myth of Odysseus and Kalypsé appears as the
story of Tanhaiiser, whom Venus entices into her magic cave,
within the Horselberg (Ercildoune) or mountain of Ursula,
After a time the sensuous enjoyment of the place palls upon
him as upon Odysseus, and he makes his escape to the earth
with a weary load of sin upon his heart, for which he vainly
seeks to obtain absolution.? At last he comes before pope
UrLan IV., who tells him that his pastoral staff will put
forth leaves and blossoms sooner than God should pardon him.
Tanhaiiser has scarcely departed when the staff is seen to
bloom ; but it is too late. The minnesinger cannot be found,
and he re-enters the Horselberg in despair, never to leave it
again. Another modification, not less obvious and more in
accordance with the spirit of the mediaval myth, would be
that of mere sleep, and Endymién would thus become the


such fictions. ‘In one of Plutarch’s of futurity.’ This is practieully the


tracts, De Defect. Orac. 21, a certain
Cleombrotus entertains the company
with an account of an Fastern traveller
whose churucter and fortunes are pfill
more remarkable than those of tho
Scottish seer. Of this man we are told
that he only appeared among his fellow
mortals once a year, The rest of his
time was spent in the society of nymphs
snd demons who had granted him an
unusual share of personal beunty, had
rendered him proof against disease, and
eupplied him with a fruit which was to
satisfy hie honger, and of which he par-
took only ones ‘a month. He was,
moreover, endowed with a miracslous
pitt of tongues; his conversation resem-
bled @ contipuous, fow of verse; his
knowledge was universal, and an un-
usual visitation of prophetie fervour
enabled him to unfold the hidden secrets


story of the Thrakian Zalmoxiy, which
Horodotos refuses to bolieve, iv. 94.

' Gould, Curious Myths, ge., second
series, 223.

® The kame story is presented in the
romance of Bir Leunfal and tho Fay
Tryamour, who bestows on him the
nover-failing purse, and in the tale of
Oberon and Huon’ of Bordeaux. This
Oberon is the dwarf king Elberich of
the Heldenbuch, who performs to Otnit
the servies discharged by Obcron to
Huon. The story of Tanhaiicor, again,
is only another form of the legend of
Ogier the Dane, who is Tithénos re-
stored to a youth,*which, like that of
‘Meleagros, is to last wa long as a, brand
which the fairy gives him remains un-
consumed —Keightley, Fairy Mythology,
B4, et seq.


THE SPELL-BOUND SLEEPERS.


type of other slumberers to whom a century was but as a


418


CHAP.


day. Among such is Epimenides, who while tending ete


sheep fell asleep one day in a cave, and did not wake until
more than fifty years had passed away. But Epimenides
was one of the Seven Sages, who reappear in the Seven
Manes of Leicester,’ and in the Seven Champions of Chris-
tendom; and thus the idea of seven sleepers was at once
suggested. This idea finds expression in the remarkable
legend of the seven sleepers of Ephesus; and the number
seven is further traced by Mr. Gould through other mediaval
stories. ‘ Barbarossa changes his position every seven years.
Charlemagne starts in his chair at similar intervals. Olger
Dansk stamps his iron mace on the floor every seven years.’
To the number of these sleepers must be added Arthur who
slumbers in Avallon, waiting for the time when he shall
wake up to free Britain once more; Sebastian of Portugal ;
the three Tells of Riitli; the priest of the Church of Hagia
Sophia, who bides the day when the Turk shall be driven
from Constantinople ; and Boabdil, the last of the Moorish
kings of Spain, who lies spell-bound within the hill of the
Alhambra in a slumber broken only on the eve of St. John,?
who himself slumbers at Ephesus.


The same mystic number is found in the seven Rishis of The Sevon


ancient Hindu traditions. These Rishis ure the media or
instruments through which the divine Veda was imparted
to mankind. In its widest meaning the word was taken to
denote the priestly bards who conducted the worship of the
gods; but they are spoken of sometimes as the poets who
compose the songs and present them to the deities whom
they celebrate, and sometimes as the mere mouthpieces of
these gods. They are mortal, and yet they are united with
immortals, and are rivals of the gods. But although the idea
most promptly associated with them is that of wisdom, they
are sometimes mentioned in language which carries us back
to the etymological meaning of the name. With their true
hymns, we art told, they caused the dawn to arise and the


1 Fergusson, The Irish before the Athambra, ‘Legend of the Two Discreet
Congucet. Statues?
+ "Washington Irving, Tales of the


Rishis.


414


BOOK


—


The Ark-
ehas or
Shiners,


The Rishis
and Many,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


sun to shine for the afflicted Vayu and Manu.' The names
of the Rishis are variously given, Manu with Bbrign,
Angiras and others, being sometimes reckoned among them:
but of the whole number seven attained a pre-eminent dig-
nity. With Manu, according to one version, they entered
into the ark while the earth Jay beneath the waters of the
flood, and therein abode with him until the vessel rested on
the peak called Naubandhbana from the binding of the ship.
In the account of this flood the Brahmana story introduces a
fish which guides the ark as the Delphian Apollén guides
the vessel of the Cretan mariners to Krisa.?

.The main story connected with the Rishis has already
been. noticed as the result of an equivocal word.’ The notion
of making bright conveyed also the idea of gladdening and
cheering, and hence arkshah became a name not only for the
sun, but fora hymn or song of praise, and the makers or
singers of these hymns were naturally termed Rishis or
gladdeners. It was not less natural that, as the Rishis or
sages took a stronger hold on the imagination of the people,
the seven arkshas or stars should be converted into rishis,
and that the rishis should be said to have their abode in
them. Among the Western Aryans, as lykos, the glistening,
denoted the wolf, arktos became a name for the bear, and
stood to the Sanskrit riksha in the relation of the Greek
véerov, a carpenter, to takshan, and the Latin pectus, a
breast, fo vakshas;‘ and then the seven stars were ne-
cessarily converted into seven bears, while the sages whom
the Hindu placed in those shining orbs survived ‘as the seven
wise men of Hellas, to reappear under different forms, as we
have already seen, elsewhere.

In the name of Manu, the friend of the Rishis, we have
simply and strictly man, as the measurer or the thinker,
The same root has also yielded names for the moon and the
month, while in Europe, as in Asia, there arose the idea of


» R. V. wii. 76, 4, and 91,1; Muir, > Max Miiller, Sdhekrié Literature,
Sanskrit Teste, part iti.p.119. ‘During 526,
this time of opreasion and eorzow, itis * Book i ch. fil
said that Vishnu thrice measured the  * Max Miller, Leotures on Language,
mundane regions for Manu. 2, V. vi. second series, 362. :
49,13; Mulr, ib. part iv. p. 71. * Greek, atv, why: Latin, mensis,


THE EVER-YOUTHFUL DAWN.


a man of whom they spoke as the son of heaven and earth.
In India he was known as Manu Syayambhuva, the child of
Svayambhu, the eelf-existent, or, like the Hellenic Minos,
the son of Eurdpé, the dawn, as Vaivasti, the worshipper or
child of Vivasvat, the sun, whose wife Saranyi, having borne
the twin Asvins, the steeds or horsemen, left in her place
another like herself, Savarna, who became the mother of
Manu.’ But Manu is also not unfrequently called the son
of Dyaus or of Brahma, just as the German tribes spoke of
their ancestor Manu as the son of Tiw or Tuisco.


Sxzcrios V—DAWN GODDESSES.


The name Ushas reappears in the Greek Eés, and Ushas,
like Eés, is the goddess of the dawn or morning.’ The
language addressed to her betokens a more distinct person-
ality than that even of Varuna and Indra, because the wor-
shipper in addressing her speaks always from the heart, and
his words are the manifest utterances of love. She is the
daughter of the heaven, who brings with her light and life
and joy; she drives away pain and anguish; she is the
image of undying youth, for day by day she appears in
unfading beauty, although they who look upon her grow
daily older and at last die.*


) Professor Max Miiller, Lectures on
Language, second series, 482, 509,
thinks that Manu may have been called
Savarni, ws meaning the Monu of all
colours, i.o. of alf tribes or castes, while
Savarna, the second wife of the sun, is
simply the twilight in which he dies,
just os the myth that Saranyf had left.
‘her twing behind, meant only that the
Dawn had disapposred. The root man
is taken also to donote ‘backward
thought, xemembering and admonishing
whence the proper name Mentor, the
adviser’ With this may be compared
the name Juno Moneta: and thus
Athéné, when she appears among the
suitors before the great vengeance of
Odysseus, is natufelly said to assume
the likeness of Mentor,

2 The root US, to burn, appears as
USH in Sanskrit. From this Ushas is
formed without. any towel modification,
‘The Greco-lItelian people raised the


vowel by regular process to au, and
formed ausos, which received no further
increase in Greek, but in Latin @
secondary noun was formed from the
primury one, that ie autogn, Now both

reeks and Italians, as ia well known,
disliked the sound s between two vowels:
the Grecks generally dropped it, and wo
got ai{e}és: the Latins changed it to r,
and made aurora: the verb appears as
uro,—Peile, Introduction to Greck and
Latin Etymology, xii. The Lithuanian
form of the word is Ausera,

4 Hence the decrepitude of some of
the mythicel beings beloved by the
Dawn. ‘This ie the idea of the myth of
E6s and Tithonos, and it seems to bo
united with that of Odin, Sarita, or

lysseus the wanderers, in the story of
the Wandering Jew. The myth is here,
aw wo might expect, strangely distorted :
bot the Jew must wander on until the
evening of the world is come.


415


CHAP.
I.


Ushas and
68,


416


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


*Ushas, nourishing all, comes daily like a matron, con-


ie es ducting all transient (creatures) to decay.’ !


‘The divine and ancient Ushas, born again and again and
bright with unchanging hues, wastes away the life of a
mortal, like the wife of a hunter cutting up the birds.’?

‘How long is it that the dawns have risen? How long
will they rise?

«Those mortals who beheld the pristine Ushas dawning
have passed away: to us she is now visible, and they ap-
proach who wil) behold her in after times.’ #

Like the Greek Athéné, she is pure and unsullied, the
image of truth and wisdom.

*Ushas, endowed with truth, who art the sister of Bhava,
the sister of Varuna, be thou hymned first of the gods.’

*Unimpeding divine rites, although wearing away the ages
of mankind, the Dawn shines the likeness of the mornings
that ‘ave passed, or that are to be for ever, the first of those
that are to come,’ 4

In all this, although it determines the source of later
myths beyond all possibility of question, there is little or no
mythology ; and we have advanced scarcely more than half-
way on the road to a full-formed myth even when we read
that ‘the night, her sister, prepares a birth-place for her
elder sister (the day), and having made it known to her
departs ;’° that the night and dawn ‘of various complexions,
repeatedly born but ever youthful, have traversed in their
revolutions alternately from a remote period earth and heaven
~-night with her dark, dawn with her luminous limbs,’ ¢ or
that ‘of all the sisters who have gone before a successor
daily follows the one that has preceded.’? It is this very
transparency of meaning which imparts value to almost
every expression of praise in the hymns addressed to her.

*She shines upon us like a young wife, rousing every
living being to go to his work. The fire had to be kindled
by men: she brought light by striking down darkness.

) HH, Wilson, R. 7. Samhita, i.129. spring from her is closely allied to the

2 Bi. 274. « 5 7h, 298, myth of Kronoa, und sees to lie at the

, 10. * Mii 12. reot of the many popular German and
‘None stories, in which the bride of the


7 J. ii, 12. The idea of Ushos us king ie aconsed of being a murdoress
Dringing to an end the days which who destroys her own children.


* th


THE DAWN LIGHT.


‘She rose up, spreading far and wide, and moving towards
every one she grew in brightness, wearing her brilliant
garment. The mother of the cows, the leader of the dcgs,
she shone gold-coloured, lovely to behold.

‘She, the fortunate, who brings the eye of the god, who
leads the white and lovely steed (of the sun), the Dawn was


seen revealed by her rays, with brilliant treasures she follows,


every one.

‘Thou, who art a blessing when thou art near, drive far
away the unfriendly ; make the pastures wide, give us safety.
Remove the haters, bring treasures. Raise up wealth to the
worshipper, thou mighty Dawn.

‘Shine for us with thy best rays, thou bright Dawn, thou
who lengthenest our life, thou the love of all, who givest us
food, who givest us wealth in cows, horses, and chariots.’ !

The hymns speak especially of the broad- -spreading light of
Ushas ; and this flush of dawn suddenly passing across the
heaven takes us at once to the many names of like meaning
which belong to the Hellenic solar beings. She ‘shines
wide’ (Urvasi), like Euryphassa and Eurydiké, like Eury-
ganeia, Eurynomé, and Eurdpé, As the daughter of Dyaus,
who chases away the darkness of the night, she goes before
Indra, Savitar, and Sirya. She reveals mysteries and opens
the ends of heaven, where the Panis had hidden away the
cows of which she is the mother. She tells the Angiras
where they are to be found, and as she lightens the sky she
is said to drive her own herds to their pastures. She is sent
eapecially to, awaken men; but she is charged to let the
Panis (the dark powers) sleep. She is the beloved of all
men and the darling of the god of love, Aniruddha, the
resistless,? who thus receives the name Ushapati, lord of the
dawn; and finally, we have in Ushas the germ of the idea
which found its most graceful expression in the Hellenic
Athéné, and its most majestic developement in the Latin
Minerva. The Sanskrit dudh means both to wake and to
know, and vayund has the double meaning of light and
knowledge, just as the notions of knowledge and of creative
power are both expressed by the root jan and the English

‘RV. vii. 7. * dpws dolare udxary—Soph. Ant. 781.


war “Pe


47


eee


Eahes,


Urhas the
broad-
uprending.


418


BOO
I.


Ahanf.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


can and ken. Hence Ushas is said to enable men to cross
the frontier of darkness, and, as the seer, to give light far
and wide. ‘Waking every mortal to walk about, she receives
praise from every thinker.’ Thus, as the Day, she is the
mother of the Divine Night, who reveals all her splendour
after she has driven away her sister the Twilight.1 Of the
birth of Athéné fully armed from the head of Zeus, when
cloven by the axe of Hephaistos, the poets of the Iliad and
Odyssey say nothing; but the presence of the story in the
Hesiodic Theogony is a conclusive argument against any
inference which might be drawn from their silence, even if
Ushas were not, as she actually is, spoken of in the Veda as
sprung from the forehead of Dyaus, the sky.*

But Ushas is only one of many names for the light of early
morning. As Ahané, she plays the part as well as bears the
name of Athéné and of Daphné. The word expresses the
idea of burning light; and although it occurs only once in
the Rig Veda,? the flexibility of the old mythology justifies
us in attributing to Ahané all that is told us of Ushas or of
Sarama.‘ If then we apply to Dahand the phrases which
spoke of Ushas as pursued by the Sun, who slays though
he loves her, or as dying in his arms, we see at once an off-
shoot from the parent stem which in the West yielded the
myths of Daphué and of Prokris. Daphné too is loved by
Phoibos, and, like Ahana, she flies from his face until she
takes refuge in the Peneian stream. But in some passages
of the Veda the idea of her might remains too prominent
to allow much room for that of love. .

“This strong and manly deed also thou hast performed, O
Indra, that thou struckest the daughter of Dyaus, a woman
ifficult to vanquish.


) The benignant aspect of night must
‘pe carefully borne in mind, as the germ
uf the myths of Asteria, Asterodia,


second series, 503,
+ + Aband comes near to every houxe,
she who makes every day to be known,


Kulyps, ‘and other Fairy Queens.
Under ail these forms we have the rig
pidla weyérvy xéouwy eredreipa of
Eschylos, Agam. 356. As such, Night
js invoked in the Veda to ‘drive away
the wolf and, the thief, and carry her
worshippers eafely across’ (to the light).
—R. V.x.121; Muiz, Sanskrit Texts,
part iv. p. 128.

2 Mux Miller, Lectures on Language,


‘Dyotana (the dawn), the active
maiden, comes back for everm»re: she
enjoys alwaya the first of all goods’—
B. V5, 128, 4,

+ CAthéné, as far gs letters go, would
correspond to e Sanskrit Abdo’, which
is but a slightly differing variety of
Abané’—Max Miller, Lectures, second
series, 603.


THE CHARIOT OF THE DAWN.


*Yes, even the daughter of Dyaus, the magnified, the
Dawn, thou, O Indra, a great hero, hast ground to pieces,

‘The Dawn rushed off from her crushed car, fearing that
Indra, the bull, might strike her.

* This her car lay there, well ground to pieces. She went
far away.’!

More commonly, however, she is beloved by all the gods,
and the Asvins bear her away triumphant in her chariot.

But it is to the phrases which speak of the dawn under
the name of Saram4, that we must look for the germ of the
great epics of the western Aryans. It is indeed only the
germ, and no fancy can be more thoroughly groundless than
that which would regard the Hellenic representative of
Sarama as derived from the dawn-goddess of the Hindu.
Identity of names and of attributes can prove nothing
more than the affinity of legends, which, as differing not
only in local colour but also in the form of thought, must
point to some common source in a past yet more remote.
Whatever may be the precise meaning of the name, whether
Sarama or Saranyii be taken to denote the storm-cloud or
the morning, there is no doubt that the root of the word is
sar, to creep or go, which we find in serpent as well as in the
Greek Erinys and Sarpédén. In the Rig Veda, Saramé is
especially the guardian of the cows of Indra, and as his
messenger she goes to the Panis, who have stolen them
away. She, too, like Ushas, is said to be the first to spy
out the cleft in the rock where the Panis, like Cacus, had
hid the plundered cattle, and, like Herakles, she is the first
to hear their Jowings. Like Ushas also, she walks in a
straight path: but when she comes to the stronghold of the
Panis, a conference follows in which we see unmistakably
the dawn peering about through the sky in search of the
bright clouds, and restoring them in all their eullince, and
beauty to the broad pastures of the heaven.

‘The Panis said, “‘ With what intention did Sarama veils
this place ? for the way is far, and leads tortuously away.
What was your wish with us? How was the night? How
did you cross the waters of the Risa?”

1 BR. Viiv. 30.


419


onae:
—~


Sarama.


“420


BOOK
IL
—_


The cows
of Indra,


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


“The Panis: “What kind of man is Indra, O Saraméa,
what is his look, he as whose messenger thou comest from
afar? Let him come hither, and we will make friends with
him, and then he may be the cowherd of our cows.”

‘* Saramd: “Ido not know that he is to be subdued, for it
is he himself that subdues, he as whose messenger I came
hither from afar. Deep streams do not overwhelm him;
you, Panis, will lie prostrate, killed by Indra.”

‘The Panis: “Those cows, O Saram4, which thou desirest,
fly about the ends of the sky, O darling. Who would give
them up to thee without fighting? for our weapons too are
sharp.”

‘Saramé: “Though your words, O Panis, be unconquer-
able, though your wretched bodies be arrowproof, though
the way to you be hard to go, Brihaspati will not bless you
for either.”

“The Panis: “That store, O Sarama, is fastened to the
rock, furnished with cows, horses, and treasures. Panis
watch it who are good watchers; thou art come in vain to
this bright place.”

‘Saramd: “Let the Rishis come here fired with Soma,
Ahasfa (Indra), and the uinefold Angiras: they will divide
the stable of cows; then the Panis will vomit out this
speech.”

‘The Panis: “Even thus, O Saramé, thou art come hither,
driven by the violence of the gods; let us make thee our
sister, do not go away again; we will give thee part of the


(cows, O darling.”


* Saramd : “I know nothing of brotherhood or sisterhood :
Indra knows it, and the awful Angiras. They seemed to me
anxious for their cows when I came: therefore get away
from here, O Panis, far away.

“Go far away, Panis, far away; let the cows come out
straight, the cows which Brihaspati found hid away, Soma,
the stones, and the wise Rishis.” ’!

This hymn, seemingly so transparent in its meaning, be-
comes unintelligible if interpreted of any other being than


+ Max Miller, Lecturea on Language, second series, 465.


USHAS AND SARAMA.


the Dawn in her struggle with the powers of darkness: and
hence it seems a superfluous task to show that all the essential
features of Ushas reappear in Saramé; that like Ushas Saramfi
is followed by Indra, and that walking first she reveals the
treasures which had been hidden away ; that both alike go
to the uttermost ends of heaven; that both break the strong-
holds of the Panis; both are the mothers and deliverers of
the cows; both drive forth their cattle to the pastures; both
walk in the right path and bestow wealth and blessings upon

en. Every phrase tells us of some change in the heaven
from the time when the sun sinks to sleep in the west to the
moment when his face is first seen again in the east. As
the light of evening dies away, the power of the darkness is
restored, and the Panis extinguish the bright-coloured clouds
which have looked down on the death of the Sun, or in other
words they steal the cows of Indra, the cattle which Phae-
thousa and Lampetié feed in the rich pastures of Helios. Du-
ring the weary hours of night they are shut up in the demon’s
prison-house ; but at length the messenger of the day comes to
reclaim her children. With a faint flush she starts slowly
from the doors of the east. Her light, creeping along the
dark face of the sky, seems to ebb and flow like the sea-
tide; and so might Saram4 be said to hold parley with the
Panis who refuse to yield up their plunder. But the Dawn
is only the messenger of one far mightier than herself, and
if they will not yield to her, they shall feel the force of the
arm of Indra; and the conference with the Panis, which
answers to the spreading of the Dawn, ends in their over-
throw, as soon as Indra appears in his chariot—in other
words, when the Sun is risen.

In the Rig Veda, Saramé steadily refuses the bribes offered
to her by the Panis. Another turn was given to the tale
when the faithfulness of Saramé was represented as not in-
vineible. Sarama, we are told in the Anukramanika, was
sent as the dogeof the gods to seek for the strayed or stolen
herds, and when she espied them in the town of*Vala, the
Panis strove to make her an accomplice in their theft. But
although she refused to divide the booty, she yet drank a
cup of milk which they gave her, and returning to Indra


421


CHAP,


The.
fidelity of
Surama,


422-


BOOK
il.


Saranyd.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS,


denied that she had seen the cows. On this Indra kicked
her, and the milk which she vomited up gave the lie to her
words, Here, then, we have in its germ the faithlessness of
the Spartan Helen, who in name as in her act is Saramé,!
aud who speaks of herself as the dog-eyed or dog-faced,
although by none else is the name ever applied to her. Thus
the Greek carried away with him the root of the great Tro-
jan epic from the time when he parted from his ancient
kinsfolk, he to find his way to his bright Hellenic home,
they to take up their abode in the land of the seven streams.
For him, Helen and Paris, Briséis and Achilleus were already
in existence. For him Phoibos already dwelt in Delos, and
Sarpédén ruled in the land of the golden river. So, again,
it makes but little difference whether the Sarameya, some-
times but rarely mentioned in the Rig Veda, be definitely
the son of Saramé, or whether the word remained a mere
epithet for any one of the gods who might denote the
morning. The name itself is etymologically identical with
that of Hermes; and the fact that he is addressed as the
watchdog of the house* may have Jed to the notion which
made him in later times the hound which served as the mes-
senger of the gods, and which in the story of Prokris reap-
pears at the feet of Artemis.’

Another name from the same root which has furnished

1 See Appendix E,

+ Professor Miller notices that in »


hymn of the seventh Look of the Jtig
Veda, Vastoshpati, the lor of the house,


Why dost thon distress us? Sleep


sleep’ — Lectures on Language,
secund series, 473.


a kind of Lar, is called Sarameye. and
is certainly addressed as the watchdog
of the house; and he adds that this
deity would thux denote the ‘peep of
diy conceived as ® person, watching
unseen at the doore of heaven during
the night and giving his fret bark in
the morning’ The features of the deity
thus eoneeived are brought out with
sufficient clearness in following
verses:


“When thou, bright Serameya, openest
thy teeth, O red one, spears seem
to glisten on thy jaws es thou
ewallowest. Sleep, sleep.

‘Bark at the thief, Sarameys, or at the
robber, O restless one. Now thou


‘Darkest at the worshippers of Indra.


* This dog of the morning is promi-
nent in the Norse tale of Bushy Bride.
‘While the hero lies in a pit full of
snakes (Helios in the land of the
throttling serpent), a lovely lady (Ushaw
or Surum&) comes into the palace
kitchen—the connection, as with Boots
or Cinderella among the ashos, lying in
the fire of the hearth or oven—and asks
the kitehen-maid for a brush. ‘Then
she brushed her hair, and ax she brushed
down dropped gold, A little dog was at
her heel, and to him she said * Run out
little Flo, and see if it will soon be day.”
This she said three times, and the third
time that she sent the dog it was juat
about the time the duwn Legins to peep.”
The old myth could not be retained with
greater fidelity.


SARANYO AND ERINYS.


those of Saramd, Helen, Hermes, and Sarpédén, is found in
Saranyd (a feminine of Saranyu), in whom some discern the
dark and impetuous stormcloud.' The phrases employed
when the poet addresses her all seem to point in another
direction. Like Ushas, she is spoken of as the mare, and as
the mother of twins. The male Saranyu is in like manner
called a horse, and the goddess herself is the mother of the
twins Yama and Yami, and again of Nasatya and Dasra, the
twin Asvins or steeds, who represent the Dioskouroi. The
persons with whom this dualism connects her indicate at
once her real nature, and with Saranyu she takes her place
by the side of the two Ahans or Dawns, of Indra, the two
Indras, of Dyava, the double Dyaus, of Ushasau, the two
mornings, of Agni, the two Agnis, of Varun4, the two
Varunas.

But as Sarama is Helen, so Saranyai is Erinys; and here
too the seed, which in the Eust sprang up only to wither
away, shot up in the West to a portentous growth. It was
certainly no Euphemism which spoke of the Erinyes as the
gentle beings or Eumenides, and there was no incongruity
in giving the name to the Dawn-mother Démétér.2 Hence
in spite of all the failure of memory, and of the fearful cha-
racter which Erinys had assumed, the poet who tells the
terrible tale of Oidipous could not but make him die in the
sacred grove of beings who, however awful to others, were
always benignant to him—in groves which to the storm-
tossed wanderer were the Hyperborean gardens into which
grief, and fear, and anguish could never enter. The change
which converted the beautiful Saranyi into the avenging
furies of ASschylos has excited the wonder of some who
hesitate on this account to believe that Erinys and Saranyt

- ean come to us from a coramon source. It is more than
probable that their scepticism arises from the notion that
comparative mythologists derive the Greek from the Sanskrit
deity. It is epough to say that they do not.

The change itself is one which could scarcely fail to be

) Ruth, quoted by Professor Mnx  ? Professor Max Miller seoms to
Miller, i. 404. The name itvclf, ax in see in Démétér, not the earth, but the


Hermes, Suramé, und Spuh, msy express dawn-mother, Dyévé Matar, correspund-
any motion, slow or rapid. ing to Dyauspiter—7), 517.


Erinys.


The
Harpies.


424


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK brought about. The Harpies, who in our Homeric poems
Paces ae are the beautiful daughters of Thaumas and Elektra, appear


Anjuni.


in the Aineid of Virgil as foul monsters, who do the work of
vultures. The Ara, or prayer of the longing heart,' became
more and more the curse which the weak uttered against
their tyrants. Indra and Phoibos, who, as the sun-gods, see
and hear all things, become almost more dreaded for their
destructive power, than loved for their beneficence. As
representing the day with its searching light, Varuna and
Indra are the avengers of all iniquity; and in this sense it
could not fail to be said of evil-doers that Saranyi would
find them out. The old phrase survives with its clearness
scarcely dimmed in the Hesiodic Theogony. Night there is
the mother of Strife (Eris), and of all the evils that come of
Strife ;? but she is also the mother of righteous recompense
(Nemesis), In other words, the evil deeds done in the night
wil’ receive their reward when brought to light in the day;
and thus, according to Aischylos the Erinyes also are
daughters of the Night, who, like the Drukhs, the Vedic
Até, track out the sins of men. It was in truth impossible
that, the germ once given, its developements should fail to
be modified by time and place, by power of imagination and
failure of memory. The Até of the Iliad is the spirit merely
of mischievous folly, and as such, she is hurled by Zeus from.
Olympos, for postponing the birth of Herakles to that of
Eurystheus; the Até of Aschylos is the sleepless doom
which broods over a house until the vengeance for the
shedding of innocent blood has been exacted ‘to the utter-
most farthing. There is nothing wonderful therefore in the
process which changed the lovely Saranyi of the Veda into
the awful goddesses* of Athens; and if the Erinys of the
Tliad is called hateful, yet she wanders in the air and hears
the summons addressed to her from the land of darkness.‘
In the fact that at Athens there were statues only of two
Erinyes, we have perhaps a memory of that early dualism
which is so marked a feature in the mythology of the Veda.
But if Eés and Zeus remained to the Greeks what Ushas


1 dghy édxorgarro waiba -yeréodus.— * Hes. bpm gs 226,


Herod. vi. 63. > caprad 6 ‘Rx on.


THE HORSES OF THE SUN.


and Dyaus were to the Hindu, there were other names which
seem to have been transplanted to Hellenic soil only to die.
Among these is Argennos in whose honour Agamemnon
is seid to have built a temple to Apbrodité Argyanis on
the banks of Kephisos. The name in the West had no
meaning: but in the Vedic Arjuni we have simply an
epithet denoting the brilliance of the dawn, while in the
later Hindu mythology, Arjuna comes before us as standing
to Krishna in the relation of Luxman to Rama, of Phaéthén
to Helios, or of Patroklos to Achilleus.

The analysis of all these myths proves convincingly that
for human thought in its earliest stages the danger lay not
in the poverty of language, but in its superabundant wealth,
The heaven, the sun, the dawn, the clouds, might be de-
acribed by o thousand names, all truthfully and vividly
denoting the thing spoken of in one of its countless aspects.
But the characteristic features so marked were found in
more than one object. If the sun shone brightly or moved
rapidly, so did the horse. If the clouds gave nourishment
to the thirsty earth, so did the cows bestow a gift scarcely
less necessary for man. The words which told of the one
would serve also to designate the other; and so in fact we
find that they did. The cow received its name as the moving
animal; the horse was named from its speed, asvan, or from
its colour, harit, the glistening—rohit, the brown: and all


425


CHAP,
nH.


The cows
and borsen
of the Sun-
gods,


these names were of necessity applied to the sun, the dawn, -


and the sky, first in their strictly etymological sense, but
insensibly, &nd by an inevitable result, in the meaning to
which usage gradually confined each word. Thus, when the
name asvan was reserved especially for the horse, the sun,
who had been hitherto called asvan simply as speeding
through the sky, now himself became the steed who hurries
across the broad heaven.' The impulse once given issued in
an almost incredible wealth of metaphor. The horse as the
bearer of burdens was called vabni;? but the flames also
bore their Purdens into the air, and the rays of the sun

' ‘The process ia completely analysed vehere, the Greck Exe, and in com-
py Professor Max Nhiller, ‘Compsrative pound yords a8 cervix, the neck, an


ology,’ Chips, $e. ii, 182, &e. carrying the
Te voot ie found ia the Latin


426 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK brought his light to man. Thus the flame of fire and the

Pee aa solar rays, being both elike vahni, became vehement and
fiery horses. So, too, the morning and the evening, the
gloaming and the dawn, became, as we have seen, twin
steeds—the Asvins—joined together in a mysterious bond
which made it impossible to draw a line between the ap-
proach of the one and the vanishing of the other. But this
step taken rendered another step necessary. The glorious
being whose light wakes a sleeping world to life must be
enthroned in a burning chariot, of which the rays that
stréam across the heaven must be the gleaming steeds; and
thus the sun who had himself been Hari, the flashing, now
became Indra, or Sirya, or Savitar, whose car was drawn by
the glistening Harits. Where we say that ‘the sun is
rising,’ or that ‘he is high in the heaven,’ they said, ‘the
sun has yoked his steeds for his journey,’ or that ‘ his horses
have borne his chariot to the house of Dyaus,’ But how
little the name Harit had lost its original meaning, is clear
from the many terms which are used in describing them.
The Vedic poet knew well the differences of meaning in the
words which he uttered when he spoke of them as Harits,
or Rohits, or Arushis; yet under each of these names was
growing up a distinct personality, and thus the Harits,
whose number is given sometimes as seven, sometimes as
ten, become sisters who fly on beautiful wings,' But while
«even in India, the idea of loveliness was beginning to predo-
minate over that of mere animal strength, among the West-
ern Aryans the glistening Harits became the lovely Charites
whom the Latins called the Gratie und we the Graces. Yet
by the side of these fair creations of human thought, the
root which yielded these names was discharging a more
homely function: and the grease with which our wheels are
rubbed is but another form of the names of Charis in the
Tliad, and the Graces of Canova.

Arushi. Arushi, however, is only the feminize form of arvan, a horse;
and the masculine arusha is a common Vedic epithet for the
sun. But this name is applied to him only at his rising.
He is arusha, when ‘Night goes away from her sister the

: “1 Max Miller, Chips, Ge. ii. 182.


ARUSHA AND EROS,


dawn, and the dark one opens the path for the bright god.’
But arusha is also a child.
him, the joyful, the white one, as he was born, the Arusha
with great might; as horses go to the foal that is born, so
did the gods bring up his son when he was born.’! He haa
the eyes of a man, and he is also Saparnas, with beautiful
wings. More evidence can scarcely be needed to show that
in this picture we have the Hellenic god of love, the bright
and winged Erés. But further, as Professor Max Miiller
has noted in his exhaustive analysis of this myth, Arusha is
called the young child of Dyaus, the child of heaven, the sun
of strength. He is the first of the gods, as coming at the
point of the days; and of his two daughters (the Snow-
White and Rose-Red of German folk-lore), the one is clad in
stars, the other is the wife of Svar, the sun. He moves
swift as thought, longing for victory: he is the love or
desire, Kama, of all men; and as irresistible in his strength,
he is Ushapati, lord of the dawn. With all these phrases
the mythology of the Greeks is in thorough harmony. Al-
though, according to later poets, Erds is a son of Zeus and
of Gaia, or Aphrodité, or Artemis, we may fairly assert that
in the Hesiodic theogony, as in the Veda, he is ‘ the first of
the gods,’ for with Chaos, Gaia, and Tartaros, he makes up
the number of self-existent deities, Still, although appearing
thus in the awful silence of a formless universe, he is the
most beautiful of all the gods, and he conquers the mind and
will both of gods and of men. The transition was easy to
the thought of Erdés, ever bright and fair as (like Yavishtha
or Hephaistos) the youngest of the gods, as the companion
of the Charites, as the child of the Charis Aphrodité: and
this association of Erés and Charis brings us back to Arusha
and the glistening Harits, who bear him across the wide seas
of heaven.?


1 ‘This is precisely the picture of the
Muses nursing tle infant Phoibos in the
Homerie hymn. Max Miller, #4, 136.

2 Inhis notes on the Rig Vida Sankita,
voli, p. 11, Professor Max Miiller, not-
ing the objections made to somo of his
interpretations of passages in which the
word Arusha ocvure, on the g that


in them the word is un epithet of Agni,
Indra, or Sirya, remarks that this objec
tion would apply ‘to many other names
originally intended for shexe conceptions,
‘but which, nevertheless, in the course of
time, become independent names of in-
dependent deities.”


427


CHAP.
u


“The seven sisters have nursed eee


428


a


aba
Snakes
and
dragons.


Sorcery,
and witeh-
craft.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


‘The brilliant steeds reappear in 2 the myth of Medeia as
the dragons who bear her mysterious chariot through the
air. The name dragon, indeed, denotes simply any keen-
sighted thing, and in its other form, Dorkas, is applied to a
gazelle. We shall presently see that 2 sharp distinction is
drawn between the serpent as an object of love and affection,
and the snake which is regarded (whether as Ahi, Vritra, or
Abriman) with profound hatred, But the serpent-worship
of the East and West is founded on the emblem of the
Linga,' and belongs to a class of ideas altogether different
from those which were awakened by the struggle of darkness
against the light and the sun. This darkness is everywhere
described as a snake or serpent: but the names applied to
Ahi and Vritra do not imply keenness of sight, and the
enemy of Indra and Phoibos becomes on Hellenic soil a
dragon, only because the beast had there received this as its
special name. The tradition, however, survived that the
steeds of the sun were also Drakontes or keen-eyed things,
and thus they not only draw the chariot of Medeia, but
reveal to Iamos the knowledge of things to come. These
snakes who nurse the infant prophet on the violet beds are
the flashing-eyed messengers of morning, not the devouring
serpents of darkness who seek to slay the new-born Herakles
in his cradle.

As possessing this gift of the dragon-chariot bestowed on
her by Helios, Medeia is emphatically the wise woman; and
in this wyth we have probably the groundwork of those no-

tions which were finally developed into the systeta of sorcery
and witcheraft. The knowledge of Medeia came to her
from the same superhuman source with the inspiration of
the Pythian priestess of Delphoi ; the Latin witch derived her
power from a@ secret compact with Hekaté. Christianity
converted Phoibos and his sister into demons; and at once
the Canidias of the empire were regarded as trafficking with
devils for the acquisition of unlawful powers. In the transi-
tion from the idea of a wisdom which, although not naturally
attainable, thight be conferred on some by the bright being
whose eye pierces all space, to the notion of compacts made

7 See Section XIL. of this chepter.


MEDEIA AND GLAUEB,


between witches and the devil we have a developement or
corruption in close analogy with that confusion between
Leukos, bright, as a general epithet, and the same word
Lukos, as @ special name for the wolf, from which sprung
first the myth of the transformation of Lykéén, and then
probably the wide-spread superstition of Lykanthropy.’

As the wise woman, Medeia is the child of the ocean
nymph Idyia, or, in another version, of Hekaté (the female
correlative of Hekatos or Phoibos), who is herself the daughter
of Asteria, the starlit night. Her father is Aiétés, the Kol-
chian king, but he is a son of Helios who leaves to him and
his descendants the magic wreath and robe by which Medeia
revenges herself on Glauké.’? This robe is, indeed, only
another form of the golden fleece, the mantle of burnished
cloud seen at sunrise and sunset. As such, it eats into the
flesh not only of Glauké, the fair daughter of the Corinthian
Kreén, but of Herakles himself, when his toile come to an
end on mount Oita. Of her share in the victory of Iasén at
Aia, it is enough here to say that in the taming of the fire-
breathing bulls, and in the discomfitore of the men sprung
from the dragon’s teeth, she plays the part of Ariadné and
receives Ariadné’s reward. Whether faithful or treacherous,
the sun can never remain with his firat love, and even Odys-
seus, whose one longing is to return to his home, is parted
from Penelopé during the weary hours which pass between
sunset and sunset. But before the time of her great sorrow
comes, Medeia avenges the wrongs done to Iasén long ago at
Tolkos. Durigg her sojourn there in the house of Pelias,
she persuaded his daughters to cut up his body and boil ‘his
limbs in a cauldron, in the belief that he would thus be
restored to youth.? Medeia purposely failed to pronounce
the spell at the right time, and the limbs of Pelias were
consumed by the fire. Then follows ber escape with Iasin
in her dragon chariot to Corinth, where his love is trans-

1 Gée Appendix F. the body of Pelias oceurs alo in the

4 Eurip. Med, 95% German story of Brother Lustig. Me-

* With this maybe comparedtheNorse deia herself appears in benggnant guise
story of the Master Smith, in whom we in the legend of the Goose-girl at the


see another form of Hephaistos or Way- Well (the Dawn-maiden with her snow-
Jand. The incident of the cutting up of white clouds).


420


CHAP,


—


The stor
of Medea.


. 430


BOOK
IL
anne


‘The myth
of Prokris.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


ferred to Glauké, after whose death Medeia, like Gudrun in
the Volaung story, slays her own children—a crime closely re- ©
sembling the slaughter of Pelops by Tantalos. Such are the
chief features of the myth of Medeia, to which some added
that she became the wife of Aigeus, the Athenian king, or
of the Corinthian Sisyphos. Some, again, made her return
with Iasin to Kolchis, while others took her to Italy, and
described her as acquiring the name Anguitia from Ler power
of fascinating serpents. Finally, she is said to have been
wedded to Achilleus in Elysion.

” The involuntary departure of the sun from the dawn or
his capricious desertion of her is exhibited in the myths of
a long series of waidens woved and forsaken, whether by
Phoibos himself or by heroes on whose head rests his light
and majesty. With the story of Korinis the mother of
Asklépios the myth of Prokris is in close accordance. Her
birthplace is Athens, the city of the Dawn, and her mother
is Hersé, the Dew, while her own name denotes also simply
the sparkling drops.! We are thus prepared for the myth
which tells us that Kephalos, a Phokian chief, coming to
Athens, won her love and plighted his feith to her. But
Kephalos was loved also by Eés, who sought to weaken his
love for Prokris with a purpose so persistent that at last
she induced him to make trial of her affection. He there-
fore deserts Prokris, to whom after a time he returns in
disguise. When in this shape he has won her love,
he reveals himself, and Prokris in an agony of grief and
shame flies to Crete, where she obtains from Artemis the
gift of a spear which shall never miss its mark and of a
hound which can never fail to seize its prey.? With these

+ Professor Max Miller, refers Pro-


kris to the Sanskrit prush and prish,
to sprinkle, used chie@y of raindrops.


thology,’ Chips, go. ii. 87.
# In the myth of Ikaros, or Ikarins,
this dog appears under the name Maira


‘The eame root in the Teutonic
languages has tuken the sense of
“ frost," and Bopp identifies prush with
the O. H. G. frus, frigere. In Greek
‘we must refer to the same root xpéf,
xpunés, a dewdrop, and also Prokris,
the dew. hus the wife of Kephatos is
only a repetition of Hersé, her mother—
Hersé, dew, being derived from Sanskrit
prish, to sprinkle'—‘ Comparative My-


(the glistening), who helps Erigont the
daughter of Ikarios in her search for
the body of her father, who hae been
slain by the peasunta and thrown into
the well Anygros (the parched). Her
grief leads her to hang herself ob a tree
under which he was buried, a myth
which suggests a comparison with that
of Helent Dendcitis. Tknros, tho gon of
Daidalos, is only a reflection of Phasthén.


PROKRIS AND K68,


gifta she returns to Kephalos, who after seeing her success
in the chase longs to possess them. But they can be yielded
only in return for his love, and thus Prokris brings home to
him the wrong done to herself, and Eés is for the time
discomfited. But Prokris still fears the jealousy of. Eés and
watches Kephalos as he goes forth to hunt, until, as one
day she lurked among the thick bushes, the unerring dart
of Artemis hurled by Kephalos brings the life of the gentle
Prokris to anend. This myth explains itself. Kephalos is
the head of the sun, and Kephalos loves Prokris,—in other
words, the sun loves the dew. But Eds alao loves Kephalos,
i.e. the dawn loves the sun, and thus at once we have the
groundwork for her envy of Prokris. So again when we are
told that, though Prokris breaks her faith, yet her love is
still given to the same Kephalos, different though he may
appear, we have here only a myth formed from phrases
which told how the dew seems to reflect many suns which
are yet the same sun. The gifts of Artemis are the rays
which flash from each dewdrop, and which Piokris is de-
scribed as being obliged to yield up to Kephalos, who slays
her as unwittingly as Phoibos canses the death of Daphné
or Alpheios that of Arethousa. The spot where she dies is
a thicket, in which the last dewdrops would linger before
the approach of the midday heats.

The various incidents belonging to the life of Eés are so
transparent that the legend can scarcely be said to be a
myth at all. Her name is, as we have seen, that of the
Vedic dawnggoddess Ushas, and she is a daughter of Hy-
perion (the soaring sun) and of Euryphassa (the broad
shining), and a sister of the sun and moon (Helios and
Seléné), If Ovid calls her a child of Pallas, this is only
saying again that she is the offspring of the dawn. Like
Phoibos and Herakles, she has many loves; but from all she
is daily parted. Every morning she leaves the couch of
Tithénos,' and drawn by the gleaming steeds Lampos and
Phaéthon, riggs into heaven to announce to the gods and to
mortal men the coming of the sun. In the Gdyssey she
closes, as she began, the day. Her love, which is given to

1 The lot of Tith6nos is simply the reverse of that of Endymidn,


431


CHAP.
IL,


Eés and
Tithdnos,


482


BOOK
el
——


Héb6 and
Gany-
mede.


The stor
of Dido”
and Anna.


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAR NATIONS,


Tithénos and Kephalos is granted also to Orién (the sun in
his character as the hunting and far-shooting god), whom
according to one version she conveys to Delos, the bright
land, but who in another is slain by the arrow of Artemia.
She also carries to the home of the gods the beautiful
Rleitos. Her children are born in many lands, As united
with Astraios, the starry, she is the mother of Zephyros,
Boreas, and Notos, the breezes or winds of morning, and
of Heésphoros, the light-bringer. Another son of Hés is
Phaéthén, whom mythographers made the father of the luck-
Jess son of Helios, but who is really the same being with his
aon, Finally, she is the mother of Memnén, the chieftain
from the glistening land of the Aithiopians (Ethiopians),
who falls by the spear of Antilochos, and on whose death she
weeps tears of morning dew, and obtains from Zeus the
boon that he shall rise again to renewed and endless life,

Another form of Eés is the beautiful Hébé, ever young,
on whom is bestowed without any drawback the youthful-
nese of the maimed Héphaistos. She is the daughter neces-
sarily of Zeus and Héré. Like the Vedic Ahand or Ushas
she can make the old young again, and she ministers to
the gods the life-giving nectar and ambrosia. But Hébé,
though the bride of the deified Herakles, or the mother of
his children Alexiarés and Anikétos, the invincible deliverers,
remains little more than a name. She is Ganymédé, the
brilliant ; and thus what Iris is to Hermes, that is Hébé to
Ganymédés, the lovely Trojan youth who is borne away on
the eagle’s wing to the Olympian heaven, where he also
became the immortal cup-bearer of the gods. Thus in both
alike we see the morning light carried up into heaven on
the wings of the sunlit cloud.

The same story of unrequited love which has ‘been em-
bodied in the myths of Ariadné and Medeia, of Seléné and
Echo, meets us again in the legends which the Latin poets
modified to suit their own traditions, or their prejudices and
fancies. But although Virgil has chosen to mix up the
story of Dido with that of Aineas (Aineias), he has intro-
duced into it little or nothing which is not found in the
myth as related by Justin. In fact, the story of Aphrodité


DIDO AND ANNA.


or Daphné is twice told in the life of Dido, for the Sichaus
or Acerbas whose déath she bewails is the Adonis who, like
Sichaus, is slain by the dark being or power of night. As
the Panis look greedily on the cattle of Indra, Pygmalion
covets the vast treasures which Sicheus possesses with
Tantalos, Sisyphos, Helen and Brynhild, or Ixién; and thus
is the husband of Dido murdered, her first and, according to
the version of Justin, her only love, and his wealth is in
the hands of his destroyer. But the idea of dwelling with
Pygmalion is as hateful to her as Paris became to the
Helen whom he had stolen with her treasures. As faithful
to the memory of her lost love as is Sarama to Indra, Dido
pretends to listen to the traitor, while she makes ready for
flight. In her new home another suitor appears in the
Libyan Hiarbas, who repeats the importunities of the Itha~
kan suitors, until Dido, wearied out, promises to do as he
wishes; but having made a huge pile for the offering of a
hecatomb, she slays herself upon it, declaring that now she
is going, as her people and the Libyans desired it, to her
husband. The version of Virgil differs from this in little
more than a name. Aineas is only another form of the bright
being with whom Dido would willingly have dwelt for ever;
but he is the sun-god who cannot pause to bestow on her
his love, or who must hasten away after a brief mockery
of gladness. In the former case, the myth answers to the
legends of Adonis, Endymién, or Narkissos; in the latter
the desertion of Dido is but the desertion of Prokris, Ariadné,
or Korénis;eand the Tyrian Elissa dies, like Herakles,
amid the flames of a fiery sunset. The same story is re-
peated yet again in the myth of Anna, the sister of Dido,
whom Latin tradition identified with the goddess Anna
Perenna.' After her sister’s death Anna follows ASneas to

' This namo was noturally referred to purna, who is described by Paterson as
the words annus und perennis by » people ‘af ruddy complexion, her robe of
who had retained tho mere name with- various colours, a crescent on her fore-
out ite menning. Hence the goddess head: Sho gives subsistence; she is
eeame to the Latfux the bestuwer of bent hy the weight of hor full breasts,
fruitful scnsons; but the fuleo etymology all good is united in her.’ In short,
of the prayer, ‘ut annare perennaroque she is a deity who, in Colebrooke's
commoda licsat’ happened to correspond words ‘fills with food, and is very


with the original foree of the name, if similar to Lakshmi, or the goddess of
Anna Perenna be the Sunskrit Apna- abundance, although not the simu deity,


vou. I. FF


433


CHAP
I.


434


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK Italy where, though she is kindly received by him, she finds
—tt_. in Lavinia a Prokris, whom she, like Eés, must regard with


deadly jealousy. But her arms are turned not upon her
rival but upon herself; and the second woman who has
lavished her affections on Aineas casts herself into the same
Numician stream in which Mineas afterwards disappears from
the sight of men. The same repetitions mark the atory of
Aneas, who, although fighting (reluctantly, as some versions
have it,) on the side of the thief who steals Helen, is yet a
being like the Lykian Sarpédén or the Aithiopian Memnén.
Like them, he is the child not of a mortal mother, but of the
brilliant goddess of the dawn, and in the Trojan army he
plays the part of Achilleus in the Achaian host. Like the
son of Thetis, he is the possessor of immortal horses, and
like him he is at feud with the king, for Priam fails to do
him honour, as Agamemnon heaps disgrace on Achilleus,
From the flames of the ruined Ilion he escapes bearing on
his shoulders his father Anchises, the aged man who, while
yet he had the youth and beauty of Tithénos, had been the
darling of Aphrodité. His wife Creusa (Kreiousa, a name
answering to that of Euryanassa, the wide-ruling, and being
simply the feminine form of Kredn or Kreién), comes behind
him like the twilight following the sun who is hastening
on into the land of night. But the twilight must vanish
before the sun can be seen again, and Creusa dies or dis-
appears, like Hellé,—the converse of the myth of Héré and
Leiandros (Leander). But Aineas like Herakles has other
loves before him; and the fortunes of Dido and Anna are
brought before us again in the legend of the Italian Lavinia.
She too is the bright Helen for whom kings and nations are
ready to fight and die; but although Aineas wins her, there
remain yet other dangers and other enemies, and in the
final strife with the Rutulians the dawn-child vanishes in
the stream of Numicius, as Arethousa and Daphné plunge
into the waters from which Anadyomené comes up in the
morning. , The true feeling of the people who recounted
‘The title Apna, in whieh we see the apparently from the same stem with


it ap(aqua), points to nourishment by the Latin pario, to produce. Nork,
serene dhe name Puma comes Real-Worleduch, i 89.


IOKASTE AND AITHRA.


this myth is shown in the title which they accorded to him.
Henceforth he is Jupiter Indiges, the father from whom
they spring, and who bestows upon them all that makes life
worth living for.

The same atory of disastrous love is presented under other
names in the legend of Leiandros (Leander), a myth which
exhibits the sun as plunging through the waters to reach the
beautiful morning, who holds out her gleaming light in the
east; for Héré (whose name is identical with that of Héré)
is the priestess of the dawn-goddess Aphrodité, and the road
which separates her lover from herself is the Hellespontos,
the Lykabas or path of light, the track of Hellé the dawn-
maiden. Héré, again, dwells in the eastern Lesbos, while
Leiandros has his home in Abydos. He is thus the Phoibos
Delphinios, the fish or frog-sun, who dies in the furious
storm; and through grief for her lost love Héré casts herself
into the waters, like Kephalos from the Leukadian cliff after
the death of Prokris.

Not Jess sad than that of Prokris or of Dido is the lot of
Tolé, Iokasté, Aithra, Augé, Danaé, or Ariadné, In the first
two of these forsaken wives or desolate mothers we see the
violet tints of morning, which reappear in Iamos, Iolfos,
and Iasén. From Herakles, Iolé is parted almost at the
moment when she meets him. Her beautiful form is seen
near his funeral pile, as the violet-tinted clouds may be seen
among the flaming vapours lit up in a blood-red sunset;
and as the blaze of the fire which consumes the body of
Herakles rises to the heavens, she is left alone in her sorrow
to vanish before the cheerless gloaming. The fate of Jokasté
had for the Greeks of the age of Perikles a more terrible
significance. She is not only the mother of Oidipous, but
his wife. As his mother, she had been tortured by seeing
her child torn from her arms, to be cast away on Mount
Kithairén ; and the shame of finding herself his wife after
his victory over the Sphinx drives her to end her misery
with her ow# hands.' According to the version of Hyginus,
the life of Aithra {the pure air), the mother of Theseus, had

1 Jokustd is the wife of the gloomy which the avn is born may be regarded aa
Laiva: in other words, the dawn from the wife of the dark and cheerless night,

Fra


435
CHAP.


—S


Tard and
Leiundros.


The Brides
of the Sun,


486


MYTHOLOGY OF THR ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK the same end. Long ago she had been loved by Bellerophén ;
— J£_. but when he was driven from Corinth, she became the wife


of the Athenian Aigeus, who left her with the infant Theseus
at Troizen, having, like the father of Sigurd, placed his
invincible weapons under a large stone, that his son might
become possessed of them only when he had reached his fall
strength. Later still, the Dioskouroi, it is said, carried her
away to Sparta, where she became the slave of Helen, and
whence with Helen she was taken to Troy, to be brought
back again through the prayers of her grandson Demophon.
By “the same hard fate, Augé, the (brilliant) daughter of
Neaira, who, as the early morning, reappears as the mother
of the nymphs Phaethousa and Lampetié in the Odyssey, no
sooner becomes the mother of Télephos (the being who shines
from far) than she is deprived of her child, who is exposed
on Mount Parthenion. The story of Ariadné exhibits much
the same outlines, She is the daughter of Minos, the son of
Zeus, and the all-brilliant Pasiphaé, who is the mother of the
Minotauros, as the bright Héré is the mother of Typh4én, In
the slaughter of this monster she has a share corresponding
to that of Medeia in the conquest of the bulls and the
dragon-sprung men; like Medeia, she accompanies the con-
queror, and like her she is deserted by him. Ariadné then
either slays herself, like Iokasté and Augé, Dido or Anna, or
becomes the wife of Dionysos, who places her among the stars.
In substance this is also the story of the Argive Danaé, who
is shut up by her father Akrisios in a brazen dungeon,’ which
Zeus enters in the form of a golden shower, asethe light of
morning pierces the dark chambers of the night, She thus
becomes the mother of Perseus; but, as in the case of Cidi-
pous, the oracle had foretold that if she had a son, he would
become the slayer of her father Akrisios, and Akrisios,
anxious like Laios to preserve his own life, placed Danaé
and her child in a chest, as according to one version Oidi-
pous also was placed and borne away to Brasiai. The story
of her sojourn in the house of Polydektés at Seriphos, of his
persecutions and the more benignant treatment of his brother
Diktys, of her rescue on the return of her son, and her restor-
! The Iron Stove of the German story, (Grimm.)


AUGR AND EUROPE.
ation to her native land, belongs rather to the mythical history


437


CHAP.
I


of Perseus. The myth of Andromeda, the beautiful daughter


of the Aithiopian king Kephens, is less gloomy; but although
her woes seem to end with her deliverance from the dragon,
she had up to that time had her full share of sorrow. Her
mother Kassiopeia had, like Niobé, boasted that her child
was more beautiful even than the daughters of Nereus, who
prayed to Poseidén to avenge the insult, as Lété called on
Phoibos to requite the wrong done to her by Niobé. Poseidén
accordingly brought the waters of the sea over the land, and
with them a sea-monster who, like the Sphinx or the Mino-
tauros, can be satisfied only with human blood. The former
fills the streets of Thebes with corpses ; the latter exacts the
yearly tribute of the dawn-children. But the solitary An-
dromeda, abandoned to the huge sea-dragon, takes a firmer
hold on the popular imagination, and is reproduced in a
thousand forms, from the women rescued by Oidipous and
Theseus down to Una and her Red Cross Knight. All these
deliverers are men unknown to fame; but they are all en-
dowed with powers for which they who see them give them
no credit, and they all exhibit the manly type of generous
chivalry which finds its consummation in the pure Sir Gala-
had.

The same idea is the groundwork of the myth of the
Arkadian Augé, the clear atmosphere of the land of light.
Hence the local myth necessarily related that Herakles came
to her whenever he visited Tegea, and thus she becomes the
mother of one of the fatal children whose life begins and
ends in disaster. No sooner is her son born than her father
Aleos decrees her death and the exposure of the child. But
Augé is saved to become the wife of the Mysian Teuthras, or,
according to another version, to escape narrowly the fate of
the Theban Iokasté, and in the end to be brought back to
Tegea by her sun Télephos, as Perseus brings his mother
back to Argos,

The story of Eurépé brings before us the dawn, not aa
fleeing from the pursuit of the sun, but as borne across the
heaven by the lord of the pure ether. Zeus here, like Indra,
himself assumes the form of a buil, and takes away the child


The Arka-
dian Augé.


Enryy
and the
Bull.


438


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK as she plays with her brother in her Phenician home.!
—. Almost every name in the myth tells its own tale, although


Adthaia
and the
burning
‘brand,


we may perhaps have to put aside the names of Agénér and
Kadmos as merely Hellenised forms of the Semitie Kedem
and Chnas. Eurépé herself is simply the broad-spreading
flush of dawn, which is seen first in the Phoinikia, or purple
region of the morning, and whose name belongs to the same
class with Eurykleia, Eurydiké, Euryganeia, and Euryphassa.
She is the child of Télephassa, the being whose light streams
from afar ;* and in her first loveliness she is lost to those who
delight in her, when she is snatched away to her western
exile. Then follows the long journey of Kadmos and Téle-
phassa, the weary search of the sun through the livelong
day for his early lost sister or bride. There were obviously
a thousand ways of treating the myth. They might recover
her in the end, as Alpheios is reunited to Arethousa and
Perse1s comes again to Danaé; but as it might be said that
they might behold her like hereafter, so the tale might run
that the being who had delighted them with her beauty should
be seen herself again no more. The myth of Hurdpé sets
forth the latter notion. Télephassa sinks down and dies far
in the west on the plains of Thessaly, and Kadmos, journeying
westward still, learns at Delphoi that he is to seek his sister
no longer.

The myth of Althaia sets forth the dawn or morning as
the mother of a child whose life is bound up with a burning
brand. As soon as the brand is burnt out her son will die,
according to the inexorable doom pronounced by the Moirai.
This brand is the torch of day, which is extinguished when
the sun sinks beneath the western horizon. From this con-

1 This bull reappears in the Norse
tale of Katie Wooden-cloak (Dasent),
endowed with the powers of Wish. In


ita left ear isa cloth which, when spread
out, farnishes abundant banquets for


Aibtés, not the loving search of Kudmos
and Télephasss ; pie the bull has to go
through fearfa! conflicts with the Trolls,
before the happy end ix brought about
by means of a golden slippor usin tho


the dawn-maiden, who has been thrust
out of her father's house ; but when the
stepmother ssys that she cannot rest
‘until she has eaten the Dun Bull’s flesh,
the beast, hearin;
maiden that if she wills, be wiil earry
her away. ‘The pursuit of Katio on her
bull is the chase of Iasdn by the angry


hey, tells the dawn- Artemi


stories of Cinderelle and Sodewa Bai.

+ Pindar (Pyth, iv.) wpgaks of Eurdph
as adaughter of Tityos, a gigantic being,
who is slain by tho swift arrow of
emis, and condemned to @ like
peualty with Ixién, Sisyphos, Tantalos,
aod Prometheus,


THE BURNING BRAND.


ception of the sun’s course sprung the idea that his mother
kept him alive by snatching the log from the fire. But
although Meleagros is, like Phoibos and Achilleus, invincible
and invulnerable, the words of the Moirai must be accom-
plished; and as the mother of the sun may be either the
dark night or the nourishing dawn (Althaia), so the wife of
Oineus has her kinsfolk among the dark beings; and when
these are slain by Meleagros, she thrusts the brand again
into the fire, and the life of her brilliant child smoulders
away. But his death brings with it the death alike of his
mother and his bride, for the tints of the dawn or the
gloaming cannot linger long after the sun is down. The
names introduced into this myth are found for the most part
in a host of other stories. She is the daughter of Eury-
themis, a reflection of Eurdpé or Euryganeia, and a sister of
Leda, the mother of the brilliant Dioskouroi; and among
her own children is Déianeira, whose union with Herakles is
fatal to the hero.' Of Kleopatra, the beaatiful wife of
Meleagros, there is little more to say than that she is,
like Daphné and Arethousa, a child of the waters, the
Enuénos being her father, and that, like Oindné and Bryn-
hild, she dies of grief when the chequered life of the being
whom she loves has been brought to an end.


Sectiox VI.—ATHENE.


The name Athéné is practically a transliteration of the
Vedic Aham4, the morning, which in a cognate form appears
as Dahand, the Greek Daphné.? The myths which have
clustered round this greatest of Hellenic dawn-goddesses
differ indefinitely in detail, but all may manifestly be traced
back to the same source, and resolved into the same mythical
phrases. She is pre-eminently the child of the waters, she
springs from the forehead of the sky, and remains fresh,
pure, and undefiled for ever. In her origin the virgin deity

2 °

1 Déianeira is the last of the many or bride of the enemy of the day: and
brides of Herakles, and belongs in tzuth, thus her name is Dasyanari, the wife of
rather to the darkness than the light, the fiend, Chips, dc. ii. 89, 234,
and as sending to him the fatal garment, —? See note 4, p. 418.
may be regarded aa rather the colleague


439


CHAP.
I.


The ori-
ginal idea
of Athing
purely
physical.


440


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


BOOK of the Athenian Akropolis was strictly physical; but the
——- notion of the being who wakes up the world after the dark-


Athans
Tritoge-


ness of night might soon pass into that of wisdom, the con-
nection between light and knowledge (the ¢és and yvaots of
the Fourth Gospel) being of the closest kind. Thus, in one
of the Vedic hymns we have already had the phrase that the
dawn as waking every mortal to walk about receives praise
from every thinker. But as being sprung from the forehead
of the sky, she may be expected to know the secrets of hea-
ven; and thus we have in Athéné a being who, like Phoibos,
is filled with all the wisdom of Zeus. In the earlier form of
the myth neither the Vedic Ahana nor the Hellenic Athéné
has any mother. In the Rig Veda, ‘ Ushas, the dawn, sprang
from the head of Dyu, the mirddhadivah, the East, the fore-
head of the sky.’?

But if Athéné is Zens-born, the poet, when he tells us this,
speaks of her as Tritogeneia, the child of Tritos.? It ia
strange that this god, whose name differs so slightly from
that of the water-god Triton, should have so far disappeared
from the memory of the Greeks as to leave them at a loss to
account for the epithet except by connecting it with places
bearing a similar name, as among others the Libyan lake
Tritonis, and the Boiotian stream Triton, on whose banks, as
on those of the Attic stream, towns sprung up called Athénai
and Eleusis.? In short, every stream so named became a birth-
place for Athéné, although the meaning of the old phrase
was not lost, until an attempt was made, by referring the
myth to the alleged Holic word for a head, to restlve it into
the story of her springing from the head of Zeus. But the
fact that in the Veda Trita rules over the water and the
air, establishes the identity of Trito or Tritos, the father of


1 Max Miiller. i8. ‘Homer knows of kitchen, asks permission to take up


no mother of Athéné, nor dees the Veda
mention « name for the mother of the
dawn, though her parente are epok@h of
in the dual’?

1 Hes. Theog. 924.

* This connection of the dawn with
water rune through almost every legend
which turns on the phenomena of morn-
ing. Thus in the Norse tale of Katie
Wouden-closk the dawn-maiden, while
working humbly like Cinderells in the


water for the prince, who will recoiva
no service frum oue 60 mran-looking.
Next day she appesrs ut the palace on &
splendid steed, and to his question
whence sho comes, hep reply is ‘I'm
from Rath ;’ the next {iy she is from
Towel-land, tho third day from Comb-
Jand, the comb being that with which
the dawn-maideos always comb their
golden locks by the watcr-side,


ATHEXE.
Athéné, not only with that deity, but with Triton, Amphi-
trité, and the Tritopatores or lords of the winds.’ The


theory which, from the supposed Libyan birthplace of Athéné,
infers a relation between Egyptian and Hellenie mythology
calls for no notice.

The Hesiodic Theogony assigns Métis (a name akin to that
of the wise Medeia) as a mother to Athéné ; but this story is
reconciled with the other myth by saying, that by the counsel
of Ouranos and Gaia Zeus swallowed Métis before her child
was born. In the saying of Pindar, that Hephaistos at her
birth split the forehead of Zeus with a brazen axe, we see
the sudden stream of light shooting up in the morning sky,
which it seems to cleave; and in the golden shower which
falls at her birth, we have only a repetition of the mode
in which Danaé became the mother of Perseus. When
Apollodoros and others say that the forehead of Zeus
was cloven by Prometheus or Hermes, we have only to
remember that these are both spoken of {together with the
Argive Phoréneus) as the first givers of the boon of fire
to mankind.?

As springing from the forehead of Zeus, Athéné was known


441
CHAP,
I


—_——_~


Birth of
Athéné.


Parentage


as Koryphasia in Messéné, as Akria in Argos, while Minerva ° Athéné.


1 M. Brial, who traces this identity,
Herevle et Cacus, 17, cites the words of
Buid 6, ‘rprrordropes: Afuay e 7h
*Ar0iB: gnoly dvduovs elves rods Tprrowd-
‘ropas.? It is said of Indra that: ‘unimated
by the sncriticial food, he Lroke through
the defences of Vala, as did Trita
through the e@forings of tho well’ —
If. H. Wilson, R. V7.8, vol. i. p. 141.
Frofessor Wilson here remarks that
“kata, Dwita, and ‘Trita [the first,
svcond, and third) were three men pro:
duevd in water, by Agni, for the purpose
of remoring or rubbing off the religues
of an oblution of clarified butter. The
Scholiast . . . eays thut Agni threw the
ciuders of the burnt-offering into the
water, whence successively arose Ekata,
Dwita, and Trita, who, as cleowbere
appears, were thogefore called Aptyas or
eons of water.’ Noticing Dr. Roth's
opinion that ‘Trita is the same name as
‘Thraétana (Feridun}, he says that the
identity of Trita and Traitang remains
to bo eatublished. It ix, at the least,
not disproved by the story which he


cites as setting it aside, This story is
that ‘the slaves of Dirghotamas, when he
was old and blind, became insubordinate,
and attempted to destroy him, first by
throwing him into the fire, whence he
was sured by the Asvius, then into
he wes extriexted by tho
; upon which Traitana,
cone of the slures, wounded him on the
head, breast, and arms, and then
inflicted like injuries on himself, of
which he perished.’ This story becomes
clear throughout when compared with
the myth of Eés, who, like the slaves of
Dirghotama, shut up the decrepit
Tithénos. The other incidents of the
tale carry us to the fiery death of
Herakles, and to Endymiéa plunging
into the waters which are soon lost to
sight in the darkness which comea on
after sunset.


> Pind. Olymp. vii. 60.

 Apoliod. 1-8, 5. The myth which
makee Hephaistos himself her father
speaks only of the burst of flaming light
from which the day seems to be rl


442 MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


200K was called Capta (capita) at Rome.’ But there were also

—— traditions which spoke of her as a child not of Zeus, but of

the giant Pallas,” who attempts to violate her purity, and is

therefore slain by her. Here we have the dawn regarded

as springing from the night, and the night as seeking

to mar or to destroy his offspring. It is, in short, the

myth which makes Laios, Akrisios, and Astyages hate their

children, who are in their turn doomed to slay their sires,

as Athéné slays the monster Pallas. The legend which

makes her a daughter of Poseidén is merely a statement

that the morning is born from the waters. But as with the

dawn there comes generally the morning breeze (Sarameya,

Hermeias, Hermes, the child of Saram4) with its sweet and

soothing tones, so when, by the aid of Athéné, Perseus

has slain the dark Gorgon, Athéné is said, like Hermes,

to have invented the flute in order to imitate the plaintive

sounds in which the Gorgon sisters mourned the slain
Medousa.?

Athénd But pure and undefiled though the dawn may be, she is

mother of yet followed by the sun, who may therefore be regarded as

and Lych- her offspring; and thus Phoibos Apollén was sometimes

called a son of Hephaistos and Athéné, while another version

expressed the same idea by making them the parents of

Lychnos {the brilliant), another Phaéthén.‘ As the dawn-

goddess, she can keep men young, or make them old. She

rouses them to fresh vigour from healthful sleep, or as the

days come round she brings them at last to old age and

death. From her come the beauty and strengtlt, the goldeu

locks and piercing glances of Achilleus and Odysseus. But

when for the accomplishment of the great work it becomes

needful that Odysseus shall enter his own house as a toil-

worn beggar, it is Athéné who dims the brightness of his

eye, and wraps him in squalid raiment,’ and again she


' Max Miller, Lectures on Language, Greece, i. 75, remarks, ‘It was altogether


second series, 603. impossible to make Hrechtheus the son
* This name is manifestly only of Athéné: the type ot the goddess fur-
another form of Phallos. bade it.” Rather, it was forbidden only
* Pind. Pyth. xii. 35. by the form which the idex of Athiud


* Athénb aleo brings up and nourishes assumed in the minds of the Athenians ;
Erechtheus, and lodges him in her own, end the reason ia obvious.
temple. On thie Mr. Grote, History of — * Od. xiii. 430. Bee vol. i. p. 160.


ATHENE GLAUKOPIS.


restores his former majesty when once more he is to meet
his son Telemachos.' So, again, she preserves to Penelopé
all the loveliness of her youth, and presents her to Odysseus
as beautiful as when he left her twenty years ago, when the
Achaian hosts set out for Ilion, while she restores Laertes
also to something of his ancient vigour.?

Of the vast number of names by which she was known
and worshipped, the earliest probably, and certainly the
most common, denote simply the light. She is especially
the goddess of the grey or gleaming face, Glanképis. She is
Optiletis, Oxyderkes, Ophthalmitis, the being of keen eyes
and piercing vision; but these epithets might, it is plain, be
made to bear a moral or intellectual meaning; and thus a
starting point would be furnished for the endless series of
names which described her as full of wisdom and counsel, as
enforcing order and justice, as promoting the tillage of the
earth, and as fostering all science and all art. Thus the
epithets Akria and Akraia, which can be rightly interpreted
only after a comparison with her other names, Koryphasia
and Capta, might be taken to denote her protection of cities
and fortresses, while her name Ageleia, as the driver of the
clouds whom Saramé leads forth to their pastures, might
be regarded as denoting her care for those who till the soil
or keep herds. But her physical character is never kept out
of sight. She is the goddess especially of the Athenians,
and of the dawn city which received her name after the
contest in which she produced the olive against the horse
created by P8seiddn, for so it was decreed by Zeus that the
city should be called after the deity who should confer the
greatest boon on man, and the sentence was that the olive,
as the emblem of peace, was better than the horse, whose
chief use was for war. But the city so named after her was
emphatically the glistening city (Acwapal ‘A@jvac), although
the epithet it seems was so little applicable to it in its out
ward aspect that the Athenians of the historical ages prized
it with a jealSus earnestness, and were ready to grant any
prayer made by people who addressed them as Citizens of
brilliant Athens.

1 Od. xvi. 172. * 2b, xxiv. 368.


443


ates


alae


Epithets of
Athéne,


444


BOOK


MYTHOLOGY OF THE ARYAN NATIONS.


She is, however, the guardian not of Athenians only but


asa of all the solar heroes; in her Bellerophontes, Achilleus,
Arhend the Herakles and Perseus, Odysseus and Diomédes, find their


guardian


of heroes,


unfailing friend and comforter. From her come all wealth
and prosperity, and accordingly we find the special emblems
of wealth and fertility intimately associated with her wor-
ship. Her sacred serpent was fed on the Akropolis, and
yearly in her great procession the sacred ship, covered with
the peplos woven by Athenian maidens, was carried to her
shrine.’ In one of the so-called Orphic hymna, she is said
to be both male and female, and thus to remain unwedded.
Doubtless the dawn may be regarded as of spotless purity
and unfading loveliness, and this idea might give rise to
images of transcendent holiness and majesty ; but she may be
thought of also not only as giving birth to children, but as
being sensible to passion, and we are not justified in leaving
out of sight those myths which present Athéné in this light,
On the one hand, according to one story, she blinds Teiresias
because he had looked upon her unclothed form (a myth
closely akin to that of the dazzling treasures of Ixién, which
no man might look upon and live), and shrinks with loathing
from Hephaistos when he seeks to lay hands upon her. On
the other, the myth of Prometheus exhibits her as aiding
him in his theft of fire against the will of Zeus, while one
version represents her as so acting from feelings not of
friendship but of love. In general, however, the harmony
between the dawn and the sky from which it. springs, in
other words, between Zeus and Athéné, is undisturbed; and
thus when Zeus is determined to take vengeance for the
deceit put upon him by Prometheus, Athéné lends herself as
a willing accomplice in his scheme. She is to teach Pandora
the skilful use of the loom, while Aphrodité is to adorn her
with aJl the enticements of physical beauty, and Hermes is
to give her a crafty and thievish mind and temper. But
even in thé Iliad where she ie generally represented as being

1 See sectien xii. of thie chapter. the girdle on Pandora and made her

> xxii. Deautiful may be regarded as another


* Hes. Op. ef Dice, 60, et seg. The version of the myth. Itis certinly not
statement in line 72 that Athéaé placed in accordance with line 65.


MINERVA.


in perfect accord with the will of Zeus, she engages, as we
have seen, in an ebortive conspiracy to bind Zeus, in which
she is the accomplice of Héré and Poseidén.!

In all her essential attributes, the Hellenic Athéné is re-
presented by the Latin Minerva, a name which Professor
Max Miiller connects with mens, the Greek sévos, and the
Sanskrit manas, mind, and compares it with mane, the
morning, Mania, an old name of the mother of the Lares,
and the verb manare as applied especially to the sun, while
Matuta and other kindred words denote the dawn.* What-
ever may be the connection between Minerva and Matuta,
we can scarcely fail to see the affinity of the name with the
verb promenervare, used in the Carmen Saliare us an equiva-
lent to the kindred moneo, to admonish. The Latin Minerva,
as embodying a purely intellectual idea, is thus a being even
more majestic than the Hellenic Athéné; and to so intellec-
tual a conception we should scarcely expect that many fables
would attach themselves. Hence the Latin Minerva can
scarcely be said to have any mythology. Like Ceres she
stands aloue in incommunicable sanctity and in unfathomable
wisdom,

1 Hi, 400, to Juno as the guardian of the mint on

2 Lectures om Language, second series, the Capitoline hill. See elso note i., p.


505. To the eame toot, probably, must 115.
bo referred the epithet moneta, spplied


445
onaP.
ia
ey


The Latin
Minerva.


APPENDICES.


APPENDIX A.—Page 217.
The Antiquity of written Poems.

It is impossible not to see that ages must have intervened between
the invention of writing, or rather as we should term it of scratch.
ing, and the preservation of long poems in manuscript. It is much
more reasonable to suppose that greater facilities for writing would
lead rather to the rise of contemporary chroniclers than to the
practice of writing down poems, which would Icse half or all their
value in the eyes of rhapsodisis if pat upon paper,

It seems scarcely necessary to treat seriously the arguments or
rather the dicta by which M. Barthélemy St.-Hilaire (L’liade
@Homére traduite en vers Francais), hotds himself to have proved.
not only that our Iliad is one poem, and that therefore there was
only one Homer, but that it was from the first a written poem. The
authority of M. de St-Hilaire is deservedly great; but it must,
nevertheless, be repeated that the question is one wholly of evidence,
and that the answer must be given in accordance with that evidence
and without regard to sentiment, prejudice, or any supposed powers
of literary divination acquired by long study. From a rapid survey
of the Thad, which omits all that is to be set on the other side,
M. St.-Hilaire infers that the unity of the poem is demonstrated,
and asserts that this unity must be regarded as an incontestable
fact, and that any one who does not admit this postulate can only
mako false steps if he ventures to speak about Homer (introduction,
xxx). His opponents appeal to the evidence of facts: M. St.-Hilaire,
in that strain of exaggerated eulogy which is the bane of conservative
criticism, addresses himself to our feelings: ‘A mon sens, il suffit
d'un coup d’cil méme rapido sur V'Iliade, poar sentir immédiate.
ment quet’est li une irapossibilité. Quoi! Cette wuvre, prodigieuse
plus encore dans son ensemble que dans ses détwils, a été faite au
hasard, dans Ja durée de plusieurs siécles, par quinze ou vingt puétes
différents, qui ne se sont pas connus, qui ne se sont pus concertéis,


448 APPENDIX.


et qui, sons Je fou d'une égale inspiration, ont pu produire des frag-
ments, rénnis plus tard en un merveillenx édifice, d'une harmonie,
dune proportion, d’une symétrie, d’une solidité sang pareilles!
Quoi! C'est la expliquer la composition de |’Iliade! C'est so
rendre compte en critique, c’est-d-dire en jugo éclairé et compétent
de ce chef-d’cenvre, dont la beanté ne peut épuiser ni l’admiration
do Ja foule ni celle des philosophes!’ (introduction, xxxiv). On
arguments of much the same weight as these M. St.-Hilaire reats
his conclusion that the Iliad and Odyssey wero poems not merely
composed, but written down on a soft material, by a single poet,
Every story about Lykourgos, Solon, or other legislators is taken
as indubitable fact; and the priority of Laios to Proitos furnishes
evidence precisely the same in kind with the priority of William the
Conqueror to Henry I. The times of Bellerophén are certainly
historical, and Bellerophén lived two generations before the Trojan
war. But letters were written in his days: and, therefore letters
‘were in use in the time of the poet who wrote about him and the
Trojan war. The question turning on the phraso ojjpara Avypd,
‘the woful signs,’ is barely noticed. It must have been an alpha
betical wri ing, for the other supposition would ascribe to pninting
& porfection which it had not attained (intr. xlvi). The difficulty
has probably been rarely felt in savage life. But again, writing was
familiar to the heroes of the Trojan war, for they mark tho lots
which they throw into a helmet (Iliad, v. 171, et seq.) M. St
Hilaire’s conclusion may well teke away our breath: ‘Chacun des
guorriers trace sa marque: on agite toutes ces marques dans le
easque d’Agamemnon, et Nestor, qui les secoua, tire celle d’Ajax,
fils de Télamon, que toute l’arméo désirait. On montre la marque
favorisée du sort i chacun des concurrents. Aucun ne la reconnait:
mais quand elle arrive A celui qui l’avait dcrite ou tracte, aussitdt
Ajax, plein de joie, déclare qu’elle est la sienne. . . Qu’est-ce au
juste que cette marque? Tl n’est pas aisé de le dire avec précision.
‘Mais comme Homire se sert du méme mot qui, pour Ia missive du
Prootua, a para signifier l’écriture, tout porte a croire qu’ici encore
c'est bien de lécriture qu'il s'agit, ot non d’une marque qucleonque
oh aucun signe graphique n'etit été tracé’ (introd. xviii), As
bearing on the main question of an Iliad written from the first, an
argument resting on a word scratched by ten or a dozen men would
be worthless. There can, however, be no sort of doubt that ina
writing age each man would have inscribed his own name, and that
the drawer would at once have named the man who ghad been
chosen, In this case the herald has to carry the lot about the
camp, as each hero failed, not to read (fer it has never been pre-
tended that yzyréecew can be used in this sense) but to recognise


AUTHORITY OF ‘ HOMER.’ 449


his particular ‘mark. It would be impossible for the poet to show
more clearly that the marks were not letters or words, but mero
arbitrary signs. This is literally the whole of the evidence adduced
from our Homeric poems, on which M. St.-Hilaire resta his con-
clusions that those poems were from the first written compositions.
It becomes a superfluous task to follow M. St.-Hilaire through his
remarks on the alleged abundance of writing materials in the
Homeric age, or on the libraries of Osymandyas and Peisistratos.
The real question is not whether poems were written centuries
before the time of Herodotus, but whether the Greeks had any
written literature before the Persian wars, Mr. Paley has expressed
his conviction that no such literature existed in the times of Pindar,
and the subject has been further examined by Mr, Fennell, in a
paper on the ‘First Ages of a written Greck Literature,’ Trans-
actions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 1868.


APPENDIX B.—Page 218.
The Historical Value of ‘ Homer.’


Since this chapter was written, Mr. Gladstone has published his
‘Juventus Mundi,’ in which he states his present convictions with
regard to the authorship and historical credibility of our Iliad and
Odyssey, which alone he regards as the poems of Homer. These
convictions are substantially what they were ten years ago, but the
discussion has really advanced beyond the point at which Mr.
Gladstone leaves it; and the only reason for repeating objectiona
to arguments which might well be left to themsolves, is the weight
which in the opinion of some they may receive from his name and
authority, Instead of noting the result of recent Homeric criticism,
whether comervative or destructive, Mr. Gladstone has chosen the
simpler and easier task of asserting that to himself his old conclu-
sions on the subject of Homer are thoroughly satisfactory, Homer
is still with him undoubtedly an historical person, and the Iliad and
Odyssey are emphatically historical poema, The poet was born, he
thinks, before or during the Trojan war, and was probably familiar
with those who had fought in it. These conjectures or convictions
are supported by a series of propositions which certainly prove his
point if they are suffered to pass unchallenged, but of most of which
it must be said that they are mere assertion or hypothesis for which
uo evidence whatever is adduced.

The ambiguity of much of Mr. Gladstone's ‘aguas introdaces a
farther element of difficulty into the discussion. When, for instance

VOL. I. ee


450 APPENDIX.


he says that, ‘A cardinal argument for placing the date of the poet
near thet of his subject is, that he describes manners from first to last
with the easy, natural, and intimate knowledge of a contemporary
observer,’ there is a sense in which the most sceptical critics will
agree with him. No one doubts that the Homeric poet (or poets)
threw over his (or their) narrative a colour borrowed from the
society in which be (or they) lived. Here there was every motive
for the poet to be trathful, none to depart from the truth; and
the exactness with which all customs of peace and war, of arts
and games, of public and private life were reproduced in the poem,
would inevitably impart an air of reality to the events related,
whatever these might be. Thisis probably true of the genuine epic
poetry of all nations ; but for the historical character of the incidents
which they relate, it obviously proves nothing. The society of the
age in which the poet lives may be described with indefinite
accuracy, though the house which he builds may be raised on sand.


"| In this senso certainly ‘it cannot be too strongly affirmed that tho


song of Homer is historic song,’ or even that he has ‘ told us more
about the world and its inbabitants at his own epoch than any
historian that ever lived.’—(P. 7.) But unless, with Mr. Gladstone,
we are prepared to infer facts from the ‘ tone and feeling’ of a poet,
or from his knowledge of human naturo generally and of his own
countrymen in particular, we are bound to say plainly that we
speak only of his pictures of lifoand manners. This limitation will
not satisfy Mr. Gladstone. With him tho ‘subject’ of Homer is
not so much the picture of society existing in his own time as the
war of which he relates some of the most important incidents,
Here then we are brought face to face with the question of facts ;
and it is, to say the least, most unfortuuate that Mr. Gladstone
has not told us plainly and candidly what the ‘chief persons
and events’ are with regard to which wo are to look upon
‘Homer’ as ‘historical.’ Mr. Blackie has done this; and we have
seen how the confidence with which he first enunciates the result
of his analysis is modified antil the supposed substance vanishes
into thin air, and how, after asserting in one place that there
was one real war, and a real quarrel between Achillens and Aga-
memnon, he admits in another not only that there may have been
no Paris and no Helen, but that it makes no difference to the
history if Agamemnon and Achilleus never met at all and were
‘distinct captains of two separate armaments’ (see p. 185). What
would Mr, Gladstone think of an English bistory whigh should tell
us that it made no difference to the essential character of the narra-
tive whether we suppose that Laud and Strafford were joint con.
spiratora against the liberties of England, or the leaders in two


AUTHORITY OF ‘ HOMER.” 451


several attempts made in successive centuries? We must be par-
doned if we refuse altogether to admit the historical character of
narratives to which the champions of their veracity obviously give
no real credit. Mr. Gladstone leads ua through a region of mists,
in which he wonld have us follow paths not pointed out to. us by
our best historical guides. Thus his first reason for accepting as
historical the chiof events of our Iliad and Odyssey is that ‘It is the
chief business of the poet or bard, as such, in early times, to record
facts, while he records them in the forms of beauty supplied by his
art.’

If we write with the sole aim and hope of discovering the trath,
if trnth and truth alone is our single object, we are bound to refuse
any leap which must be taken in the dark. Mr. Gladstone's reason
is s mere assumption. Why are we to believe that the recording of
facts was the business of the poet in early times, until we know
what their ideas of a fact were, and, indeed, until we have proved
what is here merely asserted? Against Mr. Gladstone's dogmatic
assertion we may set the conclusion of Mr. Grote, that the early
poets and bards dealt with ‘the entire intellectual stock of the age
to which they belonged,’ and that the value of this was measured
by its power of satisfying that ‘craving for adventure and appetite
for the marvellous which has in modern times become the province
of fiction proper’ (History of Greece, part i. ch. xvi.), as well as
the deliberate judgment of Bishop Thirlwall that ‘the kind of
history for which Homer invoked the aid of the Muses was not
chiefly valued as a recital of real events,’ and that ‘if in detached
passages the poet sometimes appears to be relating with the naked
simplicity of truth, we cannot ascribe any higher authority to these
episodes than to the rest of the poem.’ How completely Bishop
Thirlwall sweeps away the whole ‘ Homeric’ narrative of the Trojan
war, we have seen already, p. 197.

On Mr, Gladstone’s second reason that the truthful recording of
events is especially the business ‘of the bard who lives near the
events which he professes to sing,’ it is unnecessary to say more
than that Thucydides denies as positively as Mr. Gladstoue affirms,
thet Homer lived near to the Trojan war (p. 198). Mr. Gladstone’a
fourth reason (the third is a mere inference from the first and
second), is that the poems were always viewed as historical by the
Greeks. ‘This assertion is practically identical with the opinions of
Colonel Mure and Baron Bunsen, which wo have been already
compelled to geject as not only resting on no evidence, but as being
altogether opposed to such evidence as we possess (ps 213). This
summary of evidence I bad published in the Fortnightly Review for
May 1, 1867; and I must maintain with all earnestness that it was

aed


452 APPENDIX.


the duty of every Homeric oritic who deals with this portion of the
subject to examine and accept or refute the evidence of the facts
thus alleged. The mere statement of an opinion onght torcarry no
more weight on one side than on another; but Mr. Paley took his
stand wholly on facta, which proved, or seemed to prove, that the
Greek lyric, tragic, and comic poets either knew nothing or next to
nothing of onr Ilind and Odyssey, or, if they did, deliberately pre-
ferred to them certain other poems to which they resorted for their
materials. (He further stated, that Greek art, down to a time later
than that of Perikles, exhibits precisely the same phenomena.) In
either case the assertions of Mr, Gladstone, Colonel Mure, and
Baron Buneen fall to the ground; and for such assertions a hearing
cannot reasonably be expected, until this evidence bas been met and
refuted. Mr. Gladstone not only takes no notice of it, but ap-
parently even contradicts himself, for, having stated that from the
earliest times we find these poems holding continuously (tho word
is necessary, if the opinion is to have any force) a position of honour
and authority among the Greeks paralleled in no other literature,
he as erts that ‘the antiquity of the present text is not over-
thrown by the fact that the later poets in many instances have
followed other forms of legend in regard to the Troica, for they
would necessarily consult the state of popular feeling from time to
time; and tradition, which as to religion altered so grently after the
time of Homer, would, as to facts and persons, as it is evident, vary
materially according to the sympathies of blood and otherwise at
different periods of Greek history’ (p. 19), Even if we concede
{and it is not necessary that we should concede) that this may
possibly account for the choice of the later poets in a very few
instances, perhaps five or six, Mr. Gladstone's admission is in com-
plete conftict with the position of unparalleled honour and authority
which he attributes to our Iliad and Odyssey throughout the his-
torical ages. But no political sympathies or antipathies cpuld render
necessary that systematic degradation of characters like Odysseus,
Aias, Hektor, to say nothing of Helen, to account for which Mr.
Gladstone felt himself driven to devise a theory in his Homeric
Studies (vol. iii, p. 555). Nor can they explain the phenomena of
Greek literature already adduced (p. 214). Mr. Gladstone is com.
pelled to admit that Thucydides speaks of the Hymn to Apollén as
Homeric, and that ‘doubtless he represents a tradition of his day.’
Bat these hymna are, in Mr. Gladstone's opinion, very inferior to
‘Homer,’ and, therefore, Thucydides and his contemporaries were
mistaken ; and thus the unparelleled honour and authority of our
Tliad and Odyssey are modified into the statement that no other
poems were regarded as Homeric ‘by the general and ouhesitating


AUTHORITY OF ‘ HOMER.’ 453


opinion of the Greeks.” We do not know enough of this general
opinion to warrant any very positive statements with regard to it;
but until it can be proved that the lyric and tragic poets were
acquainted with our Iliad and Odyssey, it can scarcely be affirmed
that the general opinion of the Greeks regarded those poems as
Homeric at all. But, farther, what is the actual evidence that the
poems to which alone Mr. Gladstone will give the name of Homer,
were ‘always viewed as historical by the Greeks’? All that
Herodotos and Thucydides leave of the story is the solitary fact
of a war which lasted ten years; but if they reject its motive and
incidents, the hinges on which the whole action turns together with
all the action itself, in what sense can it be said that they regarded.
the Homeric tale of Troy ag historical? The fact is, that neither
of these great historians could receive that tangled skein of mar-
vels, miracles, and prodigies, which are inextricably intertwined in
the supernatural machinery of these mythical tales. Hence they
summarily rejected the whole, having thus ‘judged on its own
grounds’ Homer’s ‘intermixture of supernatural agency with
human events,’ altbough Mr. Gladstone insists that this intermix-
ture ‘cannot by the laws of historical criticism be held of itself to
overthrow his general credit’ (p. 9). Mr. Gladstone does not tell
us what are the Jaws of historical criticism ; but his conception of
them appears to differ widely from that of Bishop Thirlwall, whose
judgment I have more than once been obliged to cite.

It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that all the reasons adduced
by Mr. Gladstone for regarding the Ilind and Odyssey as narratives
of real events are of the same shadowy and intangible kind, We
are told that the singular correspondence of the genealogies in these
pooms strongly attests the historical trustworthiness of Homer. But
although the lowest links may possibly, in any given case, represent
real persons, these lists all run up to ome god or deified hero ; and
Mr. Grofé has long since asked by what method wo are to doter-
mine the point at which history ends and fable begins in the linka
between the real Hekataios and his divine progenitor (History of
Greece, parti. ch. iv.). In the same spirit the prophecy of Poseidén
(p. 4) is taken as proving, not that a family calling themselves
Aineiadai were reigning in Troas at the time when this portion of
the Tliad (p. 92) was composed or recited, but that the then ruling
chief was the actual grandson of the child of Anchises and of Aphro-
dité, who yisibly interferes to resene her son on the field of battle.
Mr. Gladstone assures us that ‘Homer often introduces curious
legends of genealogy, and in a manner which is palpably inoppor-
tune for the purposes of poetry, and which is, on the other hand,
fally accounted for by the historic aim.’ It is enongh to say


454 APPENDIX.


that these episodes and digressions may be as legitimately used to
prove the composite character of the poems as to uphold their
historical authority.

Of the personality of Homer, and the purity or preservation of our
Homeric text, I need here say but little. On the former Mr, Glad-
stone admits that ‘nothing is known of his person’ (p. 2), nothing
of the time of his birth, or his place of abode, or of any event in his
life (p. 6). The most determined of the separatists could scarcely
desire a thicker darkness; but to the historical critic, these, as we
have already seen (p..174 et seg.), are points of supreme indifference.
Of the text Mr. Gladstone still thinks that ‘we may, as a general
rule, proceed to handle it with a reasonable confidence that the
ground is firm under our feet,’ in spite of the evidence adduced by
‘Mr. Paley for questioning that it was known to the great lyric and
tragic poets of Hellas, Its integrity was guaranteed by ‘ the intense
love of the song of Homer felt by every Greek’ (p. 23), although
the evidence ia unfortunately scanty on which to rest the conclusion
that their Homer was our Homer, neither less nor more.

In short, after an interval of more than ten years, during which
the phase of the controversy has been wholly changed, Mr. Glad-
stone has simply repeated the confession of his old Homeric faith.
Doubtless, his appeal is not to the credulity, but to the judgment of
his countrymen, and if I say that his criticism aa litle upholds the
historical character of our Homeric poems as that of Mr. Blackie,
I do s0 because the evidence of facts seems to me to preclude any
other conclusion.


APPENDIX C.—Page 222.
The Myth of Oidipous. #


A vigorous attempt to overthrow M. Bréal’s explanation of the
myth of Oidipous, Le mythe d’@idipe, 1863, and so to bring dis-
credit on the method and results of Comparative Mythology, has
been made by M. Comparetti, Edipo ela mitologia comparata, Pisa,
1867. His chief argument seems to be the composite nature of this
myth (as of others), which compels him to regard the episode of
the Sphinx as a mere formula and in no way an essential part of
the legend, and to conclude that at the first this incident had nothing
to do with the story of Oidipous. In proof of this adgertion, he
lays stress on the silence of the Homeric poet (Odyssey, xi. 270)
on this subject, while speaking of the woeful fortunes of Epikasté
(Tokasté), and again of the Hesiodic poet (Works and Daye, 163)


THE MYTH OF OIDIPOUS. 455


when referring to the fends of tho sons of Oidipous sbout their
father’s treasures (whether these be sheep or apples). To thisargu-
ment M. Bréal in his answer to M. Comparetti, Révue critique d'His-
toire et de Litterature, Jan, 22, 1870, replies that in the Hesiodic
Theogony the Phix (Sphinx) is expressly mentioned as inflicting
deadly woes on the. Kadmeians, and thus the connexion of the
Sphinx with the mythical history of Thebes is established beyond
question, He adds that if so capital an incident be left out of the
story of Oidipous, any other myth may be pared down to the

- Euemeristic level of plausible fiction. At the same time there is a
sense in which M. Comparetti’s remark that this episode might be
replaced by any other tale of prowess is perfectly true. There is no
reason why Oidipous should not be the slayer of Geryon or Echidna
or Chimaira, or why the Sphinx should not fall by, the sword of
Hipponods, the slayer of Belleros. The assortment of exploits from
which we may make choice is large, but they are all equally mythical
and equally transparent in their meaning.

Having disposed of the Sphinx, M. Comparetti, with the usual
assurance of Euemerists, asserts that Oidipous is a purely human
person, in the story of whose life we shall look in vain for the
marvellous adventures which usually grace the traditions of the gods
or demigods. Here the answer is obvious, and M. Bréal joins issue
on the plain fact that the whole story is full of marvels from the
moment of his birth. His infancy is that of Perseus, Cyrus, Romu-
lus, or Semiramis, his grave in the gardens of the Merciful Beings
representa the treasures of the Nibelungs; and even if we get rid of

“the Sphinx, his victory over the fox of Teumessos, an exploit of the
same kind, still remains.

‘M, Comparetti’s reason for thus banishing the Sphinx from the
story is, that he may thus exhibit the myth as designedly setting
forth the horrors of incest, and so as being purely didactic in its first
intention, # But he adheres to this conclusion not much more con-
sistently than Mr. Blackie to his historical residuum in the Iliad.
Tokasté is not the only wife assigned to Oidipous, and M, Comparetti
hastens to say that the other wives were a later invention, and were
introduced to take sway the feeling of disgust excited by the idea of
the incest. This plea M. Bréal rightly dismisses in very few words :
‘Si tout le récit, comme le suppose M. Comparetti, est destiné &
produire une impression morale, un changement de cette nature (et
les autres femmes d’(Edipe sont déjé mentionées dans l’CEdipodie)
ya contre l*ntention du narrateur.’

Having demolished the Sphinx, M. Comparetti goes on to say
that, far from blinding himself and departing into exile, Oidipous,
according to the oldest form of the legend, continned to reign at


458 APPENDIX.


Thebes. But on this supposition, the idea of a moral intention is
still more completely shut ont. What sort of Nemesis is it that
would allow the doer of such things to go unpunished ?

‘With the failure’ of the attempt to reduce the myth to a caput
mortuum of historical facts the question is carried back into the pro-
vince of Comparative Mythology, and M. Bréal rightly urges that
the problem to be solved is the.recurrence of the incidents, or as M.
Comparetti styles them, the formul» which characterise the myth of
Oidipous, in the stories of other Aryan nations during times which
altogether preclude the idea of any borrowing or artificial adapta-
tion of popular stories.


APPENDIX D.—Page 406.
Swan-Maidens.


Mony of these myths have been gathered together in the Chap-
ters or Swan Maidens and the Knight of the Swan, by Mr. Baring
Gould (Curious Myths, second series), who follows them also into the
mythology of the Turanian tribes. The coincidences thus pointed
out call for the same consideration which should be given to the
traditions of American native tribes when they exhibit any atriking
features in common with those of Aryan races. Some of these
traditions, which resemble the myths of Pandora, Pyrrha and the
dolphin or fish god, have been already referred to. But it would be
as dangerous to assume that myths circulating among Turanian
tribes have been imported by them through intercourse with Aryan
nations, as to assume that these American traditions are the result of
Jesuit teaching. Of the substantial identity of the Turanian myths
cited by Mr. Gould with the stories belonging to Germany and
India there can be no question. Ina Samojed story, akman, find-
ing seven maidens swimming on @ lake, takes up from the bank the
Swan’s dress belonging to one of them, and refuses to yield it up
except on the condition that she becomes his wife and gets for him
the hearts of seven brothers which are hung up by them every night
on their tent pegs. When she brings them, he dashes all bat one on
the ground, and as each falls, the brother to whom it belongs dies. ‘
‘When the eldest whose heart has not been broken awakes and
begs to have it restored, the Samojed says that he must first bring
back to life his mother who had been killed by him. T&e man then
bide him go totthe place where the dead lie, and there he should find
a purse in which is his mother’s soul. ‘Shake the purse over the
dead woman's bones, and she will come to life.’ The Samojed,


SWAN-MAIDENS, 457


having thns recovered his mother, dashes the remaining heart on
the ground, and the last of the seven dies, This is the groundwork
of the story of Puncbkin, and of the Giant who had no Heart in his
Body (book i. chap. viii.). The difficulty in finding the magician’s
heart is here transferred to the discovery of the purse containing
the murdered woman’s soul.

Mr. Gould adds that among the Minussinian Tartars the swan-
maidens assume loathsome as well as beautiful forms, ond appear in
fact, like the Hellenic Harpyiai, the black storm-clonds which sweep
furiously acrose the sky, the swan-shaped daughters of Phorkys
: (Asch. Prom. V. 795). In the hymn addressed to Delos by Kalli.
machos the Muses are still nymphs or watermaidens, the Apsaras
(apa, water, and sar, to go), which bave acquired a faint personality
in the Veda (Max Miiller, Chips, ii. 202), and can scarcely be dis-
tinguished from the swans which attend upon them.

tcbuvoe 88 Be08 pédwovres diaiBol
Mydvioy Tlaxtwhiv deventoarro Murderer
EBoudurs wept ARdov, Exheisar BE Aoxely
povaday Spyder, dedéraros xereqvav, 249-252.

The same phrases which spoke of clouds as swans have given
birth to the myths of Kyknos transformed into a swan by Phoibos,
and of Leds wooed by Zeus in the guise of a white swan (a whito
mist answering to the golden shower in the legend of Danaé). Mr.
Gould, having cited among other northern tales that in which
Vélund, or Wayland the Smith, wins as his wife the maiden Angel.
burga, whose dress of dove's feathers he had stolen as she was bath-
ing, thinks that to such beings we must trace back the angels with
flowing white robes and large pinions, which Christendom has
derived immediately from the later Greck and Roman representa-
tions of Victory. In his chapter on the Knight of the Swan, Mr,
Gould has brought together some medieval versions of the myth
which Soythey has versified in his ballad of Rudiger. These ver-
sions turn on the main incident in the stories of Urvasi and Psyché.
The bride must never ask her husband’s name; and the old sug-
gestion that the lover is in reality » monster is travestied into the
remark of the Duchess of Oleves: ‘This Lohengrin (the Puriravas
of the tale) may be a strong man and a Christian ; but who knows
whence he has sprang?’ These words awaken the curiosity of the
Duchess of Brabant, who pays the penalty of Psyché. Lohengrin
accordingly leaves to his children his horn and his sword, and to his
wife the rigg which had been given to him by his mother, and de-
parts never to return. The story of Matabrane in the romance of
Hielias, the Knight of the Swan, is that of many jealous stepmothers
who seek the death of: the light-children (Gould, ‘id. $15; Frere,


458 APPENDIX.


Deccan Days, 59). This Helias becomes Duke of Bonillon, and his
daughter is the mother of the heroic Godfrey. So pertinaciously
do the old fables of nymphs and harpios and Erinyes keep their hold
on the annals of an historical age.
From the image of the Swan to that of the Phaiskian ship, which
needs neither rudder nor sail, the transition is obvious and easy.
_ On such s ship Odysseus is borne to his home, and in such a vessel
Scild, the son of Sceaf (the skiff) is carried to the coast of Scandia
where he becomes king. ‘In Beownlf it is added that Scild
reigned long, and when he saw that ho was about to die, he bade
his men lay him fully armed in a boat, and thrust him out to sea.
. . . And the same ia told of Baldar,’—Gould, ibid, 386, The inci-
dent is repeated in the case of Elaine and Arthur.


APPENDIX E.—Page 422.
The Name Helené.


I am indebted to Professor Max Miller for the following note.

‘The only objection which might be made by those who are not
acquainted with the latest researches on the so-called digamma is
that iA¢va is among those words, which, according to the testimony
of Greek and Latin grammarians, had an initial digamma (ef. Tryph,
a0, det. § 11; Priscianus,i. p. 21, xiii. p. 574; Abrens, De Gr. Ling.
Dialectis, lib. i. pp. 30, 31). Now because the so-called digamma
(the F, the old vau, the Latin F) corresponds in most cases to a
Sanskrit and Latin V, it has become the fashion to use digamma
as almost synonymous with the labial semi-vowel v in Greek,
Benfey, however, in his article on éearepog (in Kuhn's ‘ Zeitschrift
fir vergleichende Sprachforschung,’ viii. 381,) pointed out that
what is generally, though not correctly, called digamma jp Greek,
represents at least threo different letters in the cognate languages,
v, 8, y. These three letters became evanescent in later Greek ; and
when either on the evidence of the Homeric metre, or on the
evidence of grammarians, or even on the evidence of inscriptions,
certain Greek words are said to have had an initial digamma, we
aust be prepared to find, corresponding to this so-called digamma,
not only the.v, but also the e, and y, in Sanskrit and Latin. Greek
scholars are apt to put F, whereas the metre proves the former
presence of some one initial consonant. When howeveg we find
Fe, the F here zepresents a lost s, as proved by the Latin sex,
Sanskrit shat. When we find in Homer cde &¢, the og is lengthened
because dc had an initial y, as proved by the Sanskrit yat. In


LYKANTHROPY. 459


the same manner, the fact that grammarians quote Fedéva, nay, even
the occurrence of Fedéva in ancient inscriptions, would by no means
prove that Helené was originally Velena, and was derived from the
root svar, but only that Helen’ might in the cognate languages
begin with », , ory. The statement of Priscianua, ‘Sciendum tamen
qudd hoo ipsam (digamma) Alles quidem ubique loco aspirationis
ponebant, effugientes spiritus asperitatem,’ is more correct than was
at one time supposed even by comparative grammarians; and as the
asper in Greek commonly represents an original ¢ or y, the Holic
digamma became the exponent of sand y, as well as of the v for
which it stood originally.’


APPENDIX F.—Page 429,


Lykanthropy.


Tam speaking, of course, of the special form of the superstition,
not of enormities of which depraved appetitesand unbridled passions
may have made men guilty. The question to be answered is, whence
came the notions that men were changed into wolves, bears, and
birds, and not into lions, fishes, or reptiles; and to this question
Comparative Mythology seems to me to furnish a complete answer ;
nor can I disavow my belief that this loathsome vampire supersti-
tion was in the first instance purely the result of the verbal equivo-
cation which, as we have seen, has furnished so fruitful a source of
myths, I cannot, in the face of this evidence, believe that the
choice of the wolf or the bear as the form to be assumed by the
patient is ‘a mere matter of taste,’ as Mr. Gould says in a work
which will be most regretted by those who most value his volumes
on the myths of the middle oges. Whether there be, as Mr. Gould
maintains, ‘an innate craving for blood in certain natures,’ is a point
which lide concerns us here, although we might suppose that if
such an impulse be according to the hypothesis innate (i. e. placed
there by God himself), the impulse could not be wrong, and that
hence such persona were not fit subjects for punishment. But the
evidence for the case breaks down, and much of the evidence adduced
by Mr. Gould is really no evidence at all. Thus he tells us that, ‘as
every one knows, Jupiter changed himself into a bull, Hecuba became
8 bitch, Actwon a stag, the comrades of Ulysses were transformed
into swine, and the daughters of Preetus fled through the fields,
believing reraselves to be cows, and would not allow any one to
come near them lest they should be caught and yoked.’ —‘ Werewolf,’
p. 12. These myths belong to a different class. The persons so


460 APPENDIX.


transformed neither did nor attempted to do any harm; but the
peculiar mischievous form of lykanthropy is found developed with
snfficient clearness in the pages of Pausanias, Henoe we may dismiss
the story told by Augustine of the old woman who turned men into
asses, or of the golden ass of Appuleius; and the tale related by
Mr. Gould of the Bjorn (bear) who ‘loyes the Carle's daughter,’ and
taking her into a cave tells her that ‘by day he is a beast, by night a
man,’ ib. 24, is only a clamsy version of Beauty and the Beast, of
Erds and Psyché. Mr. Gould’s faith is large. He gives credit to
‘the unanimous testimony of the old Norse historians that the
berserk rage was extinguished by beptiam, and as Christianity
advanced, the number of the berserkera decreased,’ ib. 40, The
stories of bearsurks have probably as much and as little truth as
the stgry of the frenzy of Herakles, the madness of the one and the
rage of the other being the same thing; and the unanimous testi-
mony of the Norse historians is worth as much and as little as the
convictions of Glanvil and Hale on the reality of witchcraft. Such
a canon of evidence would compel us to receive the whole Catholic
hagiology as veritable history. That Mr. Gould should have thought
it neces ary to give the loathsome details of the story of the
Maréchal de Retz, which is simply the myth of Phalaris, is the
more to be deplored, as this man according to the tale never sup-
posed himself to be either a wolf or a brute of any other sort. The
account of the woman who single-handed and unaided kills six
hundred and fifty girls to bathe in their blood brings before us a
series of exploits worthy of a Herakles; and the story of Mr. J.
Holloway of the Bank of England is simply an impudent repetition
of the myth of Hermotimos of Klazomenai.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


LONDOR: PRINTED BY
‘SPOTTTSWOODE AND cO,, NEW-STEXET SQUARED
AND PARLIAMENT STEEZZ
