In Northern Mists, Vol. II (Fridtjof Nansen, 1911)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1911 first English edition (https://archive.org/details/innorthernmistsa02nans). Nansen's history of Arctic exploration — from Marco Polo and the medieval North to Cabot and the search for the passage.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

IN 

NORTHERN  MISTS 


IDTJOF   NANSEN 


;i: 


Marine  (Biffh^ical  Ltfhonitortj^  Librarij^ 

'VleoM  Oiok,  Mmochuictti 

'VorAGK  •  OF  •  'BVPIORATION 


Coiiccted 
^EWCOfAB  UhOMPSON  MoNTjOMERY 

(idoj-me) 

O^hflMfka  archttut,  mjfhc^  of 
nhcmas  Oiarnson  Mcntgmcrij  (1673-19121 
(MBL  mmtiQdtor,  md  <Vmcilk  ^rmim 
CMontgomcrt^  ilS74'l956X  MBL  Uhramn, 

^jft  of  tharsons  0(uQh  iMonfQomcrt^,  MfD. 
and  ^aumond  'B.  Montgomery  — 1967. 


IN  NORTHERN  MISTS 

VOL.  II 


IN  NORTHERN  MISTS 

ARCTIC  EXPLORATION  IN  EARLY  TIMES 


BY 


FRIDTJOF   NANSEN 

G.C.V.O.,  D.Sc,  D.C.L.,  Ph.D. 
Professor  of  Oceanography  in  the  University 
of  Christiania,  Etc. 


AUTHOR  OF  "FARTHEST  NORTH" 

TRANSLATED  BY  ARTHUR  G.  CHATER 

IN  TWO  VOLUMES 

WITH    FRONTISPIECES  IN   COLOR,   AND   OVER   ONE 

HUNDRED  AND   FIFTY   ILLUSTRATIONS 

IN   BLACK-AND-WHITE 


VOL.  II 


NEW  YORK 

FREDERICK    A.   STOKES    COMPANY 

igii 


Copyright,  igii ,  by 
Frederick  A.  Stokes  Company 


All  rights  reserved,  including  that    of  translation  into  foreign 
languages,  including  the  Scandtnwvtan 


Nonjember,  igii 


CONTENTS   OF  VOL.  II. 


CHAPTER  IX    (Continued) 

WINELAND    THE    GOOD,    THE   FORTUNATE    ISLES,   AND  THE  DISCOVERY 

OF   America i 

Wineland — The  African  islands — The  vine  in  North  America — The 
wild  wheat — Encounters  with  the  Skraslings  in  Wineland — The 
Skraslings  are  originally  mythical  beings — Borrowed  features — The 
maggot-sea — The  saga  narrative  a  mosaic — Features  that  appear 
genuine — Surest  historical  evidence — Are  Frode's  evidence — Runic 
stone  from  Honen — Bishop  Eric  seeks  Wineland — Wineland  in  me- 
diaeval literature — Wineland  in  Faroese  lays — Helluland  in  legend — 
Voyage  to  Markland,  1347 — Norse  ballgame  in  America — Difficulties 
in  the  way  of  colonization — Hvitramanna-land — Origin  of  the  name 
—The  name  Great-Ireland — Gudleif's  voyage — "  Gu6-Leif r  "  and 
"  Leifr  hinn  Heppni " — Voyage  of  eight  adventurers  in  Edrisi — Re- 
semblance between  Edrisi's  tale  and  Gudleif's  voyage — Irish  myth — 
Northern  tales — ^Japanese  fairy-tale — Retrospect — Postscript. 

CHAPTER  X 

Eskimo  and  Skr^ling 66 

Distribution — Original  home — Earlier  distribution — Period  of  immi- 
gration into  Greenland — Routes  of  immigration — Meeting  of 
Eskimo  and  Europeans — The  fairy  nature  of  the  Skraelings — The 
oldest  authorities  on  the  Skraelings — Silence  about  Skraelings  in  Ice- 
landic literature — Allusions  to  Skraslings  in  Icelandic  literature — Allu- 
sions to  Eskimo  in  European  literature — Silence  of  the  "  King's 
Mirror"  about  the  Skraelings — Summary  of  the  allusions  to  Skrae- 
lings in  Greenland — The  Skraelings  of  Wineland — Ultimate  fate  of 
the  Eskimo. 

CHAPTER   XI 

The  Decline  of  the  Norse  Settlements  in  Greenland.     .    .      95 

Decline  of  the  Greenland  settlements — Decline  in  reproduction — 
Cessation  of  communication  with  Europe — Gisle  Oddsson's  annals 
on  the  decline  of  the  Greenlanders — Conversion  of  the  Greenlanders 
into  Eskimo — Norse  traces  among  the  Greenland  Eskimo — Norse 
words  in  the  Eskimo  language — Complaints  of  apostasy  in  notices  of 


CONTENTS 


CHAPTER   XI 

Greenland— War  of  extermination  improbable— Ivar  Bardsson  on  the 
Western  Settlement— Eskimo  attack  in  1379— Bjorn  Jorsalafarer's 
account,  1 385-1 387— Papal  letter  of  1448  on  an  Eskimo  attack— Es- 
kimo legends  of  fighting  with  Norsemen— Unwarlike  disposition  of 
the  Eskimo— No  tradition  of  a  war  of  extermination  can  be  proved— 
Last  known  voyage  to  the  Eastern  Settlement— Trade  with  Norway's 
tributary  countries — Possibility  of  voyages  to  Greenland  in  the  15th 
century  (?)— Papal  letter  on  Greenland,  1492— Pining's  possible  voy- 
ages to  Greenland— A  new  document  on  Pining— Johannes  Scolvus's 
voyage  to  Greenland — Pining,  Pothorst  and  Scolvus  on  the  same 
voyage. 

CHAPTER    XII 

Expeditions  of  the  Norwegians  to  the  White  Sea,  Voyages  in 

THE  Polar  Sea.  Whaling  and  Sealing •     13S 

Expeditions  to  the  White  Sea— Harold  Grafeld's  expedition  to  the 
Dvina— Trollebotten— Thore  Hund's  expedition  to  Bjarmeland— Ex- 
pedition to  Bjarmeland,  121 7— Expedition  to  Bjarmeland,  1222— 
Warlike  and  peaceful  relations  with  the  White  Sea  in  the  twelfth 
century  and  later — Early  connection  of  the  Bjarmas  with  southern 
civilization— The  Frisian  nobles'  Polar  expedition— King  Harold's 
voyage  to  the  maelstrom — Whirlpool — Maelstrom  among  the  Irish — 
Maelstrom  in  Norway;  the  Moskenstrom — Possible  truth  in  Harold's 
ocean  voyage — The  Norwegians  as  whalers — Harpoon-fishing  in  the 
Mediterranean  in  antiquity — Albertus  Magnus  on  walrus-hunting — 
Hunting  expeditions  of  the  Norwegians  eastward  and  northward  in 
the  Polar  Sea— Saxo  Grammaticus's  Farther  Bjarmeland— Discovery 
of  Svalbard- Svalbard  probably  Spitzbergen— The  Russians*  arctic 
sealing  a  continuation  of  the  Norwegians' — Russians  and  Lapps 
learned  walrus-hunting  from  the  Norwegians — Mention  of  white 
bears  in  Norway — Decline  of  the  Norwegians'  sea-hunting— Decline 
of  Norwegian  navigation. 

CHAPTER  XIII 

The  North  in  maps  and  Geographical  Works  of  the  Middle 

AGES 182 

Oldest  mediaeval  maps— The  wheel-map  type— The  Beatus  map— 
Sallust-maps— The  North  on  known  wheel-maps  of  the  Middle  Ages 
— Higden's  work  and  the  Geographia  Universalis— The  Cottoniana 
map — Macrobius's  zone-maps — The  Arabs'  many  connections — The 
Arabs'  sense  for  geography — The  Arabs'  connection  with  the  North 
Ibn  Khordadbah,  A.D.  885— Ibn  al-Faqih,  900  A.D.— Ibn  al-Bahlul, 
910  A.D.— Qodama— Ibn  Ruste,  912  A.D.— Al-Mas'udi,  before  950 
A.D.— Al-Biruni,   1030  A.D.— Al-Gazal's   voyage   to   the   Magus— Al- 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 
Idrisi,  1 154  A.D.— Ibn  Sa'id,  thirteenth  century— Qazwini,  thirteenth 
century— 'Ash- Shirazi,  circa  1300— Dimashqi,  circa  1300— Book  of 
Wonders,  tenth  century— The  Arabs  and  the  compass— Oldest  au- 
thorities on  the  compass  in  Europe — Oldest  sea-charts — Extent  of 
the  compass-charts— Carignano's  chart,  circa  1300 — Sanudo's  work 
and  Pietro  Vesconte's  charts,  circa  1320 — Dalorto's  map,  1325 — The 
Isle  of  Brazil— Dulcert's  (Dalorto's)  map  of  1339— Viladeste's  chart 
of  1413— The  Medici  Atlas,  1351— Pizigano's  map,  1367— Scandina- 
vian view  of  Greenland  as  mainland— Saxo  on  the  far  North— The 
tale  of  Halli  Geit — Land  at  the  North  Pole— The  Outer  Ocean— Gin- 
nungagap — Saxo  Grammaticus — The  King's  Mirror,  circa  1240  (?) — 
Fire  derived  from  force  (labor) — The  inland  ice  of  Greenland— The 
glaciers  of  Greenland  a  pole  of  maximum  cold— Claudius  Clausson 
Swart,  born  1388— Clavus's  maps— Mystification  in  Clavus's  geo- 
graphical names— Different  views  of  Clavus's  maps  and  their  origin 
— Sources  and  genesis  of  the  Nancy  map— Clavus's  later  map  and 
text,  and  their  genesis— Clavus's  west  coast  of  Greenland  taken  di- 
rectly from  the  Medici  map— The  position  of  Iceland— Clavus's 
merits — Clavus's  influence  on  later  cartography — Nicolaus  Germanus, 
circa  1460-1470 — Henricus  Martellus,  circa  149a — Ilia  verde — Las- 
caris's  journey  to  Norway  and  Iceland,  fifteenth  century— Fifteenth 
century  maps  of  the  world — Walsperger's  map  of  1448 — The  Borgia 
map,  after  1410 — Fra  Mauro's  map,  1458 — Genoese  mappamundi,  1447 
— Globes  of  the  fifteenth  century — Behaim's  globe,  1492 — Laon  globe, 
1493- 

CHAPTER   XIV 

John  Cabot  and  the  English  Discovery  of  North  America   .     .    agi 

Awakening  of  geographical  research — Connection  of  Bristol  with 
Iceland — The  Isle  of  Brazil — Expedition  to  find  Brazil,  1480 — Gio- 
vanni Caboto — John  Cabot  arrives  in  England,  circa  1490? — Cabot's 
letters  patent,  1496 — Cabot's  preparations  and  plans — Sebastian 
Cabot's  participation  in  1497  doubtful — Most  important  authorities 
for  the  voyage  of  1497 — Pasqualigo's  letter  of  Aug.  23,  1497 — Son- 
cino's  letters  of  Aug.  24  and  of  Dec.  18,  1497 — Toby's  chronicle — 
Cabot's  western  course  in  1497 — Cabot  sighted  America  Jime  24,  1497 
— La  Cosa's  map  represents  Cabot's  discoveries  in  1497 — Cabot's 
discovery,  according  to  La  Cosa's  map,  is  probably  Nova  Scotia — 
Cabot's  homeward  voyage,  1497 — Legend  on  the  map  of  1544 — The 
island  of  St.  John — Cabot's  return — Cabot's  voyage  of  1498 — Au- 
thorities for  the  voyage  of  1498 — Puebla's  letter  of  July,  1498 — 
Ayala's  letter  of  July  25,  1498 — Cottonian  Chronicle — Fabyan's  ac- 
count— John  Cabot  probably  never  returned  from  the  voyage  of 
1498 — Sebastian  Cabot's  voyages  doubtful — Beginning  of  the  New- 
foundland fishery — Expeditions  from  Bristol  in  1501  and  following 
years — Expedition  in  1502 — English  voyage  in  1503 — Accounts  of  a 
voyage  of  Sebastian  Cabot  in  1508- 1509 — Another  doubtful  voyage  of 

ix 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Sebastian  Cabot  in  1516  or  1517 — Henry  VIII.'s  attempted  expedi- 
tion in  1521 — Cabot's  discovery  before  its  time. 

CHAPTER   XV 
The  Portuguese  Discoveries  in  the  North-west 345 

Voyages  of  the  brothers  Cortereal — Early  attempts  of  the  Portu- 
guese to  find  new  lands — Boundary  between  the  Portuguese  and 
Spanish  spheres — Letters  patent  to  Joao  Fernandez,  1499 — Letters 
patent  to  Caspar  Cortereal,  1500 — Pasqualigo's  letter  to  the  Council 
at  Venice,  Oct.  1501 — Pasqualigo's  letter  to  his  brothers,  Oct.  1501 — 
Cantino's  letter,  Oct.  1501 — The  Cantino  map,  1502 — Letters  patent 
to  Miguel  Cortereal,  1502  or  1503  (?) — Portuguese  chart  of  about 
1520 — Later  notices — Caspar  Cortereal  not  the  discoverer  of  Green- 
land (Labrador) — Joao  Fernandez  sighted  Greenland,  1500  (?) — Gas- 
par  Cortereal — Cortereal's  voyage  of  1500 — Cortereal's  voyage  of 
1501 — Late  authorities  of  the  sixteenth  century — Galvano  on  G. 
Cortereal — De  Goes  on  G.  Cortereal — Mention  of  the  natives  in 
Pasqualigo  and  Cantino — Evidence  of  the  Cantino  map  as  to  the 
Portuguese  discoveries — Construction  of  the  Cantino  map^Varia- 
tion  in  the  Portuguese  representation  of  Greenland — The  King  map, 
circa  1502 — The  Oliveriana  map,  after  1503 — Miguel  Cortereal's  voy- 
age, 1503 — The  King  despatches  ships — Vasqueanes  Cortereal  refused 
leave  to  sail. 

Conclusion        379 

List  of  the  More  Important  Works  Referred  To     .     .     .     .     •     384 

INDEX •    397 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND  MAPS  IN  VOL.  IL 
Reproduction  in  color  of  a  drawing  by  the  author Frontispiece 

PAGE 

From  an  Icelandic  MS.,  fourteenth  century i 

The  conception  of  the  northern  and  western  lands  and  islands 

»       in   Norse   literature 2 

Icelandic  representation  of  the  northern  and  western  lands  as 
connected  with  one  another,  by   Sigurd  Stefansson,  circa 

1590    7 

Eskimos  cutting  up  a  whale 12 

Fight  with  mythical  creatures  [from  an  Icelandic  MS] 15 

Felling  trees.     Marginal  decoration  of  the  Jonsbok   (fifteenth 

century)     24 

The  existing  drawing  of  the  runic  stone  from  Honen,  Ringerike  27 

Map  by  the  Icelander  Jon  Gudmundsson,  born  1574 34 

The  game  of  Lacrosse  among  the  Menominee  Indians 39 

Game  of  ball  among  the  Eskimo  of  Greenland 41 

Distribution  of  the  Eskimo   [after  W.  Thalbitzer,  1904] 67 

Kayak-fishers  and   a  women's  boat   ("  umiak  ") 70 

Carved  walrus  of  Eskimo  work,  of  the  twelfth  century  (?) 80 

Eskimo  playing  ball  with  a  stuffed  seal 85 

Ruins  of  church  at  Kakortok  in  the  Eastern  Settlement  [after 

Th.    Groth]     103 

Salmon-fishing  in  Vazdal  by  Ketilsfjord  in  the  Eastern  Set- 
tlement      104 

From  an  Icelandic  MS.  of  the  fourteenth  century 109 

A  portion  of  Gourmont's  map  of  1548 122 

The  rock  Hvitserk,  and  a  fight  with  a  Greenland  Pygmy  [after 

Olaus  Magnus,   1557] 123 

Bjarmas  and  Skridfinns  fighting  on  ski  and  riding  reindeer  [after 

Olaus  Magnus,   1555] i39 

On  snow-shoes  through  the  border-lands  of  Norway  [after  Olaus 

Magnus,  1555]   141 

Cutting  up  a  whale  [from  an  Icelandic  MS.  of  the  fourteenth 

century  of  Magnus  Lanaboter's  Icelandic  Land  Law] ....  155 

Cutting  up  a  whale  [from  an  Icelandic  MS.] 157 

Cutting  up  a  whale   [from  an  Icelandic  MS.  of  the  sixteenth 

century]     162 

xi 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND    MAPS  IN  VOL.  II. 

PAGE 

Countries  and  seas  discovered  by  the  Norwegians  and  Icelanders     167 
Map  of  the  world  from  Albi  in  Languedoc,  also  called  the  Mero- 
vingian map  (eighth  century) 183 

Beatus  map,  from  Osma,   1203 184 

Northern  Europe  on  Heinrich  of  Mainz's  map,  at  Cambridge 

(mo)     185 

Northern  Europe  on  the  Hereford  map  (circa  1280) 186 

Northern  part  of  the  Psalter  map  (thirteenth  century) 187 

Northern  Europe  on  the  Lambert  map  at  Ghent  (before  1125) . .     188 
Ranulph   Higden's  map  of  the  world,  in   London   (fourteenth 

century)     189 

Edrisi's  representation  of  Northern  Europe,  put  together,  and 

much  reduced,  from  eight  of  his  maps 203 

Northern    portion    of    Carignano's    chart    (a    few    years    later 

than   1300)    221 

Northern  Europe  in  Vesconte's  mappamundi  (1320),  in  the  Vat- 
ican  [after  Kretschmer,  1891] 223 

Northern  Europe  in  the  mappamundi  in  the  MS.  of  Sanudo's 

work  at  Oxford  [Bjornbo,  1910,  p.  123] 224 

Northern   Europe   in   the   mappamundi   in   the   Paris   MS.    of 

Sanudo's  work   [Bjornbo,   1910,  p.   123] 225 

The  North  on  Dalorto's  map  of  1325 226 

North-western  Europe  on  the  wheel-shaped  compass-chart  at 

Modena  (circa  1350)    231 

North-western  Europe  on  the  anonymous  Catalan  mappamundi 
of  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  in  the  National 

Library   at   Florence 232,   233 

The  north-western  portion  of  the  mappamundi  in  the  Medicean 

Marine  Atlas  (1351) 236 

From  the  Bayeux  tapestry,  eleventh  century 237 

From  the  Bayeux  tapestry,  eleventh  century 239 

From  an  Icelandic  MS.  of  1363 241 

Marginal  drawing  in  the  Flateyjarbok   (1387-1394) 244 

Norwegian  MS.  of  the  Gulathings  law  (fourteenth  century) 246 

The  Nancy  map.     A  copy,  of  1427,  of  Claudius  Clavus's  first 

map  of  the  North 248 

Copy,  of  about  1467,  of  Claudius  Clavus's  later  map 251 

Scandinavia  on  the  map  of  Europe  in  the  Medici  Atlas  of  1351. .     260 
The  north-western  portion   of  the  map  of  Europe  in  Andrea 

Bianco's  atlas  of   1436 267 

Map  constructed  by  Dr.  Bjornbo  after  Clavus's  later  description 

(the  Vienna  text) 273 

xii 


ILLUSTRATIONS  AND   MAPS  IN  VOL,  XL 

PAGE 

North-western  portion  of  Nicolaus  Germanus's  first  revision  of 

Ptolemy's  map  of  the  world  (after  1466) 277 

Map  of  the  North  by  Nicolaus  Germanus  (before  1482) 278 

Part  of  a  Catalan  compass-chart  of  the  fifteenth  century,  pre- 
served at   Milan 280 

Europe  on  the  mappamundi  in  the  Geneva  MS.  of  Sallust  of 

about  1450    282 

North-western  portion  of  Andreas   Walsperger's   mappamundi 

of  1448 283 

North-western  portion  of  Fra  Mauro's  mappamundi  of  1457-59, 

preserved   at   Venice 285 

Northern  Europe  on  the  Genoese  mappamundi  of  1447  or  1457. .     287 

Northernmost  Europe  and  the  north  polar  regions  on  Behaim's 

globe,  1492   288 

A  portion  of  the  Laon  globe  of  1493.     [After  d'Avezac] 290 

Hypothetical  chart  of  the  variation  of  the  compass  in  the  At- 
lantic,  circa   1500 308 

North-western  portion  of  Juan  de  la  Cosa's  map  of  1500. ...     310,  311 

Northern  portion  of  the  map  of  the  world  of  1544,  attributed 

to   Sebastian   Cabot 320 

Portion    of    Pedro    Reinel's   map,   beginning    of   the    sixteenth 

century    321 

Portion  of  Michael  Lok's  map,  London,  1582 323 

North-western  portion  of  Robert  Thome's  map,  of  1527   (copy 

of  a  Spanish  map  of  the  world) 334 

Portion  of  the  "  Cantino  "  map  of  1502,  preserved  at  Modena  350,  351 

Portion  of  an  anonymous  Portuguese  chart  of  about  1520,  pre- 
served at  Munich 354 

Portion   of   Diego   Ribero's  map   of    1529 357 

Portion  of  Maggiolo's  map  of  1527  [Harrisse,  1892] 358 

The   newly   discovered   north-western   lands   made   continuous 

with  Asia,  on  Maggiolo's  map  of  151 1 359 

The   eastern    coast-line    of    Newfoundland,    with    possibly   the 

southern  part  of  Labrador 364 

Reconstruction  of  an  equidistant  chart  on  which  the  coasts  are 
laid  down  from  magnetic  courses  without  regard  to  the 
variation    371 

North-western   portion   of    the    "  King "   map,    an    anonymous 

Italian  mappamundi  of  about  1502 373 

Northern  portion  of  an  anonymous  Italian  chart,  a  little  later 

than  1503,     In  the  Oliveriana  Library  at  Pesaro 375 

Northern    portion    of    an    Italian    map,    possibly    drawn    by 

Pilestrina,   151 1 37y 

xiii 


[From  an  Icelandic  MS.  (fourteenth  century)] 

CHAPTER   IX 

[continued] 

WINELAND  THE  GOOD,  THE  FORTUNATE  ISLES, 
AND  THE  DISCOVERY  OF  AMERICA 

ACONFIRIVIATION  of  the  identity  of  Wineland  and  the 
Insulas  Fortunatae,  which  in  classical  legend  lay  to  the 
west  of  Africa,  occurs  in  the  Icelandic  geography  (in  MSS.  of  the 
fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries),  which  may  partly  be  the 
work  of  Abbot  Nikulas  of  Thvera  (ob.  1159)  (although  perhaps 
not  the  part  here  quoted),  where  we  read: 

"South  of  Greenland  is  'Helluland,'  next  to  it  is  *  Markland,*  and  then  it 
is  not  far  to  '  Vinland  hit  G6(5a,'  which  some  think  to  be  connected  with  Africa 
(and  if  this  be  so,  then  the  outer  ocean  [i.e.,  the  ocean  surrounding  the  disk  of 
the  earth]  must  fall  in  between  Vinland  and  Markland)."  ^ 

This  idea  of  the  connection  with  Africa  seems  to  have  been 
general  in  Iceland ;  it  may  appear  surprising,  but,  as  will  be  seen, 
it  finds  its  natural  explanation  in  the  manner  here  stated.  It  also 
appears  in  Norway.  Besides  a  reference  in  the  "  King's  Mirror," 
the  following  passage  in  the  "  Historia  Norvegiae,"  relating  to 
Greenland  is  of  particular  importance : 

"  This  country  was  discovered  and  settled  by  the  Telensians  [i.e.,  the  Ice- 
landers] and  strengthened  with  the  Catholic  faith;  it  forms  the  end  of  Europe 
towards  the  west,  nearly  touches  the  African  Islands  [' Africanas  insulas'] 
where  the  returning  ocean  overflows"  (i.e.,  falls  in). 


1  Cf.  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  pp.  216,  220;  G.  Storm,  i? 
part  (in  parenthesis)  does  not  occur  in  the  oldest  MS. 


p.  12.    The  latter 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 


It  is  clear  that  "  Africanae  Insulae "  is  here  used  directly 
as  a  name  instead  of  Wineland,  in  connection  with  Markland 
and  Helluland,  as  in  the  Icelandic  geography.  But  the 
African   Islands    (i.e.    originally   the   Canary   Islands)    were   in 

fact  the  Insulse 
Fortunatae,  in 
connection  with 
the  Gorgades  and 
the  Hesperides ; 
and  thus  we  have 
here  a  direct  proof 
that  they  were 
looked  upon  as  the 
same. 


G.  Storm  [1890]  and 
A.  A.  Bjornbo  [1909, 
pp.  229,  f.]  have  sought 
to  explain  the  connec- 
tion of  Wineland  with 
Africa  as  an  attempt  on 
the  part  of  the  Ice- 
landic geographers  to 
unite  new  discoveries 
of  western  lands  with 
the  classical-mediaeval 
conceptions  of  the  continents  as  a  continuous  disk  of  earth  with  an  outer  sur- 
rounding ocean.  But  even  if  such  "  learned  "  ideas  prevailed  in  Iceland  and 
Norway  [cf.  the  "  King's  Mirror"],  it  would  nevertheless  be  unnatural  to  unite 
Africa  and  Wineland,  which  lay  near  Hvitramanna-land,  six  days'  sail  west  of 
Ireland,  unless  there  were  other  grounds  for  doing  so.  Although  agreeing  on 
the  main  point,  Dr.  Bjornbo  maintains  (in  a  letter  to  me)  that  the  Icelanders 
may  have  got  their  continental  conception  from  Isidore  himself,  who  asserted 
the  dogma  of  the  threefold  division  of  the  continental  circle;  and  the  question 
whether  Wineland  was  African  or  not  depended  upon  whether  it  came  south 
or  north  of  the  line  running  east  and  west  through  the  Mediterranean.  But 
the  same  Isidore  also  described  the  Insulae  Fortunatae  and  other  countries  as 
islands  in  the  ocean,  and  his  dogma  could  not  thus  have  hindered  Wineland 
from  being  regarded  as  an  island  like  other  islands  [cf.  Adam  of  Bremen's 
islands],  but  why  then  precisely  African?  Besides,  the  Icelandic  geography 
and  the  "  Historia  Norvegiae  "  represents  two  different  conceptions,  one  as  a 
2 


The  conception  of  the  northern  and  western  lands 
and  islands  in  Norse  literature 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

continent,  the  other  as  islands.  It  cannot,  therefore,  have  been  Isidore's  con- 
tinental dogma  that  caused  them  both  to  assume  the  country  to  be  African.  It 
seems  to  me  that  no  other  explanation  is  here  possible  than  that  given  above. 

It  might  be  objected  to  the  view  that  "  Vinland  hit 
GoSa "  originally  meant  "  Insulae  Fortunatae,"  that  several 
sorts  of  wild  grape  are  found  on  the  east  coast  of  North 
America;  it  might  therefore  be  believed  that  the  Green- 
landers  really  went  so  far  and  discovered  these.  Storm, 
indeed,  assumed  that  the  wild  vine  grew  on  the  outer  east 
coast  of  Nova  Scotia;  but  he  is  unable  to  adduce  any  certain 
direct  evidence  of  this,  although  he  gives  [1887,  p.  48]  a 
statement  of  the  Frenchman  Nicolas  Denys  in  1672,  which 
points  to  the  wild  vine  having  grown  in  the  interior  of  the 
country.^  He  also  mentions  several  statements  of  recent 
date  that  v/ild-growing  vines  of  one  kind  or  another  have 
been  observed  near  Annapolis  and  in  the  interior  of  the 
country,  but  none  on  the  south-east  coast.  Prof.  N.  Wille 
informs  me  that  in  the  latest  survey  of  the  flora  of  North 
America  "  Vitis  vulpina  '*  is  specified  as  occurring  in  Nova 
Scotia;  but  nothing  is  said  as  to  locality.  The  American 
botanist,  M.  L.  Fernald  [19 10,  pp.  19  f.],  on  the  other  hand, 
thinks  that  the  wild  vine,  "  Vitis  vulpina,"  is  not  certainly 
known  to  the  east  of  the  valley  of  the  St.  John  in  New  Bruns- 
wick (see  map,  Vol.  I,  p.  335),  where  it  is  rare  and  only  found  in 
the  interior.  From  this  we  may  conclude  that  even  if  it  should 
really  be  found  on  the  outer  south-east  coast  of  Nova  Scotia, 
it  must  have  been  very  rare  there,  and  could  not  possibly 
have  been  a  conspicuous  feature  which  might  have  been 
especially  mentioned  along  with  the  wheat.  But  even  if  we 
might  assume  that  the  saga  was  borne  out  to  this  extent,  it 
would  be  one  of  those  accidental  coincidences  which  often  occur. 
It  must,  of  course,  be  admitted  to  be  a  strange  chance  that 
the  world  of  classical  legend  should  have  fertile  lands  or 
islands    far    in    the    western    ocean,    and    that    Isidore    should 

1  Storm  thinks  that  Sir  William  Alexander's  "  red  wineberries "  from  the 
south-east  coast  of  Nova  Scotia  (in  1624)  would  be  grapes,  but  this  is  uncertain. 

3 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

describe  the  self-grown  vine  and  the  unsown  cornfields  in  these 
Fortunate  Isles,  and  that  long  afterwards  fertile  lands  and 
islands,  where  wild  vines  and  various  kinds  of  wild  com  grew, 
should  be  discovered  in  the  same  quarter.  Since  we  have  the 
choice,  it  may  be  more  reasonable  to  assume  that  the 
Icelanders  got  their  wine  from  Isidore,  or  from  the  same 
vats  that  he  drew  his  from,  than  that  they  fetched  it  from 
America.  Again,  even  if  the  Greenlanders  and  Icelanders  had 
found  some  berries  on  creepers  in  the  woods — is  it  likely  that 
they  would  have  known  them  to  be  grapes?  They  cannot 
be  expected  to  have  had  any  acquaintance  with  the  latter.^ 
The  author  of  the  "  Gronlendinga-f>attr "  in  the  Flateyjarbok 
is  so  entirely  ignorant  of  these  things  that  he  makes  grapes 
grow  in  the  winter  and  spring  (like  the  fruits  all  the  year 
round  on  the  trees  in  the  myth  of  the  fortunate  land  in  the 
west),  and  makes  Leif's  companion,  Tyrker,  intoxicate  himself 
by  eating  grapes  (like  the  Irishmen  in  the  Irish  legends),  and 
finally  makes  Leif  cut  down  vine  trees  ("  vinviS ")  and  fell 
trees  to  load  his  ship,  and  at  last  fill  the  long-boat  with  grapes 
(as  in  the  Irish  legends) ;  in  the  voyage  of  Thorvald  Ericson 
they  also  collect  grapes  and  vine  trees  for  a  cargo,  and  Karls- 
evne  took  home  with  him  "  many  costly  things :  vine  trees, 
grapes  and  furs."  It  is  scarcely  likely  that  seafaring  Green- 
landers  about  380  years  earlier  had  any  better  idea  of  the  vine 
than  this  saga  writer,  and  we  hear  nothing  in  Eric's  Saga  about 
Leif  or  his  companions  having  ever  been  in  southern  Europe. 
No  doubt  it  is  for  this  very  reason  that  the  *'  Gronlendinga-f'attr  " 
makes  a  "  southman,"  Tyrker,  find  the  grapes. 

Wheat  is  not  a  wild  cereal  native  to  America.  It  has  there- 
fore been  supposed  that  the  "  self-sown  wheat-fields  "  of  Wine- 
land   might   have   been   the   American   cereal   maize.     As   this 

1 "  Vinber "  (grapes)  are  mentioned  in  the  whole  of  Old  Norse  literature 
only  in  the  translation  of  the  Bible  called  "  Stjorn,"  in  the  "  Gronlandinga- 
t'attr,"  and  in  a  letter  [Dipl.  No.  v.]  where  they  are  mentioned  as  raisins  or 
dried  grapes.  In  addition,  "  vinberjakonguU "  (a  bunch  of  grapes)  occurs  in 
the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red. 

4 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

proved  to  be  untenable.  Prof.  Schiibeler  ^  proposed  that  it  might 
have  been  the  "wild  rice,"  also  called  "water  oats"  (Zizania 
aquatica),  an  aquatic  plant  that  grows  by  rivers  and  lakes  in 
North  America.  But  apart  from  the  fact  that  the  plant  grows 
in  the  water  and  has  little  resemblance  to  wheat,  although 
the  ripe  ear  is  said  to  be  like  a  wheat-ear,  there  is  the 
difficulty  that  it  is  essentially  an  inland  plant,  which  is  not 
known  in  Nova  Scotia.  "Though  it  occurs  locally  in  a  few 
New  England  rivers,  it  attains  its  easternmost  known  limit 
in  the  lower  reaches  of  the  St.  John  in  New  Brunswick,  being 
apparently  unknown  in  Nova  Scotia"  [Fernald,  1910,  p.  26]. 
For  proving  that  Wineland  was  Nova  Scotia  it  is  therefore  of 
even  less  use  than  the  wine. 

It  results  in  consequence  that  the  attempts  made  hitherto 
to  bring  the  natural  conditions  of  the  east  coast  of  North 
America  into  agreement  with  the  saga's  description  of 
Wineland  2  have  not  been  able  to  afford  any  natural  explana- 

1  Schiibeler,  Christiania  Videnskabs-Selskabs  Forhandlinger  for  1858,  pp. 
21  f.;  Viridarium  Norvegium,  i.  pp.  253   f. 

2  It  should  be  mentioned  that  the  American  botanist  M.  L.  Fernald  has  re- 
cently (1910)  made  an  attempt  to  locate  the  Icelanders'  Wineland  the  Good  in 
southern  Labrador,  explaining  the  "  vinber  "  of  the  Icelandic  sagas  as  a  sort 
of  currant  or  as  whortleberry,  the  self-sown  wheat  as  the  Icelanders'  lyme- 
grass  (Elymus  arenarius),  and  the  "masurr"  as  "valbirch."  By  assuming 
"  vinber  "  to  be  whortleberries  he  even  thinks  he  can  explain  how  it  was  that 
Leif  in  the  "  Gronlendinga-l^attr  "  was  able  to  fill  the  ship  with  "  grapes  "  in  the 
spring  (and  what  of  the  vine  trees  that  he  cut  down  to  load  his  ship,  were  they 
whortleberry  bushes?).  Apart  from  the  surprising  circumstance  of  the  Ice- 
landers having  called  a  country  Wineland  the  Good  because  whortleberries 
grew  there,  the  explanation  is  inadmissible  on  the  ground  that  whortleberries 
were  never  called  "vinber"  (wine-berries)  in  Old  Norse  or  Icelandic.  Cur- 
rants have  in  more  recent  times  been  called  "  vinbaer  "  in  Norway  and  Iceland, 
but  were  not  known  there  before  the  close  of  the  Middle  Ages.  In  ancient 
times  the  Norse  people  did  not  know  how  to  make  wine  from  any  berry  but 
the  black  crowberry;  but  there  are  plenty  of  these  in  Greenland,  and  it  was 
not  necessary  to  travel  to  Labrador  to  collect  them.  Fernald  does  not  seem 
to  have  remarked  that  the  sagas  most  frequently  use  the  expression  "  vinviSr," 
or  else  "  vinviSr "  and  "  vinber  "  together,  and  this  can  only  mean  vines  and 
grapes.  His  explanation  of  the  self-sown  wheat-fields  does  not  seem  any  hap- 
pier. That  the  Icelanders  should  have  reported  these  as  something  so  remark- 
able in  Wineland  is  not  likely,  if  it  was  nothing  but  the  lyme-grass  with  which 

5 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

tion  of  the  striking  juxtaposition  of  the  two  leading  features 
of  the  latter,  the  wild  vine  and  the  self-sown  wheat, 
which  are  identical  with  the  two  leading  features  in  the 
description  of  the  Insulae  Fortunatae.  If  it  were  permis- 
sible to  prove  in  this  way  that  the  ancient  Norsemen 
reached  the  east  coast  of  North  America,  then  it  might  be 
concluded  with  almost  equal  right  that  the  Greeks  and 
Romans  of  antiquity  were  there;  for  they  already  had  the 
same  two  features  in  their  descriptions  of  the  fortunate  isles 
in  the  west.  It  should  be  remembered  that  wheat  was  not 
a  commonly  known  cereal  in  the  north,  where  it  was  not 
cultivated,  and  it  would  hardly  be  natural  for  the  Icelanders 
to  use  that  particular  name  for  a  wild  species  of  corn.  Both 
wheat  and  grapes  or  vines  were  to  them  foreign  ideas,  and  the 
remarkable  juxtaposition  of  these  very  two  words  shows  that 
they  came  together  from  southern  Europe,  where,  as  has 
been  said,  we  find  them  in  Isidore,  and  where  wine  and  wheat 
were  important  commercial  products  which  one  often  finds 
mentioned  together. 

If  we  now  proceed  further  in  the  description  of  the  Wine- 
land  voyages  in  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red,  we  come  to  the 
encounters  with  the  Skraelings.  These  encounters  are,  of 
course,  three  in  number:  first  they  come  to  see,  then  to 
trade,  and  then  to  fight;  this  again  recalls  the  fairy  tale. 
The  narrative  itself  of  the  battle  with  the  Skraelings  has 
borrowed  features.  The  Skraelings'  catapults  make  one  think 
of   the    civilized    countries    of    Europe,    where    catapults    (i.e., 

they  were  familiar  in  Iceland.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  possible  that  the 
"  masurr  "  of  the  sagas  only  meant  valbirch.  But  apart  from  this,  how  can  the 
sagas'  description  of  Wineland — where  no  snow  fell,  where  there  was  hardly 
any  frost,  the  grass  scarcely  withered,  and  the  cattle  were  out  the  whole  win- 
ter— be  applied  to  Labrador?  Or  where  are  Markland  or  Helluland  to  be 
looked  for,  or  FurSustrandir  and  Kjalames?  Nor  do  we  gain  any  more  con- 
nection in  the  voyage  as  a  whole.  It  will  therefore  be  seen  that,  even  if  Prof. 
Fernald  had  been  right  in  his  interpretation  of  the  three  words  above  men- 
tioned, this  would  not  help  us  much;  and  when  we  find  that  these  very  features 
of  the  vine  and  the  wheat  are  derived  from  classical  myths,  such  attempts  at 
explanation  become  of  minor  interest. 

6 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

engines  for  throwing  stones,  mangonels)   and  Greek  fire   (?) 
were  in  use.^ 


Icelandic  representation   of  the  northern  and  western   lands 

as  connected  with  one  another,  by  Sigurd  Stefansson,  circa 

1590  [Torfasus,  1706].     Cf.  G.  Storm,  1887,  pp.  28  f. 


1  Prof.  Alexander  Bugge  has  pointed  out  to  me  that  Schoolcraft  [1851,  i. 
p.  85,  pi.  15]  mentions  a  tradition  among  the  Algonkin  Indians  that  they  had 
used  as  a  weapon  of  war  in  ancient  times  a  great  round  stone,  which  was  sewed 
into  a  piece  of  raw  hide  and  fastened  thereby  to  the  end  of  a  long  wooden  shaft. 

7 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

Catapults,  which  are  also  mentioned  in  the  "  King's  Mirror,"  had  a  long 
beam  or  lever-arm,  at  the  outer  end  of  which  was  a  bowl  or  sling,  wherein  was 
laid  a  heavy  round  stone,  or  more  rarely  a  barrel  of  combustible  material  or 
the  like  [cf.  O.  Blom,  1867,  pp.  103  £.].  In  the  "King's  Mirror"  it  is  also 
stated  that  mineral  coal  ("  jarSkol ")  and  sulphur  were  thrown;  the  stones  for 
casting  were  also  made  of  baked  clay  with  pebbles  in  it.  When  these  clay 
balls  were  slung  out  and  fell,  they  burst  in  pieces,  so  that  the  enemy  had  noth- 
ing to  throw  back.  The  great  black  ball,  which  is  compared  to  a  sheep's 
paunch,  and  which  made  such  an  ugly  sound  (report?)  when  it  fell  that  it 
frightened  the  Greenlanders,  also  reminds  one  strongly  of  the  "  herbrestr " 
(war-crash,  report)  which  Laurentius  Kalfsson's  saga  [cap.  8  in  "  Biskupa 
Sogur,"  i.  1858,  p.  798]  relates  that  Prandr  Fisiler,i  from  Flanders,  produced  at 
the  court  of  Eric  Magnusson  in  Bergen,  at  Christmas,  1294.  It  "  gives  such  a 
loud  report  that  few  men  can  bear  to  hear  it;  women  who  are  with  child  and 
hear  the  crash  are  prematurely  delivered,  and  men  fall  from  their  seats  on  to 
the  floor,  or  have  various  fits.  Thrand  told  Laurentius  to  put  his  fingers  in  his 
ears  when  the  crash  came.  .  .  .  Thrand  showed  Laurentius  what  was  neces- 
sary to  produce  the  crash,  and  there  are  four  things:  fire,  brimstone,  parch- 
ment and  tow.-  Men  often  have  recourse  in  battle  to  such  a  war-crash,  so 
that  those  who  do  not  know  it  may  take  to  flight."  Laurentius  was  a  priest, 
afterwards  bishop  (1323-30)  in  Iceland;  the  saga  was  probably  written  about 
1350  by  his  friend  and  confidant,  the  priest  Einar  HafliSason.  It  seems  as 
though  we  have  here  precisely  the  same  notions  as  appear  in  the  description  of 
the  fight  with  the  Skraslings.  It  is  true  that  this  visit  of  Thrand  to  Bergen 
would  be  later  than  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  is  generally  assumed  to  have 
been  written;  but  this  may  have  been  about  1300.  Besides  there  is  no  reason 
why  the  story  of  the  "  herbrestr  "  should  not  have  found  its  way  to  Iceland 
earlier.3  In  any  case  this  part  of  the  tale  of  the  Wineland  voyages  has  quite  a 
European  air. 

The  resemblance  between  such  a  weapon  with  a  shaft  for  throwing  and  the 
Skraelings'  black  ball  is  distant;  but  it  is  not  impossible  that  ancient  reports 
of  something  of  the  sort  may  have  formed  the  nucleus  upon  which  the  "  mod- 
ernized" description  of  the  saga  has  crystallized;  although  the  whole  thing  is 
uncertain.  This  Algonkin  tradition  has  a  certain  similarity  with  some  Green- 
land Eskimo  fairy-tales  [cf.  Rink,  1866,  p.  139]. 

1  As  arquebuses  or  guns  had  not  yet  been  invented  at  that  time,  this  strange 
name  may,  as  proposed  by  Moltke  Moe,  come  from  "  fusillus  "  or  "  fugillus  " 
(an  implement  for  striking  fire)  and  mean  "  he  who  makes  fire,"  "  the  fire- 
striker." 

-  Evidently  saltpeter  has  been  forgotten  here,  and  so  we  have  gunpowder, 
which  thus  must  have  been  already  employed  in  war  at  that  time,  and  per- 
haps long  before. 

3  Moltke  Moe  has  found  a  curious  resemblance  to  the  description  of  the 
"herbrestr"  given  above  in  the  Welsh  tale  of  Kulhwch  and  Olwen  [Heyman: 
Mabinogion,  p.  78],  where  there  is  a  description  of  a  war-cry  so  loud  that  "all 

8 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

For  the  rest,  this  feature  too  seems  to  have  a  connection 
with  the  "Navigatio  Brandani."  It  is  there  related  that  they 
approach  an  island  of  smiths,  where  the  inhabitants  are  filled 
with  fire  and  darkness.  Brandan  was  afraid  of  the  island;  one 
of  the  inhabitants  came  out  of  his  house  "  as  though  on  an 
errand  of  necessity";  the  brethren  want  to  sail  away  and  es- 
cape, but 

"  the  said  barbarian  runs  down  to  the  beach  bearing  a  long  pair  of  tongs  in 
his  hand  with  a  fiery  mass  in  a  skin  ^  of  immense  size  and  heat;  he  instantly 
throws  it  after  the  servants  of  Christ,  but  it  did  not  injure  them,  it  went  over 
them  about  a  stadium  farther  off,  but  when  it  fell  ino  the  sea,  the  water  began 
to  boil  as  though  a  fire-spouting  mountain  were  there,  and  smoke  arose  from 
the  sea  as  fire  from  a  baker's  oven."  The  other  inhabitants  then  rush  out 
and  throw  their  masses  of  fire,  but  Brandan  and  the  brethren  escape  [Schroder, 
1871,  p.  28]. 

In  the  narrative  of  Maelduin's  voyage  a  similar  story 
is  told  of  the  smith  who  with  a  pair  of  tongs  throws  a  fiery 
mass  over  the  boat,  so  that  the  sea  boils,  but  he  does  not 
hit  them,  as  they  hastily  fly  out  into  the  open  sea  [cf.  Zimmer, 
1889,  pp.  163,  329].  The  resemblances  to  Karlsevne  and 
his  people  flying  with  all  speed  before  the  black  ball  of  the 

women  who  are  with  child  fall  into  sickness,  and  the  others  are  smitten  with 
disease,  so  that  the  milk  dries  up  in  the  breasts."  But  this  "  herbrestr  "  may 
also  be  compared  with  the  "  vabrestr  "  spoken  of  in  the  Foster-brothers'  Saga 
[Grdnl.  hist.  Mind.,  ii.  334,  412],  which  M.  Haegstad  and  A.  Torp  [Gamal- 
norsk  Ordbog]  translate  by  "  crash  announcing  disaster  or  great  news "  [cf. 
I.  Aasen,  "  vederbrest "].  Fritzner  translates  it  by  "sudden  crash  causing 
surprise  and  terror,"  and  K.  Maurer  by  "  Schadenknall."  It  would  therefore 
seem  to  be  something  supernatural  that  causes  fear  [cf.  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  ii. 
p.  198I.  The  "  Gronlandske  historiske  Mindesmasrker "  mention  in  the  same 
connection  "  isbrestr  "  or  "  jokulbrestr  "  in  Iceland.  I  have  myself  had  good 
opportunities  of  studying  that  kind  of  report  in  glaciers,  and  my  opinion  is 
that  it  comes  from  a  starting  of  the  glacier,  or  through  the  latter  shrinking 
from  changes  of  temperature;  similar  reports,  but  less  loud,  are  heard  in  the 
ice  on  lakes  and  fjords.  Burgomaster  H.  Berner  tells  me  that  the  small  boys 
of  Krodsherred  make  what  they  call  "  kolabrest,"  by  heating  charcoal  on  a  flat 
stone  and  throwing  water  upon  it  while  simultaneously  striking  the  embers 
with  the  back  of  an  ax,  which  produces  a  sharp  report. 

1 "  Scorium  "  (slag)  is  also  used  in  mediaeval  Latin  for  "  corium,"  (animal's 
skin,  hide). 

9 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

Skraelings,  like  a  sheep's  paunch,  which  is  flung  over  them 
from  a  pole  and  makes  an  ugly  noise  when  it  falls,  is 
obvious;  but  at  the  same  time  it  looks  as  though  this 
incident  of  the  Irish  myth — which  is  an  echo  of  the  classical 
Cyclops  of  the  "  ^neid  "  and  "  Odyssey  "  (cf.  Polyphemus  and  the 
Cyclops),  and  the  great  stones  that  were  thrown  at  Odysseus 
— had  been  "  modernized "  by  the  saga  writer  who  has 
transferred  mediaeval  European  catapults  and  explosives  to  the 
Indians. 

The  curious  expression — used  when  the  Skraelings  come 
in  the  spring  for  the  second  time  to  Karlsevne's  settlement — 
that  they  came  rowing  in  a  multitude  of  hide  canoes  "  as  many 
as  though  [the  sea]  had  been  sown  with  coal  before  the  Hop  " 
(i.e.,  the  bay),  seems  to  find  its  explanation  in  s,ome  tale  like 
that  of  the  "  Imram  Brenaind  "  [cf.  Zimmer,  1889,  p.  138],  where 
Brandan  and  his  companions  come  to  a  small  deserted  land, 
and  the  harbor  they  entered  was  immediately  filled  with  "  de- 
mons in  the  form  of  pygmies  and  dwarfs,  who  were  as  black 
as  coal." 

The  "  hellustein  "  (flat  stone)  which  lay  fixed  in  the  skull  of 
the  fallen  Thorbrand  Snorrason  is  a  curious  missile,  and  re- 
minds one  of  trolls  (cf.  Arab  myth,  chapter  xiii.).  Features 
such  as  that  of  the  Skraelings  being  supposed  to  know  that  white 
shields  meant  peace  and  red  ones  war  have  an  altogether  Euro- 
pean effect.^ 

1  The  poles  that  are  swung  the  way  of  the  sun  or  against  it  seem  incompre- 
hensible, and  something  of  the  meaning  must  have  been  lost  in  the  transfer- 
ence of  this  incident  from  the  tale  from  which  it  was  borrowed.  It  may  be 
derived  from  the  kayak  paddles  of  the  Greenland  Eskimo,  which  at  a  distance 
look  like  poles  being  swung,  with  or  against  the  sun  according  to  the  side  they 
are  seen  from.  It  may  be  mentioned  that  in  the  oldest  MS.  of  Eric  the  Red's 
Saga,  in  the  Hauksbok,  the  reading  is  not  "  trjanum  "  as  in  the  later  MS.,  but 
"  triom  "  and  "  trionum."  Now  "  trionum  "  or  "  trjonum  "  might  mean  either 
poles  or  snouts,  and  one  would  then  be  led  to  think  of  the  Indians'  animal 
masks,  or  again,  of  the  trolls'  long  snouts  or  animal  trunks,  which  we  find 
again  in  fossil  forms  in  the  fairy-tales,  and  even  in  games  that  are  still  pre- 
served in  Gudbrandsdal,  under  the  name  of  "  trono  "  (the  regular  Gudbrands- 
dal  phonetic  development  of  Old  Norse  "  trjona  "),  where  people  cover  their 
10 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

Another  purely  legendary  feature  in  the  description  of  the 
fight  is  that  of  Freydis  frightening  the  Skraelings  by  taking 
her  breasts  out  of  her  sark  and  whetting  the  sword  on  them 
("ok  slettir  a  sverdit").  As  it  stands  in  the  saga  this 
incident  is  not  very  comprehensible,  and  appears  to  have 
been  borrowed  from  elsewhere.  Possibly,  as  Moltke  Moe 
thinks,  it  may  be  connected  in  some  way  with  the  legend  of 
the  wood-nymph  with  the  long  breasts  who  was  pursued  by 
the  hunter.  The  mention  of  Unipeds  and  "  Einfotinga- 
land "  shows  that  classical  myths  have  also  been  adopted. 
The  idea  was,  moreover,  widely  current  in  the  Middle  Ages. 
Thus  in  the  so-called  "  Nancy  "  map  of  Claudius  Clavus  (of  about 
1426)  we  find  "  unipedes  maritimi "  in  the  extreme  north- 
east of  Greenland.  In  the  "  Heimslysing "  in  the  Hauksbok 
[F.  Jonsson,  1892,  p.  166]  and  in  the  "Rymbegla"  (1780) 
"  Einfotingar "  are  mentioned  with  a  foot  "  so  large  that 
they  shade  themselves  from  the  sun  with  it  while  asleep " 
(cf.  also  Adam  of  Bremen,  Vol.  I,  p.  189).  But  in  the  Saga 
of  Eric  the  Red  the  incident  of  the  Uniped  and  the  pursuit  of 
him  are  described  as  realistically  as  the  encounters  with  the 
Skraelings.  Einfotinga-land  is  also  mentioned  in  the  same  man- 
ner as  Skraslinga-land  in  its  vicinity. 

In  reading  the  Icelandic  sagas  and  narratives  about  Wine- 
land  and  Greenland  one  cannot  avoid  being  struck  by  the 
remarkable,  semi-mythical  way  in  which  the  natives,  the 
Skraelings,  are  always  spoken  of;  ^  even  Are  Frode's  mention 

heads  with  an  animal's  skin  and  put  on  a  long  troll's  snout  with  two  wooden 
jaws.  But  that  snouts  were  waved  with  or  against  the  sun  does  not  give  any 
better  meaning;  there  may  be  some  confusion  here. 

1  It  is  worth  remarking  that  Gustav  Storm,  although  he  did  not  doubt  that 
the  Skraelings  of  Wineland  were  really  the  natives,  seems  nevertheless  to  have 
been  on  the  track  of  the  same  idea  as  is  here  put  forward,  when  he  says  in  his 
valuable  work  on  the  Wineland  voyages  [1887,  p.  57,  note  i]:  "It  should  be 
remarked,  however,  that  this  inquiry  [into  *  the  nationality  of  the  American 
Skraelings']  is  rendered  difficult  by  the  fact  that  in  the  old  narratives  the 
Skraelings  are  everywhere  enveloped,  wholly  or  in  part,  by  a  mythical  tinge; 
thus  even  here  [in  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red]  they  are  on  the  way  to  becoming 
trolls,  which  they  really  become  in  the  later  sagas.     No  doubt  it  is  learned 

11 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 


of  them  appears  strange.  Through  finding  the  connection 
between  Wineland  the  Good  and  the  Fortunate  Isles,  and 
between  the  latter  again  and  the  lands  of  the  departed,  the 
**  huldrelands,"  fairy-lands,  and  the  lands  of  the  Irish  "  sid," 
I  arrived  at  the  kindred  idea  that  perhaps  Skraeling  was 
originally  a  name  for  those  gnomes  or  brownies  or  mythical 
beings,  and  that  it  was  these  that  Are   Frode  meant  by  the 

people  who  "  were 
inhabiting  Wineland  '* 
— and  further,  that 
when  the  Icelanders 
in  Greenland  found 
a  strange,  small, 
f  orei  gn-looking 
people,  with  hide 
canoes  and  imple- 
ments of  stone,  bone, 
and  wood,  which  also 
looked  strange  to 
them,  they  naturally 
regarded  them  as 
these  same  Skrael- 
ings;  and  then  they 
people  (Eskimo,  and 
It  agrees  with 


Eskimos  cutting  up  a  whale.     Wood-cut  from 

Greenland,  illustrating  a  fairy   tale;   drawn 

and  engraved  by  a  native 


may    afterwards    have    found    similar 

perhaps    Indians)    on    the    coast    of  America. 

the  view  of  the   Skraelings  as  a  small  people  that  elves   and 

brownies    in    Norway    were    small,    often    only    two    or    three 

feet     high,     and     that     the     underground     or     huldrefolk     in 

Skane    were    called    "pysslingar"    (dwarfs).     This    idea    that 

myths  of  the  outskirts  of  the  inhabited  world  that  have  here  been  at  work."  In 
a  later  work  [1890,  p.  357]  he  says  that  it  is  "  certain  enough  that  in  the  Mid- 
dle Ages  the  Scandinavians  knew  no  other  people  in  Greenland  and  the  Amer- 
ican countries  lying  to  the  south  of  it  than  '  Skrslings,'  who  were  not  ac- 
counted real  human  beings  and  whose  name  was  always  translated  into  Latin 
as  '  Pygmaei.' "  If  Storm  had  remarked  the  connection  between  the  classical 
and  Irish  legends  and  the  ideas  about  Wineland,  the  further  step  of  regarding 
the  Skraslings  as  originally  mythical  beings  would  have  been  natural. 
12 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

the  Skrasling  was  originally  a  brownie  was  strengthened  by 
the  discovery  of  the  above-mentioned  probable  connection 
between  many  features  in  the  description  of  the  Skraelings' 
appearance  in  Wineland  and  the  demons,  like  pygmies  and 
dwarfs,  that  Brandan  meets  with  in  a  land  in  the  sea  (see 
p.  lo),  and  the  smiths  (or  Cyclops)  in  another  island  who  throw 
masses  of  fire  at  Brandan  and  Maelduin  (see  p.  9).  That  Uni- 
peds  and  Skraelings  are  both  mentioned  as  equally  real  inhabit- 
ants of  the  new  countries,  and  that  a  Uniped  even  kills  Thor- 
vald  Ericson  near  Wineland,  and  is  pursued,  points  in  the  same 
direction. 

I  then  asked  Prof.  Alf  Torp  whether  he  knew  of  anything 
that  might  confirm  such  an  interpretation  of  the  word 
Skrasling;  he  at-  once  mentioned  the  German  word  "walt- 
schreckel"  for  a  wood-troll,  and  afterwards  wrote  to  me  as 
follows : 

"The  word  I  spoke  about  is  found  in  modern  German  dialects:  'schrahe- 
lein'  '  ein  zauberisches  Wesen,  Wichtlein';  cf.  Middle  High  German  'walt- 
schreckel,'  which  is  translated  by  *  faunus.'  This  '  schrahelein  '  (from  the  Upper 
Palatinate)  agrees  entirely  both  in  form  and  meaning  with  '  skraelingr':  the 
only  difference  is  that  one  has  the  diminutive  termination  *  -ilin  *  (primary 
form  '  skrahilin'),  the  other  the  diminutive  termination  ' -iling '  (primary  form 
'  skrahiling ').  The  primary  meaning  was  doubtless  '  shrunken  figure,  dwarf.' 
From  a  synonymous  verbal  root  come  the  synonymous  M.H.G.  words  '  schraz ' 
and  *  schrate,'  1  *  Waldteuf  el,  Kobold.'  This  seems  greatly  to  strengthen  your 
interpretation  of  'skraelingr*  as  'brownie'  or  the  like.  Now,  of  course, 
*  skraeling '  means  '  puny  person '  or  the  like,  but  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  we 
do  not  find  that  meaning  in  the  ancient  language." 

It  seems  to  me  that  this  communication  is  of  great 
importance.  It  is  striking  that  the  word  Skraeling  is  never 
used  in  the  whole  of  Old  Norse  literature  as  a  term  of 
reproach  or  to  denote  a  wretched  man,  and  there  must  have 
been  plenty  of  opportunity  for  this  if  it  had  been  a  word  of 

1  This  is  the  same  word  as  the  Old  Norse  "  skratti "  or  "  skrati "  for  troll 
(poet.)  or  wizard.  "  Skraea,"  "  sickly  shrunken  and  bony  person,"  in  modern 
Norwegian,  from  north-west  Telemarken  [H.  Ross],  is  evidently  the  same 
word  as  Skraeling;  cf.  also  "  skraealeg "  and  "skraeleg";  further,  "Skreda" 
(Skreeaa),  "  sickly,  feeble  person,  poor  wretch,"  from  outer  Nordmor  [H. 
Ross]. 

13 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

common  application  with  its  present  meaning,  and  not  a 
special  designation  for  brownies.  It  only  occurs  there  as  applied 
to  the  Skraelings  of  Wineland,  Markland,  and  Greenland. 
Again,  the  Skraelings  in  Greenland  are  called  "  troll "  or 
"  trollkonur "  in  the  Icelandic  narratives,  and  in  the  descrip- 
tions of  the  Wineland  voyages  demoniacal  properties  are 
attributed  to  them  as  to  the  underground  folk.  In  the  fight 
with  the  Skraelings  they  frightened  Karlsevne  and  his  people 
not  only  with  the  great  magic  ball,^  but  also  by  glamour. 
And  in  the  "  Gronlendinga-^attr "  it  is  related  that  when 
the  Skraelings  came  for  the  second  time  to  trade  with 
Karlsevne, 

"his  wife  Gudrid  was  sitting  within  the  door  by  the  cradle  of  her  son 
Snorre,  and  there  walked  in  a  woman  in  a  black  gown,  rather  low  in  stature, 
and  she  had  a  band  on  her  head,  and  light-brown  hair,  was  pale  and  big-eyed, 
so  that  no  one  had  seen  such  big  eyes  in  any  human  head.  She  went  up  to 
where  Gudrid  sat,  and  said:  '  What  is  thy  name? '  Says  she,  *  My  name  is  Gud- 
rid, and  what  is  thy  name?'  'My  name  is  Gudrid,'  says  she.  Then  Gudrid, 
the  mistress  of  the  house,  stretched  out  her  hand  to  her,  and  she  sat  down  be- 
side her;  but  then  it  happened  at  the  same  time  that  Gudrid  heard  a  great 
crash  ['brest  mikinn,'  cf.  the  noise  or  crash  of  the  great  ball  in  the  Saga  of 
Eric  the  Red]  and  that  the  woman  disappeared,  and  at  the  same  moment  a 
Skrsling  was  slain  by  one  of  Karlsevne's  servants,  because  he  had  tried  to 
take  their  weapons,  and  they  [the  Skraelings]  went  away  as  quickly  as  pos- 
sible; but  they  left  their  clothes  and  wares  behind  them.  No  one  had  seen 
this  woman  but  Gudrid."  2 

This  phantasmal  Gudrid  is  obviously  a  gnome  or  under- 
ground woman;  and  as  she  makes  both  her  appearance  and 
disappearance  together  with  the  Skraelings,  it  is  reasonable  to 
suppose  that  they,  too,  were  of  the  same  kind,  like  the  illusions 
in  the  battle  with  the  Skraelings.  It  is  further  to  be  remarked 
that  she  is  short,  and  has  extraordinarily  large  eyes,  exactly 
as  is  said  of  the  Skraelings  and  of  huldre-  and  troll-folk  (cf.  Vol.  I, 
p.  327),  and  also  of  pygmies. 

1  It  is,  perhaps,  of  importance,  as  Prof.  Torp  has  mentioned  to  me,  that  the 
word  "  bla  "  is  more  often  used  than  "  svart "  (black)  when  speaking  of  trolls 
and  magic,  as  an  uncanny  color.  This  may  have  been  a  common  Germanic 
trait;  cf.  Rolf  Blue-beard. 

-  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  i.  p.  242;  G.  Storm,  1891,  p.  68. 

14 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 


On  account  of  the  identity  of  name  one  might  perhaps  be 
tempted  to  think  that  it  was  Gudrid's  "fylgja  "  (fetch)  coming  to 
warn  her.  But  she  does  nothing  of  the  kind  in  the  saga,  nor 
was  there  any  reason  for  it,  as  the  Skraelings  came  to  trade  with 
peaceful  intentions,  and  fled  as  soon  as  there  was  disagree- 
ment. But  the  story  is  obscure  and  confused,  and  it  is 
probable  that  this  is  a  borrowed  incident,  and  that  something 
of  the  meaning  or  connection  has  dropped  out  in  the  transfer. 
Another  remarkable  feature  (which  Moltke  Moe  has  pointed 
out  to  me)  is  that  while 
in  Eric's  Saga  Karlsevne 
pays  for  the  Skraelings' 
furs  and  red  cloth,  in  the 
"  Gronlendinga  -f>attr"  he 
makes  "  the  women  carry  out 
milk-food  ['  bunyt ']  to 
them"  (it  was  placed  out- 
side the  house  or  even 
outside  the  fence),  "and  as 
soon    as    the    Skraelings    saw 

milk-food  they  would  buy  that  and  nothing  else."  Now  the 
natives  of  America  cannot  possibly  have  known  milk-food; 
but  on  the  other  hand  it  happens  to  be  a  characteristic  of 
the  underground  folk  that  they  are  fond  of  milk  and  por- 
ridge (cream-porridge),  which  is  put  out  for  the  mound- 
elves  and  the  "nisse."  Another  underground  feature  comes 
out  in  the  incident  of  the  five  Skraelings  in  Markland,  three  of 
whom  "  escaped  and  sank  into  the  earth "  ("  ok  sukku  i 
jorS  niSr").  Possibly  the  statement  that  the  people  in 
Markland  "  lived  in  rock-shelters  and  caves  "  may  have  a  similar 
connection. 

As  the  Skraelings  of  Greenland  were  dark,  it  was  quite 
natural  that  they  should  become  trolls,  and  not  elves,  which 
were  fair. 

It  may  also  be  supposed  that  the  troll-like  nature  of 
the    Skraelings    is    shown    in    the    curious    circumstance    that 

15 


Fight  with  mythical  creatures 
[From  an  Icelandic  MS.] 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

Are  Frode,  speaking  of  them  in  Greenland,  only  mentions 
dwelling-places  and  remains  of  boats  and  stone  implements 
that  they  had  left  behind  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  260),  as  a  sign  that  they 
had  been  both  in  the  east  and  west  of  the  country,  while  the 
people  themselves  are  never  mentioned;  this  is  like  troll- 
folk,  who  leave  their  traces  without  being  seen  themselves. 
One  might  suppose  that  such  a  mode  of  expression  agreed 
best  with  the  current  Icelandic  view  of  them  as  trolls.  In 
a  similar  way  it  might  be  related  of  the  first  discoverer  of  an 
earlier  Norway,  inhabited  only  by  supernatural  beings,  that 
he  found  traces  both  in  the  east  and  the  west  of  the  land 
which  showed  that  the  kind  of  folk  ("  (?j6S ")  had  been  there 
that  inhabit  Risaland,  and  that  the  Norwegians  call  giants. 
In  this  way  possibly  this  passage  in  Are  may  be  understood 
(but  cf.  p.  77);  it  might  be  objected  that  this  expression; 
who  "  inhabited  Wineland "  ("  hefer  bygt ")  does  not 
suggest  troll-folk,  but  real  human  beings;  if,  however,  the 
existence  of  these  troll-folk  is  supported  by  the  actual  finding 
of  natives,  in  any  case  in  Greenland  (and  doubtless  also  in 
Markland),  then  such  an  expression  cannot  appear  unreason- 
able. Besides,  there  would  be  a  general  tendency  on  the  part 
of  the  rationalizing  Icelanders,  with  their  pronounced  sense 
of  realistic  description,  to  make  these  trolls  or  brownies  or 
"  demons "  into  living  human  beings  in  Wineland.  while 
the  designation  of .  troll  still  persisted  for  a  long  time  in 
Greenland,  side  by  side  with  Skraeling — as  a  name  approxi- 
mately synonymous  therewith.  The  realistic  description  of 
the  Uniped  affords  a  parallel  to  this.  One  is  inclined  to  think 
that  the  Skraelings  of  the  saga  have  come  about  through  a 
combination  of  the  original  mythical  creatures  (like  the 
sid-people  in  the  Irish  happy  lands)  to  whom  at  first  the 
name  belonged,  with  the  Eskimo  that  the  Icelanders  found 
in  Greenland,  and  perhaps  the  Eskimo  and  Indians  that 
they  found  on  the  north-east  coast  of  North  America.  It  is, 
as  in  fact  Moltke  Moe  has  maintained  in  his  lectures,  by  the 
fusing  of  materials  taken  from  the  world  of  myth  and  from  real- 
16 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

ity  that  the  human  imagination  is  rendered  most  fertile  and  cre- 
ative in  the  formation  of  legend.  The  points  of  departure  may 
often  be  pure  accidents,  resemblances  of  one  kind  or  another, 
which  have  a  fructifying  effect. 

That  the  Skrselings,  from  being  originally  living  natives, 
should  later  have  become  trolls  or  brownies,  is  an  idea  that 
Storm  among  others  seems  to  have  entertained  (cf.  note,  p. 
ii);  but  this  would  be  the  reverse  of  what  usually  happens. 
That  the  Eskimo  should  have  made  a  strange  and  supernatural 
impression  on  the  superstitious  Norsemen  when  they  first  met 
them  is  natural,  and  so  it  is  that  this  impression  should 
have  persisted  so  long,  until  it  gradually  wore  off  through 
more  intimate  acquaintance  with  them  in  Greenland;  but  the 
contrary,  that  the  supernatural  ideas  about  them  should  only 
have  developed  gradually,  although  they  were  constantly  meet- 
ing them,  is  incredible. 

In  Scandinavian  literature  also  we  find  mythical  ideas 
attached  to  the  Skraelings  of  Greenland.  In  the  Norwegian 
"  Historia  Norvegiae "  (thirteenth  century)  it  is  said  that 
when  "  they  are  struck  with  weapons  while  alive,  their 
wounds  are  white  and  do  not  bleed,  but  when  they  are  dead 
the  blood  scarcely  stops  running."  The  Dane  Claudius 
Clavus  (fifteenth  century)  relates  that  there  were  pygmies  in 
Greenland  two  feet  high  (like  our  elves  and  brownies),  and 
the  same  is  reported  in  a  letter  to  Pope  Nicholas  V.  (circa  1450), 
with  the  addition  that  they  hide  themselves  in  the  caves  of  the 
country  like  ants  (see  next  chapter)  ;  that  is,  like  underground 
beings,  although  this  trait  may  well  be  derived  from  knowl- 
edge of  the  Eskimo.  Mythical  tales  about  the  Green- 
land Eskimo  also  appear  in  Glaus  Magnus,  and  in  Jacob 
Ziegler's  "  Scondia  "  (sixteenth  century)  [cf.  Gronl.  hist.  Mind., 
iii.  pp.  465,  501]. 

A  little  touch  like  that  of  Thorvald  Ericson  drawing  the 
Uniped's  arrow  out  of  his  intestines  and  saying :  "  There  is 
fat  in  the  bowels,  a  good  land  have  we  found  .  .  ."  shows 
how  the  saga  writer  embroidered  his  romance:  Thorvald  was 

17 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

the  son  of  a  chief  and  naturally  required  a  more  honorable 
death  than  other  men.  The  Foster-brothers'  Saga  and  Snorre 
have  the  same  thing  about  Thormod  Kolbrunarskald  at  the 
battle  of  Stiklestad,  when  he  drew  out  the  arrow  and  said: 
"  Well  hath  the  king  nourished  us,  there  is  still  fat  about 
the  roots  of  my  heart."  But  of  course  there  had  to  be  a 
slight  difference;  while  Thormod  receives  the  arrow  in  the 
roots  of  his  heart  and  has  been  well  treated  by  the  king, 
Thorvald  gets  it  in  his  small  intestines  and  has  been  well  nour- 
ished by  the  country.  Similar  features  are  found  in  other  Ice- 
landic sagas. 

It  is  a  characteristic  point  that  both  in  the  "  Navigatio  Bran- 
dani "  and  in  the  "  Imram  Maelduin  "  three  of  the  companions 
perish,  or  disappear,  either  through  demons  or  mythical  beings. 
With  this  the  circumstance  that  in  Karlsevne's  voyage  three 
of  his  companions  fall,  two  by  the  Skraelings  and  one  by 
a  Uniped,  seems  to  corespond.  We  may  also  compare 
the  incident  in  the  "  Imram  Brenaind  "  where  Brandan  and  his 
companions  come  to  a  large,  lofty,  and  beautiful  island,  where 
there  are  dwarfs  ("  luchrupan ")  like  monkeys,  who  instantly 
fill  the  beach  and  want  to  swallow  them,  and  devour  one  of 
the  men  (Crosan)  (cf.  the  circumstance  that  in  the  fight  with 
the  Skraelings  two  men  fell,  of  whom  only  one  is  mentioned  by 
name). 

When  it  is  related  first  that  Karlsevne  found  five  Skraelings 
asleep  near  Wineland,  whom  they  took  for  exiles  (!)  and 
therefore  slew,  and  that  in  the  following  year  they  again  found 
five  Skraelings,  of  whom,  however,  they  only  took  two  boys, 
while  the  others  escaped,  we  may  probably  regard  these  as  two 
variants  of  the  same  story.  This  feature  also  has  an  air  of 
being  borrowed  in  its  dubious  form,  especially  in  the  for- 
mer passage ;  but  I  have  not  yet  discovered  from  whence  it  may 
be  derived. 

In  the  "  Gronlendinga-l'attr  "  there  is  yet  another  variant.  There  Thorvald 
Ericson  and  his  men  see  three  hide-boats  on  the  beach,  and  three  men  under 
each.    "  Then  they  divided  their  people,  and  took  them  all  except  one  who  got 

i8 


WINELAND  THE   GOOD 

away  with  his  boat.  They  killed  the  eight.  .  .  ."  This  is  altogether  improb- 
able. Since  one  man  could  run  away  with  his  boat,  the  hide-boats  must  be  sup- 
posed to  be  kayaks,  and  the  men  Eskimo;  but  in  that  case  only  one  man 
would  have  been  lying  under  each;  if  they  were  larger  boats  (women's  boats?) 
it  would  be  unlike  the  Eskimo  for  three  men  to  lie  under  each,  and  in  any  case 
one  man  could  not  run  away  with  a  boat. 

The  tale  of  the  kidnaped  Skrasling  children  also  shows 
incidents  and  ideas  from  wholly  different  quarters  that  have 
been  introduced  into  this  saga.  That  the  grown-up  Skrasling 
was  bearded  ("  skeggjaSr ")  agrees,  of  course,  neither  with 
Eskimo  nor  Indians,  but  it  agrees  very  well  with  trolls, 
brownies,  and  pygmies,  and  also  with  the  hermits  of  the  Irish 
legends  who  were  heavily  clothed  with  hair.  That  this 
man,  with  the  two  women  who  escaped,  "  Scink  down  into 
the  earth "  has  already  been  mentioned  as  an  underground 
feature.  That  the  Skraelings  of  Markland  had  no  houses, 
but  lived  in  caves,  does  not  sound  any  more  probable; 
unless,  indeed,  this  feature  is  taken  from  underground  gnomes, 
it  may  come  from  the  hermits  in  Irish  legends.  Thus  the 
holy  Paulus  [Schroder,  1871,  p.  32]  dwelt  in  a  cave  and  was 
covered  with  snow-white  hair  and  beard  (cf.  the  bearded 
Skraeling),  whom  Brandan  met  on  an  island  a  little  while 
before  he  came  to  the  Terra  Repromissionis  (cf.  the  cir- 
cumstance that  Markland  lay  a  little  to  the  north  of  Wine- 
land).  The  myth  of  Hvitramanna-land  is  derived  from 
Ireland,  and  has,  of  course,  nothing  to  do  with  the  Skraeling 
boys.  Storm,  it  is  true,  thought  they  might  have  told  of  a 
great  country  (Canada  or  New  Brunswick)  with  inhabitants 
in  the  west,  which  later  became  the  Irish  mythical  land; 
but  this,  too,  is  not  very  credible.  The  names  they  gave  are 
obviously  not  to  be  relied  on:  they  may  be  later  inventions, 
from  which  no  conclusion  at  all  can  be  drawn  as  to  the 
language  of  the  Skraelings,  as  has  been  attempted  by  earlier 
inquirers.^     The     two     kings*     names,      "Avalldamon"     and 

1  W.  Thalbitzer's  attempt  [1905,  pp.  190  f.]  to  explain  the  words,  not  as 
originally  names,  but  as  accidental,  misunderstood  Eskimo  sentences,  which  are 

19 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

"  Avalldidida "  (or  "  Valldidida "),  which  are  attributed  to 
them,  may  be  supposed  to  be  connected  with  "  Ivaldr "  or 
"  ivaldi."  He  was  of  elfin  race,  was  the  father  of  Idun, 
who  guarded  the  apples  of  rejuvenation,  and  his  sons, 
"  ivalda  synir,"  were  the  elves  who  made  the  hair  for  Sif, 
the  spear  "  Gungner "  for  Odin,  and  SkicSblaSnir  for  Frey. 
In  Bede  he  is  called  "  Hewald,"  and  in  the  Anglo-Saxon 
translation  "  Heavold."  ^  The  name  "  Vaetilldi "  (nom. 
"  V^tilldr "  ?)  of  the  mother  of  the  Skraeling  boys  recalls 
Norse  names;  it  might  be  a  combination  of  "vaetr"  or 
"v^ttr"  (gnome,  sprite,  cf.  modem  Norwegian  "  vaett,"  a 
female  sprite)  and  "  -hildr  "  (ace,  dat.  "  -hildi ") ;  the  word  is 
also  written  in  some  MSS.  "  Vsetthildi,"  "  Vetthildi,"  "  Vethildi," 
"  Veinhildi." 

The  last  tale  of  Bjarne  Grimolfsson  who  got  into  the  maggot- 
sea  ("  ma'Sk-sjar)  bears  a  stamp  of  travelers*  tales  as  marked 
as  those  of  the  Liver-sea.  But  even  this  feature  seems  to  have 
prototypes  in  the  Irish  legends;  it  resembles  the  incident  in  the 
tale  of  the  voyage  of  the  three  sons  of  Ua  Corra  (twelfth  cen- 
tury ?),  where  the  sea-monsters  gnaw  away  the  second  hide 
from  under  the  boat  (which  originally  had  three  hides)  [cf.  Zim- 
mer,  1889,  pp.  193,  i99]- 

It  will  therefore  be  seen  that  the  whole  narrative   of  the 

supposed  to  have  survived  orally  for  over  250  years,  does  not  appear  probable 
(see  next  chapter). 

1  Moltke  Moe  has  called  my  attention  to  the  possibility  of  a  connection  be- 
tween "  Avalldamon  "  and  the  Welsh  myth  of  the  isle  of  "  Avallon  "  (the  isle  of 
apple-trees;  cf.  Vol  I,  pp.  365,  379),  to  which  Morgan  le  Fay  carried  King  Ar- 
thur. It  is  also  possible  that  it  may  connected  with  "  daemon "  and  "  vald  '* 
(  =  power,  might).  The  possibility  suggested  above  seems,  however,  to  be 
nearer  the  mark. 

The  Skraelings  of  Markland  having  kings  agrees,  of  course,  neither  with 
Indians  nor  Eskimo,  who  no  more  had  kings  than  the  Greenlanders  and  Ice- 
landers themselves.  On  the  other  hand,  it  exactly  fits  elves  and  gnomes.  The 
Ekeberg  king  and  other  mountain  kings  are  well  known  in  Norway.  The  elves 
of  Iceland  had  a  king  who  was  subject  to  the  superior  elf-king  in  Norway. 
The  sid-people  in  Ireland,  the  pygmies  and  gnomes  in  other  lands  (such  as 
Wales)  also  have  kings.  This  feature  again  points,  therefore,  in  the  direction 
of  the  fairy-nature  of  the  Skraelings,  like  the  name  "  Vaetthildr." 
20 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

Wineland  voyages  is  a  mosaic  of  one  feature  after  another 
gathered  from  east  and  west.  Is  there,  then,  anything  left 
that  may  be  genuine?  To  this  it  may  be  answered  that 
even  if  the  romance  of  the  voyages  be  for  the  most 
part  invented — to  some  extent,  perhaps,  from  ancient  lays — 
the  chief  persons  themselves  may  be  more  or  less  historical. 
It  is  nevertheless  curious  that  it  should  be  reserved  to  father 
and  son  first  to  discover  and  settle  Greenland,  and  then 
accidentally  to  discover  Wineland.  That  to  Leif,  the 
young  leader,  should  further  be  attributed  the  introduction 
of  Christianity,  and  that  he  should  thus  represent  the  new 
faith  in  opposition  to  his  father,  the  old  leader,  who  repre- 
sented heathendom,  may  also  seem  a  remarkable  coincidence, 
but  it  may  find  an  explanation  in  the  probability  of  a  new 
faith  being  introduced  by  men  of  influence,  and  just  as  in 
Norway  it  was  done  by  kings,  so  in  Greenland  it  was 
naturally  the  work  of  the  future  chief  of  the  free  state. 
Although  it  is  strange  that  such  a  circumstance  should  not  be 
mentioned  when  Leif's  name  occurs  in  the  oldest  authorities 
("  Landnama"),  this  may  thus  appear  probable.  On  the  other 
hand,  no  such  explanation  can  be  found  for  the  circumstance 
that  he  of  all  others  should  accidentally  discover  America.  It 
would  be  somewhat  different  if,  as  in  the  "  Gronlendinga- 
f'attr,"  Leif  had  of  set  purpose  gone  out  to  find  new  land,  like 
his  father.  It  is  also  curious  that  in  the  saga  we  hear  no 
more  either  of  Leif  or  his  ship  on  the  new  voyages,  after  his 
accidental  discovery,  while  it  is  another,  Karlsevne,  who 
becomes  the  hero.  It  looks  as  though  the  tale  of  Leif  had 
been  inserted  without  proper  connection.  In  the  "  Gron- 
lendinga-f^attr,"  too,  this  discovery  is  attributed  to  another 
man,  Bjarne  Herjolfsson,  which  shows  that  the  tradition 
about  Leif  was  not  firmly  rooted.  It  may  be  supposed  that 
there  was  a  tradition  in  Iceland  of  the  discovery  of  new  land 
to  the  south-west  of  Greenland,  and  this  became  connected 
with  the  legends  of  the  fortunate  "  Wineland  the  Good." 
Popular    belief    then    searched    for    a    name    with    which    to 

21 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

connect  the  discovery,  and  as  it  could  not  take  that  of  the  dis- 
coverer of  Greenland  itself,  the  aged  Eric  who  was  established 
at  Brattalid,  it  occurred  to  many  to  take  that  of  his  son;  whilst 
others  chose  another.  It  is  doubtless  not  impossible  that 
Leif  was  the  man;  but  what  is  suggested  above,  coupled 
with  so  much  else  that  is  legendary  in  connection  with  the 
voyages  of  him  and  the  others,  does  not  strengthen  the  prob- 
ability of  it. 

But  however  this  may  be,  it  may  in  any  case  be  regarded 
as  certain  that  the  Greenlanders  discovered  the  American 
continent,  even  though  we  are  without  any  means  of  deter- 
mining how  far  south  they  may  have  penetrated.  The 
statements  as  to  the  length  of  the  shortest  day  in  Wineland, 
which  are  given  in  the  Flateyjarbok's  "  Gronlendinga-f'attr,"  are 
scarcely  to  be  more  depended  upon  than  other  statements  in  this 
romantic  tale.^ 

1  It  might  be  objected  that  when  it  is  so  distinctly  stated  that  "  it  was  there 
more  equinoctial  [i.e.,  the  day  and  night  were  more  nearly  equal  in  length] 
than  in  Greenland  or  Iceland,  the  sun  there  had  '  eykt '  position  and  '  dagmal ' 
position  [i.e.,  was  visible  between  8  a.m.  and  4  p.m.]  on  the  shortest  day  "  [cf. 
Gr.  h.  Mind.,  i.  p.  218;  G.  Storm,  1891,  p.  58;  1887,  pp.  i  f.],  this  shows  that 
the  Greenlanders  were  actually  there  and  made  this  observation.  In  support 
of  this  view  it  might  also  be  urged  that  it  was  not  so  very  long  (about  forty 
years)  before  the  Flateyjarbok  was  written  that  the  ship  from  Markland  (see 
later)  arrived  at  Iceland  in  1347,  and  through  the  men  on  board  her  the  Ice- 
landers might  have  got  such  information  as  to  the  length  of  days.  This  can 
hardly  be  altogether  denied;  but  it  would  have  been  about  Markland  rather 
than  Wineland  that  they  would  have  heard,  and  Markland  is  only  once  men- 
tioned in  passing  in  the  "  Gronlendinga-I'attr."  Moreover,  it  was  common  in 
ancient  times  to  denote  the  latitude  by  the  length  of  the  longest  or  shortest 
day  (cf.  Vol  I,  pp.  52,  64),  and  the  latter  in  particular  must  have  been  natural 
to  Northerners  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  133).  The  passage  quoted  above  would  thus  be  a 
general  indication  that  Wineland  lay  in  a  latitude  so  much  to  the  south  of 
Greenland  as  its  shortest  day  was  longer;  they  had  no  other  means  of  ex- 
pressing this  in  a  saga,  nor  had  they,  perhaps,  any  other  means  of  describing 
the  length  of  the  day  than  that  here  used.  It  appears  from  the  Saga  of  Eric 
the  Red  that  Kjalarnes  was  reckoned  to  be  in  the  same  latitude  as  Ireland  (see 
Vol.  I,  p.  326) ;  as  a  consequence  of  this  we  might  expect  that  Wineland  would 
lie  in  a  more  southern  latitude  than  the  south  of  Ireland,  the  latitude  of  which 
(i.e.,  the  length  of  the  shortest  day)  was  certainly  well  known  in  Iceland.  If, 
therefore,  in  a  tale  of  the  fourteenth  century,  the  position  of  Wineland  is  to  be 
22 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

Incidents  such  as  the  bartering  for  skins  with  the  Wineland 
Skraslings,  and  the  combat  with  unfortunate  results,  seem  to 
refer  to  something  that  actually  took  place;  they  cannot  easily 
be  explained  from  the  legends  of  the  Fortunate  Isles,  nor  can 
representations  of  fighting  in  which  the  Norsemen  were  worsted 
be  derived  from  Greenland.  They  must  rather  be  due  to  en- 
counters with  Indians;  for  it  is  incredible  that  the  Greenlanders 
or  Icelanders  should  have  described  in  this  way  fights  with  the 
unwarlike  Eskimo,  or  at  all  events  with  the  Greenland  Eskimo, 
who,  even  if  they  had  been  of  a  warlike  disposition,  cannot  have 
had  any  practice  in  the  art  of  war.  This  in  itself  shows  that 
the  Greenlanders  must  have  reached  America,  and  come  in  con- 
tact with  the  natives  there. 

The  very  mention  of  the  countries  to  the  south-west: 
first  the  treeless  and  rocky  Helluland  (Labrador?),  then  the 
wooded  Markland  (Newfoundland?)  farther  south,  and  then 
the  fertile  Wineland  south  of  that,  may  also  point  to  local 
knowledge.  It  must  be  admitted  that  this  could  be  explained 
away  as  having  been  put  together  from  the  general  experience 
that  countries  in  the  north  are  treeless,  but  become  more 
fertile  as  one  proceeds  southward;  but  the  names  Helluland 
and  especially  Markland  have  in  themselves  an  appearance 
of  genuineness,  as  also  has  Kjalarnes.  The  different  saga 
writers,  in  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  and  in  the  Flateyjarbok's 
*'  Gronlendinga-f^attr,"  give  different  explanations  of  the  reason 
for  the  name  of  Kjalarnes,  which  shows  that  the  name  is 
an  old  one  and  that  the  explanations  have  been  invented 
later  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  324).  A  point  which  agrees  remarkably  well 
with  the  trend  of  the  Labrador  coast  and  may  point  to 
a  certain  knowledge  of  it,  is  that  Karlsevne  steers  well  to 
the   south-east    from    Helluland;    but    this    may    possibly    be 

described,  it  is  natural  that  its  shortest  day  should  be  given  a  length  which 
according  to  Prof.  H.  Geelmuyden  [see  G.  Storm,  i885,  p.  128;  1887,  p.  6] 
would  correspond  to  49°  55'  N.  lat.  or  south  of  it;  in  other  words,  the  latitude 
of  France,  and  that  was  precisely  the  land  that  the  Icelanders  knew  as  the 
home  of  wine,  and  that  they  would  therefore  naturally  use  in  the  indication  of  a 
Wineland. 

23 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

connected  with  the  idea  mentioned  later  in  the  saga,  that  Wine- 
land  became  broader  towards  the  south,  and  the  coast  turned 
eastward,  which  was  evidently  due  to  the  assumption  that  it 
was  connected  with  Africa  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  326). 

The  oldest  and  most  original  part  of  Eric's  Saga,  as  of 
most  other  sagas,  is  probably  the  lays.  Of  special  interest 
are  the  lays  attributed  to  Thorhall  the  Hunter;  they  give  an 
impression  of  genuineness  and  do  not  harmonize  well  with 
the  prose  text,  which  was  evidently  composed  much  later. 
One  of  the  lays,  which  describes  the  poet's  disappointment 
at  not  getitng  wine  to  drink  in  the  new  country  instead  of 
water,  shows  that  a  notion  was  current  that  wine  was 
abundant     there,     and    this    notion    must    have     come     from 


Felling  trees.     [Marginal  decoration  of  the  Jonsbok  (fifteenth  century)] 

the  myth  of  the  Fortunate  Land,  or  Wineland;  for,  if  we 
confine  ourselves  to  this  one  saga,  the  notion  cannot  have 
been  derived  from  the  single  earlier  voyage  thither  that  is 
there  mentioned — namely,  Leif's:  during  his  short  visit  he 
cannot  possibly  have  had  time  to  make  wine,  even  if  he  had 
known  how  to  do  so.  The  lay  seems  therefore  to  show  that 
men  had  really  reached  a  country  which  was  taken  to  be 
the  Wineland,  or  Fortunate  Isles,  of  legend,  but  which 
turned  out  not  to  answer  to  the  ideas  which  had  been  formed 
of  it.  The  second  lay  attributed  to  Thorhall  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  326) 
may  also  point  to  the  country  they  had  arrived  at  not  being  so 
excessively  rich,  for  they  had  to  cook  whale's  flesh  on  FurcSu- 
strandir  (and  consequently,  were  obliged  to  support  themselves 
by  whaling).  This  gives  us  an  altogether  more  sober  picture 
than  the  prose  version  of  the  saga;  the  latter,  moreover,  says 
nothing  of  whales  except  the  one  that  made  them  ill  and  was 
thrown  out. 
24 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

The  surest  historical  evidence  that  voyages  were  made  to 
America  from  Greenland  is  the  chance  statement,  referred  to 
later,  in  the  Icelandic  annals:  that  in  1347  ^  ship  from 
Greenland  bound  for  Markland  was  driven  by  storms  to 
Iceland.  This  reveals  the  fact  that,  occasionally  at  any 
rate,  this  voyage  was  made;  and  if  the  sagas  about  the 
Wineland  voyages  must  be  regarded  as  romances,  or  as  a 
kind  of  legendary  poetry — which,  therefore,  made  no  attempt 
whatever  to  give  a  historical  exposition  of  the  communication 
with  the  countries  to  the  south-west — then  many  more 
voyages  may  have  been  made  thither  than  the  sagas  had 
use  for.  A  prominent  feature  of  the  different  tales  is  that  of 
the  Greenlanders  bringing  timber  from  thence;  this  appears 
already  in  the  story  of  Leif's  discovery  of  the  country — he 
found  various  kinds  of  trees  and  "  m9surr,"  and  brought 
them  home  with  him — and  still  more  in  the  tales  of  the 
Flateyjarbok,  where  on  each  voyage  it  is  expressly  stated 
that  they  felled  timber  to  load  their  ships,  as  though  that 
were  their  chief  object.  In  the  Icelandic  geography  men- 
tioned on  p.  I,  there  is  an  addition,  probably  of  late  date: 

".  .  .  It  is  said  that  Thorfinn  Karlsevne  felled  wood  [in  Markland?]  for 
a  *  husa-snotra,'  and  then  went  on  to  seek  for  Wineland  the  Good,  and  arrived 
where  this  land  was  thought  to  be,  but  was  not  able  to  explore  it,  and  did  not 
settle  there.    .    .    ."1 

In  the  Flateyjarbok's  "  Gronlendinga-^attr "  it  is  stated 
that    Karlsevne,    in    Wineland,    cut   down   timber   to   load   his 

1  Cf .  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  p.  220;  Storm,  1887,  p.  12.  "Husa-snotra"  is 
explained  as  a  vane  or  similar  decoration  on  the  gable  of  a  house  or  a  ship's 
stem  [cf.  V.  GuSmundsson,  i88g,  pp.  158  f.].  The  statement  given  above  shows 
that  a  "  husa-snotra  "  was  something  to  which  great  importance  was  attached, 
otherwise  attention  would  not  have  been  called  to  it  in  this  way.  And  in  the 
"  Gronlendinga-J'attr  "  [Gr.  hist.  Mind.,  i.  p.  254]  we  read  that  Karlsevne,  when 
he  was  in  Norway,  would  not  sell  his  "  husa-snotra  "  (made  of  "  mausurr  "  from 
Wineland)  to  the  German  from  Bremen,  until  the  latter  offered  him  half  a  mark 
of  gold  for  it.  One  might  suppose  that  this  ornament  (vane-staff)  on  the  prow 
of  a  ship  or  the  gable  of  a  house  was  connected  with  religious  or  superstitious 
ideas  of  some  kind,  like  the  posts  of  the  high  seat  within  the  house,  or  the 
totem  poles  of  the  North  American  Indians,  which  stood  before  the  house. 

25 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

ship,  and  that  he  had  a  "  husa-snotra "  of  "masur"  from 
Wineland.  Both  accounts  show  how  highly  timber  was 
prized  in  Greenland  and  Iceland.  It  is  likely  enough  that 
this  was  so,  since  they  had  no  timber  in  Greenland  but 
driftwood,  dwarf-birch,  and  osiers.  But  in  order  to  find 
timber  the  Greenlanders  need  have  gone  no  farther  south 
than  Markland  (Newfoundland?);  and  this  name  (perhaps 
also  Helluland)  may  therefore  have  the  surest  historical 
foundation. 

If  Adam  of  Bremen  (circa  1070)  mentions  no  more  than 
Wineland,  this  is  doubtless  because  he  has  only  heard  of  that 
legendary  country;  the  belief  in  its  existence  may  already 
have  been  confirmed  in  his  time  by  the  discovery  of  new 
lands.  More  remarkable  is  the  statement  of  the  sober  Are 
Frode  (circa  1130)  as  to  the  Skraelings  who  "inhabited 
Wineland"  ("  Vinland  hefer  bygt").  This  looks  as  if  Wine- 
land was  familiar  to  him;  it  may  be  the  mythical  name  that 
has  passed  into  a  common  designation  for  the  countries 
discovered  in  the  south-west  (cf.  Vol  I,  pp.  368,  384).  But  there 
is  also  a  possibility  that  only  the  mythical  country  is  in  question, 
and  that,  as  suggested  above  (Vol.  I,  p.  368;  Vol  II,  p.  16),  its 
inhabitants  are  merely  the  Skraslings  of  myths,  since  this  myth- 
ical land  and  its  inhabitants  were  the  best  known  and  most 
talked  of.  If  this  be  so,  it  does  not  exclude  the  possibility  of 
Are's  having  heard  of  other,  less  well-known,  but  actually  dis- 
covered countries  in  the  south-west,  which  he  does  not  mention. 
To  make  use  of  a  parallel,  let  us  suppose  that  Utrost  with  its 
fairy  people  was  better  known  in  Nordland  than  the  islands  to 
the  north  with  their  semi-mythical  Lapps.  If  then  we  had  read 
of  a  discovery  of  Finmark  that  traces  had  been  found  there  of 
the  same  kind  of  folk  ("  f>j6S  ")  who  inhabit  Utrost,  then  we 
should  no  more  be  able  from  this  to  conclude  that  Utrost  was 
a  real  land  than  that  Vesteralen  and  Senjen,  for  instance,  had 
not  been  discovered.  It  must  be  remembered  that  it  does  not 
appear  with  certainty  from  Are's  words  where  he  got  his  Wine- 
land from  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  367). 
26 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

Another  document  of  a  wholly  different  nature,  wherein  pos- 
sibly the  name  of  Wineland  is  mentioned,  has  been  found — 
namely,  the  runic  stone  of  Honen. 

On  the  estate  of  Honen,  in  Ringerike,  there  was  found  at  the 
beginning  of  last  century  a  runic  stone,  which  was  still  to  be 
seen  there  in  1823,  when  the  inscription  was  copied.  After- 
wards the  stone  disappeared.^  The  drawing  made  in  1823  is 
now  only  known  from  a  somewhat  indistinct  copy;  but  from 
this  Sophus  Bugge  [1902]  has  attempted  to  make  out  the  runic 
inscription,  and  he  reads  it  thus: 

"  Ut  ok  vitt  ok  f>urfa 
|>erru  ok  ats 
Vinlandi  a  isa 
i  ubygS  at  komu ; 
auS  ma  illt  vega, 
[at]  doyi  ar." 


\ 


The  existing  drawing  of  the  runic  stone  from  Honen,  Ringerike 
[S.  Bugge,  1902] 

In  prose  this  verse  may,  according  to  Bugge,  be  rendered 
somewhat  as  follows : 

"They  came  out  [into  the  ocean]   and  over  wide  expanses   ('vitt'),  and 
needing  (*  t-urfa  ')  cloth  to  dry  themselves  on  ('  ^erru ')  and  food  C  ats '),  away 


1  On  the  initiative  of  Professors  Sophus  Bugge  and  Gustav  Storm,  a 
thorough  examination  of  the  spot  was  made  in  1901,  the  first  named  being 
himself  present;  but  the  stone  was  not  to  be  found. 

27 


IN   NORTHERN    MISTS 

towards  Wineland,  up  into  the  ice  in  the  uninhabited  country.     Evil  can  take 
away  luck,  so  that  one  dies  early." 

Bugge  regards  this  reading  of  this  somewhat  difficult 
inscription  as  doubtful;  but  if  it  is  correct,  this  verse  may 
be  part  of  an  inscription  cut  upon  one  or  more  stones  in  mem- 
ory of  a  young  man  (or  perhaps  several)  from  Ringerike,  who 
took  part  in  an  expedition  by  sea.  According  to  his  explana- 
tion, they  were  then  driven  far  out  into  the  ocean  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Wineland,  and  were  lost,  perhaps  in  the  ice  on  the  east 
coast  of  Greenland  (which  in  the  sagas  is  generally  called  the 
uninhabited  country,  "  ubygS  ") ;  they  abandoned  their  ship  and 
had  to  take  to  the  drift-ice.  He  (or  they)  to  whom  the  inscrip- 
tion refers  thereby  met  his  death  at  an  early  age,  while  at  any 
rate  some  one  must  have  made  his  way  back  and  brought  the 
tale  of  the  voyage.  Probably  there  was  a  commencement  of 
the  inscription,  now  lost,  giving  the  name  of  the  young  man, 
who  must  certainly  have  been  of  good  birth;  for  otherwise,  as 
Bugge  points  out,  a  memorial  with  an  inscription  in  verse  would 
hardly  have  been  raised  to  him.  He  or  his  family  belonged  to 
Ringerike,  and  to  the  neighborhood  in  which  the  stone  was 
put  up. 

The  form  of  the  runes  makes  it  probable,  according  to 
Bugge,  that  the  inscription  dates  from  the  eleventh  century, 
and  perhaps  from  the  period  between  looo  and  1050; 
scarcely  before  that,  though  it  may  be  later.  The  inscription 
would  thus  acquire  a  value  as  possibly  the  earliest  document 
in  which  Wineland  is  mentioned.  What  kind  of  expedition 
the  inscription  records  we  cannot  tell;  there  is  nothing  to 
show  that  it  was  a  real  Wineland  voyage;  the  words  seem 
rather  to  point  to  their  having  been  driven  against  their  will 
out  to  sea  in  the  direction  of  "  Wineland,"  whether  we  are  to 
regard  this  as  the  Wineland  of  myth  or  as  a  historical 
country;  it  might  well  be  used  figuratively  in  an  epitaph 
to  describe  more  graphically  how  far  they  went  from  the 
beaten  track.  It  may  equally  well  have  been  on  a  voyage 
to  Ireland,  the  Faroes,  Iceland,  or  merely  to  the  north  of 
28 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

Norway  that  the  disaster  occurred,  and  they  were  driven  by 
storms  to  the  Greenland  coast;  but  since  it  cannot  be  denied 
that,  as  the  verse  has  been  translated,  the  expressions  appear 
somewhat  unnatural,  it  is  difficult  to  form  any  opinion  as 
to  this.i 

If  this  runic  inscription  from  Ringerike  has  been  cor- 
rectly copied  and  interpreted — which,  as  has  been  said,  is  un- 
certain— then  this  and  Adam  of  Bremen's  information  from 
Denmark  would  show  that  Wineland  was  known  and  discussed 
in  various  parts  of  the  North  in  the  eleventh  century,  long  be- 
fore Icelandic  literature  began  to  be  put  into  writing.  But 
strangely  enough,  in  the  Norwegian  thirteenth-century  work, 
"  Historia  Norvegiae,"  no  mention  is  made  of  Wineland,  al- 
though in  other  respects  the  author  has  made  extensive  use  of 
Adam  of  Bremen's  work;  he  merely  states  that  Greenland  ap- 
proaches the  African  Islands,  by  which,  as  pointed  out  above 
(p.  i),  he  shows  clearly  enough  that  Wineland  was  regarded  as 
belonging  to  the  African  Islands,  or  Insulas  Fortunatae.  The 
"  King's  Mirror,"  -  which  gives  a  detailed  description  of  Green- 
land, does  not  mention  Wineland,  although  the  author  evidently 
held  the  view  that  Greenland  approached  the  universal  con- 
tinent (i.e.,  Africa)  on  the  south.  The  knowledge  of  it  must 
soon  have  been  forgotten  in  Norway,  or  it  was  regarded  as 
a  mythical  country,  while  the  tradition  persisted  longer  in 
Iceland. 

The  last  time  we  meet  with  the  name  of  Wineland  in 
connection  with  a  voyage  is  in  the  "  Islandske  Annaler,"  ^ 
where  it  is  related  in  the  year  1121  that:  "  Eirikr,  bishop  of 
Greenland  [also  called  Eirikr  Upsi],  went  out  to  seek 
[leita]  Wineland."  But  we  are  not  told  anything  more 
of  this   expedition.     The  use   of      "leita"   shows   that   Wine- 

1 1  cannot  accept  the  conjectures  that  Prof.  Yngvar  Nielsen  thinks  may  be 
based  upon  this  inscription  [1905]. 

2  It  is  true  that  only  a  portion  of  this  work  has  been  preserved,  and  that 
Wineland  may  have  been  mentioned  in  the  part  that  has  not  come  down  to  us 
(if  indeed  the  work  was  ever  finished) ;  but  this  is  not  likely. 

2  Cf.  Storm's  edition,  1888,  pp.  19,  59,  112,  252,  320,  473. 

29 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

land  was  not  a  known  country,  it  can  only  apply  to  lands 
about  which  legends  or  reports  are  current;  just  in  the  same 
way  Gardar  in  the  Sturlubok  "  went  to  seek  [for  at  leita] 
Snaelandz "  on  the  advice  of  his  mother,  who  had  second 
sight  (Vol.  I,  p.  255),  or  Ravna-Floki  "for  at  leita  Gardars- 
holms"  (Vol.  I,  p.  257),  and  Eric  the  Red  "  aetlaSi  at  leita  lands 
f>ess"  which  Gunnbjom  had  seen,  etc.  (Vol.  I,  p.  267).  As  soon 
as  the  way  was  known,  it  was  no  longer  necessary  to  "  leita  " 
countries.  If  the  voyage  is  historical,  it  may  have  been  to 
seek  for  the  mythical  country,  the  happy  Wineland  that 
Bishop  Eric  set  out,  as  St.  Brandan  in  the  legend  sought 
for  the  Promised  Land,  and  as,  359  years  later,  the  city  of 
Bristol  actually  sent  men  out  to  look  for  the  happy  isle  of 
Brazil;  but  as  the  coast  of  America  seems  to  have  been 
known,  it  may  apply  to  a  country  there,  of  which  reports 
had  come,  and  to  which  the  name  of  the  mythical  country 
had  been  transferred.  As  Eric  is  called  a  bishop,  it  has  been 
thought  that  this  was  a  missionary  voyage,  which  met  with 
disaster  [cf.  Y.  Nielsen,  1905,  p.  8] ;  but  who  was  there 
to  be  converted  in  an  unknown  land,  for  which  one  had 
first  to  "  seek "  ?  It  would  have  to  be  the  unknown 
Skraelings;  but  is  this  really  likely,  when  we  hear  of  no 
mission  to  the  Skraelings  of  Greenland?  There  must  have 
been  enough  of  the  latter  to  convert  for  the  time  being,  if  it 
had  been  thought  worth  the  trouble.  Nor  do  we  know  much 
more  about  this  Eric  Upsi.^  Probably  he  was  the  same 
man  who  is  called  in  the  Landnamabok  "  Eirikr  Gnupssonr 
Gronlendinga-byskup."  It  is  possible  that  the  see  of  Green- 
land was  founded  as  early  as  iiio,^  and  that  Eric  was  the 
first  bishop  of  Greenland,  and  went  out  there  in  1112,2  but 
he  cannot  have  been  solemnly  consecrated  at  Lund,  like 
later  bishops   after    11 24.    It   is   possible   that   Eric   was   lost, 

1 "  Upsi  "  (or  "uf  si  ")  would  mean  "  big  coalfish  "  or  "  coalfish." 

2  It  has  been  generally  considered  that  it  was  not  until  11 24,  when  Bishop 

Arnaldr  was  consecrated  at  Lund.    In  any  case,  this  is  the  first  ordination  of 

which  we  have  any  information. 

3Cf.  G.  Storm,  1887,  p.  26;  Reeves,  1895,  p.  82. 

30 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

for  we  hear  no  more  of  him,  and  in  1122  and  11 23  the 
Greenlanders  made  efforts  to  obtain  a  new  bishop,  who  was 
consecrated  at  Lund  in  11 24;  but  it  is  curious  that  nothing 
is  then  said  about  any  earlier  bishop;  moreover,  the  entry  in 
the  annals  about  Eric  dates  at  the  earliest  from  the  thir- 
teenth century. 

Some  years  ago  It  was  asserted  that  a  stone  with  a  runic  inscription  had 
been  found  in  Minnesota,  the  so-called  "  Kensington  "  stone.  On  this  is  narrated 
a  journey  of  eight  Swedes  and  twenty-two  Norwegians  from  Wineland  as  far 
as  the  country  west  of  the  Great  Lakes.  But  by  its  runes  and  its  linguistic 
form  this  inscription  betrays  itself  clearly  enough  as  a  modern  forgery,  which 
has  no  interest  for  us  here  [cf.  H.  Gjessing,  1909;  K.  Hoegh,  1909;  H.  R. 
Holand,  1909;  O.  J.  Breda,  1910]. 

The  name  of  Wineland  occurs  extremely  rarely  in  mediaeval 
literature  and  on  maps  outside  Iceland,  and  as  a  rule  it  is 
confused  with  Finland,  as  already  mentioned  (Vol.  I,  p.  198), 
or  again  with  Vindland  (Vendland).  Ordericus  Vitalis  (1141) 
gives  "  The  Orkneys  and  Finland,  together  with  Iceland  and 
Greenland "  as  islands  under  the  king  of  Norway.^  As  the 
passage  seems  to  be  connected  with  Adam  of  Bremen,  who 
also  erroneously  mentions  these  islands  and  Wineland  as 
subject  to  the  Norwegians  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  192),  this  Finland  may 
be  Wineland.  It  was  pointed  out  in  Vol.  I,  p.  198,  that  the 
Latin  "  vinum  "  was  translated  into  Irish  as  "  fin."  Ordericus 
(1075-1143),  who  lived  in  England  until  his  tenth  year,  and 
wrote  in  an  abbey  in  Normandy,  may  well  have  had  com- 
munication with  Irishmen.  In  Ranulph  Higden's  "  Poly- 
chronicon"  (circa  1350)  the  following  are  described  as 
islands  in  the  outer  ocean  (surrounding  the  disc  of  the  earth) : 
first  the  "  Insulae  Fortunatas "  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  346),  imme- 
diately afterwards  "  Dacia "  (=Denmark),  and  to  the  west 
of  this  island  "  Wyntlandia,"  besides  "  Islandia,"  which  has 
Norway  to  the  south  and  the  Polar  Sea  to  the  north,  "  Tile  " 
(Thule)  the  extreme  island  on  the  north-west,  and  "  Nor- 
uegia"     (Norway).     As    this    "Wyntlandia,"    which    in    the 

1  Cf.  Ordericus  Vitalis,  Hist.  Eccles.,  iii.  i,  x,  c.  5;  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii. 
p.  428;  Rafn,  1837,  pp.  337»  460  f.;  A.  A.  Bjornbo,  1909,  p.  206. 

31 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

various  editions  of  Higden's  map  is  called  Witland,  Wint- 
landia,  Wineland,  etc.,  is  placed  out  in  the  ocean  on  the 
west,  it  is  possibly  connected  with  the  old  Wineland 
which  was  an  oceanic  island;  but  as  it  is  mentioned  together 
with  Dacia,  it  may  also  be  confused  with  Vindland  (Vend- 
land),^  and  the  circumstance  that  the  inhabitants  are  supposed 
to  have  sold  winds  to  sailors  who  came  to  them  may  have  con- 
tributed to  this.  This  may  be  connected  with  what  Mela  [iii. 
6]  says  about  the  island  of  Sena  in  the  British  Sea,  off  Brittany 
(see  Vol.  I,  p.  29),  where  the  nine  priestesses  of  the  oracle  of 
the  Gaulish  deity 

"  set  seas  and  winds  in  motion  through  their  incantations,  change  them- 
selves into  what  animal  they  please,  cure  sickness  .  .  .  know  the  future  and 
foretell  it,  but  they  only  assist  those  sailors  who  come  to  ask  counsel  of  them." 

But  the  wind-selling  wizards  of  the  "  Polychronicon "  have 
also  evidently  been  confused  with  the  Finns  (Lapps)  of 
Finmark,  whom  Adam  of  Bremen  had  already  described  as 
particularly  skilled  in  magic.  The  "  Polychronicon "  is  a  free 
revision  of  an  earlier  English  work,  the  "  Geographia 
Universalis,"  of  the  thirteenth  century.  In  this  "  Win- 
landia "  (or  "  Wynlandia ")  and  its  inhabitants,  who  sell 
winds,  are  described  at  greater  length;  it  is  there  placed  on 
the  continent  on  the  sea-coast  and  borders  on  the  mountains 
of  Norway  on  the  east.-  It  is  therefore  Finland,  or  perhaps 
rather  the  country  of  the  Lapp  wizards,  Finmark.  Thus 
through  similarity  of  sound  three  countries  may  have  been 
confused  in  the  "  Polychronicon " :  Wineland,  Vindland,  and 
Finland  (Finmark).  Evidently  the  "  Vinland "  to  be  found 
on  the  continent  in  the  map  of  the  world  in  the  "  Rudimentum 
Novitiorum"  of  Liibeck  (1475)  refers  to  Finland,  and  likewise 
the  "  Vinlandia "  mentioned  in  a  Liibeck  MS.  of  1486-1488, 
which    is    an    extensive    island    reaching    as    far    as    Livonia.^ 

1  In  a  similar  fashion  Torfaeus  [1705]  confused  Vinland  and  Vindland. 

2  Cf,  Polychronicon  Ranulphi  Higden,  etc.  Rerum  Britanicarum  Medii 
^vi  Scriptores,  London,  1865,  i.  p.  322;  Eulogium  Historiarum,  etc.  Rer. 
Brit.  Script.,  i860,  ii.  pp.  78  f.;  W.  Wackernagel,  1844,  PP*  494  f* 

3  Cf.  Nordenskiold,  1889,  p.  3;  A.  A.  Bjornbo,  1909,  pp.  197,  205,  240. 

32 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

Whether  we  regard  Wineland  as  merely  a  mythical  country, 
or  as  a  country  actually  discovered  to  which  the  name  of  the 
mythical  land  was  transferred,  this  limited  dissemination  of  it  in 
literature  and  on  maps  is  striking.  It  shows  that  knowledge  of 
the  myth,  or  of  the  country  with  the  mythical  name,  belonged 
to  older  times,  was  not  very  widely  spread  outside  the  Scandi- 
navian countries  and  Ireland,  and  was  afterwards  forgotten,  in 
spite  of  the  frequent  communication  that  existed  between  the 
intellectual  world  of  the  North  and  that  of  the  South  [cf.  Jos. 
Fischer,  1902,  pp.  106  f.]. 

While  probably  the  name  of  Hvitramanna-land  is  still 
preserved  in  the  fairy-tale  of  Hvittenland,  it  is  possibly  the  name 
of  Wineland  that  has  been  preserved  in  that  "  Vinland " 
which  is  mentioned  in  the  Faroese  lay  of  "  Finnur  hinn 
FriSi " ;  ^  but  if  so,  it  is  the  only  known  instance  of  its 
occurrence  in  popular  poetry.  The  Norwegian  jarl's  son, 
Finnur  hinn  FriSi  (Finn  the  Fair),  courts  Ingebjorg,  the 
daughter  of  an  Irish  king;  she  is  beautiful  as  the  sun,  and 
the  color  of  her  maiden  cheeks  is  like  blood  dropped  from 
snow.2  She  makes  answer :  "  Hadst  thou  slain  the  Wine- 
kings,  then  shouldst  thou  wed  me."  To  Wineland  is  a  far 
voyage,  with  currents  and  mighty  billows.  But  Finn  begs 
his  brother,  Halfdan,  to  go  with  him  over  the  Wineland  sea. 
They  hoist  their  silken  sail,  and  never  lower  it  till  they  arrive 
at  Wineland.  There  they  found  the  three  Wine-kings. 
Thorstein,  the  first,  came  on  a  black  horse,  but  Finn  tore  him 
off  at  the  navel;  the  second,  Ivint,  also  came  on  a  black 
horse.  But  the  third  transformed  himself  into  a  flying 
dragon;  arrows  flew  from  each  of  his  feathers,  and  he  killed 
many  of  their  men.  The  worst  was  that  he  shot  venom  from 
his  mouth  under  Finn's  coat  of  mail,  who,  though  he  could 
not  be  killed  by  arms,  had  to  die.  He  then  drew  a  golden 
ring    from    his    arm    and    sent    it    by    Halfdan    to    Ingebjorg, 

1  Cf.  Hammershaimb,  1855,  PP-  loS  f-J  Rafn,  Antiqu.  Americ,  pp.  330  f. 

2  This  image  of  blood  upon  snow  is  taken  from  Irish  mediaeval  texts,  as 
Moltke  Moe  informs  me. 

33 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

bidding  her  live  happily.  But  Halfdan  sprang  into  the  air, 
seized  the  third  Wine-king,  and  tore  him  off  at  the  navel. 
Halfdan    sailed    back    to    Ireland,    brought    Ingebjorg     these 


IP  isfi  mm  m  mi  mjm  m  m  m-m- 


Map  by  the  Icelander  Jon  Gudmundsson,  born  1574  [Torfaeus,  1706] 

tidings  and  the  ring,  and  slept  three  nights  with  her,  but  on 
the  fourth  she  dies  of  grief,  since  she  can  love  no  chieftain 
after  Finn.  Halfdan  had  a  castle  built  for  himself  and  passed 
his  years  in  Ireland,  but  all  his  days  he  mourned  for  his 
brother.  Although  the  whole  of  this  legend  seems  to  have 
no  connection  with  what  we  know  about  Wineland,  it  is 
34 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

most  probable  that  it  is  the  same  name,  but  that — like  the  tale 
itself  of  the  Irish  king's  daughter  whose  cheek  was  as  blood  upon 
snow — it  came  from  Ireland.  The  name  may  thus  be  a  last 
echo  of  the  Irish  mythical  ideas,  from  which  the  Wineland  of  the 
Icelanders  arose. 

Curiously  enough,  Helluland  is  the  only  one  of  the  names 
of  the  western  lands  that  has  been  widely  adopted  in  Ice- 
landic fairy  tales  and  legendary  sagas.  It  has  to  some  ex- 
tent become  a  complete  fairy-land,  with  trolls  and  giants,  and 
it  is  located  in  various  places,  usually  far  north,  even  to  the  north 
of  Greenland,  and  sometimes  on  its  north-east  coast.  In 
this  fairy-land  was  the  fjord  "  Skuggi  "  (shadow)  ;  it  is  mentioned 
in  "  drvarodds  Saga"  (circa  1300),  where  the  hero  departs  to 
seek  his  enemy,  the  wizard  Ogmund,  in  Helluland,  and 
again  in  "  BarSarsaga  Snaef ellsass "  (fifteenth  century),  in  the 
"  pattr "  of  Gunnari  Keldugnupsfifl,  in  the  "  Halfdanarsaga 
Bronufostra,"  in  the  Saga  of  Halfdani  Eysteinssyni,  and  in  Gest 
Bardsson's  Saga.^ 

In  the  geography  which  under  the  name  of  "  Gripla  '*  was  in- 
cluded in  Bjorn  Jonsson's  "  Gronland's  Annaler,"  it  is  said  of  the 
countries  opposite  Greenland : 

"  FurSustrandir  is  the  name  of  a  land,  where  is  severe  frost,  so  that  it  is  not 
habitable,  so  far  as  people  know;  south  of  it  is  Helluland,  which  is  called  Skrae- 
lingja-land;  thence  it  is  a  short  distance  to  Wineland  the  Good,  which  some 
people  think  goes  out  from  Africa.     .     .     ." 

With  this  may  be  compared  another  MS.  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  where  we  read: 

"West  of  the  great  ocean  from  Spain,  which  some  call  Ginnungagap,  and 
which  goes  between  lands,  there  is  first  towards  the  north  Wineland  the  Good, 
next  to  it  is  called  Markland  farther  north,  thereafter  are  the  wastes  [i.e.,  the 
wastes  of  Helluland]  where  Skraelings  live,  then  there  are  still  more  wastes  to 
Greenland."     [Cf.  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  pp.  224,  227.] 

From  this  it  looks  as  if  Helluland  was  regarded  as  inhabited 
by  Skraslings,  which  agrees  with  the  reality,  if  it  is  Labrador. 

1  Cf.  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  pp.  516  f.;  Storm,  1887,  pp.  37  f. 

35 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

But  these  MSB.  belong  to  the  seventeenth  century,  and  may 
be  influenced  by  the  geographical  knowledge  of  later  times.  In 
Gripla  there  is  evident  confusion,  as  FurSustrandir  has 
been  confounded  with  Helluland,  and  the  latter  with 
Markland.^ 

No  record  is  found  of  any  voyage  to  Wineland  after 
1121;  but  on  the  other  hand  there  is  mention  more  than 
two  hundred  years  later  of  the  voyage,  referred  to  above,  to 
Markland  from  Greenland  in  1347.  Of  this  we  read  in  the 
Icelandic  annals  ("  Skalholts- Annals  ")  for  that  year:  "Then 
came  also  [i.e.,  besides  ships  from  Norway  already  mentioned] 
a  ship  from  Greenland,  smaller  in  size  than  the  small  vessels 
that  trade  to  Iceland.  It  came  to  Outer  Straumfjord  [on  the 
south  side  of  Snaefellsnes] ;  it  was  without  an  anchor.  There 
were  seventeen  men  on  board  [in  the  Flatey-annals  there  are 
eighteen  men],  and  they  had  sailed  to  Markland,  but  after- 
wards [i.e.,  on  the  homeward  voyage  to  Greenland]  were 
driven  hither." 

As  the  "  Skalholts-Annals  "  were  written  not  many  years  after 
this  (perhaps  about  1362),  it  must  be  regarded  as  quite  certain 
that  this  ship  had  been  to  Markland;  but  on  the  homeward  voy- 
age, perhaps  while  she  lay  at  anchor,  was  overtaken  by  a  storm, 
so  that  the  cable  had  to  be  cut,  and  was  driven  out  to  sea  past 
Cape  Farewell  right  across  to  the  west  coast  of  Iceland.  It 
is  not  likely  that  they  sailed  so  far  as  Markland  simply  to  fish, 
which  they  might  have  done  off  Greenland;  the  object  was 
rather  to  fetch  timber  or  wood  for  fashioning  implements, 
which  was  valuable  in  treeless  Greenland;  the  driftwood  which 

1  G.  Storm  [1890,  p.  347]  thinks  that  something  is  omitted  in  "  Gripla  "  and  that 
it  should  read:  "  su5r  fra  er  Helluland,  I'd  er  Markland,  JJat  er  kallat  Skraelinga- 
land"  (to  the  south  is  Helluland,  then  there  is  Markland,  which  is  called 
Skraelingaland).  But  this  seems  doubtful;  it  would  not  in  any  case  explain 
why  FurSustrandir  is  placed  to  the  north  of  Helluland.  When  Storm  alleges 
as  a  reason  that  Helluland  is  never  mentioned  as  a  place  of  human  habitation, 
but  only  for  trolls  (in  the  later  legendary  sagas),  he  forgets  that  the  Skrae- 
lings  were  trolls,  or,  as  he  himself  puts  it  elsewhere  [1890,  p.  357],  that  the 
Skraelings  were  not  accounted  "  true  human  beings." 

36 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

came  on  the  East  Greenland  current  did  not  go  very  far. 
It  is  true  that  they  could  not  carry  much  timber  on  their 
small  vessels;  but  they  had  to  make  the  best  of  the  craft 
they  possessed,  and  they  could  always  carry  a  suffi- 
cient supply  of  the  more  valuable  woods  for  the  manufac- 
ture of  tools,  weapons  and  appliances.  They  must  for  in- 
stance have  had  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  wood  for  making 
bows ;  driftwood  was  of  little  use  for  this. 

But  if  this  voyage  took  place  in  1347,  and  we  only  hear  of 
it  through  the  accident  of  the  vessel  getting  out  of  her  course 
and  being  driven  to  Iceland,  we  may  be  sure  that  there  were 
many  more  like  it;  only  that  these  were  not  the  expeditions 
of  men  of  rank,  which  attracted  attention,  but  everyday 
voyages  for  the  support  of  life,  like  the  sealing  expeditions  to 
NorSrsetur,  and  when  nothing  particular  happened  to  these  ves- 
sels, such  as  being  driven  to  Iceland,  we  hear  nothing  about 
them.  We  must  therefore  suppose  that,  even  if  they  had  to  give 
up  the  idea  of  forming  settlements  in  the  west,  the  Greenland- 
ers  occasionally  visited  Markland  (Newfoundland  or  the  south- 
ernmost part  of  Labrador?),  perhaps  chiefly  to  obtain  wood  of 
different  kinds. 

In  the  so-called  "  Greenland  Annals,"  put  together  from  old 
sources  by  Bjorn  Jonsson  of  Skardsa  (beginning  of  the 
seventeenth  century),  it  is  said  of  the  districts  on  the  west 
coast  of  Greenland,  to  the  north  of  the  Western  Settlement,  that 
they  "  take  up  trees  and  all  the  drift  that  comes  from  the  bays 
of  Markland"  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  299).  This  shows  that  it  was  cus- 
tomary to  regard  Markland  as  the  region  from  which  wood  was 
to  be  obtained.  The  name  itself  (^woodland)  may  have  con- 
tributed to  this  view;  but  the  fact  that  it  survived  long  after 
all  mention  of  Wineland  had  ceased,  may  probably  be  due  to 
communication  with  the  country  having  been  kept  up  in 
later  times,  and  to  this  name  being  the  really  historical  one  on 
the  coast  of  America. 

According  to  the  Icelandic  annals  the  voyagers  from 
Markland    who    came    to    Iceland    in    1347,    proceeded    in    the 

37 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

following  year  (1348)  to  Norway.  This  was,  no  doubt,  with 
the  idea  of  getting  back  to  Greenland,  as  there  was  no  sailing 
to  that  country  from  Iceland,  and  they  would  not  trust  their 
vessel  on  another  ocean  voyage.  But  in  Norway,  where 
they  arrived  at  Bergen,  they  had  a  long  while  to  wait. 
"  Knarren,"  the  royal  trading  ship,  seems  to  have  been  the 
only  vessel  that  kept  up  communication  with  Greenland  at 
that  time.  We  know  that  "  Knarren "  returned  to  Bergen 
in  1346,  and  did  not  sail  again  until  1355.  From  a  royal 
letter  of  1354,  which  has  been  preserved,  it  appears  that 
extraordinary  preparations  were  made  for  the  fitting-out  and 
manning  of  this  expedition,  to  prevent  Christianity  in  Green- 
land from  "  falling  away."  Perhaps  the  presence  in  Norway 
of  these  Markland  voyagers  from  Greenland  had  something  to 
do  with  the  awakening  of  interest  in  that  distant  country,  and 
perhaps  it  is  not  altogether  impossible  that  the  intention  was 
not  only  to  secure  and  strengthen  the  possessions  in  Greenland, 
but  also  to  explore  the  fertile  countries  farther  west.  It 
cannot  be  remarked,  however,  that  it  brought  about  any  change 
in  the  fading  knowledge  of  these  valuable  regions,  and  we  hear 
no  more  of  them  until  their  rediscovery  at  the  close  of  the  fif- 
teenth century. 

Ebbe  Hertzberg,  Keeper  of  the  Public  Records  of  Norway, 
has  shown  [1904,  pp.  210  f.]  that  there  is  a  remarkable  and  in- 
teresting similarity  between  the  game  of  lacrosse,  which  is  played 
by  the  Indians  of  the  north-east  of  North  America,  and  the  An- 
cient Norse  game,  "knattleikr"  (i.e.,  ball-game),  so  far  as  we 
know  it  from  the  sagas.  It  was  greatly  in  favor  in  Iceland. 
If  Hertzberg  is  right  in  his  supposition  that  the  Indians  may 
have  got  this  game  from  the  Norsemen,  this  would  lend  strong 
support  to  the  view  that  the  latter  had  considerable  intercourse 
with  America  and  its  natives. 

According  to  Hertzberg's  acute  interpretation  of  the  accounts  of  "  knatt- 
leikr "  in  the  various  sagas,  it  was  played  on  a  large  level  piece  of  ground 
("  leikvpUr,"  i.e.,  playing-ground),  or  on  the  ice,  usually  by  many  players.  These 
were  divided  into  two  sides,  in  such  a  way  that  those  most  nearly  equal  in 
38 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

strength  on  each  side  were  paired  as  opponents  and  stood  near  to  each 
other,  and  the  two  teams  were  thus  spread  in  pairs  over  the  whole  ground. 
Each  player  had  a  club  with  which  he  either  struck  or  caught  and  "  carried  " 
the  ball.  The  club  had  a  hollow  or  a  net  in  which  the  ball  could  be  caught 
and  lie.  When  the  ball  was  set  going,  the  game  was  for  the  one  who  was 
nearest  to  seize  or  catch  it,  preferably  with  his  club,  and  to  run  off  with  it  and 
try  to  "carry  it  out,"  i.e.,  past  a  goal  or  mark;  but  in  this  his  particular  op- 
ponent tried  to  hinder  him  with  all  his  strength  and  agility.  The  other  players 
might  not  interfere  directly  in  the  struggle  of  the  two  opponents  for  the  ball. 
If  the  one  who  had  the  ball  was  so  hard  pressed  by  his  opponent  that  he  had  to 
give  it  up,  he  tried  to  throw  it  to  one  of  his  own  side,  who  then  again  had  to 
reckon  with  his  own  opponent  in  his  attempt  to  "  carry  it  out."     This  game  was 


The  game  of  Lacrosse  among  the  Menominee  Indians  [after  W.  J.  Hoffman, 
1896].     On  the  left,  a  "  crosse,"  about  a  yard  long 

much  played  by  the  Icelanders;  it  was  apt  to  be  rough,  and  men  were  often 
disabled,  or  even  killed  by  their  opponents. 

Hertzberg  shows  how  the  Canadian  Indians'  game  of  lacrosse,  which  has 
become  the  national  game  of  Canada,  completely  resembles  in  all  essentials 
this  peculiar  Norse  ball-game  from  Iceland.  The  game  of  lacrosse  is,  as  Prof. 
Y.  Nielsen  has  pointed  out  (1905),  more  widely  diffused  among  the  Indian 
tribes  of  North  America  than  Hertzberg  was  aware.  Dr.  Walter  James  Hoff- 
man 1  has  described  it  among  the  Menominee  Indians  in  Wisconsin,  the  Ojibwa 
tribe  in  northern  Minnesota,  the  Dakota  Indians  on  the  upper  Missouri,  and 
among  the  Choctaws,  Chickasaws  and  kindred  tribes  farther  south.     Hoffman 


1  The  Menominee  Indians,  Fourteenth  Ann.  Rep.  of  the  Bureau  of  Ethnol- 
ogy, 1892-1893.  Washington,  1896,  Vol.  I,  pp.  127,  f.;  cf.  also  "American  An- 
thropologist," Vol.  III.  pp.  134  f,  Washington,  i8go. 

39 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

also  mentions  that  opponents  are  picked  and  that  the  game  is  played  in  pairs 
[1896,  i.  p.  132].  Among  the  Ojibways,  he  says,  the  player  who  is  carrying  the 
ball  is  often  placed  hors  de  combat  by  a  blow  on  the  arm  or  leg;  serious  injur- 
ies only  occur  when  the  stakes  are  high,  or  when  there  is  enmity  between  some 
of  the  players.  Among  the  more  southern  tribes,  on  the  other  hand,  the  game 
is  much  more  violent,  the  crosse  is  longer,  made  of  hickory,  and  it  is  often 
sought  to  disable  the  runner.     This,  then,  is  even  more  like  the  Icelandic  game. 

Hoffman  thinks  that  the  game  is  undoubtedly  derived 
from  one  o£  the  eastern  Algonkin  tribes,  possibly  in  the 
valley  of  the  St.  Lawrence.  Thence  it  reached  the  Huron 
Iroquois,  and  later  it  spread  farther  south  to  the  Cherokees, 
etc.  In  a  similar  v^^ay  it  was  carried  westward  and  adopted 
by  many  tribes.  This,  then,  points  to  its  having  originated  in 
just  those  districts  where  one  would  have  expected  it  to  come 
from,  if  it  was  brought  by  the  Norsemen,  as  Hertzberg  thinks. 
That  the  game  is  so  widely  diffused  in  America  and  has 
become  so  much  a  part  of  the  Indians'  life,  even  of  their 
religious  life,  shows  that  it  is  very  ancient  there,  and  this,  too, 
supports  Hertzberg's  assumption  that  it  is  derived  from  the 
Norsemen.  It  is  true  that  Eug.  Beauvois  ^  has  pointed  out 
the  possibility  of  the  game  having  been  introduced  into 
Canada  by  people  from  Normandy  after  the  sixteenth  century; 
but  before  such  an  objection  could  carry  weight,  it  would  have 
to  be  made  probable  that  the  characteristic  Norse  game  was 
really  played  in  Normandy;  but  this  is  not  known.  In  support 
of  Hertzberg's  view  it  may  also  be  adduced — a  point  that  he 
himself  has  not  noticed — that  the  Icelanders  appear  to  have  in- 
troduced the  same  ball-game  to  another  American  people  with 
whom  they  came  in  touch,  namely,  the  Eskimo  of  Greenland. 
Hans  Egede  [1741,  p.  93]  says: 

"Flaying  ball  is  their  most  usual  game,  especially  by  moonlight,  and  they 
have  two  ways  of  playing:  When  they  have  divided  themselves  into  two  sides, 
one  throws  the  ball  to  another  who  is  on  his  own  side.  Those  of  the  other 
side  must  endeavor  to  get  the  ball  from  them,  and  thus  it  goes  on  alternately 
among  them.  .  .  ."  (The  other  way  of  playing  mentioned  by  Egede  is 
more  like  foot-ball.) 

1  "  Journal  de  la  Societe  des  Americanistes  de  Paris,"  1905,  No.  2,  p.  319. 
40 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 


This  description,  together  with  Egede's  drawing,  from 
which  it  appears,  among  other  things,  that  the  opponents 
are  arranged  in  pairs,  seems  to  show  that  the  Eskimo  game 
was  very  like  the  Icelanders'  "knattleikr"  and  the  Indians 
"  lacrosse " ;  but  with  the  difference  that,  according  to 
Egede's  account,  the  Eskimo  did  not  use  any  club  or  crosse; 
moreover,  from  Egede's  drawing  it  looks  as  if  both  men 
and  women  took  part,  as  with  certain  Indian  tribes.  That 
there  is  a  connec- 
tion here  appears 
natural.  The  most 
probable  explanation 
may  be  that  the 
Eskimo  as  well  as 
the  Indians  got  this 
ball-game  from  the 
Norsemen.  That  the 
Eskimo  should  have 
learnt  it  from  the 
whalers  after  the 
rediscovery  of  Green- 
land in  the  sixteenth 

century  is  unlikely,  as  also  that  it  should  have  come  to  the  In- 
dians from  the  Eskimo  round  the  north  of  Baffin  Bay  and  through 
Baffin  Land  and  Labrador ;  nor  is  it  any  more  likely  that  the  Ice- 
landers should  have  learnt  it  of  the  Eskimo  in  Greenland,  who 
again  had  it  from  America. 

It  is  in  itself  a  strange  thing  that  the  discovery  of  a  country 
like  North  America,  with  conditions  so  much  more  favorable 
than  Greenland  and  Iceland,  should  not  have  led  to  a  permanent 
settlement.  But  there  are  many,  and  in  my  judgment  sufficient 
reasons  which  explain  this.  We  must  remember  that  such 
an  outpost  of  civilization  as  Greenland  offered  poor  oppor- 
tunities for  the  equipment  of  such  settlements;  the  settlers 
would  have  to  be  prepared  for  continual  conflicts  with  the  In- 
dians,   who    with    their    warlike    capacity    and    their    numbers 

41 


Game  of  ball  among  the  Eskimo  of 
Greenland   [Hans  Egede,   1741] 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

might  easily  be  more  than  a  match  for  a  handful  of  Green- 
landers,  even  though  the  latter  had  some  advantage  in  their 
weapons  of  iron^ — and  of  these,  too,  the  Greenlanders  never 
had  a  very  good  supply,  as  appears  from  several  narratives. 
There  would  also  be  need  of  ships,  which  were  costly  and  diffi- 
cult to  procure  in  Greenland;  the  few  that  were  there  certainly 
had  enough  to  do,  and  could  hardly  manage  more  than  an  occa- 
sional trip  to  Markland  for  timber.  Moreover,  as  the  Greenland 
settlements  themselves  and  their  oversea  communications 
declined  after  the  close  of  the  thirteenth  century,  so  also  did 
their  communication  with  America  decrease,  until  it  finally  ceased 
altogether. 

It  would  thus  appear,  from  all  that  has  been  put  for- 
ward in  this  chapter,  that  Wineland  the  Good  was  originally  a 
mythical  country,  closely  connected  with  the  happy  lands  of 
Irish  myths  and  legends — which  had  their  first  source  in  the 
Greek  Elysium  and  Isles  of  the  Blest,  in  Oriental  sailors' 
myths,  and  an  admixture  of  Biblical  conceptions.  The 
description  of  the  country  has  acquired  important  features 
from  Isidore's  account  of  the  Insulas  Fortunatas  and  from 
older  classical  literature.  This  mythical  country  is  to  be 
compared  with  "  Hvitramanna-land "  (the  white  men's  land) 
"which  some  call  Ireland  the  Great  (' Irland  hit  Mikla')." 
Of  this  the  "  Landnama "  tells  us  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  353)  that  it 
lay  near  Wineland,  in  the  west  of  the  ocean,  six  "  dcegrs' " 
sail  west  of  Ireland  (according  to  the  "  Eyrbyggja  Saga  "  it  lay 
to  the  south-west) ;  the  Icelandic  chief,  Are  Marsson,  was 
driven  there  by  storms,  was  not  allowed  to  depart,  but  was 
baptized  there  and  held  in  great  esteem.  Furthermore,  the 
same  land  is  mentioned  in  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  as  lying 
opposite  Markland  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  330).  Finally,  in  the  "  Eyrbyggja 
Saga  "  there  is  a  tale  of  a  voyage  (see  later)  which  evidently 
had  the  same  country  as  its  object,  though  it  is  not 
mentioned  by  name.  Since  Thorkel  Gellisson  is  given  as 
the  authority  for  the  story  in  the  "  Landnama,"  the  legend 
42 


WINELAND  THE   GOOD 

may   have   reached    Iceland   about    the    close    of   the    eleventh 
century. 

This  Irish  land  may  also  be  derived  from  an  adaptation 
of  the  ancients'  myth  of  the  western  Isles  of  the  Blest/  and 
it  evidently  corresponds  to  one  of  the  mythical  countries  of 
the  christianized  Irish  legends.  It  bears  great  resemblance 
in  particular  to  "  the  Island  of  Strong  Men "  ("  Insula 
Virorum  Fortium ")  in  the  "  Navigatio  Brandani,"  which  is 
also  called  there  "the  Isle  of  Anchorites"  [Schroder,  1871, 
pp.  24,  17].  Three  generations  dwelt  there:  the  first  genera- 
tion, the  children,  had  clothes  white  as  driven  snow,  the 
second  of  the  color  of  hyacinth,  and  the  third  of  Dalmatian 
purple.  The  name  itself,  which  in  Old  Norse  would  become 
*'  Starkramanna-land,"  shows  much  similarity  of  formation ; 
besides  which  it  is  the  Isle  of  Anchorites  that  is  in  question, 
and  one  of  the  three  generations  wears  white  garments; 
we  are  thus  not  far  from  the  formation  of  a  name  "  Hvitra- 
manna-land."     There    is    yet    another   point    of    agreement,    in 

1  Storm's  explanation  [1887,  pp.  68  f.] :  that  it  was  Dicuil's  account  of  the 
discovery  of  Iceland  by  Irish  monks  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  164)  which  formed  the  basis 
of  the  myth  of  Hvitramanna-land,  may  appear  very  attractive  and  simple;  but 
Storm  does  not  seem  to  have  noticed  the  connection  that  exists  between  the 
Irish  mythical  islands  in  the  west  and  those  of  classical  literature.  When  he 
points  out  the  similarity  between  the  six  days'  voyage  west  of  Ireland  and 
Dicuil's  statement  of  six  days'  voyage  to  Iceland  (Thule)  northward  from 
Britain,  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  Dicuil  this  is  merely  a  quotation  from 
Pliny,  and,  further,  that  the  six  days'  voyage  has  Britain  and  not  Ireland  for 
its  starting-point.  In  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  Wineland  lies  six  "  doegrs' " 
sail  from  Greenland.  Cf.  that  in  Plutarch  ["  De  facie  in  orbe  Lunae,"  941] 
Ogygia  lies  five  days'  voyage  west  of  Britain,  and  to  the  north-west  of  it  are 
three  islands,  to  which  the  voyage  might  thus  be  one  of  six  days.  Let  us  sup- 
pose, merely  as  an  experiment,  that  Ogygia,  the  fertile  vine-growing  island  of 
the  "  hulder  "  Calypso,  was  Wineland,  then  the  other  three  islands  to  the  north- 
west might  be  Hvitramanna-land,  Markland  and  Helluland,  which  would  fit  in. 
The  northernmost  would  then  have  to  be  the  island  on  which  the  sleeping 
Cronos  is  imprisoned,  with  "  many  spirits  about  him  as  his  companions  and 
servants"  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  156,  182).  Dr.  Scisco  [1908,  pp.  379  f.,  515  f.]  and 
Prof.  H.  Koht  [1909,  pp.  133  f.]  think  that  Are  Marsson  may  have  been  bap- 
tized in  Ireland  and  have  been  chief  of  a  Christian  tribe  on  its  west  coast, 
where  Hvitramanna-land  may  have  been  a  district  inhabited  by  fair  Norsemen. 

43 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

that,  just  as  Are  Marsson  was  not  allowed  to  leave  Hvitra- 
manna-land,  so  one  of  Brandan's  companions  had  to  stay- 
behind  on  the  Isle  of  Anchorites.  It  may  also  be  supposed 
that  the  name  of  the  White  Men's  Land  is  connected  with 
the  White  Christ  and  with  the  white  garments  of  the 
baptized;  the  circumstance  of  Are  Marsson  being  baptized 
there  points  in  the  same  direction.^  But  to  this  it  may  be 
added  that  various  myths  and  legends  shov/  it  to  have  been 
a  common  idea  among  the  Irish  that  aged  hermits  and  holy 
men  were  white.  The  old  man  who  welcomes  Brandan  to 
the  promised  land  in  the  "  Imram  Brenaind "  [cf.  Zimmer, 
1889,  p.  139;  Schirmer,  1888,  p.  34]  has  no  clothes,  but  his 
body  is  covered  with  dazzling  white  feathers,  like  a  dove 
or  a  gull,  and  angelic  is  the  speech  of  his  lips.  In  the 
Latin  account  of  Brandan's  life  ("  Vita  sancti  Brandani ") 
the  man  is  called  Paulus,  he  is  again  without  clothes,  but  his 
body  is  covered  with  white  hair,^  and  in  both  tales  the  man 
came  from  Ireland  [cf.  Schirmer,  1888,  p.  40].  The  cave- 
dweller  Paulus  on  an  island  in  the  "  Navigatio  Brandani " 
[Schroder,  1871,  p.  32]  is  without  clothes,  but  wholly  covered 
by  the  hair  of  his  head,  his  beard  and  other  hair  down  to  the 
feet,  and  they  were  white  as  snow  on  account  of  his  great 
age.  It  is  evident  that  the  whiteness  is  often  attributed,  as 
in    the    last    instance,    to    age;    but    it    is    also    the    heavenly 

1  Since  the  above  was  printed  in  the  Norwegian  edition  of  this  book,  Prof. 
Moltke  Moe  has  found  a  "  Tir  na-Fer  Finn,"  or  the  White  Men's  Land,  men- 
tioned in  Irish  sagas  of  the  thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries.  The  white 
men  (f  er  finn)  are  evidently  the  same  as  the  "  Albati "  (i.e.,  the  baptized 
dressed  in  white).  Tir  na-Fer  Finn  and  Hvitramanna-land  are  consequently 
direct  renderings  of  the  "  Terra  Albatorum "  (i.e.,  the  land  of  the  baptized 
dressed  in  white),  which  is  mentioned  in  earlier  Irish  literature.  The  origin  of 
the  Icelandic  legend  about  Hvitramanna-land  seems  thus  to  be  quite  clear. 

2  Hermits  like  this,  covered  with  white  hair,  also  occur  outside  Ireland. 
Three  monks  from  Mesopotamia  wished  to  journey  to  the  place  where  Heaven 
and  earth  meet,  and  after  many  adventures,  which  often  resemble  those  of  the 
Brandan  legend,  they  came  to  a  cave,  where  dwelt  a  holy  man,  Macarius,  who 
was  completely  covered  with  snow-white  hair,  but  the  skin  of  his  face  was  like 
that  of  a  tortoise  [cf.  Schirmer,  1888,  p.  42].  The  last  feature  might  recall  an  ape. 
44 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

color,  and  the  white  clothing  of  hair  (or  feathers)  may  also 
have  some  connection  with  the  white  lamb  in  the  Revelation. 
In  the  tale  of  Maelduin's  voyage,  which  is  older  than 
those  of  Brandan's,  Maelduin  meets  in  two  places,  on  a 
sheep-island  and  on  a  rock  in  the  sea,  with  hermits  wholly 
covered  with  the  white  hair  of  their  bodies — they,  too,  were 
both  Irish — and  on  two  other  islands,  the  soil  of  one  of 
which  was  as  white  as  a  feather,  he  meets  with  men  whose 
only  clothing  was  the  hair  of  their  bodies  ^  [cf.  Zimmer, 
1889,  pp,  162,  163,  169,  172,  178].  In  the  "Navigatio"  Brandan 
also  meets  on  the  island  of  Alibius  an  aged  man  with  hair 
of  the  color  of  snow  and  with  shining  countenance.  Cf. 
Christ  revealing  himself  among  the  seven  candlesticks  to  John  on 
the  isle  of  Patmos:  "His  head  and  his  hairs  were  white  like 
wool,  as  white  as  snow;  and  his  eyes  were  as  a  flame 
of  fire  "  [Rev.  i.  14]. 

Among  the  Irish  the  white  color  again  forms  a  conspicuous  feature  in  the 
description  of  persons,  especially  supernatural  beings,  in  ancient  non-Christian 
legends  and  myths.  The  name  of  their  national  hero,  "  Finn,"  means  white.  To 
Finn  MacCumaill  there  comes  in  the  legend  a  king's  daughter  of  unearthly 
size  and  beauty,  "  Bebend "  (the  white  woman),  from  the  Land  of  Virgins 
("  Tir  na-n-Ingen  ")  in  the  west  of  the  sea,  and  she  has  marvelously  beautiful 
white  hair  [cf.  Zimmer,  1889,  p.  269].  The  corresponding  maiden  of  the  sea- 
people,  in  the  "  Imram-Brenaind,"  whom  Brandan  finds,  is  also  whiter  than 
snow  or  sea-spray  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  363).  The  physician  Libra  at  the  court  of 
Manannan,  king  of  the  Promised  Land,  has  three  daughters  with  white  hair. 
When  Midir,  the  king  of  the  sid  (fairies)  is  trying  to  entice  away  Etain,  queen 
of  the  high-king  of  Ireland,  he  says:  "Oh,  white  woman,^  wilt  thou  go  with 
me  to  the  land  of  marvels.   .   .   .   thy  body  has  the  white  color  of  snow  to  the 


1  The  resemblance  to  the  hairy  women  (great  apes?)  that  Hanno  found  on 
an  island  to  the  west  of  Africa  and  whose  skin  he  brought  to  Carthage  (cf. 
Vol.  I,  p.  88)  is  doubtless  only  accidental.  The  hair-covered  hermits  may  be 
connected  with  stories  of  hermits  and  the  hairy  wild-man,  "  wilder  Mann," 
"  Silvanus,"  who,  in  the  opinion  of  Moltke  Moe,  is  the  same  that  reappears 
in  the  Norwegian  tale  of  "  Villemand  og  Magnhild  "  (  =  der  wilde  Mann  and 
Magdelin). 

2  White  and  snow-white  women  and  maidens  are,  moreover,  of  common  oc- 
currence also  in  Germanic  legends  [cf.  J.  Grimm,  1876,  ii.  pp.  803  f.].  Expres- 
sions like  white  or  snow-white  to  depict  the  dazzling  beauty  of  the  female  body 

45 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

very  top,"  etc.  etc.  [cf.  Zimmer,  1889,  pp.  273,  279].  A  corresponding  idea  to 
that  of  the  Irish  sid-people,  especially  the  women,  being  white,  is  perhaps  that 
of  the  Norse  elves  being  thought  light  (cf.  "  lysalver,"  light-elves),  or  even 
white.  The  elf-maiden  in  Sweden  is  slender  as  a  lily  and  white  as  snow,  and 
elves  in  Denmark  may  also  be  snow-white  (cf.  also  the  fact  that  elves  are 
described  as  white  nymphs,  "  albae  nymphse  "). 

It  seems  natural  that  these  ideas — of  whiteness  as 
specially  beautiful,  and  mostly  applied  to  the  "  sid "  or 
elves,  to  the  garments  of  baptism,  and  to  holy  men 
and  hermits — led  to  a  name  which,  in  conformity  with  the 
Strong  Men's  Island  of  the  "  Navigatio,"  would  become  the 
White  Men's  Land,  for  the  mythical  western  land  oversea, 
where  Are  Marsson  was  baptized,  but  which  he  could  not 
leave  again,  and  where,  according  to  the  "  Eyrbyggja  Saga," 
the  language  resembled  Irish.  This,  then,  is  precisely  the 
"  Isle  of  Anchorites."  The  country  may  have  originated 
through  a  contact  of  ideas  from  the  religious  world  and  the 
profane,  original  conceptions  from  the  latter  having  become 
christianized.  Doubtless  the  white  garments,  which  were 
connected  with  the  other  world,  and  which  became  the 
heavenly  raiment  of  the  Christians,  have  also  played  a  part. 
In  Plato  a  white-clad  woman  (i.e.,  one  from  the  other  world) 
comes  to  Socrates  in  a  dream  and  announces  to  him  that  in 
three  days  he  is  to  depart.  During  the  transfiguration  on 
the  mountain  Jesus'  face  "  did  shine  as  the  sun,  and  his 
raiment  was  white  as  the  light"  [Matt.  xvii.  2],  or  "his 
raiment  became  shining,  exceeding  white  as  snow"  [Mark.  ix. 
3].  On  the  basis  of  this  Christian  conception  the  image  of 
the  world  beyond  the  grave  has  taken  the  form  of  a  fair, 
shining  land,  as  in  the  immense  literature  of  visions;  and 
thus  too  in  the  "  Floamanna  Saga"  [Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  ii.  p.  103], 
where  Thorgil's  wife,  Thorey,  sees  in  a  dream  a  "fair  country 
with    shining    white    men"    ("menn    bjarta"),    and    Thorgils 

also  occur  in  Icelandic  literature,  just  as  the  lily-white  arms  are  already  found 
in    Homer.     Cf.    further    such    names    as    SnjofriSr,    Snelaug,    Schneewitchen 
(Snow-white),  etc.     [Cf.  Moltke  Moe's  communications  in  A.  Helland,  1905,  iL 
pp.  641  f.]. 
46 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

interprets  it  to  mean  "  another  world  "  where  "  good  awaits  her  " 
and  "  holy  men  would  help  her." 

There  is  further  a  possibility  that  some  of  the  conceptions 
attached  to  Hvitramanna-land  may  be  connected  with  ancient 
Celtic  tales  which  in  antiquity  were  associated  with  the 
Cassiterides  (in  Celtic  Brittany) ;  in  any  case  there  is  a 
remarkable  similarity  between  the  mention  in  Eric  the  Red's 
Saga  of  men  who  went  about  in  white  clothes,  carried  poles 
before  them,  and  cried  aloud  (see  Vol.  I,  330),  and  Strabo's 
description  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  27)  of  the  men  in  the  Cassiterides 
in  black  cloaks  with  kirtles  reaching  to  the  feet,  who  wander 
about  with  staves,  like  the  Furies  in  tragedy.  That  Strabo 
should  see  a  resemblance  to  the  Eumenides  (Furies)  and 
therefore  make  his  men  black,  while  the  Northern  author 
has  the  Christian  ideas  and  in  agreement  with  the  name  of 
Hvitramanna-land  gives  them  white  clothes,  need  not  surprise 
us.  Even  if  Storm  [1887]  is  correct  in  his  supposition  that 
the  white  men's  banners,  or  "  poles  to  which  strips  were 
attached  "  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  330),  are  connected  with  ecclesiastical 
processions,  this  may  be  a  later  popular  modification,  just  as 
the  white  hermits  out  in  the  ocean  may  be  a  modification  of 
pre-Christian,  or  at  any  rate  non-religious,  conceptions  in 
Ireland. 

Reference  has  been  made  (p.  32)  to  the  resemblance  between  the  accounts 
of  the  inhabitants  of  Wynthlandia  (  =  Wineland),  who  were  versed  in  magic, 
and  of  the  Celtic  priestesses  in  the  island  of  Sena  off  Brittany.  One  might  be 
tempted  to  think  that  here  again  there  is  some  connection  or  other  between 
these  Breton  priestesses  and,  on  the  one  hand  the  Irishmen  in  Hvitramanna- 
land,  on  the  other  the  men  of  the  Cassiterides  (near  Sena)  who  were  like  the 
Furies.  Dionysius  Periegetes  [510;  cum  Eustath.  i]  relates  that  in  this  island 
of  Sena  women  crowned  with  ivy  conducted  nocturnal  bacchanals,  with  shrieks 
and  violent  noise  (cf.  the  men  in  white  clothes  in  Hvitramanna-land,  who  car- 
ried poles  and  cried  aloud).  No  male  person  might  set  foot  on  the  island,  but 
the  women  went  over  to  the  men  on  the  mainland,  and  returned  after  having 
had  intercourse  with  them  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  356).  Exactly  the  same  thing  is  re- 
lated by  Strabo  [iv.  198]  of  the  Samnite  women  on  a  little  island  in  the  sea, 
not  far  from  the  mouth  of  the  Liger  (Loire);  inspired  by  Bacchus  they  honor 
that  god  in  mysteries  and  other  unusually  holy  actions.  The  Druids  had  their 
sanctuaries  on  islands,  and  Mona  (Anglesey)  was  their  headquarters.    Tacitus 

47 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

[Ann.  xiv.  30]  tells  of  their  fanatical  women  who,  in  white  clothes  (grave- 
clothes)  with  disheveled  hair  and  flaming  torches,  conducted  themselves  alto- 
gether like  Furies  on  the  arrival  of  the  Romans. 

The  circumstance  of  Hvitramanna-land  being,  according 
to  the  "  Eyrbyggja  Saga,"  a  forbidden  land  may  correspond  to 
that  of  men  being  prohibited  from  setting  foot  on  the 
priestesses'  island,  or  again  to  the  way  to  the  Cassiterides  being 
kept  secret  and  to  the  precautions  taken  to  prevent  people 
from  reaching  them  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  27).  Something  similar,  it 
may  be  added,  is  told  of  the  rich,  fertile  island  which  the 
Carthaginians  discovered  in  the  west  of  the  ocean,  and  which, 
under  pain  of  death,  they  forbade  others  to  visit  [Aristotle, 
Mir.  Auscult.,  c.  85;  cf.  also  Diodorus,  v.  20].  That  in 
late  classical  times  there  was  a  confusion  between  the  Cas- 
siterides and  the  mythical  isles  in  the  west  appears  further 
from  Pliny's  saying  [Hist,  nat,  iv.  36]  that  the  Cassiterides 
were  also  called  "  Fortunatae,"  and  from  Dionysius  Perie- 
getes  making  tin,  the  product  of  the  Cassiterides,  come  from 
the  Hesperides. 

It  was  mentioned  above  (Vol.  I,  p.  357)  that  the 
name  of  the  promised  land,  "the  Land  of  Marvels,"  was  also 
called  in  Irish  legend  the  "Great  Strand"  ("Trag  Mor"),  or 
the  "  Great  Land  "  ("  Tir  Mor ") ;  "  two  or  three  times  as 
large  as  Ireland"  (Vol.  I,  p.  355).  It  does  not  seem  unlikely 
that  the  Icelanders,  hearing  from  Ireland  of  this  great  land, 
should  come  to  call  it  "  Irland  hit  Mikla  "  (Ireland  the  Great) ; 
and  this  seems  to  be  a  more  natural  explanation  than 
Storm's  [1887,  p.  65]  interpretation  of  the  name  as  meaning 
"  the  Irish  colony,"  like  "  Magna  Graecia "  (the  Greek 
colony  in  Italy)  and  "  Svif^jod  it  Mikla "  (the  Swedish  colony 
in  Russia,  the  name  of  which  may,  however,  have  been 
derived  from  the  name  of  the  latter:  "  Scythia  Magna"); 
on  the  other  hand,  he  gives  an  obvious  parallel  in  "  Great 
Han,"  the  mythical  land  in  the  Great  Ocean  beyond  China 
(Han). 

In  the  "  Eyrbyggja  Saga "  we  read  of  Bjorn  Asbrandsson, 
48 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

called  Breidvikinge-kjaempe,  and  his  exploits.  He  bore  illicit 
love  to  Snorre  Code's  sister,  Thurid  of  FroSa,  the  wife  of 
Thorodd,  and  had  by  her  an  illegitimate  son,  Kjartan. 
Finally  he  had  to  leave  Iceland  on  account  of  this  love;  but 
his  ship  viras  not  ready  till  late  in  the  autumn.  They  put  to 
sea  with  a  north-east  wind,  which  held  for  a  long  time  that 
autumn.  Afterwards  the  ship  was  not  heard  of  for  many  a 
day. 

Gudleif  Gudlaugsson  was  the  name  of  a  great  sailor  and  merchant;  he  owned 
a  large  merchant  vessel.  In  the  last  years  of  St.  Olaf's  reign  he  was  on  a 
trading  voyage  to  Dublin,  "when  he  sailed  westward  from  thence  he  was 
making  for  Iceland.  He  sailed  to  the  west  of  Ireland,  encountered  there  a 
strong  north-east  wind,  and  was  driven  far  to  the  west  and  south-west  in  the 
ocean,"  until  they  finally  came  to  a  great  land  which  was  unknown  to  them. 
They  did  not  know  the  people  there,  "but  thought  rather  that  they  spoka 
Irish."  Soon  many  hundred  men  collected  about  them,  seized  and  bound 
them,  and  drove  them  up  into  the  country.  They  were  brought  to  an  assem- 
bly and  sentence  was  to  be  pronounced  upon  them.  They  understood  as  much 
as  that  some  wanted  to  kill  them,  while  others  wanted  to  make  slaves  of  them. 
While  this  was  going  on,  a  great  band  of  men  came  on  horseback  with  a  ban- 
ner, and  under  it  rode  a  big  and  stately  man  of  great  age,  with  white  hair, 
whom  they  guessed  to  be  the  chief,  for  all  bowed  before  him.  He  sent  for 
them;  when  they  came  before  him  he  spoke  to  them  in  Norse  and  asked  from 
what  country  they  came,  and  when  he  heard  that  most  of  them  were  Iceland- 
ers, and  that  Gudleif  was  from  Borgarf jord,  he  asked  after  nearly  all  the  more 
important  men  of  Borgarfjord  and  Breidafjord,  and  particularly  Snorre  Gode, 
and  Thurid  of  Fr6?a,  his  sister,  and  most  of  all  after  Kjartan,  her  son,  who 
was  now  master  there.  After  this  big  man  had  discussed  the  matter  at  length 
with  the  men  of  the  country,  he  again  spoke  to  the  Icelanders  and  gave  them 
leave  to  depart,  but  although  the  summer  was  far  gone,  he  advised  them  to  get 
away  as  soon  as  possible,  as  the  people  there  were  not  to  be  relied  upon.  He 
would  not  tell  them  his  name;  for  he  did  not  wish  his  kinsmen  such  a  voyage 
thither  as  they  would  have  had  if  he  had  not  helped  them;  but  he  was  now  so 
old  that  he  might  soon  be  gone,  and  moreover,  said  he,  there  were  men  of  more 
influence  than  he  in  that  country,  who  would  show  little  mercy  to  foreigners. 
After  this  he  had  the  ship  fitted  out,  and  was  himself  present,  until  there  came 
a  favorable  wind  for  them  to  leave.  When  they  parted,  this  man  took  a  gold 
ring  from  his  hand,  gave  it  to  Gudleif,  and  with  it  a  good  sword,  and  said: 
"  If  it  be  thy  lot  to  reach  Iceland,  thou  shalt  bring  this  sword  to  Kjartan,  mas- 
ter of  Frofa,  and  the  ring  to  Thurid,  his  mother."  When  Gudleif  asked  him 
who  he  was  to  say  was  the  sender  of  these  costly  gifts,  he  answered:  "  Say  he 
sent  them  who  was  more  a  friend  of  the  mistress  of  FroSa  than  of  the  *  gode ' 
of  Helgafell,  her  brother.    .    .    ."    Gudleif  and  his  men  put  to  sea  and  ar- 

49 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

rived  in  Ireland  late  in  the  autumn,  stayed  that  winter  at  Dublin,  and  sailed 
next  summer  to  Iceland  [cf.  Gronl.  his.  Mind.,  i.  769  f.]. 

It  is  clear  that  Bjorn  Breidvikinge-kjasmpe  here  is  the 
same  as  Are  Marsson  in  the  "  Landnama,"  who  was  also  driven 
by  storms  to  Hvitramanna-land,  had  to  stay  there  all  his 
life,  and  according  to  the  report  of  Thorfinn,  Earl  of  Orkney, 
(ob.  circa  1064)  had  been  recognized  (by  travelers  like 
Gudleif?),  and  was  much  honored  there.  This  incident  of 
the  travelers  coming  to  an  unknown  island  and  there  finding 
a  man  who  has  been  absent  a  long  while  has  parallels  in 
many  Irish  legends.  Thus,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  Brandan, 
in  the  "  Navigatio,"  comes  to  the  convent-island  of  Alibius, 
with  the  twenty-four  Irish  monks  of  old  days,  and  meets 
there  the  old  white-haired  man  who  was  prior  of  the  convent 
and  had  been  there  for  eighty  years,  but  who  does  not  tell 
his  name.  Brandan  asks  leave  to  sail  on,  but  this  is  not 
permitted  until  they  have  celebrated  Christmas  there  [Schroder, 
i87i,pp.  15  f.]-' 

The  resemblance  between  the  two  names  *'  GuS-Leifr " 
(Gudleif  =  God-Leif)  and  "  Leifr  hinn  Heppni "  (Leif  the 
Lucky)  also  deserves  notice,  as  perhaps  it  is  not  merely  acci- 
dental. One  sails  during  the  last  years  of  St.  Olaf  from  Ireland 
to  Iceland  and  is  carried  south-westward  to  Hvitramanna-land ; 
the  other  sails  during  the  last  years  of  Olaf  Tryggvason  from 
Norway  to  Greenland  and  is  carried  south-westward  to  Wine- 
land  the  Good. 

It  might  also  be  thought  to  be  more  than  a  mere  coincidence  that,  while 
Leif  Ericson  is  given  the  surname  of  "  hinn  Heppni,"  a  closely  related  surname 
is  mentioned  in  connection  with  Gudleif  in  the  "  Eyrbyggja  Saga,"  where  he  is 
called  "  GuSleifr  GuSlaugsson  bins  auc5ga  "  (i.e.,  son  of  Gudlaug  the  rich).  In 
the  one  case,  of  course,  it  is  the  man  himself,  in  the  other  the  father,  who 
bears  the  surname.     "  AuSigr  "  means  rich,  but  originally  it  had  the  meaning 

1  Before  the  convent  on  this  island  Brandan  and  his  companions  were  met 
by  the  monks  "with  cross,  and  cloaks  [white  clothes?],  and  hymns";  cf.  the 
men  in  white  clothes,  who  cried  aloud  and  carried  poles  in  Eric  the  Red's  Saga. 
On  the  "  Strong  Men's  Island "  they  also  sang  psalms,  and  one  generation 
wore  white  clothes. 
50 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

of  lucky,  and  the  rich  man  is  he  who  has  luck  with  him  (cf.  further  "  auSna  " 
=  luck,  "  au5nu-maSr  "=  favorite  of  fortune).  Gudleif  Gudlaugsson  also  oc- 
curs in  the  Landnamabok,  but  this  surname  is  not  mentioned,  nor  is  anything 
said  about  this  voyage,  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  Leif  Ericson  is 
named  there,  but  without  a  surname  and  without  any  mention  of  a 
voyage  or  a  discovery;  in  both  cases  this  is  an  addition  that  occurs  in 
later  sagas.  In  spite  of  the  difference  alluded  to,  one  may  suspect 
that  there  is  here  some  connection  or  other.  Possibly  it  might  be  that,  as 
GuSriCr  is  the  Christian  woman  among  all  the  names  beginning  with  Thor-  and 
FreySis,  so  the  name  of  GuSleifr,  which  was  placed  in  association  with  the 
Christian  Hvitramanna-land,  was  used  because  it  had  a  more  rehgious  stamp 
than  "  happ  "  and  "  heppen,"  which  in  any  case  are  as  nearly  allied  to  popular 
belief  as  to  religiosity,  and  which  were  associated  with  the  non-Christian 
Wineland. 

The  following  tale  in  Edrisi,  the  Arabic  geographer,  whose 
work  dates  from  1154,  bears  considerable  resemblance  to  the 
remarkable  story  of  Gudleif 's  voyage.^ 

Eight  "adventurers"  from  Lisbon  built  a  merchant  ship  and  set  out  with 
the  first  east  wind  to  explore  the  farthest  limits  of  the  ocean.  They  sailed  for 
about  eleven  days  (westward)  and  came  to  a  sea  with  stiif  (thick)  waves  (the 
Liver  Sea)  and  a  horrible  stench,-  with  many  shallows  and  little  light  (cf.  pre- 
cisely similar  conceptions,  Vol.  I,  pp.  38,  68,  181,  182,  note  i).  Afraid  of  perish- 
ing there,  they  sailed  southward  for  twelve  days  and  reached  the  Sheep-island 
("  Djazirato  '1-Ghanam"),  with  innumerable  flocks  of  sheep  and  no  human 
beings  (cf.  Dicuil's  account  of  the  Faroes,  and  Brandan's  Sheep-island,  Vol.  I, 
pp.  163,  362).  They  sailed  on  for  twelve  days  more  towards  the  south  and 
found  at  last  an  inhabited  and  cultivated  island.  On  approaching  this  they 
were  soon  surrounded  by  boats,  taken  prisoners,  and  brought  to  a  town  on  the 
coast.  They  finally  took  up  their  abode  in  a  house,  where  they  saw  men  of 
tall  stature  and  red  complexion,  with  little  hair  on  their  faces,  and  wearing 
their  hair  long  (not  curled),  and  women  of  rare  beauty.  Here  they  were  kept 
prisoners  for  three  days.  On  the  fourth  day  a  man  came  who  spoke  to  them 
in  Arabic  and  asked  them  who  they  were,  why  they  had  come,  and  what  coun- 
try they  came  from.  They  related  to  him  their  adventures.  He  gave  them 
good  hopes,  and  told  them  that  he  was  the  king's  interpreter.  On  the  follow- 
ing day  they  were  brought  before  the  king,  who  asked  them  the  same  ques- 
tion through  the  interpreter.  On  their  replying  that  they  had  set  out  with 
the  object  of  exploring  the  wonders  of  the  ocean  and  finding  out  its  limits,  the 
king  began  to  laugh  and  told  the  interpreter  to  explain  that  his  father  had 
once  ordered  one  of  his  slaves  to  set  out  upon  that  ocean;  this  man  had  trav- 

1  Cf.  Dozy  and  De  Goeje,  1866,  p.  223  f.;  De  Goeje,  1891,  pp.  56,  59.  Moltke 
Moe  has  called  my  attention  to  this  resemblance. 

2  The  stench  may  be  connected  with  ideas  like  those  in  the  "  Meregarto," 
that  sailors  stuck  fast  and  rotted  in  the  liver-sea,  see  Vol.  I,  p.  181. 

51 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

ersed  its  breadth  for  a  month,  until  the  light  of  Heaven  failed  them  and  they 
were  obliged  to  renounce  this  vain  undertaking.  The  king  further  caused  the 
interpreter  to  assure  the  adventurers  of  his  benevolent  intentions.  They  then 
returned  to  prison  and  remained  there  until  a  west  wind  came.  Then  they 
were  blindfolded  and  taken  across  the  sea  in  a  boat  for  about  three  days  and 
three  nights  to  a  land  where  they  were  left  on  the  shore  with  their  hands  tied 
behind  their  backs.  They  stayed  there  till  sunrise  in  a  pititable  state,  for  the 
cords  were  very  tight  and  caused  them  great  discomfort.  Then  they  heard 
voices,  and  upon  their  cries  of  distress  the  natives,  who  were  Berbers,  came 
and  released  them.  They  had  arrived  on  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  and  were 
told  that  it  was  two  months'  journey  to  their  native  land. 

As  points  of  similarity  to  Gudleif's  voyage  it  may  be 
pointed  out  that  the  Portuguese  sail  for  thirty-five  days 
altogether,  to  the  west  and  afterwards  to  the  south,  and 
arrive  at  a  country  which  thus  lies  south-south-west. 
Gudleif  is  carried  before  a  north-east  wind  towards  the 
south-west  and  reaches  land  after  a  long  time.  Both  the 
Portuguese  and  the  Icelanders  are  taken  prisoners  shortly 
after  arrival,  the  former  are  surrounded  by  boats,  the  latter 
by  hundreds  of  men.  The  Portuguese  saw  red-complexioned 
men  of  tall  stature  with  long  hair,  the  Icelanders  saw  a  tall, 
stately  man  with  white  hair  coming  on  horseback.  They 
had  to  wait  a  while  before  they  were  addressed  in  a  language 
they  could  understand;  the  Portuguese  being  first  spoken  to 
by  an  interpreter  in  Arabic  ^  who  gave  them  good  hopes,  and 
afterwards  brought  them  before  the  king,  who  assured  them  of 
his  benevolent  intentions;  while  the  Icelanders  were  sent 
for  by  the  great  chief,  who,  when  they  came  before  him, 
spoke  to  them  in  Norse  and  was  friendly  towards  them,  and 
after  long  deliberations  spoke  to  them  again,  and  gave  them 
leave  to  depart.  The  Portuguese  had  to  wait  in  prison  for 
a  west  wind  before  they  could  get  away;  the  Icelanders  had 
to  wait  for  a  favorable  wind,  which  was  again  a  west  wind. 
The  Portuguese  were  led  away  blindfold,  obviously  in  order 
that  they  should  not  find  their  way  back;  when  the 
Icelanders   left   it   was   enjoined   upon   them   never   to   return. 

1  As  Portugal  was  at  that  time  under  the  Moors,  Arabic  must  be  regarded  as 
these  men's  mother-tongue. 

52 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

The  Portuguese  came  to  the  west  coast  of  Africa,  from  whence 
they  afterwards  had  to  sail  northward  to  Lisbon;  the 
Icelanders  arrived  in  Ireland,  and  sailed  thence  the  next 
summer  northward  to  Iceland.  It  seems  reasonable  to 
suppose  that  there  is  some  connection  between  the  two 
tales;  the  same  myth  may  in  part  form  the  foundation  of 
both,  and  this  again  may  be  allied  to  the  myth  alluded  to 
above  of  the  Carthaginians'  discovery  of  a  fertile  island  out 
in  the  ocean  to  the  west  of  Africa.  But  there  are  also 
striking  resemblances  between  Edrisi's  tale  and  the  descrip- 
tion in  the  "  Odyssey  "  of  Odysseus's  visit  to  the  Phseacians  in  the 
western  isle  of  Scheria.  On  his  arrival  there  Athene  warns 
Odysseus  to  be  careful,  as  this  people  is  not  inclined  to  tolerate 
foreigners,  and  no  other  me^i  come  to  them.  Odysseus  is 
brought  before  the  king,  Alcinous,  who  receives  him  in 
friendly  fashion,  and  tells  him  that  no  Phaeacian  shall  "hold 
him  back  by  force,"  and  Odysseus  relates  his  many  adven- 
tures. Finally  the  Phaeacians  convey  him  while  asleep  across 
the  sea  in  a  boat,  carry  him  ashore  at  dawn,  and  go  away 
before  he  awakes  [Od.  xiii.  79  f.] ;  this  corresponds  to  the 
Portuguese  being  taken  blindfold  across  the  sea  and  left 
bound  on  the  shore,  until  they  are  released  at  sunrise.  The 
promise  of  the  Phaeacians,  after  Poseidon's  revenge  for  their 
helping  Odysseus,  never  again  to  assist  any  seafarer  that 
might  come  to  them,  may  bear  some  resemblance  to  the  inci- 
dent of  Bjom  Breidvikinge-kjaempe  trying  to  prevent  Iceland- 
ers from  seeking  a  land  which  "would  show  little  mercy  to 
foreigners." 

Moreover,  the  tales,  both  of  Gudleif's  voyage  and  of 
Edrisi's  Portuguese  adventurers,  resemble  ancient  Irish 
myths. 

In  the  "  Imram  Snedgusa  ocus  Mac  Riagla "  (of  the  tenth  or  close  of 
the  ninth  century),  [cf.  Zimmer,  1889,  pp.  213  f.,  216],  the  men  of  Ross  slay  King 
Fiacha  Mac  Domnaill  for  his  intolerable  tyranny.  As  a  punishment,  sixty 
couples  of  the  guilty  were  sent  out  to  sea,  and  their  judgment  and  fate  left  to 
God.  The  two  monks,  Snedgus  and  Mac  Riagail,  afterwards  set  out  on  a  vol- 
untary pilgrimage  on  the  ocean — while  the  sixty  couples  went  involuntarily — 

53 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

and,  after  having  visited  many  islands/  reached  in  their  boat  a  land  in  which 
there  were  generations  of  Irish,  and  they  met  women  who  sang  to  them  and 
brought  them  to  the  king's  house  (cf.  Odysseus's  meeting  first  with  the  women 
in  the  Phaeacians'  land,  and  their  showing  him  the  way  to  the  palace  of  Al- 
cinous).  The  king  received  them  well  and  inquired  from  whence  they  came. 
"  We  are  Irish,"  they  replied,  "  and  we  belong  to  the  companions  of  Col- 
umcille."  Then  he  asked:  "How  goes  it  in  Ireland,  and  how  many  of  Dom- 
naill's  sons  are  alive?"  They  answered:  "Three  Mac  Domnaills  are  alive, 
and  Fiacha  Mac  Domnaill  fell  by  the  men  of  Ross,  and  for  that  deed  sixty 
couples  of  them  were  sent  out  to  sea."  "  That  is  a  true  tale  of  yours;  I  am  he 
who  killed  the  King  of  Tara's  son  [i.e.,  Fiacha],  and  we  are  those  who  were 
sent  out  to  sea.  This  commends  itself  to  us,  for  we  will  be  here  till  the 
Judgment  [i.e.,  the  day  of  judgment]  comes,  and  we  are  glad  to  be  here  without 
sin,  without  evil,  without  our  sinful  desires.  The  island  we  live  on  is  good, 
for  on  it  are  Elijah  and  Enoch,  and  noble  is  the  dwelling  of  Elijah."    .    .    . 

The  similarity  to  the  meeting  of  Gudleif  and  the  Icelanders 
with  the  likewise  exiled  great  man  and  chief,  who  did  not  give 
his  name  but  hinted  at  his  identity,  is  evident.  If  we  suppose 
that  the  island  Gudleif  reached  was  originally  the  white  men's, 
or  the  holy  (baptized)  men's  land,  then  it  may  be  possible  that 
the  great  man's  words  to  Gudleif  about  there  being  men  on  the 
island  who  were  greater  ("  rikari ")  than  he  is  connected  with 
the  mention  of  Elijah  and  Enoch. 

Thus  we  see  a  connection  between  Gudleif's  voyage  (and 
the  exiled  Breidvikinge-kjaempe  on  the  unknown  island) 
and  Irish  myths  and  legends,  the  Arabic  tale,  and  finally  the 

1  They  first  drifted  to  the  north-west  in  the  outer  ocean,  and  after  three  days 
suffered  intolerable  thirst;  but  Christ  took  pity  on  them  and  brought  them  to  a 
current  which  tasted  like  tepid  milk.  Zimmer's  explanation  [1889,  p.  216]  of 
this  current  as  the  Gulf  Stream  to  the  west  of  the  Hebrides  is  due  to  modern 
maps,  and  is  an  example  of  how  even  the  most  acute  of  book-learned  inquiries 
may  be  led  astray  by  formal  representations.  That  the  Irish  should  have  pos- 
sessed such  comprehensive  oceanographical  knowledge  as  to  regard  this  ocean- 
drift  as  a  definitely  limited  current  is  not  likely,  and  still  less  that  they 
should  have  regarded  it  as  so  much  warmer  than  the  water  inshore  as  to  be 
compared  to  tepid  milk.  The  difference  in  temperature  on  the  surface  is  in 
summer  (August)  approximately  nil,  and  in  spring  and  autumn  perhaps  three 
or  four  degrees;  and  of  course  the  Irish  had  no  thermometers.  Last  summer 
I  investigated  this  very  part  of  the  ocean  without  finding  any  conspicuous  dif- 
ference. The  feature  may  be  derived  from  Lucian's  "  Vera  Historia,"  where 
the  travelers  come  to  a  sea  of  milk  [Wieland,  1789,  iv.  p.  188]. 

54 


WINELAND   THE   GOOD 

"  Odyssey."  What  the  mutual  relationship  may  be  between  Ed- 
risi's  tale  and  the  Irish  legends  is  to  us  of  minor  importance.  As 
the  Norse  vikings  had  much  communication  with  the  Spanish 
peninsula  ^  it  might  be  supposed  that  the  Norse  tale,  derived 
from  Irish  myths,  had  reached  Portugal;  but  as  the  Arabic 
tale  has  several  similarities  to  the  voyages  of  Brandan  and  Mael- 
duin,  and  to  Dicuil's  account  of  the  Faroes  (with  their  sheep 
and  birds),  which  are  not  found  in  the  Norse  narrative,  it  is  more 
probable  that  the  incidents  in  the  experiences  of  the  Portu- 
guese adventurers  are  derived  directly  from  Ireland,  which  also 
had  close  connection  with  the  Spanish  peninsula,  chiefly 
through  Norse  ships  and  merchants.  We  must,  in  any  case, 
suppose  that  the  Icelandic  tale  of  Gudleif's  voyage  came  from 
Ireland;  but  it  may  have  acquired  additional  color  from  north- 
em  legends. 

There  is  a  Swedish  tale  of  some  sailors  from  Getinge  who  were  driven  by 
storms  over  the  sea  to  an  unknown  island;  surrounded  by  darkness  they  went 
ashore  and  saw  a  fire,  and  before  it  lay  an  uncommonly  tall  man,  who  was 
blind;  another  equally  big  stood  beside  him  and  raked  in  the  fire  with  an  iron 
rod.  The  old  blind  man  gets  up  and  asks  the  strangers  where  they  come  from. 
They  answer  from  Halland,  from  Getinge  parish.     Whereupon  the  blind  man 

1  It  is  doubtless  due  to  this  communication  that  an  unknown  Arabic  author 
(of  the  twelfth  century)  relates  that  the  "  Fortunate  Isles  "  lie  to  the  north  of 
Cadiz,  and  that  thence  come  the  northern  vikings  ("Magus"),  who  are  Chris- 
tians. "  The  first  of  these  islands  is  Britain,  which  lies  in  the  midst  of  the 
ocean,  at  a  great  distance  to  the  north  of  Spain.  Neither  mountains  nor  rivers 
are  found  there;  its  inhabitants  are  compelled  to  resort  to  rain-water  both  for 
drinking  and  for  watering  the  ground"  [Fabricius,  1897,  p.  157].  It  is  clear 
that  there  is  here  a  confusion  of  rumors  of  islands  in  the  north — of  which 
Britain  was  the  best  known,  whence  the  vikings  were  supposed  to  come — with 
Pliny's  Fortunate  Isles;  "Planaria"  (without  mountains)  and  "Pluvialia" 
(where  the  inhabitants  had  only  rain-water).  That  the  Orkneys  in  particular 
should  have  been  intended,  as  suggested  by  R.  Dozy  [Recherches  sur  I'Es- 
pagne,  ii.  pp.  317  f.]  and  Paul  Riant  [Expeditions  et  Pelerinages  des  Scan- 
dinaves  en  Terre  Sainte,  Paris,  1865,  p.  236]  is  not  very  probable.  We  might 
equally  well  suppose  it  to  be  Ireland,  which  through  Norse  sailors  ("  Ost- 
men  ")  and  merchants  had  communication  with  the  Spaniards  from  the  ninth 
till  as  late  as  the  fourteenth  century  [cf.  A.  Bugge,  1900,  pp.  i  f.].  The  Arabic 
name  "  Magiis "  for  the  Norman  vikings  come  from  the  Greek  fidyo<; 
(Magian,  fire-worshiper),  and  originally  meant  heathens  in  general. 

55 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

asks:  "  Is  the  white  woman  still  alive?  "  They  answered  yes,  though  they  did 
not  know  what  he  meant.  Again  he  asks:  "  Is  my  goat-house  still  standing?" 
They  again  answered  yes,  though  ignorant  of  what  he  meant.  He  then  said: 
"  I  could  not  keep  my  goat-house  in  peace  because  of  the  church  that  was  built 
in  that  place.  If  you  would  reach  home  safely,  I  give  you  two  conditions," 
They  promised  to  accept  these,  and  the  blind  old  man  continued:  "Take  this 
belt  of  silver,  and  when  you  come  home,  buckle  it  on  the  white  woman;  and 
place  this  box  on  the  altar  in  my  goat-house."  When  the  sailors  were  safely 
come  home,  the  belt  was  buckled  on  a  birch  tree,  which  immediately  shot  up 
into  the  air,  and  the  box  was  placed  on  a  mound,  which  immediately  burst 
into  flame.  But  from  the  church  being  built  where  the  blind  man  had  his  goat- 
house  the  place  was  called  Getinge  [in  J.  Grimm,  ii.  1876,  p.  798,  after  Bexell's 
"  Halland,"  Goteborg,  1818,  ii.  p.  301].  Similar  tales  are  known  from  other 
localities  in  Sweden  and  Norway.  The  old  blind  man  is  a  heathen  giant  driven 
out  by  the  Christian  church  or  by  the  image  of  Mary  (the  white  woman); 
sometimes,  again,  he  is  a  heathen  exile. 

Here  we  have  undeniable  parallels  to  the  storm-driven 
Icelanders'  meeting  with  the  exiled  Breidvikinge-kjaempe, 
who  asks  after  his  native  place  and  his  woman,  Thurid,^  and 
who  also  sends  two  gifts  home,  though  with  very  different 
feelings  and  objects.  It  may  be  supposed  that  the  Swedish- 
Norwegian  tale  is  derived  from  ancient  myths,  and  the 
Icelandic  narrative  may  have  borrowed  features,  not,  of 
course,  from  this  very  tale,  but  from  myths  of  the 
same  type. 

Remarkable  points  of  resemblance  both  to  the  voyages  of 
the  Irish  (Brandan's  voyage)  to  the  Fortunate  Isles  in  the  west, 
and  to  those  of  Gudleif  and  of  the  eight  Portuguese  (in 
Edrisi),  are  found  in  a  Japanese  tale  of  the  fortunate  isles  of 
"  Horaisan,"  to  which  Moltke  Moe  has  called  my  attention.^ 

This  happy  land  lies  far  away  in  the  sea  towards  the  east;  there  on  the 
mountain,  Fusan,  grows  a  splendid  tree  which  is  sometimes  seen  in  the  distance 
over  the  horizon;  all  vegetation  is  verdant  and  flowering  in  eternal  spring, 
which  keeps  the  air  mild  and  the  sky  blue;  the  passing  of  time  is  unnoticed, 
and  death  never  finds  the  way  thither,  there  is  no  pain,  no  suffering,  only  peace 
and  happiness.     Once  on  a  time  Jofuku,  body  physician  to  a  cruel  emperor  of 

1  In  one  of  his  lays  Bjorn  Breidvikinge-kjaempe  also,  as  it  happens,  speaks 
of  Thurid  as  the  snow-white  ("  fannhvit ")  woman. 

2  See  D.  Brauns:  Japanische  Marchen  und  Sagen.     Leipzig,  1885,  p.  146  f. 

56 


WINELAND   THE    GOOD 

China,  put  to  sea  on  the  pretext  of  looking  for  this  country  and  seeking  for 
his  master  the  plant  of  immortality  which  grows  on  Fusan,  the  highest  moun- 
tain there.  He  came  first  to  Japan;  but  went  farther  and  farther  out  into  the 
ocean  until  he  really  reached  Horaisan;  there  he  enjoyed  complete  happiness, 
and  never  thought  of  returning  to  prolong  his  tyrant's  life. 

The  old  Japanese  wise  man,  Vasobiove,  who  had  withdrawn  from  the  world 
and  passed  his  days  in  contemplative  peace,  was  one  day  out  fishing  by  himself 
(to  avoid  many  trivial  visits),  when  he  was  driven  out  to  sea  by  a  violent 
storm;  he  then  rowed  about  the  sea,  keeping  himself  alive  by  fishing.  After 
three  months  he  came  to  the  "  muddy  sea,"  which  nearly  cost  him  his  life,  as 
there  were  no  fish  there.  But  after  a  desperate  struggle,  and  finally  twelve 
hours'  hard  rowing,  he  reached  the  shore  of  Horaisan.  There  he  was  met  by 
an  old  man  whom  he  understood,  for  he  spoke  Chinese.  This  was  Jofuku,  who 
received  Vasobiove  in  friendly  fashion  and  told  him  his  story.  Vasobiove  was 
overjoyed  on  hearing  where  he  was.  He  stayed  there  for  a  couple  of  hundred 
years,  but  did  not  know  how  long  it  was;  for  where  all  is  alike,  where  there  is 
neither  birth  nor  death,  no  one  heeds  the  passing  of  time.  With  dancing  and 
music,  in  conversation  with  wise  and  brilliant  men,  in  the  society  of  beautiful 
and  amiable  ladies,  he  passed  his  days. 

But  at  last  Vasobiove  grew  tired  of  this  sweet  existence  and  longed  for 
death.  It  was  hopeless,  for  here  he  could  not  die,  nor  could  he  take  his  own 
life,  there  were  no  poisons,  no  lethal  weapons;  if  he  threw  himself  over  a  preci- 
pice or  ran  his  head  against  a  sharp  rock,  it  was  like  a  fall  on  to  soft  cushions, 
and  if  he  threw  himself  into  the  sea,  it  supported  him  like  a  cork.  Finally  he 
tamed  a  gigantic  stork,  and  on  its  back  he  at  last  returned  to  Japan.^^  after  the 
stork  had  carried  him  through  many  strange  countries,  of  which  the  most  re- 
markable was  that  of  the  Giants,  who  are  immensely  superior  to  human  beings 
in  everything.  Whereas  Vasobiove  was  accustomed  to  admiration  wherever  he 
propounded  his  philosophical  views  and  systems,  he  left  that  country  in  humili- 
ation; for  the  Giants  said  they  had  no  need  of  all  that,  and  declared  Vasobiove's 
whole  philosophy  to  be  the  immature  cries  of  distress  of  the  children  of  men. 

A  connection  between  the  intellectual  world  of  China 
and  Japan  and  that  of  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages  may  well 
be  supposed  to  have  been  brought  about  by  the  Arabs,  who 
penetrated  as  far  as  China  on  their  trading  voyages,  and  who, 
on  the  other  hand,  had  close  communication  with  western 
Europe.  Furthermore,  it  must  be  remembered  how  many 
of  our  mythical  conceptions  and  tales  are  more  or  less 
connected    with    India,    just    as    many    of    the    Arabian    tales 

1  Cf.  the  resemblance  to  the  second  voyage  of  Sindbad,  to  the  tales  in  Abu 
Hamid,  Qaswini,  Pseudo-Callisthenes'  romance  of  Alexander,  Indian  tales,  etc. 
[cf.  E.  Rohde,  1900,  p.  192]. 

57 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

evidently  had  their  birthplace  there  [cf.  E.  Rohde,  1900, 
pp.  191  £.]  ;  while  on  the  other  side  there  was,  of  course,  a 
close  connection  between  India  and  the  intellectual  world  of 
China  and  Japan,  as  shown  by  the  spread  of  Buddhism. 
A  transference  of  the  same  myths  both  eastward  to  Japan 
and  westward  to  Europe  is  thus  highly  probable,  whether 
these  myths  originated  in  Europe  or  in  India  and  the  East. 
It  is  striking,  too,  that  even  a  secondary  feature  such  as  the 
curdled,  dead  sea  (cf.  "  Morimarusa,"  see  Vol.  I,  p.  99 ;  the  stink- 
ing sea  in  Edrisi,  Vol.  II,  p.  57)  is  met  with  again  here  as  the 
"muddy  sea"  without  fish  (cf.  resemblances  to  Arab  ideas, 
chapter  xiii). 

If  we  now  look  back  upon  all  the  problems  it  has  been  sought 
to  solve  in  this  chapter,  the  impression  may  be  a  somewhat 
heterogeneous  and  negative  one;  the  majority  will  doubt- 
less be  struck  at  the  outset  by  the  multiplicity  of  the  paths,  and 
by  the  intercrossing  due  to  this  multiplicity.  But  if  we  force 
our  way  through  the  network  of  by-paths  and  follow  up  the 
essential  leading  lines,  it  appears  to  me  that  there  is  es- 
tablished a  firm  and  powerful  series  of  conclusions,  which 
it  will  not  be  easy  to  shake.  The  most  important  steps  in  this 
series  are: 

(i)  The  oldest  authority,^  Adam  of  Bremen's  work,  in 
which  Wineland  is  mentioned,  is  untrustworthy,  and,  with 
the  exception  of  the  name  and  of  the  fable  of  wine  being 
produced  there,  contains  nothing  beyond  what  is  found  in 
Isidore. 

(2)  The  oldest  Icelandic  authorities  that  mention  the  name 
of  "  Vinland,"  or  in  the  "  Landnama,"  "  Vindland  hit  G66a," 
say  nothing  about  its  discovery  or  about  the  wine  there;  on 
the  other  hand,  Are  Erode  mentions  the  Skraelings  (who  must 
originally  have  been  regarded  as  a  fairy  people).    The  name 

iThe  Ringerike  runic  stone  is  not  given  here,  as  its  mention  of  Wineland 
is  uncertain. 

58 


WINELAND   THE    GOOD 

of    Leif    Ericson    is    mentioned,    unconnected    with    Wineland 
or  its  discovery. 

(3)  It  is  not  till  well  on  in  the  thirteenth  century  that  Leifs 
surname  of  Heppni,  his  discovery  of  Wineland  ("  Vinland  "  or 
"  Vindland  "),  and  his  christianizing  of  Greenland  are  mentioned 
(in  the  "  Kristni-saga  "  and  "  Heimskringla  "),  but  still  there  is 
nothing  about  wine. 

(4)  It  is  not  till  the  close  of  the  thirteenth  century  that 
any  information  occurs  as  to  what  and  where  Wineland 
was,  with  statements  as  to  the  wine  and  wheat  there,  and 
a  description  of  voyages  thither  (in  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red), 
But  still  the  accounts  omit  to  inform  us  who  gave  the  name 
and  why. 

(5)  The  second  and  later  principal  narrative  of  voyages  to 
Wineland  (the  Flateyjarbok's  "  Gronlendinga-['attr ")  gives  a 
very  different  account  of  the  discovery,  by  another,  and  likewise  of 
the  later  voyages  thither. 

(6)  The  first  of  the  two  sagas,  and  the  one  which  is  regarded 
as  more  to  be  relied  on,  contains  scarcely  a  single  feature  that  is 
not  wholly  or  in  part  mythical  or  borrowed  from  elsewhere ;  both 
sagas  have  an  air  of  romance. 

(7)  Even  among  the  Greeks  of  antiquity  we  find  myths 
of  fortunate  isles  far  in  the  western  ocean,  with  the  two 
characteristic  features  of  Wineland,  the  wine  and  the 
wheat. 

(8)  The  most  significant  features  in  the  description  of 
these  Fortunate  Isles,  or  Isles  of  the  Blest,  in  late  classical 
times  and  in  Isidore  are  the  self-grown  or  wild-growing 
vine  (on  the  heights)  and  the  wild-growing  (uncultivated, 
self-sown  or  unsown)  corn  or  wheat  or  even  cornfields  (Isi- 
dore). In  addition  there  were  lofty  trees  (Pliny)  and  mild  win- 
ters. Thus  a  complete  correspondence  with  the  saga's  descrip- 
tion of  Wineland. 

(9)  The  various  attempts  that  have  been  made  to  bring 
the  natural  conditions  of  the  North  American  coast  into 
agreement  with  the  saga's  description  of  Wineland  are  more 

59 


IN    NORTHERN   MISTS 

or  less  artificial,  and  no  natural  explanation  has  been  offered 
of  how  the  two  ideas  of  wine  and  wheat,  both  foreign  to  the 
Northerners,  could  have  become  the  distinguishing  marks  of  the 
country. 

(lo)  In  Ireland  long  before  the  eleventh  century  there  were 
many  myths  and  legends  of  happy  lands  far  out  in  the  ocean  to 
the  west;  and  in  the  description  of  these  wine  and  the  vine  form 
conspicuous  features. 

(ii)  From  the  eleventh  century  onward,  in  Ireland  and  in 
the  North,  we  meet  with  a  Grape-island  or  a  Wineland,  which  it 
seems  most  reasonable  to  suppose  the  same. 

(12)  From  the  Landnamabok  it  may  be  naturally 
concluded  that  in  the  eleventh  century  the  Icelanders  had 
heard  of  Wineland,  together  with  Hvitramanna-land,  in 
Ireland. 

(13)  Thorkel  Gellisson,  from  whom  this  information  is  de- 
rived, probably  also  furnished  Are  Frode  with  his  statement  in 
the  Islendingabok  about  Wineland;  this  is  therefore  probably 
the  same  Irish  land. 

(14)  The  Irish  happy  lands  peopled  by  the  sid  correspond  to 
the  Norwegian  huldrelands  out  in  the  sea  to  the  west,  and  the 
Icelandic  elf-lands. 

(15)  Since  the  huldre-  and  sid-people  and  the  elves  are 
originally  the  dead,  and  since  the  Isles  of  the  Blest,  or  the 
Fortunate  Isles,  of  antiquity  were  the  habitations  of  the  happy 
dead,  these  islands  also  correspond  to  the  Irish  sid-people's 
happy  lands,  and  to  the  Norwegian  huldrelands  and  the  Icelandic 
elf-lands. 

(16)  The  additional  name  of  "hit  G6(5a "  for  the  happy 
Wineland  and  the  name  "  Landit  G6t5a "  for  huldrelands  in 
Norway  correspond  directly  to  the  name  of  "  Insulae  Fortu- 
natae,"  which  in  itself  could  not  very  well  take  any  other 
Norse  form.  And  as,  in  addition,  the  huldrelands  were 
imagined  as  specially  good  and  fertile,  and  the  underground, 
huldre-  and  sid-people,  or  elves,  are  called  the  "  good  people," 
and  are  everywhere  in  different  countries  associated  with  the 
60 


WINELAND   THE    GOOD 

idea  of  "  good,"  this  gives  a  natural  explanation  of  both  the  Norse 
names. 

(17)  The  name  "  Vinland  hit  G63a  "  has  a  foreign  effect  in 
Norse  nomenclature;  it  must  be  a  hybrid  of  Norse  and  foreign 
nomenclature,  through  "  Vinland  "  being  combined  with  "  Landit 
GoSa,"  which  probably  originated  in  a  translation  of  "In- 
sulae  Fortunatae." 

(18)  The  probability  of  the  name  of  Skreelings  for  the  in- 
habitants of  Wineland  having  originally  meant  brownies,  or  trolls, 
— that  is,  small  huldrefolk,  elves,  or  pygmies — entirely  agrees 
with  the  view  that  Wineland  was  originally  the  fairy  country, 
the  Fortunate  Isles  in  the  west  of  the  ocean. 

(19)  The  statement  of  the  Icelandic  geography,  that,  in  the 
opinion  of  some,  Wineland  the  Good  was  connected  with  Africa, 
and  the  fact  that  the  Norwegian  work,  "  Historia  Norvegiae,"  calls 
Wineland  (with  Markland  and  Helluland)  the  African  Islands, 
are  direct  evidence  that  the  Norse  Wineland  was  the  Insulae 
Fortunatae,  which  together  with  the  Gorgades  and  the  Hesperi- 
des  were  precisely  the  African  Islands. 

(20)  Even  though  the  Saga  of  Eric  the  Red  and  the 
"  Gronlendinga-f^attr "  contain  nothing  which  we  can  regard  as 
certain  information  as  to  the  discovery  of  America  by  the 
Greenlanders,  we  yet  find  there  and  elsewhere  many  features 
which  show  that  they  must  have  reached  the  coast  of  America, 
the  most  decisive  among  them  being  the  chance  mention  of 
the  voyagers  from  Markland,  in  1347.  To  this  may  be  added 
Hertzberg's  demonstration  of  the  adoption  of  the  Icelandic  game 
of  "knattleikr"  by  the  Indians.  The  name  of  the  mythical 
land  may  then  have  been  transferred  to  the  country  that  was 
discovered. 

(21)  Hvitramanna-land  is  a  mythical  land  similar  to  the  Wine- 
island  of  the  Irish,  modified  in  accordance  with  Christian  ideas, 
especially,  perhaps,  those  of  the  white  garments  of  the  baptized — 
as  in  the  "  Navigatio  Brandani  "  in  reference  to  the  Isle  of  Anchor- 
ites or  the  "  Strong  Men's  Isle  "  (=  Starkramanna-land) — and 
of  the  white  hermits. 

61 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

(22)  Finally,  among  the  most  different  people  on  earth,  from 
the  ancient  Greeks  to  the  Icelanders,  Chinese,  and  Japanese,  we 
meet  with  similar  myths  about  countries  out  in  the  ocean  and 
voyages  to  them,  which,  whether  they  be  connected  with  one 
another  or  not,  show  the  common  tendency  of  humanity  to  adopt 
ideas  and  tales  of  this  kind. 

But  even  if  we  are  obliged  to  abandon  the  Saga  of  Eric 
the  Red  ^  and  the  other  descriptions  of  these  voyages  as 
historical  documents,  this  is  compensated  by  the  increase 
in  our  admiration  for  the  extraordinary  powers  of  realistic 
description  in  Icelandic  literature.  In  reading  Eric's  Saga 
one  cannot  help  being  struck  by  the  way  in  which  many  of 
the  events  are  so  described,  often  in  a  few  words,  that  the 
whole  thing  is  before  one's  eyes  and  it  is  difficult  to  believe 
that  it  has  not  actually  occurred.  This  is  just  the  same 
quality  that  characterizes  our  Norwegian  fairy-tales:  all 
that  is  supernatural  is  made  so  natural  and  realistic  that  it 
is  brought  straight  before  one.  The  Icelanders  created  the 
realistic  novel;  and  at  a  time  when  the  prose  style  of  Europe 
was  still  in  its  infancy  their  prose  narrative  often  reaches  the 
summit  of  clear  simplicity.  In  part  this  may  doubtless  be  ex- 
plained by  their  not  being  merely  authors,  but  men  of  ac- 
tion; their  presentment  acquired  the  stamp  of  real  life  and 
the  brevity  that  belongs  to  the  narrator  of  things  seen. 
And  to  this,  of  course,  must  be  added  the  fact  that,  as  a 
rule,  the  tales  were  sifted  and  abridged  by  generations  of  oral 
transmission.  In  later  times  this  style  became  corrupted  by 
European  influence. 

After  I  had  given,  on  October  7,  1910,  the  outlines 
of  this  examination  of  the  sagas  of  the  Wineland  voyages 
before    the    Scientific    Society    of    Christiania,    attention    was 

1  It  should  be  remarked  that  the  beginning  of  this  saga,  dealing  with  the 
discovery  of  Greenland  by  Eric  the  Red,  is  taken  straight  out  of  the  Landnama- 
bok,  and  is  thus  much  older. 
62 


WINELAND   THE    GOOD 

called  in  Sweden,  by  Professor  F.  Laffler,  to  the  fact 
that  the  Swedish  philologist,  Professor  Sven  Soderberg, 
whose  early  death  in  igoi  is  much  to  be  regretted,  had  an- 
nounced views  about  Wineland  similar  to  those  at  which  I 
have  arrived.  The  manuscript  of  a  lecture  that  he  delivered  on 
the  subject  at  Lund  in  May,  1898,  but  which  was  never  printed, 
was  then  found,  and  has  been  published  in  the  "  Sydsvenska 
Dagbladet  Snallposten  "  for  October  30,  1910.  As  I  have  thus 
become  acquainted  with  this  interesting  inquiry  too  late  to  be 
able  to  include  it  in  my  examination  I  think  it  right  to  mention 
it  here. 

Professor  Soderberg  thinks,  as  I  do,  that  there  can  be  no 
doubt  about  the  Norsemen  having  discovered  a  part  of  North 
America;  but  he  looks  upon  the  tales  of  the  wine  and 
everything  connected  therewith  as  later  inventions.  He 
maintains  that  the  name  of  "  Vinland "  originally  meant 
grass-land  or  pasture-land  (from  the  old  Norse  word 
"vin"  =  pasture),  therefore  something  similar  to  the 
meaning  of  Greenland,  and  that  it  may  have  been  the 
name  of  a  country  discovered  in  the  west.  Curiously  enough, 
I  took,  at  first,  the  same  view,  and  thought,  too,  that  Adam  of 
Bremen  might  have  misunderstood  such  a  word,  just  as 
Soderberg  thinks;  but  I  allowed  myself  to  be  convinced  by 
the  linguistic  objection  that  the  word  "  vin  "  (pasture)  seems  to 
have  gone  out  of  use  before  the  eleventh  century  (cf.  Vol.  I, 
p.  367  f.).  However,  Soderberg's  reasons  for  supposing  that 
the  word  was  still  in  use  appear  to  have  weight;  and  he  also 
makes  it  probable  that  the  name  formed  thereby  might  be 
Vinland  and  not  Vinjarland.  (In  support  of  this  Mr.  A. 
Kiaer  gave  me  as  an  example  the  Norwegian  name  "  Vinas.") 
Professor  Soderberg  then  thinks  that  Adam  of  Bremen  heard 
this  name  in  Denmark,  and,  misinterpreting  it  as  a  foreigner 
to  mean  the  land  of  wine,  himself  invented  the  explanation 
of  the  country's  being  so  called.  Soderberg  gives  several 
striking  examples  to  show  how  this  kind  of  "  etymologizing " 
was  just  in  Adam's  spirit   (e.g.,  Sconia,   or  Skane,  is  derived 

63 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

from  old  German  "  sconi,"  or  "  schon "  ;  Greenland  comes 
from  the  inhabitants  being  bluish-green  in  the  face,  etc.). 
An  example  from  a  country  lying  near  Denmark,  which 
appears  to  me  even  more  striking  than  those  given  by 
Soderberg,  is  Adam's  explanation  of  Kvaenland  as  the  Land  of 
Women  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  i86  f.,  383),  the  Wizzi  as  white  people,  or 
Albanians,  the  Huns  as  dogs,  etc.  Soderberg  has  difficulty 
in  explaining  the  statement  about  the  unsown  corn  in  Wine- 
land;  but  if  he  had  noticed  Isidore's  description  of  the 
Insulas  Fortunatae  with  the  self-grown  vine  and  the  wild- 
growing  corn,  he  would  have  found  a  perfectly  natural 
explanation  of  this  also.  If  Adam  had  misunderstood  a 
"Vinland"  (=  the  grass-land),  and  then  perhaps  Finland  (Fin- 
mark,  cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  382),  as  meaning  the  land  of  wine,  it  would 
be  just  in  his  spirit  to  transfer  thither  Isidore's  description  of 
the  Insulae  Fortunatae;  a  parallel  case  is  that,  in  interpreting 
Kvaenland  as  Womanland,  he  transfers  thither  the  myth  of  the 
Amazons  and  its  fables,  and  this  in  spite  of  its  being  a  country 
on  the  Baltic  about  which  it  must  have  been  comparatively 
easy  for  him  to  obtain  information.  In  the  same  way  he 
transfers  to  the  "  island "  of  Halagland,  mentioned  imme- 
diately before  Wineland,  an  erroneous  account  of  the  mid- 
night sun  and  the  winter  night  taken  from  older  writers  (cf. 
Vol.  I,  p.  194,  note  2).  But  one  reason  for  thinking  that  "Vin- 
land "  really  meant  the  land  of  wine  as  early  as  that  time  is 
the  circumstance  put  forward  above  (Vol.  I,  p.  365),  that  at 
about  the  same  time  there  occurs  a  Grape-island  in  the  "  Navi- 
gatio  Brandani." 

Professor  Soderberg  then  goes  through  the  Icelandic 
accounts  of  Wineland,  and  points  out,  in  the  same  way  as 
has  been  done  in  this  chapter,  that  the  oldest  authorities 
have  nothing  remarkable  to  report  about  the  country,  and  do 
not  mention  wine  there,  and  he  rightly  lays  stress  on  this 
being  particularly  significant  in  the  case  of  Snorre   Sturlason, 

"knowing  as  we  do  how  prone  Snorre  is  to  digress  from  his  proper  subject, 
when  he  has  anything  really  interesting  to  communicate.  The  reason  must  be 
64 


WINELAND    THE    GOOD 

that  he  did  not  know  anything  particularly  remarkable  about  Wineland;  and 
without  doubt  this  is  due  to  his  not  having  known  Adam  of  Bremen.  It  has, 
in  fact,  been  shown  that  Snorre  has  not  a  single  statement  from  Adam." 

Later,  Soderberg  thinks,  Adam  of  Bremen's  fourth  book  be- 
came known  in  Iceland,  and  on  the  foundation  of  that  the  tale 
of  Leif's  discovery  of  the  country  with  the  wine  and  corn  arose, 
and  the  later  sagas  developed,  especially  that  of  Thorfinn  Karls- 
evne's  voyage,  which  he  thinks  in  the  main  "  rests  on  a  truthful 
foundation,"  though  he  points  out  that  a  particular  feature  like 
that  of  the  two  Scottish  runners  must  be  "  pure  invention,  or 
rather  .  .  .  borrowed  from  another  saga."  If  Professor  Soder- 
berg had  remarked  how  most  of  the  incidents  in  this  saga  are 
spurious,  he  would  have  found  even  stronger  support  for  his 
views  in  this  fact. 


65 


CHAPTER  X 
ESKIMO  AND  SKR^LING 

OF  all  the  races  of  the  earth,  that  of  the  Eskimo  is  the  one 
that  has  established  itself  farthest  north.  His  world 
is  that  of  sea-ice  and  cold,  for  which  nature  had  not  intended 
human  beings.  In  his  slow,  stubborn  fight  against  the 
powers  of  winter  he  has  learnt  better  than  any  other  how  to 
turn  these  to  account,  and  in  these  regions,  along  the  ice- 
bound shores,  he  developed  his  peculiar  culture,  with  its 
ingenious  appliances,  long  before  the  beginning  of  history. 
As  men  of  the  white  race  pushed  northward  to  the  "  highest 
latitudes"  they  found  traces  of  this  remarkable  people,  who 
had  already  been  there  in  times  long  past;  and  it  is  only 
in  the  last  few  decades  that  any  one  has  succeeded  in 
penetrating  farther  north  than  the  Eskimo,  partly  by  learning 
from  him  or  enlisting  his  help.  In  these  regions,  which  are 
his  own,  his  culture  was  superior  to  that  of  the  white  race, 
and  from  no  other  people  has  the  arctic  navigator  learnt  so 
much. 

The  north  coast  of  America  and  the  islands  to  the  north 
of  it,  from  Bering  Strait  to  the  east  coast  of  Greenland,  is 
66 


ESKIMO    AND    SKR^LING 

the  territory  of  the  Eskimo.  The  map  (below)  shows  his 
present  distribution  and  the  districts  where  older  traces  of 
him  have  been  found.  Within  these  limits  the  Eskimo 
must  have  developed  into  what  they  now  are.  In  their 
anthropological  race-characteristics,  in  their  sealing  and 
whaling  culture,  and  in  their  language  they  are  very  different 


^ 

-J. 

1 

i 

* 

"^1^ 

w 

1 

% 

k 

_^ 

H 

Distribution  at  the  present  day.   |:i:;^h:-:i:;l    Former  distribution. 
Distribution  of  the  Eskimo  [after  W.  Thalbitzer,  1904] 


from  all  other  known  peoples,  both  in  America  and  Asia, 
and  we  must  suppose  that  for  long  ages,  ever  since  they 
began  to  fit  themselves  for  their  life  along  the  frozen  shores, 
they  have  lived  apart,  separated  from  others,  perhaps  for  a 
long  time,  as  a  small  tribe.  They  all  belong  to  the  same 
race;  the  cerebral  formation,  for  instance,  of  all  real  Eskimo 
from  Alaska  to  Greenland,  is  remarkably  homogeneous; 
but  in  the  far  west  they  may  have  been  mixed  with 
Indians  and  others,  and  in  Greenland  they  are  now  mixed 
with  Europeans.  They  are  pronouncedly  dolichocephalic; 
but  have  short,  broad  faces,  and  by  their  features  and 
appearance    are    easily    distinguished    from    other    neighboring 

67 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

peoples.  Small,  slanting  eyes;  the  nose  small  and  flat, 
narrow  between  the  eyes  and  broad  below;  cheeks  broad, 
prominent,  and  round;  the  forehead  narrowing  compara- 
tively above;  the  lower  part  of  the  face  broad  and  powerful; 
black,  straight  hair.  The  color  of  the  skin  is  a  pale  brown. 
The  Eskimo  are  not,  as  is  often  supposed,  a  small  people 
on  an  average;  they  are  rather  of  middle  height,  often 
powerful,  and  sometimes  quite  tall,  although  they  are  a  good 
deal  shorter,  and  weaker  in  appearance,  than  average  Scan- 
dinavians. In  appearance,  and  perhaps  also  in  language,  they 
come  nearest  to  some  of  the  North  American  Indian 
tribes. 

From  whence  they  originally  came,  and  where  they 
developed  into  Eskimo,  is  uncertain.  The  central  point  of 
the  Eskimo  culture  is  their  seal  hunting,  especially  with 
the  harpoon,  sometimes  from  the  kayak  in  open  water,  and 
sometimes  from  the  ice.  We  cannot  believe  that  this  sealing, 
especially  with  the  kayak,  was  first  developed  in  the  central 
part  of  the  regions  they  now  inhabit;  there  the  conditions  of 
life  would  have  been  too  severe,  and  they  would  not  have 
been  able  to  support  themselves  until  their  sealing  culture 
had  attained  a  certain  development.  Just  as  in  Europe  we 
met  with  the  Finnish  sea  fishing  on  a  coast  that  was 
connected  with  milder  coasts  farther  south,  where  seaman- 
ship was  able  first  to  develop,  so  we  must  expect  that  the 
Eskimo  culture  began  on  coasts  with  similar  conditions, 
and  these  must  be  looked  for  either  in  Labrador  or  on 
Bering  Strait. 

As  the  coasts  of  Labrador  and  Hudson  Bay  are  ice- 
bound for  a  great  part  of  the  year,  it  is  not  likely  that  traffic 
by  sea  began  there  at  any  very  early  time;  and  consequently 
no  particularly  favorable  conditions  existed  there  for  an 
early  development  of  seamanship.  Nor  is  this  the  case  to 
any  great  extent  on  the  east  coast  of  North  America  farther 
south,  which,  with  the  exception  of  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence, 
has  little  protection  from  the  sea,  and  offers  few  facilities 
68 


ESKIMO   AND    SKR^LING 

for  coastal  traffic.^  Nor  has  it  produced  any  other  maritime 
people  or  any  similar  fishing  culture.  Again,  if  the  Eskimo 
culture  had  arisen  there,  it  would  be  impossible  to  under- 
stand how  they  learned  to  use  dogs  as  draught  animals.  It 
is  otherwise  on  the  northern  west  coast  of  North  America, 
which  is  indented  by  fjords  and  has  many  outlying  islands, 
with  protected  channels  between  them  and  the  land.  Here, 
seamanship  might  be  naturally  developed  and  form  the 
necessary  basis  for  a  higher  sealing  culture  like  that  of  the 
Eskimo.  In  addition,  there  are  abundance  of  marine  animals 
which  afforded  excellent  conditions  for  hunting.  Here,  too,  we 
have  many  different  peoples  with  maritime  habits;  on  the 
one  side  the  Eskimo  northward  along  the  coast  of  Alaska; 
on  the  other  side  the  Aleutians  on  the  islands  extending  out 
to  sea,  besides  Indian  tribes  along  the  coast  of  southern 
Alaska  and  British  Columbia.  Until,  therefore,  research  has 
produced  sufficient  evidence  for  a  different  view,  it  must 
seem  most  natural  that,  in  these  favorable  regions  with  a 
rich  supply  of  marine  animals  of  all  kinds,  we  must  look  for 
the  cradle  of  the  culture  that  was  to  render  the  Eskimo 
capable  of  distributing  themselves  over  the  whole  arctic 
world  of  America.  To  this  must  be  added  that  in  these 
regions,  by  intercourse  with  people  on  the  Asiatic  side  of 
Bering  Strait,  the  seafaring  Eskimo  may  have  learnt  the 
use  of  the  dog  as  a  draught  animal,  which  is  an  Asiatic,  and 
not  an  American  invention,  and  which  is  also  of  great 
importance  to  the  whole  life  and  distribution  of  the  Eskimo 
in  the  ice-bound  regions.  We  cannot  here  pursue  further  the  in- 
quiry into  the  still  open  question  of  the  origin  of  the  Eskimo 
and  the  development  of  their  culture.- 

1  It  would  be  otherwise  on  the  west  coast  of  Greenland,  with  its  excellent 
belt  of  skerries;  but  as  the  Eskimo  could  not  reach  this  coast  without  having 
developed,  at  least  in  part,  their  peculiar  maritime  culture,  it  is,  of  course,  out 
of  the  question  that  this  can  have  been  their  cradle. 

2Cf.  on  this  subject  H.  Rink  [1871,  1887,  1891];  F,  Boas  [1901];  cf.  also 
H.  P.  Steensby  [1905],  Axel  Hamberg  [1907]  and  others.  These  authors  hold 
various  views  as  to  the  origin  of  the  Eskimo,  which,  however,  are  all  different 

69 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

One  might  get  the  impression  from  the  map,  which  shows 
where  older  traces  of  the  Eskimo  have  been  found,  that  they 
were  more  numerous  and  more  widely  distributed  in  former 
times.  This  is  probably  a  mistake.  They  are  hunters  and 
fishermen  who  are  entirely  dependent  on  the  supply  of  game, 
and  who  therefore  frequently  become  nomadic  and  search 
for  fishing-grounds  where  they  think  the  prospects  are  good. 
Sometimes  they  settle  in  a  good  district  for  a  considerable 
time,    and    then    they    may    move    again;    but    sometimes,    if 


Kayak-fishers  and  a  women's  boat  ("umiak").    Woodcut  from 
Greenland,  drawn  and  engraved  by  a  native 

exceptionally  severe  winters  chance  to  come,  they  may 
succumb  to  famine  and  scurvy.  But  everywhere  they  leave 
behind  them  their  peculiar  sites  of  houses  and  tents  and  other 
traces,  and  thus  these  must  always  be  found  over  larger 
areas  than  are  actually  inhabited  by  the  Eskimo  them- 
selves. It  might  be  objected  that  on  the  American  arctic 
islands  they  no  longer  live  so  far  north  as  older  traces 
of    them    are    found;    thus    Sverdrup    found    many    relics    of 


from  that  set  forth  here.  While  Rink  thought  the  Eskimo  came  from  Alaska 
and  first  developed  their  sea  fishing  on  the  rivers  of  Alaska,  Boas  thinks  they 
come  from  the  west  coast  of  Hudson  Bay,  and  Steensby  that  they  developed 
on  the  central  north  coasts  of  Canada.  Since  the  above  was  written  W.  Thal- 
bitzer  has  also  dealt  with  the  question  (1908-1910). 
70 


ESKIMO   AND    SKRiELING 

Eskimo  in  the  new  countries  discovered  by  him,  especially  along 
the  sound  by  Axel  Heiberg  Land.  But  these  people  may,  for 
instance,  have  migrated  eastward  to  Greenland.  If  we  sup- 
pose the  reverse  to  be  the  case,  that  the  most  northerly  Eskimo 
tribe  now  known,  on  Smith  Sound,  had  moved  westward  to 
Sverdrup's  new  islands  or  to  the  Parry  Islands,  then  we  should 
have  found  numerous  traces  of  them  in  the  districts  about  Smith 
Sound  and  Cape  York,  and  might  thus  have  concluded  that  the 
Eskimo  were  formerly  more  widely  distributed  towards  the 
north-east. 

How  early  the  Eskimo  appeared,  and  came  to  the  most 
northern  regions,  we  have  as  yet  no  means  of  determining. 
All  we  can  say  is  that,  as  they  are  so  distinct  in  physical 
structure,  language,  and  culture  from  all  other  known  races 
of  men,  with  the  exception  of  the  Aleutians,  we  must  assume 
that  they  have  lived  for  a  very  long  period  in  the  northern 
regions  apart  from  other  peoples.  It  would  be  of  special  in- 
terest here  if  we  could  form  any  opinion  as  to  the  date  of  their 
immigration  to  Greenland.  It  has  become  almost  a  historical 
dogma  that  this  immigration  on  a  larger  scale  did  not  take  place 
until  long  after  the  Norwegian  Icelanders  had  settled  in  the 
country,  and  that  it  was  chiefly  the  hordes  of  Eskimo  coming 
from  the  north  that  put  an  end,  first  to  the  Western  Settlement, 
and  then  to  the  Eastern.  But  this  is  in  every  respect  mislead- 
ing, and  conflicts  with  what  may  be  concluded  with  certainty 
from  several  facts;  m.oreover,  the  whole  Eskimo  way  of  life 
and  dependence  on  sealing  and  fishing  forbids  their  migra- 
tion in  hordes;  they  must  travel  in  small  scattered  groups 
in  order  to  find  enough  game  to  support  themselves  and 
their  families,  and  are  obliged  to  make  frequent  halts  for 
sealing.  They  will,  therefore,  never  be  able  to  undertake  any  mi- 
gration on  a  large  scale. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  Eskimo  arrived  in  Green- 
land ages  before  the  Norwegian  Icelanders.  The  rich  finds 
referred  to,  among  others,  by  Dr.  H.  Rink  [1875,  vol.  ii.], 
of  Eskimo   whaling   and   sealing   weapons   and   implements   of 

71 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

stone  from  deep  deposits  in  North  Greenland  show  that  the 
Eskimo  were  living  there  £ar  back  in  prehistoric  times. ^ 
They  must  originally  have  come  by  the  route  to  the  north  of 
Baffin  Bay  across  Smith  Sound,  and  must  have  had  at  the 
time  of  their  first  immigration  much  the  same  culture  in  the 
main  as  now,  since  otherwise  they  would  not  have  been  able 
to  support  themselves  in  these  northern  regions.^  Their 
means  of  transport  were  the  kayak  and  the  women's  boat  in 
open  water,  and  the  dog-sledge  on  the  ice.  Their  v/haling 
and  sealing  were  conducted  in  kayaks  in  summer,  but  with 
dog-sledges  in  winter,  when  they  hunted  the  seal  at  its 
breathing-holes  in  the  ice,  the  walrus,  narwhale  and  white 
whale  in  the  open  leads,  and  pursued  the  bear  with  their 
dogs.  In  winter  they  usually  keep  to  one  place,  living  in 
houses  of  stone,  or  snow,  but  in  summer  they  wander  about 
with  their  boats  and  tents  of  hides  to  the  best  places  for 
kayak  fishing.  In  this  way  they  came  southward  from 
Smith  Sound  along  the  west  coast  of  Greenland  to  the 
districts  about  Umanakfjord,  Disco  Bay,  and  south  to  the 
present  Holstensborg  (the  tract  between  72°  and  68°  N.  lat.). 
Here  they  found  an  excellent  supply  of  seal,  walrus,  small- 
whale,  and  fish,  there  was  catching  from  kayaks  in  summer 

1  This  has  been  definitely  and  finally  proved  by  the  researches  of  Dr.  O.  Sol- 
berg  (1907),  referred  to  in  Vol  I,  (p.  306).  It  results  from  these  that  the  oldest 
stone  implements  of  the  Eskimo  from  the  districts  round  Disco  Bay  must  be  of 
very  great  age — far  older,  indeed,  than  I  was  formerly  [1891,  pp.  6  f.;  Engl,  ed., 
pp.  8  f,]  inclined  to  suppose.  It  results  also  from  Solberg's  researches  that, 
while  the  Eskimo  occupied  the  district  from  Umanakfjord  southward  to 
Egedesminde  and  Holstensborg  (from  71°  to  68°  N.  lat.)  during  long  prehis- 
toric periods,  they  do  not  appear  to  have  settled  in  the  more  southern  part  of 
Greenland  until  much  later.  As  will  be  pointed  out  later  (p.  83),  it  was 
especially  in  the  district  around  KroksfjarSarheiSr  that  according  to  the  his- 
torical authorities  the  Skraelings  were  to  be  found.  Since  we  may  assume,  as 
shown  in  Vol.  I,  p.  301,  that  this  was  Disco  Bay,  the  conclusion  from  histor- 
ical sources  agrees  remarkably  well  with  the  archseological  finds. 

-  Solberg,  however,  in  the  researches  referred  to,  has  been  able  to  show 
some  development  in  Eskimo  sealing  appliances  in  the  course  of  the  period 
since  their  first  arrival  in  Greenland,  but  perhaps  chiefly  after  they  had  come 
in  contact  with  the  Norsemen  and  learnt  the  use  of  iron. 
72 


ESKIMO   AND    SKR^LING 

and  on  the  ice  in  winter;  altogether  rarely  favorable  conditions 
for  their  accustomed  life,  and  it  is  therefore  natural  that  they 
settled  here  in  large  numbers.^  Some  went  farther  south  along 
the  coast;  but  they  no  longer  found  there  the  same  con- 
ditions of  life  as  before,  the  ice  was  for  the  most  part 
absent,  the  walrus  became  rare,  seal  hunting  became  more 
difficult  in  the  open  sea,  and  winter  fishing  from  the  kayak 
w^as  not  very  safe.  Southern  Greenland,  therefore,  had  no 
great  attraction,  so  long  as  there  was  room  enough  far- 
ther north.  When  they  came  round  Cape  Farewell  to  the 
east  coast  they  found  the  conditions  more  what  they  were  used 
to,  although  the  sealing  and  whaling  were  not  so  good  as  on 
the  northern  west  coast. 

It  has  been  assumed  by  several  inquirers  that  the  Eskimo  immigrated  to 
Greenland  by  two  routes.  One  branch  is  supposed  to  have  come  southward 
along  the  west  coast  from  Smith  Sound,  as  suggested  above,  while  the  other 
branch  went  northward  from  Smith  Sound  and  Kane  Basin  along  the  coast, 
where  relics  of  Eskimo  are  found  as  far  north  as  82°  N.  lat.  They  thus  gradu- 
ally worked  their  way  round  the  north  of  Greenland  and  turned  southward 
again  along  the  east  coast.  The  Eskimo  who  formerly  lived  on  the  northern 
east  coast,  and  whom  Clavering  found  there  in  1823,  are  supposed  to  have  come 
by  that  route  and  possibly  also  the  tribe  that  still  lives  at  Angmagsalik.  But 
in  the  opinion  of  some  they  may  have  traveled  farther  south,  right  round  Cape 
Farewell,  and  have  populated  the  south-west  coast  as  far  north  as  Ny-Herrn- 
hut  by  Godthaab.  The  Dane  Schultz-Lorentzen  [1904,  p.  289]  2  thinks  that 
support  may  be  found  for  this  theory  of  the  southern  immigration  from  the 
east  coast  in  the  sharp  line  of  demarcation  that  exists  between  the  dialect 
spoken  by  the  Eskimo  in  Godthaab  and  northward  along  the  whole  west  coast, 
and  that  spoken  to  the  south  and  on  the  east  coast;  furthermore,  there  are  other 
points  of  difference:  in  the  build  and  fitting-together  of  the  kayaks,  in  the  use 
of  partitions  between  the  family  compartments  on  the  couches  in  houses  and 
tents,  etc.  Although  in  an  earlier  work  [1891,  pp.  8  f.;  Engl,  ed.,  pp.  12  f.]  I 
put  forward  reasons  that  are  opposed  to  such  an  immigration  round  the  north 
of  Greenland,  I  must  admit  that  there  is  much  in  favor  of  the  Eskimo  who 
formerly  lived  on  the  northern  east  coast  having  come  that  way;  on  the  other 
hand,  it  does  not  appear  to  me  very  likely  that  this  should  have  been  the  case 
with  the  Eskimo  of  the  southern  east  coast  and  of  the  west  coast.     The  differ- 

1  As  will  be  seen  (cf.  p.  72),  this  agrees  surprisingly  well  with  the  conclu- 
sions which  Dr.  Solberg  has  reached  in  another  way  in  the  work  already 
mentioned  [1907],  which  was  published  since  the  above  was  written, 

2  Cf.  also  William  Thalbitzer's  valuable  work  on  the  Eskimo  language  [1904]. 

73 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

ence  alluded  to,  at  Godthaab,  may  be  accounted  for  by  a  later  immigration  from 
the  north  to  the  northern  west  coast,  which  did  not  come  any  farther  south 
than  this.  That  the  boundary-line  between  the  two  kinds  of  Eskimo  should  be 
so  sharp  just  between  Ny-Herrnhut  and  Godthaab,  which  lie  close  together  on 
the  same  peninsula,  is  easily  explained  by  the  fact  of  the  former  settlement 
having  always  belonged  to  the  recently  abandoned  German  Moravian  mission, 
while  the  latter  was  the  seat  of  Egede's  and  the  later  Danish  mission.  There 
is  always  the  essential  objection  to  be  made  against  the  Eskimo  having  im- 
migrated to  the  southern  east  coast  round  the  north  of  Greenland,  that  the 
conditions  of  life  for  Eskimo,  who  live  principally  by  sealing  and  whaling, 
were  poor  on  the  north  coast  of  Greenland,  where  there  are  no  seals  worth 
mentioning  and  few  bears;  and  they  can  scarcely  have  got  enough  musk-oxen 
to  support  themselves.  Their  diffusion  to  the  east  coast  could  not  have  gone 
on  rapidly.  In  the  ice-bound  regions  they  may  have  forgotten  the  use  of  the 
kayak,  as  the  Eskimo  of  Smith  Sound  had  done  until  thirty  years  ago,  when 
they  became  acquainted  with  it  again  through  a  chance  immigration  from  the 
west.  In  any  case,  their  practice  in  building  and  using  kayaks  must  have 
greatly  fallen  off.  But  when  the  Eskimo  came  southward  on  the  east  coast 
they  again  had  use  for  both  the  kayak  for  sealing  and  the  women's  boat  for 
traveling,  and  it  is  scarcely  likely  that  the  craft  they  produced  after  such  a 
break  in  the  development  should  be  so  near  to  the  women's  boats  and  hand- 
some kayaks  of  the  northern  west  coast  as  we  now  find  them;  unless,  indeed, 
we  are  to  suppose  that  they  improved  them  again  through  contact  with  the 
Eskimo  of  the  northern  west  coast,  but  in  that  case  the  whole  theory  appears 
somewhat  strained. 

We  will  now  look  at  what  the  known  historical  authorities 
have  to  tell  us  about  the  Eskimo  in  Greenland  during  the 
early  days  of  the  Norse  settlement.  I  have  already  stated 
(pp.  12  £.)  that  the  Norse  name  "  Skraeling "  for  Eskimo 
must  originally  have  been  used  as  a  designation  of  fairies 
or  mythical  creatures.  Furthermore,  there  is  much  that 
would  imply  that  when  the  Icelanders  first  met  with  the 
Eskimo  in  Greenland  they  looked  upon  them  as  fairies; 
they  therefore  called  them  "  trolls,"  an  ancient  common 
name  for  various  sorts  of  supernatural  beings.  This  view 
persisted  more  or  less  in  after  times.  Every  European  who 
has  suddenly  encountered  Eskimo  in  the  ice-covered  wastes 
of  Greenland,  without  ever  having  seen  them  before,  will 
easily  understand  that  they  must  have  made  such  an  impres- 
sion on  people  who  had  the  slightest  tendency  to  superstition. 
The  mighty  natural  surroundings,  with  huge  glaciers,  floating 
74 


ESKIMO   AND    SKR^LING 

icebergs  and  drifting  ice-floes,  all  on  a  vaster  scale  than 
anything  they  had  seen  before,  might  in  themselves  fur- 
nish additional  food  for  superstition.  Such  an  idea  must, 
from  the  very  beginning,  have  influenced  the  relations 
between  the  Norsemen  and  the  natives,  and  is  capable  of 
explaining  much  that  is  curious  in  the  mention  of  them, 
or  rather  the  lack  of  mention  of  them,  in  the  sagas,  since 
they  were  supernatural  beings  of  whom  it  was  best  to  say 
nothing. 

In  connection  with  what  has  been  said  earlier  (pp.  12  f.) 
as  to  the  Skraelings  being  regarded  as  fairies  (of  whom  the 
name  was  originally  used),  it  may  be  adduced  that,  as  Storm 
pointed  out,  the  word  was  always  translated  in  Latin  by 
"Pygmasi"  in  the  Middle  Ages  (cf.  above,  p.  12).  But 
the  Pygmies  were  precisely  "  short,  undergrown  people  of 
supernatural  aspect " — that  is,  like  fairies — and  the  Middle 
Ages  inherited  the  belief  in  them  from  the  Greeks  and 
Romans,  and,  as  Moltke  Moe  has  pointed  out,  the  northern 
Pygmies  ( BSpswi  IIvniaToi )  were  already  spoken  of  in 
classical  times  as  inhabiting  the  regions  about  Thule.  But 
authors  like  Apollodorus  and  Strabo  denied  their  existence, 
and  consigned  them,  together  with  dog-headed,  one-eyed 
one-footed,  mouthless,  and  other  similar  beings,  to  the 
ranks  of  fabulous  creatures  in  which  classical  tradition  was 
so  rich.  Through  St.  Augustine  the  enumeration  of  these 
creatures  reached  Isidore;  and  from  him  the  knowledge  of 
the  Pygmies  was  disseminated  over  the  whole  of  mediaeval 
Europe — partly  in  the  same  sense,  that  of  a  more  or  less 
fabulous  people  from  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth;  and 
partly  in  the  sense  of  a  fairy  people  (cf.  the  demons  in  the 
form  of  pygmies  in  the  "  Imram  Brenaind,"  see  above, 
p.  10).  Supported  by  popular  belief  in  various  countries, 
the  latter  meaning  soon  became  general.  Of  this  Moltke 
Moe  gives  a  remarkable  example  from  the  Welshman  Walter 
Mapes  (latter  half  of  the  twelfth  century),  who  in  his  curious 
collection  of   anecdotes,   etc.    (called   "  De   nugis   curialium "), 

75 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

has    a    tale    of    a    prehistoric    king    of    the    Britons    called 
Herla.i 

To  him  came  a  fairy-  or  elf-king,  "  rex  pygmaeorum,"  with  a  huge  head, 
thick  hair,  and  big  eyes;  the  pygmy-king  foretells  to  King  Herla  something 
that  is  to  happen,  and  when  this  is  fulfilled  King  Herla  promises  as  a  mark 
of  gratitude  to  be  present  at  his  wedding.  The  moment  the  pygmy-king  turns 
his  back  he  vanishes.  Herla  comes  to  the  wedding  of  the  fairy-king.  Enter- 
ing a  vast  cave  he  comes  through  darkness  to  the  banqueting-hall  inside  the 
mountain,  lighted  by  a  multitude  of  lamps,  where  he  is  splendidly  entertained. 
When  he  returns,  believing  he  has  been  away  for  three  days,  he  discovers  that 
he  has  been  absent  for  several  hundred  years. 

This  is  a  typical  elf-myth,  with  many  of  the  features 
characteristic  of  elves  and  fairies:  the  low  stature,  the  big, 
hairy  head  with  large  eyes,  the  gift  of  prophecy,  and  the 
power  of  making  themselves  invisible  in  an  instant,  their 
dwelling  in  caves  and  mountains  far  from  the  light  of  day, 
the  way  thither  through  darkness  and  mist,  the  rapid  dis- 
appearance of  time  in  the  fairy  world,  etc.  But  we  recognize 
most  of  these,  and  even  more  fairy  features,  precisely  in  the 
Icelandic  descriptions  of  the  Skraslings  in  Wineland,  Markland, 
and  Greenland,  as  appears  from  what  is  said  about  them  on 
pp.  12  f. ;  and  when,  for  instance,  ugly  hair  ("  ilt  har ")  and 
big  eyes  are  expressly  attributed  to  the  Skra^lings,  this  applies 
neither  to  Indians  nor  Eskimo,  but  it  applies  exactly  to  fairies. 
Further,  we  may  point  to  the  Skraelings  of  Markland  being  gov- 
erned by  kings  (cf.  p.  20),  which  again  does  not  apply  either 
to  Indians  or  to  Eskimo,  while  the  elves  and  huldrefolk  have 
kings.  It  was  mentioned  earlier  (p.  20)  that  the  name  "  Vas- 
tilldi "  or  "  Vethilldi "  may  be  Vaetthildr,  compounded  of  the 
word  "  vaettr,"  or  "  vettr  "  (fairy). 

Everything  points  in  the  same  direction,  that  the  Skraelings 
of  Wineland,  Markland,  and  Greenland  were  regarded  as  a  kind 
of  fairy  people.  Nor  can  this  surprise  us  when  we  consider 
that  even  the  Lapps  of  Finmark,  who  lived  so  near  to 
and  were  so  well  known  by  the  Norwegians,  were  regarded  as 

1  Cf.  Gualteri  Mapes,  De  nugis  curialium.     Ed.  by  Thomas  Wright,  1850, 
pp.  14,  ff. 
76 


ESKIMO   AND    SKR^LING 

a  half-supernatural  people,  and  had  various  magical  properties 
attributed  to  them. 

From  the  statement  quoted  earlier  from  Are  Frode's 
Islendingabok  (circa  1130)  it  appears  that  the  Skraelings,  or 
Eskimo,  had  been  in  South  Greenland  before  Eric  the 
Red  and  his  men,  and  that  the  latter  found  dwelling-sites 
and  other  traces  of  them,  from  which  they  could  tell  that  the 
same  kind  of  people  had  been  there  who  "inhabited  Wine- 
land  and  whom  the  Greenlanders  call  Skraelings  [Vinland 
hefer  bygt  oc  Gronlendingar  calla  Scrcelinga]."  These 
words  of  Are  have  generally  been  understood  to  imply  that 
he  did  not  know  of  any  meeting  of  Norsemen  and  Skraelings 
in  Greenland,  but  only  in  Wineland,  and  that  consequently 
it  must  have  been  after  his  time  that  the  Norsemen 
encountered  the  Eskimo  in  Greenland.  I  am  unable  to 
read  Are's  meaning  in  this  way.  He  uses  the  present  tense: 
"  calla,"  and  what  one  "  calls  Skraelings "  must  presumably 
be  a  people  one  knows,  and  not  one  that  one's  ancestors  had 
met  with  more  than  a  hundred  years  ago.  In  that  case  we 
should  rather  expect  it  to  be  those  ancestors  who  "  called " 
them  by  this  nickname.^  I  have  already  suggested  (p.  16) 
the  possibility  of  a  connection  between  this  statement  and 
the  view  of  the  Skraelings  as  trolls;  but  we  have,  besides,  a 
remarkable  parallel  to  Are's  whole  account  of  the  first  coming 
of  the  Icelanders  to  Greenland  and  the  natives  there  in  his 
account  of  the  Norwegians'  first  settlement  of  Iceland,  where 
he  says  that  there  were  Christian  men  before  they  came, 
"whom  the  Norwegians  call  [calla]  papar "  (i.e.,  priests). 
They  left  behind  them  traces  "  from  which  it  could  be  seen 
that  they  were  Irishmen."  From  these  words  it  might  be 
concluded,  with  as  much  justification  as  from  the  statement 
about   the   traces   of   Skraelings,   that   the   newcomers   did   not 

1  If  it  was  the  tradition  of  Karlsevne's  encounter  with  the  Skraslings  that 
was  referred  to,  then  of  course  neither  he  nor  the  greater  part  of  his  men  were 
Greenlanders,  but  Icelanders,  so  that  it  might  equally  well  have  been  said  that 
the  Icelanders  called  them  Skraelings. 

17 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

come  in  contact  with  the  earlier  people;  but  in  the  latter 
case  this  is  incredible,  and  moreover  conflicts  with  Are's  own 
words  in  the  passages  immediately  preceding,  according  to 
which  the  Christians  left  after  the  heathen  Norsemen 
arrived.  Three  kinds  of  traces  are  mentioned  in  each  case: 
the  "  papar  "  left  Irish  books,  bells,  and  croziers ;  the  Skraelings 
left  dwelling-places,  fragments  of  boats,  and  stone  implements. 
This  may  have  somewhat  the  look  of  a  turn  of  style  in  the 
sober  Are,  who  thought  it  of  more  value  to  lay  stress  on 
visible  signs  of  this  kind  than  to  give  a  possibly  less  trust- 
worthy statement  about  the  people  themselves.  We  must 
also  bear  in  mind  how  terse  and  condensed  the  form  of  the 
islendingabok  is.  I  therefore  read  Are's  words  as  though  he 
meant  to  say  something  like  the  following :  "  As  early  as  Eric's 
first  voyage  to  Greenland  they  found  at  once  dwelling-places 
both  in  the  Eastern  and  Western  Settlements,  and  fragments 
of  boats,  and  stone  implements,  so  that  from  this  it  can  be 
seen  that  over  the  whole  of  that  region  there  had  been  present 
the  same  kind  of  people  who  also  live  in  Wineland,  and  who 
are  the  same  as  those  the  Greenlanders  call  Skraelings." 
Nothing  is  said  about  the  waste  districts  of  Greenland,  where 
the  Skraelings  especially  lived,  and  it  is  only  in  passing  that 
Wineland  is  mentioned  in  this  one  passage.  Are's  Islendinga- 
bok cannot,  therefore,  be  used  as  evidence  that  the  Norsemen 
had  not  yet  met  with  the  Skraelings  of  Greenland  in  Are's 
time.  As  he  expressly  says  that  they  found  "  manna  vistir 
baef>e  austr  oc  vestr  a  lande "  (human  dwelling-places  both 
east  and  west  in  the  land — i.e.,  both  in  the  Eastern  and 
Western  Settlements),  this,  too,  shows  that  the  stay  of  the 
Eskimo  in  south  Greenland  cannot  have  been  merely  a  short 
and  cursory  summer  visit;  but  there  must  have  been  many 
of  them  who  stayed  there  a  long  time,  for  otherwise  they 
would  hardly  have  left  remains  so  conspicuous  and  distributed 
over  so  wide  an  area  as  to  be  mentioned  with  such  emphasis 
as  this. 

That  Eskimo  were  living  on  the  south  coast  of  Greenland  when  the  Iceland- 
78 


ESKIMO    AND    SKRiELING 

ers  arrived  there  may  also  possibly  be  concluded  from  the  mention,  in  the  list 
of  fjords  of  the  Eastern  Settlement  in  Bjorn  Jonsson's  "  Vetus  Chorographia," 
of  an  "  Utibliks  fjord"  [Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  p.  228;  F.  Jonsson,  1899,  p.  319], 
which  does  not  sound  Norwegian  and  may  recall  the  Eskimo  "  Itiblik,"  a 
tongue  of  land.  As  Finnur  Jonsson  [1899,  p.  276]  points  out,  the  name  of  the 
fjord  in  Arngrim  Jonsson's  copy  of  the  same  list  is  "  Makleiksf jorSr," 
and  both  names  may  be  misreadings  of  a  man's  name  ending  in  "  -leikr," 
from  which  the  fjord  was  called  (in  the  same  way  as  Eiriks-fjorSr, 
etc.) ;  but  as  "  tJtiblik  "  has  such  a  pronounced  Eskimo  sound,  it  appears  to  me 
more  probable  that  "  Makleik-"  may  have  arisen  through  a  misreading  of  this 
name,  which  was  incomprehensible  to  Arngrim  Jonsson  and  may  have  been 
indistinctly  written,  rather  than  that  both  names  should  be  corruptions,  of 
what?  In  that  case  it  would  afford  strong  evidence,  not  only  that  there  were 
Eskimo  in  the  Eastern  Settlement  when  the  Icelanders  established  themselves 
there,  but  also  that  they  had  intercourse  with  them. 

The  "  Historia  Norvegiae  "  (thirteenth  century)  shows  that  a 
hundred  years  later  the  Skraelings  of  Greenland  were  known  in 
Norway  and  perhaps  it  is  because  they  there  seemed  stranger 
that  the  Norwegian  author  mentions  them.  He  says  [Storm, 
1880,  pp.  76,  205]  : 

"  On  the  other  side  of  the  Greenlanders  towards  the  north  [i.e.,  on  the 
northern  west  coast  of  Greenland]  there  have  been  found  by  hunters  certain 
small  people  whom  they  call  Skraelings;  when  these  are  struck  while  alive  by 
weapons,  their  wounds  turn  white  without  blood,  but  when  they  are  dead  the 
blood  scarcely  stops  running.  But  they  have  a  complete  lack  of  the  metal 
iron;  they  use  the  tusks  of  marine  animals  [' dentibus  cetimes,'  here  walrus 
and  narwhale  tusks]  for  missiles  and  sharp  stones  for  knives." 

The  curiously  correct  mention  of  the  Skraelings'  weapons 
must  be  derived  from  a  well-informed  source,  and  the 
statement  established  the  fact  that  the  Norsemen  met  with 
the  Eskimo  of  Greenland  at  any  rate  in  the  thirteenth 
century,  while  at  the  same  time  it  may  imply  that  at  that 
time  the  Skraelings  were  not  generally  seen  in  the  set- 
tlements of  Greenland.  The  statement  as  to  their  wounds, 
although  connected  with  myth,  may  further  point  to  there  hav- 
ing been  conflicts  between  them  and  the  Norse  hunters,  who  in 
viking  fashion  dealt  with  them  with  a  heavy  hand;  but  at  the 
same  time  it  discloses  the  view  of  the  Skraelings  as  troll-like  be- 
ings (seep.  17). 

79 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

A    valuable    piece    of    evidence    of    the    Norsemen    having 

early   had   intercourse   with    the    Skraelings   in    Greenland   is  a 

little  carved  walrus,  of  walrus  ivory,  which  was  found  during 

excavations    on   the    site    of    a   house    in    Bergen,    and   which 

appears   to    be    of   Eskimo   workmanship.^     Unfortunately   the 

age    of   the   find   has   not   been   determined,    nor   has    it   been 

recorded    at    what  depth  it  lay;  but  as  it  was  amongst   the 

deepest   finds  "  right   down  in  the   very  foundations,"   and   so 

far   as   can   be   made    out   from   the   description, 

much    deeper    than    "  a   burnt    layer,    which    lay 

under    the    remains    of    the    fire    of    141 3,"    this 

walrus  may  be  of  the  twelfth,  or,  at  the  latest, 

of  the   thirteenth  century.     It  might,   no   doubt, 

have    been    accidentally    found    by    Greenlanders 

in    a    grave    or   dwelling-site    of    Skraelings,    and 

afterwards    accidentally    found    on    the    site    of 

this   house    in   Bergen;    but    this   is    assuming    a 

good    many    accidents,    and    it    is    most    natural 

r    T7    1  -^^    to    suppose    that    the    Greenlanders    obtained    it 
of    tiSkimo  ^'^ 

work,  of  the  from  the  Skfaslings  themselves,  and  that  it  is 
twelfth  cen-  thus  an  evidence  of  intercourse  with  the  latter 
*  "  ^  y    <•>'    at  that  time. 

found    on    the  ^     ,  .,.,,«,,. 

site  of  a  house  ^^  IS  strikmg  that  the  Skraehngs  are  scarcely 

inBergen  ever  mentioned  in  the  descriptions  of  the 
[after  Koren-  Norsemen  in  Greenland  in  the  Icelandic  saga 
Wiberg,  1908]  li^ej-ature,  and  that  it  is  only  in  one  or  two 
places  that  Greenland  Skr^lings  are  mentioned  in  passing 
in  Icelandic  narratives;  but  at  the  same  time  there  are 
detailed  descriptions  of  both  peaceful  and  warlike  encounters 
with  the  Skraelings  in  Wineland,  and  also  in  Markland  (see 
Vol.  I,  pp.  327  f.).  This  is  like  what  we  found  in  Are 
Frode.  The  explanation  must  be  that,  while  the  saga  teller 
could   bring   out  the   distant   Skraelings   of  Wineland  in   large 

1  Cf.    Christian    Koren-Wiberg:    Bidrag    til    Bergens    Kulturhistorie,    Ber- 
gen, 1908,  pp.  151  f.     I  owe  it  to  Prof.  A.  Bugge  that  my  attention  was  drawn 
to  this  interesting  find. 
80 


ESKIMO    AND    SKRJELING 

bodies  and  as  dangerous  opponents,  quite  worthy  of  mention 
even  for  nobles,  the  harmless  and  timorous  Skraslings  of 
Greenland  were  too  well  known  to  be  used  as  interesting 
material;  they  were  met  with  in  small,  scattered  bands, 
and  could  be  maltreated  without  any  particular  danger. 
They  belonged  to  the  commonplace,  and  the  commonplace  was 
what  a  saga  writer  had  to  avoid  above  all;  it  is  for  the 
same  reason  that  we  scarcely  hear  anything  about  the 
Greenlanders'  and  other  Norsemen's  whaling  and  sealing 
and  their  expeditions  for  this  purpose  (e.g.,  to  NorSrsetur) ; 
Only  here  and  there  a  few  words  are  let  fall  about  these 
things,  which  to  us  would  be  of  so  much  greater  value  than 
all  the  tales  of  fighting  and  slaughter.  But  as  regards 
the  Skraaelings  of  Greenland,  there  was  the  additional  circum- 
stance that  they  were  heathens;  consequently  intercourse 
with  them  was  forbidden  by  the  laws  of  the  Church,  and  it 
was  therefore  best  to  say  nothing  about  it.  Besides,  they 
were  always  regarded  in  Iceland  as  fairies  or  trolls,  and,  as 
we  have  said,  their  name  was  translated  by  "  Pygmaei,"  and 
it  has  been  the  same  with  them  as  with  huldrefolk  and 
goblins,  who  as  a  rule  are  not  mentioned  in  the  sagas  either 
in  Iceland  or  Norway,  though,  of  course,  they  were  believed 
in,  and  there  can  have  been  no  lack  of  "  authentic "  stories 
about  them.  In  several  passages  of  Icelandic  literature  the 
Skraelings  are  alluded  to  as  trolls;  to  kill  them  was  perhaps 
meritorious,  but  it  was  nothing  to  boast  about.  In  the 
"  Floamanna-saga "  it  is  related  that  Thorgils  Orrabeinsfostre, 
on  his  wonderful  voyage  along  the  east  coast  of  Greenland, 
one  morning  saw  a  large  sea-monster  stranded  in  a  creek, 
and  two  troll-hags  (in  skin-kirtles)  were  tying  up  big  bundles 
of  it;  he  rushed  up,  and  as  one  of  them  was  lifting  her 
bundle  he  cut  off  her  hand  so  that  her  burden  fell,  and  she 
ran  away.  They  may  be  regarded  as  Eskimo.  It  is  true 
that  this  saga  is  so  full  of  marvels  and  inventions  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p. 
281)  that  we  cannot  atribute  much  historical  value  to  it,  but  it 
shows,  nevertheless,  the  way  in  which  they  were  looked  upon. 

81 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

In  another  passage  of  this  description  Thorgils  saw  two 
"  women,"  which  must  mean  the  same.  It  is  stated  that 
"they  vanished  in  an  instant"  ("  [^aer  hurfu  skjott"),  just  like 
the  underground  beings.  In  the  description  of  the  voyage  of 
Bjorn  Einarsson  Jorsalafarer  (given  in  Bjorn  Jonsson's  "  An- 
nals of  Greenland  ")  it  is  related  that  when,  in  1385,  the  same 
Bjorn  (together  with  three  other  vessels)  on  his  way 
to  Iceland  was  driven  out  of  his  course  to  Greenland,  and  had 
to  stay  there  till  1387,  he  rescued  on  a  skerry  two  "trolls," 
a  young  brother  and  sister,  who  stayed  with  him  the  whole 
time  [Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  p.  438].  These,  then,  were  Skrae- 
lings  in  the  Eastern  Settlement;  but  the  designation  troll  is 
here  used  as  a  matter  of  course,  although  nothing  troll-like  is  re- 
lated of  them. 

It  may  further  be  mentioned  that  in  legendary  tales  and  in  many  of  the  fan- 
ciful sagas  we  hear  of  trolls  in  Greenland,  who  may  originally  have  been  de- 
rived from  the  Skraelings,  but  who  have  acquired  more  of  the  troll-  or  giant- 
nature  of  fairy-tale.  In  the  tale  of  the  shipwreck  of  the  Icelandic  chief,  Bjorn 
Thorleifsson  and  his  wife  on  the  coast  of  Greenland,^  the  two  were  saved  by 
a  troll  man  and  a  hag  who  each  took  one  of  them  in  panniers  on  their  shoul- 
ders and  carried  them  to  the  homestead  enclosure  at  Gardar.  In  the  "  Pattr 
af  Jokli  Buasyni "  Jokul  is  wrecked  in  the  fjord  "  OUum  Lengri "  on  the  east 
coast  of  Greenland,  which  was  peopled  by  trolls  and  giants,  and  where  a 
friendly  troll  woman  helps  him  to  slay  King  Skramr,  etc.  [Gronl.  hist.  Mind., 
iii.  p.  521].  It  will  be  seen  that  here  there  is  nothing  left  of  the  Skraelings' 
nature,  but  the  usual  Norse  ideas  of  trolls  and  giants  predominate. 

The  most  important  records  of  Skraelings  in  Greenland  in  older  times,  in 
addition  to  the  works  named  above  and  the  Islendingabok,  are :  the  "  Icelandic 
Annals,"  where  they  are  mentioned  in  one  year,  1379,  besides  the  allusion  to 
the  voyage  from  Nort^rsetur  in  1267  (cf.  Vol  I,  p.  308),  Ivar  Bardsson's  descrip- 
tion of  Greenland  [Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  p.  259],  and  finally  Gisle  Oddsson's 
Annals,  where  they  are  called  "  the  people  of  America "  [GronL  hist.  Mind., 
iii.  p.  459;  G.  Storm,  iSgca,  p.  355]. 

As  the  Norsemen,  at  all  events  during  early  days  In  Green- 
land, were  to  a  great  extent  dependent  on  keeping  cattle,  as 
they  had  been  in  Iceland,  they  must  have  stayed  a  good  deal  at 
their  homesteads  within  the  fjords;  while  the  Eskimo,  being  en- 
gaged in  fishing  and  sealing,  kept  to  the  outer  coast.     And  even 

1  Jon  Egilsson's  continuation  of  Hungurvaka,  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  p.  469. 


ESKIMO   AND    SKR^LING 

if  the  latter,  after  the  arrival  of  the  Icelanders  in  the  country, 
had  lived  scattered  along  the  southern  part  of  the  coast,  there 
may  thus  have  been  little  contact  between  them  and  the 
Norsemen. 

From  the  statements  cited  earlier  (Vol.  I,  pp.  308  f.)  about 
the  NorSrsetur  expeditions  we  may  conclude  that  the  Green- 
landers  came  across  Skraelings  in  those  northern  districts. 
It  is  true  that  the  expression  "  Skraslingja  vistir "  has 
usually  been  interpreted  as  Skraeling  sites  or  abandoned 
dwelling-places;  but  in  this  account  a  distinction  is  made 
between  "  Skraslingja  vistir "  and  "  Skraslingja  vistir  forn- 
ligar."  The  latter  are  old  dwelling-places  that  have  been 
abandoned,  while  the  former  must  be  dwelling-places  still  in  use. 
In  the  account  of  the  voyage  to  the  north,  about  1267,  we  read 
that  at  the  farthest  north  there  were  found  some  old 
Skrasling  dwelling-places  ("vistir  fornligar"),  while  farther 
south,  on  some  islands,  were  found  some  "  Skraelingja 
vistir" — that  is,  inhabited  ones.  In  agreement  with  this  it  is 
also  stated  of  the  men  who  came  from  the  north  in  1266  that 

*'  they  saw  no  *  Skraelingja  vistir '  except  in  [i.e.,  farther  north  than  in]  Kroks- 
fjarc^arheit?r,  and  therefore  it  is  thought  that  they  [the  Skraelings]  must  by 
that  way  have  the  shortest  distance  to  travel  wherever  they  come  from. 
From  this  one  can  hear  [adds  Bjorn  Jonsson]  how  carefully  the  Greenlanders 
took  note  of  the  Skraelings'  places  of  abode  at  that  time." 

It  is  clear  enough  that  this  refers  to  dwelling-places  in 
use  and  not  to  old  sites,  for  this  is  absolutely  proved  by  the 
expression  that  "they  have  the  shortest  distance  to  travel 
.  .  .";  and  we  thus  see  that  the  Skraelings  were  found  in 
and  in  the  neighborhood  of  Kroksfjord,^  but  on  the  other 
hand  not  in  the  extreme  north,  where  only  old  sites  left  by 
them  were  found;-   and  from  this  the  conclusion  was  drawn 

1  It  is  striking  how  accurately  this  agrees  with  what  we  have  arrived  at  in 
an  entirely  different  way  with  regard  to  the  places  inhabited  by  the  Eskimo 
in  ancient  times   (see  p.  73). 

-  From  this  it  cannot,  of  course,  be  concluded  that  they  were  not  living 
there  too  at  that  time;  it  only  shows  that  the  voyagers  did  not  meet  with  them 

83 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

that  they  could  not  come  from  the  north,  but  by  the  route 
through  Kroksfjord,  wherever  their  original  home  may  have 
been.  As  they  cannot  well  have  come  from  inland,  nor  from 
out  at  sea  either,  this  statement  may  give  one  the  impres- 
sion of  something  semi-supernatural.  It  is  significant  that 
the  Skraelings  themselves  are  not  spoken  of  here  either; 
this  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  there  was  nothing  remarkable 
in  meeting  with  them;  what,  on  the  other  hand,  was 
interesting  was  their  distribution  in  the  unknown  regions  far- 
ther north. 

It  was  remarked  in  an  earlier  chapter  (Vol.  I,  p.  297)  that 
the  runic  stone,  found  north  of  Uperinvik,  shows  that  Norsemen 
were  there  in  the  month  of  April,  perhaps  about  1300,  and  pos- 
sibly it  may  also  point  to  intercourse  with  the  Eskimo.  It  was 
further  mentioned  (Vol.  I,  p.  308)  that  the  finding,  in  1266, 
"  out  at  sea "  of  pieces  of  driftwood  shaped  with  "  small 
axes"  (stone  axes?)  and  adzes  (i.e.,  the  Eskimo  form  of 
ax),  and  with  wedges  of  bone  imbedded  in  them,  shows 
that  there  were  Eskimo  on  the  east  coast  of  Greenland  at 
that  time.  It  is  true  that  nothing  is  said  as  to  what  part 
of  the  sea  the  driftwood  was  found  in;  but  from  the  context 
it  must  have  been  between  the  west  coast  of  Greenland  and 
Iceland;  so  that  in  any  case  it  was  within  the  region  of 
the  East  Greenland  Current,  and  it  cannot  very  well  be 
supposed  that  these  pieces  of  driftwood  came  from  any- 
where but  the  east  coast  of  Greenland,  unless,  indeed,  they 
should  have  come  all  the  way  from  Bering  Strait  or  Alaska. 
The  way  in  which  they  are  spoken  of  shows  that  they  were 
regarded  as  something  out  of  the  common,  which  was  not  due 
to  Norsemen. 

The  brevity  of  Icelandic  literature  in  all  that  concerns 
the  Skraelings  is  again  striking  when  we  compare  it  with 
the  information  about  the  Eskimo  that  appears  in  the  maps 

in  the  most  northerly  regions,  although  they  saw  empty  sites.     As  the  Eskimo 
leave  their  winter  houses  in  the  spring  and  lead  a  wandering  life  in  tents,  this 
need  not  surprise  us. 
84 


ESKIMO   AND    SKR^LING 

and  literature  of  Europe  in  the  fifteenth  century.  Claudius 
Clavus  in  his  description  of  the  North  (before  the  middle 
of  the  fifteenth  century)  speaks  of  Pygmies  ("  Pigmei ")  in 
the  country  to  the  north-east  of  Greenland;  they  were 
one  cubit  high,  and  had  boats  of  hide,  both  short  and  long 
(i.e.,  kayaks  and  women's  boats),  some  of  which  were  hanging 
in   the   cathedral   at  Trondhjem    (see   further   on   this   subject 


Eskimo  playing  ball  with  a  stuffed  seal.    Woodcut  from  Greenland 
illustrating  a  fairy-tale,  drawn  and  engraved  by  a  native 

under  the  mention  of  Claudius  Clavus).  'He  further  speaks  of 
"  the  infidel  Karelians,"  who  "  constantly  descend  upon  Green- 
land in  great  armies."  ^  The  name  may  be  derived,  as  shown  by 
Bjombo  and  Petersen,  from  the  Karelians  to  the  north-east  of 
Norway  on  older  maps  and  have  been  transferred  to  the  west,  and 
it  may  then  perhaps  also  have  been  confused  with  the  name  of 
Skraeling. 

Michel  Beheim,  who  traveled  in  Norway  in  1450,  gives  in  his  poem  about 
the  journey  [Vangensten,  1908,  p.  18]  a  mythical  description  of  the  Skraelings 
("  schrelinge")j  who  are  only  three  "spans"  high,  but  are  nevertheless  dan- 
gerous opponents  both  on  sea  and  land.  They  live  in  caves  which  they  dig 
out  in  the  mountains,  make  ships  of  hides,  eat  raw  meat  and  raw  fish,  and  drink 


1  Cf.  Bjombo  and  Petersen,  1904,  pp.  179,  236. 


85 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

blood  with  it.  This  points  to  his  having  found  in  Norway  ideas  about  the 
Skraelings  as  supernatural  beings  of  a  similar  kind  to  those  already  mentioned. 

In  a  letter  to  Pope  Nicholas  V.  (1447-1455)  it  is  related  [cf.  G.  Storm,  1899]: 
"  And  when  one  travels  west  [from  Norway]  towards  the  mountains  of  this 
country  [Greenland],  there  dwell  there  Pygmies  in  the  shape  of  little  men, 
only  a  cubit  high.  When  they  see  human  beings  they  collect  and  hide  them- 
selves in  the  caves  of  the  country  like  a  swarm  of  ants.  One  cannot  conquer 
them;  for  they  do  not  wait  until  they  are  attacked.  They  live  on  raw  meat 
and  boiled  fish."  This  resembles  what  is  said  about  the  Pygmies  in  Clavus, 
but  as  additional  information  is  given  here,  it  is  probable  that  both  Clavus  and 
the  author  of  this  letter,  and  perhaps  also  Beheim,  have  derived  their  state- 
ments from  older  sources,  perhaps  of  the  fourteenth  century,  which  either 
were  Norwegian  or  had  obtained  information  from  Norway.  The  description 
of  the  Pygmies  and  how  they  fly  on  the  approach  of  strangers  points  to  knowl- 
edge of  the  Eskimo  and  their  habits.  The  idea  about  caves  is,  perhaps,  more 
likely  to  be  connected  with  pixies  and  fairies,  who  lived  in  mounds  and  caves 
(cf.  pp.  15,  76);  but  reports  of  the  half-underground  Eskimo  houses  may  also 
have  had  something  to  do  with  it.  It  is  possible  that  the  common  source  may 
be  the  lost  work  of  the  English  author,  Nicholas  of  Lynn,  who  traveled  in 
Norway  in  the  fourteenth  century  (cf.  chapter  xii.  on  Martin  Behaim's  globe). 

Archbishop  Erik  Walkendorf  (in  his  description  of  Finmark  of  about  1520) 
has  a  similar  allusion  to  the  Eskimo,  which  may  well  have  the  same  origin. 
He  transfers  them  to  the  north-north-west  of  Finmark,  like  the  Pygmies  on 
Claudius  Clavus'  map.  He  says:  "Finmark  has  on  its  north-north-west  a 
people  of  short  and  small  stature,  namely  a  cubit  and  a  half,  who  are  com- 
monly called  '  Skraelinger ' ;  they  are  an  unwarlike  people,  for  fifteen  of  them 
do  not  dare  to  approach  one  Christian  or  Russian  either  for  combat  or  parley. 
They  live  in  underground  houses,  so  that  one  can  neither  examine  them  nor 
capture  them.    They  worship  gods"  [Walkendorf,  1902,  p.  i2].i 

We  thus  see  that  while  Icelandic  literature,  subsequent  to 
Are  Frode,  affords  scarcely  any  information  about  the  Green- 
land Skraelings  themselves,  it  is  a  Norwegian  author,  as  early 
as  the  thirteenth  century,  who  makes  the  first  statements  about 
them  and  their  culture ;  and  a  Danish  author  of  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury, whose  statements  may  originally  have  been  derived  from 

1  Jacob  Ziegler  (circa  1532),  who  probably  made  use  of  statements  from 
Walkendorf,  confuses  the  Norsemen  and  Eskimo  in  Greenland  together  into 
one  people,  who  breed  cattle,  have  two  episcopal  churches,  etc.;  but  "on  ac- 
count of  the  distance  and  the  difficulty  of  the  voyage  the  people  have  almost 
reverted  to  heathendom,  and  are  .  .  .  especially  addicted  to  the  arts  of 
magic,  like  the  Lapps.  .  .  ."  They  use  light  boats  of  hides,  with  which 
they  attack  other  ships  [cf.  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  p.  499]. 

86 


ESKIMO   AND    SKRiELING 

Norway  (like  those  in  the  letter  to  the  Pope  and  in  Walken- 
dorf),  mentions  no  other  inhabitants  of  Greenland  but  the  Es- 
kimo (Pygmies  and  Karelians)  ;  ^  but  they  are  still  referred  to  as 
semi-mythical  and  troll-like  beings. 

The  explanation  must  doubtless  be  sought  in  a  fundamental 
difference  in  the  point  of  view.  To  the  Icelandic  authors, 
brought  up  as  they  were  in  saga  writing  (and  for  the  most  part 
priests),  the  life  and  struggles  of  their  ancestors  in  Greenland 
were  the  only  important  thing,  while  ethnographical  interest  in 
the  primitive  people  of  the  country,  the  heathen,  troll-like 
Skraelings,  was  foreign  to  them.  To  this  must  be  added  the 
reasons  already  pointed  out  (p.  8i).  In  Norway,  on  the  other 
hand,  kinship  with  the  Icelandic  Norsemen  in  Greenland  was 
more  distant,  and  interest  in  the  strange,  outlandish  Skrae- 
lings was  correspondingly  greater.  Here,  also,  different  in- 
tellectual associations,  and  intercourse  with  a  variety  of 
nationalities,  caused,  on  the  whole,  a  greater  awakening  of  the 
ethnographical  sense. 

A  remarkable  exception  is  the  "  King's  Mirror  *'  (circa 
1250),  which  makes  no  mention  of  the  Skraelings,  although 
a  good  deal  of  space  is  devoted  to  Greenland  and  the  Green- 
landers.  But  this,  as  it  happens,  throws  light  upon  the 
curious  silence  on  the  Skraelings  in  Icelandic  literature. 
From  the  "  Historia  Norvegiae,"  which  seems  to  have  been 
written  approximately  at  the  same  time  as  or  soon  after  the 
"King's  Mirror"  (perhaps  between  1260  and  1264),  it  appears, 
as  we  have  said,  that  the  Greenland  Skraelings  were  known 
in  Norway  at  that  time;  and  in  that  case  it  is  incredible 
that  the  well-informed  author  of  the  "  King's  Mirror,"  who 
shows  such  intimate  knowledge  of  conditions  in  Greenland, 
should  not  have  heard  of  them.  If  he,  nevertheless,  does 
not  allude  to  them,  it  appears  that  this  must  be  for  a  similar 
reason  to  that  which  caused  them  to  be  so  little  mentioned  in 
Icelandic    literature.     That    the    Skraelings    should    have    been 

1  In  the  account  attributed  to  Ivar  Bardsson,  first  written  down  in  Norway, 
the  Skraelings  also  receive  a  good  deal  of  attention. 

87 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

spoken  of  in  a  missing  portion  of  the  "  King's  Mirror,"  which 
perhaps  was  never  finished  by  the  author,  is  improbable,  as  the 
account  of  Greenland  and  its  natural  conditions  seems  to  be 
concluded.^ 

Concerning  the  "  King's  Mirror "  as  a  whole  one  ought  to 
be  cautious  in  drawing  conclusions  from  its  silence  on  various 
subjects;  from  its  mentioning  whales  in  the  Iceland  sea  and 
seals  in  Greenland  but  not  in  Norway  one  might  conclude  that 
neither  whale  nor  seal  occurred  in  Norway;  and  the  same  is 
the  case  with  the  aurora  borealis,  which  is  only  mentioned  in 
Greenland. 

If  we  attempt  to  sum  up  what  we  may  conclude  from  the 
historical  sources  as  to  the  Eskimo  or  Skraelings  of  Green- 
land during  the  first  centuries  of  the  Norse  settlement  there, 
something  like  the  following  is  the  result:  When  Eric  the 
Red  arrived  in  Greenland  he  found  everywhere  along  the 
west  coast  traces  left  by  the  Skraslings,  but  whether  and  to 
what  extent  he  met  with  the  people  themselves  we  do  not 
hear.  The  probability  is  that  the  primitive  people  retired 
from  those  parts  of  the  coast,  the  Eastern  and  Western 
Settlements,  where  the  warlike  and  violent  Norsemen  estab- 
lished themselves;  while  they  continued  to  live  in  the 
*'  wastes "  to  the  north.  The  "  Historia  Norvegias "  (besides 
the  accounts  of  the  voyages  to  the  north  from  Nort5rsetur 
in   1266  and   1267)   shows  that  the  Norsemen  met  with  them 

1  William  Thalbitzer,  the  authority  on  the  Eskimo,  has  lately  [1909,  p.  14] 
adduced  the  silence  of  the  "  King's  Mirror  "  and  of  the  Icelandic  annals  on  the 
subject  of  the  Skraelings  of  Greenland  as  evidence  that  the  Norsemen  had  not 
met  with  them  on  their  northern  expeditions  to  NorcSrsetur;  but  what  has  been 
brought  forward  above  shows  that  nothing  of  the  kind  can  be  concluded  from 
the  silence  of  the  "  King's  Mirror  "  (which,  moreover,  says  nothing  about  the 
NorSrsetur  expeditions);  and  why  in  particular  the  Icelandic  annals  should 
allude  to  the  Skraelings  in  Greenland  seems  difficult  to  understand.  This  is  no 
evidence,  especially  as  we  see  that  the  Skraelings  are  mentioned  in  other  con- 
temporary authorities,  such  as  the  "Historia  Norvegia2,"  Ivar  Bardsson's  de- 
scription, the  account  of  the  voyages  in  1266  and  1267,  etc.  Besides,  in  the 
last  authority  it  is  expressly  stated  that  there  were  Skraelings  in  NorSrsetur 
(Kroksfjar5arheifr,  cf.  p.  83). 
88 


ESKIMO    AND    SKR^LING 

there,  but  at  the  same  time  speaks  of  immediate  fighting. 
The  mythical  tale  of  Thorgils  Orrabeinsfostre  (p.  8i)  also 
points  in  the  latter  direction,  as  does  the  myth  in  Eric  the 
Red's  Saga  of  the  Greenlanders  in  Markland  stealing  Skraeling 
children.  We  have  further  the  stories  in  Claudius  Clavus 
and  Olaus  Magnus  of  hide-boats  and  Eskimo  (Pygmies) 
that  were  captured  at  sea.  This  points  to  the  Norsemen  of 
that  early  time  having  looked  upon  the  Skraelings  as  legitimate 
spoil,  wherever  they  met  them.  Doubtless,  upon  occasion,  the 
latter  may  have  offered  resistance  or  taken  revenge,  as  may 
be  shown  by  the  statement  in  the  Icelandic  annals  of  the 
"harrying"  in  1379;  but  as  a  rule  they  certainly  fled,  as 
is  their  usual  habit.  I  have  myself  seen  on  the  east  coast 
of  Greenland  how  the  Eskimo  take  to  their  heels  and  leave 
their  dwellings  on  the  unexpected  appearance  of  strangers, 
and  this  has  been  the  common  experience  of  other  travelers 
in  former  and  recent  times.  It  is  not  likely  that  the  ancient 
Norsemen,  when  they  came  upon  a  dwelling-place  thus 
suddenly  abandoned,  had  any  hesitation  about  appropriating 
whatever  might  be  useful  to  them;  unless,  indeed,  a  super- 
stitious fear  of  these  heathen  "  trolls "  restrained  them 
from  doing  so.  It  is  therefore  natural  that  the  Skraelings 
avoided  that  part  of  Greenland  where  the  Norsemen  lived  in 
large  numbers.  But  where  they  came  in  contact  we  may 
suppose  that  friendly  relations  sometimes  arose  between 
Eskimo  and  European  at  that  time,  as  has  been  the  case  since; 
nor  can  the  Norsemen  of  those  days  have  been  so  inhuman  as 
to  make  this  impossible;  and  gradually  as  time  went  by  the  re- 
lations between  them  probably  became  altogether  changed,  as 
will  be  discussed  in  the  next  chapter,  particularly  when  imports 
from  outside  ceased  and  the  Norsemen  were  reduced  to  living 
wholly  on  the  products  of  the  country;  they  then  had  much  to 
learn  from  the  Eskimo  culture,  which  in  these  surroundings  was 
superior. 

In   course   of  time  the   Eskimo   of   North   Greenland   grew 
in    numbers,    partly    by    natural    increase — which    may    have 

89 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

been  constant  there,  where  their  catches  were  assured  for 
the  greater  part  of  the  year,  and  they  were  free  from  famine 
and  ravaging  diseases — and  partly  perhaps  through  a  fresh 
gradual  immigration  from  the  north.  They  therefore  slowly 
spread  farther  to  the  south,  and  gradually  the  whole  of  the 
southern  west  coast  received  a  denser  Eskimo  population,  prob- 
ably after  the  Norsemen  of  the  Western  and  Eastern  Settlements 
had  declined  in  prosperity  and  numbers,  so  that  they  no  longer 
appeared  so  formidable,  and  at  the  same  time  they  undoubtedly 
behaved  in  a  more  peaceful  and  friendly  fashion,  in  proportion 
as  their  communication  with  Europe  fell  off,  and  their  imaginary 
superiority  to  the  Skraslings  proved  to  be  more  and  more 
illusory. 

We  have  still  to  speak  of  the  Skraelings  whom  the 
Greenlanders,  according  to  the  sagas,  are  said  to  have  met 
with  in  Wineland.  G.  Storm  [1887]  maintained  that  they 
must  have  been  Indians,  which  of  course  seems  natural 
if  we  suppose,  with  him,  that  the  Greenlanders  reached 
southern  Nova  Scotia;  but  in  recent  years  several  authors 
have  endeavored  to  show  that  they  were  nevertheless 
Eskimo.^  From  what  has  been  made  out  above  as  to  the 
romantic  character  of  these  sagas  it  may  seem  a  waste  of 
time  to  discuss  a  question  like  this,  since  we  have  nothing 
certain  to  go  by;  especially  when,  as  already  mentioned, 
the  name  of  Skraeling  may  originally  have  been  used  of  the 
pixies  who  were  thought  to  dwell  in  the  Irish  fairy-land,  the 
land  of  the  "  sid,"  which  was  called  Wineland.  But  even 
if  this  origin  of  the  name  be  correct,  it  does  not  prevent  later 
encounters  with  the  natives  of  America  (besides  those  of 
Greenland)  having  contributed  to  make  the  Skraelings  of  Wine- 
land more  realistic,  and  given  them  features  belonging  to  actual 
experience. 

The  description  of  them  in  these  "  romance-sagas  "  may  thus  be  considered 
of  value,  in  so  far  as  it  may  represent  the  common  impression  of  the  natives 

IE.    Beauvois,    1904,    1905;    Y,    Nielsen,    1904,    1905;    W.    Thalbitzer,    1904, 
1905. 
90 


ESKIMO    AND    SKR^LING 

of  the  western  countries,  with  whom  the  Greenlanders  may  have  had  more  in- 
tercourse than  appears  from  these  tales;  but  even  so  we  cannot  in  any  case 
draw  any  conclusions  from  it  with  regard  to  the  distribution  of  Indians  or 
Eskimo  on  the  east  coast  of  America  at  that  period.  If  it  could  really  be 
established,  as  it  cannot,  that  the  Wineland  Skraelings  of  the  saga  were  Es- 
kimo, then  this  alone  would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Greenlanders  on 
their  voyages  had  not  been  so  far  south  as  Nova  Scotia,  but  at  the  farthest 
had  probably  reached  the  north  of  Newfoundland.  If  the  authors  mentioned 
have  thought  themselves  justified  in  concluding  that  the  Greenlanders  found 
Eskimo  in  Nova  Scotia,  because  the  natives  of  Wineland  are  called  Skraelings 
and  are  consequently  assumed  to  be  the  same  people  with  the  same  culture  as 
those  in  Greenland,  they  cannot  have  been  fully  alive  to  the  difficulty  involved 
in  its  being  impossible  for  the  Skraelings  of  Nova  Scotia,  with  its  entirely  dif- 
ferent natural  conditions,  to  have  had  the  same  arctic  whaling  and  sealing  cul- 
ture as  the  Skraelings  of  Greenland,  even  if  they  belonged  to  the  same  race. 
For  we  should  then  have  to  believe  that  they  had  reached  Nova  Scotia  from 
the  north  with  their  culture,  which  was  adapted  for  arctic  conditions.  They 
would  have  to  have  dislodged  the  tribes  of  Indians  who  inhabited  these  south- 
ern regions  before  their  arrival,  although  they  possessed  a  culture  which  un- 
der the  local  conditions  was  inferior,  and  were  doubtless  also  inferior  in 
warlike  qualities.  In  addition,  these  Eskimo,  with  their  Eskimo  culture,  in 
Nova  Scotia  must  have  completely  disappeared  again  before  the  country  was 
rediscovered  500  years  later,  when  it  was  solely  inhabited  by  Indian  tribes. 
We  are  asked  to  accept  these  various  improbabilities  chiefly  because  the  word 
"  Skrasling  " — which,  it  must  be  remembered,  was  not  originally  an  ethnogra- 
phical name,  but  meant  dwarf  or  pixy — is  used  of  the  people  both  in  Wine- 
land and  Greenland,  because  the  word  "  keiplabrot "  is  used  by  Are  Frode  (see 
Vol.  I,  p.  260),  and  because  in  two  passages  of  Eric  the  Red's  Saga,  written 
down  about  300  years  after  the  "  events,"  the  word  "  huSkeipr  "  is  used  of  the 
Skraelings'  boats  in  Wineland,  while  in  four  passages  they  are  called  "  skip  " 
(i.e.,  vessel),  and  in  another  merely  "  keipana."  It  appears  to  me  that  this  is 
attributing  to  the  ancient  Icelanders  an  ethnographical  interest  which  Ice- 
landic literature  proves  to  have  been  just  what  they  lacked  (see  above,  pp. 
81  f.).  In  any  case  there  is  no  justification  for  regarding  these  tardily  re- 
corded traditions  as  ethnographical  essays,  every  word  of  which  has  a  scien- 
tific meaning;  and  for  that  they  contain  far  too  many  obviously  mythical 
features.  It  is  not  apparent  that  any  of  the  authors  mentioned  has  decided 
of  what  kind  of  hide  the  Skraelings  in  southern  Nova  Scotia,  or  even  farther 
south  ("where  no  snow  fell"),  should  have  made  their  hide-boats. 

Opportunities  of  supporting  themselves  by  sealing  cannot  have  existed  on 
these  southern  coasts.  The  species  of  seal  which  form  the  Eskimo's  indispens- 
able condition  of  life  farther  north  are  no  longer  found.  The  only  species  of 
seal  which  occurs  frequently  on  the  coast  of  Nova  Scotia  is,  as  Professor 
Robert  Collett  informs  me,  the  gray  seal  (Halichoerus  gryphus),  which  is  also 
found  on  the  coast  of  Norway  and  is  caught,  amongst  other  places,  on  the  Fro 
Islands.    But  this  seal  cannot  have  been  present  in  sufficiently  large  numbers 

91 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

in  southern  Nova  Scotia  or  farther  south  to  fulfil  the  requirements  of  the  or- 
dinary Eskimo  sealing  culture.  They  must  therefore  have  adopted  hunting 
on  land  as  their  chief  means  of  subsistence,  like  the  Indians;  but  what  then 
becomes  of  the  similarity  in  culture  between  the  Skraelings  of  Greenland  and 
Wineland,  which  is  just  what  should  distinguish  them  from  the  Indians?  The 
very  foundation  of  the  theory  thus  disappears.  Professor  Y.  Nielsen  [1905, 
pp.  32  f.]  maintains  that  the  Skraelings  of  Nova  Scotia  need  only  have  had 
"  transport  boats  "  or  "  women's  boats  "  of  hides,  and  that  "  what  is  there  re- 
lated of  them  does  not  even  contain  a  hint  that  they  might  have  used  kay- 
aks." This  makes  the  theory  even  more  improbable.  If  these  Skraelings  were 
without  kayaks,  which  are  and  must  be  the  very  first  condition  of  Eskimo  seal- 
ing culture  on  an  open  sea-coast,  then  they  cannot  have  had  seal-skins  for 
women's  boats  or  clothes  or  tents  either.  They  must  then  have  covered  these 
boats  with  the  hides  of  land  animals;  but  what?  True,  it  is  known  that  cer- 
tain Indian  tribes  used  to  cover  their  canoes  with  double  buffalo  hides,  a  fact 
which  the  authors  mentioned  cannot  have  remarked,  since  they  regard  hide- 
boats  as  decisive  evidence  of  Eskimo  culture;  moreover,  the  Irish  still  cover 
their  coracles  with  ox-hides;  but  neither  buffaloes  nor  oxen  were  to  be  found 
in  Nova  Scotia;  are  we,  then,  to  suppose  that  the  natives  used  deer-skin?  The 
whole  line  of  argument  thus  leads  us  from  one  improbability  to  another,  as 
we  might  expect,  seeing  it  is  built  up  on  so  flimsy  a  foundation. 

The  Greenlanders  may  well  have  called  the  Indians'  birch-bark  canoes 
"  keipr  "  or  "  keipull "  (a  little  boat) ;  but  it  is  still  more  probable  that  as  the 
details  of  the  tradition  became  gradually  obliterated  in  course  of  time,  the 
designation  of  the  Skraeling  boat  came  to  be  that  which  was  used  for  the  only 
boats  known  in  later  times  to  be  peculiar  of  the  Skraelings,  namely,  the  hide- 
boats  of  Greenland.  In  addition  to  this,  hide-boats  were  also  known  from 
Ireland,  while  the  making  of  boats  of  birch-bark  was  altogether  strange  to  the 
Icelanders.  Besides,  if  we  are  to  attach  so  much  importance  to  a  single  word, 
"  huSkeipr,"  which  plays  no  part  in  the  narrative,  what  are  we  to  do  with  the 
Skraelings'  catapults  ("  valslpngur  ")  and  their  black  balls  which  made  such  a 
hideous  noise  that  they  put  to  flight  Karlsevne  and  his  men? — these  are  really 
important  features  of  the  description,  to  say  nothing  of  the  glamour.  If  these, 
like  many  other  incidents  of  the  saga,  are  taken  from  altogether  different 
quarters  of  the  world,  it  is  scarcely  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  a  word  like 
"  huSkeipr  "  is  borrowed  from  Greenland  and  from  Irish  legend. 

The  names  which  according  to  the  saga  were  communicated  by  the  two 
Skraeling  children  captured  in  Markland,  and  which  are  supposed  to  have  lived 
in  oral  tradition  for  over  250  years,  have  no  greater  claim  to  serious  considera- 
tion. Everything  else  that  these  children  are  said  to  have  related  is  demon- 
strably incorrect;  the  tale  of  Hvitramanna-land  is  a  myth  from  Ireland  (cf. 
pp.  42  f.) ;  the  statement  attributed  to  them  that  in  their  country  people  lived 
in  caves  is  improbable  and  obviously  derived  from  elsewhere  (cf.  p.  19) ;  1  is 

1  As  so  much  weight  has  been  attached  to  single  words  in  order  to  prove 
the  similarity  of  culture  between  the  Skraelings  in  Wineland  and  Markland 
92 


ESKIMO    AND    SKR^LING 

it,  then,  likely  that  the  names  attributed  to  them  should  be  any  more  genuine? 
W.  Thalbitzer  [1905,  pp.  190  f.]  explains  these  names  as  misunderstood  Es- 
kimo sentences,  and  supposes  them  to  mean:  "  Vaetilldi,"  "but  do  wait  a  mo- 
ment"; "  Vaegi,"  "wait  a  moment";  "  Avalldamon,"  "towards  the  uttermost"; 
"  Avaldidida  "  "  the  uttermost,  do  you  mean?  "  As  we  are  told  that  the  two  Skrae- 
ling  boys  learned  Icelandic,  Thalbitzer  must  suppose  the  men  to  have  mis- 
interpreted these  sentences  as  names  during  the  homeward  voyage  from  Mark- 
land  to  Greenland,  and  then  he  must  make  the  Skraelings  die  shortly  after- 
wards, before  the  misunderstanding  could  be  explained.  After  that  these 
meaningless  names  must  have  lived  in  practically  unaltered  form  in  oral  tradi- 
tion for  several  hundred  years,  until  they  were  put  into  writing  at  the  close  of 
the  thirteenth  century.  It  appears  to  me  that  such  explanations  of  the  words 
as  are  attempted  on  p.  20  have  a  greater  show  of  probability.  In  addition,  as 
pointed  out  in  the  same  place,  the  "  bearded  "  Skrseling  and  their  "  sinking  into 
the  earth  "  are  mythical  features  which  are  associated  with  these  Skraelings. 

While  the  points  that  have  been  mentioned  are  incapable  of  proving  any- 
thing about  Eskimo,  there  are  other  features  in  the  saga's  description  of  the 
Skraelings  of  Wineland  which  would  rather  lead  us  to  think  of  the  Indians: 
that  they  should  attack  so  suddenly  in  large  numbers  without  any  cause  being 
mentioned  seems  altogether  unlike  the  Eskimo,  but  would  apply  better  to 
warlike  Indians.  We  are  told  that  the  Skraelings  attacked  with  loud  cries;  this 
is  usual  in  Indian  warfare,  but  seems  less  like  the  Eskimo.  During  the  fight 
with  the  Skraelings  Thorbrand  Snorrason  was  found  dead  with  a  "  hellustein  " 
in  his  head.  Whether  this  means  a  fiat  stone  or  a  stone  ax  (as  Storm  has 
translated  it  [1887,  1899]),  it  is  in  any  case  not  a  typical  Eskimo  weapon;  while 
a  stone  ax  used  as  a  missile  might  be  Indian.  But  as  stated  above,  there  is 
too  much  romance  and  myth  about  the  whole  tale  of  the  Wineland  voyages  to 
allow  of  any  certain  value  being  attached  to  such  details.  I  have  already  (p. 
23)  maintained  that  the  description  of  hostilities  with  the  natives,  in  which  the 
Greenlanders  were  worsted,  cannot  be  derived  from  Greenland,  but  may  be 
due  to  something  actually  experienced.  In  that  case  this,  too,  points  rather 
to  the  Indians.! 

William  Thalbitzer  [1904,  pp.  20  f.]  has  adduced,  as  a  possible  evidence  of 
the  more  southerly  extension  of  the  Eskimo  in  former  times,  the  fact  that  the 

and  those  in  Greenland,  it  is  strange  that  no  notice  has  been  taken  of  points  of 
difference  such  as  this,  that  the  Skraelings  in  Markland  are  said  to  dwell  in 
caves,  while  the  Greenlanders  must  have  known,  at  any  rate  from  the  dwelling- 
sites  they  had  found,  that  the  Skraelings  in  Greenland  lived  in  houses  and  tents. 
1  If  we  might  suppose  (which  is  not  probable)  that  the  missile  mentioned  on 
p.  7  note,  from  a  myth  of  the  Algonkin  Indians  has  any  connection  with  the 
Skraelings'  black  ball  which  frightened  Karlsevne's  people,  this  would  be  an- 
other feature  pointing  to  knowledge  of  the  Indians.  Hertzberg's  demonstra- 
tion that  the  Indian  game  of  lacrosse  is  probable  the  Norse  "  knattleikr  "  (pp. 
38  f.)  may  point  in  the  same  direction;  for  it  seems  less  probable  that  the 
transmission,  if  it  occurred,  should  have  been  brought  about  by  the  Eskimo. 

93 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

name  "  Nepisiguit,"  of  a  little  river  in  New  Brunswick  (47°  30'  N.  lat.),  bears 
a  strong  resemblance  to  the  Eskimo  place-name  "  Nepisat "  in  Greenland,  and 
he  also  mentions  another  place-name,  "  Tadoussac,"  which  has  a  very  Eskimo 
look.  But  in  order  to  form  any  opinion  we  should  have  to  know  the  language 
of  the  extinct  Indian  tribes  of  these  parts,  as  well  as  the  original  forms  of  the 
names  given.  They  are  now  only  known  from  certain  old  maps;  but  we  can- 
not tell  how  they  got  on  to  those  maps. 

The  Eskimo  are  one  of  the  few  races  of  hunters  on  the  earth 
who  with  their  peculiar  culture  have  still  been  able  to  hold  their 
own  fairly  well  in  spite  of  contact  with  European  civilization; 
the  reason  for  this  is  partly  that  they  live  so  far  out  of  the  way 
that  the  contact  has  been  more  or  less  cursory,  partly  also,  as 
far  as  Greenland  is  concerned,  that  they  have  been  treated  with 
more  or  less  care,  and  it  has  been  sought  to  protect  them  against 
harmful  European  influences.  In  spite  of  this  it  has  not  been 
possible  to  prevent  their  declining  and  becoming  more  and  more 
impoverished.  The  increase  of  their  population  in  recent  years 
might  doubtless  give  a  contrary  impression;  but  here  other  fac- 
tors have  to  be  reckoned  with.  When  the  Eskimo  first  came  in 
contact  with  European  culture,  it  was,  as  will  be  shown  in  the 
next  chapter,  their  own  culture  which  in  these  surroundings 
gained  the  upper  hand  as  soon  as  communication  with  Europe 
was  cut  off.  This  would  happen  again  if  European  and  Eskimo 
could  be  left  to  themselves,  entirely  cut  off  from  the  outer  world. 
But  as  this  is  impossible,  the  Eskimo  culture  is  doomed  to  suc- 
cumb slowly  to  our  trivial,  all-conquering  European  civilization. 


94 


CHAPTER  XI 

THE  DECLINE  OF  THE  NORSE  SETTLEMENTS 
IN  GREENLAND 

THE  Eastern  and  Western  Settlements  in  Greenland  seem, 
as  we  have  said,  to  have  grown  rapidly  immediately 
after  the  discovery  of  the  country  and  the  first  settlement 
there.  Their  flourishing  period  was  in  the  eleventh,  twelfth, 
and  part  of  the  thirteenth  centuries;  but  in  the  fourteenth 
they  seem  to  have  declined  rapidly;  notices  of  them  become 
briefer  and  briefer,  until  they  cease  altogether  after  1410, 
and  in  the  course  of  the  following  hundred  years  the  Norse 
population  seems  to  have  disappeared  entirely.  The  causes 
of  this  decline  were  many.^  It  has  been  thought  that  it 
was  chiefly  due  to  an  immigration  to  Greenland  on  a  large 
scale  of  Eskimo,  who  gradually  overpowered  and  exterminated 
the  Norsemen;  but,  as  will  be  shown  later,  there  is  no  ground 
for  believing  this;  even  if  hostile  encounters  took  place 
between  them,  these  cannot  have  been  of  great  im- 
portance. 

1  That  it  was  due  to  changes  in  the  climate,  as  some  have  thought,  is  not 
the  case.  The  ancient  descriptions  of  the  voyage  thither  and  of  the  drift-ice 
(cf.  for  instance,  the  "  King's  Mirror,"  Vol.  I,  p.  279)  show  exactly  the  same 
conditions  as  now. 

95 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

In  the  first  place  the  decHne  must  be  attributed  to  changes 
in  the  relations  with  Norway.  From  the  "  King's  Mirror  '* 
(c£.  Vol.  I,  p.  277),  among  other  authorities.,  we  see  that 
the  Greenlanders  doubtless  had  to  manage  to  some  extent 
without  such  European  wares  as  flour  and  bread;  they 
lived  mainly  by  sealing  and  fishing,  and  also  by  keeping 
cattle,  which  gave  them  milk  and  cheese.  But  there  were 
many  necessary  things,  such  as  iron  for  implements  and 
weapons,  and  to  some  extent  even  wood  ^  for  larger  boats 
and  ships,  which  had  to  be  obtained  from  Europe,  besides 
the  encouragement  and  support  which  was  afforded  in  many 
ways  by  communication  with  the  outer  world.  This  was  not 
of  small  moment  to  people  who  lived  in  isolation  under  such 
hard  conditions,  at  the  extreme  limit  at  which  a  European 
culture  was  possible;  it  wanted  little  to  turn  the  scale.  It 
is  therefore  easy  to  understand  that  as  soon  as  communica- 
tion with  the  m^other  country  declined,  the  conditions  of 
life  in  Greenland  became  so  unattractive  that  those  who 
had  the  chance  removed  elsewhere,  and  doubtless  in  most 
cases  to  Norway. 

But  at  the  same  time  there  was  certainly  a  physiological 
factor  involved.  For  the  healthy  nourishment  of  a  European, 
cereals  (hydrocarbons)  are  necessary,  and  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  a  prolonged  exclusive  diet  of  meat  and  fat 
will,  in  the  case  of  most  Europeans,  reduce  the  vital  force, 
and  not  least  the  powers  of  reproduction.  This  agrees  with 
my  own  experience  and  observation  under  various  conditions, 
as,  for  instance,  during  ten  consecutive  months'  exclusive 
diet  of  meat  and  fat.  It  is  also  confirmed  by  physiological 
experiments  on  omnivorous  animals.  The  Greenlanders  were 
reduced  to  living  by  sealing,  fishing,  and  keeping  cattle; 
milk,  with  its  sugar  of  milk,  was  their  chief  substitute  for 
the    hydrocarbons    in    cereals;    besides    this,    they    no    doubt 

^The  driftwood  that  was  washed  ashore  along  the  coasts  could  not  pos- 
sibly suffice  for  shipbuilding;  but  they  doubtless  obtained  timber  also  from 
Markland  (cf.  pp.  25,  37). 
96 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

collected  crowberries,  angelica,  and  other  vegetables;  but 
even  during  the  short  summer  this  cannot  have  been  sufficient 
to  counterbalance  the  want  of  flour.  It  is  therefore  probable 
that  their  powers  of  reproduction  underwent  a  marked 
decrease,  and  they  became  a  people  of  small  fecundity.  The 
Eskimo  have  had  thousands  of  years  for  adapting  them- 
selves through  natural  selection  to  their  monotonous  flesh-diet, 
since  those  among  them  who  were  best  fitted  for  it  had  the 
better  chance  of  producing  offspring;  there  is  certainly  a 
great  difference  between  individuals  in  this  respect;  some  of 
us  are  by  nature  more  vegetarian,  while  others  are  more 
carnivorous.  It  is  therefore  natural  that  the  present-day 
Eskimo  should  be  better  suited  for  this  diet;  but  it  is 
none  the  less  striking  that  the  rate  of  productiveness  among  them 
is  also  low. 

As,  then,  the  Greenlanders'  communications  with  Norway 
fell  off  more  and  more,  their  imports  of  corn  and  flour  finally 
ceased  altogether.  Their  cattle  keeping  must  then  have 
declined  as  well,  since  they  would  have  little  opportunity 
of  renewing  their  stock  or  getting  other  kinds  of  supplies,  when 
bad  years  intervened  and  the  greater  part  of  the  stock  had 
to  be  slaughtered  or  died  of  hunger.  Consequently  the  people 
became  still  more  dependent  on  sealing;  and  thereby  the 
cattle  must  have  been  neglected.  In  this  way  their  diet 
would  become  even  less  varied,  since  milk  would  be  lacking, 
and  their  reproduction  would  be  further  restricted.  Add 
to  this  that  their  average  proficiency  in  sealing,  at  first  in 
any  case,  was  doubtless  not  to  be  compared  with  that  of 
the  Eskimo,  and  that  they  were  without  salt  for  preserving 
their  catch,  which  therefore  had  to  be  dried  or  frozen.  They 
were  thus  not  able  to  lay  up  a  large  provision,  and  were 
always  more  and  more  dependent  on  occasional  catches.  It 
is  easy  to  understand  that  their  power  of  resistance  was  not 
great,  when  bad  seasons  for  sealing  occurred,  or  when  they  were 
ravaged  by  disease,  and  it  is  not  surprising  if  the 
population  decreased. 

97 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

The  cessation  of  the  communication  of  Greenland  with 
Iceland  and  Norway  came  about  in  the  following  way: 
between  1247  and  1261,  during  the  reign  of  Hakon  Hakons- 
son,  Greenland  voluntarily  became  subject  to  the  Norwegian 
crown,  whilst  before  this  it  had  been  a  free  state  like 
Iceland.  In  1294,  trade  with  the  tributary  countries  of  Nor- 
way, Greenland  among  them,  was  declared  a  sort  of  royal 
monopoly  or  privilege,  which  the  king  could  farm  out  to 
Norwegian  subjects.  The  result  of  this  was  that  only  the 
king's  ships — and  of  these  there  was,  as  a  rule,  only  one,  called 
"  Knarren,"  for  the  Greenland  traffic — were  permitted  to 
sail  there  for  the  purposes  of  trade,^  and  this  was  the 
beginning  of  the  end.  Even  before  that  time  communication 
with  Greenland  was  rare.  Thus  we  read  in  the  "  King's 
Mirror"  that  people  seldom  went  there.  But  now,  when  the 
royal  trading  ship  was  practically  the  only  one  that  made 
the  voyage,  things  were  to  be  much  worse.  Frequently 
several  years  were  occupied  on  one  trip.  As  some  time 
elapsed  also  between  each  voyage,  it  will  be  understood  that, 
at  the  best,  the  communication  was  not  lively.  But  when 
it  occasionally  happened  that  "  Knarren "  was  wrecked, 
things  were  still  worse.  That  the  communication  may  have 
been  defective  as  early  as  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth 
century  is  seen  from  a  letter  from  Bishop  Ame,  of  Bergen, 
to  Bishop  Tord  in  Greenland,  of  June  22,  1308,  wherein  it 
IS  taken  for  granted  that  the  death  of  King  Eric  nine  years 
before,  in  1299,  was  not  yet  known  in  Greenland.  In  the 
middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  for  instance,  "  Knarren " 
returned  to  Bergen  in  1346  safe  and  sound  and  with  an 
very  great  quantity  of  goods;  but  perhaps  did  not  sail 
again  until  1355,  and  we  hear  nothing  of  her  return  before 
iS^sC?).  In  1366  we  hear  that  "Knarren"  was  again 
fitted    out;    but    she    was    wrecked    north    of    Bergen    in    the 

1  Existing  royal  documents  show  that  the  prohibition  of  trade  with  these 
tributary  countries  was  again  strictly  enforced  by  Magnus  Smek  in  1348,  and 
by  Eric  of  Pomerania  in  1425. 

98 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

following  year,  probably  on  the  outward  voyage.  In  the  year 
following  a  new  trading  ship  must  actually  have  arrived 
with  the  new  bishop,  Alf;  but  it  is  stated  that  Green- 
land had  then  been  without  a  bishop  for  nineteen  years.  In 
1369  the  Greenland  ship  seems  again  to  have  been  sunk  off 
Norway.^ 

It  looks  as  if  these  voyages  of  "  Knarren "  became  rarer 
and  rarer,  until  at  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century 
(1410)  they  presumably  ceased  altogether;  in  any  case,  we 
hear  no  more  of  them.  Even  though  the  Greenland  traffic 
may  have  paid,  it  cost  money  to  fit  out  "  Knarren,"  and 
when  there  was  so  much  doing  in  other  quarters,  it  was  not 
always  easy  to  procure  the  necessary  funds.  Another  reason 
for  the  decline  was  the  growing  influence  and  power  of  the 
Hanseatic  League  over  trade  and  navigation  in  Norway. 
Together  with  the  Victualing  Brethren  and  the  adherents  of  the 
captive  King  Albrecht  of  Sweden,  the  Leaguers  took  and  sacked 
Bergen  in  1393.  In  1428  the  town  was  again  taken  by  the 
Hanseatic  League.  It  may  easily  be  understood  that  events 
of  this  kind  had  a  disturbing  and  perhaps  entirely  paralyzing 
effect  on  the  Greenland  traffic,  which  had  its  headquarters  in 
this  town.  Moreover,  Norway  had  before  this  been  much 
weakened  by  the  Black  Death,  which  visited  the  country  in 
1349.  It  raged  with  special  virulence  in  Bergen;  but  there 
is  no  notice  of  the  disease  having  spread  to  Greenland; 
perhaps  that  country  was  spared  through  "  Knarren "  not 
having  sailed  there  before  1355,  and  probably  no  other  ship 
having  made  the  voyage  in  the  interval.  In  1392  there  was 
again  a  severe  pestilence  throughout  Norway,  and  many 
people  died.  In  that  year,  too,  a  great  many  ships  were 
wrecked.  There  were  thus  a  number  of  misfortunes  at 
that  time,  and  the  people  of  Norway  had  enough  to  occupy 
them  in  their  own  affairs.  Another  circumstance  unfavor- 
able to  the  communication  with  Greenland  was  the  union 
of  Norway  with  Denmark,  and  for  a  time  with  Sweden.     The 

iCf.  Islandske  Annaler,  ed.  by  Storm,  1888,  p.  228. 

99 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

seat  of  government  was  thereby  removed  to  Copenhagen,  and 
interest  in  Norway,  and  especially  in  its  so-called  tributary  coun- 
tries, was  further  greatly  diminished  by  the  larger  claims  of  Den- 
mark and  Sweden. 

It  is  reasonable  to  suppose  that  under  such  conditions 
the  settlements  in  Greenland,  which  were  almost  entirely 
cut  off,  must  have  decayed;  comparatively  few,  perhaps,  were 
able  to  get  a  passage,  and  left  the  country  by  degrees;  but 
the  people  declined  in  numbers;  they  adopted  an  entirely 
Eskimo  mode  of  living,  and  mixed  with  the  Eskimo,  who 
perhaps  at  the  same  time  spread  southward  in  greater 
numbers  along  the  west  coast  of  Greenland.  It  was  remarked 
in  the  last  chapter  that  the  Norsemen,  when  they  arrived  in 
the  country,  evidently  looked  down  upon  the  stone-age, 
troll-like  *  Skraelings,  whom  they  could  hunt  and  ill  use  with 
impunity;  with  their  iron  weapons,  their  warlike  pro- 
pensities, and  their  larger  vessels,  they  may  perhaps  have 
been  able  to  maintain  this  imaginary  superiority  in  the  early 
days,  so  long  as  they  still  had  some  kind  of  supplies  from 
abroad.  But  it  is  obvious  that  these  relations  must  have 
been  fundamentally  changed  when  this  communication 
gradually  ceased,  and  they  were  reduced,  without  any  support 
from  Europe,  to  make  the  best  of  the  country's  resources; 
then  the  real  superiority  of  the  Eskimo  in  these  surroundings 
asserted  its  full  rights,  and  the  Greenlanders  had  to  begin 
to  look  upon  them  in  a  very  different  light.  It  is  therefore 
perfectly  natural  that  from  this  very  fourteenth  century  a 
fundamental  change  in  the  relations  between  Norsemen  and 
Skraelings  set  in.  And  that  such  was  the  case  seems  to 
result  in  many  ways  from  the  meager  information  we 
possess. 

In  the  Annals  of  Bishop  Gisle  Oddsson,  written  in 
Iceland  in  Latin  before  1637,  we  read  under  the  year  1342 
[G.   Storm,   1890,  pp.   355  f.;   Gronl.  hist.   Mind.,  iii.   p.   459]: 

"The  inhabitants  of  Greenland  voluntarily  forsook  the  true  faith  and  the 
religion  of  the  Christians,  and  after  having  abandonied  all  good  morals  and 
100 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

true  virtues  turned  to  the  people  of  America  [ad  Americae  populos  se  con- 
verterunt] ;  some  also  think  that  Greenland  lies  very  near  to  the  western  lands 
of  the  virorld.  From  this  it  came  about  that  the  Christians  began  to  refrain 
from  the  voyage  to  Greenland." 

It  is  not  known  from  whence  Gisle  Oddsson  took  this 
statement.  As  the  expression  "the  people  of  America" 
("  Americae  populi ")  is  a  curious  .  one,  and  as  the  state- 
ments in  the  bishop's  annals  following  that  quoted  above 
are  entirely  myths  and  inventions  taken  from  Lyschander's 
"  Gronlands  Chronica "  (but  originally  derived  from  Saxo 
and  Adam  of  Bremen),  Storm  regarded  the  whole  account 
as  spurious  and  lacking  any  mediaeval  authority.  Inter- 
preting, curiously  enough,  "  ad  Americae  populos  se  con- 
verterunt "  to  mean  that  the  Greenlanders  had  emigrated  to 
America,  Storm  supposes  that  this  may  be  a  hypothesis 
"  formed  to  explain  the  disappearance  from  Greenland  of 
the  old  Norwegian-Icelandic  colony."  But  the  meaning  of  the 
passage  can  scarcely  be  interpreted  otherwise  than  as  translated 
above,  that  the  Greenlanders  had  forsaken  Christianity,  given 
up  good  morals  and  virtues,  and  had  been  converted  to  the 
belief  and  customs  of  the  American  people  (i.e.,  the  Skraelings), 
"  The  people  of  America  "  must  be  a  strained  expression  the 
bishop  has  used  to  denote  the  heathen  Skraelings  (who  inhabited 
Greenland  and  the  American  lands)  in  contradistinction 
to  the  Christian  Europeans.  Greenland  was  frequently  re- 
garded in  Iceland  in  those  times  as  a  part  of  America  (cf. 
the  map,  p.  7).  Hans  Egede,  for  example,  thought  the  natives 
of  Greenland  were  "  Americans."  In  other  words,  the  state- 
ment simply  means  that  in  1342  a  report  came  that  the 
Greenlanders  were  associating  amicably  with  the  heathen 
Skraelings  (which  was  forbidden  by  the  ecclesiastical  law  of  that 
time),  and  had  begun  to  adopt  their  mode  of  life;  which,  in  fact, 
is  extremely  probable. 

The  question  is,  then,  from  whence  Gisle  Oddsson  may  have 
derived  this,  which  is  not  known  from  any  other  source.  Storm 
thought  it  out  of  the  question  that  it  was  taken  from  Lyschander 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

(from  whom  the  same  annals  have  borrowed  so  much  else) ; 
but  we  cannot  be  so  sure  of  this.  After  having  related  the  vol- 
canic eruption  and  disasters  in  Iceland  in  1340  (also  recorded 
by  Gisle  Oddsson),  Lyschander  continues: 

"  Norway  and  Sweden  and  Greenland  also 
They  were  hereafter  well  able  to  perceive 
That  such  things  boded  ill  to  them. 
These  kingdoms  they  came  into  the  hands  of  the  Dane, 
And  Greenland  went  astray  on  the  strand, 
Not  long  after  these  times." 

Whatever  may  be  meant  by  this  strained,  obscure  expres- 
sion about  Greenland  (is  "  strand "  a  misprint  for  "  stand " 
— "went  astray  in  its  condition"  ?),  it  might  at  any  rate  be 
interpreted  to  mean  that  its  inhabitants  had  been  converted 
(gone  astray)  to  a  heathen  religion  (the  people  of  America) ; 
"not  long  after  these  times"  (i.e.,  after  1340)  may  thus 
have  been  made  in  1342.  But  the  mention  of  a  definite 
date — which,  it  may  be  remarked,  would  suit  very  well  for 
the  time  when  the  Greenlanders  passed  into  Eskimo  in  larger 
numbers,  at  any  rate  in  the  Western  Settlement  (cf.  Ivar  Bards- 
son's  description,  see  below,  p.  108) — may  possibly  indicate  that 
some  ancient  authority  or  other  is  really  the  foundation  for  the 
statement,  and  perhaps  also  for  the  lines  quoted  from  Lyschan- 
der. Finn  Magnussen  [Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  p.  459]  thinks 
that  Gisle  Oddsson  may  have  derived  much  information  from 
the  archives  and  library  of  Skalholdt  cathedral,  which  was  burnt 
in  1630. 

Whether  genuine  or  not,  this  statement  may  correctly 
describe  the  fate  of  the  Greenland  settlements.  Deserted  by 
the  mother  country,  and  left  to  their  own  resources,  the 
Greenlanders  were  forced  to  adopt  the  Eskimo  mode  of 
life,  and  become  absorbed  in  them.  This  took  place  first  in 
the  more  northerly  and  more  thinly  populated  Western 
Settlement,  and  later  in  the  Eastern  Settlement  as  well.  The 
Eskimo  with  their  kayaks  and  their  sealing  appliances  were 
the  superiors  of  the  Greenlanders  in  sealing  (as  appears  from 
102 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 


the  account  of  Bjorn  Jorsalafarer),  and  their  mode  of  life 
was  better  suited  to  the  conditions  of  Greenland;  it  is  there- 
fore incredible  that  their  culture  should  not  gain  the  upper 
hand  in  an  encounter,  under  conditions  otherwise  equal, 
with  that  of  Europeans,  even  though  there  were  certain 
things  that  they  might  learn  of  the  Europeans,  especially 
the  use  of  iron.^  Furthermore,  the  Greenlanders'  stock  of 
cattle,  goats,  and  sheep  had,  as  we  have  seen  (p.  97),  greatly 
declined  owing  to  the  long  severance  from  Europe,  and  for 
this  reason  also  they  were  obliged  to  adopt  more  of  the 
Eskimo  way  of  life. 
But  then  their  places 
of  residence  within 
the  fjords,  far  from 
the  sealing-grounds, 
were  no  longer  ad- 
vantageous, and  by 
degrees  they  entirely 
adopted  the  Eski- 
mo's more  migratory 
life  along  the  outer 
coast.  Then,  again, 
the     Eskimo     women 

were  probably  no  less  attractive  to  the  Northerners  of  that 
time  than  they  are  to  those  of  the  present  day,  and  thus 
much  mixture  of  blood  gradually  resulted.  The  children 
came  to  speak  the  Eskimo  language,  and  took  at  once  to  a 
wholly  Eskimo  way  of  life,  just  as  at  the  present  day  the 
children  of  Danes  and  Eskimo  in  Greenland  do.  As  the 
Norsemen  at  that  time  must  also  have  been  very  inferior  to 
the  Eskimo  in  numbers,  they  must  by  degrees  have  become 
Eskimo  both  physically  and  mentally;  and  when  the  country 
was  rediscovered  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries 
there  were  only  Eskimo  there,  while  all  traces  of  the  Nor- 
wegian-Greenland culture  seemed  to  have  disappeared. 

1  It  is  shown  by  Solberg's  [1907]  researches  that  they  did  so. 

103 


Ruins  of  Church  at  Kakortok  in  the  Eastern 
Settlement   [after  Th.  Groth] 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 


Let  us  suppose  that  we  could  repeat  the  experiment  and 
plant  a  number  of  European  sealers  in  Baffin  Land,  for 
instance,  with  their  women,  together  with  a  greater  number  of 
Eskimo,  and  then  cut  off  all  communication  with  the 
civilized  world.  Can  we  have  any  doubt  as  to  the  kind  of 
culture   we   should   find   there   if   we   could   come   back   after 

two  hundred 
years?  All  the 
inhabitants  would 
be  Eskimo,  and 
we  should  find  few 
traces  of  European 
culture. 

It  would 

doubtless  seem 
reasonable  to  ex- 
pect that  the  de- 
scendants of  the 
ancient  Norsemen 
of  Greenland  and 
of  the  Eskimo 
with  whom  they 
became  absorbed 
should  have 
shown  signs  in  their  external  appearance  of  this  descent, 
when  discovered  in  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries; 
but  unfortunately  we  have  no  descriptions  of  them  from 
that  time  which  allow  of  any  conclusions  being  drawn  on 
the  subject.  It  is  true  that  Hans  Egede  says  [1741,  p.  66]  that 
the  Eskimo  of  Greenland  "have  broad  faces  and  thick  lips,  are 
flat-nosed  and  of  a  brownish  complexion;  though  some  of 
them  are  quite  handsome  and  white " ;  but  nothing  definite 
can  be  concluded  from  this,  and  in  the  period  after  Egede's 
arrival  the  natives  on  the  west  coast  became  so  mixed  that 
it  is  now  hopeless  to  look  for  any  of  the  original  race.  It  is, 
however,  remarkable  that  Graah  found  in  1 829-1 831  Eskimo  on 
104 


Salmon  fishing  in  Vazdal  by  Ketilsfjord  in  the 
Eastern  Settlement  (see  map.  Vol.  I,  p.  265),  where 
the  "  birch  forest "  is  as  high  as  20  ft.  From  a  pho- 
tograph by  Dr.  T.  N.  Krabbe  [A.  S.  Jensen,  1910] 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

the  east  coast  of  Greenland,  many  of  whom  struck  him  as  re- 
sembling Scandinavians  in  appearance — a  fact  which  he  sought 
to  explain  by  European  sailors  having  perhaps  been  wrecked 
there. 

But  if  it  is  now  difficult  to  prove  in  this  way  the  partially 
Norse  descent  of  the  natives  on  the  southern  west  coast  of 
Greenland,  it  is  to  be  expected  that  there  should  be  many  ves- 
tiges in  their  m5^hs  and  fairy-tales  which  would  give  evidence 
of  this.  And  this  is  precisely  what  we  find.  In  an  earlier  work 
[1891,  pp.  207  f.  Engl,  ed.,  pp.  248  f.]  I  think  I  have  pointed 
out  numerous  features  in  their  tales  that  bear  a  resemblance 
to  the  Norse  mythical  world,  and  that  must  have  been 
derived  from  thence;  and  many  more  might  be  adduced. 
The  similarities  are  sufficiently  numerous  to  bear  witness 
to  a  quite  intimate  intellectual  contact,  and  are  in  full 
agreement  with  what  we  should  expect.  But  it  may  seem 
strange  that  their  religious  ideas  did  not  show  more  Christian 
influence,  especially  when  we  see  that  even  so  late  as  1407 
Christianity  was  powerful  enough  in  the  Eastern  Settlement 
for  a  man  to  be  burnt  for  having  seduced  another's  wife  by 
witchcraft.  There  are,  however,  many  features  in  their 
conceptions  of  another  world,  of  which  Egede  speaks, 
which  appear  to  be  necessarily  of  Christian  origin;  we  must 
suppose,  too,  that  Christian  education  was  at  a  very  low  ebb 
in  Greenland  at  the  close  of  the  fourteenth  century,  and  soon 
ceased  altogether. 

Only  a  few  words  in  the  language  of  the  Greenland 
Eskimo  on  the  southern  west  coast  have  been  shown  to  be 
of  Norse  origin.  Hans  Egede  himself  pointed  out  the  following : 
"kona"  (=  wife.  Old  Norse  kona),  "sava"  or  "  savak " 
(=  sheep,  O.N.  sauSr,  gen.  sauSa),  "nisa"  or  "nisak" 
(=  porpoise,  O.N.  hnisa),  "kuanek"  (=  angelica,  O.N. 
hvonn,  plur.  hvannir).  Some  of  these  words  recur  in 
Labrador  Eskimo,  but  may  have  been  introduced  by  the 
Moravian  missionaries  from  Greenland.  We  may  also  men- 
tion  the   name   the   Eskimo    of   southern   Greenland   apply   to 

105 


IN   NORTHERN    MISTS 

themselves,  "  karalek "  or  "  kalalek,"  which  may  come 
from  the  word  Skrasling  (which  in  Eskimo  would  become 
"  sakalalek ").  This,  as  the  Eskimo  told  Egede,  was  the 
name  the  ancient  Norsemen  had  called  them  by;  otherwise 
the  Eskimo  call  themselves  "  inuit "  (=  human  beings) ; 
and  curiously  enough  "  kalalek  "  is  not  used  by  the  Eskimo  of 
northern  Greenland;  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  known  to  the 
Labrador  Eskimo,  but  may  have  been  brought  by  the  mis- 
sionaries, although  the  latter  asserted  that  it  was  known  when 
they  came.  It  is  perhaps  of  more  importance  that,  accord- 
ing to  H.  Rink,  a  similar  word  ("  kallaluik,"  "  katlalik," 
or  "  kallaaluch,"  for  chief,  or  shaman)  occurs  in  the 
dialects  of  Alaska. 

Through  all  the  notices  of  Greenland  and  its  condition, 
especially  those  from  religious  sources,  there  runs  after  the 
fourteenth  century  a  cry  of  apostasy,  which  is  ominous  of 
this  mixture  of  the  Norsemen  with  the  Skraelings:  we  see  it 
in  the  doubtful  statement  from  1342  about  their  conversion 
to  "  the  people  of  America " ;  a  little  later,  according  to 
Ivar  Bardsson's  account  (see  p.  108)  the  heathen  Skraslings 
were  predominant  in  the  Western  Settlement;  furthermore, 
the  trading  ship  was  fitted  out  in  1355  to  prevent  the 
"falling  away"  of  Christianity  [Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii. 
p.  122];  Bjom  Einarsson's  account  (see  below,  p.  112) 
concludes  with  the  statement  that  when  he  was  there  (1386) 
"  the  bishop  of  Gardar  was  lately  dead,  and  an  old  priest 
.  .  .  performed  all  the  episcopal  ordinations "  [Gronl.  hist. 
Mind.,  iii.  p.  438]  ;  after  that  time  no  bishop  came  to  Green- 
land; and  finally  the  papal  letter  of  1492-93  describes  the 
Greenlanders  as  a  people  abandoned  by  bishop  and  priest, 
for  which  reason  most  of  them  had  fallen  from  the  Christian 
faith,  although  they  still  preserved  a  memory  of  the  Christian 
church  service   (see  later ).^     This  may  all  point  in  the  same 

lAs  stated  on  p.  86,  Jacob  Ziegler  (circa  1532)  also  says  that  the  people 
of  Greenland  "  have  almost  lapsed  to  heathendom,"  etc.    Although  mythical, 
this  shows  a  similar  tradition. 
106 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

direction:  that  the  Norsemen  in  Greenland  became  more  and 
more  absorbed  by  the  Eskimo. 

Of  course  there  may  have  been  occasional  hostile  en- 
counters between  the  Eskimo  and  Norsemen  in  Greenland, 
especially  as  the  latter,  as  pointed  out  in  the  last  chapter, 
must  frequently  have  acted  with  a  heavy  hand  when  they 
had  the  power.  But  that  the  Eskimo  should  have  carried 
on  a  regular  war  of  extermination,  which  resulted  in  the 
complete  destruction  first  of  the  Western  and  then  of  the 
Eastern  Settlement,  as  has  been  generally  assumed  until 
quite  recently — this  is  incredible  to  anyone  who  knows  the 
Eskimo  and  considers  what  their  conditions  of  life  were. 
Where  should  they  have  developed  this  warlike  propensity 
which  was  afterwards  foreign  to  them,  and  where  should  they 
have  had  training  in  the  art  of  war?  This  idea  of  the 
destruction  of  the  settlements  by  hostilities  is  the  result 
mainly  of  three  statements  about  Greenland,  of  which  one  is 
very  improbable  and  on  many  points  impossible,  another 
deals  possibly  with  an  actual  attack,  and  the  third  is 
demonstrably  false.,  We  must  here  examine  these  notices  a 
little  more  closely. 

In  1 341  Bishop  Hakon  of  Bergen  sent  a  priest,  Ivar 
Bardsson,  to  Greenland.  He  was  for  a  number  of  years 
steward  of  the  bishop's  residence  at  Gardar,  and  is  said  also 
to  have  visited  the  Western  Settlement.  We  do  not  know 
for  certain  how  long  he  was  in  Greenland,  but  in  1364  he 
again  appears  in  Norway  [cf.  G.  Storm,  1887,  p.  74].  There 
exists  in  Danish  a  description  of  the  fjords,  more  especially 
of  the  Eastern  Settlement,  which,  according  to  his  own  words, 
must  to  a  great  extent  be  derived  from  oral  communications 
of  this  Ivar  (see  below).  These  must  originally  have  been 
taken  down  by  another  Norwegian,  in  Norwegian,  and  were 
thence  translated  into  Danish  [cf.  F.  Jonsson,  1899,  p.  279]. 
There  is  thus  a  double  possibility  that  the  third-hand  version 
we  possess  may  contain  many  errors  and  misconceptions, 
of  which,  in  fact,  it  bears  evident  marks.    After  speaking  of 

107 


IN   NORTHERN    MISTS 

the  fjords  in  the  Eastern  Settlement,  it  says  of  the  Western 
Settlement  and  of  the  journey  thither:  ^ 

"  Item,  from  the  Eastern  Settlement  to  the  Western  is  a  dozen  sea  leagues 
and  all  is  uninhabited,  and  there  in  the  Western  Settlement  stands  a  great 
church  which  is  called  Stensness  Church;  this  church  was  for  a  time  a  cathe- 
dral and  the  see  of  a  bishop.2  Now  the  Skraelings  possess  the  whole  West- 
ern Settlement;  there  are  indeed  horses,  goats,  cattle,  and  sheep,  all  wild,  and 
no  people,  either  Christian  or  heathen. 

"Item,  all  this  that  is  said  above  was  told  us  by  Iffuer  bort  [or  Bardsen], 
a  Greenlander,  who  was  steward  of  the  bishop's  residence  at  Gardum  in  Green- 
land for  many  years,  that  he  had  seen  all  this  and  he  was  one  of  those  who 
were  chosen  by  the  'lagmand'  to  go  to  the  Western  Settlement  against  the 
Skraelings  to  expel  the  Skraelings  from  the  Western  Settlement,  and  when 
they  came  there  they  found  no  man,  either  Christian  or  heathen,  but  some  wild 
cattle  and  sheep,  and  ate  of  the  wild  cattle,  and  took  as  much  as  the  ships 
could  carry  and  sailed  with  it  home  [i.e.,  to  the  Eastern  Settlement],  and  the 
said  Iffuer  was  among  them. 

"  Item,  there  lies  in  the  north,  farther  than  the  Western  Settlement,  a  great 
mountain  which  is  called  *  Hemelrachs  felld '  [or  '  HiminraSz  f  jail,'  cf.  Vol.  I, 
p.  302],  and  farther  than  to  this  mountain  must  no  man  sail,  if  he  would  pre- 
serve his  life  from  the  many  whirlpools  which  there  lie  round  the  whole  sea." 

Strangely  enough,  no  author  has  expressed  a  doubt  of  the 
credibility  of  this  description,  although  as  usually  interpreted 
it  contains  an  impossibility,  which  must  strike  anyone  on 
a  closer  examination.  It  is  still  commonly  interpreted  as 
though  Ivar  Bardsson  had  found  the  whole  Western  Settle- 
ment destroyed  by  Eskimo.^  But  if  this  was  so,  how  could 
he  have  found  there  wild  cattle,  sheep,  horses  and  goats? 
The  whole  Western  Settlement  must  then  have  been  destroyed 
the  summer  that  he  was  there;  for  the  wild  cattle  could 
not   possibly   have    supported   themselves   through   the    winter 

1  Cf.  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii,  p.  258;  F.  Jonsson,  1899,  p.  328. 

2  This  seems  very  doubtful,  as  it  is  not  known  that  a  bishop  ever  resided 
in  the  Western  Settlement. 

3  It  is  true  that  this  is  not  stated  in  the  narrative;  it  is  only  said  that  the 
Skraelings  possessed  the  whole  Western  Settlement,  and  that  Ivar  and  his 
companions  found  no  people  there,  either  Christian  or  heathen,  but  only  wild 
cattle;  and  it  may,  of  course,  be  doubtful  whether  the  meaning  was  that  the 
whole  settlement  had  been  destroyed  by  a  predatory  incursion. 

108 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

in  Greenland;  evidently  the  author,  who  was  unacquainted 
with  the  conditions  in  Greenland,  did  not  think  of  this. 
Besides,  can  anyone  who  knows  the  Eskimo  imagine  that 
they  slaughtered  the  men,  but  not  the  cattle?  This  repre- 
sented food  to  them,  and  that  is  what  they  would  first  have 
turned  their  attention  to.  It  is  not  stated  which  fjord  of  the 
Western  Settlement  it  was  that  Ivar  visited;  but  in  any 
case  it  is  hardly  to  be  supposed  that  it  was  all  the  fjords, 
which  thus  would  all  have  been  destroyed  at  the  same  time. 
The  conclusion  that  Ivar  found  the  whole  Western  Settlement 
laid  waste  is,  therefore,  in  any  case  unfounded ;  it  can  at  the 
most  have  been  one  fjord,  or  perhaps  only  one  homestead  (?). 


[From  an  Icelandic  MS.  of  the  fourteenth  century] 

If  there  should  really  be  some  historical  foundation  for  the 
description  of  Ivar  Bardsson's  voyage,  then  it  may  perhaps 
be  interpreted  in  an  altogether  different  way.  The  people  of 
the  Western  Settlement,  where  the  conditions  for  keeping 
cattle  were  far  less  favorable  than  farther  south  in  the 
Eastern  Settlement,  undoubtedly  became  earlier  absorbed 
among  the  Eskimo  and  went  over  to  their  mode  of  living. 
This  may  also  be  what  is  alluded  to  in  the  perhaps  approxi- 
mately contemporary  statement  of  1342,  already  quoted 
(p.  loi),  which  says  that  the  Greenlanders  "turned  to  the 
people  of  America."  It  is  possible  that  it  was  just  this  same 
state  of  things  that  was  the  cause  of  Ivar's  being  sent  to 
expel  the  Skraslings  from  the  Western  Settlement.  When  he 
arrived  in  the  summer  at  the  fjord  which  he  possibly  visited, 
the    people    may    therefore,    in    Eskimo    fashion,    have    been 

109 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

absent  on  sealing  expeditions  somewhere  out  on  the  sea- 
coast  and  living  in  tents,  while  the  cattle  were  turned  out  at 
pasture  round  the  homesteads.^  This  would  explain  how 
they  came  to  be  found  alive.  The  men  of  the  Eastern 
Settlement  then,  with  or  against  their  better  conscience, 
stole  and  carried  off  the  property  of  the  half-Eskimo  men  of 
the  Western  Settlement  during  their  absence,  and  when  the 
latter  returned  they  found  their  homesteads  plundered,  not 
by  Eskimo  but  by  Greenlanders.  But  it  is  perhaps  very 
questionable  whether  the  whole  account  of  this  voyage  is 
particularly  historical.  The  statement  about  the  whirlpools,  for 
one  thing,  is  mythical,  pointing  to  an  idea  that  this  was  near 
the  end  of  the  earth,  and  in  the  description  immediately 
following,  like  and  unlike  are  mixed  together  in  a  way  that  is 
calculated  to  arouse  doubt.     We  read  thus: 

"  Item,  in  Greenland  there  are  silver  mines  [which  are  not  found  there], 
white  bears  having  red  spots  on  the  head  [sic!].  .  .  .  Item,  in  Greenland 
great  tempests  never  come.  Item,  snow  falls  much  in  Greenland,  it  is  not  so 
cold  there  as  in  Iceland  and  Norway,  there  grows  on  high  mountains  and 
down  below  fruit  as  large  as  some  apples  and  good  to  eat,  the  best  wheat 
that  can  be  grows  there."  2 

As  will  be  seen,  one  absurdity  succeeds  another.  It  may 
be  objected  that  as  it  is  not  stated  that  this  last  paragraph  is 
due  to  Ivar  the  Greenlander,  it  may  have  been  added  later; 
but  it  contains  an  admixture  of  statements  that  must  come  from 
Greenland — e.g.,  about  the  white  bears,  whales'  tusks  (i.e.,  of 
walrus  or  narwhale),  walrus  hides,  soapstone  (steatite),  of  which 
they  make  pots,  and  large  vessels;  it  is  also  stated  that 
"  there  are  many  reindeer,"  and  it  seems  probable  that  it  is 
all  derived  from  the  same  untrustworthy  source. 

To  what  has  here  been  said  some  will  object  that,  even  if 
this    description    ascribed    to    Ivar    Bardsson    bears    evident 

1  This  explanation  offers,  of  course,  the  difficulty  that  it  would  not  be  ap- 
plicable to  dairy-cattle;  but  in  this  way  of  life  the  settlers  may  have  had  to 
give  up  milking. 

2  These  last  ideas  may  well  be  supposed  to  have  originated  in  a  confusion 
with  the  tales  about  Wineland. 

IIO 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

marks  of  being  inexact,  it  shows  at  any  rate  that  in  Norway, 
when  it  was  taken  down,  the  view  prevailed  that  the 
Western  Settlement  had  been  destroyed  by  an  attack  of  the 
Skr^lings.  But  nothing  of  the  kind  is  really  stated  in  the 
account  (cf.  above,  p.  io8,  note  3) ;  and  the  possibly  con- 
temporary statement  (of  1342?)  which  has  already  been 
given  (p.  100)  shows  that  in  Iceland,  at  any  rate  in  the 
seventeenth  century,  the  contrary  view  prevailed,  unless 
indeed  we  are  to  explain  this  statement  as  having  arisen 
through  a  misunderstanding  of  Lyschander. 

Under  the  year  1379  the  so-called  "  Gottskalks  Annall "  (of 
the  second  half  of  the  sixteenth  century)  has  a  statement  which 
cannot  be  regarded  as  certain,  as  it  is  not  found  in  the  other 
Icelandic  annals,  but  which  may  have  been  taken  from  older 
sources.  It  reads  [G.  Storm's  edition  of  "  Islandske  Annaler," 
1888,  p.  364] : 

"  The  Skraslings  harried  the  Greenlanders  and  killed  of  them  eighteen  men 
and  took  two  boys  and  made  slaves  of  them." 

It  is  possible  that  this  may  have  some  historical  founda- 
tion, and  in  that  case  it  doubtless  refers  to  some  collision  or 
attack,  perhaps  at  sea,  in  which  the  Eskimo  were  superior 
and  the  Greenlanders  were  defeated,  which  latter  circum- 
stance is  the  reason  of  our  hearing  something  about  it;  in 
the  contrary  case  it  would  not  have  been  reported.  That  the 
Eskimo  took  two  boys  is  conceivable  if  they  were  quite 
young,  so  that  they  could  be  trained  for  sealing;  they  would 
thus  provide  an  increase  of  the  capital  of  the  community. 
It  is  not  unlikely  that  rumors  of  some  such  collisions  as  this 
may  have  contributed  to  form  the  ideas  prevalent  in  Norway 
as  to  the  formidable  character  of  the  Skr^lings,^  while  at 
the  same  time  there  existed  ideas  of  their  flying  from 
Europeans,   which  appear  in  the  reports  of  the   Pygmies   (cf. 

1  We  find  conceptions  of  the  Skraelings  as  dangerous  opponents  or  assail- 
ants in  Michel  Beheim  in  1450  [Vangensten,  1908,  p.  18],  Paulus  Jovius  in  1534, 
Jacob  Ziegler  in  1532,  Olaus  Magnus  in  1555,  and  others.  But  it  is  evident 
that  these  conceptions  are  to  a  great  extent  due  to  myth  and  superstition. 

Ill 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

the  letter  to  the  Pope,  about  1450,  and  Walkendorf,  above, 
p.  86).  Whether  the  encounter  referred  to  took  place  in 
the  Western  or  in  the  Eastern  Settlement  (or  perhaps  in 
NorSrsetur?)  we  do  not  know.  If  we  are  to  place  any 
reliance  on  Ivar  Bardsson's  description,  we  must  suppose 
that  the  Western  Settlement  and  its  fate  were  little  known  at 
that  time.  But  that  friendly  relations  between  the  Green- 
landers  and  the  Eskimo  may  have  prevailed  also  in  the 
Eastern  Settlement  later  than  this  seems  to  result  from  the 
account  of  the  widely  traveled  Icelander  Bjorn  Einarsson 
Jorsalafarer's  stay  in  Greenland  from  1385  to  1387.  On  a 
voyage  to  Iceland  in  1385  he  was  in  distress,  and  was  driven 
out  of  his  course  to  the  Eastern  Settlement  with  four  ships, 
which  all  arrived  safe  and  well  in  Iceland  in  1387.^  It  seems 
that  there  was  a  difficulty  in  feeding  all  these  crews,  but 
Bjorn  is  said  to  have  had  the  district  of  Ericsfjord  handed 
over  to  him  while  he  was  there  (?),  and  received  as  a 
contribution  130  fore-quarters  of  sheep  (?).  There  is  also 
related  a  fable  that  on  his  coming  there  and  going  down 
to  the  sea  to  look  for  seals  he  happened  to  witness  a  combat 
between  a  polar  bear  and  a  walrus,  "who  always  fight  when 
they  meet,-  and  he  afterwards  killed  them  both." 

"  Then  Bjorn,  the  franklin,  found  maintenance  for  his  people  through  one  of 
the  largest  rorquals  being  driven  ashore,  with  a  marked  harpoon  belonging  to 
Olaf  of  Isafjord  in  Iceland,  and  finally  it  was  also  of  importance  that  he  came 
to  the  assistance  of  two  trolls  [i.e.,  Eskimo],  a  young  brother  and  sister,  on  a 
tidal  skerry  [i.e.,  one  that  was  under  water  at  high  tide].  They  swore  fidelity 
to  him,  and  from  that  time  he  never  was  short  of  food;  for  they  were  skilled 
in  all  kinds  of  hunting,  whatever  he  wished  or  needed.  What  the  troll  girl 
liked  best  was  when  Solveig,  the  mistress  of  the  house,  allowed  her  to  carry  and 
play  with  her  boy  who  had  lately  been  born.  She  also  wanted  to  have  a  linen 
hood  like  the  mistress,  but  made  it  for  herself  of  whale's  guts.  They  killed 
themselves,  and  threw  themselves  into  the  sea  from  the  cliffs  after  the  ships, 
when  they  were  not  allowed  to  sail  with  the  franklin  Bjorn,  their  beloved  mas- 
ter, to  Iceland." 

1  Cf.  Islandske  Annaler,  ed.  by  Storm  [1888],  pp.  365  f.  414  f.  Gronl.  hist. 
Mind.,  iii.  pp.  135  f.,  436  f. 

2  According  to  my  experience  the  bear  avoids  the  walrus,  and  I  have  never 
seen  a  sign  of  their  fighting  on  land  or  on  the  ice. 

112 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

The  description  of  Bjom  Einarsson's  voyage  is  full  of 
extravagances  and  anything  but  trustworthy;  but  his  stay 
in  Greenland  with  the  four  ships  is  certainly  historical;  and 
the  description  of  the  two  young  Eskimo  has  many  features 
so  t5^ical  of  the  Eskimo — such  as  the  girl's  fondness  for 
children,  her  making  a  hood  of  whale's  guts,  and  their 
superior  skill  in  sealing — that  they  show  without  doubt  that 
at  that  time  there  was  intercourse  with  the  Eskimo  in  the 
Eastern   Settlement. 

From  an  existing  royal  document  of  1389  it  appears  that, 
when  Bjom  and  his  companions  came  from  Iceland  to 
Bergen  in  1388,  they  were  prosecuted  for  illegal  trading  with 
Greenland,  which  was  a  royal  monopoly;  but  they  were 
acquitted,  since  they  had  been  driven  there  in  great  distress 
and  were  obliged  to  trade  in  order  to  obtain  food  [Gronl. 
hist.  Mind.,  iii.  pp.  139  f.]. 

A  document  to  which  much  weight  has  been  attached  is 
a  papal  letter  which  has  been  preserved,  from  Nicholas  V.  in 
1448  to  the  two  bishops  of  Iceland.  It  is  there  said  of 
Greenland,  among  other  things  [Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii. 
p.     170]: 

"From  the  neighboring  coasts  of  the  heathens  the  barbarians  came  thirty 
years  ago  with  a  fleet,  attacked  the  people  Hving  there  [in  Greenland]  with  a 
cruel  assault,  and  so  destroyed  the  land  of  their  fathers  and  the  sacred  edifices 
with  fire  and  sword  that  only  nine  parish  churches  were  left  in  the  whole  island 
[Greenland],  and  these  are  said  to  be  the  most  remote,  which  they  could  not 
reach  on  account  of  the  steep  mountains.  They  carried  the  miserable  inhabi- 
tants of  both  sexes  as  prisoners  to  their  own  country,  especially  those  whom 
they  regarded  as  strong  and  capable  of  bearing  constant  burdens  of  slavery, 
as  was  fitting  for  their  tyranny.  But  since,  as  the  same  complaint  adds.i  in 
the  course  of  time  most  of  them  have  returned  from  the  said  imprisonment  to 
their  own  homes,  and  have  here  and  there  repaired  the  ruins  of  their  dwellings, 
they  long  to  establish  and  extend  divine  service  again,  as  far  as  possible.  .  .  ." 
Then  follows  a  lengthy  discourse  on  their  religious  needs,  and  what  might  be 
done  to  relieve  them,  without  costing  the  rich  Papacy  anything. 

As    the     barbarians    here    must    undoubtedly    mean    the 

1 A  complaint  previously  sent  to  the  Pope,  which,  however,  was  false,  as 
will  be  shown  later. 

113 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

Eskimo,  it  has  been  regarded  as  a  historical  fact  that  the 
latter  about  141 8  made  a  devastating  attack  on  the  Eastern 
Settlement,  and  this  document  has  thus  lent  weighty  support 
to  the  general  opinion  that  the  Greenland  settlements  perished 
as  the  result  of  an  Eskimo  war  of  extermination.  But  the 
letter  itself  shows  such  obvious  ignorance  of  conditions  in 
Greenland,  especially  with  regard  to  the  Eskimo,  that  there 
must  be  some  doubt  about  the  complaint  on  which  it 
is  based.  To  begin  with,  it  is  in  itself  unlikely  that  the 
peaceful  and  unwarlike  Eskimo,  who  can  have  had  no 
practice  in  warfare,  since  they  had  previously  had  no  one  to 
fight  with,  except  walruses  and  bears,  should  have  come 
with  a  "  fleet "  and  made  an  organized  attack  in  large 
masses,  and  destroyed  people  and  houses  and  churches  in  the 
Eastern  Settlement.  Even  if  they  might  have  been  provoked 
to  resistance  or  even  revenge  by  ill-usage  on  the  part  of 
the  Greenlanders,  or  perhaps  have  coveted  their  iron  imple- 
ments, it  is  an  impossibility  that  they  should  have  organized 
themselves  for  a  campaign.  But  it  is  added  that  they  carried 
off  the  inhabitants  of  both  sexes  to  use  them  as  slaves;  for 
what  work?— in  sealing  they  were  themselves  superior,  in 
preparing  skins  and  food  their  women  were  superior,  and 
other  work  they  had  none.  To  a  Greenland  Eskimo  it  would 
be  an  utterly  absurd  idea  to  feed  unnecessary  slaves,  and  it 
betrays  itself  as  of  wholly  European  origin.  The  statement 
that  after  the  incursion  only  nine  parish  churches  were  left, 
also  betrays  ignorance;  as  pointed  out  by  Storm,  there  were 
never  more  than  twelve,  even  in  the  flourishing  period  of  the 
Settlement,  and  by  about  14 18  there  were  certainly  not  nine 
in  all.  Furthermore,  the  letter  is  not  addressed  to  the  two 
bishops  really  officiating  in  Iceland,  but  to  the  two  impostors, 
the  German  Marcellus  and  his  confederate  Mathaeus,  who  by 
means  of  false  representations  had  induced  Pope  Nicholas  V. 
to  consecrate  them  bishops  of  Iceland  [cf.  G.  Storm,  1892, 
p.  399].  The  probability  is  that  the  two  impostors  them- 
selves composed  the  complaint  from  Greenland  which  was 
114 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

the  cause  of  the  papal  letter,  and  which  thus  did  not  reach 
the  Pope  until  thirty  years  after  the  alleged  incursion;  their 
object  must  have  been  to  obtain  further  advantages.  The 
papal  document  of  1448  must  therefore  be  entirely  discarded 
as  historical  evidence  so  far  as  its  statements  about  Greenland 
are  concerned. 

Consequently,  the  only  possibly  historical  statement  left  to 
us  to  prove  that  the  Eskimo  took  the  offensive,  is  that  of 
their  "harrying"  in  1379;  but  from  this  we  can  doubtless 
only  conclude  that  at  the  most  there  was  a  collision  between 
Eskimo  and  Greenlanders.  It  has  also  been  adduced  that 
the  Eskimo  of  Greenland  have  a  few  legends  of  fighting 
with  the  ancient  Norsemen,  and  one  which  tells  how  the 
last  of  the  Norsemen  was  slain.  It  must,  however,  be 
remembered  that  these  legends  were  taken  down  in  the  last 
century,  when  the  Eskimo  had  again  been  in  contact  with 
Europeans  for  several  hundred  years,  and  when  Norwegians 
and  Danes  had  been  living  in  the  country  for  over  a  hundred 
years.  Some  of  the  legends  certainly  refer  to  recent  collisions 
with  Europeans,  and  it  is  not  easy  to  say  what  value  can  be 
attached  to  the  others  as  evidence  of  an  extermination  of  the 
last  Norsemen.  It  is  also  to  be  remarked  that  the  Norsemen, 
or  Long-Beards,  are  not  spoken  of  with  ill-will  in  these 
legends,  but  rather  with  sympathy,  which  is  difficult  to 
understand  if  there  had  been  such  hatred  as  would  account 
for  a  war  of  extermination.  Add  to  this  that  the  particular 
encounter  which  led  to  the  last  Long-Beard  being  pursued 
and  slain  arose,  according  to  the  tale,  quite  accidentally, 
which  is  difficult  to  imagine  if  it  was  the  conclusion  of  a 
lengthy  war  of  extermination,  in  which  homestead  after 
homestead  and  district  after  district  had  been  harried  and 
laid  waste.  The  legends  of  the  Eskimo  cannot  therefore 
be   cited   as   evidence    of  the   probability   of   any   such   war. 

It  has  been  said  that,  even  if  such  warlike  proceedings 
would  be  entirely  incompatible  with  the  present  nature, 
disposition   and   way    of   thinking    of    the    Greenland    Eskimo, 

115 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

it  may  formerly  have  been  otherwise.  But,  in  any  case,  no 
long  time  can  have  elapsed  between  the  alleged  final  over- 
throw of  the  Eastern  Settlement,  perhaps  about  1500,  and 
the  rediscovery  of  Greenland  in  the  sixteenth  century.  It  is 
not  likely  that  the  Eskimo  should  have  so  completely  changed 
their  nature  in  the  few  intervening  years;  those  whom  the 
discoverers  then  found  seem,  from  the  accounts,  to  have 
strikingly  resembled  those  we  find  later.  And  if  one  reads 
Hans  Egede's  description  of  the  Eskimo  among  whom  he 
lived  and  worked,  it  appears  absolutely  impossible  that 
the  same  people  two  hundred  years  earlier  should  have 
waged  a  cruel  war  of  extermination  against  the  last  of  the 
Norsemen. 

There  is,  it  is  true,  a  possibility,  as  Dr.  Bjornbo  has 
pointed  out  to  me,  that  the  mixture  of  race  which  gradually 
took  place  between  Eskimo  and  Norsemen  may,  for  a  time, 
have  produced  a  mixed  type,  which  possessed  a  more 
quarrelsome  disposition  than  the  pure  Eskimo,  and  may 
have  inherited  the  not  very  peaceful  habits  of  the  Norsemen, 
and  that  in  this  way,  for  instance,  a  possible  attack  in 
1379  may  be  explained.  But  this  can  only  have  been 
the  case  at  the  beginning  of  the  period  of  intermixture,  and 
the  type  must  have  changed  again  in  proportion  as  the  Eskimo 
element  in  race  and  culture  became  predominant.^ 

The  allusion  to  the  Pygmies  of  Greenland  in  the  letter 
to  Nicholas  V.,  quoted  above  (p.  86),  gives  us  the  Eskimo 
as  we   are   accustomed   to   see   them;   and  the   description   of 

1  Mention  should  be  made  of  two  other  factors,  which  Dr.  Bjornbo  has  sug- 
gested to  me.  It  is  possible  that  while  the  majority  of  the  Norsemen  were 
compelled  more  and  more  to  adopt  the  Eskimo  mode  of  life  in  order  to  support 
themselves,  some  more  strong-minded  individuals  among  them,  and  a  few 
zealous  priests,  may  have  resisted  stubbornly,  and  this  may  have  led  to  fight- 
ing such  as  is  spoken  of  in  the  legends.  Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that  the 
relentlessness  of  the  Eskimo  is  usually  accentuated  when  dealing  with  in- 
dividuals who  are  only  a  burden  to  the  community  without  benefiting  it;  and 
no  doubt  some  among  the  Norsemen  may  have  been  reduced  to  such  a  position 
after  the  cessation  of  imports  from  abroad,  since  they  were  inferior  to  the 
Eskimo  in  skill  as  fishermen  and  sealers. 
116 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

these  small  men,  a  cubit  high,  who  fly  in  a  body  at  the  sight 
of  strangers,  gives  a  surer  and  truer  picture  of  the  Skraelings 
than  when  they  are  represented  as  warlike  and  dangerous 
barbarians.  The  statements  about  the  Pygmies  in  Claudius 
Clavus  also  enable  us  to  see  how  the  Norsemen  sometimes 
treated   the    Eskimo,   when   they   caught   them 

"at  sea  in  a  hide-boat,  which  now  hangs  in  the  cathedral  at  Trondhjem;  there 
is  also  a  long-boat  of  hides  [i.e.,  a  women's  boat]  which  was  also  once  taken 
with  such  Pygmies  in  it." 

But  that  these  little  Pygmies,  a  cubit  high,  were  regarded 
as  formidable  warriors,  engaged  in  exterminating  the  Norse- 
men, is  difficult  to  believe,^  even  though  Michel  Beheim 
attributes  warlike  qualities  to  them  (cf.  p.  85).  Walkendorf, 
who  had  so  carefully  collected  all  traditions  about  Greenland, 
describes  (circa  1520)  the  Skrselings  as  an  "unwarlike'* 
and  harmless  people  (see  above,  p.  86).  It  is  impossible 
to  reconcile  this  with  a  tradition  of  a  war  of  extermination. 

There  are  therefore  good  grounds  for  supposing  that 
Arne  Magnussen  was  approximately  correct  when  he  said 
in   1691    [Gronl.   hist.   Mind.,  iii.  p.    138]: 

"It  is  probable  that  owing  to  the  daily  increase  of  the  ice  and  its  drifting 
down  from  the  Pole,  it  thus  befell  Greenland,  and  the  Christian  inhabitants 
either  died  of  hunger  or  were  constrained  to  practice  the  same  '  vitae  genus ' 
as  the  savages,  and  thus  degenerated  into  their  nature." 

In  the  year  1406  the  Icelanders,  Thorstein  Helmingsson, 
Snorre  Thorvason,  and  Thorgrim  Solvason,  in  one  ship,  were 
driven  out  of  their  course  to  Greenland.  "  They  sailed  out 
from  Norway,  and  were  making  for  Iceland.  They  stayed 
there  [in  Greenland]  four  winters "  [cf.  Islandske  Annaler, 
ed.  Storm,  1888,  p.  288].  While  they  were  there,  in  the 
following  year  (1407) 

"  a  man  named  Kolgrim  was  burnt  in  Greenland  for  that  he  lay  with  Thorgrim 
Solvason's  wife,  who  was  the  daughter  of  a  '  lagmand '  of  high  standing  in 
Iceland.     This  man  got  her  consent  by  black  art;  he  was  therefore  burnt  ac- 

1  It  is  true  that  Clavus  mentions  the  warrior  hosts  of  the  infidel  Karelians 
in  Greenland;  but  this  is  evidently  myth  or  invention  (cf.  chapter  xiii.). 

117 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

cording  to  sentence;  nor  was  the  woman  ever  after  in  her  right  mind,  and 
died  a  little  later." 

In  1408  one  of  the  Icelanders  married  in  Greenland,  which 
is  of  interest  from  the  fact  that  several  documents  bearing 
witness  to  the  marriage  are  extant.  In  1410  "  Thorstein 
Helmingsson  and  Thorgrim  Solvason  and  Snorre  Thorvason 
and  the  rest  of  their  crew  sailed  to  Norway."  Whether  this 
was  in  their  own  ship  we  do  not  know;  but  as  they  sailed 
to  Norway  and  not  to  Iceland  it  is  doubtless  most  probable 
that  their  ship  was  destroyed  and  that  they  had  to  wait  these 
four  years  for  a  passage  to  Norway.  In  141 1  ^  a  small  vessel 
was  wrecked  on  the  coast  of  Iceland;  on  board  her  came 
Snorre  Thorvason  from  Norway.  His  wife,  Gudrun,  had 
during  his  absence  married  another  man,  in  14 10.  She 
**  now  rode  to  meet  him.  He  received  her  kindly."  "  Snorre 
took  his  wife  to  him  again,  but  they  only  lived  a  little  while 
together  before  he  died,  and  she  then  married  Gisle  [the  other 
man]  again." 

This  is  the  last  certain  information  we  have  of  any 
voyage  to  the  ancient  settlements  of  Greenland.  After  that 
time  all  notices  cease.  As  Holberg  says  [Danm.  Hist.,  i. 
531],  after  the  time  of  Queen  Margaret  the  succeeding  kings 
had  so  much  to  do  that  they  had  no  time  to  think  of  old 
Greenland.^ 

In  1 43 1  King  Eric  of  Pomerania  complained  to  the 
English  king,  Henry  VI.,  of  the  illegal  trading  which  the 
English  had  carried  on  for  the  previous  twenty  years  (that  is, 
since  141 1)  with  "Norway's  Lands  and  Islands":  Iceland, 
Greenland,  the  Faroes,  Shetland,  the  Orkneys,  Helgeland 
and    Finmark;    and    of    the    acts    of    violence    and    piratical 

1  According  to  another  authority  it  was  not  till  1413.  In  any  case  it  looks 
as  if  traveling  took  a  good  time  in  those  days. 

2  As  evidence  of  the  state  of  things  it  may  be  mentioned  that  we  read  in  the 
"Icelandic  Annals"  [Storm,  1888,  p.  290]  under  1412:  "No  tidings  came  from 
Norway  to  Iceland.  The  queen,  Lady  Margaret,  died.  .  .  ."  When  com- 
munication even  with  Iceland  had  fallen  off  to  this  extent,  we  can  understand 
its  having  ceased  altogether  with  Greenland. 

118 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

incursions,  with  fire  and  rapine,  that  they  had  committed  in 
this  period,  by  which  they  had  carried  off  many  ships  laden 
with  fish  and  other  goods,  and  many  people  had  perished.^ 
As  early  as  141 3  King  Eric's  ambassador  to  the  English 
king,  Henry  V.,  had  made  a  strong  protest  against  all 
foreign  and  unprivileged  trade  with  these  countries.  On 
Christmas  Eve,  1432,  a  treaty  was  signed  between  the  two 
kings,  whereby  Henry  VI.  engaged  himself  to  make  good 
all  the  damage  the  English  had  caused  to  King  Eric's 
subjects  in  the  said  countries,  and  all  the  people  who,  during 
those  twenty  years,  had  been  violently  carried  off  were,  by 
the  direction  of  the  English  king,  wherever  they  might  be 
found  in  his  dominions,  to  receive  payment  for  their  services 
and  to  return  freely  to  their  native  places.  Further,  the  old 
prohibition  of  trading  with  the  Norwegian  tributary  lands 
was  renewed.  The  same  prohibition  was  renewed  and 
enforced  on  the  English  side  by  Henry  VI.  in  1444,  and  by 
a  new  treaty  between  him  and  Christiern  I.,  concluded  at 
Copenhagen,  July  17,  1449;  but  this  was  only  to  remain  in 
force  till  Michaelmas,  1451.  After  that  time  the  English 
merchants,  some  of  whom  no  doubt  were  Norwegians 
established  at  Bristol,  seem  to  have  seized  upon  nearly  the 
whole  of  the  trade  with  Iceland,  and  often  conducted  them- 
selves with  violence  there.  But,  in  1490,  this  trade  was  made 
free  on  certain  conditions. 

These  negotiations  give  us  an  insight  into  the  state  of 
things  in  Northern  waters  at  that  time.  At  the  same  time 
there  were  difficulties  with  the  Hanseatic  League,  which 
tried  to  seize  upon  all  trade. 

Among  these  so-called  Norwegian  tributary  countries  was 
Greenland,  which  is  mentioned  with  the  others  in  the  com- 
plaint of  1431 ;  but  whether  this  means  that  the  English 
extended  their  trading  voyages,  which  frequently  became 
piratical  expeditions,  so  far,  we  do  not  know;  in  any  case  it 
is  not  impossible,  although  of  course  the  voyage  to  Iceland 
1  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  pp.  160  f. 

119 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

with  its  rich  fisheries  was  much  more  important.  We 
know  that  this  was  carried  on  from  Bristol  in  particular, 
where,  as  has  been  said,  many  Norwegians  were  estab- 
lished. 

The  statements  about  Greenland  contained  in  the  papal 
letter  of  1448  were,  as  we  have  seen,  false.  Perhaps  not 
very  much  more  weight  is  to  be  attached  to  the  story,  in 
Peyrere's  "Relation  du  Groenland "  (Paris,  1647),  of  Oluf 
Worm  of  Copenhagen  having  found  in  an  old  Danish  MS. 
a  statement  that  about  1484  there  were  more  than  forty 
experienced  men  living  at  Bergen,  who  were  in  the  habit  of 
sailing  to  Greenland  every  year  and  bringing  home  valuable 
goods;  but  as  they  would  not  sell  their  wares  to  the  Hanse 
merchants,  the  latter  revenged  themselves  by  inviting  them 
to  a  supper  and  killing  them  all  at  night.  This,  then,  was 
said  to  be  the  end  of  the  Greenland  voyage,  which  had  to 
cease  thenceforward,  because  no  one  knew  the  course  any 
more  [cf.  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  pp.  471  f.].  The  story  as 
given  here  is  in  many  respects  improbable;  but  even  if  the 
forty  or  more  men  and  the  annual  voyage  are  exaggerations, 
there  are  other  indications  that  about  that  time  there  may 
have  been  some  sort  of  communication  with  Greenland  or 
the  countries  to  the  west  of  it,  as  will  be  mentioned  later. 
The  royal  monopoly  of  the  Iceland  trade  was  no  longer  in 
force,  and  the  same  may  have  applied  to  Greenland.  It  is 
then  conceivable  that  merchants  may  have  gone  there;  and 
if  their  trading  prospered  they  had  every  reason  to  keep  it  as 
secret  as  possible,  lest  others  should  interfere  with  their 
livelihood.  This  would  explain  why  such  voyages  are  not 
mentioned  by  historical  authorities.  Just  then,  too,  was  an 
uneasy  time,  with  a  sort  of  war  of  privateers  between 
England  and  Denmark-Norway,  which  was  not  concluded 
until  the  provisional  peace  of  1490;  there  were  thus  many 
pirates  and  privateers  in  Northern  waters,  who  may  well 
have  extended  their  activity  upon  occasion  to  the  remote 
and  unprotected  Greenland,  where  they  could  plunder  with 
120 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

even    greater    impunity    than    in    Iceland,    and    perhaps    they 
increased  the  ruin  of  the  settlements  there. 

Of  great  interest  is  a  letter  from  Pope  Alexander  VI. ^  of 
the  first  year  of  his  papacy,  1492-1493,  which  was  written 
in  consequence  of  a  Benedictine  monk  named  Mathias  having 
applied  to  the  Pope  to  be  appointed  bishop  of  Greenland,  and 
declared  himself  willing  to  go  there  personally  as  a  missionary 
to  convert  the  apostates.    The  letter  runs: 

"  As  we  are  informed,  the  church  at  Gade  [i.e.,  Gardar]  lies  at  the  world's 
end  in  the  land  of  Greenland,  where  the  people,  for  want  of  bread,  wine  and 
oil,  live  on  dried  fish  and  milk;  and  therefore,  as  well  as  by  reason  of  the  ex- 
treme rarity  of  the  voyages  that  have  taken  place  to  the  said  land,  for  which 
the  severe  freezing  of  the  waters  is  alleged  as  the  cause,  it  is  believed  that  for 
eighty  years  no  ship  has  landed  there;  and  if  such  voyages  should  take  place, 
it  is  thought  that  in  any  case  it  could  only  be  in  the  month  of  August,  when 
the  same  ice  is  dissolved;  and  for  this  reason  it  is  said  that  for  eighty  years 
or  thereabouts  no  bishop  or  priest  has  resided  at  that  church.  Therefore,  and 
because  there  are  no  Catholic  priests,  it  has  befallen  that  most  of  the  parish- 
ioners, who  formerly  were  Catholics,  have  (oh,  how  sorrowful!)  renounced  the 
holy  sacrament  of  baptism  received  from  them;  and  that  the  inhabitants  of 
that  land  have  nothing  else  to  remind  them  of  the  Christian  religion  than  a 
corporale  [altar-cloth]  which  is  exhibited  once  a  year,  and  whereon  the  body 
of  Christ  was  consecrated  a  hundred  years  ago  by  the  last  priest  who  was 
there."  For  this  reason,  '*  to  provide  them  with  a  fitting  shepherd,"  Pope  Alex- 
ander's predecessor.  Innocent  VIII.,  had  appointed  the  Benedictine  monk 
Mathias  bishop  of  Gade  (Gardar),  and  he  "with  much  godly  zeal  made  ready 
to  bring  the  minds  of  the  infidels  and  apostates  back  to  the  way  of  eternal 
salvation  and  to  root  out  such  errors,"  etc.  Then  follow  exhortations  to  the 
Curia,  the  chancellors,  and  all  the  religious  scriveners  under  pain  of  excom- 
munication to  let  the  said  Mathias,  on  account  of  his  poverty,  escape  all  ex- 
penses and  perquisites  connected  with  the  appointment  and  correspondence, 
etc. 

The  Statements  in  the  letter  agree  remarkably  well  with 
what  we  gather  from  other  historical  sources.  In  1410 — 
that  is,  eighty-two  years  before  the  date  of  the  letter — the 
last  ship  of  which  we  have  any  notice  arrived  in  Norway  from 
Greenland  (see  above,  p.  118).  This  agrees  with  the  statement 
in  the  letter  that  no  ship  had  been  there  for  eighty  years.     In 

1  See  G.  Storm,  1892,  pp.  399-401.  The  letter  was  discovered  some  years  ago 
in  the  Papal  archives  by  a  priest  from  Dalmatia,  Dr.  Jelic.  Cf.  also  Jos. 
Fischer,  1902,  p.  49. 

121 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

1377  the  last  officiating  bishop  of  Gardar  died,  and  six 
years  later  the  news  reached  Norway,  that  is,  109  years  before 
the  date  of  the  letter.  This  agrees  with  what  is  said  about 
the  altar-cloth  being  used  a  hundred  years  before  by  the  last 
priest  ("  ultimo  sacerdote,"  perhaps  meaning  here  "  bishop  "  ?) 
at  the  administration  of  the  sacrament.  The  assertion 
that  it  was  not  until  August  that  Greenland  became  free  of  ice 
and  that  voyages  could  be  made  thither  also  shows  a  certain 


A  portion  of  Gourmont's  map  of  1548,  with  the  north-west  coast 
of  Iceland  and  the  rocky  island  of  Hvitserk 


local  knowledge;  for  it  was  not  till  late  in  the  summer,  usually 
August,  that  "Knarren"  was  accustomed  to  sail  from  Bergen 
to  Greenland. 

Whether  news  had  recently  arrived  from  Greenland  at 
the  time  the  letter  was  written  does  not  appear  from  the 
words  of  the  letter,  and  cannot,  in  my  opinion,  be  inferred 
therefrom,  though  Storm  [1892,  p.  401]  thought  it  could. 
The  only  thing  which  might  point  to  this  is  the  story  of  the 
altar-cloth  being  exhibited  once  a  year;  but  this,  of  course, 
may  be  a  tradition  which  goes  back  to  the  last  ship,  eighty 
years  before. 
122 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

Meanwhile  we  meet  with  obscure  information  in  other  quar- 
ters about  a  possible  communication  with  Greenland  at  that 
time.  In  a  map  of  Iceland,  printed  in  Paris  in  1548  by  Hierony- 
mus  Gourmont/  a  rocky  island  is  marked  to  the  north-west  of 
Iceland,  with  a  compass-card  and  a  Latin  inscription.  This,  as 
A.  A.  Bjornbo  has  pointed  out,^  is  of  interest;  it  reads  in  trans- 
lation : 

"The  lofty  mountain  called  Witsarc,  on  the  summit  of  which  a  sea-mark 


De  Pygmaeis  Gruntlaiidiae,  A  rupe  HuitfarK. 

The  rock  Hvitserk,  and  a  fight  with  a  Greenland  Pygmy 
[Olaus  Magnus,  1557] 

was  set  up  by  the  two  pirates  (piratis),  Pinnigt  and  Pothorst,  to  warn  seamen 
against  Greenland." 

The  map  is  a  modified  copy  of  Olaus  Magnus's  well-known 
large  chart  of  1539,  on  which  the  island  with  the  compass-card 
is  found,  but  not  the  inscription. 

It  is  possibly  a  fuller  version  or  adaptation  of  the  substance 
of  this  inscription,  or  of  the  source  from  which  it  is  taken,  that 
is  met  with  again  in  Olaus  Magnus's  work  on  the  Northern 
peoples,  of  1555,  where  he  says  of  "the  lofty  mountain  '  Huit- 


1  Published  by  J.  Metelka  [1895]. 

2  A.  A.  Bjornbo,  Berlingske  Tidende,  1909;  Bjornbo  and  Petersen,  1909,  p. 


249. 


123 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

sark,'  which  lies  in  the  middle  of  the  sea  between  Iceland  and 
Greenland  " : 

"  Upon  it  lived  about  the  year  of  Our  Lord  1494  two  notorious  pirates  [pi- 
rats],  Pining  and  Pothorst,  with  their  accomplices,  as  though  in  defiance  and 
contempt  of  all  kingdoms  and  their  forces,  since,  by  the  strict  orders  of  the 
Northern  kings,  they  had  been  excluded  from  all  human  society  and  declared 
outlaws  for  their  exceedingly  violent  robberies  and  many  cruel  deeds  against 
all  sailors  they  could  lay  hands  on,  whether  near  or  far.  .  .  .  Upon  the 
top  of  this  very  high  rock  the  said  Pining  and  Pothorst  have  constructed  a 
compass  out  of  a  considerable  circular  space,  with  rings  and  lines  formed  of 
lead;  thereby  it  was  made  more  convenient  for  them,  when  they  were  bent  on 
piracy,  as  they  thus  were  informed  in  what  direction  they  ought  to  put  to  sea 
to  seek  considerable  plunder." 

It  may  be  the  expression  "piratae,"  which  might  be 
used  both  of  an  ordinary  pirate  and  of  a  privateer  or  free- 
booter, which  misled  Olaus  Magnus  into  constructing  this 
wonderful  story.  The  mere  fact  that,  both  in  his  map  of 
1539  and  in  his  work  of  1555,  he  makes  Hvitserk,  which  of 
course  was  in  Greenland,  into  a  rocky  island  out  at  sea 
between  Greenland  and  Iceland,  where  no  island  is  to  be 
found,  is  enough  to  shake  one's  belief  in  the  trustworthiness 
of  this  strange  report.  His  incomprehensible  story  of  the 
compass  constructed  there  does  not  make  things  any  better. 
G.  Storm  [1886,  p.  395]  thought  it  might  have  come  about  in 
this  way:  that  Olaus  Magnus,  who  was  no  great  sailor  or 
geographer,  read  on  a  chart  a  note  about  Fining's  voyage  to 
Greenland,  and  saw  in  its  proximity  the  name  Hvitserk  and 
a  compass-card  in  the  middle  of  the  sea;  and  then,  without 
understanding  its  real  meaning,  he  made  it  an  island  and 
gave  it  his  own  explanation.  Bjombo  and  Petersen  [1909, 
pp.  250,  251]  have,  it  is  true,  pointed  out  that  something  of 
the  same  sort  is  told  of  the  North  Cape  by  Sivert  Grubbe, 
who  accompanied  Christiern  IV.  on  his  voyage  to  Finmark, 
and  who  writes  in  his  journal  (in  Latin)  on  May  12,  1599: 
"  We  sailed  past  the  North  Cape.  On  the  top  of  this  moun- 
tain is  a  compass  cut  into  the  rock."  But  as  they  "  sailed 
past,"  Grubbe  cannot  have  been  up  and  seen  this  compass; 
124 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

it  may  therefore  be  supposed  that  a  similar  error  is  at  the 
base  of  this  improbable  statement;  it  is  difficult  to  see  what 
value  for  mariners  such  a  compass  could  have.  But  not- 
withstanding Olaus  Magnus's  fantastic  story,  Pining  and 
Pothorst  may  really  have  been  in  Greenland.  The  former 
must  be  the  Norwegian  nobleman  Didrik  Pining,  who  together 
with  Pothorst  ("  Pytchehorsius ")  is  said  to  have  distin- 
guished himself  during  the  later  years  of  Christiern  I.,  "  not 
less  as  capable  seamen  than  as  matchless  freebooters " 
(piratse).  He  was  much  employed  by  Christiern  I.  and 
King  Hans,  against  the  English  and  sometimes  against  the 
Hanseatic  League,  and  is  mentioned  by  several  historical 
authorities.^  He  seems  also  to  have  extended  his  activity 
upon  occasion  to  the  Spaniards,  Portuguese  and  Dutch,  for 
about  1484  he  captured,  off  the  English  coast  or  off  Brittany 
and  in  the  Spanish  Sea,  three  Spanish  or  Portuguese  ships, 
and  brought  them  to  the  king  at  Copenhagen.  In  a  treaty 
which  was  concluded  in  1490  between  King  Hans  and  the 
Dutch  it  is  expressly  stipulated  that  Didrik  Pining  and  a 
certain  Busch  were  to  be  excluded  from  the  place.  Didrik 
Pining  is  spoken  of  as  lord  over  Iceland,  or  perhaps 
over  the  eastern  and  southern  part,  in  1478;  but  on  the 
death  of  Christiern  I.  in  1481,  another  was  appointed  as 
"hirdstjore"  (or  stadtholder),  and  it  is  stated  in  the  letter 
of  appointment,  issued  by  the  council  at  Bergen  in  148 1, 
that  Pining  had  "  gone  out  of  Iceland " ;  but  a  few  years 
later  he  is  again  mentioned  as  hirdstjore  there.  When  in 
1487  King  Hans  took  possession  of  Gotland,  Pining  accom- 
panied him  thither,  doubtless  as  commander  of  the  Danish- 
Norwegian  squadron ;  he  is  called  "  Skipper  Pining,"  which 
corresponds  to  commodore  or  admiral  in  our  time  [cf. 
Christiern  I.'s  "Skipper  Clemens"].  In  July,  1489,  Didrik 
Pining  was  among  the  Norwegian  noblemen  who  paid  homage 

1  Cf.  L.  Daae,  1882.  Besides  the  authorities  mentioned  by  Daae,  see  "  Scrip- 
tores  rerum  Danicarum,"  ii.  563,  where  "  Puthorse  "  is  mentioned  as  "  pirata 
Danicus  "  together  with  "  Pynning."     Cf.  also  Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iiL  pp.  473  f. 

125 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

at  Copenhagen  to  the  king's  son,  Christiem  (II.),  as  heir 
to  the  kingdom  of  Norway;  and  in  August  and  September, 
1490,  he  took  part  in  the  settlement  of  a  suit  concerning  a 
large  inheritance  at  Bergen;  but  in  two  Icelandic  laws  or 
edicts  of  that  time,  1489  and  1490,  the  so-called  "  Fining's 
Laws,"  he  is  described  as  "  *  hirdstjore '  over  the  whole  of 
Iceland,"  and  a  later  chronicler  speaks  of  him  as  one  of  the 
most  famous  men  in  Iceland,  and  he  says  that  "he  was  in 
many  ways  a  serviceable  man  and  put  many  things  right 
that  were  wrong."  It  must  be  the  same  Didrik  Pining  who  was 
appointed  in  1490  governor  of  Vardohus,  and  it  may  be  sup- 
posed that  he  was  commander-in-chief  on  sea  and  land  in  north- 
ern waters. 

We  hear  of  Pining,  and  his  associate  Pothorst,  in  an  old  (Ice- 
landic?) report  which,  together  with  Ivar  Bardsson's  descrip- 
tion of  Greenland,  was  found  in  an  old  book  of  accounts  in  the 
Faroes,  and  which  in  an  English  translation  was  included 
in  "  Purchas  his  Pilgrimes"  [London,  1625,  vol.  iii.],  where 
we  read : 

"  Item,  Punnus  [corruption  of  Pinning]  and  Potharse,  have  inhabited  Island 
certayne  yeeres,  and  sometimes  have  gone  to  Sea,  and  have  had  their  trade  in 
Groneland.  Also  Punnus  did  give  the  Islanders  their  Lavi^es,  and  caused  them 
to  bee  written.  Which  Lav(res  doe  continue  to  this  day  in  Island,  and  are 
called  by  name  Punnus  Lawes." 

As  this  last  statement  agrees  with  the  two  "  Pining's 
Laws"  mentioned  above,  there  may  also  be  some  truth  in 
the  voyages  to  Greenland.  An  unexpected  confirmation  of 
this  recently  came  to  light  in  the  discovery  of  a  document  by 
Louis  Bobe  [1909]  at  Copenhagen;  it  is  a  letter,  dated 
March  3,  1551,  from  Burgomaster  Carsten  Grip,  of  Kiel,  to 
King  Christiern  III.  Grip  was,  as  we  are  told  in  the  letter,  the 
king's  commissioner  for  the  purchase  of  books,  paintings, 
and  the  like.  He  tells  the  king  that  he  has  not  found  any 
valuable  books  or  suitable  pictures,  but  sends  him  two  maps 
of  the  world, 

"  from  which  your  majesty  may  see  that  your  majesty's  land  of  Greenland  ex- 
126 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

tends  on  both  maps  towards  the  new  world  and  the  islands  which  the  Portu- 
guese and  Spaniards  have  discovered,  so  that  these  countries  may  be  reached 
overland  from  Greenland.  Likewise  that  they  may  be  reached  overland  from 
Lampeland  [i.e.,  Lapland],  from  the  castle  of  Vardohus,  etc.i  This  year  there 
is  also  published  at  Paris  in  France  a  map  of  your  majesty's  land  of  Iceland 
and  of  the  wonders  there  to  be  seen  and  heard  of;  it  is  there  remarked  that 
Iceland  is  twice  as  large  as  Sicily,  and  that  the  two  skippers  ['  sceppere,'  i.e., 
commodores  or  admirals]  Pyningk  and  Poidthorsth,  who  were  sent  out  by 
your  majesty's  royal  grandfather,  King  Christiern  the  First,  at  the  request  of 
his  majesty  of  Portugal,  with  certain  ships  to  explore  new  countries  and  islands 
in  the  north,  have  raised  on  the  rock  Wydthszerck  [Hvitserk],  lying  off  Green- 
land and  towards  Sniefeldsiekel  in  Iceland  on  the  sea,  a  great  sea-mark  on 
account  of  the  Greenland  pirates,  who  with  many  small  ships  without  keels 
£'  szunder  bodem ']  fall  in  large  numbers  upon  other  ships,"  etc. 

It  seems,  as  Dr.  Bjornbo  has  suggested,-  that  the  Paris 
map  here  spoken  of  may  be  Gourmont's  of  1548,  mentioned 
above.  But  Grip's  letter  contains  information  about  the 
dispatch  of  the  expedition  and  about  the  Eskimo  kayaks, 
which  cannot  be  taken  from  the  inscription  attached  to 
Hvitserk  on  that  map.  The  statement  about  the  Eskimo 
(the  Greenland  pirates)  recalls  what  Ziegler  says  in  his  work 
"Scondia"  (1532)  of  the  inhabitants  of  Greenland,  that 
"  they  use  light  boats  of  hide,  safe  in  tossing  on  the  sea  and 
among  rocks;  and  thus  propelling  themselves  they  fall  upon 
other  ships"  [Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii.  p.  499].  It  also  has 
some  resemblance  to  what  Glaus  Magnus  says  in  his  later 
work  of  1555  of  the  Greenland  "pirates,  who  employ  hide- 
boats  and  an  unfair  mode  of  seamanship,  since  they  do  not 
attack  the  upper  parts  of  merchant  ships,  but  seek  to  destroy 
them  by  boring  through  the  hull  from  outside,  down  by  the 
keel,"  etc.  These  statements  may  be  derived  from  mythical 
accounts  of  the  Greenland  Eskimo,  which  have  come  down 
by  some  channel  we  do  not  know  of.  Something  of  the 
sort  may  have  appeared  on  some  now  lost  map,  from  which 
Grip   may  have   taken   it;    but   his   statement   as   to   the    two 

1  This  was  the  usual  representation  at  that  time;  cf.  Ziegler's  map  of  1532. 

2  A.  A.  Bjornbo,  Berlingske  Tidende,  Copenhagen,  July  17,  1909;  Bjornbo 
and  Petersen,  1909,  p.  249. 

127 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

skippers  having  been  sent  out  by  Christiern  I.  shows  that  in 
any  case  there  was  in  his  day  a  tradition  of  the  voyage  of 
Pining  and  Pothorst.  We  must  therefore  assume  that  they 
were  dispatched  on  a  voyage  of  discovery  by  Christiern  I. 
(some  time  before  1481,  when  he  died),  probably  at  the 
request  of  the  well-known  King  Alfonso  V.  of  Portugal 
(1438-1481).  As  Hvitserk  must  be  on  the  coast  of  Green- 
land, they  seem,  in  agreement  with  the  other  positive  statement 
in  Purchas,  to  have  really  reached  Greenland,  perhaps  more 
than  once,  and,  to  have  traded  by  barter  with  the  natives, 
which  may  have  ended,  as  it  frequently  did  later,  in  skirmishes 
brought  about  by  the  encroachments  of  the  Europeans.  This 
last  possibility  would  explain  Grip's  statement  about  the 
Greenland  pirates  attacking  in  many  small  ships  without 
keels,  as  also  the  mythical  statements  of  Ziegler  and  Olaus 
Magnus.  Nor  is  it  impossible  that  Pining  may  have  set  up 
some  sea-mark  or  other  there.  All  this  sounds  more  probable 
than  Olaus  Magnus's  wonderful  story.  But  nevertheless  it 
does  not  appear  to  me  that  the  authorities  now  known  justify 
us  in  altogether  rejecting  the  latter  and  the  date  1494.  As 
there  is  mention  in  1491  of  a  new  "  hirdstjore "  in  Iceland, 
we  must  suppose  that  Pining  was  either  dead  or  had  left 
the  island;  if  we  compare  with  this  the  fact  that  Pining  was 
excluded  from  the  peace  that  King  Hans  concluded  in  1490 
with  the  Dutch,  and  thus  in  a  way  became  an  outlaw  to  the 
latter,  and  that  in  the  same  year  a  provisional  peace  was 
made  with  the  king  of  England,  by  which,  of  course,  all 
privateering  against  English  subjects  on  the  part  of  Norwe- 
gians and  Danes  was  strictly  forbidden,  we  may  possibly 
perceive  a  connection.  Pining  and  Pothorst  were  not  able 
to  break  themselves  of  old  habits,  and  thus  had  both  the 
English  king  and  their  own,  besides  the  Dutchmen,  against 
them,  and  were  compelled  to  fly  the  country  as  outlaws.  This 
would  also  agree  with  Olaus  Magnus's  words,  that  they  were 
outlawed  by  the  strict  edict  of  the  northern  kings  ("  aqui- 
lonarium  regum  severissimo  edicto").  It  may  be  supposed 
128 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

that,  like  the  outlawed  Eric  the  Red  500  years  before,  they 
took  refuge  in  distant  Greenland,  which  they  already  knew. 
But  finally  they  may  have  come  to  grief;  for  among  the 
many  "  pirates  "  who  "  met  with  a  miserable  death,  being  either 
slain  by  their  friends  or  hanged  on  the  gallows  or  drowned 
in  the  waves  of  the  sea,"  Paulus  Eliae  mentions  "  Pyning  "  and 
"Pwthorss."  1 

We  have  yet  to  mention  certain  obscure  statements  about 
another  Northern  sailor  of  this  time,  Johannes  Scolvus  (Jon 
Skolv?)-  The  Spanish  author,  Francesco  Lopez  de  Gomara,  who 
was  a  priest  in  Seville  about  1550,  and  published  his  "  Historia 
de  las  Indias"  (i.e.,  America)  in  1553,  says  there  of  "la  Tierra 
de  Labrador  " : 

"Hither  also  came  men  from  Norway  with  the  pilot  ['piloto,'  i.e.,  navi- 
gator] Joan  Scoluo,  and  Englishmen  with  Sebastian  Gaboto." 

As,  according  to  Storm's  showing  [1886,  p.  392],  Gomara 
met  Glaus  Magnus  "  in  Bologna  and  Venice "  (perhaps 
about  1548),  and  says  himself  that  the  latter  had  given  him 
much  information  about  northern  waters  and  the  sea  route 
from  Norway,  the  statement  about  Scolvus  may  also  be  due 
to  him. 

An  English  State  document — probably  of  1575,  and  written 
on  the  occasion  of  the  preparations  for  Frobisher's  first 
voyage  (1576) — gives  a  brief  survey  of  earlier  attempts  to 
find   the    North-West    Passage,^    and   mentions   among   others 

1  Monumento  Historiae  Danicae,  ed.  Holger  Rordam,  i.  Copenhagen,  1873, 
p.  28;  L.  Daae,  1882. 

2  Cf.  G.  Storm  [1886].  B.  T.  de  Costa  [1880,  p.  170]  points  out  that  Hakluyt 
says  that  the  voyage  of  this  navigator  is  mentioned  by  Gemma  Frisius  and 
Girava.  Gemma  Frisius  published  among  other  works  a  revised  edition  of 
Petrus  Apianus's  "  Cosmographicus  Liber  "  in  1529.  Girava  published  in  1553 
"  Dos  Libros  de  Cosmographia,"  Milan,  1556.  I  have  not  had  an  opportunity 
of  referring  to  these  authorities;  the  former,  if  this  be  correct,  may  have  given 
information  about  Scolvus  earlier  than  Gomara.  De  Costa  also  says  that  on 
the  Rouen  globe  (i.e.,  the  L'Ecuy  globe,  see  p.  131)  in  Paris,  of  about  1540, 
there  is  an  inscription  near  the  north-west  coast  of  Greenland  stating  that 
Skolnus  (Scolvus)  reached  that  point  in  1476. 

3  Cf.  R.  CoUinson,  1867,  pp.  3  f. 

129 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

Scolvus.  This  the  historians  who  have  written  about  him  have 
not  noticed.  After  stating  that  Sebastian  (should  be  John) 
Cabotte  was  sent  out  by  King  Henry  VII.  of  England  in  1496 
(should  be  1497)  to  find  the  passage  from  the  North  Sea  (i.e., 
the  Atlantic  Ocean)  to  the  South  Sea  (i.e.,  the  Pacific),  and  that 
"  one  Caspar  Cortesreales,  a  pilot  of  Portingale,"  had  visited 
these  islands  on  the  north  coast  of  North  America  in  1500,  the 
document  continues : 

"  But  to  find  oute  the  passage  oute  of  the  North  Sea  into  the  Southe  we 
must  sayle  to  the  60  degree,  that  is,  from  66  unto  68.  And  this  passage  is  called 
the  Narowe  Sea  or  Streicte  of  the  three  Brethren  [i.e.,  the  three  brothers  Corte- 
real] ;  in  which  passage,  at  no  tyme  in  the  yere,  is  ise  wonte  to  be  found.  The 
cause  is  the  swifte  ronnyng  downe  of  sea  into  sea.  In  the  north  side  of  this 
passage,  John  Scolus,  a  pilot  of  Denmerke,  was  in  anno  1476." 

Then  follows  a  story  of  a  Spaniard  who,  in  1541,  is  said 
to  have  been  on  the  south  side  of  this  passage  with  a  troop 
of  soldiers,  and  to  have  found  there  some  ships  that  had 
come  thither  with  goods  from  Cataya  (China).  Complete 
impossibilities,  like  this  last  story,  are  thus  blended  together 
with  statements  that  have  a  sure  historical  foundation,  like 
the  voyage  of  Caspar  Cortereal.  As  the  statement  about 
Scolus,  or  Scolvus,  contains  things  that  are  not  found  in 
Comara,  it  seems  to  be  derived  from  another  source;  the 
date  in  particular  is  remarkable.  That  Scolus  is  a  pilot 
from  Denmark,  while  the  pilot  Scolvus,  in  Comara,  came 
from  Norway,  is  perhaps  immaterial,  as,  of  course,  Norway 
and  Denmark  were  under  a  common  king,  who  resided 
in  Denmark. 

On  an  English  map  of  1582  (after  Frobisher's  voyages), 
which  is  attributed  to  Michael  Lok,  there  is  a  country  to  the 
north-west  of  Creenland,  upon  which  is  written:  "Jac. 
Scolvus  Croetland."  As  the  name  is  here  written  Jac. 
Scolvus,  it  is  not  likely  that  it  can  be  derived  from  the 
document  of  1575  we  have  quoted.  The  corresponding 
country  on  Mercator's  map  of  1569  is  inscribed:  "  Croclant, 
insula  cuius  incole  Suedi  sunt  origine"  (island  whose  inhabi- 
130 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

tants  are  Swedes  by  descent).  It  may  seem  as  if  this  inscrip- 
tion also  was  connected  with  Scolvus,  and  we  thus  get  the  third 
Scandinavian  country  as  his  native  land ;  but  this  word  "  Suedi " 
may  be  derived  from  Olaus  Magnus,  who  happens  to  have  often 
used  it  in  the  sense  of  Scandinavians — i.e.,  Swedes  and  Norwe- 
gians. 

In  1597,  the  Dutchman  Cornelius  Wytfliet  in  his  description 
of  America  ("  Continens  Indica  ")  states  that  its  northern  part 
was  first  discovered  by  "  Frislandish  "  fishermen  (i.e.,  from  the 
imaginary  Frisland  of  the  Zeno  map),  and  subsequently  further 
explored  about  1390  during  the  voyage  of  the  brothers  Zeno 
(which  is  fictitious). 

"  But  [he  continues]  the  honor  of  its  second  discovery  fell  to  the  Pole 
Johannes  Scoluus  [Johannes  Scoluus  Polonus],  who  in  the  year  1476— eighty- 
six  years  after  its  first  discovery — sailed  beyond  Norway,  Greenland,  Frisland, 
penetrated  the  Northern  Strait,  under  the  very  Arctic  Circle,  and  arrived  at 
the  country  of  Labrador  and  Estotiland." 

Estotiland  is  another  fictitious  country  on  the  notorious 
Zeno  map  (a  fabrication  from  several  earlier  maps).  Apart 
from  this  introduction  of  the  Zeno  voyage  the  statement 
contains  nothing  that  has  not  already  appeared  in  Gomara 
and  in  the  English  document  of  1575,  with  the  exception 
that  Scolvus  is  called  a  Pole  (Polonus),  but  this,  as  pointed 
out  by  Storm  [1886,  p.  399],  must  be  due  to  a  misreading  of 
"  Polonus  "  for  "  piloto."  *  As  Norway  is  named  first  among 
the  countries  beyond  which  the  voyage  extended,  it  may 
have  started  from  thence  in  Wytfliet's  authority.^ 

On  the  L'Ecuy  globe,  of  the  sixteenth  century,  there 
is  written  in  Latin  between  70°  and  80°  N.  lat.  and  in  long. 

1  Lelewel's  conjecture  [1852,  iv.  p.  106,  note  50,  52]  that  Scolvus's  name  was 
Scolnus  and  that  he  came  from  a  little  Polish  inland  town  near  the  frontier  of 
East  Prussia,  is,  as  shown  by  Storm  [1886,  p.  400],  improbable. 

2  Storm  [1886,  p.  399]  thought  that  Wytfliet  might  have  borrowed  from 
Gomara,  and  himself  invented  and  added  the  date  1476,  in  order  to  disparage 
the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese  as  discoverers;  but  Storm  was  not  aware  that 
this  date,  as  we  have  seen,  is  mentioned  in  an  earlier  English  source. 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

320° :  ^  "  These  are  the  people  to  whom  the  Dane  Johannes 
Scowus  penetrated  in  the  year  1476."  The  description  of 
Scolvus  as  a  Dane  may  indicate  the  same  source  as  the 
English   mention  of  him  in   1576.2 

Finally  it  may  be  mentioned  that  Georg  Horn  in  his 
work  "  Ulysses  peregrinans "  (Louvain,  1671),  after  speaking 
of  voyages  of  the  Icelanders  (Thylenses)  to  "  Frisland  or 
Finmark"  (sic!),  to  Iceland,  Greenland,  Scotland,  and 
Gotland  under  "  auspiciis  Margaretae  Semiramis  Dan.,  Sued., 
Norv.,"  and  then  of  the  voyages  of  the  Zenos  in  the  year 
1390,   says: 

"Joh.  Scolnus  Polonus  discovered  under  the  auspices  of  Christian  I.  King 
of  the  Danes,  the  Anian-strait  and  the  country  Laboratoris  in  the  year  1476." 

The  Anian-strait  was  the  mythical  strait  between  Asia 
and    north-western    America,    which    was    talked    about    and 

1  Cf.  Harrisse,  1892,  pp.  286  f.,  658.  The  inscription  reads:  "  Quii  populi 
ad  quos  Johannes  Scowus  danus  pervenit.     Ann.  1476." 

2  Just  as  the  above  is  at  press,  I  have  received  a  sheet  of  Dr.  Bjornbo's  new 
work  [1910,  pp.  256  f.],  from  which  it  appears  that  the  inscription  mentioned 
above  is  already  found  on  Gemma  Frisius's  globe  engraved  by  Gerard  Mer- 
cator,  probably  1536-1537  (found  at  Zerbst,  and  reproduced  for  the  first  time 
in  Bjornbo's  work).  The  inscription  is  placed  on  the  polar  continent,  to  the 
north-west  of  Greenland,  and  reads:  "  Quij  populi  ad  quos  Joes  Scoluss  danus 
peruenit  circa  annum  1476."  Bjornbo  translates  it:  "  Quij,  the  people  to 
whom  the  Dane  Johannes  Scolvuss  [Scolwssen?]  penetrated  about  the  year 
1476."  (The  interpretation  of  the  word  "  Quij  "  as  the  name  of  a  people  may 
be  probable,  especially  as  the  same  word  occurs,  as  pointed  out  by  Bjornbo,  as 
the  name  of  a  people  on  Vopell's  map  of  the  world  of  1445).  This  is  there- 
fore the  oldest  notice  of  Scolvus's  voyage  at  present  known,  and  it  may  seem 
possible,  though  not  very  probable,  that  he  reached  a  land  to  the  west  of 
Greenland.  The  L'Ecuy  or  Rouen  globe  (of  copper)  is  evidently  a  copy  of 
the  Frisius-Mercator  globe,  and  has  the  same  inscriptions.  It  may  be  to  the  same 
source  (or  to  a  contemporary  work  of  Gemma  Frisius),  that  Hakluyt  referred 
(cf.  above,  p.  129,  note  2),  and  several  statements  in  the  English  document  of 
about  1575  (p.  129)  seem  also  to  be  derived  from  it.  As  Gomara  calls  Joan 
Scolvo  "  piloto,"  which  is  not  on  the  globe  (but  on  the  other  hand  is  found  in 
the  English  document!),  and  as,  further,  he  has  not  the  dates,  he  may  possibly 
have  had  a  somewhat  different  authority.  It  is  interesting  to  note,  as  shown 
by  Bjornbo,  that  the  Frisius-Mercator  globe  seems  to  betray  Portuguese  asso- 
ciations, and  thus  its  information  about  Scolvus  may  also  have  come  from 
Portugal. 


DECLINE  OF  GREENLAND  SETTLEMENTS 

which  appeared  upon  maps  more  than  a  hundred  years  before 
Bering  Strait  was  discovered  by  the  Russian  Deshenev  in 
1648.  But  the  name  may  sometimes  have  been  extended 
to  the  whole  of  the  strait,  called  above,  p.  130,  the  Strait  of 
the  Three  Brethren,  which  was  assumed  to  go  north  of 
America  to  the  Pacific.  What  is  new  in  Horn's  statement 
is  that  the  voyage  is  said  to  have  been  made  under  the 
auspices  of  Christiern  I.;  it  may  be  supposed  that  he  knew 
enough  of  the  history  of  Denmark  to  draw  this  conclusion 
from  the  date,  1476. 

This  is  what  is  known  from  old  sources  about  this 
Scolvus  and  his  voyage.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the 
name  of  Labrador  (in  various  forms)  was  used  on  the  maps 
of  the  sixteenth  century  both  for  Greenland  and  Labrador, 
and  was  originally  the  name  of  the  former.  It  is  there- 
fore most  probable  that  the  statements  about  Scolvus's 
voyage  referred  in  the  first  instance  to  Greenland,  which  in 
the  first  part  of  the  sixteenth  century  was  known  as 
Labrador. 

To  sum  up  what  has  been  said  above,  we  have,  on  the 
one  hand,  statements,  from  wholly  different  sources,  of  one 
or  more  voyages  to  Greenland  under  the  leadership  of 
Pining  and  Pothorst,  in  the  time  of  Christiern  I. — i.e.,  before 
1 481;  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  statements,  probably 
from  several,  but  at  least  from  two  sources  independent  of 
each  other,  about  a  voyage,  also  to  Greenland,  with  the 
pilot  Johannes  Scolvus,  from  Denmark  or  more  probably 
from  Norway,  in  the  time  of  Christiern  I.,  and  this  is  even 
referred  to  a  particular  year,  1476.  One  is  therefore  led  to 
conclude,  as  G.  Storm  has  already  done,  that  we  are  here 
concerned  with  the  same  voyage  or  voyages  to  Greenland, 
which  were  made  under  the  leadership  of  the  two  "  skippers  " 
and  freebooters.  Pining  and  Pothorst,  with  Johannes  Scolvus 
(Jon  Skolvsson?)  as  pilot  or  navigator.  In  some  authorities 
of  Scandinavian  origin  the  voyage  was  connected  with  the 
names   of   the   real   leaders,   while    in    Southern   authorities   it 

133 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

was  connected  with  that  of  the  pilot  or  navigator,  in  the 
same  way  as,  for  instance,  the  name  of  WilUam  Barentz 
was  associated  with  the  voyages  in  which  he  took  part, 
instead  of  those  of  Hemkerck  and  the  other  leaders.  There 
seem  thus  to  be  sufficiently  good  historical  documents  in 
support  of  at  least  one  expedition  having  reached  Greenland 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,  possibly  sent  out 
by  Christiern  I.  in  1476,  and  perhaps  there  were  more. 
Possibly  it  was  rumors  of  this  new  communication  with 
Greenland  that  awoke  a  desire  in  the  monk  Mathias  to  go 
there  as  bishop. 

But  then  we  hear  no  more  of  it.  For  a  while  longer 
bishops  continued  to  be  appointed  to  Greenland,  a  land  which 
was  no  longer  known  to  anyone,  and  to  these  bishops  least  of 
all.  Thus  ends  the  history  of  the  old  Greenland  settlements. 
Notices  of  them  become  rarer  and  rarer,  with  long  inter- 
missions, until  after  this  time  they  cease  altogether,  and  we 
know  no  more  of  the  fate  of  the  old  Norsemen  there. 

"  The  standing-stone  on  the  mound  bears  no  mark, 
and  Saga  has  forgotten  what  she  knew." 


134 


CHAPTER  XII 

EXPEDITIONS    OF    THE    NORWEGIANS    TO    THE 

WHITE    SEA,    VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR 

SEA,   WHALING   AND   SEALING 


EXPEDITIONS  TO  THE  WHITE  SEA 

EVEN  if  Ottar  was  perhaps  not  the  first  Norwegian  to 
reach  the  White  Sea,  his  voyage  is,  in  any  case,  a 
remarkable  exploring  expedition,  whereby  both  the  North 
Cape  and  the  White  Sea  became  known,  even  in  the  literature 
of  Europe,  nearly  seven  hundred  years  before  Richard 
Chancellor  reached  the  Dvina  in  the  ship  "  Edward  Buona- 
ventura "  in  1553,  from  which  time  the  discovery  of  this 
sea  has  usually  been  reckoned. 

In  Ottar's  time,  or  soon  after,  the  Norwegian  king  asserted 
his  sovereignty  over  all  the  Lapps  as  far  as  the  White  Sea, 
and  in  the  "  Historia  Norvegiae "  it  is  said  that  Halogaland 
reached  to  Bjarmeland.  The  headland  Vegistafr  is  men- 
tioned in  the  "  Historia  Norvegiae,"  in  the  laws,  and  elsewhere, 
as  the  boundary  of  the  kingdom  of  Norway  towards  the 
Bjarmas  (Beormas).  This  may  have  been  on  the  south  side 
of  the  Kola  peninsula  by  the  river  Varzuga,  already  mentioned, 

135 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

or  by  the  river  Umba  (see  map,  Vol.  I,  p.  lyo).^  After  Ottar's 
time  the  Norwegians  more  frequently  undertook  expeditions, 
doubtless  for  the  most  part  of  a  military  character,  to  the 
White  Sea  and  Bjarmeland.  We  hear  about  several  of  them  in 
the  sagas. 

Eric  Blood-Axe  marched  northward,  about  920,  into  Fin- 
mark  and  as  far  as  Bjarmeland,  and  there  fought  a  great 
battle  and  gained  the  victory.  His  soon,  Harold  Grafeld,  went 
northward  to  Bjarmeland  one  summer  about  965  with  his 
army,  and  there  ravaged  the  country  and  had  a  great  fight 
with  the  Bjarmas  on  "  Vinu  bakka "  (i.e.,  the  river  bank  of 
the  Vina  Dvina),  in  which  King  Harold  was  victorious  and 
slew  many  men;  and  then  laid  the  country  waste  far  and  wide, 
and  took  a  vast  amount  of  plunder.  Of  this  Glumr  Geirason 
speaks: 

"  Eastward  the  bold-spoken  king 
intrepidly  stained  his  sword  red, 
north  of  the  burning  town; 
there  I  saw  the  Bjarmas  run 

For  the  master  of  the  body-guard  good  spear-weather 
was  given  on  this  journey, 
on  Vina's  bank  the  fame 
of  a  young  noble  traveled  far." 

At  that  time,  then,  the  Norwegians  must  have  reached  the 
Dvina  and  discovered  the  east  side  of  the  White  Sea,  which 
was  still  unknown  to  Ottar.  They  had  thus  proved  it  to  be 
a  gulf  of  the  sea.  The  Bjarmas  probably  lived  along  the  whole 
of  its  south  side  as  far  as  the  Dvina,  and  the  name  of  "  Bjarme- 
land "  was  now  extended  to  the  east  side  also,  and  thus  became 
the  designation  of  the  country  round  the  White  Sea.  As  a 
people  of  strange  race  of  whom  they  knew  little,  the  Norwegians 
regarded  the  Lapps  as  skilled  in  magic;  but  it  was  natural 
that  the  still  less  known  and  more  distant  Bjarmas  gradually 
acquired  an  even  greater  reputation  for  magic,  and  in  these 
regions  stories  of  trolls  and   giants  were  located.     The   Polar 

1  G.  Storm  [Mon.  hist.  Norv.,  1880,  p.  78]  thought  that  "  Vegistafr  "  might 
be  "  Sviatoi  Nos  "  at  the  entrance  to  Gandvik  (the  White  Sea). 
136 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

Sea  was  early  called  "  Hafsbotn,"  later  "  Trollebotten,"  and 
the  White  Sea  was  given  the  name  of  "  Gandvik,"  to  which  a 
similar  meaning  is  attributed,  since  it  is  supposed  to  be  con- 
nected with  "  gand  "  (the  magic  of  the  Lapps)  ;  but  the  name 
evidently  originated  in  a  popular  etymological  corruption 
of  a  Karelian  name,  KanSanlaski,  as  already  shown  (Vol.  I, 
pp.  218  f.,  note). 

Snorre  Sturluson  (ob.  1241)  included  in  the  Saga  of  St.  Olaf 
a  legend  from  Nordland  about  an  expedition  to  Bjarmeland, 
supposed  to  have  been  undertaken  in  1026  by  Thore  Hund,  in 
company  with  Karle  and  his  brother  Gunnstein  from  Haloga- 
land,  men  of  the  king's  bodyguard.  The  tale  may  be  an 
indication  that  at  that  time  more  peaceful  relations  had  been 
established  between  the  Nordlanders  and  the  Bjarmas.  They 
went  in  two  vessels,  Thore  in  a  great  longship  with  eighty  men, 
and  the  brothers  in  a  smaller  longship  with  about  five-and- 
twenty.  When  they  came  to  Bjarmeland,  they  put  in  at  the 
market-town ;  ^  the  market  began,  and  all  those  who  had 
wares  to  exchange  received  full  value.  Thore  got  a  great 
quantity  of  skins,  squirrel,  beaver,  and  sable.  Karle  also  had 
many  wares  with  him,  for  which  he  bought  large  quantities 
of  furs.  But  when  the  market  was  concluded  there,  they 
came  down  the  river  Vina;  and  then  they  declared  the  truce 
with  the  people  of  the  country  at  an  end.  When  they  were 
out  of  the  river,  they  held  a  council  of  war,  and  Thore  proposed 
that  they  should  plunder  a  sanctuary  of  the  Bjarmas'  god 
Jomale,"  with  grave-mounds,  which  he  knew  to  be  in  a 
wood   in  that   part   of   the   country.^     They   did   so   by   night, 

1  This  was  the  market-place  on  the  bank  of  the  Dvina,  presumably  the  same 
that  the  Russians  afterwards  called  Kholmogori,  and  that  lay  a  little  higher  up 
the  river  than  Archangel  (founded  in  1572). 

2 This  is  Karelian  for  heaven  or  the  sky-god;  the  Kvasns  (Finlanders)  called 
their  god  "  Jumala,"  and  the  Finns  (Lapps)  theirs  "  Ibmel,"  which  is  the  same 
word.     [Cf.  G.  Storm's  translation  of  "  Heimskringla,"  1899,  p.  322.] 

3  From  the  account  it  would  look  as  though  Thore  Hund  was  already  well 
acquainted  with  the  country.  Even  if  the  tale  as  a  whole  is  not  historical,  a 
feature  like  this  may  point  to  the  Norwegians  having  been  in  the  habit  of 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

found  much  silver  and  gold,  and  when  the  Bjarmas  pursued 
them,  they  escaped  through  Thore's  magical  arts,  which  made 
them  invisible.  Both  ships  then  sailed  back  over  Gandvik. 
As  the  nights  were  still  light  they  sailed  day  and  night  until 
one  evening  they  lay  to  off  some  islands,  took  their  sails  down 
and  anchored  to  wait  for  the  tide  to  go  down,  since  there 
was  a  strong  tide-rip  (whirlpool)  in  front  of  them  ("  rost  mikil 
var  fyrir  [>eir").  This  was  probably  off  "  Sviatoi  Nos "  (the 
sacred  promontory),  where  Russian  authorities  speak  of  a 
strong  current  and  whirlpool.  Here  there  was  a  dispute 
between  the  brothers  and  Thore,  who  demanded  the  booty  as 
a  recompense  for  their  having  escaped  without  loss  of  life 
owing  to  his  magical  arts.  But  when  the  tide  turned, 
the  brothers  hoisted  sail  and  went  on,  and  Thore  followed. 
When  they  came  to  land  at  "  Geirsver "  (Gjesvaer,  a  fishing- 
station  on  the  north-west  side  of  Magero) — where  we  are  told 
that  there  was  "  the  first  quay  as  one  sails  from  the  north " 
(i.e.,  east  from  Bjarmeland) — the  quarrel  began  again,  and 
Thore  suddenly  ran  his  spear  through  Karle,  so  that  he  died 
on  the  spot;  Gunnstein  escaped  with  difficulty  in  the  smaller 
and  lighter  vessel;  but  was  pursued  by  Thore,  and  finally  had 
to  land  and  take  to  flight  with  all  his  men  at  Lenvik,  near 
Malangenfjord,  leaving  his  ship  and  cargo. 

Even  if  this  expedition  is  not  historical,  the  description  of 
the  voyage  and  the  mention  of  place-names  along  the  route 
nevertheless  show  that  these  regions  were  well  known  to 
Snorre's  informants;  and  journeys  between  Norway  and 
Bjarmeland  cannot  have  been  uncommon  in  Snorre's  time  or 
before  it.  Many  things  show  that  the  communication  with 
Gandvik  and  Bjarmeland  continued  through  the  whole  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  and  was  sometimes  of  a  peaceful,  sometimes  of  a 
warlike  character;  but  of  the  later  voyages  only  three  are, 
in  fact,  mentioned  in  Norwegian  authorities:  one  of  them 
was  undertaken  by  the  king's  son,  Hakon  Magnusson,  about 

visiting  Bjarmeland,  and  therefore  looking  upon  it  as  natural  that  a  man  like 
Thore  knew  the  country. 

138 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

1090;  of  this  expedition  little  is  known.  In  Hakon  Hakons- 
son's  time  we  have  an  account  ^  of  another  expedition  to 
Bjarmeland    in   the   year    121 7,   in   which    took   part    Ogmund 


Bsmimi  ■■■■iiiiTii 

Bjarmas  and  Skridfinns  fighting  on  ski  and  riding  reindeer 
[after  Olaus  Magnus,  1555] 

of  Spanheim  from  Hardanger,  Svein  Sigurdsson  from  Sogn, 
Andres  of  Sjomaeling  from  Nordmor,  all  on  one  ship,  and 
Helge    Bograngsson    and    his    men    from    Halogaland,    on    an- 

1  Hakon  Hakonsson's  Saga  in  Fornmanna-sogur,  ix.  p.  319. 

139 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

other.  Svein  and  Andres  went  home  with  their  ship  the 
same  autumn;  but  Ogmund  proceeded  southward  through 
Russia  to  the  Suzdal  kingdom  in  East  Russia,  on  a  tributary 
of  the  Volga.  Helge  Bograngsson  and  his  Nordlanders  stayed 
the  winter  in  Bjarmeland;  but  he  came  in  conflict  with  the 
Bjarmas  and  was  killed.  After  this  Ogmund  did  not  venture 
to  return  that  way,  but  went  on  through  Russia  to  the  sea 
(i.e.,  the  Black  Sea)  and  thence  to  the  Holy  Land.  He  came 
safely  home  to  Norway  after  many  years. 

When  the  rumor  of  what  had  happened  to  Helge  and  his 
men  reached  home,  a  punitive  expedition  was  decided  on. 
The  king's  officers  in  Nordland,  Andres  Skjaldarbrand  and 
Ivar  Utvik,  placed  themselves  at  the  head  of  it;  and  they 
came  to  Bjarmeland  with  four  ships  in  the  year  1222,  and 
accomplished  their  purpose;  "they  wrought  great  havoc  in 
plunder  and  slaughter  and  obtained  much  booty  in  furs  and 
burnt  silver."  But  on  the  homeward  voyage  Ivar's  ship  was 
lost  in  the  whirlpool  at  "  Straumneskinn,"  and  only  Ivar  and 
one  other  escaped.  "Straumneskinn"  is  probably  Sviatoi 
Nos    (see  p.    138). 

This  is  the  last  Norwegian  expedition  to  Bjarmeland  of 
which  Norwegian  accounts  are  known;  but  that  the  White 
Sea  traffic  continued,  though  it  was  never  very  active,  may  be 
concluded  from  other  sources.  The  name  of  the  Bjarmas  them- 
selves disappears  after  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century, 
when  it  is  related  that  a  number  of  Bjarmas  fled  before  the 
"  Mongols "  and  received  permission  from  King  Hakon  to 
live  in  Malangenfjord.  After  that  time  in  the  districts  near 
the  Dvina  we  only  hear  of  Karelians  and  their  masters,  the 
Russians  of  Novgorod. 

That  there  was  considerable  navigation,  probably  combined 
with  piratical  incursions,  between  the  north  of  Norway  and 
the  countries  to  the  east,  may  also  appear  from  a  provision 
of  the  older  Gulathings  Law,  where  in  cap.  315,  in  a  codex  of 
1 200-1 250,  we  find: 

"  The  inhabitants  of  Halogaland  are  to  fit  out  thirteen  twenty-seated  and  one 
140 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 


thirty-seated  ship  in  the  southern  half,  but  six  in  the  northern  half;  since  they 
[i.e.,  the  inhabitants  of  the  northern  half]  have  to  keep  guard  on  the  east." 

This  keeping  guard  might,  it  is  true,  refer  to  Kvsens  in 
Finmark,  but  it  seems  rather  to  point  to  ships  coming  from 
the  east.  In  the  negotiations  of  1251,  between  the  Grand 
Duke  of  Novgorod  (Alexander  Nevsky)  and  Hakon  Hakonsson, 
there  is  express  mention  of  disturbances  from  the  east  in 
Finmark,  and  after  that  time  we  hear  more  frequently  of 
hostile  incursions  of  Karelians  and  Russians  in  Finmark;  they 
may  have  come  by  land,  but  occasionally  also  by  sea. 

A  treaty  of  1326  between  Norway  and  Novgorod  shows 
that  Norwegian  mer- 
chants traded  with 
the  people  of  Nov- 
gorod on  the  White 
Sea.  The  erection 
of  the  fortress  of 
Vardohus,  as  early 
as  1307,  also  shows 
the  imp  ortanc  e 
attached  to  these 
eastern  communica- 
tions, and  the  for- 
tress    certainly 

afforded  them  a  fixed  point  of  support.  Thus,  about  1550  we 
see  that  "  Vardohus  weight "  (mark  and  pound)  had  penetrated 
into  northern  Russia  and  was  generally  used  in  the  North 
Russian  fish  and  oil  trade.  The  Norwegians  chiefly  bought  furs 
in  Bjarmeland,  but  what  they  exported  thither  is  not  mentioned 
in  the  Norwegian  notices;  it  may,  even  at  that  time,  have  been 
to  some  extent  fish,  which  in  later  times  was  the  most  important 
article  of  export  to  North  Russia  from  the  north  of  Norway. 

As  G.  Storm  [1894,  P*  1°°]  ^^^  pointed  out,  the  Russian 
chronicles  tell  of  many  hostile  expeditions  by  sea  between 
Norway  and  the  White  Sea  in  the  fifteenth  century.  In  141 2 
the     inhabitants    of     "  Savolotchie "     (the     countries     on    the 

141 


On  snow-shoes  through  the  border-lands  of 
Norway  [Olaus  Magnus,  1555] 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

Dvina)  made  a  campaign  against  the  Norwegians.  A  com- 
plaint from  Norway  of  1420  shows  that  the  attack  was  directed 
against  northern  Halogaland,  without  informing  us  whether 
it  was  made  by  land  or  by  sea.  Some  years  later,  in  1419,  the 
Norwegians  made  a  campaign  of  reprisal  and  came 

"  with  an  army  of  500  men  in  trading  vessels  and  sloops  and  ravaged  the  Kare- 
lian district  about  the  Varzuga  [on  the  Kola  peninsula  on  the  north  side  of 
the  White  Sea]  and  many  parishes  in  Savolotchie  [on  the  Dvina],  amongst 
others  St.  Nikolai  [at  the  mouth  of  the  Dvina],  Kigo  and  Kiaro  [in  the  Gulf 
of  Onega],  and  others.  They  burned  three  churches  and  cut  down  Christians 
and  monks,  but  the  Savolotchians  sank  two  Norwegian  sloops,  and  the  rest 
fled  across  the  sea."  1  "  In  1444  the  Karelians  went  with  an  army  against  the 
Norwegians,  and  fought  with  them,  and  in  1445  the  Norv/egians  came  with 
an  army  to  the  Dvina,  ravaged  Nenoksa  [in  the  gulf  off  the  mouth  of  the 
Dvina]  with  fire  and  sword,  killed  some  and  carried  off  others  as  prisoners; 
but  the  inhabitants  on  the  Dvina  hastened  after  them,  cut  down  their  '  voivods ' 
[leaders,  chiefs]  Ivar  and  Peter,  and  captured  forty  men  who  were  sent  to 
Novgorod."  1 

This  will  be  sufficient  to  show  that  the  White  Sea  voyage 
remained  familiar  in  Norway.  This  communication  increased 
about  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  and  this  had  a  de- 
cisive influence  on  the  so-called  rediscovery  of  the  White  Sea  by 
the  English. 

In  reading  Ottar's  narrative  and  the  earliest  Norse  accounts 
of  voyages  to  Bjarmeland  it  must  strike  us  that  the  Bjarmas 
we  hear  about  seem  to  have  possessed  a  surprisingly  high 
degree  of  culture.  As  Professor  Olaf  Broch  has  also  pointed 
out  to  me,  this  may  be  an  indication  that  a  comparatively 
active  communication  had  existed  long  before  that  time  along 
the  Dvina  and  the  Volga  between  the  people  of  the  White 
Sea  and  those  on  the  Caspian  and  the  Black  Sea  (by  transport 
from  the  Volga  to  the  Don).  In  those  early  times,  before  the 
Russians  had  yet  established  themselves  in  the  territory  of  the 
upper  Volga,  this  communication  may  have  passed  to  the  east 
of  the  Slavs  through  Finnish-speaking  peoples  the  whole  way 
from  the  lower  Volga  and  the  Finnish  Bulgarians  (cf.  the  Mord- 
vin  tribes  of  to-day). 

1  The  Russian  chronicles  in  translation,  "  Suomi "  for  1848. 
142 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

It  appears  to  me  that  various  statements  in  Arabic  literature 
may  indicate  such  a  connection.^  The  Arabs  received  infor- 
mation about  northern  regions  through  their  commercial 
communications  with  the  Mohammedan  Finnish  nation  of 
the  Bulgarians,  whose  capital,  Bulgar,  lay  on  the  Volga  ^  (near 
to  the  present  town  of  Kazan),  and  was  a  meeting-place  for 
traders  coming  up  the  river  from  the  south  and  coming  down 
the  river  from  the  north.  Special  interest  attaches  to  the 
mention  of  the  mysterious  people  "  Wisu,"  far  in  the  north. 
This  is  evidently  the  same  name  as  the  Russian  "  Ves  "  ^  for  the 
Finnish  people  who,  according  to  Nestor^  (beginning  of  the 
twelfth  century),  lived  by  Lake  Bielo-ozero  (the  white  lake) 
in  859  A.D.  They  are  mentioned  together  with  Tchuds,  Slavs, 
Merians,  and  Krivitches,  and  were  doubtless  the  most  northerly 
of  them,  possibly  spreading  northward  towards  the  White 
Sea.  They  are  probably  the  same  people  that  Adam  of  Bremen 
[iv.,  c.  14,  19]  calls  "  Wizzi"  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  383,  Vol.  II,  p.  64), 
and  possibly  those  Jordanes  calls  "  Vasinabroncae,"  ^  who  to- 
gether with  "Merens"  (Merians?)  and  "  Mordens ".  (Mord- 
vins?)  were  subdued  by  Ermanrik,  king  of  the  Goths.  But  the 
Arabic  "  Wisu  "  seems  sometimes  to  have  been  a  common  name 
for  all  Finnish  (and  even  Samoyed)  tribes  in  North  Russia  and 
on  the  coast  of  the  Polar  Sea. 

According  to  Jaqut,^  Ahmad  Ibn  Fadhlan  (about  922  A.D.)'^ 
stated  in  his  work  that 

1  Professor  Alexander  Seippel  has  given  me  valuable  help  in  the  transla- 
tion of  the  Arabic  authors. 

2  The  Volga  was  often  called  Itil,  after  the  town  of  that  name,  but  was  later 
named  after  Bulgar  (Bolgar  =  Volga). 

3  Cf.  Frahn,  1823,  p.  218. 

4  Chronica  Nestoris,  ed.  Fr.  Miklosisch,  Vindobonae,  i860,  pp.  9  f.;  Nestors 
russiske  Kronike,  overs,  og  forkl.  af  C.  W.  Smith,  Copenhagen,  1869,  p.  29. 

5  Cf.  T.  Mommsen,  1882,  pp.  88,  166. 

«  Jacut,  1866,  i.  p.  113;  cf.  also  Mehren,  1857,  p.  171. 

7  Ibn  Fadhlan's  mission  as  ambassador  from  the  Caliph  al-Muktadir-Billah 
of  Bagdad  to  Bulgar  took  place,  according  to  his  own  statements,  reproduced 
by  Jaqut  (ob.  1229),  in  the  years  921  and  922  A.D.  Ibn  Fadhlan,  like  Jaqut, 
was  a  Greek  by  birth. 


IN   NORTHERN    MISTS 

"the  King  of  the  Bulgarians  had  told  him  that  behind  his  country,  at  a  dis- 
tance of  three  months'  journey,  there  lived  a  people  called  Wisu,  among  whom 
the  nights  [in  summer]  were  not  even  one  hour  long."  Once  the  king  is  said 
to  have  written  to  this  people,  and  in  their  answer  it  was  stated  that  the  people 
"Yagug  and  Magug  [on  the  Ob?]  lived  over  three  months'  journey  distant 
from  them  [i.e.,  the  Wisu]  and  that  they  were  separated  from  them  by  the 
sea"  (?).  The  Yagug  and  Magug  lived  on  the  great  fish  that  were  cast 
ashore.  The  same  is  told  by  Dimashqi  (ob.  1327)  about  the  Yagug  and  Magug, 
and  by  Qazwini  (thirteenth  century)  about  the  people  "  Yura  "  on  the  Pechora. 

Jaqut  (ob.  1229)  in  his  geographical  lexicon^  has  an 
article  on 

"  *  Wisu '  situated  beyond  Bulgar.  Between  it  and  Bulgar  is  three  months' 
journey.  The  night  is  there  so  short  that  one  is  not  aware  of  any  darkness, 
and  at  another  time  of  year,  again,  it  is  so  long  that  one  sees  no  daylight." 
In  his  article  on  "Itil"  Jaqut  says:  "Upon  it  [the  river  Itil  or  Volga]  trad- 
ers travel  as  far  as  '  Visu '  -  and  bring  [thence]  great  quantities  of  furs,  such 
as  beaver,  sable,  and  squirrel." 

Al-Qazwini  (ob.  1283)  says:^ 

"  The  beaver  is  a  land-  and  water-animal,  which  dwells  in  the  great  rivers 
in  the  land  of  *Isu'  [i.e.,  Wisu,  cf.  al-Biruni],  and  builds  a  house  on  the  bank 
of  a  river."  He  further  relates  that  "  the  inhabitants  of  *  Wisu '  never  visit  the 
land  of  the  Bulgarians,  since  when  they  come  thither  the  air  changes  and  cold 
sets  in — even  if  it  be  in  the  middle  of  summer — so  that  all  their  crops  are 
ruined.  The  Bulgarians  know  this,  and  therefore  do  not  permit  them  to  come 
to  their  country."  Qazwini  also  gives  the  information  that  "Wisu"  is  three 
months'  journey  beyond  Bulgar,  and  continues:  "The  Bulgarians  take  their 
wares  thither  for  trade.  Each  one  lays  his  wares,  which  he  furnishes  with  a 
mark,  in  a  certain  spot  and  leaves  them  there.  Then  he  comes  back  and  finds 
a  commodity,  of  which  he  can  make  use  in  his  own  country,  laid  by  the  side 
of  them.  If  he  is  satisfied  with  this,  he  takes  what  is  offered  in  exchange,  and 
leaves  his  wares  behind;  if  he  is  not,  he  takes  his  own  away  again.  In  this 
way  buyer  and  seller  never  see  one  another.  This  is  also  the  proceeding, 
as  we  have  related,  in  the  southern  lands,  in  the  land  of  the  blacks."  The  same 
story  of  dumb  trading  with  a  people  in  the  north  is  met  with  again  in 
Abu'lfeda  (ob.  1321)  and  Ibn  Batuta  (cf.  also  Michel  Beheim,  later). 

Ibn  Batuta  (i 302-1 377)  has  no  name  for  this  people,  any- 
more  than  Abu'lfeda;   but  he   calls   their  country   "the   Land 

ijacut,  1866,  iv.  p.  944;  i.  p.  113. 

2  This  agrees  with  reality.  Along  the  Volga  one  can  reach  the  land  of  the 
Vesses  on  Lake  Bielo-ozero. 

3  Al-Qazv/ini,  1848,  ii.  p.  416. 
144 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

of  Darkness,"  and  has  an  interesting  description  of  the  journey 
thither.^ 

He  himself,  he  says,  wished  to  go  there  from  Bulgar,  but  gave  it  up,  as 
little  benefit  was  to  be  expected  of  it.  "  That  land  lies  40  days'  journey  from 
Bulgar,  and  the  journey  is  only  made  in  small  cars  ^  drawn  by  dogs.  For  this 
desert  has  a  frozen  surface,  upon  which  neither  men  nor  horses  can  get  foot- 
hold, but  dogs  can,  as  they  have  claws.  This  journey  is  only  undertaken  by 
rich  merchants,  each  taking  with  him  about  a  hundred  carriages  [sledges?], 
provided  with  sufficient  food,  drink  and  wood;  for  in  that  country  there  is 
found  neither  trees  nor  stones  nor  soil.  As  a  guide  through  this  land  they 
have  a  dog  which  has  already  made  the  journey  several  times,  and  it  is  so 
highly  prized  that  they  pay  as  much  as  a  thousand  dinars  [gold  pieces]  for 
one.  This  dog  is  harnessed  with  three  others  by  the  neck  to  a  car  [sledge?], 
so  that  it  goes  as  the  leader  and  the  others  follow  it.  When  it  stops,  the  others 
do  the  sanje.  .  .  .  When  the  travelers  have  accomplished  forty  days'  journey 
through  the  desert,  they  stop  in  the  Land  of  Darkness,  leave  their  wares  there, 
and  withdraw  to  their  quarters.  Next  morning  they  go  back  to  the  same 
spot  .  .  ."  and  then  follows  a  description  of  the  dumb  barter,  like  that  in 
Qazwini.  They  receive  sable,  squirrel  and  ermine  in  exchange  for  their  goods. 
"Those  who  go  thither  do  not  know  with  whom  they  trade,  whether  they  be 
spirits  or  men;  they  see  no  one."  ^ 

Of  special  interest  for  our  subject  is  the  following  statement 
in  Abu  Hamid  (io8o-ii6g  or  11 70)  which  may  point  to  the  peo- 
ples on  the  shores  of  the  Polar  Sea  having  obtained  steel  for  their 
harpoons  and  sealing  weapons  from  Persia : 

"  The  traders  travel  from  Bulgar  to  one  of  the  lands  of  the  infidels  which  is 
called  isu  [Wisu].  from  which  the  beaver  comes.  They  take  swords  thither 
which  they  buy  in  Adherbeigan  [Persia],  unpolished  blades.  They  pour  water 
often  over  these,  so  that  when  the  blades  are  hung  up  by  a  cord  and  struck, 
they  ring.  .  .  .  And  that  is  as  they  ought  to  be.  They  buy  beavers'  skins 
with  these  blades.  The  inhabitants  of  Isu  go  with  these  swords  to  a  land  near 
the  darkness  and  lying  on  the  Dark  Sea  [the  northern  Atlantic  or  the  Polar 
Sea]  and  sell  these  swords  for  sables'  skins.  They  [i.e.,  the  inhabitants  of 
that  country]  again  take  some  of  these  blades  and  cast  them  into  the  Dark 
Sea.  Then  Allah  lets  a  fish  as  big  as  a  mountain  come  up  to  them,  etc.  They 
cut  up  its  flesh  for  days  and  months,  and  sometimes  fill  100,000  houses  with 
it,"  etc.     [Cf.  Jacob,  1891,  p.  76;  1891,  p.  29;  Mehren,  1857,  pp.  169  f.] 

It  is  not  credible  that  the  swords  which  rang  in  this  way 

1  Ibn  Batuta,  Voyages,  etc.,  par  Defremery  et  Sanguinetti,  ii.  pp.  399  f. 

2  This  is  doubtless  an  expression  for  a  conveyance  of  some  kind,  which 
must  here  have  been  a  sledge. 

3  Cf.  Frahn,  1823,  pp.  230  f. 

145 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

were  harpoons,  as  Jacob  thinks.  We  must  rather  suppose 
that  they  were  rough  ("  unpoHshed ")  steel  blades,  which 
were  used  for  making  harpoons  and  lances  (for  walrus  hunting 
and  whaling).  The  blades  having  water  poured  over  them 
must  doubtless  mean  the  tempering  of  the  steel,  through  which, 
when  it  was  afterwards  hung  up  by  a  cord,  it  came  to  give 
the  true  ring.  Although  Abu  Hamid  is  no  trustworthy  writer, 
it  seems  that  there  must  be  some  reality  at  the  base  of  this 
statement;  and  we  here  have  information  about  some  of  the 
wares  that  the  traders  carried  to  Wisu,  and  that  were  derived 
from  their  commercial  intercourse  with  Arabs  and  Jews. 
The  people  to  whom  the  inhabitants  of  Wisu,  or  Vesses,  took 
the  steel  blades  must  have  been  fishermen  on  the  shore  of  the 
Polar  Sea,  who  carried  on  seal  and  walrus  hunting,  and 
perhaps  also  whaling,  and  this  is  what  is  referred  to  by  the 
fish  that  Allah  sends  up.  They  may  have  been  Samoyeds  (on 
the  Pechora),  Karelians,  Tver-Finns,  and  even  Norwegians.  It 
might  be  objected  that  sables  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  been 
obtained  from  the  last  named;  but  this  is  doubtless  not  to  be 
taken  too  literally.  Ibn  Ruste  (circa  912  A.D.)  thus  says  that 
the  Rus  (Scandinavians,  usually  Swedes)  had  no  other  occupa- 
tion but  trading  in  sables,  squirrel,  and  other  furs,  which  they 
sold  to  anyone  who  would  buy  them. 

It  seems  to  result  from  what  may  be  trustworthy  in  these 
statements  that  there  was  fairly  active  commercial  intercourse 
from  Bulgar  with  the  Vesses  and  with  the  peoples  on  the  White 
Sea,  and  perhaps  in  districts  near  the  Polar  Sea.  A  shortest 
night  of  one  hour  would  take  us  to  a  little  north  of  the  mouth 
of  the  Dvina.  In  the  land  of  the  Vesses,  by  Lake  Bielo-ozero, 
there  was  an  easy  way  across  from  the  Volga's  tributary, 
Syexna,  to  Lake  Kubenskoye,  which  has  a  connection  with 
the  Dvina ;  and  there  was  also  transit  to  the  river  Onega.  There 
was  thus  easy  communication  along  the  great  rivers ;  but  besides 
this  the  traders  seem  also  to  have  traveled  overland  with  dogs; 
this  was  probably  when  going  north  to  Yugria  and  the  country 
of  the  Pechora,  in  the  same  way  as  traders  in  our  time  generally 
146 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

go  there  with  reindeer.  The  trade  in  furs  was  then,  as  in  an- 
tiquity, the  powerful  incentive;  it  was  that  too  which  chiefly  at- 
tracted the  Norwegians  to  Bjarmeland. 

It  is  not  likely  that  the  Arabs  themselves  reached  North 
Russia;  one  would  suppose  rather  that  traveling  Jews  assisted 
as  middlemen  in  the  trade  with  these  regions.  But  the  finding 
of  Arab  coins  on  the  Pechora  would  point  to  Arab  trade  having 
penetrated  through  intermediaries  to  the  shores  of  the  Polar 
Sea.i 

THE  POLAR  EXPEDITION  OF  THE  FRISIAN  NOBLES  AND  KING 
HAROLD'S  VOYAGE  TO  THE  WHIRLPOOL 

Among  mediaeval  voyages  to  the  North  there  remain 
yet  to  be  mentioned  Harold  Hardrade's  expedition  ^  and  the 
voyage  of  the  Frisian  nobles,  related  by  Adam  of  Bremen 
in  the  descriptions  already  given  (Vol.  I,  pp.  195,  f.).  That 
the  latter  voyage  must  be  an  invention,  and  cannot  contain 
much  of  historical  value,  is  obvious  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  196).  The 
whole  description  of  the  abyss  or  maelstrom  is  taken  from 
Paulus  Wamefridi  (as  will  be  seen  by  a  comparison  of  the 
descriptions  on  pp.  157  and  195,  Vol.  I);  the  Cyclopes  of 
marvelous  stature,  as  well  as  the  treasures  of  gold  that  they 
guard,  are  originally  derived  from  classical  literature,  although 
Adam  may  have  taken  them  from  earlier  mediaeval  authors, 
and  northern  ideas  about  the  giants  in  the  north  in  Jotunheim 
may  have  helped  to  localize  the  story.^  The  great  darkness,  the 
stiffened  sea,  chaos,  and  the  gulf  of  the  abyss  at  the  uttermost 
end  of  the  world  or  of  the  ocean  are  all  classical  conceptions, 

1  Cf.  Peschel,  2nd  ed.,  1877,  p.  107.  There  has  also  been  found  a  metal 
mirror  with  an  Arabic  inscription  of  the  tenth  or  eleventh  century  at  Samarovo 
in  the  land  of  the  Ostyaks,  where  the  Irtish  and  the  Ob  join. 

2  Cf.  on  this  subject  G.  Storm,  1890,  pp.  340  f.;  A.  A.  Bjornbo,  1909,  pp. 
234  f. 

8  Saxo  also  has  conceptions  of  half-awake  or  half-dead  ("  semineces ") 
giants  in  the  underworld  in  the  North  as  guardians  of  treasures  (cf.  Gorm's 
and  Thorkel's  voyage).  Moltke  Moe  thinks  they  may  be  derived  from  ancient 
notions  of  the  giants  as  the  evil  dead,  who  guard  treasures. 

147 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

and  the  description  itself  of  the  dangers  of  the  voyage,  of  the 
darkness  that  could  scarcely  be  penetrated  by  the  eyes,  etc.,  is 
just  what  we  find  in  classical  literature  and  in  many  points  bears 
great  resemblance  to  the  poem  of  Albinovanus  Pedo,  for  example 
(see  Vol.  I,  p.  82).  It  is  possible,  of  course,  that  there  may 
be  thus  much  historical  truth  in  the  story,  that  some  Frisian 
nobles  made  a  voyage  to  the  Orkneys  or  perhaps  to  Iceland, 
but  even  this  is  doubtful,  and  the  rest  is  demonstrably  invention. 
In  spite  of  this  Magister  Adam  asserts  that  Archbishop  Adalbert 
in  person  had  told  him  all  this,  and  that  it  happened  in  the 
day  of  his  predecessor.  Archbishop  Alebrand,  who  had  the 
story  from  the  travelers'  own  lips;  for  they  returned  to 
Bremen  and  brought  thank-offerings  to  Christ  and  to  their 
saint  "  Willehad "  for  their  safety.  One  might  suppose  that 
these  nobles  themselves  had  invented  the  story  and  told  it 
to  the  archbishop ;  ^  but  it  does  not  seem  likely  that  they  were 
acquainted  with  Paulus  Warnefridi's  description  of  the  mael- 
strom, and  the  Cyclopes  with  their  treasures  in  the  North  seem 
also  to  be  learned  embroidery;  they  might  have  heard  oral 
tales  about  them,  but  in  any  case  we  may  doubtless  suppose 
that  the  story  has  been  much  "  improved "  by  Adam.  There 
is  a  mediaeval  folk-song  about  the  dangers  of  sailors  at  sea 
which  may  also  be  supposed  to  have  contributed  to  the 
description. 

Be  that  as  it  may,  this  story  must  weaken  our  confidence 
in  Adam's  credibility,  or  rather  in  his  critical  sense.  If  his 
narrative  of  a  voyage  which  started  from  his  own  adopted  town 
of  Bremen  not  long  before  his  time,  is  so  untrustworthy,  what 
are  we  to  think  of  his  statement  about  the  experienced  Nor- 
wegian king  Harold's  expedition  to  explore  the  extent  of 
the  ocean?  No  doubt  it  may  appear  as  though  he  had  his 
information  about  this  voyage  from  'the  Danish  King,  Svein, 

iKohl  [1869,  pp.  II  f.]  supposes  that  they  may  have  carried  on  piracy,  and 
invented  their  story  to  explain  to  the  bishop  how  they  had  come  by  the  booty 
they  brought  home  and  how  they  had  lost  their  companions,  who  may  have 
been  killed  in  fighting. 
148 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

who  is  mentioned  as  his  authority  for  the  statements  immedi- 
ately preceding,  and  so  far  this  information  might  have  a  good 
source;  but  it  has  received  precisely  the  same  decoration  as  the 
other  voyage,  with  the  mist  or  darkness  that  shuts  out  the  ut- 
termost end  of  the  world,  and  the  vast  gulf  of  the  abyss  which 
was  narrowly  escaped.  This  is  certainly  of  older  origin,  and 
he  has  not  even  given  himself  the  trouble  to  make  a  little  al- 
teration in  the  dangers  of  the  two  stories.  Another  thing  that 
weakens  our  confidence  in  his  statements  is  his  saying  that  the 
Danish  king  had  told  him  that  all  the  sea  beyond  the  island  of 
Winland  was  filled  with  intolerable  ice  and  immeasurable 
darkness.  It  may  doubtless  be  supposed  that  classical  con- 
ceptions had  even  at  that  time  created  superstitions  of  this 
kind  in  the  North,  and  thus  King  Svein  may  have  told  him 
this;  but  it  must  be  more  probable  that  all  these  ancient  book- 
learned  ideas  are  due,  not  to  the  unlearned  and  traveled  mon- 
arch, but  to  the  well-read  magister,  who  moreover  himself  quotes 
in  the  same  connection  Marcianus's  words  about  the  congealed 
sea  beyond  Thule. 

It  would  be  entirely  in  Adam's  vein  if  some  accidental 
resemblance  or  association  had  given  him  an  opportunity  of 
making  use  in  this  way  of  ideas  he  had  from  his  learned 
reading,  just  as  the  name  of  Kvaenland  gave  him  the  chance 
of  bringing  in  the  myths  of  the  Amazons,  Cynocephali,  etc. 
(cf..  Vol.  I,  p.  383).  It  was  pointed  out  earlier  (Vol.  I,  pp.  195, 
197)  that  the  statements  about  the  sea  "beyond  this  island" 
and  about  Harold's  voyage  are  possibly  a  later  addition  by  Adam 
himself,  which  has  been  inserted  in  the  wrong  place ;  "  this 
island "  might  then  mean  Thyle  (Iceland)  and  not  Winland. 
Whether  we  regard  the  latter  as  a  newly  discovered  country  in 
America  or  as  the  Insulae  Fortunatae,  it  is  difficult  to  understand 
why  precisely  the  sea  on  the  other  side  of  this  island  should  be 
particularly  associated  with  the  ancient  conceptions  of  the 
dark  or  misty,  and  the  congealed  or  ice-filled  sea;  ice  and 
darkness  are  nowhere  connected  in  this  way  with  Wineland 
in  later  authorities.    It  is  true   that   in  Arabian  myth   there 

149 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

are  islands  in  the  west  near  the  Sea  of  Darkness  (cf.  chapter 
xiii.)  and  that  the  Promised  Land  in  Irish  myth  is  surrounded 
by  darkness  (=fog)  like  the  Norwegian  huldrelands  and  the 
Icelandic  elflands;  but  if  Adam  got  his  ideas  in  this  way,  it 
would  only  show  more  conclusively  how  mythical  his  narrative 
is.  If  Adam  confused  the  names  of  Vinland  and  Finland  (i.e., 
Finmark)  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  198,  382,  Vol.  II,  p.  31),  it  would  also 
be  natural  for  him  to  imagine  that  beyond  it  were  ice  and 
darkness. 

The  view  has  been  held  that  the  whirlpool  in  which  King 
Harold  and  the  Frisian  nobles  were  nearly  drawn  down  was 
of  Scandinavian  or  Germanic  origin  [cf.  S.  Lonborg,  1897, 
pp.  173  f.].  It  seems  undoubtedly  to  correspond  to  the 
Norse  "  Ginnungagap "  [cf.  G.  Storm,  1890,  pp.  340  f.] ; 
but  it  is  a  question  how  early  this  idea  arose.  I  have  already 
(Vol.  I,  pp.  II,  12,  17)  pointed  out  the  probable  connection 
between  it  and  the  Greek  Tartaros  (and  Anostos)  or  Chaos,  and 
have  shown  (Vol.  I,  pp.  158  f.)  that  Paulus  Wamefridi  took  his 
whirlpool  from  this  source,  and  called  it  Chaos.  But  now  it  is 
evident,  as  we  have  seen,  that  Adam  took  his  description  of  the 
whirlpool  from  Paulus,  and  thus  we  have  the  full  connection. 
It  may  also  be  mentioned  as  curious  that  Lucian  in  his  "  Vera 
Historia  "  tells  of  just  such  an  abyss : 

"  We  sailed  through  a  crystal-clear,  transparent  water  until  we  were  obliged 
to  stop  before  a  great  cleft  in  the  sea.  .  .  .  Our  ship  was  near  being  drawn 
down  into  this  abyss,  if  we  had  not  taken  in  the  sails  in  time.  As  we  then  put 
our  heads  out  and  looked  down,  we  saw  a  depth  of  a  thousand  stadia,  before 
which  our  minds  and  senses  stood  still.  .  .  ."  Finally  with  great  difficulty 
they  rowed  across  a  bridge  of  water  that  stretched  over  the  abyss  [Wieland, 
1789,  iv.  p.  222]. 

With  this  may  be  compared  that  in  the  Irish  legend  ("  Imram  Maelduin  ") 
Maelduin  and  his  companions  came  to  a  sea  like  green  glass,  so  clear  that  the 
sun  and  the  green  sand  of  the  sea  were  visible  through  it.  Thence  they  came 
to  another  sea  which  was  like  fog  (clouds),  and  it  seemed  to  them  that  it 
could  hardly  support  them  or  their  boat;  they  saw  in  the  sea  beneath  them 
people  adorned  with  jewels  and  a  delightful  land,  etc.;  but  when  they  also  saw 
down  below  a  huge  monster  which  devoured  a  whole  ox,  they  were  seized 
with  fear  and  trembling,  for  they  thought  they  would  not  be  able  to  get  across 
this  sea  without  falling  through  to  the  bottom,  because  it  was  as  thin  as  cloud; 
but  they  came  over  it  with  great  danger  [cf.  Zimmer,  1889,  p.  164], 
150 


VOYAGES    IN   THE   POLAR   SEA 

Although,  as  already  mentioned  (Vol.  I,  p.  362),  Lucian  does 
not  seem  to  have  been  read  in  western  Europe  before  the 
fourteenth  century,  I  cannot  get  away  from  the  impression 
that  in  some  oral  way  or  other  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  362  f.)  there  must 
be  a  connection  between  the  Irish  tale  (written  down  long  be- 
fore Adam  of  Bremen's  work)  and  the  above-mentioned  fable 
(as  well  as  many  others)  which  Lucian  reproduces,  whether  the 
connection  be  with  Lucian  himself  or  with  the  authors  he  paro- 
dies. But  then  it  will  not  be  rash  to  conclude  further  that  there 
may  also  be  a  connection  between  the  cleft  in  the  sea  or  pro- 
found abyss  of  Lucian  or  of  Greek  fable,  from  which  mariners 
escaped  with  difficulty,  and  Adam's  whirlpool,  which  King  Har- 
old avoided  by  turning  back. 

But  it  is  also  conceivable  that  the  various  currents  in  north- 
em  waters  may  have  furnished  food  for  these  constantly  recur- 
ring ideas  about  maelstroms  and  whirlpools.  Such  maelstroms 
appear  also  in  Irish  legends.  In  the  "  Imram  Brenaind "  [cf. 
Zimmer,  1889,  p.  134]  it  is  related  that: 

"  One  day  the  voyagers  saw  on  the  ocean  deep,  dark  currents  [whirlpools] 
and  their  ships  seemed  to  be  drawn  into  them  with  the  force  of  the  storm.  In 
this  great  danger  all  eyes  were  turned  upon  Brandan.  He  spoke  to  the  sea, 
saying  that  it  should  be  satisfied  with  drawing  him  alone,  but  spare  his  com- 
rades. Thereupon  the  sea  became  calm,  and  the  rushing  of  the  whirlpool 
ceased  immediately;  from  that  time  until  now  it  has  done  no  harm  to  others." 

The  "  Historia  Norvegiae "  places  "  Charybdis,  Scylla,  and 
unavoidable  whirlpools "  in  the  north  in  "  Hafsbotn " 
(cf.  later).  This  must  have  been  a  general  idea  in  Norway; 
for  about  one  hundred  years  later,  in  1360,  the  Englishman, 
Nicholas  of  Lynn,  who  traveled  in  Norway  in  the  middle 
of  the  fourteenth  century,  wrote  his  lost  work,  "  Inventio 
Fortunata,"  on  the  northern  countries  and  their  whirlpools 
from  53°  to  the  North  Pole;  but  unfortunately  we  do  not 
know  its  contents.^  The  conceptions  of  these  whirlpools 
may  doubtless  be  connected  with  reports  of  dangerous  currents 

1  Giraldus  Cambrensis  also  mentions  the  dangerous  whirlpool  north  of  the 
Hebrides. 


IN    NORTHERN   MISTS 

in  the  North.  The  Moskenstrom  by  the  Lofoten  Islands  may 
in  particular  have  given  rise  to  much  superstition  at  an  early 
time.  In  winter  with  a  westerly  wind  it  runs  at  a  rate  of  as 
much  as  six  miles  an  hour,  and  with  a  rising  tide  it  may  be  al- 
together impassable.  It  may  set  up  a  high  topping  sea,  which 
breaks  over  the  whole  current  so  that  it  can  be  heard  three  or 
four  miles  off.^  In  later  times,  there  are  terrifying  descriptions 
of  this  dangerous  current.  Thus  Olaus  Magnus  (1555)  says 
that  between  Rost  and  Lofoten 

"is  so  great  an  abyss,  or  rather  Charybdis,  that  it  suddenly  swamps  and 
swallows  up  in  an  instant  those  mariners  who  incautiously  approach  "  (see  the 
illustration,  Vol.  I,  p.  158).  ..."  Pieces  of  wreckage  are  very  seldom 
thrown  up  again,  and  if  they  come  to  light,  the  hard  material  shows  such  signs 
of  wear  and  chafing  through  being  dashed  against  the  rocks,  that  it  looks  as  if 
it  were  covered  with  rough  wool."  And  the  natural  force  here  manifested 
exceeds  all  that  is  related  of  Charybdis  in  Sicily  and  other  wonders. 

The  Englishman,  Anthony  Jenkinson,  who  made  a  voyage  to 
the  White  Sea  in  1557,  writes  of  it:  ^ 

"  Note  that  there  is  between  the  said  Rost  Islands  &  Lof oot,  a  whirle  poole 
called  Malestrand,  which  from  halfe  ebbe  untill  halfe  flood,  maketh  such  a  ter- 
rible noise,  that  it  shaketh  the  ringes  in  the  doores  of  the  inhabitants  houses 
of  the  sayd  Islands  tenne  miles  off.  Also  if  there  commeth  any  Whale  within 
the  current  of  the  same,  they  make  a  pitiful!  crie.  Moreover,  if  great  trees 
be  caried  into  it  by  force  of  streams,  and  after  with  the  ebbe  be  cast  out  againe 
the  ends  and  boughs  of  them  have  bene  so  beaten,  that  they  are  like  the  stalkes 
of  hempe  that  is  bruised." 

Schonnerbol,  in  1591,  gives  a  more  detailed  description  of  the 
current,  in  which  the  same  things  are  reported 

of  the  iron  ring  "in  the  house  door  ...  it  is  shaken  hither  and  thither 
by  the  rushing  of  the  current";  of  the  whale,  who  when  "he  cannot  go  for- 
ward on  account  of  the  strong  stream,  gives  a  great  cry,  as  it  were  a  great  ox, 
and  then  he  is  gone  .  .  .";  and,  finally,  of  great  trees,  spruce  or  fir,  which 
disappear  in  this  current,  and  when  at  last  they  come  up  again,  "then  all  the 
boughs,  all  the  roots  and  all  the  bark  is  torn  off,  and  it  is  shaped  as  though 
it  had  been  cut  with  a  sharp  axe."     He  says  that  "  many  people  are  of  the 

1  Cf.  Amund  Helland,  Lofoten  og  Vesteraalen.  Norges  geologiske  Under- 
sogelse.     No.  23.     Christiania,  1897,  p.  106. 

2  Hakluyt:  Principal  Navigations,  Glasgow,  1903,  ii.  p.  415. 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

opinion  that  there  is  a  whirlpool  in  this  current  or  immediately  outside  it"; 
and  "when  the  stream  is  strongest,  one  can  see  the  sun  and  the  sky  through 
the  waves,  since  they  go  as  high  as  other  high  mountains."  ^ 

Peder  Clausson  Friis  gives  a  similarly  exaggerated  descrip- 
tion of  the  current  (circa  1613),  sometimes  using  the  same  ex- 
pressions as  the  authors  quoted.  The  resemblance  between 
these  various  descriptions  is  so  great  that  it  cannot  easily  be 
explained  merely  by  their  reporting  the  same  oral  tradition; 
what  they  have  in  common  must  rather  be  derived  from  an  older 
written  source  (Nicholas  of  L5mn?),  which  again  has  adopted 
ancient  mythical  conceptions.  It  is  strange  how  few  more  recent 
ideas  have  been  added  even  in  Schonnebol,  who  was  sheriff  of 
Lofoten  and  Vesteralen  for  at  least  twenty  years  (from  1570), 
and  must  have  had  plenty  of  opportunity  for  gathering  informa- 
tion on  the  spot;  but  it  is  the  usual  experience  that  everything 
that  could  be  got  from  old  books  was  preferred.  That  stories  of 
the  Moskenstrom  may  have  been  known  in  Adam  of  Bremen's 
time  is  highly  probable,  perhaps  even  Paulus  Warnefridi  had 
heard  of  it  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  158). 

When  we  have  shorn  Adam's  tale  of  all  borrowed  features, 
is  there  enough  left  to  make  it  possible  that  the  Norwegian 
king  Harold  undertook  a  voyage  out  into  the  ocean?  It  is 
not  easy  to  form  a  definite  opinion  on  this,  but  the  proba- 
bility must  be  that  King  Svein  of  the  Danes  told  some  such 
story,  which  was  then  adorned  by  Magister  Adam.  As  the  voy- 
age was  supposed  to  have  taken  place  recently,  it  must  be  Har- 
old Hardrade  who  was  intended,  otherwise  one  might  be  led  to 
think  of   Harold   Grafeld's   celebrated   voyage   to   Bjarmeland.^ 

1  Cf.  Storm,  1895,  pp.  190  f. 

2  It  is  not  impossible  that  it  was  of  this  Norwegian  king  Harold's  voyage 
that  Adam  heard  from  the  Danes;  in  that  case  he  may  readily  be  supposed  to 
have  made  a  mistake  and  connected  it  with  the  King  Harold  who  was  then 
living,  to  whom  he  also  attributes  a  voyage  in  the  Baltic;  it  is  a  common  expe- 
rience that  many  similar  incidents  in  which  different  persons  were  engaged 
collect  about  one  of  them.  The  circumstance  that  Harold  is  here  mentioned 
without  any  term  of  abuse,  with  which  Adam  is  elsewhere  in  the  habit  of  ac- 
companying any  mention  of  him,  is  perhaps,  as  already  said  (Vol.  I,  p.  195, 
note),  of  no  particular  significance.    Harold  Grafeld  was  much  in  Denmark, 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

What  the  object  may  have  been,  and  what  direction  the  voyage 
took,  we  do  not  know.  As  Adam  says  it  was  to  explore  "  the 
breadth  of  the  northern  ocean "  (  "  latitudinem  septen- 
trionalisoceani"),  one  must  suppose  that  in  his  opinion  it 
set  out  from  Norway  northward  or  north-westward  over  the 
ocean  towards  its  uttermost  limit,  since  according  to  the  maps 
and  ideas  of  that  time  he  imagined  the  ocean  as  surrounding 
the  disk  of  the  earth  like  a  ribbon  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  199),  and  he 
may  then  have  sailed  across  this  to  find  out  its  extent.^  But 
it  is  quite  possible,  as  P.  A.  Munch  [1852,  ii.  pp.  269  f.] 
suggested,  that  Magister  Adam  may  have  heard  something 
about  a  northward  voyage  undertaken  by  Harold,  during 
which  he  had  been  exposed  to  some  danger  in  the  Saltstrom  or 
the  Moskenstrom ;  -  or  if  it  was  a  voyage  to  Bjarmeland 
(Harold   Graf  eld's?)    that   he  heard  of,   then   it   might   be   the 

and  reports  of  his  expedition  to  Bjarmeland  may  well  have  lived  there,  as  in 
Iceland.  If  it  is  this  to  which  Adam's  words  refer,  this  would  also  explain 
the  curious  silence  of  the  Icelandic  authorities  about  Harold  Hardrade's  al- 
leged voyage  in  the  Arctic  Ocean. 

1  Professor  Yngvar  Nielsen  [1904,  1905]  thinks  that  Adam's  description 
cannot  be  explained  otherwise  than  as  referring  to  a  voyage  to  the  west,  and 
probably  a  Wineland  voyage.  The  Icelandic  historian,  Tormodus  Torfaeus,  re- 
garded it  in  the  same  way  two  hundred  years  ago.  Prof.  Nielsen  even  thinks 
he  can  point  to  the  Newfoundland  Banks  with  their  "  surf  caused  by  the  cur- 
rent" (?)  as  a  probable  place  where  King  Harold  turned  back  to  avoid  the  gulf 
of  the  abyss.  I  will  not  here  dwell  on  the  improbability  of  so  daring  a  man 
as  Harold,  whom  we  are  to  suppose  to  have  sailed  across  the  Atlantic  in  search 
of  Wineland,  being  frightened  by  a  tide-race  (of  which  he  knew  worse  at 
home)  on  the  Newfoundland  Banks,  so  as  to  believe  that  he  was  near  the 
abyss  ("  Ginnungagap"),  and  therefore  making  the  long  voyage  home  again 
without  having  accomplished  his  purpose,  without  having  reached  land,  and 
without  having  renewed  his  supplies — of  fresh  water,  for  instance.  I  can  only 
see  that  all  this  is  pure  guess-work  without  any  solid  foundation  and  far  be- 
yond the  limits  of  all  reasonable  possibility.  But  in  addition,  as  Dr.  A.  A. 
Bjombo  [1909,  pp.  121,  234  f.]  has  clearly  shown,  the  whole  of  this  view  be- 
comes untenable  if  we  pay  attention  to  the  universal  cartographical  represen- 
tation of  that  time,  by  which  Adam  of  Bremen  was  obviously  also  bound,  and 
in  particular  it  is  impossible  to  conclude  from  his  words  that  Harold's  voyage 
should  have  been  made  to  the  west. 

2  Suhm  [Historie  af  Danmark,  1790]  was  the  first  to  think  that  the  gull  of 
the  abyss  was  the  maelstrom  by  Mosken. 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

current  at  Sviatoi  Nos  or  Straumneskinn,  often  spoken  of  in  the 
sagas,  that  Adam  has  made  into  the  whirlpool. 


WHALING  AND  SEALING  VOYAGES  OF  THE  NORWEGIANS 
IN   THE   POLAR   SEA 

The  skill  of  the  Norwegians  as  fishermen,  whalers,  and 
sealers,  had,  of  course,  a  great  deal  to  do  with  the  development 
of  their  seamanship  and  ability  to  travel  and  support  themselves 
along  unknown  and  uninhabited  shores.  The  accurate  knowl- 
edge of  the  many  species  of  seals  and  whales  shown  in  the 
"  King's  Mirror,"  to  which  no_ 
parallel  is  met  with  earlier  in  the 
literature  of  the  world,  proves  how 
important  the  hunting  of  these 
animals  must  have  been;  for 
otherwise  so  much  attention  would 
not  have  been  paid  to  them.^ 
When  in  speaking  of  the  greater 
whales  a  distinction  is  made  be- 
tween those  that  are  shy  and  keep 
away  from  the  hunters,  and  those 
that  are  tamer  and  easier  to 
approach,  and  when  the  longest  of 
all  ("  reySr ")  is  mentioned  as 
being  specially  tame  and  easily 
caught,  we  can  only  regard  this  as  showing  that  whaling 
was  also  carried  on  in  the  open  sea;  that  is,  not  in  a  merely 
accidental  fashion,  as  when  the  whales  entered  narrow  fjords 
where  they  could  be  intercepted,  or  when  they  ran  aground. 

1  A  peculiarity  of  the  account  in  the  "  King's  Mirror  "  is  that  whales,  seals, 
and  walruses  are  mentioned  only  in  the  seas  of  Iceland  and  Greenland,  and  not 
off  Norway,  although  the  Norwegian  author  must  undoubtedly  have  heard  of 
most  of  them  in  his  native  land.  In  the  same  way  the  northern  lights  are  only 
spoken  of  as  something  peculiar  to  Greenland.  Of  the  six  species  of  seal  that 
are  mentioned,  one  ("  orknselr ")  must  be  the  gray  seal,  or  "  erkn "  (Hali- 
choerus  gryphus),  which  is  common  on  the  coast  of  the  northern  half  of  Nor- 
way, but  is  not  found  in  Greenland. 


Cutting  up  a  whale  [from 
an  Icelandic  MS.  of  the 
fourteenth  century  of 
Magnus  Lanaboter's  Ice- 
landic Land  Law] 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

From  Ottar's  statement  to  King  Alfred  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  172) 
that  **  in  his  own  land  [i.e.,  Norway]  there  is  the  best  whaling. 
They  are  forty-eight  cubits  long,  and  the  largest  are  fifty  cubits 
long  " — we  may  conclude  that  the  Norwegians,  and  perhaps  the 
Lapps  also,  hunted  the  great  whales  as  early  as  the  ninth  cen- 
tury, and  doubtless  long  before  that  time,  while  King  Alfred 
does  not  seem  to  have  known  of  any  such  whaling  being  prac- 
tised in  England.  1  We  are  not  told  in  what  way  the  whale  was 
caught  in  those  days,  but  from  statements  elsewhere  it  is  prob- 
able that  the  Norwegians  had  several  methods  of  taking  whales, 
as  is  the  case  even  to  the  present  day  in  Norway:  one  way  was 
with  the  harpoon  and  harpoon-line  in  open  waters,  that  is,  with- 
out cutting  off  the  whale's  escape  with  nets. 

The  Arab  cosmographer,  Qazwini  (of  the  thirteenth  century), 
quoting  the  Spanish-Arabic  writer  Omar  al-*Udhri  ^  (of  the 
eleventh  century),  says  that  the  Norsemen  in  Irlanda  (Ireland) 

"hunt  young  whales,  and  they  are  very  great  fish.  They  hunt  their  young 
and  eat  them.  ...  Of  the  method  of  catching  them,  al-'Udhri  relates  that 
the  hunters  collect  in  their  ships.  They  have  a  great  iron  hook  [i.e.,  harpoon] 
with  sharp  teeth,  and  on  the  hook  a  strong  ring,  and  in  the  ring  a  stout  rope. 
When  they  come  to  a  young  one,  they  clap  their  hands  and  make  a  noise.  The 
young  one  is  amused  by  the  clapping  of  hands  and  approaches  the  ship,  de- 
lighting therein.  Thereupon  one  of  the  seamen  approaches  and  scratches  its 
forehead,  which  the  young  one  likes.  Then  he  lays  the  hook  to  the  middle  of 
its  head,  takes  a  heavy  iron  hammer  and  gives  three  blows  with  all  his  force 
upon  the  hook.  It  does  not  heed  the  first  blow,  but  with  the  second  and  third 
it  makes  a  great  commotion,  and  sometimes  it  catches  some  part  of  the  ship 
with  its  tail,  and  knocks  it  to  pieces,  and  it  continues  in  violent  agitation  until 
it  is  overcome  by  exhaustion.  Then  the  crew  of  the  ship  draw  it  to  shore  with 
their  combined  force.  Sometimes  the  mother  notices  the  movements  of  the 
young  one,  and  pursues  them.     Then  they  have  a  great  quantity  of  crushed 

1  One  might  receive  a  different  impression  from  Bede's  statement  that  in 
Britain  "seals  are  frequently  taken  [' capiuntur '],  and  dolphins,  as  also  whales 
['balenae']  [Eccles.  hist.  gent.  Angl.  i.  c.  i].  But  it  is  uncertain  whether  this 
refers  to  regular  hunting  of  great  whales  with  harpoons  in  the  open  sea,  or 
whether  it  does  not  rather  refer  to  stranded  whales,  which  must  have  been 
of  frequent  occurrence  in  those  days,  to  judge  from  the  Norman  and  later 
English  regulations  regarding  them. 

2  He  belonged  to  the  South  Arabian  tribe  'Udhra,  "  die  da  sterben,  wann 
sie  lieben." 

156 


VOYAGES    IN   THE    POLAR   SEA 


onions  in  readiness,  and  throw  it  into  the  water.  When  the  whale  perceives 
the  smell  of  the  onions  it  finds  it  detestable,  turns  round  and  retreats.  Then 
they  cut  the  flesh  of  the  young  one  in  pieces  and  salt  it.^  And  its  flesh  is 
white  as  snow,  and  its  skin  black  as  ink."  2 

This  is,  clearly  enough,  a  layman's  naive  description  of 
whaling  with  harpoon  and  harpoon-line  in  open  waters,  a 
method  which  had  therefore  already  been  introduced  into 
Ireland  by  the  Norwegians  at  that  time.  It  may  consequently 
be  regarded  as  certain  that  the 
Norwegians  were  acquainted  with 
harpooning.  That  this  was  very 
usual  appears  also  from  the  "  King's 
Mirror"  and  the  ancient  Norwegian 
laws,  where  whaling  and  whale- 
harpoons  ("  skutill ")  are  often  men- 
tioned. 

On  the  west  coast  of  Norway,  in 
the  neighborhood  of  Bergen,  there 
is  still  practised  to-day  another 
method  of  catching  whales  which 
must  be  very  ancient.  When  the  great 
whales  enter  certain  fjords  which  have  a  narrow  inlet,  their 
escape  is  cut  off  by  nets,  and  they  are  shot  with  poisoned  arrows 
from  bows  which  entirely  resemble  the  cross-bows  of  the  Middle 
Ages.  The  arrows  used  are  old  and  rusty,  and  convey  bacteria 
from  one  whale  to  another.  When  the  whale  has  been  hit  by 
these  arrows  it  is  rapidly  weakened  from  blood-poisoning,  so 
that  it  may  easily  be  harpooned  and  then  killed  by  lances,  after 
which  it  is  cut  up  and  divided  among  the  inhabitants  of  the 
fjord,  according  to  ancient,  unwritten  rules.  In  spite  of  the 
blood-poisoning,  the  whale's  flesh  and  blubber  are  eaten,  and 
are  regarded  as  very  valuable  provisions.  I  have  myself  often 
taken  part  in  this  kind  of  whaling.     Possibly  Peder  Clausson 


Cutting  up  a  whale   [from 
an  Icelandic  MS.] 


iThis  is  exactly  what  is  still  done  with  the  whale  on  the  west  coast  of 
Norway. 

2  Cf.  G.  Jacob,  1896,  pp.  23  f. 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

Friis  [c£.  Storm,  1881,  p.  70]  refers  to  a  similar  method  of  whal- 
ing when  he  says  that 

"  in  ancient  times  many  expedients  or  methods  were  used  for  catching  whales, 
which     ...     on  account  of  men's  unskillfulness  have  fallen  out  of  use." 

They  had  "  a  spear  with  sharp  irons,  so  that  it  could  not  be 
pulled  out  again."  This  was  hurled  into  the  whale,  which  died 
in  a  short  time,  or  became  so  weakened  that  it  could  be  drawn 
to  land ; 

"  which  whales  were  then  cut  up  and  divided  among  those  who  had  shot,  and 
him  who  owned  the  land,  or  him  who  had  first  found  the  whale  driven  in,  ac- 
cording to  the  provisions  of  the  law." 

We  must  suppose  that  this  iron  was  poisoned  with  bacteria 
from  former  whales,  in  a  similar  way  to  the  arrows  mentioned 
above,  whereby  the  animal's  wound  was  infected.  However, 
Peder  Clausson's  description  of  the  hunt  is  evidently  taken  in 
great  measure  from  older  literary  sources,  since  similar  descrip- 
tions are  found  as  early  as  in  Albertus  Magnus  (ob.  1280.)  [  "  De 
animalibus,"  xxiv.  651],  and  in  Vincent  of  Beauvais  [  "  Speculum 
majus,"  i.  1272].  In  all  three  authors  the  whale  dives  after 
being  struck,  and  tosses  about  on  the  bottom  or  rubs  itself 
against  it,  thereby  driving  the  spear  farther  in;  but  in  Peder 
Clausson  it  does  so  in  order  to  "  get  rid  of  the  shot,"  while  in 
Albertus  it  is  on  account  of  salt  water  getting  into  the  wound, 
and  in  Vincentius  the  salt  water  penetrates  and  kills  the  wounded 
whale.  As  the  descriptions  of  Albertus  and  Vincentius  evidently 
refer  to  ordinary  harpoon-whaling,  it  may  be  doubtful  whether 
Peder  Clausson's  statement  really  relates  to  a  method  of 
catching  different  from  the  usual  one  with  harpoon  and  line, 
although  one  is  disposed  to  believe  that  it  does.  He  also  men- 
tions in  the  same  place  other  whales  that  they  could  "pursue 
with  boats  and  drive  into  bays  and  small  fjords,  and  kill  them 
there  with  hand-shot  and  bow-shot."  This  may  be  supposed 
to  refer  to  a  method  similar  to  that  mentioned  above,  with 
poisoned  arrows;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  relate  to  a 
third  method  of  taking  small  whales,  which  was  certainly 
158 


VOYAGES  IN  THE  POLAR  SEA 

practised  from  very  early  times  in  Norway,  and  which  con- 
sists in  schools  of  small  whales  being  driven  into  bays  and 
inlets,  where  they  are  intercepted  with  nets  and  driven  ashore. 

The  method  of  whaling  with  poisoned  arrows  or  by  throw- 
ing spears  must,  as  has  been  said,  be  very  ancient.  Whether  it 
was  invented  by  the  Norwegians  themselves,  or  whether  they 
did  not  rather  learn  it  from  the  older  hunter-people  of  Norway, 
the  "  Finns,"  is  difficult  to  determine.  Nor  do  we  know  how 
ancient  whaling  in  general  may  be  in  the  North;  it  may  date 
from  early  times,  though  Ottar's  mention  of  it  is  the  earliest 
known  in  literature. 

It  is  evident  that  a  high  development  of  seamanship,  skill 
in  hunting,  and  resourcefulness  was  required  before  men  could 
venture  to  encounter  the  great  whales  of  the  ocean  in  open 
fight  with  free  sea-room,  where  the  whale  was  not  crippled 
by  having  run  aground  or  into  narrow  fjords  with  no  outlet. 
This  whaling  in  the  open  sea  demanded  the  invention  of  special 
appliances,  of  which  the  harpoon  with  its  line  was  of  special 
importance.  It  may  be  possible,  though  it  is  not  certain,  that 
the  Norwegians  were  the  first  Europeans  to  practise  this  kind 
of  whaling,  and  as,  from  numerous  documents,  we  may  con- 
clude that  whaling  was  actively  carried  on  by  the  Normans  in 
Normandy  as  early  as  the  tenth  and  eleventh  centuries,  one  is 
inclined  to  suppose  that  it  was  the  Normans  who  first  intro- 
duced the  method  of  harpoon  and  line  there,^  and  then  passed 
it  on  to  the  Basques.     But  we  ought  not  to  lose  sight  of  the  fact 

1  Louis  the  Gentle  confirms  a  division  of  the  property  of  the  abbey  of  St. 
Dionysius,  which  the  abbot  Hilduien  had  made  in  832  [cf.  Bouquet,  Historiens 
de  France,  vi.,  p.  580].  He  says  in  this  document  that  "we  give  them  this 
property  ...  on  the  other  side  of  Sequana  the  chapel  of  St.  Audoenus  for 
repairing  and  clearing  fishing-nets  ...  in  Campiniago  two  houses  for  fish 
.  .  .  the  water  and  fish  in  Tellis  .  .  .  and  Gabaregium  in  Bagasinum  with 
all  the  manorial  rights  and  lands  attached,  of  which  part  lies  in  the  parish  of 
Constantinus  [Coutances]  for  taking  large  fish  [' crassus  piscis']."  It  is  prob- 
able that  "  crassus  piscis "  means  Biscay  whale  (Balaena  biscayensis  or 
glacialis),  which  at  that  time  was  common  on  these  shores.  In  that  case  the 
people  of  Cotentin  would  have  carried  on  whaling  as  early  as  the  beginning  of 
the  ninth  century,  but  of  their  methods  we  can  form  no  conclusions. 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

that  there  are  other  possibilities,  since  the  harpoon  was  probably 
known  to  and  used  on  smaller  marine  animals  by  the  neolithic 
people  of  Europe,  and  the  taking  of  larger  fish  with  harpoon 
and  line  was  known  in  the  Mediterranean  in  antiquity,^  as  ap- 
pears, for  instance,  from  Polybius's  description  of  the  catching 
of  swordfish  at  Scyllaeum  (on  the  Straits  of  Messina),  which  is 
reproduced  in  Strabo,  i.  24: 

"A  common  look-out  man  goes  at  their  head,  while  they  collect  in  many 
two-oared  boats  to  lie  in  wait  for  the  fish;  two  in  each  boat.  One  of  them 
rows,  the  other  stands  in  the  bow  with  a  spear,  while  the  look-out  man  gives 
warning  of  the  appearance  of  the  fish;  for  the  animal  swims  with  a  third  of  its 
body  above  water.  As  soon  as  the  boat  has  reached  the  fish,  the  spearman 
pierces  it  by  hand,  and  immediately  draws  the  spear  out  of  its  body  again, 
with  the  exception  of  the  point;  for  this  is  provided  with  barbs,  and  is  pur- 
posely attached  loosely  to  the  shaft,  and  has  a  long  line  fastened  to  it.  This 
is  paid  out  after  the  wounded  fish,  until  it  is  tired  by  floundering  and  attempts 
at  flight;  then  it  is  drawn  to  land,  or  taken  into  the  boat  if  it  is  not  very  large." 
No  better  description  of  harpoon  fishing  is  to  be  found  in  the  Middle  Ages. 
The  dolphin  was  to  the  Greeks  Poseidon's  beast,  and  they  did  not  take  it;  but 
from  Oppian's  account  we  see  that  the  barbarian  fishermen  on  the  coast  of 
Thrace  had  no  such  scruples,  but  caught  dolphins  with  harpoons  to  which  a 
long  line  was  attached  [cf.  Noel,  1815,  p.  42]. 

If  the  Iberian  people  of  the  western  Mediterranean  practised 
this  kind  of  fishing,  the  Basques  may  also  have  been  acquainted 
with  it.  But  if  they  used  the  harpoon  on  swordfish  and  small 
whales,  the  further  step  to  using  it  for  the  Biscay  whale  was 
not  insuperable  to  these  hardy  seamen,  and  they  may  thus  have 
themselves  developed  their  methods  of  whaling  without  having 
learnt  from  the  Normans,  even  if  no  evidence  is  forthcoming 
of  their  having  been  acquainted  with  whaling  so  early  as  the 

1  It  is  possible  that  the  peoples  on  the  shores  of  the  Indian  Ocean  (and 
Red  Sea)  even  in  early  antiquity  caught  whales  and  ate  whale's  flesh  [cf.  Noel, 
1815,  p.  23].  Strabo  [xv.  725  f.;  xvi.  767,  773]  tells  of  the  great  numbers  of 
whales,  23  fathoms  long,  that  Nearchus  is  said  to  have  seen  in  this  ocean,  and 
says  that  the  Ichthyophagi  (fish-eaters)  used  whales'  bones  for  beams  and 
rafters  in  their  huts.  Strabo  thinks  [i.  24]  that  the  mention  of  the  monster 
Scylla  (who  catches  dolphins,  seals,  etc.)  in  the  "  Odyssey  "  [xii.  95  f.]  would 
point  to  large  marine  animals  having  been  taken  in  ancient  times;  but  all  this 
may  be  very  doubtful. 
160 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

latter.*  It  may  also  be  supposed  that  the  Norsemen  in  the  be- 
ginning, far  back  in  gray  antiquity,  took  their  harpoon  fishing 
from  the  south,  just  as  they  obtained  the  form  of  their  craft  to 
some  extent  from  the  Mediterranean. 

Thus,  although  we  cannot  regard  it  as  certain  that  the 
Norwegians  introduced  the  knowledge  of  whaling  with  the 
harpoon  and  line  in  Normandy,  it  is  in  any  case  probable  that 
they  were  particularly  active  in  practising  and  developing  this 
method,  and  we  may  conclude  that  they  must  have  been 
acquainted  with  whaling  before  they  came  there,  since  we  see 
that  the  whalers  of  Normandy  bore  the  Scandinavian  name  of 
"  walmanni."  ^  If  they  had  learnt  their  whaling  in  the  foreign 
land,  it  goes  without  saying  that  they  would  also  have  taken 
the  name  from  thence,  and  it  is  extremely  improbable  that 
they  should  have  acquired  a  Scandinavian  designation  for  an 

1  Cf.  M.  P.  Fischer,  1872,  pp.  3,  S.  In  1202  the  merchants  of  Bayonne  bound 
themselves  to  pay  King  John  Lackland  ten  pounds  sterling  a  year  for  permis- 
sion to  catch  whales  between  St.  Michael's  Mount  (in  Normandy)  and  a  place 
called  Dortemue  [cf.  Delisle,  1849,  P-  i3i]«  This  may  point  to  a  connection 
in  the  whale  fishery  between  the  south  of  France  and  Normandy. 

2  Cf.  Johannes  Steenstrup,  1876,  vol.  i,  p.  188.  Prof.  Steenstrup  puts  forward 
the  view  that  it  was  the  Danes  who  developed  this  whaling  in  Normandy.  This 
is  scarcely  possible.  There  cannot  be  much  doubt  that  it  was  the  compara- 
tively valuable  Biscay  whale,  or  Nord-caper,  that  was  the  chief  object  of  the 
active  whaling  on  the  coast  of  Normandy,  and  that  was  specially  called  "  cras- 
sus  piscis";  for  it  was  precisely  this  species  of  whale  which,  then,  at  certain 
times  of  the  year  appeared  in  great  numbers  along  the  whole  French  coast, 
and  which  the  Basques  also  pursued  so  actively  along  the  shores  of  the  Bay 
of  Biscay,  Brittany,  and  Normandy.  The  name  "  crassus  piscis "  (i.e.,  the 
thick  or  fat  fish)  would  also  exactly  describe  this  species,  which  is  remarkable 
beyond  all  other  whales  that  occur  on  the  coasts  of  France  for  its  striking 
breadth  and  bulk  in  proportion  to  its  length,  which  is  about  fifty  feet.  This 
whale  was  more  valuable  than  the  other  great  whales  that  occurred  along  these 
coasts,  and  was  in  addition  much  easier  to  catch.  But  this  species  certainly 
never  regularly  frequented  the  shallow  Danish  waters,  any  more  than  other 
great  whales  that  might  be  an  object  of  hunting.  There  is,  therefore,  scarcely 
a  possibility  that  Danish  vikings  should  have  brought  with  them  from  their 
native  land  any  experience  in  hunting  great  whales.  If  we  may  assume  that 
the  Normans  were  already  acquainted  with  the  hunting  of  great  whales  before 
they  came  to  Normandy,  then  it  may  have  been  Norwegians  who  possessed 
this  experience,  which,  in  fact,  agrees  with  the  statement  of  Qaswini  (see  above). 

161 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

occupation  the  knowledge  of  which  they  had  not  brought  with 
them  from  their  native  land. 

The  Normans  also  took  with  them  the  knowledge  of  whaling 
as  far  as  the  Mediterranean.  In  Guillelmus  Appulus's  descrip- 
tion (of  about  1099-1111)  of  the  Norman  conquest  of  southern 
Italy  it  is  related  ^  that  when  Robert  Guiscard  comes  to  the  town 
of  Regina  in  Calabria  he  hears 

"the  rumor  that  there  is  a  fish  not  far  from  the  town  in  the  waves  of  the 
Adriatic,  a  great  one  with  an  immense  body,  of  an  incredible  aspect,  which  the 
people  of  Italy  had  not  seen  before.  The  winds  of  spring,  on  account  of  the 
fresh  water,  had  driven  it  thither.  It  was  captured  by  the  ingenuity  of  the 
leader  [i.e.,  Robert]  by  means  of  various  arts.  It  swam  into  a  net  made  of 
fine  ropes  and  when  it  was  completely  entangled  in  the  nets  with  the  heavy 
iron,  it  dived  down  to  the  depths  of  the  sea,  but  at  last  it  was  hit  by  the  sea- 


Cutting  up  a  whale  [from  an  Icelandic  MS.  of  the  sixteenth  century]. 

men  in  various  projecting  places,  and  with  much  pains  dragged  ashore.  There 
the  people  look  at  it  as  a  strange  monster.  Then  it  is  cut  in  pieces  by  order 
of  the  leader.  Thereof  he  obtains  for  himself  and  his  men  much  food,  and 
also  for  the  people  who  dwelt  on  the  coasts  of  Calabria.  And  the  Apulian 
people  also  have  a  share  of  it." 

It  looks  as  though  the  author's  view  was  that  the  whale  was 
caught  with  nets  and  killed  by  the  throwing  of  lances,  which  is 
not  impossible;  but  it  may  also  be  supposed  that  the  poetical 
description  is  somewhat  misleading,  and  that  the  "  nets  with  the 
heavy  iron"  were  the  harpoon  with  its  line  (?). 

It  may  be  regarded  as  doubtful  whether  the  harpooning 
of  great  whales  in  open  waters  was  ever  so  actively  carried  on 
and  brought  to  such  perfection  during  the  Middle  Ages  in 
Norway,  Iceland,  and  Greenland  as  was  evidently  the  case 
in  Normandy  and  especially  among  the  Basques,  from  whom, 

iMuratori:   Script,  rer.   Ital.,  v.   p.   265.    Cf.  also  Joh.   Steenstrup.    1876, 
i,  p.  188. 
162 


VOYAGES    IN   THE   POLAR   SEA 

later,  the  English  and  the  Dutch  learned  it.  As  in  those  days 
there  was  abundance  of  whales  to  be  caught  on  the  Norwegian 
coast  (the  Nord-caper  was  then  numerous  there),  this  kind  of 
whaling  would  not  tempt  the  Norwegians  to  seek  better  hunting- 
grounds  along  other  coasts  in  northern  waters.  On  the  other 
hand,  it  is  evident  that  practice  in  whaling  must  have  been  of 
great  importance  to  them,  wherever  they  settled  in  these 
regions. 

Albertus  Magnus  (ob.  1280),  who  gives  a  detailed  descrip- 
tion of  the  harpoon  and  of  whaling  (cf.  above,  p.  158),  has  also 
the  following  description  of  walrus  hunting : 

"  Those  whales  which  have  bristles,  and  others,  have  very  long  tusks,i  and 
by  them  they  hang  themselves  up  on  stones  and  rocks  when  they  sleep.  Then 
the  fisherman  approaches,  and  tears  away  as  much  as  he  can  of  the  skin  from 
the  blubber  by  the  tail,  and  makes  fast  a  strong  rope  to  the  skin  he  has 
loosened,  and  he  binds  the  ropes  fast  to  rings  fixed  in  the  rocks  or  to  very 
strong  posts  or  trees.    Then  he  throws  large  stones  at  the  fish  and  wakes  it. 

1  The  text  has  "  culmi  "  (literally,  straw),  which  gives  no  sense.  We  must 
suppose  that  something  has  been  omitted  in  the  MS.  of  Albertus  that  was  used 
in  the  printed  edition;  or  else  he  has  taken  the  description  from  an  older 
source,  which  had  it  correctly,  and  from  which  later  authors  have  taken  the 
same  expression;  for  otherwise  it  is  difficult  to  understand  their  using  it  in  a 
reasonable  way.  Erik  Walkendorf  (circa  1520)  says  of  the  walrus  in  Fin- 
mark:  "  They  have  a  stiff  and  bristly  beard  as  long  as  the  palm  of  a  hand,  as 
thick  as  a  straw  [' crassitudine  magni  culmi'],  they  have  rough  bristly 
[*  hirsuta ']  skin,  two  fingers  thick,  which  has  an  incredible  strength  and  firm- 
ness"; but  he  says  nothing  about  the  method  of  catching  them  [Walkendorf, 
1902,  p.  12].  Olaus  Magnus  [i,  xxi.  c.  25]  says  that  walruses  ("morsi"  or 
"  rosmari ")  appear  on  the  northern  coast  of  Norway.  "  They  have  a  head  like 
an  ox,  have  rough  [bristly,  '  hirsutam ']  skin,  and  hair  as  thick  as  straw  ['  cul- 
mos ']  or  the  stalks  of  corn  ['  calamos  f  rumenti ']  which  stands  in  all  directions. 
They  heave  themselves  up  by  their  tusks  to  the  tops  of  rocks  as  with  ladders, 
in  order  to  eat  the  grass  bedewed  with  fresh  water,  and  roll  themselves  back 
into  the  sea,  unless  in  the  meantime  they  are  overcome  by  very  deep  sleep  and 
remain  hanging."  Then  follows  the  same  story  of  catching  them  as  in  Alber- 
tus Magnus.  This  is  done,  he  says,  chiefly  for  the  sake  of  the  tusks,  "  which 
were  highly  prized  by  the  Scythians,  Rutens,  and  Tartars,"  etc.  "  This  is  wit- 
nessed also  by  Miechouita."  This  description  of  Olaus  is  evidently  put  to- 
gether from  older  statements  which  we  find  in  Albertus  Magnus,  in  Walken- 
dorf, and  in  Russian  sources,  of  which  he  himself  quotes  Mikhow  (who  is  also 
mentioned  in  Pistorius;  see  p.  173). 

163 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

When  the  fish  is  awake  and  wants  to  go  back  [into  the  sea],  it  pulls  its  skin 
off  from  the  tail  along  the  back  and  head,  and  leaves  it  behind  there.  And 
afterwards  it  is  caught  not  far  from  the  spot,  when  it  has  exhausted  its 
Strength,  as  it  floats  bloodless  upon  the  sea,  or  lies  half  dead  on  the  shore." 

He  also  tells  us  that  walrus-rope  ^  was  commonly  sold  at 
the  fair  at  Cologne,  which  shows  that  walrus  hunting  must 
have  acquired  great  importance  at  that  time.  It  can  only 
have  been  carried  on  by  the  Norwegians  (and  Icelanders?), 
the  Finns,  or  Lapps,  the  peoples  of  the  north  coast  of  Russia, 
and  the  Greenlanders.  It  is  unlikely  that  the  ropes  were  brought 
all  the  way  from  Russia  by  land  to  Cologne;  they  must  rather 
have  come  from  Norway.  The  Norwegians  obtained  a  certain 
quantity  of  walrus-rope  ("  svarSreip  ")  through  the  trade  with 
Greenland,  and  perhaps  with  North  Russia,  but  they  probably 
got  most  from  their  own  hunting  in  northern  waters.  The 
quantity  of  walrus  they  could  kill  in  Finmark  would  not  be 
sufficient  to  satisfy  the  demand,  and,  as  suggested  earlier  (Vol. 
I,  p.  177),  they  must  certainly  have  sought  fresh  hunting- 
grounds,  above  all  eastward  in  the  Polar  Sea. 

Norse-Icelandic  literature  does  not  tell  us  that  the  Norwe- 
gians in  their  voyages  to  Bjarmeland  went  any  farther  east  than 
"  Gandvik "  (the  White  Sea)  and  the  Dvina.  But  it  is  to  be 
noted  that  the  sagas,  as  a  rule,  only  mention  the  expeditions  of 
chiefs,  with  warlike  exploits,  fighting,  and  slaughter  of  one  kind 
or  another;  while  peaceful  trading  voyages,  which  were  cer- 
tainly numerous,  are  not  spoken  of,  nor  walrus  hunting  and 
hunting  expeditions  in  general,  since  such  occupations  were  not 
usually  followed  by  chiefs.  We  cannot,  therefore,  expect  to  find 
an5rthing  in  the  sagas  about  countries  or  waters  where  there  were 
no  people,  and  where  only  hunting  was  carried  on. 

From  Ottar  however,  who  was  not  a  saga  writer,  we  learn 
that  walrus  hunting  was  practised,  and  doubtless  very  per- 
severingly,  in  the  ninth  century  (Vol.  I,  p.  176),  and  that 
even  at  that  time  he  went  in  pursuit  of  it  as  far  as  the  White  Sea. 

1  This  was  very  valuable  on  account  of  its  strength,  and  was  much  used  for 
ships'  cables,  mooring-hawsers,  and  many  other  purposes. 
164 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

It  is  thus  extremely  improbable  that  such  hardy  hunters  should 
have  stopped  there,  and  not  continued  to  move  eastward,  where 
there  was  such  valuable  prey  to  be  secured.  We  must  suppose 
that  at  least  they  reached  the  west  coast  of  Novaya  Zemlya, 
where  there  was  walrus  and  seal  in  abundance.  That  such  was 
the  case  is  just  as  probable  as  the  reverse  is  improbable,  and  as 
it  is  improbable  that  expeditions  of  this  kind  should  have  found 
mention  in  the  sagas.  That  the  Norwegians  knew  Novaya  Zem- 
lya may  perhaps  be  concluded  from  the  mediaeval  Icelandic  ge- 
ography (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  313,  Vol.  II,  p.  i),  according  to  which  the 
land  extended  northward  from  Bjarmeland  round  the  north  of 
Hafsbotn  (the  Polar  Sea)  as  far  as  Greenland,  making  the  latter 
continuous  with  Europe  (cf.  the  map,  p.  2).  The  knowledge 
that  the  west  coast  of  Novaya  Zemlya  extended  northward 
into  the  unknown  may  have  given  rise  to  such  an  idea.  It  was 
general  in  Scandinavia  and  Iceland  in  the  latter  part  of  the 
Middle  Ages,  whilst  Adam  of  Bremen  speaks  of  Greenland 
as  an  island,  like  Iceland  and  other  islands  in  the  northern 
ocean.  The  discovery  of  "  Svalbard "  (Spitzbergen?)  in  1194 
may,  as  we  shall  see  directly,  have  lent  support  to  the  belief  in 
this  connection  by  land. 

Saxo  Grammaticus  in  his  Danish  history,  of  the  beginning 
of  the  thirteenth  century,  also  has  mythical  tales  of  voyages 
to  Bjarmeland.  Among  others,  the  legendary  king  Gorm 
and  Thorkel  Adelfar  on  a  mythical  voyage  to  the  north  and 
east  came  first  to  Halogaland,  then  to  "  Hither  Bjarmeland," 
which  had  steep  shores  and  much  cattle,  and  then  to  a  land 
with  continual  cold  and  heavy  snow,  without  any  warmth 
of  summer,  rich  in  impenetrable  forests,  which  was  without 
produce  of  the  fields,  full  of  beasts  unknown  elsewhere,  and 
where  many  rivers  rushed  through  rocky  beds.  This  land 
was  "  Farther  Bjarmeland."  ^  If  we  except  the  forest,  this 
description  suits  Novaya  Zemlya  better  than  the  Kola  peninsula ; 
but  it  is  extremely  doubtful  whether  any   real  knowledge   of 

1  Saxo,  viii.  287  f .  ed.  by  H.  Jantzen,  1900,  pp.  447  f . ;  ed.  by  P.  Herrmann, 
1901,  pp.  385  f. 

165 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

these  regions  lies  at  the  root  of  Saxo's  mythical  tales,  in  which 
for  instance,  the  travelers  come  to  the  river  of  death  and  the 
land  of  the  dead.  The  designation  "  Farther  Bjarmeland  "  may 
nevertheless  point  to  a  land  having  been  known  beyond  the 
often-mentioned  Bjarmeland. 

In  the  old  legendary  sagas  there  is  frequent  mention  of 
"the  Farther  Bjarmeland,"  which  lay  to  the  north  or  north- 
east of  the  real  Bjarmeland  (Permia),  and  where  there  was  a 
people  of  gigantic  size  and  immense  riches.  This  fabulous 
country  may,  it  is  true,  be  entirely  mythical,  perhaps  originally 
derived  from  ancient  Greek  myths;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  it 
may  be  the  knowledge  of  Novaya  Zemlya  that  has  influenced 
the  formation  of  the  myths  about  it.  However  this  may  be, 
we  may  be  sure  that  the  voyages  of  the  Norwegian  hunters 
in  those  days  extended  into  the  eastern  Polar  Sea  far  beyond 
the  limits  of  Ottar's  voyage,  and  much  farther  than  the  chance 
mention  in  the  sagas  of  more  or  less  warlike  expeditions  of 
chiefs  to  the  White  Sea  would  indicate. 

A  notice  that  is  extant,  relating  to  the  year  1194,  shows 
better  than  anything  else  that  the  Norwegians  probably  made 
extensive  voyages  in  the  Polar  Sea,  and  the  mention  of  it  is 
purely  fortuitous.  In  the  "  Islandske  Annaler  "  (in  six  different 
MSS.)  it  is  briefly  stated  of  the  year  1194:  "  SvalbartSs 
furdr "  or  "  SvalbarSi  fundinn "  (Svalbard  was  discovered) ; 
but  that  is  all  we  are  told;  surely  no  great  geographical 
discovery  has  ever  been  more  briefly  recorded  in  literature. 
SvalbarSi  means  the  cold  edge,  or  side,  and  must  here  mean 
the  cold  coast.  In  the  introduction  to  the  Landnamabok  we 
read  about  this  land: 

"  From  Reykjanes  on  the  south  side  of  Iceland  it  is  five  [in  Hauk's  Land- 
nama  three]  doegrs'  sea  [i.e.,  sail]  to  Jolldulaup  in  Ireland  to  the  south,  but 
from  Langanes  on  the  north  side  of  Iceland  it  is  four  dcEgrs'  sea  to  Svalbard 
on  the  north  in  Hafsbotn,i  but  it  is  one  doegr's  sail  to  the  uninhabited  parts 
of  Greenland  from  Kolbeins-ey  in  the  north." 

iln  the  description  of  Greenland  attributed  to  Ivar  Bardsson  we  read: 
"Item,  from  Langanes,  which  lies  uppermost  [or  northernmost]  in  Iceland  by 
166 


VOYAGES    IN   THE   POLAR   SEA 

As  will  be  seen,  Svalbard  is  spoken  of,  here  and  in  the 
annals,  as  a  land  that  is  known.  It  is  also  mentioned  in 
Icelandic  legendary  sagas  of  the  later  Middle  Ages. 

The  "  Historia  Norvegiae  "  says  of  a  country  in  the  north :  ^ 

"but  in  the  north  on  the  other  side  of  Norway  towards  the  east  there  ex- 
tend various  peoples  who  are  in  the  toils  of  heathendom  (ah,  how  sad),  namely 
the  Kiriali  and  Kwasni,  horned  Finns  2  and  both  Bjarmas.  But  what  people 
dwell  beyond  these  we  do  not  know  for  certain,  though  when  some  sailors 
were  trying  to  sail  back  from  Iceland  to  Norway  and  were  driven  by  contrary 


Countries  and  seas  discovered  by  the  Norwegians  and  Icelanders.    The 

shaded  coasts   were   probably  all  known  to   them.     The   scale  gives 

"  doegr  "-sailing,  reckoning   2°    (or  120  geographical  miles)   to   each 

"  doegr's  "  sail 

winds  to  the  northern  regions,  they  landed  at  last  between  the  Greenlanders 
and  the  Bjarmas,  where  they  asserted  that  they  had  found  people  of  extraor- 
dinary size  and  the  Land  of  Virgins  ['  virginum  terram ']  who  are  said  to 
conceive  when  they  taste  water.  But  Greenland  is  separated  from  these  by 
ice-clad  skerries  ['  scopulis ']." 


the  aforesaid   Hornns  it  is  two   days'  and  two  nights'  sail  to   Sualberde   in 
haffsbaane  (or  haffsbotnen)."     [F.  Jonsson,  1899,  p.  323.] 

1  Monumenta  hist.  Norv.,  ed.  G.  Storm,  1880,  pp.  74  f.,  79. 

2  In  the  "Rymbegla"  [1780,  p.  350]  is  mentioned,  together  with  other 
fabulous  beings  in  this  part  of  the  world,  "  the  people  called  *  Hornfinnar,'  they 
have  in  their  foreheads  a  horn  bent  dovmwards,  and  they  are  cannibals." 

167 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

And  in  a  later  passage  we  read: 

"  The  fourth  part  [of  Norway]  is  Halogia,  whose  inhabitants  live  in  great 
measure  with  the  Finns  [Lapps],  and  trade  with  them;  this  land  forms  the 
boundary  of  Norway  on  the  north  as  far  as  the  place  called  Wegestaf,  which 
divides  it  from  Bjarmeland  [*  Biarmonia '] ;  there  is  the  very  deep  and  north- 
erly gulf  which  has  in  it  Charybdis,  Scylla,  and  unavoidable  whirlpools;  there 
are  also  ice-covered  promontories  which  plunge  into  the  sea  immense  masses 
of  ice  that  have  been  increased  by  heaving  floods  and  are  frozen  together  by 
the  winter  cold;  with  these  traders  often  collide  against  their  will,  when  making 
for  Greenland,  and  thus  they  suffer  shipwreck  and  run  into  danger." 

It  may  seem  probable  that  the  description  of  a  country  in 
the  north  referred  to  Svalbard;  and  the  naive  allusion  to 
glacier-ice  plunging  from  the  land  is  most  likely  to  be  derived 
from  voyagers  to  the  Polar  Sea;  for  it  seems  less  probable 
that  it  should  be  merely  information  about  Greenland  transferred 
to  the  North.  Storm,  it  is  true,  dated  the  "  Historia  Norvegiae," 
between  1180  and  1190,  that  is,  before  the  discovery  of  Svalbard 
according  to  the  annals;  but  later  writers  place  it  in  the 
thirteenth  century,  even  as  late  as  the  year  1260.  The 
ideas  of  the  people  of  great  size  and  of  the  Land  of  Virgins 
are  obviously  taken  from  Adam  of  Bremen,  and  may  be  a 
literary  ornament. 

There  have  been  different  opinions  as  to  what  country 
Svalbard  was.  Many  have  thought  that  it  might  be  the 
northern  east  coast  of  Greenland;  Jan  Mayen  has  also  been 
mentioned;  while  others,  like  S.  Thorlacius,  a  hundred 
years  ago  (1808),  supposed  that  it  was  "the  Siberian  coasts 
of  the  Arctic  Ocean,  lying  to  the  east  of  Permia  [Bjarmeland], 
that  the  ancient  Norsemen  included  under  the  name  of  Svalbard, 
i.e.,  the  cold  coast."  Gustav  Storm  [1890,  p.  344]  maintained 
that  Svalbard  in  all  probability  must  be  Spitzbergen,^  and 
many  reasons  point  to  the  correctness  of  this  supposition. 

No  certain  conclusion  can  be  drawn  about  Svalbard  from 
the  passage  quoted  from  the  Landnamabok.  "  On  the  north 
in  Hafsbotn,"  must  mean  in  some  northerly  direction;  for 
it  is  only  the  chief  points  of  the  compass,  north,   south,  and 

1  Cf.  also  A.  Bugge,  1898,  p.  499;  G.  Isachsen,  1907. 
168 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

west  that  are  mentioned,  and  no  intermediate  points;  for 
one  course  alone,  from  Bergen  to  Hvarf  in  Greenland,  the 
direction  "due  west"  is  given,  which  must  be  true  west.^ 
Langanes  is  said  to  lie  on  the  north  side  of  Iceland  instead  of 
on  the  north-east,  from  Reykjanes  to  Ireland  the  course  was 
south,  instead  of  south-east,  etc.  The  points  of  the  compass 
are  evidently  used  in  the  same  way  as  is  still  common  in 
Norway ;  "  in  the  north  of  the  valley "  may  be  used  even  if 
the  valley  bends  almost  to  the  west.  The  "  Landnama's  "  state- 
ment [Sturlubok]  that  it  is  four  "  doegrs'  sea  "  from  Snaefellsnes 
"  west "  to  Greenland  (i.e.,  Hvarf)  then  agrees  entirely  with 
the  common  mode  of  expression  that  I  have  found  among 
the  arctic  sailors  of  our  day  in  Denmark  Strait,  where  they 
never  talk  of  anything  but  sailing  east  or  west  along  the  edge 
of  the  ice,  even  though  it  is  north-east  and  south-west;  we 
sail  westward  from  Faerder  to  Christiansand,  or  we  travel 
south  from  Christiania  to  Christiansand.  Consequently  "  on 
the  north  in  Hafsbotn"  means  the  same  as  when  we  say 
north  in  Finmark  (cf.  Ottar's  directions.  Vol.  I,  p.  171),  or  even 
north   in  the   White   Sea,  and   speak  of  sailing  north  to  Jan 

1  True  north  of  Langanes  there  is  no  land:  Jan  Mayen  lies  nearest,  N.N.E., 
and  Greenland  W.N.W.  As  the  "  leidar-stein  "  (compass)  was  known  in  Ice- 
land when  Hauk's  Landnamabok  was  written  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  248),  magnetic  di- 
rections might  be  meant  here,  and  the  variation  of  the  compass  may  at  that 
time  have  been  great  enough  to  make  Greenland  lie  north  (magnetic)  of  Lan- 
ganes. In  that  case  it  is  perhaps  strange  that  Langanes  should  be  mentioned 
as  the  starting-point,  and  not  some  place  that  lay  nearer;  but  it  might  be  sup- 
posed that  this  was  because  one  had  first  to  sail  far  to  the  east  to  avoid  the 
ice,  when  making  for  the  northern  east  coast  of  Greenland.  A  large  eastern 
variation  would  also  agree  with  Jolldulaup  in  Ireland  lying  south  of  Reykjanes, 
the  uninhabited  parts  of  Greenland  lying  north  of  Kolbeinsey  (Mevenklint,  see 
Vol.  I,  p.  286),  and  the  statement  in  the  Sturlubok  that  from  Snsfellsnes  it  was 
"four  'doegrs"  sea  west  to  Greenland"  (i.e.,  Hvarf).  But  it  does  not  agree 
with  this  that  from  Bergen  (or  Henno)  the  course  was  "  due  west "  to  Hvarf 
in  Greenland;  and  still  less  does  it  agree  with  its  being,  according  to  the  Stur- 
lubok, "  seven  '  dcEgrs' '  sail  west  from  Stad  in  Norway  to  Horn  in  East  Ice- 
land." If  these  are  courses  by  compass,  we  must  then  suppose  a  large  eastern 
variation  between  Norway  and  Iceland,  which  indeed  is  not  impossible,  but 
which  will  not  accord  with  a  large  western  variation  between  Reykjanes  and 
Ireland.    The  probability  is,  therefore,  that  magnetic  courses  are  not  intended. 

169 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

Mayen.  As  Langanes  in  particular,  the  north-east  point  of 
Iceland,  is  mentioned  as  the  starting-point,  we  should  be 
inclined  to  think  that  Svalbard  was  supposed  to  lie  in  a  north- 
easterly direction;  it  is  true  that  the  course  to  Ireland  is 
calculated  from  Reykjanes  and  not  from  the  south-east  point 
of  Iceland;  but  this  may  be  because  the  voyage  was  mostly 
made  from  the  west  country. 

The  distances  given  in  these  sailing  directions  in  the 
Landnamabok  are  even  less  accurate  than  the  points  of  the 
compass.  From  Stad  in  Norway  to  the  east  coast  of  Iceland 
is  said  to  be  seven  "  dcegrs' "  sail,  while  from  Snaefellsnes  to 
Hvarf  is  four  "doegr,"  from  Reykjanes  to  Ireland  three  or 
five  "dcegr,"  from  Langanes  to  Svalbard  four  "doegr,"  and 
from  Kolbeins-ey  to  the  uninhabited  parts  of  Greenland  one 
"doegr."  The  actual  distances  are,  however,  approximately: 
from  Norway  to  Iceland  548  nautical  miles,  from  Snaefellsnes 
to  Hvarf  692,  from  Reykjanes  to  Ireland  712,  from  Langanes 
to  Spitzbergen  840  (from  Langanes  to  Jan  Mayen  288),  and 
from  Mevenklint  to  the  east  coast  of  Greenland  184  nautical 
miles.  It  is  hopeless  to  look  for  any  system  in  this;  the 
distances  from  Iceland  to  Greenland  and  from  Iceland  to 
Ireland  are  given  as  being  much  less  (  1  and  3  or  5.  )  than  the 
distance  from  Norway  to  Iceland,  whereas  in  reality  they  are 
considerably  more.  In  the  fourth  part  of  the  "  R5niibegla " 
[1780,  p.  482]  a  "doegr's"  sail  is  given  as  equal  to  two 
degrees  of  latitude,  that  is,  120  nautical  miles  (or  twenty-four 
of  the  old  Norwegian  sea  leagues),  but  according  to  the 
measurements  given  there  would  be  eighty  nautical  miles  in 
a  "  doegr's "  sail  between  Norway  and  Iceland,  172  between 
Iceland  and  Greenland,  and  236  (or  144)  between  Iceland  and 
Ireland.  These  measurements  of  distance  are  therefore  far 
too  uncertain  to  be  of  any  use  in  finding  Svalbard.  According 
to  the  scale  in  the  "  R5nTibegla "  it  would  be  two  and  a  half 
"  doegr "  to  Jan  Mayen,  and  seven  "  doegr "  to  Spitzbergen 
from  Langanes.^ 

1  As  already  mentioned,  a  "  dcEgr "  was  half  a  day  of  twenty-four  hours, 
170 


VOYAGES    IN   THE   POLAR   SEA 

The  old  Norwegians  imagined  Hafsbotn  (or  Trollabotn)  ^  as 
the  end  ("  botn  ")  of  the  ocean  to  the  north  of  Norway  and 
north-east  of  Greenland,  as  far  as  one  could  sail  to  the  north  in 
the  Polar  Sea.  But  Svalbard  lay,  according  to  the  Landnamabok, 
in  the  north  of  Hafsbotn;  and  if  one  tries  to  sail  northward 
in  summer  time,  either  from  Langanes,  the  north-east  point 
of  Iceland,  or  from  Norway,  endeavoring  to  keep  clear  of 
the  ice,  it  will  be  difficult  to  avoid  making  Spitzbergen.  If 
one  followed  the  edge  of  the  ice  northward  from  Iceland  in 
July,  it  would  infallibly  bring  one  there.  Such  a  voyage 
would  correspond  to  the  sailing  directions  from  Snaefellsnes 
when  they  steered  west  to  the  edge  of  the  ice  off  Greenland, 
and  then  followed  it  south-westward  round  Hvarf.  On  the 
other  hand,  it  would  be  impossible  to  arrive  at  the  northern 
east  coast  of  Greenland  without  venturing  far  into  the  ice, 
and  it  is  not  likely  that  the  ancient  Norsemen  would  have 
done  this  unless  they  knew  that  there  was  land  on  the  inside 
and  consequently  hunting-grounds  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  286).  No  doubt 
one  might  make  Jan  Mayen;  but  it  is  difficult  to  suppose 
that  this  little  island  should  have  been  given  such  a  name, 
which  is  only  suited  to  the  coast  of  a  larger  country.  The 
conclusion  that  Svalbard  was  not  the  northern  east  coast  of 
Greenland  seems  also  justified  from  the  latter  being  mentioned 
and  a  "dcEgr's"  sail  is  thus  the  distance  sailed  in  a  day  or  in  a  night.  One 
might,  perhaps,  be  tempted  to  think  that  here,  where  it  is  a  question  of  sailing 
over  the  open  sea,  and  where  it  would  therefore  be  impossible  to  anchor  for 
the  night,  as  on  the  coast,  a  "  doegr's  "  sail  might  mean  the  distance  covered  in 
the  whole  twenty-four  hours  [cf.  G.  Isachsen,  1907] ;  but  it  appears  from  a  pas- 
sage in  St.  Olaf's  Saga  [in  "  Heimskringla  "],  among  others,  that  this  was  not 
the  usual  way  of  reckoning;  for  we  read  there  [cap.  125]  that  Thorarinn 
Nevjolfsson  sailed  in  eight  "  dcegr  "  from  More  in  Norway  to  Eyrar  in  south- 
western Iceland.  Thorarinn  went  straight  to  the  Althing  and  there  said  that 
"he  had  parted  from  King  Olaf  four  nights  before.  .  .  ."  The  eight  "dcegr" 
mean,  therefore,  four  days'  and  four  nights'  sailing.  Precisely  the  same  thing 
appears  from  the  sailing  directions  given  above  (p.  166)  from  Ivar  Bardsson's 
description,  where  four  "  doegrs' "  sea  is  taken  as  two  days'  and  two  nights'  sail. 
1  Sometimes  also  called  Nordbotn  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  262,  303),  perhaps  mostly 
in  fairy-tales.  This  form  of  the  name  is  still  extant  in  a  fairy-tale  from  Fyres- 
dal  and  Eidsborg  about  "  Riketor  Kraemar "  [H.  Ross  in  "  Dolen,"  1869,  vii. 
No.  23]. 

171 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

immediately  afterwards  in  Hauk's  Landnamabok  under  the 
name  of  "the  uninhabited  parts  of  Greenland,"  one  "doegr's" 
sail  north  of  Kolbeins-ey  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  286,  Vol.  II,  p.  166). 

As  has  already  been  said,  the  Norwegians  [cf.  "  Historia 
Norvegiae  "  and  the  "  King's  Mirror  "  ]  and  Icelanders  [cf.  the 
mediaeval  Icelandic  geography],  thought  that  "land  ex- 
tended from  Bjarmeland  to  the  uninhabited  parts  in  the 
north,  and  as  far  as  the  beginning  of  Greenland,"  that  is, 
round  the  whole  of  the  north  of  Hafsbotn.  From  several 
legendary  sagas  of  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries  we 
can  see  that  Svalbard  was,  in  fact,  reckoned  among  these  unin- 
habited parts  in  the  north,  which  were  reached  by  sailing 
past  Halogaland  and  Finmark,  and  northward  over  Dumbshav 
(see  map,  p.  34). 

Thus,  in  Samson  Fagre's  Saga  (of  about  1350)  we  read  in 
the  thirteenth  chapter,  "On  the  situation  of  the  northern 
lands  " : 

"  Risaland  lies  east  and  north  of  the  Baltic,  and  to  the  north-east  of  it  lies 
the  land  that  is  called  Jotunheimar,  and  there  dwell  trolls  and  evil  spirits,  but 
from  thence  until  it  meets  the  uninhabited  parts  of  Greenland  goes  the  land 
that  is  called  Svalbard;  there  dwell  various  peoples."  [Gronl.  hist.  Mind.,  iii. 
p.  524.] 

The  outcome  of  what  has  been  advanced  above  will  be 
briefly:  there  can  be  no  doubt,  from  the  positive  statement  in 
the  Icelandic  annals  and  in  the  "  Landnama,"  that  the  land  of 
Svalbard  really  was  discovered,  even  though  the  date  need 
not  be  accurate;  and  it  may  further  be  regarded  as  probable 
that   this   land   was   Spitzbergen. 

It  may  be  supposed  that  it  was  discovered  accidentally  by 
a  ship  on  the  way  between  Iceland  and  Norway,  as  stated  in 
the  "  Historia  Norvegiae,"  being  driven  by  storms  to  the  north 
of  Hafsbotn;  but  the  mention  of  the  country  in  the  Land- 
namabok may  indicate  that  the  voyage  was  made  more  than 
once,  and  that  knowledge  of  the  country  cannot,  in  any  case, 
have  been  limited  to  an  accidental  discovery  of  this  sort. 
It  is  more  probable  that  the  Norwegians  and  Icelanders  carried 
172 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

on  seal  and  walrus  hunting  northward  along  the  edge  of 
the  ice  in  the  Polar  Sea,  and  in  that  case  it  was  unavoidable 
that  they  should  arrive  at  Svalbard,  or  Spitzbergen.  And  when 
it  was  once  discovered  they  must  often  have  resorted  to  it; 
for  the  valuable  walrus  was  at  that  time  very  plentiful  there. 

As  we  nowhere  find  mention  of  these  sealing  expeditions 
of  the  Norwegians  in  the  Polar  Sea,  except  in  Ottar's  narrative, 
it  may  be  difficult  to  show  certain  evidence  of  their  having 
taken  place;  but  the  Russians'  seal  hunting  in  the  Polar 
Sea,  of  which  we  hear  as  early  as  the  sixteenth  century,  can  in 
my  opinion  scarcely  be  explained  in  any  other  way  than  as  a 
continuation,  in  the  main,  of  the  Norwegian's  sealing.  When 
the  English,  and  later  the  Dutch,  came  to  the  Murman  coast 
and  the  coasts  eastward  as  far  as  the  Pechora,  Vaigach,  and 
Novaya  Zemlya,  they  found  fleets  of  Russian  smacks  engaged 
in  fishing  and  walrus  hunting;  most  of  them  were  from  the 
Murman  coast,  some  from  the  White  Sea,  and  a  few  from  the 
Pechora.  Stephen  Burrough  thus  found  in  June,  1556,  no  less 
than  thirty  smacks  in  the  Kolafjord,  which  had  come  sailing 
down  the  river,  on  their  way  to  fishing-  and  sealing-grounds 
to  the  east.  These  smacks  sailed  well  with  the  wind  free, 
could  also  be  rowed  with  twenty  oars,  and  had  each  a  crew  of 
twenty-four  men. 

Pistorius  ^  refers  to  Andrei  Mikhow  as  saying  that  the 
"  Juctri "  (Yugrians  in  the  Pechora  district)  and  "  Coreli " 
(Karelians)  on  the  coast  of  the  Polar  Sea  hunted  seals  and 
whales,  of  whose  skins  they  made  ropes,  purses,  and  .  .  .? 
("redas,  bursas  et  coletas"),  and  used  the  blubber  (for  light- 
ing?) and  sold  it.  They  also  hunted  walrus  (called  by  Mikhow 
by  its  Norwegian  name  "rosmar"),-  the  tusks  of  which  they 
sold  to  the  Russians.  The  latter  kept  a  certain  quantity  for 
their  own  use,  and  sent  the  rest  to  Tartary  and  Turkey.     The 

1  Pistorius,  Polonicae  historiae  corpus,  1582,  i.  150.  I  have  not  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  consulting  this  work.  We  saw  above  (p.  163,  note)  that  Olaus  Mag- 
nus also  quotes  Mikhow. 

2  Cf.  Noel,  1815,  p.  215. 

^72> 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

hunting  was  said  to  proceed  in  a  curious  fashion;  the  walruses, 
which  were  very  numerous,  clambering  up  on  to  the  mountain- 
ridges  and  there  perishing  in  great  numbers.^  The  Yugrians 
and  Karelians  then  collected  the  tusks  on  the  shore.  Is  there 
here  some  confusion  with  stories  of  the  collection  of  mammoth 
tusks? 

What  was  said  earlier  (p.  145)  from  an  Arabian  source 
about  steel  blades  being  sold  to  the  peoples  on  the  coast  of 
the  Polar  Sea  in  North  Russia  seems  to  point  to  sea  hunting 
having  been  well  developed  in  these  regions  as  early  as  the 
twelfth  century;  for  otherwise  steel  for  hunting  appliances 
could  not   have   been  a   common   article   of   commerce. 

That  Norwegians  and  Russians  often  met  in  northern  waters 
may  apparently  be  concluded  from  the  words  already  quoted 
from  Erik  Walkendorf,  about  1520  (cf.  p.  86),  that  fifteen 
of  the  Skrselings  did  not  venture  to  approach  a  Christian  or 
Ruten  (i.e.,  Russian).  As  he  places  the  land  of  the  Skraslings 
north-north-west  of  Finmark,  this  seems  to  be  a  legend  that 
is  brought  into  connection  with  the  Polar  Sea.  Of  walrus 
tusks  he  says  that  "  these  are  costly  and  greatly  prized  among 
the  Russians."  Unless  this  is  taken  from  older  literary 
sources  (?),  one  might  suppose  that  it  was  information  he 
himself  had  obtained  in  Finmark,  and  it  might  then  point 
to  the  Norwegians  having  sold  walrus  tusks  to  the  Russians. 

The  fact  that,  as  mentioned  above,  a  Russian  author  of 
the  sixteenth  century  (Mikhow)  uses  the  Norwegian  name 
"rosmar"  seems  also  to  point  to  Russian  connection  with 
the  Norwegians  in  the  arctic  fisheries.  In  addition  to  this, 
the  Russian  word  "  morsh "  for  walrus  is  evidently  the  same 
as  the  Lappish  "morssa"  (Finnish  "mursu"),  and  may 
originally  be  the  same  word  as  "rosmar"  ("rosmhvalr"). 
For  it  is  striking  that  the  same  letters  are  present  in  "  morsh  " 
or    "morssa"    as    in   "  rosm(hvalr),"    or   in    "rosmar";    there 

1  The  idea  may  have  arisen  through  a  misunderstanding  of  stories  that  the 
walruses  often  lie  in  great  herds,  close  together,  on  the  tops  of  skerries  and 
small  islands,  and  are  there  speared  in  great  numbers  by  the  hunters. 


VOYAGES    IN    THE    POLAR    SEA 

is  only  a  transference  of  consonants,  which  is  often  met  with 
in  borrowed   words  in  different   languages. 

I  asked  Professor  Konrad  Nielsen  what  he  thought  about  this,  and  whether 
he  could  imagine  any  Finnish-Ugrian  origin  of  the  word,  or  whether  any 
similar  word  was  known,  for  instance,  in  Samoyed.  He  considers  that  my  as- 
sumption may  "  be  quite  well  founded."  ^  He  has  consulted  Professor  Setala 
of  Helsingfors  about  it,  and  the  latter  thinks  that  if  the  word  was  borrowed 
from  Finnish  into  Russian,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  its  being  connected  with 
the  Norse  rosm  (hvalr) — the  latter  would  then,  of  course,  be  the  primary 
form.  Similar  metatheses  are  found  in  other  Norse  loan-words  in  Finnish. 
Konrad  Nielsen  thinks  that  "the  Lappish  word  is  pretty  certainly  borrowed 
from  Finnish,  so  that  the  idea  of  its  Norse  origin  meets  with  no  difficulty  from 
that  quarter."  And  as  to  the  possible  Russian  origin  of  the  word,  he  has 
spoken  to  the  Slavic  authority.  Professor  Mikkola,  who  informs  him  that  in 
popular  language  the  Russian  word  is  only  found  in  the  most  northern  dialects, 
and  there  is  no  point  of  connection  in  other  Slavic  languages,  so  that  he  re- 
gards it  as  probable  that  it  is  not  originally  a  Slavic  word.  No  Finnish-Ugrian 
etymology  for  the  word  can,  according  to  Konrad  Nielsen,  be  put  forward. 
"  In  Samoyed,"  he  says,  "  the  name  for  walrus  is  only  known  as  far  as  Jura- 
Samoyed  (the  most  western  dialect  of  Samoyed)  is  concerned:  't'ewot'e,' 
'  tiut'ei.'  I  have  compared  this  with  the  Lappish  name  for  seal,  *  daevok ' — 
*davak* — 'daevkka.'  In  this  I  see  evidence  that  the  Lapps  (contrary  to  Wik- 
lund's  view)  were  acquainted  with  the  Polar  Sea  and  its  animals  before  they 
came  to  Scandinavia."  He  also  draws  my  attention  to  the  fact  that  "  the  Fin- 
nish 'norsu'  (in  the  older  language  also  'nursa').  'elephant,'  seems  to  be  con- 
nected with  '  mursu,'  which  is  easily  explained  by  the  analogous  use  of  walrus- 
tusks  and  elephant-tusks." 

Professor  Olaf  Broch  also  considers  my  assumption  probable,  and  has  sub- 
mitted the  question  of  the  etymology  of  the  Russian  "  morsh  "  to  Professor 
Berneker,  who  may  doubtless  be  regarded  as  the  first  authority  in  questions  of 
this  kind.  He  replies  that  a  "  wdld  "  etymologist  might  connect  the  word  with 
a  series  of  words  in  Slavic  languages  which  express  various  movements;  but 

1  He  calls  my  attention  to  two  papers  by  Professor  Sophus  Bugge  [in  "  Ro- 
mania," iii.  1874,  p.  157,  and  iv.  1875,  p.  363],  in  which  the  etymology  of  the 
French  word  "  morse "  is  discussed.  Bugge  first  seeks  to  explain  the  word 
(precisely  as  above)  as  a  metathesis  for  "  rosme,"  from  the  Danish  "  rosmer  " 
=  Old  Norwegian  "  rosmall,"  "  rosmhvalr."  In  the  second  paper  he  withdraws 
this  explanation,  and  says  that  V.  Thomsen  has  pointed  out  to  him  the  identity 
of  "  morse "  with  the  Russian  "  morsh,"  Polish  "  mors,"  Czechic  "  mrz," 
Finnish  "  mursu,"  Lappish  "  mors."  The  word  would  "  according  to  V.  Thom- 
sen be  rather  of  Slavic  (cf.  'more,'  sea?)  than  of  Finnish  origin."  After  what 
•  has  been  advanced  above,  this  last  conclusion  may  be  somewhat  improbable. 
Professor  Nielsen  also  refers  to  Matzenauer  Cizi  slova,  p.  257,  which  I  have 
not  had  an  opportunity  of  consulting. 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

the  Russian  word,  being  so  definitely  localized,  must  doubtless  be  derived  from 
the  North-Finnish  linguistic  region.  Whether  the  Finnish  "mursu,"  Lappish 
"  morssa,"  "  morsa,"  can  be  referred  to  a  metathesis  of  Old  Norse  "  rosm- 
hvalr,"  Danish  "  rosmer,"  etc.,  Professor  Berneker  is  unable  to  determine. 
"  But  with  loan-words  all  sorts  of  anomalies  take  place,  and  no  rules  can  be 
laid  down." 

If  we  compare  these  various  utterances  of  such  eminent 
authorities,  it  appears  to  me  that  there  are  paramount  reasons 
for  regarding  the  Russian-Finnish  name  for  walrus  as  of 
Norse  origin.  But  in  that  case  it  also  becomes  probable  that 
the  Norwegians  were  the  pioneers  in  walrus  hunting  along 
the  coasts  of  the  Polar  Sea,  and  that  both  the  Finnish  peoples 
and  the  Russians  learned  from  them. 

It  will  doubtless  be  difficult  to  find  a  natural  explanation 
of  the  peoples  on  the  northern  coasts  of  Russia  having  from 
the  first  developed  their  arctic  sea  hunting  with  large  craft, 
unless  we  suppose  that  they  learned  it  from  the  Norwegians, 
and  that  it  is  thus  a  continuation  of  the  methods  of  the  latter. 
It  should  also  be  remembered  that  the  Kola  peninsula  as  far 
as  the  White  Sea  itself  was  reckoned  a  tributary  country  of 
Norway  (cf.  p.  135),  and  that  the  name  of  the  Murman  coast 
means  simply  the  Norwegians'  coast.  None  of  the  peoples 
on  the  north  coast  of  Russia  can  have  been  a  seafaring 
people  very  far  back,  as  is  shown  by  their  boats  and  appli- 
ances; and  it  is  difficult  to  believe  that  they  should  have 
been  able  to  develop  independently  a  system  of  navigation 
on  a  coast  presenting  such  unfavorable  conditions;  no 
doubt  they  could  have  done  so  with  small  boats,  originally 
river  boats,^  but  not  with  larger  craft;  this  they  must  most 

1  Professor  Olaf  Broch  has  described  to  me  the  peculiar  river  boat  that  is 
used  far  and  wide  in  North  Russia,  and  that  is  evidently  a  very  old  type  of 
boat.  Broch  saw  it  on  the  Sukhona,  a  tributary  of  the  Dvina.  The  bottom  of 
the  boat  is  a  dug-out  tree-trunk  of  considerable  size,  which  can  only  be  found 
farther  up  the  country.  By  heating  the  wood  the  sides  are  given  the  desired 
shape,  and  to  the  dug-out  foundation  is  fastened  a  board  on  each  side;  Broch 
did  not  remember  whether  it  was  sewed  or  nailed  on.  The  boat  is  thus  a 
transitional  form  between  the  dug-out  canoe  and  the  clinker-built  boat.  This 
type  of  boat  may  also  have  reached  the  shore  of  the  Polar  Sea;  but  there  can- 
not have  been  timber  for  building  it  there. 
176 


VOYAGES   IN   THE   POLAR   SEA 

probably  have  learned  from  their  nearest  seafaring  neighbors, 
the  Norwegians,  who  were  masters  at  sea. 

It  is  remarkable  that  already  as  early  as  in  Adam  of  Bremen 
white  bears  (polar  bears)  are  mentioned  as  occurring  in  Norway 
(cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  191  f.).  That  this  might  be  due  to  the  connec- 
tion with  Iceland  and  Greenland,  even  at  that  time,  is  perhaps 
possible,  but  not  very  probable,  as  these  countries  are  mentioned 
separately  by  Adam.  The  white  bears  in  Norway  may  rather 
point  to  a  connection  with  the  Polar  Sea  and  to  the  Norwegians 
having  practised  sealing  there. 

It  is  perhaps  due  to  the  same  connection  of  the  Norwegians  with  the  Polar 
Sea  that  we  find  on  the  Italian  Dalorto's  map  of  1325  (see  next  chapter)  and 
on  several  later  maps  the  statement  that  there  are  white  bears  in  northern 
Norway.  Probably  polar  bears'  skins  were  brought  to  the  south  from  Norway 
as  an  article  of  commerce  and  the  Norwegians  may  have  obtained  the  skins 
partly  by  their  own  hunting  in  the  Polar  Sea,  partly  by  the  trade  with  Green- 
land, and  partly,  no  doubt,  by  that  with  the  peoples  on  the  north  coast  of  Rus- 
'  sia.  The  Arab  Ibn  Sa'id  (thirteenth  century)  mentions  white  bears  in  the 
northern  islands,  among  them  the  island  of  white  falcons  (i.e.,  Iceland). 
"  These  bears'  skins  are  soft,  and  they  are  brought  to  the  Egyptian  lands  as 
gifts."  In  the  "  Geographia  Universalis  "  of  the  thirteenth  century  (see  next 
chapter)  the  white  bears  in  Iceland  are  described.  It  was  a  common  idea  in 
southern  Europe  in  the  Middle  Ages  that  Greenland,  and  sometimes  also  Ice- 
land (cf.  Fra  Mauro's  map),  lay  to  the  north  of  Norway,  or  they  were  made 
continuous  with  it,  and  even  a  part  of  it. 

The  Venetian  Querini,  who  was  wrecked  on  Rost  Island  and  traveled  south 
through  Norway  in  1432,  says  that  he  saw  a  perfectly  white  bear's  skin  at  the 
foot  of  the  Metropolitan's  chair  in  St.  Olaf's  Church  at  Trondhjem.i  As 
Greenland  was  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Archbishop  of  Trondhjem,  this 
skin  may  have  been  a  gift  from  pious  Greenlanders,  as  perhaps  were  also  the 
Eskimo  hide-canoes  mentioned  by  Claudius  Clavus  (cf.  p.  85).  In  Norse  litera- 
ture polar  bears  are  always  connected  with  Icelanders  or  Greenlanders, 
who  sometimes  brought  them  alive  as  gifts  to  kings. 

We  may  thus  conclude  from  what  has  been  advanced 
above  that  the  hunting  of  whales,  seals,  and  particularly 
walrus  was  of  great  importance  to  the  Norwegians  in  ancient 
times,  and  for  the  sake  of  the  last  they  certainly  made  extended 
expeditions  in  the  Arctic  Ocean.  It  may  therefore  be  difficult 
to  understand  how  it  came  about  that  this  sea  hunting  declined 

1  Cf.  A.  Helland,  Nordlands  Amt,  1908,  ii.  p.  888. 

177 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

to  such  an  extent  in  more  recent  times  that  we  hear  nothing 
about  the  Norwegians'  hunting  in  the  Polar  Sea,  while  in  the 
sixteenth  century  fleets  from  the  northern  coasts  of  Russia 
were  engaged  in  fishing  and  walrus  hunting;  and  Peder 
Clausson  Friis  is  able  to  say  of  whaling  in  Norway  (about 
1613): 

"In  old  time  many  expedients  or  methods  were  used  in  these  lands  [i.e., 
Norway]  for  catching  whales  .  .  .  but  on  account  of  men's  unskilfulness 
they  have  fallen  out  of  use,  so  that  they  now  have  no  means  of  hunting  the 
whale  unless  he  drifts  ashore  to  them." 

This  seems  to  show  that  the  Norwegians'  whaling  in  open 
sea  had  really  gone  out  of  practice,  for  otherwise  this  author 
must  have  known  of  it;  on  the  other  hand,  whale  hunting 
in  the  fjords,  which  were  closed  by  nets,  has  continued  to 
our  time.  Walrus  hunting  (as  well  as  sealing)  appears  to 
have  been  still  carried  on  in  Finmark  in  Peder  Clausson  Friis's 
time. 

His  description  of  the  animal  and  its  hunting  is  in  part  accompanied  by 
stories  similar  to  those  in  Olaus  Magnus  and  Albertus  Magnus  (see  p.  163), 
and  he  mentions  the  great  strength  of  walrus-hide  ropes,  and  their  use  "  for 
clappers  in  hanging  bells,  item  for  shore-ropes  and  other  ropes,  and  for  the 
screws  on  the  quay  at  Bergen,  with  which  the  dried  fish  is  screwed  into  bar- 
rels, and  for  such  other  uses  as  no  hawser  or  cable  can  so  well  serve  for." 
This  shows  that  these  ropes  must  have  been  widely  employed  and  that  there 
must  have  been  considerable  hunting  of  walrus.  According  to  an  order  of 
Christiern  IV.,  dated  from  Bergenhus  Castle,  July  6,  1622,  fifteen  walrus  hides 
were  to  be  bought  yearly  for  the  king's  service,^  and  from  K.  Leem's  descrip- 
tion it  seems  that  walrus  was  still  hunted  in  Finmark  in  his  time  (1767).  He 
says  too  [1767,  p.  302]  that  "even  the  Sea  Lapps  of  the  Varangerfiord  for- 
merly practised  whaling,  using  for  that  purpose  appliances  invented  and  made 
by  themselves."  To  this  is  added  in  a  note  by  Gunnerus:  "The  same  thing 
may  also  be  said  in  our  time  of  the  Lapps  in  Schjerv  Island  and  of  a  few 
peasants  in  Nordland,  especially  in  Ofoten." 

But  in  none  of  these  accounts  is  there  any  hint  that  the 
Norwegians  carried  on  their  hunting  beyond  the  limits  of  the 
country,  as  Ottar  did  in  the  ninth  century. 

The  decline  of  this  productive  hunting  may  have  come 
about  through  the  concurrence  of  many  circumstances.     Hostile 

1  Cf.  K.  Leem,  1767,  p.  216. 
178 


VOYAGES   IN   THE   POLAR   SEA 

relations  with  the  Karelians  and  Russians  on  the  east  may  have 
had  some  influence  on  it;  as  the  latter  in  increasing  numbers 
took  up  the  same  hunting  in  their  smacks,  the  eastward  waters 
may  have  become  unsafe  for  the  Norwegians,  who,  though 
superior  in  seamanship,  were  inferior  in  numbers.  But  a 
more  important  factor  was  the  rapid  growth  of  the  fisheries 
on  the  home  coasts  in  Finmark  after  the  fourteenth  century, 
which  may  have  claimed  all  available  hands,  leaving  none 
over  for  fishing  in  more  distant  waters.  Besides  which  the 
influence  of  the  Hanseatic  League  no  doubt  contributed; 
then,  as  later,  they  learned  to  prefer  the  valuable  trade  in 
dried  fish  to  fitting  out  vessels  for  the  more  uncertain  and 
dangerous  hunting  in  the  Polar  Sea,  which  they  knew  noth- 
ing about.  Finally  came  the  royal  edict  of  April,  1562,  which 
enforced  Bergen's  monopoly  in  the  trade  with  Finmark, 
whereby  the  mortmain  was  laid  upon  this  part  of  the  country, 
as  formerly  upon  Greenland.  In  those  days  a  corresponding 
displacement  of  the  arctic  fisheries  must  have  taken  place 
from  Norway  to  north  Russia,  as  in  the  last  century  again  a 
displacement  took  place  in  the  contrary  direction,  when  the 
Russian  hunting  in  the  Arctic  Ocean  and  Spitzbergen  ceased 
and  the  Norwegians  again  became  the  only  hunters  in  these 
waters. 

It  was  a  concatenation  of  unfortunate  accidents  that  pro- 
duced the  gradual  decline  of  the  voyages  of  the  Norwegians 
and  of  their  unrestricted  command  of  all  northern  waters 
from  the  White  Sea,  and  probably  also  Novaya  Zemlya  and 
Spitzbergen,  all  over  the  northern  islands,  Shetland,  the 
Orkneys  (to  some  extent  the  Hebrides,  Man,  and  Ireland), 
the  Faroes,  Iceland,  and  as  far  as  Greenland,  and  probably 
also  for  a  time  the  north-east  coast  of  America.  Unfavorable 
political  conditions  had  a  great  deal  to  do  with  this,  not  the 
least  of  them  being  the  long  union  with  Denmark,  with  the 
removal  of  the  seat  of  government  to  Copenhagen,  which  was 
extremely  unfavorable  to  the  interests  of  Norwegian  commerce. 
To  this  was  added  the  growing  power  of  the  Hanseatic  League 

179 


IN   NORTHERN    MISTS 

in  Norway,  the  effect  of  which  was  as  demoralizing  to  all  activ- 
ity in  the  country  as  it  was  paralyzing  to  our  navigation.  But 
not  the  least  destructive  were  the  royal  monopolies  of  trade  with 
the  so-called  tributary  countries  of  the  kingdom;  like  all  State 
monopolies,  they  laid  their  dead  hand  upon  all  private  enter- 
prise. In  this  way  the  Norwegian  command  of  northern  waters 
received  its  death-blow;  while  the  mercantile  fleets  of  other  na- 
tions, especially  the  English,  came  to  the  fore,  to  a  large  extent 
by  making  use  of  Norwegian  seamanship  and  enterprise;  thus 
the  English  seaport  of  Bristol  seems  to  have  had  many  Nor- 
wegians among  its  citizens,  who  certainly  found  there  better  con- 
ditions to  work  under  than  at  home. 

The  mass  of  knowledge  the  Norwegians  had  acquired 
about  the  northern  regions,  before  their  time  entirely  unknown, 
was  to  a  great  extent  forgotten  again;  and  at  the  close  of 
the  Middle  Ages  all  that  remained  was  the  communication 
with  Iceland  and  the  knowledge  of  the  neighboring  seas, 
besides  the  continuance  of  the  connection  between  the  White 
Sea  and  Norway;  while  the  voyage  to  Greenland,  to  say 
nothing  of  America,  was  forgotten,  at  any  rate  by  the  mass  of 
the  people. 

The  development  of  humanity  often  proceeds  with  a  strangely 
lavish  waste  of  forces.  How  many  needless  plans  and  unsuc- 
cessful voyages,  how  much  toil  and  how  many  human  lives 
would  not  a  knowledge  of  the  Norwegians'  extensive  discoveries 
have  been  able  to  save  in  succeeding  ages?  How  very  different, 
too,  might  have  been  the  development  of  many  things,  if  by  the 
chances  of  an  unlucky  destiny  the  decline  of  Norwegian  navi- 
gation had  not  come  just  at  a  time  when  maritime  enterprise 
received  such  a  powerful  impetus  among  more  southern  nations, 
especially  the  Portuguese,  then  the  Spaniards,  later  the  French, 
the  English,  and  the  Dutch.  By  their  great  discoveries  it  was 
these  nations  who  introduced  a  new  era  in  the  history  of 
navigation,  and  also  in  that  of  polar  voyages.  But  if  Norwegian 
seamanship  had  still  been  at  its  height  at  that  time,  then  cer- 
tainly the  Scandinavians  of  Greenland  would  once  more  have 
1 80 


VOYAGES   IN   THE   POLAR   SEA 

sought  the  already  discovered  countries  on  the  west  and  south- 
west, and  the  Greenland  settlements  might  then  have  formed 
an  important  base  for  new  undertakings,  whereby  a  new 
period  of  prosperity  for  Norwegian  navigation  and  Norwegian 
enterprise  might  have  been  introduced.  This  was  not  to  be; 
it  was  only  reserved  for  the  Norwegians  to  be  the  people  who 
showed  the  way  to  the  other  nations  out  from  the  coasts  and 
over  the  great  oceans. 


i8i 


CHAPTER   XIII 

THE  NORTH  IN  MAPS  AND  GEOGRAPHICAL  WORKS 
OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES 

AT  the  beginning  of  the  Middle  Ages  and  down  to  the 
fifteenth  century  the  cartography  of  the  Greeks,  which 
had  reached  its  summit  in  the  work  of  Ptolemy,  was  entirely 
unknown  in  Europe;  while  the  early  Greek  conceptions  (those 
of  the  Ionian  school)  of  the  disc  of  the  earth  or  "  cEcumene  "  as 
a  circle  (called  by  the  Romans  "  orbis  terrarum,"  the  circle  of 
the  earth)  round  the  Mediterranean — and  externally  surrounded 
by  the  universal  ocean — had  persisted  through  the  late  Latin 
authors,  and  probably  also  through  Roman  maps.  At  the 
same  time  Parmenides's  doctrine  of  zones  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  12,  123), 
remained  prevalent  owing  to  its  enunciation  by  Macrobius, 
and  maps  exhibiting  this  doctrine  were  common  until  the 
sixteenth  century.  These  two  conceptions  became  the  founda- 
tion of  the  learned  view  and  representation  of  the  world,  and 
consequently  also  of  the  North,  throughout  the  greater  part  of 
the  Middle  Ages.  It  was  the  age  of  speculation,  not  of  observa- 
tion. The  Scandinavians  were  the  first  innovators  in  geography, 
182 


MEDIiEVAL    CARTOGRAPHY 


by  going  straight  to  nature  as  it  is,  unfettered  by  dogmas. 
The  Italian  and  Catalan  sailors  followed  later  with  their 
portulans  (sailing-books)  and  compass-charts. 

We  find  what  is  perhaps  the  oldest  known  Christian  map 
of  the  world  (cf.  Vol. 
I,  p.  126)  in  the 
"  Christian  T  o  p  o  g- 
raphy "  of  Cosmas 
Indicopleustes.^  A  n 
attempt  is  made  to 
combine  the  Roman 
classical  view  of  the 
world,  as  lands  grouped 
round  the  Mediter- 
ranean, with  Cosmas's 
pious  conception  of  it 
as  formed  on  the  same 
rectangular  plan  as 
the  Jews'  tabernacle. 
A  map  of  the  world 
of  somewhat  similar 
form  is  found  in  a 
MS.  (by  Orosius  and  ^^P  °^  ^^^  ^^''^^  f^°"^  ^^^'  ^"  Languedoc, 
T   ,.  TT  •      \  r    also    called    the    Merovingian    map    (eighth 

Juhus     Honorius)     of  ^^^^^^^^     ^^^    ^^^^    .^    ^^    ^^^    ^^p^    ^^^ 

the       eighth       century,  Mediterranean     in     the     middle,     and     the 

preserved   in  the  universal  ocean  outside,  with  its  three  bays: 

library       at       Albi      in  *^^  Caspian  Sea,  the  Persian  Gulf,  and  the 

_                ,            -r.         ,  Red   Sea 

Languedoc,     But  these 

attempts  must  be  regarded  as  accidental.  Typical  of  that  time 
were  the  so-called  wheel-  or  T-maps,  the  shape  of  which  was 
due  especially  to  Isidore  Hispaliensis  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  151  f.). 
The  circular  Roman  maps  of  the  world  seem  already  to  have 
had  a  tendency  to  a  tripartition  of  the  world:  Europe,  Asia 
and  Africa.  Sallust  (in  the  "  Bellum  Jugurthinum ")  indicates 
something    of    the    sort,    and    Orosius's    geographical    system 

1  The  Florentine  MS.  of  it  dates  from  the  ninth  century. 

183 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

seems  to  be  founded  upon  a  map  of  this  kind.  In  St.  Augustine 
we  first  find  the  division  of  the  T-map  clearly  expressed.  This 
dogmato-schematic  form  was  fixed  by  Isidore,  according  to 
whom  the  round  disc  of  the  earth  surrounded  by  the  outer 
ocean  was  to  be  corripared  to  a  wheel  (or  an  O),  divided  into 
three  by  a  T.^     Mechanical  map-forms  after  this  prescription 


Beatus  map,  from  Osma,  1203.    The  east  is  at  the  top. 

(cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  125,  150)  were  common  during  the  whole  of  the 
first  part  of  the  Middle  Ages  until  the  fourteenth  century ;  indeed 
they  circulated  and  exercised  influence  far  into  the  sixteenth; 
but  sometimes,  in  accordance  with  the  four  corners  of  the  earth 
in  the  Bible,  the  maps  were  given  a  square  form  instead  of  a 

iPor  this  reason  they  were  also  called  OT-maps,  which  corresponded  to 
the  initial  letters  of  "  orbis  terrarum." 
184 


MEDIAEVAL    CARTOGRAPHY 


round.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  most  authors,  among  them 
Isidore  himself,  expressly  declare  that  the  earth  had  the  form 
of  a  globe,  this  does  not  seem  to  have  been  anything  more  than 
a  purely  theoretical  doctrine,  for  in  cartographical  representa- 
tions, through  the  whole  of  the  Middle  Ages  to  about  the  close 
of  the  fifteenth  century,  there  is  never  any  hint  of  projection, 
or  of  any  difficulty  in  transferring  the  spherical  surface  of  the 
earth  to  a  plane,  which  had  been  so  clearly  present  to  the  minds 
of  the  Greeks. 

The  wheel-maps  were,  as  we  have  said,  from  the  first 
purely  formal ; 
but  by  degrees 
an  attempt  was 
made  to  bring 
into  the  scheme 
real  geographi- 
cal informa- 
tion, although 
the  endeavor 
to  approach 
reality  in  the 
representation 
is  scarcely  to 
be   traced.     To 

this  type  of  map  belongs  the  so-called  "  Beatus  map,"  which 
the  Spanish  monk  Beatus  (ob.  798)  added  to  his  commentary 
on  the  Apocalypse,  and  which  was  reproduced  in  very  vary- 
ing forms,  ten  of  which  have  been  preserved.  The  original 
map,  which  is  not  known,  was  probably  round,  but  in  the 
reproductions  the  circle  of  the  earth  is  sometimes  more  or 
less  round  (as  in  the  illustration,  p.  184),  sometimes  oblong 
(cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  199),  and  sometimes  four-sided  with  rounded 
corners  [cf.  K.  Miller,  ii.,  1895].  Jerusalem  was  frequently 
placed  in  the  center  of  the  wheel-maps.  Paradise  (often  with 
Adam  and  Eve  at  the  time  of  the  Fall,  or  with  the  four  rivers 
of  Paradise)  in  the  extreme  east  of  Asia,    which  is  at  the  top  of 

185 


Northern  Europe  on  Heinrich  of  Mainz's  map, 
at  Cambridge  (mo) 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

the  map,  and  the  Mediterranean  (Mare  magnum),  which  forms 
the  stem  of  the  T,  pointing  down  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  150).  The  cross- 
stroke  of  the  T  was  formed  by  the  rivers  Tanais  (with  the  Black 
Sea)  and  Nile.  In  the  band  of  ocean  surrounding  the  disc  of  the 
earth  the  oceanic  islands  were  distributed  more  or  less  according 
to  taste,  and  as  there  happened  to  be  room.  Thus  in  the  version 
of  the  Beatus  map  here  given,  from  Osma,  in  Spain  (of  1203), 


Northern  Europe  on  the  Hereford  map  (circa  1280) 

Scandinavia  appears  as  an  island  ("  Scada  insula ")  by  the 
North  Pole,  as  in  the  Ravenna  geographer  (cf.  the  map,  Vol.  I, 
p.  152),  and  the  "  Orcades "  (the  Orkneys),  and  "Gorgades" 
(the  fabulous  islands  of  the  Greeks  to  the  west  of  Africa)  are 
placed  on  the  north-east  of  Asia.  The  so-called  "  Sallust "  maps, 
drawn  up  from  Sallust's  description  of  the  world  in  the  "  Bellum 
Jugurthinum"  [cf.  K.  Miller,  iii.,  1895,  pp.  no  f.]  were  an- 
other type  of  very  formal  wheel-maps  that  were  still  current  in 
the  fourteenth  century. 
186 


MEDIEVAL    CARTOGRAPHY 


But  by  degrees  many  changes  were  introduced  into  the 
strict  scheme.  The  outer  coast-line  of  the  continents  was  in 
parts  indented  by  bays  and  prolonged  into  peninsulas,  and  the 
islands  were  given  a  less  formal  shape.  Such  attempts  appear, 
for  instance,  in  Heinrich  of  Mainz's  map,  which  is  taken  to 
have  been  drawn  in  mo  [cf.  K.  Miller,  iii.,  1895,  p.  22],  and 
the  closely  related  "Hereford  map"  of  about  1280  by  Richard 
de  Holdingham  [cf.  K.  Miller,  iv.,  1896;  Jomard,  1855].  Some 
resemblance  to  these  maps  is  shown  by  the  "  Psalter "  map 
in  London,  of  the 
second  half  of 
the  thirteenth 
century,  and  the 
closely  related 
"  Ebstorf  "  map 
of  1284  [cf.  K. 
Miller,  iii.,  pp. 
37  f.;  iv.,  p.  3; 
v.] ;  and  it  is 
quite    possible 

^  ^  Northern  part  of  the  Psalter  map  (thirteenth  century) 

be    derived    from 

the  same  original  source;  there  is  in  particular  a  great 
resemblance  in  their  representation  of  Britain  and  Ireland. 
On  the  first  three  of  these  maps  Scandinavia,  or  Norway 
("  Noreya,"  or  "  Norwegia ")  forms  a  peninsula  with  gulfs 
on  the  north  and  south  sides.  On  Heinrich's  map  there  is 
beyond  this  an  island  or  peninsula,  called  "  Ganzmir,"  a  name 
which  occurs  again  on  the  Hereford  map  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  15  f.) ; 
Miller  explains  it  as  a  corruption  of  Canzia,  Scanzia  (Scandi- 
navia). On  the  "Lambert"  map  in  the  Ghent  codex  of 
before  1125  [cf.  K.  Miller,  iii.,  1895,  p.  45],  "Scanzia,"  also 
with  the  name  "  Norwegia,"  is  represented  as  a  peninsula  with 
narrow  gulfs  running  up  into  the  continent  on  each  side. 
"  Island "  (or  "  Ysland ")  appears  on  Heinrich's  and  the 
Hereford  maps  as  an  island  near  Norway.     On  the  Ebstorf  map 

187 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

"  Scandinavia  insula "  and  "  Norwegia "  are  also  shown  as 
islands.  Many  fabulous  countries,  such  as  "  Iperboria "  (the 
land  of  the  Hyperboreans),  "  Arumphei "  (on  the  Psalter  map, 
i.e.,  the  land  of  the  Arimphaeans,  cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  88),  etc., 
appear  as  peninsulas  or  islands  in  the  northern  regions  on 
several  of  these  maps;  on  the  other  hand,  neither  Green- 
land nor  Wineland  occurs  on  any  of  them. 

Ranulph  Higden's  map  of  the  v^rorld,  vi^hich  accompanied 
his  already  mentioned  work,  "  Polychronicon "  (of  the  first 
part  of  the  fourteenth  century),  is  more  fettered  by  the  scheme 


Northern 


Europe  on  the  Lambert  map  at  Ghent  (before  1125) 


of  the  wheel-maps  in  the  form  of  the  outer  coast-line  and  of 
the  islands.  He  took  his  vows  in  1299,  was  a  monk  of  St. 
Werburg's  Abbey  at  Chester,  and  died  at  a  great  age  in  1363. 
Various  reproductions  of  his  map  are  known,  but  they  display 
little  sense  of  realistic  representation.  "  Scandinavia "  is 
placed  in  Asia  on  the  Black  Sea,  together  with  the  Amazons 
and  Massagetae,  and  to  the  north  of  it  "  Gothia "  (Sweden?). 
Islands  in  the  ocean  off  the  coast  of  northern  Europe  are  called 
"Norwegia,"  "  Islandia,"  "  Witland "  (or  "Wineland,"  etc.), 
with  "gens  ydolatra,"  "Tile"  (Thule)  and  "  Dacia "  (Den- 
mark) with  "  gens  bellicosa  "  somewhere  near  the  North  Pole. 
In  spite  of  this  representation  on  the  map,  the  "  Polychronicon  " 
(cf,  above,  p.  31)  contains  various  statements  about  the 
North,  which  may  point  to  a  certain  communication  with  it,  or 
may  be  echoes  of  Northern  writers.  Higden  to  a  large  extent 
copied  an  earlier  work,  the  "  Geographia  Universalis,"  a  sort 


MEDIEVAL    CARTOGRAPHY 

of  geographical  lexicon  by  an  unknown  author  of  the  thirteenth 
century/  which  is  for  the  most  part  based  on  earlier  writers, 
especially  Isidore.  Both  works  are  practically  untouched  by 
the  knowledge  of  the  North  that  had  already  appeared  in  King 


Ranulph  Higden's  map  of  the  world,  in  London  (fourteenth  century) 


1  The  work  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum  in  a  MS.  of  the  fourteenth 
century,  which  unfortunately  has  not  been  published.  The  geographical  de- 
scription in  the  "  Eulogium  Historiarum  "  of  about  1360  [vol.  ii.  Rerum  Britann. 
Medii  ^vi  Script.,  London,  i860,  cf.  the  introduction  by  F.  S.  Haydon]  may 
be  taken  from  this  work.  It  is  evidently  a  MS.  of  the  same  "Geographia" 
that  W.  Wackernagel  found  in  the  library  at  Berne,  and  of  which  he  published 
extracts  relating  to  the  North  [1844].  It  is  probably  the  same  "Geographia 
Universalis,"  again,  that  is  published  in  Bartholomaeus  Anglicus:  "  De  proprie- 
tatibus  rerum,  and  in  Rudimenta  Novitiorum,"  Liibeck,  circa  1475. 

180 


IN    NORTHERN   MISTS 

Alfred  and  in  Adam  of  Bremen,  and  show  how  much  ignorance 
could  still  prevail  in  learned  quarters  on  many  points  connected 
with  these  regions.  The  "  Geographia "  speaks  of  "  Gothia," 
or  lower  Scythia,  as  a  province  of  Europe,  but  obviously 
confuses  Sweden  (the  land  of  the  Gotar)  and  Eastern  Germania 
(the  land  of  the  Goths).  Norway  ("Norwegia")  was  very 
large,  far  in  the  north,  almost  surrounded  by  the  ocean;  it 
bordered  on  the  land  of  the  Goths  (Gotar),  and  was  separated 
from  Gothia  (Sweden)  on  the  south  and  east  by  the  river  Albia 
(the  Gota  river).  The  inhabitants  live  by  fishing  and  hunting 
more  than  by  bread;  crops  are  few  on  account  of  the  severity 
of  the  cold.  There  are  many  wild  beasts,  such  as  white 
bears,  etc.  There  are  springs  that  turn  hides,  wood,  etc.,  into 
stone;  there  is  midnight  sun  and  corresponding  winter  dark- 
ness. Corn,  wine,  and  oil  are  wanting,  unless  imported.  The 
inhabitants  are  tall,  powerful,  and  handsome,  and  are  great 
pirates.  "  Dacia "  ^  was  divided  into  many  islands  and 
provinces  bordering  on  Germania.  Its  inhabitants  were  de- 
scended from  the  Goths  (Gotar  (?)  cf.  Jordanes,  Vol.  I,  p.  135), 
were  numerous  and  finely  grown,  wild  and  warlike,  etc. 
"  Svecia "  (the  land  of  the  Svear)  is  also  mentioned.  That 
part  of  it  which  lay  between  the  kingdoms  of  the  Danes  and  of 
the  Norwegians  was  called  Gothia.  Svecia  had  the  Baltic  Sea 
on  the  east  and  the  British  Ocean  on  the  west,  the  mountains 
and  people  of  Norway  on  the  north,  and  the  Danes  on  the 
south.  They  had  rich  pastures,  metals,  and  silver  mines.  The 
people  were  very  strong  and  warlike,  they  once  ruled  over  the 
greater  part  of  Asia  and  Europe. 

" '  Winlandia '  is  a  country  along  the  mountains  of  Norway  on  the  east,  ex- 
tending on  the  shore  of  the  ocean;  it  is  not  very  fertile  except  in  grass  and 
forest;  the  people  are  barbarously  savage  and  ugly,  and  practise  magical  arts, 
therefore  they  offer  for  sale  and  sell  wind  to  those  who  sail  along  their  coasts, 
or  who  are  becalmed  among  them.    They  make  balls  of  thread  and  tie  various 

1  The  name  of  "  Dacia  "  for  Denmark,  which  frequently  occurs  on  maps  of 
the  Middle  Ages,  arose  through  a  confusion  of  the  name  of  the  Roman  prov- 
ince of  the  Danube  with  "  Dania." 
190 


MEDIiEVAL    CARTOGRAPHY 

knots  on  them,  and  tell  them  to  untie  three  or  more  knots  of  the  ball,  accord- 
ing to  the  strength  of  wind  that  is  desired.  By  making  magic  with  these 
[the  knots]  through  their  heathen  practices,  they  set  the  demons  in  motion, 
and  raise  a  greater  or  less  wind,  according  as  they  loosen  more  or  fewer  knots 
in  the  thread,  and  sometimes  they  bring  about  such  a  wind  that  the  unfortu- 
nate ones  who  place  reliance  on  such  things  perish  by  a  righteous  judgment." 

It  is  possible  that  the  name  "  Winlandia "  itself  is  a 
confusion  of  Finland  (i.e.,  the  land  of  the  Finns  [Lapps], 
Finmark)  with  Vinland  (cf.  above,  p.  31);  although  the 
description  of  the  country  must  refer  to  the  former.  It  may  be 
supposed  that  a  misunderstanding  of  the  name  was  the  origin 
of  the  myth  of  selling  wind  being  connected  with  it.  The  idea 
persisted,  and  the  same  myth  is  given  so  late  as  by  Knud  Leem 
[1767,  p.  3]  from  an  anonymous  book  of  travels  in  northern 
Norway. 

Of  Iceland  the  "  Geographia  "  says : 

"  *  Yselandia '  is  the  uttermost  part  of  Europe  beyond  Norway  on  the  north. 
...  Its  more  distant  parts  are  continually  under  ice  by  the  shore  of  the 
ocean  on  the  north,  where  the  sea  freezes  to  ice  in  the  terrible  cold.  On  the 
east  it  has  upper  Scythia,  on  the  south  Norway,  on  the  west  the  Hibernian 
Ocean.  ...  It  is  called  Yselandia  as  the  land  of  ice,  because  it  is  said  that 
there  the  mountains  freeze  together  to  the  hardness  of  ice.  Crystals  are  found 
there.  In  that  region  are  also  found  many  great  and  wild  white  bears,  that 
break  the  ice  in  pieces  with  their  claws  and  make  large  holes,  through  which 
they  plunge  down  into  the  water  and  take  fish  under  the  ice.  They  draw 
them  up  through  the  said  holes,  and  carry  them  to  the  shore,  and  live  on  them. 
The  land  is  unfertile  in  crops  except  in  a  few  places.  .  .  .  Therefore  the 
people  live  for  the  most  part  on  fish  and  hunting  and  meat.  Sheep  cannot 
live  there  on  account  of  the  cold,  and  therefore  the  inhabitants  protect  them- 
selves against  the  cold  and  cover  their  bodies  with  the  skins  of  the  wild  beasts 
they  take  in  hunting.  .  .  .  The  people  are  very  stout,  powerful,  and  very 
white  ['alba']." 

In  Higden*s  "  Polychronicon "  Gothia  is  also  spoken  of  as 
lower  Scythia,  but  among  the  provinces  of  Asia,  although  it  is 
said  that  it  lies  in  Europe;  it  has  on  the  north  Dacia  and  the 
northern  ocean.  But  the  geographical  confusion  in  this  work 
is  greater;  as  already  mentioned  (p.  31)  the  countries  of  the 
Scandinavians  are  described  together  with  the  Insulae  For- 
tunatae,  Wyntlandia,  etc.,  as  islands  in  the  outer  ocean.  The 
disagreement  between  Higden's  text  and  his  map  gives  us  an 

191 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

insight  into  how  little  weight  was  attached  at  that  time  to  the 
relation  between  maps  and  reality;  they  are  for  the  most  part 
merely  graphic  schemes.  Probably  Higden's  map  was  partly 
copied  from  an  older  one,  and  the  desirability  of  bringing  it  into 
better  agreement  with  his  text  did  not  occur  to  him. 

The  so-called  "  Anglo-Saxon  mappamundi "  or  "  Cotto- 
niana"  (reproduced  Vol.  I,  pp.  i8o,  183),  which  is  in  the 
British  Museum,  occupies  a  position  of  its  own  among  early 
mediaeval  maps.  Its  age  is  uncertain;  it  may  at  the  earliest 
date  from  the  close  of  the  tenth  century,  but  possibly  it  is  as 
late  as  the  twelfth  [cf.  K.  Miller,  iii.,  1895,  p.  31]-  It  exhibits 
no  agreement  with  the  text  of  Priscian  (Latin  translation  of 
Dionysius  Periegetes,  see  Vol.  I,  p.  114),  to  which  it  is  appended. 
Many  of  the  names  might  rather  be  derived  from  Orosius,  there 
is  also  great  resemblance  to  Mela  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  85  f.), 
and  in  some  ways  to  the  mediaeval  maps  already  mentioned, 
although  the  representation  of  the  North  is  different.  Probably 
an  older,  perhaps  Roman  (?)  map  formed  the  basis  of  it. 
Name-forms  like  Island,  Norweci  ^  (Norwegia),  Sleswic,  Sclavi, 
may  remind  us  of  Adam  of  Bremen,  but  they  may  also  be 
older.  This  map  is  doubtless  less  formal  than  the  pronounced 
wheel-map  type,  but  it  does  not  bear  a  much  greater  resemblance 
to  reality,  although  the  form  of  Britain,  for  instance,  may  show 
an  effort  in  that  direction.  The  peninsula  which  has  been 
given  the  name  of  Norweci  (Norway)  has  most  resemblance  to 
Jutland,  and  the  name  seems  to  have  been  misplaced.  No  doubt 
it  ought  rather  to  have  been  attached  to  the  long  island  lying 
to  the  north,  which  has  been  given  the  names  Scridefinnas  and 
Island.  The  representation  has  great  resemblance  to  Edrisi's 
map  (cf.  p.  203),  where  Denmark  forms  a  similar  peninsula, 
and  Norway  a  similar  long  island,  with  two  smaller  islands  to 
the  east  of  Denmark,  which  is  also  alike.  The  "  Orcades 
Insule "  are  given  a  wide  extension  on  the  Cottoniana  map, 
and  "  Tyle  "  (Thule)  lies  to  the  north-west  of  Britain,  as  it  should 

1 "  Nero,"  which  appears  before  this  word  on  the  map  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  183), 
is  crossed  out,  and  was  evidently  an  error. 
192 


MEDIEVAL    CARTOGRAPHY 

do  according  to  Orosius.  This  map  does  not,  therefore,  indicate, 
any  more  than  the  others,  any  particular  increase  of  knowledge 
of  the  North,  and  compared  with  King  Alfred's  work  it  is  still 
far  behind  in  the  dark  ages. 

The  zone-maps,  already  alluded  to,  which  are  derived  from 
Macrobius  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  123),  gave  a  formal  representation  of 
the  earth  of  a  peculiar  kind,  which  was  common  throughout 
the  whole  of  the  Middle  Ages ;  they  may  be  regarded  as  mathe- 
matical geography  more  than  anything  else.  The  earth  is 
divided  in  purely  formal  fashion  into  five  zones,  two  of  which 
are  habitable:  our  temperate  zone,  and  the  unknown  temperate 
zone  of  the  antipodes  (in  the  southern  hemisphere)  and  three 
uninhabitable:  the  torrid  zone  with  the  equatorial  ocean,  and 
the  two  frigid  zones,  north  and  south.  These  conceptions  also 
reached  the  North  at  an  early  time,  and  are  mentioned  in  the 
"  King's  Mirror,"  among  other  works,  although  its  author 
thought  that  the  inhabited  part  of  Greenland  really  lay  in  the 
frigid  zone.  A  zone-map  from  Iceland  is  also  known  of  the 
thirteenth  century.  Another  of  the  fourteenth  century  and  a 
kind  of  wheel-map  of  the  twelfth  century,  but  with  geographical 
names  only  without  coast-lines,  are  also  found  in  Icelandic 
MSS.,  besides  a  small  wheel-  and  T-map.^  Otherwise  it  is  not 
known  that  maps  were  drawn  in  the  North  during  the  Middle 
Ages.  A  purely  formal  wheel-  and  T-map  is  known  from  Lund 
before  11 59  [see  Bjornbo,  1909,  p.  189].  Another  Danish  wheel- 
map  of  the  sixteenth  century  is  known  [see  Bjornbo,  1909, 
p.  192],  and  Bjornbo  reproduces  [1909,  p.  193  f.]  two  wheel- 
maps  of  i486  from  Llibeck,  belonging  to  Professor  Wieser, 
where  the  lands  and  islands  of  the  North  are  drawn  as  round 
discs  (with  names)  in  the  outer  universal  ocean. 

iCf.  Rafn,  Antiquites  Russes,  ii.  pp.  390  f.,  PI.  IV.;  K.  Miller,  iii.  1895, 
p.  125. 


193 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

THE  ARAB  GEOGRAPHERS  OF  THE  MIDDLE  AGES 

If  we  turn  now  from  the  intellectual  darkness  of  Christian 
western  Europe  in  the  early  Middle  Ages  to  contemporary 
Arabic  literature,  it  is  as  though  we  entered  a  new  world; 
not  least  is  this  shown  in  geographical  science,  where  the 
authors  follow  quite  different  methods.  Through  their  contact 
with  the  intellectual  world  of  Greece  in  the  Orient,  the  Arabs 
kept  alive  the  Greek  tradition;  they  had  translations  in  their 
own  language  of  Euclid,  Archimedes,  Aristotle,  the  now  lost 
work  of  Marinus  of  Tyre,  and  others,  and  of  special  importance 
to  their  geographical  knowledge  was  their  acquaintance  with 
Ptolemy's  astronomy  and  geography,  which  had  been  forgotten 
in  Europe,  and  which  first  became  known  there  through  the 
Arabs  (cf  Vol.  I,  p.  ii6).  They  were  also  acquainted  with  Greek 
cartography.  To  this  education  in  Greek  views  and  interests 
was  added  the  fact  that  they  had  better  opportunities  than  any 
other  nation  of  collecting  geographical  knowledge;  through 
their  extensive  conquests  and  through  their  trade  they  reached 
China  on  the  east — where  for  a  considerable  time  their 
merchants  had  fixed  colonies,  first  in  Canton  (in  the  eighth 
century),  and  later,  in  the  ninth  century,  even  in  Khanfu  (near 
Shanghai)  ^ — and  the  western  coasts  of  Europe  and  Africa  on 
the  west,  the  Sudan  and  Somaliland  (and  even  Madagascar)  on 
the  south,  and  North  Russia  on  the  north.  In  spite  of  the 
religious  fanaticism  which  in  the  seventh  century  made  them 
an  irresistible  nation  of  conquerors,  they  had  civilization 
enough  to  remember  that  "  the  ink  of  science  is  worth  more 
than  the  blood  of  martyrs,"  and  there  flourished  among  them 
a  remarkably  copious  literature,  with  an  endless  variety  of 
works,  from  the  ninth  century  through  the  whole  of  the  Middle 
Ages. 

Although  the  Arabs  never  attained  the  Greeks'  capacity 
for  scientific  thinking,  their  literature  nevertheless  reveals  an 

1  Cf.  M.  de  Goeje  in  the  "  Livre  des  Merveilles  de  I'lnde,"  ed.  by  v.  d.  Lith 
and  Devic,  Leiden,  1883-86,  p.  295, 
194 


ARAB  GEOGRAPHERS 

intellectual  refinement,  which,  with  the  dark  Middle  Ages 
of  Europe  as  a  background,  has  an  almost  dazzling  effect. 
The  Arab  geographers  have  a  special  gift  for  collecting  con- 
crete information  about  countries  and  conditions,  about  peoples' 
habits  and  customs,  and  in  this  they  may  serve  as  models; 
on  the  other  hand  sober  criticism  is  not  their  strong  side, 
and  they  had  a  pronounced  taste  for  the  marvelous;  if  classi- 
cal writers,  and  still  more  the  learned  men  of  the  Euro- 
pean Middle  Ages  had  blended  together  trustworthy  informa- 
tion and  fabulous  myth  more  or  less  uncritically,  the  Arabs 
did  so  to  an  even  greater  degree,  and  we  often  find  in  them 
a  truly  Oriental  splendor  in  the  mythical;  thus  it  must  not 
surprise  us  to  hear  of  whales  two  hundred  fathoms  long 
and  snakes  that  swallow  elephants  in  the  same  author  (Ibn 
Khordadbah)  who  says  that  the  earth  is  round  like  a  sphere, 
and  that  all  bodies  are  stable  on  its  surface  because  the  air 
attracts  their  lighter  parts  (thus  we  have  the  buoyancy  of  the 
air),  while  the  earth  attracts  towards  its  center  their  heavy 
parts  in  the  same  way  as  the  magnet  influences  iron  (a  perfectly 
clear  description  of  gravitation). 

Chiefly  on  account  of  the  language  the  new  fund  of  geo- 
graphical knowledge,  which  together  with  much  that  is 
mythical,  is  contained  in  the  rich  literature  of  the  Arabs,  did 
not  attain  any  great  importance  in  mediaeval  Europe;  on  the 
other  hand  the  Arabs  exercised  more  influence  through  the 
geographical  myths  and  tales  which  they  brought  orally  from 
the  East  to  Europe,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  the  world  of  Irish 
myth,  among  others,  was  influenced  thereby. 

The  ideas  of  the  Arabs  about  the  North  are,  in  most  cases, 
very  hazy.  Putting  aside  the  partly  mythical  conceptions 
that  they  had  derived  from  the  Greeks  (especially  Ptolemy), 
they  obtained  their  information  about  it  chiefly  in  two  ways: 
(i)  by  their  commercial  intercourse  in  the  east  with  Russia — 
chiefly  over  the  Caspian  Sea  with  the  towns  of  Itil  and  Bulgar  ^ 

1  Bulgar  was  the  capital  of  the  country  of  the  Mohammedan  Bulgarians. 
These  were  a  Finnish  people.     From  Bulgar  or  Bolgar  comes  the  name  Volga. 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

on  the  Volga — they  received  information  about  the  districts  in 
the  north  of  Russia,  and  also  about  the  Scandinavians,  com- 
monly called  Rus,  sometimes  also  Warank.  (2)  Through  their 
possessions  in  the  western  Mediterranean,  especially  in 
Spain,  they  came  in  contact  with  the  northern  peoples  of 
western  Europe,  the  Scandinavian  vikings  ("  Magus ")  in 
particular,  and  in  that  way  acquired  information. 

"  Magus "  ^  means  in  the  west  the  same  northern  people, 
the  Scandinavians,  whom  in  the  east  the  Arabs  called  Rus  or 
Warangs,  which  word  they  may.  have  got  from  the  Greek 
"  Varangoi  "  (^Bapayyot )  and  the  Russian  "  Varyag." 

All  that  the  Arab  authors  of  the  oldest  period  have 
about  the  North,  and  that  is  not  taken  from  the  Greeks,  they 
got  through  their  commercial  connections  with  Russia;  but  it 
is  not  until  the  ninth  century  and  later  that  anything  worth 
mentioning  appears,  and  even  in  the  tenth  and  eleventh 
centuries  their  ideas  on  the  subject  are  very  much  tinged 
with  myth.  Professor  Alexander  Seippel  in  his  work  "  Rerum 
Normannicarum  fontes  Arabici"  (1896),  printed  in  Arabic,  has 
collected  the  most  important  statements  about  the  North  in 
mediaeval  Arabic  literature,  and  has  been  good  enough  to 
translate  parts  of  these,  which  I  give  in  the  following  pages.  I 
have  also  made  some  additions  from  other  sources.  In  an 
earlier  chapter  (pp.  143  f.)  several  Arabic  authors  have 
already  been  quoted  on  the  connection  with  northern  Russia. 

The  imperfection  of  Arabic  script  and  its  common  omission 
of  vowels  easily  give  rise  to  all  kinds  of  corruptions  and  mis- 
understandings;  this  is  especially  fatal  to  the  reproduction  of 
foreign  words  and  geographical  names,  which  explains  the 
great  uncertainty  that  prevails  in  their  interpretation. 

In  the  oldest  Arab  writers,  of  the  ninth  century  and  later, 
there  is  little  or  no  knowledge  of  the  North.  We  are  only  told 
in  some  of  their  works  that  furs  come  from  there,  and  that  the 
ocean  in  the  north  is  entirely  unknown.  Abu'l-Qasim  Ibn 
Khordadbah  (ob.  912),  a  Persian  by  descent  and  the  Caliph's 

1  For  the  origin  of  the  name  see  p.  55,  note. 
196 


ARAB  GEOGRAPHERS 

postmaster  in  Media,  thus  relates  in  his  "book  of  routes  and 
provinces  "  (completed  about  885)  :  ^ 

"As  concerns  the  sea  that  is  behind  [i.e.,  to  the  north  of]  the  Slavs,  and 
whereon  the  town  of  Tulia  [i.e.,  Thule]  lies,  no  ship  travels  upon  it,  nor  any 
boat,  nor  does  anything  come  from  thence.  In  like  manner  none  travels  upon 
the  sea  wherein  lies  the  Fortunate  Isles,  and  from  thence  nothing  comes,  and  it 
is  also  in  the  west.  The  Russians,-  who  belong  to  the  race  of  the  Slavs  [i.e., 
Slavs  and  Germans],  travel  from  the  farthest  regions  of  the  land  of  the  Slavs 
to  the  shore  of  the  Mediterranean  [Sea  of  Rum],  and  there  sell  skins  of  beaver 
and  fox,  as  well  as  swords  "  (?). 

The  Russian  merchants  also  descended  the  Volga  to  the 
Caspian  Sea,  and  their  goods  were  sometimes  carried  on  camels 
to  Bagdad.^ 

There  was  no  great  change  in  knowledge  of  the  North  in 
the  succeeding  centuries.  Ibn  al-Faqih,  about  900  A.D.,  has 
nothing  to  say  about  the  North.  He  mentions  in  the  seventh 
climate  women  who  "  cut  off  one  of  their  breasts  and  burn  it 
at  an  early  age  so  that  it  may  not  grow  big,"  "*  and  he  says  that 
Tulia  (Thule)  is  an  island  in  the  seventh  sea  between  Rumia 
(Rome)  and  Kharizm  (Khwarezm  in  Turkestan)  "  and  there 
no  ship  ever  puts  in."  Ibn  al-Bahlul,  about  910  A.D.,  gives 
information  after  Ptolemy  about  the  latitudes  of  the  northern 
regions  and  mentions  two  islands  of  Amazons,  one  with  men 

1  Cf.  Ibn  Khordadbah,  1889,  pp.  xx.,  67,  115,  88;  1865,  pp.  214,  235,  264. 

2 "  Rus "  was  the  name  of  the  Scandinavians  (mostly  Swedes)  in  Russia 
who  founded  the  Russian  empire  ("  Gardarike  "  or  "  SviJ'joi?  hit  mikla  "). 

3  Among  the  four  wonders  of  the  world  Ibn  Khordadbah  mentions  "  a 
bronze  horseman  in  Spain  [cf.  the  Pillars  of  Hercules],  who  with  outstretched 
arm  seems  to  say:  Behind  me  there  is  no  longer  any  beaten  track,  he  who 
ventures  farther  is  swallowed  up  by  ants."  So  De  Goeje  translates  it.  It 
might  seem  to  be  connected  with  the  swarms  of  ants  that  came  down  to  the 
shore  and  wanted  to  eat  the  men  and  their  boat  on  the  first  larger  island  out  in 
the  ocean  that  Maelduin  arrived  at  in  the  Irish  legend  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  336) ;  but 
Professor  Seippel  thinks  it  possible  that  the  original  reading  was  "  is  swal- 
lowed up  in  sand  "  (and  not  by  ants). 

■i  This  comes  very  near  to  Hippocrates'  words  about  the  Amazons,  that  the 
mothers  burn  away  the  right  breast  of  their  girl  children,  "  thereby  the  breast 
ceases  to  grow  and  all  the  strength  and  fullness  goes  over  to  the  right  shoulder 
and  arm"  (cf.  also  Vol.  I,  p.  8  £.). 

197 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

and  one  with  women,  in  the  extreme  northern  ocean  [Seippel, 
1896].  Qodama  Ibn  Gafar  (ob.  948  or  949  A.D.)  says  of  the 
encircling  ocean  (the  Oceanus  of  the  Greeks)  in  which  the 
British  Isles  lie  that 

"it  is  impossible  to  penetrate  very  far  into  this  ocean,  the  ships  cannot  get 
any  farther  there;  no  one  knows  the  real  state  of  this  ocean."  [Cf.  De  Goeje 
in  Ibn  Khordadbah,  1889,  p.  174.] 

Abu  All  Ahmad  Ibn  Ruste,  about  912  A.D.,  says  of  the 
Russians  ("  Rus,"  that  is,  Scandinavians,  usually  Swedes) 
that  they  live  on  an  island,  which  is  surrounded  by  a  sea,  is 
three  days'  journey  (about  seventy-five  miles)  long,  and  is 
covered  with  forest  and  bogs;  it  is  unhealthy  and  saturated 
to  such  a  degree  that  the  soil  quakes  where  one  sets  foot  on  it. 
They  come  in  ships  to  the  land  of  the  Slavs  and  attack  them,  etc. 
They  have  neither  fixed  property,  nor  towns,  nor  agriculture; 
their  only  means  of  support  is  the  trade  in  sable,  squirrel,  and 
other  skins,  which  they  sell  to  anyone  who  will  buy  them. 
They  are  tall,  of  handsome  appearance,  and  courageous,  etc.^ 
Probably  there  is  here  a  confusion  of  various  statements;  the 
ideas  about  the  unhealthy  bog-lands  are  doubtless  connected 
with  northern  Russia,  and  the  trade  in  sables  can  scarcely  be 
referred  to  the  Swedes  on  the  Baltic.^ 

The  well-known  historian,  traveler,  and  geographer,  Abu'l 
Hasan  'All  al-Mas'udi  (ob.  956),  in  his  book  (allegorically 
entitled  "  Gold-washings  and  Diamond-mines ")  repeats  certain 
Arab  astronomers  who  say : 

"that  at  the  end  of  the  inhabited  world  in  the  north  there  is  a  great  sea,  of 
which  part  lies  under  the  north  pole,  and  that  in  the  vicinity  of  it  there  is  a 
town  [or  land]  which  is  called  Tulia,  beyond  which  no  inhabited  country  is 
found."  He  mentions  two  rivers  in  Siberia:  "the  black  and  the  white  Irtish; 
both  are  considerable,  and  they  surpass  in  length  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates; 
the  distance  between  their  two  mouths  is  about  ten  days.  On  their  banks  the 
Turkish  tribes,  Kaimak  and  Ghuzz,  have  their  camps  winter  and  summer." 

He  also  states  that  the  black  fox's  skin,  which  is  the  most 
valuable    of    all,    comes    from    the    country    of    the    Burtasians 

1  Cf.  V.  Thomsen,  1882,  p.  34. 

2  As  to  the  trade  in  furs,  etc.,  see  above,  pp.  144   f. 
198 


ARAB  GEOGRAPHERS 

(a  Finnish  people  in  Russia,  Mordvins?),  and  is  only  found 
there  and  in  the  neighboring  districts.  Skins  of  red  and  white 
foxes  are  mentioned  from  the  same  locality,  and  he  gives  an 
account  of  the  extensive  trade  in  furs,  whereby  these  skins  are 
brought  to  the  land  of  the  Franks  and  Andalusia  (i.e.,  Spain), 
and  also  to  North  Africa,  "  so  that  many  think  they  come  from 
Andalusia  and  the  parts  of  the  land  of  the  Franks  and  of  the 
Slavs  that  border  upon  it."  ^  He  also  has  a  statement  to  the 
effect  that  before  the  year  300  of  the  Hegira  (i.e.,  912  A.D.) 
ships  with  thousands  of  men  had  landed  in  Spain  and  ravaged 
the  country. 

"  The  inhabitants  asserted  that  these  enemies  were  heathens,  who  made  an 
inroad  every  two  hundred  years,  and  penetrated  into  the  Mediterranean  by  an- 
other strait  than  that  whereon  the  copper  lighthouse  stands  [i.e.,  the  Straits  of 
Gibraltar].  But  I  believe  [though  Allah  alone  knows  the  truth]  that  they  come 
by  a  strait  [canal]  which  is  connected  with  Masotis  [the  Sea  of  Azov]  and 
Pontus  [the  Black  Sea],  and  that  they  are  Russians  [i.e.,  Scandinavians]  .  .  . 
for  these  are  the  only  people  who  sail  on  these  seas  which  are  connected  with 
the  ocean."  - 

This  is  evidently  the  ancient  belief  that  the  Black  Sea  was 
connected  through  Masotis  with  the  Baltic. 

The  celebrated  astronomer  and  mathematician,  Abu-r- 
Raihan  Muhammad  al-Biruni  (973-1038,  wrote  in  1030),^  a 
Persian  by  birth,  is  of  interest  to  us  as  the  first  Arabic  author 
who  uses  the  name  "  Warank  "  ^  for  Scandinavian,  and  mentions 
the  Varangians'  Sea,  or  Baltic. 

1  Seippel,  1896;  cf.  Magoudi,  1861,  p.  275;  i8g6,  pp.  92  f.;  1861,  p.  213. 

2  Magoudi,  1861,  pp.  364  f. 

3  Seippel,  1896,  pp.  42,  43. 

4  In  the  Russian  chronicles  the  word  is  "Varyag"  (plur.  "Varyazi"),  and 
the  Baltic  is  called  "  Varyaz'skoye  More  "  (the  Varasgian  Sea).  It  is  the  same 
word  as  Varaeger,  Varanger,  or  Vaeringer  (in  Greek  Varangoi)  for  the  origi- 
nally Scandinavian  life-guards  in  Constantinople.  The  Greek  princess  Anna 
Comnena  (circa  iioo),  celebrated  for  her  learning,  speaks  of  the  "Varangians 
from  Thule  "  as  the  "  ax-bearing  barbarians."  In  a  Greek  word  of  the  eleventh 
century,  by  an  unknown  author,  it  is  said  of  Harold  Hardrade  that  "  he  was  the 
son  of  the  king  of  *  Varangia '  (  BapaUia  )."  The  word  is  evidently  from  a 
Scandinavian  root;  but  its  etymology  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  certain.  It 
was  probably  used  originally  by  the  Russians  in  Gardarike  of  their  kindred 
Scandinavians,  especially  the  Swedes  on  the  Baltic  [cf.  Vilhelm  Thomsen, 
1882,  pp.  93  f.]. 

199 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

In  his  text-book  of  the  elements  of  astronomy  he  says  that  from  "  the  Encir- 
cling Ocean"  (the  Oceanus  of  the  Greeks),  out  into  which  one  never  sails,  but 
only  along  the  coast — "  there  proceeds  a  great  bay  to  the  north  of  the  Slavs, 
extending  to  the  vicinity  of  the  land  of  the  Mohammedan  Bulgarians  [on  the 
Volga].  It  is  knovirn  by  the  name  of  the  Varangians'  Sea  [' Bahr  Warank'], 
and  they  [the  Varangians]  are  a  people  i  on  its  coast.  Then  it  bends  to  the 
east  in  rear  of  them,  and  between  its  shore  and  the  uttermost  lands  of  the 
Turks  [i.e.,  in  East  Asia]  there  are  countries  and  mountains  unknown,  desert, 
untrodden." 

Al-Biruni  also  has  a  very  primitive  map  of  tlie  world  as  a 
roiirxd  disc  in  the  ocean,  indented  by  five  bays,  of  which  the 
Varangians'  Sea  is  one  [cf.  Seippel,  1896,  pi.  i].  The  peoples 
who  are  beyond  the  seventh  climate,  that  is,  in  the  northern- 
most regions,  are  few,  says  he,  "such  as  the  Isu  [i.e.  Wisu], 
and  the  Warank,  and  the  Yura  [Yugrians]  and  the  like."  - 

The  Arabs  of  the  West  came  in  contact  with  the  North 
through  the  Norman  vikings,  whom  they  called  Magus  (cf. 
p.  55),  and  who  in  the  ninth  century  and  later  made  several 
predatory  expeditions  to  the  Spanish  peninsula.  Their  first 
attack  on  the  Moorish  kingdom  in  Spain  seems  to  have  taken 
place  in  844,  when,  among  other  things,  they  took  and 
sacked  Seville.  After  that  expedition,  an  Arab  writer  tells 
us,  friendly  relations  were  established  between  the  sultan  of 
Spain, 'Abd  ar-Rahman  II.  and  "the  king  of  the  Magus,"  and, 
according  to  an  account  in  Abu'l-Khattab  'Omar  Ibn  Dihya^ 
(ob.    circa    1235),   the    former   is   even    said   to   have   sent   an 

1  The  Persian  version  and  as-Shirazi  add  "  tall,  warlike." 

2  The  Christian  Jew  Assaf  Hebraeus's  cosmography,  of  the  eleventh  century, 
was  probably  written  in  Arabic,  but  is  only  known  in  a  Latin  and  a  Hebrew 
translation  [cf.  Ad,  Neubauer,  in  "  Orient  und  Occident,"  ed.  Th.  Benfey,  ii., 
Gottingen,  1864,  pp.  657  f.].  He  mentions  beyond  "  Scochia  "  (Scotland)  the 
land  of  "  Norbe  "  (Norway)  with  an  archbishopric  and  ten  bishoprics.  In  these 
northern  lands,  and  particularly  in  Ireland,  there  are  no  snakes.  Many  other 
countries  and  islands  are  beyond  Britain  and  the  land  of  "  Norve  "  (Norway), 
but  the  island  of  "  Tille  "  (Thule)  is  the  most  distant,  far  away  in  the  northern 
seas,  and  has  the  longest  day,  etc.  There  is  the  stiffened,  viscous  sea.  Next 
the  Hebrides  ("  Budis  ")  are  mentioned,  where  the  inhabitants  have  no  corn, 
but  live  on  fish  and  milk  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  160),  and  the  Orcades,  where  there  dwell 
naked  people  ("  gens  nuda,"  instead  of  "  vacant  homines,"  see  Vol.  I,  p.  161). 

3  Cf.  R.  Dozy,  1881,  pp.  267  f. 
200 


ARAB  GEOGRAPHERS 

ambassador,  al-Gazal,  to  the  latter's  country.  Ibn  Dihya  says 
that  he  took  the  account  from  an  author  named  Tammam 
Ibn'Alqama  (ob.  896),  who  again  isi  said  to  have  had  it  from 
al-Gazal's  own  mouth.  It  is  obviously  untrustworthy,  but 
may  possibly  have  a  historical  kernel.  The  king  of  the  Magus 
had  first  sent  an  ambassador  to  *Abd  ar-Rahman  to  sue  for 
peace  ( ?) ;  and  al-Gazal  accompanied  him  home  again,  in  a 
well-appointed  ship  of  his  own,  to  bring  the  answer  and  a 
,  present.  They  arrived  first  at  an  island  on  the  borders  of  the 
land  of  the  Magus  people.^  From  thence  they  went  to  the  king, 
who  lived  on  a  great  island  in  the  ocean,  where  there  were 
streams  of  water  and  gardens.  It  was  three  days'  journey,  or 
300   (Arab)   miles,  from  the  continent. 

"  There  was  an  innumerable  multitude  of  the  Magus,  and  in  the  vicinity 
were  many  other  islands,  great  and  small,  all  inhabited  by  Magus,  and  the 
part  of  the  continent  that  lies  near  them  also  belongs  to  them  for  a  distance 
of  many  days'  journey.  They  were  then  heathens  [Magus] ;  now  they 
are  Christians,  for  they  have  abandoned  their  old  religion  of  fire-worship, 2  only 
the  inhabitants  of  certain  islands  have  retained  it.  There  the  people  still  marry 
their  mothers  or  sisters,  and  other  abominations  are  also  committed  there  [cf. 
Strabo  on  the  Irish,  Vol.  I,  p.  81].  With  these  the  others  are  in  a  state  of 
war,  and  they  carry  them  away  into  slavery." 

This  mention  of  many  islands  with  the  same  people  as  those 
established  on  the  continent  may  suit  the  island  kingdom  of 
Denmark;  but  Ireland,  with  the  Isle  of  Man,  the  Scottish  is- 
lands, etc.,  lies  nearer,  and  moreover  agrees  better  with  the  300 
miles  from  the  continent. 

We  are  next  told  of  their  reception  at  the  court  of  the  king 
and  of  their  stay  there,  and  especially  how  the  handsome  and 
wily   Moorish   ambassador   paid   court   in   prose   and   verse   to 

1  This  island  may  have  been  Noirmoutier,  in  the  country  of  the  Normans  of 
the  Loire  (according  to  A.  Bugge). 

2  It  is  the  name  "  Magus,"  from  the  Greek  Mdyo'z  (Magian,  fire-worshiper 
cf.  p.  55),  that  led  the  author  into  this  error.  Magus  was  used  collectively  of 
heathens  in  general,  but  especially  of  the  Norse  Vikings  [cf.  Dozy,  1881,  ii. 
p.  271]. 

201 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

the  queen/  who  was  very  compliant.  When  Ibn  ^Alqama 
asked  al-Gazal  whether  she  was  really  so  beautiful  as  he  had 
given  her  to  understand,  that  prudent  diplomatist  answered, 
"  Certainly,  she  was  not  so  bad ;  but  to  tell  the  truth,  I  had  use  for 
her  ..."  When  he  was  afraid  his  daily  visits  might  attract 
attention,  she  laughed  and  said : 

"  Jealousy  is  not  among  our  customs.  With  us  the  women  do  not  stay  with 
their  husbands  longer  than  they  like;  and  when  their  consorts  cease  to  please 
them,  they  leave  them."  With  this  may  be  compared  the  statement  for  which 
Qazwini  gives  at-Tartushi  (tenth  century)  as  authority,  that  in  Schleswig  the 
women  separate  from  their  husbands  when  they  please  [cf.  G.  Jacob,  1876,  p.  34]. 

After  an  absence  of  twenty  months,  al-Gazal  returned  to  the 
capital  of  the  sultan  'Abd  ar-Rahman.  In  the  excellence  of  its 
realistic  description  and  the  introduction  of  direct  speeches  this 
tale  bears  a  remarkable  resemblance  to  the  peculiar  method  of 
narration  of  the  Icelandic  sagas. 

The  best  known  of  the  western  Arab  geographers  in  Abu 
'Abdallah  Muhammad  al-Idrisi  (commonly  called  Edrisi),  who 
gives  beyond  comparison  the  most  information  about  the 
North.  He  is  said  to  have  been  born  in  Sebta  (Ceuta)  about 
1099  A.D.,  to  have  studied  in  Cordova,  and  to  have  made 
extensive  voyages  in  Spain,  to  the  shores  of  France,  and  even 
of  England,  to  Morocco  and  Asia  Minor.  It  is  certain  that 
in  the  latter  part  of  his  life  he  resided  for  a  considerable  time 
at  the  court  of  the  Norman  king  of  Sicily,  Roger  II.,  which 
during  the  Crusades  was  a  meeting-place  of  Normans,  Greeks 
and  Franks.  According  to  Edrisi's  account,  Roger  collected 
through  interpreters  geographical  information  from  all 
travelers,  caused  a  map  to  be  drawn  on  which  every  place  was 
marked,  and  had  a  silver  planisphere  made,  weighing  450 
Roman  pounds,  upon  which  were  engraved  the  seven  climates 
of   the    earth,    with   their    countries,  rivers,  bays,  etc.-     Edrisi 

1  Her  name  may  be  read  "Bud"  (Bodhild?),  or — according  to  Seippel's 
showing — with  a  trifling  correction,  "  Aud." 

2  Probably  this  was  made  from  Edrisi's  design  and  corresponded  to  the 
map  of  the  world  in  his  work.  Khalil  as-Safadi  (born  circa  1296)  also  relates 
202 


ARAB  GEOGRAPHERS 

wrote  for  him  his  description  of  the  earth  in  Arabic,  which  was 
completed  in  1154,  and  was  accompanied  by  seventy  maps  and  a 
map  of  the  world.     Following  the  Greek  model,  the  inhabited 


Edrisi's  representation  of  Northern  Europe,  put  together,  and  much  reduced, 

from  eight  of  his  maps.     [Chiefly  after  Seippel's  reproduction  (1896)  and  after 

Lelewel    (1851).]     Some    of    the    Arabic    names   are    numbered    on   the    map 

and  given  below  according  to  Seippel's  reading. 

(i)  "Khalia"  (empty);  (2)  the  first  part  of  the  7th  climate;  (3)  "  gazirat 
Birlanda "  (the  island  of  Birlanda,  by  a  common  error  for  Ireland) ;  (4) 
"kharab"  (desert);  (5)  the  island  of  "Dans"  or  "Vans"  (Seippel  reads 
Wales);  (6)  "gazirat  Angiltara "  (the  island  of  England);  (7)  "gazirat 
Sqosia "  (the  island,  or  peninsula,  of  Scotland) ;  (8)  "  al-bahr  al-muslim  ash- 
shamali "  (the  dark  northern  ocean) ;  (9)  "  gazirat  Islanda "  (the  island  of 
Iceland);  (10)  "gazirat  Danamarkha  "  (the  island,  or  peninsula,  of  Denmark); 
(11)  "Hrsns"  (Horsens) ;  (12)  "  Alsia "  (Als?);  (13)  "Sliaswiq";  (14)  "  Lun- 
dunia"  (Lund);  (15)  "  sahil  ard  Polonia"  (the  coast  of  Poland);  (16) 
"Derlanem"  (Bornholm?);  (17)  "  Landsu(d)den  "  (in  Finland);  (18)  "Zwada'* 
(Sweden);  (19)  "  nahr  Qutelw"  (the  Gota  river);  (20)  "gazirat  Norwaga " 
(the  island  of  Norway);  (21)  may  be  read  "Trona"  (Trondhjem);  (22) 
"  'Oslo"  (Oslo);  (23)  "Siqtun";  (24)  "bilad  Finmark"  (the  district  of  Fin- 
mark);  (25)  "Qalmar";  (26)  "Abuda"  (Abo?);  (27)  "mabda'  nahr 
D(a)n(a)st"  (the  beginning  of  the  river  Dniestr?);  (28)  "ard  Tabast "  (the 
land  of  Tavast) ;  (29)  "  Dagwada "  (Dago) ;  (30)  "  gazirat  Amazanus  er-rigal 
al-magus"  (the  island  of  the  male  heathen  Amazons);  (31)  "gazirat  Amazanus 
an-nisa"  (the  island  of  the  female  Amazons). 

world,  which  was  situated  in  the  northern  hemisphere,  was  di- 
vided into  seven  climates,  extending  to  64°  N.  lat. ;  farther  north 


that  Roger  and  Edrisi  sent  out  trustworthy  men  with  draughtsmen  to  the  east, 
west,  south,  and  north,  to  draw  from  nature  and  describe  everything  remark- 
able; and  their  information  was  then  included  in  Edrisi's  work.  If  this  is  true 
(which  is  probably  doubtful),  these  would  be  real  geographical  expeditions 
that  were  sent  out. 

203 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

all  was  uninhabited  on  account  of  the  cold  and  snow.  Edrisi  de- 
scribes in  his  great  work  the  countries  of  the  earth  in  these  cli- 
mates, which  again  are  divided  each  into  ten  sections,  so  that  the 
book  contains  in  all  seventy  sections.^ 

On  the  outside  of  all  is  the  Dark  Sea  (i.e.,  Oceanus,  the  ut- 
termost encircling  ocean),  which  thus  forms  the  limit  of  the 
world,  and  no  one  knows  what  is  beyond  it.  After  describing 
Angiltara  (England)  with  its  towns,  Edrisi  continues : 

"Between  the  end  of  Sqosia  [Scotland],  a  desert  island  [i.e.,  peninsula]  2 
and  the  end  of  the  island  of  Irlanda  is  reckoned  two  days'  sail  to  the  west. 
Ireland  is  a  very  large  island.  Between  its  upper  [i.e.,  southern,  as  the  maps 
of  the  Arabs  had  the  south  at  the  top]  end  and  Brittany  is  reckoned  three  and 
a  half  days'  sail.  From  the  end  of  England  to  the  island  of  Wales  (?)  ^  one 
day.  From  the  end  of  Sqosia  to  the  island  of  Islanda  two-thirds  of  a  day's  sail 
in  a  northern  direction.  From  the  end  of  Islanda  to  the  great  island  of 
Irlanda  one  day.  From  the  end  of  Islanda  eastward  to  the  island  of  Norwaga 
[Norway]  twelve  miles  (?).*  Iceland  extends  400  miles  in  length  and  150  in 
breadth." 

Danamarkha  is  described  as  an  island,  round  in  shape  and 
with  a  sandy  soil ;  on  the  map  it  is  connected  with  the  continent 
by  a  narrow  isthmus.  There  are  *'  four  chief  towns,  many 
inhabitants,  villages,  well  protected  and  well  populated  ports 
surrounded  by  walls."  The  following  towns  are  named: 
"Alsia"  (Als?),  "Tordira,"  or  "Tondira"  (Tender), 
"Haun"  (Copenhagen),  "Horsnes"  (Horsens),  "  Lunduna " 
(Lund),  "Slisbuli"  (Sliaswiq?).  From  "  Wendilskada," 
written  "  Wadi  Lesqada  "  (Vendelskagen)  it  is  a  half-day's  sail 
to  the  island  of  "Norwaga"  (Norway).  An  island  to  the  east 
of  Denmark  and  near  Lund  is  called  on  the  map  "  Derlanem  " 
(Bornholm?). 

1  Cf.  Jaubert's  translation  [Edrisi,  1836],  where,  however,  the  geographical 
names  must  be  used  with  caution.     See  also  Dozy  and  De  Goeje  [Edrisi,  1866]. 

-  The  Arabs  have  the  same  word  for  island  and  peninsula. 

3  Professor  Seippel  considers  this  the  probable  interpretation  of  the  name 
and  not  "  the  island  of  the  Danes  "  as  in  Jaubert. 

■*  Edrisi  reckoned  a  degree  at  the  equator  as  100  Arabic  miles,  according  to 
which  his  mile  would  be  fully  a  kilometer.     According  to  other  Arab  geogra- 
phers the  degree  at  the  equator  has  been  reckoned  as  66s  Arabic  miles,  in 
which  case  the  mile  would  be  about  1.7  km.,  or  nearly  a  statute  mile. 
204 


ARAB  GEOGRAPHERS 

On  the  continent  to  the  south  of  Denmark  is  the  coast  of 
"  Polonia  "  (Poland),  and  to  the  east  of  it,  also  on  the  continent, 
is  "Zwada"  (Sweden),  and  a  town  "  Guta "  (Gotaland),  also 
"  Landsu(d)den"  (in  Finland).  We  have  further  the  river 
"  Qutelw"  (the  Gota  river),  on  which  is  the  town  of  "  Siqtun.'* 
There  is  also  "  Qimia  "  (Kemi?).  Farther  east  is  "  bilad  Fin- 
mark"  (the  district  of  Finmark),^  where  we  still  find  the  river 
Qutelw  with  the  town  of  "  Abuda  "  (Abo  ?)  inland,  and  "  Qal- 
mar  "  on  the  coast  near  another  outlet  of  the  Gota  river.  These 
two  towns  are 

"large  but  ill  populated,  and  their  inhabitants  are  sunk  in  poverty;  they 
scarcely  find  the  necessary  means  of  living.  It  rains  there  almost  continually. 
.    .    .     The  King  of  Finmark  has  possessions  in  the  island  of  Norwaga." 

Next  on  the  east  comes  the  land  of  "  Tabast "  (Tavast)  with 

"  *  Dagwada '  (Dago?),  a  large  and  populous  town  on  the  sea.'* 

In  the  land  of  Tabast 

"  are  many  castles  and  villages,  but  few  towns.  The  cold  is  more  severe 
than  in  Finmark,  and  frost  and  rain  scarcely  leave  them  for  a  moment." 

Farther  east  Esthonia  and  the  land  of  the  heathen  are  also 
mentioned. 

"  As  regards  the  great  island  of  Norwaga  [Norway],  it  is  for  the  most  part 
desert.  It  is  a  large  country  which  has  two  promontories,  of  which  the  left- 
hand  one  approaches  the  island  of  Danamarkha,  and  lies  opposite  to  the  har- 
bor that  is  called  Wendilskada,  and  between  them  the  passage  is  short,  about 
half  a  day's  sail;  the  other  approaches  the  great  coast  of  Finmark.  On  this 
island  [Norwaga]  are  three  inhabited  towns,-  of  which  two  are  in  the  part 
that  turns  towards  Finmark,  the  third  in  the  part  that  approaches  Danamarkha. 
These  towns  have  all  the  same  appearance,  those  who  visit  them  are  few,  and 
provisions  are  scarce  on  account  of  the  frequent  rain  and  continual  wet.  They 
sow  [corn]  but  reap  it  green,  whereupon  they  dry  it  in  houses  that  are 
warmed,  because  the  sun  so  seldom  shines  with  them.  On  this  island  there 
are  trees  so  great  of  girth  as  are  not  often  found  in  other  parts.  It  is  said 
that  there  are  some  wild  people  living  in  the  desert  regions,  who  have  their 
heads  set  immediately  upon  their  shoulders  and  no  neck  at  all.    They  resort  to 

1  This  name  is  doubtless  a  confusion  of  Finmark  and  Finland. 

-  Of  the  names  of  these  towns  given  on  the  map  there  can,  according  to 
Seippel's  interpretation,  be  read  with  certainty  "'Olso  "  and  probably  "  Trona  " 
(Trondhjem).     The  third  name  is   difficult  to   determine. 

205 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

trees,  and  make  their  houses  in  their  interiors  and  dwell  in  them.  They  support 
themselves  on  acorns  and  chestnuts.  Finally  there  is  found  there  a  large  num- 
ber of  the  animal  called  beaver;  but  it  is  smaller  than  the  beaver  [that  comes] 
from  the  mouth  of  Russia  [i.e.,  no  doubt,  from  the  mouths  of  the  Russian 
rivers]. 

"  In  the  Dark  Sea  [i.e.,  the  outer  encircling  ocean]  there  are  a  number  of 
desert  islands.  There  are,  however,  two  which  bear  the  name  of  the  Islands  of 
the  Heathen  Amazons.  The  western  one  is  inhabited  solely  by  men;  there  is 
no  woman  on  it.  The  other  is  inhabited  solely  by  women,  and  there  is  no  man 
among  them.  Every  year  at  the  coming  of  spring  the  men  travel  in  boats  to 
the  other  isle,  live  with  the  women,  pass  a  month  or  thereabouts  there,  and  then 
return  to  their  own  island,  where  they  remain  until  the  next  year,  when  each 
one  goes  to  find  his  woman  again,  and  thus  it  is  every  year.  This  custom  is 
well  known  and  established.  The  nearest  point  opposite  to  these  islands  is 
the  town  of  Anho  (?).  One  can  also  go  thither  from  Qalmar  and  from  Dag- 
wada  [Dago?],  but  the  approach  is  difficult,  and  it  is  seldom  that  anyone  ar- 
rives there,  on  account  of  the  frequency  of  fog  and  the  deep  darkness  that  pre- 
vails on  this  sea." 

Edrisi  says  that  there  are  many  inhabited  and  uninhabited 
islands  in  the  Dark  Sea  to  the  west  of  Africa  and  Europe,  indeed 
according  to  Ptolemy  "  this  ocean  contained  27,000  islands." 
He  mentions  some  of  them.  There  is  an  island  called  "  Sara," 
near  the  Dark  Sea. 

"It  is  related  that  Du'1-Qarnain  [Alexander  the  Great?]  landed  there  be- 
fore the  deep  darkness  had  covered  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and  spent  a  night 
there,  and  that  the  inhabitants  of  the  island  attacked  him  and  his  companions 
with  stones  and  wounded  many  of  them  [cf.  the  Skraelings'  attack  in  Eric  the 
Red's  Saga,  and  the  island  of  smiths  in  the  "  Navigatio  Brandani,"  Vol.  I,  p. 
328;  Vol.  II,  p.  9].  Another  island  in  the  same  sea  is  called  the  Isle  of  Female 
Devils  ["  gazirat  as-sa-ali"],  whose  inhabitants  resemble  women  more  than 
men;  their  eye-teeth  protrude,  their  eyes  flash  like  lightning,  their  cheeks  are 
like  burnt  wood;  they  speak  an  incomprehensible  language  and  wage  war  with 
the  monsters  of  the  ocean.    .    .    ." 

He  also  mentions  the  Isle  of  Illusion  ("  gazirat  khusran  "  = 
"  Villuland,"  cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  377),  of  great  extent,  inhabited  by  men 
of  brown  color,  small  stature,  and  with  long  beards  reaching  to 
their  knees;  they  have  a  large  (broad) ^  face  and  long  ears  (cf. 
the    ideas    of   the    Pygmies,    dwarfs,    underground   people    and 

1  This  may  be  the  same  idea  that  we  meet  with  again  in  the  description  of 
the   Skraelings  in   Eric   the   Red's   Saga,  where   we   are   told   that  they   were 
"  breiSir  i  kinnum." 
206 


ARAB    GEOGRAPHERS 

brownies),  they  live  on  plants  that  the  earth  produces  of  itself. 
There  was  a  further  large  island  "  al-Gaur,"  with  abundance 
of  grass  and  plants  of  all  kinds,  where  wild  asses  and  oxen  with 
unusually  long  horns  lived  in  the  thickets.  There  was  the  Isle 
of  Lamentation  ("  gazirat  al-mustashkin"),  which  was  in- 
habited, and  had  mountains,  rivers,  many  trees,  fruits,  and 
tilled  fields;  but  where  there  was  a  terrible  dragon,  of  which 
Alexander  freed  the  inhabitants.  On  the  island  of  "  Kalhan " 
in  the  same  sea  the  inhabitants  have  the  form  of  men  but 
animal  heads;  another  island  was  called  the  Isle  of  the  Two 
Heathen  Brothers,  who  practised  piracy  and  were  changed  into 
two  rocks.  He  also  names  the  Island  of  Sheep  and  "  Raka," 
which  is  the  Island  of  Birds  (cf.  pp.  51,  55). 

"  To  the  islands  in  this  sea  belongs  also  the  island  of  "  Shasland  "  [presum- 
ably Shetland,  perhaps  confused  with  Iceland],  the  length  of  which  is  fifteen 
days'  journey,  and  the  breadth  ten.  It  had  three  towns,  large  and  populous; 
ships  put  in  and  stayed  there  to  buy  ambra  [amber?]  and  stones  of  various 
colors;  but  the  majority  of  the  inhabitants  perished  in  dissensions  and  civil 
war  which  took  place  in  the  country.  Many  of  them  removed  to  the  coast  of 
the  European  continent,  where  large  numbers  of  this  people  still  live.     .    .     ." 

What  is  here  said  about  this  island  is  approximately  the 
same  as  Edrisi  elsewhere  states  about  the  island  of  Scotland, 
following  the  "  Book  of  Wonders,"  which  is  attributed  to 
Mas'udi. 

It  will  be  seen  that  he  has  a  very  heterogeneous  mixture  of 
islands  in  this  western  ocean.  Some  of  them,  like  the  Island 
of  Sheep  and  that  of  Birds,  as  already  suggested  (p.  55), 
probably  came  from  Ireland,  and  this  whole  archipelago  is 
evidently  related  to  the  numerous  islands  of  Irish  legend,  and 
points  to  an  ancient  connection,  which  may  have  consisted  in 
reciprocal  influence;  while  many  of  these  conceptions  traveled 
from  the  East  through  the  Arabs  to  western  Europe  and  Ireland, 
the  Arabs  again  may  have  received  ideas  from  the  Irish  and 
from  western  Europe  and  carried  them  to  the  East.  Thus 
Edrisi  relates  that,  according  to  the  author  (Mas^udi)  of  the 
"Book  of  Wonders,"  the  king  of  France  sent  a  ship   (which 

207 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

never  returned)  to  find  the  island  of  Raka;  we  may  therefore 
conclude  that  the  Arabs  had  this  myth  from  Europe.  That 
many  of  these  islands  are  inhabited  by  demons  and  little 
people,  who  resemble  the  northern  brownies  and  the  Skraslings, 
is  interesting,  and  shows  that  whether  the  myths  came  from 
the  Irish  to  the  Arabs  or  vice  versa,  there  were  in  this 
mythical  world  various  similar  peoples  who  may  have  helped 
to  form  the  epic  conceptions  of  the  Skraelings  of  Wineland 
(cf.  pp.  12,  75). 

Edrisi's  map  of  the  world  is  to  a  great  extent  an  imitation 
of  Ptolemy's,  but  shows  much  deviation,  which  may  resemble 
the  conceptions  of  Mela,  for  instance.  It  might  seem  possible 
that  Edrisi  was  acquainted  with  some  Roman  map  or  other. 
In  his  representation  of  the  west  and  north  coast  of  Europe,  for 
instance,  there  are  also  remarkable  resemblances  to  the  so- 
called  Anglo-Saxon  map  of  the  world  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  183;  Vol.  II, 
p.  192) ;  this  may  point  to  both  being  derived  from  some  older 
source,  perhaps  a  Roman  map  (?).  ^ 

Abu'l-Hasan  *Ali  Ibn  Sa'id  (1214  or  1218-1274  or  1286) 
says  (in  his  book :  "  The  extent  of  the  earth  in  its  length  and 
breadth ")  ^  of  Denmark  (the  name  of  which  he  corrupts  to 
"  Harmusa ")  that  from  thence  are  obtained  true  falcons  (for 
hunting) ; 

"around  it  are  small  islands  where  the  falcons  are  found.  To  the  west  lies 
the  island  of  white  falcons,  its  length  from  west  to  east  is  about  seven  days 
and  its  breadth  about  four  days,  and  from  it  and  from  the  small  northern 
islands  are  obtained  the  white  falcons,  which  are  brought  from  here  to  the 
Sultan  of  Egypt,  who  pays  from  his  treasury  1000  dinars  for  them,  and  if  the 
falcon  arrives  dead  the  reward  is  500  dinars.  And  in  their  country  is  the  white 
bear,  which  goes  out  into  the  sea  and  swims  and  catches  fish,  and  these  falcons 
seize  what  is  left  over  by  it,  or  what  it  has  let  alone.     And  on  this  they  live, 

1  As,  among  others,  the  name  "  Norveci "  is  misplaced  (in  Jutland)  in  the 
Cottoniana  map  (cf.  p.  192),  one  might  almost  be  tempted  to  suppose  that  the 
cartographer  had  made  use  of  Edrisi's  map  without  understanding  the  Arabic 
names;  but  this  would  assume  so  late  a  date  for  the  Cottoniana  map  that  it  is 
scarcely  probable. 

2  Cf.  Seippel,  1896,  pp.  138,  ff. 
208 


ARAB  GEOGRAPHERS 

since  there  are  no  [other]  flying  creatures  there  on  account  of  the  severity  of 
the  frost.  The  skin  of  these  bears  is  soft,  and  it  is  brought  to  the  Egyptian 
lands  as  a  gift." 

He  speaks  of  the  women's  island  and  the  men's  island  which 
are  separated  by  a  strait  ten  miles  across,  over  which  the  men 
row  once  a  year  and  stay  each  with  his  woman  for  one  month. 
If  the  child  is  a  boy,  she  brings  it  up  until  it  reaches  maturity, 
and  then  sends  it  to  the  men's  island;  the  girls  stay  on  the 
women's  island. 

"  To  the  east  of  these  two  islands  is  the  great  Saqlab  island  [i.e.,  the  Slavs' 
island,  which  is  Edrisi's  Norwaga],  behind  which  there  is  nothing  inhabited  in 
the  ocean  either  on  the  east  or  north,  and  its  length  is  about  700  miles,  and  its 
width  in  the  middle  about  330  miles."  Then  he  says  a  good  deal  about  the  in- 
habitants, among  other  things  that  they  are  still  heathens  and  worship  fire, 
and  on  account  of  the  severity  of  the  cold  do  not  regard  anything  as  of  greater 
utility  than  it.  This  is  evidently  the  same  error  as  in  Ibn  Dihya,  due  to  the 
designation  of  Magus"  (  =  Magian)  for  heathen  (cf.  p.  201). 

Zakariya  Ibn  Muhammad  al-Qazwini  (ob.  1283)  has  in  his 
cosmography  ^  several  statements  about  the  North,  some  of 
which  have  already  been  referred  to  (Vol.  I,  pp.  187,  284;  Vol. 
II,  144).  Of  the  northern  winter  he  has  very  exaggerated  ideas. 
Even  of  the  land  of  "  Rum  "  (the  Roman,  especially  the  Eastern 
Roman  Empire ;  in  a  wider  sense  the  countries  of  central  Europe) 
he  says  that  winter  there  has  become  a  proverb,  so  that  a  poet 
says  of  it : 

"Winter  in  Rum  is  an  affliction,  a  punishment  and  a  plague;  during  it 
the  air  becomes  condensed  and  the  ground  petrified;  it  makes  faces  to  fade, 
eyes  to  weep,  noses  to  run  and  change  color;  it  causes  the  skin  to  crack  and 
kills  many  beasts.  Its  earth  is  like  flashing  bottles,  its  air  like  stinging  wasps; 
its  night  rids  the  dog  of  his  whimpering,  the  lion  of  his  roar,  the  birds  of  their 
twittering  and  the  water  of  its  murmur,  and  the  biting  cold  makes  people  long 
for  the  fires  of  Hell." 

He  says  of  the  people  of  Rum  (i.e.,  the  Germanic  peoples  of  central  Eu- 
rope) that  "  their  complexion  is  for  the  most  part  fair  on  account  of  the  cold 
and  the  northern  situation,  and  their  hair  red;  they  have  hardy  bodies,  and  for 
the  most  part  are  given  to  cheerfulness  and  jocularity,  wherefore  the  astrono- 
mers place  them  under  the  influence  of  the  planet  Venus." 

1  Al-Qa2wini,  1848,  ii.  pp.  356,  334,  412. 

209 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

Of  the  cold  in  "  Ifranga  "  (the  land  of  the  Franks,  Western 
Europe)  he  says  that  it 

**  is  quite  terrible,  and  the  air  there  is  thick  on  account  of  the  excessive  cold."  i 
" '  Burgan '  [or  '  Bergan,'  as  the  first  vowel  is  doubtful]  is  a  land  which  lies 
far  in  the  north.  The  day  there  becomes  as  short  as  four  hours  and  the  night 
as  long  as  twenty  hours,  and  vice  versa  [cf.  Ptolemy  on  Thule,  Vol.  I,  p.  117]. 
The  inhabitants  are  heathens  ['  Magus ']  and  worshipers  of  idols.  They 
make  war  on  the  Slavs.  They  resemble  in  most  things  the  Franks  [West  Eu- 
ropeans].    They  have  a  good  understanding  of  all  kinds  of  handicraft  and  ships." 

Professor  Seippel  considers  it  not  impossible  that  there  may 
here  be  a  corruption  of  the  Arabic  Nurman  (  =  Normans)  to 
Burgan,  and  to  a  layman  this  looks  probable.  In  any  case 
Burgan  cannot  here  as  elsewhere  in  Arab  authors  be  Bulgar 
(the  Bulgarians)  ;  on  the  other  hand  it  might  be  the  Norwegian 
town  of  Bergen.  In  any  case  the  description  seems  to  suit  the 
Norwegians  best,  and  the  mention  of  Ptolemy's  latitude  for 
Thule  (the  longest  night  of  20  hours)  also  points  to  this.  That 
they  are  said  to  be  heathens  is  due  again  to  the  name  "  Magus  " 
(cf.  pp.  201,  209). 

Qazwini  also  ^  tells  us  that : 

"Warank  is  a  district  on  the  border  of  the  northern  sea.  For  from  the 
ocean  in  the  north  a  bay  goes  in  a  southerly  direction,  and  the  district  which 
lies  on  the  shore  of  this  bay,  and  from  which  the  bay  has  its  name,  is  called 
Warank.  It  is  the  uttermost  region  on  the  north.  The  cold  there  is  exces- 
sive, the  air  thick,  and  the  snow  continuous.  [This  region]  is  not  suited  either 
for  plants  or  animals.  Seldom  does  anyone  come  there,  because  of  the  cold 
and  darkness  and  snow.     But  Allah  knows  best  [what  is  the  truth  of  the  matter]." 

As  mentioned  above  (p.  199),  elsewhere  in  Arab  writers  the 
Varangians'  Sea  undoubtedly  meant  the  Baltic;  but  here,  as 
is  also  suggested  by  Professor  Seippel,  one  might  be  tempted 
to  think  that  it  is  Varanger  or  the  Varangerfjord  in  Finmark 
that  is  intended.^     It  may  also  be  recalled  that  Edrisi  already 

1  Jacob,  1896,  pp.  II  f. 

-  Seippel,  1896,  p.  44. 

3  It  might  seem  tempting  to  suppose  that  the  name  "  Varanger "  is  con- 
nected with  "Warank";  but  this  can  hardly  be  the  case.  Mr.  J.  Qvigstad  in- 
forms me  that  in  his  view  the  name  of  the  fjord  must  be  Norwegian,  "  and  was 
210 


ARAB  GEOGRAPHERS 

knew  the  name  o£  Finmark.  But  as  Qazwini  has  such  exag- 
gerated ideas  of  the  cold  in  Rum  and  in  Ifranga,  he  may  also 
be  credited  with  such  a  description  of  the  regions  on  the 
Baltic.^  No  importance  can  be  attached  to  the  statement  that 
the  bay  proceeds  from  the  northern  ocean  in  a  southerly 
direction,  as  ideas  of  that  kind  were  general. 

Mahmud  ibn  Mas  'ud  'ash-Shirazi  (ob.  13  lo)  has  the  following 
about  the  northern  regions.^ 

"Thus  far  as  regards  the  islands:  you  may  know  that  in  that  part  [of  the 
sea]  which  goes  into  the  north-western  quarter  [of  the  earth]  and  is  connected 
with  the  western  ocean  there  are  three,  whereof  the  largest  is  the  island 
'Anglisi'  [or  'Anglisei'  Island,  probably  England],  and  the  smallest  the 
island  Irlanda.  The  most  handsome  of  hunting-birds — those  that  are  known 
by  the  name  of  'sunqur'  [hunting  falcons] — are  only  found  on  it  [this  island]. 
The  middlemost  of  them  is  the  island  of  Orknia."  Probably  Ireland  and  Ice- 
land are  here  thrown  together  under  the  name  of  Irlanda,  as  elsewhere  falcons 
are  especially  attributed  to  the  latter.  "  The  longest  day  reaches  twenty  hours 
where  the  latitude  is  63°  [cf.  Ptolemy,  Vol.  I,  p.  117].  There  is  an  island  that 
is  called  Tule.  Of  its  inhabitants  it  is  related  that  they  live  in  heated  bath- 
rooms [literally,  warm  baths]  on  account  of  the  severe  cold  that  prevails 
there.  This  is  generally  considered  to  be  the  extreme  latitude  of  inhabited 
land."     It  appears  to  be  Norway  that  is  here  meant  by  Thule. 

Shirazi  says  that  "  the  sea  that  among  the  ancients  was  called  Maeotis  is 
now  called  the  Varangians'  Sea,  and  there  are  a  tall,  warlike  people  on  its 
shore.     And  after  the  ocean  has  gone  past  the  Varangians'  country  in  an  east- 

originally  '  *Verjangr '  (from  *  *Varianger  ')  ;  thence  arose  '  *Verangr,'  and  by 
progressive  assimilation  '  Varangr,'  cf.  the  fjord-names  Salangen  (from  Se- 
langr),  Gratangen  (from  Grytangr),  Lavangen  (from  Lovangr)  in  the  district 
of  Tromso.  In  old  Danish  assessment-rolls  of  the  period  before  the  Kalmar 
war  we  find  '  Waranger.' "  The  first  syllable  must  then  be  the  Old  Norse 
"  ver  "  (gen.  pi.  "  verja  ")  for  "  vaer,"  fishing-station,  and  the  name  would  mean 
"  the  fjord  of  fishing-stations  "  ("  angr  "  =  fjord).  In  Lappish  the  Varanger- 
fjord  is  called  "  Varjagvuodna  "  ("  vuodna  "  =  fjord),  which  "presupposes  a 
Norwegian  form  '  *Varjang '  ('  *Verjang  ').  The  Lappish  forms  '  Varje- '  and 
*  Varja- '  are  abbreviated  from  *  Varjag.'  This  district  of  Varanger  is  called  in 
Lappish  'Varja'  (gen.  'Varjag,'  root  'Varjag').  Norwegian  fjord-names  in 
'-angr'  are  transferred  to  Lappish  with  the  termination  '-ag';  only  in  more 
recent  loan-words  do  we  find  the  termination  *  -angga '  or  *  -anggo,'  as  in 
'  Pors-angga.' "  O.  Rygh  thought  that  the  first  syllable  in  "  Varanger  "  might 
be  the  same  as  in  "  Vardo,"  Old  Norse  "Vargey";  but  this  may  be  more 
doubtful. 

1  Cf.  also  Jordanes'  description  of  the  great  cold  in  the  Baltic  (Vol.  I,  p.  131). 

2  Seippel,  1896,  pp.  142,  145. 

211 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

erly  direction  it  extends  behind  the  land  of  the  Turks,  past  mountains  which 
no  one  traverses  and  lands  where  no  one  dwells,  to  the  uttermost  regions  of 
the  land  of  the  Chinese,  and  because  these  are  also  uninhabited,  and  because 
it  is  impossible  to  sail  any  farther  upon  it  [the  ocean],  we  know  nothing  of 
its  connection  with  the  eastern  ocean." 

Shams  ad-din  Abu  'Abdallah  Muhammad  ad-Dimashqi  (1256- 
1327)  in  his  cosmography  has  little  of  interest  about  the  North, 
and  his  ideas  on  the  subject  are  obscure. 

"  The  habitable  part  of  the  earth  extends  as  far  as  66  ^^  ° ;  ^  the  regions 
beyond,  up  to  90^,  are  desert  and  uninhabited;  no  known  animals  are  found 
there  on  account  of  the  great  quantity  of  snow  and  the  thick  darkness,  and  the 
too  great  distance  from  the  sun.  ...  It  is  the  climate  of  darkness."  It 
lies  in  the  middle  of  the  seventh  climate,  which  surrounds  it  as  a  circular  belt, 
and  "  around  it  the  vault  of  heaven  turns  like  the  stone  in  a  mill. 

"  The  sea  beyond  the  deserts  of  the  Qipdjaks  [southern  Russia,  Turkestan 
and  western  Siberia]  in  latitude  63°  has  a  length  of  eight  days'  journey,  with  a 
breadth  varying  to  as  little  as  three.  In  this  sea  there  is  a  great  island  [prob- 
ably Scandinavia],  inhabited  by  people  of  tall  stature,  with  fair  complexions, 
fair  hair  and  blue  eyes,  who  scarcely  understand  hum^an  speech.^  It  is  called 
the  Frozen  Sea  because  in  winter  it  freezes  entirely,  and  because  it  is  sur- 
rounded by  mountains  of  ice.  These  are  formed  when  the  wind  in  winter 
breaks  the  waves  upon  the  shore;  as  they  freeze  they  are  cast  upon  the  icy 
edges,  which  grow  in  layers  little  by  little,  until  they  form  heights  with  sepa- 
rate summits,  and  walls  that  surround  them."  ^ 

He  has  besides  various  strange  fables  about  the  northern 
regions  and  the  fabulous  creatures  there.  Of  the  sea  to  the 
north  of  Britain  he  says  that  its  coasts 

"turn  in  a  north-westerly  direction,  and  there  is  the  great  bay  that  is  called 
the  Varangians'  Sea,  and  the  Varangians  are  an  inarticulate  people  who  scarcely 
understand  human  speech,  and  they  are  the  best  of  the  Slavs,  and  this  arm  of 
the  sea  is  the  Sea  of  Darkness  in  the  north." 


1  In  another  passage  [c.  i.  3]  he  says  that  "  the  habitable  part  extends  .  .  . 
towards  the  north  as  far  as  63°  or  665°,  where  at  the  summer  solstice  the  day 
attains  a  length  of  twenty  hours"  [cf.  Ptolemy,  Vol.  I,  p.  117.]  But  he  never- 
theless thinks  (like  the  Greeks)  that  at  the  north  pole  the  day  was  six  months 
and  the  night  equally  long. 

-  An  expression  from  the  Koran,  which  is  used  of  barbarous  people  (Gog 
and  Magog)  who  do  not  understand  the  speech  of  civilized  human  beings. 

y  Cf.  A.  F.  Mehren,  1874,  pp.  19,  158  f.,  21,  193. 
212 


ARAB  GEOGRAPHERS 

Afterwards  the  coasts  extend  farther  still  to  the  north  and 
west,  and  lose  themselves  in  the  climate  of  Darkness,  and  no 
one  knows  what  is  there. 

Of  the  whales  he  says  that  in  the  Black  Sea  a  kind  of  whale 
is  often  seen  which  the  ignorant  assert  to  have  been  carried 
by  angels  alive  into  Hell,  to  be  used  for  various  punishments, 
while  others  think  it  keeps  at  the  bottom  of  the  sea  and  lives 
on  fish ; 

"  then  Allah  sends  to  It  a  cloud  and  angels,  who  lift  it  up  out  of  the  sea  and 
cast  it  upon  the  shore  for  food  for  Yagug  and  Magug.  The  whales  are  very 
large  in  the  Mediterranean,  in  the  Caspian  Sea  (!)  and  in  the  Varangians'  Sea 
(!),  as  also  off  the  coasts  of  Spain  in  the  Atlantic  Ocean." 

There  is  preserved  an  "  abstract  of  wonders "  (oldest  MS. 
of  1484),^  by  an  unknown  Arab  author,  which  gives  a  picture 
of  the  Arabs'  mythical  ideas  in  the  tenth  century.  It  also  tells 
of  islands  in  the  west,  which  are  of  interest  to  us  on  account  of 
their  resemblance  to  many  of  the  mediaeval  mythical  concep- 
tions of  Western  Europe. 

"In  the  great  ocean  is  an  island  which  is  visible  at  sea  at  some  distance, 
but  if  one  tries  to  approach  it,  it  withdraws  and  disappears.  If  one  returns 
to  the  place  one  started  from,  it  is  seen  again  as  before.  It  is  said  that  upon 
this  island  is  a  tree  that  sprouts  at  sunrise,  and  grows  as  long  as  the  sun  is 
ascending;  after  midday  it  decreases,  and  disappears  at  sunset.  Sailors  assert 
that  in  this  sea  there  is  a  little  fish  called  '  shakil,'  and  that  those  who  carry 
it  upon  them  can  discover  and  reach  the  island  without  its  concealing  itself. 
This  is  truly  a  strange  and  wonderful  thing." 

This  is  evidently  the  same  myth  as  that  of  the  Lost  Isle,  already  referred 
to  (Perdita,  Vol.  I,  p.  376),  and  of  the  Norwegian  huldrelands,  etc.  It  also 
bears  resemblance  to  legends  from  China  and  Japan.  The  tree  is  the  sun-tree 
of  the  Indian  legends,  which  was  already  introduced  into  the  earliest  versions 
of  the  Alexander  romance  (Pseudo-Callisthenes,  circa  200  A.D.),  and  which  is 
met  with  again  in  the  fairy  tales  and  mythical  conceptions  of  many  peoples.2 
Possibly  it  is  this  same  tree  that  grows  on  the  mountain  Fusan  in  the  Japa- 
nese happy-land  Horaisan,  and  which  is  sometimes  seen  over  the  sea  horizon 
(see  p.  56). 

"  The  island  of  '  as-Sayyara.'  There  are  sailors  who  assert  that  they  have 
often  seen  it,  but  they  have  not  stayed  there.  It  is  a  mountainous  and  cul- 
tivated island,  which  drifts  towards  the  east  when  a  west  wind  is  blowing,  and 

1  C.  de  Vaux,  1898,  pp.  69  f. 

2  Cf.  Moltke  Moe,  "  Maal  og  Minne,"  Christiania,  1909,  pp.  9  f. 

213 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

vice  versa.  The  stone  that  forms  this  island  is  very  light.  ...  A  man  is 
there  able  to  carry  a  large  mass  of  rock."  This  floating  island  resembles  those 
met  with  in  tales  from  the  Faroes  and  elsewhere  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  375  f.).  Even 
Pliny  [Nat.  Hist.,  ii,  c.  95]  has  statements  about  floating  islands,  and  Las  Casas, 
in  1552-61  [Historias  de  las  Indias  in  "  Documentos  ineditos,"  Ixii.  p.  99],  says 
that  in  the  story  of  St.  Brandan  many  such  islands  (?)  are  spoken  of  in  the 
sea  round  the  Cape  Verde  Islands  and  the  Azores,  and  he  asserts  that  "  the 
same  is  mentioned  in  the  book  of  '  Inventio  f  ortunata,' "  that  is,  by  Nicholas  of 
Lynn  [cf.  De  Costa,  1880,  p.  185]. 

" '  The  Island  of  Women.'  This  is  an  island  that  lies  on  the  borders  of  the 
Chinese  Sea.  It  is  related  that  it  is  inhabited  only  by  women,  who  become 
pregnant  by  the  wind,  and  who  bear  only  female  children;  it  is  also  said  that 
they  become  pregnant  by  a  tree,  of  which  they  eat  the  fruit.i  They  feed  on 
gold,  which  with  them  grows  in  canes  like  bamboo."  This  myth,  as  will  be 
seen,  resembles  Adam  of  Bremen's  tale  of  the  land  of  women,  Kvaenland  (VoL 
I,  p.  186).  Myths  of  women's  islands  are,  moreover,  very  widespread;  they  are 
found  in  various  forms  in  classical  authors  (p.  47)  in  Arab  writers  (cf.  above, 
pp.  197,  206),  in  Indian  legends,  among  the  Irish  (Vol.  I,  pp.  354,  357),  among 
the  Chinese,  etc.  It  is  partly  the  Amazon  idea  that  appears  here,  partly  the 
happy  land  desired  by  men. 

Through  an  apparently  small  thing,  the  Arabs  possibly 
exercised  more  than  in  anything  else  a  transforming  influence 
upon  the  navigation,  geography,  and  cartography  of  Europe; 
for  it  was  probably  they  who  first  brought  to  Europe  the  knowl- 
edge of  the  magnetic  needle  as  a  guide.  We  know  that  the 
Chinese  were  acquainted  with  it,  at  any  rate  in  the  second 
century  A.D.,  and  used  it  for  a  kind  of  compass  for  overland 
journeys.  Whether  they  also  used  it  at  sea  we  do  not  know, 
but  it  may  readily  be  supposed  that  they  did.  That  the  Arabs 
through  their  direct  commercial  intercourse  with  the  Chinese 
became  acquainted  with  this  discovery  at  an  early  date,  seems 
probable;  but  curiously  enough  we  hear  nothing  of  it  in 
Arabic  literature  before  the  thirteenth  century.  As  the  Arabs 
and  Turks  after  that  date  used  the  Italian  word  "  bossolo " 
for  compass  (bussol),  it  has  been  thought  that  they  may  have 
derived  their  knowledge  of  it,  not  from  China,  but  from  Italy; 
but  it  seems  more  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  while  they  had 
their  first  knowledge  of  the  magnetic  needle  from  China,  they 

1  The  same  ideas  also  occur  in  European  fairy-tales  and  generally  in  the 
world  of  mediaeval  conceptions. 
214 


COMPASS-CHARTS 

obtained  an  improved  form  of  the  compass  from  Italy,  and  with 
it  the  Italian  word. 


COMPASS-CHARTS 

We  do  not  know  how  early  the  magnetic  needle's  property 
of  pointing  to  the  north  became  known  in  Europe  and  was  used 
for  finding  the  way  at  sea.  The  first  mention  of  it  is  found  at 
the  close  of  the  twelfth  century  in  the  works  of  the  Englishman 
Alexander  Neckam,  professor  in  Paris  about  ii  80-1190,  and 
of  the  troubadour  Guyot  de  Provins  from  Languedoc.  The 
latter,  in  a  satirical  poem  of  about  1190,  wishes  the  Pope  would 
imitate  the  immutable  trustworthiness  of  the  polar  star  by 
showing  the  steadiness  of  the  heavenly  guide;  for  sailors  come 
and  go  by  this  star,  which  they  are  always  able  to  find,  even  in 
fog  and  darkness,  by  a  needle  rubbed  with  the  ugly  brown 
lodestone;  stuck  in  a  straw  and  laid  upon  water,  the  needle 
points  unfailingly  to  the  north  star.  As  late  as  in  1258  Dante's 
teacher,  Brunetto  Latini,  saw  as  a  curiosity  in  the  possession 
of  Roger  Bacon,  at  Oxford,  a  large  and  ugly  lodestone,  which 
was  able  to  confer  on  an  iron  needle  the  mysterious  power  of 
pointing  to  the  star;  but  he  thinks  that  it  cannot  be  of  any 
use,  for  shipmasters  would  not  steer  by  it,  nor  would  sailors 
venture  to  sea  with  an  instrument  which  was  so  like  an  inven- 
tion of  the  devil.  As  always  when  the  progress  of  humanity  is 
at  stake,  orthodoxy  and  religious  prejudice  raises  its  head. 
It  is  certain  that  the  use  of  the  compass-needle  must  have 
been  known  in  the  Mediterranean  at  the  beginning  of  the 
thirteenth  century,  and  probably  even  in  the  twelfth.  It  has 
been  alleged  that  the  compass  was  known  long  before  that 
time,  even  in  the  eleventh  and  tenth  centuries;  but  no  proof 
of  this  has  been  found,  and  it  does  not  appear  very  probable.^ 
How  early  the  compass,  or  lodestone,  was  known  in  the  North 

1  Cf.  K.  Kretschmer,  1909,  pp.  67  f.;  Beazley,  iii.  1906,  p.  511.  It  has  been 
asserted  that  the  compass  was  discovered  at  Amalfi.  This  is  not  very  probable, 
but  it  seems  that  an  important  improvement  of  the  compass  may  have  been 
made  there  about  the  year  1300. 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

is  uncertain.  We  only  know  that  when  the  Hauksbok  was 
written,  at  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century,  it  was 
at  any  rate  known  in  Iceland  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  248) ;  but  it  may  of 
course  have  been  known  before  that  time,  and  it  does  not 
appear  that  any  long  time  elapsed  between  the  instrument's 
being  known  in  the  Mediterranean  and  its  reaching  the 
Scandinavians. 

When  the  compass  came  into  general  use  on  Italian  ships 
in  the  thirteenth  century,  it  naturally  led  to  the  development 
of  an  entirely  new  type  of  map,  the  Italian  sea-charts  or 
compass-charts,  which  were  to  be  of  fundamental  importance 
to  all  future  cartography.  The  mediaeval  maps  of  the  world 
already  mentioned  were  learned  representations  which  were  of 
no  practical  use  to  the  navigator.  The  Greeks  had  drawn 
land  maps  which  were  also  of  no  great  use  at  sea,  and  we  do 
not  know  that  they  had  sea-charts.  On  the  other  hand,  sailing- 
books  ("peripli"),  which  gave  directions  for  coasting  voyages, 
were  in  use  far  back  in  antiquity.  In  the  Middle  Ages  sailing- 
books,  called  "portolani,"  which  gave  information  about 
harbors,  distances,  etc.,  were  an  important  aid  to  the  navigator, 
especially  in  the  Mediterranean.  It  was  the  Italians  before  all 
others  who,  at  that  period,  developed  navigation.  When 
coasting  was  to  some  extent  replaced  by  sailing  in  open  sea, 
after  the  compass  came  into  use,  sea-charts  became  a  necessary 
adjunct  to  the  written  sailing-books  or  portolani.  How  early 
they  began  to  be  developed  is  unknown;  we  only  know  that 
charts  were  in  use  on  Italian  ships  in  the  latter  half  of  the 
thirteenth  century ;  ^  and  we  must  suppose  that  they  were 
employed  long  before  that  time.  Whether,  as  some  have 
maintained,  there  v/as  a  connection  between  these  charts  and 
the  maps  of  the  Greeks,  is  doubtful,  though  there  may  indeed 
have  been  an  indirect  connection  through  the  Arabs,  among 
whom  Edrisi,  for  instance,  seems  perhaps  to  have  exercised 
some  influence.     But  in  any  case  it  is  certain  that  the  Italians 

1  Cf.  D'Avezac:  Coup  d'oeil  historique  sur  la  projection  des  cartes  geo- 
graphiques.     Paris,  1863,  p.  37;  Th.  Fischer,  i885,  pp.  78   f. 
216 


COMPASS-CHARTS 

of  the  Middle  Ages  were  not  acquainted  with  Greek  cartography, 
and  this  may  in  a  way  be  regarded  as  an  advantage;  for  they 
were  thus  obliged  to  invent  their  own  mode  of  representation. 
For  Greek  thought  the  chief  thing  was  to  find  the  best  expression 
for  the  system  of  the  world  and  the  "  oecumene,"  to  solve 
problems  such  as  the  reduction  of  a  spherical  to  a  plane 
surface  by  projection,  etc.;  while  the  sense  of  accurate  detail 
was  less  prominent.  The  Italian  sailor  and  cartographer  went 
straight  to  nature,  unhindered  by  theory,  and  to  him  it  appeared 
a  matter  of  course  to  set  down  on  the  map  coasts  and  islands 
as  accurately  as  possible  according  to  the  course  sailed  and  the 
distance,  without  reflecting  that  sea  and  land  form  a  spherical 
surface. 

The  Italian  sea-charts  seem  especially  to  have  been 
developed  in  the  republics  of  northern  Italy,  Genoa  and  Pisa, 
and  to  some  extent  Venice.  Later  the  Catalans  of  the  Balearic 
Isles  and  of  Spain  (Barcelona  and  Valencia)  also  learned  the 
art,  probably  from  Genoa.  The  charts  have  been  justly 
admired  for  their  correct  and  detailed  representation  of  the 
coasts  known  to  the  Italians  and  the  seamen  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean; the  world  had  never  before  produced  any  parallel  to 
such  a  representation.  It  shows  that  the  sailors  of  that  time 
were  masters  in  the  use  of  their  compass,^  and  in  making  up 
their  reckoning.  The  remarkable  thing  is  that  the  first  known 
compass-charts,  of  the  beginning  of  the  fourteenth  century, 
were  already  of  so  perfect  a  form  that  there  was  little  to  add 
to  or  improve  in  them  in  later  times.  It  looks  as  though  this 
type  of  chart  suddenly  sprang  forth  in  full  perfection,  like 
Athene  from  the  brain  of  Zeus,  without  our  knowing  of  any 
forerunner;  it  held  the  field  with  its  representation  of  the 
coasts    of    the    Black    Sea,    the    Mediterranean,    and    western 

1  How  early  the  error  of  the  compass  became  known  is  uncertain.  Even  if 
it  was  known,  it  seems  that  at  any  rate  no  attention  was  paid  to  it  at  first; 
and  thus  the  coast-Hnes  were  laid  down  on  the  charts  according  to  the 
magnetic  courses  and  not  the  true  ones.  Later  on,  a  constant  error  was  as- 
sumed and  the  compass  was  corrected  in  agreement  therewith;  but  the  cor- 
rection differed  somewhat  in  the  various  tovsms  where  compasses  were  made. 

217 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

Europe  almost  unaltered  through  three  centuries.  There  is 
something  puzzling  in  that.  We  must  suppose  in  any  case 
that  these  charts  were  developed  through  many  smaller  special 
charts  throughout  the  whole  of  the  thirteenth  century,  but  even 
that  seems  a  short  period  for  the  development  of  a  represen- 
tation so  complete  as  this,  which  thenceforward  became  almost 
stereotyped.  It  is  principally  the  coasts  that  are  represented, 
with  many  names,  while  inland  there  are  comparatively  few, 
which,  of  course,  is  natural  in  sea-charts. 

As  Italian  trade  did  not  extend  farther  north  than  Flanders 
and  England  (from  whence  came  wool),  it  is  also  characteristic 
of  the  compass-charts  that  their  detailed  representation  of  the 
coast  extends  to  the  south  of  England  and  to  Sluis  in  Flanders, 
and  to  the  mouth  of  the  Scheldt.  Farther  than  this  the  Italian 
ships  did  not  sail;  beyond  this  boundary  began  the  commercial 
domain  of  the  Hanseatic  League.  The  delineation  on  the 
compass-charts  of  the  greater  part  of  Ireland,  northern  England, 
Scotland,  the  north  coast  of  Germany,  Denmark,  the  Baltic, 
and  Scandinavia  has  an  entirely  different  character  from 
that  of  the  more  southern  coasts.  The  coast-lines  are 
there  evidently  drawn  in  a  formal  way,  and  more  or  less 
h5^othetically ;  the  names  (chiefly  those  of  a  few  ports, 
bishops'  sees,  and  islands)  are  also  strikingly  few.  It  is  clearly 
seen  that  these  coasts  cannot  have  been  drawn  from  actual 
compass-courses  and  reckonings;  they  are  sketches  based  on 
second-  or  third-hand  information.  For  this  reason,  too,  the 
shape  of  the  northern  countries  may  be  subject  to  considerable 
variation  in  the  different  types  of  compass-charts. 

We  know  little  of  the  sources  from  which  they  may  have 
obtained  their  delineation  of  the  North;  probably  they  were 
many  and  of  different  kinds.  A  glance  at  the  maps  reproduced 
(pp.  226,  232)  will  convince  one  that  their  image  of  the  North  dif- 
fered greatly  from  that  which  we  find  on  the  wheel-maps,  and 
from  that  which  was  probably  shown  on  the  maps  of  antiquity. 
It  is  a  decisive  step  in  the  direction  of  reality,  although  the 
representation  is  still  imperfect.  In  a  whole  series  of  these 
218 


COMPASS-CHARTS 

charts  the  image  of  the  North  shows  certain  typical  features. 
The  coast  of  Germany  and  Jutland  goes  due  north  from 
Flanders,  thus  coming  much  too  near  Britain,  and  the  North 
Sea  becomes  nothing  but  a  narrow  strait.  Even  on  the  earliest 
charts  (Dalorto's  chart,  p.  226)  the  shape  of  Jutland  is  quite 
good.  Norway,  the  coasts  of  which  are  indicated  by  chains  of 
mountains,  is  placed  fairly  correctly  in  relation  to  Jutland, 
but  is  put  too  far  to  the  west  and  too  near  to  England. 
It  is  also  made  too  broad.  The  Skagerak  appears  more  or  less 
correctly,  but  the  Danish  islands,  including  Zealand,  usually 
as  a  round  island,  are  placed  in  the  Cattegat  to  the  north- 
east of  Jutland.  This  greatly  distorts  the  picture.  Sweden 
is  much  too  small,  and  is  given  too  little  extension  to  the 
south;  the  Baltic  has  a  curious  form;  it  extends  far  to  the 
east  and  has  a  remarkable  narrowing  in  the  middle,  through 
the  German  coast  making  a  great  bend  to  the  north  towards 
Sweden.  Gotland  lies  in  the  great  widening  of  its  inner  por- 
tion. The  Gulf  of  Bothnia  seems  to  be  unknown.  The  islands 
to  the  north  of  Scotland :  Shetland  (usually  called  "  scetiland," 
"  sialanda  "  or  "  stillanda  "),  the  Orkneys,  and  often  Caithness 
as  an  island,  come  to  the  west  of  Norway,  frequently  placed  in 
a  somewhat  arbitrary  fashion,  and  in  the  wrong  order. 
"Tille"  (Thule),  the  round  island  off  the  north-east  coast  of 
Scotland,  is  a  characteristic  feature  on  many  compass-charts. 
Its  origin  is  uncertain,  but  possibly  it  may  be  connected  with 
the  Romans  having  thought  they  had  seen  Thule  to  the  north 
of  the  Orkneys  (?)  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  10  f.).  The  names  in  the  North 
are  in  the  main  the  same  on  most  of  the  compass-charts,^  and 
one  cartographer  has  copied  another;  by  this  means  also  many 
palasographic  errors  have  been  introduced,  which  are  after- 
wards repeated.  As  an  example:  the  Baltic  is  originally 
called  "  mar  allemania,"  this  is  read  by  Catalan  draughtsmen 
as  "  mar  de  lamanya,"  also  written  "  de  lamaya,"  and  thus 
we    get    "mar    de    la    maya"    (cf.    pp.    231,    233).     Another 

1  Bjornbo  and  Petersen  [1908,  tab.  i,  pp.  14  f.]  give  a  comparison  of  these 
names  from  the  most  important  compass-charts. 

219 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

example:  Bergen  is  originally  called  "  bergis "  (cf.  p.  221), 
a  draughtsman  corrupts  this  to  "  bregis,"  and  that  becomes 
the  name  of  the  town  in  later  charts  (c£.  p.  232).  Whence 
these  names  first  came,  we  do  not  know;  partly,  no  doubt, 
from  sailors,  and  partly  from  literary  sources.  The  latter  must 
be  true  of  names  in  the  interior.  There  are  also  various  legends 
or  inscriptions  on  these  charts,  e.g.,  in  Norway,  in  Sweden,  in 
the  Baltic,  on  the  islands  in  the  northern  ocean,  and  in  Iceland. 
Many  of  these  legends  can  be  certainly  proved  to  have  a  literary 
origin.  Some  of  them  (e.g.,  that  attached  to  Norway)  may  be 
derived  in  part  from  the  "  Geographia  Universalis."  Others  are 
connected  with  such  authors  as  Giraldus  Cambrensis,  Higden, 
and  others.  Certain  resemblances  to  Arabic  writers,  especially 
Edrisi,  might  also  be  pointed  out;  but  it  is  uncertain  whether 
these  are  not  due  in  part  to  their  being  derived  from  a  common 
source. 

The  first  known  compass-chart,  the  so-called  "  Carte 
Pisane,"  of  about  1300,^  goes  no  farther  north  than  to  the 
coast  of  Flanders  and  southern  England.  But  the  compass- 
chart  2  drawn  by  the  Genoese  priest,  Giovanni  da  Carignano  (ob. 
1344),  evidently  a  little  after  1300,  already  gives  a  delineation  of 
Great  Britain,  Ireland,  the  Orkneys,  and  Scandinavia,  with  the 
Baltic.  That  these  regions  are  only  represented  hypothetically, 
and  do  not  belong  to  the  compass-chart  proper,  is  also  indicated 
by  their  partly  lying  outside  the  network  of  compass-lines.  It 
is  in  the  main  a  land  map,  with  many  names  in  the  interior  of 
the  continents,  but  the  delineation  of  the  known  coasts  (to  the 
south  of  Flanders)  is  evidently  taken  from  the  sea-charts.  The 
representation  of  the  British  Isles  and  of  the  North  reminds  one 
a  good  deal  of  the  Cottoniana  map  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  183),  and  of 
Edrisi's    representation    (cf.    p.    203)  f    as    an    example,    it    is 

1  Reproduced  by  Jomard,  1879;  Nordenskiold,  1897,  p.  25. 

2  Reproduced  by  Th,  Fischer-Ongania,  1887,  pi.  iii.  [cf.  pp.  117  f.];  Nor- 
denskiold, 1897,  pi.  V.     Cf.  Bjornbo,  1909,  pp.  212  f.;  Hamy,  1889,  pp.  350  f. 

^  That,  on  the  other  hand,  it  should  be  directly  connected  with  Ptolemy's 
representation,  as  alleged  by  Hamy  [1889,  p.  350],  is  difficult  to  understand  [cf. 
220 


COMPASS-CHARTS 


(T^^^^^^^-^^^^ 

^^^ 

pL           ^\)              /"^^'^       f""^  ^ 

1    (— — 

'^^^^T^^^'^^^^si 

^^% 

"i^^fc'^^i 

-PW^ 

p^^ 

difficult  to  suppose  that  the  western  inclination  of  Scotland 
should  have  come  about  independently  on  each  of  the  three 
maps.  There  is  also  considerable  resemblance  to  Edrisi  in  the 
names  on  other  parts  of  the  chart;  but  Carignano  has  no  hint 
of  Edrisi's  "  Island,"  nor  of  the  Cottoniana's  island  of  Tylen 
(Thule).  Whether  his  Scandinavia  is  a  peninsula,  as  usually 
asserted,  and  not  rather  a  long  island,  as  on  the  two  maps  in 
question,  is  uncertain,  since  the  delineation  has  suffered  a  good 
deal  and  is  indistinct  in  the  inner  part  of  the  Baltic.  To  judge 
from  a  photograph  of  the  chart  (Ongania,  pi.  iii)  it  appears  to 
me  most  prob- 
able that  it 
was  an  island, 
which  then  has 
considerable  re- 
semblance to 
the  island  of 
Norwaga  (Nor- 
way) in  Edrisi. 
Names  that  are 

legible  on  this  island  or  peninsula  are :  "  noruegia,"  "  finonia  " 
(Finmark  or  Finland),  "suetia:"  also  "bergis"  (Bergen), 
"tromberg"  (Tonsberg),  "uamerlant"  (Vermeland),  "scarsa'* 
(Skara  on  Lake  Vener),  "kundgelf"  (Kungelf),  "scania" 
(Skane),  "lendes"  (Lund),  "  stocol"  (Stockholm),  etc. 
On  the  two  islands  in  the  Baltic  there  is  "  scamor "  [i.e., 
"scanior''  (?)  (Skanor),  and  "  gothlanda "  (Gotland).  Many 
of  these  names  appear  here  for  the  first  time  in  any 
known  authority.  Carignano  may  have  taken  them  from 
older  unknown  maps,  but  he  may  also  in  some  way  or  other 
have  received  information  from  the  North;  possibly,  for 
instance,  he  may  have  had  the  names  of  ports,  etc.,  from 
sailors.  His  representation  of  the  western  part  of  Scandinavia, 
with  three  long  peninsulas  [cf.  Saxo],  is  curious;  of  these  the 

Bjornbo,  1909,  p.  213];  but  an  indirect  influence,  e.g.,  through  Edrisi's  map,  is 
possible. 

221 


Northern  portion  of  Carignano's  chart  (a  few  years 
later  than  1300) 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

eastern,  with  "  scania,"  might  be  south  Sweden  with  Skane ; 
the  central  one  with  "  tromberg "  (Tonsberg)  might  be  Vest- 
fold  and  Grenmar,  and  the  western  with  Bergen  might  be  western 
Norway.  The  smaller  peninsula  to  the  north  might  be  Tronde- 
lagen  (the  district  of  Trondhjem)  (cf.  also  "  Historia  Norvegias," 
below,  p.  235). 

Between  the  years  1318  and  1321  the  Venetian  Marino 
Sanudo  wrote  a  work,  "  Liber  secretorum  fidelium  crucis " 
(the  Book  of  Secrets  for  Believers  in  the  Cross),  to  rouse 
enthusiasm  for  a  new  crusade,  and  himself  presented  a  copy  of 
it  with  a  dedication  to  the  Pope  at  Avignon,  which  is  probably 
one  of  the  two  now  preserved  at  the  Vatican.  The  work  is 
accompanied  by  several  charts  which  must  have  been  drawn 
by  the  well-known  cartographer,  Pietro  Vesconte,  in  1320,  since 
an  atlas  bearing  his  name  has  been  found  in  the  Vatican  with 
charts  that  completely  correspond.^  Among  them  is  a  circular 
map  of  the  world  of  the  wheel  type,  but  on  which  the  forms  of 
the  coasts  from  the  compass-charts  are  introduced.  Scandinavia 
is  there  represented  as  a  peninsula  with  a  mountain  chain 
(Kjolen?)  along  the  middle  (see  map  p.  223),  and  the  names 
"  Gotilandia,"  "  Dacia,"  "  Suetia,"  "  Noruega "  may  be  read. 
On  the  continent  is  written  "  Guenden  Kvaenland,  or 
else  =  ' Suenden '  =  Sweden?  vel  Gotia";  and  on  the  coast 
to  the  north  of  the  peninsula  is  *'  Liuonia  "  and  to  the  south 
of  it  "Frixia"  (Friesland).  As  Kretschmer  has  shown,  Scan- 
dinavia was  originally  drawn  (in  both  atlases)  as  an  island, 
but  was  afterwards  connected  with  the  continent  by  a  nar- 
row isthmus.  This  representation  of  Scandinavia  as  a  penin- 
sula resembles  that  on  many  of  the  wheel-maps  mentioned 
above  (see  pp.  185  f.).  It  also  bears  a  strong  resemblance 
to  the  view  of  Saxo  (beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century),  who 
says:  ^ 


1  Cf.  K.  Kretschmer,  1891,  pp.  352  f.    Vesconte  was  a  Genoese,  but  resided 
for  a  long  time  at  Venice. 

2  Cf.  Saxo,  ed.  H.  Jansen,  1900,  pp.  13  f.;  ed.  P.  Hermann,  1901,  p.  12. 
222 


COMPASS-CHARTS 


"  Moreover  the  upper  arm  of  the  ocean  [i.e.,  the  southern  arm,  the  Baltic, 
as  the  south  is  supposed  to  be  at  the  top  of  the  map],  which  cuts  through  and 
past  Dania,  washes  the  south  coast  of  Gothia  [Gotaland,  i.e.,  Sweden]  with  a 
bay  of  fair  size;  but  the  lower  [northern]  branch,  which  goes  past  the  north 
coast  of  Gothia  and  Noruagia,  turns  towards  the  east  with  a  considerable 
widening,  and  is  bounded  by  a  curved  coast.  This  end  of  the  sea  was  called 
by  our  ancient  primaeval  inhabitants  Gandvicus.  Between  this  bay  and  the 
southern  sea  lies  a  little  piece  of  continent,  which  looks  out  upon  the  seas 
washing  it  on  both  sides.  If  nature  had  not  set  this  space  as  a  limit  to  the 
two  almost  united  streams,  the  arms  of  the  sea  would  have  met  one  another, 
and  made  Suetia  and  Noruagia  into  an  island." 

It  seems  not  improbable  that  the  delineation  on  Vesconte's 
map  may  have  a  connection  with  this  description;  it  has  also 
very  nearly  the  same  forms 
of  names.  The  regions  far 
in  the  north  and  east  on  his 
map  are  pure  fancy,  and 
the  "rifei  montes"  are  still 
found  there. 

Eight  other  MSS.  (in  vari- 
ous libraries)  of  Sanudo's 
work  are  known,  accom- 
panied by  maps,  and  six  of 
them  have  the  circular  map- 
pamundi;  but  the  repro- 
ductions differ  considerably 
one  from  another,  especially 
in   the   representation   of  the 

northern  coast  of  Europe.^  The  mappamundi  in  the  MS 
Queen  Christina's  collection  in  the  Vatican  (Codex  Reginensis, 
548),  and  the  exactly  similar  map  in  the  MS.  at  Oxford,  have  a 
remarkably  good  delineation  of  the  Scandinavian  peninsula 
(see  map  on  p.  224),  with  the  names  "Suetia"  (Svealand), 
"Gotia"  (Gotaland),  and  "Scania"  on  the  east,  "Noruegia" 

1  On  Marino  Sanudo  and  Pietro  Vesconte's  maps  cf.  Hamy,  1889,  pp.  349 
f.  and  pi.  VII.;  Nordenskiold,  1889,  p.  51;  1897;  pp.  17,  56  f.;  Kretschmer, 
1909,  pp.  113  f.;  Bjornbo,  1909,  pp.  210  f.;  Bjornbo,  1910,  pp.  120,  122  f.;  K. 
Miller,  iii.  1895,  pp.  132  f. 

223 


Northern  Europe  in  Vesconte's  mappa- 
mundi   (1320)    in    the    Vatican    [Kret- 
schmer, 1891] 


m 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

on  the  west,  "Finlandia"  and  "  Alandia "  (Aland,  or  perhaps 
Hallandia?)  in  the  extreme  north-east.  On  the  continent  is 
written  "  Kareli  infideles,"  "Estonia,"  "  Liuonia,"  etc.  In 
the  Baltic  are  two  islands,  "  Gotlandia "  in  the  middle,  and 
"Ossilia"  (Osel)  farthest  in.  The  shape  of  Jutland  (with 
the  names  "  Dacia "  and  "  Jutia ")  the  direction  of  the  coast 
of  northern  Europe  and  the  Baltic,  with  Scandinavia  parallel 
to  it,  remind  one  a  good  deal  of  Edrisi's  map,  of  the  Cot- 
toniana,    and    also    of    Carignano's    map.     Evidently    there    is 

here  new  information  which 
Vesconte  did  not  possess 
when  he  drew  the  map 
previously  mentioned ;  the 
correct  placing  of  the  names 
in  Sweden  and  Norway  is 
especially  striking.  These 
names,  as  also  "  Jutia,"  occur 
in  Saxo  in  approximately  the 
same  forms  [cf.  also  "  His- 
toria  Norvegiae"].  Marino 
Sanudo,  according  to  his  own 
statement,  had  himself  sailed 
from  Venice  to  Flanders, 
and  had  also  traveled  in 
Holstein  and  Slavonia.  He 
was  thus  able  to  collect  geographical  information,  and 
as  suggested  by  Bjornbo  [1909,  pp.  211  f.],  may  have  re- 
ceived communications  from  North  German  priests  whose 
picture  of  the  North  had  been  formed  by  the  study  of 
Adam  of  Bremen  and  Saxo;  but  there  does  not  appear 
to  me  to  be  any  necessity  for  such  a  hypothesis;  he  may 
just  as  well  have  received  direct  information  from  people 
who  knew  the  localities,  while  doubtless  the  names  are  to  a 
great  extent  literary.  If  we  suppose  that  it  was  Pietro  Vesconte 
who  drew  all  the  maps,  he  may  have  derived  his  information 
about  the  North  through  Sanudo  himself;  but  in  that  case  it 
224 


Northern  Europe  in  the  mappamundi 

in    the    MS.    of    Sanudo's    work    at 

Oxford  [Bjornbo,  1910,  p.  123] 


COMPASS-CHARTS 

would  be  strange  that  he  did  not  use  it  for  his  first  map.  We 
must  therefore  suppose  that  it  was  after  this  that  their  real 
collaboration  began. 

But  here  we  come  upon  another  difficulty,  and  this  is 
the  third  entirely  different  form  of  the  delineation  of  the 
North  that  is  found  in  the  corresponding  mappamundi  in 
the  MS.  of  Sanudo,  at  Paris.  There,  the  Scandinavian  peninsula 
is  divided  in  an  unaccountable  way  into  several  islands,  the 
largest  of  which  bears  the  name  "  scania  de  regno  dacie " 
or  "scadinaua."  To  the  north  of  it  is  a  long  island,  "  got- 
landia,"  which  has  been 
read  by  some  "yrlandia"  or 
"yslandia,"  and  made  into 
Iceland  [as  in  Thoroddsen,  i. 
1897,  P«  84].  "Noruegia" 
is  written  outside  the  border 
of  the  map  to  the  north  of 
Jutland  (called  *'  dacia "), 
and  the  name  "prouincia 
noruicie "  is  placed  on  the 
west  coast  of  Jutland,  which 
has  been  given  a  fantastic 
extension  towards  the  north 
with  many  bays.  An  island 
in  the  ocean  to  the  north  of 


Northern  Europe  in  the  mappamundi 

in  the  Paris  MS.  of  Sanudo's  work 

[Bjornbo,  1910,  p,  123] 


Russia  ("  rutenia ")  is  marked  "  kareli  infideles."  The  whole 
of  this  representation  is  in  complete  disagreement  with  the 
other  Sanudo  maps,  and  it  is  difficult  to  understand  that 
Vesconte  can  have  also  drawn  this  one,  although  in  other 
respects,  it  may  bear  much  resemblance  to  the  rest  from  his 
hand.  One  might  be  inclined  to  think  that  some  other  man 
had  tinkered  at  this  part  of  the  map,  introducing  ideas  which 
he  entirely  misunderstood. 


A  remarkable  thing  about  it  is  that  it  is,  perhaps,  the  first  that  has  a  legend 
about  the  North.  For,  on  the  large  island  in  the  Baltic  (?)  we  read,  "In  hoc 
mari  est  maxima  copia  aietiorum  "  ("  In  this  sea  is  the  greatest  abundance  of 

225 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

herrings  "?).    In  the  opinion  of  Bjornbo  this  may  allude  to  the  herring  fishery 
in  the  Sound.i 

The  type  which  is  first  known  from  Angellino  Dalorto's 
map  of  1325  (or  1330?),  and  from  that  of  1339,  signed  "  Angellino 
Dulcert,"  which  is  undoubtedly  by  the  same  man,  was  of  funda- 
mental importance  to  the  representation  of  the  North  on  the 
Catalan  compass-charts.  It  has  been  thought  that  he  belonged 
to  a  well-known  Genoese  family  named  Dalorto,  and  that  the 


--5 

ciS»nW)i      /^ 

^ 

L.  p 

--"^svA^^ 

^^ — c 

y^ 

V 

^ 

--& 

x^^ 

f».'"' 

'J 

^ 

S^^ 

■r 

a; 

If  • 

/ 

1 

The  North,  on  Dalorto's  map  of  1325.     The  network  of  compass- 
lines  is  omitted  for  the  sake  of  clearness.     Only  a  few  of  the 
names  are  given 

first  map  was  drawn  in  Italy,  while  the  latter  was  certainly 
drawn  in  Majorca,  either  by  a  copyist  who  corrupted  the  name 
of  Dalorto  to  Dulcert,  or  by  himself,  who  in  that  case  must  be 
supposed  to  have  given  his  name  a  more  Catalan  sound  on 
settling  in  Majorca.  But,  in  any  case,  these  maps  had  Italian 
models;  this  appears  clearly  in  the  form  of  the  names 
[cf.  Kretschmer,  1909,  pp.  118  f.]. 

The    two    maps    are    much    alike.    The    oldest,    of    1325 

IK.  Miller   [iii.  1895,  p.  134]  reads  "alcuorum"  instead  of  "aletiorum," 
which  would  make  it  "  the  greatest  abundance  of  flying  creatures  "  (i.e.,  birds, 
which  would  also  be  appropriate  to  the  North).    But  Miller's  reading  is  evi- 
dently wrong,  from  what  Bjornbo  has  seen  on  the  original. 
226 


COMPASS-CHARTS 

(1330?),*  gives  a  more  complete  representation  of  the  North 
and  of  the  Baltic  than  any  earlier  map  known.  In  its 
names  it  shows  a  connection  both  with  Carignano's  map 
and  with  Marino  Sanudo,  but  new  names  and  fresh  information 
have  been  added,  the  delineation  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland 
is  more  correct,  and  there  is  also  a  more  reasonable  representa- 
tion of  Scandinavia  and  of  the  extent  of  the  Baltic  than  on 
Carignano's  map.  Among  new  names  in  the  North  may  be 
mentioned  "  trunde "  (Trondhjem,  cf.  "  Throndemia "  in  the 
"  Historia  Norvegiae  "),  and  "  alogia  "  for  a  town  on  the  west  side 
of  Norway;  this  is  evidently  Halogia  (Halogaland),  a  form  of 
the  name  which  was  used,  for  instance,  in  the  "  Historia 
Norvegiae  "  and  by  Saxo.  Another  name  in  the  far  north,  and 
again  at  the  south-western  extremity  of  Norway,  is  "  alo- 
landia"  (see  illustration,  p.  226).  One  might  suppose  that 
the  form  of  the  name  and  its  assignment  to  these  two  places 
is  due  to  a  confusion  of  the  name  Halogaland  with  Hallandia 
[in  Saxo]  and  "alandia"  on  the  Sanudo- Vesconte  map 
(see  p.  224). 

It  will  be  seen  that  Norway,  which  is  represented  as  a 
pronouncedly  mountainous  country,^  has,  on  this  map,  been 
given  a  great  increase  of  breadth,  so  that  its  west  coast  is 
brought  to  the  same  longitude  as  the  west  coast  of  Great 
Britain.  In  the  legends  attached  to  Norway  we  read  that  from 
its  deserts  are  brought  "  birds  called  gilfalcos "  ("  hunting 
falcons"),   and   in   the   extreme   north   is   the    inscription: 

"  Here  the  people  live  by  hunting  the  beasts  of  the  forest,  and  also  on  fish, 
on  account  of  the  price  of  corn,  which  is  very  dear.  Here  are  white  bears  and 
many  animals." 

The  substance  of  this  may  be  derived  in  the  main  from  the 
"  Geographia  Universalis"  (cf.  pp.  189  f.;  see  also  p.  177). 
Islands  in  the  ocean  to  the  west  of  Norway  are:  farthest  north, 

1  Gf.  A.  Magnaghi,  1898.  The  date  is  somewhat  indistinct  on  the  map,  and 
it  is  uncertain  whether  it  is  MCCCXXV.  or  MCCCXXX. 

^  The  dark  shading  along  the  coast  and  across  the  country  represents  moun- 
tain chains. 

227 


IN   NORTHERN    MISTS 

"  Insula  ornaya "  (the  Orkneys) ;  farther  south,  "  sialand " 
(Shetland,  "  Insula  scetiland "  on  the  map  of  1339,  and 
"silland,"  or  "  stillanda,"  on  later  maps).  The  resemblance 
to  "shasland,"  the  name  of  an  island  in  Edrisi  (cf.  above, 
p.  207),  is  great,  but  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  we  have  here 
a  corruption  of  Iceland.  At  the  north-eastern  comer  of 
Scotland  is  the  round  island,  "  Insula  tille  "  (cf.  p.  219). 

In  the  ocean  to  the  west  of  Ireland  we  find  for  the  first  time 
on  this  map  an  island  called  "  Insula  de  montonis  siue  de 
brazile."  This  island  is  met  with  again  on  later  compass- 
charts,  under  the  name  of  "brazil,"  as  late  as  the  sixteenth 
and  seventeenth  centuries.^  It  is  evidently  the  Irish  fortunate 
isle,  Hy  Breasail,  afterwards  called  O'Brazil,  that  has  found 
its  way  on  to  this  map,  or  probably  on  to  the  unknown 
older  sources  from  which  it  is  drawn.  On  this  and  the  oldest 
of  the  later  maps  the  island  has  a  strikingly  round  form,  often 
divided  by  a  channel. 

The  Irish  myth  of  Hy  Breasail,  or  Eresail,^  the  island  out  in  the  Atlantic 
(cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  357),  is  evidently  very  ancient;  the  island  is  one  of  the  many 
happy  lands  like  "Tir  Tairngiri"  (the  promised  land).  In  the  opinion  of 
Moltke  Moe  and  Alf  Torp  the  name  may  come  from  the  Irish  "  bress  "  (good 
fortune,  prosperity),  and  would  thus  be  absolutely  the  same  as  the  Insulae 
Fortunatae.  The  Italians  may  easily  have  become  acquainted  with  this  myth 
through  the  Irish  monasteries  in  North  Italy,  unless,  indeed,  they  had  it 
through  their  sailors,  and  in  this  way  the  island  came  upon  the  map.  The  form 
"  brazil "  may  have  arisen  through  the  cartographer  connecting  the  name  with 
the  valuable  brazil-wood,  used  for  dyeing.  The  channel  dividing  the  island  of 
Brazil  on  the  maps  may  be  the  river  which  in  the  legend  of  Brandan  ran 
through  the  island  called  "  Terra  Repromissionis,"  and  which  Brandan  (in  the 
"  Navigatio  ")  was  not  able  to  cross.  It  is  probably  the  river  of  death  (Styx), 
and  possibly  the  same  that  became  the  river  at  Hop  in  the  Icelandic  saga  of 
Wineland  (see  Vol.  I,  p.  359).  We  thus  find  here  again  a  possible  connection, 
and  this  strengthens  the  probability  that  Brazil  was  the  Promised  Land  of 
the  Irish,  which,  on  the  other  hand,  helped  to  form  Wineland. 

1  As  late  as  in  Jeffrey's  atlas,  1776,  it  is  pointed  out  that  this  island  is  very 
doubtful,  but,  according  to  Kretschmer  [1892,  p.  221],  a  rock  6  degrees  west 
of  the  southern  point  of  Ireland  still  bears  the  name  "  Brazil  Rock "  on  the 
charts  of  the  British  Admiralty  (?). 

2  Cf.  Lageniensis,  1870,  pp.  114  £.;  Liebrecht,  1872,  p.  201;  Moltke  Moe  in 
A.  Helland,  1908,  ii.  p.  516. 

228 


COMPASS-CHARTS 

On  later  compass-charts,  several  isles  of  Brazil  came  into  existence.  As 
early  as  in  the  "Medici  Atlas"  (1351)  an  "Insula  de  brazi "  appears  farther 
south  in  the  ocean,  to  the  west  of  Spain,  and  on  the  Pizigano  map  (1367)  and 
the  Soleri  map  (1385)  there  is  to  the  west  of  Brittany  yet  a  third  "  brazir,"  af- 
terwards commonly  called  "  de  manj,"  or  "  maidas,"  etc.i  The  name  "  Insula 
de  montonis  "  is  difficult  to  understand.  If  we  may  believe  it  to  be  an  error 
for  "  moltonis  "  (or  perhaps  "  moutonis,"  a  latinization  of  the  French  "  mou- 
ton"  (?))  it  might  mean  the  sheep-island  of  the  "  Navigatio  Brandani,"  which 
was  originally  Dicuil's  Faroes  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  362).  Thus,  this  name  also  carries 
us  to  Ireland.2 

At  the  same  time,  another  Irish  mythical  conception  has  found  its  way  on 
to  the  map  of  1325,  and  faithfully  attends  the  isle  of  Brazil  on  its  progress 
through  all  the  compass-charts  of  later  times;  this  is  the  "fortunate  lake," 
("  lacus  f OTtunatus,")  with  its  islands,  "  insuUe  sci  lacaris "  (Lough  Carra  or 
Lough  Corrib?),  which  were  so  numerous  that  there  was  said,  later,  to  be  one 
for  every  day  of  the  year.  On  Perrinus  Vesconte's  map  of  1327  the  same  lake 
with  its  many  islands  is  found,  and  as  far  as  I  can  read  the  greatly  reduced 

1  Kunstmann  [1859,  pp.  7  f.]  thought  that  the  names  of  the  more  southerly 
islands  might  be  derived  from  that  of  the  red  dye-wood  "  brasile,"  or  "  bresil," 
which  afterwards  gave  its  name  to  Brazil.  He  [1859,  pp.  35  f.,  41],  and  after 
him  G.  Storm  (1887),  was  therefore  misled  into  the  belief  that  the  island  to  the 
west  of  Ireland  had  also  got  its  name  from  the  same  dye-wood;  neither  of 
them  can  have  known  of  the  Irish  myth  about  this  island.  Both  connect  the 
appearance  of  the  island  on  the  Pizigano  map  (1367)  with  the  arrival  of  the 
Greenland  sailors  from  Markland  in  Norway,  in  1348,  not  being  aware  that  the 
island  is  found  on  earlier  maps.  Storm  went  so  far  as  to  suppose  that  the 
word  "  brazil "  might  have  become  a  term  for  a  wooded  island  in  general,  and 
might  thus  be  an  echo  of  the  Norse  name  Markland  (woodland).  J.  Fischer 
[1902,  p.  no]  has  again  fallen  into  the  same  error,  but  has  remarked  that  the 
name  was  already  found  on  Dalorto's  map  of  1339.  Kretschmer  [1892,  pp.  214 
f.]  has  devoted  a  chapter  to  the  island  of  Brazil,  but  abandons  the  attempt  to 
find  the  origin  of  the  name  and  of  the  island,  regarding  the  derivation  from  the 
name  of  the  dye-wood  as  improbable.  Hamy  [1889,  p.  361],  however,  noticed 
the  connection  of  the  island  with  the  Irish  myth  of  "  O'Brazil." 

2  Buache  read  the  inscription  on  the  northernmost  isle  of  Brazil  on  the  Pizi- 
gano map  as  "  ysola  de  Mayotas  seu  de  Bracir,"  while  Jomard  makes  it  "n 
cotus  sur  de  Bracir."  Kretschmer  [1892,  p.  219]  has  examined  the  map  but 
can  read  neither  one  nor  the  other,  as  the  text  is  indistinct.  On  the  other 
hand,  he  points  out  that  on  Graciosus  Benincasa's  map  of  1482  the  same  island 
has  a  clearly  legible  "  montorio  "  (on  a  map  of  1574  "  mons  orius  "  is  found), 
which  he  is  equally  unable  to  explain.  It  may  be  added  that  on  an  anony- 
mous compass-chart  of  1384  [Nordenskiold,  1897,  pi.  xv.],  a  corresponding 
island  is  marked  "  monte  orius,"  on  Benincasa's  map  of  1457  "  montorius," 
and  on  Calapoda's  map  of  1552  "montoriu"  [Nordenskiold,  1897,  pi.  xxxiii., 
XXVI ].  This  is  evidently  our  "montonis"  on  Dalorto's  map  of  1325,  appear- 
ing again. 

229 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

reproduction  in  Nordenskiold's  "Periplus"  (pi.  vii)  the  words  are:  "gulfo  de 
issolle  CCCLVIII.i  beate  et  fortunate"  ("the  gulf  of  the  358  blessed  and 
happy  islands"),  as  also  found  on  some  later  maps.-  I  have  not  had  an  oppor- 
tunity of  examining  the  map  of  the  British  Isles  in  the  same  draughtsman's 
atlas  of  1321,  to  see  whether  this  happy  lake  and  the  isle  of  Brazil  are  given 
there;  the  gulf  with  the  358  islands  is  stated  to  be  on  Vesconte-Sanudo  maps 
[cf.  Harrisse,  1892,  pp.  57  f.],  which  I  have  also  had  no  opportunity  of  con- 
sulting. 

Angellino  Dulcert's  (Dalorto's)"  map  of  1339^  differs  some- 
what from  the  map  of  1325  (1330?)  in  its  delineation  of  the 
North,  in  that  Norway  is  given  a  narrower  and  more  rectangular 
form,  with  only  those  four  headlands  on  the  south  side  which  are 
largest  on  the  map  of  1325,  while  the  country  with  the  smaller 
headlands  to  the  west  of  these  is  cut  away,  whereby  the 
narrower  shape  is  brought  about.^ 

Dalorto's  maps  of  1325  and  1339  furnish  the  prototype  for 
the  representation  of  the  North  in  later  compass-charts;  and 
this  persists  without  important  alteration  until  well  into  the 
fifteenth  century.  But  while  later  Italian  charts  [cf.  Pizigano's 
of  1367]  more  closely  resemble  the  Italian  Dalorto  map  of  1325, 
the  Majorca  map  of  1339  represents  the  type  of  the  later  Catalan 
charts.  In  the  one  preserved  at  Modena,  and  dating  from 
about  1350,'  the  Catalan  compass-chart  is  combined  with  the 
representation  of  the  world  of  the  wheel-maps.  We  find  the 
picture  of  the  North  to  be  the  same  in  all  its  main  outlines; 
but  here  a  new  feature  is  added,  in  that  Iceland  appears  as  a 
group  of  eight  islands  in  the  far  north-west,  out  on  the  margin 
of    the    map,    with    the    note :    "  questas    illes    son    appellades 

1  The  number  with  the  preceding  words  is  also  evidently  given  in  the  line 
below. 

2  Cf.  Th.  Fischer,  1886,  p.  42;  Hamy,  1889,  p.  366;  Magnaghi,  1899,  p.  2. 
I  have  not  been  able  to  find  this  legend  on  Dalorto's  map  of  1339  (in  the 
reproduction  in  Nordenskiold's  "Periplus,"  pi.  viii.),  where  Magnaghi  asserts 
that  it  is  to  be  found. 

3  Cf.  Hamy,  1888,  1903;  Nordenskiold,  1897,  pi.  viii;  Kretschmer,  1909,  p. 
188. 

*  This  is  the  same  form  as  on  the  later  maps,  pp.  231,  232,  233. 

5  For  a  description  and  reproduction  of  the  Modena  chart,  see  Kretschmer, 
1897;  PuUe  and  Longhena,  1907. 
230 


COMPASS-CHARTS 

islandes"  ("these  islands  are  called  Icelands").  The  southern- 
most island  is  called  "  islanda,"  the  others  have  incompre- 
hensible names  ("  donbert,"  "  tranes,"  "  tales,"  "  brons,"  "  bres," 


North-western    Europe   on   the    wheel-shaped   compass-chart    at 

Modena   (circa  1350).    The  network  of  compass-lines,  names 

and  legends  omitted.    Mountains  indicated  by  shading 

"mmau  .  .  .  ,"  "bilanj"  (?));  but  the  name  of  Greenland 
is  not  found.  In  the  ocean  to  the  north  of  Norway  there 
is  "Mare  putritum  congelatum  "  (the  putrid,  frozen  sea).  This 
is  evidently  the  idea  of  the  stinking  Liver  Sea  (as  in  Arab 
myths,  cf.  p.  51),  combined  with  that  of  the  frozen  sea. 
On  the  approximately  contemporary  Catalan  compass-chart 
(see  the  reproduction,  pp.  232-3),  preserved  in  the  National 
Library  at  Florence  (called  No.  16),  we  find  the  same 
group  of  islands  called  "  Island,"  with  a  long  inscription 
(see  p.  232) ;  [cf.  also  Bjornbo  and  Petersen,  1908,  p.  16],  which 
is  partly  illegible,  but  wherein  it  is  stated  that  "the  islands 
are    very   large,"    that    "the    people    are   handsome,    tall    and 

231 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 


North-western  Europe  on  the  anonymous   Catalan  mappamundi  i 
at  Florence.     Reproduced  mainly  from  a  tracing  of  the  original  i 
has  been,  somewhat  enlarged  to  render  it  legible  in  the  reduced  | 
landia"  is  given,  while  the  original  has 


fair,  the  country  is  very  cold,"  etc.    The  name  of  Greenland 
does  not  occur  on  this  chart,  either. ^ 


1  In  the  reproduction  above,  "  gronlandia "  is  given  in  the  inscription  in 
the  Baltic,  taken  from  the  reading  of  Bjornbo  and  Petersen  [1908,  p.  16].  Mr. 
232 


COMPASS-CHARTS 


of  the  middle  of  the  fourteenth  century,  in  the  National  Library 
made  by  Dr.  A.  A.  Bjornbo.  The  text  of  the  names  and  legends 
reproduction.  In  the  legend  on  the  Baltic  the  erroneous  "  gron- 
"  gotlandia "  (according  to  O.  Vangensten) 

The    same   tj^e    o£    Catalan    charts   includes    Charles    V.'s 
well-known     mappamundi,     or     "  Catalan     Atlas "     of     1375, 


O.  Vangensten  has  examined  the  original  at  Florence  and  found  that  this  is  a 
misreading,  the  correct  one  being  "  gotlandia." 

233 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

as   well   as   Mecia   de    Viladeste's    chart    of    1413/    and   many 
others.^ 

We  find  a  different  representation  of  the  North,  especially 
of  the  Scandinavian  peninsula,  in  the  anonymous  atlas  of 
1351,  preserved  at  Florence  and  commonly  called  the  "  Medi- 
cean  Marine  Atlas,"  ^  which  is  an  Italian,  probably  a  Genoese, 
work.     The  North  is  here  represented  on  a  map  of  the  world 

1  On  this  chart  there  is  a  picture  in  the  northern  ocean  to  the  west  of  Nor- 
way of  a  ship  with  her  anchor  out  by  the  side  of  a  whale,  with  the  following 
explanation  [cf.  Bjornbo,  1910,  p.  121]:  "This  sea  is  called  'mar  bocceano,' 
and  therein  are  found  great  fish,  which  sailors  take  to  be  small  islands  and 
take  up  their  quarters  on  these  fish,  and  the  sailors  land  on  these  islands  and 
make  fires,  and  cause  such  heat  that  the  fish  feels  it  and  sets  itself  in  motion, 
and  they  have  no  time  to  get  on  board  and  are  lost;  and  those  who  know  this, 
land  on  the  said  fish,  and  there  make  thongs  of  its  back  and  make  fast  the 
head  of  the  ship's  anchor,  and  in  this  way  they  flay  the  skin  off  it,  whereof  they 
make  saraianes  [ropes?]  for  their  ships,  and  of  this  skin  are  made  good  cover- 
ings for  haystacks." 

We  have  here  a  combination  of  two  mythical  features.  One  is  the  great 
fish  of  the  "  Navigatio  Brandani,"  on  which  they  land  and  make  a  fire  to  cook 
lamb's  flesh,  when  the  fish  begins  to  move,  and  the  brethren  rush  to  the  ship, 
into  which  they  are  taken  by  Brandan,  while  the  island  disappears  and  they 
can  still  see  the  fire  they  have  made  two  leagues  away.  Brandan  told  them 
that  this  was  the  largest  of  all  the  fish  in  the  sea;  it  always  tries  to  reach  its 
tail  with  its  head  (like  the  Midgards-worm,  cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  364)  and  its  name  is 
lasconicus.  The  same  myth  is  referred  to  in  an  Anglo-Saxon  poem  [Codex 
Exoniensis,  ed.  Benj.  Thorpe,  London,  1842,  pp.  360  f.]  on  the  great  whale 
Fastitocalon,  where  ships  cast  anchor  and  the  sailors  go  ashore  and  make 
fires,  upon  which  the  whale  dives  down  with  ship  and  crew.  The  idea  of  such 
a  fish  resembling  an  island  is  also  found  in  the  northern  myth  of  the  hafgufa 
[cf.  the  "King's  Mirror"],  or  krake,  and  is  doubtless  derived  from  the  East. 
Tales  of  landing  on  an  apparent  island  which  suddenly  turns  out  to  be  a  fish 
are  found  in  Sindbad's  first  voyage,  in  Qazwini  (where  the  fish  is  an  enormous 
turtle),  and  even  in  Pseudo-Callisthenes  in  the  second  century  [iii.  17;  cf.  E. 
Rohde,  1900,  p.  192]. 

The  second  feature  of  flaying  the  skin  is  evidently  the  same  as  already 
found  in  Albertus  Magnus  (ob.  1280),  and  must  be  referred  to  fabulous  ideas 
about  the  hunting  of  walrus,  which  was  also  called  whale  (see  above,  p.  163). 
That  walrus  hide  was  used  for  ships'  ropes  is,  of  course,  well  known,  but  that 
it  should  be  also  used  for  coverings  of  haystacks  is  not  likely,  as  it  was  cer- 
tainly far  too  valuable  for  that. 

2  Cf.  also  the  anonymous  Catalan  chart  in  the  Biblioteca  Nazionale  at 
Naples,  reproduced  in  Bjornbo  and  Petersen,  1908,  pi.  i. 

"  Cf.  Nordenskiold,  1897,  pp.  21,  58,  pi.  x.;  Hamy,  1889,  pp.  414  f.;  Fischer- 
Ongania,  pi.  v. 

234 


COMPASS-CHARTS 

and  on  a  map  of  Europe  (reproduced  pp.  236,  260).  The  repre- 
sentation to  a  great  extent  resembles  the  Dalorto  type.  Its 
division  of  western  Scandinavia  into  three  great  promontories 
no  doubt  recalls  the  Carignano  map  to  such  an  extent  that  one 
may  suppose  it  to  have  been  influenced  by  some  Italian  source 
of  that  map;  but  in  the  names  it  shows  more  resemblance 
to  the  Dalorto  maps:  the  delineation  of  the  Baltic  and  of 
the  peninsula  corresponding  to  Skane  is  practically  the  same; 
it  perhaps  resembles  in  particular  the  Modena  map  and  the 
anonymous  map  at  Florence  (cf.  pp.  232,  233).  Jutland,  on 
the  other  hand,  has  been  greatly  prolonged  and  given  a  different 
shape.  The  three  great  tongues  of  land  in  Norway,  with  a 
smaller  one  on  the  east,  near  Denmark,  may  correspond  to 
the  four  headlands  on  the  south  coast  of  Norway  on  the  Dalorto 
maps  [cf.  especially  that  of  1339].  Through  these  being  con- 
siderably increased  in  size,  and  the  bays  between  them  being 
enlarged,  the  west  coast  of  Norway  has  been  moved  even 
farther  to  the  west  than  on  the  map  of  1325,  and  has  been 
given  a  somewhat  more  westerly  longitude  than  Ireland.  On 
the  map  of  Europe  "C.  trobs "  ("  capitolum  tronberg"? 
i.e.,  Tonsberg)  is  written  on  the  first  bay  (like  "  trunberg "  on 
the  Dalorto  map) ;  "  c.  bergis "  ("  capitolum  bergis,"  i.e.,  the 
see  of  Bergen),  and  "  c.  trons"  (?)  (the  see  of  Trondhjem)  on 
each  of  the  two  other  bays.  Finally,  "  alogia,"  which  on  the 
Dalorto  map  is  marked  as  a  town  on  the  northern  west  coast 
of  Norway,  to  the  north  of  Nidroxia  (Nidaros),  has  followed 
the  west  coast  and  is  placed  on  the  westernmost  tongue  of 
land.  How  the  whole  of  this  delineation  came  about  is 
difficult  to  say.  One  might  be  tempted  to  think  that  it  was 
through  a  misunderstanding  of  a  description  of  Norway,  like 
that  we  find  in  the  "  Historia  Norvegiae,"  where  the  country  is 
described  as  divided  into  four  parts,  the  first  being  the  land 
on  the  eastern  bay,  near  Denmark,  the  second  "  Gulacia " 
(Gulathing),  the  third  "  Throndemia,"  the  fourth  "  Halogia.''^ 

1  Cf.  Mon.  Hist.  Norv.,  ed.  Storm,  1880,  p.  77.  The  circumstance  that  on 
one  of  the  Sanudo  maps  (p.  224),  Norway  is  divided  into  four  peninsulas, 
may  be  connected  with  a  similar  conception. 

235 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

The  map  of  the  world  in  the  "  Medici  Atlas "  is  drawn  in  the 
same  way  as  the  compass-charts.  It  has  no  names  of  towns 
in  Scandinavia,  and  the  westernmost  tongue  of  land  is  without 
a  name  (see  the  reproduction).  On  the  other  hand,  the  name 
*'alolanda"  occurs  inland  in  eastern  Norway,  and  is  there 
obviously    a    corruption    of    "  Hallandia "    (cf.    p.    227).     This 


The  north-western  portion  of  the  mappamundi  in  the  "  Medicean  Marine 
Atlas"  (1351).    The  degrees  are  here  inserted  after  the  maps  of  Ptolemy 

mappamundi  is  interesting  from  the  fact  that  it  makes 
the  land-masses  of  the  continent  extend  without  a  limit  on 
the  north,  whereas  Africa  is  terminated  by  a  peninsula  on  the 
south. 

The  map  of  the  Venetian  Francesco  Pizigano,  of  1367, 
resembles  Dalorto's  of  1325  in  its  delineation  of  the  North; 
the  south  side  of  Norway  has  somewhat  the  same  rounded 
form  with  seven  headlands,  and  "alogia"  is  a  town  on  the 
west  coast. 


236 


[From  the  Bayeux  tapestry,  eleventh   century] 

VIEWS  OF  THE  NORTH  AMONG  THE  NORTHERN 
PEOPLES 

It  has  been  already  pointed  out  that,  while  the  oldest 
Northern  authority,  Adam  of  Bremen,  regarded  the  countries 
of  the  North,  outside  Scandinavia,  as  islands  in  the  ocean 
surrounding  the  earth's  disc  (in  agreement  with  the  learned 
view  and  with  the  wheel-maps),  the  Scandinavians,  unfettered 
by  learned  ideas,  assumed  that  Greenland  was  connected  with 
the  continent,  for  the  reason,  among  others,  that,  as  the 
author  of  the  "  King's  Mirror  "  expresses  it,  continental  animals 
such  as  the  hare,  wolf,  and  reindeer  could  not  otherwise  have 
got  there.  But,  as  we  have  seen,  this  land  communication 
could  only  be  supposed  to  exist  on  the  far  side  of  Gandvik  (the 
White  Sea)  and  the  Bjarmeland  (northern  Russia)  that  they 
knew,  and  to  go  round  the  north  of  the  sea  that  lay  to  the  north 
of  Norway.  Thus,  the  sea  came  to  be  called  "  Hafsbotn  "  (i.e., 
the  "bay,"  or  "gulf,"  of  the  ocean).  We  find  the  clearest  ex- 
pression of  this  view  in  the  Icelandic  geography  already  referred 
to,  which  may  in  part  be  attributed  to  Abbot  Nikulas  Bergsson 
of  Thvera  ^  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  313;  Vol.  II,  pp.  i,  172),  and  where  we 
read : 

"Nearest  Denmark  is  lesser  Sweden  [so  called  to  distinguish  it  from 
'Svil^joS  it  Mikla,'  Russia],  there  is  Oland,  then  Gotland,  then  Helsingeland, 
then  Vermeland,  then  two  Kvasnlands,  and  they  are  north  of  Bjarmeland. 
From  Bjarmeland  uninhabited  country  extends  northward  as  far  as  Green- 
land. South  of  Greenland  is  Helluland,"  etc.  (cf.  the  continuation,  above,  p. 
i).  In  a  variant  of  this  geography  in  an  older  MS.  we  read:  "  North  of  Sax- 
land  is  Denmark.  Through  Denmark  the  sea  goes  into  Austrveg  [the  coun- 
tries on  the  Baltic].  Sweden  lies  east  of  Denmark,  but  Norway  on  the  north. 
To  the  north  of  Norway  is  Finmark.  From  thence  the  land  turns  towards  the 
north-east,  and  then  to  the  east  before  one  comes  to  Bjarmeland.  This  is 
tributary  to  the  Garda-king  [the  king  of  Gardarike].  From  Bjarmeland  the 
land  stretches  to  the  uninhabited  parts  of  the  north,  until  Greenland  begins. 
To  the  south  of  Greenland  lies  Helluland,"  etc. 

1  Cf.  Finnur  Jonsson  [1901,  ii.  p.  948],  who  thinks  that  the  part  dealing  with 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

We  have  yet  a  third,  later  and  more  detailed  variant  in  the 
so-called  "  Gripla,"  given  in  Vol.  I,  p.  288. 

The  belief  in  this  land  connection  with  Greenland  may  have 
originated,  or  at  any  rate  have  been  considerably  strengthened 
by  the  discovery  of  countries  such  as  Novaya  Zemlya,  Svalbard, 
(Spitzbergen?),  and  the  northern  uninhabited  parts  of  the 
east  coast  of  Greenland  ^  (cf.  above,  pp.  165  f.).  In  addition 
to  this,  those  sailing  the  Polar  Sea  came  across  pack-ice 
wherever  they  went  in  a  northerly  direction,  closing  in  the 
sea  and  making  it  like  a  gulf,  and  it  must  therefore  have  been 
natural  to  believe  in  a  continuous  coast  which  connected 
the  countries  behind  the  ice,  and  which  held  this  fast.  The 
belief  in  a  land  connection  seems  to  have  been  so  ingrained 
that  it  can  scarcely  have  rested  on  nothing  but  theoretical 
speculations,  but  must  rather  have  been  supported  by  tangible 
proofs  of  this  kind. 

It  was  to  be  expected  that  the  countries  on  the  north  of 
Hafsbotn  should  become  fairy-lands  in  popular  belief,  Jotun- 
heimr  and  Risaland,  inhabited  by  giants.  Even  Saxo 
(beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century)  says  that  to  the  north 
of  Norway 

"lies  a  land,  the  name  and  position  of  which  are  unknown,  without  human 
civilization,  but  rich  in  people  of  monstrous  strangeness.  It  is  separated  from 
Norway,  which  lies  opposite,  by  a  mighty  arm  of  the  sea.  As  the  navigation 
there  is  very  unsafe,  few  of  those  who  have  ventured  thither  have  had  a  for- 
tunate return." 

As  it  can  hardly  be  the  Christian  settlements  in  Greenland 
that  Saxo  refers  to  as  a  land  without  human  civilization, 
we  must  doubtless  suppose  that  his  land  in  the  North  is  a 
confusion  of  the  eastern  uninhabited  tracts  of  Greenland 
with     Jotunheimr,     as     in     Icelandic     ideas.     For    Adam     of 

the  northern  regions  is  not  due  to  Nikulas.  The  hypothesis  put  forward  by 
Storm  in  Gronl.  Hist.  Mind.,  iii.  219,  that  it  was  Abbot  Nikolas  of  Thingeyre, 
appears  less  probable. 

1  If  the  old  fishermen  of  the  Polar  Sea  landed  on  any  of  these  countries 
(Novaya  Zemlya,  Spitzbergen),  they  would  there  have  found  reindeer,  which 
would  again  have  strengthened  their  belief  in  the  connection  by  land. 
238 


NORTHERN   AUTHORITIES 

Bremen  already  had  giants  (Cyclopes)  on  an  island  in  the  North, 
and  we  have  seen  that  there  were  similar  conceptions  in  the 
"Historia  Norvegiae  "  (cf.  p.  i6  f.). 

A    mediaeval    Icelandic    tale    (inserted    in    Bjorn    Jonsson's 
"  Greenland  Annals  ")  says  of  Halli  Geit  that 

"he  alone  succeeded  in  coming  by  land  on  foot  over  mountains  and  glaciers 
and  all  the  wastes,  and  past  all  the  gulfs  of  the  sea  to  Gandvik  and  then  to 
Norway.  He  led  with  him  a  goat,  and  lived  on  its  milk;  he  often  found  val- 
leys and  narrow  openings  between  the  glaciers,  so  that  the  goats  could  feed 
either  on  grass  or  in  the  woods." 

Ideas  of  this  kind  led  to  the  view,  held  by  some,  that  there 
was   land    as    far    as    the    North    Pole,    which    appears   in   an 


[From  the  Bayeux  tapestry,  eleventh  century] 

Icelandic  tract,  included   in  the   "  Rymbegla "    [1780,   p.   466]. 
Of  a  bad  Latin  verse,  there  reproduced,  it  is  said: 

"  Some  will  understand  this  to  mean  that  he  [i.e.,  the  poet]  says  that  land 
lies  under  leidarstjarna  [the  pole-star],  and  that  the  shores  there  prevent  the 
ring  of  the  ocean  from  joining  [i.e.,  around  the  disc  of  the  earth];  with  this 
certain  ancient  legends  agree,  which  show  that  one  can  go,  or  that  men  have 
gone,  on  foot  from  Greenland  to  Norway." 

But  the  mediaeval  learned  idea  of  the  outer  ocean  sur- 
rounding the  whole  disc  of  earth  also  asserts  itself  in  the 
North,  and  appears  in  Snorre's  "  Heimskringla "  and  in  the 
*'  King's  Mirror,"  among  other  works.  This  ocean  went 
outside  Greenland,  which  was  connected  with  Europe,  and 
made  the  former  into  a  peninsula.  In  the  work  already 
referred  to,  "  Gripla "  (only  known  in  a  late  MS.  in  Bjorn 
Jonsson  of  Skardsa,  first  half  of  the  seventeenth  century), 
we  read,  in  continuation  of  the  passage  already  quoted  (p.  35): 
"  Between  Wineland  and  Greenland  is  Ginnungagap,  it  proceeds 
from  the  sea  that  is  called  '  Mare  oceanum,'  which  surrounds 
the  whole  world."  Since  Wineland  (i.e.,  the  Insulas  Fortu- 
natae),   as  already  stated,  was  by  some,   evidently  through   a 

239 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

misunderstanding,  made  continuous  with  Africa/  it  is  clear  that 
the  outer  ocean  must  be  supposed  to  go  completely  round  both 
Greenland  and  Wineland  (cf.  the  illustration,  p.  2).  Thus,  it 
was  also  natural  to  suppose  that  there  was  an  opening  some- 
where between  these  two  countries,  through  which  the  outer 
ocean  was  connected  with  the  inner,  known  ocean  between  Nor- 
way, Greenland,  etc.^ 

At  least  as  old  as  the  Norsemen's  conceptions  of  countries 
beyond  the  ocean  in  the  North  was  probably  the  idea  of  the 
great  abyss,  Ginnungagap,  which  there  forms  the  boundary  of 
the  ocean  and  of  the  world,  and  which  must  be  derived  from 
the  Tartarus  and  Chaos  of  the  Greeks  (cf.  p.  150).  When  the 
Polar  Sea  (Hafsbotn)  was  closed  by  the  land  connection 
between  Bjarmeland  and  Greenland,  it  was  natural  that  those 
who  tried  to  form  a  consistent  view  of  the  world  could  no 
longer  find  a  place  for  the  abyss  in  that  direction;  and 
G.  Storm  (1890)  is  certainly  right  in  thinking  that  it  was  for 
this  reason  that  Ginnungagap  was  located  in  the  passage 
between  Greenland  and  Wineland;  since,  no  doubt,  the  idea 
was  that   this   "  gap "   in   some   way   or   other  was   connected 

1  The  reason  for  this  might  be  supposed  to  be  the  very  name  of  Wineland, 
formed  in  a  similar  way  to  Greenland  and  Iceland,  instead  of  Vin-ey  (Wine 
island).  A  "  land,"  if  one  knew  no  better,  would  be  more  likely  to  be  con- 
nected with  the  continent;  whereas,  if  it  had  been  called  "  ey,"  it  would  have 
continued  to  be  an  island,  as  indeed  it  is  in  the  "  Historia  Norvegiae,"  (cf.  p.  i). 

2  Storm  [1890;  1892,  pp.  78  f.]  and  Bjornbo  [1909,  pp.  229  f,;  1910,  pp.  82 
f.]  have  put  forward  views  about  these  ideas  of  the  Scandinavians  which  dif- 
fer somewhat  from  those  here  given  (cf.  above,  p.  2),  but,  in  the  main,  we  are 
in  agreement.  I  do  not  think  Dr.  Bjornbo  can  be  altogether  right  in  suppos- 
ing that  the  Icelanders  and  Norwegians  connected  Greenland  with  Bjarme- 
land, and  Wineland  with  Africa,  because  the  learned  views  of  the  Middle  Ages 
made  this  necessary;  for  this  view  of  the  world  also  acknowledged  islands  in 
the  ocean  [cf.  Adam  of  Bremen],  perhaps  indeed  more  readily  than  it  acknowl- 
edged peninsulas  [cf.  the  wheel-maps].  But  perhaps,  after  Greenland  and 
Wineland  had  been  connected  v^ith  the  continents  on  other  grounds,  the  pre- 
vailing learned  view  of  the  world  demanded  that  the  outer  ocean  should  be 
placed  outside  these  countries,  so  that  they  became  peninsulas.  But  we  have 
seen  that  side  by  side  with  this,  other  views  were  also  held  (cf.,  for  instance, 
the  "  Rymbegla "  and  the  Medicean  mappamundi,  pp.  239,  236). 

240 


NORTHERN   AUTHORITIES 


with  the  void  outer  ocean.  But  this  view  is  first  found  in 
the  very  late  copy  (seventeenth  century)  of  "  Gripla,"  and  of 
the  somewhat  older  map  of  Gudbrand  Torlaksson  (Torlacius) 
of  1606  [Torfaeus,  1706;  pi.  i.  p.  21],  where  "  Ginnunga 
Gap "  is  marked  as  the  name  of 
the  strait  between  Greenland  and 
America.  What  "  Ginnungagap  " ' 
really  was  seems  never  to  have 
been  quite  clear,  different  people 
having  no  doubt  had  different 
ideas  about  it;  but  when,  as  here, 
it  is  used  as  the  name  of  a  strait 
through  which  the  outer  ocean 
enters,  it  cannot  any  longer  be 
an  abyss;  at  the  most  it  may 
have  been  a  maelstrom,  or  whirl- 
pool, which,  indeed,  is  suggested 
by  the  whirlpool  on  Jon  Gud- 
mundsson's  map  (cf.  p.  34).  But 
even  this  interpretation  of  the 
name  became  effaced,  and  in 
another  MS.  of  the  seventeenth 
century  (see  p.  35)  it  is  simply  [Prom  an  Icelandic  MS.  of  1363] 
used  as  a  name  for  the  great 
ocean  to  the  west  of  Spain  (that  is,  the  Atlantic). 

On  the  other  hand  we  have  seen  (pp.  150  f.)  that  ideas  of 
whirlpools  in  the  northern  seas  appear  to  have  been  widely 
spread  in  the  Middle  Ages.  There  is  a  possibility,  as  already 
hinted  (Vol.  I,  p.  303),  that  when,  in  Ivar  Bardsson's  description  of 
the  northern  west  coast  of  Greenland,  "  the  many  whirlpools 
that  there  lie  all  over  the  sea"  are  spoken  of,  it  was  thought 
that  here  was  the  boundary  of  the  ocean  and  of  the  world,  and 
that  it  was  formed  by  the  many  whirlpools,  or  abysses,  in  the 
sea.  In  that  case  these  cannot  be  regarded  merely  as  mael- 
stroms like  the  Moskenstrom,  but  more  like  the  true  Ginnunga- 
gap.    But  this  is  extremely  uncertain ;  it  may  again  have  been  one 

241 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

of  those  embellishments  which  were  often  used  in  speaking  of 
the  most  distant  regions. 

Saxo  Grammaticus  (first  part  of  the  thirteenth  century)  in 
the  preface  to  his  Danish  history  gives  geographical  information 
about  Scandinavia  and  Iceland,  to  which  we  have  already  re- 
ferred several  times.  He  does  not  mention  Greenland.  He  says 
himself  that  he  has  made  use  of  Icelandic  literature  to  a  large 
extent;  but  he  has  also  mingled  with  it  a  good  deal  of  mythical 
material  from  elsewhere. 

Beyond  comparison  the  most  important  geographical 
writer  of  the  mediaeval  North,  and  at  the  same  time  one  of 
the  first  in  the  whole  of  mediaeval  Europe,  was  the  unknown 
author  who  wrote  the  "  King's  Mirror,"  ^  probably  about 
the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century.-  If  one  turns  from 
contemporary  or  earlier  European  geographical  literature, 
with  all  its  superstition  and  obscurity,  to  this  masterly  work, 
the  difference  is  very  striking.     Even  at  the  first  appearance 

1  The  name  of  the  work  ("  Konungs-Skuggsja  "  or  "  Speculum  Regale  ") 
had  its  prototype  in  the  names  of  those  books  which  were  written  in  India  for 
the  education  of  princes,  and  which  were  called  "  Princes'  Mirrors."  In  imita- 
tion of  these,  "  mirror "  ("  speculum ")  was  used  as  the  title  of  works  of 
various  kinds  in  mediaeval  Europe. 

-  Various  guesses  have  been  made  as  to  who  the  author  may  have  been 
and  when  the  work  was  written.  It  appears  to  me  that  there  is  much  to  be 
said  for  the  opinion  put  forward  by  A.  V.  Heffermehl  (1904),  that  the  author 
may  have  been  the  priest  Ivar  Bodde,  Hakon  Hakonsson's  foster-father.  In 
that  case  the  work  must  have  been  written  somewhat  earlier  than  commonly 
supposed  (Storm  put  it  between  1250  and  1260),  and  it  appears  that  Heffer- 
mehl has  given  good  reasons  for  assuming  that  it  may  have  been  written 
several  years  before  1250.  Considerable  weight  as  regards  the  determination 
of  its  date  must  be  attached  to  the  circumstance  that,  in  the  opinion  of  Pro- 
fessor Marius  Haegstad,  a  vellum  sheet  preserved  at  Copenhagen  (new  royal 
collection,  No.  235g)  has  linguistic  forms  which  must  place  it  certainly  before 
1250,  and  the  vellum  must  have  belonged  to  a  copy  of  an  older  MS.  On  the 
other  hand.  Professor  Moltke  Moe  has  pointed  out  in  his  lectures  that  the 
quotations  in  the  "  King's  Mirror "  from  the  book  of  the  Marvels  of  India, 
from  Prester  John's  letter,  are  derived  from  a  version  of  the  latter  which,  as 
shown  by  Zarncke,  is  not  known  before  about  1300.  Moltke  Moe  therefore 
supposes  that  the  "  King's  Mirror,"  in  the  form  we  know  it,  may  be  a  later  and 
incomplete  adaptation  of  the  original  work.  The  latter  may  have  been 
written  by  Ivar  Bodde  in  his  old  age,  between  1230  and  1240. 
242 


NORTHERN   AUTHORITIES 

of  the  Scandinavians  in  literature,  in  Ottar's  straightforward 
and  natural  narrative  of  his  voyage  to  King  Alfred,  the 
numerous  trustworthy  statements  about  previously  unknown 
regions  are  a  prominent  feature,  and  give  proof  of  a  sober 
faculty  of  observation  altogether  different  from  what  one 
usually  meets  with  in  mediaeval  literature.  This  is  the  case 
to  an  even  greater  degree  in  the  "  King's  Mirror,"  and  the 
difference  between  what  is  there  stated  about  the  North  and 
what  we  find  less  than  two  hundred  years  earlier  in  Adam 
of  Bremen  is  obvious.  Apart  from  the  fact  that  the  whole 
method  of  presentation  is  inspired  by  superior  intelligence, 
it  shows  an  insight  and  a  faculty  of  observation  which  are 
uncommon,  especially  at  that  period;  and  in  many  points 
this  remarkable  man  was  evidently  centuries  before  his  time. 
Although  well  acquainted  with  much  of  the  earlier  mediaeval 
literature,  he  has  liberated  himself  to  a  surprising  extent 
from  its  fabulous  conceptions.  We  hear  nothing  of  the  many 
fabulous  peoples,  who  were  still  common  among  much  later 
authors,  nor  about  whirlpools,  nor  the  "  curdled  "  and  "  dark  " 
sea,  but,  instead,  we  have  fresh  and  copious  information  about 
the  northern  regions,  and  it  comes  with  a  clearness  like  that 
which  already  struck  us  in  Ottar.  We  have  a  remarkably 
good  description  of  the  sea  ice,  its  drift,  etc.  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  279 
f.) ;  we  have  also  a  description  of  the  animal  world  of  the  north- 
ern seas  to  which  there  is  no  parallel  in  the  earlier  literature 
of  the  world  (cf.  pp.  155  f.).  No  less  than  twenty-one  different 
whales  are  referred  to  fully.  If  we  make  allowance  for  three 
of  them  being  probably  sharks,  and  for  two  being  perhaps 
alternative  names  for  the  same  whale,  the  total  corresponds 
to  the  number  of  species  that  are  known  in  northern  waters. 
Six  seals  are  described,  which  correspond  to  the  number  of 
species  living  on  the  coasts  of  Norway  and  Greenland.  Besides 
these  the  walrus  (rostung)  is  very  well  described.  But 
even  the  author  of  the  "  King's  Mirror "  could  not  altogether 
avoid  the  supernatural  in  treating  of  the  sea.  He  describes  in 
the   seas  of  Iceland  the   enormous  monster  "  hafgufa,"   which 

243 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

seems  more  like  a  piece  of  land  than  a  fish,  and  he  does  not 
think  there  are  more  than  two  of  them  in  the  sea.  This  is 
the  same  that  the  Norwegian  fishermen  now  call  the  "krake," 
and  certainly  also  the  same  that  appears  in  ancient  Oriental 
myths,  and  that  is  met  with  again  in  the  Brandan  legend  as 
the    great   whale   that   they   take   for   an   island   and   land    on 

(cf.  p.  234).  In  the  Green- 
land seas  the  "  King's 
Mirror"  has  two  kinds  of 
trolls,  "  hafstrambr "  (a 
kind  of  merman),  with  a 
body  that  was  like  a  glacier 
to  look  at,  and  "  mar- 
gygr"  (^  mermaid),  both 
Marginal  drawings  in  the  Flateyjarbok  of  which  are  fully  described. 
(1387-1394)  There  is  also  mention  in  the 

Greenland  seas  of  the  strange  and  dangerous  "  sea-fences," 
which  are  often  spoken  of  in  the  sagas  (and  about  which 
there  is  a  lay,  the  "  HafgerSinga-drapa ").  The  author 
does  not  quite  know  what  to  make  of  this  marvel,  for  "it 
looks  as  if  all  the  storms  and  waves  that  there  are  in  that 
sea  gather  themselves  together  in  three  places,  and  become 
three  waves.  They  fence  in  the  whole  sea,  so  that  men 
cannot  find  a  way  out,  and  they  are  higher  than  great  moun- 
tains and  like  steep  summits,"  etc.  It  is  probable  that  the 
belief  in  these  sea-fences  is  derived  from  something  that  really 
took  place,  perhaps  most  likely  earthquake  waves,  or  submarine 
earthquakes,  which  may  sometimes  have  occurred  near  volcanic 
Iceland.  But  it  is  curious  that  in  the  "  King's  Mirror "  these 
waves  are  connected  with  Greenland.  They  might  also  be  sup- 
posed to  be  connected  with  the  waves  that  are  formed  when  ice- 
bergs capsize. 

The  principal  countries  described  are  Ireland,  Iceland,  and 
Greenland;  but  it  is  characteristic  of  the  author  that,  the 
farther  north  he  goes,  away  from  regions  commonly  known, 
the  freer  his  account  becomes  from  all  kinds  of  fabulous 
244 


NORTHERN   AUTHORITIES 

additions.  In  Ireland,  he  is  still  held  fast  by  the  superstition 
of  the  period,  and  especially  by  the  priests'  fables  about  them- 
selves and  their  holy  men,  and  by  the  English  author  Giraldus 
Cambrensis.^  In  Iceland,  as  a  rule,  he  is  free  of  this  troublesome 
ballast,  and  gives  valuable  information  about  the  glaciers  of 
Iceland,  glacier  falls,  boiling  springs,  etc.  In  his  opinion,  the 
cold  climate  of  Iceland  is  due  to  the  vicinity  of  Greenland, 
which  sends  out  great  cold  owing  to  its  being  above  all  other 
lands  covered  with  ice;  for  this  reason  Iceland  has  so  much 
ice  on  its  mountains.  Although  he  thinks  it  possible  that 
its  volcanoes  are  due  to  the  fires  of  Hell,  and  that  it  is  thus 
the  actual  place  of  torment,  and  that  Hell  is  therefore  not 
in  Sicily,  as  his  Holiness,  Pope  Gregory,  had  supposed,  he  never- 
theless has  another  and  more  reasonable  explanation  of  the 
origin  of  earthquakes  and  volcanoes.  They  may  be  due  to 
hollow  passages  and  cavities  in  the  foundations  of  the  land, 
which  by  the  force  either  of  the  wind  or  of  the  roaring  sea  may 
become  so  full  of  wind  that  they  cannot  stand  the  pressure, 
and  thus  violent  earthquakes  may  arise.  From  the  violent 
conflict  which  the  air  produces  underground,  the  great  fire 
may  be  kindled  which  breaks  out  in  different  parts  of  the 
country.  It  must  not  be  thought  certain  that  this  is  exactly 
how  it  takes  place,  but  one  ought  rather  to  lay  such  things 
together  to  form  the  explanation  that  seems  more  conceivable, 
for 

"We  see  that  from  force  [afli]  all  fire  comes.  When  hard  stone  and  hard 
iron  are  brought  together  with  a  blow,  fire  comes  from  the  iron  and  from  the 
force  with  which  they  are  struck  together.  You  may  also  rub  pieces  of  wood 
together  until  fire  comes  from  the  labor  that  they  have.  It  is  also  constantly 
happening  that  two  winds  arise  from  different  quarters,  one  against  the  other, 
and  if  they  meet  in  the  air  there  is  a  hard  shock,  and  this  shock  gives  off  a 
great  fire,  which  spreads  far  in  the  air." 

1  If  Professor  Moltke  Moe's  view  is  correct,  that  the  "  King's  Mirror,"  in 
the  form  which  we  know,  is  a  later  adaptation  (cf.  p,  242,  note  2),  it  may  be 
supposed  that  the  section  on  Ireland  was  inserted  by  the  adapter.  Presum- 
ably a  thorough  examination  of  the  linguistic  forms  would  determine  whether 
this  is  probable. 

245 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

This  idea  of  a  connection  between  labor  (friction)  and  force 
(motion),  and  this  explanation  of  the  possible  origin  of  volcanoes 
are  surprising  in  the  thirteenth  century,  and  seem  to  bring  the 
author  centuries  in  advance  of  his  time ;  we  here  have  germs  of 
the  theory  of  the  conservation  of  energy. 

His  statements  about  Greenland  are  remarkable  for  their 
sober  trustworthiness.  He  gives  the  first  description  of  its 
inland  ice : 


But  since  you  asked  whether  the  land  is  thawed  or  not,  or  whether  it  is 
covered  with  ice  Uke  the  sea,  you  must 
know  that  there  are  small  portions  of  the 
land  which  are  thawed,  but  all  the  rest  is 
covered  with  ice,  and  the  people  do  not 
know  whether  the  country  is  large  or  small, 
since  all  the  mountains  and  valleys  are  cov- 
ered with  ice,  so  that  no  one  can  find  his 
way  in.  But  in  reality  it  must  be  that  there 
is  a  way,  either  in  those  valleys  that  lie  be- 
tween the  mountains,  or  along  the  shores, 
so  that  animals  can  find  a  way,  for  other- 
wise animals  cannot  come  there  from  other 
countries,  unless  they  find  a  way  through 
the  ice  and  find  the  land  thawed.  But  men 
have  often  tried  to  go  up  the  country,  upon 
the  highest  mountains  in  various  places,  to 
look  around  them,  to  see  whether  they 
could  find  any  part  that  was  thawed  and 
habitable,    but    they    have    not    found   any 

such,  except  where  people  are  now  living,  and  that  is  but  little  along  the  shore 

itself." 


[From  a  Norwegian  Ms.  of 
the   Gulathings  law  (four- 
teenth century)] 


This,  as  we  see,  is  an  extremely  happy  description  of  the 
mighty  ice-sheet.  He  also  describes  the  climate  of  the  country, 
both  the  fine  weather  that  often  occurs  in  summer,  and  its  usu- 
ally inclement  character,  which  causes  so  small  a  proportion  of 
the  country  to  be  habitable. 

"  The  land  is  cold,  and  the  glacier  [i.e.,  the  great  ice,  or  inland  ice]  has  this 
nature,  that  he  sends  out  cold  gusts  which  drive  away  the  showers  from  his 
face,  and  he  usually  keeps  his  head  bare.  But  often  his  near  neighbors  have  to 
suffer  for  it,  in  that  all  other  lands  which  lie  in  his  neighborhood  get  much  bad 
weather  from  him,  and  all  the  cold  blasts  that  he  throws  off  fall  upon  them." 
246 


NORTHERN   AUTHORITIES 

Though  in  simple  and  everyday  words,  this  really  expresses 
the  idea  that  Greenland  and  the  neighboring  regions  are  dispro- 
portionately cold,  and  that,  in  part  at  any  rate,  this  is  due  to  the 
glaciers  of  Greenland,  which  have  a  refrigerating  effect  (as  an 
anticyclonic  pole  of  maximum  cold).  This  is,  to  a  certain  de- 
gree, correct.  In  crossing  Greenland,  in  1888,  we  found  that  a 
pole  of  cold  (anticyclone)  lies  over  the  inland  ice,  which  gives 
off  cold  air.  Scientific  greatness  does  not  always  depend  on  eru- 
dition or  acute  learned  combinations ;  it  is  just  as  often  the  result 
of  a  sound  common  sense. 

The  allusion  in  the  *'  King's  Mirror  "  to  the  Norse  inhabitants 
of  Greenland  and  their  life  has  already  been  quoted  in  part  (Vol. 
I,  p.  277  f.) ;  curiously  enough  the  Skraslings  are  not  mentioned. 
The  author  gives  a  graphic  description  of  the  aurora  borealis, 
and  attempts  to  explain  its  cause.  As  already  noted  (p.  155), 
it  is  curious  that  he  should  speak  of  it  as  something  peculiar  to 
Greenland,  when  he  must,  of  course,  have  known  it  well  enough 
in  Norway. 

The  cosmography  of  the  "  King's  Mirror  "  is  based  on  older 
mediaeval  writers,  especially  Isidore.  The  spherical  form  of 
the  earth  and  the  course  of  the  sun  are  mentioned,  as  is 
Macrobius's  doctrine  of  zones.  In  the  frigid  zones  the  cold 
has  attracted  to  itself  such  power  that  the  waters  throw  off 
their  nature,  and  are  changed  to  ice,  and  all  the  land  and  sea 
is  covered  with  ice.  They  are  usually  uninhabitable,  but 
nevertheless  the  author  considers  that  Greenland  lies  in  the 
North  Frigid  zone.  He  thinks  that  "  it  is  mainland,  and  con- 
nected with  other  mainland,"  as  already  mentioned,  because  it 
has  a  number  of  terrestrial  animals  that  are  not  often  found  on 
islands.     It 

"lies  on  the  extreme  side  of  the  world  on  the  north,"  and  he  does  not  think 
"  there  is  land  outside  Heimskringla  [the  circle  of  the  world,  orbis  terrarum] 
beyond  Greenland,  only  the  great  ocean  which  runs  round  the  world;  and  it  is 
said  by  men  who  are  wise  that  the  strait  through  which  the  empty  ocean  flows 
comes  in  by  Greenland,  and  into  the  gap  between  the  lands  [landa-klofi] 
and  thereafter  with  fjords  and  gulfs  it  divides  all  countries,  where  it  runs  into 
Heimskringla." 

247 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 


This  is,  as  we  see,  the  same  idea  as  already  (p.  240)  referred 
to,  that  the  outer  ocean  runs  in  through  a  sound  between 
Greenland  and  another  continent  to  the  south,  evidently 
Wineland,  which  is  thus  here  again  regarded  as  part  of  Africa 
(cf.  p.  I). 

It  is,  moreover,  striking  that  neither  Wineland,  Markland, 
nor  Helluland  is  mentioned  in  the  "  King's  Mirror,"  and  Bjarme- 
land,  Svalbard,  etc.,  are  also  omitted.  Thus,  it  does  not  give 
any  complete  description  of  the  northern  lands,  but  it  must  be 
remembered  that  what  we  know  of  the  work  is  only  a  fragment, 
and  perhaps  it  was  never  completed. 


,s|,HvW??K,°K'MM^M^^IHvh?h^h,°lvlvK^l'H^?K'^T!y|^,^Hg 


,-!lsl.?lrl;il'M!H',->l;?l:^hThl-.?l;?l?'.l',flf?li?k?hfh7l'fJ?,^^rl?:5mi5 


Caicin 


ofi*«liuie5io1n4<ve(eplei<inor 


iSuffor,uitj,ot>ath^,mo.:^ 


The  Nancy  map.  A  copy,  of  1427,  of  Claudius  Clavus's  first 
map  of  the  North.  The  lines  of  latitude  and  longitude  are 
omitted  for  the  sake  of  clearness 

CLADIUS  CLAVUS 
The   credit   of  having   introduced   the   name   of   Greenland, 
with    the    ancient    Norsemen's    geographical    ideas    about    the 
extreme  North,  into  cartography  belongs,  so  far  as  is  known, 
248 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

to  the  Dane,  Claudius  Clausson  Swart,  usually  called  in  Latin 
Claudius  Clavus  (sometimes,  also,  Nicolaus  Niger).  He  wa? 
born  in  Fiinen,  traveled  about  Europe,  and,  as  shown  by- 
Storm  [1891,  pp.  17  f.],  was  probably  the  "Nicolaus  Gothus" 
who  is  mentioned  at  Rome  in  January,  1424,  and  who  is 
reported  to  have  there  given  out  that  he  had  seen  a  copy  of 
Livy  in  the  monastery  of  Soro,  near  Roskilde  (which  was 
probably  a  romance  on  his  part).  We  are  told  that  he  was 
a  man  of  acute  intelligence,  but  a  rover,  and  unsteady.  His 
subsequent  history  is  unknown.  As  a  supplement  to  Ptolemy's 
"  Geography,"  which  just  at  that  time  (1409)  was  becoming 
known  in  western  Europe  in  a  Latin  translation,  he  made,  prob- 
ably, in  Italy,  two  maps  of  the  North,  with  accompanying  de- 
scriptions. The  maps  must  have  been  drawn  either  by  himself 
or  with  his  help.  They  are  the  first  maps  known  in  western 
Europe  which  are  furnished,  after  the  model  of  Ptolemy 
(or  Marinos),  with  lines  of  latitude  and  longitude,^  and  they 
thus  mark  the  beginning  of  a  more  scientific  cartography  and 
geography  in  western  Europe.^ 

His  first  map  (the  Nancy  map)  must  have  been  drawn 
between  the  years  141 3  and  1427,  probably  between  1424 
and  1427;  but  it  can  never  have  been  widely  known,  as  it 
has  excercised  no  noticeable  influence  on  the  cartography  of 
the  succeeding  period.  The  French  cardinal  Filastre 
(ob.    1428),   who  was  staying   in   Rome   in    1427,   became   ac- 

1  The  famous  Roger  Bacon  is  said  to  have  already  made  an  attempt,  before 
Ptolemy's  "  Geography  "  was  known,  to  draw  a  map  according  to  mathematical 
determinations  of  locality;  but  the  map  is  lost  [Roger  Bacon,  Opus  majus, foL 
186-189].  The  title  of  Nicholas  of  Lynn's  book  is  said  to  have  been:  "  Inventio 
f  ortunata  qui  liber  incipet  a  gradu  54,  usque  ad  polum  "  (i.e.,  "  which  book  be- 
gins [in  its  description]  at  54°  [and  goes]  as  far  as  the  pole  ")  [cf.  Hakluyt, 
Princ.  Nav,,  1903,  p.  303].  This  may  show  that  degrees  were  already  in  use 
at  that  time  (1360)  for  geographical  description. 

"  On  Claudius  Clavus  see  in  particular  Storm's  work  of  fundamental  im- 
portance (1880-1891),  and  the  valuable  monograph  by  Bjornbo  and  Petersen 
(1904,  1909)  also  A.  A.  Bjorno  (1910).  Cf.  further  Nordenskiold  [1897,  p. 
86  f.],  V.  Wieser  [Peterm.  Mitteilungen,  xlv.  1899,  pp.  119  f.],  Jos.  Fischer 
[1902,  cap.  5],  and  others. 

249 


IN    NORTHERN    MISTS 

quainted  with  it  there,  and  made  a  reduced  copy  of  it,  which, 
together  with  a  copy  of  the  accompanying  text,  he  had  bound 
up  with  his  copy  of  the  Latin  translation  of  Ptolemy's 
"  Geography  "  with  maps.  This  work  was  not  rediscovered  at 
Nancy  until  1835,  when  it  was  published;  the  map  is,  therefore, 
called  the  Nancy  map.  Clavus's  second  map,  which  seems 
to  have  been  drawn  later  than  that  just  mentioned,  has, 
on  the  other  hand,  had  considerable  influence  on  the  cartograph- 
ical representation  of  the  northern  regions  through  a  period  of 
two  centuries. 

A  copy  of  the  later  map  was  first  brought  to  light  by  Nor- 
denskiold  at  Warsaw  in  i88g  [1889,  pi.  xxx.] ;  since  then  several 
copies  have  been  rescued  from  oblivion,  while  the  text  accom- 
panying the  map  was  accidentally  discovered  in  1900  by  Dr.  A. 
A.  Bjombo  in  a  mediasval  MS.  at  Vienna  [Bjombo  and  Petersen, 
1904].  The  original  map  is  lost;  but  except  as  regards  details 
of  no  great  consequence  there  can  now  be  no  doubt  as  to  what 
it  was  like. 

The  reproductions  (pp.  248  and  251)  will  give  an  idea  of  the 
representation  of  the  North  on  the  two  maps.  As  far  as  Ptol- 
emy's map  extended  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  118  f.),  it  will  be  seen  that  its 
coast-lines  and  islands  are  almost  slavishly  adhered  to  on 
both  maps.  To  this,  the  Nancy  map  adds  a  Scandinavia,  with 
Iceland,  the  east  coast  of  Greenland,  and  a  northern  land 
connection  between  the  latter  and  Russia.  On  the  later  map, 
Scandinavia  has  been  given  a  somewhat  altered  form,  and 
Greenland  has  a  west  coast.  The  Nancy  map  has  few  names, 
many  more  being  mentioned  in  the  text,  especially  in  Denmark. 
Even  as  regards  Denmark,  they  are  evidently  to  a  great  extent 
taken  from  an  older  itinerary  like  that  of  Bruges  ("  Itine- 
raire  Brugeois,")  [cf.  Storm,  1891,  p.  19].  Some  of  the  names 
on  the  map,  like  "  bergis,"  "  nidrosia,"  etc.,  may  be  taken 
from  older  compass-charts;  both  texts  have  the  northern 
form,  "Bergen."  Headlands,  bays,  and  islands  (on  the  coasts 
of  Norway,  Iceland,  and  Greenland),  for  which  he  had  no 
names  (and  which,  moreover,  are  due  to  the  free  imagination 
250 


251 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

of  the  draughtsman),  have  been  designated  in  the  Nancy  text 
by  Latin  numerals  (Primum,  Secundum,  etc.),  or  are 
simply  named  after  each  other  (in  Iceland),  a  sure  sign  that 
Clavus  neither  knew  nor  had  heard  anything  about  these 
coasts. 

On  his  later  map,  Clavus  has  made  up  for  the  want  of  names 
in  an  astonishing  way.  On  some  of  the  coasts  he  has  continued 
to  use  Latin  numerals  for  bays,  etc.,  but  side  by  side  with  this 
on  the  shores  of  the  Baltic  and  in  Sweden  he  has  used  Danish 
numerals,  such  as,  "  Forste  aa  fluuii  ostia"  (First  river, 
river-mouth),  "  Anden  aa "  (Second  river)  .  .  .  ,  etc.  The 
southerners,  who  did  not  understand  Danish,  of  course  regarded 
these  as  names,  and  subjected  them  to  all  sorts  of  corruptions. 
Matters  became  worse  when,  in  Gotland  and  Norway,  he  used 
as  the  names  of  headlands  and  rivers  the  words  of  a  meaning- 
less rigmarole :  "  Enarene,"  "apocane,"  "  uithu,"  *'  wultu," 
"  segh,"  "  sarlecrogh,"  etc.  (evidently  corresponding  to  chil- 
dren's rigmaroles  like  "  Anniken,  fanniken,  fiken,  foken,"  etc.).^ 
In  Iceland  he  used  the  names  of  the  runic  characters  for  head- 
lands and  rivers;  but  most  remarkable  of  all  are  his  names  in 
Greenland,  alternately  for  headlands  and  the  mouths  of  rivers  ( !). 
If,  as  shown  by  Bjornbo  and  Petersen,  these  are  read  continu- 
ously from  the  most  northern  headland  on  the  east  coast  round 
the  south  of  the  country,  the  following  verse  in  the  dialect  of 
Fiinen  is  the  result : 

"Thaer   boer   eeynh   manh    secundum    [  =  ij?]2eyn   Gronelandsz   aa, 
ooc  Spieldebedh  mundhe  hanyd  heyde; 
meer  hawer  han  aff  nidefildh, 
een  hanh  hawer  flesk  hinth  feyde. 
Nordh  um  driuer  sandhin  naa  new  new." 

1  Cf.  Axel  Olrik,  Danske  Studier,  1904,  p.  215. 

2 This  "secundum"  in  the  MS.  must  doubtless  have  been  inserted  by  a 
copyist.  Bjornbo  and  Petersen  think  the  original  had  "ij,"  which  the  copyist 
took  for  a  Roman  numeral  and  replaced  by  "  secundum."  As  it  might  seem 
strange  that  the  man  lived  "'in'  a  river  of  Greenland,"  Axel  Olrik  thought 
that  the  word  might  have  been  "  wit "  ("  by,"  or  "  near  ") ;  but  then  it  becomes 
more  difficult  to  understand  how  and  why  the  word  should  have  been  re- 
placed by  "  secundum,"  unless  the  copyist  had  some  knowledge  of  Danish. 
252 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

("  There  lives  a  man  (in  ?)  a  Greenland  river, 
and  Spieldebedh  is  his  name; 
he  has  more  vermin  (?) 
than  he  has  fat  bacon."  etc.) 

The  verse,  as  pointed  out  by  Axel  Olrik,  is  evidently  an  imi- 
tation or  travesty  of  the  folk-songs,  and,  as  Karl  Aubert  has 
shown,  ^  its  protot3^e  must  certainly  have  been  the  first  verse  of 
the  same  folk-song  that  is  now  known  in  Sweden  by  the  name 
of  "KungSpeleman": 

"  Dher  bodde  een  kjempe  vid  Helsingborg, 
Kung  Speleman  mande  han  beta, 
Visst  hade  han  mera  boda  solf, 
An  andra  flesket  dhet  feta. 
Uren  drifver  noran,  och  hafvet  sunnan  for  noran." 
("  There  lived  a  giant  by  Helsingborg, 
King  Fiddler  -was  his  name. 
Sure  he   had  greater  store   of   silver 
Than  others  of  fat  bacon."  etc.) 

This  method  of  fabricating  geographical  names  adopted  by 
Clavus  recalls  the  designation  of  the  notes  in  the  mediaeval  scale, 
for  which  the  words  of  a  Latin  hymn  were  used,  and  it  seems 
likely  that  this  is  what  he  has  imitated.  But  his  mystification, 
with  all  these  strange  names  which  no  one  in  southern  Europe 
understood,  and  which,  in  course  of  time,  underwent  many  cor- 
ruptions, has  caused  a  good  deal  of  trouble;  many  intelligent 
men  have  racked  their  brains  to  discover  learned  etymological 
interpretations  of  their  origin,  until  Bjornbo's  lucky  find  of  the 
later  text  of  Clavus  solved  the  riddle. 

Bjombo  and  Petersen,  who  by  their  valuable  work  on  Clau- 
dius Clavus  with  a  reproduction  of  this  text  have  the  credit  of 
throwing  light  on  the  relation  between  his  first  and  second  maps, 
have  put  forward  the  view  that  Clavus  must  have  made  his 
first  map  (the  Nancy  map)  with  its  Latin  text  in  Italy;  but, 
curiously  enough,  they  think  he  entirely  rejected  the  Italian 
compass-charts  as  unsuitable  for  the  representation  of  the  North, 
and  constructed  his  delineation  of  the  northern  regions  inde- 
pendently of  them,  as  an  addition  to  Ptolemy's  coast-lines, 
1  Danske  Studier,  1907,  p.  228. 

253 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

simply  from  information  he  had  derived  from  northern  sources. 
After  this,  we  are  to  suppose  that,  in  order  to  extend  his  geo- 
graphical knowledge,  he  went  back  to  Denmark;  and  since  the 
authors  place  reliance  on  Clavus's  assertion  (in  his  later  text) 
that  he  had  seen  the  places  himself,  they  even  credit  him  with 
having  made  a  voyage  of  geographical  exploration,  first  to  Nor- 
way (Trondhjem)  and  then  to  Greenland,  And  then  he  is  sup- 
posed to  have  drawn  his  later  map,  and  written  the  text  for  it 
(in  Latin),  in  the  North. 

I  have  come  to  an  entirely  different  conclusion.  His 
older  map  must  be  based,  in  my  opinion,  not  only  on  Ptolemy, 
but  to  a  great  extent  on  Italian  maps.  His  later  map  and  text, 
I  consider,  show  beyond  doubt  that  he  cannot  have  been  either 
in  Norway  or  Greenland,  and  I  cannot  find  a  single  statement 
in  the  Vienna  text,  or  any  coast-line  in  his  later  map,  which 
shows  that  he  was  outside  Italy  in  the  period  between  the  two 
works.  Doubtless  the  delineation  of  Denmark,  especially 
Zealand,  is  more  detailed  in  the  second  map;  but  the  additions 
do  not  disclose  any  more  local  knowledge  than  might  be  at- 
tributed to  Clavus,  as  a  native  of  Fiinen,  before  his  first  map 
was  drawn,  even  though  he  had  not  then  ventured  to  change 
the  form  of  Ptolemy's  Scandia,  which  to  him,  of  course, 
became  Zealand.  After  this  first  attempt,  however,  he  may 
have  gained  courage  to  launch  out  further  with  his  knowledge. 
He  may  also  have  discovered  a  few  fresh  pieces  of  information, 
in  the  papal  archives,  for  instance.  Besides  this,  he  may, 
of  course  have  received  oral  communications  from  people 
from  the  northern  countries;  but  even  of  this  I  am  unable 
to  find  sure  signs.  In  consideration  of  the  imaginative  ten- 
dencies shown  by  Clavus  in  his  distribution  of  names,  and  to 
some  extent  in  the  coast-lines  on  his  map,  which,  perhaps, 
may  also  have  asserted  themselves  in  his  statement  that  he 
had  seen  a  complete  MS.  of  Livy  in  Soro  monastery,^  we  shall 

1  Many  vain  searches  were  afterwards  made  (in  1451  and  1461)  in  the 
monastery  of  Soro  for  this  MS.  of  Livy,  and  there  may  therefore  be  grounds 
for  doubting  the  statement  to  be  true  [cf.  Bjornbo  and  Petersen,  1909,  pp.  197  f.]. 

254 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

scarcely  be  insulting  him  if  we  believe  his  statements  (in  two 
passages  of  the  Vienna  text)  that  he  himself  had  seen  Pygmies 
from  a  land  in  the  North,  and  Karelians  in  Greenland,  to  be  rhe- 
torical phrases,  calculated  to  strengthen  the  reader's  confidence, 
and  to  mean,  at  the  outside,  that  he  had  seen  something  about 
these  people  in  older  authorities. 

After  having  heard  my  reasons,  Bjombo  and  Petersen  have 
in  all  essentials  come  round  to  my  views.  In  particular,  they 
agree  with  me  that  Clavus  cannot  have  been  in  Greenland,  but 
that  the  delineation  of  that  country  on  his  later  map  is  based  on 
the  Medicean  map  of  the  world,  which  will  be  mentioned  later. 
I  therefore  consider  it  superfluous  to  combat  any  further  here 
the  reasons  given  in  their  work  for  their  former  view. 

Claudius  Clavus's  task  must  have  been  to  supplement  the 
newly  discovered  atlas  of  Ptolemy  by  what  he  knew  of  the 
North ;  and  to  this  end,  his  maps  were  drawn,  either  by  himself 
or  by  a  professional  draughtsman  in  Italy  from  his  instructions. 
The  text  was  prepared  after  each  of  the  maps,  as  a  description 
of  it;  and  the  latitudes  and  longitudes  are  taken  from  the 
map  [cf.  Bjombo  and  Petersen,  1904,  p.  130].  With  the 
superstitious  respect  of  the  period  for  older  learned  authorities 
in  general,  and  for  Ptolemy  in  particular,  he  did  not  venture 
to  alter  the  latter's  coast-lines  or  latitudes  as  far  as  they  extended ; 
even  in  the  Danish  islands  he  has  done  so  with  hesitation; 
thus,  Zealand  in  his  first  sketch  (the  Nancy  map)  has  still  the 
same  form  as  Scandia  in  Ptolemy,  etc.  He  then  added  to  the 
latter's  coast-lines  what  he  knew  or  could  get  together  from  other 
quarters. 

His  first  map  (the  Nancy  map)  may  presuppose  the  fol- 
lowing sources,  besides  Ptolemy's  various  maps  of  northern 
Europe:  Pietro  Vesconte's  mappamundi  (circa  1320)  in 
Marino    Sanudo's    work,^    and    the    anonymous    mappamundi, 

1  Cf.  the  maps  on  pp.  223,  224.  As  we  certainly  do  not  know  nearly  all  the 
maps  that  were  in  use  at  that  time,  I  regard  it  as  probable  that  Claudius  or 
his  draughtsman  had  older  maps,  now  lost,  of  this  or  a  similar  type,  which  re- 
semble the  Nancy  map  even  more  closely  than  these  two  known  maps.  But, 
of  course,  it  is  wiser  to  confine  ourselves  as  far  as  possible  to  those  we  know. 

255 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

now  preserved  in  the  so-called  "  Medicean  Marine  Atlas,"  of 
1351,  at  Florence.^  In  addition  to  these,  either  the  Bruges 
itinerary  itself  (Itineraire  Brugeois),  [cf.  Storm,  1891,  p.  19], 
or  one  of  its  earlier  sources.  Possibly  he  also  had,  in  part 
at  all  events,  a  tract  (in  Icelandic?)  that  is  included  in  the 
fourth  part  of  the  "Rymbegla"  (1780);  that  he  also  knew 
of  the  Icelandic  sailing  directions,  as  assumed  by  Bjornbo 
and  Petersen,  I  regard  as  less  certain,  although  not  impossible; 
perhaps  it  would  be  safer  to  suppose  that  he  may  have  seem 
some  statements  from  Ivar  Bardsson's  description  of  Green- 
land, in  an  itinerary,  for  instance.  I  have  not  been  able  to 
find  any  certain  indication  of  his  having  been  acquainted 
with  the  Icelandic  geography  mentioned  on  p.  237;  perhaps 
he  may  rather  have  known  of  the  land  connection  between 
Greenland  and  Russia  from  some  tale  or  other,  or  from  a 
legendary  saga;^  from  the  same  source  (or  from  Ivar  Bards- 
son's description?)  may  also  be  derived  the  name  "  Nordbotn  " 
(cf.  p.  171,  note  i),  which  is  not  known  in  the  Icelandic  geog- 
raphy, but  which  seems  most  probably  to  be  a  legendary  form. 
Certain  names,  such  as  those  of  the  bishops'  sees  in  Norway 
and  Iceland,  Clavus  may  easily  have  found  in  the  papal  archives 
in  Rome. 

In  the  first  place,  exactly  following  Ptolemy,  the  draughts- 
man has  marked  Ireland  with  the  islands  around  it,   and  six 

1  Storm  [1891,  p.  16]  was  the  first  to  hold  that  Clavus  made  use  of  Italian 
compass-charts  as  his  model  for  the  delineation  of  the  south  coast  of 
Scandinavia,  and  that  he  also  took  names  from  them.  Bjornbo  and  Petersen 
have  rejected  this  view,  as  the  names  in  Clavus's  text  are  principally  taken 
from  other  sources,  and  the  Baltic  has  been  given  quite  a  different  shape. 
But  the  necessity  of  this  change  seems  to  have  escaped  them,  as  it  was  caused 
by  Clavus  retaining  Ptolemy's  outline  for  the  south  coast  of  the  Baltic. 

"  If  we  assume  that  the  names  "  Wildhlappelandi,"  "  Pigmei,"  etc.,  on  the 
Nancy  map  are  due  to  Clavus  himself,  he  may  have  had  some  authority  like 
that  of  the  anonymous  letter  to  Pope  Nicholas  V.  (of  about  1450),  which 
Michel  Beheim  may  also  have  used  (see  later).  From  this  source  he  may 
have  obtained  the  information  about  the  land  connection  between  the  land  to 
the  north-east  of  Norway  and  Greenland.  As  will  be  mentioned  later  (p.  270), 
it  is  possible  that  this  source  was  Nicholas  of  Lynn. 
256 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

Hebrides  to  the  north-east,  Scotland  with  the  island  of  Dumna 
and  the  archipelago,  Orcadia,  to  the  north  (the  island  of 
Ocitis  a  little  farther  east),  and  the  south  coast  of  Thule  farther 
north;  next  Jutland,  with  its  small  islands  round  about, 
and  with  the  large  island  of  Scandia,  which,  of  course,  became 
Zealand  (he  has  added  Fiinen  and  a  number  of  other  islands) ; 
finally  the  coast  of  Germany,  and  Sarmatia  eastward  to 
63°  N.  lat.-,  and  with  the  same  number  of  river-mouths  as  in 
Ptolemy.  As  this  coast  does  not  extend  nearly  so  far  to  the 
east  as  does  the  Baltic  on  the  compass-charts,  it  resulted 
that  Clavus's  Baltic  became  much  shorter  than  that  of  the 
charts,  and  its  shape  had  to  be  altered  to  suit  Ptolemy's 
coast-line.  Then,  at  its  northern  end,  the  draughtsman 
has  placed  possibly  Pietro  Vesconte's  Scandinavian  peninsula, 
going  out  towards  the  west  (see  the  two  maps,  pp.  223,  224) ; 
but,  as  he  saw  Norway  on  the  compass-charts  extending  west 
as  far  as  to  the  north  of  Scotland,  where  on  Ptolemy's  map 
he  found  Thule,  it  was  natural  that  he  should  take  the  latter 
to  be  the  southern  point  of  Norway,  and  he  was  obliged  to 
move  Vesconte's  peninsula  farther  to  the  west.  Its  south 
coast  may  have  been  drawn  with  the  Medici  map,  or  a  similar 
one,  as  model.  As  the  southern  coast  of  the  Baltic  was  moved 
far  to  the  south,  after  Ptolemy,  and  Jutland  was  given  a 
different  and  smaller  form  than  on  the  Medici  map,  besides 
a  marked  inclination  to  the  east,  and  as  Skane  had  to  be  near 
Zealand  (Scandia),  the  draughtsman  was  obliged  to  move  the 
peninsula  corresponding  to  Skane  about  five  degrees  to  the 
south.  The  south  coast  of  the  peninsula  on  the  north  of 
Scotland  on  the  Medici  map  (see  pp.  236,  260)  corresponded  very 
nearly  to  the  south  coast  of  Thule  (with  an  east-south-easterly 
direction)  on  Ptolemy's  map;  it  lay  in  an  almost  corresponding 
latitude,  but,  on  account  of  the  puzzling  prolongation  of  Scot- 
land to  the  east  on  Ptolemy's  map,  it  had  to  be  moved  a  good 
fifteen  degrees  of  longitude  to  the  east.  Thule  was  thus 
united  to  Norway  ^  and  its  south  coast  was  given  exactly  the 

1  Storm  [1891,  p.  15]  also  maintains  that,  on  the  Nancy  map,  Thule  has  been 

257 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

same  shape  as  the  south  coast  of  the  peninsula  in  question,  with 
three  arched  bays  (the  broadest  on  the  east)  and  a  projecting 
point  towards  the  south-east.  The  coast  between  this  promon- 
tory and  Skane  may  then  have  been  drawn  with  the  same  num- 
ber of  four  large  bays  as  on  the  Medici  map :  a  deeper  one  farth- 
est west,  then  a  broad  peninsula,  next  two  wide,  open  bays,  with 
a  narrow  peninsula  between  them,  and  finally  a  smaller  bay  op- 
posite Zealand.  The  "  Halandi "  of  the  Nancy  map  is  thus 
brought  to  the  corresponding  place  with  the  "  alolanda  "  of  the 
Medici  map  (p.  236).^ 

Thus  far  it  may  be  fairly  easy  to  compare  the  maps;  but 
then  Norway,  according  to  most  of  the  compass-charts,  ought 
not  to  have  any  considerable  farther  extension  to  the  west, 
while,  on  the  other  hand.  Northern  ideas  demanded  a  Greenland 
in  the  far  west,  as  well  as  a  land  in  the  north  between  that 
and  Russia.  With  the  latter,  the  westernmost  tongue  of 
land  in  Norway  on  the  Medicean  mappamundi  ^  agrees 
remarkably  well.  The  southern  point  of  Clavus's  Greenland 
has  also  the  same  length  in  proportion  to  the  west  coast  of 
Ireland,  and  about  the  same  breadth,  as  on  this  map.  There 
was  also  an  extensive  mass  of  land  in  the  north.  According 
to  various  representations,  such  as  those  of  Vesconte's  map- 
pamundi,   Saxo's    description    (cf.    p.    223),    and    others,   there 

incorporated  with  Norway,  but  Bjornbo  and  Petersen  [1904,  p.  194;  1909,  p. 
158]  think  that  this  must  be  regarded  as  "  one  of  the  unfortunate  results  of  his 
desire  to  reduce  all  Clavus's  contributions  to  a  single  one";  why,  we  are  not 
told.  According  to  my  view,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  Storm  is  right. 
Clavus  has  made  the  south  coast  of  Thule  into  the  southernmost  coast  of 
Norway,  with  its  south-eastern  point  due  north  of  the  island  of  Ocitis,  and  its 
south-western  point  north  of  the  west  side  of  Orcadia,  exactly  as  on  Ptolemy's 
map.  In  addition,  this  coast  has  the  same  latitude  and  longitude  as  the  south 
coast  of  Ptolemy's  Thule. 

1  Of  course  there  is  always  the  possibility  that  Clavus  may  have  had  maps 
of  the  Medici  type  which  resembled  the  Nancy  map  even  more  closely  than 
that  with  which  we  are  acquainted. 

~  On  this  map  the  tongue  of  land  in  question  is  nameless,  while  on  the  map 
of  Europe  in  the  "  Medicean  Atlas  "  it  is  given  the  name  of  "  alogia,"  which 
shows  it  to  have  been  regarded  as  a  part  of  Norway  (see  the  reproduction, 
p.  260). 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

should  be  a  gulf  on  the  north  side  of  the  Scandinavian  peninsula. 
According  to  representations  like  that  of  the  Lambert  map  at 
Ghent  (cf.  p.  i88),  this  arm  of  the  sea  had  the  same  form  as 
that  on  the  south  side  of  Scandinavia,  and  there  should  only 
be  a  narrow  isthmus  between  these  two  arms  of  the  sea, 
connecting  the  peninsula  with  the  mainland  [cf.  Saxo].  On 
the  Nancy  map,  too,  the  north  coast  of  Scandinavia  is  drawn 
almost  exactly  like  the  south  coast,  with  the  same  number  of 
promontories  and  bays,  which  correspond  very  nearly  even 
in  their  shape.  In  this  way  Clavus's  "  Nordhindh  Bondh " 
(Nordbotn),  also  called  "  Tenebrosum  mare"  (i.e.,  the  dark 
sea)  or  "  Quietum  mare"  (the  motionless  sea),  may  have 
originated.  This  remarkable  bay  is  connected  on  his  map 
with  the  Baltic  by  a  canal  (which  is  also  mentioned  in  the 
Vienna  text).  By  this  means  Scandinavia  really  becomes 
an  island.  Clavus  cannot  have  acquired  such  an  idea  from 
any  known  source,  although,  as  already  mentioned,  Saxo 
says  that  it  is  nearly  an  island  (p.  223) ;  but  similar  con- 
ceptions seem  to  have  arisen  in  Italy  (cf.  above  on  Pietro 
Vesconte's  mappamundi,  p.  223). 

The  south  coast  of  Norway  (with  "  Stauanger ")  and  the 
southern  point  of  Greenland  retained  on  Clavus's  map  the 
same  relation  of  latitude,  a  difference  of  13^°,  as  the  corre- 
sponding localities  on  the  Medici  map,  with  very  nearly  the 
same  degrees  of  latitude  as  on  the  latter,  if  we  there  employ 
a  scale  of  latitude  calculated  upon  this  map's  representation 
of  Spain  (the  straits  of  Gibraltar)  and  France  (Brittany),  and 
use  Ptolemy's  latitudes  for  these  countries.  This  has  been 
done  in  the  reproduction  of  the  Medicean  mappamundi  on 
p.     236.^     The    scale   of   longitude   is    calculated    in   the    same 

1  As  there  is  considerable  difference  between  the  coast-lines  of  Europe  on 
Ptolemy's  maps  and  those  on  the  Medici  maps,  one's  scale  of  latitude  will  vary 
according  to  the  points  one  may  choose  for  determining  it.  The  points  here 
given  were  the  first  I  tried,  and  as  the  resulting  scale  seems  to  agree  remark- 
ably well  with  Clavus's  later  map  I  have  kept  to  it,  although  of  course  Clavus 
may  have  proceeded  in  a  somewhat  different  way  in  determining  the  scale  on 
his  map;  in  particular  he  seems  on  the  older  map  to  have  arranged  it  so  that 

259 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

proportion  to  the  latitude  as  in  Ptolemy.  In  some  tract 
like  that  included  in  the  fourth  part  of  the  "  Rymbegla " 
[1780,  p.  474]  Clavus  may  have  found  that  Bergen  lay  in 
latitude  60°  and  so  placed  the  town  on  the  west  coast  of  Norway 
in  this  latitude  according  to  his  own  scale  (on  the  right-hand 
side  of  the  Nancy  map,  see  p.  248).  In  relation  to  the  south 
coast  of  Norway,  Bergen  was  thus  brought  ^^  farther  south 


Scandinavia  on  the  map  of  Europe  in  the  "  Medici  Atlas  "  (of 

1351).     The  scales  of  latitude  and  longitude  are  here  added 

from   Ptolemy's  maps.     The   network  of   compass-lines  is 

omitted 

than  "c.  bergis"  on  the  Medici  map  (above).  Calculated 
according  to  Ptolemy's  scale  of  latitude  (on  the  left-hand  side 
of  the  Nancy  map),  Bergen  was  consequently  placed  in  Clavus's 
text  in  64°,  while  the  southern  point  of  Greenland  is  placed 
in  63°  15',^  a  difference  in  latitude  of  45'  (in  the  Vienna  text 
the  difference  is  35'),  while  in  reality  it  is  38';  a  remarkable 

the  parallel  for  63°  passed  through  the  southernmost  part  of  Norway,  cor- 
responding to  Ptolemy's  Thule.  In  order  better  to  agree  with  this  (cf.  the 
left-hand  scale  of  latitude  of  the  Nancy  map)  the  degrees  of  latitude  on  the 
map  above,  ought  therefore  to  be  increased  half  a  degree,  and  on  the  map, 
p.  236,  nearly  a  degree. 

1  On  the  Nancy  map,  the  southern  point  of  Greenland  lies  in  63°  30';  but  as 
we  do  not  know  how  accurately  this  copy  reproduces  Clavus's  original  map, 
it  is  safer  to  confine  ourselves  to  Clavus's  text. 
260 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

accidental  agreement.  According  to  Clavus's  own  scale  o£ 
latitude  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  Nancy  map,  we  get 
the  following  latitudes:  Bergen  60°;  the  southern  point  of 
Greenland  59°  15';  Stavanger  58°  30'.  In  reality  the  latitudes 
of  these  places  are:  60°  24';  59°  46',  and  58°  58'.  This 
agreement  is  remarkable,  as  a  displacement  of  the  scale  of 
latitude  half  a  degree  to  the  north  on  the  Nancy  map  would 
give  very  nearly  correct  latitudes.^  The  mutual  relation 
between  the  latitudes  of  the  three  places  may,  as  we  have 
seen,  be  explained  from  the  Medici  map,  but  hardly  from  a 
possible  acquaintance  with  the  Icelandic  sailing  directions; 
for,  according  to  these,  Bergen  and  the  southern  point  of  Green- 
land would  be  placed  in  the  same  latitude,  since  we  are  told 
that  from  Bergen  the  course  was  "  due  west  to  Hvarf  in 
Greenland."  2  The  Medici  map  may  also  give  a  natural 
explanation  of  places  like  Bergen  and  the  southern  point 
of  Greenland  having  been  given  by  Clavus  a  latitude  so  much 
too  northerly  (even  in  the  Nancy  map),  and  of  the  southern 
point  of  Greenland  having  only  half  a  degree  more  westerly 
longitude  than  the  west  coast  of  Ireland.^ 

1  Gerard  Mercator  writes  that,  according  to  a  tradition,  an  English  monk 
and  mathematician  from  Oxford  (i.e.,  Nicholas  of  Lynn)  had  been  in  Norway 
and  in  the  islands  of  the  North,  and  had  described  all  these  places  and  de- 
termined their  latitude  by  the  astrolabe  [cf.  Hakluyt,  Principal  Navigations, 
1903,  p.  301].  It  is  therefore  possible  that  Clavus  may  have  obtained  the  lat- 
itudes of  some  places,  such  as  Stavanger  and  Bergen,  from  his  work;  but,  in 
any  case,  he  cannot  have  got  the  latitude  of  the  southern  point  of  Greenland 
from  it.  Moreover,  if  he  had  had  such  accurate  information  to  depend  on,  it 
would  be  difficult  to  understand  why  he  retained  the  incorrect  latitudes  which 
he  obtained  by  introducing  those  of  Ptolemy  on  the  Medici  map;  in  his  later 
map,  indeed,  he  has  used  nothing  else. 

-  Cf.  Sturlubok  and  Ivar  Bardsson's  description  of  Greenland.  In  Hauk's 
"  Landnama "  we  read  that  it  was  from  Hernum  (that  is,  north  of  Bergen) 
that  they  sailed  west  to  Hvarf.  According  to  this,  then,  the  southern  point 
of  Greenland  would  be  brought  even  farther  north  than  Bergen. 

3  Although  Dr.  Bjornbo  now  admits  that  the  Medici  map  must  have  been 
used  for  Clavus's  later  map,  he  is  still  in  doubt  as  to  this  being  the  case  with 
the  older  one  (the  original  of  the  Nancy  map) ;  he  is  inclined  to  think  that  this 
map  may  have  been  constructed  from  Northern  sources,  sailing  directions, 

261 


IN   NORTHERN    MISTS 

Iceland  lay,  according  to  the  Bruges  itinerary,  midway 
between  Norway  and  Greenland,  precisely  as  on  the  Nancy 
map.  Between  Norway  and  Iceland,  according  to  the  same 
itinerary,  lay  "  Fareo "  (Faero),  and  the  fabulous  island 
**  Femoe,"  "  where  only  women  are  born  and  never  men." 

After  speaking  of  the  "third  headland"  in  71°  on  the  east 
coast  of  Greenland,  the  Nancy  text  goes  on: 

"  But  from  this  headland  an  immense  country  extends  eastward  as  far  as 
Russia.  And  in  its  [i.e.,  the  country's]  northern  parts  dwell  the  infidel  Kar- 
elians  [Careli  infideles]  whose  territory  [regio]  extends  to  the  north  pole 
[sub  polo  septentrionalis]  towards  the  Seres  1  of  the  east,  wherefore  the  pole 
[polus  =  the  Arctic  Circle?],  which  to  us  is  in  the  north,  is  to  them  in  the 
south,  in  66°." 

It  is  probable,  as  suggested  by  Bjornbo  and  Petersen,  that 
these  "  Careli  infideles "  are  identical  with  those  who  are 
found  almost  in  the  same  place,  in  the  ocean  to  the  north  of 
Norway,  on  one  of  the  maps  in  Marino  Sanudo's  w^ork  (in  the 
Paris  MS.,  see  above,  p.  225)  and  who,  on  other  maps  belonging 
to  that  work,  are  placed  on  the  mainland  to  the  north-east  of 
Scandinavia.     As    pointed    out   by    Storm,    "  Kareli "    are    also 

etc.  But  there  appear  to  me  to  be  too  many  striking  agreements  between  the 
Medici  map  and  the  Nancy  map  for  such  an  assumption  to  be  probable;  and 
the  following  may  be  given  as  instances:  the  number  of  bays  between  Skane 
and  the  south  coast  of  Norway,  with  the  deepest  bay  on  the  west;  the  resem- 
blance between  the  south  coast  of  Norway,  with  its  three  bays  on  the  Nancy 
map,  and  the  south  coast  of  the  corresponding  peninsula  to  the  north  of  Scot- 
land on  the  Medici  map;  the  high  latitude  of  this  south  coast  on  both  maps; 
the  agreement  in  latitude  between  the  southern  point  of  Greenland  and  that 
of  "alogia"  in  the  Medici  map;  the  remarkable  similarity  in  the  relation  be- 
tween the  longitudes  of  these  two  southern  points  and  the  west  coast  of  Ire- 
land on  both  maps;  the  mutual  relation  in  latitude  between  the  southern 
point  of  Greenland  and  the  south  coast  of  Norway  (with  Stavanger);  the  far 
too  northerly  latitude  of  all  these  places;  the  east  coast  of  Greenland  having 
the  same  main  direction  as  the  east  coast  of  the  corresponding  peninsula  on 
the  Medici  map,  etc.  To  these  may  be  added  the  similarity  in  the  way  the 
coast-lines  are  drawn,  with  round  bays.  Each  of  these  points  of  agreement 
may  no  doubt  be  explained,  as  Bjornbo  suggests,  as  a  coincidence  and  as  hav- 
ing arisen  in  another  way;  but  when  there  are  so  many  of  them  it  must  be 
admitted  that  a  connection  is  more  natural. 

1  "  Serica  "  on  Ptolemy's  map  of  the  world  lies  in  the  extreme  north-east 
of  Asia,  and  is  most  likely  China. 
262 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

mentioned  together  with  Greenland  and  "  Mare  Gronlandicum  " 
in  the  Bruges  itinerary. 

Bjornbo  and  Petersen  maintain  that  Claudius  Clavus  has 
here  consciously  put  forward  a  new  and  revolutionary  view 
which  was  a  complete  break  with  the  cosmogony  of  the  whole 
of  the  Middle  Ages,  since  according  to  the  latter,  the  disc  of 
the  earth  was  entirely  surrounded  by  sea  to  the  south  of  the 
North  Pole,  as  represented  on  the  wheel-maps.  I  think  this 
is  attributing  to  Clavus  rather  too  much  original  thought, 
of  which  his  maps  and  text  do  not  otherwise  give  evidence. 
It  is,  of  course,  correct  that  the  idea  of  land,  and  inhabited 
land,  too,  at  the  North  Pole,  or  to  the  north  of  the  Arctic 
Circle,  did  not  agree  with  the  general  learned  conception  of 
the  Middle  Ages;  but  the  same  idea  had  already  been  clearly 
enough  expressed  in  Norwegian-Icelandic  literature.  Even 
the  "  Historia  Norvegiae  "  has  inhabited  land  beyond  the  sea  in 
the  north,  and  the  Icelandic  legendary  sagas  and  Saxo  have 
it,  too.  In  addition  to  these,  the  tract  included  in  the 
"  Rymbegla "  says  distinctly  (see  above,  p.  239)  that  this 
land  in  the  opinion  of  some  lies  under  the  pole-star  (cf.  Clavus's 
expression:  "sub  polo  septentrionalis ").  The  fact  that  the 
continent  on  the  Medicean  map  of  the  world  extended  bound- 
lessly on  the  north  into  the  unknown  (whereas  Africa  ended 
in  a  peninsula  on  the  south)  must  have  confirmed  Clavus  in 
the  view  that  the  land  reached  to  the  pole.  To  this  was  added, 
what,  perhaps,  weighed  most  with  him,  the  fact  that  such  a 
view  did  not  conflict  with  Ptolemy,  whose  continent  also  had 
no  limit  on  the  north. 

On  the  connecting  land  in  the  north  is  written,  on  the 
Nancy  map :  "  Unipedes  maritimi,"  "  Pigmei  maritimi," 
"  Griff  onii  regio  vastissima,"  and  "  Wildhlappelandi."  As 
these  names  are  not  mentioned  in  Clavus's  text,  it  is  uncertain 
whether  the  fabulous  creatures  may  not  be  to  some  extent 
additions  for  which  he  is  not  responsible. 

After  the  map  was  drawn,  with  its  bays  and  headlands, 
and  the  coast  of  Scandinavia  provided  with  a  suitable  number 

263 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

of  islands,  Claudius  Clavus  set  himself  to  describe  it;  where  he 
had  no  names  from  earlier  sources,  he  numbered  the  headlands, 
bays,  and  islands,  "  Primum,"  "  Secundum,"  etc. 

A  remarkable  thing  about  the  Nancy  map  is  that  it  has  two 
divisions  of  latitude:  one  according  to  Ptolemy  on  the  left- 
hand  side  of  the  map,  and  another  according  to  Clavus  himself, 
on  a  scale  four  degrees  lower,  on  the  right-hand  side.  Accord- 
ing to  the  latter,  Roskilde  would  have  a  longest  day  of  seventeen 
hours  (through  a  transposition  the  Nancy  map  gives  seventeen 
hours  thirty  minutes),  which,  as  pointed  out  by  Bjornbo  [1910, 
p.  96],  exactly  agrees  with  what  Clavus  may  have  learnt  from 
a  Roskilde  calendar  ("Liber  daticus  Roskildensis ")  of  1274. 
Bjornbo  has  also  remarked  that  Bergen  is  given  a  remarkably 
correct  latitude,  60°  (the  correct  one  is  60°  24'),  and  thinks 
it  possible  that  there  may  have  been  a  Bergen  calendar  which 
Clavus  has  used.  But  a  more  likely  source,  unnoticed  by 
Bjornbo,  is  to  be  found,  as  mentioned  on  p.  260,  in  the 
"  Rymbegla "  tract,  where  the  latitude  of  Bergen  is  given 
as  60°.  It  is  true  that  the  same  tract  gives  the  latitude  of 
Trondhjem  (Nidaros)  as  64°,  which  does  not  agree  with  the 
Nancy  map,  where  there  is  a  difference  of  only  2°  between 
Bergis  and  Nidrosia.  Even  though  it  is  probable  that  Clavus 
was  acquainted  with  some  such  tract,  with  which  his  statement 
as  to  land  at  the  North  Pole  also  agrees,  it  may  have  been 
a  somewhat  different  version  from  that  which  found  its  way 
into  the  "  Rymbegla,"  and  perhaps  the  latitude  of  Trondhjem 
was  not  mentioned  there.  On  the  other  hand,  he  may  have 
found,  there  or  elsewhere,  the  latitude  of  Stavanger  given, 
15^°  farther  south  than  Bergen  (?). 

If  we  assume  that  Clavus,  even  in  the  construction  of  his 
first  map,  made  use  of  the  Medicean  map  of  the  world,  and 
that  his  Greenland  is  the  most  westerly  peninsula  of  the  latter's 
Norway,  it  will  seem  strange  that  he  did  not  also  draw  the  west 
coast  of  that  peninsula,  which  would  naturally  become  the 
west  coast  of  Greenland.  It  is  true  that  the  Nancy  map  is 
only  a  copy,  but  as  the  west  coast  of  Greenland  is  not  mentioned 
264 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

in  the  copy  of  Clavus's  text  either,  we  are  bound  to  believe  that 
he  did  not  include  it.  The  margin  on  the  western  side  of  Clavus's 
first  map  was  evidently  determined  by  that  of  Ptolemy's  map 
of  the  British  Isles,  and  follows  precisely  the  same  meridian. 
Thus  there  was  no  room  for  the  Medici  map's  peninsula  corre- 
sponding to  Clavus's  Greenland.  As  already  stated,  it  is  difficult 
to  get  away  from  the  belief  that  the  Medici  map  was  used  for 
the  east  coast  of  Greenland,  the  south  coast  of  Norway,  etc.; 
the  resemblances  are  too  great,  and  otherwise  inexplicable 
(cf.  p.   261,  note  3). 

After  the  first  map  was  drawn,  Clavus  may  have  made 
further  cartographical  studies  in  Italy,  and  may  thus  have 
become  acquainted  with  other  compass-charts,  especially 
those  of  the  Dalorto  type.  At  the  same  time  he  may  have 
obtained  a  new  and  more  accurate  determination  of  the 
latitude  of  Trondhjem,  probably  by  the  length  of  its  longest 
day.  As  Trondhjem  was  an  archbishopric,  it  is  not  unlikely 
that  he  found  such  a  piece  of  information  in  the  papal  archives 
at  Rome.  He  may  then  naturally  have  wished  to  bring  his 
map  more  into  agreement  with  his  new  knowledge,  and  this 
may  have  led  to  his  later  map,  which  is  now  known  to  us 
through  several  somewhat  varying  copies.  To  this  he  then 
wrote  a  new  text  (the  Vienna  text),  which  in  all  important 
points  resembles  the  former,  but  has  various  additions  and 
alterations.  The  later  map  has  not  the  double  scale  of  lati- 
tude on  any  of  the  copies  known,  but,  curiously  enough,  only 
Ptolemy's  degrees.  Besides,  a  more  accurate  delineation  of 
Jutland  and  the  Danish  islands,  especially  Zealand,  Bornholm, 
and  Gotland,  is  drawn  in  closer  resemblance  to  the  Medici 
map;  the  south  coast  of  Scandinavia  has  been  altered  to 
agree  more  with  compass-charts  of  the  Catalan  type.  In 
particular,  the  south  coast  of  Norway  has  been  given  the  four 
characteristic  promontories  (as  on  the  Dalorto  map  of  1339, 
and  on  the  Modena  map,  etc.;  cf.  the  reproductions,  pp.  226, 
231),  and  Bergen  (Bergis)  has  been  placed  at  the  head 
of  the  westernmost  of  the  three  bays  thus  formed,  which  is 

265 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

also  a  peculiarity  of  the  maps  of  this  type  (the  Catalan  chart  of 
1375  has  five  promontories  with  four  bays),  [cf.  Nordenskiold, 
1896,  pi.  XI ].  The  other  two  diocesan  towns,  Stavanger 
and  Hamar,  are  placed  at  the  heads  of  the  other  two  bays 
to  the  east,  and  Stavanger  has  thus  lost  the  remarkably  correct 
position  in  relation  to  Bergen  and  the  south  point  of  Green- 
land, which  it  had  on  the  older  map.  Trondhjem  has  been 
placed  at  the  extremity  of  the  westernmost  promontory, 
possibly  because  there  had  been  found  a  more  correct  deter- 
mination of  the  latitude  of  the  town,  which  was  to  be  fitted 
into  Ptolemy's  graduation;  thereby  the  shape  of  Norway 
has  become  still  narrower  and  farther  removed  from  reality. 

From  the  "  lac  scarsa "  (Lake  Skara,  i.e.,  Vener)  with 
its  river  is  derived  the  great  lake  Vona  (Vener)  in  the 
center  of  Scandinavia  on  all  the  copies  of  Clavus's  later  map 
from  which  the  river  Vona  (also  mentioned  in  the  Vienna 
text)  runs  into  the  deep  bay  by  Aslo  (Oslo)  and  the  island 
of  Tunsberg.  A  connection,  especially  with  Dalorto's  map 
of  1339,  seems  again  to  be  implied  by  Clavus's  statement  in 
the  Vienna  text  that  on  Lister-ness  "  white  falcons  are  caught " 
("  Liste  promontorium,  ubi  capiuntur  falcones  albi").  On 
Dalorto's  map  there  is  a  picture  of  a  white  falcon  on  the  head- 
land to  the  west  of  that  which  Clavus  has  made  into  Lister, 
and  the  words  "  hie  sunt  girfalcos "  ("  here  are  hunting 
falcons").  That  Clavus  has  moved  the  hawks  to  a  headland 
farther  east  is  of  small  importance.  Either  he  may  have  taken 
his  hawks  from  Dalorto's  or  a  similar  map,  or  else  they  are 
derived  from  an  older  common  source. 

Through  the  alteration  of  the  south  coast  of  Norway,  it 
became  necessary  to  separate  it  from  Thule,  which  again 
became  an  island,  as  originally  in  Ptolemy;  but  on  the  copies 
of  the  map  it  has  in  addition  the  name  "  Bellandiar,"  which 
may  be  a  corruption  of  "  Hetlandia "  (Shetland).  The  north- 
west coast  of  Norway  has  also  been  given  a  form  which  agrees 
better  with  the  compass-charts,  although  it  has  a  much  more 
east-north-easterly  direction  than  even  on  the  Modena  map; 
266 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

but  this  was,  of  course,  necessary  to  make  room  for  the  sea 
"  Nordhenbodnen  "  (Nordbotn).  That  the  compass-charts  might 
lead  to  something  resembling  Clavus's  last  form  of  Scan- 
dinavia, and  especially  of  the  south  coast  of  Norway,  is 
shown  by  the  map  of  Europe  in  Andrea  Bianco's  atlas  of 
1436,  which  must  have  been  drawn  without  knowledge  of 
Clavus's  work.  If,  on  this  map,  we  move  the  coast  of  the 
Baltic  farther  south,  and  Skane  also,  which  would  be  necessi- 
tated by  a  better  knowledge  of  Denmark  (and  by  the  alteration 
of  the  map,  fol- 
lowing Ptolemy), 
and  draw  the 
coast-line  of  Nor- 
way towards  the 
east-north-east 
from  the  south- 
western promon- 
tory ^^insteaa  01  r^^^  north-western  portion  of  the  map  of  Europe 
making  it  go  in  a  in  Andrea  Bianco's  atlas  of  1436.  The 
northerly        direc-  compass-lines  are   omitted 

tion),  we  shall  get  a  Scandinavia  of  very  similar  type  to  that  in 
Clavus's  later  map. 

Bjornbo  and  Petersen  have  maintained  in  their  mono- 
graph that  Clavus  must  have  been  in  Norway  before  he  drew 
this  map,  and  that,  among  other  things,  his  remarkably 
correct  latitude  for  Trondhjem  must  be  due  to  his  own 
observation  of  the  length  of  the  day  at  the  summer  solstice. 
Storm  [1889,  p.  140]  seems  also  to  have  supposed  that  Clavus 
may  really  have  been  in  Norway.  To  me  it  appears  that 
his  map  and  text  are  conclusive  evidence  against  his  ever 
having  been  there;  for  a  man  who  had  sailed  to  Trondhjem 
along  the  coast  of  Norway  could  not  possibly  have  produced 
a  cartographical  representation  of  the  country  so  entirely 
at  variance  with  reality  as  Clavus  has  done,  however  ignorant 
we  may  suppose  him.  The  fact  in  itself  that  Trunthheim 
(Trondhjem),    or    Nidrosia,    is    placed    at    the    extremity    of 

267 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

the  south  side  of  the  south-western  promontory  of  the  country 
is  extraordinary.  If  he  had  come  there  asleep  he  could  not 
have  got  any  such  idea;  and  for  a  man  who  had  sailed  in 
through  the  long  channel  of  the  Trondhjem  fjord  up  to  the 
town,  it  is  incredible.  It  is  equally  incredible  that  a  man 
who  had  sailed  along  the  coast  from  Stavanger  and  Bergen 
to  Trondhjem  could  place  the  latter  town  in  a  latitude  lo' 
to  the  south  of  Bergen,  and  only  lo'  to  the  north  of  Stavanger. 
We  are  not  justified  in  attributing  to  Clavus  such  an  entire 
lack  of  power  of  observation,  especially  if  we  are  to  suppose 
him  capable  of  determining  with  remarkable  accuracy  the 
length  .of  the  longest  day  at  Trondhjem.  That  Trondhjem  is 
placed  to  the  west  of  Bergen  and  Stavanger,  that  the  Dovre- 
fjeld  is  called  a  high  promontory,  while  on  the  Nancy  map  it 
was  inland,  that  Hamar  (Amerensis)  is  put  on  the  sea- 
coast,  etc.,  all  shows  the  same  want  of  knowledge  of  the  country 
and  its  configuration.  The  names  he  may  have  taken  from  an 
itinerary  or  other  sources,  and,  as  already  suggested,  it  is  not 
unlikely  that  he  may  have  found  in  the  papal  archives  a  fairly 
correct  statement  of  the  latitude  (or  length  of  the  longest  day) 
of  Trondhjem,  which  was  an  archbishop's  see.  That  the  towns 
he  gives  are  just  those  that  are  the  heads  of  dioceses  is  perhaps 
an  indication  of  a  connection  with  the  Vatican. 
Clavus  tells  us  further  that 

*  Norway  has  eighteen  islands,  which  in  winter  are  always  connected  with 
the  mainland,  and  are  seldom  separated  from  it,  unless  the  summer  is  very 
warm,"  and  that  "  Tyle  [Thule]  is  a  part  of  Norway  and  is  not  reckoned  as  an 
island,  although  it  is  separated  from  the  land  by  a  channel  or  strait,  for  the 
ice  connects  it  with  the  land  for  eight  or  nine  months,  and  therefore  it  is 
reckoned  as  mainland.  The  same  applies  to  the  sea,  Nordhinbodnen  [Nord- 
botn],  which  separates  Wildlappenland  from  Vermenlandh  i  and  Findland  by 
a  long  strait,  since  the  countries  are  united  by  almost  eternal  ice." 

This  discloses  an  extraordinary  lack  of  knowledge  of 
Northern  conditions.     Such  a  connection  of  the  islands  with  the 

1  It  seems  possible,  as  Mr.  O.  Vangensten  has  suggested  to  me,  that  this 
name  may  here  be  due  to  a  confusion  of  Vermeland  with  Bjarmeland.    Peder 
Clausson  Friis   [Storm,  1881,  p.  219]  says  that  Greenland  extends  round  the 
north  of  the  "  Norwegian  Sea "  "  eastward  to  Biarmeland,  or  Bermeland." 
268 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

mainland  by  ice  occurs,  of  course,  nowhere  on  the  whole  outer 
coast  of  Norway  from  Fasrder  to  the  Murman  coast.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  Gulf  of  Bothnia  and  the  Aland  archipelago  are 
frozen  over  for  a  long  time  in  winter,  and  it  might  be 
supposed  that  Clavus  had  heard  reports  of  this.  But  I  have 
not  been  able  to  discover  any  source  from  which  he  may  have 
derived  these  fables.  Most  probably  they  are  embellishments 
of  the  same  kind  as  the  eighteen  islands  of  Norway,  that 
form  an  arbitrary  decoration  of  the  coast-line  of  his  map, 
a  circumstance  which  does  not  hinder  him  from  describing 
them  as  real.  Clavus  has  used  the  ice  as  a  transition  be- 
tween the  representation  of  his  older  map,  where  Thule  was  part 
of  the  mainland,  and  that  of  the  later  one,  where  it  was  made 
into  an  island. 

At  the  northernmost  limit  of  Norway,  between  two  places 
called  Ynesegh  and  Mestebrodh,  Clavus  connected  the  Polar  Sea 
(Nordhinbodhn)  by  a  narrow  channel  with  the  Gotland  Sea 
(the  Baltic),  and  a  little  farther  north,  in  67°,  he  says 
that 

"the  uttermost  limit  is  marked  with  a  crucifix,  so  that  Christians  shall  not 
venture  without  the  king's  permission  to  penetrate  farther,  even  with  a  great 
company.  And  from  this  place  westward  over  a  very  great  extent  of  land 
dwell  first  Wildlappmanni  [Wild  Lapps,  Le.,  Mountain  Lapps,  Reindeer 
Lapps(?)  cf.  Vol.  I,  p.  227],  people  leading  a  perfectly  savage  life  and  covered 
with  hair,  as  they  are  depicted;  and  they  pay  yearly  tribute  to  the  king.  And 
after  them,  farther  to  the  west,  are  the  little  Pygmies,  a  cubit  high,  whom  I 
have  seen  after  they  were  taken  at  sea  in  a  little  hide-boat,  which  is  now 
hanging  in  the  cathedral  at  Nidaros;  there  is  likewise  a  long  vessel  of  hides, 
which  was  also  once  taken  with  such  Pygmies  in  it." 

Two  things  are  to  be  remarked  about  this  assertion  that  he 
himself  had  seen  these  Pygmies  (one  might  suppose  in  Norway) : 
(i)  if  he  had  really  seen  a  captive  Eskimo  brought  to  Nor- 
way (by  whom?),  he  could  hardly  have  been  ignorant  that  this 
remarkable  native  was  from  Greenland,  and  not  from  a  fabu- 
lous northern  land.  And  (2),  how  could  he  then  give  their 
height  as  no  more  than  a  cubit,  like  the  Pygmies  of  myth?  It 
appears  to  me  that  in  one's  zeal  to  defend  Clavus,  one  would 

269 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

thus  have  to  attribute  to  him  two  serious  falsehoods,  instead  of 
a  more  innocent  rhetorical  phrase  about  having  seen  this,  that, 
and  the  other. 

Clavus's  statement  about  the  Pygmies'  small  hide-boat,  and 
the  long  hide-boat,  that  hung  in  Trondhjem  cathedral,  is,  how- 
ever, of  great  interest  from  the  fact  that  this  is  the  first  mention 
in  literature  of  the  two  forms  of  Eskimo  boat:  the  kayak  and 
the  women's  boat  (umiak).  Perhaps  he  got  this  from  the  same 
unknown  source  (in  the  Vatican?)  in  which  he  found  the  state- 
ment of  the  latitude  of  Trondhjem  (?).  In  the  fact  that  the 
Wild  Lapps  are  mentioned  first,  and  after  them  the  Pygmies, 
Clavus's  text  again  bears  a  great  resemblance  to  the  anonymous 
letter  to  Pope  Nicholas  V.  (of  about  1450).  In  the  northern- 
most regions  (to  the  north-west  of  Norway)  this  letter  mentions 
[cf.  Storm,  1899,  p.  9] 

"  the  forests  of  Gronolonde,  where  there  are  monsters  of  human  aspect  who 
have  hairy  limbs,  and  who  are  called  wild  men.  .  .  .  And  as  one  goes  west 
towards  the  mountains  of  these  countries,  there  dwell  Pygmies,"  etc.  (cf 
above,  p.  86). 

Michael  Beheim  also  mentions  "Wild  lapen,'*  who  live 
in  the  forests  to  the  north  of  Norway,  and  who  carry  on  a  dumb 
barter  of  furs  with  the  merchants,  like  that  described  by  the 
Arab  authors  as  taking  place  in  the  country  north  of  Wisu  (cf. 
above,  p.  144),  and  he  goes  on  to  speak  of  the  Skraelings,  three 
spans  high,  etc.  (cf.  above,  p.  85).  Beheim's  statement 
differs  from  Clavus's  text,  and  this  again  from  the  letter  to 
Nicholas  V.,  so  that  one  cannot  be  derived  from  the  other.  It 
is  therefore  most  probable,  as  suggested  already  (p.  86),  that 
they  have  all  drawn  from  some  older  source,  and  it  may  be 
supposed  that  this  was  Nicholas  of  Lynn.  We  have  seen  that 
there  are  other  points  in  Clavus  that  lead  one's  thoughts  in  the 
same  direction. 

Clavus  proceeds: 

"  The  peninsula  of  the  island  of  Greenland  stretches  down  from  land  on  the 
north  which  is  inaccessible  or  unknown  on  account  of  ice.  Nevertheless,  as  I 
have  seen,  the  infidel  Karelians  daily  come  to  Greenland  in  great  armies 
[bands  of  warriors,  "cum  copioso  exercitu"],  and  that,  without  doubt,  from 
270 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

the  other  side  of  the  North  Pole.  Therefore  the  ocean  does  not  wash  the 
limit  of  the  continent  under  the  Pole  [Arctic  Circle?]  itself,  as  all  ancient 
authors  have  asserted;  and  therefore  the  noble  English  knight,  John  Mande- 
vil,  did  not  lie  when  he  said  that  he  had  sailed  from  the  Indian  Seres  [i.e., 
China?]   to  an  island  in   Norway." 

If  we  compare  this  with  the  "  R5nnbegla  "  tract  already  men- 
tioned [1780,  p.  466],  we  see  that  these  are  much  the  same  ideas 
as  there  expressed.     We  read  there 

"  that  it  is  the  report  of  the  same  men  that  the  sea  is  full  of  eternal  ice  to  the 
north  of  us  and  under  the  pole-star,  where  the  arms  of  the  Outer  Ocean 
meet.  ..." 

When  it  is  there  stated  that 

"  those  shores  [under  the  pole-star]  hinder  the  ring  of  the  ocean  from  coming 
together  [i.e.,  round  the  earth]."  .  .  .  and  "that  one  can  go  on  foot  .  .  . 
from  Greenland  to  Norway  "  (cf.  above,  p.  239). 

this  is  evidently  something  similar  to  what  Clavus  says;  but 
the  latter's  words  as  to  the  voyage  which  he  attributes  to 
Mandeville  from  the  Indian  Seres  to  Norway  being  more 
probable  because  there  is  land  at  the  North  Pole,  are  somewhat 
incomprehensible. 

John  Mandeville's  book  about  a  voyage  through  many  lands  to  the  Far 
East  and  China  dates  from  between  1357  and  1371,  and  is  put  together  from 
various  accounts  of  voyages,  with  the  addition  of  all  kinds  of  fables.  Mande- 
ville does  not  himself  claim  to  have  made  any  such  voyage  from  China  to 
Norway;  on  the  other  hand,  he  has  much  to  say,  in  chapter  xvii.,  about  the 
possibility  of  sailing  round  the  world,  which  he  declares  to  be  practicable, 
and  if  ships  were  sent  out  to  explore  the  world,  one  could  sail  round  the 
world,  both  above  and  below.  He  says  that  when  he  was  young  he  heard 
of  a  man  who  set  out  from  England  to  explore  the  world,  and  who  went  past 
India  and  the  islands  beyond  it,  where  there  are  more  than  five  thousand 
islands,  and  so  far  did  he  travel  over  sea  and  land  that  he  finally  came  to  an 
island  where  he  heard  them  calling  to  the  ox  at  the  plow  in  his  own  lan- 
guage, as  they  did  in  his  own  country.  This  island  afterwards  proved  to  be 
in  Norway.! 

Clavus's  assertion  that  he  himself  saw  (ut  uidi)  Kare- 
lians  in  Greenland  is  impossible.  As  it  is  expressly  stated  that 
there  was  land  at  the  North  Pole,  and  as  it  is  not  mentioned  that 
these  Karelians  had  hide-boats  like  the  Pygmies,  the  meaning 

1  Cf.  Mandeville,  1883,  pp.  180,  182,  183  f.  Mandeville  also  says  that  in  the 
opinion  of  the  old  wise  astronomers  the  circumference  of  the  world  wa^ 
20,425  English  miles;  but  he  himself  maintains  that  it  is  31,500  miles. 

271 


IN   NORTHERN    MISTS 

must  be  that  their  armies  came  marching  by  the  land  route, 
which,  of  course,  is  an  impossibility,  which,  if  he  had  been  in 
Greenland,  would  make  him  a  worse  romancer  than  if  we 
suppose  his  "  ut  uidi "  to  mean  that  he  had  seen  something 
of  the  sort  stated  in  a  narrative;  but  even  this  may  be  doubtful. 
In  the  Bruges  itinerary  [cf.  Storm,  1891,  p.  20]  or  some  similar 
older  authority,  which  we  know  he  may  have  used,  he  may 
have  seen  "  Kareli "  beyond  Greenland  spoken  of  as  "  in 
truth  a  populus  monstrosus."  We  have  already  said  that  on 
the  maps  accompanying  Marino  Sanudo's  work  he  may  have 
seen  "  Kareli  infideles  "  marked  on  the  mainland  to  the  north- 
east of  Norway,  or  even  on  an  island  out  in  the  northern  sea, 
and  he  would  then  naturally  have  connected  the  Karelians  of 
the  itinerary  with  these  Karelians  north  of  Norway.  If  we  add 
to  this  that,  on  the  Medicean  map  of  the  world,  he  saw  the  mass 
of  the  continent  extending  from  Scandinavia  and  the  peninsula 
corresponding  to  Greenland,  northward  into  the  unknown,  and 
that  in  the  "  Rymbegla  "  tract  he  saw  mention  of  land  at  the 
North  Pole — then,  indeed,  his  whole  statement  seems  to  admit 
of  a  perfectly  natural  explanation. 

His  lack  of  knowledge  of  the  conditions  in  Greenland 
appears  again  in  his  speaking  of  Pygmies  and  Karelians  as  two 
different  peoples,  one  apparently  on  the  sea,  and  the  other 
marching  in  armies  on  land;  and  in  his  mentioning  hide-boats 
as  something  peculiar  to  the  former  in  the  fabulous  northern 
country,  while  he  does  not  say  that  the  Karelians  in  Greenland 
had  boats  or  went  to  sea.  If  he  had  only  spoken  to  people 
who  had  been  in  Greenland,  he  could  hardly  have  avoided  hear- 
ing of  the  Skraslings,  who  come  to  meet  every  traveler  in  their 
hide-boats. 

It  is  an  important  difference  between  Clavus's  first  and 
second  maps  (and  also  between  his  first  and  second  texts)  that, 
on  the  latter,  Greenland  is  given  a  west  coast.  Its  form  bears 
an  altogether  striking  resemblance  to  the  west  coast  of  the 
corresponding  peninsula  on  the  Medicean  mappamundi,  so 
that  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  coast  is  copied  from 
272 


CLAUDIUS    CLAVUS 

it.^  This  is  notably  the  case  i£  we  confine  ourselves  to  Bjornbo 
and  Petersen's  reconstruction  of  the  coast  after  the  text  of 
Clavus,  from  which  it  appears  plainly  enough  that  there  are  the 
same  number  of  bays  as  on  the  Medici  map;  they  are  closest 
together  near  the  southern  point  of  the  country;  then  come 
two  larger  bays  to  the  north,  then  a  very  broad  bay,  longer 
than  the   two   others  together,   and  then  a  straight  coast-line 


Map  constructed  by  Dr.  Bjornbo  after  Clavus's  later  descrip- 
tion (the  Vienna  text).  [Bjornbo  and  Petersen,  1904,  pi.  11.] 
to  the  north  of  that  (cf.  p.  236).  The  east  coast  of  Greenland 
has  in  part  been  provided  with  corresponding  bays,  although 
this  coast  is  almost  straight  on  the  Medici  map;  but  this 
answers  to  the  north  coast  of  Scandinavia  on  the  Nancy  map, 
having  very  nearly  the  same  indentations  as  the  south  coast. 
In  taking  the  Medici  map  as  the  foundation  of  Clavus's  Green- 
land coast,  we  also  have  a  natural  explanation  of  the  relation 
between  his  distribution  of  names  on  the  east  coast  and  the 

1  That  the  delineation  of  this  coast  is  not  based  upon  personal  examination, 
either  by  Clavus  himself  or  by  any  possible  informant,  is  also  shown  by  the 
fact  that  the  coast  has  not  a  single  real  name.  Even  if  we  suppose  that  Cla- 
vus, or  his  possible  informant,  during  the  voyage  along  this  coast,  had  been  so 
unfortunate  as  not  to  meet  with  a  single  one  of  the  Norse  inhabitants  who 
might  have  communicated  names,  we  cannot  very  well  assume  that  the  crew 
of  the  ship  on  which  the  voyage  was  made  were  totally  unacquainted  with 
Greenland;  they  must  certainly  have  had  plenty  of  names  and  sea-marks. 

273 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

west.  In  his  later  text  it  is  striking  that  his  description 
of  the  east  coast  of  Greenland  does  not  reach  farther  than 
to  his  "  Thaer  promontorium  "  in  65°  35',  while  the  description 
of  the  west  coast  goes  as  far  north  as  72°.  This  might  seem 
to  be  connected  with  real  local  knowledge,  since  the  latitude 
65°  35'  on  the  east  coast  agrees  in  a  remarkable  way  with  the 
latitude  of  Cape  Dan,  65°  32',  where  the  coast  turns  in  a  more 
northerly  direction.  To  the  north  of  this,  the  coast  is  usually 
blocked  with  ice,  and  this  place  has,  therefore,  frequently  been 
given  as  the  northern  limit  of  the  known  east  coast,  and  probably 
it  was  there  that  the  Icelanders  first  arrived  off  the  land  on 
their  voyage  westward  to  the  Greenland  settlements.  But 
this  is  one  of  those  accidental  coincidences  that  sometimes 
occur,  and  that  warn  us  to  be  careful  not  to  draw  too  many 
conclusions  from  evidence  of  this  nature.  ^  We  find  the 
explanation  in  the  Medici  map  (p.  236),  where  the  east  coast 
of  the  peninsula  corresponding  to  Greenland  does  not  go 
farther  north  than  to  about  the  same  latitude  as  the  promontory 
on  the  south  side  of  the  broad  bay  already  referred  to  on 
the  west  coast,  which  promontory  Clavus  calls  Hynth 
(Hyrch) ;  it  lies  in  65°  40'.  As  Clavus's  coast  from  this 
point  of  the  east  coast  northward  had  no  map  to  depend  on, 
he  did  not  venture  to  go  farther  in  his  description  this  time, 
though  in  the  Nancy  map  text  he  goes  to  71°  with  his  northern- 
most cape. 

The  Medicean  map  of  the  world  gives  us  at  the  same  time 
a  simple  explanation  of  Clavus's  designations  for  the  two  most 
northerly  points  on  the  west  coast  of  Greenland.  If  we  con- 
fine ourselves  to  the  scale  of  latitude  for  the  Medici  map,  which, 
as  stated  above  (p.  259),  we  have  found  by  using  Ptolemy's 
latitudes  for  more  southern  places  on  the  map  (Gibraltar  and 

lit  must  be  remembered  that  Clavus's  latitudes  are  throughout  too  high; 
his  south  point  of  Greenland  lies  about  three  degrees  too  far  north,  in  62°  40' 
instead  of  59°  46'.  If  we  carry  this  reduction  to  the  most  northerly  point  he 
describes  on  the  east  coast,  this  will  lie  in  about  62°  30'  instead  of  65°  35',  and 
thus  the  coincidence  with  Cape  Dan  disappears.  His  description  of  the  east 
coast  of  Greenland  in  the  Nancy  map  is  quite  different. 
274 


CLAUDIUS  CLAVUS 

Brittany),  and  which  is  inserted  in  the  left-hand  margin  of  the 
reproduction,  p.  236,  we  shall  find  the  following:  just 
at  the  spot  of  which  Clavus  declares,  "  Now,  the  uttermost 
limit  of  the  land  which  we  know  on  this  side,  lies  in  70°  10'"  ^ 
the  heavy  coloring  of  the  land  on  the  Medici  map  comes 
to  an  end  judging  from  the  photograph  in  Ongania,  pi.  v. 
Farther  to  the  north  extends  the  coast  of  the  lightly 
colored  mass  of  land;  but  just  at  this  point,  in  72°,  where 
Clavus  has  his  "  ultimus  locus  uisibilis "  (last  point  visi- 
ble) 2  this  coast-line  disappears  into  the  oblique  frame  which  cuts 
off  the  upper  left-hand  corner  of  the  map.  The  agreement  is 
here  so  exact  and  so  complete  that  it  would  be  difficult  to  find 
any  way  out  of  it. 

Bjornbo  and  Petersen  have  asserted  that  Iceland,  on  the 
later  map  and  in  the  Vienna  text,  has  been  given  a  position 
more  in  agreement  with  the  sailing  directions  than  on  the 
Nancy  map.  I  cannot  see  the  necessity  for  this  supposition, 
as  it  has  almost  exactly  the  same  position  in  relation  to  the 
southern  point  of  Greenland  and  to  Norway  in  both  works; 
the  chief  difference  is  merely  that  the  longitude  of  all  three 
countries  is  made  3°  farther  east  in  the  later  work  (and  the 
latitude  of  the  southern  points  of  Iceland  and  Greenland  is  put 
somewhat  farther  south),  and  that  the  east  coast  of  Green- 
land has  a  more  oblique  north-easterly  direction  than  the  cor- 
responding north-east  coast  on  the  Medici  map,  with  the  direc- 
tion of  which  the  Nancy  map  agrees  fairly  well.  In  this  way 
it  is  brought  nearer  to  Iceland;  but  that  this  should  be  due  to 
a  knowledge  of  the  sailing  directions  seems  very  uncertain, 
and  is  not  disclosed,  so  far  as  I  can  see,  elsewhere  in  the  later 
work.     The   only   things   I   have   found   which   might   possibly 

1  Such  an  inscription  as  this  is  quite  in  the  style  of  Clavus's  great  prototype, 
Ptolemy,  in  whom  we  often  find,  "  this  is  the  end  of  the  coast  of  the  known 
land." 

2  It  is  worth  remarking  that  Clavus  puts  his  last  point  visible  no  less  than 
1°  50'  (that  is,  no  nautical  miles)  to  the  north  of  the  limit  of  the  knovim  land. 
If  a  statement  like  this  was  calculated  to  be  taken  as  derived  from  local  knowl- 
edge it  would  not,  in  any  case,  disclose  much  nautical  experience. 

275 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

point  to  Northern  authorities  having  been  consulted  since  the 
production  of  the  Nancy  work,  are  the  accurate  latitude  of 
Trondhjem,  already  referred  to,  and  the  island  of  Byorno 
between  Iceland  and  Greenland.  The  latter  might  be  the  Gunn- 
bjornskerries  (or  Gunnbjarnar-eyar)  mentioned,  among  other 
places,  in  Ivar  Bardsson's  description  of  Greenland;  but  the 
abbreviation  of  the  name  is  curious.  Perhaps  the  island  may 
be  due  to  some  oral  communication,  or  an  erroneous  recollec- 
tion of  something  the  author  may  have  heard  of  in  Denmark  in 
his  youth. 

On  the  whole,  we  shall  be  compelled  after  all  to  detract 
considerably  from  Claudius  Clavus's  reputation  as  a  Northern 
traveler  and  cartographer.  His  journey  did  not  extend  farther 
north  than  the  Danish  islands,  and  perhaps  Skane.  On  the 
other  hand,  he  was  in  Italy,  where  he  drew  his  maps  or  had  them 
drawn,  and  where  he  also  found  his  most  important  authorities. 
His  chief  merit  as  a  cartographer  is  that  he  is  the  first  we 
know  of  to  have  adopted  Ptolemy's  methods  and  that  he  gave 
the  name  of  Greenland  to  the  westernmost  tongue  of 
land  in  Norway  on  the  Medicean  mappamundi,  and  altered  this 
a  good  deal  with  the  help  of  other  compass-charts  and  Ves- 
conte's  mappamundi,  to  make  it  agree  better  with  the 
ideas  of  the  North  which  he  may  have  acquired  to  some 
extent  in  his  youth  through  legendary  tales,  and  later  through 
Saxo  and  other  writers. 

Claudius  Clavus's  later  map  of  the  North  exercised  for  a 
long  period  a  decisive  influence  on  the  representation  of 
Scandinavia  and  to  some  extent  of  Greenland.  This  was 
chiefly  due  to  the  two  well-known  cartographers,  Nicolaus 
Germanus  and  Henricus  Martellus.^  The  former  must  have 
become  acquainted  with  Clavus's  map  soon  after  1460,  and 
included  copies  of  it  in  the  splendid  MSS.  of  Ptolemy's  "  Geog- 
raphy" which  proceeded  from  his  workshop  at  Florence.  In 
these    copies,    of   which   several   are    known    (cf.    p.    251),   he 

1  On  the  influence  of  these  men  on  the  cartographical  representation  of  the 
North,  see,  in  particular,  J.  Fischer,  1902, 
276 


FIFTEENTH   CENTURY   MAPS 


has  redrawn  Clavus's  map  in  the  trapezoidal  projection  invented 
by  himself,  whereby  his  Greenland  has  been  given  a  more  oblique 
position  than  the  Greenland  of  the  original  map  and  the  corre- 
sponding peninsula  on  the  Medici  map.  He  also  introduced 
this  Greenland  into  his  map  of  the  world  [cf.  J.  Fischer,  1902, 
pis.  I,  iii;  Bjornbo,  1910,  p.  136];  but,  in  order  to  make 
it  agree  better  with  the  learned  mediaeval  view  of  the  earth's 
disc  surrounded  by  ocean,  he  surrounded  it  by  sea  on  the 
north,  so  that  it 
came  to 
long  and 
tongue 
projecting 
northern 
instead 

northern    mass 

land  extendmg  to  North-western  portion  of  Nicolaus  Germanus's  first 
the  North  Pole  ac-  revision  of  Ptolemy's  map  of  the  world   (after 

cording    to    Clavus.  ^^66)   [J.  Fischer,  1902.  pi.  i] 

But  this  long  peninsula  does  not  seem  to  have  entirely  satisfied 
this  priest's  erudite  ideas  of  the  continent,  and  on  later  maps 
(which  were  printed  after  his  death,  in  the  Ulm  editions  of 
Ptolemy  of  1482  and  i486)  he  shortened  it  so  much  that  it 
became  a  rounded  peninsula  to  the  north  of  Norway,  with 
the  name  "  Engronelant,"  ^  and  at  the  same  time  he  moved 
Iceland  out  into  the  ocean  to  the  north-west.  This  apparently 
quite  arbitrary  alteration  may  perhaps  be  due  to  a  desire  to 
bring  the  map  as  far  as  possible  into  agreement  with  the 
learned  dogma  of  the  continent  [cf.  Bjornbo,  19 10,  pp.  141  f.]  ; 
but  older  conceptions  of  Greenland  may  also  have  contributed 

1  As  shown  by  Bjornbo  and  Petersen,  this  is  evidently  Clavus's  name  "  Eyn 
Gronelandz  aa  "  for  a  river  on  the  east  coast  of  Greenland,  which  was  misun- 
derstood on  Clavus's  map  and  made  the  name  of  the  country,  assisted,  per- 
haps, by  the  resemblance  in  sound  with  the  name  "  Engromelandi "  (for  An- 
germanland),  which  Clavus  has  on  the  north  side  of  Scandinavia  (p.  248). 
This  resemblance  of  sound  may  also  have  had  something  to  do  with  the  re- 
moval of  Greenland  to  the  north  of  Norway. 

^77 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

towards  it  [cf.  J.  Fischer,  1902,  pp.  87  £.].  We  have  already 
seen  that  Adam  of  Bremen  regarded  Greenland  as  an  island 
**  farther  out  in  the  ocean  opposite  the  mountains  of  Suedia  " 
(see  Vol.  I,  p.  194),  and  in  his  additions  to  the  copy  of  Ptolemy, 
Cardinal  Filastre  (before  1427)  states  that  Greenland  lay  to 
the  north  of  Norway;  we  find  the  same  view  in  the  letter  of 


Map  of  the  North  by  Nicolaus  Germanus  (before  1482),  after 

Claudius  Clavus,  but  with  Greenland  transferred  to  the  north 

of  Norway 

1448  from  Pope  Nicholas  V.  (see  above,  p.  113).^  It  is  also 
somewhat  remarkable  that  on  the  Genoese  mappamundi  of 
1447  (or  1457)  there  occurs  a  peninsula  north  of  Scandinavia 
just  at  the  place  where  Clavus's  Greenland  should  begin 
(see  p.  287). 2     On  Fra  Mauro's  mappamundi   (1457-59)   there 

1  Cf.  Gronl.  Hist.  Mind.,  iii.  p.  168.  Bjornbo  [1910,  p.  79]  by  a  slip  quotes 
the  letter  to  Pope  Nicholas  V.  of  about  the  same  date,  instead  of  that  given 
above. 

2  According  to  Lelewel  [Epilogue,  pi.  vi]  this  peninsula  bears  the  name  of 
*'  Grinland,"  but  this  cannot  be  seen  on  the  somewhat  indistinct  original  [cf. 
Bjornbo,  1910,  p.  80;  Ongania,  pi.  x.]. 

278 


FIFTEENTH    CENTURY    MAPS 

are  several  peninsulas  to  the  north  of  Scandinavia,  some  of 
which  proceed  from  Russia  (see  p.  285). 

The  cartographer,  Henricus  Martellus,  who  succeeded  Nico- 
laus  Germanus,  again  adopted  Clavus's  form  of  Greenland, 
wholly  or  in  part,  on  his  maps  dating  from  about  1490. 

In  this  way  there  arose  on  the  maps  of  the  close  of  the  Mid- 
dle Ages  two  types  of  the  North:  one  with  Greenland  in  a  com- 
paratively correct  position  to  the  west  of  Iceland,  though  far 
too  near  Europe  and  connected  therewith,  and  another  type  with 
Engronelant  as  a  peninsula  to  the  north  of  Norway.  The  lat- 
ter remained  for  a  long  time  the  usual  one  in  all  editions  of  Ptol- 
emy, in  other  cartographical  works,  and  on  many  globes.  After 
the  rediscovery  of  Greenland  we  even  get  sometimes  two  de- 
lineations of  this  country  on  the  same  map,  one  to  the  north  of 
Norway  and  the  other  in  its  right  place,  in  the  west. 

Greenland  seems  to  have  been  given  a  wholly  different 
form  on  a  Catalan  compass-chart  from  Majorca,  of  the  close 
of  the  fifteenth  century,  where  in  the  Atlantic  to  the  west 
of  Ireland  and  south-west  of  Iceland  (Fixlanda)  there  is 
an  island  called  "Ilia  verde "  (the  green  isle).  It  seems,  as 
assumed  by  Storm  [1893,  p.  81],  that  the  name  must  be  a 
translation  of  Greenland,  which  is  called  in  the  "  Historia 
Norvegias "  "  Viridis  terra."  The  representation  of  Iceland 
(Fixlanda)  on  this  map  is  incomparably  better  than  on 
all  earlier  maps,  and  gives  proof  of  new  information  having 
come  from  thence.  As  the  place-names  point  to  an  English 
source,  it  is  possible  that  the  cartographer  may  have  received 
information  from  Bristol,  which  city  was  engaged  in  the  Iceland 
trade  and  fisheries,  and  his  island,  Ilia  verde,  may  be  due 
to  an  echo  of  reports  about  the  forgotten  Greenland  in  the  west. 
It  is  worth  remarking  that  the  island  is  connected  with  the 
Irish  mythical  "  Ilia  de  brazil,"  which  lay  to  the  west  of  Ireland 
and  which  appears  in  this  map  twice  over  in  its  t5^ical 
round   form   (cf.  above,   p.  228).^     If  we   remember  that  this 

1  Storm  [1893],  and  following  him  J.  Fischer  [1902,  pp.  99  f.],  erroneously 
regard  this  island  of  Brazil  as  Markland  (see  above,  p.  229). 

279 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

happy  isle  is  in  reality  the  Insulae  Fortunatae,  and  that  in  the 
"  Historia  Norvegiae  "  (see  above,  p.  i)  it  is  said  that  Greenland 
(Viridis  terra)  nearly  touches  the  African  Islands  (i.e.,  Insulae 
Fortunatae),  then  we  possibly  have  an  explanation  of  this  juxta- 
position. But  as  it  is  said  in  the  same  passage  that  Greenland 
forms  the  vs^estem  end  of  Europe,  v^^e  cannot  suppose  that  the 


Part  of  a  Catalan  compass-chart  of  the  fifteenth  century, 
preserved  at  Milan  [Nordenskiold,  1892,  pL  v.] 

cartographer  was  acquainted  with  this  work.  The  probability 
is,  no  doubt,  that  Greenland  (Ilia  verde)  together  with  Brazil, 
or  the  Insulae  Fortunatae,  had  become  transformed  into  mythical 
islands  out  in  the  ocean. 

On  another  compass-chart,  bound  up  in  a  Paris  MS.  of 
Ptolemy  of  the  latter  part  of  the  fifteenth  century,  a  similar 
island  (or  peninsula?)  with  the  same  round  island  to  the  south 
of  it,  is  seen  to  project  southward  from  the  northern  border 
of  the  chart  out  into  the  Atlantic,  and  a  little  farther  east 
than  the  Insulae  Fortunatae.  On  the  island  is  written, 
"  Insula  uiridis,  de  qua  fit  mentio  in  geographia "  ("  The 
280 


FIFTEENTH   CENTURY   MAPS 

green  island,  of  which  mention  is  made  in  the  geography  ").^  We 
do  not  know  what  geographical  work  may  here  be  meant; 
Bjornbo  suggests  that  it  might  be  the  lost  work  of  Nicholas  of 
Lynn,  who  again  may  have  used  the  "  Historia  Norvegiae."  It 
is  striking  that  the  island,  besides  being  connected  with  a  round 
island  like  Brazil,  but  without  a  name,  is  placed  on  this  map 
near  the  Insulas  Fortunatae. 

This  "  green  island,"  which  thus  is  probably  a  remnant  of  old 
Greenland,  occurs  again  in  various  forms  and  in  various  places 
on  many  sixteenth-century  maps. 

It  is  not  surprising  that  information  about  the  northern 
lands  made  its  appearance  also  on  the  maps  of  this  time,  as 
we  know  that  the  North  was  visited  more  frequently,  and 
sometimes  by  eminent  Southerners,  from  the  year  1248,  when 
the  well-known  Matthew  of  Paris,  who,  among  other  things, 
drew  a  map  of  England  remarkable  for  his  time,  visited  Norway. 
Rather  is  it  strange  that  the  direct  knowledge  thus  obtained 
did  not  leave  more  definite  traces.  Early  in  the  fifteenth  century 
(some  year  between  1397  ^''^^  1448)  a  Byzantine,  Cananos 
Lascaris,  traveled  in  the  North  and  wrote  about  it  (in  Greek). 
He  mentions  among  other  things  that  in  Bergen,  the  capital 
of  Norway  (Bergen  Vagen)  money  was  not  used  in  trading 
(this  must  have  been  due  to  scarcity  of  coin)  ;  but  in  Stockolmo, 
the  capital  of  Sweden,  they  had  money  of  alloyed  silver.  Ber- 
gen had  a  month  of  daylight  from  June  24  to  July  25.  He  also 
says  that  he  himself  went  to  the  land  of  the  Ichthyophagi  (fish- 
eaters),  Islanta,  from  Inglenia,  and  stayed  there  for  twenty-four 
days.  The  people  were  strong  and  powerfully  built,  they  lived 
only  on  fish,  and  they  had  a  summer  day  of  six  months  [cf.  Lam- 
pros,  1881]. 

It  would  take  us  too  far  here  to  attempt  a  mention  of  all 
the  fifteenth-century  maps  which  have  a  different  repre- 
sentation of  the  North;  but  perhaps  some  of  the  mappamundi 
in   wheel-form,   which   were   still   current   at   this   time,,   ought 

1  See  J.  Fischer,  1902,  p.  99.     Cf.  also  Bjornbo  [1910,  pp.  125  f.],  who  gives 
a  drawing  of  the  map. 

281 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

to  be  referred  to.  We  saw  that  on  Vesconte's  map  of  the 
world  accompanying  Marino  Sanudo's  work  the  coast-lines 
of  the  compass-charts  in  the  Mediterranean,  etc.,  had  already 
been  introduced.     On  the  Modena  map   (p.231)   this  has  also 

been  carried  out  as 
regards  the  North. 
In  the  fifteenth  cen- 
tury we  have  various 
wheel  -  maps,  of 

which  some  seem  to 
be  more  antiquated. 
Lo  Bianco's  round 
mappamundi,  in  his 
atlas  of  1436,  is 
connected  with  the 
compass  -  charts  of 
that  time.  Johannes 
Leardus's  round 
mappamundi,  in  many 
editions  of  1448  and 
earlier,^  likewise 
shows  a  strong  af- 
finity to  the  com- 
pass-charts, although 
there  is  little  detail  in  the  delineation  of  the  North.  The 
same  is  the  case  with  the  anonymous  round  mappamundi  in  a 
codex  in  the  Library  of  St.  Mark  at  Venice  [cf.  Kretschmer, 
1892,  atlas,  pi.  Ill,  no.  13],  but  this  map  has  also  points 
of  similarity  to  Vesconte's  mappamundi,  in  Sanudo's 
work,  and,  among  other  things,  it  has  the  same  mountain  chain 
along  the  north  coast  of  the  continent,  and  the  same  form  of 
the  Baltic. 

The  round  mappamundi  in  a  MS.  of  Mela,  of  141 7,  at  Rheims,^ 

iTwo  editions  are  reproduced  in  Nordenskiold  [1897,  p.  61]  and  Ongania 

[pi.    XIV.]. 

2  Reproduced  by  Nordenskiold  [1897,  p.  5],  and  Lelewel  [1851,  pi.  xxxiii]; 
Miller,  1895,  iii.  p.  138. 
282 


Europe  on  the  mappamundi  in  the  Geneva  MS.  of 
Sallust  of  about  1450.     (The  south   should 
be  at  the  top) 


FIFTEENTH   CENTURY   MAPS 

is,  on  the  whole,  of  a  very  antiquated  type,  but  its  image  of  the 
North  seems  more  modern,  and  it  has  the  same  mountain  chain 
along  the  north  coast  of  the  continent  as  Vesconte's  map.  The 
"  Sallust "  map  at  Geneva,  of  about  1450,  is  also  antiquated,  but 


North-western    portion    of    Andreas    Walsperger's    mappamundi 

(of  1448).    Most  of  the  names  are  omitted.     (The  south  should 

be  at  the  top) 

its  Baltic  resembles  the  compass-charts,  and  the  two  mountain 
ridges,  one  along  the  north  coast  of  the  continent,  the  other 
parallel  with  it  in  the  interior,  strongly  recall  Vesconte's  map 
of  the  world.  On  the  other  hand,  the  connection  by  water  be- 
tween the  Baltic  and  Maeotis  (the  Sea  of  Azov)  is  evidently  de- 
rived from  an  earlier  age  (cf.  p.  199).  Out  in  the  ocean  to  the 
north-west  and  west  of  Norway  lie  four  islands.  Bjornbo  sup- 
poses [191  o,  p.  75]  that  the  two  more  northerly  of  these  may 

283 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

correspond  to  Adam  of  Bremen's  Greenland  and  Wineland,  but 
this  must  be  very  uncertain.^ 

A  curious  delineation  of  the  North  is  found  on  the  round 
mappamundi  which  was  drawn  at  Constance  in  1448  by 
the  Benedictine  monk,  Andreas  Walsperger,  of  Salzburg  [cf. 
Kretschmer,  1891].  The  map  is  in  most  respects  imperfect  and 
antiquated,  but  shows  also  more  recent,  particularly  German, 
influence. 

The  Mediterranean  and  the  Baltic  are  disproportionately  large,  and  the  mass 
of  land  between  them  has  been  contracted.  There  are  many  mediaeval  myth- 
ical conceptions,  and  items  showing  possible  influence  by  Adam  of  Bremen  [cf. 
Miller,  iii.  1895,  p.  147].  Thus  in  northern  Asia  we  have  Cenocephali  and  Can- 
nibals (Andropophagi),  bearded  women,  Gog,  Magog,  etc.  In  Norway  we 
read,  "  Here  demons  often  show  themselves  in  human  shape  and  render  serv- 
ice to  men,  and  they  are  called  trolls."  Claudius  Clavus  also  speaks  of  trolls 
in  Norway.  In  the  northern  ocean  to  the  north-west  of  Norway  is  written, 
"  In  this  great  sea  there  is  no  sailing  on  account  of  magnets."  This  is  evi- 
dently the  widely  distributed  mediaeval  myth  of  the  magnet-rock,  which  at- 
tracted all  ships  with  iron  in  them;  in  Germany  it  occurs  in  the  legend  of 
Duke  Ernst's  wanderings  in  the  Liver  Sea,  and  it  is  doubtless  derived  from 
the  Arabian  Nights.  On  the  mainland,  to  the  north-east  of  Norway,  we  read 
that  "  here  under  the  North  Pole  the  land  is  uninhabitable  on  account  of  the 
excessive  cold  which  produces  a  condition  of  continual  frost.  .  .  ."  In  the 
extreme  north  of  the  ocean,  near  the  Pole,  is  written,  "  Hell  is  in  the  heart  or 
belly  of  the  earth,  according  to  the  opinion  of  the  learned." 

"  Palus  meotidis "  (the  Sea  of  Azov)  is  marked  as  a  lake  due  east  of  the 
Baltic.  Along  the  north  coast  of  Europe  (and  Norway)  is  indicated  a  ridge 
of  mountains,  somewhat  similar  to  that  in  the  Sanudo-Vesconte  maps  of  the 
world.  The  delineation  of  Denmark  ("  dacia,"  with  "  koppenhan  "  and  "  lon- 
doma,"  i.e.,  Lund),  the  straight  south  coast  of  the  Baltic,  and  a  long-shaped 
island  called  "  Suecia  "  (with  "  stocholm  "  and  "  ipsala  ")  on  the  north,  remind 
us  a  good  deal  of  Edrisi's  map  (p.  203),  and  also  somewhat  of  the  Cottoniana 
(Vol.  I,  p.  183).  To  the  north  of  the  island  of  Suecia  "  the  very  great  king- 
dom of  Norway  "  (Norwegie)  projects  to  the  west  as  a  long  peninsula  bound- 
ing the  Baltic,  with  "  brondolch "  (Bomholm?)  and  "  nydrosia  metropolis" 
[the  capital  Nidaros]  as  towns  on  its  south  coast,  and  with  the  land  of 
"yslandia"  (Iceland)  and  the  town  of  "pergen"  (Bergen)  on  its  extreme 
promontory. 

Another  peculiar  t5^e  of  the  round  mappamundi  is  the 
so-called    Borgia   map    of   the    fifteenth    century    (after    141  o). 

1  Bjornbo,  by  the  way,  only  speaks  of  two  islands,  whereas  in  Lelewel's 
reproduction  there  are  four  islands,  which  is  no  doubt  correct.     It  seems,  too, 
as  though  all  four  could  be  faintly  distinguished  in  Bjornbo's  photographic 
reproduction  [1910,  p.  74]. 
284 


FIFTEENTH   CENTURY   MAPS 

Its  representation  of  Europe,  with  the  Mediterranean  on  the 
southern  side  of  the  earth's  disc,  is  very  imperfect  and  far  re- 
moved from  reality.  The  same  is  the  case  with  its  delineation 
of  the  North,  but,  curiously  enough,  its  Scandinavia,  which  is 


North-western    portion   of   Fra    Mauro's   mappamundi    (of    1457- 
59),  preserved  at  Venice.     The  legends  and  most  of  the  names 
are  omitted.     (The  south  should  be  at  the  top) 
different  from  that  of  the  compass-charts,  and  in  which  Skane 
forms  a  peninsula  on  the  south,  to  the  east  of  Denmark,  has  a 
greater  resemblance  to  reality  than  that  of  other  maps  of  this 
time.     This  map,  too,  has  a  chain  of  mountains  along  the  north 
coast  of  the  continent,  as  in  the  Vesconte  maps  [see  Norden- 
skiold,  1897,  pi.  xxxix]. 

285 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

The  best  known  fifteenth-century  map  of  the  world  is 
that  of  Fra  Mauro  (1457-59),  which  is  also  drawn  in  wheel- 
form  and  is  preserved  at  Venice.  The  coast-lines  are  taken 
to  a  great  extent  from  the  compass-charts,  but  a  great  deal  of 
new  matter  has  been  added.  As  regards  Norway,  this  consists 
of  information  from  Querini's  voyage  in  1432,  as  well  as  from 
other  sources  which  are  unknown  to  us;  this  is  indicated  by, 
among  other  things,  an  inscription  on  the  sea  to  the  north 
of  Russia  (Permia),  which  relates  that  a  short  time  before 
two  Catalan  ships  had  sailed  thither  [cf.  Vangensten,  19 10]. 
On  this  map  the  Scandinavian  peninsula  has  been  given  a 
more  reasonable  extension  to  the  north;  but  the  west 
coast  is  very  imaginatively  supplied  with  peninsulas  and  islands, 
while  the  ocean  outside  is  full  of  fabulous  islands  and  contains 
many  legends. 

Denmark  (Datia)  has  been  made  into  an  island  (which  is  also  called  Isola 
islandia),  and  the  Baltic  (Sinus  germanicus)  has  been  widened  into  an  inland 
sea  with  islands.  In  its  northern  part  is  a  note  that  on  this  sea  the  use  of  the 
compass  is  unknown  [cf.  Vangensten,  1910].  Could  this  inscription  be  due 
to  a  misunderstanding  like  that  on  the  Walsperger  map  in  the  ocean  to  the 
north-west  of  Norway,  that  it  could  not  be  navigated  on  account  of  magnets 
(cf.  p.  283)?  There  is  no  hint  of  the  name  of  Greenland  on  this  map;  on  the 
other  hand,  Iceland  appears  in  three  or  four  different  places.  Besides  Den- 
mark, as  mentioned  above,  there  is  in  northern  Norway  or  Finland  a  penin- 
sula named  Islant,  "where  wicked  people  dwell,  who  are  not  Christians";  also 
a  large  island  Ixilandia,  north-west  of  Ireland,  and  finally  an  intricate  penin- 
sula in  the  middle  of  Norway  called  Isola  di  giaza  (i.e.,  the  island  of  ice).  On 
the  north  of  Norway  or  Finland  a  peninsula  projects  into  the  Polar  Sea  with 
the  name  of  Scandinabia.  The  map  does  not  contribute  anything  new  of  im- 
portance about  the  North,  but  points  to  a  few  fresh  pieces  of  information 
about  Norway,  which  are  not  to  be  traced  in  the  older  compass-charts;  thus 
Bergen  comes  nearly  in  its  right  place  on  the  west  coast,  and  Marstrand  ap- 
pears to  the  east  of  Christianiafjord. 

A  picture  of  the  North  of  a  wholly  different  type  is  given 
on  the  elliptical  Genoese  mappamundi  (of  1447  or  1457), 
which  is  still  more  fantastic  than  any  of  those  hitherto  men- 
tioned. The  Scandinavian  peninsula  has  a  very  long  extension 
to  the  west,  and  ends  in  a  promontory  projecting  northward. 
To  the  north  of  this  Scandinavia  there  is  another  fantastic 
peninsula  where  Lelewel  thinks  he  can  read  the  name,  Grin- 
286 


FIFTEENTH   CENTURY   MAPS 

land,  which  is  probably  due  to  a  misunderstanding,  since, 
as  pointed  out  by  Bjornbo  [1910,  p.  80],  the  name  cannot 
be  seen  on  the  much-damaged  original,  or  on  Ongania's 
photographic  reproduction  [Fischer-Ongania,  pi.  x].  Many 
imaginary  islands  are  scattered  about  in  the  sea  round  these 
peninsulas. 

Towards  the   close   of  the   fifteenth  century  the   discovery 
was  made  of  representing  the  surface  of  the  earth,  with  land 


Northern  Europe  on  the  Genoese  mappamundi  of  1447  or  1457 

and  sea,  on  globes.  It  was  evidently  the  efforts  of  Toscanelli 
that  led  to  the  general  adoption  of  this  mode  of  representation, 
which  had  been  used  by  the  Greeks  at  an  early  time  (cf.  Vol.  I,  p. 
78) ;  in  1474  he  announced  that  his  idea  of  the  western  route  to 
India  could  best  be  shown  on  a  sphere.  Columbus  seems  to 
have  taken  a  globe  with  him  on  his  voyage  of  1492,  according 
to  his  own  words  in  the  ship's  log.  The  oldest  known  terres- 
trial globe  that  is  preserved  was  made  in  1492  by  the  German 
Martin  Behaim  (born  at  Nuremberg  in  1459).^  He  spent  much 
time  in  Portugal  and  also  in  the  Azores,  after  making  a 
distinguished  marriage  with  a  native  of  those  islands,  a  sister- 
in-law  of  Caspar  Cortereal's  sister.  But  it  was  during  a 
visit  to  his  native  town  (1490-93)  that  he  constructed  his 
globe.  The  sources  of  Behaim's  representation  of  the  North 
1  As  to  Behaim,  see,  in  particular,  Ravenstein,  1908. 

287 


IN  NORTHERN   MISTS 

were  principally  Nicolaus  Germanus's  mappamundi  in  the 
Ulm  editions  of  Ptolemy,  of  1482  and  i486,  where  Greenland 
is  placed  to  the  north  of  Norway,  and  Marco  Polo's  travels, 


Northernmost  Europe  and  the  North  Polar  regions  on  Behaim's  globe,  1492 

which  speak  of  the  northern  regions  of  Asia.  Besides  these 
a  name  like  "tlant  Venmarck"  (the  land  of  Finmark),  for 
instance,  points  to  a  use  of  the  same  older  authority  as  in 
the  anonymous   letter   to    Pope    Nicholas   V.,    of    about    1450, 

288 


FIFTEENTH   CENTURY   MAPS 

where  in  the  existing  French  translation  there  is  mention 
of  "lieux  champestres  de  Venmarche "  (the  plains  of  Fin- 
mark). ^  Thus  we  are  here  again  led  to  the  lost  work  of  Nicholas 
of  Lynn,  "  Inventio  f ortunata  "  (1360)  as  the  possible  source. 
That  it  really  was  this  work  that  was  used  seems  also  to  result 
from  the  fact  that  the  countries  about  the  North  Pole  on 
Behaim's  globe  bear  a  remarkable  resemblance  to  Ruysch's 
map  of  1508,  where  this  note  is  given  at  the  North   Pole: 

"  In  the  book  '  De  Inventione  fortunata  '  it  may  be  read  that  there  is  a 
high  mountain  of  magnetic  stone,  33  German  miles  in  circumference.  This 
is  surrounded  by  the  flowing  'mare  sugenum,'  which  pours  out  water  like  a 
vessel  through  openings  below.  Around  it  are  four  islands,  of  which  two  are 
inhabited.  Extensive  desolate  mountains  surround  these  islands  for  24  days' 
journey,  where  there  is  no  human  habitation." 

What  is  new  in  Behaim's  picture  of  the  North  is  chiefly 
this  circle  of  land  and  islands  around  the  North  Pole,  which 
he  evidently  took  from  Nicholas  of  Lynn,  and  which  is  not 
represented  on  any  older  map  known  to  us.  It  consists  of 
a  continuous  mass  of  land  proceeding  from  his  Greenland- 
Lapland  to  the  north  of  Scandinavia,  and  extending  east- 
'  ward  nearly  to  the  opposite  side  of  the  Pole,  where  the  Arctic 
Ocean  ("  das  gefroren  mer  septentrional ")  to  the  north  of 
the  continent  becomes  an  enclosed  sea.  On  the  other  side 
of  the  Pole  are  two  large  islands  and  a  number  of  smaller 
ones.  On  one  of  the  large  islands  is  a  picture  of  an  archer 
in  a  long  dress  attacking  a  polar  bear  (which  may  be  connected 
with  myths  about  Amazons?),  and  on  the  other  side  is 
written:  "Hie  fecht  man  weisen  valken"  ("Here  they  catch 
white  falcons").  It  might  be  supposed  that  this  was  derived 
from  statements  about  Scandinavia  or  Iceland  [cf.  e.g.,  the 
legends  of  the  compass-charts] ;  but,  as  assumed  by  Raven- 
stein  [1908,  p.  92]  and  Bjornbo  [1910,  p.  156],  it  is  more 
likely  to  come  from  Marco  Polo's  travels,  where  the  arctic 
coast  of  Siberia  is  spoken  of.  The  many  correct  names,  in 
a  German  form,  in  Martin  Behaim's  Scandinavian  North 
point  to  the  possibility  of  his  also  having  received  oral  infor- 
1  Cf.  Storm,  1899,  p.  5. 

289 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

mation,  though  they  may  equally  well  be  derived  from  older 
German   maps. 

Almost  contemporary  with  Behaim's  globe  is  the  so-called 
Laon  globe  of  1493,  which  was  accidentally  discovered  in  a 
curiosity  shop  at  Laon  some  years  ago.  It  gives  a  wholly 
different  representation  of  the  North,  more  in  agreement 
with  the  usual  maps  of  the  world  of  the  Nicolaus  Germanus 
type,  with  sea  at  the  pole  round  the  north   of  the  continent, 


A  portion  of  the  Laon  globe  of  1493  [after  D'Avezac] 

which  terminates  approximately  at  the  Arctic  Circle.  The 
Scandinavian  peninsula  (called  "  Norvegia ")  has  a  form 
somewhat  resembling  this  type;  but  to  the  north  of  it,  Gron- 
landia  appears  as  an  island,  with  a  land  called  Livonia  project- 
ing northward  on  the  east,  and  two  islands,  Yslandia  and  Tile, 
on  the  west.  Nothing  is  known  of  the  origin  of  the  Laon 
globe,  or  of  the  sources  of  its  representation  of  the  North. 

Such  were  the  geographical  ideas  of  the  North  at  the  close 
of  the  Middle  Ages,  when  the  period  of  the  great  discoveries 
was  at  hand;  they  were  vague  and  obscure,  and  the  mists 
had  settled  once  more  over  large  regions  which  had  been 
formerly  known;  but  out  in  the  mists  lay  mythical  islands  and 
countries  in  the  north  and  west. 
290 


CHAPTER    XIV 

JOHN   CABOT   AND    THE    ENGLISH    DISCOVERY    OF 
NORTH   AMERICA 

OVER  the  cloud-bridge  of  illusion  lies  the  path  of  human 
progress.  The  greatest  achievements  in  history  have 
been  brought  about  more  by  the  aid  of  ideas  than  of  truth. 
Religious  illusions  have  ennobled  the  rude  masses  and  raised 
them  to  higher  forms  of  society;  in  the  domain  of  science 
intuition  and  hypothesis  have  led  to  fresh  victories  as  also  in 
geographical  exploration;  there,  too,  illusions,  like  a  fata 
Morgana,  have  impelled  men  forward  to  great  discoveries. 

It  is  true  that  Columbus's  plan  was  based  on  the  correct 
idea  that  the  world  was  round;  but  if  he  had  known  the  real 
distance  of  India — if  he  had  not  been  fettered  by  the  ancient 
dogmas  of  the  Greeks  about  the  great  extension  of  the  continent 
to  the  east,  and  their  low  estimate  of  the  earth's  circumference, 
which  made  India  appear  so  enticingly  near — if  he  had  not 
believed  in  myths  of  lands  in  the  west — he  certainly  would 
never  have  been  the  discoverer  of  a  new  world. 

The  people  of  the  Middle  Ages  lived,  as  we  have  seen,  to 

291 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

a  great  extent  on  remnants  of  the  geographical  knowledge 
and  conceptions  of  the  Greeks.  It  was  the  age  of  super- 
stition and  speculation;  with  the  exception  of  the  Norsemen 
and  the  Arabs,  and  in  some  degree,  also,  the  Irish  monks, 
there  was  during  the  earlier  part  of  this  period  no  enterprise 
that  broke  through  the  bounds  of  the  known,  except  in  the 
mythical  world  of  fancy.  It  was  not  until  the  Crusades  that 
the  horizon  began  to  be  widened.  The  Eastern  trade  of  the 
Italian  republics  and  the  development  of  capable  Italian 
seamen  were  of  great  significance.  At  an  early  date  they 
made  discoveries  along  the  west  coast  of  Africa.  Of  even 
greater  importance  was  it  that  the  Portuguese  learned  sea- 
manship from  them,  and  no  doubt  from  the  Arabs  as  well, 
and  displayed  great  enterprise  on  the  ocean  along  the  shores 
of  Africa,  finding  groups  of  islands  in  the  west,  and  finally 
the  Azores,  in  1427;  but  these  must  have  been  discovered 
earlier,  since  similar  islands  occur  on  Italian  maps  of  the 
fourteenth  century  [cf.  the  "Catalan  Atlas"  of  1375]. 

When  Ptolemy's  work,  and  through  it  the  geography 
of  the  Greeks,  became  known  in  western  Europe  at  the 
beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century,  it  created  a  greater  stir 
in  the  learned  world  than  even  the  discovery  of  America 
did  later;  the  circle  of  geographical  ideas  was  greatly  changed, 
and  the  world  was  regarded  with  new  eyes  as  a  sphere.  The 
doctrine  of  the  possibility  of  circumnavigating  the  earth  was 
especially  framed  and  scientifically  established  by  the  cele- 
brated astronomer  Toscanelli  of  Florence.  But  this  was  not 
a  new  doctrine;  for  the  Greeks,  Eratosthenes  and  Posidonius, 
for  example  (cf.  Vol.  I,  pp.  77,  79),  had  already  announceci 
it  clearly  enough,  and  even  in  the  Middle  Ages  it  was  not  for- 
gotten. We  saw  that  Mandeville,  the  writer  of  fabulous  narra- 
tives, fully  understood  the  possibility  of  sailing  round  the  globe, 
and  related  ancient  tales  about  such  a  voyage  (cf.  p.  271).  But 
at  the  close  of  the  fifteenth  century  the  idea  was  seriously  taken 
up  by  two  men  of  action,  both  Genoese.  One  of  them  was 
Columbus,  the  other  Cabot.  Whether  the  latter  had  already 
292 


JOHN   CABOrS   VOYAGES 

conceived  the' idea  before  the  first  voyage  of  Columbus,  we  do 
not  know  for  certain,  but  it  is  not  improbable;  the  thought  was 
latent  in  the  age,  and  many  must  have  come  near  it.  Another 
force  impelling  men  to  the  western  voyage,  and  perhaps 
as  powerful  a  one  as  these  scientific  speculations,  was  the 
belief  in  the  mythical  world  of  enticing  islands  that  lay  out 
in  the  ocean  to  the  west  of  Europe  and  Africa;  the  Isles  of 
the  Blest  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Atlantis  of  Plato,  conceptions, 
originally  derived  from  the  East,  which  were  still  alive,  though 
in  other  forms.  There  lay  Antillia,  the  Isle  of  the  Seven 
Cities,  mythical  islands  of  the  Arabs,  and  the  Irish  legendary 
world,  Brandan's  isles,  and  many  others;  some  of  them  had 
had  a  part  in  creating  the  Norse  idea  of  Wineland  and  the 
White  Men's  Land;  now  they  were  given  a  fresh  lease  of 
life,  and  power  over  the  imagination  of  western  Europe. 
Possibly  in  connection  with  echoes  of  tales  of  the  Norsemen's 
discoveries — coming  from  Iceland  to  Bristol,  and  thence  to 
the  continent — these  mythical  islands  helped  to  form  a  wide- 
spread belief  in  countries  in  the  far  west  across  the  ocean. 
The  fact  that  the  Portuguese,  as  has  been  said,  really  found 
islands,  the  Azores,  out  in  the  Atlantic,  in  1427,  also  con- 
tributed to  establish  this  belief.  From  these  islands  many 
expeditions  set  out  in  the  course  of  the  fifteenth  century 
to  search   for  new  lands  farther  west.^ 

From  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century  Bristol  was  in 
frequent  communication  with  Iceland,  both  for  the  fishery 
and  for  trade.  As  already  pointed  out,  this  was  certainly 
due  in  no  small  degree  to  the  number  of  Norwegians  who  had 
settled  in  the  town.  Sailors  and  merchants  returning  from 
voyages  to  Iceland  doubtless  brought  thence  many  tales  of 
marvels  and  of  unknown  islands  and  countries  out  in  the  ocean; 
legends  of  the  Icelanders'  voyages  to  Greenland  and  Wine- 
land  may  have  served  to  entertain  the  winter  evenings  in 
Bristol.2     It  was  therefore  surely  not  an  accident  that  attempts 

1  Cf.  Harrisse,  1892,  pp.  655  f. 

2  As  is  well  known,  the  possibility  has  been  suggested  that  during  his  visit 

293 


IN   NORTHERN    MISTS 

to  find  land  In  the  west  should  originate  precisely  in  this 
enterprising  seaport. 

On  the  maps  o£  the  fourteenth  and  fifteenth  centuries 
there  lay  out  in  the  ocean  to  the  west  of  Ireland  the  Isle  of 
Brazil  (cf.  p.  228).  It  was  the  Irish  fortunate  isle,  Hy  Breasail, 
of  which  it  is  sung : 

"  On  the  ocean  that  hollows  the  rocks  where  ye  dwell, 
A  shadowy  land  has  appeared,  as  they  tell; 
Men  thought  it  a  region  of  sunshine  and  rest. 
And  they  called  it  O'Brazil — the  isle  of  the  blest. 

"  From  year  unto  year,  on  the  ocean's  blue  rim, 
The  beautiful  specter  showed  lovely  and  dim; 
The  golden  clouds  curtained  the  deep  where  it  lay. 
And  it  looked  like  an  Eden,  away,  far  away." 

[Gerald  Griffin.] 

We  have  seen  that  on  certain  maps  this  round  fabled 
isle  was  brought  into  connection  with  an  *'  Insula  verde," 
probably  Greenland,  and  this  conception  of  the  latter  prob- 
ably came  from  Iceland  by  way  of  England.  We  do  not 
know  what  myths  were  associated  with  Brazil  at  that  time; 
but  the  belief  in  it  was  so  much  alive  that  ships  were  sent 
out  from  Bristol  to  search  for  the  island.  A  contemporary 
account  of  such  an  attempt  made  in  1480  has  come  down  to 
us:  ^ 

"On  the  15th  of  July  [25th  of  July,  N.S.]  ships    .    .    .     [belonging  to?] 
.    .    .    and  John  Jay  junior,  of  80  tons  burthen,  sailed  out  of  the  port  of  Bris- 

to  Iceland,  in  1477,  Columbus  may  have  heard  of  the  Norsemen's  voyages  to 
Greenland,  Markland,  and  Wineland,  and  that  this  may  have  given  him  the 
idea  of  his  plan.  Storm  has  pointed  out,  convincingly  it  seems  to  me,  the  un- 
tenability  of  the  latter  supposition.  But  it  appears  to  me  that  he  has  over- 
looked the  possibility  of  Columbus  having  heard  tales  of  these  voyages  in 
Bristol,  or,  still  more  probably,  on  a  Bristol  vessel.  As,  of  course,  he  must 
have  been  able  to  make  himself  understood  among  the  other  sailors  on  board, 
it  would  be  unlikely  that  he  should  not  have  heard  such  tales,  if  they  were 
known  to  his  shipmates. 

iWillelmus    Botoner,    alias    de    Worcester    (1415-1484).     MS.    in    Corpus 
Christi  College,  Cambridge,  No.  210;  printed  in  "  Itineraria  Symonis  Simeonis 
et  Willelmi   de   Worcestre,"   ed.  J.   Nasmyth,   Cambridge,   1778,  pp.   223,   267. 
Cf.  H.  Harrisse,  1892,  p.  659;  Kretschmer,  1892,  p.  219, 
294 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

tol  [to  navigate]  as  far  as  the  island  of  Brazil  [insulam  de  Brasylle]  on  the 
west  side  of  Ireland,  ploughing  the  seas  by  .  .  .  and  .  .  .  Thlyde 
[Thomas  Lyde,  or  Lloyd?]  is  the  most  expert  seaman  in  the  whole  of  Eng- 
land, and  on  the  i8th  of  September  [27th  of  September,  N.S.]  the  news  reached 
Bristol  that  after  having  sailed  the  seas  for  about  9  months  they  had  not 
discovered  the  island,  but  on  account  of  storms  had  returned  to  the  port  .  .  . 
in  Ireland  to  allow  the  ships  and  men  to  rest." 

Parts  of  the  MS.  being  illegible,  it  does  not  appear  whether 
John  Jay  junior,  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  expedition, 
or  (as  Harrisse  thinks)  one  of  the  owners  of  the  ships,  but  in 
any  case  we  must  suppose  that  the  Thomas  Lyde  mentioned 
above  was  the  actual  leader  or  navigator.  The  "  nine  months  " 
("  9  menses  ")  must  either  be  a  clerical  error  for  two  months 
or  for  nine  weeks,  either  of  which  would  fit  the  dates  given, 
while  "  nine  months  "  is  meaningless.  This  must,  at  any  rate, 
have  been  a  serious  attempt  to  find  lands  in  the  west,  twelve 
years  before  Columbus's  discovery  of  the  West  Indies;  and 
this  was  not  the  last  attempt  made  from  Bristol  to  find  this 
happy  land,  for,  in  1497,  Ayala,  the  Spanish  Minister  in  London, 
writes : 

"  For  the  last  seven  years  the  Bristol  people  have  equipped  every  year  two, 
three,  or  four  caravels  to  go  in  search  of  the  islands  of  Brazil  and  of  the  Seven 
Cities,^  following  the  imagination  of  this  Genoese." 

"  This  Genoese "  is  Giovanni  Caboto,  or  John  Cabot,  as 
he  was  called  in  England.  We  find  only  a  few  casual  state- 
ments about  this  man,  who  was  to  give  England  the  right  of 
discovery  to  a  new  continent,  and  who,  together  with  his 
fellow  townsman,  Columbus,  forms  the  great  turning-point 
in  the  history  of  discovery;  for  the  most  part  an  impene- 
trable  obscurity   rests   upon  his  life   and   activity.^     As   he   is 

1  The  Island  of  the  Seven  Cities  was  a  fabulous  island  out  in  the  Atlantic 
which  is  frequently  alluded  to  in  the  latter  part  of  the  Middle  Ages. 

-  As  to  John  Cabot  and  his  voyages,  see  in  particular  Henry  Harrisse 
(1882,  1892,  1896,  1900),  F.  Tarducci  (1892,  1894),  Sir  Clements  R.  Markham 
(1893,  1897),  Samuel  Edward  Dawson  (1894,  1896,  1897),  C.  R.  Beazley  (1898), 
G.  Parker  Winship  (1899,  1900).  Harrisse  among  recent  authors  has  the 
special  merit  of  having  collected  and  arranged  all  the  authorities  on  John  and 
Sebastian  Cabot,  Unfortunately,  I  am  unable  to  follow  him  in  his  conclusions 
from  these  authorities  as  to  the  voyages  of  John  and  Sebastian.    It  seems  to 

295 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

often  called,  e.g.,  in  letters  from  the  contemporary  Spanish 
ambassadors  in  London,  *'  this  Genoese,"  or  "  a  Genoese  like 
Columbus,"  we  must  suppose  that  he  was  born  in  Genoa; 
but  from  existing  State  documents  of  the  republic  of  Venice 
it  appears  that  Joanni  Caboto  obtained  his  freedom  in  Venice 
on  March  28,  1476,  after  having  lived  there  fifteen  years, 
which  was  the  legal  period  necessary  to  enable  a  foreigner 
to  become  a  citizen  of  the  republic.^  From  the  statements 
of  contemporaries  we  must  conclude  that  John  Cabot  was 
a  capable  seaman  and  navigator,  with  a  good  knowledge 
of  charts  and  cartography;  he  also  constructed  a  globe  to 
illustrate  his  voyages.  This  is  no  more  than  was  to  be  expected 
of  a  Genoese,  trained  in  the  Venetian  school,  which  at  that 
time  was  the  foremost  in  seamanship.  It  may,  therefore, 
be  regarded  as  probable  that  John  Cabot  was  familiar  with 
the  leading  ideas  of  the  geographical  world  of  his  time.  Thus, 
while  still  living  at  Venice,  he  may  have  heard  of  the  idea  of 
reaching  eastern  Asia  by  sailing  to  the  west,  which  was 
put  forward,  notably  by  Toscaneili,  as  early  as  1474,  and  in 
this  way  it  is  possible  that,  independently  of  Columbus,  he 
may  have  thought  of  accomplishing  this  voyage  to  the  fabulous 
riches  of  the  East  by  a  shorter  route  than  that  which  the 
Portuguese  sought  to  the  south  of  Africa.  In  support  of  this 
it  may  be  mentioned  that  in  1497  he  himself  told  the  Minister 
of  Milan  in  London,  Raimondo  di  Soncino,  that 

"he  had  once  been  at  Mecca,  whither  spices  were  brought  by  caravans  from 
distant  lands,  and  that  those  who  brought  them,  when  asked  where  the  said 

me  that,  like  most  other  writers,  he  pays  too  much  attention  to  later  state- 
ments, derived  directly  or  indirectly  from  Sebastian  Cabot,  while  he  places 
too  little  reliance  on  what,  in  my  opinion,  may  be  concluded  with  tolerable  cer- 
tainty from  contemporary  sources.  Sebastian  Cabot's  statements  on  various 
occasions,  so  far  as  we  know  them,  prove  to  be  mutually  conflicting,  and  it 
looks  as  if  this  wily  man  seldom  expressed  himself  without  some  "arriere 
pensee  "  or  other,  which  was  more  to  his  own  advantage  than  to  that  of  the 
truth.  My  views  of  John  Cabot's  voyage  of  1497  on  several  points  agree 
more  nearly  with  those  of  S.  E.  Dawson,  and  for  later  voyages  with  those  of 
G.  Parker  Winship. 

1  Cf.  Harrisse,  1896,  pp.  i  f. 
296 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

spices  grew,  answered  that  they  did  not  know,  but  that  other  caravans  came 
to  their  home  with  this  merchandise  from  more  distant  lands,  and  these 
[other  caravans]  again  say  that  it  is  brought  to  them  from  other  regions 
situated  far  away."  Soncino  adds  that  "  Cabot  reasons  thus — that  if  the  east- 
ern people  tell  those  in  the  south  that  these  things  come  from  places  far  dis- 
tant from  them,  and  so  on  from  hand  to  hand,  then,  granting  the  earth  to  be 
round,  the  last  people  must  obtain  them  in  the  north-west;  and  he  says  it  in 
such  a  way  that,  as  it  does  not  cost  me  more  than  it  costs,  I,  too,  believe   it.  .  .  ."  ^ 

It  is  not  improbable  that  Cabot  may  have  thought  that  as, 
on  account  of  the  spherical  form  of  the  earth,  the  circum- 
ference of  the  lines  of  latitude  decreases  towards  the  north, 
the  shortest  way  over  the  western  ocean  to  the  east  coast  of 
Asia  must  lie  along  the  northern  latitudes  (cf.  Posidonius,  Vol. 
I»  P-  79)-  But  we  cannot  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  Cabot 
did  not  advance  this  until  long  after  the  first  voyage  of  Columbus 
and  it  is,  therefore,  uncertain  whether  the  idea  occurred  to  him 
before  or  after  that  time.  When  this  journey  to  Mecca  took 
place,  we  do  not  know. 

Pedro  de  Ayala,  the  Spanish  Minister  in  London,  says  in  a 
letter  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  of  Spain,  in  1498,  that  Cabot 
is  "another  Genoese  like  Columbus,  who  has  been  in  Seville 
and  Lisbon,  endeavoring  to  obtain  help  for  this  discovery " 
(i.e.,  of  land  in  the  west).  The  question  is  whether  this  "  who  " 
refers  to  Columbus  or  to  Cabot.  The  latter  appears  more  likely, 
as  it  seems  superfluous  for  the  Minister  to  inform  Ferdinand 
and  Isabella  that  Columbus  had  been  in  Seville.  But  here 
again  we  do  not  learn  when  Cabot  may  have  made  this  journey 
to  Spain  and  Portugal,  whether  before  or  after  Columbus's 
voyage  in  1492.  In  any  case,  it  may  point  to  his  having 
been  occupied  for  a  long  time  with  plans  of  this  sort. 

Nor  do  we  know  when  John  Cabot  came  to  England;  but 
perhaps  it  was  about  1490  that  he  settled  in  Bristol.  If  he 
really  came  there  with  ideas  of  making  for  Asia  across  the 
western  ocean,  he  certainly  found  a  favorable  soil  for  such 
plans  in  the  port  which  had  already  sent  out  ships,  in  1480,  to 
look  for  the  island  of  Brazil.     But  it  is  also  very  possible  that 

1  Cf.  Harrisse,  1882,  p.  325. 

297 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

these  plans  occurred  to  him  after  he  had  heard  of  this  expe- 
dition, and  had  become  familiar  at  first  hand  with  the  ideas 
of  western  lands  which  dominated  the  minds  of  the  sailors 
of  western  Europe  (Englishmen  and  Portuguese)  of  that 
time.  With  the  many  fresh  arguments  he  brought  with  him 
from  Italy  and  the  Mediterranean  countries,  it  cannot  have 
been  difficult  for  him  to  induce  the  merchants  of  Bristol  to 
make  fresh  attempts  to  find  these  countries  in  the  west  or 
north-west;  and,  to  judge  from  Ayala's  letter  of  1497  about 
the  expeditions  sent  out  annually  for  the  previous  seven 
years,  he  seems  to  have  been  persistent. 

We  do  not  know  whether  Cabot  himself  took  part  in  the 
attempts  made  after  1490.  None  of  them  seems  to  have  met 
with  any  success  before  1497,  for  otherwise  it  would  have  been 
mentioned.  But  it  was  while  the  people  of  Bristol  were 
occupied  with  such  enterprises  that  Cabot's  great  fellow- 
countryman,  Columbus,  made  his  remarkable  voyage  across 
the  ocean  farther  to  the  south,  in  1492,  and  found  a  new  world, 
which  he  took  to  be  India.  With  that  came  the  awakening  with 
which  the  time  was  pregnant.  The  news  of  the  achievement, 
which  fired  all  the  adventurers  of  Europe,  must  soon  have 
reached  Bristol,  and  put  new  life  and  a  wider  purpose  into 
the   old   plans. ^     That   Cabot   now  became   the   soul    of   these 

1  The  Minister,  Raimondo  di  Soncino,  says  in  his  letter  of  December  18, 
1497,  to  the  Duke  of  Milan,  that  Cabot,  "after  having  seen  that  the  Kings  of 
Spain  and  Portugal  had  acquired  unknown  islands,  had  proposed  to  obtain  a 
similar  acquisition  for  the  King  of  England."  It  cannot  be  concluded  from 
this  that  it  was  not  till  then  that  Cabot  formed  his  plans,  though  probably  it 
was  at  that  time  that  he  first  entered  into  negotiations  with  the  King  of  Eng- 
land. It  is  in  the  same  letter  that  Soncino  tells  of  Cabot's  speculations  on  see- 
ing caravans  arriving  at  Mecca  from  the  Far  East  with  spices,  etc.  His  son, 
Sebastian  Cabot,  who  evidently,  on  several  occasions,  made  it  appear  as  though 
he  himself  and  not  his  father  had  discovered  the  American  continent,  is  re- 
ported (according  to  the  statement  of  the  anonymous  guest  in  Ramusio,  see 
below)  to  have  said  that  he  (i.e.,  Sebastian)  got  the  idea  of  his  expedition  after 
having  heard  of  the  discovery  of  Columbus,  which  was  a  common  subject  of 
conversation  at  the  court  of  Henry  VII.  But  even  if  Sebastian's  words  are 
correctly  reported,  which  is  doubtful,  he  must  demonstrably  have  been  lying, 
and  therefore  no  weight  can  be  attached  to  his  statement;  if  he  could  sacrifice 
298 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

plans  is  clear  enough  from  all  the  facts,  and  we  see  from 
existing  public  documents  that,  at  the  beginning  of  1496, 
he  was  making  special  efforts  to  get  an  important  expedition 
sent  out,  and  was  applying  to  the  King  of  England  for  pro- 
tection and  letters  patent  to  assure  to  himself  and  his  three 
sons,  Lewis,  Sebastian,  and  Sancto,  the  profit  of  the  discoveries 
he  expected  to  make  on  this  expedition,  which  was  to  consist 
of  five  ships. 

The  letters  patent  were  recorded  on  March  5  (14,  N.S.), 
1496,^  and  give  Cabot  and  his  sons  the  right  under  the  English 
flag 

"  to  sail  in  all  parts,  regions  and  bays  of  the  sea,  in  the  east,  west,  and  north, 
with  five  ships  or  vessels  of  whatever  burthen  or  kind,  and  with  as  many  men 
as  they  wished  to  take  with  them,  at  their  own  expense,  and  to  find,  discover, 
and  investigate  whatever  islands,  countries,  regions,  or  provinces  belonging  to 
heathens  or  infidels,  in  whatsoever  part  of  the  world  they  might  be,  which  be- 
fore that  time  were  unknown  to  all  Christians."  They  also  had  the  right  as 
vassals  or  governors  of  the  King  of  England,  to  take  possession  of  whatsoever 
towns,  camps,  or  islands  they  might  discover  and  be  in  a  position  to  capture 
and  occupy.  They  were  to  give  the  king  a  fifth  part  of  all  merchandise,  profits, 
etc.,  of  this  voyage,  or  of  each  voyage,  as  often  as  they  came  to  Bristol,  to 
which  port  alone  they  were  bound  to  return.  They  were  exempted  from  all 
duty  on  goods  they  might  bring  from  newly  discovered  lands,  and  were  given 
a  monopoly  of  all  trade  and  traffic  with  them.  Furthermore,  all  English  sub- 
jects, both  by  land  and  sea,  were  ordered  to  afford  the  said  John,  his  sons, 
heirs,  and  assigns,  good  assistance,  "  both  in  fitting-out  their  ships  or  vessels, 
and  in  supplying  them  with  provisions  which  were  paid  for  with  their  own 
money." 

As  the  south  is  not  mentioned  among  the  regions  which 
might  be  explored,  and  as  the  new  countries  might  not  be 
known  to  Christians,  it  is  clear  that  Cabot  is  here  enjoined 
not  to  frequent  those  waters  where  the  Spaniards  and  Portu- 
guese  had   just   made    their   most    important   discoveries,    and 

his  father  to  his  personal  advantage,  then,  no  doubt,  if  he  profited  by  it,  he 
could  also  sacrifice  his  birthright  in  the  plan  to  the  advantage  of  Spain,  in  the 
service  of  which  country  he  then  was.  Furthermore,  Ayala's  letter,  quoted 
above,  points  to  John  Cabot  having  got  expeditions  sent  out  from  Bristol  as 
early  as  1491  to  look  for  land  in  the  west,  and  besides  this  we  know  of  such 
an  expedition  in  1480. 

1  They  are  dated  March  5,  in  the  eleventh  year  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VII. 
The  eleventh  year  of  Henry  VII.  was  from  August  22,  1495,  to  August  21,  1496. 

299 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

thus  run  the  risk  of  bringing  England  into  conflict  with  the 
Spanish  or  Portuguese  crowns. 

As  the  letters  patent  bear  the  same  date  (March  5),  and 
are  to  some  extent  couched  in  the  same  terms  as  Cabot's 
petition,  they  must  have  been  granted  as  the  result  of  previous 
negotiation  and  agreement  between  Cabot  and  the  King,  and 
must  therefore  contain  Cabot's  plans  for  the  new  voyage, 
which  were  thus  already  formed  in  March,  1496,  when  he  had 
doubtless  made,  at  all  events,  some  preparations  for  the 
expedition. 

That  Cabot's  plans  had  been  spoken  of  at  the  English  court 
as  early  as  January  of  that  year  appears  from  an  existing 
letter  from  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  of  Spain  to  the  Spanish 
Ambassador  in  England,  Dr.  Ruy  Gonzales  de  Puebla.  The 
letter  is  dated  March  28  (April  6,  N.S.),  1496,  and  is  an 
answer  to  a  letter,  now  lost,  of  January  21  (30,  N.S.)  from  the 
Ambassador.    The  answer  is  as  follows : 

"You  write  that  one  like  Columbus  has  come  to  propose  to  the  King  of 
England  another  enterprise  like  that  of  the  Indies,  without  prejudice  to  Spain 
or  Portugal.  He  has  full  liberty.  But  we  believe  that  this  enterprise  was  put 
in  the  way  of  the  King  of  England  by  the  King  of  France  in  order  to  divert 
him  from  other  business.  Take  care  that  the  King  of  England  be  not  deceived 
in  this  or  any  other  matter.  The  French  will  try  as  much  as  they  can  to  lead 
him  into  such  enterprises;  but  they  are  very  uncertain  undertakings,  and  are 
not  to  be  commenced  for  the  moment.  Moreover,  they  cannot  be  put  into 
execution  without  prejudice  to  us  and  to  the  King  of  Portugal."  1 

It  will  be  understood  from  this  that  Cabot's  plans  had 
attracted  attention  in  London,  and  that  great  importance 
was  attached  to  them;  consequently  they  must  have  been 
discussed  for  some  time  before  the  granting  of  letters  patent. 
For  this  reason,  also,  we  must  suppose  that  Cabot  was  prepared 
for  his  expedition  in  March,  1496.  It  seems  therefore  unlikely 
that  this  was  the  expedition  which  did  not  leave  until  the  year 
following  that  in  which  he  applied  for  the  letters  patent, 
all  the  more  so  as  the  expedition   of   1497   consisted   of  only 

1  Cf.  Harrisse,  1882,  p.  315. 
300 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

one  ship.^  If  we  may  interpret  Ayala's  words  of  1498  literally, 
that  Bristol  had  sent  out  ships  yearly  for  the  seven  previous 
years  to  search  for  the  island  of  Brazil,  etc.,  then  we  must 
suppose  that  Cabot  actually  set  out  in  1496  with  the  projected 
expedition  of  five  ships,  but  for  some  reason  or  other  turned 
back  without  having  accomplished  his  object.  After  having 
been  unfortunate  in  so  large  an  undertaking,  Cabot  may  have 
found  it  less  easy  to  enlist  support  for  a  fresh  attempt  in 
1497,  and  was  thus  obliged  to  content  himself  with  one  small 
ship  and  a  scanty  crew  (eighteen  men).^  It  may  also  be 
supposed  that,  as  the  earlier  expeditions  consisting  of  several 
ships  had  failed  to  find  the  land  they  were  looking  for,  Cabot 
as  a  practical  seaman  wished  to  make  a  pioneer  expedition 
with  a  small  swift-sailing  craft  and  a  picked  crew,  before 
again  embarking  on  a  large  and  costly  undertaking.  He 
was  more  independent,  and  could  sail  farther  and  more  rapidly 
to  the  west  than  where  he  was  tied  by  having  to  keep  a  fleet  of 
several  ships  together. 

Cabot's  sons,  who  are  mentioned  in  the  letters  patent, 
may  have  taken  part  in  the  voyage  of  1496;  on  the  other 
hand,  it  is  less  probable  that  they  were  among  the  eighteen 
men  in  1497.^  It  is  true  that  his  son  Sebastian  claimed 
to  have  been  present  as  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  expedition, 
but  he  also  claimed  to  have  made  the  voyage  alone,  so  that  no 
weight  can  be  attached  to  his  words.  In  any  case,  he  must  have 
been  very  young  at  that  time,  and  he  cannot  have  played  any 

1  It  has  been  suggested  that  Cabot  set  out  in  1496  and  did  not  return  till  Aug- 
ust 1497  [cf.  Church,  1897],  but  this  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  statements 
in  the  letters  of  Soncino  and  Pasqualigo  that  the  expedition  had  only  lasted  a 
few  months. 

-  According  to  Soncino's  letter  of  December  18,  1497,  Cabot  was  a  poor 
man.  In  addition  to  this  he  was  a  foreigner,  and  as  such  was  scarcely  looked 
upon  with  favor;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  reputation  of  Italian  sailors  was 
great  at  that  time,  and  he  may  therefore  have  been  respected  for  his  knowledge 
of  seamanship  and  cartography,  which  was  not  possessed  by  the  sailors  of  Bristol. 

3  The  only  ones  of  these  named  in  the  authorities  (Soncino's  letter,  Decem- 
ber 18,  1497)  are  Cabot's  Italian  barber  (surgeon?)  from  Castione,  and  a  man 
from  Burgundy. 

301 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

important  part.  Nor  is  a  word  said  about  him  in  a  single  one 
of  the  letters  from  contemporary  foreign  ambassadors  in 
London,  and  in  Pasqualigo's  letter  of  August  23,  1497,  we 
are  told  of  John  Cabot  after  his  return  that  "  in  the  meantime 
[i.e.,  until  his  next  voyage]  he  is  staying  with  his  Venetian 
wife  and  his  sons  in  Bristol."  This  does  not  seem  to  show 
that  any  of  the  sons  had  been  with  him;  and  the  protest 
of  the  Wardens  of  the  Drapers'  Company  of  London  (see  later) 
against  Sebastian  as  a  navigator  points  in  the  same  direction. 

Not  a  line  have  we  from  Cabot's  own  hand  either  about 
this  important  voyage  of  1497,  or  any  other.  We  hear  that 
he  made  maps  of  his  discoveries;  but  these,  too,  have  been 
lost,  like  so  many  other  maps  that  must  have  been  drawn 
during  this  period  before  1500.^  We  can,  therefore,  only  draw 
our  conclusions  from  the  statements  of  others,  some  contem- 
porary and  some  later. 

The  most  important  documents  giving  trustworthy  in- 
formation about  John  Cabot's  voyage  in  1497  are  the 
following : 

(i)  The  three  letters  from  his  two  compatriots  in  London: 
one  from  the  Venetian,  Lorenzo  Pasqualigo,  to  his  two  brothers 
in  Venice,  dated  August  23  (September  i,  N.S.),  1497;  and 
two  letters  from  the  Milanese  Minister,  Raimondo  di  Soncino, 
to  the  Duke  of  Milan,  dated  August  24  (September  2,  N.S.), 
and  December  18  (27,  N.S.),  1497. 

(2)  An  entry  in  the  accounts  of  the  King  of  England's 
privy  purse,  from  which  we  see  that  Cabot  was  back  in 
London  by  August  10  (19,  N.S.),  1497. 

(3)  The  map  of  the  world,  drawn  in  1500,  by  the  well-known 
Spanish  pilot,  Juan  de  la  Cosa. 

(4)  A  Bristol  chronicle  by  Maurice  Toby,  written  in  1565, 
but  from  older  sources. 

1  Between  1493  and  1500  at  least  thirty  expeditions  went  in  search  of  the 
coast  of  America.    These  were  all  certainly  provided  with  charts,  and  some 
of  them  also  produced  maps  of  their  discoveries,  but  not  one  of  these  has 
been  preserved.     [Cf.  Harrisse,  1900,  p.  14.] 
302 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

Besides  these  may  be  mentioned  a  legend  on  the  map  of 
the  world  of  1544  which,  according  to  what  is  written  on  it, 
was  the  work  of  Sebastian  Cabot.  But  even  if  this  be  correct, 
the  legend  is  of  no  great  value,  as  he  cannot  be  regarded  as 
a  trustworthy  authority.^ 

Lorenzo  Pasqualigo  writes  on  August  23  (September  i, 
N.S.),  1497,  to  his  two  brothers  in  Venice,  among  other 
things : 

"  Our  Venetian,  who  set  out  with  a  little  ship  from  Bristol  to  find  new 
islands,  has  returned,  and  says  that  he  has  discovered  700  leagues  [Italian  nau- 
tical leagues]  away  the  mainland  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Great  Khan  [Gran 
Cam]  [China],  and  that  he  sailed  300  leagues  along  its  coast  and  landed,  but 
saw  no  people;  but  he  brought  here  to  the  King  some  snares  that  were  set  up 
to  catch  game,  and  a  needle  for  making  nets,  and  he  found  some  trees  with 
cuts  in  them,  from  which  he  concluded  that  there  were  inhabitants.  Being 
in  doubt  he  returned  to  the  ship,-  and  was  three  months  on  the  voyage,  and 
this  is  certain;  and  on  the  way  back  he  saw  two  islands  on  the  right  hand,  but 
would  not  land  so  as  not  to  lose  time,  as  he  was  short  of  provisions.  He  says 
that  the  tides  are  sluggish  and  do  not  run  as  here  [i.e.,  in  England].  The 
King  has  promised  him  next  time  ten  ships  fitted  out  according  to  his  desires, 
and  has  given  him  as  many  prisoners  to  take  with  him  as  he  has  asked,  ex- 
cept those  who  are  in  prison  for  high  treason;  and  he  has  given  him  money 
to  enjoy  himself  with  in  the  meantime,  and  now  he  is  with  his  Venetian  wife 
and  his  sons  at  Bristol.  His  name  is  Zuam  Talbot  [sic,  for  Cabot],  and  he  is 
called  the  Grand  Admiral  and  great  honor  is  shown  him,  and  he  goes  dressed 
in  silk  and  the  Englishmen  run  after  him  like  madmen,  but  he  will  have  noth- 
ing to  do  with  any  of  them,  and  so  [do]  many  of  our  vagabonds.  The  dis- 
coverer of  these  things  has  planted  on  the  soil  he  has  found  the  banner  of 
England  and  that  of  St.  Mark,  as  he  is  a  Venetian;  so  that  our  flag  has  been 
hoisted  far  away"  [cf.  Harrisse,  1882,  p.  322]. 

The  Minister,  Raimondo  di  Soncino,  writes  on  August  24 
(September  2,  N.S.),  1497,  to  the  Duke  of  IVEilan,  among  other 
things : 

"  Some  months  ago  [sono  mesi  passate]  his  majesty  the  King  [of  Eng- 
land] sent  out  a  Venetian  who  is  a  good  sailor,  and  has  much  ability  in  find- 

1  No  importance  can  be  attached  in  this  connection  to  any  of  the  statements 
derived  at  second  or  third  hand  from  Sebastian  Cabot  and  communicated  by 
Contarini,  Peter  Martyr,  Ramusio,  and  others.  So  far  as  they  are  worthy  of 
credence,  they  must  refer  to  one  or  more  later  voyages.  The  statement  in  the 
Cottonian  Chronicle  and  in  the  Fabyan  Chronicle  refers  to  the  voyage  of  1498. 

2  Harisse's  reproduction  of  the  letter  [1882,  p.  322]  reads:     "  Vene  in  nave 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

ing  islands,  and  he  has  returned  safely  and  has  discovered  two  very  large  and 
fertile  islands,  and  found  as  it  seems  the  seven  cities  ^  400  leagues  to  the  west 
of  the  island  of  England.  His  majesty  the  King  here  will  on  the  first  oppor- 
tunity send  him  with  fifteen  or  twenty  ships   .   .   ."  [cf.  Harrisse,  1882,  p.  323]. 

On  December  18  (27,  N.S.),  1497,  Soncino  again  writes  to  the 
Duke  more  fully  about  Cabot's  voyage : 

"  Perhaps  among  Your  Excellency's  many  occupations  it  may  not  be  unwel- 
come to  hear  how  this  Majesty  has  acquired  a  part  of  Asia  without  drawing 
his  sword.  In  this  kingdom  is  a  Venetian  called  Messer  Zoanne  Caboto,  of 
gentle  bearing,  very  skilful  in  navigation,  who,  seeing  that  the  most  serene 
Kings,  first  of  Portugal  and  then  of  Spain,  had  taken  possession  of  unknown 
islands,  proposed  to  himself  to  make  a  similar  acquisition  for  the  said  Majesty. 
After  having  obtained  the  royal  privilege,  which  assured  to  him  the  use  of  the 
dominions  he  might  discover,  while  the  Crown  retained  the  sovereignty  over 
them,  he  gave  himself  into  the  hands  of  fortune  with  a  small  ship  and  eighteen 
men,  and  sailed  from  Bristol,  a  port  on  the  west  of  this  kingdom;  and  after 
passing  Ireland  farther  west,  and  then  steering  to  the  north,  he  began  to  sail 
towards  the  eastern  regions  [i.e.,  westward  to  the  lands  of  the  Orient,  thus 
making  for  the  east  coast  of  Asia],  leaving  [after  some  days]  the  pole-star  on 
his  right  hand;  and  after  a  good  deal  of  wandering  [havendo  assai  errato]  he 
finally  came  to  land  [terra  firma],  where  he  raised  the  royal  banner  and  took 
possession  of  the  country  for  his  Highness,  and  after  having  taken  some 
tokens  [of  his  discovery]  he  returned.  As  the  said  Messer  Zoanne  [John] 
is  a  foreigner  and  poor,  he  would  not  be  believed  if  his  crev/,  who  are  nearly 
all  English  and  belong  to  Bristol,  had  not  confirmed  the  truth  of  what  he 
said.  This  Messer  Zoanne  has  the  description  of  the  world  on  a  chart,  and 
also  on  a  solid  sphere  which  he  has  made,  showing  on  it  where  he  has  been; 
and  in  traveling  towards  the  east  he  went  as  far  as  to  the  land  of  the  Tanais 
[i.e.,  Asia],  and  they  say  that  the  country  there  is  excellent  and  temperate,  and 
expect  that  brazil-wood  [il  brasilio]  and  silk  ~  grow  there,  and  they  declare 
that  this  sea  is  full  of  fish  which  can  be  caught  not  only  with  the  seine,  but 

per  dubito  .  .  .";  while  Tarducci  [1892,  p.  350]  gives:  "  Vene  in  mare  per 
dubito  .  .  .",  where  "mare"  is  perhaps  a  misprint  for  "nave"(?).  In  any 
case  the  meaning  must  be  that  Cabot  turned  back  and  would  not  go  farther 
into  the  country  for  fear  of  being  attacked  by  the  inhabitants,  which  might 
easily  have  been  dangerous  for  him  with  his  small  crew. 

1  That  is,  the  mythical  "  Island  of  the  Seven  Cities  "  out  in  the  Atlantic. 

2  It  ^  is  interesting  that  here  we  find  attributed  to  the  newly  discovered 
country  the  two  features,  dye-wood  and  silk,  which  were  the  most  costly 
treasures  characteristic  of  the  land  that  was  sought,  exactly  in  the  same  way 
as  the  Norsemen  attributed  to  their  Wineland  the  Good  the  two  features,  wine 
and  cornfields  (wheat),  which  were  characteristic  of  the  Fortunate  Isles. 
Thus  history  repeats  itself. 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

also  with  a  dip-net  [or  bow-net  ?]  to  which  is  fastened  a  stone  to  sink  it  in 
the  water,  and  this  I  have  heard  related  by  the  said  Messer  Zoanne.  And  the 
said  Englishmen,  his  companions,  say  that  they  took  so  many  fish  that  this 
kingdom  will  no  longer  have  any  need  of  Iceland,  from  which  country  there 
is  a  very  great  trade  in  the  fish  they  call  stockfish.  But  Messer  Zoanne  has 
set  his  mind  on  higher  things,  and  thinks  of  sailing  from  the  place  he  has  oc- 
cupied, keeping  along  the  coast  farther  to  the  east,  until  he  arrives  opposite  to 
an  island  called  Cipango  [i.e.,  Japan],  lying  in  the  equinoctial  region,  where  he 
thinks  that  all  the  spices  of  the  world,  as  well  as  jewels,  are  to  be  found." 
Then  follows  the  reference  to  his  visit  to  Mecca,  already  cited  (p.  296).  The 
letter  continues:  "And  what  is  more,  this  Majesty,  who  is  prudent  and  not 
prodigal,  has  such  confidence  in  him  on  account  of  what  he  has  accomplished, 
that  he  gives  him  a  very  good  subsidy,  as  Messer  Zoanne  himself  tells  me. 
And  it  is  said  that  his  Majesty  will  shortly  fit  out  some  ships  for  him,  and 
will  give  him  all  the  criminals  to  go  out  to  this  land  and  form  a  colony,  so 
that  they  hope  to  establish  in  London  an  even  greater  emporium  of  spices 
than  that  at  Alexandria.  The  principals  in  this  enterprise  belong  to  Bristol; 
they  are  great  sailors,  and  now  that  they  know  where  to  go,  they  say  that  the 
voyage  thither  will  not  take  more  than  fifteen  days,  if  they  have  a  favorable 
wind  on  leaving  Ireland.  I  have  also  spoken  with  a  Burgundian  of  Messer 
Zoanne's  company,  who  confirms  all  this,  and  who  wishes  to  return  thither, 
because  the  Admiral  [for  this  is  the  title  they  give  Messer  Zoanne]  has  given 
him  an  island;  and  he  has  given  another  to  his  barber  [surgeon?]  from  Cas- 
tione,^  a  Genoese,  and  both  consider  themselves  counts,  nor  do  they  reckon 
Monsignor  the  Admiral  for  less  than  a  prince.  I  believe  some  poor  Italian 
monks  who  have  been  promised  bishoprics  will  also  go  on  this  voyage.  And 
if  I  had  made  friends  with  the  Admiral  when  he  was  about  to  sail,  I  should  at 
least  have  got  an  archbishopric;  but  I  thought  the  benefits  that  Your  Excel- 
lency has  reserved  for  me  were  more  certain  .  .  ."  [cf.  Harrisse,  1882,  pp. 
324  f.]. 

As  confirming  and  to  some  extent  supplementing  what  is 
said  in  these  letters,  we  have  various  statements  in  the  letters 
of  the  two  Spanish  ambassadors  about  the  voyage  in  the  follow- 
ing year  (see  later) ;  they  both  say  that  the  newly  discovered 
country  lay  not  more  than  four  hundred  Spanish  leagues  distant. 

In  IVTaurice  Toby's  Bristol  chronicle  of  1565,  we  read  of 
the  year  1497: 

"  This  year,  on  St.  John  the  Baptist's  day,  the  land  of  America  was  found 
by  the  merchants  of  Bristowe  in  a  shippe  of  Bristowe  called  the  '  Mathew,' 
the  which  said  shippe  departed  from  the  port  of  Bristowe  the  second  day  of 
May,  and  came  home  again  the  6th  of  August  next  following."  2 

1  Probably   Castiglione,  near   Chivari,  by  Genoa. 

2  Cf.  Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  9th  ed.,  Edinburgh,  1875,  iv.  p.  350;  and  G,  P. 
Winship,  1900,  p.  99. 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

Of  course  this  chronicle  was  written  long  after  the  voyage 
took  place;  but  it  is  extremely  probable  that  it  was  taken  from 
older  sources;  for  it  agrees  in  every  way  (both  as  to  the 
length  of  the  voyage  and  the  time  of  the  return)  with  the 
contemporary  statements  of  the  Italian  ministers,  with  whose 
letters  the  author  of  the  chronicle  cannot  possibly  have  been 
acquainted.  I  can,  therefore,  see  no  reason  why  this  state- 
ment should  not  be  correct.  But  the  most  important  autho- 
rities are  the  letters  referred  to. 

If  we  compare  all  this  we  shall  get  a  fairly  complete  idea 
of  the  voyage  of  1497.  After  sailing  round  the  south  of 
Ireland,  probably  in  the  middle  of  May,  according  to  our 
calendar,  Cabot  would,  at  first,  have  held  a  somewhat  northerly 
course.  If  this  is  correct,  he  may  have  done  so  for  several 
reasons:  unfavorable  winds,  which  in  May  are  prevalent 
from  the  south-west;  the  idea  that  great-circle  sailing  would 
prove  the  shortest  way ;  ^  fear  of  encroaching  on  the  waters 
of  the  Spaniards  and  Portuguese  to  the  south;  finally,  perhaps, 
an  idea  that  the  course  to  Asia  was  shorter  in  northern  lati- 
tudes (?).  But  we  cannot  tell  what  reasons  decided  him,  or 
whether  he  steered  very  far  to  the  north  at  all;  for  it  must 
be  remembered  that  in  speaking  to  a  foreign  minister  he  may 
have  had  good  reason  for  making  his  course  appear  somewhat 
northerly  lest  it  might  be  said  that  the  lands  he  had  arrived 
at  were  those  discovered  by  the  Spaniards.  In  any  case,  it 
was  not  long  before  he  made  for  the  west  as  rapidly  as  possible 
towards  his  goal,  and  we  cannot,  therefore,  suppose  that  he 
went  very  far  north.  And  it  is  expressly  stated  in  Soncino's 
first  letter  that  the  lands  lay  to  the  west  of  England,  and  in 
the  letters  of  the  Spanish  ambassadors  in  the  following  year 
we  read  that,  after  having  seen  the  direction  taken  by  Cabot, 
they  thought  that  the  land  he  had  found  was  that  belonging 

1  It  is  by  no  means  improbable  that  Cabot,  who  was  an  expert  navigator, 
knew  that  great-circle  sailing  gave  the  shorter  course.     For  instance,  he  might 
easily  have  seen  this  from  a  globe,  and  we  are  told  that  he  himself  made  a 
globe  to  illustrate  his  voyage  (cf.  p.  304). 
306 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

to  Spain,  or  was  "  at  the  end  of  that  land."     This  again  does 
not  point  to  any  northerly  course. 

Many  writers  have  thought  that  from  Soncino's  statements 
about  the  courses,  a  conclusion  might  be  drawn  as  to  where 
on  the  American  coast  Cabot  made  the  land;  but  this  is 
impossible.  In  the  first  place,  Soncino's  words  are  anything 
but  definite;  besides  which,  of  course,  Cabot  could  not  steer 
in  a  straight  line  across  the  Atlantic,  but,  with  the  frequent 
contrary  winds  of  May  and  June,  was  obliged  to  shape  many 
courses,  and  often  had  to  beat;  in  fact,  we  are  told  as  much 
in  Soncino's  words,  "  havendo  assai  errato."  Everyone  who 
has  had  experience  of  the  navigation  of  sailing  ships  knows 
how  difficult  it  is  under  such  conditions  to  make  way  in  the 
precise  direction  one  wishes,  however  good  one's  reckoning 
may  be;  currents  and  leeway  set  one  far  out  of  the  reckoned 
course,  and  on  a  voyage  as  long  as  across  the  Atlantic  the  lee- 
way may  be  considerable.  Whether  Cabot  was  able  to  correct 
his  reckoning  by  the  aid  of  astronomical  observations  (with 
a  Jacob's  staff  or  an  astrolabe)  we  do  not  know,  but  we  hear 
nothing  of  latitudes,  so  that  it  is  not  very  probable  (cf.  also 
Columbus's  gross  error  in  latitude).  Especially  during  the 
first  part  of  the  voyage  currents  and  prevailing  winds  may  have 
set  Cabot  to  the  north-east;  but  he  may  also  have  encountered, 
particularly  during  the  latter  part  of  the  voyage  in  June, 
heavy  north-westerly  gales  which  set  him  still  farther  to 
the  south,  and  he  may  thus  have  had  a  southerly  leeway. 
In  addition,  as  Dawson  has  so  strongly  insisted,  the  error 
of  the  compass  must  have  set  him  to  the  south.  Whether 
Cabot  was  aware  of  the  error,  and  remarked  its  variation 
during  the  westward  voyage,  we  do  not  know;  it  is  possible, 
since  we  know  that  Columbus  remarked  this  variation  during 
his  first  voyage;  but,  in  any  case,  Cabot  doubtless  paid  as 
little  attention  to  it  as  Columbus  in  his  navigation.  Unfortu- 
nately we  do  not  know  the  amount  of  the  error  at  that  time, 
but  by  examining  the  relation  between  the  true  direction  of 
the   coast-lines   and   those   we   find   on   the   most   trustworthy 

307 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 


compass-charts  (especially  the  Cantino  chart)  of  a  little  later 
than  1500  (which  are  drawn  in  ignorance  of  the  error),  I  have 
attempted  to  reconstruct  the  distribution  of  the  error  in  the 
Atlantic  Ocean  at  that  time  (cf.  chart,  below) ;  of  course, 
this  is  purely  hypothetical.  According  to  this,  during  Cabot's 
voyage  westward  the  error  would  have  varied  from  about 
6°  east  at  Bristol  to  about  30°  west  off  the  coast  of  America. 
If  we  suppose  that  he  was  able  to  follow  a  magnetic  western 
course  the  whole  way  from  the  south  coast  of  Ireland,  then  he 

must  have  passed  quite  to  the 
south  of  Cape  Race  in  New- 
foundland. But  we  are  told 
that  he  first  held  somewhat  to 
the  north,  though  we  do  not 
know  how  much,  and,  on  the 
"other  hand,  his  leeway  may 
have  set  him  at  least  as  far  to 
the  south.  The  assertion  that 
the  course  mentioned  by  Soncino 
Hypothetical  chart  of  the  variation   must      have      brought      Cabot      tO 

land  in  Labrador  or  Newfound- 
land is  thus  untenable.  Nor  does 
it  agree  with  Soncino*s  allusion  to  the  country  as  excellent  and 
temperate,  and  one  where  dye-wood  and  silk  might  be  expected 
to  grow.  If  this  be  explained  away  as  due  to  the  usual  pro- 
pensity of  discoverers  at  that  time  to  exhibit  the  newly  found 
countries  in  the  most  favorable  light,  which  is  very  possible,  it 
is  not  so  easy  to  explain  why  we  do  not  hear  a  word  about  their 
having  encountered  ice  on  the  voyage.  If,  on  his  western  voy- 
age, Cabot  came  to  Labrador  or  the  north-east  coast  of  New- 
foundland some  time  in  June,  it  is  improbable  that  he  should  not 
have  seen  icebergs,  and  it  is  equally  unlikely  that  the  Italian 
ministers  should  not  have  mentioned  this,  which  to  them  would 
be  a  great  curiosity,  if  they  had  heard  of  it;  we  see,  too,  that 
later,  in  descriptions  of  Sebastian  Cabot's  alleged  voyage,  the  ice 
is  mentioned  above  all  else.  Even  if  John  Cabot  might  have 
308 


of  the  compass  in  the  Atlantic, 
circa  1500 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

kept  quiet  about  the  ice,  lest  it  should  cool  the  hopes  raised 
by  his  narrative,  it  is  not  likely  that  his  crew  would  have 
done  so,  if  they  had  met  with  it.  But  although  other  state- 
ments of  the  crew  are  reported,  we  do  not  hear  a  single  word 
about  ice,  nor  even  of  icebergs,  which  are  common  enough 
on  the  Newfoundland  Banks  at  that  time  of  the  year,  and  would 
be  an  entirely  new  experience,  even  to  Bristol  sailors  who  were 
accustomed  to  the  voyage  to  Iceland.  From  this  we  must  sup- 
pose that,  in  the  course  of  his  beating  to  the  west,  Cabot  was 
set  so  far  to  the  south  of  the  Newfoundland  Banks  that  he  did 
not  encounter  icebergs,  and  that  he  first  made  land  somewhere 
farther  west.^ 

According  to  the  Bristol  chronicle  already  quoted  (Toby, 
1565),  and  according  to  a  legend  on  the  map  of  1544,  which  is 
ascribed  to  the  collaboration  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  it  was  on 
St.  John's  Day  (July  3,  N.S.)  that  the  first  land  was  discovered. 
In  spite  of  Harrisse's  objections  ^  it  does  not  appear  to  me 
unlikely  that  this  may  be  correct.  If  he  sailed  on  May  2  (11, 
N.S.),  he  was  fifty-three  days  at  sea.  Supposing  that  he  landed 
at  Cape  Breton,  the  distance  in  a  straight  line  on  the  course 
indicated  is  about  2200  nautical  miles.  Consequently  he 
would  have  made  an  average  of  forty-two  miles  a  day  in  the 
desired  direction.  This  is  doubtless  not  very  fast  sailing, 
but  agrees  with  just  what  we  should  expect,  since  he 
often  had  to  beat,  and  "  wandered  a  good  deal,"  in  the  words 
of  Soncino. 

For  determining  the  question,  what  part  of  North  America 
it  was  that  Cabot  discovered,  it  appears  to  me  there  is  no 
trustworthy    document    but    La    Cosa's    map    of    the    world 

1  It  must  also  be  remembered  that  on  the  Newfoundland  Banks  and  off  the 
coast  of  Newfoundland  and  Nova  Scotia  fogs  are  extremely  prevalent  (in 
places,  over  50  per  cent,  of  the  days)  at  the  time  of  year  here  in  question,  so 
that  their  first  sight  of  land  might  be  accidental. 

^Harrisse  [1896,  pp.  63  f.]  does  not  seem  to  have  remarked  that  Cabot 
must  necessarily  have  been  longer  on  the  westward  voyage,  when  he  had  the 
prevailing  winds  against  him,  than  on  the  homeward  voyage,  when  the  wind 
conditions  were  favorable. 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

of  1500.*  The  Basque  cartographer,  Juan  de  la  Cosa,  who 
owned  and  navigated  Columbus's  ship,  in  1492,  and  who  was 
afterwards  entrusted  with  many  public  undertakings,  enjoyed 
a  reputation  in  Spain  as  a  map-maker  and  sailor.  He  was 
commissioned  by  the  Spanish  crown  to  produce  a  map  of  the 
world,  and  we  must  suppose  that,  for  this  work,  he  was  pro- 


North-western  portion  of  Juan  de  la  Cosa's  map  of  1500.    Only 


vided  with  all  the  maps  and  geographical  information  that 
were  available  in  Spain.  From  a  letter  of  July  25,  1498,  to 
Ferdinand  and  Isabella  of  Spain,  from  Ayala,  the  Spanish  Min- 

1  No  particular  weight,  it  is  true,  can  be  attached  to  the  map  of  1544,  which 
is  attributed  to  Sebastian  Cabot,  or  which  was,  at  any  rate,  influenced  by  him, 
as  the  statements  of  this  man  can  never  be  depended  upon.  At  the  same  time, 
the  information  given  on  this  map  to  the  effect  that  Cabot  first  reached  land 
at  Cape  Breton  agrees  in  a  remarkable  way  with  La  Cosa's  map,  as  we  shall 
see  directly. 
310 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

ister  in  London,  we  know  that  the  latter  had  obtained  a  copy 
of  "  the  chart,  or  mapa  mundi "  that  John  Cabot  had  made  in 
order  to  set  forth  his  discoveries  of  1497;  and  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  a  copy  of  this  was  also  sent  to  Spain,  as  Ayala  says 
he  believes  their  majesties  already  had  the  map.  It  may,  there- 
fore, be  regarded  as  a  matter  of  course  that  La  Cosa  was  in 


a  few  names  are  given;  the  network  of  compass-lines  is  omitted, 
possession  of  this  map  when,  less  than  two  years  later,  he  was 
about  to  make  his  own,  and  that  it  is  from  this  source  and  no 
other  that  he  derived  his  information  about  the  English  dis- 
coveries. We  do  not  know  of  any  other  map  being  sent  from 
England  to  Spain  during  these  two  years,  and  there  is  no  ground 
whatever  for  assuming  that  La  Cosa's  information  may  be  de- 
rived from  Cabot's  voyage  of  1498,  which,  in  any  case,  must  have 
been  a  failure. 

For  the  understanding  of  La  Cosa's  map  it  must  be  remarked, 

311 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

first  of  all,  that  it  is  a  compass-chart,  and  that  it  takes  no  no- 
tice of  the  magnetic  variation  on  the  American  coast.  This  ex- 
plains the  fact  that,  for  instance,  lines  of  coast  which  in  reality 
run  from  west  to  south-west,  are  made  to  appear  on  the  chart 
as  running  from  west  to  east.  Furthermore,  the  latitude  of  the 
coast  of  North  America  is  made  too  northerly,  through  coasts 
which,  for  instance,  lie  to  the  magnetic  west  of  Ireland,  being 
placed  on  the  chart  true  west  of  it.  In  this  way  Cape  Breton 
(or  Cape  Race,  in  Newfoundland)  can  be  brought  to  about  the 
same  latitude  as  the  south  of  Ireland,  whereas  in  reality  it  lies 
nearly  5°  farther  south. 

The  coast  marked  with  five  English  flags  is,  of  course, 
the  land  discovered  by  Cabot.  That  La  Cosa  had  a  map  of 
this  district  is  further  shown  by  the  details,  which  distinguish 
it  from  his  delineation  of  the  remainder  of  the  North  American 
coast,  but  which  give  it  a  resemblance  to  that  part  of  South 
America  which  is  marked  with  Spanish  flags  and  of  which 
he  had  a  map.  Curiously  enough,  only  part  of  the  English  dis- 
trict has  names;  we  must  suppose  that  this  is  the  coast  that 
Cabot  is  said  to  have  sailed  along.  La  Cosa's  representation  of 
the  rest  of  the  North  American  coast  is  doubtless  guesswork, 
although  it  has  features  which  bear  a  remarkable  resemblance 
to  reality;  but  it  is  not  altogether  impossible  that  he  may  have 
had  oral  or  written  reports  of  later  voyages,  which  are  unknown 
to  us. 

La  Cosa's  map  is  in  complete  agreement  with  the  state- 
ments in  the  letters  of  Pasqualigo,  Soncino,  and  the  two 
Spanish  ambassadors.  Soncino  says  that  the  country  lies  four 
hundred  Italian  leagues  to  the  west  of  England,  while  both 
Puebla  and  Ayala  say  that  they  believe  the  distance  to  be 
no  more  than  four  hundred  Spanish  leagues.  On  the  other 
hand,  according  to  Pasqualigo,  Cabot  said  that,  at  a  distance 
of  seven  hundred  Italian  leagues,  he  had  discovered  the  main- 
land of  the  kingdom  of  the  Great  Khan,  and  that  he  had 
sailed  (i.e.,  after  having  sailed?)  three  hundred  leagues  along 
the  coast.  It  has  been  thought  that  there  is  here  a  disagree- 
312 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

ment  between  the  four  hundred  leagues  of  the  three  first- 
named  and  of  the  seven  hundred  of  Pasqualigo,  but  if  we 
interpret  it,  in  what  must  be  the  most  reasonable  way,  as 
meaning  that  the  distance  of  seven  hundred  leagues  does  not 
refer  to  the  nearest  land,  but  to  the  most  distant,  where  Cabot 
thought  that  he  had  at  last  come  within  the  boundaries  of 
the  kingdom  of  the  Great  Khan  (China)  and  did  not  venture 
to  go  farther,  then  we  have  complete  agreement,  since  the 
three  hundred  leagues  he  must  first  have  sailed  along  the  coast 
must  be  deducted  in  order  to  get  the  distance  from  England 
to  the  nearest  land.  The  length  of  a  Venetian  "lega,"  or 
a  Spanish  "  legua,"  cannot  be  precisely  determined.  If  we 
assume  [cf.  Kretschmer,  1909,  pp.  63  f.]  that  between  20 
and  i'jYz  went  to  a  degree  of  latitude,  each  league  would  corre- 
spond to  between  3  and  3.43  geographical  miles  (minutes), 
or  between  5.6  and  6.3  kilometers.  According  to  the  former 
estimate  (three  miles),  four  hundred  leagues  will  be  about 
equal  to  1200  miles,  and  seven  hundred  leagues  to  about 
2100  miles. ^  The  first  distance  is,  at  any  rate,  a  good  deal 
too  small,  while  the  second  is  too  great.  This  may  easily 
be  explained  by  Cabot,  or  his  crew,  having  naturally  wished 
to  make  the  voyage  to  the  newly  discovered  country  appear  as 
little  deterrent  as  possible,  and,  therefore,  having  under- 
estimated the  distance,  while  desiring  to  make  the  country 
itself  as  large  as  possible,  they  greatly  overestimated  the  length 
of  their  sail  along  the  coast.  That  the  voyagers  really  supposed 
the  distance  to  the  newly  discovered  land  to  be  four  hundred 
leagues  from  Ireland,  agrees  also  with  Soncino's  statement  that 
the  Bristol  sailors  thought  the  voyage  would  not  occupy  more 
than  fifteen  days  from  Ireland. 

La  Cosa's  map  is  drawn  as  an  equidistant  compass-chart, 
and  we  can  therefore  make  ourselves  a  scale  of  miles  by  using 
the  distance  between  the  equator  and  the  tropic.     In  this  way 

1  The  distance  from  Ireland  to  Newfoundland  is  fully  1600  geographical 
miles,  and  to  Cape  Breton  about  1900;  but  reckoned  from  Bristol  it  will  be 
about  280  miles  more. 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

we  find  the  easternmost  headland,  Cauo  de  Yngla- 
terra  (Cape  England),  on  the  coast  discovered  by  Cabot 
lies  four  hundred  leagues  from  Ireland,  while  the  distance 
from  it  to  the  most  western  headland  with  a  name,  Cauo 
descubierto  (the  discovered  cape),  is  about  three  hundred 
leagues.^  Furthermore,  this  coast  lies  on  the  map  due  west  of 
Bristol  and  southern  England,  as  it  should  according  to  Son- 
cino's  first  letter. 

There  is  thus  full  agreement  between  this  map  and  all  the 
contemporary  information  we  have  of  the  voyage,  and  there 
is  no  room  for  doubt  that  its  names  represent  John  Cabot's 
discoveries  of  1497,  which  thus  extended  from  Cauo  de  Yngla- 
terra  on  the  east  (with  two  islands,  Y.  Verde  and  S.  Grigor, 
to  the  east  of  it)  to  Cauo  descubierto  on  the  west.  But  it 
seems  to  me  that  this  tract  must  be  either  the  south  coast  of 
Newfoundland  or  the  south-east  coast  of  Nova  Scotia,  and 
Cauo  de  Ynglaterra  must  be  either  Cape  Race  or  Cape  Breton; 
the  latter  is  more   probable ;  -  this  also   agrees  best  with   all 

1  To  be  perfectly  accurate,  the  distance  on  La  Cosa's  map  between  Ireland 
and  Cauo  de  Ynglaterra  is  1290  geographical  miles;  between  Bristol  and  the 
same  cape  1620  miles;  while  the  distance  between  Cauo  de  Ynglaterra  and  the 
name  of  Cauo  descubierto  is  1080  miles.  If  we  reckon  17J  leagues  to  a  degree, 
these  distances  correspond  respectively  to  376,  472,  and  315  leagues;  while  20 
leagues  to  a  degree  give  430,  540,  and  360  leagues.  As  the  name  of  Cauo 
descubierto  stands  out  in  the  sea  to  the  west  of  the  cape  it  belongs  to,  the  dis- 
tance will  be  less,  very  nearly  300  leagues.  Along  the  upper  margin  of  the  map 
a  scale  is  provided,  each  division  of  which,  according  to  the  usual  practice,  cor- 
responds to  50  miglia.  This  gives  us  the  distance  from  Ireland  to  Cauo  de 
Ynglaterra  as  1425  miglia,  and  from  the  latter  to  the  name  of  Cauo  descubierto, 
1200.     Reckoning  4  miglia  to  a  legua,  these  distances  will  be  356  and  300  leagues. 

2  I  here  disregard  altogether  the  common  assertions  that  Cabot  arrived  on 
the  east  coast  of  Newfoundland  (at  Cape  Bonavista,  or  to  the  north  of  it),  or 
even  on  the  coast  of  Labrador.  This  cannot  possibly  be  reconciled  with  La 
Cosa's  map,  nor  does  it  agree  with  the  accounts  of  Pasqualigo  and  Soncino, 
nor,  again,  with  the  information  on  the  map  of  1544  (by  Sebastian  Cabot?),  if 
we  are  to  attach  any  weight  to  this.  Other  trustworthy  documents  are  un- 
knov(m.  No  importance  can  be  attributed  to  the  evidence  of  Cabot's  having 
arrived  in  Labrador  in  1497  which  Harrisse  [1896,  pp.  78  f.]  thinks  may  be  seen 
in  the  circumstance  that  the  English  discoveries  are  placed  in  the  northern- 
most part  of  the  east  coast  of  North  America  (between  56°  and  60°)  on  the  offi- 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

the  documents  we  possess  and  involves  fewest  difficulties. 
It  might,  then,  seem  probable  that  Cabot  first  arrived  off  the 
land  at  Cauo  de  Ynglaterra,  or  Cape  Breton,^  and  that  he 
sailed  westward  (magnetic)  from  there  to  explore  the  newly  dis- 
covered country.  The  main  direction  of  the  coast  of  Nova  Sco- 
tia is  about  west-south-west,  and  if  we  suppose  that  the 
compass-error  at  Cape  Breton  was  then  about  28°  "W.,  which 
I  have  found  in  another  way  ^   (cf.  above,  p.   308 ;  it  is  now 

cial  Spanish  maps  of  the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century;  this  does  not  by  any 
means  counterbalance  La  Cosa's  map,  which  speaks  plainly  enough.  Even  if 
Sebastian  Cabot  had  the  superintendence  of  these  later  maps,  this  proves  little 
or  nothing.  If  it  was  to  his  interest  not  to  offend  the  Spaniards  by  emphasiz- 
ing his  father's  discoveries,  he  would  scarcely  have  hesitated  to  omit  them,  or 
allow  them  to  be  moved  to  the  north.  For  on  these  very  maps  (e.g.,  Ribera's, 
of  1529)  it  is  claimed  that  the  whole  coast  to  the  south-west  of  Newfoundland 
(Tiera  nova  de  Cortereal)  was  discovered  by  Spaniards  (Gomez  and  Ayllon). 
But,  in  addition  to  this,  in  so  far  as  any  importance  can  be  attributed  to  the 
inscriptions  attached  to  Labrador  on  the  Spanish  maps,  they  evidently,  like 
others  of  the  statements  attributed  to  Sebastian  Cabot,  do  not  refer  to  Cabot's 
discoveries  of  1497,  which  are  found  on  La  Cosa's  map,  but  to  discoveries  made 
on  later  English  voyages  from  Bristol,  on  which  ice  was  met  with.  If  the  map 
of  1544  can  be  attributed  to  the  collaboration  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  it  further 
shows  clearly  enough  that  he  had  no  knowledge  of  the  northern  part  of  the 
east  coast  of  America,  since  he  makes  it  extend  to  the  east  and  north-east, 
which  is  due  to  Greenland  (Labrador)  being  included  in  it.  The  map  is  a 
plagiarism  of  an  earlier  French  one.  Harrisse's  view  results  in  complete  em- 
barrassment in  the  interpretation  of  La  Cosa's  map  [cf.  1900,  p.  21],  and  he  is 
obliged  to  abandon  the  attempt  to  make  anything  of  it,  since,  of  course,  it  con- 
tradicts all  he  thinks  may  be  concluded  from  the  much  later  Spanish  maps. 
Moreover,  since  Harrisse  insists  so  strongly  on  the  importance  of  the  northerly 
latitudes  of  the  English  discoveries  on  these  maps  (and  on  La  Cosa's)  as  a 
proof  of  their  being  on  the  coast  of  Labrador,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  the 
latitudes  of  Newfoundland,  for  instance,  and  Greenland,  to  say  nothing  of  the 
West  Indian  islands,  vary  on  the  maps;  this  shows  that  no  weight  can  be  at- 
tached to  evidence  of  this  kind. 

1  It  has  been  maintained  that  "  Cauo  descubierto  "  must  denote  the  land  he 
first  sighted;  but  the  name  only  means  "discovered  cape,"  and  says  nothing 
as  to  its  being  discovered  first  or  last.  There  may,  indeed,  have  been  more 
about  it  on  Cabot's  original  map,  and  it  happens  that  on  La  Cosa's  map  there 
is  a  hole  in  the  parchment  just  after  this  name.  That  it  should  be  the  same 
cape  that  on  Sebastian  Cabot's  map  of  1544  is  called  "Prima  tierra  vista"  is 
not  likely,  as  this  lies  at  the  extreme  east  of  the  promontory  of  Cape  Breton. 

2  For  determining  this  I  have  to  some  extent  relied  on  later  maps,  chiefly 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

25°  W.),  this  will  mean  that  the  coast  extended  a  little  to 
the  north  of  west  by  compass,  which  exactly  agrees  with 
La  Cosa's  map.  On  account  of  contrary  winds,  and  of  the  care 
necessary  in  sailing  along  an  unknown  coast,  the  voyage 
may  have  proceeded  slowly,  and  Cabot  greatly  overestimated 
his  distances,  which  is  not  an  uncommon  thing  with  explorers 
in  unknown  waters,  ever  since  the  days  of  Pytheas.  Finally, 
about  three  hundred  miles  on,  Cabot  came  to  the  south- 
western point  of  Nova  Scotia,  which  at  first  he  must  have  taken 
for  the  end  of  the  land.  But  as  he  certainly  would  be  bent 
upon  deciding  this,  he  may  have  continued  to  sail  across  the 
mouth  of  the  Bay  of  Fundy  until  he  again  sighted  land,  the 
fertile  coast  of  smiling  Maine,  stretching  westward  as  far 
as  the  eye  could  reach,  and  he  would  then  have  thought  that 
he  had  surely  arrived  at  the  coast  of  the  mainland  of  the 
vast  kingdom  of  the  Great  Khan.  Here  it  must  have  been  that 
he  landed,  as  related  by  Pasqualigo  and  Soncino,^  and  saw 
signs  of  inhabitants  but  met  with  none.  He  may,  of  course, 
have  landed  earlier  at  Cape  Breton  or  in  Nova  Scotia  without 
finding  trace  of  inhabitants,  and  said  nothing  about  it;  for 
he  was  not  looking  for  an  uninhabited  country,  but  the  wealthy 
eastern  Asia.  It  may  also  very  well  be  the  spot  where  he 
first  found  signs  of  men  that  is  called  "  Cauo  descubierto  " ;  for 
it  is  striking  that  on  La  Cosa's  map  this  name  is  not  placed  on; 
any  projecting  headland  of  the  coast,  but  in  front  of  a  com- 
paratively deep  gulf,  which,  in  that  case,  might  be  the  mouth 
of  the  Bay  of  Fundy.  And  it  is  in  the  sea  to  the  west  of  this 
bay,  across  which  Cabot  sailed,  that  La  Cosa  has  placed  his 

the  Cantino  map,  where  the  direction  of  the  north-eastern  coast  of  Newfound- 
land gives  a  magnetic  error  of  between  31°  and  38°,  and  the  direction  between 
Cape  Farewell  and  Cape  Race  gives  an  error  of  28°,  which  is  certainly  some- 
what too  high. 

1  To  this  it  might  be  objected  that  he  says  "  the  tides  are  sluggish,  and  do 
not  run"  as  in  England  ("le  aque  e  stanche  e  non  han  corso  come  qui ").  The 
tide  is  considerable  inside  the  Bay  of  Fundy,  but  on  the  coast  of  Maine  and 
in  the  outer  waters  of  Nova  Scotia  it  is  slight  in  comparison  with  the  tide 
Cabot  was  acquainted  with  in  the  Bristol  Channel. 
316 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

"  mar  descubierta  por  jnglese  "  ("  sea  discovered  by  the  Eng- 
lish ").  La  Cosa's  "  mar  "  will  then  be  probably  the  whole  gulf 
between  Cape  Sable  and  Cape  Cod.^ 

Cabot  now  thought  he  had  found  what  he  so  eagerly  sought. 
He  was  not  provisioned  for  any  long  stay,  and  with  his  small 
crew  he  could  not  expose  himself  to  possible  attacks  of  the 
inhabitants  of  the  country.  Consequently,  he  had  good  rea- 
son for  turning  back.  To  provide  himself  with  the  necessary 
water,  and  perhaps  wood,  for  the  homeward  voyage,  would 
not  take  long.  Food  was  a  greater  difficulty,  and  we  are  told 
that  he  was  so  short  of  it  that  on  the  way  back  he  would  not 
stop  at  new  islands;  it  is  true  that  we  hear  of  abundance  of 
fish,  but  this  cannot  have  been  sufficient.  He  then  returned 
to  Cauo  de  Ynglaterra,  and  thence  homeward  as  quickly  as 
possible.^  The  distance  from  Cape  Breton  past  the  southern 
point  of  Nova  Scotia  to  the  coast  of  Maine  is  420  geographical 
miles.  There  and  back,  with  a  cruise  in  the  open  sea  towards 
Cape  Cod,  it  might  be  1200  miles.  If  we  suppose  Cabot  to  have 
taken  twenty  days  to  do  it,  including  the  time  occupied  in 
going  ashore,  this  will  be  sixty  miles  a  day,  which  may  seem 
a  good  deal;  but  if  on  the  way  back  he  had  a  favorable 
wind  and  was  able  to  sail  a  somewhat  straight  course,  it  is 
possible;  and,  in  that  case,  he  may  have  been  back  at  Cape 
Breton  or  Cauo  de  Ynglaterra  about  July  14  (23,  N.S.),  and  then 
have  laid  his  course  for  home  east  by  compass  out  to  sea. 
This  course  took  him  off  Newfoundland,  and  he  had  the 
island  of  Grand  Miquelon,  with  Burin  Peninsula  to  the  east 
of  it  (S.  Grigor,  on  La  Cosa's  map?)  in  sight  on  his  star- 
board  bow,   or   on   his   right   hand,   as   Pasqualigo    says.    As 

1  It  must  always  be  remembered  that  La  Cosa  did  not  have  Cabot's  original 
chart,  on  which  the  coast  and  the  Bay  of  Fundy  may  have  been  represented 
more  in  accordance  with  reality. 

~  La  Cosa's  map  may  point  to  his  having  made  a  cruise  in  the  open  sea 
westward  from  Cauo  descubierto  before  turning,  and  having  seen  the  coast 
extending  on,  until  in  the  far  west  it  turned  southward  towards  a  headland, 
perhaps  Cape  Cod,  where  La  Cosa  put  his  westernmost  flag.  But  this  seems 
doubtful,  and  is  only  guessing. 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

he  was  afraid  of  more  land  in  that  direction,  which  would  be 
awkward  to  come  near,  especially  when  sailing  at  night, 
he  bore  off  to  the  south-east,  where  he  knew  from  the  outward 
voyage  that  there  was  open  water.  After  a  time,  thinking 
himself  safe,  he  again  set  his  course  east  by  compass,  but  then 
had  fresh  land,  Avalon  Peninsula,  ahead  or  on  his  starboard 
bow,  and  again  had  to  bear  off.  He  took  this  for  another 
large  island  (Y.  Verde),  but  would  not  land,  both  on 
account  of  shortness  of  provisions,  and  because  he  wanted 
to  be  home  as  soon  as  possible  with  the  news  of  his  discovery, 
and  to  prepare  a  larger  expedition  to  take  possession  of  the 
new  country.^  To  be  quite  sure  of  encountering  no  more 
land,  Cabot  may  then  have  borne  off  well  to  the  south-east, 
thus  reaching  the  Newfoundland  Banks  on  the  south,  and 
keeping  quite  clear  of  the  icebergs  which  are  found  farther 
north.  For  his  eastern  voyage  he  was  well  served  by  the 
wind,  since  nearly  all  the  winds  in  this  part  of  the  Atlantic 
are  between  south  and  west  or  north-west  in  July  and  the 
beginning  of  August.  He  was  further  helped  by  the  current 
to  some  extent,  and  may,  therefore,  very  easily  have  made 
the  homeward  voyage  in  twenty-three  days,  and  sailed  back 
into  the  port  of  Bristol  about  the  6th  (15th,  N.S.)  of  August,  1497. 
That  Cabot  cannot  have  taken  much  more  than  twenty  days  on 
the  return  voyage  also  appears  from  the  statement  already  quoted 

1  That  the  distance  between  these  islands  and  Cauo  de  Ynglaterra  is  less 
than  half  what  it  ought  to  be  on  La  Cosa's  map  cannot  be  considered  of  de- 
cisive importance,  since,  as  we  have  seen,  the  distances  on  this  map  are  in  gen- 
eral not  to  be  relied  on.  The  name,  S.  Grigor,  must  certainly  be  due  to  the 
Englishmen,  while  Y.  Verde  may  be  due  to  Cabot  or  to  La  Cosa,  and  may 
be  the  same  name  as  is  found  on  compass-charts  of  the  fifteenth  century  (cf. 
above,  p.  279).  La  Cosa  or  Cabot  may  have  taken  these  two  islands  to  be  the 
same  as  Ilia  verde  and  Ilia  brazil  on  these  older  charts,  and  while  one  of  the 
islands  has  been  given  a  new  name  (perhaps  because  there  were  other  islands 
with  the  name  of  Brazil  (?),  or  because  this  island  was  nameless  on  some  of 
the  compass-charts)  (see  above,  p.  281),  the  other  has  been  allowed  to  retain 
the  old  name,  which  was  originally  a  translation  of  "  Greenland."  This  old 
land  of  the  Norsemen  is  here  brought  far  to  the  south,  and  reduced  to  a  very 
modest  size,  being  confused  with  peninsulas  of  Newfoundland. 

318 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

of  the  Bristol  sailors,  that  they  could  make  the  voyage  in  fifteen 
days.^ 

The  view  of  John  Cabot's  voyage  of  1497  set  forth  above 
agrees  also  with  the  map  of  the  world  of  1544,  which  is  at- 
tributed to  the  collaboration  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  but  which  the 
latter,  in  any  case,  cannot  have  seen  or  corrected  after  it  was 
engraved,  probably  in  the  Netherlands,  and  by  an  engraver  who 
did  not  understand  Spanish,  the  language  of  the  map  [cf.  Har- 
risse,  1892,  1896;  Dawson,  1894].  Its  delineation  of  the  north- 
ern east  coast  of  North  America  is  for  the  most  part  bor- 
rowed from  the  representation  on  French  maps  of  Cartier's  dis- 
coveries in  the  Gulf  of  St.  Lawrence  [cf.  Deslien's  map  of  1541]. 
Cape  Breton  is  called  "  Prima  tierra  vista,"  and  in  the  in- 
scription referring  to  the  northern  part  of  the  American 
coast,^  the  import  of  which  must  apparently  be  derived  from  Se- 
bastian Cabot,  we  read : 

"  This  land  was  discovered  by  Joan  Caboto  Veneciano  and  Sebastian  Caboto 
his  son  in  the  year  1494  [sic]  after  the  birth  of  our  savior  Jesus  Christ,  the  24th 
of  June  in  the  morning;  to  which  they  gave  the  name  'Prima  Tierra  Vista,* 
and  to  a  large  island  which  is  near  the  said  land  they  gave  the  name  of  St. 
John,  because  it  was  discovered  the  same  day  "  (i.e.,  St.  John's  Day).^ 

1  As  evidence  that  a  homeward  voyage  of  twenty-three  days  would  not  be 
unusually  fast  sailing  for  that  time,  it  may  be  mentioned,  for  comparison,  that 
Cartier,  in  June  and  July,  1536,  took  nineteen  days  from  Cape  Race  to  St. 
Malo.  Champlain  made  the  same  voyage  in  1603  in  eighteen  days,  and  in  1607 
he  took  twenty-seven  days  from  Canso,  near  Cape  Breton,  to  St.  Malo. 

2  Cf.  Dawson,  1897,  pp.  209  f. 

3  Hakluyt  [Principal  Navigations,  London,  1589]  gives  a  corresponding  in- 
scription from  the  copy  of  this  map,  which  at  that  time  was  in  the  Queen's 
private  gallery  at  Westminster;  it  was  engraved  in  London  in  1549  by  the  well- 
known  Clement  Adams.  As,  in  1549,  Sebastian  Cabot  held  a  high  position  with 
the  King  of  England  as  adviser  on  all  maritime  matters,  and  especially  as 
cartographer,  we  must  suppose  that  he  was  consulted  in  the  publication  of  so 
important  a  map,  especially  as  it  was  attributed  to  himself.  We  may  there- 
fore assume  that  the  inscription  was  revised  by  Sebastian  Cabot.  Hakluyt 
mentions  this  legend  on  Clement  Adams's  map  for  the  first  time  in  1584  [cf. 
Winship,  1900,  p.  56]  and  then  says,  as  in  the  first  edition  of  "  Principal  Navi- 
gations," that  the  date  of  the  discovery  was  1494;  but  in  the  1600  edition  of 
"  Principal  Navigations  "  he  corrected  it  to  1497,  for  what  reason  is  uncertain 
[cf.  Taducci,  1892,  p.  47;  Harrisse,  1892,  1896;  Winship,  1900,  pp.  20  f.].     How 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

The  remainder  of  this  legend — that  the  natives  wear  the 
skins  of  animals,  that  the  country  is  unfertile,  that  there  are 
many  white  bears,  vast  quantities  of  fish,  mostly  called 
**  bacallaos,"  etc.,  etc.,  cannot  refer,  as  Harrisse  appears  to 
think,  to  this  land  (Cape  Breton)  which  was  first  discovered, 
but  to  the  northern  regions  of  the  new  continent  as  a  whole. 
It  is  characteristic  of  this  map,  as  of  the  earlier  French  ones, 


Northern  portion  of  the  map  of  the  world  of  1544,  attributed  to 
Sebastian  Cabot 

that  Newfoundland  is  cut  up  into  a  number  of  small  islands.  If 
the  view  is  correct  that  Y.  Verde  and  S.  Grigor  on  La  Cosa's 
map  are  also  parts  of  Newfoundland,  it  may  explain  the  fact  of 
Sebastian  Cabot  having  no  difficulty  in  bringing  this  map,  or  his 
father's,  into  agreement  with  the  French  ones,  since  he  must 
have  thought  that  a  number  of  "  islands,"  discovered  later,  had 
been  added. 

No  Island  of  St.  John  is  to  be  found  on  La  Cosa's  map, 
but  there  is  a  Cauo  S.  Johan  not  far  from  Cauo  de  Ynglaterra 
and  close  to  the  island  that  is  called  "  Ilia  de  la  trinidat."  That 
the  name  is  attached  to  a  cape  instead  of  to  an  island  may  be 
due   to   a   transposition   in   the    course    of   repeated    copyings. 

the  certainly  erroneous  date,  1494,  got  on  to  the  map  of  1544  is  unknown;  it 
may  be  supposed  that  MCCCCXCIIII  is  an  error  of  reading  or  writing  for 
MCCCCXCVII,  the  two  strokes  of  V  being  taken  to  be  divided:  II  [cf.  Har- 
risse, 1896,  p.  61]. 
320 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

On  the  Portuguese  map  of  Pedro  Reinel,  of  the  beginning  of 
the  sixteenth  century  (that  is,  only  a  few  years  after  1497), 
Cape  Breton  is  marked  without  a  name,  but  an  island  lies  off 
it,  called  "  Sam  Joha "  (St.  John) ;  on  Maggiolo's  map  of 
1527  there  is  "  C.  de  bertonz,"  with  an  island,  "  Ja  de  S.  Joan," 
in  the  same  place;  and  on  Michael  Lok's  map,  in  Hakluyt's 
"Divers  Voyages,"  1582,  we  have  "  C.  Breton"  with  the 
island  of  "  S. 
Johan,"  lying  ofB 
it,  and  on  Cape 
Breton  Island  (or 
Nova  Scotia), 
called  "  Norom- 
bega,"  is  written 
"J.  Cabot,  1497" 
(see  p.  323). 
There  seems 
thus  to  have  been 
a  definite  tradi- 
tion that  it  was 
here  that  John 
Cabot  made  the 
land,  and  St.  John 
may  then  be  the  little  Scatari  Island  which  lies  on  the  out- 
side of  Cape  Breton  Island  [cf.  Dawson,  1897,  PP-  210  f.].  That 
the  "I.  de  S.  Juan"  on  the  map  of  1544  lies  on  the  inside  of 
"  Prima  tierra  vista "  and  answers  to  the  Magdalen  Islands  is 
of  minor  importance;  we  do  not  even  know  whether  Sebastian 
Cabot  can  be  made  responsible  for  it,  as  it  may  be  due  to  a  con- 
fusion on  the  part  of  the  draughtsman.  More  importance  must 
be  attached  on  this  point  to  the  agreement  between  the  earlier 
maps  of  1500,  1527,  and  that  of  Reinel  (compared  with  Lok's 
map  in  Hakluyt),  than  to  the  map  of  1544.^ 

1  Another  possible  explanation  is  that  Cauo  de  Ynglaterra,  Cabot's  most 
eastern  point  01  the  country,  was  Cape  Race  in  Newfoundland,  in  spite  of  Se- 
bastian Cabot's  having  placed  it  at  Cape  Breton.     As  has  been  said,  it  is  very 

321 


Portion  of  Pedro  Reinel's  map,  beginning  of  the 
sixteenth   century 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

John  Cabot  returned  to  Bristol  at  the  beginning  o£  August, 
probably  about  the  6th  (15th,  N.S.)-  He  naturally  hastened  to 
London  to  tell  the  King  of  his  discovery,  and  we  know  that  he 
must  have  been  there  on  the  loth  (20th,  N.S.)  of  August,  for 
there  is  an  entry  in  the  accounts  of  the  King's  privy  purse : 
"  10  August,  1497.    To  hjrm  that  found  the  new  isle,  £10." 

This  cannot  be  called  an  exaggerated  regal  payment  for 
discovering  a  new  continent,  even  though  £10  in  the  money 
of  that  time  corresponds  to  about  £120  now.  Later  in  the 
same  autumn  Cabot  was  granted  a  pension  from  the  King  of 
£20  a  year. 

Meanwhile,  as  the  letters  already  quoted  show,  his  discovery 

doubtful  whether  Sebastian  Cabot  was  with  his  father  in  1497,  though,  on 
the  other  hand,  he  probably  knew  his  father's  map,  and  in  1544  had  a  copy  of 
it,  or,  at  any  rate,  of  La  Cosa's.  Then  he  saw  the  French  maps  representing 
Cartier's  discoveries,  e.g.,  Deslien's  map  of  1541;  and  it  was  a  question  of  iden- 
tifying his  father's  discoveries  with  this  map.  It  would  then  be  perfectly  nat- 
ural to  assume  that  C.  de  Ynglaterra  answered  to  Cape  Breton,  which  looked 
like  the  easternmost  point  of  the  mainland  in  that  region,  while  farther  east 
there  was  a  group  of  islands  which  might  well  answer  to  S.  Grigor  and  Y. 
Verde  on  La  Cosa's  map.  Perhaps  he  also  had  a  note  to  the  effect  that  it  was 
on  St.  John's  day  that  the  first  land  was  sighted.  On  his  father's  map  he 
found  an  island  of  St.  John  off  this  promontory,  or  he  knew  it  from  the  tradi- 
tion of  Reinel's  and  later  maps,  and  so  placed  his  "  Prima  tierra  vista "  at 
Cape  Breton.  If  the  view  that  C.  de  Ynglaterra  is  Cape  Race  be  regarded  as 
correct,  it  might  be  assumed  that  Cauo  descubierto  was  really  the  place  where 
Cabot  first  made  the  land,  perhaps  in  the  neighborhood  of  Cape  Breton,  and 
that  from  thence  he  sailed  eastward,  the  supposed  300  leagues,  along  the  south 
coast  of  Newfoundland.  The  two  islands  he  discovered  to  starboard  might 
then  be  Grand  Miquelon  and  St.  Pierre,  though  this  is  not  very  probable,  and 
he  would  then  have  sailed  between  them  and  the  land.  But  in  that  case  we 
have  a  difficulty  with  the  two  islands,  S.  Grigor,  and  Y.  Verde,  which  must 
then  lie  east  of  Cape  Race,  where  no  islands  exist.  That  they  were  icebergs 
taken  for  islands  is  not  very  likely.  It  is  more  probable  that,  as  already  sug- 
gested, they  are  the  ghosts  of  the  "  Ilia  verde  "  and  "  Ilia  de  Brazil "  of  earlier 
compass-charts  (of  the  fifteenth  century;  see  above,  pp.  279,  318).  But  the 
whole  of  this  explanation  seems  rather  artificial,  and  the  even  coast  of  La 
Cosa's  map  is  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  extremely  uneven  coast-line  we 
should  get  between  Cape  Breton  Island  and  Cape  Race.  There  is  the  further 
difficulty,  if  La  Cosa's  coast  was  the  south  coast  of  Newfoundland,  that  we 
should  have  to  assume  that  John  Cabot  was  aware  of  the  variation  of  the 
compass,  and  allowed  for  it  on  his  chart. 
322 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

attracted  much  attention  in  England,  and  gave  rise  to  great  ex- 
pectations. 

What  Cabot  accomplished  by  his  voyage  of  1497  was  in  the 
first  place  to  prove  the  existence  of  a  great  country  beyond  the 
ocean  to  the  west  of  Ireland,  which  country  he  himself  assumed 
to  belong  to  Asia  and  to  be  part  of  China.    Besides  this  he 


Portion  of  Michael  Lok's  map,  London,  1582 

discovered  great  quantities  of  fish  off  the  newly  discovered 
coast;  a  discovery  which  was  soon  to  create  a  great  fishery, 
carried  on  by  several  nations,  off  Newfoundland,  and  one 
which  surpassed  the  Iceland  fishery,  hitherto  the  most  im- 
portant. But  John  Cabot  evidently  had  little  idea  of  the  impor- 
tance of  this  last  discovery.  He  had,  as  Soncino  says,  "  set  his 
mind  on  higher  things,"  for  he  thought  that  by  following  the 
coast  of  the  mainland  farther  to  the  west  he  would  be  able  to 
reach  the  wealthy  Cipango  (Japan)  and  the  Spice  Islands  in  the 
equatorial  regions. 

Here  we  have,  in  brief,  the  plan  of  his  next  voyage.     Cabot 

323 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

himself  had  great  expectations  and  saw  a  brilliant  future 
before  him,  when  he  would  rule  as  a  prince  over  newly 
conquered  kingdoms  which  he  would  make  subject  to  the 
English  crown.  And,  as  we  have  seen,  he  was  liberal  in 
distributing  islands  to  his  barber,  to  a  Burgundian,  etc. 

At  the  beginning  of  1498,  Cabot  obtained  new  letters  patent, 
dated  February  3,  in  the  thirteenth  year  of  Henry  VII.'s  reign.^ 
These  letters  are  in  John  Cabot's  name  alone  (his  sons  are  not 
mentioned  this  time). 

They  give  him  the  right  of  taking  at  his  pleasure  six  English  ships  in  any 
English  port,  of  200  tons  or  under,  with  their  necessary  equipment,  "and 
theym  convey  and  lede  to  the  Londe  and  lies  of  late  founde  by  the  seid  John 
in  oure  name  and  by  oure  commaundemente,  payng  for  theym  and  every  of 
theym  as  and  if  we  should  in  or  for  our  owen  cause  paye  and  noon  otherwise." 
And  the  said  John  might  further  "  take  and  receyve  into  the  seid  shippes  and 
every  of  theym  all  suche  maisters  maryners  pages  and  our  subjects,  as  of 
theyr  owen  free  wille  woll  goo  and  passe  with  hym  in  the  same  shippes  to  the 
seid  Londe  or  lies,"  etc. 

It  thus  seems  as  if  this  not  very  prodigal  king  had  on 
second  thought  considerably  reduced  his  first  plan  of  sending 
a  fleet  of  ten,  fifteen,  or  twenty  ships  with  all  the  prisoners  of 
the  realm. 

The  most  important  documents  on  this  voyage  are: 

(i)  Two  contemporary  letters,  written  before  the  return 
of  the  expedition,  by  the  older  Spanish  Ambassador  in  London, 
Ruy  Gonzales  de  Puebla,  and  the  younger  contemporary 
Spanish  Minister  in  London,  Pedro  de  Ayala,  to  Ferdinand 
and  Isabella  of  Spain.  The  latter's  is  dated  July  23  (August  3, 
N.S.),  1498;  the  former's  undated,  but  of  about  the  same 
time. 

(2)  A  narrative  in  the  so-called  "  Cottonian "  Chronicle  ^ 
(the  contents  of  which  are  the  same  as  in  Robert  Fabyan's 
Chronicle)  undoubtedly  refers  to  this  voyage  of  1498  and 
not,    as    many    have    assumed,    to    the    voyage    of    1497.     It 

1  This  would  be,  according  to  the  reckoning  of  that  time,  February  3,  1497, 
since  the  civil  year  began  on  March  25;  in  New  Style  it  will  therefore  be 
February  12,  1498. 

2  The  MS.  is  preserved  in  the  British  Museum.  Cf.  G.  P.  Winship,  1900, 
p.  47- 

324 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

appears  to  be  a  contemporary  notice  of  1498,  written  before 
the   return   of  the   expedition. 

These  documents  contain  all  that  we  know  with  certainty 
about  John  Cabot's  voyage  of  1498. 

The  Spanish  Ambassador,  Ruy  Gonzales  de  Puebla,  writes 
in  1498  to  Ferdinand  and  Isabella  of  Spain  (probably  in 
July): 

"The  King  of  England  sent  five  armed  ships  with  another  Genoese  like 
Columbus  to  search  for  the  island  of  Brasil  and  others  near  it,i  and  they  were 
provisioned  for  a  year.  It  is  said  that  they  will  return  in  September.  Seeing 
the  route  they  take  to  reach  it,  it  is  what  Your  Highnesses  possess.  The 
King  has  spoken  to  me  at  various  times  about  it,  he  hopes  to  derive  great  ad- 
vantage from  it.  I  believe  that  it  is  not  more  than  400  leagues  distant  from 
here"  [of.  Harrisse,  1882,  p.  328]. 

Pedro  de  Ayala  writes,  July  25,  1498: 

"  I  believe  Your  Highnesses  have  heard  how  the  King  of  England  has  fitted 
out  a  fleet  to  discover  certain  islands  and  mainland  that  certain  persons,  who 
sailed  out  of  Bristol  last  year,  have  assured  him  they  have  found.  I  have  seen 
the  chart  that  the  discoverer  has  drawn,  who  is  another  Genoese  like  Colum- 
bus, who  has  been  in  Seville  and  Lisbon  to  try  to  find  some  one  to  help  him 
in  this  enterprise.  The  people  of  Bristol  have  sent  out  yearly  for  the  last 
seven  years  a  fleet  of  two,  three,  or  four  caravels  to  search  for  the  island  of 
Brasil  and  the  Seven  Cities,  following  the  fancy  of  this  Genoese.  The  King 
has  determined  to  send  out  an  expedition  because  he  is  certain  that  they  found 
land  last  year.  One  of  the  ships,  on  which  a  certain  Fray  Buil  sailed,  recently 
came  into  port  in  Ireland  with  great  difficulty,  the  ship  being  wrecked. 

"  The  Genoese  continued  his  voyage.  After  having  seen  the  course  he  has 
taken  and  the  length  of  the  route,  I  find  that  the  land  they  have  found  or  are 
looking  for  is  that  which  Your  Highnesses  possess,  because  it  is  at  the  end 
of  that  which  belongs  to  Your  Highnesses  according  to  the  convention  with 
Portugal.  It  is  hoped  that  they  will  return  in  September.  I  will  let  Your 
Highnesses  know  of  it.  The  King  of  England  has  spoken  to  me  at  various 
times  about  it;  he  hopes-  to  derive  great  advantage  from  it.  I  believe  the  dis- 
tance is  not  more  than  400  leagues.  I  told  him  I  believed  the  lands  that  had 
been  found  belonged  to  Your  Highnesses,  and  I  have  given  him  a  reason  for 
it,  but  he  would  not  hear  of  it.  As  I  believe  Your  Highnesses  are  now 
acquainted  with  everything,  as  well  as  with  the  chart  or  mapa  mundi  that  he 

1  The  text  has  "  vicinidades,"  but  Desimoni  [1881,  Pref.  p.  15]  supposes  it 
to  be  a  misreading  for  "  septe  citades,"  i.e.,  "  the  Seven  Cities." 

2  "  Spero  "  is  obviously  a  slip  of  the  pen  for  "  spera." 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

[i.e.,  this  Genoese]  has  drawn,  I  do  not  send  it  yet,  though  I  have  it  here,  and 
it  seems  to  me  very  false  to  give  out  that  it  is  not  the  islands  in  question." 

According  to  the  Cottonian  Chronicle,  the  King 

"at  the  besy  request  and  supplicacion  of  a  Straunger  venisian  [i.e.,  John 
Cabot],  .  .  .  caused  to  manne  a  ship  .  .  .  for  to  seche  an  Hand  wheryn 
the  said  Straunger  surmysed  to  be  grete  commodities,"  i  and  it  was  accom- 
panied by  three  or  four  other  ships  of  Bristol,  "  the  said  Straunger "  [i.e., 
Cabot]  being  leader  of  this  "  Flete,  wheryn  dyuers  merchauntes  as  well  of  Lon- 
don as  Bristowe  aventured  goodes  and  sleight  merchaundises,  which  departed 
from  the  West  Cuntrey  in  the  begynnyng  of  Somer,  but  to  this  present 
moneth  came  nevir  Knowlege  of  their  exployt."  2 

Haklu5rt,  in  "Divers  Voyages"  (1582)  [cf.  Haklu]^, 
1850,  p.  23],  has  a  rather  fuller  version  of  this  account,  quoted 
from  Robert  Fabyan,  where  we  read  that  the  ships  from 
Bristol  were 

"fraught  with  sleight  and  grosse  merchandizes  as  course  cloth.  Caps,  laces, 
points,  and  other  trifles,  and  so  departed  from  Bristowe  in  the  beginning  of 
May:  of  whom  in  this  Maior's  time  returned  no  tidings."  s 

"This  Mayor"  would  be  William  Purchas,  who  was 
Lord  Mayor  of  London  until  October  28  (November  6,  N.S.), 
1498.  Thus,  if  this  is  correct,  the  expedition  had  not  yet 
returned  in  the  late  autumn. 

The  information  contained  in  Ayala's  letter,  that  one  of 
Cabot's  ships  had  put  in  to  Ireland,  is  the  last  certain  intelli- 
gence we  have  of  this  expedition,  which  was  looked  forward 

1  Harrisse's  contention  [1896,  pp.  129  f.],  that  this  expression,  "surmysed 
to  be  grete  commodities,"  points  to  the  chronicler  here  having  introduced 
statements  about  the  first  voyage,  in  1497,  is  hardly  well  founded.  For  Cabot 
discovered  according  to  the  statements,  no  commodities  (except  fish)  in  1497; 
on  the  other  hand,  he  supposed  that  by  penetrating  farther  to  the  west  along 
the  coast  he  would  reach  these  treasures. 

2  Cf.  G.  P.  Winship  [1900,  p.  47].  In  the  Cottonian  Chronicle  this  account 
is  given  under  the  thirteenth  year  of  Henry  VII.'s  reign,  which  lasted  from 
August  22,  1497,  to  August  21,  1498.  This  has  led  some  to  think  it  referred  to 
the  voyage  of  1497,  but  that  is  impossible,  as,  of  course,  Cabot  had  returned 
before  the  thirteenth  year  of  Henry's  reign  began. 

3  In  the  note  preceding  this  statement  taken  from  Fabyan,  Hakluyt  has 
made  Sebastian  Cabot  leader  of  the  expedition;  but  there  is  nothing  to  this 
effect  in  the  text. 

326 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

to  with  such  great  hopes.  John  Cabot  now  disappears  com- 
pletely and  unaccountably  from  history,  and  his  discovery, 
which  the  year  before  had  attracted  so  much  attention,  seems 
to  have  been  more  or  less  forgotten  in  the  succeeding  years, 
and  is  never  referred  to  in  the  later  letters  of  the  Spanish 
ambassadors  in  London.  It  may,  therefore,  seem  reasonable 
to  suppose  that  the  expedition  disappeared  without  leaving  a 
trace.  The  probability  of  this  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that 
two  years  and  a  half  later,  in  March,  1501,  Henry  VII.  again 
granted  letters  patent,  for  the  discovery  of  lands,  to  three 
merchants  of  Bristol  and  three  Portuguese,  without  mentioning 
Cabot;  it  is  merely  stated  that  all  former  privileges  of  a 
similar  kind  were  canceled.  But  according  to  some  old  account- 
books  from  Bristol,  found  at  Westminster  Abbey,  John  Cabot's 
royal  pension  of  £20  a  year  was  paid  as  late  as  the  adminis- 
trative year  beginning  September  29,  1498.  This,  as  Harrisse 
and  others  think,  shows  that  Cabot  returned  from  the  voyage 
and  was  still  alive  in  that  year.  But  this  seems  to  be  uncertain 
evidence.  The  money  need  not  have  been  paid  to  him  per- 
sonally; it  may  have  been  paid  to  his  wife  or  his  sons  or  other 
representatives  during  his  absence  on  the  voyage,  and  we 
cannot  conclude  anything  certain  from  it.  As  the  pension 
is  not  entered  in  the  following  years,  it  seems  rather  to  show 
that  Cabot  was  really  lost,  and  the  money  was  only  paid 
during  the  first  year  of  his  absence. 

It  has  been  supposed  that  the  following  is  another  proof 
of  the  participators  in  the  voyage  of  1498  having  returned: 
the  accounts  of  Henry  VII.'s  privy  purse  for  1498  show  that 
on  March  22  and  April  i  the  King  advanced  money  (sums 
of  £20,  £3,  and  40S.  5d.,  in  all  about  £650  in  the  money  of 
the  present  day)  to  Launcelot  Thirkill  (who  seems  to  have  had 
a  ship  of  his  own),  Thomas  Bradley,  and  John  Carter,  who 
were  all  going  to  "the  new  Isle."  Probably  these  men  may 
have  fitted  out  their  own  ships  to  accompany  Cabot's  expe- 
dition; but  we  do  not  know  whether  they  sailed.  This  is 
probably  the  same   Launcelot  Thirkill,  who,   according  to  an 

327 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

old  document,  was  in  London  on  June  6,  1501,  when  he  and 
three  others  whose  names  are  given  (perhaps  his  sureties) 
were  "bounden  in  ij  obligations  to  pay"  £20  to  the  King 
before  next  Whitsuntide.  Possibly  it  was  this  loan  received 
from  the  King  for  the  voyage,  which  he  then  had  to  repay.  If 
he  really  started,  it  may  be  supposed  that  his  ship  was  the  one 
that  put  back  to  Ireland;  and  this  document  is  therefore  no 
certain  proof  of  any  of  the  other  four  ships  having  ever  returned. 
For  that  matter  they  may  all  have  been  lost  in  the  same  gale. 
But,  in  the  year  1501,  the  ship  that  returned  from  Caspar  Corte- 
real's  expedition  is  reported  to  have  brought  back  to  Lisbon  a 
broken  gilt  sword  of  Italian  workmanship  from  the  east  coast 
of  North  America;  and  it  is  also  stated  that  two  Venetian 
silver  rings  had  been  saen  on  a  native  boy  from  that  country. 
It  has  been  assumed  that  these  objects  may  have  belonged  to 
some  of  the  participators  in  John  Cabot's  expedition  of  1498, 
which  in  that  case  must  have  reached  America,  and  there 
met  with  some  disaster. 

It  is  difficult  to  say  more  of  this  voyage.  That  John 
Cabot  should  have  returned  after  having  reached  America, 
and  after  having  sailed  a  greater  or  less  distance  along  the 
coast  without  finding  the  riches  he  was  in  search  of,  appears 
to  me  unlikely.  Such  an  assumption  would  provide  no 
explanation  of  the  complete  silence  about  him.  As  the 
foreign  ministers  had  followed  this  expedition  with  so  much 
attention,  we  might  surely  expect  -  them  to  say  something 
about  its  having  disappointed  the  great  expectations  that 
were  formed  of  it;  and  in  any  case  it  was  unlikely  that  the 
whole  should  be  buried  in  complete  silence,  which,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  easily  comprehensible  if  nothing  more  was  heard 
of  the  expedition,  since  it  may  all  have  been  forgotten  for 
other  things  which  claimed  attention.  Thus  the  story  of 
Giovanni  Caboto,  the  discoverer  of  the  North  American  conti- 
nent, ends,  as  it  began,  in  obscurity.  He  was  too  early  with 
his  discovery.  England  had  not  yet  developed  her  trade  and 
navigation  sufficiently  to  be  able  to  follow  it  up  and  avail 
328 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

herself  of  it;  this  was  not  to  come  until  about  eighty  years 
later. 

But  John  Cabot's  discovery  was  not  altogether  unheeded 
in  the  years  that  followed;  it  was  considered  of  sufficient 
importance  for  his  son,  Sebastian  Cabot,  by  appropriating 
the  honor  of  it,  to  acquire  much  fame  and  reputation  in  his 
day  as  a  great  discoverer  and  geographer.  But  whether  he 
ever  made  discoveries  on  the  east  coast  of  North  America  is 
very  doubtful,  indeed  it  is  not  even  certain  that  he  ever  under- 
took a  voyage  to  these  regions.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
he  himself  asserted  he  had  done  so  repeatedly  and  to  different 
men,  though  his  various  utterances,  so  far  as  we  know  them, 
agree  imperfectly.  We  see,  too,  that  as  early  as  151 2  he  had 
the  reputation  of  being  acquainted  with  north-western  waters, 
since  he  obtained  an  appointment  in  the  service  of  King 
Ferdinand  of  Aragon  on  account  of  the  remarkable  knowledge 
he  claimed  to  possess  of  "  la  navigacion  a  los  Bacallaos  '* 
("the  voyage  to  Newfoundland")  [cf.  Harrisse,  1892,  p.  20]. 
But  Sebastian  Cabot  seems,  on  the  whole,  to  have  been  one 
of  those  men  who  are  more  efficient  in  words  than  deeds. 
It  was  the  habit  of  the  time  to  be  not  too  scrupulous  about 
the  truth,  if  one  had  any  advantage  to  gain  from  the  contrary, 
and  Sebastian  was  evidently  no  better  than  his  age.  If  his 
utterances  are  correctly  reported,  he  endeavored,  when  his 
father  had  long  been  dead  and  forgotten,  to  claim  for  himself 
the  honor  of  his  voyages,  in  which  he  succeeded  so  well  that 
for  many  centuries  he,  and  not  his  father,  was  regarded  as  the 
discoverer  of  the  continent  of  America.  In  the  legend  on  the 
map  of  the  world  of  1544,  it  is  true,  he  was  modest  enough  to 
share  the  honor  with  his  father,  and  this  legend  is  at  the 
same  time  the  only  evidence  which  might  point  to  Sebastian 
as  having  been  present  on  that  occasion;  but,  as  we  have 
already  seen,  no  great  importance  can  be  attached  to  it,  and  it 
is  not  confirmed  by  contemporary  statements  about  the  voyage. 
His  assertion  that  he  had  been  in  north-western  waters  is  in 
direct  conflict  with  statements  in  the  protest  made  on  March 

329 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

II,  1 52 1,  by  the  Wardens  of  the  Drapers'  Company  of  London 
against  King  Henry  VIII. 's  attempt  to  obtain  contributions 
towards  an  expedition  to  *'  the  newe  found  Hand  "  (the  coast 
of  North  America)  in  1521  under  the  command  of  Sebastian 
Cabot.     The  protest  says: 

..."  And  we  thynk  it  were  to  sore  avenf  to  joperd  V  shipps  w*  men  and 
goods  vnto  the  said  Hand  vppon  the  singuler  trust  of  one  man  callyd  as  we 
vnderstond  Sebastyan,  whiche  Sebastyan  as  we  here  say  was  neu""  in  that 
land  hym  self,  all  if  he  maks  reports  of  many  things  as  he  hath  hard  his 
Father  and  other  men  speke  in  tymes  past,"  etc. 

This  statement  is  clear  enough,  and,  coming  as  it  does 
from  men  who  were  acquainted  with  his  father's  services, 
it  cannot  be  disregarded.  It  is  also  confirmed  by  a  remark- 
able statement  in  Peter  Martyr's  narrative  (in  151 5)  of  an 
alleged  voyage  of  Sebastian  Cabot  (see  later),  which  con- 
cludes : 

"  Some  of  the  Spaniards  deny  that  Cabot  [i.e.,  Sebastian]  was  the  first  dis- 
coverer of  the  land  of  Bacallaos,  and  assert  that  he  had  not  sailed  so  far  to 
the  west." 

This  might  point  to  his  really  having  made  a  voyage,  but 
in  the  opinion  of  the  Spaniards,  never  having  reached  the  coast 
of  North  America. 

The  immediate  consequences  of  John  Cabot's  discovery  of 
the  continent  of  North  America  was  probably  that  the  practical 
merchants  of  Bristol,  who  were  accustomed  to  fishing  ventures 
in  Iceland,  at  once  sent  out  vessels  to  take  advantage  of  the 
great  abundance  of  fish  that  John  Cabot  had  found  in  1497 
and  that  had  evidently  made  so  deep  an  impression  on  his 
crew  that  they  told  everyone  about  it.  But  the  English  fisher- 
men were  soon  followed,  and,  indeed,  outstripped,  by  Portu- 
guese, Basque,  and  French  (chiefly  Breton)  fishermen,  and  thus 
arose  the  famous  Newfoundland  fisheries.  The  cause  of  the 
fishermen  of  Portugal  and  other  countries  having  followed 
so  soon  was  doubtless  the  discovery  of  Newfoundland  by  the 
Portuguese,  Cortereal,  on  his  voyages  of  1500  and  1501  (see 
next  chapter.) 

But  of  the  development  of  this  fishery  we  hear  little  or 
330 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

nothing  in  literature;  just  as  in  the  Icelandic  literature  of 
earlier  times,  these  fishing  expeditions  of  ordinary  seamen 
are  passed  over;  in  the  first  place,  they  were  not  "notable" 
travelers,  and  in  the  second,  men  of  that  class  in  all  ages 
have  preferred  to  avoid  advertising  their  discoveries  for  fear 
of  competition. 

From  various  documents  and  statements  v^e  may  conclude 
that  fresh  expeditions  were  sent  out  from  Bristol  in  1501 
and  the  following  years;  but  these  were  Anglo-Portuguese 
undertakings  and  may  have  been  occasioned,  at  any  rate  in 
part,  by  the  discoveries  of  the  Portuguese,  although,  of  course, 
the  knowledge  of  Cabot's  voyage  may  have  had  some  signi- 
ficance.^ 

On  March  19  (28,  N.  S.),  1501,  Henry  VH.  issued  letters  patent 
to  Richard  Warde,  Thomas  Ashehurst,  and  John  Thomas, 
merchants  of  Bristol,  who  were  in  partnership  in  the  enter- 
prise with  three  Portuguese  from  the  Azores,  John  and  Francis 
Fernandus  (i.e.,  Joao  and  Francisco  Fernandez)  and  John 
Gunsolus   (Joao  Gonzales?)."     They  were  given  the  right  for 

1  It  was  suggested  above  that  the  Burgundian  who  took  part  in  Cabot's 
voyage  in  1497  may  have  been  from  the  Azores.  It  might  be  supposed  that  he 
also  accompanied  Joao  Fernandez  or  Cortereal  in  1500,  and  now  took  part 
with  Fernandez  in  the  English  undertaking,  and  in  this  way  we  should  get  a 
connection;  but  all  this  is  mere  guessing. 

-  Possibly  the  first-named  Portuguese  was  the  origin  of  the  name  of  Lab- 
rador. On  a  Portuguese  map  of  the  sixteenth  century,  preserved  at  Wolfen- 
biittel  it  is  stated  that  the  country  of  Labrador  was  "  discovered  by  English- 
men from  the  town  of  Bristol,  and  as  he  who  first  gave  the  information  was 
a  '  labrador '  [i.e.,  laborer]  from  the  Azores,  they  gave  it  that  name  "  [cf.  Har- 
risse,  1892,  p.  580;  1900,  p.  40].  Ernesto  do  Canto  [Archivo  dos  Agores,  xii. 
1894]  points  out  that  in  documents  of  as  early  as  1492  there  is  mention  of  a 
Joao  Fernandez  who  is  described  as  "  llavorador,"  and  who  was  engaged  with 
another  (Pero  de  Barcellos)  in  making  discoveries  at  sea.  "  Llavorador "  did 
not  mean  merely  a  common  laborer,  but  one  who  tilled  the  ground,  an  agricul- 
turist, landowner.  We  are  then  tempted  to  suppose  that,  as  Do  Canto  as- 
sumes, this  Joao  Fernandez  (llavorador)  is  John  Fernandus,  who  is  men- 
tioned in  the  letters  patent  of  1501.  The  name  of  Labrador  first  appears  on 
Portuguese  maps  [cf.  the  King  map  of  about  1502],  and  is  there  used  of  Green- 
land. It  may  there  be  due  to  this  Joao  Fernandez  (llavorador),  who,  perhaps 
returned  to  Portugal  in  1502,  as  he  is  no  longer  mentioned  in  the  letters 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

ten  years  "to  explore  all  Islands,  Countries,  Regions,  and 
Provinces  whatever,  in  the  Eastern,  Western,  Southern,  and 
Northern  Seas,  heretofore  unknown  to  Christians,"  and  all 
former  privileges  of  this  kind,  granted  to  "  any  foreigner  or 
foreigners  "  were  expressly  canceled.  This  last  provision  must 
refer  to  the  letters  patent  granted  to  Cabot  in  1496  and  1498. 

That  this  new  expedition  from  Bristol  really  took  place, 
and  returned  before  January,  1502,  seems  to  result  from  the 
accounts  of  Henry  VII.'s  privy  purse,  where  on  January  7, 
1502,  there  is  an  entry:  "To  men  of  BristoU  that  found 
Thisle,  £5."  In  1502  there  was  possibly  a  new  expedition, 
as  in  the  same  accounts  there  is  an  entry  of  September  (24), 
1502:  "To  the  merchants  of  Bristoll  that  have  bene  in  the 
Newfounde  Lande,  £20."  ^  According  to  a  document  of 
December  6,  1503,  Henry  VII.  further  granted  on  September 
26,  1502,  to  the  two  Portuguese,  ffranceys  ffernandus  (Fran- 
cisco Fernandez)  and  John  Guidisalvus  (Gonzales?)  a  yearly 
pension  of  ten  pounds  each,  for  the  service  they  had  done  to 
the  King's  "  singler  pleasur  as  capitaignes  unto  the  new 
founde  lande." 

patent  of  December  1502  [cf.  Harrisse,  1900,  p.  40  f.;  Bjornbo,  1910,  p.  174]. 
Possibly  he  may  have  accompanied  Cortereal  in  1500,  or  himself  made  a  voy- 
age in  that  year  (see  next  chapter),  before  he  came  to  Bristol;  of  that  we 
know  nothing,  but  in  that  case  the  name  referred  to  some  such  Portuguese 
voyage,  on  which  we  know  that  Greenland  was  sighted  in  1500,  though  the 
voyagers  were  unable  to  reach  the  coast  (see  next  chapter).  It  may  then  be 
supposed  that  the  English  expedition  from  Bristol  in  1501,  in  which  Joao  Fer- 
nandez took  part,  did  reach  the  coast  of  Greenland,  and  therefore  on  later  maps 
the  discovery  was  attributed  to  the  English,  who  not  only  saw  the  coast,  but 
also  landed  on  it.  The  Spanish  cosmographer,  Alonso  de  Santa  Cruz,  (born 
1506)  says:  "It  was  called  the  land  of  Labrador  because  it  was  mentioned  and 
indicated  by  a  'labrador'  from  the  Azores  to  the  King  of  England,  when  he 
sent  on  a  voyage  of  discovery  Antonio  [sic]  Gabot,  the  English  pilot  and  father 
of  Sebastian  Gabot,  who  is  now  Pilot  Major  (piloto  mayor)  to  Your  Maj- 
esty"  [cf.  Harrisse,  1896,  p.  80].  As  this  was  written  so  long  after,  and  in. 
Spain,  it  is  not  surprising  that  Cabot's  voyage  of  1497  has  been  confused  with 
the  voyage  of  1501,  especially  as  it  was  not  to  the  interest  of  Sebastian,  who 
was  still  in  Spain  at  that  time,  to  correct  this.  The  statement  agrees,  more- 
over, with  the  legend  on  the  Portuguese  map  at  Wolfenbiittel. 
1  Cf.  Harrisse,  1896,  p.   147. 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

Haklu)^  states  (1582)  in  "Divers  Voyages"  [1850,  p,  23] 
after  Robert  Fabyan's  Chronicle,  that  in  the  seventeenth 
year  of  the  reign  of  Henry  VII.  (i.e.,  August  22,  1501,  to 
August  21,  1502)  :^ 

"  were  brought  unto  the  king  three  men,  taken  in  the  new  f ounde  Hand,  that 
before  I  [i.e.,  Fabyan?]  spake  of  in  William  Purchas  time,  being  Maior.2' 
These  were  clothed  in  beastes  skinnes,  and  ate  rawe  fleshe,  and  spake  such 
speech  that  no  man  coulde  understand  them,  and  in  their  demeanour  like  to 
bruite  beastes,  whom  the  king  kept  a  time  after.  Of  the  which  vpon  two 
yeeres  past  after  I  [i.e.,  Fabyan]  saw  two  apparelled  after  the  manner  o£ 
Englishmen,  in  Westminster  pallace,  which  at  that  time  I  coulde  not  dis- 
cerne  from  Englishemen,  till  I  was  learned  what  they  were.  But  as  for 
speech,  I  heard  none  of  them  vtter  one  worde."  3 

These  natives  must  have  been  brought  back  from  the 
expedition  of  1501  or  from  that  of  1502  (if  the  latter  returned 

1  In  the  repetition  of  the  same  statement  (from  Fabyan)  in  Stow's  Chron- 
icle the  eighteenth  year  is  given  as  the  date  (i.e.,  August  22,  1502,  to  August 
21,  1503);  but  it  is  doubtful  which  is  correct;  it  appears  to  me  that  the  text 
itself  must  be  more  original  in  Hakluyt;  but  the  date  occurs  in  the  heading 
added  by  himself. 

2  The  most  natural  explanation  of  this  seems  to  me  to  be  that  Fabyan, 
whom  Hakluyt  quotes,  thought  that  these  savages  were  taken  on  the  same 
island  (i.e.,  North  America)  that  John  Cabot  had  discovered  (in  1497);  of 
whose  expedition  in  1498  he  had  said  that  it  had  not  returned  during  the  mayor- 
alty of  William  Purchas  (see  above,  p.  326).  That  Hakluyt  also  interpreted 
Fabyan's  words  thus  seems  to  result  from  the  fact  that  in  his  later  repetition 
of  this,  in  "Principal  Navigations,"  in  1589  and  1599-1600,  he  has  altered  the 
heading,  making  it  the  fourteenth,  instead  of  the  seventeenth,  year  of  Henry 
VII.  (i.e.,  August  22,  1498-August  21,  1499)  when  the  three  savages  were 
brought  to  him.  Hakluyt  must  then  have  misunderstood  it  to  mean  that  they 
were  taken  on  the  voyage  of  1498. 

3  In  Hakluyt's  heading  to  this  statement  we  are  told  that  it  was  Sebas- 
tian Cabot  who  brought  these  savages;  but  his  name  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
text  itself,  which  appears  to  be  more  genuine  than  the  heading,  and  there  is  no 
ground  for  supposing  that  Sebastian  took  part  in  either  of  these  expeditions 
of  1 501  or  1502;  in  any  case  he  was  not  the  leader.  In  Stow's  version  [Win- 
ship,  1900,  p.  95]  Sebastian  Gabato  is  introduced  into  the  text  as  he  who  had 
taken  the  three  men;  but,  as  suggested  above,  Stow's  text  seems  less  original 
than  Hakluyt's.  It  is  probable  that  both  Stow  and  Hakluyt  may  have  started 
from  the  assumption  that  it  was  Sebastian  Cabot  who  made  the  voyage,  and, 
therefore,  that  they  thoughtlessly  introduced  his  name  [cf.  Harrisse,  1896, 
pp.  142  f.] ;  on  the  other  hand  it  appears  to  me  doubtful  that  his  name 
should  already  have  occurred  in  Fabyan  in  this  connection. 

333 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

before  August  21st?).  They  were  most  likely  Eskimo,  since 
Indians  with  their  darker  skin  could  scarcely  have  looked 
like  Englishmen.  It  might  even  be  supposed  that  they  came 
from  Greenland,  and  were  descendants  of  the  Norsemen 
there,  in  which  case  their  resemblance  to  Englishmen  is 
most   naturally   explained. 

On  December  9  (18,  N.S.),  1502,  Henry  VII.  again  granted 
letters  patent  to  Thomas  Ashehurst,  Joam  Gonzales,  Francisco 


North-western  portion  of  Robert  Thome's  map,  o£  1527  (copy 
of  a  Spanish  map  of  the  world) 

Fernandes,  and  Hugh  Eliot  for  a  voyage  of  discovery  to 
parts  not  hitherto  found  by  English  subjects.  That  this 
projected  expedition  took  place  in  1503  is  possibly  shown  by 
an  entry  in  the  accounts  of  the  King's  privy  purse:  "1503, 
Nov.  17.  To  one  that  brought  hawkes  from  the  Newfounded 
Island,  i.L."  [cf.  Harrisse,  1882,  p.  270]. 

It  seems  that  it  must  be  the  same  voyage  to  the  north- 
west that  is  mentioned  by  Robert  Thome  of  Bristol  in  his 
letter  of  1527  to  Henry  VIII.'s  Ambassador  in  Spain.  Thorne 
was  then  living  in  Seville,  and  was  interested  in  Indian  enter- 
prises. He  tries  to  induce  Henry  VIII.  to  send  an  expedition 
to  the  Indies  by  way  of  the  Polar  Sea,  and  sends  with  his  project 
a  rough  copy  he  has  had  made  of  a  Spanish  mappamundi. 
He  says  that  he  has  inherited  the  "  inclination  or  desire  of 
this   discoverie "   from  his 

"father,  which  with  another  marchant  of  Bristow  named  Hugh  Eliot,  were 
334 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

the  discoverers  of  the  New  found  lands,  of  the  which  there  is  no  doubt, 
(as  nowe  plainely  appeareth)  if  the  mariners  would  then  have  been  ruled, 
and  followed  their  Pilots  minde,  the  lands  of  the  West  Indies  (from  whence 
all  the  gold  commeth)  has  bene  ours.  For  all  is  one  coast,  as  by  the  Carde 
appeareth,  and  is  aforesayd." 

On  the  map  the  northern  east  coast  of  America  extends 
uninterruptedly  to  the  north  (see  the  reproduction,  p.  334),  and 
upon  it  is  written :  "  the  new  land  called  laboratorum,"  and  along 
the  coast  there  is,  "  the  land  that  was  first  discovered  by 
the  English."  It  might  appear  as  though  it  was  really  the 
present  Labrador  that  was  then  discovered;  but  this  is  hardly 
the  case;  what  we  see  on  the  map  is  probably  Greenland,^ 
which  is  here  moved  over  to  America  as  on  other  Spanish 
maps,  and  the  east  coast  of  which  is  given  a  northerly  direction, 
as  on  Ruysch's  map  of  1508. 

It  is  possible  that  another  expedition  set  out  in  1504; 
for  in  the  accounts  of  the  King's  privy  purse  we  find  an  entry 
on  April  8,  1504,  of  £2  "to  a  preste  that  goeth  to  the  new 
Islande."  We  see  thus  that  there  is  a  probability  of  many 
expeditions  having  left  England  for  the  west  and  north-west 
at  this  time,  and  that  thus  Greenland,  Newfoundland,  and 
doubtless,  also,  Labrador  had  been  reached  by  the  English; 
and  this  would  explain  their  being  recorded  on  Spanish  maps 
as  discoverers  of  the  northern  part  of  the  east  coast  of  America. 
But  we  have  no  further  information  about  these  voyages. 

Just  as  we  have  seen  that  the  note  on  Robert  Thorne*s 
map  of  1527  (that  the  English  had  discovered  the  northern 
part  of  the  east  coast  of  America)  must  probably  refer  to 
the  expedition  of  1501  or  to  one  in  the  following  year,  so  it 
is  doubtless  discoveries  of  the  same  voyages  that  are  alluded 
to  on  Maggiolo's  compass-chart  of  151 1  (see  reproduction, 
P'  359)  >  where  a  peninsula  to  the  north  of  Labrador  is  marked 
as  "  Terra  de  los  Ingres  "  ("  the  land  of  the  English  ").  On  later 
maps,  such  as  Verrazano's  of  1529,  Ribero's  of  1529  (see 
reproduction,    p.    357),    the    Wolfenbuttel    map    of    1530,    and 

1  Greenland  is  represented  on  the  map  conformably  to  the  type  that  was 
introduced  on  some  mappemundi  after  Clavus's  map  (cf.  p.  278). 

335 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

others,  Labrador  is  marked  as  having  been  discovered  by  the 
English,  sometimes,  indeed,  with  the  addition  that  they  came 
from  Bristol.  As  already  mentioned,  no  hint  is  to  be  found  in 
trustworthy  documents  of  Sebastian  Cabot's  having  taken 
part  in  these  expeditions  or  having  been  in  any  way  connected 
with  them,  and  there  is  therefore  no  ground  for  assuming  this. 
And  the  remarkable  thing  is  that  even  his  father's  name  is 
not  mentioned  in  connection  with  them,  though  it  was  so  few 
years  since  he  had  sailed  from  the  same  port. 

We  find,  however,  in  various  works  of  the  sixteenth  century 
records  of  voyages  to  northern  or  north-western  waters, 
supposed  to  have  been  made  by  Sebastian  Cabot;  which  may 
be  due,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  himself.  Formerly  there  was 
a  tendency  to  connect  these  statements  with  John  Cabot's, 
voyages  of  1497  and  1498  [cf.  Harrisse],  but  this  assumption 
seems  to  have  little  probability.  G.  P.  Winship  [1899, 
pp.  204  f.],  on  the  other  hand,  has  pointed  out  with  good 
reason  that  according  to  Sebastian  Cabot's  own  words  the 
voyage  was  undertaken  by  himself  in  the  years  1508-9;  but 
even  this  appears  to  me  uncertain;  in  any  case  I  doubt  that 
he  reached  America. 

We  hear  of  a  voyage  to  the  north-west  said  to  have  been 
undertaken  by  Sebastian  Cabot  from  Peter  Martyr  (in  his 
"Decades,"  1516),  from  the  Venetian  Minister  to  Spain,  Con- 
tarini,  especially  in  a  report  to  the  Venetian  Senate  in  1536,  from 
Ramusio  (1550-54  and  1556),  from  Gomara  (1553),  and  from 
Antonio  Galvano  (1563),^ 

We  may  expect  the  most  trustworthy  of  these  authorities 
to  be  Peter  Martyr,  who  was  the  oldest,  and  who  knew 
Sebastian  Cabot  personally;  but  certain  main  features  of 
the  voyage  are  to  some  extent  common  to  all  the  accounts. 
If  we  compare  these,  the  voyage  is  said  to  have  taken  place 
somewhat  in  the  following  manner:  the  expedition,  consisting 

1  As  to  the  works  of  these  authors,  see  Winship  (1900).  Markham  (1893) 
reproduces  them  (except  Contarini's  report  of  1536)  in  translations,  which, 
however,  must  be  used  with  some  caution. 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

of  two  ships  with  three  hundred  men/  was,  according  to  Peter 
Martyr,  fitted  out  at  Sebastian's  own  cost,  but,  according  to 
Ramusio,  it  was  sent  out  by  the  King.  They  sailed  so  far  to  the 
north  (according  to  Gomara,  even  in  the  direction  of  Iceland) 
that  in  the  month  of  July  they  found  enormous  masses  of  ice 
floating  on  the  sea;  daylight  was  almost  continuous,  and 
the  land  was  in  places  free  of  ice  which  had  melted  away. 
According  to  the  various  accounts  Cabot  is  said  to  have  reached 
55°,  56°,  58°,  or  6o°.2 

According  to  Galvano  they  first  "  sighted  land  in  45°  N,  lat.  and  then  sailed 
straight  to  the  north  until  they  came  to  60°  N.  lat.,  where  the  day  is  eighteen 
hours  long-  [sic],  and  the  night  is  very  clear  and  light.  There  they  found  the 
air  cold  and  great  islands  of  ice  [icebergs?]  but  no  bottom  with  soundings  of 
seventy,  eighty,  or  one  hundred  fathoms,^  but  they  found  much  ice  which 
terrified  them." 

When,  according  to  Peter  Martyr,  their  hopes  of  making 
their  way  to  the  west  in  these  northern  latitudes  were  thus 
annihilated  by  the  ice,  they  sailed  back  to  the  south  and 
south-west  along  the  North  American  coast,  as  far  as  the 
latitude  of  Gibraltar,  36°  (according  to  Peter  Martyr),  or  to 
38°  (according  to  Gomara  and  Galvano),  while  according  to 
Ramusio's  anonymous  informant  they  sailed  as  far  as  Florida.^ 
From  thence  the  expedition  returned  to  England. 

With  regard  to  the  date  of  this  voyage,  we  are  told  in 
the  continuation  of  Peter  Martyr's  "  Decades,"  (Dec.  vii)  written 
in  1524  (published  1530),  that  "  Bacchalaos  [i.e.,  Newfound- 
land, or  the  northern  east  coast  of  America]   was  discovered 

1  These  two  ships  and  the  three  hundred  men  occur  in  Peter  Martyr  and 
Contarini,  as  well  as  in  Gomara  and  Galvano;  while  Ramusio  only  has  two 
ships  and  says  nothing  about  the  crews. 

2  In  Peter  Martyr's  original  account  no  latitude  is  given. 

3  The  meaning  must  be  that  these  islands  of  ice  were  aground,  but  that 
nevertheless  a  line  of  one  hundred  fathoms  did  not  reach  the  bottom.  The 
ice  must  consequently  have  been  over  one  hundred  fathoms  thick,  which,  of 
course,  was  a  remarkable  discovery  at  that  time. 

*  This  was  the  name  at  that  time  (1550)  for  the  whole  south-eastern  part 
of  the  present  United  States. 

337 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

from  England  by  Cabot  sixteen  years  ago."  According  to 
this  the  voyage  took  place  in  1508.  In  Contarini's  report 
of  1536  [cf.  Winship,  1900,  p.  36]  it  is  said  of  Sebastian  Cabot's 
voyage  that  on  his  return  he  "found  the  King  dead,  and  his 
son  cared  little  for  such  an  enterprise."  As  Henry  VII.  died 
on  April  21,  1509,  it  would  be  during  the  autumn  of  that 
year  that  Cabot  returned;  but  then  he  must  have  sailed 
before  April,  v^^hich  is  unlikely,  at  any  rate  if  it  is  a  question 
of  a  voyage  up  into  the  ice  to  the  north  or  north-west,  such 
as  is  described.  That  he  should  have  sailed  in  the  previous 
year  and  not  returned  until  after  the  King's  death  is  still  more 
improbable. 

These  accounts  contain  so  many  improbabilities,  and  to 
some  extent  impossibilities,  that  it  is  on  the  whole  extremely 
doubtful  whether  Sebastian  Cabot  ever  made  such  a  voyage 
to  the  north-west.  That  he  did  so  is  contradicted  in  the 
first  place  by  the  already  quoted  protest  against  Sebastian  of 
the  Wardens  of  the  Drapers'  Company,  which  was  issued  in 
the  name  of  the  various  Livery  Companies  of  London,  and 
which  is  of  great  significance,  as  it  was  written  so  soon  after 
the  events  are  supposed  to  have  taken  place  that  they  must 
have  been  in  the  memory  of  most  people;  and  it  must  have 
been  easy  for  the  King  to  inquire  into  the  justification  of  the 
protest  (cf.  above,  p.  330). 

The  map  of  1544,  which  is  attributed  to  the  collaboration 
of  Sebastian  Cabot,  may  also  point  to  his  having  never  sailed 
along  the  northern  part  of  the  coast  of  America,  since,  according 
to  the  custom  of  that  time,  the  coast  of  Labrador  is  made 
to  run  to  the  east  and  north-east.  This  agrees  with  the  state- 
ment of  Ramusio's  anonymous  informant,  that  Sebastian  had 
to  turn  back  because  in  56°  N.  lat.  he  found  the  land  turning 
eastward  (Galvano  says  the  same).  This  is  evidently  derived 
from  the  study  of  maps.  As  such  a  delineation  of  the  coast 
had  not  yet  occurred  on  maps  of  Peter  Martyr's  time,  it  is  natural 
that  this  reason  for  turning  back  is  also  absent  from  his 
account. 
338 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

In  addition  to  all  this,  there  are  in  the  various  accounts 
several  statements  v^^hich  we  must  suppose  to  be  really  derived 
from  Sebastian  Cabot,  but  which  are  evidently  untruthful. 
Thus,  Ramusio's  anonymous  guest  attributes  to  Sebastian  the 
words  that  his  father  was  dead  when  the  news  of  the  discovery 
of  Columbus  reached  England,  and  that  it  was  then  Sebastian 
conceived  the  plan  of  his  voyage  which  he  submitted  to  the 
King.  That,  as  stated  by  Peter  Martyr,  he  should  have  fitted 
out  two  ships  with  crews  of  three  hundred  men  at  his  own 
expense,  is  extremely  improbable.  He  is  also  reported  to 
have  told  Peter  Martyr  that  he 

"  called  these  countries  '  Bacallaos,'  because  in  the  seas  about  there  he  found 
such  great  quantities  of  certain  large  fish — which  might  be  compared  to  tunny 
[in  size],  and  were  thus  called  by  the  inhabitants — that  sometimes  they 
stopped  his  ships." 

These  are  nothing  but  impossibilities.  In  the  first  place, 
he  never  gave  the  name  of  "  Bacallaos " ;  in  the  second,  the 
inhabitants  cannot  have  called  the  fish  so,  if  by  inhabitants 
is  meant  the  native  savages.  These  statements  are,  therefore, 
of  the  same  kind  as  that  of  the  masses  of  fish  stopping  the  ships. 
Peter  Martyr  further  relates  that  he  said  of  these  regions 
that 

"  he  also  found  people  in  these  parts,  clad  in  skins  of  animals,  yet  not  without 
the  use  of  reason."  He  says  also  that  "  there  are  a  great  number  of  bears  in 
these  parts,  which  are  in  the  habit  of  eating  fish;  for,  plunging  into  the  water 
where  they  see  quantities  of  these  fish,  they  fasten  their  claws  into  their 
scales,  and  thus  draw  them  to  land  and  eat  them,  so  that  [as  he  says]  the  bears 
are  not  troublesome  to  men,  when  they  have  eaten  their  fill  of  fish.  He  de- 
clares also  that  in  many  places  of  these  regions  he  saw  great  quantities  of 
copper  among  the  inhabitants." 

The  Statement  about  the  bears  may  come  from  older 
literary  sources,  and  resembles  a  similar  statement  in  the 
"  Geographia  Universalis  "  (see  above,  p.  191).  That  the  inhabi- 
tants have  copper  and  are  clad  in  skins  may  be  derived  from 
reports  of  the  various  voyages. 

From  what  we  have  been  able  to  conclude  as  to  Sebastian 
Cabot's  character,  it  seems  reasonable  to  suppose  that,  in 
consequence  of  his  position  as  "pilot  major"  in  Spain,  he  was 

339 


IN   NORTHERN    MISTS 

acquainted  with  the  various  maps  and  accounts  of  voyages  in 
western  and  north-western  waters,  and  that  from  this  knowledge 
he  constructed  the  whole  story  of  his  alleged  voyage;  he  was 
then  incautious  enough  to  magnify  his  exploits  to  such  an 
extent  that  he  made  the  whole  story  improbable;  for  his 
claim  was  nothing  less  than  that  he  had  first  discovered  land 
as  far  north  as  between  55°  and  60°,  that  is  to  say,  to  about 
Hudson  Strait,  and  then  sailed  along  and  discovered  the  whole 
coast  of  North  America  to  about  36°  N.  lat.,  that  is,  to  Cape 
Hatteras  or  even  Florida ;  in  other  words,  a  voyage  of  discovery 
to  which  we  have  no  parallel  in  history,  and  it  is  truly  remark- 
able that  we  should  have  had  no  certain  information  about  it, 
while  we  have  so  much  about  other  expeditions  which  step 
by  step  discovered  the  various  parts  of  this  same  extent  of 
coast. 

Sebastian  Cabot  seems  to  have  laid  claim  to  having  made 
yet  another  voyage  in  north-western  waters,  unless,  indeed, 
it  is  the  same  one  again  with  variations.  In  the  third  volume 
of  his  "  Navigationi  et  Viaggi,"  etc.,  published  at  Venice, 
1556,  Ramusio  says  (writing  in  Venice,  June,  1553)  that 

"  Sebastian  Gabotto,  our  Venetian,  a  man  of  great  experience,  etc.,  wrote 
to  me  many  years  ago."  Sebastian  is  said  to  have  sailed  "  along  and  beyond 
the  land  of  New  France,  at  the  charges  of  Henry  VII.,  King  of  England.  He 
told  me  that  after  having  sailed  a  long  time  west  by  north  [ponente  e  quarta 
di  Maestro]  beyond  these  islands,  lying  along  the  said  land,  as  far  as  to  sixty- 
seven  and  a  half  degrees  under  our  pole  [i.e.,  the  North  Pole],  and  on  June 
II,  [20,  N.S.]  finding  the  sea  still  open  and  without  any  kind  of  impediment, 
he  thought  surely  by  that  way  to  be  able  to  sail  at  once  to  Cataio  Orientale 
[China],  if  the  mutiny  [malignita]  of  the  master  and  mariners  had  not  com- 
pelled him  to  return."  ^ 

As  will  be  seen,  this  statement  is  altogether  different  from 
those  previously  mentioned;  but  such  assertions  as  that  Cabot 
had  got  so  far  to  the  north-west  by  June  11,  and  found  the  sea 

1  Cf.  Winship,  1900,  p.  89.  Sir  Humphrey  Gilbert  in  1576  repeats  the  same 
statement  almost  word  for  word,  saying  that  he  has  taken  it  from  maps,  on 
which  Sebastian  Cabot  had  described  "  from  personal  experience  "  the  north- 
west passage  to  China  [cf.  V/inship,  1900,  pp.  17,  52;  Kohl,  1869,  p.  217]. 


JOHN    CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

free  of  ice  in  67°  N.  lat.,  are  not  of  a  kind  to  strengthen  our 
confidence.  It  might  seem  to  be  the  same  voyage  that  is 
referred  to  in  a  statement  of  Richard  Eden,  which  he  may  have 
had  from  Sebastian  Cabot  himself.  In  the  dedication  (written 
in  June,  1553)  of  Eden's  translation  of  the  fifth  part  of  Sebastian 
Munster's  "  Cosmographia  "  we  read  that 

"Kinge  Henry  the  viij.  about  the  same  yere  [i.e.,  the  eighth  year]  of  his 
raygne,  furnished  and  sent  forth  certen  shippes  vnder  the  gouernaunce  of 
Sebastian  Cabot  yet  liuing,  and  one  Syr  Thomas  Perte,  whose  faynt  heart 
was  the  cause  that  that  viage  toke  none  effect;  yf  [I  say]  such  manly  courage 
whereof  we  haue  spoken,  had  not  at  that  tyme  bene  wanting,  it  myghte 
happelye  haue  comen  to  passe,  that  that  riche  treasurye  called  Perularia> 
[which  is  now  in  Spayne  in  the  citie  of  Ciuile,  and  so  named,  for  that  in  it  is 
kepte  the  infinite  ryches  brought  thither  from  the  newe  found  land  of  Peru] 
myght  longe  since  haue  bene  in  the  towne  of  London."  ^ 

As  Peru  is  mentioned,  it  might  doubtless  appear  as  though 
a  voyage  to  South  America  were  in  question;  but  we  often 
see  that  the  western  countries  beyond  the  sea  were  spoken  of 
as  a  continuous  possession  (cf.  Robert  Thome's  letter,  above, 
p.  334),  and  it  may  therefore  refer  to  the  same  alleged  expe- 
dition as  is  spoken  of  by  Ramusio;  for  both  Ramusio  and 
Eden  have  evidently  the  same  statements  from  Sebastian 
Cabot,  and  the  latter  can  hardly  have  spoken  of  two  expeditions 
which  were  both  unsuccessful  merely  because  his  companions 
failed  him. 

If  this  is  correct,  the  voyage  took  place  in  the  eighth  year 
of  Henry  VIII.'s  reign,  i.e.,  April  16,  1516,  to  April  15,  1517;^ 
but,  as  Harrisse  contends,  it  is  very  doubtful  whether  the 
voyage  was  made  at  all.  It  is  true  that  a  poem  of  Henry  VIII.'s 
time  also  speaks  of  an  English  expedition  which  may  have 
taken  place  at  this  time,  and  which  failed  on  account  of  the 
cowardice  of  the  crew.  Robert  Thorne,  too,  as  we  have  seen 
(P-  335)  >  tells  of  a  voyage  made  by  his  father  and  Hugh  Eliot, 

1  Cf.  Harrisse,  1896,  pp.  159  f.;  Winship,  1900,  p.  44. 

2  We  must  then  suppose  that  "  Henry  VII."  in  Ramusio  is  an  error  for 
"  Henry  VIII." 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

on  which  the  sailors  would  not  "  follow  their  pilot's  mind." 
It  may,  indeed,  have  occurred  on  several  voyages  that  the 
crews  refused  to  proceed  farther,  and  for  that  matter  these 
statements  need  not  refer  to  the  same  voyage;  but  at  the  same 
time  it  is  by  no  means  incredible  that  Sebastian  Cabot  may 
have  heard  of  such  an  expedition,  and,  when  it  was  more 
appropriate  than  the  ice,  used  it  as  an  explanation  of  his  not 
having  discovered  the  north-west  passage  to  China.  We 
know  that  Sebastian  Cabot  was  in  the  service  of  Spain 
(and  appointed  "pilot  major")  in  151 5,  and  that  he  was 
occupied  with  plans  of  a  voyage  to  the  north-west  for  the  King 
of  Spain;  for  Peter  Martyr  writes  of  him  in  that  year  that  he 
was  impatiently  looking  forward  to  March,  1516,  when  he  had 
been  promised  a  fleet  with  which  to  complete  his  discoveries 
[cf.  Winship,  1900,  p.  71].  As  Ferdinand  of  Aragon  died  on 
January  23,  15 16,  nothing  came  of  this  voyage,  and  as  we 
hear  nothing  of  Sebastian  Cabot  before  February  5,  15 18, 
when  he  was  appointed  "pilot  major"  by  Charles  V.,  it  is  not 
impossible  that  in  the  meantime  he  may  have  been  in  England, 
and  have  taken  part  in  an  English  expedition;  but  no  record 
of  his  having  come  to  England  is  extant,  and  it  would  hardly 
agree  with  the  protest  against  him  of  the  Drapers'  Company 
a  few  years  later. 

There  may  yet  be  mentioned  the  attempts  made  by 
Henry  VIII.  in  1521  to  prepare  an  expedition  to  north-western 
waters  under  the  command  of  Sebastian  Cabot,  chiefly  at 
the  expense  of  the  merchants  of  London,  which,  however, 
evoked  a  powerful  protest  against  Sebastian  on  the  part 
of  these  merchants  (see  above,  p.  330).  It  is  true  that,  upon 
pressure  from  the  king,  they  afterwards  declared  themselves 
willing  to  give  a  smaller  sum,  but  the  expedition  never  came 
to  anything.  Sebastian  Cabot  was  at  that  time,  as  he  had 
been  since  151 2,  in  the  service  of  Spain,  and  he  remained 
so  until,  in  1547,  he  again  took  up  his  abode  in  England  and 
entered  the  service  of  the  English  king.  In  December  1522 
Sebastian  Cabot  informed  the  Venetian  Minister  in  Spain, 
342 


JOHN   CABOT'S   VOYAGES 

Contarini,  that  he  had  been  in  England  three  years  before 
(i.e.,  in  15 19),  and  that  the  cardinal  there  (i.e.,  Wolsey,  who 
was  trying  on  behalf  of  Henry  VIII.  to  get  together  the  expe- 
dition of  1 521)  had  endeavored  to  persuade  him  to  undertake 
the  command  of  a  fleet  which  was  almost  ready  (sic!)  for  the 
discovery  of  new  lands;  but  he  had  replied  that,  as  he  was 
in  the  service  of  Spain,  he  must  first  obtain  the  permission  o£ 
the  emperor;  and  that  he  had  then  written  to  the  emperor, 
requesting  him  not  to  grant  such  permission,  but  to  recall 
him.  This  Sebastian  asserted  that  he  had  done  on  account  of 
his  desire  of  serving  his  own  city  of  Venice;  for,  in  1522,  and 
later  he  was  carrying  on  treacherous  intrigues  with  Contarini 
to  enter  the  Venetian  service,  presumably  with  the  hope  of  a 
high  salary.  Thus,  wherever  we  are  able  to  check  Sebastian 
Cabot's  utterances,  they  prove  to  be  extremely  untrustworthy. 
Even,  if,  therefore,  there  was  no  lack  of  attempts  after 
1500  to  follow  up  John  Cabot's  great  and  important  discoveries 
in  the  west,  it  is  nevertheless  surprising  how  little  persistence 
seems  to  have  been  shown.  The  love  of  discovery  and  adven- 
ture which  had  been  so  prominent  a  feature  of  the  Northern 
viking  nature  had  not  yet  awakened  in  earnest  among  the  Eng- 
lish people.  England's  mercantile  marine  was  at  that  time  still 
comparatively  unimportant,  it  had  not  the  strength  for  such 
great  enterprises  or  for  colonization.  The  earliest  voyages 
were  mainly  the  work  of  a  foreigner,  an  Italian,  and  the 
later  ones  were  in  part  undertaken  by  Portuguese;  they  did 
not  grow  naturally  from  the  English  people  themselves. 
Cabot's  plan  was  like  an  exotic  flower  springing  up  in 
untilled  soil,  and  more  than  half  a  century  before  its  time. 
Another  factor  was  doubtless  the  disappointment  of  the 
king  and  of  the  merchants;  they  had  ventured  their  money 
in  fitting  out  ships  in  the  hope  of  immediate  profit.  What 
they  were  looking  for  was  the  way  to  the  rich  east  of  Asia, 
where  mountains  of  spices  lay  ready  to  hand,  and  gold  and 
precious  stones  in  heaps,  only  waiting  to  be  picked  up.  What 
they    found    was    nothing    but    new,    unknown    countries    on 

343 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

the  ocean,  inhabited  by  wandering  tribes  of  hunters,  countries 
the  opening  up  of  which  demanded  much  time  and  labor. 
All  this  had  scarcely  more  than  a  geographical  interest  for 
the  time  being,  and  for  that  they  cared  little. 


344 


CHAPTER   XV 

THE   PORTUGUESE    DISCOVERIES    IN   THE 
NORTH-WEST 

VOYAGES  OF  THE  BROTHERS  CORTEREAL 

THE  Portuguese,  who  in  the  fifteenth  century  were  the 
most  enterprising  of  seafaring  peoples  as  regards 
discoveries,  had,  as  already  stated,  made  various  attempts  to 
find  new  countries  out  in  the  ocean  to  the  west  of  the  Azores, 
from  which  islands  the  majority  of  the  expeditions  proceeded. 
It  was  therefore  to  be  expected  that  the  important  discoveries 
of  Columbus  should  encourage  them  to  fresh  attempts  of  this 
kind;  it  was  also  natural  that  such  enterprises  should  originate 
especially  in  the  Azores.  From  what  has  been  stated  above 
(p.  128),  it  appears  that  the  King  of  Portugal  (Alfonso  V.) 
induced  Christiern  I.  to  send  out  expeditions  (Pining  and 
Pothorst)  to  search  for  new  islands  and  lands  in  the  North. 
It  seems  probable  that  the  King  of  Portugal  was  informed 
of  the  results  of  these  expeditions,  and  that  in  this  way  the 
Portuguese  may  have  known  of  the  existence  of  Greenland 
or  of  countries  in  the  north-west.  In  the  same  way,  as  we 
have  seen  (p.  132,  note  2),  the  fact  that  the  earliest  literary 

345 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

allusions  to  Scolvus  seem  to  be  derived  from  Portugal  may  be 
explained. 

Possible  Portuguese  enterprises  in  the  western  regions  were 
barred  by  the  claim  of  the  Spanish  crown  to  the  dominion  over 
all  lands  to  the  west  of  a  certain  boundary,  and  in  the  final 
treaty  of  Tordesilhas,  June  7,  1494,  between  Portugal  and 
Spain,  this  boundary  was  fixed  by  the  Pope  at  370  leagues  (about 
1200  geographical  miles)  to  the  west  of  the  Cape  Verde  Islands, 
and  it  was  to  follow  the  meridian  from  pole  to  pole.  All  that 
lay  to  the  west  of  this  meridian  was  to  belong  to  Spain,  while 
Portugal  had  the  right  to  take  advantage  of  all  lands  to  the 
east.  Thereby  the  Portuguese  were  debarred  from  the  search 
for  India  and  China  to  the  west.  These  enterprising  sea- 
farers must,  therefore,  have  had  every  reason  to  find  out  whether 
there  were  any  countries  on  their  side  of  the  boundary  line, 
and  it  may  be  supposed  that  their  attention  would  naturally 
be  drawn  in  the  direction  of  the  north-western  lands  (Greenland) 
of  which  they  had  already  heard. 

And,  in  fact,  such  voyages  were  undertaken  from  Portugal 
(and  the  Azores?)  about  1500;  but  the  accounts  of  them 
are  meager  and  casual,  and  have  been  interpreted  in  very  dif- 
ferent ways. 

In  order  to  enable  one  to  form  as  unbiased  a  view  as  possi- 
ble of  these  voyages,  it  will  be  necessary  to  begin  by  reviewing 
the  most  important  contemporary  documents  which  may  contain 
statements  of  value;  and  afterwards  to  summarize  what  may  be 
concluded  from  these  documents. 

On  October  28,  1499,  King  Manuel  of  Portugal  issued  at  Lis- 
bon to  Joao  Fernandez  letters  patent  (preserved  in  the  Portu- 
guese State  archives,  Torre  do  Tombo)  for  discoveries,  evidently 
in  the  north-west,  in  which  it  is  said : 

"We  [the  King]  make  known  to  all  who  may  see  this  our  letter,  that 
Joham  Fernamdez  [now  written  Joao  Fernandez]  domiciled  in  our  island  of 
Terceira  [Azores]  has  told  us  that  he,  in  God's  and  our  service,  will  work  and 
travel  and  try  to  discover  certain  islands  of  [for?]  our  conquest  at  his  own 
cost,  and  we  seeing  his  good  will  and  purpose,  promise  him  and  hereby  give 
him  de  facto— in  addition  to  taking  him  into  our  service— the  mark  of  our 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

favor  and  the  privilege  of  Governor  over  every  island  or  islands,  both  in- 
habited and  uninhabited,  that  he  may  discover  and  find  for  the  first  time,  and 
this  with  such  revenues  [taxes],  dignities,  profits,  and  interests  as  we  have 
given  to  the  Governors  of  the  islands  of  Madeira  and  others,  and  for  this  ob- 
servance and  our  remembrance  we  command  that  this  letter  be  given  him, 
signed  by  us  and  sealed  with  our  attached  seal."  i 

On  May  12,  1500,  King  Manuel  granted  to  Caspar  Cortereal 
letters  patent,  as  follows: 

"  We  [i.e.,  the  King]  make  known  to  all  who  may  see  this  deed  of  gift,  that 
forasmuch  as  Gaspar  Cortereall,  a  nobleman  of  our  household,  has  in  times 
past  made  great  endeavors  at  his  own  charges  for  ships  and  men,  employing 
his  own  fortune  and  at  his  personal  danger,  to  search  for  and  discover  and 
find  certain  islands  and  mainland,  and  in  future  will  still  continue  to  carry  this 
into  effect,  and  in  this  way  will  do  all  that  he  can  to  find  the  said  islands  and 
lands,  and  bearing  in  mind  how  much  he  deserves  honor  and  favor  and  pro- 
motion in  our  service,  to  our  honor,  and  to  the  extension  of  our  realms  and 
dominions  through  such  islands  and  lands  being  discovered  and  found  by  our 
natives  [i.e.,  Portuguese],  and  through  the  said  Gaspar  Cortereall  thus  per- 
forming so  much  labor,  and  exposing  himself  to  so  great  danger;  we  are  there- 
fore pleased  to  decree  that,  if  he  discovers  and  finds  any  island,  or  islands,  or 
mainland,  he  be  granted,  by  our  own  consent  and  royal  and  absolute  power, 
the  concession  and  gift,  with  the  privilege  of  Governor  and  its  attendant 
rights,  etc.  .  .  .  over  whatsoever  islands  or  mainland  he  may  thus  find  and 
discover,  etc.  .  .  .  and  we  decree  that  he  and  his  heirs  in  our  name  and  in 
the  name  of  our  successors  shall  hold  and  govern  those  lands  or  islands,  which 
are  thus  found,  freely  and  without  any  restriction,  as  has  been  said.  .  ,  , 
The  said  Gaspar  Cortereall  and  his  heirs  shall  have  one  quarter  free  of  all 
that  they  can  thus  obtain  [i.e.,  realize]  in  the  said  islands  and  lands  at  what 
time  soever.    .   .   ."  [Cf.  Harisse,  1883,  pp.  196  f.]. 

An  order  is  preserved,  dated  April  15,  1501,  from  King 
Manuel  to  the  master  of  the  bakehouse  at  the  city  gate  of 
La  Cruz  to  deliver  biscuits  to  Gaspar  Cortereal,  and  further, 
a  receipt  of  April  21,  1501,  for  the  biscuits,  signed  by  Gaspar 
Cortereal  himself,  proving  that  the  latter  was  in  Portugal  on 
that  date.2 

Pietro  Pasqualigo,  the  Venetian  Minister  at  Lisbon,  wrote  as 
follows  to  the  Council  at  Venice  on  October  18,  1501 : 

"  On  the  gth  of  this  month  there  arrived  here  one  of  the  two  caravels  which 
the  said  King's  majesty  sent  last  year  to  discover  lands  in  the  direction  of  the 
northern  regions  [verso  le  parte  de  tramontana],  and  they  have  brought  seven 

1  Cf.  Harrisse,  1883,  p.  44. 

2  Cf.  Harrisse,  1883,  Supplement  post  scriptum,  pp.  6  f. 

347 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

men,  women,  and!  children  from  the  country  discovered,  which  is  in  the  north- 
west and  west,  1800  miglia  distant  from  here.  These  men  resemble  gypsies  in 
appearance,  build,  and  stature.  They  have  their  faces  marked  in  different 
places,  some  with  more,  others  with  fewer  figures.  They  are  clad  in  the  skins 
of  various  animals,  but  chiefly  of  otter;  their  speech  is  entirely  different  from 
any  other  that  has  ever  been  heard  in  this  kingdom,  and  no  one  understands  it. 
Their  limbs  are  very  shapely,  and  they  have  very  gentle  faces,  but  their  man- 
ners and  gestures  are  bestial,  and  like  those  of  savage  men.  The  crew  of  the 
caravel  believe  that  the  land  alluded  to  is  mainland,  and  that  it  is  joined  to  the 
other  land  which  was  discovered  last  year  in  the  north  by  the  other  caravels 
belonging  to  this  majesty,  but  they  were  unable  to  reach  it,  for  the  sea  was 
frozen  over  with  the  great  masses  of  snow,  so  that  it  rose  up  like  land.  They 
also  thought  that  it  was  connected  with  the  Andil'ii  [Antilles],  which  were  dis- 
covered by  the  sovereign  of  Spain,  and  with  the  land  of  Papaga  [Brazil], 
newly  found  by  a  ship  belonging  to  this  king,  on  her  way  to  Calcutta.  The 
grounds  for  this  belief  are,  in  the  first  place,  that  after  having  sailed  along 
the  coast  of  the  said  land  for  a  distance  of  six  hundred  miglia  and  more,  they 
found  no  end  to  it;  and  further  because  they  say  they  found  many  very  great 
rivers  which  there  fell  into  the  sea.  The  second  caravel,  that  of  the  com- 
mander [caravella  capitania],  is  expected  from  day  to  day,  and  from  it  the 
nature  and  condition  of  the  aforesaid  land  will  be  clearly  understood,  since  it 
went  farther  along  the  coast  in  order  to  discover  as  much  of  it  as  possible. 
This  royal  majesty  has  been  much  rejoiced  by  this  news,  for  he  thinks  that  this 
land  will  be  very  profitable  for  his  affairs  in  many  respects,  but  especially  be- 
cause it  is  so  near  to  this  kingdom  that  it  will  be  easy  to  obtain  in  a  short 
time  a  very  great  quantity  of  timber  for  making  ships'  masts  and  yards  of,  and 
to  get  a  sufficient  supply  of  male  slaves  for  all  kinds  of  labor,  for  they  say 
that  that  country  has  many  inhabitants,  and  is  full  of  pine  trees  and  other  ex- 
cellent wood.  The  news  in  question  has  rejoiced  his  majesty  so  much  that  he 
has  given  orders  that  the  ships  are  to  sail  to  the  said  place,  and  for  the  in- 
crease of  his  Indian  fleet,  in  order  to  conquer  it  more  quickly,  as  soon  as  it  is 
discovered;  for  it  seems  that  God  is  with  his  majesty  in  his  undertakings,  and 
brings  all  his  plans  to  accomplishment."     [Cf.  Harrisse,  1883,  pp.  209  f.]. 

On  October  19,  1501,  Pietro  Pasqualigo  writes  to  his  brothers 
at  Venice : 

"  On  the  8th  of  this  month  there  arrived  here  one  of  the  two  caravels  which 
this  most  serene  majesty  sent  last  year  to  discover  lands  in  the  north  under 
Captain  Caspar  Corterat;  and  they  state  that  they  found  land  two  thousand 
miglia  from  here  between  north-west  and  west,  which  before  was  not  known 
to  anyone;  along  the  coast  of  this  land  they  sailed  perhaps  six  hundred  or 
seven  hundred  miglia  without  finding  an  end  to  it;  therefore  they  believe  that 
it  is  a  continent  which  is  continuous  with  another  land  that  was  discovered 
last  year  in  the  north  [by  some  other  caravels],  which  caravels  could  not  reach 
the  end  of  it,  because  the  sea  was  frozen  and  there  was  an  infinite  quantity  of 
snow.     They  believed  it  also  on  account  of  the  great  number  of  rivers  that 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

they  found  there,  and  that  certainly  would  not  be  so  numerous  or  so  large  on 
an  island.  They  say  that  this  land  has  many  inhabitants,  and  that  their  houses 
are  made  of  great  wooden  poles,  which  are  covered  on  the  outside  with  skins 
of  fish  [i.e.,  seals?].  They  have  brought  seven  men,  women,  and  children  from 
thence  and  fifty  more  are  coming  in  another  caravel,  which  is  hourly  expected. 
These  are  of  similar  color,  build,  stature,  and  appearance  to  gypsies,  clad  in 
skins  of  various  animals,  but  mostly  otter;  in  the  summer  they  turn  the  skin 
in,  in  winter  the  reverse.  And  these  skins  are  not  sewed  together  in  any  way, 
and  not  prepared,  but  they  are  thrown  over  the  shoulders  and  arms  just  as 
they  are  taken  off  the  animals.  The  loins  are  fastened  together  with  strings 
made  of  very  strong  fish-sinews.  Although  they  seem  to  be  savages,  they  are 
modest  and  gentle,  but  their  arms,  legs,  and  shoulders  are  indescribably  well 
shaped;  they  have  the  face  marked  [tattooed]  in  the  Indian  fashion,  some  with 
six,  some  with  eight,  and  some  with  no  figures  [lines?].  They  speak,  but  are 
understood  by  no  one;  I  believe  they  have  been  addressed  in  every  possible 
language.  In  their  country  they  have  no  iron,  but  make  knives  of  certain 
stones,  and  spear-heads  in  the  same  way.  They  have  brought  from  thence  a 
fragment  of  a  broken  gilt  sword,  which  was  certainly  made  in  Italy.  A  boy 
among  them  wore  in  his  ears  two  silver  rings,  which  seem  without  doubt  to 
have  been  made  in  Venice.  This  induced  me  to  believe  that  it  is  a  continent, 
for  it  is  not  a  place  to  which  ships  can  ever  have  gone  without  anything  hav- 
ing been  heard  of  them.^  They  have  a  very  great  quantity  of  salmon,  herring, 
cod,  and  similar  fish.  They  have  also  great  abundance  of  trees,  and  above 
all  of  pine  trees  for  making  ship's  masts  and  yards  of.  For  this  reason  it  is 
that  this  most  serene  King  thinks  he  will  derive  the  greatest  profit  from  the 
said  land,  not  only  on  account  of  the  trees  for  shipbuilding,  of  which  there 
is  much  need,  but  also  on  account  of  the  men,  who  are  excellent  laborers,  and 
the  best  slaves  that  have  hitherto  been  obtained;  this  seems  to  me  to  be  a 
thing  worth  giving  information  about,  and  if  I  hear  anything  more  when  the 
commander's  caravel  [caravella  capitania]  arrives,  I  will  also  communicate 
it."     [Cf.  Harrisse,  1883,  pp.  211  f.]. 

Alberto  Cantino,  Minister  at  Lisbon  of  Duke  Ercule  d'Este 
of  Ferrara,  wrote  to  the  Duke  as  follows,  on  October  17, 
1501: 

"It  is  already  nine  months  since  this  most  serene  King  sent  two  well- 
equipped  ships  to  the  northern  regions  [alle  parte  de  tramontana]  with  the  ob- 
ject of  finding  out  whether  it  was  possible  to  discover  lands  and  islands  in 
those  parts;  and  now  on  the  nth  of  this  month  one  of  these  ships  has  safely 
returned  with  a  cargo,  and  brought  people  and  news,  which  I  have  thought 
it  my  duty  to  communicate  to  Your  Excellency,  and  thus  I  write  here  below 
accurately  and  clearly  all  that  the  captain  [of  the  ship]  reported  to  the  King 
in  my  presence.     First,  he  stated  that  after  leaving  the  port  of  Lisbon  they 

1  As  remarked  above  (p.  328),  it  is  possible  that  these  objects  belonged  to 
John  Cabot's  unfortunate  expedition  of  1498. 

349 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

sailed  for  four  months  at  a  stretch  always  with  the  same  wind,  and  towards 
the  same  pole,  and  in  all  that  time  they  never  saw  anything.  When  they  had 
entered  the  fifth  month  and  still  wished  to  proceed,  they  say  that  they  en- 
countered immense  masses  of  snow  frozen  together,  floating  on  the  sea  and 
moving  under  the  influence  of  the  waves.  On  the  top  of  these  [ice-masses] 
clear,  fresh  water  was  formed  by  the  power  of  the  sun,  and  ran  down  through 
little  channels  hollowed  out  by  itself,  wearing  away  the  foot  [of  the  ice]  where 
it  fell.     As  the  ships  were  already  in  want  of  water  they  approached  in  boats, 


'^Wusarticus: 


©cawus 


^^^affifflE, 


=3 


'<=»    e^a^-^^.^| 


Portion  of  the  Cantino  map  of  1502,  preserved  at 

and  took  as  much  as  they  required;  and  for  fear  of  staying  in  that  place  on 
account  of  the  danger,  they  were  about  to  turn  back,  but  impelled  by  hope 
they  consulted  as  to  what  they  could  best  do,  and  determined  to  proceed  for 
a  few  days  yet,  and  they  resumed  their  voyage.  On  the  second  day  they  found 
the  sea  frozen,  and  being  obliged  to  abandon  their  purpose,  they  began  to 
steer  to  the  north-west  and  west,  and  they  continued  on  this  course  for  three 
months,  always  with  fair  weather.  And  on  the  first  day  of  the  fourth  month 
they  sighted  between  these  two  points  of  the  compass  a  very  great  land,  which 
they  approached  with  the  greatest  joy;  and  many  great  rivers  of  fresh  water 
ran  through  this  region  into  the  sea,  and  on  one  of  them  they  traveled  for  a 
legha  [=  about  three  geographical  miles]  inland;  and  when  they  went  ashore 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

they  found  a  quantity  of  beautiful  and  varied  fruits,  and  trees,  and  pines  of  re- 
markable height  and  size,  that  would  be  too  large  for  the  masts  of  the  largest 
ship  that  sails  the  sea.  Here  is  no  corn  of  "any  kind,  but  the  people  of  the 
country  live,  they  say,  on  nothing  but  fishing  and  hunting  animals,  of  which 
the  country  has  abundance.  There  are  very  large  stags  [i.e.,  caribou,  Cana- 
dian reindeer]  with  long  hair,  whose  skin  they  use  for  clothes  and  for  making 
houses  and  boats;  there  are  also  wolves,  foxes,  tigers  [lynxes?],  and  sables. 
They  declare,  what  seems  strange  to  me,  that  there  are  as  many  pelerine  fal- 


Modena.     The  network  of  compass  lines  omitted. 


cons  as  there  are  sparrows  in  our  country;  and  I  have  seen  them,  and  they  are 
very  handsome.  Of  the  men  and  women  of  that  place  they  took  about  fifty 
by  force,  and  have  brought  them  to  the  King;  I  have  seen,  touched,  and  ex- 
amined them.  To  begin  with  their  size,  I  may  say  that  they  are  a  little  big- 
ger than  our  countrymen,  with  well-proportioned  and  shapely  limbs,  while 
their  hair  is  long  according  to  our  custom,  and  hangs  in  curly  ringlets,  and 
they  have  their  faces  marked  with  large  figures  like  those  of  the  Indians. 
Their  eyes  have  a  shade  of  green,  and,  when  they  look  at  you,  give  the 
whole  face  a  very  wild  aspect.  Their  speech  is  not  to  be  understood,  but  it  is 
without  harshness,  rather  is  it  human.  Their  conduct  and  manners  are  very 
gentle,  they  laugh  a  good  deal,  and  show  much  cheerfulness;  and  this  is 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

enough  about  the  men.  The  women  have  small  breasts  and  a  very  beautiful 
figure,  and  have  a  very  attractive  face;  their  color  may  more  nearly  be  de- 
scribed as  white  than  anything*  else,  but  that  of  the  males  is  a  good  deal 
darker.  Altogether,  if  it  were  not  for  the  wild  look  of  the  men,  it  seems  to  me 
that  they  are  quite  like  us  in  everything  else.  All  parts  of  the  body  are  naked, 
with  the  exception  of  the  loins,  which  are  kept  covered  with  the  skin  of  the 
aforesaid  stag.  They  have  no  weapons,  nor  iron,  but  all  the  work  they  pro- 
duce is  done  with  a  very  hard  and  sharp  stone,  and  there  is  nothing  so  hard 
that  they  cannot  cut  it  with  this.  This  ship  came  thence  in  one  month,  and 
they  say  that  it  is  2800  miglia  [miles]  distant;  the  other  consort  has  decided 
to  sail  along  this  coast  far  enough  to  determine  whether  it  is  an  island  or 
mainland,  and  thus  the  King  is  waiting  the  arrival  of  this  [the  consort]  and 
the  others  [i.e.,  his  companions]  with  much  impatience,  and  when  they  have 
come,  if  they  communicate  anything  worthy  of  Your  Excellency's  attention,  I 
shall  immediately  inform  you  of  it    .     .    ."  [cf.  Harrisse,  1883,  pp.  204  f.]. 

At  the  request  of  the  Duke  of  Ferrara,  Cantino  had  a  map 
made  at  Lisbon,  chiefly  for  the  purpose  of  representing  the 
Portuguese  discoveries,  and  sent  it  to  the  duke  in  1502.  In 
a  letter  to  the  duke,  dated  November  19,  1502,  he  mentions 
having  already  sent  it.  This  map,  commonly  called  the  "  Can- 
tino map,"  and  now  preserved  at  IVIodena,  gives  a  remarkably 
good  representation  of  southern  Greenland,  which  is  called  "  A 
ponta  de  [asia]  "  (i.e.,  a  point  of  Asia).  On  its  east  coast  are 
two  Portuguese  flags  to  show  that  it  is  a  Portuguese  discovery, 
one  flag  somewhat  to  the  north  of  the  Arctic  Circle,  the  other 
a  little  to  the  west  of  the  southern  point,  and  this  coast  bears  the 
following  legend : 

"  This  country,  which  was  discovered  by  the  command  of  the  most  highly 
renowned  prince  Dom  Manuel,  King  of  Portugal,  is  a  point  of  Asia  [esta  a 
ponta  d'asia].  Those  who  made  the  discovery  did  not  land  but  saw  the  land, 
and  could  see  nothing  but  precipitous  mountains.  Therefore  it  is  assumed,  ac- 
cording to  the  opinion  of  the  cosmographers,  to  be  a  point  of  Asia." 

To  the  west  of  Greenland  on  the  same  map  a  country  is 
marked,  called  "  Terra  del  Rey  de  portuguall "  ("  the  land  of 
the  King  of  Portugal ")  ;  it  answers  approximately  to  Newfound- 
land, possibly  with  the  southern  part  of  Labrador  (?).  The 
north  and  south  ends  are  marked  with  two  Portuguese  flags, 
and  the  country  bears  the  following  legend : 

"  This  land  was  discovered  by  command  of  the  most  exalted  and  most 
renowned  royal  prince  Dom  Manuel,  King  of  Portugal;  Caspar  de  Cortereal, 
a  nobleman  of  the  said  King's  household,  discovered  it,  and  when  he  had  dis- 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

covered  it,  he  sent  [to  Portugal]  a  ship  with  men  and  women  taken  in  the 
said  land,  and  he  stayed  behind  with  the  other  ship,  and  never  returned,  and 
it  is  believed  that  he  perished,  and  there  are  many  masts  [i.e.,  trees  for  masts]." 

On  January  15,  1502,  King  JVIanuel  gave  Caspar's  brother, 
JVTiguel  Cortereal,  fresh  letters  patent  as  follows :  ^ 

"We  make  known  to  all  who  may  see  this  letter  that  Miguell  Cortereall, 
a  nobleman  of  our  household  and  our  head  doorkeeper  [chamberlain?],  now 
tells  us  that,  seeing  how  Caspar  Cortereall,  his  brother,  long  ago  sailed  from 
this  city  with  three  ships  to  discover  new  land,  of  which  he  had  already  found 
a  part,  and  seeing  that  after  a  lapse  of  time  two  of  the  said  ships  returned  to 
the  said  city  [Lisbon],  and  five  months  have  elapsed  without  his  coming,^  he 
wishes  to  go  in  search  of  him,  and  that  he,  the  said  Miguell  Cortereall,  had 
many  outlays  and  expenses  of  his  own  in  the  said  voyage  of  discovery,  as  well 
as  in  the  said  ships,  which  his  said  brother  fitted  out  the  first  time  for  that 
purpose  [i.e.,  for  the  first  voyage],  when  he  found  the  said  land,  and  likewise 
for  the  second  [i.e.,  the  second  voyage],  wherefore  the  said  Caspar  Cortereall 
in  consideration  of  this  promised  to  share  with  him  the  said  land  which  he  thus 
discovered  and  .  .  .  which  we  had  granted  and  given  to  him  by  our  deed 
of  gift,  for  which  the  said  Caspar  Cortereall  asked  us  before  his  departure, 
etc."  Therefore  Miguel  claimed  his  share  of  the  lands  discovered  by  his 
brother,  which  he  obtained  from  the  king  by  these  letters  patent,  as  well  as 
the  right  to  all  new  islands  and  lands  he  might  discover  that  year  (1502), 
besides  that  which  his  brother  had  found.^ 

Two  legends  on  the  anonymous  Portuguese  chart  of  about 
1520  are  also  of  interest.  On  the  land,  Do  Lavrador,*  (i.e., 
Greenland)  is  written: 

"  This  land  the  Portuguese  saw,  but  did  not  enter." 

1  The  document,  as  reproduced,  has  1502.  As  the  civil  year  at  that  time  be- 
gan on  March  25,  the  date  given  would  correspond  to  January  24,  1503,  ac- 
cording to  our  calendar.  But,  according  to  the  tradition  given  in  later  ac- 
counts, Miguel  Cortereal  sailed  in  1502,  the  year  after  his  brother  (cf.  the 
legend  on  the  Portuguese  chart  of  about  1520,  p.  354).  Either  we  must  sup- 
pose that  the  year  or  month  in  the  document  is  an  error,  or  the  tradition  is 
incorrect. 

2  These  five  months  are  a  little  difficult  to  understand.  Either  they  must  be 
reckoned  from  his  departure — if  we  put  that  in  May,  1501,  five  months  will 
take  us  to  October,  1501,  but  then  the  other  ship  had  returned  (see  pp.  347 
f.) — or  they  must  be  reckoned  from  the  return  of  the  "  two  ships  "  (in  Octo- 
ber), but  that  takes  us  to  March,  1502.  Thus  neither  gives  good  sense.  Most 
likely,  as  in  the  case  of  the  three  ships  instead  of  two,  it  is  an  error  in  the 
document. 

3  Cf.  Harrisse,  1883,  p.  214. 

4  Cf.  Kohl,  1869,  p.  179,  pi.  X.;  Kretschmer,  1892,  pi.  xii.;  Bjombo,  1910,  p. 
212. 

353 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

On  Newfoundland,  called  "  Bacalnaos,"  is  written : 
"To  this  land  came  first  Caspar  Corte  Regalis,  a  Portuguese,  and  he  car- 
ried away  from  thence  wild  men  and  white  bears.  There  is  great  abundance 
of  animals,  birds,  and  fish.  In  the  following  year  he  suffered  shipwreck  there, 
and  did  not  return,  and  his  brother,  Micaele,  met  with  the  same  fate  in  the 
next  year." 

In  addition  to  this  may  also  be  mentioned  the  various  maps 
of  Portuguese  origin  of  1502  or  soon  after,  especially  the  Italian 
mappamundi,  the  so-called  "  King"  map  of  about  1502  (p.  373), 


Ml 


VISL^ANDA? 


*  c/HH 


^^^^^^  ..^ 


/•occea;nO'\ 


•X  I 


iiJ 


Portion   of   an  anonymous   Portuguese  chart  of  about   1520, 
preserved  at  Munich.    The  network  of  compass-lines  omitted 

which  must  be  a  copy  of  a  Portuguese  map,  where  Newfoundland 
is  called  Terra  Cortereal. 

Besides  these  documents  contemporary  with  the  voyages,  or 
of  the  years  immediately  succeeding,  there  are  also  several  much 
later  notices  of  them  in  Gomara  (1552),  Ramusio  (1556),  An- 
tonio Galvano  (1563),  and  Damiam  de  Goes  (1566),  but  as  these 
were  written  so  long  after,  we  will  leave  them  on  one  side  for 
the  present. 

When  we  endeavor  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  the 
354 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

Portuguese  voyages  of  these  years  on  the  basis  of  the  oldest 
documents,  the  first  thing  that  must  strike  us  is  that  there  are 
indications  of  several  voyages,  and  of  the  discovery  of  two 
wholly  different  countries,  which  must  undoubtedly  be  Green- 
land and  Newfoundland.  As  it  is  expressly  stated  on  the 
Cantino  map,  on  the  Portuguese  chart  of  about  1520,  and  in 
many  other  places,  that  Newfoundland  was  discovered  by 
Gaspar  Cortereal,  while  his  name  is  not  mentioned  in  a 
single  place  in  these  documents  in  connection  with  Greenland 
(or  Labrador),  and  as  Pasqualigo's  letter  to  the  Council  of 
Venice  expressly  says  that  that  land  was  seen  the  previous  year 
(1500)  by  "the  other  caravels  [I'altre  caravelle]  belonging  to 
this  majesty,"  ^  the  logical  conclusion  must  be  that  it  was  not 
Gaspar  Cortereal  who  saw  Greenland  in  the  year  1500,  but 
some  other  Portuguese.  It  may  be  in  agreement  with  this 
that  on  the  King  map  (of  about  1502)  Newfoundland  is  called 
"Terra  Cortereal"  (see  p.  373),  while  the  island  which  clearly 
answers  to  Greenland  is  called  "  Terra  Laboratoris."  One  might 
be  tempted  to  suppose  that  both  lands  were  named  after  their 
discoverers,  one,  that  is,  after  Cortereal,  the  other  after  a 
man  who  is  described  as  "  laborator."  The  generally  accepted 
view  that  it  was  Gaspar  Cortereal  who  saw  Greenland  on  his 
voyage  of  1500  is  thus  unsupported  by  the  above-mentioned 
documents. 

On  the  other  hand,  we  seem  to  be  able  to  conclude  from  the 
royal  letters  patent  to  Miguel  Cortereal  that  Gaspar  made 
two  voyages,  one  in  1500,  and  another  in  1501,  and  that  it 
was  the  same  country  (i.e.,  Newfoundland)  that  he  visited 
on  both  occasions.     This  is  also  confirmed  by  the  legend  on 

1  It  might  be  objected  that  Gaspar  Cortereal's  name  is  not  mentioned  in 
the  whole  letter,  and  that  he  might  thus  have  also  been  in  command  of  these 
"other  caravels";  but  in  Pasqualigo's  letter  to  his  brothers,  Caspar's  name 
is  mentioned,  and  there,  too,  the  meaning  does  not  seem  to  be  that  he  was 
connected  with  the  discovery  in  the  previous  year  of  the  country  which  could 
not  be  approached  because  of  ice;  but  nothing  definite  can  be  concluded  on 
this  point  from  the  two  letters. 

355 


IN  NORTHERN   MISTS 

the  Portuguese  chart  of  about  1520.  If  it  was  not  he  who  on 
the  first  voyage,  in  1500,  saw  Greenland  without  being  able 
to  approach  it,  we  must  conclude  that  yet  another  expedition, 
on  which  Greenland  was  sighted,  left  Portugal  in  the  year 
1500.  One  is  then  inclined  to  suppose  that  this  was  commanded 
by  the  same  Joao  Fernadez,  to  whom  the  king  gave  letters 
patent  as  early  as  October,  1499.  This  supposition  becomes 
still  more  probable  when  we  take  it  in  conjunction  with 
what  has  already  been  said  as  to  the  possible  origin  of  the 
name  of  "Labrador"  (see  p.  331).  We  must  suppose  that  this 
is  the  same  man  from  the  Azores  who,  under  the  name  of 
John  Fernandus,  took  part  in  the  Bristol  enterprise  of  1501, 
and  who  is  further  mentioned  in  documents  of  as  early  as  1492, 
together  with  another  man  from  the  Azores,  Pero  de  Barcellos, 
and  is  described  as  a  "  Uavorador."  These  men  would 
already  at  that  time  have  been  engaged  in  making  discoveries 
at  sea. 

If  we  compare  the  legend  attached  to  Labrador  (Greenland) 
on  Diego  Ribero's  Spanish  map  of  1529  with  the  corresponding 
legend  on  the  anonymous  Portuguese  chart  of  about  1520  this 
will  also  confirm  our  supposition.  While  on  the  latter  we  read 
that  the  "  Portuguese  saw  this  land,  but  did  not  enter  it,"  Ribero's 
map  has,  "  this  land  was  discovered  by  the  English,  but  there  is 
nothing  in  it  that  is  worth  having."  As  this  part  of  Ribero's 
map  is  evidently  a  copy  of  the  Portuguese  maps,  we  may 
conclude  Ribero's  alteration  of  the  legend  to  mean  that 
doubtless  the  land  was  first  sighted  by  the  Portuguese,  but  that 
it  was  the  English  who  first  succeeded  in  landing  there,  and  in 
this  way  were  its  real  discoverers.  If  we  add  to  this  the  state- 
ment on  the  sixteenth-century  Portuguese  chart  preserved 
at  Wolfenbiittel,  that  the  land  was  discovered  by  English- 
men from  Bristol,  and  that  the  man  who  first  gave  news  of  it 
was  a  "  labrador  "  from  the  Azores,  then  everything  seems  to  be 
in  agreement. 

We  may  hence  suppose  the  connection  to  be  somewhat 
as  follows;  having  obtained  his  letters  patent  in  October, 
356 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

i499>  Joao  Fernandez  fitted  out  his  expedition,  and  sailed 
in  the  spring  o£  1500;  he  arrived  off  the  east  coast  of  Green- 
land and  sailed  along  it,  but  the  ice  prevented  him  from 
landing.  We  have  no  information  at  all  as  to  where  else  he 
may  have  been  on  this  voyage.  But  having  returned  to  Portugal, 
perhaps  after  a  comparatively  unsuccessful  expedition,  and 
finding  furthermore  that  the  king  had  issued  letters  patent  to 
Gaspar  Cortereal,  whose  voyage  had  been  more  successful,  Fer- 
nandez may  have  despaired  of  finding  support  for  fresh  enter- 


Portion  of  Diego  Ribero's  map  of  1529  [Nordenskiold,  1897] 

prises  in  Portugal,  and  have  turned  at  once  to  Bristol,  where 
he  took  part  in  getting  together  an  Anglo-Portuguese  undertak- 
ing, and  was  thus  the  "  llavorador "  who  first  brought  news  to 
Greenland. 

It  must,  of  course,  be  admitted  that  the  hypothesis  here 
put  forward  of  the  voyage  and  discovery  of  Joao  Fernandez 
is  no  more  than  a  guess;  but  it  seems  more  consistent  than 
any  of  the  explanations  hitherto  offered,  and,  as  far  as  I  can 
see,  it  does  not  conflict  on  any  point  with  what  contemporary 
documents  have  to  tell  us.  It  may  be  supposed  that  here, 
as   so  frequently  has  happened,   the   name   of  the   discoverer, 

357 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

Joao  Fernandez,  has  been  more  or  less  forgotten.  His  memory 
has,  perhaps,  only  been  preserved  in  the  name  "  Labrador  "  itself 
— originally  applied  to  Greenland,  but  afterwards  transferred  to 
the  American  continent  ^ — while  all  the  Portuguese  discoveries 
in  the  north  have  been  associated  in  later  history  with  the  other 
seafarer,  Caspar  Cortereal,  who  was  of  noble  family  and  belonged 


Portion  of  Maggiolo's  map  of  1527  [Harrisse,  1892]. 
lines  omitted 


Compass- 


to  the  king's  household,  and  who  came  from  the  same  island  of 
the  Azores,  Terceira. 

1  The  connection  with  the  latter  is  evidently  brought  about  by  the  south 
coast  of  the  insular  Greenland  (-Terra  Laboratoris) — which  we  meet  with  first 
on  the  King  map  (p.  373),  and  which  was  given  a  broad  form  like  that  of  the 
Greenland  coast  on  the  Oliveriana  map  (p.  375),  but  even  broader — being  trans- 
ferred westward  towards  America,  to  the  north  of  the  coast  of  Cortereal  or 
Newfoundland,  as  we  find  it  on  the  anonymous  Portuguese  chart  of  about  1520 
(P'  354)  arid  on  Reinel's  map  (p.  321).  Maggiolo's  map  (see  above)  forms  a 
transitional  type  between  these  maps  and  the  Oliveriana.     Greenland  (Labra- 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 


Caspar  Cortereal  belonged  to  a  noble  Portuguese  family 
from  Algarve,  and  was  bom  about  1450.  He  was  the  third 
and  youngest  son  of  Joao  Vaz  Cortereal,  who  for  twenty- 
two  years,  since  1474,  had  had  a  "  capitanerie "  as  Governor 
of  the  Azores — first  at  Angra  in  the  island  of  Terceira,  later 
in  Sao  Jorge — and  died  in  1496.^  Caspar  probably  spent 
a  part  of  his  youth  in 
the  Azores,  which  were 
altogether  *'  a  hothouse 
of  all  kinds  of  ideas  of 
maritime  discovery  " ;  he 
certainly  became  familiar 
at  an  early  age  with 
narratives  of  the  numer- 
ous earlier  attempts,  and 
with  the  many  plans  of 
new  ocean  voyages  which 
were  discussed  by  the 
adventurous  sailors  of 
those  islands.  As  already 
mentioned,  the  German, 
Martin  Behaim,  was  also 
living  in  the  Azores  (cf. 
p.  287). 

From  the  letters  patent  of  May,  1500,  we  see  that  Caspar 
Cortereal  had  at  his  own  expense  been  trying  even  before  that 
time  to  discover  countries  in  the  ocean,  but  as  no  more  is  said 
about  it,  the  attempt  was  doubtless  unsuccessful.  It  was  pointed 
out  above  that  from  the  king's  letters  patent  to  his  brother  Mig- 

dor)  was  later  made  continuous  with  Newfoundland  (cf.  Ribero's  map  of  1529, 
P'  357)»  and  remained  so  on  maps  for  a  long  time  (see  the  map  of  1544,  p.  320). 
1  The  expedition  attributed  to  Joao  Vaz  Cortereal,  on  which  he  is  said  to 
have  discovered  Nev^foundland  as  early  as  1464  or  1474,  is  unhistorical,  and  is  a 
comparatively  late  invention  which  is  first  found  in  the  Portuguese  author,  Dr. 
Caspar  Fructuoso,  in  his  "  Saudades  da  Terra"  [vi.  c.  9],  written  about  1590 
[cf.  Harrisse,  1883,  pp.  25  f.].  Father  Antonio  Cordeyro  [Historia  Insulana, 
Lisbon,  1717],  says  that  the  discovery  was  made  in  company  with  Alvaro  Mar- 


The  newly  discovered  north-western  lands 
made  continuous  with  Asia,  on  Mag- 
giolo's   map    of    151 1    [Harrisse,    1900] 


tins  Homen. 


359 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

uel,  it  looks  as  though  Caspar  had  made  two  voyages  to 
the  land  he  had  discovered,  which  is  also  confirmed  by  the 
legend  referred  to  on  the  anonymous  Portuguese  chart  o£  about 
1520.  On  the  other  hand,  nothing  is  said  about  this  voyage  in 
the  letters  of  the  two  Italian  ministers,  or  on  the  Cantino  map. 
It  may  seem  natural  to  conclude  that  Caspar,  after  having 
obtained  his  letters  patent  in  May,  1500,  set  out  on  an  ex- 
pedition, the  expenses  of  which  were  defrayed  by  himself  and 
his  brother  Miguel  in  partnership  (cf.  the  letters  patent  to  the 
latter,  above,  p.  353). 

On  his  first  voyage  of  1500,  Caspar  had  already  discovered 
"  a  part  of  "  Newfoundland ;  but  we  know  nothing  of  what  else 
he  may  have  accomplished  on  this  expedition.  He  must  have  re- 
turned to  Lisbon  by  the  same  autumn. 

Encouraged  by  his  success  he  then  set  out  again  with  a 
larger  expedition  in  1501,  after  April  21,  at  which  date  he 
was  still  in  Lisbon.  This  time  the  expenses  were  again  borne 
by  himself  and  his  brother  Miguel  in  partnership.  According 
to  the  king's  letters  patent  of  January,  1502,  he  had  three 
ships  on  this  voyage,  of  which  two  returned.  This  does  not 
agreje  with  the  letters  of  the  two  Italian  ministers,  which 
distinctly  say  that  he  left  with  two  ships.  But  these  letters, 
it  is  true,  do  not  mutually  agree  in  their  statements  as  to  the 
ships  that  had  returned:  Pasqualigo  says  that  the  ship  arrived 
at  Lisbon  on  October  9  in  one  of  his  letters,  on  the  8th  in  the 
other,  and  that  it  brought  seven  natives;  while  Cantino 
says  that  the  ship  arrived  on  October  11  and  brought  fifty 
natives  to  the  king.  As  Pasqualigo  says  that  the  other  ship 
was  expected  daily  with  fifty  natives,  it  has  been  thought 
[cf.  Harrisse]  that  this  was  the  ship  referred  to  by  Cantino; 
but  in  that  case  it  is  puzzling  that  two  ministers  in  the  same 
city  should  have  heard  of  two  different  ships,  and  that  they 
should  both  be  ignorant  of  more  than  one  ship  having  arrived, 
although  there  was  an  interval  of  no  more  than  two  or  three 
days  between  each  ship's  arrival,  and  they  are  both  writing 
a  week  after  that  time.  Besides,  both  mention  that  the 
360 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

second  ship,  and  only  one,  is  expected,  and  Pasqualigo  calls 
it  the  commander's  caravel  (caravella  capitania).  We  may 
readily  suppose  that  it  is  the  arrival  of  the  same  ship  that 
is  alluded  to  by  the  two  ministers  (no  importance  need  be 
attached  to  the  discrepancy  of  dates,  since  we  see  that 
Pasqualigo  alters  the  date  of  his  ship's  arrival  from  one  letter 
to  the  other).  They  may  both  have  heard  of  fifty  natives 
having  been  captured,  of  which  they  had  seen  some  (seven, 
for  instance) ;  but  while  Cantino  understood  that  the  whole 
fifty  had  arrived,  Pasqualigo  thought  that  only  the  seven 
he  had  seen  had  come,  while  the  other  fifty  were  expected 
on  the  next  ship.  Considerable  weight  must  be  attached  to  the 
fact  that  in  the  legend  on  the  Cantino  map,  which  must  evi- 
dently have  been  drawn  from  Portuguese  documents,  only  one 
ship  is  mentioned  as  having  returned.  The  chief  difficulty  is 
that  this  is  in  direct  conflict  with  the  king's  later  letters  patent 
to  Miguel.  We  should  then  have  to  suppose  that  the  statement 
in  this  document  as  to  three  ships  having  sailed  and  two 
returned  is  due  to  a  clerical  error  or  a  lapse  of  memory,  which 
may  seem  surprising.  But  the  question  is,  after  all,  of  minor 
importance.  The  main  point  is  that  Caspar  Cortereal's  ship  never 
returned. 

In  estimating  the  degree  of  trustworthiness  or  accuracy  to 
be  attributed  to  Pasqualigo's  and  Cantino's  statements  about 
the  voyage,  it  must  be  remembered  that  they  are  both  only 
repeating  what  they  have  heard  said  on  the  subject  in  a  lan- 
guage not  their  own,  and  that  when  the  letters  were  written 
they  had  probably  seen  no  chart  of  the  voyage  or  of  the  new 
discoveries.  Cantino  says  that  he  was  present  when  the 
captain  of  the  ship  gave  his  account  to  the  king,  and  that 
he  is  writing  down  everything  that  was  then  said;  so  that 
perhaps  he  had  only  heard  the  narrative  once,  and  without 
a  chart,  which  easily  explains  his  obvious  errors;  it  is  no 
difficult  matter  to  fall  into  gross  errors  and  misunderstandings 
in  reproducing  the  account  of  a  voyage  which  one  hears  in 
this  way  told  even  in  one's  own  language.     Pasqualigo  does 

361 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

not  tell  us  how  he  had  heard  about  the  voyage,  but  it  may  have 
been  on  the  same  occasion.  The  letters  of  the  two  Italians  re- 
producing the  Portuguese  narrative,  cannot  therefore  be  treated 
as  exact  historical  documents,  every  detail  of  which  is 
correct. 

Cantino  says  in  his  letter  (of  October,  1501)  that  Caspar 
Cortereal  had  sailed  nine  months  before,  that  is,  in  January, 
1 50 1.  Pasqualigo  says  that  he  left  in  the  previous  year, 
which  agrees  with  Cantino,  since  the  civil  year  at  that  time 
began  on  March  25.  But  the  existing  receipt  of  April  21, 
1 501,  from  Caspar  Cortereal  proves  with  certainty  that 
the  two  Italians  were  mistaken  on  this  point.  It  may  be 
supposed  that  they  regarded  the  expeditions  of  the  two  con- 
secutive years  as  a  connected  voyage  (?),  but  even  this  will 
not  agree  with  Cantino's  nine  months.  According  to  Cantino's 
letter,  Cortereal  on  leaving  Portugal  held  a  northerly  course 
("towards  the  pole"  are  the  words),  and  Pasqualigo  says 
something  of  the  same  kind;  but  this  is  scarcely  to  be  taken 
literally,  for  otherwise  we  should  have  to  suppose  that  from 
Portugal  he  sailed  northward  towards  Iceland;  besides 
which,  Pasqualigo  says  in  both  his  letters  that  the  land  dis- 
covered was  between  north-west  and  west.  Cantino's  state- 
ment about  the  ice  might  give  us  firm  ground  for  determining 
Cortereal's  route;  if  it  were  not  unfortunately  the  case 
that  there  are  here  two  possibilities,  and  that  Cantino's  words 
do  not  agree  well  with  either  of  them.  The  description  of 
the  ice  points  most  probably  to  Cortereal's  having  first  met 
with  icebergs;  he  may  have  come  upon  these  in  the  sea  off 
the  southern  end  of  Greenland,  and  as  in  continuing  his  course 
he  found  the  "  sea  frozen,"  he  may  have  reached  the  edge 
of  the  ice-floes.  As  nothing  is  said  about  land,  we  must 
suppose  that  he  did  not  sight  Greenland.  It  is  a  more  difficult 
matter  when,  by  changing  his  course  to  the  north-west  and 
west,  he  finally  in  this  direction  sighted  land,  which,  according 
to  the  description  and  the  Cantino  map,  must  have  been 
Newfoundland.  To  arrive  there  from  the  Greenland  ice  he 
362 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

would  have  had  to  steer  about  west-south-west  by  compass,  and 
in  fact  Newfoundland  (Terra  del  Key  de  portuguall)  lies  approxi- 
mately in  this  direction  in  relation  to  the  southern  point  of 
Greenland  on  the  Cantino  map.  But  it  may  be,  of  course, 
that  Cantino's  statement  of  the  direction  is  due  to  a  misunder- 
standing ;  ^  he  may  have  heard  that  the  newly  found  land 
lay  to  the  north-west  and  west  from  Lisbon,  as  Pasqualigo 
says. 

Another  possibility  is  that  it  was  on  the  Newfoundland  Banks 
that  Cortereal  met  with  icebergs;  but  in  that  case  he  must  have 
held  a  very  westerly  course,  almost  west-north-west,  all  the  way 
from  Lisbon,  and  there  would  then  be  little  meaning  in  the 
statement  that  he  altered  his  course  to  north-west  and  west  to 
avoid  the  ice,  even  if  we  take  into  account  the  possibility  of  the 
variation  of  the  compass  having  been  20°  greater  on  the  New- 
foundland Banks  than  at  Lisbon.  Another  difficulty  is  that  on 
the  Newfoundland  Banks  he  would  hardly  have  found  "  the  sea 
frozen,"  if  by  this  ice-floes  are  meant;  for  that  he  would  have 
had  to  be  (in  June?)  farther  to  the  north-west  in  the  Labrador 
Current.  In  neither  case  would  he  have  been  very  far  from  land, 
so  that  the  times  mentioned,  three  months  with  a  favorable  wind 
from  the  ice  to  land,  and  four  months  from  Lisbon,  are  out  of 
proportion.- 

Thus  Cantino's  words  cannot  be  brought  into  agreement  with 
facts ;  but  at  the  same  time  many  things  point  to  its  having  been 
the  Greenland  ice  that  Cortereal  first  met  with,  in  1501.  Doubt- 
less it  might  be  objected  that  he  is  said  in  the  previous  year  to 

1  It  may  also  be  supposed  that  from  the  ice  off  the  south-west  of  Greenland 
Cortereal  steered  north-west  and  west,  and  met  with  the  ice  in  the  Labrador 
Current,  and  was  then  obliged  to  turn  southward  along  the  edge  of  the  ice 
until  he  sighted  land. 

-These  times  given  by  Cantino  for  the  voyage  are,  of  course,  improbable; 
if  we  might  suppose  that  he  meant  weeks  instead  of  months,  it  would  agree 
with  the  time  naturally  occupied  on  such  a  voyage.  If  we  add  his  one  month 
for  the  homeward  voyage  to  the  seven  months  given  above,  and  if  another 
month  be  reckoned  for  the  stay  in  the  country,  we  shall  have  his  nine  months 
for  the  whole  voyage. 

3^3 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

have  already  found  part  of  Newfoundland,  and  in  that  case  he 
would  be  likely  to  make  straight  for  it  again;  but  Pas- 
qualigo's  letter  gives  one  the  impression  that  Caspar  Cortereal 
may  have  been  interested  in  finding  out  whether  the  land  he  had 
found  was  mainland  and  continuous  with  the  country  (Green- 
land) which  in  the  previous  year  (1500)  had  been  seen  by  the 
other  caravels  (Joao  Fernandez?),  and  thus  it  may  have  been 
natural  that  he  should  first  steer  in  that  direction,  but  he  was  then 
forced  by  the  ice  westward  towards  the  land  he  himself  had  dis- 
covered. 

That   it   was   really   Newfoundland,    and   not   the    coast   of 
Labrador    farther    north,    that    Cortereal    arrived    at,    appears 


c  6e  boawentoto 


\a^  Jr  be  re 


am  /VaiTCi  %qiio 


cavetaio 


Modern  Cantino  Reinel's  King 

map.  map.  map.  map. 

The  eastern  coast-line  of  Newfoundland,  with  possibly  the 

southern  part  of  Labrador 

plainly  enough  from  the  maps  (the  Cantino  map,  the  King 
map,  etc.),  and  may  also  be  concluded  from  the  descriptions 
in  the  letters  of  Pasqualigo  and  Cantino.  We  read,  among 
other  things,  that  many  great  rivers  ran  through  that  country 
into  the  sea.  The  east  coast  of  Labrador  has  no  rivers  of 
importance,  with  the  exception  of  Hamilton  River;  but 
the  entrance  to  this  is  by  a  long  estuary,  Hamilton  Inlet  and 
Lake  Melville,  up  which  they  would  hardly  have  sailed.  On 
the  other  hand,  there  are  in  Newfoundland  several  considerable 
rivers  falling  into  the  sea  on  the  east  coast,  up  the  mouths 
of  which  Caspar  Cortereal  might  have  sailed.  The  allusion 
364 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

to  the  country  as  fertile,  with  trees  and  forests  of  pines  of 
remarkable  height  and  size,  and  to  there  being  abundance 
of  timber  for  masts,  etc.,  also  agrees  best  with  Newfoundland. 
In  addition,  the  coast-line  of  the  country,  both  on  the  Cantino 
map  and  on  later  Portuguese  maps,  agrees  remarkably  well 
with  the  coast-line  along  the  east  and  north-east  sides  of 
Newfoundland. 

The  statement  in  Pasqualigo's  letter  of  October  i8,  that 
they  sailed  "  along  the  coast  of  the  said  land  for  a  distance 
of  six  hundred  miglia  and  more,"  which  agrees  with  the 
extent  of  the  coast  on  the  Cantino  map,  must  be  an  exaggeration. 
It  is  a  common  error  to  exaggerate  the  distance  during  a  voyage 
along  a  coast  so  indented  as  that  of  Newfoundland,  where 
Cortereal  may  perhaps  have  sailed  in  and  out  of  bays  and 
inlets. 

As  already  stated,  Caspar  Cortereal's  voyages  are  mentioned 
in  several  works  of  the  sixteenth  century,  but  as  these  were  writ- 
ten so  long  after  the  events  took  place,  no  particular  importance 
can  be  attached  to  them,  in  cases  where  they  conflict  with  the 
earlier  documents.  The  allusions  to  Caspar  Cortereal  in  the 
Spanish  author,  Gomara,  and  the  Italian,  Ramusio,  seem  for  the 
most  part  to  be  derived  from  Pietro  Pasqualigo's  letter  of  Octo- 
ber 19,  1 501,  to  his  brothers  at  Venice,  which  was  published  for 
the  first  time  as  early  as  1507.  The  Portuguese  Antonio  Gal- 
vano  says  in  his  "  Tratado  "  (1563)  that  Caspar  Cortereal  sailed 
in  1500 

"  from  the  island  of  Terceira  with  two  ships,  fitted  out  at  his  own  expense,  and 
traveled  to  the  region  that  is  in  the  fiftieth  degree  of  latitude,  a  land  which  is 
now  called  by  his  name.  He  returned  safely  to  Lisbon;  but  when  he  again 
set  out,  his  ship  was  lost,  and  the  other  ship  returned  to  Portugal." 

This,  it  will  be  seen,  agrees  remarkably  well  with  the  conclu- 
sions we  arrived  at  above ;  but  as  Galvano  spent  the  greater  part 
of  his  life  in  the  East  Indies,  and  only  came  home  to  end  his  days 
in  a  hospital  at  Lisbon,  no  great  importance  can  be  attached  to 
his  statements  [cf.  Harrisse,  1900,  p.  35],  except  in  so  far  as  they 
reproduce  a  Portuguese  tradition. 

365 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

Damiam  de  Goes,  in  his  "  Chronica  do  Felicissimo  Rei  dom 
Emanuel"  [Lisbon,  1566],  has  a  more  detailed  account  of  Gas- 
par  Cortereal's  voyage  of  1500,  and  of  the  land  he  visited.  He 
says: 

"He  sailed  from  the  port  of  Lisbon  at  the  beginning  of  summer,  1500.  On 
this  voyage  he  discovered  in  a  northerly  direction  a  land  which  was  very  cold, 
and  with  great  forests,  as  all  those  [countries]  are  that  lie  in  that  quarter.  He 
gave  it  the  name  of  Terra  verde  [i.e.,  green  land].  The  people  are  very  bar- 
baric and  wild,  almost  like  those  of  Sancta  Cruz  [i.e.,  Brazil],  except  that  they 
are  at  first  white,  but  become  so  weather-beaten  from  the  cold  that  they  lose 
their  whiteness  with  age  and  become  almost  dark  brown.  They  are  of  middle 
height,  very  active,  and  great  archers,  using  sticks  hardened  in  the  fire  for 
throwing-spears,  with  which  they  make  as  good  casts  as  though  they  had 
points  of  good  steel.  They  clothe  themselves  in  the  skins  of  beasts,  of  which 
there  is  abundance  in  that  country.  They  live  in  caves,  and  in  huts,  and  they 
have  no  laws.  They  have  great  belief  in  omens;  they  have  marriage,  and  are 
very  jealous  of  their  wives,  in  which  they  resemble  the  Lapps,  who  also  live  in 
the  north  from  70°  to  85°.  .  .  .  After  he  [Caspar  Cortereal]  had  discovered 
this  land,  and  sailed  along  a  great  part  of  its  coast,  he  returned  to  this  king- 
dom. As  he  greatly  desired  to  discover  more  of  this  province,  and  to  become 
better  acquainted  with  its  advantages,  he  set  out  again  immediately  in  the  year 
1501,  on  May  15,  from  Lisbon;  but  it  is  not  known  what  happened  to  him  on 
this  voyage,  for  he  was  never  seen  again,  nor  did  there  come  any  news  of  him." 
[Cf.  Harrisse,  1883,  p.  233.] 

The  last  statement,  that  Cortereal  disappeared  without  any 
more  being  heard  of  him,  shows  that  De  Goes  was  not  well  in- 
formed, in  spite  of  his  being  chief  custodian  (Guarda  m'or)  of 
the  Torre  do  Tombo  where  the  State  archives  were  kept  at  Lis- 
bon. His  whole  account  may  therefore  be  of  doubtful  value  as 
a  historical  document.  His  description  of  the  newly  discovered 
land  and  of  the  inhabitants  may  be  derived  from  other  state- 
ments, or  from  literary  sources,  and  is  of  the  same  kind  as  we 
often  meet  with  in  accounts  of  natives  in  the  authorities  of  that 
time.  It  appears  that  the  cold  country,  Terra  verde,  with  great 
forests  and  wild,  barbaric  people,  must  be  the  Greenland  (Grono- 
londes)  that  is  referred  to  in  the  anonymous  letter  of  about  1450 
to  Pope  Nicholas  V.^     Most  of  what  is  said  about  these  natives 

1  That  the  Eskimo  lived  in  caves  in  the  mountains  or  underground  was  a  not 
uncommon  idea  even  in  later  times;  see,  for  instance,  Wilhelmi:  Island,  Hvitra- 
mannaland,  Gronland,  und  Finland,  1842,  p.  172. 
366 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

would  apparently  suit  the  Eskimo  quite  as  well  as  the  Indians, 
but  as  we  do  not  know  from  whence  the  whole  is  derived,  it  is 
not  easy  to  form  an  opinion  as  to  which  people  is  really  referred 
to  in  the  description.  The  remarkable  statement  that  the  na- 
tives are  at  first  white,  but  turn  brown  through  the  cold,  will 
hardly  suit  the  Indians,  but  might  apply  to  the  Eskimo,  who  at 
an  early  age  have  a  very  fair  skin,  perhaps  quite  as  light  as  the 
Portuguese. 

What  is  said  of  the  natives  in  the  letters  of  Pasqualigo  and 
Cantino  seems,  on  the  whole,  to  suit  the  Eskimo  better  than  the 
Indians;  typical  Eskimo  features  are:  that  they  had  boats 
covered  with  hides  (it  is  true  that  Cantino  says  stags'  hides, 
i.e.,  reindeer  hides,  but  this  must  be  a  misunderstanding) ;  ^  also 
houses  (i.e.,  tents)  of  long  poles  covered  with  fish  skin  (i.e.,  seal- 
skin) ;  that  the  color  of  their  skin  was  rather  white  than  any- 
thing else,  that  they  laughed  a  good  deal  and  showed  much  cheer- 
fulness. It  may  seem  somewhat  surprising  that  the  Eskimo 
should  be  "  a  little  bigger  than  our  countrymen  "  (i.e.,  the  Ital- 
ians), but,  in  the  first  place,  it  may  have  been  particularly  good 
specimens  of  the  race  that  were  exhibited,  and  in  the  next  place 
the  Eskimo  are  a  race  of  medium  stature,  and,  perhaps,  on  an 
average,  quite  as  tall  as  Italians  and  Portuguese.  That  they  were 
naked  with  the  exception  of  a  piece  of  skin  round  the  loins  an- 
swers to  the  indoor  custom  of  the  Eskimo.  Pasqualigo's  descrip- 
tion, that  they  were  clothed  in  the  skins  of  various  animals,  mostly 
otter,  and  that  the  skins  were  unprepared  and  not  sewed 
together,  but  thrown  over  the  shoulders  and  arms  as  they  were 
taken  from  the  animals,  conflicts  with  the  words  of  Cantino,  and 
is,  no  doubt,  due  to  a  misunderstanding;  it  does  not  sound  prob- 
able. If  it  is  correct,  Pasqualigo  and  Cantino  must  have  seen 
different  natives. 

It  is  probable  that  there  were  Eskimo  in  the  north-east  of 
Newfoundland  at  that  time,  and  that  the  natives  may  have  been 
brought  from  thence  or  from  southern  Labrador. 

iWe  do  not  know  that  the  Indians  of  Newfoundland  had  hide-boats;  but 
it  is  not  impossible. 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

Of  all  known  maps,  the  Cantino  map  undoubtedly  gives 
the  most  complete  and  trustworthy  representation  of  the 
Portuguese  discoveries  of  1500  and  1501  in  the  north-west; 
we  know,  too,  that  it  was  executed  with  an  eye  to  these,  at 
Lisbon,  and  immediately  after  the  return  thither  of  those 
who  had  taken  part  in  the  later  voyage.  We  may  con- 
sequently suppose  that  the  cartographer  availed  himself  of 
the  sources  then  at  his  disposal.  He  may  either  himself 
have  had  access  to  log-books,  with  courses  and  distances, 
and  to  the  original  sketch-charts  of  the  voyages,  or  he  may 
have  used  charts  that  were  drawn  from  these  sources.  But 
he  used  in  addition  maps  and  authorities  of  a  more  learned 
kind,  as  appears,  for  instance,  in  the  legend  attached  to  Green- 
land, where  he  speaks  of  the  opinion  of  cosmographers,  and 
says  that  this  country  is  a  point  of  Asia.  It  is  clear,  as  pointed 
out  by  Bjorrbo  [1910,  p.  167]  that  Greenland  was  connected 
on  the  map  with  Scandinavia,  which  is  called  "  Parte  de 
assia,"  but  the  upper  edge  of  the  map  has  been  cut  off,  so  that 
this  land  connection  is  lost,^  as  is  the  last  part  ("  asia  ")  of  the 
inscription  on  Greenland.  The  basis  of  this  idea  of  a  land  con- 
nection must  have  been  a  map  of  Clavus's  later  type;  while 
the  delineation  of  Greenland  itself  is  evidently  new.  In  fact, 
it  is  here  placed  for  the  first  time  very  nearly  at  a  correct 
distance  from  Europe,  and  with  Iceland  in  a  relatively  correct 
position;  and  in  addition  to  this  it  has  been  given  a  remarkably 
good  form.  If  we  assume  that  the  variation  of  the  compass 
was  unknown,  and  that  the  coasts  were  laid  down  according 
to  the  courses  sailed  by  compass  as  though  they  were  true, 
then  the  southern  point  of  Greenland  comes  just  where  it 
should,  if  the  variation  during  the  voyage  from  Lisbon  averaged 
11°  west.  The  Portuguese  flags  on  the  coast  indicate  that  the 
Portuguese  sailed    along    the    east    coast    of    Greenland    from 

iThis  land  connection  is  found  on  the  Canerio  map  of  1502-1507,  which  is 
of  the  same  type  as  the  Cantino  map  and  is  an  Italian  copy,  either  of  the  Can- 
tino map  itself  or  of  a  similar  Portuguese  map  of  1501  or  1502  [cf.  Bjornbo, 
1910,  p.  167]. 
368 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

north  of  the  Arctic  Circle  of  the  map  to  past  Cape  Farewell 
(without  landing,  according  to  what  the  legend  says),  and  its 
direction  on  the  map  is  explained  by  a  variation  of  about  14° 
west.  The  remarkably  good  representation  of  Greenland  with 
the  characteristic  form  of  the  west  coast  cannot  possibly  be 
derived  from  the  Clavus  maps,  where  Greenland  is  a  narrow 
tongue  of  land  with  its  east  and  west  coasts  running  very 
nearly  parallel.  The  west  coast  has  been  given  a  form  approxi- 
mately as  though  it  were  laid  down  from  courses  sailed  with  a 
variation  increasing  towards  the  north-west  from  20°  to  nearly 
30°  (cf.  p.  371).  It  is  also  characteristic  that  while  the  east  coast 
is  without  islands,  a  belt  of  skerries  is  shown  on  the  north  along 
the  west  coast.  It  may  seem  a  bold  assumption  to  attribute  this 
to  pure  chance  and  the  caprice  of  the  draughtsman,  even  though 
it  may  be  pointed  out  that  he  has  given  the  west  coast  of  Nor- 
way a  similar  curved  form  with  a  belt  of  slferries  outside, 
(as  on  the  Oliveriana  map,  p.  375).  If  the  cartographer 
was  acquainted  with  the  representation  of  Greenland  on  the 
Clavus  maps,  the  probability  becomes  still  greater  that  he  had 
definite  authority  for  his  west  coast,  since  it  differs  from  that  of 
the  Clavus  maps.  It  is  true  that  the  Portuguese  flags  on  the 
map  and  the  statement  in  the  legend  that  the  Portuguese  did  not 
land  on  the  coast  do  not  seem  to  point  to  their  having  sailed  any 
considerable  distance  to  the  north  along  the  west  coast,  for  other- 
wise there  would  doubtless  be  mention  of  this;  but  there  may 
have  been  lost  authorities  for  the  Cantino  map,  which  were 
based  upon  voyages  unknown  to  us,  as  well  as  to  the  car- 
tographer.^ 

1  Since  I  contended,  in  a  preliminary  sketch  of  this  chapter,  which  Dr.  A.  A. 
Bjornbo  read,  that  the  representation  of  Greenland  on  the  Cantino  map  was 
most  probably  based  on  a  voyage  along  the  west  coast  as  well  as  the  east.  Dr. 
Bjornbo  [1910,  pp.  313  f.;  igio,  pp.  176  f.]  has  examined  the  delineation  of 
Greenland  on  the  Oliveriana  map,  and  found  that  it  represents  discoveries 
made  during  a  cruise,  not  only  along  the  east  coast,  but  also  along  a  part  of  the 
south-west  coast,  and  he  sees  in  this  a  partial  confirmation  of  my  contention. 
He  thinks  it  was  during  Cortereal's  voyage  of  1500  that  this  cruise  was  made, 
and  even  supposes  that  the  prototype  of  the  Oliveriana  map  was  Cortereal's 

369 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

If  we  may  suppose  that  the  lighter  tone  of  the  sea  off  the  east 
coast  of  Greenland  and  over  to  Norway  (on  the  original  map)  rep- 
resents ice-floes,  then  this  again  gives  evidence  of  a  knowledge  of 
these  northern  waters  which  we  cannot  assume  to  have  been  de- 
rived merely  from  Portuguese  voyages  on  which  the  east  coast 
of  Greenland  was  sighted;  it  must  have  had  other  sources,  un- 
known to  us. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  "Terra  del  Rey  de  portu- 
guall "  of  the  Cantino  map  is  the  east  coast  of  Newfoundland, 
which,  through  the  variation  of  the  compass  being  disregarded, 
is  given  a  northerly  direction.  If  we  draw  the  east  coast  of 
Newfoundland  from  Cape  Race  to  Cape  Bauld  on  approximately 
the  same  scale  as  that  of  the  Cantino  map,  and  turn  the 
meridian  to  the  west  as  far  as  the  variation  may  have  been 
at  that  time  (about  20°  at  Cape  Race,  and  4°  or  5°  more  at 
Belle  Isle  Strait),  we  shall  have  a  map  (see  p.  364)  the  coast- 
line of  which  bears  so  great  a  resemblance  to  that  of  the  Cantino 
map  that  it  is  almost  too  good  to  believe  it  not  to  be  in  part 
accidental  (the  Newfoundland  coast  on  Reinel's  map  is  also 
very  nearly  the  same  as  that  of  the  Cantino  map).  The  resem- 
blance is  so  thorough  that  we  might  even  think  it  possible  to 
recognize  the  various  bays  and  headlands;  but  perhaps  a 
part  of  the  southern  coast  of  Labrador  has  been  included  in 
the  Cantino  map.  According  to  the  scale  attached  to  the 
map,  in  which  each  division  represents  fifty  miglia,  the  distance 
between  the  south-eastern  point  of  the  country  and  the  northern 

admiral's  chart  itself;  but  this  I  regard  as  very  doubtful,  as  will  appear  from 
what  I  have  said  above  regarding  the  discoveries  of  1500.  Bjornbo  thinks  that 
an  original  map  like  the  Oliveriana  map  is  sufficient  to  explain  the  form  of  the 
west  coast  of  Greenland  on  the  Cantino  map,  while  the  more  northern  por- 
tion has  been  given  a  direction  in  accordance  with  the  Clavus  maps.  I  have 
admitted  to  Bjornbo  the  possibility  of  such  an  explanation.  But  the  more  I 
look  at  it,  the  more  doubtful  it  seems;  for  the  form  of  the  west  coast  on  the 
Cantino  map  has,  in  fact,  not  the  least  resemblance  to  that  of  the  Clavus  maps; 
indeed,  the  very  direction  is  different,  more  northerly  and  more  like  the  real 
direction,  when  allowance  is  made  for  the  probable  variation.  It  appears  to 
me,  therefore,  that  we  cannot  assume  offhand  that  the  Clavus  maps  could  lead 
to  a  representation  like  that  of  the  Cantino  map. 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 


^ 


Ty 


Portuguese  flag  is  seven  hundred  miglia,  which  thus  corre- 
sponds to  the  six  hundred  or  seven  hundred  miglia  that 
Pasqualigo  says  the  Portuguese  sailed  along  the  coast.  If 
we  divide  the  map  into  degrees  according  to  the  distance 
between  the  tropic  and  the  Arctic  Circle,  the  extent  of  the 
country  will  be  about  eleven  degrees  of  latitude.  On  Reinel's 
map  the  length  of  Newfoundland  from  north  to  south  is  between 
ten  and  eleven  degrees  of 
latitude.  The  distance  from 
Cape  Race  to  Belle  Isle  Strait 
corresponds  in  reality  to 
about  5%°,  that  is,  fairly  near 
the  half. 

Both  Greenland  and  New- 
foundland lie  too  far  north 
on  the  Cantino  map.  The 
southern  point  of  Greenland 
lies  in  about  62°  20'  N.  lat., 
instead  of  59°  46',  while 
Cape  Race,  the  south-eastern 
point  of  Newfoundland,  lies 
in  about  50°  N.  lat.,  in- 
stead of  46°  40'.  It  is  un- 
necessary to  assume  that 
Greenland  is  derived  from 
southern    point    lies    in    62° 


^ 


Reconstruction  of  an  equidistant  chart 
on  which  the  coasts  are  laid  down 
from  magnetic  courses  without  re- 
gard  to   the  variation. 

the  too  northerly  latitude  of 
the  Clavus  map,  where  its 
40'  N.  lat.,  since  a  natural 
explanation  of  the  position  both  of  this  point  and  of  Cape 
Race  is  provided  by  the  way  in  which  the  Cantino  map 
is  drawn.  It  is,  in  fact,  an  equidistant  compass-chart, 
which  takes  no  account  of  the  surface  of  the  earth  being 
spherical  and  not  a  plane,  and  on  which  the  courses  sailed 
have  been  laid  down  according  to  the  points  of  the  compass, 
presumably  in  ignorance  of  the  variation  of  the  needle.  If 
we  try  to  draw  a  map  of  the  same  coasts  in  the  same  fashion, 
using  the  correct  distances,  and  taking  the  courses  as  starting 
from    Lisbon,    and    the    variation    to    be    distributed    approxi- 

371 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

mately  as  given  on  p.  308/  we  shall  then  get  a  map  in  its 
main  outlines  as  here  represented.  The  southern  point  of 
Greenland  comes  in  about  62°  20',  or  the  same  as  on  the 
Cantino  map,  and  Cape  Race  comes  still  farther  to  the  north 
than  on  it.  The  distance  from  Lisbon  to  Greenland  is  almost 
exactly  the  same  on  both  maps,  and  this  seems  to  point  to 
remarkable  capabilities  of  sailing  by  log  and  compass,  while, 
on  the  other  hand,  astronomical  observations  were  probably 
not  used.  The  distance  between  Lisbon  and  Newfoundland 
(Terra  del  Rey  de  portuguall)  is  on  the  Cantino  map  a  little 
longer  than  reality,^  and  the  southern  end  of  the  latter  is 
brought  so  far  to  the  south  that  it  would  correspond  to  an 
average  variation  of  about  4°  west,  instead  of  10°,  during  the 
voyage  from  Lisbon.  Newfoundland,  accordingly,  comes  farther 
west  in  relation  to  Greenland  and  its  southern  end  farther 
south  than  it  should  do  on  a  map  constructed  like  this  one. 
But  we  do  not  know  whether  the  course  from  which  the  position 
of  Newfoundland  is  laid  down  was  taken  as  going  directly  to 
that  country  from  Lisbon;  perhaps,  for  instance,  it  went  first 
up  into  the  ice  off  Greenland,  and  in  that  case  a  greater  error 
is  natural.  If  we  lay  down  the  West  Indian  Islands  (and  Flor- 
ida) on  our  sketch-map  according  to  the  same  method,  we  shall 
get  them  in  a  similar  position  to  that  of  the  Cantino  map,  except 
that  there  they  have  a  far  too  northerly  latitude,  and  the  dis- 
tance from  Lisbon  is  much  too  great ;  but  this  is  due  to  the  Span- 
ish maps  which  served  as  authorities ;  for  we  know  that  even  Co- 
lumbus was  guilty  of  gross  errors  in  his  determination  of  lati- 
tude,3  and  on  La  Cosa's  map  they  lie  for  the  most  part  to  the 
north  of  the  tropic. 

1  Owing  to  the  compass-error  varying  in  the  course  of  the  voyage,  the 
courses  sailed  will  be  more  nearly  parts  of  a  great  circle. 

2  According  to  the  scale  of  the  Cantino  map,  this  distance  is  about  2250 
miglia,  but  according  to  Pasqualigo's  letters  it  should  be  1800  or  2000,  and  ac- 
cording to  Cantino's  letter  2800  miglia. 

3  This  is  not  the  place  to  discuss  what  is  represented  by  the  coast  of  the 
mainland  to  the  west  of  Cuba  on  the  Cantino  map,  whether  the  east  coast  of 
Asia,  taken  from  Toscanelli's  mappamundi  (or  a  source  like  Behaim's  globe), 
372 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 


The  representation  of  the  Portuguese  discoveries  in  the  north- 
west evidently  varied  a  good  deal  even  on  early  maps,  and  some- 
times diverged  considerably  from  the  Cantino  map;  Greenland, 
especially,  was  given  various  forms,  while  Newfoundland  was 
more  uniform  in  the  different  types  of  map.  This,  again, 
strengthens  the  supposition  that  these  countries  were  discovered 
on  various  voyages,  and  not  by  the  same  man. 


I  f  y  TT  T" 

It t  i  A  A  i  liXI  i  1 11 1  il  A  i  t  iiri#t  i  1 1  tJt^tl^^^^^  I 


T  ERRArlABORACrORlS 


TERBACORTXRtAl. 
capo  z.afo 


North-western  portion  of  the  "  King "  map,  an  anonymous  Italian 
mappamundi  of  about  1502.  Scandinavia,  with  Greenland  ("  Evglove- 
lant")  to  the  north  of  it,  is  the  type  of  Nicolaus  Germanus's  maps; 
Newfoundland  and  the  Greenland  ("  Terra  Laboratoris ")  discovered 
by  the  Portuguese  and  shown  as  an  island,  are  taken  from  a  Portu- 
guese source.    Compass-lines   omitted 

Thus,  on  the  so-called  "  King  "  map — an  Italian  mappamundi 
of  about  1502,  which  was  probably  taken  from  Portuguese 
sources — Newfoundland,  called  Terra  Cortereal,  lies  in  about  the 
same  place  and  has  the  same  form  as  on  the  Cantino  map  (its 
southern  point  is  called  "capo  raso"),  while  Greenland,  called 
Terra  Laboratoris,  lies  farther  south  than  on  the  Cantino  map 

or  real  discoveries  on  the  coast  of  North  America  made  by  unknown  expedi- 
tions (?).  In  any  case  this  coast  has  nothing  to  do  with  Gaspar  Cortereal,  and 
Sir  Clements  Markham  [1893,  pp.  xlix  f.]  is  evidently  wrong  in  thinking  that 
this  discoverer  on  his  last  voyage  (in  1501)  may  have  sailed  along  this  coast. 

373 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

and  has  become  a  long  island,  the  south-east  coast  of  which 
should  doubtless  correspond  to  the  east  coast  of  Greenland  on 
the  Cantino  map,  but  has  a  very  different  direction  and  form, 
and  has  in  addition  many  islands  to  the  south  of  it.  A  similar, 
but  still  more  varied  representation  is  found  on  another  Italian 
mappamundi,  the  so-called  "  Kunstmann,  No  2."  If  Greenland 
and  Newfoundland  were  both  discovered  by  Gaspar  Cortereal 
and  on  the  same  voyage,  and  if  these  discoveries  formed  the  basis 
both  of  the  Cantino  map  and  of  the  prototype  of  the  King  map, 
then  it  would  be  incomprehensible  how  the  representation  of  one 
of  these  countries  should  vary  so  much,  and  not  that  of  the 
other.  ^ 

The  so-called  "  Oliveriana "  map,  an  anonymous  Italian 
compass-chart  of  a  little  later  than  1503,  shows  more  resem- 
blance to  the  representation  of  Greenland  on  the  Cantino 
map;  but  here  that  of  Newfoundland  is  very  different  from 
what  we  find  on  the  other  maps,  as  its  east  coast  is  remarkably 
short  and  the  south  coast  extends  a  long  way  to  the  west,  in 
the  same  direction  as  the  coast  discovered  by  the  English 
on  La  Cosa's  map  of  1500;  ^  but  the  names  have  no  resem- 
blance to  those  of  that  map,  unless  the  island,  Groga  Y, 
should  be  La  Cosa's,  S.  Grigor  (?),  which,  however,  Hes 
farther  east,  while  the  island  corresponding  to  Groga 
is  called  by  La  Cosa,  **  I.  de  la  trinidat."  "  Cauo  del  marco  " 
might  also   remind  us   of  the   Venetian   Cabot.     Dr.   Bjornbo 

1  Yet  a  third  type  of  representation  of  Greenland  may  be  said  to  be  found 
on  the  so-called  "Pilestrina"  map  (p.  377),  perhaps  of  1511  [cf.  Bjornbo,  1910, 
p.  210],  where  Greenland  forms  a  peninsula  (from  a  mass  of  land  on  the 
north)  as  on  the  Cantino  map,  but  much  broader  still.  On  the  south-eastern 
promontory  of  Greenland  is  here  written:  "C[auo]  de  mirame  et  lexame '* 
(i.e.,  Cape  "look  at  me  but  don't  touch  me"),  which  may  be  connected  with 
the  Portuguese  voyage  of  1500,  when  the  explorers  saw  the  coast  but  could 
not  approach  it  on  account  of  ice.  Finally,  I  may  mention  the  type  of  the 
Reinel  map  (see  p.  321),  where  Greenland  in  the  form  of  a  broad  land  has  been 
transferred  to  the  coast  of  America.  On  all  these  maps  with  their  changing 
representation  of  Greenland,  Newfoundland  has  approximately  the  same  form 
and  position. 

2  Cf.  Harrisse,  1900,  pp.  54  f. 

374 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

thinks,  as  mentioned  above  (p.  369),  that  the  prototype  of 
the  Greenland  on  the  Oliveriana  map  was  Gaspar  Cortereal's  own 
admiral's  chart  of  his  voyage  of  1500.  It  seems  to  me  possible 
that  Bjornbo  may  be  right,  in  so  far  as  the  representation  may 
be  derived  from  the  Portuguese  expedition  which  sighted  Green- 
land in  1500;  but,  from  what  has  been  advanced  above,  this  was 
not  commanded  by  Cortereal,  but  more  probably  by  Joao  Fer- 
nandez. As  the  Newfoundland  of  the  map  has  so  little  resem- 
blance to  reality  and  to  the  usual  Portuguese  representations 
[cf.  also  Bjornbo,  1910,  p.  315],  it  is  improbable  that  the  prototype 


Northern  portion  of  an  anonymous  Italian  chart,  a  little  later  than  1503. 
In  the   Oliveriana  Library  at  Pesaro.      Compass-lines   omitted. 

of  the  map  was  due  to  Gaspar  Cortereal.  Moreover,  one  can- 
not imagine  that  mythical  islands  such  as  "  Insula  de  labardor," 
"Insula  stille,"  etc.,  were  drawn  by  him;  in  such  a  case  they 
would  have  to   be   explained  as  later  additions  from  another 


We  saw  from  the  letters  of  the  two  Italian  ministers  that 
King  Manuel  was  very  well  satisfied  with  the  discoveries  of  Gas- 
par Cortereal,  and  expected  great  advantages  therefrom,  both 
on  account  of  the  trees  for  masts  and  of  the  slaves,  etc. ;  he  there- 
fore awaited  his  return  with  impatience.  But  he  waited  in  vain. 
Gaspar  Cortereal  never  returned.  Whether  he  fell  fighting  with 
the  natives  on  an  unknovm  coast,  or  whether  he  plunged  into  the 

375 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

mists  and  ice  of  the  unknown  north,  there  to  find  a  cold  grave,  or 
was  lost  in  a  storm  on  the  homeward  voyage  across  the  Atlantic, 
will  never  be  revealed. 

As  he  did  not  return,  his  brother,  Miguel  Cortereal,  fitted  out 
a  new  expedition  in  the  hope,  on  the  one  hand,  of  going  to  help 
his  brother,  and,  on  the  other,  of  making  fresh  discoveries.  On 
January  (?)  15,  1502  (or  1503?),  he  obtained  letters  patent  from 
King  Manuel  (see  p.  353).  On  May  10,  according  to  Damiam 
de  Goes,  he  sailed  from  Lisbon  with  two  ships,  and  nothing  more 
was  heard  of  him.  Antonio  Galvano,  on  the  other  hand,  says 
that  he  had  three  ships,  and  that  these  arrived  in  Newfoundland 
(Terra  de  Cortereal),  but  there  separated  and  went  into  different 
inlets 

"with  the  arrangement  that  they  should  all  meet  again  on  August  20.  The 
two  other  ships  did  so,  and  when  they  saw  that  Miguel  Cortereal's  ship  did 
not  come  at  the  appointed  time,  nor  for  some  time  after  that,  they  returned 
to  Portugal,  and  never  since  was  any  more  news  heard  of  him,  nor  did  any 
other  memory  of  him  remain;  but  the  country  is  called  to  this  day  the  Land 
of  the  Cortereals.i 

"  The  King  felt  deeply  the  loss  of  the  two  brothers,  and,  moved  by  his 
royal  and  compassionate  feeling,  he  caused  in  the  year  1503  ~  two  ships  to  be 
fitted  out  to  go  and  search  for  them.  But  it  could  never  be  discovered  how 
either  the  one  or  the  other  [of  the  brothers]  was  lost." 

If  this  account  of  Galvano's  is  correct,  then  the  last  relief  ex- 
pedition returned  without  having  accomplished  its  purpose.  As 
to  what  discoveries  it  may  have  made,  we  hear  nothing,  nor  do 
we  see  any  trace  of  them  on  the  maps,  unless,  indeed,  the  hint 
of  an  extension  of  Newfoundland  to  the  north  on  the  so-called 
*'  Pilestrina  "  map  of  about  151 1  (see  p.  377)  may  be  due  to  this 
expedition  or  to  the  ship  that  returned  from  Miguel  Cortereal's 
voyage  of  1502.  On  Pedro  Reinel's  map  (p.  321)  there  is  marked 
a  land  answering  to  Cape  Breton,  with  a  coast  extending  west- 

1  That  Miguel  Cortereal  really  reached  Newfoundland  seems  also  to  result 
from  the  legend  quoted  above  from  the  chart  of  about  1520,  since  he  would 
hardly  be  named  on  this  coast  unless  there  were  grounds  for  supposing  that 
he  arrived  there;  but  this  again  must  point  to  some  of  the  expedition  having 
returned. 

-  If  Miguel  Cortereal  set  out  in  1503,  and  not  in  1502  (cf.  p.  353,  note  i),  it 
must  have  been  in  1504  that  the  King  despatched  these  fresh  ships. 


PORTUGUESE   DISCOVERIES 

ward  from  it.  It  is  possible  that  this  may  be  derived  from  these 
expeditions,  and  in  the  same  way  all  the  Portuguese  names  along 
Newfoundland,  the  coast-line  of  which  must  be  taken  from  the 
same  source  as  the  Cantino  map.  It  is,  however,  more  prob- 
able that  the  names  are  due  to  Portuguese  fishermen;  though 
there  is  also  a  possibility  that  Reinel's  additions  may  be  referred 
to  the  Anglo-Portuguese  expeditions  from  Bristol  in  1501  and 
the  following  years.  His  island,  Sam  Joha  (St.  John),  points, 
as  has  been  said  (p.  321),  to  a  possible  connection  with  John 
Cabot's  discoveries. 


Northern  portion  of  an  Italian  map,  possibly  drawn  by  Pilestrina,  151 1. 
Only  a  few  of  the  names  are  given.     [Bjornbo  and  Petersen,  1908] 

When  neither  of  the  brothers  returned,  the  eldest  brother, 
Vasqueanes  Cortereal,  who  held  very  high  positions  both 
at  the  king's  court  and  as  governor  of  the  islands  of  Sao 
Jorge  and  Terceira  in  the  Azores,  wished  "to  fit  out  ships 
at  his  own  expense  in  order  to  go  out  and  search  for  them. 
But  when  he  asked  the  king  to  excuse  his  absence,  his  majesty 
could  not  consent  to  his  going  further  in  the  matter,  and  insisted 
that  it  was  useless,  and  that  all  had  been  done  that  could  be 
done."  [De  Goes.]  Thus  the  spirit  of  the  capable  and  enter- 
prising Portuguese  for  further  exploration  in  these  difficult 
northern  waters  seems  to  have  become  cooled,  and  we  do 
not  hear  much  more  of  official  expeditions  despatched  from 
Portugal  to  find  other  new  countries  in  that  quarter.     Mean- 

377 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

while  Newfoundland  (Terra  de  Cortereal)  continued  through 
the  whole  of  the  sixteenth  century  to  be  regarded  as  a  province 
under  the  Portuguese  crown,  and  the  post  of  its  governor,  with 
special  privileges,  was  hereditary  in  the  family  of  Cortereal,  until 
Manuel  Cortereal  II.,  the  last  of  the  male  line,  fell  fighting  by 
the  side  of  King  Sebastian,  in  the  fatal  battle  of  Kas-rel-Kebir,  in 
1578.^ 

The  Portuguese  seem  for  a  long  time  to  have  kept  up 
the  connection  with  Newfoundland,  more  especially  in  order  to 
avail  themselves  of  the  rich  fisheries  that  had  been  discovered 
there.  But  of  this  it  is  only  by  the  merest  accident  that  history 
has  anything  to  relate.  It  appears  as  though  this  fishery  became 
active  immediately  after  Cortereal's  discovery;  for  we  see 
that,  as  early  as  1506,  King  Manuel  gave  orders  that  the  fisher- 
men on  their  return  from  Newfoundland  to  Portugal  were  to 
pay  one-tenth  of  the  proceeds  in  duties  [cf.  Kunstmann,  1859, 
p.  69]. 

1  It  is  reported  that,  in  1574,  Vasqueanes  Cortereal  IV.,  father  of  this 
Manuel,  undertook  an  expedition  to  Labrador  to  find  the  North-West  Passage. 


378 


CONCLUSION 

IF  we  would  discover  how  a  watercourse  is  formed,  from  the 
very  first  bog-streams  up  in  the  mountain,  we  must  follow  a 
multitude  of  tiny  rills,  receiving  one  fresh  stream  after  another 
from  every  side,  running  together  into  burns,  which  grow  and 
grow  and  form  little  rivers,  till  we  come  to  the  end  of  the  wooded 
hillside  and  are  suddenly  face  to  face  with  the  great  river  in  the 
valley  below. 

A  similar  task  confronts  him  who  endeavors  to  explore 
the  first  trickling  rivulets  of  human  knowledge;  he  must 
trace  all  the  minute,  uncertain,  often  elusive  beginnings, 
follow  the  diversity  of  tributaries  from  all  parts  of  the  earth, 
and  show  how  the  mass  of  knowledge  increases  constantly 
from  age  to  age,  sometimes  reposing  in  long  stretches  of  dead 
water,  half  choked  with  peat  and  rushes,  at  other  times  plunging 
onward  in  foaming  rapids.  And  then  he,  too,  is  rewarded;  the 
stream  grows  broader  and  broader,  until  he  stands  beside  the  navi- 
gable river. 

But  a  simile  never  covers  the  whole  case.  The  latter  task  is 
rendered  not  only  wider,  but  incomparably  more  difficult,  by  the 
fact  that  the  brooks  and  rivers  whose  courses  are  to  be  followed 
are  even  more  intricate  and  scarcely  ever  flow  in  an  open  stream. 
True  knowledge  is  so  seldom  undiluted;  as  a  rule  it  is  suffused 
with  myths  and  dogmatic  conceptions,  often  to  such  a  degree  that 
it  becomes  entirely  lost,  and  something  new  seems  to  have  arisen 
in  its  place. 

379 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

For  one  thing,  man's  power  of  grasping  reality  varies  greatly ; 
in  primitive  man  it  is  clouded  to  a  degree  which  we  modern  human 
beings  can  hardly  understand.  He  is  as  yet  incapable  of  dis- 
tinguishing between  idea  and  reality,  between  belief  and  knowl- 
edge, between  what  he  has  seen  and  experienced  and  the  explana- 
tion he  has  provided  for  his  experience. 

But  even  with  those  who  have  long  outgrown  the  primitive 
point  of  view,  imagination  steps  in,  supplying  detail  and  explana- 
tion wherever  our  information  fails  us  and  our  knowledge  falls 
short;  it  spreads  its  haze  over  the  first  uncertain  outlines  of  per- 
ception, and  the  distant  contours  are  sometimes  wholly  lost  in  its 
mists  of  legend. 

This  is  a  universal  experience  in  the  history  of  intellectual 
life.  In  the  domain  to  which  this  work  is  devoted,  it  makes  itself 
felt  with  perhaps  more  than  its  usual  force. 

The  inquiry  embraces  long  periods.  In  all  times  and 
countries  we  have  seen  the  known  world  lose  itself  in  the 
fogs  of  cloudland — never  uniformly,  it  is  true,  but  in  constantly 
changing  proportions.  Here  and  there  we  have  a  glimpse, 
now  and  again  a  vision  over  wider  regions;  and  then  the 
driving  mists  once  more  shut  out  our  view.  Therefore,  all 
that  human  courage  and  desire  of  knowledge  have  wrested  in 
the  course  of  long  ages  from  this  cloudland  remains  vague,  un- 
certain, full  of  riddles.  But  for  this  very  reason  it  is  all  the  more 
alluring. 

We  saw  that  to  the  eyes  of  the  oldest  civilization  in  history 
and  down  through  the  whole  of  antiquity,  the  North  lay  for  the 
most  part  concealed  in  the  twilight  of  legend  and  myth;  here 
and  there  genuine  information  finds  its  way  into  literature,  but 
is  again  effaced.  At  the  beginning  of  the  Middle  Ages  the  dark 
curtain  thickens. 

Again  there  is  a  glimmer  of  light,  first  from  the  intermingling 
of  nations  at  the  time  of  the  migrations,  then  from  new  trading 
voyages  and  intercourse,  until  the  great  change  is  brought  about 
by  the  Norsemen,  who,  with  their  remarkable  power  of  expan- 
sion, overran  western  and  southern  Europe  and  penetrated 
380 


CONCLUSION 

the  vast  unknown  solitudes  in  the  north,  found  their  way 
to  the  White  Sea,  discovered  the  wide  Polar  Sea  and  its 
shores,  colonized  the  Faroes,  Iceland,  and  Greenland,  and 
were  the  first  discoverers  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean,  and  of  North 
America. 

As  early  as  in  the  writings  of  King  Alfred  and  Adam  of 
Bremen  the  Norsemen's  initiatory  knowledge  of  this  new  northern 
world  made  its  way  into  European  literature. 

No  doubt  the  mists  closed  again,  much  of  the  knowledge 
gained  was  forgotten,  even  by  the  Norsemen  themselves,  and 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  Middle  Ages  it  is  mostly  mythical 
echoes  of  this  knowledge  that  are  to  be  traced  in  the  literature 
of  Europe  and  that  have  left  their  mark  on  its  maps.  None  the 
less  were  the  discoveries  of  the  Norsemen  the  great  dividing 
line.  For  the  first  time  explorers  had  set  out  with  conscious 
purpose  from  the  known  world,  over  the  surrounding  seas, 
and  had  found  lands  on  the  other  side.  By  their  voyages  they 
taught  the  sailors  of  Europe  the  possibility  of  traversing  the 
ocean.  When  this  first  step  had  been  taken  the  further  develop- 
ment came  about  of  itself. 

It  was  in  the  Norsemen's  school  that  the  sailors  of  England 
had  their  earliest  training,  especially  through  the  traffic  with 
Iceland;  and  even  the  distant  Portuguese,  the  great  dis- 
coverers of  the  age  of  transition,  received  impulses  from  them. 

Through  all  that  is  uncertain,  and  often  apparently  fortuitous 
and  checkered,  we  can  discern  a  line,  leading  towards  the 
new  age,  that  of  the  great  discoveries,  when  we  emerge  from 
the  dusk  of  the  Middle  Ages  into  fuller  daylight.  Of  the  new 
voyages  we  have,  as  a  rule,  accounts  at  first  hand,  less  and  less 
shrouded  in  medisevalism  and  mist.  From  this  time  the  real 
history  of  polar  exploration  begins. 

Cabot  had  then  rediscovered  the  mainland  of  North  America, 
Cortereal  had  reached  Newfoundland,  the  Portuguese  and  the 
English  were  pushing  northward  to  Greenland  and  the  ice.  And 
this  brings  in  the  great  transformation  of  ideas  about  the  north- 
ern world. 

381 


IN   NORTHERN   MISTS 

It  is  true  that,  as  yet,  we  have  not  passed  the  northern  limits 
of  our  forefathers'  voyages;  and  that  views  of  the  arctic  regions 
are  still  obscure  and  vague.  While  some  imagine  a  continent 
at  the  pole,  others  are  for  a  wreath  of  islands  around  it  with 
dangerous  currents  between  them,  and  others,  again,  reckon  upon 
an  open  polar  sea.  There  is  obscurity  enough.  But  new  prob- 
lems are  beginning  to  shape  themselves. 

When  it  became  apparent  to  the  seamen  of  Europe  that  the 
new  countries  of  the  west  were  not  Asia,  but  part  of  a  new  conti- 
nent, the  idea  suggested  itself  of  seeking  a  way  round  the  north — 
as  also  round  the  south — of  this  continent,  in  order  to  reach  the 
coveted  sources  of  wealth,  India  and  China :  the  problem  of  the 
North- West  Passage  was  presented — a  continuation  on  a  grand 
scale  of  the  routes  opened  up  by  the  Norsemen  towards  the  north- 
west. 

But  equally  present  was  the  thought  that  perhaps  there  was 
another  and  shorter  way  round  the  north  of  the  old  world;  and 
the  problem  of  the  North-East  Passage  arose.  The  working  out 
of  this  problem  was  simply  a  continuation  of  the  north-eastern 
voyages  of  the  Norwegians  to  the  White  Sea. 

In  this  way  were  born  the  two  great  illusions,  which  for 
centuries  held  the  minds  of  explorers  spellbound.  They  could 
never  be  of  value  as  trade-routes,  these  difficult  passages 
through  the  ice.  They  were  to  be  no  more  than  visions, 
but  visions  of  greater  worth  than  real  knowledge;  they  lured 
discoverers  farther  and  farther  into  the  unknown  world  of 
ice;  foot  by  foot,  step  by  step,  it  was  explored;  man's  com- 
prehension of  the  earth  became  extended  and  corrected;  and 
the  sea  power  and  imperial  dominion  of  England  drew  its 
vigor  from  these  dreams. 

What  a  vast  amount  of  labor  lies  sunk  in  man's  knowl- 
edge of  the  earth,  especially  in  those  remote  ages  when 
development  proceeded  at  such  an  immeasurably  slower  pace, 
and  when  man's  resources  were  so  infinitely  poorer.  By 
the  most  manifold  and  various  ways  the  will  and  intelli- 
gence of  man  achieve  their  object.  The  attraction  of  long 
382 


CONCLUSION 

voyages  must  often  enough  have  been  the  hope  of  finding 
riches  and  favored  lands,  but  deeper  still  lay  the  imperious 
desire  of  getting  to  know  our  own  earth.  To  riches  men  have 
seldom  attained,  to  the  Fortunate  Isles  never ;  but  through  all  we 
have  won  knowledge. 

The  great  Alexander,  the  conquering  king,  held  sway  over 
the  greater  part  of  the  world  of  his  day;  the  bright  young 
lord  of  the  world  remained  the  ideal  for  a  thousand  years, 
the  hero  above  all  others.  But  human  thought,  restless  and 
knowing  no  bounds,  found  even  his  limits  too  narrow.  He 
grew  and  grew  to  superhuman  dimensions,  became  the  son  of 
a  god,  the  child  of  fortune,  who  in  popular  belief  held  sway 
from  the  Pillars  of  Hercules,  the  earth's  western  boundary, 
to  the  trees  of  the  sun  and  moon  at  the  world's  end  in  the  east ; 
to  whom  nothing  seemed  impossible;  who  descended  to  the 
bottom  of  the  sea  in  a  glass  bell  to  explore  the  secrets  of  the 
ocean;  who,  borne  by  tamed  eagles,  tried  to  reach  Heaven, 
and  who  was  fabled  by  Mohammedans  and  Christians  to  have 
even  attempted  to  scale  the  walls  of  Paradise  itself — there  to 
be  checked  for  the  first  time.  "Thus  far  and  no  farther." 
No  man  that  is  bom  of  woman  may  attain  to  the  land  of  heart'^ 
desire. 

The  myth  of  Alexander  is  an  image  of  the  human  spirit 
itself,  seeking  without  intermission,  never  confined  by  any 
bounds,  eternally  striving  towards  height  after  height,  deep 
after  deep,  ever  onward,  onward,  onward  .  .  . 

The  world  of  the   spirit  knows  neither  space  nor  time. 


FINIS 


383 


LIST   OF  THE   MORE   IMPORTANT    WORKS 
REFERRED   TO 

1876  ADAM  of  Bremen:  Adami  Gesta  Hamburgensis  Ecclesiae  Pontificum  ex 
recensione  Lappenbergii,  Editio  altera.  "  Scriptores  Rerum  Germani- 
carum."     Hannoverae,  1876. 

1862  ADAM  of  Bremen:  Om  Menigheden  i  Norden  o.  s.  v.  Overs,  af  P.  W. 
Christensen.     Copenhagen,   1862. 

1893  ADAMS  von  Bremen  Hamburgische  Kirchengeschichte.    Ubers.  von  J.  C.  W. 

Laurent.     2.  Aufl.     Leipzig,  1893. 
1839    ^LIANUS   (Claudius):    Varia.    "  Vermischte   Nachrichten,"  Werke,  Bd.   I, 
iibers.    von    Ephorus     Dr.    Wunderlich.     "  Griech.    Prosaiker    in    neuen 
Uebers.,"  hgb.  v.  Tafel,  Osiander,  und  Schwab,  Bd.  182.     Stuttgart,  1839. 

1894  AHLENIUS  (Karl):    Pytheas'  Thuleresa,  "  Sprakvetenskapliga  Sallsk.  i  Up- 

sala    Forhandl.,"    I,    1882 — 94,    pp.    loi — 124,    in    "  Upsala    Universitets 
Arsskrif  ,"   1894. 

1900  AHLENIUS  (K.):  Die  alteste  geographische  Kenntnis  von  Skandinavien. 
"  Eranos,"  III,   1898 — 1899.     Upsala,   1900. 

1859  ALFRED,  King:  Anglo-Saxon  Version  of  Orosius.  Ed.  by  JOSEPH  BOS- 
WORTH,  London,  1859.  As  to  Ottar,  see  also  HENRY  SWEET:  An 
Anglo-Saxon  Reader,  Oxford,  1884;  R.  RASK  in  "  Skandinaviske  Littera- 
turselskabs  Skrifter,"  XI.  Copenhagen,  1815,  with  Danish  transl.  and 
notes;  G.  PORTHAN:  "  Kgl.  Vitterh.  Hist.  o.  Antique  Acad.  Handl." 
VI,  Stockholm,   1800,  with   Swedish  transl.  and  notes. 

1845  d'AVEZAC  (M.  P.):  Les  lies  fantastiques  de  I'ocean  occidental  au  moyen- 
age.     Paris,  1845. 

1887    AVIENUS  (Rufus  Festus):    Rufi  Festi  Avieni  Carmina.    Ed.  Alfred  Holder, 
Innsbruck,  1887. 
BATUTA  (Ibn):     Voyages  d'Ibn  Batoutah,  Texte  arabe  et  traduction  par 
DEFREMERY  et  SANGUINETTI. 

1902     BAUMGARTNER  (A.):  Island  und  die  Faroer.    3  Aufl.     Freiburg,  1902. 

1876     BAUMSTARK   (Anton),  see   TACITUS. 

1880  BAUMSTARK  (A.):  Ausfuhrliche  Erlauterung  des  besondem  volkerschaft- 
lichen  Theiles  der  Germania  des  Tacitus.     Leipzig,  1880. 

1904  BEAUVOIS   (Eug.):    "Journal  de  la  Societe  des  Americanistes  de  Paris," 

1905  1904,  No.  2;  1905,  No.  2. 

1897  BEAZLEY  (C.  Raymond):    The  Dawn  of  Modern  Geography,  I,  1897;  II, 

1906  1901;  III,  1906,  London. 

1898  BEAZLEY  (C.  R.):    John  and  Sebastian  Cabot.    London,  1898. 

1902     BERARD   (Victor):     Les  Pheniciens  et  I'Odyssee.     I,  1902;  II,  1903.     Paris. 
1880     BERGER  (Hugo):     Die  geographischen  Fragmente  des  Eratosthenes.    Leip- 
zig, 1880. 
1887    BERGER  (H.):    Geschichte  der  vvdssenschaftlichen  Erdkunde  der  Griechen. 
— 93  I,  1887;  II,  1889;  III,  1891;  IV,  1893.     Leipzig. 

384 


MORE  IMPORTANT  WORKS  REFERRED  TO 

BERGER  (H.):     Mythische  Kosmographie  der  Griechen.    Appendix  to  Ros-     1904 

Cher's  "  Mythol.  Lexikon."     Leipzig,  1904, 
BETHMANN  (L.)  and  WAITZ  (G.),  See  PAULUS  WARNEFRIDI.  1878 

BJORNBO    (Axel  Anthon) :     Adam  af  Bremens  Nordensopfattelse.     "  Aarb.     1909 

f.  nord.  Oldk.  o.  Hist."     Copenhagen,  1909. 
BJORNBO  (A.  A.)     Cartographia  Groenlandica.     Indledning  eg  Perioden  til     1910 

Aar  1576.     Medd.  om  Gronland,  XLVIII,  i.     Copenhagen,  191 1. 
BJORNBO  (A.  A.):    Die  echte  Corte-Real-Karte.    "Peterm.  Geogr.  Mitt."  1910a 

1910,  II. 
BJORNBO  (A.  A.)  and  PETERSEN  (Carl  S.):    Fyenboen  Claudius  Clausson    1904 

Swart  o.  s.  v.     "  Kgl.  Danske.  Vid.  Selsk.  Skr."    6,  R.,  hist,  filos.  Afd.  VI. 
_  2.  Copenhagen,  1904. 
BJORNBO  (A.  A.)  and  PETERSEN  (C.  S.):    Anecdota  Cartographica  Sep-    1908 

tentrionalia.     Havnia,  1908. 
BJORNBO  (A.  A.)  and  PETERSEN  (C.  S.):    Der  Dane  Claudius  Clausson    1909 

Swart.     Innsbruck,  1909. 
BLOM    (O.):     Om   Kongespeilets  Affattelsestid.    "Aarb.   f.   nord.   Oldk.  o.     1867 

Hist."     Copenhagen,  1867. 
BOAS   (Franz):    Eskimo   of  Baffin  Land  and  Hudson  Bay.    "Bull.  Amer.    1901 

Mus.  Nat.  Hist."     XV,  1901. 
BOBE  (Louis):    Aktstykker  til  Oplysning  om  Gronlands  Besejling.    "Danske    1909 

Magazin,"  5.  R.,  VI.     Copenhagen,  1909. 
BOSWORTH  (J.):  see  King  ALFRED.  ,  1859 

BREDA  (O.  J.):     Rundt  Kensington-stenen.    " Symra,"  VI.     Decorah,  1910.    1910 
BRENNER   (Oskar):     Nord-  und  Mitteleuropa  in  dem  Schriften  der  Alten.     1877 

Zuang.  Diss.     Miinchen,  1877. 
BROGGER  (A.  W.):    Den  Arktiske  Stenalder  i  Norge.    "  Vid.-Selsk.  Skr."  II    1909 

Hist,  filos.  Kl.,  1909.     No.  I.     Christiania. 
BRUUN  (Daniel):     Arkaeologiske  Undersogelser  i  Julianehaabs  Distrikt,  1895.     1896 

"  Medd.  om  Gronland,"  XVI.     Copenhagen,  1896. 
BRUUN   (D.):     Det  hoie  Nord.     Copenhagen,  1902.  1902 

BUGGE     (Alexander):     Vare    forfaedres     opdagelsesreiser    i    Polaregnene.    1899 

"  Kringsja,"  XI.     Christiania,   1899. 
BUGGE  (A.):  Contributions  to  the  History  of  the  Norsemen  in  Ireland,  III.     1900 

"  Vid.-Selsk.  Skr."     II  Hist,  filos.  Kl.     1900.     Christiania,  1901. 
BUGGE  (A.):     Vikingerne.     Billeder  fra  vore  forfaedres  liv.     I,  1904;  II,  1906.     1904 

Christiania.  — 06 

BUGGE  (A.):    Vesterlandenes  Indflydelse  pa  Nordboernes  og  saerlig  Nord-    1905 

maendenes  ydre  Kultur  o.  s.  v.  i  Vikingetiden.    "  Vid.-Selsk.  Skr."  II  Hist. 

filos.  Kl.     1904,  No.  I.     Christiania,  1905. 
BUGGE  (A.):    Nordlands  skiftende  Skjaebne.    "Hist.  Tidsskrift."    4.  R.,  V.    1908 

Christiania,  igo8. 
BUGGE  (Sophus):  Bidrag  til  Nordiske  Navnes  Historie.  "  Arkiv  for  Nordisk    1890 

Filologi,"  VI.     Lund,  1890. 
BUGGE  (S.):     Germanische  Etymologien,  Beitrage  3.    "  Gesch.  d.  Deutschen     1896 

Sprache  in  Literatur,"  XXI.     Halle,  1896. 
BUGGE  (S.) :     Norges  Indskrifter  med  de  yngre  Runer.     Honen-Runerne  fra     1902 

Ringerike.     Christiania,   1902. 
BUGGE   (S.):    Foranskudts,  isaer  i  Navne.    "Arkiv.  for  Nordisk  Filologi,"    1904 

XXI.     Lund,  1904. 
BUGGE     (S.).     Om     nordiske     folkenavne     hos     Jordanes.    "Fornvannen."    1907 

Stockholm,  1907. 

385 


LIST   OF  THE   MORE   IMPORTANT 

1910    BUGGE  (S.):    Der  Runenstein  von  Rok  in  6sterg6tland,  Schweden.    Hgb. 

dutch  Magnus  Olsen.     Stockholm,  1910. 
1883     BUNBURY  (E.  H.):     A  History  of  Ancient  Geography,     London,  1883. 
1904     CALLEGARI  (G.  V.):    Pitea  di  Massilia.     "  Rivista  di  Storia  Antica,"  VII, 

4;  VIIIj  2;  IX,  2.     Padova,  1904. 

1866  CHRIST   (Wilhelm):     Avien  und  die  altesten  Nachrichten  iiber  Iberien  und 

die  Westkiiste  Europas.     "  Abhandl.  d.  Philos.-Philol.  Classe  d.  K.  Bayer- 
ischen  Akad.  d.  Wiss.,"  XI.     Miinchen,  1866. 

1867  COLLINSON  (Richard):    The  three  Voyages  of  Martin  Frobisher,  1576—8. 

London,  1867. 

1880  COSTA   (B.  F.  de):    Arctic  Exploration.     "Joum.  of  the  American  Geogr. 

Soc.  of  New  York,"  XIL     1880. 

1828  CROKER  (T.  Crofton).  Fairy  Legends  and  Traditions  of  the  South  of  Ire- 
land.    London,  1828. 

1890  CRUSIUS  (O.):  Hyperboreer  in  "  Roscher's  Mythol.  Lexikon,"  I,  2.  Leip- 
zig, 1890. 

1871     CUNO  (J.  G.):  Forschungen  im  Gebiete  der  Alten  Volkerkunde.  Berlin,  1871. 

1882     DAAE  (Ludvig) :  Didrik  Pining.  "  Hist.  Tidsskrift  "  2.  R.,  III.  Christiania,  1882. 

1888  DAAE  (L.):  Italieneren  Francesco  Negris  Reise  i  Norge  1664 — 1665.  "Hist. 
Tidsskrift "  2.  R.,  VL     Christiania,  1888. 

1894  DAWSON  (Samuel  Edward):  The  Voyages  of  the  Cabots  in  1497  and  1498; 
with  an  attempt  to  determine  their  landfall  and  to  identify  their  island  of 
St.  John.  "  Proc.  and  Trans,  of  the  R.  Soc.  of  Canada,  1894,"  XII.  Ot- 
tawa, 1895. 

1896  DAWSON,  (S.  E.).    The  Voyages  of  the  Cabots  in  1497  and  1498.    A  sequel 

etc.     "  Proc.  and  Trans,  of  the  R.  Soc.  of  Canada."     2  Ser.,  II,  1896. 

1897  DAWSON  (S.  E.) :  The  Voyages  of  the  Cabots.  Latest  Phases  of  the  Contro- 

versy.   "  Proc.  and  Trans,  of  the  R.  Soc.  of  Canada."    2  Sen,  III,  1897. 
J673     DEBES  (Lucas  Jacobson):     Faeroe  et  Fasroa  Reserata.     Det  er:  Faeroernis  oc 

Faeroeske  Indbyggeris  Beskrivelse  o.  s.  v.     Copenhagen,  1673. 
1849    DELISLE   (L.):     Des  Revenus  Publics  en  Normandie  au  Douzieme  Siecle. 

"  Bibliotheque  de  I'Ecole  des  Chartes."     Hie  Serie,  I.     Paris,   1849. 

1881  DESIMONI    (Cornelio):     Intorno   a   Giovanni   Caboto   Genovese  etc.    "Atti 

della  Societa  Ligure  di  Storia  Patria."     Geneva,  1881. 
1897     DETLEFSEN  (D.).     Zur  Kenntniss  der  Alten  von  der  Nordsee.     "  Hermes," 

XXXIL     Berlin,  1897. 
1904     DETLEFSEN   (D.):     Die  Entdeckung  des  germanischen  Nordens  im  Alter- 

tum.     "  Quellen  u.  Forsch.  z.  alten  Gesch.  u.  Geographic."     Hgb.  v.  W. 

Sieglin.     H.  8.     Berlin,  1904. 
1814    DICUIL,  see  LETRONNE. 

1870     DICUIL:    De  mensura  orbis  terrae,  ed.  Parthey.     Berlin,  1870. 
1890     DIODORUS  SICULUS:  Bibliotheca  Historica.  Ed.  F.  VOGEL.  Leipzig,  1890. 
1881     DOZY   (R.):     Recherches  sur  I'Histoire  et  Litterature  de  I'Espagne.     3.     ed. 

Paris,  Leyde,  1881. 
1836.    EDRISI:    Geographic  d'Edrisi.    Trad,  par  P.  A.  JAUBERT.    "  Recueil  de 

Voyages  et  de  Memoires  publ.  p.  1.  Soc.  de  Geographic."     V.     Paris,  1836. 
i865     EDRISI,     Description  de  I'Afrique  et  dc  I'Espagne  par   EdrisL     Publ.  avec 

trad,  par  R.  Dozy  et  M.  J.  de  Gocje.     Leyden,  1866. 
1741     EGEDE  (Hans):    De  gamle  Gronlands  nye  Perlustration  eller  Naturel-His- 

torie,     Kiobenhafn,  1741. 
1794     EGGERS  (H.  P.) :   Om  Gronlands  Ostcrbygds  sande  Beliggenhed.     "  Det  kgl. 

danske  Landhusholdnings   Selskabs   Skrifter."     IV.     Copenhagen,   1794. 
1845    EINHARDI:    Vita  Caroli  magni,  ed.  B.  H.  PERTZ.    Hannover,  1845. 
386 


WORKS   REFERRED   TO 

EIRIKS  Saga  RauSa,  og  Flatobogens  Groenlendinga-l'attr  o.  s.  v.  ved  Gustav    1891 
Storm.     "  Samfund  til  Utg.  af  gammel  nordisk  Literatur,"  XXI.     Copen- 
hagen, 1891. 
ERATOSTHENES  see  BERGER. 
FABRICIUS    (A.):     Nordmannertogene   til  den   Spanske   Halvo.    "Aarb.   f.     1897 

^Nord.  Oldk.  og.  Hist."     2.  R.,  XII.     Copenhagen,  1897. 
FAQIH  (Ibn  al-) :  Kitab  al-buldan.   Ed.  M.  J.  de  Goeje.   Lugduni-Batavorum,    1865 

1865. 
FERNALD  (M.  L.) :  Notes  on  the  Plants  of  Wineland  the  Good.  "  Rhodora,"     1910 

"Journal  of  the  New  England  Botanical  Club."     XII.     Boston,  1910. 
FISCHER   (M.  P.):    Documents  pour  servir  a  I'Histoire  de  la   Baleine  des     1872 

Basques.     1872.     "  Ann.  d.   Sciences   Nat.  Zoologie."     XV.     Paris,   1872. 
FISCHER  (Theobald):     Beitrage  zur  Geschichte  der  Erdkunde  und  der  Kar-     1886 
tographie  in  Italien  im  Mittelalter.     Samml.  Mittelalterl.  Welt-  und  See- 
karten  italienischen  Ursprungs.     F.  Ongania.     Venice,  1886. 
FORBIGER    (Alb.):    Handbuch   der   alten   Geographic.    I,    1842;   II,    1844;    1842 

III,  1848.     Leipzig. 
FRAHN  (C.  M.).  Ibn-Foszlan's  und  anderer  Araber  Berichte  iiber  die  Russen    1823 

alterer  Zeit.     St.  Petersburg,  1823. 
FRIIS   (Peder  Clausson):    Samlede  Skrifter,  utg.  av  Gustav  Storm.    Chris-    1881 

tiania,,  1881. 
GEELMUYDEN  (H.) :   De  gamle  Kalendere,  saerlig  Islaendernes.  "  Nattiren,"    1883 

VII.     Christiania,  1883. 
GEELMUYDEN  (H.) :  Den  forste  Polarexpedition.  "  Naturen,"  VII.  Chris-    1883a 

tiania,  1883. 
GEIJER  (E.  G.):    Svea  Rikes  Hafder.    I.    Upsala,  1825. 
GEMINI  Elementa  Astronomiae.     Ed.   C.   Manitius.     Leipzig,  1898.     (Greek,     1898 

with  German  trans.) 
GERLAND  (G.).   Zu  Pytheas  Nordlandsfahrt.   "  Beitrage  zur  Geophysik,"  II.     1895 

Stuttgart,  1895. 
GJESSING   (Helge):    Runestenen   fra   Kensington.    "  Symra,"   V.   Decorah,     1909 

1909. 
GOEJE  (M.  J.  de):  La  legende  de  Saint  Brandan.     "  Actes  du  Huitieme  Con-     1891 

gres  internat.  des  Orientalistes,  1880."     Leiden,  1891. 
V.  GRIENBERGER:     Die  nordischen  Volker  bei  Jordanes.     "  Zeitschrift  fiir     1901 

Deutschen  Altertum."     XLV,  1901;  XLVII,  1904.     Berlin.  —04 

GRIMM    (Jacob).     Deutsche    Rechtsalterthumer.     2.   Ausg.     Gottingen,   1854.     1854 
GRIMM  (J.):    Deutsche  Mythologie.    4.  Ausg.    I,  1875;  H,  1876;  III,  1878.     1875 

Berlin.  yg 

GRIMM  (J.):  Geschichte  der  Deutschen  Sprache.    I.   4.  Ausg.   Leipzig,  1880.     1880 
GRONDAL  (B.) :  Folketro  i  Norden,  "  Ann.  f.  Nord.  Oldk.  o.  Hist."  Copenha-     1863 

gen,  1863. 
"Gronlands  Historiske  Mindesmaerker."    Utg.  af  d.  Kgl.  Nordiske  Oldskrift-     1838 

Selskab.     Copenhagen,  1838 — 1845.  — 45 

GUDMUNDSSON    (Valtyr).    Privatboligen    paa    Island    i    Sagatiden;   samt    1889 

delvis  det  ovrige  Norden.     Copenhagen,  1889. 
GUICHOT  Y  SIERRA  (Alejandro):    Supersticiones  populares,  recojidas  en    1884 

Andalucia  y  comparados   con  las   Portuguesas.     "  Biblioteca  de   las  tra- 

diciones  populares  Espanolas.     Madrid,  1884. 
GULDBERG   (Gustav   A.):     En  kort  historisk   Udsigt   over  Hvalfangsten  i     1889 

aeldre  Tider.     "  Folkevennen."     N.  R.,  XIIL     Christiania,  1889. 
GULDBERG  (G.  A.):    Om  Skandinavernes  hvalfangst.    "Nord.  Tidsskrift."    1890 

Stockholm,  1890. 

387 


LIST   OF  THE   MORE   IMPORTANT 

GUNTHER  (S.):    Adam  von  Bremen,  der  erste  deutsche  Geograph.     "  Sitz-     1894 
ungsberichte    der    Koniglich   bohmischen    Gesellschaft    der   Wissenschaf- 
ten  Phil,  histor.  Kl."     1894. 

1850     HAKLUYT  (Richard):     Divers  Voyages  touching  the  Discovery  of  America 
and  its  Islands  Adjacent.     Hakluyt  Society.     London,  1850. 

1903  HAKLUYT  (R.):  The  Principal  Navigations,  etc.  Hakluyt  Society.  Glasgow, 

1903. 
1907     HAMBERG  (Axel) :     Om   eskimaernes  harkomst  och  Amerikas  befolkande. 

"Ymer,"  XXVIL     Stockholm,  1907, 
1855     HAMMERSHAIMB  (V.  U.) :  Faeroiske  Kvasder.   2.  hefte.    Copenhagen,  1855. 

1891  HAMMERSHAIMB   (V.  U.) :    Faeroisk  Anthologi,  I.    Copenhagen,  1891. 

1907  HANSEN   (Andr.  M.):    Oldtidens  Nordmaend  Ophav  og  Besaetning.    "  Gam- 

mel  Norsk  Kultur  i  Tekst  og  Billeder,"  Norsk  Folkemuseum.    Christiania. 
1901. 

1908  HANSEN  (A.  M.):    Om  Helleristningerne.    Foren.  t.  norske  Fortidsmindes- 

maerkers  Bevaring,  Aarsbog.     1908. 

1909  HANSEN    (A.   M.).      Peder   Clausson   om   Sjofinnernes   Sprog.      "  Maal   og 

Minne."     Christiania,  1909. 

1882  HARRISSE  (Henry):  Jean  et  Sebastian  Cabot,  leur  origine  et  leurs  voyages, 

etc.     "  Recueil  de  voyages  et  de  documents,"  etc.     I.     Paris,  1882. 
1883.     HARRISSE    (H.):.    Les    Corte-Real   et   leurs   voyages  au   Nouveau-Monde. 
"  Rec.  de  voy.  et  de  doc,"  etc.     III.     Paris,  1883. 

1892  HARRISSE  (H.):    The  Discovery  of  North  America.     London,  1892. 

1896    HARRISSE  (H.):    John  Cabot  the  Discoverer  of  North  America  and  Sebas- 
tian his  Son.     London,  1896. 

1900  HARRISSE  (H.):    Decouvrte  et  evolution  cartographique  de  Terre-Neuve  et 

des  Pays  Circonvoisins,  1497 — 1501 — 1769.     London,  Paris,  1900. 

1892  "  Hauksbok."    Utg.  af  det  kgl.  Nordiske  Oldskrift-Selskab  (ved  Finnur  Jons- 
—96  son).     Copenhagen,  1892 — 96. 

1904  HEFFERMEHL  (A.  V.).     Presten  Ivar  Bodde  o.  s.  v.     Hist,  Skrifter  tilegn. 

Prof.  Ludvig  Daae  o.  s.  v.  af  Venner  og  Diciple.     Christiania,  1904. 
1878     HEIBERG  (Jacob) :     Lappische  Graber-schadel.     "  Arch  for  Math,  og  Natur- 
vid.,"  III.     Christiania,  1878. 

1905  HELLAND    (Amund) :    Finmarkens  Amt.    "  Norges   Land   og   Folk,"   XX. 

Christiania,  1905. 

1908  HELLAND  (A.) :   Nordlands  Amt.   "  Norges  Land  og  Folk,"  XXIII.   Chris- 

tiania, 1908. 

1893  HERGT  (Gustav) :  Die  Nordlandfahrt  des  Pytheas.     Inaug.-Diss.     Halle,  1893. 

1901  HERRMANN   (Paul) :    Erlauterungen  zu  den  ersten  neun  Buchern  der  Dan- 

ischen  Geschichte  des  "  Saxo  Grammaticus,"  I.     Leipzig,  1901. 
1904    HERTZBERG  (Ebbe):     Nordboernes  gamle  Boldspil.     Hist.  Skrifter  tilegn. 

Prof.  Ludwig  Daae  o.  s.  v.  af  Venner  og  Diciple.     Christiania,  1904. 
1880    "  Historia  Norvegiae  "  see  STORM,  1880. 

1909  HOEGH    (Knut).    Om  Kensington  og   Elbow  Lake-stenene.    "  Symra,"  V. 

Decorah,  1909, 
1865    HOFMANN    (Conrad):    Ueber    das    Lebermeer.    "  Sitzungsber.    d.    konigl. 

bayer.     Akad.  d.  Wissenschaften,"  II,  i.     Munchen,  1865. 
1909    HOLAND    (R.    Hjalmar):     Kensington-stenens   sprog    og   runer.    "Symra," 

V.    Decorah,  1909. 

1883  HOLM  (G.  F.):     Beskrivelse  af  Ruiner  i  Julianehaabs  Distrikt,  der  er  under- 

sogte  i  Aaret  1880.    "  Medd.  om  Gronland,"  VI.    Copenhagen,  1883. 
388 


WORKS  REFERRED   TO 

HOLZ  (Georg):     Beitrage  zur  deutschen  Altertumskunde.     H.     i.    Uber  die     1894 

Germanische  Volkertafel  des  Ptolemaeus.     Halle,  1894. 
HOMEYER  (C.  G.):     Die  Haus-  und  Hofmarken.     Berlin,  1870.  1870 

JRGENS  (O.) :  Et  Sporsmaal,  vedkommende  de  gamle  Nordmaends  oversoiske     1904 

fart.     "  Skrifter  utg.  av  Bergens  hist.  Forening,"  Nr.  10.     Bergen,  1904. 
"Islandske  Annaler"  indtil  1578.     Udg.  £.  d.  "  Norske  hist.  Kildeskriftfond"     1888 

ved  Gustav  Storm.     Christiania,  1888. 
JACOB   (Georg):    Welche   Handelsartikel  bezogen  die  Araber  des  Mittelal-     1891 

ters  aus  den  nordisch-baltischen  Landern?     2.  Ausg.     Berlin,  1891. 
JACOB  (G.) :     Die  Waaren  beim  arabisch-nordischen  Verkehr  im  Mittelalter.  1891a 

Berlin,  1891. 
JACOB   (G.):  Studien  in  arabischen  Geographen.     IV.     Berlin,  1892.  1892 

JACOB   (G.) :     Ein  arabischer  Berichterstatter  aus  dem  10.  Jahrhundert  etc.     1896 

Artikel  aus  Qazwinis  Athar  al-bilad.   3.  verm.  u.  verb.  Aufl.     Berlin,  1896. 
JACUT'S    Geographisches    Worterbuch.     Hgb.    v.    F.    Wustenfeld.     Leipzig,     1866 

i865. 
JAKOBSEN  (Jakob):  Faeroiske  Folkesagn  eg  .ffiventyr.    Copenhagen,  1898—    1898 

1902.  1902 

JAKOBSEN  (J.):  Shetlandsoernes  stednavne.    "  Aarb.  f.  nord.  Oldk."  o.  s.  v.    1901 

1901. 
JANTZEN   (Hermann):    Saxo  Grammaticus.    Die  ersten  neun  Biicher  der    1900 

danischen  Geschichte,  uebersetzt  und  erlautert.     Berlin,  1900. 
JONSSON  (Finnur)  see  "  Hauksbok."  1892 

_96 
JONSSON  (F.):  En  kort  Udsigt  over  den  Islandsk-Gronlandske  Kolonis  His-     1893 

torie.     "  Nord.  Tidsskrift."     Stockholm,  1893. 
JONSSON  (F.):  Den    oldnorske  og  oldislandske  Literaturs  Historie.   I,  1894;     1894 

II   I,    1898;   II  2,   1901.     Copenhagen.  1901 

JONSSON  (F.):  Sigurdarkvida  en  Skamma.    "Aarb.  f.  Nord.  Oldk."  o.  s.  v. 

2  R.,  XII.     Copenhagen,  1897.  1897 

JONSSON    (F.):   Gronlands   gamle   Topografi   efter   Kilderne.    "  Medd.  cm    1899 

Gronland,"  XX.     Copenhagen,  1899. 
JONSSON    (F.J:    Landnamabok.     Copenhagen,   1900.  1900 

JORDANIS  Romana  et  Getica,  rec.  Th.  Mommsen.     "  Monumenta  Germaniae     1882 

Historica."     Berolini,  1882. 
JORDANES  Gothengeschichte.    Ubers.  v.  Wilhelm  Martens.    I.  W.  Watten-     1884 

bach:   "Die  Geschichtschreiber  der  deutschen  Vorzeit.  6.  Jahr."   I.   Leip- 
zig, 1884. 
JOYCE    (P.   W.):     Old    Celtic   Romances.    London,   1879.  1879 

KAHLER    (Friedrich):     Forschungen   zu   Pytheas'   Nordlandsreisen.     Stadt-     1903 

gymnasium  zu  Halle  a.  S.   "  Festschrift  z.  Begriiss.  d.  47  Vers.  Deutscher 

Philologen  u.  Schulmanner  im  Halle."     1903. 
KEYSER  (R.) :  Om  Nordmaendenes  Herkomst  og  Folkeslaegtskab,  "  Samlin-     1839 

ger  til  det  norske  Folks  Sprog  og  Historie,"  VI,  1839.   Reprinted  in  "  Sam-     1868 

lede  Afhandlinger."     Christiania,  1868. 
KHORDADHBEH  (Ibn):    Le  Livre  des  Routes  et  des  Provinces.   Trad,  par     1865 

C.  BARBIER  DE  MEYNARD.     Paris,  1865. 
KHORDADHBEH    (Ibn):     Kitab    al-Masalik    wa'1-mamalik,    auctore   Abn'l-     1889 

Kasim  ....     Ibn  Khordadhbeh,  etc.     "  Bibliotheca  Geographorum  Ara- 

bicorum,"  ed.  M.  J.  de  Goeje,  VI.     Lugduni-Batavorum,  1889. 
KOCH   (John).     Die  Siebenschlaferlegende,  ihr  Ursprung  und  ihre  Verbreit-     1883 

ung.     Leipzig,  1883. 
KOHL  (J.   G.):  Die  erste  Deutsche  Entdeckungsfahrt  zum  Nordpol.    "  Pe-    1869 

term,  geogr.  Mitt."  1869. 

389 


LIST   OF   THE   MORE   IMPORTANT 

1880  KOHL  (J.  G.):  Documentary  History  of  the  Discovery  of  the  State  of  Maine. 

"  Maine  Historical  Soc.  Collections."     Portland,  1880. 
1908     KOHLMANN  (Phipp  Wilhelm):    Adam  von  Bremen.    "  Leipzigs  Historische 
Abhandlungen,"  X.     Leipzig,  1908. 

1908  KOHT  (Halvdan):    Om  Haalogaland  og  Haaloyg-^tten.    "Hist.  Tidsskrift," 

4.  R.,  VI.     Christiania,  1908. 

1909  KOHT   (H.) :    Sagnet  om  Hvitramannaland.    "  Hist.  Tidsskrift,"  4.  R.,  VL 

Christiania,  1909. 
1909     KRABBO   (Hermann).    Nordeuropa  in  der  Vorstellung  Adams  von  Bremen. 
"  Hansische   Geschichtsblatter."     Heft.     I.     Leipzig,   1909. 

1891  KRETSCHMER   (Konrad):    Marino  Sanudo  der  Altere  und  die  Karten  des 

Petrus  Vesconte.     "  Zeitschr.  d.  Gesellsch.  f.  Erdkunde  z.  Berlin,"  XXVI. 
1891. 
1891a  KRETSCHMER  (K.) :  Eine  neue  mittelalterliche  Weltkarte  der  vatikanischen 
Bibliothek.     "Zeitschr.  d.  Gesellsch.  f.  Erdkunde  z.  Berlin,"  XXVI.    1891. 

1892  KRETSCHMER   (K.):     Die    Entdeckung   Amerikas  in  ihrer   Bedeutung   fiir 

die  Geschichte  des  Weltbildes.  "  Festschr.  d.  Gesellsch.  f.  Erdkunde  z.  Ber- 
lin."    1892. 
1897     KRETSCHMER  (K.):  Die  Katalanische  Weltkarte  der  Biblioteca  Estense  zu 

Modena.    "Zeitschr.  d.  Gesellsch.  f.  Erdkunde  z.  Berlin,"  XXXII.     1897. 
1909     KRETSCHMER  (K.):    Die  italienischen  Portolane  des  Mittelalters.    Veroff. 

d.  Instituts  f.  Meereskunde  u.  d.  geogr.  Instituts  a.  d.  Universitat  Berlin, 

XIIL     1909. 
1859     KUNSTMANN  (Fr.).    Die  Entdeckung  Amerikas  nach  den  altesten  Quellen 

geschichtlich    dargestellt.    "Monum.   saec.     Kgl.    Bayerischen   Akad.    d. 

Wissensch."  Munchen,  1859. 
1894    LAFFLER    (L.   Fr.) :    Om   de   5stskandinaviska   Folknamnen  hos   Jordanes. 

"  Bidrag  till  Kannedom  om  de  Svenska  Landsmalen  ock  Svensk  Folklif," 

XIII,  No.  9.     Stockholm,  1894. 
1907     LAFFLER    (L.   Fr.):   Anmarkningar  till  professor   Sophus    Bugges   uppsats 

"  Om  nordiske  Folkenavne  hos  Jordanes."  "  Fornvannen,"  1907.  Stockholm. 
1870    "LAGENIENSIS":    Irish  Folk  Lore.     Glasgow,  1870. 

1881  LAMPROS  (S.  P.):  Cananos  Lascaris  and  Basileios  Batatzes,  two  Greek  trav- 

ellers of  the  14th  and  15th  centuries.   "Parnassos,"  V.   Athens,  1881.    (In 

Greek). 
1888    LANCARBANENSI    (Caradoco):    Vita  Gildae,  in   "  Monumenta   Germaniae 

Historica"  4to.    "  Auctores  antiguissimi,"  XIII,  III:    "Chronica  Minora, 

Saec."    IV,  V,  VI,  VII,  ed.  Th.  Mommsen.     Berolini,  1888. 
1900    "  Landnamabok."    Utg.   af   det  kgl.   nordiske   Oldskrift-Selskab,   (ved  Finnur 

Jonsson).     Copenhagen,  1900. 
1838     LAPPENBERG  (I.  M.):     Von  den  Quellen,  Handschriften  und  Bearbeitun- 

gen  des  Adam  von  Bremen.     "  Archiv.  der  Gesellsch.  f.  altere  deutsche 

Geschichtskunde,"  VI.  Hannover,  1838. 
1876     LAPPENBERG,  see  Adam  of  Bremen. 

1767     LEEM    (Knud):     Beskrivelse    over   Finmarkens   Lapper.     Copenhagen,   1767. 
1852     LELEWEL   (Joachim).     Geographie   du  Moyen  Age.     Breslau,   1852.    Atlas, 

1851. 
1814    LETRONNE  (A.):    Recherches  Geographiques  et  Critiques  sur  le  livre  de 

Mensura  Orbis  Terrae,  etc.  par  Dicuil.     Paris,  1814. 
1872     LIEBRECHT   (Felix):    Sanct  Brandan.     Ein  lateinischer  und  drei  deutsche 

Texte.     Herausg.  von  Schroder.     "  The  Academy,"  III.  1872. 
1689     LILLIENSKIOLD  (Hans  Hansen):  Speculum  boreale,  1689.    MS.  (No.  948— 

949)  in  the  Thott  Collection  in  the  Royal  Library  at  Copenhagen.     Copy 

in  the  collections  of  the  Norwegian  Historical  MSS.  Commission. 


WORKS  REFERRED   TO 

LONBORG  (Sven  Erik):    Adam  af  Bremen  och  hans  skildring  af  Nordeuro-     1897 

pas  Lander  och  Folk.     Akad.  Afh.     Upsala,  1897. 
MACOUDI:  Les  Prairies  d'or.  Par  C.  Barbier  de  Meynard  et  Pavet  de  Cour-    1861 

teille.     "  Coll.  d'ouvr.  orient.     Soc.  Asiatique."    Paris,  1861. 
MACOUDI:  Le  livre  de  I'avertissement  et  de  la  revision.  Par  Carra  de  Vaux.     1896 

"  Coll.  d'ouvr.  orient.  Soc.  Asiatique."     Paris,  1896. 
MANDEVILLE  (John):  The  Voiage  and  Travaile  of  Sir  John  Maundeville.     1883 

Ed.  by  J.  O.  Halliwell.     London,  1883. 
MARKHAM   (Clements  R.) :     Pytheas,  the  Discoverer  of  Britain.    "  Geogr.    1893 

Journal,"  I.     London,  1893. 
MARKHAM  (C.  R.):   The  Journal  of  Christopher  Columbus  and  Documents     1893 

relating    to    the    Voyages    of    John    Cabot    and    Caspar    Cortereal.    The 

Hakluyt  Society,  LXXXVI.     London,  1893. 
MARKHAM  (C.  R.) :   Fourth  Centenary  of  the  Voyage  of  John  Cabot,  1497.    1897 

"  Geogr.  Journal,"  IX.     London,  1897. 
MARX  (Friedrich) :   Aviens  ora  Maritima.   "  Rheinisches  Museum  fur  Philo-    1895 

logic,"  N.  F.  L.     Frankfurt,  1895. 
MATTHIAS   (Franz):    Uber  Pytheas  von   Massilia  und  die   altesten   Nach-     1901 

richten   von   den   Germanen.   Wissensch.     Beilage   z.   "  Jahresbericht   des     1902 

Konigl.     Luisengymnasiums  zu  Berlin."     Programm  No.  62,  1901:     Pro- 

gramm  No.  64,  1902.     Berlin. 
MAURER  (Konrad) :  Die  Bekehrung  des  Norwegischen  Stammes  zum  Chris-    1855 

tenthume.     Miinchen,  1855. 
MAURER  (K.) :  I.  Gronland  im  Mittelalter.  II.  Gronlands  Wiederentdeckung.     1874 

"  Die  zweite  Deutsche  Nordpolarfahrt,"  1869 — 1870.    I.  Leipzig,  1874. 
MAURER  (K.):     Island  von  seiner  ersten  Entdeckung,  etc.    Miinchen,  1874.     1874 
MEHREN    (A.   F.) :    Fremstilling  af   de   Islamitiske  Folks  almindelige   geo-     1857 

graphiske  Kundskaber,  o.  s.  v.     "  Aarb.  f.  nord.   Oldk.  o.  Hist."     Copen- 
hagen, 1857. 
MEHREN   (A.   F.):    Manuel  de  la  Cosmographie  du  Moyen  Age.    Copen-    1874 

hague,  1874. 
MEISSNER  (R.):     Die  Strengleikar.     Halle  a.  S.,  1902. 
MELA  (Pomponius) :  Jordbeskrivelse.    Ovs.  a.  J.  H.  BredsdorfF.   Copenhagen,     1822 

1822. 
METELKA  (J.):    O  neznamem  dosud  vydani  mapy  Islandu  Olaa  Magna  zr.     1895 

1548.     "  Sitzungsber.  d.  kgl.  bohmischen  Gesellsch.  d.  Wissensch.,  CI.  f. 

Philos.,  Gesch.  u.  Philol."    Jahrg.  1895.     Prag,  1896. 
MEYER  (Kuno)  and  NUTT  (Alfred) :  The  Voyage  of  Bran  son  of  Febal  to     1895 

the  Land  of  the  Living.     I,  1895;  II,  1897.     London.  — 97 

MICHELSEN   (A.  L.   J.).     Die   Hausmarke.     Jena,  1853-  1853 

MILLER   (Konrad):   Mappe  mundi.    Die  altesten  Weltkarten,  I— III,   1895;     1895 

IV— V,  1896;  VI,  1898.     Stuttgart. 
MOGK   (E.):    Die  Entdeckung  Amerikas  durch  die  Nordgermanen.     "Mitt.     189a 

d.  Vereins  f.  Erdkunde  z.  Leipzig."     1892. 
MOMMSEN  (Th.)  see  JORDANES. 
MOMMSEN  (Th.)  see  SOLINUS. 
MUCH    (Rudolf):     Goten  und  Ingvaeonen.     "  Beitr.  z.  Gesch.  d.  Deutschen     1893 

Spr.  u  Lit."     XVII.     Halle,  1893. 
MUCH  (R.) :   Germanische  Volkernamen.   "  Zeitschr.  f.  Deutsches  Altertum,"     1895 

XXXIX.     Berlin,  1895. 
MUCH  (R.):  "  Alokiai  Beitr.  z.  Gesch.  d.  Deutschen  Spr.  u.  Lit.,"  XX.  Halle,  1895a 

1895. 


LIST   OF   THE   MORE   IMPORTANT 

1905    MUCH    (R-).      Deutsche    Stammeskunde.    "  Sammlung    Goschen."    Leipzig, 

..  1905. 
1870    MULLENHOFF  (Karl):    Deutsche  Altertumskunde.    I,  1870;  II,  1887;  III, 
1900  1892;  IV,   1900.     Berlin. 

1889  MULLENHOFF   (K.) :    Beovulf.     Berlin,   1889. 

1892     MULLENHOFF  (K.)  and  SCHERER  (W.):    Denkmaler  Deutscher  Poesie 

_  und  Prosa.     3.  Ausg.     Berlin,  1892. 
1909     MULLER  (Sophus) :   De  forhistoriske  Tider  i  Europa.    "  Verdens  Kulturen  " 
ved  Aage  Friis,  11.     Copenhagen,  1909. 

1851  MUNCH    (P.  A.J):    Det  norske  Folks  Historie.     Christiania,  1851. 

1852  MUNCH    (P.   A.).    Geographiske    Oplysninger   om   de   i   Sagaerne   forekom- 

mende    skotske    eg    irske    Stedsnavne.     "Ann.    f.    nord.    Oldk.    o.    Hist." 

Copenhagen,  1852. 
i860    MUNCH   (P.  A.):     Chronica  Regum  Manniae,  ed.  Christiania,  i860. 
1895     MURRAY    (John):     A   Summary   of  the    Scientific   Results,   etc.     Historical 

Introduction.     "  Challenger's   Report,"   Summary,   I.     London,    1895. 

1890  NANSEN  (Fridtjof) :   Pa  ski  over  Gronland.   Christiania,  1890.    (Engl,  transl. 

"  The  First  Crossing  of  Greenland,"  London,  1890.) 

1891  NANSEN  (F.):    Eskimoliv.    Christiania,  1891.    (Engl,  transl.,  "  Eskimo  Life," 

London,   1893.) 
1905     NIELSEN    (Yngvar):    Nordmaend   og    Skraslinger   i   Vinland.     "Hist.   Tids- 

skrift,  4.  R.,  Ill:  and  in  "Norsk  geogr.    Selsk,  Aarbog."     1905. 
1882     NIESE   (B.):    Entwickelung   der   Homerischen   Poesie.     Berlin,   1882. 

1837  NILSSON  (Sven):    Nagra  Commentarier  till  Pytheas  fragmenter  om  Thule. 

"  Physiographiska   Sallskapets   Tidsskrift,"   I,    1837.     Lund,    1837 — 1838. 

1838  NILSSON   (S.).    Einige   Bemerkungen  zu  Pytheas  Nachrichten  uber  Thule 

(from  Swedish).     "  Zeitschr.  Alterthumwiss."     1838. 
1862     NILSSON   (S.):    Skandinaviske  Nordens  Ur-Invanare.    Bronsalderen.    2.  utg. 

1865  Stockholm,  1862.  Tillagg,  1865.  In  German  translation:  "Die  Urein- 
wohner  des  scandinavischen  Nordens."  Das  Bronzealter.  2.  Ausg. 
Hamburg,  1866. 

1815     NOEL   (S.   B.  J.).     Histoire   Generale   des   Peches   Anciennes   et   Modernes. 

Paris,  1815. 
1889     NORDENSKIOLD    (A.   E.):     Facsimile   Atlas.     Stockholm,   1889. 

1892  NORDENSKIOLD    (A.   E.) :     Bidrag   til    Nordens    aldsta    Kartografi.     Utg. 

af  "  Svenska  Sallsk.  f.  Antr.  o.  Geogr."     Stockholm,  1892. 
1897     NORDENSKIOLD  (A.  E.) :     Periplus.     Stockholm,  1897. 
1899     NYSTROM    (J.    F.):     Geografiens    och    de    Geografiska   Upptacktemas   His- 

toria,  till    Borjan   af   1800-Talet.     Stockholm,   1899. 
1905     OLSEN    (Magnus):     Det    gamle   norske    onavn   NjarSarlog.     "  Forh.    i   Vid. 

Selsk."     Christiania,  1905. 
1909    OLSEN   (M.) :  Peder  Clausson  om  Sjofinnemes  Sprog.    "  Maal  og  Minne." 

Christiania,  1909. 
1886     ONGANIA,  see  TH.  FISHER. 
1878     PAULUS  WARNEFRIDI:    Historia  Langobardorum.     Ed.  L.  Bethmann  et 

G.  Waitz.     Script.   Rer.  Langob.   et  Italic.   Saec.   VI^IX.     "  Monumenta 

Germaniae  Historica."     Hannover,  1878. 
1878     PESCHEL    (Johannes):     Das    Marchen    vom    Schlaraffenlande.     "  Beitr.    z. 

Gesch.  d.  Deutschen  Spr.  u.  Lit.,"  V.     Halle,  1878. 

1866  PLINII  (C.)  Secundi:    Naturalis  Historia.    Rec.  D.  Detlefsen.    Berolini,  1866. 
1881     PLINIUS:    Die  Naturgeschichte  des  Cajus  Plinius  Secundus.     Ubs.  v.  G.  C. 

Wittstein.    Leipzig,  1881. 


WORKS  REFERRED   TO 

PLUTARCH:     Moralia,  ed.   BERNARDABIS.     V.     Leipzig,  1893.  1893 

PONTOPPIDAN  (Erich) :  Det  forste  Forsog  paa  Norges  Naturlige  Historic.     1753 

Copenhagen,  1753. 
PORTHAN  (H.  G.),  see  King  ALFRED. 
PROCOPIUS:    Des  Prokopius  von   Casarea  Geschichte  seiner  Zeit;  III   og     1829 

IV,  Gothische  Denkwiirdigkeiten.     Ubers,  von  P.  F.  Kanngeisser.     Greifs- 

wald,  1829  og  1831. 
PROCOPIUS:     Procopii    C^sariensis    opera    omnia.     Recognovit    Jacobus    1905 

Haury.     Leipzig,  1905. 
PTOLEM^US    (Claudius):     Claudii   Ptolemasi   Geographiae   libri   octo.     Ed.     1838 

F.  G.  Wilberg.     Essendiae,  1838. 
PULLE    (F.   L.)   and    LONGHENA    (M.):     Illustrazione   del   Mappamondo     1907 

Catalano  della  Biblioteca   Estense  di  Modena.    "  VI   Congress©  Geogra- 

fico  Itaniano,  Venezia,  1907."     Venezia,  1908. 
QAZWINI:     Zakarija  b.  Muhammed  b.  Mahmud  el-Caswinis  Kosmographie.     1848 

Hgb.  von  F.  Wustenfeld.     Gottingen,  1848. 
QVIGSTAD   (J.  K.):     Nordische  Lehnworter  im  Lappischen.    "  Forhandl.  i     1893 

Vid.-Selsk."     Christiania,  1893. 
QVIGSTAD    (J.    K.):    Peder   Clausson   om   Sjofinnernes   Sprog.     "  Maal   og     1909 

Minne."     Christiania,  1909. 
RAFN    (C.    Chr.) :     Antiquitates   Americanae.     Copenhagen,   1837.  1837 

RANISCH    (Wilhelm):     Die    Gautreksaga.     "Palaestra,"    XI.     Berlin,    1900.     1900 
RASK  (R.),  see  King  ALFRED.  1815 

RAVENNA   GEOGRAPHER:    Ravennatis  Anonymi   Cosmographia  et  Gui-     i860 

donis   Geographican.     Ed.   M.   Pinder   et   G.   Parthey.     Berolini,   i860. 
RAVENSTEIN  (E.  G.) :  Martin  Behaim,  his  Life  and  his  Globe.  London,  1908.     1908 
REEVES  (Arthur  Middleton).   The  Finding  of  Wineland  the  Good.    London,     1895 

1895. 
REINACH  (Salomon):  L'etain  celtique.  "  L'Anthropologie,"  III.  Paris,  1892.     1892 
RINK    (H.):     Gronland,   geografisk   og   statistisk  beskrevet.     Copenhagen,       1852 

1852—57.  —57 

RINK   (H.):     Eskimoiske  Eventyr  og  Sagn.     Copenhagen,  1866.  1866 

RINK   (H.):    Om  Eskimoernes  Herkomst.     "  Aarb.  f.  nord.  Oldk.  o.  Hist."     1871 

Copenhagen,  1871. 
RINK   (H.).     Om  de  eskimoiske  Dialekter  som  Bidrag  til  Bedommelsen  af     1885 

Sporgsmaalet  om  Eskimoernes  Herkomst  og  Vandringer.     "  Aarb.  f.  nord. 

Oldk.  o.  Hist."     Copenhagen,  1885. 
RINK  (H.).    The  Eskimo  Dialects  as  serving  to  determine  the  Relationship 

between  the  Eskimo  Tribes.     Anthrop.  Inst,  of  Great  Britain  and  Ireland, 

XV. 
RINK  (H.):    The  Eskimo  Tribes.    "  Medd.  om  Gronland,"  XL    Copenhagen    1887 

1887;  and  "Supplement"  to  XI.     1891. 
ROHDE  (Erwin):     Der  Griechische  Roman  und  seine  Vorlaufer.     2.     Aufl.    1900 

Leipzig,  1900. 
RUGE    (Sophus):      Die    Entdeckungs-Geschichte    der   Neuen   Welt.     "  Fest-     1892 

schrift  der  Hamburgischen  Amerika-Feier,"  I.     Hamburg,  1892. 
RUGE    (S.):      Die   Entwickelung   der   Kartographie   von   Amerika  bis   1570.     1892 

"  Peterm.   geogr.  Mitt."     Erg.  heft  No.  106.     Gotha,  1892. 
RYDBERG   (Viktor):    Undersokningar  i  Germanisk  Mythologi.  Stockholm,    1886 

1886. 
"  Rymbegla  "  sive  rudimentum  compasti  ecclesiatici  veterum  islandorum.  Ed.     1790 

Stephanus   Biornonis.     Havniae,   1780. 
SAN-MARTHE.     Die  Sagen  von  Merlin.     Halle,  1853.  1853 

393 


LIST    OF   THE    MORE    IMPORTANT 

1877     SARS   (J.  Ernst):  Udsigt  over  den  norske  Historic.    Christiania,  I— IV,  1877 
(2.  utg.)— 1891. 
SAXO  GRAMMATICUS,  see  HERRMANN  and  JANTZEN. 
1873     SCHIERN    (Frederik):    Om    Oprindelsen    til    Sagnet    om    de    guldgravende 
Myrer.     Ovs.    over    Kgl.    Danske    Vid.-Selsk.    Forh.     Copenhagen,  1873, 

1888  SCHIRMER  (Gustav).    Zur  Brendanus-Legende.    Habilitationsschrift.    Leip- 

zig, 1888. 

1881     SCHLIEMANN  (H.):     IHon.     Leipzig,  1881. 

1851  SCHOOLCRAFT  (Henry  R.) :  Historical  and  Statistical  Information  re- 
specting the  History,  Condition  and  Prospects  of  the  Indian  Tribes  of 
the  United  States.     Philadelphia,  1851. 

1901  SCHRADER  (O.):  Reallexikon  der  Indogermanischen  Altertumskunde. 
Strassburg,  1901. 

1871     SCHRODER   (Carl):     Sanct  Brandan.     Erlangen,  1871. 

1890  SCHUCHHARDT:  Schliemanns  Ausgrabungen  im  Lichte  der  heutigen 
Wissenschaft.     Leipzig,  1890. 

1904  SCHULTZ-LORENTZEN:    Eskimoernes  Indvandring  i  Gronland.     "  Medd. 

om  Gronland,"  XXVI.     Copenhagen,  1904. 

1898  SCHWEIGER-LERCHENFELD   (A.  v.):    Der  Bernstein  als  Handelsartikel 

bei  den  Alten.     "  Oesterr.  Monatschrift  fiir  den  Orient."     Wien,  1898,  No. 
12,  Anhang. 
1884    SCHWERIN    (H.   H.   von):    Herodots   framstallning   af   Europas   Geografi. 
Lund,  1884. 

1905  SCHWERIN   (H.  H.  von:)    De  Geografiska  Upptackternas  Historia.    Forn- 

tiden  och  Medeltiden.     Stockholm,  1905. 

1908  SCISCO  (L.  D.) :  The  Tradition  of  Hvittramanna-land.  "  American  His- 
torical Magazine,"  III.     1908. 

1896  SEIPPEL  (Alexander):  Rerum  Normannicarum  fontes  Arabici.  Fasc.  I. 
Christiania,  1896.     (In  Arabic) 

i886  SERBILLOT  (Paul):  Legendes  croyances  et  superstitions  de  la  Mer.  Paris, 
1886. 

1908  SIRET    (Louis):     Les    Cassiterides    et    I'empire    Colonial    des    Pheniciens. 
— 09  "  L'Anthropologie,"  XIX,  1908;  XX,  no.  2 — 4.     Paris,  1909. 

1899  SNORRE  STURLASON:  Kongesagaer  oversat  av  G.  Storm.  Christiania,  1899. 

1909  SOLBERG    (O.):     Die   Wohnplatze   auf   der   Kjelminsel   in    Siid-Waranger. 

1910  Vid.-Selsk.  Skr.,"  II,  1909,  No.  7.  .  Christiania,  1910. 

1907     SOLBERG  (O.):    Beitrage  zur  Vorgeschichte  der  Ost-Eskimo.     "Vid.-Selsk. 

Skr.,"  II,  No.  2.     Christiania,  1907. 
1895    SOLINI    (C.  Julii):     Collectanea  rerum  memorabilium,   ed.  Th.  Mommsen. 

Berolini,  1895. 
1905     STEENSBY   (H.  P.):    Om  Eskimokulturens  Oprindelse.    Copenhagen,  1905. 

1889  STEENSTRUP    (Japetus):    Nogle    Bemerkninger   om    Ottar's    Beretning   til 

Kong    Alfred    om    Hvalros-    og    Hvalfangst    i   Nordhavet   pa    bans    Tid. 

"Hist.  Tidsskr.,"  6.  R.  II.     Copenhagen,  1889. 
1876     STEENSTRUP   (Johannes  C.  H.  R.):     Normannerne,  I.     Copenhagen,  1876. 
1899     STEENSTRUP   (K.  I.  V.):    Om  CDsterbygden.    "  Medd.  om  Gronland,"  IX. 

Copenhagen,  1899. 

1880  STORM   (Gustav) :    "  Monumenta  Historica  Norvegiae."    Latinske  Kildeskrif- 

ter  til  Norges  Historic  i  Middelalderen,  udgivne  ved  G.  Storm.     Chris- 
tiania, 1880. 

1881  STORM  (G.),  see  Peder  Clausson  FRIIS. 

1886     STORM   (G.):    Om  Betydningen  av  "  Eyktarstadr "  i  Flatobogens  Beretning 
om  Vinlandsreiserne.     "  Arkiv.  f.  Nord.  Filologi,"  III.     Christiania,  1886. 
394 


WORKS  REFERRED   TO 

STORM   (G.):  Studier  over  Vinlandsreiserne,  Vinlands  Geografi  og   Ethno-     1887 

grafi.  Reprinted  from  "  Aarb.  for  nord,  Oldk.  o.  Hist."  1887.  Copenhagen, 

1888. 
STORM  (G.):  Studies  on  the  Vineland  Voyages.  Extracts  from  "Mem.  d.  1.     1888 

See.  Royale  d.  Antiquaires  du  Nord,"  1888.     Copenhagen,  1889.  1889 

STORM   (G.),  see  "  Islandske  Annaler."  1888 

STORM  (G.) :  Om  Kilderne  til  Lyschanders  "  Grondlandske  Cronica."  "  Aarb.     1888 

for  nord.  Oldk.  o.  Hist."     Copenhagen,  1888. 
STORM  (G.):  Om  det  i  1285  fra  Island  fundne  "Nye  Land."  "Hist.  Tidsskr."  1888a 

2.  R.,  VI.     Christiania,  1888. 

STORM    (G.):     Den  danske  Geograf  Claudius  Clavus  eller  Nicolaus  Niger.     1889 

"  Ymer."     Stockholm,  1889,  1891. 
STORM    (G.):     Ginnungagap.     "  Arkiv  f.  Nord.   Filologi,"   VI.     (N.   F.   II).     1890 

Lund,  1890. 
STORM  (G.) :   Om  Biskop  Gisle  Oddsons  Annaler.  "  Arkiv  f.  Nord.  Filologi,"  1890a 

VI.    (N.  F.  II).     Lund.  1890. 
STORM  (G.),  see  EIRIKS  Saga  RauSa.  i8gi 

STORM   (G.):  Nye  Efterretninger  om  det  gamle  Groland.  "Hist.  Tidsskr.,"     1892 

3.  R.  II.     Christiania,  1892. 

STORM  (G.):  Columbus  pa  Island  og  vore  Forfaedres  Opdagelser  i  det  nord-     1893 

vestlige  Atlanterhav.  "  Norske  geogr,  Selsk.  Aarbog,"  IV.  Christiania,  1893. 
STORM  (G.) :    Om  opdagelsen  av  "  Nordkap  "  og  veien  til  "  det  Hvite  Hav."     1894 

"  Norske  geogr.  Selsk.  Aarbog."  V.     Christiania,  1893 — 94. 
STORM   (G.):   Utg.  av  Historisk  topografiske  Skrifter  om  Norges  og  norske     1895 

Landsdele  forfattede  i  Norge  i  det  i6de  Aarhundrede.    Christiania,  1895. 
STORM  (G.):    Et  brev  til  pave  Nicolaus  den  5te  om  Norges  beliggenhet  og     1899 

undre.     "  Norske  geogr.  Selsk,  Aarbog,"  X.     Christiania,  1899. 
STORM    (G.):     Erig   den   Rodes   Saga   eller    Sagaen   om   Vinland,    oversat.  1899a 

Christiania,  1899. 
STORM  (G.),  see  SNORRE  STURLASON.  1899 

STRABO'S  Erdbeschreibung,  ubs.  v.  A.  Forbiger.     Stuttgart,  1856—58.  1856 

STRABONIS  Geographica.     Recogn,  Aug.   Meineke.     Leipzig,   1877.  1877 

STROM   (G.):     Beskrivelse  over  Sondmor.     Soroe,  1766.  1766 

SYDOW  (C.  W.  von):     Tors  Fard  till  Utgard.     "Danske  Studier,"  1910.  1910 

TACITI  (Cornelii)  Agricola.     Ovs.  a.  H.  W.  Ottesen.     Christiania,  1870.  1870 

TACITI    (Cornelii)    Germania.     Erb.  v.  A.   Baumstark.     Leipzig,    1881.  1881 

TACITUS  (Cornelius):    Germania  Antiqva,  etc.   Ed.  Karolus  Muellenhoffivs.     1873 

Berolini,  1873. 
TACITUS  (C.) :    Die  Germania  des  Tacitus.  Ubs.  v.  Anton  Baumstark.   Frei-    1876 

burg  in  Br.,  1876. 
TARDUCCI   (Francesco):    Di  Giovanni  e  Sebastiano  Caboto.     "  R.  Deputa-     1892 

zione  Veneta  di  Storia  Patria."     Venezia,  1892. 
TARDUCCI    (F.):     H.   Harrisse   la   Fama   di   Sebastiano    Caboto.     "  Revista     1894 

Storica  Italiana,"  XI,  fasc.  IV.     Torino,  1894. 
THALBITZER    (William):    A   phonetical   study    of   the   Eskimo   Language.     1904 

"  Medd.  om  Gronland,"  XXXI.     Copenhagen,  1904. 
THALBITZER  (W.).   Skraelingerne  i  Markland  og  Gronland,  deres  Sprog  og     1905 

Nationalitet.     "  Overs,   over  Kgl.   Danske  Vid.-Selsk.   Forh.,"  No.  2.  Co- 
penhagen, 1905. 
THALBITZER    (W.):     Bidrag    til    Eskimoernes    Fortidshistorie.     "Geogr.     1908 
Tidsskrift,"  XIX,  1908;  XX,  1909— 1910.     Copenhagen.  —10 

THEOPHRASTUS:   Historia   Plantarum.     German  transl.     Naturgeschichte     1822 

der  Gewachse,  ed.  R.  Sprengel.    Altona,  1822. 

395 


MORE  IMPORTANT  WORKS  REFERRED  TO 

1882  THOMSEN  (Vilhelm):  Ryska  Rikets  Grundlaggning  genom  Skandinaverna. 
Ofvers.  ved  Sven  Soderberg.  "  Ur  Var  Tids  Forskning,"  XXX.  Stock- 
holm, 1882. 

1897  THORODDSEN  (Th.) :  Geschichte  der  Islandischen  Geographic,  I,  1897;  II, 

1898.     Leipzig. 
1889    TOMASCHEK  (Wilhelm):    Kritik  der  altesten  Nachrichten  uber  den  skythi- 
schen  Norden.    "  Sitzungsber.  d.  Philos.-Hist.    CI.  d.  R.  Akad.  d.  Wiss.'* 
Wien,  CLXX,  1889. 

1843  THUE  (H.  J.):    Om  Pytheas  fra  Marseille  og  Hans  Reiser  til  det  nordlige 

Europa.     "  Nor,"  II.     Christiania,  1843. 

1908  VANGENSTEN  (Ove  C.  L.):  Michel  Beheims  Reise  til  Danmark  og  Norge 

i  1450.     "  Vid.-Selsk.  Skr.,"  1908,  II,  No.  2.     Christiania. 
1910    VANGENSTEN    (Ove    C.    L.) :     Middelalderens    Norges-Karter.     "Norske 
Geogr.  Selsk.  Aarb.,"  1910.     Christiania. 

1898  VAUX  (Carra  de) :    L'Abrege  des  Merveilles,  traduit  de  I'Arabe.    Paris,   1898. 
1856    VIGFUSSON  (Gudbrand):    Safn  til  sogn  Islands  og  Islenzkra  Bokmenta  aS 

fornu  og  nyju.     Copenhagen,  1856. 
1878    VIGFUSSON  (G.):    Sturlunga  saga.    Oxford,  1878. 

1844  WACKERNAGEL     (Wilh.):     Geographic     des    Mittelalters.    "Zcitschr.    f, 

Deutsches  Alterthum,"  IV.     Leipzig,  1844. 
1902    WALKENDORF  (Erik):    Finmarkens  Beskrivelse.    Utg.  av.  K.  H.  Karlsson 

og    Gustav    Storm.    "Norse     Geogr.    Selsk.    Aarb.,"    XII.    1900 — 1901. 

Christiania,  1902. 
1833    WELCHER  (F.  G.):    Die  Homerischen  Phaaken  und  die  Inseln  der  Seligen. 

"  Rhenisches  Museum  fur  Philologic,"  I.     Bonn,  1833. 
1789    WIELAND  (C.  M.);    Lucians  von  Samosata  Samtlichc  Werke,  IV,  Wahre 

Geschichte.     Leipzig,  1789. 
1895    WIKLUND  (K.  B.):    Om  kvanerna  och  deras  nationalitet.    "Arkiv  £.  Nord. 

Filologi,"  XII.     Lund,  1895. 
1854    WUTTKE  (H.):    Cosmographia  Aethici  Istrici.    Leipzig,  1854. 
1837    ZEUSS  (Kaspar):    Die  Deutschen  und  die  Nachbarstammc.    Miinchen,  1837. 
1889    ZIMMER   (Heinrich):     Keltische  Beitragc.     "Zcitschr.  f.  Deutsches  Alter- 
thum," XXXIII.    Berlin,  1889. 
1891    ZIMMER  (H.):  Uber  die  friihesten  Beriihrungen  der  Iren  mit  den  Nordger- 

manen.     "  Sitzungsber.  der  Berliner  Akademie,"  i8gi. 
1893    ZIMMER    (H.):     Nennius    Vindicatus.     Uber    Entstehung,    Geschichte   und 

Quellen  der  Historia  Brittonum.     Berlin,  1893. 

1909  ZIMMER  (H.):    Uber  direkte  Handelsverbindungcn  Westgalliens  mit  Irland 

im  Altertum  und  friihen  Mittelalter.    "  Sitzungsber  d.  Kgl.  Prcussischen 
Akad.  d.  Wissenschaften."    Berlin,  1909. 


396 


INDEX 


Aasen,  L,  i.  352;  ii.  9 

Abalus,  Island  of,  i.  70,  71,  72,  73,  118, 

365 

Ablabius,  i.  129,  142,  144,  155 

Abu  Hamid,  ii.  145,  146 

Abyss,  at  the  edge  of  the  world,  i.  12, 
84,  157-9.  195.  199".  ii-   i5o»  154.  240 

Adam  of  Bremen,  i.  21,  59,  84,  112, 
135.  159.  179.  182,  183,  184-202,  204, 
206,  229,  252,  258,  303,  312,  353,  362, 
363.  365,  367,  382-4;  ii-  2,  II,  26,  29, 
31,  32,  58,  63,  64,  65,  loi,  143,  147- 
54,  165,  168,  177,  192,  214,  224,  237, 
238,  240,  243,  278,  284 

"Adogit,"   Northern  people,   L   131-3, 

143.  194 
Msea,  Isle  of,  i.  13 
^lian,  i.  12,  16,  17 
^ningia,  i.  loi,  104 
^stii  (see  Esthonians) 
iEthicus  Istricus,  i.  154-5,  187,  188 
"^tternis  stapi"  (the  tribal  cliff),  L 

18-9 
Africa,     Supposed     connection     with 

Wineland,  i.  326;  ii.  1-2,  29,  61,  240, 

248,  280 
Agathemerus,  i.  44 
Agricola,  i.  107-8,  117 
Agrippa,  i.  97,  106 

Ahlenius,  K.,  i.  43,  93,  104,  112,  131 
Aithanarit,  i.  144,  153,  154 
Alani,  i.  188,  383 

Albertus  Magnus,  ii.  158,  163,  178,  234 
Albi,  mappamundi  at,  ii.  183 
Albion  (see  Britain),  i.  38,  39,  117 
Aleutians,  ii.  69,  71 
Alexander  the  Great,  i.   19,  182,  363; 

ii.  57,  206,  207,  213 
Alexander  VI.,  Pope,  Letter  from,  on 

Greenland   (1492-3),  ii.   106,  121-2 
Alexander,  Sir  William,  ii.  3 
Alfred,  King,  i.   104,  160,  169-81,  204, 

252;  ii.  156,  243 
Al-Gazal,  voyage  to  the  land  of  the 

Magus,  ii.  200-2 


Algonkin  tradition,  ii.  7-8,  93;  lacrosse 
among,  ii.  40 

Alociae,  i.  118,  119,  132 

Amalcium  (northern  sea),  i.  98-9,  105 

Amazons,  i.  20,  87,  88,  112,  114,  150, 
154.  159.  i5o.  186,  187,  189,  198,  356, 
383;  ii.  64,  188,  197,  206,  209,  214 

Amber,  i.  14,  19,  22,  23,  27,  31-4,  70, 
71,  72,  96,  loi,  106,  109-10;  il  207 

Amdrup,  Captain,  i.  290 

America,  discovered  by  the  Norse- 
men, i.  234,  248,  312;  ii.  22,  61,  63 

Ammianus   Marcellinus,  i.  44,   123 

Anaxagoras,  i.  12 

Anaximander  of   Miletus,  i.  11 

Anaximenes,  i.  11,  128 

Angles,  i.   180 

Anglo-Portuguese  expeditions  of  1501, 
ii.  331-2,  357;  of  1502,  ii.  332-4;  of 
1503,  ii.  334-5;  of  1504,  ii.  335 

Angmagsalik,  Greenland,  i.  261,  263, 
282,  290,  291 ;  ii.  73 

"  Anostos,"  The  gulf,  i.  17,  158;  ii.  150, 
240 

Ants,  fabulous,  i.  154,  336;  ii.  197 

Apollo,  worshiped  among  the  Hyper- 
boreans, i.  16,  18,  19 

Apollonius  of  Rhodes,  L  19,  44 

Appulus,  Guillelmus,  ii.  162 

Arab  myths,  i.  382;  ii.  10,  51,  197,  206- 
8,  213-4;  affinity  to  Irish,  ii.  207 

Arabs,  i.  362,  366;  ii.  57;  their  trade 
with  North  Russia,  ii.  143-7,  194; 
their  culture,  ii.  194-5;  possible  ex- 
change of  ideas  with  the  Irish,  ii. 
207;    Arab   geographers,   ii.    194-214 

Arctic,  origin  of  the  word,  i.  8;  Arctic 
Circle,  i.  53,  55-7,  62,  76,  117 

Arctic  Ocean,  Voyages  in,  i.  287;  ii. 
177  (see  also  Polar  Sea) 

Are  Frode  ("  Islendingabok"),  i.  165- 
6,  201,  253-4,  257,  258-60,  312,  313, 
331.  332,  353.  354.  366,  367,  368;  ii. 
XI,  16,  26,  58,  60,  77-8,  82,  86,  91. 

Are  Marsson,  voyage  to  Hvitraman- 

397 


INDEX 


naland,  i.  331-2,  353-4,  377;  "•  42, 
43,  46,  50 

Argippaeans,  i.  23,  88,  114,  155 

Arimaspians,  i,  16,  19,  98 

Arimphaei,  i.  88;  ii.  188 

Aristarchus  of  Samos,  i.  47,  77 

Aristeas  of  Proconnesus,  i.  19 

Aristotle,  i.  28,  40,  41,  44,  76,  182;  ii. 
48,  194 

Arnbjorn  Austman,  lost  in  Greenland, 
L  283 

Arngrim  Jonsson,  i.  263;  ii.  79 

"Arochi"  (or  "Arothi";  see  Haru- 
des),  i.  136,  148 

Asbjornsen,  i.  381 

Askeladden,  Tale  of,  i.  341 

Assaf  Hebraeus,  ii.  200 

Assyria,  supposed  communication 
with  the  North,  i.  35,  36 

"  Astingi,"  or  "  Hazdingi "  (Hadding- 
jar,  Hallinger),  i.  104 

Athenaeus,  i,  46,  351 

"  Atlamal  en  grcenlenzku,"  i.  273. 

Atlantic  Ocean,  i.  10,  39,  40,  77,  78, 
251,  315,  316,  346;  ii.  154,  293,  307, 
308 

Atlantis,  i.  376;  ii.  293 

Aubert,  Karl,  ii.  253 

"  Augandzi,"  i.  136 

Austlid,  Andreas,  i.  340 

Avallon,  Isle  of,  i.  72,  365-6,  379;  ii. 
20 

d'Avezac,  M.  P.,  i.  362;  ii.  216,  290 

Avienus,  Rufus  Festus,  i.  37-42,  68,  83, 
123,  128,  130 

Aviones,  i.  95,  118 

Ayala,  Pedro  de,  adjunct  to  the  Span- 
ish Ambassador  in  London,  ii.  295, 
297,  298,  299,  301,  310,  311,  324,  325- 
6 

Azores,  discovered,  ii.  292;  expedi- 
tions from,  ii.  293,  345,  346,  347 


"  Bacallaos,"    name    for    Newfound- 
land, ii.  329,  337,  339 
Bacon,  Roger,  ii.  215,  249 
Baffin  Land,  i.  322,  323;  ii.  41 
Baffin  Bay,  i.  248,  250,  304,   305,  308, 
309;  ii,  41,  72 


Bahlul,  Ibn  al-,  ii.  197 

Balcia,  Island  of,  i.  71,  72,  99,  100,  loi, 
185 

Balder,  i.  372 

Baltic,  amber  from,  L  14,  22,  32,  34, 
35,  96;  ancient  names  for,  and  ideas 
of,  i.  93,  99,  100,  105,  log,  121,  131, 
167,  169,  185;  ii.  210,  211,  219;  rep- 
resentation of,  in  mediaeval  cartog- 
raphy, Ii.  219,  224,  227,  257,  269, 
284,  286;  overland  communication 
with  the  Black  Sea,  i.  244;  ii.  199 

Basilia,  island,  i.  70,  71,  99 

Basques,  as  whalers,  ii.  159-62. 

Bastarni  (Bastamae),  i.  iii,  112,  113, 
114 

Batuta,  Ibn,  ii.  144,  145 

Baumgartner,  A.,  i.  193 

Baumstark,  A.,  i.  113 

Baunonia,  Island  of,  i.  70,  98 

Bavarian  geographer.  The,  i.  167 

Bayeux  tapestry,  L  239,  248,  249;  ii. 
237,  239 

Bears,  Polar,  i.  191,  192,  323;  iL  72, 
112,  177,  191 

Beatus  map,  i.  198,  199;  ii.  184,  185-6 

Beauvois,  E.,  ii.  40,  90 

Beazley,  C.  R.,  ii.  215,  295 

Bede,  L  151,  184,  193,  194,  199;  ii.  20, 
156 

Behaim,  Martin,  ii.  86,  287-9,  359»  372 

Beheim,  Michel,  i.  226;  ii.  85,  86,  iii, 
117,  144,  270 

Belcae,  or  "  Belgae,"  i.  89,  92 

Benedikson,  E.,  i.  59 

Beormas,  i.  171,  173-5,  214,  218,  219, 
222;  ii.  135  (see  also  Bjarmas) 

"  Beowulf,"  i.  234,  372 

Berard,  V.,  i.  348,  371,  379 

Bergen,  ii.  80,  120,  122,  125,  157,  169, 
178,  210,  220,  221,  222,  260,  261,  264, 
265,  266,  281,  286 

Berger,  H.,  i.  11,  12,  43,  75 

"  Bergos,"  island,  i.  106,  107 

Bering  Strait,  i.  212,  223;  ii.  68,  69,  84 

Berneker,  Prof.,  ii.  175-6 

"  Berricen "  (or  "Nerigon"),  i.  53, 
57-8,  106,  107 

Bethmann  and  Waitz,  i.  139 

Bexell,  ii.  56 


INDEX 


Bianco,     Andrea,     map     of     Europe 

(1436),  ii.  267,  282 
Bible,  The,  i.   125,  126,   153,   184,  338, 

358,  363;  ii-  45.  46,  184,  185 
Birds,  used  to  find  position  at  sea,  i. 

250-1,  257,  318 
Biruni,  ii.  igg,  200 
Bishops  of  Greenland,  i.  273,  283;  ii. 

29,   30-1,   98-9,   106,   108,    113-4,   121, 

122,  134 

"  Biskupa  Sogur,"  i.  284;  ii.  8 

Bjarmas  (see  also  Beormas),  ii.  135- 
40,  167 

Bjarmeland  (Northern  Russia),  i.  173- 
5,  288;  ii.  135-42,  154,  164,  165,  166, 
168,  172,  237,  268;  "Farther  Bjarme- 
land," ii.  165-6 

Bjarne  Grimolfsson,  Wineland  voy- 
ager, i.  319,  320,  326,  329,  330;  ii.  20 

Bjarne  Herjulfsson,  traditional  dis- 
coverer of  Wineland,  i.  314,  317,  334; 
ii.  21 

Bjarneyjar  (Bear-islands),  Greenland, 
i.  301,  302,  304,  321,  322,  323,  335, 
336 

Bjorn  Breidvikingekjaempe,  i.  360;  ii. 
49.  50,  53.  54.  56 

Bjorn  Einarsson  Jorsalafarer,  ii.  82, 
106,  112,  113 

Bjorn  Jonsson  of  Skardsa  (Annals  of 
Greenland),  i.  263,  282-3,  288,  292, 
295.  299,  301,  308,  309,  321,  377;  ii. 
35,  37.  82,  83,  239 

Bjorn  Thorleifsson,  shipwrecked  in 
Greenland,  ii.  82 

Bjornbo,  Dr.  A.  A.,  i.  200,  201,  202, 
297;  ii.  2,  31,  32,  116,  123,  127,  132, 
147,  154,  193,  220,  221,  223,  224,  225, 
226,  233,  234,  240,  249,  250,  253,  261, 
262,  264,  273,  277,  278,  281,  283,  284, 
287,  289,  332,  353,  368,  369,  370,  374, 
375 

Bjornbo   and   Petersen,  i.   226;  ii.   85, 

123,  124,  127,  219,  232,  234,  249,  250, 
252,  253,  254,  255,  256,  258,  262,  263, 
267,  273,  275,  277,  377 

Blaserkr   (Greenland),  i.  267,  291-6 

Blom,  O.,  ii.  8 

Boas,  F.,  ii.  69,  70 

Boats  of  hides  (coracles,  etc.),  in  the 


CEstrjntnnides,  L  38,  39;  Scythians, 
Saxons,  etc.,  i.  154,  242;  Greenland- 
ers',  i.  305;  Irish,  ii.  92;  Skraelings', 
in  Wineland,  i.  327;  ii.  10,  19;  in 
Trondhjem  cathedral,  ii.  85,  89,  117, 
269,  270;  in  Irish  tales,  i.  336;  ii.  20; 
in  Newfoundland  (?),  iL  367;  Es- 
kimo, see  Kayaks  and  Women's 
Boats 

Bobe,  Louis,  ii.  126 

Borderie,  A.  de  la,  L  234 

Borgia  mappamundi,  ii.  284-5. 

Bornholm,  i.  169,  180;  ii.  204,  265 

Bothnia,  Gulf  of,  i.  169,  187;  ii. 
269;  in  mediaeval  cartography,  ii. 
219 

"Boti,"  i.  87 

Bran,  Voyage  of,  I  198,  354,  356,  365, 
370;  ii.  56 

Brandan,  Legend  of,  i.  281-2,  334,  337, 
344.  345,  358-64,  366,  376;  I  9,  10, 
13.  18,  19,  43-5.  50,  51,  61,  64,  75,  151, 
206,  214,  228-9,  234 

Brattalid,  in  Greenland,  i.  268,  270, 
271.  275,  317,  319,  320,  331 

Brauns,  D.,  i.  377;  ii.  56 

"  Brazil,"  Isle  of  (Hy  Breasail, 
O'Brazil,  etc.),  i.  3,  357,  379;  ii.  30, 
228-30,  279,  294-5,  318;  expeditions 
to  find,  ii.  294-5,  301,  325 

Breda,  O.  J.,  ii.  31 

Brenner,  O.,  i.  58 

Brinck  ("  Descriptio  Loufodiae "),  i. 
378 

Bristol,  trade  with  Iceland,  ii.  119, 
279,  293;  Norwegians  living  at,  ii. 
119,  180;  expeditions  sent  out  from, 
ii.  294-5,  298,  301,  304,  325,  326,  327, 
330,  331 

Britain,  i.  193,  234,  240,  241 ;  visited  by 
Pytheas,  i.  49,  50-3;  Caesar  on,  i.  79- 
80;  Mela  on,  i.  97;  Pliny  on,  ii.  106; 
Ptolemy  on,  i.  117;  in  mediaeval  car- 
tography, ii.  220,  227 

Brittany,  cromlechs  in,  i.  22;  tin  in, 
i.  23,  26,  27,  29-31,  38-42 

Broch,  Prof.  Olaf,  ii.  142,  175,  176 

Brogger,  A.  W.,  i.  14 

Bronlund,  Jorgen,  i.  2-3 

Bruun,  D.,  i.  164,  270,  271,  274,  275 

399 


INDEX 


Bugge,  Prof.  A.,  i.  136,  137,  138,  146, 
163,  164,  166,  170,  173,  234,  245,  246, 
258,  297,  304;  ii.  7,  55,  80,  168,  201 

Bugge,  Sophus,  i.  93,  94,  103,  132,  134, 
135,  136,  138,  146,  148,  207,  273;  ii. 
27,  28,  175 

Bulgarians  of  the  Volga,  ii.  142-5,  i95, 
200,  210 

Bunbury,  E.  H.,  i.  30,  107 

"  Burgundians  "  (=  Bornholmers  ?), 
i.  169,  180 

Burrough,  Stephen,  ii.  173 

Cabot,  John,  i.  3,  115,  312;  ii.  130,  295- 
330,  333,  343.  374,  377;  settles  at 
Bristol,  ii.  297;  voyage  of  1496,  ii, 
299-301;  voyage  of  1497,  ii.  301-23; 
voyage  of  1498,  ii.  311,  324-8,  349; 
his  discovery  premature,  ii.  343 

Cabot,  Sebastian,  ii.  129,  130,  295-6, 
299,  301-2,  308,  319,  326,  329,  330, 
332,  333.  336-43;  reported  voyage  of 
1508-9,  ii.  336-40;  doubtful  voyage 
of  1516  or  1517,  ii.  340-2;  his  credi- 
bility, ii.  296,  298,  303,  329,  338-40; 
map  of  1544,  attributed  to,  ii.  303, 
309,  310,  314-5,  319-20 

Caesar,  C.  Julius,  i.  39,  40,  79-80,  92, 
242 

Callegari,  G.  V.,  i.  43,  58,  59 

Callimachus,  i.  375 

Callisthenes   (Pseudo-),  ii.  213,  234 

Calypso,  i.  347,  355,  370;  ii.  43 

"  Cananei,"  i.  155 

Canary  Isles,  i.  117,  348-50,  362,  376; 
ii.  2 

Canerio  map  (1502-07),  ii.  368 

Cannibalism,  among  the  Irish,  Scy- 
thians, Celts,  Iberians,  i.  81;  Isse- 
donians,  i.  81;  Massagetae,  i.  81,  148; 
in  Scandinavia,  i.  149 

Cantino,  Alberto,  his  map  of  1502,  ii. 
316,  350-1,  355,  361,  362,  364,  365, 
368-74;  his  letter  of  Oct.  1501, 
ii.  349-52,  360,  361,  362,  363,  367, 
372 

Canto,  Ernesto  do,  ii.  331 

Cape  Breton,  i.  324,  329,  335;  ii.  309, 
312,  314,  315,  316,  317,  319,  321,  322; 
John  Cabot's  probable  landfall  in 
1497,  ii.  314-5 

400 


Capella,  Marcianus,  i.  123,  126,  184, 
188,  195,  197,  334 

Carignano,  Giovanni  da,  compass- 
chart  by,  ii.  220-2,  227,  235 

"  Carte  Pisane,"  ii,  220 

Carthage,  Sea-power  of,  i.  45,  75 

Caspian  Sea,  i.  10,  74,  76,  122;  ii.  142, 
183,  195,  197,  213 

Cassiodorus,  i.  120,  128-30,  132,  137, 
138,  142,  154,  155,  203 

Cassiterides,  i.  23,  24,  25,  27-9,  89;  ii. 
47,  48 

"  Catalan  Atlas,"  mappamundi  of 
1375,  ii.  233,  266,  292 

Catalan  compass-chart  at  Florence,  iL 
231,  232-3,  235 

Catalan  compass-chart  (15th  century) 
at  Milan,  ii,  279,  280 

Catalan  sailors  and  cartographers  (see 
Compass-charts),  ii.  217 

Catapult,  used  by  the  Skraelings,  i. 
327;  ii.  6-8,  92 

Cattegat,  The,  i.  93,  100,  loi,  102,  105, 
169,  180 

"  Cauo  de  Ynglaterra  "  on  La  Cosa's 
map,  ii.  314-5,  317,  321-2;  probably 
Cape  Breton,  ii.  314;  or  Cape  Race 
(i*),  ii.  321-2 

Celts,  i.  19,  41,  42,  68,  81,  208;  early 
Celtic  settlement  of  the  Faroes,  i. 
162-4;  of  Iceland,  i.  167,  258;  possi- 
ble Celtic  population  in  Scandina- 
via, i.  210;  mythology  of  the,  L 
379 

Chaldeans,  i.  8,  47 

Chancellor,   Richard,  ii.   135 

Chinese  myths  of  fortunate  isles,  i. 
377;  ii.  213 

Christ,  The  White,  ii,  44,  45,  46 

Christ,  Wilhelm,  i,  14,  37 

Christianity  introduced  in  Iceland,  i. 
260,  332;  introduced  in  Greenland, 
i,  270,  272,  317,  332,  380;  decline  of, 
in  Greenland,  ii.  38,  100-2,  io5,  113, 
121 

Christiern  I.  of  Denmark,  ii.  119,  125, 
127,  128,  132,  133,  134,  345 

Christern  IV.  of  Denmark,  ii.  124, 
178 

Chukches,  i.  212 

Church,  ii,  301 


INDEX 


Cimbri,  L  14,  21,  82,  85,  91,  94,  99,  100, 
loi,   118,  145 

Cimmerians,  i.  13,  14,  21,  79,  145 

Circumnavigation,  Idea  of,  i.  77,  79; 
ii.  271,  291-3,  296-7 

Clavering,  ii.  73 

Clavus  Claudius,  i.  226,  303;  ii.  11,  17, 
85,  86,  89,  117,  248-76,  284;  his 
Nancy  map  and  text,  ii.  249,  250, 
253,  255-65;  his  later  map  and  Vi- 
enna text,  ii.  250,  251,  252-3,  254, 
265-76;  his  methods,  ii.  252-5,  259- 
61 ;  his  influence  on  cartography,  ii. 
276-9.  335,  368,  369,  370,  371 

Cleomedes,  i.  44,  52,  53,  55,  57,  134 

Codanovia,  island,  i.  91,  93-4,  103 

Codanus,  bay,  i.  90-5,  loi,  102,  103, 
105,  118 

CoUett,  Prof.  R.,  L  345;  ii.  91 

Collinson,  R.,  ii.  129 

Columbus,  i.  3,  77,  79,  115,  116,  312, 
376;  ii.  291,  292,  293,  294,  295,  296, 
297,  300,  307,  310,  325 

Compass,  Introduction  of,  i.  248;  ii. 
169,  214,  215-6;  variation  of,  ii.  217, 
307-8,  370-1 

Compass-charts,  ii.  215-36,  265,  279, 
280,  282,  308,  313;  development  of, 
ii.  215-8;  limits  of,  ii.  218 

Congealed  or  curdled  sea,  beyond 
Thule,  i.  65-9,  70,  100,  106,  121,  165, 
181,  195,  363,  376;  ii.  149,  200,  281 

Connla  the  Fair,  Tale  of,  i.  371 

Contarini,  G.,  iL  303,  336,  337,  338, 
342,  343 

Converse,  Harriet  Maxwell,  i.  377 

Cornwall,  Tin  in,  i.  23,  29,  31 

Cortereal,  Caspar,  ii.  130,  328,  330, 
331,  332,  347-53,  354,  357,  358-66, 
373;  letters  patent  to  (1500),  ii.  347; 
voyage  of  1500,  ii.  360;  voyage  of 
1501,  ii.  347-53,  360-75;  his  fate,  ii. 
353,  375;  his  discoveries,  ii.  354-5, 
362,  364 

Cortereal,  Joao  Vaz,  unhistorical 
expedition   attributed  to,  ii.   359 

Cortereal,  Miguel,  ii.  353,  360,  361; 
letters  patent  to,  ii,  353,  355,  376; 
voyage  of  1502  or  1503,  ii.  353,  376; 
probably  reached  Newfoundland,  ii. 
376;  his  fate,  ii.  376 


Cortereal,  Vasqueanes,  refused  leave 
to  search  for  his  brothers,  ii.  377 

Cortereal,  Vasqueanes  IV.,  reported 
expedition  of,  in  1574,  ii.  378 

Cosa,  Juan  de  la,  map  by,  ii.  302,  309- 
18,  321,  374;  represents  Cabot's  dis- 
coveries of  1497,  ii.  311-2 

Cosmas  Indicopleustes,  i.  126,  127, 
128;  ii.  183 

Costa,  B.  T.  de,  ii.  129,  214 

"  Cottoniana "  mappamundi,  i.  180, 
182,  183;  ii.  192-3,  208,  220,  284 

Cottonian   Chronicle,  ii.  303,  324,  326 

Crassus,  Publius,  visits  the  Cassiter- 
ides,  i.  27 

Crates  of  Mallus,  i.  44,  78-9 

Croker,  T.  Crofton,  i.  379 

Cromlechs,  Distribution  of,  i.  22,  239 

Cronium,  Mare,  i.  65,  100,  106,  121, 
182,  363,  376 

Crops,  in  Thule,  i.  63;  in  Britain,  i. 
63;  in  Greenland,  i.  277 

Cuno,  J.  G.,  i.  59 

Cwen-sae,  i.  169 

Cyclopes,  i.   189,  196;  ii.   10,  147,  148, 

239 
Cylipenus,  i.  loi,  104,  105 
Cynocephali,    i.    154-5,    159,    187,    189, 

198,  383 
"  Cystophora   cristata "    (bladder-nose 

seal),  i.  276,  286 

Daae,  L.,  i.  226;  ii.  125,  129 

Dalorto  (or  Dulcert),  Angellino,  ii. 
226-30;  his  map  of  1325,  ii.  177,  219, 
226,  229,  235,  236;  his  map  of  1339 
(Dulcert),  ii.  229,  230,  235,  265,  266 

Damastes  of  Sigeum,  i.  16 

Danes,  i.  94,  121,  136,  139,  142,  143, 
145,  146,  153,  167,  169,  180,  188,  245; 
ii.  115,  161 

Darkness,  Sea  of,  i.  40-1,  192,  195,  199, 
363,  382;  ii.  149,  204,  206,  212 

Dauciones,  i.  120,  121 

Davis  Strait,  i.  269 

Dawson,  S.  E.,  ii.  295,  307,  319,  321 

Debes,  Lucas,  i.  375 

Delisle,  L.,  ii.  161 

Delos,  i.  375 

Delphi,  i.  18,  19 

Democritus,  i.  127 

401 


INDEX 


Denys,  Nicolas,  ii.  3 

Denmark,   i.  82,   94,  180,  185,  234;  ii. 

179,   201,   204,  205,   208,   237;   called 

"Dacia"  on  mediaeval  maps,  ii.  188, 

190,  222,  225;   representation  of,  in 

mediaeval  cartography,   ii.   219,   225, 

235.  250,  286 
Desimoni,  C,  ii.  325 
Deslien's  map  of  1541,  ii.  322 
Detlefsen,  D.,  i.  43,  70,  71,  72,  83,  84, 

85,  93,  97,  99,  102,  119 
Dicaearchus,  i.  44,  73 
Dicuil,  i.  58,  160,  162-7,  252,  362;  IL  43, 

51,  229 
Dihya,  Ibn,  ii.  200-1,  209 
Dimashqi,  ii.  212-3 
Diodorus  Siculus,  i.  23,  29-30,  44,  50, 

51,  52,  58,  63,  71,  80,  87,  90,  346;  ii. 

48 
Dionysius     Perigetes,     i.     114-5,     123, 

356;  ii.  47,  48,  192 
Dipylon  vases,  i.  236-7 
Disappearing    (fairy)    islands,    i.    370, 

378-9;  ii.   213 
Disc,  Doctrine  of  the  earth  as  a,  i.  8, 

12,  126,  127,  153,  198;  ii.  182 
Disco  Bay,  Greenland,  i.  298,  300,  301, 

302,  306,  307;  ii.  72 
"Doegr"    (==half    a    24    hours'    day), 

used  as   a   measure   of   distance,   i. 

287,  310,  322,  335;  ii.   166,   169,  170, 

171 
Dogs  as   draught   animals,  ii.  69,   72, 

145,  146 
Down    Islands     (Duneyiar),     i.     285, 

286 
Dozy,  R.,  ii.  55,  200,  201 
Dozy  and  de  Goeje,  ii.  51,  204 
Draper's  Company,  Protest  of,  against 

Sebastian    Cabot,    ii.    302,   330,   338, 

342 
"  Draumkvaede  "  (Dream-Lay),  i.  367, 

381 
Driftwood,  in  Greenland,  i.   299,  305, 

307,  308;  ii.  37,  96 
Drusus  (The  elder  Germanicus),  i.  83 
"  Dumna,"  island,  i.  106,  117;  ii.  257 
Dumont  d'Urville,  i.  376 
Dvina,  river,  i.   173,  174,  222;  ii.   135, 

136,  137,  142,  146,  164,  176 
402 


Eastern  Settlement  of  Greenland,  i. 
263,  265,  267,  271,  272,  274,  275,  276, 
296,  301,  302,  307,  310,  311,  321;  ii. 
71,  82,  90,  107,  108,  112,  116;  decline 
of,  ii.  95-100,  102 

Ebstorf  map,  i.  102,  191;  ii.  187 

Edda,  The  older  (poetic),  i.  273 

Edda,  The  younger  ("  Snorra-Edda  "), 
i.  273,  298,  304,  342,  364 

Eden,  Richard,  ii.  341 

Edrisi,  i.  182,  382;  ii.  51-53,  202-8,  209, 
210,  216;  his  map,  ii.  192,  203,  208, 
220,  284 

Egede,  Hans,  ii.  40,  41,  74,  loi,  104, 
105,  106 

Egil  Skallagrimsson's  Saga,  i.  175,  218 

Egyptian  myths,  i.  347 

Einar  Sokkason,  i.  283,  294 

Einar  Thorgeirsson,  lost  in  Green- 
land, i.  284 

Einhard,  i.  167,  179,  180,  185 

Eiriksfjord  (Greenland),  i.  267,  268, 
271,  275,  317,  318,  319,  321;  ii.  112 

Elk  ("achlis"),  i.  105,  191 

"  Elymus  arenarius "  (lyme  grass), 
ii-  5 

Elysian  Fields,  i.  347,  349,  351 

Empedocles,  i.  12,  127 

England  (see  Britain),  Arab  geog- 
raphers on,  ii.  204,  211;  maritime 
enterprise  of,  ii.  180,  294-5,  343?  in 
mediaeval  cartography,  ii.   218 

English  State  document  (1575)  on 
North- West  Passage,  ii.  129-30,  132 

"  Engronelant,"  ii.  277,  279,  373 

d'Enjoy,  Paul,  i.  377 

Eratosthenes  of  Cyrene,  i.  20,  29,  44, 
47,  52,  55,  61,  73,  75-7,  78,  82,  115; 
ii.  292 

Eric  Blood-Axe,  ii.  136 

Eric  of  Pomerania,  ii.  118,  119 

Eric  the  Red,  i.  251,  256,  259,  262,  280, 
288,  293,  318-21,  324,  330,  337,  344, 
368;  ii.  22,  77,  88;  discovers  Green- 
land, i.  260,  263,  266-70. 

Eric  the  Red,  Saga  of,  i.  260,  266,  273, 
291,  292,  293,  296,  310,  313,  314,  318, 
322,  331,  332-5,  337,  338,  342,  343, 
367,  382;  ii.  4,  6,  8,  10,  II,  14,  15,  22, 
23,  24,  42,  43,  50,  59,  61,  89,  91,  206; 


INDEX 


its  value  as  a  historical  document, 
ii.  62 

Ericson,  Leif  (see  Leif  Ericson) 

Eric  Upsi,  bishop  of  Greenland,  ii. 
29-31 

Eridanus,  river,  i.  31,  32,  34,  42 

Eruli,  i.  21,  94,  136,  137-8,  i39-49>  I53. 
235.  245 

Erythea,  i.  9 

Erythraean  Sea,  i.  10 

Eskimo,  i.  19,  51,  150,  212,  215,  216, 
223,  231-2,  260,  298,  306,  307,  308, 
309,  310,  368;  ii.  10,  12,  16,  17,  19; 
66-94,  102-6,  107,  111-2,  113-6,  333. 
366-7;  fairy-tales  and  legends  of,  ii. 
8,  105,  115;  ball-game  among,  ii. 
40-1;  distribution  of,  ii.  66-74;  racial 
characteristics  of,  ii.  67-8;  their  cul- 
ture, ii.  68-9,  91-2;  Norse  settlers 
absorbed  by,  ii.  100,  102-105,  106, 
107-11,  117;  unwarlike  nature  of,  ii. 
114,  115-6 

Esthonians  (^stii,  Osti),  Esthonia, 
i.  69,  72,  104,  109,  131,  167,  169,  170, 
181,  186;  ii.  205 

"  Estotiland,"  fictitious  northern 
country,  ii.  131 

Eudoxus,  i.  46 

"  Eyrbyggja-saga,"  i.  313,  376;  ii.  42, 
46,  48,  50 

Fabricius,  A.,  ii.  55 

Fabyan,  Robert,  Chronicle  (quoted 
by  Hakluyt),  ii.  303,  324,  326,  333 

Fadhlan,  Ibn,  ii.  143 

Fairies,  Names  for,  i.  372-3 

Fairy-lands,  Irish,  i.  357,  370-1,  379; 
ii.  60;  Norwegian,  i.  369-70,  378;  ii. 
60,  213;  laudatory  names  for,  i.  374; 
characteristics  of,  i.  375-9;  ii.  213-4 

Faqih,  Ibn  al-,  ii.  197 

Faroes,  The,  i.  254,  255,  257,  316,  324, 
362;  ii.  51,  229,  262;  discovered  by 
the  Irish,  i.  162-4,  233;  Irish  monks 
expelled  from,  i.  252,  253;  early  Cel- 
tic population  in,  i.  164,  253 

Farewell,  Cape,  i.  261,  267,  280,  282, 
284,  288,  291,  295,  307,  316;  ii.  73 

Felix,  The  monk,  in  mediaeval  legend, 
i.  381 


Fenni  (Finns),  i.  109,  112,  113,  114, 
120,  149,  203 

Ferdinand  and  Isabella  of  Spain,  let- 
ter from,  ii.  300 

Fernald,  M.  L,,  ii.  3,  5-6 

Fernandez,  Joao  (called  "  Lavora- 
dor"),  ii.  331-2,  356;  letters  patent 
to  (1499).  "•  346,  356;  probably 
sighted  Greenland  (1500),  ii.  356, 
357,  375;  took  part  in  Bristol  expe- 
dition (1501),  ii.  331,  356,  357; 
Greenland  (Labrador)  named  after 
him,  ii.  358 

Filastre,  Cardinal,  ii.  249-50,  278 

Finland  (see  Kvaenland),  i.  206,  209, 
210,  214;  the  name  confused  with 
Vinland,  i.  198,  382;  ii.  31,  191;  and 
with  Finmark,  i.  382;  ii.  191,  205; 
in  mediaeval   cartography,  ii.   224 

Finmark,  i.  61,  173,  175,  i77»  191,  198, 
204,  210,  213,  220,  222,  225;  ii.  86, 
141,  163,  164,  172,  178,  179,  205,  211, 
237;  the  name  confused  with  Fin- 
land, i.  382;  ii.  32,  191,  205;  in  me- 
diaeval   cartography,   ii.    221 

"  Finn,"  The  name,  i.   198,  205-7,  210 

"  Finnaithae  "  (Finnedi,  Finvedi)  (see 
Finns),  i.  135,  137,  189,  198,  203, 
204,  206,  382 

Finn,  MacCumaill,  i.  363;  ii.  45 

Finns,  i.  109,  112,  113,  114,  120,  135, 
136,  137.  149,  171,  173-8,  189,  198, 
203-32,  382;  ii.  68,  143;  Horned 
Finns,  ii.  167 

"Finns,"  in  southern  Scandinavia,  i. 
103,  203,  205,  206-11;  ii.  159 

Finn's  booths  ("  FinnsbuSir "),  in 
Greenland,  i.  283,  296,  305 

"  Finnur  hinn  FriSi,"  Faroese  lay  of, 

ii.   33-4 
Fischer,  J.,  ii.   33,   121,   229,   249,   276, 

277,  278,  279,  281 
Fischer,  M.  P.,  ii.  161 
Fischer,  Theobald,  ii.  216,  220,  230,  234 
Fishing   Lapps,   i.   204,   205,   207,   218, 

221,  223-32 
"  Flateyjarbok,"   i.   254,  283,  313,   314, 

317,  318,  324,  329,  331,  334,  338,  340, 

343,  344,   359,  360;   ii.  4,   I4,   ^5,   18, 

21,  22,  23,  25,  59,  61 

403 


INDEX 


Fletcher,  Giles,  i.  226 

"  Floamanna-saga,"  i,  280,  281 ;  ii.  46, 

81 
Floating  islands,  Legends  of,  i.  375-7; 

ii.  213-4 
Floki   Vilgerdarson,   sails  to  Iceland, 

i-  255,  257,  269 
Florus,  L.  Annaeus,  i.  350 
Forbiger,  A.,  i.  58,  102 
Forster,  L  179 
Fortunate    Isles     ("  Insulae    Fortuna- 

taz"),   i.    117,    198,    334,    345-53,   367, 

370,  372,   373,   382-4;   ii.    1-6,  24,  31, 

42,  55,  59-61,  64,  191,  228,  280,  304 
Fortunate    Lake,    Irish    myth    of,    ii. 

229-30 
"Foster-Brothers'   Saga,"  i.   276,  320; 

ii.  9,  18 
Frahn,  C.  M.,  ii  143.  145 
Franks  Casket,  The,  i.  176 
Freydis,  daughter  of  Eric  the  Red,  i. 

320,  328,  332,  333;  ii.  II,  51 
Friesland,  Frisians,  i.  95,  153,  205 
Friis,  J.  A.,  i,  372 
Friis,    Peder    Clausson,   i.    224,    227-9, 

232,  369;  ii-  153,  158,  178,  268 
Frisian   noblemen's   polar   expedition, 

i.  195-6,  200,  383;  ii.  147-8 
Frisius,  Gemma,  ii.  129,  132 
Frisland,    fabulous    island    south    of 

Iceland,  i.  377;  ii.  131 
Fritzner,  ii.  9 
FurSustrandir,    L    273,    312,    313,    322, 

323,  324,  325,  325,  334,  336,  337,  339, 

357;  ii.  24,  36 
Fyldeholm  (island  of  drinking),  i.  352 


Gadir   (Gadeira,  Gades,   Cadiz),  i.  24, 

27,  28,  30,  36,  37,  66,  79 
Galvano,    Antonio,    ii.    336,    337,    338, 

354,  364,  376 
Gandvik    (the    White    Sea),    i.    218-9, 

228;   ii.   136-8,   164,   223,  237,  239 
Gardar,  discoverer  of  Iceland,  i.  255- 

7,  263 
Gar?ar    (Gardar),    Greenland,    i.    272, 

273,  275,  311;  ii.  106,  107,  108,  121,  122 
"Gautigoth"  (see  Goths),  i.  135 
"  Gautrek's  Saga,"  i.  18-9 
404 


Geelmuyden,  Prof.  H,,  i.  52,  54,  311; 

ii.  23 
Geijer,  E.  G.,  i.  60,  102,  iii,  131,  205, 

207 
Gellir  Thorkelsson,  i.  366 
Genoese  mappamundi  (1447  or  1457), 

ii.  278,  286,  287 
Geminus  of  Rhodes,  i.  43,  44,  53,  54, 

57,  63,  64 
"  Geographia    Universalis,"   i.    382;    ii. 

32,  177,  188-91,  220,  227,  339 
Gepidae,  i.  139,  142,  153 
Gerfalcons,  Island  or  Land  of,  ii.  208, 

227,  266,  289 
Germania,  i.  69,  71,  73,  87,  90,  95,  loi, 

108-14,  154,   169;  Roman  campaigns 

in,  i.  81,  83,  85,  97 
Germanicus,  The  younger,  i.  83 
Germanus,    Nicolaus,    iL    251,    276-9, 

288,  290,  373 
Germany,  coast  of,  in  mediaeval  car- 
tography, ii.  219,  257 
"  Gesta  Francorum,"  i.  234 
Gilbert,  Sir  Humphrey,  ii.  340 
Gildas,  i.  234,  364 
Ginnungagap,  i.  12,  84,  158;  ii.  35,  150, 

154,  239-41 
Giraldus    Cambrensis,   i.    379;   ii.   151, 

220,  245 
Gisle  Oddsson's  Annals,  ii.  82,  100-2, 

109 
Gissur  Einarsson,  Bishop,  i.  285 
Gjessing,  H.,  ii.  31 
Glaesaria,  island,  i.  loi,  106 
Glastonbury,    Legend    of    sow   at,    i. 

378-9 
"  GliS,"  mythical  island,  i,  364 
Globes,    used   by    the    Greeks,    i.    78; 

introduced    by    Toscanelli,    ii.    287; 

Behaim's,  ii.  287-9;   Laon  globe,  ii. 

290;  used  by  Columbus,  ii.  287;  and 

Cabot,  ii.  304,  306 
Gnomon,  The,  i.  11,  45-6 
Godthaab,  Greenland,  i.  271,  304,  307, 

321;  ii.  73,  74 
Goe,  month  of,  i.  264,  265 
Goeje,  M.  de,  i,  344,  382;  ii.  51,  194, 

197,  198 
Goes,  Damiam  de,  ii.  354,  366,  376,  377 
Gokstad  ship,  i.  246 


INDEX 


Gomara,  Francesco  Lopez  de,  ii.  129, 
130,  131,  336,  337,  354.  364 

"  Gongu-Rolv's  kvaeSi,"  i.  356 

Gota  river,  i.  131;  ii.  190,  205 

Goter  (Gauter),  i.  120,  135,  141,  i44, 
147;  ii.  190 

Goths  (Getae,  Gythones,  Gytoni),  i. 
14,  21,  71,  120,  129,  130,  135,  137. 
139,  145,  147,  153;  ii.  143.  190 

Gotland,  i.  121,  180,  378;  ii.  125,  237; 
in  mediaeval  cartography,  il  219, 
221,  224,  233,  265 

Gourmont,  Hieronymus,  map  of  Ice- 
land, ii.  122-3,  127 

Graah,  Captain,  i.  297;  ii.  104 

Grail,  Legends  of  the,  i.  382 

Grampus,  i.  50-1 

Granii,  i.  136 

Grape  Island  ("Insula  Uvarum"),  L 
358,  361,  363,  365,  366 

Greenland,  i.  184,  192,  194,  197,  199, 
200,  201,  215,  223,  251,  315-21,  322;  ii. 
I,  5,  12,  25,  30,  38,  40-2,  66-94,  95- 
134,  167,  169,  177,  244,  345,  366;  Es- 
kimo of,  ii.  71-5;  discovered  and 
settled  by  Norwegians,  i.  258-78; 
estimated  population  of  settle- 
ments, i.  272;  conditions  of  life  in, 
L  274-8,  319;  ii.  96-7;  voyages  along 
the  coasts  of,  i.  279-311;  glaciers 
(inland  ice)  of,  i.  288-95,  3°!,  3o8; 
ii.  246-7;  decline  of  Norse  settle- 
ments in,  ii.  90,  95-100;  last  voyage 
to  (from  Norway),  ii.  117;  last  ship 
from,  ii.  118;  geographical  ideas  of, 
ii,  237-40,  246-8,  254-5,  259-62,  270- 
6,  278,  279,  280;  east  coast  of,  i. 
271-2,  279-96,  308;  ii.  168,  170,  171, 
238;  uninhabited  parts  ("  ubygder  ") 
of,  i.  279-311,  320,  321;  ii.  28,  166, 
172;  sixteenth-century  discovery  of, 
"•  315,  332,  335,  352,  363,  364,  375; 
called  Labrador,  ii.  129,  132,  133, 
315,  335.  353;  in  sixteenth-century 
maps,  ii.  368-75 

Gregory  of  Tours,  i.  234 

"  Greipar,"  in  Greenland,  L  298,  299, 
300-1,  304 

"  Grettis-saga,"  i.  313,  367 

Griffins,  i.  19,  154;  ii.  263 


Grim  Kamban,  i.  253 

Grimm,  J.,  i.   18,  94,  95,  355,  372;  ii. 

45,  56 
Grimm,  W.,  i.  373 
Grip,    Carsten,    letter    to    Christiern 

III.,  ii.  126-8 
"  Gripla,"  i.  288;  ii.  35-6,  237,  239,  241 
Grondal,  B.,  i.  371,  375 
"  Gronlands     historiske     Mindesmaer- 

ker,"  i.   262,  263,  271,  281,  282,  283, 

284,  285,  288,  292,  294,  295,  296,  297, 

298,  299,  300,  301,  302,  304,  305,  311, 

333,  359.  377;  ii-  i,  9,  I4,  I7.  22,  25, 

31,  35,  46,  79,  82,  86,   100,   102,  106, 

108,  112,  113,  117,  119,  120,  125,  127, 

172,  237,  278 
"  Gronlendinga-J^attr "      (see     Flatey- 

jarbok) 
Groth,  Th.,  ii.  103 
"Grottasongr,"  i.  159 
Gudleif    Gudlaugsson,    story    of    his 

voyage,    ii.    49-50,    53-4;    compared 

v(^ith  Leif  Ericson,  ii.  50-1 
Gudmund  Arason's  Saga,  i.  284 
Gudmundsson,   Jon,   map   by,    ii.   34, 

241 
GuSmundsson,  V.,  ii.  25 
Gudrid,  wife  of  Karlsevne,  L  318,  319, 

320,  321,  329,  330,  333;  ii.  14-5,  51 
Guichot  y  Sierra,  A.,  i.  376 
Gulathings  Law,  ii.   140 
Gulf  Stream,  i.  251;  ii.  54 
Gunnbjomskerries,  i.  256,  261-4,  267, 

280;  ii.  276 
Gunnbjorn  Ulfsson,  i.  256,  261-4,  267, 

280,  296 
Gustafson,  Prof.  G.,  L  237,  240 
Gutae,  i.   120 
"  Guta-saga,"  i.  378 
Gutones   (see  Goths),  L  70,  71,  72,  93 
Gytoni  (see  Goths),  i.  71 

Haegstad,  Prof.  M.,  ii.  242 

Haegstad    and    Torp    ("  Gamal-norsk 

Ordbog  ")   ii.  9 
Haemodae      ("  Acmodas "      "  Haecmo- 

das"),  i.  90,  106 
"Hafsbotn"    (the  Polar   Sea),  i.  283, 

303;  ii.   137,  151,   165,  166,  167,   168, 

171,  172,  237,  240 

405 


INDEX 


Hakluyt,  R.,  i.  226;  ii.   129,   132,  152, 

261,  319,  321,  326,  333 

Hakon   Hakonsson's   Saga,   i.   299;   ii. 

139.  141 
"Halichoerus  gryphus  "  (grey  sejil),  i. 

217;  ii-  91,  155 

Halli  Geit,  Tale  of,  ii.  239 

Hallinger,  i.  104,  247 

Hallstatt,  i.   24,  36 

Halogaland  (Halogaland,  Halogi, 
Halgoland,  Halagland,  Halogia, 
Helgeland),  i.  61,  62,  64,  132,  135, 
138,  175.  179,  194,  197.  200,  231,  247, 
264,  381,  383;  ii.  64,  137,  139,  140, 
142,  165,  168,  172;  in  mediaeval  car- 
tography, ii.  227,  236 

Halsingia,  or  Alsingia,  i.  104 

Hamberg,  Axel,  ii.  69 

Hammershaimb,    V.    U.,   i.    356,    375; 

ii.  33 
Hamy,  ii.  220,  223,  229,  230,  234 
Hanno,  i.  37,  88,  350;  ii.  45 
Hans    (John),   king    of    Denmark,    ii. 

125,   128 
Hanseatic  League,  ii.  99,  119,  125,  179, 

218 
Hansen,  Dr.   A.   M.,  i.   149,   192,  206, 

207,  208,  218,  221,  222,  228,  229,  230, 

235-7,  239 
Harold  Fairhair,  i.  253-4,  255,  258 
Harold  Grafeld,  ii.  136,  153,  154 
Harold  Hardrade,  i.  185,  195,  201,  283, 

383;  ii.   147,  199;  his  voyage  in  the 

Polar  Sea,  i.  195;  ii.  148-54 
Harpoons,  I  214-7,  277;  ii.  145-6,  156- 

63 
Harrisse,  Henry,  ii.  132,  230,  293,  294, 

295,  296,  297,  300,  302,  303,  304,  305, 

309.  314,  315.  319,  320,  326,  327,  329, 

331.  332,  333,  334,  336,  341,  347,  348, 

349,  353,  358,  359,  360,  365,  374 
Harudes    (Charydes,    Charudes,    Hor- 

der),  i.  85,  118,  136,  143,  148,  246 
"  Hauksbok,"  i.  188,  251,  256,  257,  261, 

262,  264,  268,  286,  291,  293,  308,  309, 
322,  327,  331,  333,  353.  367,  369;  ii. 
10,   II,   166,  169,  172,  216,  261 

Hebrides  (Ebudes,  Hebudes),  i.  57, 
90,  106,  117,  123,  158,  159,  160,  161, 
234,  273,  316;  ii.  151,  200 

406 


Hecataeus   of  Abdera,  i.  8,  9,  10,  15, 

16,  98 
Heffermehl,  A.  V.,  ii.  242 
Heiberg,  Prof.  J.,  i.  219,  220 
"  Heimskringla,"    i.    270,   313,    331;    ii. 

59,  137,  171,  239 
Heiner,  i.  138 
Heinrich   of    Mainz,  map  by,  ii.   185, 

187 
Helge    Bograngsson,   killed   in   Bjar- 

meland,  ii.   139-40 
Heligoland,  i.  197 
Helland,  A.,  i.  226,  231,  369,  372,  373, 

378,  381;  ii.  46,  152,  177,  228 
Helluland,   i.   312,   313,   322,   323,   334, 

336,  357;  ii.  I,  23,  35-6,  61,  237 
Helm,  O.,  i.  14 

Helsingland,  Helsingers,  i.  189;  ii.  237 
Henry  V.  of  England,  ii.  119 
Henry  VI.  of  England,  ii.  119 
Henry  VII.   of  England,  ii.   130,   298, 

299,  302,  303,  322,  324,  326,  327,  331, 

332,  333.  334,  337,  338,  340 
Henry  VIII.  of  England,  ii.  319,  330, 

334,  338,  341,  342,  343 
Heraclitus,  L    12 

"  Herbrestr  "  (war-crash),  ii.  8-9 
Hereford  map,  i.  91,  92,  102,  154,  157, 

190;  ii.  i85,  187 
Hergt,  G.,  i.  43,  51,  60,  65,  66,  67,  71, 

72 
Herla,  mythical  king  of  Britain,  ii.  76 
Hermiones,  i.  91,  104 
Hermits,  in  Irish  legends,  ii.  19,  43-6, 

50 
Herodotus,  i.  9,  12,  20,  23,  24,  27,  31-2, 

46,  76,  78,  81,  88,  114,  148,  155,  156, 

161,  187 
Hertzberg,  Ebbe,  ii.  38,  39,  40,  61,  93 
Hesiod,  L  9,  11,  18,  42,  84,  348 
Hesperides,  i.  9,  161,  334,  345,  376;  ii. 

2,  61 
Heyman,  i.  342;  ii.  8 
Hielmqvist,   Th.,  i.   381 
Hieronymus,  i,   151,  154 
Higden,        Ranulph         ("  Polychroni- 

con"),   i.   346,   382;   ii.   31-2,    188-92, 

220;    his   mappamundi,   ii.    188,    189, 

192 
Hilleviones,  i.  loi,  104,  121 


INDEX 


Himilco's  voyage,  i.  29,  36-41,  68,  83 

HiminraS  (Hunenrioth,  etc.),  moun- 
tain in   Greenland,  i.  302-4;  ii.   108 

Hipparchus,  i.  44,  47,  52,  56,  57,  73, 
77-8,  87,  116;  ii.  197 

Hippocrates,  i.  13,  88 

Hippopods,  i.  91 

Hirri,  i.  loi 

"  Historia  Norvegiae,"  i.  204,  229, 
251,  255,  256,  257,  298;  ii.  I,  2,  17, 
29,  61,  79,  87,  88,  135,  151,  167,  168, 
172,   222,   227,   235,  239,  240,  280 

Hjorleif,  settles  in  Iceland  with  In- 
golf,  i.  166,  251,  254,  255 

Hoegh,  K.,  ii.  31 

Hofmann,  C,  L  59 

Hoffmann,  W.  J.,  ii.  39,  40 

Holand,  H.  R.,  ii.  31 

Holberg,   Ludvig,  ii.   118 

Holm,  G.  F.,  i.  271,  274 

Holz,  G.,  i.  85,  102 

Homer,  i.  8,  lo-ii,  13,  14,  25,  33,  77, 
78,  196,  347,  348,  371;  "•  53,  54,  160 

Homeyer,  C.  G.,  L  214 

Honen,  Ringerike,  Runic  stone  from, 
ii.  27-9,  58 

Honorius   Augustodunensis,   L   375 

Honorius,  Julius,  i.  123;  ii.  183 

Horace,  L  349,  350-1 

Horaisan,  Japanese  fortunate  isle,  ii. 
56-7,  213 

Horder  (see  Harudes),  i.  85,  118,  136, 
138,  143,   147,  209,  246 

Horn,  Georg,  ("  Ulysses  peregri- 
nans"),  "•   132,  133 

Horses,  Swedish,  i.  135;  in  Green- 
land, L  276 

Hrabanus  Maurus,  i.   159,  167,  184 

"  Huldrefolk  "  (Norwegian  fairies),  i. 
355,  356,  370-3,  381;  ii.  12,  60 

"  Huldrelands "    (see    Fairy-lands) 

Humboldt,  L  363 

Huns,  i.  188 

Hvarf  point,  in  Greenland,  L  263,  267, 
269,  279,  288,  290,  292,  294,  295,  303, 
310,  315;  iL  169,  171,  261 

Hvergelmer,  i  158,  159 

Hvitramanna-land  (the  White  Men's 
Land),  l  312,  313,  330,  353,  366,  368, 
376;  ii.  2,  19,  42-56,  60,  61,  92;  called 


Great  Ireland,  i.   330,  353,  366;   ii. 

42,  48;  Are  Marsson's  voyage  to,  i. 

331-2,  353-4;  ii.  42,  46,  50 
Hvitserk  glacier,  in  Greenland,  i.  283, 

286,  288,  291,  292,  294-5,  303;  ii.  122, 

123,  124,  127,  128 
Hyperboreans,  i.  13,  15-21,  79,  81,  88, 

89,  98,  128,  187,  188,  348;  ii.  188 

Iberians,  in  British  Isles,  i.  26;  in 
Brittany,  i.  30;  cannibalism  among, 
i.  81 

Ibrahim  ibn  Ja'qub,  i.  187 

Iceland,  L  181-4,  192,  193-4,  197,  201, 
248,  251,  262,  263,  267,  278,  285,  286, 
289,  295,  305,  308,  324,  337,  353,  362, 
374;  ii.  43,  49,  102,  112,  169,  170,  191, 
211,  242,  244,  245,  281;  discovered 
by  Irish  monks,  L  59,  164-7,  233, 
258;  identified  with  Thule,  i.  59-60, 
164,  193;  fables  of  ice  in,  i.  181,  183- 
4,  193;  ii.  191;  Norwegian  settle- 
ment of,  i.  252-8;  called  "  Gardars- 
holm,"  i.  255 ;  called  "  Snowland," 
i.  255;  in  mediaeval  cartography,  ii. 
225,  230,  231,  250,  262,  275,  279,  284, 
286 

Icelandic  Annals  ("  Islandske  Anna- 
ler"),  i.  282,  284,  285,  305;  ii.  25,  29, 
36,  37,  82,  88,  99,  III,  112,  117,  118, 
166,  172 

Ictis,  i.  29 

"  Ilia  verde,"  on  fifteenth  and  six- 
teenth century  maps,  ii.  279-81,  294, 
318 

Indian  myths,  i.  19,  92,  351,  356,  363; 
ii.  57,  213,  214 

Indians,  North  American,  i.  327,  377; 
ii.  7,  12,  16,  23,  25,  68,  69,  90,  92,  93, 
334,  367;  lacrosse  among,  ii.  39-41, 
93 

Ingasvones,  L  loi 

Ingimund  Thorgeirsson,  lost  in 
Greenland,  i,  284 

Ingolf  Arnarson,  first  Norse  settler 
in  Iceland,  i.  251,  253,  254,  255,  257, 
267 

Ingolf's  Fjeld,  Greenland,  i.  291,  293, 
294,  296 

Ingram,  Dr.,  i.  179 

407 


INDEX 


Ireland  (Hierne,  Hibernia,  Juvema, 
Ivernia,  Ibernia),  i.  38,  57,  80,  81, 
90,  117,  179,  192,  234,  253,  326;  ii. 
201,  211,  244,  245;  connection  with 
Iceland,  L  167,  258,  353;  whaling 
in,  ii.  156 

Irgens,  O.,  i.  248,  250 

Irish  monks,  i.  162-7,  362;  ii.  43; 
("Papar")  in  Iceland,  i.  254,  258; 
ii.  77,  78 

Irish  myths,  i.  281-2,  334,  336-9,  353- 
64.  370,  371;  ii-  18,  19,  20,  43-5,  50, 
53-4,  56,  60-1,  206,  207,  228-9,  234 

Iroquois   myth    of   floating   island,   L 

377 

Isachsen,  G.,  i.  300,  304,  306;  ii.  168, 
171 

Isidorus  Hispalensis,  i.  44,  102,  151, 
159,  160,  167,  184,  187,  345,  346,  347, 
352,  353.  367.  382-4;  ii.  2,  3-4,  58,  59, 
64,  75.  183,  184,  185,  189,  247 

Isles  of  the  Blest,  The,  I  9,  84,  348, 
349.  351,  363,  370;  ii.  59 

Issedonians,  i.  16,  19,  81 

Italian  sailors  and  cartographers  (see 
Compass-charts),   ii.   217 

"  Itineraire  Brugeois,"  ii.  250,  256,  262, 
263,  272 

Itineraries,  Roman,  i.  116,  123,  153 

Ivar  Bardsson's  description  of  Green- 
land, i.  262-3,  290,  292,  295,  302,  304; 
ii.  82,  87,  88,  102,  106,  107-11,  126, 
166,  171,  241,  256,  261,  276 

Ivar   Bodde,  probable  author  of  the 

"  King's  Mirror,"  ii.  242 


Jacob,  G.,  i.  187,  284;  ii.  145,  157,  202 

Jakobsen,  Dr.  J.,  i.  163,  293,  374 

Jan  Mayen,  i.  287;  ii.  168,  169,  171 

Japanese  myth,  ii.  56-8,  213 

Jaqut,  ii.  143,  144 

Jaubert,  P.  A.,  ii.  204 

Jenkinson,  Anthony,  ii,  153 

Jensen,  A.  S.,  ii.  104 

Jomard,  ii.  220,  229 

Jones  Sound,  i.  304,  306 

"Jonsbok,"  Icelandic  MS.,  i.  316,  320, 

329;  ii.  24 
Jonsson,  Finnur,  i.  166,  198,  256,  258, 
408 


260,  262,  265,  266,  273,  301,  305,  314, 
331,  367;  ii.  79.  107,  108,  167,  237 

Jordanes,  i.  104,  120,  129-38,  142,  143, 
144,  145,  147,  148,  149,  153.  154,  155, 
194,  203,  206;  ii.  211 

Jorgensen,  N.  P.,  i.  272,  274-5 

Jotunheim,  i.  303;  ii.  147,  172,  238 

Jovius,  Paulus,  ii.  ni 

Joyce,  P.  W.,  i.  360,  379 

Julianehaab,  Greenland,  L  267,  271, 
274 

Jutland,  i.  69,  71,  72,  82,  85,  93,  94,  loi, 
102,  105,  117,  139,  142,  143,  147,  169, 
180,  185,  246;  ii.  192;  in  mediaeval 
cartography,  ii.  219,  224,  225,  235, 
257.  265 


Kahler,  F.,  I  43,  68 

Kandalaks,  river  and  gulf,  L  174,  218- 
9,  222 

Kara  Sea,  L  212 

Karelians  (Kirjals),  Karelia,  i.  175, 
218,  219,  220,  222,  223;  ii.  85,  137, 
140,  146,  167,  173,  174;  "  Kareli  in- 
fideles,"  ii.  85,  117,  224,  225,  255,  262, 
270,  271,  272 

Karlsevne,  Thorfinn,  i.  260,  313,  318, 
319.  331,  333,  336,  346,  354;  ii.  14.  15, 
18,  23,  25,  65;  voyage  to  Wineland, 
i.  320-30,  334-45;  battle  with  the 
Skraelings,  i.  328;  ii.  6-1 1 

"  Kassiteros,"  Derivation  of,  i.  25-6 

Kayaks,  Eskimo,  ii.  10,  68,  70,  72,  74, 
85,  91,  92,  127,  270 

Kemble,  John  M.,  i.  364 

Kensington  stone,  Minnesota,  ii.  31 

Keyser,  R.,  i.  58,  59,  60,  65,  93,  99,  104, 
105,  107 

Khordadbah,  Ibn,  ii.  195,  196-7 

Kiaer,  A.  (see  also  Kjaer),  ii.  63 

Kingigtorsuak,  Runic  stone  from,  i. 
297;  ii.  84 

King  map  (circa  1502),  ii.  331,  354, 
355.  358,  364.  373,  374 

*'  King's  Mirror,"  The  ("  Konungs- 
Skuggsja  "),  i.  3,  272-3,  277,  279-80, 
300,'  352;  ii.  I,  2,  29,  87,  88,  95,  96, 
98,  155,  157,  172,  193,  234,  242-8;  au- 
thorship of,  ii.  242 


INDEX 


Kjaer,  A.,  L  324 

Kjalarnes,  i.   322,   323,   324,  325,   326, 

329;  ii.  23 
Kjelmo,    archasological    find    from,   i. 

212-9,  224 
Kjolen  range,  i.  102,  224;  ii.  222 
Kleiven,  Ivar,  i,  340 
"  Knarren,"    Royal    trading    ship    to 

Greenland,  ii.  38,  98-9,  106,  122 
Knattleikr,  Norse  ball-game,  ii.  38-9, 

61,  93;  similar  to  lacrosse,  ii.  39 
"Kobandoi"    (Cobandi),   i.   93-4,    118 
Koch,  J.,  i.  156 
Kohl,  J.  G.,  ii.  148,  340,  353 
Kohlmann,  P.  W.,  i.  194 
Koht,  H.,  i.  247;  ii.  43 
Kola  peninsula,  i.  173,   174,  217,  223; 

ii.  135,  142,  165,  176 
Koren-Wiberg,  Christian,  ii.  80 
Krabbo,  Hermann,  i.  202 
Krag,  H.  P.  S.,  i.  340 
Kraken,  sea  monster,  i.  375;  ii.  234,  244 
Kretschmer,  K.,  i.   10,  12,  14,  74,  78; 

ii.  215,  222,  223,  226,   228,  229,  230, 

282,  284,  294,  313,  353 
Kristensen,  W.  Brede,  i.  347 
"  Kristni-saga,"  i.  313,  331,  367;  ii.  59 
Kroksf jar SarheiSr  (Greenland),  i.   267, 

299,   300-1,   304,   306,   308,   309,   310; 

ii.  72,  83,  88 
Kulhwch  and  Olwen,  Tale  of,  i.  342; 

ii.  8 
Kuntsmann,   F.,   ii.   229,  378 
"  Kuntsmann,  No.  2,"  Italian  mappa- 

mundi,  ii.  374 
Kvaenland  (Cvenland,  Cwenland;  Fin- 
land), i.   155,  170,  175,  178,  198;  the 

name     mistaken     for     "  Land     of 

Women,"   i.   112,   186-7,  383;   ii.   64, 

214,  237 
Kvasns   (see  Finns),  Cwenas,  i.     178, 

191,  206,  207,  220,  223;  ii.   137,  141, 

167;     their     name     confused     with 

"cyon"   (dog),  i.  155,  188 

Labrador,  i.  322,  323,  334,  335;  ii.  5, 
23,  41,  68,  105,  106,  131,  133,  308,  314, 
335,  338,  352,  358,  364.  370;  =Green- 
land,  ii.  129,  132,  133,  315,  331,  335; 
the  name  of,  ii.  331-2,  357-8 


Lacrosse,  iL  38-41;  perhaps  derived 
from  Norsemen,  ii.  40 

Lactantius,  i.  127 

Laestrygons,  i.  13,  78 

Laffler,  Prof.  L.  F.,  i.  132,  134,  136, 
297;  ii.  63 

"  Lageniensis,"  i.  357,  379;  ii.  228 

Lagnus,  bay,  i.  loi,  105 

Lambert  map,  iL  188,  259 

Lampros,  S.  P.,  ii.  281 

Landa-Rolf,  i.  285-6 

Landegode  ("  Landit  G65a"),  island 
off  Bodo,  Norway,  i.  369-70,  372, 
373,  374;  ii-  60 

"  Landnamabok,"  i.  166,  251,  255,  256, 
258,  260,  261,  266,  273,  288,  291,  293, 
3^3.  324,  330,  332,  353,  366,  367,  368, 
369,  377;  ii-  21,  42,  58,  60,  62,  166, 
168,  169,  170,  172 

Langebek,  i.  179 

Langobards,  i.   138,  139,  155,  156,  159 

Laon  globe,  ii.  290 

Lappenberg,  I.  M.,  i.  193,  195,  303 

Lapps,  i.  61,  113,  150,  171,  173,  177, 
190,  191,  203-8,  218,  220,  224-32,  372; 
ii-  76,  135,  164,  168,  175,  178;  their 
magic,  i.  191,  204,  219,  227,  229;  ii. 
32,  77,  136,  137;  their  archery,  i. 
227-30;    their   languages,    i.    228-9 

Lascaris,  Cananos,  travels  in  the 
North,  ii.  281 

Las  Casas,  ii.  214 

Latitude,  calculation  of,  L  46-8,  64, 
76,  78,  1 16-7;  ii.  22,  260,  307;  scale 
of,  on  Ptolemy's  and  other  maps, 
ii.  259,  260-1,  264,  274-5 

Latris,  island,  i.  loi,  105 

Laurentius  Kalfsson's  Saga,  ii.  8 

Leardus,  Johannes,  mappamundi  by, 
ii.  282 

L'Ecuy  globe  (or  Rouen  globe),  ii, 
129,  131-2 

Leem,  K.,  ii.  178,  191 

Leif  Ericson,  i.  270,  313,  314,  315-8, 
321,  331,  332,  338,  339,  343,  346,  359, 
380,  384;  ii.  4,  21,  22,  25,  50,  51,  59, 
65;  called  "the  Lucky,"  i.  270,  313, 
317,  331;  meaning  of  the  name,  i. 
380-2;  discovers  Wineland  the 
Good,  i.  313,  317,  332;  rescues  the 
409 


INDEX 


shipwrecked  crew,  L  317;  introduces 

Christianity,  L  317,  332,  380 
Lelewel,  J.,  ii.  131,  203,  278,  282,  384, 

286 
Leucippus,  i.  12,  127 
Liebrecht,  F.,  ii.  228 
Ligurians,  i.  41,  42,  114 
Lik-Lodin,  i.  282-3 
Lillienskiold,   Hans   Hansen,   L    177 
Lind,  E.  H.,  i.  332 
"Liver    Sea"    ("  Lebermeer"),    i.    69, 

181,  363;  ii.  20,  51,  231 
Lok,   Michael,   Map   of   1582,   ii.    130, 

321,  323 
Lonborg,   S.  E.,  i.   102,   112,  131,  135, 

156,  174,  180,  193,  197;  ii.  150 
Longest  day,  calculation  of,  ii.  52,  54 
Lot,  F.,  i.  357,  379 
Loth,  J.,  i.  342 
Lucian,  i.  352,  355,  356,  360,  361,  363, 

366,  376;  ii.  54,  150 
Lugii  (Vandal  tribe),  i.  247 
"Lycko-Par"    ("  Lykke-Per "),  i.   381 
"  Lykk-Anders,"   Tale  of,   i.   381 
Lyschander  ("  Gronlands  Chronica  "), 

ii.  loi,  102,  III 
Lytton,  Lord,  i.   350 

Machutus,  St.,  Voyage  of,  i.  334,  354, 

363 
Macrobius,  i.  123,  126,  184;  ii.  182,  193, 

247 
Maelduin,    Voyage    of,    i.    336-7,    338, 

355.  356,  358,  360,  361,  362,  363,  364, 

366;  ii.  9,  18,  45,  150 
Maelstrom,  Legends  of  the,  i.   157-9; 

ii.  138,  150-3,  241 
Maeotides,  i.  88 
Maeotis  Palus  (Sea  of  Azov),  i.  89;  ii. 

199,  211,  283,  284 
Maggiolo,  map  by  (1527),  ii.  321,  335, 

358,  359 
"Mag    Mell"    (the   happy    plain),    i. 

355,  357,  365,  370 
Magnaghi,  A.,  ii.  227,  230 
Magnussen,  Finn,  ii.   102 
Magnus  Barfot's  Saga,  i.  197 
Magus,     Arab     name     for     Northern 

Vikings,  ii.  55,  196,  200,  201,  209,  210 
Maine,  coast  of,  ii.  316,  317 
410 


Mair,  G.,  i.  35,  36,  37,  43,  47,  59 

Manannan  mac  Lir,  i.  363,  370;  il  45 

Mandeville,  Sir  John,  ii.  271,  292 

Manna,  i.  338 

Mannhardt,  W.,  L  365 

Manuel,  King  of  Portugal,  ii.  346,  347, 
352,  353,  375,  376,  377,  378 

Mapes,  Walter,  ii.  75-6 

Maps  (see  also  Compass-charts),  ear- 
liest Greek,  i.  11,  76,  77,  78;  ii.  182; 
Ptolemy's,  i.  116-22;  wheel-maps,  i. 
151;  ii.  183-8,  193,  218,  222;  T-  and 
OT-  maps,  i.  151;  ii.  183-4,  ^93; 
Arab  maps,  ii.  203;  15th  century 
mappemundi,  ii.  281-7 

Marcianus  of  Heraclea,  i.   123 

Margaret,  Queen  of  Denmark,  Nor- 
way, and  Sweden,  ii.  118,  132 

Marinus  of  Tyre,  i.  115,  116,  121,  122; 
ii.  194,  249 

Markham,  Sir  C.  R.,  i.  43,  58,  64;  ii. 
295,  336,  373 

Markland,  i.  299,  305,  307,  312,  313, 
322,  323,  324,  329,  334,  335,  336,  338; 
ii.  I,  19,  22,  23,  36,  37,  42,  61,  92,  93, 
96,  229,  279;  ship  from  M.  reaches 
Iceland,  ii.  22,  25,  36-8,  61,  229 

Martellus,  Henricus,  ii.  276,  279 

Martyr,  Peter,  ii.  303,  330,  336,  337, 
338,  339,  342 

Marx,  F.,  i.  37 

Massagetae,  i.  81,  148;  ii.  188 

Massalia,  i.  31,  42,  43,  45,  46,  47,  48, 
67,  70 

Mas'udi,  ii.  198-9,  207 

Matthew  Paris,  ii.  281 

Matthias,  Franz,  i.  36,  43 

Maurenbrecher,  B.,  i.  349 

Maurer,  K.,  i.  265;  ii.  9 

Mauro,  Fra,  map  by,  ii.  177,  278,  285, 
286 

"Medici  Atlas"  (1351),  i.  362;  ii.  229, 
234-5,  236,  240,  255,  256,  257,  258, 
259,  260,  261,  262,  263,  264,  265,  272- 
6 

Mehren,  A.  F.,  ii.  143,  145,  212 

Meissner,   R.,  i.   255 

Mela,  Pomponius,  i.  15,  ig,  28,  38,  44, 
55,  63,  72,  75,  85-96,  97,  loi,  103,  114, 
118,  131,  144,  155;  ii.  32,  192,  208 


INDEX 


Melville  Bay,  i.  305,  310 

Mercator,  Gerard,  iu  261;  his  map  of 

1569,  ii.  130 
"Meregarto,"  i.  69,  181-4,  193,  252;  ii. 

51 

Mevenklint  (Kolbeins-ey),  i.  264,  286, 
287;  ii,  i65,  169,  170,  172 

Meyer,  Kuno,  i.   198,  354 

Michelsen,  A.  L.  J.,  i.  214 

Midgards-worm,  i,  364;  ii.  234 

Mid-glacier,  ("  MiSjokuU "),  Green- 
land, i.  267,  288,  290,  293,  294,  295 

Midnight  sun  (long  summer  day  and 
winter  night  in  the  North),  i.  14, 
45,  53-4,  62,  79,  92,  98,  106,  131,  133- 
4,  140,  157,  165,  193,  194,  309-11;  ii. 
144,  190,  212,  281 

Mikhow,  Andrei,  ii.  163,  173,  174 

Mikkola,  Prof.,  ii.  175 

Miller,  K.,  i.  77,  87,  90,  109,  115,  123, 
150,  152,  180,  182;  ii.  185,  186,  187, 
192,  193,  223,  226,  282,  284 

Modena  compass-chart,  ii.  230-1,  235, 
266,  282 

Moe,  Prof.  Moltke,  i.  69,  247,  304,  332, 
341,  342,  352,  358,  364,  366,  370,  372, 
373,  374,  378,  379,  381;  ii.  8,  11,  15, 
16,  20,  33,  44,  45,  46,  51,  56,  75,  147, 
213,  228,  242,  245 

Mommsen,  T.,  i.  57,  123,  129,  136,  137, 
193;  ii.  143 

Montelius,  O.,  i.  239,  241 

Monopoly  of  trade  with  Greenland, 
ii.  98,  1 1 8-9,  179-80;  with  Finmark, 
ii.   170 

"  Moorbriicken,"  i.  36 

Mordvins,  ii.  142,  143,  199 

Morimarusa,  i.  99,  100,  105;  ii.  58 

Moskenstrom  (Lofoten),  i.  158;  ii. 
152-3,   154,  241 

"  Mosurr "  (masurr),  wood  from 
Wineland,  i.  317;  i.  5,  25 

Much,  R.,  i.  93,  94,  95,  99,  no,  112, 
119,  120,  246,  247 

Miillenhoff,  K.,  i.  37,  38,  41,  42,  43,  56, 
57.  59,  60,  61,  65,  83,  85,  92,  93,  102, 
103,  no.  III,  112,  113,  114,  120,  128, 
132,  134,  136,  137,  145,  206,  207,  234, 
235,  246,  247 

Miillenhoff  and  Scherer,  L  181 


MuUer,  I.,  i.  83 
Muller,  S.,  i.  22 
Munch,  P.  A.,  i.  50,  132,  134,  136,  146, 

179,   180,  205,  246,  247,  258,  331;  ii. 

154 
Muratori,  ii.  162 
Murman    coast,    i.    212;    ii.    173,    176, 

269 
Mylius-Erichsen,  i.  2,  3 


Naddodd,  viking,  i.  255-7 

Nansen,  F.,  "  First  Crossing  of  Green- 
land," i.  281,  293 

Nansen,  F.,  "  Eskimo  Life,"  ii.  72,  73, 
105 

Narwhale,  i.  300,  303 

Natives  of  North  America,  brought 
to  England  in  1501  or  1502,  ii.  333; 
probably  Eskimo,  ii.  334;  brought 
to  Lisbon  by  Cortereal's  expedi- 
tion, ii.  348,  349,  351-2,  366-7;  per- 
haps Eskimo,  ii.  367 

Negri,  Francesco,  i.  226 

Nepos,  Cornelius,  i.  87 

Nestor's  Russian  Chronicle,  ii.  143 

Newfoundland,  i.  248,  322,  323,  324, 
334,  335;  ii.  23,  91,  308,  309,  312,  313, 
314,  315,  317,  318,  321,  322,  329,  335, 
337,  355,  362,  363,  364,  376;  discov- 
ery of,  by  Cortereal,  iu  330,  354, 
355,  362;  on  i6th  century  maps,  ii. 
370-5;  fisheries  of,  ii.  330-1,  378; 
called  Terra  de  Cortereal,  ii.  354, 
355,  376,  378 

Newfoundland  Banks,  ii.  154,  309,  318, 
363 

New  Land   ("Nyaland"),  i.  285-6 

Nicholas  V.,  Pope,  Letter  to,  on 
Greenland,  ii.  17,  86,  112,  116,  256, 
270,  288,  366;  Letter  from,  on  Green- 
land  (1448),  ii.  1 13-5,  278 

Nicholas  of  Lynn,  ii.  86,  151,  153,  214, 
249,  256,  261,  270,  289 

Nicolayssen,  O.,  i.  375 

Nielsen,  Prof.  Konrad,  i.  219,  223;  ii. 

175 
Nielsen,   Prof.   Yngvar,  i,  369;  ii.  29, 

39,  90,  92,  154 
Niese,  B.,  L  14 

411 


INDEX 


Nikulas  Bergsson,  Abbot,  of  Thvera, 
(Icelandic  geographical  work),  i. 
198,  313;  ii.  I,  2,  237,  256 

Nilsson,  Sven,  L  35,  60,  205 

"  Nisse,"  Scandinavian  fairy,  i.  373, 
381;  ii.  15 

Njal's  Saga,  i.  372 

Noel,  S.  B.  J.,  ii.  160,  173 

"  Nordbotn "  (Norderbondt,  Nord- 
hindh  Bondh,  Nordenbodhn),  the 
Polar  Sea,  i.  303,  304;  ii.  171,  256, 
259,  267,  268,  269 

Nordenskiold,  A.  E.,  i.  226;  ii.  32,  220, 

223,  229,  230,  234,  249,  250,  266,  282, 
285,  357 

NorSrsetur    (Greenland),   i.   267,   296, 

298-307,  308,  309,  310;  ii.  83,  88 
"  NorSrsetudrapa,"  i.  273,  298 
Normans,  i.  145,  146,  153,  188,  234;  ii. 

159-62,  200-2 
North  Cape,  i,  171,  172,  174;  ii.  124 
North  Pole,  whirlpool  at,  i.  159;  land 

at,  ii.  239,  263,  272 
North  Sea,  amber  from,  i.  14,  32,  34, 

35 

North-West  Passage,  i.  115;  ii.  129, 
130,  378 

Norway,  i.  58,  60-5,  147,  253,  292,  316, 
324,  353;  ii.  98-100,  169,  170,  204,  237; 
the  name  of,  i.  107,  179;  Jordanes 
on,  i.  136-8;  Solinus  MSS.  on,  L 
161;  Ottar  on,  i.  170-1,  175-80;  Adam 
of  Bremen  on,  i.  188,  190-2,  194,  200; 
anthropological  characteristics  in, 
i.  209-10;  fairy-lands  in,  i.  369-70; 
whaling  in,  ii.  155-9;  Edrisi  on,  ii. 
205;  Shirazi  on,  ii.  211;  in  mediaeval 
cartography,  ii.  219,  221,  225,  227, 
231.  235-6,  257,  258-61,  265-9,  286 

Norwegian   seafaring,  i.   62,  221,  223, 

224,  233-5,  246-52,  287;  ii.   135,  140; 
decline   of,  ii.    179-81 

Nova  Scotia,  i.  329,  335,  345;  ii.  3,  5, 
90,  91,  309,  314-6,  317,  321;  prob- 
ably discovered  by  John  Cabot,  ii. 
314-6 

Novaya  Zemlya,  i.  212,  248;  ii.  165, 
166,  173,  238 

Novilara,  Carvings  on  gravestone  at, 
i.  238,  239 

412 


Novgorod,  ii.  140,  142 
Nydam,  Boat  from,  i.   no,  238,  241, 
244,  246 

Oceanus,  i.  8,  9,  10,   11,  16,  79,  192, 

198,  199,  200,  201;  ii.  I,  154,  182,  198, 

200,  204,  239,  248 
Ochon,    King    of    the    Eruli,    i.    141, 

148 
Odysseus,  i.  13,  78;  ii.  53,  54 
"  CEcumene "    (the    habitable    world), 

i.  8,  10,  12,  45,  55,  76,  78,  79,  81,  82, 

115,  121,  198;  ii.  182,  217 
CEneae,  or  GEonae  (egg-eaters),  L  91, 

92,  95,  131,  155 
CEstrymnides,    L    28,    37-41;    =Cassi- 

terides,  i.  39 
Ogygia,  i.  182,  347,  355,  363;  il  43 
Olaf  the  Saint,  i.  331;  ii.  49,  50,  171 
Olaf  Tryggvason,  i.  270,  316,  321,  339; 

ii.  50 
Olaus  Magnus,  i.  205,  211,  228;  ii.  17, 

89,  III,  123,  124,  125,  127,  128,  129, 

131,  139,  141,  152,  163,  173,  178 
Oliveriana  map    (circa   1503),  ii.   358, 

369,  370,  374-5 
Olrik,  Axel,  ii.  252,  253 
Olsen,  Gunnar,  i.  377 
Olsen,  Prof.  Magnus,  L  228,  229,  246, 

297 
Omar  al  'Udhri,  i.  284;  ii.  156 
Ongania  (reproductions  of  maps),  ii. 

221,  234,  278,  282,  287 
Oppert,  J.,  i.  35 
Orcades,  i.  57,  90,   106,  107,  117,  123, 

130,  160,  161,  192,  199,  200;  ii.  186, 

192,  200 
Ordericus  Vitalis,  i.  382;  ii.  31 
"Orkan"   (or  "Orkas"),  L  50-3,  58, 

90 
Orkneys,  i.  52-3,  90,  107,  113,  117,  192, 

195,   258;   ii.   55,   148;   in  mediaeval 

cartography,  ii.  219,  228 
Orosius,    Paulus,   i.    38,   44,    123,    151, 

169,  184;  ii.  183,  192,  193 
Oseberg  ship,  i.  246,  247 
Ostiasi,  i.  69,  72 

Ostimians  (Ostimnians),  i.  38,  69,  72 
Ost-sae,  i.  169 
Ostyaks,  i.  207;  ii.  147 


INDEX 


Ottar  (Ohthere),  i.  170-80,  204,  211, 
213,  214,  218,  220,  225,  230,  231,  247; 
ii.  135-6,  142,  156,  159,  164,  173,  243 

"Pagomys  foetidus,"  i.  177 

Panoti   (long-eared),  i.  92 

Paris,  Gaston,  i.  359 

Parmenides  of  Elea,  i.  12,  123;  ii.  182 

Pasqualigo,  Lorenzo,  ii.  301,  302,  303, 

312,  314,  316,  317 
Pasqualigo,  Pietro,  Venetian  Minister 

at   Lisbon,   ii.   347-9,   355.   3^0,   361, 

362,  363,  365,  367,  372 
Paulus  Warnefridi,  i.  136,  139,  155-60, 

184,   187,   196,  203,  284;  ii.  147,  148, 

150,  153 
Pechora,  river,  ii.  144,  146,  147,  173 
Pedo,   Albinovanus,   i.   82-4;   ii.    148 
"Perdita"  (the  Lost  Isle),  i.  376;  ii. 

213 
Permians,  i.  174 

Peschel,  Johannes,  i.  352;  ii.  147 
Peucini,  i.  iii,  112,  113,  114 
Peyrere   ("  Relation  du  Groenland  "), 

ii.  120 
Phaeacians,  i.  347,  271,  378;  ii.  53,  54 
Philemon,  i.  99,   100 
"  Phoca      groenlandica "      (saddleback 

seal),  i.  217,  276 
"  Phoca  vitulina,"  i.  217 
Phoenicians,  i.  24,  25,  27,  30,  33,  34-6, 

40,  41,  99,  233,  249,  346,  349,  362,  376 
Pilestrina,  map  of  151 1,  attributed  to, 

"•  374,  376,  377 
Pindar,  i.  18,  348 
Pining,  Didrik,  ii.  123-9,  i33,  345 
Pistorius,  ii.   173 

Pizigano  map  (1367),  ii.  229,  230,  236 
Plato,  ii.  46,  293 
Pliny,  i.  15,  19,  20,  26,  28,  30,  33,  37, 

38,  44,  52,  53,  55,  57,  58,  65,  70,  71, 

72,  75,  84,  85,  87,  93,  96-107,  118,  121, 

123,  126,  134,  155,  162,  185,  334,  348, 

349,  362,  376;  ii.  48,  55,  59,  214 
Plutarch,  i.  156,  182,  187,  349,  363,  376; 

ii-  43 
Polar  Sea,  i.  169,  172,  195-6,  213,  283, 

303;   ii.   145,   164,  165,  i65,  171,  173, 

174,  176,  177,  238 
Polo,  Marco,  ii.  288,  289 


Polus  (equinoctial  dial),  i.  46,  48 
Polybius,  i.  43,  44,  45,  52,  56,  66,  67, 

73,  74,  78,  80;  ii.  160 
Pontoppidan,  Erich,  i.  375 
Porthan,  H.  G.,  i.  179 
Pothorst,  associate  of  Pining,  ii.  123- 

9,  133,  345 
"  Portolani,"  iL  216 
Portuguese  adventurers,  Arab  tale  of, 

ii.  51-5 
Portuguese    chart   of    about    1520,   at 

Munich,  ii.  353,  354,  355,  356 
Portuguese,    maritime    enterprise    of, 

ii.  292-3,  345,  377 
Posidonius,  i.   14,  23,  27,  52,  79,   115; 

ii.  292,  297 
Priscianus  Caesariensis,  i.  123 
Procopius,  i.  60,  94,  132,  134,  138,  139- 

50,  154,  194,  203,  372 
Promised    Land    (see    Tir    Tairngiri 

and  Terra  Repromissionis) 
Provisioning   Viking  ships,  i.   268-9 
Psalter  map,  ii.  187,  188 
Ptolemy,  i.    26,  38,  44,  72,  75,  76,  79, 

93,  99,  102,  III,  112,  115-22,  128,  130, 

131,   132,  142,   143,  144,  246,  349;   ii. 

182,  194,  195,  197,  206,  208,  210,  211, 

212,  220,  236,  249,  250,  254,  255,  256, 

257,  258,  259,  260,  261,  262,  263,  264, 

265,  266,  267,  275,  277,  278,  279,  280, 

292 
Puebla,    Ruy    Gonzales    de,    Spanish 

Ambassador  to  Henry  VIL,  ii.  300, 

324,  325 
Pulle  and  Longhena,  ii.  230 
"  Purchas  his  Pilgrimes,"  ii.   126 
Pygmies,  ii.  17,  75,  76,  85,  86,  iii,  117, 

206,  255,  263,  269,  270 
Pythagoras,  i.  11,  12 
Pytheas,  i.  2,  29,  38,  41,  43-73,  74,  75, 
77,  78,  80,  81,  82,  90,  92,  97,  100,  106, 
116,  165,  172,  193,  234,  246;  date  of 
his  voyage,  i.  44;  his  astronomical 
measurements,  i.  45;  his  ship,  i.  48; 
in  Britain,  i.  50;  in  Thule,  i.  53;  on 
the  sea  beyond  Thule,  i.  65;  voyage 
along  the  coast  of  Germania,  i.  69 

Qazwini,  i.   187,  284;  iL  57,  144,   156, 
202,  209-11,  234 


INDEX 


Qodama,  ii.  ig8 

Querini's   travels   in    Norway    (1432), 

ii.  177,  286 
Qvigstad,  J.  K.,  i.  173,  220,  221,  226, 

228,  229,  372;  iL  210 

Rafn,  C,  i.  304,  340;  ii.  31,  33,  193 
Ragnaricii   (see  Ranrike),  i.  136 
Raka,  island  in  Arab  myth,  ii.  207-8 
Ramusio,  G.  B.,  ii.  298,  303,  337,  338, 

339,  340,  341,  354»  364 
Ranii,  i.  136,  137 
Ranisch,  W.,  i.  18 
Ranrike,  i.  136 
Rask,  R.,  i.  179 

Raumarici   (see   Romerike),  i.  136 
Ravenna  geographer.  The,  i.  144,  152- 

4,  203 
Ravenstein,  E.  G.,  ii.  287,  289 
Ravn  Hlymreks-farer,  i.  354,  366 
Reeves,  A.  M.,  i.  267,  322;  ii.  30 
Reinach,  S.,  i.  26,  27 
Reindeer,    i.    175,    176,    191,    204,    212, 

217,  226,  227,  230,  276,  277 
Reindeer-Lapps,   i.   61,    190,   204,   205, 

207,  218,  220-32;  ii,  269 
Reinel,    Pedro,   map   by,   iL   321,   322, 

358,  364,  370,  371,  374,  376,  377 
Rheims  mappamundi  in  MS.  of  Mela, 

ii,  282-3 
Rhipaean,   or   Riphaean,   Mountains,  i. 

13,    16,   79,   81,   88,  89,   98,   loi,   128, 

189,   190,   191,   194,  200;  ii.  223 
Riant,  Paul,  ii.  55 
Ribero,   Diego,  map   of   1529,  ii.   315, 

335,  356,  357,  359 
Rietz,  i,  373 
Rimbertus,  i.   167 
Rink,  H.,  ii.  8,  69,  70,  71,  106 
Rock-carvings,    Scandinavian,    i.    236- 

41,  245 
Rodulf,   Norwegian   king,  i,    129,   132, 

135,  136,  137,  138,  139,  143,  147 
Roger  II,,  Norman  king  of  Sicily,  ii. 

202,  203 
Rohde,  E,,  ii,  57,  58,  234 
Rok-stone,  The,  i,  138,  148 
Rolf  of  Raudesand,  i.  264,  315 
Romerike,  i,  136 
Romsdal,  i.  136,  137,  147 
414 


Rordan,   Holger    ("  Monumenta   His- 

toriae  Danicae  "),  ii.  129 
Ross,  H,,  i.  341,  352;  ii,  13,  171 
"  Rudimentum   Novitiorum,"   Map   in, 

ii,  32;  geography  in,  ii,  189 
Rum   (Eastern  and   Central   Europe), 

ii.  197,  209,  211 
Rus     (Scandinavians    in    Russia),    ii, 

196,  197,  198,  199 
Rusbeas,   or   Rubeas,   promontory,   L 

99-100,  102 
Russia  (see  also  Bjarmeland),  i.  185, 

187,  188,   191,  214,  383;  ii.  141,  143, 

164,   174,  195,   196,   197,  206 
Ruste,  Ibn,  ii,  146,  198 
Ruysch's  map  (1508),  i.  262;  ii,  289 
Rydberg,  Viktor,  i,  156,  158 
Ryger  (Ruger,  Rugii),  i.  136,  138,  147, 

179,  209,  246 
Rygh,  K,,  i.  173,  304,  323,  324,  369 
Rygh,  O.,  i.  304,  324,  374;  ii.  211 
"  Rymbegla,"  L  188,  249,  287,  322,  335; 

ii.    II,   167,   170,   239,   240,   256,   260, 

263,  264,  271,  272 

Sabalingii,  i.  72,  118 

Saevo,  Mons  (or  Suevus),  i.  85,  loi, 

102 
Sa'id,  Ibn,  ii,  177,  208-9 
Sailing    directions,    Icelandic,    i.    262, 

285,  288,  290;  ii.  166,  168-71,  261 
St.  John,  Island  of,  on  sixteenth-cen- 
tury maps,  ii,  320-1,  377 
St,  John,  Valley  of.  New  Brunswick, 

i.  335;  ii-  3,  5 
St,  Lawrence,  Gulf  of,  ii,  68 
Sallust,   i.   349;   ii,    183,    186;   "  Sallust 

map  "  at  Geneva,  ii,  282,  283 
Samoyeds,  i,  212,  223;  ii.  143,  146,  175 
Samson  Fagre's  Saga,  ii.  172 
Sanali   (long-eared),  i.  91,  92 
San-Marte,  i,  365 
Santa  Cruz,  Alonso  de,  ii.  332 
Sanudo,    Marino,    ii.    222-5,    227,    262, 

272,  282 
Sargasso  Sea,  i.  40 
Sarmatia,    Sarmatians    (Slavs),    i    87, 

91,  95,  97,  loi,  109,  113,  120,  170 
Sars,  J.  E.,  i.  234,  258 
Save,  P.  A.,  i.  374 


INDEX 


Savolotchie  (the  country  on  the 
Dvina),  ii.    141-2 

Saxo  Grammaticus,  i.  193,  206,  355, 
364;  ii.  loi,  147,  165-6,  221,  222-3, 
224,  227,  238,  242,  258,  259,  263 

Saxons,  i.  145,  153,  154,  180,  235,  242, 

245  _ 

"  Scadinavia,"  or  "  Scatinavia,"  i.  93, 
loi,  102-4,  105,   155,  156 

"Scandia"  ("Scandza"),  i.  102-4,  106, 
107,  119,  120,  130-1,  136,  142-4,  153, 
155;  ii.  254,  257 

Scandinavia,  regarded  as  a  peninsula, 
i.  185;  ii.  222;  as  an  island,  ii.  186, 
188,  225;  representation  of,  in  me- 
diaeval cartography,  ii.  221-5,  227, 
254-6,  256,  258-69,  285,  286;  geogra- 
phy   of,    in    Northern    writers,    ii. 

237-9 
Schafarik,  i.  185 
Schanz,  M.,  i.  83 
Schiern,  F.,  i.  191 
Schirmer,  G.,  ii.  44 
Schlaraffenland,  i.  352 
Schleswig  (see  Sleswick) 
Schliemann,  H.,  i.  24 
Schonnerbol,  ii.  152,  153 
Schoolcraft,  H.  R,,  ii.  7 
Schrader,  O.,  i.  24,  34,  36 
Schroder,   C,  i.  360;  ii.  9,  19,  43,  44, 

50 
Schiibeler,  Prof.,  ii.  5 
Schuchhardt,  C,  i.   14 
Schultz-Lorentzen,   ii.   73 
Sciringesheal  (Skiringssal),  i.  179,  247 
Scirri   (Skirer),  i.  loi,  179,  247 
Scisco,  Dr.  L.  D.,  ii.  43 
Scolvus,    Johannes,    ii.    129-33 
Scotland,  i.   161;  ii.   204;   Pytheas  in, 

i-    53-6;    in    mediaeval    cartography, 

ii.  221,  257 
Scottish   runners,  Karlsevne's,  i.  321, 

324-5,  337,  339-43;  ii.  65 
Scythia,   Scythians,   i.   13,    16,    19,   20, 

23,  69,  70,  71,  81,  85,  87,  88,  89,  95, 

97,   98,   99,    loi,    114,    153,    154,    185, 

187 
Sealand   (Zealand),  i.  93,  94,  103,  105, 

138;    in    mediaeval    cartography,    ii. 

219,  254,  255,  257,  265 


Seals,  Sealing,  i.  177,  216-9,  224,  276-8, 
286-7,  299,  300;  ii.  72,  91,  97,  155, 
156,  165,  173,  243 

"  Sea-lung  "  (Meerlunge),  i.  66-7 

Sebillot,  P.,  i.  377 

Seippel,  Prof.  Alexander,  ii.  143,  196, 
197,  198,  199,  200,  202,  203,  204,  205, 
208,  210,  211 

Seleucus,  i.  77 

Semnones,  i.  85 

Sena,  island  off  Brittany,  i.  29,  356; 
ii-  32,  47 

Seneca,  i.  82,  84 

Seres,  Serica   (China),  ii.  262,  271 

"Sermende"    (=Sarmatians  ?),    170 

Sertorius,  i.  349-50 

Setala,  Prof.  E.,  i.  219;  ii.  175 

Seven  Cities,  Isle  of  the,  ii.  293,  295, 
304,  325 

Seven  Sleepers,  Legend  of  the,  i.  20, 
156,  284 

Severianus,  i.  127 

Shetland  Isles,  i.  52-3,  57,  58,  67,  90, 
106,  107,  117,  161,  163,  179,  192,  234, 
257,  292,  374;  ii.  207;  in  mediaeval 
cartography,  ii.  219,  228,  266 

Ship-burials,  i.  239,  241 

Ships,  Egyptian,  i.  7,  23,  235,  237,  242, 
243;  Greek,  i.  48-9,  235,  237,  242, 
243,  245;  Phoenician,  i.  35,  237,  243, 
245;  early  Scandinavian,  i.  no,  236- 
-44;  Viking,  i.  236,  238,  241,  242, 
243,  246-7;  in  Greenland,  i.  305 

Shirazi,  ii.  21 1-2 

"  Sid "  (Irish  fairies),  i.  356,  371 ;  ii. 
16,  20,  45-6,  60 

Sigurd  Stefansson's  map  of  the 
North,  ii.  7 

Simonsson,  Jon,  i.  227 

Sinclair,  Legends  of,  in  Norway,  i. 
339-41 

Sindbad,  i.  159;  ii.  57,  234 

Siret,  L.,  i.  22,  24,  29 

Sitones,  i.  11 1-2 

SkaSi,  Norse  goddess,  i.  103,  207 

"  Skald-Helga  Rimur,"  i.  298-9,  300 

Skane,  i.  72,  103,  104,  180;  in  mediae- 
val cartography,  ii.  221,  222,  235, 
257,  258,  267,  285 

Skaw,  The,  i,  85,  100,  105,  186;  ii.  204 


INDEX 


Ski  running,  i.  149,  157.  158,  203,  223; 
ii.  139 

Skolte-Lapps,  i,  214,  220,  231 

Skraelings,  in  Greenland,  i.  260,  298, 
308,  312,  327;  ii.  17,  77-90,  loi,  108, 
III,  117;  in  Wineland,  i.  260,  312, 
313,  327-30,  368;  ii.  6-1 1,  26,  60,  90-3, 
206,  208;  in  Markland,  i.  329;  ii.  15, 
ig,  20,  92-3;  in  Helluland,  ii.  35; 
originally  mythical  beings,  ii.  11-20, 
26,  60,  75-6;  meaning  of  the  word, 
ii,  13;  called  Pygmaei,  ii.  12,  17,  75, 
270 

Skridfinns  (Screrefennae,  Scrithifini, 
Rerefeni,  Scritobini,  Scride-Finnas, 
Scritefini),  i.  131-2,  140,  i43,  i44, 
149-50,  153-4,  156-7,  170,  189,  191, 
194,  198,  203-8,  210,  221,  222,  223, 
382;  ii.  139,  192 

Skull-measurements,  of  Scandina- 
vians, i.  209,  211;  of  Lapps,  i.  219- 
20;  of  Eskimo,  ii.  67 
Slavs  (see  also  Sarmatians),  i.  167, 
188,  208,  209,  210;  ii.  142,  143,  197, 
198 
Sleswick    (Schleswig),   i.    70,   72,    loi, 

119,  179,  180;  ii.  202,  204 

Sluggish    sea,    outside   the   Pillars    of 

Hercules,  and  in   the   North,  i.  38, 

40-1,  68,  83,  100,  108,  112-3,  130,  165 

Smith  Sound,  i.  304,  306;  ii.  71,  72,  73, 

74 
"  Smorland  "  as  a  name  for  fairy-land, 

i.  374 
Snaebjorn  Galti,  i.  264,  280 
Snaefell    (Greenland),  i.   267,  308,  310 
Snaefellsnes  (Iceland),  i.  257,  262,  267, 

288,  290,  293,  294,  295 
Snedgus  and  Mac  Riagail,  Voyage  of, 

ii.  53-4 
Snorre    Sturlason,   i.   270,   273;   ii.   18, 

64,  137,  239 
Snorre       Thorbrandsson,      Wineland 
voyager,  i.   313,  319,   320,   326,   327, 

333 
Soderberg,  Prof.  Sven,  on  Wineland, 

ii.  63-5 
Solberg,  Dr.  O.,  i.  213,  214,  217,  219, 

230,  306;  ii.  72,  73,  103 
Soleri  map  (1385),  iL  229 
416 


SoHnus,  C.  Julius,  1.  52,  55,  57,  64,  66, 
99,  123,  126,  151,  160,  184,  189,  193, 
348 
Soncino,  Raimondo  di,  Milanese  Min- 
ister in  London,  ii.  296-7,  298,  301, 
302,    303-5,    306,    307,    308,   309,    312, 
314,  316,  323 
Sorensen,  S.  A.,  i.  179 
Spain,  tin  in,  i.  23,  31;  suggested  ori- 
gin of  the  name  of,  i.  380;  Viking 
raids  in,  ii.  199,  200 
Spherical  form  of  the  earth,  Doctrine 
of,  i.  II,  97,  126,  127,  151,  194,  199; 
ii.  185,  247 
Spies,  in  land  of  Canaan,  i.  339 
Spitzbergen,   i.    248;    ii.    165,    168,   170, 

172,  173,  179,  238 
Steensby,  H.  P.,  ii.  69,  70 
Steenstrup,  Japetus,  i.  172 
Steenstrup,  Johannes,  ii.  161,  162 
Stenkyrka    (Gotland),   Stone   from,   i. 

239,  243 
"  Stjorn  "  (Norwegian  version  of  Old 

Testament),  i.  338;  ii.  4 
Stokes,  V/hitley,  i.  357 
Storm,  Gustav,   i.    132,    174,    196,  218, 
228,  254,  255,  260,  284,  285,  292,  301, 
305,  313,  314,  317,  321,  322,  324,  329, 
333,  369;  ii.  I,  2,  3,  7,  II,  14,  17,  19, 
22,  23,  25,  27,  29,  30,  35,  36,  43,  47, 
48,  75,  79,  82,  86,  90,  93,  99,  100,  loi, 
107,  III,  112,  114,  117,  118,  121,  122, 
124,  129,  131,  136,  137,  141,  147,  150, 
153,  158,  167,  168,  229,  235,  237,  240, 
242,  249,  250,  256,  257,  258,  262,  267, 
268,  270,  272,  279,   289,  294 
Stow,  John,  Chronicle,  ii.  333 
Strabo,  i.  14,  15,  20,  23,  24,  27,  28,  38, 
42,  43,  44,  45.  50,  52,  53,  55,  56,  57, 
61,  63,  64,  65,  66,  67,  69,  70,  72,  73, 
74,  75,  76,  77,  80-2,  87,  III,  112,  161, 
187,  349;  ii.  47,  75,  160,  201 
Straumsfjord   (Wineland),  i.  325,  326, 

329,  330,  337,  343,  345 
Strom,  Hans   ("  Description  of  Sond- 

mor"),  i.  370,  375 
Strong  Men,  Island  of,  ii.  43,  46,  50, 

61 
•  Sturlubok,"  i.  255,  256,  257,  261,  262, 
293,  331,  354,  367,  368;  ii.   169,  261 


INDEX 


Styx,  i.  359,  372 

"  Suehans "  (see  Svear),  i.  135,  137 

Sueones  (see  Svear),  i.  188-9 

*'  Suetidi,"  i.  136,  137 

Suevi  (Suebi),  i.  87,  108-9 

Suhm    ("Historic   af   Danmark"),   iL 

154 
Suiones  (see  Svear),  i.  110-2,  236,  238, 

244,  245 
Sun-dial,  i.  46-7 
Sun's  altitude,  measurement  of,  i.  249, 

250,  309-11;  ii.  307 
SValbard  (Spitzbergen  ?),  ii.  165,  166- 

73,  238 
Svear     (Swedes,     Suiones,     Suehans, 

Sveones,     Sueones),    i.    110-2,     135, 

137,  167,  170,  188-9;  "•  190 
Svein  Estridsson,  King   of  Denmark, 

i.  184,  188,  189,  195,  201,  383;  ii.  148 
Sverdrup,  Otto,  i.  306;  ii.  70,  71 
Sviatoi  Nos,  promontory,  i.  171,  174; 

ii.  136,  138,  140,  155 
Svinoi,  name  of  island  off  Sunnmor,  i. 

369-70,  378;  island  off  Nordland,  i. 

378;    island    in    the    Faroes,    i.    375, 

378;   probable   origin   of  the   name, 

i.  378 
Sweden,  i.  71,  loi,  112,  134-5,  178,  187, 

188-9,  210,  381,  383;  ii.  190,  205,  237; 

in    mediaeval    cartography,    ii.    219, 

221,  222,  223 
Swedes  (see  Svear  and  Goter) 
Swedish    legends    and    fairy  tales,    ii. 

55-6 
Sydow,  C.  W.  von,  i.  342,  364 


Tacitus,  i.  69,  71,  83,  95,  104,   107-14, 

131,  144,  149,  150,  203,  236,  238,  244, 

245;  ii.  47 
Tanais  (the  Don),  i.  66,  70,  78,  88,  151; 

ii.  186 
Tarducci,  F.,  ii.  295,  304,  319 
Tarsis    (Tarshish,    Tartessos),    i.    24, 

28,  31,  38 
Tartarus,  i.  11,  68,  158;  ii.   150,  240 
Tartushi,  at-,  i.  187;  ii.  202 
Tastris,  promontory,   i.   loi,   105 
Terfinnas,  i.  171,  173-5,  204,  213,  218; 

ii.  146 


"Terra  del  Rey  de  portuguall "  on 
Cantino  map,  ii.  352,  363,  372; 
= Newfoundland,  ii.  363,  370 

"  Terra  Repromissionis  Sanctorum," 
i.  357,  358,  359,  363,  364;  "•   19,  228 

Teutones,  i.  70,  72,  91,  93,  94 

Thalbitzer,  W.,  ii.  19,  67,  70,  73,  88, 
90,  93 

Thales  of  Miletus,  i.  12,  33,  34,  47 

Theodoric,  King  of  the  Goths,  i.  128, 
129,  136,  137,  138,  147 

Theopompus,  i.  12,  16,  17,  355 

Thietmar  of  Merseburg,  i.  229 

Thomsen,  V.,  ii.  175,  198,  199 

Thor,  i.  325,  333,  341,  343,  364; 
"  Thor-"  names,  i.  332-3;  ii.  51 

Thorbjom  Vivilsson,  i.  318,  319,  320, 
332 

Thorbrand  Snorrason,  killed  in  Wine- 
land,  i.  313,  328,  333;  ii.  10 

Thore  Hund's  expedition  to  Bjarme- 
land,   ii.   137-8 

Thorfinn,  Earl  of  Orkney,  i.  354;  ii. 
50 

Thorgils  Orrabeinsfostre,  sails  to 
Greenland,  i.  280-2;  ii.  81,  89 

Thorgunna,  Leif's  mistress,  i.  316,  333 

Thorhall  Gamlason,  Wineland  voy- 
ager, i.  313,  319,  320,  333,  367 

Thorhall  the  Hunter,  i.  296,  320,  321, 
325-6,  329,  333,  338,  343-4;  ii.  24 

Thorkel  Gellisson,  i.  253,  258,  260,  313, 
354,  366,  367,  368;  ii.  42 

Thormod  Kolbrunarskald,  L  276;  ii. 
18 

Thorne,  Robert,  ii.  324,  341;  map  by, 
334,  335 

Thoroddssen,  Th.,  i.  262;  ii.  225 

Thorolf  Kveldulfsson,  i.  175,  231 

Thorolf  Smor,  i.  257,  374 

*'  Thorsdrapa,"  i.  219 

Thorstein  Ericson,  i.  249,  317-9,  320, 
321,  331,  333;  attempts  to  find  Wine- 
land,  i.  318 

Thorvald  Ericson,  i.  318,  320,  329,  332; 
ii.  4,  13,  17-8 

Thorvard,  Wineland  voyager,  i.  320, 
332 

Three  Brethren,  Strait  of  the,  ii.  130, 
133 

417 


INDEX 


Thue,  H.  J.,  i.  60 

Thule  (Tyle,  Thyle,  Ultima  Tile,  etc.), 
i.  123,  134,  147;  ii.  75,  149,  188,  192, 
197,  198,  200;  visited  by  Pytheas,  i. 
53-64;  derivation  of,  i.  58-9;  =Nor- 
way,  i.  60;  Mela  on,  i.  92;  Pliny  on, 
i.  106;  Tacitus,  i.  108;  Ptolemy,  i. 
117,  120,  121;  Jordanes,  i.  130;  Pro- 
copius,  i.  140-4;  Solinus  MSS.,  i. 
160-1;  Adam  of  Bremen,  i.  193-4; 
Dicuil  on  (=Iceland),  i.  164-7; 
Tjodrik  Monk  (=Iceland),  i.  254; 
"Historia  Norvegiae"  (=Iceland),  i. 
255;  in  mediaeval  cartography,  iL 
219,  228,  257,  266,  268,  269 

Thyssagetas,  i.  88 

Tides,  on  W.  coast  of  France,  i.  40; 
observed  by  Pytheas,  i.  50;  on  coast 
of  N.  America,  ii.  316 

Timaeus,  i.  44,  51,  70,  71 

Tin  in  ancient  times,  i.  23-31;  deri- 
vation of  Greek,  Celtic,  and  Latin 
words  for,  i.  25-7;  tin-trade  in 
southern  Britain,  i.  68 

"  Tir  f  o-Thuin  "  (Land  under  Wave), 
i-  358,  370,  373 

"  Tir  Mor "  (The  Great  Land),  i.  357, 
367;  ii.  48 

"Tir  na  Per  Finn"  (The  White 
Men's  Land),  ii.  44 

"  Tir  na  m-Ban  "  (Land  of  Women), 
i-  354,  355 

"Tir  na  m-Beo"  (Land  of  the  Liv- 
ing), i.  357,  371 

"  Tir  na  n-Ingen  "  (Land  of  Virgins), 
i-  355,  356,  363;  ii.  45 

"  Tir  na  n-Og "  (Land  of  Youth),  i. 
357 

"Tir  Tairngiri"  (Promised  Land),  i. 
357;   ii.   228 

Tjodhild,  wife  of  Eric  the  Red,  i.  267, 
270,  318,  331 

Tjodrik    Monk,   i.    166,   254,   255,   256, 

257 
Toby,  Maurice,  Bristol  chronicler,  ii. 

302,  305-6 
Torfaeus,  Tormodus,  ii.  7,  32,  34,  154, 

241 
Torlacius  (Gudbrand  Torlaksson),  ii. 

241 
418 


Torp,  Prof.  Alf,  i.  25,  26,  27,  58,  59,  94, 

107,  148,  181,  183,  210,  304,  361,  371; 

ii.  13,  14,  228 
Toscanelli,  ii.  287,  292,  296,  372 
Trade-routes  to  the  North  in  ancient 

times,  i.  14,  21-2,  28,  31,  36,  75,  96 
"Trag   Mor"    (the   Great   Strand),   i. 

339,  357,  371;  ii-  48 
Triads,  in  legend,  i.  337-8;  ii.  6 
Triquetrum  (regula  Ptolemaica),  i.  47 
Trolls,  attributes  of,  i.  327,  344;  ii.  10, 

14-6,  19,  76 
Trondhjem,    i.    192;    ii.    85,    117,    177, 

205,  227,  235,  264,  265,  266,  267,  268, 

269,  270 
Troy,  Bronze  in,  i.  24,  25 
Turcae,  i.  88 
Tylor,  E.  B.,  i.  380 
Tyrker    (in    Wineland   story),   i.   341, 

343-4,  360;  ii.  4 

"Ua"  Corra,  Navigation  of  the  Sons 

of,  i.  338-9,  355,  361;  ii.  20 
Unger,  C.  R.,  i.  331,  338,  360 
Unipeds  (Einfotingar,  Ymantopodes^, 

i.  189,  329;  ii.  II,  13,  17,  263 
"  Urus  "   (aurochs),  i.   191 
"Uttara  Kuru,"  L  19,  351 

Vandals,  i.  247 

Vangensten,  O.,  L  226;  ii.  85,  iii,  233, 

268,  286 
Van  Linschoten,  i.  376 
Varangerfjord,    i.    213,    214,    217,   219, 

220;  ii.   178,  210-11 
Varangians'  Sea  (see  Warank),  ii.  210, 

211,  212,  213 
Vardohus  fortress,  ii.   126,  127,   141 
Varzuga,  river,  i.  174;  ii.  135 
de  Vaux,  C,  ii.  213 
Velleius,  i.  85 

Venedi  (Wends),  i.  loi,  113 
Vener,  Lake,  i.  131;  iL  266 
Veneti,  i.  39,  40,  242 
Venusberg  myth,  i.  355,  371 
Verrazano's  map  of  1529,  ii.  335 
Vesconte,   Perrinus,  map   of   1327,   ii. 

229;  atlas  of  1321,  ii.  230 
Vesconte,   Pietro,   ii.    222-5,   230,    255, 

257,  258,  259,  276,  282,  283,  284,  285 


INDEX 


Vigfusson,  Gudbrand,  i.  258,  314 
Viking    expeditions,    the    earliest,    i. 

234-5;  in  Spain,  ii.  200 
Vikings,   origin   of   the  name,   i.   244, 

245 
Viladeste,    Mecia    de,    compass-chart 

of  1413,  ii.  234 
"Villuland"  (Norse  land  of  glamour), 

i.  377;  ii.  206 
Vincent  of  Beauvais,  ii.  158 
Vine,  Wild,   ("  Vitis  vulpina "),  in  N. 

America,  i.  317;  ii.  3-4 
"  Vinili,"  i.  136 
"  Vinoviloth,"  i.  136,  203 
Virgil,  i.  130,  157,  159,  363 
Vistula,  i.  71,  75,  95,  96,  loi,  104,  119, 

120,  121,  130,  131,  181 
Vogel,  i.  235 

Volga,  ii.  142,  143,  144,  146,  197 
Voyage    of     1267,    to    the    north    of 

Baffin  Bay,  i.  250,  307-11;  ii.  82,  83, 


Wackernagel,  W.,  ii.  32,  189 

Walkendorf,  Archbishop  Eric,  ii.  86, 
112,  117,  163,  174 

Walrus,  ii.  112,  155,  163,  165,  243; 
hunting,  i.  172,  176-8,  212,  216,  221, 
276-8,  287,  300;  ii.  72,  163-4,  173-8; 
tusks,  i.  172,  176,  192,  212,  217,  277, 
300,  303;  ii.  163,  174;  hide  for  ropes, 
ii.  172,  176,  212,  277,  303;  ii.  164, 
178 

Walsperger,  Andreas,  mappamundi 
by,  ii.  283,  284,  286 

Warank,  Varyag,  Varangi  (Arab, 
Russian  and  Greek  names  for  Scan- 
dinavians), ii.  196,  199,  200,  210-1 

Wattenzone,   Die,   i.   68 

Welcher,  F.  G.,  i.  371 

Wends,  i.  loi,  113,  169,  180 

Western  Settlement  of  Greenland,  i. 
266,  271,  272,  300,  301,  302,  307,  311, 
321,  322,  334;  ii.  71,  90;  decline  of, 
ii.  95-100,  102,  106,  107-111;  visit  of 
Ivar  Bardsson  to,  ii.  108 

West-sae,  i.  169,  170 

Whales,  Whaling,  i.  251;  ii.  145,  173; 
in  Bay  of  Biscay,  i.  39;  ii.  159,  161; 
in    Normandy,    ii.    159,    161;    Nor- 


wegian, i.  172;  ii.  155-9,  178,  243; 
in  Greenland,  i.  276,  277;  ii.  72;  in 
Ireland,  ii.  156;  in  the  Mediterra- 
nean, ii.  162;  in  legend,  i.  325-6,  344, 
363.  364;  ii.  213,  234 

Whirlpools  (see  Maelstrom) 

White  Men's  Land,  The  (see  Hvitra- 
manna-land,  and  Tir  na-Fer  Finn) 

White  Sea,  i.  169,  171,  172,  174,  175, 
218-9,  222;  ii.  135-42,  164,  173,  179, 
237 

Wichmann,  Prof.,  i.  219 

"  WidsiS,"  i.  234 

Wieland,  C.  M.,  i.  352,  362;  ii.  54,  150 

Wieser,  von,  ii.   249 

Wiklund,  K.  B.,  i.  112;  ii.  175 

"  Wildhlappelandi,"  i.  226;  ii.  256, 
263,  268;  "  Wildlappmanni,"  ii.  269, 
270 

Wilhelmi,  ii.  366 

Wille,  Prof.  N.,  ii.  3 

William  of  Malmesbury,  i.  378 

Wilse,  J.  N.,  i.  352 

Wineland  (Vinland,  Vinland,  Vind- 
land,  Winland,  Wyntlandia,  etc.), 
i.  184,  195,  196-8,  201,  249,  260,  273, 
312-84;  ii.  1-65,  90-3,  no,  154,  188, 
190-1,  228,  239,  240,  293,  294,  304; 
called  "  the  Good,"  i.  313,  353,  369, 
373;  ii.  60;  vines  and  wheat  in,  i. 
195,  197-8,  317,  325,  325-7,  345-53, 
382-3;  ii.  3-6,  59;  =the  Fortunate 
Isles,  i.  345-53,  382-4;  ii,  1-2,  61; 
authorities  for  the  Wineland  voy- 
ages, i.  312-3;  discovered  by  Leif 
Ericson,  i.  317;  Karlsevne's  voy- 
age, i.  320-30;  Irish  origin  of  ideas 
of,  i.  167,  258,  353-69;  ii.  60;  the 
name  of,  i.  353,  367;  ii.  61;  summary 
of   conclusions  on,  ii.   58-62 

Winge,  Herluf,  i.  275 

Winship,  G.  P.,  ii.  295,  305,  319,  320, 

324,  326,  333,  336,  340,  341,  342 
"  Wisu "    (or    "  Isu "),    Arabic    name 
for   a   people   in   North    Russia,   ii. 
143-6,  200,  270 
Wizzi,  i.  188,  383;  ii.  64,  143 
Wolf,  Jens  Lauritzon,  i.   364 

Wolfenbiittel,  Portuguese  16th-cen- 
tury map  at,  ii.  331,  332,  335,  356 

419 


INDEX 


Women,    Land    of    ("Terra    Femina- 

rum"),  on  the  Baltic,  L  186-7,  383; 

ii.  214 
Women's  boats  (umiaks),  Eskimo,  ii. 

19,  70,  72,  74,  85,  92,  269,  270 
"Wonders,    Book    of"     (Arabic),    ii. 

207,  213-4 
Worcester,  Willemus  de,  ii.  294 
Wulfstan,  i.  104,  180 
Wuttke,  H.,  i.  154 
Wytfliet,  Cornelius,  ii.  131 

Xamati,  i.  88 

Xenophon    of   Lampsacus,    i.    71,   99, 


Yagug  and  Magug,  ii.  144,  212,  213 
"Ynglinga  Saga,"  L  135 


York,  Cape,  i.  306,  ii,  71 
Yugrians,  ii.  173,  174,  200 


Zarncke,  ii.  242 

Zealand  (see  Sealand) 

Zeno  map,  ii.  131,  132 

Zeuss,  K.,  i.  112,  120,  145,  234,  235 

Ziegler,  Jacob,  i.  294;  ii.  17,  86,   106, 

III,  127,  128 
Zimmer,  H.,  i,  234,  281,  334,  336,  339, 

354,  355,  356,  357,  358,  360,  361,  363, 

364,  371;  ii.  9,  10,  20,  44,  45,  53,  54, 

150,  151 
"  Zizania  aquatica "  (wild  rice),  in  N. 

America,  ii.  5 
Zones,  Doctrine  of,  i.  12,  76,  86,  123; 

ii.  182,  193,  247 


420 


f  f,-^" 
