Eskimo Life (Fridtjof Nansen, 1894)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1894 first English edition (https://archive.org/details/eskimolife00nansgoog). Nansen's ethnography of the Greenland Inuit after his 1888–89 crossing — the foundational modern account of Eskimo life.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ESKIMO LIFE 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR 

I 

THE FIRST CROSSING OF GREENLAND 

. With numerou* JlltMratUnu and a Map 
Cheap Edition. Grown 8vo. 7«. 6<(. 

London: LONGMANS, GREEN, AKD CO. 
■Ad NEW YORK: IS EAST lOtii STREET 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




A HIJNTKR, HIS WIFE, AND A YOUNG GIRL (WEST COAST OF GREENLAND) 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ESKIMO LIFE 



BY 

FEIDTJOF NANSEN 

AUTHOR or 'TIIK FlRfiT CROKHINO OP GRRRNLAND ' 



TRANSLATED BY WILLIAM ARCHER 



WITH ILLUSTRATIONS 



SECOND EDITION 




LONDON 
LONGMANS, GEEEN, AND CO. 

AND NEW YORK: 15 EAST 16"' STREET 
1894 



All rights r^n'rwcd 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



^% 






REESE 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 






TEANSLATOE'S PEEFACE. 



Before placing his ' Eskimoliv ' ia my hands for 
translation. Dr. Nansen very carefully revised the 
text, and made numerous excisions and additions. 
Thus the following pages will be found to differ in 
several particulars from the Norwegian original. I 
also requested and received Dr. Nansen's permission 
to suppress one or two especially nauseous details of 
Eskimo manners, which seemed to have no particular 
ethnological significance. The excisions made on 
this score, however, probably do not amount to 
half a page in all. 

Dr. Nansen suggested that I should follow the 
example of Dr. Eink in his * Tales and Traditions of 
the Eskimo/ and treat the word 'Eskimo' as in- 
declinable. I have ventured, however, to overrule 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



VI ESKIMO LIFE 

his suggestion. There is precedent for both 'Eskimo' 
and ' Eskimos ' as the plural form ; and where there 
is any choice at all, it seems only rational to prefer 
the regular declension. 

In Chapters XIII. and XIV. Dr. Nansen naturally 
makes numerous references to that great storehouse 
of Greenland folk-lore, Dr. Eink's * Eskimo Sagn og 
Eventyr,' which has been translated and condensed 
by the author himself, under the above-mentioned 
title. Where it was possible, I have • given the 
reference to the English edition ; but in cases where 
the text has been very freely condensed or expur- 
gated, I have referred to the Danish original as well. 
Even where I have not done so, students of folk-lore 
may be advised to go back to the original text, 
which is 6ften fuller and more characteristic than 



the English version. 



W. A. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



AUTHOE'S PEEFACE. 



PoB one whole winter we were cut off from the world 
and immured among the Greenlanders. I dwelt in 
tlieir huts, took part in their hunting, and tried, a3 
•well as I could, to live their life and learn their lan- 
guage. But one winter, unfortunately, is far top 
short a time in which to attain a thorough knowledge 
of so peculiar a people, its civilisation, and its ways 
of thought — that w^ould require years of patient 
study. Nevertheless, I have tried in this book to 
record the impressions made upon me by the Eskimo 
and his polity, and have sought, as far as possible, 
to support them by quotations from former authors. 
•There may. even be things which a newcomer sees 
-jnore clearly than an observer of juany years' stand- 
-ing, who lives in their midst. 

On many- pointy, perhaps,- the reader may not 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



via ESKIMO LIFE 

think as I do. I cannot, it is true, find that 
whatever is is very good; I am weak enough to 
feel compassion for a declining race, which is perhaps 
beyond all help, since it is already stung with the 
venom of our civilisation. But I comfort myself 
with the thought that at least no words of mine can 
make the lot of this people worse than it is, and I 
hope that the reader will accept my observations in 
the spirit in which they are written. Amicus Plato j 
amicus Socrates^ m^gis arnica Veritas — the truth before 
everything. And if in some points I should appear 
unreasonable, I must plead as my excuse that it is 
scarcely possible to live for any time among these 
people without conceiving an affection for them — for 
that, one winter is more than enough. 

During the long, dark evenings, as I sat in the 
low earth-huts and gazed at the flame of the train-oil 
lamps, I had ample time for reflection. It often 
seemed to me that I could see these hardy children 
of Nature pressing westward, stage by stage, in their 
dog sledges and in their wonderful skin-canoes, along 
the barren ice-coasts ; I saw how they fought their 
way onward, and, little by little, perfected their in- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE IX 

genious implements and attained their masterly skill 
in the chase. Hundreds, nay thousands, of years 
passed, tribe after tribe succumbed, while other and 
stronger stocks survived — and I was filled with ad- 
miration for a people which had emerged victorious 
f ronv the struggle with such inhospitable natural 
surroundings. 

But in melancholy contrast to this inspiriting 
picture of the past, the present and the future rose 
before my eyes — a sad, a hopeless mist. 

In Greenland the Eskimos fell in with Europeans. 
First it was our Norwegian forefathers of the olden 
times ; them they gradually overcame. But we re- 
turned to the charge, this time bringing with us 
Christianity and the products of civilisation; then 
they succumbed, and are sinking ever lower and 
lower. The world passes on with a pitying shrug 
of the shoulders. 

* What more can one say ? Who's a penny the worse 
Though a beggar be dead ? ^ 

But this people, too, has its feelings, like others*; 
it, too, rejoices in life and Nature, and bleeds under 
our iron heel. If anyone doubts this, let him 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



X ESKIMO LIFE 

observe their sympatliy with one anotlier, and tlieir 
love for their children ; or let him read their 
legends. 

Whenever I saw instances of the suffering and 
misery which we have brought upon them, that 
remnant of a sense of justice which is still to be 
found in most of us stirred me to indignation, and 
I was filled with a burning desire to send the truth 
reverberating over the whole world. Were it once 
brought home to them, I thought, people could not 
but awaken from their indifference, and at once make 
good the wrong they had done. 

Poor dreamer ! You have nothing to say which 
lias not been better said before. The hapless lot of 
the Greenlanders, as well as of other ' native * races, 
has been set forth on many hands, and always without 
avail. 

But, none the less, I felt I must unburden my 
conscience-; it seemed to me a sacred duty to add 
my protest to the rest. My pen, unhappily, is all 
too feeble : what I feel most deeply I have failed 
to express : never have I longed more intensely for 
a poet's gifts. I know very -well that my voice, too, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE XI 

will be as a cry sent forth over a flat expanse of 
desert, without even mountains to echo it back. My 
only hope is to awaken here and there a feeling of 
sjrmpathy with the Eskimos and of sorrow for their 
destiny. 

FEIDTJOF NANSEN. 

GODTHAAB, LtSAKER: 

November 1891. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CONTENTS. 



CRAF. PA OB 

I. GBEENLAND AND THE ESKIMO 1 

II. APPEABANCE AND DRESS IS 

III. THE 'KAIAK' and ITS APPUBTEKANCES ... 80 

IV. THE ESKIMO AT SEA 56 

V. WINTEB-HOUSBS, TENTS, WOMAN-BOATS, AND EXCURSIONS 78 

VI. GOOKEBT AND DAINTIES 89 

( 
YI^ CHABACTEB AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS . • .100 

VIII. THE POSITION AND WORK OF WOMEN . . . 121 

IX. LOVE AND MARRIAGE 138 

X. MORALS 157 

XI. JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS— DRUM-DANCES AND ENTER- 
TAINMENTS 186 

XII. MENTAL GIFTS — ART — MUSir — POETRY — ESKIMO NARRA- 
TIVES 198 

XIII. RELIGIOUS IDEAS 209 

XIV. THE INTRODUCTION OF CHRISTIANITY . . . . 301 

XV. EUROPEANS AND NATIVES 313 

XVI. WHAT HAVE WE ACHIEVED] 327 

XVII. CONCLUSION 341 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by 



Google 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



A HuKTER, HIS Wife, and a Younq.Giri. (West , 

Coast of Greenland) .... Frontispiece 

* The Boundless Snow-Fields stretching Calm 

AND White from Sea to Sea' . ,• . to fare page *2 

Covering a Kalak „ ^^ 82 

• The Head turned Half Backwards to watch 

the Seas* , „ ' „ '-^S 

Seaward in Search of Seals .... t< n ^'^ 

Seal- hunting ,, „ 02 

Before the Wind ...... „ „ 66 

A Kalvk-Man rescuing a Comrade ... ,« „ OH 

A Kaiak-Man attacked by a Walrus . . „ ,i 74 

Halibut-Fishing » » 70 

An Eskimo Camp „ „ 84 

A Summer Journey ,, „ 86 

Fishing „ ». 114 

A Greenland Dance „ ,i 100 

A Fiord Landscape on the East Coast (at 

Tingmlarmiut) . . . . * . . „ „ 828 

Northern Lights— * The Dead at Play' . . „ » 848 



■Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



XVI ERKIxMO LIFE 

WOODCUTS IN THE TEXT. 

FAOS 

Greenland Indoor Dress (East Coast)- (1) Male Costume; 

(2) Female Costume 26 

Bladder-dart . . • .34 

Harpoon 36 

The Head of the Harpoon 87 

Lance ••••... 89 

Throwino-stick with Bird-dart 40 

The Bird-dart Thrown 42 

Throwino-stick with Harpoon 48 

EaIAK, seen FICOM ABOVE . • 44 

Kaiak-frame ••• 44 

Section of the Kaiak • 47 

Paddle 49 

Half-Jacket .••« 50 

Whole-Jacket 50 

Eskimo Venus and Apollo 199 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



ESKIMO LIFE 



*"*'-. 



CHAPTER I 

GREENLAND AND THE ESKIMO 

Greenland is in a peculiar manner associated with 
Norway and with the Norwegians. Our forefathers 
were the first Europeans who found their way to 
its shores. In their open vessels the old Vikings 
made their daring voyages, through tempests and 
drift-ice, to this distant land of snows, settled there 
throughout several centuries, and added it to the 
domain of the Norwegian crown. 

After the memory of its existence had practically 
passed away, it was again one of our countrymen ' 
who, on behalf of a Norwegian company, founded 
the second European settlement of the country. 

It is poor, this land of the Eskimo, which we 
have taken from him ; it has neither timber nor gold 
to offer us — it is naked, lonely, like no other land 

^ Hans Egede. Trans, 

B 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



2 ESKIMO LIFE 

inhabited of man. But in all its naked poverty, how 
beautiful it is ! If Norway is glorious, Greenland is 
in truth no less so. When one has ouce seen it, how 
dear to him is its recollection ! I do not know if 
others feel as I do, but for me it is touched with all 
the dream-like beauty of the fairyland of my childish 
imagination. It seems as though I there found our 
own Norwegian scenery repeated in still nobler, 
purer forms. 

It is strong and wild, this Nature, like a saga of 
antiquity carven in ice and stone, yet with moods of 
lyric delicacy and refinement. It is like cold steel 
with the shimmering colours of a sunlit cloud 
playing through it. 

When I see glaciers and ice-mountains, my 
thoughts fly to Greenland where the glaciers are 
vaster than anywhere else, where the ice-mountains 
jut into a sea covered with icebergs and drift-ice. 
When I hear loud encomiums on the progress of our 
society, its great men and their great deeds, my 
thoughts revert to the boundless snow-fields stretch- 
ing white and serene in an unbroken sweep from sea 
to sea, high over what have once been fruitful 
valleys and mountains. Some day, perhaps, a 
similar snow-field will cover us all. 

Everything in Greenland is simple and great — 
white snow, blue ice, naked, black rocks and peaks. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 







M 

m 

5 






H 

o 



S 

pa 

n 

H 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



GREENLAND ANT) THE ESKIMO 3 

and dark stormy sea. When I see the sun sink 
glowing into the waves, it recalls to me the Green- 
land sunsets, with the islets and rocks floating, as it 
were, on the burnished surface of the smooth, softly- 
heaving sea, while inland the peaks rise row on row, 
flushing in the evening light. And sometimes when 
I see the saeter-life* at home and watch the saiter- 
girls and the grazing cows, I think of the tent-Ufe 
and the reindeer-herds on the Greenland fiords and 
uplands ; I think of the screaming ptarmigan, the 
moors and willow-copses, the lakes and valleys in 
among the mountains where the Eskimo lives 
through his brief summer. 

But like nothing else is the Greenland winter- 
night with its flaming northern lights ; it is Nature's 
own mystic spirit-dance. 

Strange is the power which this land exercises 
over the mind ; but the race that inhabits it is not 
less remarkable than the land itself. 

The Eskimo, more than anyone ej|e, belongs to 
the coast and the sea. He dwells by the sea, upon 
it he seeks his subsistence, it gives him all the 
necessaries of his Ufe, over it he makes all his 
journeys, whether in his skin-canoes in summer, or 
in his dog-sledges when it is ice-bound in winter. 
The sea is thus the strongest influence in the life of 

* Salter = mountain ch&let. Trans, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



4 ESKIMO LIFE 

the Eskimo ; what wonder, then, if his soul reflects 
its moods? His mind changes with the sea — 
grave in the storm ; in sunshine and calm full of 
unfettered glee. He is a child of the sea, thought- 
lessly gay like the playful wavelet, but sometimes 
dark as the foaming tempest. One feeling chases 
another from his childlike mind as rapidly as, when 
the storm has died down, the billows sink to rest, 
and the very memory of it has passed away. 

The good things of life are very * unequally 
divided in this world. To some existence is so 
easy that they need only plant a bread-fruit tree 
in their youth, and their whole life is provided for. 
Others, again, seem to be denied everything except 
the strength to battle for life ; they must laboriously 
wring from hostile Nature every mouthful of their 
sustenance. They are sent forth to the outposts, 
these people ; they form the wings of the great army 
of humanity in its constant struggle for the subjuga- 
tion of nature. 

Such a people are the Eskimos, and among the 
most remarkable in existence. They are a living 
proof of the rare faculty of the human being for 
adapting himself to circumstances and spreading 
oyer the face of the earth. 

The Eskimo forms the extreme outpost towards 
the infinite stillness of the regions of ice, and as far. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



G^REENLAND AND THE ESKIMO 5 

almost, as we have forced our way to tlie north- 
ward, we find traces left behind them by this hardy 
race. 

The tracts which all others despise he has made 
his own. By dint of constant struggle and slow 
development, he leamt some things that none have 
learnt better. Where for others the conditions which 
make life possible came to an end, there life began 
for him. He has come to love these regions ; they 
are to him a world in which he himself embodies the 
whole of the human race.^ Outside their limits he 
could not exist. 

It is to this people that the following pages are 
devoted. 

The mutual resemblance of the different tribes of 
Eskimos is no less striking than their difference from 
all other races in features, figure, implements and 
weapons, and general manner of life. 

A pure-bred Eskimo from Bering Straits is so 
like a Greenlander that one cannot for a moment 
doubt that they belong to the same race. Their 
language, too, is so far alike that an Alaska Eskimo 
and a Greenlander would probably, after some little 
time, be able to converse without much diflSculty. 

* The Eskimos call themselves t'nui^— that is to say, 'human 
beings ' ; all other men they conceive as belonging to a different genus 
of animals. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



6 IJSKLMO LIFE 

Captain Adrian Jacobsen, who has travelled both in 
Greenland and in Alaska, told me that in Alaska he 
could manage to get along with the few words of 
Eskimo he had learnt in Greenland. These two 
peoples are divided by a distance of about 3,000 
miles — something like the distance between London 
and Afghanistan. Such unity of speech among races 
so widely separated is probably unique in the history 
of mankind. 

The likeness between all the different tribes ot 
Eskimos, as well as their secluded position with 
respect to other peoples, and the perfection of their 
implements, might be taken to indicate that thej'' are 
of a very old race, m which everything has stiffened 
into definite forms, which can now be but slowly 
altered- Other indications, however, seem to conflict 
with such a hypothesis, and render it more probable 
that the race was originally a small one, which did 
not until a comparatively late period develop to the 
point at which we now find it, and spread over the 
countries which it at present inhabits. 

If it should seem difficult to understand, at first 
sight, how they could have spread in a comparatively 
short time over these wide tracts of country without 
moving in great masses, as in the case of larger 
migrations, we need only reflect that their present 
inhospitable abiding-places can scarcely have been 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 






GREENLAND AND THE ESKIMO 



inhabited, at any rate permanently, before they took 
possession of them, and that therefore they had 
nothing to contend with except nature itself. 

The region now inhabited by the Eskimos stretches 
from the west coast of Bering Straits over Alaska, 
the north coast of North America, the North Ameri- 
can groups of Arctic Islands, the west coast, and, 
finally, the east coast, of Greenland. 

By reason of his absolutely secluded position, the 
Eskimo has given the anthropologists much trouble, 
and the most contradictory opinions have been ad- 
vanced with reference to his origin. 

Dr. H. Kink, who has made Greenland and its 
people the study of his hfe, and is beyond compari- 
son the greatest authority on the subject, holds that 
the Eskimo implements and weapons — ^at any rate, 
. fpr the greater part — may be traced to America. 
' He regards it as probable that the Eskimos were once 
a race dwelling in the interior of Alaska, where 
there are still a considerable number of inland Es- 
kimos, and that they have migrated thence to the 
coasts of the ice sea. He further maintains that 
their speech is most closely connected with the 
primitive dialects of America, and that their legends 
and customs recall those of the Indians. 

One point among others, however, in which the 
Eskhnos differ from ihe Indians is the use of dog- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



8 ESKIMO LIFE 

sledges. With the exception of the Incas of Peru, 
who used the llama as a beast of burden, no Ameri- 
can aborigines employed animals either for drawing 
or for carrying. In this, then, the Eskimos more 
resemble the races of the Asiatic polar regions. 

But it would lead us too far afield if we were 
to follow up this diflSicult scientific question, on which 
the evidence is as yet by no means thoroughly 
sifted. ( So much alone can we declare with any 
assurance, that the Eskimos dwelt in comparatively 
recent times on the coasts around Bering Straits 
and Bering Sea — probably on the American side — 
and have thence, stage by stage, spread eastward 
over Arctic America to Greenland.} 

It is in my judgment impossible to determine at 
what time they reached Greenland and permanently 
settled there. From what has already been said it 
appears probable that the period was comparatively 
late, but it does not seem to me established, as has 
been asserted in several quarters, that we can con- 
clude from the Icelandic sagas that they first made 
their appearance on the west coast of Greenland in 
the fourteenth century. It certainly appears as 
though the Norwegian colonies of Osterbygd and 
Vesterbygd {i.e, Easter- and Wester-district or 
settlement) were not until that period exposed to 
serious attacks on the part of the 'Skrellings' or 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



GREENLAND AND THE ESKIMO 9 

Eskimos, coming in bands from the north ; but this 
does not preclude the supposition that they had 
occupied certain tracts of the west coast of Green- 
land long before that time and long before the 
Norwegians discovered the country. They do not 
seem to have been settled upon the southern part 
of the coast during the first four hundred ^ears of 
the Norwegian occupation, since they are not men- 
tioned in the sagas ; but it is expressly stated that 
the first Norwegians (Erik the "Eed and others) who 
came to the country, found both in the Easter- and 
the Wester-districts ruins of human habitations, 
fragments of boats, and stone implements, which 
in their opinion must have belonged to a feeble 
folk, whom they therefore called * SkreUings ' (or 
* weaklings '). We must accordingly conclude that 
the * Skrellings ' had been there previously ; and 
as such remains were found in both districts, it 
seems that they could scarcely have paid mere 
passing visits to them. It is not impossible that 
the Eskimos might simply have taken to their heels 
when the Norwegian viking-ships appeared in the 
offing; we, too, found them do so upon the east 
coast ; but it does not seem at all probable that they 
could vanish so rapidly as to let the Norwegians 
catch no glimpse of them. The probability is, on 
the whole, that at that time the permanent settle- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



10 ESKIMO LIFE 

ments of the Eskimos were further north on tlie 
coast, above the 68th degree of north latitude, where 
seals and whales abound, and where they would first 
arrive on their course from the northward ^ (see p. 
.13). From these permanent settlements they pro- 
bably, in Eskimo fashion, made frequent excursions 
of more or less duration to the more southerly part 
of the west coast, and there left behind them the 
traces which were first found. When the Nor- 
wegian settlers began to range northwards they at 
last came in contact with the Eskimos. Professor 
G. Storm *^ is of opinion that this must first have 
happened in the twelfth century.^ We read in the 
* ffistoria Norvegise ' that the hunters in the un- 
settled districts of north Greenland came upon an 
undersized people whom they called ' Skrellings,' 
and who used stone knives and arrow-points of 
whalebone. As their more northern settlements 
became over-populated, the Eskimos no doubt began 
to migrate southwards in earnest ; and as the Nor- 
wegians often dealt hardly with them when they 

' North of the 68th degree they could kill seals and whales in 
plenty from the ice all the winter through ; and this is a method of 
hunting which they must have learnt further north, where it would be 
the most important of all for them. 

'^ Gustav Storm : Studiea on the Vineland Voyages, Extracts from 
MSmoires de la SociiU Royale dea Antiquaires du Nord, 1888, p. 58 . 

' The Eskimos themselves have several legends as to their en- 
counters with the old Norsemen. See Rink : 'Tales and Traditions of 
tlie Eskimo, pp. 308 321. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



GREENLAND AND THE ESKIMO n 

met, they may eventually have taken revenge in the 
fourteenth century by first (after 1341) attacking 
and devastating (?) the Wester-district, and later 
(1379) making an expedition against the Easter- 
district, which seems in the following century to 
have been entirely destroyed.* It was about this 
time, accordingly, that the Eskimos probably effected 
their first permanent settlements in the southern 
parts of the country. 

There is evidence in the Eskimo legends as well 
of the battles between them and the old Norsemen. 
But from the same legends we also learn that there 
was sometimes friendly intercourse between them ; 
indeed the Norsemen are several times mentioned 
with esteem. This appears to show that there was 
no rooted hatred between the two races ; and the 
tlieory that the Eskimos carried on an actual war of 
extermination against the settlers seems, moreover, 
in total conflict with their character as we now know 

' Some writers have cod eluded from the mention of* troll- women * 
in the ' F16amanna8aga * that so early as the year 1000, or there- 
abouts, ThorgUs Orrabeinsfostre must have encomitered Eskimos on 
the south-east coast of Greenland. But, as Professor Storm has 
pointed out, the romantic character of this saga forbids Us to base 
any such inference upon it. It must also be remembered that the 
extant manuscript dates from no earlier than about 1400, long after 
the time when the Norsemen had come in contact with the Eskimos 
on the west coast. Even if the Eskimos are meant in the passage 
about the troll-women, which is extremely doubtful, it may very well 
be a late interpolation. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



12 ESKIMO LIFE 

it. Thus it can scarcely have been such a war alone 
that caused the downfall of the colony. We may, 
perhaps, attribute it partly to natural decline due 
to seclusion from the world, partly to absorption of 
the race, brought about by the crossing of the two 
stocks ; for the Europeans of that age were probably 
no more inaccessible than those of to-day to the 
seductions of Eskimo loveliness. 

As to the route by which the Eskimos made 
their way to the west coast of Greenland there has 
been a good deal of difference of opinion. Dr. Eink 
maintains that after passing Smith's Sound the 
Eskimos did not proceed southwards along the west 
coast, which would seem their most natural course, 
but tupned northwards, rounded the northernmost 
point of the country, and came down along the 
east coast. In this way they must ultimately have 
approached the west coast from the southward, after 
making their way round the southern extremity of 
Greenland. This opinion is mainly founded upon 
the belief that Thorgils Orrabeinsfostre fell in with 
Eskimos upon the east coast, and that this was the 
Norsemen's first encounter with them. I have 
already, in a note on the preceding page, remarked 
on the untrustworthiness of this evidence ; and such 
a theory as to the route of the Eskimo immigration 
stands, as we know, in direct conflict with the ac- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



GREENLAND AND THE ESKIMO 13 

counts given in the sagas, from which it appears 
(as above) that the Eskimos came from the north 
and not from the south, the Wester-district having 
been destroyed before the Easter-district. It appears, 
moreover, that we can draw the same conclusion 
from an Eskimo tradition in which their first en- 
counter with the old Norsemen is described. In 
former days, we are told, when the coast was still 
very thinly populated, a boatful of explorers came 
into Godthaab-fiord and saw there a large house 
whose inhabitants were strange to them, not being 
Kaladlit — ^that is, Eskimo. They had suddenly come 
upon the old Norsemen. These, on their side, saw 
the Kaladlit for the first time, and treated them in 
the most friendly fashion. This happened, it Will be 
observed, in Godthaab-fiord, which was in the 
ancient Wester-district — that is to say, the more 
northern colony. There is another circumstance 
which, to my thinking, renders improbable the route 
conjectured by Dr. Eink, and that is that if they 
made their way around the northern extremity of 
the country, they must, while in these high latitudes, 
have lived as the so-called Arctic Highlanders — that 
is, the Eskimos of Cape York and northwards — now 
do ; in other words, they must have subsisted chiefly 
by hunting upon the ice, must have travelled in dog- 
sledges, and, while in the far north, must have used 



■ Digitized by LjOOQIC 



U ESKIMO LTFK 

neither kaiaks nor woman-boats, since the sea, beinj^ 
usually ice bound, offers little or no opportunity for 
kaiak-hunting or boating of any sort. It may not be 
in itself impossible that, when they came further south 
and reached more ice-free waters again, they may 
have recovered the art of building woman-boats and 
kaiaks, of which some tradition would in any case 
survive ; but it seems improbable, not to say im- 
possible, that alter having lost the habit of kaiak- 
hunting they should be able to master it afresh, and 
to develop it, and all the appliances belonging to it, 
to a higher point of perfection than had elsewhere 
been attained. 

The most natural account of the matter, in my 
opinion, is that the Eskimos, after crossing Smith's 
Sound (so far there can be no doubt about their 
route), made their way southwards along the coast^ 
and subsequently passed from the west coast, around 
the southern extremity of the country, up the east 
coast. It is impossible to determine whether they 
had reached the east coast and settled there be- 
fore the Norsemen came to Greenland. On their 
southward journey from Smith's Sound they must, 
indeed, have met with a great obstacle in the 
Melville glacier (at about IT" nortlr latitude), which 
stands right out into the sea at a point at which 
the coast is for a long distance unprotected b^^ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



OREKXLAXI) AND THE ESKIMO If, 

islands. But, in the first place, they may have been 
able to make their way onward in the lee of the 
drift-ice ; and, in the second place, this difficulty is 
at worst not so great as those they must have en- 
countered in passing round the northern extremity of 
Greenland. Moreover, the passage in an open boat 
from Smith's Sound southward along the west coast 
of Greenland to the Danish colonies has been several 
times accomphshed in recent years without any par- 
ticular difficulty. In opposition to this theory it 
may, no doubt, be alleged that the East Greenlanders 
possess dog-sledges, which are not used on the 
southern part of the west coast, where there is not 
enough ice for them. But if we remember with 
what rapidity, comparatively speaking, the Eskimos 
travel in their women-boats, and how fond they were 
in former times of roaming up and down along the 
coast — ^and when we take into account the fact that 
from time immemorial dogs have been kept along the 
whole of the west coast — this objection seems to lose 
its weight. 

The Eskimos are at present spread over the 
whole west coast of Greenland, right from Smith's 
Sound to Cape Farewell. On the Danish part of the 
west coast they number very nearly 10,000. On the 
east coast, as we learn from the account of the Danish 
woman-boat expedition of 1884-85, under Captain 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



16 ESKIMO LIFE 

Holm, there are Eskimos as far north as the Anff- 
magsalik district (66*" north latitude), their numbers 
in the autumn of 1884 being in all 548. Further 
north, as the Eskimos told Captain Holm, there were 
no permanent settlements so far as they knew. They 
often, however, made excursions to the northward, pos- 
sibly as far as to the 68th or 69th degree of latitude ; 
and a year or two before two woman-boats had sailed 
in that direction, and had never been heard of again. 
It is uncertain whether there may not be Eskimos 
upon the east coast further north than the 70th de- 
gree of latitude. Clavering is known to have found 
one or two families of them in 1823 at about 74** 
north latitude ; but since that time none have been 
seen; and the German expedition which explored 
that coast in 1869-70, and wintered there, found 
houses and other remains, but no people, and there- 
fore assumed that they must have died out. The 
Danish expedition of 1890 to Scoresby Sound, 
under Lieutenant Eyder, reports the same experience. 
It therefore seems probable that they have either 
died out or have abandoned this part of Greenland. 
This does not seem to me absolutely certain, however. 
There may be small and confined Eskimo colonies in 
these northern districts, or there may be a few no- 
madic families whom no one has as yet come across. 
This portion of the east coast must, in my opinion. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



GREENLAND AND THE ESKIMO 17 

be quite specially adapted for Eskimo habitation, as 
it is very rich in game. It therefore seems to me 
strange that when once the Eskimos had arrived 
there they should have gone away again ; nor does 
it seem probable that they would die out in so excel- 
lent a hunting-ground. K there are Eskimos upon 
this north-east coast, their secluded position, debar- 
ring them from all intercourse, direct or indirect, 
with the outer world, must render them, from an 
ethnological point of view, among the most interest- 
ing people in existence. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



18 ESKIMO LIFE 



CHAPTEE II 

APPEARANCE AND DRESS 

As I now sit down to describe these people, at such 
a distance from them and from the scenery amid 
which we lived together, how vividly my first meeting 
with them, upon the east coast of Greenland, stands be- 
fore my mind's eye ! I see two brown laughing counte- 
nances, surrounded by long, coal-black hair, beaming, 
even amid the ice, with bright contentment both with 
themselves and the world, and full of the friendliest 
good-humour, mingled with unaffected astonishment 
at the appearance of the marvellous strangers. 

The pure-bred Eskimo would ,at first glance seem 
to most of us Europeans anything but beautiful. 

He has a round, broad face, with large, coarse 
features ; small, dark, sometimes rather oblique eyes ; 
a flat nose, narrow between the eyes and broad at 
the base ; round cheeks, bursting with fat ; a broad 
mouth ; heavy, broad jaws ; which, together with the 
round cheeks, give the lower part of the face a great 
preponderance in the physiognomy. When the mouth 
is di'awn up in an oleaginous smile, two rows of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



APrEAIlANOE AND DRESS 19 

strong white teeth reveal themselves. One receives 
the impression, upon the whole, of an admirable 
chewing apparatus, conveying pleasant suggestions 
of much and good eating. But, at the same time, 
one traces in these features, especially in those of the 
women, a certain touch of ingratiating petted soft- 
ness. 

To our way of thinking, such a face could scarcely 
be described as beautiful 4 but how much prejudice 
there is in our ideas of beauty ! I soon came to find 
these brown faces, gleaming with health and fat, 
reaUy pleasing. They reflected the free life of nature, 
and suggested to my mind pictures of blue sea, white 
glaciers, and glittering sunshine. 

It was, however, chiefly the young that produced 
this impression ; and they soon grow old. The 
shrunken, blear-eyed, hairless old women, reminding 
one of frost-bitten apples, were certainly not beauti- 
ful ; and yet there was a certain style in them, too. 
Toil had left its traces upon their wrinkled counte- 
nances, but also a life of rude plenty and a habit of 
good-humoured, hopeless resignation. There was 
nothing of that vitreous hardness or desiccated dig- 
nity which the school of life so often imprints upon 
aged countenances in other parts of the world. 

The half-caste race which has arisen upon the 
"west coast, of mingled European and Eskimo blood, 

c 2 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



20 ESKIMO LIFE 

is apt to be, according to our ideas, handsomer than 
the pure-bred Eskimos. They have, as a rule, a 
somewhat southern appearance, with their dark hair, 
dark eyebrows and eyes, and brown complexion. A 
remarkably Jewish cast of countenance sometimes 
appears among them. Types of real beauty are by 

k 

no means rare — ^male as well as female. Yet there is 
apt to be something feeble about these half-breeds. 
The pure-bred Eskimos undoubtedly seem more 
genuine and healthy. 

It is a common error among us in Europe to 
think of the Eskimos as a diminutive race. Though 
no doubt smaller than the Scandinavian peoples, they 
must be reckoned among the middle-sized races, 
and I even found among those of purest breeding 
men of nearly six feet in height. Their frame pro- 
duces, on the whole, an impression of strength, espe- 
cially the upper part of the body. The men have 
broad shoulders, strong, muscular arms, and a good 
chest ; but, on the other hand, one notices that their 
thighs are comparatively narrow, and their legs not 
particularly strong. When they get up in years, 
therefore, they are apt to have an uncertain gait, 
with knees slightly bent. This defective develop- 
ment of the lower extremities must be ascribed, for 
the most part, to the daily confinement in the cramped 
kaiak. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



APPEAHANCE AND DRESS 21 

A noticeable physical characteristic of the women 
appeared to me to be their comparatively narrow 
hips, which we are apt to regard as inconsistent 
with the type of feminine beauty. They certainly 
seemed to me considerably narrower than those of 
European women ; but it is hard to say how much 
of this effect is to be ascribed to difference of dress. 
The Eskimo women, however, are remarkable for 
their very small and well-formed hands and feet. 
Their physique, as a whole, strikes one as sympa- 
thetic and pleasing. 

The compleidon of the pure-bred Greenlander 
is of a brownish or greyish yellow, and even 
among the half-breeds a certain tinge of brownish 
yellow is unmistakable. This natural darkness of 
the skin, however, is generally much intensified, 
especially in the case of men and old women, 
by a total lack of cleanUness. As an indication 
of their habits in this particular, it will be suf- 
ficient if I quote the concise description given by 
our very reverend countryman, Hans Egede, of the 
method of washing practised by the men in par- 
ticular : ' They scrape the sweat off their faces with 
a knife.' ^^ 

The skin of new-born children i^air, and that 
not merely because they have not yet had time to 
grow dirty. Hans Egede Saabye noted long ago in his 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



22 ESKIMO LIFE 

Journal * that children have on the small of their 
back a bluish-black patch, about the size of a six- 
penny piece, from which the dark colour of the skin 
seems to spread as they grow older. Holm makes a 
note to the same effect in his account of the east 
coast. ^ I cannot speak on the subject from personal 
observation. It is perhaps worth noting that some- 
thing similar is related of Japanese children. 

Most of my readers have probably formed some 
idea of the Eskimo costume from pictures (see 
Frontispiece). They are probably aware that its 
most noteworthy peculiarity lies in the fact that the 
women dress almost like the men. Their costume is 
certainly very much prettier and more sensible than 
our ugly and awkward female fashions. 

In South Greenland the men wear upon their 
body what is called a timiak. It is made of bird-skins, 
with the feathers or down turned inwards, is shaped 
very much like our woollen jerseys, and, like them, 
is drawn over the head. The timiak is provided 
with a hood, used as a head-covering in the open 
air ; at other times it is thrown back, and forms, 
with its upstanding selvage of black dog-skin, a sort 
of collar rcu^d the neck. At the wrists, too, the 

' Saabye : Greenland ; being extracU from a Journal Tcept in that 
country in the years 1770 to 1778. London : 1818. 

* Meddeleliser om Gronland. Pt. 10, p. 58. Copenhagen: 1889. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



APPEAEANCE AND DRESS 23 

timiak is edged with black dog-skin, like a showy fur 
overcoat among us. Above the timiak, an outer vest 
{anorak) is worn, now for the most part made of 
cotton. Trousers of sealskin, or of European cloth, 
are worn upon the legs ; on the feet a peculiar sort 
of shoes, kamiks, made of sealskin. These consist of 
two layers, an interior sock of skin with the fur 
turned inwards, and an exterior shoe of hairless, 
water-tight hide. In the sole, between the sock and 
the outer shoe, is placed a layer of straw or of 
bladder-sedge.* Into these kamiks the naked foot is 
thrust. 

u The costume of the women closely resembles that 
of the men. In South Greenland a bird-skin jacket 
is worn upon the body, which has, however, no hood 
to cover the head, but instead of it a high upstand- 
ing collar edged with black dog-skin, which is made 
to glisten as much as possible ; and outside this 
collar a broad necklace of glass beads is often worn, 
radiant with aU the colours of the rainbow. The 
wrists, too, are edged with black dog-skin. The 
cotton vest above this garment is of course as 
brightly coloured as possible, red, blue, green, 
yellow, and round its lower edge there generally 
runs a broad variegated band of cotton, or, if pos- 
sible, of silk. Trousers are worn on the legs, 

^ Norwegian, aennegrass. Trans, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



24 ESKIMO LIFE 

generally of mottled sealskiii, but sometimes of 
reindeer-skin. They axe considerably shorter than 
the men's trousers, coming only to a little way above 
the knee, but are richly decorated in front with 
bright-coloured embroideries in leather, and white 
stripes of reindeer-skin or dog-skin. The kamiks 
are longer than those of the men, and come up to 
above the knees; they are generally painted red, 
but sometimes blue, violet, or white. Down the 
front of them is sewn a band of many-coloured 
embroidery. 

Besides the garments above mentioned, there is 
another, used by women who are nursing children. 
It is called an amaut, and resembles an ordinary- 
anorak, except that at the back there is a great ea- 
largement or pouch, in which they carry the child 
all day long, whatever work they may be about. As 
the amaut is lined both inside and out with reindeer- 
or seal-skin, this pouch makes a nice warm nest for 
the child. 

As no fashion-paper is published in Greenland, 
fashions are not so variable among the Eskimos as 
they are with us. Even in this respect, however, 
they are no mere barbarians, as the foUowmg example 
will show : 

In former times, the women's anoraks and jackets 
were as long as the men's ; but after the Europeans 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



APPEARANCE AND DRESS 26 

had imported the extravagant luxury of wearing 
white linen, they felt that such a wonderful tissue 
was far too beautiful and effective to be concealed. 
Instead, however, of cutting away their bodices from 
above, like our beauties at home, they began below, 
and made their anoraks so short that between them 
and the trouser-band, which was allowed to slip right 
down on the hips, there appeared a gap of a hand's 
breadth or more, in which the fabric in question 
became visible. A somewhat original style of * low 
dress,' this. 

The Eskimos of the east coast wear costumes 
practically similar to those here described, only that 
they almost always use seal-skins instead of bird- 
skins for their jackets. In North Greenland, too, 
seal-skin and reindeer-skin are greatly used for these 
garments, and the same was the . case in earlier times 
all along the west coast. 

On the east coast, a surprising habit prevails ; to 
wit, that in their houses and tents, men, women, and 
children go about entirely naked — or so, at least, it 
seemed to me. Balto, however, no doubt after closer 
examination, assured me that the grown men and 
women had all a narrow band around their loins, a 
detail which my bashfulness had prevented me from 
discovering. This remarkable observation of our 
friend Balto is corroborated by the majority of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



26 ESKIMO LIFE 

travellers who have undertaken researches on the 
subject, so I am bound to believe them. This band, 
which the travellers are pleased to designate under- 
drawers — how far it deserves such a name I will 
leave to the reader to judge from the accompanying 
illustration — is, I am told, called ndtit by the Green- 
landers. 

In former days this simple indoor garb was worn 
all over Greenland, right up to the northernmost 




GREENLAND INDOOR DREBS (eaST COAST). 

(1) Male costume. (3) Female costame. 

settlements on Smith's Sound, where, indeed, it is 
still in use. 

This light raiment is, of course, very wholesome ; 
for the many layers of skins in the outdoor dress 
greatly impede transpiration, and it is therefore a 
natural impulse which leads the Eskimo to throw 
them oflf in the warm rooms, where they would be 
particularly insanitary. When the Europeans came 
to the country, however, this free-and-easy custom 
offended their sense of propriety, and the missionaries 
preached a<?ainst it. Thus it happens that the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



APPEARANCE AND DRESS 27 

national indoor dress has been abolished on the 
west coast. Whether this has led to an improve- 
ment in morality, I cannot say — I have my doubts. 
That it has not been conducive to sanitation, I can 
unhesitatingly declare. 

The Eskimos, however, are still very unsophisti- 
cated with respect to the exposure of Iheir person. 
Many women, it is true, make some attempt to con- 
ceal their nudities when a European enters their 
houses ; but I greatly fear that this is rather an 
affectation which they think will please us, than a 
result of real modesty ; and when they discover that 
we are not greatly impressed by their attempts, they 
very soon give them up. In regard to their own 
countrymen they show very little sense of modesty. 

The hair of the Eskimos is coal-black, coarse and 
straight, Uke horsehair, and is allowed by the men 
to grow wild. On the east coast they usually do not 
cut it at all, even regarding it as dangerous to lose 
any of it ; they keep it back from the face by means 
of a band or thong. Sometimes they take it into 
their heads to cut the hair of children, and the 
children so treated must continue all through their lives 
to cut their hair, and must also observe certain fixed 
formalities in the matter ; for instance, they must cut 
the ears and tails of their dogs while they are 
puppies. Iron must on no account come in contact 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



28 ESKIMO LU^-E 

with the hair, which is, therefore, sawn off with the 
jawbone of a Greenland shark. 

The women knot their hair in a tuft upon the 
crown of the head. This they do by gathering it 
tightly together from all sides and tying it up, on the 
east coast with a thong, on the west coast with 
ribbons of various colours. Unmarried women wear 
a red ribbon, which they exchange for green if they 
have had a child. Married women wear a blue, and 
widows a black ribbon. If a widow wants to marry 
again she will probably mingle a little red with the 
black ; elderly widows, who have given up all thought 
of marriage, often wear a white ribbon. If a widow 
gives birth to a child, she too must assume the green 
ribbon. 

Her top-knot is the pride of the Greenland 
woman, and it must stand as stiff and straight up in 
the air as possible. This is, of course, held especially 
important by the young marriageable women, and 
as they are scarcely less vain than their European 
sisters, they draw the hair so tightly together that it 
is gradually torn away from the forehead, the temples 
and the neck, whence they often become more or less 
bald while still comparatively young. This does not 
add greatly to their attractiveness, but is, never- 
theless, a speaking proof of the vanity of human 
nature. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



APPEARANCE AND DRESS 29 

In order to get the hair thoroughly well knotted 
together, and at the same time to give it the glisten- 
ing appearance which is prized as a beauty, they 
have furthermore the habit of steeping it in urine 
before doing it up, thus making it moist and easier 
to tighten. 

Mothers lick their children instead of washing 
them, or at least did so in former days ; and as to the 
insects they come across in the process, their principle 
is, 'They bite, therefore they must be bitten.' 

If any should be offended by these peculiarities 
in the manners and customs of the Greenlanders, 
they ought to reflect that their own forefathers, not 
so many generations ago, conducted themselves not 
so very differently. Let them read the accounts of 
the domestic life of the Teutonic peoples some cen- 
turies ago, and they will learn many things that will 
surprise them. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



30 ESKIMO LIFE 



CHAPTER ni 

THE ' KAIAK ' AND ITS APPURTENANCES 

A SUPERFICIAL examination of certain details in the 
outward life of the Eskimo might easily lead to the 
erroneous conclusion that he stands at a low grade of 
civilisation. When we take the trouble to look a 
little more closely at him, we soon see him in 
another light. 

Many people nowadays are vastly impressed with 
the greatness of our age, with all the inventions and 
the progress of which we daily hear, and which 
appear indisputably to exalt the highly-gifted white 
race far over all others. These people would learu 
much by paying close attention to the development 
of the Eskimos, and to the tools and inventions 
by aid of which they obtain the necessaries of life 
among natural surroundings which place such piti- 
fully small means at their disposal. 

Picture a people placed upon a coast so desert 
and inhospitable as that of Greenland, cut oif from 
the outer world, without iron, without firearms, with- 
out any resources except those provided by Nature 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



TIIE 'KAIAK' AND ITS APPURTENANCES 31 

upon the spot. These consist solely of stone, a little 
drift- wood, skins, and bone ; but in order to obtain the 
latter they must first kill the animals from which to 
take them. We, in their place, would inevitably go to 
the wall, if we did not get help from home ; but the 
Eskimo not only manages to live, but lives in con- 
tentment and happiness, while intercourse with the 
rest of the world has, to him, meant nothing but 
ruin. 

In order that the reader may realise more vividly 
upon what an accumulation of experiences the civili- 
sation of this people rests, I shall try to give a sketch 
of the way in which we must conceive it to have 
arisen. 

Let us, then, assume that the ancestors of the 
Eskimos, according to Dr. Eink's opinion, lived in 
long bygone ages somewhere in the interior of 
Alaska. They must at all events have been in- 
landers somewhere and at some time, either in 
America or in Asia. Besides being hunters upon 
land, these Eskimos must also have gone a-fishing 
upon the lakes and rivers in birch-bark canoes, as 
the inland Eskimos of Alaska and the Indians of the 
North- West do to this day. In course of time, how- 
ever, some of these inland Eskimos must either have 
been allured by the riches of the sea or must have 
been pressed upon by hostile and more warlike Indian 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



32 ESKIMO LIFE 

tribes, so that they must have migrated in their 
canoes down the river-courses toward the western 
and northern coasts. The nearer they drew to the 
sea, the more scanty became the supply of wood, 
and they had to hit upon some other material than 
birch-bark with which to cover their canoes. It is 
not at all improbable that before leaving the rivers 
they had made experiments with the skins of aquatic 
animals; for we still see examples of this among 
several Indian tribes. 

It was not, however, until the Eskimo encoun- 
tered the rough sea at the mouths of the rivers that 
he thought of giving his boat a deck, and at last of 
closing it in entirely and joining his own skin-jacket 
to it so that the whole became watertight. The 
kaiak was now complete. But even these inventions, 
which seem so simple and straightforward now that 
we see them perfected — what huge strides of pro- 
gress must they not have meant in their day, and 
how much labour and how many failures must they 
not have cost ! 

Arrived at the sea-coast, these Eskimos of the 
past soon discovered that their existence depended 
almost entirely upon the capture of seals. To this, 
then, they directed all their cunning, and the kaiak 
guided them to the discovery of the many remark- 
able and admirable seal-hunting instruments, which 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



i^ 


• .'"' 


^▼dL^i 


> 

■3 


I'^^i^jMOtfi^ T ■ 








sT^ 








<.'ii 



■'T' 

A 



^ 



E;2^ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 'KAIAK' AND ITS APPURTENANCES 33 

they brought to higher /ind ever-higher perfection, 
and which prove, indeed, in the most striking fashion, 
what ingenious animals many of us human beings 
really are. 

The bow and arrow, which they used on land, 
they could not handle in their constrained position 
in the kaiak ; therefore, they had to fall back upon 
throwing-weapons. 

The idea of these, too, they borrowed from 
America, making use in the first instance of the 
Indian darts with steering-feathers, which they had 
themselves used in hunting upon land. Small har- 
poons or javelins of this sort are still in use among 
Eskimos of the southern part of the west coast of 
Alaska. 

Ad one passes northward along this coast, how- 
ever, the feathers soon disappear, and are replaced 
by a little bladder fastened to the shaft of the javeUn. 
This device has been found necessary in order to 
prevent the harpooned seals from diving and swim- 
ming. Further, it has been found necessary so to 
arrange the point of the javelin that it cannot be 
broken by the seal's violent efforts to get rid of it, 
but detaches itself instead (at c on accompanying 
engraving) and remains hanging to a line (from c 
to b) fastened (at b^) to the middle of the javelin 
shaft, which is thus made to take a transverse posi- 

D 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



34 ESKIMO LIFE 

tion, and still further to impede the movements of 
the seal when it rushes away with it. Such was the 
origin of the so-called bladder-dart, known to 
all Eskimo tribes who live by the sea. 

The bladder is made of a seagull's or 
cormorant's gullet, inflated and dried. It -is 
fastened to the javelin-shaft by means of a 
piece of bone with a hole bored through it 
for the purpose of blowing up the bladder. 
This hole is closed with a little wooden plug. 
From this bladder-dart the Eskimo's prin- 
cipal hunting-weapon — the ingenious harpoon 
with bladder and line — ^has probably de- 
veloped. In order to cope with the larger 
marine animals, the size of the bladder was 
doubtless gradually increased; but the dis- 
5 advantage of this — the fact that it offered too 
^L much resistance to the air to be thrown far 
m| and with force — must soon have been felt. 
I The bladder was then separated from the 
I javelin, and only attached to its point by 
1 means of a long and strong line, the harpoon- 
BLADDER- liuc. Thc harpooii, which was now made 
larger and heavier than the original javelin, 
was henceforward thrown by itself, but drawing 
the line after it. The bladder, fastened to the other 
end of the line, remained in the kaiak until the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 'KAIAK' AND ITS APPURTEXANCES 35 

animal had been pierced, when it was thrown over- 
board. 

This harpoon, with all its ingenuity of structure, 
ranks, along with the kaiak, as the highest achieve- 
ment of the Eskimo mind.^ 

Its shaft is made in Greenland of red drift-wood 
— a sort of fir from Siberia, drifted by the polar 
current across the Polar Sea — ^which is heavier than 
the white drift-wood used in making smaller and 
Ughter projectiles. The upper end of the shaft is 
fitted with a thick and strong plate of bone, on the 
top of which is fix.ed a long bone foreshaft— com- 
monly made of walrus or narwhal tusk — which is 
fastened to the shaft by means of a joint of thongs, 
so that a strong pressure or blow from the side, 
instead of shattering the foreshaft, causes it to break 
ofi* at the joint. This foreshaft fits exactly into a 
hole in the harpoon-head proper, which is made of 
bone, generally of walrus or narwhal tusk. It is 
now always provided with a point, or rather a sharp 
blade, of iron ; in earlier days they used flint or 
simply bone. The harpoon-head is fastened to the 
harpoon-line by means of a hole bored througli it, 

* The Indians of the North- West and the Tchuktchi — and even, if 
I am not mistaken, the Eoriaks and the Kamtchatkans — use the 
same harpoon, with a line and large bladder, in hunting sea animals, 
throwing the harpoon from the bow of their large open canoes or skin- 
boats. It seems probable, however, that they have learned the use of 
these instruments from the Eskimos. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



36 



ESKIMO LIFE 



and is provided with barbs or hooks so that it 
btir'kr^ fast wherever it penetrates. It is, 
moreover, so adjusted that it works itself 
transversely into the flesh as the wounded 
seal tugs at the line. It is attached to the 
harpoon shaft by being fitted to the before- 
mentioned foresliaft, whereupon the line is 
liooked on to a peg, placed some distance up 
the harpoon-shaft (at a), by means of a per- 
forated piece of bone fixed at the proper 
distance. Thus the head and the shaft are 
held firmly together. 

When the luirpoon strikes and the seal 
begins to plunge, the bone foreshaft instantly 
breaks off at the joint 
(see illustration), and the 
harpoon-head, with the 
line attached to it, is thus 
loosened from the shaft, 
which floats up to the 
surface and is picked up 
by its owner, while the 
seal dashes away, drag- 
ging the line and' bladder 
after it. It must be ad- 
mitted, I think, that it 
is diflScult to conceive a 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 'KAIAK' AND ITS APPURTENANCES 



37 



more ingenious appliance, composed of such materials 
as bone, sealskin, and drift- 
wood; and we may be sure 
that it has cost the labour of 
many generations. 

Two forms of tliis harpoon 
are in use in Greenland. The 
one is called undk; its butt-end 
is finished off with nothing 
more than a bone knob, and it 
is longer and slighter than the 
other. This is called emang- 
naky and has at its butt-end 
two flanges or wings of bone, 
now commonly made of whale- 
rib, designed to increase the 
weight of the harpoon and to 
guide it through the air. It is 
one of these which is repre- 
sented on p. 36.^ 

At Godthaab the ernangnak 
was most in use ; but I heard 
old hunters complaining that, 

' In North Greenland there is yet a 
third and larger form of the harpoon, 
which is used in walrus hunting, and is 
hurled' without a throwing- stick ; it has 
instead two bone knobs, one for the 
thumb and one for the forefinger. "^^^ heai> of the harpoon. 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



38 ESKIMO LIFE 

in a wind, it was more diflScult to throw than the 
un&k, since a side gust was apt to take too strong 
hold of the bone flanges and to make the harpoon 
twist. 

The harpoon line is made of the hide either of 
the bearded seal {Phoca harbata) or of the young 
walrus. It is generally from 15 to 18 yards long, 
and a good quarter of an inch (about 7 millimetres) 
thick. 

For the bladder they use the hide of a young 
ringed seal {Phoca fcetida). The skin is slipped off, 
as nearly as possible whole, the hair is removed, the 
apertures at the head, the fore limbs, and the hind 
limbs are tied up so as to be air-tight, and the whole 
is dried. 

The line is coiled upon the kaiak-stand, which is 
fixed in front of the man. It serves to keep the coil 
well above the sea, which is always washing over the 
deck ; and thus the line is always ready to run out 
without fouling when the harpoon is thrown. 

The harpooned seal is killed by means of a lance 
{(ingtivigak). This consists of a wooden shaft (com- 
monly made of the light white drift-wood, in order 
that it may carry well), a long bone foreshaft, and an 
iron-bladed tip. In former days flint was used in- 
stead of iron. The foreshaft is generally made of 
reindeer horn or else of narwhal tusk. In order that 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 'KAIAK* AND ITS APPURTENANCES 



the seal may not break it off, it is fastened to the 
shaft by a joint similar to that which fastens ^ 
the foreshaft to the harpoon. 

The Eskimos have also the so called bird- 
dart {nufit). Its shaft is likewise of white 
drift-wood. Its point consists of a long nar- 
row spike, now made of iron, but in earlier 
times of bone ; and besides this there are 
fastened to the middle of the shaft three 
forward-slanting spikes, made of reindeer- 
horn and provided with large barbs. The 
idea is that if the end of the dart does not 
pierce the bird, the shaft shall glide along 
it, and one of these outstanding spikes must 
strike and penetrate it; and it is thus, in 
fact, that the bird is generally brought down. 
Another invention, this, which no one need 
blush to own. 

All these projectiles can, as I have shown 
above, be traced back to the Indian feather- 
dart. 

But in order to throw their weapons fur- 
ther and with greater force, the Eskimos have 
invented an appliance which distinguishes 
them from all surrounding races, whether 
American or Asiatic. This invention is the 
ihrowingstich Oddly enough, this admirable 



D^itized by VjOOQ IC 



40 ESKIMO LIFE 

device, which by its sling-like action greatly aug- 
ments the length and strength of the arm, is known 
in very few parts of the world — probably only in 
three. It is found in Australia in a very primitive 
form, among the Conibos and Purus on the Upper 
Amazon, where it is scarcely more developed than in 
Australia, and finally among the Eskimos, where it 
has reached its highest perfection.^ We can scarcely 




TUROWn«Q-STlCK WITH BIRD-DART. 

conjecture that the throwing-stick, appearing in 
places so remote from each other, springs from any 
common origin, and we must thus accept the Eskimo 
form of it as an original invention of that particular 
race. It is generally made in Greenland of red drift- 
wood, and is about half a yard long (fourteen sticks 
in ray possession range from 42 to 52 centimetres in 
length). At its lower and broader end it is about 
3 inches (7 or 8 centimetres) in width, and is flat, 

^ As to the different forms of the throwin^-stick among the Eskimos, 
see Mason's paper upon them in the Annual Keport, &c. of the Smith- 
sonian Institution for 1884, Part II. p. 279. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



TIIE *KAIAK' AND ITS APPURTENANCES 41 

with a thickness of rather more than half an inch 
(about 1^ centimetre). The sides, at the lower and 
broader end, have indentations in them for convenience 
in grasping— on one side for the thumb, on the other 
for the fore-finger ; while on the upper flat side there 
runs a long groove along the whole length of the stick, 
to receive the dart or harpoon.* The throwing-stick 
is found in two forms. The one is most used for the 
bladder-dart and the bird-dart ; it has at the upper 
narrow end a knob which fits into an indentation in a 
plate of bone fixed to the butt end of the dart. 
(Compare illustrations on pp. 40 and 42). The 
other form is used for harpoons and lances ; it has a 
hole in the upper narrow end, into which fits a back- 
ward-slanting spur in the side of the harpoon or lance- 
shaft, and it has besides another hole further down 
and near the grip, into which fits another slanting 
spur. (Compare illustration, p. 43). Throwing- 
sticks of this sort are used in the North, for example 
in Sukkertoppen, for the bird-dart as well. 

A third form of the throwing-stick is used in the 
most southern part of Greenland and on the east 
coast for the ernangnak or flange harpoon. This 
form has in its upper narrow end a small knob, as in 

' In some places — for example, in the most southern part of Green- 
land and on the East Coast — there is only a hollow for the thumb, while 
the other side is smooth or edged with a piece of bone in which are 
notches to prevent the hand from slipping. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



42 ESKIMO LIFE 

the bird-dart throwing-stick, and this knob fits inta 
an indentation in the butt end of the harpoon between 
the bone flanges ; in the lower end of the shaft, on 
the other hand, near the grip, there are one or even 
two holes into which fit bone knobs in the side of 
the harpoon shaft, as above described. 

When the harpoon or the dart is to be hurled. 




THE BIRD -DART THROWN. 



the throwing-stick, of whatever form it may be, is 
seized by the grip and held backward, together 
with the weapon, in a horizontal position. (See 
illustration, page 40) ; being then jerked forward 
with force, its lower end comes away from the dart 
or harpoon, while, with the upper end, still fitted to its 
knob or peg (see illustrations on this and the next 
page), the thrower hurls the weapon away to a con- 
siderable distance and with great accuracy. This is 
an extremely simple and effective invention. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 'KAIAK' AjS'D ITS APPURTENANCES 43 

Besides the weapons above mentioned, the Eskimo 
has behind him in his kaiak, when he goes out hunt- 
ing, a knife with a handle about 4 feet long (1-20 
metre) and a pointed blade measuring some 8 inclies 
(20 centimetres). This is used for giving the seal or 
other game its finishing stroke. He has, moreover, 
a smaller knife lying before him in the kaiak ; it is 
used, amongst other things, for piercing holes in the 




THROWING -STICK WITH HABPOON. 



seal through wliich to pass the bone knobs of the 
towing-line, wherewith the seal is made fast to the 
kaiak and towed to land. To this end, too, he always 
carries with him one or more towing bladders, which 
he inflates and fastens to the seal in order to keep 
it afloat. These bladders are made of the pouch of 
small whales {e,g, the grampus). 

To complete this description, I should also men- 
tion the bone -knife which forms part of the kaiak- 
man's outfit, especially in winter, and wliich is prin- 
cipally used for scraping the ice ofl* the kaiak. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



44 



ESKIMO LIFE 



:, SEEN 
ABOVE. 



From the accompanying draw- 
ing, the reader will be able to 
form an idea of how all these 
weapons are fitted to the kaiak 
when it is in full hunting trim : 
a is the kaiak-opening ; 6, the 
harpoon-bladder ; c, the kaiak- 
stand with coiled harpoon-line (e); 
(i, the harpoon hanging in its 
place ; /, the Isftice ; g^ the kaiak- 
knife ; A, the bladder-dart ; t, the 
bird-dart ; i, its throwing-stick. 

But the most important thing 
of all yet remains, and that is a 
description of the kaiak itself. 

It has an internal framework 
of wood. This, of which the 
reader can, I hope, form some 
conception from the accompany- 
ing drawing, was formerly always 
made of drift-wood, usually of the 
white wood, which is lightest. 
For the ribs, osiers were some- 
times used, from willow bushes 
which are found growing far up 
the fiords. In later days they 
have got into the habit of buying 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 'KAIAK' AND ITS APPURTENANCES 46 

European boards of spruce or Scotch fir in the west 
coast colonies, although drift-wood is still considered 
preferable, especially on account of its lightness. 

This framework is covered externally with skins, 
as a rule with the skin of the saddleback seal {Phoca 
gr(Brdandica\ or of the bladder -nose or hood seal 
{Cystopfwra cristata). The latter is not so durable 
or so water-tight as the former ; but the skin of a 
young bladder-nose, in which the pores are not yet 
very large, is considered good enough. Those who 
can afford it use the skin of the bearded seal {Phoca 
barbata), which is reckoned the best and strongest ; 
but, as it is also used for harpoon Unes, it is, as a 
rule, only on the south and east coast that it is found 
in such quantities that it can be commonly used for 
covering the kaiak. The skin of the great ringed 
seal {Phoca foetida) is aLso used, but not so frequently. 

The preparation of the kaiak-skins will be de- 
scribed subsequently, in Chapter VIII. They are 
generally fitted at once to the kaiak in a raw state ; 
but if they have been already dried they must be 
carefully softened for several days before they can 
be used. The point is to get them as moist and 
pliant as possible, so that they can be thoroughly 
well stretched, and remain as tense as a drum-head 
when they dry. The preparation of the skins, and 
the sewing and stretching them on the kaiak, belongs 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



46 ESKIMO LIFE 

to the women's department; it is not very easy 
work, and woe to them if the skin sits badly or is 
too slack ! They feel it a great disgrace. 

All, or at any rate a great many, of the women 
of the village are generally present when a kaiak is 
being covered ; it is a great entertainment to them, 
especially as, in reward for their assistance, they are 
often treated to coffee by the owner of the kaiak. 
The cost of the entertainment ranges, according to 
his wealth, from threepence or fourpence up to a 
shilling or more. 

In the middle of the kaiak's deck there is a hole 
just large enough to enable a man to get his legs 
through it and to sit down ; his thighs almost en- 
tirely fill the aperture. Thus it takes a good deal of 
practice before one can slip into or out of the kaiak 
with any sort of ease. The hole is surrounded by 
the kaiak-ring, which consists of a hoop of wood. 
It stands a little more than an inch (3 or 3^ centi- 
metres) above the kaiak's deck, and the waterproof 
jacket, as we shall presently see, is drawn over it. 
At the spot where the rower sits, pieces of old kaiak- 
skin are laid in the bottom over the ribs, with a piece 
of bearskin or other fur to make the seat softer. 

As a rule, each hunter makes his kaiak for him- 
self, and it is fitted to the man's size just like a 
garment. A kaiak for a Greenlander of average size 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 'KAIAK' AND ITS APPURTENANCES 47 

measures, in the neighbourhood of Godthaab, about 
6 yards (5^ metres) in length. The greatest breadth of 
deck, in front of the kaiak-ring, is about 18 inches (45 
centimetres), or a little more ; but the boat narrows con- 
siderably towards the bottom. The breadth, of course, 
varies according to the width of the man's thighs, 
and is generally no greater than just to allow him to 
slip in. I should note, however, that the kaiaks in 
Godthaab fiords — as, for example, at Sardlok and 
Kamok — were longer and narrower than the kaiaks 
on the sea-coast, for example at Kangek, obviously 
for the reason that on the open coast they are ex- 
posed to heavier seas, and must therefore be stiffer 
and easier to handle. The shorter and broader 
kaiaks are better sea-boats, and ship less water. ^ 

The depth of the kaiak from deck to bottom is 
generally from 5 to 6^ inches (12 to 15 centimetres), 
but in front of the kaiak-ring it is an 
inch or two more, in order to give room 
for the thighs, and to enable the rower section of 
to get more easily into his place. The (Th™^rer«. 

, , preaents the akin.) 

bottom of the kaiak is pretty flat, sloping 
to a very obtuse angle (probably about 140°) in the 
middle. The kaiak narrows evenly in, both fore and 
aft, and comes to a point at both ends. It has no 
keel, but its underpart at both ends is generally 
provided with bone flanges, for the most part of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



48 ESKIMO LIFE 

whale-rib, designed to save the skin from being 
ripped up by drift-ice, or by stones when the kaiak 
is beached. Both points are commonly provided 
with knobs of bone, partly for ornament, partly for 
protection as well. 

Across the deck, in front of the kaiak-ring, six 
thongs are usually fastened, and from three to five 
behind the rower. Under these thongs weapons and 
implements are inserted, so that they lie safe and 
handy for use. Pieces of bone are let into the 
thongs, partly to hold them together, partly to keep 
them a little bit up from the deck, so that weapons 
can the more easily and quickly be pushed under 
them, and partly also for the sake of ornament. To 
some of these thongs the booty is fastened. The 
heads of birds are stuck in under them; seals, 
whales, or halibut are attached by towing-lines to the 
thongs at the side of the kaiak ; and smaller fish are 
not fastened at all, but either simply laid on the back 
part of the deck or pushed in under it. 

A kaiak is so light that it can without diflSculty 
be carried on the head, with all its appurtenances, 
over several miles of land. 

It is propelled by a two-bladed paddle, which is 
held in the middle and dipped in the water on each 
side in turn, like the paddles we use in canoes. It 
has probably been developed from the Indians' one- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 'KAIAK' AND ITS APPCRTENANCES 



49 



bladed paddles. Among the Eskimos on the south 
west coast of Alaska the one-bladed paddle 
is universal ; not until we come north of the 
Yukon Eiver do we find two-bladed paddles, 
and even there the single blade is still the 
more common. Further north and eastward 
along the American coast both forms are 
found, until the two blades at last come 
into exclusive use eastward of the Mackenzie 
Eiver. 

The Aleutians seem, strangely enough, to 
be acquainted with only the two-bladed 
paddle,^ and this is also the case, so far as 
I can gather, with the Asiatic Eskimos.^ 

In fair weather the kaiak-man uses the 
so-called half-jacket {akuilisak). This is made 
of water-tight skin with the hair removed, 
and is sewn with sinews. Bound its lower 
margin runs a draw- string, or rather a draw- 
thong, by means of which the edge of the 
jacket can be made to fit so closely to the 



' On this point, see even such early authors as Cook and 
King, A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean, rfc, 8rd ed., ii. p. 613, 
London, 1785. 

' It is remarkable that the inhabitants of St. Lawrence 
Island do not seem to use the kaiak at all. They have large 
open skin-boats (haddars) of the same build as those of the 
Tchucktchi. (Compare Nordenskiold, The Voyage of tfie paddle. 
Vega, ii. p. 254, London, 1881.) 

E 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



60 



ESKIMO LIFE 



kaiak-ring that it can only be pressed and drawn 
down over it with some little trouble. This done, 
the half-jacket forms, as it were, a water-tight 
extension of the kaiak. The upper margin of 
the jacket comes close up to the armpits of the 
kaiak-man, and is supported by braces or straps, 
which pass over the shoulders and can be length- 





HALF-JACKET. 



WHOLE-JACKET. 



ened or shortened by means of handy runners or 
buckles of bone, so simple and yet so ingenious that 
we, with all our metal buckles and so forth, cannot 
equal them. 

Loose sleeves of skin are drawn over the arms, 
and are lashed to the over-arm and to the wrist, thus 
preventing the arm from becoming wet. Watertight 
mittens of skin are drawn over the hands. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 'KAIAK' AND ITS APPURTENANCES 61 

This half-jacket is enough to keep out the smaller 
waves which wash over the kaiak. In a heavier sea, 
on the other hand, the whole-jacket {tuilik) is used. 
This is made in the same w^ay as the half-jacket, and, 
like it, fits close to the kaiak-ring, but is longer 
above, has sleeves attached to it, and a hood which 
comes right over the head. It is laced tight round 
the face and wrists, so that with it on the kaiak-man 
can go right through the breakers and can capsize 
and right himself again, without getting wet and 
without letting a drop of water into the kaiak. 

It will readily be understood that it is not easy 
to sit in a vessel like the kaiak without capsizing, and 
that it needs a good deal of practice to master its 
peculiarities. I have seen a friend of mine in Nor- 
way, on making his first experiment in my kaiak, 
capsize four times in the space of two minutes ; no 
sooner had we got him up on even keel and let him 
go, than he again stood on his head with the bottom 
of the kaiak in the air. 

But when one has acquired by practice a mastery 
of the kaiak and of the two-bladed paddle, one can 
get through the water in all sorts of weather at an 
astonishing speed.. The kaiak is beyond comparison 
the best boat for a single oarsman ever invented. 

In order to become an accomplished kaiak-man, 
one ought to begin early. The Greenland boys often 

£ 2 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



52 ESKIMO LIFE 

begin to practise in their father's kaiak at from six 
to eight years old, and when they are ten or twelve 
the provident Greenlander gives his sons kaiaks of 
their own. This was the rule, at any rate, in former 
times. Lars Dalager even says : ' When they are 
from eight to ten years old they take seriously to 
work in Uttle kaiaks.' 

From this age onwards, the young Greenlander 
remains a toiler of the sea. At first he generally 
confines himself to fishing, but before long he ex- 
tends his operations to the more difficult seal- 
hunting. 

You cannot rank as an expert kaiak-man until 
you have mastered the art of righting yourself 
after capsizing. To do this, you seize one end of 
the paddle in your hand, and with the other hand 
grasp the shaft as near the middle as possible ; 
then you place it along the side of the kaiak with its 
free end pointing forward towards the bow; and 
thereupon, pushing the end of the paddle sharply 
out to the side,^ and bending your body well forward 
towards the deck, you raise yourself by a strong cir- 
cular sweep of the paddle. If you do not come right 
up, a second stroke may be necessary. 

^ While the paddle is being pushed out sideways, until it comes at 
right angles to the kaiak, it is held slightly aslant, so that the blade, in 
moving, forces the water imder it, and acquires an upward leverage. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE 'KAIAK' AND ITS APPURTENANCES 63 

A thorough kaiak-man can also right himself 
without an oar by help of his throwing-stick, or 
even without it, by means of one arm. The height 
of accomplishment is reached when he does not even 
need to use the flat of his hand, but can clench it ; 
and to show that he really does so, I have seen a 
man take a stone in his clenched hand before cap- 
sizing, and come up with it still in his grasp. 

An Eskimo told me of another who was so extra- 
ordinarily skilful at righting himself that he could 
do it in every possible way : with or without an oar, 
with or without a throwing-stick, or with his clenched 
hand. The only thing he could not right himself 
with was — ^his tongue ; and my informant protruded 
that member and made some horrible griqjaces with 
it to illustrate what exertions it would cost to recover 
yourself with so inconvenient an implement. 

In earUer times, on the west coast of Greenland, 
every at all capable kaiak-man was able to right 
himself; but in these later days, since the intro- 
duction of European civilisation, and the consequent 
degeneracy of the race, this art has declined, along 
with everything else. It is still quite common, how- 
ever, in many places. For instance, I can assert of 
my own knowledge that at Kangek, near Godthaab, 
almost all the hunters possessed it. On the east coast, 
according to Captain Holm, it seems to be usual, yet 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



54 ESKIMO LIFE 

not SO much so as it was in former times upon the 
west coast. Nor is this to be wondered at, as it is 
far more necessary on the west coast, where there is 
little drift ice and heavy seas are common. 

A kaiak-man who has entirely mastered the art 
of righting himself can defy almost any weather. If 
he is capsized, he is on even keel again in a moment, 
and can play like a sea-bird with the waves, and cut 
right through them. If the sea is very heavy, he 
lays the broadside of his kaiak to it, holds the 
paddle flat out on the windward side, pressing it 
against the deck, bends forward, and lets the wave 
roll over him ; or else he throws himself on his side 
towards it, resting on his flat paddle, and rights him- 
self againJsvhen it has passed. The prettiest feat of 
seamanship I* have ever heard of is that to which 
some fishers, I am told, have recourse among over- 
whelming rollers. As the sea curls down over them 
they voluntarily capsize, receive it on the bottom of 
the kaiak, and when it has passed right themselves 
again. I think it would be difficult to name a more 
intrepid method of dealing with a heavy sea. 

If you cannot right yourself, and if there is no 
lielp at hand, you are lost beyond all hope as soon 
as you capsize. This may happen easily enough — 
a wave can do it, or even the fouling of the harpoon- 
line when a seal is struck. Just as often, too, it 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



TnE 'KAIAK' AND ITS APPURTENANCES 66 

happens through an unguarded movement in calm 
weather, or at moments when there seems to be no 
danger. 

Many Eskunos find their death every year in this 
manner. For example, I may state that in Danish 
South Greenland in 1888, out of 162 deaths (of which 
90 were of males), 24, or about 15 per cent, (that is 
to say, more than a fourth part of the male mortality), 
were caused by drowning in kaiaks. 

In 1889, in South Greenland, out of 272 deaths 
(of which 152 were of males), 24, or about 9 per 
cent., were due to the same cause. This in a popu- 
lation of 5,614, of which 2,591 were males. 



• 



^ ' :.";ijl^zed>y Google 

V ■ 



56 ESKIMO LIFE 



CHAPTEE IV 

THE ESKIMO AT SEA 

One often hears the Eskimo accused of cowardice. 
This is no doubt mainly due to the fact that his 
accusers have seen him only on land, or in fine 
weather at sea ; and then he is too good-natured and 
easy-going to show any courage. It may be, too, 
they have not taken the trouble to place themselves 
in sympathy with his view of life ; or else they may 
have call^jl^n him to do things which he neither 



al^jjj^r 



understc^^^V cared about. 

If by courage we understand the tigerish ferocity 
which fights to the last drop of blood, even against 
superior force — that courage which, as Spencer says, 
is undoubtedly most common among the lowest races 
of men, and is especially characteristic of many 
species of animals — it must be admitted that of this 
the Eskimos do not possess any great share. They 
are too peaceable and good-natured, for example, to 
strike back when attacked ; and therefore Europeans, 
ever since the time of Egede and the first mission- 
aries, have been able to strike them with impunity 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE ESKIMO AT SEA 67 

and to call them cowardly. But this sort of courage 
is held in no great respect by the natives in Green- 
land, and I am afraid that they do not look up to us 
any the more because we exhibit a superabundance 
of it. They have from all time respected the beauti- 
ful Christian doctrine that if a man smite you on the 
right cheek, you should turn to him the left also. 

But to conclude from this that the Eskimo is a 
coward would be unjust. 

To estimate the worth of a human being, you 
must see him at his work. Follow the Eskimo to 
sea, observe him there — where his vocation lies — and 
you will soon behold him in another light ; for, if we 
understand by courage that faculty which, in mo- 
ments of danger, lays its plans with calmness and 
executes them with ready presence of mind, or which 
faces inevitable danger, and even certain death, 
with immovable self-possession, then we shall find 
in Greenland men of such courage as we but rarely 
find elsewhere. 

Kaiak-hunting has many dangers. 

Though his father may have perished at sea, and 
very likely his brother and his friend as well, the 
Eskimo nevertheless goes quietly about his daily 
work, in storm no less than in calm. If the weather 
is too terrible, he may be chary of putting to sea ; 
experience has taught him that in such weather 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



68 ESKIMO LIFE 

many perish ; but when once he is out he goes ahead 
as though it were all the most indifferent thing in the 
world. 

It is a gallant business, this kaiak-hunting ; it is 
like a sportive dance with the sea and with death. 
There is no finer sight possible than to see the kaiak- 
man breasting the heavy rollers that seem utterly to 
engulf him. Or when, overtaken by a storm at sea, 
the kaiaks run for the shore, they come like black 
storm-birds rushing before the wind and the waves, 
which, like rolling mountains, sweep on in their wake. 
Tlie paddles whirl through air and water, the body is 
bent a little forwards, the head often turned half 
backwards to watch the seas ; all is life and spirit — 
while the sea around reeks like a seething cauldron. 
And then it may happen that when the game is at its 
wildest a seal pops its head up before them. Quicker 
than thought the harpoon is seized and rushes through 
the foam with deadly aim ; the seal dashes away with 
the bladder behind it, but is presently caught and 
killed, and then towed onwards. Everything is done 
with the same masterly skill and with the same quiet 
demeanour. The Eskimo never dreams that he is 
performing feats of heroism. 

Here he is great — and we? Ah, in these sur- 
roundings we are apt to seem very small. 

Let us follow the Eskimo on a day's hunting. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




m 
n 

H 

» 
O 
H 

S 



Id 

< 
X 









Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE ESKIMO AT SEA 69 

Several hours before dawn he stands upon the 
outlook-rock over the village, and scans the sea to as- 
certain whether the weather is going to be favourable. 
Having assured himself on this point, he comes slowly 
down to his house and gets out his kaiak-jacket. His 
breakfast in the good old days consisted of a drink 
of water ; now that European effeminacy has reached 
hun too, it is generally one or two cups of strong 
coffee. He eats nothing in the morning ; he declares 
that it makes him uneasy in the kaiak, and that he 
has more endurance without it. Nor does he take 
any food with him' — only a quid of tobacco. 

When the kaiak is carried down to the beach and 
the hunting-weapons are ranged in their places, he 
slips into the kaiak-hole, makes fast his jacket over 
the ring, and puts out to sea. From other houses in 
the village his neighbours are also putting forth at 
the same time. It is the bladder-nose that they are 
after to-day, and the hunting-ground is on some 
banks nine miles out to the open sea. 

It is calm, the smooth sea heaves in a long swell 
towards the rocky islets that fringe the shore, a light 
haze still lies over the sounds between them, and the 
sea-birds floating on the surface seem double their 
natural size. The kaiaks cut their way forwards, 
side by side, making only a silent ripple ; the paddles 
swing in an even rhythm, while the men keep up an 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



60 ESKIMO LIFE 

unbroken stream of conversation, and now and then 
burst out into merry laughter. Bird-darts are thrown 
in sport, now by one, now by another, in order to 
keep eye and hand in practice. Presently an auk 
comes within range of one of them ; the dart speeds 
through the air, and the bird, transfixed, attempts, 
with much flapping of wings, to dive, but is held up 
next moment upon the point of the dart. The point 
is pulled out, the hunter seizes the bird's beak be- 
tween his teeth, and with a strong twitch breaks its 
neck, then fastens it to the back part of the kaiak. 

They soon leave the sounds and islets beliind 
them and put straight out to the open sea. 

After some hours' paddling, they have at la^st 
reached the hunting-ground. Great seal-heads are 
seen peering over the water in many directions, and 
the hunters scatter in search of their prey. 

Boas, one of the best hunters of the village, has 
seen a large he-seal far off, and has paddled towards 
it ; but it has dived, and he lies and waits for its re- 
appearance. There ! a little way before him its 
round black head pops up. He bends well forward, 
while with noiseless and wary strokes he urges the 
kaiak toward the seal, which lies peaceful and undis- 
turbed, stretching its neck and rocking up and down 
upon the swell. But suddenly it is on the alert; it has 
caught a glimpse of the flashing paddle-blade, and now 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




o 

K 






Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE ESKIMO AT SEA 61 

looks straight at him with its great round eyes. He 
instantly stops paddling and sits motionless, while the 
way on the kaiak carries it noiselessly forward. The 
seal discovers nothing new to be alarmed at, and 
resumes its former quietude. It throws its head 
backwards, holds its snout straight up in the air, and 
bathes in the morning sun which gleams upon its 
black, wet skin. In the meantime the kaiak is 
rapidly nearing; every time the seal looks in that 
direction. Boas sits still and moves no muscle ; but 
as soon as it turns its head away again, he shoots 
forward like a flash of lightning. He is coming 
within range ; he gets his harpoon clear, sees that 
the hne is properly coiled upon the stand ; one 
stroke more and it is time to throw — when the seal 
quietly disappears under the water. It was not 
frightened, and will consequently come up again at 
no great distance. He lies still and waits. But the 
minutes drag on ; a seal can remain under water 
an incredible time, and it seems even longer to 
one who is waiting for his prey. But the Eskimo 
is gifted with admirable patience ; he lies absolutely 
motionless except for his head, with which he keeps 
watch on every side. At last the seal's head once 
more appears over the water a little way off and to 
one side. He cautiously turns the kaiak, unobserved 
by his prey, and once more he shoots towards it 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



62 ESKIMO LIFE 

over the mirror-like sea. But suddenly it catches 
sight of him again, looks at him sharply for a 
moment, and dives. He knows its habits, however, 
and at full speed he dashes towards the spot where 
it disappeared. Before many moments have passed 
it pops up its head again to look around. Now he 
is within range : the harpoon is seized and carried 
back over his shoulder, then with a strong move- 
ment, as if hurled from a steel spring, it rushes 
whistling from the throwing-stick, whirling the line 
behind it. The seal gives a violent plunge, but at 
the moment it arches its back to dive, the harpoon- 
sinks into its side, and buries itself up t^ the shaft. 
A few convulsive strokes of its tail churn the water 
into foam, and away it goes, dragging the harpoon- 
line behind it towards the depths. In the meantime 
Boas has seized the throwing-stick between his teeth, 
and, quicker than thought, has thrown the bladder 
out of the kaiak behind him. It dances away over 
the surface of the sea, now and then seeming on the 
point of disappearing, as indeed it finally does. 
Before long, however, it again comes in sight, and 
he chases after it as quickly as his paddle can 
take him, snapping up on the way his harpoon- 
shaft which has floated to the surface. The lance 
is laid ready for use. Next moment the seal comes 
up; infuriated at its inability to escape, it turns 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




H 

p 
n 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC. 



THE ESKIMO AT SEA 63 

upon its pursuer, attacks first the bladder, which it 
tears to pieces, and then goes straight for the kaiak. 
Again Boas is within range ; the animal arches its 
back and hurls itself forward with gaping maw, so 
that the water foams around it. A miss may now 
cost him his life ; but he calmly raises his lance and 
sends it speeding with terrible force through the 
seal's mouth and out at the back of its neck. A 
shudder runs through it, and its head sinks ; but the 
next moment it raises itself perpendicularly in the 
water, the blood pours frothing from its mouth, it 
gapes wildly and utters a smothered roar, while 
the hood over its nose is inflated to an astounding 
size. It shakes its head so that the lance-shaft 
quivers and waves to and fro ; but it does not 
succeed in breaking it or getting free from it. A 
moment more and Boas's second lance has pierced 
through one of its fore-flappers into its lungs; 
the seal collapses, and the fight is over. He 
paddles up to its side, and as it still moves a little, 
he gives it a finishing stab with his long-handled 
knife. Then he sets quietly about pulling out his 
lances and replacing them in the kaiak, takes out his 
towing-line and blows up his towing-bladder, which 
he fastens to the seal, cuts the harpoon-head out and 
once more makes it fast to the shaft, coils the line on 
the stand, and takes out a new bladder and places it 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



64 ESKIMO LIFE 

behind him. Next, the seal's flappers are lashed 
close to its body, with the thong designed for that 
purpose, and the animal is attached by means of 
the towing-line to one side of the kaiak, so that it 
can easily be towed along, its head being fastened to 
the foremost pair of thongs on the deck, and its tail 
to the hindmost. Now Boas is ready to look about 
him for more game. He is lucky, and has not paddled 
far before he catches sight of another seal. In an 
instant he has cast loose the one already killed, 
which is kept afloat by the towing-bladder, while he 
again sets off* in pursuit. This one, too, he kills, 
after some wary stalking and eager waiting; he 
takes it in tow and returns for his first prey. The 
two great animals are fastened one on each side of 
the kaiak. He has now a good cargo, and cannot 
get very quickly through the water ; but that does 
not prevent him from increasing his bag. As soon 
as another seal comes in sight those already secured 
are cast loose, and when the next one is killed it is 
fastened behind the others. In this way one man 
wiU sometimes come towing as many as four seals, 
or even more at a pinch. 

Tobias, in the meantime, another of the best 
hunters of the village, has not been quite so for- 
tunate as Boas. He began by chasing a seal which 
dived and did not come up again within sight. Then 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



TITK ESKIMO AT SEA m 

he set off after another ; but as he is skimming over 
the sea towards it the huge head of a hooded seal * 
suddenly pops up right in front of the kaiak, and is 
harpooned in an instant. It makes a frightful wal- 
lowing and dives, the harpoon-line whirls out, but 
suddenly gets fouled under the bird-dart throwing- 
stick ; the bow of the kaiak is drawn under with an 
irresistible rush, and before Tobias knows where he 
is, the water is up to his armpits, and nothing can be 
seen of him but his head and shoulders and the stern 
of the kaiak, which sticks right up into the air. It 
looks as if it were all over with him ; those who are 
near him paddle with all their might to his assist- 
ance, but with scant hope of arriving in time to save 
him. Tobias, however, is a first-rate kaiak-man. In 
spite of his difficult position, he keeps upon even keel 
while he is dragged through the water by the seal, 
which does aU it can to get him entirely under. At 
last it comes up again, and in a moment he has seized 
his lance and, with a deadly aim, has pierced it right 
through the head. A feeble movement, and it is 
dead. The others come up in time to find Tobias 
busy making his booty fast and to get their pieces of 
blubber from it.^ They cannot restrain their admira- 

* HoBttesosU the full-grown male of the Klap^nyta (bladder-nose). 
It has a hood over its nose, which it can inflate enormously. 

* When a seal is kiUed, each of the kaiak-men in the neighbourhood 
receives a piece of its blubber, which he generally devours forthwith. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



66 ESKIMO LIFE 

tion for his coolness and skill, and speak, of it long 
afterwards. Tobias and Boas, however, are the best 
hunters of the village. It is related of them that, in 
their younger days, they were such masters of their 
craft that they even disdained the use of bladders. 
They made fast the harpoon-line round their own 
waist or round the kaiak-ring, and when the har- 
pooned seal was not killed at the first stroke, they 
let it drag themselves and the kaiak after it instead 
of the blailder. This is looked upon by the Green- 
landers as the summit of possible achievement, but 
there are very few who attain such mastery. 

Hitherto the weather has been fine, the glassy 
surface of the sea has been heaving softly under the 
rising sun. But in the course of the last hour or 
two, black and threatening banks of clouds have 
begun to draw up over the southern horizon. Just 
as Tobias has made fast his seal, a distant roar is 
hieard and a sort of steam can be seen rising over 
the sea to the southward. It is a storm approaching, 
and the steam is the flying spray which it drives 
before it. Of all winds, the Greenlanders fear the 
south wind (nigek) most, for it is always violent and 
sets up a heavy sea. 

The thing is now to get under the land as quickly 
as possible. Those who have no seals in tow have 
the best of it, yet they try to keep with the others. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




'A 



n 






Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE ESKIMO A.T SEA 67 

One relieves Boas of one of his seak. They have 
not paddled far before the storm is upon them ; it 
thrashes the water to foam as it approaches, and the 
kaiak-men feel it on their backs, like a giant lifting 
and hurling them forward. The sport has now 
turned to earnest ; the seas soon tower into moun- 
tains of water and break and welter down upon 
them. They are making for the land with the wind 
nearly abeam ; but they are still far off, they can see 
nothing around them for the spray, and almost every 
wave buries them so that only a few heads, arms, 
and ends of paddles can be seen above the combs of 
froth. 

Here comes a gigantic roller — they can see it 
shining black and white in the far distance. It 
towers aloft so that the sky is almost hidden. la 
a moment they have stuck their paddles under the 
thongs on the windward side and bent their bodies 
forward so that the crest of the wave breaks upon 
their backs. For a second almost everything has dis- 
appeared ; those who are further a-lee await their turn 
in anxiety ; then the billow passes, and once more the 
kaiaks skim forward as before. But such a sea does 
not come singly ;• the next will be worse. They hold 
their paddles flat to the deck and projecting to wind- 
, ward, bend their bodies forward, and at the moment 
when the white cataract thunders down upon them 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



68 ESKIMO LIFE 

they hurl themselves into its very jaws, thus some- 
what breaking its force. For a moment they have 
again disappeared — then one kaiak comes up on even 
keel, and presently another appears bottom upwards. 
It is Pedersuak {i.e. the big Peter) who has capsized. 
His comrade speeds to his side, but at the same 
moment the third wave breaks over them and he 
must look out for himself. It is too late — the two 
kaiaks lie heaving bottom upwards. The second 
manages to right himself, and his first thought is for 
his comrade, to whose assistance he once more 
hastens. He runs his kaiak alongside of the other, 
lays his paddle across both, bends down so that he 
gets hold under the water of his comrade's arm, and 
with a jerk drags him up upon his side, so that he 
too can get hold of the paddle and in an instant raise 
himself upon even keel. The water-tight jacket has 
come a little loose from the ring on one side and 
some water has got in ; not so much, however, but 
that he can still keep afloat. The others have in the 
meantime come up ; they get hold of the lost paddle, 
and all can again push forward. 

It grows worse and worse for those who have 
seals in tow; they lag far behind, and the great 
beasts lie heaving and jarring against the sides of the 
kaiaks. They think of sacrificing their prey, but one 
diflicult sea passes after another, and they will still 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




o 

< 

o 



'A 

D 






Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE ESKIMO AT SEA 69 

try to hang on for a while. The proudest moments 
in a hunter's life are those in which he comes home 
towing his prey, and sees his wife's, his daughter's, 
and his handmaiden's happy faces beaming upon 
him from the shore. Far out at sea he already sees 
them in his mind's eye, and rejoices like a child. 
No wonder that he will not cast loose his prey save 
at the direst pinch of need. 

After passing through many ugly rollers, they 
have at last got under the land. Here they are 
somewhat protected by a group of islands lying far 
to the southward. The seas become less violent, and, 
as they gradually get further in, they push on more 
quickly for home over the smoother water. 

In the meantime the women at home have been 
in the greatest anxiety. When the storm arose they 
ran up to the outlook-rock or out upon the headlands, 
and stood there in groups gazing eagerly over the 
angry sea for their sons, husbands, fathers, and 
brothers. So they stand watching and sliivering, 
until, with eyes rendered keener by anxiety, they at 
last discern what seem like black specks approaching 
from the horizon, and the whole village echoes to one 
glad shout : * They are coming ! They j^re coming ! ' 
They begin to count how many there are ; two are 
missing ! No, there is one of them ! No, they ar^ 
all there ! They are all there ! 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



70 ESKIMO LIFE 

They soon begin to recognise individuals, partly 
by their method of paddling, partly by the kaiaks, 
although as yet they are little more than tiny dots. 
Suddenly there sounds a wild shout of joy : * Boase 
kaligpok!' (*Boas is towing') — ^him they easily 
identify by his size. This joyful intelligence passes 
from house to house, the children rush around and 
shout it in through the windows, and the groups 
upon the rocks dance for joy. Then comes a new 
shout : * Ama Tobiase kaligpok ! ' (* Tobias too is 
towing ') ; and this news likewise passes from house 
to house. Next is heard : * Ama Simo kaligpok ! ' 
*Ama David kaligpok!' And now again comes 
another swarm of women out of the houses and up 
to the rocks to look out over the sea breaking white 
against the islets and cliflfs, where eleven black dots 
can now and then be seen far out amid the rolling 
masses of water, moving slowly nearer. 

At last the leading kaiaks shoot into the little bight 
in front of the village. They are those who have no 
seals. Lightly and with assured aim one after the 
other dashes up on the flat beach, carried high upon 
the crest of the waves. The women stand ready to 
receive them and to draw them further up. 

Then come those who have seals in tow; they 
must proceed somewhat more cautiously. First, they 
cast loose their prey and see. that it comes to the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



TIIE ESKIMO AT SEA 71 

hands of the women on shore. Then they themsetves 
make for the land. When once they have got out of 
the kaiak, they, hke the first comers, pay no heed to 
anything but themselves and their weapons, which 
they carry to their places above high-water mark. 
They do not even look at their prey as it lies on the 
shore. From this time forward all work in connec- 
tion with the ' take ' falls to the share of the women. 

The men go to their homes, take off their wet 
clothes and put on their indoor dress, which, as we 
have seen, was in the heathen times exceedingly 
airy, but has now become more visible. 

Then at last comes the first meal of the day ; but 
it does not begin in earnest till the day's * take ' is 
boiled and served up in a huge dish placed in the 
middle of the floor. Then there disappear incredible 
quantities of flesh and raw blubber. 

When hunger is appeased, the women always set 
themselves to some household work, sewing or the 
like, whilst the men give themselves up to well-earned 
laziness, or attend a little to their weapons, hang up 
the harpoon-line to dry, and so forth. 

Then the hunters begin to relate the events of the 
day, the family Ustening eagerly, especially the boys. 
The narrative is sober, with none of that boasting or 
striving to impress the hearers with an exaggerated 
idea of the diflSculties overcome, in which we 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



72 :eskimo life 

Europeans, under similar circumstances, would often 
indulge. 

But at the same time it is lively and picturesque, 
with a peculiar breadth of colouring. Experiences 
are described with illustrative gestures, and, as 
Dalager says : ^' When they have come so far in the 
story that the cast has to be depicted, they swing the 
right arm in the air while the left is held straight out 
to represent the animal. Then the demonstration 
goes on as follows : * When the time came for using 
the harpoon, I looked to it, I took it, I seized it, I 
gripped it, I had it fast in my hand, I balanced it ' — 
and so forth. This alone may go on for several 
minutes, until at last the hand sinks to represent the 
throw ; and after that they do not forget to make 
note of the last twitches given by the seal." 

At other times the most remarkable events are 
dismissed in a few words. But a^s often as an 
opportunity presents itself, a broad humour enters 
into the narration, and is unfailingly rewarded by 
shrieks of laughter from the eager listeners. No 
more perfect picture could be imagined of happy 
family life. 

So the days pass for the Eskimo. Although there 
is nothing unusual in experiences such as these, they 
have for him a distinct attraction. His best thoughts 
are wedded to the sea, the hard life upon it is for him 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE ESKIMO AT SEA 73 

the kernel of existence — and when he is forced to 
remain at home, his heart is heavy. But when he 
grows old — ah, then the saga is over. There is 
always a melancholy in old age, and nowhere more 
than here. These kindly old men have also in their 
day known strength and youth — times when they 
were the pillars of their little society. Now they 
have only the memories of that life left to them, and 
they must let themselves be fed by others. But when 
the young people come home from sea with their 
booty, they, too, hobble down to the beach to receive 
them ; even if it were but a poor foreigner like me, 
they were glad to be able to help me ashore with my 
kaiak. And then when evening comes they set them- 
selves to story-telling ; adventure follows adventure, 
the past comes to life again, and the young people 
are spurred on to action. 

The hunting is often more dangerous than that 
described above. It will easily be understood that 
from his constrained position in the kaiak, which 
does not permit of much turning, the hunter can- 
not throw backwards or to the right. If, then, 
a wounded seal suddenly attacks him from these 
quarters, it requires both skill and presence of mind 
to elude it or to turn so quickly as to aim a fatal 
throw at it before it has time to do him damage. It 
is just as bad when he is attacked from below, or 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



74 ESKIMO LIFE 

when the animal suddenly shoots up close at his side, 
for it is lightning-like in its movements and lacks 
neither courage nor strength. If it once gets up on 
the kaiak and capsizes it, there is little hope of 
rescue. It will often attack the hunter under water, 
or throw itself upon the bottom of the kaiak and 
tear holes in it. In such a predicament, it needs very 
unusual self-mastery to preserve the coolness neces- 
sary for recovering oneself upon even keel and re- 
newing the fight with the furious adversary. And 
yet it sometimes happens that after being thus 
capsized the kaiak-man brings the seal home in 
triumph. 

A still more terrible adversary is the walrus ; 
therefore there are generally several in company 
when they go walrus-hunting, so that one can stand 
by another if an3''thing should happen. But often 
enough, too, a single hunter will attack and over- 
come this monster. 

The walrus, I need scarcely say, is a huge animal 
of as much as 16 feet (5 metres) in length, with a thick 
and tough hide, a deep layer of blubber, a terribly 
hard skull, and a powerful body. There needs, then, 
a sure and strong arm to kill it. The walrus has the 
habit, as soon as it is attacked, of turning upon its 
assailant, and will often, with its ugly tusks, make 
itself exceedingly unpleasant. If there are several 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




I < 



Q 
H 

o 

< 

H 

fed 

-«5 



mmt'^. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



/ 



/ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE ESKIMO AT SEA 75 

walruses in a flock, they will very likely surround 
him and attack him all at once. 

Even the Norwegian hunters, who go after the 
walrus in large, strong boats, each containing many 
men, armed with guns, lances, and axes— even they 
stand much in awe of it. 

How much more courage and skill does it re- 
quire for the Eskimo to attack it in his frail skin 
canoe, with his light ingenious projectiles — and 
alone ! 

But this is no unusual occurrence for the Eskimo. 
He fights out his fight with his dangerous adver- 
sary ; calmly, with his lance ready poised for throw- 
ing, he awaits its attack, and, coolly seizing his 
advantage, he at the right moment plunges the 
weapon into its body- 

Coolness is more than ever essential in walrus- 
hunting, for the most unforeseen difficulties may 
arise ; and catastrophes are by no means rare. At 
Kangamiut, some years ago, a kaiak was attacked 
from below, and a long walrus-tusk was suddenly 
thrust through its bottom, through the man's thigh, 
and right up through the deck. His comrades at 
once rushed to his assistance, and the man was 
rescued and helped ashore. 

Besides these animals, the Eskimo also attacks 
whales from his little kaiak. There is one species in 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



76 ESKIMO LIFE 

particular which is more dangerous than any other 

the grampus, or, as he calls it, ardluk. With its 
strength, its swiftness, and its horrible teeth, if it 
happens to take the offensive, it can make an end of 
a kaiak in an instant. Even the Eskimo fears it ; 
but that does not prevent him from attacking it 
when opportunity offers. 

In former times they hunted the larger whales as 
well, using, however, the great woman-boats, with 
many people in them, both men and women. For 
this sort of whale-hunting, says Hans Egede, * they 
get themselves up in their greatest finery as if for a 
marriage, for otherwise the whale will avoid them ; 
he cannot endure uncleanliness.* The whale was 
harpooned, or rather pierced with a big lance, from 
the bow, and it sometimes happened that with a 
whisk of its tail it would crush the boat or capsize 
it. The men were often so daring as to jump on 
the whale's back, when it began to be exhausted, in 
order to give it a finishing stroke. This method of 
hunting is now unusual. 

It is not only the larger animals that expose the 
Eskimo to danger. Even in ordinary fishing — for 
example, for halibut — disasters may happen. If one 
has not taken care to keep the line clear, and it gets 
fouled in one place or another, while the strong fish 
is making a sudden dash for the bottonu the crank 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 







D 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



TIIE ESKIMO AT SEA 77 

kaiak is easily enough capsized. Many have met 
their end in this way. 

But we must not dwell too long on the shady 
sides of life. I hope I have succeeded in giving the 
reader a slight impression of the life of the Eskimo 
at sea, and of some of the dangers which are his 
daily lotr— enough, perhaps, to have convinced him 
that this race is not lacking in courage when it 
comes to the pinch, nor in endurance and cool self- 
command. 

But the Eskimo has more than this; when 
disaster overtakes him, he will often show the rarest 
endurance and hardihood. In spite of the many 
dangers and sufferings inseparable from his industry, 
he devotes himself to it with joy. If the history of 
the Eskimos had ever been written, it would have 
been one long series of feats of courage and forti- 
tude ; and how much moving self-sacrifice and devo- 
tion to others would have had to be recorded ! 
How many deeds of heroism have been irrecover- 
ably forgotten! And this is the people whom we 
Europeans have called worthless and cowardly, and 
have thought ourselves entitled to despise. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



78 ESKIMO LIFE 



CHAPTER V 

WINTER-HOUSES, TENTS, WOMAN-BOATS, AND 
EXCURSIONS. 

In winter the Greenlanders live in houses built of 
stones and turf. They rise only from four to six feet 
(one and a half to two metres) above the level of the 
ground, and the floor is sunk somewhat beneath it. 
The roof is flat or slightly arched. From outside, the 
whole structure generally looks like an insignificant 
mound of earth. 

There is only one room in these houses, and in it 
several families generally live together — ^men and 
women, young and old. The roof is so low that a 
man of any stature can scarcely stand upright. The 
room forms an oblong quadrangle. Along the whole 
of the longer wall, opposite the door, runs the chief 
sleeping- bench, about six feet six inches in width, 
upon which sleep the married people, with grown-up 
unmarried daughters and young boys and girls. 
Here they lie in a row, side by side, with their feet 
towards the wall and their heads out into the room. 

Hans Egede Saabye says, in his before-mentioned 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



T\qNTER-HOUSES, TENTS, WOMAN-BOATS, &c. 79 

Journal, that they make their marriage-bed under the 
sleeping-bench. I saw nothing to indicate that any 
such practice now exists anywhere in the Godthaab 
district. 

Unmarried men generally lie upon smaller benches 
under the windows, which are in the opposite long 
waU, and of which there are one, two, or three, 
according to the size of the house. The windows 
were formerly filled with gut-skin, or some similar 
material ; but nowadays, on the west coast, glass is 
commonly used. Against the side walls, too — the 
shorter walls — there are generally benches. These, 
or the window-benches, are, as a rule, assigned to 
strangers as their sleeping-places. 

When several families, as is generally the case, 
dwell in one house, the chief sleeping-bench is divided 
into stalls —one for each family. The stalls are marked 
off by wooden posts, placed against the outer edge of 
the bench, and reaching to the roof, from which low 
partitions extend to the back wall. It is incredible 
how little room they are content with. Captain Holm 
describes a house on the east coast which measured 
about twenty-seven feet by fourteen and a half, and 
in which dwelt eight families, consisting in all of 
thirty-eight persons. In one stall, four feet broad, 
dwelt a man with two wives and seven children. 
This does not give much space to each. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



80 KSKIMO LIFE 

They use sealskins or reindeer-skins to lie upon, 
and also, in former days, as bedclothes, going to 
bed entirely naked, with the exception of the before- 
mentioned indoor dress. Nowadays, on the west 
coast, down quilts are commonly used as bedclothes. 

Internally, the walls of the house were in former 
times always lined with skins. The floor was formed 
by the naked earth, partly paved with flags. Nowa- 
days, since the introduction of so much European 
luxury, they have begun, on the west coast, to line 
the walls with boards and to lay wooden floors. 
They have even, to a certain extent, adopted the 
habit of washing the floors — so much as several 
times a year. 

The house is entered through a long and narrow 
passage, partly dug out beneath the level of the 
ground, and, like the houses, walled with stones and 
turf. You descend into it from the level of the 
ground through a hole. It is, as a rule, so low and 
narrow that one has to crouch one's way through it, 
and a large man finds it difficult enough to effect an 
entrance. I was told at Sardlok of a fat storekeeper 
from Godthaab who stuck fast at a difficult point in 
the passage leading to Terkel's house. There he 
stuck, struggling and roaring, but could not advance, 
and still less retreat. In the end, he had to get four 
small boys to help him, two shoving behind and two, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WINTER-HOUSES, TENTS, WOMAN-BOATS, Xc. 81 

from within the house, dragging him in front by the 
arms. They laboured and toiled in the sweat of their 
brows, but the man was jammed as fast as a wad in a 
gun-barrel, and there was some thought of pulling 
down the walls of the passage in order to liberate 
him, before he at last managed to squeeze through. 
If I remember rightly, a window had to be torn down 
in order to let him out of the house again. 

From the passage, you enter the house through a 
little square opening, usually in the front long wall, 
which is closed by a door or trap-door. 

The purpose of this passage is to prevent the cold 
air from coming in and the warm light air from 
escaping. It is to this end that it is made to lie 
lower than the house ; by which means, too, a little 
ventilation is obtained, since the heavy bad air can, 
to some extent, sink down into it and escape. 

In Greenland houses of the old style there are no 
fireplaces ; they are warmed, as well as lighted, by 
train-oil lamps, which burn day and night. They 
are left burning all night through, not merely for the 
sake of warmth, but also because the Eskimos are 
exceedingly superstitious, and therefore afraid of 
even sleeping in darkness. You may hear them 
relate, as a proof of extreme poverty, that this family 
or that, poor things, have to sleep at night with no 
lamp burning. 

(1 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



82 ESKIMO LIFE 

The lamps are large, flat open saucers of soap- 
stone. They are of semi-circular form, and along 
the straight side lies the wick, which is formed of dry 
moss, or, nowadays, of cotton. These lamps rest on 
a wooden stand, and are placed on a little table or 
raised place in front of the sleeping-bench. There is 
generally one of these lamp-tables to each family. If 
several families dwell in one house, there are many 
lamps, for each family has at least one burning, and, 
as a rule, more. 

In former days, food used to be cooked over these 
lamps in soapstone pots, which hung from the roof. 
The preparation of food, like every other business of 
life, of course went on in the common room. 

So it is to this day on the east coast. On the 
west coast, modern civilisation has effected a change, 
in so far that, food is now generally cooked in a 
special room with a fireplace, built on to the side of 
the passage leading into the house. Peat is used as 
fuel in these fireplaces, and also lumps of dried sea- 
gulls' dung. Iron saucepans, too, bought at the 
stores in the colonies, are now used instead of soap- 
stone pots. 

Many West Greenlanders have, moreover, become 
so highly sophisticated as to have bought stoves, 
which they use instead of the train-oil lamps for 
heating their houses. The fuel used is the same as 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WINTER-HOUSES, TENTS, WOMAN-BOATS, &c. 83 

that mentioned above. At the same time, however, 
the indispensable lamps are kept burning, for the 
sake of light, if for no other reason. 

In former days the houses were generally large, 
and several families lived in each. By this means 
they were able to economise in fuel, and they lived 
warmly and comfortably, while in many other ways 
the habitation in common was found advantageous. 
In this point the influence of the Europeans has 
been unfortunate. They have encouraged the dis- 
tribution of the families into separate small houseSj 
and have even offered prizes for house-building ; it 
was thought to be such a grand thing that each 
family should have its own home for itself. The 
result was that the houses became poorer and colder, 
more material in proportion was needed for warming 
and lighting — ^material which was not always forth- 
coming — and the advantages of the old system of 
partial communism were sacrificed; so that the 
separation tended to the greater discomfort of the 
greater number. 

In winter, when everything is frozen hard, these 
houses are all well enough ; but in summer, when 
the moisture exudes from the thawing walls and the 
roof leaks and sometimes falls in, they are anything 
but wholesome dwelling-places. As soon as spring 
arrives, therefore, with the month of April, the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



84 ESKIMO LIFE 

Greenlanders used always iu former days to quit 
their houses, often unroofing them themselves, in 
order that they might be thoroughly ventilated and 
washed out by the autumn rains— an exceedingly 
simple method of house-cleaning. 

The whole summer through, and a good way 
into the' autumn (until September or October), the 
Greenlanders dwelt in tents, each family, as a rule, 
having its own. These tents are of a peculiar semi- 
circular form, with the entrance-door in the high 
flat side. Internally, they are arranged very like 
the houses, with the sleeping-bench running along 
the curved back wall opposite to the door, which 
is closed with a curtain of semi-transparent gut- 
skin. The walls of the tent consist of an outer 
layer of water-tight skin with the hair taken oflf 
(old boat-skins being used as a rule), and an inner 
layer of reindeer- or seal-skin with the fur turned 
inwards. These tents are tolerably warm, and iu 
them, as in their houses, they go without clothes. 

The woman-boat is inseparably connected with 
this summer tent-life. These boats, which are from 
30 to 40 feet long (10 to 12 metres), have received 
their name from the Europeans, because, unlike the 
kaiaks, they are rowed by women. 

They are entirely open boats, consisting of a 
wooden framework covered with sealskin, and are 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




a) 

< 

o 



2; 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WINTER-HOUSES, TENTS, WOMAN-BOATS, &c. 86 

harrow in proportion to their length, and flat- 
bottomed. They are easy to row, l?ut their shape 
renders them defective and inconvenient sea-boats, 
so that as soon as there is any wind the Greenlanders 
make for the land with them. They have generally 
a small sail which can be set in the bow, for running 
before a fair wind ; but it will be readily understood 
that they are not good sailing-boats. Sailing is, on 
the whole, a pursuit of which the Eskimo under- 
stands little, and for which he has no great liking. 

In these boats there is room for all a family's 
worldly goods — tents, household implements, dogs, 
children, women, &c. They are rowed by as many 
as half a score of oarswomen, and when they are so 
well ' manned,' they attain a good speed. A run of 
fifty English miles a day is not at all uncommon. 
They are generally steered by the paterfamilias, 
while the other males of the family follow in their 
kaiaks. 

In their woman-boats, the Greenlanders used 
to move from one hunting-ground to another all 
through the summer. For one or two months they 
always went far up the fiords in search of reindeer, 
and there they lived on the fat of the land. 

In those days they often undertook long journeys 
up and down the west coast, as they do to this day 
on the east coast. To show how long these journeys 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



86 ESKIMO LIFE 

sometimes are, I may mention that on the east coast 
families travel from the Angmagsalik district, in 65^** 
north latitude, the whole way to the trading-settle- 
ments west of Cape Farewell, and back again — a 
distance of about 500 miles. They do not generally 
travel quickly; one of two woman-boats which we 
met on the east coast at Cape Bille in 1888, on their 
way southwards, did not reach Pamiagdluk, west of 
Cape Farewell, until two years later, in 1890 — and 
this is only a distance of some 180 miles, which we 
with our boats could no doubt have covered in a 
week or two. But as soon as the Eskimos come to a 
place where there are plenty of seals, they go ashore, 
pitch their camp, take to hunting, and live at their 
ease. When the autumn and winter approach, they 
choose a good site and build a winter-house, con- 
tinuing their journey in the spring or summer as 
soon as the ice permits. The woman-boat in ques- 
tion had in this manner spent three years on the 
passage from Umivik, and would no doubt take 
pretty nearly as long to return. The other woman- 
boat that was passing southwards from Cape Bille 
got as far as Nanusek, about 65 miles from the 
trading-settlements west of Cape Farewell, and there 
went into winter quarters ; but then the father of 
the family died, and they faced round and set about 
the long journey back to Angmagsalik, without ever 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WINTER-HOUSES, TENTS, WOMAN-BOATS, &c. 87 

having reached their goal, the trading-settlements, 
or accomplished their errand. 

Journeys along the west coast were of course 
easier and more rapid, as the drift ice did not there 
present impediments. 

By means of this habit of wandering they es- 
caped the evil effects of too great seclusion in 
separate villages ; they met together and kept up 
intercourse with other people, so that there was all 
through the summer a certain life and traflSc from 
which they reaped many benefits. Their minds were 
enlivened, interest in hunting was stimulated, and 
skill was developed in many different ways, to say 
nothing of the fact that the frequent changing of 
hunting-grounds brought much more game within 
their reach. 

This summer life in the comparatively clean, 
airy tents, besides being exceedingly pleasant, was, 
as we may easily understand, very much healthier 
than confinement in the close, evil-smelling earth 
cabins. No wonder, then, that the Greenlanders' 
fairest dreams of happiness were associated with the 
woman-boat and the tent. 

Here again, alas ! we Europeans have brought 
about melancholy changes. Hans Egede, indeed, 
complained bitterly of the difficulty of getting the 
Greenlanders to leave off their perpetual wanderings 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



88 ESKIMO LIFE 

and settle down peaceably in one place, so that lie 
could preach Christianity to them at his ease ; he 
even proposed that they should be forcibly bound 
down to a less migratory life. If this pious man, 
who thought of nothing but the advancement of the 
Kingdom of God, had been living now, he might in so 
far have been happy ; for the Christian Greenlanders of 
to-day scarcely travel at all. By reason of the great 
impoverishment which we have brought upon them, 
. there are every day fewer and fewer hunters who can 
procure enough skins to make a woman-boat and a 
tent, both of which are of course necessary for travel- 
ling. They are more and more forced to pass the 
whole year round in the unwholesome winter houses, 
which are, of course, mere hot-beds for bacteria and 
all sorts of contagious diseases, while the men are 
thus unable to change their hunting-grounds, and 
must keep to the same spots year out year in. By 
this means the ' take ' is of course greatly diminished, 
food is consequently much less plentiful, and the in- 
dispensable sealskins become fewer and fewer. As 
soon as the whole Greenland community has sunk to 
the level of Egede's ideal and has entirely abandoned 
its migratory habits, it will be almost, if not quite, 
beyond salvation. The decline in this direction has 
of late years been very alarming. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



89 



CHAPTER VI 

COOKEKT AND DAINTIES 

One feature of the Greenlanders' daily life, which to 
us seems strange enough, is that they have no fixed 
meal-tunes ; they simply eat when they are hungry, if 
there is anything to be had. As already mentioned, 
the hunters often go the whole day without anything 
to eat. They have a remarkable power of doing 
without food, but to make up for this they can con- 
sume at a sitting astonishing quantities of meat, 
blubber, fish, &c. 

Their cookery is simple and easy to learn. 

Meat and fish are eaten sometimes raw or frozen, 
sometimes boiled, sometimes dried; and sometimes 
meat is allowed to undergo a sort of decomposition 
or fermentation, when it is called mikiakj and is eaten 
without further preparation. A dish of this sort, 
which is very highly esteemed, is rotten seals'- 
heads. 

The blubber of seals and whales is generally eaten 
raw. My dainty readers will of course shudder at 
the very thought of eating raw blubber ; but I can 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



^ ♦ 



90 ESKIMO JAFE 

assure them that, especially when quite fresh, it is 
very good. It has a sweetish, perhaps rather 
mawkish, taste, reminding one of cream, with nothing 
of what we should call an oily or fishy flavour ; this 
does not make itself felt until the blubber has been 
boiled or roasted, or when it has grown rancid. There 
are still people, no doubt, who believe that the Eskimos 
are in the habit of drinking train-oil, although even 
Hans Egede has pointed out that this is a mistake. 
That they do not always refuse it, however, when it 
comes in their way, 1 was able to assure myself at 
Godthaab; for I always saw our old maid-servant 
Eosina take a sip or two out of our lamp when she 
was cleaning it in the morning, and, as she usually 
did, had filled the vessel a little too full. It did not 
seem at all to disagree with her. 

They also preserve the stalks of angelica in train- 
oil, preparing them, according to Saabye's account, 
in the following peculiar fashion ; * A woman takes a 
mouthful of blubber, chews it, and spits it out, and 
so continues until she thinks she has enough. When 
the angelica-stalks have steeped for a certain time in 
this liquid, they are taken out and eaten as dessert 
with much appetite.' 

Of vegetable food, the primitive Greenlanders used 
several sorts ; in addition to angelica, I may mention 
dandelions, sorrel, crowberries, bilberries, and different 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



COOKERY AND DAINTIES 91 

kinds of seaweed. One of their greatest delicacies is 
the contents of a reindeer's stomach. K a Green- 
lander kills a reindeer, and is unable to convey much 
of it home with him, he will, I believe, secure the 
stomach first of all ; and the last thing an Eskimo 
lady enjoins upon her lover, when he sets off rein- 
deer-hunting, is that he must reserve for her the 
stomach of his prey. It is no doubt because they 
stand in need of vegetable food that they prize this 
so highly, and ako because it is in reality a very 
choice collection of the finest moss and grasses which 
that gourmet J the reindeer, picks out for himself. It 
has undergone a sort of stewing in the process of 
semi-digestion, while the gastric juice provides a 
somewhat sharp and aromatic sauce. Many will no 
doubt make a wry face at the thought of this dish, 
but they reaUy need not do so. I have tasted it, 
and found it not uneatable, though somewhat sour, 
like fermented milk. As a dish for very special 
occasions, it is served up with pieces of blubber and 
crowberries. 

Another dish, which will doubtless shock many 
Europeans, is the entrails of ptarmigans. In this 
case they do not confine themselves to the stomachs, 
but devour in a twinkling the viscera with their con- 
tents. The remainder of the ptarmigan they sell to 
the traders for a penny or less (5 to 8 ore). This 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



92 ESKfMO LIFE 

is the reason why, in Greenland, one never sees 
ptarmigan whole, except those one has shot oneself. 

One time when we went on a hunting expedition 
up the Ameralik fiord, and had the Greenlander Joel 
with us, he devoted a day to tearing the entrails out 
of all our ptarmigan ; but as they numbered a good 
many more than a hundred, he could not devour the 
whole on the spot, and gathered up the remains in a 
large sack. Upon its delicious contents, which must 
have become a sort of gruel before he reached home, 
he no doubt intended to feast in company with his 
well-beloved Anna CJornelia. I hope the reader will 
pardon my inability to inform him how this dish 
tastes ; it was the one Greenland deUcacy which I 
could not make up my mind to essay. 

Among other dainties I must mention the skin 
(matak) of different sorts of whales, especially of 
white whale and porpoise, which is regarded as the 
acme of deliciousness. The skin is taken off with the 
layer of blubber next to it, and is eaten raw without 
further ceremony. I must oflfer the Eskimos my 
sincerest congratulations on the invention of this 
dish. I can assure the reader that now, as I write 
of it, my mouth waters at the very thought of matak 
with its indescribably delicate taste of nuts and 
oysters mingled. And then it has this advantage 
over oysters, that the skin is as tough as india-rubber 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



COOKERY AND DAINllES 93 

to masticate, so that the enjoyment can be protracted 
to any extent. Even the Danes in Greenland are 
greatly addicted to this delicacy when it is to be 
had ; they cook it, however, as a rule, thus making 
it of a jellyish consistency and easy of mastica- 
tion. The taste of nuts and oysters disappears 
entirely. 

A delicate dish, which does not, however, rival 
matak, is raw haHbut-skin. It has the same advan* 
tage that, by reason of its toughness, it goes such a 
long way. I can confidently recommend it as ex- 
ceedingly palatable, especially in winter. 

The Greenlander is also very fond of raw seal- 
skin with the blubber. Its taste was very tolerable, 
but I could not quite reconcile myself to the hairs, 
and therefore took the liberty of spitting them out 
again, after having made several vain attempts to 
swallow them. 

They eat the flesh of seals, whales, reindeer, birds, 
hares, bears, even of dogs and foxes. The only 
things, so far as I know, that they despise, are ravens ; 
as these birds feed to some extent upon. the dung- 
heaps, they are regarded, like the plants that grow 
there, as unclean. 

Lean meat they do not care about at all ; there 
fore they prefer, for example, sea-birds to ptarmigan. 
It happened once that in one of the colonies in South 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



94 ESKIMO LIFE 

Greenland, a clergyman, who had just arrived in the 
country, invited some of his flock to a party, and his 
wife treated them to the greatest delicacy she knew, 
namely, roast ptarmigan. The Greenlanders ate very 
sparingly of it, though their hostess pressed it hospi- 
tably upon them. At last she asked whether they did 
not like ptarmigan. Oh yes, they answered, they ate 
it sometimes — ^when there was a famine. 

What I have said above will doubtless be enough 
to prove that the Eskimos are by no means so easily 
contented in their diet as is generally supposed. In 
famine times, however, they will eat almost anything. 
Dalager assures us that they will, for example, * cut 
their tent skins to pieces and make soup with them,' 
and it is not uncommon to hear of some one who has 
made soup of his old skin trousers. 

The method of serving the food differs consider- 
ably from that which obtains in Europe. There are 
no tables in the Greenland house ; therefore the dish 
is placed in the middle of the floor, and the people sit 
on the benches around, and dip into it with the forks 
provided by Nature. It seldom occurs to them to 
place the dish upon a box or any other raised placci ; 
it seems almost a necessity for them to stoop. An 
example of this may be found in an anecdote of 
a young Danish lady who, soon after her arrival in 
Greenland, got some Eskimo women into her house 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



COOKERY AND DAINTIES 96 

to do washing. Coming into the wash-house, she 
found them bending over the wash-tubs, which stood 
npon the floor, and, thinking this an awkward 
position, she brought them some stools to place the 
tubs upon. Shortly afterwards she went in again 
to see how they were getting on, and found them, 
to her astonishment, standing upon the stools and, 
of course, stooping still more awkwardly over the 
tubs, which remained upon the floor. Se non e vero 
h ben trovato. 

Of all the many delicacies to which we have 
introduced them, the Christian Greenlanders are most 
addicted to coffee, and the indulgence in it has on 
the west coast become almost a vice. They brew it 
strong, and seldom drink less than two large bowls 
at a time ; and it is not at all unusual for them to 
take coffee four or five times a day — it tastes so nice 
and puts them in such excellent spirits. They are 
not insensible to its deleterious effects, however, and 
therefore young men are allowed little or none of it, 
lest it should spoil them for hunting. A dizziness 
from which the older men sometimes suffer, and 
which makes them unsteady in the kaiak, they 
attribute in large part to coffee. This harmonises 
curiously with the results of recent physiological 
experiments, which have shown that the most 
dangerous poisons contained in coffee — cafeonet, &c. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



96 ESKIMO LIFE 

— attack precisely that part of the nervous system 
on which equilibrium depends. 

Next to coffee they are devoted to tobacco and 
bread. On the west coast, tobacco is for the most 
part smoked or chewed; while snuff* is the East 
Greenlanders' weakness. The women on the west 
coast, too, are given to snuffing, and it is often an 
unpleasant surprise to observe an attractive young 
woman blackening her nostrils and upper lip with 
a copious pinch. They grind their own snuff* with 
flat stones, out of undamped roll-tobacco, which they 
cut up small and dry over the lamp. To make it go 
further it is sometimes mixed with powdered stone ; 
and it is kept in horns of different sizes. On the 
east coast, snuff* performs a definite social function. 
The Eskimos have no words for * good-day ' or * wel- 
come,' and fill up the gap by offering their snuff-horns 
to any stranger who is acceptable in their sight, 
whereupon the newcomer responds by offering his 
horn in exchange. When they part, the same cere- 
mony is repeated. 

The West Greenlanders prepare their chewing 
tobacco in a way which to us seems somewhat sur- 
prising. A deep Danish porcelain pipe is half-filled 
with smoking-tobacco, which is then thoroughly 
drenched with water, after which the pipe is filled 
to the brim with dry tobacco ; then it is smoked till 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



COOKERY AND DAINTIES 97 

the fire reaches the wet tobacco and is extinguished. 
The ashes are then knocked out, and as much oil as 
possible is scraped together from the oil-cell, the pipe- 
stem, the old accretions in the pipe-bowl, &c., and is 
added to the already well impregnated mass in the 
bottom of the bowl, which is then considered ready 
for chewing. This particularly strong preparation is 
specially prized for use on board the kaiak. 

The Government has, fortunately, prohibited the 
sale of brandy to the Greenlanders. Europeans, 
however, are allowed to order it from home, and 
may treat the Greenlanders with it. It is very 
common to let them have a dram when they are 
serving as rowers on board the boats of Europeans 
travelling in the summer-time, and after any bargain 
has been concluded with them. It has furthermore 
been wisely ordained that the Jcifaks^ or those who 
are in the employ of the Danish Company, get each 
his dram every morning ; while the hunters, who 
ought to be more capable and better men than the 
kifaks, cannot obtain any without either entering 
into the service of the Europeans or selling something 
to them. 

They are passionately fond of brandy — women as 
well as men — not, as they often confided to me, be- 
cause they like the taste of it, but because it is so 
delightful to be drunk; and they get drunk when- 

H 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



9» ESKIMO LIFE 

ever an opportunity offers, which is, happily, not 
very often. That the intoxication is really the main 
object in view appears also from the fact that the 
kifaks do not greatly value their morning dram, 
because it is not enough to make them drunk. 
Several of them, therefore, agreed to bring their 
portions into a common stock, one of them drinking 
the whole to-day, the next to-morrow, and so on by 
turns. Thus they could get comfortably drunk at 
certain fixed intervals. When the authorities dis- 
covered this practice, however, they took means to 
stop it. 

Unlike their sisters here in Europe, the Eskimo 
wives, as a rule, find their husbands charming in 
their cups, and take great pleasure in the sight of 
them. I must confess, indeed, that the Eskimos, 
both men and women, seemed to me, with few ex- 
ceptions, considerably less repulsive, and, of course, 
considerably more peaceable, in a state of intoxi- 
cation than Europeans are apt to be under similar 
conditions. 

When the Europeans first came to the country, 
the natives could not at all understand the effects of 
brandy. When Christmas approached, they came 
and asked Niels Egede when his people were going 
to be ' mad ' ; for they thought that ' madness ' was 
an inseparable accompaniment of the feast, and the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



COOKERY AND DAINTIES 99 

recurring paroxysm had become to them a landmark 
in the almanack. They afterwards ascertained that 
it was due to this liquor, which they therefore called 
silaerunartok — that is to say, the thing which makes 
men lose their wits ; but now they usually call it 
snapsemik. 



H 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



100 ESKIMO LIFE 



CHAPTER Vn 

CHARACTER AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 

When I see all the wrangling and all the coarse 
abuse of opponents which form the staple of the 
different party newspapers at home, I now and then 
wonder what these worthy politicians would say 
if they knew anything of the Eskimo community, 
and whether they would not blush before the people 
whom that man of God, Hans Egede, characterises as 
follows: — * These ignorant, cold-blooded creatures, 
living without order or discipline, with no knowledge 
of any sort of worship, in brutish stupidity/ With 
what good right would these * savages' look down 
upon us, if they knew that here, even in the public 
press, we apply to each other the lowest terms of 
contumely, as for example *liar,' Uraitor,' * per- 
jurer,' * lout,' * rowdy,' &c., while they never utter 
a syllable of abuse, their very language being un- 
provided with words of this class, in which ours is 
so rich. 

This contrast typifies a radical difference of 
character. The Greenlander is of all God's creatures 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTER AND SOCIAL COXDtTIONS 101 

gifted with the best disposition. Good-humouri 
peaceableness, and evenness of temper are the most 
prominent features in his character. He is eager to 
stand on as good a footing as possible with his 
fellow-men, and therefore refrains from offending 
them and much more from using coarse terms of \ 
abuse. He is very loth to contradict another even 
should he be saying what he knows to be false ; if 
he does so, he takes care to word his remonstrance in 
the mildest possible form, and it would be very hard 
indeed for him to say right out that the other was 
lying. He is chary of telling other people truths 
which he thinks will be unpleasant to them ; in such 
cases he chooses the vaguest expressions, even with 
reference to such indifferent things as, for example, 
wind and weather. His peaceableness even goes so 
far that when anything is stolen from him, which 
seldom happens, he does not as a rule reclaim it 
even if he knows who has taken it. ' Give to every 
man that asketh of thee ; and of him that taketh 
away thy goods ask them not again ' (Luke vi. 30). 

The result is that there is seldom or never any , 
quarrelling among them. The Greenlanders cannot 
afford to waste time in wrangling amongst them- 
selves ; the struggle to wring from nature the neces- 
sities of life, that great problem of humanity, is 
there harder than anywhere else, and therefore this 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



102 ESKIMO LIFE 

little people has agreed to carry it on without need- 
less dissensions. 

On the whole, the Greenlander is a happy being, 
his soul being light and cheerful as a child's. If 
sorrow overtakes him, he may perhaps suffer bitterly 
for the moment ; but it is soon forgotten, and he is 
once more as radiantly contented with existence as 
he used to be. 

This happy levity of his saves him from brooding 
much upon the future. If he has enough to eat for 
the moment, he eats it and is happy, even if he has 
afterwards to suffer want — which is now, unfor- 
tunately, often the case, and becomes so oftener year 
by year. 

His carelessness has frequently been made a sub- 
ject of bitter reproach to him. The missionaries 
declai-e, no doubt rightly, that it makes him inacces- 
sible to civilisation, and have tried to exhort him to 
greater providence and frugality. They quite over- 
look the fact that it is written, ' Take ye no thought 
for the morrow. . . . Behold the fowls of the air : 
for they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather 
into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth 
them.' 

This levity of mind has also it^ bright side ; it is 
even, in a way, the Eskimo s chief strength. 

Poverty and want have, with us, two conse- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




CHARACTER AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 



quences. The most immediate is, of course, the 
physical suffering ; but together with it and after it 
comes mental suffering, * the cares of bread,' the un- 
ceasing anxiety which pursues one night and day, 
even in sleep, and embitters every hour of life. In the 
majority of cases, this is probably what tells most upon 
our poor people ; but for this, the bodily sufferings, 
which, after all, are generally transitory, would be 
easily supported. But it is precisely from this phase 
of suffering that the Eskimo's elastic spirit saves him. 
Even a long period of starvation and endurance is at 
once forgotten so soon as he is fed ; and the memory 
of bygone sufferings can no more destroy his enjoy- 
ment and happiness, than can the fear of those which 
to-morrow or the next day may bring. The only 
thing that really makes him unhappy is to see others 
in want, and therefore he shares with them whenever 
he has anything to share. 

What chiefly cuts the Eskimos to the heart is to 
see their children starving ; * and therefore,' says 
Dalager, * they give food to their children even if 
they themselves are ready to die of hunger ; for they 
live every day in the hope of a happy change of 
fortune— a hope which really sustains life in many 
of them.' 

In order to obtain a clearer conception of the 
radical difference between the Eskinu^ character and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



\ 



104 ESKIMO LIFE 

ours, we ought to study the Eskimos in their social 
relations. 

It is not unusual to hear people express the 
opinion that the Eskimo community is devoid of 
law and order. This is a mistake. 

Originally, on the contrary, it was singularly well 
ordered. It had its customs and its fixed rules for 
every possible circumstance, and these customs and 
rules were handed down from generation to genera- 
tion, and were almost always observed; for the 
people are really incredibly well-disposed, as even 
Egede himself, who has, as we have seen, written so 
harshly of them, cannot help admitting in such a 
passage as, for eiample, the following ; ' It is won- 
derful in what peace and unity they live with each 
other ; for quarrelling and strife, hatred and covetous- 
ness, are seldom heard of among them.' And even 
if one of them happens to bear an ill-will to 
another, he does not let it be seen, nor, on account 
of their great tenderness for each other, does he 
take upon himself to attack him openly with vio- 
lence or abuse, their language being indeed devoid 
of the necessary words.' Observe that this is said 

' ' When they have seen our dissolute sailors quarrelling and 
fighting, they regard such behaviour as inhuman, and say : *' They do 
not treat each other as human beings.'* In the same way, if one of 
the officers strikes a subordinate, they at once exclaim : " He behaves 
to his fellow-men as if they were dogs." ' 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTER AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 105 

by a missionary of heathens, who, therefore, could 
not have developed this peaceful temper through the 
influence of Christianity. 

Then came the Europeans. Without knowing or 
understanding the people or its requirements, they 
started from the assumption that it stood in need of 
improvement in every possible way, and consequently 
set to work to disturb and overturn the whole social 
order. They tried to force upon the Eskimos a 
totally new character, gave them, all in a moment, 
a new religion, and broke down their respect for their 
old customs and traditions, of course without being 
able to give them new ones in their place. The 
missionaries thought that they could make this wild, 
free people of hunters into a civilised Christian 
nation, without for a moment suspecting that at 
heart these people were in many respects more 
Christian than themselves, and, among other things, 
like so many primitive people, had put into practice 
the Christian doctrine of love (charity) very much 
more fully than any Christian nation. The Euro- 
peans, in short, conducted themselves in Greenland 
exactly as they are in the habit of doing wherever 
they come forward in the name of the Christian 
religion to * make the poor heathen partakers in the 
blessings of eternal truth.' 

Very characteristic of this view is the following 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



106 ESKIMO LIFE 

utterance of Egede's, of which I have already spoken : 
' The inborn stupidity and dulness of the Greeu- 
landers, their slothful and brutish up-bringing, their 
wandering and unstable way of life, certainly offer 
great hindrances to their conversion, and ought as 
much as possible to be obviated and remedied.' What 
a lack of comprehension ! Only think, to want to 
obviate and remedy the nomadic life of a tribe of 
hunters! What would remain to them? I may 
add that he at another time proposes to attain this 
end by means of ' chastisement and discipline.' 

The Eskimos at first listened in astonishment to 
the strangers. They had hitherto been very well 
content with themselves and their whole way of 
living; they did not know that man and his life 
on earth were so miserable as the missionaries again 
and again assured them they were. They had not, 
as Egede says, *any just realisation of their own 
profound corruption,' and had great diflSculty in 
understanding a religion so cruel as to condemn 
people to everlasting fire. They could quite well 
recognise ' original sin ' as a common characteristic 
of the kavdlunaks (Europeans), for it was clear 
enough that many of them were bad ; but the 
kalacUit (Eskimos) were good people, and ought 
without any trouble to get into heaven. 

When in 1728 a number of Danisli men and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTER AND SOCIAI. CONDITIONS 107 

women came to Godthaab to colonise the country, 
many of them gave great offence to the heathens by 
their evil ways, so that they 'often asked how it 
was that so many of our people were so bad. 
Women (that is, Greenland women), they said, are 
naturally quiet and modest; but these (the Euro- 
peans) were boisterous, brazen, and lacking in all 
womanly propriety. Yet they surely all knew 
God's will.' And the Greenlanders looked down 
upon and laughed at the stupid, self-satisfied 
Europeans who preached so finely but practised so 
little what they preached, and who, besides, knew 
nothing about hunting or about all the things which 
the Eskimos regarded as the most important in Ufe. 

The power which comes of a higher development 
gradually gave the Europeans the upper hand, so 
that in the course of time they have brought about 
a complete disturbance of the primitive social order, 
and replaced it by an indeterminate mixture of 
Eskimo and modern European habits and civilisa- 
tion; while they have also effected a deplorable 
mixture of breeds, and produced, without the help 
of the clergy, an exceedingly mongrel population. 

But, as the Eskimos are a very conservative 
people, we can still find many important traces of 
their primitive condition. 

The Greenlanders, like all nations of hunters, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



y 



108 ESKIMO LIFE 

have a very restricted sense of property ; but it is 
a mistake to suppose it entirely non-existent. 

As regards the great majority of things, a certain 
communism prevails; but this is always limited to 
wider or narrower circles according to the nature 
of the thing in question. Ascending from the 
individual, we find in the family the narrowest 
social circle ; then come housemates and the nearest 
kinsfolk, and then all the families of the village. 
Private property is most fully recognised in the 
kaiak, the kaiak-dress and the hunting-weapons, 
which belong to the hunter alone, and which no 
one must touch. With them he supports himself 
and his family, and he must therefore always be 
sure of finding them where he last laid them; it 
is seldom that they are even lent to others. In 
former times, good hunters would often own two 
kaiaks, but that is seldom the case now. Snow- 
shoes may almost be regarded as belonging to 
implements of the chase; but as they were intro- 
duced by the Europeans, they are not considered 
matters of private property in the same degree ; 
so that while an Eskimo seldom or never touches 
another's weapons he will scarcely think twice about 
using another's snow-shoes without asking leave. 
J Next to clothes and hunting implements come the 

tools which are used in the houses, such as knives, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTER AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 109 

axes, saws, skin-cutters, &c. Many of these, and 
especially the women's sewing materials, are regarded 
as altogether private property. 

Other household implements are the common 
property of the family or even of all the occupants 
of the house. The woman-boat and the tent belong 
to the father of the family or to the family as a whole. 
The house belongs to the family, and if several 
families live together they own it in common. 

The Eskimo knows nothing of private property 
in land ; yet there seems to be a recognised rule that 
no one shall pitch a tent or build a house at a place 
where people are already settled without obtaining 
their consent. 

As an example of their consideration for each 
other in this respect I may cite a custom which was 
thus described by Lars Dalager more than a hundred 
years ago : * In the summer, when they take their 
tents and baggage with them, and think of settling 
down at a place where other Greenlanders are living, 
they row very slowly towards the shore, and when 
they come to within a gunshot of it they stop and lie 
upon their oars without saying a word. If those on 
shore are equally silent and give no sign, the new- 
comers think they are not wanted and therefore row 
away as fast as possible to some unoccupied place. 
But if those on shore, as generally happens, meet 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



no ESKIMO LIFE 

them with compliments, such as : " Look here ! here 
are good places for your tents, a good beach for your 
woman-boats — come and rest after the labours of the 
. day ! " they, after a little consideration, lay in to 
the shore where the others stand ready to receive 
them and to help with the landing of the baggage. 
But when they are starting again, the people of the 
place confine themselves to helping in the launch of 
the* woman-boat, and let the strangers themselves see 
to the rest, unless they happen to be very good friends 
or near relations, in which case they are despatched 
with the same marks of honour with which they 
were received, and with some such phrases as this : 
" Your visit will be a pleasant memory to us." ' ^ 
• We may perhaps find the rudiments of the con- 
ception of private property in land in the fact that 
where dams have been built in a salmon river to 
gather the fish together, it is not regarded as the 
right thing if strangers come and interfere with the 
dams or fish with nets in the dammed-up waters, as 
Europeans were often in the habit of doing in earlier 
times. This too is mentioned by Dalager. 
y Driftwood belongs to whoever first finds it float- 
ing in the sea, wherever it may happen to be. In 
order to sustain his right to it, the finder is bound to 
tow it ashore and place it above the high-water line, 

* Dalager, GronlandsTce Relationer, Copenhagen, 1752, pp. 15-16. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTER AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 111 

if possible marking it in one way or another. For 
this form of property the Eskimo has the greatest 
respect, and one who has left a piece of driftwood on 
the shore may be sure of finding it again even several, 
years after, unless Europeans have come along in the 
meantime. Any one taking it would be regarded as 
a scoundrel. 
*^ As to their customs in lending and trading, I may 
again quote Dalager : * If one man lends another 
anything, for example a boat, a harpoon, a fishing- 
line, or other sea-implement, and it comes to harm — 
if, for instance, the seal gets away with the harpoon, 
or the fish breaks the line, or the fish or seal does 
injury to the boat — the owner must bear the loss, ^^ 
the borrower making no reparation. But if anyone 
borrows darts or implements without the knowledge 
of the owner, and they come to harm, the borrower 
is bound to make good the damage. This happens 
very seldom ; for a Greenlander must be hard pushed 
before he will trouble his neighbour to lend him 
anything, for fear of any harm occurring to it. 

* When one makes a purchase from another, and 
the wares do not suit him, he can return them even 
after a considerable time has elapsed. 

' If one buys of another such costly things as a 
boat or a gun, and the buyer is not in a position to 
satisfy the seller in ready money, he is allowed credit 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



112 ESKIMO LIFE 

until he can pay up. But if the debtor dies in the 
meantime, the creditor never makes any claim. This/ 
adds Dalager, *is an inconvenient habit for the 
merchants of the colony, who are always bound to 
give credit ; whereof I have had several experiences, 
especially this year, many of my debtors having de- 
parted this life, and thus brought me into consider- 
able perplexity.' 

On his complaining to *some influential and 
reasonable Greenlanders,' they advised him * to re- 
gister his claim at once, but to let the man's lice die 
in the grave (as they expressed it) before he pro- 
ceeded to execution.' 

Beyond the articles above enumerated,^ the 
Greenlander, according to his primitive customs, can 
possess but little. Even if he had a faculty for lay- 
ing up riches, which he very seldom has, his needier 
fellows would have the right to enforce a claim upon 
such of his possessions as were not necessary for him- 
self. Thus we find in Greenland this unfortunate 
state of things : that the European immigrants, who 
are in reality supported by the natives, often become 
rich and live in abundance (at any rate, according to 
the Eskimo ideas), while the natives themselves are 
in want. 

' Dogs, however, must be added to the list, and, in the case of the 
North and East Greenlanders, do^- sledges. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHA.RACTER AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 113 

The Greenlander has not even unrestricted rights 
over the game he himself secures. There have been 
fixed rules from time immemorial according to which 
it is divided, and there are only a few sorts of animals 
which he can keep pretty well to himself and to his 
family. To these belong the atak or Greenland seal ; 
but even in its case he must give a portion of blubber 
to each of the kaiak-men who are present when he 
takes it, and in the same way the children of the 
village, when he comes home, receive a little scrap 
of blubber apiece. There are fixed rules for other 
sorts of game, in accordance with which the whole 
animal is divided among those who were present 
when it was killed or even among all the houses of 
the village. This is especially the case with regard 
to the walrus and several sorts of whales, as, for 
example, the white whale ; of this the hunter receives 
only a comparatively small portion, even when he 
has killed it without help from others. When a whale 
of any size is brought to shore, it is said to be quite 
a horrible sight to see all the inhabitants of the 
village, armed with knives, flinging themselves upon it 
to secure each his share, while it is still in the water. 

The scene is so sanguinary that Dalager declares 
that he has * never seen or heard of a whale being 
cut up without someone or other being mutilated, or 
at least badly wounded, so great is the careless 

I 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



114 ESKIMO LIFE 

eagerness with which several hundred people will 
rush upon the fish, each one doing his best for him-- 
self, and, therefore, paying very little heed as to 
where he slashes with his knife/ It is characteristic 
of their amiability, however, that * when one of them 
has thus come to harm, he does not bear any grudge 
against the man who injured him, but regards it as 
an accident.' 

It is not only with respect to the larger animals 
that such rules hold good ; they also apply in the 
case of certain fishes. Thus if a halibut is caught, 
the fisher is bound to give the other kaiak-men upon 
the hunting-ground a piece of the skin for division 
among themselves ; and in addition to this, when he 
comes home, he generally gives some of the animal 
to his housemates and neighbours.^ 

^ When several are hunting in company, there are fixed rules to 
determine to whom the game belongs. If two or more shoot at a 
reindeer, the animal belongs to him who first hit it, even if he only 
wounded it slightly. As to the rules for seal-hunting, Dalager says : 
* If a Oreenlander strikes a seal or other marine animal with his light 
dart, and it is not killed, but gets away with the dart, and if another 
then comes and kills it with his darts, it nevertheless belongs to the 
first ; but if he has used the ordinary harpoon, and the line breaks, 
and another comes and kills the animal, the first has lost his right to 
it. If, however, they both throw at the same time and both harpoons 
strike, the animal is cut lengthwise in two, and divided between them, 
skin and all.* * If two throw at a bird simultaneously, it is divided 
between them.* * If a dead seal is found with a harpoon fixed in it, if 
the owner of the harpoon is known in the neighbourhood, he gets his 
weapon back, but the finder keeps the seal.* Similar rules seem also 
to be in force upon the east coast. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTER AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 115 

Even when a Greenlander has fulfilled all the 
aforesaid laws, he cannot always keep to himself his 
own share of his booty. For instance, if he makes a 
catch at a time when there is scarcity or famine in 
the village, it is regarded as his duty either to give a 
feast or to divide his prey among other families, who 
may perhaps have had to go for long without fresh 
meat. 

After a good haul, they make a feast, and eat as 
long as they can. If everything is not eaten up, and 
there is plenty in the other houses as well, what 
remains is stored against the winter ; but in times of 
scarcity it is regarded as the duty of those who have 
anything to help those who have nothing, even to the ''^ 
last remnant of food. After that, they starve in 
rompany, and sometimes starve to death. That some 
people should live in profusion while others suffer 
need, as we see it occurring daily in European com- 
munities, is an unheard of thing in Greenland ; except 
that the European settlers, with the habitual provi- 
dence of our race, have often stores of food while the 
Greenlanders are starving. 

It wiU be understood from what has been said 
that the tendency of the law is, as much as possible, 
to let the whole village benefit by the captured 
prey, so that no family shall be entirely dependent 
upon the daily * take ' of those who provide for it. 

I 2 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



116 ESKIMO LIFE 

These are laws which have developed through the 
experience of long ages, and have become established 
by the habit of many generations. 

The Greenlander is, on the whole, like a sympa- 
thetic child with respect to the needs of others ; his 
^ first social law is to help his neighbour. Upon it, and 
upon their habit of clinging together through good 
and ill, depend^ the existence of the little Greenland 
community. A T^k-d life has taught the Eskimo that 
however capable he may be, and able as a rule to 
look after himself, there may come times when with- 
*out the help of his fellow men he would have to go 
to the wall; therefore, it is best to help others. 
* Therefore, all things whatsoever ye would that men 
should do to you, do ye even so to them ' — this com- 
mandment, one of the first and most important of 
Christianity, Nature itself has instilled into the Green- 
lander, and he always acts up to it, which can 
scarcely be affirmed of Christian nations. It is un- 
fortunate that, as he advances in civilisation, this 
commandment seems to lose its power over him. 

Hospitality to strangers is a no less binding law 
among the Eskimos than helpfulness to neighbours. 
The traveller enters the first hut he comes to, and 
remains there as long as convenient. He is kindly 
received and entertained with what the house can 
offer, even if he be an enemy. When he proceeds 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTER AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 117 

on liis way, he often takes a store of food along with 
him ; I have seen kaiak-men leave houses where they 
had remained weatherbound for several days, loaded 
with halibut flesh, which had been presented to them 
on their departure. No payment is ever made for 
the entertainment. A European, too, is everywhere 
liospitably received, although the Greenlanders would 
not think of making similar claims upon his hospi- 
tality. Europeans, however, often make some sort of 
recompense by treating their entertainers to coffee 
and such oAer delicacies as they may have with 
them. 

That hospitality is considered a very binding 
duty upon the east coast of Greenland appears from 
several remarkable instances related by Captain 
Holm. I may refer the reader to what he tells of 
the murderer Maratuk, who had kiUed his stepfather. 
He was a bad man, and no one liked him ; yet when 
he presented himself at the house of the murdered 
man's nearest .relatives, he was received and enter- 
tained for a long time — but they spoke ill of him .- 
when he had gone. 

Hospitality is of course forced upon them by 
their natural surroundings ; for it often happens that 
they are overtaken by storms when far from home, \y^ 
so that they are compelled to take refuge in the 
nearest dwelling-place. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



118 ESKIMO LIFE 

It seems, unhappily, as though hospitality had 
declined of late years on the west coast. Doubtless 
it is once more the Europeans who have given the 
example. And the fact that the people are by no 
means so well-to-do as in earlier times, and are 
therefore less able to entertain strangers, has no 
doubt tended in the same direction. 

Many of my readers are probably of opinion that 
I am unjust to us Europeans ; but that is far from 
my intention. If the Europeans have not had the 
best influence, the fact cannot always be directly 
laid to their charge ; circumstances have rendered it 
inevitable, in spite of excellent intentions on their 
part. For example, they have conscientiously la- 
boured to foster the sense of property among the 
Greenlanders, encouraging them to save up portions 
of their booty, instead of lavishing it abroad in their 
usual free-handed way, and so forth ; the principle 
being that a more highly-developed sense of property 
is the first condition of civilisation. Whether this is 
a benefit may seem doubtful to many ; for my part I 
have no doubt about the matter. I must admit, of 
course, that civilisation presupposes a much greater 
faculty for the acquisition of worldly goods than 
the Eskimo is .possessed of; but what I cannot 
understand is what these poor people have to 
do with civilisation. It assuredly makes them no 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CHARACTER AND SOCIAL CONDITIONS 119 

happier, it ruins what is fine and admirable in their 
character, makes them weaker in the struggle for 
existence, and inevitably leads them to poverty and 
misery. But more of this at a later opportunity. 

The laws upon which the heathen community in 
Greenland rests are, as we have seen, as nearly as 
possible socialism carried into practice. In this 
respect, accordingly, they are more Christian than 
those of any Christian community. The social re- 
formers of to-day might learn much in these high 
latitudes. 

Spencer has in one of his books pointed out that 
mankind has two religions. The first and most 
natural is the instinct of self-preservation, which 
impels the individual to protect himself against all 
outward opposition or hostile interference. Tliis he 
calls the religion of enmity. The other is the in- 
stinct of association, which impels men to join 
fellowship with their neighbours ; and to it we trace 
the Christian doctrine that you should love your 
neighbour as yourself, and should even love youi: 
enemies. This he calls the religion of friendship. 
The former is the religion of the past, the latter that 
of the future. 

Precisely this religion of the future the Eskimo 
seems to have made his own to a peculiar degree. 

The men of some tribes or races are driven to com- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



120 ESKIMO LIFE 

bine with each other by the pressure of human enemies, 
others by inhospitable natural surroundings. The 
latter has been the case with the Eskimos. Where 
the instinct of association and mutual help has been 
most strongly developed, there has the community's 
power of maintaining itself been greatest, and it has 
increased iu numbers and in well-being ; while other 
small communities, with less of this instinct, have 
declined or even succumbed altogether. 

In so far as we believe with Spencer that the 
religion of friendship is that of the future, that self- 
sacrifice for the benefit of the community is the 
point towards which development is tending, we 
must assign to the Eskimo a high place in the scale 
of nations. 

It is a question, however, whether our forefathers 
also, in long bygone ages, did not act upon a 
similar principle. It may be that social develop- 
ment proceeds in a spiral with ever wider and wider 
convolutions. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



121 



CHAPTER Vin 

THE POSITION AND WORK OF WOMEN 

Many leading thinkers have remarked that the social 
position occupied by its women affords the best 
criterion of a people's place in the scale of civilisa- 
tion. I am not entirely convinced that this is always 
the case ; but if it is, I think we have here another 
indication that the Eskimo must be allowed to have 
reached a pretty high level of development. For 
the Eskimo woman plays no insignificant part in the 
life of the community. 

It is true that, according to the primitive Eskimo 
conception, she is practically regarded as the pro- 
perty of her husband, who has either carried her off, 
or sometimes bought her, from her father. He can 
therefore send her away when he pleases, or lend 
her, or exchange her for another ; and, when he can 
afford it, he can have more wives than one. But as 
a rule she is well treated, and we find this conception 
of her as the husband's chattel more clearly marked 
among many other races ; there is even a good deal 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



122 ESKIMO LIFE 

of it in our own society, only under a somewhat 
different disguise. 

There are some who maintain that our women 
have plenty to do, but that the great mistake is that 
their employments are not exactly the same as those 
of the men. These people will be no better con- 
tented with the state of affairs in Greenland, for 
there, too, the employments of the two sexes are 
entirely distinct. 

It is true that both sexes wear trousers, and have 
done *so from time immemorial ; but nevertheless 
they have not yet attained to the conception that 
there is little or no difference between men and 
women. 

They hold that there are, among other things, 
certain essential physical differences, and imagine 
that women are not as a rule so strong, active, and 
courageous as men, and that they therefore are not 
so well fitted for hunting and fishing. On the other 
hand, they do not think that men are best fitted to 
have the care of children, to give them suck, and so 
forth. 

This is no doubt the reason for the very clear 
line of demarcation between the employments proper 
to the two sexes in Greenland. 

To the man's share falls the laborious life at sea, 
as hunter, and food-provider ; but when he reaches 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE POSITION AND WORK OF WOMEN 123 

the sliore with his booty, he has fulfilled the most 
important part of his social function. He is received 
by his womenfolk, who help him ashore ; and while 
he has nothing to do but to look after his kaiak and 
his weapons, it is the part of the women to drag the 
booty up to the house. In earlier times, at any rate, 
it was beneath the dignity of any hunter to lend a 
hand in this work, and so it still is with the 
majority. 

The women flay the seal and cut it up according 
to fixed rules, and the mother of the family presides 
at the division of it. Further, it is the women's 
.duty to cook the food, to prepare the skins, to cover 
the kaiaks and woman-boats, to make clothes, and to 
attend to all other domestic tasks. In addition to 
this they build the houses, pitch the tents, and row 
the woman- boats. 

To row in a woman-boat was formerly, at any 
rate, quite beneath a hunter's dignity, but it was the 
part of the father of the family to steer it. Now we 
often see men sitting and rowing, especially if they 
are hired by travelling Europeans. When you have 
become thoroughly accustomed to their way of life, 
this makes an unpleasant impression ; the kaiak is 
and must be the indispensable condition of their 
existence, and one feels that they ought to neglect 
no opportunity for exercising themselves in its use. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



124 ESKIMO LIFE 

Even now no hunter of the first rank will condescend 
to enter a woman-boat, except as steersman. 

When the family is out reindeer-hunting, it is of 
course the men who shoot the reindeer, while it 
often falls to. the share of the women to drag the 
game to the tent ; and this is a laborious business, 
calling for a great deal of endurance. 

The only sort of fishery with which the women 
as a rule concern themselves is caplin-fishing. The 
season for this is the early summer, when the caplin 
appear on the coast in such dense shoals that they 
can be drawn up in bucketsful into the woman- 
boats. The fishing continues until a sufficient store 
is laid up against the winter ; when once that is 
done they care no more about them, however abun- 
dant they may be. The fish are dried by being spread 
out on the rocks and stones ; it is the women's 
business to look after them, and, when they are 
dried, to pack them together. 

Sometimes they take part in seal-fishing, when a 
sort of battue is made, the seals being hunted into 
narrow sounds and fiords and driven ashore. 

Only a few cases are on record in which women 
have tried their hand at kaiak-fishing. 

Captain Holm mentions two girls at Imarsivik on 
the east coast who had taken to the kaiak. The pro- 
portion between men and women in the village was 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE POSITION AND WORK OF WOMEN 125 

unfortunate, there being only five men out of a 
population of twenty-one. We are unhappily not 
informed whether these women had attained as 
great skill in hunting as their male comrades. 

They had entirely adopted the masculine manner 
of living, dressed like men and wore their hair like 
men. When they were allowed to select what they 
wanted from among Holm's articles of barter, they 
did not choose needles or other feminine implements, 
but preferred spear-heads for their weapons. It must 
have been difficult to distinguish them froja men ; I 
must doubtless have seen them when 1 was on the 
east coast in 1888, without suspecting their .sex. 
Holm mentions that one or two other girls in the 
same place were also destined to be trained as 
hunters, but they were as yet too young. 

While the men pass most of their time on the sea, 
the women remain at home in their houses ; and there 
you will generally find them busily occupied with one 
task or another, in contrast to those fair ones on our 
side of the ocean who do nothing but eat, lounge 
about, gossip, and sleep. When they go beyond the 
circle of their ordinary domestic employments, it is 
generally to busy themselves with the weapons of the 
men, ornamenting them with bone-carvings, &c. ; 
these are their chief pride. 

The men generally sit at the outer edge of the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



126 ESKIMO LIFE 

sleeping-bench with their feet on the floor ; but the 
women always sit well back on the bench, with their 
legs crossed, like a tailor on his table. Here they 
sew, embroider, cut up skins with their peculiar 
crooked knives, chew bird-skins, and in short attend 
to many of their most important occupations, while 
their tongues are in ceaseless activity ; for they 
are very lively and seldom lack matter for con- 
versation. I cannot, unhappily, quite acquit them 
of the proverbial feminine loquacity ; and, if we may 
believe D^ager, they are not altogether free from 
graver defects. He says : * Lying and backbiting 
are chiefly to be found among the women. The men, 
on the other hand, are much more honest, and shrink 
from relating anything which they are unable to sub- 
stantiate.' 

Oh woman, woman, are you everywhere the 
same! 

The very first thought to which Loke gave birth, 

It was a lie, and he bade it descend 

In a woman's shape to the men of earth. 

The preparation of skins is a very important part 
of the women's work, and as the methods are ex- 
tremely peculiar, I shall give a short description of 
them, as I learnt them from the Eskimos of the Godt- 
haab district. The processes vary according to the 
different sorts of skins and the purposes for which 
they are destined. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE POSITION AND WORK OF WOMEN 127 

Kaiak-skins are dressed either black or white. ^ 
The black shin {erisdk) is obtained by scraping the 
blubber from the under side of the skin while it is 
fresh, and then steeping it for a day or two in stale 
urine, until the hairs can be plucked out with a knife. 
These being removed, the skin is rinsed in sea water, 
and in summer it is then dried, but not in the sun. 
In winter, it is not dried, but if possible preserved by 
being buried in snow. Whether in summer or winter, 
however, it is best if, immediately after being washed, 
it can be stretched on the kaiak so as to dry upon 
the framework. These skins are dark because the 
grain or outer membrane of the skin of the seal is 
either black or dark brown. 

White kaiak-skins {unek) are prepared in this way : 
Wliile they are quite fresh, and after the blubber has 
been roughly removed, they are rolled up and laid in 
a tolerably warm place either out of doors or in. 
There they lie until the hairs and the outer membrane 
can easily be scraped away with a mussel-shell. For 
this purpose, however, the Greenland beauties gene- 
rally prefer to use their teeth, since they can thus 
suck out a certain amount of blubber, which they 
consider delicious. Then, in summer, the skins are 

^ The skins used, as before mentioned (p. 45) are nsnally those 
of the saddleback seal or hood seal ; but the skin of the bearded seal 
is also used, and occasionally that of the ringed seal or even of the 
mottled or common seal (Phoca vitulina). 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



128 ESKIMO LIFE 

hung up to dry — ^not in the sun — upon a wooden rail, 
and are often turned in order that they may dry 
evenly ail over. In winter they are preserved, like 
the black skins, in the snow. The dark membrane 
being scraped away, these skins are quite light- 
coloured or white when they are finished. 

It must be noted that neither of these sorts of 
skins is stretched while drying. 

Both sorts are used for woman-boats as well as for 
kaiaks. 

For the kaiak, the white skins, which ought always 
to be kept well greased with seal-blubber, are con- 
sidered best in summer ; the black, on the other hand, 
which are never greased, are preferred in winter. A 
well-appointed hunter, therefore, ought to re-cover 
his kaiak twice a year : nowadays, however, he can 
generally do so only once, and sometimes only once 
in two years. 

If the sealskins are to be used for kamiks (shoes), 
the blubber and the inner layer of the skin itself is 
scraped away with a crooked knife {ulo) upon a 
board made for the purpose out of a whale's shoulder- 
blade. When the skin has been scraped thin it is 
steeped for a day or so in stale urine until the hairs 
can be plucked ofi* with a knife. This done, the 
skin is stretched, by means of small bone pegs, 
upon the earth or the snow, and dried. Then it is 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE rOSTTIOX AND WORK OF WOMEN 12d 

rubbed until it is soft, and the process is complete. 
As this sort of skin has its outer membrane intact, it 
is of a dark colour. 

White kamik-skins are prepared up to a certain 
point like the foregoing, but when the hairs have 
been removed they are dipped in warm water (not 
too warm) until the black membrane is loosened, 
and then steeped in sea water, as cold as possible. 
If all the membrane is not removed, the skin is 
again dipped alternately in warm water and sea 
water until it comes away. Then the skin is pegged 
out and dried like the black skin. 

The white skins, not being as strong and water- 
tight as the black, are used almost entirely by 
women, who either keep them white or dye them 
in different ways. 

Sole leather for the kamiks is prepared in the 
same way as the black kaiak-skin, but is pegged 
out while drying. 

Skins for kaiak-gloves are prepared at first 
like the black kamik skins, but after the hairs have 
been removed they are dressed with blood, and 
then rolled together and put away. This is re- 
peated two or three times until they become 
entirely black. Then they are stretched for dry- 
ing — in summer out of doors, but in winter in the 
houses. This skin is wonderfully water-tight. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



130 ESKIMO LIFE 

If the sealskin is to be prepared with its hairs 
on, as for example, for the inner sock of the kamiks 
or for jackets, it is scraped on the blubber side 
with a crooked knife, just like the ordinary kamik- 
skin. Then it is steeped in water, and washed with 
soft soap ; whereupon it is rinsed out in clean water, 
stretched, and dried as above described. It is then 
made soft and pliant by rubbing, and is ready for 
use. 

Reindeer skin is simply dried and rubbed, no 
water being applied to it. 

In preparing bird-skins, the first step is care- 
fully to dry the feathers ; then the skins are turned 
inside out, and the layer of fat is scraped away as 
thoroughly as possible with a mussel shell or a 
spoon, and is eaten — ^it is held a great delicacy. 
Then the skins are hung up under the roof to 
dry. After a few days, the last remnants of fat 
are removed from them by means of chewing, 
then they are dried again, then washed in warm 
water with soda and soap three times over, then 
rinsed out in very cold water, pressed, and hung 
up for the final drying. If the feathers are to be 
removed so that only the down is left, as, for 
example, in the case of the eider duck, they are 
plucked out when the skin is half dry. Then it is 
thoroughly dried and cut up, and so is ready for use. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE POSITION AND WORK OF WOMEN 131 

The chewing above mentioiied is a remarkable 
process. The operator takes the dry skin, almost 
dripping with fat, and chews away at one spot until 
all the fat is sucked out and the skin is soft and 
white ; then the chewing area is slowly widened, the 
skin gradually retreating further and further into 
the mouth, until it often disappears entirely, to be 
spat out again at last with every particle of fat 
chewed away. This industry is for the most part 
carried on by the women and children, and is very 
highly relished by reason of the quantity of fat it 
enables them to absorb. In times of scarcity, the 
men are often glad enough to be allowed to do their 
share. It is a strange scene that is presented when 
one enters a house and finds the whole of its popula- 
tion thus engaged in chewing, each with his skin in 
his mouth. The excellence of the Greenland bird- 
skins is due to this process. How few of those who 
have admired the exquisite eider-down rugs which 
adorn so many a luxurious European home, have 
any idea of the stages through which they have 
gone ! And how many a European beauty, resplen- 
dent in costly skins, would shudder if she could see 
in a vision all the more or less inviting mouths 
through which her finery has passed, up there in 
the far North, before it came to deck her swan-like 
form! 

K 2 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



132 ESKIMO LIFE 

On the whole, the Greenland women make great 
use of their teeth, now to stretch the skms, now to 
hold tliera while they are being scraped, and again 
for the actual scraping. It is rather startling to 
us Europeans to see them take up a skin out of the 
tub of fetid liquor in which it has been steeping, 
and straightway fix their teeth in it and begin to 
dress it. The mouth, in fact, is a third hand to 
them ; and therefore the front teeth of old Eskimo 
women are often worn away to the merest stumps. 

The sinews of seals, whales, and reindeer are used 
as thread in making garments out of skins. The 
sinews are simply dried. For sewing kaiak-jackets, 
kaiak-gloves, and sometimes for kamiks, the gullet 
of the saddleback seal, the ringed seal, the bladder- 
nose seal, the small mottled seal, and the cormorant 
is also used. The outer membranes of the gullet 
are cut away while it is quite fresh, and then it is 
drawn over a round stick prepared for the purpose, 
and greased with blubber. Sometimes the gullet is 
also scraped with mussel-shells. When it has dried 
upon the stick and has been cut lengthwise into 
narrow strips, it is ready for use. The thread thus 
obtained has this advantage over the sinew-thread 
that it does not soften in water. 

The Greenland women are very capable at their 
work, and are especially skilful with their needle. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE POSITION AND WORK OF WOMEN 133 

One has only to examine the seams of a kaiak-skin, 
a kaiak-jacket, or a gut- skin shirt to convince one- 
self of this. But their skill is still more conspicuous 
in the admirable embroideries with which they orna- 
ment their trousers, kamiks, and other garments. 
On the west coast, where tliey have learned the use 
of dyes from the Europeans, they now execute these 
embroideries with small patches of hide of different 
colours, which they sew together into a sort of 
mosaic. They work entirely in freehand, without 
any pattern to go by, and display great neatness and 
precision, to say nothing of their sense of colour 
and of form. 

In living with the Eskimos in their homes, one 
does not at all receive the impression that the women 
are particularly oppressed or slighted. It seemed to 
me, on the contrary, that the housewives of Godt- 
haab and the surrounding district often played a 
very important part in the domestic economy, in 
some cases even ruling the roost. Judging from my 
own experience, then, I should say that there is a 
good deal of exaggeration in what Dalager says of 
the women, that ' even what ought to be the best 
hours of their life, from the time they come to 
maturity, are nothing but a long chain of trouble, 
contempt, and sorrow.' 

It cannot be denied that in social life one observes 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



134 ESKIMO LIFE 

a certain difference of status between men and 
women. Thus at meal-times or at coffee-parties, the 
hunters and the men of most importance are first 
helped, then the less important males, and finally the 
women and children. Dalager, in last century, 
makes a similar remark in his description of a ban- 
quet. The men, he says, take the leading place, and 
tell each other their adventures, while ' the women 
too have in the meantime formed a little party by 
themselves in another comer, where, no doubt, 
nothing but empty chatter is to be heard.' But, if it 
comes to that, such a description would apply in 
several other parts of the world besides Greenland. 

I must admit, however, that the Eskimo men 
sometimes show themselves sadly deficient in polite- 
ness towards the ladies. For example, * when the 
women are hard at work, building houses, drawing 
water, or carrying heavy burdens of one sort or 
another, the men stand by with their hands thrust 
into the breast of their jackets, and laugh at them, 
without offering the slightest help.' But is this so 
very much worse than what we often see in Norway, 
when a Bergen peasant, returning from market, 
lights his pipe, stretches himself in the stern of the 
boat, and lets his women row him home ? 

That women are not held in such high esteem as 
men is also unhappily evident from the fact that 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE POSITION AND WORK OF WOMEN 135 

when a man-child is born, the father is jubilant, and 
the mother beams with pride, while if it be a girl, 
they both weep, or are at any rate very ill content. 

But is this so very much to be wondered at? 
With all his goodness of heart, the Eskimo is, after 
all, no more than a man. The boy is, of course, 
regarded as the kaiak-man and hunter of the future, 
the support of the family in the old age of his parents, 
in short as a direct addition to the working capital ; 
while they no doubt think that there will always be 
plenty of girk in the world. 

The same difference is observable in the bringing- 
up of the children, the boys being always regarded 
as the food-providers of the future, who must in 
every way be well cared for ; and if a boy's parents 
die, his position is never a whit the worse, for all the 
neighbours are quite willing to receive him into 
their houses and do all they can to make a man 
of him. With the girls it is different; if they 
lose their parents and have no relations, they can 
always, indeed, have plenty of food, but they have 
often to put up with the most miserable clothing, so 
that it is pitiful to see them. When they come to 
the marriageable age, however, they stand on pretty 
much the same level as girls who have been more 
fortunately situated ; for no such thing as a dowry is 
known, and their chances simply depend upon 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



136 ESKIMO LIFE 

' beauty and solidity, which shall secure them favour 
in the eyes of the young men — lacking these they 
are despised, and will never be married, since there 
are always plenty to choose from.' Of this, however, 
they cannot complain, for the men themselves are no 
better off. If they are not strong enough to make 
good hunters, as sometimes happens, they have poor 
enough chances of ever finding a mate, and are 
looked down upon by every one. 

That boys are regarded very much in the light of 
capital appears from the fact that although widows 
are not in demand in the marriage-market, it some- 
times happens that they find a husband, * especially 
if they have a family of boys ; in that case they are 
pretty sure one day to make a match with a respect- 
able widower.' 

Even in death, women seem to be placed at a dis- 
advantage, as we may conclude from the following 
remark of Dalager's : * It sometimes happens that a 
woman of no great importance, when mortal sickness 
falls upon her, is buried alive. A horrible case of 
this sort occurred a short time ago at this very place. 
Several people declared that they had heard the 
woman, a long time after her burial, calling out from 
her grave and begging for something to drink. If 
you remonstrate with them upon such inhuman 
cruelty, they answer that when the patient cannot 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE POSITION AND WORK OF WOMEN 137 

recover, it is better that she should be put away in 
her last resting-place, than that the survivors should go 
through the agony of death in observing her misery. 
But this reasoning will not hold good ; for if any male 
person were thus barbarously dealt with, it would 
be regarded as the most brutal murder.' Yes, this 
was ill done ; but fortunately such events are very 
exceptional. Their real reason, moreover, is pro- 
bably to be found in the Eskimos' intense dread of 
touching dead bodies, which makes them clothe the 
dying, whether men or women, in their grave- 
clothes, often long before death occurs, preparing 
everything for the carrying out of the corpse and its 
burial, while the patient himself lies and looks on. 
For the same reason, they shrink from assisting one 
who has met with an accident at sea, if he seems to 
be already in the pinch of death, fearing lest they 
should happen to lay hands upon him after life has 
departed. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



188 ESKIMO LIFE 



CHAPTEE IX 

LOVE AND MARRIAGE 

Love, that power which permeates all creation, is by 
no means unknown in Greenland ; but the Greenland 
variety of it is a simple impulse of nature, lacking 
the many tender shoots and intricate blossoms of the 
hot-house plant which we know by this name. 

It does not make the lover sick of soul, but 
drives him to sea, to the chase ; it strengthens his 
arm and sharpens his sight ; for his one desire is to 
become an expert hunter, so that he can lead his 
Naia home as his bride, and support a family. And 
the tender young Naia stands upon the outlook-rock 
gazing after him ; she sees with what speed and cer- 
tainty he shoots ahead, how gracefully he wields the 
paddle, and how lightly his kaiak dances over the 
waves. Then he disappeai's in the far distance ; but 
she still gazes over the endless blue expanse, which 
heaves over the grave of so many a bold kaiak-man. 

At last he comes home again, towing his booty ; 
she rushes down to the beach and helps the other 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOVE AND MARRIAGE 139 

women to bring his prey ashore, while he quietly 
puts his weapons together and goes up to his house. 

But one evening he does not return, for all her 
waiting and gazing ; all the others have come — him 
the sea has taken. She weeps and weeps, she can 
never survive the blow. But her despair does not 
last long ; after all, there are other men in the world, 
and she begins to look on them with favour. 

The pure-bred Eskimo generally marries as soon 
as he can provide for a wife. The motive is not always 
love ; * the right one ' has perhaps not yet appeared 
on the scene ; but he marries because he requires a 
woman's help to* prepare his skins, make his clothes, 
and so forth. He often marries, it is said, before he 
is of an age to beget children. On the east coast, 
indeed, according to Holm, it is quite common for a 
man to have been married three or four times before 
that age.^ 

Marriage in Greenland was, in earlier times, a 
very simple matter. When a man had a mind to a 
girl, he went to her house or tent, seized her by the 
hair or wherever he could best get hold of her, and 
dragged her without further ceremony home to his 
house,^ where her place was assigned her upon the 

' MeddeUUer om Oronlandy pt. 10, p. 94. 

' It sometimes happened, too, that he got others to do this for him > 
but the afiair must always take the form of a capture or abduction. 
Similar customs, as is well known, formerly prevailed in Europe, and 
have even, in certain places, survived down to our own day. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



140 ESKIMO LIFE 

sleeping bench. The bridegroom would sometimes 
give her a lamp and a new water-bucket, or 
something of that sort, and that concluded the 
matter. In Greenland, however, as in other parts 
of the world, good taste demanded that the lady 
in question should on no account let it appear that 
she was a consenting party, however favourably 
disposed towards her wooer she might be in her 
heart. As a well-conducted bride among us feels 
it her duty to weep as she passes up the church, 
so the Eskimo bride was bound to struggle against 
her captor, and to wail and bemoan herself as much 
as ever she could. If she was a lady of the very 
highest breeding, she would weep and ' carry on ' 
for several days, and even run away home again 
from her husband's house. If she went too far in 
her care for the proprieties, it would sometimes 
happen, we are told, that the husband, unless he 
was already tired of her, would scratch her a Uttle 
on the soles of the feet, so that she could not walk ; 
and before the sores were healed, she was generally 
a contented housewife. 

When they first saw marriages conducted after 
the European fashion, they thought it very shock- 
ing that the bride, when asked if she would have 
the bridegroom for her husband, should answer 
Yes. According to their ideas, it would be much 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



L0\T: and marriage 141 

more becoming for her to answer No, for they regard 
it as a shameful thing for a young lady to reply to 
such a question in the aflftrmative. When assured 
that this was the custom among us, they were of 
opinion that our women-folk must be devoid of 
modesty. 

The simple method of marriage above described 
is still the only one known upon the east coast of 
Greenland, and a good deal of violence is sometimes 
employed in the carrying off of the bride. The 
lady's relations, however, stand quite unmoved and 
look on. It is all a private matter between the 
parties, and the Greenlander's love of a good under- 
standing with his fellows makes him chary of mixing 
himself up in the affairs of others. 

It sometimes happens, of course, that the young 
lady really objects to her wooer ; in that case she 
continues her resistance until she either learns to 
possess her soul in patience, or until her captor gives 
her up. 

Graah relates a curious instance^ proving how 
difficult it is for an onlooker to determine what are 
really the lady's sentiments. An able-bodied young 
rowing-woman in his boat, an East Greenlander 
named Kellitiuk, was one day seized and carried to 

* W. A. Graah, Narrative of an Expedition to the East Coast of 
Greenland, London, 1887, pp. 140 -148. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



142 ESKIMO LIFE 

the mountains by one of her countrymen named 
Siorakitsok, in spite of the most violent resistance on 
her part. As Graah believed that she really disliked 
him, and as her friends affirmed the same thing, he 
went after her and rescued her. A few days later, 
as he was preparing to set forth on his journey 
again, and the boat had just been launched, Kellitiuk 
jumped into it, lay down under the thwarts, and 
covered herself with bags and skins. It soon ap- 
peared that this was because Siorakitsok had just 
landed on the island, bringing his father with him to 
back him up. While Graah's back was turned for a 
moment, he jumped into the boat and dragged the 
fair one out of her hiding-place. Convinced that 
her brutal wooer was really repulsive to her, Graah 
thought it his duty to rescue her. When he came 
up, the suitor had already got her half out of the 
boat, and his father stood by on shore ready to lend 
a hand. Graah tore her from his grasp, and re- 
commended him instead to try his luck with ' Black 
Dorothy,' another of the rowing-women, whom he 
would have been glad to get rid of. The baffled 
bridegroom listened to him quietly, * muttered some 
inaudible words in his beard, and went away with 
wrathful and threatening looks.' The father did not 
take his son's fate much to heart, ' but helped us to 
load the boat,* says Graah, * and then bade us a no 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOVE AND MARRIAGE ' 143 

doubt well-meant farewell/ When they were about 
to start, however, Kellitiuk was nowhere to be found, 
although they shouted and searched for her all over 
the little island. She had evidently hidden her- 
self away somewhere, and they set oflf without her ; 
80 it appears that she had, after all, no irreconcilable 
antipathy to Siorakitsok. 

Among the heathen Greenlanders, divorce is as 
simple an affair as marriage. When a man grows 
tired of his wife — the reverse is of rarer occurrence — 
he need only, says Dalager, * lie apart from her on 
the sleeping-benches, without speaking a word. She 
at once takes the hint,' and next morning gathers all 
her garments together and quietly returns to her 
parents' house, trying, as well as she can, to appear 
indifferent. How many husbands at home could 
wish that their wives were Greenlanders I 

If a man takes a fancy to another man's wife, he 
takes her without ceremony, if he happens to be the 
stronger. Papik, a highly respected and skilful 
hunter at Angmagsalik, on the east coast, took a 
fancy to the young wife of Patuak, and, towing a 
second kaiak behind his own, he set off for the place 
where Patuak lived. He went to his tent, carried off 
the woman, made her get into the second kaiak, and 
paddled away with her. Patuak, being younger 
than Papik, and not to be compared with him in 



/ 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



144 ESKIMO LIFE 

strength and skill, had to put up with the loss of his 
wife.* 

There are cases on the east coast of women who 
have been married to half-a-score of different men. 
Utukuluk, at Angmagsalik, had tried eight hus- 
bands, and the ninth time she remarried husband 
No. 6.2 

Di^i^Qrce is especially easy so long as there are no 
children. When the woman has had a child, es- 
pecially if it be a boy, the bond is apt to become 
more lasting. 

On the east coast, if a man can keep more 
than one wife, he takes another ; most of the good 
hunters, therefore, have two, but never more.^ It 
appears that in many cases the first wife does not 
like to have a rival; but sometimes it is she that 
suggests the second marriage, in order that she may 
have help in her household work. Another motive 
may also come into play. * I once asked a married 
woman,' says Dalager, ' why her husband had taken 
another wife ? "I asked him to myself," she repUed, 
" for Tm tired of bearing children." ' 



' Holm, Meddelelser om Oronland, pt. 10, p. 96. 

* Holm, Meddelelser om Gronlandj pt. 10, p. 103. 

* Dalager states that, in his time, on the west coast, ' scarcely one 
in twenty of the Greenlanders had two wives, very few three^and still 
fewer four ; I have, however, known a man who had eleven.' — Grdn- 
land-she Belatianer, p. 9. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOVE AND MARRIAGE 146 

The first wife seems always to be regarded as the 
head of the household, even if the husbaud shows a 
preference for the second. 

Polyandry seldom occurs. Nils Egede mentions 
a woman who had two husbands, but both she and 
they were angekoks.^ 

On the introduction of Christianity, these primi- 
tive and simple marriage customs were of-:^ course 
aboUshed on the west coast of Greenland, where 
people ate now united with religious ceremonies as 
in Europe. The bride, too, is no longer required to 
offer so determined a resistance. 

But if it was formerly easy to get oneself a wife, 
under the new order of things it has become difficult 
enough. For the ceremony must necessarily be per- 
formed by a clergyman, the native catechists, who 
fill the place of the pastors in the various villages, 
not being reckoned good enough. If, then, you 
happen to Uve at a place which the pastor visits only 
once a year, or perhaps once in two years, you must 
take care to come to an understanding with the 
lady of your choice just in time to seize the oppor- 
tunity. If a young fellow should take it into his 
head to marry just after the pastor has gone away, 
he must wait a year, or perhaps two, before he can 
go through the necessary ceremony, unless, indeed, 

' Aiigekok => medicine-man, or priest. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



146 ESKIMO LIFE 

he and his bride are prepared to take a long journey 
in search of clerical ministrations. 

Such a state of things would inevitably lead 
many to form less binding connections, or to marry 
without the help of the clergy, even if the Green- 
landers were naturally less incUned towards such 
laxity than as a matter of fact they are. I have 
heard of a case in which a cleric, on coming to a 
certain village after a two years' absence, had to 
confirm a girl, marry her, and christen her child on 
the same day. This may be called summary pro- 
cedure. Such an arrangement cannot but be hurtful, 
tending to undermine all respect for the ceremony 
whose impressiveness it is sought to enhance by 
making the clergy alone competent to officiate at it. 

On the introduction of Christianity, polygamy 
was of course abolished. The missionaries even in- 
sisted that when a man who was married to two 
wives became a Christian, he should put away one 
of them. In 1745, an Eskimo at Frederikshaab had 
a mind to be baptised, ' but when it came to a ques- 
tion of putting away his second wife, he began to 
hesitate, for he had two sons by her, whom he would 
thus lose. In the end he changed his mind and went 
his way.'^ For this one can scarcely blame him. 
Similar cases, in which it is required that a man shall 

' Dalager : Gronlandske Eelationer, p. 9. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOVE AND MARRIAGE 147 

put. away one of his wives, with whom he has perhaps 
lived happily for many a year, still occur now and 
then, when a Greenlander from the east coast settles 
on the west coast (near Cape Farewell) and is 
baptised. The hardship which the man is thus forced 
to inflict upon the woman need scarcely be insisted 
upon. Even to Dalager, in last century, it appeared 
an injustice, and 'how far it conflicted with the 
ordinances of God that a man should have more than 
one wife, seemed to him a problem.' 

Polygamy, however, is still occasionally to be 
found upon the west coast, a second wife being 
apparently one of the indulgences which first occur 
to a Greenlander's mind when he is inclined to kick 
over the traces. 

In Greenland, as elsewhere, the position of 
women in marriage differs according to the circum- 
stances of each particular case. As a rule the man 
is the master ; but I have also seen cases, doubtless 
exceptional, in which the grey mare has been the 
better horse. 

Among the primitive Eskimos, the wife seems 
practically to have been regarded as the husband's 
property. It sometimes happens on the east coast 
that a formal bargain and sale precedes the marriage, 
the bridegroom paying the father a harpoon, or 
something of the sort, for the privilege of wedding 

L L> 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



148 ESKIMO LIFE 

his lovely daughter. Sometimes, on the other hand, 
the father will pay a hunter of credit and reno^Ti to 
take his daughter off his hands, and the daughter is 
bound to marry at her father's bidding.^ Moreover, 
it often occurs on the east coast that two hunters 
agree to exchange wives for a longer or shorter 
period — sometimes f<5r good. Temporary exchanges 
of wives still occur, doubtless, on the west coast as 
well, especially during the summer reindeer-hunting, 
when the people are living in tents in the interior of 
the country. At these times they allow themselves 
many liberties which cannot be controlled by the 
missionaries. 

Married people as a rule live on very good terms 
with each other. I have never heard an unkind word 
exchanged between man and wife ; and this is the 
general experience. Dalager declares that * the 
longer a married couple live together, the more 
closely are they united in affection, until at last they 
pass their old age together like innocent children.' 
They are, on the whole, exceedingly considerate to- 
wards each other, and may sometimes be seen to 
exchange caresses. They do not kiss as we do, how- 
ever, but press their noses together or snuff at each 
other. This process I am unfortunately unable to 
describe, as I lack the necessary practice. 

' Holm : MeddeleUer om Gronland, pi. 10, p. 96. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOVE AND MARRIAGE 149 

On the east coast, too, the relation between 
husband and wife seems to be very good as a rule, 
though it appears, according to Captain Hohn, that 
scenes of violence are not unknown. 

A certain Sanimuinak one day came home to his 
spouse Puitek, bringing with him' a second wife, the 
young XJtukuluk (the before-mentioned lady of the 
nine husbands), whereupon Puitek became angry 
and fell to scolding her husband. This made him so 
furious that he seized her by the top-knot and struck 
her with his clenched fist on the back and in the face. 
At last he seized a knife and stabbed her in the knee, 
so that the blood spurted forth.^ Holm also relates 
a case in which a man received a sound thrashing 
from his wife. Scenes of this sort, however, are very 
rare among this peaceable people. 

Any very deep love between man and wife is no 
doubt exceptional, depth of feeling being, on the 
whole, uncommon among the Eskimos. K one dies 
the survivor is generally pretty easily consoled. * If 
a man loses his wife,' says Dalager, ' not many of his 
own sex come to condole with him. The women- 
folk, on the other hand, squat along the inner edge 
of the sleeping-benches in his house and bewail the 
deceased, while he, in response, sobs and wipes his 
nose. After a short time, however, he begins to 

' Holm : MeddeleUer om Qrimland^ pt. 10, p. 102. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



150 ESKIMO LIFE 

axiom himself as he used to in his bachelor days, 
polishing up his kaiak and his weapons with par- 
ticular care, these being the things with which a 
Greenlander always makes the greatest show. When, 
at sea, he comes dashing up to his comrades in this 
brilliant array, they say to each other : " Look, look 
—here comes a new brother-in-law." If he over- 
hears it, he says nothing, but smiles to himself.' It 
is highly incumbent upon a widower's new wife to 
lament her own imperfections and belaud the virtues 
of her predecessor: 'Whence we learn that the 
Greenland women are as apt at acting a part, where 
their interest is concerned, as are others of their sex 
in more polite countries.' 

The chief end and aim of marriage in Greenland 
is unquestionably the procreation of children. 
Therefore, as in the Old Testament times, unfruitful 
women are contemned, and a childless marriage is 
often dissolved. 

On the average, the pure-bred Greenlanders are 
not prolific. Two, three, or four children to each 
marriage is the general rule, though there are in- 
stances of families of six Or eight, or even more. 

Twins are uncommon, and I was often asked by 
the women if it were true that in the land of the long 
beards (Norway) women gave birth to two children 
at a time. When I answered that tliev not onlv 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOVE AND MARRIAGE 151 

bore twins but also triplets and even four children 
at a birth, they shrieked with laughter and declared 
that our women were Uke dogs : for human beings 
and seals bear only one at a time. 

As a rule, the Greenland women suffer little in 
childbirth. As an example of how easily they take 
this incident in their lives, I may quote a case men- 
tioned by Graah. As he was passing by Bernstorffs- 
fiord, on his journey along the east coast, one of the 
women of his company was taken with labour-pains. 
They hastened to land upon a naked rock on the 
north side of the fiord. While the labour continued, 
the husband stretched himself on the rock and fell 
asleep; but presently they awakened him with the 
joyful intelligence that a son had been born to him. 
As already stated, this is regarded as a piece of good 
luck, while the birth of a daughter is a matter of in- 
difference. *Emenek accordingly (that "'was the 
husband's name) expressed his satisfaction by smiling 
on his spouse and saying " Ajungilatit" (Not so bad 
for you). With our new passenger, we at once pro- 
ceeded on our journey.' ^ 

The heathen Greenlanders kill deformed children 
and those which are so sickly as to seem unlikely to 
live ; those, too, whose mother dies in childbirth, so 

* W. A. Graah, Na/rrative of an Expedition to the East Coast of 
Gre«n2ani, London, 1887, p. 185. -" 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



<^ 



162 ESKIMO LIFE 

that there is no one to give them suck. This they do, 
as a rule, by exposing the child or throwing it into 
the sea.^ However cruel this may sound to many 
European mothers, it is nevertheless done from com- 
passion, and it is undeniably reasonable ; for under 
such hard natural conditions as those of Greenland, 
we cannot wonder that people are unwilling to bring 
up offspring which can never be of any use, and can 
only help to diminish the common store of suste- 
nance.* It is for the same reason that people who 
have grown so old as to be quite unable to fend for 
themselves are held in small esteem and are thought 
to be better out of the way. On the east coast it 
sometimes happens that old people, who seem likely 
to die, are drowned, or else drown themselves. 
Similar practices also obtained in former days upon 
the west coast (compare next chapter). 

Greenland mothers are very slow to wean their 
children. They often give suck until the child is 
three or four, and I have even heard of cases in 
which children of ten or twelve contmued to take 
the breast. A European at Godthaab told me that 
he had seen a dashing youth of twelve or so come 

' Compare P. Egede, Efterreininger om Grbnland^ p. 107 ; and 
Holmi MeddeUUer om Oronland, pt. 10, p. 91. 

' Although, as we have seen, the Eskimos are not greatly delighted 
at the birth of daughters, they do not, like so many other primitive 
people, make a habit of killing female children. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOVE AND MARRIAGE 163 

home in his kaiak with his booty, rush up to his home, 
and there consume a biscuit, standing between his 
mother's knees, and drinking, from time to time, from 
lier breast. 

All the children of Christian Greenlanders are of 
course christened and given names. The original 
Greenland names however, have, owing to the in- 
fluence of the missionaries, almost entirely died out. 
In their stead are used all possible Biblical names 
from both the Old and the New Testament. No- 
where in the world, probably, is one surer to meet 
with the whole dramatis person© of the Scriptures, 
right from Father Adam down to Peter and Paul. 
Our notable friend Dalager does not seem to have 
liked this misuse of the Bible, and therefore, he 
says, *I once asked a certain missionary why a 
Gxeenlander, when he was christened, could not be 
allowed to retain his former name, which was pro- 
bably a very natural and good one. " It sounds ill " 
he replied, " to have a Christian called after a seal or 
a sea-bird." I smiled and answered that at home 
there were plenty of Eavens, Hawks, and Crows, 
who passed for excellent people none the less.' On 
this point I cannot but agree with Dalager. 

The Greenlanders are exceedingly fond of their 
children and do everything to make them happy, 
especially if they are boys. These little tyrants will 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



154 ESKIMO LIFE 

often rule over the whole house, and the words of 
Solomon : * Chasten thy son while there is hope, 
and let not thy soul spare for his crying/ are by 
no means acted upon. Punishment, especially of 
course where their own flesh and blood is concerned, 
they regard on the whole as inhuman. I have never 
once heard an Eskimo say an unkind word to his 
child. With such an upbringing, one might expect 
that the Greenland children would be naughty and 
intractable. This is not at all the case. Although I 
have gone about a good deal among the Eskimos on 
the west coast, I have only once seen a naughty 
Eskimo child, and that was in a more European than 
Eskimo home. When the children are old enough 
to understand, a gentle hint from father or mother is 
enough to make them desist from anything forbidden. 
I have never seen Eskimo children quarrelling either 
indoors or in the open air ; not even talking angrily to 
each other, much less fighting. I have watched them 
playing by the hour, and have even taken part in 
their football (a pecuUar game of theirs, very like the 
English football), which, as we know, is rather apt to 
lead to quarrels ; but I have never seen an angry or 
even an unfriendly look pass between them. Could 
such a thing happen in Europe ? I shall not attempt 
to determine what may be the reason of this remark- 
able difference between Eskimo and European chil- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



LOVE AND MARRIAGE 155 

(Iren. No doubt it is mainly due to the excessively 
peaceable and good-humoured temperament of the 
race, devoid of all nervousness or irritability. It 
may partly be attributed, also, to the fact that the 
Eskimo women always live in the same room as their 
children, and carry them with them in the amauts on 
their backs even when they go to work. Thus they 
can give them much more constant care, and there is 
a more unbroken intercourse between children and 
parents in Greenland than in Europe. 

We must not judge the Eskimo boys too severely 
if they now and then amuse themselves with throwing 
stones at the Colonial Manager's or the Pastor's fowls 
and ducks, or if they make occasional irruptions into 
the Manager's garden and root up or destroy the 
plants. It must.be remembered that the conception 
of property in land, and the notion that one is not at 
liberty to chase or to appropriate whatever moves or 
grows upon the face of the earth, are quite foreign 
to their instinctive ideas. Even if such conceptions 
are inculcated upon them, they do not grasp them 
clearly ; they are, and will always remain, notions 
which the European foreigners have tried to intro- 
duce in their own interests, and which are founded 
upon no natural right. 

In order to exercise their eyes and their arms, 
the provident Greenlander gives his sons, even while 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



156 ESKIMO LIFE 

they are mere children, toy bird-darts and harpoons ; 
and with these, or, failing these, with common stones, 
one may see the three or four-year-old hunters prac- 
tising upon small birds and anything else worthy of 
their passion for the chase which they happen to 
come across. I have already mentioned that they 
commence practising in the kaiak at a very early 
age. 

It is, of course, of the greatest importance for 
the Greenland community that the rising generation 
should be brought up to be expert hunters. On this 
their whole future depends. 

The girls, too, must be early trained in their life- 
work; they must learn to sew, and to assist their 
mother in her domestic labours. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



167 



CHAPTER X 

MORALS 

The Eskimo has, of course, like every other race of 
men, his virtues and his foibles ; possibly with this 
difference from the civilised European, that the 
former are more numerous in proportion to the 
latter. But, on the other hand, neither his virtues 
nor his foibles are found in such high development. 

Even the earliest accounts of Greenland, how- 
ever, such as Egede's, Cranz's, Dalager's, and others, 
show clearly enough the falsity of the frequent 
assertion that the Eskimo stands upon a low moral 
plane; although in some of these writers, for 
example in Hans Egede, we can trace an evident 
tendency to paint the Eskimo, individually and 
socially, in as dark colours as possible, in order to 
prove how sadly this people stood in need of the 
lights of religion, and how necessary it therefore 
was that the Greenland mission should be supported. 

One of the most prominent and attractive traits 
in the Eskimo's moral character is certainlv his 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



158 ESKIMO LIFE 

integrity. If some Europeans have denied him this 
virtue, it can only be, I am sure, because these 
gentlemen have not taken the trouble to place them- 
selves in sympathy with his modes of thought, and 
to realise what he regards as dishonourable. 

It is of special importance for the Eskimo that he 
should be able to rely with confidence upon his 
neighbours and his fellow-men; and it is the first 
condition of this mutual confidence, on which depends 
all united action in the battle for life, that every man 
shall be upright in his dealings with his neighbours. 
The Eskimo therefore regards it as in the highest 
degree dishonourable to steal from his housemates or 
from his fellow-villagers, and it is very seldom that 
anything of the sort occurs. Even Egede tells us 
that they let their goods and chattels * lie open to 
everyone without fear of anyone stealing or taking 
away the least portion of them. . . . This mis- 
demeanour is so repulsive to them that if a girl is 
found stealing, she loses all chance of making a good 
marriage.' 

For the same reason they very seldom lie to each 
other — especially the men. The following trait, re- 
lated by Dalager, afibrds a remarkable proof of this : 
' In describing a thing to another person, they are 
very careful not to paint it in brighter colours than 
it deserves ; especially in the sale of an object which 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS 159 

the buyer has not seen, even although the seller may 
be anxious to get rid of it, he will depreciate it rather 
than overpraise it/ 

When one owes another money, the creditor may, 
as a rule, be assured that the debtor will pay up as 
soon as ever he can. The Danish merchants confirm 
this trait. They have often told me that they lend 
with confidence to the Greenlanders, because it very 
seldom happens that they are not repaid in full. 

The Eskimo's conception of his duties towards 
strangers, especially towards people of another race, 
is not quite so strict. We must remember that a 
foreigner is to him an indifferent object, whose 
welfare he has no interest in furthering; and it 
matters little to him whether he can rely on the 
foreigner or not, since he has not got to live with 
him. Thus he does not always find it inconsistent 
with his interests to appropriate a little of the 
foreigner's property, if he thinks it can be of use to 
him. 

The first Europeans who came to the country 
suffered a good deal from this peculiarity. We can- 
not greatly wonder that the Eskimos stole from 
them, when we consider how the European expedi- 
tions at first conducted themselves, after the land 
had been discovered anew. They often plundered 
the natives, maltreated their women, and what was 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



160 ESKIMO LIFE 

worse, tempted them on board their ships, set sail, 
and took them as prisoners to Europe. Thus the 
Eskimos had from the first but little reason to regard 
us as friends. Nor does it seem by any means irre- 
concilable with European morality to plunder foreign 
peoples, if we may judge by the way in which we 
deal with the native races in Africa and elsewhere. 
Or let us suppose that it had been the Eskimos who 
came and planted themselves upon our shores, and 
behaved to us as we did in Greenland — would it 
then have been altogether inconsistent with our 
moral code to rob and filch from them whatever we 
could ? 

It must also be taken into account that in com- 
parison with the Eskimos the Europeans possess pro- 
perty in superabundance. According to Eskimo 
morality, therefore, it appears that we ought to be 
able to dispense with some of our superfluity, and 
if we decline to do so it is because we are miserly 
and selfish. 

As the Europeans have gradually settled down 
in the country and ceased to be regarded as 
foreigners, matters have altered a good deal, and 
theft even from them is now rare. I believe, however, 
that when an opportunity oflers the natives are 
still inclined to appropriate trifles which they think 
can never be missed. I have myself seen respect- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS 161 

able Greenlanders fill their pockets and gloves with 
meal from the barrels in the store, quite unabashed 
by the fact of my observing them. In such a case 
they no doubt think that it is the Royal Greenland 
Company from whose superfluity they are helping 
themselves. The company will neither be richer 
nor poorer for a few handfuls of meal, which for 
them are of great moment — and in this comfortable 
conviction they go on their way rejoicing. I am 
afraid that such modes of thought are not peculiar 
to Greenland. 

For the rest, it must be remembered as an extenu- 
ating circumstance that the Eskimos were from the 
first, and even down to comparatively recent times, 
shamelessly defrauded by the European traders, who 
used false weights and measures, and gave them, 
in barter, wares of wretched quality. I need only 
mention, on Saabye's authority, that the traders of 
last century used excessively large four-bushel mea- 
sures, which had, in addition, no bottom, but were 
carefully placed over cavities in the floor. These the 
natives had to fill with their blubber when they 
wanted to sell it, so that what passed for four bushels 
was in reality at least six. They knew and under- 
stood quite well that they were being cheated, but 
they submitted uncomplainingly. Such practices 
are now, of course, things of the past. 

Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



162 ESKIMO LIFE 

As a proof of the Eskimo's scrupulous respect few: 
the moral law which he recognises, I may remind the 
reader that he never touches driftwood which another 
has placed above high-water mark, though it would 
often be so easy to appropriate it without fear of 
detection. And when we Europeans break through 
this law, and help ourselves without ceremony to 
their stored-up driftwood — as we have often done, I 
am sorry to say, intentionally or otherwise — ^have not 
the Eskimos, I wonder, at least as good right to 
despise us as we have to look down upon them ? 

Fighting and brutalities of that sort, as before 
mentioned, are unknown among them, and murder is 
very rare. They hold it atrocious to kill a fellow- 
creature ; therefore war is in their eyes incomprehen- 
sible and repulsive, a thing for which their language 
has no word ; and soldiers and officers, brought up to 
the trade of killing, they regard as mere butchers. 

It has, indeed, as Egede says, ' occurred now and 
then that an extremely malicious person, out of 
rankling hatred, has killed another.' But when he 
adds that ' this they regard with the greatest cool- 
ness, neither punishing the murderer nor taking the 
thing to heart in any way,' I believe that he is not 
quite just to them. They certainly abhor the crime, 
and if they do not actively mix themselves up in the 
matter, it is because they" regard it as a private affair 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS im 

between the murderer and his victim. It is not th6 
business of the community, but simply of the mur- 
dered man's nearest relatives, to take revenge for his 
death, if they are in a position to do so ; and thus t9:e 
find, even among this peaceable folk, traces of a sort 
of blood-feud, though the practice is but slightly 
developed, and the duty does not, as a rule, seem to 
weigh heavily upon the survivors. In cases of 
extreme atrocity, however, the men of a village have 
been known to make common cause against a mur- 
derer, and kill him. 

Here, as elsewhere, women and love are among 
the most frequent causes of bloodshed. 

The attack often takes place at sea, the murderer* 
transfixing his victim from behind with his harpoon, 
or capsizing his kaiak and cutting a hole in it. It 
does not accord with the Eskimo's character to 
attack another face to face, not so much because he 
is afraid as because he is bashful, and would feel it 
embarrassing to go to work under the other's eye. 

They do not regard it as criminal to kill old 
witches and wizards, who, they think, can injure 'and 
even kill others by their arts. Nor is it inconsistent 
with their moral code to hasten the death of those 
who are. sick and in great sufiering, or of those in 
delirium, of which they have a great horror. 

Of our commandments, the seventh is that which 

H 2 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



164 ESKIMO LIFE 

the Greenlanders are most apt to break ; for, as the 
reader may already have gathered from the foregoing 
chapter, virtue and modesty are not held in high 
esteem among them. This is especially the case 
among the Christian Eskimos of the west coast, who 
have come much in contact with us Europeans. By 
many of them it is not regarded as any particular 
disgrace for an unmarried girl to have children. Of 
this I have seen frequent examples. While we were 
at Godthaab, two unmarried girls of the neighbour- 
hood who were with child made no sort of attempt 
to conceal the fact, and even tied up their top-knots 
with green ribbon^ long before it was necessary, 
seeming almost proud of this visible sign that they 
were not disdained, I have seen green-tops who 
not only wore the colour in their hair, but trimmed 
and embroidered their anoraks quite stylishly with 
ribbons of the same hue, though such a proceeding is 
neither obligatory nor customary. 

The missionaries have, of course, been vehement 
in their denunciations of the prevalent laxity in this 
direction, and have tried to inculcate a stricter 
morality upon the youth of both sexes, from their 
schooldays onwards ; but they do not seem to have 
succeeded in inducing their flocks to regard the 

* As stated on p. 28, green top-knots are worn by unmarried 
women who have had children. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS 165 

matter from a higher standpoint, for things grow 
worse rather than better. When a young woman 
stands in an illicit relation to a man, she attempts no 
concealment ; if the man be a European, indeed^ she 
positively glories in it, and it seems to procure her 
additional consideration among her female friends. 
For this state of things the Europeans themselves are 
chiefly to blame. In the first place, the young men 
who have come to Greenland have often behaved ill 
to the native women, and set a bad example ; and, in 
the second place, the Europeans have on the whole 
managed so to impose upon the natives that the 
women will now prefer the commonest European 
sailor to the very best Eskimo hunter. The result is 
that during the century and a half since we settled 
in the country, the race has suffered so large an 
admixture of European blood that it is now extremely 
difficult to find a single pure-bred Eskimo on the 
whole west coast. ^ And this although the Europeans 
form but a small fraction of the population of the 
country, a few hundred as against ten thousand. 

It is obvious that the proneness of the Europeans 
to this form of immorality has not made it any easier 
for the missionaries to vindicate the sanctity of the 

^ One reason of this is also to be found in natural selection, for the 
half-castes are now generally regarded as handsomer than the pure- 
bred Eskimos, and are consequently apt to be preferred in marriage. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



lae ESKIMO LIFE 

seventh commandment. My experience, and I believe 
that of most observers, is that the native women 
of the colonies, where many Europeans reside, are 
much more immodest than those of the villages 
where there are no Europeans. For example, I may 
mention that the women at Sardlok, Eomok, Eangek, 
and Narsak made an altogether better impression 
than those at Godthaab and New Hermhut, where 
their behaviour was often the reverse of discourag- 
ing towards young men who happened to take their 
fancy. 

Sexual morality seems to have been considerably 
higher among the heathen Eskimos before the Euro- 
peans came to the country. Even Hans Egede, who 
does not, as a rule, depict their moral qualities in 
too bright colours, says in his * New Perlustration ' : 
'Young girls and maidens, on the other hand, are 
modest enough. We have never seen them conduct- 
ing themselves wantonly with the young men, or 
making the least approach to such conduct, either in 
word or deed. During the fifteen years I was in 
Greenland, I knew of only two or three unmarried 
girls who gave birth to children; for this they re- 
gard as a great disgrace.* 

Dalager's general testimony to the national 
character in this respect is that 'the Greenlanders 
are certainly inclined to the sin of incontinence, but 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS m 

not SO much so as other nations/ Of the girls he 
says, that ^ in their first years of maturity they bear 
themselves very chastely, for otherwise they are 
certain to spoil their chances in marriage.* 

Among the heathens of the east coast at the pre- 
sent day, the matter does not seem to be regarded so 
seriously; for Holm assures us that ' it is not considered 
any disgrace for an unmarried girl to have children.' 

The strict morality which obtained among the 
unmarried youths and maidens of the west coast in _ 
the heathen days, seems to have been very consider- 
ably relaxed when once they were married. The 
men, at any rate, had then the most unrestricted 
freedom. Egede says that for long * he could not 
ascertain that men had to do with other Women 
than their own wives, or wives with other men ; but 
at last we discovered that they were none too par- 
ticular in this respect.' He describes, among other 
things, a remarkable game for which ^ married men 
and women come together, as though to an assembly,' 
The men stepped forth by turns, and, to the accom- 
paniment of a drum, sang songs in honour of women 
and love ; whereupon shameless license became the 
order of the day for all present. ' But in this game 
the young and unmarried are forbidden by modesty 
to take part ; married people see in it nothing to be 
ashamed of.' 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



168 ESKIMO LIFE 

Egede also remarks that women regard it as a 
great honour and happiness to become the concubine 
of an angekok — that is, * one of their prophets and 
learned men.' *Many husbands even regard this 
with favour, and will sometimes pay the angekoks to 
lie with their wives, especially if they themselves 
have no children by them.' 

The Eskimo women, then, are allowed far greater 
freedom in this respect than women of Germanic stock. 
The reason probably is that whereas inheritance, 
and the continuance of the race and name, have been 
matters of supreme importance to the Teutons, the 
Eskimos have had little or no property to transmit 
from father to son, while for them the great con- 
sideration is simply that children shall be born. 

With reference to the above-mentioned game, 
however, Dalager declares that it is of very rare 
occurrence, * and that it is to be observed that a 
married woman who has duly become the mother of 
a family never takes part in it.* 

On the other hand, he tells us that widows and 
divorced wives are not so particular. While it is 
very seldom that * a young girl has a child, one sees 
older women bearing just as many children as if 
they were living in wedlock. If they are reproved 
for this., even by their own countrymen, they will 
often answer that their conduct does not proceed 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS 169 

from mere wantonness, but from a natural longing to 
bear children, which leads them to seduce many a 
worthy man/ 

On the east coast, too, the morality of married 
people seems to leave a good deal to be desired, ac- 
cording to our ideas. I have mentioned, for instance, 
that the men often exchange wives ; but the ex- 
change is strictly a personal matter, and the husband 
will usually resent any unfaithfulness on the wife's 
part to the man to whom he has lent her, he himself, 
however, claiming full liberty. While living in their 
winter houses they often play a wife-exchanging or 
lamp-extinguishing game, like that above mentioned ; 
but in this the unmarried also take part. Holm tells 
us that ^ a good host always has the lamps put out at 
night when there are guests in the house.* 

So far as I know, this game is no longer prac- 
tised on the west coast. Married Christian Green- 
landers, however, do not seem to have any over- 
weening respect for the seventh commandment, and 
irregularities of conduct are far from uncommon. 

The morals above described seem to us very bad 
on the whole; but it does not follow that the 
Eskimos share this feeling. We should beware how 
we fix ourselves at one point of view, and unsparingly 
condemn ideas and practices which the experience of 
many generations has developed among another 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



170 ESKIMO LIFE 

people, however much they may conflict with, our 
own. There may be underlying reasons which do 
not at 6nce meet the eye, and which place the whole 
matter in a very different light. 

The conceptions of good and evil in this world 
are exceedingly divergent. As an example, let me 
cite the case of the Eskimo girl who, when Niels 
Egede spoke to her of love of God and her neigh- 
bour, said to him : * I have given proof of love for 
my neighbour. Once an old woman who was ill, 
but could not die, offered to pay me if I would lead 
her to the top of the steep cliff from which our people 
have always thrown themselves when they are tired 
of living ; but I, having ever loved my neighbours, 
led her thither without payment, and cast her over 
the cliff.' Egede told her that this was ill done, and 
that she had killed a fellow-creature. * She said no ; 
but that she was filled with pity for her, and cried 
after she had fallen over.* Are we to call this a good 
or an evil deed ? 

Another time, when Egede was explaining how 
God punishes wicked people, an Eskimo remarked 
that in that respect he was hke God, for he had 
killed three old women who were witches. 

The same divergence of judgment makes itself 
felt with regard to the seventh commandment. To 
the Eskimo the other exhortation to increase and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS . 171 

multiply seems to be of greater weight. The reason 
may partly be that his race is by nature unprolific. 

Like many other peoples, the Eskimos fl5und it 
strange that we should not regard polygamy with 
warm approval. Among them, a man was held in 
esteem in proportion to the number of wives he pos- 
sessed, and they therefore thought the Old Testament 
patriarchs more reasonable than we. This, however, 
is a view which we find prevailing among our own 
forefathers, until well on in historical times. 

When Paul Egede was remonstrating with the 
Greenlanders one day upon their polygamous pro^ 
clivities, one of them fell to eulogising his own 
wife for her ' good humour in never being angry 
because he loved strange women.' Egede said that 
^ women in our country could not endure that their 
husbands should care for others ; they would turn 
them out of their houses/ * It is no praise to your 
women," replied the Eskimo, *that they want to 
have their husbands all to themselves and to be 
masters over them ; we hold that a fault.' 

Their way of thinking in these matters is less 
ideal and more practical than ours, and their point 
of view entirely different. Their habit of exchanging 
wives, for example, and their treatment of barren 
women, seems to us wanton and immoral ; but when 
we remember that the production of offspring is^ tjbe 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



172 ESKIMO LIFE 

great end and aim of their conduct, and reflect what 
an all-important matter this is for them, we may 
perhaps pass a somewhat milder judgment. 

If a Greenlander's wife does not bear children, 
his marriage fails of its chief purpose, and it is 
quite natural that he should try to find a remedy. 
A young man whose wife had no children once 
offered Niels Egede a fox-skin either to come to his 
aid himself in the matter, or to order one of his 
sailors to do so, and was much astonished to find 
Egede indignant at the proposal. * There would be 
no disgrace,' he said, ^ for she is married, and she 
could have one of your married sailors/ 

It appears, however, that even the married 
Greenlanders are not by nature devoid of what we 
understand as moral feeling, for their everyday be- 
haviour is, as a rule, quite reputable and void of 
offence ; on that point all travellers must agree. • 

If a heathen — and in many cases even a Chris- 
tian — Greenlander refrains from having to do with 
another man's wife, whom he has looked upon with 
favour, it is generally, no doubt, more because he 
shrinks from quarrelling with the husband than 
because he regards adultery as morally wrong ; but 
we may gather from the following saying, current at 
Angmagsalik, that even on the east coast there is a 
vague feeling that it is not the right tiling. * The 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS ITS 

whale, the musk-ox, and the reindeer,' so the saying 
runs, * left the country because men had too much 
to do with other men's wives.' Many men declared, 
however, that it was * because the women were 
jealous of their husbands.' The jealousy of the 
women was also alleged as a reason for the fact 
that the channel which formerly went right through 
the country, from the Sermelik Fiord to the west 
coast, had been blocked with ice.^ 

Egede relates that, strangely enough as he 
thought, the women before his arrival had felt no 
jealousy when their husbands had more wives than 
one, * and got on very well with each other ' ; but as 
soon as he had preached to them the wickedness of 
such proceedings, they began to show much annoy- 
ance when their husbands wanted to take second 
wives. * When I have been reading with them,' he 
says, *and instructing them in the Word of God, 
they have often urged me to bring the seventh com- 
mandment sharply home to their husbands.' The 
men, as may be supposed, did not at all approve of 
the missionaries' influence over the women in this 
respect, and one of them, whose two wives had 
fallen by the ears, said angrily to Niels Egede : ^ You 
have spoiled them with your teaching, and now 
they're jealous of each other.' It appears to me 

' Holm : MeddeleUer om QronUmdy pt. 10, p. 100. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



174 ESKIMO LIFE 

that the man's anger was not without justificalioa. 
What should we say if Greenlanders came to our 
country, forced themselves into our houses, and 
preached their own morality to our wives? 

Before we utterly condemn the morality of the 
Eskimos, we ought also, perhaps, to remember the 
golden maxim that those who live in glass housed 
should not throw stones. European morality is in 
many respects of such doubtful value that we have 
scarcely the right to pose as judgesi After all is 
said and done, it is possible that the most essential 
difference between our morality and that of the 
Eskimos is that with us the worst things take place 
behind the scenes, in partial or complete secrecy, 
and therefore produce all the more demoralising 
effect, while among the Eskimos everything happens 
on the open stage. The instincts of human nature 
cannot be altogether suppressed. It is with them as 
with explosives : where they lie unprotected on the 
surface, they may be easily *set off*,' but they do 
little mischief; whereas when they lie deeper and 
more concealed, they are perhaps less easily kindled; 
but when once they take fire the explosion is far 
more violent and destructive, and the greater the 
weight that is piled upon them, the greater havoc do 
they work. 

According to the Rskimo code, marriage between 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS 175 

first cousins, or between any near relations, is pro- 
hibited. Even foster-children, who happen to have 
been brought up in the same household, cannot 
marry. A man should," if possible, seek his wife in 
another village. 

This rule answers to the so-called law of exogamy, 
or prohibition of marriage with blood relations, with 
people of the same family name, or even belonging 
to the same clan (among the Chinese), gotra (among 
the Hindus), or gens (among the Eomans ?), which is 
also found in slightly diifferent forms in the Greek, and 
formerly in the Catholic, Church, among the Slavonic 
and Indian races, and in many other quarters. 
Plutarch says of the Eomans that in earlier times 
they no more thought of marrying women of the 
same stock than they would in his day think of 
marrying aunts or cousins. Our own forefathers, in 
long past ages, probably observed the law of exo-» 
gamy, which, however, stands in sharp opposition 
to the feeling now dominant in Norway, that natives 
of the same place should be chosen in marriage, and 
if possible near relatives, even first cousins. It seems 
to be the general rule that we find the widest circles 
of prohibition against marriage among savage 
peoples, while among modern and civilised nations 
a greater freedom prevails. Exogamy would thui 
appear to be a relicof barbarism from which we Nor* 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



176 ESKIMO LIFE 

wegians have very thoroughly freed ourselves. It is 
very diflScult to explain the origin of this law. Many 
writers, as we know, seek to trace it to the primitive 
conception of woman as a chattel, and commonly as 
a captive of the spear, whence it followed that a 
wife ought not to be taken from among relations or 
friends, but should be carried off from another tribe. 
Although the scientific authorities are against me, it 
appears to me by no means impossible that we may 
also find at the root of the custom the belief that 
marriage between near relations produces a weakly 
progeny. This belief, at any rate, prevails among 
almost all nations in the form of a dread of incest. 
It is true that modern research has sought to show 
that marriage between kinsfolk is not injurious ; but 
whether well-founded or not, the contrary belief has 
undoubtedly been entertained, and from it the law 
of exogamy would naturally follow. The fact that 
among the Greenlanders it goes the length of for- 
bidding marriage between people of the same village 
is easily explicable when we think of the above- 
mentioned customs, which render it impossible to 
be sure who may or may not be half-brothers and 
sisters. 

In several respects the morality of the heathen 
Eskimos stands considerably higher than that which 
one generally finds in Christian communities. As I 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS 177 

have already pointed this out (in Chapter Vlii.), I will 
here only remind the reader of their self-sacrificing 
love of their neighbour and their mutual helpfulness, 
to which, indeed, we find no parallel in European 
society. These virtues, however, are not unfre- 
quently to be found among primitive peoples, and 
are probably in the main due to the simpler struc- 
ture of society, A more developed and consequently 
more complicated social order leads to the decline of 
many of the natural virtues of humanity. 

But the Eskimo's love of his neighbour goes the 
length of restraining him from slandering him, and 
even from any sort of evil-speaking, especially in the 
case of a neighbour in the literal sense of the word. 
Scandal and malice are inconsistent with his peace- 
able and kindly disposition. As before remarked, 
the women do not seem to be quite so exemplary in 
this respect ; but we know that such weaknesses are 
commonly attributed to the softer sex all the world 
over. 

Keverence for the aged is not a prominent feature 
of the Eskimo character. They are honoured, indeed, 
so long as they are able to work, and if they have 
in their younger days been good hunters, and have 
sons, they may retain great influence and be regarded 
as the head of the household. A woman who has 
able-bodied sons may also be treated with reverence, 

N 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



178 ESKIMO LIFE 

even should she attain a great age. A widow especi- 
ally has often great power, governing the house as 
long as she lives, and having the upper hand of her 
daughters-in-law. But, as a rule, when people grow 
so old that they cannot take care of themselves, they 
are apt to be treated with scant consideration, espe- 
cially women. Sometimes the younger generation 
will even go the length of making fun of them, and 
to this the poor old people submit with great pati- 
ence, regarding it simply as the way of the world. 

That the reader may form some conception of a 
primitive Eskimo's habits of thought on moral ques- 
tions, I quote the following letter from a converted 
Greenlander to Paul Egede.* I reproduce it here, 
because it in many respects bears out the views 
above expressed, and Egede's book * Accounts of 
Greenland,'^ in which this translation is printed (pp. 
230-236) is now not easily obtainable. The writer 
was a heathen who had been baptised by Paul 
Egede's father, Hans Egede. The letter, which was 
of course written in Eskimo, gives evidence not only 
of a peculiar moral point of view, but also of a keen 
understanding, and of feelings which, as Paul E^ede 
says, one would scarcely expect 'in so »stupid a 

> Paul Egede was for many years a missionary in Greenland, bat 
had at this time (1766) returned to Copenhagen. 
* Efterretninger om Chronland, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS 179 

people as we have hitherto taken them to be.' It is, 
as will be seen, an answer to an epistle of Egede's, 
and runs as follows : — 

Amiable Pauia ! * 
You know how precious and agreeable your letter is to 
me ; but how appalled I was when I read of the destruction 
of such multitudes of people in the great earthquake,' incon- 
ceivable to us, which you say devoured in one moment more 
people thau there are in all our country. I cannot tell you 
how this moved me, or how frightened we were, so that many 
fled from the place where they lived to another, which was 
quite as unsafe, though it was on a rock ; for we see even 
here that rocks have been split open from the top to the very 
depths, though when it happened none of us know. Granite 
rocks, such as our land consists of, and sand-hills like your 
land, are equally easy for God to overthrow, in whose power 
the whole world stands, and we poor little animals are easily 
buried in the ruins. You give me to underetand that with 
yon there have been neither snow nor great cold this winter, 
and conclude that it must have been all the severer with us ; 
but we, too, have had an unusually mild winter. I hear that 
your learned men are of opinion that this mild weather has 
been caused by the warm vapoui-s emanating from the earth 
at the time of the earthquake, which have Warmed the air and 
melted the snow-material. But if I had not heard that this 
was the opinion of the learned, I should have thought that 
the warmth of the earth would avail little to heat the height 
and breadth of the air — ^as little as a man's breath avails to 
warm a large house in which he simply breathes for a moment . 

^ Pauia or Pavia is the Eskimo corruption of Paul. 
^ [Evidently the earthquake at Lisbon. — Trans,] 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



180 ESKIMO LIFE 

and then goes out again. The south winds, which are always 
warm, and have blown all the year through with us, are the 
cause of the moderate cold we have had ; but why the south 
wind blew I cannot tell, nor the learned either, perhaps* 
Were these Wretched people killed by the heat, or did the 
earth swallow them up, or were they shaken to death? 
Skipper B. thought that their own houses must have fallen 
upon them and killed them. Your people do not seem to 
care very much about it ; for they are not only cheerful and 
merry, but they relate that the two nations ' who come here 
whale-fishing, not your countrymen, but of the same faith as 
you, are lighting with and shooting each other both by land 
and sea, hunting each other as we hunt seals and reindeer, 
and stealing and taking away ships and goods from each 
other, from people they have never seen or known, simply 
because their lord and master will have it so. When I asked 
the skipper, through an interpreter, what could be the cause 
of such inhumanity, he answered that it was all about a 
piece of land right opposite ours,^ so far away that it could 
only be reached after three months* sailing. Then I thought 
that there must be great scarcity of land where these people 
dwell ; but he said no, that it was only because of the great 
lords' greediness for more riches and more people to rule 
over. I was so astounded by this greediness, and so 
terrified lest it should fall upon us too, that I was almost 
out of my mind ; but I presently took heart again, 
you will scarcely guess why. I thought of our snow-clad 
country and its poor inhabitants, and said to myself: 
* Thank God ! we are poor and possess nothing which these 
greedy Kablunaks [so they call all foreigners] can desire. 

* Probably the Dutch and English.— [Surely rather the French and 
English.— Trans,] 

'^ Doubtless America. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS 181 

What we have upon the earth they do not care to possess, 
what we require for food and clothing swims in the great 
sea ; of that they may take as much as they can, there will 
always be enough for us/ If only we have as much food as 
we can eat, and skins enough to keep us from the cold, we are 
quite contented ; and you know very well that we let to- 
morrow take care of itself* Therefore we wUl not fight with 
anyone, even if we were strong enough ; although we can 
as justly say that the sea belongs to us as the believers in 
the East can say of the unbelievers in the West that they 
and their possessions belong to them. We can say it is our 
sea which surrounds our land, and that the whales, cachalots, 
grampuses, porpoises, unicorns [that is, narwhals], white 
whales, seals, halibuts, salmon, cod, and sea-scorpions which 
swim in it belong to us too ; but we willingly allow others 
to take of this great store as much as they please. We are 
happy in that we have not so great a natural covetousness as 
they. I have often wondered at the Christians, and have not 
known what to think about them — they leave their own 
beautiful land, and sufier much hardship in this country, 
which is to them so rough and disagreeable, simply for the 
sake of making us good people ; but have you seen so much 
evil in our nation, have you ever heard such strange and 
utterly senseless talk among us ? Their teachers instruct us 
how we are to escape the devil, whom we never knew ; and 
yet the roystering sailors pray with the greatest earnestness 
that the devil may take them, or may split them. I daresay 
you remember how I, in my youth, learned such phrases from 
them to please them, without knowing what they meant, 
until you forbade me to use them. Since I have come to 
understand them myself, I have heard more than I wanted of 
them. This year in particular I have heard so much of the 
Christians, that if I had not, in the course of long familiarity 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



182 ESKIMO LIFE 

with them, known many good and worthy men among them, 
and if Hans Pungiok and Amarsak, who have been to your 
country, had not told me that there were many pious and 
virtuous people there, I could have wished that we had never 
set eyes upon them lest they should corrupt our people. I 
daresay you have often heard how my countrymen think of 
you and yours that you have learned good behaviour among 
us ; and when they see a pious person among yon, they will 
often say, * He is like a human being,' or ' a Greenlander.' You 
no doubt remember that funny fellow Okako*8 idea of sending 
angekoks [that is, medicine-men] to your country to teach 
the people to be good, as your king has &ent preachers hither 
to teach us that there is a God, which we did not know before. 
But I know that your people do not lack instruction, and 
therefore that proposal is of no use. It is strange enough, 
my dear Pauia ! — your people know that there is a God, the 
creator and upholder of all things, that after this life they will 
either be happy or miserable, according as they shall have con- 
ducted themselves here, and yet they live as if they were under 
orders to be wicked, and it was to their honour and advantage 
to sin. My countrymen, on the other hand, know nothing 
either of a God or a devil, believe neither in punishment nor 
in reward after this life ; and yet they live decently, treat 
each other kindly, and share with each other peaceably when 
they have food to share. There are, of course, bad people 
among us too, which proves that we must be of one stock ; 
and perhaps we must thank our barren land for the fact that 
most of us are above reproach. (You do not think, I hope, 
that I am talking hypocritically about my countrymen, for 
you know by experience that what I say is true.) When I 
have heard accounts of your pleasant country I have often 
envied its inhabitants ; for they have great abundance of the 
delicious fruits of the earth, and of animals, birds, and fishes 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS 183 

of innumerable sorts, fine large comfortable houses, fine 
clothes, a long summer, no snow or cold, no midges, but 
everything pleasant and desirable; and this happiness, I 
thought, belonged to you alone because you were believers, 
and, as it were, God's own children, while we, as unbelievers, 
were placed in this country as a punishment. But, oh, we 
happy Greenlanders ! Oh, dear native land ! How well it 
is that you are covered with ice and snow ; how well it is 
that if in your rocks there are gold and silver, for which the 
Christians are eo greedy, it is covered with so much snow 
that they cannot get at it ! Your unfruitfulness makes us 
happy and saves us from molestation ! Pauia ! we are indeed 
contented with our lot. Fish and flesh are our sole food ; 
dainties seldom come in our way, but are all the pleasanter 
when they do. Our drink is ice-cold water; it quenches 
thirst and does not steal away the understanding or the natural 
strength like that maddening drink of which your people are 
80 fond. Our clothing is of unsightly thick-haired skins, 
but it is well suited to this country, both for the animals, 
while the skins are still theirs, and for us when we take 
them firom them. Here then, thank God, there is nothing to 
tempt anyone to come and kill us for its sake. We live without 
fear. It is true that here in the North we have the fierce white 
bears ; but to deal with them we have our dogs, which fight 
for us, so that we do not run the slightest risk. Murder is 
vAry seldom heard of among us. It does not happen unless 
someone is suspected or accused of being a magician and of 
having killed someone by his witchcraft, in which case he is 
killed without remorse by those whose duty it is, who think 
they have just as good right as the executioner in your 
country to take the lives of malefactors ; but they make no 
boast of it, and do not give thanks to God for it like the great 
lords in your country, when they have killed all the people of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



184 ESKIMO LIFE 

another land, aa D. has told me. It surely cannot be to the 
good Gtod of whom yon teach us, who has forbidden as to 
shed blood, that they give thanks and pridaes ; it must be to 
another who loves slaughter and destruction, I wonder if it 
is not to the Tomarsuk [the devil] ? Yet that cannot be 
either ; for it would be flying in the face of the good Gk>d to 
give any honour to Satan. I hope you will explain this to 
me at your convenience. I promise not to tell my country- 
men about it. It might lead them to think like Kaua, who 
dared not become a Christian for fear he should come to be 
like the wicked sailors. I will not tell you anything about 
the conversion of my countrymen, for I know that our 
teacher has given you all information. The thing you desired 
me to look into I will, as far as I am able, attend to. I have 
not been able to make the experiment with the compass, 
since the cold this year has been only moderate. The cause 
of the two conflicting currents is no doubt what you say. 
Since you value so much the two fishes almost turned to 
stone, I shall try to procure more for you ; they are found 
in clay beds, as you suppose. Now I seem to have been 
speaking to you and you to me — now I must close my letter. 
The skipper is ready and the wind is fair. The mighty Pro- 
tector of ^1 of us guide them over the great and perilous 
sea, and preserve them, especially from the wicked men- 
hunters, of whom I see they are most in dread, so that they 
may come scatheless to their fatherland and find you, my 

beloved, with gladness. 

Paul Greenlander. 

Greenland, 1756. 

This letter, as well as what has been stated in the 
earlier part of this chapter, surely justifies us in 
saying that the primitive morality of the Eskimo 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MORALS 185 

stands in many respects close to that of ideal Chris- 
tianity, and is even in one way superior to it ; for, as 
the letter-writer says, the Greenlanders *know no- 
thing either of a God or a devil, believe neither in 
punishment nor in reward after this Ufe, and yet they 
live virtuously ' none the less. 

Many people will, no doubt, think it astonishing 
that we should find so highly developed a morality 
among a race so uncultivated, and so unclean in 
their outward habits. Others will perhaps find it 
more surprising that this morality should have been 
developed among a people who have no religion, or 
at any rate a very imperfect one, as we shall pre- 
sently see. Such facts are inconsistent with the 
theory which is still held in many quarters, that 
morality and religion are inseparable. A study of 
the Eskimo community shows pretty clearly, I think, 
that morality to a great extent springs from and rests 
upon natural law. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



186 ESKIMO J.IFE 



CHAPTER XI 

JUDICIAL PBOCEEDINGS — DEUM-DANCES AND 
ENTERTAINMENTS 

I HAVE again and again sought to impress upon the 
reader that the Eskimos are a peaceable and kindly 
race. There is no more striking proof of this, I 
1/ think, than their primitive judicial process. 

It is a mistake to suppose that the heathen 
Eskimos had no means of submitting any wrong they 
had suffered to the judgment of their fellows. VJlieir 
judicial process, however, was of a quite peculiar 
nature, and consisted of a sort of duel. It was not 
fought with lethal weapons, as in the so-called 
civilised countries; in this, as in other things, the 
Greenlander went more mildly to work, challenging 
the man who had done him wrong to a contest of 
song or a drum-dance^ This generally took place 
at the great summer meetings, where many people 
were assembled with their tents. The litigants stood 
face to face with each other in the midst of a 
circle of onlookers, both men and women, and, beat- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS, DRUM-DANCES, ETC. 187 

ing a tambourine or drum, each in turn sang satirical 
songs about the other. In these songs, which as a 
rule were composed beforehand, but were sometimes 
improvised, they related all the misdeeds of their 
opponent and tried in every possible way to make 
him ridiculous. The one who got the audience to 
laugh most at his jibes or invectives was the con- 
queror. Even such serious crimes as murder were 
often expiated in this way. It may appear to us 
a somewhat mild form of punishment, but for this 
people, with their marked sense of honour, it was 
sufficient ; [Tor the worst thing that can happen to a 
Greenlander is to be made ridiculous in the eyes of 
his fellows, and to be scoffisd at by themj It has 
even happened that a man has been forcea to go into 
exile by reason of a defeat in a drum-dance. 

This drum-dance is still to be found upon the 
east coast. It seems clear that it must be an ex- 
ceedingly desirable institution, and for my pai't I 
only wish that it could be introduced into Euirope ; 
for a quicker and easier fashion of settling quarrels 
and punishing evil-doers it is difficult to imagine. 

The missionaries on the west coast of Greenland, 
unfortunately, do not seem to have been of the same 
opinion. Being a heathen custom, it was therefore, 
in their opinion, immoral and noxious as well ; and 
on the introduction of Christianity they opposed it 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



188 ESKIMO LIFE 

and rooted it out. Dalager even tells us that * there 
is scarcely any vice practised among the Greenlanders 
against which our missionaries preach more vehe- 
mently than they do against this dance, affirming 
that it is the occasion of all sorts of misbehaviour, 
especially among the young/ This policy he did 
not at all approve. He admits, indeed, that the 
dances may be the occasion of a few irregularities, 
but adds that if a girl has made up her mind to 
part with her virtue, she is not likely to select so 
unquiet a time and place ; and one cannot but agree 
with him when he exclaims, ' And in truth, if people 
danced to such good purpose among us, we should 
presently see every second moralist and advocate 
transformed into a dancing-master/ 

The result of this inconsiderate action on the 
part of the missionaries is that, in reality, no law 
and no forms of justice now exist in Greenland. 
The Europeans cannot, of course, or at any rate 
should not, mix themselves up in the Greenlanders' 
private affairs. But when, on some rare occasion, a 
crime of real importance occurs, the Danish authori- 
ties feel that they must intervene. The conse- 
quences of such intervention are sometimes rather 
surprising. At a settlement in North Greenland 
some years ago (so I have been told), a man who 
had killed his mother was punished by banishment 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS, DRUM-DANCES, ETC. 189 

to a desert island. In order that he should be able 
to support himself in solitude, they had to give him 
a new kaiak, and a small store of food to begin 
with. Some time afterwards, the food having run 
out, he returned to the settlement and declared that 
he could not live on the island, because there was 
not enough game in the waters around it. He 
therefore settled down again in his old house, and 
the only change in his life brought about by his 
matricide was that he got a new kaiak. 

The managers of the colonies sometimes have 
recourse to a more effective method of punishment 
in the case of women : it consists in excluding them 
for a certain time from dealing at the stores. 

Besides being a judicial process, the drum-dance 
Was also a great entertainment, and was often danced 
merely for the sake of pastime. In this case the 
dancers sang songs of various kinds, beating a 
drum the while, and going through a varied series 
of more or less burlesque writhings and contor- 
tions of the body. This is another consideration 
which ought to have made the missionaries think 
twice before abolishing the drum-dances, for amuse- 
ment is a necessity of life, serving to refresh the 
mind, and is of quite peculiar importance for a 
people which, like the Greenlanders, inhabits an 
inhospitable region and has few diversions. To 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



190 ESKIMO LIFE 

make up for the loss of the drum-dances, they have 
now borrowed from the European whale-fishers and 
sailors many European dances, especially reels, 
which they have to some extent modified according 
to their own taste. At the colonies, the carpenter's 
shop, the blubber-loft, or some other large apart- 
ment, is generally used as a ball-room, and here 
dances takie place as often as the managers or other 
authorities will give permission — ^generally once a 
week. In the other villages the dancing takes place 
in the Greenlanders*^ own houses, 

A Greenland ball ofiers a picturesque spectacle — 
the room half lighted by the train-oil lamps, and the 
crowd of people, young and old, all in their many- 
coloured garments, some of them taking part in the 
dance, some standing as on-lookers in crowded 
groups along the walls and upon the sleeping-benches 
and seats. There is plenty of beauty and of grace- 
ful form, commingled with the most extravagant 
hideousness. Over the whole scene there is a sense 
of sparkling merriment, and in the dance a great 
deal of grace and accomplishment. The feet will 
often move so nimbly in the reel that the eye can 
with difficulty follow them. In foi-mer days the 
music was generally supplied by a violin, but now 
the accordion, too, is much in use. 

The unhappy Eskimos who belong to the German 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




H 

P 
'A 

2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS, DRUM-DANCES, ETC. 191 

or Herrnhut communities, of which there are several 
in the country, are forbidden to dance, and even to 
look at others dancing. If they do, they are excom- 
municated by the piissionaries, or put down in their 
black books. 

Among other amusements, church-going takes a 
prominent place. They find the psalm-singing ex- 
tremely diverting, and the women in particular are 
very much addicted to it. 

The women, however, find shopping at least as 
entertaining. As the time for opening the stores 
approaches, they are to be seen, even in the winter 
snowstorms, standing in groups along the walls and 
waiting for the moment when the doors of Paradise 
shall be flung wide and they can rush in. Most of 
them do not want to buy anything, but they while 
away the hours during which the store is open, 
partly in examining aU the European articles of 
luxury, especially stuffs and shawls, partly in flirting 
with the storekeepers, and partly in exchanging all 
sorts of more or less refined witticisms and ' larking ' 
with each other. 

The rush is particularly great every summer, 
after the arrival of the ships with cargoes of new 
wares from Europe. Then the stores are literally in 
a state of siege the whole day long. Like their 
European sisters, the Eskimo women are fond of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



I 192 ESKIMO LIFE 



novelties of all sorts, so that as soon as they arrive 
the stores do a roaring trade in them. The main 
point, so far as I could understand, is that the wares 
shall be new ; the use they are to be put to is a 
minor consideration. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



193 



CHAPTER XII 

MENTAL GIFTS — ART — MUSIC — POETRY — ESKIMO 
NARRATIVES 

The Greenlanders are endowed with good mental 
faculties and great inventiveness. Their implements 
and weapons, as we have seen, afford a striking proof 
of this. The missionaries, too, especially at first, 
found only too ample opportunity to judge of the 
keenness of their understanding, when they were so 
foolish as to let themselves be drawn into discussions 
with the heathen angekoks. When the missionaries 
were cornered, however, they had often arguments 
in reserve which were much more forcible than those 
of the natives. They wielded, as my friend, the 
master carpenter at Godthaab used to say, * a proper 
fist,' and to its persuasions the peaceable Greenlanders 
could not but yield. 

To prove that their natural parts are good, I may 
mention that they learn to read and write with com- 
parative ease. Most of the Christian Eskimos can 
now read and write, many of them very well; in- 

o 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



lU ESKIMO LIFE 

deed, their faculty for writing is often quite mar- 
vellous. Even the heathen Eskimos learn to play 
dominoes, draughts, and even chess, with ease. I 
have often played draughts with the natives of the 
Godthaab district, and was astonished at the abihty 
and foresight which they displayed. 

All our ordinary branches of education they 
master with more or less readiness. Arithmetic is 
what they find most difficult, and there are compara- 
tively few who get so far as to deal competently with 
fractions ; the majority have quite enough to do with 
addition and subtraction of integers, to say nothing 
of multiplication and division. The imperfection of 
their gifts in this direction is no doubt due to age-old 
causes. The Eskimo language, like most primitive 
idioms, has a very undeveloped system of numerals, 
five being the highest number for which they have 
a special word. They count upon their fingers: 
One, atausek; two, mardluk; three, pingasut\ four, 
sisamet; five, tatcUimaty the last having probably 
been the original word for the hand. When an 
Eskimo wants to count beyond five, he expresses six 
by saying * the first finger of the other hand ' {arjinek 
or igluane aiausek) ; for seven he says ' the second 
finger of the otlier hand ' {arjinek mardluk), and so 
forth. When he reaches ten he has no more hands 
to count with, and must have recourse to his feet. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MENTAL GIFTS, ART, MUSIC, POETRY, ETC. 196 

Twelve, accordingly, is represented by *two toes 
upon the one foot ' {arkanek mardluk), and so forth ; 
seventeen by ' two toes on the Second foot ' {arfer- 
sanek mardluk)^ and so forth. Thus he manages to 
mount to twenty, which he calls a whole man {inuk 
ndvdlugo). Here the mathematical conceptions of 
many Eskimos come to an end; but men of com- 
manding intellect can count still further, and for 
one-and-twenty say * one on the second man ' {in(tp 
dipagssdne atausek). Thirty-eight is expressed by 
* three toes on the second man's second foot ' {inHip 
dipagssdne arfinek pingasut\ forty by ' the whole of 
the second man' {inUp dipagssd ndvdlugo)^ and so 
forth. In this way they can count to a hundred, or 
' the whole of the fifth man ' ; but beyond that his 
language will not carry even the most gifted Eskimo. 
This is, as will be easily understood, a somewhat 
unwieldy method of expression when one has to deal 
with numbers over twenty. In former days there 
was seldom any need to go further than this ; but 
the introduction of money and trade has, unfortu- 
nately, rendered this more frequently necessary. It 
is therefore not surprising that, in spite of their 
remarkable power of resistance to foreign words, 
th^ Greenlanders have begun more and more to 
adopt the Danish numerals, even for the smaller num- 
bers. By their aid they have now got so far that 

2 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



196 ESKIMO LIFE 

they can count to over a hundred, which they call 
untritigdlit^ ; but I strongly suspect that they have 
still a difficulty in forming any distinct conception of 
so high a number. A thousand they call tusintigdlit} 

This primitive Eskimo method of numeration 
answers to what we find among most primitive 
peoples, the fingers and toes having been from all 
time the most natural appliances for counting with ; 
even our forefathers no doubt reckoned in the same 
way. Imperfect though it be, however, this method 
is a great advance upon that of the Australian tribes, 
who cannot count beyond three, or in some cases not 
beyond two, and whose numerals consist of : ' One, 
two, plenty.' That the forefathers of the Eskimos, 
as of all other peoples, at one time stood on this level 
appears from their original grammar, in which we 
find a singular, dual, and plural, as in Gothic, Greek, 
Sanscrit, the Semitic languages, and many others. 

All travellers agree in acknowledging the Es- 
kimo's remarkable sense of locality and talent for 
topography. When Captain Ommaney, in 1850, 
asked an Eskimo from Cape York to draw the 
coast, he took a pencil, a thing he had never seen 
before, and sketched the coast-line along Smith's 
Sound from his birthplace northwards with astonish- 
ing accuracy, indicating all the islands, and the more 

' Danish, hundrede, * Danish, ttisinde. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MENTAL GXKTS, ART, MUSIC, POETRY, ETC. 197 

important rocks, glaciers, and mountains, and men- 
tioning the names of all of them. The heathen 
natives brought to Captain Holm a map of the east 
coast north of Angmagsalik, which they had cut out 
in wood. 

The Greenlanders have, in my opinion, an in- 
dubitable artistic faculty, and if their culture in this 
direction is but little developed, I believe the reason 
lies in their hard fight for existence, which has left 
them no time for artistic pursuits. Their art ^ con- 
sists chiefly in the decoration of weapons, tools, and 
garments with patterns and figures, cut out of bone 
or wood, or embroidered in leather. The designs 
often represent animals, human beings, woman*boats, 
and kaiaks ; but they are conventional, and intended 
rather for decorative or symbolic efiect than as true 
reproductions of Nature ; indeed, they have as a rule 
assumed quite traditional forms. Some, too, are of 
religious significance, and represent, for example, the 
tdmdrsauk — one of their spirits or supernatural 
beings. When they really try to copy Nature, they 
sometimes display a rare sense of form and power 
of reproducing it, as may be seen from the remark- 
able pictures given by Captain Holm of dolls and 

^ The most important contribution to our knowledge of Eskimo art 
in its primitive condition is to be found in Captain Holm's instructive 
account of the Eskimos at Angmagsalik, MeddeleUer om Oronland, 
pt. 10, p. 148, &c., with illustrations. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



196 ESKIMO LIFE 

toys from the east coast, which are therefore quite 
uninfluenced by European art-products. 

Weapons and tools were doubtless among the 
first things upon which the human artistic faculty 
thought of exercising itself; but the human body 
itself was perhaps a still earlier subject for artistic 
treatment. Belies of this early form of art are found 
among the Eskimos, the women seeking to heighten 
their attractions by means of geometrical lines and 
figures which they produce upon face, breast, arms, 
or legs, by means of drawing sinews, blackened witt 
lamp-soot, through the skin. 

Hieroglyphics, which many believe to have been, 
in part at least, the origin of art, seem oddly enough 
to have been unknown among the Greenlanders, un- 
less indeed the symbolic designs in their ornamenta- 
tion can be supposed to have some such significance. 
The oply attempt at real picture-writing which I 
have been able to discover among them does not 
evince a very high order of talent. It was a missive 
to Paul Egede from an angekok, which consisted 
simply of a stick, upon which was drawn, with soot 
and train oil, a figure like this : A- The angekok 
called after the letter-carrier, as he took his de- 
parture, 'If Pauia Angekok does not understand 
what I mean (though he probably will), then say to 
him : " This means a pair of trousers which I want 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MENTAL GIFTS, ART, MUSIC, POETRY, ETC. 199 

him to buy for me at the stores." But he will 
understand it well enough.' 

Eskimos who have seen specimens of European 
art and methods of representation, will sometimes 
produce remarkable things without any sort of in- 
struction. A Greenlander named Aaron once fell 








K8KIMO VENUS AND APOLLO. 



sick and had to keep to his bed. Dr. Rink sent him 
some materials for wood-engraving and some old 
woodcuts. Lying in bed, he at once began to illus- 
trate the Eskimo legends, and he not only drew his 
pictures, but also cut them on the wood. 

As an example of their talent for sculpture I 
here reproduce two heads, carved in wood, which a 
native of a village in the Godthaab district brought 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



200 ESKIMO LIFE 

to me. They seem to me to betray a marked sense 
of humour ; and one can scarcely doubt that it is 
the features of his own race which the artist has 
immortalised. 

l/ Of musical talent the Greenlanders have a good 
share. They pick up our music with remarkable 
ease, and reproduce it, sometimes vocally, for they 
are very fond of singing, sometimes on the violin, 
guitar, organ, accordion, or other instruments, which 
they quickly teach themselves to play upon. This is 
the more remarkable as their primitive music, which 
was performed at the drum-danoes, is monotonous 
and undeveloped, like that of most primitive peoples. 
It employs only a few notes, as a rule not more than 
five ; but it is nevertheless pecuUar and not without 
interest. It is believed to be in the main an imita- 
tion of the rushing of the rivers. The East Green- 
landers told Holm that when they sleep beside a 
river they hear the singing of the dead, and this 
they seek to imitate. 

The primitive characteristics of their music have 
of course been more or less destroyed by their 
intercourse with Europeans. They have now 
adopted many European airs, and it produces a 
quaint and surprising effect, among the moun- 
tains and the glaciers, suddenly to hear a snatch 
of a Ciopenhagen street song, as for example, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MENTAX GIFTS, AKT, MUSIC, POETRY, ETC. 201 

*Gina, lovely maiden mine, . . . won't you come 
along ? ' 

The Greenlanders have a great wealth of fairy 
tales and legends, many of them very characteristic; 
Nothing affords a better insight into the whole 
spiritual life of the people, their disposition, feelings, 
and moods, than the matter of these legends and the 
manner in which they are t^ld. We find in them a 
considerable talent for narrative and gift of imagi- 
nation, along with a grotesque humour, which of 
course often takes the form of coarseness. 

Besides this legendary lore (see next chapter) and 
narratives of exploits and adventures, the Green- 
landers had a poetry of their own. The songs were 
either lampoons, such as they used to sing at the 
before-mentioned drum-dances, or else descriptions 
of different objects and events. 

When, on the introduction of Christianity, the 
drum-dance was abolished, the art of versification 
also fell into disuse or assumed new shapes. Still, 
however, the Greenlanders make up songs. They 
are often of a jocose character, the poet setting 
forth to ridicule, in a more or less innocent manner, 
the peculiarities of others. I understand that several 
songs of this nature were composed with reference 
to members of my expedition. Indeed I have often 
heard them sung about the settlement of an evening, 



Digitized by-Vj^QglC 




202 ESKIMO LIFE 

though I never succeeded in obtaining the text of 
any of them. 

Thanks to the initiative of Dr. Bink, an Eskimo 
newspaper, Atuagagdliutit, has ever since 1861 been 
published in Godthaab. It is printed by a native, 
Lars Moller, who has been to Copenhagen to learn 
the trade, and who even draws and lithographs 
pictures for it. It is published twelve times a year, 
and is distributed gratis to the community, the 
expenses being borne out of the public funds. Its 
contents consist partly of translations from the 
Danish, partly of independent contributions from 
the natives describing their hunting, their travels, 
and so forth. Thus a whole hew literature has been 
called into existence. 

A specimen of their method of narration was 
given in ' The First Crossing of Greenland,' Vol. II. 
pp. 217-236. It consisted of the account given 
by an Eskimo named Silas, in the AtuagagdUutit^ 
of his expedition from Unanak on Godthaab-fiord 
to the Ameralik fiord to render assistance to the 
four members of our expedition who had remained 
behind there in October 1888, after Sverdrup and I 
had proceeded to Godthaab. The following narra- 
tive, from the Atnagagdliutit, is also a good sample 
of their style. It exemplifies, moreover, the strong 
hold which their superstitious still possess upon the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MEKTAL GIFTS, ART, MUSIC, POETRY, ETC. 203 

Eskimo mind, and is thus of interest with reference 
to the matter of my next chapter. I have to thank 
Mrs. Signe Rink for her kindness in translating it for 
me. 

At last I send you something which I have long thought 
of contributing to your * Varieties ' column. There is not 
much in what I have to tell, but what there is I have seen 
with my own eyes. I refer to the comical customs in con- 
nection with the killing of a bear in certain southern dis- 
tricts, which are quite unknown elsewhere. These things 
took place in the year 1882-83 down at Augpilagtut, a little 
way from Pamiagdluk.' There are two Eskimo houses at 
Augpilagtut. In one of them lived three seal-hunters with 
their fiEunilies, to wit, Benjamin, surnamed Ak&tit, Isaac, 
or UmangAjok, and lastly Moritz ; and in the other dwelt 
MathsBUS, who was generally called Ulivkakaungamik, or 
' the full-stuffed,' from a catch-word he himself was in the 
habit of using. He was over seventy, but still went 
hunting very oflen, and had even killed many bears all by 
himself. 

It happened one Sunday, when all the other hunters had 
gone to sea, that we who remained behind held a prayer- 
meeting in Mathaeus's house. When it was over, Benjamin's 
son was the first who went out, and he came rushing back 
again crying, ' There's a bear right outside here, eating the 
blubber.' 

I was half frightened, half rejoiced by this news; but old 
Mathseus positively trembled with delight, and burst foith, 
^ Thanks to him who brings such good tidings ; I must go 
out at once and kill the bear.' I looked at him, thinking 

' Near Cape Farewell. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



204 ESKIMO LIFE 

that he was going to pick out for himself a good weapon, k 
long knife or spear. But nothing of the kind ! The weapon 
he had taken scarcely stuck out from his clenched fist. What 
use can that be, I thought, against the bear's hide and thick 
layer of fat. However, the women of the house would not 
let him attack the bear, and all seized upon him to hold him 
back, I helping them. The women all untied their top-knots 
and let their hair spread loose, that the bear might think 
they were men, and therefore keep his distance. For our 
heathen forefathers thought that bears had human under- 
standing. 

As we were afraid lest this bear should take it into his 
head to come into the house through the gut-skin window, I, 
too, had to think about getting hold of some weapon or 
other, and therefore asked for their axe ; but I of course 
found that it had been lent to the people of the other house. 
At the same time I caught sight of a woman's knife lying 
upon the ipaJc ^ beside the lamp, and that I seized, along with 
a piece of wood from an old kaiak-keel, which I wanted to tie 
to the knife and use* as a spear-shaft. But no sooner had I 
taken these things than someone behind me cried, ' Give 
them to me ; I am ever so much stronger than you ! ' It 
was no other than Mathasus's daughter, a widow. She took 
them both away from me. 

The house-clock ' now began to strike eleven, and that 
brute of a bear forthwith began to look hungrier. I pushed 
at once to stop the striking, but in my consternation I made 
a mistake and increased the racket, until at last I managed 

> The ipak is an extension of the sleeping-bench (generally sqnare) 
on which they place the lamp with its wooden stand. 

' Cheap Nuremberg or Swiss clocks are among the articles of 
luxury which commerce has introduced into Greenl^d; th^y are to 
be found in the remotest corners of the country. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MENTAL GIFTS, ART, MUSIC, POETRY, ETC. 205 

to get the weight loosened and the striking stopped. The 
women were still holding tight to Mathseas to keep him back. 
Then, all at once, the mother of the boy who had seen the 
bear began to slip her trousers down to her knees, and so go 
shnflBing round the room, while she plaited some straws. 
This, they said, was to weaken the bear, so as to make it 
easier to get the better of him. In the meantime, old 
Mathaeus shook the women off and set forth. I rushed after 
him, and came up with him before he had quite got out of 
the entrance-passage. He told me to go quietly, and said, 
^ Hush, hush, now he's going down towards the sea.' 

Mathseus's rifle was lying in his kaiak on the beach, and 
as soon as the bear had passed the kaiak, the old man crept 
cautiously on all fours in the same direction. I stood at 
the entrance to the passage and saw the bear suddenly tarn 
and nish roaring towards him. This frightened me so that 
I fled over to the other house where, in my hurry, I came 
tumbling in at the door. While I still lay grovelling upon 
the floor, I could see through the window i how the bear 
and Mathaeus stared each other straight in the face, each on 
his own side of the kaiak, Mathseas making grimaces, and 
the bear roaring with his mouth wide open, ready to bite him ; 
but Mathaeus planted his foot flrmly against the kaiak and 
aimed, without once taking his eyes off the bear for a single 
moment ; and then he fired. I now harried out, jast in time 
to see him thrust his sealing-lance into its carcase. Then he 
called loudly to those in the house that now they had better 
come and get their ningek (slice of fat). In their hurry to 
outstrip each other, the women almost stuck fast in the 
narrow house-passage, part of which they tore down. When 
they reached the bear, they all thrust their hands into the 

* Which is verj* low in the genuine Eskimo huts. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



20(5 ESKIMO LIFE 

wound and lapped some of the blood, while each of them 
named the part of the animal which she wanted to have. At 
last my tarn came to drink the blood, and I did so, saying 
that I wanted one ham as my portion ; bat thereupon they 
answered that all the limbs were already bespoke, and that I, 
moreover, had neglected to touch the bear when I came up 
to it. It was extremely vexatious that I had forgotten this 
detail. The mother of the boy who had first seen the bear 
now ran for a bowl of water and made us all take a mouthful 
of it, though none of us was thirsty. This she did in order 
that her son might always have good luck in spying bears. 
The drinking of the blood was meant to prove to the whole 
race of bears how they thirsted after them. Before they set 
to work to cut up the bear, they kept dramming at his skin 
and crying : ' You are fat, fat, beautifully fat.' This they do 
out of politeness, in the hope that the bear may really be fat; 
but when we skinned this one it was found to be quite un- 
usually lean. 

When they carried the head into the house, I went along 
with them, knowing that they would go through certain 
ceremonies with it. First it was placed on the edge of the 
lamp-table with the face towards the south-east ; then they 
stopped its mouth and nostrils with sediment from the lamps 
and other sorts of grease ; and lastly, they bedecked the 
crown of the head with all sorts of little things, such as shoe- 
soles, sawdust, glass beads, knives, &c. The south-east 
direction is due to the fact that it is from this quarter of the 
compass that the bears generally come, being carried by ' the 
great ice ' round the southern extremity of the land. The lamp- 
moss in the nostrils is meant to prevent the bear they next 
attack from scenting the approach of men ; and the greasing 
of the mouth is designed to give it pleasure, as the bear is 
supposed to be a lover of all sorts of fried grease. The head 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MENTAL GIFTS, ART, MUSIC, TOETRY, ETC. 207 

is covered with knick-knacks because they think that the 
bear is sent to them by their forefathers for the purpose of 
bringing these things with it to the other world ; and as they 
reckon that the bear's soul cannot reach its home in less than 
five days, they always refrain for that time from eating its 
head, lest its soul should die on the way, and the little gifts 
to their relatives should thus be lost. They are even careful 
to stop up all the holes in the neck where the head has been 
cut off, in order to prevent the soul from bleeding to death 
on its journey. For my part, I call all this idolatry. The 
heathens, indeed, believed in the old days that everything, 
whether living or dead, had its soul ; but there is nothing 
that one ought to mix up with man's immortal soul. The fact 
that, even in our days, so long after the introduction of 
Christianity, the people here in the far south still cling to 
some of the habits of their forefathers is due to their frequent 
(almost yearly) intercourse with the heathens of the east 
coast. 

1 left Augpilagtut in 1885. I am not quite sure whether 
even out at Pamiagdluk there may not be a few families who 
still lean to these bear superstitions ; but all certainly do not 
— not Isaac*s family, for one. At other places, for example 
here at the Colony, they have scarcely even heard of the 
customs I have described. 

I had not been told on what day they intended to cook 
the bear's head, and was therefore surprised by a sudden 
invitation to come and share in it. I cut the snout off with- 
out ceremony ; but they soon let me know that I had made 
a mistake, at once tearing it out of my hands. I confess I 
was a good deal offended, and told them straight out that, 
however foolish they might think me, I did not believe a bit 
in all this. They assured me quite earnestly that in that 
case I would never kill a bear, whereupon I answered that 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



208 ESKIMO LIFE 

this prophecy was very likely to be fulfilled, since I was so 
short-sighted that the bear would probably be licking me 
before I was aware of its presence. 

They have also these further* customs : If they see the 
track of a bear in the snow, they eat a little of it in order to 
assure themselves of killing the bear if it should happen to 
come back the same way. Little boys are given the kidneys 
of bears to eat, in order that they may be strong and 
courageous in bear-hunting. Furthermore, they are carefnl 
during the aforesaid five days not to make any jingling noise, 
for the bear is supposed to dislike any sort of clinking or 
clanking. 

MathsBus told me that the bear I had seen him kill was 
his eleventh, and that he had not been in the least afraid of 
it because in this case he knew he had his rifle to trust to ; 
but that once before when he had seen a bear come crawling 
up the beach in the same way, he had rushed right in upon 
it with only his lance. He said he could not remember how 
long ago that was. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



209 



CHAPTER Xm 

RELIGIOUS IDEAS 

Religion and religious ideas are amon^ the most 
remarkable products of the human spirit. With all 
their reason-defying assertions and astounding incon- 
gruities, they seem at first sight inexplicable. Time 
out of mind, therefore, men have found it difficult to 
conceive them as having arisen otherwise than 
through a supernatural or divine revelation, which, 
it would follow, must originally have been imparted 
to all men alike. But gradually, as people became 
acquainted with the more or less rudimentary reli- 
gions of the various races, which often differ greatly 
on the most essential matters, they began to doubt 
the accuracy of this assumption, and came more and 
more to consider whether religious ideas must not be 
reckoned as a natural product of the human mind 
itself, under the influence of its surroundings. 

The first theory was that they arose from a 
religious craving common to all human beings, which 
was itself, therefore, in a certain sense supernatural. 

p 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



210 ESKIMO LIFE 

It 18 a mysterious incomprehensible presentiment, 
says Schleiermacher, which drives mankind across 
the boundaries of the finite world, and leads everyone 
to religion; only by the crippling of this natural 
proclivit}'' can irreligiousness arise. ' Eeligion begins 
in the first encounter of the life of the All with that 
of the individual ; it is the sacred and infallible inter- 
marriage — the creative, productive embrace — of the 
universe with incarnate reason.' 

Gradually the explanations became less vague and 
/ high-sounding. Peschel and others held that religious 
ideas arose from the need of conceiving the cause or 
beginning of all things, or, in other words, that it 
was the sources of movement, life, and thought, 
which mankind sought after, with its inborn longing 
to realise the absolute. Others hold, with Max 
Muller, that a longing for the in finitc^ a striving to 
understand the incomprehensible, to name the un- 
nameable, is the deep spiritual bass-note which 
makes itself heard in all religions. Others again, like 
0. Pfleiderer, see in mankind's inborn and incom- 
prehensible thirst for beauty, its fantasy, and its 
aesthetic sense, the first germs of religious conscious- 
ness. Some theorists, finally, have sought to explain 
religious ideas as an outcome of the moral sense of 
mankind, of its thirst for righteousness. 

In the light of a moderately penetrating study of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 211 

the religious ideas of the Eskimos, as of every other 
primitive people, all these philosophic theories vanish 
away. In our empirical age, people have come more 
and more to recognise that religious ideas must be 
ascribed to the same natural laws which condition all 
other phenomena, and to hold, as David Hume first 
maintained, that they can be traced for the most part 
to two tendencies in our nature— or perhaps we 
should rather call them instincts — which are common 
to all animals ; to wit, the fear of death and the desire 
of life. From the former instinct arises fear of the 
dead and of external nature with its titanic forces, 
and the craving for protection against them. From 
the latter arises the desire for happiness, for power, 
and for other advantages. Thus, too, we understand 
the fact that the early religions are not disinterested, 
but egotistical, that the worshipper is not so much 
rapt in contemplation of the enigmas of nature and 
of the infinite, as eager to secure some advantage to 
himself. When, for example, amulets and fetishes 
are supposed to possess supernatural power, they are 
not only treasured, but worshipped. 

It is difficult, not to say impossible, to search 
back to the first vague forms in which religious ideas 
dawned in the morning of humanity, when thought 
began to emerge from the primal mists of animal 
consciousness. It was with religious ideas in that 

p 2 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



212 ESKIMO LIFE 

time as with the first organic beings which arose upon 
our earth — they had not yet assumed such deter- 
minate forms, their component parts were not yet so 
definitely fixed, as to leave traces behind them ; what 
we find are the more advanced stages of develop- 
ment. The first ideas must have been exceedingly 
obscure impressions, dependent upon many outward 
chances, and we can no more reason ourselves back 
to them, than we can conceive the appearance of the 
first organisms. Nor can we determine at what st^e 
of the development of humanity these first vague 
germs of religious ideas appeared — whether, for ex- 
ample, they were present in our simian forefathers. 
It does not even seem to me certain that the lower 
animals are devoid of all superstitious feeling. We 
cannot, therefore, expect to discover in any now 
existing race a total lack of even the most rudimen- 
tary superstitious conceptions. We must rather 
wonder that in a people otherwise so highly developed 
as the Eskimos, they should still remain on such a 
remarkably low level. 

In the light of our knowledge of the primitive 
religions, it seems to me best not to regard the 
aforesaid instincts as the direct cause of superstitious 
conceptions, but rather to distinguish between at 
least three germs or impulses, which have provided 
the material .out of which these instincts — in reality 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



HELIGIOUS IDEAS 213 

resolvable into one, the instinct of self-preservation — 
have fashioned all religious systems. The three 
germs are : our tendency to personify nature, our 
belief in its and our own duality and in the immor- 
tality of the soul, and the belief in the supernatural 
power and influence of certain inanimate objects 
(amulets). In order to recognise the great impor- 
tance of these germs, especially at a primitive 
stage of development, we must try to throw our 
minds back to the standpoint of the child, which 
most nearly answers to that of primitive man. To 
personify nature is for the child no mere passing 
fancy ; he consistently regards all surrounding 
objects, animate and inanimate, as persons, and will, 
for example, carry on long conversations with his 
toys. A child of my acquaintance, standing one 
day in the kitchen watching some long sausages 
boiling in a pot, exclaimed to the cook : * I say, are 
these sausages killed yet ? ' All of us, probably, can 
remember from our childhood how we personified 
trees, certain mountains, and the Uke. It is the 
same proclivity, as Tylor says, which reappears in 
our often irrational desire or thirst for vengeance 
upon inanimate things which in one way or another 
have caused us pain or injury. For example, when 
we were crossing Greenland, Sverdrup and I had a 
sledge which was heavy to draw ; it would have 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



214 ESKIMO LIFE 

caused us quite real satisfaction to have destroyed it, 
or otherwise revenged ourselves upon it, when we at 
last left it behind. Another inseparable characteristic 
of the child-mind is its determination to see in every 
movement or occurrence in its little world the 
activity of a personal will. 

In the first childish philosophy of the human 
race, the same method of regarding all natural 
>J objects as persons must have been quite inevitable. 
Trees, stones, rivers, the winds, clouds, stars, the sun 
and moon became living persons or animals. The 
Eskimos, for example, believe that the heavenly 
bodies were once ordinary men and w^omen before 
they were transferred to the sky. 

But after or along with this proclivity there must 
also have arisen quite naturally the tendency to con- 
ceive a twofoldness, a duality, in nature and in man, 
the feeling of a visible and tangible, and of an 
invisible and super-sensible, existence. Let us, for 
instance, with Tylor, conceive an ignorant primitive 
man hearing the echo of his own voice ; how can he 
help believing that it is produced by a man ? He 
knows nothing of the theory of sound-waves. But 
when he hears it time after time, and can find no 
man who produces the sound, it is inevitable that he 
should attribute it to invisible beings. 

Or take, for example, the dew, which he sees 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 215 

appearing and disappearing, he cannot tell whence 
or whither ; the stars which are lighted in the even-^ 
ing, and put out again at morning ; the clouds which 
gather aU of a sudden, and of a sudden are dis- 
persed ; the rain, the wind, the currents in the water 
— ^must not all these arouse in him the thought or 
conception of visible and invisible existences ? When 
the primitive Eskimo first met with the glacier which 
he saw gliding out into the sea, and giving birth, 
from time to time, to mighty icebergs, could he see 
in this anything else than the activity of a live 
being? He attributed life to the thing itself, and 
regarded these monstrous births as voluntary and 
awe-inspiring actions. 

Or, to take another example, when a primitive 
man saw his own shadow or his own image in the 
water, now here, now gone again, eluding alike his 
touch and his grasp, how could this fail to arouse in 
him the conception of tangible and intangible ex- 
istences, things that could now be here and at the 
next moment could vanish away ? 

There were plenty of grounds, in short, for the 
evocation of the idea of duality in nature, of a 
visible and an invisible phase of existence. But this 
belief in the duality of nature must have been greatly 
strengthened by the primitive man's conceptions of 
himself. When he slept, and dreamed that he was 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



216 ESKIMO LIFE 

out hunting, was dancing, was visiting others, in 
short, was wandering far and wide, and then awoke 
and discovered that his body had not moved from 
his cave or hut, and heard his wife or his com- 
panions con-oborate this, he naturally could not but 
believe that he consisted of two parts, of one part 
which could leave him at night and go through all 
these experiences, and one which lay still at home. 
'\To distinguish between dreams and reality was far 
knore than could be expected of him. The speech 
of many primitive races cannot to this day, as 
Spencer points out, express this distinction, having 
no means of saying * I dreamed that I saw ' instead 
of * I saw.' When he had further noticed that his 
shadow followed him by day but not by night, it 
was quite natural that he should give to the part 
that was separable from him the name of * shadow ' 
or * shade,' which, therefore, came to mean the same 
thing which others denominate soul or spirit. We 
shall presently see that the Eskimo has acquired iu 
this way his belief in, and his name for, the soul. 
The conviction of his own kinship with all the 
objects around him is further strengthened by the 
observation that they have shadows as weU as 
himself. 

But when primitive man was brought face to 
face with death it must have made a powerful 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 217 

impression upon him, and the belief in his own 
duality must have been confirmed in a still higher 
degree. Here, he saw, was the same body, the same 
mouth, and the same limbs ; the only difference was 
that in Ufe they spoke and moved, whereas now all 
was still. Their speech and motion must be due to 
some life-giving principle, and this must of course 
be the soul, which, as he knew from dreams, had the 
power of quitting the body. We must also hold it 
only natural that the soul, which at death departed 
from the body, came to be associated with the breath 
of the mouth, which was now gone ; and therefore (as 
for example among some of the Eskimos) man was 
endowed with two souls, the shadow and the breath. 
This belief in the duality of the soul, which is some- 
times also traceable to the shadow and the reflection 
in the mirror, is very widely spread, and to it we 
may probably trace our own distinction between soul 
and spirit, psyche and pneuma. 

It might at first sight seem natural for primitive 
man to conclude that the soul no less than the body 
dies at death. There are, in fact, some who think 
so ; but most of them, on meeting the dead again in 
their dreams, were driven to the conclusion that 
their souls still lived. Furthermore, it was not at all 
difficult to couceive that, as the soul was temporarily 
absent from the body in sleep, deUrium, and so forth, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



218 ESKIMO LIFE 

it was perraanently absent in death. Thus the belief 
in the continued life of the soul has quite naturally 
and inevitably arisen ; and as the idea of annihilation 
is very unattractive to every living creature, this 
conception of immortality has appealed forcibly to 
the human mind. 

But as most men are afraid of death and of the 
dead, they do not like to meet them again as ghosts ; 
and, terror stimulating the imagination, a super- 
natural power is attributed to them, mainly hurtful, 
but sometimes helpful as well. People therefore 
come to think it wisest to propitiate and make friends 
with them. Thus has arisen that worship of the dead 
which plays so great a part in the religion of most 
races, and which lies, if not at the foundation, at any 
rate, very near to it, in almost all religions — as, for 
instance, among the Eskimos. 

It cannot be thought unnatural that the spirits of 
the dead, and especially those of the more eminent 
among them, such as chiefs and princes, were gradu- 
ally converted into gods. 

The word for God among the Hebrews {il or el), 
among the Egyptians (nutar), and among many other 
peoples, meant only a powerful being, and could be 
applied as well to heroes as to gods. As there were 
upon the earth peculiarly powerful men, so there 
must be in the spirit-world peculiarly powerful 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 219 

spirits ; and these naturally became the divinities par 
excellence y^hom it was specially important to worship. 
Thus we arrive at last at the belief in one God, at 
the moment when absolute monarchy is established 
in the spirit world. 

But alongside of this ancestor-worship, we recog- 
nise as a powerful factor in the development of 
superstitious ideas the marked tendency of the human 
race to attribute supernatural power to certain in- 
animate objects, wliich, in the primitive stage, are 
used to avert or influence the power of the dead or 
to attain other advantages ; and from this has de- 
veloped the whole wide-spread belief in amulets, and 
possibly also, in a measure, fetish-worship. We shall 
consider later how the belief in the power of the 
amulet may have arisen. 

An important force tending towards the continu- 
ance and development of superstitious conceptions, 
when they have once arisen, is of course to be found 
in the authority of the medicine-men (spirit-exor- 
cisers), or of the priests, over their fellow-men. 
Some minds, and these the ablest, naturally came to 
have a better understanding than the others of super- 
natural things, and to stand in a closer relation to 
the dead. It was clear that they could thus help 
their neighbours, when, for example, there was ques- 
tion of applying the powers of the dead to the benefit 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



220 ESKIMO LIFE 

of an individual or of a body of men ; and the priest 
thus attained power and influence in the community, 
and often advantages of a more material nature as 
well. It has thus always been to the interest of the 
medicine-men and priests to sustain and nurture 
superstitious or rehgious ideas. They must them- 
selves appear to believe in them ; they may even 
discover new precepts of divinity to their own ad- 
vantage, and thereby increase both their power and 
their revenues. 

Among people like the Eskimos, yet another in- 
fluence comes into play, which colours their super- 
stition ; the influence, to wit, of the natural sur- 
roundings among which they are placed, and of the 
hard and hazardous life they lead. It is a recog- 
nised fact that a race which hves by hunting and 
fishing has a special tendency to become supersti- 
tious; of this we have a striking example in our own 
country. Compare the men of the west and north 
coasts with those of the eastern districts. The 
former have to look mainly to the sea for their 
livelihcod, they are dependent on wind and weather, 
on the coming of shoals of fish, &c. — in short, on a 
whole series of influences unfathomable by man, 
which they describe in one word as chance, and 
which may be not only unfavourable but even fatal 
to them. Inevitably, therefore, they become super- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 221 

stitious ; nor is there any part of the country where 
pietism and obscurantism find such fertile soil as on 
the west coast. When we turn to the peasant of the 
eastern districts, we find a remarkable difference. 
He dwells at ease upon his farm ; somewhat depen- 
dent, it is true, on wind and weather, but in a com- 
paratively secure position; and therefore he is less 
superstitious. How much more strongly must the 
stimulus towards superstition act upon the Eskimo, 
whose whole life depends upon hunting and fishing ! 
And it is still further intensified by the perpetual 
danger in which he lives, and by his Arctic sur- 
roundings. Nature so wild and majestic as that of 
Greenland — with its glaciers, icebergs, mirages, 
tempests, and the long winter - nights with the 
shimmering Northern Lights — obtains an irresistible 
power over the mind, evokes reverence and terror, 
and feeds the imagination. We look upon all these 
marvels in the dry light of reason ; but primitive 
man, like a child, ekes out defective comprehension 
with wild fantasy, and his belief in the supernatural 
is strengthened and developed. 

Morality, which many believe to be intimately 
connected with religious conceptions, has in its origin 
little or nothing to do with them. As already in- 
dicated in Chapter X. it springs from the social 
instinct, and is, among primitive races, quite distinct 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



222 ESKIMO LIFE 

from superstitious ideas. Thus they have no re- 
wards beyond the grave for a life of moral ex- 
cellence. 

Tlie Eskimos are in some measure an example of 
this. It is true that we find hints in the Greenland 
legends of punishment in this life for evil-doing, and 
especially for witchcraft, at the hands of supernatural 
powers. The dead may possibly to a certain extent 
requite survivors for benefits conferred upon them 
during their life ; the souls (or inue ?) of animals can 
revenge a too cruel slaughter of their ofispring ; the 
soul or spirit of a murdered man demands that his 
murder shall be avenged ; wrong done to the weak 
is punished in divers fashions, and so forth. But all 
these notions are so vague that they cannot be 
conceived as primary or fundamental, but rather as a 
sort of occasional overgrowth, due to the natural 
mingling of social relations and laws with the primi- 
tive legends. They may therefore be regarded as the 
first hesitating steps of the religious ideas towards 
morality. It is not until a considerably later stage 
that religion has consciously and in earnest entered 
into an alliance with morality which helps to 
strengthen both. Eeligion has thereby acquired a 
strong back-bone, and moral precepts produce a 
deeper impression when they come from an exalted 
and divine source, and are moreover reinforced by 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 2i>3 

promises of rewards and punishments beyond the 
grave. 

A remarkable feature in all religions is that in 
spite of their great differences in many essentials, 
there are also such great and important similarities 
spread over the whole earth. This may be explained 
in two ways : either on the theory that all religion is 
the result of the same causes, acting independently 
in different places, or on the theory that religious 
conceptions have arisen in one place and have thence 
spread all the world over. For my part I believe 
that we may have recourse to both theories in order 
to explain this similarity of religions. The human 
brain and nerve-system are astonishingly similar 
among all races ; the differences consist chiefly in 
the development which must be associated with the 
progress of. the higher races. It follows that we 
must assume the same laws of thought to hold good 
throughout, especially in earlier and less complex 
stages of development; and as experiences must in 
a certain measure have been everywhere identical, 
people must not only have arrived at the same right 
conclusions, but must have also, when the right ex- 
planation did not lie on the surface, have everywhere 
fallen into the same fundamental errors ; and upon 
these errors religions are built. But in addition to 
this, certain definite religious conceptions have pre- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



294 ESKIMO LIFE 

sumably shaped themselves in particular places, and 
have, in the form of mouth-to-mouth traditions and 
legends, permeated all races of the earth. We shall 
subsequently find speaking evidence for the belief 
that they may have reached even such remote races 
as the Eskimos. 

The faith of the Greenland Eskimo is of great 
interest towards the elucidation of the questions 
above touched upon. It is so primitive that I doubt 
whether it deserves the name of a religion. There 
are many legends and much superstition, but it all 
lacks clear and definite form; conceptions of the 
supernatural vary from individual to individual, and 
they produce, as a whole, the impression of a religion 
in process of formation, a mass of incoherent and 
fantastic notions which have not yet crystallised into 
a definite view of the world. We must assume that 
all religions have at one time or another passed 
through just such a stage as this. 

The Greenlanders, like all primitive races, origin- 
ally conceived nature as animate throughout, every 
object — stone, mountain, weapon, and so forth — 
having its soul. We still find traces of this belief. 
The souls of tools, weapons, and clothes, follow the 
dead on his wandering to the land of the shades; 
therefore they are laid in the grave, that there they 
may rot and their souls may be set free. Gradually, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS • IDEAS 225 

however, this belief has, in the confused and illogical 
way peculiar to primitive races, mixed itself up with 
a totally different one : the belief, to wit, that the 
souls of the dead can take up their abode in different 
animals, objects, mountains, and the like, which they 
subjugate to themselves, and from which they can 
issue from time to time, even showing themselves to 
the living. There has thus arisen the belief that in 
every natural object there dwells a particular being, 
called its inua (that is, its owner) — a word which, 
characteristically enough, originally signified human 
being or Eskimo. 

According to the Eskimos, every stone, mountain, 
glacier, river, lake, has ils inua; the very air has 
one. It is still more remarkable to find that even 
abstract conceptions have their inue ; they speak for 
example of the inue of particular instincts or passions. 
This may seem surprising in a primitive people, but 
it is iiot very difficult to explain. When, for example, 
a primitive man suffering from violent hunger, feels 
an inward gnawing, it is quite natural that he should 
conceive this to be caused by a being, whom he 
therefore describes as the inua of hunger or appetite. 
As a rule, these inue are invisible, but when they are 
seen, according to Eink, they take the form of a 
brightness or fire, and the sight of them is very 
dangerous. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



226 ESKIMO LIFE 

Man himself, according to the Greenlanders, con- 
sists of at least two parts : the body and the soul — 
and these they hold to be quite distinct from 
each other. The soul can only be seen by aid of a 
particular sense which is found in men under certain 
conditions, or in those who possess a special gift : to 
wit, the angekoks. It appears in the same shape as 
the body, but is of a more airy composition. The 
angekoks explained to Hans Egede that souls were 
' quite soft to the touch, indeed scarcely tangible at 
all, just as if they had neither muscle nor bone.' * 
The people of the east coast hold that the soul is 
quite small, no larger than a hand or a finger. The 
Greenlanders' word for the soul is taimik ; this re- 
sembles the word tarrak^ which signifies shadow, and 
I think there can be no doubt that they have origin- 
ally been the same word, since the Eskimo, as before 
indicated, used to regard the soul and the shadow as 
one and the same thing.^ This tallies exactly with 
what we find among other peoples. The Fijian, for 
example, calls his shadow his dark soul, which leaves 
him during the night ; his image in the mirror is his 

^ As to the constitution of the soul see also Paul Egede, E/ter- 
retinger om Qronland^ p. 149, and Cranz, Historie von Qronland^ 
p. 258. 

« Paul Egede says expressly (Efterretinger om Oronland, p. 126) 
that the natives make no distinction between tarrah and iameh 
(ta/mik), and he himself uses the two words indifferently. Bee also 
the same work, p. 92. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 22r 

light soul. Tarrak in the Greenland language meansr 
both shadow and reflection, so that the original word 
for soul meant all these three things. According to 
Cranz,^ some of the Greenlanders believed that man 
had two souls : his shadow and his breath (compare 
above, pp. 216, &c.). The general belief in Egede's 
and Cranz's time seems to have been that the soul 
was most intimately connected with the breath. For 
instance, the angekok used to blow upon a sick man 
in order to cure him or give him a new soul. 

It is worth noting that Hanserak, a native cate- 
chist from West Greenland who accompanied Captain 
Holm on his journey along the east coast (in 1884-85), 
stated in his diary (written in Eskimo), with reference 
to the Angmagsaliks' belief in the soul, that * a man 
has many souls. The largest dwell in the larynx 
and in the left side, and are tiny men about the size 
of a sparrow. The other souls dwell in other parts 
of the body and are the size of a finger joint. If 
one of them is taken away, its particular member 
sickens.'^ Whether this belief has ever been wide- 
spread among the Eskimos does not appear from 
other sources of information. 

The soul is quite independent, and can thus leave 
the body for any time, short or long. It does so 

* Historie von Oronlandt p. 267. 

^ See Holm, MeddeUUer om Qronland, pt. 10, p. 112. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 

i N 



228 ESKIMO LIFE 

every night, when, in vivid dreams, it goes hunting 
or joins in merrymakings and so forth. The soul can 
also remain at home when the man is on a journej^ a 
notion which Cranz beUeves to arise from home-sick- 
ness. It can also be lost, or stolen by means of 
witchcraft. Then the man falls ill and must get his 
angekok to set off and fetch his soul back again. If, 
in the meantime, any disaster has happened to it, 
for example if it has been eaten up by another 
angekok's tornarssuk, the man must die. An 
angekok, however, had also power to provide a new 
soul or exchange a sick soul for a sound, which, 
according to Cranz, he could obtain from, say, a 
hare, a reindeer, a bird, or a young child. 

The strangest thing of all is that the soul could 
not only be lost in its entirety, but that pieces of it 
could also go astray ; and then the angekok had to 
be called in to patch it up. 

Among the Greenlanders of the east coast, accor- 
ding to Holm, a third element in addition to these 
two enters into the composition of man : to wit ' the 
name * {atekata). * The name is as large as the man 
himself, and enters into the child after its birth, on 
its mouth being damped with w^ater, while at the 
same time the " names " of the dead are spoken.' 
Among all the Greenlanders, even the Christians, the 
first child born after the death of a member of the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 229 

family is almost always called after him, the object 
being to procure peace for him in his grave. The 
East Qreenlander believes that the ' name ' remains 
with the body or migrates through different animals/ 
until a child is called by it. It is therefore a duty 
to take care that this is done; if not, evil conse- 
quences may follow for the child to whom the name 
ought to have been given. 

This belief is remarkably similar to one which (as 
Professor Moltke Moe^ informs me) is current in 
Norway : to wit, that the dead * seek after names.' 
A pregnant woman dreams of one or other departed 
relative who comes to her (* seeking after a name '), 
and after him she must call her child ; if not, she is 
guilty of an act of neglect, which may injuriously 
affect the child's future.^ The same superstition is 
also found among the Lapps. Among the Koloshes iu 
North- West America, the mother sees in a dream the 
departed relative whose soul gives the child its like' 

^ A similar idea is also current on the west coast (compare 
MeddeleUcr om Oronland, pt. 10, p. 342), but seems there to have 
reference to the ordinary soul of the deceased. The distinction between 
the soul and the name cannot, therefore, be sharply drawn among the 
different tribes. 

^ Throughout the foot-notes to this chapter, Dr. Nansen is profuse 
in his acknowledgments of the assistance rendered him by Professor 
Moltke Moe. I have ventured to concentrate these recurrent acknow- 
ledgments into this one note, and shall refer to Professor Moe only 
where he figures as the authority for a statement of fact* — Tra/n*. 

^ See also Liebreoht, Zur VolkskundCf p. 311. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



230 ESKIMO LIFE 

ness. Among the Indians also the naming of chil- 
dren is made to depend on a dream.^ 

In Greenland, as everywhere else, the name is of 
great importance ; it is believed that there is a 
spiritual affinity between two people of the same 
name,^ and that the characteristics of a dead person 
are transmitted to one who is called after him, who, 
moreover, is specially bound to defy the influences 
which have caused his predecessor's death. Thus 
the name-child of a man who has died at sea must 
make it his special business to defy the sea in his 
kaiak — a notion which is also found among other 
races, for example, the Indians. 

The Greenlanders are very much afraid of men- 
tioning the names of the dead. On the east coast, 
according to Holm, this fear goes so far that when 
two people have borne the same name the survivor 
must change his ; and if the deceased has been named 
after an animal, an object, or an abstract idea, the 
word designating it must be altered. The language 
is thus subjected to important temporary changes, 
for these re-christenings are accepted by a whole 



* Klemm, CulturgeacJiichte, iii. p. 77; Tylor, Primitive Culture 
(1878), ii. p. 4 ; Antiquariak Tidsslcrifty 1861-68, p. U8. 

^ It appears to me that exogamy between two of the same siumame, 
which is found among many races (see p. 175), can easily be explained 
on this principle, since the same name creates a close spiritual 
affinity, which may, like blood-affinity, act as a bar to marriage. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 231 

tribe.^ The same custom is very widely diffused among 
the Indians of North America and of Patagonia, 
among the Samoyedes in Asia, and the Gipsies in 
Europe. It is also found in Eastern Africa, in 
Madagascar, Australia, Tasmania, New Guinea, and 
the Society Islands. When Queen Pomare of Tahiti 
died, the word po (night) was dropped from the 
language, and mi took its place.'^ 

The fear of mentioning the names of the dead is 
also found in Europe — in Germany, the Shetland 
Islands,^ and elsewhere — and, no doubt, among us in 
Norway as well. In Greenland, as among some 
native races in America and in the Sunda Islands,* 
sick people who bear the same name as one who is 
dead change it in order to cheat death. 

The East Greenlanders are also afraid to speak 
their own names. Holm says that when they were 
asked what they were called they always got others 
to answer for them. When a mother was asked 
* what was the name of her child, she answered that 
she could not tell. The father Ukewise refused to 

^ See Holm, op, cit, p. Ill, where examples of such re-christenings 
are given. Holm thinks that * the old names reappear when the 
deceased is quite forgotten.* It seems to me more natural to suppose 
that this occurs, as soon as a child has been called after the dead man. 

* Nyrop, Mindre AfJtandlinger tulgivne of det philologisk-his- 
toriske Samfundy Copenhagen, 1887, pp. 147-160. 

» Nyrop, op. cit, pp. 130 & 187. 

^ Liebrecht, Academy, iii. (1872), p. 322. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



'2S2 ESKIMO LIFE 

say ; he intimated that he had forgotten it, but 
that we could learn it from his wife's brother.' ^ 

Among the Indians, the name plays a great part ; they 
even try to keep it secret, and therefore a man is often 
called by a nickname.^ Among many races, custom 
forbids the mention of the names of relations, as, for 
instance, a husband's, a mother-in-law's, a son-in-law's, 
the nam€s of parents, or the name of the king. This 
potency of the name goes to considerable lengths 
amongst certain races. When the King of Dahomey, 
Bossa Ahadi, ascended the throne, he had everyone 
beheaded who bore the name of Bossa. 

The fear of mentioning names is common to 
humanity ; we find it in many of our legends,^ and it 
prevails among us even to this day, especially upon 
the west coast.^ It may probably be traced to the 
fact that the name and the thing are apt to melt 
into one. People come to think that when once the 
name is known the thing ^ is known as well, so that 

^ Meddelelaer om Grdnland, pt. 10, p. 118. 

^ See Schoolcraft, in Antiquarisk Tidsakrift, 1801-68, p. 119, Ac., 
Also Andr^e, Ethnographische ParalUlen nnd Vergleiche, p. 180; 
Tylor, Early History of Mankind, p. 142. 

^ The reluctance prevailed among our forefathers. * Sigurd con- 
cealed his name because people believed in the old days that a dying 
man's curse had great power, when he called his enemy by name.* — 
Scevitmdar Edda, ed. by Sophus Bugge, p. 219. 

'* Information received from Prof. Moltke Moe. 

^ The way in which name and thing melt into one appears clearly, 
to mention one instance, in the Swabian custom of * throwing the 
names of throe shrewish women ' into the wine, in order to turn it 
into fjood vine^a 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 233 

the mention of its name comes to exercise an in- 
fluence upon the thing itself. A man may thus lose 
his strength by revealing his name. Therefore, loo, 
we may suppose that dead people do not like to be 
called by their names, and that to name them may be 
a means of summoning them from their graves or of 
disturbing them in their rest. The Greenlanders 
dare not even speak the name of a glacier {puisortok) 
as they row past it, for fear lest it should be offended 
and throw off an iceberg. ^ A similar notion is very 
prevalent among the Indians and others, who dare 
not speak the names of places or of rivers.*^ 

With reference to the soul's Ufe after death, the 
Greenlanders seem to have had diverse opinions. 
Some, whom the missionaries call stupid and brutish 
people, thought that all was over at death, and that 
there was no life beyond the grave. Most of the 
Greenlanders, however, seem to have thought that 
even if the soul was not quite immortal, it was yet in 
the habit of continuing to live after leaving the body, 

' Compare Nansen : The First Crossing of Greenland, i., p. 828 ; 
abridged edit., p. 100. 

' As to the significance of the name and its mention among the 
different races, compare Kristoffer Nyrop's comprehensive essay, * The 
Power of the Name,' in Mindre Afhandlinger tidgiime af det pldlo* 
logisk-hisioriske Samfundf Copenhagen, 1887, pp. 119-209, See also 
B. Grdndahl in Annaler for nordisk Oldkyndighed, 1863, p. 127, &c. ; 
Moltke Moe, in Letterstedtske Tidsskrift, 1879, p. 286, &c. ; S. Grundt- 
vig, Danmarks gamle Folkcviser, ii. p. 339, &c. ; H. Spencer, Principles 
of Sociology, vi. p. 701. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



234 ESKIMO L[FE 

or at any rate of coining to life again even if it had 
died along with the body. In that case it went 
either to a place under the earth and the sea or to 
the upper world in the sky, or rather between the 
sky and the earth.* The former place is regarded as 
the better of the two ; it is a very good land, where, 
according to Hans Egede, there is * lovely sunshine, 
excellent water, animals and birds in abundance/ 
To many it may seem strange that, unlike us, they 
should place their happiest region under the earth or 
the sea ; but this, it seems to me, may easily have 
arisen from their having seen the heaven and the 
mountains reflected in the water, and believed that 
it was another world they saw. No doubt they have 
in process of time discovered that it is only a reflec- 
tion, but the original belief in an under-world has 
maintained itself none the less. It is particularly 
characteristic that this under-world is placed under 
the water, and that there is much sunshine in it ; for 
it must have been chiefly in the sunshine that they 
saw the reflection. 

The other region, in the over-world, is colder ; it 
is like the earth with its hills and valleys, and over it 
is arched the blue heaven. There the souls of the 
dead dwell in tents round a lake, and when the lake 

' Compare Emk, Aarhogerfor nordiak Oldkyndiglied og HUtorie, 
1868, ill. p. 202. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 236 

Overflows it rains on earth. There are many crow- 
berries there, and many ravens, who always settle on 
the heads of old women ^ and cUng on to their hair ; 
it is difficult to drive them off, and they seem to fill 
the place of lice here on earth. The souls of the 
dead can be seen up there by night, in the form of 
northern hghts, playing football with a walrus head. 
On the east coast, however, it is believed that the 
northern lights are merely the souls of stillborn or 
prematurely bom children, or of those who are 
killed after their birth. These children's souls * take 
each other's hands and dance around in mazy 
circles. They play at ball, too, and when they see 
orphan children, they rush upon them and throw 
them to the ground. They accompany their sports 
with a hissing, whistling sound.' ^ Therefore, the 
northern lights are called alugstikat, which appears 
to mean untimely births, or children born in con- 
cealment. This notion of the Greenlanders seems to 
be closely related to the Indians' belief® that the 
northern lights are the dead in dancing array. 

The Eskimos have no hell. Both the above- 
named regions are more or less good, and whether 
the soul goes to the one or to the other does not 

* Compare Paul Egede, Efterretninger om Oronland, p. 149. 
' Holm, MeddeUUer om Gronland, part 10, p. 118. 
3 Communicated to me by Moltke Moe. 



Digitized by VjOOQI(^ 



236 ESKIMO LIFE 

seem to depend particularly upon the man's good or 
evil acts. 

Egede, however, asserts that to the lovely land 
under the earth there go only * women who die in 
childbirth, men who are drowned at sea, and whale- 
fishers, as a reward for the evil they have sufiered 
here on earth ; all others go to the sky/ ^ It seems 
doubtful whether this was ever a general behef. An 
exactly analogous idea is to be found among our- 
selves. An old woman in Telemark said to Moltke 
Moe, speaking of her son : * Ah, yes, he is certain 
enough to have gone straight to heaven; for you 
know it's said in God's Word that those who are 
drowned at sea or die in childbirth go straight away 
to the Kingdom of God.' ^ 

From other accounts, in any case, it seems 
that these are not the only souls which go to the 
under world. The destination of the soul may 
partly depend on the treatment of the body. Paul 
Egede says [Efterretninger om Gronland^-p. 174) that ' it 
was their custom to take people who were sick unto 
death gently out of bed, and, laying them on the 

* See on the same subject Paul Egede, Efterretninger om OrdU' 
land, p. 117. According to some accounts, witches and * wicked people ' 
go to the over-world. 

'^ Connnunicated by Moltke Moe. Compare also J. Flood, Qron- 
Zanf^,. Kristiania, 1873, p. 10, note. Similar notions are said to be 
current in Bavaria and in the Marquesas islands. Compare Liebrecht, 
in the Acndcmij. iii. (1872),. p. c521. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 237 

floor, to swathe them in their grave-clothes. This 
lowering them down from the bed probably sym- 
bolises their wish that after death they may descend 
beneath the earth. But if a man dies before he is 
taken from the bed, his soul goes upward.' On his 
inquiring why - a dog's head was laid beside the 
grave, he was answered ' that it was a custom among 
some of their fellows to lay a dog's head beside a 
child when it was buried, in order that it might scent 
about and guide the child to the land of spirits when 
it came to life again, children being foolish and wit- 
less, and unable to find their own way.' ^ It seems as 
though Captain Holm^ doubted the correctness of 
this trait (which, however, he quotes from Hans 
Egede),' on the ground that he could discover no such 
poetical custom among the East Greenlanders. But 
in this he does not seem to be quite justified ; for, on 
the one hand, we are scarcely entitled to doubt so 
definite a statement by a man like Paul Egede, who 
knew the Greenlanders and their language so well, 
while, on the other hand, we must always remember 
how fluctuating and changeable are religious concep- 
tions. Analogous customs, moreover, are found 
among the Indians. The Aztecs killed a dog at 

' p. Egede, Efterretninger om Grimland, p. 109. See also H. 
Egede, Det gamle Orimlands nye Perluatrationy p. 84. Granz, Historic 
V(m Gronland, p. 801. 

' Meddelelaer om Grdnland, part 10, p. lOG, note. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



288 ESKIMO LIFE 

funerals, and burned or buried it along with the 
body, with a cotton thread tied around its throat. 
Its function was to lead the deceased over the deep 
waters of Chiuhnahuapan on the way to the land of 
the dead.^ 

The journey to the beautiful region is, however, 
no easy matter. Egede says that there is on the way 
a high sharp rock, ' down which the dead must sUde 
on their backs, wherefore the rock is bloody.' Cranz 
asserts that it takes the souls five or even more days 
to slide down this rock or mountain ; and those 
luckless ones are especially to be pitied who have to 
make the journey in winter or in stormy weather, 
for then they can easily come to harm. This they 
call the second death, after which nothing is left of 
them.^ They fear this very much, and, in order to 
avert it, the survivors, during the critical days, are 
bound to observe certain precautions. Similar 
legends as to the many difficulties besetting the long 
journey of souls to the land of the dead are to be 
found amongst most races.^ It seems probable that 
these difficulties have arisen in order to serve as tests 
through which the good can pass more easily than 

' Tylor, Primitive Culture (1878), i. p. 472. 

^ This conception of a second death, or the death of the soul, is 
found among many races : Hindus, Tartars, Greeks, Kelts, Frenchmen, 
Scandinavians, Germans, &c. 

* Tylor, Primitive Culture, ii. p. 44. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 239 

the wicked. But since, among the Eskimos, the 
difficulties afford no touchstone of moral qualities, we 
must conclude that the legend describing them must 
be borrowed from others, and most probably from 
the Indians. The sharp rock in particular reminds 
us of the Indians' * mountain ridge, which was as 
sharp as the sharpest knife,' along which the souls 
had to pass on the way to their dweUing-place, 
Wanaretebe} 

The Greenlanders seem generally to have attri- 
buted a soul to animals, which, like the human soul, 
could survive the body and journey to the regions 
beyond. This appears clearly enough from the bear 
story related in Chapter XII (see p. 206). It also 
appears from the custom mentioned on p. 237 of lay- 
ing dogs' heads in the graves of children ; for it is 
of course the dog's soul, dwelling in its head, which 
is to accompany the child. For the rest, this is a 
general belief among primitive peoples. The Kamt- 
chatkans, for instance, believe that the souls of all 
animals, even of the smallest fly, come to life again 
in the under-world. 

The Greenlanders know of many supernatural 
beings of a higher order. Among those who stand 
nearest to man, and are most useful to him through 

^ KnortZi Ana dem Wigwam^ Leipzig, 1880, p. 188 ; compare 
p. 142 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



240 ESKIMO LIFE 

the medium of the angekoks, we must first name the 
so-called tomat (the plural of tomaky These are the 
angekoks' ministering spirits, who impart to them 
their supernatural power. They are often said to be 
souls of the dead, especially of grandfathers or other 
ancestors ; but they may also be the souls of various 
animals, or other supernatural beings, either of 
human origin, like the kivigtiit, to be hereafter men- 
tioned, or independent spiritual essences dwelling in 
the sea or far inland. They may also be the souls of 
absent Europeans. An angekok would as a rule 
have several, some acting as councillors, others as 
helpers in danger, and others, again, as avengers and 
destroyers. These last were despatched by the 
angekok to show themselves in the form of ghosts, 
and thus to frighten to death those against whom the 
vengeance was directed. 

In connection with, or superior to, the tornat, we 
find the tomdrssuk, which is generally held to be 
their master, or a particularly powerful tornak. The 
tornarssuk was regarded as, on the whole, a benevo- 
lent power ; through his tornak the angekok could 
get into communication with him and obtain wise 
counsels. But evil deeds seem often to have been 
attributed to him. With him, as with all the other 
supernatural beings, it probably depended on the 
angekoks whether he should be beneficent or the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDFAS 241 

reverse. His home lay in the under-world, in the 
land of the souls. As to his appearance, ideas were 
very vague ; some holding that he had no form at 
all ; others that he was like a bear ; others, again, that 
he was huge and had only one arm ; and some, finally, 
that he was no larger than a finger. As to his nature, 
according to Hans Egede, there was no less difference 
of opinion; for while some held that he was im- 
mortal, others believed that it needed very little to 
kill him. Thus E^ede relates that during an ange- 
kok's magic operations, or while he is communing 
with the tornarssuk, * no one must scratch his head, 
or fall asleep ; for by such means they say the 
wizard may be killed, and even the devil [that is, 
the tornarssuk] himself.* Dr. Eink holds that all 
this is founded upon misunderstandings on the part 
of Egede and the other missionaries, and that, on the 
whole, very little was known either as to the tor- 
narssuk's appearance or as to his nature. The 
heathens on the east coast, however, seem, as we 
shall see, to know all about him. 

In this tornarssuk many have been fain to see a 
beneficent supreme being whom the Eskimos wor- 
ship ; answering, accordingly, to our God. Never- 
theless he was, on the introduction of Christianity, 
transformed into the devil, with whom he is now 
synonymous. I cannot help believing that Egade 

B 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



242 ESKIMO LIFE 

and the first missionaries have had some hand 
in working-up this conception of him as God. 
They no doubt started, as many missionaries do 
even to this day, from the hypothesis that every 
people must have a conception of God or of a bene- 
ficent supreme being, and, assuming this, they pro- 
bably cross-questioned the poor heathen so long 
about their tornarssuk, that they at last came to 
answer just what their questioners desired. More- 
over, they doubtless talked so much of their good 
and almighty God that the heathen priests, in order 
not to be beaten, began to maintain that they, too, 
had such a God to help them. That the tornarssuk 
was not so great a spirit as is commonly stated seems 
evident from Captain Holm's account of the heathen 
East Greenlanders' belief. Their tornarssuk is a much 
less imposing creature, who dwells in the sea, and 
whom many people, both angekoks and others, can 
see and have seen. They therefore describe him 
with great exactitude, and have even numerous 
representations of him. He is long, like a large 
seal, but fatter than a seal, and has, among other 
things, long tentacles. Holm, judging from their 
descriptions, has come to the heretical opinion that 
he must be an ordinary cuttle-fish. He devours the 
souls of those whom he can capture, and is often 
quite red with blood. One must admit that if this 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 243 

creature is descended from our innate conception 
of God, he has deplorably degenerated. More- 
over, he is not, on the east coast, one and in- 
divisible ; but every angekok, according to Holm, has 
his tornarssuk. He has also a coadjutor, aperketek, 
a black animal as much as two ells in length, and 
-with great * knife-tongs in his head.' Holm says ex- 
pressly that he could discover no trace of a concep- 
tion of the tornarssuk as the master of the tornak ; 
and we are thus forced to subtract a little from the 
power and importance attributed to this spirit by 
former authors.^ 

It seems to me clear that this belief in the tor- 
narssuk, no less than in the tornat, must be traced 
to a belief in the spirits or ghosts of ancestors. We 
may possibly find evidence of this in the words 
themselves. It seems probable that tdmak may have 
been the same word as tarnik or tame (that is, soul), 
which again resembles tan^ak (shadow — compare p. 
226). We find some support for this theory in the 
fact that tdmak appears on the east coast in the form 
of tartok or tartak, which is the same word as tarrak,^ 

* It is interesting to note that the Alaska Eskimos seem to believe 
in a being similar to this tornarssuk of the east coast of Greenland, 
with long tentacles, Ac, See Holm: MeddeleUer om Grimland^ 
part 10, p. 115, note 1. 

' Tartok means properly * dark.' Among the Eskimos of Southern 
Alaska, the same word, taituky means * mist.* In East Greenland 
^ar/^A' means * black.' (Compare Rink: Mcddeleher om Oronlan'ly 
part 11, p. 152.) 

R 2 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



244 ESKIMO LIFE 

Thus it appears to me probable that all these words 
were originally one and the same, signifying shadow, 
reflection, or soul, and also designating the souls of 
the dead. Tamdrssukj again, is certainly a deriva- 
tive of tdmak, having probably been in its origin 
the same as tomdrssuak, that is to say, * the big, or 
the bad and horrible, tornak.' This implies that he 
was originally a particularly powerful tornak, which, 
among some tribes, has gradually obtained a sort of 
dominion over the other tornat or souls of the 
dead. 

That these souls should have become the subject 
of peculiar superstitions is readily comprehensible 
when we observe the fear with which they still re- 
gard the dead, and still more, of course, their spectres. 
These gengangere are often visible and may be very 
dangerous, though sometimes, too, they are tolerably 
well disposed. The most amiable way in which they 
can manifest themselves is in a whistling sound, or a 
singing in people's ears. . In the latter case they are 
begging for food, and to such a request a Green- 
lander will reply : ' Help yourself ' — meaning * from 
my stores.' ^ That the ghost is not always hostile 
appears from what Niels Egede '^ relates of a boy at 

^ Rink : TaUs and Traditions of the Eskimo, p. 44. In Scotland 
a Bingingin the ears is called * the dead-hell/ and portends (he death of 
a friend. Hogg : Mountain Bard, 8rd ed. p. 81. 

^ Tredie Continuation, &c., p. 74. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 243 

Godthaab who, playing one day with several others 
in the neighbourhood of his mother's grave, sud- 
denly saw a shape rising up from it. He and the 
others took to their heels, but the ghost ran after 
them, caught her son, ' embraced him, kissed him, 
and said, " Do not be frightened of me ; I am your 
mother, and love you " ; * with more to the same 
effect. 

Their customs at the death and burial of their 
friends show how much they fear the dead, and 
especially their souls or ghosts. The dying are often 
dressed in their graveclothes — that is to say, in their 
best garments — a little while before death. The legs> 
too, are often bent together, so that the feet come up 
under the back, and in this position they are sewed 
or swathed in skins. The object is, no doubt, that 
they may take up less space and need a smaller 
grave ; and it is done during their life in order that 
the survivors may have to handle their corpses as 
little as possible. This dread of touching a dead 
body goes so far (as before mentioned on page 137) 
that they will not help a man in danger — for example, 
a kaiak-man who is drowning — ^when they believe 
that he is at the point of death. 

When they are finally dead, they are taken, if it be 
in a house, out through the window ; if in a tent, 
through an opening cut in the skins of the back 



Digitized "by LjOOQ IC 



24t5 ESKIMO LIFE 

wall.^ This corresponds remarkably with the common 
custom in our own country of carrying a body out 
through an opening in the wall made for the pur- 
pose.^ The reason is, no doubt, the same in both 
cases — namely, that these openings can be entirely 
closed again, so that the spectre or soul cannot re- 
enter, as it might if the body were carried out by way 
of the passage or the door. It is not improbable that 
the Greenlanders may have borrowed the habit from 
the ancient Norwegian or Icelandic settlers in Green- 
land. It is mentioned in several sagas as having been 
the custom of the heathen Icelanders. In the Eyr- 
byggja Saga^ it is said : * Then he [Amkel] let break 
down the wall behind him [the body of Thorolf], and 
brought him out thereby.' The clothes and other 
possessions of the deceased are also at once thrown 
out, that they may not make the survivors unclean. 
This recalls our death-bed burning, which is also a 

* Holm, however, tells us (Meddelelser om Gronlandj part 10, 
p. 105), that on the east coast the body is sometimes dragged out 
through the house-passage by means of a thong looped aroimd the 
legs. In such cases, I take it, the dread of touching the body must 
have conquered the dread of taking it out through the passage, for if 
it is taken through the window it must be lifted and handled. By 
dragging it with the feet foremost and pointing outwards they pro- 
bably think to hinder the soul from effecting a re-entrance. 

^ From information given me by Moltke Moe. Compare also 
Liebrecht, 2ur VolkaMmdc, p. 872. 

* Morris and Magniisson, The Saga Library ^ vol ii. * The Ere- 
Dwollers; p. 88. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 247 

widespread custom among our kindred races in 
Europe.* 

The survivors also carry their own possessions 
out of the house, that the smell of death may pass 
away from them. They are either brought in again 
at evening, or, as on the east coast, are left lying out 
for several days. The relatives of the dead man, on 
the east coast, go so far as to leave off wearing their 
old clothes, which they throw away.^ 

When> the body is carried out, a woman sets fire 
to a piece of wood, and waves it backwards and for- 
wards, saying: * There is nothing more to be had 
here.' This is, no doubt, done with a view to show- 
ing the soul that everything belonging to it has been 
thrown out. 

Bodies are either buried in the earth or thrown 
into the sea (if one of the dead man's ancestors has 
perished in a kaiak (?) ). The possessions of the 
deceased — such as his kaiak, weapons, and clothes ; 
or, in the case of a woman, her sewing materials, 
crooked knife, &c. — are laid on or beside the grave, 
or, if the body is thrown into the sea, they are laid 
somewhere upon the beach. This seems to be partly 
due to their fear of a dead person's property and 



* See Moltke Moe*8 paper in the NoraJce VniverstfetS'Og SJcolean- 
naUr, 1880j and the works there cited. 

- Holm, Meddelehcr om Gronlandj part 10, p. 107. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



248 ESKIMO LIFE 

unwillingness to use it ; partly, too, as Hans Egede 
says, to the fact that the sight of these things and 
the consequent recollection of the dear departed 
would be apt to set them crying, and * if they cry 
too much over the departed they believe that it 
makes him cold/ ^ This idea reminds one strongly 
of the second song of Helge Hundingsbane, where 
his widow Sigrun meets him wet and frozen, and 
wrapped in a cloud of hoar frost, by reason of 
her weeping over him. ('Helge swims in the dew 
of sorrow.' ^) Compare also the well-known Swedish- 
Danish folk-song of *Aage and Else,' in which we 

read : 

' For every time that in thy breast 
Thy heart is glad and light, 
Then all within my coffin seems 
With rose-leaves decked and dight. 

For every time that in thy breast 

Thy heart is sad and sore. 
Then all within my coffin seems 

To swim in red, red gore.' 

But, beyond this, it was doubtless the belief of 
the Greenlanders that the deceased had need of his 
implements, partly for earthly excursions from the 
grave, partly also in the other world. They saw, 
indeed, that the implements rotted, but that only 

^ Hans Egede, Det gamle Gronlanda nye PerluMtration, p. S8. 
^ See P. A. Godecke's translation of the Edda, p. 170, and notes 
on p. 885. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 249 

meant that their souls followed the soul of the 
deceased. Those who cany the body out, or have 
touched it or anything belonging to it, are for some 
time unclean, and must refrain from certain foods 
and occupations, which the angekoks prescribe ; in- 
deed, all those who hve in the same house must 
observe the like precautions, partly to avoid injury 
to themselves, partly in order to place no hindrance 
in the way of the departed soul on its journey to the 
other world. 

They must weep and mourn for a stated time 
over the deceased ; and if they meet acquaintances 
or relatives whom they have not seen since the 
death took place, they must, even if it be a long 
while after, begin to weep and howl as soon as the 
newcomer enters the house. Such scenes of lamen- 
tation must often be exceedingly ludicrous, and are, 
in fact, the merest comedy, ending in a consolatory 
banquet. They have also many other mourning 
customs, which exercise a tolerably powerful in- 
fluence upon their lives. Those, for example, who 
have carried out a body must do no work in iron for 
several years. Moreover, we must remember the 
before-mentioned dread of uttering the name of the 
deceased. 

The great object of all this is no doubt, as the 
East Greenlanders said to Holm, * to keep the dead 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



260 ESfflMO LIFE 

from being angry ; ' whence we see what a powerful 
influence over this life they attribute to the de- 
parted. There is, therefore, nothing improbable in 
the theory that the whole belief in the tomat and 
tornarssuk may have developed from this fear. In 
process of time, however, other kinds of superstition 
have doubtless come to play a part in the matter. 

The Greenlanders believe in a whole host of 
other supernatural beings. Of these I can only 
mention a few. 

Marine animals are under the sway of a gigantic 
woman whom some call 'the nameless one,' others 
Arnarhuagasdk^ which simply means * the old woman.' 

Her dwelling is under the sea, where she sits 
beside a lamp under which, as under all Greenland 
lamps, there is a saucer or stand to catch the 
dripping train-oil. In this saucer whole flocks of 
sea-birds are swimming, and out of it proceed all 
the sea animals, such as the seal, the walrus, and 
the narwhal. When certain impurities gather in her 
hair, she keeps the sea animals away from the coasts, 
or they remain away of their own accord, attracted 
by the impurities ; and it is then the angekok*s diffi- 
cult duty to seek her out and appease or comb her. 
The way to her abode is perilous, and the angekok 
must have his tornak with him. First he passes 
through the lovely land of spirits in the under- world ; 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 251 

then he comes to a great abyss, which he can cross 
only (by the help of the tornak) on a large wheel as 
smooth as ice, and whirling rapidly. Tlien he passes 
a boiling cauldron with live seals in it ; then either 
through a dangerous picket of angry seals who 
stand erect and bite on every side, or else past a 
huge dog which stands outside the woman's house, 
and gives warning when a great angekok approaches. 
This dog takes only a few winks of sleep every now 
and then, and one must be ready to seize the oppor- 
tunity; but this only the highest angekoks can 
manage. Here, again, the tornak must take the 
angekok by the hand ; the entrance is wide enough, 
but the further way is narrow as a thread or the 
edge of a knife, and passes over a horrible abyss. 
At last they enter the house where the woman is 
sitting. She is said to have a hand as large as the 
tail-fin of a whale, and if she strikes you with it 
there is an end of you. According to some accounts, 
she tears her hair and perspires with fury over such 
a visit, so that the angekok, aided by his tornak, 
must fight with her in order to get her hair cleaned 
or combed ; while others hold that she is accessible 
to persuasions and appeals. His task achieved, the 
return journey is comparatively easy for the angekok.^ 

* Paul Egede, Continuation af Relationeme, &c., p. 45 ; Hans 
Effede, Gronlands nye Perlust ration, p. 118 ; Rink, Talcs and Tradi- 
tions of the EsJdjuo, pp. 40, 4H6. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



262 ESKIMO LIFE 

This myth reminds us strongly of the visits to the 
under-world or Hades which play so prominent a 
part in European legends, for example, in those of 
Dionysos, Orpheus, Heracles, and others (compare 
also Dante), and to which we have a parallel in our 
own mythology in Hermod's ride to Hel to bring 
back Balder. Similar legends are also found, how- 
ever, among the Indians. From information given 
me by Moltke Moe, it seems scarcely doubtful that 
this Eskimo conception is coloured by, or even bor- 
rowed from, European legends. The smooth wheel,* 
for example, and the bridge which is narrow as a 
thread or a knife-edge, reappear, sometimes in the 
same words, in mediaeval legends of journeys to the 
under world. In an old ballad of the north of 
England mention is made of ' the bridge of dread 
no wider than a thread.' Tundal sees in purgatory 
a narrow bridge over a horribly deep, dark, and 
malodorous valley, and so forth. The oldest ap- 
pearance in legendary literature of this hell-bridge 
is in Pope Gregory the Great's Dialogues, dating 
from the year 594 (lib. iv. cap. 36).^ But these 
mediaeval conceptions, in their turn, are indubitably 

' The Dakota Indians relate that on the way to Wanaratebe there 
is a wheel which rolls with frightful velocity along the bottom of the 
abyss below the mountain ridge mentioned on p. 239. To this wheel 
are bound those who have treated their parents despitefully. See 
Liebrecht, OervasiiM Otia Imperialia (1856), p. 91, note. 

' Eeference commimicated by Moltke Moe. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 263 

coloured by Oriental traditions. The Jews speak of 
the thread-like hell-bridge, and the Mahommedans 
believe that in the middle of hell all souls must pass 
over a bridge narrower than a hair, sharper than a 
sword, and darker than night.^ According to the 
Avesta, the souls of the old P3,rsees, on the third 
night after death, had to cross the * high Hara ' — a 
mountain which surrounds the earth and reaches 
right to heaven — in order to arrive at the Tsj in vat- 
bridge which is guarded by two dogs. In the 
Pehlevi writings, this bridge is said to widen out to 
nearly a parasang when the souls of the pious pass 
over it, but it narrows in before the ungodly until 
they topple down into hell, which lies right under.^ 

An analogous conception is found (compare 
Sophus Bugge, op. cit) in the old folk-song * Drau- 
mekvfiedi,' as to the Gjallar bridge on the way to 
the land of the dead. It hangs high in air so 
that one grows dizzy upon it (* Gjallarbrui, hon 
henge saa hogt i vinde '), and in some variants of the 
song it is expressly stated to be narrow, whilst in 
others it is said to be * both steep and broad.' In 

* See Sophns Bugge, MythologisJce Oplyaninger til Draume- 
Jcvadi, in Norsk Tidaskrift for VidenaJcab og Litsratur, 1854-55, 
p. 108-111 ; Grimm, Mythologies p. 794 ; Liebrecht, Gervasitta Otia 
ImperiaUa, p. 90. Compare also H. Htlbschmami, Die paraiache 
Lehre vom Jenaeita und jiingaten Qerichi^ in Jahrhucher fur pro- 
teatantiache Theologie^ v. (Leipzig, 1879), p. 242. 

» Compare H. Hubschmann, op. cit., pp. 216, 218, 220, 222. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



264 ESKIMO LIFE 

the Eddas we are told that Hermod, on the way to 
Hel, rode over the Gjallar-bridge, which was roofed 
with shining gold, and which thundered under his 
horse's hoofs not less than if five squadrons of dead 
men (that is to say 250) had been passing over it. 

It seems probable that this belief of the Green- 
landers in a narrow bridge or pass must be coloured 
by these European, or partly Oriental, conceptions, 
imparted to them by the ancient Scandinavians. At 
the same time there may also be something more 
original at the root of it. Thus we find among the 
Indians the notion of a snake-bridge, or a tree trunk 
swinging in the air, which leads over the river of the 
dead to the city of the dead.^ 

The notion of the huge dog who guards the 
entrance to the woman's house reminds us strongly 
of Hel's terrible dog Garm, with the bloody breast, 
who barks before the Gnipa-cave. For the rest, this 
notion of the dog in the other world is a common one. 
Among the Hindoos, two dogs watch the path to the 
abode of Jama,^ and among the old Parsees, two dogs 
guard the Tsjinvat bridge (see last page). The 

* Tylor, Primitive Cultwre, ii. 60. Compare, too, the Indians* 
conception of a mountain ridge as sharp as the sharpest knife (see 
p. 289). It is of course possible that the Indians may have got 
this idea from the Eskimos, or more probably, perhaps, from the 
Europeans after the discovery of America. 

* Sophus Bugge, ojh cit,, p. 114. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 265 

Indians station a huge and furious dog at the other 
end of the above-mentioned snake bridge.^ 

In European folk tales, and especially in those of 
Scandinavia, we often meet with an old woman who 
bears rule over animals. She likes to be called 

* Mother,' is fond of being scratched or washed, and 
is glad to get hold of a pair of shoes, a piece of 
tobacco, or the like. If the Ash-Lad meets her and 
does her any such service, she requites him with a 

* motherly turn,' making her animals help him or 
giving him gifts. But besides this common theme 
which reappears in a majority of our folk-tales, we 
can also point to a particular story which is founded 
on similar conceptions. The Ash-Lad comes to the 
ogress with a whole company of animals, the stoat, 
the tree-bear (the squirrel), the hare, the fox, the 
wolf and the bear, to try to rescue his sister whom 
she has carried off. While he is eating, the ogress 
cries * Scratch me ! scratch me ! ' * You must wait 
till I've finished,' says the boy ; but his sister warns 
him that if he does not do it at once the ogress will 
tear him to pieces. Then he makes the animals 
scratch her, one after the other ; but none of them 
content her until it comes to the turn of the bear, 
who claws her tiU her itch departs. In several 

' Tylor, op. cit, p. 50. Compare Knprtz, Aus dent Wigwam, p. 
142. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



256 ESKIMO LIFE 

variants, three brothers make the attempt one after 
the other, and she kills the first two of them.^ Even 
at first sight this Scandinavian group of stories seems 
suspiciously like the Greenland legends, the scratch- 
ing and washing especially reminding us strongly of 
the hair-combing; but when we also find that 
Arnarkuagssak is unknown to the Alaskan Eskimos, 
the connection seems to be clear. According to one 
Greenland legend she was the daughter of a power- 
ful angekok who, being overtaken by a storm, threw 
her out of the woman-boat to save himself. She 
clung on to the gunwale, whereupon he, one by one, 
cut off her fingers and her hands. These were trans- 
formed into seals and whales, over which she ob- 
tained dominion ; and when she sank to the bottom, 
she took up her abode there for good. Among the 
Eskimos of Baffin's Land the same legend is told of a 
woman named Sedna, who has, however, become a 
different being from Arnarkuagssak. The latter 
seems to be unknown on the Mackenzie river. * If 
it should appear,' says Dr. Eink, ' that the Green- 
land myth is not known in Alaska either, we must 
conclude that it was invented during the course of 

^ Communicated by Moltke Moe, irom his impublished collection 
of folk-tales. See also a tale reported from Flatdal in Fedraheimen, 
1877, No. 16; a Hardanger tale (watered down) in Hankenes's 
Natwr, Folkeliv og Folketro i Hardanger, ii., 283. Danish variants 
in Kl. Berntsen, FolJee-JE verity r, I. (Odense, 1878) p. 116; Et. 
Eristensen, Jyska Folkeminder, v. 271. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 2ru 

the emigration to Greenland/ ^ It seems more 
natural, however, to conjecture, as I have done 
above, that it descends from the old Scandinavians. 

On the whole, then, it seems probable that this 
Greenland divinity was originally a character in old 
Norwegian folklore, and that the description of the 
journey to her abode is descended from, or at least 
coloured by, European myths and legends, imported 
by the old Scandinavian settlers ; but more original 
Eskimo elements may also be mixed up in it, having 
their origin in the west, and resembling the myths 
of the Indians. 

The souls who go to the over-world have to 
pass the abode of a strange woman who dwells at 
the top of a high mountain. She is called Erd- 
laversissok {i.e. the disemboweller), and her properties 
are a trough and a bloody knife. She beats upon a 
drum, dances with her own shadow, and says nothing 
but ' My buttocks, &c.,' or else sings ' Ya, ha, ha, ha ! ' 
When she turns her back she displays huge hind- 
quarters, from which dangles a lean sea-scorpion; 
and when she turns sideways her mouth is twisted 
utterly askew, so that her face becomes horizontally 
oblong. When she bends forwards she can lick her 

^ Bink, Meddelelser om Gronland, part 11, p. 17. Compare 
Boas, Petermann's Mittheilungen, 1887, p. 303 ; Bink and Boas, 
'Eskimo Tales and Songs,' in Journal of American Folk-Lore, 
1889 (?), p. 127. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



268 ESKIMO LIFE 

own hindquarters, and when she bends sideways she 
can strike her cheek, with a loud smack, against her 
thigh. If you can look at her without laughing you 
are in no danger ; but as soon as anyone begins to 
smile she throws away her drum, seizes him, hurls 
him to the earth, takes her knife and rips him up, 
tears out his entrails, throws them into the trough, 
and then greedily devours them.^ In this story, too, 
we meet with more than one trait of Scandinavian 
tradition.- Thus * the underground folk ' cannot 
endure laughter; the human being who wounds 
them by laughing at them must pay dear for his 
thoughtlessness. And in two names for the Jotun- 
woman which are preserved in Snorro's Edda,^ 
Bakrauf and Rijingajla {' the woman with the cleft 
or torn hindquarters ') we find exactly the same idea 
which is represented in the ogress of the Greenland 
legend. 

On the same journey the souls also pass the 
dwelling of the Moon Spirit. The way they have to 
go is described as very narrow, and one sinks in it 
up to the shoulders.'* This reminds us of the bogs 

* Note by Glahn in Crantz's Historie von Oronland, Copenhagen, 
1771, p. 848. Rink, Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo, p. 440 ; 
Danish edit. pp. 87, 166, suppl. p. 44. 

' Communicated by Moltke Moe. 

« I. 651, 668. 

^ Rink, Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo j p. 440 ; Danish edit, 
p. 87. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 



259 



which are said in our * Draumekvaedi ' to lie in the 
neighbourhood of the Gjallar-bridge, and into which 
the wicked sink.^ 



Hog'e 88 den Gjallarbrui, 
ho tisst 'puade skyi hange ; 
men eg totte tyngre del Ga- 

glemyrann, — 
gu' bsere den, dei ska gange ! ^ 



High is the Gjallar-bridge ; it 

hangs, 
Close to the clouds, in air ; 
But worse I deem the Gagle- 

moss — 
God help who treadeth there ! 



In Denmark, too, popular legend speaks of these 
hell-bogs or hell-mosses. Thus it seems that here 
again we can trace the influence of the ancient 
Scandinavians, to whom the conception of such peni- 
tential swamps in the under-world no doubt came 
from the ecclesiastical vision-fictions of the middle 
ages. 

When kaiak-men are at sea, they believe them- 
selves to be surrounded by the so-called ignerssuit 
(the plural of ignei^ssuaky which means ' great fire '). 
These are for the most part good spirits, inclined to 
help men. The entrance to their dwellings is on the 
sea shore. * The first earth which came into exist- 
ence had neither seas nor mountains, but was quite 
smooth. When the One above was displeased with the 
people upon it, he destroyed the world. It burst 
open, and the people fell down into tlie rifts and 

' Compare Sophus Bugge, op, cit., p. 115. 
'^ Noted by Moltke Moe. 

s 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



200 ESKIMO LIFE 

became ignerssuit, and the water poured over every- 
thing. When the earth reappeared, it was entirely 
covered by a glacier. Little by little this decreased, 
and two human beings fell down from heaven, by 
whom the earth was peopled. One can see every 
year that the glacier is shrinking. In many places 
signs may yet be seen of the time when the sea rose 
over the mountains.' ^ 

In this myth we can trace influences from no 
fewer than four different quarters. ' The conception 
of the ignerssuit, who resemble men and live under 
the earth, suggests the Indian legend that men for- 
merly lived under the earth, but began one day to 
climb to the surface by means of a vine which grew 
up through a fissure or chasm in a mountain. Wlien a 
fat old woman (or man) tried to clamber up, the vine 
broke off, and the rest had to remain below, while 
those who had reached the top peopled the earth.* 

The two beings who fall down from heaven 
appear to belong to the cosmogony of the Finnish- 

' Hohn, MeddeleUer om Gronlandj part 10, p. 144. 

' Compare K. Knortz, Aiis dem Wigwam, p. 180. H. de Charencey 
{Melusin^, i.225) mentions (quoting from Maltheeus, Hidatsa Gramm^ir, 
1878, Intr. p. xvii.) that the forefathers of the Minnetarees, a 
tribe belonging to the Missouri region, lived at the bottom of a great 
lake, and climbed up to the surfiAce of the earth by help of a big tree, 
which ultimately broke, so that many of them had to remain below. 
(From an unpublished manuscript by Moltke Moe.) This legend pre- 
sents an even closer analogy to that of the ignerssuit^ who dwell under 
the sea. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 261 

Ugrian races, or to be borrowed from the same 
source. Among the Vogulians, the two first people 
descended from heaven in a cradle of silver wire. 
The idea that heaven is the birthplace of humanity 
is also found in the myths of other Finnish-Ugrian 
tribes in Asia and Europe.^ 

Similar ideas have also reached the Indians (per- 
haps through the Eskimos?) Thus the Hurons 
believe that the first human beings came from 
heaven.^ The idea that the earth was originally flat 
and then split up also reminds us of the Finnish- 
Ugrian cosmogony, according to which the earth, 

* See J. Krohn, FinsTca Litteratv/r-HUtorie^ 1st Part, Kalevala, 
(1891), p. 165. Moltke Moe has directed my attention to this simi* 
larity, and has lent me the MS. of an as yet unpublished essay on 
legends of this class. As a rule, the connection between earth and 
heaven is effected by a great tree, by which people climb up and down. 
The myth of such heaven-trees is to be found in almost every quarter 
of the world. We find it in Scandinavia (Ygdrasil) no less than in 
Polynesia, Celebes, Borneo, New Zealand, &c. Among the Vogulians, 
the son of the first two human beings (see above) transforms himself 
into a squirrel, climbs up a tree to heaven, and afterwards climbs down 
again. (Compare A. Lang, Myth^ Bittucd and Religion (1887). i. 182, 
note 2.) Among the Indians the first man climbs into a tree, in chase 
of a squirrel, and so reaches heaven, whence he returns with the 
elements of civilisation, or, according to some, in order to take his 
sister up with him again. (Compare Tylor, Early History of Man-* 
hind (2nd ed.), p. 349.) The gipsies on the borders of Transylvania 
have a legend of a great tree firom which flesh fell down to earth, and 
from whose leaves human beings sprang forth (H. von Wlislocki, 
Mdrchen und Sag en der transailvanischen Zigeaner^ No. 1.) There 
is probably some connection between these myths and the Greenland 
legend ; it is quite natural that in the Eskimo version the tree should 
have disappeared. 

'^ Compare A. Lang, Myth, Ritual, and Religion^ i. 181. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



263 ESKIMO LIFE 

when first created, formed a quite smooth and level 
crust over the water, but was afterwards made to 
billow by an internal convulsion, and stiffened in its 
billowy form, whence the origin of mountains and 
valleys.^ 

We may distinguish a third element in the people 
who originally dwelt upon this flat earth, in its dis- 
pleasure with whom the Power above caused the 
earth to split and the water to rush forth. It seems 
scarcely doubtful that this conception is due to a 
direct intermixture of the Christian or Jewish legend 
of the Deluge, which might, of course, have passed 
from the west coast up along the east coast. Possibly, 
however, the notion of the flood may have been sup- 
plemented by touches from a very widespread legend 
in Europe, and especially in Scandinavia, as to how 
the subterranean or invisible people {hiddre-folk) 
came into existence. The Lord one day paid a visit 
to Eve as she was busy washing her children. All 
those who were not yet washed she hurriedly hid in 
cellars and corners and under big vessels, and pre- 
sented the others to the visitor. The Lord asked if 
these were all, and she answered * Yes ' ; whereupon 
He rephed, * Then those which are " dulde " (hidden) 
shall remain "hulde" (concealed, invisible).' And 

' Compare J. Krohn, op, cit.^ pp. 163-173. 



• Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 263 

from them the huldre-folk are sprung.^ Be this as it 
may, the ignerssuit cannot but remind us of the sub- 
terranean people in our Scandinavian folk-lore. 

Finally we have as a fourth element the glacier^ 
which must belong exclusively to Greenland itself.^ 

Among other supernatural beings may be men- 
tioned the different sorts of inland- folk who live in 
the interior of the country or upon the ice-fields. 
Some of these are called tomit (the plural of tunek) 
or inorutsit^ or, upon the east coast, timersit They 
are of human aspect, but of huge stature. Some say 
they are 4 metres (13 feet) in height, and others that 
they are as tall as a woman-boat is long, that is to 
say at least 10 metres (more than 32 feet). Their 
souls alone are as big as ordinary people. They 
live by hunting both land and sea animals. They 
can run exceedingly fast. On the sea they do not 
use kaiaks, but sit in the water * with the fog for 

* CommiMicated by Moltke Moe. Others relate that it was the 
ugly children whom Eve concealed, or that she was ashamed of having 
so many. (See Faye, Norske Folkesagn, 2nd ed. p. xxv. ; Soegaard, 
FraFjeldbygdeme, p. 102; Dolen, 1862 (III.) No. 17 ; Storaker and 
Fuglestedt, Folkesagnfra Lister og Mandals Amt,p. 51 ; Finn Magnu- 
sen, EddaUereriy iii. p. 329 ; Grimm, Deutsche Mytkologie, 4th ed. 
iii. 168, &G.) The legend is originally Jewish,* and may be traced to 
the Rabbis; see, for example, Liebrecht on Gervasius TUberiensis 
Otia Imperialia, p. 70. 

' Paul Egede gives a somewhat different account of the ignerssuit 's 
fall from human estate. They * formerly dwelt upon earth, imtil the 
time of the great flood, which caused the earth to capsize, so that 
what had formerly been uppermost was now below.' — Continuation 
af Rclationerne, p. 96. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



264 ESKIMO LIFE 

their kaiak.* ^ They can catch seals from the land 
(in great traps), and they can carry two huge 
saddlebacks or bladder-noses inland with them in a 
sealskin bag upon their shoulders. As a rule they 
stand on ia hostile footing towards men, but they 
are also open to friendly intercourse, and will some- 
times even exchange wives with them. 

Another class of inland folk are the igaligdlil 
(the plural of igalilik\ who go about with a whole 
kitchen on their backs. The pot alone is so huge 
that they can boil an entire seal in it ; and it boils 
even as they carry it about. A third class are the 
erkigdlit (the plural of erkilek\ who, according to 
some, are like men above and dogs below, but 
according to others have dogs' heads or dogs' noses. 
They are expert archers, and carry their arrows 
in quivers on their backs.^ They are hostile to 
men. I may also mention the isserkat (the plural 
of isserak\ who ' blink lengthwise ' — which probably 
means that their eye-holes are perpendicular instead 
of horizontal. 

As Eink has shown, there can be very httle 
doubt that these inland folk, who all play a pro- 

' This suggests our Norwegian * draug * which sails in a half boat 
(i.e. a boat split in two longitudinally) ; and it does not seem impos- 
sible that we may here trace the influence of the old Scandinavian 
settlers. 

- Paul Egede ; Efierrclninger om Gronland^ p. 172. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 265 

mlnent paxt in the Eskimo legends, were originally 
different races of Indians with whom the forefathers 
of the Greenlanders, while they still dwelt on the 
north coast of America, had dealings, sometimes ami- 
cable, but generally hostile. Tliey brought with them 
to Greenland stories of these adventures, and they 
still laid the scene in the interior of the country, 
where the Indians in process of time became en- 
tirely mythical beings. The word tunek seems 
simply to mean Indian, and is so used to this day 
by the Eskimos of Labrador. By the Eskimo 
tribes on the west coast of Hudson's Bay and 
further west the word erkigdlit is applied to the 
Indians of the interior. The description of the 
tomit as large and swift applies well to the Indians, 
who are taller than ' the Eskimos, and have the 
upper hand of them by land. The fact that the 
erkigdlit are clever with the bow and carry their 
arrows in quivers — a custom not in use among 
the Greenlanders — also suggests the Indians. So, 
too, do the dogs' legs or dogs' faces attributed to 
them, these having no doubt arisen from the Indians' 
own belief that they are descended from a dog (see 
p. 271).^ The isserkat, ' those who blink lengthwise,' 

^ Legends of dog-men being widely spread over the world (they 
are found, for instance, among the Greeks), it is possible that the 
Eskimos may have received them from some other quarter, and applied 
them to the Indians, who, they knew, claimed descent fiom a dog. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



266 ESKIMO LIFE 

may originally have been Indian races with remark* 
ably oblique or otherwise peculiar eyes ; such tribes 
are described by travellers. Here, then, we have 
supernatural or mythical beings who may be as* 
sumed to be of historical origin. The legends of 
wars with them have also, no doubt, a certain his- 
torical foundation. In the same way, probably, 
did the classical peoples come in contact with the 
mythical races of their legends.^ 

The kivitut (the plural of kivitok) are beings of a 
peculiar nature. They have at one time been ordi- 
nary men, who for some reason or other, often quite 
insignificant, have fallen out with their families or 
their companions, or have felt aggrieved by them, 
and have therefore turned their backs upon their 
fellows and fled to the mountains or into the interior. 
Here they henceforth live alone, feeding upon animals 
which they kill without ordinary weapons, simply 
by throwing stones at them, an art in which they 
become very skilful. While the kivitok has only 
been a short time away, it is still open to him to 
return to his fellows ; but if he does not within a 
certain number of days obey the voice of his home- 
ward longing, he loses the power of resuming his 
place among men. Some hold that a year is the 

* Compare Tobler : * Ueber sajfenhafte Volker des Altertrnna/ Ac, 
in ZcUschrifi der VolkcrpaycJwhffie, vol. xviii. (1888), p. 225. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 267 

allotted period. He now acquires supernatural 
faculties; he becomes so swift of foot that he can 
leap from one mountain peak to another, he can 
catch reindeer without weapons, and whatever he 
aims at he hits. He grows to a great size, clothes 
himself in reindeer skins, and, according to some, 
his face turns black and his hair white. Further- 
more, he becomes omniscient or clairvoyant ; he can 
hear the speech of men from any distance, and 
comes to understand the language of the animals. 
But he pays for all this in his inability to die, and 
he is always mournful, shedding tears of longing 
for humankind to which he can never return. He 
can, however, when opportunity offers, especially at 
night, make his way into houses or store-rooms to 
pick up something to eat, or perhaps a little tobacco. 
Those who have wronged him are always in danger 
of his vengeance. 

The remarkable feature of this belief is that it 
probably has a certain foundation in fact. Suicide is 
almost unknown in Greenland, except in the case of 
a few old or hopelessly infirm people, who, finding 
themselves at death's door, sometimes throw them- 
selves over a precipice into the sea (compare p. 170) 
in order to put an end to their sufferings and assure 
themselves burial. On the other hand, it now and 
then happens tliat someone or other, wounded, perr 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



268 ESKIMO LI^ 

haps, by a single word from one of his kinsfolk, 
runs away to the mountains, and is lost for several 
days at least. I myself know Greenlanders who have 
done this ; and authentic examples are given of 
people who have lived for years as kivitoks. About 
twenty-five years ago, on the island of Akugdlek in 
North Greenland, a cave was found which bore evi- 
dence of having been a human habitation for a con- 
siderable time. A well-trodden path led up to it, 
and within it was a hearth, a hole in the ground 
which had served as a store-room, a soft bed of moss, 
remains of dried fish, edible roots, &c. A few paces 
away, there was found a smaller cave with stones piled 
up against its mouth. In this the kivitok had buried 
himself when he found death approaching. There he 
lay, still in his sealskin jacket ; he had himself, from 
within, closed up the entrance to the sepulchre with 
a stone. The Greenlanders recognised him, and con- 
cluded that he must have lived there as a kivitok for 
two or three years. His reason for turning his back 
upon mankind is said to have been that, as a bad 
hunter, he was looked down upon and slighted by 
his kinsfolk ; and, after the death of his little son, 
life became so hard for him that he fled.^ 



' See "HAininer y Meddeleher om Gronland, part 8, p. 22; E. Skram 
m Tilskucreiif October, 188.0, p. 705. As to kivitut, see also liink, Tales 
and Traditiona of the Eskimo, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 269 

As Moltke Moe has pointed out to me, there is a 
remarkable resemblance between these kivitut and 
the utilegumennj * out-liers * so common in the Ice- 
landic popular legends — criminals, that is to say, 
who have fled to the mountains and live in the wil- 
derness far from mankind. The great part which 
these ' out-liers ' play in the popular fantasy, and the 
mystic fear with which they are regarded, has caused 
them, from a very early period, to be in great mea- 
sure confounded in common belief with trolls, huldre- 
folk, and other legendary creatures, in whose super- 
natural facuhies they partake. They can see into 
the future, they know what is happening in distant 
places, they can conjure up mists and lead the tra- 
veller astray, and they possess superhuman strength.^ 
Like the kivitok, they seek the abodes of men in order 
to pick up something to eat ; they steal sheep, food, 
and clothes from the people of the settlements. The 
most characteristic feature of both the Greenland and 
the Iceland legends is that men, by being cut off from 
society, obtain supernatural power. The coincidence 
becomes still more striking when we observe that 
both in Greenland and in Iceland these legends form 
an essential part of living popular tradition and 

* See Amasen, Islenzkar pjd^sogur, ii. 160-304, translation by 
Powell and Magnusson (London, 1866), pp. cxlvi, and 101-'231. Maurer 
Isldndische Volkaaagen^ p. 240 ; Carl Andersen, Islandshe Folkesagn, 
2nd ed., p. 258. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



270 ESKIMO LIFE 

belief. Among other races (with the partial excep- 
tion of Norwegians of the west coast, and especially 
of Nordland) similar ideas are scarcely to be found 
at all. The conclusion, then, is almost inevitable, 
that the behef in the kivitok is derived from the 
ancient Scandinavians, or rather from the Icelanders 
in particular. 

I have still to mention, among the remarkable 
beings known to the Greenlanders, the igdUokok^ who 
is like half a human being, with half a head, one eye, 
one arm, and one leg. Precisely similar beings are 
also to be found among the Greeks, the Mohamme- 
dans, the Zulus, and the Indians.^ 

As to the creation of the world, the Greenlanders 
had no definite opinion. The earth and the universe 
must either have come into existence of their own 
accord, or must have existed from all time and be 
destined so to endure. 

Nor had they any clear idea as to the creation 
of man, or of the Eskimo race itself. Some were of 
opinion that the first man grew up out of the ground 
and mated with a mound of earth. It brought forth a 
girl, whom he took to wife.^ This notion of growing 

* p. Egede, Efterretninger om Oronland, p. 172 ; Tylor, Primitive 
Culiv/re, i. 801 ; Tobler, op. cit., p. 288 ; Liebrecht in The Academy, 
iii. (1872), 821. 

' P. Egede, Continuation af Relationeme^ p. 97; H. Egede, Grim- 
lands Pcrlustration, p. 117. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 271 

up from the ground is quite common, occurring in 
Scandinavia and Iceland,^ among other places. We 
say : * He who strikes the earth with a stick beats his 
mother ; he who strikes a stone beats his father' — an 
idea which closely corresponds with the Eskimo con- 
ception, in which, no doubt, the man should properly 
be represented as rising from a rock. 

As to the origin of us Europeans, they have a 
legend which is not altogether flattering to our 
vanity. An Eskimo woman, with whom no husband 
would remain for any time, at last took a dog to 
mate, and was brought to bed of a mingled litter of 
human children and puppies. The puppies she 
placed on an old shoe-sole and pushed them out to 
sea, saying, *Be off with you and become kavdlunaks' 
(i.e. Europeans). Therefore it is, say the Eskimos, 
that the kavdlunaks always live on the sea, and that 
their ships are shaped like a Greenland shoe, round 
before and behind. The human children she placed 
upon willow-leaves and despatched them in the oppo- 
site direction, so that they became inland-folk or 
Indians {erkiligdlit or toimit).^ Precisely similar 

^ Compare Liebrecht, Zur Volhslcunde p. 882, and the authorities 
there cited. See also Moltke Moe in Letterstedtske Tidsskrift, 1879, 
pp. 277-281. 

* H. Egede, Oronlands 'Perlustration, p. 117 ; P. Egede, Con- 
tinuation af Belationeme, p. 47 ; Rink, Tales and Traditions of tlie 
Eskimo^ p. 471 ; Meddelelser om Qrihiland^ part 10, pp. 290, 842. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



272 ESKIMO LIFE 

legends are to be found among the Eskimos of Baf- 
finsland,^ and also on the north coast of Alaska; 
though there they refer to the Indians alone, not to 
the Europeans. Analogous myths of descent from 
dogs (or wolves, or bears) occur among many races, 
Aryan as well as Mongolian or American.^ They lie 
at the root of the mythology of many Indian tribes, 
who hold that the first woman took a dog to mate, 
and that they themselves are descended from this 
connection. It seems to me evident that the Eskimos 
have taken their legend from this source, and that 
they originally applied it to the Indians alone. Wlien, 
subsequently, they fell in with another strange race 
(the Europeans), they extended it so as to account 
for them also. It is noteworthy that the shoe which 
turns into a ship occurs in the Baffinsland versions 
as well. 

The Eskimos, according to some authorities, 
trace the origin of death to a woman who once said: 
*Let people gradually die, or else there will be 
no room for them in the world.' Others believe that 
two of the first human beings quarrelled, the one 
saying 'Let there be day and night and let men 
die/ the other 'Let there be night alone, and let 

* Bink and Boas, Journal of American Folklore (1888 ?) p. 124. 
' F. Liebrecht, Zur Volkalmnd^, 1870, pp. 17-25 ; J. C. Mtiller, 
Qeichichte der americanischen Urreligioneny pp. 134, 65. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 273 

men live for ever ; ' and after a long quarrel the former 
gained the victory. Others, again, hold that there 
was a race between a snake and a louse as to which 
should first reach mankind ; if the snake arrived 
first they should live for ever, if the louse arrived 
first they must die. The snake got a long start, but 
fell over a high precipice by the way, and had to 
make a long detour, so that the louse won the race 
and brought death with it.^ These myths, by their 
very meaninglessness and incoherence, seem to show 
that they come from elsewhere, and are fragments of 
older beliefs whose original point and meaning is 
forgotten. If we look around in the \70rld, we shall 
find remarkable analogies among the most distant 
races. The second myth (that of the quarrel) re- 
appears in the Fiji Islands, where the moon wrangles 
with a rat, maintaining that men ought to die and 
come to life again as she herself does ; while the rat 
maintains that they ought rather to die like rats — 
and he gets the best of it. Among the Lidians it is 
two wolf-brothers, ancestors of the race, who quarrel. 
The younger says : * When a man dies, let him come 
back the following day so that his friends may re- 
joice.' * No,' says the elder, ' let the dead never 

^ p. Egede, Continuation af Belationeme, pp. 82, 80 ; EfterreU 
ninger om Qronlomd^ pp. 127, 106. H. Egede, Gronla/ndB Perhts- 
iraiion^ p. 117. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



274 ESKIMO LIFE 

return.' Then the younger kills the son of the elder, 
and that is the beginning of death. ^ ^ 

We find remarkable analogues in South Africa 
to the myth of the snake and the louse. On 
the Gold Coast, among the Zulus, and elsewhere, it 
is related that the first great Being sent an animal (a 
chameleon) to mankind with the message that they 
were to live and never die. But then the Being 
changed his mind, and sent after it another animal 
(the fleet-footed salamander) with the message that 
they were to die ; and as the latter arrived first, so it 
was. There are several forms of this myth. Among 
the Hottentots it was the moon who sent the message 
to mankind : * You, like me, shall die and come to 
life again.' But the hare heard this, and ran ahead 
and said : * You, like me, shall die and never come 
to life again.' ^ This myth, again, is remarkably 
similar to the Fiji legend quoted above ; and thus 
we have a bridge between the second and third 
Greenland myth, which must accordingly be taken 
to be two variants of one original — an exceedingly 
ancient one, since it has spread so far. 

' Tylor, Primitive Culture, i. 855; A. Lang, La Mythologie 
(Paris, 1886), pp. 204, 20G ; Smithsonian Institute, Annual Beport of 
the Bureau of Ethnology^ 1879-80, p. 45. The choice between day 
and night in the Greenland form of the myth may possibly be bor- 
rowed, directly or indirectly, from the biblical cosmogony. 

'^ Chrx^iiiler in Zeitachriftfiirafrihanischen SpracJien, L 1887 88, 
pp. 49 62. Compare also Bleek, Beineke Ftichs in Afrxka (Weimar, 
1870) : Tylor, pp. cit,y p. 855 ; A. Lang, op. cit,, p. 203. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 276 

The Eskimos trace to their fellow-countrymen the 
origin of almost everything in external nature. It 
was an old man hewing chips from a tree that 
brought into being the fishes and other marine 
animals. He rubbed the chips between his legs 
(* sudore testiculorum ') and threw them into the 
water, upon which they turned into fishes. The 
Greenland shark, however, is of different origin : 
* One day a woman was washing her hair in urine. 
A gust of wind carried away the cloth with which 
she was drying her hair, and it became a shark ; 
wherefore the flesh of this fish still smells of urine.' ^ 

The heavenly bodies were once ordinary Eskimos, 
living upon the earth, who, for one reason or an- 
other, have been translated to the skies. The sun 
was a fair woman, and the moon her brother, and 
they lived in the same house. She was visited 
every night by a man, but could not tell who it was. 
In order to find out, she blackened her hands with 
lamp-soot, and rubbed them upon his back. When 
the morning came, it turned out to be her brother, 
for his white reindeer-skin was all smudged; and 

* Hans Egede, Qronlands Perlustration, p. 117 ; P. Egode, Con- 
tinuation af Belationerne, pp. 20, 60. As to washing in urine (see 
p. 29), I may remark that it seems to have been a custom of untold 
antiquity. We find allusions to it even in the sacred writings of the 
Farsees. Thus it is said {Vendidad, 8, 18) that corpse-bearers shall 
wash themselves with urine ' not of men or women, but of small 
animals or beasts of draught.* 

T 2 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



276 ESKIMO LIFE 

hence come the spots on the moon. The sun seized 
a crooked knife, cut off one of her breasts, and 
threw it to him, crying : ' Since my whole body 
tastes so good to you, eat this/ Then she lighted a 
piece of lamp-moss and rushed out ; the moon did 
likewise and ran after her, but his moss went out, 
and that is why he looks like a live cinder. He 
chased her up into the sky, and there they still are.^ 
The moon's dwelling lies close to the road by which 
souls have to pass to the over- world ; and in it is a 
room for his sister the sun. This myth seems to 
have come to the Eskimos from the westward. 
Among the North American Indians the sun and 
moon are brother and sister, and even so far away as 
among the Indians of the Amazon district we find 
the same myth, only that there the moon is a woman 
who visits her brother the sun in the darkness. He 
discovers her criminal passion by drawing his black- 
ened hand over her face. (Compare also the myths 
from Australia and the Himalayas on the following 
paige.) Among the Incas of Peru, the sun and moon 
were at the same time brother and sister and man 
and wife. (Compare also the Egyptians' Isis and 
Osiris.) ^ It is remarkable that among the Green- 

^ P. Egede, Continuation of Belationeme^ p. 16; H. Egede, 
Gronlanda Perlustration^ p. 121; Rink, Tales and TradiHrms of 
the Eskimo, p. 286 ; Holm, Meddelelser om Gronland, part 10, p. 268. 

' A. Lang, Custom and Myth, p. 182 ; Tjlor, Primitive Culture, 
1.288. 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 277 

landers the sun is conceived as being beautiful in 
front, but a naked skeleton behind.^ This so strongly 
suggests our beautiful * huldre/ who are hollow when 
seen from behind, that it seems as though the idea 
must be a European and especially a Scandinavian 
one, imported into Greenland by the old Norse 
settlers. According to the East Greenlanders, the 
reason wh)'- the sun has nothing but bare bones be- 
hind is that, when she is at her lowest point, that is 
to say on the shortest day, people cut her back with 
knives in order to make her rise again. The flesh is 
thus cut away, and only the bones remain.^ 

The moon has not yet turned over a new leaf, 
but stiU pays frequent visits to the earth in search of 
amorous adventures. Therefore, it behoves women 
to beware of him, not to go out alone in the moon- 
light, not to stand looking at his orb, and so forth. 
This erotic proclivity of the moon's seems to be of 
very ancient date. In Australia he is a tom-cat who, 
on account of an intrigue with the wife of another, 
was driven forth to wander for ever. Among the 
Khasias of the Himalayas, the moon every month 
commits the unpardonable sin of falling in love with 
his mother-in-law, who throws ashes in his face, thus 

^ Compare Bink, ToUb <md Traditions of the Eskimo^ pp. 237, 
440. Danish ed. suppl. p. 44. Liebrecht in Oermania, vol. 18 (1878)| 
p. 866. 

^ Holm, MeddeleUcr om Grimland, part 10, p. 142. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



i>78 ESKIMO LIFE 

causing the spots upon it.^ According to a Slavonic 
legend, the moon was the sun's husband, who, on 
account of infidelity with the morning star, was cleft 
in twain/^ Among the old Greeks and Eomans the 
moon was of female sex, indeed, but the fair Luna 
was by no means exempt from amatory tendencies. 
Among the Eskimos, again, the moon is supposed to 
be the cause of cold weather. He produces snow by 
whittling a walrus tusk, and strewing the shavings 
upon the earth, or else by blowing through a reed ; 
and when he visits the earth, he always comes driving 
in a sledge over the winter ice. It is quite natural 
that such associations should attach to the moon, 
since it is in the ascendant during the night and in 
winter. As a frigid and austere influence, too, he is 
naturally enough regarded as a man ; while further 
south, where heat is more dreaded than cold, it is 
the sun who is supposed to be of the sterner sex. 

Thunder they believe to be produced by two old 
women fighting for a dry and stiiflT skin, and tugging 
each at her end of it ; in the heat of the contest they 
upset their lamps, and thus cause the lightning. The 
origin of fogs they trace to a tornarssuk who drank 

^ This myth is so strikingly like the Greenland legend that there can 
scarcely be a doubt of their having sprung from the same source. 
Among the Ehasias to love your mother-in-law is the direst sin, while 
among the Greenlanders it is worst to love your sister. 

* Tylor, Primitive Culture, i. 854. See also A. Lang, Myth, 
Bitual, and Religion, i. p. 128. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELiaiOUS IDEAS 279 

SO much that he burst. ^ As to the cause of rain, they* 
have on the east coast another legend in addition to 
that already mentioned. Rain, according to this 
account, is produced by a being named Asiak, who 
dwells in the sky. In ancient , days, after a long 
drought, the angekoks would set out for his abode to 
beg for rain. When they arrived, they would peep 
in, and would usually see his wife sitting on the edge 
of the sleeping-bench, while Asiak himself would be 
lying covered up close to the wall. On their implor- 
ing her aid, she would ultimately reply : * Last niglit 
he wetted his rug a little, as he usually does;' 
whereupon she would take up the piece of bear-skin 
on which he had been sitting, and would shake it, 
thus causing it to rain upon earth.^ The very fact 
that the angekoks are represented as begging for 
rain, which is of no service whatever to a people of 
hunters and fishers like the Eskimos, seems to prove 
that this myth must have originated in other latitudes, 
where agriculture is practised. It is not impossible, 
as Holm conjectures, that Asiak may be identical 

" p. Egede, Efterretninger om Gronlandf pp. 150, 206. 

* Holm, OeografisJc Tidsskrift (Copenhagen, 1891), xi. 16. The 
idea that rain is due to the overflow of a lake in the over- world may 
possibly be traceable to more southern regions, where agriculture and 
artificial irrigation are practised, and where accordingly the mountain 
lakes have been dammed up. In the Greenland myth there is also 
mention of the lake being closed by a dam. (Compare Egede and 
Cranz.) 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



280 ESKIMO LIFE 

with the rain-gods of several of the American abori- 
ginal races — deities who lived on the tops of high 
mountains. The Mayas of Yucatan, it may be noted, 
called their rain-god Chac. But it is also possible 
that the whole myth may come from further west. 
Among primitive races, rain was very generally 
traced to a similar origin. In Kamtchatka we meet 
with the idea in its crudest form. When the modern 
Greek peasant indicates rain by the phrase KarovpdeL 
6 ^€09, he is merely employing an image at least as 
old as Aristophanes, who makes one of his characters 
in * The Clouds ' (v. 373) remark that formerly when 
it rained he used to believe Zeus 8ta kockipov 
ovpew. The same idea, more or less disguised, and 
generally with a touch of the jocose in it, reappears 
in many popular expressions current in Germany, 
Belgium, Norway, and elsewhere. They have all 
their root in a belief of primeval antiquity, which 
can also be traced among many other races — for 
example, among the old heathen Arabians, and even 
among the Jews.^ 

In their beliefs or superstitions the Eskimos used 
to be, and still are on the east coast, instructed by 
their priests or exorcisers, the angekoks {angakoky 

^ See Schwartz, Die poetischen Naturanschautmgen, L pp. 188, 
250; ii. p. 108; Schmidt, Das Volksleben der Neugriechen, i. p. 81 ; 
Belgisch, Mu$eu/nt, v. p. 215 ; Ign. Goldziher, Der Mythos hei den 
Hebrdemt p. 88. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




RELIGIOUS IDEAS 



plural, angakut). These men are the wisest and 
ablest among them, but also, as a rule, the craftiest. 
They assert that they have the power of conversing 
with spirits, journeying both to the under-world and 
to the sky and other places unattainable to ordinary 
mortals, conjuring up the tomarssuk and other 
supernatural beings, obtaining revelations from them, 
and so forth. They influence and work upon their 
countrymen principally through their mystic exor- 
cisms and seances, which occur as a rule in the 
winter, when they are Uving in houses. The lamps 
are extinguished, and skins are hung before the 
windows so that it is quite dark. The angekok him- 
self sits upon the floor. By dint of making a horrible 
noise so that the whole house shakes, changing his 
voice, bellowing and shrieking, ventriloquising, 
groaning, moaning, and whining, beating on drums, 
bursting forth into diabolical shrieks of laughter, and 
all sorts of other tricks, he persuades his companions 
that he is visited by the various spirits he personates, 
and that it is they who make the disturbance. 

In order to become an angekok a long apprentice- 
ship is naturally required, frequently as much as ten 
years. The neophyte must often and for long periods 
go into solitary retirement,^ and rub a stone round 

* This idea reonrs in several parts of the world. Compare Christ^s 
forty days* solitude in the wilderness. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



282 ESKIMO LIFE 

upon another stone, following the sun, for several 
days on end, whereupon a spirit comes forth from 
the mountain. Then he must die of fright, but after- 
wards come to life again ; and thus he graduallj^ 
obtains the mastery of his tornat. He must not 
reveal that he is going through this probation until 
it is completed, but then he must make public 
announcement of the fact. If he is to be a regular 
tip-top* angekok, it is highly desirable that he 
should be seized and dragged to the seashore by a 
bear ; then there comes a walrus, buries its tusks in 
his genital organs, drags him away to the horizon, 
and eats him up. Thereupon his bones set off home- 
wards, and meet the shreds of flesh upon the way ; 
they grow together again, and he is whole once more. 
Now he is at the head of his profession. 

The influence of these angekoks of course de- 
pended upon their adroitness ; but they do not seem 
to have been mere charlatans. It is probable that 
they themselves partly believed in their own arts, 
and were even convinced that they sometimes received 
actual revelations ; although Egede is not inclined to 
believe that they had * any real commerce or under- 
standing with the devil.' 

They can also cure diseases by reciting charms, 
give a man a new soul, and so forth. Among the 

* So in original (Trafu.). 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 283 

diseases which they profess to cure are reckoned 
inability to catch seals, in a man, and, in a 
woman, inability to bear children. In the latter 
case, the East Greenland angekok, even to this 
day, has to jourfiey to the moon, from which a 
child is thrown down to the woman, who becomes 
pregnant of it. After this laborious journey, the 
angekok has the right to lie with the woman.* This 
visit to the moon is, of course, connected with the 
aforesaid erotic proclivities of that luminary. Among 
the Indians, too, the moon seems to possess an in- 
fluence over procreation. 

In order that the angekok may heal diseases he 
must be well paid ; otherwise his arts will be of no 
avail. It is of course not he himself that receives 
the gifts, but the tornak, for whom he merely acts as 
agent. ~^ 

By reason of their connection with the super- 
natural world, the most esteemed angekoks have con- 
siderable authority over their countrymen, who are 
afraid of the evil results which may follow any act of 
disobedience. For it is in Greenland as it used to be 
here, with priests who were really masters of their 
craft — they were not only the servants of God, but 
knew ' the black book ' as well, and had power over 
the devil. The angekoks, indeed, are for the most. 

' Holm, Meddelelser om Gronland, part 10, p. 181. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



284 ESKIMO LIFE 

part well disposed ; but they may also work evil by 
robbing other people of their souls and giving them 
to their tornarssuk to eat, by sending their tornat to 
frighten the life out of their enemies, and so forth. 
Thus we find even among the Eskimos the beginnings 
of priestly rule. 

For the most part, however, it is people of 
another class who are guilty of such misdeeds a^ 
killing others by magic, bewitching their weapons, 
and the like. These are the so-called ilisitsoksy 
who may be either male or female.^ These wizards 
and witches are much hated. It used to be held 
that most evils, especially death and disease, were 
due to them ; and if an old woman was suspected of 
being an ilisitsok she was remorselessly killed.! This 
cannot surprise us, when we remember how our own 
ancestors, with the priests at their head, used to burn 
their witches. While the angekoks commune with the 
spirits in the presence of other people, the ilisitsoks' 
dealings with the supernatural powers are carried on 
in the deepest secrecy and always to noxious ends. 
They must be instructed in secrecy by an older 
ilisitsok and must pay dear for the teaching. It does 
not seem to be clear what supernatural powers they 
have dealings with; they are doubtless different from 

^ Angekoks, too, might be of either sex, but women seem alwajrs 
to have been in the minority among them. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOrS IDEAS 285 

those known to the angekoks, and are purposely kept 
secret. In their diabolical arts they use many dif- 
ferent properties, as for instance human bones, the 
flesh of corpses, skulls, snakes, spiders, water-beetles, 
and the like; but their most potent device consists in 
making tupileks. A tupilek is prepared in the dead- 
liest secrecy of various animals' bones, skins, pieces of 
the anorak of the man who is to be injured or por- 
tions of the seals he has caught; all this being 
wrapped together and tied up in a skin. Finally, it 
is brought to life by dint of singing charms over it. 
Then the ilisitsok seats himself upon a bank of stones 
close to the mouth of a river. He turns his anorak 
back to front, draws his hood up over his face, and 
then dangles the tupilek between his legs. This 
makes it grow, and when it has attained its proper 
size it glides away into the water and disappears. It 
can transform itself into all sorts of animals and 
monsters, and is supposed to bring ruin and death 
upon the man against whom it is despatched ; but if 
it fails in this, it turns against him who sent it forth. ^ 
These tupileks remind us strongly of the wide- 
spread belief both in Norway and Iceland in gand or 
' messengers,' and it seems scarcely doubtful that the 

^ Holm, Meddelelser om Oronlandy part 10, p. 185 ; Bink, Tales 
and Traditions of the Eskimo, pp. 58, 151, 201, 461 ; N. Egede, 
Tredie Continuation af Belationeme, pp. 48, 48 ; P. Egede, Efter- 
retninger om Qronla/nd^ p. 18, &c. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



286 ESKIMO LIFE 

Eskimos have borrowed this conception from our 
ancestors in Greenland. The 'gand' in Iceland is 
also a fabulous, magic creature, sent forth by wizards, 
with the power of transforming itself into every pos- 
sible shape ; and if it does not succeed in destroying 
the person against whom it is sent, it returns and 
kills the sender. It can, however, in Greenland, no 
less than in Iceland and Norway, be snapped up by 
other wizards or witches, and its evil influence thus 
averted.^ 

Bink sees in these ilisitsoks and their connection 
with the powers of evil a possible survival from an 
older or primaeval faith in Greenland, which is per- 
secuted by the priests of the new faith, the angekoks.^ 
Just so do we find t|jat witchcraft among us consisted 
largely of remnants of the old heathenism and was, 
therefore, bitterly persecuted by the Christians. 
There seems to be much in favour of this ingenious 
conclusion of Eink's. It appears to me possible, 
however, that as the tupilek is descended from the 
ancient Scandinavians' belief in gand or * mes- 

^ Compare Carl Andersen, lalandske Folkeaagn og Eventyr^ 2nd 
edit. (1877) pp. 144-149. It is interesting to compare these Icelandio 
tales with the East Greenland legend related by Holm {Meddelelser 
om Oronlandf part 10, p. 808), which is very similar in matter, though 
of course adapted to the conditions of life in Greenland. Analogous 
tales are also to be found in Norway, according to Moltke Moe, who 
has directed my attention to this remarkable similarity. 

' Hink, Tales and Traditiona of the EakimoSy p. 4*2. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 287 

sengers/ so the origin of the whole witch-lore may be 
found in the same quarter. There seem to be sufficient 
points of likeness to justify such a conjecture.^ It is 
by no means improbable that precisely this belief in 
the power of the Evil One, the contract with Satan, 
the Black Book and so forth — in a word the whole 
belief in wizardry which lay, and to some extent still 
lies, at the very root of the superstitions of our race, 
even deeper, one might almost say, than the belief in 
God — might have been the first thing borrowed by 
the Eskimos in their dealings with our forefathers. 
This rapid and easy way of obtaining supernatural 
power must have been particularly attractive to 
them. So far as I have been able to learn, too, 
witchcraft does not play anything Uke such a pro- 
minent part among the more western Eskimos, if it 
is to be found at all (?). 

I have still to speak of the Greenlanders' belief 
in amulets. They are used by almost everyone, and 
consist of particular objects, generally portions of 
animals or of human beings. Charms are sung or 

^ One of the characteristics of the ilisitsoks, as well as of the ange- 
koks, is that they breathe fire. In the medieeval legends, and even in 
more recent European folk-lore, this faculty was attributed to the De\'il, 
and was often extended to those who had sold themselves to hiui. 
The Greenland fire-breathing is probably connected with this medisbval 
superstition. The ilisitsoks, moreover, when seen by the angekoks 
during their exorcisms, are observed to be black firom the hands up 
to the elbows — a trait which may also have its origin in the popular 
European conception of the Devil and his host as black in colour. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



288 ESKIMO LIFE 

muttered over them, and they are given by parents 
to their children while they are still quite little ; or 
young people are instructed by their elders how to 
find amulets for themselves. They are worn all 
through life, as a rule upon the body or among the 
clothes. The men, for example, often have them 
sewn into skin pouches made for the purpose, and 
worn upon the breast, while women often tie them 
into the topknot of their hair. Others are placed 
in the house-roof or in the tent ; or in the kaiak 
to prevent it from capsizing. One man as a rule 
will have several amulets. They are supposed to 
have power to protect one against witchcraft, and 
against injury from spirits, to be of assistance in 
times of danger, and to endow their possessor with 
certain peculiar faculties. Some amulets can even 
be used to disguise their possessors in the shape of 
animals, and thus remind us of the * hamlobing ' (the 
putting on of falcon-skins, swan-skins, &c.) in our old 
mythology. If, for example, a man has a bird or a 
fish for his amulet, he may by calling upon it trans- 
form himself into a bird or a fish ; or he may trans- 
form himself into a tree, seaweed, or the like, if his 
amulet consists of a piece of wood or of seaweed. The 
belief in amulets, as we all know, is spread over the 
whole world, and can be traced from the most primi- 
tive right up to the most highly developed races. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 289 

Among the Eskimos it no doubt dates from a very- 
early stage of development, and is the most primitive 
of their existing religious conceptions. The origin 
of this belief appears to me quite explicable. Some- 
times, of course, it may have arisen from a mere 
external accident, for example the observation of a 
series of fortunate events — that a man who is in 
possession of some particular object has always been 
lucky in his fishing, and so forth. But as a rule its 
source lies deeper. When, for example, a man sees 
that a bird, such as the falcon, cleaves the air with in- 
credible ease and has extraordinary powers of attack 
with beak and claws, he is apt to attribute these 
powers to every part of the animal, and especially to 
the head, with the soul inhabiting it, to the beak, 
and to the claws. It is not at all unnatural that 
barren women, in order to have children, should take 
pieces of a European's shoesole and hang them round 
their necks. Seeing that Europeans are proUfic, they 
think that through these shoesoles, on which our 
strength has rested, some part of it will * pass into 
their garments and serve them to the Uke end.'^ 
When a boy who spits blood, and whose family is 
consumptive, is given a seal-blood plug as an amulet 
(the plug which is used to stop the flow of blood 
from the wounds of a captured seal), and when this 

^ Hans Egede, Oronlanda Perlttstration, p. 116. 

IT 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



290 ESKIMO LIFE 

is sewn into the anorak upon his breast, the reason is 
surely clear enough. It is based upon the same belief 
msympathetic transferenceyiYiicii plays so great a part in 
the popular superstitions of all countries. The Eskimos 
often have for amulets portions of their forefathers' 
clothes or other possessions, as a rule of their grand- 
fathers'. This has no doubt its origin in the belief 
that the souls of the dead can protect them, and that 
when they carry some portions of the dead man's 
possessions about with them, it is easier to come into 
rapport with him. Cases are also recorded of the 
carrying about of small male and female figures to 
serve as amulets.^ The transition from this belief in 
amulets to fetish-worship, or rather idol- and image- 
worship, does not seem to me to be very difficult. 

The Greenlanders also think they derive super- 
natural help from their charms. These are employed 
in sickness, in danger, against enemies, &c., and have 
about the same influence as the amulets. Even less 
than the amulets, however, have they any connection 
with spirits, and the method of their action is 
unknown — no one knows even the meaning of the 
words which are spoken. They are simply old 
formulas which have been handed down by means of 
sale from generation to generation. They have to 
be learned in secrecy, and must be paid for on the • 

' Compare Holm, MeddeUlser om Gronland^ part 10, p. 118. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



BELIGIOUS IDEAS 291 

spot and at a very high rate, else they have no 
efficacy. They are uttered slowly in a subdued, 
mystic tone;^ it seems as though they were con- 
nected to a certain extent with witchcraft. They 
remind us forcibly of our old witch-crones and their 
often meaningless formulas. It seems to me pro- 
bable that they must be reminiscences of old cus- 
toms, imported from outside, whose original significa- 
tion has been lost. According to Eink, charms may 
also be learnt by listening to the song of birds.^ 

Besides these formulas, magic songs are also in 
use. The words of these, however, are comprehen- 
sible, and they may be sung in the hearing of others. 

According to Eink, it is as a rule the deceased 
relations and ancestors of the person using the 
charm, and especially his grandparents, whose help 
is invoked in these formulas and in the songs. From 
Holm's account, on the other hand, we gather nothing 
of this sort. It seems to me not unreasonable, how- 
ever, to suppose that they, and also the amulets, 
have often a certain connection with the dead, and 
may thus be the beginning of (or a survival from) a 
more developed ancestor-worship. When a boy is 
for the first time placed in a kaiak, the father, by 

^ Holm, Meddelelser om Qronla/ndy part. 10, p. 119. 
' Tale» and Traditions of the Eskimo, p. 51 ; Danish ed. siippl. 
p. IM. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



292 ESKIMO LIFE 

means of magic songs, will invoke for him the pro- 
tection of his deceased grandparents and great-grand- 
parents. 

Offerings to the supernatural powers are very 
infrequent among the Greenlanders. The most com- 
mon form of offering is made to the inue of the sea, 
the so-called kungusutarissat (the plural of hmgusu- 
tariak). They are fond of foxes' flesh and foxes' 
tails, which are, therefore, offered to them whenever 
a fox is caught, that they may make the fishing 
successful In travelling, too, the Eskimos will make 
offerings to certain headlands, glaciers, and the like, 
which they regard as dangerous, in order to get past 
them unharmed. The offering is as a rule thrown 
overboard into the sea ; it often consists of food, but 
may also take the form of beads or other things 
which they value. 

Besides these religious ceremonies the Green- 
landers have others, especially certain rules of life as 
to fasting, abstinence, and the like, which must be 
observed, for example, by women immediately before 
or after the birth of a child. It would, however, 
lead us too far to go in detail into these matters. 



From this survey of the religious conceptions of 
the Greenlanders, it will doubtless appear that they 
are not so exempt from foreign influences as many 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 293 

have been inclined to think. We can trace in them 
admixtures from many quarters ; we have found 
myths whose place of origin is certainly as distant as 
Central Asia ; nay we have even found some which 
unquestionably bridge the distance between Green- 
land, South Africa, and the Fiji Islands.* The migra- 
tions of such myths presuppose immense periods of 
timeA What is perhaps most interesting for us, 
lowever, is the traces which we find of our own 
forefathers' visits to Greenland. It is not only a few 
ruined buildings that bear witness to their presence ; 
they have also left an unmistakable imprint on the 
spiritual life of the natives. I shall cite one or two 
more examples of remarkable resemblances to Euro- 
pean, and especially Scandinavian, superstitions, 
which must in all probability have arisen from inter- 
course with our forefathers. 

The Greenlanders believe that children born in 
secresy, or murdered after birth, become dangerous 
spectres {angiak). Among other things, they are in 

^ As regards the greater part of these myths, the theory that they 
were invented independently in different parts of the world seems 
quite inadmissible ; the coincidences are too numerous and too cha- 
racteristic. Examples may be cited, indeed, of the same invention 
having been made independently by dififerent races remotely situated 
from each other ; but they are remarkably rare. On the other hand, 
it is surprising how certain tools, cultivated plants, and arts or accom- 
plishments have been handed on from people to people over immense 
tracts of the earth. (Compare Peschel, AbJiandlungcn zur Erd- und 
Volkerkunde, 1877, i. p. 4G8). 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



294 ESKIMO LIFE 

tlie habit of seeking but a dog's skull, which they use 
as a kaiak, in order to persecute and kill their kins- 
folk — either their mother's later-bom children, or, it 
may be, their mother's brothers, who, by reproaching 
her for her misconduct, have led her to conceal the 
birth. Sometimes, too, they pursue people in the 
form of a feather, a mitten, &c.^ This conception is 
very like the belief in what is called utburden, which 
is very widespread in Norway. These are children 
who, being born in concealment and killed, have not 
received a name. They cannot rest, but, in the form 
of visible or invisible ghosts, they pursue either llie 
mother or people who pass by the place where they 
have been laid.^ The resemblance between this 
Norwegian conception and the Greenland supersti- 
tion is so great that there is every probabiUty of its 
having been imported into Greenland by the old 
Scandinavians.^ 

' Glahn, Nye Samling of det Icongelige norske Videnskahelige 
Sehhahs Slcrifter, i. 1784, p. 271. Rink, Tales and Traditions of the 
Eslimo, pp. 45, 891, 4b9 ; KleinBchmidt, Den gronlandshe Ordbog, 
p. 88. 

'^ See Moltke Mce's Introduction to Qvigstad and Sandberg: 
Lajppishe Evcntyr eg Folkesagn^ p. vii; Nyrop, Mindre A/hand- 
linger iidgivne a/ det philologisk-historislce Samfund, Copenhagen, 
1887. p. 198 ; Liebrecht, Zur Volkshunde, p. 819. 

' I must not omit to note, however, that similar conceptions are to 
be found in different parts of the world. In Tahiti, Oromatus, the 
mightiest of spirits, is said to have come into existence in this way, 
and among the Polynesians generally the souls of children are regarded 
as being especially dangerous. (Compare F. Liebrecht, in The 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 296 

Passing on to their fairy tales, we find many which 
resemble Norwegian and other European legends. 
For example we have in Norway an as yet unpub- 
lished tale^ of three sisters who were bent upon 
getting married. The one said, *I am minded to 
marry even if I got only a fox for a husband ; ' the 
second said she would marry if she got only a goat, 
and the third if she got only a squirrel. Thereupon 
there came a fox, a goat, and a squirrel, and took 
each his wife. Their father afterwards paid a visit 
to each of his sons-in-law. When he came to the 
squirrel's house, the squirrel bade his wife hang a 
pot over the fire, and then all three went out and 
came to a river, into which the squirrel dived and 
brought up a trout. When the man reached home 
he bade his wife put a pot on the fire and go out 
with him. On reaching a river, the man tried to 

Academy t iii. 1872, p. 821.) One of my reasons for thinking that the 
Greenlanders may have borrowed their angiak from the Scandinavians 
is that, so far as I can ascertain, other Eskimo tribes have no such 
belief^-at least it cannot be common among them. There is no 
mention of the angiak even among the legends collected by Holm on 
the east coast. On the other hand, there are several apparently more 
primitive myths of ordinary children who are turned into monsters. 
(Compare Meddclelser om Oronlandf part 10, p. 287 ; Bink, Tales and 
Traditions of the Eskimo, p. 258 ; Danish ed. suppl. p. 125.) One of 
these, who on the east coast is the child of the moon by a human mother 
(Meddclelser om Oronland, part 10, p. 281), has on the west coast 
become an angiak. This is, no doubt, a late recasting of the legend 
— a theory which is borne out by the fiEict that variants occur on the 
west coast in which the angiak is an ordinary child. 
^ Communicated by Mollke Moe. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



296 ESKIMO LIFE 

dive as lie had seen the squirrel do, but was drowned. 
In Greenland we find this story spUt into two. In 
the one it is two sisters who go down to the shore 
and wish, the one for an eagle, the other for a whale, 
as a husband ; and these animals at once come and 
carry them ofT.^ In the other we are told of a pair 
of old people who live alone with their daughter. 
One d^y there comes a big unknown man, who says 
that he lives near them to the southward, and asks 
for their daughter in marriage. He obtains her, and 
on leaving her home asks his father-in-law to come 
and pay them a visit. This the father-in-law does. 
When he enters the house, his daughter hangs a 
kettle over the fire and her husband goes out. The 
old man looks after him through the window, but 
sees only a cormorant which flies over the water, 
dives, and comes up with a sea-scorpion. Presently 
the son in-law comes in with the sea-scorpion, which 
he gives to his father-in-law to eat. On the old 
man's return home he asks his wife to hang the pot 
over the lamp, then rows with her a little way out 
from the land, and ties a stone round his neck and a 
long rope round his waist, saying to his wife : * I will 
dive into the water, and when I tug at the rope you 
must haul me up again.' He jumps overboard and 

' Rink, Tales and Traditirns of the EakimOt p. 126 ; Holm^ 
Meddelelser on Gronland, part 10, p. 276, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 297 

sinks, and when his wife hauls him up again he is 
drowned.^ The resemblance between this story and 
the latter part of the Norwegian one is so great that 
there can scarcely be any doubt as to its origin. We 
must, however, take into account the possibility that 
it did not come through the old Scandinavians, 
but through Hans Egede and Tiis people, or even 
later. 

The following story resembles both Asiatic and 
European legends. A reindeer-hunter once saw a 
number of women bathing in a lake. He took away 
the clothes of the fairest of them, who had therefore 
to follow him home and become his wife, whilst the 
others rushed to the shore, put on their clothes, and 
were transformed into geese or mergansers and flew 
away. His wife bore him a son ; but presently she 
set to work collecting feathers, by means of which she 
changed both herself and her son into birds, and flew 
away with him one fine day, when the man was out 
hunting. He set forth to search for them, and came 
upon a man who was cutting chips of wood which . 
were transformed into fishes. This man placed him 
upon the tail of a big salmon which he made out of 
a chip, and told him to close his eyes, whereupon the 

' Bink, Tcdea and Traditions of tJie Eskimo, Danish ed. suppL 
p. 119. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



298 ESKIMO LIFE 

fish brought him to his wife and son.^ The American 
Eskimos have an altogether similar story. Among 
the Samoyedes it is related that a man went out on a 
journey and came upon an old woman who was fell- 
ing birch trees. He helped her, and went with her 
to her tent, where he hid himself. Then in came 
seven girls, who talked to the old woman and went 
away again. She said to him : 'In the darkest part 
of yonder wood there is a lake ; there the seven girls 
will bathe ; take away the clothes of one of them ' — 
and he did so. The remainder is quite different from 
the Greenland story, and there is nothing at all about 
their being changed into birds, though their home 
was in air or in the sky.^ Tliis story, whose likeness 
to the Greenland legend is remarked by Dr. Eink,^ is 
not, however, so like it as an Icelandic story, in 
which we are told that a man was walking early one 
morning beside the sea and came to the mouth of a 
cave. He could hear sounds of dancing and merri- 
ment from inside the cave, and outside it lay a heap 
of sealskins, one of which he took home with him. 
Later in the day he came again to the mouth of the 
cave ; there sat a fair young woman quite naked, and 

* P. Egede, Continuation af Belaiionemet p. 19 ; Efterretninger 
om Grdnla/ndf p. 55; Rink, Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo^ 
p. 145 ; Meddelelser om Gronland^ part 11, p. 20, Suppl. p. 117. 

' Castren, Ethnologislce Foreldsningar, Helsingfors, 1857, p. 182. 

' Meddelelser om Uronlandy part 11, Suppl. p. 117. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



RELIGIOUS IDEAS 299 

weeping. She was the seal who owned the skin. He 
gave her clothes, took her home with him, married 
her, and they had children. But one day when the 
man was out fishing his wife found the old sealskin ; 
the temptation was too strong for her, she said good- 
bye to her children, put on the skin and threw her- 
self into the sea.^ The Greenland story, for the rest, 
resembles the swan legends which are spread over 
almost the whole world, and of which we have 
several in Europe. That it cannot have been intro- 
duced into Greenland of recent years is proved by 
the fact that Paul Egede heard it there so long ago 
as 1735. The possibility that it may have been 
brought to Greenland by the old Scandinavians seems 
to me strengthened by the fact that swan-legends and 
stories of a like nature do not seem to have been 
common in America. Powers, for example, in his 
book about the Indians of California, says that he can 
find no stories of this nature among them.^ 

K space permitted I could adduce several other 
remarkable coincidences between the folk-lore of 



* C. AnderBen, Islandake Folke^agn, 1877, p. 205. 

' The Iroquois, however, have a legend of seven boys who were 
transformed into birds and flew away from their parents. They have 
also a tale of a young man who goes out fishing and comes upon some 
boys who have put off their wings and are sw^imming. They give him 
a pair of wings which enable him to fly away with them ; but they 
afterwards take his wings away from him and leave him helpless. 
Compare "Rink, Meddelclser om Gronland, part 11, p. 21. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



800 ESKIMO LIFE 

Greenland and that of Europe, and especially of 
Scandinavia. It appears, then, that the intercourse 
between the old Scandinavians and the natives must 
have been greater than has generally been believed.' 

^ It has hitherto been supposed that there are no traces of snch 
mtercourse except m the Eskimo legends (mentioned in Chapter I.), of 
their encomiters with the old Scandinavians, and in the throe following 
words : nUa for nise (porpoise), kitd/nek for kvanne (angelica) and 
haldlek (meaning Greenlander). The derivation of nUa (old Norse 
nisa) and kttdnek seems probable enough, though some doubt is 
thrown on the latter by the fact that in Labrador the word is applied 
to an eatable sea- weed. KalaXek was supposed to be the same as the 
Norwegian skrselling — the name given by our forefathers to the Eski- 
mos, which in an Eskimo's mouth would sound somethinp^ like kalaJek. 
It is rather surprising, however, to find the same word among the 
Eskimos of Alaska in the form of katlalik or kallaaluch, meaning an 
angekok or chieftain (Rink, MeddeleUer om Gronlandj part 11, Suppl. p. 
94 ; Tales and Traditions of the Eskimo, Danish ed. suppl. p. 200). It 
is possible, however, that the word may have been imported into Alaska 
fi-om Greenland in modem times. Another thing which, as it seems to 
me, may possibly be a rehc of the old Scandinavians, is the cross-bow 
which Holm found upon the east coast, and which was formerly in use 
on the west coast also. So fiar as I know, it is not found among the 
Indians. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



301 



CHAPTEE XIV 

THE INTRODUCTION OF CHRISTIANITY 

AbLfhis superstition of which I have been speaking 
of course seems to us mere meaningless confusion, 
the extirpation of which must be an unmixed advan- 
tage. But if we place ourselves at their point of 
view, is it so much more meaningless for them than 
our Christian dogmas, which lead them into a world 
entirely foreign to them ? In order to understand 
these dogmas, they had first to transpose them into 
their own key of thought, or, in other words, they 
had to make them more or less heathen before they 
could really grasp them at all. \ It is useless to 
imagine that a people can suddenly, at a word of 
command, begin to think in an entirely new manner. 
This transmutation has cost them much labour, and 
though they are still heathen at bottom and believe 
in their old legends, yet the new doctrine has intro- 
duced confusion into their ideas. This alone might 
tempt one to think that it would have been better to 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



302 ESKIMO LIFE 

have let them preserve their own faith undisturbed. 
It gave them, with their comparatively meagre capa- 
city for ideas, the easiest explanation of their sur- 
roundings; it peopled nature with the supernatural 
powers which they needed for consolation when 
reality became too hard and complex for them. 
And how characteristic these myths are of the 
Eskimos — for example, the conception of the region 
beyond the grave ! Here there is neither silver nor 
gold, neither gorgeous raiment nor shining palaces, 
as in our stories; earthly riches have no value for 
the Eskimo. Nor are there lovely women, flowery 
gardens, and so forth. No ; at most there is a mud 
hut, a little larger than his own, and in it sit the 
happy spirits eating rotten seals' heads, which lie in 
inexhaustible heaps under the benches ; and around it 
there are splendid hunting-grounds, with quantities of 
game and much sunshinej In his eyes our Paradise 
of white-robedf angelsTwhere the blessed sit around 
upon chairs, seems a tedious and colourless existence 
which he does not understand, and which excites no 
longing in him. We can scarcely wonder at an 
angekok, who said to Niels Egede that he far pre- 
ferred the tornarssuk's or ' Devil's house,' where he 
had often been ; * For in heaven there is no food to 
be had, but in hell there are seals and fishes in 
plenty.' 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE INTRODUCTION OF CHIHSTIANITV 303 

One would expect that the missionaries' victory ^ 
over heathendom would be a very easy one among so 
peaceful and good-humoured a people as the Green - 
landers ; but this can scarcely be said to have been 
the case. The natives had many objections to allege 
against the Christian assertions. For example, they 
could not understand that the sin which Adam and 
Eve conmiitted ' could be so great and involve such 
melancholy consequences ' as that the whole human 
race should be condemned on account of it. * Since 
God knew all things, why did he permit the first man 
and woman to sin?' The idea of free-will seems to 
them, frankly speaking, mere rubbish, and, but for 
free-will, Adam's offspring would never have been 
corrupted, and the Son of God need not have 
suffered. 

One girl was not at all contented with the an- 

^ Missionary activity in Greenland, then a possession of the Nor- 
wegian crown, was commenced in 1721 by Hans Egede, who to that 
end set on foot a combined commercial and missionary company in 
Bisrgen. This mission was afterwards supported by the Danish-Nor- 
wegian Government, and after the separation of 1814, by which 
Denmark retained the Norwegian possessions of the Faroe Isles, Ice- 
land, and Greenland, by the Danish Government alone. Ten years 
after Egede's arrival in the country, Count Zinsendorf, who had heard 
of his mission, despatched three Moravian brethren to Greenland. 
These also formed a little congregation, and the German or Hernhutt 
mission has likewise obtained a footing. It has now a few stations in 
the Godthaab district, and one or two in the extreme south of the 
cotmtry. The peculiarity of these Hernhutt communities, so far as I 
could gather, is that in them the natives have sunk to an even greater 
depth of misery than elsewhere. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



804 ESKIMO LIFE 

swer she received to these objections. ' She wanted 
to have them so answered that she could inwardly 
assent and feel that the answer was true, and that 
she could silence those who had so much to say 
against this part of our doctrine.' Similarly, they 
were of opinion that Adam and Eve must have been 
very foolish to think of chattering with a serpent, 
and * that they must have been very fond of fruit 
since they would rather die and suffer pain than 
forego a few big berries.' Others thought that it 
was just like the kavdlunaks (Europeans) ; for * these 
greedy people never have enough ; they have, and 
they want to have, more than they require.' One 
angekok thought it was very unlucky that Christ, the 
great angekok, who could even bring the dead to life, 
was not born among the Eskimos ; they would have 
loved him, and obeyed him, and not done Uke the 
foolish kavdlunaks. ' What madmen ! to kill the 
man who could bring the dead to Ufe ! ' When they 
saw that Christian Europeans quarrelled and fought, 
they had little faith in the Christian doctrines, and 
said: * Perhaps, if we knew as much as they, we, 
too, would become inhuman.' And they thought 
that it was impossible to find well-behaved Europeans, 
* unless they had been several years in Greenland and 
had there learnt mores' 

Some asked, since Christianity was so essential. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE IXTRODUCTION OF CHIIISTIAXITY 305 

why God had not instructed them in it sooner, for 
then their forefathers, too, could have gone to heaven. 
When Paul Egede answered that perhaps God had 
seen that they would not accept the Word, but rather 
despise it, and thereby become more guilty, an old 
man said that he had known many excellent people, 
and had himself hAd a pious father ; and even if 
some of them mi^t have despised the Word, ' still 
there were thor women and children, who are all 
credulous.' 3(vhen Paul Egede explained to them 
that worldly goods are * trumpery,' altogether un- 
worthy to go to heaven, someone answered : ' I did 
not know that these things were not worth thinking 
about ; if it is so nice there, why are we so unwilling 
to leave the earth ? ' 

When the Scriptures came to be translated, con- 
siderable objections presented themselves. Many 
even of the Christian Greenlanders thought that it 
would not be advisable for their unbelieving coun- 
trymen to be told, for example, of * Jacob's slyness 
and treachery towards his father and brother, of the 
patriarchs' polygamy, and especially of Simeon's and 
Levi's matchless wickedness.' *The story of Lot,' 
too, they thought unfortunate. *A selection of 
what was most important would be best for this 
people.' ^ 

* Compare Paul Egede, Efterretninger om Grbnlandy pp. 117, 162. 

X 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



306 ESKIMO LIFE 

The sacrament of the altar, of course, seemed in 
their eyes the most arrant witchcraft, and baptism 
likewise. One time, says Niels Egede, when they 
had seen some Europeans going through this cere- 
mony, ' an angekok asked me why I was always 
denouncing those who practised witchcraft, when 
here was one of our own priests performing sorceries 
over us ? ' To which Egede found no better answer 
than that it was ' in accordance with Christ's com- 
mand ; ' he did not think * the dog had any right 
to know more.' Once, when the missionaries told 
a man * that he should especially thank God who 
had given him many children,' he became very 
angry and answered, * It is a great lie to say that 
God has given me children, for I made them myself. 
" Is it not so ? " he said, turning to his wife.' 

Their criticism of the doctrine and practice of 
the missionaries was sometimes so mordant that the 
intelligent and honest merchant Dalager has to admit 
that ' even the stupidest natives from far beyond the 
colony have often confronted me with such objections 
on these points as have made me groan, while the 
perspiration stood on my brow.' 

Divine service seems at first to have bored them 
very much ; they preferred to hear about Europe, 
and would ask many naive questions: * Whether 
the King was very big ? Was he strong ? Was he 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE INTRODUCTION OF CHRISTIAMTY 807 

a great angekok? And had he caught many 
whales?' Paul Egede records that when they 
thought his father's sermons too long ' they went up 
to him and asked him if he was not soon going to 
stop. Then he had to measure off upon his arm how 
much of his discourse was left, whereupon they went 
back to their places and sat moving their hands 
down their arms every moment. When the preacher 
paused at the end of a paragraph, they made haste 
to move the hand right out to the finger-tips ; but 
when he began again they cried "Ama" (that is, 
" Still more ") and moved the hand back again half 
way up the arm. The singing was in my department, 
and when I began a new psalm, or sang for too long, 
they would often hold a wet sealskin mitten over my 
mouth.' 

The missionaries' treatment of the natives was not 
always of the gentlest. I may cite a couple of ex- 
amples chosen at random from their own statements : 
* I gave him to understand,' says Niels Egede, * that if 
he would not let himself be persuaded by fair means, 
but despised the Word of God, he should receive the 
same treatment from me as other angekoks and liars 
had received (namely a thrashing).' ' When I had 
tried all I could by means of persuasion and ex- 
hortation, without avail, I had recourse to my usual 
method, flogged him soundly and turned him out of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



308 ESKIMO LIFE 

the house.' ^ A girl was beaten by her priest, ' be- 
cause she could not believe that God was so cruel as 
he represented Him to be ; he had said that all her 
forefathers were with Tornarssuk, and were to be 
tortured to all eternity, because they did not know 
God/ She tried to defend them by suggesting that 
they knew no better, whereupon he lost his temper ; 
and when at last she said * that it was horrible for 
her to learn that God was so terribly angry with 
those who sinned that he could never forgive them, 
as even wicked men will sometimes do,' he gave 
her a beating.^ It cannot but jar upon us to hear of 
such conduct on the part of our countrymen and 
Christian missionaries towards so peaceable a people ; 
and it would scarcely make a better impression upon 
the natives themselves. We can only admire the 
good humour which prevented them from driving the 
missionaries out of their houses. In excuse for the 
missionaries, we must remember that they were born 
in Europe, and in a much ruder age than our own. 

The conversion of the natives at first went but 
slowly and with difficulty ; but they gradually dis- 
covered that the missionaries were in reality great 
angekoks, and that their ceremonies, such as baptism, 
their doctrines and formulas, the Christian books, 

* Niels Egede, Tredie Continuation af Relationeme^ pp. 82, 45. 
' Paul Egede, Efterretninger om Oronland, p. 221. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE INTRODUCTION OF CHRISTIANITY 809 

and so forth, were magical appliances, potent for 
curing disease, protecting against want, and ensuring 
good fishery and other advantages ; not to mention 
that conversion and a little appearance of contrition 
often bore immediate fruits in the shape of small 
rewards from the eager missionaries. Accordingly 
they said of them: 'They are good people, they 
gave us food when we believed and looked sorrow- 
ful/ A father whose son was dangerously ill, after 
having had recourse to various angekoks, took 
counsel with an old and experienced one ' as to 
whether he should not seek help from the priest at 
the Colony ; ' whereupon the old man calmly answered: 
* You may do as you please ; for I am of opinion 
that the Word of God and the words of skilful ange- 
koks are equally powerful.' This gradually became 
the general opinion ; and as it fortunately chanced 
in several cases that the Word of God seemed more 
effectual than that of the angekoks, it was natural 
that some should let themselves be baptised. The 
example once given, there were plenty to follow it, 
especially when distinguished hunters led the way. 

But if the Greenlanders nominally went over to 
Christianity, they held, and still hold in a greater or 
less degree, to their old faith as well. It was at 
first very difiicult to convince them of the falsity of 
the grotesque hiventioiis of their angekoks. When 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



310 ESKIMO LIFE 

they were reproached with their credulity they 
answered simply ' that they were not in the habit of 
lying and therefore believed all that people said to 
them.' 

That they were not absolutely simple-minded, 
however, in their acceptance of all that the Europeans 
told them, seems clear from this, amongst other 
things, that when some Greenlanders could not get 
Niels Egede to swallow their assertion that *they 
had killed a bear on Disco which was so big that it 
had ice on its back that never melted,' they said : 
' We have believed what you tell us, but you will not 
believe what we tell you.' 

To show what a little way below the surface 
Christianity has gone, and how some of them, at any 
rate, still understand baptism,! may mention that some 
years ago in North Greenland a catechist (a man who 
has received a theological education, and supplies the 
place of the clergyman in his absence) baptised not 
only his parishioners, but also his puppies in the 
name of the Father, the Son, &c. His wife was 
childless, and he took this means, as he thought, of 
setting matters right; and, sure enough, next year 
she bore a child. 

The part of their old heathenism which now most 
haunts their fancy is, so far as my experience goes, 
the belief in the kivitut or mountain-men (see above. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



THE IXTRODUCTIQN OF CILRISTIANITY 311 

p. 266). Of these they stand in great dread, and 
frequently think they see them. While we were at 
Godthaab several of them were seen. Whenever 
anything is stolen from one of their store-rooms it is 
of course the kivitut who have done it, and if a 
kaiak-man disappears, and his body is not found, he 
is at once supposed to have taken to the mountains, 
and become a kivitok. This belief seems of late 
years to have gained ground greatly. A catechist, 
in the * Atuagagdliutit,' takes his countrymen to task 
on the subject, and exclaims : ' No, let us believe of 
those who perish on the treacherous sea that they 
rest their limbs upon the great burying-ground at the 
bottom of the ocean, and that their souls live in the 
joys of eternity.' 

I had once an unpleasant proof of the ingrained 
nature of this superstitious terror. At Godthaab, 
late one evening, I went over to one of the Green- 
landers' houses with a letter which was to be sent ofl 
early next morning with some kaiak-men from an- 
other place. When I entered, the whole house was 
in deep slumber ; men and women side bj'' side on 
the chief sleeping-bench like herrings on a thwart. 
Not to disturb them more than necessary, I wanted 
to awaken the only unmarried son of the house, 
Jacob, who lay alone on the window-bench. He and 
I were excellent friends, and saw each other daily. I 



Digitized by 



Google 



312 ESKIMO LIFE 

shook Lira, and shouted * Jacob ' into his ear. He 
slept as heavily as ever, and I had to shake him long 
and violently before he at last opened his eyes a little 
and grunted. But when he saw me bending over 
him, his eyes grew glassy with terror, and he sat up, 
uttered a frightful shriek, and kicked and struck out 
at me. He went on shrieking more and more wildly, 
and fought his way backwards on the bench. All of 
those upon the main bench now sat up too and stared 
in blank affright at me, while poor I stood there in 
speechless astonishment at the hubbub I had created. 
At last I recovered my powers of speech, approached 
Jacob, held out my hands towards him, and spoke 
some reassuring words. But that only made him 
worse than ever. When I saw that words were of 
no avail, I stopped speaking, and began to laugh, 
whereupon the yells ceased as suddenly as they had 
begun, and Jacob became as red in the face as he 
had formerly been white, and muttered something in 
a shamefaced way about having dreamt of a kivitok 
that wanted to carry him off to the mountains. I 
gave him my letter, and withdrew as quickly as I 
could. The next day it was known over all the 
Colony that I had been a kivitok ; for the neighbours 
had heard the yells. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



313 



CHAPTER XV 

EUROPEANS AND NATIVES 

The relation of the Europeans to the Greenlanders is 
in many respects unique, for the Eskimos have been 
treated more tenderly than any other primitive 
people which has been subjected to our experiments 
in civilisation. The Danish Government certainly 
deserves the highest respect for its action in this 
matter, and it were much to be desired that other 
States would follow the example here given them. 
Care for the true welfare of the natives has been 
largely operative in their policy, and there is scarcely 
another instance of a people of hunters which has 
come into such close contact with European civilisa- 
tion and proselytism, and has held its own so well for 
so long a time. 

We do not often meet with such enthusiasm as 
that which impelled our countryman Hans Egede 
and the first missionaries to seek out this at that 
time almost unknown land, and led them to endure so 
many hardships there. They did it with the best of 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



3U ESKIMO LIPT: 

motives, and thought that they were thereby advanc- 
ing both the spiritual and temporal welfare of the 
Eskimo. If we compare this mission and the treat- 
ment of Greenland as a whole with the conduct of 
Europeans under similar circumstances in other 
parts of the world, we cannot but recognise the 
working of an unusually humane spirit ; and as we 
examine the whole history of the government of 
Greenland down to our own day, we find ever new 
and gratifying examples of this spirit. 

With all the good will in the world, however, 
civilised men cannot resist the tendency to look down 
upon a primitive people as essentially their inferiors. 
Even in the history of Greenland we find many proofs 
of this. We learn from his own writings that the 
devoted Hans Egede himself cherished no small con- 
tempt for the natives whom he held it his mission to 
christianise. He even relates how he often beat 
them, and had them flogged, or given the rope's end. 
On one occasion, learning from a small boy that an 
angekok, named Elik, had said that it would be an 
easy matter to root out the foreigners who had come 
to their country, he set off with seven armed men, 
fell upon the angekok, took him prisoner, and 
brought him to the colony. There *he received 
some blows with the rope's end, and was put in irons.' 
In the evening the angekok's sons came to inquire 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EUROPEANS AND NATIVES 316 

about their father, and * were permitted, at their own 
request, to pitch their tents in the colony.' After a 
few days the prisoner was set at liberty, and they 
went away. One might suppose that after such 
treatment the Greenlanders would bear ill-will to 
the foreigners ; but their good-humour and hospitality 
are incomparable. As luck would have it, the fol- 
lowing winter, Hans Egede's son, Paul, who had 
taken part in this high-handed proceeding, was 
driven by stress of weather to a place where he was 
surprised to find the angekok Elik. It was not par- 
ticularly pleasant, as he himself confesses ; but to his 
astonishment he was invited to take up his quarters 
with the angekok, who spread a reindeer skin for 
him upon his own sleeping-bench. There Paul 
Egede had to remain for tliree days, and was enter- 
tained with the best of everything.^ This is indeed 
' To return good for evil ' and ' To do good to them 
that hate you ' ; but Egede attributed it to the Green- 
landers' willingness * to put up with punishment when 
they feel they have deserved it.' 

Hans Egede had also another habit, which does 
not show the greatest possible consideration towards 
the natives ; he would now and then take children 
to his house, against their parents' wishes, and keep 
them there to learn the language from them. In this 

* p. Egede, E/terretninger om Gronland, p. 21 ; compare also p. 25. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



316 ESKIMO LIFE 

connection they made a song about him : ' There 
has come a strange man over the great sea from the 
West, who steals boys, and gives them thick soup 
with skin upon it (that is, porridge) to eat, and dried 
earth from his own land (that is, ship's biscuits)/ 
When Paul Egede on one occasion offered a mother 
a present if she would let her son remain some time 
longer with him, she answered that children were not 
articles of commerce. 

We can still find evidences in Greenland of how 
difficult it is for us to get rid of our ingrained con- 
tempt for all so-called aborigines. The motive of 
the Europeans for supporting colonies in the country 
is that they may be a blessing to it ; it is, of course, 
exclusively for the sake of the mission and of the 
natives that trade is carried on. Nevertheless, the 
relation between the natives and the foreigners has 
come to rest on an entirely wrong basis. The 
foreigners are regarded both by themselves and by 
the Greenlanders as a higher race and the lords of 
the country, to whom all obedience is due ; whereas, 
if they were really there for the sake of the natives, 
they ought rather to be their self-sacrificing servants. 
Half voluntarily, half involuntarily, the Europeans 
have themselves emphasised this relation, and have 
all along treated the natives as a subject race. We 
came to the country to preach Christianity ; but how 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EUROPEANS AND NATIVES 317 

does this accord with our Christian doctrine of free- 
dom and equality, and especially with the example 
of Christ himself ? 

As an instance of the extent to which this abuse 
has been carried I may mention that at several settle- 
ments in South Greenland the natives are forbidden to 
keep dogs, because the handful of European families 
who live there want to keep goats. This prohibition 
has, it is true, in many cases been determined upon 
in the local council (see p. 821) ; but it has been 
proposed by the Europeans, and as the Greenlanders, 
as I have said, always follow their lead, it was not 
difficult to get them to consent to it, against their own 
real wishes. I have heard them regretting bitterly 
that they should have been so foolish as to agree to 
such a prohibition. The most glaring injustice, 
however, is to be seen in the villages where the 
German missionaries reside, and where, for no other 
reason but that his own goats may live in peace, the 
reverend gentleman issues an ukase forbidding his 
flock to keep dogs. 

I have spoken of this to many otherwise intelli- 
gent and kind-hearted residents in Greenland, but 
found them all of the opinion that since the dogs 
chased and worried the goats, it followed as a matter 
of course that they must be prohibited. On my ob- 
jecting that the Europeans were few and the Green- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



318 ESKIMO LIFE 

landers many, so that it was more reasonable that 
the latter should forbid the keeping of goats, they 
simply laughed in my face. It did not seem to 
occur to them that they themselves are the inter- 
lopers, and that the Eskimos have kept dogs from 
time immemorial. Nor did they see anything par- 
ticularly wrong in the fact that the goats often 
tore the turf from the roof and walls of the Green- 
landers' houses, injured their fish when it was hung 
up to dry, and so forth. 

Another result of the different manner in which 
the rights of the Europeans and of the natives are 
regarded is to be found in the regulations concerning 
the sale of brandy. Wliile it is illegal, as stated in 
Chapter V., to sell brandy to the natives of the 
country, the European residents are free to have as 
much of it as they please. This is unfortunate ; for 
it can scarcely fail to annoy the natives to have it 
perpetually brought home to them that they are not 
held good enough to be entrusted with that which 
the meanest European may have at will. But this 
ordinance becomes still more hurtful from the fact 
that the Greenlanders who enter into the service of 
Europeans are allowed brandy every day, while 
others can obtain it if they sell something to the 
Europeans. That this may easily lead to the gravest 
abuses is clear enough, and we may be sure that it 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EUROPEANS AND NATIVES 31^ 

has actually done so. I pass over minor inconsis- 
tencies, such as the fact that certain individual 
natives of mixed descent and of social importance 
are allowed to order from Europe a stated quantity 
of brandy every year. 

It was of course a clear necessity to forbid the 
sale of brandy in Greenland, on pain of greatly 
accelerating the extermination of the native race. 
But the only right and consistent thing to do would 
have been to make the prohibition apply to natives 
and Europeans alike. Many maintain, I am aware, 
that this would have been to inflict an unjust hard- 
ship upon the Europeans, who have all their lives 
been accustomed to this stimulant ; and I know that 
this would have been speciaUy the case with regard 
to people from Denmark, where brandy is drunk at 
almost every meal, even among the working classes, 
and where it is thus regarded as well-nigh a necessity 
of life. But notwithstanding this, I cannot but hold 
to my opinion that a general prohibition would have 
been the only right and advantageous thing for both 
parties. Such a demand cannot be called unjust ; 
for if the prohibition is known beforehand, it is 
always open to any European to refrain from going 
to Greenland, and I have no fear but that, in any 
event, there would always be plenty of Europeans 
in the country. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



320 ESKIMO LIFE 

But my demands would go still further. I hold 
that not only should the sale of brandy be pro- 
hibited, but also the sale of coffee, tobacco, and the 
other indubitably noxious, or at any rate valueless, 
products which we have introduced among the na- 
tives. It is certain that they had no desire for them ; 
on the contrary, it took us a long time to make them 
acquire the taste for them. The East Greenlanders 
to this day do not like coffee. On the west coast, as 
before stated, we have been unhappily successful in 
begetting this taste, and coffee has contributed not a 
little to the decline of the race. But if the sale of 
coffee to the natives were forbidden, its importation 
for the use of Europeans should, of course, be for- 
bidden as well. Many will call this fanaticism, but 
I cannot help it. My opinion is that if it be indeed 
for the sake of the natives that we have come to 
their country and undertaken to Uve there and teach 
them, we must prove this by our conduct, we must 
fulfil consistently the duties imposed upon/us by 
such a responsible and difficult mission, and we must 
submit to the small deprivations it may involve. 
Such a work of self-sacrifice cannot be carried on 
without deprivations. The Apostles of the Lord 
have always regarded suffering as an essential part 
of their calling, and if we cannot endure it we are 
neither fitted for, nor worthy of, such a task, and 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EUROPEANS AND NATIVES 321 

ought to refrain from it altogether. If, on the 
other hand, we have come to Greenland not for the 
natives' sake but for our own, that is quite a dif- 
ferent matter ; but in that case let us call things by 
their right names, and not use big words such as 
civilisation and Christianity. 

In order to remedy the state of lawlessness which 
arose from the disuse of the old customs through 
the influence of the missionaries, and from the fact 
that the meanest European felt himself entitled to 
look down upon and domineer over the natives, the 
enthusiastic energy of Dr. Eink has succeeded in 
introducing the so-called local councils {forstan- 
derskaher\ which consist partly of native members, 
chosen by the different villages or small districts. 
The intention was that in these councils all the 
internal affairs of the community should be regulated, 
the poor-rate should be determined, and, in general, 
law and order should be maintained. As the Green- 
landers, however, did not themselves understand 
these matters, the pastor in every district was to act 
as chairman of the council, and the other European 
residents were to be members of it, and to advise 
and guide the native councillors* It now appears 
that the Europeans have gradually got into their 
hands the whole real authority, and that the others 
simply obey their wishes. It was a fine idea, and 

V 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



322 ESKIMO LIFE 

worthy of all recognition, that the natives should 
acquire the habit of self-government, and Dr. Eink's 
innovation marks a turning-point for the better in 
the history of the Greenlander. It suffers, however, 
from the disadvantage inseparable from all measures 
which the Europeans can devise for the benefit of 
the natives — to wit, that it has not arisen from 
among the people themselves who are to profit by 
it. The introduction of new social customs is no- 
where to be effected in a moment ; changes cannot 
be brought about by a single act of will, but must 
be the result of a long process of development in 
the people themselves. An institution imposed from 
without by foreigners must at least need a very long 
time to take root in the national life. Many Green- 
landers now regard it as a distinction to serve as a 
councillor ; but I have also known others, and these 
the most capable among them, who do not appre- 
ciate the honour, holding it of more importance to 
look to their hunting and to the support of their 
families than to travel long distances in order to 
attend meetings where, after all, with their exagge- 
rated deference towards the Europeans, they can do 
nothing but follow their lead and agree to what 
measures they propose. 

From what I have just said, and from many other 
passages in this book, the reader may perhaps be 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EUROPEANS AND NATIVES 323 

inclined to conclude that the Greenlanders are a 
people of no natural independence, and born for 
subjection. This, however, is quite a mistake. On 
the contrary, the Greenlander's love of freedom and in- 
dependence has always been very marked. When the 
Europeans first came to the country, the natives held 
themselves at least their equals, and the idea of 
standing in a menial or subordinate position to 
another man, as they saw the Europeans do among 
themselves, seemed to them strange and degrading. 
It is true that the father of a family exercises a cer- 
tain authority in his own household, and perhaps 
over all the families who live in the same house ; but 
this authority is so mild and unobtrusive that it is 
scarcely felt. They have servants, too, in so far that 
-women who have no parents or other relatives to pro^ 
vide for them are often received into the house of a 
hunter, to assist the mother, daughters, and daughters- 
in-law in the household work ; but they stand on a 
footing of equality with them, and are thus servants 
in name rather than in reality* Male servants are 
entirely unknown. Consequently they could with 
diflSculty reconcile themselves to the idea of going 
into service : and they still dislike above everything 
to be ordered about in a domineering fashion, even 
if their extreme peaceableness of disposition prevents 
them from protesting openly. • 

Y'2 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



324 ESKIMO LIFE 

This love of freedom rendered it difficult at first 
for the Europeans to procure native servants. Gra- 
dually, however, European influence has demoralised 
the natives in this respect as well, so that even 
hunters now enter the service of the Company and 
sometimes feel a certain pride in so doing; for, 
among other things, they thus, as Danish * officials,' 
are entitled to their snapsemik (dram) every morning. 

Danish ladies can still bear witness to the fact 
that it is not so easy to avoid giving offence to the 
pride of their Greenland maid-servants. They are 
active and agreeable so long as they are well treated; 
but if a hard word is addressed to them, they will 
often disappear without ceremony and not come 
back again. If then the mistress is not prepared to 
eat the leek and beg pardon, she must look out for 
another handmaiden. 

If the Greenlander sometimes impresses one as 
being of a servile disposition, I think the effect is 
due to his astounding patience and power of taking 
everything, even to the most open injustice, with 
imperturbable calmness. It must be this patience 
which Egede describes as * the Greenlanders' inborn 
stupidity and cold-bloodedness, their lazy and brutish 
upbringing,' and so forth. I believe it is the hard- 
ship of their life that has taught them this apparently 
phlegmatic calmness. The very uncertainty of their 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



EUROPEANS AND NATIVES 325 

hunting, for instance, often puts their patience to 
the severest tests ; as, for example, when they strike 
a run of ill luck, and come home day after day with 
no booty to their hungry families. Egede least of 
all had any right to complain of this characteristic ; 
since but for it, and their extreme peaceableness of 
disposition, they would certainly not have put up so 
amiably with the often violent proceedings of the 
first Europeans. I had many an opportunity of 
admiring their stoical patience — when, for example, 
I would see them in the morning standing by the 
hour in the passage of the Colonial Manager's house, 
or waiting in the snow outside his door, to speak to 
him or his assistant, who happened to be otherwise 
engaged. They had probably some little business to 
transact with them before starting for their homes, 
often many miles from the colony, and it might be of 
the greatest importance to them to get away as soon 
as possible in order to reach their destination be- 
times. If the weather happened to look threatening, 
every minute would be more than precious ; but 
there they would stand waiting, as immovable as 
ever, and to all appearance as indifferent. If I asked 
them if they were going to make a start, they only 
answered , ' I don't know,' * Perhaps, if the weather 
doesn't get worse,' or something to that effect ; but I 
never once heard the smallest murmur of impatience. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



326 ESKIMO LIFE 

The following occurrence, for which my infor- 
mant vouches, affords an excellent illustration of 
this side of their character. An inspector at Godt- 
haab once sent a woman-boat with its crew into the 
Ameralik fiord to mow grass for his goats. They 
remained a long time away, and no one could under- 
stand what had become of them. At last they 
returned ; and when the inspector asked why they 
had been so long, they answered that when they got 
to the place the grass was too short, so that they 
had to settle down and wait until it grew. 

With just the same patience do the Greenlanders 
await the ripening of their own ruin. They are a 
patient people. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



327 



CHAPTER XVI 

WHAT HAVE WE ACHIEVED? 

The purpose of our mission and of our work of 
civilisation in Greenland was, in the first place, to 
win honour for ourselves before God and man, and 
secure our own salvation in the other world ; and, in 
the second place, to benefit the natives. But what 
have we done ? 

Let us first look at the purely material side. It 
might seem at first sight as if we ought to have been 
able to bring to a people like this, living practically 
in the Stone Age, many things that would aid them 
in their hard fight for existence. As a matter of 
fact, this has been by no means the case. The 
things that were of most importance for them, their 
weapons and their hunting implements, were in no 
way susceptible of improvement at our hands. It is 
true that we brought them iron, which is useful for 
harpoon-points and knives ; but the Greenlanders 
were not entirely ignorant of it before, and, can, 
besides, get on quite well without it. They fitted 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



328 ESKIMO LITE 

their harpoons with points of hard ivory or stone, 
they made their knives of the same material, and 
caught, in those days, a great many more seals than 
they do now. 

But have not our firearms been of great advan- 
tage to them ? Quite the reverse. The rifle, for 
example, has enabled them to perpetrate terrible 
slaughter among the reindeer, merely for the sake of 
a small and momentary gain. This went so far, that 
on the narrow strip of naked, broken country which 
stretches along the west coast, no fewer than 16,000 
reindeer were killed every year, only the skin, ss a 
rule, being taken and sold to the Europeans, while 
the flesh was left behind to rot. Of course, this pre- 
sently led to the almost total extermination of the 
animals, and hunting almost entirely ceased because, 
as it was explained, ' the reindeer had left the coast.' 
In former days, when they hunted with bow and 
arrow, they could kill all that they required, but the 
slaughter was never so great as seriously to diminish 
the numbers of the reindeer. 

For marine hunting, too, the rifle has been the 
reverse of an advantage. When there are many 
seals in the fiord, they are frightened by the shots 
and set ofi* to sea, whereas harpoon-hunting is carried 
on in silence. Moreover, it is, of course, easier to 
kill seals with the rifle than to harpoon them, aud 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 







g 
H 

H 

< 



X 
H 

o 

H 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 






( VJ'^^"' 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WHAT HAVE WE ACHIEVED? 329 

therefore the rifle has led to a decline in skill with 
the harpoon. And yet the harpoon remains of 
supreme importance ; for while the rifle hunter 
must stop at home in rough weather, the harpoon 
hunter can go out in all weathers and support his 
family. Harpoon hunting, too, is the more rational 
method, the wounded animal being almost always 
secured ; whereas of seals wounded by the rifle, at 
least as many escape and die to no purpose as are 
secured and brought home. 

Nor has the shot-gun been of real service. In 
many districts it has tempted the inhabitants to 
devote themselves more to the easier bird-shooting 
than to seal-hunting, which is and must be the pur- 
suit upon which depends the very existence of the 
Eskimo community ; for the seal provides flesh, 
blubber, both for food and fuel, and skins for kaiaks, 
boats, tents, houses, clothes, boots, and so forth — 
nothing can replace it. Another evil is that, by help 
of the shot-gun, the Greenlanders are enabled to kill 
so many birds of certain species (for example, eider- 
ducks) that their numbers are yearly decreasing ; 
and this will soon lead to great misery, for bird- 
hunting has now become the chief means of support 
of many families. At Godthaab, for example, the 
inhabitants live upon it during the greater part of 
the winter, there being few capable seal-hunters. In 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



830 ESKIMO LIFE 

earlier times, the Eskimo killed birds with his 
throwing-dart. It, too, was an eflective weapon, 
and the birds he wounded he secured ; when he now 
sends his small shot scattering in among a flock of 
eider-duck, who can reckon how many are destroyed 
without doing any good to anyone ? 

No, we certainly cannot flatter ourselves that we 
have perfected his methods of hunting ; we have 
only introduced disturbance into them, the full ex- 
tent of whose ruinous results we cannot even yet 
foresee. 

But worst of all is the irreparable injury which 
all our European commodities have done to him. We 
have, as I have shown, been so immoral as to let him 
acquire a taste for coflee, tobacco, bread, European 
stufis and finery ; and he has bartered away to us his 
indispensable sealskins and blubber, to procure all 
these things which give him only a moment's doubtful 
enjoyment. In the meantime his woman-boat has 
gone to ruin for want of skins, his tent likewise, and 
even his kaiak, the essential condition of his existence, 
will often he uncovered on the beach. The lamps in 
his house have often to be extinguished in the winter, 
because the autumn store of blubber has been sold to 
the Company. He himself must go on winter days 
clad in European rags instead of in the warm fur 
garments he used to have. He has grown poorer 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WHAT HAVE ^VE ACHIEVED? 331 

and poorer, the delightful summer journeys have for 
the most part had to be abandoned for want of 
woman-boats and tents, and all the year round he has 
now to live in confined houses where contagious 
diseases thrive and play worse havoc among the 
population than they ever did before. To show how 
great the decadence has been in certain districts, I 
may mention that at a place near Godthaab where a 
few years ago there were eleven woman-boats,* there 
was now only one, and that one belonged to the 
missionary.^ 

The statistics of population in Greenland during 
recent years may at first sight seem encouraging. 
For example, the number of natives on the west coast 
was, in 1855, 9,644, while in 1889 it was 10,177. 
But we must not lull our conscience to sleep with 
these figures ; they are unfortunately deceptive, and 
the figures of the intervening years will show that 
the population fluctuates very greatly. In 1881 it 
was no more than 9,701, and in 1883 only 9,744 
(thus showing an increase of only 100 since 1855), 
In 1885 it had risen to 9,914, and in 1888 to 10,221 ; 

* That a man should have a woman -boat, which was formerly the 
general rale, is now regarded as a conclusive proof of exceptional 
wealth and capability ; for he must of course catch many seals in order 
to have enough skins for it. Compare atUe p. 85. 

'^ It must be mentioned, however, that accidental circumstances, 
such as the removal of some good hunters to other places, had con- 
tributed in some measure to this great falling off. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



332 ESKIMO LIFE 

but then it fell again in 1889 to 10,177. I have no 
later statistics. These figures, in which increase and 
decrease alternate, show that the state of things can- 
not be healthy. It ought not to be forgotten, too, 
that Hans Egede, a century and a half ago, estimated 
the population of the west coast at 30,000. This is 
probably a large over-estimate, but there is an 
enormous margin between 30,000 and 10,177. 
Assuredly this people is sailing with ' a corpse in the 
cargo.' ^ 

Disease has of late years increased alarmingly. 
It is especially the Greenlanders' scourge, consump- 
tion, or more properly tuberculosis, which makes ever 
wider ravages. There can be few places in the world 
where so large a proportion of the population is 
attacked by it. It is not quite clear whether we im- 
ported this disease into Greenland, but most probably 
we did; and at any rate, as I have several times 
pointed out, our influence has in more ways than one 
tended strongly to promote the spread of this and 
other contagious diseases.* Tuberculosis is now so 
common that it is almost easier to number those who 
are not attacked by it than those who are. It is re- 

* An allofiion to the well-known nautioal superstition. — Trans. 

' For instanoe, by causing the natives to wear worse clothes, and 
to live all the year round in their damp, insanitary houses, where the 
germs of disease find the best possible soil to flourish in, by intro- 
ducing European articles of diet, and so forth. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WHAT HAVE WE ACHIEVED ? 333 

markable, however, what a power of resistance the 
natives show to this disease. They are sometimes so 
far gone in it while young as to spit blood copiously, 
and yet survive to a good age. I have even seen 
excellent hunters who had consumption, and who 
would one day lie abed spitting blood, and a few days 
later would be out at sea again. This power of 
resistance is probably due in part to the amount of 
fat they consume, and especially to the blubber which 
is admirably adapted to fortify them against the 
disease. It is proved, too, that people at the Colonies, 
who consequently live largely upon European fare, 
are most apt to succumb to it. As a rule, however, 
it reduces their strength all round, so that those 
attacked by it can do little for themselves ; and it is 
clear that this must hamper the activities of so small 
a community. An epidemic disease such as small- 
pox, which we have of course also imported and 
thereby greatly thinned the population, is much to 
be preferred ; for it kills its victims at once, and does 
not keep them lingering like this slow, sneaking 
poison.* 

^ It is strange that the Greenlanders have in great naeasure escaped 
syphilis, which is usually one of the first gifts y/e confer upon those 
primitiye people whom we select as subjects for our experiments in 
civilisation. It is found only in one plape, Arsuk in South Greenland, 
where they try to isolate it. It is only of recent years that it has been 
introduced, but from what I hear it appears to have spread, and it seems 
probable that it will continue to do so, and in course of time affect the 
whole popiilation. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



334 ESKIMO LIFE 

We see, then, that the result of our influence upon 
the Greenlanders' material circumstances has been 
a continuous decline from their former well-being 
and prosperity towards an almost hopeless poverty 
and weakness. 

Many will admit this, but object that it was really 
to raise the level of their spiritual life and culture 
that we went to Greenland, and that this cannot be 
done save at the expense of their temporal welfare. 
Let us, then, look a little at this side of our activity. 
Many people think that a highly developed and 
civilised community can be fashioned at one stroke 
out of so unpromising material as a primitive race. 
This is a great mistake ; human nature is not to be 
transformed at the good pleasure of individuals. 
It is, indeed, capable of modification ; but the de- 
velopment always occurs slowly, like development 
in nature as a whole. We must not imagine, 
therefore, that we have the right, as we have done 
in Greenland and in other places, to swoop down 
upon a primitive race with our civilisation and im- 
pose it upon them. * Try to fit a hand with five 
fingers into a glove with four,' says Spencer, * and the 
difficulty is strikingly like the difficulty of implanting 
a complex or composite idea in a mind which has not 
a correspondingly composite faculty.'* 

The only change which can be brought about 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WHAT HAVE WE ACHIEVED? 336 

with any sort of rapidity among a primitive race is 
the change towards degeneration and ruin. Such a 
change, in the spiritual sphere, sets in as soon as we 
attempt to impose ethical conceptions upon a people 
at a stage of cultivation different from our own. 
This is precisely what we have achieved among the 
Eskimos. When, for example, in contempt of their 
own laws and ordinances, we have sought to impose 
upon them our conceptions of property, which are 
undeniably fitted for a more developed but less 
neighbour-loving community than that of Greenland, 
how can we expect to bring about anything but 
confusion and ruin ? Their whole social scheme was 
arranged to fit their primitive socialistic conceptions 
of property, and as their habits of life are irrecon- 
cilable with the new and foreign conception, de- 
generation is inevitable. And as with the idea of 
property, so is it with all the other ideas which we 
have sought to implant in them. 

To take one more example : How baneful to them 
has been the introduction of money ! Formerly they 
had no means of saving up work or accumulating 
riches ; for the products of their labour did not last 
indefinitely, and therefore they gave away their 
superfluity. But then they learned the use of 
money ; so thgit now, when they have more than 
they need for the moment, the temptation to sell the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



336 ESKIMO LIFE 

overplus to the Europeans, instead of giving it to 
their needy neighbours, is often too great for them ; 
for with the money they thus acquire they can 
supply themselves with the much-coveted European 
commodities. Thus we Christians help more and 
more to destroy instead of to develop their old self- 
sacrificing love of their neighbours. And money 
does still more to undermine the Greenland com- 
munity. Their ideas of inheritance were formerly- 
very vague, for, as before mentioned, the clothes and 
weapons of a dead man were consigned with him to 
the grave. Now, on the other hand, the introduction 
of money has enabled the survivors to sell the effects 
of the deceased, and they are no longer ashamed to 
accept as an inheritance what they can obtain in this 
way. This may seem an advantage ; but, here, too, 
their old habit of mind is upset. Greed and covet- 
ousness — vices which they formerly abhorred above 
everything — have taken possession of them. Their 
minds are warped and enthralled by money. 

Let us, however, look at another aspect of the 
case. Our true aim, I suppose, was, after all, to 
make them a cultivated people, and open up to them 
a wider range of spiritual interests. But even if we 
could actually attain this end, must it not neces- 
sarily be perilous in the highest degree to give a 
people like the Eskimos new interests which may 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



T\HAT HAVE WE ACHIEVED? 837 

divert them from the one thing needful — the duty of 
providing for themselves and their families. It is 
vaunted as a brilliant achievement that the majority 
of the natives of the west coast can now both read 
and write. Unfortunately for them, they can ; for 
these arts are not to be learned for nothing, and they 
have indeed to pay dear for their acquirements. It 
is self-evident that an Eskimo cannot possibly devote 
his time to these branches of knowledge and never- 
theless be as good a hunter as when he had only one 
interest in life, and learned nothing except hunting 
and the management of the kaiak.* We have direct 
evidence of the fact that skill with the kaiak has 
declined, in the many accidents which have happened 
of late years. Formerly, according to Eink, no 
more than fifteen or twenty deaths in kaiak-hunting 
occurred during the year; but in 1888 and 1889 
there have been thirty-one fatal kaiak accidents each 
year. 

The chief aim of all education must surely be to 
make the rising generation good and capable citizens 
of the community in which their lot is cast. But in 
what way does an Eskimo become a capable citizen 
of his little community ? Since hunting and fishing 

* Just as I am sending this to press there appears Gejerstam's 
Kulturkampen i HerjedaXen^ in which the author argues, as I do, that 
our school teaching has been the ruin of the Lapps, by weakening 
their interest in the business of their lives. 

Z 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SS8 ESKIMO LIFE 

are the sole means of supporting existence assigned 
by Nature to this community, it follows that he can 
become a capable citizen only by acquiring the 
greatest possible skill in these pursuits. Of what 
profit, then, to the Eskimo, is his ability to read and 
write ? He assuredly does not learn hunting by help 
of these arts. It is true that by means of the few 
books he possesses he may gain information as to 
other and better countries, unattainable conditions 
and alleviations, of which he before knew nothing ; 
and thus he becomes discontented with his own lot, 
which was formerly the happiest he could conceive. 
And then, too, he can read the Bible — but does he 
understand very much of it ? And would it not do 
him just as much good if the matter of it were related 
to him, as his old legends used to be ? There can be 
no doubt that the advantage is dearly bought. We 
must bear well in mind that the Eskimo community 
lives upon the very verge of possible human existence, 
and that a concentrated exertion of all its energies is 
necessary to enable it to carry on the fight with in- 
hospitable nature. A little more ballast and it must 
sink. This is what is already happening, and aU the 
wisdom in the world is of no avail. 

The upshot, then, of European activity in Green- 
land has been degeneration and decadence in every 
respect. And the only compensation we have made 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



WHAT HAVE WE ACHIEVED? 339 

to the natives is the introduction of Christianity. In 
so far we have achieved a happy consummation, for, 
in name at least, all the Greenlanders of the west 
coast are now Christians. But the question seems to 
me to be forced upon us whether this Christianity, 
too, is not exceedingly dearly bought, and whether 
the most ardent believer ought not to have some 
doubts as to the blessings it has conferred upon this 
people, when he sees how it has cost them their whole 
worldly welfare ? 

Wliat part of Christianity is most to be valued, 
its dogmas or its moral teaching ? It seems to me 
that even the best Christian must admit that it is the 
latter which is of enduring value ; for history can teach 
him how variable and uncertain the interpretation 
of the dogmas has always been. Of what value, then, 
have these dogmas, which he understands so im- 
perfectly, been to the Eskimo ? Can anyone seriously 
maintain that it is a matter of essential moment to a 
people what dogmas it professes to believe in ? 
Must not the moral laws which it obeys always be 
the matter of primary concern ? And the Eskimo 
moralitj' was, as we have seen, in many respects 
at least as good as that of the Christian communities. 
So that the result of all our teaching has been that, 
in this respect too, the race has degenerated. 

And lastly comes this question : Can an Eskimo 

z 2 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



340 ESKIMO LIFE 

who is nominally a Christian, but who cannot support 
his family, is in ill-health and is sinking into deeper 
and deeper misery, be held much more enviable than 
a heathen who lives in ' spiritual darkness,' but can 
support his family, is robust in body, and thoroughly 
contented with life ? From the Eskimo standpoint 
at any rate, the answer cannot be doubtful. If he 
could see his true interest, the Eskimo would assuredly 
put up this fervent petition : God save me from my 
friends, my enemies I can deal with myself. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



341 



CHAPTER XVII 

CONCLUSION 

Let us cast a backward glance over the foregoing 
chapters, and mark what lesson they teach us. 

They show us a people, highly gifted by nature, 
which used to live happily, and, in spite of its 
faults, stood at a high moral standpoint. But our 
civilisation, our missions, and our commercial pro- 
ducts have reduced its material conditions, its 
morality, and its social order to a state of such melan- 
choly decline that the whole race seems doomed to 
destruction. 

And yet, as we have seen, it has been more 
kindly and considerately dealt with than any other 
people under similar conditions. Is not this a serious 
warning for us? And if we look around among 
other primitive peoples, do we not find that the result 
of their contact with European civilisation and Chris- 
tianity has everywhere been the same ? 

What has become of the Indians ? What of the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



342 ESKIMO LIFE 

once 80 haughty Mexicans, or the highly gifted 
Incas of Peru ? Where are the aborigines of 
Tasmania and the native races of Australia ? Soon 
there will not be a single one of them left to raise an 
accusing voice against the race which has brought 
them to destruction. And Africa ? Yes, it, too, is 
to be Christianised; we have already begun to 
plunder it, and if the negroes are not more tenacious 
of life than the other races, they will doubtless go 
the same way when once Christianity comes upon 
them with all its colours flying. Yet we are in no 
way deterred, and are ever ready with high-sounding 
phrases about bringing to the poor savages the 
blessings of Christianity and civiUsation. 

If we look at the missions of to-day, do we not 
almost everywhere learn the same lesson ? Take for 
instance a people like the Chinese, standing on a 
high level of civilisation, and therefore, one would sup- 
pose, all the better fitted to receive the new doctrine. 
One of * the most enlightened mandarins in China, 
himself a Christian, and educated at European uni- 
versities,' writes in the North China Daily News an 
article about the missionaries and their influence, in 
which, among other things, he says : * Is it not an 
open secret that it is only the meanest, most helpless, 
most ignorant, necessitous, and disreputable among 
the Chinese who have been and are what the mi»- 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CONCLUSION 343 

sionaries call " converted " ? . . . I ask whether it 
cannot be proved that these converts — ^men who have 
thrown away the faith of their childhood, men who 
are forbidden by their teachers to show any sym- 
pathy, or indeed anything but contempt, for the 
memories and traditions of our ancient history — 
whether it cannot be proved that these men, as soon 
as they have had to relinquish the hope of worldly 
gain, have shown themselves to be worse than the 
worst of the common Chinese rabble? The mis- 
sionaries are ready enough to tell their hearers that 
the mandarins are a parcel of idiots who believe in 
heavenly portents and all such nonsense, while the 
very next day they will probably be telling the same 
listeners that the sun and moon really stood still at 
the command of the Hebrew general, Joshua.' As 
to the alleged beneficence of the mission towards the 
natives in the way of relieving poverty and misery, 
the writer asks : ' Can it be shown that this assis- 
tance affords even the barest equivalent for the 
money which the Chinese Government has to pay for 
the protection of the missionaries ? I believe that 
the interest alone of these immense sums would be 
sufficient to support a much larger staff of skilful 
European doctors and nurses. . . . Let it be shown 
what proportion of the millions which compassionate 
people in Europe and America subscribe for the 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



344 ESKIMO LIFE 

China missions really goes to the relief of misery. 
Let it be shown how much goes to the support of the 
missionaries and their wives and children, to the 
building of their fine houses and sanatoriums, to 
postage and paper for their voluminous rose-coloured 
reports, to the expenses of their congresses, and 
many other things. ... Is it not an open secret 
that the whole mission is nothing but a charitable 
foundation for the benefit of unemployed persons in 
Europe and America ? ' He further asks whether it 
is not notorious that the missionaries, ' with their 
high opinion of their own infallibility, are often in- 
trusive and arrogant, and apt to mix themselves up, 
with self-imposed authority, in matters that do not 
concern them ? If anyone doubts that the mission- 
aries, taken as a whole, are inclined to these vices, 
let him study and note the tone and spirit of their 
own writings.' 

This account of matters forcibly reminds us, in 
many particulars, of what we have just seen in 
Greenland. The main difference is that when the 
Chinese offer resistance to the missionaries who have 
come among them uninvited, they are not simply 
cuffed and flogged. Recognising the evils that 
threaten them, they ' beg the foreign powers, in the 
interests of China as weU as of America and Europe, 
to recall the missionaries,' and having begged in vain, 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CONCLUSION 346 

they then try to expel them by force ; whereupon 
these gentlemen, who have come to preach the 
Gospel of Peace, call upon their Governments for 
protection, and are supported by gunboats and troops 
who direct a destructive fire*of shells and grape-shot 
upon the natives, and secure for the pious mis- 
sionaries a sanguinary compensation for the harm 
done to their goods and gear, as though it had never 
been written : * Provide neither gold, nor silver, nor 
brass in your purses ' (Matthew x. 9). 

In all this we recognise the race which, when 
China sought to protect itself against the ruinous 
opium-poison, forced it, by means of a bloody war, 
to open its harbours to the noxious traflSc, in order 
that Europeans might grow rich while the Chinese 
social fabric was being undermined — from first to 
last a piece of such shameless scoundreUsm that no 
language has words adequate to describe it. The 
Eskimos, unfortunately, do not seem to be so far 
wrong in thinking the Europeans a corrupt and dis- 
honourable race, which ought to come to Greenland 
in order to learn morals. 

But do not the missions elsewhere produce better 
results ? Scarcely. Statistics have recently been pub- 
hshed as to crime in India, which cast grave doubts 
upon the benefits resulting from missionary enterprise. 
As to Africa I can find no statistics, but from all I 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



346 ESKIMO LIFE 

can learn it appears that there, too^ the results of the 
missions are nothing to boast of. African travellers 
are, I beheve, unanimous in declaring that the native 
converts to Christianity are by no means those whom 
they prefer to take into their service or to rely upon 
141 any way. And Norway, too, contributes its 
hundreds of thousands^ yearly to the missions both 
in Africa and India ! Have we so much superfluous 
wealth that we cannot employ this money to better 
advantage at home ? The desire to help these poor 
savages whom we have never seen, and whose needs 
we do not know, is no doubt a noble aspiration ; but 
I wonder whether it would not be nobler still to 
help the thousands of unfortunates whose necessities 
we have daily before our eyes ? Since we are bent 
on doing good works, why not begin with those 
nearest to us ? Then, when all at home were beyond 
the need of assistance, it would be time enough to 
look abroad and inquire whether there are not else- 
where others who need our help. * Charity begins 
at home.* 

I am by no means arguing that all missionary 
enterprise must necessarily be hurtful ; but I am of 
opinion that in order to be really beneficent it must 
fulfil conditions which, in our time, are almost 
beyond attainment. In the first place, it demands 

' Crowns, the krone being equal to U. l|d.— Trant. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CONCLUSION 347 

such a number of noble, self-sacrificing, and alto- 
gether remarkable men as we cannot hope to find all 
at one time. One may come to the front, perhaps 
two or three, but there can be no steady supply of 
them. And then we must remember that so many 
evil influences follow in the wake of a mission, that 
the most ideal missionaries can neither hold them 
aloof nor repair the damage they do to the natives. 
So the result is always the same in the end. 

Are we never, then, to open our eyes to what we 
are really doing? Ought not all true friends of 
humanity, from pole to pole, to raise a unanimous 
and crushing protest against all these abuses, against 
this self-righteous and scandalous treatment of our 
fellow-creatures of another faith and at another stage 
of civiHsation? 

The time will come when posterity will sternly 
condemn us, and these abuses, which we now hold 
consistent with the fundamental principles of Chris- 
tianity, will be branded as profoundly immoral. 
MoraUty will then have so far developed that men 
will no longer consider themselves justified in swoop- 
ing down upon the first primitive people that comes 
in their way, in order to satisfy their own reUgious 
vanity and to do ' good works ' which shall minister 
to their self-complacency, but which may or may net 
be beneficial to the race in question. Then only 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



a48 ESKIMO LIFE 

competent and in every sense well-equipped people 
will take upon themselves to study the life and 
civilisation of another race in order to see whether 
it needs our assistance, and if so, in what way it can 
best be accorded ; and if the result of the inquiry is 
to show that we can do them no good, they will be 
left alone. But before that time comes, most of 
such races, even of those which now survive, will 
have been swept away. 

If we ask, in conclusion, whether there is no 
hope of salvation for the Eskimo community, every- 
one who knows the circumstances will be forced to 
admit that the only expedient would be for the 
Europeans gradually to withdraw from the country. 
Left to themselves, and freed from subversive foreign 
influences, the Eskimos might possibly recover their 
old habits of life, and the race might yet be saved. 
But this possibility must doubtless be regarded as 
merely Utopian, at any rate for many a long day to 
come. In the first place, it would be a severe blow 
to the vanity of a European state to have to give up 
an experiment in civilisation which it has once 
begun, and which it has recorded in large letters to 
the credit side of its account in the other world; 
and in the second place it would be useless for the 
Danish colonies to withdraw unless the ships of other 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




NOBTHERN LIGHTS—' THE DEID AT PL IT * 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 




Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



CONCLUSION 849 

nations could be restrained from trading with the 
natives and importing European commodities, espe- 
cially brandy. 

But apart from their intercourse with us, another 
danger threatens the Eskimos : to wit, the alarming 
decrease in the number of seals. This is not due to 
their own fisheries, in which the ' take ' is infini- 
tesimal in comparison with the hundreds of thousands 
of newly born seal-whelps which the European and 
American sealers slaughter every year, especially 
upon the drift-ice off Newfoundland. Here it is 
again the white race which injures the Eskimo ; but 
even if he knew of it, he would not have the power 
to set any limits to the abuse ; his voice cannot 
make itself heard. Yet seal-hunting is an industry 
with which our society could very well dispense, 
while for the Eskimo the seal means life itself. 

Thus we find this loveable people inevitably 
destined either to pass utterly away or to decline 
into the shadow of what it once was. But the 
Greenlander bears up cheerfully, and is perhaps 
happier than we are apt to be ; he does not realise 
his own ruin, and does not hate us, but gives us a 
friendly welcome when we come to him. 

Greenland was once an excellent source of revenue 
to the Danish Government ; but that time is past. 
Now the Eoyal Greenland Company and the mission 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



860 £SEIMO LIFE 

cost large sums every year, and the sums will grow 
ever larger. Is it to be expected that the Danish 
Government will keep this going for ever ? Would 
it not be better and wiser for us first to recall our out- 
posts, and then gradually to withdraw the colonies 
and hand over the warehouses and buildings to the 
natives ? In my own opinion, the very best thing 
we could do in the end would be to pack up all the 
stores, put them and the traders on board the Com- 
pany's nine ships, and set sail with the whole back 
to Denmark. This will have to be done sooner or 
later, but perhaps not until there are no natives left 
behind to inhabit the land. The lifeless numbness 
of the inland ice will extend to the margin of the 
sea, where only the mournful wail of the seagulls 
will be heard along the unpeopled shores. The sun 
wiU rise and set and waste its glory over a deserted 
land. Only once in a while will some storm-driven 
ship skirt the desolate coasts. But in the long 
winter nights the dead will dance in shimmering 
sheets of light over the eternal silence of the snow- 
fields. 

THE END. 




SPOTTIBWK^ODB AND CO.» NRW-STRI^ SQCAJUt 
tONDOS 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



E Classttieb Catalogue 

OF WORKS IN 

GENERAL LITERATURE 

PUBLISHED BY 

LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO. 

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON, E.G. 

91 AND 93 FIFTH AVENUE NEW YORK, and 32 HORNBY ROAD, BOMBAY, 



CONTENTS. 



PAOB 
10 



BADMINTON LIBRARY (THE) 
BIOGRAPHY, PERSONAL ME- 
MOIRS, &c. 7 

CHILDREN'S BOOKS - - - 26 
CLASSICAL LITERATURE, TRANS- 
LATIONS, ETC. .... 18 
COOKERY, DOMESTIC MANAGE- 
MENT, &c. 28 

EVOLUTION, ANTHROPOLOGY, 

&c. 17 

FICTION. HUMOUR, &c. - - 21 

FUR, FEATHER AND FIN SERIES 12 
HISTORY, POLITICS, POLITY, 

POLITICAL MEMOIRS, &c. - - 3 
LANGUAGE, HISTORY AND 

SCIENCE OF 16 

MANUALS OF CATHOLIC PHIL- 
OSOPHY 16 



MENTAL, MORAL, AND POLITICAL 
PHILOSOPHY 14 

MISCELLANEOUS AND CRITICAL 
WORKS 29 

MISCELLANEOUS THEOLOGICAL 
WORKS 32 

POETRY AND THE DRAMA - - 19 

POLITICAL ECONOMY AND ECO- 
NOMICS 16 

POPULAR SCIENCE .... 

SILVER LIBRARY (THE) 

SPORT AND PASTIME - 

STUDIES IN ECONOMICS AND 
POLITICAL SCIENCE - 

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE, THE 
COLONIES, &c. - - - - 

VETERINARY MEDICINE. &c. 

WORKS OF REFERENCE - 



24 

lO' 

8 



25 



INDEX OF AUTHORS AND EDITORS. 



Page 



Abbott (Evelyn) - 


3.18 


— (T. K.) - - 


M 


(E. A.) - - 


14 


AcUnd (A. H. D.) - 


J 


Acton (Eliza) - 
AdcaneO-H.)- - 


7 


£schylu8 


18 


Aiager (A. C.) - - 


II 


Albemarle (Earl of) ■ 


10 


Allen (Grant) - 


24 


Amos (S.) 


3 


Aodrd (R.) - - 


12 


Anstey (F.) - - 


21 


AhBtophanes - 


z8 


Aristotle • 


14, 18 


Armstrong (G. F. 




Savage) 


19 


- — (E. J. Savage) 7, 
Arnold (Sir Edwin) - 


10,29 
8,19 


— (Dr. T.) - - 


3 


Ashbourne (Lord) - 


ai 


Ashby (H,) - 


Ashley (W. JJ»- - 


16 


Atidnson (C. T.) 


^ 


^vebury (Lord) 


17 


Ayre (Rev. J.) - 


25 



Page 
Baker (Sir S. W.) - 8. zo 
Balfour (A. J.) - 11,32 

(Lady Betty) - 5 

BallGohn) - - 8 
Baring-Gould(Rev. S.)27,a9 
Barraud (C. W.) - 19 
BayneB (T. S.) - 99 

Beaconafield (Earl of) 21 
Beaufort (Duke of) - 10. 11 



18 
«4 
7 

3 

XI, 12 



Page 
26 

28 
3 
4 

24 



Bacon - - - 7. '4 
Baden-Powell (B. H.) 3 
Bagehot (W.) - 7, 16, 29 
Bagwell (R.) - - 3 I 
Bam (Alexander) - 14 



Becker (W. A.) 
Beddard (F. E.) 
Bcesly (A. H.) - 
BeU (Mrs. Hugh) - 
Bent (J. Theodore) - 
Besant (Sir Walter). 
Bickerdyke(J.) 
Bicknell(A. C.) 
Birt (A.) - - - 21 ; 
Blackburne (J. H.) - 12 > 
Bland (Mrs. Hubert) 20 j 
Boa8e(Rev. C. W.)- 4 
Boedder (Rev. B.) - 16 1 
Boevey (A. W. Crawley-) 7 
Boeanquet (B.) 14 

Boyd (Rev. A. K. H.) 99, 32 | 
Brassey (Lady) - 9 1 

(Lord) 3, 9, II, 16 ■ 

Bray (C.) - - • 14 
Bright (Rev. J. F.)- 3 
Broadfoot (Major W.) 10 
Browning (H. Ellen) 9 
Buck (H. A.) . II 



Buckland (las.) 
Buckle (H. T.) - 
Buckton (C. M.) 
Bull(T.) - 
Burke (U.R.) • 
Burrows (Montagu) 
Butler (E. A.) - 
(Samuel) - 18, 20, 29 

Caldcr(J.) - - 30 

Cameron of Lochiel 12 

Campbell (Rev. Lewis) 32 

Camperdown (Earl of) 7 

Cannan (E.) - - 17 

Channing (F. A.) - 16 

Chesney (Sir G.) - 3 

'Chola' - - - 21 
Cholmondeley-Pennell 

(H.) - - - II 
ChurchilKW. Spencer) 3, 21 



Pag$ 
3 



Cicero 
Clarke (Rev. R. F.) ■ 
Climenson (Emily J .) 
Clodd (Edward) 
Clutterbuck(W. J.)- 
Coleridge (S. T.) - 
Comparetti (D.) 
Conington (John) - 
Conway (Sir W. M.) 
Conybearc(Rev.W.J.) 

& Howson (Dean) 
Coolidge (W. A. B.) 



Corbett Qultan S.) 
Corder (Annie) 

Coutt8(W.) • 18 

Coventry (A.) - - 11 

Cox (Harding) xo 

Crake (Rev. A. D.) • s6 

Creiirhton (Bishop) - 3, 4 

Crozier (J. B.) - - 7, 14 
Curzon of Kedleston 

(Lord) ... 4 

Costance (Col. H. - 12 

Cutts (Rev. E. L.) . 4 

Dallinger (F. W.) - 4 
Davidson (W. L.) 14, 16, 32 

Davies (J. F.) - - 18 

Dent (C, T.) - - u 

Deploige (S.) . 17 
De Salis (Mrs.) - 28, 99 

Dc Tocqueville (A.) - 4 

Devas (C. S.) • x6 

Dickinson (G. L.) - 4 

(W. H.) - - 30 

Diderot - - - 21 

Dougall(L.) - - 21 

Dowden(E.) - - 31 

Doyle (A. Conan) • az 

Du Bois (W. E. B.) - 4 

Dufferin (Marquis of) zx 

Dunbar (Mary F.) - 20 

Eardley'Wrim( 

S.) 



I5p 



INDEX OF 

Page 
Ebrington (Viscount) 12 
Ellis (J. H.) • 12 

(ft.L.) - 14 

Evans (Sir John) - 30 



Farrar (Dean) - - 16, 21 

Fitzwygram (Sir F.) 10 

Folkard(H. C.) - 12 

Ford (H.) - - - 12 

(W.J.) - - 12 

Fowler (Edith H.) - 21 

Foxcroft (H. C.) - 7 

Francis (Francis) - 12 

Francis (M. E.) - 21 
Freeman (Edward A.) 
Freshfield (D. W.) - 
Frothingham (A. L.) 



AUTHORS 

Page 
Ingelow (Jean) 

iames (W.) • 
efferies (Richard) • 
ekyil (Gertrude) • 
Jerome (Jerome K.) ■ 
; lohnson(J.&J.H.) 

1 tones (H. Bence) - 
I ; Jordan (W. L.) 
^ Jowett (Dr. B.) 
,J 1oyce(P.W.) - 5 
* I Justinian : 

2 I Kant (I.) - 
II Kaye (Sir J. W.) - 
4 Kelly (E.)- - - 
I ' Kent (C. B. R.) 

30 Kerr (Rev. J.) - 



AND EDI TO R S-^ntinued, 



19 

30 
30 

22 

30 
85 
16 
17 
22, 30 
M 



Page 

Moon (G. W.) - . 30 
Moore (T.) 25 

( Rev.- Edward) - 1 4 

Morg^an (C. Lloyd) - 17 
Morris (Mowbray) - 11 

(W.) 18. JO, 22. 31 

MuIhaU (M. G.) 17 



POfii 



Froude Qames A.) 4. 7, 9, 21 1 KiUick (Rev. A. H.) 



Furneaux (W.) - 24 1 

Gallon (W. F.) - 17 ' 

Gardiner (Samuel R.) 4 
Gathome-Hardy (Hon. I 

A. E.) - - 12 

Gibbons (J. S.) - 12 1 
Gibson (Hon. H.) 

(C.H.) - 

(Hon. W.) 

Gleig (Rev. G. R.) 
Goethe - 
Gore-Booth (Eva) 

(Sir H. W.) 

Graham (P. A.) • 12, 13 

(G.F.) - . 

Granby (Marquis of) 
Grant (Sir A.) - 
Graves (R. P.) - 
Green (T. Hill) 
Greene (E. B.)- 
Grcville (C. C. F.) - 
Grow (T. H.) - 
Gross (C.) 
Grove (F. C.) - 

(Mrs. Lilly) - 10 

Gurdon (Lady Camilla) 2x 

Gurnhill (J.) - - 14 

Gwilt (J.) - - - 25 

Haggard (H. Rider)- 21. 30 

Hake(0.)- - ir 

Halliwell-Phillipps(J.) 8 

Hamlin (A. D. F.) - 30 

Hammond (Mrs. J. H.) 4 

Harding (S. B.) 4 

Harte (Bret) - 22 

Harting(J. E.)- - 12 

Hart wig (G.) - - 24 

HassalKA.) - - 6 

Haweis (H. R.) - 7, 30 

Heath (D. D.) - - 14 
Heathcote(J. M.and 

C. G.) - - ir 
Helmholtz (Hermann 

von) - - - 24 
Henderson (Lieut- 
Col. G. F.) - 7 
Henry (W.) - ri 
Henty (G. A.) - - 26 
Herbert (Col. Kenney) 12 
Hiley (R. W.) • 7 
Hill (Sylvia M.) - 2c 
Hillier (G. Lacy) - 10 , 
Hime (H. \V. L.) - i» 
Hodgson (Shad\vorth)i4. 30 , 
Hocnig (F.) - - 30 
Hogan (J. F.) - - 7 
Homer - . - ih 
Hope (Anthony) - 22 
Horace - - i^ 
Houston (D. F.) - 4 
HowelKG.) - - 16 
Hewitt (W.) - - 9 
Hudson (W. H.) - 24 
Hullah(j.) • - 30 
Hume (David) - - 14 
" MRev. W.) - 4 
- (Sir W.) - 5 
ison (Horace G.) 



Kint 

Kitd 

Knight (E. F.) - 

Kostlin (J.) 



igaley (Rose G.) - 
chin (Dr. G. W.) 



Ladd (G. T.) - 15 

Lang (Andrew) s. 10. 11, 13, 
17. 18, 19, 20, 22, 26, 30, 32 
Lapsley(G. T.) - 4 
Lascelles (Hon. G.) 

zo, iz, 12 

Laughton (J. K.) • 8 

Lawley (Hon. F.) - 11 

Lawrence (F. W.) - 17 

Layard (Nina F.) - 19 

x6 i Lear (H. L. Sidney) • 29 

12 Leclcy (W. E. H.) 5, 15. 19 

14 1 Lees (J. A.) - - 9 

7 1 Leslie (T. E. Cliffe) - x6 

14 Levett- Yeats (S.) - 22 

4 1 Lillie (A.)- - - 13 

4I Lindley(J.) - - 25 

14 ; Lodge (H. C.) - - 4 

4 I Loftie (Rev. W. J.) - 4 

II Longman (C. J.) 10,12,30 

10 1 (F. W.) - - 13 

21 I (G. H.) - -II. 12 

Lowell (A. L.) - - 5 
Lubbock (Sir John) - 17 
Lucan - - - 18 
Lutoslawski (W.) - 15 
Lyall (Edna) - - 22 
Lyttelton (Hon. R. H.) 10 

(Hon. A.) - - II 

Lytton (Earl of) 



Macaulay (Lord) 
Macdonald (G.) 

(Dr. G.) - 

MacfarTen(SirG. A.) 



- 5. 19 I 

5. 6. 19 I 
9 ; 

- 20. 32 I 



Nansen (F.) 
Nesbit (E.) 
Nettleship (R. L.) - 
Newman (Cardinal) • 

Ogle (W.) - - - 
Onslow (Earl oO - 
Orchard (T. N.) 
Osbourne (L) - 



Palgrave(GwenllianF.) '8 
Park(W.) 13 

Payne-Gallwey (Sir 
I R.) - - - II. 13 
, Pearson (C. H.) 8 

. Peek (Hedley) - 11 

Pembroke (Earl of) - 11 
Phillipps-Wollcy(C.) 10, « 
Phillips (Mrs. Lionel) 6 
Pitman (CM.) - 11 
PleydeU-Bouverie (E. O.) 1 1 
Pole(W.)- - - 13 
Pollock (W. H.) - 11.31 
Poole (W.H. and Mrs.) 29 
Poore (G. V.) - - 31 
Potter (J.) - 16 

Powell (E.) - - 6 
Powys (Mrs. P. L.) - 8 

Praeger (S. Rosamond) 26 
Prevosi(C.) - - n 
Pritchett (R. T.) - 11 
Proctor (R. A.) 13. 24, 28 



Raine (Rev. James) - 
Rankin (R.) - 
Ransome (C\Til) 
Raymond (W.) 
Reader (Emily E.) - 
Rhoades (J.) - 
Ribblesdale (Lord) - 
Rich (A.) - 
Richardson (C.) 
Richter (J. Paul) - 
Rickaby (Rev. John) 

(Rev. Joseph) - 

Ridley (Sir E.) - 
Riley (J. W.) 



- 7. 



18 
6 
16 
H. A.)i2 



11.13 



MackaiKJ. W.) 
Mackinnon (J.) 

I Macleod (H. D.) 
Macpherson (Rev 
Madden (D. H.) - 13 
Magnusson (H.) - 22 
Maher (Rev. M.) - 16 
Malleson (Col. G. B.) 5 

{ Mann (E. E.) - - 29 
Mar hot (Baron de) - 7 

Marquand (A.) - - p 
Marshman (J. C.) - 7 

Martineau (Dr. James) 32 
Mahon \k. E. W.) - 22 
Maskelyne (J. N.) - 13 

I Maunder (S.) - - 25 
Max Miiller (F.) 

7.8.15, 16, 22. J 
Mav(SirT.Erskine^ 
Meade (L. T.) - 
Melville {G. J. Whyte) 
Merivalc (Dean) 
Merrimin 'H. S.) - 
Mill (lames) - 

(John Stuart) 

Milner (G.) 

Moffat (D.) 

Monck (W. H. S.) - 15 

Montague (F. C.) • 6 

Montagu (Hon. John 

Scott) - - 12 



18 

\l 

10 

31 
16 
16 
18 I 
. - - aol 

Rogei (Peter M.) - 16, 25 ' 
Romanes (G. J.) I 

" 15. 17. 20, 32 1 



Southev(R.) - 51 
SpcddingCJJ - -7.14 

Sprigge (S. Sqnite) - S 

Staniev (Bishoo) - 24 

(Lady) - - r 

Sutham tS. P. H.) - 6 

Stebbing (W.) - - t.Zy 

Steel (A. G.) - - i3 

U-H.) . - 10 

Stephen (Leslie) 9 

, Stephens (H. Morse) 6 

(W. W.) - - 8. 17 

Ste\-ens (R. W.) ji 

Stevenson (R. L.) - ty, 16 

Stock (St. George) - 15 

' ' Stonehenge ' - 10 

i Storr (F.) - - - 14 

, Stuart-Wortley(A.J.)n,i2 

Stubbs(J. W.)- - 6 

Suffolk & Berkshire 

I (Earl of) - - 11 

< Sullivan (Sir E.) 11 

' Sully (James) - 15 

Sutherland (A. and G ) 6 

(Alex.) - - 15. 31 

Suttner (B. \'oo) - aj 

1 Swinburne (A. J.) - 15 

I Symes (J. E.) - - 17 

Tavlor (Meadows) - 6 

; (Una) - - 23 

I Tebbutt (C. G.) - n 

Terrv (C. S.) - - 7 

Thofnhtll (W. J.) - x8 

Todd (A.) ... 6 

I Toynbee (A.' - 17 

' Trevehan (Sir G. O,) 6. 7 

; (C.P.) - - 17 

I (G. M.) - . 6 

; Trollope (Anthony)- 23 

I Turner (K. G.) - 3» 

iTyndalKI.) - - 7.9 

I Tyrrell (R. Y.) - - la 

' UptOD(F.Kjind Bertha) 36 

Van Dyk-e (J. C.) - 3» 
Verney (Frances P. 

and Margaret M.) 8 

Virgil - - - IS 

Vivekananda (Swami) 52 

Vivian (Herbert) - 9 



32 
6 
26 
22 
6 
22 
15 
15, 16 
31 
15 



I (Mrs. G. J.) 

Ronalds (A.) • 

Roosevelt (T.) - 
I Rossetti (Maria Fran- 
cesca) - - - 

Rowe (R. P. P.) 

Russell (Bertrand) - 
' (Alys) 

(Rev. M.) - 

Saintsbury (G.) 
Samuels (E.) - 
Bandars (T. C.) 
Sargent (A. J.) - 
Schreiner (S. C. Cron- 

wrighi) 
Seebohm (F.) - 
Selous (F. C.) - 
Sewell (Elizabeth M.) 
Shakespeare 
Shand (A 1.) - 
Sharpe (R. R.) - 
Shaw (\V. A.) - 
Shearman (M.) 
Sinclair (A.) - 
Smith (R. Bosworth) 

(T.C.) - - 

(W. P. Haskett) 

Somerville (E.) 

Sophocles 

Soulsby (Lucy H.) - 



X4 

10 1 
6.8, 

10' 

23 I 
20 

12 ( 

V 

ID, II ' 

11 i 

6 

4 

9, 
a3 
18 
31 



Wagner (R.) - 20 

Wakeman (H. O.) - 6 
Walford (L. B.) 23 

Walker (Jane H ) - 29 
Wallas (Graham) - ^ 
Walpole (Sir Spencer) 6 
Walrond (Col. H.) - 10 
Walsingham (Lord) - n 
Waller (J.) - - 8 
Ward ( Mrs. W.) - 23 
War>»4ck (Countess of) '>t 
Watson (A. E.T.) 

10, II. 12.13' 23 
Webb (Mr. and Mrs. 

Sidney) - 17 

(T. E.) - - 15, 19 

Weber (A.) - - 15 
Weir (Capt. R.) n 

Weyman (Stanley) - 25 
Whatelv(Archbishop) 14. ^5 

(E. lane) - '* 

White (W. Hale) 
Whitelaw (R.) - 
Wilcocks (J. C.) 
WUkins (G.) - 
WiUard (A. R.) 
Williamson (W.) - 
Willich (C. M.» 
Witham (T. M.) - 
Wood (Rev. J. G.) - 
Wood- Mart in (W. G.) 
Wordsworth (William j 
Wright (C. D.) 
Wylie(J. H. ■ 
Youatt (W 



16 

ao, 31 

W 



Zeller (E.) 



iJ| 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



History, Polities, Polity 

Abbott. — A History of Greece, I 
By Evelyn Abbott, M.A., LL.D. 
Part L— From the Earliest Times to the 

Ionian Revolt. Crown 8vo., 105. 6<f. 
Part II. — 500-445 B.C. Crown 8vo., loj. 6rf. j 
Part in. — From the Peace of 445 b.c. to 

the Fall of the Thirty at Athens in 403 

B.C. Crown 8vo., 105. bd. 

Acland and Ransome.— ^ Hand- 
book /iV Outline of the Political His- 
tory of England to i^'b. Chronologically 
Arranged. By the Right Hon. A. H. Dyke 
Acland, and Cyril Ransome, M.A. Crown 
8vo., 65. 

Amos. — Primer of the English \ 
Constitution and Governmbnt. For ' 
the Use of Colleges, Schools, and Private 
Students. By Sheldon Amos, M.A. Cr. 
8vo., 65. 

Annual Register (The). A Review 

of Public Events at Home and Abroad, for 
the year 1899. 8vo., 185. 
Volumes of the Annual Register for the 
years 1863-1898 can still be had. 185. each. 

Arnold. — Introductory Lectures 
on Modern History. By Thomas Ar- 
nold, D.D., formerly Head Master of Rugby . 
School. 8vo., 75. 6d. 

Ashbourne. — Pitt: Some Chapters , 
on His Life and Times. By the Right , 
Hon. Edward Gibson, Lord Ashbourne, 
Lord Chancellor of Ireland. With 11 Por- ' 
traits. 8vo., 215. 

Atkinson. — Michel de l' Hospital: ' 
being the Lothian Prize Essay for 1899. By 
C. T. Atkinson, Fellow of Exeter College, 
Oxford ; formerly Demy of Magdalen Col- 
lege. Crown 8vo., 45. net. 

Baden-Powell. — The Indian 
Village Community. Examined with 
Reference to the Physical, Ethnographic, 
and Historical Conditions of the Provinces; 
chiefly on the Basis of the Revenue- 
Settlement Records and District Manuals. 
By B. H. Baden-Powell, M.A., CLE. 
With Map. 8vo., i6i. 

Bagwell. — Ireland under the 
Tudors. By Richard Bagwell, LL.D. 
(3 vols.) Vols. L and H. From the first 
invasion of the Northmen to the year 1578. 
8vo., 32J. Vol. HL 1578-1603. 8vo., 185. 

Besant. — The History of London. 
By Sir Walter Besant. With 74 Illus- 
trations. Crown 8vo., 15. ^d. Or bound 
as a School Prize Book, 25. 6^/. 
Brassey (Lord). — Papers and Ad- 
dresses. 
Na val and Ma ritime, i 8 7 2 - i 893 . 
2 vols. Crown 8vo., 105. 



, Politieal Memoirs, &e. 

Brassey (Lord) Papers and Ad- 
dresses — continued. 

Mercantile Marine and Naviga- 
tion^ from 187 1 -1894. Crown 8vo., 5s. 

Imperial Federation and Colon- 
isation from 1 880- 1 894. Cr. 8vo., 55. 

Political and Miscellaneous. 
1 861 -1 894. Crown 8vo., 55. 

Bright. — A History of England, 
By the Rev. J. Franck Bright, D.D. 
Period I. Medimval .Monarchy: a.d. 

449-1485. Crown 8vo., 4^. 6d. 
Period II. Personal Monarchy. 1485- 

1688. Crown 8vo., 55. 
Period III. Constitutional Monarchy, 

1 689- 1 837. Crown 8vo., 7s. td. 
Period IV. The Growth of Democracy. 

1837-1880. Crown 8vo., 6j. 

Buckle. — History of Civilisation 
IN England, Fra.vce, Spain, and Scot- 
land. By Henry Thomas Buckle. 3 vols. 
Crown 8vo., 24 j. 

Burke. — A History of Spain, 
From the Earliest Times to the 
Death of Ferdinand the Catholic. 
By Umck Ralph Burke, M.A. Edited 
by Martin A. S Hume. With 6 Maps. 
2 vols. Crown 8vo., 165. net. 

Chesney. — Indian Polity: a View of 
the System of Administration in India. By 
General Sir George Chesney, K.C.B. 
With Map showing all the Administrative 
Divisions of British India. 8vo., 215. 
Churchill (Winston Spencer). 
The River IVar : an Historical 

Account of the Reconquest of the Soudan. 

Edited by Colonel F. Rhodes, D.S.O. 

With 34 Maps and 51 Illustrations, also 7 

Photogravure Portraits. 2 vols. Medium 

8vo., 36s. 

The Story of the Malakand 
Field Force, 1897. With 6 Maps and 
Plans. Crown 8vo., 35. 6rf. 

Ia ^ndon 10 Lad ) smi tii vi.^Pre tori a . 
With 3 Folding-out Maps and i Map and 
4 Plans in the Text. Crown 8vo., 65. 

Corbett. — Drake and the Tudor 
Navy, with a History of the Rise of Eng- 
land as a Maritime Power. By Julian S. 
Corbett. With Portraits, Illustrations and 
Maps. 2 vols. Crown 8vo., 165. 

Creighton (M., D.D., Lord Bishop 

of London). 
A History of the Papacy from 
THE Great Schism to the Sack of 
Home, 1378-1527. 6 vols. Crown 8 vo., 
65. each. 
Queen Elizabeth, \^'ith Portrait. 

Crown 8vo., 65. C^ r\r\n\o 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



History, Polities, Polity, Political Memoirs, &c —continued. 



Curzon. — Persia axd the Persian 
Question. By the Right Hon, Lord 
Curzon of Kedlestok. With 9 Maps, 96 
Illustrations, Appendices, and an Index. 2 
vols. 8vo., 42s. 

Dc Tocqyi^yiW^,— Democracy in 
America. By Alexis de Tocqueville. 
Translated by Henry Reeve, C.B., D.C.L. 
2 vols. Crown 8vo., its. 

Dickinson. — The Development of 
Parliambst during the Ninbtbbnth 

Cbaturv. By G. Lowes Dickinson, M.A. 
8vo., 75. 6</. 

Froude (James A.). 

The History OF England^ from the 
Fall of Wolsey to the Defeat of the Spanish 
Armada. j 

Popitlar Edition. 12 vols. Crown Svo., I 
35. 6d. each. I 

* Silver Library* Edition. 12 vols. 
Crown 8vo., 31. 6d. each. 

The Divorce of Catherine of 
Aragon. Crown 8vo., 35. 6rf. 

The Spanish Story of the Ar- 
mada, and other Essays. Cr. 8vo., 31. 6d. 

The English in Ireland in the 
Eightbbnth Century. 3 vols. Cr.Svo., 
loj. td. 

English Seamen in the Sixteenth 

Century. Cr. 8vo., 6*. 
The Council of Trent. Crown 

8vo., 3s. 6d. 

Shoe t Studies on Grea t Subjects, 
4 vols. Cr. 8vo., 3s. td. each. 

CjSsar : a Sketch. Cr. Svo, 35. 6d. 
Gardiner (Samuel Rawson, D.C.L., 

LL.D.). 
History of England^ from the Ac- 
cession of James I. to the Outbreak of the 
Civil War, 1603- 1642. 10 vols. Crown 
8vo., 65. each. 

A History of the Great Civil 

1^^^,1642-1649. 4 vols. Cr.8vo.,6s.each. 

A History of the Commonwealth 

AND THR PrOTBCTORATB. 1649-1660. 

Vol.1. 1649-1651. With 14 Maps. 8vo.,2Ij. 
Vol. II. 165 1 -1654. With 7 Maps. 
8vo., 21 J. 
What Gunpowder Plot Was. 

With 8 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 5s. 
Cromwell' s Place in History. 
Founded on Six Lectures delivered in the 
Universitv of Oxford. Cr. 8vo., 35. td. 



Gardiner (Samuel Rawson, D.C.L. , 

LL.D. ) — continued. 

The Student's History of Eng- 
land. With 378 Illustrations. Crown 

8vO., I2S. 

Alio in Three Volumes, price 45. each. 
Vol. I. B.C. 55 — A.D. 1509. 173 Illustrations. 
Vol. II. 1509-1689. 9b Illustrations. 
Vol. III. 1689-X885. 109 Illustrations. 
Greville. — A Journal of the Reigns 
OF King Georgb IV., King IVilliam IV., 
AND QuBBN Victoria. By Charles C. F. 
Gre-ville, formerly Clerk of the Council. 
8 vols. Crown 8vo., 35. td. each. 
HARVARD HISTORICAL STUDIES. 
The Suppression of the African 
Slave Trade to the United States op 
America, 1638- 1870. By W. E. B. Du 
B018, Ph.D. 8vo., 71. td. 
The Contest over the Ratificaton 

OF THE FbDERAL CONSTITUTION IN MASSA- 
CHUSETTS, By S. B. Harding, A.M. 
8vo., ti. 

A Critical Study of Nullification 
IN South Carolina. By D. F. Houston, 
A.M. 8vo., 65. 

Nominations for Elective Office 
IN the United States. By Frederick 
W. Dallinger, A.M. 8vo., 75. td. \ 

A Bibliography of British Muni- 
cipal History, including Gilds a.vd 
Parliamentary Representation. By 
Chakles Gross, Ph.D. 8vo., 125. 

The Liberty and Free Soil Parties 
IN the North West. By Theodore C. 
Smith, Ph.D. 8vo, 75. td. 

The Provincial Governor in the 
English Colo.vibs of North America. 
By EvARTs BouTELL Greene. Svo., 7*. td. 

The County Palatine of Durham: 

a Study in Constitutional History. By 
Gaillakd Thomas Lapsley, Ph.D. Svo., 

I05. td. 

*^* Other Volumes are in preparation. 

Hammond. — A IVoman's Part in 

A NsvoLUTiON. By Mrs. John Kays 
Hammond. Crown Svo., 2s. td. 

Historic Towns. — Edited by E. A. 

Freeman, D.C.L., and Rev. William Hunt, 

M.A. With Maps and Plans. Crown 8vo.. 

35. td. each. 
BristoL By Rev. W.Hunt. Oxford. By Rev. C W. 
Carlisle. By Mandell | Boase. 

Creighton, D.D. I Winchester. By G. W. 

Cinque Porta. By Mon- ' Kitchin. D.D. 

tagu Burrows. ' York. By Rev. James 

Colchester. By Rev. E. L. ! Raine. 

Cutts. , New York. By Theodace 

Exeter. ByE. A. Freeman., Roosevelt. 
London. By Rev. W. J. • Boaton (U.S.) By Heary 1 

Loftie. (T> Cabot Lodge. 

Digitized by VjC I 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



History, Polities, Polity, Political Memoirs, &e. — continued. 



Hunter. — A History of British \ 
India, By Sir William Wilson Hunter, 
K.C.S.L, M,A., LL. D. ; a Vice-President 
of the Royal Asiatic Society. In 5 vols. 
Vol. I. — Introductory to the Overthrow of 
the English in the Spice Archipelago, 1623. 
With 4 Maps. 8vo., i8i. 

Joyce (P. W., LL.D.). 

A Short History of Ireland, 
from the Earliest Times to 1603. Crown 
8vo., lOi. 6d, 

A Child's History of Ireland. 
From the Earliest Times to the Death 
ofO'Connell. With specially constructed 
Map and 160 Illustrations, including 
Facsimile in full colours of an illumi- 
nated page of the Gospel Book of Mac- 
Durnan, a.d. 850. Fcp. 8vo., 3s. bd. 

Kaye and HizMesoti.—HisTORy of 

THE Indian Mutiny, 1857- 1858. By Sir 
John W. Kaye and Colonel G. B. Mallb- 
SON. With Analytical Index and Maps and 
Plans. 6 vols. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. each. 

Kent. — The English Radicals : an 
Historical Sketch. By C. B. Roylance 
Kent. Crown 8vo., 75. 6</. 

Lang^. — The Companions of Fickle: 
Being a Sequel to ' Pickle the Spy '. By 
Andrew Lang. With 4 Plates. 8vo., 165. 

Lecky (The Rt. Hon. William E. H.) 
History of England in the Eigh- 

TBBA TH CB,\ TURY. 

Library Edition. 8 vols. 8vo. Vols. I. 
and II., 1700-1760, 36J. ; Vols. III. and 
IV., 1760-1784, 36J. ; Vols. V. and VI., 
1784-1793, 36J. : Vols. VII. and VIII., 
1793-1800, 365. 

Cabinet Edition, England. 7 vols. 
Crown 8vo., 65. each. Ireland. 5 
vols. Crown 8vo., 65. each. 
History of European Morals 

FROM Augustus to Charlbmagnb. 2 

vols. Crown 8vo., 1^5. 

History of the Rise and In flu- 
encb of the Spirit of Na tionalism in 
Europe. 2 vols. Crown 8vo., 12s. 

Democracy and Liberty. 

Library Edition. 2 vols. 8vo., 365. 
Cabinet Edition. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., 125. 

Lowell. — Governments and Par- 
ties IN Coatine:\tal Europe. By A. 
Lawrence Lowell. 2 vols. 8vo., 21J. 

Lytton. — The History of Lord 
Lytton's Indian Administration, from 
1876- 1880. Compiled from Letters and 
Official Papers. Edited by Lady Betty 
Balfour. With Portrait and Map Svo., 185. 



Macaulay (Lord). 

The Life and fVoR/cs of Lord 
Macaulay. * Edinburgh ' Edition. 10 
vols. 8vo., 65. each. 

Complete Works. 

' Albany ' Edition. With 12 Portraits. 

12 vols. Large Crown 8vo., 35. bd. each. 
Vols. I. -VI. History of England^' 

FROM THE Accession of Jambs the 

Second. 
Vols. V 1 1 . -X. E ssA Ys and Biogra phibs. 
Vols. XI.-XII. Speeches, Lays of 

Ancient Rome, etc., and Index. 



Library Edition. 8 vols. 8vo., £$ 58. 

* Edinburgh ' Edition. 8 vols. 8vo., 65. 

each. 
Cabinet Edition. 16 vols. Post 8vo., 
£4 i6j. 

History of England from the 
Accession of Jambs thb Second. 
Popular Edition. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., 5s. 
Students Edition. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., i2J. 
People^ s Edition. 4 vols. Cr. 8vo., its. 
^ Albany ' Edition. With 6 Portraiu. 6 
vols. Large Crown 8vo., 35. td. each. 
Cabinet Edition. 8 vols. Post 8vo., 48s. 

* Edinburgh ' Edition. 4 vols. 8vo., 6j. 

each. 
Library Edition. 5 vols. 8vo., £4. 

Critical and Historical Essays, 
WITH Lays of Ancient Rome, etc., in i 
volume. 

Popular Edition. Crown 8vo., 25. td. 
Authorised Edition. Crown 8vo., 2s. 6<f., 
or gilt edges, 35. 6d. 

* Silver Library ' Edition. With Portrait 

and 4 Illustrations to the ' Lays '. Cr. 
8vo., 35. 6d. 

Critical and Historical Essays. 

Student's Edition, i vol. Cr. 8vo., 65. 
People's Edition. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., 85. 
' Trevelyan ' Edition. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., gs. 
Cabinet Edition, 4 vols. Post 8vo., 24s. 

* Edinburgh' Edition. 3 vols. 8vo., 6s. 

each. 
Library Edition. 3 vols. 8vo., 36*. 

Ess A YS, which may be had separately, 
sewed, 6d. each ; cloth, is. each. 
Addison and Walpole. 
Crolcer's Bcwwell's Johnson. 
HalUm'B Consututional 

History. 
Warren Hastings. 
The Earl of Chatham (Two 

Essays). 



Frederick the Great. 

Ranke and Gladstone. 

Lord Bacon. 

Lord Clive. 

Lord Byron, and The 

Comic Dramatists of 

the Restoration. 



Miscellaneous Writings 

People's Edition, i vol. Cr. 8vo., 45. td. 
Library Edition. 2 vols^^^Svo., 21s. 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO/S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



History, Polities, Polity, Political Memoirs, &e. — continiud. 



Macaulay (Lord) — continued. 
Miscellaneous Writings^ 
Speeches and Poems. 
Popular Edition. Crown 8vo., 2s. 6d. 
Cabinet Edition. 4 vols. Post 8vo., 245. 

Selections from the Writings of 
Lord Macaulay. Edited, with Occa- 
sional Notes, by the Right Hon. Sir G. O. 
Trevelyan, Bart. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

Mackinnon. — The Hl^torv of 
Edward the Third. By James Mac- 
Kinnon, Ph.D., Lecturer on Histor>' in the 
University of St. Andrews. 8vo., 185. 

May.— The Constitutional His- 
TORY OF England since the Accession 
of George 1 1 L 1 760- 1 870. By Sir Thomas 
Erskine May, K.C.B. (Lord Farnborough). 
3 vols. Cr. 8vo., i8j. 

Merivale (Charles, D.D.). 

History OF the Romans under the 
Empire. 8 vols. Crown 8vo., 35. bd. each. 

The Fall of the Roman Republic: 
a Short History of the Last Century of the 
Commonwealth. lamo., 7s. 6rf. 

General History of RomEj from 

the Foundation of the City to the Fall of 
Augustulus, B.C. 753- A.D. 476. With 5 
Maps. Crown 8vo, 7s. td. 

Montague. — The Elements of 
English Constitutional History. By 
F. C. Montague, M.A. Crown 8vo., 35. bd. 

Phillips. — South African Recol- 
lections. By Florence Phillips (Mrs. 
Lionel Phillips). With 37 Illustrations from 
Photographs. 8vo., ys.bd. 

Powell and Trevelyan. — The 

Peasants* Rising and the Lollards: 
a Collection of Unpublished Documents, 
forming an Appendix to * England in the 
Age of Wycliffe '. Edited by Edgar Powell 
and G. M. Trevelyan. 8vo., 65. net. 

Ransome. — The Rise of Consti- 
tutional Government in England. 
By Cyril Ransome, M.A. Crown 8vo., 65. 

Seebohm. — The English Village 
Community Examined in its Relations to 
the Manorial and Tribal Systems, etc. By 
Frederic Seebohm, LL.D., F.S.A. With 
13 Maps and Plates. 8vo., 165. 

Sharpe. — London and the Kingdom: I 
a History derived mainly from the Archives j 
at Guildhall in the custody of the Corpora- ' 
tion of the City of London. By Reginald I 
R. Sharpe, D.C.L., Records Clerk in the I 
Office of the Town Clerk of the City of 1 
London. 3 vols. 8vo. X05. td. each. 



Shaw. — A History of the English 
Church during the CiriL Wars .n.) 
UNDER the Commonwealth, 1640- 1660. 
By William A. Shaw, Litt.D. 2 voU. 
8vo., 365. 

Smith. — Carthage AND the Carth- 
aginians. By R. Bosworth Smith, M.A., 
With Maps, Plans, etc. Cr. 8vo., 35. 6d. 

Statham. — The History of the 
Castle, Town and Port of Doves. By 
the Rev. S. P. H. Statham. With 4 Plates 
and 13 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., los. (yd. 

Stephens. — A History of the 
French /^evolution. By H. Morse 
Stephens. 8vo. Vols. L and IL 185. 
each. 

Stubbs. — History of the Univer- 
sity of Dublin, from its Foundation to 
the End of the Eighteenth Century. By J. 
W. Stubbs. 8vo., izs. bd. 

Sutherland.— The History of Aus- 
tralia AND New Zealand, from 1606- 
1890. By Alexander Sutherland, M.A., 
and George Sutherland, M.A. Cro>v'n 
Svo., 2i. bd. 

Taylor.—^ Student's Manual of 
THE History of India. By Colonel Mea- 
dows Taylor, C.S.L, etc. Cr. 8vo., 75. td. 

Todd. — Parliamentar y Govern- 
ment IN THE British Colonies. By 
Alpheus Todd, LL.D. 8vo., 305. net. 

Trevelyan. — The American Revo- 
lution. PartL 1766-1776. By the Rt. Hon. 
Sir G. O. Trevelyan, Bart. ' 8vo., 16s. 

Trevelyan. — England in the Age 

of Wycliffe. By George Macaulay 
Trevelyan. 8vo., 15J. 

Wakeman and Hassall.— -^55^41.^^ 

Introductory to the Study of Engush 
Constitutional History. Edited by 
Henry Offley Wakeman, M.A., and 
Arthur Hassall, M.A. Crown 8vo., 6j. 

Walpole. — History of England 
from the Conclusion of the GRE.iT 
^Var in 181 5 TO 1858. By Sir Spencer 
Walpole, K.C.B. 6 vols. Cr. 8vo., 6i. each. 

Wood-Martin. — Pagan Ireland : 
AN Arch^ological Sketch. A Handbook 
of Irish Pre-Christian Antiquities. By W. 
G. Wood-Martin, M.R.LA. With 512 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 15s. 

Wylie. — History of England 
UNDER Henry IV. By James Hamilton 
Wylie, M.A. 4 vols. Crown 8vo. Vol I., 
1399-1404, I05. td. Vol. II., 1405-1406, 155. 
Vol. III., 1407- 141 1, 15J. Vol. rv., 1411- 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Biography, Personal Memoirs, &e. 



Armstrong. — The Life andLetters 
OP Edmund J. Armstrong. Edited by 
G. F. Savage Armstrong. Fcp. 8vo., 75. 6rf. 

Bacon. — The Letters and Life of 
Francis Bacon, including all his Oc- 
casional Works, Edited by James Sped- 
DING. 7 vols. 8vo., £^ 45. 

Bagehot. — Biographical Studies. 
By Walter Bagehot. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d, 

Boevey. — ' The Perverse Widoiv' : 

being passages from the Life of Catharina, 
wife of William Boevey, Esq., of Flaxley 
Abbey, in the County of Gloucester. Com- 
piled by Arthur W. Crawlev-Boevey, 
M.A. With Portraits. 4to., 42J. net. 

Carlyle. — Thomas Carlyle: A His- 
tory of his Life. By James Anthony 
Froude. 

1795- 1835. 2 vols. 
1834- 1881. 2 vols. 



Cellini. — Chisel, 



Crown 8vo., 75. 
Crown 8vo., 7s. 

PENy AND POIG- 
Nard ; or, Benvenuto Cellini, his Times 
and his Contemporaries. By the Author of 
' The Life of Sir Kenelm Digby,' * The Life 
of a Prig,' etc. With 19 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 55. 

Crozier. — Mf Inner Life : being a 

j;^ Chapter in Personal Evolution and Auto- 
biography. By John Beattie Crozier, 
Author of * Civilisation and Progress,' etc. 
8vo., 145. 

Dante. — The Life and Works of 
Dante Allighieri : being an Introduction 
to the Study of the * Divina Commedia '. 
By the Rev. J. F. Hogan, D.D., Professor, 
St. Patrick's College, Maynooth. With 
Portrait. 8vo., lis. 6d. 

Danton. — Life of Dan ton. By A. 
H. Beeslv. With Portraits of Danton, his 
Mother, and an Illustration of the Home of 
his family at Arcis. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

Duncan. — Admiral Duncan. By 
The Earl of Camperdown. With 3 Por- 
traits. 8vo., 16s. 

Erasmus. — Life and Letters of 
Erasmus. By James Anthony Froude. 
Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. 

Faraday. — Far a da r as a Dis- 
coverer. By John Tvndall. Crown 
8vo, 1%. 6d. 

Foreign Courts and Foreign 

Homes. By A. M. F. Crown 8vo., 6s. 



Fox. — The Early History of 
Charles ^ambs Fox. By the Right Hon. 
Sir G. O. Trevelyan, Bart. 
Library Edition. 8vo., i8s. 
Cheap Edition. Crown 8vo., 3*. 6d. 

Halifax. — The Life and Letters of 
Sir George Safile, Baronet, First 
Marquis OP Halifax. By H. C. Foxcroft. 
2 vols. 8vo., 36s. 

Hamilton. — Life of Sir William 
Hamilton. By R. P. Graves. 8vo. 3 vols. 
155. each. Addendum. 8vo., 6d. sewed. 

Havelock. — Memoirs of Sir Henry 
Havblock, K.CB. By John Clark 
Marshman. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. 

Haweis. — My Musical Life. By 
the Rev. H. R. Haweis. With Portrait of 
Richard Wagner and 3 Illustrations. Crown 
8vo., 6s. net. 

Hiley. — Memories of Half a 
Century. By the Rev. R. W. Hiley, 
D.D., Vicar of Wighill, Tadcaster. With 
Portrait. 8vo., 15s. 

Jackson. — Stoneivall Jackson and 
THE American Civil War. By Lieut.-Col. 
G. F. R. Henderson. With 2 Portraits and 
33 Maps and Plans. 2 vols. 8vo., 42s. 

Leslie. — The Life and Campaigns 
of Alexander Leslie, First Earl of 
Leven. By Charles Sanford Terry, 
M.A. With Maps and Plans. 8vo., i6s. 

Luther. — Life of Luther. By 
Julius Kostlin. With 62 Illustrations 
and 4 Facsimilies of MSS. Cr. 8vo., 3s. 6rf. 

Macaulay. — The Life and Letters 
OF Lord Macaulay. By the Right Hon. 
Sir G. O. Trevelyan, Bart. 

Popular Edition, i vol. Cr. 8vo., 2s. bd. 

Student's Edition i vol. Cr. 8vo., 6s. 

Cabinet Edition. 2 vols. Post 8vo., 125. 

* Edinburgh ' Edition. 2 vols. 8vo.,6s. each. 

Library Edition. 2 vols. 8vo., 36s. 

Marbot. — The Memoirs of the 
Raron de Marbot. Translated from the 
French. 2 vols. Crown 8vo., 7s. 

Max Miiller. — Auld Lanc. Syne. 

By the Right Hon. F. Max Muller. 
First Series. With Portrait. 8vo, los. 6d. 
Contents. — Musical Recollections — Literary Recol- 
lections— KecoUections of Royalties — Beggars. 

Second Series. My Indian Friends. 
8vo, los. 6d. 

Morris. — The Life of IVilliam 
Morris. By J. W. Mack ail. With 6 Por- 
traits and 16 Illustrations by>E. H. jNew, 
etc. 2 vols. 8vo., 32s. /VjOOQIC 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Biography, Personal Memoirs, Slq.— continued. 

Palgrave. — FRAmis Turner Pal- , Shakespeare. — Outlines of the 

LrPB OF Shakbsprarb. By J. O. Halli- 
well-Phillipps. With lUustnttions and 
Fac-similes. 2 vols. Royal 8vo., 2». 

Shakespeare's True Life. By 
James Walter With 500 Illustrations ij 
Gerald E. Moira. Imp. 8vo., 21?. net. 

Stanley (Lady). 

The Girlhood of Maria yosEFHA 

HoLROYD (Lady Stanley of Alderky). 
Recorded in Letters of a Hundred Years 
Ago, from 1776-1796. Edited by J. H. 
Adeane. With 6 Portraits. 8vo., iSs. 
The Early Married Life of 
Maria Joseph a, Lady St axley, from 
1796. Edited by J. H. Adeane. With 
10 Portraits and 3 Illustrations. 8vo.. 185. 



gra vb : His Journals, and Memories of his 
Life. By Gwenllian F. Palgrave. With 
Portrait and Illustration. 8vo., los. 6d. 

Pearson. — Charles Henry Pear- 
son y Fellow of Oriel, and Education 
Minister in Victoria ; Author of • Na- 
tional Life and Character '. Memorials by 
Himself, his Wife, and his Friends, Edited 
by W. Stebbing, Hon. Fellow of Worces- 
ter College, Oxford. With Portrait. 8vo. 

Place. — The Life of Francis Place^ I 
1771-1854. By Graham Wallas, M.A. 
With 2 Portraits. 8vo., I2J. . 

P o w y S. — Passages from the \ 
Diaries of Mrs. Philip Lybbe Poitys, , 
of Hardwick House, Oxon., 1756- 1808, 



Edited by Emily J. Climenson, of Shiplake , Turgot — The Life AND Writings 
Vicarage^, Oxon. With 2 Pedigrees (Lybbe ( of Turcot, Comptroller-General of France, 
and Powys) and Photogravure Portrait. 1774-1776. Edited for English Readers by 
8vo., lbs. W, Walker Stephens. With Portrait. 

AND I «^^' 75. 6rf. 

Max Vemey. —Memoirs of the Verney 
\ Family. Compiled from the Letters and 



Life 
Hon. F. 



R&makr/shna : ILis 

Sayings. By the Right 
MiJLLER. Crown 8vo., 55. 

Reeve. — Memoirs of the Life and 
Correspondence of Henry J^reve, C.B., \ 
late Editor of the ' Edinburgh Review,' and - 
Registrar of the Privy Council. By John ^ 
Knox Laughton, M.A. With 2 Portraits. \ 
2 vols. 8vo., 285. I 

Romanes. — The Life and Letters 
of George John A*omanbs, M.A., LL.D,, 
F./f.S. Written and Edited by his Wife. 
With Portrait and 2 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 6s. 

Seebohm. — TheOxford Reformers 
—John Colbt, Erasmus and Thomas 
More : a History of their Fellow- Work. 
By Frederic Seebohm. 8vo., 145. 



Illustrated by the Portraits at Clayden 

House. 

Vols. I. & II.. During the Civil War. 

By Frances Parthenope Verney. With 

38 Portraits, Woodcuts and Fac-simile. 

Royal 8vo., 425. 
Vol. III., During the Commonwealth. 

1650- 1660. By Margaret M. Vernby. 

With 10 Portraits, etc. Royal 8vo., 215. 
Vol. IV., From the Restoration to the 

Revolution. 1660 to 1696. ByMARCARCT 

M. Verney. With Ports. Royal 8vo., 21 j. 

Wellington.— Z//^£ of the Duke 

of Wellington. By the Rev. G. R. 
Gleig, M.A. Crown 8vo., 35. 6</. 



Travel and Adventure, the Colonies, &e. 



Arnold. — Seas and Lands. By Sir 
Edwin Arnold. With 71 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 33. 6r/. 

Ball (John). 
The Alpine Guide. Reconstructed 
and Revised on behalf of the Alpine Club, 
by W. A. B. CooLiDGE. 
Vol. I., The Western Alps: the Alpine 
Region, South of the Rhone Valley, 
from the Col de Tenda to the Simplon 
Pass. With 9 New and Revised Maps. 
Crown 8vo., I2J. net. 

HiNis and Notes, Practical and 
Scientific, for Travellers in the 
Alps: being a Revision of the General 
Introduction to the • Alpine Guide '. 
Crown 8vo., 35. net. 



Baker (Sir S. W.). 
Eight Years in Ceylon. With 6 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 31. 6d. 

The Rifle and the Hound is 
Ceylon. With 6 Illustrations. Crown 
8vo., 35. 6d. 

Bent. — The Ruined Cities of Ma- 
shon ALAND : being a Record of Excavation 
and Exploration in i8gi. By J. Theodore 
Bent. With 117 Illustrations. Crown 
8vo., 3J. 6d. 

Bicknell. — Travel and Adventure 
IN Northern QuBBNSLAND. By Arthur 
C. Bicknell. With 24 Plates and 22 IHus 
trations in the Text. 8vo., 15s. 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Travel and Adventure, the Colonies, &e. — continued. 

Brassey. — Voyages and Travels l^^t.'^.— Peaks and Pines: another 
OP Lord Brassey, K.C.B.y I) C.L.y 1862- Norway Book. By J. A. Lees. Wi|h 
1894. Arranged and Edited by Captain S. | 63 Illustrations and Photographs by the 
Eakdley-Wilmot. 2 vols. Cr. 8vo., lOi. Author. Crown 8vo., 65. 



Brassey (the late Lady). 

A Voyage in THE' Sunbeam' ; Our 

Home on the Ocean for Eleven \ 

Months. 

Cabinet Edition. With Map and 66 . 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 7s. 6d. 

• Silver Library ' Edition. With 66 Illus- 
trations. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d. 

Popular Edition. With 60 Illustrations. 
4to., 6d. sewed, is. cloth. 

School Edition. With 37 Illustrations. , 
Fcp., 2s. cloth, or 35. white parchment. 

Sunshine and Storm in the East. 
Cabinet Edition. With 2 Maps and 114 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 75. 6d. 
Popular Edition. With 103 Illustrations. ' 

4to., 6d. sewed, 15. cloth. 

In the Trades, the Tropics, and 
the * /^OARING Forties '. 
Cabinet Edition. With Map and 220 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., ys. 6d. ' 

Browning. — A Girl's Wanderings 
FN Hungary. By H. Ellen Browning. 
With Map and 20 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., ' 
35. bd. 

Froudc (James A.). 

Oceana : or England and her Col- 
onies. With 9 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 3*. 6rf. 

The English in the West Indies : 
or, the Bow of Ulysses. With 9 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 25. boards, 25. 6d. cloth. 

Howitt. — Visits to Remarkable 
Places. Old Halls, Battle- Fields, Scenes, 
illustrative of Striking Passages in English 
History and Poetry. By William Howitt. 
With 80 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 31. 6rf. 

Knight (E. F.). 

The Cruise of the * Alerte ' ; the 
Narrative of a Search for Treasure on the 
Desert Island of Trinidad. With 2 Maps 
and 23 Illustrations. Crown 8vo.-, 33. cirf. 

Where Three Empires meet: a 
Narrative of Recent Travel in Kashmir, 
Western Tibet, Baltistan, Ladak, Gilgit, 
and the adjoining Countries. With a 
Map and 54 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 3s. 6d. 

The ^Falcon' on the Baltic: a 
Voyage from London to Copenhagen in 
a Three-Tonner. With 10 Full-page 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. 6</. 



Lees and Clutterbuck.— B.C. 1887 : 

A Ramble IN British CoLusfBiA. By J. A. 
Lees and W. J. Clutterbuck. With Map 
and 75 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3^. 6d. 

Macdonald. — TheGoldCoastiPast 

AND Present. By George Macdonald, 
Director of Education and H.M. Inspector 
of Schtx>l8 for the Gold Coast Colony and 
the Protectorate. With 32 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., fs. 6rf. 

Nansen. — The First Crossing of 
Greenland. By Fridtjof Nansen. With 
143 Illustrations and a Map. Crown 8vo., 

Smith. — Climbing in the British 
Isles. By W. P. Haskbtt Smith. With 
Illustrations by Ellis Carr, and Numerous 
Plans. 
Part I. England. i6mo., 3s. td. 
Part II. IV ALES AND Ireland. i6mo., 
35. bd. 

Stephen. — The Play- Ground of 
Europe (The Alps). By Leslie Ste- 
phen. With 4 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 
35. 6</. 

Three in Norway. By Two of 

Them. With a Map and 59 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 25. boards, 25. 6d. cloth. 

TyndalL— (John). 

The Glaciers of the Alps : being 
a Narrative of Excursions and Ascents. 
An Account of the Origin and Phenomena 
of Glaciers, and an Exposition of the 
Physical Principles to which they are re- 
lated. With 61 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 
65. 6d. net. 

HoL'Rs OF Exercise lv the Alps. 

\\ ith 7 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., bs. bit. net. 

Vivian. — Seriia : the Poor Man's 
Paradise. By Herbert Vivian, M.A., 
Officer of the Royal Order of Takovo. 
With Map and Portrait of King Alex- 
ander. 8vo., iSJ^.g^.^^^^^GoOgle 



lo MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Veterinary Medicine, &c. 



Steel GoHN Henry, F.R.C.V.S., 

F.Z.S., A.V.D.), late Professor of Veterin- 
ary Science and Principal of Bombay 
Veterinary College. 

A Treatise on the Diseases of 
THE Dog; being a Manual of Canine 
Pathology. Especially adapted for the use 
of Veterinary Practitioners and Students. 
With 88 Illustrations. 8vo., los. 6rf. 

A Treatise on the Diseases of 

THE Ox ; being a Manual of Bovine 
Pathology. Especially adapted for the 
use of Veterinary Practitioners and 
Students. With 2 Plates and 117 
Woodcuts. 8vo., 15s. 

A Treatise on the Diseases of 
the Sheep; being a Manual of Ovine 
Pathology for the use of Veterinary Prac- 
titioners and Students. With Coloured 
Plate and 99 Woodcuts. 8vo., 125. 

Outlines of Equine Anatomy ; a 
Manual for the use of Veterinary Students 
in the Dissecting Room. Cr. 8vo., 75. 6d. 



Fitzwygram. — Horses and 

Stables. By Major-General Sir F. Fitz- 
wygram, Bart. With 56 pages of Illustia- 
tions. 8vo., 25. 6d. net. 

Schreiner. — The Angora Goat 
(published under the auspices of the South 
African Angora Goat Breeders' Association), 
and a Paper on the Ostrich (reprinted from 
the Zoologist for March, 1897). With 26 
Illustrations. By S. C. Cronwright 
Schreiner. 8vo., 105. 6rf. 

* Stonehenge.' — Th e Dog in 

Health and Disease. By ' Stone- 
HENGE '. With 78 Wood Engravings. 
8vo., 75. 6rf. 

Youatt (William). 

The Horse, Revised and Enlarged 
by W. Watson. M.R.C.V.S. With 52 
Wood Engravings. 8vo., 75. 6d. 

The Dog. Revised and Enlarged. 
With 33 Wood Engravings. 8vo., 65. 



Sport 



and Pastime. 

THE BADMINTON LIBRARY. 

Edited by HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF BEAUFORT, K.G., and A. E. T. WATSON. 

Complete in 29 Volumes, Crown 8vo., Price los. bd. each Volume, Cloth. 
*,* The Volumes arc also issued half-bound in Leather, with gilt top. The price can be had 

from all Booksellers. 

ARCHER V. By C. J. Longman and BILLIARDS. By Major W. Broad- 
- - ' FOOT, R.E. With Contributions by A. H. 

Boyd, Sydenham Dixon, W. J. Ford, etc. 
With II Plates, 19 Illustrations in the Text, 
and numerous Diagrams. Cr. 8vo., 105. 6d. 
COURSING AND FALCONRY. 
By Harding Cox, Charles Richardson, 
and the Hon. Gerald Lascelles. With 
20 Plates and 55 Illustrations in the Text. 
Crown 8vo., los. 6rf. 

CRICKET By A. G. Steel and 
the Hon. R. H. Lyttelton. With Con- 
tributions by Andrew Lang, W. G. Grace, 
F. Gale, etc. With 13 Plates and 52 Illus- 
trations in the Text. Crown 8vo., loi. td. 

CYCLING, By the Earl of Albe- 
marle and G. Lacy Hillier. With 19 
Plates and 44 Illustrations in the Text. 
Crowo 8vo., 10*. bd. 

DANCING. By Mrs. Lilly Grove, 

F.R.G.S. With Contributions by Miss 
Middleton, The Hon. Mrs. Armytage, 
etc. With Musical Examples, and 38 Full- 
page Plates and 93 Illustrations in the Text. 
Crown 8vo., los. bd. 

DRIVING. By His Grace the Duke 
of Beaufort, K.G. With Contributions by 
A. E. T. Watson the Earl of Onslow, 
etc. With 12 Plates and 54 Illustrations 
in the Text. Crown 8vo., ia$. bd. 



Col. H. Walrond. With Contributions by 
Miss Legh, Viscount Dillon, etc. With 
2 Maps, 23 Plates and 172 Illustrations in 
the Text. Crown 8vo., los. bd. 



ATHLETICS. By Montague 
Shearman. With Chapters on Athletics [ 
at School by W. Beacher THqMAS ; Ath- 1 
letic Sports in America by C. H. Sherrill ; 
a Contribution on Paper-chasing by W. Rye, | 
and an Introduction by Sir Richard Web- i 

. STER, Q.C., M.P. With 12 Plates and 37 | 
Illustrations in the Text. Cr. 8vo., los. bd. j 



BIG GAME SHOOTING. 
Clive Phillipps-Wolley. 



By 



Vol. I. AFRICA AND AMERICA. 
With Contributions by Sir Samuel W. 
Baker, W^ C. Oswell, F. C. Selous, 
etc. With 20 Plates and 57 Illustrations 
in the Text. Crown 8vo., 105. bd. 

Vol. II. EUROPE, ASIA, AND THE 
ARCTIC REGIONS. With Contribu- 
tions by Lieut.-Colonel R. Heber 
Percy, Major Algernon C. Heber 
Percy, etc. With 17 Plates and 56 Illus- 
trations in the Text. Cr. 8vo., los. bd. 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. ii 



Sport and Pastime — continued, 

THE BADMINTON lABRKRY -continued. 



FENCING, BOXING, AND 
WRESTLING. By Walter H. Pollock, 

F. C. Grove, C. Prevost, E. B. Mitchell, 
and Walter Armstrong. With i8 Plates 
and 24 Illust. in the Text. Cr. 8vo., 105. 6d. 

FISHING. By H. Cholmondeley- 
Pennell. 

Vol. L SALMON AND TROUT. With 
Contributions by H. R. Francis, Major 
John P. Traherne, etc. With 9 Plates 
and numerous Illustrations of Tackle, 
etc. Crown 8vo., lOi. 6d. 

Vol. IL PIKE AND OTHER COARSE 
FISH. With Contributions by the 
Marquis of Exeter, William Senior, 
G. Christopher Davis, etc. With 
7 Plates and numerous Illustrations of 
Tackle, etc. Crown Svo., los. 6d. 

FOOTBALL, By Montague Shear- 
man, W. J. Oakley, G. O. Smith, Frank 
Mitchell, etc. With 19 Plates and 35 
Illustrations in the Text. Cr. Svo., los. 6d, 

GOLF, By Horace G. Hutchinson. 
With Contributions by the Rt. Hon. A. J. 
Balfour, M.P., Sir Walter Simpson, Bart., 
Andrew Lang, etc. With 32 Plates and 57 
Illustrations in the Text. Cr. 8vo., los. 6d. 

HUNTING, By H is Grace the Duke 
OF Beaufort, K.G., and Mowbray Morris. 
With Contributions by the Earl op Suffolk 
and Berkshire, Rev. E. W. L. Davies, 

G. H. Longman, etc. With 5 Plates and 54 
Illustrations in the Text. Cr. 8vo., loj. td, 

MOUNTAINEERING, By C. T. 
Dent. With Contributions by the Right 
Hon. J. Bryce, M.P., Sir Martin Conway, 
D. W. Freshfield, C. E. Matthews, etc. 
With 13 Plates and gi Illustrations in the 
Text. Crown 8vo., loi. td. 

POETRY OF SPORT {THE),-- 
Selected by Hedley Peek. With a 
Chapter on Classical Allusions to Sport by 
Andrew L\ng, and a Special Preface to 
the BADMINTON LIBRARY by A. E. T. 
Watson. With 32 Plates and 74 Illustra- 
tions in the Text. Crown 8vo., 105. td. 

RACING AND STEEPLE-CHAS- 
ING, By the Earl of Suffolk and 
Berkshire, W. G. Craven, the Hon. F. 
Lawley, Arthur Coventry, and A. E. T. 
Watson. With Frontispiece and 56 Illus- 
trations in the Text. Crown 8vo., io5. 6d. 

RIDING AND POLO. By Captain 
Robert Weir, J. Moray Brown, T. F. 
Dale, The Duke of Beaufort, The Earl 
OF Suffolk and Berkshire, etc. With 
18 Plates and 41 Illustrations in the Text. 
Crown 8vo., los. 6//. 



ROWING, By R. P. P. Rowe and 
C. M. Pitman. With Chapters on Steering 
by C. P. Serocold and F. C. Begg ; Met- 
ropolitan Rowing by S. Le Blanc Smith ; 
and on PUNTING by P. W. Squire. With 
75 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 105. 6rf. 

SEA F/SHIXG. By John Bicker- 
dyke, Sir H. W. Gore-Booth, Alfred 
C. Harmsworth, and W. Senior. With 
22 Full-page Plates and 175 Illustrations in 
the Text. Crown 8vo., loj. 6d. 

SHOOTING. 
Vol. I. FIELD AND COVERT. By Lord 
Walsingham and Sir Ralph Payne- 
Gallwey, Bart. With Contributions by 
the Hon. Gerald Lascelles and A. J. 
Stuart- WoRTLEY. With 1 1 Plates and 
94 lUusts. in the Text. Cr. 8vo., los. 6d, 
Vol. II. MOOR AND MARSH. By 
Lord Walsingham and Sir Ralph PayWe- 
Gallwey, Bart. With Contributions by 
Lord Lovat and Lord Charles Lennox 
Kerr. With 8 Plates and 57 Illustrations 
in the Text. Crown 8vo., loj. 6d. 
SKATING, CURLING, TOBOG- 
GANING, By J. M. Heathcote, C. G. 
Tebbutt, T. Maxwell Witham, Rev. 
John Kerr, Ormond Hake, Henry A. 
Buck, etc. With 12 Plates and 272 Illus- 
trations in the Text. Crown 8vo., 105. 6rf. 
SWIMMING. By Archibald Sin- 
clair and William Henry, Hon. Sees, of the 
Life-Saving Society. With 13 Plates and ro6 
Illustrations in the Text. Cr. 8vo., 105. 6</. 
TENNIS, LA WN TENNIS, 
RACKETS AND FIVES. By J. M. and 
C. G. Heathcote, E. O. Pleydell-Bou- 
VERiE.andA.C.AiNGER. With Contributions 
by the Hon. A. Lyttelton, W. C. Mar- 
SH.\LL, Miss L. DoD, etc. With 12 Plates and 
67 Illustrations in the Text. Cr. 8vo., 105. 6^. 
YACHTING, 
Vol. I. CRUISING, CONSTRUCTION 
OF YACHTS, YACHT RACING 
RULES, FITTING-OUT, etc. By Sir 
Edward Sullivan, Bart., The Earl of 
Pembroke, Lord Brassey, K.C.B., C. 
E. Seth-Smith, C.B., G. L. Watson, R. 
T. Pritchett, E. F. Knight, etc. With 
21 Plates and 93 Illustrations in the Text. 
Crown 8vo., los. 6d. 
Vol. IL YACHT CLUBS, YACHT- 
ING IN AMERICA AND THE 
COLONIES, YACHT RACING, etc. 
By R. T. Pritchett, The Marquis of 
Dufferin and Ava, K.P., The Earl of 
Onslow, James McFerran, etc. With 
35 Plates and 160 Illustrations in the 
Text. Crown 8vo., los. 6d 



12 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Sport and Pastime — contintud. 
FUR, FEATHER, AND FIN SERIES. 



Edited by A. E. T. Watson. 

Crown 8vo., price 51. each Volume, cloth. 

*^* The Volumes are also issued half-bound in Leather, with gilt top, 

from all Booksellers. 



The price can be had 



THE PARTRIDGE, Natural His- 
tory, by the Rev. H. A. Macphbrson ; 
Shooting, by A. J. Stuart- Wortley ; 
Cookery, by' George Saintsbury. With 
II Illustrations and various Diagrams in 
the Text. Crown 8vo., 55. 

THE GROUSE, Natural History, by 
the Rev. H. A. Macpherson; Shooting, 
by A. J. Stuart-Wortley ; Cookery, by 
George Saintsbury. With 13 Illustrations 
and various Diagrams in the Text. Crown 
8vo., 55. 

THE PHEASANT Natural History, 
by the Rev. H. A. Macpherson ; Shooting, 
by A. J. Stuart-Wortley ; Cookery, by 
Alexander Innes Shand. With 10 Illus- 
trations and various Diagrams. Crown 
8vo., 5s. 

THE HARE, Natural History, by 
the Rev. H. A. Macpherson ; Shooting, 
by the Hon. Gerald Lascelles ; Coursing, 
by Charles Richardson ; Hunting, by J. 
S. Gibbons and G. H. Longman ; Cookery, 
by Col. Kenney Herbert. With 9 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo, 5s. 

Andre. — Colonel Bogey s Sketch- 
book. Comprising an Eccentric Collection 
of Scribbles and Scratches found in disused 
Lockers and swept up in the Pavilion, to- 
gether with sundry After- Dinner Sayings 
oi the Colonel. By R. Andre, West Herts 
Golf Club. Oblong 4to., 2s. bd. 

Bickerdyke. — Da^s of My Life on 

Waters Fresh Axn Salt, axd other 
Papers. By John Bickerdyke. With 
Photo-etching Frontispiece and 8 Full-page 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 65. 

Blackburne. — Mr. Bl a ckb i 'rne s 

Games at Chess. Selected, Annotated 
and Arranged by Himself. Edited, with a 
Biographical Sketch and a brief History of 
Blindfold Chess, by P. Anderson Graham, i 
8vo., 75. bd. net. 

Dead Shot (The) : or, Sportsman's | 
Complete Guide. Being a Treatise on the Use ' 
of the Gun, with Rudimentary and Finishing 
Lessons in the Art of Shooting Game of all 
kinds. Also Game-driving, Wildfowl and j 
Pigeon-shooting, Dog-breaking, etc. By I 
Marksman. With numerous Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., los. t>d. 



RED Z>^^^.— Natural History, by 
the Rev. H. A. Macpherson ; Deer Stalk- 
ing* hy Cameron of Lochiel ; Stag 
Hunting, by Viscount Ebrington ; 
Cookery, by Alexander Innes Shand. 
With 10 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 55. 

THE SALMON, By the Hon. A. E. 

Gathorne-Hardy. With Chapters on the 

Law of Salmon Fishing by Claud Douglas 

Pennant; Cookery, by Alexander Innes 

I Shand. With 8 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 5*. 

THE TROUT By the Marquess 
OP Granby. With Chapters on the Breed- 
ing of Trout by Col. H. Custance ; and 
Cookery, by Alexander Innes Shand. 
With 12 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 55. 

THE RABBIT By James Edmund 

Harting. With a Chapter on Cookery by 
Alexander Innes Shand. With 10 Illus- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 55. 

WILDFOWL. By the Hon. John 
Scott Montagu, etc. With Illustrations, 
etc. [/n preparation. 

Hllis. — Chess Sparks ; or, Short and 
Bright Games of Chess. Collected and 
Arranged by J. H. Ellis, M. A. 8vo., 45. td. 

Folkard. — The Wild-Foivler : A 

Treatise on Fowling, Ancient and Modern, 
descriptive also of Decoys and Flight-ponds. 
Wild-fowl Shooting, Gunning-punts, Shoot- 
ing-yachts, etc. Also Fowling in the Fens 
and in Foreign Countries, Rock-fowling, 
etc., etc., by H. C Folkard. With 13 En- 
gravings on Steel, and several Woodcuts. 
8vo., 12s. 6d. 

Ford. — The Theory and Practice 
OF Archery. By Horace Ford. New 
Edition, thoroughly Revised and Re-written 
by W. Butt, M.A. With a Prefecc by C. 
J. Longman, M.A. 8vo., X45. 

Ford, — A History of Middlesex 
County Cricket. Edited by W. J. Ford. 
With Photogravure Portrait of V. E. Walker. 
8vo., 105. net. 

Francis. — A Book on Angling : or, 
Treatise on the Art oi Fishing in every 
Branch : including full Illustrated List of Sal- 
mon Flies. By Francis Francis. With Por- 
trait and Coloured Plates. Crown 8vo., 15*. 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Sport and Pastime — continued. 



Gibson. — Tobogganing on Crooked 
Runs. By the Hon. Harry Gibson. With 
Contributions by F. de B. Strickland and 
* Lady-Toboganner '. With 40 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 6s, 

Graham. — Country Pastimes for 
Boys. By P. Anderson Graham. With 
252 Illustrations from Drawings and 
Photographs. Crown &vo., 35. 6^/. 

Hutchinson. — The Book of Golf 
AND Golfers. By Horace G. Hutchin- 
son. With Contributions by Miss Amy 
Pascoe, H. H. Hilton, J. H. Taylor-, H. 
J. Whigham, and Messrs. Sutton & Sons. 
With 71 Portraits, etc. Large crown 8vo., 
75. td. net. 

Lang. — Angling Sketches. By 
Andrew Lang. With 20 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. 

Liilie. — Croquet: its History, Rules 
and Secrets. By Arthur Lillie, Champion, 
Grand National Croquet Club, 1872 ; Winner 
of the ' All-Comers' Championship,' Maid- 
stone, 1896. With 4 Full-page Illusuations 
by LuciEN Davis, 15 Illustrations in the 
Text, and 27 Diagrams. Crown 8vo., 65. 

Longman. — Chess Openings. By 
Frederick W. Longman. Fcp. 8vo., 2s. 6rf. 

Madden. — The Diary of Master 
William Silence : a Study of Shakespeare 
and of Elizabethan Sport. By the Right 
Hon. D. H. Madden, Vice-Chancellor of the 
University of Dublin. 8vo., 165. 

Maskelyne. — Sharps and Fla ts : a 

Complete Revelation of the Secrets of 
Cheating at Games of Chance and Skill. By 
John Nevil Maskelyne, of the Egyptian 
Hall. With 62 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 65. 

Moffat. — Crick E tyCricket: Rhymes 
and Parodies. By Douglas Moffat, with 
Frontispiece by Sir Frank Lockwood, Q.C, 
M.P., and 53 Illustrations by the Author. 
Crown 8vo, 2i. bd. 

Park. — The Game of Golf. By 
William Park, Jun., Champion Golfer, 
1887-89. With 17 Plate.s and 26 Illustra- 
tions in the Text. Crown 8vo., 75. td. 



Pa]rne-Gallwey (Sir Ralph, Bart.). 

Letters to Young Shooters (First 
Series). On the Choice and use of a Gun 
With 41 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 71. 6d. 

Letters to Young SHOOTERs{Second 
Series). On the Production, Preservation, 
and Killing of Game. With Directions 
in Shooting Wood- Pigeons and Breaking- 
in Retrievers. With Portrait and 103 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 125. 6d. 

Letters to Young Shooters. 
(Third Series.) Comprising a Short 
Natural History of the Wildfowl that 
are Rare or Common to the British 
Islands, with complete directions in 
Shooting Wildfowl on the Coast and 
Inland. With 200 Illustrations. Crown 
8vo., 1 8s. 



Pole — The Theory of the Modern 
Scientific Game of Whist. By William 
Pole, F.R.S. Fcp. 8vo., 2s. 6d. 



Proctor. — JLoiv to Flay Whist: 
with the Laws and Etiquette op 
Whist. By Richard A. Proctor. Crown 
8vo., 3s. td. 



Ribblesdale.— TViE Queen's Hounds 

AND STAGMUATING /RECOLLECTIONS. By 

Lord Ribblesdale, Master of the Buck- 
hounds, 1892-95. With Introductory 
Chapter on the Hereditary Mastership by 
E. Burrows. With 24 Plates and 35 Illus- 
trations in the Text. 8vo., 255. 



Ronalds. — The Fly-Fisher s Ento- 
mology. By Alfred Ronalds. With 20 
145. 



coloured Plates. 8vo., 



Watson. — Facing and 'Chasing: a 
Collection of Sporting Stories. By Alfred 
E. T. Watson, Editor of the * Badminton 
Magazine'. With 16 Plates and 36 Illus- 
trations in the Text. Crown 8vo, 7s. 6d. 



'Wilcocks. — The Sea Fisherman: 
I Comprising the Chief Methods of Hook and 

Line Fishing in the British and other Seas, 
I and Remarks on Nets, Boats, and Boating. 

By J. C. Wilcocks. Illustrated. Cr. 8vo.,6j. 



14 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Mental, Moral, and 

LOGIC, RHETORIC, 

Abbott. — The Elements of Logic, 
By T. K. Abbott, B.D. i2mo., 3*. 

Aristotle. 

The Ethics: Greek Text, Illustrated 
with Essay and Notes. By Sir Alexan- 
der Grant, Bart. 2 vols. 8vo., 325. 

An Introduction to Aristotle's 
Ethics. Books L-IV. (Book X. c.vi.-ix. 
in an Appendix). With a continuous 
Analysis and Notes. By the Rev. E. 
Moore, D.D. Crown 8vo. los. 6^. 

Bacon (Francis). 
Complete Works, Edited by R. L. 

Ellis, James Speoding and D. D. 

Heath. 7 vols. 8vo., ;f 3 13J. 6rf. 
Letters and Life^ including all his 

occasional Works. Edited by James 

Spedding. 7 vols. 8vo., £^^ 41. 
The Ess a ys : with Annotations. By 

Richard Whately, D.D. 8vo., los. 6d. 
The Essays: with Notes. By F. 

Storr and C. H. Gibson. Cr. 8vo, 35. 6^/. 
The Essays: with Introduction, 

Notes, and Index. By E. A. Abbott, D.D. 

2 Vols. Fcp.8vo.,6s. The Text and Index 

only, without Introduction and Notes, in 

One Volume. Fcp. 8vo., 2s. td. 

Bain (Alexander). 
Mental and Moral Science : a 
Compendium of Psychology and Ethics. 
Crown 8vo., 105, 6d. 

Or separately, 
Part I. PsvcHOLOGV .1XP History of 

Philosophy. Crown 8vo., 61. bd. 
Part 1 1 . r HKOR 1 " OF E thics a np E thica l 
Systems. Crown 8vo., 45. 6rf. 
Senses AND theIntellect. 8vo.,i55. 
Emotions and the Will. 8vo., 15s. 
Logic. Part I. Deduction. Crown 
8vo., 45. Part II. IxnrcTiox. Crown 
8vo., 65. td. 
Practica l Ess a j s. C r. 8 vo. , 25 . 

Bray. — The Philosophy of Neces- 
sity: or. Law in Mind as in Matter. By 
Charles Brav. Crown 8vo., 5s. 

Crozier (John Beattie). 

Civilisation and Progress: being 
the Outlines of a New System of Political, 
Religious and Social Philosophy. 8vo.,i45. 

History of Intellectual De- I 
VELOPMEXT : on the Lines of Modern 
Evolution. 

Vol. I. Greek and Hindoo Thought ; Graeco- ' 
Roman Paganism ; Judaism ; and Christi- | 
anity down to the Closing of the Schools | 
of Athens by Justinian, 529 a.d. 8vo., 14s. 



Politioal Philosophy. 

PSYCHOLOGY, 6'C. 

! Davidson. — The Logic of Defini- 
tion^ Explained and Applied. By William 
L. Davidson, M.A. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

Green (Thomas Hill). — The Works 
OF. Edited by R. L. Nettleship. 

Vols. I. and II. Philosophical W^orks. 8vo.,- 
165. each. 

Vol. III. Miscellanies. With Index to the 
three Volumes, and Memoir. 8vo., 2ii. 

Lectures on the Principles of 
Political Obligation. With Preface 
by Bernard Bosanquet. 8vo., 55. 

Gumhill. — The Morals of Suicide. 
By the Rev. J. Gurnhill, B.A. Crown 
8vo., 6i. 

Hodgson (Shadworth H.) 
Time and Space: A Metaphysical 

Essay. 8vo., x6s. 
The Theory of Practice: an 

Ethical Inquiry. 2 vols. 8vo., 245. 

The Philosophy of Reflection, 

2 vols. 8vO., 215. 

The Metaphysic of Ejcperience. 

Book I. General Analysis of Experience ; 
Book II. Positive Science; Book III. 
Analysis of Conscious Action ; Book IV^ 
The Real Universe. 4 vols, 8vo., 365. net. 

Hume. — The Philosophical Works 
OF David Hume, Edited by T. H. Green 
and T. H. Grose. 4 vols. 8vo., 28s. Or 
separately, Essays. 2 vols. 145.. Treatise 
OF Human Nature. 2 vols. 14J. 

James.— 7>/A' Will to Believe, Sin^ 
Other Essays in Popular Philosophy. By 
William James, M.D., LL.D., etc. Crown 
8vo., 75. 6d. 

Justinian. — The Institutes of 
Justinian: Latii. Text, chiefly that of 
Huschke, with English Introduction, Trans- 
lation, Notes, and Summary. By Thomas 
C. Sandars, M.A. 8vo., i8s. 

Kant (Immanuel). 
Critique of Practical Reason, 
AND Other IVorks on the Theory of 
Ethics. Translated by T. K. Abbott, 
B.D. With Memoir. 8vo., 12s. 6rf. 

Fundamental Principles of the 
Metaphysic of Ethics. Translated by 
T. K. Abbott, B.D. Crown »vo, 3*. 

Introduction to Logic, and his 
Essay on the Mistaken Subtilty op 
the Four Figures.. Translated by T. 
K. Abbott. 8vo., 6$. 

Kelly. — Government or Human 
Evolution. — Justice. By Edmond 
Kelly, M.A., F.G.S. Cr. 8vo., ys. 6d. net. 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 15 



Mental, Moral and Politioal Philosophy— con/muecl. 

LOGIC, RHETORIC, PSYCHOLOGY, d^C. 



Killick. — Handbook to Mills 
System of Logic. By Rev. A. H. 
Killick, M.A. Crown 8vo., 35. 6^. 

Ladd (George Trumbull). 

A Theory of Reality: an Essay 
in Metaphysical System upon the Basis of 
Human Cognitive Experience. 8vo., i8i. 

Elements of Physiological Psy- 
chology. 8vo., 215. 

Outlines of Descriptive Psycho- 
logy: a Text-Book of Mental Science for 
Colleges and Normal Schools. 8vo., 12s. 

Outlines of Physiological Psy- 
chology. 8vO., 125. 

Primer of Psychology. Cr. 8vo., 
55. td, 

Lecky. — The Map of Life: Con- 
duct and Character. By William Edward 
Hartpole Lecky. 8vo., 105. td. 

Lutoslawski. — The Origin and 

Growth of Plato's Logic. With an 
Account of Plato's Style and of the Chrono- 
logy of his Writings. By Wincentv 
Lutoslawski. 8vo., 215. 1 



Max MuUer (F.). 
The Science of Thovcht. 8vo., 



The Six Systems of Indian Phil- 
osophy. 8vo., 1 8s. 

Mill. — Analysis of the Phenomena 
OF THE Human Mind. By James Mill. 
2 vols. 8vo., 285. 

Mill (John Stuart). 

A System of Logic. Cr. 8vo., 3s. 6^. 

On Liberty. Crown 8vo., 15. \d. 

Considerations on Representa- 
tive GovERN\fE.\T. Crown 8vo., 25. 

Utilitarianism. 8vo., 25. 6d. 

Examination of Sir William 
Hamilton's Philosophy. 8vo., 165. 

Nature, the Utility of Religion, 
AND Theism. Three Essays. 8vo., 55. 

Mo nek. — An Introduction to 
Logic. Ky William Henry S. Monck, I 
M.A. Crown 8vo., 55. 

Romanes. — Mind and Motion and j 
Monism. By George John Romanes, ' 
LL.D., F.R.S. Cr. 8vo., 45. bd. 

Stock. — Lectures in the Lyceum ; \ 
or, Aristotle's Ethics for English Readers. 
Edited by St. George Stock. Crown 1 
8vo., 75. bd. i 



Sully (James). 
T^E Human Mind : a Text-book of 

I Psychology. 2 vols. 8vo., 215. 

1 Outlines of Psychology. Crown 

8vo., 95. 

I The Teacher's Handbook Of Psy- 

j chology. Crown 8vo., 65. 6rf. 

I Studies of Childhood, Svo., 

105. 6rf. 
Children '5 Wa j s : being Selections 
I from the Author's ' Studies of Childhood '. 

With 25 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 45. bd. 

Sutherland. — The Origin and 

Growth of the Moral Jnstinct. By 
Alexander Sutherland, M.A. 2 vols. 
Svo, 285. 

Swinburne. — /'/C7'6^i?^ Logic: an 

Attempt to Popularise the Science of 
Reasoning. By Alfred James Swinburne, 
M.A. With 23 Woodcuts. Cr. 8vo., 25. bd. 

Webb. — The Veil of Is is : a Series 
of Essays on Idealism. By Thomas E. 
Webb, LL.D., Q.C. 8vo., 105. bd. 

Weber. — History of Philosophy. 
By Alfred Weber, Professor in the Uni- 
versity of Strasburg. Translated by Frank 
Thillv, Ph.D. 8vo., 165. 

Whately (Archbishop). 

Pacon^s Essays. With Annotations. 
8vo., I05. bd. 

Elements of Logic. Cr. 8vo., 4s. 6d. 
Elements OF Rhetoric. Cr. 8vo., 
45. bd. 

Zeller (Dr. Edward). 

The Stoics, Epicureans, and 
Sceptics. Translated by the Rev. O. J. 
Reichel, M.A. Crown 8vo., 155. 

Outlines of the History of 
Greek Philosophy. Translated by 
Sarah F. Alleyne and Evelyn Abbott, 
M.A., LL.D. Crown Svo., 105. bd. 

Plato and the Older Academy. 

Translated by Sarah F. Alleyne and 

Alfred Goodwin, B.A. Crown 8vo., 

185. 
Socrates and the Socratic 

Schools. Translated by the Rev. O. 

J. Reichel, M.A. Crown 8vo., 105. bd. 

Aristotle AND the Earlier Peri- 
PA TETics. Translated by B. F. C. Cos- 
telloe, M.A., and J. H. Muirhead, 
M.A. . vols. ^ Crown ^^ygjg 



i6 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Mental, MordI, and Politioal Philosophy — continued. 

MANUALS OF CATHOLIC PHILOSOPHY, 

{Sttmyhurst Serits.) 



A Manual of Political Economy, 
By C. S. Devas, M.A. Crown 8vo., 6j. 6rf. 

First Principles of Knowledge. 
By John Rickaby, S.J. Crown 8vo., 5*. 

General Metaphysics. By John 
Rickaby, S.J. Crown 8vo., 5*. 

Logic, By Richard F. Clarke, S.J. 

Crown 8vo., 5s. 



'Moral Philosophy {Ethics .lyn 
Na TiRAL La w). By Joseph Rickaby, ^.} . 
Crown 8vo., 5*. 



Natural Theology, By Brrnard 

BoEDDBR, S.J. Crown 8vo., 65. bd. 

Psychology. By Michael Mahf.k, 

S.J. Crown 8vo., 6s. 6d. 



History and Science of Language, &o. 

DsLvidson.— Leading and Import- 
ant ENGUSif Words : Explained and Ex- 
emplified. By William L. Davidson, 
M.A. Fcp. 8vo., 3s. bd. 



Farrar. — Language and Languages. 
By F. W. Farrar, D.D., Dean of Canter- 
bury. Crown 8vo., 6s. 



Grab am. — English Synon\ ms, 

Classified and Explained: with Practical 
Exercises. By G. F. Graham. Fcp. 8vo.,6s. 



Max MuUer (F.). 
The Science of Language. — Found- 
ed on Lectures delivered at the Royal In- 
stitution in 1861 and 1863. 2 vols. Crown 
8vo., los. 

Biographies of Words, and the 
Home of the Arvas. Crown 8vo., 5s. 

Regret. — Thesaurus of English 
Words and Phrases. Classified and 
Arranged so as to Facilitate the Expression 
of Ideas and assist in Literary Composition. 
By Peter Mark Roget, M.D., F.R.S, 
With full Index. Crown 8vo., los. 6d. 



Whately. — English Synonyms. 
E. Jane Whately. Fcp. 8vo., 35. 



By 



Political Economy and Economics. 



Ashley. — English Economic His- ■ 
TORY Axn Theory. By W. J. Ashley, 
M.A. Cr. 8vo., Part I., 55. Part II., los. W. , 

Bagehot. — Economic Studies. By ' 
Walter Bagehot. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. 

3rassey. —Papers and Addresses ^ 
ox WoRA' AND Wages. By Lord Brassey. \ 
Edited by J. Potter, and with Introduction 
by George Howell. M.P. Crown 8vo., 55. 

Channing. — Thf Truth about 

AGRicruiRAL Depression ; an Econo- 
mic Study of the Evidence of the Ro>'al 
Commission. By Francis Allston Chan- 
ning, M. P., One of the Commission. Crown 
8vo., 6s. 

Devas. — A Manual of Political 
EcoyoMV. By C. S. Devas, M.A. Cr. 8vo., 
6s. 6d. {Manuals of Catholic Philosophy.) 

Jordan. — 77//; SiAXDARn of Value. 

By William Lkiohton Jordan. Cr.8vo.,6s. 



Leslie. — Essavs on Political Eco- 
nomy. By T. E. Cliffe Leslie, Hon. 
LL.D., Dubl. 8vo., los. 6</. 

Macleod (Henry Dunning). 
Economics for Beginners. Crown 

8vO., 25. 

The Elements op Economics. i 

vols. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6</, each. 
BiMETALiSM. 8vo., 55. net. 
The Elements of Banking. Cr. 

8vo., 3s. 6</. 
The Theory and Practice of 

Banking. Vol. I. 8vo., 12*. Vol. II. 14s. 
The Theory of Credit. 8vo. 

In I Vol., 30s. net; or separately. Vol. 

I., ros. net. Vol. II., Part I., roi. net. 

Vol II., Part II. 105. net. 



Mill. — Pol i tic. i l Economy '. 
John Stuart Mill. 

Popular Edition. Crown 8vo., 35. 6ti. 
Library Edition. 2,av)1s. 8\|0., 30?. 
Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



By 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Politieal Eeonomy and 

Mulhall. — Industries and Wealth 
OP Nations, By Michael G. Mulhall, 
F.S.S. With 32 Diagrams. Cr. 8vo., 8j. 6rf. 

Stephens. — Higher Life for Work- 
ing People : its Hindrances Discussed. An ' 
attempt to solve some pressing Social Pro- 
blems, without injustice to Capital or 
Labour. By W. Walker Stephens. Cr. 
8vo., 3s. td, 

S^mes. — Political Economy. With 
a Supplementary Chapter on Socialism. By , 
J. E. Symes, M.A. Crown 8vo., 25. 6rf. 

Toynbee. — Lectures on the In- ! 
dustrial Revolution of the 18th Cen- \ 
tury in England, By Arnold Toynbee. I 
With a Memoir of the Author by Benjamin 
JOWETT, D.D. 8vo., lOJ. 6rf. I 



Eeonomies — continued, 
Webb (Sidney and Beatrice). 

The History of Trade Unionism, 
With Map and full Bibliography of the 
Subject. 8vo., i8s. 

Industrial Democracy : a Study 
in Trade Unionism. 2 vols. 8vo., 255. net. 

Problems of Modern Industry : 

Essays. 8vo., 75. 6d, 



Wright. — Outline of Practical 
Sociology'. With Special Reference to 
American Conditions. By Carroll D. 
Wright, LL.D. With 12 Maps and 
Diagrams. Crown 8vo., gs. 



STUDIES IN ECONOMICS AND POLITICAL SCIENCE. 

Issued under the auspices of the London School of Economics and Political Science. 



German Social Democracy. By 
Bertrand Russell, B.A. With an Ap- 
pendix on Social Democracy and the 
Woman Question in Germany by Alys 
Russell, B.A. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. 

The Referendum in Switzerland. 
By Simon Deploige, Advocate. Translated \ 
by C. P- Trevelyan, M.P. Edited, with ' 
Notes, Introduction and Appendices, by 1 
Lilian Tomn. Crown 8vo., 7*. td. 

The History of Local Rates in 
England: Five Lectures. By Edwin 
Cannan, M.A. Crown 8vo., 2J. 6J/. 



Local Variations in Wages. By 
F. W. Lawrence, M.A., Fellow of Trinity 
College, Cambridge. Medium ^to., 8s. 6d, 

The Economic Policy of Colbert, 
By A. J. Sargent, B.A., Senior Hulme 
Exhibitioner of Brasenose College, Oxford. 
Crown 8vo., 2s. 6rf. 

Selec t Documents II l us tra ting 

the History of Trade Unionism. 

I. The Tailoring Trade. Edited by 

W. F. G ALTON. With a Preface by 

Sidney Webb, LL.B. Crown 8vo., 5s. 



Evolution, Anthropology, &e. 



Clodd (Edward) 
The Story of Creation: a Plain 
Account of Evolution. With 77 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. 
A Primer of Evolution: being a 
Popular Abridged Edition of * The Story 
of Creation '. With Illustrations. Fcp. 
8vo., 15. 6rf. 

Lang^ (Andrew). 
Custom and Myth: Studies of 

Early Usage and Belief. With 15 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. 6rf. 
Myth, Ritual, and Religion. 2 

vols. Crown 8vo., 7s. 
Modern Mythologv : a Reply to 

Professor Max Miiller. 8vo., gj. 
TheMakingof Religion. 8vo., 125. 
Lubbock. — The Origin of Civilisa- 
tion, and the Primitive Condition of Man. 
by Sir J. Lubbock, Bart., M.P. (Lord 
AvEBURv). With 5 Plates and 20 Illustra- 
tions. 8vo., 185. 



Romanes (George John). 

I Darwin, and after Darwin: an 

' Exposition of the Darwinian Theory, and a 

Discussion on Post-Dan\'inian Questions. 

Part I. The Darwinian Theory. With 
Portrait of Darwin and 125 Illustrations. 
I Crown 8vo., 105. 6rf. 

' Part II. Post- Darwinian Questions: 

' Heredity and Utility. With Portrait of 

I the Author and 5 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 

I los. 6rf. 

Part III. Post- Darwinian Questions : 
Isolation and Physiological Selection. 
I Crown 8vo., 5s. 

I An Examination of Weismann- 
I ISM. Crown 8vo., 65. 

I Essays. Edited by C. Lloyd 

j Morgan, Principal of University College, 

Bristol. Crown 8vo., 6^^ i 

Digitized by VjOOQLC 



i8 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Classieal Literature, Translations, &e. 



Abbott — Hellenica, A Collection 
of Essays on Greek Poetry, Philosophy, 
History, and Religion. Edited by Evelyn 
Abbott, M.A., LL.D. Crown 8vo., 7*. 6rf. 

iEschylus. — EuMENiDEs of ^schy- I 

LUS. With Metrical English Translation. 
By J. F. Da VIES. 8vo., 7*. j 

Aristophanes. — The Acharnians \ 

OP Aristophanes, translated into English 
Verse. By R. Y. Tyrrell. Crown 8vo., is. 

Aristotle. — Youth and Old Age, 
Life and Death, and Respiration. 
Translated, with Introduction and Notes, 
by W. Ogle, M.A., M.D. 8vo., 75. td. 

Becker (W. A.), Translated by the 
Rev. F. Metcalfe, B.D. 

Gallus: or, Roman Scenes in the 
Time of Augustus. With Notes and Ex- 
cursuses. With 26 Illustrations. Post 
8vo., 3s. 6rf. 

Charicles : or, Illustrations of the 
Private Life of the Ancient Greeks. 
With Notes and Excursuses. With 26 
Illustrations. Post 8vo., 3s. td. 

Butler. — The Authoress of the 
Odyssey, where and when She wrote, 
WHO She was, the Use She made of 
J HE Iliad, and how the Poem grew 
UNDER Her hands. By Samuel Butler, 
Author of 'Erewhon,' etc. With Illustra- 
tions and 4 Maps. 8vo., ids. 6rf. 

Cicero. — Cicero's Correspondence. 
By R. Y. Tyrrell. Vols. I., 11., III., 8vo., 
each i2i. Vol. IV., 155. Vol. V., 14s. 

Vol. VI., 125. 

Hime. — Luc/ax, the Syrian Sa- 
tirist. By Lieut.-Col. Henry W. L. Hime, 
(late) Royal Artillery. 8vo., 5s. net. 
CoNTKNTs.— 1. Life of Lucian — 2. Classification of 
Lucian's Works— 3. The Limits of Satire — 4. Lucian's 
Philosophy and Religion— 5. Characteristics. Ap- 
pendix : Lucian's Knowledge ol Latin 

Homer. 

The Iliad of Homer. Rendered 
into English Prose for the use of those 
who cannot ^ read the original. By 
Samuel Butler, Author of 'Erewhon,' 
etc. Crown 8vo. , 7s. bd. 

The Odyssey of Homer. Done 
into English Verse. By William Mor- 
ris. Crown S\o., 65. 



Horace. — The Works of Horace, 
rbndbrbd into English Prose, With 
Life, Introduction and Notes. By William 
CoUTTS, M,A. Crown 8vo., 5s. net. 

Lang^. — Homer and the Epic, By 
Andrew Lano. Crown 8vo., 95. net. 

Lucan. — The Pharsalia of Lucan. 

Translated into Blank Verse. By Sir 
Edward Ridley. 8vo., i+s. 

Mackail. — Select Epigrams frcm 
the Greek Anthology. By J. W. Mac- 
kail. Edited with a Revised Text, Inuo- 
duction, Translation, and Notes. Svo., 165. 

Rich. — A Dictionary of Roman and 
Greek Antiquities. By A. Rich, B.A. 
With 2000 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo., ts. nt- 1. 

Sophocles. — Translated into English 
Verse. By Robert Whitelaw, M.A., 
Assistant Master in Rugby School. Cr. Svo.> 
8j. 6rf. 

Tyrrell. — Dublin Translations 
INTO Greek and Latin Verse. Edited 
by R. V. Tyrrell. 8vo., 6*. 

Virgil. 

The ^Eneid of Virgil. Translated 
into English Verse by John Conington. 
Crown 8vo., 6j. 

The Poems of Virgil. Translated 
into English Prose by John Conington. 
Crown 8vo., 6j. 

The .-Eneids of Virgil, Done into 
English Verse. By William Morris. 
Crown 8vo., 65. 

The JEneid of Virgil, freely trans- 
lated into English Blank Verse. By 
W. J. Thorn HILL. Crown 8vo., ts. net. 

The ^neid of Virgil, Translated 
into English Verse by James Rhoades. 
Books I. -VI. Crown 8vo., 5s. 
Books VII.-XII. Crown 8vo., 5*. 

The Eclogues and Georgics of 
Virgil. Translated into English Prose 
by J. W. Mackail, Fellow of Ballio! 
College, Oxford. i6mo., 5J. 



Wilkins. — The Growth 



of the 

S. 8vo.,6i$. 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 19 



Poetry and the Drama. 



Armstrong: (G. F. Savage). 

Poems : Lyrical and Dramatic. Fcp. 
8vo., 6s, 

King Sa ul . (The Tragedy of I srael , 
Part L) Fcp. 8vo., 51. 

King Da vid, (The Tragedy of I srael , 
Part IL) Fcp. 8vo., 65. 



Goethe. 

The First Part of the Tragedy 
OF Faust in English. By Thos. E. 
Webb, LL.D., sometime Fellow of Tri- 
nity College ; Professor of Moral Philo- 
sophy in the University of Dublin, etc. 
New and Cheaper Edition, with The 
Death of Faust, from the Second Part. 
Crown 8vo., 6s. 



King Solomon. 
Israel, Part III.) 



(The Tragedy of 
Fcp. 8vo., 65. 



Ugone : a Tragedy. Fcp. 8vo., 65. 

A Garland from Greece : Poems. 
Fcp. 8vo., ys. 6d, 

Stories OF Wich'Loiv : Poems. Fcp. 

8vo., 7s. 6d, 

Mephistopheles in Broadcloth : 
a Satire. Fcp. 8vo., 45. 



By Eva 



Gore- Booth.— /* oem s. 

GoRE-BooTH. Fcp. 8vo., 5s. 

Ingelow Oean). 

Poetical Works, Complete in 
One Volume. Crown 8vo., 6i. net. 

Lyrical and other Poems, Selec- 
ted from the Writings of Jean Ingelow. 
Fcp. 8vo., 2s. bd, cloth plain, 3s. cloth gilt. 



One in the Infinite: 
Crown 8vo., 7 J. 6d. 



a Poem. 



Lang (Andrew). 

Grass of Parnassus. 
2s. 6d. net. 



Fcp, 8vo., 



Armstrong. — The Poetical Works 
OF Edmund y. Armstrong, Fcp. 8vo., 55. 



Arnold. — The Light of the World : 
or, The Great Consummation. By Sir 
Edwin Arnold. With 14 Illustrations 
after Holman Hunt. Crown 8vo., 6,$. 



Barraud. — The Lai- of the 

KxiGHTS. By the Rev. C. W. Barraud, 
S.J., Author of ' St. Thomas of Canterbury, 
and other Poems '. Crown 8vo., 4s. 



Bell (Mrs. Hugh). 

Chamber Comedies : a Collection 
of Plays and Monologues for the Drawing 
Room. Crown 8vo., 6s 

Fairy Tale Plays, and Ho\v to 
Act Them, With 91 Diagrams and 52 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., y. 6d. 



Coleridge. — S elections from. 

With Introduction by Andrew Lang. 
With 18 Illustrations by Patten Wilson. 
Crown 8vo., 3s. 6ti. 



The Blue Poetry Book. Edited 
by Andrew Lang. With 100 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 6j. 

Layard and Corder.— Songs in 

Many Moods, By Nina F. Layard ; The 
Wandering Albatross, etc. By Annie 
Corder. In One Volume. Crown 8vo., 5s. 

Lecky. — Poems, By the Right Hon. 
W. E. H. Lecky. Fcp. 8vo., 5*. 

Lytton (The Earl of), (Owen 
Meredith). 

The Wanderer. Cr. Svo., 105. 6d. 

LuciLE. Crown 8vo., 105. 6rf. 

Selected Poems. Cr. 8vo., 105. 6<f. 

Macaulay. — La ys of Ancient Rome^ 
with 'Ivry' Ai\d * The Armada \ By 
Lord Macaulay. 

Illustrated by G. Scharf. Fcp. 410., los. 6rf. 
Bijou Edition. 

i8mo., 25. 6(f. gilt top. 
Popular Edition. 

Fcp. 4to., td. sewed, is. cloth. 
Illustrated by J. R. Weguklin. Crown 

8vo., IS. 6d. 

Annotated Edition. Fcp. 8vo., is. sewed, 

IS. 6d. cloth. C^n^r^n]^ 

Digitized by VjOOv LC 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Poetry and the 

MacDonald (George, LL.D.). 

A Book of Strife^ in the Form of 
THE Diary of an Old Soul ; Poems. 
i8mo., ^J. 

Rampolli : Growths from a Long- 
Planted Root: being Translations, New 
and Old (mainly in verse), chiefly from the 
German ; along with * A Year's Diary of 
an Old Soul '. Crown 8vo., 6j. 

Moffat— Cj^/CA-^T-rCj^/CAfr: Rhymes 
and Parodies. By Douglas Moffat. 
With Frontispiece by Sir Frank Lockwood, 
Q.C., M.P.. and 53 Illustrations by the 
Author. Crown 8vo, 2J. 6rf. 

Moon. — Poems of Love and Home, 
etc. By George Washington Moon, 
Hon. F.R.S.L., Author of ' Elijah,' etc. 
i6mo., 25. 6rf. 

Morris (William). 
POETICAL WORKS— Library Edition. 
The Earthly Paradise. 4 vols. 
Crown 8vo., 65. each. 

The Life and Dea th of Jason. 

Crown 8vo., 6s. 

The Defence of Guenevere, and 

other Poems. Crown 8vo., 65. 

The Story OF Sigurd THE Volsung, 
AND The Fall of the Nibluscs. Cr. 
8vo., 6i. 

Poems hy the IV ay, and Love is 

EvorG//. Crown 8vo., 6s. 
The Odyssey of Homer. Done 

into English Verse. Crown 8vo.. 65. 
The yENEiDS of Virgil. Done 

into English Verse. Crown 8vo., 6s. 
The Tale of Beowulf, sometime 

King of the Folk of the Wedbrgba ts. 

Translated by William Morris and A. 

J. Wyatt. Crown 8vo., 6s. 



Dram a — continued. 



U^shit.— Lays and Legends. By E. 
Nesbit (Mrs. Hubert Bland). Firj^i 
Series. Crown 8vo., 3s* td. Second Scrie-- 
With Portrait. Crown 8vo., 5s. 



Riley (James Whitcomb). 
Old Fashioned Roses . 



Poems- 



Certain of the Poetical Works may also be 
had in the following Editions :— 

The Earthly Paradise. 

Popular Edition. 5 vols. i2mo., 25s.; 

or 5s. each, sold separately. 
The same in Ten Parts, 25s.; or 2S. 6^. 

each, sold separately. 
Cheap Edition, in i vol. Crown 8vo., 

65. net. 

Poems BY I HE Way. Square crown 

8vo., 6s. 
*^* For Mr. William Morris's Prose 
Works, see pp. 22 and 31. 



i2ino., 5S. 
The Golden Year, From the 
Verse and Prose of James W^hitcomb 
Riley. Compiled by Clara E. L\ugh- 
LiN. Fcp. 8vo., 5s. 

Romanes.— -4 Selection from the 
Poems of George John Komanbs, .u.A.. 
LL.D., F.R.S. With an Introduction by 
T. Herbert W^arren, President of Mag- 
dalen College, Oxford. Crown 8vo., 4s. td. 

Russell.— 'Sc^A^A'^T-^ ON the Sonnet: 
an Anthology. Compiled by the Rev. 
Matthew Russell, S.J. Crown 8vo.. 
3s. 6d. 

Samuels.— Shadows, and Other 
Poems. By E. Samuels. With 7 Ulus- 
uations by W. Fitzgerald^ M.A. Cro^-n 
8vo., 3s. td. 

Shakespeare. 
Bowdlers Family Shakespeare. 
With 36 Woodcuts, i vol. 8vo., M^- 
Or in 6 vols. Fcp. 8vo., 21s. 
Shakespeare s Sonnets. Recon- 
sidered, and in part Rearranged, with 
Introductor>' Chapters and a Reprint of 
the Original 1609 Edition, by Samuel 
Butler, Author of 'Erewhon'. ' 8%o., 
I OS. bd. 

, The Sha kespea re Bir thda y Book. 

I By Mary F. Dunbar. 32mo., is. 6rf. 

Wagner.— 77/£ yisELUNCEN Rl^c. 

Done into English Verse by Reginald 
Rankin, B.A. of the Inner Temple, Barris- 
ter-at-Law. Vol. I. Rhine Gold and Val- 
kyrie. Fcp. 8vo., 4s. td. 

Wordsworth. — Selected Poems. 

By Andrew Lang. With Pbotogra\Tiie 
Frontispiece of Rydal Mount. With 16 
Illustrations and numerous Initial Letters. 
By Alfred Parsons, A.R.A. Crovr-n Svo., 
gilt edges, 3s. 6rf. 

Wordsworth and Coleridge. ->^ 

Description of the Wordsworth asd 
Coleridge Manuscripts in the Pos- 
session OF Mr. T. Norton Longman. 
Edited, with Notes, by W, Hale Whitj. 
With 3 Facsimile^ Reproductions. 4to» 
los. td. Digitized by VjOOQ , 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 2X 



Fielion, Humour, &e. 



Anstey. — yocES Populi, Reprinted 
from * Punch '. By F. Anstey, Author of 
* Vice VersiL \ First Series. With 20 Illus- 
trations by J. Bernard Partridge. Crown 
8vo., 35. 6d. 

Beaconsfield (The Earl of). 
Novels and Tales. Complete 
in II vols. Crown Svo., is. td, each. 



Vivian Grey. 
The Young Duke, etc. 
Alroy, Ixion, etc. 
Contarini Fleming, 

etc. 
Tancred. 



Sybil. 

Henrietta Temple. 

Venetia. 

Coningsby. 

Lothair. 

Endymion. 



Birt, — Castle Czvargas : a Ro- 
mance. Being a Plain Story of the Romantic 
Adventures of Two Brothers, Told by the 
Younger of Them. Edited by Archibald 
BiRT. Crown 8vo., 6i. 

*Chola.' — A New Divinity, and 
OTHER Stories of Hindu Life, By 
*Chola'. Crown 8vo., 2J. 6</. 

Churchill. — Savrola : a Tale of the 
Revolution in Laurania. By Winston 
Spencer Churchill. Crown 8vo., 6j. 

Diderot. — Rameau's Nephew: a 
Translation from Diderot*s Autographic 
Text. By Sylvia Margaret Hill. Crown 
8vo., 3s. 6rf. 

Dougall. — Beggars All. By L. 
Dougall. Crown 8vo., 35. 6 J. 

Doyle (A. Conan). 

Micah Clarke: A Tale of Mon- 
mouth's Rebellion. With 10 Illustra- 
tions. Cr. 8vo., 3*. td. 

The Captain of the Polestar^ 
and other Tales. Cr. 8vo., 35. td. 

The Refugees: A Tale of the 
Huguenots. With 25* Illustrations. Cr. 
Svo., 3 J. W. 

The Stark Munro Letters, Cr. 
8vo, 3s. td. 
Farrar (F. W., Dean of Canter- 
bury). 

Darkness and Dawn: or, Scenes 
in the Days of Nero. An Historic Tale. 
Cr. 8vo., 65. net. 

Gathering Clouds : a Tale of the 

Days of St. Chrysostom. Cr. 8vo., 65. net. 

Fowler (Edith H.). 
The Young Pretenders. A Story 
of Child Life. With 12 Illustrations by 
Sir Philip Burne-Jones, Bart. Crown 
8vo., 6s. 
The Professor^ s Children. With 
24 Illustrations by Ethel Kate Burgess. 
Crown 8vo., 65. 



Francis. — Yeoman Fleetwood. By 
M. E. Francis, Author of * In a North- 
country Village,' etc. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

Froude. — The Two Chiefs of Dun- 
boy: an Irish Romanceofthe Last Century. 
By James A. Froude. Cr. 8vo., 31. td. 

Gurdon. — Memories and Fancies : 
Suffolk Tales and other Stories ; Fairy 
Legends; Poems; Miscellaneous Articles. 
By the late Lady Camilla Gurdon, Author 
of • Suffolk Folk- Lore '. Crown 8vo., 5J. 

Haggard (H. Rider). 

Black Heart AND White HEARTy 
AND other Stories. With 33 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

Swallow : a Tale of the Great Trek. 
With 8 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

Dr, Therne. Crown 8vo., 35. 6^f. 

Heart of the World. With 15 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6^. 

fOAN Haste. With 20 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 

The People of the Mist. With 
16 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 

Montezuma^ s Da ughter. With 24 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 

She. With 32 Illustrations. Crowo 
8vo., 3s. td. 

Allan Quatermain. With 31 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 

Maiwa's Revenge. Cr. 8vo., js. 6d. 

Colonel Quaritch^ V.C. With 

Frontispiece and Vignette. Cr. 8vo., 3s. td. 

Cleopatra. With 29 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 

Beatrice. With Frontispiece and 
Vignette. Cr. 8vo., 3s. td. 

Eric Brighteyes. With 51 Illus- 
trations. Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 

Nada the Lily. With 23 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 

Allan's Wife. With 34 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 35. td. 

The Witch's Head. With 16 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 

Mr. Meeson's Will. With 16 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 
Dawn. With 16 Illustrations. Cr. 
8vo., 3s. td. 

Haggard and Lang.— The World's 

Desire. By H. Rider Haggard and 
Andrew Lang. With /27 JlUratrations. 
Crown 8vo., 35. 6;)/gitized by VjOOV^ 



82 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Fiction, Humour, &o.—cofi/imieo(. 



Harte. — /^ t/ze Carquinez Woods. '■ 
By Bret Harte. Crown 8vo., 3*. 6d. ' 

Hope. — T/fE Heart of Princess 
OsRA. By Anthony Hope. With 9 Illus- ' 
trations. Crown 8vo., 65. 

Jerome. — Sketches ix Lavender : 
Blub and Green. By Jerome K. Jerome, i 
Crown 8vo., 35. 6rf. 

Joyce. — Old Celtic Romances. 
Twelve of the most beautiful of the Ancient \ 
Irish Romantic Tales. Translated from the ' 
Gaelic. By P. W^ Joyce, LL.D. Crown , 
8vo., 35. 6d. 

Lang^. — A Monk of Fife ; a Story 
of the Days of Joan of Arc. By Andrew 
Lang. With 13 Illustrations by Selwyn 
Image. Crown 8vo., 35. td. 

Levett-Yeats (S.), 

The Chevalier UAuriac, Crown 
8vo., 3 J. 6rf. 

The Heart of Denise, and other 
Tales. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

Lyall (Edna). 

The Autobiography of a Slander. 
Fcp. 8vo., IS., sewed. 
Presentation Edition. With 20 Illustra- 
tions by Lancelot Speed. Crown 
8vo., 25. td. net. 

The Autobiography of a Truth. 

Fcp. 8vo., ij., sewed; is. 6d., cloth. 
DoREEN. The Story of a Singer. 

Crown 8vo., 65. 

Wayfaring Men. Crown 8vo., 65. 

Hope the Hermit : a Romance of 
Borrowdale. Crown 8vo., bs. 

Mason and Lang. —Parson Kelly, i 

By A. R. W. Mason and Andrew Lang. 
Crown 8vo., 6s. 

Max Miiller. — Deutsche Liebe 

(Gkrman Lor/:): Fragments from the 
Papers of an Alien. Collected by F. Max 
Muller. Translated from the German by 
G. A. M. Crown 8vo. , 5s. 



Melville (G. J. Whyte). 



The Gladiators. 
The Interpreter. 
Good for Nothing. 
The Queen *s Maries. 



Holmby House. 
Kate Coventry. 
Digby Grand. 
General Bounce. 



Crown 8vo., is. 6d. each. 



Merriman. — Flotsam: A Story of 
the Indian Mutiny. By Henry Seton 
Merriman. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. 

Morris (William). 
The Sundering Flood. Cr. 8vo., 

js.6d. 

The Water of the Wondrocs 
Isles. Crown 8vo., js. 6d. 

The Well a t the World's End. 
2 vols. 8vo., 2Ss. 

The Story of the Glittering 
Plain, which has been also called The 
Land of the Living Men, or The Acre of 
the Undying. Square post 8vo., 51. net. 

The Roots of the MouNTAisSy 
wherem is told somewhat of the Lives of 
the Men of Burgdale, their Friends, their 
Neighbours, their Foemen, and their 
Fellows-in-Arms. Written in Prose and 
Verse. Square crown 8vo., 8i. 

A Tale of the House of the 
WoLFiNGS, and all the Kindreds of the 
Mark. Written in Prose and Verse. 
Square crown 8vo., 6s. 

A Dream of John Ball^ and a 
King's Lesson'. i2mo., li. 6rf. 

News from Nowhere; or, An 
Epoch of Rest. Being some Chapters 
from an Utopian Romance. Post 8vo., 
15. td. 

The Story of Grettir the Strom-. 
Translated from the Icelandic by Eirikr 
Magm'sson and William Morris. Cr. 
8vo., 5s. net. 
♦,* For Mr. William Morris's Poetical 
Works, see p. 20. 

Newman (Cardinal). 
Loss and Gain: The Story of a 
Convert. Crown 8vo. Cabinet Edition, 
65. ; Popular Edition, 35. bd. 
Callista: a Tale of the Third 
Century. Crown 8vo. Cabinet Edition, 
65. ; Popular Edition, 35. 6d. 

Phillipps-WoUey.— 5ao4/>: a Legend 
of the Lone Mounuin. By C. Phillipps- 
WoLLEY. With 13 Illustrations. Crown 
8vo. , 3 J. 6rf. 

Raymond (Walter). 
Two Men o' Men dip. Cr. 8vo., 6^. 
No S( J UL Abo ve Mone y, C r. 8vo., 6^. 

Reader. — Priestess and Qvees: 

a Tale of the White Race of Mexico ; being 
the Adventures of Ignigene and her Twenty- I 
six Fair Maidens. By Emily E. Reade" I 
Illustrated by Em^y K. Reader. Crowi^ 
8vo., 6s. Digitized by VjOOQ , 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



23 



Fietion, Humour, &o. — continued. 



Sewell (Elizabeth M.). 

A Glimpse of the World. Amy Herbert. 
Laneton Parsonage. Cleve Hall. 

Margaret Percival. Gertrude. 

Katharine Ashton. Home Life. 

The Earl's Daughter. After Life. 

The Experience of Life. Ursula. Ivors. 
Cr. 8vo., I J. 6d. each cloth plain. 25. td, 
each cloth extra^ gilt edges. 



Walford (L. B,)^-continued. 
I The Baby's Grandmother, 

I 8vo., 25. td. 

Cousins. Crown 8vo., 25. 6d. 



Cr. 



Cr. 



Somenrille and Ross.—Some Ex- 

PSRIENCBS OF AN IRISH RM. By E. (E. 

SoMERyiLLE and Martin Ross. With 
31 Illustrations by E. CE. Somerville. 
Crown 8vo., 65. 

Stebbing^. — Probable Tales. \ 
Edited by William Stebbing. Crown ; 
Svo., 4s. 6d. 

Stevenson (Robert Louis). 

The Strange Case of Dr.Jekyll 
AND Mr, Hyde, Fcp. Svo., is. sewed. 
15. td. cloth. 

The Strange Case of Dr. 
Jbkyll and Mr, Hyde; with other 
Fables. Crown 8vo., 35. td. 

More Neiv Arabian Nights — The \ 
Dynamiter. By Robert Louis Steven- 
son and Fanny van de Grift Steven- 
son. Crown 8vo., 35. td. 

The Wrong Box. By Robert 
Louis Stevenson and Lloyd Osbourne. 
Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 

Suttner. — Lay Down Your Arms 
(Die Waffen Nieder) : The Autobiography 
of Martha von Tilling. By Bertha von 
Suttner. Translated by T. Holmes. 
Cr. 8vo., I J. td. 

Taylor. — Early Italian Love- 
stories. Taken from the Originals by 
Una Taylor. With 13 Illustrations by 
Henry J. Ford. Crown 410., 15s. net. 

TroUope (Anthony), 
The Warden. Cr. 8vo., 15. 6rf. 
Barchester Towers. Cr.8vo.,i5.6^. 

Walford (L. B.). 

The Intruders. Crown 8vo., 65. 

Leddy Marget. Crown 8vo. , 25. M. 

IvA Kildare: a Matrimonial Pro- 
blem. Crown 8vo,, 6i. 

Mr. Smith: a Part of his Life. 
Crown 8vo., 25. td. 



Tro ublesome Da ughters. 

8vo., 25. td. 

Pauline. Crown 8vo., 25. 6rf. 

Dick Netherby. Cr. Svo., 25. 6^.. 

The History of a Week. Cr. 
8vo. ^s. td. 

A Stiff-necked Generation. Cr^ 

8vo. 25. td. 

Nan^ and other Stories. Cr. Svo.,. 

25. td. 

The Mischief of Monica. Cr. 

8vo., 25. td. 

The One Good Guest. Cr. Svo. 

25. td. 

^ Ploughed, and other Stories. 
Crown 8vo., 25. td. 

The Ma tchmaker. Cr. Svo., 25. 6fl?. 

Ward. — One Poor Scruple. By 
Mrs. Wilfrid Ward. Crown 8vo., 65. 

Watson. — Pacing and 'Chasing: a 
Collection of Sporting Stories. By Alfred. 
E. T. Watson, Editor of the * Badminton 
Magazine '. With j6 Plates and 36 Illustra- 
tions in the Text. Crown 8vo., 75. td. 

Wejrman (Stanley). 

Sophia. With Frontispiece. Crown 
8vo., 65. 

The House of the Wolf. With 

Frontispiece and Vignette. Crown 8vo., 
is.td. 

A Gentleman of France. With 
Frontispiece and Vignette. Cr. 8vo., 65. 

The Red Cockade. With Frontis- 
piece and Vignette. Crown 8vo., 65. 

Shrewsbury. With 24 Illustra- 
tions by Claude A. She4»person. Cr. 

°'"^ "' Digitized by CiOOgle 



8vo., 65. 



24 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Popular Seienoe (Natural History, &c.). 



Beddard. — The Structure and 
Classification of Birds. By Frank E. 
Beddard, M.A., F.R.S., Prosector and 
Vice-Secretary of the Zoological Society 
of London. With 252 Illustrations. 8vo., 
2ii. net. 

Butler. — Our Household Insects, 
An Account of the Insect-Pests found in 
Dwelling- Houses. By Edward A. Butler, 
B.A., B.Sc. (Lond.). With 113 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 3J. td. 



Hartwig^ (Dr. George) — continued. 



Volcanoes and 
With 30 Illustrations. 



Earthquakes, 
Cr. 8vo., zs. 6d, 



Wild Animals of the Trop/cs. 
With 66 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 35. 6</. 

Helmholtz; — Popular Lectures on 
Scientific Subjects, By Hbrmann vos 
Helmholtz. With 68 Woodcuts. 2 vols. 
Cr. 8vo., 35. bd. each. 



Furneaux (W.). 
The Outdoor World; or The I Hudson (W. H.). 
Young Collector's Handbook. With 18 
Plates (16 of which are coloured), and 549 
Illustrations in the Text. Crown 8vo., 
61. net. 



Butterflies and Moths (British). . 
With 12 coloured Plates and 241 lUus- { 
trations in the Text. Crown 8vo., 65. net. I 

Life in Ponds and Streams. ' 
With 8 coloured Plates and 331 Illustra- 
tions in the Text. Crown 8vo., 6j. net. 

Hartwis (Dr. George). 

The Sea and its Living Wonders. 
With 12 Plates and 303 Woodcuts- 8vo., 
^i. net. 

The Tropical World. With 8 
Plates and 172 Woodcuts. 8vo., 75. net. 

The Polar World. With 3 Maps, 
8 Plates and 85 Woodcuts. 8vo., 71. net. 

The Subterranean World. With 
3 Maps and 80 Woodcuts. 8vo., 75. net. 

The Aerial World. With Map, 8 I 
Plates and 60 Woodcuts. 8vo., 71. net. ' 

Heroes of the Polar World. With ! 
19 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 2s. 

Wonders of the Tropica l Fores ts. \ 
With 40 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 2j. 

Workers under the Gro und.W ith \ 

29 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 25. 

Marvels Over our Heads. With I 
29 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 2s. ! 

Sea Monsters and Sea Birds. 

With 75 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 2s. 6d. \ 

Denizens of the Deep. With 117 i 
Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 21. 6</. 



British Birds. With a Chapter 
on Structure and Classification by Frank 
E. Beddard, F.R.S. With 16 Plates (8 
of which are Coloured), and over 100 Illus- 
trations in the Text. Cr. 8vo., 6j. net. 



Birds in London. With 17 Plates 
and 15 Illustrations in the Text, by Bryan 
Hook, A. D. McCormick, and from 
Photographs from Nature, by R. B. 
Lodge. 8vo., 12s. 

Proctor (Richard A.). 

Light Science for Leisure Hours. 
Familiar Essays on Scientific Subjects. 3 
vols. Cr. 8vo., 5i. each. Vol. I., Cheap 
Edition. Crown 8vo., 35. 6<£. 



Fami- 
Crown 

Crown 



Rough Wa ys made Smooth. 
liar Essays on Scientific Subjects. 
• 8vo., 35. 6<f. 

Pleasant Wa ys in Science. 
8vo., 35. 6d. 

Na ture Studies. By R. A. Proc- 
tor, Grant Allen, A. Wilson, T. 
Foster and E. Clodd. Crown 8vo., 
3i.6d. 

Leisure Readings. By R. A. Proc- 
tor, E. Clodd, A. Wilson, T. Fostep 
and A. C. Ran yard. Cr. 8vo., 3*. td, 

*^* For Mr. Proctor's other books see pp. 13, 
28 and 31, and Messrs, Longmans & Co.'s 
Catalogue of Scientific Works. 



Stanley.—^ Familiar History of 
Birds. By E. Stanley, D.D.. formerly 
Bishop of Norwich. With 160 Illustrations, 

'^'■*^*'-3*Di^ied by Google 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS 25 



Popular Seienee (Natural History, &e.) — con/tnuecl. 

Wood (Rev. J. G.) — continued. 



Wood (Rev. J. G.). 

Homes without Hands: A Descrip- 
tion of the Habitations of Animals, classed 
according to the Principle of Construc- 
tion. With 140 Illustrations. 8vo., 
7J. net. I 

Insects at Home : A Popular Ac- ' 
count of British Insects, their Structure, \ 
Habits and Transformations. With 700 I 
Illustrations. 8vo., 75. net. 

Out of Doors; a Selection of 
Original Articles on Practical Natural 
History. With 11 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 
35. W. 

Strange Dwellings : a. Description 
of the Habitations of Animals, abridged 
from * Homes without Hands '. With 60 
Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 35. 6d. 



Petland Revisited. With 33 
Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 35. td. 

Bird Life of the Bible, With 32 
Illustrations. Cr. 8vo. , 35. td. 

Wonderful Nests, With 30 Illus- 
trations. Cr. 8vo., 35. 6</. 

Homes under the Ground, With 

28 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 35. ttd. 

Wild Animals of the Bible. With 

29 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 35. td. 

Domestic Animals of the Bible, 
With 23 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 31. 6rf. 

The Branch Builders, With 28 
Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 25. 6<f. 

Social Habitations and Parasitic 
Nrsts. With 18 Illustrations. Cr.Svo., 21. 



Works of Referenee. 



Gwilt — An Encyclopedia of Ar- 
chitecture. By Joseph Gwilt, F.S.A. 
With 1700 Engravings. Revised (1888), 
with Alterations and Considerable Addi- 
tions by Wyatt PAbwoRTH. 8vo., 2 IS. net. 



Maunder (Samuel). 

Biographical Treasury, With 
Supplement brought down to 1889. By 
Rev. James Wood. Fcp. 8vo., 6j. 

Treasury of Geography, Physical, 
Historical, Descriptive, and Political. 
With 7 Maps and 16 Plates. Fcp. 8vo., 6s. 

The Treasury of Bible Know- 
ledge. BytheRev.J. Ayre, M.A. With 
5 Maps, 15 Plates, and 300 Woodcuts. 
Fcp. 8vo., 6i. 

Treasury of Knowledge and Lib- 
RARY OF /Reference. Fcp. 8vo., 65. 

Historical Treasury, Fcp.8vo.,65. 



Maunder (Samuel) — continued. 

Scientific and Literary Trea- 
sury. Fcp. 8vo., 65. 



The Treasury of Botany, Edited 
by J. Lindley, F.R.S., and T. Moors, 
F.L.S. With 274 Woodcuts and 20 Steel 
Plates. 2 vols. Fcp. 8vo., 12s. 



Rog^et. — Thesa ur us of English 
IVoRDS AND Phrases. Classified and Ar- 
ranged so as to Facilitate the Expression of 
Ideas and assist in Literary Composition. 
By Peter Mark Rooet, M.D., F.R.S. 
Recomposed throughout, enlarged and im- 
proved, partly from the Author's Notes, and 
with a full Index, by the Author's Son, 
John Lewis Roget. Crown 8vo., 10s. fid. 



'Willich.-PopuLAR Tables forgiving 
information for ascertaining the value 01 
Lifehold, Leasehold, and Church Property, 
the Public Funds, etc. By Charles M. 
WiLLicH. Edited by H. Bence Jones. 
Crown 8vo., loi. 6d. 

Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



«6 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Children's Books. 



Buckland. — Tt^o LittleRuita wa ys. 

Adapted from the French of Louis Des- 
NOYBRS. By James Buckland. With iio 
Illustrations by Cecil Aldin. Cr. 8vo., 6s. 

Crake (Rev. A. D.). 
Edwy the Fair; or, The First 
Chronicle of ifBscendune. Cr. 8vo. , 25. td, 

Alfgar the Dane; or, The Second 
Chronicle of iSscendune. Cr. 8vo. 2i. 6</. 

The Rival Heirs : being the Third 
and Last Chronicle of iSscendune. Cr. 
8vo., IS. 6d. 

The House OP Walderne. A Tale 
of the Cloister and the Forest in the Days 
of the Barons' Wars. Crown 8vo., 24. td. 

Brian Fitz- Count. A Story of 
Wallingford Castle and Dorchester 
Abbey. Cr. 8vo., 2j. 6rf. 

Henty (G.A.). — Edited by. 

Yule Logs : A Story-Book for Boys. 
By Various Authors. With 61 Illus- 
trations. Crown Svo., 6s. 

Yule Tide Yarxs: a Story-Book: 
for Boys. By Various Authors. With 
45 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

Lang (Andrew). — Edited by. 

The Blue Fairy Book, With 138 
Illustrations. Crown 9vo., 5s. 

The Red Fairy Book, With 100 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 
The Green Fairy Book. With 99 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 
The Yellow' Fairy Book, With 

104 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 
The Pink Fairy Book. With 67 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 
The Bl ue For try Book. With 1 00 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

The Blue Poetry Book, School 

Edition, without Illu<;trations. Fcp. 8vo., 
2S. 6^. 

The True Story Book. With 66 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 
7 HE Red Tr ue Stor 1 * Book. With 

100 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 
The Animal Siory Book. With 

67 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 
The Red Book of Animal Stories. 

With 65 IllustratioiK. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

The Arabian Xights Entertain- 
AfBA TS. With 66 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 6s. 



Meade (L. T.). 

Daddy's Boy, With 8 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. 

Deb and the Duchess, With 7 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. M. 

The Beresford Prize. With 7 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 35. td. 

The House of Surprises. With 6 

Illustrations. Crown Svo. 3s. td. 

Praeger (Rosamond). 

The Adventures of the Three 
Bold Babes: Hector, Honoria and 
Alisander. a Story in Pictures. With 
24 Coloured Plates and 24 Outline Pic- 
tures. Oblong 4to., 3s. 6</. 

The Further Doings of the 
Three Bold Babies. With 24 Coloured 
Pictures and 24 Outline Pictures. Oblong 
4to., 3s. M. 



Stevenson. — A Child's Garden of 
Verses. By Robert Louis Stevenson. 
Fcp. 8vo., 5s. 



Upton (Florence K. and Berth.a). 

The Adventures of Tivo Dutch 
Dolls and a ' Colli ivogg\ With 31 
Coloured Plates and numerous Illustra 
tions in the Text. Oblong 4to., 6s. 



The Golliivogg's Bicycle Club. 
With 31 Coloured Plates and numerous 
Illustrations in the Text.* Oblong 410.. 
6s. 

The Gollih'ogg at the Seaswf- 
With 31 Coloured Plates and numerous 
Illustrations in the Text. Oblong 410. . 65. 

The Golliivogg in War. With 31 
Coloured Plates. Oblong 4to., 6s. 

The Vege-Mens Revenge. With 
31 Coloured Plates and numerous Illus- 
trations in the Te5tl.^ Oblong 4to., 6s. 

Digitized by VjOOg, ®^ 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



27 



The Silver 

Crown 8vo. 31. 6rf. 
Arnold*! (81r Edwin) Beat and Landi. With 

71 Illustrations, y. 6d. 
Batfehof ■ (W.) Blotfraphloal Stadlei. y. 6d. 
Bagehot's (W.) Bconomlo StndlM. y. 6d. 
Ba^hori(W.) I ttenuT Studies. With Portrait. ' 

3 vols, y. 6d. each. 
BalMr*t (Sir 8. W.) Bl^t Yean In Ceylon. | 

With 6 Illustrations. 3^. 6d, 
Baker's (Blr B. W.) Bllle and Hound In Ceylon. , 

With 6 Illustrations, y. 6d. 1 

Barlntf-Qould*! (Roy. 8.) Curioue Mythe of the | 

Middle Ages. y. 6d. 
BarlBtf-Ooald*t (Boy. 8.) Origin and Develop- | 

ment of Bell^ons Belief. 2 vols. y.6d.eAx\x. 
Becker*! (W. A.) Oallns : or, Roman Scenes in the 

Time of Augustus. With 26 lUus. y. 6d. 
Beeker*! (W. A.) Charlelee: or, Illustrations of 

the Private Life of the Ancient Greeks. 

With 26 Illustrations. 3;. 6d. 
Bent*! (J. T.) The Bulned Oltlee of Ha!liona. , 

land. With 117 Illustrations, y. 6d. 
Brae!ey*s (Lady) A Voyage In the * Sunkeam *. 

With 66 Illustrations, y. 6d. 
Churchliri (W. 8.) The Story of theHalakand 

Field Force,1897. With 6 M aps and Plans. 3^. 6d. ' 
Clodd'e (B.) Story of Creation: a Plain Account I 

of Evolution. With 77 Illustrations, y. 6d. 
Conybeare (Boy. W. J.) and Howeon*! (Very 

Boy. J. 8.) Ufe and Bpletles of St. Paul. 

With 46 Illustrations, y. Od. 
Dougaire (L.) Beggan All : a Novel. 3;. 6d. \ 
Doyle*! (A. Conan) Hlcah Clarke. A Tale of 

Monmoutn's Rebellion. With 10 Illusts. y.6d. ' 
Doyle*! (A. Conan) The Captain of the Poleetar, 

and other Tales. 31. 6d. 
Doyle*! (A. Conan) The Ref^eee : A Tale of 1 

the Huguenots. With 2.s Illustrations. 316^. 
Doyle*! (A. Conan) The Stark Hunro Letten. 

y. 6d. 
Fronde*! (J. A.) The Hletory of England, from 

the Fall of Wolsey to the Defeat of the 

Spanish Armada. 12 vols. 3J. td. each. 
Fronde*! (J. A.) The Englleh In Ireland. 3 vols. 

loj. (id. \ 

Fronde*! (J. A.) The Divorce of Catherine of ' 

Aragon. y. 6d. 
Fronde*! (J. A.) The SpanUh Story of the • 

Armada, and other Essays, y. 6d. I 

Fronde*! (J. A.) Short Studies on Great Sub- 
ject!. 4 vols. 3;. 6d. each. | 
Froude*! (J. A.) Oceana, or England and Her I 

Colonic!. With 9 Illustrations, y. bd. 
Froude*! (J. A.) The Council of Trent. 3;. dd. 
Froude*! (J. A.) The Life and Letters of 

Erasmus. 3;. td. 
Froude*s (J. A.) Thomas Carlyle : a History of 

his Life. 

1795-1835. 2 vols. js. 1834-1881. 2 vols. 7J. I 
Froude*s (J. A.) Cssar : a Sketch. 3;. dd. 
Froude*s (J. A.) The Two Chlefli of Dunboy : an 

Irish Romance of the Last Centurv. 3^. (yd. , 
01eig*s (Bev. 0. B.) Life of the' Duke of 

Wellington. With Portrait. 3J. dd. 1 

erevllle*s (C. C. F.) Journal of the Belgns of \ 

King George lY., King William lY., and 

Queen Victoria. 8 vols. , 3;. dd. each. 
IIaggard*s (H. B.) She : \ History of .Adventure. ; 

With 33 Illustrations, y.dd. * 1 

HagiUFd*! (H. B.) Allan (^uatermaln With : 

20 Illustrations. 3^. dd. 



Library. 

EACH VOL.UME 

Haggard*! (H. B.) Colonel Quaritch, V.C. : a 
Tale of Country Life. With Frontispiece 
and Vignette. 3;. dd. 

Haggard*! (H. B.) Cleopatra. With 29 Illustra- 
tions, y. dd. 

Haggard*! (H. B.) Brio Brighteyee. With 51 
Illustrations, y. dd. 

Haggard*! (H. B.) Beatrice. With Frontispiece- 
and Vignette. 3;. dd. 

Haggard*! (H. B.) Allan*s Wife. With 34 Illus- 
trations. 3r. dd. 

Haggard (H. K.) Heart of the World. With 

15 Illustrations. 3^. dd. 

Haggard*s (H. B.) Hontexnma's Daughter. With 

25 Illustrations. 3^. dd. 
Haggard*s (H. K.) The Witch's Head. With 

16 Illustrations, y. dd. 
Haggard*s (H. K.) Mr. Heeson*s WIU. With 

16 Illustrations. 3;. dd. 

Haggard*s (H. B.) Hada the Uly. With 23 

Illustrations, y. dd. 
Haggard's (H.B.) Dawn. With i6IUusts. 3^.6^. 
Haggard*s(H.B.) The People of the Hist. With 

16 Illustrations. 3;. dd. 
Haggard*s (H. B.) Joan Haste. With 20 Illus- 
trations, y. dd. 
Haggard (H. B.) and Lang*s (A.) The World's 

Desire. With 27 Illustrations, y. dd. 
Harte*s (Bret) In the Carqulnes Woods and 

other Stories, y. dd. 
Helmholtz's (Hermann von) Popular Lectures 

on Sdentlllc Subjects. With 68 Illustrations. 

2 vols. 31. dd. each. 
Hornung*s (E. W.) The Unbidden Ouest. 3;. dd. 
Howltt*s (W.) Yislts to Bemarkable Places. 

With 80 Illustrations, y. dd. 
Jefferies* (B.) The Story of My Heart: My 

Autobiography. With Portrait, y. dd, 
Jefferies* (B.) Field and Hedgerow. With 

Portrait, y. dd. 
Jefferies* (B.) Bed Deer. With 17 lUusts. y. dd, 
Jefferies* (B.) Wood Magic: a Fable. With 

Frontispiece and Vignette by E. V. B. 35. dd. 
Jefferies (B.) The Tollers of the Field. With 

Portrait from the Bust in Salisbury Cathedral. 

y. dd. 
Kaye (Sir J.) and Malleson*s (Colonel) Hlstorv^ 

of the Indian Mutiny of 1857-8. 6 vol& 

y. t>d. each. 
Knight's (B. F.) The Cruise of the <Alerte>: 

the Narrative of a Search for Treasure on 

the Desert Island of Trinidad. With 2 

Maps and 23 Illustrations, y. dd. 
Knight's (E. F.) Where Three Bmplres Meet: a 

Narrative of Recent Travel in Kashmir, 

Western Tibet, Baltistan, Gilgit. With a Map 

and 54 Illustrations. 3;. dd. 
Knight's (E. F.) The ' Falcon ' on the Baltic : a 

Coasting Voyage from Hammersmith to 

Copenhagen in a Three-Ton Yacht. With 

.VI ap and 11 Illustrations, y. dd. 
Kbstlin's (J.) Life of Luther. With 62 Illustra- 
tions and 4 Facsimiles of MSS. y. dd. 
Lanrs (A.) Angling Sketches. With 20 Illustra> 

tions. V. dd. 
Lang*s (A.) Custom and Myth : Studies of Early 

Usage and Belief, y. dd. 
Lang's (A.)CockLaneand Common-Sense, y.dd, 
Lant's (A.) The Book of Dreams and Ohosts« 

3^. di. Digitized by vjOOQ ^ 



38 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



The Silver Lihrsxy— continued, 

LanO (A.) 1 Monk of Fife : a Story of the ~ ...--.- - 



a _ 
Days of Joan of Arc. With 13 Illusts! y. 6d. 

Lang! (A.) Mytti,RUDal, and RoiUlon. a vols. 7s. 

Loot (J. 1.) and Olntterbaok'i (W. i.) B. 0. 
18Vr, 1 Ramble In Brltlth Oolombia. With 
Maps and 75 IJIustratioos. y. 6d 

LeTett-Veato' (B.) The CheYaller D'Aorlae. 

Macaalay'i (Lord) Complete Works. ' Albany ' 

Edition. With la Portraits. la vols. y. 6d. 

each. 
Macaolay'i (Lord) Btiayi and Layi of Inelent 

Rome, etc. With Portrait and 4 Illustrations 

to the • Lays '. 31. 6d. 
If aeleod*! (H. D.) Blemente of BanldB|. 3; . 6d. 
Marbot*! (Baron de) Memoirs. Translated. 

a vols. 7s. 
Varshman's (J. 0.) Memoirs of Blr Henry 

HaTeloek. 3; . 6d. 
Merlvale*s (Dean) History of the Romans 

under the Empire. 8 vols, y, 6d. each. 
Merriman*s (H. 8.) Flotsam : A Tale of the 

Indian Mutiny, y. 6d. 
tMlU*s (J. S.) PoUtleal Eoonomy. 3r. 6d, 
MlU*s (J. 8.) System of Logle. 3^. 6d, 
'Mllner*s (Geo.) Oonntry Pleasures : the Chroni- 
cle of a Year chiefly in a (harden, y. 6d. 
Bansen's (F.) The First Grossing of Greenland. 

With 14a Illustrations and a Map. y. 6d. 
'PhllUpps-WoUey^s (0.) Snap: a Legend of the 

Lone Mountain With 13 Illustrations. y,6d. 
Prootor*s (R. A.) The Orbs Around Us. y. 6d. 
Proetor*s (R. A.) The Expanse of HeaYon. y. 6d. 
Prootor's (R. A.) Light Bclenoe for Leisure 

Hoars. First Series, y. 6d. 
Proctor's (R. A.) The Moon. 3;. 6d. 
Proetor*s (R. A.) Other Worlds than Onrs. y,6d. 



Proetor*s (R. A.) Our Plaoe among laflnltM 

a Series of E^ays contrasting our LM 

Abode in Space and Time with the Infiniti 

around us. y, 6d» 
Prootor*s (R. A.) Other 8ans than Onn. 3^. 6 
Proetor*B (R. A.) Rough Ways made Smoot 

y.6d. 
Proetor's(R.A.)PleasantWaysln Selanee. 3^.6 
Proetor*B (R. A.) Myths and Manrala of Al 

tronomy. 35. 6d. 
Proctor's (R. A.) Mature 8tudles. 3^. 6^. 
Proctor's (R. A.) Ulsure Readings. By R. i 

Proctor, Edward Clodd, Andrci 

Wilson, Thomas Foster, and A. ( 

Ranyard. With Illustrations. 3J. 6d, 
Roesettl*B (Maria F.) A Shadow of Danta. y. & 
Smith's (R. Bosworth)Oarthags and tha Cartti 

ginlans. With Maps, Plans, etc. 3^. 6d. 
Stanley's (Bishop) FamUlar History of BMi 

With 160 Illustrations. 3;. 6d. 
Stephen's (L.) The Playground of Europe (Tb 

Alps). With 4 Illustrations. 35. 6d. 
StOYenson's (R. L.) The Strange Casa of Di 

Jekyll and Mr. Hyde; with other Fables, y. (m 
StoTenson (R. L.) and Osboume's (LL) Tb 

Wrong Bos. 3^. 6<f. 
StCYenson (Robert Louis) and Stovonsoa' 

(Fanny Tan de Grift) More Hew Arabisi 

Bights.— The Dynamiter. 3;. 6d, 
TrsTelyan's (Sir O. 0.) The Early History 

Gharles James Fox. 35. 6</. 
Weyman's (Stanley i.) The House of cb( 

Wolf: a Romance. 3^. 6d. 
Wood's (Be¥. J. G.) Petland Bevlslted. Witt 

33 Illustrations, y. 6d. 
Wood's (RsT. i. G.) Strange DweUlngs. Witt 

60 Illustrations, y. 6d. 
Wood's (Rev. J. G.) Out of Doore. With 11 

Illustrations. 3^. 6d. 



Cookery, Domestie 

Acton. — Modern Cookery, By 1 
Eliza Acton. With 150 Woodcuts. Fcp. | 
8vo., 43. td. 

Ashby. — Health in the Nursery. 
By Henry Ashby, M.D., F.R.C.P., Physi- 
cian to the Manchester Children's Hospital, 
and Lecturer on the Diseases of Children at 
the Owens College. With 25 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 3*. 6</. 

Buckton. — Comfort and Cleanli- 
ness: The Servant and Mistress Question. 
By Mrs. Catherine M. Buckton. With 
14 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 25. 

Bull (Thomas, M.D.). 
Hints to Mothers on the Man- 

AGEAfBA T OF THEIR HEALTH DURING THE 

Period of Pregnancy. Fcp. 8vo., is. 6d. 
The Maternal Management of\ 
Children in Health and Disease. I 
Fcp. 8vo., 15. 6d. I 

De Salis (Mrs.). ' 

Canes and Confections a la \ 

Mode. Fcp. 8vo., is. td. ' 



Management, &e. 

Dc Salis (Mrs.).— co«<i«««tf. 
Dogs: A Manual for Amateurs. 

Fcp. 8vo., 15. td. 
Dressed Game and Poultry a la 

Mode. Fcp. 8vo., 15. 6rf. 
Dressed Vegetables a la A/ode, 

Fcp. 8vo., 15 6rf. 
Drinks Ala Mode Fcp.Svo., i5.6t/. 
Entries a la Mode, Fcp. 8vo., 

15.6^. 

Floral Decorations. Fcp. bvo., 

IS.td. 

Gardening a la Mode. Fcp. 8vo. 

Part I., Vegetables, 15. bd. Part H.. 

Fruits, 15. €i. 
National Viands A LA Mode, Fcp. 

8vo., 15. 6d. 
New-laid Eggs, Fcp. 8vo., is. 6rf. 
Oysters ^ la Mode. Fcp. 8vo., 

15. 6rf. 
Soups *and Dressed Fish .^ li 

Mode. Fcp. Syo», 15. 6</j 

Digitized by LjOOQ IC 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



29 



Cookery, Domestic Management, &e. — coniinued. 



|De Salis {}A.'EiS,y— continued. 



SAyOURIES A LA MODE. Fcp. 8vO., 

Puddings and Pastry^ la Mode, 
Fcp. 8vo., 15. W. 

Sweets and Supper Dishes a la 
Mode, Fcp. 8vo., is, 6d. 

Tempting Dishes for Small In- 
comes, Fcp. 8vo., 15. W. 

Wrinkles and Notions for 

E VERY Household, Crown 8vo. , is, 6d. 

Lear. — Maigre Cookery, By H. L. 

Sidney Lear. i6mo., 25. 
Mann. — Manual of the Principles 

OF Practical Cookery. By E. E. Mann. 

Crown 8vo. 15. 



Poole. — Cookery for the Diabetic. 
By W. H. and Mrs. Poole, With Preface 
by Dr. Pavy. Fcp. 8vo., 25. 6rf. 

Walker Qane H.). 

A Book for Every Woman, 
Part L, The Management of Children 

in Health and out of Health. Crown 

8vo., 25. 6rf. 
Part H. Woman in Health and out of 

Health. Crown 8vo., 25. fid. 

A Handbook for Mothers : 
being Simple Hints to Women on the 
Management of their Health during 
Pregnancy and Continement, together 
with Plain Directions as to the Care of 
Infants. Crown 8vo., 25. 6</. 



Miscellaneous and Critical Works. 

Butler (Samuel), 



Armstrong^. — Essa ys and Sketches. 
By Edmund J. Armstrong. Fcp. 8vo., 55. 

'RdL'gAlot.— Literary Studies, By 
Walter Bagehot. With Portrait. 3 vols. 
Crown 8vo., 35. td, each. 

Barins-Gould.— Curious Myths of 
the Middle Ages. By Rev. S. Baring- 
Gould. Crown 8vo., 3s. 6d. 

Bajrnes. — Shakespeare Studies ^ 
and other Essays. By the late Thomas 
Spencer Baynes, LL.B., LL.D. With a I 
Biographical Preface by Professor Lewis 
Campbell. Crown 8vd., 75. 6rf. 

Boyd (A. K. H.) C A.K.H.B.'). 

And see MISCELLANEOUS THEOLOGICAL 
WORKS, p. 32. 

Autumn Holidays of a Country 

Parson. Crown 8vo., 35. td. 
Commonplace Philosopher. Cr. 

8vo., 35. 6d. 
Critical Essays of a Country 

Parson. Crowr 8vo., 3s. 6d. 
East Coast Days and Memories, 

Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. 
Landscapes^ Churches, and Mora- 
lities. Crown 8vo., 35. bd. 
Leisure Hours in Toiyn. Crown 

8vo., 35. 6d. 
Lessons of Middle Age. Crown 

8vo., 3s. td. 
Our Little Life. Two Series. 

Crown 8vo., 35. 6rf. each. 
Our Homely Comedy: and Tra-\ 

gedy. Crown 8vo., 35. td. 
J^ECREA TIONS OF A COUNTR yPaRSON, 

Three Series. Crown 8vo., 35. 6d, each. 



Erewhon. Crown 8vo., 55. 

The Fair Haven. A Work in De- 
fence of the Miraculous Element in our 
Lord's Ministry. Cr. 8vo., 75. fid. 

Life and Habit., An Essay after a 
Completer View of Evolution. Cr. 8vo., 
75. 6d, 

Evolution^ Old and New, Cr. 
8vo., 105. td. 

Alps and Sanctuaries of Pied- 
mont and Canton Ticino. Illustrated. 
Pott 4to., ro5. td. 

Luck, or Cunning, as the Main 
Means of Organic Modification? 
Cr. 8vo., 75. td. 

Ex VoTO. An Account of the Sacro 
Monte or New Jerusalem atVarallo-Sesia. 
Crown 8vo., 10$. td. 

Selections from Works, with Re- 
marks on Mr. G. J. Romanes' ' Mental 
Evolution in Animals,' and a Psalm of 
Montreal. Crown 8vo., 7$. td. 

The Authoress of the Odyssey, 

WHERE AND WHEN ShE WROTE, WHO 

She was, the Use She made of the 
Iliad, and how the Poem grew under 
Her hands. With 14 Illustrations. 
8vo., 105. td. 

The Iliad of Homer, Rendered 
into English Prose for the use of those 
who cannot read the original. Crown 
8vo., 7s. td. 

Shakespeare* s Sonnets, Recon- 
sidered, and in part Rearranged, with 
Introductory Chapters and a Reprint ot 
the Original 1609 Edition.., 8vo. . 
Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



30 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Miscellaneous and Critioal Works— contmuei/. 



Calder. — Accident ix Factories : | 
its Distribution, Causation, Compensation, 
and Prevention. A Practical Guide to the | 
Law and to the Safe- Guarding, Sale- 
Working, and Safe- Construction ofFactory ' 
Machinery, Plant, and Premises. With 20 i 
Tables and 124 Illustrations. By John 
Calder. Crown 8vo,, ys. 6rf. net. ; 

Charities Register, The Annual, 

AXD Digest: being a Classified Register 
of Charities in or available in the Metropolis. ; 
With an Introduction by C. S. LocH, Sec- 
retary to the Council of the Charity Organi- 
sation Society, London. 8vo., +s. 

Comparetti. — The Traditional 
Poetry of the Finns. By Domenico 
Comparetti. Translated by Isabella M. 
Anderton. With Introduction by Andrew 
Lang. 8vo., i6s. 

Dickinson. — A'in(; Arthir in Corn- 
ii'Ai.L. By W. HowsHip Dickinson, M.D. 
With 5 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 45. 6^. 

Evans. — The Ancient Stone Im- 
plements^ IVeafons and Ornaments of 
Great Hritain. By Sir John Evans, , 
K.C.B., D.C.L.. LL.D., F.R.S., etc. 
With 537 Illustrations. Medium 8vo., 285. 

Haggard. — A Farmer's Year : 

being ' his Commonplace Book for 1898 '. 
By H. Rider Haggard. With 36 Illus- 
trations by G. Leon Little. Crown 8vo., 
7s. biL net. 

Hamlin. — A Text-Book of the 
History of Architecture. By A. D. F. 
Hamlin, A.M. With 229 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 7 J. td. 

Haweis. — Music and Morals. By 

the Rev. H. R. Haweis. With Portrait of 
the Author, and numerous Illustrations, 
Facsimiles, and Diagrams. Cr. 8vo., 65. net. 

H odgson. — OuTCAs t Ess a i 's a nd 
Verse Translations. By Shadworth 
H. Hodgson, LL.D. Crown 8vo., 85. 6rf. 

Hoenig. — Inquiries concerning 
THE Tactics of the Fcture. Fourth 
Edition, 1894, of the ' Two Brigades'. By 
Fritz Hoenig. With 1 Sketch in the Text 
and 5 Maps. Tr^tnslated by Captain H. M. 
Bower. Hvo., 15s. net. 

HuUah. — The History of Modern 
Mrs/c. By John Hullah. 8vo., 8j. 6d. 

Jefferies (Richard). 
Field and Hedgerow: With Por- 
trait. . Crown 8vo., 35. bd. 
The Story of My Heart: my 
Autobiography. With Portrait and New 
Preface by C. J. Longman. Cr. 8vo., 35. td. 



Jefferies (Richard) — continued. 

Red Deer, With 17 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vOm 35. 6rf. 

The Toilers of the Field. With 
Portrait from the Bust in Salisbury 
Cathedral. Crown 8vo., 55. td^ 

Wood Magic : a Fable. With Fron- 
tispiece and Vignette by E. V. B. Crown 
8vo. , 35. 6rf. 

Jekyll (Gertrude). 

IVooD AND Garden: Notes and 
Thoughts, Practical and Critical^ of a 
Working Amateur. With 71 lUustratic-iv 
from Photographs by the Author. Svo 
I05. td. net. 

Home and Garden : Notes and 
Thoughts, Practical and Critical, of a 
Worker in both. With 53 Illustration^ 
from Photographs by the .\uthor. 8vo., 
los. 6^/. net. 

Johnson. — The Patentees A/an- 
UAL : a Treatise on the Law and Practice 
of Letters Patent. By J. & J. H. Johnso.v» 
Patent Agents, etc. 8vo., los. 6<f. 

Joyce. — The Origin and History 
OF Irish Names of Places. By P. W. 
Joyce, LL.D. 2 vols. Crown 8 vo., 55. each. 

Kingsley. — A History of French 
Art, 1 100- 1 899. By Rose G. Kingsley. 
8vo., 124. 6rf. net. 

Lang (Andrew). 

Letters to Dead Authors. Fcp. 

8vo., 25. 6d. net. 
Books and Bookmen. With 2 

Coloured Plates and 17 Illustrations. 

Fcp. 8vo., 25. 6d. net. 
Old Friends. Fcp. 8vo., 2s. 6d. net. 
Letters on Literature. Fcp. 

8vo., 2s. 6d. net. 
Essays IN Little. With Portrait 
of the Author. Crown 8vo., 2s. 6<f. 

Cock Lane and Common-Sen'^e. 

Crown 8vo., 35. 6rf. 

The Book of Dreams and Ghosj>. 

Crown 8vo., 3J. bd. 

Macfarren. — Lectures on Har- 
MONY. By Sir George A. Macfarren. 

8V0., I2S. 

Marquand and Frothingham. — A 

Text-Boor of the History of HcuLr- 
TURE. By Allan Marquand, Ph.D., and 
Arthur L. Frothingham, Junr., Ph.D., 
Professors of Archeology and the History 
of Art in Princetown University. With 113 
Illustrations. CrowivSvo., 6s. 

9le 



Digitized by VjOOQl£ 



MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



31 



Miseellaneous and Critical Works — continued. 



Max MilUer (The Right Hon. F.). 
iN^niA : \Vhat can it Teach Us ? 

Crown 8vo., 55. 

Chips from a German Workshop, 

Vol. L Recent Essays and Addresses. 
Crown 8vo., 5J. 

Vol. n. Biographical Essays. Crown 
8vo., 5s. 

Vol. in. Essays on Language and Litera- 
ture. Crown Svo., 5s. 

Vol. IV. Essays on Mythology and Folk 
Lore. Crown 8vo., 5s. 
Contributions to the Science ofi 

Mythology. 2 vols. 8vo., 325. 

Milner. — Country Pleasures : the 
Chronicle of a Year chiefly in a Garden. 
By George Milner. Crown 8vo., 35. bd. 

Morris (William). 

Signs op Change. Seven Lectures 
delivered on various Occasions. Post 
8vo., 45. 6d. 

Hopes and Fears for Art. Five 
Lectures delivered in Birmingham, Lon- 
don, etc., in 1 878- 1 88 1. Cr 8vo., 4s. td. 

An Address delivered at the 
Distribution of Prizes to Students 
OF the Birmingham Municipal School 
OF Art on 2ist February, 1894. 8vo., 
25. 6</. net. 

Art and the Beauty of the 

Earth: a Lecture delivered at Burslem 

8vo., 



Town Hall, on October 13, 1881 
25. bd. net. I 

Some Hints on Pattern-Design- 
ing : a Lecture delivered at the Working 1 
Men's College, London, on loth Decem- 
ber, 1 88 1. Svo., 25. 6rf. net. I 

Arts and Crafts Essays. By , 
Members of the Arts and Craftu Exhibition 
Society. With a Preface by William ' 
Morris. Crown 8vo., 25. td. net. 

Orchard. — The Astronomy of 
Miltox's ' Paradise Lost\ By Thomas , 
N, Orchard, M.D., Member of the British 
Astronomical Association. With 13 Illus- 
trations. 8vo., 6s. net. 

Pollock.— /.J A'£ Austen: her Con- 
temporaries and Herself An Essay in 
Criticism. By Walter Herries Pollock. 
Crown 8vo., 35. 6^/. net. 

Poore (George Vivian), M.D., 
F.R.C.P. 
Essays ON Rural Hygiene. With 

13 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 65. 6^. 
The Dwelling House. With 36 

Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3s. td. 



Richter. — Lectures on the Na- 
tional Gallery. By J. P. Richter. 
With 20 Plates and 7 Illustrations in the 
Text. Crown 4to., 95. 

RossettL— -4 Shadoiv of Dante: 
being an Essay towards studying Himself, 
his World and his Pilgrimage. By Maria 
Francesca Rossetti. With Frontispiece 
by Dante Gabriel Rossetti. Crown 
8vo., 35. 6d, 

Soulsby (Lucy H. M.). 
Stray Thoughts on Reading. 

Small 8vo., 25. 6d. net. 
Stra y Thoughts for Girls. i6mo., 

15. td. net. 
Stra y Thoughts for Mothers and 

Teachers. Fcp. 8vo., 25. 6d. net. 
Stray Thoughts for Invalids. 

i6mo., 25. net. 

Southey. — The Correspondence of 
RoBERi Southey with Caroline Bowles. 
Edited, with an Introduction, by Edward 
DowDEN, LL.D. 8vo., 145. 

Stevens. — On the Stoivage of Ships 
AND THEIR CARGOES. With Information re- 
garding Freights, Charter- Parties, etc. By 
Robert White Stevens, Associate-Mem- 
ber of the Institute of Naval Architects. 

8vO., 215. 

Turner and Sutherland.— TViE: De- 

YELO PATENT OF AUSTRALIAN LITERATURE. 

By Henry Gyles Turner and Alexander 
Sutherland. With Portraits and Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 55. 

Van Dyke. — A Text-Boo at on the 
History of Pal\tixg. By John C. Van 
Dyke, Professor of the History of Art in 
Rutgers College, U.S. With no Illustra- 
tions. Crown Svo, 65. 

Warwick. — Progress in 11 omen's 
Educa tion in the British Emfire : being 
the Report of Conferences and a Congress 
held in connection with the Educational 
Section, Victorian Era Exhibition. Edited 
by the Countess of Warwick. Cr. 8vo. 65. 

White. — An Examination of the 
Charge of Apostacy agaia'st Words- 
worth. By W. Hale White, Editor of 
the ' Description of the Wordsworth and 
Coleridge MSS. in the Possession of Mr. 
T. Norton Longman '. Crown 8vo., ^s. 6d. 

Willard. — His tor )■ op Modern 

Italiax Art. By .\shton Rollin.s 
Willard. With Photogravure Frontis- 
piece and 2^ Full-page Illustrations. 8vo., 

'^'•"*''' Digitized by Google 



32 MESSRS. LONGMANS & CO.'S STANDARD AND GENERAL WORKS. 



Misoellaneous Theologioal Works. 

•*• For Church of England and Roman Catholic Works see Messrs. Longmans & Co.'s^ 

Special Catalogues, 

Balfour. — The Foundations of 
Belief: being Notes Introductory to the 
Study of Theology. By the Right Hon. 
Arthur J. Balfour, M.P. 8vo., 125. 6d, 



Boyd (A. K. H.) (* A.K.H.B.'). 

Counsel and Comfort from a ' 
City Pulpit. Crown 8vo., y.bd. \ 

SUNDA y A FTER NOONS IN THE Pa RISH j 

Church of a Scottish University I 
X:iTY. Crown 8vo., 35. M. I 

Changed Aspects of Unchanged j 
yytuTHS. Crown Svo., 35. 6rf. 

Graver Thoughts of a Country^ 
Parson. Three Scries. Crown 8vo., | 
35. td. each. 

Present Dav Thoughts. Crown 

8vo.. 35. 6d. 

Seaside Musings, Cr. 8vo., 3s. 6d, ^ 

' To Meet the Da v ' through the ' 
Christian Year : being a Text of Scripture, 
with an Original Meditation and a Short 
Selection in Verse for Every Day. Crown | 
8vo., 4s. 6rf. j 

Campbell. — Religion in Greek Li- \ 
terature. By the Rev. Lewis Campbell, 
M.A., LL.D., Emeritus Professor of Greek, I 
University of St. Andrews. 8vo., 155. 

Davidson. — Theism, as Grounded in 
Human Nature, Historically and Critically ' 
Handled. Being the Burnett Lectures , 
for 1892 and 1893, delivered at Aberdeen. | 
By W. L. Davidson, M.A., LL.D. 8vo., 155. 



Gibson. — The Abbe de Lamennais. \ 
and the Liberal Catholic Movement 
IN France. By the Hon. W. Gibson. 
With Portrait. 8vo., 125. 6rf. 

Lang (Andrew). 

The Ma king of Religion. 8vo. 

Modern Mythology : a Reply to 
Professor Max Miiller. 8vo., 95. I 

Mac Donald (George). ' 

Unspoken Sermons, Three Series. | 
Crown 8vo., 35. 6rf. each. 

The Miracles of oufi^-'ToMD,' 
Crown 8vo., 35. 6d. 

2,500/5/00. 




Martineau (James). 
Hours of Thought on Sacrei> 

Things : Sermons, 2 vols. Crown Svo.p 

35. bd, each. 
Endeavours AFTER the Christian- 

Life. Discourses. Crown 8vo., 7s. td. 
The Seat of Authority in RE'\ 

UGION. Svo., 145. I 

Ess A Ys, Reviews^ and Addresses. 

4 Vols. Crown 8vo., 75. 6rf. each. 
Home Prayers, with Two Services 

for Public Worship. Crown 8vo., 3J. fw/. 

Max Muller (F.). 

The Six Systems of Ind/an 
Philosophy. 8vo., i8s. 

Contributions to the Science o 
Mythology. 2 vols. 8vo., 323. 

The Origin and Growth of Reli- 
gion^ as illustrated by the Religions ot 
India. The Hibbert Lectures, delivered 
at the Chapter House, Westminster 
Abbey, in 1878. Crown 8vo., 55. 

Introduction to the Science of 
Religion : Four Lectures delivered at the 
Royal Institution. Crown 8vo., 5^. 

Natural Religion. The Gifford 
Lectures, delivered before the University 
of Glasgow in 1888. Crown 8vo., 5s. 

Physical Religion, The Gifford 
Lectures, delivered before the University 
of Glasgow in 1890. Crown 8vo., 55. 

Anthropological Religion, The 
Gifford Lectures, delivered before the Uni- 
versity of Glasgow in 1891. Cr. 8vo., 51. 

Theosophy, or Psychological Re- 
ligion. The Gifford Lectures, delivered 
before the University of Glasgow in 1892. 
Crown 8vo., 5J. 

Three Lectures on the Vedanta 
Philosophy^ delivered at the Roy a) 
Institution in March, 1894. 8vo., 53. 

RAMAKRismiA : His Life and Sa ) - 

iXGS. Crown 8vo., 5s. 

Romanes. — Thoughts on Religion. 
By George J. Romanes, LL.D., F.R.S. 
Crown 8vo., 4s. 6rf. 

Vivekananda. — Yoga Philosophy : 

Lectures delivered in New York, Winter of 
1895-96, by the SWAMI VIVEKANANDA, 
on Raja Yoga ; or. Conquering the Internal 
Nature; also Patanjali's Yoga Aphorisni>it 
with Commentaries. Crown 8vo, 35. 6d. 

Williamson. — The Grea t Lah : 

A Study of Religious Origins and of the 

nity underlying them. By William 

LIAMSON. 8vo., t4l©Q[^ 






Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



Digitized by VjOOQ IC 



SII!!^SSsr^s»^ 



202 MoinLibror 




;,::,(.* to iii« Cifculaiw-' 0«i> 




FORM NO. DD6, 60m, 1/83 



;^;;;^Sty of California. Berkeley 

'^''"'^' BERKELEY. CA 94720 



VC 49307 



fiEREfUU. U8IUIIY • 0^ BERKELEY I 



BOOO*iOAi.l5 



.1 > 



* *.. . 




Google 



-LSJ 
