The Pentagon Papers (Part -IV-C-2c) (U.S. Department of Defense, 1971)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration: Report of the Office of the Secretary of Defense Vietnam Task Force (The Pentagon Papers) (https://nara-media-001.s3.amazonaws.com/arcmedia/research/pentagon-papers/Pentagon-Papers-Part-IV-C-2c.pdf).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vols.)
Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968
 (16 Vols.)
 2. Military Pressures Against NVN (3 Vols.)
 c. November - December 1964
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 IV . C, 2, ( c)

 EVOLUTION OF THE FAR

 NOVl!;;\1BER - DECDffiEF. 1964

 PART III

.' TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Sec Dei" Cent Nr.
 '295
 x-____________
 ~
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 en
 C

 i
 ::0
 <
 >
 Z
 >
 r-
 <
 (I)
 (I)
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(
 ~LITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NVN: NOVEJvIBER - DECEMBER 1964

 SUMMARY and A}~LYSIS

 In the late fall of 1964, President Johnson made a tentative decis i on
 in favor of limited military pressures a gainst North Vietnam . He acted on
 the consensus recommendation of his principal advisors, a consensus achieved
 by a process of compromising alternatives into a 10l-Test·'common- denominator
 proposal at the sub-cabinet and cabinet level, thereby precluding any real
 Presidential choice among viable options. The choices he was given all
 included greater pressures against North Vietnmn . The Presidential decision
 itself was for a limited and tightly controlled two-step build - up of pressures .
 The first phase involved an intensification of existing harassment activities
 w·ith reprisals; the second, which was approved in principle only, iVas to be
 a sustained, slo"ldy escalating air campaign against the North . The spectrum
 of choice could have run from (a) a judgment that the situation i n the South
 "lvas i rretrievable and, hence, a decision to begin the withdravTal of U. S.
 forces ; to (b) a judgment that the maintenance of a non-cow~unist South
 Vietn8m was indispensable to U. S. strategic interests and, therefore, required
 a massive U.S . intensification of the war both in the North and in the South.
 The extreme wi thdra,val option "I'TaS rej ected almost "I'Ti thout surfacing for
 consideration since it was in direct conflict with the independent, non-
 communist SVN commitments of NSfu~ 288 . The opposite option of massive involve -
 ment, which was essentiaJ.ly the JCS recommendation at an early point in these
 deliberations, was shunted aside because both its risks and costs were too
 high .

 Short of those extremes, hmvever, were two other alternat i ves that
 were briefly considered by the Horking Group as fal lback positions but
 r ejected before they "I,rere fully explored . While both came into some con-
 flict with the cor~mitments to South Vietn~m of N&A-M 288 , they could have
 been justified as flol-ring from another long-standing U.S . conviction,
 namely that ultimately the "lvar would have to be won in the South by the
 South Vietnamese. These fal lback positions Ivere outlined in the follol-Ting
 m~rmer :

 "1 . To hol d the situation together as long as possible so that
 we have time to strengthen other areas of Asia .

 "2. To take forceful enough measures in the s i tuation so that
 \ve' emerge · from it , even in the worst case , with our
 standing 8,S the principal helper against Communist expan-
 sion as little impaired as possible .

 "3. To rrLq,ke clear .. . to nations, in Asia particularly, that
 failure in South Vietnmll, if i.t comes, ,'Tas due to special
 l ocal factors that do not apply to other nations we are
 cow.mi.tted to defend .. . . "

 i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

In operational terms the first would have meant holding the line- - placing
an i mmediate , 101<7 ceiling on the number of U.S . personnel in SVN, and
taking vigorous efforts to build on a stro!l.-ger base else. . rhere , possibly
Thailand . The second alternative would have b~en to undertake some spec -
tacular, highly visible supporting action like a limited-duration selective
bomb ing campaign as a last effort to save the South; to have accompanied
it with a propaganda campaign about the unwim1ability of the . . rar given the
GVN ' s ineptness and ; then, to have sought negotiations through compromise
and neutralization . . rhen the bombing failed . Neither of these options was
ever developed .

 The recommendation of the Principals to the President left a gap
between the maximum objective of NSJLM 288 and the marginal pressures against
the North being proposed to achieve that objective. There are two by no
means contradictory explanations of this gap .

 One explanation is the I·ray in which pressures and the controlled use
 of force were viewed by the Principals . There is some reason to believe that
 the Principa ls thought that carefully calculated doses of force could bring
about predictable and desirable responses from Hano i. The threat j~pli cit
 in minim1..lJu but increasing amounts of force ( " slo. . r sQueeze" ) would , i t "ras
hoped by some, ultimately bring Hanoi to the t able on terms favorable to the
U.S. Underlying this optimistic view was a significant underestimate of
the level of the DRV commitment to victory in the South , and an overestimat e
of the effectiveness of U.S. pressures in weakening that resolve . The
ass umption ~,as that the threat value of limited pressures coupled wi th
declarations of firm re solve on our part would be sufficient to force the
DRV into maj or conc.ess ions . Therefore, the U. S. negotiating posture could
be a tough one . Another factor which , no doubt, corr@ended the proposal to
the Admini stration was the relatively low-cost--in political terms--of such
action. F1..rrthermore , these limited measures would give the GVN a temporary
breathing spell, it was thought, in which to regroup itself, both politicall y
and militarily should stronger action involving a direct confrontation between
the bro Vietna..lJls be reQuired at some future date . And l astly , it ,.,as the
widely shared belief that the recommendation was a moderate solution that
did not foreclose future options for the President if the measures did not
fully achieve their intended results. The JCS differed fr om this vievl on
t he grounds that if ,.,e were really interested in affecting Hanoi 's will ,
we would have to hit hard at i ts capabiliti es .

 A second explanation of the gap bet. . reen ends and means is a more simple
one. In a phrase , we had run out of alt ernatives other than pressures.
The GVN vras not r eforming , ARVN . . las being hit nard , further U. S. aid and
advice did not seem to do the trick , and som~thing was nee ded to keep the
GVN afloat until \<7e . . rere ready to decide on further actions at a l ater
date. Bombing the North would fit that bill, and make it look l ike we tried.

 ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The President vlaS cautious and equivocal in approaching the decision;
 Indicative of his reluctance to widen the U.S. cOfimitment and of his des ire
 to hedge his bets Ivas the decision to make phase II of the new policy
 contingent on GVJlT reform and i mprovement . P..mbFl.ssador Taylor was sent back
 to Saigon in December after the White House meetings with the understanding
 that the U. S. Government did not believe:

 "that I·re should incur the ri sks . which are inherent in any
 expansion of hostilities without first assuring that there is
 a government in Saigon capable of handling the serious problems
 involved in such an expansion and of exploiting the favorable
 effects which may be anticipated .... "

 As with the discussions of the preceding six months , the decisions at
 the end of 1964 marked another step in the U. S. involvement in Vietnam.
 The follO'lving is a sUIlllllary of the November - December , 1964 and January ,
 1965 delib erat ions.
 On the eve of the November election, and after the decision not to
 r etaliate against the North for the VC attack on the Bien Hoa airbase on
 November 1, the President appointed an inter-agency working group and asked
 i t to conduct a thorough re-examination of our Vietnam policy and to present
 him ,'lith alternatives and re cormnendations as to our future course of action .
 That such a revi ew should have been undertaken so soon after the policy
 delib erations and decisions of September is at first glance surprising .
 The President , hO'\'lever , Ivas now being elected in his OHn right with an
 over"rhelming mandate and all the sense of opportunity and freedom to recon-
 sider past poli cy and current trends that such a victory invariably brings.
 In retro spec t, there appears to have been, in f act, remarkably little l ati-
 tude for r eopening the bas ic questions about U. S. involvement i n the Vietnam
 struggle . NSAM 288 did not seem open to question. In Vietnam, our now sub-
 stantial efforts and our public affirmation of resolve to see the war through
 to success had fail ed to revers e either the adverse trend of the '\'lar or the
 conti,nuing deterioration of South Vietnamese political life. The September
 deliberations had produced only a decision against precipitate action and
 had done nothing to redress the situation. Significantly, however , they had
 revealed the existence of an Administration consensus that military pressures
 aga inst the North vloul d be required at some proximate futUre date for a
 variety of reasons . Now, in November, vli th a nei·r electoral mandate and the
 abundant evidence of the i nadequacy of current measures , the President was
 once again looking for new i deas and proposals --a l ow-cost option with
 prospects for speedy , positive re sults.

 The Working Group ' s first job had been to exrunine U.S. interests and
 objectives in South Vietnam. This subject stirred some of the most heated
 debate of the entire Working Group project . At the outset, the maximum
 statement of U.S. i nterests and objectives in South Vietnam was accompanied
 by t,vo fallback positions --the first a compromise , the second merely rational-
 izat ions for withdra,·ral. The JCS representat i ve took testy except ion to

It

 TOP SECRET Sens itive
 iii
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

i ncluding the fallback posl~lons in the Group's paper and cited JCS
Memoranda on the critical importance of South Vietnam to the U.S. position
in Asia. His forceful objections were effective and they were downgraded
in the final paper w'hich , while also pointedly rej ecting the "domno theory"
as over-simplifi ~d, nevertheless, went on to describe the effect of the
fall of South Vietnam in much the same terms . Specifically pointing up
the danger to the other Southeast Asian countries and to Asia in general,
the paper concluded :

 "There is a great deal we could still do to reassure these
 countries, but the picture of a defense line clearly breached
 could have serious effects and could easily, over time, tend to
 unravel the whole Pacific and South Asian defense structures ."

In spite of these concessions, the JCS refused to associate itself with
the final formulation of interests and objectives, holding that the domino
theory Has perfectly appropriate to the South Vietna'1lese situation .

 One of the other important tasks assigned to the Working Group was the
intelligence assessment of the. effectiveness of measures against the North
in improving the situation in the South. The initial appraisal of the
intelligence community Has that "the basic elements of Cornmunist strength
in South Vietnam remain indigenous ," and that " even if severely dama,ged"
the DRV could continue to support a reduced level of VC activity . While
bombing might reduce somewhat the level of support for the VC and give the
GVN a re spite , there was very little like lihood that it would break the will
of Hanoi . The estimate was that Hanoi was confident of greater staying
power than the U,S. in a contest of attrition . These views were challenged
by the JCS member who stressed that the military damage 'of air strikes would
appreciably degrade DRV and VC capabilities. In deferen~e to this view, the
final Working Group estimate gave greater emphasis to the military effect i ve -
ness of strikes , although it was pes simistic about the extent of damage the
DRV leaders woul d be ,'lilling to incur before reconsidering their obj ecti ves.
It concluded with the assessment that there ,vas very little likelihood of
either Chinese or Soviet intervention on behalf of the DRV i f pressures
were adopted by the U.S.

 As the Working Group toiled through November i n i ts effort to develop
options , it focused on three alternative courses of action. Option A was
es sentially a continuation of rrilitary and naval actions currently underway
or authorized in the September decisions , i ncluding prompt reprisals against
the North for attacks on U.S. forces and VC " spectaculars ". It also
included a resistance to negotiations until the North had agreed in advance
to our concli tiom . Option B augmented c11Trent policies ,vi th systematic,
sustained mil itary pressures against the North and a r esistance to negoti -
ations unless I'Te could carry them on I'lhil e cont inuing the bomb ing. Option C
propos ed only a modest campaign against the North as compared with option B

 iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and was designed to bring the DRV to the negotiating table. If that
occurred the pressures were to be suspended--although with the threat of
resumption should negotiations break down.

 In the course of the month, these ' options converged and the distinctions
behreen them blurred. In particular, option A was expanded to include some
10'lv-level pressures against the North; the negotiations element of option B
was, in effect, dropped and the pressures vTere to be applied at a faster ,
l ess flexible pace; and option C was stiffened to re semble the first incar-
nation of option B--the pressures would be stronger and the negotiating
position tougher . Thus , by the end of the month when the Working Group ' s
propo sals were presented to the NSC Principals for consideration before
a recommendation viaS made to the President, all options included pressures
against the North , and, in effect, excluded negotiations in the short -run,
sinc e the terms and pre-conditions proposed in all three options were
entirely unrealistic . The policy climate i n vlashington simply was not
receptive to any suggestion that U.S . goals might have to be compromised .
And, in proposing pressures against the North , the Working Group was conscious
of the danger that they might generate compelling vTorld-vride pressure on t.he
U.S. for negotiations . How large a role the specific perception of the
President's views, validated or unvalidated, may have played in the Working
Group~s narrowing of the options i s not clear. It seems likely, however ,
that some guidance from the White House was being received .

 During the last week in November , the NSC Principals met to consider
the Working Group ' s proposals. They were joined on November 27 by Ambassador
Taylor. Taylor ' s r eport on conditions in South Vietnam was extremely bleak .
To i mprove South Vietnamese morale and confidence, and to "drive the DRV out
of its reinforcing role and obtain its cooperation i n bringing an end to the
Vi et Cong insurgency ," he urged that military pressures against the North
be adopted . His report had a considerable i mpact on the ~rincipals and
l ater on the President . As the discussions continued through the several
meetings of that week , opinion began to converge in favor of some combina-
tion of an "extended option A" and the first measures against the North of
option C.

 In the end , t he Principals decided on a two-phase recommendation to the
Pr esident. Phase I would be merely an extension of current actions with
some increased air activity by the U.S. i n Laos and tit-for-tat r eprisal s
for VC attacks on U.S . forces or other major incidents. During this period,
t he GVN would be informed of our desires for its reform and I'Then these
were 'Ivell undervTay, phase II, a campaign of gradually escalating air strikes
against the North , vTOuld begin. This proposaJ, VTas presented to the Presi-
dent on December 1. He approved phase I and gave assent, at l east in prin-
ciple, to phase II. In approving these measures, the President appears to
have been reluctant to grant final authorization for phase II until he felt
it was absolutely necessary .

 v . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 If a consensus vTas reached within the Ad.rninistration in favor of mili-
tary pressures against the North, it certainly reflected no commonly held
rationale for such action. Generally speaking the military (MACV, CINCPAC,
JCS) favored a strong campaign against the North to interdict the infiltra-
tion routes, to destroy the overall capacity of the North to support the
insurgency , and to destroy the DRV's will to continue support of the Viet
Congo 'I'he State Department (vTith the exception of George Ball) and the
civilian advisors to Secretary McNamara favored a gradually mOULDting series
of pressures that would place the North in a SlO\'T squeeze and act as both
carrot and stick to settling the war on our terms. As would be expected,
State was also concerned with the international political i mplications of
such steps. Bombing the North '\wuld demonstrate our resolve, not only to
the South Vietnamese but also to the other Southeast Asian countries and
to' China, vThose containment Has one of the i mportant justifications of the
entire American involvement . Walt Rostow, the Chairman of State's Policy
PlaPJling Council, took a slightly different vievr, . emphasizing the importance
of pres sures as a clear signal to the North and to China of U.S. determina-
tion and r esolve and its willingness to engage the tremendous power at its
disposal in support of the 1954 and 1962 Geneva agreements. Ambassador
Taylor supported strikes against the North as a means of reducing infil-
tration and as a way of bolstering South Vietnamese morale.

 As is readily apparent, there "l'TaS no dearth of r easons for striking
North. Indeed, one almost has the i mpression that there "l'Tere more reasons
than were required. But in the end, the decision to go ahead with the
strikes seems to have resulted as much from the lack of alternative pro-
posals as from any compelling logic advanced in their favor. By January,
for example, Hilliam Bundy, ,'Thile still supporting the pressures, could
only offer the following in their favor:

 lion balance we believe that such action l'Tould have some faint
 hope of r eally improving the Vietnamese situation, and, above all,
 would put us in a much stronger position to hold the next line of
 defense, namely Thailand. II _ffind it would put us in a better posi-
 tion in our Asian relationq-" since ,ve \'Tould have appeared to Asians
 to have done a lot more about it."

 It is interesting to note that during the deliberations of September
one of the preconditions to such strikes had been generally acknolvledged
as a unity of domestic American opinion in support of such Presidentially
authori zed action. During the November debates, this is no longer an
important factor. Indeed , it is openly conceded that such action is likely
to evoke opposition in both domestic and international public opinion.
Another in te:?:'esting aspect of this policy debatE" I'Tas that the question of
Consti tutional authority for open acts of ,var against a sovereign nation
"l'TaS never seriously raised.

 Phase I of the ne,vlY approved program "l'Tent into effect in mid-December.
The BARREL ROLL "armed recce" by U.S. aircraft in the laotian panhandle
began on a limited scale on December 14. It had been foreseen that the

 vi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

nwnber of sorties would slo'\·rly increase '\'ri th each succeeding week. How'-
ever, once the first week I s level of tVI'O missions of four aircraft each
was determined by Secretary McNamara, it became the guideline for the
remainder of ,December and January. Covert GVN operations along the North
Vietnamese coast were continued at about the level of the previous months
and JCS proposals for direct U.S. air and naval support were rejected.
Furthermore, the public disclosure of inforID~tion on DRV infiltration into
the South was deferred at the request of Secretary McNamara . On December 24,
the Viet Cong bombed aU. S. officers billet in Saigon killing hro Americans.
MACV, CINCPAC , the JCS, and Ambassador Taylor all called immediately for a
repri sal strike against the North of the kind authorized under phase I.
For ,reasons still not clear, the Administration decided against such a
r eprisal. Thus, in purely military terms, the phase I period turned out
to be little more than a continuation of measures already under'l'ray. (The
BARREL ROLL activity apparently was not differentiated by the DRV from
RLAF strikes until well into January.)

 One of the explanations for this failure to ftl1ly implement the
December 1 decisions was the political crisis that erupted in South Vietnam.
Ambassador Taylor had returned to South Vietnam on December 7 and i mmedi -
ately set about getting the GVN to undertake the reforms we desired, making
clear to both the civilian and military leaders that the implementation of
phase II was contingent on their efforts to revive the flagging war effort
and morale in the South . For his efforts, he 'Ivas re,\,larded with a military
purge of the civilian govern~ent in late December and rumored threats that
he '\'rould be declared personna non grata . The political crisis boiled on
into January with no apparent solution in sight in spite of our heavy
pressure on the military to return to a civilian regime. And, while Taylor
struggled '\vi th the South Vietnamese general s , the war effort continued to
decline.

 At the same time that Taylor had been dispatched to Saigon a vigorous
U.S. diplomat ic effort had been undertaken with our Asian and NA.TO allies
to inform them of the forthcoming U. S. intensiInication of the war, with
the expected eventual strikes against the North . The fact that our allies
nO,\,T came to expect this action may have been a contributing reason in the
February decision to proceed with phase II in spite of the failure of the
South Vietnamese to have complied with OUY requirements. In any case, it
added to the already considerable momentum behind the policy of striking the
North. By the end of January 1965, William BQndy, McNaughton, Taylor and
others had come to believe that we had to proceed with phase II irre spective
of vThat the South Vietnamese did.

 Clear indication that the Administration was considering some kind of
escalation came on January 25. Ambassador Taylor ,'las asked to cormnent on
a proposal to wi thdravT U. S. dependents from Saigon so as to "clear the
decks." Previously, this action , "rhich VTas nOlV approved by the JCS, was
always associated vTith pressures against the North. While there is no
indi cation of any decision at this point to move into phase II; it is clear
that the preparations were already unde~Tay.

 vii TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 (")
 :I:
 e3
 z
 o
 5
 G>
 <
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 MILITA.."RY PRESSURES 'AGAJNST NORTH VIETNAM : l-TOV 1964 - JAN 1965
IV.C. CHRONOLOGY

 EVE:N'T OR
DATE DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

16 Oct 64 Embassy Saigon Ambassador Tay lor reports greatly
 Message} JPS 303} increased infiltration from the
 Taylor to the North} including North Vietnamese
 Pre sident regulars} and a steadily worsen -
 ing situation in the South .

21 Oct 64 JCSM 893 -61~ The JCS urge Secretary McNamara to
 back military measures to seize
 control of the border areas of South
 Vietnam and to cut off the supply and
 direction of the Viet Cong by direct
 measures against North Vietnam .

27 Oct 64 JCSM 902 -64 On the basis of the new intelligence
 on infiltration levels } the JCS
 again recommend direct military pres -
 sures against the North .

 1 Nov 64 Viet Cong Attack I n a daring strike, the Viet Cong
 Bien Hoa Airbase staged a mortar attack on the l arge
 U. S. airbase at Bien Hoa} killing
 four _~ericans } destroying five
 B-57s, and damaging eight others .

 White House Decides Concerned about possib l e further
 Not to Retaliate North Vietnamese escalation and the
 uncertainty of the Red Chine se re-·
 sponse} the White House decides }
 against the advice of Ambassador
 Tayl or} not to retaliate in the tit-
 for-tat fashion envisaged by NSAM
 314. As a result of the attack} how-
 ever} an i nteragency Working Group
 of the NSC is establi shed to study
 future courses of U.S. action under
 the Chairmanship of 1-Ti l liam Bundy}
 Assistant Secretary of State for
 Far Eastern Affairs .

 3 Nov 63 Civilian Named Tran Van Huong i s named Premier in
 Premier SVN.
 First Meeting of The NSC Working Grou:p held its f irst
 NSC Working Group meeting .. Other members are Michael
 Forrestal and Marshall Green from
 viii TOP SECRET - Sensi ti.ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 EVENT OR
 DATE DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 State, John McNaughton from l SA,
 Harold Ford for CIA, and Admiral
 Lloyd Mustin from JCS. Work con-
 tinues for three weeks .

 3 Nov 64 President Re - In a l andslide victory, President
 elected J ohnson is re -elected with a nelf
 Vic e President, Hubert Humphrey .

 4 Nov 64 JC SM 933 -64 The JCS place in writing their re-
 quest for r eprisal action against
 North Vietnam in retaliation for
 the Bien Roa attack . Failure to act
 may be misinterpreted by the North
 Vi etnamese as a lack of will and
 determination in Vietnam .
14 Nov 64 CGCS Memorandum to In separate memos to the Secretary,
 SecDef, CM 258-64; the JCS r ecommend covert GVN air
 and JCSM 955 -64 strikes against North Vietnam and
 additional U. S. deployments to South
 East Asia to m~ke poss i ble implemen -
 tation of U.S. strikes should these
 .be approved .
17 Nov 64 Working Group Circu- The Working Group circulates its
 lates Draft 1I0ptionsll draft paper on the 1I0ptionsll avail -
 for Comment able to the U.S. i n South Vietnam.
 They are three : (A) continuation
 of present pol icies in the hope of
 an improvement in the South but
 strong U.S. resistance to negotia-
 tions; (B) strong U. S. pressures
 against the North and resistance of
 negotiations until the DRV was
 ready to comply with our demands ;
 and (C) l imited pressures against the
 North coupled lvi th vigorous efforts
 to get negotiations started and
 recogni tion that Ife Iwuld have to
 compromise our objectives. Option B
 is favored by the Working Group .
18 Nov 611. JCSM 967 -64 The JCS reneT.fS i ts recommendation
 for strikes against the North tem-
 pedng it slightly in t erms of "a
 ix controlled program of systematically
 increased military pressures ."

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 EVENT OF
DATE DOClJliIENT DESCRIPTION

21 Nov 64 Revi sed .v!orking Having received comments from the
 Group Draft different agencies, the Working
 Group revises its draft slightly,
 takes note of different viewpoints
 and submits its work to the NSC
 Principals for the consideration.

23 Nov 64· ROstOlv Memo to Sec .Ta.1dng a some,vhat different tack,
 State the then Director of State's
 Policy Planning Staff,W. W. Rostow,
 proposes military pressures against
 the North as a method of' clearly
 signaling U.S. determination and
 commitment to the North.

24 Nov 64 NSC Principals Meet- No consensus is reached, but Option
 ing A is generally rejected as promis-
 ing only e.-v'"entual defeat. Option B
 is favored by the JCS and CIA, while •
 State and OSD favor Option C. No
 firm conclusion is reached on the
 issue of sending ground troops to
 South Vietnam.

27 Nov 64 Taylor Meets with Having returned for consultations,
 Principals Ambassador Taylor meets in th the
 NSC Principals and after giving a
 gloomy report of the situation in
 South Vietnam, recommends that to
 shore up the GVN and improve morale
 we take limited actions against the
 North but resist negotiations until
 the GVN is improved and the DRV is
 hurting. He proposed an extended
 Option A with the first stages of
 Option Co This proposal was adopted
 by the PrinCipals as the recormnenda-
 tion to be made to the President.

28 Nov 64 NSC Principals Meet- In a follow-up meeting, the Prin-
 ing cipals decide to propose a hTO
 phase program to the President. The
 first phase would be a thirty-day

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 x
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 EVENT OF
DATE IXlCUME.N'r DESCRIPTION

 period of slightly increased pres -
 sure such as the resumption of the
 DE SOTO patrols and U.S . armed
 recce on the Laotian corridor iv-bile
 we tried to get reforms in South
 Vietnam. The second phase would
 involve direct air strikes against
 the North as in Option C. Wi lliam
 Bundy was charged with preparing a
 draft NSAM to this effect and an
 i nfiltration study was commissioned .
30 Nov 64 NSC Principals Meeting to revievT the draft prepared
 Meeting by Bundy, the Principals decided not
 t o call it a NSAM . Its provisions
 are those recommended on 28 Nov .
 Phase I I woul d be a graduated and
 mounting set of primarily air pres -
 sures against the North coupled
 wi th efforts to sound out the DRV on
 r eadiness to negotiate on U. S. terms .
 A !ecommendation on linking U. S.
 actions to DRV infiltration is de -
 leted .
1 Dec 64 White House Meet- Whil e the exact decisions made at
 i ng thi s meeting of the Pri ncipals ,vi th
 the President are not availab l e , it
 i s clear that he approved in general
 t erms the concept outlined i n the
 Bundy paper . He gave his approval
 f or implementation of only Phase I,
 however . The President stressed
 t he need for Taylor to get improve -
 ment from the GVN and the need to
 brief our allies on our new course
 of action , and to get more assist -
 ance from them in the conflict .
3·Dec 64 Taylor Meets The President meets privatel y with
 PreSident Tayl or and gives him instructions ,
 that he is to explain the new pro -
 gram to the GVN, .i ndicate to its
 leaders that the Phase II U. S .

 xi TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 'j
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 EVENT OF
DATE DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 strikes against the North are con -
 tingent on improvement in the South,
 and explain that these will be
 cooperative efforts .

 4 Dec 64 Cooper Report on A thorough study on North Vietnamese
 Infiltration infiltration as commissioned by the
 Principals is submitted to the NSC
 and later fonrarded to Saigon . De-
 cisions on its release are continu-
 ally deferred .

 7 Dec 61~ Taylor Meets \ri th The day after his return to Saigon,
 Premier Huong Tayl or meets with Premier Huong and
 wi th General Khanh and outlines the
 new U.S. policy and states the re -
 quirements this places on the GVN .

. 7 - , 9 Dec 64 Prime Minister In Washington on a state visit ,
 Wilson briefed British Prime Minister Wilson is
 thoroughly briefed on the forth -
 coming U. S. actions . On 4 Dec.,
 William Bundy had gone to New Zea-
 land and Australia to present the
 'new policy and seek support. Other
 envoys were meeting with the re -
 maining Asian allies .

9 Dec 64 Second Taylor-Huong- At a second meeting with Huong and
 Khanh Meeting Khanh, Taylor presents a detailed
 set of actions he desires the GVN
 t o take to L"'llprove the situation
 and r eceives agreement from the hro
 leaders.

10 Dec 64 Souvanna Phounla Ap- The U. S. proposal for armed air
 proves U. S. Laos recce over the Laotian corridor is
 Strikes presented to Souvanna Phouma i-rho
 gives his assent .

11 Dec 64 GVN Announces Gre ater Complying with Taylor ' s request , the
 Efforts GVN announces stepped-up efforts to
 improve the campaign against the VC
 and to reform the government .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 xii
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 EVENT OF
 DATE DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

. 12 Dec 64 SecDef Approves The Secretary approves a JCS pro -
 JCS Proposal for posal for shore bombardment, naval
 Naval Actions patrols and.offshore aerial recce
 for the first thirty days . A de -
 cision on the Phase II ioTaS deferred .

 NSC Principals As 'planned, the NSC approved armed
 Approve Armed air recce over t ·h e Laotian corridor
 recce in Laos with the exact number and frequency
 of the patrols to be controlled by
 SecDef.

14 Dec 64 BARREL ROLL Begins The firs t sorties of U.S. aircraft
 in the 'armed recce " of the Laotian
 corridor, knOlID as BARREL ROLL,
 take place . They mark the begin -
 ning of the thirty -day Phase I of
 the l imited pressures .

18 Dec 64 Level of Laotian Secretary McNamara sets bm mis -
 Mis sions Set sions of four aircraft each as the
 weekly l evel of BARBEL ROLL activ -
 ity.

19 Dec 64 NSC Principals The NSC Principals approve McNamara ' s
 Meeting r ecommendation that BARRELL ROLL
 missions be held at constant levels
 through Phase I. It is revealed that
 adverse sea conditions have brought
 inaritime operations against the DRV
 to avirtual· balt. At McNamara ' s in-
 sistence it is agreed that the infil-
 tration study vall not be made public .

 Khanh Purges Ci vil - Late in the evening, the military
 i an Government high c ommand, led by Khanh, moved to
 remove all power from the civilian
 r egime of Premier Huong by dissolv -
 i ng the High National Council. Khanh
 a ssumes power .
20 bec 6l~ Taylor Meets With In a meeting with the leading South
 ARVN Leaders Vietnamese military officers , Taylor
 once again outlined the actions

 TOP SECP~T - Sensitive
 xiii
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 . TOP SECRET - Sensi ti ve

DATE DESCRIPTION

 required from the GVN by the U.S.
 before Phase II could be started.

22 Dec 64 Khanh Publicly After having given initial appear-
 Repudiates Taylor ances of understanding the difficulty
 that the miE tary purge placed the
 U.S. in, Khanh on Dec. 22 holds a
 news conference and states that the
 military is resolved not to carry out
 the'policy of any foreign power.

24 Dec 64 Rumors of Taylor!s Rumors are received by the Embassy
 Expulsion that Khanh intends to have. Taylor
 declared personna non grata. Vigor-
 ous U.S. efforts to dissuade him
 and the use of Phase II as leverage
 cause Khanh to reconsider.

 u.s. BOQ Bombed; Em- In a terror attack this Christmas
 bas sy Saigon Message Eve, the VC bomb a U.S. BOQ in
 1939; CINCPAC Message Saigon. Two U.S. officers are
 to JCS, 262251Z Dec; killed, 58 injured. Taylor urges
 JCSM 1076-64 reprisals against the North. He is
 supported by CINCPAC and the JCS.

29 Dec 64 NBC Principals Meet- At the meeting of the NSC Principals,
 ing a decision against reprisals for the
 barracks bombing is taken in spite
 of the strong recommendations above.
 At the same meeting, ISA reported
 the readiness of the Phillipines,
 ROK, a:.rl.d GRC to send military assist-
 ance to South Vietnam.

31 Dec 64 Embassy Saigon Taylor proposes going forward In th
 Message 2010 the Phase,II U.S. strikes against
 the North in spite of the political
 crisis in the South and under any
 concei vable U. S. relations in th the
 GVN short of complete abana.onmeni.,.

 CJCS Memo to DepSecDef) The JCS recommend the addition of
 CM 347-64 several air missions to already ap-
 proved operations, including hro air
 stri.."kes by unmarked VNAF aircraft
 xiv'

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 EVEIITT OF
DATE DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 against the North, and U.S. air
 escort for returning GVN naval
 craft.

3 Jan 65 Rusk TV Inter- Secretary Rusk appears on a Sun-
 view day TV interview program and
 defends U.S. policy, ruling out
 either a U.S. vQthdrawal or a
 majqr expansion of the 'l-Tar . The
 public and Congressional debate on
 the war had heated up considerably
 since the Army take-over in South
 Vietnrun in December. The debate
 continues through January 'Ivith
 Senator Morse the most vocal and
 sharpest critic of the Administra-
 tion.

4 Jan 65 Soviets call for ne,v Renewing their earlier efforts, the
 Conference on Laos Soviets call again for a conference
 on the Laotian problem . '

5 J a..'Yl 65 NSC Principals Meet The Principals disapprove the JCS
 recommendation for VIITAF strikes
 ~th unmarked aircraft against the
 North. The JCS voice concern at
 the failure to begin planning for
 Phase II of the pressures program.
 But no decision to go ahead is
 taken.

6 Jan 65 William Bundy Memo In view of the continued deterior-
 to Rusk ation of the·situation in the South
 and the prevailing vie'l-T that the
 U.S. vas going to seek a way out,
 Bundy recommended some limited meas-
 ures, short of Phase II (i.e. recce,
 a reprisal, evacuation of U.S. de-
 pendents, etc .), to strengthen our
 hand. There vTere risks in this
 course but it would i mprove our
 position ~th respect to the other
 SEA nations if things got rapidly
 'l-TorSe in SVN and vTe had to con-
 template a 'VTi thdrawal.

 xv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 EVENT OF
DATE OOCUME]\lT DESCRIPTION

 8 Jan 65 First Korean Troops The first contingent of 2,000 South
 Go to South Vietnam Korean troops leave for South
 Vietnam.

 9 Jan 65 Generals A..rlllounce Under U.S. pressure, the South Viet-
 Return to Civilian namese genera ls announce that mat-
 Govenunent ters of state will be left in the
 future in the hands of a civilian
 gov~rnment. The joint Huong-Khanh
 cow~unique promises to convene a
 const:i,tuent assembly.

11 Jan 65 US-GVl~Aid Discu s- With the return to civilian govern-
 sions Resume ment, the U.S. resumes its discus-
 sions with the GVN on aid and
 measures to improve the military
 situation.

14 Jan 65 u.S. Laotian Opera- A UPI story reveals the U. S. BARREL
 tions Reve aled ROLL armed recce missions in Laos
 and tells the story of the YANKEE
 TEiuVI armed escort for the RLAF.

17 Jan 65 Buddhist Riots . Shortly after the GVN announcement
 of increased draft calls, Buddhist
 protest riots brea.."k. out in several
 cities against the allegedly anti-
 Buddhist military leaders. Disturb-
 ances continue through the month.

22 Jan 65 Soviets Mfirm Sup- In letters to Hanoi and Peking,
 port of DR\T Gromyko affinns Soviet support for
 the DRV struggle against American
 imperialism.

23 Jan 65 USIS Library Burned Rioting Buddhists burn the USIS
 in Hue library in Hue.

27 Jan 65 McNaughton paper, The U.S. stakes in South Vietnam
 If Observations re were defined a s holding buffer land
 South Vietnam Mter for Thailand and Malaysia and main.:.
 Khanh's 'Re-:-Coup,1f taining our national honor. They
 required continued Ferseverance in a

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 xvi

 r
 '7
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 EVENT OF
DATE DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 bad situation, taking some risks
 such as reprisals. It was impor -
 tant to remember that our objec -
 tive was the containment of China
 not necessarily the salvation of
 South Vietnam . I n thi s effort , hOlf-
 ever, we should soon begin reprisal
 strikes against the North . They
 ,wuld not help the GVN much but
 \-Touid have a posi ti ve overall effect
 on our policy in SEA .

 Generals Withdraw The generals under Khanh ! s leader-
 Support from Huong ship act once again to eliminate
 the civilian government . This time
 they succeed in · their coup and the
 U.S. only protests .
28 J an 65 General Oanh Named General Nguyen Xuan Oa..."lh is named
 Premier acting Premier by General Khanh .

 xvii
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 MILITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NORTH VIETNA.Ivf

 NOVEMBER 1964 - JANUARY 1965

I. POLICY DEBATE Hr KOVEMBER ••••.••..•.•.•••••• ~ ••• ; •.•••••••. 1

 1. Immediate Antecedents .................................. 1

 2. Formation of the NSC lilorki ng Group ....•...••.••.•...... 5
 3. Ivorking Group Assessments of the utility of
 Pressures .......................... -................... . 6
 a. Sense of Ur gency . . . . . . . . . . • • . . . . . . . . . . • • . • • . . • • . . . . 7
 b. Vi ews of DRV Suscept ibility ........................ . 8
 4. Perceptions and Development of U. S. Pres sure Options ... 12

 a. Perception of U. S . Obj ectives and Interests . ·....... 12
 b. Evolution of Options .....". • . . . . • . . . • . . • • . . . . . . • . . . . 18
 c. Sign ificance of Negotiations.. . • . . . . . . . . • • . • • • • • . • . 23
 d. Perceived React ions to Options ..................... 27

 5. Vielvs from Outside the NSC Ttlorking Group . .•..••.....•.. 31

 a. JC S Views .... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
 b. Rostow Vi ews . • • • • . •.• . . . . . . • . . . . • . . • . . • . . . . . • . . • • • . • 35

II. POLICY DEC ISIONS ....•.•••.•.•..••....•••.....••..•....•••.. 38
 1. Reactions of Principals to Ivorking Group Analyses . • • • • . 38

 a. Consensus llIllong NSC Officials .......•••.•...••....•• 38
 b. Vie\vs Backing Consensus .....•..•...•.•••...•.•••..•. 41
 c. Policy Vievls From Saigon ........................... . 42
 d. Discussions ~'Ti th Ambassador Taylor ...•.••••...•.••. 45
 2. Courses of Action Approved in the White House. ......... 54
III. n ,IPLEMEFTTNG THE POLICy .••......•.....••...•......••••... •• 59
 1. Early Actions . . . . . .•• • • . • • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . • . . • . . . • • . . • . • • 59

 a. GV1'T Maritime Operations... ......................... 59
 b. Armed Reconnaissance in Laos ....................... 61
 c. Surfacing Infiltration Evidence .................... 63
 d. Consultations 'iTith "Third Countries" ..... . ......... 65

 TOP ·SECRET - Sensitive

 a
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET' - Sensitive

2. Relat i ons \-Ti th the GVI~ ..•••• ~ . . • • • . • • • • • . • • • • • • . . • • • . • • 67

 a. J oint Planning ....•.••••••••.•..•..•....• ~ •..•....• 68
 b. G"VN" Crises ........................................................... .. 69
 C.. Joint Reprisals ................................................................ . 72
3. Policy Vie1,vs in January......... • . • . . . • • . • • • • . . • • . • . • . . 73

 a. Public Debate ..... ;................................ 73
 b. Policy Assessments ................................. 75

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 b
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 1.

IV.C . 2 . POLICY DEBATE IN NOVENBER

 In their Southeast Asia policy discussions of August-October 1964,
Administration officials hacl accepted the view that overt military
pressures against North Vietnam probably "\wuld be required. Barring
some critical developl:lents , hOlTever , it I·Tas gener2,11y conceded that
thes e should not begin lli~til after the nevT year . Preparations for
applying such pressures yrere made in earnest during November .

 1. IL1ffiediate ~ntecedents

 In Adrninistrat ion policy discussions, the tiw developments most
often cited as perhaps \·rarranting i mpl ementation of OVeI·t military pres -
sures before 1965 I're:ce: (1) i ncreased leve ls of infiltration of guerrillas
into South Vietnam and ( 2) serious deterioration of the GVN . Evidence of
both ,.,ras repol'ted to Washingtqn during October .

 National int e lligence est~nates gave t he G\~T little hope of sur -
Vl vlng the apathy and discouragement yii th "Thich it 'was plagued . They
reyol'ted , tlGovernment ministries in Saigon are close to a standstill,
with only the ::nost routine 0p'erations going on.tI U.S./GVJ.\f planning "Tas
not being folloi·r ed by G-VN action. A coup by disgruntled South Vietnom.ese
military figures ,ms believed irrminent (one had been attempted unsuccess-
fully on 13 September) . Moreover, the civ2-.lian government ,vhich General
Khanh ·had promised for the end of October was seen as unlikely to bring
about any r eal improvement . y .
 A threat of GVN ca-oitulation to the NLF , in the form of accept-
ing a coalition government,- I·ra s also seen as a: real possibility . Citing
lI nume:cous signs that Viet Cong agents have played a role in helping sus -
tain the leve l of civil disorder ... in the cities,tI intelligence rep orts
estlinated that it was the COF~unist intention to seek victory through a
tlneutr a list coalitiontl rather than by forc e of arms . Perhaps straining
a bit, an estimate stated, tiThe pl'incipal GVN leaders have not to our
knowledge been in recent cont act uith the Corrrrnunists , but there has been
at le ast one instance of informa l contact bet<:reen a lesser governmental
official and members of th e HLF. tI '?J
 Anot~2r estlinate portrayed the
DRV and Chinese as regarding South Vi etnam as a tldeveloping political
yaCmUll , tI soon to b e filled tl v i th a neutralist coalition government
dominated by pro-Conr.nunist elements. tI 1/
 Report s of increasing infiltr 2.t ion began arrlvlug in mid-October .
Ambassador Taylor cabled on the 14th that he had received. indications of
a tldefinite step-up in infiltration from North Vietnam, particule.rly in
the northern provinces . •• . tI He 'trent on to re port :

 .1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 IIA recent 2.nalysis sugge sts that if the present rate of
 infiltration is me-intained the annual figure for 196 Lf u ill
 be of the order of 10,000 . Furthermore ... "voTe ar e finding
 more and more ' bona fide ' North Vietnames e soldiers among
 t he i nfiltrees . I feel sure that Ive must soon adopt nelV
 and dr astic methods to reduce and eventua lly end such infil-
 trat ion if ,ve are ever to succeed in South Vietnam . Il~/

 A similar report 'Ha s cabled directly to the i'lhit e House on 16 October .
 I n it, P~bassador Taylor repeated his co~~nents on infiltration and
 advised the President of th e steadily 'Iwrsening situation i n South
 Vietnmn . The Ambassador reported the infiltration of northern- born
 conscripts and relayed GVN claims that they ,'rere coming in or gani zed
 uni ts . He pointed out tha t with the advent of t he dry season, the
 problem ,;"QuId B.ssume even greater magnitude and urged that it be given
 immediate attention . ~

 The Taylor estimates of end-year infiltration totals probably
 "rere quite alarming . If accurate they indic ated that the rate had
 risen sharply during September and early October: The tote-l nl®ber of
 infiltrees for 1964 as of 1 September 'Ivas then estimated as 4 ,700 . 6/
 Of particular concern, no doubt , was the apparent 8J.'11phasis on reinr'orc -
 i ng Communist units in the Central Highlands and in the northern
 provinc es of South Vietnmo.. These vrarnings came hard on the heels of
 widespread press r eports of badly weakened GVl\J' control in three portions
 of the country . 11
 The J CS seized on these fresh reports and resubmitted their pro-
 posals for taking prompt meas ure s 9-gainst Horth Vietnam . On 21 October ,
 t hey argued :

 "Application of the principle of i solating the guerrilla
 fo rce f rom its reinforcement and support e-nd then to frag -
 ment and defeat the forces has not been successful in Vietnam
 ••. oThe principle must be applied by control of the national
 boundar i es or by eliminating or cutting off the source of
 supply and. direction . n §j

 On the 27th they submitted a major proposal for II s trong mil itary actions ll
 to c01l..l1.te r ac t the tr ends cited in the national intelligence estima tes
 Emd in the Taylor cables . I n l anguage identical to that u sed in t .w
 August memol'anda. and at the Septemb e r strategy meeti ng , th ey stated that
 such actions vlere " required nOi'~ in order to prevent the collapse of the
 U. S . position ir Southeast Asia . Il They th en recomme nded a program of
 actions to support the follO'.·l ing strategy:

 a . Depriving the Viet Cong of out of country aSSls~ance by
 applying military pressUl'es on the ... DRV to the extent necessary to
 caus e the DRV to cease support and direction of the i nsurgency .

•
 TOP SECREI' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Secti o n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 b . DeprivL'1g the VC of assistance \-rithin SVN by expanding the
 cOQnterinsurgency effort - - military, economic , ~nd political -- within
 ~~ . .

 c . Continuing to seek a viable effect i ve government i n SVN
 based on the broadest possible consensus .

 d. Maintaining a military readiness posture in Southeast Asia
 that :

 (1 ) D~nonstrates the U. S . will and capabil ity to escalate
 the action if requir ed .

 ( 2) Deters a major Comrrnmist aggression in the area . 2./
 The program recommended by the JCS included a list of actions
to be taken ,d thin South VietnaJn and. a separate list of actions outsid.e .
The Chiefs had listed them in orcler of increasing intensity , and they
requested authority li to implement now· 1I the first six actions w~ thin the
c ountry and the first eight outside . The latter i ncluded air strikes
by GVW/FAPJvIGATE aircraft agc.inst Communist LOC I S in Laos and i n the
southern portion of North Vietnam . "J:. O/

 I n the context of the reported ,vorsening situs.tion in South
Vietnam , the JCS proposal Has g i ven serious considere.tion in OSD .
 Since Ambass ador Taylor had e~cpressed concern over initiating overt
pressures against North Vietnam "before ,Ie have a r esponsible set of
authorities to \lO1'l( with in South Vietnarn , II a copy of the JCS paper
,.laS fon-larded to him for revie-,l and comment . The OSD I S stated i ntent ion
,vas to consider the Ambassador I s v:Levls before developing a p1'oposal t o
present to President Johnson . ~

 While this proposal ,'l as still under consideration (1 November
1964 ) , Viet Cong forces atte.cked U.S . facilities at the Bien Hoa airbase
ivi th 8lrr.rrru mortar fire . Four Amer ican servicemen ,.lere kill ed , and f i ve
B- 57 tactical bombers \"ere destroyed, and major damage was i nflicted on
eight others . 12/

 Administration attention vIas focused immediatel y on the qu est ion
 Qf "That the United States should do in response to the Bien Hoa provoca -
t ion . I t ;,.rill be recalled that such an eventuality had been discussed
 at the September strategy meeting . The Presidential directive which
 r esu~ted from it stated : "'Vie should be prepared to respond as appro -
priate age.inst t.he DRV in the event of 8.ny att,acl( on U. S . units o r any
 special DRV/VC action against SVN ." 1 3/ As of the end of Oct ober ( in
anticipa tion of resumed DE SOTO Patrols ), elements of our Pac i fic forces
,Tere reported as I!:poised and ready'! to execute x'eprisals fo1' any DRV
attacks on our naval vessels . Thus , there vias a rather l arge expectancy
aJQong Administration officials that the United States would do somethi ng
i n retaliation .

 3 TOP SECRET - Sens i t i ve
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Proj ect Number: NND 633 16 , By: NWD Date: 201 1

 TO.P SECRET - Sensitive

 Apparently, the decision I'ras made to do nothing -- at least not
 of a retaliatory nature . At a White House meeting to discuss possible
 courses of action, on 1 November , "concern \'Tas expressed that proposed
 U. S . retaliatory punitive actions could trigger North Vietnamese/CHICOM
 air and ground retaliatory acts 0" Q.uestions I'ere raised about "increased
 security measures and prec a utionary moves of U. S . air and ground Qnits
 to protect U. S. dependents, units and insta llations against such retali-
 ation . 14/ Folloi'Ting the meeting, a White Hous e ne,o[s rele ase announced
 that the President had ordered the destroyed and ba.dly damaged aircra.ft
 replaced . Administration officia ls stated that " the mortar attack must
 be vieloTed in the light of the Vi etnamese vrar' and of the I-Thole Southeast
 Asian situation. If the United st ates is to retaliate against North
 Vietnam in the future, It they reported ly said, " i t must be for broader
 reasons than the stril\:e against the Bien Hoa base . It Moreover , they
 eirev, a contrast bet\oreen this incident and the Tonkin Gulf attacks where
 o ur destroyers vrere "on United states business . II 15/

 Source docUlnents avails,ble do not indicate that any further
 decisions ','fere made on the Bien Hoa me,tter . A second meeting to discuss
 possible U.S. actions was Ittentatively scheduled lt for 2 November , but
 the available materials contain no evidence that it vTaS held . 16/
 P"resident Jormson ,'TaS scheduled to appear in Houston that afternoon ,
for his final pre -election address, and it may be that the second White
House meeting I·Tas called off . In any event, unofficial reports from
 Saigon , two days later , st ated that most of the B- 57s had been vii thdrmm
from the Bien Hoa base . While acknowledging that II some lt had b ee n
removed to Clark Air Base, in the Philippines , official spokesmen in
Saigon refused to comment on whether or not a 'Ivholesale Ivithdrmral had
t aken place . 17/ O.ne thing is certain; there ,rere no retaliatory
strikes authorized follm'ring the attack on the U. S. bomber base .

 HOvTever , retaliatory measures were proposed, O.n 1 November ,
t he J CS suggested orally to Secretary McNamara that air strikes be
authorized on key COIDm11..'I1ist targe ts in both Laos and North Vietnam .
According to the JCS -plan , those in Laos ,vould be hit yri thin 2~· - 36 hours
after approval , with .forces already in place, and. ,these atta,cks would
divert attention from the preparation necessary for the stronger actions
t o follOl'T , The latter 'Hould include a B-52 night attack on Piluc Yen
airfield ( outside Hanoi ), to be followed by a
 da"rn strike by USAF and
Navy tactical aircraft against other airfields and PO.L storage in t he
Hanoi - Ha.iphong area . 18/

 Ambassador Taylor immediately cabled a Sa igon ErfibassY-MACV
recommendation fo r II retaliatory b anb ing attacys on selected DRV targets
by comb ined U. S . /V1~itF air forces and for a policy statement that '\ve ,vi II
act similarly in like cases in the futur e . 1I 'J:2/
 In a later cable he
made specific refe r ence to lithe retaliatory principle confirmed in
NSAlvf 314,1' stating that if his initial recommendation ,vas not accepted
at least a less er alternative shortld be adopted . This he described as

 ' 4 TO.P SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 "intensifying 3~·-A ope:cations and initiating air opere:GlOnS a gainst
 selected targets as an interim substitute f'or more positive l."leasures ." 20/

 On 4 November, the JCS repeated in \·rri ting their recommendations
of the 1st, adding some explanatory comment and ta.king issue \vith certain
aspects of' the Taylor re conrrnendat ions They e=~plained that they con-
 0

sidered the VC attack on Bien Hoa airf'ield !! a deliberate act of' escala··
tion and a change of' the ground rules under '"hich the VC h eNe operated
1.1;> to nm,r ." They cautioned aga.inst ''tmdue delay or restraint " in making
a response, since it "could be misinterp:r:eted by our allies in Southeast
Asia, as ,,,ell as by the DRV and Commu.nist China " and "could encoura.ge
the enemy to conduct additional attacks •... " Referring to P..robassador
Taylor ' s recon~~endat ion to announce a policy of reprisal bombing, the
JCS denounced a t:tit-for-tat" policy as "u.'l1duly restrictive" and tending
to "pass to the DRV SUbstantial initi at ives "rith respect to the nature
and timing of' further U. S. actions." ?:J:./ They concluded:

 "Early U. S. military action against the DRV ,-:auld l essen
 the possibility of' misinterpretation by . the DRV and Com.mu.'1ist
 China of' U.S. determination and intent and thus serve to deter
 furth er VC attacks such a's that at Bien Hoa . "

 In the meantime, there had b een created vTha t may have been the
only concrete result from the high-leve l policy deliberations f'ollm'7ine
the Bien Hoa incident . 1m interagency task fo:cce, lmo'l-m as the NSC
I-Torking Group, had begu.."l em int ens ive study of future U. S. courses of
action. Recommendations from the JCS and othe:c s 'i·rere passed on to that
group for incorporation in their vTOrlc 22/

 2. Formation of the NSC Wo:tking Group

 The "NSC Working Group on S'VN/SEA" held its first meeting at
0930 hOlITS, 3 November, thus placing the decision to organize such a
group at som.etime earlier -- probably on 2 November or perhaps even at
the high-level meeting on 1 November . Its chal~tel~ \Tas to study
" limnecliately and intensively" the f'uture courses (If' action and alterna-
tives open to the United States in Southeast Asia and to report as
appropriate to a "Principals Group" of NSC members. I n turn, this g:coup
of senior officials i'70uld then recommend specific courses of action to
the President . Initially, the Iwrking group vTaS given approximately
one I'T eek to ten days to cOT!lnlete its Hork . 23/ Actually, it developed
and recast its reports over~ a period of tp..ree i·reeks or more .

 Four 8,genc ie s '.'Te re l'epresented in the formal membership of the
group . The Department of stat e contingent included Assistant Secretary
B1?-D d y (C hairman ), Me.rsh8.11 Gre en , Michael Forrestal (both of the Bureau
of Far Eastern Affairs ), end Robert Johnson (of the Policy Planning
Council) . Assistant Secretei'y (I SA) 1-1cNaughton represented OSD . Vice
Admiral Lloyd' Mustin iTas the ,YCS member 0The CLl\. Vias repTese.:1ted by
Harold Ford . Other staff members from these agencies assisted in work
on specific topics. ?}:j

 5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SEC?.ET .. Sensitive

 The Horking Group's efforts were apportioned among seven tasks,
the initial input for each being 8.ccomplished by a particular member or
subcommittee, as follmls :. 25/

 TODIC RESPONSIBILITY

Assessment of the current situation Int elligence
in South Vietnam, including policy community
direction of interested pOVlers .

U. S. objectives and stal~es in South \\Tilli am Bundy
Vietne.m and Sout heast As ia .

Broad options ( 3) available to the Bundy and ISA
Uni ted States .

Alternative forms of ~ossible state/Policy Planning
negotiation . Counci l

Analyses of different options JCS to propose specific
vis-a-vis U.S. objectives and actions; Policy Planning
interests . Council to examine po -
 litical impacts of the
 most violent option
 first.

Im. . nediate actions in the period State/Far East Bureau
prior to Presidential decision
on options.

 Nost inputs '\Tere made in the form of either (1) draft papers
tre ating fully a topic intended for inclus ion in the Iforking Group ' s
final submission 01'-(2) memoranda cormnentil}g on an initial draft paper
and suggesting alterat ions . Because of the unique responsibilities and
advisory processes of the JCS, t heir member apparently chose to make
initial in:puts largely thro'l~gh references to or excer?ts from regular
JC S documents; he also contributed to the redrafting of the option
analyses. 26/ The initial papers on each of the topics were circulated
among the VIorking Group members , revie"red in consultation '\Vi th their
parent organizations and modified . Some positions passed through as
many as three drafts before being submitted to the Principals .

 3. ,\<Torking Group Assess:n.ents of' the Utility of Pressures
 The NSC Iforking Group approached its '_Tork "\ i th the general
assessment that increased pressures against North Vietnam '\wuld be both
useful and necessary. Ho\vever , this assessment embraced a "'ide ral'J.ge
of considerations stemming from the developing situation in South Viet-
nam and a variety of vie\rpoints concerning \'That kinds of pressures
\wulcl be most effective .

 6 TOP SECRET' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 a . Sense of Urgency . As the I'Jorking Group began its delibera-
tions, an avrareness that another Bien Hoa could occur at any time "\-Tas
prominent in both the official and the public mind o The t enuous security
of U. So bases in South Vietnam had received "dde pub li city . 27/ More -
over, t he nellS services ,Tere reporting the tin'eat of civil protest
against the new Saigon government , and the increased l eve l of 8uerr illa
i nfiltration from the North I·ras being publicly e.ired . ?!}) These deve lop-
ments l ent an added sense of urgency to the Group!s Iforl\:o The Chairman
of the Working Group Has sensit i ve to these developments and to related
attitudes l·rUhin the Administration . For example , he ind ic ated that the
i n telligence (J,gencie s ,'Jere tt on the verge of . o. agreement the,t infi 1 trat ion
has i n fact mounted , If and that the Sa i gon miss i on Ivas tturging that I'l e
surface this by the end of this I'Teel\: or earl y next I'Teek . tt He stress ed
that tit he President i s clearly thinking in tenns of maximum u se of a
Gulf of TOTL~in Lreprisaf! rationale . tt The ne,ture of such a decision IvaS
expected to b e :

 either for an action that would shm1 toughness and hold
 the line till ."..,e c an dec ide the big issue , or as a basis
 for starting a clear course of action under .• obroad
 options 0

He implied that OUl~ intention to stand firm i n South Vietnalll "\-laS being
c m..municated to the USSR ('!Secretary Rusk is talking today to Dobryninf!)
and i ndicated the desirability of President Jo hnson signalling something
similar rather soon through the public media . This vras seen as particu-
larly important If to cOtmter any SVN fears of a softening i n ou:r policy, If
presumably in viel'l of our not r esponding to the Bien Hoa attack 29/ 0

 Chairman Bundy i'Tas cl,\-mre a lso of t he significance attach ed by
 some obs ervers to t he first U.S o actions aft er the ?.cesidential ele ction .
As vras po i nted out to him , lIall Vietnamese and othe r interested obs ervers ll
,.;auld be "\-latchLl1.g carefully to II see Hhat posture the ne"idy mandat ed
Johnson Administrat ion ,vill assume . If For this l~eason, William H. Sullivan,
head of the int eragency Vietnam Coordinating Committee ( and soon to be
appointed the nel'T U. S. Ambe,ssador to Laos ), urged !Ithat our first action
be .•• one whi ch g ive s the appearance of a detenaination to t ake risk s i f
necessary to maintain our position in Southeast As i a . 1I An imme di ate
retalie.tion for any repetition of th e Bien Hoa attacl~ and armed recon -
n a is sance missions i n the Laotian Panha...ndle uere c ited as spe cific
exar.o.ples . He vTent on to r ecorn.illend to I'h' . Bundy :

 "I feel t hat it is i mport ant ... that t he Administration go
 on record fairly soon plac in8 our po licy in Viet Nam '\.;ithin
 the larger persnective of OlIT' no li c i es in the Hestern Pacific ,
 espec i a lly as t hey i nvolve confrontat ion ,·Tith Communist China . If 30/

 A sense of urgency for the Worki ng Group ! s efforts i'Tas also de -
rived from asse s SLlent s of the trends vTi thin South
 .
 Vietnam
 /
 . For example,
the i ntelligence panel composed of CIA , DIA, and State/INR members S2.n

 TOP SECREf - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sens~

little prospect for an effective GVN despite an ac}mmrledged slmling of
Il adverse political trends . II In their vi~i'T the political situation lTaS
"extremely fragile, II ivi th the Saigon administration IIp l agued by con- .
fus ion, apathy and p oor mOI'e.le lJ and the new l eadership hampered by the
older factionalism . - The security situation i n the countryside ',ms
ass essed as having continued to deterior e,te , w' i th "Vie t Cong control 1I
 •• • spreading over areas h eretofore controlled by the government .
Alt hough indicating IIbetter than even ll che.nces that the GVN coulE: I'hcmg
on for the nea:c future and thus e.fford a platform upon vThich .•• Lt9..7
pros ecute the vTar and attemnt to tUTn the tide, II the panel painted a
grim pictu:re of its prospects . 31/ This 8,ssessment Ivas probabl y
instrument al in prompting Ass ist ant Secretary HcNe.ughton I S cry-pt ic
observation that " Progress inside SITN i s import ant , but it is unlikely
 desp it e our best i deas and efforts . 1I Besides , he obs erved , if it came
 at all it ivould t a..1<:.e II at l east several months . If I n his vie"T , the efforts
 of the Horking Group , could in some meaSUTe compensate for this slOi'T
progr ess i nside South Vietnam :

 IIAction age.ins t North Vietnam is to some extent a sub -
 stitute for strengthening the government i n South Vietnam .
 That i s, a less active VC ( on ol'ders from DRV) can b e
 handled by a less efficient GVN (vThich "Te expect to have ). II 32/

 b. Vie,vs of DRV Susceptibility . The extent to ,,,rhich " e.ction
against North Vietns..m.1f might affect that nation I S sUP:9 0rt of the con-
flicts i n SoUtl1 Vietnam a..nd Laos i'TaS a matter on i"Thich mero.bers of the
\forking Group did not fully agree . The i n t e lligence panel members
t ended tow'ard a pess:iJnistic vievl . They pointed out t he.t lit he basic
ele.i1lents of Commu..ni.st str ength in South Vietnaro. remain i ndigenous , II
 and that lI even i f severely dall1ag~dlf the DRV could continue to support
 the insu:rrection at a l ess ened l eve l. Therefore , they stressed the.t
 t he U.S. ability to compe l a halt to the DRV support depended on erod-
 ing Hanoi I S \vill and persuad ing the DRV :

 that the p:C'ice of m01mting the i nsurrection in the South
 at a high level would be too great and that it vmuld b e
 p referable to reduce i ts a i d . .. and dir ect at l east e.
 t emporary reduction of V. C . activity .

 As the panel members Salt, it , this respite ,·rould then provide an oppor -
 tuni ty to st abili ze e.nd inlprove the GVN . But, in their Hords , If Even
 so, l ast i ng s uccess Hould depend. upon 2" substantial im:.orovement in the
 energy and effectiveness of the RVN government and pac i fication machi n -
 ery ." 33/

 HOI.reve r, the int e lligence pa.nel did not concede very strong
 chances for breaking the vTill of Hanoi . They thought i t quite likely
 that the DRV Has "Tilling to suffer diilll2.ge lIin the COUl'se of a test of
 "rills uith the Unit ed Stat es over the COUTse of events i n South Vietnam . II
 To SUppOl't this vie-v! , they c ited Hanoi I s belief that int ernationa l

 8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

pressure would develop against deliberate U. S . expansion of the "lar .
Further , that given present trends in South Vietnam, both Hanoi and
Peking h ad good reason to expect success vrithout haying to ini~iate
actions c arrying the ri sk of the kind of Ivar vrhich would ~'(pose them
to lithe great ,·!e i.ght of superior U. S. weaponry . II The panel also viewed
Hanoi as est:ilnating that the U. S. \vill to maintain resistance in South-
east Asia could in time be eroded -- tha t the recent U. S . election vrou~d
provide the Johnson Administration with " greater policy flexibilityll
than it previously felt it had. 34/

 This vie,v vlaS challenged by the 1'Torking Group ' s JCS member as
being too "negative . 1I Int erpreting the panel 1 s non-s:pecific reference
to II po licy flexibility" in an extreme sense, he wrote :

 II If t his means that Hanoi thinks we are nm'T i n position
 to accept vlOrld-wide humiliation "ivi th respect to our formerly
 stated obj ectives in Vietnam, this is another reason why i t
 i s desirable that Vie take early measures to disabuse their
 t hinking . II

Moreover, he indi cated the JCS vi e"T tha t the slightly improved hopes for
 government stability (aclmmlledged by the panel) i'iere good reason ivhy
 "early and positive actions ll should be taken . This point was reinfol"Ced
by his judgment that (in contre.st with its impact on eSlll"it and political
effectivenes s) the mm ' s "pr incipal task is to e,fford the platform upon
';-,hich the RVN armed forc es , vTith U. S . assistance, prosecute the vrar. 1I 221
 I n criticism of the intelligence panel ' s emphasis on the need
t o i nfluence DRV "r:i,ll, ACLlliral M:us tin indic a ted that enemy capabilities
r epresented a more appropriate t arget . He stated the JCS assessment
t h s.t :

 " a. The actual U.S . requirement "i-'lith respect to the DRV
 i s reduction of the rat e of delivery of support to the VC ~
 t o levels belmo[ the ir minimum necessary sustaining leveL • .

 lib. I n the present unstable situation something far less
 t h an total destruction may be all that i s required to accom-
 pli sh the above . A very modest change in the government ' s
 [ftvrj] favor ... may b e enough to turn the tide and lead to a
 successful solution . Of course it is not possible to predict
 in advance ... the precise l evel of measures ...rhich will be
 r equired to achieve the above . This is the reason for de -
 signing a }1rogram of progressively increas ing squeeze ."

One of the factors encouraging JCS optimism, he pointed out, was t he.
assessment accepted by the panel that both H~Doi and Peking wanted to
avoid dir ect conflict "ldth the United Stdes . This 'liould act as a ' de -
terrent to Comm.unist persistence, pe..rticularly if by a program of

 . 9 TOP SECRET - Sensit i ve
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

milita..ry pressures vTe ,',ere able to revise their asse s sment that they could
vlirt lI,vithout much risk of having to feel the vre ight of U.S. response." 361

 Apparently as a result of these criticisms and their influence
on other \-Torking Group member s, the Group ' s fi:1al assessment of DRV
sus ceptibility to milit al'y pressures was sorneo,vhat modified . \-Thile con-
tinuing to emphasize that a,ffecting Hanoi ' s vTill ,-Tas important , the cri t-
i ca.lity of it was obscured by conc essions to the possible :iJ:npact of
damage to DRV capabilities and by greater reliance on _conditional phras-
i ng . For example :

 "the natUre of the "mr in Vietne.m is such that U. S • ability
 to compe l the DRV to end or reduce the ve insurrection rests
 essentially upon the effect of the U.S . s anctions on the will
 of DRV leadership to sustain and enlarge that insurre ction, and
 to a less er extent upon the effect of sanctions on the capabili-
 ties of the DRV to do SO .II

Although giving explicit recognition to " a r lslng rate of infiltration ,1I
and continuing to acknowledge limits to U. S. abilities to prevent the
DRV ' s material support for the VC, the assessment stated that "U.S._
inflicted destruction in North Vietnam and Laos Kould reduce these sup-
porting increment s and. damage DRV Ive morale . II It qualified this state-
ment, how'ever , by pointing out that the degree to ,-Thich such damage
vTould provide the GVN \Vi th a breathing spell would depend l argely on
IIvThether any DRV' 'removal' of "i ts direction and support of the ve "were
superficial or iIhole . II If sU-:::Jerficial or Itlimi ted to gestures ..• that
r emoved only the more Vi sible-evidences of the DRV increment,fJ t he
report continued , Itit would probably not be possible to develop a viable
and free government in South Vietnam ." 371

 In general, the final assessment of DRV susceptibility to
pressw'e s vms less discom'aging than the intelligence panel ' s initial
submission, although it could not be considered particularly encouraging
either . The reference to U. S. It policy flexibility, 1t to which the JCS
took such violent objection, was removed, and the follOl'Ting non-co::nmi tting
st atement i'laS used i nstead : "Hanoi ' s i ,1TInediate estimate is probably that
the p ass ing of the U.S . election gives \~ashington the opportunity to take
new mil i ta:cy actions against t he DRV and/or ne,,! cliplomatic initiatives. "
I f ne", military pressures Here applied , t he report i ndicat ed that Hanoi ' s
l eaders would be faced Idth a basic question: Ill s the U. So determined
to continue escalating it s pressures to achieve its announced obj ectives
••. or is t he U.S . escalation essentially a limited attempt to improve the
U.S. negot:"ating posit ion?tl It continued :

 "The ir decision ..• ,vould be affected by the U. S. military
 posture in the area, by the extent and nature of the U. S.
 escalation, the ch~cacter of the U.S . communication of its
 intentions , and thei:c reading of da:uestic Uo S. and inter-
 national.react ions to the inaugurat ion of UoS . attacks on the
 North . It

 10 TOP SSCRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Secti on 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The report made no attempt to nredict hOyT the DRV might anSl'i"er the "basic
 question" given alternative as;essments of the variables i n the quoted
 paragraph . HOi'r ever, it did offer the caveat that " comprehension of the
 other I s intentions iiOuld al1r.ost certainly be difficult on both si'des ,
 and especially S0 as the scal~ of hostilities m01.Ll1.ted ." 38/

 In assessing Hanoi I s ability and willingness to sustain U. S .
 attacks in order to pursue its goals, the report continued its balanced
 but slightly pessimistic approach :

 "~{e have many indications that the H8.J."'1oi leadership i s
 acutely 8...11cl nervously a"\'r are of the extent to vThich North
 Vi etnam I s trans portation system and industrial :Dlan is v ul-
 nerable to 2.ttack . On the other hand , North Vietnam I s
 economy is oven"helmingly agriculture and, to a large extent ,
 decentralized ...• Interdiction of imports and e!>.'tensive de -
 s truction of trans~ortation facilities and. i"ndustrial plants
 would cripple DRV industry . These actions vTOuld also seriously
 r estrict DRV milita:!:"'y ca?abilities, 8.J."'1d '.{Quld degrade, though
 t o a lesser extent} Hanoi I s capabilities to support. guerrilla
 "\>Tarfare i n South Vietna.."lll ·a..11d Laos . •. •1;.7e do not believe that
 attacks on industrial targets vTould so greatly exacerbate
 current economic difficulties as to creat Q11IDanageable control
 problems . • . •DRV leaders .•. w'ould probably be i'r illing to suffer
 some damage to the cOQntry in the course of a tp.st of ifills
 1iTith the D. S . over the course of events in South Vietnam ." 39/

 The assessment concluded with estimates of likely Chinese Com-
munist and Soviet efforts to offset pressures directed to"Harcl North
 Vietnam . The Working Group recorded its belief "that close cooperation
 eXlS""GS behTeen Hano i and Peiping and that Hanoi consults Peiping on
major decisions regarding South Vi etnaJD. ." Because the VC i nsurrection
 served IIPeiping l s interests in undermining the U. S. position in As i a "
and because of the SinO-Soviet dispute , the group thought i t likely that
t he Chinese "Tould " feel compelled to demonstrate their readiness to
 suppor~ " Hanoi i n ma i ntaining pressure on South Vietnam . HOi,rever , i t
vms no-ted that " Chinese COIDmQnist canabilities to aug:.lllent DRV offensive
and defensive capabilities are slight ," being l imited largely t o modest
quantities of air defense equipment, additional jet fighters and n aval
patrol craft . On the other hand, t he group believed " MoscovT ' S rol e i n
Vietnam is likely to remain a relatively mi nor one . " Khrushchev ' s
successors "Were beli eved unuilling to run substa...'1tial r i sks t o undermine
the GVN . Citing Hano i' s desire for continuing Soviet military and
econonic aid , thp. report stated an ironic judgment concerning the l ess -
milit~~t of the large Coronunist powers :

 "MoscOlv" I s ability to influe nCe decisions in Hanoi t ends
 consequently to be proportional to the North Vietnamese
 r egime I s fears of AmericB-n action against it, ~ising in

 '11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 moments of crisis and diminishing in quieter periods . Moscow 's
 willingness to give overt backing to Hanoi, hm·rever, seems to
 be in inverse proportion to the level of threat to North Vi~t­
 nam.!1 40/ (Underlining added)

 4. Perce)tions and Development of U.S. Yressure Options

 The NSC Horking Group began its deliberations i-d th a variety of
U.S. actions in mind and vlith an appaxently flexible approach to the
objectives that the Administration might reasonably s ecl~ to achieveo As
ideas "Tere exchanged and debc:..tecl, hm·rever, objectives became someHhat
l ess flexib le and options seemed to narrm·! . Such a process could have
result ed from either: (1) preconceptions on the pa rt of particularly
influential members; ( 2) a bureaucL'atic tendency to comp"-'omise; or (3)
simply the limited availability of pr8,ctical alternatives . A combinat ion
of these f actors may even have been e.t vrorlc in the case of the Horking
Group. lLn asses~~ent of this nature is beyond the scope of this pri-
marily doc1)Juentary research effort . Still, the question is an important .
one to reflect on in tracing the development of \~orldng Group recommen -
dations 0

 a. Perception of U.S. ObjectiVeS and Interests. National ob-
jectives in Southe ast Asia I,rere regarded in t,.,,-o catego r i e s: eXlS'c,lng
( sometimes called !!initial fl ) policy obj ectives and thos e comprising a
possible fallback position. The former did not change and did not
tLndergo a.ny reinterpret a.tion dUl"ing the cours e of the Horking Group I s
study. These Here seen 8.S (1) IthelpL'1g a government [Of South vietna::!=7
defend its independence ," and ( 2) fI,;orking to preserve fJ.n Laoil an
international neutralized settlement . 11 Three b a sic flfactors fl I'rel'e
recognized as II standing behind lt these policy objectives:.

 Ilao The general pr inciple of helping cOlmtries that try
 to defend their mm freedom against cOInmunist subversion and
 attack.

 lib. The specific consequences of conrrntLYlist control of
 South Viet-Na:m and Laos for the secuTi ty of, successively,
 Cambodia, Thailand (most seriously), Nalaysia , and the
 Philippines -- and resulting increases in the t hreat to
 India and -- more in the realm of morale effects in the short
 term -- the threat to [Other nations in Asi~7 .

 It c . South Viet-Nam , &'1d to a l esser extent , La os, as test
 cas es of cO;':Itnunist I\mrs of n 8.tiona l lib e-~ 8.tionlt 'rTorld-l,·ride . It 41/

 Current U.S. obj ectives in South Vietnmu and Laos \Vere seen as
an integl'al part of the "overa ll policy of resisting Communist expansion
\'Torld-vide, II and particula:"ly a part of the Ifpolicy of resisting t he
e xpans ion of COIDmtLnist China and its allies, North Viet-Nam and North

 . 12 TOP SECRET -. Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Korea . If Thus, I~or South Vietnam to come under Communist control, "in
 any form," was seen as

 " a major blO':" to our basic Dolicies. U.S. prestige is
 heavily cormni tted to the maintenance of a non-Cormnunist
 South Viet-N~~, and only less heavily so to a neutra-
 lized Laos," 42/

 Unlike the ClU'rent obj ect ive s, those comprising a fall-back
 position dealt only with South VietnalTI . Moreover, they I'lere mod.ified
 during the cours e of the iforking Group 's efforts . The modifice,tions
 occurred in the \'lay the obj ect ives were presented -- in the context of
 the presentation -- rather than in their specific phrasing . The words
 rema ined the same throughout:

 "1. To hold the situation to gether as 1 ong as POSSl'bl e
 so that "ltIe h ave ti.rne to strengthen other areas of Asia.

 "2. To ta.~e forceful enough measures in the situation
 so that We emerge from it, even in the worst case, 1dth our
 standing as the principal helper against Communist expan-
 sion as little impa ired as possible.

 "3. To make clear .•• to nations in Asia particularly,
 that failure in South Viet-Nam, if it comes , vTaS due to
 special 10c2.1 factors that do not apply to other n ations
 we are committed to defend __ that, in short , our wi ll and
 ability to help those nations defend themselves i s not im-
 paired." 43/

 At first, th ese fall-back objectives for South Vietnam were pre-
sented as Possible alternatives __ to be considered in conjunction lvith
a reassessment of the costs and risks associate d vTith currently ac-
knm-rledged obj e ctives. Follovring its recognition of the extent to i'T hich
U. S.' prestige had been committed , even the second dr aft (8 November )
s t a"ced :

 "Yet •.. "!;OTe cannot guarantee to mai ntain a non-Communist
 South Viet-NaTa short of committing ourselves to iThatever
 degree of military action vTOuld be required to defeat North
 Viet-Ham a..l1d probably Communist China militarily . SUch a
 commitment ;'70uld involve high risks of a major conflict in
 Asia, 'Hhic~1 could not be confined to air and naval action
 but Would almost ineVitably involve a Korea.l1-scale ground
 action and possibly even the us e of nuclear I'Teapons at some
 point."

Despite a 11 th lS,
 " . . vTaS aclmo"dledged,
 l"C ' SOUt".Lh_ V·le t i l mlgnt...
 "nam . ' . L S t l_
 ' 11 come
al)art, " leaving the United State s d eeply commit ted but i<li th much of its
initi a l justification disintegrated . "Hence ," the evaluation continued,

 13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 ~OP SECRET - Sens itive

 II •.• we must consicier realistically "That our over-all obj ectives
 and stakes are, and just "ilhat ciegree of risk and loss ':Te should
 be prepared to make to hold South Vietnam, or alternatively~ to
 gain ti."".e and s ecure our further lines of defense in the 'Horld
 and specifi~ally in Asia. n 44/

 Significant, in shedding lig!:lt on the subt.le changes that
occurred in this ration a le during the ensuing three or four i·r eeks , i'Tas
its treatment of the third fall -back objective . Observing that IImost
of the lwrld he.d written off" both South VietnalU 3.nd Laos in 195~, an
early draft acknm?ledged tha t neither had acquired the international
standing of such former targets of Con:rr:lUnist aggression as Greece, Iran
and South Korea . It '\lent on to point out several historical characte:c-
istics of South Vietnam and Laos that made them such unique cases, in-
cluding : (l)!!a bad colonial heritage!! &nd i nadequate preparation for
self-government; (2) a " colonialist lIar fought in half- ba.ked fashion
and lost!!; and (3) !!a n a tionalist movement tali:en over by Communists
ruling in the other half of an ethnic2.11y and historically u"Yli ted
country .• II It then added :
 0 •

 IIl'f1h
 .J. e b aS lC
 . point, of course, is thaI" vTe h ave never
 J...

 thought 1;.1e could defend a government or a yeople that had
 ceased to care strongly about defending themselves, or tha t
 'Here unable to maintain the fundamentals of goyernment .
 And the oven{helTr:.ing "iorld im:;Jress ion is that these are
 l acking elements in South Viet -·IJam ••.. !!

Moreover , the commentary noted that there ,{as "Tidespread expectancy
that i f South Vietnam i'rere lost it i-TOuld be due to its lack of these
elements. Lf5/

 Subse<;,uent to circulation of the initial draft of the lIobjectives
 and national interest!! Section a number of critical or related conTInents
i'Tere directed tOi{ard Group Chairman Bundy . On Lf November , Michael
Forrestal suggested thc.t Ilan important fle.Yor!! .laS lacking in the original
analysis -- namely, lit he role of China!! and her need for !!ideological
 successes abl'oad .!! In his vie,'T, given Chinese :po licy , "thE! effect of
our i'T ithdra1{al from a situation in 1;Thich the people we \{ere trying to
help seemed unable to help themselves" 'liTOuld be more politically pervasive
in Asia than if China did not exist . He thought the U. S. object should
be to "contain" Chinese polit ical and ideological influence "for the
longest possible period," thus providing tiDe to create "at the very
least, Titoist regimes on the p~riphery of Chinao L~6/ On 6 November,
 0 •• "

\'iilliam Sullivan also urged :i.) l~cing U. S. :policy in Viet-Nam in the
"larger perspect i ve " of the Dolitical confrontation with Commu"Ylist China .
In an attached , longer eX'position of :policy rationale for the Western
Pacific, he presented con~eptions of the U. S. problem quite similar to
thos e advocated by Forrestal. The Doli tical future of the peoples of East
Asia 'IoTas portra,yed as de2.)encling largely on a struggle behreen Washington

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive O rder 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND Project Num ber: NND 633 16 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and Peking . Chinese political and ideological aggressiveness 1TaS viei'led
as a thre at to the ability of these peoples to determine their OVD
futures, and henc'e to develop along 'I'lays compatible ,vi th U. S . interests .
The U. S. commitment to defeat North Vietnamese aggression, even at the
risk of IIdirect m.ilitary confront ationll "ith Co:tnl"J.unist China, I'las pel~ ­
ceived as part of the longe r-term policy of establishing conditions
which permit the inde pendent nations of the region to develop the ability
and confidence lito co;e "vith the emerging and expanding pOl'Ter of China . lI!:!J}
These cOlliIDents may have influenced that part of the 8 Nove,l1ber version
which referred to current U. S. obj ectives as par t of the broader policy
of "resisting the expansion of Co::mnunist China and its allies .• • • 11

 The JCS membe r also stressed the importance of not falling bac1\.
from current policy aims . He stat ed that "in the eyes of the i'lOr l d l1 the
Unite d States 1vaS committed to its i ni tir.l obj ect ives lias matters of
natione.l prestige, credibility, and honor . II Furthel", that U. S retention
of lIa measure of free-,\'/Orld leadership" required II successful defense " in
South Vietnam against the I-lar s of national libera tion strs.tegy . Adriliral
Mustin critici zed the Bundy draft for oversta ting lI the degree of diffi -
culty associated 'I'lith succe ss for our objective s in S-VN . " He asserted :

 " Our first objective is to cause the DRV t o termine.te
 s upport of the SEA insu::'gencies .•.. To achieve this objective
 does not necessarily requir e that vTe tdefeat North Viet-NaIll , I
 and i t alnlOst certa inly do es not r equi.re that I-re defeat
 Corr.anu.n.ist China . Hence our commitment to svn does not i nvolve
 a hi gh probability , let alone ' high r i sks , I of a ma jor conflict
 i n Southe a st Asia ."

He characteri z ed the draft Ts expre ssion of concern over r i sks and costs
as an inference " as though the harder 'I,;e try the more '\ve stand to risk
and to lose. On the contrary , he stated, the II best hope for minimi zing
risks, cost s , and losses i n achieving our objectives " could be attained
t hough lI a l'esolute course of action. II L:-8/

 Admiral Nustin also attacked the i mplicat i on that there was
 II some alternative to our holding South Viet-Nam . There is none, " he
 stated , adding : Il\ole have no further fall-back pos i tion in Southeast Asia
i n the stated vievr of t he Joint Chiefs of Staff . " Specifically, he vlarned
that to 8.ttempt to strengthen other are8.S of Asia , " in the context of our
having been pushed out of SVi'J , Fould 'I:le a thoroughly non-productive effort
mili tarily .... It Moreover , chare.cter i zing the draft I s concessions to the
u.n.ique difficulties in Laos and South Vietnam as II sour gra:;:>es, " he
att e.cked i ts assumptions that '\-re could conv ince other nations that
failUTe in South Vietnam HaS due to stl'ictly loca l factors . He warned
that othel' nations vTould regal'd any such explanation on our part as
" completely tl'ans p3.:cent . " Concern ing any lack of GVJlT '\o!ill to defend
i tself , he commented , "A resolut e Unit ed States '\Tould ensUT e ... that this
l ack "Jere cLUoed , as the alternative to accepting the loss . " The JCS
member pOTtrayed a U. S . failuTe in South VietnC'm as an If abject h1.IDlilia tion ,1f

 . 15 TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive O rder 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 that "i;Tould be disastrous in sh<L'k:.ing the faith and resolve of the non-
 Communist nations \-rho rely on the United States for major help against
 Communist aggression . In that event , he sm.1' little possibility for
 effective U.S. reassurances . 49/

 The impact of these criticisms can be seen i n the Working
Group's final assessment of U.S. interests in Southeast Asia . In ex-
pla ining the need to cons ider a fall-back position, the statement
stressed the need merely to assess "the dre.wbacks!! associated I'lith
it . Lending to this judgment Here admissions tha t "there is some
chance that South Vietnam might come apart l.mder us 'w hatever course
of action 'He pursue ll and II s trong military action necessarily involves
some risl\:s of an enlarged and even conceivably major conflict in Asia . "
Then follovre d the statement :

 !!These problems fo:rce us to 'I-reight i n our analysis the
 dravTbac};:s anel, Dossibili ti es of success of various options ,
 In cluding the-.'d.T c;\.,bacl;:s of acce;>ting only the fall-back
 obj ectives· set forth be loll" . (Underlining e.dded)

Missing vlaS the earlier draft 's reference to potential costs 8.c'1d risks
involved in pursuing current obj ectives . Missing also vTaS <Ll1y sugge s-
tion that the Afuainistration might find some advantage in seclcing an
alt ernative to these objectives. 50/

 '1'he Working Group Ivent on to assess , in terli1s almost identical
to those in the initia l draft, the likely consequence of COnIDllli1ist con -
trol of South Vietnam for different l,wrld areas of interest to the
United States . The' group sav.r important distinctions bet"reen the likely
impact on U. S. interests in Asia and thOSe in the 1l0rld at large . For
the l atter , the most significant variable I'TaS seen as the degree to
which adverse developments in Southeast Asia might produce domestic
public revulsion against all U,S, commitments overseas :

 "Hithin NATO ( except for Greece and Turkey to some degree ),
 the lo ss of South Vietnam probably ,voulcl not shc,ke the faith
 and resolve to face the t hreat of Communist aggression or con-
 fide nce in us for major help . This is so provided we carried
 out any military actions in Southeas t Asia 'without taking
 forc es from NATO and vlithout generating a 'ilave of !!isolation-
 ism!! in the U. S. In other areas of the iwrld , either the
 nature of the Corr.!lU.Q.l1ist threat or the deg:::' e2 of U, S . commit-
 ment or bot~ are so radically different than in Southeast Asia
 that it is lifficult to assess t~e linpe.ct. The question ,wuld
 be I,[ hether the U. S. was in fact ab le to go on ,'lith its present
 policies . If 51 /

For Asia, other than Southeast ASia, the vTor~cing Group's assessment 'iTent
as follovTs :

 '16 TOP SECRET - Sen s itive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 liThe effects in Asia generally "rould depend heavily on
 t he circumst ances in which South Vietnam. Has lost a..n.d on
 1-rhether the loss did in fact great ly \·Tea.~en or l ead to the
 early lo ss of oth2r areas in Southeast Asia. . Nationa.l
 China. 0 S0uth Korea , and the Philippine"3 ivou.ld need
 .,

 maximum reas sura.."lce • I'Thile J an an I 13 faith in our military
 posture and determination might not be sh91l:en, the gl'oi"ling
 feeling that CO:rr'J'lllllist China must somehOiv be lived ldth
 might Hell be 2.ccentuated . I ndia 8....Yld I :can appear to be the
 Asian problem cases outside the Far East . A U.S . defeat
 could lee.cl to serious re"oercussions i n these cOli...'1tries .
 There is a great deal we- could still do to reassure these
 countri e s, but the picture of a defense line clearly breached
 could h ave serious effects and could .easi l y , over t ime , t end
 to unravel th e whole Pacific and South Asian defense struc-
 tur es ." 52/

 The consequences for Southeast Asia of Cmill.:1Uni st control in
South Vietnam -vrere s een as highly d i fferentiated and by no means a uto-
matic . The I1 clomino theory" was vie. .red as "over-s :Lmpli fied . f! The
Working Group felt that i t might apply lIif , but only i f , Communist
China . entered Southeast Asia in force and/or the United States 1'.Tas
 0 •

for ced out of South Vietnam , in circumst ances of military defeat . "
Nevertheless the group judged ths.t l1 almost i Ir.medi atel y ," Laos \vou.ld
b ecome extremely hard to hold and Cambodia ,,;ould be Ilbending sharply
to the Conmnmist side . II These developments i·re:ce seen as placing great
pressure on Tha iland and encouraging Indone si a to increase its pressure
on Mala;y-sia . Tha i land, it I'TaS noted, had l1 an historic t endency to make
' peace' with the side that seems to be "Tinning,11 and Malays i a. ' s " a h-eady
s erious HaJ"a~"-· C~1inese prOblem" was cited . The Horking Group concluded :

 "We could do more i n Thailand and ,vith the British in
 Malaysia to reinforce the defense of these countries, the
 ini tial shoc..'k "rave 1-rould be great . .. f!

This assessment vle.S quite clos e to that made in the 8 November draft in
which Bundy h ad gone -on to po int out that even if vIe succeeded in over-
coming t he shock we.ve in Thai l and and Malays i a , "the struggle '\vould b e
uphill for a long time to come . f! But in ne ither case vTaS much credence
placed i n the domino theory- . 2J../
 It should be n oted that Admiral Mustin and the JCS did not agree
vTith this assessment . The Admiral commented that t he JCS b e lieved the
so-c e.lled domino theory "to b e the most r ealistic estimate for Cambodia
and 1'hailand, :probably BlLrma , possibly Malaysia . ". In the conte:x-t of
l {ite 196~ , these nations \Tere exuected to colla:pse "pla i nly and simp ly
as t he corollary to our 1-1i thdraw~ l. I! 541 Accordingly, a specific no -
tation of the differing vie1.'point of the J CS vTas p l aced in the I'lo rk ing
Gr ou~o
 - 's f'l' __
 n 2.1 re:por.
 t 55I

 .17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - S:cnsitive

 In summari z ing its assess~ent of the consequences of COIT@unist
control in South Vietnam, the \'lorking Group stated:

 "There are enough I ifs I in the above analysis so that it
 cannot be (;)ncluded that the loss of South Vietne.m. 'would soon
 have th e totally crippling effect in Southeast Asia and Asia
 generally that the loss of Berlin "[ould have in Europe; but it
 could be that bad, driving us to the progressive lo ss of other
 areas or to t aking a stand a t some point 180
 tha!7 there would
 almost certainly be a major conflict and perhaps the great risk
 of nuc:j..e ar war . " 2§j

 b. ~rolution of Options . The alternative courses of action
perceived by the Working Group went through a fairly rapid evolution.
As conceived by Chairman Bundy and John McNaughton , who apparently
collaborated in their initial formulation, the ontions vould offer a
,vide range of mi litary actions and diplomatic postures . As the vieivs
of other members and interested officials ~ere expressed , and as it
b ecaIile more apparent hOi, little flexibility was perceived i,rith respect
to national ob<l ecti ves, subtle changes occurred . The effect \Vas to
narrOiv somei'That the range of effects which the different options might
achieve and to t end to b 1m' the distinctions b et\'Teen them . Hm·rever,
the process occurred so early in the life of the Working Group that it
is difficult to pin- po int the changes and someifhat presumptuous, relying
only on documentary ~vidence, to explain them .

 The perceived options i ,rere three in number , labe l ed A, B, and
C. Option A essentially- ifas a continuation of military and naval actions
cur rent ly unden-ray· or previously authorized, to include prompt reprisals
for attacks on U. S . facilities or other VC II spectaculars" in South
Vie tnam . These i{ere to be accompani ed by continued resistance to a
negotiated settlement unless stringent preconditions, amounting to
agre ement to abide by U. S . int erpret ation s of the Geneva. Accords, it[ere
met. Option B consi s ted of current nolicies plus a systematic program
of prog:cessi vely h eaV\J military pr es~ures against North Vietnam, to be
continued until current objectives 'were met . Negotiations were to be
reSist ed , as in itA," although to be entered ultimat e ly, but they were to
be carried on in conjunction vlith continued bombing attacks . Option C
combined current policies idth ( 1) additional - - but somewhat milder - -
military pressures against North Vietnam and (2) a declared "lilillingness
to negotiate . Onc e negotiations \'Jere b egu.l1, the military p:cessures >Tere
to stop, although the thr eat to resume itlaS to be kept alive .

 In a g"neral s ense , th ese distinctiol' S remained constant thr rmgh-
 out the Horking. Group I s effort . Hm-lever, subtle changes occurred . In
the initi al c onc ept j.on of tlB, 71 it Ivas perceived as Il meshing at some :point
itTi th negotiations, II based on an underlying assumption tha t negotiations
Ttlould probably be unavoidable . 57/ The full analysis of this earliest
forrD. of "Bf! (dis cussed more full;{ later) makes it clear that SOIc.e kind
of international discussions '. ~ould pro'oably be gin fairly early and con-
tinue as the intensity of our militax'y ·pressures mounted. 58/ Moreover,

 18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive

it is evident that these pressuxes vlOuld be applied deliberately to permit
 ·
eva1 ua t-lon 0 f resul-cs
 , at
 -each step . Ye-c,
 , t'ne lnllJla 1 f onn 0 f "B" 1vaS In-
 ".L' .
tended to embrace high intensity options -- in Mctlaughton ' s terminology,
a "full squeeze ." It vTill be recalled from the discussions earlier in
the fall, that t'1is t erm vms al)plied to gradu&~ed operations that included
mining harbors, bombing bridges and LOC t argets and eventually attacking
industries. 59/ As Option B developed, hovrever , it became associated "lith
prolonged
 . resistance to a neo-otiated
 b settlement. _60/ Moreover, although
the intensity of the military operat ions it e.1nbraced remained about the
s EHne, they Here perceived as being applied at a faster, less flexible pace .
For example, in a comment about this option on 11+ Nove...'llber, Admiral Mustin
1Hote:

 " ••• while the Joint Chiefs of Staff offer the capability
 for pursuing Option liB" as defined, they have not explicitly
 re con~mended that the operat ions be conducted on a basis
 necessarily that infle;:ible. All implement ing plans ..• would
 permi t s~spension vThenever desired by national authority ." 61/

 Perceptions of Option C became more like liB." Initi ally, the
additiona l pressures in "c" "Jere conceived as lTacLditional forceful measures
and military moves ." 62/ They included such operations as extension of
the current G.rmed escort of reconnaiss2..Ilce flights in Laos to full - fledged
armed route reconnaissance __ gradually leading to similar attac1\:s against
infiltration routes in the southe rn border regions of North Vietnam . The
initial Option C also provided for authorization of the a lready planned
for cross-border ground o~ er ations in Laos and possibly in Cambodia . By
8 November, hOI,rever, the pressure -cortion of this option 'Has perceived as
(1) including eventual attacks against other-than-infiltration targets in
North Vietnam and (2) giving ITthe impression of a steady deliberate
approach, II the pace of v:hich could be quickened if necesse.ry . .Moreover,
in this lat e r development of ftC " the U.S. negotiating position would be
to insist from the outset on fuil acceptance of the cUIrent U.S. objectives .
Ini tiaUy this position iwuld incorpor~te certain additional bargaining
elements that could drop out in the- course of discussion. 6~/

 This modification of the pressure and negotiation aspects of "C 'I
led other members of the Horking Group to expre ss reservations. Robert
J ohnson stated that this "proposed stiffer version" ',Ta S little different
from " B.' II He argued that ..the ~ only real differences nO'iT 1-Jere ( 1 ) a
declared vlillingness to n egot.iate and (2) our m:n·;illingness under "C!!
to carry the action through to its ultimate conclusions ." He cautioned
that the nev; version 'Has unlikely to produce the hoped for advantages of
IIpure C" a:1d tha:1; it could convince the Communists that our negotiatory
spirit Has not sincere . 64/ Enclosed 1,vith his comments ,'Jere the views
of the CIA member , "Tho also believed there vlOuld be confusion beti-Jeen "BI!
and the n ev; "c" -- particularly as observed by the DRV . Other reser-
vations '..rere expressed by Assist ant Secretary IvkNaughton, v7ho urged that
the proposed pace of the nev !lC" be slo~-red dO'dIl. This '{QuId be accomplished
by dividing the additional press'LlTe oper;:ltions into distinct phases, id th

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 only the armed reconnaissance in Laos as Dart of the first phase . The
 OSD r epresentati.ve also urged not yielding to pressures to participate
 in a Geneva conference lLT1til after several military actions had been
 t~~en against the DRV . 65/ Of all the reservations stated above , only
 the last ( delaying Geneva participation) was reflected in subsequent
 descriptions of Option C.

 Eve n Option A \Vas altered to some extent. The mai n emphasis for
 "A'l continued to be the currently adopted !,lolicies . At some time prior
 to 8 November (when the final analysis ivas drafted), interest I'Tas sho~rn
 in an Ilextended A." This version retained the poli cy of resist i ng nego -
 tiat i ons in hope that the situation ,wuld :L.m!,lrove, but it incor:porated
 l OY1- level pressure actions akin to the early stages of "C." The t Y'pe
 and intensity of the actions '\lOuld vary i n direct proportion to our
 success in convincing the lvorld and our mID public of the truth abo ut
Hanoi I s support , direction and control of the VC. II It might begin v!ith
armed recon..na j.ssance in Laos , include greater naval activity along the
co ast, and gradually pha. se into strikes against LOC tal'Ge ts in North
Vietna.m . I n t erms of military actions alone , extended trAil resemb l ed
closely the initial version of "C." Hm.,rever, it lvaS conceded that even
an extended Option A did not offer a very promising means f or moving
t m.,ra.rd n egot iations . 66/

 . Why did these changes t ~~e place? The avai lable doct~entary
materlals do not make this entirely clear . One f a ctor ,vhich may have
 influenced the modifications in all three of the options vTaS recognition
 of the problem of conflicting signals that could result frOYIl reprisal
 actions . If reprisals Here designed to be forceful and :puni tive and
 intended to match the seriousness of VC provocations, they might be so
strong as to int erfere lrith the messages to Hano i vlhich it ,-1as originally
i ntended l\[QuId b e conveye d by t he graduated pressures . I ndeed, it 'was
p ointed out that operations orders already developed by CINCPAC for
retaliations in reS)Xlnse to attacks on DE SOTO Patrols ( sho1J~d they be
resumed) vlere "of m~gnitude vrhich Hould not be polit ically vi able " except
unde r extremely serious p:covocations . 67/ Moreover, it vTaS feared that
improp erly orchestrated repr is als mightcreate lLndue international
pressU2.' es for negotiations that could upset the negoti at i ng strategy
appropriate for the selected option. ~ .

 Both "A" and liB" may have been a ltered as a result of changes
made i n "C. 11 The objections raised to the ne"l "c" may have encouraged
Chairman Bundy to i nclUde an extended "A" that \Tas closer i n the mi litary
s ense to his and MclJaughton I s original concept of graduated pressures .
Ivloreoever , i t had b een 'ooint ed out that the same negotiating si tue.t ions
 s een as appropriate for- "e" (to include discussions of Laos and/or
Cambodia as Hell as South Vietnam) could also apply to eventual negotia-
tions al':cived at th...rough "A." 69/ Besides , ioTith the st iffening of the
"e" negotiating Inormula, the distinctions betvTeen the respective bar-
gaining :positions for "A" and "elf had become someiolhat blurred . Op tion B IS

 20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive

fast er pace in its later versions may have been an attempt to mc~e a
clear distinction bet'Jeen it and the nei'T "C." Use of the term
"fast/full squeeze" in reference to ODtion B began concurrently v.ri th
descriptions of the stiffer version of Option C. 70/

 In addition, it is possible that the empha sis on a fast-paced
IIB,II with its harsher measures , was motivated in pai't by a desire to
make this option unattractive to hi gher authority . This may explain the
rather perplexed tone of the previously cited Mustin comment comparing
the JC S and Working Group approaches . Other than the JCS member , Y Lost
of the 'Ivorking Group members appee.r to have favored less intensive
pressures than thos e being advocated by the military . Despite a sense
of high stakes in Southeast Asia, which vas shared by several members
and other int erested officials, many of these persons did not vrant the
United States to plunge ahead vrith deeply committing actions as long as
there vras some doubt a,bout the GVN I s durability and. commitment . 71/

 Not incompatible vri th the forego i ng argument is a possible
additional explanation for the stiffening of Option C. As U. S. obj ec -
tives came to be vie,fed some1Vhat less flexibly, it is possible that
dominant elements in the Working Group thought it 8,dvisable to make
IIC II into a tougher position . There is little question that Option C
vms the natural heir of the concept of graduated pressures coupl ed with
a negotiated settlement advocated at several points earlier i n the y ear.
Several of the Working Group memoe1's had been instrument a l in shaping
tho se proposals and lTere quite naturally attached to them conceptucdly.
Now , advocates of the graduated approach 'VJe re confronted with : (1)
grea,ter pressu'c e s from the JCS and the ir ljJ~e -t hinkers in the Congress;
(2) recognition of little flexibility among Administration officials
regarding int erpretations of national interest and objectives; and (3)
an inc reasingly critical situation in South Vietna~m. It is lL~ely that
that these individuals viewed it necessaTY to stiffen their preferred
approach in order to improve its compatibility '\-lith the current policy
climate .

 'Iihatever the reasons , the options for reviei'T and discussions
'tTere somewhat more closely a,like than the ori ginal conceptions had been.
Option A provided for intensified efforts to improve the situation in
 South Vietnam and for somei'lhat int ensified militery actions in line i'lith
 current policy . Inside South Vietnam it provided fo1' improvements i n
the GVN administrative performance ~nd for str engthening different ele-
ments of the pacification p:.'ogram . These internal act ions ,rere stressed
 as necessary r egardless of 'whatever other measures i're re decided on.
Option Als provi~ions for measures outside the country included: (1)
 continuing ~nd incr easing the G~f ' s covert maritime harassment program;
 ( 3) resuming the DE SOTO Patrol opel'ations; (3) increas ing the scope of
Laotian T- 28 attacks on infiltration targets in Laos and ( 4) ivhen feasible ,
undertaking sme,ll-scale cross-border GV1T ground and air operations i nto

 .21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 20 11

,.--------

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 the Laotian Panhandle . The option also included individual U. S . reprisal
 actions "not only against such incidents as the Gu.lf of Tonkin 8.tt acks
 but also against any recurrence of VC I spectaculars I such as Bien Hoao I'
 The aim of these actions \-Tould be to deter repetition s of and to p 1.m ish
 for such a.ctions in South Vietnem , "'out not to a degree that Iwuld
 create strong i nternational negotia.ting pressures ."

 Basic to O::,' tion A I'laS its provision for "continued rejection of
 negotiation in the hope that the . situation will improve ." Hmvever , i t
 i ncluded recognition that "the GVN its elf , or i ndividual South Vietnamese
 in potentially pouerful positions " mi ght initiate " discussions "lith :rIa.noi
 or t he Liberation Front ." If a co alition govcrTl.ment ,,,ere thus arr2nged ,
 the Horking Group believed, the odds "Tere t hat it Hould eventually I!be
 t aken over by the Comnnm i st element ." I n the event of such discussions ,
 t he U.S. r esponse under Option A might be either (1) " stand as ide," thus
 dis associat i ng the United States f rau such a settlement, or ( 2) " seek to
 cover a retreat by accepting negotiations " tll..rough som~thing like s
 Geneva conference ) \-rhich might buy additional t ime . ]Jj

 Option B provided for everything i ncluded in "A" plus a program
 of U. S. military preSS1.U'es against North Vi etnam . These were to con-
 tinue " at a f airly rapid pace and Hithout i nterruption" UIltil the DRV
 agreed to stop supporting and direct ing the Ivar in South Vietnam and
 Laos . The pressures Ivere to begin itT i th attacks on inf iltrat ion t argets
 and increase i n i ntensity; hOI'lever , the option included provision t hat
 an e arly attack on Phu c Yen airfi e l d and certain key br i dge s in the
 northern part of North Vietnam might be required "to reduce the chances
 of DRV int erference YTi th the spectrum of actions" that were contemplated 0

 Although our 'Public p o s ition on negotiations \vould be "totally
 i nflexible 'l under Opt i~n B, it pr ovided for recognition of the need to
 n egot i a t e eventually. Under B, this Ivould occur simul taneou s ly wi t h a
 continuation and escal ation of the pressures and Iwuld be based on
 ",In fl eXl' bl e lnSls~ence
 '
 '.L. ~ '
 on our present obJec·~lves
 '
 . " ~~ever th
 1\"
 _e 1 ess , "B"
 aclmmdedged the need "to deal 1¥ith cha.nnels of ffnt ernationay communi-
 cation, the UN, a.nd perhaps __ despite our strong oppos ition -- a
 reconvened Geneva Conference of some sort l! even before l-re agreed to
 enter i nto settlement taL~s . Moreover, ~Thile r esisting n egotiat i ons,
 the option provided for (1) ma..~ing lithe strongest pos sible public case
 of the importance, increase , 8Jld present intolerab l e level o f DRV i n -
 filtr at ion" and ( 2) "strengthening t he p icture of a military situation
 in South Vietnam requiring the application of systematic military fo r c e oIf']]/

 Option C provided f or every milit ary act ion i nc luded i n !tA" p lus
 "graduated military moves against i nfilt ration targets, fi rst i n Laos and
 then in t he D3.V , B-Yl.d t hen against otb.er t a.rgets in North Vi etn21ll. . II The
 air strikes on i nfi l tl'ation ::::'outes 'ilit h i n North Vietnam vlere to be pre -
 ceded by 10l7-level reconnaiss ance fli ghts over. t he s ame general area o
 Advantage Has seen in i nitiating such meaS1.U'es "fol1m·.'ing e it he:r; additiona l

 •
 · 22 TOP SECF~T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 VC ' spectaculars' 01' at least stronao addit ional eVlClence of major infil-
 tration.fI Moreover , Option C made provision for th e possibility of
 making a flsi gnificc:.nt grolilld deploYillent to the northern part of South
 Vietnamfl , either in the form of a U. S. combat force or a SEATO-members
 force &s an e..d.chtional bargaining counter . 1.1 any event, fl CfI "lms
 intended. to fI give the im:ore ssion of C'. steady delibere.te approe,ch fl and
 fl designed to give the D. So the option at any time to proceed or not, to
 escalate Or not, and to quicken the pace or not . I!

 In "c , fI ml_l
 . 1 . t ary pressures i-Tere""Co
 ' b " "'n le
 e aCCOll!.po. ' d b-y II c o-rm'u' ''n;
 J..U.1 u..J. _ -

 c at ions -vrith Hanoi and/or Peiuing ll indicating in essence lI a 'willi ngness
 to negotiate in a.n. affirmativ~ sense . I! From the outset ' '\.Te -vTOuld b e .••
 accepting the possibility that -VTe might not achieve our full obj ectives . II
 Accordingly, the concept for IICI! included provision for an initial nego -
 t iating position that ~dded II certain b a rgaining e l ements " to t he b as ic
 U. So obj ectives . Once negotiations started the :milit ary pressures i'lOuld
 cease . As in fiB," these i'lOuld be preceded by a vigorous program of
 public information efforts and politi cal consultations "lvith Congress i onal
 leadel's and foreign alli es , surf-a.cing information on DRV i nfiltration and
 explaining our rationale for action . The latte:!.' \vould b e IIthat docum.ented
 DRV ill egal infiltration of armed and trained. insurgents , and over- a ll
 DRV direction and control of VC insu:cgency, had nO-VT re e.ched en i ntolerable
 l evel Emd that it was nOl! necessary to hit at the infiltration . and to 00

 bring pressure on Hanoi to c ease this infiltration and direction . 1I 7~/

 Co Significance of Negotiations . One of the most significant
 aspects of the NSC Horking Grau]) , s ancQyses vas its emphasis on a
 n egotiated settlement as th e final out come of cont~mplated U. S . act ion s .
 Regardless of the option selected or the pressUYe actions 6uployed, inter-
 national negotiations in some form \'Te"-'e perceived as the means by 'vhich
 the situation in Southeast Asia Hould ultimately be r elieved . Even in
 the event of a unilateral GVN or a South Vietnamese splinter negoti at ion
 "lith t he NLF , under circulllstances of a re18.ti vely shalloYT U. S. commit-
 ment (Option A), negotiation under a Geneva format ';TaS regarded as e.
 prefere.ble outcome 75/0 HOI-leVer , it i s also clear the.t a parallel aim
 "laS to insure that pressures on behalf of such negotiations did not be -
 come compelling before the U.S. bargaining position could be improved .

 Also Signific ant i s the fact that the kind of settlement which
 ,vas seen as the purpose of negotiation I'Tas one vhich would end North
 Vietnam's participation in the conflicts in Southeast Asia -- and con-
 currently , a lso end tile United States ' direct participation (a s i t Ivas
 in 1964) i n tho se conflicts . In vie"l" of thE: preval ent Administration
 perception of No_'th Vietnam as instig8.tor and 3.ggl'essor in the conflict
 ..Iithin South VietnG1l1 , it is i ronic that the Horking Group I s considera-
 tions of a negotiated settlement did not include the problems of a poli-
 tical settlement in tb.e South. I n the availab le source materials , this
 subject YTas r e.ised only once and even then Has not dealt 1-lith further .
 Theone i nste.nce "Tas in the context of Robert Johnson ! s analysis of
. Option B. In it he pointed out thc.t if a fully successful "B" negotiation

 23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

result e d ( one in 'which the DRV in f a ct complied ivith our de~ands to the
 extent that we ce ased OU!." pressure act.ions) '\ore "muld then have t o .
 consieler . o •\vbether or not to mal~e compromises -- such as, for example,
accept less tha n p e rfe ction for international supervisory mechanism,
 agree to permit ~he NLF to become a l egitlluate political party in the
South, or agree to Doli tical consultations behTeen GVN and DRV . It 76/
In other 'Horels) at the level of the Horking Group ' s 2.nalysis, the-
poli ~ical stakes for i'lhich the game in Vietnam vTaS really being played.
and "che very pO~'Terful and relevant cards held by the DRV and the VC
ivere not really considered . To continue the analogy , the Working Group
concerned itself only I-!ith the various opening bids the United States
might make in order to 8.chieve a position from i-Thich it coulel attempt
a finesse .

 The main problem apparently recognized by the Ivorking Group
Ivas that, given its current objectives the United States had fevT bar -
gaining points ivith Ivhicb to ne.o·otiate ~ In essence, it vTaS primarily
to fill this lack that many gro~n members and Administration officials
favored initiation of direct military pressures against North Vietnam .
To ~ome, bombing atte.cks Here something that might then be removed as
an lnducement for the DRV to StOD or to reduce its support of the mili -
tary ope rations in South Vietnam~ and Laos . To others, such vigorous
measures might at least serve as a demonstration of U. S . resolve to
combat external aggression but also 2"S a screen behind vThich to extract
ourselves should the situation in South Vietnam deteriorate further .

 Gaining maximum bargaining advantage from the military measures
c ontemplated u...'1der each of the options vTaS one of the major emphases in
t he Working Group ' s analyses . For example, llilder itA, tI emphasis was
placed on obtaining moxiro.um levere.ge from exploiting the th...reat of
further escalation -_ to be demonstra:ted primarily through reprisal
actions a.l'1d deployments . Under tl B, tI a similar kind of psychological
levera~~ ,<TaS to be achieved through the clearly ascending nature' of
the aC~lons , particularly i f some tble were penaitted to assess results o
Under ltC, tI tbe effect vIaS to be achieved by the combined effects of
(1) me..ximizing the t:h..reat of imnending escalation after each graduB.ted
and ca:cefully pCl.ced step and (2) minimizing the COIT!lnunist gove:cnlllents I
problems of tl face " as thev moved to"{ard ne .a otia;tion . 77/
 u ' Q _

 . I t vTaS the recognized lack of strong bargaining points that l ed
t he Horking Group to consider the introduction of ground forces i nto the
no:ctheTn provinces of South Vietnam. In advancing this proposal , the
State POlicy Pla~ning Council member pointed. out that tI,'Thatever the
stated U. S. intentions, It the Co:rnmul1ists -wouJ_d proo8.bly expect to put en
end to all air and naval attacks on Horth Vietnam merely by ag:ree i ng t o
enter negotiations . In that event , he pointed out, the Unit.ed States
could.n~t use these pressures (or the promised relief from them) as a
ba:-galnlng COll..i1ter during negotiations . I I~ ground forces vTere deployed
prlor to an Obvious need to combat invadLl'1g enemy troops , this dis-
position could be used as such a counter . Their deployment tlwould,

 ' 24 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By : NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

moreover, carry with it the threat of subsequent a i r and naval ,attacks
against North Vietnam . And,1I he continued, IIthreat may be as important
as execution ... in producing desired Comn1.Unist react ions. II 78/

 Althoug:1 initially advocated, as a vaLlable ba,rgaining piece
 for all the options, the concept of c1ep19ying ground forces for this
pur'pose became associated ,Iii th Options A or C. In the former case , it
\'Ta~ urged \'lith recognition that IIAII offered little l everage for be,rgain-
 ing other than hoped for ~~provement in the GVN's i nternal ailininistrat ion
and pacification efforts. For' IIC II it vms peJ;'ceived much in the sense in
'Hhich it \'ms originally proposed __ serving as an additional negotiating
ploy before it might be needed as an o~erational mi litary capacity. Such
a fOl'ce 'Has seen as taking either of t~o forms : (1) a U.S. como8,t force,
probably of division strength, or ( 2) a force composed of contingents
 from cer't8.in SEATO members (Austre.lia, New Zealand, the UK, Thailand and
the Philippines). Inter'esting, in vieI'T of subsequent events, is the fact
that participation by South Korea and the Republic of China specifically
was not to be sought, (This may also h8.ve been significant of the Ad-
ministration's tendency at the time to vievT Corrrrnunist China as co-insti-
gator of the Vietnamese aggression .) The contemplated ground force
deployment also 'I'las seen as serving some au.xillary functions: (1) to
deter DRV ground force deployments i nto South Vietnam; (2) by t aking
blocking positions, to reduce the infiLtration into the South thr'ough
Laos; and (3) (in the case of the multi.,national force) to improve the
int ernational picture of our 8.ctions in South Vietnam by virtue of
visible international par'ticipation . 121
 As stated pr'eviously, the primary bargaining element in Option B
''las the applicat ion of clearly ascending military strikes against North
Vietn81n. These vrould be halted only in return for demonstrated DRV com-
plia.'I1ce "Tith demands that it stop supporting and directing military
operations in South Vietnam and Laos. It vTaS pointed out that DRV
compliEmce under pressure '\vould be tanta.rnolmt to surrender . Further,
if 'we insisted that compliance i nclude calling off all acts of VC
ter'rori sm and of resistance to pacification efforts in South Vietnam,
 it \oJ'Ould mean IIvirtual unconditional surrender . II 80/ To obtain such
high stakes, the group recogni zed that intensive pr'essures ,wuld be re-
quired. BOliever, it also recognized that the combination of extreme
demands and harsh actions vTould be most likely to produce adverse inter-
national re act ion and incre8.sed pressur'es for an early cease -fire and
negotiations .

 The basic political obj ective perceived for Option B 'was to
IIprevent int ernAt ional consideration .•. from if'terfering with our continu-
ing pressures against the DRV u.'I1til the DRV has taken the actions vie
desire of it. II In vie'i'l of the eX'oected demands for an early cease -fire,
it 'Has believed advisable to pres~nt the U. S. case in the United Nations
at the time II BII military oper'ations i'Jere initi2.ted. This, it vIas felt,
v!ould chal'h"1el some of the international pressures into a controlled

 , 25 TOP SECREf - Se~sitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By : NWD Date: 2011

 ~OP SEC~ET - Sensitive

envirolliaent I'There the ensuing discussions "Tould likely consume considerable
time. .Moreover, ta.king such initiatives "Tould avoid the defensive posture
that the United states ,<TQuld be placed in if our milit ary actions vTere
introduced for condemnatory purposes by another governmento The vlorking
Group stressed t~lat under Option B, the Uni teo. states should firmly resist
a Geneva-·type conference until it heed obtained assurances of DRV compli-
ance "lith its demands. Should the pressures for negotiation become too
fOrmidable to resist ancl discussions begin before a Co:rmnunist agreement to
comply , it '\vas stressed that the United States should define its negotia-
ting position "in a vray Ilhich makes COYlIrmmist acceptance unlikely . " In
this manner it vlOuld be made lIvery likely that the conference vTould breall:
up rather rapidly, II thus enabling our military pressures to be reSUIDGc'L . §lj

 The only option that provided for bargaining in the usual sense
of the vTord 'vas Option C. The Working Group intended that ,'iith the ini tia-
tion of this option and the U.S. declaration of willingness to negotiate,
the Administration "lOuld have embarked on a ba:cgaining course . In the
group IS vievT, 'Ife 'Iwuld stick to our full obj ectives 8.t the outset Ilbut
"re would have to accept the possibility that, as the vTho l e situation
developed, 'He might not 8.chieve those full objectives lIDless He "Tere pre -
pared to take the greater risks envisaged under Option B. " In such cir -
cumstaJ1CeS, it acknOl'Tledged , "it might become desirc,ble to settle for less
than complete assurances on our key objectiveso" 82/ .
 Accepting in principle the possible need to compromise the initial
U. So position under Option C, . the Working Group specified a somevJhat
hardened definition of that position. The initial negotiating objective
( lithe complete termination of DRV support to the insUJ.'gency .•. II ) was
refined to specify that it incorporated three fundamentals: ( a ) that the
DRV cease its assistance to and direction of the VC; (b) that an indepen-
dent and secure GVN be reestablished; and (c) that there be adequate
international supervising machinery'. il Specific areas of IIgi veil for the
bargaining process 'were identifiec:' 8,S the question of free elections and
the degree of v erification vTe vlOuld require The group further provided
 0

tha.t during negotiations the intensity vTi th 'I>Jhich the United States ,[ould
pursue its initial objectives "Tould vc.ry ,-lith the extent of improvem.ent
within the GlnJ . If the situation in South Vietnam got better the United
States vlOuld press haTder for acceptance of its initial position . If the
situation grew' vlOrse, !lIve ,vould ha~e to decide whether to intensii"y our
military actions, mOdif'Jr our negotiating positions, or both . II 83/

 Because of a declared "Tillingness to negotiate from the outset,
the approach to a negotiating situation under Option C 'ivas vie"led by the
'-Jorking Gr,:mp as considerably different from that under Option B . vlhereas ,
 in the latter case it i'Tas believed that the UN iwuld provide the most
 useful medium for discussions , the preferred approach uJlder Option C ,vas
till'ough a. Geneva-ty-pe meet ing. The channels, both dil"ect fu'1d indiTect,
to Hanoi I'jere not believed useful for negotiating purposes . Although po -
tentie.lly helpfUl in relaying impressions of current c..ttitudes and
 negotiating positions in Hanoi and Peking, the Soviet government '-TaS not

 26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 seen as a. us eful negotiating i ntermediary . The UN vTas viewed as present-
 ing a special proble~ because of the approaching annual issue of Con$nunist
 Chinese membership. For this reason the Horking Group felt that it \-!auld
 not provide an effective negot i ating forum until late February or March
 1965, although i+. aCf"illOldedged the necessity of presenting the U. S . case
 b efore the Security Coul:1cil. In view' of these considerations the Working
 Group vie,·re d i t most desirable to yield to the expected pressures for a
 Geneva conference -- but only after conducting "a number of military
 actions aga ins t the DRV . 11 84/

 d . Perce ived Reactions to Options . The Working Group evalua ted
the relative advantages and disadvantates of the three options and con-
cluded that Option C provided the most promising course of action . The
evaluation 'lias based on thre e general criteria: (1) likely reactions of
allied and non-aligned foreign governments ; (2) reactions I·rithin South
Vietnam.; and (3) effectiveness in bri..11.ging desired responses from the
Communist government. With. respect to the first, the group reported:

 I1011tion A vTOuld cause no adverse reactions but if it failed
 it Iwuld l eave a considerable after - taste of U. S . failuT e and
 i neptitude; Option B wouid run major risks of sharply expressed
 condenmation , which i{Quld be erased only if the course of action
 succeeded quite clearly and in reasonable tline ; Option C would
 pr obably b e in bet"'reen in both re spects . II

With respe ct to the r emaining criteria, Option A seemed likely to achieve
little more than buying some t ime , and in some respects it appeared
counterproductive . While Option B was viewed as standing l1a greater
chance than either of the other t"lo[Q of attaining our obj ect ive s," it
also was seen as running "considerably highe:c risks of major military
conflict with Hanoi and possibly COlYl.Inunist China . " On balance , Option C
was con sidered "more conti-ollable and less risky of major military action"
than "B" and more like ly "to achi eve at least part of our obj e ctives " than
"A. " 85/

 The Working Group repor ted that Option A appeared to offer "little
hope of getting Hanoi out or an independent South Vietnam re-.established . II
I t was recognised that the actions included in this option could not
physically affect the extent of infiltration from the North and vTould not
be likely to affect Ha11.oi ' s determination to continue its policies . At
best, the group believed , "they might • • • keep the DRV from engaging in
further spectaculars, ~11.d thus keep the scale of the conflict in the south
vTithin some limits 0 "Hm-Tever, Option A \-Tas conceded little chance of con-
tributing to an improved G\~, in the short period of additional time its
effects might possibly make available . The group recognized sagging morale
ap.d doubts concerning U. S. intentions as the "most i..r mnediate problem" in
South Vietnam . Several members f elt that without fill'the r U. S . actions,
political collapse '\'Tas irruninEmt -- that to add only reprisals for VC
sp ec t a.culars might lift morale immedi ately th ereaft~r , as in the case of

 . 27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Secti o n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Tonkin Gulf reprisals, but 1-TOuld not have lasting effect . At best ,
under "A, II it I'las believed that the gradual deterioration in the c01.mtry-
side of South Vietnam would continue. 86/

 Althoug~ the \{orld.ng Group vie,fed a c:~cision to continue Option A
indefinitely as ruling out either "B" or IIC , " i t di d suggest the possi-
bility of extending I'A" to its limits and gradually phe.sing i nto opera-
tions like those in Option C. It \Vas suggested that tllis might , over
time , generate "favorable, or at least not uJlfavorable , II domestic and
international reaction ",hich along ,{ith the increasing cost of gradual
disruption in I~orth Vietnam might cause Hanoi to slow down its i nf i ltra-
tion . However, the result of this process, at best, vmuld be a gradual
improveme nt of the Do S . posit i on ,{ithout advancement toward a meaningful
settlement . 87/ Lacking a deliberate attempt to phase i nto something
like "C, " Option A 'vas vielved as "an indefinite course of action ." As
such , its II s0 1 e advantages " I'Tere seen as:

 " ( a ) defeat vmuld be clearly due to GVIJ failure, an<l
 ,{e oUTselves Ivould be less :Lrnplicated than if 've tried
 Option B or Option C, and failed;

 "( b) t he most likely result I'Tould be a Vi e t namese -
 negotiated deal, QDder which an evehtually unified
 Corrnnunist Vietnam "TOuld reassert its traditional hos -
 t ility to Communist China and limit its mffi ambitions
 t o Laos and Cambodia . " 88/

The group r S assessment VTent on to indicate that should this occur , Tha i -
l and ,Tould likely conclude that "we simply could not be counted on , and
"Tould accommodate somehm-T to Commlmist China even '.vi thout any marked
military move by Cormmmist China ." 89/

 The Horking Group reported that the actions in Option B offered
a number of unique advantages relative to the othel' options :

 "1 . Option B '
 probably stands a greater chance t .h an
 e i ther of the other t'ITO of attaining our objectives
 vi s-a- vis Hanoi and a settlement in South Vietnam .

 "2 . 0 ur d lsplay
 ' . ac t lon
 of reC'ol muscle ln . 1-TOU ld un-
 doubtedly have a salutary effect on the morale of t he
 r est of non-Communist Asia .

 "3 . Th~ course of military events vis-a-vis Communi st
 China might give us a defensible case to destroy the Chinese
 ComnrlL.'1.ist nuclear production capability ." J2J
 Hmvever Option B was also seen to present some unique problems
and to possibly lead to some undesirable results . For example, most of

 , 28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND Project Num ber: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive.

 the group believed O~otion B "rould risk an impaiTment of the ItU . S . stand-
 ing in the NATO and European fTe.me'iwrk . It The option "Tas believed likely
 to produce 8. majoT conflict and these effects "ifere seen as quite probable
 if it Itproduced anything less than an early and completely satisfactoTY
 outcome . It 91/ =-".coblems '\<Tere also perceived aJu home . It \las pointed
 out that a..YJ.Y U. S . -initiated militaTY pTessures against North Vietnam
 should be consistent "Tith the provisions of the Joint Congressional
 Resolution passed follm.Ting th~ Tonkin Gulf incidents, but that Option B
 would be difficult to justify under the authorities cited in this resolu-
 tion .

 ItCharacteTizing the use of force in the context of this
 alternative as a legitimate exercise of the right of indi -
 vidual OT COllective self-defense in res'oonse t o an " armed
 lt
 attack from the North would be a major public relations
 effort . II

Noreover, given the pace and IH~ely intensity of escalation in this option ,
it was suggestecl that lithe constitutional preroga.tives of the Congress,
for exa.m;>le, to declare "i'lar '/youl{j become - peTtinent . It ~

 As seen by the Working Grou~ the most disturbing aspect of
Option B ,·; as its almost irreveTsible commitment to a major military
effort, the ultimate nature of which vTaS difficult to predict . That
Hanoi would yield to U.S . demands at an early stage of ItB II 1-TaS considered
unlikely . ,The chances vTere considered II significantly g.ceaterlt that the
DRV would TetaUa.te , either by air attacks on the South or a ground offen-
sive either in Laos or into South Vietnam . It 'Nas considered most likely .
hOI Tever , that Hanoi 'Hould continue to hold firm, thus requiring the Uni tecl
States to " up the ante militarily ." Hi th further increases in our mili -
tary pressure, the group argued , lithe odds would necessar i ly start to
increase that Hanoi. . olwuld either start to yield by some real actions
to cut dmm, or 'iTould move itself to a more drastic military responseo It
The Working Group then cautioned :

 ItWe could find ourselves dravTl1 into a situation I'There
 such miU tary actions as an amphibious la...YJ.ding i n the DRV
 - - proposed as one of our further actions -- moved us very
 far to'.la.Td continuing occupation of DRV soil. Alternatively ,
 t he volmne of international noise ... could reach the point
 i'There , in the interest of our \wrld-i'iide obj ect ives , 've iwuld
 have to consider accepting a negotiation on terms that "TOuld
 r elatively but not necessarily be "rholly favorable to the
 attainment of our fu~l obj ectives . I I 2~

 Option C ,vas pa:cticularly attractive to the Horking GTOUp because
 it '!,Tas beli eved to be more controllable and, therefore , l ess deeply com-
l!litting than "Bc II MOTeover , in the event of a GVN collapse ( recognized
as a danger lU1cler all of the options), the group aTgue d, tr our ha.ving taken
strongel' meaSUTes I-Tould still leave us a good deal better off than under

 29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Option A "lith respect to the confidence and \'lillingness to stand firm of
 the nations in tb~ next line of defense in Asia . II 9L~/

 The r eact ions to "CIf expected by the Horking Group differed
 from "B" primarily as 8. resuit of the U. S. negotiating posture . The
 initial strikes 2.gainst ta,rgets in North Vietnam ,{ere seen as a "first
 break-point, II marking the beginning of major international pressures for
 n egotiation. Communist reactio~s to the early pressures i·jere regarded
 as little different from "B . II Some chance of a milite.ry res ponse Iras
 conc eded, but i t I-Tas thought more li};:ely that the DR'! 1-Tould IIhold :firm
 ylhile stimulating condemnat ion of fih e United StateEJ by world opinion,
 and , if in negotiations) take a tough position ." Under IIC," hOi-lever,
 our r esponse ,muld not necessar ily be an irn.medie.te incr ease in press~e .
 If the GVN situation had improved "yle Kould try to capitalize on [J.y
 •. • by pressing h2.rder for acceDtance of our initi a l negotiating position ."
 Ba,r:r ing success, the pl'essures - yTOuld continue,' &Dd the Horking Group
 reco gnized that the likely dragging out of the "Jar at this point would
 probably lead to a resumption of deteriorating trends in South VietnaJn .
 I t stated : If In this case \Ve iwuld have to decide i'Thether to intensify
 our military actions, mOdify our negotiating po s itions or both ." If
 U. S. military- measures 'I:ere increased at this point it was expected the,t
 11th e r e ,-lOU1 d be a prog-.cess i vely increasing chance of maJor
 . Corr..munlSt;
 . ,
 military response) II such as those considered tUlder liB." I f the U. S.
 n egoti ating position were modified at this point , the group perceived
 a Ilmajor problem., in that key nations on both sides Kould suspect t hat
 ,ve wel"e getting ready :for a "ayout ." Ther efore, i t suggested that
 additional military actions, possibly including greater deplo;;'.'Irlents to
 Southeast Asia, vlOuld need to accompany the modifying move s . 95/

 The major dis advant ages of Option C ack:lO\dedged by the Horking
 Group 1,'iaS its tendency to tl stretch- out" the confrontation and expose
 the United Stat es to an increasing variety of pressures Gild cr iticism .
 For exaraple, the group e,c}mowl edged that GVH mOl.'ale and effectiveness
ivere likely to suf':fer 2.t several Doints in the course OI~ the options :
 (1) upon initi al U. S. agreement t~ enter negotiations; ( 2) as it became
clear that the war ,vas dragging on; and (3) "lith modification of t he
U. S. negoti2.ting position . It also recognized several measures that
the Cormnunis ts might t~~e during a prolonged, indecisive period to
reduce our initi a l advantage : (1) improving air defenses i n North
Vietnam; (2) deyloying Chinese groul1d forces southvmrd; and (3) hard-
ening the ir prOpagand2. . Whi le i ncreasing t he enemy ' s publ ic commitment
to its current line of policy, these measures \wuld not serv-e as clear
acts of escalation . 96/

 These difficulties and other u..l1certainties encompassed by
 Option C illustra.te the intensity yTith T.-Thicn most members of the NSC
Ivorking Group iHnted the United States to couple limited military com-
mitments \-li th a negotie.ted settlement to relieve our pos ition in Vie tnam.
The fact that the group judged "c II as preferable to ".qn or liB , II d espite
its rather obv~ous inherent problems makes this evident . ( One ~ight also

 30 TOP SECRET - Sen s itive
 Declassified per Executive O rder 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 have -viel1ed it as evidence that United Sta.tes 'policy in Southeast Asia
 was fraught 'l'Ti th real contradictions,) For <2-X21l1:91e, the one feature
 that gave O.ption HCI! its most distinctive character -- early willing..l1.ess
 to negotiate -vri thout the concurrent effects of continually mount{ng
 military pressures -- ';'Tas its most uncert2.in a 'peet . This pe..rt icular
 part of the analysis 'Has revised tHice bet',veen the final drafting of
 the group I s findings and their consideration by the Principals . More -
 over, the Working Group had received at least one informed judgment
 to th e effect tnat , given H2,noi I s high stakes in South Vi etnam and it s
 perceived opportunity to deal the United States a major blow, the DRV
 would not be likely to negotiate in response to any of the options . 211
 On the eve of the initial meeting "ith the Principals, Chairman Bundy
 called. early negot i ations I! the least satisfactory part of the present
 script . II In particula.r it ~ms recognized as difficult to IIkeep up our
 ShovT of determination and at the same tline listen for nibbles . II 98/

 In many respects Oution C see.rns to have been favored primari ly
 for "That it incorporated -_ for th e means i t employed -- rather than
 for vhEl.t it might achieve . It certainly vTas not presented as an opti-
mistic a.lternative . Under IlC,U the group perceived that I!at best ..•
 th e DRV might feign compliance and settle for an OPPOl't unity to subvert
 t he South another day . Il This stood in marked contrast to 'I..hat it per -
 ceived as th e "at best" outcome of I! B, II namely that Hanoi "might be
 r eady to sit dO\m and Horle out a settlement in some form that '\'lOuld give
 a restoration of the 1954 agreements, !! hopefully Hith firmer guarantees .
Moreoyer , with IIC, I! the group believed that i n behveen the best and
'Horst outcomes , the United states "might be faced ',vi th no improvement
i n the int ernal South Vietna1l1 situation and ivith the difficult decision
whether to escal ate on up to major conflict vTith China .!! 99/ This ldnd
of outcome promised little more than the group perceived, as available
through "A" - - and l'r ithout the additiona l commitment of national pres -
tige and military force . But it 'Ivas an outcome readily perceivable
from a policy that clu..l1g tenaciously to rather major objectives but 1.iaS
reticent to accept major risks .

 5. Vieus From Outside the NSC ~I}'orking Grou?

 Vlhile the NSC 'Horking Group vTaS preparing its findings for sub-
mission to the Principals, other sources of influential opinion 'l'Tere
communicating their vi e-i'Ts to these individuals . In addition , it is i m-
port ant to consider that member s of the vTorking Group ivere most likely
communicating the ir r espective impressions of group :prog-..cess to the
principal Official in the agencies they representedo ThUS, William
Blmdy no doubt s~ared i dea.s "Tith Sec:cetary Rusk; John I.lcNaughton 'I'lith
Secretary l<1cNanl£'..ra; Harold Fo:cd ,OTi th CL'i. Directol' ~llcCone ; and Admiral
Mustin "lith General Wheeler, Some of these F-..cincipals no doubt had
inject ed particular ideas i nto the gl'OUp ' S deliberations . ~I}'hatever the
source , these high officials i'rere exposed to a ve.riety of suggestions and
vieupo i nts before reacting directly to the 'Horking (}r oup I s submissions .

 31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The follO\'ling seC-Glons deal .lith two rather significant sources
of ideas \>Those communications reached Secrete.ry j\lcNa.mara . HO\"ever, their
vim'Ts "Tere kno,'ffi to other members of the Principals Group as 1;7ell,
through the normal interdepartmental coordination p~ocedures . Tliese
propose.ls are si:;;nificant also because of their rather contending vie'w-
points on the subject of D.S . courses of action .

 a . JCS Vie,.rs . On four different occasions during the period of
the \'lorking Group ' s existence, the JCS submitted. formal proposals for
direct military strikes against North Vietnamese targets . On each
oc casion they took pains to remind the Secretary of Defense and other
readers of their earlier recommendation for a preferred course of action,
ivhich involved a systematic pattern of air attaci>.s on major t argets .

 On 14 November , tva such recornnendations Ivere made. One vTaS
intended to bring about expansion of the GVN's covert operations, to in-
clude "air strikes by ur.Qna~ked aircraft" of the V'NAF . It specified that
these vTere to be 'Isenarate and distinct from larger (more decisive) air
stri..~e actions reco~ended . .• on 1 November 1964 ." The JCS stated that
such smaller attacks vwuld be useful in: (1) continuing the pressure on
the DRV; ( 2) encouragi ng GVN ieaders; (3) p~oviding useful air defense
data; and (4) demonstrating patterns of DRV/Chinese reactions that could
be helpful in planning larger operations. 100/ The other recorr~mendations
came in response to Secretary Mcl'Janlara ' s request to examine possible
DRV /CHICQI/I military reactions to U. S . air strikes against North Vietnam .
In ansvTer, they discussed various Cor:mmnist military alternatives and
Do S. means to counter them, and they described "Ilhat they vie-Iled as the
most likely enemy reactions. These, they felt, ,,[ould be primarily in
the propaganda and diplomatic spheres because of \'That vras perceived as
China ' s general reluctance to become directly involved in conflict with
the United Sta.tes o In addition, the JCS repeated their recommendations
of 1+ November (with respect to the VC attacks on Bien Hoa) as r etaliatory
actions equally applicable to any other serious ?rovocations . They ,{ent
on to recol2Hnend deployments "to improve capabilities to conduct the
program of a ir strikes" reco;ll1lJ.ended on L~ November 1964 . 101/

 Four de.ys later they submitted another P1oOpOS8.1, in response
to Secretary }i1cNa..."nara ' s interest in a possible program of graduated U. S.
pressures against North Vietne.m . This possibility "Nas described as
 "a controlled progra'!l of systematically increased military pressures
against the Democratic Republic of Vietnam (DRV) applied in coordina -
tion vi th appl'opriate poll tical pressures . II (Int erest ingl.y , the Secre-
t ary ' s i nterest "Tas expressed on the sa.me day as NcNaughton ' s reactions
to the dra.ft analysis of Option C.) The JCS refe10red to their statements
 of 4 and 14 November , describing their preferred course of action for
 cp,using the DRV "to cease supporting and directing the insurgencies II in
South Vietnc.m. and Laos. HOI'l ever, they also proposed an alterna.tive
series. of specific actions, ll should a controlled program of systematically
increased p:cessUJ'cs . .. be directed . 11 Moreover, they recommended a set of
operational objec:t:i.ves ,vhich they termed "appropriate" for such a gradu-
ated program, as follOi'TS : .

 32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 lIao Signal the ',villingness and deterBination of' th e
 Unit ed States to em~loy incYeasing f'orce in support of ... an
 independent and stable noncommunist govermnent in RVN and
 a f'ree and neutral Laos ..•.

 "b. Reo.uce, progl.'essive ly, DRV support of the insur-
 gencies in Rv}: and Laos to the extent necessary to tip the
 balance clearly in favor of the Governments of RVN and Laos
 by :

 "( 1) Reduction of the arnou,,"1t of support avail2.ble
 through destruction of men , material , and
 suppo:l'.'ting facilities;

 "( 2) .. . jj.ng through diversion of DRV Y0S01JYCeS to
 i ncreased homeland defenses and alc:::ts ; and

 "(3) Reduct ion of the rate of delivery of e.v a ilab le
 support through destruction of bridges and
 other LOC choke points •.. and throug~1 interrup -
 tion of movements • ...

 "c. ful1.ish the DRV for DRV - supported milit ary act i on s
 by the Viet Cong/Pathet Lao ... 0

 li d . Terminate the conflict i n Laos and RVN only under
 condi tions 'tThich ~'iOuld result in the achiev6TI.ent of U. S .
 objectives ." 102/

 The
 ll
 final JCS proposal to be subnitted relative to the " courses
of action debate in Fovember 1964 came in direct response to the NSC
Working G)~OUp' s draft papers, circulated to int erested agencies for
comment on 17 November . 10 3/ Critici zing the group ' s assessment of U. S.
stakes and interests, the JCS called Southeast Asia lI an area of major
strategic importance to the United States , t he loss of vrhich woul d l ead
to grave political and nilitary consequences in the entire Western
Pacific, and to serious political consequences 'Iwrld- vTicle ." They r e j.t-
erated their vi e'.·r that the best probability of success in attaining the
currently recognized U,S. obj ect ives in that region 'i'TOuld be "by achiev-
ing the prerequisite objective of c ausing the cessation of DRV support
and direction of the insUl'genc ies i n RVN and Laos . II lO~/

 The JCS also critici2ed the three opt ions described by the Work-
i ng Group and outlined five alternatives to them, in an ascending order
of int ensity :

 1. Te:cminate commitments i n South Vietnam and Laos and 'i'Ti thdraw'
as gracefully as possible . The JCS called this "implicit in the content
of th e NSC I{orking Group paper but ... not clearly identifi ed as a separate
and distinct option .1!

 ·33 TOP SECr~T - Sensit ive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 2 . Cont inue act ions contained vTi thin pre sent poli cies , inc lud-
 ing reprisals fo~ VC provocations . The JCS identified this a.s the .
 group ' s Option A but sta.ted that the added demands it placed on t.he DRV
 .
 were " nO"G. commensurate \·rith those imposed
 . by DRV or R1T11T
 v~, . " I n essence ,
 .l

 they agreed "vith the Horking Group ' s evaluatio:1 t hat this alternative
 would neither accomplish our objectives nor alleviate the critical
 situation in South Vietnam .

 3. Undertake graduated military and political initiatives to
 apply additional preSSlITeS against the DRV,

 v-Tithout necessarily determining in 8.dvance to I"hat
 degree lye \'rill comIui t oUl'selves to achieve OUT ob-
 jectives, or at ';ihe.t Doint He might stop t o nego -
 tiate, or "That our negotiating obj ect i ves might be 0

The JCS stated that this alternative corresponded to the NSC 'Horking
Group's Option C, I.".hieh they criticized for its !Iuncertain pace " and
because it did not include " a clear determination to see things through
l' n full0 " T'ney argued that such an " inconc.1USlve
 ' " op t lon
 ' 11 co uld perTlll
 't
~11d
Col encou'''''' "
 . . . . . . age enemy bUlld-ups "GO counter OllY' mm, II " t' u " .
 ana n s 1 alse ne ' t'
risks and costs to us of ea~h separate military unclel'taldng ."

 4. Undert ake a II controlled program" of graduated. mi litary and
political pressures, based on an l1 advanced decision to continue military
pressures, if necessary, to the full limits of ,vhat military actions Ca.l1
contribute to;.vard U. S . national objectives . " The JCS called this 11 80
var i ant and logical extension " of Option C and cited their proposal of
18 November as a detailed description of it .
 5. Undertake a "controlled program of int ense military pres -
 sures . .. designed to have major milite.:cy and psycho logical impact from
th e outset, and accompe.nied by appropriate political pressUTes ." The
JCS offered this alternat ive i n li eu of the 'Horking Group ' s Option B
I'Thich they stated lIi s not a valid formulation of any authoritative
vieHs kno1,m to the JCS. 11 In particular , they specified that their in-
tensiv e program vlould

 be undertal~en on the basis t hat it 'I-1Oul6. be carried
 t hrough , if' necessary, to the full lL~i.t of what
 milit ary actions can contribute towm'd national ob-
 j ectives; it vlould be designed, hmiever , for sus -
 pension short of those lirni ts if objectives ,!;Tere
 earlier achieved..

For a full description of this alternative, they r eferred to their pro -
posal of' 14 November . 10 5/

 Of the five alternatives , the JCS stated tbeir belief that only
the last til'O offered II a probability of achieving [current U. S~7 obj ectives . II

 . 34 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 In addition to providing for stronger, more determined actions, these
 alternative s also provided for sizeable force build-ups th2.t "should ,
 make miscalculation of U. S . resolve less likely . " Option C "ras objec -
 tionab l e in the ir vie,'T b e c a use it did 'not permit "a clear set of agreed
 military objecti res " and because it urovided fJr "the contingency that
 as developments are analyzed, it may·be thought expedient to settle for
 less th an complete achievement of our obj ectives for RVN and Laos c IT It
 is important to note tha t in outlining the l as t tv!O options, the JCS
 stressed tha t they called for "controlled" programs . 106/ In the
 mode of AcllJ1.iral Must in ' s memorandUt""TI, referr~d to earlier , they were
 apparently attempting to combat the Horking Group's inferences that the
 more int ens ive actions ',-rhich the JCS advocated we re not controllable .
 It is f a irly clear that group m~"11bers favor i ng OI)t ion C h ad tagged the
 extreme Option B loTi th a JCS l abe l.

 . b. Rost01'i Vie'Ts . W"hereas the JCS emphasized daLlaging actions ,
 des~gned to affect HanOi's will be destroying a significant portion of
 the n capability, \'laU RostO"l'r urged a different approach . In his vi cI"T ,
 ~~~h~sis should have been placed on signalling to Hanoi and Pcl~ing our
 COl11J.Ultment to Use our vast resourc es to whatever extent requLced to
 reinstate effectively the provisions of the 1954 and 1962 Geneva Accords .

 . W"ith r espect to milit ary moves most useful for this purpose ,
 Ros-covl comi'llUJlicated to Secretary HcNmne,ra. his concern that " too much
 thought is being given to the actual damage I,re do i n the North) not
 e~o~gh thought to the Signal "T,ve Ivish to send." Outlining a concept
 slllnlar to the earliest Option C) h e urged that the initial use of
 additiona l force against N01'th Vietnam I! should be as limited and unsan -
 guinary as Possible" and that it

 " should be deSigned merely to install the principle
 that Lthe DRy] ,'Till , from the present fon/arel , be
 vUlnerable to ... 8.ttack ..• for continued violations
 o f the 1954 and 1962 Accords . In other ,-TOrds , T,'re
 would Signa l a shift from the principle involved
 . th e Toru~in Gulf response . " 107/
 In

Eve~ ~ore imJ?ortant, in his vie,'r, 1/TOuld be the Signals communicated by
 addltlOnal mllitary moves in the Southeast Asi a region. He urged de-
ploying U. So ground forces to South Vietnam and large-scale retaliatory
forces into the Hestern Pacifi c . Besides the ir value as a barga ining
counter , Rosto", S2;';'T a ground force commitment as a clear signal that
 "1'e are prepared, to fac e dO'l-rn 2.ny form of escalation North Vietnam might
mount on the ground . " He argued the.t sv,ch a Irove l-TOuld rule out "the
possibility of Lthe Com.munist~ re.d ic a lly extending the ir position on
the gro1.L.'1d at the cost of air and naval damage alone." He stated that
the in creased r etaliatory forces ,'Tould signal:

 "that ,{e are putting in p l ace a capac ity subsequently
 to step up direct and naval pressure on the north ,
 .,

 , 35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 ",
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 if that should be required; {an~ that we are putting
 forces into place to exact retaliation directly aga inst
 CommQDist China, if Peiping should join i n an escalator~
 response from Hanoi . II 1081

 The broader context of Rostol'TIS vie1j'T s O!l military actions \las
described for Secretary Rusk on the eve of the first meeting of the
Principa ls to discuss the vTorking Group findings . Stating his agreement
with those portions of the latest intelligence estimate -~lhich stressed
the Asian Communist pO-Hers r desire not to become involved in a direct
conflict Ivi th the United States, he framed .the "most basic rr U. S. problem
as follo'ITS:

 II • • • how to persU!lde it
 he Connmmist~ that a cont~nua~ion
 of their present policy will risk major destr'.1Ctlon In
 North Viet Nam ; that a preemptive move on the groQDd as
 a prelude to negotiation will be met by U. S . strength on
 the groQl1d; and that Communist Chi:r..a ,dll not be a sanc-
 tuary if it assists North Viet Nam in counter-escal ation ."

He then. repeated his prescriution of military moves earli er ur ge d on
Secretary EcN amara . Hm'lever- he stre s sed that t he se move s ,·rould not,
",I n th
 - emse 1ves, constitute a ' decisive si gnal. II :..:ore
 · ' ' f lcan
 Slgtll ' t In
 '
Communi st eyes, he felt, would be signals to ansver the question .

 "Is the President of the United St[1tes deeply committed
 to reinstalling the 1954-62 Accords; or i s he putting on
 a demonstr a tion of force that "Tould save f a ce for, essen-
 tially a U. S. politi cal defe at at a diplomati c conference?"
 ~091

 In ROStovl l s vi e"T , the CommQDists vTould not accept a setback until
they "Tere absolutely certain that the United states really meant business
-- an assessment that could only come as a result of firm public commit-
ments on the part of the President and appropriate follol-T-throug..'1. actions 0

He stated :

 . "I have no doubt '.ve have the capacity to a chieve a rein-
 stallation of the 1954-1962 Accords if we enter the exercise
 with the same determination and staying pover that vre entered
 the long test on Berlin and the short te st on the Cuba.
 missiles. But it vlill take that kind of Presidential commit-
 ment and staying pOiver . II

Acknowleding that the kind of conflict He faced lent it se lf to :9rolonged
 uncertainties and that the Communi sts could pretend to call off the
guerrilla war , only to reviv~ it again, he stressed the need to maintain
pressure on them for some time . The i nstallation of ground forces and a.
II , " ,
 non-sangulnary naval blockade ,'iere suggested as p;9.rtlcularly useful for

 . 36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 this purpose . Rosto,,! urged trying lito gear this ,:rhole operation loTi th
 the best cou..l1terinsurgency effort vie can mou..l1t "\OTith our Vietnamese
 friends ..• and not withdrmv U. S . forces from Viet lITem until the Ivar is
 truly under control. It 110/

 In closing, Rostow outlined a scenar io of action that ,vould
follmv from the kind of Presidential decision described above . This
would include, in sequence:

 (1) Immediate movement of relevant forces to the Pacific .

 ' (2 ) Immediate direct communication to Hanoi ..• including
 a clear statement of the limits of our objectives
 but our absolute cormnitment to them.

 (3) Should this first communic ation fail (a s is likely)
 i nstallation of our ground forces and naval blockade ,
 plus first attack in North, to be accompanied by
 publication LOf a r e~ort on infiltr at io~ and Presi-
 denti al spe ech . 111/ .

Thus, in their communications to senior officials in the latter half of
November, both Walt Rostow and the JCS stress ed a similar point . Al-
t~o~g~ advo~at ing different solutions, they both em~h8 sized that the
A~lnlstratlon could not expect to dissuade H~~oi and Paking from con-
tlnued ? ursui t of the DR'iI ' s inmortant and strongly-held comilli tments
without making corres pondingly-strong commitments to resist them. The
JCS, for their Oim re asons , sought to avoid a commitment of ground
forces to Vietnam and argued inste ad for punitive a ir and naval actions .
Rostow felt that by forceful and meaningful de.t'llonstra-ciQns of national
r~solve, including the commitment of ground forces to South Vietnam,
dlrect Use of force against the Communist nations need be minimal .

 . 37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 II .

 POLICY DECISIONS

 The efforts of the NSC Working Group vrere intended to be completed
 in preparation for a major policy revie'w' late in November 1964 . Plans
'vere made for Ambassador Taylor to return to \-!ashington from Saigon to
 join in a series of strategy meetings . The expectations vrere that the
meetings would result in a Presidential action order to supersede the
one issued following the hi gh-level conference in September (NSAM 314) .

 Meetings with the President Ivere scheduled for the vleek following
Thanksgiv ing , '\vhen he returned from his '\vorking holiday at the r anch .
Preliminary meetings between Ambassador Taylor and the principal officials
from agencies ,'lith national security interests in Southeast Asia vrere
held during the preceding Iveekend, 27-29 November . The. Ivh01e episode
took place amid i'lidesnread speculation that a major POllCY cha..'1ge was
imminent and rumors that Taylor had returned to insist on the bombing
of infiltrat ion targets in Korth Vietnam and Laos . Public and Congress-
i onal speculation ra..'1 so high on the eve of the meetings that the Hhite
House and St ate Department sought to dampen it ,'lit h statements that
Taylor T s reported comments !! vlere not policy!! and that his return did not
mean that II any great, horrendous decision!1 ",ould result . 112/

 1. Reactions of' Principals to Horking Group Analyses

 Before their meetings i-lith Taylor and the President, the Prin-
cipals in 1ATashington met to consider the \\forking Group T s findings and
to assess the major is s ues affecting ruture U. S. courses of action. Just
prior to their initi a l gathering, on 24 November , ~\Tilliam Bu..ndy h ad for-
"larded a list of questions and comments pertaining to the \\forking Group T s
findings, and these served as a kind of agenda. Included were such issues
as: ( 1) Vlhether the relative advantages among the t h ree options vlere
actually as evident as the group had found; (2) ,-Thether or not the papers T
assessment of U.S . stakes in Southeast Asia should be revised in the di-
rection of JCS attitudes; (3) whether the actions associated with the
various options could in fact be carried out to achieve the results ex-
pected; and (4) whether a deployment of ground forces to South Vietnam
vrould in fact provide any advantages. 2:13/ (TAB A)

 a . Consensus Among NSC Officials. As the Principals meeting
opened, Secretary Rusk rais ed an is sue that vlaS hi gh among Administration
concerns -- n amp.ly that the J..lllerican public ivas '\'mrried about the chaos
in the GVN, and particularly vlith respect to its viability as an obj ect
of an incre ased U.S. commitment . Secretary McNamara and General Hheeler
conceded th e plopriety of this concern but '\'larned t hat the situat ion in
the GVIiJ Hould only get i-TOrSe if additional steps' were not taken to reverse
present trends. Rusk then presented a question '\-Thich seemed basic to the

 . 38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

,vhole rationale for contem~lated U. S . courses of action . He asked
whether the situa tion in South Vietn~ could be improved i n time to
 save it if the DRV ivere now to ,dthdraw its support. CIA Director
McCone conceded that the VC "'{QuId still have plenty of capability
remaining but eX:9ressed the vie-~T that the situation could be coped
,·rith from the st and~o int of internal security criteria. At this point
Under Secretary of State George Ball asked if bombing North Vietnam
could improve the situa tion in South Vietnam directly. IftcNarnara re-
plied that it could not unless the bomb ing actually cut down the infil-
tration into the South. After agreeing with a Rusk comment that the
struggle i<!Ould be a long one, even with the DRV out of it, the group
reached consensus that South Vietnam could be made secure , prov ided the
Saigon government could maintain itself. 114/ This was the first of
sever a l major policy judgments reached in the course of the meeting.

 Other points of clear consensus ("\"lith no more than a single
dissenting opinion) were as follQ1ivs:

 ( 2) 'l'hat the situation in South Vietnam would deteri-
 orate further under Option A even vri th reprisals,
 but th~1.t there was a "significant cheXl ce" that the
 actions proposed under "B" or "c" would result in
 .
 an lffiproved G~{ per f ormance an d " mak
 -e POSSl' ble " an
 improved security situat ion (Geor ge Ball indicated
 doubt ) .

 ( 3) That any negotiating outcome under Option A (;tTith ·
 . or vIi thout U. S. negotiating participation ) probably
 ~<!Ould be clearly iwrse than under Option B or C.

 (4) That it was doubtful (contrary to the view expressed
 i n the t-lorking Group papers) that Option B "\"lOuld
 h ave the best chance of achieving the full U. S . ob-
 jectives ( General ~vheeler expressed agreement with
 the Working Group st atement) 0

 (5) That the requirement of Op tion C, "that we ma intain
 a credible thre a t of major act ion ,vhile at the same
 time seeking to negotiate," could be c arried out
 despite acknQ1ivledged public pressures.

 (6) That the Administration could safely aSsltme that
 South Vietnam could "only come apart for morale
 re asons , and not in a milit ary sense, II as a result
 of intensified VC effort .

 (7) That early military actions against North Vietnam
 under Option C should be determined , but low in
 scale -- that at this stage, strong damaging actions

 . 39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 should be limited to reprisals (General Hheeler dis-·
 sented, stating that our losses might be higher in
 the long run with such an approach) .

 (8) That the loss of South Vietnam would be more serious
 than stated in Section II of the I'lorking Group's
 draft papers and tha.t the Administration ' s assess-
 ment should be revised at least in the direction of
 the JCS vieupoint (George Ball argued against this
 judgment) . 115/

 The context of the Principals' discussion of this last point
contained some significant expressions of opinion . Secretary Rusk stated
the vievlpoint that the confidence of other nations in the United states
l'lOuld be affected by the loss of South Vietnam despite their poss i ble
indifference to the political struggle in Southeast Asia . He added that
i f I'!e did nothing to c.ffect the course of eve:'lts' in Vietnam it Il"Ould
have the effect of giving more to de Gaulle . Hm-lever, Rusk did not ac cept
the \'lorking Group's ration a le that ,,·re would obtain international credit
merely for trying . In his vielv , the harder vie tried and then failed, the
Iwrse our situation "IlOuld be . ' McGeorge Bundy disagreed with this last
point , except to acknmrledge that to attempt something like Option Band
then quit 'YTould clearly be damaging. Secretary Mcl'Tamara seemed to support
the (McGeorge) Bundy vi el'! , stating that "B" fol l o'Yied by failure would
clearly be '1lOrse than Option C follov!ed by a compromise settlement.
George Ball expressed strong agreement 1(Tith the last Rusk point , saying
that de Gaulle 'would portray us as being foolish and reiter at ing that the
 II
d&."Uage to U. S. prestige vlOuld be 'YTorse if 'YTe tried either liB" o r "C and
failed . General Hheeler st ated the opinion that to do little or nothing
at this point would be an act of bad faith . ~IT. McCone pointed out a
perpetual dilemma i f the Administration continued to act despite South
Vietnamese deterioration; hence , he ur ged great care. 116/

 I t i s interesting to note the views and associations of the two
o ccasional dissenters in the series of consensus judgments rendered by
the Principals. General Hheeler , Cha irman of the JCS, expressed vieH-
points consistent throughout with the recorded JCS views on future courses
of action . On the other h and , George Ball , Under Secretary of State, had
no obvious j urisdictional or institutiona.l influences to affect his .iudg-
ments . l';evertheless, kno,'Tll to Administration observers as lithe devil ' s
advocate , " he had developed something of a reputation as an independent
thinker . At about the time of the Horking Group deliberations , for
example, he developed a paper suggesting U. S. diplomatic strategy in the
event of an i mmi_nent GVN collapse . In it , he advocated i·mrking tl1..rough
the U.K., i'rho \'iould i n turn seek cooperation from the USSR , in arr anging
a,n internationa l conference ( of sme.ller proportions tha.Yl those at Geneva )
at I'Thich to vlOrk out a compromise political settlement for South Vietnam .
117/ In addition, Ball's prevalent occupation Ivith European affairs may
h ave influe nced. him to viei·r Southeast Asia as of lesser importance to the
U. S . national interest .

 . L~O TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 b. Views Lacking Cor-sensus . Also discussed at the 24 November
 Principals meeting were several issues on which consensus was not re ached .
 Nost of these related to immediate U. S. actions that vlOuld need to be
 taken irre spective of the option selected, or to problems faced in carry-
 i ng out a particular option . Since earlier a~reements had indicated
 little interest in Option A, only "B" and "C II were examined further.

 Di scussions of Option B dealt primarily with questions of the
 intens ity of blOl'iS that might be struck at Korth Vietnam . Wi th r espect
 to 1vhether DRV airfields should be struck early or as a part of a more
 gradual sequence, General Hheeler pointed out that early strjJ~es on air-
 fields were what made liB" operations so different . It ,>JaS these strikes
 at potential DRV capabilities to interfere with U. S. attacks , or to
 r etaliate, that made systematic, intensive air operations possible . In
 re sponse to a specific quest i on from the v·j orking Group , the possibili ty
 of using nuclear "reapons "JaS a l so discussed . Secretary McNamara stated
 that he could not imagine a case where they "rould be considered. McGeorge
 Bundy observed that under certain circumstances there might be great
 pressure for their use both from the military and from certain political
 circles . General iilheeler stated that he "rould not norma lly vote for their
 use - - never , for example, i n an interdict ion role. Ho,,;ever, he suggested
 that they might be considered in extremis -- for example, to hold off
 an enemy to s ave a force threatened ,lith destruction , or to knock out a
 special target like a nuclear weapons facility. In re spons e to Secretary
 Rusk 's query as to their potential for cordoning off an area , both
 .McNa."l1ara and vThee ler anm'J ered negatively . 118/

 Discus s ions of Option C dealt with the pr oblem of early negotia-
 tions and, at greater length , with that of deploying ground forces to
 South Vietnam . On the former, there was little interchange noted i n the
 proceedings . Desp ite the Horking Group 1 s admitted frustration "rith this
 particular i ssue, only two Principals 1 comments were r ecorded . McGeorge
 Bundy stated t he vie"i" that we should let negotiations come i nto play
 slowl y . Secretary Rusk expressed concern that the G~~ would be very
 sens i tive on the iss ue of a negotiating conference . Earlier, hmrever,
 he indicated his opinion tha.t pressure for a conference would not be a
 seri ous problem as long as military actions continued . 119/

 On the issue of sending ground forces to South Vietnam i n the
 early stages of Option C, there was no firm conclusion. Secretary
 Mcl~amara stated that there w-as no military requirement for ground forces
 and that he would prefer a massive air deployment . In response to
 General Hheeler's suggestion that some ground forces could b e justified
 for air defense and base security purposes, he ackno1.dedged that I\le
 might do both ." Mr . McCone stated the op i nion that U. S. ground forces
 would help stabilize South Vietnam, similar to their effect on Lebanon
 i n 1958. They mi ght even provide a general security force in the South .
 Mc:Namara disagreed . Secretary Rusk and McGeorge Bundy suggested their
 utility in proving a "preemptive effect," pre su-.m.ab ly to deter IJorth
 Vietnamese offe nsive moves i nto the South . To this McCone added thd

•
 41 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 these forces might be equipped in ways to show our determination. In
 the end, it "i'laS agreed to raise this issue vlith Ambassador Taylor, at
 the Principals next meeting. Significantly, the value of grolli~d forces
 as a bargaining counter apparently was not discussed, thus providing
 one more indication of the Principals reticen"e to de a l with the issue
 of negotiations. (It is interesting to note in this respect that
 William Bundy ' s memorandlli~, formally sUY&narizing the points of consensus
 and disagreement, does not deal 1vith the ear ly negotiating problem
 despite its being a specific agenda item which he had suggested as
 Chairman of the Horking Group .) 120/

 The only basic issue between the options on uhich the Principa ls
 did not arrive at a consensus "ivas the question of the relative risks of
major conflict entailed by Options Band C. General 'Ivheeler stated that
there was less risk of a major conflict before achieving success under
 Option B than under Option C. Secretary McNamara believed the opposite
to be true. Secretary Rusk argued that if IlBIl were selected, there
"iwuld be no chance to apply the JCS variant of IlC, t1 '\'lhereas under the
Working Group's IlC, II this would still be left available. He observed
that entry into the JCS variant of IIC II would feel something like the
Cuban - is sile rlSlS. McNamara then suggested a four-vTeek program of
actions follo'lving the general pattern of Option C. Mr . McCone stated
that they sounded IIfine,!! but that in his opinion the !!negotiating mood!!
interfered "Ti th their potential effects . He agreed to attempt a paper
to deal more directly with the relation of risk to likely success, as
beh'Teen the two options. In the end, the only c onc Ius ion that could be
ill'awn was that there was not complete agreement that liB!! ran a higher
risk of major conflict than "C,!! as alleged by the Horking Group. 121/

 During the meeting of 24 November there vTaS no clear decision
as to 'Ivhich option VIas favored by the Principals. It seems likely that
IIAII VTaS favored by Ball. Hheeler clearly favored IlB,11 and he may have
had support from NcCone, although this is far from clear. On the basis
of either their participation in the ~vorking Group or from st atements of
preference made at the meeting, it is clear that IIC II was favored by
McNamara, McHaughton , Rusk , and the Bundy brothers. However McGeorge
Bundy and 1-1cl'\amara apparently preferred a !!firm C,!! whereas the other
three wanted a more restrained, incremental approach. 122/ '

 c. Policy Views from Saigon. The same group of Principals
t hat met on the 24th re-assembled on 27 lTovember for their first meet-
i ng with Jtmbassador Taylor. Present also was Michael Forrestal \oTho had
gone to Saigon to help prepare Taylor for the forthcoming stra.tegy meet -
ings and t,o app!'ise him of the ':Torking Group efforts. 123/ Taylor led
off with a prepared b riefing on the current state of affairs 1Vithin
South Vietnam .

 Ambassador Taylor's estimate of the situation in South Vietnam
was rather ble~~. Confirming many of the assessments made weeks earlier

 42 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 in intelligence estimates, he reported continued deterioration of the
pacification program and continued ,veakness in the central government.
The former was portrayed as . related to i ncreased direction and support
of VC operations from Hanoi and increasing VC strength despite "very
heavy losses ini licted almost daily" by the ASVN . Particular areas of
concern were i dentified as the area surrounding Saigon and the northern
provinces , which ,{ere !Inm. in deep trouble." Taylor related GVH weak-
ness to political factionalism , mounting war weariness and hopelessness ,
"particularly in the urban areas," and a lack of "team play or mutual
loyalty" among many central and provincial officials . Calling such
chronic weakness "a critical li ability to future plans , " he ivarned that
l ack of an effective central government caused U.S . efforts to assist
South Vietnam to have little impact . 124/

 To alter the course of what Taylor called "a losing game in
South Vietnam ," he recommended three measures : (1) "establish an adequate
government"; (2) improve the counterins urgency effort ; and (3) "persuade
or force the DRV" to stop aiding and directing the insurgency . With
respect to the first , Taylor allovTed that it was "hard to decide vlhat is
the minimu.."'U government which is necessary to permit reasonab le hope" of .
success . However, he stated:

 " ... it is hard to visualize our being willing to make
 added outlays of re sources and to run increas i ng political
 risks without an allied government Ivhich, at least , can
 speak for and to i ts people, can maintain law and order in
 .the principal cities, can provide local protection for the
 vit al military bases and installations, can raise ~nd sup-
 port Armed Forces, ru~d can gear its efforts to those of the
 United States . Anything les s than this \wuld hardly be a
 government at all, and under such circmnstance s, the
 United States Government might do better to carry forward
 the war on a purely unilateral basis .

Wi th regard to the counterinsurgency effort, he opined , "iVe cannot do
much better than '\'That we are doing at present until the government
improves. " 125/

 .Ambassador Taylor saw U. S . military actions directed at the DRV
as fulfilling a twofold purpose . On t he one hand, he believed that even if
an effective government were established, "we will not succeed in the end
unless ive drive the DRV out of its reinforcing role and obtain its cooper-
ation in bringing an end to the Viet Cong i nsurgency . " On the other hand ,
he sa,T actions ·)utside South Vietnam as a meac1.S to improve GV1'~ morale and
confidence . Acknm'lledging that using our aid, advice and encouragement
on behalf of programs to st ab ilize the goverr~ent would probably be insuf-
ficient for this purpose, he suggested additional measures :

 "One way to accomplish this lift of moral e imuld be to
 increase the covert operations against l\orth Viet iiam by sea

 43 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 and air and the counterinfiltration attacks within the Laotian
 corridor. Ivhile the former ""ould be covert •.• knmdedge of
 their occurrence could be made knm-m ... to give the morale l ift
 which is desired. Additionally 'VoTe could engage in reprisal
 bombings , to repay outrageous acts of the Viet Cong in South
 Viet ram .••• tt

HovTever, be added that even all these actions might not be sufficient
lito hold the present government upright, tr in which case we 'Ivould have
to reconsider our polici es . Our alternatives, he said, would be either
to support one form or another of a replacement govermnent or to "limit
our contribution to military action directed at North Viet-J'Tam . 1I 126/

 In addition to t he military actions already ident ified with
morale-raising purposes, Taylor suggested:

 " ••• we cou ld begin to escalate progressively by attack-
 i ng appropriate targets in North Vi et-Nam . If we justified
 our action prlinarily upon the need to reduce infiltration,
 it 'would be natural to direct these attacks on infiltration-
 related targets such as staging areas, training facilities,
 communications centers and the like .. . . In its final forms ,
 this kind of attack could extend to the destruction of all
 import ant fixed t argets in liorth Viet-x/am and to the inter-
 diction of movement on all lines of communication . 127/

 Ambassador Taylor ' s views regarding the circumstances under which
such escalatory actions should be initiated were not entirely clear i n his
briefing to the Principals . After reiterating the 'necessity of stepping
up the 34A operations , i ncreasing those in Laos , and undertaking reprisals
as part of the efforts to raise morale and strengthen the GVI~, he stated
tlvo somewhat different, although not necessarily contradictory , viewpoints
on the question of stronger mi l itary actions :

 "If this course of action is inadequate, and the govern-
 ment falls , then we must start over again or try a neii
 approach .... In any case, 'Voce shoul.d be prepared for emer -
 gency military action against the Eorth if onl y to shore up
 a collapsing situation .

 "If, on the other hand ... the government mai ntains and
 . proves itself, then i'le should be prepared to embark on a
 methodical 'Program of mounting air attacks in order to
 accomplish our pressure objectives vis-a-vis the DRV .... "

He then proposed a scenario for controlled escalation, the actions i n YThich
were quite similar to an extended Option A or a low-order Option C without
declared negotiating y/illingness. 128/

 . 44 TOP SECREl' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 . The impression is that Taylor visualized graduated air opera-
 tions having primarily psychological impact on the Horth following
 logically from successful political efforts in the South -- but that
 he also ,'mnted an (perhaps somevlhat stronger) air c2.1ll.paign held in
 readiness as a punitive measure in the event of a critical reversal in
 the South . This impression is strengthened by his earlier comment
 about U. S. alternatives and by the second of "three principles" which
 he recommended to the Princinals '
 ~ .
 "a. Do not enter into negotiations until the DRV is
 hurting.

 "b. Never let the DRV gain a victory in South Viet-Ham
 without having paid a disproportionate price .

 . " c. Keep the GVH in the forefront of the combat and the
 negotiations." 12 9/

 Involving the GVN in all phases of our operations ",as an im-
portant aspect of the Ambassador's-thinking about next cOur£es of action.
He stressed that before making a final decision on the course we "Tould
follm", it 'VGuld be neces sary to obtain the react ions of Prime Minister
Huong and General Khanh to our various alternatives . He explained:

 "They will be t aking on risks as great or greater than
 ours so that they have a right to a serious hearing . He
 s hould make every effort to get them to ask our help in
 expanding the war . If they decline, we shall have to re-
 . think the whole situation."

"If, as is likely, they urge us " Taylor added, ,'T e should take advantage
of their enthusiasm "to nail do~n certain important point.s " on which we
vlant their agreement . Included were Gvi'J pledges to maintain military
and police strength, to replace incompetent officials, and to suppress
di sorder and agreements to stinulated divisions of responsibility for
conducting military operations: 130/

 Taylor's briefing made clear his commitment to l imited U.S. ob-
jectives in Southeast As ia and his believe in the necessity of assur i ng
the DRV of this limitation. Further, he made explicit his expectation
that the DRV "muld not accept U. So offensive actions "Tithout some inten-
sified military reaction in the South and that any DRV submi ssion to our
demands might well be temporary .

 d. Discussions vrith Ambassador Taylor . Following the briefing,
the Principals commented on a number of the J\mbassador' s observations
and discussed further the cuestion of future courses of action. Secretary
Rusk asked what could be d~ne to make the G~T perform better .. Taylor
replied that he must be able to convey a strong message but that we

 . 45 TOP SECRE"I' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

couldn lt threaten the Saigon government. For example, a threat to
I\vithdrm'l unless" l'lOuld be "quite a gamble . II The issue of neutralism
was raised and "Ambassador Taylor noted that I neutralism , as it existed
in Saigon appeared to mean thrm-ring the internal political situation
open and thus inviting Communist participation ." Mr . Ball observed
that a neutralist state could not be maintained unless the VC were
defeated and that the GVN must continue to be free to receive external
aid until that occurred. Therefore, "neutralism in t he sense of with-
drm·ral of external assistance" did not seem to be a hopeful alte rnative.
In apparent reply to Taylor's briefing comments to the effect that the
United states might continue military act ion against North Vietnam de-
spite a GVl'J collapse, Rusk commented that he "couldn't see a unilateral
war" in this event. Taylor indicated that he meant "only punitive
actions. II Secretary :McNamara agreed with Rusk , but added that if the
GVN continued to veaken we would need to try Option C or A. "The con-
sensus was that it 1tTas hard to visualize continuing in these circum-
st ances jJ.f the GVIT collapsed or told us to get ouy,
 but tha.t the
choice must certainly be avoided if at all possible. II 131/

 After a discussion of same of the administrative problems in
the GVN, "Ambassador Taylor noted that General Hestmore land had pre-
pared a report of the military situation" in South Vietnam. (The
report 1'1as l ater distributed to the group .) He indic ated that
"Hestmoreland I.;as generall y more optimistic than he (Taylor) II and that
he ' sal'l better mora,le , i ncreased defections and the like as signs of
improvement in the military situation. Further , he stated that
Westmoreland would be inclined to wait six months before taking further
actions in order to have a firmer base for them. HOvTever, Taylor added
t hat " he himsel f did not believe that vle could count on the situation
hold i ng together that long , and that we must do something sooner than
this. II Secretary NcI-Jrunara also disagreed 'tTith Westmoreland's vie'v,
expressing doubts that the military situation vTould improve. In answer
to specific questions, McNamara stated his opinions that (1) no, the
political situation ivould not become stronger, but ( 2 ) yes, vTe would
be justi fied in undertaking Option C even if the political situation
did not improve. Taylor replied that II stronger action iwuld definitely
have a favorable effect II i n South Vietnam, "but he was not sure this
would be enough really to improve the situation." Others, including
McHamara, agreed with Taylor's evaluation , but the Secretary added that
lithe s trengthening effect of Option C could at least buy time, possibly
measured in years. II 132/ '

 A..mbassador Taylor then urged that "over the next tvlO months
vTe adout a progl'<:m of Option A plus the first stages of Option C. II
He argued that the GVI'T i,'as badly in need o f same "pul.m otor treatment, II
t hat any other alternative "rould probably result in a worsened situation
-- perhaps militarily . He added that the likelihood of GVN improvement
se e..me d so doubtful that livre should move into C right away . II Secretary
Rusk asked if Option C \'lOuld give Tayl or the "bargaining leverage ll

 46 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By : NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

needed with the G'If':·~ . The Ambassador replied by suggesting cer'Galn details
of the message he would propose passing to the Saigon government. In
effect these called for the GVr~ to agree. to the kind of internal. policies
and command arrangements suggested in his briefing, in return for a
prompt U.S. implementation of 1I0ntion A plus ll and acknmdedgment of the
intention to go further if the GVT~ stabilized itself. 133/ It is im-
portant to note that the official memorandum of the foregoing discussion
implies agreement among the Principals that Option A plus early stages
of C should be reconunended. The memorandum states, lilt "ras urged that
 II and lito get what improvements ,.".e could it "TaS thought that we should
move into some parts of C soon. 1I

 There followed a discussion of the infiltration evidence, during
which Mr . McCone indicated that an intelligence team bad made a further
investigat ion of it.

 "It ,iaS agreed that State and Defense should check st ate -
 ments made by Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara , and General
 iVheeler on this subject, so the.t these could be related to
 the previous MACV and other estimates and a full explanation
 developed of hO"T these earlier estimates had been made and
 "Thy they had been 'wrong in the light of fuller evidence. Il 134/

 Before the meeting adjourned (with agreement to meet again the
next day), ..A.mbassador Taylor r aised a number of questions ,.".hich he
thought the Horking Group papers had not covered adeque.tely (TAB B) .
Only a few received answers during the meet i ng , and he agreed to furnish
the Principals with the complete list . Hm·rever, it "Tas i ndicated that
Option B or C could be initiated. from a flstanding start" -- presumably
with no incidents necessarily occurring first . The G'lfN .were acknowledged
to have flpl enty of capabilities ll to participate -- even before arriving
at the intended four-squadron strength of A-I aircraft. It vTaS stress ed
that the VrAF role would be in :North Vietnam only -- not in Laos -- and
Secretary t.icFamara indicated a strong role for them against targets belmv
the 19th Parallel. Finally, a time-span of three to six months vTaS indi-
cated as the expected duration for Option C. 135/

 On the follovting day, when the Principals reas sembled, I'lilliam
Bundy circulated a draft scenario of actions proposed in the event a
decision were made to Qndert~~e measures like those contained in Option A.
It had been agreed at the end of the initial meeting that these would
be revie'fed by the group "Ti th the assumption that they could be imple-
mented ''vTith or without a decision to move into the full Option C program
at some ti::ne thereafter. Il 136/ ( It is i mportfmt to note hOloi r eadily the
attention of the Principals focused on the similarity of preparatory
a.ctions and early military measures in t he various options , apparently
without regard to the particular negotiating rationale vrhich each option
i ncorporated. ) Bundy 's scenario of early milit ary , political and diplO-
matic actions Was based on a similar assumption IIthat a decision is or
is not fi,oing to b:=.7 taken to go on '''ith Option C thereafter if Hanoi does

 47 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 not bend or the GVF come apart. II He i ndicated , hOl'l ever , that the Horki ng
 Group believed I!that at le ast a contingent decision to go on is now re-
 quired. fl To facilitate discussion on the part of the Principals, "Tork-
 sheets indicating proposed language or procedures were distributed, -Co
 include the folL)"ling action c<l.tegories. 137/
 . .- -
 1. U.S. public action

 a. White House statement follOidng 1 December meeting
 b. Background briefing on infiltration
 c. Congressional consultation
 d. Major Presidential speech
 e. Public report on infiltration

 2. Consultation Ivith the GVl\

 3. Consultation with key allies

 4: Communications with Communist nations
 5. EXisting forms of military actions (including recon -
 naissance and RLAF strikes i n Laos, GVH maritime
 operations , etc.)

 6. Reprisal actions resulting from DE SOTO Patrols and
 "spectaculars "

 7. Added military and other actions

 Certain of these topics received more attention than others in
the course of the meeting, with empbasis being placed on "spelling outl!
the exact steps that the Principals 1wuld be aski ng the President to
approve. Hith respect to actions aimed at the n. S. public, McGeor ge
Bundy stressed that the Presidential speech must both (1) affirm U.S.
determination and ( 2) be co nsistent with the infiltration evidence .
General Hhee ler stated that earlier i nfiltration reports could be defended
because of their small data base and suggested that the discrepancies
could be used to explain how the VC operated. It "laS determined that one
man should be put in charge of assembling the available infiltration data
for public release, and Chester Cooper Ivas sugge sted for the job. Hith
res pect to coordination "rith the GVE , Ambassador Taylor pointed out the
need to prepare a draft statement to the GVN for the President I s reviel'T
and agreed to pr.epare a table of the specific GVr: actions needed.
Secretary Rusk c ckn01'Tledged the possible desil-ability of delaying unt~_l
GVN le adership issues were resolved , but that I!anyt hing now would cause
problems. I! Mr . Ball reminded that it 'l'lould be necessary to query the
GVI": regarding release of some of the i nfiltration evidence .133/

 . 48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Military and othe r related actions were also discussed :
 Secret ary Rusk indic ated the need to surface the GVi:'; maritime operations,
 and Ambassador Taylor suggested that they and other morale-raising ac-
 tions could be made public "in one package." In discussing the possible
 need for additional airfields in the northern part of South Vietnam, i t
 was pointed out that a new jet field might ta.ke t"ro years . Secretary
 McNamara said he thought there Fere enough fields to suppcrt Option C
 no"r if certain re ad ily accessible improvements ',Tere added. He and the
 generals (Hheeler and Taylor) r eminded the group that stopping the move -
 ment of U. S . dependents to South Vietnam or withdra"ring those already
 there could not be concealed and that this problem must be resolved
 promptly -- certainly within the initial 30 days. Taylor cautioned that
 actions re garding denendents could not be taken until our full course
 "ras decided , presumably because of potential GVi.'T fears of a U.S. with-
 drawal. The ques t ion of resumed DE SOTO Patrols was raised with the
 reminder that CINCPAC vanted them for intelligence purposes. Taylor,
 NcNamara and NcGeorge Bundy opposed the idea, while General )'Theeler
 strongly supported it. ITotes of the meeting indicate resolution to the
 effect that the patrols should not be r esumed during the first 30-day
 period. It Ivas -;;'lso agreed to .recommend joint U. S/GVH planning of
 reprisal actions and of further escalatory measures. 139/

 At some point during the meeting it was detenni ned that William
Bundy "rould undertake preparation of a draft nat ional security action
paper containing policy gui dance for the approaching period . The paper
was to describe the strategic concept, outline the actions to be taken
during the initi al 30-day period, and indicate likely follow-on measures
and the conditions under which they might be implemented. It was decided
that the paper would be revie~ed at another meeting of the Principals on
30 November , before submission to the President. A Hhite House meeting
had been scheduled for the follo"ring day. 140/

 On the afternoon of the 30th, in Secretary Rusk 's conference
room, the Principals met again . Bundy's draft paper had been distri-
buted to them earlier after being generally approved (re format ) by Rusk
and revielved for substance by I.~essrs . Hcl:aughton and Forrestal. 141/

 In describing the basic con cept, the paper presented U.S. objec-
 tives as "unch nged ,rt although giving primary emphasis to our aims in
. South Vietnam. HOlvever, gett i ng the DRV to remove its support and direc-
 tion from the insurgency in t he South, and obtaining their cooperation
 in ending VC operat ions there, were listed among the basic objectives
 not presented as a strategy for attaining them. The oqjectives \{e re
 to be pur sued in the first 30 days by measureL including those contained
 in Option A, plus U. S . armed route reconnaissance operations in Laos.
 They were linked with _~bassador Taylor's rationale that these actions
 '.;Quld be intended primarilyltto help GVN morale and to increase the costs
 and strain on Hano L" The concept also included Taylor 's emphasis on

 . 49 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive

pressing the GVN to mru~e itself more effective and to push forward its
pacification efforts . For the period beyond the first 30 days, the
concept provided that

 It • • • fil st-phase actions may "be contirlued without change ,

 or additional military measures may be taken i ncl uding
 t he wi thdrm-ral of dependents and the possib l e i ni t i at ion
 of strikes a short distance across the border against the
 i nfil tration routes from the DRV . In t he l atter case
 this '\wuld "become a transitional phase . It 142/

 The kind of actions that the transition "Tould l ead to "rere de -
scribed in a carefully qualified manner :

 n •• • i f the GV1\, i mproves i ts effectiveness to an acceptable
 degree and Hanoi does not yield on acceptable terms, or if
 the GVN can only "be kept going by stronger act i on, the U. S.
 is prepared -- at a time to be determined -- to enter i nto
 a second phase progrrun ... of graduated military pressures
 directed systematically against the DRV ."

The concept continued with a mixture of suggested actions and r ational e
similar to that in Option C. The air strikes would be flpro gressi vely
more serious" and " adjusted to the situation. fI The expected duration
was indicated as "possibly r unning from t'\vo to six months ." "Targets
i n the DRV.would start wi th i nfiltr at ion targets south of the 19th
Parallel and vlOrk up to targets north of that point." The approach
would be steady and deliberate, to give the United states the opt i on
"to proceed or not, to escalate or not, and to quicken the pace or not .1t
It concluded with the following:

 It Concurrently , the U. S. wO'Ll.ld be alert to any sign of
 yielding by Hanoi , and would be prepared to explore
 negotiated solut i ons that attain U.S . objectives i n an
 acceptable manner • . The U. S. woul d seek to control any
 negoti at ions and would oppose any independent South
 Vietnrunese efforts to negotiate .!! 143/

 Blmdy ! s draft ESAM als o i n cluded a summation of the recommended
JCS alternative concept and a brief description of the various military,
political and diplomatic measures to be taken during the first 30 ':lays
following implementation of the concept. Significantly , t he l atter
i ncl uded reprisal actions flprefer ab ly within 24 hours lt for a wide r ange
of specified VC provocations. It also contained a s:pecifi c provision
t hat DE 80T0 Patrols ,{Quld not be res umed during the i nit i al 30-day
period , but would be considered for the follm,-on period .

 In the documents available there was no r ecord of the proceed-
i ngs of the meeting on 30 I';ovember . The only evidence avai l ab l e "ras

 . 50 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the notations appearing on the original draft NSAJ1 , filed with other
papers from the I\!"SC l'lorking Group at the State Department . Therefore,
the follo"l'ring assessment of l<That occurred is limited to inferences
from that sparse evidence. ~oreover , based on this evidence , it is
not absolutely certain that the change s indicated came as a result of
the PrinCipals meeting .

 Severa l changes apparently were made in order not to ask the
President to commit himself unnecessarily (e.g., the language was
changed from "take " to "resume " a snecific action in the second phase
to lIbe prepared to take," etc.). Others had policy implications. The
only significant change in the first category ,,,as to remove any reference
in the title to )\i"SAivI and to call it merely a "position paper ." In the
latter category , several changes seem significant . For example, keeping
the GV1~ going through the effects of stronger U. S. action 'vas deleted as
one of the circumstances under ·which vTe might initiate a program of
"graduated military pres sures 11 against the DRV . Apparently based on
Secretary Mc)\T81nara ' s comment, reference to the United States seeking to
control the negotiations and blocking South Vietnamese efforts in this
direction Ivas removed. The summary of JC S vieiVs vlaS also r emoved from
the concept, in effect presenting a united front to the President . From
the description of 30-day actions, all reference to the intent to pub-
licize infiltrat ion evidence or present it to allied and Congressional
leaders was eliminated, including the intention to link reprisal actions
to DRV infiltrat ion to develop If a com.rnon thread of justificat ion." Also
removed was reference to a major Presidential spe ec h, apparent ly on the
advice of McGeorge Bundy. 144/

 Although there is a bare minimum of rationale or explanation
for these change s i n the available evidence, the pattern described by
the changes themse l ves is significant . In effect, Option A along with
the lowest order of Option C actions ",·ere being recommended by the
Principals in a manner that 'lTould represent the least pos sible additional
commitment. This represented a considerable softening of the positions
held at the end of the first Principals meeting, on the 24th .

 It also repres ented a substantial deviation from the findings
of the vlorking Group. It 1.vill be recalled that the group conceded
Option A little chance of contribut i ng t o an improved Gv}; and saw its
l ikely impact on South Vietnamese morale as no more lasting than the
effects of the Ton.kin Gulf repr i sals . Horeover, even extended l1A" was
believed "at best" to be ca nable of little more than an improved U. S.
position -- ceri:.ainly not of a meaningful settlement. 145/ In effect,
the Princ ipals "rere returning to the initi al conc ept of Option C held
in the Harking Group by Bundy, Johnson and McITaughton -- but without the
initially flexible attitude tow·ard national interest and objectives in
Southeast As ia.

 51 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 It is important to consider the factors that may have brought
about the change . (1) It mav have resulted as a reaction to the
persuasiveness of General Taylor's arguments . ( 2) It may have repre-
sented a genuine mellow'ing of i ndividual vie"-Tpoints after the oppor-
tunity to cons i c'..er other judgments and weigh--"ll the factors. (3) It
may have resulted from the Principals ' uneasiness with the negotiating
track included in Option C. (4) It may have reflected concern over
public pressure for harsher measures that could have resulted from too
much public emphasis on the increased infiltration. (5) It may have
represented an attempt to enhance the chance.s of the President 's
approving some kind ;f stepped up U.S. action outside of South Vietnam.
With re gard to the latter, McGeorge BlL.'1dy, as the President 's Assistant
for Nat ional Security Affairs ,¥as in a position to convey President
Johnson , s mood to the group. ' Moreover, notes taken at the ~..Jhlte
 . House
meeting tend to confirm that the President 's mood vTaS more closely akin
to the measures recommended than to those in Option B or full Option C.
Then again, it may be that all of these factors operated on the Prin-
cipals in some measure.

 Also significant, in the series of discussions held by the
Principals, I'las their apparent lack of attention to the policy issues
related to negotiations. Despite the f act that Option C measures 'Here
stipulated for the second phase of U. S. actions, the early negotiating
posture intended to accompany that option ,<las apparent ly paid little
heed. According to the meeting notes, the only reference to our bar -
gaining capability '. JaS Secretary Rusk 's concern as to ,,[hether Option C
actions vTOuld enable Ambassador Taylor to bargain in Saigon. Among the
documents from the Principals meetings , the only reference to Hanoi 's
interest in negotiating occurred in Bundy 's draft NSAM , ,'.'here he re-
flected apparent Administration expectations that after more serious
pressures "Tere applied the DRV would move first in the quest for a
settlement. 146/

 In retrospect, the Principals appear to have assumed rather low
motivation on the part of the DRV . Either this or they viere overly opti-
mistic regarding the threat value of U.S. military might, or both.

 For example, P~bassador Taylor ' s perception of how a settlement
 might be reached -- which apparently produced little unfavorable reaction
 among the others -- indicated the assun~tion that DRV concessions to
 r ather major demands could be obtained I'Ti th relatively "Teak pressures.
 In bis suggested scenario (acknmlledged as "very close" to the concept
 accepted by the Principals), 1 47/ the U.S. negotiating posture accom-
 panying a serie i of attacks , limited to infiltration targets "just north
. of the Dl-iZ, II vIaS intended to be as follo'lls:

 " ... in absence of public statement s by DRV, initiate no
 public statements or publicity by ourselves or GVN. If
 DRV does m~~e publis stat ements , confine ourselves and

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 GVlJ to statements that GVlJ is exercising right of self-
 defense and we are assisting .•.. disclose to selected
 allies, and possibly USSR , U.S./GVN terms for cessation
 of attacks as follOl·1S:
 --_._-
 A. Demands:

 1. DRV return to strict observance of 1954 Accords
 with respect S~~ -- that is, stop infiltrat ion
 and bring about a cessation of VC armed i nsur -
 gency.

 B. In return:

 L U. S ..,,,, ill return to 1954 Accords with respect
 to military personnel in GVN and GVE vTould be
 willing to enter into trade talles looking
 toward normalization of economic relations
 between DRV and GVN .

 2. Subject to faithful compliance by DRV·with 1954
 Accords, U.S. and GVT{ would give assurances that
 they not use force or support the use of force
 by any other party to upset the Accords ','Ii th
 res pect to the DRV.

 3 • • . • the GVN would permit VC desiring to do so to
 return to the DRV without their arms or would
 grant amnesty ... "
Taylor went on to suggest that 'Iif and I-Then Hanoi indicates its accep-
tance'lthe United States should avoid (1) the rlanger of a cease-fire
accompanied by prolonged negotiations and ( 2 ) II making conditions so
stringent II as to be impracticable. 148/

 SignificantJ_y the terms were to be conveyed to Hanoi private~.
'I'hey did not consti tut~ a declaratory policy in the usual sense of that
 term. Hence, it must be assumed that they would be presented to the DRV
with the attitude of "acceptance or else" -- that they were not per-
ceived pri.marily as conveying a firm public linage. Moreover , the terms
..Jere designed to accompany '''hat became knOlm as IIphase two, II the gradu-
 ated pressures of Option C __ not the 30-day actions derived from
Option A. They were meant to represent the lIearly negotiating" posture
 of the United S·... ates __ not the Il no -negotiati0n" posture associated with
Option A.

 This general attitude to,,,,ard negotiations \'Tas apparently shared
by other Principals. This is indicated by changes made in Option C
procedures, in the Summary of the Tilorking Group I s findings, following

 53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the first Principals meeting. Essentially, these involved an adamant
 . t ance t 0 fl any formal Geneva Conference on Vietnam. fl Formerly,
reS1S
such a conference was regarded as the flbest forurn fl -- after conducting
a number of military actions against the DRV . Under the revised
approach, the U.S. Government would merely "wl1.tch and listen closelyfl
for signs of 'veakening from Hanoi and Peking. If the DRV held firm in
r~sponse to initial military actions against North Vietnam and if along
,nth these actions an improvement had occurred in the GVTJ , the Adminis-
tration vlOuld press harder for acceptance of the initial negotiating
position. 149/ Thus, it is fair ly clear th at the policy position
formulated by the Principals before presentation to the President in-
cluded no provision for early bargaining at the conference table.

 2. Courses of Action Approved in the '\'Thite House

 On 1 December the Principals met with President Johnson and
 Vice President-elect H~phrey in the Fhite House . During a meeting
 that l asted t'll"O-and-a-half hours !unbassador Taylor briefed the Presi-
 dent on the situation in South vietnam, and the group revie,\qpd. the
 evidence of increasing DRV support for the conflicts in South Vietnam
 and Laos. Ways of cOQDtering the impact of infiltration and of im-
 proving the situation viere discussed. At the conclusion of the meeting
 Secretary Hc1'!amara ''I'as reported to have been overheard saying to the
 President, "It would be impossible for Max to talk to these people
Lwaiting reporters7 ..dthout leaving the impression that the situation
 is going to hell.O Accordingly, Ambassador Taylor slipped out the
'Hhi te HOuse rear entrance, and only a brief, forma l st atement was gi v~n
 to the press. 150 /

 The source documents available at the time of this writing do
not indicate the precise nature of the President 's decisions. Since a
NSAM was not issued follmoJ'ing the meeting, one would have to have access
to VIhi te House case files and l'~at io na l Security Council meeting notes
to be certain of what was d ec ided. Even then , one might not find a
clear-cut decision recorded. However, from hand,vri tten notes of the
meeting, from instructions issued to action agencies, and from later
reports of diplomatic ~Dd military actions taken, it is possible to
reconstruct the approximate nature of the discussion and the decisions
reached .

 . The revised flDraft Position Paper on Southeast Asia, rr contain -
ing the t'\w-phase conc ept for future U. S. policy and the proposed 30-day
action program, provided the basis for the Hhite House discussions.
Hand'Kritten notes of the proceedings refer to various topics in approxi -
mately the sa....'ue order as they are listed in that portion of the position
paper dealing with the 30-day action program. There is no indication
that the o ver-all concept 1-TaS discussed . HOIvever, it is evident from
the notes that the various actions under discussion were con sidered in
terms of the details of their implementation. 151/ This fact --
together with the content of the fo rmal instructions later issued to

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Ambassador Taylor -- make it clear th~t, in gener~l outline at l east,
the concept submitted by the Principals was accepted by the President.
However , as will be seen , it. is also clear that he ge..ve his appr.oval
to implement only the first phase of the concept .

 In addition to P~bassador Taylor ' s report, the meeting dealt
mainly with hro subjects : (1) Taylor ' s consultations with South Viet-
nallle se leade rs and (2) conve rsations with other U. S. allies who had an
interest i n the Vietnalllese situation.

 The PreSiden t made it clear that he considered that pulling
 the South Vietnamese together 'tras basic to anything eJ se the United
 States might do. He asked the Ambassador specifically i-Thich groups
 he might talk to and whe..t more we might do to help bring unity alllong
 South Vietnalll's leaders. He asked whether we coul d not say to them
 "we just can It go on" unless they pulled together . To this , Taylor
 replied that we must temper our insistence some..·,'hat , and suggested that
we could say that !lour aid is for the Huong government, hot necessarily
for its successor." The President asked whether there was not some vray
we could !I ge t to" such groups as the Ce..tholics, the Buddhists and the
Army. Possible additional increments of military aid we re then discussed
as means of increasing U.S. leverage alllong military l eaders . The Presi-
dent also asked about "the Connnunists" in South Vietnalll . Taylor ' s r eply
vIas noted rather cryptically but the impression given is that the
Cor:.m.~ists were being used already, but that he questioned the desir-
ablllty of trying to pressure them. He apparently stated that they were
11 rea 11 y neu t rallsts,
 . " but that the French I{ere "
 not rea II Y b 0 t'nerlng
 . "
to use them. The President observed that the situation in South Vietnalll
"does l ook blacker l1 to the public than it apparently i<Tas . He wondered
if something could not be done to change the impression being given i n
the ne1,vs. 152/

 Toward the end of the discussion of consultations viith the
South Vietnamese, President Johnson stated .h i s convicti.on that the GVH
was too weak to take on the DRV militarily . He ac1mowledged that the
South
tt
 Vietnalllese had received good trainina , but emphasized tha t we
 ( : ) .
 must have done everything Ife can!l to strengthen them before such a
conflict occurred. 153/ This attitude y;'as reflected in the guidance
given to Ambas sador Taylor and in the statement he viaS authorized to make
to the GV}IJ . The statement contained a passage asserting that the U. S.
Government did not believe

 "that vie should incur the risks I·Thich are inherent i n any
 expansion of hostilities yritho~lt fir~t assuring that there
 is a government·.in Saigon capable of handling the serious
 problems involved in such an expansion and of exploiting
 the favorable effects vrhich may be anticipated ...• "

The statement vrent on to emphasize that before the· United States could
move to expand ho st ili tie s, the GVN '\wuld have to be capable of

 55 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Itmaintaining law and order,lI of ensuring that its plans for further
operations ,vould be carried out and of coping "lith li the enemy reactions
,,'hich must be expected to result II from changes in the current pattern of
operations . 1:.54/

 The 'i'Ihite House discussions of U. S. consultation ",ith other
 allies ,vere prefac e d by the President ' s strong affirmation that we needed
 "ne,v dramatic, effective" forms of assistance from several of these
 c?untries. Australta, New Zealand, Canada and the Philippines were syeci-
 f1c all~ mentioned. 8ecret ary Rusk added that the U. K. also could do more .
A poss1ble Republic of China contribution "TaS discussed, but the Secretary
 expressed concern that introduct ion of G-RC comb at units would tend to
merge the problem of Vietnam ,vith the conflict betvTeen the two Chinese
 regimes . Apparently, the Principals' proposal to send a representative
to the govermnents of Australia, I'.;ew Zealand, and the Philippines "TaS
 approved. In each case, the representative ';vas to explain our concept
 ~nd~proposed actions and request additional contributions by Ifay of forces
1n Ghe event the second phase of U. S. actions '.-rere entered . Vice President-
 elect Humphrey "laS suggested for consultations with the Philippine govern-
men~ . The President asked about the possibility of a \;Test German contri-
but1on, but Secretary McHe.mara e!n:phas i zed that German political problems
l{Quld inhibit such a pledge from BOD-l1 . Finally, it was a.greed that Am-
bassador Taylor lvauld cable the particula.r kind of third country assis-
tance that would be 'welcomed after he had a chance to consult ,·!ith the
GVH. 155/ .

 At the close of the meeting, the 1iThi te House released a press
stat ement which contained only t "ro comments re garding any determinations
that had been r eached . One reaffi r med "the basic United States policy
of P~o:iding all poss ible and useful assistance" to South Vietnam,
spec1f1cally linking this policy ,vith the Congressional Joint Resolution
of 10 August. The other stated:

 "The President instructed Ambassador Taylor to cons ult
 urge nt ly with the South Vietnamese Government as to
 measures that should be taken to improve the situation
 in all its aspects." 156/

 During the subsequent press briefing, George Heedy indicated
to reporters that Taylor iw.uld be vmrking on the specific details of his
fort hcoming conversations in Saigon "for another two to three days" and
"muld hav e at l east one more meeting with the President before his
~etur~.!21/ Em.rever , it seems clear that most of "That he would say
\:'0 GVI, offic i a l , ,,:as settled during the initLLl 'White House meeting . A
~ro~osed text was appended to the Principals' draft position paper, and
1 t 1S clear that this "Tas discussed on 1 December . Apparently, the only
change made at that time iTas to relllove a proposed U. S. pledge to furnish
air cover for the GVN maritime operations against the North Vietnamese
coast .' 158/

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By : NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SZCRET - Sensitive

 After the meeting, the statement v-Tas r ecast in the form of
 Presidential instructions to Ambassador Tayl or -- v[ith specific authori -
 zation for the Ambassador to alter the phrasing as he thought necessary
t o insure effective communications with the GVT-i' . Hm/ever , the concept
 and the specifi .. points for conrrn1Ll1.ication were unchanged . The instruc-
 t ions made s pecific provision for him to inform senior GVN o ff i cials o f
 the U. S. YTillingness (1) to cooperate in intensifying the GVF maritime
operations and (2) lito add U. S . airpower as needed to r estrict the use
of Laotian territory as an infiltration route i nto SVI:Y . 11 These p l edges
were prefaced by statements to the effect that U. S . actions d i rect l y
against the DRV could not be taken until GVN effectiveness was assured
along certain specified lines . The statements made explicit the poli cy
v i ew that lI"re should not i ncur the risks "Thich are i nherent i n such an
expansion of hostilities" until such improvements w'ere made . As evidence
o f our desire to encourage these developments, hOI-rever , the rational e
stressed that the Administration Has "wi lling to strike harder at the
i nfil trat i on routes in Laos and at sea . " 15,2/

 The i nstructions a l so included syecific pr ovi s i on that the U. S.
Mission in Saigon 'Nas to work ,o/ith the GY}\; i n developing joint p l ans for
r eprisal operations and for a i r operations appropriate fo r a second
phase of ne"T U. S . actions . The general relationship behleen the t,w
c ?nt~mplated phases was explained, and the Phase THO purpose " of con-
VlnClng the leaders of DJ.11 that it is to their i nterest to cease to aid
the Viet Cong" 'vas stated . The joint character of the "progressively
 ll
mounting air operations o.gainst liorth Vietnam , should they be decided
on later , was emphasized. 160/

 As i ndicated
 . earlier , there "las n o NSAlt1 i ssued fo lloHing the
 strategy meeting of 1 December . The reasons vThy are c l ear . In effect ,
the actions recommended by the Princ i pals and approved by the President
did not constitute a significant departure from the actions author i zed
 i n NSM1 314 (9 September 19(4). That doctiIDent had already provided f or
d iscussions with the Laotian governrnent leading to possible U. S . armed
r econnaissance operations along the infiltrat i on routes . Further , i t
h ad provided for resumption of the 34.11.. maritime operations , which had
c ontinued throughout the fall. In .effect , the December strategy meeting
produced l itt l e change except to make more concrete the concept of poss i b l e
future operations aga i nst North Vietnam and to authorize steps to i nc l ude
the GVI; in preparations for these possibilities .

 It i s c l ear that the President did not make any commitment at
thi s point to expand the "Tar tl1..Yough future operat i ons against north
Vietnam. The assurances intended for the GW. in this regard ", ere con-
dit i onal at best . The extent to '"hich the :?resident was committed t o
such a course i n his mind, or i n discussions vl i th his leading advisors ,
was not made explicit in the sources available . It i s implied , hOI-leve r,
i n brief notes which "Tere apparently intended to summa rize the mood of
the meeting on 1 December . In "vhat may have been a summation of the
President ' s expressions, these notes indicate several themes : (1) i t is
necessary to Iveigh the risks of careful action versus the risks of l oss

 57 TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

(of South Vietnam? ) ,v-ithout action; ( 2 ) it may be necessary to act from
a base not as strong as hop ed for; (3) it is not certain, however, how
public opinion can be h a ndled; and (4) it is desirable to send out a
II some'iThat stronger signal." In addition, a comment not entirely legi-
ble stated "Mea.-ures can ' t do as much (1) U . N . and ( 2 )
i nternational [riegotiations?7 . If In the context of the discussions, the
impression left by these notations is that the vihi te House 'iiaS con-
sider ably less than certain that future U. S. actions age.inst Horth Vi et-
nam would be t aken, or that they 'ilould be desirable . 161/

 58 TOP SE C R~T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECP~T - Sensitive

 III

 IMPI.ErBI-iTH;G THE POLICY

 When Ambassador Taylor next met with the President on the afternoon
of 3 December, McGeorge Bundy was the only other official present. Prior
to· this occasion, Taylor had sat with t he other Pri ncipals to review
specific features of the Administration 's position ~nd to work out details
of the scenario that was about to . go into production. I'l"hen he left the
President's office, presumably having received the final version of his
i nstructions, the Ambassador told reporters that he ,-las going to hold
"across-the - board ll discussions 1,.,ri th the GVi:i . Asserting that U. S. policy
for South Vietnam remained the s~me, he stated that his aim would be to
improve the deteriorating situation in South Vietnam. Although he hinted
of changes "in tactics and method, " he quite naturally did not disclose
the kind of operations in which the United States was about to engage or
any future a.ct ions to which ill.m.ediate activities could lead . 162/

 1. Early Actions

 Phase One actions to exert additional pressures against North
Vietn~m were c:.uite limited. Only tlW, the GV1:J maritime operations and
U.S. armed reconnaissance missions i n Laos, were military actions . The
others involved stage-managing the public release of evidence of the
increased Communist infiltrat ion into South Vietnam and the acquisition
of additional assistance for that country from other governments .

 a. GVn l·iaritime Operations . .,laritime operations under OPLl\H 34A
represented nothing new . These had been underway steadily since 4 October,
and their Fovember schedule ,-las in the process of being carried. out at the
time the decisions on immediate actions were being made. On 25 Hovember,
six Pl'F craft bombarded a barracks area on Tiger Island "l'ri th 8JJmn mortars,
setting numerous fires. Moreover, a proposed schedule for December had
been submitted by cO?rJm01"cv on 27 F ovember. Thi s i ncluded a total of 15
maritime operations involving shore bombardments, a jur>.k capture, a kidnap
mission, and a demolition sortie against a coastal highway bridge. 164/
According to the concept, these lv-ere to be i ntensified during Phase One.

 Soon after the decisions had been made to begin Phase One, the
JCS tasked COMUs.;,1ACV with developing a revised December 34A schedule to
better reflect the ne\·rly adopt ed pressure concept . CIKCPAC was requested
tb submit revised 34A plans so as to arrive in TiT aShington not lat er than
8 December. The i nstructions specified that these I'T ere "to i nc lude pro-
posed sequence and timing for increased freque ncy of maritime opera.tions ll
in tlW package s. The first vTaS to begi n on 15 December , extend over a
period of 30 days and provide for "s hallow penetration r aids ... on all

 59 ~OP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

types of targets y!hich yTould provide the greatest psychologica l benefits
 " Destructive results and mili tary utility 1"ere to be strictly
secondary considerations. Package Tvro vras to add 4 to 6 u. S. aircraft
to afford protective cover and incorporate action against certain Forth
Vietnamese coastal targets above the 19th Parallel. This package was
intended to begin approximately 30 days follmdng initiation of the
first, a lthough the i nstructions caution ed that the plans should be
IIprepared to provide for an i ndefinite period" of operations under
Package One. 165/

 }lillCV ' s new proposal for maritime operations was submitted on
5 December, vrith proposals for psychological operations and aerial
resupply/reinforce missions following close behind. On the lOth, appro-
val for the l atter t"ro was cOll1.nunicated back to the field. At the time ,
the MAROPS proposals were still under consideration 1tlithin the JCS. 166/
On the 12th, t he JCS submitted their two-package proposal . Included in
their first 30-day package were coast a l bombardment of radar Sites,
barrack s , and PT boat bases Dlus a maritime equivalent of aerial armed
route reconnaissance. Patrol boats '{QuId mak~ "fire svTeepsll along the
coast against "targets of opp·ortunity ." In addition, upon their return
from bombardment missions, it 'faS proposed that the GV1'J PT boats attempt
the ca:pture of NV.N jmLl<;,s and Sl-lATml craft . ~'T i th the single exception of
the coastal fire sweeps, all of these i n i tia.l package operation s were
approved by OSD , and instructions ,-rere issued to implement the initial
increment of such oDerat ions on or about 15 December . 1 6 7/
 ~ ---
 In accord with the i nstructions initially issued regarding inten-
sified maritime operations, OSD decisions on the propose d second package
were deferred. The J CS i ndicated that the addition of U. S. air cover,
and the necessary cornnand and control procedures needed to support such
operations, could be implemented on or about 15 January . They went on
to recommend that if this were decided , the "maritime operations should
be surfaced ... prior to [imp l ement at ion 0!...7 Package Two." 168/

 The JCS were disconcerted over disapproval of the fire s,,,eeps
along the l~orth Vietname se co ast . . Hm·:ever, their conce r n stemmed not so
much fr om the lack of support for those particular operations as from
their vie,,; that the di sapproval removed from the package the only signi--
fic ant intensificat ion beyond the level already attained before the
President ' s Phase One decision. At a Principals meeting on 19 December,
Acting JCS Chairman, General Harold K . Johnson, pointed out that ,vith the
modific at ions nOH made to it, the 34A program vTaS , in effect, not inten -
sified at all. I'ioreover , as discussion revealed, seasonal sea conditions
were nmV' so severe that no maritime operation had been completed sucess-
fully during t he previous three ,,,eeks . 169/ In effect, therefore, . the
"intensified" December schedule of approved maritime operations still
remained to be implemented as the month dre'" to a close.

 60 TOP SECRE'r - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 For January, the JCS urged that several air missions be added
to the kind of operations already approved. Included were two Vl:~AF air
strikes, using unmarked aircraft a..nd U. S. air escort for returning
surface craft. 170 / Hmlever both of these items 'N'ere disapproved ;
 '-
only the air oPeration ,
 s in support of psychological and resupply opera-
tions gained acceptance . 171 / Apparently there was little addi tional
MAROPS activity during January, 1965; the normal documentary sources
include very little for this period .

 b . Armed Peconnaissance in Laos. Like the maritime operations,
armed reconnaissance in Laos 'Was , in some respects , a continuation of
operations that had been unden-ray for some time . At least, U. S. aircraft
had been operating over Laos since the previous Eay , performing r econ-
naissance ftillctions and nroviding armed escort for these and ( since
October ) the RL~ strike-missions . Of course , armed escort was carried
out under strict r ul es of engagement that permitted attacking ground
targets only in response to host ile fire . Given the ope rational code
YAil1illE TE.AJl.1, these carrier and land-based missions had been f ollowing
a constant pattern for several months . This had included roughly four
daylight reconnaissance flights in the Plaine des Jarres - Route 7 area
every two weeks , and during a like period, approximately ten r econnaissance
fli ghts in the Panhendle , and two night-reconnaissance flights along
Route 7 . Complementing these efforts were those of the RLA..F , \vhose T- 28 ' s
harassed the Pathet Lao, ga.Ne tactical air support to Royal Laotian Army
units, interdicted Route 7 and the Panhandle, and performed armed route
reconnaissance i n Central Laos . During the period 1 October-30 December ,
there \vere a total of 724 T-28 sorties i n the Panhandle alone . These had
alre ady precipitated several comnlaints from the DRV, al leging UoS .-
sponsored air atta'cks on Korth vietnamese territory . 172/

 The intended U.S . policy was dis cussed with Premier Souvanna
Phouma on 10 December by the new U. S. Ambassador to Laos, Hilli am
Sullivan . He reported that Souvanna Ilfully supports the U. S. pressures
program and is prepared to cooperate in full." 'l'he Premier particularly
wanted interdiction of Routes 7 , 8, and 12 , but he insisted on making no
public ad..rnission that U. S. aircrar:t had taken on new missions i n Lao s.
The Administrat ion had i ndicated to the Vientiane Embassy a few days
earlier that it 'lished the RLCl..F to i ntensify its strike program also ,
particularly "in the Corridor areas and close to the DRV border ." 173/

 In the meantime, the JCS developed an air strike program to
complement the Y.AI::~E TEJU1 operat ion i n accordance with current guidance ,
and had instructed CETCPAC to be prepared to carry it out. The program
included missio;lS against targets of opportunity along particular portions
of Route 8 and Routes 121 and 12 . It also i ncluded secondary targets for
each T,lission that i nc luded barracks areas and military strong points .
The second missj on ivas to be flmw not earlier than three days follmving
the first . 174/ The progr21U 'was briefed at a l~ December meeting of the

 . 61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Principe.ls by Deputy Secreta.ry Vance and 'I'las approved by them with one
 exception. They amended the ordnance instructions vrhich had been pre-
 pared for CIKCPAC to specifica lly exclude the use of napalm. For its
 first use against targets in Laos, they felt, the RL~ would be t he
 only appropriatl. user. McGeorge Bundy stated that the amended program
 "fulfilled precisely the President 's ''fishes,'' and that he (Bundy ) would
 so inform the President . He further stated that, barring separate ad-
 vice to the contrary, the program should be executed . It was also
 agreed at this meeting that there ..rould be no public statements about
 armed reconnaissance operations in Laos unless a plane were lost. In
 such an event, the Pri~cipa ls stated, the Government should continue to
 insi st that 'ie were merely escorting reconnaissance flights as requested
 by the Laotian GoverD~ent . 175/

 Armed reconnaissance operations in Laos, called BARR6L ROLL,
 got undervlay on 14 December . This first mission was flo'tTn by {,SAF jet
 aircraft along Route 8 . It vras follm,red on the 17t h by carrier- based
A-l and jet aircraft, striking along Routes 121 and 12 . On the 18th ,
this pattern of tivo missions by four aircraft each ,{as determined by
Secretary of Defense or higher authority to be the 'veekly standard --
at le ast through the third ..reek . 176/ Just a day earlier, the JCS had
proposed a second 'tTeek ' S program. that included repetition of the first
vreek ' s operations plus missions along Route 7, 9 and 23 . Their proposals
were prepared id th a statement of JCS understanding "that a gradual
increase in i ntensity of operations is intended for the second week ."
Recalling Souvanna Phouma '~ reported requests for such operations, they
also included a strong recommendation that Route 7 be struck as part of
the second week's missions . 177/

 This same r ationale was voiced by General Johnson in the Pr in-
cipals meeting on 19 December . He pointed out that the BA-J.'\REL ROLL
program briefed there by Deputy Sec;etary Vance did not represent any
intensification beyond the previous 'iveek ' s effort . Vance confirmed that
not intenSifying the pro gr~ had been one of the criteria applied in
selectir,g the second "i{eek ' s missions. Consensus ,-ras reached by the
Principals that the program should r emain about the same for the next
two weeks, in accordance with the most recent guidance. 178/

 At the end of December, ..rhen there viaS serious question about
the efficacy of maintaining the direction of U.S. policy in South Vietnam ,
Defense Officials requested an evaluation of the BARREL ROLL progr am .
In particular, they were concerned as to "vThy neither the DRV nor the
Communist Chine£e have made any public mention of or appeared to have
taken cognizanc3 of our BARREL ROLL operations." 179/ In response, a
DIA assessment i ndicated that the Communists apparently had made no
"distinction bet,'; een BLRREL ROLL missions on the one hand and the
Laotian T-28 strikes and YAlY.EE ':CEAJ"i missions on the ot he r." Attributing
all stepped up operations i n Laos to the Uni ted States and its fllackeys ,"
they had lumped all operations together as "U.S. armed i nterference in

 62 TOP Sj!,';CREl' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP S7,CnET - Sensitive

Laotian 's LSiiJ affairs , gross violations of the General Agreement s, and
events wh ic h are causing a grave situation in Laos and Indochina." DIA
went on to obser,re that "it ,vould be most difficult to distinguish.
between YI\NKEE TE.A.2,1 with its flat suppression aircraft from the BAIillEL
ROLL missions." Further, the assessment observed t hat "Bi\..RREL ROLL
strH:.es have followed T-28 strikes by varying periods of time and have
been of l esser intensity. They probably appear to be a continuation of
the Laotian program ." It concluded:

 "On balance, therefore, while the communists are apparently
 aware of some i ncreased use of U. S. aircraft, they probably
 have not considered the BP~REL ROLL strikes to date as a sig-
 nificant change i n the pattern or as representi ng a ne,v thre at
 to their activities." 180/

 De spite the lack of discernible Communist re act ion to BARREL
ROLL by the end of the year and considerable concern among the JCS, there
was little c hange in the op erat io n during eal"ly Jan uary. On the ~th,
CINCPAC "ras authorized to go ahead "rith the fourth "reek 's program:

 "One U.S. armed reco~naissance/pre-briefed air strike
 missions in Laos for the "reek of 4-10 January 1965, is ap-
 proved. Additional missions "Ti ll be the subject of later
 message." ( Under lining added)

The approved mission called for night armed reconnaissance along Route 7,
the fi~st of its kind. 181/ Attlle"time , the JCS "Jere avaiting a decision
on thelr proposals for a complementary mission, but the Department of State
had objected to their choice of a secondary target because it was located
near Cambodian territory. Earlier in the s er ies, the Tchepone barracks
had been deleted as a seconda.ry mission by the '\<ihite House because a Hanson
Baldvrin article had named it as a likely target. On 5 January, the JCS
representative r eminded the Principals t hat the currently approved
BA."RREL ROLL mission constituted the fourth veek of these operations and,
therefore, vrould terminate the ini ti.al 30-day period of Phase One pres-
sure s . The JCS were quite concerned that there had not yet been plans
made for a "transition phase" of .stepped up attacks to be gin around mid-
January . 182/

 c. Surfacing Infiltration Evidence . An integral part of the
Administration 's pressures policy, particularly if U.S. forces were to
be involved in direct 8.ttacks on l'Torth Vietnam, 'liaS the presentation to
the public of convincing evidence of DRV responsibility for thE. precar ious
 situa tion in So"\.'th Vietnam . As seen earlier, a former i nte lligence
specialist, Chester Cooper, was selected to c ompile a public account of
 n
the i nfiltration OI trained cadre and guerrilla fighters, to be used for
this p ur.pose. His account was to be developed from the various class i-
fi ed reports that had been produced and was to l ay particular stress on
the alarming increase in th~ rate of infiltr at ion in the l atte r half of
1964 .

 63 TOP SECRE1' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Cooper submitted his report on 4 December. It was based on
 (1) a State-sponsored updating of the so-called Jorden Report , which
 described also the DrtV's direction, control and materiel support of
 the ins urgency (this had been discussed during the policy discussions
 in the Spring and i nitiated during the Summer); (2) the MACV i nfiltr a -
 tion study, based on interrogations of VC prisoners and completed in
 October; and (3) reports from a DIA/CIA Il';-R team who \Vent to Saigon
 in mid-Eovember to evaluate the M.''l.CV report (t hey confirmed its validity).
 Hi's re port consisted of four items: (1) a s ummary statement and a more
 det ailed public discussion of VC infiltration LTAB~; (2) a list of
 possible questions and suggested anSl.ers for use with the press or the
 Con~ress; (3) II a reconciliat ion , or at least an explanation of past low
 estlIDates of infiltration given in Congressional testimony and to the
 press"; and (4) a listing of available documentary evidence and graphic
 materials to aid in public presentations. In his covering memorandum,
 Cooper urged that the materials be fOTIvarded to Saigon so as to make
 J·1A_CV and tJubassy Officials fully aI-Tare of the proposed approach and to
 make consistent its Use by U. S. and GVN personnel. 183/

 The Cooper materials were forwarded for review to the Saigon
 Embassy on 8 December, and to the Principals on the 9th . 184/ Shortly
 thereafter, Secretary Rusk cabled Ambassador Taylor, express i ng his
 concern that early release of the infiltration data '\vould generate
 pressures for actions beyond what we nOl'T contemplate. II He sought
 'I'aylor I s advice as to '..rhether release \vould be 'wise. In the Ambassador IS
 rep ly,he urged early release. He stated, III do not feel that, at this
 point, the substance of the release ivill generate pressure for extreme
 action. II Moreover , he expressed the viel' that release would serve to
 quiet the currently rife speculation among ne\Vs correspondents and parts
 of the GVn concerning I-That the United States ,ms int ending to do in SVH.
 Citing a HeYl York Daily Helvs article (7 December) as an example of I'That
 he felt Here increasingly like ly leaks , he expressed his desire to ma...'ke
 planned deliberate announcements of "That the United States lvaS nOl·T doing
 and I-That might be done in the future . He expressed his i ntention to
 have the GVh release the report on i nfiltrat ion , complete I-rith press
 briefings and statements, betl-Teen 10-17 December. 185/

 Despite strong recow~endations from the field to release the
 in f iltr ation data, the Principals determined that it should not yet be
 made pUblic. During the first part of December, the chief advocate for
 not releasing it Has Secretary McIJamara . At their meeting on 12 December,
 Mr . Vance stated that I.1r. Hcramara ,vanted to I-Ti thhold the infiltration
 data for the tirne being . His rationale "TaS not recorded in the minutes.
 The State Depar~ment opinion in response was that the Department "did not
 consider i t of any great moment ." Thereafter , the Pr incip als decided
 that release should be ,dthheld, at le ast until their next meeting ,
 19 Dece~ber . 186/

 By the tL'1le they met again , a ,veek l ater , several expressions
 o f support for r eleasing the data had b,e en received. On the 14th

, . t

 64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By : NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECP.ET - Sensitive

Ambassador Taylor recalled that the ARVN intelligence chief had review'ed
the original ·P.,ACV infiltration report and the proposed press release and
had "concurred in cormnending declassification." On the 16th J-\mbassador
Sullivan praised the Cooper report and suggested passing it to Souvanna
Phouma prior to "lhat he hoped "muld be a proml)t public release . 187/
At the Principals meeting these vie"Ts "Tere cited in a strong statement
by William Bundy concerning the problems of keeping the infiltration
evidence out of the press. General Johnson, Acting Chairman, JCS ,
favored rele ase as a morale boost to U.S. personnel in South Vietnam .
HcGeorge Bundy and Carl Rowen ( USIA ) favored gradual or p i ecemeal release .
However, Nr . Vance repea.ted Secretary r.lci:Tamara I s wish to continue sup-
pression of the infiltration reuort __ possibly for an i ndefinite period .
'i'his vie'\v finally prevailed, as ~ the Principals agreed not to release the
Cooper report either in Saigon or 'iTashington . Instead, they felt that
the President might disseminate some of the information through such
vehicles as his State of the Union message or in a contemplated Christmas
address to U. S. forces in Saigon . 188/

 Follo'" ing the meeting, but before recelvlng reports concerning
the current political upheaval in Saigon, the State Department cabled
the Administration's decision not to meke a formal GV1(/US release of the
infiltration data . It gave as rationale the feeling that fonnal release
"COUld be misinterpreted and became vehicle [fo!,7 undesirable speculat ion, I t
and suggest ed alternative procedures. Stating that "general background
briefings •.. should continue to indicate infiltration has incre ased "Ii th-
out getting into specifics,"it indicated that under pressure, the Saigon
Embassy tlcould have one or more deep background sessions with fihiJ
America,n forces. 11 The cable caut ioned , however, that specific numbers
and comparisons "ti th previous years t estimates should be avoided . These
would not be released, it ,{as advised, until late in January after senior
Administration officials he,d testified to Congress in a scheduled inquiry .
The current aim was stated "to get general picture into survey stores
such as Grose article of Fovember 1 rather than as spot news cormnanding
wide attention. 11 The c able conc luded by acknowledging a "just received 1l
Taylor Dlessage and approving his stated judgment to proceed with periodic
background briefings in Saigon, along lines outlined above . 189/

 Follo"dng the rift betl,reen the South VietnameRe military leaders
 and the American Embassy, resistance to the release of infiltration data
 hardened. In cables of 24 December, P~bassador Taylor was instructed to
 avoid background briefi ngs on the infiltration incre ases wltil the po-
 l itical situation clarified . ~e was cowlseled that release of the data
'\-TOuld be "umvise 1l unless he "rere to obtain evidence that the South Viet-
 namese military was planning to go ahead witll a unilate ral release . 1.90/
 These instructions prevailed until well into J-anuary, 1965 . --

 d. Consultations 1dth "'l'hird Countries. I I In the days irmnediate1y
followi ng the policy decisions of 1-3 December , several U. S. allies >{ere
con sulted concerning the intended U.S. approach in Southeast Asia . In

 TOP SECRgl - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 accord vTi th the F-..cincipals' vie"rs, the govern.'nents of Thailand and Laos
 were briefed by the respect ive U.S. Ambassadors to those countries .
 Foreign f,::i nister Thuan Khoman later visited the President in 'i;.rashington
 and pres1.l1l1ably :pursued the matter further . The Canadians were cont a.cte d
 in both Ottalva a:ld ·Hashington. l'iilliam Bundy lle ld discussions in Kew
 Zealand and Australia on 4-5 December. Prime .Minister Hilson of the
 United Kingdom vas thoroughly briefed during a series of meetings in
 Hashington, 7-9 December. Later, William Bundy told the Principals that
 the U.K., Australia and New Zealand re c eived the full picture of immediate
 U.S. actions and its sti'Oulations to the GV1I: and the potential two -phased
 concept of graduated Dre~sures on Horth Vietnam. The Canadian Government
 Vias told slightly les; . The Philipp i nes , South Korea and the Republic of
 China i'T ere briefed on Phase One only. 191/

 One of the aims stressed by President Johnson in the meeting of 1 and
 3 Dec ember , and continually thereafter, vTas obtaining increased assistance
 for the GVH and for our efforts on its behalf from our allies . During the
 1 2 December Principals meeting, for ex.amyle, vT illiam. Bundy related the
 President's rec ent i{ish to obtain assistance even from governments vTithout
 strong Southeast As ia commitments, like Denmark, "Jes t Germany and India .
 This was mentioned in the context of a summary report on current "third-
 country assistance of all kinds to South Vietnam." 192/

 At the tir!l.e , ho,;>,ever, not only general assistance from many countries
but specifically militarv assistance from a select few '\.laS particularly
sought . D~~ing the cons~lt at ions with allied goverlli~ents, both Australia
and Few Zealand were pressed to send troop units to assist ABVN . Both
supported the u . S . policy decisions as probably necessary , but neither
vTas "\-Tilling at the ·time to make a commitment . l':ell Zealand officials ex-
pressed grave doubts that Phase II ",!ould lead to negotiations , predicting
instead that the DRV would on ly increase the clandestine troop deployments
to the South. They eXDressed doubts about the advisability of sending
allied ground forces i~to South Vietnam. 193/

 The concept under 11lhich the allied troop deployments 'were believed
 desirable was related to that 'which the NSC II)'0rking Group had recomr::tended
 as deservi ng further study . Contemplated vTaS an international force
built around one U. S. division, to be deployed just south of the DMZ in
conjunction with stepped-up uS/GVn air operat ions a gainst North Vietnam .
In essence,therefore , it Was a Phase ~~ro concept, dependent in some
respects on the degree of success achieved during Phase One activities .
The concept was examined in detail by the Joint Staff in early December ,
and their staff study was fonra.rded to the services and the Joint Pacific
Headquarters I1f(r comment and recommendations " on 10 December . The pur-
poses cited for such a fo~ce deployment by the Joint Ste.ff were stated as
follows : (1) to deter gr oUIld invasion by the DRV ; (2) to hold a "blocking
position agai nst DRV attacks dmoJD the coastal plain and make more difficult
DRV efforts to bypass"; and (3) to be "capab le of holding the defensive
positions against attack until reinfor cements a,rrive if required . " 19 4/

 66 TOP SSCRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The degree to which the international force vTas believed to offer a
 useful option seems to have been in question . Hhile the State Department
 and other non-mi litary agencies apparently favored it, the Department of
Defense was less than enthusiastic. At t he 19 December Principals meet-
 ing, for example, all of those present agreed t hat "suitable planning
 to-ward such a force should go fon-Tard!! except Ass istant Defense Secretary
 McNaughton . He stated that he thought the idea had been shelved. 195/
 Later, in their reviel,'T of the ,Toint Staff's study, the services expressed
 reservations concerning the concept . They questioned its military
 utility, due to the deployments being framed essent ially within a narrOH
 deterrent context. They r ecommended i nstead a continued adherence to the
 deployment concept in the approved SEATO plans, which in their totality
 >'i'ere aimed at the military defense of all southeast Asia. The Army, in
 particular, expressed concern re garding routes and modes of possible DRV
 advance i nto South Vietnam that differed from tho se assumed by the study's
 belovr-the-m,1Z concept. The Air Force pointed out that the international
 force concept conflicted with the JCS concept for deterring and dealing
..lith overt DRV/CHICOM aggression as submitt~d on 14 November (JCSH-955-64).
 196/

 :Hr. McNaughton 's comments on 19 December seem to have been correct.
The case files cont aining the service comments on the international force
concept indicate no further action by the JCS after mid-J~nuary.

 In the meantime, however) a different approach to attracting wider
alli ed participation in the military defense of South Vietnam appeared
promising. On 29 December, OSD/ISA reported readiness on the part of
the Philipp i ne , ROK and GRC Governments to provide various forms of assist-
ance to South Vietnam. Included in the available Philippine and Korean
packages were an assortment of military forces. The ROK Joint Chiefs of
Staff offered a combat engi neer battalion, an engineer field maintena.n.ce
team, an Army transportation company, and a Marine Corps combat engineer
company . The Philippine Government stated its ,dllingness to send a
reinforced infantry battalion, an engineer construction battalion, and
some Special Forces units. 197/

 2. Relations with the G~~

 Following his second meeting with Pres ident Jo~~son, Ambassador
Taylor returned to Saigon . He arrived on 6 December amid press specula-
tion concerning the details of his i nstructions and subsequent UoS.
actions. 198/ The bas ic charge given him by the President had been vTell
publicized since their meeting on the 1st : lito consult urgently ''lith the
government of P:rime Hi nister Tran Van Huong a~ to measures to be taken
to improve the situation in all its aspects. II Hmiever, such a diplo-
matically worded statement left much room for imaginative interpretation
-- particularly in view of the AmbCJ.ssador' s "unannounced stopover in
Hong Kong to get a briefing by U. S. 'China watchers' in that listening
post." Several correspondents speculated on the like lihood of air action

 TOP SECREr - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 age.inst the Eorth. One, with an apparent inside source, even reported
 that these would be held in abeyance pending the outcome of strikes in
 Laos and the Gvn re act ions to U. S . suggestions for improvement . 1 98/

 a . Joint Planning. In the days immediately follmving his
r eturn, PJnbassador Taylor! s schedule precipitated press reports of fran-
t i c activity within the Embassy and other parts of the U. S. Mission in
Saigon. Taylor first briefed his Embassy Council and the Embassy staff
on the policy disc us sions in Hashington and the joint US/GVN courses of
action which it was hoped ,,;ould be follo.red in South Vietnam during
ensuing Iveeks. On 7 December, he met "rith Premier Huong and his senior
ministers and .li th General Khanh . On these occasions he outli ned the
military and diplomat ic actions which the U.S . Government intended to
take during Phase One and explained hml the Adlliin:is tration related the
possibilities of Phase Two actions to GVI~ perform,o nce. The Ambassador
described in general terrns the .kinds of administrative imp rovements and
joint planning activities which U. S . officials thought the GVR should
undert ake . 199/

 Similar sessions 1,jere held during the next few days, as the details
 for the joint GVU/US efforts .rere Iwrl\:ed out . On the evening of the 8th,
Ambassador Taylor held a reception for niemoers of the High ra.t ional
Council and Gene ral ~'lestmore land hosted the top A?VN generals at dinner .
At both occas ions, Taylor briefed the assembled on U. S . attitudes toward
the GV:r-; and, presumably, on the Administration ' s calculations of U. S .
risk relative to G'll; capab ility. On the follmring d ay , he held a lengthy
session .rith Premier Huong, Deputy Premier Vien and General Khanh . On
this occasion, he distributed a paper outlining nine specific actions
which the U. S. Government believ~d-,'rere needed to strengthen the GVN a.nd
i n vlhich the local U. S. mission "las committed to help . Taylor reported
that the rI:oape r was generally well received ll and that II specific joint
action responsibilities" had been agreed on . These were to be confirmed
i n writing on the follmdn g day . On tha,t same day, he submitted a pro-
posed GVH press release, describing in general terms the nature of the
new U. S, assistance to be given and the nei'J areas of GVN and joint G~/US
planning, designed to improve the situation in South Vietnam . 200/

 On the 11th, having obtained AcLministration approval , an official
GVH statement I{as re l eased to the press~ It related that lIa series of
discussions with the U.S. Mission ll had just been completed and that the
U.S , Government had offered additional assistance rl to improve the execu-
tion of the Govermnent ' s progrelliS and to restrain foot ' offset ' as
originall~T '10rd"~7 the mounting infiltration of men and equipment ll from
l'iorth Vietnam. Among military measures, it s::.:>ecified that U. S . support
\vould enable rI increased numbers of ffiouth Vietname siJ mili tary, p a ra-
military and police forces rl and 'w ould permit lithe strengthening of the
air defense of South Vietnam." It also mentioned assistance IIfor a
variety of forms of industrial, urban and rural development ll and promised

 ' 68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 a GVH effort to improve "security and local government in the rural areas. 1I
 The statement closed with the follOl'Ting bro paragraphs, which subse quent
 events made to appear ironic but which "Tere juxtaposed with great care:

 "TogetLer, the Government of Vietnam and the United States
 mission are making joint plans to achieve greater effectiveness
 against the i nfiltration threat.

 "In the course of the discussions, the United states repre-
 sentatives exuressed full suuuort for the duly constituted
 Government of~ Prime Hinister· }IUong." 201/

 As the follmdng section '''ill shmo[, the joint plarming that h ad just
 gotten unden-ray for reurisal actions and Phase II o perations was soon to
 be h a lted. It 'Has def~rred for a period of about three 'veeks during the
 forthcoming GV::J crisis. Howeve r, as implicit in the quoted paragraphs
 abov e , its resumption provided'effective U. S . leverage to help bring about
 an accommodation bet"lveen the mi lit ary dissidents and the civilian regime.

 b. GVN Crises . Late in the evening of 19 December, high-ranking
 South Vietnamese military leaders, l ed by General Khanh , moved to remove
 all power from the civilian regime of Premier huong . The move c ame in
 the announced dissolution of the High national C01mcil, "I-!hich had been
 serving as a provisional l egislature pending adoption of a permanent con-
 stitution , and the arrest of some of its members. Aiy Commodore Ky , acting
 as spokesman for the military, claimed that their intent was "to act as a
 mediator Fo resolviJ all differences in order to achieve national unity. II
 The immediate apparent conflict was with the Buddhists who had been demon-
 strating and threatening to provoke civil disorders in protest against the
 Huong government . In P..:mbas sador Taylor I s vie\v, hmvever, the under l ying
 motive \V'as grmving antipathy \-lith particular members of the High I'I 8.tional
 Council, brought to a head by the Council's refusal to approve a military
 plan to retire General ( Big) Minh from active service (and thus remove
 him from a position to contend ,dtb the ruling military clique). Moreover,
 the military had become quit e impatient with the civili an offic ials. 202/

 The general cons ensus among the _lJUbassador, General Westmore land
 and State Department officials \Vas that Gene r a l Khanh I s relat ionship "lith
 the o ther inf lue ntial generals and younger officers was rather uncertain.
 Therefore, they sought to bolster Premier Huong 's resolve to remain in
 office on the basis of an lmderstanding ,lith the generals -- even to the
 extent of seeking Khanh I s resignation or dismissal. T:Jhen presented with
 U.S. views, Khanh gave i nitial appearances of recognizing that the mili-
 tary seizure ha<..i. directly defied the U. S. pollcy position and the stipulatei
 basis for continuing joint GVlT/US efforts, and of accepting the need to
 vri thdralv. Hm'lever, he quickly attempted to turn the crisis into a dire ct
 confrontation betv.'een himself and j\mbassador Taylor . 203/ On t he 22nd,
 he i ssued a strong pub lic affirmation of the military~aders' actions,

•
 . 69 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of the need to avoid situations "favorable to the common enemies /Commu-
nism and colonialism in any foril," and of the military's resolve-"not
to carry out the policy of any foreign country." On the 24th, informa-
tion '.vas received that he intended to pressure Premier Huong into
declaring Pilllbassador Taylor personna non grata . 204/

 Administration r eact ion to this challenge indicated that it con-
sidered Khanh 's defiance as a threat to the fOQndations of U.S . policy in
South Vietnam. Alubassador Taylor vTas instructed to inform Huong t hat the
U. S. GoverIl.ment regarded the Pl~G issue as a "matter of gravest importance,"
and that "any acceptance of ffihanh'i/ demand or hesitation in rejecting
it would make it virtually impossible ..• to continue support LOf th~7 GVD
effort." Suggesting that. :Iuong might asked if he thought the "Aluerican
People could be brought to support continued U.S. effort in S~~ in face
LOt! E';G action against trusted i~.mbassador ," the Administrat ion urged
persistence in encouraging Huong to seek an accommodation with the other
military l eaders . Moreover, high-ranking HACV personnel were urged to
exploit their close relationships with South Vietnamese counterparts to
encourage such an arrangement. As leverage , Taylor 1tlaS encouraged to
emphasize the i ntended directions of U.S. policy, subsequent to a
strengthened and stable GVH . Specifically, he was urged to point out
that joint reprisals for unusual VC actions and "any possible future
decision to initiate !Jh~7 second phase" ;;.;ere imposs ible as long as
current conditions persisted. He was told, ";;.;ithout offer ing anything
beyond tenns of your instructions you could use these to their fullest
to bring jj;.y and the other generali! around." 205/

 There is no indication in the available sources that this advice
was directly employed. It is evident, h01tTeVer, that .A.1l1bassador Taylor
had explained the dependency of further U.S. actions on G~~ progress very
cle arly to the key military le aders on 8 and 20 December. 206/ Therefore,
they were vlell a\.;are that continued U. S. assistance along the pOlicy line
explained to them I'las predicated on their cooperation, and this ,·.' as
demonstrated early in the crisis. Even before Khanh ' s public declaration
of independence from U. S. po licy, it became knmm that joint talks con-
cerning incre ased aid to the South Vietnamese war effort had been sus-
pended. A fei'T days later that fact 1tlaS given additional circulation,
wit h emphasis that this suspension i ncluded p~ticularly any discussions
of mea,sures to reduce the infiltration from Laos and North Vietnam. 2117/

 The degree to which the suspensions of joint planning actions
affected the judgments of the South Vietnmnese generals is, of course,
not clear. l>lhat is apparent, hm ever, is that this factor together 1tTi th
car eful Embassy and Administration efforts to clarify possible misunder-
st andings l ed the generals to reconsider. By 28 December, _kmbassador
Taylor Fas reporting encouraging signs of an accommodation. 208/ On the
29th, Secreta.ry Rusk advised the Pres ident that the "gener a ls 1tTere having
second thoughts " and that "he hoped to see signs of political unity in
Saigon soon." 'l'hese comments 1tTere made in close cooperation with report s

 70./
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

that the Administration now' felt that Prew.ier Huong ' s cabinet might
require broader representation. Finally, on the 9th, the generals
pledged to return to terms agreed to during the previous August vThereby
matters of state would be left in the hands of a civilian government.
The joint commurlique issued by Huong and Khanh also promised to speedily
convene a representative constituent assembly to replace the High l'i ational
Council. 209/

 The generals ' reassessments ".rere no doubt helped by a strong
U.S. public statement, directed toward the South Vietnamese press, ex-
plaining the U. S. policy position to"Tard that country's political situ-
ation. In l anguage strikingly similar to the President's draft instruc-
tions to Taylor , it included the follmling:

 liThe primary concern of the United States Government and
 its repr esentatives is that there be in Saigon a stable
 government in place, able · to speak for all its components,
 to carry out plans and to execute decisions. 'iTithout such
 a government, United States cooperation ,¥ith and assistance
 to South Vietna..rn cannot be effective.

 " ... The sole object of United States activities has been
 and continues to be the reestablish.ment as quickly as possible
 of conditions favorable to the more effective prosecution of
 the war against the Vietcong. II 210/

Consistent "lith the expressed U. S. policy position, discussions betlveen
U.S. and G~ : officials concerning expanded assistance to the South
Vietnamese war effort I'Tere resumed on 11 January. 211/

 However, the apparent reconciliation of South Vietnam's military
and civilian le adership was short-lived. Close on the heels of an
announced G\ft\T decision (17 January) to increase its milit ary draft calls
-- long advocated by the U. S. l1ission -- student and Buddhist riots
s 'vept through Hue and Dalat . On the 20th, as arrangements "Tere completed
to appoint four leading generals to Premier Huong 's cabinet, a le ading
Buddhist official issued a proclamation accusing the Huong Government of
 attempting to split the Buddhist movement . On the 21st, Tri Quang issued
a st atement charging that the Huong Government could not exist ,dthout
U.S. support, a charge that . gained in int ensity in the days to follow.
On the 23rd, i3uddhist le aders ordered a military struggle against the
United States . Denouncing Premier Huong as a lackey of the U. S. Ambassa-
dor, they accused Taylor of seeking to wipe out Buddhism i n Vietnam. In
Hue , student-·lee.:. demonstrators sacked the USIJ." library and destroyed dJl
 estimat ed 8 , 000 books. THO days later, riots and strikes were in progress
in Rue, Saigon and Da r'Tang, and Hue "TaS placed under martial law. Mean-
"Thile, military leaders I'Tere attemp ting to convince Buddhist spokesmen
to call off their demonstrations a gainst the C::VK and the United States.
Finally, on the 27th , the generals withdr ew their support from the Huong

 . 71 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECR~T - Sensitive

 Government, and General Khanh is sued a statement that he vlaS resuming
 power !tto resolve the political situation." Soon after, the Buddhist
 leaders is sued orders to their follOlvers to halt their demonstrations,
 at least until they had s uffi cient opportunity to observe the perfor-
 mance of the nevi re gime . 21 2/

 Thus, in late January, the United states Government was faced
 with a dilemma . In December , it had spoken
 -"
 out quite clearly to the
 effect that its continued assistance along previously determined policy
 lines was dependent upon the effective functioning of a duly constituted
 South Vietnamese Gove;nment . By its actions and state~ents during the
 initial December crj_sis, i t had indicated that what it had in mind "as
 a civilian regime governing without interference from any particular
 grou:p . Now' , less than a month from the settlement of the former crisis
 along lines compa,tible with the preferred U. S. solution, it I'las faced
 with another military coup . A time for reassessing former policy
 decisions and taking stock of the shifting debits and assets in the U.S.
 position had arrived.

 c. Joint Reprisals. ~.Ieanwhile, an issue of great significance
to the Administration, as ','Te ll as to future relations with the GVN, \'las
adding to the grovring diss at isfaction with progress achieved in other
Phase One actions. One of the basic elements in Phase One policy Ivas to
have been joint GV:iTjus repris a l actions in respons e to any lIunusual
actions " by the VC. Hhen faced .dth a significant provoc8,tion at the
end of December, t he Administration fail ed to authorize such actions.
At the time, the circumstances in South Vietnam provided cogent reasons
for not doing so, but it nevertheless represented a significant departure
from the agreed policy position.

 At the height of the first government crlsls, on Christmas Eve,
 the Brink D. S. officers billet in d01i'.'l1to'ilD Saigon was bombed and severely
damaged. TIVQ jI,mericans were killed and 58 injured; 13 Vie tnamese also
were in jured . 213/ Ko suspicious person vlaS observed near the building ,
 so the repons ible party "Tas unkno"m. In reportin g the incident, Am-
bas sador Taylor treated it as an occasion for reprisal action. The
 i mmediate Administrat ion assessment \,.'as that und.er current political
circumstances , neither the Amer ic an public nor international opinion
might believe that the VC had done it. l'!;oreove r, with clear evidence
lacking , it felt that a reprisal at this time might appear as though
",·re are trying to shoot ourvJay out of an internal political crisis . !t
Given the Political disunity in Saigon, the Administration believed !lit
would be hard for ifhi/ P,merican people to understand action to extend
Ith::..7war. II ThE: refore, so the re asoning vTent , it would be undesirable
to underta.~e repr isals at that time. Howeve r, in cabling this e,ss essment,
Secretary Rusk added : :'but we are prepared to m8ke quick decision if
you !jaylo!] make recommendation ,dth different ass essment of above
factors or ';lith other factors not covered. above.!l 214/

 72 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP S~CBET - Sensitive

 Recommendations to take reprisal action came from several quar-
ters. Citing "Ihat i t called lIa further indication!! of Viet Cong respon-
sibili ty, and cautioninG ao'ainst adding the Brink affair to the Bien Hoa
 o '"
instance of unreciprocated enemy provocation, CIECPAC urged a reprisal
atta.ck. He argl.'ed that the Ilbombing of Brink BO,< ..TaS an act aimed
directly at U. S. armed forces in R~!li: 1I and that failure to respond would
only encourage further attacks. 215/ .Ambassador Taylor' forwarded what
he termed lIa unanimous re commendation ll by himself and members of the U.S.
Mission Council IIthat a reprisal bombing attack be executed Las soon as
possibl~f1 on a specified target tlaccompanied by statement relating this
action to Brink bombing." He st ated that !lno one in this part of the
vlOrld has Eh~ slight est doubt of VC guilt ll and pointed out that the NLF
was publicly taking credit for the incident. 216/ Citing Taylor T s
re quest and concurring in his recow~endation,-even to the specific target
selection, the JCS added their 'voices to those arguing for reprisals. In
their proposed exe cute message to CIFCPAC, they proposed a one - day
mission by 40 strike aircraft against the Vit Thu Lu Army barracks.
Further , · they recommended that the -~\AF should participate if their
state of readiness and tnne permitted. ~17/

 In spite of these strong r e commendations, the decision was made
not to retaliate for the Br i nk bombing incident. On 29 December , the
follo'l'ling message was dispatched to the U. S. embass ies in Southeast As ia
and to CmCPAC :

 !!Highest levels today reac hed negative decision on proposal '
 ••• for reprisal action for BOQ, bombing . T'Je vrill be sending
 fuller statement of reasoning and considerations affecting future
 actions after . Secretary's return from Texas tonight." 218/

Available materials do not include any further explanation.

 3. Policy Views in January

 As the new year began, the Administration vTaS beset ,"'lith frus-
tration over an apparent l ack of impact from Phase One operations, over
it s failure to take repris als after an attack on U.S . personnel, and
over the still troublesome crisis within the G~\ . In this mood , U.S
policy vIas subjected to various kinds of criticism and comment. Some
came from within the Administration , various reactions came from outside
it •.

 a. Pub~ Debate. At the height of the GV'::.~ cn.sls, a D"Lunber
of newspapers al1.d periodicals joined vIit.h the already committed (in
opposition ) and influenti al Eew' York Times an.d st. Louis Post Dispatch
in questioning U. S. objectives in Southeast Asia and/or advocating U:S.
withdra'\ml from the entanglements of South Vietnam . 219/ In the midst
of this kind of public question.ing , a major debate arose among members
of Congress and enmeshed, on occas ion, l eading officials in the Adminis-
tration. Leading off in opposition ( 26 December) was Senator'Church,

 "73 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

vThocriticized U. S. i nvolvement in South VietnCLm and urged a shift of
policy i n support of the neutralization of all Southeast Asia . Senator
Dirksen voiced agreement (2 JCLrlUary) with the need for a policy reassess-
ment, preferably involving both the Administr at ion and bi-part isan
Congressional leadership, but he stated his own view that lito give up in
 1I
Vietnam means a loss of face throughout the Orient. 222./

 The debate blossomed in January. In a particularly active
television day, Sunday, 3 January, Secretary Rusk defended Vietnam
p?~icy in the context of a year-end foreign policy report. Ruling out
enher a U. S. "rithdra"ral or a major expansion of the war , Rusk gave
assur ances that 'with internal unity and our aid and persistence the
South Vietnamese could themselves d~feat the insurgency. On another
netlvork, three Senators expressed i mpat ience vli th U. S. policy in Vietnam
and urged a public reevaluation of it. Senator Eorse criticized our in-
volvement in South Vietnam on a unilateral basis, "rhile Senators Cooper
and Monroney spoke in favor of a ful l -fledged Senate debate t o IIc ome to
grips II Ivi th the situation there . Senator f.~ansfi e ld al so appeared on the
3rd, to urge consideration of Church 's neutralization idea as an alterna-
tive. to current policy but in keeping " ith the Pre sident I s desire n~ither
to Inthdraw nor carry the war to l':orth Vietnam . 22~/ On the 6th , In
re sponse to an Associated Press survey, the views i n the Senate ,\Tere
shown to be quite divided . Of 63 Senators commenting, 31 suggested a
negotiated settlement after the anti-communist bargaining positions we re
improved, while 10 favored negotiating imrnediately. E i ~ht others favored
commitment of U.S. forc es against North Vietnam, 3 urged immediate with-
drawal of U. S. advisers and military aid , and 11 stated that they didn ' t
know ..,rhat should be done other than to help strengthen the Gvl~ . On
11 January , Senator Russe ll r eacted to a briefing by CIA Director McCone
wi th a statement that flu'P 1l...l1til no,,! we h e.ve been l osing ground instead
of gaining i t . " He urged reevaluation of the U. S. position in South
Vietnam , cautioning that unless a more effective government devel oped i n
Saigon the situation ,-rould become a prolonged stalemate at best . 222/

 . On 14 January, as a re sult of repor~s of the loss of two U.S .
Jet combat aircraft over Laos accounts of U.S. air operations against
Laot~an infiltration routes g~ ined "ide .circulation for the first time .
O~e In particular, a U. P. I . story by Arthur Domraen, in effect blew the
lld ?n the entire YANKEE 'J:'EAl-l operation in Laos since May of 1964. 223/
Desplte Official state or Defense refusal to comment on the nature of the
Laotian ai r miSSions , these disclosures added new fuel to the public
policy debate . In a Senate speech the following day, in which he ex-
pressed his uneasiness over "recent reports of Punerican air strikes in
Lao~ and l:orth Vietnam," Senator iilcGovern criticized '\That he called !lthe
pollcy f, nO.'tl gairdng support in ~1ashington , of extend~ng ~he war to the
north. He denied that bombing l:orth Vietnam could serlously 'l,veaken
guerrilla fighters 1,000 miles awayll and urged seeking a "political
settlement ll ''lith Hortn Vietnam . On the 17th, Senator Saltonstall told
a radio aUdience that he thought bomb ing the supply lines in Laos was

 ~OP SEC3ET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive

 was lithe right thing to do. II Senator Long and Congressman Ford indicated
 on a TV program that they didn't feel that such operations ,'T ere lIa par-
 ticularly dangerous course" for the nation to follow and that they were
 the kind of actions that could help protect OUI forces i n South Vietnam .
 Senator :',Iorse criticizei the bombi~g~ as part of the Administration IS
 IIforeign poli cy of conceal1nent i n Southeast Asia . IT On the 19th, in the
 Senate, he rey eated his blasts, charging that the air strikes ignored
 the 1962 Geneva P-ccords and violated the nation ' s belief in II substi tuting
 the rule of l avT for the jungle law of military might . II Broadening his
 attack he vlarned that "there is no hope of avoiding a massive ..Tar in
 Asia" if the LJ . S. policy tov~ard Southeast As ia w'ere to continue uithout
 change. 224/

 b . Policy Assessments . The intensifying public debate and the
event. s and forces "Thieh ureciuitated it brought about an equally search-
ing reassessment of pOli~y within the Administration . Hhile there is
l i ttle evidence in the available materials that shmTs any serious ques-
tion ing of former policy decisions among the Principals, questioning did
o ccur vrithin the a gencies vThich they represented. It i s clear th at some
of the judgments and alternative approaches were discussed ,vith these I'SC
members, and presumbably, some fOQ.'l:i their v~ay into discussions with the
President .

 One very signific ant and probably influential viewpoint '\\-as
 registered by the Saigon Embassy. - In a message (':lAB E ) described as
 the reflectio ns of Alexis Johnson ar.d l\.Illbassador 'J:'aylor on '\lhich
 General Hestmoreland concurred, the thrust of the advice seemed to be
 to move into Phase T,;'Q, almost in spite of the pol:i.tical outcome i n
 Saigon. Afte r listing four possible " solutions" to the then-Q.'1s ettled
 GVl': crisis, Taylor identified either a military takeover coupled vrith
 Huong ' s resi gnat ion or a successor civilian gover~~ent dominated by the
 military as equally the '\wrst possible outcomes. (It is important to
 note here that , dependin g on hOlv one interprets the structure of the
January 27th re gime, one or the other of these vTaS in fact the cas e at
the beginning of the air strikes in February, 1965.) In the event of
 such an outcome, Taylor argued that the United States could either
 "carryon about as we are nm'T ll or llseek to ' disengage from the present
 intimacy of relationship ,.;ith the GVY" i"hile continui ng "to accept re -
 sponsibility for fJ.tiJ air and maritime defense .. • against the DRV . " In
the case of disengagement , he argued, the United states could offset the
danger of South Vietnamese leaders being yanicked into making a deal
,'lith the NLF l!if we '\fere engaged in reprisal attacks or had i nitiated
Phase II operations against DRV . " The message then summarized the three
differe nt eondit ions l.Ulder which the l,1 iusion I )fficials thought Phase 'l"wo
operations could be undertaken : '

 '~ . In association with the G~~ after the latter has proved
 itself as a reasonab ly stable gove r nment able to control
 its armed forces .

 , 75 TOP S~C ~ET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECR~T - Sensitive

 B. Under a situation such a s now as an emergency stimulant
 hopefully to create unity at home and restore failing
 morale.

 C. As a unilateral U.S. action to compen sate for a reduced
 in-colliltry U.S. presence . 1f (Underlining added)

'In other words, under any conceivable alliance condition short of complete
 U.S. abando~ment
 . of South Vietnrun , Aniliassador Taylor and his top-level
 assoclates in Saigon saw the graduated air strikes of Phase Two as an
 appropriate course of action . As they conc luded, II\r{ ithout Phase II opera-
 tions, we SE.e slight chance of moving toward a successful solution." 225/

 Within the more influential sections of the State Department,
policy reexaminat ion took a Similar, though not identical, tack. Rather
than adjust the sUbstance or projected extent of the pressures policy,
the t endency vTaS to recalculate and adjust the conditions under which it
was considered appropriate to apply it. The motivation for a reassess-
me~t ''las the sense of impending disaster in South Vietnam . lilhat the
Salgon Embassy reports appear to have portrayed at the time as concrete
instances of foot-dra gging , political maneuvering, and sparring for ad-
vantage among political and military leaders seem to have been interpre-
ted in Washi ngton as an imuendin.a sell-out to the NLF . For example, the
Assistant Secretary for Fa~ :i.<::ast~rn Affairs, "I'iho had been an important
pa;-ticipant in the policy a.nd decision-making processes through most of
1904, of'fered the following prognosis:
 11 • • • the situation in Vietnam is now likely to come apart

 more rapidly than we had anticipated in ~T ovember. 'de would
 still stick to the estimate that the most likely form of
 coming apart 'ivould be a government or key groups starting to
 negotiate covertly with the Liberation Front or Hanoi, perhaps
 not asking in the first i nstance that 'de get out, but "Ti th
 that necessarily follo"l1ing at a fairly early st age. II 226/

 The perceived impacts of a collapse in Saigon on other nations --
perhaps even more than the political fortunes of South Vietnam itself -_
were a significant part ' of the State Department calculations (Tab F) . If ·
a un ilatera l "Vietnam solution" v;ere to be arranged, so the thinking "I'T ent
in Janua.ry 1965, not only would Laos and Cambodia be indefensible, but
Thailand I s position i.;ould become unpredictable. Bundy "rrote :

 If Most seriously, there is grave question whether the Thai
 i n these ci.rcumstances "rould retain any confidence at all in
 our continued SUpport .... As events have developed, the Ameri-
 can public would prooably not be too sharply critical, but the
 r eal question would be whether Thailand and other nations were
 weakened and taken over ther eafte r."

 TOP SECRZT - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECR.ET - Sensitive

The reasons why this kind of inmact was believed likely \'Tas related tD a
perceived lack of realism or effectiveness i n U. S. policies during the
late autunm. Bundy reflected an apparently 1ddel y sbared concern that
Administrat ion actions and statements since the election had convinced
the Vietnamese and other Asians that the U. S. Government did not intend
to take stronger action and was "possibl y looking for a way out. 1I
ltIoreover , he saw this impression being created by our !linsisting on a
more perfect goverlli~ent than can re asonab ly be expected, before we con-
sider any additiona l action -_ and that we might even pullout our
support unless such a government emerges. lI 227/

 To ch~Dge this impression and reverse the disturbing trends ,
 Bundy and others i n state ~uggested stronger actions, even though recog-
 ni zing that these actions incurred certain risks. HOI·rever the irn..mediate _
actions suggested fell somewhat short of Phase rr..TO (a term that was not
used i n the correspondence). They i n cluded: (1) lIan early occasion for
reprisal action .•• "; ( 2 ) "possibly beginning 10H- l evel reconnaissance of
the DRV ... I I ; (3) 11 an orderly 'wi thdralval of our dependents, II which was
termed !I a grave mistake in the absence of stronger action"; and (4)
l1introduction of limited U.S . ground forces into the northern area of
South Vietnam ... concurrently with the first air attacks i nto the DRV. 11
They downgraded the potential of further intensifying the air operations
in Laos, i ndicating that such actions ""TOuld not meet the problem of
Saigon morale" and might precipitate a "Coronn.mist i ntervention on a
SUbstantial scale i n Laos .... 11 The perceived risks of' the suggested
a ctions were: (1) a deepened U. S. commitment at a time "l-lhen South
Vietnamese "rill appeared weak ; ( 2) the likelihood OI~ provoking open
opposition to U. S. policies in nations like India and Japan ; (3) the
uncertainty of any meaningful stiffening effort on the GIn' ; and (4) the
inability of "limited actions against the southern DEVI1 to sharply reduce
infiltration or !Ito induce Hano i to call it off.11 228/

 If the gra.duated, !lprogressively mounting, II air operations of
Phase II were implied by these suggest ions , it a~)pears that they vrere
perceived as being entered rather gingerly and with little intent to
 intens i fy them to whatever extent might be required to force a decision
 in Hano i. Rather , the expectancies in State vTere quite different: "on
balance ive believe that s~ch action would have some faint hope of really
 improving the Vietnamese situation, and, above all, ~ould put us in a
much stronger position to hold the next line of defense, namely Thailand."
Moreover , Bundy and others felt that even vTi th the stronger actions, the
negotiating process that they believed vTaS bound to C0me about could not
be expected to bring about a really secure and independent South Vietn8.l.11.
Still, despite '"his shortcoming, they re asonel that their suggested
 I1stronge r actions" "TOuld have the desirable effect i n Southeast Asia :
" ••. we vlould still' have appeared to As ians to have done a lot more about
it.11 229/ ~

 , 77 TOP SECP~T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Underlying the State Department IS concerns over the impact of
U.S. Vietnam policy on the re st of Southea st As ia were current develop-
ments i n the commQDist world. For one thing, the Soviet Union h&d
re-entered Southeast Asian politics in an active way, after a period of
nearly three yeaLs of dilig~nt detacD...ment . Fo~_lO\'ling a reported Soviet .
pledge in l';ovember to i nc re ase economic and military aid to Horth Viet-
nam, the Administration held a series of conversat ions in December ,d th
rep:esentative s of the new Soviet re gime . During at least one of these
-- 1.n addition to exchanging the nOl, standard respective lines about II'ho
violated the Geneva Accords __ Secretary Rusk stressed the seriousness
of the situation created by Hanoi's and Peki ng 's policies, implying
strongl y that ' .;'e ",Tould remain in South Vietnam until those policies
changed or had resulted in "a real scrap. I. Soviet Foreign Hinister
Gromyko replied that if the enited states felt so strongly about improv-
ing the situation in Vietnam ' it should be Hilling to attend an inter-
national conference to discu~s Laos and Vietnam . . HO':Tever , he would not
a gree ",ith Eusk I s request for assurances that Laos "Tould be represe nted
by Souvanna Phouma . 230/

 Hi thin a fe,.r Tdeeks of this conversation , Hr. Gromyko sent
assurances to the DRV that the Soviet Union T,wuld support it in the
face of aggressive actions by the United States . Further, he expressed
the official Soviet vie,,, that it 'was the duty of all p artic ipants in the
Geneva agreements to take the stens necessary to fiustrate U. S. military
plans to ext €.ond the ,,,ar in Indo-China. This note , sent on 30 Dece..mber,
was made public in a renevled call on 4 January for a conference on Laos,
to be convened without nreconditions On 17 January, Pravda carried an
authoritative statement- ''larning that "the provocations of the armed
forces of the United States and their Saigon puppets against ]'T orth Viet-
nam" carried dangers of "large armed conflict," and citing naval attaclcs
on the D~V coast and U.S. air attacks in. Laos as eXall1ples. On the 22nd ,
i n l~tt~rs to both nanoi and Peking, Gromyko reiterated the Soviet pledge
to a1.d Lorth Vietnam in resisting any U.S . military action . 231/

 In addition to rene',ved Soviet activity in Southeast Asia, that
o~ ?ommunist China also appeared ominous. Fenned by Sukarno I s abr~p~
vT1.tndr a\\~al of Indonesia IS particination in the U. i'L, some U. S. off1.c1.als
voiced concern over the develonme~t of a "Peking -Jakarta axis to promote
 ll

revolution in ASia . .I':"orth Vietnam, together "Tith l'; orth Korea, were seen
as n:~, ural allies ,Tho might join in to form an international grouping
exert"lng an attraction on other Asian states to cOlU1t.er that of the U. N.
Peking I'Tas vie'.ved as the inst i gator and prime benefactor of such a group-
ing. 23 ~/

 Complementing the State Depa,rtment policy assessments, were those
in OSD . For example, in early January, Assi stant Secretary J.Icr:aughton
regarded U.S. stakes in South Vietnam as: (1) to hold onto IIbuffer real
est ate " near Thailand ani Ealaysia and ( 2 ) to maintain our national

 ·78 TOP SECRET - Sen s itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By : NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECr~T - Sensitive

reputation . In his view the l atter was the more importa.nt of the two .
Sharing the State view that South Vietnam was being lost (tlthis means
that a government not unfriendly to the DRV will probably emerge within
t,m yearstl), he believed that the U. S. reputation would suffer least
lIif we continue to support South Vietnam and jf Khanh and company con-
tinue to behave like children as the game is lost . tI }Ioy,ever, he pointed
out that tldogged perseverance ll 1N'as also recommended because the situation
might possibly improve. 233/

 In specific terms, I.lc]\~aughton defined perseverance as including
the follmdng course of action:

 tl a . Cont i nue to take risks on behalf of SVlT. A reprisal
 should be carried out soon. (Dependents could be removed at
 that time.)

 b. Keep slugging away. Keep help flowing, BUT do not
 . increase the number of US men in SVI'J . (Additional US sol-
 dier s are as like ly to be cOQnter-productive as productive.)

 c. Do not lead or appear to lead in any negotiations . .
 Chances of reversing the tide 'I·rill be better and, if we don It
 reverse the tide , our reputation
 - "rill emerge in better condi-
 tion .

 d. If we leave , be sure it is a departure of the kind
 ..[hich· would Pllt everyone on our side, \vondering ho"r we stuck
 it and took it so 10ng. 1I

In the event of in~bili ty to prevent deterioration \d thin South Vietnam ,
he urged the development of plans to move to a fall-be.ck position by
helping shore-up Thailand and f.ialaysia . 234/

 An OSD assessment made immediately after the Khanh coup i n late
January adds perspective to this view-point. In it, McNaughton stated
a nd Secretary licl,'amara agreed , tlU. S. objective in South Vietnam is not
to I help friend I but to contain China. II In particular, both ~.lalaysia
and Thailand "\vere seen as the next targets of Chinese aggressiveness.
I'Te i the r official smv any alternative to IIkeep plugging ll insofar as U. S.
efforts inside South Vietnam "rere concerned. Hm·rever , outside the
borders, both favored i nit iating strikes against ~·; orth Vietnam. At first,
t. hey believed, these should tal<;:e the form of reprisals; beyond that , the
Admin istrat ion vrould have to IIfee l its way" into stronger, graduated
pressures . Mcnaughton doubted that such strikes would actually help
the situation in South Vietnam , but thought they should be carried out
anyvray . i\~cl[ amara beli eved they probably vTould help the situation, in
addition to their broader impacts on the U.S. position in Southeast
Asia . 235/

 79 TOP SECR~ - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Though different i n some respects, all of these policy views
 pointed in · a similar direction. In his mVD way, each Principal argued
 that it was unproductive to hold off on further actions against ~·jo rth
 Vietnam lmtil the GifT:; began to operate i n an effective manner . Each
 suggested broad~r benefits that could be gained for the United States
 i f firmer measures were t8~en directly against the DRV.

 The impact of these views can be seen in the policy guidance
 emanating from WaShington in mid and late January 1965 0 For example,
 on the 11th, P~bassador Taylor was apprised of Administration doubts
 that General Khanh had put aside his intentions to stage a coup and
 was given counsel for such an eventuality . Ess entially, the guidance
 was to avoid actions that 1'Tould further commit the United states to any
 particular form of political solution. ~he underlying rational e ex-
 pressed vias that if a milital'y gover nment did emerge, "vre might well
 have to swallow· our pride and ilOrk \dth it." 236/ Apparent ly, the
 Ad.rninistra,tion's adamant insist ence on a11 effective GVF along lines
 specified by the United states had been eroded. Hm·reve r, on the 14th,
 guidance to Taylor indicated that the Administration had not yet
 determined to move into a phase of action more vigorous than the current
 one. In the inLrnediate vlak~ of public disclosures concerning the bomb ing
 operations in Laos, Secretary Rusk concurred in Taylor's proposal to brief
 the C;Vl~ leaders on these operations but caut ioned against encouraging
 their expectations of new· U. S. move~ a gainst the Eorth. Rusk considered
. it "essential that they not be given fC~7 impres~io~ that ~ArWZL ROL~,
 etc~7 repr~sents a major st ep-up of act i v ity agalns~ the DRV or that It
 r epresents an irnportant ne,'r pha.;e of U.S. operat ional activity ." 237/
 The im.med iate matter for s peculation was the striking of a key hi gh~Tay
 bridge in Laos, but the pr;gram still called for t v-lO missions per week .

 Clear indication that the Afuninistration was contemplating some
kind of incre ased military activity came on 25 January. Ambassador
~aylor vIas asked to comment on the "Departmental view" that U. S. depen-
dents should be withdravTn to "clear the decks" in Saigon and enable
better concentration of D.S . efforts on behalf of South Vietnam. 23~/
Previously, the J·CS he.d reversed their init ial position on this issue
and requested the removaL a vie"!. . \\Thich was fOrlmrded to State IIfor con-
sideration at the highest'levels of government " in mid-January . 239/
Recalling the Bundy policy assessment of 6 January ( ~AE F), it will be
noted that clear i ng the decks by removing dependents was recommended only
i n association with "stronger actions . tl Hm.rever, there is no indication
of any decision at this point to move into Phase ~~o . The Rusk c able
made specific r~ference to a current interest in reprisal actions . More -
over, cons idera.J.; ion of later events and decis;.ons compels the judgment
that it was only reprisals which the Administration had in mind as
January drew to a close .

 . 80 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 -n
 §
 Z
 S
 m
 en
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By : NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECIlliT - S~n s itive

 IV.C. FOOTNOTES

 October 1964 ~ Jenu~ry 1965

 1. SlUE 53- 2~64.$ 1 October 1964, pp. 1-3 12assim. (TOP SECRE'r ).

 2. Ibid., p. r(; see aJ.so pp. 1, 2, 9 ( TOP SECREI' ) .

 3· SNIE lO - 3 ~·64, 9 Octob '::l' 196!~, p. 2 ( TOP SECRl'S'I' ).
 4. Taylor to D~1?artnC!nt of State, 14 October 196)~ ( TOP SECRET ).
 5. Ta ylor messe.ge to President Johnson, 16 Octo .... Cl' 1964 ( JPS 303, DrG
 161030~ ), de sC2'ibe d j n CJCS m:''::mornndu.s to SecD3f, "Courses of
 Action, Southc2..Gt Asia., II 27 October 1964 ( JCS M-j02~6!~ ) ( TOP
 SECRI~l ) •

6. Study of Infil :;r? tion from No:rth Vietna.m ll ,
 "Ch:r:Ol.'lOlog ic L,l
 24 October 1961~ ( SECR:2:;; ) r

·7 . See P ter Grose, in P(;",7 York T:iJ:l:;S, 2 Octob0r 1964.

8. CJCS r.lemoranU:l1'U to SecD3f, "An~..1-ysi5 of Southeast Asia Actions .. 11
 21 O~t ober 1964 (JC811.-893-64 ) (In Viet.m;n 381 : Sens itive file )
 ( TOP SECRET ). .

9· JCSM-9 0 2-64, 27 Octobe r 1961t ( TOP SECRET ).
10. Ibid.

11. S0cDcf J-1er:lore.n(lll.:n to CJCS, "Courses of Actio:l, Sout!J.~f!.st ASic , "
 29 October 196L~ (In Vietnam 381 : Sens itive fil e ) ( TOP SECRET ).
 See also JOint St.ate/D~fense mcssag~ to Ambassador Tn.ylor, 29
 October 1964 ( D3fensc 13l~2) ( In Vietn::J'!l 381 : Novcmb~r fHe )
 ( TOP SECI{Z1' ).

12. Nev York T1rne s, 2 Nove.llbcr 1961.~ .

13· NSAM 314) 10 Sept . . . :nb cr 1964 ( TOP SECRE'r ).
14. CJCS mcss~.ge to CINCPAC, HACV and Amb:J.ssD.dor Taylor, 1 Novc:nb er
 Nov(mi~er file) ( TOP SECRET ).
 1964 ( JCS 1451) ( In Victn:un 381 :
15· S e~ Tad Szulc , !\(;..? York Ti."nes , 2 Nov::::nber 1964 .
 .
16. CJCS to CnTCPAC , ~;;".1 November 196 1j. ( TOP SECRET ).

 81 TOP SEC~;r - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECR~T - Sens itive

18. Descrlbed. in CJCS mcmoranci.u::n to SecD:!f, "Recommended U.S. Courses
 of Action i n Relation t o Viet Cong Attack on Bien Roa Airfield,
 1 Nove:m.ber 1961 ~ ( SECRET )" 4 Nove.ruber 1964 ( JC Sl.1-933~64) (TOP SECRE'I' ).

19. Saigon 1357, in Taylor mess~ge to SeeDef, 5 November 1964 (Saigon
 251) ( In Vir.:tn~m 381: November fil e ) (TOP SECRET ).

2O~' T~ylor to SeeD .. f , 3 November 1964 (TOP SECRE'I' ).

21. JCSM-933-64, 4 NO'fcmber 1964. ( TOP SECREI' ).

22. S ~e f.1cNe.nl3.r?
 mcmorandu..'1l to CJCS, "Recommended U ~S. Courses of Action
 in Rclo.tion to Viet Conl7 Att£~ck on Bien Hoa Airficld, 1 No'rerr:ber 1964
 (SECRET )II, 13 Novcmbe:t' 1964 ( In Vietnam 381: November file (TOP
 SECRET ) •

23· J onathz..n Moo!'l:: memor:m um, 3 Nov(',m.b er 1964 ( In State Department
 }'lv..t erio.ls, Vol. II ) (CONFIDENTIAL).
21~. Ibid.

25. "Proj ;;ct Ou.tline , II 3 Nov~Llbcr 1964, attachment to Corcor.:m memo~.~nd.um
 to Hichael Forrest ,3 Eovember 1964 (In State Dcp~~tmcnt r.1~terie.1s ,
 Vol. II) (TOP SECRE':C )·.

26. See his d~sCl'iption of work i n lJiustin me:norc.nduIn. to Chairuw.n, NSC
 '-lorking Gr o1.1:p on Southeast Asia, "Addit ional Materi<::l for Pro j ect
 on C01.u'ses of .Action in Southeast Asia" , 14 November 196 1+ (In
 s tate DeparCr.l0nt Materiels, Book III) (TOP SECRET ) 0

270 For eX()J;Jple , see No,,, York Times and Neil" York J ournnl American,
 2 NovClmbcr 1964· aDd Chicago Tribu.'1c, · 3 Nov(!:mber 195~

280 P ·tel' Gr ose, l{e\7 York Times, 2, 6, o.nd 8 November 1964.

290 Buno.y Qr.:1ft , ro:t'king p3.per, If Condit ions for Act ion and Kcy Actions
 SurrOlL1'1ding Any D~cis:i.on, " 5 November 1961~ ( In Stat ~ Department
 Materiel s , Vol II. ) (TOP SECRE.r )0

30. Sulllv-V}l memor.:'.l1dum to As siste.nt S_cretary Bu.ndy, "Courses of .Action
 i n Vict.n:vn, It 6 l!ovembcr 1964 ( In State Depa:rt!!l.ent l-1at erials, Vol II)
 ('J:OP SECR3T ) e

31. CIA-DIA- I HR P3l1el G.r£'.ft p~per, If Section I ~ 'r he Situat ion , fI 6 November
 1964 ( I n USC Working Group l1~vorkine Pc-pers ") ( TOP SECRET ) <>

32 0 . ;·1cThughton draft outline, "Action for South Victnc.'U, fI 7 No vember 1964
 ( In State D~D3.rt,m~nt Vlatericl.s, Vol. II ) (TOP SECRET ).

33. Int elligence ~el draft p.:'.per, 6 Novemb~i.· J.961~ (TOP SECRET ).

 82 TOP SEC~ET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

34. Ibid.

35. Hustin vlOrking paper, "Comm.~nts on CIA-DLf>.-INR Panel Dr~.ft Section I -
 The Situ:t"cion, II enc1osur~ to Joint Staff memorandum, 10 november 1964
 ( In State D!:p3.rtmc:lt Materials, Vol. II) (TOP SECRE'T ).

370 NSC "'orking Group on Vietn$} (sout ·~ast Asia ), "Section I; I ntelligence
 The Situation in Vietnam, I~ 21~ November 1964, pp. 6, 7-8
 Assc:l3.'!l::t!l.t :
 ( Ll1 Stute Department Iviuterinls, Vol. IV) (TOP SECRET ).

38. Ibiel. , p. 11-

39 . Ipid. , p. 12.

40. Ib~~., ppo 14-15, E.~.
11-10 NSC Worki.:rg Group on Southe~st Asia, "Section II: U. S . Objectives
 al1 (l StakM in Sout Vietn2.l1l c"nd Southeast Asi:l, II 8 Novc::n. er 196 1t
 ( In Draft Pape:es of NSC Ilm'king Group, 17 NOVCflber 196L~, AF'''{PDRB
 8730..64 ) (TOP fmCnET ). See olso draft ( quoted in parts ) in
 enclostU'c to Muotin mcmor.mdum to Cbc,irms.n, NBC "rorking Greup,
 "COID.cll:_nt on Draft for FEzt II of Project OUtline on Courses of'
 Action in SOlltheL~st Asia., II 10 November 1964 (TOP SECRET) and Revised
 Draft,' liS :"111).l"Y _ Courses of Action in southeast Asia, II 21 November
 1964 ( TOP 8ECRE'I' ) (Both in state D~p3Itm.ent :Vlaterials, Vol. II and
 Vol .. IV).

420 Ibid.

43. Ibid.

44. NSC 'H orking Group, Section II, 8 November 196t~ (TOP SECRET ).

45. Ibid.

46. Forrestal m,,:::,:nol"Jndul'!l to ."'.ssistant Secretary Bundy, IfCoITh"';1cnts on
 I nput - II U.S. Objectives and stakes in south Vietn:'Jl1 :md Southeast
 Asie.,," 4 Jlfoyemb:::r 196!~ ( In State D-~:partment Mat erinls, Vol o II)
 (TOP SECfu,~).

47 . 8'1.' livan to' Buney" vith attached u..ll.cla.ssified p o.per, 6 November 1964
 (TOP SECiBl ).

48. MUSti..l1 to Cho. irm:'J...'T1, 10 Novem er 1964, pp o 1, 2, 3 (TOP SECRET ).

1}9. Ibicl.) pp. 4, 5, 6.
50 e Revised Drai't, "Sl)!nr~~.ry, " 21 November 1964, pp. 3-4 (TOP SECRET ).

 TOP SECHE'l1 - Sens it i vo
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRE1 - s ~ns itive

510 D)id., p o 6.

52. Ibid., :?p. 5.·6.

53· Ibid., pp. 4-5. Se_ also NSC ~'] orking GrcJ.p. ItS ection II," 8 Novc;:n.bcr
 196L~ (TOP SEC?ET ).

54. Mustin to CbaiJ."T1an, 10 Nov'vrnber 1964 (TOP SECRB:r).

55· See Revised Dr~ft , "Sur:nnary, II 21 ~rovember 1964, po 7 (TOP SECRE1 ) 0

 ItProj ect Outline," 3 November 1964 ( TOP SEC&~T ).

 IIAltcl'natiY<! Forms of Negot:",'1.t ions t1-nd Related Supporting Po1iticn1
 Act::.o!:',s - ,.Ut~rnnt iv~ B. If att::>.cr.nent to Rob ert J oh.l1son memorc..ndu,!n to
 As sis-Grmt Sc:cr::ta::y B1tn~1y, lICour.scs of Action in Southec.st Asia :
 Politic al Aspects ( l'urt_-..r 'I'houg to)," 6 No\remb~r 1964 (In sta t e
 D~p3.rt!Uent iiJ.teri a1s , Vol. II) ( SECRE.'l' ).

59. HcHaue'1ton I s fir st drs.ft out,l ine , "Action for South Vict!l.~i.L1, Tl
 5 1:OV'2D.DCr 1961.~ (In HcNo.ughton II ) ( SECRET ). See also his "Plan of
 Action for South Vietnam," 3 SeptQ;'Ub\:!l' 1964 <".nd "Aims and O".[)tions
 in S ot~the,?,,8t ASia, II 13 Octob er 196 J.j. (TO? SECRZT ) 0

60. See NSC l'iorkin0 Group, "Section IIItI, 17 November 1964, and. "S ection
 VI," 11 Novemner 1964 (TOP SECRET) .
61. MUstb to Che,i rm,::..n, 11+- November 1964 Crop SECRET ).

62c trPl~o.j cct Outlin<!,!! 3 November 1964 (TOP SECRET).
63. Bundy draft i-iOrking pc-per, "III - The Broa.d Optionc, " '7 November 1964
 ( TOP SZCHET ) ; Bundy drnft worl~ing Pc.pel' , "VIII - Analysis of Option
 C," B nC'vc:ubcr 1964 ( TOP SBCRET ) (Both in State D~par'cm~nt r-Iateri e.ls,
 Vol. II).

64. Rob ert J ohnson me!:1or~dum to Assist;c3,nt SeCl'etary i3lmdy, !ICoI!lll1cnts
 on Drclt l-laterial for Report of iliSe Horking Grcup"," 10 November 196L~
 (In s t •.'.te D~p3.rtment llateria~s, VoL II) (TOP SECR..4.:T ).

65. Sec Hcl\aU&;lton 1 s penc ileo. c Clmi:lents in rllargin of Bundy drc!.ft, ttAnalysis
 of Oytion C," att3.ch '~ d to Bi.mc1y m~;n orand: 11 to fiSC ~"; ork ing Group"
 10 Nov~~bcr 1964 ( TOP SECRET).

66. USC Forkin3 Group, I:Sect ion V, I! 8 November 1964 (TOP SECRET).

 84 TOP SECRET - Sens it i vt)
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

68. Se ... Bundy d.-raft, liThe Brand Ortions, If 7 Nov<..:!:1b,-.r 1964 (TOP SECRET') .
 and its discussion of Option.A (included as P:ll't of all other options).

69. JohnsG..l'l to Bundy, 6 November 1964 (SECR.E'l' ) 0

70. Bundy dTC'.ft , "T:Ce Broa,d Options, II 7 November 1964 (TOP SECfuir) 0

71. S~~ Sullivan to Bundy, 6 November 196!~ (TOP SECRET); Johnson to
 Bundy" 6 November 1964 ('l'OF SECRET); CLA.-DL~.-INR Panel draft pLpcr,
 6 :Novc.m.b r~r 1961.,. ( TOP SECRET ).

72. See IJSC :{orking Group, "Section III, II and IISection V, II 8 November
 1964 (TOP SECRET); also Revised Draft IISUu"11!lo,l'Y, II 21 November 1964,
 pp. la, 12-15 (TOP SECRET).

73 . SeC! NSC Harking Group, IIS cc tlon III, II 17 November 196L~, and "Section
 VI, 11 11 November 1964 (TOP SECRET); also Revis~d J):"caft, "S1.lr.ll!l.ary, fI
 21 Nov . . mbcr 1964, PPe 10, 17 ( TOP SEC?J:!,~).

 See NSC ·Horking Grou.p t'Scction III," 17 November 1964, and. "Section
 VII," 13 Nov~.1t:ber 1964 (TOP SECP.El' ); 8.180 Revised. Dr.:U't) I!Su..~!::.ry, fI
 21 November 1961;,.1 ppo 10-11, 23-25 (TOP SECRET).

 See Revised Draft, ffS~iLllary, II 21 Novem.ber 1961~, pp. 14-15 (TOP
 SECRET) •

 IfA1tcrnative Forms of Negotiations -- Altern.:;.tivc B," 6 November 196i~
 p. 20 ( SECfu..~ ).

77 · "Alterne,tivc Forms of Negotiations ... Some Ccmpaisons of the
 Negotiating Situ~l,tions Uncler the ThTe!! Policy A1te!'native~. , If
 6 November 1964 (SECRET ).

 fOido; 8e~ also Johnson to Bundy, "Further Thot ghts, " 6 Novcmbf)r 1964.
 (SECRET ) 0

 NSC Working Grou.p, "S ~ction VII, n 1,3 November 1964 ( TOP SECHET);
 Rcvisecl Draft" "Su."nma:.-y, 11 21 nov .nber J.96~., pp .. 24-25 ( TOP SECRET).

 "Altern[:.tiv~ Forms of Negotiation -- Alterne.tive B," 6 November 1961+,
 pp. 1-2 (SECRZr )o

 See ~o, ppo 12-19 p~ssim. (SECFBT ).

 NSC Horking Group, "Section III," 17 NOtlCmb2l' 1964 and "Section VI,"
 13 November 196!~ ( TOP SECRSr ); see altO Bundy draft, "'l'he Broad
 Optionc," 7 l'To\"(~mbcr 1961~ (TOP SECREr).

 Ibid • .; Revised Draft, "Sunnna.ry," 21 NO'/e.lnber 1961~, pp. 25-26, 27 (TOP
 SEeRE'i:) •

 . 85 TOP SECilET .M ScnsHive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

84. Ibid.; see also draft , with pemciled c mments , "Analysis of Option
 C, II 10 November 1964 ( TOP SECRET ). .

85. Revised Draft, II 81.l1JID1.t!..-ry, " 21 November 1964, pp. 8-9, 15, 21-22,
 28-29 ( TOP SEC~x )o
86. Ibid., pp. 13, 15; NSC I,lorking Group, "Se ction V," 8 Nove!l1.ber 1964
 ( TOP SECRET ) 0

87. NSC Horking Group, "Sect ion V, II <3 November 196 1-1- ( TOP SECRET ) 0

88. Revised Draft , "S'-1.lTJlJlary," 21 NO"v-cmber 1964, p. 15, (TOP SECRE·r ).

89. Ibid., po 16.

90. NSC Working Grou:p, "Section VI,II 13 November 1964 (TOP SECRET) 0

91. NSC Vorl,ing Group, II Sec t ion III! ( portion complet ed 11 November 1964)
 (TOP SECRB"T ).

92. I!Alternative Forms of Negoti~tion -- Alternative B,I! 6 November 1964,
 pp. 4, 4a, 4b ( SECP.BT ).

93. Revi se d Draft, I!Summ:lry, II 21 Nove.'Uber 196)+, pp. lTr-21, pass:l£o (TOP
 SECRNr ); see also NSC vTorking Group, "Section VI, 13 NOVCl-abcr 1964
 (TOP SECRET ). .

94. Ibid., ppo 28, 29 0

95· Ibid., pp. 25-27; NBC I-Jorking Group, "Section VII, II 13 November 1964
 r TOP SECRET ).
 Ibid.

97 • Hal'S 1.3.11 Green mc:mot'2ndum to Assista...'1t Secretary Bundy,
 IINegot iating
 Positions on Victn3l!l, II 16 Novembcl" 1964 (In S-tate Dcpartmcnt 1,1atel"i e.ls ,
 Vol e I II ) (TOP SECRET ) .
 BI.U1dy me.mora-l1dllm to the PrinciI'21~s" "Issues Ra,ised by Papers on
 Southeast ASia, \1 24 November 1964 ( In State D:!p.2.rtment r-hterials , Vol.
 IV) ( TOP SECRbT ).

99. Revised Draft, "Su.rrunary," 21 November 1964, pp. 20, 28 (TOP SECRET) 0

1000 CJCS memorandtU!l to SecDef, "Opcr:c'.tion Plan 34A. - Additiom,l Actions
 ( SECRET ) ,," 14 I'rovcmber 196L~ ( C~fl-258-64 ) ( In VietnrJ;). 381 : Scnsi ti ve
 fHe) ( TOP SECRET ).

1010 C.JSC mcrnorc 1dl.1:11 to Se cD:':f ) "Courses of Act ion in Sout.heast As ie., "
 14 November 1964 ( JCSH-955-64) (TOP SECRS:r ).
 86 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

102. CJCS me..llorandum to Sec:G~f, "Courses of Action in Southeast Asia, "
 18 !;o',-e,:nb~l' 1564 (JCSN-967-64) (In Vietnun 381: Sens itive file )
 (TOP SECRET ) 0

1030 Bundy m~:lorandu:u to SeeDer, Director CIA) and CJCS, "Review of
 Working i)raft on Course of Action in South'!ast Asia, II 17 November
 1964 (In State Departr:lent Hatcrin.ls) Volo III) (SECREI') 0

104. CJCS memorandum to Sec~f, "Courses of .4.ct ion in South(~ast ASi.?,"
 23 Nove:nber 1964 (JC mi-982-6!~ ) (TOP SECRET ).
105. Ibid.

106. Ibid.

107. RostO"tT memOrandUill to Secret,;ory HcNaxne.ra, "Hilite,ry Dispositions and
 Politiccl. Signt~1s, " 16 November 1964 ( In Vietnem 381: Novemb er
 fil e ) (TOP SECRET ).

108. )1)i(10

109. RostenV' mc.'!1.orandum to Secretary Rusk, ':'Som.e O'oservations As We Cc:m/ol
 to the Crunch in Southeast ASia, " 23 November 1964 (In Vietne.m
 381: NOv~llber file ) (TO? SECRET).
1.10. Ibid ..

:lB.• Ibid .

1120 Hei·' York Times J 24 and 28 No\rember 196L~.

1130 Bun<3y to Princip:lls, 24 November 196!J. (TOP SECR'Eir ).

 Bl,mdy memorandlun to the Principcls, "Issues Raised by Pa.pers on
 South-east ASia, II 25 NOYc-1nber 1964 ( In state Department Mc.teri2J.s,
 Vol. IV) (TOP SECREI' ); h?..nclwrlttcn notes of Principals I:ieeting,
 211- N01rember 1964 (CONl.'''IDEI')"I'IAL ) .

115.

116.
 --
 Ibid.

 He.ndwritte.'1 meeting notes, 24 NOVt;rnber 1964 (C ONFIDEJI:"TIAL ).

117· Ball drc.ft · paper in fou.r parts (u.nda:te1 ) (In state Dep~rtrr_e nt
 Mo:terials, Vol. IV) (SECREl' ) 0

118. EOlld,.;rritten meeting notes, 24 November 1964 (CONFIDEl'v'TIfI.L ) 0

119. Ibid.; see also Bundy to Principn1s, 25 November 1964 (TOP SECRET).

120. Ibid~

 87 TOP SECREr ..., Sensitj.ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET .. Sensitive

121. Ibid.

1220 H[>.!lc1~·rrHt~ rri.cet:L'1g notes, 24 Nove:aber 1964 (CONFIDENTIAL ).
1230 See Ne,\l York Time s" 25 Nove.;'Ubc)r 1964.

124. Taylor brief:ing, "Tht, Current Situation in South Viet-N,,-'n - I';ovc:Jber,
 1964, TI 27 November 1964 (In state Departm~nt :'!aterials , Vol. IV)
 (TOP SECRET) •

125. rbid.

126. Ibid.

127. Ibid.

128. Ibid.

1290 ~.

1300 Ibiclo

131. Bunc\)' m.::moran~ll"'1 to Prbcip_ s , ttHemOl'J;l"u7:1 of Hc)eting on Southeast
 Asia.," 27 Nov~mber 1964 (In Stat_ Del}mmcnt t.~a.teriols, Vol. IV)
 ( TOP SECRET ) ; h.:1nCcn.'itten notes of Princip"ls Nceting, 27 November
 1964 ( CONFID~lTIAL ).

132. Ibid.

133. Ibido

131~. Bundy to PrinCipa.ls, 27 Novmn1)~r 1964 (TO? SECR..'ST).

135. He.ncr.;rittcn mc~ting notes , 27 November 1964 (COIIPIDE.i'ITIAL ).

136. B'J..nCly to PrincipeJ.s,27 Novcmoc)r 1964 ( TOP SECREr).

137 " Bunay • : - , , ITS cenarlO
 ' mC!l1or;J...11. cl:urn to Sout e::lst Asia J?rl.nC1I8.-LS • f or
 Itn.J7l.cdiate Action Progra1Jl, " 28 November 1964 (In State Department
 Materials, Vol. V) ( TOP SECRE'T).

138 0 HanaliTHten notes of Principals Meeting, 28 November 1964 (CONFIDE.N1'IJ'tL).

139. Ibid.

1l:-0. Ibid.; see also I-li11i :1.ln Pe Bundy "MemoTe.ncl'Lil to Southeast Asia
 Princip,-J.s, II 29 Nov~::J.bcr ls6l~ ~na attacrunc:1t, "Dr-8.ft NSNI on
 Southeast As:i.c." (In State D::partrn~nt Ho.terials, Vol. V) ( TOP SECREI' ).

141. BunCly to Principals, 29 No'r rlber 1964. ( TOP SECRZT ).

 . 88 TOP SECRET - Scnsitiye
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRE'I' ... Sens it.i'le

142. "Draft NSA:\1," 29 November 1964 (TOP SECRET) 0

143. Ibid.
144. Penciled notes on or i ginal IIDraft NSPN, tI 29 November 1964 (TOP
 SECI{ET ) •

145. See NSC vlorking Group, "Section V, tI 8 November 1964 (TOP SECRET).

146. IIDr::lft NSPJ.1," 29 No vemb er 196L~ ( TOP SECHET ).

147. Bundy to Principals, 28 November 1964 (TOP SECRET ).

148. Annex I to T!lY10~ briefing, 27 November 1961~ (TOP SECREI').

149. Revined Draft, "Sun~aryJ" pp . 25, 26, revised 25 November 1964
 (TOP SECRET).

 ~Tew :t:ork Times and The vlashington Post, 2 December 1964.
150.
 - -
151. Handi-1:..'itten notes of vlhite House m~eting, 1 December 1961~ .
 ( CONFlIEI\TTIAI, ) •

152 . Ibid.

153. Ibid.

154. Statement to the Govcrnn~nt of the Hepub1ic of Vi~tnam.

155. Handi,r.c itt.en meeting notes , 1 December 1964 (CON'FIDET'-I"rIAL ).

156. Text i n Neff Yor k Times, 2 D::ce.llbcr 1964.

157. Toe Ha:::hington Post, 2 Deco-nbcr 1964.

158. Handwritten eat i ng notes , 1 December 1964 (Cm~FIDEl'JTIAL) 0

159. Cmpare "DrD.ft stat~r.1cmt to' GVN, " T:\B B to ".Draft Position Paper on
 Southeast ASia," 30 NovC'.mber 1964 (TOP SECRET ), "7ith "Drc.ft I nstruction s
 from t he Prc3ident to Amb!3.ss:1dor T..::.ylor, f'.f} reviped on 2 Deccmbe:c 1964, 1I
 Enc1oSUl'e B to Joint Sccl'cG2.ria.t memora....'1dum to JCS t "Amb ~2saa.o!.'
 Tcy1or's Vi s it," 3 D~ce:nb~r 1964 . (JCS 2311-37 499 ) (TOP SECR1'T ).

160. "Dr'aft I nstruct io:ls from t he Presid~nt. ," 2 December 1991- (TOP SECfu,x).

161. Hanciv..citten m~eting notes , 1 December 1964, (COHFIDEl\iTIAL ).

162 . Tho Bcltimol"~ Sun, !~ December 1964 .

163- NSC 'r';orkil g G:roup, '\>lorking Paper, Fart VIII, "Imrncdint c Actions in the
 Period Prior to D~cision , II 7 l;ov~ni'c~r 196 1+ (In Ste.te Depcn:'t::lcnt
 J:vie:terials, Vol. II) (TOP SECR:?T ) •. "0PLAH 34A I,u:::sionc" 26 Novc:m.bcr
 196)~ ( In Victn::!Ju 381 : Sensitive fil e ) (TOP SSCP,El' ).

 89 TOP SECRE'l' -, Sensiti.ve
 Declassified per Exec uti ve O rder 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Proj ect Number: NND 633 16 . B y: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECP~ - Sensitive

164 . co~\mS[;lJl.cv to JCS ( SACSA ) -' 270830SEovember1964 (HACSOG 15084 ) (TOP
 SECM~ ).

 SACSA to CINCPAC. IIOPLAN 34A-~.'l!3.ritime Open',tions (S ), II 2 December
 196L~ ( JCS 002524) (TOPSECREr ). .

166 . See CO~.mE1vL4CV to JCS(SACSA), 050245;;December1961~ (Mll.CSOG 1 5735)
 (TOP SECP3r); SAC8A to CINCPAC and CO~fUffi/iACV} 1I0PL/l.N 3L.-A} II 10
 Dec~:1!ber J.961~ (JCS 002810 ) (TOP SECRET ).

167 . CJCS memore.nc1.lt:!l. to See Dei' , "Intensification of OPLAN 34A-:v1!\ritime
 Operatlons, n 12 Dec mber 1964 (JC5£;1-104-2-64 ); D~l?lty SecDef
 mer.'10randUiu to CJ-CS, "Intensification of Orr..p.N 34A l'-Ial'itime u

 Operat ions, rr l It December 1964 (:soth in Vietnam 381 : Sensiti ve f ile )
 ( TOP SECREr).

 J CSH-104-2-6!;.•

 Joint SecreJv.~'..ri2.t menornnd'\.l.'Il to J CS, "meeting of NSC Princ i pals,
 19 DeC::!lnb er 1964, on Southcas':'; Asia, II 19 ~ce..'Tlber 196L~ (JCS 2339/166)
 (TOP SEC REI' ) •

170. CJCS m~mora..l1c1um to D~put;y SecD:.f,t!OFL.4N 3~-A-Air Operations , · J ....!1'tlal'Y,
 19 6 5,11 31 D~ccmb~r 1965 ( CN 347-64) (,rop SECRE'1I ) .

171. Section 2 , II Meeting of the Principo.ls, 5 January 1965 11 (A 3-ri ng
 b inde!', XPDm371.~26-65, in USAF, Directora.te of Plans Repository) ( TOP
 SECRZT ). .

172. NSC 'H orking Gro'j.p, " Immedi~te Actions, " 7 November 1961~ ; also DIA
 me'llorand'.lln to CJCS, ItEva..luation of COmDTh"1ist Rec.ction to B3.rre1 Roll , 11
 31 Decc.'IlbC!r 196t~-, attachment to J CS memorandum to Depu.ty SecD:::f
 ( subject us above ) , 2 Jenuery 1961~ (CM-353065 ) ( In Vietnam 381 :
 Decemb er file ) (TOP SEC?BT ) .

173· J Oint Stut0/ D~fense mcss~ge to .vi~n;;irne Embassy, II Intensification of
 RLAF Air Oper.:l.tions, II 8 D~cenbcr 1961\. ( St::.te 508; Su11iva..Yl. to Sccstate ,
 10 De~cmber 1964 ( Vienti&"1e 868 ) (Both. in IIMee ting of the Principals,
 1 2 Dc;cembc!' 1964} 11 a 3-ring binder, XPDRB8967664, in USAF Directort.te
 of PIe.ns R~pository ) (TCP SECRE'r ) .

17~'o J CS to CINCPAC, "OpcrcJtions in L:105, II 11 Dece."Tlber 1964 ( J-CS 0028!t8 )
 ( TOP SEeM':' ) • .

175. J oint Secrct<1r i at memorancbllu to JCS} 1I1-1ceting of H2C PrinCipals , 12
 Dec ember 1964, on Southeast Asia," 12 Decr.:.1lber
 . 1964 (J-CS 2339/164 )
 (TOP SECRET) .

176. S<:ction 1, l~r1eet ing of the Principa S;. 19 ~cerJ.oer 1964> 11 ( A 3-ring
 b incl~J.', X:pD3I.8968-61~ J in US S Directorate of P1~ns Repository) ( TOP
 SECRET ) •

177· JCS mcmorandu;n to SecDef', rtOperat ions in La os; It 17 December 1964
 ( JCSI-1-1050 ..6h ) (TOP SECHET ) .
 90 TOP SECRST - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

178. Section 1" "Meeting of the Principals, 19 December 1964," (TOP
 SECRE'r ) •

·179. Deputy SecDer memorandum to CJCS, 29 December 1964 (In Vietnam 381:
 Lecember file): (TOP SECRET )

180 • DIA to CJCS, 31 December 1964 (TOP SECRF'l').

181. JCS to CINCPAC, "Barrel Roll," 4 January 1965 (JCS 003441) (TOP
 SECRE'r ) •
 ~.

182. Section 1, "!-Ieeting of the Principals. 19 December 1964·;11 Section 1,
 "Meeting of the Principals, 5 J a.."'lUary
 - . , 1965, II ( TOP SECHET) 0

 Cooper memorondum to Hil1iDm Bundy, "Public statement on VC
 InfiltJ:'8.tion (w/ attaclunent )," l~ Dece:nber 1964 (In Vietn3lll 381:
 December file) (COIfl7IDEHTIAL ); see elso Section l~ , IIneeting of the
 Princip;:>J.s, 12 December 1964.!!
184 . Bundy me.'11oranclum to Secretar-f Rusk, et. al. , "Cooper MD.terials on
 Nort.h Vietn::unese Infiltration,1I 9 December 1964 (In Vietne.m 381:
 Dece..TUbe:r. file) ( SECRET ).

 Rusk to Taylor, 9 Decer:ibeJ' 1964 (state 1230); Taylor to SecState,
 10 December 196~. (So.igon 1775) 1776) ( all in Section 4, IIMeeting of
 the Prlncip31s , 12 Deceaber 196411 ) (TOP SECRET).

186. JCS 2339/16 4,. 12 D2ccmber 196L~ (TO? SZCRET).
 Taylor to SecState ))~ Decemoer 1964 (Saigon 1808) (TOP SECRET);
 Sullhra.n to Hil1iD.~ Bundy, 16 DecEmber 196!~ (Vientic:ne 904)
 (CO:NFIDEi\~I.A.L ) (Both in Section 3, tlliJ.eeting of t he Principals, 19 ·
 December 19(411).

 JCS 2339/165, 19 December 1964 (TOP SECRET).

 State mcssag:= to Saigon Dnb.9 :"sy, 19 :ceccmber 1961~1 ( state 1312) (In
 VietnGm, December 1964, CF~20) (TOP SECRET ).
190., RUsk mess8.gcs to P.m ass~.dor Taylor, 24 December 1964 (State 1347 in
 11
 CF-20 ) ( Stat.e l3'+9--in "Neeting of the Principe.Is , 5 J anuary 1965 )
 (TOP SECRE'i').

19L At the Principals meeting, 12 Dece.mber 1961~) JCS 2339/161~.

192. Ibid.

193. "New Zealand r;ote," attacbrn..8nt to Bundy memornndl.l.m to Secretary Rusk,
 et.aJ.• , 15 b;-;c ·2.mbe:c~ 196!+ (I -3715V64) (In "P01j.cy-Vietnam, 15-31Dec64,"
 RL(b"r;:)3 8-9, USAF Directoro."e of ?1uns Rel)Osit.o~'Y) (TOP SECRErI' ).

 91 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive

194. Joint Staff Di~ectorts memorru1dum to the Chiefs, CINCPAC and
 COI1USMACV, IIEstab1 ish."!lent of Intemationul Force in South Vietnam,
 (S),II 10 December 1964 ( DJSM-1938 -64) (TOP SECRET). .

1950 JCS 2339/166, 19 December 1964 (TOP SECRET ).
196. Service memoranda to tbe Joint Stai'f, !lEstablj.shment of International
 Fo;rce in South Vietne1n, (S)," 6, 7, 9 end 18 January 1964 (JCS
 23 4 3/50 5-1,2,3, and 4) (TOP S:SCM'~ )o .

197. Enclosure to I SA memorandu.'U to Deputy SecDef, "third COtmtry Assistance
 to Vietnam, It 29 December 1964 ( In Vietnam 381: December file) (SECRE"T ).
198. See Joseph Fried, New York Daily News, 7 Deca'Uber 1964; see also Wen
 Ygrk Times and. We.sting-Gon Pos:~, 7 Decenber 1964.
199. Ta.ylor message to SecState, 9 December 19614- (Saigon 1763) (In
 "Neeting of the Princ ipa.1s , 19 December 1964") ( TOP SECRE'r ); sec also
 John Naffre, in story filed from Saigon, \-,Tashington Poet, 9 December
 1964.

200. Ibid.; Taylor messages to SecState, 9 Dece.nber 1961~ (Saigon 1760, in
 "Meet:i.ne; of the Princi!i3..1s, 19 ~ca"1lb er 1961~1I ) (Saigon ~762-in Vietnsm
 381: December file) ( CONFIDilllTIAL ) •
201. Full text in Nm-r York Times, 12 December 19614-.
202. Taylor message to Secretary Rus~>:, 20 December 1964 (Saigon 1877) (In
 CF-20) (SECREl'); see also Peter Grose, New York Times l 22 December
 1964. -

 Ibide; Taylor messages to SecretarY' Rusk, 21 December 1964 (Saigon
 181r:L) ruld 22 December ( Saigon 1890, 1895, 1897, 1900); Rusk .
 messages to Ambas sador Taylor, 21 December 1964 ( St.ate 1318, 1320)
 (In CF-20) ( TOP SECRET ).

204. Rusk message to A"UbassadQr Taylor, 24 December 1964 (state 1347) (In
 CF-20) (TOP SEClli.'""'T ); see also Peter Grose , ~ew York Times, 23 and 24
 Decemb er 1964.

205. Rusk to Taylor (State 1347) (TOP SECRET ).

206. See Taylor message to SecSto.te , 25 December 196 t:. (Sa igon 1939) (L"1
 CF~20) ( ~OP SECRET )~

 See· Peter Grose COlU.ll1.11S filed from Saigon in NmT Yor]\: Times, 23 and
 27 Dec emb~r 1964.

 See Te.ylor messages to SecState, 28 t-ecember 1964 ( Sa igon 1969" 1976)
 and. 29 December 1964 (Sa i gon 1981 ) ( all in CF-20) ( SECRET ).

 Charles J..iohr, NeiT Yorlc Times,.., 30 .J):;cem er 19611-; Seymour Topping,
 Nev.' York Times" 10 Janual"Y 1965.

 92 ~O?
 ----
 - SECRET - Sensitive
 ~ --",~.
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRBT - Sensitive

210. Jock LaV'gguth, in story filed from Saigon, New York Times, 6 January
 1965.

211. Seymour Topping, Net.,.. York Timep, 11 Janu':.l.ry 1965.

212. See Nei·T Yorl~ Times, 18, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, Clnd 27 Je.nuary 1965;
 a.l so the Bal t ir.1.ore Sun, 18 and 25 January 1965.

213. Reported by Peter Grose, New York T~les, 25 December 196~.

214. Rusk to Taylor (state 1347); state-Defense message to Saigon Embassy,
 25 Decanb~r 1964 (state 1355) (In CF-20) (TOP SECRE~).

215. CINCPAC message to JCS 262251gDecember1964 (In Vietnam 381: Decem.ber
 file) (TOP SECRET ). '

216. Taylor message to Secretro'y Rusk, 28 December 1964 (Saigon 1975) (In
 CF-20 ) ( TOP SECREr ). .

217. CJCS memorandum to SecDef, "Re.cO'..mnendect Reprisal Actions in TIetnliation
 to Break BOQ Incident (rrS ), 2e December 1964 (JCSH-I076.64) (TOP SECRET).

218. Rusk messaae to Sa igon Embassy, 29 December 1964 (State 1365) (In CF-20)
 (TOP SECRET).

219$ For example see editorials in p".covidence Journal, ?4 December 1964; Ne~;
 YOl~k Journal hnerican 28 December '1964; and Life, 8 Janual'y 1965.
 ------~~~~~----,

220.' See ~ York Times, 27 December 1964 and 3 January 1965.

221. See The Baltimo!'e Sun, N eil York Times, and :~shington Post , 4 J anuary
 1.965.

2220 See NC'.l York Tjmes, 7 and. 12 J enuary 1965.

223· See The B2.1timore S'-1.'1, Ne"'{ Yor~ Time s and v18.11 Street J01J.rn' ,14 J anuary
 1965; in particu.lar, see JI..rth\l~ I:cmnen, UPI teletype ne"TS reles,se from
 Saigon, 14 J8.Iluary 1965.

224. See NCvT York Times, 16 and 20 Ja.YlUary 1965; Tashington Post, 18
 J amlary 1965.

225. Taylor message to SecState. 31 J)ec~rnber ~.96)+ ( Saigon 2010) (In
 IrS algon
 . "I I '
 CrisIs, J anuary 1965, ) ( TOP S:SCID';'1.1 ) •
 CF-21

226 • bundy mcmorandur1 to SCGretary Ru"l~) 1fNotes on the South Vietnamese
 Situation and jI~ternative3." 6 January 1965 (In state Department
 Matcl'ials, Vol. V) ( 'I:OP SECR.'TI') e

227· Ibid. (TOP SECp~r ).

228. Ib icl . ' (TOP SECRS?) .
 93 TOP SEC!<E'l' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

229 . Ibid. (TOP SECRET).

230. Departl-:1ent of State llIe!!10randum of c onversation, "South East Asia"
 (Conversation::; beti,,-cen U.S. and Soviet officials, Pa.':"t V of VII),
 30 D~c€mbe:-:- 1961~ (In Vietnam 381 : Decell'lJer file) (SECRE'I' ).

231. See rYm; York Ti.n:.es, 5, 14 and 23 January 1965; tJashington Post,
 18 January 1965 0

2320 See Tad Szulc, New York Times, L~ J anua...:"jT 1965 .

2330 McNc.ug ton dro.i't su.r11'11ary, "Observations re South Vietnam, II 4 January
 1965 ( In tl D1'afts 1965,11 M:cN3.ughton II ) (TOP SECRET ) 0

234 . Ibid. (TOP SECRET) .

235. r.lcNaughton draft SUlI'!'la.ry i'T ith McNema.ra co:r.ments I>enciled in,
 110bservations re Sout" Vietnarl after Kh2.nh ' s 'Re.·CouI>J tl 27 January
 1965 (In tlDrD.fts 19 6 5, II I.lcNaughton II ) (TOP SECREr ).

 Rusk message to Saigon Eilbassy, 11 J e.nuary 1965 (State 1~-36 ) (In
 CF-21 ) ( SECRET ).

 Rusk message to Saigon Embassy, 14 J anuary 1965 (State 1471) (In
 CF-21 ) (TOP SECRBI' )0

23 8 0 Rusk messege to Saigon Embassy, 25 J?~uarJ 1965 (C opy tr~~scribed by
 OSD in Vietnam 381: Janua~J file ) (TOP SECRET ) 0

239. See CJCS melll01'CXI.dum to SeeDef, "Evacuation of U.S . :Dependents fyo:n
 South Vietnam~" 4 J0.l11.'.a.ry 1965 (CH-358-65 ) ( SECRET ) and Roche
 memoranclu.m to the JOint Sec::cet2.rifl.t (Subject as above )" 19 January
 1965 ( SECRET ) (Both in Vietne>Jll 381 : January file).

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive