f

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

Microfilm Publication M887

RECORDS OF THE UNITED STATES

NUERNBERG WAR CRIMES TRIALS

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KARL BRANDT ET AL. (CASE I)

NOVEMBER 21, 1946-AUCUST 20, 1947

Roll 1

Finding Aids

Documents of Authorization
List of Tribunal Members
Covers of Transcripts.
Minute Book
Prosecution and Defense Exhibit Index
Court Docket
List of Witnesses

THE NATIONAL ARCHIVES
NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS SERVICE
GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION

WASHINGTON: 1974

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

INTRODUCTION

On the 46 rolls of this microfilm publication are reproduced

the records of Case I (United States of America v. Karl Brandt
et al., or the "Medical" Case), 1 of the 12 trials of war criminals
conducted by the U.S. Government from 1946 to 1949 at Nuernberg
subsequent to the International Military Tribunal held in the
same city. These records consist of German- and English-language
versions of official transcripts of court proceedings,- prosecution
and defense briefs, and final pleas of the defendants as well as
prosecution and defense exhibits and document books in one lan¬
guage or the other. Also included in this publication are a
minute book, the official court file, order and judgment books,
clemency petitions, and finding aids to the documents.The transcripts of this trial, assembled in 2 sets of 30
bound volumes (1 set in German and 1 in English), are the recorded
daily trial proceedings. The prosecution and defense briefs and
answers are also in both languages but unbound, as are the final
pleas of the defendants delivered by counsel or defendants and
submitted by the attorneys to the court. The unbound prosecution
exhibits, numbered 1-570, are essentially those documents from
various Nuernberg record series offered in evidence by the
prosecution in this case. The defense exhibits, also unbound,
are predominantly affidavits by various persons. They are
arranged by name of defendant and thereunder numerically. Both
prosecution document books and defense document books consist
of full or partial translations of exhibits into the English
language. Loosely bound in folders, they provide an indication
of the order in which the exhibits were presented before the
tribunal.

The minute book, in one bound volume, is a summary of the

transcripts. The official court file, in four bound volumes,
includes the progress docket, the indictment, amended indictment,
and the service thereof; appointments and applications of defense
counsel and defense witnesses and prosecution comments thereto;
defendants applications for documents; motions; uniform rules of
procedures; and appendixes. The order and judgment books, in
two bound volumes, represent the signed orders, judgments, and
opinions of the tribunal as well as sentences and commitment
papers. Clemency petitions of the defendants, in five bound
volumes, were directed to the military governor, the Judge
Advocate General, the U.S. district court, the Secretary of
Defense, and the Supreme Court of the United States. The finding
aids summarize transcripts, exhibits, and the official court file.

Case I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I from November 21,

1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as theCase I was heard by U.S. Military Tribunal I from November 21,

1946, to August 20, 1947. The records of this case, as the

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

!

AT ION A L ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

records of the other Nuernberg and Far East (IKTFE) war crimes
trials, are part of the National Archives Collection of World War
II War Crises Records, Record Group 238.

The Brandt Case was 1 of 12 separate proceedings held before

several U.S. Military Tribunals at Nuernberg in the U.S. Zone of
Occupation in Germany against officials or citizens of the Third
Reich, as follows:

United States v

Karl Brandt et al
Erhard Hiloh

Joeef Altetoetter
et al.
Oevald Pohl et al
Friedrich Flick
et al.
Carl Krauoh et al.

Wilhelm List et al
Ulrich Greifelt
et al.
Otto Ohlendorf
et al.
Al fried Krupp
et al.
Emet von
Weineaeoker et al.
Wilhelm von Leeb
et al.

Medical Case
Milch Case
(Luftwaffe)
Justice Case

Pohl Case (SS)
'Flick Case
(Industrialist)
I. G. Farben Case
(Industrialist)
Hostage Case
RuSHA Case (SS)

Einsatzgruppen
Case (SS)
Krupp Case
(Industrialist)
Ministries Case

Authority for the proceedings of the International Military

Tribunal against the major Nazi war criminals derived from the
Declaration on German Atrocities (Moscow Declaration) released
November 1, 1943, Executive Order 9547 of May 2, 1945, the London
Agreement of August 8, 1945, the Berlin Protocol of October 6,
1945, and the Charter of the International Military Tribunal.

Authority for the 12 subsequent cases stemed mainly fromAuthority for the 12 subsequent cases stemed mainly from

Control Council Law 10 of December 20, 1945, and was reinforced
by Executive Order 9679 of January 16, 1946; U.S. Military Govern¬
ment Ordinances Nos. 7, and 11 of October 18, 1946, and February 17,
1947, respectively; and U.S. Forces, European Theater General
Order 301 of October 24. 1946. The procedures applied by U.S.
Military Tribunals in the subsequent proceedings were patterned
after those of the International Military Tribunal and further
developed in the 12 cases, which required over 1,200 days of
court sessions and generated more than 330,000 transcript pages.

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

The criaes charged in the Brandt case consisted largely of
medical experiments performed on defenseless concentration camp
inmates against their will; "euthanasia" carried out on the
mentally defective, the physically sick, the aged, and ethnic
and racial groups; and the murder of concentration camp inmates
for the express purpose of collecting skulls and skeletons for
the Anatomical Institute of the Reich University of Strassburg.
The following medical experiments were conducted:
n

!• High altitude: to investigate effects of low pressure

on persons.

2. Freezing: to test human resistance to extemely low

temperatures.

3. Malaria: to develop controls over the recurring nature

of the disease..

4. Mjstard gas: part of a general research program in gas

warfare.

5. Sulfanilamide: to test the efficacy of the drug in bone
■uscle and nerve regeneration and bone transplantation.

6. Seawater: to test methods of rendering seawater potable.
7. Epidemic jaundice: to develop an antitoxin against the

disease.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.
9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.disease.

8. Sterilization: to test techniques for preventing further
propagation of the mentally and physically defective.
9. Typhus: to investigate the value of various vaccines.

10. Poison: to test the efficacy of certain poisons.
Us Incendiary bomb: to find better treatment for phosphorus

. burns. '

The prosecution alleged and the judgment confirmed that these

experiments were not isolated acts of individual doctors and
scientists on their own responsibility but that they were the
result of high-level policy and planning. They were carried out
with particular brutality, often disregarding all established
medical practice. Consequently, large numbers of the victims
died in the course of or as a result of the experiments.

The euthanasia program was the direct result of a directive

by Hitler of September 1, 1939. It resulted in the secret killing
not only of aged, insane, incurably ill, and deformed German
citizens in sanatoriums in Germany but also in the clandestine
murder of foreign workers. The killing in gas chambers and by
injections in the sanatoriums served as a proving ground for
these forerunners of much larger installations in the mass v/
extermination camps. /

In addition to these experiments, over 100 concentration

camp inmates were killed for the purpose of obtaining their
skeletons. Their ghastly remains were found in Strassburg by
Allied troops.

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

3

The transcripts of the Brandt case include the indictments

of the following 23 persons all of whom were physicians except
defendants Rudolf Brandt, Viktor Brack, and Wolfram Sievers:

Karl Brandt: Personal physician to Adolf Hitler, Gruppen-
fuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant (Major General) in
the Waffen SS, Reichskoamissar fuer Sanitaets- und Gesund-
heitswesen (Reid ommissioner for Health and Sanitation),
and member of the ..eichsforschungsrat (Reich Research
Council).Kurt Blcme: Deputy (of the] Reichsgesundheitsfuehrer (Reich
Health Leader) and Plenipotentiary for Cancer Research in the
Reich Research Council.

Rudolf Brandt: Standartenfuehrer (Colonel) in the Allgemeine
SS, Persoenlicher Referent von Himmler (Personal Admin¬
istrative Officer to Reichsfuehrer SS Himmler), and Min¬
isterial Counselor and Chief of the Ministerial Office in
the Reich Ministry of the Interior.

Joachim Mrugowsky: Oberfuehrer (Senior Colonel) in the
Waffen SS, Oberster Hygieniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Hygienist of the Reich Physician SS and Police),
and Chef tfes Hygienischen Institutes der Waffen SS (Chief
of the Hygienic Institute of the Waffen SS).

Helmut Poppendick: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Chef des
Persoenlichen Stabes des Reichsarztes SS und Polizei (Chief
of the Personal Staff of the Reich Physician SS and Police).

Wolfram Sievers: Standartenfuehrer in the SS, Reich Manager
of the "Ahnenerbe" Society and Director of its Institut
fuer Wehrwissenschaftliche Zweckforschung (Institute for
Military Scientific Research), and Deputy Chairman of the
Managing Board of Directors of the Reich Research Council.

Karl Genzken: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and Generalleutnant
in the Waffen SS and Chef des Sanitaetsamts der Waffen SS
(Chief of the Medical Department of the Waffen SS).

Karl Gebhardt: Gruppenfuehrer in the SS and General leutnant
in the Waffen SS, personal physician to Reichsfuehrer SS
Himmler, Oberster Kliniker, Reichsarzt SS und Polizei
(Chief Surgeon of the Staff of the Reich Physician SS and
Police), and President of the German Red Cross.

Viktor Brack: Oberfuehrer in the SS and Sturmbannfuehrer
(Major) in the Waffen SS and Oberdienstleiter, Kanzlei
des Fuehrers der NSDAP (Chief Administrative Officer in
the Chancellery of the Fuehrer to the NSDAP).

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONSNATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

Waldemar Hoven: Hauptsturmfuehrer (Captain) in the Waffen
SS and Chief Physician of the Buchenwald Concentration Camp.

Herta Oberheuser: Physician at the Ravensbrueck Concentration
Camp and assistant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the
hospital at Hohenlychen.

Fritz Fischer: Sturmbannfuehrer in the Waffen SS and assist¬
ant physician to the defendant Gebhardt at the hospital
at Hohenlychen.

Siegfried Handloser: Generaloberstabsarzt (Lieutenant
General, Medical Service), Heeressanitaetsinspekteur
(Medical Inspector of the Aray), and Chef des Wehr-
machtsanitaetswesens (Chief of the Medical Services of the
Armed Forces).

Paul Rostock: Chief Surgeon of the Surgical Clinic in
Berlin, Surgical Adviser to the Aray, and Aatschef der
Dienststelle Medizinische Wissenschaft und Forschung
(Chief of the Office for Medical Science and Research)
under the defendant Karl Brandt, Refch Commissioner for
Health and Sanitation.

Oskar Schroeder: Generaloberstabsarzt; Chef des Stabes,
Inspekteur des Luftwaffe-Sanitaetswesens (Chief of Staff
of the Inspectorate of the Medical Service of the Luftwaffe);
and Chef des Sanitaetsvesens der Luftwaffe (Chief of the
Medical Service of the Luftwaffe).

Hermann Becker-Freyseng: Stabsarzt in the Luftwaffe
(Captain, Medical Service of the Air Force) and Chief of
the Department for Aviation Medicine of the Medical Service
of the Luftwaffe.

Georg August Weltz: Oberfeldarzt in the Luftwaffe (Lieu¬
tenant Colonel, Medical Service of the Air Force) and
Chief of the Institut fuer Luftfahrtmedizin (Institute for
Aviation Medicine) in Munich.

Wilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.Wilhelm Beiglboeck: Consulting physician to the Luftwaffe.

Gerhard Rose: Generalarzt of the Luftwaffe (Brigadier
General, Medical Service of the Air Force); Vice President,
Chief of the Department for Tropical Medicine, and Professor
of the Robert Koch Institute; and Hygienic Adviser for
Tropical Medicine to the Chief of the Medical Service of
the Luftwaffe.

Siegfried Ruff: Director of the Department for Aviation
Medicine at the Deutsche Versuchsanstalt fuer Luftfahrt
(German Experimental Institute for Aviation).

S

Hans Wolfgang Romberg: Physician on the staff of the Depart¬
ment for Aviation Medicine at the German Experimental Institute
for Aviation. _

Konrad Schaefer: Physician on the staff of the Institute for
Aviation Medicine in Berlin.

Adolf Pokorny: Physician, specialist in skin and venereal
diseases.

The indictment consisted of four counts. Count one charged

participation in a common design or conspiracy to commit war crimes
or crimes against humanity. The ruling of the tribunal disregarded
this count, hence no defendant was found guilty of the crime charged
in count one. Count two was concerned with war crimes and count
three, with crimes against humanity. Fifteen defendants were found
guilty, and eight were acquitted on these two counts. Ten defendants
were charged under count four with membership in a criminal organiza¬
tion and were found guilty.The transcripts also contain the arraignment and plea of each
defendant (all pleaded not guilty), opening and closing statements
of defense and prosecution, and the judgment and sentences, which .
acquitted 7 of the 23 defendants (Blome, Pokorny, Romberg, Rostock,
Ruff, Schaefer, and Wcltz). Death sentences were imposed on
defendants Brack, Karl Brandt, Rudolf Brandt, Hoven, Gebhardt,
Mrugowsky, and Sievers, and life imprisonment on Fischer, Genzken,
Hand loser. Rose, and Schroeder; varying terms of years were given
to defendants Becker-Freyseng, Beiglboeck, Oberheuser, and
Poppendick.

The English-language transcript volumes are arranged numer¬

ically, 1-30; pagination is continuous, 1-11S38. The German-
language transcript volumes are numbered la-30a and paginated
1-117S6. The letters at the top of each page indicate morning,
afternoon, and evening sessions. The letter "C" designates com¬
mission hearings (to save court time and to avoid assembling
hundreds of witnesses at Nuernberg, in most of the cases one or
more commissions took testimony and received documentary evidence
for consideration by the tribunals). Several hundred pages are
added to the transcript volumes and given number plus lotter
designations, such as page number 1044a. Page 1 in volume 1
(English) is preceded by pages numbered 001-039, while the last
page of volume 28 (English) is followed by pages numbered 1-48.

Of the many documents assembled for possible prosecution use,

570 were chosen for presentation as evidence before the tribunal.
These consisted largely of orders, directives, and reports on
medical experiments or the euthanasia program; several interrogation
reports; affidavits; and excerpts from the Reiohegteetablatt (tho
official gazette of Reich laws) as well as correspondence. A number

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

of the medical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

of the medical reports were accompanied by series of photographs
and charts of various experiments.

The first item in the arrangement of the prosecution exhibits

is usually a certificate listing the document number, a short
description of the exhibit, and a statement on the location of
the original document of the exhibit. The certificate is followed
by the document, the actual prosecution exhibit (most of which are
photostats), and a few mimeographed articles with an occasional
carbon of the original. In rare cases the exhibits are followed
by translations or additional certificates. A few exhibits are
original documents, such as:

Exhibit No, Doc, No.

Exhibit No. Doc. No.

301 NO-1314
307 NO-120
309 NO-131
310 NO-132
357 1696 PS
362 628 PS
368 NO-817
403 616 PS

410
441
443
451
462
507
546

NO-158
NO-1730
NO-890
NO-732
NO-1424
NO-365
NO-3347

No certificate is attached to several-exhibits, including

exhibits 433, 435-439, 462, 559, and 561. Following exhibit 570
is a tribunal exhibit containing the interrogation of three
citizens of the Netherlands. Number 494 was not assigned, and
exhibit 519 is followed by S19a and 519b.

Other than affidavits, the defense exhibits consist of newspaper

clippings, reports, personnel records, Rcichegeeetablatt excerpts,
and other items. There are 901 exhibits for the defendants. The
defense exhibits are arranged by name of defendant and thereunder by
exhibit number, each followed by a certificate wherever available.The translations in the prosecution document books are
preceded by indexes listing prosecution document numbers, biased
descriptions, and page numbers of the translation. They are
generally listed in the order in which the prosecution exhibits
were introduced into evidence before the tribunal. Pages 81-84
of prosecution document book 1 are missing. Books 12, 16, and
19 are followed by addenda. The document books consist largely
of mimeographed pages.

The defense document books are similarly arranged. Each
book is preceded by an index giving document numbers, description,
and page number for each exhibit. The corresponding exhibit
numbers are generally not provided. There are several unindexed
supplements to numbered document books. Prosecution and defense
briefs are arranged alphabetically by names of defendants; final
£lmas and defense answers to prosecution briefs follow a similar

/

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

schene. Pagination is consecutive, yet there are many pages where
an "a" or "b" is added to the numeral.

The English-language final pleas, closing briefs, and replies

to prosecution briefs of several defendants are missing, as are
a few Genian-language closing briefs and replies to prosecution
briefs.

At the beginning of roll 1 are filled key documents from
which Tribunal I derived its jurisdiction: the Moscow Declaration,
U.S. Executive Orders 9547 and 9679, the London Agreement, the
Berlin Protocol, the Charter of the International Military Tri¬
bunal, Control Council Law 10, U.S. Military Government Ordinances
7 and 11, and U.S. Forces, European Theater General Order 301.
Following these docuaents of authorization is a list of the names
and functions of the members of Tribunal I and counsels.

These docuaents are followed by the transcript covers givingThese docuaents are followed by the transcript covers giving

'such information as name and nuaber of case, volume numbers,
language, page nuabers, and inclusive dates. They are followed
by summaries of the daily proceedings providing an additional
finding aid for the transcripts. The exhibits are listed in an
index, which notes type of exhibit, exhibit nuaber and name,
corresponding document number and document book and page, a short
description of the exhibit, and the date when it was offered in
court. The official court file is indexed in the court docket,
which is followed by a list of witnesses.

Not filmed were records duplicated elsewhere in this micro¬
film publication, such as prosecution and defense document books
in the German language that are largely duplications of pros¬
ecution and defense exhibits already microfilmed or opening
statements of prosecution and defense, which can be found in
the transcripts of the proceedings.

The records of the Brandt case are closely related to otherThe records of the Brandt case are closely related to other

microfilmed records in Record Group 238, specifically prosecution
exhibits submitted to the International Military Tribunal, T988;
NI (Nuernberg Industrialist) Series, T301; NOKW (Nuernberg Armed
Forces High Command) Series, Til19; NG (Nuernberg Government)
Series, T1139; and records of the Milch case, M888, the List case,
M893, the Greifelt case, M894, and the Ohlendorf case, M89S.
In addition, the record of the International Military Tribunal
at Nuernberg has been published in Trial of the Major Uar Criminate
Before the International Military Tribunal (Nuernberg, 1947), 42
vols. Excerpts from the subsequent proceedings have been pub¬
lished as Triale of Uar Criminate Before the Nuernberg Military
Tribunal Under Control Counoil Lav No. 10 (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 1950-53), 15 vols. The Audiovisual Archives
Division of the National Archives and Records Service holds motion
picture records and photographs of all 13 trials and tape re¬
cordings of the International Military Tribunal proceedings.

NATIONAL ARCH I \ h S M IC R O F I L M P L’ B LIC A T IO N S

John Mendelsohn wrote these introductory reaarks and arranged

the records for microfilning in collaboration with George Chalou.

*

NAT IONA I- AHCIIIV IS MICROFILM P l II L IC A T I ON S

9

ROLL

DESCRIPTION

CONTENTS

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12
13
14

Inclusive Dates

Finding Aids
Documents of Authorization
List of Tribunal Members
Covers of Transcripts
Minute Book
Prosecution and Defense

Exhibit Index

Court Docket
List of Witnesses

Transcript Volumes
(English Version)

1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9 .

10
11
12
13
14
15
16 .
17
18
‘ 19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30Court Docket
List of Witnesses

Transcript Volumes
(English Version)

1
2
3

4
5
6
7
8
9 .

10
11
12
13
14
15
16 .
17
18
‘ 19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30

Nov. 21-Dec. 12, 1946
Dec. 13-19, 1946
Dec. 20, 1946-Jan. 6,
1947
Jan. 7-10, 1947
Jan. 13-16, 1947
Jan. 17-29, 1947
Jan. 30-Feb.
Feb. 6-11, 1947
Feb. 12-19, 1947
Feb. 20-26, 1947
Feb. 27-Mar. 4, 1947
Mar. 5-11, 1947
Mar. 12-20, 1947
Mar. 21-28, 1947
Mar. 31-Apr. 8, 1947
Apr. 9-15, 1947
Apr. 16-23, 1947
Apr. 24-30, 1947
May 1-7, 1947
May 8-14, 1947
May 15-21, 1947
May 22-June 2, 1947
June 3-9, 1947
June 10-14, 1947
June 16-19, 1947
June 20-24, 1947
June 25-28, 1947
June 30-July 9, 1947
July 14-17, 1947
July 18-Aug. 20, 1947

Prosecution Exhibits
1-138
139-300
301-450

10

%

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

ROLL

DESCRIPTION

451-570

Tribunal Exhibit

Prosecution
Book

Document Books
Title
Document Authentication, Positions Held

by Defendants

High-Altitude Experiments
Freezing Experiments
Malaria Experiments
Seawater Experiments
Sterilization Experiments
Extermination of TB Poles
Jaundice Experiments
Jewish Skeleton Collection
Various Experiments
Blood Coagulation and Phlegmone

Experiments

12
12 Addendun
13
14 pt. 1
14-pt. 2
14 pt. 3
15
16
16 Addendun
17
18
19
19 Addendun

Typhus Experiments
Typhus Experiments
Mustard Gas (Lost Gas) Experiments
Euthanasia
Euthanasia
Euthanasia
Euthanasia
Euthanasia
Euthanasia
Euthanasia
No Title >^-
No Title
No Title

Transcript Volumes
(German Version)
la
2a
3a

Nov.
Dec.
Dec.
1947
Jan.
Jan.
Jan.
Jan.
Feb.
Feb.
Feb.
Feb.
Mar.
Mar.
Mar.
Mar.

21-Dec. 12, 1946
13-19, 1946
20, 1946-Jan. 6,

7-10,
13-16,
17-29,
30- Feb
6-11,
12-19,
20-26,
27-Mar
5-11,
12-20,
21-28,
31- Apr

1947

1947
1947

. 5, 1947
1947

. 4, 1947
1947

1947
1947

1947
1947

. 8, 19477-10,
13-16,
17-29,
30- Feb
6-11,
12-19,
20-26,
27-Mar
5-11,
12-20,
21-28,
31- Apr

1947

1947
1947

. 5, 1947
1947

. 4, 1947
1947

1947
1947

1947
1947

. 8, 1947

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

ROLL DESCRIPTION

23

24

%

25

26

27

28

29

30

31

32

33

16a
17a
18a
19a
20a
21a
22a
23a
24a
25a
26a
27a
28a
29a
30a

Defense Exhibits
Becker-Frcyseng
Beiglboeck
Blome
Brack
Brandt, K.
Brandt, R.
Gebhardt
Genzken
Handloser
Hoven
Mrugowsky
Oberheuser
Pokomy
Poppendick
Romberg
Rose
Rostock
Ruff
Schaefer
Schroeder
Sievers
Weltz

Apr. 9-15, 1947
Apr. 16-23, 1947
Apr. 24-30, 1947
May 1-7, 1947
May 8-14, 1947
May 15-21, 1947
May 22-June 2, 1947
June 3-9, 1947
June 10-14, 1947
June 16-19, 1947
June 20-24, 1947
June 25-28, 1947
June 30-July 9, 1947
July 14-17, 1947
July 18-Aug. 20, 1947

Nos.
i-66
1-38
1-25
1-55
1-103
1-21
1-45
1-23
1-72
1-20
1-115
1
1-30
1-24
1-6
1-63
1-13
1-32
1-40
1-26
1-59
1-24

Defense Document Books
Becker-Freyseng
Beiglboeck
Blome
Brack
Brandt, K.
Brandt, R.

I-V,2
1-11,3
I-Supplement 5
1-11,5
I-Supplement 4
I-Miscellaneous

Documents

Fischer, Gebhardt, Oberheuser

I-Miscellaneous

Documents

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

12

ROLL DESCRIPTION

Genzken
Handloser

Hoven
Mrugowsky
Pokorny
Poppendick
Romberg
Rose
Rostock
Ruff
Schaefer
Schroeder
Sievers
Weltz

Other Items

I-Supplement 2
I-Miscellaneous

Documents
I-Supplement 1
I-Supplement 3

I-Supplement 3
I-Supplement 1
I-Supplement 4
I-Supplement 1
.I-Supplement 7
I-Supplement
I-III
I-Supplement
I-III

36 Prosecution Closing Statements apd Briefs on
All Defendants (English and German Versions)
37 Final Pleas, Closing Briefs, and Answers to

Prosecution Briefs (English Version) by Defendants:

Becker-Freyseng, Beiglboeck, Blome, Brack, K.
Brandt

38 R. Brandt, Fischer, Gebhardt, Genzken, Handloser,Prosecution Briefs (English Version) by Defendants:

Becker-Freyseng, Beiglboeck, Blome, Brack, K.
Brandt

38 R. Brandt, Fischer, Gebhardt, Genzken, Handloser,

Hoven, Mrugowsky, Oberheuser, Pokorny, Poppcndick,
Romberg, Rose

39 Rostock, Ruff, Schroeder, Sievers, Weltz

Final Pleas, Closing Briefs, and Answers to
Prosecution Briefs (German Version) by Defendants:

Becker-Freyseng, Beiglboeck, Blome, Brack

40 K. Brandt, R. Brandt, Fischer, Gebhardt, Genzken,

Handloser, Hoven, Mrugowsky
Oberheuser, Pokorny, Poppcndick, Romberg, Rose,
Rostock, Ruff, Schaefer, Schroeder, Sievers,
Weltz

42 Minute Book Vol. 31
Official Court File Vol. 32
Official Court File Vol. 33
43 Official Court File Vol. 34
Official Court File - Vol. 3S
Order and Judgment Book Vol. 36
44 Order and Judgment Book Vol. 37
Defendants Clemency Petitions Vol. 38
45 Defendants Clemency Petitions Vol. 39
Defendants Clemency Petitions Vol. 40
46 Defendants Clemency Petitions Vol. 41
Defendants Clemency Petitions Vol. 42

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

Roll 1

Target 1

Documents of Authorization

r

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

DECLARATION ON GERMAN ATROCITIES

[Moscow Declaration]

Released November 1, 1W3Roll 1

Target 1

Documents of Authorization

r

NATIONAL ARCHIVES MICROFILM PUBLICATIONS

DECLARATION ON GERMAN ATROCITIES

[Moscow Declaration]

Released November 1, 1W3

THE UNITED KINGDOM, the United States and the Soviet Union have re¬
ceived from many quarters evidence of atrocities, massacres and cold-blooded
mass executions which are be]ng perpetrated by the Hitlerite forces In the
many countries they have overrun and from which they are now being steadily
expelled. The brutalities of Hitlerite domination arc no new thing and all
the peoples or territories in their grip have suffered from the worst form of
government by terror. What Ih new is thnfmnny of these territories are now
being redeemed by the advancing armies of tlie liberating Powers and that in
their desperation, the recoiling Hitlerite Huns are • redoubling their ruthles*
cruelties.. This la now evidenced with particular clearness by monstrous crimes
of thb Hitlerites on the territory of the Soviet Union which.is being liberated
from the Hitlerites, and on French and Italian territory.

Accordingly, the aforesaid three allied Powers, speaking in the interests of
tho-thirty-two [thirty-three] United Nations, hereby solemnly declare and give
full warning of their declaration ns follows:At the time of the granting of any armistice to any government which may
be set up in Germany, those Gerrnnn ollicers and men and members of tho Nazi
party Who have been responsible for, or have taken a consenting part in the
above atrocities, massacres, and executions, will be sent back to the countries in
which their Abominable deeds were done in order that they may be Judged and
punished according to tho laws of these liberated countries and of the free govern¬
ments which will bo created therein. Lists will be compiled In all possible detail
from alt these countries having regard especially to the Invaded parts of the
Soviet Union, to Poland and Czechoslovakia, to Yugoslavia and Greece, including
Crete and other islands, to Norway, Dcnmurk, the Netherlands. Belgium, Luxem¬
burg, France and Italy.

• •

Tims, tho Germans who take part In wholesale shootings of Italian ollicers or
in the execution of French, Dutch. Belgian, or Norwegian hostages or of Cretan
peasants, or who have shared In.the slaughters indicted on the people of
Poland or in territories of the Soviet Union which are now being swept clear
of the enemy, will know that they will lx* brought back to the scene of their
crimes and Judged on the spot by the peoples whom they have outraged. Let
those who have hitherto not Imbrued their hands with innocent blood beware
lest they Join the ranks of the guilty, for most assuredly the three allied Powers
will pursue them to the uttermost ends of the earth and will deliver them to
their accusers In order that Justice may be done.

The above declaration is without prejudice to the case of the major criminals,
whose offences have no particular geographical localisation and who will b»-
punished by. the Joint decision of the Governments of the Allies.

[Signed] .

Roosevelt
Chuichill
Stalin

VIII

• ([Signed] .

Roosevelt
Chuichill
Stalin

VIII

• (

acre:-., an? dy the govi.;:..ext Wr' .he
united oTai - g? America, the
/XSZu.tAL GoTS Aw XI \jT . ii£ FRENCH
rEIUbLIC, THE GoVERihEXT Cr THE
U»>IT. .D a*, uuum */F Git AT s.iT:All. AXD
northern Ireland and tkl ggverxaent
OF .'HE Ui.IG.. vF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS FOR THE PRooEC'JTIOK AND
PUKISK1ENT OF THE iAUOR WAR CREHNALS
^F THE EUROPEAN AXIS.

’.KZ'EAS Che United Nations have from tine to tine made

seel.-.- tlone of their Intention that '.Tar Srlnlnale shall be

brought to Justice:

AND “'HEREAS the I-oscow Declaration of the 30th October

19-13 on German ntrocltlec In Occupied Europe stated that

-hOee German Officers ar.d men and mer.bcrc of the Nasi Party

who have been responsible for or have tr.Xen a consenting

part In atrocities and crlr.cs will be cent or cl: to the

countries In which their abominable uced6 were done In order

thot they nay be Judged and ounlshed according to the laws

of these liberated countries and of the free Governments

that will be created therein;

AND WHEREAS this Declaration wa6 stated to be without

prejudice to the case cf major criminals whose offenses hwe

no particular cjcographlcnl location and who will be -.unished

by the Joint decision of Che Gcvcrncents of the Allies; ^

AG’.V T.EPEFwRE the Government of the Unit'd Stat.-s of

An. *lcr-, the Provisional Government of the French Republic,

thi Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and

Nor Vi r an Ireland and the Government of the Union of Soviet

Serial1st Republics (hereinafter called "the Signatories")

• Cl:.,; In the Interests of all the United Nr clone ar.d by

th Ir . cprecentf-lives duly authorized thereto hr ve concluded

thi l Agreement.

-1-

■vrtlolc 1.

There shall be established rfter consultation with tr.e

Control Council for Germany an Interna tlonnl lillltr ry Tribunal

for the trial of war criminals whose offences have no particularThere shall be established rfter consultation with tr.e

Control Council for Germany an Interna tlonnl lillltr ry Tribunal

for the trial of war criminals whose offences have no particular

ec ra ;hicnl location whether they be accused Individually or

in tneir’ capacity as members of organizations or groups or

In both capacities.

ir.e constitution, Jurlsclctlon and functions of the

International -llltary Tribunal shall be t..ose set out in

the Charter annexed to tnls Agreement, which Charter rhall

form an Integral part of this Agreement.

nL^cl_e_3.

Zach of the Signatories shAll take the necessary stero

to make available for the Investigation of the cncrges and

trial the major war or In Inals detained by tr.en who are to be

trieJ by the International Allltax*y Tribunal. Tr.e Signatories

shell also use their best endeavors to make available for

Investigation of the charges against and the trial before

the International Military Tribunal such of the major war

criminals os are not in the territories of any of the Signa¬

tories.

Article 4.

. %

nothing in this Agreement snail prejudice the provisions

entnollshed by the Uosoow declaration concerning the return

of .v^r criminals to the countries where they committed tneir

crl c z.

Article 5.

Any Government cf tr.e United Nations may adhere to this

Agreement by notice give:, through the diplomatic channel to

the Government of the United Kingdom, who shall Inform the

oti. r signatory and adhering Governments of each such ad¬

herence .

-2-

Artl.-lc 3.

-.0thing in this Agreement shall prejudice the Jurisdiction

or t: e powers of any national or occupation court established

or to Joe established in any allied territory or In Germany

:'or the trial of war criminals.

Article 7.

This Agreement shall cone Into force on the day of

signature and shall remain In force for the period of or.e

year and shall continue thereafter, subject to the right ofArticle 7.

This Agreement shall cone Into force on the day of

signature and shall remain In force for the period of or.e

year and shall continue thereafter, subject to the right of

any Signatory to give, through the diplomatic channel, one

month's notice of Intention to terminate it. Such termination

shall not orcjudice any proceedings already taken pr any

findings already made In pursuance of this Agreement.

IN WITNESS V.':-.EREGF the Undersigned have signed the

present Agreement.

GONE In qundrunllcntc in London this day of

August 1945 each In English, French end Russian, and each

text to have equal authenticity.

For the Government of the United Stntee
of America

For the Provisional Government of the.
French Republic s

f,.^/ 't'~/

For the Government of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

• r

• • • r* i

For the Government of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics

.

.

°X

CHASTER OF THE IKT-P.NATIo: AL i-IMTARY TRIBUNAL

INTERNATIONAL MILITARY TRIBUNAL

Article 1.

In pursuance of the Agreement signed on the ^ day

of August 1945 by the Government of the United States of

America, the Provisional Government of the French Republic,

the Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and

Northern Ireland and the Government of the Union of Soviet

Socialist Republics, there shall be established an International

-Illitnry Tribunal (hereinafter called "the Tribunal") for

the Just and prompt trial and punishment of the major war

criminals of the European Axle.

Article 2.

The Tribunal snail consist of four members, each with an

alternate. One member and one alternate shall be appointed

by each of the Signatories. Tne alternates shall, so far as

they are able, be present at all cessions of the Tribunal.

In cate of Illness of any member of the Tribunal or his

incapacity for some other reason to fulfill his functions,

hit alternate shall take his place.

Article 3.In cate of Illness of any member of the Tribunal or his

incapacity for some other reason to fulfill his functions,

hit alternate shall take his place.

Article 3.

Neither the Tribunal, its members nor their alternates

cn. be challenged by the prosecution, or by the Defendants

or their Counsel. Encr. Signatory may reclece its member of

the Tribunal or r.lo alternate for reasons of health or for

other good reasons, except that no replacement cay take place

during a Trial, other than by an alternate.

Article 4.

(a) Tne presence of all four members of the Tribunal

or the alternate for any absent member shall be

necessary to constitute the quorum.

vo) The aemberc *>f the Tribune! shall, before nr.y trial

beglnr, agree among tncmrelves upon the selection

from their nur.ber of a President, r,nd the President

shall hold office during that trial, or a3 mny

otherwise be agreed by a vote of not less than

three members. The principle of rotation of presi¬

dency for successive trials le agreed. If, however,

a session of the Tribunal takes place on the

territory of one of the four Signatories, the

representative of that Signatory on the Tribunal

shall preside.

(c) Save as aforesaid the Tribunal shall take decisions

by a majority vote and Ir. caee the voles are evenly

divided, the vote of the President shall be declrlvc:

provided always that convictions and sentences shall

only be Imposed by affirmative votes of at least

three members of the Tribunal.

In case of need and depending on the number of the matters

to be tried, other Tribunals may be set up; and the establish¬

ment, functions, and procedure of each Tribunal shall be

identical, and enall be governed by thl6 Charter.

The Tribunal establisr.ed by the Agreement referred to In

Article 1 hereof for the trial and punishment of the major

war cri' Inals of tho Zurooean Axis countries shall nave the

po..er to try and ounlsn persons who, acting in the InterestsArticle 1 hereof for the trial and punishment of the major

war cri' Inals of tho Zurooean Axis countries shall nave the

po..er to try and ounlsn persons who, acting in the Interests

of'the 'European Axis countries, whether as Individuals or as

rembere of organizations, committed any of the following

crimes.

.he following rets, or any. of theei, are crlroes comim*

within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal for *hlcr. there shall

be individual rernonrlolllty:

(ft) CR11-ZS AJAIhST 7-ZACS: nnir.ely, planning, preparation.

Initiation or waging of a war of aggression, or a

w.-r In violation of International treaties, agree¬

ments or assurances, or participation In a common

plan or conspiracy for the accomplishment of any

of the foregoing;

(b) '.7A:-. CRISIS: namely, violations of the laws or

customs of war. Suer, violations snail Include,

out not be limited to, murder, ill-treatrent or

deportation to slave labor or for any other purpose

of civilian population of or In occupied territory,

murder or 111-treatment of prisoners of war or

persons on the seas, killing of hocteges, plunder

of public or private property, wanton destruction

of clticc, towns or villages, or devastation not

Juotlfled by military necessity;

(c) CHl:Ss AG A lid ITY: namely, murder, extermina¬

tion, enslavement, deportation, and other inhumane

°cts committed agnlr.ct any civilian population,

before or during the war; or persecutions on

political, racial or religious grounds In execution

of or In conr.ectlon with any crime within the

Jurisdiction of tne Tribunal, whether or not In

violation of the domestic law of the cour.tr>1 where

perpetrated.

Lenderc, organizers, instigators and accomplices partici¬

pating In the formulation cr execution of a common _l»n or

cons Iracy to commit any of the foregoing crimes are rescor.-

rlole for all acts performed by any persons lr. execution of

such plan.

The official position of defendant* , whether as Headscons Iracy to commit any of the foregoing crimes are rescor.-

rlole for all acts performed by any persons lr. execution of

such plan.

The official position of defendant* , whether as Heads

cf State or responslole officials In Government Depprtmente,

shall net be considered as freeing then from reecor.elblllty

or mitigating punishment.

Article 9.

-'he fact that the Defendant acted pursuant to order of

his Government or of a euperlor shall not free him from respon¬

sibility, but any be considered In mitigation of punishment

If the Tribunal determines that Justice so requires.

am o3,c 9- •

At the trial of any Individual member of any group or

organization the Tribunal may declare (in connection with any

act cf which the individual any be convicted) that the greup

cr organization of which the Individual was a member was a

criminal organization.

After receipt of the Indictment the Tribune1 shall give

such notice ae It thinks fit that the prosecution Intends to

ask the Tribunal to make such declaration and any member of

the organization will be entitled to apoly to the Tribunal

for leave to be heard by the Tribunal upon the question cf

the criminal character of the organization. The Tribunal

shall have power to allow or reject the application. If the

application Is allowed, the Tribunal may direct in what manner

the applicants shall be represented and heard.

Article 10.

In cares where a group or organization Is declared

criminal by the Tribunal, the competent notional authority

of any Signatory snail have the right to bring individuals

tp trial for membership therein before national, military

or occupation courts. In any 6uch case the criminal nature

of Che group or organization Is considered proved and shall

not be questioned.

Article 11.

Any percon convicted by the Trlbui^l nr.y be charged before

r national, military or occupation court, referred tc In

Article 1C of this Charter, with a crime otner than of nenber-Article 11.

Any percon convicted by the Trlbui^l nr.y be charged before

r national, military or occupation court, referred tc In

Article 1C of this Charter, with a crime otner than of nenber-

shlp In c criminal group or orPmlzatlon and ouch court nay,

after convicting hlc, lnpose upon him punishment Independent

of and additional tc the punishment Imposed by the Tribunal

for participation In the crlnlnal activities of such group or

organ1 cation.

^tlcle_13.

The Tribunal shall have the right to take prcccedlnga

again8t a percon charged with crimes eet out In Article 6 of

this Charter in hlc absence, if he has not been found or If

the Tribunal, for any reason, finds It necessary, in the

Interests of Justice, to conduct the hearing lr. hie absence.

Article ,1?.

Ihc Tribunal 6nall draw up rules for Its procedure.

Tnece rules shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of

t..l8 Cmrter.

Article 14.

in. co::'itits 70R r-g i::*/?:st:ca:icx
TRySZCJii-_cra u\?. vap. c.haiio.ls

Each Signatory shall appoint a Chief Froseoutor for the

Investigation of the charges ngnlnet and the prosecution of

m~jor w.*>r criminals.

The Chief Frorecutors shall act as a committee for the

following purposes:

(a) to agree upon a plan of the Individual work of

each of the Chief Prosecutors and his staff,

(b) to settle the final designation of major war

criminal3 to be tried by the Tribunal,

•

(c) tc aoprove the Indictment and the documents to

be submitted therewith.

(d) to lodge the ladletoent and the accompanying

docuncntc with the Tribunal,

(e) to draw uc and recommend tc the Tribunal for

ltc approval draft rule# of procedure, contec-

plated by Article 13 of this Charter. The

Tribunal shall nave po^er to accent, with or

without ar.endr.ents, or to inject, the rules

eo recomr.ended.

7r.e Conr.lttee snail act in all the Above matters by a

majority vote and shall a* c.olr.t a Chairman A3 cay be convenlenwithout ar.endr.ents, or to inject, the rules

eo recomr.ended.

7r.e Conr.lttee snail act in all the Above matters by a

majority vote and shall a* c.olr.t a Chairman A3 cay be convenlen

ond in accordance with the principle of rotation: provided

that If there is an equal division of vote concerning the

deal, nation of a Defendant to be tried by the Tribunal, or

the Crimea with which he shall be charged, that proposal will

:e adopted which was cade by the party which proposed that the

cartlculr.r Defendant be tried, or the particular charges oc

-referred against hlo.

Article 15.

The Chief Prosecutors shall Individually, and acting in

collaboration with one another, also undertake the following

dut lee:

(a) lnvestlg* tlon, collection end production before

or at the Trial of all necessary evidence,

(b) the preparn tlon of the Indietnent for approval

by the Committee In accordance with paragraph (c)

of Article 14 hereof,

(c) the preliminary examination of all necessary

witnesses nnd of the Defendants,

(d) to act as prosecuto* at the Trial,

(e) to appoint raprecei.tr.tives tc carry out such

l

duties as may be assigned to them.

U') CO undertake such other natters as any .appear

necessary to then for the pux-po*ec of the

preparation for and conduct of the Trial.

It ie understood that no witness or Defendant detained

by nny Signatory shall be taker, out of the poneeeslcn of that

Signatory without Its a66ent.

IV. FAIR Tril/.L ?CH ISPrhCAI.TS

Article 13.

In order to eneure fair trial for the Defendants, the

following procedure shall be followed:

(a) Tr.e Indietr.cr.t shall Include full particulars

specl^lr* in detail the charges against the

Defendants. A copy of the Indietaent and of

all the docuaents lodged with the Indietaent,

translated into a lAng-uagc which he understands,

shall be furnished to the Defendant at a con-

able tier before the Trial.

(b) During nny preliminary exaolnntlon or triol of atranslated into a lAng-uagc which he understands,

shall be furnished to the Defendant at a con-

able tier before the Trial.

(b) During nny preliminary exaolnntlon or triol of a

Defendant he shall have the right to give any

explanation relevant to the charges nade against

hia.

(c) A preliminary examination of a Defendant and

his Trial shall be conducted In, or translated

Into, a language which the Defendant understands.

(U) A defendant shall have the right to conduct his

own defense before the Tribunal or to have the

resistance of Counsel.

(e) A defendant shall have the right through hlr.relf

or through his Counsel to present evidence at

the Trlrl in support of r.ls defense, and to croes-

exnslne any witness called by the Prosecution.

-w'.rs:3 o/ iuf. : i <ukal a;:d cd::dj

Article 1°.

The Tribunal shell have the power

(a) to summon witnesses to the Trlr.1 and to require

their attendance anu testimony and to put

questions to thea,

(b) to Interrogate any Defendant,

(c) to reculre the production of documents and

other evidentiary material,

(d) to administer oaths to witnesses,

(e) to appoint officers for the carrying out of

*ny tael: desisted by the Tribunal Including

the power to nave evidence taken on commission.

The Tribunal shall

(a) confine tne Trial strictly to an expeditious

herring of the issues raised by the charges,

(b) trke strict me sures to prevent any action

which will cause unreasonable delay, and rule

out irrelevant les-cs and statements of any

kind whatsoever,

(c) deal summarily with any contumacy, imposing

appropriate punishment, including exclusion of

%

any Defendant or his Counsel from some or all

further proceedings, but without prejudice

to the determination of the charges*

Article 19.

Af.G Tribunal shall r.ot be bound by technical rules of

evidence. It shall adopt and aprly to the greatest possible

%

extent expeditious and non-technical procedure, and shallArticle 19.

Af.G Tribunal shall r.ot be bound by technical rules of

evidence. It shall adopt and aprly to the greatest possible

%

extent expeditious and non-technical procedure, and shall

ndalt any evidence which it deems to have probative value.

-he Tribunal any raculre Co be Informed of ‘.he nature

of any evidence before it Is offered eo that It may rule upon

the relevance thereof.

Article 31.

The Tribunal shall not require proof of facts of common

knowled. e but shall take Judicial notice thereof. It shall

rlso take Judicial notice of official governmental documents

and re.-orts of the United I.'stlons, including the acte nr.d

£ documents of the comr.lttces set up in the various Allied

countries for the investlgrtlon of war crimes, and the recorde

ax.d fin .Inga of military or other Tribunals of any of the

United Untions.

Article °r?.

Tne permanent cent of the Tribunal chall be lr. Berlin.

The first meetings of the members of the Tribunal And of the

Chief Prosecutors shall br held nt 3erlln in a place to be

design*ted by the Control Council for Germany. The first

trial er.nll be held At l.'urcnberg, and any subsequent triAls

shrll be held at cuch places as the Tribunal may decide.

Article ?3.

One or core of the Chief Prosecutors cay take pert in the

crosecutlor. nt each Trial. The function of any Chief Frosccutor

C a*y oc discharged by him personally, or by any person or

persons authorised by hlo.

The function of Counsel for a Defendant cay be discharged

nt the Defendant'8 reoue6t by any Counsel professionally

qualified to conduct cases before the Courts of his own

country, or by any other person who cay be specially authorized

thereto by the Tribunal.

Article 14.

The proceedings at the Trial shall take the- following

course:

-9-

(ft) The Indictment c.-all be read lr. court.

(o) The Tribunal shell nok each Defendant whether

he plends *guil*y“ or "not guilty".

(c) Tr.e prosecution shall make nn opening etaiement.-9-

(ft) The Indictment c.-all be read lr. court.

(o) The Tribunal shell nok each Defendant whether

he plends *guil*y“ or "not guilty".

(c) Tr.e prosecution shall make nn opening etaiement.

(d) The Tribunal shall ark the prosec-tlor. and the

defense whnt evidence (If any) they wish to

submit to the Tribunal, and the Tribunal shall

rule upon the admissibility cf any such evidence.

%

(e) The witnesses for the Prosecution shall be

examined ar.d After that the vritr.es6es for the

Defense. Thereafter such rebutting evidence

as may bo held by the tribunal to be admissible

chall be called by either the Prosecution or

the Defence.

(f) The Tribunal nay out any o.uestior. to ar.y witness

and to any Defendant, at r.ny tire.

(b) The Prosecution ana the Defense shall Interrogate

and nay cross-examine any witnesses and ar.y

Defendant who gives testimony.

(h) The Defense shAll address the court.

(1) Tne Prosecution chall address the court.

(j) Each Defendant may make a statement to the Tribunal.

(k) Tne Tribunal shall deliver Judgment and pronounce

sentence.

Article :?5.

All official documents shall be produced, ar.d all court

proceedings conducted, in English, French and Russian, and

in the language of the Defendant. So much of the record and

of the proceedings may also be translated Into the language

•
of any country in which the Tribunal Is sitting, as the

Tribunal considers desirable in the Interests of Justice

and public opinion. .

VI.

JUJC—IKT A::s SLAI E.iCE

Article Co.

rne judgment of the Tribunal as to the guilt or the

Innocence of any Defendant snail give the reasons on which

It is based, and shall be final and not subject to review.

Article 27.

The Tribunal shall neve the right to Impose upon a

Defendant, on conviction, death or such other punishment as

shall be determined by It to oe Just.

Article :?o.

In addition to nr.y punishment Imposed by It, the Tribunal

shall have the right to de rive trie convicted person of Anyshall be determined by It to oe Just.

Article :?o.

In addition to nr.y punishment Imposed by It, the Tribunal

shall have the right to de rive trie convicted person of Any

stolen property and order its delivery to the Control Council

for Germany.

Article^.

In case of guilt, sentences snail be carried out in

accordance with the orders of the Control Council for Germany,

which may At any time reduce or otherwise alter the sentences,

out may not Increase the severity thereof. If the Control

Council for Germany, after any Defendant .vs oeen convicted

and sentenced, discovers fresh evidence which, lr. Its opinion,

would found a fresh charge against him, the Council shall

report accordingly to the Committee established under Article 14

hereof, for such action as they may consider proper, having

regard to the Interests of Justice.

VII. SXPg.'SSS

Article 3G.

Tne expenses of the Tribunal and of the Trials, shall be

charged by the Signatories against the funds allotted for

maintenance of the Control Council for Germany.

raorcccL

Whereas ar. Agreement and Charter regarding the Prosecution of War
Criminals was signed in London on tho 8th August 1%5. in the English,
French, and Hu®aian languogea.

And whereas a di screponcy has been found to exist between the ori¬

ginals of Article 6. paragraph (c), of the Charter in the Ruasian language,
on the one hand, and the original a in the English and French lengua.-ee, on
the other, to wit, the oooi-colon in Article 6. paragraph (c), of the
Charter between the worde 'war* and 'or,' aa carried in the English and
French texto, ia a caana in the Ruasien text.

And whereas it ia desired to rectify thie diecrepancyiAnd whereas it ia desired to rectify thie diecrepancyi

NOT, THEREFORE, the undersized, signatories of the aaid Agreement
on behalf of thoir roapectiTo Corenrienta, duly authorized thereto, have
agreed that Article 6, poragroph (c), of tho Charter in the Ruaaion text
is correct, and that tho mooning and intention of the Agreement end Charter
require that the oaid sen!-colon in tho English text ahould be changed to
a ccroa, and that the French toxt ahould be emended to reed as followoi

o) Lgsjnrss CpriRS L'HU*.A.‘.TrSi C'est a diro 1'assasainat,

1'extermination, la reduction on osclavoge, lo deportation,
ot tout outre acte lnhumoin co-nis contro toutoa populations,
civilos, avant ou pondent la guerre, ou bien lea persecutions
pour dea motifs polltlquos, reciaux, ou r6ligieux, lorsquo
cos actos ou persecutions, qu'ils aient constitu6 ou non une
violation du droit interno du pays oil ils oat oto perp6tres,
ont 6to ccrnis a la suite do tout crime rentrent dona la
caapotenco du Tribunal, ou en liaise® ovoc ce crime.

HI TITJSSS THEREOF the Undersized have signed the present Protocol.

D0?S in quadruplicate in Berlin thla 6th day of October, I945, each
in English, French, and Russian, and each text to have equal authenticity.

For the Government of the United States of America

For the Government of the United Kingdaa of Great Britain aal
Northern Ireland - 1

iLcxuAVrY)

For the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

lL

EXECUTIVE OKUHt

PSOVIDIIC ICR REPRESENTATION OF IMS UNITED STATES IN PREPARING
AND PROSECUTING CHARGES 07 ATROCITIES AM) WAR CRUCES AGAINST
IKK LEADERS OF THE EUROPEAN AXIS POWERS AID IKEIR PRINCIPAL

AG3.TS AND ACCESSORIES

By virtue of the authority Tested in os as President and as

Contender in Chief of the Army and Nary, under the Constitution and

atatutea of the United Statea, it is ordered as follows:

1. Associate Justice Robert E. Jaoicson is hereby designated to aotContender in Chief of the Army and Nary, under the Constitution and

atatutea of the United Statea, it is ordered as follows:

1. Associate Justice Robert E. Jaoicson is hereby designated to aot

as the RepresentatlTe of the United States and as its Chief of Counsel in

preparing and prosecuting charges of atrooltles and war orlmea against suoh

of the leaders of the European Axis powers and their principal agents and

accessories as the United States cay agree with any of the United Nations

to bring to trial before an international military tribunal. He shall

sarre without additional compensation but shall recelT# such allowance

for expenses as nay be authorized by the President.

2. The Representative named herein is authorized to seleot and recom¬

mend to the President or to the head of any executive department, independ¬

ent establishment, or other federal agoncy neoessary personnel to assist

in the perforcrmce of his duties hereunder. The head of each executive

dopartcent. Independent establishment, and other federal agency is hereby

authorized to assist the Representative named herein in the performance

of his duties hereunder and to employ such personnel and make such expendi¬

tures, within the limits of appropriations now or hereafter available for

the purpose, as the Representative named herein cay deem neoassary to

accomplish the purposes of this order, and cay make available, assign, or

detail for duty with the Representative named herein such members of the

anaod forces and other personnel as may be requested for suoh purposes.

3. The Representative named herein Is authorized to oooperate with,

and receive the assistance of, any foreign Government to the extant deemed

TEE WHITE HOUSE

Hay'K 1945

\Ki 3 .is*#

306

CONTROL COUNCIL

Law No. 10

PUNISHMENT OF PERSONS GUILTY G? 7/Aft CRIMES,
CRLiES AGAINST PEACE AND AG A LIST KUI-iANITY

In order to give effect to the terns of the Moscow\Ki 3 .is*#

306

CONTROL COUNCIL

Law No. 10

PUNISHMENT OF PERSONS GUILTY G? 7/Aft CRIMES,
CRLiES AGAINST PEACE AND AG A LIST KUI-iANITY

In order to give effect to the terns of the Moscow

Declaration of 30 October 1943 and the London Agreement of
o August 1945, and the Charter issued pursuant thereto and •
ir. order to establish a uniform legal basis in Germany for
the prosecution of war criminals and other similar offenders,
other than those dealt with by the International Military
Tribunal, the Control Council enacts as follows:

Article I

The Moscow Declaration of 30 October 1943 "Concerning

Responsibility of Hitlerites for Committed Atrocities'* and
the London Agreement of 8 August 1945 "Concerning Prosecution
end Punishment of Major ’/nr Criminals of the European Axis"
are made integral parts of this Law. Adherence to the pro¬
visions of the London Agreement by any of the United Nations,
as provided for in Article V of that Agreement, shall not en¬
title such Nation to participate or intorfero ir* the opera¬
tion of this Lav# within the ‘Control Council area of authority
in Germany.

Article II

1. Each of the following acts is recognized as a crime:

(*) Crimes against Peace. Initiation of invasions

of other countries and wars of aggression in violation of
international laws and treaties, including but not limited
-o planning, preparation, initiation or waging a war of ag¬
gression, or a war of violation of international treaties,
agreements or assurances, or participation in a common plan
or conspiracy for the accomplishment of any of *ho foregoing.

(b) Mar Crimes. Atrocities or offenses against per¬
sons or property constituting violations of the laws or customs(b) Mar Crimes. Atrocities or offenses against per¬
sons or property constituting violations of the laws or customs

c: war, including but not Ii.-rJ.tcd to, murder, ill treatment
or asportation tc slave labour or Ter rr.:j other purpose, of
civilian population frcic occupied territory, murder* or ill
treatment of prisoners of war or persons or. the seas, kili-
xn- or hostages, plunder of public cr private property,
.'■vanton destruction Of cities, towns or villages, cr devasta¬
tion not justified by military necessity.

ic) Crimes r.;T.ains* Humanity. Atrocities end cf-
.onses, including but net limited to murder, ext emir, a tier.,
enslavement, deportation, imprisonment, torture, rape, cr

other inhumane acts committed against any civilian popula-
ticr., or persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds
whether or not ir. violation of the domestic laws of the coun¬
try where perpetrated.

(d/ n^mborship in categories of r. criminal groun

or organization declared criminal by the International Military
Tnour.ai. . J

2. «r.y person without regard to nationality or the
capacity ir. which ho acted, is doomed to have committed a

crime as defined in paragraph i of this Article, if he was
(a; a principal cr (b) was an accessory to the commission of
any such crime or ordered or abetted the camo or (c) took a

consenting part therein’cr (d) was connected with plans or
enterprises involving its commission or (o) was a member of
any organization cr group c- .-.neeted with tho commission of
any such crime or (f) with reference to paragraph 1 (a), if
r.u held a high political, civil or military (including Gen¬
eral eJiaff) position ir. Germany or ir*. one of its Allies, co-

belligerent3 or satellites cr held high position in the
financial, industrial or economic life, of any such country.belligerent3 or satellites cr held high position in the
financial, industrial or economic life, of any such country.

3. -Any person found guilty of any of the Crimes above
mentioned may upon conviction be punished as shall be deter¬
mined oy the tribunal to be just. Such punishment may con¬
sist of one or more cf the following:

(a) Doath.

(o) Imprisonment for life or .a term of years, with

or without hard labour.

303

(c) Fine, and imprisonment vdth or without hard

labour, in lieu thereof*

(d) Forfeiture of proporty..

(o) Restitution of property wrongfully acquired.

(f) Deprivation of seme or all civil rights.

Any property deelarod to be forfeited or the

restitution of which is ordered by the Tribunal shall bo
delivered to the Control Council for Germany, which shall
decide on its disposal.

A. (a) The official position of any person, v/hothor

rs H_ad of State or as a responsible official in a Government
Department, does not free him from responsibility for a crimo
or entitle him to mitigation of punishment.

(b) The fact that any person acted pursuant to

the order of hizi Government or of a superior does not froe
him from responsibility for ft crime, but may bo considered
in mitigation.

5. In any trial or prosecution for a crime heroin

referred to, the accused shall not be entitled to the bono-

* fits of any statute of limitation ir. respect of the period

from 30 January 1933 to 1 July 19A3, nor shall any immunity,
parden or amnesty granted under tho thzi rogimo bo admitted
as a bar to trial or punishment.

..rticlo III

i. each occupying authority, v.'ithin its Zono of occupa¬

tion,

(a) shall have the right to cause persons v/ithin

such Zone suspected of having committed a crimo, including
those charged with crime by one of tho United Nations, to be

arrested and snail take under control tho property, real and
personal, owned or controlled by the said persons, pending
decisions as to its eventual disposition.

*arrested and snail take under control tho property, real and
personal, owned or controlled by the said persons, pending
decisions as to its eventual disposition.

*

(b) shill report to the Legal Directorate the r.araos

of all suspected criminals, -.the reasons for and the places of
their detention, if they arc detained, and tho names and loca¬
tion of witnesses.

(c) shall take .appropriate measures to see that wit¬

nesses and evidence will be available Vrhon required.

(d) shall have the right to cause all persons so

arrostud and charged, and not delivered to another authority
as heroin provided, or released, to be brought to trial be¬
fore an appropriate tribunal. Such tribunal may, in the case
of crimes committed by persons cf German citizenship or na-
tionaiity against other persons cf German citizenship cr na¬
tionality, or stateless persons, be a Gorman Court, if auth¬
orized by the occupying authorities.

2. The tribunal by which persons charged with offenses

hereunder sliall be tried and the rules and prccoduro thereof
shall bo determined or designated 'ey each Zone Commander for
his respective Zone. Nothing hurcin is intended to, cr shall
impair or limit the jurisdiction cr power of any court cr
tribunal now or hereafter established in any Zeno by tho
Cc.mmar.dor thereof, or of tho International military Tribunal
established by the London Agreement of 8 ..ugust 1945.

3. Persons wanted for trial by an International Mil¬
itary Tribunal will not bo tried without tho consent cf tho
Cemmittoo of Chief Prosecutors, iach Zone Commander will
deliver such persons who arc within his Zone to that corrmit-
too upon request ar.d will make witnesses and evidence avail¬
able to it..

4. Persons known to be wanted for trial in another
or outside Germany will not bo tried prior to decision4. Persons known to be wanted for trial in another
or outside Germany will not bo tried prior to decision

under article IV unless tho fact of their apprehension h«as
been reported it: accordance with Section 1 (b) of this /.rt-
iclo, three months have elapsed thereafter, and no request
for delivery of tho type contemplated by Article IV has been
roco-ivod by the Zeno Gonmander concerned.

5... The execution of death s--nt^nces may bo deferred

by not to exceed one month after the sentence has become
final when the Zone Commander concerned has reason to boliovo

that oho testimony cf those under sentence would be of value
ir. the investigation and trial of crimes within or without
his Zone.

6. Each Zone Commander will cause such effect to be

given to tho judgments of courts of competent jurisdiction,
with respect to the property taken under his control pur¬
suant heroto, as he may deem proper in tho interest of
justice.

article IV

1. \/hon. any porsou in a Zone ir. Gorsany is alleged
to have committed a crime, as defined in Articio II, in a
country other than Germany or in another Zone, the govern¬
ment of shat nation or the Germander cf tho latter Zo.no, as
tho case may be, may request the Commander of tho Zone in
which tho parser. is located for his arrest end delivery for
trial tc th«. country or Zeno in widen tho crime was commit¬
ted. Such request for delivery shall bo granted by tho
Commandor receiving it unless he believes such person is
wanted for trial or as a witness by an International Mil¬
itary Tribunal, cr in Germany, cr la a nation other than tho
one making the request, or tho Comm? ndor is not satisfied that
delivery should bo made, in any of which cases ho shall h-avo
the right to forward the said request to the Legal Direct¬
orate of tho Allied Control Authority. A similar procedure
shall apply tc witnesses, material exhibits and other forms
cf evidence.

2. The Legal Directorate shall consider all requests2. The Legal Directorate shall consider all requests

referred to it, and snail determine the samo in acccrdanco
with the following principles, its determination tc be com¬
municated to tho Zone Commander.

(a) .. person wanted for tri; 1 or as a -witness by

an International Military Tribunal shall not bo delivered
far trial - r required tc give cvLder.co outside Germany, as
the case r.vy be, except upon rppiovai by xr.o Committee of
Chief Prosecutors acting under t.r.j Lender Agreement of 8
August 1945.

(b) j. person wanted for trial by several author¬
ities (other than an International Military Tribunal) shall
bo disposed of in accordance with the following priorities:

311

(1) If v/anted for trial in tho Zeno in which
hu is, he should not be delivered unless
arrangements are made for his return
after trial elsewhere;

(2) If wanted for 'trial in a Zone ether than

that in which ho is, he should bo ae-
livcr-d to that Zone in preference to
delivery outside Germany unless arrange¬
ments are made for his return to that
Zone after trial elsewhere;

(3) If wanted for trial outside Germany by

owe or more cf tho United Nations, of
ono of which ho is a citizen, that one
should have priority;

(4) If wanted for trial outside Germany by

several countries, not all of which are
United Nations, United Nations should
have priority;

(5) If wanted for trial outside Germany by
two or more of the Unitoa Nations,
then, subject tc Articlo IV 2 (b) (3)
abovo, that which has tho most serious
charges against him, which are more¬
over supported by evidence, should have
priority.

Article V

The dolivjry, under Article IV of this Law, of personsArticle V

The dolivjry, under Article IV of this Law, of persons

for trial shall be iar.de on demands cf tho Governments or Zcr.e
Commanders in such .a manner that the delivery of criminals to
one jurisdiction will not become the moans of defeating or un¬
necessarily delaying the carrying out of justice in -anothor
place. If within six months the delivered person has not been
convicted by tho Court of tho Zeno or country to which ho has
boon delivered, then such person shall bo returned upon demand
of the Commander of tho Zone whore tho person was located-
prior to dolivory.

Done at 3orlin 20 December 1945

(coni/p(45)53)

EXECUTIVE ORDER

AMENDMENT OF EXECUTIVE ORDER >D. 9547 OF LIAY 2, 1945,
ENTITLED "PROVIDING FOR REPRESENTATION OF THE UNITED
STATES IN PREPARING AND PROSECUTING CHARGES OF
ATROCITIES AND VAR CRIMES AGAINST THE LEADERS OF
THE EUROPEAN AXIS FOY/KIS A)© THEIR PRINCIPAL AGENTS
AND ACCESSORIES"

By virtu® of the authority vested in me as President and

Commander in Chief of the Amy and Navy, under the Constitution

and statutes of the United States, it is ordered as follows:

1. In addition to the authority vested in the Representa¬

tive of the United States and its Chief of Counsel by Paragraph 1

of Executive Order No. 9547 of May 2, 1945* to prepare and prose¬

cute charges of atrocities and war crimes against such of the

leaders of the European Axis powers and their accessories as

the United States may agree with any of the United Nations to

bring to trial before an international military tribunal, such

Representative and Chief of Counsel shall have the authority to

proceed before United States military or occupation tribunals,

in proper cases, against other Axis adherents, including but not

limited to cases against members of groups and organizations

declared criminal by the said international military tribunal.

2. The present Representative and Chief of Counsel islimited to cases against members of groups and organizations

declared criminal by the said international military tribunal.

2. The present Representative and Chief of Counsel is

authorized to designate a Deputy Chief of Counsel, to whom he

may assign responsibility for organizing and planning the prose¬

cution of charges of atrocities and war crimes, other than those

now being prosecuted as Case No. 1 in the international military

tribunal, and, as he may be directed by the Chief of Counsel, for

conducting the prosecution of such charges of atrocities and war

crimes

3. Upon vacation of office by the present Representative

and Chief of Counsel, the functions, duties, and powers of the

Representative of the United States and its Chief of Counsel,

as specified in the said Executive Order No. 9547 of May 2,

1945, as aaended by this order, shall be vested in a Chief of

Counsel for War Crimes to be appointed by the United States

Military Governor for Germany or by his successor.

4. The said Executive Order No. 9547 of May 2, 1945, is

amended accordingly.

THE WHITE 3)USE,

Janaary/4 I946.

.nt "•

rut a-

jut(7 nosM’J1
'Vt0£»-

mines in Article if of Control Council Law No. It*. including

conspiracies lo commit any such crimes. Nothing herein
■js'mt'J prejudice the jurisdiction or the powers of other courts
" ' ' *^il>!i>hcd or which nt • be established for the Inal of any

» offense*.

AUTICLK II

at Pursuant t.» the powers of the Military Governor for the

United State* Zone of Occupation within Germany and

further pursuant to the powers conferred u;ion the Zone

Commander ’•»' Cer.irol Council la.u No. 10 and Articles 10

and t: of the Citancr of the international Military Tribunal

annexed to the London Agreement of 8 August 19J 3 certain

tribunals to be known a* "Military Tribunals” shall be

established hereunder.

b) Each such tribunal shall consist of three or more

members to be designated by the Military Governor. Onetribunals to be known a* "Military Tribunals” shall be

established hereunder.

b) Each such tribunal shall consist of three or more

members to be designated by the Military Governor. One

alternate member may be designated to any tribunal if

deemed advisable by the Military Covcrr.or. Except as

provided m subsection (cj of this Article, all members and

alternates shall in* lawyers who have been admitted to

practice, for at least five years, in the highest courts of one

of the United States or its territories or of the District of

Columbia, or who have been admitted to practice in the

Untied State* Supremo Court.

e) The Military Governor may in his discretion enter into

..n agreement with one or more other /one commanders of

Sue member nations of the Allied Control Autnority provid¬

ing for the Joint trial of .my ease or caws. In such caScs the

tribunals shall consist of three or more members a.. may

bo provided In the agreement. In such cases the tribunals

nay include properly qualified lawyer* designated by the

other member nation*.

dj The Military Governor shall designate or.c o: the mem¬

bers of the tribunal to servo as the presiding judge.

ct Neither site tribunal* nnr the member.* of the tribunal*

or the alternate.- may be challenged by the prosecution or

by the defendant* or their counsel.

•

f> Jn ease of illness ot any member of a tribunal or his

incapacity for some other reason, the alternate, if one has

been designated, shall lake his place r.* a member in the

pending trial. Members may be replaced for reason of health

or for other good reasons, except that no replacement Of a

member may take place, during a trial, other than by the

alternate. If no alternate ha* been designated, the trial shall

be continued to conclusion by the remaining members.

k! The presence of the three members of the tribunal or of

two members when authorized pursuant to subsection (f>

Mipra, shall Ik- necessary to constitute a quorum In thek! The presence of the three members of the tribunal or of

two members when authorized pursuant to subsection (f>

Mipra, shall Ik- necessary to constitute a quorum In the

case of tribunal* designated under (c) above, the agreement

shall determine the requirements for a quorum.

iw Decision* .rnd judgments, including convictions and

•< ntcnvc', siiali be by majority vote of the members.' If the

vote* of the member,, arc equally divided, the presiding

member shall dt.larc - mistrial.

likel II «k-s Kon troll rat gevt/.c* Nr. 10 al Vfriwiwn l.c-
zoiclincten stralbarcn Humllung mi. r w..:< r. Voi-br'-dni..:
/ur ltcgchung cine* solchcn Verbrechen.: an. • :1a I I».
Z.isthndigkcit und licfiignissc nndcrer Gorichte, < /.ur Ab-
urteiiung von strafbaren Ilandlur.- en die.<r Art .,i. .. v.t
worden »ind oder spatcr cn;ri-aelzl werden, nit .!«•:, un-
bcriihrt.

AKTIKt.l, It

a) Auf Grund dcr Refugni.-sc dcs Miiii. rgouv rncura dor
amcrikanlsrhen Besetzungszono Dc-ulsch!ar..*is t.owic auf
Gnmd dcr llcfugnissc, die den Zonenbef* hi-habor du. ch da
Kontrollratgcsou Nr. 10 und die Artikcl lb und 1. <!<;.-> St.ilul.
dc* Intcmationalen Mi.i.argerichb. — Anlaiie /i n Londoner
Abkommen vom 8. August 1015 — ubtrlrngm . rl. v'crdon
hiermit gewi**c Gcr.chlc untcr dor Bern chnu. . ...M llt.’lr-
gerichtt" cingcsotzt.

b) Jctics dicscr Gcrichtc scut slch a. -Ire. -.'let mehr
Mitghedern zusammen. die von dem Mil. ugo. .vnour be-
stimmt werden. Ein stollvertrcter.de* M.tgli d l:mn bin
jedom Gcricht bestimmt werden. wrnn der M.hi...- /.uviinoui
dies fur ratsam halt. Mil Ausnahme des ;r. Ah :r, diose*
Art'kcls vorgosehcr.cn Fallc* mus-or. sh.r.tJ.'cl. M.tgliunT
und slellvcrlrctcndo Mitglicdor Juristcr. .»< .u, d.o .-. it mln-
destens funf Jahren bci den hdehstcr. Gi: i«-hi«*r. do.*
Verclniglcn Staalcn b/w. dor TerritorJen (»(icr <i« . Oir uifcts
Columbia oder bci dem Obvrsten Gcrichtshof dev V' rv.nigttv.
Staaten zugclasscn sind.cj ber Militargouvcrncur kann nach seincm ErrtU**cn tin
Abkommen init emem oder mehreren Zonenb' MAhuberr.
dcr in der Kontrollbehoidc vcrlrotcncn Nalionen (Iber d'.
gcmcmschafthchc Vcrhandlung von einem oca mehreren
Fallen trefTen nach Bcstimmur.g in dem Abkommen. In
diestm Fallc bcstcht das Goricht au* droi oder mchr Mil-
glicdern nach Abstimmung in dem Abkommen. Ir. diesem
Fallc ktr.ncn auch den Gcrlchlcn voll quoilflr.crlo Juristen
angehOren, die von den andcrcn vcrtrolcncr. Natlor.cn be-
si;mm: worden sind.

d) Der Militargouvcrncur bcstcll: ein Mitglied do Ce-

richts zum vorsilzenden Richter.

ok Weder die Gcrichtc nocli dcrcr. Mitglicdor <.dcr -tc.l-
vcrirctcr.den Mitglieder kbnncn von dor Anitlagebchbrdc.
den Angcklaglen oder deren Vcrtcldigorn obgclchtil w» iden

f> Erkrankt em Mitglied dcs Gcricht* oder Larin os nu*
sonstlgcn Crtlr.den semen I'flichtcn nicht nnchkonimort. *•.
wird c* durch setnen Stellvcrtretcr, falls ein rolehvr be-
slimmt worden ist. In dcr schwcbcndcn Vcrhandlung or.c;.:>.
Mitglieder konnen au* gesundhcltlichon oder *o:ist.gvn «■ -
rechtfcrtigtcn Grunden crscizt werden. Jcdoch ,;..:ir. tin
glied wahrond e.ncr Vcrhandlung nur durch ein stoLvur-
tretcndcs Mitglied erset/t werden. 1st ein stoilvortrelcr.di. •
Mitglied nicht bcstlmml worden. so 1st die Vcrhandlung von
den vcrblcibenden Mitgliedern /um AbschluG /.u brlngen.

g) FUr die ik'Chlullfahigkeit ist die Anwes r.helt dcr drvt
Mitglieder dcs Gcrichtshofs oder soweit dies gvmi.il Absatz t:j
gcsUUcl ist. von zwcl Mitgliedern crfordcrlich. sir. Fallc
von unter Absau (c) vorgesehenen Gcrichtcn hat d;.s Abko.n-
•men die Voraussetzung fur die BcschluOfahigkeit /u be-
•'immen.hi Entschcidungcn und Urtcllc. cinschlicOlivh «Ser Bo-
schluvsc qber Schuldlgsprochung und Strafm.i.'l, sind durch
Mchrheitsabstiinnuing dcr Mitglieder zu fnssen. Ergebon die
Stunmen der Mitglieder Stimmenglcichheit. so hat dor Vur-
sitzendc Einstellung dcs Verfahrons ohne Vcrbrnuch dor
Strafklagc aunusprcchcn.

AltTICLU III

ARTIKEL Ill

m Charge* again t (tersons to bo tried in the tribunals

c-l.aih;heti hereunder -hail originate in the Office of the
Chief Coum for War Crime*, appointed by the Military
Moycr.'.iir ununnt to Paragraph 3 of Executive Order Num-
.. ..t the President of the United States dated
' . .y 1U S6. The Chief of Counsel for War Crimes shall
.. the persons t«. I*c tried by the tribunals and ho
.. i..noted i> i iv illative shall !■*•- the indictment*
\.:n n. rotary Gvmr.il of the tribunal* i*vc ArticleXIV.
mini/ . i.u shall conduct tlic pruwution.

u> Anklagvn gvgen Personen, die vor den gcmiiil dtcMt
Verordnung errichtcton Gcrichtcn nbgcurteiit werden so'.len,
werden vom Amte d«-s Hauptanklagcvcrlrcters .ur Kueg'-
vcrbrechcn erhoben, das von dem Militdrgouverneur gcmiifi
Z.ffcr 3 des Erlasscs Nr. 0079 des Priisidcnten dvr Verelntg-
ten Staaten vom 16. Jar.uar 19*16 ernannt ist. Dvr liaupt-
anklagcvertreter fur Kriegsvcrbrcchcn bestimmt die von ». n
Gcnchten abzuurtoi'.endcn Personen und cr oder der vor.
ihm bv/c.rhn. te Vertroter reichcn die A'nklnge beiin Gencral-
-<■kret.tr dcr Gcrichtc ein (siehe Artikel XIV; ur.d fiihrcn aie
uUentliche Anklagc durch.

11

1>* The Chi. ( <• OumscI for War Crime', when in hi*
Judgment u ;> advisable. may invite one or more United

.Nations tv* designate reprox-mativc- to participate in Ux»
prosecution of any case.

bl I*cr llauplanklagevnrtrefer fur Krug .•tr..r.th«o l:-r.n.
warn ci nach scincm Ermexstn raison. < .\eh .si, r.u.o CKic:
mehrcrc der Vereinten Nationon uuffordvrn, VerUcler t"
Tcilnnhinc an der Vrrfolgur.g fine.- Falle.. xu bt-sLmmon. __ g

ARTICLE IVARTICLE IV

In order to ensure fair trial for the defendants, the fol¬

lowin'. procedure shall be followed:

al A m icttdniU be furnished, at a reasonable li.no
Iv..ire trial, a copy of the indictment and of all ducti¬
n'.. nt> iiul,.eit tv.;a r.. ' md.ztmc.it, translated into a language
which ho U::dci.>tnnd5. The .nuictntent .hall state the ciiargc*
plainly, cnncWely and with suificicnl particulars to inform
defendant of the offenses charged. ' %

In To trial >h.iil be conducted in. or' translated into, a

language wlsi.h tho defendant understands.

cl. A defendant shall, have the right to be represented
by counsel of hi* own selection, provided such counsel shall
bo n person qualified under existing regulations to conduct
cases before the court* of defendant'* country, or any other
iKTvin who may be specially authorized by the tribunal
Hi ti.bunal -hull appoint qualified counsel to represent a
defendant who D not represented by courncl of hu own

•election.

ill Every defendant shall os- entitled to be present at hi*

•flits except that a defendant r..a> oc proceeded against
•hiring temporary absences if In the opinion of the tribunal
defendant’* interests Will noi thereby be Impaired, and
except further a. provided in Article VI (c>. Tho tribunal
may til>0 proceed in the al* . nee of any defendant who has

applied for and ha., been grunted permission to be absent

e) A defend..ill hall have the right through itl* counsel

to present evidence at live trial in support of hU defense

mid to crossexuinlne any w.tncs* called by ihe prosecution

I) A defend.ini may apply in writing to the tribunal fot

Ihe production of witnesses or of documents. The applica¬

tion shall state whore She wanes* or document is thought
lo bo located and shall a..*o state the. facts to be proved by

ihe witness or the document and the relevancy of such
facie lo the defense. If the tribunal grunt* the applicationihe witness or the document and the relevancy of such
facie lo the defense. If the tribunal grunt* the application

iho nufendunt shall be given »uch aid in obtaining pro-
iluclion of evidence a. the tribunal may order.

AltTICLE V

Thu tribunals snail have the power  CT

al to summon witnesses to the trial, to require their atten-

l.uice and tesUmnny and to pul question* to them.

l») To inleirouali- any defendant who takes the stand to
testify in Ids own behalf, or who t* called to testify regarding

another defendant.

<’> To require the production of documcnU and other evi-

. ii .arr m.terinl.

<> To 'dinmM.-r oath*.

AUTIKEL IV

I

/w.ci.v Wahrung der ltechto der Angel;.ago n soil fr.igcn-

dc* Verfahren cincewdilngen werden:

... rVir. Angcklagtcn i»t cine Au>.*< rligung der Anklstt*
...w,,- allc mil der Anklage clngcrcichtcn LV ui.de n. iii.a--
sotzt :n cine Sprachc, der cr nibchtig i.t. time, .-.alb < incr r.-
gemc.' ..non Frist vor dcr Hauptvcrhandlung .11 ubcrml’.tein
Ore Anklagcschrifl sol! die Klagojunkto el.....eh, dcut licit
unci mit gcm.gcr.dcn Einzclhcuen oe/*.ei;r.cr.. tim den An-
geklagtcn uber die inm zur Last gcic..te >'ra.' .aro Hondlur.3
zu untcrrichtcn.

b) D.c llauptvoihar.dlung .»t in eir.er 8pn.c,vc xn fuhrer.,
Oder in cine Sprachc zu ubcm-tz.cn. der tier Angoltlaglv
machtlg 1st.

c) Der Angcklagtc hat da* It edit, steh von e.r.un VortCl*
diger seiner cigcncn Wahl vertreten zu ia.*>en. vorausgcsotzf,
di.C dcr Vertcidiger nach den goltrndcn Bestlmmungon be-
f-higt ist, VertcldiRuntcn vor den Gjrichlcn dc* Landes dc-i
Angoklaittrn zu lumen. Es kann jcdoch auch Jede unde-re
Pcrior. vom Gericht ousd.ucklich zugeia-sci. werden. Das
Gcr.cht hat cincm Angcklagtcn, der nlch: v-n cinen; Vor-
tcldlgcr seiner cigcncn Wahl vertreten ist, ein.n cnt.-r.ro-
ehend befahigten Vertcidiger zur Vertretung zu bCMollor..d» Jeder Angcklagtc 1st bcrcehllgt, bcl der Huuptvcrhur.d-
lung gcgcnvvfirtig zu *dn, mil dcr Ausnnhmc, dull gogen ,
cinen Angcklagtcn, der zcitwcisc abivcsend 1st, vcrhandolt
werden kann, v.cnn nach Ansichl dc* Gericht.. die Ir.tercsKn
do* Aiigektagtcn dadureh r.lchi bceintrachttgt werden ur.d
mil dcr wcttcrcn sn Artlk