The Pentagon Papers (Part -IV-B-5) (U.S. Department of Defense, 1971)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration: Report of the Office of the Secretary of Defense Vietnam Task Force (The Pentagon Papers) (https://nara-media-001.s3.amazonaws.com/arcmedia/research/pentagon-papers/Pentagon-Papers-Part-IV-B-5.pdf).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 IV.B Evolution of the War (26 Vols.)
Counterinsurgency: The Kennedy Commitments, 1961-
 1963 (5 Vols.)
5. The Overthrow ofNgo Dinh Diem, May-Nov, 1963
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 IV. B . E.

 EVOLlJTIOE OF THS HAP.

 The OverthrmT of Ngo Dinh Diem

 TOP SECRET ., Sensitive

 -----------
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 SUMlf~RY AND ANALYSI§

 The Diem coup was one of those critical events in the history of U.S.
policy that could have altered our commitment. The choices were there:
(1 ) continue to plod along in a limited fashion with Diem -- despite his
and l'J11U!s growing unpopularity; (2) encourage or tacitly support the over -
throw of Diem, taking the risk that the GVN might cruEble and/or accommodate
to the VC; and (3) grasp the opportunity -- with the obvious risks -- of the
political instability in South Vietnam to disengage. The first option ·was
rejected because of the belief that we could not win with Diem-Nhu. The
third was nevery seriously considered a policy alternative because of the
assumption that an independent, non-communist SVN was too important a stra-
tegic interest to abandon - - and because the situation ".;as not sufficiently
drastic to call into question so basic an assumption . The second course
was chosen mainly for the reasons the first was rejected --Vietnam was
thought too important ; we "mnted to win; and the rebellious generals
seemed to offer that prospect.

 In making the choice to do nothing to prevent the coup and to tacitly
support it , the U.S. inadvertently deepened its involvement . The inadvertence
is the key factor . It was a situation without good alternatives. While
Diem ! s government offered some semblance of stability and authority , its
repressive actj.ons against t he Buddhists had permanently alientated popular
support, with a high probability of victory for the Viet Congo As efficient
as the military coup leaders appeared, they were without a manageable base
of political support . When they came to power and >-Then the lid was taken
off the Diem-Nhu reporting system, the GVN position was revealed as weak
and deteriorating . And , by virtue of its interference in internal Vietnamese
affairs , the U. S. had assQmed a significant responsibility for the new regime,
a responsibility which heightened our commitment and deepened our involvement.

 The catalytic event that precipitated the protracted crisis which
ended in the downfall of the Diem regime was a badly handl ed Buddhist religious
protest in Hue on May 8, 1963 . In and of i tself the incident was hardly
s omething to shake the foundations of power of most modern rulers , but the
manner in which Diem responeded to it , and the subsequent protests which i t
generated, was precisely the one most likel y to aggravate not alleviate the
situation . At stake , of course, was far more than a r eligious issue . The
Buddhist protest had a profoundly pol itical character from the beginning .
I t sprang and fed upon the feelings of political frustration and repression
Diem ! s autocratic rule had engendered .

 The beginning of the end for Diem can, then, be traced through events
to the regime !s violent suppression of a Buddhist protest demonstration in

 i TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Hue on Buddha's birthday, May 8, in 1'Thich nine people were killed and
another fourteen injured. Although Buddhists had theretofore been wholly
quiescent politically, in subsequent vleeks, a full-blown Buddhist "struggle "
movement demonstrated a sophisticated command of public protest techniques
by a cohesive and disciplined organization, somewhat belying the notion tha,t
the movement was an outraged,spontaneous response to religious repression
and discrimination. Nonetheless, by June it was clear that the regime was
confront ed not with a dissident religious minority, but with a grave crisis
of publi c confidence. The Buddhist protest had become a vehicle for mobiliz-
ing the widespread popular resentment of an arbitrary -and often oppressive
rule. It had be come the focal point of political opposition to Diem. Under
strong U. S. pressure and in the face of an outraged world opinion, the r egime
rea ched ostensible agreement with the Buddhists on June 16. But the agree-
ment merely papered over the crisis, without any serious concessions by
Diem. This intransigence was reinforced by Diem ' s brother, Ngo Dinh Nhu,
and his I'life , who bitterly attacked the Buddhists throughout the summer .
By mid-August the crisis was reaching a breaking point.

 The Buddhists ' demonstrations and protest created a crlS1S for American
policy as well . The U.S. policy of support for South Vietnam's struggle
against the Hanoi-supported Viet Cong insurgency was founded on unequivocal
support of Diem, whom the U.S. had long regarded as the only national leader
capable of unifying his people for their internal war . When the Buddhist
protest revealed widespread public disaffection , the U.S . made repeated
attempts to persuade Diem to redress the Buddhist grievances, to r epair
his public image, and to win back public support . But the Ngos were un-
willing to bend. Diem, in true mandarin style, was preoccupied with ques-
tions of face and survival - - not popular support . He did not understand
the profound changes his country had experienced under stress, nor did he
understand the requirement for popular support that the new sense of national-
ism had created. The U.S. Ambassador, Frederick Nolting, had conducted a
low-key diplomacy toward Diem, designed to bring him to the American way
of thinking through reason and pers uasion. He approached the regime during
the first weeks of the Buddhist crisis in the sa~e manner, but got no re-
sults . lVhen he left on vacation at the end of May, his DCM, William Truehart,
abandoned the soft sell for a tough line. He took U.S . views to Diem not
as expressions of opinion, but as demands for action . Diem, however, re-
mained as obdurate and evasive as ever. Not even the U. S. threat to dissoci-
ate itself from GVN actions in the Buddhist crisis brought movement .

 In late June, with Nolting still on leave , President Kennedy announced
 the appointment of Henry Cabot Lodge as Ambassador to Vietnam to replace
 Nolting in September. In the policy deliberations then taking place in
 Washington, consideration was being given for the first time to "That effect
 a coup against Diem would have. But Nolting returned, first to Washington
 and then to Saigon, to argue that the only alternative to Diem was chaos .
 The U.S . military too, convinced that the war effort was going well, felt
. that nothing should be done to upset the apple cart. So Nolting was given
 another chance to talk Diem into conciliating the Buddhists . lne Ambassador
 worked assiduously at the task through July and the first part of August ,
 but Diem would agree only to gestures and half-measures that could not

 ii TOP SECRET - 2nsitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET .- Sensitive

stop the grave deterior8,tion of the political situation . Nolting left
Vietnam permanently in mid-August with vague as surances from Diem that
he would seek to improve the climate of relations with the Buddhists.
Less than a week later, Nolting "Tas b etrayed by Nhu ' s dramatic August 21
midnight raids on Buddhist pagodas throughout Vietnam

 One of the important lessons of the American involvement in South
Vietnam in support of Diem was that a policy of unreserved commitment to
a particular leadership placed us in a weak and manipulable position on
important int ernal issues. The view that there vTere "no alternatives"
to Diem greatly limited the extent of our influence over the regime and
ruled out over the years a number of kinds of l everage that we might use-
fully have employed or threatened to emply . Furthermore, it placed the
U.S. in the unfortunate role of suitor to a fickle lover . Aware of our
fundamental commitment to him, Diem could with relative impunity ignore
our vrishes. It reversed the real power r elationship b etween the hlO coun-
tries. Coupled with Diem ' s persistent and ruthles s elimination of all po-
tential political opposition, it left us with rather stark alternatives
indeed ,vhen a crisis on which we could not allow delay and equivocation
finally occurred. For b ett er or worse, the August 21 pagoda raids decided
the issue for us.

 The raids, themselves , were carefully timed by Nhu to be carried out
when the U.S. vTaS without an Ambassador, and only after a decree p,;Lacing .
the country under military martial law had b een issued. They were conducted
by combat police and special forces units taking orders directly from Nhu,
not through the Army chain of command . The sweeping attacks resulted in
the wounding of about 30 monks, the arrest of over 1,400 Buddhists and
the closing of the pagodas (aft er they had been damaged and looted in the
raids). In their brutality and their blunt repudiation of Diem ' s solemn
word to Nolting, they were a direct, impudent slap in the face for the U. S.
Nhu expected that in crushing the Buddhists he could confront the new U. S.
Ambassador with a fait accompli in which the U. S. would complaininglyac -
quies ce , as we had in so many of the regime's actions which we opposed .
Moreover , he attempted to fix blame for the raids on the senior Army gener-
als . Getting word of the attacks in Honolulu, where he was conferring
with Nolting and Hilsman, Lodge flew directly to Saigon . He immediately
let it be known that the U. S. completely dissociated itself from the raids
and could not tolerate such behavior . In Washington the morning after,
while much confusion reigned about who was responsible fo r the raids, a
statement repudiating them was promptly released . Only after several
days did the U. S. finally establish Nhu ' s culpabili in t he attacks and
publicly exonerate the Army .

 On August 23, the first contact vTith a U. S. representative ,vas made
by generals who had begun to plan a coup against Diem. The generals wanted
a clear indication of where the U. S. stood . State in i ts subsequently con-
troversial reply, drafted and cleared on a weekend when several of the
principal Presidential advisors were absent from Wa shington , affirmed that
Nhu I s continuat ion in a pOvTer position ,vi thin the regime "las intolerable

 iii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and, if after Diem had been given an opportunity to rid hlifiself of Nhu
and did not, "then, we must face the possibility that Diem himself canJlot
be preserved." This message was to be communicated to the generals , and
Diem was to be warned that Nhu must go . Lodge agreed ,vi th the approach
to the generals, but felt it was futile to present Diem with an ultimatum
he would only ignore and one that might tip off the palace to the coup
plans . Lodge proceeded to inform only the generals . They were told that
the U.S. could no longer support a regime which included Nhu, but that
keeping Diem "ioTaS entirely up to them . This vTaS cormnunicated to the gener-
als on August 27. The President and some of his advisors, however, had
begun to have second thoughts about svr:l tching horses so suddenly, and with
so little information on whether the coup could succeed, and if it did,
what kind of government it would bring to power . As it turned out, Washir~­
ton's anxiety was for naught, the plot "ioTaS premB,ture, B,nd after several
uncertain days, its demise was finally recognized on August 31.

 Thus by the end of August, we found ourselves without a lead ership
to support and without a policy to follo,v in our relations with the GVN.
In this cont ext a month-long policy review took place in Washington and in
Vietnam . It was fundamentally a search for alternatives . In both places.
the issue was joined betwe en those who saw no realistic alternatives to
Diem and felt that his policies were having only a marginal effect on the
war effort, which they wanted to get on with by renewing our support and
communication with Diem; and those who felt that the war against the VC
would not possibly be won with Diem in power and preferred therefore to
push for a coup of some kind. The first view was primarily supported by
the military and the CIA both in Saigon and in Washington, while the latter
was helf by the U. S. Mission, the State Department and members of the
White House staff . In the end, a third alternative "lvas selected, namely
to use pressure on Diem to get him to remove Nhu from the scene and to
end hi s repressive policies . Through September, however , the debate con-
tinued with growing intensity . Tactical considerations, such as another
Lodge approach to Diem about removing the Nhus and the effect of Senat9r
Church ' s resolution calling for an aid suspension, focused the discussion
at times, but the issue of whether to renew our support for Diem remained .
The decision hinged on the asses sment of how seriously the political deteri-
ora tion "ioTaS affecting the war effort.

 In the course of these policy debates, several participants pursued
the logical but painful conclusion that if the war could not be won with
Diem, and if his removal would lead to political chaos and also j eopard ize
the war effort, then the "IoTar was probably unwinnable. If that were the
case, the argument vlent, then the U. S. should really be facing a more basic
decision on either an orderly disengagement from an irretrievable situa-
tion, or a major escalation of the U. S. involvement, including the use of
U. S. combat troops. These prophetic minority voices were, hO"lorever , rais -
i ng an unplea sant prospect that the Administration was unprepared to face
at that time . In hindsight, however, it is clear that this was one of
the times in the history of our Vietnam involvement when "lve \"Tere making
fundamental choices . The option to disengage honorably at that time now
appears an attractively low-cost one. But for the Kennedy Administration

 iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sellsitive

then, the costs no doubt appear ed much higher. In any event, it proved to
be um-Tilling to accept the implica tions of predictions for a bleak future.
The Administration hewed to the belief that if the U,S, be but willing to
exercise its power, it could ultimately always have its vlay in world affairs.

 Nonetheless, in view of the widely divergent views of the principals
 in Saigon, the Administration sought independent judgments with t"TO successive
 fact-finding missions . The first of thes e whirlwind inspections , by General
 Victor Krulak, JCS SACSA, and a State Department Vietnam expert, Joseph
 Mendenhall, from September 7- 10, resulted in diametrically opposing reports
 to the President on the conditions and situation and "ivas, as a result, futile.
 The Krulak-Mendenhall divergence was significant because it typifies the
 deficient analysj_s of both the U,S, civilian and military missions in Viet-
 nam with respect to the overall politics,l situation in the country. The
 U, S. civilian observers, for their part, failed to fully appreciate the im-
 pact Diem had had in preventing the emergence of any other political forces .
 The Buddhists, while a cohesive and effective minority protest movement,
 lacked a program or the means to achieve power . The labor unions were
 entirely urban-based and appealed to only a small segment of the population.
 The clandestine political parties were small, urban, and usually elitist .
 The religious sects had a narrow appeal and were based on ethnic minorities .
 Only the Viet Cong had any real support and influence on a broad base in
 t he countryside . The only real alternative source of political power was
 the Army since it had a large, disciplined organization spanning the country,
.wi th an independent communica tj_ons and transportation system and a strong
 superiori ty to any other group in coercive pOl'ler . In its reports on the
 Army, however, General Harkins and the U.S . military had failed to appre-
 ciate the deeply corrosive effect on internal allegiance and discipline
 in the Army that Diem's loyalty based promotion and assignment policies
 had had . They did not foresee that in the 'Yrake of a coup senior officers
 would lack the cohesiveness to hang together and that the temptations of
 power would promote a devisive internal competition among ambitious men
 a t the expense of the "i'lar against the Viet Cong .

 Two weeks after the fruitless Krulak-Mendenhall mission, with the
Washington discussions still stalemated, it was the turn of Secretary
McNamara and General Taylor, the Chairman of the JCS, to assess the problem .
They left for Vietnam on September 23 with the Presidential instruction
t o appraise the condition of the war effort and the impact on it of the
Buddhist political tUrmoil and to recommend a course of action for the
GVN and the U,S . They r eturned to Washington on October 2 . Their report
was a somewhat contradictory compromise between the views of the civilian
and military staffs . It affirmed that the war was being won, and that it
would be successfully concluded in the first three corps areas by the end
of 1964 , and in the Delta by 1965 , thereby permitting the withdrawal of
American advisors, although it noted that the political tensions were start -
ing to have an adverse effect on it , But , more importantly, it r ecommended
a series of measures to coerce Diem into compliance vrith American wishes
t hat included a selective suspension of U, S. economic aid, an end to aid
for the special forces units used in the August 21 raids unless they were
subordinated to the Joint General Staff, and the continuation of Lodge ' s
cool official aloofness from the regime . It recommended the public

 v TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensi tj.ve

announcement of the U,S, intention to vlithdraw 1,000 troops by the end
of the year, but suggested that the aid suspensions not be a,nnounced in order
to give Diem a chance to respond without a public loss of face . It con-
cluded by re commending aga,ins t active U, S, encouragement of a coup, in
spite of the fact that an aid suspension was the one step the generals had
asked for in August as a sign of U,S, condemnation of Diem and support for
a change of government. The report ivaS quick.ly adopted by Kennedy in the
NSC and a brief, and subsequently much rued, statement was r eleased to the
press on October 2, announcing the planned withdra\val of 1,000 troops by
year's end .

 The McNamara-Taylor mission, like the Krulak-Mendenhall mission before
it and the Honolulu Conference in November after the coup, points up the
great difficulty encountered by high l evel fact-finding missions and con-
ferences in getting at the "facts" of a complex policy problem like Viet -
nam in a short time . It is hard to believe that hasty visits by harried
high level officials with overloaded itineraries really add much in the
way of additional data or lucid insight . And because they be come a focal
point of worldwide press coverage, they often raise public expectations or
anxieties that may only create additional problems for the President . There
were many such high level conferences over Vietnam .

 Of the recommendations of the McNamara-Taylor mission, the proposal for
a selective suspension of economic aid, in particular the suspension of
the commercial import program, was the most significant both in terms of
its effect , and as an example of the adroit use or denial of American assis-
tance.to achi eve our foreign policy objectives , In . this instance economic
sanctions, in the form of selected aid suspensions in those programs to which
the regime would be most sensitive but that would have no immediate adverse
effect on the war effort , were used constructively to influence events rather
than negatively to punish those who had violated our wishes , our usual re-
action to coups in Latin America', The proposal itself had been under con-
sideration since the abortive coup plot of August . At that time, Lodge
had been authorized to suspend aid if he thought it would enhance the like-
lihood of the SUccess of a coup . Later in September he was again given
specific control over the delay or suspension of any of the pending aid
programs . On both occasions, however, he had expressed doubt about the
utility of such a step . In fact, renewal of the commercial import program
had been pending since early in September, so that the adoption of the
McNamara- Taylor proposal merely formalized the existing situation into
poli cy . As might have been expected (although the record l eavffiambiguous
whether this was a conscious aim of the Administration ) , the Vietnamese
general s interpreted the suspension as a green light to proceed vli th a
coup .

 While this policy was being applied in October , Lodge shunned all
contact with the regime that did not come at Diem ' s initia,ti ve . He wanted
it clearly understood that they must come to him prepared to adopt our
advice before he would recommend to Washington a change in U, S, policy .
Lodge performed with great skill , but inevitably frictions developed l'Tithin

 vi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 the Mission as different viewpoints and proposals came forward . In particular,
. Lodge's disagreements and disputes with General Harkins during October vThen
 the coup plot was maturing and lat er were to be of considerable embarrass-
 ment to Washington when they leaked to the press. Lodge had carefully
 cultivated the press, and 1-Then the storj.es of friction appeared, it was
 invariably Harkins or Richardson or someone el se who was the villain.

 No sooner had the McNamara-Taylor mission returned to Washington and
reported its recommendations than the generals r eopened contact with the
Mission indicating that once again they were preparing to strike against
the regime. Washington's immediate reaction on October 5 was to reiterate
the decision of the NSC on the McNamara-Taylor report, i.e . , no U.S. encour-
agement of a coup. Lodge was instructed, however, to maintain contact with
the generals and to monitor their plans as they emerged . These periodic
contacts continued and by October 25, Lodge had come to believe that Diem
was unlj.kely to respond to our pressure and that we should therefore not
thwart the coup forces. Harkins disagreed, believing that we still had not
given Diem a real chance to rid himself of Nhu and that we should present
him with s uch an ultimatum and test his r esponse before going ahead with
a coup. He, furthermore , had reservations about the strength of the coup
forces when compared with those likely to remain loyal to the re gime . All
this left Washington anxious and doubtful. Lodge was cautioned to seek
fuller information on the coup plot, including a line - up of forces and the
proposed plan of action . The U. S. could not base its policy on support for
a coup attempt that did not offer a strong prospect of success . Lodge was
counseled to consider ways of delaying or preventing the coup i f he doubted
its prospects for success. By this juncture, however, r,odge felt committed
and, furthermore, felt the matter was no longer in our hands . The generals
were taking the action on their own initiative and we could only prevent
it now by denouncing them to Diem . While this debate was still going on,
the generals struck.

 Shortly after Ambassador Lodge and Admiral Felt had called on Diem on
November 1, the generals made their move, culminating a summer and fall of
complex intrigue . The coup was led by General Minh, the most respected of
the senior generals, together with Generals Don, Kim and Khiem . They convoked
a meeting of all but a few senior officers at JGS headquarters at noon on
the day of the coup, announced their plans and got the support of their com-
patriots. The coup itself '-Tas executed with skill and swiftness . They
had devoted special attention to ensuring that the major potentially loyal
forces were isolated and their leademneutralized at the outset of the opera -
tion . By the late afternoon of November 1, only the palace guard remained
to defend the two brothers. At 4:30 p .m., Diem called Lodge to ask where
the U. S. stood . Lodge was noncommital and confined himself to concern for
Diem ' s physical safety . The conversation ended inconclusively. The gener-
als made repeated calls to the palace offering the brothers safe conduct
out of the country if they surrendered, but the tv-TO held out hope until the
very end . Sometime that evening they secretly slipped out of the palace
through an underground escape passage and went to a hide - away in Cholon .
There they were captured the following morning after their whereabouts was
learned when the palace fell . Shortly the tvlO brothers were murdered in the
back of an armored personnel carrier en route to JGS headquarters.

 vii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Having successfully carried off their coup, the generals began to
make arrangements for a civilian goverrunent. Vice Pre s ident Tho 'Ivas named
to hea,d a largely civilian cabinet, but General Minh became President and
Chairman of the shado'H Military Revolutionary Council . After having delayed
an appropriate period, the U,S. recognized the ne'H goverDJnent on November 8 .
As the euphoria of ,t he first days of lib er ation from the heavy hand of the
Diem r egime 'Hore off, hO'Hever, the r eal gravity of the economic situation
and the lack of expertj,se in the ne'H government b e ca..me apparent to both
Vietnamese and American officials. The deterioration of the military situa-
tion and the strategic hamlet program also came more and more clearly into
perspe ctive .

 These topics domina,ted the discussions at the Honolulu Conference on
November 20 'Hhen Lodge and the country team met 'Hith Rusk, McNamara, Taylor,
Bell, and Bundy . But the meeting ended inconclusively. After Lodge had
conferred with the President a fe'H days later in Wa shington, the ,White House
tried to pull together some conclus ions and offer some guidance for our con-
tinuing and no'H deeper involvement in Vietnam. The instructions contained
in NSAM 273, hOi-rever, did not reflect the truly dire situation as it 'Has to
come to light in succeeding weeks. The reappraisals forced by the ne'H
information would s'Hiftly make it irrelevant as it 'Has "overtaken by events. 1I

 For the military coup d ' etat against Ngo Dinh Diem, the U. S. must
a ccept its full share of responsibility . Beginning in August of 1963 'He
variously authorized, sanctioned and encouraged the coup efforts of the
Vietnamese generals and offered full support for a successor goverDJnent .
In Octob er 'He cut off aid to Diem in a direct rebuff, giving a green light
to the generals . We maintained clandestine contact 'Hith them throughout
the plaD~ing and execution of the coup and sought to revie'H their operational
plans and proposed ne'H government. Thus, as the nine-year rule of Diem
came to a bloody end, our complicity in his overthro'H heightened our r e ~
sponsibilities and our commitment in an essentially leaderle ss Vietnam .

 viii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 ("')
 :I:
 :::a
 o
 2
 o
 5
 C>
 -<
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 CHRONOLOOY

 DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 S May 1963 Hue incident Government troops fire on a Buddhist pro··
 test demonstration, killing nine and
 wounding fourteen . The incident triggers·
 a nationwide Buddhist protest and a
 crisis of popular confidence for the
 Diem regime. GVN maintains the inci-
 dent was an act of VC terrorism.

 10 May 1963 Manifesto of Buddhist A five point demand by the Buddhist
 clergy clergy is transmitted to the Govern-
 ment. It calls for freedom to fly
 the Buddhist flag, legal equality
 with the Catholic Church, an end
 of arrests, punisbment of the perpe-
 trators of the May S incident, and
 indemnification of its victims.

 lS May 1963 Nolting meeting with U.S. Ambassador Nolting meets with
 Diem; Embassy Saigon Diem and outlines the steps the U.S.
 message 103S · wants Diem to take to redress the
( Buddhist grievances and recapture
 public confidence. These include
 an admission of responsibility for
 the Hue incident, compensation of the
 victims, and a reaffirmation of re-
 ligious equality and non-discrimina-
 tion.

 30 May 1963 Buddhist demonstration 350 Buddhist monks demonstrate in
 front of the National Assembly and
 announce a 4S-hour hunger strike.

 4 Jun 1963 Truehart meeting with With Nolting on leave, charge d'affaires
 Thuan Truehart meets with Secretary of State
 Thuan,and on instruction from the
 State Department, warns that U.S.
 support for the GVN could not be
 maintained if there were another bloody
 suppression of Buddhists.

 Tho committee Later that day the Government announces
 appointed the appointment of an inter-ministerial
 committee headed by Vice President Tho
 to resolve the r eligious issue.

 ix TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sens:i.tive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

5 Jun 1963 Tho committee meets The first meeting between the Tho
 Buddhists committee and the Buddhist leader-
 ship takes place, after which
 each side publicly ques t ions the
 other's good faith in the negotia-
 tions.

8 Jun 1963 Madame Nhu attacks Madame ~fuu, wife of Diem ' s powerful
 . Buddhists brother , publicly accuses the Buddhists
 of being infiltrated with communist
 agents .

 Later on the same day, Truehart
 protests Mme Nhu ' s remakrs. to Diem
 and threatens to dissociat e the U. S .
 from any future repres sive measures
 against the Buddhists .

11 Jun 1963 First Buddhist suicide At noon in the middle of a dmmtown
 by fire intersection , a Buddhist monk, Thich
 Quang Duc, is immersed in gasoline
 and sets himself afire. His fiery
 protest suicide is photographed and
 is front page material in the world ' s
 newspapers . Shock and indignation
 are universal. Mme Nhu subsequently
 refers to it as a "barbecue ."

12 Jun 1963 Truehart repeats U.S. Truehart sees Diem again to protest
 dissociation threat his lack of action on the Buddhist
 problem and says that Quang Due ' s
 suicide has shocked the world. If
 Diem does not act , the U. S. will be
 forced to dissociate itself from
 him.

14 Jun 1963 Tho committee meets Under U.S. pressure, negotiations
 again with Buddhists between Vice President Tho ' s committee
 and the Buddhist leadership reopen
 in apparent earnest .

16 Jun 1963 GVN-Buddhist communique A joint GVN-Buddhist communique is
 released as a product of the nego -
 tiations that outlines the elements
 of a settlement, but affixes no re-
 sponsibility for the May 8 Hue inci -
 dent.

 x TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

Late June- Buddhist protest Buddhists protest activities intensi~y
July intensifies as l eadership passes from the dis-
 credited moderate , older leademto
 younger militants . The Saigon press
 corps is actively cultivated .

27 Jun 1963 Kennedy announces President Kennedy , visiting in Ireland,
 Lodge appointment a nnounces the appointment of Henry
 Cabot I,odge as the new U. S. Ambassador
 to South Vietnam , effective in Septem-
 b er.

3 Jul 1963 Tho committee Vice President Tho ' s committee announces
 ab solves regime that a preliminary investigation of
 the May 8 i ncident has confirmed that
 the deaths were the result of an act
 of VC terrori sm .

4 Jul 1963 White House meeting At a State Department briefing for the
 on Vietnamese s i tua - President it is generally agreed that
 tion Diem will not voluntar ily remove Nhu .
 A dis cussion of the likely consequences
 of a coup r eveal s divergent views.

5 Jul 1963 Nolting in Washington Having cut short his vacation to re-
 turn to Washington for consultations ,
 Nolting confers with Under Secretary
 of State George Ball and voices the
 fear that an attempt to overthro\v Diem
 would r esult in a protract ed religious
 ci vil '\'rar that would open the door to
 the Viet Cong o We should not abandon
 Diem yet. While in Hashington he also
 se es Secretary McNamara .

10 Jul 1963 SNIE 53-2-63 This special intelligence estimate notes
 coup rumors in Vietnam and warns that
 a coup would di srupt the war effort
 and perhaps give the Viet Cong the
 opportunity for gains they had been
 hoping for. It concludes , however ,
 that if Diem does nothi ng to implement
 the June 16 agreement s , Buddhist un-
 rest will continue through the summer
 and increase the likelihood of a coup
 att empt.

 xi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCU1I1EN'T DESCRIPTION

11 Jul 1963 Nolting ' s return Nolting returns to Vietnam with
 to Saigon Washington ' s blessing to make one l ast
 attempt to persuade Diem to conciliate
 the Buddhists . The hope is to dra\-l
 on the good will that Nolting has
 built up i n his two year s of service .

 Nhu squelches coup At a special meeting for all senior
 plotting generals, Nhu attacks the ir loyalty
 to the r egime for not having thwarted
 the numerous coup plots that had been
 repor t ed. The meeting apparently
 forestalls any immediate threat to
 the family .

15 Jul 1963 Embassy Saigon Deeply resentful of Truehart ' s t ough
 message 85 pressure tactics, Nolting meets with
 Diem and attempts to mollify him . ,
 He convinces Diem to make a nation-
 wide radio address with concessions
 to t he Buddhists .

19 Jul 1963 Diem speaks on radio Complying with the letter but not the
 spirit of Nolting ' s r equest , Diem
 delivers a brief cold ratio address
 that makes only very minor conce ss ions
 t o the Buddhists and a sks for harmony ,
 and support of the Government.

 McNamara pres s At a press conference , Secretary
 conference McNamara says the war i s progressing
 well and the Buddhist crisis has not
 yet affected it .

5 Aug 1963 Second Buddhist A second Buddhis t monk commi ts suicide
 suicide by burning himse l f to death in the
 continuing protest against the Diem
 regime .

14 Aug 1963 Nolting-Diem meeting In their final meeting b efore Nolting ' s
 departure from Vietnam, Diem promises
 to make a public statement r epudiating
 Mme Nhu ' s inflammatory denunciations of
 the Buddhists. Nolting l eft the next
 day.

15 Aug 1963 New' York Herald Tribune Diem ' s promi sed public statement takes
 arti cle by Marguerite the form of an intervi ew with Marguerite
 Higg ins Higgins , conservative corr espondent

 xii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRE~r - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCill1ENT DESCRIPTION

 of the New York Herald Tribune . Diem
 asserts that conciliation has been
 his policy toward the Buddhists all
 along and the family is pleased vIi th
 Lodge's appointment.

18 Aug 1963 Generals decide on Ten senior Army generals meet and de -
 martial law cide that in view of the deteriorating
 political situation, they "Till ask
 Diem for a declar8.tion of martial law
 to permit them to return monks from
 outside Saigon to their OIVD provinces
 and pagodas and thus reduce tensions
 in the capital.

20 Aug 1963 Generals propose A small group of generals meets first
 martial l aw to Nhu with Nhu and then with Dj_em to propose
 and Diem that martial law be decreed forthwith .
 Di em approves the propo sal and the
 decree takes effect at midnight .

21 Aug 1963 Nhu ' s forces attack Under the cover of the military martial
 pagodas law, shortly after midnight, forces
 l oyal to Nhu and under his orders
 attack pagodas throughout Vietnam,
 arresting monks and sacking the sacred
 build ings . Over 30 Buddhists are in-
 jured and over 1400 arrested . The
 attack is a shattering repudiation of
 Diem ' s promis es to Nolting. The Embassy
 i s taken by surprise.

 Lodge confers with First ne"rs of the attacks r eaches Lodge
 Nolting and Hil sman in Honolulu where he is conferring
 with Nolting and Assistant Secretary
 of State Hilsman . He is dispatched
 immediately to Vietnam .

 Washington reaction At 9:30 a.m . a stiff statement is re-
 leased by State deploring the raids
 as a direct violation of Diem ' s assur -
 ances to the U.S. But first intelli-
 gence places the blame for them on the
 Army , not Nhu .

22 Aug 1963 Lodge arrives in After a brief stop in Tokyo, Lodge
 Saigon arrives in Saigon at 9:30 p.m. The
 situation still remains confused .

 xiii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPrION

23 Aug 1963 CIA Informa.tion Report General Don, armed forces commander
 TDCS DB-3/656, 252 under the martial lavr decree, has
 contacted a CAS officer and asked why
 the U.S. was broadcasting the erroneous
 story that the Army had conducted the
 pagoda raids . Nhu's special forces
 were responsible . The U. S. should make.
 its position known . A separate con-
 tact by another general i·ri th a member
 of the mission had brought another
 inquiry as to the U. S. position.
 The query is clear . Would we support
 the Army if i t a.cted against Nhu and/or
 Diem?

 Student demonstrations Large student protest demonstrations
 on behalf of the imprisoned Buddhists
 take place at the faculties of medicine
 and pharmacy at the Univers ity of
 Saigon. They are a dramatic break with
 the tradition of student apathy to
 politics in Vietnam . The regime re -
 acts with massive arrests .

24 Aug 1963 Embassy Saigon Lodge lays the blame for the raids at
 message 316, Nhu ' s feet and states that his influ-
 Lodge to Hilsman ence is significantly increased . But,
 in view of the loyalty of Saigon area
 commanders , a coup attempt would be
 a " shot i n the dark ."

 State message 243 , Subsequently known as the "Aug 24
 State to Lodge cable ," this controversial message ac -
 knowledges Nhu ' s responsibility for
 the raids and says that U. S. can no
 longer tolerate his continuation in
 power . If Diem is unable or unwilling
 to remove him , the generals are to
 be t old that the U. S. will be prepared
 to discontinue economic and military
 support, accept the obvious implica-
 tion and will promise assistance to
 them i n any period of inte rim break-
 down of the GVN . Lodge's permission
 i s requested for a VOA broadcast
 exonerating the Army of responsibility
 for the Aug 21 raids .

 xiv TOP SECRE= - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 1./ fJ5
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

25 Aug 1963 Embassy Saigon message Lodge approves the proposed COlITSe
 of action but sees no r eason to approach
 Diem first. Diem ,vill not remove the
 Nhus and it would merely tip off the
 palace to the impending mi litary action .

 CAS Saigon message Lodge , Harkins, and Richardson meet
 0292 and agree on an approa ch to the generals
 vTith the information in State ' s 243.

26 Aug 1963 VOA broadcast Early on this Monday morning, VOA in
 South Vietnam broadcasts t h e press
 stories placing blame for the Aug 21
 raids on Nhu and absolving the Army .
 It also broadcast press speculation
 that the U.S . is contemplating an
 aid suspension.

 Lodge pres ent s Later the same morning, Lodge presents
 credentials to Diem hi s credentials to Diem, after an early
 morning meeting with Harkins and
 Richardson , at which they agree on
 the details of the approach to the gen-
 erals.

 NSC meeting The Aug 24 cable of ins tructions had
 been drafted, cleared and s ent on a
 weekend with McNamara, McCone, Rusk
 and the President all out of town.
 The NSC me eting on Monday morning
 reveals that these top advisors have
 r eservations about proceeding hastily
 with a coup when we lack so much basic
 information about its leadership and
 chances . Lodge is asked for more
 details.

27 Aug 1963 CAS agents meet CAS agents Conein and Spera meet with
 generals Generals Khiem and Khanh respectively .
 Khiem tells Cone in that other partici-
 pants are Generals Minh, Kim , Thieu
 and Le, and that General Don was aware
 of the plot and approved, but was too
 exposed to participate.

 Embassy Saigon Lodge gives an optimistic apprai sal
 message 361.f of the balance of forces for a coup
 and expresses confidenc e in the identi-
 fied leaders .

 xv TOP SECRET - 9 0 ns itive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive t' }
 --- -.
 '--
DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 NSC meeting At the now daily NSC meetings in
 Washington, the State Department
 participants generally favor going
 ahead with the coup, while the Defense
 Department, both civilian and military,
 prefers another try with Diem .

28 Aug 1963 MACV message 1557 Harkins goes on record vTi th doubts
 about the line-up of forces for the
 coup and sees no reason for our "rush
 approval."

 State message 269, Concerned by the differing views of
 President to Lodge; Lodge and Harkins, as Hel~ as the
 and JCS message 3385, division of opinion in Washington,
 Taylor to Harkins the President asks the Ambassador
 and MACV for their separate appraisa~s .

29 Aug 1963 CAS agents meet Minh At this meeting, arranged by Minh,
 he asks for clear evidence that the
 U.S. will not b etray them to Nhu .
 He is unwilling to discuss the details
 of his plan . When asked what would
 constitute a sign of U.S. support,
 he replies that the U. S. should sus -
 pend economic aid to the regime .

 Embassy Saigon message Lodge replies to the Presidential query
 375 that the U.S . is irrevocably committed
 to the generals . He recommends show-
 ing the CAS messages to them to establish
 our good faith and if that is insuffi -
 cient, he recommends a suspension of
 economic aid as they reque sted .

 MACV message 1566 Harkins reply to Taylor suggests that
 one last effort be made 'tri th Diem in
 the form of an ultimatum demanding
 Nhu's removal. Such a move he feels
 will strengthen the hand of the generals,
 not imperil them .

 NSC meeting Another inconclusive meeting is held
 with the division of opinion on a
 U.S. course of action still strong.
 The resu~t is to leave policy making
 in Lodge's hands.

 State message 272 Lodge is authorized to have Harkins
 show the CAS messages to the generals

 xvi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVEl\1T OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 in exchange for a look at their
 detailed plans. He is further au-
 thorized to suspend U.S. aid at his
 discretion .

31 Aug 1963 MACV message 1583; Harkins meets with Khiem who tells
 Embassy Saigon message him that Minh has called off the coup .
 391; and CAS Saigon Military ,'Tas unable achieve a favorable
 message 0499 balance of forces in the Saigon area
 and doubts about whether the U,S.
 had l eaked their plans to Nhu were
 the deciding factors . A future attempt
 is not ruled out .

 NSC meeting; MGen With the demise of the coup plot con-
 Victor C. Krulak, firmed, the NSC (witho-L1t the President )
 Memo for the Record, meets to try to chart a new policy
 Vietnam Meeting at for Vietna~ . The discussion reveals
 the State Dept . the divergence b etween the military
 desire to get on with the war and re-
 pair relations with Diem, and the
 State Department view that continued
 support for Diem will eventually mean
 a loss of the war as more and more of
 the South Vietnamese are alientated
 from it . No decisions are taken.

2 Sep 1963 Kennedy TV interview The President, in a TV interview with
 CBS Nev.]'s' Walter Cronkite, expresses
 his disappointment with Diem 's handling
 of the Buddhist crisis and concern
 that a greater effort i s needed by the
 GVN to win popular support . This can
 be done , he feels, "with change in
 policy and perhaps with personnel. . . "

 Lodge meet:> with Nhu Avoiding any contact with Diem, Lodge
 nonetheless meets with Nhu who announces
 his intention to quit the Government
 as a sign of the progress of the cam-
 paign against the VC. Mme Nhu and
 Archbi shop Thuc, another of Diem's
 brothers, are to leave the country
 on extended trips shortly.

6 Sep 1963 NSC meeting The NSC decides to instruct Lodge to
 reopen "tough" negotiations ,vi th Diem
 and to start by clarifying to him the

 xvii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVEl.\J"'T OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 U,S . position . Robert Kennedy
 speculates that if the war can be won
 neither with Diem nor in the event
 of a disruptive coup, we should per-
 haps be considering a U.S, disengage-
 ment . Secretary McNamara proposes
 a fact-finding trip by General Krulak,
 and State suggests including Joseph
 Mendenhall, a senior FSO with Vietnam
 experience . They leave later the
 same de.y.

7 Sep 1963 Archbishop Thuc With the intercession of the Vatican
 leaves Vietnam and the Papal Delegate in Saigon,
 Archbishop Thuc leaves the country for
 Rome on an extended visit .

8 Sep 1963 AID Director Bell In a televised interview, AID Director
 TV intervie,v Bell expresses concern that Congress
 might cut aid to South Vietnam if the
 Diem Government does not change its
 repressive policies.

9 Sep 1963 Mme Nhu leaves Mme Nhu departs from Saigon to attend
 Vietnam the World Parliamentarians Conference
 in Belgrade and then to take an extended
 trip through Europe and possibly the
 U.S .

 Kennedy TV intervie"l Appearing on the inaugural program of
 the NBC Huntley-Brinkley News, the
 President says he does not believe
 an aid cut-off would be helpful in
 achieving American purposes in Vietnam
 at present .

10 Sep 1963 . NSC meeting Krulak and Mendenhall r eturn from
 Vietnam after a whirlwind four day
 trip and make their report to the
 NSC . With them are John Mecklin,
 USIS Director in Saigon, and Rufus
 Phillips , USOM ' s Director of Rural
 Programs . Krulak ' s report stresses
 that the war is being won and , while
 t here i s some dissatisfaction in the
 military with Diem, no one would risk
 his neck to remove him . A continua-
 tion of pre sent policies under Diem

 xviii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensit ive

 EVEl\TT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPI'ION

 will yield victory . Mendenhall pr esents
 a completely contradictory view of
 the situation. A breakdown of civil
 administration "'T8,S possible and a
 religious civil war could not be ex-
 cluded if Diem was not r eplaced . The
 war certainly could not be won with
 Diem. Phillips and Mecklin support
 Mendenhall with varia t:Lons .. Nolting
 agrees with Krulak. All the disagree-
 ment prompts the President to ask the
 two emissaries, "You two did visit
 the same country, didn ' t you?"

11 Sep 1963 Embassy Saigon Lodge reverses himself in suggesting
 message 478 a complete study of kinds of economic
 aid suspension that might be us ed to
 topple the regime.

 White House meeting White House decides to hold economic
 aid r enewal in abeyance pending a com-
 plete examination of hO"'T it might be
 u sed to pressure Diem.

12 Sep 1963 Senator Church ' s With White House approval, Senator
 Resolution Church introduces a resolution in the
 Senate condemning the South Vietnamese
 Gover nment for its repre ssive handling
 of the Buddhist problem and calling for
 an end to U.S. aid unles s the repressions
 are abandoned .

14 Sep 1963 State message 411 Lodge is informed that approval of
 the $18.5 million commercial import
 program is deferred until basic policy
 deci sions on Vietnam have been made.

16 Sep 1963 Martial law ends Martial law is ended throughout the
 country .

17 Sep 1963 NSC meeting Two a lternative proposals for dealing
 with Diem a r e considered . The first
 would use an escalatory set of pressures
 to get him to do our bidding. The
 second would involve acquiescence in
 rec ent GVN actions, recognit ion that
 Di em and Nhu are ins eparable , and an
 att empt to salvage as much as possible
 from a bad situation. A decision is

 xix TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENf DESCRIPTION

 taken to adopt the first as policy,
 and also to send Secretary McNamara
 and General Taylor on a fact - gathering
 mission.

21 Sep 1963 White House press The forthcoming McNamara-Taylor mission
 release is announced to the press by the White
 House .

 White House instruc- The White House instructions for the
 tions to McNamara- mission ask the tI.,ro men to (1) apprais e
 Taylor the status of the military effort ;
 (2) assess the impact on the war effort
 of the Buddhist crisis; (3) recommend
 a course of action for the GVN to
 redress the problem and for the U.S.
 to get them to do it; and (4) examine
 how our aid can further no. 3.

23 Sep 1963 McNamara-Taylor The McNamara-Taylor party l eaves Hashing-
 mission departs ton for itsten day trip to Vietnam .

25 Sep 1963 Opening meeting of The disagreement behleen Harkins and
 McNamara-Taylor with Lodge about the situation in-country
 country team and the progress of the war surfaces
 immediat ely in this first conference.
 McNamara spends several subsequent
 days touring various parts of Vietnam
 to appraise the war first hand and
 talk with U. S. and Vietnamese officers .

27 Sep 1963 National Assembly As announced earlier, and at the end
 elections of a ~ro forma one week campaign, the
 GVN holds nation-wide elections for
 the Nat:i.onal Assembly with predictably
 high turnout s and majorities for Govern-
 ment candidates.

 Embassy Saigon messages Aware that McNamara and Taylor are
 602 and 608 tasked to recommend uses of the aid
 program to pressure Diem, both Lodge
 and Brent , the USOM Director, go on
 record against them .

29 Sep 1963 McNamara, Taylor and In their protocol call on Di em , and
 Lodge see Diem after his two-hour monologue, McNamar~
 is able to pointedly stress that the
 political unrest and Government re-
 pressive measures against the Buddhis~s

 xx TOP SECr-1 - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 were undermining the U. S. war effort .
 Diem seems unimpressed, but does ask
 Taylor for his appraisal, as a mili-
 tary man, of the progress of the "Tar.
30 Sep 1963 McNamara, Taylor Tho stresses to the two visitors the
 and Lodge meet gravity of the political deterioratio~
 Vict President Tho and the negative effect i t I'Tas having
 on war . He ~uestions the success of
 the strategic hamlet program. Later
 that day, the McNamara-Taylor party
 leaves South Vietnam for Honolulu.

2 Oct 1963 SecDef Memo for the After a day in Honolulu to prepare
 President: Report of a report, McNamara and Taylor return
 the McNamara-Taylor to Washington and present their find -
 mission ings and recommendat ions to a morning
 NSC meeting . Their long r eport repre-
 sents a compromise between the mili-
 tary a.nd the civ J.lian views. It con:~irms
 the progress of the war, but warns of
 t he dangers inherent in the curr ent
 political turmoil and recommends pres -
 sures against Diem to bring changes .
 Militarily, it calls for greater GVN
 effort, especially in the Delta and
 i n clear and hold operations, and a
 consolidation of the strategic hamlet
 program . It proposes the announcement
 of the plans to withdraw 1,000 American
 t roops by year ' s end . To put political
 pressure on Diem to institute the re-
 f or ms we we.nt , it r ecommends a selec -
 tive aid suspension , an end of support
 for the special forces responsible fer
 the pagoda raids, and a continuation
 . of Lodge I s aloofness from the regime .
 I t recommends against a coup, but
 ~ualifies this by suggesting that an
 alternative leadership be identified
 and cultivated. The recow~endations
 are promptly approved by the President .

 White House A statement following the meeting is
 press release r el eased as recommended by McNamara
 and Taylor that reiterates the U. S.
 commitment to the struggle against
 the VC , annOUl1ces the 1 , 000 man troop

 xxi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 withdrawal, and dissociates
 the U.S. from Diem's repressive
 policies . It does not, however,
 announce the aid suspensions.

 CAS Saigon CAS agent Conein "accidently"
 message .1385 meets General Don at Tan Son
 Nhut . · Don asks him to come to
 l\Tha Trang that evening . Wi th
 Embassy approval Cone in keeps
 the appointment . Don states
 that there is an active plot
 among the generals for a coup,
 and that General Minh wants to
 see Cone in on Oct 5 to discuss
 details . The key to the plan,
 according to Don, is the conver -
 sion of III Corps Commander ,
 General Dinh .

5 Oct 1963 NSC meeting The President approves detailed
 recommendations of the McNama,ra-
 Taylor mission for transmission
 to Lodge .

 CAP message 63560 " ... President today approved
 r ecommendation that no initiative
 should now be taken to give any
 a cti ve covert encouragement to
 a coup. There should , however ,
 b e urgent covert effort . .. to
 identify and build contacts with
 possible alternative leadership
 as and when it appears. "

 CAS Saigon message With Lodge ' s approval, and
 · 1445 pr obably before receipt of
 fo r egoing message , Conein meets
 with General Minh . Minh says
 h e must knOi<T the U. S. position
 on a coup in the near future .
 The GVN ' s loss of popular sup-
 port is endangering the whole
 war effort . Three possible plans
 are mentioned , one involving
 assas·sination . Cone in is non-
 commits,l .

 xxii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPrION

 CAS Saigon mes sage Lodge reco~nends that when
 34026 Cone in is contacted again, he
 be authorized to say that the
 U.S. will not thwart a coup,
 that we are willing to review
 plans, and that we will con-
 tinue support to a successor
 r egime .

 Richardson recalled His identity having been com-
 promised in recent press stories
 about internal pol icy struggles
 in the U.S. mission, CIA Chief
 of Station, John Richardson,
 is recalled to Washington .

6 Oct 1963 CAP message 63560 Washington clarifies its views
 on a coup by stating that the
 U. S. will not thwB.rt such a
 move if it offers prospects
 of a more effect ive fight against
 the VC. Security and denia-
 bility of all contacts i s para-
 mount.

7 Oct 1963 National Assembly The newly elected National
 convenes Ass embly convenes to hear
 Diem's State of the Union
 addr ess . Diem speaks mainly
 of Vietnam's past progress under
 his rule , playing down the
 current political crisis and
 making only scant r eference to
 U.S. aid.

 Mme Nhu arrives in Mme Nhu arrives in the U.S.
 U.S. from Europe for a three-week
 speaking tour . She i mmedi -
 ately launches into vituperative
 attacks on the U.S. and its
 role in Vietnam.

8 Oct 1963 UN General Assembly The UN General Assembly, after
 vote a strong debate with many voices
 denouncing Diem ' s anti -Buddhist
 policy, votes to send a fact-
 finding team to Saigon to
 investigate the charges of
 r epr ess ion .

 xxiii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUME1TT DESCRIPTION

10 Oct 1963 CAS officer meets A CAS officer reportedly meets
 Minh with Minh and conveys the U. S.
 position that it will neither
 encom·age nor thvlart a coup
 attempt, but would hope to be
 informed about it .

17 Oct 1963 GVN informed of aid Acting for the Ambassador, General
 cut-off to special Stillwell, MACV J-3, informs
 forces Secretary Thuan that U. S. aid
 for the special forces units
 responsible for the Aug 21
 raids is being suspended un-
 til they are transferred to
 the field and placed under
 J GS command.

22 Oct 1963 Depe,rtment of State, The State Department publishes
 INR Research Memo a controversial research memor -
 RFE90 andum which takes issue with
 the Pentagon ' s optimistic
 r eading of the statistical
 indicators on the progress
 of the war . The memo states
 that certain definitely nega -
 tive and ominous trends can
 be identified .

 Harkins sees Don General Harkins sees General
 Don, and in a conversation
 whose interpretation is subse-
 quently disputed, tells him
 that U. S. officers should not
 be approached about a coup
 a s it distracts them from
 thei.r job, fighting the VC .
 Don takes it as U. S. discour -
 a gement of a coup .

23 Oct 1963 CAS agent meets Don General Don reneivS contact with
 Conein to ask for clarifica-
 tion of U. S. policy after
 Harkins ' statement to him
 of the previous day . Cone in
 r epeats Washington guidance ,
 which relieves Don . Conein
 asks for proof of the exis -
 tence of the coup and its plan ;
 Don promises to provide politi -
 cal organization plan as proof
 the following day .

 xxiv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENf DESCRIPTION

24 Oct 1963 Diem invites Lodge to Diem extends an invitation
 Dalat to Lodge and his wife to spend
 Sunday, Oct 27, with him at
 his villa in Dalat . Lodge is
 pleas ed, Diem has come to him.

 1st CAS agent me eting Conein meets vii th Don in the
 with Don morning and the latter reports
 that Harkins had corrected his
 previous r emarks and apologized
 for any misundersta.nding .
 The coup is set to take place
 before Nov 2 and he will meet
 Conein later that day to re-
 vie"l'T the plans .

 2nd CAS agent meeting In the evening, Don tells Conein
 with Don that the coup committee voted
 not to reveal any plans because
 of concern about security
 leaks. He promises to tUrn
 over to Conein for Lodge's
 Eyes Only the operation plan
 two days before the coup occurs.

 UN fact-finding team The UN fact-finding team arrives
 arrives in Saigon in Saigon and begins its in -
 vestigation.

25 Oct 1963 CAS Saigon message Lodge argues that the time has
 1964 come to go ahead with a coup
 and we should not th"l'rart the
 maturing plot. He takes strong
 exception to Harkins reserva-
 tions about the determination
 and ability of the plotters
 to carry off the coup .

 CAP message 63590 Bundy, replying for the White
 House, is concerned about the
 dangers of U. S. support for
 a coup that fails . We must
 be in a position to judge the
 prospects for the coup plan
 and discourage any effort with
 likelihood of failure .

 xxv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

26 Oct 1963 Vietnamese National Diem reviews the troops in
 Day the National Day parade before
 scant cro"i'Tds 1<Tith Lodge and
 all other diplomatic personnel
 in attendance . The coup had
 originally been scheduled for
 thi s day .

27 Oct 1963 Lodge - Diem meeting As plaJ:1...ned, Lodge travels to
 Dalat with Diem and engages
 in a day-long conversation
 that produces li ttle results.
 Diem makes his standard com-
 plaints against the U. S., and
 whenever Lodge asks what he is
 planning t o do about specific
 U.S. requests , he changes the
 subject . At one point, he
 does inquire, however , about
 resumption of the conunercial
 import program . Lodge asks
 what movement he will make on
 our requests . Diem changes
 the subj ect . Lodge ' s feelings
 of fru stration confirm his con-
 viction that we cam10t work
 with Diem.

 Buddhist suicide A seventh Buddhi s t monk commits
 suicide by fire .

28 Oct 1963 Don contacts Lodge At the airport in the morning
 prior to departing for the
 dedication of an atomic energy
 facility in Dalat, General Don
 approaches Lodge and asks i f
 Cone in is authorized to speak
 for the U.S. Lodge says yes .
 Don then a ffirms the need for
 the coup to be completely Viet-
 namese. Lodge a gr ees , but when
 he asks about timing, Don re-
 plies that the generals are
 not yet ready.

 CAS agent meets Don That evening Conein meets Don
 again and the latter says that
 the plans may b e available for
 Lodge only four hour s b efore

 xxv i TOP SECRET - Sensi ti.ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVEl'lT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPrION

 the coup. Lodge should not
 change his plans to go to
 Washington on Oct 31 as this
 would tip off the palace .
 Some deta,ils of the organi-
 zation of the coup committee
 are discussed.

29 Oct 1963 CINCPAC alerts CINCPAC alerts a naval and
 task force air task force to stand off
 Vietnam for possible evacua-
 tion of American dependents
 and civilians if required.

 NSC meeting A decision is made at the
 NSC meeting to have Lodge
 fully inform Harkins on the
 coup Pbtting and arrangements,
 since if Lodge leave~ Harkins
 will be in charge, Concern
 is also r egistered at the
 differing views of the two
 men toward a coup.

 Special forces trans- In the first preparatory act
 ferred from Saigon of the coup, General Dinh orders
 Colonel Tung ' s special rorces
 out of Saigon for maneuvers .
 It is unclear whether the ac-
 tion came as a part of the
 generals ' coup or 1~u ' s pseudo ,
 coup.

30 Oct 1963 MACV messages 2028, Belatedly apprised of the con-
 20 33, and 2034 tinuing contacts with the
 generals and the U.S. role
 in the coup plotting, General
 Harkins dispatches three angry
 cables to Taylor in which he
 disagrees with Lodge ' s inter -
 pretation of the U. S , policy .
 He understands it to be no
 active covert encouragement .
 He opposes personally a coup
 and doesn ' t think the generals
 have the forces to pull one off.

 xxvii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 CAS Washington The White House is now genuinely
 message 79109 concerned at the Saigon dispute
 and tells Lodge it believes
 He still have the power to
 call off the coup if vie choose
 to .

 CAS Saigon Lodge replies to Wa,shington
 message 2063 that he is powerless to stop
 the coup, the matter is en-
 tirely in Vietnamese hands.
 Harkins does not concur.

 CAS Washington To clear the air and redefine
 message 79407 U. S . policy, Washington sent
 another cable to Lodge . The
 U.S. cannot accept as a policy
 position that it has no power
 to prevent the coup. If the
 coup does not have high pros-
 pects of success, Lodge should
 i ntercede with the generals
 to have it delayed or called
 off . More detailed informa -
 tion on the plans is urgently
 request ed . Specific instruc -
 tions to guide U.S. action
 during a coup are issued .
 They prescribe strict non-
 involvement and somewhat less
 strict neutrality.

31 Oct 1963 Lodge defers Lodge, who had been scheduled
 departure to leave for Washington for
 high-level conferences, defers
 his departure because of the
 tense atmosp~ere and the appar -
 ent imminence of the coup .

}- Nov 1963

 10: 00 a . m. Lodge and Felt meet Admiral Felt, who i s visiting,
 ,'lith Diem and Lodge calIon Diem, who
 reiterates many of the points
 he made to McNamara a month
 earlier . At the end of the
 meeting, Diem takes Lodge aside
 and indicates he is ready to
 talk about 'vhat the U. S. wants

 xxviii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 , TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 him to do. Felt leaves Saigon
 after the meeting .
 Late Coup units begin The first coup units begin to
 morning to deploy deploy in and around Saigon.
 1 2 : 00 a.m . Officers meet at JGS The coup committee has con-
 vened a meeting of all senior
 Vietnamese officers except
 Generals Dip~ and Cao at JGS.
 There they are informed of
 the coup and asked to support
 i t . All except Colonel Tung
 do. Their pledges of support
 are taped. Tung is taken into
 custody later to be executed .
 The CNO "ras killed en route
 by an escort . A CAS officer
 is invited to the JGS and main'~
 tains telephone contact with
 the Emba,s sy throughout t he
 coup.

 1: 45 p .m. U. S. notified General Don calls General Stillwell,
 J-3 to General Harkins , and i n -
 forms him that the coup is
 under "ray .
 2 : 00 p.m. Key installations About this time coup forces
 taken are seizj,ng the key i nstalla -
 tions in Saigon, including
 the post office , police head-
 . quarters , radio stations , air -
 port, naval headquarters, etc.
 They ,',ere also deploying for
 attacks on the palace and the
 palace guard barracks and to
 block any counter -attack from
 outs ide the city .

 4:00 p.m. First skirmishes, By about this time the first
 Diem told to surrender skirmish was taking place at
 the palace and guard barracks .
 Failing to r each General Dinh,
 Diem and Nhu r ealize the coup
 is serious . The generals called
 shortly after this and told the
 two brothers t o surrender .
 They refused.

 xxix TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Execut ive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION
 4:30 p.m. Coup broadcast, Diem The generals go on radio,
 calls Lodge announce the coup and demand
 the resignation of Diem and
 Nhu. At the same tj~e, Diem
 is calling Lodge . He asks
 Lodge where the U. S. stands .
 Lodge replies that the U. S.
 cannot yet have a view . He
 expresses concern for Diem !s
 safety, and the conversation
 ends there .
 5 :00 p .m. Generals again call Repeated calls are now made
 Diem to demand to the palace to get Diem to
 surrender surrender. All the generals
 try. Colonel Tung is put
 on the phone and tells Diem
 he is a captive . Tung is then
 taken outside and executed .
 Diem and Nhu now frantically
 call all unit commanders but
 can find none loyal. Outside
 sporadic firing continues .
 8:00 p.m. Diem and Nhu flee Sometime in the early evening,
 probably about eight o !clock,
 the two brothers escape from
 the palace through one of the
 secret underground passages
 constructed for just such
 emergencies. They are met
 by a Chinese friend vlho takes
 them to a previously prepared
 hideaway in Cholon. There they
 spend the night in telephone
 contact with the palace .

 9:00 p.m. Palace bombarded At about nine o !clock, the
 attackers launch e.n artillery
 a nd armored barrage on the
 palace and its defenders which
 l ast s through the night.

2 Nov 1963

 3:30 a.m. Assault on the pa18.ce The tank and infantry assault
 begins on the Gia Long palace begins .
 6:20 a .m. Diem calls generals Diem calls General Don from
 to surrender the Cholon hideout to surrender,
 but does not tell his location .

 xxx TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 6:30 a.m. Palace falls Realizing the hopelessness of
 the situation, Diem issues
 a cease fire order to the palace
 guard and the palace falls to
 the i nsurgents . Colonel Thao,
 the con®ander of the attacking
 forces, learns of Diem ' s where -
 abouts and "l'lith JGS permission
 goes to arrest him.

 6:45 a.m. Diem and Nhu again Arriving at the Cholon house,
 escape Thao calls JGS and is over -
 heard by the brothers who
 escape to a nearby Catholic
 church.

 6:50 a.m. Diem and Nhu are Diem again calls Genera,l Don
 captured and surrenders, this time un-
 condit ionally. He and Nhu are
 taken prisoner shortly there-
 after and are murdered in the
 back of an a,rmored personnel
 carrier en route to JGS .

 afternoon Vice President Tho Vice President Tho enters into
 confers on ne"l'l intensive conferences and nego-
 government tiations with the coup cOD®ittee
 on the composition of a new
 interim government which he
 will head.

3 Nov 1963 Lodge meets with Generals Don and Kim call on
 Generals Don and Kim Lodge at the Embassy and apolo-
 gize for the absence of Minh
 who is closeted with Tho working
 on the composition of the new
 government . A t"lvo -tiered govern-
 ment is expected . A military
 cOD®ittee chaired by General
 Minh will supervise a largely
 civilian cabinet under Tho's
 Prime Ministership . Lodge
 promises the iD®ediate restora-
 tion of aid programs and assures
 the generals of forthcoming
 U.S. recognition .

4 ·Nov 1963 Lodge meets with On instructions from Washington,
 General Minh Lodge meets with Minh and Don
 and urges them to make a clari-
 fying statement on the deaths

 xxxi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVEN'l' OR DOCUiYEENT DESCRIPI'ION

 of Diem and Nhu to allay
 anxieties about the new leaders.
 Minh promises to do so and
 to armounce the nevl government
 soon.

5 Nov 1963 New government The nel'/' government is announced
 announced with Minh as President and
 Chief of the Military Comrrlittee.
 Tho is Premier, Minister of
 Economy and Minister of Finance .
 Don is Minister of Defense and
 Dinh is Minister of Security.
 Most other posts are filled
 by civilians, but there is
 a noticeable absence of well-
 known opponents to Diem. A
 later announcement suspends
 the 1956 constitution, and
 outlines the structure and
 functions of the new interim
 government .

6 Nov 1963 Composition of the Saigon Radio announc es the
 Military Revolutionary composition of the new Mili-
 Council announced tary Revolutionary Council
 with Minh as Chairman and
 including all important
 generals except Khanh .

7 Nov 1963 1~ makes post - coup In a post-coup policy state -
 policy statement ment, the NLF lists eight de-
 mands of the new regime , all
 but one of which the Minh- Tho
 Government ,vas going to do
 anyway .

 Brent meets with Tho USOM Director Brent meets with
 on U. S. aid Tho "rho indicated that all
 economic aid questions would
 be handled directly by his
 office . It was further agreed
 that a high - level Vietnamese
 commission 'Ivould work with a
 similar group in the U. S. mission
 to establish economic and aid
 policies and levels .

 xy.xii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

8 Nov 1963 U. S. recognizes new Lodge calls on the new For eign
 government Minist er , Pham Dang Lam, and
 preseDts a note of U.S . recog-
 nition. The new goverD~ent
 will be heavily dependent on
 the U.S. in all areas .

9 Nov 1963 Embassy Saigon message In the weekly progress report ,
 986 the mission notes the greatly
 increased VC activity in the
 week follovring the coup . The
 return of coup units to the
 field '¥Till reverse this trend,
 it is hoped.

12 Nov 1963 CINCPAC message to JCS CINCPAC takes note that the
 120604z 63 statistical indicators for the
 '¥Tar (VC atta,cks, weapons loss
 ratio, VC defections) show
 deterioration dating back to
 the summer.

17 Nov 1963 NLF releases stronger Its first set of demands baving
 set of demands been effectively preempted by
 the new Min..h Government, the
 NLF release a new and stronger
 set of demands including that
 the U.S. influence be eliminated,
 the fighting be halted and that
 a coalition 'government be estab-
 lished. For the first time
 the NLF states that reunifica-
 tion of Vietnam is an objective .

20 Nov 1963 Honolulu Conference The entire country team meets
 with Rusk, McNamara., Taylor,
 Bundy, and Bell to review the
 current situation . Lodge
 voi ces optimism about the new
 government, but notes the in-
 experience of the ne'¥T l eaders.
 He should not press them too
 hard. He should secondl.y pledge
 aid to them in at l east the
 amounts vle were giving it to
 Diem. Brent notes the economic
 naivety of the generals and
 indicates the need for greater
 U. S. technical assistance to

 xxxiii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 ~4~L.- .:r Y j' J// ~~;/,c..vr1
 ...e..~de. V..c. .. G
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensit'ive

 · DATE EVENT OR DOCUME.tIJ"T DESCRIPrION
 .'
 the govern.ment. Ha.rkins r
 a~sess ment is guardedly opti-
 . mistic, taking note of the
 'higher than average VC activity
 in the i'Teek after the coup.
 The determination of the new
 leaders impressed him, but he
 "Tas concerned about the dis -
 ruptions that wholesale replace-
 ments of province and district
 chiefs might have .

 Press release The press relea.se gives few
 after Honolulu details but does reiterate the
 Conference U.S. intent ion to Hithdraw
 1,000 troops by the end of
 the year.
 22 Nov 1963 Lodge confers with Having flOioJn to Hashington
 the President the day after the conference,
 Lodge meets id.th the President
 and presumably continues the
 kind of report given in Honolulu .
 23 Nov 1963 NSAN 273 Dravring together the results
 of the Honolulu Conferenc e and
 Lodg7' , s meeting idth the ,P1.;esi -
 dent , NSAlvl 273 reaffirms : the
 U.S. commit:nent to defeat the
 VC in South Vietna..1Jl.. It rei ter-
1
L. ate s the plan to ·vri thdre.i·[ 1)000
 troops by year ' s end and to end
 the Har in the first't~ree corps
 areas by the end 'o~ 1964 ~nd
 in the Delta by the end ·~ f 1965 .
 u. S. support for the nevl regime
 is confirmed a,n.d a:i.d in at least
 the amou.l1ts g;t ve:1 to Die:n is
 guaranteed . The Delta is to
 be the area of c cncen~~at ion
 for all r:cilitary , po ",,i t i ca.l,
 econo f.1_~c and socie,le::'forts.
 And clandest in~ o}>2Yations .
 against the North and into'
 laos are authorized .

 xxxiv TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 .. .
 . ',,:"
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sens i t i ve

 THE OVERTHROH OF HGO D Il~H DIEM

 TABLE OF Cm~TEI;TS Mill OlYi'LIHE

 I" II~'l.lRODD·CrpIOr~ ..... " " , " , , " " , " , " " " , " , " , , , , , , , , , , , , " , " " e " " " " " " " " " , " 1

 II. THE BUDDHIST CRISIS: MAY 8 - AUGUST 21. ..•..•••••••..••• •·••· 4

 1. The Cri s i s Er 'Llpts """""""""""""""""" " """"""" .. "",, .. ,,"" .. """ .. ,, 4
 2. Th e U. S . liFo Alternat i v e s to Di em ll Poli cy................ 7

III. LODGE vs. DIE~ : AUGUST 20 - 0 CTOB1R 2 ••••••.•.•••••••••• ·••••·• 12

 1. The Pa go da TIai ds an d Reper c u ssion s •.•.••••.•••....• •••••· 12

 2. Mi s..". Coup " " " " " .. " " " .. " " .. " " " " .. " .... " " " " " " ...... " " " .. " " " .. " .. " .... " " .... " " 17

 3. Toward a l,ley.l Policy ."""" .. """""""" .... " .. " .. "" .... """""" .. ,,"""",, .. 21

 4. The McNamar a-Tayl or Mi ss ion •••.••••..•• ··•••••··••••••··• 30

 IV. THE COUP i.ffi.TURES - OCTOBER 2 - l'WV}.!;llliER 1. .................. . 37

 1. The South Vietname se Situat ion i n Octobe r ••.•.•••.••• •••• 37

 2. The Eew American Policy .•.••.•.•.••••••.•.•••••.•.••••••• 37

 3. Renevled Coup Plott i ng ••••••••••••••••• •·•••••·•••••••••·• 41

 V. THE COUP .Mill I TS AFl'ERM.ATH - n OVEMBER 1 - 23 •••••• ••·•••••·•• 52

 1. The Coup ...... """" .... """""" . """" .. " .... ".. " . "" .. """ .. " .. " ...... """""",,.. 52

 2. Establi shment of an Int erim Re g ime ••.•••••.••.•• •••••·••• 60

 3. The Hon olulu Con f e r e nce and NSAM 273 •••••.••• ••·•••·••••• 65

 a
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECFET - Sensitive

IV. B. 5. THE OVERTI-JROW OF TWO DINE DIEM
 , 1963
 MA.Y-NOVEHBER

 I

 INTRODUCTI01'T

 I n the spring of 1963, the regime of Ngo Dinh Diea seemed to exhibit
no more signs of advanced decay or j.lllminent demise than might have been
di scerned since 1958 or 1959 . Only i n hindsight can certail1 developments
be identj.fied as salient . Of these, certainly the steadily i ncreasing
i nfluence of the Nhus I.Tas the most ominous . Nhu came more and more to
dominate Di em in the l ast year of the Diem J.'ule . But as his pOvrer
i ncreased , Nhu I s g rip on r eality seems to have slipped a'1d he was
reported in that l ast year to have been smoking op i um. and to have been
mental ly ill. Y Meamlhile, Mme . Nhu viaS developing a power obsession
of her m·m . The catastrophic effect of their i nfluence during the ensuing
c ri s is, hO'tTever , was h a.po s sible to have predicted . As one percep-Uve
observer noted , the Ngo fanily !!ha d come to pm{er vlith a well-developed
persecution complex and had subsequently de ve loped a positive mani a
for survivaL !! ?/
 Anot her source of concerh shou ld have been the reg ime ' s sel f -
i mposed isolation from the populace . It had left the peasants apathetic ,
a cause fo r real concern i n a struggl e vrith the zealOUS , doctri n6.ire
Viet Cong ; but, more importantly, it had alienated l arge porti ons of
t he re stive urban population wl,o felt I:l0S t directly the impact of the
r egime ' s arbit rary rule. The regi;:ne , i n fact , had no r eal base of
politic a l support and relied on the l oyalty of a handful of key milit ary
commanders to keep it in pOvTer by fore s talling any overthrow' . The l oyalty
of these men I{as bought with promotions and favors . Graft and corruption
should also have dralm concern , even if governmental dishonesty was
e ndemic i n ASia, a nd p robab ly not dis proport j.onate at that time i n South
Vietnam .

 It vTaS not , hovrever , the strains that these problems had placed
on the Vietnamese polit ical structure tha t ',Tere ultimately decis ive .
The f undamental Iveakness of the Diem r egime ,Tas the curious rig idity
a nd political in sensitivity of i ts mandarin styl e in the face of a
dramatic cris is of popular confiden ce .

 With regard to the var , the consensus of the U.S. military mission
and the U.S . i ntelligence commun i t y in the spring of 1963 vTaS that the
military situation in South Vietnam I-TaS steadily improving and t he wal'
1-TaS beginning to be won . A National I ntelli gence Estimate in Apri l 1963
con cluded that t he infusion of U.S. advisors had begun to have the
desire d effect of strengthening t he AR"VN and increasing its agg ressive -
ne ss . ]/ The Viet Cong retaLQed good strength, but cou ld be cont a i ned

 1 TOP , SECRET - S~1 SITIV~
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

by the ARVN i f they did not receive a great increase in external support.
Statistical ina.ices shoved a decline in Viet Cong attacks from the
previous year, increased ARVN offensive acti vi ty, a..nd improvement j.n the
weapons loss ratio. Continuing problems vere Diem's loyal ty.·base d officer
promotion policy, ARVN desertions and AWOL's , poor intelligence, and lov
grade NCO ' s and company grade officers. Nonetheless, the overall out-
look i-laS sangu.ine. Particular reason for encouragement was the adoption
i n February 1963 of the Nationa l Campaign Plan urged by the U.S, The
hopefu.l prospects were smnmarized for Secretary XcNamara in a briefing
paper for the Honolulu Conference of Nay 6:

 The over-all situation in Vietn81ll is improving. In the
 mili tar,;! sector of the counterinsurgency, we are vinning,
 Evidences of improvement are clearly visible , as the com··
 bined impact of the programs vThich involve a l ong lead
 time begin to have effect on the Viet Congo ~/

Even as seasoned an observer of insurgency as Sir Robert Thompson, Chief
of the British Advisory J'l 'lissioD , vTaS able to report that, "Irovr, in March
1963, I caD say, and in this I am su.pported by a ll members of the miSSion,
that the GoverPJUent is beginning to win the shooting war against the
Viet Cong. If '2/

 One reason for the optimism of these appraisals vas the vigor vIi th
which the government, under the direction of Nhu, was pushing the
Strategic Harnlet Program. Nhu had been initially cool to the i dea, but
once he establi shed the U.S, Hillingness to fund the program, he focused
on it as the princ i pal vehicle of the cou:.nterinsurgency campaign and as
an excellent means of extending the oligarchy's control into the country-
side . In April the GVN claimed it had completed 5,000 strategic hamlets
and had another 2,000 under construction. 6/ There vas already official
U. S. misgiving, hovever, about the quality-of many of the hamlets and
about overextens ion of the country 's limite d human r esources in the
program 's frantic rate of expansion . Nevertheless , field reports seemed
to support the success of the program which was seen as the key to the
struggl e a.gainst the Vi et Congo

 U. S. -GVN relations in the spring of 1963 were beginning to shovT signs
of accumulating stress. As the U.S. commitment and involvement deepened,
frictions behreen American advisors and Vietnamese cOll..n te rparts at all
levels increased . Diem, under the influence of Nhu, compl a ined about
the quantity and ze al of U. S. advisors. 7/ They were creating a coloni al
impression among the people, he sa id. Diem chose to dramatize his com-
plaint by delaying agreement on the commitment of South Vietnamese funds
for joint counterinsurgency projects. 8/ The issue was eventually
resolved , but the sensitivity to the growing U.S. presence remai ned and
as the long crisis SUJDIDer wore on , it gradually became a deep .·seated
suspicion of U.S . motives.

 The report of the t·1aDsfield mission , published in March, furthe r
exacerbated relations between the hro countries. Diem and Nhu vrere

 2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63 3 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

parti cul arly incensed by i ts praise of Cambodian neutralism and
 cri tic i sm of Jcheir regime . Coup rumors began to circul ate again that
 spring, and the prevailing palace state of mind hearkened back to
 suspicions of U.S . complicity in the abortive 1960 coup . 9/ ~lme . Nhu 1s
ascerbic publ ic criticism of the Uni ted States was a furthe r source of
f rict ion . By Nay 1963 , these problems in U.S . -GVN re l ations were
a l ready substantial enough to preoccupy officials of both governments .
' vi thi n a matter of weeks , hovever , events thrust them into the back -
ground of a far more serious crisis .

 3 TOP SECRET - Sens i t i ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET .. Sensi ti ve

 II

 THE BUTImnST CRISIS: M.ll.Y 8 - AUGUST 21

1. The Crisis Erupts

 The i ncident in Hue on May 8, 1963 , that precipitated }That came
to be called the Buddhist crisis, and that started the chain of events
that ultimately led to the overthrOiv of the Diem regime and the murder
of the Ngo brothers, happened both inadvertently and unexpectedly .
No one then foresavr that it 'vould generate a national opposition move-
ment c apable of r a llying virtually all non-communist dissidence in
South Vietnam. Nore importantly, no one then appreciated the degree
of alienation of Vietnam ' s people from their government, nor the extent
of the political decay within the regime, a regime no longer capable of
coping '·T ith popular disconter.t.

 The religious origins of the incident are traceable to the massive
flight of Catholic r efugees from North Vietnam after the French defeat
i n 1954. An estimated one million Catholics fled the North and r esettled
in the South. 1::/ Diem, animated, no doubt, by religious as lvell as
humanitarian sympatby, and with an eye to recruiting political support
from his coreligionists , accorded these Catholic refugees preferenti al
treatment in l and redistribution, relief and assistance , commerc i a l
and export-import lic enses , government employment , and othe r GVH l arge ss.
Because Diem could r ely on their loyalty, they came to fill almost all
imp or t a..l1t civilian and military positions. As an i nstitution , the
Catholic Church enjoyed a special legal status. The Catholic primate ,
Ngo Dinh Thuc, was Diem's brother and advisor . But prior to 1962 , there
had be en no outright discrimination against BudcLhists. However, among
South Vietnam's 3-4 million practicing Buddhists and the 80% of the
population }Tho }Tere nominal B,uddhists, the regime's favoritism,
authori taria..l1ism, and discrimination created a smoldering resentment.

 In April 1963, the goverp..ment ordere d provincial officia ls to
enforce a longstanding but generally ignored ban on the public display
of religious flags. The order came just after the officially encouraged
celebrations in Hue commemorating the 25th anniversary of the ordination
of Ngo Dinh Thuc, t he Archbishop of Hue, during which Papal flags had
been prominently flown. The order also came, as it happened, just prior
to Buddha 's birthday (1)lay 8) -- a major Buddhist festival. Hue, an old
provincial capital of Vietnam, }TaS the only real center of Buddhist
learning and scholarship in Vietnam and its university had long been a
center of left-wing dissidence. Not su~prisingly, then, the Buddhists in
Hue defifu'1tly flew their flags in spite of the order and, when the local
administration appeared to have backed do}m on the ban, }rere emboldened
to hold a previously scheduled mass meeting on May 8 to commemorate
Buddha ' s birthday. Seeing the demonstration as a cha llenge to f amily
prestige ( Hue was also the capital of the political fief of another Diem

 4 TOP SECFBT - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECF.ET - SensiU ve

brother , Ngo Dinh Ca...Yl ) and to goverPJllent aut hority, loc a l offici als
tried to disperse the cr01fds . vlhen preliminary efforts produc ed no
re sults , the Catholic deputy province chief ordered his troops to fir e .
In t he ensu i ug melee, nine persons were killed, i ncluding some ch ildren ,
and fourt een vTere i n jured. Armored veh icle s a llegedly c rushed some of
the victims. The Diem government subsequently put out a story tha t a
Viet Cong agent h ad thrown a grenade i nt o the crm-Td and that the victims
had been crushed i n a st amped~ . It steadfas tly r ef1.'...sed to admit
respons ibili ty even i·rhen neutral observers p roduced films showing
government troops firi ng on the crovTd.

 Diem ! s m8..ndari n character "Tould not permit him to h andl e this
cri sis vTi th the kind of flexi b ility and finesse it required . He wa s
i ncapable of publicly acknmoTledgi ng respcmsibili ty for the tragedy and
se eking to conciliate the angry Buddhists. He "Ta s convinced that such
a pub lic loss of f a ce would undermine his authority to rule, ob livious
to the f act tha t no modern r Lller c an long i gnore massive popular dis-
affection "rha tever his ovm p articu l a r personal virtues may be . So the
gove rnment clung t enacious ly to its version of wha t had occurr e d.

 The following day in Hue over 10,000 people demonstrated in protest
 of the killings. It wa s the first of the long series of protest activities
 vTith "rhich the Buddhists were to pressure the regime i n the next four
months . The Buddhists r apidly organize d themse lves , and on May 10, a
manifesto of the Bu ddhist c l ergy ioTaS tra nsmitted to the government demand-
 ing freedom to fly their fl ag , legal equality with the Catholic Church,
 an e n d of arrests and freedom to prac tice their beliefs , an d indemn ific a -
 tion of the victims of the l-Iay 8th inci dent with punishment for its
perpetrators . 2/ These five demands 'fere officia lly presented to
President Diem-on May 15, and the Buddhists held their first press c on-
ference after the meeting. Publicized hunger strikes and meetings con-
 tinued throughout },:ay, but 'Diem continued to drag hi s feet on placating
 the diss enters or settling is sues . On Hay 30, about 350 Buddhist
monks demon strated in front of the National Assemb ly in Saigon, and a
48-hour hunger strike vas anno1..llced . On June 3, a demonstration in Hue
vas broken u p loTi th tear gas and several people were burned, prompting
charges that the troops had us e d mustard gas. On June 4, the govern-
ment announced the appointment of an interministerial committee headed
by Vice President· Tho to resolve the religious issu e , but by this time
 s uch gestures ,·rere probably too l ate . Large portions of the urban
population had rallied to the Buddl1ist protest , recognizing in it the
beginnings of genuine politic a l opposition to Diem. On June 8, Mme .
Nhu exa cerbated the problem by announcing that the Buddhists were
i nfiltrated by communists .

 Throughout the early days of the crisis, the U. S . press h ad clo sely
covered the events and brought them to the attention of the "\-lOrld. On
J une 11, the press vms tipped off to be at a dovmtollD. intersection at
noon . Expecting another protest demonstration, they vTere horrified to
vitness the first burning suicide by a Buddhist monk. Thich Quang Duc ' s
fiery death shocked the "rorld and electrified South Vietnam .

 5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND P roject Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Negotia tions had been taking place bet"i·reen Vice President Tho IS
 commi ttee and the Buddhists since June 5, vli th considerable acrimonious
public questioning of good f aith by both sides. After the suicide, the
U.S . intens ified. its already cons i derab l e pressure on the government to
mollify the Buddhists , and to bring the deteriorating political si tua ··
tion under control. Finally, on June 16, a joint GVN -Buddhist communique
,vas released outlining the elements of a settlement , but affixing no
responsibility for the Hay 8 i nc ident. Violent suppression by the GVN
of rioting the next day, hOvTever , abrogate d the spirit of the Hgreement.
The IIThus, for their part, immedi ately undertook to s ab otage the agreement
by secretly calling on the GVl'T-sponsored youth organiz2,tions to denounce
it . By late June , it was apparent that the agreement was not meant as
a genuine gesture of conciliation by Diem, but was only an effort to
appease the U. S. and paper over a steadi ly widening fissure in internal
poli tics.

 The evident lack of faith on the part ,of the government in the
June 16 agreement discredited the conciliatory policy of moderation that
t he older BUddhist l eadership had folloved until that time. In late
J une , le adership of the Buddhist movement passed to a Y01mger, more
radic al set of monks , with more far.-re aching political objectives . They
made i ntelligent a11.d ski l lful political uS,e of a r i si ng tide of popul ar
support . Carefully planned ma ss meetings and demonstrations were accom-
panied ioTi th a..v:t aggressive press campaign of opposition to the regime .
Seizing on the importa..11.ce of America..11. news media, t hey cul tivated U.S.
nevlsmen , tipped them off to demonstrations and rallies , and carefully
timed their activities to get maximum press coverage. Not surprisingly,
t he l\Tgo family reacted .lith ever more severe suppression t o the Buddhist
a ctivists , and with acrimonious crit icism and even t hreats to the _Americ an
newsmen .

 Early i n July, Vice P:r:esident Tho I S committee annOlmced that a
prel iminary i nvestigation of the lilay 8 i ncident had confirmed that the
deaths '\fere the result of an act of Viet Cong terrorism . Outraged , the
Buddhists denounced the findings and i ntensifi ed their protest activities .
On J ul y 19, Q.YJ.o,er U. S. pressure , Diem made a brief t wo-minute radio
address , ostensibly an expression of conciliation to the Buddhists , but
so '\fri tten and coldl y delivered as t o destroy i n advance any effect its
announced minor concessions mi ght have had .

 Wi thin the regime , Hhu and his wife were severe l y critiC izing Diem
for caving in under Buddhist pressure . lv'Ime . Nhu publ i cly ridiculed t he
Buddhist suicide as a IIbarbecue ," accused the Buddhis t l eaders of be i ng
i nfjltrated with communists , and construed the protest movement as Viet
Cong inspired. Both Nhu and his w'ife vrorked publicly and pri vatel y to
undermine Diem 1s feeb l e effor ts at compromise with t he Buddhists , and
r umor s t hat Nhu YTas conSideri ng a coup agai ns t his br other began t o
ci rcu~ate in J ul y.

 AU. S. Special National Intelligence Estimate on tTuly 10 c onc l uded
vli th the perceptive prediction that i f the Diem regime dtd nothing to
implcmeEt the June 16 agreement and to appease the Buddhists , the

 6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

likelihood of a summer of demonstrations was great, "l-ri th the strong
possibili ty of a non-conununist coup attempt. 3/ By mid-_"l.Ugust a week
before Nhu l aunched general raids on Buddhist-pagodas in Saigon and
elsewhere , the CIA had begun to note malaise in the bureau.cracy and
the army:

 Since the Buddhist dispute with the Diem government
 erupted on 8 May, there have been a series of reports
 indicating not only intensified plotting and grumbling
 among Diem's traditiona l non-Communist critics, but
 renewed restiveness and grovTing diSE'..ffection in official
 civilian and military circles over Diem's handling of the
 dispute.~/

This estimate went on to detail numerous rumors of coup plots in existence
since at least l ate J-une. But l'Jhu, in a bold move designed to frighten
coup plotters, a..TJ.cl to throv them off guard, had called in the senior
generals on July 11, reprimanded them for not having tal<::en action to
squelch revolt, and questioned their loyalty to the regime. Ifhu 's move
seemed to have temporarily set back all plans for an overthrOl-T. CIA
also reported rumors that Nhu himself "l-TaS planning a ttfalse cO"G.ptt to
draw out a:..Gd then crush the Buddhists. '2/ .

 In August, Buddhist mili ta..TJ.cy reached new intensity j monks burned
themselves to death on the 5th, 15th, and 18th. The taut political
atmosphere in Saigon i n mid-August should have suggested to U.S.
ob servers that a shovTdmill "l-TaS on the "ray. When the showdovffi came , hOl·r-.
ever, in the August 21 raids on the pagodas, the U.S. mission was
apparently caught almost completely off guard.

2. The U.S. ttNo Alternatives to Diem" Policy

 The explanation of how the U.S. mission became detached from the
re alities of the political situation in Saigon in August 1963, is among
the most ironic and tragic of our entire involvement in Vietnam. In
dealing "Ti th Diem over the years, the U. S. had tried two radically
different but ultimately equally unsuccessful approaches . Under
Ambassador Elbridge D<lrbrow from the late '50s until 1961, we had used
tough pressure tactics to bring Diem to i mplement programs and ideas we
felt necesse_ry to mn the war against the Viet Congo But Diem soon
le arned that the U.S. was committed to him as the only Vietnamese l eader
capable of rallying his country to defeat the c ommcm ists. Armed vri th
this knowledge he could defer action or ignore the Ambassador vrith
r e l ative impunity. He became adept at playing the role of offended
lover. Thus by 1961 , Durbrow was cut off from the palace, m th little
information about '-That was going on and even l ess influence over events.
Under Frederick Holting as U.S. Ambassador , the U.S. pursued a very
different tactic. Forevrarned not to allow himself to be isolated,
Nolting set out through the patient cultivation of Diem's friendship and
trust to secure a role for himself as Diem's close and confidential
advisor. But there had been no basic change in the American belief that

 '7 TOP SECRET . Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 Top SECRE~I - Sensi ti ve

there ims no a l ternati ve to Diem, and Diem must have quickly sensed
this, for he conti nued to respond prim2.rily to family interest, at best
only listeni ng impatiently to Nolting 's ca refully put complaints ,
secure in the knowledge that ultimately the U. S. i{Quld not abandon him
no matter i"hat he did. Both tactics failed because of American commi t-
mente No amount of pressure or suasion was like ly to be effective in
getting Diem to adopt ide as or policies vlhich he did not find to his
liking, since we had communicated our unwillingness to consider the
ul timate sanction -- vri thdrai·ral of support for his regime . We had
ensnared ourse lves in a pOi·Terless , no alternatives policy.

 The denouement of this policy, the ultimate failure of all our
efforts to coerce , ca jole and coax Diem to be something other than the
mandarin that he vTaS , came in the midnight attack on the pagodas on
August 21. And it created a fundamental dilemma for U.S . policy with
respect to Diem. On the one hand , ,vi thdravral of support for his regime
was the only l ever likely to force Diem to redress t he Buddhist grievances
and to make the political reforms prerequisite for popular support in the
common fight against the Viet Cong o On t he other hand, withdra'iTal of
U. S. support for Diem vTOuld be signal U. S. approval for an ant i-Diem
coup, 'in th all its potential for political instability and erosion of
the war effort. He found ourselves i n this predicament not entirely
unexpectedly . .

 In May 1963 , though it had failed to anticipate the Buddhist
upheaval, the U.S. mi ss ion nevertheless quickly recognized the gravity
of the threat to Diem and reported it to "\{ashi ngton . 6/ Nolting met
with Diem on May 18 and outlined the steps he f elt were necessary to
retrieve the situation. These included a government acknowl edgement
of r esponsibility f or t he Hue i ncident , an offer to compensate the
f amilies of the VictimS, and a reaffirmation of r eligious equality and non-
discrimination . As an a lternative , he suggested an investigatory commis -
sion. Diem IS noncommittal response l ed t he Ambas sador to think that Di em
really believed the Viet Cong had caused the deaths and that t he Buddhists
had provoked the inci dent . Diem felt the U.S. was over -re acting to the
events. 1/ Thus, at a critical time Nolting, in spite of his hTO years
of careful groundw'ork, was unab l e to exerci se any re al influence over
Diem~ Nolting left on a well-deserved holiday and home le ave shortly
after this frustrating meet i ng .

 By the end of 11ay, Hashington had become conce r ned at Diem IS
f a ilure to act, and at the widening Buddhist protest. The Charge
d'Affa ires , ivilliam Truehart , was instruc t e d to pre ss the GVH for
action .'§/ Horking with Secretary of State for Defense Thuan, Truehart
tried to move the government toward negotiations vri th the Buddhists.
After t he demonstrations in Hue on June 3, the State Department instructed
Truehart to t ell Diem or Thuan that the U.S. also had a stake in an
amicable settl ement vn th t he Buddhists . 9/ On the follmTi ng day, Truehart
met wIth Thuan and told him th('1.t U. S. support of South Vietnam could not
be maintained if there vTa S bl oody repressive action in Hue . 10/ This
s eemed to get action . Later that day, Truehart was i nformed-that

 8 TOP SECR.ET - Sensi ti ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 ,

Nolting's second suggestion had been adopted and a high-level commission
had been named to settle the problem. The commission, headed by Vice
President Tho, met belatedly \-lith the Buddhists on June 5.

 On June 8, Truehart had an intervie\-l vlith Diem to protest ~,Jme .
l'lliu's public criticism of the Buddhists , which \-las poisoning the atmos-
phere for a settlement. Hhen Diem refused to disavow her statements,
Truehart threatened a U.S . IIdissociation" from any future repressive
measures to suppress demonstrations. Trllehart left the meeting with the
impression that Diem was more preoccupied with security measures than
vii th negotiations. 11/ Nol ting' s lovr··key policy had by now been abandoned,
both in \'Tashington and in Saigon, in favor of a new tough line .

 The situation was dramatically altered by the first Buddhist suicide
on June 11. Alarmed , the State Department authorized Truehart to tell
Diem that unless drastic action was taken to meet t he Buddhist demands
promptly, the U. S. vlov.ld be forced to state publicly its dissociation
from the GVN on the Buddhist issue. 12/ Truehart made his demarche on
June 12 . Diem replied that any suchu.S. announcement vlOuld have a
disastrous effect on the GVN-Buddhist negotiations. 13/ The negotiations
finally got under way i n earnest June ll~ and the joint communique was
issued June 16.

 Truehart made repeated c alls on Diem in late June and early July,
urging him in the strongest l anguage to t ake some action indic ating the
government's i ntention to abide i n good faith by the June 16 agreement .
His efforts were unavailing . Diem was either noncommittal, or t alked in
generalities about the difficulties of the problem.

 On J une 27, President Kennedy named Henry Cab ot Lodge to replace
Ambassador Nolting effective in September. After a brief stop i n
Washington, Nolting vTaS hurried back to Saigon on July 11 to make one
l ast effort to get Diem to conciliate the Buddhists. Nolting , evidently
resenting the pressure tactics used by True hart , met immedj.ate ly vri th
Diem and tried to mollify him. 14/ He succeeded only in convincing Diem
to make the shallow gesture of the July 19 radio speech. Othenrise,
Diem merely perSisted in appeals for public harmony and support of the
government , without any real attempt to deal vri th the Buddhist grievances.

 Nolting spent his last month in Vietnam trying to repair U. S. -GVN
relations and to move Diem to resolve the Buddhist criSiS , but his
attempts were continually undercut by the Nhus both publicly and pri-
vately'. They had grOlm i ncre asingly belligerent about the Buddhists
during the summer, 8..11d by August spoke often of II crushing II them .
Ifashington asked N01 ting to prote st such inflammatory r emarks , and began
to suspect Diem'.s capacity to conciliate the Buddhists in the face of
Nhu sabotage . Nolting was instructed to suggest to Diem that Nme . Nhu
be removed from the scene . 15/ Nolting asked Diem for a public declara-
tion repudiating her remarkS-but after i nitially agreei ng , Diem then
demurred and postponed it. 16/ Finally, as a parting gesture to Nolting,
he agreed on August ll~ to make a statement . g/ It came in t he form of

 9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3_3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

an interview with Marguerite Higgins of the Ne ..,' York Herald Tribune.
Diem asserted that conciliation had been his policy all along and that it
"ras "irreyersible. II He further said, in direct contradiction of a
previous remark by r-!me. Nhu, that the family "Tas pleased with Lodge 's
appointment. 18/ Washington was apparently satisfied by this statement,
which Diem viewed merely as a going-away present for Nolting . 19/ Less
than a week l ater , Nolting 's two years of -careful "Tork and an Americ,m
policy "muld be in a shambles, betrayed by Nhu ' s midnight raid on the
pagodas. .

 Underlying the prevailing U.S. view- that there was no alternative
to Diem was the belief that the disruptive effect of a coup on the .rar
effort, and the disorga."'1ization that would follO'iv such a coup, could
only benefit the VC, perhaps decisively. 20/ rHlitary estimates and
reports emanating from jvUWV through the summer of 1963 continued to
reflect an optimistic outlook, i ndicating good reason to continue our
support of Diem even in the face of his inept handling of the Buddhist
crisis. 21/ . In retrospect, it can be seen that by July the GVN position
i n the war had begun to seriously deteriorate. At the time , hO'ivever,
this weakening Ivas not yet apparent. The then prevailing view also held
that the Buddhist crisis had not yet detracted from the war effort,
although its potential to do so was recognized. Secretary McNamara on
July 19 told a press conference that the "rar was progressing well and
that the Buddhist crisis had thus far not affected it. 22/ The intel-
ligence community, however, had already begun to note depressing effects
of the crisis on military and civilian morale . 23/

 Meanwhile , the U. S. press corps ,-ras reporting a far different view
of both the war and the Buddhist crisis , one which vas , i n retrospect,
nearer the re ality . In particular, they were reporting serious failures
in the Delta in both military operations and the Strategic Hamlet
Program. 24/ Typical of this reporting vas an August 1 5 story in the
Nev York Times by David Halberstam presenting a very negative appraisal
of the war in the Delta . 25/ Such reports were vehementl y refuted within
t -he Administration, most notably by General Krulak, the JCS Special
Assi stant for Counterinsurgency. 26/ At the 10lver eche l ons in the field,
hOvreyer, there 1-Tere many U. S. advisors 'vho did not share Krulak' s
s anguine view of the "Tar I s progress .

 -Hi thin the Administration, no rea l l ow-risk alternative to Diem had
 eyer been identified, and we had continued our support for his trouble-
 some regime because Diem was regarded as the only Vietnamese figure
-capable of rallying national support in the struggle against the Viet
 Cong . The Buddhist crisis shattered our illusions about him, and increased
 the domestic U.S. political price to Kennedy of supporting Diem . But
 the only other option for us se eme d a coup, with highly uncertain pros-
 pects for post -c oup political stability . At a briefing for the President
 on July 4, the possibilities and prospects for a c oup vere discussed . 27/
It ivas the consensus that the Nhus could not be r emoved , but tha.t there
vould s-:.lrely be coup attempts in the next four months . Nolting's
reported viev, with vhich then Ass istant Secretary of State , Roger Hilsman ,

 10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Execut ive Order 13526, Section 303
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

did not entirely agree, was that a coup would most likely produ ce a
civil war. Hilsman felt that the likelihood of general chaos in the
wake of a coup was less than it had been the preceding year. ( Notes
on this briefing, reproduc ed in the Appendix, provide the first docu-
mentary evidence of highest level consideration of the ramifications of
a coup .)

 In a meeting at State the following day, July 5, Ambassador
Nolting, \.ho ha d cut short his vacation to return to vlashington in the
"¥rake of the Buddhist crisis, told Under Secretary of State George Ball =

 In his view if a revolution occurred i n Viet -Nam wohich
 gre,. out of the Buddhist si tuati 011 , the country would be
 spli t betvreen feuding factions and the .A.mericans "¥rould
 have to wi thdrmv and the country might be lo st to the Com-
 munists. This l ed to the que stion of hOI'; much pressure we
 could exert on Diem. Mr . Nolting replied that if we
 repudiated him on this is sue his government would fall.
 The Ambassador believed that Diem would live up to the
 agreement (June 16 ) unless he believed that he was dealing
 with a political attempt to cause his overthrOlol. 28/

Earlier in the same interview he had said:

 that although interference by the Nhus vas
 serious , he believed that t he GVN would be able to come
 through thi s one slOlvly . As to tactic s , the more Diem
 was prodded the slovTer he went . Hhile Nhu \-ras trouble-
 some he was chiefly responsible for gains which had been
 made in the provincial pacification program. 29/

Nol ting , no doubt , expressed similar views when he met vTi th SecretaT'J
McNamara before returning to Saigon.

 In spite of the mounting political pressure on the President in
Congress and in the press because of the Buddhi st repreSSions , the
Administration decided to send Nolting back for another try at getting
Diem to settle the dispute \vi th the Buddhists . Anxiety i n Hashington
mounted as the summer \-rore on , and Nolting I s efforts with Diem produced
evident progress. By the time of the August 21 r aids , WOashi ngton IS
patience with Diem \-ras all but exhausted .

 11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECHET - Sensitive

 III

 LODGE vs. DIEM: : AUGUST 20 - OCTOBER 2

1. The Pagoda Haids and Repercussions

 Shortly after midnight on August 21, six days after Nolting's
frustr ated departure , Nhu, shattering any remaining illusions about the
GVN's conciliatory approach to the Buddhists, and betraying Diem ' s
parting pledge to Nolting, st age d a general assault on Buddhist pagodas.
In Saigon, Hue, and other coastal cities, the regime ' s private shock
troops -- the U. S. -trained Spec i al Forces -- and the c ombat police
invaded the pagodas and arrested hundreds of Buddhist monks , effectively
destroying an JI..merican policy and marking the beginning of t he end of the
Diem regime .

 On August 18, ten senior generals had met and decided that they
would ask Diem for a declaration of martial law to permit them to
return Buddhist monks from outside Saigon to their own provinces and
pagodas, hopefully reducing tensions in the capital. 1/ _lImong those
in attendance at the meeting were General Ton That Dinh, military
governor of Saigon and comma..l1der of III Corps surrounding it, and
General Huynh Van Cao, IV Corps commander, both of whom ovTed their
positions to their loyalty to the regime. Either or both of them
probably reported the outcome of this meeting to Diem and Nhu .

 In any case, Nhu had decided to eliminate. the Buddhist oppOSition,
and to confront the U.S. with a fait accompli on Lodge 's arrival; he
assumed the U.S. would protestingly acquiesce , as it always had in the
past . On the afternoon of the 20th, :Nhu met "Ti th a small group of
generals, i ncluding Don, Khiem, and Dinh who presented the mart i al
l aw proposa l to him. Nhu, his ol-m plans for the raids now far advanced,
told them to take their proposal to Diem . At a meeting l ater that
evening , Diem acquiesced i n the generals ' pla..l1 and at midnight the
decree was pub lished under the signature of General Don, Chief of the
Joint General Staff. 2/ Mean,,,hile , unbeknmm to the generals, Nhu had
already alerted Colonel Tung 's Special Forces and the c ombat police.
Once the facade of mart i al l a", '¥Tas i n place, so the army would be blamed
for the raids, Nhu gave the ..TOrd and the crackdown began. To further
implic ate the army, s ome of t he combat police wore paratroop uniforms.
Pagodas i"ere ransacked in all the maj or South Vietnamese cities, and
over 1400 Buddhi sts, primarily monks, were arrested. '1./ In the r ai d on
Xa Loi pagoda in Saigon about thirty monks were wounded or injured,
a nd several were subsequently listed as miSSing; exact casualties were
never establishe d. 4/ Diem had approved the martial law de cree '¥Tithout
consulting his c abinet , but it was never established whether he kneif of
and apPToved Nhu 's plans for the pagoda r aids . Significantly, he never
subsequently sought to dissociate himself from Nhu or t he r a id s .

 12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP S~CRBT - Sensitive
 ,

 vlliile the martial law decree gave General Don command of all troops,
in fact, Gener<al Dinh and Colonel Tung took their orders directly from,
the palace. Thus, when the raids came , General Don VTas at 3GS lmaware.
In a long discussion on August 23 va th a Clill officer, he suggested that
the martial la"T decree "Tas only phase one of a larger< Generals' plot. 5/
They "Tere thrOim off balance, hovrever, by the raids and by General Dinh's
rapid assumption of local control of martial l avT in Saigon.

 In planning the raids, Nhu had been extremely careful not to have
word l eak. to the U.S. mission ( although the Buddhists and the U.S. press
corp s had been tipped off by their mID informants). On the morning
after the attack, Richardson, the CIA chief and the senior .P.unerican
civilian in Saigon , emphatically denied to Halberstam any foreknovTledge
of the plan. 6/ To further isolat e the U.S. from an accurate assessment
during the operation, Nhu had the telephone lines to the Embassy and the
homes of all senior U.S. personnel cut shortly after the r aids got under
way. 7/ His efforts h ad the desired effect. It vTaS several days before
the U.S. mission in Saigon and officials in Hashington could piece
together what happened. In "Hashington, Harriman and Michael Forrestal, a
member of McGeorge Bundy 's staff at the Hhite House, drafted a stiff
public statement that "'\'Tas released by the State Department at 9: 30 the
follo"ang morning. It deplored the raids as "a direct violation by the
Vietnamese Goyernment of assurances that it was pursuing a policy of
reconc iliation vTith the Buddhists. " 8/ But the first U.S. intelligence
reports, based on information from Nhu, accepted army responsibility for
the raids, and treated their coincidence with the martial lavr decree as,
in effect, a military coup. In an August 21 memorandum for the Secretary
of Defense, the Director of DIA J General Carroll, wrote, "Although the
military moves are based on an alleged preSidential proclamation, the
mili tary leaders have, in effect, assumed full control." 2/
 When the raids occurred, Lodge, Nolting, and Roger Hilsman, the
Assistant Secr'e tary of State for the Far East, had been conferring in
Honolulu. Lodge was immediately instructed to proceed to Saigon. 10/
After a brief stop in Tokyo, Lodge touched down in Saigon at 9:30 p.m.
on August 22, in an atmosphere charged 1vi th tension and official U. S.
~onfusion. Awai ting him "Tas a cable from Hilsman asking for a clarifica-
tion of the situation. Had the military taken over a.YJ.d retained Diem as
a figureheadj had Diem strengthened his Ovill position by calling in the
militaryj or were the Nhus really calling the shots? 11/ Hithin twenty-
four hours, Lodge had sent a preliminary reply: therehad been no coup,
but there seemed also to be no diminution in the roles of the Nhus,
although the power roles vTithin the regime were unclear. 12/

 . That same day, the first military feelers had been put out from
the Vietnamese generals to determine what the U.S. reaction would be to
a military coup . Gener'al Don, the commander of the armed forces under
the martial law decree, had a long, rambling conve rsation with a GAS
officer. He first outlined the true role the army had played in the
events of August 20-21 and then inquired why the U.S. had blamed the army
for the raids on the pagodas :

 13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 General Don has heard personally that the military is
 being blamed by Vietnamese public for the attack on t he
 pagodas . He said that the US Govt i s at fault for this
 misconception because VOA announced that the military took
 action against the pagodas. Don queried "Thy VOA did not
 admit that Colonel Tung's Special Forces and the Police
 c arried out the action . Don believes this would help t he
 military at this point. Don stated that the USA should
 nmf make its position kn01fD. l3/

In a conversation the same day ..lith RufuS' Phillips of USOM, General Kim,
deputy to General Don, bitterly attacked Nhu, ch~rging him ..,ith responsi-
bility for the raids, and deploring his dominant role in the government.
He said that unless the popular impression that t he army was r esponsib le
for the r aids were corrected, the army would be handic apped j.n its fight
against the VC. He stated that a firm U. S. stand for the removal of
the Nhus would un i fy the army and permit it to act against them. ' lh/
These t wo direct and obviously reinforcing requests for U.S. support
for military action aimed at Nhu ' s ouster marked the formal beginning
of the U.S. i nvol vement in the protrac ted plotting against the Diem
regi me. Two seni or civilians i n the government, Diem's chef de cab inet,
Vo Van Hai , and Secretary of State , Nguyen Dinh Thuan, ",ere simul taneously
telling U.S. contacts that Nhu 's elimination from the government was vital
and that t he U.S. should take a strong stand against him. 15/

 On .August 24, Lodge c ab led his appraisal of the situation t o
'vashington, based on these conversations . IfNhu, If he reported, Ifprobab ly
with full support of Diem, had a l arge hand in planning of action against
Buddhists , if he did not fully master-mind it. His influence has also
been significant l y increased." 16/ Nhu ha d simply taken advantage of the
concern of certai n generals , possibly not fully informing t he r egular
army of the planned action. Nonethe le ss , none of t he i mport ant Sai gon
area troop commanders ( Don, Dinh, and Tung) ..!ere presently dis affe cted
with the r egime . Furthermore, absence of clear -cut military leadership
and troop strength in Saigon for a move against the Nhus would make U.S
support of such an action a "shot in the dark." 17/

 For the State Department, the problem of clarifyi ng the public
record about the r a i ds and affixing r esponsibility for t hem had become
acute by August 24. The press r eports emanating from Saigon had fr om
the outset blamed Nhu for the raids, but VOA, with a l arge audienc e i n
Vietnam, cont i nued to r eport the officia l U.S. position that the army
was culpab le. 18/ The accumul ating evidence agai nst Nhu and the likeli-
hood of severedamage to army morale if VOA did not broadcast a clarific a -
tion seemed to c all for r etract ions .

 The second issue for Washington was Nhu . The generals had asked ,
in effect , for a green light to move against him, but Lodge had caut ioned
against it. Hilsman r eports t hat as he, Harriman , Forrestal, and Ball
de liberated over the drafti ng of a reply on that Saturday morni ng , the
st at ement of Thuan to Phillips t hat "under no circumstance should the

 14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

United States acquiesce i n "hat the Nhus had done ,1I was given great
weight . 19/ Admiral Felt telephoned ·W ashington from CINCPAC to support
a strong U. S. stand against the Nhu s. 20/ The unanswered question, of
course , was 1-lhether the Nhus could be removed without also sacrificing
Diem, and if not, whether the resulting political i nstab ility- would not
have an even more detrimental effect on the .Tar effort than maintaining
Diem.

 The August 24 c ab le of instruct ions to Lodge resulti ng from these
deliberat ions outlined an i mportant , and subsequently- controversial, new
policy approach for the U.S. in South Vietnam. Its opening paragraphs
cri sply set forth the ne., American view:

 It is now clear that whether military proposed martial
 lavr or whether Nhu tricked them into it, Nhu took advantage
 of its imposition to smash pagodas 1-lith police and Tung ' s
 SpeCial Forces loyal to him, thus plac ing onus on military
 in eyes of .TOrld and Vietnamese people . Also clear that Nhu
 has maneuvered himself into commending position.

 US Government cannot tolerate situation in which power
 lie s in Nhu 's hands. Diem must be giyen chance to rid himself
 of Nhu and his coterie and replace them with best military and
 political persona lities availab l e.

 If, in spite of all your efforts , Diem remains obdurate
 and refuses, then we must face the possibility that Diem
 himself cannot be preserved. 21/

Lodge was instructed to tell the GVN the U.S. could not accept the
actions against the Buddhists and that prompt dramatic steps to redress
the situation must be taken. The key military leaders were to be
privately informed that,

 • . • US would find it impossible to continue support
 GVN militarily- and economically unless above steps are taken
 i mmediately- .lhich we recognize requires removal of Nhus
 from the scene. We wish give Diem reasonable opportunity
 to remove Nhus , but if he remains obdurate, then we are
 prepared to accept the obvious implication that we Ca..l1 no
 longer support Diem . You may also tell appropriate military
 commanders we will give them direct support i n any interim
 period of breakdown central goverr~ent mechanism. 22/

Finally, the message recognized the need to publicly exonerate the army
from the raids and asked Lodge to approve a VOA broadcast to that effect.
Lodge was requested, as well, to survey urgently for alternative leader-
ship.

 Clearance of the draft message was complicated by the coincident
week··end absence from Ivashington of most of the top level members of
the Administration . The President was in Hyannis Port; Rusk was i n
New York ; and McNamara and l'-~cC one Here away on vacat ion. Both the

 15 TOP SECRET - uens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRE'I' .. Sensitive

President and the Secretary of State were reached, however, and approved
the draft. Deputy Secretary of Defense RosvTell Gilpatric approved for
Defense, and General Taylor for the JCS. Schlesinger, i n his account
of the i ncident , suggests that the cable vas hasty and ill-considered ,
and that the President immediately began to back away from it. 23/

 Lodge replied the follm·ring day endorsing the strong position but
proposing to fo rego a futile approach to Diem and to state our position
i nstead only to the generals, thus throvnng all our weight behind a
coup. The cable stated:

 Believe that chances of Diem's meeting our demands are
 virtually nil. At the same time, by making them I.e give
 Nhu chance to forest all or block action by military. Risk,
 vTe believe, is not '-fOrth takj.ng, vTi th Nhu in control combat
 forces Saigon. Therefore, propose vTe go straight to Generals
 vn th our demands, without informing Diem. Vlould tell them
 we prepared have Diem without Nhus but it is in effect up
 to them whether to keep him. 24/

Hilsman asserts that the cab le also reflected Lodge ' s view that since
our disapproval of GVN action was ,'Te ll known , it was not fitting for the
U.S. to go to Diem, it was Diem who should come to us. 25/

 In a separate CAS cab le the same dey, Richardson, the CIA Chief of
Station in Saigon, reported that at a meeting vn th Lodge and Harkins it
had been agreed that Diem would not remove Nhu and that therefore,
assuming State's cable of instruct ions on 24 August (Appendix) represented
Washington's basic pollcy, the consensus was that contact should be
imme diately made with generals such as Hinh and Khanh to assess the
degree of unity and determination of senior officers. Minh was considered
the best possible interim leader, with Vice President Tho as the most
attractive candidate for President among the civilians. The cable con-
cluded with the viev! that a junta would probably operate behind the
scenes in the event of a successful coup, and that the U.S. should
l eave the specific tactics of a coup up to the generals . 26/ There is
a hiatus in the available cable traffic at this point, butHilsman
indic ates that Washington decided on Sunday, August 25, to defer a
direct approach to Diem until more was knovm about the situation. 27/

 In Lodge's reply, he had also appa rently approved the proposed VOA
broadcast to exonerate the army. Hilsman briefed the press on the basis
of a previously approved draft statement on August 25. The statement
expressed strong U.S. disapproval of the raids, which were attributed to
Nhu. In reporting the story, the press speculated that such a strong
statement probably indic ated that measures such as aid suspension vJere
being considered. VOA had been instructed to broadcast only the sub-
stances of the U.S. statement as provided in the press guidance and
nothing more. The i nstructions somehm-r got mislaid, and on Iilonday
morning, August 26, just several hours before Lodge was to present his
credentials to Diem, VOA broadcast in full a UPI story which flatly

 16 TOP SECRET - Sensiti ve
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

asserted that tit he US may sharply reduce its aid to Vietnam unl ess
President Diem gets rid of secret police officials responsible for the
attacks. tt 28/ Lodge was understandably upset , and sent a testy cable
r hetorically inquiring whether he really vas i n charge of tactics as he
had been given to understand. 29/ Rusk sent a personal cab le of apology
to Lodge, and VO."!" promptly broadcast a denial of U.S . intent to cut aid,
but the initial dalnage had been done.

 The Vietnamese reaction to the attack on the pagodas during this
time had been dramatic. In the United States, rifuIe . Nhu ' s father and
mother, respectively the Vietnamese AJllbassador to the U.S. and the
Vietnamese observer at the UN, had both resigned, making bitter public
statements denouncing the raids. In South Vietnam, the Foreign r.~inister ,
Vo Van !-.~au , had resigned and shaved his head like a Buddhist monk in
protest. On August 23, students at the faculties of medicine and
pharmacy at the University of Saigon turned out to stage mass demonstra-
tions on behalf of the Buddhists. The GVN reacted i n the only ...ray it
seemed to knm.r, ...ri th massive arrests. But the demonstrations continued,
and when the uni versi ty ...ras closed, the protest vas t aken up by high
school and junior high school students. These were dramatic evidences
inde ed of the degree of disaffection ...lith the regime, since most of the se
s tudents "Tere from the middle class families that formed the bureaucracy
and the army le adership. Students in Vietnam had no substantia l record
of political activism as was the case with their counterparts i n other
parts of ASia, like Kore a. Furthermore, some of the Buddhist leadership
had survived the raids and gone underground and ...rere soon pas s ing out
le aflets on the streets again . On the day of the raids, tvo monks had
t aken refuge i n the USO:M building next door to Xa Loi pagoda . 'llhe
foll owing day, three others , i nc l uding the militant young leader Tich
Tri Quang, took r efuge in the U. S. Embassy, "'There they vrere warmly
received by Lodge and remained until the successful November coup. 30/

2. tli s -Coup

 Rumors of coup plotting had been a standard part of the Saigon scene
under Diem from the very beginning. And there had been several attempts .
I n 1957, an assassin fired at Diem at an up-country fair. In November 1960,
he had narrovTly escaped being overthrmrD by a military c oup by negotiating
with the dissident officers until loyal reinforcements could be moved
i nto Saigon to restore his control. And i n 1962, tvro disgruntled Air Force
pilots had unsuccessfully bombed and strafed the Gia Long Pal ace . So,
when rumors of coup plotting began to gain currency again i n the spring
of 1963, they i-lere monitored by the U. S. intelligence conrrnuni ty, but not
gi Yen extraordinary prominence or credence. By mid -summer, hovrever, with
the Buddhist crisis in full bloom, more serious consideration was given
to the grovTing nUJllber of reports identifying plotters and schemes . 31/
One plot, identified in l ate June , was l ed by Dr. Tran Kim Tuyen, Diem 's
Director of Political and Social Studies ( national int e lligence) . 32/
It i nvolved elements of the Civic Action r.1in istry, t he Information--
Ministry, the Secret Police, and some junior army officers. A separate
plot i nvolving other elements of the army was reported, and on July 8

 17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECFET - Sensitive

General Don indicated to a CAS officer that there was support among
all but a couple of generals for a coup. 33/ Nhu ' s July 11 meeting with
the generals J hm.rever, seeme d to disorient-their efforts temporarily .
In a..11 August 14 memorandum, the CIA. acknowledged some military support
for a coup , but doubted that anyone "Tould risk it unless a deterioration
of the political situation threatened a Viet Cong Victory. 34/ The
pagoda attack was j ust such a deterioration and it precipitated the
generals ' first approach to the U.S. on August 23 about a coup .

 \-vi th State I s instructions of 24 August as guidance , Lodge met .Ti th
Harkins, Truehart, Mecklin , and Richardson on the morning of August 26
before presenting his credentials to Diem. They decided that the
official U. S. hand should not shm.: - - i. e., Harkins should not tan: to
the generals . It vas agreed that Lt. Colone l Cone in of the CIA viould con-
t act General Khiem, and I'1r. Spera ( also of CIA ) .lOuld contact General
Khanh, II Corps commac'1der in Pleiku, conveying the following points to
e ach :

 a. Solidification of further elaboration of action
 aspects of present thinki ng and planning. What should
 be done?
 b. We in agreement Nhus must go ..
 c. Question of retaining Diem or not up to them.
 d. Bon zes and other arrestees must be released
 i mmediately and five -point agreement of 16 June be fully
 c arried out.
 e. We will provide direct support during any interim
 period of breakdo1-lD of central government mechanism.
 f. We cannot be of any help during initial action of
 assuming power of t he state. Entirely their ow acti on ,
 win or los e. Don't expect to be bailed out.
 g. If Nhus do not go and i f Buddhi sts'situation is
 not redressed as indicated, we would find it i mpossible
 continue military and economic support.
 h. It is hoped bloodshed can be avoided or reduced to
 ab sol ute minimum.
 1. It is hoped that during process and afte r, develop-
 ments conducted in such manner as to retain and i ncrease the
 necessary relations between Vietnamese a..l1d Americ ans .Thich
 will allOl'T for progress of country and successful prosecution
 of the .lar. 35/

 Cone in met with Khiem on August 27, and after conveyi ng his message
learned that Hinh vas t he l eader of the cabal, 'fhich i ncluded also
Generals Kim, Khanh, Thieu, and Le . Don ,fas aware of the plot and
approved, but .ras too exposed to participate. General Minh was u.nder
surveillance , and had asked not to be contacted by the U. S. Khiem
r ecognized the need to neutralize General Cao, t he IV Corps c ommander,
General Dinh, the III Corps and Saigon Area commander, and Colone l
Tung . 36/ A separate CAS report i ndic ated that General Ki m had charge
of plans for the provisional succes sor government which would i nclude
both civilians and roili tary J with Minh as Presj.dent. 37/

 18 TOP, SECRET - ) ensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Meanwhile, back in 't:ashington, by the time the NSC met on :Monday
 morning, August 26 , misgivings about lJ1,lDPOl;'\;:l.n a (; m1.p '- ' ... pc lJol1(;y G;l'b -
 lined in State ' s August 24 message -- had developed. Hilsman ' s account
 credits 1.1cNamara, Taylor, a..nd NcCone with second thought s. 38/ Hhatever
 the outcome of 1"londay ' s meeting, another was held the next day, after
 which Lodge ,vas cabled for more details about the coup plans, and an
 assessment of their chances of success. 39/ Reflecting the reservations
 in Vlashington, the message asked vThat effect delaying the coup would
 have.

 Replying the following day, Lodge gave a favorable assessment of
 coup prospects; expressed confidence in the generals 'Tho were to lead
 it, especially 1!linh, Khanh, and Kim; and argued, "that chances of
 success '-TOuld be diminished by delay. II 40/ A ca'91e from Harkins to
 Taylor on the S81l1e day is the first documentary indication of Harkins'
reservations about supporting the coup attempt. Cryptically, Harkins
indic ated that he would offer his full support to the Ambassador in
implementing State's instructions, but noted that, "Reference b. (CINCPAC
250l~5 62 Aug 1963 ) advises me that reference a. (State 21~3) embodies
CINCPi"C opinion an'd that my support had been volunteered. II 41/ He vTould
have preferred one l ast attempt to persuade Diem to dispense-.dth Nhu .
Furthermore, the line-up of forces did not indicate a clear-cut advantage
for the coup plotters. Therefore, he stated, "In my opinion as thi ngs
stand nOl" I don't believe there is sufficient reason for a crash approval
on our part at this time." 42/ He also had concluded that the coup would
not take place until we gave-the word. In a separate message, Richardson ,
however, described the situation as having " reac hed the point of no
return. II 43/ Further, he conc luded, "Unless the generals are neutralized
before being able to launch their operation, vre believe they 'Ifill act and
that they have good chance to vdn. II 44/

 In Hashington, State and Defense 'I.Jere divided on the issue . Nolting,
who was regularly attending the daily NSC meetings at the President's
 request, sided vli th the Pentagon in the view that prospects for t he coup
weI"e not good, a..nd that another effort should be made with Diem. Hi lsman ,
Harrima..n, and Ball .rere convinced the U.S. had to get on with the coup,
since Diem offered no prospect of complying the U.S. wishes. 45/ The
discussions in the NSC, reportedly, were increasingly heated and te sty. l~6/
The division of opinion between Harkins and Lodge concerned the Presicer.t
and upon receipt of their respective messages on August 28, he cabled
each of them separately for their "independent judgment" about the
prospects for a coup and their personal advice on the course the U.S.
should pursue. The President was at pains to reiterate his great con-
fidence in both men, and to assure them that differences of opinion in
Washington would not prevent the U.S. government from acting as a unit
under his direction . 47/ In a separate message, State asked Lodge to
indicate the latest point at which the operation could be suspended,
and with what consequences j since U. S. prestige '\oTOuld be engaged in the
venture, the message stated, once the coup .Tere under way, it had to
succeed. 1~8/ Lodge .Tas also asked what actions the U. S. might take to
promote the coup.

 19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 ~~.( ~~ t_,C
 TOP SECRE'I' - Sensitive ~p

 On August 29, Colonel Conein and Hr . Spera met with Generals Khiem
and Minh. Hinh bluntly said that the generals had to be cautious until
they had clear evidence that the U. S. "lOuld not betray them to Nhu . They
vTere um-Tilling to discuss their plans J and ..Then asked "That would con-
stitute a sign of U.S. support, replied that the U.S. should stop economic
aid to the regime. 49/ In a subsequent separate contact w'i th Rufus
Phillips, General Kim asked for verification that the Minh-Conein meeti ng
had Lodge!s approval. After checking with Lodge, Phillips assured Kim
who then asked for a meeting to discuss planning on t he next day. Lodge
the n authorized CAS to assist in t actical planning. 50/

 Stressing the generals' reported l ack of confidence in U.S. support,
Lodge's reply to Hashington asked Presidential permission for Harkins to
shm. CAS messages to the generals to prove our commitment. If that failed,
he reluctantly recommended suspension of economic aid as they requested.
Ty-pical of the P.rnbassador ' s all-out support for the coup is the follm,r ing
summary he gave of the U.S. position:

 He are l aunched on a course from "Thich there is no
 respectab l e turning back: The overthrow of the Diem Govern-
 ment. There is no turning back in part because US prestige is
 already pub licly committed to this end in large measure and
 will become more so as f act s leak out. In a more fundamental
 sense , there is no turning back because there is no possibility,
 in my view, that the war can be won under a Diem administra-
 tion, still less that Diem or a.'1y member of the family can
 govern the country in a way to gain the support of the people
 vho count , i. e., the educated class in and out of government
 service , civil and military -- not to mention the .American
 people. 51/

 Harkins, on the other hand, felt that there was still time to make
one last approach to Diem, vithout endange ring the plotters, since the ir
plans did not appear fully mature yet. Diem should be handed an ultimatum
that the Nhus must go. Thi s, he felt, would strengthen the hand of the
generals whose oppOSition, like ours, vras to the Nhus, not Diem. If Diem
did not act, there would then be time to back a move by the generals. 52/

 These vievTs were all revie-.red at the noon meeting of the NSC on
August 29. At the meeting, I'.fcNamara backed Harkins' view in favor of a
final approach to Diem, but the issue vras not decided. 53/ Rusk took
up the question in a subsequent cable to Lodge, asking Lodge 's opinion
about an approach to Diem, possibly by the generals at a time when they
would be ready to act, in vThich they ,",ould insist on the removal of the
Nhus, and threaten vri thdravral of U. S. support. 54/ A separate State
c able to Lodge and Harkins authorized the latterto shov1 CAS cables to
the generals to prove our support. Harkins vras instructed to insist on
kno,dng the personne l involved in the coup, and the forces available, and
to ask to review the detailed plans , vn thout, however, directly involving
himself in the coup planning. Lodge vas authorized to suspend aid to
Diem, Tlat a time and under conditions of your choice.!! '22/
 20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 In his response to Rusk ' s cable, Lodge stoutly opposed any further
contact with Diem, even to present an ultimatulll. Agreeing .that removal
of the 1'lms I{as the prime objective, Lodge argued, "This surely cannot
be done by \vorking through Diem. In fact, Diem vill oppose it. He
wishes he had more ]\Thus , not le s s . The best chance of doing it is by the
generals taking over the government lock, stock and barrel. After this
has been done, it can then be decided vhether to put Diem back in again
or go on ..Ti t hout him." 56/ "That genuinely concerned Lodge at that point
was the l ack of action by t he generals, but he 1-raS reluctant to use the
aid suspension as a lever .

 Throughout this period, another CAS officer had been in cont ac t
with a Colonel Thao , an i nspector of strategic hamlets, vho was the
leader of an indepeno.ent junior officer-civilian plot. On August 30,
he told the CAS officer that he was in touch ,D.th the ' generals, and ",ould
support any move they might make, but that for the moment the plans of
his group had stopped because the risk of failure was too great . 57/

 l<Tith Lodge's anxiety at the generals' failure to act increas i ng
daily, Genera l Harkins met ",ith General Khiem on August 31. He was told
t hat ~,[inh had called off the coup for the time being because of the
i nabili ty to achieve a favorab le balance of forces in the Saigon area,
and because of continuing anxiety among the generals about Richardson ' s
c lose identificat ion with the Nhus . 58/ Both Richardson and Lodge con-
f irmed the end of this coup attempt On the sa.rne day . 59/ Apparently
unable to win over General Dinh, the Saigon III Corps-area commander,
Minh ha d decided not to risk an indecisive , protracted bl ood bath "Ti th
only a slim likelihood. of success . Three factors appear t o have been
i mportant in Minh's decision to abort the coup: ( 1 ) the f ailure to win
over Dinh, l eaving the coup forces at a tactical disadvantage i n the
Saigon area ; ( 2 ) continuing doubts about the firmness of the U. S. com-
mi tment to Diem ' s overthrow' 8...110. the related concern that the U. S. had
wi ttingly or unwittingly tipped off Nhu to the plot ; and ( 3) uncertainty
about the cohesion of the coup group and the firmness of pl ans . Lodge
c onc l uded somewhat bitterl y, " • • • there i s neither the .Til l nor the
organization among the genera ls to accomplish anything ." 60/ He did not,
however , rule out a future attempt. --

3. T,o ward a New . Policy

 Having at long l ast decided to seek 8...11 a lternative t o the Diem
r egime by sanctioning a coup, only to have t he attempt f a il, the U. S .
f ound itself at t ·he end of August 1963 vTi thout a policy and with most
of i ts bridges burned . In both Saigon and Hashington , t he reappraisal
and t he search for alternatives began ane"T . In the c abl e acknm-rledging
t he demise of the coup plot on August 31, Lodge suggested t hat :

 Perhaps an arrangement could be worked out ,{hereby
 the f ollowing could be made to happen : Had8Jlle Nhu t o
 l eave the country, Hr . Nhu ' s funct i ons to be limited

 21 TOP SECR~T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 entire l y to strategic hamlets; the office of Prime
 Minister to be created and liir. Thuan to become Prime
 Minister; Archbishop Thuc to leave the country. In
 addition, the students and Buddhists 'vould be liberated ;
 Decree La,., 10 "Tould be repealed; the pagodas vrould be
 repaired and conciliatory gestures vTOuld be made. All
 of this, if agreed to, might be announced by President
 in Washington. 61/

These suggestions bec2JIle the basis of discussion of a t'vrhere do vre go
from here ll NSC meeting on the same day.

 In the absence of the President, Secretary Rusk chaired the meeting
at the State Department, and called for consideration of the Lodge
proposals , but s a id he felt it vms unrealistic to start off by asserting
that Nhu must go. 62/ Secretar'J McNamara urged that "re lIestab lish
quickly and firmly();~r line of communication behreen Lodge, Harkins and
the GVN . II He pointed out that lI at the moment our channe ls of communic a -
tion are essentially broken and that ttthey should be reinstituted at
 tl

all costs. II 63/ These considerations .rere soon submerge d, ho"rever, in
a broader discussion of the negative impact of the regime ts actions on
the vrar effort . Hilsmal1, supported by State 1 s Kattenburg of the Vietnam
1-lorking Group, argued that we should not continue our support of a Nhu -
dominated regime because i ts repressive policies 1-TOuld eventually have
a dis astrous effect on the war, even if the statistics did not yet reveal
their negative impac t. 64/ Hilsman and Kattenburg pointed to the grm.ring
disaffection and restiveness of middle level bureaucrats and military
officers as a factor which vTOuld ste ad ily erode the military effort . 65/
Unconvince d, both Secretary Ecl'l'amara and General Taylor asked for evidence
of this development.

 Kattenburg offered his estimate that I-re would be thro.m out of the
country i n six months if the regime rema ined in pOi-rer and that the
question the meeting should be considering was lithe decision to get out
honorably .1I 66/ Taylor and Nolting immedi ate ly took exception to these
views and Secretary Rusk remarked that they ,-rere IIlargely speculative. II 67/
He continued, II that it vTOuld be far better for us to start on the firm
basis of two things -- that we will not pullout of Vietnam until the war
is won, and that vIe will not r un a coup. II 68/ Secretary McNamara and
Vice President Johnson supported Rusk 1 s views, the Vice President saying
he had never rea lly seen an alternative to Diem. The meet ing ended incon-
clusive ly ; the only decision taken was to ask for Lodgers advice.

 As the only documented meeting during this period of major policy
deliberation, the August 31 meeting is signific ant for the vie,vpoints
it revea ls. Rambling inab ility to foc us the problem, indeed to reach
common agreement on the nature of the pro'Q lem, reflects disorientation
in the aftermath of the initial failure . More importantly, ho.rever, the
meeting is the first recorded occ as ion in which someone follo.red to its
logical conclusion the negative analysis of the situation -- i.e., that
the var could not be won vrith the Diem regime , yet its remova l would

 22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

l eave such political i nstability as to foreclose success in the war:
for the first time , it was recognized that the U.S . should be c onsider-
i ng methods of honorably disengaging itself from an irretrievable situa-
tion . The other alternative, not fully appreciated unti l the year
following , ",as a much greater U.S. involvement i n and assumption of
r esponsibility for the ltTar . At this point, hOI-lever, t he negative
analysis of the impact of the politic al situation on the war effort was
not share d by M.clTamara, Taylor , Krulak, nor seemingly by Rusk .

 But discussions "Tere overtaken by events. On the following Monday,
September 2, the PreSident, appearing on the initial broadcast of the
CBS Evening HeloTS , was intervievTe d by \\7alter Cronkite:

 1·1,r . Cronkite. Hr. Pre sident, the onl y hot war .Te ' ve got
 r unning at the moment is of course the one in Viet .-~Tam , and
 we have our difficul ties here , quite obviously.

 Pre sident Kennedy. I don't think t hat ul1less a, greater
 effort is made by the Government to win popular support that
 the war can be won out there. I n the final 8..'r1alysi s , it is
 their war . They are the ones i{ho have to "Tin it or lose it.
 lie c an he l p them, we can give them equipment, we can send
 our men out there as advisers , but t hey have to .Tin it --
 the people of Viet-Nam -- against the Commun ists. 1tIe are
 prepared to continue to assist t hem, but I don't think
 that t he "Tar can be ifon unless the people support the
 effor t, and, i n my opinion, i n t he l ast hro months the
 Government has gotten out of touch with the people.

 The repressions against the Buddhi s ts, we felt,
 were very umTise. NOIf all we can do is to make it very
 clear t hat we don't think this i s the "lay to win. It is
 my hope. t hat this will become i ncreasingl y obvious to
 the Government , t hat they will take steps to try to
 bring back popular support for t his very essential struggle.

 Mr. Cronkite . Do you think this Government has time
 to regain the support of the people?

 President Kennedy . I do, vIi th changes in policy and
 perhaps with personnel, I think it can , If i t doesn't
 make those changes , I "rould t hink that the chances of
 winning it would not be very good, 69/ .
Confront ed by the necessity of public comment , the Pres ident had spoken
boldly and forthrightly. The President 's c all for change s of policy and
personnel patently conveyed the message that the Buddhist repres s ions
must end, and the Nhus must go. Later i n the s ame interview, ho.Tever,
the President had sai d, II • • , I don't agree "Tith t hose who say we
should withdraw. That would be a great mi st ake, II 19./ As Hilsman sum-
mari zed it l ate r,

 23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 'He had embarked on a policy that avoi ded t he
 extremes both of wi thdra"ring from Vietnam or of actually
 taking part in direct action to change t he Government .
 The policy was one of trying to discriminate by con-
 tinuing to support those Vietnamese "rho were struggling
 against the Communists but maintai ning the t ens ion of
 our disapproval of Diem 's and Nhu ' s repressive policies . Jl/

It vas , in effect, t he policy Lodge had proposed.

 Meanwhile i n Saigon , Lodge had gone ahead with his proposals.
He cont i nued to avoid any official contact with Diem, but on September 2
he had his second meeting vri th Nhu (the first on August 27 was an i ncon-
clusi ve statement of positions on e ach side 72 /) in c ompany "rith the
Itali an Alllbas sador and the Papal Delegat e. Nhu, perhaps encouraged by
 a collateral i ntercession of the l<'rench Ambassador, announce d he i ntended
to resign from the government for good and r et i re to Dalat. 73/ ' A GVN
announcement would state t hat the progress of the program against the
Viet Cong permitted hi s departure. t·~e . Nhu was to l eave Vietnam for
a trip to Yugoslavia, Ita ly, and po ss i bly the U.S. The Papal De l egate
"TOu ld arrange for Archbi shop Thuc to leave the country. Some measures
to e ase Buddhist tensions would be taken and, as a public relation s
gesture, a prime minister would be appointed. These "rere all proposal s
which Lodge had i nitia lly advanced. But as the days passed, nothing
happened and Lodge gre,., i mpatient. Contributing to his concern ,.,ere
the fre quent and often contradictory rumors that Nhu was secretly
dealing with Hanoi and/ or the VC through the French and the Polish
Ambassadors, both of whose government s favored a neutralist solution
betw'e en North and South Vietnam. 74/

 For the remai nder of the week, the Italian Ambassador and the
Papal Delegate urged IJhu to act on his promises to Lodge . On Friday ,
September 6, after they had stress ed the urgency for action created by
Senator Church 's r umored aid-suspension resolution, Nhu vent into a
tirade and s aid he would not cons ider l eaving the count ry. He did,
however, say he would !!formally!! resign . 75/ On the follovring day, the
Papal Delegate, who had condemned Archbishop Thuc's activity to the
Vatic an and rece ived the Pope 's support, got Thuc out of the country. 76/
Mme. I-Ihu left the countI"J for Europe on September 9. The arrests of -
students by the r egime , hovrever, continued and stories of torture and
atrocities began to circulate.

 In 'Washington , the NSC met on September 6 and renewed the discussion
of reopening !!tough negotiations!! with Diem. 77/ Lodge, of course,
opposed this while continuing his dialogue with Nhu . But others at the
meeting (pre sumably including IvIcNamara on the bas is of his views at the
August 31 meeting) urged that Lodge be instructed to make another
approa ch to Diem. Lodge wa s accordingly i nstructed to clarify for Diem
the U. S. position a.nd explain the diffic ult pos ition his policy placed
us in ,-rith respect to U. S. and world opinion. 78/

 24 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Perhaps the most important discussion at the meeting was that
 engendered by Robert Kennedy over the fundamental purpose of the U.S.
 involvement. According to Hilsman, Robert Kennedy said:

 As he understood it we were there to help the people
 resisting a Commw1ist take-over. The first question was
 vlhether a Communist take-over could be successfully resisted
 with any government. If it could not, now was the time to
 get out of Vietnam entirely, rather than waiting. If the
 answer was that it could, but not with a Diem-Nhu govermnent
 as it 'fas nOlv constituted, vle owed it to the people resisting
 Communism in Vj.etnam to give Lodge enough sanctions to bring
 changes that would permit successful resistance. But the
 basic question of whether a Communist take-over could be
 successfully resisted 'Ti th any government had not been
 answered, and he vas not sure that anyone had enough informa-
 tion to answer it. 12/

Kennedy! s trenchant analysis, hOI-rever, did not generate a searching
reappraisal of U.S. policy. It Md stimulate further efforts to get
more infonna.tion on the situation. HcNamara proposed sending General
Krulak on an immeMate fact-finding trip. It 'vas agreed that a senior
Foreign Service Officer with Vietnam experience, Joseph Mendenhall ,
would accompany him, and that they .TOuld bring John Ilecklin, the USIS
director, and Rufus Phillips , the director of rural programs for USOI>1,
back I-Tith them to report. 80! Krulak and Hendenhall left later that
day. State, for its part,-Sent Saigon a long comprehensive cable of
questions on Vietnamese attitudes at all levels of society. 81/

 The purpose of the Krulak-rt::endenhall mission was to assess, i n
Krulak!s VTords, If the effect of recent events upon the attitudes of the
Vietnamese in general, and upon the war effort against the Viet Cong .1f 82/
In a vrhirlwind four-day trip, the two men visited throughout Vietnam and
returned to Washington to report . Krul ak .lent to ten different locations
in all four corps areas and spoke with the }'unbassador, General Harkins
and his staff, 87 U.S. adVisors, and 22 Vietnamese officers. 83/
Mendenhall vent to Saigon, Hue, Da Nang , and several other provincial
cities and talked primarily to old Vietnamese friends. Not surprisingly,
their estimates of the situation were almost completely opposite.

 The NSC convened on the morning of September 10, immediately after
their return, to hear their reports. Krulak gave a very optimistic
appraisal of the progress of the war and discounted the effect of the
political crisis on the army. The following, in his OIm words, .Tere
his general conclusions :

 The shooting war is still going ahead at an impressive
 pace. It has been affected adversely by the political
 crisis, but the impact is not great.

 There is a lot of war left to fight, particularly in
 the De lta , .There the Viet Cong remain strong.

 25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Vietnamese officers of all r anks are well aware of the
 Buddhist is sue . Most have viewed it in de tachment and have not
 permitted religious diffe rences significant ly to affect their
 internal military relationship.

 Vietnamese military commanders , at the variQus echelons,
 are obedient and could be expected to execute any order
 they view as law·ful.

 The U.S. / Vietnamese military relationship has not been
 damaged by the political crisis, in any significant degree.

 There is some dissatisfaction, among Vietnamese officers,
 ",ith the na,tional administration. It is focused far more on JlTgo
 Dinh Nhu than on President Diem. Nhu ' s departure would be
 hailed, but fev officers would extend their necks to bring it
 about.

 Excluding the very serious political and military factors
 external to Vietnam, the Viet Cong ",ar "'ill be ,von if the
 current U.S. military and sociological programs are pursued,
 irrespective of the grave defects in .the ruling regime.

 Improvements in the quality of the Vietnamese Govern-
 ment are not going to be brought about by leverage applied
 through the military. They do not have much, and vTill
 probably not use vlhat they have. 81+/

This sanguine vievl of the situation was forcefully disputed by J',Iendenhall.
He argued that the disaffection mth the regime had reached the point
vThere a breakdown of civil government was threatened, and the possibility
of a religious civil war could not be excluded. The war could not be
won mth the present regime, he concluded . 85/ The polar opposition of
these two reports prompted Kennedy 's now f aiiiOus query, "You two did
visit the same country, didn't you?" 86/

 The critical failure of both reports was to understa.TJ.d the f unda -
mental political role that the army was coming to play in Vietnam.. It
was the only potential force with sufficient power to constitute an
alternative to Diem. Diem and Nhu fully understood this fact, and had
coped l"i th it by usurping the prerogative of senior officer promotion ,
and basing those promotions on loyalty to the palace. This had SOvTD deep
seeds of distrust among the senior military men, and fragmented their
potential power. Krulak failed to see that once the internal political
situation deteriorated to the point where massive disaffect ion mth the
regime threatened a communist victory, the generals would unite and
plunge into politics out of common necessity. But more importantly)
neither Krulak nor 1·1endenhall seemed to anticipate that, if the army
achieved power, the divi sive effect of Diem's preferential promotion
policies would surface in an internal army pOl·rer struggle. Nor did
they fully understand the negative effect on the war effort this pre-
occupation .Ti th politics among the generals .lOuld have.

 26 TOP SECRET Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECR~T - Sensitive

 Nolting took is sue with l':endenhall' s appraisal, noting that
 Mendenhall had been pessimistic abot;.~ prospe cts in Vietna'TI for several
 years. But John Mecklin, the USIS director, corroborated Nen denha ll's
 view, and pushed it even further, sa:,-ing that the U. S. should apply
. direc t pressure, such as suspension of non-mil itary aid, to bring about
 a change of government. In Mecklin' s .lords:

 This would unavoidably be ds...'1gerous. There was no way
 to be sU.re hoY! events "TOuld develop . It was possible, for
 example, that the Vietnamese fOY'ces mJght fragment into
 "Tarring factions , or that t he new government rTOuld be so
 incompetent fu'1d/or unstable that the effort against the
 Vi et Cong would collapse. The US should t herefore resolve
 no", to i ntroduce American combat forces if necessary to
 present a Communist triumph midst the debris of the Diem
 regime . 87/ -

Mecklin appreciated the potential for i nstability inherent in any army
successor regime that Krulak and l=end.enhall had not seen. But he,
nevertheless, concluded that ve should proceed to bring about a c hange
of government, accept the consequences , and contemplate the introduction
of U.S. combat troops to stave off a Viet Cong victory.

 The meeting went on to hear Rufus Phillips ' dour report on the
situation in the Delta, and his doubts about the validity of Krulak's
optimistic outlook on the military situation. 88/ Phillips argued that
this was primarily a political contest for theallegiance of people, not
a military war, and that the Diem r egi me was losing it. The Strategic
Hamlet Program was a shambles in the field, especially in the Delta.
The meeting ended on this note and no decisions were made.

 One course of action being given increasing consideration in these
meetings, as well as in Saigon and on Capitol Hill, was a suspension of
non-mili tary aid to Diem. Jifter the erroneous VOA announcement of aid
suspension on August 26, Lodge had been authorized on August 29, as
already noted, to suspend aid at his discretion if it would facilitate
the coup. Lodge had been reluct ant to do so. The question had been
raised again in a joint State / .AJD cable to Lodge on September 3 ",hich
listed the items currently up for a:9proval or renewal. 89/ Lodge 1-TaS
informed that all approval for non-military aid would be-temporarily
held up but that no suspension 1.,as to be announced , since such a policy
decision was still pending. Lodge took advantage of this by having the
mission, and especially USOM, reply to all GVN inquiries about the
status of the aid renevTals or approvals that President Diem wou ld have
to taU:. to IJodge about it. Meamrhile , the U. S. Senate began to put
pressure on the Administration to do something about Diem. Hilsman ,,,as
badgered by the Senate Subcommittee on the Far East, and there were
threats of f urther cuts in the .UD bill if something vasn ' t done.
Senator Church informe d the .Administration he intended to introdu ce soon
a resolution condemning Diem 's repression s against the Buddhists and
calling for an end of aid to South Vietnam unless they "Tere aba..l1doned.

 27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 \
 He agreed to delay its introduction temporarily so as not to embarrass
 the Administration. 22/
 The idea of a selective aid suspension to goad Diem into action was
actively discussed at State during the Krulak-Mendenhall mission, and
later John Hecklin had specifically suggested it to the NSC . 91/ On
September 8, AID Director David Bell warned in a TV interview-that the
Congress might cut aid to South Vietnam if the Diem government did not
change its policies. 92/ On r.:onday, September 9, ho,·rever, the President ,
in a TV i nterview for the nevI Huntley-Brinkley Nei-TS , said, "I don't
think Ire think that (a reduction of U. S. aid to South Vietnam) vlould be
helpful at this time." 93/ On September 11, the day after the President
received the Krulak-I,lendenhall reports, Lodge reversed his previous
position, and in a long cable proposed that o.etailed consideration be
given to frays in vhich non -military aid suspension might be used as a
s anction to topple the government. 94/ He had concluded we could not
get satisf'action from Diem, and hadto face up to the unpleasant task
of forCing events. This view vlaS reinforced the next day in a long series
of ca..bles replying to State 's September 7 request for a comprehens ive
evaluation of South Vietnamese attitudes. 95/

 Lodge's proposal, and a proposal by Hilsman for a comb ined set of
public and private measures to bring pressure on Diem, formed the basis
of a ~-lhi te House meeting on September 11. 96/ On the follmvi ng day,
Senator Church was given the green light and introduced his resolution.
On September 14, Lodge was informed that approval of the $18.5 million
remainder of the commercial import program (the principal piastre support,
anti-inflation aid device) was deferred until basic U.S. policy decisions
had been made . 97/ The decision on aid suspension was nov absorbed i nto
the broader consideration of a set of coordinated measures to put pre ssure
on the GVN .

 Throughout September, the division of oplnlon lvithin the U.S.
mission in Saigon had grown sharper and sharper. Harkins, Richardson,
and to a lesser extent Brent ( Director of usmn, did not believe that
the Diem government's bungling of the Buddhist crisis and loss of popular
support were threatening the war effort, or that the crisis vlaS as serious
as Lodge, Me cklin, Mendenhall et a1. portrayed it. In any case, the
 ' - -as , to require aU. S. abandonment of
si tuation was not so irretrievable
Diem in a risky venture at coup-making tm-rards an unknown alternative. 98/
The opposite viev Vlas held by Lodge, Truehart, Hecklin, Phillips, and the
majority of the junior officers in the mission. By mid-September, the
debate had reached a shrill and acrimonious level, as the follmving
excerpt from a Harkins' cable to Taylor indicates:

 As everyone else seems to be talking, writing and
 confUSing the issue here in Vietnam, it behooves me to also
 get into the act. From most of the reports and articles
 I read, one vTOuld say Vie tnam and our programs here are
 falling apart at the seams. Hell,' I just thoroughly
 disagree. 99/

 28 TOP SECRET - 'Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The situation was of such concern that CIA dispatched a special officer
to reach aD independent evaluation, His conclusion .ras that had .,e
hastily expended our capability to overthrm{ the regime, that an aid
suspension "\-,ould not guarantee a constructive result, and that to prevent
furt her political fragmentation we should adopt a "business as usual"
policy to buy time. 100/ P.Jllidst all this internal U. S. dissension, the
GVN announced on September 14 that martial 1m·, would end on September
16 and that National Assembly elections would be held September 27. 101/

 In Hashington , the NSC convened again September 17 to consider hro
alternative proposals for dealing with Diem prepared by Hilsman. The
firs t , ,·,hich Hilsman and others at State favored, was the "pressures
and persuasion track,1I and involved an escalatory ladder of measures
both public and private, including selective aid suspension, to coerce
Diem into getting rid of Nhu and taking steps to restore the political
 - ,
situation. 102/ The alternative proposal the IIreconciliation vith a
rehab ilitated GVN track,!! involved a public posture of acquiescence in
rece nt GVN actions, recognition that Diem and Nhu were inseparable,
and a decision to salvage as much as possible from a bad situation.
This, of course, would have involved a reopening of the dialogue with
Diem, to which Lodge was opposed. Both proposals assumed that for the
moment a coup was out of the question.

 There are no available records of what transpired in the meeting,
but two deCisions were clearly made. The first was, in effect, to adopt
Hilsman 's llpressures and persuasion" proposal. The guidance c able to
Lodge after the meeting, however, came from the White House. It stated
that,

 We see no good opportunity for action to remove present
 government in i mmediate future; therefore, as your most
 recent message suggests, we must, for t he present, apply such
 pressures as are available to secure whatever modest improve-
 ments on the scene may be possible . • • Such a course, more-
 over, is consistent .lith more drastic effort as and when means
 became available. 103/

Lodge .las to press for a reduction of Nhu ' s authority and his departure
from Saigon, at least temporarily. The cable included a long list of
other measures for the GVN to take to redress the political situation and
gave Lodge complete control over . the aid program to enhance his bargaining
position .

 This authorization specifically includes aid actions
 currently held in abeyance and you are authorized to set
 those in train or hold them up further in your discretion.
 l¥"e leave entirely in your hands decisions on the degree of
 privacy or publicity you "l-lish to give to this proce ss. 104/

There is no evidence on the degree of consensus of the principals in
this decision.

 29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 'l'OP SE C ~(EI - Sensitive

 Lodge replied to the ne", policy guidance on September 19 in a
 generally negative vein. 105/ The pro})osals for specific actions by
the GVn had all been previously suggested to Diem without any results,
and Lodge "TaS not optimistic about tieir adoption now. He specifically
felt that he should not be required to make a futile overture to Diem.
The PJ'abassador! s aloofness was begir_n ing to cause official concern at
the palace, and he felt he should press vie'ws on the ~~ go family only 'when
they initiated the contact. He did f"ot think. a public relations effort
was likely to have any effect on the regime, whose appreciation of
questions of public support was virtually nil. 'Hithholding aid was
another delicate matter that did not offer great prospects of success.
Lodge was particuarly concerned that such action "TQuld impede the "rar
effort or damage the economy, but hE..-re no re8.1 effect on the regime.
I~ o doubt recalling the generals! pre-fious request for an aid suspension
as a sign of U.S. support, Loig e expressed his view that any suspension
o f aid should be timed to coin cide -ith another coup attempt and should
be used to facilitate it. He ',:as troubled by the opinion expressed by
both General Minh and Secretary ThuE..n privately within the previous hw
days that the \Var vTaS going very baily and the VC were winning . In
general, he felt that a patient "let them come to me" tactic vTaS more
lik ely to have results, unless a real coup possibility emerged, which
he felt we should back.

4. The l1cNaro.ara-Taylor l"iission

 The second decision to come out of the September 17 NBC meeting was
to adopt a suggestion of Secretary Lcl~ amara for another fact-finding
mission, this time by himself and Ger:.eral Taylor, Chairman of the JCS. 106/

 Lodge reacted immediately to the proposed HcNamara-Taylor mission,
pointing out to the President that such a visit vlOuld require a call on
Diem that would be construed by the regime as a return to business as
usual. 107/ Since he had been consciously pursuing a policy of official
aloofnesS; he wondered ,,[hether such a high level visit was desirable.
Furthermore, it coincided with the proposed 1;ational Assembly elections
on September 27 , a.l1d could not but be construed as an indication of the
lack of importance I'le attached to ttem. But the Pres ident was insistent,
and Lodge acquiesced, suggesting that the public announcement state that
Lodge had requested the visit . 108/ After an exchange of alternative
phraseology, it vms agreed that the release would say that the President
had decided to send the mission after consultation vlith Lodge. It was so
announced on September 21 . 109/

 The President ! s instructions to Ncl': amara described the purpose of
the mission in the following terms:

 I am asking you to go because of my desire to have the
 best possible on-the-spot appra.isal of the military and
 parrunilitary effort to defeat the Viet Cong .... The events
 in South Vietnam since i·lay have nOVi raised serious questions

 . 30 TOP SECRLT - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECBEr - Sensitive

 both about the present prospects for success against the Viet
 Cong and still more about the future effectiveness of this
 effort unless there can be important political improvement in
 the country. It is in this context that I now need your
 appraisal of the situation . If the prognosis in your judgment
 is not hopeful., I would like your vie1trs on what action must be
 taken by the South Vietnamese Government and what steps our
 Govermnent should take to lead the Vietnamese to that action .

 • . . I will also expe ct you to examine ,'lith Ambas sador Lodge
 1trays and means of fashioning all forms of our assistance to
 South Vietnam so that it will support our foreign policy ob-
 jectives more precisely . 110/

The purpose, thus, IvaS fourfold: (1) appraise the war effort; ( 2) assess
the impact on that effort of recent political developments; (3) recommend
a course of action for the GVN and for the U.S.; and (21-) examine "lith
Lodge ways of tailoring our aid to achieve our foreign policy objectives .
In a statement to the press at Andre1tTs Air Force Base just before leaving.
for Vietnam on September 23, Secretary ncl{amara said that t he purpose
of t he trip ,vas, " . .. to determine whether that military effort bas been
adversely affected by the unrest of the past several 1treeks . 11 111/

 Both Schlesinger and Hilsman , however, contend that Kennedy sent
McNamara and Taylor to Vietn am to convince them of the negative effect
on the war effort that the protracted political crisis 'Has having, and
o f the necessity of applying sanctions to the Diem regime to bring about
change . According to this argmaent, the President felt he could not
afford a major policy rift in the Administration over applying sa,nctions,
e specially the oppo sit ion of the powerful JCS, and concluded that only
Mc:~amara, if convinced, could bring the military along. 112/

 Vlhatever the exact purpose of the trip, the party left Has hington
on September 23 and returned ten days later, on October 2 , after an
exhausting trip and a comprehensive revieI'J of the situation .

 The div ergent vielvs of the members of the U. S . mission about the
r elative pro gress .of the ,'Tar , and the effect on it of the political
crisis, were exposed immediate ly i n the opening session that Mc~~amara
and Taylor held in Saigon with the country team on September 25. General
Harkins and the .rill.CV staff generally presented a favorable picture of
the war , emphas izing the progress of the strategic hamlet program, and
the generally improve d A~VN position , in spite of recent rises in VC
i nitiated i nc idents and declines in ARVN operations related to the po-
litical turmoil. 113/ Mcnamara and Taylor prodded the briefers "llTith
questions trying to get comparative i ndicators of the situation over the
previous tl,oTO years. NIcl\~amara in particular pressed for det a ils about
the Delta . Lodge I sand Eecklin I s re ad i ng OI~ recent events, and their
estimate of war progress, differed sharply from that of General Harki ns .

 31 TOP SECP~T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Lodge stressed the more polit ical and intangible aspects of the conflict
and cast doubt on the lIhardness" of the statistical data from :M.4CV .
With the Mission 's division of opinion exposed and the is sues joined.,
McNamara l eft to tour the country .

 His subsequent itinerary took him throughout the country i nter -
vieWing Americans and Vietnamese bot h at headquarters, and in the field.
In Saigon, in the l ast few days of t he visit, he \·:as given extensive
briefings by the civ ili an side of the Miss ion and, since he stayed ;.rith
Lodge , had ample opportunity for discussions vTith the .L\mbassador .

 On September 29, MCl,Tamara, Taylor, Harkins, and Lodge c alled on Diem,
 after having previously decided against delivery of a stiff letter from
Kennedy . 114/ After a two-hour monologue by Diem, l'1cNamara vIas finally
 able to stress the U. S. concern that Dolitical unrest ' was undermining
t he war effort. 115/ He stress ed th~ problem that repressions vlere
 cre ating for President Kennedy because of aroused pub lic opinion . But
he did not ask for the removal of the Hhus, a matter W"tshington had left
to his and Lodge ' s discretion. All this seems to have ' had litt l e impact
on Diem, hovrever . Diem had asked Taylor for his appraisal of the I\rar ,
and -vri th the approval of 1-1cNamara, a l ong letter from Taylor vTaS delivered
to Diem on October 2 . The l etter pointedly outlined the major military
problems in the Delta , vTarned of the danger to the war effort of the
political criSis, and li sted many of the spec ific steps needed to improve
t he military effort that subsequent l y appeared i n the r eport to the
President. The l etter summed up with a terse, tough statement of the
U. S. view:

 In closing, Nr . President , may I gi ve you my most import ant
 over-all impres s ion? Up to nm'l , the battle against the Viet
 Cong has seemed endless; no one has been willing to set a date
 for its successful conclusion. After talking to s cores of
 officer s, Vietnamese and American, I am convinced that the
 Viet Cong i nsurgency i n the north and center can be r educed to
 litt l e more than sporadic incidents by t he end of 1964. The
 Delta will take longer but should be completed by the end of
 1965 . But for t hese predictions to be valid, certain conditions
 must be met . Your Government should be prepared to energize
 all agencies, milit ary and civil, to a hi gher output of activity
 than up to now . Ineffective commanders and province officials
 must be rep l aced as soon as i dentified. Fi nally , t here should
 be a r estoration of domestic tranquility on the home fr ont if
 politi cal tensions are to be allayed and external critic i sm is
 to abate. Condi tions are needed for the creation of an atmos"'
 phere conduc ive to an effective campaign directed at the obj ec-
 tive , vital to both of us, of defeating the Viet Cong and of
 re storing peace to your community. 116/

 32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 On September 30, their last day in Vietnam, HcF81nara and Taylor, together
 with Lodge , met with Vice President Tho. Tho s aid that the U. S ., after
 T8.ylor's report in 1961, had responded to the Vietnam situation promptly
. and efficiently, but that recently lye ha,d failed to use our strength and
 i nfluence intelligently to prevent the current political deterioration. 117/
 But he had no methods to suggest . Later he sharply questioned the succesS-
 of the Strategic Haml et Program, and said that i ncreased Viet Cong strength
 had to be attributed to vlidespread peasant disaffection with the government.
 'I'hese views, from the man most often mentioned in U. S . circles as an al-
 ternative to Diem, coming at the end of the visit as they did, must have
 had an important influence on ltlcl'!amara' s conclusions. Later that day the
 party left Vietnron to return home.

 During the briefings for Nciiamara, Lodge ha d rai's ed ag ain his doubts
about the efficacy of aid suspension as a l ever against Diem, but had also
expressed his concern that the foreign aid bill vTould be p enalized in
Congre ss for Diem ' s repressions. 118/ Lodge reiterated in his cables to
Washington during the visit his belief that an aid suspension could
boomerang and alienate the populat ion as well as the r egime. 119/ AVIare ;
no doubt, that an aid suspension vIaS a potential recommendation of the
mission, Brent went on r ecord against it, too. 120/ Both views were
important because McFamara and Taylor had been specifically charged by
the President with examining VIaYs to make our aid serve our foreign policy
goals, and their briefing papers included a program-by-program cons i dera-
tion of the impact of aid suspension prepared by AID -'IIashington . 12.1/

 After a one-day stop i n Honolulu to prepare their report , l:lci'Tamara
a nd Taylor arrived back in Ho.shi ngton on October 2 and promptly met 1-rith
the President and the l~SC . Their report concluded that the l1mili tary
c ampaign has made great progress and cont i nues to pro gress ." 122/ But
it war ned that the serious pol itical tensions in Saigon and the increas-
ing unpopularity of Diem and Ehu could abet the then limited r estiveness
of some ARVE officers and erode the favorab l e military trends. They
rep ort ed no evi dence of a succe ssful coup in the making, and felt that
U. S. pressure woul d probably only further harden the regime's attitudes .
Eevertheless, "unless such pressures are exerted, they (Diem-Nhu) are
almo st c ertain to continue past patterns of behavior . 11 123/

 The report's military r ecommendations were that General Harkins should
 review the war effort with Diem with a view tOlmrd i ts successful conclu-
 sion i n I, II, and III Corps by the end of 1964 and in the Delta by the
 end of 1965 . This would necessitate: ( a ) a shift in military emphasis and
 strength to the Delta; (b) an i n creased tempo of mi litary activity
 throughout the country; (c) an emphasis on II c l ear and ho ld operations";
 (d) a consolidation of the strategic Hamlet Program with the emphasis on
 se curity; and (e) the fleshing out of combat units and better trai n ing
,and arms for the hamlet militia. It vras furt her proposed that an aru1ounce-
ment be made of the planned withdrawal of 1, 000 U. S. troops by the end o f

 33 TOP SECRE'l.' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

1963 in connection with a progrB1ll to train Vietnamese to replace Americans
in all essential functions by 1965.

 To bring political pressure on the Diem regime to end its repressive
policies, the follm'ling measures '-Tere recommended : ( a) a continued wi th-
holding of funds in the commodity import program, but without formal
annou..l1cement ; (b) suspension of approval of AID loans for the Saigon-
Cholon Haterworks and the Saigon Electric Pm'ler Proj ect; (c) suspension
of support for Colonel Tung I s forces unless they "\-Tere transferred to the
field and placed under JGS authority; (d) maintenance of purely "correct"
relations bebveen the Ambassador and Diem (Ceneral Harkins I contact with
the regime not to be suspended, hOI-lever ). In subsequent evaluations of
the success of these sanctions, the report stated:

 •.• the situation must be closely v.ratched to see what steps
 Diem i s taki ng to reduce repressive practices and to improve
 the effectiveness of the military effort. He should set no
 fixed criteria, but r ecognize that we 1,wul d have to decide in
 2··1.~ months "\-Thether to move to more drastic action or try to
 carryon with Diem even i f he had not taken significant steps.
 124/
Finally, the report recommended against our actively encouraging a coup,
although it recommended seeking "urgently to identify and build contacts
with an alternative leadership if and when it appears." 1 2 5/
 The report is a curiously contradictory document. It "\-Tas, no doubt,
a compromise bet'-leen General Harkins I view of the war I s progress as sup-
ported by General Taylor, and Secretary Mc}'~amara I s growing conviction of
the gravity of the political crisis and it s dire potential for the war
effort. Its recommendations for aid suspensions and the announcement of
U.S. troop withdrawals were obviously designed as measures, short of a
withdravla l of U. S. support, that ,wuld create doubt vli.thin the Diem regime
about U.S. intentions and i ncent i ves for policy changes. 126/ The fact
that these sanctions would be seen by the generals as a signal of our
willingness to accept alternative leadership -- i.e., a C01.l.]J - - does not
seem to have figured in the recommendation, however, because elsewhere
the report specifically rules out D,S. encouragement of "a change of
government. II 1-2 7/ This is an important lapse in view of the generals I
clear statement in August that they "lwuld regard an aid suspension as a
coup signal.

 Neve rtheless, the recommendations of the Hission met "\-!i th swift
approval at the NSC on October 2, and later that day Secretary McHamara
made the Presidentially approved statement to the press that included the
announcement of the 1,000 man troop wi thdra,val by the end of the year. 128/
The statement reiterated the U. S. commitment to the struggle against in-
surgency and aggression in South Vietnam, noted the progress of the war,

 TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

announced the troop withdrmval, and dissociated the U.S. from the GVN's
repressive policies. It aVOided, however, any reference to economi c
aid suspensions or other sanctions against the regime , thereby giving
Diem a chance to come around ,dthout a public lo ss of face .

 On October 5, the President approved the specific military recom-
mendations of the r1chamara-Taylor report, IIbut directed that no formal
announcement be made of the implementation of plans to wi thdravT 1,000
U.S. military personnel by the end of 1963. 11 129/ The details of how
the new policy '\vould be applied were spelled out in a long cable to
Lodge fol101ving this meeting . The purpose of the nel'T course of action
was described at the beginning of the message:

 Actions are des igned to indicate to Diem Government our
 di spleasure at its political policies and activities and to
 cre ate signific:.a,nt uncertainty in that government and in key
 Vi~tn8mese groups as to future intentions of United States.
 At same time, actions are designed to have at most slight
 impact on military or cO'lmterinsurgency effort against Viet
 Cong, at l east in short term.

 The recommendat ions on negotiat ions are concerned vrith
 what U.S. is after, i.e., Gv}T action to i ncrease effective-
 ness of its military effort; to ensure popular support to
 win vrar ; and to eliminate strains on U. S. Government and
 public confidence. The negotiating posture is designed not
 to lay down specific hard and fast demands or to set a dead-
 line, but to produce movement in Vietnamese Government along
 these li.nes. In this way we can test and probe effectiveness
 of any actions the Gvn actually takes and, at the same time,
 maintain sufficient flexibility to permit U.S. to resume full
 support of Diem regime at ~ny time U.S. Govermnent deems it
 appropriate. 130/ .

The cable goes on to acknowledge that the proposed sanctions can only be
applied for 2-4 months before they begin to adversely affect the military
effort, and therefore when that begins to happen reco gnizes that,
" ••. further major decisions will be required. 1I 131/

 The specific actions to be taken included: (1) suspension of the
commodity import program without public announcement; ( 2) selective
suspension of PL 480, on an item-by-item, sometimes monthly, basis, after
referral to vJashington for revie\v ; (3) suspension of the loans for the
Saigon-Cholon vTater,vorks and the Saigon Electric POvTer Proj ect; (4) noti-
fication to the GVN that financial support of Colonel Tung's forces ;"Tould
be contingent on their co~mitment to field operations under JGS control,
agai n without public announcement. Lodge was i nstruct ed to maintain his
policy of "cool correctness in order to make Diem come to you, II but to be

 35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

prepared to re -estab lish contact later if it did not vTork. Specifica lly
he ,vas to seek improvements in the GVi'J military effort, as outlined in
the HcKamara-Taylor report; in the GV1'~ ' s internal policies that would
restore popular confidence ; and in the GViJ's international (particularly
American ) public image and it s attitudes and actions toward the U. S.
Once again, ho·wever , the discussion of this new program of pressures did
not allude to their impa.ct on the military nor how a coup initiative by
the generals, stemming from such measures , should be dealt with .

 Thus, the Kennedy Administration, after a long month of se e.rching
deliberations had made a far-reaching decision on American policy tOl-Jard
South Vietnam. It had chosen to take the difficult and ri sky path of
positive pressures against an a lly to obtain from him compliance with
our policies. To our good fortune, that policy was to be implemented
by an Ambassador who not only supported it, but was uniquely equ:j.pped
by background and temperament tb make it succeed.

 TOP SECRET Sensit i ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 IV

 THE COUP MATURES ~, OCTOBER 2-rOVE.MBER 1

.1. The South Vietnamese Situation in October

 Through the month of September the GVH resorted to police state t.actics
ever more frequently. The regime, no,v more than ever under Nhu' s dominance,
lifted martial law September 16, but repressions against the Buddhist
clergy cont.inued unabated. Students, down to t.he grade school level, 'Here
arrest.ed a nd detained for t.he most minor of protests. Civil servants came
under pressure to avoid contact with P~ericans, and to demonstrate their
loyalty t.o t h e ruling family. Re gime-inspired rumors of impending mob
attacks on U.S. facilities, and assassination lists of prominent Americans
circulat.ed regularly. 1/ Then, on October 5, at. noon in t.he centra.l mar-
ket. place, another Buddhist monk burned himself to death, t.he first self ..
immolation since the pagoda raids. 'i!:.,/

 In t.his t.ense atmosphere, elections for t.he }~ational Assembly "Tere
held on September 27 after a pro forma one-week campaign. Predictably,
GVN candidates won oven.rhelming victories. The new assembly convened on
October 7 to hear President Diem's state of the union message. Diem spoke
mainly of South Vietnam 's past. and present progress, playing dovn t.he
internal political crisis, and made only scant reference to U. S. assist-
ance. 1/ As might have been expect.ed, he t.hrei' the blame for the Buddhist
crisi s on t.he Communists, foreign advent.urers, and the Hest.ern press.

 On the same day, Mme . Nhu arrived in the U.S. after a month i n Europe
t.o begin a three"i,eek speaking .t.our. She immediat.ely l aunched into shrill
denunciations of the Buddhists and of D.S. policy that. progressively
alienated U. S. public opinion. She "Tas follo'Ned around t.he country by her
father, the former Ambassador to the United States , however, vIho acted as
a one-man trut.h squad revealing the inaccuracies and distort.ions of her
st. at.ements . The Administration 's dignified and t.emperate reaction further
dis credited her att.acks. On October 8, the Ul: General Assemb ly voted to
send a fact-finding team to South Vietnam t.o investigate the charges of
repre ssions against Buddhists .

2. The new American Policy

 Lodge's immediate reaction to t.he neiv policy approach ,.,as enthusias-
tic, It an excellent inst.ruction outlining a course of action ivhich should
yield constructive results."!:J vJith the exception of the aid suspen-
sion, his views, in essence, had prevailed vTith both frIc:[amara and the
President, t.he st.andard public kudos to military progress notwithstand-
ing . His plan was to allow the suspension of t.he commodity import pro··
gram, the l argest and most important of t.he economic sanctions, to become

 37 TOP SECRET· Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRE'r - Sensitive

 evident ,d thout making any ment ion of it, and, by maintaining his aloof-
 ness from official contact , force the re gime to come to him . ~ On
 October 7, however, Lodge expressed some doubts about the real value of
 the political concessions itemized in State ' s instructions if our real
 goal was removal of l'Thu, an objective of questionable feasibility under
 the current circumstances . §) In view of Hhu 's increasing hostility
 to the U.S. presence and i nf luence, Lodge felt a request from the regime
 for a U. S. vii thdrawal was a distinct possibilit;)T.

 That same day, the regime 's reaction to the aid cut-off hit the
streets with banner headlines in its mouthpiece, the Time s of Vietnam :
"USOM Freezes Economic Aid Progr am ." 7/ The article accused the U. S.
of subverting the 'war effort, and asserted that the cut-off had been
decided in mid-September. Such fantastic pressure for p'etty reforms
would jeopardize the entire revo lutionary progr am of the government, it
concluded. Lodge made no com.ment on the story.

 In mid-October, Lodge was re quested to provide Hashington with a
 "Teekly eva luation of the effects, both positive and negative, of the
 new policy. 8/ Lodge 's October 16 reply summarized the situ8,t10n as
 follo ws : "Sa far we appear to be getting virtually no effect from our
 actions under DEPI'EL 534, but we ..Tould not have expected effects this
. early."21 Other reports indicated that the regime Ivas preparing to
 take a number of belt-tightening meaSlITeS, including r eductions in
 civil service salaries; that Chinese businessmen and bankers had begun
 to get jittery about currenc y stability; and that the government was
 planning to draw down its foreign exchange reserves to sustain import
 levels i n the face of the U. S. cut-off of CIP funds. 10/ A CIA memo-
 randum concluded that the GVn re action to the ne..T U. S-.-policy, parti-
 cularly the violent anti-U. S. campaign in the Times of Vietnam and the
 surveill ance and harassment of America..'1s and their employees, indicated
 that Diem and n hu ..Tere preparing for a long fight and were unmoved by
 the new policy. 11)

 Under Lodge's instructions, General Still'vell elvill.CV - J - 3) met with
Secretary Thuan on October 17 and informed him of the impending cut-off
of funds for the Special Forces , both MAP and CIA, unless the three CIA-
funded companies under Colonel Tung's command were placed under JGS
contro l and transferred to the field. 12/ Thuan said he would take
the matter up ivi th Diem inunediately. Harkins informed Diem directly of
this action in a letter on October 18. 13/ General Don and Colonel
Tung ..Tere also personally advised of theaction, but again no public
announcement I'Tas made. On October 26 it was learned that Tung and JGS
were ..,orking on plans to transfer his Special Forces to the Central
Highlands. 14/ By then, however, coup plans "Tere well advanced and
the significance of this transfer must be understood therein.

 Militarily, in October whi le the GVI'1 had taken some minor steps in
line with the McNamara-Taylor recornTl1endations (such as agreeing to

 38
 --
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

realign III and IV Corps bound,3.ries to give added emphasis to the Delta
war), the combat situation c OY".t inued to "rorsen . The tempo of VC att a cks,
particularly i n the Delta, i ncreased; the \Ve apons- loss ratio and casua lty
ratio s deter i orated ; and G'TN "mis sing in act.ion" increased . 15/ In
Hashi ngt.on, furt.her doubt "Has cast on the optimism of previous reports
by a cont roversial Stat.e Department. rese arch study of October 22 . 16/
The memorandum took is sue vlith encouraging con clusions about the progress
of the military campaign derived from statistical tre nds , pointing out
important unfavorable trends r evealed by the same st.atistical data. In
Saigon, KACV continued unsuccessfully to press Diem to take further st.eps
to strengthen the war effort .

 Heanwhi le, the U. S. i":is sion had been feeling the i mpact of the neVi
policy in internal strains of its OVTn. Hilpman reports that Lodge
decided early in October that the recall of John Richardson , the CIA
chief in Saigon, would be a useful additional pressure against Nhu because
they had been clos ely ident i fied. during n olting ' s ambassadorship, and
because Richardson was kno~~ to favor a more conciliatory approach to
the re gime . 17/ ivhile there are no cables i n the available files to
confirm it, Hi lsman mai ntains that Lodge sent a private message to the
President and CIA Director McCone request ing Richardson 's tr ansfer. The
President agreed, McCone acquiesced , and Hichardson Ivas r eturned to
YJashington on October 5. 'Ilhatever other motives may have been invo lved,
Richardson had, in fact , been the sp ecific object of an attack in the
U. S . press on October 2 that had ac cused him of i nsubordination and had
c ompromised his ide nt ity. 18 / It i s not surprising under such circum-
stances that he should havebeen tran sferred . Vlhatever the c ase, the
press i nterpreted his rec a ll as a slap at the regime, as Hi l sman suggests
Lodge wanted .

 This was only an i ncident i n the continu ing series of st orie s b y U. S.
correspondents on divis ions vlithin the mission . Lodge's relations with
the press, hovrever , r emai ned excellent throughout his t our . He con-
scious l y cultivated the U. S. press corps with private luncheons ,
"backgrounders," and o ccasional leaks, and i t paid off for him personally .
But the : press sharply attacked. those i n the mission , like Richardson and
Harkins , with "ivhom they disa greed about U. S. policy. YJashington regis -
ter ed i ts concern that these stories, whatever their origin, were damag-
ing to the official posture of unity the U. S . C~vernment was trying to
maintain i n the impl ementation of a difficult policy to"rard South Vi etnam. 19/
But the stories cont i nued, even after the coup. --

 In his weekly evaluation of the impact of the new U.S. policy on
October 23 , Lodge was not encouraged by the r esults to date. "Diem/Hhu
give every appearance of sitting ti ght and reacting to U. S. pressure with
counter pressure and implying through publ ic statements that they c an go
it alone." 20/ F evertheless, there "ivere several straws i n the "rind .
Secretary Thuan had reported that Diem was worried and that he had i n·-
structed Thuan to a,sk Lodge if \'7ashington had reac he d any decisions' on

 39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 commercial imports. Lodge also felt that the regime was being more care--
 ful about repressive actions. Furthermore, experienced observers felt
 the U. S. policy was creating favorable conditions for a coup, although
 Lodge did not see anyone seriously con sidering it. 'I'he day after this
 message was sent, Lodge and his _'life v,ere invited by Diem to spend the
 next Sunday (the day after the National Day celebration) \-rith him at his
 villa in Dalat, after visiting an agricultural station and a strategic
 hamlet. Lodge promptly accepted. Diem had made the first move.

 vlashington instructed Lodge to use the occasion of the trip vii th
 Diem to test for movement by the GVV on any of the U.S. demands. 21/
 Lodge _vas to take advantage of any subject of interest that Diem brought
 up to determine both the wi llingness of the government to make conces ..
 sions and the effect of our selective sanctions. If Diem did not provide
 such conversationa l opportunities, Lodge "Tas to assume the i nitiative .
 In particular, he was to inquire about changes i n the military campaign
 that had been recommended by the McYamara-Taylor mission and subsequently
 pressed by General Harkins; he was to suggest that Diem be cooperative
 to the UN investigatory team that had arrived in the cOlliltry on October 24,
 and a.llow them full access to inform2.tion and people; and he was to inquire
 whether Diem did not think it time to end the bitter anti-American cam-
 paign of the Times of Vietnam and the Fhus .

 Lodge I S Sunday with Diem on October 27, the day after the Hat ional
 Day celebration, vIaS frustrating in almost all respects. Diem did bring
 up several issues of interest , but gave no indication that he had changed
 his position or his attitude about the Buddhists or the U.S . 22/ He did
 i nquire about the suspension of the commercial import programto ivhich
 Lodge i nquired in reply about the release of Buddhists and students from
 jail, the reopen i ng of the schools, and the elimination of anti - BUddhist
 di scrimination. Diem offered excuses and complaints as usual. Taking
 the initiative, Lodge complained to Diem of the public opinion pressure
 that his policies were placing the President under i n the U. S. He com-
 plained about the physical attacks on U. S. newsmen and about Bme Ehu I S
 inflammato ry remarks in the U. S. as examples of the kind of thing Diem
 could prevent that would enhance his public image in the U. S. and the
 world . Lodge describes the end of the conversation in this manner:

 When it was evident that the conversation was practically
 over , I said: "Iv!r. President , every single specific suggestion
 ,·rhich I have made , you have rejected. Isn 't there some one
 thing you ~ay think of that is within your capabilities to do
 and that \<!oul d favorably impress U. S. opinion? " As on other
 pr evious occasions when I asked him similar questions , he gave
 me a blank look and changed the subject . 23/

 While Lodge sa\<l no movement on the basis of the conversation, he nonethe-
 less suggested that consideration be given in vlashi ngton to what we \vould

 40 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
-----
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP S~C?BT - Sensitive

consider adequa.te response on Diem I s part for a resumption of the como.
mercial import program. J:'he follm<iing day, after Lodge had related the
disappointing res ults of the conversation to Secretary Thuan over
l uncheon, the latter observed that the U. S. really wasn't asking much
and that perhaps the conversation with Diem had been a beginning . 24/
In retro spect , the comment is iro ~ ic, for with the coup only five days
away, the October 27 conversation i"as in reality a path etic ending not
a hopeful beginning.

 At one level, attention n01,o, turned to Lodge' s sch~duled trip to
Washington OctOber 31. The exact purpose of the trip remains a mystery.
On October 30, he sent a cable to c:ias h ington '. . . i th some suggestions of
steps by the GVH that Uashington m. ig~t consider adequate for resuming
the commercial import program under various 'conditions , steps which he
hoped to discuss when he arrived. 25/ n01,orever , earlier in October,
Lodge had sent a private note to l'lcGeorge Bundy, asking that the Presi-
dent make hilu available for a triu to Vietnam to discuss with Lodge a
matt er which Lodge did not feel f;ee to enter into through any electronic.
communication channel. 26/ The following cryptic reference suggests
that ,·rhatever the mysterious subj ect Lodge had in mind, it vTaS the pur-
pose for the planned trip to viashington at t he end of October:

 Regarding my '<lire, I appreciate your willingness to send
 Bundy. Would not have brought this up if I did not have a
 proposal "'hich I think contains ne',,' ideas and which might just
 change the situation here for the better. It cannot be properly
 handled by telegram or letter and requires a chance for me to
 have a dialogue 'with Rusk and/or Harriman and/or Bundy . I wired
 Bundy because I cannot leave here immediately, but I could come
 for one working day to 'IJashington after Vietnamese National Day
 on October 26 and dedic ation of Vietnamese Atomic Energy Plant
 on October 28, returning here ilmediately thereafter, and would
 be glad to do it." 27/

In order to shorten Lodge's absence fram Saigon and to add flexibility to
his departure timing, the President dispatched a military aircraft to
Saigon and left it . at his disposal. But as the October 31 date arrived,
it coincided with the momentary anticipation of a move by the generals.
Lodge, no doubt preferred to remain in control of U.S. actions during a
coup rather than see Harki ns take over, as vJashington' s instructions for
his absence stipulated, and so, he postponed his 01,om departure.

3. Renevred Coup Plotting

 vlhile Diem's reaction to the tough nevl American policy was hostile,
the senior South Vietnffiuese generals , predictably, interpreted the new
policy as a green li ght for a coup. Plotting was reactivated almost
immediately, if indeed it had ever been completely dormant.

 41 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 c
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 On October 2, the day the Mc::'Iamara-Taylor mission reported to the
President, General Don Ifaccidentally" encountered Lt Colonel Conein,
the CIA contact man in the August plot, at Tan Son Nhut airport and
asked him to meet him that night in ~ha Trang. ~ Truehart approved
the contact, instructing Conein to neither encourage nor discourage a
coup but only to get information. At the meeting, General Don said that
General r·linh I'Tanted to meet "lith Conein at 8:00 a.m. on October 5 at
JGS headquarters at which time Minh ",ould be able to go into the details
of the generals ' plan. Don emphatically stated that there was a plan,
and that essential to it was the conversion of General Dinh, III Corps
commander , to the cause.

 So, "Ti th Lodge 's approval, Cone in met General l1inh on October 5.
Getting straight to the point, " General Mi nh stated that he must knoVT
American Government 's position with respect to a change in the Govern-
ment of Vietnam within the very near future." 29/ The government's
loss of popular support was endangering the whole war effort, which was
deteriorating rapidly . He did not expect any U.S. support, but needed
assurances the U.S. would not th,'Tart the attempt. Also involved, he
said, "I"ere Generals Don, Khiem and Kim . Of three possible and not
mutually exclusive plans mentioned by Minh, two involved military action
against loyal units in Saigon, and one was an assassination plot against
brothers Nhu and Can, but not Diem. Conein remained noncommittal about
both U. S. support and the various plans. Minh then expressed doubt about
General Khiem whom he suspected of having played a double role in August,
but indicated that the generals would have to act soon to forestall
abortive attempts by lower echelon officers. Minh hoped to meet vlith
Conein in the near future to go over the detailed plan of operations.
Conein was again noncommittal and Viinh said he understood.

 Lodge, with Harkins r concurrence, recommended that when Minh , about
whom he "Tas row dubious after his August experience, approached Conein
again, he be told: (1) that the U. S. would not thwart his plans; ( 2 ) that
we would be willing to revievT his plans, except those for assassinations; and
(3) "that U.S. aid will be continued to Vietnam under government which
gives promise of gaining support of people and winning the war again st
the Communists. II 30/ In pressing Minh for det a ils of the planned composi-
tion of a successor regime , Lodge felt we should stress the need for a
"good proportion of well qualified civilian leaders in key positions." 31/

 A message emanating from an NSC meeting was sent to Lodge on the
same d ay and appears to have been dispatched before the arrival of the CAS
report on the Conein-l-Hnh meeting and Lodge's comment . In it the Pres i-
dent specifically instructed Lodge to avoid encouraging a coup. The
message stated:

 •.• President today approved r ecommendation that no
 initiative should now be taken to give any active covert
 encouragement to a coup. There shOUld, however, be urgent
 covert effort with closest security under broad guidance

 \

 42 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 I'P

 of Ambassador to identify and build contacts with possible
 alternative le adership as and w'hen it appears. Essential
 that this effort be totally secure and fully deniable and
 sepa.rated entirely from nonnal po lit ical analysi s and report-
 ing and other activi ties of countery te8111. vIe. repeat that
 this effort is not repeat not to be aimed at active promotion
 of coup but only at surveillance and readiness. In order to
 provide plausibility to denial suggest you and no one else in
 Embassy i ssue these i nstruction orally to Acting Station Chief
 and hold him responsible to you alone for making appropriate
 contact s and reporting to you alone. 32/

Responding the next day, October 6, to the report of the Conein-Minh
meeting, Washington r eferred to the preceding day's cable, but, prompted
by Lodge 's suggestion, added:

 ~Thile we do not wish to stimulate coup, we also do not
 wish to l eave impression that U.S. would thwart a change of
 government or deny economic and military assistance to a
 new regime if it appeared capable of incre asing effectiveness
 of military effort, ensuring popular support to win war and
 improving -~TOrk ing relat ions with U. S. v.Te would like to be
 informed on "That is being contemplated but we should avoid
 being drawn into reviewing or advising on operational plans
 or any other act which might tend to identify U.S. too
 closely with change in government. 33/

WaShington was, further, greatly concerned about the security and denia-
bility of any further contacts and suggested to Lodge that someone could
be brought in from outside Vietnam for follow-up contacts if he thought
it necessary. Lodge apparently did not.

 An important apparent lacuna in the available message traffic occurs
at this point. By Shaplen' s ac count, a CAS officer met ..rith Minh on
October 10 and conveyed the substance of the U.S. position as defined in
CAP 14228. 31..~/ \I)"hether or not the date is accurate, it is probable that
some such contact took place by mid-October. On October 20 a Colonel
Khuong at JGS contacted an American counterpart and reported a coup plot
involving Minh , Khiem, Kim, and a fourth unidentified general, plus a
number of colonels. 35/ He ,,;as seeking assurances of U. S. support
following a coup. --

 There were no further reported contacts with the generals Qntil
October 23 when Conein again met with Don at the latter's initiative. 36/
In a state of agitation, Don stated that the coup had been scheduled to
take advantage of the October 26 I-":-at ion al Holiday, but that on October 22
Harkins had called on him to report the Khuong contact and to discourage
a coup. Don further i ndicated that the palace had lea.rned of Khuong ' s
overtures, implying that Ear kins was responsible, and had taken action

 43 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 ('
to ensure that the vital 5th and 7th Divisions v[ould be avIaY from Saigorl.
Don demanded to kno"l what the U. S. attitude ''las to. . lard a coup. Cone in
reiterated the \{ashington guidance . Apparently relieved , Don asked
Conein to assure Lodge that Khuong i'laS not a member of the coup committee
and ''lOuld be punished. He indicated that the generals had avoided con-
tacting Lodge directly at a party on October 18 because of the presence
of members of Harkins ' staff. Conein then asked for proof of the existence
of the coup group and its plan. · Don said that if they could meet the
following day, he would give Conein, EYES OlJLY for Lodge, the political
organi zation plan.

 In a subsequent conversation with :rtarkins on the matter, Lodge
report ed that Harkins confirmed his demarche to Don on October 22, and
after they had reviewed CAP 74228, said he had misunderstood the policy
and hoped he had not upset any delicate arrangements. J]} Earkins added
that he '''0uld inform Don that his previous statements did not reflect
U. S. Government policy.

 By Harldns ' account, he had not violated Hoshington' s guidance in
his conversat ion with Don. 38/ He ,'laS merely trying to discourage
Vietnamese officers from approaching U.S. counterparts about coup plots
which only detracted from the i'rar effort. Furthermore, Don had at no
time mentioned coup planning to him. ~e concluded by cormnenting about
the renewed plotting by the generals that:

 Thoug...h I am not trying to th-wart a change in government,
 I think we should take a good hard look at the group ' s pro-
 posals to see if we think it would be capable of increasing
 the effectiveness of the military effort . There are so
 many coup groups mak i ng noises that unless elements of all
 'are included I'm afraid there will be a continuous effort to
 upset whoever gains control for sometime out and this to me
 will interfere with the "rar effort. ]2/

This incident once again highlighted the differing outlooks of the
.A..mbassador and NACV and underscored the lack of close coordination
between t hem . Unfortunately , it did not lead to any improvement in
the situat ion . The close ident ification of 2arkins with Diem made the
Vietnamese generals mistrust him. Lodge , responsive to their great
 sensitivity about security, tended to restrict information about the
 contacts and coup plans to himself .

 In response to this contact by Don, vlashington reflected mainly
concern that he might be acting as an agent of the palace to le ad us
dmm the garden path . 40/ As he had indicated, Don contacted Conein
on the morning of the 24th, but not with the promised plans. 41/ He
reported t hat the prev ious evening Harkins had spoken to him,-Correcting
his earlier statements about the nondesirability of a change of govern-
ment. Don further said he had a scheduled meeting with I~dge that

 44 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 evening ( which Lodge denied.) and that plans vTere nm\' far advanced for a
 coup sometime before november 2 . He as}~ed Conein t.o meet him later that
 afternoon to discuss the details o f the plru1. In a separate cable dis-
 puting some of Lodge s i nterpretat i ve description of his statement to
 Don, Harki ns stated that he had. repulsed Don 1 s su.ggestion that they meet
 a gai n to discuss the coup plans. III told Don that I Ilould not discuss.
 coups th8,t "i{ere not my business though I had heard rumors of m~my . ~!3 /
 Taylor replied immediately , S1 ating, "View' here is t.hat your actions in
 disengaging from the coup discussion were correct and that you should
 continue to avoid any involvement." 43 /

 A Conein I s meeting wi th Don on the evening of the 24th , the l atter
i ndicated he had misunderstood General Harkins and had not seen Lodge . 44/
He said that the coup committee h ad r efused to release any plans because
of its anxiety about breaches of security . He did promise to t urn ove r
to Conein for Lodge's r evievT detailed p l ans of the operation and the
proposed successor g ove r mnent t"ivo days before the coup , which he
r eit erated li ould take place b efor e lTovember 2 .

 At this j uncture, the nature of the dialo gue beti,reen Lodge and the
vlhi te House b egan to cha..l1ge . On October 25 , Lodge sent McGeor ge Bmldy
a long c ab le t aking exce:;:,tion to Harki ns 1 res ervat ions about a coup and
ar guing for a policy of flnot thwarting ." 45/ Eo succ essor government
could bungle the "rar as badly as Diem had-,-he argued, and, furthermore ,
for us to prevent a change of government '\'lOu ld b e " assuming an undue
r es[>onsibility for k eepi ng the incumbents in office. 1I ~6/ In his reply,
Bundy eXIlressed the Hhite House anxiety about re ap ing the blame for an
unsuccessful coup .

 He are particularly concerned about hazard that an uns uc ce ss-
 ful coup, howeve r carefully \'re avoid d i rect engagement , will be
 l aid at our door by pub l ic opinion almo st eve ryvrl'ler e . Therefore,
 while sha ring your view that we shoul d not be i n position of
 thvrarting coup, we would like to have option of judging and "Tarn-
 ing on any plan 'l'rith poor prospects of success . ~'I e recognize that
 this is a l arge orde r, but President wants you to know of our
 con c ern ~ 47/
The discus s ion of these issues dominated the cable tr affic between Lodge
and the White House up to the day of the coup , with r,'Tashington concerned
about det ailed p l ans and prospects for suc cess and Lodge str essing the
irrevocab ility of our involvement .

 There were no further contacts with the coup group until t he day
after the fruitless Lodge-Diem conversations. That Monday, Oct ober 28 ,
J..J0dge and Diem were le e.v ing Saigon for Dalat to dedicate the Vietna..mese
At omic Ener gy Pl ant. At the airport before their depart ure , Gene r a l Don
daringly took Lodge aside and asked if Conein was authorized to speak for
h im. ~ Lodge assured Don that he "Tas . Don s a i d that the coup must

 1'OP SECRET - Sens i tive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET Sensitive

be thoroughly Vietna.mese and that the U. S. must not interfere. Lodge
agre ed, adding that the U. S. vranted no satellites but 'Ivould not th"Tart
a coup. vThen Lodge asked about the timing of the coup, Don replied that
the generals vTere not yet ready .

 Later that evening Conein met Don by prearrangement at the latt er ' s
ini tiative. 49/ ~Then Conein called Don' s attention to I..odge I s scheduled
trip to VJashiri-gton on October 31, indicating that it was important for
him to revie'l'l the coup plans before his departure, Don replied that the
p l ans might not be available unti l four hours i n advance , but urged that
the Ambassador not change his plans as this might be a tip-off. Don said
that nothing VTould h appen in the next 48 hours , but the implic at ion 'I-TaS
that the coup would r.re~·empt Lodge's departure. ~'lhen pressed for details
of the planning, Don i ndic8~ted that liithin the committee , Minh had charge
of the military plans for the operation, Kim \':'as doing the political
planning, and he, Don , was the liaison vrith the Americans . They h a d
s urrounded GeneTal Dinh vi th coup supporters and he vTould be neutralized.
Genera ls Tri and Khanh Here both involved in the planning. General Khiem
was being circULYlspect because he viaS lEider pala~ ce suspicion . Minor details
of the plan and a list of units supporting the coup we re also discussed.

 Simultaneous separate contacts had confirmed that several i mportant
opposition civilians were i n contact vii th the generals , i nc luding Phan
Huy Quat, Bui Diem, and Tran Trung Dlmg, and that they expected to play
a role in the post-coup goverruflent, which rej)ortedly woul d be headed by
Vice President Tho . In a cable dispatched that same day summar izing the
situation , Lodge expressed some concern at the possibility of a premature
coup by junior officers, but generally expressed confidence in the generals
while regretting their reluctance for security reasons to provide details
o f their p l ans . 50/ He concluded in these words:

 In summary, it 'i!ould appear that a coup attempt by the
 Generals ' group is imminent; that 'Ivhether this coup fails or
 succeeds, the USC must be prepared to accept the fact that vTe
 will be blamed, hm·rever unjustifiably ; and finally , that no
 pOl?itive action by the USG can prevent a coup atterapt short
 of informing Diem and Elm "idth all the opprobrium that such
 an action 'l<Tould entail. Note too Don ' s statement vi e will
 only have four hours notice . This rules out my checking with
 you bet"i<iee n time I learn of coup and time that it starts . It
 means US wi ll not be able significantly to influence course
 of events . 51/

Lodge ' s view 'l<TaS cle a r . vT e were conrmi tted and it was too late for second
thoughts . Noreove r, vThen the balloon "rent up he did not expect to h av e
tim e to consult vlashington. He expected , and probably preferred, to
guide events himself.

 In view of the deteriorat ing situation, instructions were given to
Admiral Felt , CINCPAC , to have a task force stand off the Vietnemese

 TOP SECHET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

coast for the possible evacuation of j\merican dependents and civil:i.a..l1s
if events required. 52/ This vlaS a re-enactment of a similar alert
during the abortive August coup.

 In Washington, I,lcFamara and the JCS had become concerned. about the
differing vievTs of Lodge and Harkins as to the correct U. S. course of
action. 53/ ]\lore importantly, they were alarmed at the apparent break-
down of communication and coordination bet"Teen the Ambassador and Mf'.CV .
The cable traffic tended lito form a picture of a relationship which l acks
the depth and continuity required by the complex circumstances in Saigon. "5L~';
Harkins ' suggestions for improving their rapport vTere invited. After the - .
HSC meeting o n October 29, the ~'Thi te House vTas also concerned and instructed
Lodge to shoYl Harkins the relevant cables and be sure he ,vas fully a....lare
of the coup arrangements, since during rJodge t s absence in VTa.shington
Harkins would h ave overa ll responsibility for the U.S. ]5/

 These tvTO cables triggered a flurry of strong opposing react ions
from Lodge and Harkins. Harkins , belatedly apprised of the recent Conein-
Don contacts and of Lodge ' s evaluations and re commendations , took bitter
exception to the Ambassador's conclusions in three separate cables on
October 30. He particularly r esented Lodge ' s independent , gloomy assess-
ments of how the war ,,,as gOing, which "Tere at direct odds with his own
viel'[s , vie,,,s I'Thich he had provided Lodge for inclusion in his ,.;reekly
reports to Hashington . 57/ As to U. S . policy t0 1trard a coup, he was irate
at having been excludedby Lodge from information and consult ation about
the continuing contacts "Tith the generals. 58/ The heart of the issue,
hmvever , was a disagreement about vTh at was, i n fact, U. S . policy to-vrard
a coup as defined by the VTashington guidance cables. Harkins outlined
the disagreement in a separate October 30 cable to Taylor:

 There is a basic difference apparently bet',veen the .Am-
 bassador's thinking and mine on the i nterpretation of the
 guidance contained i n CAP 63560 dated 6 October ( see Appen -
 dix) and the additional thoughts, I repeat, thoughts expressed
 in CAS Washington 74228 dated 9 October (Appendix ). I i nter-
 pret CAP 63560 as our basic guidance and that CAS 74228 being
 addi tional thoughts did not change the b asic guidance in that
 no initiative should now be taken to give any active covert
 encour agement to a coup. The Ambassador feels that 74228 does
 change 63560 and that a change of government is desired and
 feels as stated in CAS Saigon 1964 (Appendix) that the only
 way to bring about such a change is by a coup.

 I'm not opposed to a change i n government, no i ndeed, but
 11m inclined to feel the.t at t his time the change should be in
 methods of governing rather than complete change of persoJ:l.J1e L
 I have seen no batting order proposed by any of the coup groups .
 I think ,,!e should take a hard look at any proposed list before
 we make any decisions. In my contacts here I have seen no one

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Proj ect Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SEC;:mT - Sensitive

 vTith the strength of character of Diem, at le ast in fighting
 connnun ists. Certainly there are no Generals qualified to
 take over in my opinion.

 I am not a Diem man per se. I certainly see the faults
 . in his character. I am hereto back 14 million 8'1,11:; peoj:'le in
 their leader at this time.

 -x- -x- -x·

 I would suggest we not try to change horses too quickly.
 That we continue to taJl:e persuasive actions that vrill make
 the horses change their course and methods of action . That
 we vlin the military effort as quickly a,s possible, then let
 them make any and all the changes they vrant.

 After all, ri ght ly or v:rongly, we have backed Di em for
 eight long hard years. To me it seems incongruous nov! to get
 him dovlD, kick him around, and get rid of hi1n. The US has
 been his mother superior and father confessor since he ' s been
 i n office and he has leaned on us heavily. 58/

 The f i rst y,Tashington mess age to Lodge on October 30 revealed that
 Hhite House anxiety about the possible failure of a coup attempt ,
 already evident on October 25 in CAP 63590 ( see _A_ppendix ) , he,d increa,se d.2.2I
 The CIA ' s evaluation of the balance of forces cast doubt on vlhether the COU~0
 group could pull off a decisive action. 60/ ~Hth these concerns in mind ,
 'lVashington could not accept Lodge ! s judgment If that no positive action by
 the USG can prevent a coup attemp ... II 61/ The Whi te House view \'laS that :

 ... our attitude to coup grou~ can still have decisive
 e ffects on its decisions. vTe believe that what vle say to
 coup group can produce delay of coup and that betrayal of
 c oup plans to Diem is not repeat not our only way of stopp-
 i ng coup . §]j

 I n a long reply (in vThich Harkins did Dot concur ), Lodge was at pai ns to
 point out his pmverlessness to prevent \vhat '\oras fundamental l y a Vi etnamese
 affair , short of revealing it to the palace .

 vIe must , of course, get best possible estimate of chance
 of coup ' s success and this estimate must color our thi nking,
 but do not t hi nk we have the power to delay or discourage a
 c oup . Don has made it clear many times that this i s a Viet-
 namese affair . It i s theoretically possible for us to turn
 over the informa tion which has been given to us 'in confidence
 to Diem and this 'w ould undoubtedly stop the coup and '\olOuld
 make traitors out of us. For practical purposes therefore I

./
 48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 lvould say that I·re have very little influence on what is
 essentially a Vietn21llese affair. In addition, this would
 place the heads of the Generals, their civilian supporters,
 a,nd Im-Ter military officers on the spot, thereby sacrific ..
 ing a significa.nt portion of the civilian and military
 l eadership needed to carry the war against the VC to its
 successful conclusion. After our efforts not to discourage
 a coup and this change of heart, -v!e vrould foreclose any
 possibili ty of change of the GVN for the better .

 -)(- -x- -lE-
 *
 As re gards your paragraph 10 (question of determination
 B.nd force of character of coup leaders), I do not kno1t: what
 more proof can be offered than the fact these men are ob -
 viously prepared to ri sk their lives and that they vmnt noth-
 ing for themselves. If I am any judge of human nature, Don ' s
 fa,ce expressed sincerity and determination on the morning
 that I spoke to him. Heartily agree that a miscalculation
 could jeopardize position i n Southeast Asia . vIe also run
 tre~endous risk s by dOing nothing . 63/

'.'Thether Lodge seriously believed this or merely used it as an argumenta-
tive excuse for not entertaining the possibility of intervention to delay
 or stop an llilviable attempt is not clear. His defense of the plotters
 and his support for their goal in this telegraphic dialogue with vJashing -
ton , hOvTever, clearly shOl"'- his emotional bias in favo r of a coup . El se-
where i n the cable Lodge obj ected to the designation of Harkins as the
Chief of 1·1ission i n the event of a coup during his absence .

 The tone and content of these parallel messages from Harkins and
I"odge only heightened IfIhite House anxiety and, no doubt, r aised concern
about the obj ectivity of these tvro principal D. S. observers of the criti-
c al Vietnamese situation. In an effort to clear the air, explicitly re -
define and restate the policy guidance, and clarify the ass i gnment of
roles and respons ibilitie s 1-rithin the !ifl ission , the Ttihite House sent still
another cable to Saigon later on October 30 . 64/ Taking pointed issue
with Lodge's View, the message stated: --

 We do not accept as 8. basis for US po li cy that we have no
 p OVier to delay or discourage a coup . In your paragraph 12
 you say that if you 'were convinced that the coup ,vas going to
 fail you would of course do everything you could to persuade
 coup l eaders to stop or delay any operation 1-Thich, i n your
 be st j udgement, does not clearly give high prospect of success.
 vre have never considered any betraya l of generals to Diem, and
 our 79109 explicitly rejected that course. He recognize the
 danger of appearing hostile to generals, but we believe t hat our
 own position should be on as firm groli.l1d as poss ible , hence I·re
 c annot limit ours e lves to proposition implied in your message

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND P roject Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1

 TOP SECRJi;T - Sensitive

 that only conviction of certain failure justifies interven-
 tion . He believe that your standard for intervention should
 be that sta,ted above.

 Therefore, if you should conclude that there i s not
 clearly a high prospect of success, you should communicate
 this doubt to generals in a way calculated to persuade them
 to desi st at least until chances are better. In such a com-
 munic ation you should use the \',eight of uS best advice and
 explicitly reject any implic ation that vre oppose the effort
 of the generals because of preference for present regime .
 Ive recogniz e need to bear i n mind generals' i nterpretation
 of US role in 1960 coup attempt and your agent should main-
 tain clear distinction betvreen strong and honest advice
 given as a friend and any opposition to their objectives. 65/

Lodge was also urgently requested to obt a in more detailed information
about the compos ition of the forces the coup leaders expected to have
at their disposal so that we could better assess their prospects.

 IHth regard to Lodge ' s absence , the instructions placed Truehart in
 - occurred , i -n which case Harkins \'i'Ould be Chief of
c harge lmless a COUD
Mission . The desir ab ility of having Lodge on the scene i n the event of
a coup, hmvever , was stressed and he was encouraged to delay his depar-
ture if he thought the coup was i mminent. The following four-point
standing instructions for U. S. posture i n the event of a coup were a l so
gi ven:

 a. US authorities ,.;rill r ej ect appeals for direct inter-
 vention from either Side, and US-controlled aircraft and other
 r esources will not be committed between the battl e lines or
 i n support of either side , vIi thout authorization from '\rJ e.shing-
 ton .

 b. In event of indecisive contest, US authorities may i n
 their discretion agree to perform any acts agreeable to both
 s ides , such as removal of key personalities or relay of infor-·
 mation . . In such actions , however , US authorities 'Ivill stren-
 uously avoid appearance of pressure on either side . It i s not
 i n the interest of USG to be or appear to be either i nstrument
 of existing goverxunent or instrument of coup.

 c. In the event of imminent or actual fa i lure of coup, US
 authorities may afford asylum in their discret i on to those to
 whom there is any express or implied obligation of this sort.
 ide be l ieve, hO't'ever, that in such a case it woul d be in our
 i nterest and probably in interest of those seeking asylum that
 they seek prote ction of other Embass ies in addition to our O'.m.
 This point should be made strongly if need arises .

 50 TOP SECRET - Jensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECR:~T - Sensitive

 d. But once a coup under responsible leadership has begun,
 and id thin these restrictions, i t is i n tbe i nterest of the
 US Government that i t should succeed. §6/

With re spect to i nstruction d . , hoviever , no specific act ions .to support
or guarantee the success o f a coup vTere author ized . This message ,,!as
the l ast guidance Lodge received from vJashin;ton before the c oup began.

 51 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND P roject Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1

 TOP SECR}<;T - Sensitive

 v
 THE COUP AND ITS AFTERt·iA.TH - IWVEHBER 1 - 23

 1. The Coup

 The atmosphere of Byzantine intri.gue in Saigon in the fall of 1963
 made it virtually impossible to keep track of all the plots against the
 regime. In one of his last messages to 'VJashington before the coup,
 Lodge identified ten individual di ssident groups in addition to the
 genera ls I group.Y These vari.ous plots vlere highly fluid in composi-
 tion and quixotic in characte r, quickly appearing, dis appear ing and/or
 merging with other groups. There were, hm'lever , two groups that came
 into exi stence in the summer and ret a ined their identity with some
 mut at ion until near the end. The first, chronologically, 'Was variously
 i dentified as the Tuyen or Thao group after its successive leaders. It
 was conceived sometime in June by Dr . Tran Kim Tuyen, the Dir ector of
 Politic a l Studies ( national intelligence) under Diem, and invol ved ele-
 ments of the Ministries of Civic Action and Information and certain ele-
 ments o f the Army . VThen Dr. Tuyen vms sent out of the country in
 September, the group was more or less merged ,1ith a separate group of
 middle level officers headed by Lt Colonel Phamh Goc Thao . Several
 d ates vTere established by this group for a coup during the summer and
 f all, but each time critical military units ,'Jere temporarily tran sferred
 by either the palace or the JGS, under General Don, each of ,.;hom was
 someHhat avTare of the group I s plans and was interested in frustrating
 t hem. In the end, it concerted efforts 'with the generals as the only
 a l ternative vTi th prospects o f succe ss .

 The second group was , of course, composed of the senior general s
 o f the Vietnamese Army . Plotting by this group also began i n earnest
 i n June. Initially, its leader was identifi ed as General Khiem and l ater
 Gener a l Don, but the de facto leader throughout vlas , no doubt, General
, Minh who cOllunanded by far the greatest respect and allegiance within the
 officer corps. The four principal members of the group 'VTere Gen eral s
 Minh, Don, Khiem, and Kim, a l l of whom "Tere stationed i n Saigon vlithout
 troop conlllland , the latter three at JGS and General Hinh as a palace
 military advisor . Generals Tri and Khanh, I and II Cor.,ps commanders
 respectively, were secondary members OI~ the generals I group, but were
 also in touch with the Thao group. The abortive attempt by the generals
 to launch a coup in August has already been described in detail. Impor-
 tant lessons seem to have been learned by these men from that expe rience ,
 for vThen they again began to set their plans and make arrangements it
 vTaS with great attent ion to detail and ~ith an explici t division of l abor.

 Among the plotters, General M-lnh had the overe.ll direction of the
coup activities, although the group acted i n committ ee fashion "id th t he
members apparently voting at several points on part i cular actions . He

 52 TO? SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP S:~C3E(;' - Sensitive

was also responsible for the military operation of the coup itself.
General Don ,vas the liaison ,.,rith the Americans and responsible for
wooing General Dinh. General Kbn handled planning for the post - coup
government and the relations with the civilian groups that "rere ex-
pected to be called on to support the coup.?J General Khiem was to
playa critical role at the end of October as the liaison man "Tith the
Thao coup group in working out the details of their support and inte··
gration into the actual execution of the coup.

 As already noted, the fundamental problem of the plotters ,\'as their
l ack of troop cornmand in the immediate Saigon area . The l\Igo family ' s
longstanding fear of military coups, as previously discussed, had been
the main factor in all military command assignments and promotion policy .
l'~owhere "Ias loyalty a more important prerequisite for coinmand than in I
Saigon, the surrounding III Corps, and the nearby IV Cor:9s , with its
headqua.rters only iW miles away dO\m Highvray 4. In addition to the
sizable special forces units in Saigon under Colonel'Tung and the various
national police and paramilitary units that a1'so took their orders directly
from the palace, Diem had appointed the vain, ambitious , aIld supposedly
loyal General Dinh as Commander of III Corps ( vThose 5th Division was
stationed at nearby Bien Hoa) and the Saigon Military District. Further-
more, the r{ Corps was commanded by General Ca.o, vTho had saved Diem
during the 1960 coup by bringing his loyal 7th Division troops up from
My Tho . It was on this formidable line-up of forces that the family had
staked it s survival; a...n.d not '-lithout reason , as the frustrated coup of
August demonstrated.

 Saigon, hm-lever, was not entirely without dissident elements . \'lith
the exception of their commanders, the ;'.Iarine battalion, the airborne
battalion, and the Air Force were all sympathetic to a coup. But the
plotters knevl that a favorable balance of forces could not be achieved
or maintained vri thout either the conversion or neutralization of Generals
Dinh and Cae.

 During the August pagoda raids, Dinh had been given overall command
o f the crackdovTD, although Tung had taken his instructions as all·rays
directly from Nhu in carrying out the attacks . ]) Thereafter, Dinh,
who was a notorious braggart , boasted that he had saved the country f rom
the Buddhists , Communists , and "foreign adventurers.1! Carried alva.Y'-lith
himself, he held a news conference on August 27 in which he was harried
and finally humiliated by antagonistic _4.1ller ican journalists . The plotting
generals decided that they would play on his vanity and e goism to win him
over to their side. With his pride injured at the hands of the newsmen,
Dinh was easy prey to Don ' s suggestion that Khu had. played him for a fool,
but that be r eally was a national hero , and that the re gime vTas indebted
to him. Don suggested that Dinh go to Diem vJith a plan to i ncrease mili-·
t ary participation in the goverrnnent, specifically that he, Dil;h, be
named Minister of Interior. Don rightly expected that Diem would be
outraged at such a brazen request, and vrould repriman.d Dinh, further

 53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECR~r - Sensitive

..rounding his pride and alienating him from the regime. Diem reacted
as expected, and ordered Dinh to take a "vacB.tion tl in Dalai; for a while.
Don at this point began his long effort to 1'1'00 Dinh to the plotters
 side against Diem. Dinh, hm'Tever, lacked self-confidence and vacillated,
although he does not appear to have played a double role by revealing
t he existence of the plot to the palace. \'ihile the elaborate stratagems
for seducing Dinh ,,{ere taldng place, the plotters had carefully sur-
rounded him "lith supporters of the coup, including his deputy, Colonel Co,
whom they felt they could rely on to neutralize him if he sho'vred signs
of rallying to the family once the balloon was up. By the end of the
third week in October, the plotters felt reasonably confident that the
problem of Dinh had been resolved: he v:auld, as an opportunist, rally
to the coup if he felt i t vias going to succeed; if he did not, he would
be eliminat ed .

 At the same time, plans had been under vlay to neutralize General Cao,
the 11 Corps conrrnander, since he would certainly b~tray the plotters to
the palace if he got word of the plans, or bring his troops to Diem's
aid if the coup started while he ,vas still in control of them. To do
this, Colone l Co , Dinh' s deputy, vTaS sent to the Delta to vrin the support
of the subordinate commanders in IV Corps. In the ultimate plan, Co '
would be sent ,,'lith J GS orders to take command of the 7th Division in
My Tho on the day before the coup began; he would order all boats to the
Saigon side of the l1ekong River; and, thus, act as a blocking force to
General Cao ..rho, stranded in Can 'l'ho on the far side of the Helwng,
would then be arrested by dissident officers in his o'l-m command. Co
apparently was successful in getting the support of the great majority
of the subordinate officers, but one loyal officer heard of the plans
and immediately tipped off Nhu .

 Diem and l';hu called in Dinh and revealed what they had l earned ,
attempting to force his hand. Dinh reacted 'I-;i th feigned shock and
suggested that Co be executed immediately. This conv inced Fhu that.
Dinh ,\-1as not involved. They preferred to keep Co alive to get more
information from him. Nhu then revealed his mill elaborate scheme for
a pseudo-coup that vlOuld pre-empt the plotters and squelch tlleir plans.
His hlO~part plan was to start with the transfer of Colonel Tung , s
special forces out of Saigon on maneuvers. The phony coup vwuld then
take place with Diem and I~hu escaping to their hideavTaY at Cap st Jacques .
After several days of hooliganism including the murder of sevel'al promi-
nent Vietnamese and some Americans, the l oyal 5th Division under Dinh
and the 7th under Cao \wuld counterattacll:. the city and Diem and Nhu would
return as triumphant heroes, more secure than ever . Dinh vTaS the key
to J'Thu's plan.

 Dinh's role becomes confused at this point. He apparently was
uncertain about the relative balance of forces and decided to cooperate
with both sides until he could decide ..rhich he felt was going to gain
the upper hand, although he VTaS proba,b ly still leaning tovTard the palace.

 TOP SECPJi,T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP Sl~CHET - Sensitive

In any cas e, if he I'Tas tru.st cd by the Elms, he certainly Ims not by tbe
generals because they confided in him none of their detailed plan s for
the operation, and l~hu ' s plan, in vlhich he would have played the )\:e;y'
role, ne er came to fruition. It vas pre··empted by the real coup the
generals had been plotting.

 By the last w'eek in Oc-(.olJer, timing hB.d become critical. The Thao
group apparently had intended to act on October 2)+, but ,,-Tere dissuaded
by Don and Khiem who argu.ed that they had too fe"r forces to guarant,ee
 StlCCess. ~/ It Ims at this juncture that Khiem brought i..he Thao grony
into the plans anJ worked out joint arrangements Idth them for the
execution of t.he coup. Sbaplen says the.t tl,e generals' coup i';as
 orginally planned for november 4. Th:i S c-1nflicts, hovever , with \>'hat
Don had told Conein on Oc"i.,ober 2 Lf, namely that it '.;Qul,l occur before
November 2. 21 By Shaplen! s accomrL, Dinh revealed the planned date
of' the coup to hhu 1>,ho instructed him to urge that it be advance:t to
Eovember 1. 6/ Phu still t.h01.1ght somehmr he could carry off hi s plan
by abandoning the phony COUI),' by letting tJle real one substitute for
 it in the hope that i t vlOuld be thro'\w off balaflce by the advanced. d2ote,
 and by relying on Dinb's loyal troops as supplemented by Cao's to tip
the scale in the family's favor once the chips were dovm. In allmdng
the generals to mB_ke their move, t11e principal rebels 1>~ould all be com-
promised and Nhu could then act to crush all major dissidence. Ilhatever
'(,he reason, yhether by Lbu ' s intr:i gue or by their Ulm timetc:.ble, the
generals set the coup for Hovember 1.

 While they had left a ,vorr led U. S. officialdom with only s~.etchy
ideas of the plam1ed operation, the generals had themselves devoted
great attention to all details of their move. 1i!hen the hour came for
execution, the plan was implemented vTith haTdly a hitch, and the fate
of the reg:iJne ,ms sealed in the first hours of the coup.

 On October 29 , the first preparatory action for a coup was t.aken.
General Dinh ordered Colonel TUJ1g to move his special forces out of the
c apital for maneuvers, but whether he 'vas acting as the agent of the
generals or the palace is still tlJ1clear. Simultaneously, the chief of
intelligence, who had been a member of the Thao plot and was nOH parti-
cipating in the generals ! plan, passed phony intelligence of a VC
build-up outside Saigon to Diem and Nhu to get them to divert loyal
units that could have been used to thwart a coup.

 The day of the coup it self began improbably vlith an official
U. S. c all on Diem. Acl.miral Ji'elt , CTI'TCPAC, had been visiting General
Harkins to revievi the situ2,tion and prior to his departure at noon,
he and IJodge paid a courtesy call on the Pre sid.ent. Diem ! s monologue
was little different from vThat he had said to },Ic:':81nara and Taylor the
month before. As tl1ey i'!ere leaving, hmiever , he called Lodge as:i de and
they talked priv'ately for twenty minvtes. Diem, in a tragically unwitting
example of too little too late, indicated tl1at he yanted to t8.U\: to Lodge

 55 1'OP Si!:CRl~T .. Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

sometirae about ",bat i t i"iaS the U. S. wanted him to do. 7/ The atmosphere
of t.l':!is meeting must have been strained in the extreme'-'in view of Lodge's
aivareness of the inrrninence of the COD,p. After the meeting, Felt "lent
straight to the airport and. held a press conference, ,'lith a nervous
General Don at his side, before departing at noon unai·mre of the drcuna
that "ros already unfolding.

 1'lhile Lodge and Felt had been at the palace, coup UIlitS had 8,lready
begun to deploy in and around Saigon. At the S81ile time, nearly all the
generals and. top offieeTs had been convened for a noon meeting at JCS
headquarters at Tan Son l:hut. TheTe the coup commit tee informed them
that the coup had begucl and asked for their support. Pledges of support
were recorded on tape by all those present "I~Tho s'l['pported the action.
They \~ere to be used later over the radio and '.-muld implicate the entire
senior officer corps of the Army in the event the conp failed. 1.11 this
way the plotters "I{ere able to enlist the support of several wavering
officers. The only senior officers not present \'1ere Generals Dinl1 6nd Ce.o,
who were not. informed of the meeting to prevent their revealing the coup
prematurely to the palace or taJdng cO'lwter action. Also not present ~'as
the South Viet.n8.1llese Chief of Naval Operations, vrho had been assassinated
by a "trigger-happy escort enroute. Several officers suspected of being
loyal to Diem were taken into immediate custody at JGS, including Colonel
Tung, and the commanders of the Air Force, the airborne brigade, the
Earines, the Civil Guard., and the police force. A CAS officer, pre·-
sumably Lt Colonel Conein, 'I:as also invited to come to JGS and was
authorJzed to maintain telephone contact vdth the Embassy during the
coup. }Ie provided reliable reporting throughout the next two days.

 At 1 :45 p.m., Don called General StilvTell, Harkins ' J-3, and informed.
 him that all the generals were assembled at JGS and that the coup had
 begun. F}) At the same time, coup forces 'H ere seizing the post office
'(lith its telecOllllilunicat.ions facilities, the poli c e headquarters, the
 r adio stations , the airport , and the naval headci.uarters, and were deploy-
 i ng i n positions to assault the special forces headquarters near Tan
 Son J'Thut , the palace, and the barracks of the palace guard. Other units
h ad been deployed in blocking positions to defend aga.inst any l oya:!,
 counterattack from uni ts outside Saigon. These actions were s,-lift and
met with little r esistance. The units i nvol ved i nc l uded the n:arine and
airborne units under the l eadership of jlmior offi cers, the Air Force
under junior officers, and 'u ui ts from the 5th Di vis i on under orders from
Dinh , who had thrown i n his lot ",hen he became a"l",-are of the unanimity of
t he senior officers and their annarent l ikel ihood of success . Later i n
t he day , armor ~md troops from t11e 7th Di v i s i on at My The , illlder the
i nsurgent l eadership of Colonel Co , arr i ved f or the assaul t on the palace .

 As is a l ways the c ase i n this kind of crisis, tbe quantity of cabl es
qu i ckly overwhelmed the c ommunications system, and the incompleteness of
t he r eports meant tha.t no clear picture of "That 1-raS happening could be
pi eced together tmtil later . As i n all such s i tuations , the }~iliassy
b ecame an i sland l inl<.:ed to outside events onl y by tenuous r eports from
t e l ephone contacts.

 TOP b?CRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63 316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP S:CCRKC - Sensitive

 In the early afternoon, Colo1;el 1'U.llg) \lTho had been arres ted on the
 morning of J',ovember 1, '\'laS forced to call his special forces and tell
 t hem to surl"ender to the coup forces. Fot l ong thereaf'ter, the adjacent
 special forces hea:iqlJarters fell to the coup units after a brief skir ..
mish. I"1hen this occurred, the palace "Tas reduced for i ts defense to
 the palace guard, since the remainder of the special forces were outside
 t he city and effectively cut off from it, and a ll other unit commanders
 had come under the cormua,nd of officers involved in the coup. General Cs.o,
t he IV Corps c::)lmnander, pledged hi s support to the coup in the l ate after-·
 noon, although it is not clear whether this was opportLmistic or whether
he thought th e coup I·tas recdly Phase I of I:hu I s plan. Eot trusting him,
 hovrever, the [,;enerals placed him under guard. At it: 30 p.m. , the generals
went on tbe radio to announce the coup and demand the resignation of Diem
 and F.hu.~./ This ;;·ras follm"ed by a continuine; broadcast of the pledges
o f support of the senior officers 'Lhat had been recorded that morning.
l1eamlhile, Air rorce transports ';Tere dropping prepared l eaflets announc ..
in g the coup, and calling on the populs.ce to support it .

 At the beginning, Diem and hhu "rere apparently fooled by the cou.P ,
 or h e.d completely miscalculated the extent of its support. At the first
 indicat i ons of coup actions, Phu reportedly assured an a l armeJ. offi.cial
tha,t it 1;Tas all a part of a palace plan . 10/ vlben "wrd r eached the
p a lace that all key points had fallen, l\:hutried to contact General Dinh.
IIThen he coul d not re8.ch him, he realiz ed. that be had been out.foxed and
t hat the coup I-laS genuine. By thi s time , fighting "Tas go i ng 0!.1 between
the coup forces and the paJace guard at the palace and the nearby guard
barracks. I'Then the generals called the t"lVO brothers and asked them to
surr ender , promising t hem safe conduct, out o f 1-,11e couXltry , Diem replied
by asking t hem to c ome to the palace for I I con sult at ions , II an obv j ous
attempt to repeat the 1960 t act ic of delaying the coup long enough for
l oyal troops to reach the city. The generals, hOl'lever , I'Tere not b ar-
ga ining - - they iv-ere demanding .

 At it: 30 p. m. , Diem called Lodge to ask where he stood and the follm-7-
i n g conversat ion ensued :

 Diem: Some units have made a rebellion and I want to knm-T "That
 . is the at·l:.itude of the US?

 Lodge: I do not f ee l I-re ll enough i nformed to be able to t e ll you.
 I have heard the sbootjng, but am not acquainted I'i"ith a ll
 the facts. Also it is ~:30 a .m . in \'Jashi ngton and the US
 Government cannot possibly have a view.

 Diem: But you must have some general ideas. After all, I am
 a Chi ef of state. I have tried to do my duty . I want
 to do nov what duty and good sense reqlLi. re . I believe
 in duty above all.

 5'7 TOP SECR~T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TO:? SJ::C:8.ET ,- Sensitive

 Lodge: You have cel~tainly done your duty'. As I told you only
 this mornjng, I admire your courage and your great
 contr" butions to your C()Ull'~ry. Fo one can take a~·:ay
 from you the credit for all you hewe dOlle. HOvT I aln
 v:orried about your physj c:al safety. I have a report
 that those in charge of the current activity offer you
 cmd your brother safe conduct out of the country if
 you resign. liad you lleard this?

 Diem: 1·'10. Ulnd then after a pause) You have my telephone
 number.

 Lodge: Yes. If I can do anything for your physical safety,
 ples_se call me.

 Diem: I am trying to re-establish order. 11/

There is no evidence availab1 e as to 'w hether ~"iashington issued further
instl'lwtions vlith respect to the personal safet.y of Dic:m and lihu at this
time. 12/ The above conversation I'TaS the last that alW iJlleric8.n had
vith Diem. lJOdge, as was h:Ls custom, retifed thc_t night at. about 9: 30
p.m. 13/

 Shortly after Diem I s call to 110dge, the gen.erals called the palace
again and put Colonel Tung on the phone. Tung told Ehu he had sur--
rendered. Tl1e generals then demanded the immediate surrender of tbe
brothers or tbey \wuld put t.he palace under air and grou..n.d at.tack. ~ach
general at JGS, in turn, ",!as put on the phone to assure Diem of safe con-
duct if he would re sign , but l~hu apparently dissnacled him. Iif/ General lliinh
himself made a separate t.elephone caJl to Diem in a final attempt to get
h im to surrender, but Diem hung up. 15/ The tlvO brothers nov! began
frantically calling unit commanders throughout the country on thejr pri-
v ate cOllull1.mico.,tions system to get them to come to their aid . In most
c ases t.hey could. not. get tbrough, and. vThen they did they vrere told to
surrender by officers who nO':T supported the coup. \'Then they could get
no help from the rcgulcr military, they ma,Je a vain effort to enlist the
support of paramili t.ary u.n.i ts and t.hej.r Republic youth groups . Sometime
in the early evening~ probably by eight o ' clock , they recognized the
hopelessne ss of the situation and esca'f)ed. from the palace, u_Dbelmown to
i ts defenders , tbrough one of the secret u_l1derground exits connected
to the sewer system. They v,ere met 'by a Chinese friend \v-ho took them
to his home in Cholon \There they had previously set up a communications
channel to the palace for just such an emergency. There they spent
their l ast night.

 In the face of the brothers ' i ntransigent refusal to surrender and
confident· that they lv-ere nov; in control of the entire cODl1try and that

 58 TOP m~CHET - Sensj ti ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

their plans had succeeded, the generals began assembling forces and pre-
paring for the siege of the palace. At about. nine o'clock, they opened
an artillery barrage of the palace and its defenders. Since the :nalace
\'Jas being defended by some tanks, ari infantry assault vTith ta.nk suppor'f,
"TaS required to captuTe it. ~.'his began about 3: 30 a.m. on IToverlber 2,
and lasted until about 6:30 a.m., "Then the palace fell, aft.er Diem he.d
 is s'ned a cease-fire order to the palace guard from his Cholon hidem,ray.

 Throughout t.he night the brothers had remained in contact with both
their loyal supporters at the l')alace, and periodically "d. tll the inslJ.r·-
gents. The latter did not learn tbat the brothers had fled 1.mtil the
rebel forces under Colonel Trlao invaded the palace. At 6:20 a.m., Diem
called J'CS and spoke personally \V':i.th General Don, offering to surrender
i n exchange for a guarantee of safe cO!1duct to tbe air:nort and departure
from Vietnmn. 16/ Hinh agreed to these terms, bu.t Diem did not reveal
his \V'hereabouts, still apparently uXlable to grasp the new realities.
Colonel Thao learned of the location of the hidea,,'8,y from a captu.red
officer of the palace guard and received permission from Yinh to go
there and get the bro'Lhers. T.ihen he arrived e;t the house, he telephoned
again to headquarters 'Lo report his location and vTaS overheard by the
brothers on a.rlOther extension. They escaped to a nearby Catholic church,
where once ag&'in Diem called Ceneral Don at 6:50 a.m. and surrendered
unconditionally. 17/ He and rhu were ta.'ken prisoner shortly ~(,herea,fter
by General Lai :1:uuXuan, a long time enemy, "Tho according to most accounts
ordered or permitted their murder in the back of an armored personne l
carrier enroute to JCS headquarters. }!})

 The state Department reacted to ne'l{S of the coup in terms of the
recogn ition problem 'Ivith respect to t.lJe new' government. Rusk felt tha,t
a delay "TOuld be useful to the generals i n not appearing to be U. S.
agents or stooges and v:auld assist us in our public si:.ance of noncom ..
plicity. 19/ He further discouraged any large delegation of the generals
from calling on Lodge as if they 't7ere "reporting in. II A subs equent'
me ssage stressed the need to underscore publicly the fact that this ,as
not so much a coup as an expression of nat i onal will, a fact r evealed by
the near unanimous support of important mi litary and civi lian leaders. 20/
It further stressed the importance of Vice President Tho to a quick return
to constitutional government and the need, therefore, for t he generals to
i nclude him in any interim I' egiroe. Lodge replied affirmatively to these
vie\vs, indicating his opinion that vie should encourage other friendly
countries to recognize the nelV' government first ,vi th the assu:rance that
the U. S. \-Tould follovT suit shortly. 21/ Further, we should ShOll our
frie ndly support for the regime and \dthout fanfare re sume payments i n
the c~~ercial L~port program.

 The news of the brutal and seemingly pointless murder of Diem and
Nhu, hov:ever, was received in ;'!asbington vlith shock and disma~T. ~/
President Kennedy vTas reportedly personally stunned at the ne\\'s, par-
ticularly in view of the heavy U,S. involvement in encouraging tbe coup

 59 TOP Sk'CEV;T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

------~-

 TOP SEC~1I:::[I' - Sensitive

 leaders. 23/ Apparently, '\',e had put. full confidence i n the coull com"
 mitt.ee's offers of safe conduct to the brothers and, reluctant t.o inter·~
 cede on behalf of Diem arId Lhu f'or fear of appearing to offer sli:pport.
 to them or of reneging on OUT pledges of non-·interference to the generals,
 we had not appreciated the degree of hatred of the lI;go faraily among the
 generals, nor their fear that if the brothers survived the coup they
 i'TOuld somehovt, sometime stage a comeback. In their first meeting "lith
 Lodge after the coup, hm·rever, the generals denied that. the assassination
 had been ordered, and promised to make public their offer of' safe conduct
 to Die.m jf he ''lOuld resign . .?!:./

 Hhile the callousness of the murde:cs of Diem and Thu, their previous
 represni-l;eness not\lithst.anding, horrified tlle ,:orld, the succers of tbe
 coup and t.l1e deaths of' the ho.ted brothers were greet.ed with popular jubi-
 l ation in South Vietno.m. Spontaneous street demonstrations by stUdents
 i n a holiday mood ended in the btTn ing of the offices of the Tuaes of
 Vietnam and the destruction of a statue modeled after i'-:;:rne. Elm. ~he­
 tension released set off celebrations rivaled only by the annual Tet
 new Year fes'Livities. ,A.illerjcaJ.ls were greeted and received Yl1th great
 enthusiasm, and Lodge "ms widely regarded as the hero of tbe vihole train
 of events. Vietnamese v;ere heard to remark that if an election for
 president i\'ere held Lodge would 1t'in by a l andslide. 25/

 'l'hus, the nine·-year rule of rigo Dinh Diem came to a sudden, bloody,
 and permanent end, and U. S. policy in Vietnam p l unged into the unknoym ,
 our complicity in the coup only heightening our responsibilities and our
 commitment in tl'Jis struggling, leaderless l and . ~'~e could be certain only
 that YJhatever nev,T l eadership emerged 'I.;Quld be fragile , untried, and
 unt.est.ed.

 2. Estab li shment of an Inter:im Hegime

 Even before the i nitiat ion of the coup, the coup committee through
 General Kim had been in touch ylith civilian political oppositionists and
 to some extent with members of Diem ' s government. Once the success of
 the coup vias certain, negot i ations Y.Tith these civilians by t he generals '
 committee began i n earnest. On the night of Yovember 1 and the follo,,;-
 i ug day, all mi nisters of Diem ' s government were told to submit their
 r esignations and did so, some on U.S. advice. 11:0 r epr i sals "rere t a..'k:en
 against them. Indeed, Vice President 'l:'ho entered i nto intensive nego-
 tiat io ns vTi th General I'linh on rovember 2 on the composition of the in·-
 terim government . He apparently understood the eagerness of the generals
 t o have 11im heB.d a ne'l'/ government to provide continuity, and he used this
 knOldedge to bargain with t hem about the compos ition o f the cabinet . He
 was not to be t heir pliant tool.

 \'ihi l e these conferences "Tere taking p l ace, the coup commit tee , or
 ItRevolutionary Committee" as it '1mB nOyT calling i tse l f , di stributed
 l eaflets and press releases announcing the dissolution of the l'(at ional

 60 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 'rOP SEC:;:;:;:::I' .. Sensi ti ve

Assembl;y and the abolition of the Diem··:')hu government lJased on the _COD-· _ __
stitution of 1956, and proclaiming the support of the connnHtee for such
democratic principler: as free elections, unhampered political oppos i tioD ,
freedom of press, freedom of religion, and an end to discrimination. 26/
'.rhey were at pains to eXl)lain that t.he purpose of the coup ,·ras to bolster
tbe fight against the Comm<.mists vlhich they pledge themselvcf3 to pt,rsue
"lith renevled. vigor an.d determination.

 On the afternoon of november 3, the second day af·ter the coup,
Generals Don and Ki.m called on L.odge at the J:mbassy, explaining that
General l'·1inh was tied up in conversatio[ls vtith Vi ce President Tho on the
neVi government . 27/ The conversation \"'8S long and touched on many topics.
It began vrith mutual expressions of satisfaction at the success of the
coup, and continued "\'lith Lodge's ansurance of forthcoming U. S. recognition
for their new government. The generals explained tl1C.t tbey had decided
on a tlfO-tiel'cd gov-ernment strllCture w':Lth a military commJ ttee presided
over by General Einh overseeing a regular cabinet that vwuld be mostly
civilian ,\'it,h Tho as prime minister. Lodge promised to see to tbe im"
mediate restorat:Lon of certain of' the ald programs and. the Sl)eedy res1:unp-
tioD of the otl1ers 'when the government 1"as in place. Tbey then dealt
with a host of ilmnediate problems including tl1e r et urn of' tbe :,)hu chil' A

dren t.o their mother and the disposition of the rest of the :t>:go family,
press censorship, the release of '1'ri Quang from the fmbassy, curfey,
reprisals against former ministers, etc. The general s confirmed the
psychological importance of the cOIlIffiodl ty import suspension to the suc-
c ess of their plans. Lodc;e \TaS elated , both at tbe efficiency and
success of the coup, and the seriousness and determination of the general s
to deal vlith the pressing problems and get on wi ttl the I·lar.

 The foll owing day, on i nstruction s from T"l as hington , Lodae, in company
with JJt Colone l Conein, met vlith Genera.ls l'Hnh and Don. 28 / 1/ashi ngton
h ad been anxious for LOige to urgently convey to the gen"erals the neei
to make a clarifying statement about the deaths of t he brothers and to
take steps to i nsure humane t reatment of other members of the family.
The generals "T~re responsive to Lodge ' s urgings and promised to see that
action I,ras taken on the U. S . requests. I,'iinh said that the ccm:pos i t i on of
the new govermnent woul d be annom1cecl shortly. I n describing the meet:Lng
later , Lodge offered a prophetic description of t,Iinh: "Minh seemed tired
and somewhat fra.zzled; obviously a good , v.Tell-intentioned man . i'7ill he
be strong enol.1gh to get on top of things?"?:2/ Lodge clo sed the cable
by taking exception to State ' s excessive pre-occupation with the negat i ve
public relations problems of the coup and decrying its f ai lure to note
the brilliance vlith which the coup vias planned and executed .

 The promised 8.lmounce.ment of the nel, gov'ernment c arne on tb e morning
of Hovem1er 5. I t vTaS very much as General Kim had described it to Lodge
on November 3. Minh FB.S named President and Chief of the .r~ilitary
COImlli ttee ; Tho ,ms li sted as Premier , !,unister of Economy , ani Idnister

 61 TOP SECRt:'i' - Sensit i ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SJ':CRET - Sensitive

of Finance; Don \{8.8 rWilled. lIinister of Defense; and. General Dinh 'was named
to the j'linistry of Security (Interior). 30/ Only one other general ,ms- -
incl uded in the cabinet o.f fifteen I;Thichwas com!.)osed. primarily of
bureaucrats and civilians \'Titb no previous eX];lerience. Political
figures, either opposed to Diem or not, "Jere conspicuously absent from
the cabinet, a fact 'which "I-lQuld impair the ne,,; government f s seclll'ing the
roots in popular support it ,-lQuld need in the l ong run. The announcement
of the ne"l',' cabinet "ras followed by the release of IIProvisional Constitu-
tional Act Eo. 1, If signed by General 1.Unh, formally suspending the 1956
constitution 8_nd outlining the structure and functions of the :interim
government. 31/ On Eovember 6, Saigon radio nn01.mced the composition
of the ExecutIve Committee of the IHlitary Revolutionary Council. l\:inh
"lvas Chairman, Don and Dinh v:ere Deputy Chairmen, and nine other senior
generals, inclucling Kim., Khi.em, '11ittle" l'linb, Chieu, and Thieu v;ere mem-
bers. Significantly, General Khanh ,,:as not.

 On October 5, the new Foreign Minister had sent a note to the Embassy
informing the J\mbassador officially of the change of government, and
expressing the hope that relations between the tl'iO c01.m-Lries \{Quld be
continued and strengthened. 32/ State approved IJod.ge f s proposed reply
of recognition the follOl'lingday, l:ovember 6, and, under the pressu.re of
other governments and the press, announced it.s intention to recognize
on fovember 7 in Hashington. ill The note of recognition was delivered
on l'ovember 8, ,,:hen LoJge called on the ne,,! Foreign j'.Iinist.er, Pham Dang
Lam. 34/ IJam, emphasizing his OvTD insufficiencies for the job he had
been given, asked for 1,0:3. ge f s advice "lhich Lodge was apparently not
re l uct-ani, to give on a variety of topics . The prim8.ry impression left
was that the neH government would be heavily dependent. on 1.' . S. advice
and support, not only for the vmr effort, but also in the practice_l prob-
l ems of running the country .

 In the fj rst three vTeel\s of Jlovember 1963, three problems pre-
occupied most Americans and Vietnamese in the nelV po l itical and military
sitva tion created by the coup. The first of these l'laS getting the neY!
government started, developing the re l ations beh;reen the new Vietnamese
o fficials and their American counter:par,ts, and. most importantly shaking
down the po"wer relationships ",ithin the nevI regime . 35/ The first tvm
aspects of this problem ,<TQuld be self-resolving and were l argely a matter
of ti1l1e. ":lith r espect to the latter, it was clear from the outset that
General 1,'llnh was the domi nant figure in the new government and "\las so
r egarded by near l y all the military men. Tho, however, had exhibited
c onsiderable independence during the negotiations over the cabinet,
r eflecting his confidence that the generals fe l t they needed him . The
open question , then, was what degree of freedom of action the nevT cabinet
under Tho ,{Quld have, or alternatively , hOl-T deeply the mil itary councj.l
i nt.ended to involve itself i n run.ning the cOlmtry . ':I.' his i ssue v:as not
resolved in the public statements and communiques of the new regime and
ambiguity on the subject ioTas clearly reflected in the lack of decisive-
ness and vigor of the new ministers and in their general uncertainty as

 62 TOP SBCln~T 'Q Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

to tl1eir authority. Hhile the exac··: reE-sons for not including any poli tj ~ •
cians in the cabinet. are not knm'iD, it is reasonable to assu.'l1e that neither
Tho nor the military were anxioLJ.s tc see potential political rivals , with
pOvrer deriving from popular support ~ in positions to chaLLenge the
authority of 'Lhe ne,-: leaders. '11bat c'ter tte case , it 'I'laS the irrefwlution
of the pouer relationship wit-bin t~e ne:" goverr;ment that vTas one of the
factors contributing t.o the next 1'0:.:1 of coup-maldng in J'anuary 1961.f.

 The second urgent problem of t:',ese first \'leeks in ];ovem"oer \'TaS the
rapidly deteriorating economic sitv:'io0. in Vietnalll. The situation had
been serious 1n September, and 8, l:::.::';e deficit for the 196~ budget had
 already been forecast. The suspensi.on of the commercial import payments
 and selected PL l.f80 had aggravated '::-:e situation during September o.nd
October. Furt.hermore, all negotip.t ':':>ns on tlle 19S~ budget levels and U. S
support had been suspended and were ::0',1 serio:.lsly behind schedule. ./.l,.vmre
of the urgency of the problem, Sta.t e, 0:1 ~'.ovember 2, had asl\:ed for Lodge ' s
reC01J1Illendations on the resumption 0::' aid. and had urged hj]ll to identify the
people responsible for econo~ic pl8.'·.'·~.i.r:g in the neli' government so that
negotiations could begin imnlediatel~:. 36/ Concern \.;as also expressed
at the lack of expertise in this areB. auong the generals and LoJge was
advised to encourage t.hem to mal~e rr.exlrc.nn use of econom.ists in the
previons govcl'rJIDent I'Tho were farllilL::r .vi th the problems. Lodge prOpOReo.
in response that the government. be 2..,kei to name a high level conuilissioll
of economic experts to work with a similar group from the U. S. IHssion. 3r { /
Thj s suggestion h8.d, been agreed to i~l priEciple the previous day by Tho,
through whose office all economic a:'..-l r::e.tters ;iere to be cha,nLelcd. 38/
Lodge also believed that our aid sL::>'J.ld 'be incree.sed as an indication of
our support for tbe new goverJ1lnent. 39/ nut beyond these preliminary
discussions, no real progress was rr:e.le on the economic prob l ems before
the Honolulu'Conference on November 20.

 The third problem that viorried .-'..mericans '\-I'as the heightened level of
 Viet Cong activity in the wake of t:-,e coup and the military dislocations
 caused by i t. Related, but of even TIore importance , Fas the ne'Yi infor-
mation that came to light after the coup and ill the atmosphe r e of free
discussion that i t generated sho'Yd.r:~ that the military situat i on Vlas
 far worse than \i'e had believe,i . The overall statist i cal indicators had
 nOVI begun to' ShovT deteriora,tion dat=-~,g back to the s·ummer . The i nc i dence
o f VC attacks \vas up over the first six months of 1963, the \·reapons l oss
r atio had ,vorsened and the rate of '::; defections \-las ' ,'ray dOWIl . 40/
In the immediate vlake of the coup, "'-:; activity had j 'LJJnped dramat i cal ly
as MACV had feared i t vTould and the:ce vTas great concern t o r eturn un i ts
participating i n the coup to the field Quickly to foresta ll any major
Communist offens i ve . Lfl/ Cause for more fundamenta l concern , hO'lvever ,
vlere t he first rumorsand i ndicatioLs that under Diem there had been
r egular and substantial fals i ficatio:l in the mi lita.ry reporting I'ystem
and i n r eport i ng on. the strategic hc-.J.lets that had badly di storted the
r eal military situation in Vietnam to lL5.ke i t appear l ess serious than i t was.

 TOP SECnE'l' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 . TOP Sl~CB.E'I Sensitive

This , it turned out, lVas the main rEC.son for the previous discrepancies
in Nl"..CV and D. S. )ilission evaluatior:s of the war. In the first flush of
self-satisfactj on after the coup, Lei ze had predicted that the change
of regime v,ould shorten the ,,:ar bec5..lse of the improved mOTe.le of the
lillVL troops. 112/ :i3ut as time vlOre o~'l, the accun;ulating evidence of
the gravity oftbe military situatio:::. displaced these sanguLl.e prog.·
noses.

 The only comforting note in the intelligence Ivas the apparent dis~
comfiture of the j\~ational IJiberatior:. lront. Throughout the summer and
fall, the JiJLF had seemingly been ufl5.·ule to capitalize on the 3uddhist
or student struggle movements. In fe.ct ~ its principal respor:se to the
Diem-ulJ:idhist clash ha:i been increas:".nt::ly vituperative attad:s on the
D. S. hot tmtj.l j;ofclllber 7th did the ~'Ll.-;> issue a post~Diern policy state"
ment, consisting of a list of "eieht demands": .!2/
 (1) Destroy all strategic i!e.mlets . .. and other disguised camps.

 (2) Helease all political detainees .•..

 (3) Promulgate without dele.y democratic freedom ....

 ( 4) Roo.t out all vestiges of the fascist and m'lite.rist dic-
 K
 tatorial regime.

 ( 5) Stop all persecution 2.l.:i repression and raiding operations.

 (6) Dissolve all nepotist organizaU.ons ..• .

 ( 7) Immediately stop forcible conscription ....

 (8) Cancel all kinds of unjustified taxes.

The Duong Van Minh government could claim that it I'!aS in the process of
meeting all of -Lhese Ildemands Tl exce]?:. one _.- halting the draft _ .. so that
the rLF ivas effectively pre-empted. On r ovember 17, the ELF Central
Committee issued another series of demands:

 ( 1) Eliminate the vestiges of the Diem regime .

 ( 2) Establish democratic freedom.

 ( 3) Eliminate Amer i can influence.

 (4) Hake social and economic reforms.

 ( 5) Balt the fighting.

 ( 6) EstabUsh a coalition govermnent.

 64 TOP SJi:CHI:T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 To:e s~c~Cm~l' - Sensitive

The demands "Tere accompal1ied by a statement affirming the relmification
of Vietnam as a goal of the rLl" ~ the first such statement in over tl<!O
years. Douglas l)ike! s analysis vas Mable to resolve the reasons for
tbe inaction of the ITlJI' throughout the crisis:

 Had the llL}i' leadership 'wished to do so, it could luwe
 used its iInpressi ve struggle machine to IB:LlllCh i.n the name
 of the Buddha a nation-\Tide strugg1e movement Ulat con-
 ceivably could have ended .-lith its long-pursued General
 Uprising .•• Knowledgeable Vietnamese attributed its refu::;al
 to act to an umrillingness to involve itself in an alien
 struggle move:m,ent. ~l'he l~LF and the communists, ran the
 argl)ltlent, avoid ac:tjvi-Lies over vrhich they do not exercise
 total cont,rol. ... Tl"Je Buddhist leadership made i t clear it
 did not seek nLF hel]? since i t wisl!ed at all costs to avoid
 the Communist stigrna. A110ther popular explanation for the
 JTLF! S n sit.-tight tI policy during the Buddhist troubles ",-as
 that the ELF vas going to allov7 the bourgeois revolutionary
 forces to succeed in toppling Diem, after which it would
 capture t.he Hevo lution as the Kerensky Government was cap-
 t ured in the Rus sian Hevolntion. Wo such effort, hOl'rever,
 vTaS made by the rLF. A slanderous but Iddely bandied
 explanation among Vie"Lnamese at; the time vTaS that the l'ILF
 did not want Diem removed, that he and his brothers and
 si st.er-in- l aw "rere far more valuable to the FLF in office
 than out. In truth, the FLF posture during this period
 remains something of a mystery. ~}+/

3. The Honolulu Conference and Jl:S)1,.M 27~

 Having postponed his planned October 31 visit to I"ashington because
of the irn.:minence of the coup; Lodge apparently suggested, i n r esponse to
a state query, that it be rescheduled for Iiovember 10. Husk proposed a
further postpollement to insure time for Lodge to establish ",-orking rela-
tions ,·ri th the nelv government and to take advantage of hi s olm planned
trip to Tokyo lat er in the month. L14/ Accordingly, a meeting with Husk ,
Bundy, Bell , l-icHamara, and Taylor Tn
 rlono lulu was scheduled on I;ovember 20
for the entire country tea.m. Lodge \v2"s invited to proce ed on to I'Te.shing-
ton after the meeting if he felt he needed to te,lk Ivith the President.

 In preparation for the conference , Ste,te dispatched a long series
o f' s pecific questions to Lodge on possible methods of broadening the
political base of support of the new government and i ncreasing the effec"
tiveness of the ,qar effort. L16/ This viaS additional to the comprehen-
 sive r eview of the situation-,-including an evaluation of progress on the
14d:a.mara··Taylor recolmnendations, that the military lias expected to provide
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 ':f'OP St~CRzr - Sensitive

and the in-depth assessment of the nevr regime and its prospects by the
country temu. lj7/ Lodg~ replied even before arriving at., the conference
that the proposed discussions vTOuld require detailed information about
the functioninc of the new rulers '>Thich it i\aS far too early to obta;in. ~8/

 In a broad overvie,·,' of the new political situation in Vietnal1l at
 the plenary session in Honolulu, l,odge voiced his optilnism about the
 actions taken thus far by the new' government. to consolIdate its popular
 support. 49/ In particular, he noted the efforts to eliminate forced
 l abor in the strategic ha:m.lets, to cmtail arbitrary arrests, to deal
vii th extortion and corruption, to enlist the support of the Hoa Hao and
Cao Dai sects, and to consolidate and strengthen the strategic hmnlet
program. But, he left no doubt tbat the nel{ leadership vTas inexperienced
 and fragile. For this reason:J he urged the conferees not to press too
much on the government too soon, either in tbe lI'e.y of military and eco-
nomic programs, or steps to democratize and constitutionalize the country.
His second major point \-;as the psychological a.nd poli tica.l, as \'Tell as .
economic, need for ll. S. aid to the ne" government in at least the amount
of our aid to Diem, and preferably more. lIe recognized the domestic
poli tical problems in the U. S. with Congress, but he argued that anything
l ess vlOuld be a severe blow to the new rulers \,ho i{ere still getting their
bearings. USOf,1 Director Brent supported these latter vie\\Ts, but registered
his concern about the naivete of the nei>T leaders in tbe face of an ex···
tremely grave economic situation. 50/ In response to a direct question
from Rush: as to whether an increase"in dollars \\Tould sborten the \'lar,
Lodge demurred some,'That and replicd that wbat "m~ required was greater
motivation. 51/ NcI'Tamara immediately disagreed, saying that his uYlder-
standillg of the piaster deficit problem vTaS that it ,vas endanger inc all
the programs, and that both AID and ),J.:'\.P \~ere in need of increased. funding.
Conc urring in this vie"r, AID Administrator Bell agreed to revie\'! the
entire AID program.

 General Harkins I assessment of the military situation took llote of
the upsurge of Viet Cong activity in the '>Teek follovring the coup} but
i n general remained optimistic, although more guardedly than in the past. 52 /
The sharp increase in VC attacks after the coup seemed to have been
haphaza.:rd, and not part of a v{ell coordinated country-\·,ide response to
t he uncertain political situation. And in the vreek just ended, activity
had returned to more normal levels. Horeover, he did not sbow concern
about the seeming long term deterioration in the statistical indicators.
Hhile he Ivas favorably impressed I{ith the determination of the new leaders
to prosecute the vtar and make needed changes, he vJaS vorried about the
m>Teeping replacement of division and corps commanders and province chiefs.
The discontinuities and disruptions created by \\Tholesale replacement of
province chiefs could have a serious negative effect on the vlhole counter-
insurgency program:. On the posi ti ve side> he noted tbe strengthened
chain of cormnand under General Don as both Defense ]'!linister and Chief of
Staff. I~c»amara pOintedly questioned. both Harl;:ins and the other military

 66 TOP SECR:ii::T Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63 316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

briefcrs about conditions in the Delta and see11led s]~cptical of the
offidal optimism, although he "laS eC].ually disinclined to accept
undocumented negative judgments.

 The conference ended inconclusively with respect to the military
problem. It did, hOl·rever, underscore 1.'. S. support for the nevT regime
and focus U.S. official concern on the urgency and gravity of the
economj c problem confronting the neVi government. An urJinformative
press release afLer the conference took note of U.S. support for the
new govcrrDnent in facing the difficult political and economic problems
in South Vietnwn, and pointedly reiterated the plan to vrithdravl 1,000
U.S, troops by the end of the year ,,>'"it.h 300 to leave on Decem1)er 3. 2.]../

 Lod.ge f1el{ to Has 1ington the follmving day and c::mferred Hith
 President Johnson. Based on tbat meeting and the report of the dis-
 cussions at Eorlolulu, a Hational SeclJrity Action r·lemorandum ,vas drafted
 to give Guidance ctnd direction to our efforts to improve tIle conduct of
 the "\var under the nev South Vietnamese leadership. 54/ It described
 the plITpOSe of the Am.erican involvement in Vietn81n as, lito assist the
 people and GOvernment of thai.. country to win their contest against the
 externally directed and supported Comm1m:is t conspiracy. II :25/ It defined
 contribution to tlJat purpose as the test of all U. S. actions in Vietnam.
 It reiterated the obj ect.ives of wit.hdraviing l, 000 U. S. troops by the end
 of 1963 and ending the in su.r gency in I, II, and III Corps by the end of
 19611-, and in the Delta by the end of 1965. U. S. support for the nE'v!
 regime VJaS confirmed and all U. S. efforts ,.;ere directed to assist it
 to consolidate i t.,self and expand its popul.ar· support. In vie', of the
 series of press stories dU:-cing November about the disagreements between
Harldns and Lodge, the President requested 1lfull unity of support for
 established US policy1l both in Saigon and in Hashington. 56/ ]'\SAlI 273
 directed the concentration of D,S. and Vietnamese militarY, political,
 economic and social efforts to improve the counterinsurgency campaign
 i n the Mekong DeUa. It further directed that economic and military aid
to the nevl regime should be maintained at the same l evels as during
Diem 1 s rule. And in conclUSion, plans were requested for clandest.ine
operations by the GVl~ against tbe l\orth and also for operations up to
 50 kilometers into Laos; and, as a just.ification for such measures , State
' \TaS directed to develop a strong, documented case 1lto demonstrate to t.he
world the degre to v[hi ch the Viet Cong i s controlled, sustained and sup-
p li ed from HanOi, through Laos and other channels. l1 57/

 As a policy document , rSPJ-1 273 "\ITaS to be extremely short lived. In
the j argon of the bureaucracy, it vras s i mply overta}~en by event.s . The
gravity of the military situation in South Vietnam vJaS onl y hinted at
i n rSAl,,- 273 and in the discussions in Honolulu . Its full dimensions
"muld rapidly come to light in the remaj ning "I'l eeks of 1963 and force
high level reappraisals by year 1 s end. But prooably more important, the
deterioration of the Vietnamese position in the countryside and the rapid

 TOP SBCR8'r . Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SBCRET - Sensitive

collalise of the strategic ham] et program 1'rere to confront the fragile neK
political structure in South Vietnam with difficulties it could not sur-
mount and to set off rivalries tbat would fulfill all the dire predictions
of political i nstability made by men as diverse as John MeckEn and :"ritz
Tlolting before Diem! s fall.

 68 TOP Sr.C~ET . ~eD sitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 I

IV. B. 5. FOCI-NOTGE::

 Rob-:::..:t 8!Lplcn., 'Jh:. Lo,:;t 1966)
 p. 189

)\.. r..~~:id·:in~~ p~,.p~~::~; 1 H:I3:i:ilj~~i.rtc of' 'l";lK C\1:~~~··~}!:1.:~ G:1.t.1n:ti(u.1! for the:
 Sc.. c,~;,.;t..,;'.:~'Y oj" D::J'('·!:..~, E::>no~nJ.u Confc. (,)1(,(; $ I!;.;~·:l G, 1963.

5. S:1.:-:" R. G. K. ti'l 'c,,,r")f; o~ls liThe S:itu:;r- io~, :tn S01.r:~h V:i.':')tn~-'il; M':,1'ch 1963.~ 11
 MU"ch )"11' :,963.

 ,
 o~~.
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SEeTIlT ~ Senslt:i.Vc

 II

1. CJA J}l"L~Jl:i[{c;ncc EC'fDO: CU"!dllJll Ho. 0811/66,1) 1~ r:",y 1966. '1'1118 C.:;.i"til"il~,t{;
 is Pj:QI),1I. y h;~ 1. GvN :t'e:f.'l'z .. '::' o:tfici'41a (~C~;i.l ,:;1.:,(:(1 [l,borr~ 8oo"oao
 CCVIO~Ue[; 'i"'w':~ 1)-",;:;:i:i~ c: .:l'U;;:; Cf. Dl1.i. V~~l) V2011~ :In R:1.ch""l',l ~~.
 Linc'lilo: lOp ctT •. ~ \Tic,\;=N,'(l (i',l"l'1 I~i.'bo:r:: 1.I:i.ol1:;.c~m ste.t(~ Unive:csi-cy .hoe!J.':;,
 19590 ) - -'----

6. 8<:,i[Jon r>lE~3 10~)8p r'l:~~" 18) 1;/)j
 0c:-, (C)

 fk., ie: O!1 rln;~ 1050; j:)(,Y 22~ 1963 (8)

8. S·G~ . :t;(~ r!.3~ 1159.~ 1'~ ,,,. 29~
 'J._lo~. .
 "10 L ',
 ~ ./ "):; (8)
 St~tc; !L~ZC 171, JUDe J' 1963 ( Ei )
 ~.

10. GoiC O•1 1il:::~ l100, J"l'."'..-:: ~l, 1>6:; (8 )

11. S2,iGO'i~ ]jll~3 11"r.;
 .>'.' J\mc 9, 1963 ( s )
12. Stif-.tc 11l3r~ J.207, J U2K; 1 . :J 1963 (8 )

13· Sa.~r'on nJ.S3 1168, Jnno 12, J.963 (6 )

 70
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

21.

22.

25· 1'.. i..i.d E··'lb').l'",~t,:q~ "Vic"Gn···.:J.cGC R(~cs Gnin in KC'" A:CL2" II J'k'i: YO}:'};: T:lmc.s;
 lI.uS\.1.rJt. 15, 1963. -----
26. J.hjo!' GC:L:.:o.l Y. R. l~'1rLl"j.rl" JCS" 8ACS\1I I'-1c"O:;:',l1C:bJ.:.1 :Co:c the SC::':l:({t~,l'Y
 0:1.' D:;:t'c.nGG An::.~ur.·G J.6 ~ 1953 (f»).

270 r ""1.':n. L·u:," I"r:; 0:::.' St:1. u "· .l' H 11~("1'_' iC!.'-'.'il of Convc.. ",LtJon fo:!o' the Hr. C:! o.d.
 J

 ( PJ- iJ5.ci[:,Y,tr;: t!10 b·,--,,-,:i.0-n~_.~ J>1.)., It :r:r.:1';'.;n.~ H~G-(cC) Bln.:".Y's
 JIIJ.:-.J 10'! ~Ind I'OX');c:s'(,.cJ.) s J·ul.y 4.l' 1963 ( ~'G l!,{}~S ONLY ) . (0, (.t::.cl!'~cl in
 G.!l:!.xmCi·i,). ) •

28. 1'.)pa;;·i;mcrrt of Ctc,:ce JlI::!'!o,!.', .nd.'}.H of Conv0).'1.~[j'j:lonJl Jul.y ~., 19S3 ( 8 ).
 (Attu.:l c1 :in Lr-:li::n(t:t·~ ) 0

290 Th:tCt.

 71
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 III

 2. 'l'C'!xl:. :;:·~}!o~_'Gc(]. in S:.:iQ;v1 j"~J 2,sO, A":;o.!Sl; ?1, 1963 (u); o~h_r . . . ccounts
 c:t'(;d.H 1':111.1 '\iLt;}.l t.he m::t·i;.:Ld 1[1,'\-7 id":!,~ t2S H0j_J.o

 3·

 C·1.e·l t 0
 ~.!--

6.

9.

13e CIA Info;Cii1:::.tion HG·oo~~·t" o"Poc5t.c
 ..,. iI~_

150 ScdGo!1 m::;~ 316J> I,OL:~;0 to H1J.f'T'l:;.U, Al'gUf~t. 2lJ, 1963 (::vs ) , )';'()POl'ts a con~
 vcrGatlon 1,et,TcCfl Kaiit!:.nbu:cg (ViT/HG), ~Tho :\Q acc('·np~.'1icO. Loc1~~0 from
 Honolulu, [TIo. Vo Ven Ee.i" Die!. r s chef de ci:;:.b::nc"(;; S::a.lson msg 32hJ>
 Io '1r,,, to C'~'~
 r u~;,,\,.; " 'r
 .J(,;·(,..~l'''J ~" ,....u t 2h
 .J;'\.vl.~) "',-, 1C/?
 -/OJ ( •.• ,)
 ).\'); .'.~
 ... -no····-" F·l~·iJl··L·)M
 .... ·.\.v.:) "'''L .. - . . ~l/~ I c O''''\"'-'''''l'''ion
 .. 1 , .. J..I~\"'-"~'._
 v;.i:Lh SCC~CC-C[;.l· r 01 stc.t'3 Nsny.:.m. D.lnh 'j.'h.u:'n.

 - ..
 Ib:!.(;~

 TOP S"2~CHET· 'cD.sit:i.v.
 72
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 rC'(;'neJJ~p ·Lx· . .nsph'ei.1. :i.n '~hc .. [.ids C'1J. r:' .. :l't:L"'l It"ii d.ec:.t'~'-' Ullul1. 1~.1·Gt1,~·t.;
 260 BCG C1}L.:'urf.; In-G'_~~! lige-nee 1·Ie}!10L-"~lCU'tl OC!)"" Noo 29!3/63" l!."l'Sus"l., 26,
 1963 (f;) ; < '1<..1.. T:t:( C'CC " I. D:LA, I-1c..mm~,- \'clV~ fo:c the f;C"r;J..~C·:;c;.l y 0:(' 1; ~Et!rL_,
 Im:..,.u/t.. ~.:6> 1~S3 ( S ) 0

190 9:l:l.i.l~J1 [r;;::.!."t("~1I::1rl.. 11.8 :t.'cport(:cl in Sr'.:i.gon !'1:~ 32 21., OPo ~~J.; H:l1crn.!1n,
 !2.1~~:i.Ol~J' 9~o~.l:~0> »0 1:.85.

210 f.l-l;c:ce r.! ... ~ 2h,). St.:;,tc -Co Loese:.? j\.t'S1'.~;t 21~, 1963 (1'iJ ) ( c:ti.,: ..chr;u. in
 al)rl~;nL1L_) 0 - •

230 .k1'Ll11.':' Sc}(Lu,,:tr;~~c:L'5 A 'I lOt': ,1'"1(1 Jb,p;;J ( HO;1 Y():d~: Hou[;;hton IHi'21in COo,
 1965):> 1)0 901f.; for r.:,ni:.J:l·(:~-~,\,t~~- -\'1(:,7 of til!'!;:;..) C'.i,.n ;G, s·e H.i..l::?:l;:l1.,
 em it e. n'r)
 _LJ.. G _(:.t... _ 1·:8.)":;1 -9
 iI' 0 0

21~ o Mic; :1.CJ. VO Fcn'j'GfJ',-.~'l~ I\~(;)nC:i.';..D.du.m. for the PrN;iClJ."11 ·G, l.u3UG-G 25.9 1963
 (TS EYES ONLY ); dir'c.'c'<.i (lu.ote frol1l, 'Ima·laH&.ble, u.l1n'L'!.'rrbC1'L,<1 S:.:tr:o. c_blc. 0

27 0 HnLm"~n, £:£o£:tto~ IJl>o 4 88~9o
28, Ibic1c

31c S c~ Cn:cz"'n-t; Intel:ligC!nce HCl'1ore-.n{h, OCl No. 2339/ 63, Au!:;ust 1 J~, 1963,
 nd OCI NOQ 23tf1/ 63, I\.UgUtTC 21, 1963 ( 8 ) .

320 Ibiel.

330 Ibi<1e

350 CIA to Stt:'..tc (n.o mmibcJ. . ) , August 26, 1963 (1£8 ) e

 CAS ~J.).ig(jn 03116, ClL "to 8t~i.tC, Augu.st 27; 106 ? (TB )
 .- ./ ..J 0

 CbS S~.i'::';OD 03;7, CIh t,o StC.~.:t·:~ J A"i.1Gust 27, 1963 (8).

 TOP BEeBE'! • Sl,;n~i t:l.VO
 73 .
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP Sf;GREr - f3ensHiv8

 Hilsman, op.C:1t., pp. h90~9L 1'''OL' [" simll'T accour''G [CG fc'(J.csin[,:Cel""
 2.:.Q.git.~ p~-90j~. The \-jl'c.\l9,ll(':L 0:; o:i'fici.~,l rc,:::o:('~1.; fo:.:. tbc HGC
 meet.ingb :i.n Av;:;ust; September, Gno. Octob ;:c 1953 :t(;t}u:iy",::: D. n'ujoL' c;:vcc::t.
 on tbe P:'Tt ot the Luthoz' \.':1th rC';'·jJC:c'(, to the £m_1Yf:ls of \!e:'.Lhing1.,on
 pol icy c.'.Lth:.r. tio?J:; :Co:,::, th-l p, ':'i'O;:.1. 0:: PC:::los::·:l:l.;y, the (;.1..1':-110:(' lLS
 t ill'nCo. to '\:~hr; public ·::'OUj'(~.J (,i"ic:h ::-.'(.\~ noJ~ 1·i:L'lihou!.; bie.D) in [.n cffol"1;
 to piece torr . . . th_:;:· the sto:'~r oJ: ho,; C.ccir ions h;l'C 1'<.£:.Cl1~a; priIll_X' jly
 Rog(;r m.JelT1(,.'.1" '1'0 Hov(': C'. N<"l.:Lon, op.cl'\.;.; Ab"(·hLU' Schlc:;cdnC<.::t',
 A Thous~>.n(l ) ws;-op.ci'li'.-;--i,nd ;fohri-!.i:::cklin, !:IiJJGIOl1 :in :L'ar! i.:·nt, 9J..... c:tt •
 . - --- -
39.

 H~,rk:ilw to 'l 't.yJ OJ: ancl F01'l; ('I'S, Exl';S OJ';LY ), AuguJt 28,
 t1,c.l~d..:!(l~o

1~4 . Ibiel.

45. Hilsm".n., 212.Ci~. ~ pp. 492-3.

46. Ibid.

ll·7 . State lllSg 269, President; to Loc'(ge ~ l iugus'G 28, 1963 ('l'S ) ; :-.li.(1 JCS
 msg 3385, 'f" Jr1o:c 'co HD,rkin s ~ A w·t.1St. 29, 1963 (1'8 ).

1+8. State nlsg 268~ state "GO Loage~ Al1.zust 28, 1963 (TS ) .

50. CAS Saigon 11lS3 0437, Augu.st 29, 1963 ('1'S ) .
51. Snigon m:::g 375, LOl'l3c to Sts.:tc, J'mgu.s·c 29, 1963 ( TS ) .
52. MACV m;~'g 1566, H0.rldnG to Taylor, AUGu,:;"t 29, 1963 ( TS ) .

55. stv.te mS3 272, StG:!:;(j " 0 LoCl.:;c (J.1.d. Ht:..:tklns, AusuGt 29, 1963 ('rs ) .

 TOP f3ECRET - Scnr;J:civ0
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP S:r:;CR8.L - SClldti vo

 59. G! 8 Sd:;O;l mE ~ O~·99,1' CLA to Stu;l;c" .h1.t£,1.l,:,t 31. s 1953 (S); l.lnd Sai £:,Oll
 mq~ 391,9 1..063.: to S·0:..t", l\.n.:!.Tw·l; 31, 1963 ( Ci.'3).

 610

 10:;'(1.•

 6t;.•

66.
 lb: 0.•

68.

10.
 -Ibid.•
11.
12.

1!~ . So.:ig(.\)1 IN<~ 388 , Lodsc to Sto"tc, Au[~ust 30, 1963 ( ~"S ) ; Ss,ie;on meg 391,
 Loa(l;G to state, AUGust 31, 1963 ( ~l'~3).

19· 501.
 TO:O SEC1{i~II Sr~n.Gj.t,'-ve
 ------0

 15
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

82. 1,1:..,jor G~i.1~i.'ol Vo
 (TsL pp" 1~2.

83· IbJc1.

8!~. lb i,cl. s pp. 2-3.
 [~c..Ll(. ... :i..l1sur, C/;:l.C:it..$ p. 905; HnC~H 1~ op.c5t., pj). 502-5()5; G'ul
 I,h;c1<-J..iil s orocT~o 208 eh"\:; I'- J..'iJ.1J e1 -.::-c(:ou.r;t:~ of tll:i..s m3 ··G:inc.
 r

86.
87.
B8.

90.
91.
92.

93· IITrQncC).':i.pt of b:~'O~0.C!e s'c on NBC I G 'Eu~'li,lcy~Dr:L~11".lcy Hope.!.' G' ,
 Sc.ptcmb::::r· 9, 1963", PLlI;lic P2..Cj:8 ot the Pl'c:')'ic1en-cs, op.c1t., p. 659.

 SaiGon JIlf'~ t!'78, Loc1::;~ -to State,; Sc'oL~ubcT.' J.l~ 1963 (TS ) . S::dg01" mi)g
 t~83, LO,-1,:;. a.nd Brc:nt to S'i:;~.tc, 0n t!'l"l 13';7;18 Q~:Y, took th:) op}}odt;)
 ViCiT n11d requcr;-liccJ. }. ~TilliE;r.do:l t.o Ll)p:"o're p::.1clin.3 aid pro;:';1.\:jt)t'. Th:ts
 c able p:..'obc.1)ly rcflecJ(;s Brcnt f ~ Vi(;~'7, in ,·:hie}), Locl.g<.: conCi.u:r~cl -to
 void )'ovc-:.:.1i~!3 ·('h~ cO~ltm1'i.; of' h:lG e~n'licr c.::.b1c .

95. Sr.1gon L1SZS 469~477, :Googe to St8,ta, Sept:::-:mbol" 12, 1963 ('J:[j ) •

96. stc;tc msg 391, St2.te to Loo,:;e, S::;:ot~-,mbc:r. J.2, 1963 (1'8 ) •
 s-to,tc mS3 ) ~ll, St:1tc to LO')~~j Sopt.~!!lbcr 14:I 1963 (TS ).
 HA.CV msg 161~9s Ih~"klp::, to Tc.JJ.o~·-, S31kctIlcol' 9.9 1963 ( TS ) ; MJl.CV liW3
 1675; Hc"l\::ina to Tv,ylm.~~ S::r.At.',~bsl> 12, 1963 ( ~l,18 ) ; c.no. John Ao l\!cConJ,
 Dil'(.ctOJ' CIA, Nc·;nol,".n.c1llJI., S:;!l"t;."'I,i;)('l' 13 ~ 1963 (rrs ) .

 TOP SEcrIST
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP 8ECmc:,l'

 99~ MAC",r T;l,<'0..'
 ~
 ~75~;1<
 .> J E~" 1 "n" '.:0
 C· .~.L ~'"
 rj1 V~ ~
 .....~ J..vl'.,

 100.

 nob:..X' FilP!!' 11,? j·jCLlO:" 'ld.1'.I~ to tb.:J SCC!..'(,';"r: "',; of 8'L:...:i:ie, Hnbj:c~;:
 V;i..et-N:-)'a, G :(Jt:'7l!b'::'1' 16, 1963 (T;ja,El'I';'J Ol'JJX).

 C!~P n:s""' 63 c,l6, m~i';;<" Ho:'~" ';';0 Loc)~~, S(;p'GEnbcr 17) 1963 (;;s)
 ( :l.'Vt;:'l.c·h')O,· ;:, u])", ;;dL.) •__ 'J.'

10 ~o

105. 19,

108. St~"i:i,-, )11'"'3 431, l-r(~,:dc"'nt; to LO(i~~:, S~p'i.;cllbc::i.' 18, 1963 ( 'l'8); "'TId
 S.:-.ison 1I1~'~ 5t..O..., L00;:,> to n.',-,!:!icknt, 8Dptcmb~:::' 18 s 1953 ("1'8).

110. l'?:cG:i.clcnt Jo~m 1'0 K('Dnoc1ys llC;-,lO:t'sndum fo'!.' t.ho SCCJ,'c'tm of D.)i'cnt:c,
 GpC",""O':::l' 21.9 1963 ( ~i'B ) ( ctt.c.(!he,l in ap:p::l1~ii:... ).

111. Se;""r.::t:;,:,:,y of D-:!:;:'cn~J' Robe!vt S. HCX:::';:18,1"~j'Jl lkmc-.1,'ks '00 tho P;;'I.:cs on
 D;;:p.:~:ct·m.'0. f():,~ Vict.n:::.,'n, lmc3rmm fIFD" ].ld.; scpt"m11Cl' 23, J.963.

113 · Cc "·,n1~m(l.-"r UGW~CV, ItT:<.'ClUct;:!::i.pt of OJ):;n:! ng Confel'cncc -wit. , the Sccr0~
 t{tr;r of D\,;f0.n;:c~ !..:nb"'ss(lCi.o:r r,lcl CJ1C':t~u1::~"t'1 of the Joint Cldd's of
 stuff on the S-ktU8 of the US Eff'O:t:; in Vi e:-t!):.: '': " , ?5 Septc'1'b(;z' 1963 (TS ) .
 str~tc lJ1Sc; for jI.nb:3s.-:'c".or J",oC1:;c ".n5. fJ::,cJ.'<:r.~:i'y McN~na~ra,
 Sc:ptC'ibcr end SGiS041 moSS 593, EY'}:~S ONLY f01' Pl cs i<lont,
 September

115- s~; gon m;::z 61?; Loc1.::;e.. to st~(,c, Sc:p-i;cnl e:c 29; 1963 (TS ) .

 77
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SEGP"DJ.! S~;!")sitj_,,'\:'
 -"-'-"-

121. US/l.lD D:~':Lcfi!1C; l'\)D_J:'; IlI...icd:;:l.rlg of Pos~;:;.bl( l":Cc-l1Ul.1C /'..1.(1 S'll.JPCnr::iC21!J
 ,. r:i:(;h :C.3ti'11~..ted J.j~i·:\C·G::;, II no (,-:be (8.:r..1111 .LS) •

122. Scc:;~cti:ny oJ: :r;:':;:\;l1D"~ r·1r"'(1:·~'"1(}1.U:·1 for. ·Lh .. r.".G:i.('C'nt~ f:ubj.:;c~·t: TIcpm:0
 of t'I'i,C: l.-1ciL'·' .. ':,. 'l'-ylo:..' ;.l:l.G~;;.Ol1 'GO Son.:~h VtCi.-r>.'l", 2 OC'Gcibcr J.963 ( S),lI
 ti

 :[Jo2 ( CO':l.clusL"'~~ c,;:J.(!. . :t'\::CCm:. ncht;io~;,<j L'.'C/G'Nc!l"'ci. in aPI,,-;nr]j :) 0

123~ n)icl~

12::·., Ibi(~9" 1),,50

125·
 ---
 n1:LC 0

126 ~ 'J:b.e 1.1'000 )l'~ll \iithdJ.'~..u['l.. 'pJ.~n is cl.c&lt Wit!1 in cJ.ctdJ. in <"nO~'13T
 Tu.uk ]7'o)"c;c r~11)eJ:', "I'l~0.GCO." H:i-ch([.i~c·.-;L1 of US F01:ec.;":j J.962 lS6),H.
 h

129. NS!\1'l; l"ioo 263, O~tob(.:c 1.1, 1963 ( 'l'3 r::n::s O}\'LY), cl':1pn:...sis r.c:ckd
 ( ct ;~ .c}-".::d in 2.pp:.D.dix ) 0

131. Ibio.
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 -_._--------
 TOP - __-
 2~C1~r Scn~jtlv~
 ..

 IV

10 c/,g mes rvs 97~;O~ to ste.."Ge f:i.'(~l s::-;.: SOY"t, Oe'0obej:' 9:, 1967 \.,.)
 , c< )
 ;
 C1S mc~~ l-\t~ 97~;3 "to ~1t&. ·c '" f:.c 1 Eo:-' -i gO"'''" Oc·i.,oly'1,"' 9 ~ 1967 (s'\·J
 I

 E~a;:lG:vn m.[:~ 676.i 1,06':':0 to E.,t,,"A~'~ J O~"l;o";)::":C 10, 196'7 ('.1';') 0

 Su.i2:0~ m::'c; 6371; to S'" .'t· ......, fl"CY:l J...') --'"' ...
 ~ l....,~ )
 OC"',C)b~l' C". /, 10.1""'·)
 :;;0:> (S) •

 Sr.:) ('on 11"'S 6r.),
 ,J • ;; to S"G_ .~c: f:L'C . _1 Lo(,gc, o·:;to~)~:(· 7; 1963 ('l'S) •
 Sn. lso:n rrtr~ rt'
 l.~ ~~
 6),'""'J to St.G.te f:r-0Y'l Lo:12:'·· , O:::';'OD :.c' 6,1 1963 ( ~·S ~':tTS 0"".. -r\/"
 L\
 ,"

 JJ):i.d~

6. Sr5.:on lr.::.~ 652" "to S:ta'i..c fl'Cm. LoCD:' .• o{:~torJ ~~
 7, 1963 (T" B~ill'1 07'if " )
 .,...).,.1 .....Ll (\

'7 c· f.>ai:,cl1 rnGg 61:7, to St,~.:G~ fJ.'Cml I~oc1~(".. , Oct,ob{;~~ 7, lS63 (~s) 0

80

100 Sr·jcon m'3 715,S OC"/:,ODC:i' 16" J953 (c); 8,)"\(3. Sc..:iGcn mE'S 732,p O~\jo'bGl'
 18, 1963 (~r3 ) Q

12" S~lcon )'1(..;5; 731, Octo (;1' 18, 1953 (S).

130 t'~I~CV nsr~ J01 8250;1 f01' Gener, ). 'I(~y:Lo:c and AJ:1i:r.'c:.l Fe:):;; :f':cc-n Ib.:ckinG,$
 Oc'iio1)c:r: 17; J.963 (TS)o

16 0 D~p.llrtrl.,:LG of S'I.;c, -A, INR R;:;;:;c:;.rc ?·:enlOr" nauru R?E90, Octollor 22,
 1963 (S)o

 st ....,,~
 I
 r. 1)1'.'('
 ~·llv t.c~ J
 t;')()
 / '-~;
 OC+:c"
 ~'\...i
 ')' l!
 '_.io. ",
 3. 0'" '.' (r.; ) 0
 /.) I.-'

 200

 79 TOP SECRET - S~ aitivc
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

260 f}i.~·L·C r'l.«~ 5'(6 .. to F~·\,;.d'1"""1.·::) O~tol):;~ 1 1;., 1963 (,l'S
 LOI.1:jC 1':l.'o_! the
 EyeS O:UY).:; Ll1d 08 S~.~Go!' r'!.;:~ lJl!28 s LO"::.;c "to t ho 1'1(:.['1':' :.;)",-l;,
 Oct;!jbC:C 15; 1903 (r,rfJ ) 0

 C.,/I...0, r:'.,:_Lr.~(~·.l
 ~ ~_ _ __ 138)\-
 ..I_~,r...
 T _, Oc}~ (' '),~-.!...
 ,,~. _ 3 ,._,/V
 1 a~3 ( ,e,), ) •

29" CllS Sd ;~c..Ti li: J 1~l.lJ..5, to St.~:i;;c frC:j,\ Lo ]S'''; ,'1 O::-t,oDc-r 5$1 1963 ( ':i_~i )
 ( l1;ttr;:~chQGl :lXt_ al)F(;l') (J.. :J..~~ ) ()

300 c.t,S [~~d_C~(Jl' nc~ 3tt026, to 8t:-<ot.~ i.'1:Ci1 LOC:;/~, Octob:-:r.' 5, 1963 ('3:8
 EYID ONLY FOr 8ECREWJ~Y RU:J;n.

310 Ib:Lc)."

320 C/l.P lMg 63560 via CIS ch3.:£r1Jl, OCi;O'l:lC>l" 5, 1963 ('l'S) ( [~M.,:"chcd in
 ap;;:·cnuh. ) 0

350 US.APJ.r/t S::d.f!;:on ffiJg 199$1 fl·C>,.!l J one8, USAl1HA ~ Saigon,? to HcN:~T;J:!,X\."
 OC"tOb3\' 2J., 1963 ( r.rs ) 0

39. Thiel.

~Oo CAS m.c.g 77878.~ to Loa~(:JI OCtob0l' 2)4." 1963 (TS ); and CAS mlj~ 781 1n,
 McCone to S.,5con, Oct; 6Dc;,,' 21~.9 1963 ( TS ) 0

 80 TOP SECRET - S Cll~ itiVG
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP ~:[~CBE'J' .• rcn~5t:LV':~
 - . -.... --_.-

11·5 CAS Sc,igon m;,;~~ 1961~, IOll~'.C to MC.({cOJ:g-..: Bp~10y, Oc'/;obc:>:' 25, 1963 ( '1S )
 ( e:Ltcwhcd. :tn c ~:>l!~nd.:l.x ) •

46 c 11: itt.

1}.7. Cl.P lTI.~'S 63590, HcGc o:Y'c~e 13l nc1y to Lo~\~c" 0:; 'ob,.r 25, J963 ('1\3)
 ( L;ttu:;I!0 rl :in u.p:r(,nGi.~·) 0

510 :r.b:i.rlo

550 el'S \1: '"ll::n:;to·j, )il;:~ 79109 ., Fc:G:Ol':3c, I:nnr:y t.o L00C~e" Oct.ob::.;l,' 30, 1963
 (T,S ) ( ~,.tta(lhe(l. in 11}!ydl(li ~ ) 0

56.. 1\:J~C{ l"",g ~:033.t lk;dd.!1S '1.,0 'I'c:.y1o:c, Oetoo;:;2' 30;; 1963 (TS ) ( G.J~t.D.ch~<.l. 111
 • 1Y~~ :;::0 ~1ix ) 0

570 NAC'.T meg 20~ ~j IL~l~,.:il1n to 1';:',ylo,-', OC"tO'b0j,' 30 1963 ( rs ) (. ·Vt.V.~h8d in
 ~pp:ndix ) c

58c J:.1/W r ril:.g 2028,. Ik.r)~ins tc' ~(I,-yloJ"j C;.~t(;b·;l' 30, 1963 (T:3) ( [,tt~ . chcd I n
 (:l,P]?l..llcl.t:>: ) e

 o"Pocii..o
 :.-.. - - - = ,... ~

61 ~ GlIB S ~".:l.son mfg 201~O J OT).. 0('. 'i.t ~
 _._-
620 CAS ·P u;hing\:.cn mEg 79109:; ?E. o :::..~t.i

63 0 CAS St.l.ieon ll\:.,g 2063, LodL;~ to S-tu:l:c, Octo or 30, 1963 (Irs ) ( ntt(1,c1:}U
 in append:1:,: ) 0

61:.. c.tJ~\ IL,')hi!1:;tol.1 ecg 791107. Bm'oy 'l;o 1,0 gQ, octoher 30, 1963 (T3 )
 (r;ttLc wd in c.IJPcIHI h. ) .

 65. Ibic10

 81 TOP SECRE'l' - Sens:ttiv",
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 FOO1'NOI'ES

30 It:Lr:; (';-t.:cc"'"YIcly 0:lf'i'j.crl1:i:. to Fi.<.."!CG togc:t;"h.~r Erell"! cla.~'f;i:L:i N1. sonre.;):.;
 the s"(.o·'·Y' of' t}10 CCT..,lee intrlS1!.3s t.1L:li culr'1:i.i.1.:c.cc1. in th.~ eo1.'p i":~8c.lf'.
 In \'iC1·r 02 hi~3 c:t.ensiv\.:. CC:")l~: ~".;:; [ ,1-::''1.'~; U.S. on1 Vietnc..F\~';'" off:ci;;.ls
 in Sa:lgol1.. ~~s vdJ. f'..S tJl).C'lS the £;t:nc'.''Ilr::; the rno:Jt plr'uJ1.blc Ll1.d.
 c· . . lr.ilcd ~cccun\.: of th~ 1'1ott-:in~; ~.'1a. cour.d;ey~plot"ti"')~, C"la. toL; 0; ~~ 07
 T'"',)': ";1' '("11:1"
 l • . .L~,_-,- •
 n .... , ,'...
 ~.;) !..'- ...... t'J.V ....'
 L ... \._'••
 ~'_ ~ lC.O,.jlJ
 . ",.'. ...l-'" "1 Y •,', ~--1"
 J.,,:......\r.l.. ... .l.\..;,.,.,........?.1." (. "';1',"
 It. c.;.f.)·
 0;>
 ..:....
 I'r,") ,.;.
 lv_ V.1. ~

 Sl\ .. - em
 : .• -~,")1 .~ :in
 •. r',c'
 J..,~,1 ' . .L-"''- ').....; '''OJ
 ... ~i-,.\..I ,;.. ' 1.. V"'0'1
 V .,.t .I . _,' ..o'~ ro ' t JJ
 ~.,.:.;.;;.:.(j ~'1) "O'i.,';'12
 J~)..lo U c.. ~_ " ....,.... 0

12. l:Jl3,tC;V-:!:t'" if :,u';)"l;hi2~7) t :tanE,p::.:cecl. bc-cH'}cn i;rr_~;jb:i.nston c:,.nd jI,l'rr.J.-b Snipon
 0 :-1 Ho ~c':El OZ· 1, C ... ?1, only b~ i',C6E::l'k.. uwd thron~h iu-i;cl'V i C t 7,3 e

 }lec}- in,

15· Shaplcn, op •.£l!. , p. 2080
16. CIA Saigon CR I~:I C lJ1SC; 18 to D:tJ'ector N~~A) Novcmb~r 2, 1963 (S).

17· CIA Se-igon. CRrr:W 111Sg 19 to Dh'c('tor USA., r~o v(;rrlber 2, 1963 ( s) •

18. Sec S<.dgcrl E.Sg 888.1' 1,0(.1[$ ... to st;:,.tc, r-Tov::n;lbcr 2, 1 963 .. 8:h5 l~.m. (S ) ,
 for the coni'lict:inu ,re:cs.i.0"13 of thC' mul'ucc .

20. state m::g 683, NOV'G:uo::r 1, 1963" 8:1.~7 p.m. ( S EYES ONLY).

 82 TOP SECRE·r
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 po 909.

26. ~l"\o.
 <,'• - 886 $ I.odge to St:"::t~, Nov'c!1!ber 2~ 1963 (u).

2S, StD:i,e 1118~ 70 1}J WGi1.t~ to Loc.1~c, l'JoV'C'1"ibu):' 3, 1963 ( 8); t;n0. Ek:.:i.gon
 917, Lod~~ "'0 St~:t(:: NOVv·1bc::c 1!, 1963 (8 ).
 illf.Jg

29· S.::.1i.2:c~n. m~~g 917~ op·Si.t.

 Saigon lf1: c; 92'{" 5" '1963 (u) •
 I..od~.:: '(',0 S-Lat!! , 1'1ov;:;;0.1),,:1'

 t:
 8a5,~on mt{~ 929.9 I.o0."c to S'c:"t(~, NO\"Embcr 'h 1963 (u) •

33. st~~t;c ru;G; 71~ 2, s't..~,tc to LoC2;8.1' Novc--caber 6, 1963 (8 ) ; St::rte j <1E'C 7);,9,
 stc..tc. 'GO V:x~~e, I'JovC"ol)':!l' 7, 191-: 3 (C).

35· rO:(~ D, ecncJ"(·.l nsscr'CllKn't; of t.h{; T)oliticc.l sHua:tion, SCi) CIA S:-j.i~;on
 Inr::{~ 2428, lJovc:nbcr lt~, 1963 (S EYES ONLY ) .

36. st~tc mzs 701, stc.tc 'co Lot3c, NO'fUrl)Cl' 2; 1963 (S).

37. S ~l1.gon msg 975, 1,oc13~ ·~ o State,? N07Cmbcl' S, 1963 ( s).

39·
ItO. CIHCPAC mer; to JCS 1206011-Z 63 ( s ).

41. S::dgon 111;:; 925." Lod~0 to st,<.l..tc:, I{OV'(:rll'uel' 9, ).963 (8 ), HiS liP,'hts
 ']:-l"/ Sr.:Lc;on t s li i':-8Jdy P:..~ocresB Rcpo~: LJ.

1~2 • Saigon nw"" 917, OJ!. c :l.t •

 'l'OP f;ECR!TI' S::''1D~tivc

 83
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 Stctc

1!·9o "S1..'.;n llt:'2 y of Sp:..::;i.::l MrotiDcr on. the R(~LJnblie of Viccru'1., I! CIi'-JC" AC
 1

 HC0.c1.C1Ui.J:tc:cs ;- . 20 l'Jo':,~nber 1963 (TS), }?p . l~ 30

510 ~<.9 p. 12.

55. Th:i.C.•

56. Ibid.

 TOP SECRET C' -:~ns j.t i vc