The Pentagon Papers (Part -IV-A-1) (U.S. Department of Defense, 1971)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration: Report of the Office of the Secretary of Defense Vietnam Task Force (The Pentagon Papers) (https://nara-media-001.s3.amazonaws.com/arcmedia/research/pentagon-papers/Pentagon-Papers-Part-IV-A-1.pdf).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 IV.A Evolution of the War (26 Vols.)
U.S. MAP for Diem: The Eisenhower Commitments,
 1954-1960 (5 Vols.)
 1. NATO and SEATO: A Comparison
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

·.

 IV . A.l
 ----
 NATO AND SEATO: A COMPARISON

 029
 So Def Cant '1- . ______________
 x~ ~
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 IV. A. 1. NATO AND SEATO: A COMPARISON

 SUMMARY

 Because the SEATO Treaty has been used by the Eisenhower, Kennedy,
 and Johnson Administrations to justify U.S. policy, aid, and presence
 in Vietnam , and because many have questioned this justification; the
 treaty has become a center of controversy. The issue is whether by
 intent of the parties and by treaty terminology the U. S. 'vas obligated
 to use force to help defend the territorial independence and int egr ity
 of South Vi etnam. No one seriously challenges U.S. military and eco-
 ~omic aid provisions under the SEATO Treaty; the thrust of the criticism
 is the use of U.S. ground combat forces.

 There are plentifu]_ statements over time by the U. S. Government
.\ on the i mport ance of SEATO .
 l

 President Eisenhower stated: IIWe gave military and economic
 assistance to the Republic of Vietnam . We entered into a treaty -- the
 Southeast Asia Security Treaty -- which plainly warned that an armed
 attack against this area would endanger our own peace and safety and
 that we would act accordingly.1I
 .'i. .

 President Kennedy stated: II •.• The SRA.TO Pact ... approved by
 the Senate with only, I think , tvlO against it, under Article 4, stated
 that the United States recognized that aggression by means of armed
 attack against Vietnam would threaten our own peace and security. So
 since that time the United States has been assisting the gover~~ent
 of Vietnam to maintain its independence ••. The attack on the government
 by communist forces, with assistance from the north, became of greater
 and greater concern to the Government of Vietnam and the Government of
 the United States."

 Secretary Rusk, speaking for the Johnson Administration, made
 the strongest statement of all: "We have sent American forces to fight
 in the jungles .•. because South Viet-Nam has, under the language of the
 SEATO Treaty, b een the victim of 'aggression by means of armed attack. '
 Tho se I.,ho challenge this rationale contend that unlike the NATO Treaty
 which specifically included the 'use of armed force' and unambiguously
 intended such action, the SRA.TO Treaty vlas not meant by its U. S. framers
 as an umbrella for Americ8,n military intervention. II

 This is the kind of issue that can readily be argued either vray.
 It is obvious the language of the SEATO Treaty allows the signatories
 the choice of military means. And, a respectable argument can b e made
 for the further step of obligation. For example, the Senate Foreign
 Relations Committee Report on the treaty in 1954 stated:

 liThe committee is not impervious to the risks which this
 treaty entails. It fully appreciates that acceptance of these
 additional obligations commits the Unit ed States to a cause of
 action over a vast expanse of the Pacific. Yet these risks

 1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

"r TOP SECRET - Sensitive
I
 are consistent i-lith our ow11 highest interests. There are
 greater hazards in not advising a potential enemy of "That he
 can expect of us, and in failing to disabuse - him of assumptions
 which might lead to a miscalculation of our intentions. It

 To the contrary, a statement before the Fureign Relations Com-
 mittee by Secretary Dulles himself can be cited to demonstrate more
 modest, less obligatory designs:

 "I might say in this connection, departing somevhat
 from order of my presentation, that it is not the policy of
 the United States to attempt to deter attack in this area by
 building up a local force capable itself of defense against
 an all-out attack by the Chinese Communists if it should occur.
 We do not expect to duplicate in this area the pattern of the
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization and its significant standing
 forces. That ivould require a diversion and comi'l1itment of
 strength ivhich "Te do not think is either practical or desir-
 able or necessary from the standpoint of the United States.

 "We believe that our posture in that area should be one
 of having mobile striking pover, and the ability to use that
 against the sources of aggression if it occurs . We believe
 that is more effective than if 'Vle tried to pin dmm American
 forces at the many points around the circumference of the
 Communist \-Torld in that area .

 "It may very well be that other countries of the area will
 want to dedicate particular forces for the protection of the
 area under this treaty. But we made clear at Manila that it
 was not the intention of the United States to build up a large
 local force including, for example, United States ground troops
 for that area, but that vre rely upon the deterrent pOvTer of
 our mobile striking force."

 By looking into the "lOrds of the treaty in the light of its orlglDS
 and the interests of the U.S. as perceived in 1954, and by comparing
 these vrith NATO language, origins, and development, it is possible to
 make a tentative judgment on the issue of obligation. Whereas it is
 clear that NATO vas intended for deterrence against aggression and
 defense vrith U.S. forces should deterrence fail, SEATO seems to have
 been designed vrith a vie'l'T only tm-rard deterrence. Defense, especially
 ,vith U.S. ground forces, vras not seriously contemplated.

 There are t~1ree pieces of evidence in support of this contentious
 conclusion: (1) the stringent preconditions i..[hich the U.S. delegation
 to the Manila Conference to establish SRATO vrere instructed to insist
 upon; (2) the lack of institutional and force structure development in
 SEATO as compared to NATO; and ( 3) the fact that SEATO and NATO treaty
 terminology differ in respect to the use of force and other matters .

 2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Unlike the guidance under \-;hich U. S. negotiators helped to frame
 NATO, U.S. representatives to the conference establishing SEATO were
 given four uncompromisable pre-conditions:

 (a) The U.S. would refuse to commit Rny U.S. forces
 unilaterally;

 (b) Were military action to be required, one or more of the
 European signatories \-TOuld have to participate;

 (c) The U.S. int ended to contribute only sea and air power,
 expecting that other signatories would provide ground forces;
 r
.,I
i (d) The U.S. \-lOuld act only against communist aggression .

 These instructions not only clearly exempt the use of U.S. ground forces,
 but presuppose multilateral action before the U. S. ,vould act in any
 capacity.

 With respect to the comparative development of SEATO and NATO, U.S.
 behavior also indicates great re straint and avoidance of commitment.
 NATO was formed in 1949, and ,vithin t'\vo years it \-las 1tIell institution-
,, .
 alized -- combined command forces in-being and a Standing Group for
 policy guidance. The UoS. consistently resisted the efforts of its
 SEATO partners for comparab le institutions . Secretary Dulles, in fact,
 sought to discourage public identification of SEATO \-lith NATO. Only
 in 1959, did the U.S. accede to the formation of a modest SEATO secre-
 tariat . Moreover, SEATO had to \-mit until 1960 before the U.S. would
 participate in the development of a series of SEATO contingency plans.
 Most important, no U.S. troops have ever been designated specifically
 for SEATO.

 Comparing the specific terminology of the operative sections of the
 SEATO and NATO treaties gives additional credence to the non-obligation
 argument. The key articles of both treaties are those calling for action
 against an enemy threat. Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty declares
 that the member nations "agree that an armed attack against one or more
 of them in Europe or North America shall be con s idered an attack against
 them all," and that in that event each \-Till take "forthivith ... such action
 as it deems necessary, including the use of armed force .... " The cor-
 relative phraseology in the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty
 Article Dr declares that "each Party rec ognizes that aggression by means
 of armed attack against any of the Parties, or against any state or
 territory vhich the Parties by unanimous agreement may hereafter desig-
 nate, \-{ould endanger its own peace and safety, and agrees that it vill
 in that event act to meet the common danger in accordance \-rith its
 constitutional process." The SEATO \-lording is thus i ntent ionally ambig-
 uous on the point of just what response would be made by the members in
 the event of an armed attack. Such an attack against one of the SEATO
 members would be viewed as a "common danger" rather than as an "attack

 2A TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 on all." vlhere NATO prescribes action "fort ll1-rit h) " SEATO requires only
 that the "common danger" be "met" in accordance with "constitutional
 processes." SEATO also forecloses action on the treaty of any threat-
 ened state without the consent of that state -- a qualification designed
 to reassure memb ers that their independence was not threatened by neo-
 colonialism or other domination in a SEATO guise.

 In some respects) hOvTever) the SEATO Pact is broader than its NATO
 counterparts. The nature of the threat is loosely defined in Article IV
 as "any fact or situation that might endanger the peace of the area"
 and provision is made to protect threatened member countries of the
 region. The area of applicability is left flexible. Moreover) Article
r II of the SEATO Treaty applies the pact against not only "armed attack"
I
! but also "subversive activities directed from without against fjftember,!}.7
 territorial integrity and political stability." Also) unlike the North
 Atlantic ~reaty) there is no clause in the SEATO Treaty implying a depen-
 dence on United Nations intervention to restore peace once the treaty
 "lere invoked.

r '

 2B TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 TABLE OF CONTENTS

 Paragraph

 1. Genesis. ...................................................................... ....... A-5

 a. Trurllan Doctrine , 1947 •.....•...•....•.•••••.•.. "... .•••... A-5

 b. Marshall Plan , 1947...................................... A-6
r'
(
i c. ERP and NATO, 19L~8-1949 .........•...•.•..•.•.••.••....... A-7

 d. The China Aid Program.................................... A-8

 e. MDAP, 1949............................................................................................ A-8

 f. Precursor Pacts in Asia.................................. A-9

 g. Indochina and Unit ed Action, 1954 ...................... .. A-IO

 h. Manila Conference , 1954 •..••.........•..•.•..••..••...••. A-13

 (1) Force Commitment
 (2) Anti-Communism

 2. The Treaties Compared ............................................................................. . A-15

 a. Introductory Arti cles Alike .•.... .' ...•.••.•.....•..•••.•. A-16

 b.. The Key Al-.ticles ................................................................................ . A-16

 c. Extent of Treaty Ar eas ..•.•..•.••••.•.•.••.•.•"........... . A-19

 d.. UN and Other ~cts ............................................................................ . A-19

 e. Treaty Institutions ••.......•..••.•.•••.•••••...•.•.•..•• A-19

 f.. TI' ea ty Longevity ................ '............................................................... .. A-20

 g. The Appended U. S. ItUnderstand ing lt • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • A-20

 h. The vtetnam-Laos-Cambodia Protocol .•.••••••.••••...••...• A-21

 A-3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET Sensitive

 Paragra-ph

 3. Evolution of the Treaty Organization........................ A-23

 a. NATO Develops Rapidly ................................... A-23

 b. SEATO Unstructured by U.S. Preference ................... A-23

 c. SEATO Contingency Planning .. . • • . • • . • • • • • • • • • • • • • . . . . . • • • A-27

 (1) Laos Planning
f . (2) Vietnam Planning
 (3) Thailand Planning
I (4) The Future

 Footnote s ...••...•....•...•.••..•.•.•....•..••.•.•.•............ A-3 2 .

 Appendix A - A Comparison of the \yording of the
 NATO and SEATO Treaties .....•......••......•..•..•• A-37

 Appendix B - Organi zational Chart s .............................. A-46

 A-4 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. A. 1. NATO and. SEATO : A Comparison

 1. Genesis

 a. Trmnan Doctrine, 1947

 In 1946, vlinston Churchill perceived. a postwar threat ina
wartime ally:

 "Nobody knows what Soviet Russia and. its communist interna-
 tional organization intends to d.o ... "That are the limits, if any,
 to' their expansive and. preselytizing tactics ... From Stettin in
 the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic, an iron curtain has d.e scend.ed.
 across the continent ... "y
And. he also depicted. a counter:

 "Neither the sure prevention of war, nor the continuous
 rise of werld. organization will be gained. without ... a special
 relationship between the British Commonwealth and. Empire and.
 the United. States ... I! . '

These insights were reinforced. in early 1947 by influential analyses of
George Kennan and. ethers of Soviet motives and. capabilities, which pointed.
out that occasienal and. sporad.ic efforts to feil Soviet pelicy were severely
disadvantaged. . These analysts held. that the West sheuld. seek to oppose
Sovi et expansionism by what the Foreign Affairs "Xl! article of January ,
1947, called. "the adreit and. vigilant application ef counter-ferce." '?J
Such a s.trat egy, it was h eld , would. ferce the Soviet to reassess and. ad.-
just its policies, and. the U.S. ceuld. expect eventually the llbreak-up
or th e gradual mellewing of Soviet pe'Her. '.' Out of these , and. similar
appreciations of Soviet intent emerged. the conc ept ef a U.S. strategy
of involvement.

 Theory was swiftly abetted. by event. The British netified.
th e U.S. that it 'Hould. b e un.able to extend. its economi c and. military aid.
to Greece and. Turkey beyond. March, 1947. The U.S., rather than accept
the distinct pO'ssibili ty O'f a Seviet intrusiO'n fO'llevdng British 'Hi thdra'Hal,
chO'se to' take up the burd.en the British were l aying down in the eastern
Medi terranean. Congress authO'rized. in May, 1947, some $400 million for
dir ect aid. to' thO'se cO'untries, acting upen the recO'mmendatiO'n ef' President
Truman in the March, 1947, message kne"m since as the "Truman DO'ctrine":

 "I believe that it must be the pelicy ef the United. States
 to suppO'rt fl'ee peoples who are resisting attempted. subjugation
 by armed. minorities or by eutsid.e pressures. I believe 'He must.
 assist free peoples to 'Hork out their mm d.e stinies in their
 . "3/
 own way... 2J

The Presid.ent ",ent en to' und.erscore the U. S. d.etermination to commit its
r eseurces to contain communism,clearly subordinating military aid to

 A-5 TOP SECRET · - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

economic and. political means. Fina,lly :

 liTo insur e the peaceful d.evelopment of nations, free from
 coercion, th e United. States has taken a lead.ing part in establish-
 ing the Unit ed. Nations. The United. Nations is d.esigned to make
 possible frectl.om and. ind.epend.ence for all its members . We shall
 not re a lize our objectives, however, unless vle are ,villing to
 h elp fr ee peoples to maintain their free institution and. their
 national int egrity against aggressive movements that seek to i m-
 pose upon th em totalitarian regimes. 1I

 b. Marshall Plan, 1947
 The U.S. Secretary of Stat e on June 5, 1947, proposed. the
cooperative interna tional economic aJd. subsequently entitled. the European
Recovery Program ( ERP ), but knmm wid.ely as the Marshall Plan. ERP was at
first explicitly d.esigned. to permit and. even attract Soviet cooperation :

 "Our policy i s d.irected. not against any country or d.octrine
 but a,gainst hunger , poverty , d.esparation and. chaos. Its purpose
 should. be the revival of a working economy in the world. so as to
 permit the emergence of political and. social conditions i n YThich
 fr ee institutions can exist . 1I !!J
But the Sovie t r ebuffed. the Marshall Plan, turned. Bloc propaganda against
i t as an adjunct of the TrUIllan Doctr ine, and. by so d.o ing , bifurcated. Europe .
l'Ioreover, among three top-leve l U. S. cOITlmi ttees examining ways of bring ing
U. S. r esources to b ear on Europea.n recovery , the Committee on Foreign Aid.
 (Harriman Committee ) found. that:

 liThe int erest of the Unit ed. Sta tes in Europe ..• cannot b e
 measured. simply.in economic t erms . It i s also strategic and.
 poli tical. We all know that vle are faced. in the world. today
 with hlO conflicting i d.eologies ... Our position in th e world. has
 b een bas e d. for at l east a century on the existence in Europe of
 a number of strong states cornrni tted. by trad.ition and. inclina -
 tion to the d.emocra ti c concept ... II 11
The bipolar world. had. begun t o emerge . In J anuary , 1948 , the Briti sh
For eign Secretary, following talks with the U.S. Se cretary of State , pro -
p osed. an a lliance among the U.K., France, and. the Benelux nations, r efer -
ring to lithe conception of the unity of Europe and. the preservation of
Europe as the heart of vlestern civilization." §} At the end. of February ,
1948 , western Europe was shocked. by the fall of the Czechoslovakian govern-
ment to a communist coup d.'etat. · In March , the Br iti sh- proposed. a l liance
was contracted. as the Brussels Ba,ct , a fifty-year treaty of collective
d.e fense and. economic collaboration. U.S. approval was immediate; the
Pr esid.ent told Congress that:

 lilts significance goes fa.r beyond. the actual terms of the
 agreement itself. It i s a notable. ste'p in the d.irection of

 A-6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 unity in Europe ... This development deserves our full support.
 I am confident the United States will , by appropriate means ,
 extend to the free nations the support which the situation
 r equires ... It 1/

 c. ERP and NATO, 1948-1949

 On 1 April, 1948, the Soviets initiated the blockade of Berlin.
 In late April, the President called a conference of his senior advisers
 to consider the Soviet threat, as well as the possibility of communist
 fomented uprisings in France and Italy. John Foster Dulles, then State
 Department consultant, later reported that the conferees agreed that:

 " ••. Onlya decisive pronouncement by the United States
 would check the fear that vlas inspired by Moscow ... Land that
 the U.S. shou~ proceed along the lines of a North Atlantic
 regional pact ... 1t

 Dulles also stated that Senator Vandenberg:

 1t • • • Felt that the Senate liked the idea of r egional associa-
 tions and vlould be disposed to approve in prinCiple a further
r' developing of such associations for collective defense. 1t W
 In May, 19Lf8, Senator Vandenbe.rg introduced a resolution adopted by the
 Senate on June 11, 1948, by a vote of 64 to 4, advising the Executive to
 undertake the:

 1t • • • Progressive development of r egional and other collec-

 tive arrangements for individual and collective self-defense
 in accordance with the purposes, principles, and provisions of
 the Charter [Of the uJfl, association of the United States, by
 constitutional process, with such regional and other collective
 arrangements as are based on continuous and effective self-help
 . and mutual aid, and as affect it s nc:-tional secu.rity. It 2/
 The Department of State later explained to Congress that Itthe contents of
 this r esolution ... became our guide in the di scuss ion and subsequent nego-
 tiations 'Ivhich l ed to the North Atlantic Pact." ~

 In June , 1948, Congress also passed the Economic Cooperation
 Act, establishing the Economic Cooperation Administration (ECA) to adminis-
 ter a program of foreign aid . The following month, armed with the Economic
 Cooperation Act and the Vandenberg Resolution, the U.S. opened exploratory
 talks on an alliance with the Brussels Pact memu ers and Canada . Subse-
 quently, the talks "Jere broadened to include t.v.lelve nations. On April 4,
 1949, the North Atlantic Treaty was signed , and in lat e July ratified by
 the Senate. It entered into force August 24, 1949.

 A-7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 d.. The China Aid. Program

 In the meantime, U.S. policy suffered. a s e tback in Asia.
 A China Aid. Program had. been enacted. by Congress in June, 1948, in the
". same omnibus forei gn assistance legislation which authorized. ERP and. ECA.
 The China Aid. Pro ~ram met almost i mmediate fail~re , for Mao's armies spread
 unchecked. over .the China mainland., and. by late 1949, the position of the
 Nationalists there was untenable. This "failure" of U.S. aid. -- it was
 t ermed. such by Congres s ional critics -- no less than the urgent situation
 in Europe figured. in Congressional action on military assistance legisla-
 tion placed. before it in 1949. ll/
 e. MDAP) 1949
 In September 1949, th e Soviets explod.ed. their first nuclear
 device. On October 6, 1949, Congress passed. the Mutual Defense Assistance
 Ac.t, designed. as a comprehensive law, provid.ing a Mutual Defense Assistance
 Program (MDAP ) through which U,S. arms, military equipment and. training
 assistance might be provide d. for collective defense. In the first appro-
 priations under MDAP, NATO tountries received. 76% of the total, and. Greece
 and. Turkey (not yet NATO members ), 16%. ~ But Korea and. th e Philippines
 received. modest aid, and. the legislators clearly intended. the law to und.er -
 write subsequent appropriations for collective security in Asia . The open-
 ing paragraph of the Im'T not only supported. NATO, but foreshadowed. SEATO:

 "An Act to Promote the Foreign Policy and. Provide for
 the Defense and. General Welfcore of the Unite d. States
 by Furnishing Military Assistance to Foreign Nat ions,
 Approved. Octobe r 6, 1949.

 !lBe it enacted. by the Senate and House of Representatives
 of the United. States of America in Congress assembled., That this
 Act may b e cited. as the 'Mutual Defense Assistance Act of 1949. '

 '1 FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY
 liThe Congress of the United. States reaffirms the policy of
 the Unit ed. States to achieve international peace and. security
 thr ough the United. Nations so that armed. force shall not be used.
 except in the common interest . The Congress hereby find.s that
 the efforts of the United. States and. other countries to promote
 peace and. security in furth eranc e of the purposes of the Charter
 of the United. Nations require additional measures of support
 bas ed. upon the principle of continuous and. effective self-help
 and. mutual aid. . These measures include th e furnishing of military
 assistance essential to enable the United. States and. other nations
 dedicated. t o the purposes and. principles of the United. Nations
 Charter to participate effectively in arrangements for individual
 and. collective self-d.efense in support of those purposes and.
 principles . In furnishing such military assistance, it remains

 A-8 TOP SECRET -Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 the policy of the United. States to continue to exert maximrun
 efforts to obtain agreements to provid.e the Uni ted. Nations with
 armed. forces as contemplated. in the Charter and. agreements to
 achieve universal control of "[eapons of mass destruction and.
 universal regulation and. reduction of armaments, including armed.
 ~', forces, under adequate safeguards to protect complying nations
 against violation and. evasion.

 "The Congress hereby expresses itself as favoring the cre-
 ation by the free countries and. the free peoples of the Far East
 of a j oint organization, consistent with the Charter of the
 Unit ed Nations, to establish a program of self-help and. mutual
 cooperation designed. to develop their economic and. social well-
 I
 \
 being, to safeguard basic rights and. liberties and. to protect
 their security and. independ.ence .

 "The Congress 'recognizes that economic recovery is essen-
 tial to int ernational peace and. security and must be given clear
 priority. The Congress also recognizes that the increased con-
 fid.ence of free peoples in their ability to resist d.irect or
 ind.i rect aggression and. to maintain internal security vdll ad.-
 vance such recovery and. support political stability." r;J
 f. Precursor Pacts in Asia

 With the Nationalist evacuation to Formosa in November , 1949,
 an urgent situation developed. in Asia that in ways paralleled. the cond.i-
 tions that prompted. formation of NATO. The rise of Mao's Peoples Republic
 of China (PRC ) seemed. to project the monolithic power of Soviet communism
 to the eastern shores of Asia, menacing the relatively small nations along
 China ' s periphery like the Russians threatened. Western Europe. The Chi-
 nese parroted. the Kremlin's aggressive announcements, participated. in the
 assault on South Korea, and. provided aid. to Ho Chi Minh in Southeast Asia.

 U.S. counteract ion was forthcoming. By 1951, in an effort
 to bolster the defensive capabilities of the area, the U.S. had. become
 a partner in five separate defense treaties in the region. Four bilateral
. , arrangements linked. the U. S. vlith J apan, South Korea, Na.tionalist China,
 and. the Philippines, forming an arc around. the periphery of Communist China.
 In ad.d.ition, the ANZUS Treaty vIas signed. in 1951, and. the Five-Pm'ler Staff
 Agency (composed. of Australia, New Zealand., France, UK, and. US) vIas formed.
 in 1953 If to facilitate coord.i nation on problems in Southeast Asia. II In
 1954, John Foster Dulles recall ed that:
 I1When I went out to the Pacific area in 1950 to b egin the
 negotiations which resulted. in the Japane se Peace Treaty and.
 a s e ries of secQrity treaties, the original hope had. been that
 we could. have a fairly broad. collective security arrangement.
 As it happened., it was not possible to d.o at that time, and. we
 were content p e rforce vlith a series of treaties ... But those
 treaties themselves indicated. that vIe d.id. not regard. them as
 an end., but only as a b eginning ... It W

 A-9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 From 1949 through 1953 the National Security Council maintained. the view
 that a broader r egional defense pact or association should. be initiated.
 by the countries of the area, gJ In the follo,ving 1950 exchange with
 Congressman Fulton, Secretary of State Acheson expressed. Administration
 " policy: .
, '

 "MR, 'FUI,TON: May I read. to the Secretary from the second ..
 paragraph of the Mutual Defense Assistance Act:
( 'The Congress hereby expresses itself as favoring the crea-
It " tion by the free countries and free peoples of the Far East, of
 a joint organization consistent with the Charter of the United.
 Nations to establish a program of self-help and. mutual coopera-
 tion designed. to develop their economic and. social well-being,
 to safeguard. the basic rights and. liberties, and. to protect their
 security and. independence. '

 "Now may I point out that is a bipartisan policy, because
 it was two Republicans and. two Democrats on this committee v1ho
 put'that amendment in. My ~uestion then is to the Secretary
 and. to the State Department , why, when this was passed. clear
 back in 1949, October 6, has not the State Department taken
 steps to put into effect the d.e clared. bipartisan foreign policy
 of the Congress? IT

 "SECRETARY ACHESON: Mr. Fulton, I think it is important
 for you to really look at your own ''lOrd.s . You said. that the
 Congress expresses itself as favoring the creation by the free
 countries and. free peoples of the Far East of certain things.
 NOvl the President stated. he favors that. On all occasions he
 has stated. i t and. I have stated. that that is the attitud.e of
I.
 the Govern.rnent of the United. States. I should. think that the
 President and. I and. the Congress are all agreed. that the very
 important words are that this organization should. be created. by
 the free peoples of the Far East and. not created. by the United.
 States. We are not calling these nations together and. you never
 . asked. us to call these nations together and. tell them they should.
 create something. I knov; that your kno'V11edge of the Far East
 is sufficient to lead. you to conclude that if we did. that it "TOuld.
 have exactly the opposite effect of the one which you wish to
 achieve. The President of the Philippines has been going forward
 . to accomplish this. We have stated, to him, and. publicly, that
 we are most sympathetic to this activity on his part , but it
 is most important that it should. be a spontaneous Asian action .!t }fd

 g. Indochina and. United Action, 1954

 In the spring of 1954, however, the d.e terioration of the
 French situation in Indochina caused. a re-evaluation of U.S. policy on
 collective security in Asia and. pr ecipitated proposals by the U. S. to
 the French,'the British and several other countries to establish some

 A-10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 kind. of Southeast Asian coalition. On 6 April 1954, the NSC, asked. to
 consider Ilappropriate action regarding Ind.ochina and. the need. for U. S.
 military intervention, Il replied. that the best alternative was a regional
 grouping with maximum Asian participation. ~ On 13 May, the NSC looked.
 to It avoid. the loss of Indochina and. to resolve the colonial problem by
 the creation of a regional grouping.1t ~ Crisis transformed. the U.S.
 position on a tvide re gional alliance from that of a potential joiner to
 that of an anxious organize r.

 When the U.S. position changed., the pendulum swung far, pro-
 ducing not only the general concept of Itunited. action, It but also several
 specific plans for U. S. -allied. intervention in Ind.o china in a variety of
 circumstance s. Secretary Dulles approached. the British and. French directly
 with a plan in which a ten-nation coalition would. confront communist ex-
 pansion in Southeast Asia. On 12-14 April, Dulles visited. London to get
 Eden's support for this plan, but was turned down. Eden thought it best
 to wait and. see "That could. be accomplished. at the Geneva Conference, then
 in preparation. Dulles did. get what he thought was Eden's agreement to
 a plan for an ad. hoc group of the same nations to meet and. d.iscuss plans
 for collective-action in case it became necessary, and. a public statement
 in favor of a broad. Asian alliance.

 Congressional reaction to the latter was immed.i ate. The
 House Foreign Affairs Committee was at the time holding hearings, and. promptly
 issued. a statement end.o rsing the Dulles and. Eden action, and. citing the
 ~~P legislation. The following is from the Hearings:
 , .
 I
 l .' "MR. VORYS. Now, cou~d. I read. a paragraph from the text
 of the recent statement issued. by Messrs. Dulles and. Ed.en ...
 this para~raph was what caught my attention this morning.
 [j.ead.ing.:.../

 'Accord.ingly l'le are ready to take part with the other coun-
 tries principally concerned. in the examination of the possibility
 l _, of establishing a collective defense within the framework of
 the charter of the United. Nations Organization, to assure the
 peace , security, and. freedom of Southeast Asia, in the "Testern
 Pacific. '

 III have changed. our proposed. statement slightly.
 \_-
 'The Committee on Foreign Affairs notes with approval the
 statement issued. in Lond.on on April 13, 1954, by the Secretary
 of State and. the British Foreign Secretary which is in line with
 recommendations previously expressed. by the Committee and Con-
 gress in 1949. '
r
l "The second. paragraph read.s as follows:

 I This paragraph "TaS drafted. by the Committee on Foreign

 Affairs and. incorporated. in the original Mutual Defense Assistance

r A-ll TOP SECRET - Sensitive
I
"-
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Act. A similar paragraph Ivas incarparated. in the Mutual Security
 Act .of 1953 by the Cammittee an Fareign Affairs and. passed. by
 the Hause .of Repr esentatives. This language was left aut .of the
 act as finally passed. because the cammittee .of canference regarded
 the existing paragraph .of the Mutual Defense Assistance Act as
 giving ad.equate expressian .of cangressianal palicy.'" ~

 The U. S. maved. immed.iately ta assemble the ad hac graup Dulles had. dis-
 cussed. with Ed.en, inviting representatives .of same 10 nations ta meet
 in Hashingtan an 20 April. Two days befare the meeting ",as ta take place,
 the British annaunced. they ",auld. be unable ta attend. . They had. nat realized.,
 they said., that the meeting VTauld. take place sa saan; and. they had. nat
 been given the .opportunity ta pass an the canferees. gQ/ The meeting
 was held anY'tTay, but became a general briefing .of the twenty natians cam-
 prising the allied. sid.e at the Geneva Canference.

 In the meantime, ather caalitian plans were in the making.
 An early cancept, t he first of many ta be advanced., pravid.ed. a chaice
 .of hla caurses of act ian :

 "The U.S. is prepared.ta jain actively in twa regianal graup-
 ings. The first such grauping will include natians ready immed.i -
 ately ta interve ne in Indachina pravid.ed. certain canditians are
 o met. The secand. such grauping shauld. be defined., with wid.er
 participatian, ta guarantee against cammunist aggressian .or sub-
 versian .of all Sautheast Asia ';.lith the exceptian .of Ind.ochina
, sa lang as active fighting cantinues." .?:ll
l _
 The first .of these graupings vTaS ta cantain the U.S., France, the Assaciated.
 States .of Laas, Cambad.ia, and. Vietnam, Thailand., and. the Philippines ~ The
 secand. was ta be campased. .of l1all cauntries ,vho ,vish ta jain l1 including the
 Calamba Plan countries ( Burma, Ceylon, Ind.ia, Ind.o nesia , Pakistan), Korea,
 and. "perhaps 11 the Chinese Nationalists. The U. S. wished. to avoid. a '\-,hite
 man's pc.rty"?:51 in the formatian of any regional graup, but the powers
 able to contribute substantial military ~upport to the plans were not Asian.
 Neither coalition materialized. before Geneva.

 The dramatic fall of Dien Bien Phu served. notice to the world.
 of French military impotence in Ind.o china. When the participants .of the
 Ind.ochina fighting moved. to the conference table in April, 1954, the U.S.,
 fresh from the bitter experience of Panmunjom, looked. on the upcoming dis-
 cussions apprehensively, fearing that the French tactical defeat presaged.
 strategic disaster. At one time or another during the Geneva Conference,
 the U. S. considered.: (1) merely urging the French to a greater effort,
 (2) assisting the French with material support in varying degrees, (3)
 intervening in canjunction with the British, (4) taking military action
 with all those prepared. to d.o so, and. (5) working out a long range South-
 east Asia alliance. None of these courses of action proved. practicable.
 Nonetheless, the outcome of the Geneva Conference d.id. catalyze SEATO .
 Within the councils of the U.S. Government, the concession of half of Viet-
 nam to the communists was cons idered another retreat before cammunist ex:pe.nsion .

 A-12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
,
~
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Secretary of State Dulles publicly drew t'\vo lessons from Geneva: (1) that
 popular support was essential to combat communist subversion, and. (2) collec-
 tivedefense against aggression could. not be d.e vised. after the aggression
 was in progress.?Jj He went on to assert that a collective security
 system in Southeast Asia could. in the future check both outright aggression
 and. subversion. 1~e U,S, moved. promptly to convene an international con-
 ference at Manila in late summer, 1954, to d.evise such a security system.

 h. Manila Conference, 1954
r
l. The outlook at Manila, however, tend.ed. to be more retrospec-
 tive than futuristic. Vice Admiral A. C. Davis, Deputy Assistant Secretary
 of Defense (ISA) and. chief DOD representative in the U.S. delegation observed.
 in his report that:

 ", .• the Manila Conference convened. following communist mili-
! tary achievements in Ind.ochina and. political and psychological
I
t. successes at Geneva. Against this background the effort of the
 Manila Conference to construct a collective d.e fense arrangement
 for Southeast Asia and the Southwest Pacific was d.i rected. in
 large measure to recovering from the psychological blOlv thus ad-
 ministered. to the Free World.. Much of what was said. at the Con-
 ference bore witness to the preeminence of psychological objec-
 tives in the thinking of the participating States. In a real
 sense, the Treaty that emerged. at Manila is a response to the
 Geneva Agreements. II ?:l.±/

 The task facing the conferees was formidable compared. with that Atlantic
 planners had faced. six years earlier. The Geneva reverse provid.ed a small
 basis for common action. NATO had. been created. in a relatively uncompli-
 cated. political situation, in an atmosphere of und.e rstanding and. common
 need., to meet an unambiguous threat. Moreover, the North Atlantic nations
 could build. collective d.efense on an infrastructure of shared. culture,
 poli tical id.e als, and. interd.epend.ent economies. Commitments of the member
 nations could. be clarified. to stipulate stand.i ng forces, command. structures,
 and. roles in planning. The nations at Manila, on the other hand, confronted
 a complex of d.i lemmas. Anti-communism was no unifying force. Throughout
 the region, potential communist aggressors were likely to adopt causes of
 anti-coloniali'sm, anti-traditionalism, racism, religion, or irredentism.
 Moreover, the conferees represented. disparate cultures in countries scat-
 tered. across the world.. Of the eight nations present, only two were Asia:!);
 several nations whose location mad.e them logical candidates for an Asian
 coalition chose not to attend..

 The U.S. representatives at the Manila Conference in Septem-
 be~ 1954, arrived. with instructions to insist on a number of preconditions
 for U.S. military action in Southeast Asia. First, with its commitments
 in Europe, the U.S. would. refuse to act unilaterally in Asia; further,
 any such action would. have to involve not only Asian nations, but also
 major European partners. Moreover, the U.S. would. not be prepared. to com-
 mit ground. troops into combat in Asia; other nations would. do the ground.

 A-13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 f'ighting und.e r a cover of' U.S. sea and. air power. In add.ition, the U.S.
 def'ined the communist threat as the only real danger in the area; the U.S.
 d.id. not want to be dra,m into an alliance d.irected. against any other sort
 of' enemy, particularly d.es iring to avoid colonial conf'licts. Hence, the
 U.S. sought to restrict the applicability of' any U.S. commitment to a f'ew
 specified. nations especially vulnerable to communist aggression. Each of
 these two major U.S. qualifications -- the proscriptions against land. f'orces,
 and. emphasis on anti-communism -- created. its o,m d.ilemmas, solutions to which
 proved to be elusive.

 (1) Force Commitment

 The r~source -- political as well as military -- the U.S.
 was prepared. to commit to SEATO was bound. to constitute its principal
 strength. But the U.S., with its NATO commitments already a sizeable bur-
 den, was not prepared. to pay the price of' a strong coalition. In no sense
 "Tas the U. S. prepared. to commit itself' to SEATO as it had. to NATO. (It
 is interesting that Dulles ",as so concerned. with avoid.i ng a public identi-
 f'ication of SEATO with NATO that he tried to have the ne,., treaty called.
 "MANPAC," f'or "Manila Pact." ?21 )
 Rather, the U. S. searched. for ways in
 which other nations would. provide troops. But f'ew nations in 1954 possessed.
 the capability to f'ield. an army of' signif'icance within the SEATO region.

 Vice Admiral Davis noted. that:

 "The United. States was f'aced. in this issue, I believe, with
 the d.ilemma of attempting to attain t ..TO objectives that were
 not completely compatible; on the one hand there 'vas a desire to
 place the communists on notice as clearly as possible that further
 aggression on the area "Tould. meet with effective collective counter-
 action. Such unequivocal notif'ication would. tend. to enhance the
 psychological effect of the Treaty on the Free World. and. the d.e -
 terrent effect on the communists. Yet on the other hand., in spite
 of the greater psychological ef'fect that a str.ongly worded. Treaty
 might have, the attainment of this objective was necessarily limited
 by the extent to which the United. States, in its own interest,
 c ould. undertake ad:vance military commitments under the Treaty in
 restriction of its freedom of action." ?!i/ .
 While the U. S. continued. to call the prospective pact
 "regional," a region existed. only in the sense that a certain geographical
 . area was consid.ered. to be threatened. by the expansion of' communism. The
 membership solicited. for the SEATO conf'erence was worldwide ; potential
 force contributors were overbalanced on the European sid.e ; and. even within
 the region itself, several countries d.i d. not d.e &ire to become participants,
 and. others were not invited.. Determined. not to become eruneshed. in South-
 east Asia without help f'rom Europe, the U.S. settled. f'or a SEATO based on
 unspecif'ied f'orces from eight nations, f'ive of' which were ethnically
 European -- a position 1vhich apparently d.ismissed. f'rom consid.eration the
 d.isad:vantages ..,hich "Tould. accrue to armies drawn from former metropole
 nations.

 A-14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
!I
, .
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

f '

l TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Several of the states at Manila were acutely disappointed.
 at the reluctance of the U.S. to place its military forces at the disposal
 of the pact; they were expecting a NATO-like commitment and. they were sur-
 prised. when it was not forthcoming. Admiral Davis reported. that:

 "With respect to the military aspects of the Treaty, most
 of the participating States, notably the Philippines and. Thailand.,
 urged. provisions that would. explicitly commit the Treaty Parties
 to take military action in event of aggression in the Treaty area.
 The commitment of the United. States to such action, of course,
 was the purpose of these urgings. Much was said. about the de-
 sirability of the NATO as opposed. to the allegedly weaker ANZUS
r . formula. Most of the participating States argued. that explicit
l commitments to take action were necessary if the Treaty 'vas to
 have the d.esired. d.e terrent effect on the communists. tI m
 .But the U.S. d.e legates maintained. their opposition, arguing that the U.S.
 had. to retain its freedom of action, and could. not accept a treaty commit-
 ment that was inconsistent with Constitutional requirements,and. therefore
 prejudicial to ratification of the treaty by the Senate.

 (2) Anti-Communism

 At the beginning of the Manila Conference, the U.S. served.
 notice that it looked. on the future SEATO agreement as an anti-communist
 pact, and that it vlOuld. react only against a communist threat. The U.S.
 agreed. to trconsultll ,dth the other membersto decide future action, if
rI. faced. with a non-communist threat. This, of course, had. the effect of
 emphasizing once again the qualified. nature of the U.S. commitment: the
 strongest power in the pact reserved the right to opt out of contingencies.
 Other nations present at Manila sa"T many other threats to regional peace,
 some of which seemed.to them a good. deal more dangerous than communism
 (~. Indonesian relations vTith Malaya, and. Indian relations with Pakistan).
 There \vas, as a result, some hesitance to leok on the pact as a mutual band.-
 ing together against all dangers. Few missed. the irony of the U.S. being
 the chief advocate of the SEATO pact, and. also its prime qualifier. ~

 2. The Treaties Compared.

 Although Secretary of State Dulles wished. to avoid comparisons
 of SEATO with NATO, such were inevitable. Similarities 'fere in fact intended.
 by many of the Manila Conferees, and. emerged. in the vlOrding of the treaties.
 All the delegations at Manila, the U. S. included., took pains with treaty
 terminology, calcu.lating carefully the effect ic would have on their morn
 domestic politics, as well as ori the communist countries. As Admiral Davis
 reported.:

 tiThe Treaty is a d.o cument that speaks to many audiences;
 it supports self-determination of peoples, self-government and.
 independence in de ference to Asian nationalism; it provides for
 economic and. technical cooperation as an inducement to present

 A-15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Asian 'neutralist' countries to associate themselves with the
 Treaty; it permits the accession of other states, thus avoiding
 the charge that the Treaty members form an exclusive club with
 aggressive designs 'against' other States; ... These elements of
 the Treaty attest to the importance the member States place on
 the effect o~ the document upon their resp~ctive publics .•• The
 success t0at the Treaty may have in enhancing the defense of the
 area will therefore have to be judged in light of the fact that
 it has psychological and economic as well as military objectives." 52./

 a. Introductory Articles Alike

 The initial article of both treaties is the same, word for
 word.* The member nations promise not to use force in any manner incon-
 sistent with the principles of the United Nations. Article 2 of NATO
 conforms to Article III of SEATO: an undertaking to strengthen free insti-
r" tutions and promote economic progress, and is identical except for speci-
! fic mention in SEATO of technical assistance and promotion of social
l
 well-being, wording which is not in the NATO version. The reversal of
 the order of presentation of the second and third articles is interest-
r ing. In NATO, the article committing the members to strengthen free in-
l. stitutions precedes the article on developing collective capacity to
 resist attack. The order is changed in SEATO, perhaps emphasizing defense
 over other considerations. Article 3 of NATO corresponds to Article II
 of SEATO: an expression of resolve to develop a collective capacity to
 resist armed attack. There is, however, a significant difference in the
 SEATO article with the addition of a clause applying the Treaty specifically
 to subversion. This clause, in combination with the provision of SEATO
 Article IV that the parties shall consult immediately on measures of com-
 mon defense if threatened by other than armed attack, places subversive
 aggression, in the form of externally fomented or supported insurgency,
 or coup d'etat, within the purview of the treaty.

 b. The Key Articles

 Central to analysis of the two treaties is comparison of the
 articles calling for action to meet an enemy threat. These are Articles
 4 and 5 of the NATO Treaty, and Article IV of the SEATO Treaty. In general,
 the SEATO article has come under heavy criticism for lack of forcefulness.
 As presented below, the SEATO article has been trans posed to parallel
 the two articles of NATO, but no words have been added or deleted.

 NATO Art. 4 & 5 SEATO Art. IV

 The Parties will consult together If, in the opinion of any of the
 whenever, in the opinion of any of parties, the inviolability or
 them, the territorial integrity, the integrity of the territory or

 *Appendix A, Comparison of the Wording of the NATO and SEATO Treaties

 A-16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 NATO Art. 4 &5 SEATO Art. IV

 political' independ.e nce or security the sovereignty or political in-
 of any of the Parties is threatened.. d.epend.ence of any Party in the
 Treaty ~ea or of any other State
 or territory to shich the provi-
 sions of paragraph 1 of this Arti-
 cle from time to time apply is
 threatened. in any way other than
 by armed. attack or is affected or
 threatened. by any fact or situation
 which might endanger the peace of
 the area, the Parties shall con-
r sult immediately in ord.er to agree
{ on the mea.sures which should. be
 taken for the common d.efense.

 The Farties agree that Each Party recognizes that aggres-
 an armed. attack sion by means of armed. attack

r
I •
 against one or more of them against any of the Parties or
 against any state or territory
 which the Parties by unanimous
 agreement may hereafter d.esignate

 in Europe or North America In the Treaty a;ea

 shall be considered. an attack would. endanger its own peace and.
 against them all safety

 and. consequently they agree that and. agrees that

 'if such an armed. attack occurs, it "Till in that event
 each of them

 in exercise of the right of in-
 d.ividual or collective self-
 d.efense recognized. by Article
 51 of the Charter of the United.
 Nations

 will assist the party or act to meet the common danger in
 parties so attacked. by taking accord.a nce \vith its constitutional
 forthvTi th, ind.ividually and. in processes
 concert with:,;he other parties

 such action as it d.eems neces-
 sary, including the use of
 armed. force.

 to restore and. maintain the
 security of the North Atlantic
 Area.

 A-17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

r .
l TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 NATO Art. 4 & 5 SEATO Art. IV

 any such ·armed. attack and. all mea- measures under this paragraph shall
 sures taken as a result thereof be immediately reported. to the
 shall immediately be reported. to Security Council of the United.
 the Security Council.. Nations

 Such measures shall be terminated.
 . when the Security Council has
 taken the measures necessary to
 restore and. maintain international
 peace and. security.

 It is und.erstood. that no action
 on the territory of any state
 designated. by unanimous agreement
 under paragraph 1 of this article
 or on any territory so d.esig-
 nated. shall be taken except at the
I . invitation or with the consent
I
I. . of the government concerned..

 As the American d.elegation at Manila not ed) the SEATO Article IV was in
r line with the ,'lOrding used. in the U. S . ,Philippine, Korean, and. ANZUS pacts.
 The issue of pre commitment to react to armed. attack was sid.e-stepped.:

 . "Secretary Dulles pointed. out during the conference that the
 word.ing of the North Atlantic Treaty, vihich speaks of an attack
 on one as an attack on all, nevertheless provid.es that the Parties
[. will act in accordance with their constitutional processes. He
 persuad.ed. the Conference that the final agreed. wording of Arti-
 cle IV viOuld be better re cei ved. by the Senate, should. tend. to
 minimize d.ebate, and. 1'lOuld facilitate ratification by the United.
 States. II J9J -
 The SEATO Treaty wording is thus intentionally ambiguous on the point of
 just what response would be mad.e by the members in the event of an armed.
 attack. Such an attack against one of the SEATO members would. be viewed.
 as a "common danger" rather than as an "attack on all." Where the NiI.TO
 Treaty notes that action taken "forthwith" might includ.e the "use of armed.
 force," the SEATO Treaty' states merely that "common danger" would. be "met"
 in accordance with"constitutional processes." SEATO also . makes the provision
 that no action shall be taken on the territory of any threatened. state viith-
 out the consent of that state, a qualification necessary to reassure small-
 country members that their ind.epend.ence was not threatened. by neocolonialism
 or other d.omination, and. recognition of one of the most significant differ-
 ences in the environment of the two treaty organizations.

 In some respects, nevertheless, Article IV of the SEfl..TO Treaty
 is broad.er than its NATO counterparts. The nature of the threat is loosely

 A-18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 d.e fined. as "any fact or situation that might endanger the peace of the area,"
 and provision is mad.e to respond. to threatened. countries that are non-members
 of the pact. In add.ition, there is no clause implying dependence on the
 Security Council of the UN to step in to II res tore and. maintain international
 peace and. security, It as there is in the NATO Treaty. Yet, the main point
 evid.ent is that bvth the wording of NATO and. that of SEATO provid,e the
 basis for a strong d.e fensive strategy or, ind.eed., "TOuld, admit of a weak
 one . There is enough room for interpretation und.er the SEATO Treaty for
 membersto devise all the d.efensive protection that NATO offers, and, more.
( ,
I
l c. Extent of the Treaty Areas

 NATO Article 6 is the equivalent of SEATO Article VIII, dealing
 with d.efinition of the treaty area . Both are broad, but the SEATO article
 is the more flexible of the two. In SEATO the area is limited. on the
 north at latitud.e 21 d.egrees, 30 minutes, thus elirninatipg Formosa, Hong
 Kong, Korea, and Japan. The rest of the area is d.e fined. only as "the
 general area of South-East Asia" and, "the general area of the South-West
 Pacific." The area, the treaty notes, can be mod.ified, at any time by
 unanimous agreement. The phrase that permitted, inclusion of "the entire
 territories of the Asian parties" was noted. by the U.S. d.e legation as
 having the advantage of bringing in West Pakistan Ilund.er the protection
 of the Treaty even though it is not in Southeast Asia." W

 d.. UN and. Other Pacts

 Except for a change in two or three unimportant "TOrds, NATO
 7 and, 8 are summed. up and, repeated in SEATO VI; these articles d.eclare
 that agreements between SEATO members and, the UN, or by members with other
 countries are not, nor will be, in conflict with ~EATO responsibilities.

 e. Treaty Institutions

 NATO 9 and. SEATO V establish a council for military and other
 planning. In the NATO Treaty this council is authorized to set up "sub-
 sidiary bodies," while in the SEATO Treaty such authorization is not given.
 This 'vas a disappointment to several of the d.e legations at the Manila •.
 Conference. The Australians came forward. with a request for a strong
 organization, but the U. S. d.elegation ",as able to persuad.e them to accept
 a modification of their proposal, subst.ituting a concept of "consultation":

 "During the sessions of the Working Group it became evid.ent
 that some countries would. propose wording calling for the establish-
 ment of military machinery, possibly along NATO lines. Recalling
 the position of [the U.S; StatiJ Department that military partici-
 pation should be consultative along lines of the ANZUS arrangement
 rather than 'permanent and formal as in NATO, the Defense Representa-
 tive .• ~pr oposed that consideration be given to the inclusion of
 the following wording after the first sentence of Article IV:
 ITo this end the Parties to the Treaty will consult with regard

 A-19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

r TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 to military planning as required by the situation in the area.'
 Shortly thereafter the Australian delegation -proposed the follow-
 ing addition to Article V: 'The Council shall set up such sub-
 sidiary machinery as may be necessary to achieve the military
 and other objectives of the Treaty.' Since the Australian proposal
 involv~d an open ended commitment, this Department and the Joint
 Chiefs of Staff opposed it and accepted the \-Tording suggested by
 the Defense Representative. The Department of State agreed, and
 instructed the U.S. Delegation to support incorporation of this
 wording in Article IV." 32/

 Secretary Dulles was able to bring about deletion of the references to
 periodic or regular consultation that had been introduced into the draft
 treaty.

 f. Treaty Longevity

 The final NATO articles (11-14) are administrative, covering
 ratification of the treaty, the length of time it is to remain in for~e,
 provisions for review of the articles, and archival responsibilities . .
 These are paralleled in SEATO articles IX-XI. The NATO Treaty provides
 for withdrm'Tal of its members after 1969; members are to give a year's
 notice prior to such action. The SEATO Treaty is to remain in force in-
 definitely, but members also may \-Tithdraw o~ one year's notice.

 g. The Appended U.S. "Understanding"

 Throughout the discussions at M.anila the U.S. insisted that
 the focus of the pact be on the prevention of further commUnist expansion
 in the treaty area. When the other nations would not acquiesce to a word-
 ing of the treaty to make anti-communism its specific objective, the U.S.
 requested that an "understanding" be appended to the treaty. This \-TaS a
 U.S. unilateral statement of intent -- a qualifier upon the first paragraph
 of Article IV., in "Thich the members agreed that in the event of aggression
 they will "act to meet the common danger in accordance with constitutional
 processes." The U.S. in the understanding restricts the applicability of
 its agreement to act, stating that only communist aggression will be recog-
 nized as \-Tarranting immediate response. In the event of other kinds of
 aggression, the U.S. would consult with the other member nations. Admiral
 Davis reported disagreement over this point at the conference:

 "All participating States except the United States supported
 exclusion of the word 'Communist' from the Treaty. The U.S. draft
 originall~r referred to 'Communist aggression' in the preamble and
 in Article IV. The chief reason advanced by the other signatories
 for the deletion was the desire of most of the Parties that the
 Treaty cover any kind of aggression in the area. Pakistan, for
 example, wished that the Treaty '!;VQuld apply to possible aggression
 by India. The United States position was that the United States
 could not properly say that any aggression in Southeast Asia would
 endanger its own peace and safety, and that it could accept the

 A-20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

r
l. TOP SECRET - Sensitive

r'
! obligations of Article IV only in respect to Communist aggression.
 For this reason, the United States attached an 'understanding'
 to the Treaty in this sense. All other participants accepted the
 Treaty with the U. S. 'understanding.' It W
 In the "understanding" the U.S. further complicc..ted the matter by changing
 "aggression by means of armed attack" of Article IV to "aggression and armed
 attack"; in the same sentence, the understanding uses "aggression or armed
 attack" to refer to paragraph 2 of Article IV, which in fact is worded
 "threatened in any way other than by armed attack." The admixture of terms
 accentuates one of the major difficulties of the alliance: the governments
 of the SEATO treaty area were threatened by a complicated variety of destruc-
 tive movements that might be called aggression against a member state.
 The appellation could be fitted in anywhere between "armed attack" and
 "fact or situation I-Thich might endanger the peace." The U.S. insistence on
 this point of "understanding" was probably superfluous. The latitude that
 the U.S. wanted already was built into the treaty, in Article IV. The
 emphatic nature of such an appendix to the treaty may have been calculated
 as a way to call the attention of the world to a pm'Terful U. S. stand against
 further encroachments of communism. Such a call would have been consistent
 with the U.S. feeling of a necessity to re-establish a psychological posi-
 tion in the face of the "defeats" of Geneva: Nevertheless, the confirma-
 tion of U.S. single-mindedness that made a communist threat the only valid
 call for immediate response narrowed SEATO at its inception.

 h. The Vietnam-Laos-Cambodia Protocol

 The final item of the SEATO Treaty is a "protocol," which
 states unanimous agreement among the members to include Cambodia, Laos,
 and "the free territory under the jurisdiction of the State of Vietnam"
 under the protection of Articles III and IV of the Treaty. In other words,
 these countries, witbout actually becoming members of the pact, would be
 entitled to "economic measures including technical assistance" and also
 to defense against any attack, overt or not, from without or within. The
 U.S. had wanted to include these countries in SEATO, but membership might
 have seemed legally a contravention of the Geneva Agreements. At Geneva,
 Laos had not signed any agreement prejudicial to such a pact, but the
 Laotian Government, on the final day of that conference, had made the
 following declaration:

 "The Royal Government of Laos will never join in any agree-
 ment with other states if this aBreement includes the obligation
 for the Royal Government of Laos to participate in a military
 alliance not in conformity with the principles of the United
 Nations or w:;.th the principles of the fjierl.2.vi/ Agreement on
 the Cessation of Hostilities ... " W
 South Vietnam, on the other hand, "las coextensive with one of the "zones"
 described in Article 19 of the armistice, which specifies:

 A-21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 "The two Parties shall ensure that the zones assigned to
 them do not adhere to any military alliance and are not used for
 the resumption of hostilities or to further an aggressive policy." 32/
France -- one of the "Parties" to the armistice -- was thus not in a posi-
tion to admit the GVN to SEATO. However, nothing in the Geneva Accords
appeared to exclude all three countries from being extended protection .
under such a pact without member status.]§/ This was pointed out by the
French delegation:

 "At French suggestion specific reference to Cambodia, Laos,
 and Vietnam was removed from the text of the Treaty, but these
 States are covered by the provisions of the Treaty in a separate
 protocol .•• The French ~elt that this method of extending the
 application of the Treaty to the Associated States was less
 likely to be construed as a violation of the spirit of the Geneva
 Agreements ~" B./

 At the conclusion of · the Manila Conference, Admiral Davis
wrote:

 "I believe the Manila Conference accomplished the objec-
 tive expected of it from the United States point of view. In
 my judgment our Defense representation in the U.S. Delegation
 succeeded in its efforts to insure that the Treaty is consistent
 in its military implications with the positions taken by the
 ·Joint Chiefs of Staff and by this Department." 3§)

The U.S. had, in effect, made a public statement of its intent to counter
further COIDnlunist moves in SEA, but left vague the specifics of its response.
The pact, as intended, was fundamentally "consultative." There was to be
no unified command, no bases, and no contribution of forces to a standing
group; the U.S. accepted these lacks, and stressed the psychological gains
of merely bringing a treaty into existence, pointing out that SEATO opened
the way to a stronger and more all-encompassing defense of Southeast Asia
than had theretofore been possible.

 A-22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 3· Evolution of the Treaty Organization

 a. NATO Develops Rapidly

 NATO rapidly acquired institutions.* The treaty entered
 f into force in August, 1949. By September, a Military Committee, a .
 I· Standing Group, and the Regional Planning Groups had been created. By
 November a Financial and Economic Board and a Military Production and
.r Supply Board had been set up. By December agreement had been reached
 on a strategic concept for the integrated defense of the NATO area.
 A year later a centralized command and control structure was formulated,
 becoming operational as SF~PE on 2 April 1951, with headquarters in the
 old Hotel Astoria, in Paris. Spurred on by the events occurring in
 Korea, NATO was further simplified and streamlined in the ottawa meeting
 of September 1951, where a Temporary Council Committee chaired by
 W. Averell Harriman was set up. This became a permanent council, in
 March, 1952, a month after the accession of Greece and Turkey to the
 pact. 39/ In the wake of a major setback when the French Assembly
 refusedto ratify the European Defense Community (EDC) proposal in
 August, 1954, the Paris Agreements were pushed through in October,
 providing for the accession of West Germany to NATO, and the establish-
I '
 ment of a combined field command.** Early in 1956 the NATO Council
 appointed a Committee of Three Ministers (Mart ino of Italy, Lange of
 Norway, and Pearson of Canada) to study w~ys that further cooperation
 could be achieved within NATO. The report of this Committee was approved
 by the Council on 14 December, 1956. Consultation "Tithin NATO 1ms to
 become "an integral part of the making of national policy." 40/ The
 meeting of 16-19 December 1957 of the NATO Council included the heads of
 government, with Eis enhower and Macmillan participating. This meeting
 symbolized the significance which all the NATO countries attached to the
 pact -- and it ",as this sense of meaningfulness, commonality, and neces-
 sity, more than the terms of the North Atlantic Treaty, that accounted
 for the rapid organizational growth.

 b. SEATO Unstructured by U.S. Preference

 The Manila Conference eventuated in a pact termed the
 "Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty and Protocol Thereto, Septem-
 ber 8, 1954"j the treaty was ratified by the U.S. Senate by a vote of
 82 to 1, and entered into force on February 19, 1955. 41/ The history
 of the development of SEATO thereafter is quite different from NATO!s,
 since the initial policy of the U. S. was to discourage, rather than to
 assist, the evolution of a permanent structure. SEATO military staff

 * Appendix B, Organizational Charts

 . *-l(- In the same month -- October, 1954 -- the WarsaYl Pact came into being.

 A-23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
I
,.
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 consultations were held frequently, but were attended by relatively
 low'-ranking U. S. officers, carefully instructed on limits of the ir
 l planning flexibility. At the SEATO conference in Bangkok in February
 1955, the U.S. position on military arrangements under the pact was
 to avoid discussion of permanent formal organization. A Defense Depart-
 ment memorandum on the U.S. stance again recommended that the ANZUS
 pact be used as a model:

 l .
 "The U.S. desires to make no commitments of U.S. forces
 for use under the Manila pact. (This view has not been con-
 veyed to the other pm.,rers.)

 "vlith regard to military machinery for the coordination
 of measures to combat overt aggression, the U.S. is opposed
 to the establisrunent of formal military machinery or of a
 permanent SFATO staff. Instead, the U.S. supports the estab-
 lisrui1ent of military advisors, who would meet periodically,
 formulate their own rules of procedure and any necessary
 organizational arrangements, designate planning assistants to
 work on specified projects, and insure that military planning
 activities are coordinated with those designed to counter sub-
 versive activities.

 "While not explicitly so stated, the U.S. position is one
 of confining its activities and commitments to the scope of
 those made under the ANZUS Pact. Such apparent concessions
 to the other powers as have been made in the Working Group
 papers do not alter the fact that the U.S. is unwilling to
 commit any forces to the defense of Southeast ASia, opposes
 any military organizational arrangement i·rhich would require
 the integration of U.S. and allied war plans, and prefers to
 deal ,-lith its allies bilaterally rather than multilaterally. "
 1. .' 4.2/ ~nphasis adde~7
 The U.S., although it refused to become deeply committed
 in advance to a military organization styled along NATO lines, was
 well a'iorare of the necessity to be prepared to fight in the SEATO area.
 U.S. unilateral plans and preparations had been set in motion when, in
 January, 1955, the Secretary of Defense requested the JCS to provide
 "a concept of the possible application of U.S. military pOlver in the
 implementation of Article IV of the Manila Pact II under two different
 assumptions: (1) prohibition of nuclear weapons; (2) permission to
 L, employ nuclear \v(;apons. Requirements vrere estnblished for:

 "1. Broad outline plans for U. S. action ... to deter
 ,,I or counter overt aggression by Com.munist China or, where
 applicable, by Viet Minh, against each of the Southeast
1 • Asian nations vrhich are parties to the Manila Pact or
i against the free areas of Indochina vrhich might be covered
;

 by the Pact. LEmphasis adde~7

 A-24 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

r TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 I~ • • • • a statement as to the readiness capability of U.S.
 armed forces, in the next fey' years, to conduct operations in
 implementation of Article IV, I, of the Manila Bact." 43/

 The U.S. forces 'I,ould constitute a "mobile reserve" ready for commit-
 ment to the treaty area , but the U.S. would enter no fixed agreement
 as to what those forces might be, or under what circunlstances they
 would be us ed . Despite this unilateral planning, however, instructions
 for the delegates to the Bangkok conference indicated that planning for
~.- or creation of combined commands ,.,ere not to be considered within the
 ;,." scope of the SEATO Pact. Suppression of guerrillas was to be handled
 ,. by "indigenous forces only" unless these proved incapable of coping
 with the problem.

 At the 1955 Bangkok Conference the Australians and New
 Zealanders repeated their willingness to make troop commitments to a
 SEATO force, but the U.S. representatives, following instructions,
 evaded discussion of the subject. 44/ The pressures on the U.S. team
 were strong, and the members came away with the conviction that the
 major factor "t o contend "Tith" in future meetings 'fllas bound to be

 " . '•. the obvious desire of the Asian nations to establish
 a NATO-type SEATO organization with everything that it implies
 in the nature of force commitments." 45/

 Later in 1955, U.S. planners once more were approached by
 counterpart s of several other countries with the proposal that, as a
 step toward some kind of SEATO standing group, a small secretariat be
 set up to study methods of creating a "possible future organizational
 structure." The report of the U.S. representatives stated, "The
 establishment of such an ad hoc arrangement should not prejudice the
 eventual creation or evolution of a standing group ... should the need
 become nec essa ry because of inadequac ies revealed by experience." 46/
 The JCS conrrnented: -

 "The Joint Chiefs of Staff have no objection to the
 establishment of a small permanent secretariat, vThich would
 be an instrument of the Military Advisers and subordinate
 planning committees . However, the Joint Chiefs of Staff
 would not agree to the possible evolution of such a secre-
 tariat into an organization of a standing nature .... " 47/

 This 'I-TaS the same point of vieVT expressed by Cn~CPAC , VTho noted with
 apparent r el i ef that :

 "The recognition of the requirement for a small permanent
 secreta riat has definitely forestalled for the foreseeable
 future any 'determined insistence for either a permanent staff
 planners organization, a standing group, or a combined staff." 48/

 A-25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The U.S. memb ers attending the SEATO ~ilitary Staff
Planners Conference in Pearl Harbor in November, 1955, received
basically the same instructions as had been given to earlier planners:

 (1) No Lcceptance of a permanent "sta!lding group" staff
 organization.

 (2) No U.S. participation in the development of combined
 .plans.

 (3) No commitment of U.S. forces. ~

A demonstration by the U.S. 25th Ir.fantry Division was considered ~uite
impressive by the conference delegates, but did not assuage the appetite
among other SEATO nations for strong, concrete U.S. force commitments.
The chief U.S. delegate, Rear Admiral A. P. Storrs, recommended to his
superiors that the U.S. add "SUbstance" to SEATO by:

 (1) Accepting the concept of a permanent staff organization.

 (2 ) Accepting the concept of combined planning.

 (3) Maintaining a U.S. division in the Central Pacific., 2SY
Storrs felt that these actions might satisfy the rest of the SEATO
nations and ~uiet their demands for a permanent U.S. force commitment,
but he focused on a fading issue . . While some SEATO members, especially
Australia and Ne'\'J Zealand, kept up an insist ence on a stronger organiza-
tion for the pact, others began to show less and less interest in SEATO
per se. By the end of 1955, the U.S. realized that SEATO would fall
apart unless something were done to provide a permanent structure. Admit-
ting that the Asian countries were !!losing faith!! in SEATO, the State
Department decided to reexamine the U.S. position pertaining to a perma-
nent staff organization for the SEATO Council.dl! A decision for a
permanent body of staff planners was taken at a meeting of SEATO Mili-
tary Advisers in Karachi in March, 1956. ~ The advisers agreed on a
staff organization headed by a chief of staff with flag rank. Bangkok
was selected as the site for SEATO head~uarters.

 At the ninth conference of SEATO Military Advisers, in
February 1959, it was agreed that a series of outline plans for the
"introduction of a SEATO force into threatened areas!! would be prepared. 121
The plans would be based on the assumption that the initial re~uirement
would be for one lrigade group or regimental coubat team with appropriate
nav~l support. Discussion of a command structure to implement these plans
was postponed to 'a later meeting, over the objections of the Pakistani
delegate, ,vho insisted that the time for action was "now":

 A-26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

l
 "Until a command structure, even if only in skeleton form,
 for SEATO forces has been evolved, SEATO is not in a position,
 collectively, to operate instantaneously .•.. A study on command
 structure shpuld be started now." 54/

 At the following meeting, in September 1959, a SEATO command was estab-
 lished in embryo \-Then the U. S. agreed to the reorganization of the '
 Military Planning Office into a configuration that could be assimilated
 by the planning staff of a permanent SEATO headquarters along the lines
[ of SFAPE. 55/* By the twelfth SEATO Military Advisers Conference in
 Washingtonin May 1960, Secretary of Defense Gates w'as able to make
 the public announcement that SEATO had advanced significantly in organ-
 ization and planning:

 "National forces of the Southeast Asia countries, backed
 by pOl-rerful mobile forces, contribute to the deterrent ....
 Coordinated SEATO military plans have been prepared and are
 capable of rapid execution to parry any like ly Cormnunist threat ....
 SEATO exercises have progressed from simple observer type to ...
 sophisticated maneuvers .... " 56/

 c. SEATO Contingency Planning

 During the i-Tinter of 1959-1960 a series of plans Ylas pre-
 pared for contingencies throughout the SEATO area. By ·the spring of
 1961 these SEATO plans, numbered 1 through 6, came under consideration
 in the first "invoking " of the SEATO Treaty, when the Pathet Ufo forces
 threatened to overrun Laos and invade Thailand. 57/ From the U.S.
 point of vi e'\oT , the SEATO plans 1-lere derivatives of
 u. S. unilateral plans
 for Southeast Asia covering "action up to and including action '-rith
 Communist China ." The then current U.S. master plan, PACOM Operations
 Plan 32-59, served as the basis for U.S. contributions to the SEATO
 Plans. 58/

 The U.S. led the way in preparation of a series of six
 contingency plans for the treaty area. By the fall of 1961 some of
 these plans had been approved and others were under discussion at
 Bangkok. 59/ Of these plans, at lea st three vere concerned vlith the
 SEATO Protocol states of Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam. Plan 1f1~ provided
 for the defense of Southeast Asia, including Pakistan, against attack
 by forc es of CorrSnun ist China and the DRV. The general concept vTaS:

 (1) "To launc h air and naval attacks; local forces to
 delay the enemy's advance as fe asib le while rapidly reinforcing
 with external SEATO forces."

 (2) "To establish ground defenses in order to hold the
 enemy forl-Tard of vital areas in South Vietnam, Thailand and
 East Pakistan, and to build up forces behind them i-, hile con-
 ducting air and naval offensive against enemy forces, base
 areas, LOC's and war-making capacity.tI

 *See Appendix B for present organization.
 A-27 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 (3) IIAfter appropriate build-up) to launch a counter offen-
 sive) including a major amphibious assault on North Vietnam} to
 inflict a decisive defeat on enemy military forces and at the
 same time liberate occupied territory." 60/
 (
. I Plan 5 provided U.S. troops to release the Royal Laotion forces for
 ) offensive operations and to assist them lito regain areas lost." The
 U.S. would also provide "additional military and logistic support."
 This "I{as a fully developed and approved plan} for which "the Field Force
 Commander's plan is complete." 61/ Plan 6 provided for the defense of
 the protocol states against attack by forces of the DRV. The general
 concept was:

 (1) "To hold the enemy as far fOri-lard as possible and to
 provide defense in depth) securing main ports of entry and
 bases for build-up and deployment of forces for counter-offensive."

 (2) "To destroy the enemy's forces) ' LOC's and capacity to
 "lage .rar through an intensive interdiction program conducted by
 SEATO air and naval forces supported by such air and naval forces
 under national command as are made available."

 (3) "vmile maintaining the defense) forces for the counter-
 offensive phase .Till be assembled and built up. VThen appropriate)
 a general offensive to include a major amphibious assault against
 North Vietnam will be mounted to inflict a decisive defeat on the
 enemy military forces and to liberate the territory overrun by
 the DRV." §3/

 U.S. ground force commitment to the plans was a corps consisting of
 three infantry divisions plus a Marine Expeditionary Force of one division.
 Air support \-las a tactical bomber squadron) t"lVQ tactical fighter squad-
 rons) and a Marine air Hing. Anticipated support of the' plans by other
 SEATO countries is evident in available ground rorce troop lists for
 plans 4 and 6: 63/

 A- 28 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 TOTAL GROUND FORCES
 Plan 4 (SEA) Plan 6 (VN-L-C)

 NATION Di.v RCT Bn "Div RCT/BDE Bn
.! t
 Thailand 3 4 2 3
 Pakistan 1 1 1
 United Kingdom 1 1
 Australia 1 1
 Nevr Zealand 1 1

r France
 Philippines
 South Vietnam 4 1
 1
 1
 4 1
 1
 1
 3
 6
r Total Non-U.S.
 CINCPAC Est. Rqmt
 Shortage
 11
 15
 4
 8
 1-1/3
 2 9
 12*
 3
 5
 7-'1<-
 2
 5.
 5*

r_
I
 ( 1) laos Planning

 A modification of Plan #5 existed under the temporary
I - title of "Plan 5-plus," drafted by the JCS in September 1961 as a pro-
 posed contingency plan for intervention in laos. In, this concept,
 25,400 troops would be sent into laos. The force vlOuld consist of the
 following: 64/

 Country In laos Support and Reserves

 U.S. 5,50 0 11,000
 Thailand 11,400 3,300
" Commonwealth 4,400 3,500
 (UK, Australia, NZ)
 ?akistan 1,400 4,700
 Philippines 200
 GVN 2,700

 These troops '{Quld augment the Royal laos forces of 38,500 in the Regu-
 lar Army, 11,000 Meos, and 29,800 other defense forces. In this modifica-
 tion of Plan 5, it vTaS assumed that the Royal laotian Government would
 appeal to SEATO for assistance. This would initiate an airlift of SEATO
 forces into key points along the Mekong River at Vientiane, Paksane,
 Thakkek, Savannakhet, and Pakse. These forces would support the Royal
 Laotian troops against communist forces in the areas of northern laos
 bordering on Thailand and from all of the laotian panhandle. At the
 same time, Thai forces would operate around Luang Prabang and GVN troops
 would operate along the GVN-laos border. §:i/ "

 * Includes a two division reserve held outside the theater of operations
 and two RCT-size airborne units held in SVN.

 A-29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.J"

 r
 l
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 (2) Vietnam Planning

 The JCS, in a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense
 on 5 October, 19h1, noted that although recommendations had been for-
 warded on the subject of intervention in Southeast Asia, nothing had
 been done. liThe time is past,l1 they stated, I1when action short of inter-
 vention could reverse the rapidly ,vorsening situation. 11 The JCS con-
 sidered that "the execution of SEATO Plan 5, or a suitable variation
 thereof" ioTaS the "military minimum commensurate with the situation." 66/
 Defense replied on the same day, requesting JCS analysis of two concepts
 for SEATO intervention in Vietnam:

 I1There appear to be two principal military possibilities.
 One iolOUld involve the use of SEATO forces at the greatest
 possible number of entry points along the whole of the South
 Vietnamese border, probably excluding that part of the 17th
 parallel now held in force by the Vietnamese Army itself. An
 alternative possibility .[ould be the use of SEATO forces to
 cover solely the 17th parallel itself, which includes some
 major infiltration routes, and thus to free the Vietnamese forces
 nmv stationed there for engagement against the Viet Cong. Under
 either possibility, planning should envisage maximum possible use
 of the SEATO forces to establish effective communications in as
 wide an area of Viet-Nam as possible, and to serve as a means
 for introducing new techniques into the Vietnamese forces them-
 selves. The forces would, of course, be entitled to take all
 necessary action for their own security, but would not (unless
 the concept were later expanded) engage in .offensive operations
 against the Viet Cong that were not strictly necessary to their
 Oiom security. Your military recommendations for the refinement
 of these guidelines into more prec ise rules of engagement should
 be a part of your response. 11 §]J

 The JCS reply, on 9 October 1961, noted that the use of SEATO troops
 all along the border was "not. feasible" because the VC could bypass such
 forces or attack them piecemeal. Further, the concept of use of SEATO
 troops at the 17th parallel was "feasible .... but militarily unsound l1
 because the area was not the VC main avenue of approach, and also because
 the move could easily be interpreted as aggression against the DRV. The
 JCS recommended, instead, that:

 11 • • • .the over-all objective could best be served by the

 implementation of SEATO Plan 5/61 or a variation thereof,
 novT." 68/

 If this action could not be taken, the JCS continued, then the U.S. could
 I1provide a degree of assistance" to the GVN and could I1free certain South
 Vietnamese forces for offensive actions against the Viet Cong." No
 action 'Has taken to implement the SEATO plan.

 A-30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63 316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 (3) Thailand Planning

 In May 1962 when the Pathet lao threat against
Thailand became acute, a U S. battle group .Tas dispatched on joint
 0

training exercises .Tithin the country. President Kennedy announced
that more UoS. troops .Tould be sent, and by 15 May a second cont in-
gent landed. On the same day, newspapers reported that the UoS. was
seeking SEATO help, and that W. Averell Harriman, then Assistant
Secretary of State for Far Eastern Affairs, had "outlined the U.S.
position in separate conferences with envoys of Australia, New Zeland,
Pakistan, and the Philippines." 69/ Within two days, all the SEATO
members except France had agre edto send help if necessary. The U. S.
sent 4,000 troops into Thailand. Three other SEATO nations actually
put forces (albeit token forc es) into Thailand. The UK sent 10 Hunter
jet · fighters, Australia sent a jet squadron, and New Zealand sent 100
parachute troops and three transport aircraft. The Philippines and
Pakistan publicly noted that they were standing by to help.

 (4) The Future

 Discussions on the best method under SEATO to "meet
the common danger" in Vietnam have not produced an overall agreement,
and three of the eight SEATO nations -- the UK, France, and Pakistan --
have not responded to Vietnam's invitation to commit troops there. Of
the five SEATO nations now fighting in Vietnam; the strength figures as
of 17 October 1967 were:

 U.S. 1~69, 000
 Australia 6,500
 Thailand 2,500
 Philippines 2,000
 New Zealand 400
 Total 480,400 70/

One non-memb er of SEATO, the Republic of Korea, was contributing 48,000
troops to the fighting as of that date, raiSing the Free \Vorld Forces
total to 528,400. France, in view of past policies, could not be expected
to make a contribution; the amount of SEATO "unity" displayed by French
participation would be offset by other obvious considerations. Pakistani
assistance might be welcomed as a gesture of support for SEATO. But the
major shortfall to date in SEATO has be en the British decision that it is
unable to participate militarily in Vietnam.

 With all its weaknesses, the ~ajority of the SEATO pact
nations have actually collaborated in regional defense in the Vietnam war.
In fact, given the range of disparity among the members, it is a source
of wonder that support of SEATO nations for Vietnam has been as strong
as it has been0 The conflict in Vietnam is a crucible for SEATO; the
future of the alliance will be profoundly affected by the outcome of the
war.

 . A-31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3_3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. Ao 1. FOOTNOTES

1. Winston Churchill, "Alliance of English-Speaking People," Vital
 Speeches of the Day, Vol. 12 (March 15,1946). Speech was delivered
 in Fulton, Missouri.

2. By ItX," liThe Sources of Soviet Conduct, It Foreign Affairs, Vol. 25
 (July, 1947), 566-82.

3. u.S. Department of State Bulletin, Vol. 16 (March 23, 1947), 536.

4. _ Ibid., (June 15, 1947), 1159-1160.

50 Commi ttee of European Economic Coop eration , General Report, Vol. 1
 (U.S. Department of State Publication 2930, 1947), 13.

6. Hansard, Parliamentary Debates, 446. H. C. DEB 5 S Col. 396-397
 (J-anuary 22, 191+8).

7. u.S. Department of State Bulletin, Vol. 18 (March 28, 1948), 419.

8. John Foster Dulles, War or Pe ace (1950), 95-96.

9. Congressional Record, Vol. 94, Part VI, 80th Congress, 2d Session, 7791.

10. North Atlantic Treaty, .Hearings Before the Senate Comrni ttee on Foreign
 Relations , 81st Congress, 1st Session, Part I, 237.

11. Charles Wolf, Jr., Foreign Aid: Theory and Practice in Southern Asia
 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1960), 40-52.

12. Ibid., 53--54

13. Documents on American Foreign Relations, 1949, 626.

14. U.S. Congress , Hearings on Executive K, 83d Congress, 2d Session,
 Part I (November 11, 1954).

15. NSC 48/2, 30 Dec 1949 (TOP SECRET) favors a regional association of
 non-Communist states in Southeast Asia, in which the U. S. II should
 not take an active part in early stages."
 NSC 48/3, 2h Apr 1951 (TOP SECRET) recommends that the U.S. "consider
 the desir ability of security arrangements with other countries of
 Asia, either on a bilateral or multilateral basis. II A NSC progress
 report (5 Aug 1953) on NSC 124/2 states that the ·U.S. "rill continue
 to maintain the position that regional defense pacts should be initi-
 ated by countries in the region. Cf., also note 23, below.

 A-32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

-I
• TOP SECRET - SeDs i tive

 16. u.s. Congress, House, Hearings to Amend the ECA Act of 1948 as
 Amended> 1950, Part I, 33-35.

 17. Report of NSC 192d meeting, 6 Apr 195!.~ (TOP SECRET), 3.

 18. NSC 5405-2, Bonesteel Memorandum, NSC Policy Board (TOP SECRET),
 May 13, 1954~

 19. u.s. Congress , House, Hearings on East-Hest Tr ade Before the Sub-
 Committee on Foreign Economic Policy of the Committee on Foreign
 Affairs, 83d Congress, 2d Session (GPO, 1954), 292-2930
( - 20. Memorandum by Merchant (EUR) of conversation between Ambassadors
 Makin and Smith (U), and betvleen Makin and Dulles, 18 Apr 1954
 (SECRET); Tel DULTE 3,22 Apr 1954, from Paris (TOP SECRET). Re-
 ported in State Department Research Project 370, 21-22.

 21. NSC 5405-2, Bonesteel Memorandum, NSC Policy Board (TOP SECR~T),
 May 13, 1954.

 22. Robert Cutler, ina White House Memorandum of May 7, 1954 (TOP SECRET),
 calls the 5-power Staff Agency a "w'hite man's party, II Cf., NSC File
 No. 5405. .

 23. NSC 5405-2, Policy Planning Board files, April, May, June (TOP SECRET),
 Paragraph 17 of NSC 5!.~05 (TOP SECRET) states: "Take measures to pro-
 mote the coordinated defense of Southeast Asia, recognizing that the
 initiative in regional defense measures must come from the governments
 of the area." ISA Memorandum, Wade to Bonesteel, 13 Apr 1954 (TOP
 SECRET) comments on this paragraph: "In view Of. what vre are now try-
 ing to do t01>rard organizing a re gional group, the initiative is ob-
 viously with us."

 24. Memorandum to SecDef, "Report on the Manila Conference " (SECRET),
 14 Sep 1954, p. 1 (hereafter referred to as "Manila Report").

 25. John R. Beal, John Foster Dulles (Ne,v York: Harper, 1957), 222; re-
 ported in Roscoe Robinson, SEATO: An Appraisal (University of
 Pittsburgh Marter's Thesis, 1964). Cf., also Hearings, 83d Congress,
 2d Session, Part I, 1954. --

 26. Memorandum to SecDef, "Report on the lvlanila Conference" (SECRET),
 14 Sep 1954, 3; A.S.B. Olver, SEATO: The Manila Treaty and Hestern
 Policy in Southeast Asia. (London: Royal In stitute of International
 Affairs, 1956), p. 12.

 27. Manila Report (SECRET), 2.

 28. New York Times, September 8) 1954

 A-33 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET Sensitive

29. Manila Report (SECRET), 1.

30. Ibid. , 3.

31. Ibid. , 4.

32. Ibid. , 3.' ; TOSEC 25 (Sep 3, 54)

33· Ibid. , 4.

34. Memorandum to SecDef from Herman Phleger, Subject: "Geneva Armistice
 Agreement Restrictions on Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam," . dated
 July 27, 1954 (SECRET).

35. U.S. Congress, "Agreement on the Ces sation of Hostilities in Vietnam ,
 July 20, 1954,11 in Background Information Relating to Southeast Asia
 and Vi etnam (Committee Print, 89th Congress, 2d Session), 43.

36. Phleger, op. cit., (SECRET), 5.

37. Manila Report (SECRET), 4.

38. Ibid., (SECRET), 5.

39. Lord Ismay , NATO: The First Five Years . (Utrecht: Bosch, 1952) passim.

40. NATO Information Service, The NATO Handbook. (Utrecht: Bosch, 1963 ), 62

410 U. S. Congress, Background Information Relating to Southeast Asia and
 Vietnam, Ope cit., 70-74.

42. DoD (ISA) Memorandum, Subject: ItAnalysis of Possible Implications of
 the Bangkok Conference, II January 31, 1955 (TOP SECRET), File #71325 in
 NSC 5405-2, 3.

1.~3. SecDef Memorandum for JCS, Subject: IIConcept and Plans for the Imple-
 mentation, if Necessary, of Article IV, 1, of the Manila Pact," dated
 January 6, 1955 (TOP SECRET).

44. Memorandum, Subject: IIDepartment of Defense Contribution to and
 Participation in the Bangkok Conference, II dated March 29, 1955
 (TOP SECRET).

45. Ibid., (TOP SECRET)

46. JCS MemorarJ,dum CIvI-171-55, Subject: "Surmnary of Report of Military Staff
 Planners Conference ... Baguio; Philippines , April-May 1955,11 dated
 July 1, 1955, (TOP SECRET).

47. Ibid.

 A-34 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

[ : TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 48. JCS Memorandum, Subject: "Report of Military Staff Planners Confer-
 ence, Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, Baguio, Philippines,
 April-May 1955," dated June 2, 1955 (Appendix "A") (TOP SECRET)'.

 Defense Memorandum, "U.S. Support of SEATO Military Activities,"
 (TOP SECRET), 1., in NSC 5405-3.

 50. Ibid., (TOP SECRET), 3.

 51. Defense Memorandum to SecNav, Subject: "Southeast Asia Collective
 Defense Tre aty (SEATO) Staff Organization," dated December 16, 1955
 (SECRET).

{ 52. CINCPAC Message to OSD, 222208z March 1956, (TOP SECRET).

 53.· JCS Memorandum for SecDef, Subject: "Force Availabilities and Command
 Relations for the South East Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO)," dated
r March 23, 1959, (SECRET), 1. . /'
 54. Ibid., (SECRET), 2.

 55. JCS Memorandum for SecDef, Subject: "Proposal for Reorga..'Y1ization of
 the SEATO Military Planning Office, dated September 8, 1959, (SECRET) ,1.
 If

r. 56. Appendix to the Congressional Record, ALf475 (1960).
 57. State Departmant Memorandum of Conversation #8857, Subj ect: "Laos, "
 dated 29 April 1961 (TOP SECRET), covering meeting of SecState, SecDef,
 Atty Gen., JCS , and 8 others.

 58. Memorandum for SecDef, dated October 5, 1961, "Alternative Plans for
 Southeast Asia," (TOP SECRET)

 59. Memorandum for SecDef from Deputy Assistant SecDef, Subject: "Alterna-
 tive Plans for Southeast Asia," (TOP SECRET), dated 5 October 1961.
 The plans, numbered 1 - 6, e.re not -avail able ; data on the plans had
 been obt ained from cross -checking cOIlh"nentaries on them, and is incom-
 plete. One plan ("5 plus"), an adoption of #5, is singled out as
 existing "only as a U.S. concept." Plan 5 has be en "fully approved."
 Plans 4 and 6 are "being discussed this "reek at the SEATO MilAd Con-
 ference in Bangkok.

 60. Study for SecDef from Asst SecDef (ISA) recommending U.S. troop list
 for SEATO plans 4 and 6, dated 22 September 1961, (TOP SECRET).

 61. Memorandum for SecDef, Subj ect: "Alternative P}.ans for Southeast Asia"
 (TOP SECRET), dated 5 October 1961.

 A-35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

62. ISA Study of 2 September 1961, cited in Note 60, (TOP SECRET).

63. Ibid., (TOP SECREr).

64. JCS Memoranc1.um 661-61 to SecDef, Subject: "Plan for Military Inter-
 vention ~n Laos," dated 20 September 1961, (TOP SECRET).

65. Ibid., (TOP SECRET)

66. JCS Memorandum 704-61 to SecDef, Subject: "Planning for Southeast
 ASia," dated 5 October 1961, (TOP SECRET).

67. Memorandum from SecDef to JCS, Subject: "Planning for Southeast Asia,"
 dated 5 October 1961, (SECRET) . .

68. JCS Memorandum 716-61 to SecDef, Subject: "Concept of Use of SEATO
 Forces in South Vietnam," dated 9 October 1961, (TOP SECRET).

69. The New' York Times, 15 May 1962.

70. Figures from OASD/PA Vietnam Desk.

 A-36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 '.
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 APPENDIX· A TOP SECRET - Sensitive
I.
 A COMPARISON OF THE WORDING OF THE NATO AND SEATO TREATIES

 NOTES:
 "
 1. In this layout, sections of the SEATO Treaty are transposed for comparison
r with like sections of the NATO Treaty. No "lOrds have been omitted.
f
 2. Significant passages pointing out differences are underlined.

 3. Comments are in brackets.

 NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY SEATO TREATY
 Washington, D.C., 4~ 1949*

 The Parties to this Treaty reaffirm The Parties to this Treaty,
 their faith in the purposes and prin-
 ciples of the Charter of the United
 Nations &~d their desire to. live in Recognizing the sovereign equality of
 peace with all peoples and all Gov- all.the Parties,
 ernments.

 Reiterating their faith in the pur-
 They are determined to safeguard the poses and principles set forth in the
 freedom, common heritage and civiliza- Charter of the United Nations and
 tion of their peoples, founded on the' their desire to live in peace \-ri th
 principles of democracy, individual all peoples and all governments,
 liberty and the rule of la\-J.

 Reaffirming that, in accordance 'with
 They seek to promote stability and the Charter of the United Nations,
 well-being in the North Atlantic area. they uphold the principle of equal
 rights and self-determination of
 peoples, and declaring that they "rill
 They are resolved to Unite their earnestly strive by every peaceful
 efforts for collective defense and for . means to promote self-government and
 the preservation of peace and security. to secure the independence of all
 countries whose peoples desire it and
 are able to undertake its responsi-
 They therefore agree to this North bilities,
 Atlantic Treaty:

 Desiring to strengthen the fabric of
 peace and freedom and to uphold the
 principles of democracy, individual
 liberty and the rule of law, and to
 promote the economic well-being and
 development of all peoples in the
 Treaty Area,

 * Effective 24 August 1949
 A-37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Intending to declare publicly and
 formally their sense of unity, so
 that any po-t ential aggressor 1"rill
 appreciate that the Parties stand
 together in the area, and,

 Desiring further to co-ordinate their
 efforts for collective defense for
 the preservation of peace and
 security,

 Therefore agree as follows:

 ARTICLE 1 ARTICLE I

 The Parties undertake, as set forth The Parties undertake, as set forth
 in the Charter of the United Nations, in the Charter of the United Nations,
 to settle any international dispute to settle any international dispute
 in 'l'Thich they may be involved by in which they may be involved by
 peaceful means in such a manner that peaceful means in such a manner that
 international peace and security and international peace and security and
 justice are not endangered, and to justice are not endangered, and to
 refrain in their international rela- refrain in their international rela-
 tions from the threat or' use of force tions from the threat or use of force
 in any manner inconsistent 'l'ri th the in any manner inconsistent with the
 purposes of the United Nations. purposes of the United Nations.

 ARTICLE 2 ARTICLE III

 The Parties will contribute toward the The Parties undertake to strengthen
r further development of peaceful and .
 friendly international relations by
 their free institutions and to co-
 operate with one another in the
 strengthening their free institutions, further development of economic
 by bringing about a better under- measures, including technical assist-
 standing of the principles upon which ance, designed both to promote
 these institutions are founded, and economic progress and social well-
 by promoting conditions of stability being and to further the individual
 and well-being. They will seek to and collective efforts of governments
 eliminate conflict in their inter- toward these ends.
 national economic policies and will
 encourage economic c')llaboration
 between any or all of them. /Jhe SEATO Treaty places more stress
 on tecm1ical assistance and social
 well-being; reversal of the order of
 the second and third articles places
 emphasis on collective defense~

 A-38 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 ARTICLE 3 ARTICLE II

 In order more effectively to achieve In order more effectively to achieve
 the objectives of this Treaty, the the objectives of this Treaty, the
 Parties, sep arately and jOintly, by Parties, separately 'and jointly, by
 means of continuous ~nd effective means of continuous and effective
 self-help and mutual aid, will main- self-help and mutual aid will main-
 tain and develop their individual tain and develop their individual
 and collective capacity to resist and collective capacity and to resist
 armed attack. armed attack and to prevent and
 counter subversive activities dire cted
 from without against their territorial
 inte grity and political stability. .

r
 LThe SEATO Treaty adds subversion as
 a contingency.. :.7
 ARTICLE 4 ARTICLE IV

 The Parties vlill consult together 2. If, in the oplnlon of any of the
 whenever, in the opinion of any of Parties, the inviolability or the
 them, the territorial integrity, integrity of the territory or the
 political independence or security sovereignty or political independ-
 of any of the Parties is threat ened. ence of any Party in the Treaty Area
 or of any other State or territory to
 which the provisions of paragraph 1
 of this Article from time to time
 apply is threatened in any way other
 than by armed attack or is affected
 or threatened by any fact or situa-
 tion which might endanger the peace
 of the area, the Parties shall con-
 sult immediately in order to agree on
 the measures which should be taken
 for the common defense.

 LThe SEATO Treaty expands upon the
 word "threatened.':'7

 ARTICLE 5

 The Parties agree that an armed 1. Each Party recognizes that aggres-
 attack against one or more of them sion by means of armed attack in the
 in Europe or North ~m e rica shall be Treaty Area against any of the Parties
 considered an attack against them or against any State or territory
 all, and consequently they agree that, vlhich the Parties by Unanimous agree-
 if such an armed attack occurs, each ment may hereafter desig,.'1ate, vrould

 A-39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of them, in exercise of the right of endanger its m'lD peace and safety,
individual or collective self-defense and agrees that it "rill in that event
recognized by Article 51 of the Char- act to meet the common danger in
ter of the United Nations, will assist accordance vTith its constitutional
the Party or Parties so attacked by processes. Measures taken under this
taking forthwith, individually and in paragraph shall be immediately
concert vii th the other Parties, such reported to the Security Council of
action as it deems n ece ssary, includ- the United Nations.
ing the use of armed force, to restore
and maintain the security of the North
Atlantic area. [The SEATO Treaty specifically covers
 non-members -- "any statel! -- this is
 not specific in the NATO Treaty.7
/:Armed force" is not specifically men-
tioned in the SEATO Treaty~

Any such armed attack and all measures
taken as a result thereof shall imme-
diately be reported to the SecQYity
Council. Such measures shall be
terminated Ivhen the Security Council
has taken the measures necessary to
restore and maintain international '
peace and security.

[This requirement is not in the SEATO
Treaty·7

 3. It is understood that no action
 on the territory of any State desig-
 nated by unanimous agreement under
 paragraph 1 of this Article or on
 any territory so designated shall be
 taken except at the invitation or
 with the consent of the government
 concerned.

 [This understanding is not specific
 in the NATO Treaty~

ARTICLE 6* ARTICLE VIn

For the purpose of Article 5;
 an armed As used in this Treaty, the I!Treaty
attack on one or more of the Parties Areal! is the general area of South-
is deemed to include an armed attack: East Asia, including also the entire

* As amended by Article 2 of the
 Protocol to the North Atla.ntic Treaty
 on the accession of Greece and Turkey.
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 on the territory of any of the Parties territories of the Asian Parties,
 in Europe or North America, on the and the general area of the South-
 Algerian Departments of France** on West Pacific not including the
 the territory of Turkey or on the Pacific area north of 21 degrees 30
 islands under the jurisdiction of any minutes north latitUde. The Parties
 of the Parties in th~ North Atlantic may, by unanimous agreement, amend
 area north of the, Tropic of Cancer; this Article to include '\vi thin the
 Treaty Area the ' territory of any
 State acceding to this Treaty in
 on the forces, vessels, or aircraft of accordance vri th Article VII or other-
 any of the Parties, when in or over ,vise to change the Treaty Area.
 these territories or any other area in
 Europe in ,vhich occupation forces of
 any of the Parties ""ere stationed on Lfhis emphasis on flexibility of
 the date when the Treaty entered into application is not in the NATO
 force or the Mediterranean Sea or the Treaty~}
r North Atlantic area north of the
t, Tropic of Cancer.

 - ARTICLE 7 ARTICLE VI

 This Treaty does not affect, and shall This Treaty does not affect and shall
 not be interpreted as affecting, in not be interpreted as affecting in
 any ""ay the rights and obligations any 'tray the rights and Obligations of
 under the Charter of the Parties any of the Parties under the Charter
 which are members of the United of the United Nations or the responsi-
 Nations, or the primary responsi- bility of the United Nations for the
 bility of the Security Council for maintenance of international peace
 the maintenance of international and security. Each Party declares
 peace and security. that none of the international
 engagements nOl'l in force beti'leen it
 and any other of the Parties or any
 ARTICLE 8 third party is in conflict 'vith the
 provisions of this Treaty, and under-
 Each Party declares that none of the takes not to enter into any inter-
 international engagements nOH in force national engagement in conflict with
 this Treaty.

 ** On 16th January, 1963, the French
 Representative made a statement to the
 North Atlantic Council on the effects
 of the independence of Algeria on cer-
 tain aspects of the North Atlantic
 Treaty. The Coun~il noted that insofar
 as the former Algerian Departments of
 France were concerned the relevant
 clauses of this Treaty had become
 inapplicable as from 3rd July, 1962.

 A-41 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 betvleen it and any other of the
 Parties or any third State is in con-
 flict with the provisions of this
 Treaty, and undertakes not to enter
 into any international engagement in
 conflict ,I/"i th this Tre aty .
f
.l ARTICLE 9 ARTICLE V

 The Parties hereby establish a coun- The Parties hereby es tablish a Coun-
 cil, on which each of them shall be cil, on which each of them shall be
 represented to consider matters con- represented, to consider matters con-
 cerning the implementation of this cerning the implementation of this
 Treaty. The Council shall be so Treaty. The Council shall provide for
 organized as to be able to meet consultation with regard to military
 promptly at any time. The Council and any other planning as the situ-
r shall set up such subsidiary bodies
 as may be necessary; in particular
 ation obtaining in the Treaty Area may
 from time to time require. The Coun-
 it shall establish immediately a cil shall be so organized as to be
 defense committee which shall recom- able to meet at any time.
 mend measures for the implementation of
 Articles 3 and 5.
 LSee also NATO #12~
 A-"RTICLE 10 ARTICLE VII

 The Parties ' may, by unanimous agree- Any other state· in a position to
 ment, invite any other European State furth er the objectives of the Treaty
 in a po s ition to further the prin- and to contribute to the security of
 ciples of this Treaty and to contrib- the area may , by unanimous agreement
 ute to the security of ,the North of the Parties, be invit ed to accede
 Atlantic area to accede to this Treaty. to this Treaty. Any State so invited
 Any state so invited may become a p arty may become a Party to the Treaty by
 to the Treaty by depositing its instru- depo s iting its instrument of accession
( . ment of accession vlith the Government with the Government of the Republic
! of the United states of Amer ica. The of the Philippines. The Government
 Government Qf the United states of of the Repub lic of the Philippines
 America will inform each of the shall inform each ·of the Parties of
 Parties of the deposit of each such the deposit of each such instrument
 instrmaent of acce ssion. of accession.

 ARTICLE 11 ARTICLE IX

 This Treaty shall be ratified and its 2. The Treaty shall be ratified and
 provisions carried out by the Parties its provlslons carried out by the
 in accordance with their respective Parties in accordance with their
 constitutional processes. The instru- respective constitutional proces ses .
 ments of ratification shall be deposited The instruments of ratification shall

I
I. A-42 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3"3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

as soon as possible ,dth the Govern- be deposited as soon as possible
ment of the United States of America, with the Government of the Republic
"Thich ,·;ill notify all the other of the Philippines, ''lhich shall
signatories of each deposit . The notify all of the other signatories
Treaty shall enter into force betvTeen of such deposit.
the States which have ratified it as
soon as the ratifications of the
majority of the signatories, includ- 3. The Treaty shall enter into force
ing the ratifications of BelgiQm, bet"ween the States which have rati-
Canada, France, Luxembourg, the fied it as soon as the instruments of
Netherlands, the United Kingdom and ratification of a majority of the
the United States, have been deposited signatories shall have been deposited,
and shall come into effect with and shall come into effect ''lith
respect to other States on the date of respect to each other State on the
the deposit of their ratifications. date of the deposit of its instrument
 of ratification.

ARTICLE 12

After the Treaty has been in force for LTouched on in Article V of SEATO.7
ten years, or at any time thereafter,
the Parties shall, if any of them so
requests, consult together for "the
purpose of revie1tTing the Treaty,
having regard for the factors then
affecting peace and security in the
North "Atlantic area, including the
development of universal as well as
regional arrangements under the Charter
of the United Nations for the main-
tenance of international peace and
security.

ARTICLE 13 ARTICLE X

After the Treaty has been ~n force for This Tre aty shall remain in force
tvTenty years, any Party may cease to indefinitely, but any Party may
be a party one year after its notice cease to be a Pa,rty one year after
of denunciation has been gi ve"n to the its notice of denQDciation has been
Government of the United States of given to the Government of the
America, "Thich 'dill inform the Republic of the Philippines, I'lhich
Governments of the other Parties of shall inform the Governments of the
the deposit of each notice of denun- other Parties of the deposit of each
ciation. notice of denunciation.

 A-43 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 [. TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 ARTICLE 14 ARTICLE XI

 This Treaty, of which the English and The English text of this Treaty is
 French texts are equally authentic , binding on the Parties, but when the
 shall be deposited in the archives Parties have agreed to the French
 of the Government of the United States text thereof and have so notified the
 of America. Duly certified copies Government of the Republic of the
 will be transmitted by that Govern- Philippines, the French text shall be
 ment to the Governments of the other equally authentic and binding on the
 signatories. Parties.

 FROM ARTICLE IX

 1. This Treaty shall be deposited
 in the archives of the Government
 of the Republic of the Philippines.
 Duly certified copies thereof shall
 be transmitted by that Government to
 the other signatories.

 UNDERSTANDING OF
 THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

 The United States of America in
 executing the present Tre aty does
 so vlith the understanding that its
 recognition of the effect of aggres-
 sion and armed attack and its agree-
 ment with reference thereto in
. I
 l Article IV, paragraph 1, apply only
 to Communist aggression but affirms
 that in the event of other aggression
 or armed attack it will consult under
 the provisions of Article IV, paragraph
 2.

 In witness vThereof the undersigned
 Plenipotentiaries have signed this
 Treaty.

 Done at Manila, this eighth day of
 September, 1954.

 A-44 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 PROTOCOL

 LOn 23 October 1954 a NATO Protocol Designat ion of States and territory
 permitted accession of the Federal as to which provisions of Article
 Republic of GermanY~7 IV and Article III are to be appli-
 cable:
 (

 ·1
 I
 The Parties to the South-East Asia
 Collective Defense Treaty unani-
 mously designate for the purposes
 of Article IV of the Treaty the
 States of Cambodia and Laos and the
 free territory under the juri~diction
 of the State of Vietnam.

 The Parties further agree that the
 above mentioned States and territory
 shalL be eligible in respect of the
 economic measures contemplated by
 Article III.

 This Protocol shall enter into force
 simultaneously with the coming into
 force of the Treaty.

 In witness whereof, the undersigned
. I
 Plenipotentiaries have signed this
 t
 Protocol to the South-East Asia
 Collective Defense Treaty.

 Done at Manila, this eighth day of
 September, 1954.

 A-45 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 I
 !
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 NATO CIVIL AND MILITARY ORGANIZATIO!':
 ~ .
 .iNO~Tr; ATLANTiC COU~~CIL I
 j

 r l
 ~ PitE~I:>ENT: QJnl~ "f'I !'U! 1~1 • 10
 '""
 CHA1P.MAN: ThO! Secl'!::;"rl Cio!r.cr:l
 1
 J L -----.-:;w---- .~_ J
 ! ~
 ...........,oc"""" "' =QWCO.~i~~~-:~:::r:~~~-~~-.~
 ....,._""".x""_"c=...""""'___

 ~ ~. IIHERNATlO N.'C \ ~
 ~
 2--_ _
 STAH/SECRETA!l,IAi' .~~
 ~

 " STANDING GP'OU~
 CO UNCI~ COMMIITW;
 -~-- ~
 1---- .
 REPP.ESEN:Ai:VE

 CA:-lADA- U.S.
AWED COM:-1AND EUROPE ALLIED COMMAND ATLANTIC
 REGIONAL rLA.'lNING GROUP

 L

 A-46 TOP SECRET - SENSITIVE

 .,
 i
 j
 P R I N C I PAL C 0 til M . -:::: 5 O F TH E COU N C I L

 1 NO RT H ATLANTIC CO U N CIL
 1
 ,
 i
 I

 -I
 l
 1I
 =ut~
 - .~ ~
 cr=:l~-= ~~.~--=
 1 I I

 ,;
 I
 1
 ~
 ~
 COMMtiT

 EJ
 OF POllT CAL
 ADVISE \S
 COMMITTEE
 OF ECONOMIC
 ADVISERS
 ANNUAL REVIEW
 COMMliTEE
 [ ARMAMENTS
 COMMITTEE
 SCIENCE
 COMHITI"e
 INFAASTRUCTua"
 COMMITI"E
 NATO PIPELlI':"
 COMMITIEE

 I
, 'j
 j
 '---
 1 COMMliTEE COMMITTEE

 i
 J O N INFORMATION
 AND CU " TU RAl
 CIVILIAN BUDGET
 COMMITIEE I
 MILITA RY BUDGET
 COlMMliTEE
 OF EUROPEAN
 AIRSPACE I Z
 'I
 1
 RELATIONS
 "-
 """"----
 ! CO-ORDINATION
 I
 I
 I 80
 '"Or!>
 " I
 ! .., c.
 ~ , <II
 ~
 1
 'j SENIOR CIVIL
 EMERGENCY
 I o~ <II
 ~
 _.
 :l
 Zr!>
 1I
 PLANNING
 ,~__ ~OI1t1 I!TE~ __
 ,- Q..
 3 "0
 J IJ'~.
 ~~,=
 ~

 l
 ,I r- ~~ --.""'"
 f
 :: tr1
 z~
 8 g,
 t
 j O'
 ~
 .
 I
 I
 , 0' <
 'j III : W~

 [
 PLANI\; IN G i :lARD PETROLEUM
 I CIVil DEFENCE
 PLANNING SOARD
 FOR CO-ORCINATIN G
 FOR EURO EAN MEDICAL
 PLANNING
 i wO
 f- ..,
 1 COMMITIEE
 OCEAN SHIPPING COMMITIEE
 IN LAND SU FACE COMMITIEE
 COMMITTEE i . ..,
 0'0-
 ~
 TRANSPO RT
 l to
 1 I-j
 ~ ':<: w
,j 0 Z~
 ~ '"d ! ~p,

 [
 IN DUSTRIAL FOOD AND
 I MANPOWER CIVIL
 t)C/J
 CJ)
 PLANNING
 COMMITIEE
 GRICUlTURE
 PLANNING
 PLANNING AVIATION I t)g
 :1 COMMITIEE

 - ntr.1
 I
 COMMITIEE ~ ::::::!".
 ~ 'sm ,...
 ~
 0
 ::s

 ii ~
 tr.1
 I-j
 I
 NW
 O~

 .1
 I
 1
,1
 !_ _ Itr.1
 CJ)

 .....
 i
 I
 ,/
 Z
 CJ)
 ~"~-""-., ----..--~

 ~
 I-j
 ~

 <:
 tr.1
 NATO INTERNATIONAL STAFFISEC"RETARIAT

I ,,"
I. SECRETARY GENI:RAl
 CHAIRMAN OF THE COUNCIL

I DEPUTY SECRETARY GENeRAL

 OffICE Of TH! S!C.\ET.v.Y
 C EN~AAI.

 UiVK! 0' THf flNAl'C;IAI. I'tMONS!I.AN:) z
 a~
 cONn.O ~lf. 1I. AO~NlsrIV.:nON Sl '.V1 ~!

 'i::i~
 (3 iii
 <..;C.
 ()
 (1)
 .... :ll
 _.
 '"
 '"

 ZI':>
 c:: c..
 !)(ECUTlVE P'Ol.!TICAl ECONOMICS
 PP,OOUcnON.
 lCG~snCS AND
 DrV I ~10N
 3 -0
 SECP.ETAflJAT AFFAIRS AND FINANce
 INFi'..ASTP.'JCTU?E
 O~ Sc!ENn!1C
 A.cFAI~S
 CT~
 CIVI$ION DIVISIO N (1)
 OIVlSJO'l :; tTl
 ><
 Z(1)
 z8
 tI :::'.
 ~ <

 B
 I 0\(1)
 ~ ~O
 -J
 ~3.
 • (1)
 1J:i:'
 '< w
 I· .. Ul
 I
 1· Ztv
 ~ .0\
 tic/)
 (1)
 tI~
 p.j
 _.
 .... 0
 ~ ::>
 H tv W
 O w
 o
 ~
 ((l
 tx1
 ()
 ~
 tx1
 1-3 "P~~~... ~~,--:or--.~--""-"""-

 ((l
 tx1
 Z
 ~
 1-3
 ~

 <:
 tx1
 1
i
 J

j THE MILITARY ORGANiZATION OF NATO
1
 i
I! r
 l
 J
 NORTH I'

 I'===
 ! ATLANTiC I

 . COUNC1L {'
 1
 Paris -----, I
 r·

 ~--'- ~'f"' I
 I
 !!
 !
 I Z
1 I. 8e;,
 I "CI~
:j MILITARY COMMITTEE ~. [
 '"_.
 j ..
 STANDING GROUP
 r---.J Paris
 """,'O,'OI GROU'
 REPRESENTATIVE
 ~
 ()
 ..... :=J
 Z~
 c: c..
 3 -g
.-\ 0"...,
 U.S. _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ J~
 J Wushln~to" ~ tTi
 .. ><
1 Z~

 ~
.\
 --o NATO DEFENCE COLLEG::: (Paris) z8
 tI ::1'.
 <
 1 . - { ) MILITARY AGENCY FOR STANDARDIZATION (London) o-~

 j~ --0 COMMUNICATIONS A.GENCIES IN EUROPE (Paris·London) t30
 f- ...,

 1 I --0 ADVISORY GROUP FOR AERONAUTICAL RESEARCH 0-0-
 . ~

 l ~ AND DEVELOPMENT (Paris) ttl:'
 i III '<
 ..
 ZN
 t,;.)
 V1

.j CHANNSL COMMITIEE
 ~ .0-
 tic/)
 1 y London tI~
 ~
 _.
 ALLIED COMMAND A LLIED COMMAND CANADA-U.S.

 I
 '1 ~

 "1 ..... 0
 WROP. ATLANTIC REGIONAL PLANNING GROUP

 ~
 ·1 (P ::l
 i ALLIED COMMAND CHAN'5JEL
 Nt,;.)
 Ow
 I~
 ~ Pari, France Norfolk' u.s. Portsmouth/Northwood U.K. Y/Jshingcon U.S.
 s=m?JjIT3."O'r ........ ~=X1V c:renz- .==:=,....". ~

 1
 .. In Washington D. c., U.S., when In Permanent Session
 CIl
 M
 ()
 ::0
 '-
 M
 I~

 CIl
 M
 Z
 CIl
 H
 ~
 H

 <
 M
 \
,
I
J A L LI E D COM I'vUd\! D E U R 0 ~") Eo
i
.1
1
 II SUPREME ALLIED COMMAND.ER. E U R O r L
 Paris france
.~
 t
1
 j
 j
 I __
 L~
 NAVAL DEPUTY
 ~,_
 DEPUTY SUPREME ALLIED
 COMMANDER
 AI~ DEPUTY

 ] ',.:,
 I
.J' I
.1
 I
11 I I . !
 i
 Z
 8e;,
 ~
i
 COMMANDER-iN -CHiEF
 ALLIED FORCES f COMMANDER-IN-CHiEF
 ALLIED FORCES ~
 COMMANDER-IN-CHiEF
 ALLIED FORCES
 COM MAN DERol N o c j
 ALLIED FORCES
 i
 l
 ~!
 >-cIrt>
 ..., c..
 ~

 b
 l P 0
 ~.
-I,
 1
 NORTHERN EUROPE
 Kolsaas Norway
 CENTRAL EUROPE
 Font~incbleou . France
 SOUTHERN EUROPE
 ~ NOP~~s italy] Malta
 MEDITERP.ANEAN
 ~
 I

 t I
 ~
 () _.
 'J}
 til
 ~
 Z ~
 1'""1"

 1
.j
 ~-
 r, i. c:
~1 f 3 -g
 l 0-...,
 14
 W
 COC1MANDER COMMANDER
 ~
 CO MMANDER
 COMMANDE R ~ ><
 tTi
 ~ ALLIED LAND FORCES ::
 1 . ALLIED LAND FORCES
 ~
 !---ii ALLIED LAND FORCES
 CENTRAL EUI\O~E BSOUTI-!EASTERN EUROP"
 COM MANOER - GIBRALTAR-
 MEDITERRANEAN I Z~
 1l>
.1 ~ 0,10
 NORWAY
 NorwJY Fontainebleau Francc ~ Izm;r Turkey
 WESTERN
 f-- Glbral'ar t z8
 1I MEDITERRANEAN I t::1 :c.
 8~
 I' _-
 I
 ~--""""--=::";'

 ~ H:>-
 . Algicrs
 ) 00
 ~
 COM MANDER COMM ANDER P. CO MMANDER COMMANDER , ,-,-,0
 O\~
 \ f- ...,
 j ALLIED LAND FORCES
 I--
 ALLIED AIR FORCES ~S ALLIED LAND FORCES
 " ~ COMMANDER I-- CENTRAL
 i
 DENMARK ~
 : to:
1
 CENTRAL EUROPE SOUTHEI\N EUf\OPE MEDITeRRANEAN
 EASTERN
 ~~
 Dcnmark Fontainebleau Fra nce '0Verona ¥"}.;/cal y ~ MEDITERRANEAN f-- , N" plcs I'aly
 I ':< ~
 . Athcns Greece { Ztv
101
 1
 1
 t-3
 '"d
 COMMANDER
 ALLIED AIR FORCES
 NORTHERN EUROPE
 Ko/sa::s
 - ......,.=orrrn.,
 NOTW.Oy
 U COMM ANDER
 . ALLIED NAVAL FORCES
 ~ C"NTRALEUROPE
 R Fontaincblc(;JU
 CY'C
 Franc.e
 5"'TT
 I~:11 ALLIED
 COM~lANDER
 AIR FORCES
 SOUTHERN EUROPE
 11...;:,::,':'.__ Italy
 l.
 ooMM'N'"
 NORTHEAST
 MEDITERPcANEAN
 .~k_ara ___ TurkeY'
 L COMMANDER
 SOUTHEAST
 MWITERRANEAN
 Alal ca
 [
 I,
 I

 t.
 ~ .0\
 HC/)
 V

 ~
 ~
 t::1~
 ,....
 ~
 ~ '-'-'
 ~.
 0
 ::l
-·1 Ul
 M
 CO MMANDER COMMANDER f 0,-,-,
 ALLIED NAVAL FORCES L...-..;j NAVAL STRIKING f
-1.1 ()
 ~ :;0
 .. NORTHEi'.N EUROPE
 Kolscas Norway
 " AND SUP?ORT FOf\CES
 SOUTHERN EUROPE
 !
 1 M -..... Naple, Ita I:. I
 !,
 ] t-3
 I
 j Ul
 1 M
 .j Z
 ~-- ~ -.
 t-3
 H

 <
 M
 \' f...1J... 'r':-'; .lIl·"'," ,,; '11..{

 i
 1
 1 ALL lED COM tv, P. ~\! D A T L A hI Ti l:
 i
 SUPREME ALLIED
 j
 r
 COMMANDER. ATLANTIC

 j
 iq I
 NJrrolr

 DEPUTY SUPREME
 COM MANDER
 - - - - - - --------
 U.S.A.

 •

 j
 ~ ~" ~ .'M 1
 i

.f I Z
I,
 J
 COM MAtWER· IN·CHI"f
 WESTERN ATLANTIC MEA
 COMMANDER
 STRiKiNG FLEET ATLANTIC
 COMMANDER..JN·CHIEF
 EASTERN ATLANTIC AREA Sc
 ""dg
.1
 Norfolk U.s.A. N~w York U.S.A. Northwood U.K.
 a E"
i
 , •
 =.
 (")
 ~
 OIl
 (1) OIl _.
 ::ll
J COMMANDEitt MARITIME AIR Z c..
 ,... rt>
i

j~
 COMI1AND"R
 OCEAN
 SUB·AREA - I
 EASTERN AllLANTIC AREA
 North\vood
 .
 -
 U.K. COMMANDER
 SUB MARINE FOil,CE
 EASTERN ATLANTIC AREA
 J 3 "0
 O'~
 ~
 .. t'I1
 ><
 Norfolk U.s.A. cCOMMAND"R UJ<. Z(1)
j ~ I Caspart
 . "" zg
j -..o COMMANDER
 I NORTHERN
 CI ::1".
 I SUa·AREA
 0\(1)
 <
•1 NORTH AM=RICAN Ro'yth U.K.
 I
 i-- t30
~
 ANTI· SUBMARINE DEfENCE
 .. I (
 COMMAt-:DER >- ..,
 FORCE ATLANTIC
 I rMARITIME AIR 0\0.
 • (1)
 1--
j
·1
 COMt1ANDER
 CANADIAN ATLANTIC
 su a·AK~
 1--
 I
 1
 I
 Ro,yth
 NO:\'THERN SUB·AREA

 - U.K. COMMANDER
 BAY OF BISCAY
 ,
 to:'w
 '<
 ..
 ZN
 t..Il

! ~~ _______
 _._____~_C!:..n:!~ I r--- 8re5~
 SUB·AREA
 France
 ::E .0\
 1 ~ I
 COMMAND"R
 CENTRAL
 i ClCIJ
 (1)
·l
j
 o
 '1:l
 I
 I
 Plymou,h
 SUB·AREA
 U.K. I CI~
 !OJ
 ~
 - .
 0

j Ul
 I
 L_.
 CO MM~NDER MARITlr1E AIR
 CE.'1TRAL SUB·AREA
 !I ~
 N~
 Ow
 :J

 trJ

I n
 ::a
 trJ
 Plymouth 11K. I
 I
iI '"i I

 r
..,.. · 1Ul
 trJ
 )
 Z
 Ul
 H
 ~
 H

 -<trJ
 . )
 \
 \

 .
 1
 1
 1
 ALLIED COt"1MAND CHAt\!NEL
 1
 j CHP.N NEL C9NMlTTEE
 !. U.K.
 i
 .i
 ~ "ey,
 [.
j ALLIED COMMAND!:R-IN-CHIEF
 CHANNEL
 t
 r
 J
 l
 Portsm~uth
 , -
 U.K.

 Z
'j
 1
 COMMANDER
 , 8e;,
 "CI~
J
1 r--
 ALLIED MARITIME AIR' FORCE
 CHANNEL 1-, ~. [
 I ~ '"_.
 '_~
1 Northwood U.K.
 ()
 ..... :=J

 ~ "I , "'""~===""""""'"
 1 I Z~
 I1 ___II~~i" c: c..

11 ~ I
 ~"-"""'T'-~''''r==~ ; 3 -g
 0'...,
 ~ tri
 ~COMMANDER
 j ,
 I Z~
 ><
 I z8
 CHEf.BOU~G sua-AREA
 COMMAND:;f\ COt1MANDE!'. COMMANDER

 1~
 I tI ::1'.
 BENELUX SUB-Ai\EA NORE SUa·AREA BREST sua-AREA
 11 I <
1~
 CHANNEl. CHANNEl. CHANNEL CHANNEl. CHANNel
 II I o-~

 Den Helder Neth. ~ Rosy,h U.K. I I ~ Plymouth U.K.,; Cherbourg Freoce Brut Fronce t30
 &,.;::;-.-~.== ..
 ~I ~ ''?''i''"l't''C'MXn7
 f-
 0-0.
 ...,

j - ~
 1
 ~
 ttl:'
 '< t,;.)
 j COMMAND !:R.
 MARITIME A:R MARITIME AIR
 ..
 ZN
 V1

'1 NORE SUS·AREA _ PI.YMOUTH SUa-AREA ~ .0-
 CHANNEL ~I CHANNEl. tic/)
 ~
 Rosyth U.K. Plymo"'" U.K. tI~
 ~

 .....
 _.
 0
 (P ::l
 Nt,;.)
 ) Ot,;.)

 l o ~ \
 ~

 1 ~
 1;
 \
 '1 M
• n
 ~
 1~~M
 ~
 M
 Z
 ~
 H
 ~
 H
 <:
 M
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 '1
 l
 '; .

 r
 -1('* 1.' ,~ ,~ , ~ * ,~1.' * y."~ * ,~~,
 y., ,;, '" ,,'< ,;, y., ':' >:: ::' [
 SEATO COU)J"CIL
 .1
 \ "***
 * L -__________________,~~--~------------'

 r __~!~_______________ ____________________ 1___________________-.
- .[ . Secretary G~n e ral ~----------~
 r______________________
 Council Repr esenta tives
 __________________
 ~

- 1- '
 , -- - -: ----- ~- I .. . Perm anent vVo:cking Group

 ,I "

 Deputy Secretary-Gener8.l
 r - Budget Sub-Comm.i'~t ee
- I

 .
 t.

 , L_- I I
 Committee of Eco~omic
 Experts
 . l
 '

 ,
 ' Commi.ttee on Information
 Cultura l, Education
 and Labour Activities
 Committee of Sec urity .
 Experts

 • t

 .t

 b Central
 3, e.rv~.c~s
 Cultural
 Relations
 Econom ic
 Servic es
 Public
 Information
 Res earch
 Service
 .\
 Security
 Office
[ Office Office Offic e Office
 . Ofllce

 ***'~ *1.'When Council is in session
 - - - - - -Chairman of P. W.G.

 A-50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 .,
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET' Sensitive

 i -.
 . .
 . ,,
 ;

 SEA TO COUNC IL
 . [ ._ _ , - - - - - - - - J

 I II
 I
 ~: --- - -- ~ - - -:- - - --- - --'1_______ M_i_ll_.t_a_r_Y,_A_'
 Group _d_V_is_e_I_'::i_'_ _ _ _- l I
 I,
 :
 I
 I· . r
f I
 Chief, SEATO Military
 I
 I Planning Office
 i ·

 .I
 I
 I

 I ,-~-·_·_.!I:r
 I . .
 I
 ,
 I
 f I
 Senior
 Planner s
 I :Milital'Y
 Lcretariat
 Administrative
 Staff
 Deputy, PIO
 (Military) ! SE;!C uriiy
 Co-or dinator
 ___..-1"
 ~cmmitt[ec I L
 Planning
 Teams Senior Planners also act as the representa tives
 ------:--- -in the Military Planning Office of their respective
 Military Advisers

 A-5l TOP SECRET
 -------- Sensitive

f.
 . .