The Pentagon Papers (Part -IV-B-4) (U.S. Department of Defense, 1971)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration: Report of the Office of the Secretary of Defense Vietnam Task Force (The Pentagon Papers) (https://nara-media-001.s3.amazonaws.com/arcmedia/research/pentagon-papers/Pentagon-Papers-Part-IV-B-4.pdf).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 IV.B Evolution ofthe War (26 Vols.)
Counterinsurgency: The Kennedy Commitments, 1961-
 1963 (5 Vols.)
4. Phased Withdrawal of U.S. Forces in Vietnam, 1962-64
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 EVOLUT ION or 'rIIE HAR

 PHASED vlI'l'I-IDRAWlIL OF U. S. FORCES

 Foreword
 This monograph traces planning for cutting back numbers of U.S.
military personnel in Vietnam.

 - Summary and Analysis

 - Chronology
 - Table of Contents and Outline

 - Footnotes

 0295
 Sec Def CO~ ~ • X---------------
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

\.
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 SUMMARY

 A formal planning and budgetary process for the phased withdrawal
 of U.S. forc es from Vietnam was begun amid the euphoria and optimism of'
 July 1962, and was ended in the pessimism of March 1964 . Initially, t he
 specific objectives were : (1) to draw d01Vll U.S. military personnel then
 engaged in advisory, training , and support efforts from a FY 64 peak of
 12,000 to a FY 68 bottoming out of 1,500 (just HQ, MAAG); and (2) to re-
 duce MAP from a FY 64 peak of $180 million to a FY 69 base of $40 .8 million .
 South Vietnamese forces were to be trained to perform all the functions then
 being carried out by U. S. personnel. What the U.S . G. was a.ctually trying
 to accomplish during this period can be described in either or both of
 two ways : (1) a r eal desire and attempt to extricate the U.S. from dir ect
 military involvement in the war and to make it a war which the GVN would
 have to l earn to vrin, and (2) straight-forward contingency planning and
 the use of a political- managerial t echniq.,ue to SlOV1 down pressures for
 greater U. S. inputs. A blend of the vTish embodied in the first explana-
 tion and the hard-headedness of the second seems plausible .

 Needless to say, the phase-out never came to pass . The Diem coup
 with the resulting political instability and deterioration of the military
 situation soon vTere to lead U. S. decision- makers to set aside this planning
 proce ss . An ostensible cut-back of 1000 men did take place in December
 1963, but this was essentially an accounting exercise -- cmd the U. S.
 force level prior to the reduction had already reached 16,732 in October
 1963 · By December 1964, U.S . strength had risen to 23,000 and further
 deployments were on the ,'lay .

 l1hat, then, did the whole phased -withdrawal exercise accomplish?
 It may have impeded. demands for mor e men and money, but this is doubtful .
 If the optlifiistic reports on the situation in SVN were to be believed,
 and they apparently were, little more would have been req.,uested . It may
 have frightened the GVN, but it did not induce Diem or his successors to
 reform the political apparatus or make RVNAF fight hard er . It may have
 contributed, hOvTever, to public charges about the Administration ' s credi -
 bility and over-opti.mism about the end of the conflict. Despi te the care-
 fully worded vJhite House announcement of the phase-out policy on October 2,
 1963, tentative Johnson Administration judgments came to be regarded by
 the public as' firm predictions. While this announcement made clear that
 t'he U. S. effort would continue "until the insu.r.gency has been suppressed
 or until the national security forces of the GVN are capable of suppressing
 it," the public tended to focus on the prognosis ,vhich follovTed -- "Secretary
 McNamara and General Taylor r eported their judgment that the major part
 of the U. S. military task can b e completed by the end of 1965 .... " In

 . i TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

August 1964, Mr . McNamara further explained the policy: "We have said --
as a matter of fact , I say today -- as our training missions are completed ,
vre will bring back the training forces ."

 Quite apart from what was actually accomplished by the phase-out
policy and the costs in terms of domest ic political per ceptions of Adminis -
tration statements on Vietnam, there are some important lessons to be
learned from this exercise . What was the U.S. rationale behind the policy?
Was it sound, feasible , and consistent with statements of national objec -
tives? By what policy and programmatic means were we trying to bring
about the desired results? Were thes e , in fact , the most appropriate
and effective vehicles? How did the intelligence and r eporting system
in Vietnam help or hi nder policy formulation? Why was not the Diem coup
in its darkening aftermath grasped as the opportunity to r e-examine policy
and unamb iguously to decide to phase out, or to do whatever was deemed
neces sary? .

 The rationale behind the phased withdrawal policy '-las by and l arge
internally consistent and sensibl e .

 To put Vietnam in the perspect ive of other U. S.
 world interests . Vietnam, at this time, \'las not
 the focal point of attention in Washington ; Berlin
 and Cuba were . Part of this exercise \Vas to make
 clear that U.S. interests in Europe and i n the
 western hemisphere came first . Even i n terms of
 Southeast Asia itself, Laos , not Vietnam, was the
 central concern . So, the phas e-out policy made
 the kind of sense that goes along with the struc -
 turing of priorities.

 To avoid an open - ended Asian mainl and land war .
 Even though violated by U.S. i nvolvement in the
 Korean war, this was a central tenet of U.S.
 national security policy and domestic politi cs .
 The notion of the bottomless Asian pit, the
 difference in outlook about a human life, were
 well under stood .

 To plan for the contingency that events might force
 withdrawal upon us. Seen i n this light, the planning
 process was prudent ial preparation .

 To treat the insurgency as fundamentally a Vietnamese
 matter, b est solved by the Vietname se themselves .
 Most U.S. deci.sion-makers had well-d eveloped doubts
 about the efficacy of us ing "vlh i te faced" soldiers
 to fight Asians . This view was invariably coupl ed
 publ icly and priva tely loTi th statements like this
 one made by Secretary McNamara : " I personally

 ii- TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 believe that this is a war that the Vietnamese must
 fight ... I don't believe we can take on that combat task
 for them. I do believe we can carry out training . We
 can provide advice and logistical assistance ."

 To increase the pre ssure on the GVN to make the necessary
 reforms and to make RVNAF fight harder by making the
 extent and future of U,S, support a little more tenuous.
 This was explicitly stated in State's instructions to
 Ambas sador Lodge on how to handle the White House state-
 ment of October, 1963 : "Actions are designed to indi -
 cate to Diem Government our displeasure at its political
 policies and activities and to create significant uncer-
 tainty in that government and in key Vietnamese groups
 as to future intentions of United States ." In other
 words, phased wi thdra"ral was thought of as a bargaining
 counter with the GVN.

 To put the lid on inevitable bureaucratic and political
 pressures for increased U.S, involvement and inputs into
 Vietnam. It was to be expected and anticipated that
 thos e intimately involved in the Vietnam problem vlOuld
 be wanting more U,S. resources to handle that problem .
 Pressures for greater effort, it was reasoned, eventu-
 ally would come into play unless counteracted . What
 Secretary McNamara did "ras to force all theater justi-
 fications for force build-ups into tension "rith long-
 term phase-down plans . On 21 December, 1963, in a memo
 to the President after the Diem coup, Mr . McNamara urge d
 holdi ng the line: "u. S. resources and personnel caml0t
 usefully be substantially incr eased . .. . "

 To deal vrith international and domestic criticism and
 pressures . While Vietnam was not a front burner item,
 there were those who already had begun to question and
 offer non-consensus alternatives. During 1963, for
 example, both General de Gaulle and Senator Mansfield
 were s·trongly urging the neutralization of Vietnam.

 It is difficult to sort out the relative importance of these varying
rationales ; all were important . Paramount perhaps, were the desires to
limit U.S. involvement, and to put pressur~ on the GVN for greater efforts .
And, the rationa)es were all consistent with one another . But they did not
appear as being wholly consistent with other statements of our national objec -
tives in Southeast As ia. For exam~le on July 17, 1963, President Kennedy
sal' d : "we are not going to withdraw
 .1=' ,
 from Lbringing about a stable govern-
ment there, carrying on a struggle to maintain its national independencB ·
In my opinion, for us to withdraw from that effort vrould mean a collapse
not only of South Vietnam, but Southeast Asia ." He added : "We can think
of Vietnam as a piece of strategic real estate . It's on the corner of main-
land Asia, across the East -West,trade routes, and in a position that would

 iii TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

make it an excellent base for further Communist aggression against the
rest of free Asia. " In a September 9 , 1963 intervieH, the President stated :
"I believe r the domino theory '7. I think that the struggle i s close
enough. China is so large, looms up high just beyond the frontiers, that
i f South Vietnam went , it would not only give them an improved geograp0 ic
position for a guerrilla assault on Malaya, but i-TOuld also give the im-
pression that the wave of the future in Southeast Asia was China and the
Communists." One could argue that such an unequivocally strong statement
of strategic importance would not be consistent i'lith any sort of phase -
out proposal short of a clear-cut victory over the cornmunists . Despite
the caveats about it being essentially a South Vietnamese struggle, President
Kennedy ' s statements were very strong . And, insofar as the U.S . was inter -
ested in greater leverage on the GVN, these statements tended to reduce
U. S. bargaining pow'er because of the explicit and vital nature of the
commitment .

 The rationales behind the phased ,vithdrawal.policy were incorporated
into a formal progra..rrnning and planning process that began in July 1962
and ended on 27 March 196~ . It was at the Honolulu Conference on 23 July
1962, the same day that the 14-nation neutralization declaration on Laos
was formally signed, that the.Secretary of Defense on guidance from the
President put the planning machine in motion . Noting that " tremendous
progress " had been made in South Vietnam and that it might be difficult
to retain public support for U. S. operations in Vietnarn i ndefinitely,
Mr . McNamara directed that a comprehensive long range program be developed
for building up SVN military capability and for phasing - out the U. S. role .
He asked that the planners assume that it would require approximately three
years, that is, the end of J-965 , for the RVNAF to b e trained to the point
that it could cope vlith the VC . On 26 July, the JCS formally directed
CINCPAC to develop a Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam (CPSVN) in accor-
dance with the Secretary ' s directives . Thus began an intricate, involved
and sometimes arbitrary bargaining process, involving mainly MACV, the
Joint Staff, and ISA . There were hlO main pegs that persisted throughout
this process : MAP planning for the support and build-up of RVNAF, and
dralv-downs on U. S. advisory and training personnel.

 The fir st COMUSY~CV CPSVN was floated on 19 January 1963 · It envisioned
MAP for FY 1963-1964 at a total of $405 million . The total for FY 1965-
1968 was $673 million . The RVNAF force level 'was to peak in FY 64 at
458,000 men . U.S. personnel in SVN were to drop from a high of 12.2 thou-
sand in FY 65 to 5 . 9 thousand in FY 66, bottoming out in FY 68 at 1.5
thousand (Hq MAAG ). No sooner was this first CPSVN cranked into the policy
machinery than it conflicted with similar OSD/ISA planning . This conflict
between lSA/OSD guidance and COMUSMACV/Joint Staff planning was to be
continued throughout the life of the CPSVN .

 Secretary McNamara opposed General Harkins version of the plan for
a variety of reasons : (1) it programme d too many RVNAF than were train-
able and supportable; (2) it involved weaponry that vas too sophisticated;
(3) i t did not fully take account of the fact that if the insurgency came
into control in FY 65 as anticipated, the U.S . }fJAP investment thereafter

 iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

), •.
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 should be held at no more than $50 million per year; (4) the U.S . phase-
 out was too slow, and the RVNAF training had to be speeded up. In other
 words, Mr. McNamara wanted both a more rapid U.S. withdrawal of personnel,
 and a faster reduction in U.S . military/economic support .

 The Secretary's views prevailed. The emhodiment of Mr . McNamara ' s
 desire to quicken the pace of phase-out plannin~ was embodied first in a
 Model M plan prepar ed by the JCS and later in what came to be ce.lled the
 Accelerated Model Plan of the CPSVN. The Accelerated Plan provided for
 a rapid phase - out of the bulk of U. S. military personnel. It also pro-
 vided for building up GVN forces at a faster pace , but at a more reduced
 scale . ~1AP costs for FY 1965-1969 totaled $399 .4 million, or nearly $3 00
 million Imver than the original projection .

 All of this planning began to take on a kind of absurd quality as
 the situation in Vietnam deteriorated drastically and visibly . Strangely,
 as a result of the public White House promise in October and the power of
 the wheels set in motion, the U.S . did effect a 1000 man withdrawal i n
 December of 1963. All the planning for phase-out, however, was either
 ignored or caught up in the new thinking of January to March 1964 that
 preceded NSA11288 . The thrust of this document was that greater U.S.
 support was needed in SVN. Mr . McNamara identified these measures as
 those that "will involve a limited increase in U.S. personnel and in
 direct Defense Department costs. " He added : "More significantly they
 involve significant increases in Military Assistance Program costs .... ,"
 plus "additional U. S. economic aid to support the incr eased GVN budget ."
 On 27 March 1964, CINCPAC was instructed not to t ake any further action
 on the Accelerated Plan. Quickly, requests for more U. S. personnel poured
 into Washington . The planning process was over, but not forgotten .
 Secretary McNamara stated in his August 1964- testimony on the Tonkin Gulf
 cri sis that even tode.y " if our training missions are completed, we will
 bring back the training forces ."

 While the phase-out policy was overtaken by the sinking after-effects
 of the Diem coup, it is important to understand that the vehicles chosen
 to effect that policy - - MAP planning, RVNAF and U. S. force levels --
 were the right ones. - They Ivere programmatic and, therefore, concrete and
 visible. No better way could have been found to convince those in our
 own government and the l eaders of the GVN that we were serious about limit-
 ing the U. S. commitment and thrmving the burden onto the South Vietnamese
 themselves . The public announcement of the policy, on Octob er 2, 1963,
 after the McNa...rnara-Taylor trip to Vietnam was also a wise choice . Even
 though this announcement may have contributed to the so - called "credibility
 gap, " publication was a necessity: Without it, the formal and classified
 planning procesG would have seemed to be not.hing more than a drill .

 While the choice of means was appropriate for getting a handle on
 the problem, it proceeded from some be.sic unrealities . First, only the
 most Mic8.\vberesque predictions could have l ed decision-makers in Washing-
 ton to believe that the fight age.inst the guerrillas "lYould have clearly
 turned the corner by FY 65 . Other nations ' experience in internal "Tar -
 fare pointed plainly in the other direction . with. more propitious

 v TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

circumstances, e.g. isolation from sanctuaries, the Philippine and Malayan
insurgencies each took the better part of a dozen years to bring to an
end .

 Second, there I-vas an unrealistic contradiction within the CPSVN it-
self. As directed by Secretary McNamara, U. S. MAP was to decrease as -
RVNAF increased . In practical terms, MAP costs should have been programmed
to increase as the South Vietnamese Army increased, and as they themselves
b egan to bear most of the burden. The desire to keep MAP costs down after
FY 65 could, at best, be perceived as a budgeting or programgnrumick not a
serious pOlicy.

 Three, the political situation in South Vietnam itself should ha.ve
prompted more realistic contingency plans against failure of the Vietnamese, .
in order to give the U. S. some options other than what appeared as precipi-
tous withdrawal . The intelligence and reporting systems for Vietnam during
this period must bear a principal responsibility for the unfounded opti-
mism of U.S. policy. Except for some very tenuous caveats, the picture
was repeatedly painted in terms of progress and success .

 In the July 1962 Honolulu Conference the tone was set. Secretary
McNamara asked COMUSMACV how long it would take before the VC could be ex-
pect ed to be eliminated as a significant force . In r eply, COMUSMACV esti-
mated about one year from the time RVNAF and other forces became fully
operational and began to press the VC in all areas . Mr . McNamara 'ilaS told
and believed that there had been " tremendous progress " in the past six
months. This theme was re-echoed in April of 1963 by' COMUSMACV and by
the intelligence community thx'ough an NIE. All the statistics and evalu-
ations pointed to GVN improvement. While noting general progress, the
NIE stated that th~ situation remains flexible . Even as late as July
1963 a rosy picture was being painted by DIA and SACSA. The first sug-
gestion of a contrary evaluation within the bureaucracy came from INR .
Noting disquieting statistical trends since July, an unpopular INR memo
stated that the "pattern showed steady decline over a period of more than
thre e months duration ." It was greeted with a storm of disagreement,
and in the end was disregarded .

 The first, more balanced evaluation came with the McNamara -Taylor
trip report late in September and October, 1963. While it called the
political situation "deeply seriOUS, " even this report was basically opti -
mistic .about the situation, and saw little danger of the political crisis
affecting the prosecution of the lvar.

 Not until after the Diem coup, the assassination of President Kennedy,
and the December Vietnam trip of Secretary McNamara 'ilaS the Vietnam s i tua -
tion accurately assessed . In Secretary MCNamara ' s December memo to the
President, after his trip, he wrote : "The situation is very disturbing.
Current trends, unless reversed in the next 2-3 months, 'iTill lead to a
neutralization at best and more likely to a communist - controlled state. "
One of the most serious deficiencies he found VlaS a "grave reporting vleak-
ness on the U. S. side ." Mr . McNamara ' s judgment, apparently , was not

 vi TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

1·
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 predominant . He noted in the concluding paragraph of his memo that he
 tl may be overly pessimistic, inasmuch as the ambassador, COMUSMACV, and
 General Minh v,ere not discouraged and look forward to significant improve-
 ments in January .tI

 By 6 March 1964 when another major Secret~ry of Defense Conference
 convened at CINCPAC Headquarters, the consensus Has the the military situa-
 tion was definitely deteriorating. The issue was no longer whether there
 was or Has not satisfactory progress; the question vTaS how much of a set-
 back had there been and what "ivas needed to make up for it . Mr . McNamara
 observed that attention should nOi,r be focused on near term objectives
 of providing for necessary greater U. S. support . It was finally agreed
 that the insurgency could be expected to go beyond 1965 .

 The intelligence and reporting problem during this period cannot b e
 explained ai"8,Y . In behalf of the evaluators and assessors, it can be
 argued that their report ing up until the Diem coup had some basis in fact .
 The situation may not have been too bad until December 1963 . Honest and
 trained men in Vietnam looking at the problems ,,,ere reporting what they
 believed reality to be . In retrospect , they were not only wrong, but more
 importantly, they were influential . The Washington decision-makers could
 not help but be guided by these continued reports of progress .

 Phased witbdrawal vlaS a good policy tbat was being reasonably well
 executed . In the way of our Vietnam involvement , it "ioTaS overtaken by
 events . Not borne of deep conviction in the necessity for a U. S. with-
 drawal or in the necessity of forcing the GVN to truly carry the load ,
 i t Has bound to be submerged in the rush of events . A policy more deter
 mined might have used the pretext and the fact of the Diem coup and its
 aftermath as r eason to push for the continu8,tion of withdravlal. Instead,
 the instability and fear of collapse resulting from the Diem coup brought
 the U. S. to a decision for greater commitment .

 vii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 ()
 :r:
 ::c
 o
 Z
 o
 5C>
 -<
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - SensH1 ve
 PHASED WTIKDRt}lAL OF U. S . FORCES : 1962-1964
 Event or
 Date Doctmlcnt Description
 23 Jul 62 Geneva Accords on Laos 14-r,ation declaration on the neutrality of Laos.
 23 Jul 62 Sixth Secrctary of Called to exruni:.e present and f'uture developme!.ts in South
 Derense Conference, Vietnam - ..... hich looked gOOd .Nr. l-1cIJ8li.ara initiated irr:medi -
 Honolulu ate plrumjr..g for the phase - out of U. S . military involve:men ·.
 by 1965 and developlr.ent of a progrmn to build a GV~ n:Hilary
 capability st.rong enough to take over fUll defense respor..si -
 bilities by 1965 .
 26 Jul 62 JCS Mcssage to CINCPAC , CINCPAC "" as formally instructed to develop C! "Comprehensive
 26231SZ Plan for South Vietnam" (CPSV~) 1n line ", lth instructioIls
 given at iiof,Oltdll.
 14 Aug 62 CINCPAC Message to ~:ACV , MACV ....·as d irecled to dra.... \Ap a CPSV;; des igr.cJ t.o ensure G"'lN
 1404 28z milita.ry end para-military strength commensurate .... 1 th it;
 s overeign respo!,sibilit1.es. The CPSV'!; \HlS to assume the
 insurgency . . ·ould be ur.der contro l in three y ears . th at ex -
 t ensive US support would be available during the three-year
 period: that thos e items essential to development of ~~ ul:
 RVNA F ~p_pab' lity ... ould be (large 1y) available tt.rougb tile
 mill tar)" assJ stance progra."II (V.AP) .
 Oct-No,' GVN National Campaign In add! tier. to the CPSVi\' , 1-{ACV prepared B....-: outl ine for all inte-
 1962 Plan developed grated, nationdde offensive military campaign to destroy the
 i nsurgency lilld restore GV1. con!..rol in Sot:.th Vjetnli1D. . ':'he con -
 c.ept .... as adopted by the GVN in !\ovember.
 26 Nov 62 Military Reorgan1zation Diem ordered re alignment 0:' Ir,jlltary chair. of coronar.d , r eor£aJ~l ­
 Decreed zation of RVi~AF establl shment of four CTZ ' s and a joint
 Operations Cent~r to centralize control over current Jf.ilitary
 operations. (JOC becBlne operat ional on ?O !!ecembe r 1962 . )
 7 Dec 62 First Draft of C~0~ CI~CPAC disapproved first d raft becau'e of high costs and
 Complet ed inadequate t.rainir.g pro·.risions.
 19 Jan 63 ~!ACV Letter to ClNCPAC, ~'.ACV submitted a rev1sed CPSVN . Extended through IT 1963 and
 3010 Sc r 0021 concurred in by the !..mbassador , i t called for GV:: mi Ii tary
 forces to peak at 45Q , 000 in i'Y 1964 (RV:\tJ' strength Io"ouU be
 230 , 900 in FY 19611) ; cost prOjected over sIx years "'odd total
 $97'3 mi ll ion .
22 J an 63 OSD(ISA) Hessage to MAP- Vietnam dollar guidellnesi6sued . Cell1 ngs considerably
 CINCPAC , 222243Z different fran: and lo .... er thBJI tho se in CPS',:,.
25 Jan 63 cn;CPAC Letter to JCS, Approved the CPS\-:; , s upported and jus t i f ied t~c higher MJ;P
 3010, Ser 0079 costs proj ected by It .
T Mar 63 JC SM 190-63 JCS recon:mended SeeDef approve the CPSVij; supporting the higher
 MAP costs , jCS proposed CPSV; . be the basis for revis io:l of
 IT 1964 MAP ar.d developrr.ent of FY 1965 - 69 progr8Jr.s .
20 Mar 63 USMACV "Summ.Ty of Reported conti:mine;,gro .... ing R'fj~AF effectiveness, increased
 Highlight. , 1 Feb 62 - GV:-' streng th eco"omically and poll tlcally . The strategiC
 7 Feb 63" hamlet prograrr, looked espec I ally good . !I.ACY forecast .... 1 nni ng
 the milltary phase if! 1963 -- barr lrlg "great.ly ir.creased " VC
 rei nforcement and resupply .
17 Apr 63 lilE 53-63 Al though "fragile ," the sit uat ion in SV:. did not nppea:' se rious ;
 general pr'ogress "'-as reported in most areas.
6 ~Iay 63 Sevent.h SeeDer Honolulu Ca lled to review the CPS-V; . . Large l y be cause of prevailir:s
 Conference o ptimism over Vietnam , Nr. Mc:;emara fou[,d the CPSV:, (l.s sistance
 too costly, the planned ... ithd:a...·al of US forces too s1m,' and
 RV,.A[ develo prr.ec l m1 sdJ rected .
3 May 63 Buddhist Crisis Begins C1[~;forcel> fired on \t{orshipers celebrating Buddha. ' s birthday
 (s evera l killed , more ... ounded) for roo good cause. LO:'".g sta:Jd -
 in g a.ntipathy toward GV:; quI ckly turr:ed jntc e.ctive opposition .
8 May 63 1';(0SecDef ~!emore.nda First : Directed Jo1nt ISA/J CS Second: Requested the OffIce ,
 fo r ASD/ISA development of plans to re- L 1 !'ecll"l:' of ~: i 1 i tp.r:.
 place US forces W'ith GY!; troo ?s Assist.ar~ce . I SA , "corr:pletely
 a s soon as possib l e £'J.d to plan re'Jork. " the MAP nr0G.ram
 th e withdra"al of 1, 000 US r eccm:n:.er.1cd in the CPSV:'i lU':d
 tr oops by the end of 1963· sub::Jt nc" "uidellnes by
 1 BeptMnhE"r. The Sec'retary
 felt CPSv], total s '''ere too
 high (e.g. , e xpendiLures pro-
 TOP SECRf;r' - Sen_sit i ve posed for F";s 1965-W could be
 cut by ~,2 70 ~ll11ion in his vI e w)

 a
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

9 ~ay 63 JCS Message 9820 to Di rected Cr;;CPAC to revise the
 CI;,CPAC CPSV:i and program the ... ith-
 drawnl of 1,000 men by the end
 of 1963 . Force reduction "'as
 to be by US units (not indi -
 viduals); units were to be
 r eplaced by specially trained
 RV:;AF units. lIithdra ... al plans
 'Were to be contingent upon
 cant inued progress in the
 counterinsurgency campaign.

11 ~:ay 63 Cr:;CPAC Letter to JCS , Cr::CPAC recOl!lJ1lended some changes ,
 3010 Ser ool.47 -63 then approved MACV 's revision of
 the CPSVN and the lIoACY plan for
 withd.rawal of 1,000 men . As
 i nstructed , those 1 , 000 men were
 drawn lrom logistic and service
 support slots; actual operations
 would be unaffected by their ab-
 s ence .

17 May 63 ASD/IS.t.. r.:emore.ndtJL for ISA's propos ed MAP-Vietnam
 the Secretary program based on the Secre-
 tary's instructions was
 r ejected. as still too high.

29 May 63 OSD I ffiA lo\.essaee to CHICPAC wns directed to
 CI;,C PAC , 291752~: develop three alternative
 MAP plans for FYs 1965 -69
 based on these levels:
 $535 M (CPSVN recommendation)
 $450 M (Compromise )
 $365 M (SecDef goal)
 I'M for FY 1964 had been set
 at $180 l~ .

16 J= 63 CV:: - Buddhist Truce Reflected temporary and tenuous abat ement of GVN-Buddbi.t hostili -
 (State .~irgr!ll!l ;.- 7'31 ties ... hich flared up in Hay. The truce was repudiated almost
 to ~bassy Saigon , immediately by both sides. Budd.hist alienation fr om the GVN
 l() June) polari zed; hostilities spread.

17 Jul 63 OIA Inte lli gence Reported the mi l itary situation was unaffected by the political
 Summary cr l slsj ~ prospects for continued counterinsurgency progress
 were "certainly betterll "than in 1962; VC activity was reduced
 but VC capability essentially unimpaired.
1'3 Jul 63 CLCPAC - prcposed MAP c n,CPAC suggeGted. mill tary
 program s ubmitted to ..ssistance programs at tile
 JCS three levels set by the JCS
 but recommended adoption of
 a fourth Plan developed by
 CI NCPAC. "Plan J" totalled
 $450.9 M over t he fi ve-year
 period.

4 ~.ug 63 OIA Intelligence Rathe r suddenly , Viet Cong offensive actions were reported bigh
 Bulletic- for the third consecutive .eel<; the mplication wa. that the VC
 wer e capitalizing on the political crisis and might step up the
 insurgency .

14 Aug 63 SACSA Memoro.nd\ll1l Discounted the importance of increased. VC activity ; the compara-
 for the Secretary tive magnitude of attocks "as 10\1; deve l opments did not yet seem
 salient or last ing.

20 Aug 63 Oi~ declared ~artial This decree plUB repressive meru;ures against the Budd.bists
 law; ordered a~tacks s hattered hopes of reconc iliation, and irrevocably isolated
 on Buddhist pa;;odas the Diem government .

 TOP SECRET - Scneitl ·:·,

 b
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Secti on 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. B y: NWD Date: 2011

I.A

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 20 Aug 63 JCSM 629-63 Recommend SeeDef approve the
 CI ~.CPAC/MACV proposed pIal, for
 1 ,OOO-rnan ,dt.hdrawal in t hree
 to four increments for planning
 purposes only; re commei'!ded
 final decisio:1 on wlthdra',;al
 be delayed until October .

 21 Aug 63 Direct(,r, DIA Memo- Estimated that Diem's acts \o,'i!l hav e "serious reperc ussions"
 randum for SeeDer throughout SV:,: foresaw more coup and c ounter - coup activi t y.
 But reJX)rted mili tary op erations 'oIerc so far unaffected by
 thes e events.

 27 Aug 63 JCSM 6 40- 63 JCS added yet a fifth
 "~Iodel ~~ .. Plan to Cr:;C PAC ' s
 four alter native l·tA P lev el s.
 Providl ng for higher force
 l eve Is termed nece::sary by
 the JCS, the Mode l ~I total
 "'as close to $1'00 M. JCS
 r econunended the Model ~
 Plan be approved .

 30 Aug 63 OSD/rSA Memorandum Recorr.mended approval of ~CSM
 for the Secretary 629-63 . But noced many ""-" i ts "
 to be withdrawn "'ere ad hoc
 creatior s of expendable support.
 personnel, c autio ned t ha!.. public
 r enctioll to "phony" . dthdra1,:al
 would ue darnagJng : s uggested
 actual strength and nu t.hori zed
 celli r.g levels be publici zed
 and monitored.

 3 Sep 63 SeeDer Memorandum to App roved JCSl~ - 6? 9- 63. Adv i sed
 CJCS JCS against creatIng special
 uni t. s as a means to cut ba c k
 unnecessary pe rsonne l : re-
 ques ted the pro j ected :;S
 strength fi gu res through 1903 .
 5 Sep 63 ASD/rSA ~!emorahdum to Cor,curred I n JCS re c~e:1 -
 the Secretary datton with minor r eserva-
 tions that the Mode l M
 Pl8..'i for ml) i t.nry ass is-
 tBl lce to SV~. be appro·:ed.

 6 Sep 63 SecDef Memo randum Approved Model M Plan as
 f o r CJCS t he bas I s for FY 65-69
 HAP plann ing; ad'dsed that
 ~S materiel tur ned over t.o
 RVi~ fi..? mu st be char ged to
 and absorbed by the aL:.thor -
 ized Model M Plan ceilings .
 11 Sep 63 CJCS Memorandum for Fo rwarded the mi litary
 SecDef s tre nGt h figures (August
 t hru Decemoer) to SeeDe f;
 e.:I'lised that the 1 ,000-
 man vit hdra.... a) .... ould be
 counted again st the peak
 October strength (16,732) .
 Fi rst increment was sched -
 uled for wlthdn"al in
 November , the rest in
 December .
 21 Sep 63 Presidential Memoran- Directed Mci:amara and Taylor (CJCS) to personally ' assess the
 dum for the SecDef c ritical situation In SV:: -- both political an d military; to
 determine what GV:i action .... as required f or chnnge and what t he
 US s hould do t.o produce such act i o n .
 2 7 Sep 63 ASD/rSA (ODMA) "MAP Approved ~ttJ' total s re-
 Vietn :m : Manpower and f l e cted the Model M Plan:
 Financial Summary" FY 196 , 1 : 18 0 . 6 M
 FY 1965 - 69: 2 11. 6 M
 To tal: 392 . 2 H
 The GVN fo rce l evels pro -
 posed vere substantially
 bel"" those o f the J a.nuary
 CPSV:; (from a peak strength
 i n FY 1964 of 442 , 500 ,
 Ie'reis were to fall to
 120 , 200 i n n 1969) .

 TOl' SECRET - Sens it I\'e

 c
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 "
:/1

 f
 TOP SF-CRE! - Sensitive

 26 Sep - SeeDef 'ercs t-~iss 10.1 Posi t.i ve detai led evidence presented 1n numerous briefings indi -
 2 Oct 63 to South Vietnam cated cond! tions ,",'ere good and would impro·re. Hence , the Secre-
 tary ordered acceleration of the plBP~ed ~ . S. force phase-out .•
 2 Oct 63 Mc:, B..'T,ara- f aylor Brlef- Concluded the ~ilitary campaign has made great progress and con-
 i~£ for the President , tinues to progress, but warned t hat further Diem-Nhu r epression
 and later, the :;SC cou ld chll...'lge the "present favorable mlll tary trends."

 5 Oct 63 Mc.::a.-narn-Taylor !T.et The Preside:1t approved the military rec =endations made by the
 "l th Preside!!t and Secretary and Chairman:
 :.SC
 that ~:.ACV and Diem review changes necessary to canplete
 the military carr-paign In I , II, ~"d III Corps by the end
 of 1961j , in IV Corps by 1965 :

 that a training program be established to enable RVNAF
 to take ov~r military functions from the US by the end
 of 1965 whe~ the bulk of US personnel could be ~ith ­
 drawn:

 that DOD infonnally anr.ounce plans to withdra" 1,000
 men by the end of 1963.

 ho furthcr reductions in US strcngth would be made until re-
 quirements of lhe 196h campal gn ""ere clear .

 11 Oct 63 Approved the ml1"tary recar.:mendations contained in the Mcl'iamara-
 1'f::lylor Report..; d1.rected no fonr.al announcereent be made of
 implementation of plans to ~ithdraw 1, OOC men by the end of
 1963.

 ..

 22 Oct (3 State Department Assessed trends since ":u 1y 1963 as evidence of an tmfavorab le
 I:,R Memo RFE-90 s hift in military balance. ( This was one of the first indica-
 tions that all ~a" not as rosy as V~CV et al had l ed MD~nmara
 and Taylor to believe . ) - -
 ov 63 Di em Goverronent The feared political chaos, civil war and collapse of the war
 Overthrm.~ d id not mater ial1 ze immed iately ; US C-ovcrncent was uncertain
 as to what the new circumstances ~eant . General Minh headed
 the junta re sponsible for the coup.
 20 :;ov 63 All-agency Co~ference Ambassador Lodge assessed prospects as hopeful; recOlronended
 o n Vietnrur., Honolulu US continue the policy of eventual mil: tary withdra'Ral from
 SV:~" said annou:1ced 1,OOO-rnan withdra.... al v as having Bulutory
 effects. MACV agreed. In this li ght, officials agreed that
 the Accelerated Plan ( speed -up of force wHhdraw"l by six
 months directed by Mc;:amara in October) s hould be maintained .
 MC;:a.'T,ara "anted MAP spending held close to 050 ' s $175.5 million
 ceiling (because of acceleratlon , a IT 64 MAP of $197 . 7 million
 l ooked posslble) .
 22 i;ov 63 President Kennedy One result: US Government policies in gen eral were maintained
 Assass inated for the sake of contlnuity, to allov the n~. administration
 time to settle and adjust. TWs te ndency to reinforce exist -
 ing policies arbitrarily, just to keep t hem gOing, extended
 the phase-out , withdrawal and ~tAP concepts - - probably for too
 l ong .

 SeeDef fJ.emorandUlD. Calling GYX political stability vital to t he liar and c a lling
 for the President attention to G\'!\ fi n8.llctal straits, the Secretary said the
 US must be prepared to increase aid to Saigon . Funding vell
 above current ~-1AP plans .... as envisaged .

 26 :.ov 63 President J ohnson approved recommendations to continue current
 policy tovard Vietnam put forward At the 20 November Honolulu
 meeting: reaffl rmed US objectives on wit hdrawnl .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 d
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

I/!.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 3 Dec 63 Director , Fnr East In response to the President's wish for a reappra isa l of "v'iet-
 Region/rSA Memoran- nam de .... elopments, for a "fresh new look" at the pro: 1 err. ,
 d um for the ASD/rSA second - echelon leaders outllned a broad i nterdepartrr.ental
 "Review of the South Vietne.m Situation ." '!"his sys len:atic
 effort did not cullLinate 11'1 hIgh level nat.ional reassessmen t or
 specIfic policy rc-orient.aLior. .
 5 Dec 63 CI);CPAC Message to JCS Submitted the Accelerated Model Plan version of crsv., . From
 a total of 15,200 in 1'":' 1901" US military strer.gth i" Vietr.am
 wo u ld drop to 11, 500 in IT 1965 (vice 13,100 rccOli!!lle nded by
 the Model II, Plan). to about 3, 200 in IT 1906 and 2 ,('00 in
 Fl' 19(,7 . GV:; force levels were a bit lower but G V~: force
 build-up a bit faster than recon:rr.ended by the Model M Pla:l.
 uAP costs for roS 1905-1969 totalled $399.11 million (vice
 $392.2 million Q"der Mode l M pIa") .
 11 Dec 63 Thp eti .1 ust€'d year-end strenGth figure ...·as 1 5 , ~94 . Althl,)ug~l
 1,000 men were tech:licnlly ... ithdra .... n , nO actual reducti o n ut'
 US st rength was achieved. The December figure was not 1,000
 less than the peak October leve1.
 13 Dec 63 Director , DIA Memorandum Reported the VC "ad impro',ed combat effecU-;eness ar.d force
 fo r the Secretary posture during ] 963 , t.ha:' ';C capability .... as unimpaired .
 (Quite a dlfferc"t p icture had been painted by SACSA In late
 October: "An Q',rerview of the Vietnam '''ar , 1900-1963," per -
 so nally directed to the Secretary , ...·a:; a g lo .... ir.g account of
 ste ady mllltar'y progress .)
 30 Jan 64 Second Coup in Salgon General Minh ' s military regime 'lins replaced by a jur.ta headed
 by General Khan" .
 10, 11, 11" Deputy Director , CIA Suspicious of progress reports, CIA sent a specJa.l group to
 1'1 Feb 64 Mereorandn for SeeDer, "look at" South Vietnam. Its indeper:denL evaluation rc ·... ealed
 SecState, ~ ~ a serious o.nd ste adi ly deter10rnLing GV~; si Luation. V ictco!:g
 gains and , signifJcantly, the qualit y and quantity of VC arms
 had increased. The Strnte£ic Han:let Progrrun was "at v : rtual
 standstill." The insurgency tide seemed to be "goi.!Jg agair. st..
 II
 GVN in all four Corps.
 6 Mar 64 Elghth SecDef Conference Participants agreed that the milltary situation was definitely
 on Vietn8{!l, Honolulu deteriorating, that insurt:ency ...·o"Jld pl'obably cor.tir.ue beY0:1d
 1965 , that. the !;S must lmmediat.el y dctennine _hat had to be
 done to make up for the setback ( s) .
 '\ -16 McNlllIlara/Taylor Trip Personally confinned the gra'llty of the Vietnam situa~jon .
 Mar EIJ to Vietnam

 16 Mar 64 SecDef Memorandum for Mr. MC~jn."'Dara report ed the sit.uation 'Was "unquest.ionab l y" "'orse
 . the P"esident: "Report than in September. (RV:'AF desertion rates were up: GV:, mili -
 o n Trip to Vietnam" tary posi t.ion 'Was ..... eak and the Vietcong . \,rith increased :,v:.
 Support, was stro;, £: . ) CO:lcluding that mOre US s upport ...·as
 necessary, t.he Secreto.ry made twelve reco:rm.endat.ions. These
 i ncluded:

 ~ o re
 economic assist.ance, military t.rai n ing, equipment
 and advisory aSGist.ance , as needed.

 Continued high -level US overflights of G'/?i borders:
 authori:>ation for "hol pursuit" a.nd ground operati.ons
 in Laos.

 Prepare to initiate - on 72 hours' notice· Laos and
 Cambodia 90rder control operations 8.!!d ret.aUatory actio:'.s
 against :,ort:l Vietr.Ml.

 Make plans to inj Uat.e - on 30 days ' notice - 8. "progran:
 of Graduated Overt. Military Pressures" against r-iorth
 Vietnam.

 Mr . MC::8r.!ara called the p0licy of reducing existing :.JS person:1el
 where South Vietnamese could assume their f\J.nct.lons "still sound"
 but said no major reductions could be e xpected in the near future.
 He felt [;S training personnel could be s ubstantially reduced
 before the e n d of 1905 .
 17 Mar (4 The Preside nt. appro"led the twelve re commendat ions presented by
 Mr. MC~;BJllo.ra and directed all agenci es concer ned to carry theIt
 out pramptly.

 'lOF SECnC7I' - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

'.:",

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 27 Mar 64 OSD Message 96302'3 Formally suspended five-year MAP program planning until further
 to Cri.CPAC notice: said the previous plans for phasing down US and GI'iI'
 f orces was s uperseded by the pol icy of providing South Vietnam
 assist8Jlce and support as long as r equired to br ing aggression
 and terrorism under control (as per ~SAM 233) .
 6 ~I .y 64 Cr::CPAC ~:essage to Indicated grolo'ing US military cOIIJIlitment: thi s 1500-man aug-
 fo'.ACV ( 0621457,) mentation r aised the total authorized level to 17 , 000 .
 1-2 ~un 64 Special Meetir.g on Calld i n part to examine the GVI: National Campaign Pl an -- ;:hiGh ;:as
 Southeast ASia , failing. The conferees agreed to increase Rv:.lAF effectiveness by
 Honolulu extending and in t ensifying the liS advisory effort a s ~IACV
 recommended.
 25 Jun 64 II.ACV Message 325310 Fonnal W,CY r equest for 900 additional advisory personnel. His
 to JCS justification for adviso rs at the battalion level and for D:i.ore
 advisors at di.strict and sector levels was included. Also, 80
 US:~ advisors were requested to estab li sh a Junk Force and other
 lI"ari tirr.e counter insurgency measu res .
 4 Jul 64 CI~.CPAC "~essae;e to CI:;CPAC rccOlllJl1ended approval of the MACV proposal for intens i-
 JCS (01, 2320Z ) fication of US advisory efforts.
 15 Ju1 61, Saigon EMBTEL l O~ Ambassador 1aylor r epo rted th at revised VC str ength estimates
 now put the e nemy force between 2'3 , 000 and 34,000. ,0cause
 for alarm, he said the ne'" estimate did demonstrate the magn i-
 tude of the problem end t he need to raise th e l eve l of US/GVJ(
 efforts . Taylor tho ughta US strength increase to 21 , 000 by
 t he end of the year ;;oul d be sufficient.

 MACV Hess age 61'10 to MACV re quested 3,200 personnel to support t he expansion (by 900)
 CIi;CPAC (161oJ.5Z) of US advisory efforts - - or I, , 200 more men over the next nine
 months .
 17 Ju1 64 EMBTEL Ambassador Taylor concurred in ~~CVIS proposed i ncrease , re com-
 ( 171210:-:) mended prompt approval and action.
 21 Ju1 61, State 205 to Saigon Reported Presidential approval (at the 21 J u ly NSC meeting) of
 t he MACV deployment package .
 Dec 64 Further increases Total US strength was 23 , 000: further deployments were on t.he
 way .

 TOP SEcif,:"!' - oensitive

 f
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

r
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND P roject Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1

 TOP SECRET- SGnsitive

 PB..ASED WITIiDJ:\AWAL OF U. S. FORCES

 TABLE OF' COFJTENTS and OU~'Lr:l\1E

Introduction . . 1

The Secretary of Defense Honolulu Decj.sions of July 1962 3

National Campaign Plan 5
Comprehensive Plan for South Vietnam 6

Secretary of Defense Honolulu Decisions of l~ay 1963. 12

MAP Planning 13

1000-Man Withdrmml. • 15
The Buddhist Crisis. . . 16

McNamara-Taylor Mission to South Vietnam) October 1963 18

The rTovember Coup and OverthrOi{ of DieHl . 24

Assassination of President Kennedy 25

Accelerated Model Plan of the CPSVN. 26
The 1000-I'lan Wi thdrm-ra1 of December 1963 30

The Vietnam Situation Horsens . . • . . . • 30

Demise of the CPSVN . 37
Build-Up of the U. S. Force Commitment • . 37

p ostscript to Withdra'iral Planning . . 39

 FIGURES

1. CPSVN - Total U. S. Supported Forces. 8

2. CPSV'N - Forecast of Phase-Out of U. S . F'or·ces . • 10

3. CPSVN - Phase Dmm of U.S. Forces 27

4. CPSVN - Ph8se DOim of GVN Forces. 28

5. CPSVN - W\P Cost. . . . 29

 g
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. B. 4. PHASED WITHDRAWAL OF U.S. FORCES
 1962-1964

INTRODUCTION

 From mid-1962 to early 1964 the U. S. government went through a formal
planning process, ostensibly designed to disengage the U. S. from direct and
lar ge-scale military involvement in Vietnam. In retrospect, this experi-
ence falls into place as a more or l ess isolated episode of secondary im-
portance; eventually abortive, it had little impact on the evolution of the
Vietnam war . It does, however , serve as a vehicle for understanding one
long phase of the war and the U.S. role in it.

 The genesis l ay in a conjuncture of circumstances during the first
half of 1962 that prompted the U. S. to shift its Vietnam perspective
from the hitherto restricted one of largely tactical responses to current,
lo calized, and situational requirements, to fitting these to more strate-
giC and purposeful long-range courses of action. The expanded perspective
was programmatic in outlook, and oriented toward specific goals -- end
the ins1Jxgency and withdraw militarily from Vietnam.

 At the outset, the motivation for the idea of ph3.sed withdrawal of
U.S. forces was threefold: in part, the belief that developments in Viet-
nam itself were going v1ell; in part, doubt over the efficacy of us ing U. S.
forces in an internal war; and in part, the demands of other crises in the
world that were more important to Washington than Vietnam . In the course
of materializing into policy and assuming form as plans, these premises were
transformed into conclusions, desiderata institutionalized as objectives,
and wish took on the character and force of i mperative .

 For example, in March 1962, Secretary McNamara testified before Con-
gress that he was "optimistic" over prospects for U. S. success in aiding
Vietnam, and "encouraged 8,t the progress the South Vietnamese are making ."
He expressed conviction that the U. S. would attain its objectives there .
But he emphasized that the U. S. strategy \Vas to avoid participating directly
in the war Ivhile seeking an early military conclusion : y
 "I would say definitely we are approaching it from the
 point of vie"" of trying to clean it up, and t erminating sub-
 version , covert aggre s sion, and combat operations .. . .

 " ... We are wise to carryon the operations against the
 Communists in that area by assisting native forces rather than
 by using U. S. forces for combat .

 1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Execut ive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

16,

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 "Not only does that release U.S. forces for use elsewhere
 in the world or for stationing in the United States, but also
 it is probably the most effective way to combat the Communist
 subversion a :"1d covert aggression . To introduce white forces --
 U.S. forces - - in l arge numbers the:re today, while it might
 ' have an initial favorable military impact would almost certainly
 lead to adverse political and in the long run adverse military
 operations . And therefore, we think the program we are carrying
 out is the most effective one and certainly it is directed toward
 t ermination of operations as rapidly as possible ."

 In late spring of 1962, the military situation in South Vietnam showed
 hopeful signs of at last having turned a corner. The various programs
 under way, initiated the previous fall as a r esult of decisions in NSAM
 No . lll,appeared to be b earing out the basic soundness of the nevl approach .
 Ass essments and evaluations being reported from the fi eld i ndicated a
 pattern of progress on a broad front , and their consist ency through time
 r einforced the impression . By mid-year the prospects looked bright .
 Continuing favorable developments now held forth the promise of eventual
 success, and to many the end of the insurgency seemed in sight . Thi s
 optimism was not without the recognition that there were unsolved politi-
 cal problems and serious soft spots in certain areas of the military
 effort. But U. S. leadership, both on the scene in Vietnam as well as in
 Washington, w'as confident and cautiously optimist ic. In some quarters,
 even a measure of euphoria obtained .

 At the same time, events outside Vietna.rn, some of them ostensibly
 unrelated, were asserting a direct and immedia,te r el evance for U. S. policy
 and strategy in Vietnam . As competing priorities, they far overshadowed
 Vietnam. In the l arger scheme of things, an indefinite military commit -
 ment in Southeast Asia 'was b e i ng relegated perforce to a parenthetical.
 diversion the nation could then ill afford. More central i ssues in Berlin ,
 Cuba , and in Laos were at stake, perhaps even to the extent of survival.

 Looming foremost was the Berlin problem. Fraught with grave over-
 tones of potential nuclear confrontation with the USSR, it reached cri sis
 proportions in the spring of 1962 over the air corridor issue , and after
 a temporary lull, flared anevl in early summer . By the first of July it
 was again as tense as ever . U.S. res erv~s had b een recalled to active
 duty, additional forces were deployed to Europe, and domestic Civil Defense
 activities , including shelter construction programs , were accelerated .

 The burgeoning Cuba problem too was taking on a pressing urgency by
 v irtue of both its proximity and grovring magnitude . The Castro aspects
 alone "lere becoming more than a vexing l ocal ized embarrassment . Given
 the volatile Caribbean political climate, Cuban inspired mischief could
 r aise tensions to the flash point momentarily . Moreover , by early smrrmer
 of 1962 increasing evidence of Soviet ma.chinations to exploit Cuba mili-
 tarily was rapidly adding an alarming strategic dimension . Though the

 2 TOP SECRET - Sensitjve
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

17.
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 natur e and full significance of these l atter developments would not b e
 revealed until the climactic Cuban Missile Crisis a few months later, the
 U.S. was already apprehensive of serious danger on its very doors~ep .
 Official interpretive evaluations at the time saw' an intimate causal nexus
 b etween Berlin and Cuba.
 Finally, another set of factors altering the strategic configuration
 in Southeast Asia and affecting the U. S. position there also came to a
 head in mid-summer of 1962 . These were developments regarding Laos, 'w hich
 impinged upon and helped reshape the U.S . relationshipto"rard Vietnam.
 In the fall of 1961 and through the spring of 1962 the U.S., its objec-
 tives frustrated in Laos, had decided to salvage as much as possible by
 settling for neutralization . After lengthy and complex diplomatic maneuver-
 ing, this was essentially achieved by early summer . On 23 J uly 1962 the
 l~- nation declaration and protocol on the neutrality of Laos was signed
 formally, ending the 15-month Geneva Conference on IJaos. The outcome
 had at once the effect of extricating the U.S. from one insoluble dilemma
 and serving as a stark object lesson for another . The Laos settlement
 now both allo"red the U. S. a free hand to concentrate on Vietnam and pro-
 vided the incentive and determination to bring to a close its military
 cowaitment there as well -- but this time successftllly .

 It was in this spirit and context that the U.S. decid ed to pursue
 actively the policy objective of divesting itself of direct military involve-
 ment of U.S. personnel in the Vietnam insurgency . The aim was to create
 militar ily favorable conditions so that further U.S. military involvement
 would no l onger be needed . To this end , two prerequisites had to be satis-
 fied: bringing the insurgency effectively under control ; and simultaneously,
 developing a mil itarily viable South Vietnam capable of carrying its own
 defense burden "\vithout U.S. mil itary help. In phase with the progress
 toward both these goals, there then could be proportionate reductions in
 U.S. forces.

 THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE HONOLULU DECISIONS OF JULY 1962 ?J
 In July 1962, as the prospect of the neutralization of Laos by the
 Geneva Conference became i~minent , policy attention delib erately turned
 tow'ard the remaining Vietnam prob l em. At the b ehest of the President,
 the Secretary of Defense undertook to reexamine the situation there and
 address himself to its futur e -- vd th a view to assuring that it b e brought
 to a successful conclusion within a reasonable time . Accordingly, he
 called a full-dress conference on Vietnam at CINCPAC Headquarters in Hawaii.
 On 23 July, the same day that the 1.4-nation neutralization declaration
 on Laos was forma lly signed in Geneva, the Sixth Secretary of Defense
 Conference convened in Honolulu .

 The series of briefings .and progress reports presented at the con-
 ferenc e depicted a generally favorable situation . Things were steadily

 3 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

J ~,

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 improving and promised to continue. Most programs underway were moving
 forward, as the statistical indicators clearly demonstrated . Those
 directly related to prosecution of the counterinsurgency effort shoived
 measurable advances being made toward winning the war . Programs for ex-
 panding and improving RVNAF capability were likewise coming along well,
 and in most cases, were ahead of schedule . Confidence and optimism pre-
 wikd. .

 ' d Mr . McNamara acknowledged that the " tremend
 I mpresse, "
 ous progress
 in the past six months was gratif'ying . He noted, hOI'lever, that these
 achi evements had been the result of short-term ad hoc actions on a crash
 basis. What was needed now was to conceive a long-range concerted pro
 gram of systematic measures for training and equipping the RVNAF and for
 phasing out major U.S. advisory and logistic support activities . The
 Secretary then asked how long a period it would take before the VC could
 be expected to be eliminated as a significant force . COMUSMACV, in reply
 to the direct question, estimated about one year from the time the RV~~F,
 the Civil Guard, and the Self-Defense Corps became fully operational and
 began to press the VC in all areas.

 The Secretary said that a conservative view had to be taken B,nd to
 assume it would take three years instead of one, that is, by the latter
 part of 1965 · He observed that it might be difficult to retain public
 support for U.S. operations in Vietnam indefinitely. Political pr essures
 would build up as losses continued . Therefore, he concluded, planning
 must be undertaken now and a program devised to phase out U.S . military
 involvement . He, therefore, directed that a comprehensive long-range
 program be developed for building up South Vietnamese military capability
 for taking over defense responsibilities and phasing out the U. S. role,
 assuming that it would require approximately three years (end 1965 ) for
 the RVNAF to be trained to the point that they could cope with the VC.
 The program was to include training requirements, equipment requirements,
 U.S. advisory requirements, and U. S. unit s .

 For the record, the formulation of the decisions made and the direc-
 ti ves for action to be t aken resulting from the Conference was as follOl'lS:

 a. Prepare plans for the gradual scaling down of USMACV
 during the next 3-year period, elj~inating U.S. units
 and detachments as Vietnamese were trained to perform
 their functions .

 b. Prepare programs with the objective of glvlng South
 Vietnam an adeque.te military capahili ty without the
 need for special U. S. military assistance, to include
 (1) a long-range training program to establish an
 officer corps able to manage GVN military operations,
 and (2) a long-range program and requirements to provide
 the necessary materiel to make possible a turnover to
 RVNAF three y'ears from July 1962 .

 4' TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The U. S. Military Assistance Advisory Group, Vietnam, had been
augmented in 1961 by aviation) communicatiOns) and intellj.gence units)
as well as by Special Forces and other advisers. The Secretary of
Defense plainly intended that plans be devised for terminating the
mission of the auwnenting units.

 Three days later on 26 July, the JCS formally directed CINCPAC
to develop a Comprehens ive Pls.n for South Vietnam (CPSVN ) in accordance
with the Secretary 's decision s of 23 July. 3/ CINCPAC) in turn, so
instructed COMUSJvrACV on 14 August, at the same time furnishing addi-
tional guidance and terms of reference elaborating on the original SecDef
decisions at Honolulu and the JCS directive. The stated objective of the
CPSVN was given as:

 Develop a capability ivithin mi.lHary and para-mHitary
 forces of the GVN by the end of CY 65 that wi.ll help the GVN
 to achieve the strength necessary to exercise permanent and
 continued sovereignty over that part of Vietnam. vrhich lies
 below the demarcation line without the need for continued U.S.
 special military assistance.

 Development of the plan Has to be based on the following assump-
tions: '

 a. The insurgency will be under control at the end of three
 years ( end of CY 65).

 b. Extensive U.S. support vri.ll continue to be required during
 the three year period, both to bring the insurgency under
 control and to prepare GVN forces for early take-over of
 U.S. activities.

 c. Previous MAP funding ceilings for SVN are not _aP;plicable.
 Program those it ems essential to do this job. 4/

NATIONAL C.AJ.v1PAIGN PLAN

 Planning, in tvo complementary modes ) got unden18Y immediately.
Concurrently with development of the unilateral U.S. CPSVN, USMACV
planners prepared a concept and proposed outline of a GVN National Cam-
paign Plan ( NCP ) for launching an integrated nation-ivide campaign of
offensive military operations to eliminate the insurgency and restore
the country to GVN control. A central purpos e was to reorganize and
redispose the VNAF and streamline the chain of command, in order to
improve responsiveness ) coordination, and general effectiveness of the
military effort against the VC. Greater authority would be centralized
in the Vietnamese Joint Gene ral Staff (JGS)j Corps Tactical Zones ( CTZs )
v(ould be increased from three to four; and each CTZ would have its m-ffi
direct air and naval support.

 5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Over and above organizational considerations, the NCP provided for
syst ematic intensification of aggressive operations in all CTZs to k eep
the VC off balance, while simultaneously conducting clear and hold opera -
tions in support of the expanding Strategic Hamlet Program. Priority
of military tasks \-las fir st to concentrate bn areas north of Saigon,
then gradually shift toward the south to Saigon and the Delta. 2/

 The proposed NCP "\oTas submitted to the GVN in Octob er and a month
later was adopted in conc ept and outline . On 26 November, President Diem
promulgat ed the necessary j~p l ementing decrees and directives to effect
the r eorganization of the SVN armed forces and realign the chain of com-
mand. An integrated Joint Operations Center ( JOC ) was also established and
became operational on 20 December, with repre sentation from JGS and its
count erpart in US~ACV to centralize control over current operations . The
following J anuary the draft of a detailed implementing plan for the NCP
itself was completed and subsequently approved. ~I

COMPREHENSIVE PL.lI.N FOR SOUTH VIETNAM

 Meanwhile, the first cut at the CPSVN "\oTaS also completed by the MACV
planners. It was forwa rded to CINCPAC on 7 December, but CINCPAC, upon
revievTing the proposed plan, considered it infeas ible bec ause of the high
costs involved and the marginal capacity of the RVNAF to train the neces-
sary personnel in the required skills vTithin the time frame specified. As
a result of CINCPAC I S reaction to the initial versj.on, the CPSVN was revised
and resubmitted by COMU~ffiCV on 19 January 1963 . 7/ The new CPSVN covered
the period IT 1963-1963. In transmittj_ng it; CO.tviU~ffiCV r ecommended that
futur e Military Assistance Programs (MAPs ) be keyed therefore to the CPSVN.
He also indicat ed that the CPSVN had been coordinated "\OTith the Ambassador,
who concurred in it . Q/

 Force l evels laid out in the CPSVN provided for total personnel
i ncrea ses reaching a peak of 458,000 ( regular and para-military ) i n FY 6l.~,
with RVNAF manning strength raised from 215,000 to a peak of 230,000 in
the same IT period and remaining on that plateau t hereafter . Order of
magnitude costs ( in $ millions ) of the CPSVN would come to:

 IT 61-1- FY 66 FY 68 TOTAL

 218 153 138 113 978
 CINCPAC approved the CPSVN as submitted and sent it on to the JCS.
However) in the interim, OSD had issued dollar guidelines for MAP planning
for Vietnam. The ceilings indicated therein were significantly at va riance
wi,th the costing figures employed by MACV in devel oping the CPSVN. When 2/
CINCPAC forwarded the plan) therefore, he went to considerable lengt hs to
explain the discrepanc ies and to support and j ustify the higher costs.
Comparison of the DOD dollar guidelines .Tith the CPSVN, proj ected through
IT 69, shm-led a net difference of approximately 66 million dollars , with

 6 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the preponderance of the increase occurring in FY @~ . 10/ Most of
this difference was accounted for by additional Packing-Crating-Handling-
Transportation (PCHI' ) costs associated with the CPSVN but not accommodated
in the DOD guideline figures.

 The body of the CPSVN laid out the costs in relation to the DOD
dollar guidelines) as follows:

 CPSVN - DOD DOLLAR GUIDELINES COST COMPARISON ($ millions )

 FY @~ FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FY(J3 FY 69 TOTAL
 CPSVN* 218 ---
 153 . 138 lb9 113 110 901
 DOD Guidelines 160 165 160 150 140 122 897
 Difference +5E -12 -22 +19 -27 -12 ~
 PCHI' Added +11 +11 +11 +11 +10 +8 +62
 Difference +69 -1 -11 +30 -17 -=4 "+bb
 *Excludes PCHI'.

The rationale offered vTaS that) in order to prosecute the counter-insurgency
to a successflLl conclusion) 'l-Thile at the same time building up GVN capability
to allov7 early withdrmral of U.S. forc es ) the major costs of the program had
to be compress ed into the FY 63·-65 time frame ) with a particular increa se in
FY 64 and another folloVling U.S. withdrawal in FY 67. 11/ But clearly most
of the greater cost throughout the period reflected PCFf.

 The pattern of force levels for all South Vietnamese forces that the
CPSVN provided for, including the separate non-MAP funded Civilian Irregu-
lar Defense Group, is shovn in Figure 1.

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 7
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRNf - Sensitive

 600r-----------.-----------,-----------~------------------~--~~~--~--,
 ClOG -Civilian Irreg ular Defense Graup
 (Nan-NIAP fund ed)
 SOC - Self-Defense Carps
 550
 CG - Civil Guard
 RVNAF-Republic af Vietnam Armed Farces
 500

 PARAMI LlTARY JU NK FORCE

.!8c
 5l:>
 a
-£
~ 300
:r:
G
Z
UJ
cr:
I-
V1

 1965 1966
 FISCAL YEAR
12-9 -68-1
 FIGURE 1 CPSVN - Total U. S. Supported Forces (U)

 8 TOP SECRET - Sensit ive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Sinc e the ultimate objective of the CPSVN 'Ias early wUhdra\val of
U.S. special military assistance) the plan provided for phasing out U.S.
advisory forces. The affected ma jor commands of USlf~CV that would largely
not be required after FY 66 were:

 1. The U.S. Marine Element which provided helicopter trans-
 portation support.

 2. The 2d Air Division vhich provided the USAF portion of the
 special military assistance support perforraed in SVN. This
 support · included "Farmgate " ( Fighter ) ) "Mule Train " ( Trans-
 portation ), and "Able Mable" ( Reconnaissance ) . It also
 provided USAF administration and logist ical support for USAF
 personnel and equipment engaged in special military assistance
 to SVN.

 3· U.S. Army Support Group Vietnam (USASGV ) which provided the
 U.S. Army portion of the special militaTy assistance support
 for SVN ( except that performed by ~AAG and Headquarters MACV ) )
 including helicopter and fixed ving air transportat i on) signal
 corr®unications ) and special forces . It also provided U. S.
 administrative and logistical support for assigned and attached
 personnel and equipment engaged in the special military assistance.

 4. Headquarters Support Activity Saigon ( HSAS ) ,Ihich provided
 administrative support to the U.S. Headquarters and other U.S.
 government sponsored agencies and activities located in Saigon.

 5· MAAG Vietnam vould have Us strength reduc ed by one-half after
 FY 65· Only 1) 500 ~AAG personnel "Jere to remain in country
 after FY t8.

 The target scbedule for U.S. force withdrawal) as then forecast) is
contain ed in Figure 2. 12/

 9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 (thousands )

 ORGANIZATION FY63 FY64 FY65 FY66 FY67 FY68

 HQ USMACV .3 .4 .4 .1 .0 .0

 HQ MAAG 3.0 3.0 3.0 1.7 1.6 1.5

 2D AI R DIV 2.2 2.3 2.3 l.i .0 .0

 USASG (V) 5.1 5.5 5.5 2.7 .0 .0

 USMC HELICOPTER UNIT .5 .5 .5 .0 .0 .0

 HSAS .5 .5 .5 .3 .0 .0

 TOTAL 11:6 12.2 12.2 5.9 1.6 1.5

12-9-68-2
 FIGU RE 2 CPSV N - Forecast of Phase-Out of U.S. Forces (U)

 10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 On 7 March 1963) the JCS accept ed the MACV CPSVN in toto and for-
warded it to the Secreta ry of Defense . They rec~Mlended approval) and
proposed that it be the basis for both revising the FY 64 MAP and develop-
ment of the FY 65-69 l<IAPs. They requested an early decision on the CPSVN
because the greatest increase lolOUld occur in the FY 64 1Y1AP. The JCS fully
supported the higher costs of the CPSVN above the DOD dollar guidelines. 13/

 In OSD, the proposed CPSVN underwent staffing revi evl in ISA MA Plans
and elsei-There. Draft respons es to the JCS ,·r ere prepared and then with-
dra wn. Secretary McNamara was not satisfied vrith either the high funding
level s or the adequacy of the plan regarding exactly hoVl the RVN forces
were to take over from the U.S. to effect the desired phase-out of the
U. S. military commitment. In mid-April he decided to l{ithhold action
pending full revievr of the CPSVN at another Honolulu conference vlhich he
expressly scheduled for that purpose for 6 May. Meantime, the various OSD
agencies concerned were instructed to prepare detailed analyses and back-
ground studies for him. 14/

 The main focus of interest of the Secretary of Defense 'ioTaS on the policy
obj ective behind the CPSVN) namely) to reduce systematically the scale of
U.S. involvement until phased out completely. Hovrever) the b eginnings of
a counter-current l-rere already evident. New demands for increases all
around 'Jere to overvrhelm the phasing out objective. Ad hoc requirements
for more U.S. forces l{ere being generated piecemea l, each in its molD right
sufficiently reasonable and so honored. This current) counter-current
dynamic can be illustrated well by Mr. McNama ra's decisions of lat e March.
As part of the Secretary's policy of demanding strict accounting and tight
control on authorized U.S. in-country strength ceilings, he asked for the
latest reading on projected U.S. military strength to be reached in Vietnam.
He was reassured by the Chairman, JCS) that the estimated peak vTOuld not
exceed 15)@~O personnel. Yet) on this very same day) the Secretary approved
a substantial force augmentat ion) requested earlier) for FARMGATE and air-
lift support, involving I I I additional aircraft and a tota l of approximately
1475 additional personnel. 15/ Other similar special requirements and ad
hoc approvals soon were to follm-r.

 Ass essments of continuing favorable developments in the improving
Vietnam situation in the spring of 1963 seemed to warrant more than ever
going ahead with the planned phase out. The general tenor of appra isals
at the USMACV level l{ere that the RVNAF had regained the initiative from
the VC and that the GVN position had improved militarily, economically,
and politically. Evaluations expressed in the "Summary of Highlights"
covering the first year of MACV's existence cited in detail the record of
the increasing scale, frequency, and effectiveness of RVNAF operations)
vThile those of the VC vTere declining. Casua l ty ratios favored RVNAF by
more than two to one, and the balance of vreapons captured vs weapons lost
had also shHted to the GVN s i de. Cited as perhaps the most significant
progress ioTaS the Strategic Hamlet Program. The . future looked even brighter)
e.g., " .. . barring greatly increased resupply and reinforcement of the Viet
Cong by i nfiltration, the military phase of the war can be virtually von
in 1963. II 16/ .

 11 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Other evaluations) though more conservative) still tended to corr-
oborate this optimism. NIE 53-63) issued 17 April 1963 ) found no particular
deterioration or serious problems in the military situation in South Viet-
nam; on the contrary) it Sal, some noticeable improvements and gent;ral
progress over the past year. The worst that it could say was that the
situation "remains fragile." 17/

SECRETARY OF DEFENSE HONOLULU DECISIONS OF MAY 1963.

 At the 6 May Honolulu Conference) briefj.ng reports again confirmed
gratifying progress in the military situation. Addressing the CPSVN)
Mr. McNamara questioned the need for more Vi etnamese forces in FY 6f3 (2 2~ .~.
thousand ) than the present l evel of 215 thousand. His reasoning was that
a poor nation of 12 million like Vietnam could not support that many men
under arms. Qualitatively) furthermore) the planned evolution of V~ffiF
seemed overambitious in terms of sophisticated veaponry such as fighter
aircraft. In SUill) the Secretary felt the CPSVN assumed an unrealistically
high force level for the SVN military establismlent and assigned it equip-
ment that vas both unduly complicated to operate and expensive to procure
and maintain.

 Based on these considerations) the Secretary of Defense concluded that)
if the insurgency came under control in FY 65 as anticipated) the U.S. MAP
investment in SVN thereafter should not be more than at the rate of about
$50 million per year. In his view) thus) the $573 million MAP proposed in
the CPSVN for the period FY 65 through FY 6f3 was at least $270 million higher
than an acceptable program.

 With regard to phasing out U.S. forces) the Secretary of Defense stated
that the pace contemplated in the CPSVN was too slov. He .-ranted it revised
to accompli sh a more rapid withdral,al by accelerating training programs in
order to speed up r eplacement of U.S. units by GVN units as fast as possible.
'mile recognizing that the build-up of RVNAF vas inherently a slm, process)
he stressed that in the instance of some U.S. units which had been in SVN
since 1961) it "rould be possible more rapidly to transfer functions to Viet-
namese . Specifically toward this end) he decided that 1)000 UoS. military
personnel should be vlithdrmm from South Vietnam by the end of CY 63 and
directed that concrete plans be so dravn up. 18/

 On r eturning to 'vashington the Secretary of Defense instructed the
ASD( ISA) on 8 May to develop) in coordination vith the Joint Staff) a plan
for replacing U.S. forces currently deployed in Vietnam vith indigenous SVN
forc es as rapidly as possible) and particularly) to prepare a plan for with-
drmring 1) 000 U. S. troops before the end of 1965. In another memorandum
the same day to the ASD( ISA) regarding the VlAP) he not ed that "the plan
needs to be completely reworked." He therefore instructed ISA also to
develop anew) ImTer .1I'1AP for Vietnam for the period FY 65 through 69)
requesting that the I SA recommendations b e submitted by the first of
September . 19/

 12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 A day l ater, on 9 May, the JCS formally directed CINCPAC to tals.:e
the necessary actions resulting from the Honolulu Conference and revise
the CPSVN. Guidance and terms of reference were provided reflecting the
Secretary of Defense reactions and specifying the decisions reached .
Singled out especially "lTaS the requirement for U.S. force withdravral.
The . JCS directive read:

 As a matter of urgency a plan for the vlithdraval of about
 1,000 U.S. troops before the end of the year should be developed
 b ased upon the assumption that the progress of the counter-
 insurgency campaign "lwuld "lTarrant such a move. Plans should be
 based upon withdraval of US Q~its ( as opposed to individuals )
 by replacing them llith selected and specially trained RVNAF units. 20/

 COMUSo/JACV in turn "lTaS tasked to draft the revised CPSVN and prepare a
plan for the 1000-man r eduction . CINCPAC, after some changes and revisions,
concurred in the proposed plans and forwarded them to the JCS on 11 May.
The revised outline CPSVN nOvl provided for the follo"l-Ting SVN force levels
( in' thousands ) :

 FY64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FY63 FY 69
Total Military
and Para -military 447.4 445.5 362 · 9 317·1 263.8 211~. 7

MAP levels provided for .rere as follows ( in $ millions ):

FY64 FY 65 . FY 66 FY 69 Grand Total
 - FY 67 FY 63

178·9 149·0 130·3 120.4 100·5 85.0 764.1

The proposed plan for vi thdra"l-ral of the first inc rement of U. S. forces, in
compliance with instructions, emphasized Units rather than individuals, but
the list of so-called "units " scheduled to be included vere all smaller than
c ompany size. All Services vTere represented. The criter ia employed, also
based on earlier guidance, were to se lect most of the personnel from service
support and logistics skills most easily spared and whose release "lwuld have
l east effect on operations. The total came to 1,003 U.S. military personnel
to be withdravm from South Vietnam by the end of December 1963. 21/

lflAP PL.4NNING

 ISA meamr-hHe developed tentative dollar guidelines for MAP planning
for Vietnam. Thp first cut, based on the Secretary of Defense ' s 0I-lD sug-
gested total for the FY 65-69 period, was rejected by the Secretary of
Defens e as too high and returned, "I{ith various desired reductions entered
by t he Secretary of Defense. 22/ Reconciling the MAP vrith the CPSVN
proved to be a difficult problem. As CPSVN succeeded, it Ivas logical
that MAP vould have to increase; yet CPSVN tried to cut back lflAP as .Tell.
For instance, the contemplated phase-out of U.S. art illery-spotter aircraft
SQuadrons entailed an add-on to MAP to accoJIl.modate the sQuadron ' s eQuip-
ment and maintenance after transf~rral to the Vietnamese.

 13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Tmlard the end of May the MAP dollar ceiling for FY 64 vTaS estab-
lished at $180 million. But for the period after FY 64 both the MAP
and the CPSVN were far from being settled. On 29 May CINCPAC was directed
to develop three alternative plans in comparative terms based on the fol-
lowing total dollar levels for the FY 65-69 period:

 a. $585 million (derived from the current proposed CPSVN).

 b. $~· 50 million ( compromise ) .

 c. $365 million ( SecDef goal ).

Funding guidelines for each of the three versions were provided as follmls:

Plan ( $ millions) FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FytJ3 FY 62
 ---
 585 150 130 120 100 85

 450 150 .120 70 60 50

 365 125 90 50 50 50

Implied vTaS that a choice ivould be made somevThere with:in this range. 23/

 A new) complex MAP-CPSVN planning cycle vTaS thus set i n motion that
would not fully run its course for almost a year longer. CINCPAC responded
by preparing the comparative analysis of the alternative MAP levels) as
instructed) but bes.ides the three plans required) introduced a fourth ver-
sion developed by the Joint Staff and identified as "Plan J)" which fell
mid-range and came to $450.9 million. Submitted to the JCS on 18 July)
the four plans i·rere reviewed at l ength) with the upshot that the JCS added
a fifth plan identified as the "Model M Plan) " the total cost of ifhich fell
closer to the bottom-range figure but still came to $400 million. It pro-
vided for higher force levels deemed necessary during the critical period
FY 65 and FY 66) and thus go above the Secretary of Defense desired ceiling
of $365 million. The breakout of the Model M Plan was as fol10vTs :

 FY 65 FY 66 IY 67 FY
 .
 tJ3. FY 69
SVN military strength
 ( thousands ) 225·5 225·5 148.8 122.0 121.2

MAP costs ( $ millions ) 145 · 2 117·2 51.2 45·1 41·3

All five plans vTere fonrarded by the JCS on 27 August) with the recornmenda-
tj.on that the Secretary of Defense approve the Model M Plan. 24/

 ISA concurred in the JCS recofimendation with certain minor reserva-
tions ) 25/ and on 6 September) the Secretary of Defense accordingly
appr ovedthe Model M Plan as a basis for development of the FY 65-69 MAPs .
However) the Secretary at the same time advised the JCS that U.S. materiel
turned over to SVN units vTOuld henceforth be charged to the MAP. Such costs

 14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

therefore would have to be absorbed Ivithin the authorized Model Plan ceilings . 26/

 Nonetheless, there "Tere still further refinements made. As finally
published, the approved lfUW reflecting the Model M Plan version of the
CPSVN provided for the follmling SVN active military strength lev1=ls ( in
thousands) :

 FY64 FY 65 FY 66 FY 67 FYffi FY 69

ARVN 207.5 201·3 177·5 121~. 5 101~ .8 103·9

Total ( All Servic es 442.5 437.0 340.2 142 . 1 122.2 120 . 2
 regular and para-military )

Costing levels vere as follows ( in $ millions ) :

 FY64 FY 66 FY 67 FYffi Tota l

 180.6 107·7 46.2 392. 2

This final product repr esented a radica l reduction in both force l evels and
financial investment after FY 66, consistent vith the Administration's
original policy goal of ending the var and the U. S • militar y involveme nt
by December 1965. 27/ "

1000-t1AN WITHDRAvlAL PL.AN

 Meanwhile, planning for the 1000-man withdraval directed by the
Secretary of De fense on 6 May was split off from the CPSVN proper and
the MAP, and was being treated as a separa t e entity. On 20 August, the
JCS, concurring in the proposed plan developed by COMUSMACV and CINCPAC,
forwarded it to the Secr etary of Defense . They recomme nded approva l at
this time for planning purposes onlyj final decision I'T8S to depend upon
circumstances as they developed. The JCS also seconded CINCPAC's added
proposal to withdravl the 1000 troops in three or four increments, rather
than all at one time . The reasons given ,vere that this would be more
practical and efficient for the U. S.) would minimize the impact on on-going
military ope rational activities vithin South Vietnam, and vould afford the
opportunity for "nei-Ts prominence and coverage over an extended period of
time ." 28 /

 I SA, ",ith certain reservations) recommended approval of the vithdravral
plan submitted by JCS. ISA pointed out to the Secretary of Defense that the
plan as it stood would not drmv all of the 1000 troops from U.S . units that
vTere to be relieved by adequately trained SVN units, as had been intended.
Many of the so- called "units" designated therein actually "Tere not bona
f~de existing units but vere specially formed "service support units" made
up of random individuals most easily spared throughout USMACV . ISA cau-
tioned that the arbitrary creation of such ad hoc "units " solely for the
purpose of the vithdra"ral mi ght bacJ:J'ire in press reaction . ISA also recom-
mended) in order to shov cred.ibly that the final year-end. U. S. in-c ountry

 TOP SECREr - Sensit Jve
 15
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

strength had dropped by 1000 from peak strength, that U.S. military
strength figures in Vietnam be made public, and that the actual strength
as well as the authorized ceilings at any given time be carefully moni-
tored to insure that the desired reductions 1-rere indeed achieved. 29/

 A few days lat er the Secretary of Defense approved the 1000-man with-
drawal plan fOri-larded in JCSM-629-63 as recommended. He agreed, how"ever,
'-lith ISA and advised the JCS against creat ing special units if their only
purpose was to be a holding unit as a vehicle for withdrawal of individuals.
He also requested that he be provided 1-lith a proj ect ion of U.S. military
strength in South Vietnam, by month, for the period September through
December 1963. 30/ " .

 The following 1-reek the Chairman, JCS, responded to the Secretary of
Defense's request and furnished the following proj ect ion of end-of-month
U.S. military strengths in South Vietnam :

 August 16,201

 Sept emb er- - 16,483

 Oct ober 16,73 2

 November 16,456

 December 15,73 2
It was noted that the planned 1000-man vlithdrawal would represent a reduc-
tion based on the October peak strength . The first increment of 276
personnel vlould be 1-Tithdra1-rn during November arid the remaining increments
in December. 31/ ThiS, as it turned out, i-laS destined to be changed
somel-lhat before the withdrmml was executed.

THE BUDDHIST CRISIS

 vlhile the CPSVN-JVlAP and "I{ithdrawal planning 1-Tere going on, significant
developments altering the character of the entire situation to which the
planning effort i·ras addressed--in fact threatening to invalidate the very
premises from which the planning sprung--were occurring within South Vietnam.
The Buddhist crisis was rocking the foundat ions of what precarious political
stability the Diem government enjoyed and there "lms grOi-ling concern about
its effect on the prosecution of the war against the VC and on improve-
ments of RVNAF.

 A series of incidents beginning early in May revealed the deep divisions
behleen militant Buddhist factions, who purported to speak for the bulk of
the South Vietnamese population, and the Government . lack of popular support
for the Diem regime had nOll turned to open opposition. As pas s ions flar ed

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 16
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

,31.
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 and Buddhist activism '\Vas met with increasingly severe countermeasures}
 viol ence spread and grew more serious. A tenuous truc e was reached briefly
 behreen Buddhist leaders and the GVN on 10 June (formally signed on 1 6 June )
 i n a mutual effort to reduce tensions--but proved short-lived. Almost
 immediately the actions of both sides repudiated the agreements. 32/

 The U.S . began to be apprehensive about the possible consequences of
 the Diem government falling as the result of a coup. By early July} the
 cris i s was recognized as serious at the highest levels of the U.S. Govern-
 ment. 33/

 Through mid-July assessments remained reasonably reassuring. There
 was little evidence of impact on the military sector . In fact} indications
 pointed to the military situation continuing to improve. DIA reported on
 17 July that the general level of VC-initiated actions during the first
 six months of 1963 was considerably Im.;rer than for the same period the
 year before. Battal:Lon and company-size attacks 1-rere at about half the
 1962 level. It was noted} hm.;rever } that despite reduced activity} VC
 capability remained essentially unimpaj.red. Regarding the progress of
 South Vietnamese counterinsurgency efforts} the DIA evaluation was cau-
 tiously optimistic: though there was still a long \-ray to go} GVN prospects
 Ir are certainly better than they ,-rere one year ago . Ir 34/

 Quit e abruptl~} a disturbing element began to emerge. Little more
 than hro ,.;reeks l ater} the DIA Intelli gence Bulletin of 4 August r eported
 a significant increase in the level of VC offensive act ions . Moreover}
 t he rate ,.;ras high for the third week in a row since mid-July . 35/ The
 clear implication I.?S that the VC at last were taking advantageof the
 opportunity presented by the Buddhist crisis. It had been expected--
 and feared--that they ,vould seek to ha sten pol itica l collapse and exploit
 "rhatever military vulnerabilities there vere . The U. S. was thus j ustifi-
 ably concerned lest the recent revived VC aggressiveness be the opening
 phase of a stepped up insurgency. Within ten days of thj.s DIA report}
 hm-rever} a reevaluation of the significance to be attached to the increased
 rate of enemy actions allayed fears somevrhat. On 14 August} SACSA} r eporting
 to t he Secretary of Defense} discounted the upsurge in VC activity over the
 past month. Its magnitude} comparatively} was below the average of the
 p receding year and fell far short of the previous high . In this perspective}
 SACSA sal. no cause to read undue implications into developments that vere
 as yet neither particularly salient nor of long duration. 36/

 The political crisis meam.hile took a turn for the worse . President
 Diem} in an attempt to regain control} declared mart ial la'\V on 20 August .
 The decree Has accompanied by forcible entry into pagodas and mass arrests
 of Buddhist leaders and laity} and was immediately followed by a series of
 preemptory repressive measures . Any hope of reconciliation "ra s nOiv sbattered)
 and the Diem government vas irrevocably i solated.

 17 TOP SECRET .- Sens Hive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 (II'
,.,;,L ,
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The Director) DIA) in a special report to the Secretary of Defense)
 expressed concern that the declaration of martial law "will have serious
 repercussions throughout the country." He foresaw further coup or counter-
 coup activity in the making) though for the time being the military had .
 effectively assumed full control. So far) he saw little military effect
 on the war effort; relatively few troops had been withdrmm from nonna1
 missions. 37/ At an August 31 review' of the problem for Vic e President
 Johnson) Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary McNamara agreed that U.S.
 planning had to be based on tlVO principles--that the U. S. "rould not pull
 out of Vietnam until the Har were Vlon) and that it would not participate
 in a coup d'etat against Diem. 38/

 For the next month) as the precarious political situation balanced on
 the brink of imminent disaster) U. S. anxieties mounted. The Administration
 was confront ed by a dilemma. It was helpless to ameliorate conditions as
 long as Diem remained in pOi·rer--nor did it want to . approve and support such
 a regime . Yet at the same time) it was equally helpless to encouxage a
 change of government--there was no feasible replacement anywhere on the
 South Vietnamese political horizon. The upshot "ras an ambivalent policy
 of watchful waiting toward the GVN) while the main preoccupation and focus
 of attention "ras on the conduct of the South Vietnamese military forces
 and the progress of the counterinsurgency programs. These still remained
 the first order of business.
 ~
 McNAMARA-TAYLOR MISSION TO SOUTH VIETNAM) oc'rOBER 1963

 By the middle of September) the President "18S deeply concerned over
 the critical political situation) but more importantly) over its effect
 on the war. A decision juncture had been reached. At issue was the U.S.
 military commitment in South Vietnam; a redirection of U.S. policy and
 objectives might be required. On 21 September) the President directed
 the Secretary of Defense) in company I{ith the Chairman) JCS) to proceed
 to South Vietnam for a personal examination of the military aspects of the
 situation. The Pres ident gave as the purpose of the trip ". . . my desire
 to have the best possib1e on-the-spot appraisal of the military and para-
 military effort to defeat the Viet Cong." He stated that there had been)
 at least until recently) "heartening results) " but that political deter iora-
 tion since May had raised serious questions about the continued effective -
 ness of these efforts and the prospects for success . The President) there-
 fore) needed an assessment of the present situation) and if the McNamara-
 Taylor prognosis were not hopeful) they were to recommend needed actions .
 by the SVN and steps the U.S. should take to bring about those actions. 39/

 The Secretary of Defense and the CJCS) accompanied by a team of civ-
 i~ian and military assistants to help in the survey) arrived in South Vietnam
 on 26 September and returned to Washington on 2 Octob er. During their visit)
 detailed data "rere compiled for them) presentations prepared ) extensive
 briefings given) conferences convened) and consultations held . Emerging
 from the invest igations and appraisals vas a body of positive evidence

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 18
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Numbe r: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

3~.
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 indicating that conditions were good and prospects improving . In fact,
 in the course of these reassurances, the Secretary of Defense decided to
 order a speed up of the planned program for release of U.S. forces. In
 guidance furnished at the time, he directed t hat the proj ected schedules
 for force reduction provided for in the currently approved Model M Plan
 version of the GPSVN be accelerated by approx:iJnately six months . Accord-
 ingly, necessary planning revisions were undertaken immediately on a
 priority b asis .

 In contrast to the generally favorable military situation, hOlvever,
 there were grave misgivings about the political state of affairs. Earlier,
 a draft text of a proposed l etter from the President of the Unit ed States
 to President Diem of the RVN had been fonrarded by cable to the Secretary
 of Defense and the Ambassador, vlith a request for their reaction and com··
 ments. President Kennedy himself' thought the l etter too extreme, and
 iIould reluctantly resort to it only if the situation was found so serious
 that such direct US Presidential pressu:re wa s necessary. The text of the
 proposed l etter vTaS characterized by harsh, blunt candor. In effect it
 laid dmm 8n ultimatum: unless the GVN changed the repressive policies,
 methods , and actions practiced by some individual officials and gained for
 itself a broad base of popular political support, the United States might
 have to c onsider disassociating itself from the Diem Govermuent, and fur-
 ther US SUP:flort of Vietnam might become impossible . The Secre tary of
 Defense and the Al1lbassador prOmT)t ly responded idth a strong r ecorrnnendation
 against transmitting the proposed letter . Both agreed that the situation
 vas indeed very serious, but that it Has not likely to be influenced by
 "
 such a letter to Diem.*

 The proposed President ial letter was not s ent . Instead, many of
 t he points "-Tere conveyed in conversations vTith Di em, ·)H.· and, just before
 t he departure of the McNamara-Taylor Mission from Vietnam, another letter
 to President Diem was c omj)osed and. sent j.n i ts place . The n e'l-! v ers ion
 vras not only much so:fter in tone and more circumspect but i'Tent out over
 the signature of General Taylor as Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff . The
 l etter vas dated 1 October 1963, but '\oJas delivered on 2 October, i-Tith the
 approval of the Secret ary of Defense and with the concurrence of the US
 Ambassador to Vietnam ( Lodge ).

 In this letter the CJCS offered his personal, professional comments
 on the military Situation, in response to Diem I s earlier expressed
 int erest in receiving the.'1l. After ackn m'Tl edging the encouraging mili-
 tary progress over the preceding ti-TO y ears , the CJCS stated, !fIt was not
 until the recent political disturbances beginning in May and continuing
 through August and beyond that I personally had any doubt as to the
 ult:iJ:nate succe~lS of our campaign against the Viet Cong .!f He then addecl :

 7(. Msg Stat e 4"Tb to Saigon, 24 Sep 63, TOP SEC.REI' EYES ONLY for MtJ1lASSADOR
 LODGE and SECRETARY IvIcl\TAHARA; MSG Saigon 593 t o State , 24 Scp 63)
 TOP SEeBEr EYES ONLY for PRESIDENT FRCM McNj\MARA.

 *,X· Airgram, Saigon A-2L~4 to State, 3 Oct 63, Subj : "McNam.ara-Taylor Mission
 Bemo of Conversation 'iTith Pr ~s id ent Diem, Sep 29, 1963) " SECRET.

 19 TOP S~CR£~.- Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 1'OP SECR1"T - Sensitive

 "Nml, as Secretary McNamara h8S told you) a serious doubt
 hangs over our hopes for the future . Can vre win together in
 the face of the reaction to the measures taken by your Govern-
 ment against the Buddhists and the students? As a military man
 I would say that VIe can Hin providing there are no further
 political setbacks . The military indicators are still generally
 favorable and can be made more so by actions readily within the
 pOiTer of your Government . If you will allmr me ) I would mention
 a fe,·r of the military actions -which I believe necessary for this
 improvement. II

 The Chairman noted that though the military situation in I) II) and
III Corps· areas V!as generally good, some of the hard-core war zones of
t he Viet Cong remained virtually untouched . There ,rere not enough offensive
actions against the enemy in the field and', in his opinion) t he full poten-
tial of the military units Has not being exploited, for 11 • • • only a ruthless)
tireless offensive can \Tin the ..rar . "

 The principal military problems) he pointed out) "('Tere noV! in the
Delta, and the time had. . come to concentrate efforts there . An over-
haul of the Strategic Hamlet Program WBS needed . For it to succeed)
there must be a related clear-.ynd .. hold campaign by the combat units
of IV Corps) and the tactics should be oriented to the \Vatenvsys that
were a natural char'scteristic of the region. Furthennore) infantry
line units vTOuld have to operate at full strength, 'l-Tithout divc:r.sion
of combat pOller to rear echelon functions. The CJCS suggested that this
latter problem Has the case in ARVN generally, 'Thich President Diem
might vlant to examine closely.

 Finally he summed up vhat \Vas intended as the statement of the US
position :

 " In clOSing, Mr . President, may I give you my most impor-
 t ant overall impression? Up to now) the battle against the
 Viet Cong has seemed endless; no one has been ,Tilling to set
 a date for its successful conclusion . After talking to scores
 of officers, Vietnamese and .American ) I am convinced that the
 Viet Cong insurgency in the north and center can be reduced to
 little more than sporadic incidents by the end of 1964. The
 Delta ,vill take longer but should be completed by the end of
 1965. But for these predictions to be valid, certain c onditions
 must be met . Your Government shoul d be prepared to energize all
 agencies, military and civil, to a higher output of activity than
 up to nov . Ineffective c ormnanders and province officials must
 be replaced as soon as identified . Finally) there should be a
 r estoration of domestic tranquility on the homefront if political
 t ensions are to be allayed and external criticism is to abate .
 Conditions are need.ed for the creation of an atmosphere conducive
 t o an effective campaign directed at the objective, vital to both

 20 TOP SECRET ., Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 IDP SECRET .. Sensitive

 of us, of defeating the Viet Cong and of restoring peace to
 your community. ",)<-

 The results of the survey conducted by the McNamara-Taylor nlission
"Tere consolidated into a lengthy, formal report to the President con-·
taining specific findings, general evaluations, and reco~nendations . The
substance of the report Has presented in an hour-long, oral briefing to
the President immediately upon the return of the mission on the morning
of 2 October . Attending the briefing ,vere the Under Secretary of State,
the Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs, the Director of the
CIA, and the Special Assistant to the President for National Security
Affairs. Follmling the personal report, the President called for a
special meeting of the full National Security Council, which was held
from six to seven that same evening .

 The l'lcNamara-Taylor RelJOrt generally Vlas opt:iJuistic about the military
situation and S8'i! little direct effect of the poiitical crisis on the
prosecl).tion of the II81' . Their conclusions, inter alia, were that despite
serious political tensions and the increasing unpopularity of the Diem-Nhu
regime, liThe military campaign has made great progress and continues to
progress. II GVJ.'J military officers, though hostile to the government and
its repressive policies) continued to perfol~ their military duties in the
larger cause of fighting the Viet Cong enemy. This reassuring evaluatj.on,
hOI-rever, "TaS caveated to the effect that " . . . further repressive actions
by Di em and N'nu could change the present favorable military trends. II

 Specific findings in their appraisa l of the military situation bore
out the general evaluation . In the body of the report they stated :

 "'i'lith allOlvances for all ll..l1certainties, it is oue firm con-
 c lusion that the (fIJN military program has made great progress in
 the last year and a half, and that the progress has continued at
 a fairly steady rate in the past six months even through the
 p eri od of greatest political unrest i n Saigon . The tactics and
 t echniques employed by the Vietnamese under U. S . monitorship are
 sound and give promise of ultimate victory ."

Ex-pecially notevTortby, in their vie"l, ,.ras the progress clearly be i ng
achieved in the northern areas (I and II Corps ). Their apprai sal of the
p r ogress of the Strategic Hamlet Program \Vas also largely favorable. In
both connections , they cited the effect i veness of the U. S . military advisory
and support effort .

 Included among their military recommendations 1-7ere :

 a. General Harkins j}50flflJSfflACY] revie\V vi th Diem the military
 c hanges necessary to complete the military campaign in the
 ]\Tol'thern and Centr~l areas ( I , II, I II Corps ) by the end of
 1964, .and in the Delta ( IV Corps ) by the end of 1965 .
 b. A program be established to train Vi etnamese so that essential
 .
 functions nov -
 -perfonned
 . by U S . military personnel . can be
 0

~~~~L
 ~·t-r--
 C~J·-CS~~(~T-a- to President Diem of RVN, 1 Oct 63 ( delivered
 y~l-o-r)
 2 Oct 63 ), TOP SECRErr'.
 21 TOP SECRET .. 'Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 .carried out by Vi etnames e by the end of' 1965. It should be
 possible to withdra'il the bulk of U. S. personnel by that time.

 c. In accordance vlith the program to train progressively Viet-
 namese to take over military functions, the Defense Department
 should announce in the near future presently prepared plans to
 withdraw 1000 U.S. military personnel by the end of 1963. This
 action rhould be explained in 101-1 key as an initial step in a
 long-term program to replace U. S. personnell'lith trained Viet-
 namese vithout impairment of the war effort.

Germane to the above recommendations, however, it was stated elsevrhere
in the report, "No further reductions should be made until the requirements
of the 1964 campaign become firm." L~O/

 FollOl'ling the NSC meeting of2 October, the White House issued a
formal public announcement of the major policy aspects of the McNamara-
Taylor Mission Report. The "'hite House statement is reproduced below.

 U.S. POLICY ON VIET-NAM:
 WHITE HOUSE STATEME~~, OCTOBER 2, 1963 41/

 Secretary /of Defense Robert S. 7 McNamara and General ffiaxwell D.:...7
 Taylor reported to the President this morning and to the National
 Security Council this afternoon. Their report included a number of
 cla ssified findings and rdcommendations which will be the subject
 of further review and action. Their basic presentation was endorsed
 by all members of the Security Council and the following statement
 of Unit ed States policy "\oTaS approved by the President on the basis
 of recommendations received from them and from Ambassador /Henry
 Cabo~7 Lodge. -

 1. The security of South Viet-Nam is a major interest of the
 Unit ed States as other free nations. We "\orill adhere to our policy
 of working with the people and Government of South Viet-Nam to deny
 this country to communism and to suppress the externally stimulated
 and supported insurgency of the Viet Cong as promptly as possible.
 Effective performance in this undertakj.ng is the central objective
 of our policy in South Viet-Nam.

 2. The military program in South Viet-Nam has made progress and
 is sound in principle, though improvements are being energetically
 sought.

 3. Major U. S. assistance in support of this military effort is
 needed only until the insurgency has been suppressed or until the
 national se~urity forces of the Government of SouthViet-Nam are
 capable of suppressing it.

 Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their judgment
 that the major part of the U.S. military task can be c ompleted by the
 end of 1965, although there may be a continuing requirement for a
 limit ed nQmber of U.S. trainins personnel. They reported that by
 the end of this year, the U.S. program for training Vietnamese should

 22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 have progressed to the point where 1,000 U.S. military personnel.
 assigned to South Viet-Nam can be withdrawn.

 4. The political situation in South Viet-Nam remains deeply
 serious.. The United States had made clear its continuing opposition
 to any repressive actions in South Viet-Nam. While such actions have
 not yet significantly affected the military effort, they could do so
 in the future.

 5· It r emains the policy of the Unit ed States, in South Viet-
 Nam as in other parts of the ""orld, to support the efforts of the
 people of that country to defeat aggression and to build a peaceful
 and free society.

Considerable emphasis was given to the ~Vhite House statement, and to the
McNamara-Taylor Mission generally, in news media. Played up particularly
was the U. S. force vTithdrawal, especially the prospective 1000-man reduction.

 Three days later, on 5 October, in another meeting with the President,
followed by another NSC meeting, the McNamara-~laylor recommendations them-
s elves were addressed. The President "approved the milHary recommendations
contained in the report." The President also directed) in line with their
suggestion, that no formal announcement be made of the i.mplementation of
plans to withdravl 1000 U. S. military personnel from South Vietnam by the
end of 1963. 42/

 The effect of the McNamara-Taylor mission) thus) was to revalidate
the existing U.S. policy position regarding Vietnam. Reaffirmed were the
military objectives, courses of action, and programs essent ially as they
vlere laid out by the Secretary of Defense at the Honolulu Conference over
a year earlier on 23 July 1962. The underlying premises and soundness
 of the rationale seemed more cogent than ever. In fact, a new impetus
vlBS thereby given to pursuing the same goals vith even greater thrust and
purpose . Such an outcome could have been forecast, as noted earlier,
,·rhen Mr. McNama ra set in motj.on another CPSVN planning cycle to revise
the Model M Plan and develop an accelerated plan to Hi thdraw U. S. forces.

 Part of the motivation behind the stress placed on U.S. force with-
dravral, . and particularly the seemingly arbitrary desire to effect the 1000-
man reduction by the end of 1963, apparently was as a signal to influence
both the North Vietnamese and the South Vietnamese and set the stage for
possible l ater steps that vould help bring the Jnsurgency to an end. With
r egard to the SVN) the demonstration of determination to pullout U.S.
forc es was intended to induce the South Vietnamese to increase the effective-
nes s of their military effort . 43/ Staters instructions to Ambassador
Lodge resulting from NSC actionon the McNamara-Taylor mission indicated
that :

 "Actions are designed to indicate to Diem Government our dis-
 pleasure at it s political p.olicies and activities and to create
 significant uncertainty in t hat government and in key Vietnamese
 groups as to future intentions of United States. At same time,
 actions are designed to have at most slight impact on military or

 23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 counterinsurgency effort against Viet Cong, at least in
 short term. . . . 'I 41!-/

\-lith respect to HanOi, it might present an opportunity for a demarche--
exploiting vithdrm'Tal of U. S. forces fTOm. South Vietnam by a specified
date as exchange for North Vietnam ' s abandoning its aggression against
South Vietn!3m . But events 'Ifere already cons p iring otherw-ise, and 'I-[ould
soon frustrate such expectations and intentions as developed. The
internal SVN situation 'i-TaS about to lmdergo rapid tTansfo:cmation .

 By late October, there '\-TaS increasing skepticism in so::ne quarters
about the military situation in South Vietnam. L'1deed , it lIas beginnj_ng
to be suspected that reports of pTogress by U. S. military sources actu-
ally cloaked a situation that 'l-laS not only bleak, but deteriorating. A
State Department intelligence evaluation of 22 October shOl·r ed markedly
pessLmistic statistical trends since July 1963, in most areas of enemy-
frie ndly Telative progress measurement, indicating an unfavorable shift in
the military balance . Hbat '\Vas disquieting 'l-TaS that the pattern shOl-Ted
steady decline over a peTiod of more than three months ' duration . ~· 5/

 Circulation of the I NR evaluation occasioned controversy and no little
recrimination. Substantive differences' degenerated into a procedural issue .
The outcome \-Tas a personal memorandu..'ll from the Se cretary of State to the
Secretary of Defense on 8 November, amounting to an ap olog,y fOT the incident.
The Se cret ary of State stat ed in regard to Il\JR ' s RFE-90 of 22 October :

 " ... . it is not the policy of the Stat e Department to issue
 military app raisals 'IJithout seeking the vievs of the Defense
 ' Departme nt. I have requested that any memoranda given inter-
 departmental circulation 'I{hich include military appraisals be
 c oordinated 'l-ri th your Department. II 46/

TIlE NOVEiYIBER COUP AND OVERTHROW OF DIEM

 On 1 November, the politica l situation fell apart . The l ong-anticipated
coup occurred. The Diem regime was overthrmm, and both Diem and Nhu '\Vere
assassinated . A military junta of politically inexperienced generals took
over the government as their successors .

 The significance of the great change, for good or i ll, vas not readily
apparent . Over the next three 'I{eeks the feared political chaos , civi l '\Var,
and col lapse of the var effort fol lowing a coup did not seem to be mater-
i alizing . For the United States, the important question Has "That did the
nevr circumstanc es mean militarily for existing policy and plans oriented to
b ringing the j_nsurgency under control and to phas :Lng out US force c ommitments.

 On 20 Nov~ili er , at the. President ' s direction, a special all -agencies
c onference on Vietnam vas convened in Honolulu for a "full-scale reviev "
i n depth of all aspects of the situation and to reassess U. S. plans and
policies in the political, military, economic and informa tion fi elds
since the change of government . Attending'l-Tere SOille l.f5 s en ior U.S .
officials, military and civilian , inclti.ding: t he Se cretary of State ,
Secrcta:r.·y of Defense, Special Assistant to the Pre sident for National

 24 TOP SEC REI' .. Sens itive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Num ber: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

~ '1>
;; •.
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Security Affairs, Chairman, JCS, Director of CIA, CINCPAC, Ambassador to
 to Vietnam, and COlvIDSfllACV. Ambassador Lodge assessed the prospects for
 Vietnam as hopeful. In his estimation the nevr government llas not vithout
 promise . Vietnamese military leadership appeaY'ed to be united and deter-
 mined to step up the war effort . The Ambassador advocated continuing to
 pursue the goal of setting dates for phasing ou~ U.S. activities and
 turning them over to the Vietnamese , and he volunteered that the announced
 vTithdrawal of 1000 troops by the end of 1963 was alY'eady having a salutary
 affect . COlviTJSNACV agreed with the Ambassador that the conduct of the Far
 against the VC was coming along satisfactorily . Admitting that the VC-
 incidents rate shot up 300 to ~-OO percent after the coup , he noted that
 since 6 November, hm-lever, it had dropped dovm to "normal" and remained
 so to the present. Military operational statistics nov generally shm-led
 a more or less favorable balance . In short, the briefings and assessments
 received at the conference constituted "an encouraging outlook for the
 principle objec;tive of joint U. S. - Vietnamese policy in South Vietnam-·-the
 succes sful prosecution of the Vlar against the Viet Cong communists. " More-
 over, "excellent "lOrking relations bet'l{een U. S . officials and the members
 of the new Vietnamese government " had been estabIished. All plans for the
 UoS. phas ing out vTere to go ahead as scheduled.

 In this light t0e U. S • military plans and progrB.ll1s for Vietnam uere
 addressed . The revision of the Iviodel 1,,'1 Plan of the CPSVN, ordered by
 the Se cretary of Defense during his last visit to Vietnam in October "TaS
 progress ing apace and the finished Accelerated Plan vas expected to be
 fon-larded shortly . It vlOuld cost $6.4 million more than the Model Plan,
 ho'"ever . Indications "rere tha t the IT. ~- 11.AP would also cost more because
 of the acceleration--to a total now of $187.5 million . The Secretary of
 Defense made it clear that he felt that the proposed CINCPAC MAP c ould be
 cut back and directed that the program be revie'ded to refine it and cut
 c osts to stay as close as possible to the OSD ceiling of $175.5 million .
 He "ioTaS e'lually emphatic, hO'tTever, that while he would not tolerat e fat or
 i nefficiency in the program he vTaS prepared to provide 'Ivhatever funds
 might be re'luired under M...AP to support the GVN . In fact, he obs erved
 that the GVN \-las already running into "tremendous financial def icits , "
 and opined that neither AID nor MAP had budgeted enough to provide for
 the emergencies Fhich were likely to arise during 19~ . 47/

 ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT KEN1~DY

 On 22 November 1963, Pres ident Kennedy vTaS assass i nated . The con-
 se'luences ,.;ere to set an institutional fY'eeze on the direction and momentum
 of U . S. Vietnam policy. Universally opeY'at ive vTaS a desire to avoid change
 of any kind dill ing the c:citical int e rregnum :&eriod of the nevl Johnson
 Administration. Both the President and the governmental establisl1ment
 c onsciously strove for cont inuity, \-Tith respect to Vietnam no less than
 i n other areas. In Vietnam this continuity meant that the phase-out
 concept, the CPSVN 'l-Tithdrawal plan, and the MAP programs probably survived
 b eyond the pOint they might have othervTise.

 25 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECR1~ - Sensitive

 The i mmediate Johnson stamp on the Kennedy policy came on 26 November .
At a NSC meeting convened to consider the ,results of the 20 November'
Honolulu Conference, the President "reaffirmed that U.S. objectives ,{ith
respect to "\.,rithdYav!al of U.S. military personnel remain as stated in the
White House statement of October 2, 1963 . II 1~8 / The only hint that some-
thing might be different from on-going planscame in a Secretary of Defense
memo for the President thJee days prior to this NSC meeting. In that memo,
Mr. McNamara said that the nel-T South Vietnamese government "\Vas confront ed
by serious financial problems, and that the U.S. must be prepared to
raise planned MAP levels. ~9/

 In early December, the President began to have, if not second thoughts ,
at least a sense of uBeasiness about Vietnam. In discussions with his
advisors, he set in motion "\{hat he hoped "[ould be a major policy review,
fully staffed j,n depth, by Administration principals. The President "lvanted
"a fresh new look taken " at the Fhole problelli. In preparation for such a
bas i c reappraisal; an interdepartmental meeting of second-echelon principals
accordingly convened on 3 December and laid out a broad outline of basic
topics to be addressed and staff papers to be developed by various.depart-
ments and agencies . 50/ This attempt at a systematic and comprehensive
r eexamination, hOl{ever, did not culminate in a fundamenta l national reass ess --
ment.

ACCELERATED NiODEL PLAN OF THE CPSVN

 \V:i.th no i ndication of policy change in the offing, U.S. military plan-
ning thus ,vent fOTImrd 'ivith hardly a break in stride . On 5 December
CINCPAC submitted the Accelerated Model Plan to the JCS. It was the
r evision to the Model M Plan version of the CPSVN that the Secretary of
Defens e had ordered during his early Octob er visit t o Vietnam . The
Acc elerated Plan provided for more rapid phase-out of the bulk of U.S .
military personnel and uBits and a decrease i n the r es idual strength
r emaining thereafter ( see Figure 3 ). It also provided for building up
GVN forces at a faster pace but on a more reduced scale, then cutting
back from t he peak sooner and leveling out somevrhat lower ( see Figure 4).
MAP costs for the FY 1965-69 period would be a little higher than the
$39 2 . 2 million under the l'lIodel M Plan, coming to $399 .4 million in the
Accelerated Plan ( see Fib~re 5). 51/

 26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 16,-- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ,

 MACV AND SPECIAL
 ASSISTAI'4CE UN ITS
 15 (F Y66 AND AFTER
 LEVEL AT 36 PERSONNEL)

 14 ST ARCOM
 AND RRU

 MAAG AND
 13
 SUPPORT

 AP - ACCELERATED PLAN
 12
 MP - MODEL PLAN

 11

 10

-g 9
 &l
 ::J
 o
-£
I 8
I-
<.9
Z
UJ
~ 7
Vl

 6

 5

 4 /(C-123 SQUADRON: TELECOMMUNICATIONS)

 3

 2

 1966 1967 1968 1969
 END FISCAL YE AR
12-9-68-3

 FIGUR E 3 (5). Co mprehensive Pla n South Vietnam (CPSVN)
 Phase Down of U.S . Fo rces (U)
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 55°r-----------------------------------------·--------------------------i
 CIVILIAN IRREGULAR
 DEFENSE GROUPS

 JUNK SAILORS
 500
 SELF-DEFENSE CORPS

 CIVIL GUARD
 REGULAR
 450 ARMED FORCES

 MP - MODEL PLAN
 AP - ACCELERATED PLAN

 400

 350

~
 ~ 300
 :>
 o
-£
~

::r:
G
Z
UJ
 250
0<
t;;

 100

 1965 1966 1967 1968
 END FISCAL YEAR
12-9-68-4

 FIGURE 4 (5). Comprehensive Plan Vietnam (CPSVN)
 Phase Down of GVN Forces (U)
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 1~r---------------------------------~---------------------------------'

 ~ ACCELERATED PLAN
 180

 [i:::::t:II MODEL PLAN
 170

 160

 150

 140

 130

 110
..
~

c
.~
 100
·E
I-
V> 90
0
v
 80

 70

 50

 40

 20

 10

12-9-68-5

 FIGURE 5 (5). Comprehensive Plan Vietnam (CP5VN) MAP Cost (U)
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 THE 1000-MAN WITHDRAI"AL OF DECEMBER 1963

 During the month of December, the planned 1000-man reduction was
executed. It proved essentially an accounting exercise . Technically,
more than a thousa nd U.S. personnel did leave, but many of these were part
of the normal turnover cycle, inasmuch as rotation policy alone, not to
mention medical evacuation or administrative reasons, resulted in an
average rate of well over a thousand returnees per month. Though the
replac ement pipeline IoTas slOl·red somevrhat, year-end total in-country strength
nevertheless vTaS close to 16,000. 52/ This did not even represent a
decline of 1000 from the October peak of 16,732 .

 1'hat the avm-red goal of 1000 would not be reached had in fact been
anticipat ed and acknmrledged before mid-December . Despite close monitoring
of authorized ce ilings and actual strengths, the force level kept rising.
On 11 December, for example, the estimate of projected year-end U.S.
strength in Vietnam had to be revis ed upward to reflect additional deploy-
ments approved since September. The adjusted figure now came to 15,894,
a net increase of 162 over the. earlier estimate . This new strength ceiling
was 'ioJ'hat would be left after the 1000-man vrithdravral then in progres s vras
completed. 53/

THE VIETNAM SITUATION WORSENS

 In December conflicting estimates of the situation in Vietnam indi-
 cated that the bright hop es and predictions of the past vrere increasingly
 less than realistic. A McNamara memo to the President ,vritten follOl'Ting
 a trip to Vietnam of 21 December, was laden \oJ'ith gloom. 54/ He wrote:
 liThe situation is very disturbing . Current trends, unless reversed in
 t he next 2-3 months, I·rill lead to neutralization at best and more likely
. to a cormnunist-controlled state . 11 He went on to note that lithe ne'ioJ' govern-
 ment is the greatest source of concern, " and that "it is indecisive and
 drifting." The Country Team, he added, "lacks leadership, and has been
 poorly informed." One of the most serious deficiencies he found .TaS a
 IIgrave reporting ,.,eakness " on the U.S. side . "Viet Cong progress has been
 great during the period since the coup , with my best guess being that the
 situation has in fact been deteriorating i n the countryside since July to
 a far greater extent than "e realize because of our undue dependence on
 distorted Vietnamese reporting ." Mr . McNamara clearly concluded that none
 of these conditions could be reversed by the influx of more American
 personnel, nor did he even mention that the U.S. could continue to withdraw
 troops at all or as scheduled . His proposal Has to hold the l ine : "u. S.
 resources and personnel," he said, "cannot usefully be substantially
 i ncreased . • . 7 " although he did announce his intention to increase staffs
 lito sizes that will give us a reliable, independent U.S. appraisal of the
 status of operat ions." In h:i,s concluding paragraph, hOl.rever, the Secretary
 of Defense admitted that his OHn estimate IImay be overly pessimistic," inas-
 much as the Ambassador, COYIUSMACV, and Gene ral Minh ,.,ere not discouraged
 and looked fonrard to significant jJnprovements in January . ',24/

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

 Vestiges of optimism still persisted in one degree or another in
some quarters. The earlier sense of confidence that had been established
was deep-rooted and not easily shaken. A retrospective evaluation of
the Vietnam situdtion ostensibly covering the period 1960 through 1963,
prepared by SACSA (General Krulak ) is indicative. Although intended as
a broad overview ( and so called), and though actually cut off as of some-
time in Odober 1963, it I·Tas forwarded in late October or November directly
to the Secretary of Defense. The SACSA report presented nothing l ess
than a gloving account of steady progress across the board in the mili-
tary situation. Significantly, it contained no hint that the rate of
progress possibly might have temporarily slol{ed somewhat in the second
half of 1963, despite the fact that it expressly treated events as late
as Oct ober. 55/ Yet by this tj~e , other evaluations giving a quite
different picture were a l ready asserting themselves. Near the close of
1963 the Director, DIA, reported to the Secretary of Defense that year-
end reviei{ and reassessment of the enemy situation revealed VC capabilities
had not been impaired Over the past year. On the contrary, the VC had in
many regards improved in combat effectiveness and nmT enjoyed a generally
improved force posture for insurgency. 56/

 Hopeful bias alone does not explain the endurance of past firmly
rooted optimism-- such as the SACSA overvie,\{. The difference between
those who stressed the positive and those who saw decline vlaS, in part,
the product of vieHing the situation in greater or shorter time frames.
Those \'Tho applied a macroscopic perspective, believed--and not vlithout
cert ain logic--that current unfavorable reports io/'ere, at vlorse, a temporary
l apse in t he larger curve of progress over the years. ,Those who took spot
checks tended to be more impressed by the immediate situation, and at
this time, the immediate situation was critical. The feelj_ngs of this
latter group ilere buttressed vThen on 30 January another coup, this time
largely bloodless, ousted the ruling Minh government . I t was a facti onal
power struggle in which one military group r eplaced another, this time
with General Khanh emerging as Premier . The latest development held
forth little promise of giving the country the political stability so
desperately needed in the midst of a '\-rar for survival. The event vlould
prove only symptomatic as part of a sequence of similar government up-
heavals that were to follml.

 In the U.S., the coincidence of domestic tragedy and patent i nstability
in Vietnam evoked a chorus urging a Laos-like resolution of the Vietnam
conflict. In late August, 1963, President de Gaulle had issued a policy
statement on Vietnam vThich was subsequently officially interpreted as a
proposal for " i,r.dependence and neutrality " for Vietnam--meaning eventual
U.S. withdrawal. In the aftermath of the assassinations, speculation turned
i ncreasingly to this solution . For exam.ple, Senator Mansfield '\-Trote to
Pres i dent Jor...nson to propose a division of Vietnam beti{een the GVN and the
Viet Cong, coupled vlith a U.S. withdl"avral. In early J'anuary, 1964, Secre-
tary McNamara furnished. the President the following counters to Senator
Mansfield 1 s arguments:

 31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

I (fb i
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 "l. \tie should certainly stress that the war is essentially
 a Vietnamese responsibility) and this we have repeatedly do~e)
 particu~arly in our announced policy on U.S. troop vithdrawal .
 At the same time Ive cannot disengage U.S. prestige to any sig-
 nificant degree . ...

 "2. The security situation is serious) but we can still \olin)
 even on present ground rules •...

 "3. . .. . Any deal either to divide the present territory of
 South Vietnam or to Ineutralize I South Vietnam would inevitably
 mean a ne,,, government in Saigon that would in short order become
 Communist-dominated .

 "4. The consequences of a Communi st-dondnated South Vietnam
 are extremely serious both for the rest of Southeast Asia and
 for the U.S. position in the rest of Asia and indeed in other
 key areas of the I-lorld ....

 "5. Thus) the stakes in preserving an anti-Communist South
 Vietnam are so high that) in our judgment ) we must go on bending
 every effort to win .... And) I am confident that the American people
 are by and large in favor of a policy of firmness and strength in
 such situations." 57/

 Secretary McNamara in his testimony before Congress on the fiscal
 year 1965 budget in early February) 1961i·) declined to link the previously
 planned U. S. withdrmvals 'ivith either "pessirllism" or " optimism" regarding
 events in Vietnam) saying simply that the withdrawals had all along been
 conditioned upon Vietna~mese capability to assume full r espons ibility from
 the U.S. trainers) and that there would be a "substantial reduction in
 our force as 'ile train them. II Further:

 "Last falL .. I 'iJasn It as optimistic perhaps about the course
 of the \olar as I vas about being able to bring back our personnel
 in certain numbers by the end of last year and also in increments
 betveen then and the end of 1965.

 " I still am hopeful of doing that. We' did) of course) bring
 back 1)000 men toward the latter part of last year. I am hopeful
 \ore can bring back additional numbers of men later this year and
 certa inly next year. I say this because I personally believe
 that this is a vaY' that the Vietnamese must fight ... I don It believe
 vre can take on that combat task for them. I do believe "-Ie can
 carry out training. We can provide- advice and logistical assistance.

 "But after all) the training) by the very nature of the vlork)
 comes to an end at a certa in paint. We vTill have started this
 expanded training and carried it out for a period of 4 years) by
 the end of next year. vie started at the end of 1961. The end
 of n ext ,year will have been .4 years later and cert ainly 'vTe should

 32 'I'OP SECRET , - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

'{ I'

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 have completed the majority of the training task by that time.
 This, in General Taylor's vie"T and mine, is what ,{e should be
 able to do. If we do, 'rle should bring our men back.

 "I don ' t believe we should leave our men there to substitute
 for Vietnamese men ,{ho are qualified to carry out the task, and
 this is really the heart of our proposal. I think it I-laS a sound
 proposal then and I think so noVT •• •• "

 Unsureness about the actual state of affaiNs in Washington spread
 eventually to the highest levels of government, and prompted the dis-
 patching to South Vietnam in early February of a CIA "Special CAS Group"
 for an independent evaluation of the military situation. A series of
 four reports, dated 10, 11, 14 and 18 February 19611-, were produced, each
 transmitted by the Deputy Director, CIA, to the Secretary of Defense,
 Secretary of State, and others as soon as it came out. Instead of finding
 progress, these reported a serious and steadily deteriorating situation.
 Cited vere VC gains in the past several months, and particularly noted VTas
 that VC arms were increasing in quantity and quality. As for the Strategic
 Hamlet Program, they found it " at present at virtual standstill. " The
 Special CAS Group ' s concluding appraisal vas pessimistic: "Tide of
 insurg ency in all four corps areas appears to be going against GVN." 58/
 COMUSMACV ( who had no prior knovledge of the Special CAS Group ' s reports )
 took issue vlith the Group's findings} contesting less the data used than
 the conclusions, especially the "personal " evaluational opinions as to
 degree of deterioration. He suggested that in the future such reports
 be first coordinated before being dispatched. 59/

 On 6 March a major Secretary of Defense Conference again convened at
 CINCPAC headquarters for a broad reassessment. The consensus was that the
 military situation was definitely deteriorating. No longer was the issue
 'rlhether it vas progressing satisfactorily or not. The question now ioTaS
 how much of a setback had there been and what was needed to make up for it.
 An opinion shared by many ,{as that the insurgency could be expected to go
 beyond 1965. This general reorientation of perspective was reflected in
 the Secretary of Defense ' s observation that attention should be focused on
 the near-term objectives of providing the greater U.S. support that would
 be necessary, and suspending for the time being consideration of longer-
 range concerns such as 5-year MAP projections. 60/ The visit to Vietnam
 on 8 March corroborated the gravity of the im:mediate problems at hand.

 FollOl.,ring his return from Vietnam, Mr. McNamara, on 16 March, sub
 mitted to the President a formal report. In it the Secretary of Defense
 acknowledged, "The situation has unquestionably been grmling 'rlOrse , at
 l east since September." RVNAF desertion rates were i ncreas.ing, and the GVN
 military position generally 'rTaS "Teakening noticeably. The VC position , on
 the other hand, shoved signs of improving. He referred pointedly to the
 increase in North Vietnamese support. The conclusion was that greater
 U So support ,vas needed.
 0

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 In describing vThat I-TaS required to improve the situation in South
Vietnam) Mr. McNamara identified measures that uwill involve? limited
increase in U,S. personnel and in direct Defense Department costs. More
significantly they involve significant increases in Military Assistance
Program costS ... , ) f I plus fladditional U.S. economic aid to support the
increased GVN budget. II The estimated additional annual MAP costs 'dould
come to between $30 and $40 million each year) plus a one-time additional
cost of $20 million for military equipment. In the recommendation section
of the report) the Secretary listed the following 12 items:

 1. To make it clear that \ire are prepared to furnish assistance
 and support to South Vietnam for as long as it takes to bring
 the insurgency under control.

 2. To make it clear that we fully support the Khanh government
 and are opposed to any further coups.

 3. To support a Program for National Mobilization ( including a
 national service law ) to put South Vietnam on a war footing.

 4. To assist the Vietnamese to increase the armed forces ( regular
 plus paramilitary ) by at least 50)000 men.

 5· To assist the Vietnamese to create a greatly enlarged Civil
 Administrative Corps for vTOrk at province) district and hamlet
 levels.

 6. To assist the Vietnamese to improve and reorganize the para-
 military forces and to increase their compensation.

 7. To assist the Vietnamese to create an offensive guerrilla force.
 8. To provide the Vietnamese Air Force 25 A-IH aircraft in exchange
 f or the present T-28s.

 9. To provide the Vietnamese army additional M-113 armored personnel
 carriers (w'ithdrawing the M-114s there ), additional river boats)
 and approximately $5-10 million of other additional material .

 10. To announce publicly the Fertilizer Program and to expand it
 with a vieH l{ithin tyro years to trebling the amount of fertilizer
 made ayailable .

 11. To authorize continued high-level U. S. overflights of South
 Vietnam ' s borders and to authorize !thot pursuit U and South Viet-
 namese ground operations over the Laotian line for the purpose
 of border· control. More ambitious operations into Laos involving
 units beyond battalion size should be authorized only with the
 approval of Souvanna Phouma. Operations across the Cambodian
 border should depend on the state of relations with Cambodia .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 12. To prepare immediately to be in a position on 72 hours'
 notice to initiate the full range of Laotian and Cambodian
 "Border Control" actions ( beyond those authorized in para graph
 11 above ) and the "Retaliatory Actions" against North Vietnam,
 and to be in a position on 30 days' notice to initiate the .
 program of "Graduated Overt Mllitary Pressure" against North
 Vietnam .

 As for the future of the phased-withdraval plans, the Secretary of
Defense's report contained the following:

 "The U.S. policy of reducing existing personnel Vlhere South
 Vietnamese are in a position to assume the functions i s still sound.
 Its application vill not lead to any major reductions in the near
 future, but adherence to this policy as such has a sound effect in
 portraying to the U. S. and the ,,[orld that we continue to regard
 the "Tar as a conflict the South Vietnamese must Vlin and take ultimat e
 responsibility for. Substantial reductions in the numbers or" U.S.
 military training personnel should be possible before the end of
 1965· HOVlever, the U. S. 'should continue to reiterate that it ,,[ill
 provide all the assistance and advice required to do the job r egard-
 less of hOi·' long it takes." 61/

 By formal decision at the NSC session of 17 March, the President
approved the Secretary of Defense r eport of 16 March 1964 and directed all
agencies to carry out the 12 recommendations contained therein. 62/ A
vlhite House statement, reproduced below, was issued the same day.

 JMMEDIATE RELEASE March 17, 1964

 Offic e of the I,fuite House Press Secretary

 THE WHITE HOUSE

 Secretary McNamara and General Taylor, folloVling their
 initial oral report of Friday, today reported fully to President
 Johnson and the m6nbers of the National Security Council. The
 report covered the situation in South Vietn~l, the measures being
 taken by General Khanh and his government, and the need for United
 States assistance to supplement and support these measures. There
 vas also discussion of the continuing support and direction of the
 Viet Cong insurgency from North Vietnam.

 At the close of the meeting the President accepted the report
 and its printipal recommendations, "lhich had the support of the
 National Security Council and Ambassador Lodge.

 Comparing the situation to last October, "\oThen Secretary McNamara
 and General Taylor last report ed fully on it, there have unques-
 tionably been setbacks . The Viet Cong ha ve taken maximum advantage
 of t"TO ~hanges of government, and 0f more long-standing difficulties,

 35 TOP SECRET - Sensit ive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

including a serious "\oreakness and over-extension vhich had developed
in the basically sound hamlet program. The supply of arms and
cadres from the north has continued; careful and sophisticated
control of 'Tiet Cong operations has been gpparent ; and evidence
that such control is centered in Hanoi is clear and ~~istakable.

 To meet the situation, General Khanh and his government are
acting vigorously and effectively. They have produced a sound
central plan for the prosecution of the var, recognizing to a far
greater degree than before the crucial role of economic and social,
as veIl as military, action to ensure that areas cleared of the
Viet Cong survive and prosper in freedom.

 To carry out this plan, General Khanh re~uires the full enlistment
of the people of South Vietnam, partly to augment the strength of his
anti-guerrilla forces, but particularly to provide the administrators,
health Horl~ers, teachers and others "\orho must follOl-r up in cleared
areas. To meet this need, and to provide a more e~uitable and
common basis of service, General Khanh has informed us that he
proposes in the near future to put into effect ' a National Mobilization
Plan that Ivill provide conditions and terms of service :in appropriate
jobs for all able-bodied South Vietnamese b eti,een certain ages.

 In addition, steps are re~uired to bring up to re~uired levels
the pay and status of the paramilitary forces and to create a highly
tra :ined guerrilla force that can beat the Viet Cong on its own ground.
Finally, limited but significant additional e~uipment is propos ed
for the air forces, the river navy, and the mobile forces.

 In short, where the South Vietnames e Government now has the
pOl,er to clear any part of its territory, Gene ra l Khanh' s ne"\Ol
program is designed to clear and to hold, step by step and province
by province.

 This program will involve substantial increases in cost to the
South Vietnamese economy, which in turn depends heavily on United
States economic aid. Additional, though less subst antia l, military
assistance funds are also needed, and increased United States
training activity both on the civil and military side. The policy
should cont:inue of withdrawing United States personnel where their
roles can be assumed by South Vietnamese and of sending additional
men if they are needed. It "\olill r emain the policy of the United
Stat es to furnish assistance and support to South Vietnam for as
long as it is re~uired to bring Ccrmnunist aggression and terrorism
under control.

 Secretary McNamara and General Taylor reported their overall
conclusion that "\-lith continued vigorous l eadership from General
Khanh and his gover nment, and the carrying out of these steps, the
situation can be significantly lifiproved in the coming months.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive O rder 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

5'\
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 DEMISE OF THE CPSVN

 Before the month of March '\Vas over the CPSVN, as ,Jell as the MAP
 planning that had been such an integral part of it, finally received the
 coup de grace. Sacrificed to the UoS. desire "to make it clear that '\Ve
 fully support" the GVN, they '\Vere fonnally terminated, for the record, on
 27 March in the OSD message reproduced below:
 FROM: OSD WASH DC DEF 963028 Date: 27 March 196L~
 (Col. Iv. J. Yates )
 TO: CINCPAC
 REFS: a. CINCPAC 110626z Mar 64
 b. DEF 959615 DTG 132352Z Mar e~

 1. As indicated .in ref. b., ceiling for Vietnam FY 66 MAP is
 $143.0 million against $143.1 million for FY 65 . Requirements
 above ~hese program levels should be identified as separate packages .

 2. Submission of five-year programs FY 66-70 for Vietnam is
 suspended until further notic e . Your best est:i.mates of FY 66
 requirements are neces sary inasmuch line detail as feasible by
 1 Jul 64 in order that ( a ) the Military Departments can revievr
 for pricing, lead time, availabilities, and prepare for procure-
 ment action and (b ) requirements can be process ed within DoD,
 State/AID and BoB for budget/Congressional Presentation purposes.

 3 . Preyious guidance re Model Plan projection for phas edown of
 U.S. forces and GVN forces is superseded. Policy is as announced
 by White House 17 Mar 61.,. : Quote The policy should continue of
 .rithdrmTing U.S. personnel where their roles can be assumed by
 South Vietnamese and of sending additional men i f they are needed.
 It .rill remain the policy of the U.S. to furnish assistance and
 support of South Vietnam for as long as is required to bring
 Communist aggression and terrorism under control . Unquote .

 4. No further action required or being taken here relative to
 accelerated model plan.

 Thus ended dejure the policy of phase out and vrithdrawal and all the
 pl ans and programs oriented to it. Shortly, they '\Vould be cancelled out
 de facto.

 BUILD-UP OF THE DoS. FORCE COMMI'I'MENT

 Soon the whole evolutionary direction of the U.S. military commit-
 ment began to change. Rather than diminishing, the magnitude rose there-
 after. In early May the approved U.S. military strength ceiling for South
 Vietnam '\Vas raised by more than 1500 so that total in-country authorization
 came to over 17,000. Further increases were in sight. 63/ As the mili-
 tary situation in Vietnam failed to shm-1 signs of amerliorating, pressures

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 37
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET .. Sensitive

began to develop in late spring for an even more significant increase in
UoS. forces.

 A special meeting on Southeast Asia was called at PACOM Headquarters
in Honolulu for 1-2 Jun e because of the unsatisfactory progress in execu-
tion of the National Pacification Plan. There) COMUSMACV proposed extending
and intensifying the U.S. advisory effort in order to improve the operational
effectiveness of the VNAF performance genera lly. The idea ioTaS discussed
and supported in principle ) and a staff ,lorking paper outlining the concept
was prepared by the conferees. Near the end of Jun e ) COMUSMACV submitted
to JCS (info CINCPAC) DOD) State) White House) his formal proposal recom-
mending enlargement of the advisory assistance program. He reiterated) and
offered further justification for) the need to augment the current advisory
detachments at the battalion l evel and to extend the advisory effort at both
the district and sector levels. His detailed breakout of primary personnel
requir ements came to a total of 900 more advisors. as the net in-c ountry
increase) but conceded that additional administrative and logistic support
requirements would be substantial and would be submitted separately. Also)
approximately 80 additional U.S. Navy advisors ,{QuId be reCl.uested) in con-
nection with recommendations mtade earlier in the flBucklev Report" for a
Junk Force and other measures to counter infiltration by sea. CINCPAC
indicated concurrence and recommended approval of the proposal on 4 July. 64/

 In the middle of July) the nevi U. S. Ambassador to Vietnam) General
MaxVlell Taylor) sent an evaluation of the military situation to the Secre-
tary of State) Secretary of Defense) and JCS that lent strong support to
COMUSMACV 's proposal. The Ambassador advised that forraal estimates of
regular VC strength in South Vietnam had been revised and nmi ..Tere raised
to b etween 28)000 and 34)000. He explained that this did not reflect a
sudden dramatic increase ) but had been suspected for the past two or three
years ) though confirmatory evidence had become available only in the l ast
few months. There was thus no occasion for alanll) but the new estimate
emphasized the growing magnitude of the problem and the need to increase
the l evel of U.S./GVN efforts. Therefore) additional requirements were
being fonnulated) including U.S, military personnel requirements) to support
U.S. plans during the ensuing months to cope ,-lith the ne" lLl1derstanding of
the r ealities of the situation. He forecast an increa se in U.S. military
strength to around 21)000 over the next six-month period to meet proj ected
needs. 65/

 Immediately the size of the estimated force requirements connected
with the proposed expansion of the advisory effort began to climb. On
16 July COMOStvLACV submitted the support requirements associated ..,ith the
program . For th(' next year he Vlould need) over and above the original
900 additional advisors requested) more than 3200 other personnel) fo r a
total gross military strength increa se of about 4200. 66/ The Ambassador
in Saigon concurred in COMUSlvlACV's pfoposedincrease inU.S. military
strength by 4200 over the next nine months) bringing the total in~country
to nearly 22)000) and he urged prompt action. The Secretary of State also
recommended approval) as did CINCPAC and JCS) and on 20 July) at the JCS-
SecDef meeting) overall support was given to the COMUSMACV requested

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

deployment package. The following day, at the NSC meeting of 21 July,
the President gave it final approval, though that action was not included
in the NSAM is sued the next day. 67/

 As eventually refined, the total force increment actually came to
over 4900 u.s. personnel. In addition, other requirements not directly
relat ed to the advisory effort itself were being generated and met inde-
pendently. By the close of 1964 the year-end U.S. in-country strength
figure had climb ed to approximately 23,000 personnel and further authorized
deployments were under way or in preparation.

 The actual effect of "phased withdrawals" was minimal. Though 1,000
spaces among the personnel authorized MACV vTere eliminated in 1963, add-ons
overtook cut-backs. As an example, U.S. Army strength in Vietnam--the bulk
of the advisory effort--vras allocated as follows:

 PERCENTAGE OF U.S. ARMY STRENGTH IN VIETNAM fBI
 Total Army Hq & Spt Aviation Communica- Special Other
 Strength Units Units tion Units Forces Advis ers

Nov 63 10,000 17 35 15 6 27

Mar 64 10,000 19 34 13 7 27

Nov 6'+ 14,000 28 30 12 8 22

POSTSCRIPT TO HITHDRAHAL PLANNING

 The officia l termination of formal planning tmrards withdravlal by
no means ended its attraction as one issue in the grmTing public debat e
over Vietnam policy. In August, 1964, the Tonkin Gulf crisis brought
Congressmen back in perplexity to Secretary McNamara's statements on with-
dra;.rals, and elicited the following exchange:

 " . .. LSecretary McNamara, you7 have again always indicated that
 you hoped that by the end of this year there ;.rould have been a sub-
 stantial reduction .... \{here we had a planned reduction of the
 number of troops, and what appeared to be a ;.rithdrawal of the United
 States from the area, then this attack comes , "lvhich would put us
 finnly in the area, or at least change our mind. The ;.rhole thing,
 to me, is completely, at least, not understanding.

 SECRETARY McNAVLARA: "The · period, Decembe r 1961, through the
 summe r of 1963 was a period of great progress within South Vietnam,
 in countering the effort of the Viet Cong to overthro;.r that govern-
 ment. However, starting in May, 1963, you ;.rill r ecall, a series
 of religious riots developed, controversy 'within the country devel-
 oped, lead.ing eventually upon Novembe r 2nd to the overthro;.r of the
 Diem government . Prior to tha t time in September , 1963, Genera l

 39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECREl' - Sensitive

 Taylor and I had advised and visited that country. At that time)
 the progress of the counter insurgency effort was so great it
 appeared that ,ve "lould be able to withdrav much of our training
 forc e by the end of 1965, and not 1964, and .le would -- we so stated
 upon our return. But follOlving that -- and I should also mention
 that in that same statement, vre made in September, 1963, vre pointed
 out the very serious nature of the political difficulties that were
 building up i n South Vietnam, because of the conf lict between the
 Buddhist s and the CatholiCS, and the government.

 "In any event, as I say, in November, 1963, the government was
 overthrmrn. There vTaS another change of government January 30th,
 and this completely changed the outlook and the political instability
 that followed the tvro coups has given the Viet Cong an opportunity
 to take advantage of the political and military weakness. They have
 taken advantage of H. It is now necessary to add further U. S. mil-
 itary assistance to counter that Viet Cong offensive ....

 "We have never made the statement since September, 1963, that ive
 believed .le could bring the bulk of the training forces out by the
 end of 1965, because the actions in November and January made it
 quite clear that would not be possible .

 "We have said -- as a matter of fact, I say today - - as our
 training missions are cOIllpleted, we will bring back the training
 forc es . I think this is only good sense, and good judgment. We
 have c ertain trainj.ng missions that I hop e .le can complete this
 year, and others next year, and the forces associated vrith those
 miss ions should be brought back.

 "We have forces there training the Vietnamese to fly spotter
 aircraft, for artillery spotting purposes. I am very hopeful
 that we can bring the U.S. forces out as the Vietnamese acquire
 that capability.

 "On the other hand , the Vietnamese quite clearly need addi-
 tional assistance in training for counter guerrilla operations ,
 because of the increased guerrilla activities of the Viet Cong,
 and we are sending additional special forces to Vietnam for that
 purpose .

 "There :vill be a flml in both directions, but I am certain in
 the next several months the net flow will be strongly tOlvard South
 Vietnam . " 69/

 After Tonkin Gulf, the policy objective of gradual disengagement
from Vietnam was no longer relevant. The hope, as .lell as the concept
of phase out and .rithdrawal, dwindled, since such ivithdrawal was now seen
as tant amount to surrendering SVN to Hanoi . The issue for the future
would no longer be wi thdraiVa l s, but what additional U. S. forces i{QuId be
required to stem the tide--and hOiv fast they would have to be thrown into
action.

 40 TOP SECRET - Sensit ive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. B. 4. FOOTNOTES

 Secretary of Defense McNamara, testimony ~efore the U.S. Congress ,
 House Committee on Appropriations , March 16, 1962.

2. ClNCPAC Ltr 3010 Ser 000223 to SecDef 26 July 1962, "Record of the
 LSixt'E.7 Secretary of Defense Conference held 23 July 1962 at Head-
 quarters, Commander in Chief Pacific (U)," Enc1. "Summary Record
 of Conferenc e " (S). .

3· Msg JCS 5455 to cmCPAC 26231SZ July 1962, SECREI'·

4. Msg CINCPAC to COMUSMACV 14042SZ August 1962, SECRET.

5· Hq USMACV "Summary of Highlights S Feb 1962-7 Feb 1963," 20 March
 1963, TOP SECRET ; SACSA, OJCS, "An Overview of the Vietnam War (1960-
 63)," 16 January 1961.~, SECRET.

 6. Ibid.

7· Ibid.

S. Ltr COMUSMACV MACJ5 to CINCPAC 3010 Ser 0021 "Comprehensive Plan for
 South Vietnam," 19 January 1963, SECRET.

 9· Msg OSD (ISA ) DEF 923923 to CINCPAC 222243Z January 1963, SECRET.

10. Ltr CINCPAC 3010 to J·CS Ser 0079, 25 January 1963, SECRET.

11. CPSVN, encl to CINCPAC Ltr 3010 to JCS Ser 0079, 25 Janua ry 1963,
 SECRET.

12. Ibid.

13· Memo JCSM-1S0-63 for SeeDef 7 March 1963, SECRET.

14. Memo for Record, MA Planning Div, OASD (lSA), 25 May 1963, SECRET .

15· Memo CM-439-63 for SecDef, 26 March 1963, CONFIDENTIALj Memo, SecDef
 for CJCS, 26 March 1963, SECRET.

16. USMACV "SUIllIl1ary of Highlights S Feb 1962-7 Feb 1963," 20 March 1963,
 TOP SECREI'.

17· NIE 53-63, 12 April 1963, SECRET.

lS. CINCPAC Ltr Ser 000223 to SecDef "Su..ITlluary Report on Secretary of
 Defense Conference; Honolulu, 6 May 1963 (u)," 7 May 1963, TOP SECHET.

 41 . TOP SECRET - Sensit.ive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

19. Two memos SecDef for AsstSecDef (lSA ), both 8 May 1963, both SECRET.

20. Msg JCS 9820 to CINCPAC 091805Z May 1963, SECRET.

21. CINCPAC Ltr 3010 Ser 00447-63 to JCS, 11 May 1963, SECRET.

22. AsstSecDef ( ISA ) Memo for SecDef 1-2346:)/63, 17 May 1963 (v.rith hand-
 written marginal notations by SecDef on original copy ), SECRET.

23. Msg DEF 928638 from OASD (lSA ) to CINCPA'C 291752Z May 1963, SECRET.

24. Memo JCSM-640- 63 for SecDef, ·27 August 1963, SECRET.

25. Memo AsstSecDef (lSA ) for SecDef, 1-23369/63, 5 September 1963, SECRET.

26. Memo SecDef for CJCS, 6 September 1963, SECRET.
27. OASD( ISA )OWlA 1-24609/63, MAP Vietnam, IIMilitary Manpower, II 16 September
 1963, and IIFinancial Summary, II 27 September 1963, both SECRET.

28. Memo JCSM-629-63 for SecDef, 20 August 1963, SECRET.

29. Memo AsstSecDef (ISA) for SecDef, 1-26:)04/63, 30 August 1963, SECRET.

30. Memo SecDef for CJCS, 3 September 1963, SECRET.

31. Memo CJCS for SecDef, 11 September 1963, SECRET.

32. Airgram A-781, State to AmEmbassy Saigon et al, 10 June 1963,
 CONFIDENTIAL.

33. State Dept Memo of Conversation, Under SecState, U.S. Ambassador to
 Vietnam, et al, 5 J'uly 1963, SECRETj State Dept Memo for Record,
 IIBriefing for the President, " 4 July 1963, TOP SECRET EYES ONLY.

34. DLA Intelligence Summary Supplement (RVN), 17 July 1963, SECRET.

35. DIA Intelligence Bulletin, 4 August 1963, SECRET.

36. Informal memo SACSA for Secretary of Defense, 14 August 1963, SECRET.

37. Director, DLA, memo for Secretary of Defense, S-18548/p-3, 21 August
 1963, SECRET.
38. SACSA, IIRemarks at a Meeting on Vietnam ,-lith Vice President Johnson,
 Secretary Rusk, et al, at the Department of State, 31 August 1963,
 Summarized by Gene ral Krulak. II

39. Memo Pres ident for the Secretary of Defense, 21 September 1963, trans -
 mitted as attachment to vfuite House memo McGeorge Bundy for Secretary
 of Defense, 21 September 1963, TOP' SECRET.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 ~1-2
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16, By: NWD Date: 2011

..;) /.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 40. Joint Memo, SecDef-CJCS for President, 'Report of McNamara-Taylor
 Mission to South Vietnam," 2 October 1963 (TOP SECRET ).

 41 . Department of State Bulletin, October 21, 1963, p. 623 ·

 42 . NSAM 263, 11 October 1963, TOP SECRET EYES ONLY .

 43. This expl anation, retrospectively developed by General Maxwell Taylor
 during an intervieH on 18 January 1968, Has one of the primary
 reasons operative at the time.

 44. State 534 to Saigon of 5 October 1963.

 45. Dept of State INR Research Memo, RFE-90, 22 October 1963.

 46. Memo SecState for SecDef, 8 November 1963, SECRET .

 47. CINCPAC Ltr 3010 Ser 001218 to SecDef "Record of the Special Meeting
 on the Republic of Vietnam, held 20 November 1963 at Headquarters
 CINCPAC ... ," 22 November .1963, SECRET .

 48. NSAM 273, 26 November 1963, TOP SECRET.

 49. Memo SecDef for President, 23 November 1963, SECRET .

 50. Dir FERISA Memo for AsstSecDef (ISA ), "RevieH of t he South Vietnam
 Situation," 3 December 1963.

 51. Tab 14 "Accelerated Model Plan (CPSVN )," Back Up Book Saigon Trip
 18 - 20 December 1963, prepared by OSD for SecDef . TOP SECRET SENSITIVE .

 52. NOTE: U.S. in-country strength figures for Vietnam vary Hidely
 depending on source. Discrepanc ies are accounted for by different
 standards for computing total according to a~ministrative crite ria,
 such as distinctions in personnel assignment category, e . g ., J oint
 Table of Distribution (JTD ), Permanent Change of Stat i on (PC S),
 Temporary Duty (TDY ), replac ement and rotational pipelines, etc .

 53. CM-I079-63 for SecDef, 11 December 1963, SECRET: Msg JCS 3944 to
 CINCPAC 112148z December 1963.

 54. Memo SecDef for the President , 21 December 1963, SECRET.

 55. SACSA "An Overvie,ol of the Vietnam Wa r (1960- 63)," no date (OSD
 han~vlritten entry on coversheet giving file date as 16 J anuary 1961-~)
 SECRET . Provided to SecDef f'or us e in his Decem.be r trip to SVN).

 56. Dir DIA Memo for SecDef'S-18982/P-3, 13 December 1963 SECRET .

 57. Memorandu.m for the President from Se cretary McNamara , dat ed 7 January
 1964 , subject: "Comment on Memoranda by Senator Mansfield. "

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive

 DepDir CIA Memos for SecState, SecDef, et al, 10, 11, 14, 18 February
 . 1964, SECRET .

59· Msgs JCS 731! CJCS to COMUSJYlACV, 18 February 1964 (S); COMUSMACV MAC
 610 to CJCS, 19 February 1964 (TS); COMUSMACV MAC 665 to CJCS,
 21 February 1964 (1'S ).

60. Msg ClNCPAC to ASD (lSA) 110626/ZMarch 19@+, TOP SECRET.
61. Memo SecDef for the President, 16 March 1964.
62. NSAM 288, 17 March 1964, SECRET.

63· Msg ClNCPAC to CO~IDSMA CV 062145Z May 1964, SECRET.

64. Working Paper, Special Meeting on Southeast Asia, HQ. PACOM, 1-2 June
 1964, Extension of U.S. Advisory Assistance in RVN, 2 June 1964, SECRET;
 Msg CO~SMACV MACJ 325380 to JCS, info DOD, State ( Sullivan), White
 Hous e (Forrestal ), Cm-CPAC, DA, 250005Z June 1964, SECRET; Msg COmISMACV
 MACJ 325580 to ClNCPAC info JCS 272357Z June 1964, SECRET; Msg CINCPAC
 to JCS 042320Z July 1964, SECRET.

 Msg AmErobassy Saigon 108 to SecState (Taylor to Rusk and McNamara )
 info JCS and Cm-CPAC 150900Z July 1965, SECRET.

66. Msg COMuSMACV to Cm-CPAC JYlACJ-31 6180 161045Z July 1964, SECRET.
67· Msg AmEmbassy Saigon to SecState info vlhite House, DOD, JCS, ClNCPAC
 171210Z July 1964, SECRET; Msg CINCPAC to JCS 200036z July 1964,
 SECRET ; Msg SecState 205 to AmErobassy Saigon 21 July 1964, TOP SECRET;
 Msg JCS 7492 to ClNCPAC 211917Z July 19@+, SECRET.

63 . Department of the Army, Offic e of the Deputy Chief of Staff for
 Operations, Periodic Report, Subj ect: Southeast Asia Military Forces
 (CFP-ODCSOPS-7), various dates.
 Secretary of Defense McNamara, Testimony Before the House Committee
 on Foreign Affairs on the Tonkin Gulf Resolution, August 6, 1964
 (Executive Session).

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive