The Pentagon Papers (Part -IV-B-2) (U.S. Department of Defense, 1971)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration: Report of the Office of the Secretary of Defense Vietnam Task Force (The Pentagon Papers) (https://nara-media-001.s3.amazonaws.com/arcmedia/research/pentagon-papers/Pentagon-Papers-Part-IV-B-2.pdf).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

r-
f
 IV.B Evolution of the War (26 Vols.)
 Counterinsurgency: The Kennedy Commitments, 1961-
 1963 (5 Vols.)
 2. Strategic Hamlet Program, 1961-63
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECR'::;'.£' - Sensitive

 I V. B. 2.

 Strategic Hamle.! . Pr~gr~

 _1~9_6_1__1.3 6]

 TOP SECRE~ - Sens i tive

 Sec ~ef Cant :N:v. X-_____________ _
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SEC~ST - Sensitive

IV.B.2. STRliTEGIC Hfl..ELET PROGRAI-1

 A specific strategy by 1!lhich the U. S. and GVJ:l would attempt to end
the insu~ ge ncy in South Vietnarn had never been agreed upon at the time
that the U.S, decided, l ate in 1961, to :i..ncrease materially its assist-
ance to GVW and to expand its advisory effort into one which vlOuld
implement a "limited partnership." By early 1962, hOl·.rever, there "I-ras
apparent consensus among the princ ipa l part icipants that the Strategic
Hamlet Program, as it c arD.e to be called , represented the unifying concept
for a strategy des i gned to pacif;y- rural Vietnam (the Viet Cong I s chosen
battleground ) and to develop support among the peasants for the central
government.

 The Strategic Hamlet Program VT8.S much broader than the construction
of strategic hamlets p e r see It envisioned sequential phases which,
beginn ing vri th clearing the ins urg ents from an area and protecting the
rural populace, progressed through the establish.ment of GVW infrastructure
and thence to the provision of services vThicn Hould le ad the peasants to
identify with their government . The s trategic hamlet program "I,raS , in
short , an attempt to translat e the nevTly articulated theory of counter-
insu~gency into operational reality. The objectj.ve was polit:i.cal though
the means to its realization "I'Je re a mixture of military, social, psycho··
logical, economic and political measu~es .

 'I'he effect of these sequential steps to pacification 'tTas to make it
very difficult to make interTtlediate assessments of progress . One could
not really be sure hO'N one was doing unt il one ·\'Tas done . Physical
security by itself (the so-called 'Icl ear and hold" initial step ) was a
necessary condition for pacification, not a sufficient one. The establish-
ment of governmental functions was not, by itself, ne cessar ily conducive
to a successful effort; the qua lity of those functions and their respon-
siveness to locally felt needs "lvas critical. This inherent difficulty in
assessi.ng progress did not simply mean that it VIas difficult to identify
problems and to make improvements as one went along -- which it v!as. It
also meant that it was quite possible to conclude that the program as a
whole "lms progressing well (or badly) according to evidence relating only
to a single phase or a part of a phase.

 A related problem arose from the uniaueness of this program in
Americ an experience -- pacification-by pr;xy. The theory of se quential

 i TOP SF.CRBT - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sens i t i ve

phases could be variously int erpreted. This is not the problem of the
three blind men describing the elephant; it is the probl em of men vIi th
different perspectives each moul ding his olm conception of a proper
body to the same ske leton. If the final product vTere to h ave some sem-
blance of coherence and mutual satisfaction it \\Tas necessary that the
shapers came to agreement on substa.nce and operational procedure, not
just that they agree on the proper skeleton upon which to work .

 The problem "lith the apparent consensus hich emerged early in 1962
was that t he principal partic ipants did view it with different perspec-
tives and expectations. On the U.S. side, military advisors had a set
of preferences which affected their approach to the Strategic Ha...11l1et
Program. They wanted to make RVNAF more mobile , more aggressive, and
bett ~r orga.nized to take the offensive against the Viet Cong o They vrere ,
consequent ly, extremely l eery of proposals which might l ead it to be tied
dOlm in strategic defenses ("holding" after liclearing" had been completed)
or diverted too much to military civic act ion undertakings .

 The American politic al leadership , insofar as a genera li zat ion may
b e attempted , may be said to have b een most concerned with the later
phases of the program .. .- those in which GVH services vTere provided,
local governments established, and the economy bolstered. Military
clearing operations were , to them, a distasteful, expensive, but neces-
sary precondition to the really critic a l and important phases of the
e ffort.

 Both of these U.S. groups h ad perspect i ves different from those of
the Diem administrat ion. In the U.S . view the i nsurgents were on l y one
o f Diem I s enemies ; he himself vTaS the other. I n this view the p roc ess of
pacification coul d proceed successfully only if Diem reformed his OvlD
government . It was precisely to achieve these goals simul taneously that
the U. S. agreed to enter a !!limited partnership!! with GVF in the cOUllter-
insurgent effort. The strategic Hrunlet Program became the oper at iona l
s ymbol of this effort .

 President Diem -., unsurpris i ng ly -- had a very different viev! . His
need, as he saw it, was to get the U. S. committed to South Vietnam ( and
to his administration ) 'without surrendering his i ndependence . He knew
that his nation vTOuld f a ll without U. S. support; he feared that his
government ,wuld fall i f he either appeared to toady to U. S. vris hes or
allowed any single group too much pot ential power -- p articularly coer-
cive povTer. The Strategic Hamlet Program offered a vehi cle by vrhich E~
could direct the counterinsurgent effort as he thought it should be
directed and 1'Tithout giving up either his prerogatives to the U. S or his
mantle to his restle s s generals .

 The progra~, i n the form of a plan for pacification of the Delta,
)Vas forma lly propos ed to Diem in November 1 961 by R . G. K. Thompson ,
head of the ne.vly arrived British Adv isory Mi ssion . U. S. military

 ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

advisors favored at that time an ARV":{ penetration of the VC redoubt in
Hal' Zone D prior to any opere,tions aimed specifically at pacification.
But UoS. political desires to start some lo cal operation which could
achieve concrete gains combined vrith Die..rn ' s preference for a pacifica-
tion effort in an area of strategic importance led to the initi al effort
i n Harch 1962, 1T0pers,tion SmmISE, II in Binh Duong Province north of
Saigon. This was a heavily VC-infiltrated area rather than one of
minimal penetration, as Thompson had urged. But planning .. - as distinct
from operations -- continued on the Delta plan and strategic hamlets were
constructed in a variegated, uncoordinated pattern throughout the spring I
and early summer. The U. S. had little or no i nfluence over these activi-
ties; the primary impetus vms traceable directly to the President's
brother and political counsellor, Lgo Dinh ?lhu .

 'In August 1 962, GVN produced its long aI>Jait ed national pacification
pleD with four priority areas and specified priori ties vri thin each area.
At the same time, however, it indicated that over 2,500 strategic hamlets
had already been completed and that vlork was already undenvay on more
than 2 ,500 more. Although it viaS not until October 1962, that GVS
explicitly annou.nced the strategic Haml et Program to be the unifying
concept of its pacification and counterinsurgent effort it 'tTaS clear
earlier that the program had assumed this central position.

 Three import ant implications of this early progress (or , more pre-
cisely, reported progress ) are also clee,r in retros:pect. These impli-
c ations seem not to have impressed themselves acutely upon U. S. observers
at the time . First, the program viaS truly one of GVH initiat ive rather
than one embodying priorities and time phasing recommend ed by the U. S.
Diem was runn ing -.;dth his ovm b a ll in programmatic terms, no matter viho
articulated the theory of the approach. The geographic dispersion of
hamlets already reported to be complet ed indicated that there was, in
f act , a conscious effort to implement this phase almost simultaneously
throughout the entire nation r ather than to build slowly as Di em ' s
fo reign advisors (both U. S. and Br itish) recommended.

 Finally, the physical aspects of Die..:m ' s program 'I>Jere s i milar if not
identi cal to earlier population resettlement and control efforts prac-
tic ed by the French and by Diem . The l ong history o f these efforts was
marked by consistency in results as well as i n techniques: all fai l ed
di smally because they ran i nto resentment i f not active resistance on
the part of the peasants at whose contro l and safety, t hen loyalty, they
were aimed. U.S . desires to begin an effective process of pac i fication
h ad fastened onto security as a necessary precondition and slighted the
histor i c record of rural resistance to resettlement . President Di em and
hi s brother, for their part , had decided to emphasize control of the
rural population as the precondition to vTinning loyalty. The record is
i nconclusive 'I'lith respect to their v:eighing the record of the past but
it appears that they, too, paid it scant attention . Thus the early
operational efforts indicated a danger of peasant resist ance , on one hand ,

 iii TOP SECR!.IT - Sens itive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECHET - Sensitive

and of divergent approaches between, in the i nitia,l steps, the U.S .
(focused on security measures) and Diem (conce rned more vlith control
me asures ). Since the physical actions to achieve security and those
to impose control are in many respects the same, there was generated
yet another area in vlhich assessments of progress 'Ivould be inconclus ive
and difficult to maJ~e.

 U.S. attention, once an apparent consensus had been forged con-
centrated on program management efforts in t iro categories: to convince
 . (
GVN to proceed at a more measured, coherent pace vlith a qualitative
improvement in the physical construction of strategic hamlets; and to
schedule materi al assistance ( fortifica.tion materials, etc.) and train-
ing for local defense forces to match the rate of desired hamlet con-
struction .

 U.S. assessment s, at the same time, concentrated on the physical
 asp ects of the program and on VC activity in areas 'I-There strategic
 hamlets had been constructed. Assessments tended to be favor able from
 a security (or control ) viewpoint and uneven with respect to political
 development. The general conclusion was almost abmys one of cautious
 optimism when security (control ) vms emphasized, one of hopeful pessi-
mism vThen political follow-up vIas stressed. The impression in Hashing·,
ton vms typic ally slanted tOl-lard the more optimistic appraisals i f for
no other reason than that hamlet construction and security arrangements
'\ITere the first chronological steps in the long process to pacification.
Ha.s it not, after all, "progress" to have moved from doin g nothing to
doing something even though the something was being done imperfect ly?

 These U.S. assessments changed only marginally throughout the life
of the program. By the time , in 1963, that the hopeful pessimist voices
were clearer, it 'Has also much clearer t hat the Ngo brothers had made
the Strategic Hamlet Program i nt o one closely identified with their
regime and with Diem ' s r ather esoterically phrased "personalist revolu-
t ion. 11 Fears grew that Diem vTas attempting to impose loyalty from the
top through control rather than to build it from the bottom by deeds.
These fears 'I<Tere not limited to the Strategic Hamlet Program , hm<Tever ;
they extended to urban as well as rural phases of South Vietnamese li fe
and liere subsumed, as the Buddh ist question moved to the fore , by the
general is sue of the viability of Diem ' s regime .

 President Diem gre'I'T increasingl y umiilling to meet U. S. demands for
r eform. He believed that to do so lvould cause his government to ' fail.
U. S. observers held that. failure to do so would cause the nation, not
just the government to fall. In the event the government fell and the
nation ' s counterinsurgent program took a definite turn for the worse ,
but the nation did not fall. The Strategic Hamlet Program did . Closely
i dentified Iii th the Ngo brothers , it vms alnl0st bound to suffer their
fortunes; when they died it died, too. The nevr government of generals ,
presumably realizing the extent of peasant displeasure with resettlement
and control measures, did nothing to save it.

 iv TOP SECRET Sens i tive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. B y: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 A number of contributory reasons can be cited for the fai l ure of the
Strategic Hamlet Program. Over-expansion of construction and poor
quality of defenses forms one category. This r eason concentrates only
on the initial phase of the prograil1, however . ~'lhile valid, it does little
to explain why the entire program collapsed rather than only some hamlets
v!ithin it. Rural antagonisms l'lhich identified the program with its
sponsors in the central government are more suggestive of the b as is for ,-
t he complete collapse as Diem and Nhu departed the scene. The reasons
why they departed are traceable in part to the di fferent expectations
which combined in the apparent consensus at the program ' s beginning: to
Diem's insistence on material assistance and independence, to U. S. willing-
ness to prov ide assistance only if its advice was heeded, and to the
f ailure to re solve this question either by persuasion or l everage • .

 Having said this , it does not automatically fo llo't1 that the program
 would have succeeded even if Diem had met U.S. demands for change. To
 point to the causes of failure is one thing; to assume that changes of
 style v10uld have led to success is c;uite another . It may well be that
 the program was doomed from the out;et because of peasant resistance to
 measures yrhich changed the pattern of rural life .~ .. whether aimed at
 s ecurity or control. It might have been possible, on the other hand, for
 a well- executed program eventually to have achieved some measure of success.
 The early demise of the program does not permit a conclusive evaluation.
·The weight of evidence suggests that the Strategic Hamlet Program was
 fatally fla'tred in its conception by the unintended consequence of alienat-
 i ng many of those whose loyalty it aimed to 'tri n .

 This inconclusive finding, i n turn, suggests that the sequential
phas es embodied i n the doctrine of counterinsurgen cy may slight some
v ery i mportant problem areas. The evidence i s not sufficient f or an
i ndictment ; still less i s one able to validate the counterin surgent doc -
trine with reference to a program that failed. The only verdict that
may be given at this time with respect to the~lidity of the doctrine is
that used by Scots courts -- !I case not proved ;"

 v TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 ()
 I
 :xJ
 o
 Z
 or
 o
 G>
 -<
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Secti o n 3.3
 NND P roject Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECR~~"i' - Sensitive

IV.B.2. C}mO=~OLOGY

DATE OCC uPI{E~WE

1953-1959 French and GVE early attempts at popul ation r esettle··
 ment int o defended communities to create secure zones.

1959 Hural Community Development Centers (Agroville ) Pro-
 gram initiated by GVf.L
Late 1960 USMN~G Counterinsurgency Plan Vietnam completed.
Early 1961 Agroville Program modified by construction of "Agro-
 Harnlets II to meet peasant obj ections.
May 1961 Vice President Johnson I s visit to RVN .
J uly 1961 Staley Gro'up report on i ncreased economic aid and
 i ncrease in RV=~AF strength.
15 September 1961 USVlALiG Geographically Phased I,rational Level Operation
 Pla.n for Counterinsurgency.
18 October 1961 Genera.l Taylor arrives i n RVI~ ; President Diem declares
 nat i onal emergency .

27 October 1961 R. G.K. Thompson submits to President Diem hi s
 Appreciation of Vietnam, .November 1961-April 1962.
3 li[ovember 1961 General Taylor submits his report and r ecommendations
 to President Kennedy .
13 Fovember 1961 RoG. K. Thompson submits his draft plan for pacification
 of the Delta to Pres i dent Di em .
15 November 1961 NSC drafts FSJ:":f 111. Cable to .JiJnbassador No l ting,
 i nstructing hi.lll to meet ,,7ith Diem , l ays out pr oposed
 U. S. assistance and expected GVN effort .
22 November 1961 NSA.vl 111.

15 December 1961 First Secretary of Defense Conference , Honolul u .
2 February 1962 Roger Hilsman I S A strategic Concept for South Vietnam.

3 February 1962 Di em creates Inter-Mini sterial Committee on Strategic
 Hamlets.

 vi TOP SECRE'l' - Sensi ti ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE OCCU.HREl'fCE

19 Harch 1962 Diem approves Thompson's "Delta Plan ll for execution.

22 Narch 1962 "Opera,tion SliHRISE tl corolUences in Binh Duong Province.

8 August 1962 GV~ Nat ional Strategic Hamlet Construction Plan.

28 October 1962 GYii devotes ent ire is sue of The Times of Vietnam to
 "The Year of the Strategic Hamlet . Ir

8 May 1962 Buddhist controversy erupts I'Then GVh troops fire on
 demonstrators i n HUe.

24 August 1963 State to Lodge, Me ssage 24.], says that U, S. c an no
 l onger tolerate Fhu ' s continuation in po''.'"er.

10 September 1963 General Krulak and Mr . Mendenhall give contradictory
 r eports on progress of war to I\"SC .

2 October 1963 Secretary McNamara reports to President Kennedy fo lloVl-
 i ng his visit to RVH vlith General Tayl or.

1 November 1963 Coup d' etat by group of generals agai nst President Diem.

 vii TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 TIlli STRATEGIC ~lliET PROGRAM

 1961 - 1963

 TABLE OF CONTENTS AND OUTLINE

 1. INTRODUCTION........................ .... ... ...... .. .... . 1

 A. Scope and Terminology • eo • • • • • • ~ • • • • • " " • • • • 0 • • • • • • • • • 1

 B. .Arlt·ecedent·s ••• o . e • • • • • • • • • • • • • I 0... eo. e • • • • • • 0....... 1

 C. The Situation in Late 1961 .•••••.••..•. ••• •••• ••••• · 3

 II. Tllli FORMUlATION OF TIlE STRATEGIC HAMLE~ PROGRAM ..••• • ••• 4

 A. U. S. -GVN Con sultations •.•• " ••• 0 ............... 0 (I ... ... 4
 B. "Limited Partnership"... ............ ....... . ....... . 7

 C. U.S.-Proposed National Plans •••••••••••••••••.•. ••·• 7
 D. Initial Vietname se Reactions ... . .... .... .. .... ...... 8
 E. Thompson ' s Counterproposals......................... 10

III. DEVELOPING A CONSENSUS AMONG THE ADVISORS ••.••.•..•..••• 12

 A. Initial Reaction of UoS. Military Advisors.... ...... 12

 B. Reactions in Washington .••.•..••..••• ~ •• ••• •• • . . • • •. 13

 C. The Advisors Reach Agreement... ..................... 14

 IV. . THE ADVISORS "SELL" DIEM (OR VICE-VERSA)................ 15

 A. Wb.~re to Begin? •••••• • •• • •• •• 0 •••• e..... ........... 15

 B. Concurrent GVJIif Acti vi ty. • • • • • • • • • • . • • • • • • • • • • • • . • . . . 16

 C. Early Signs of GVN Expectations .............. . ...... 17

 V. DIFFERING PERSPECTIVES AND EXPECTATIONS ••.•.•••••••••.•• 18

 A. U.S. Military Advisors.............. ................ 18

 B. U.S. Political Leadership........................... 18

 a
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Pa.ge

 C. President Diem••••••••• e ••• •••••• • ••• " • •••••••• 19

 D. The Central Issue .••••••• •• ..0 ••• 0 ••••• ••••• • •••••
 19

 E. The Problem of Assessment . • • • • • • • co.c • • • • • • • • • .. • •
 20 (

 VI. TEE NATION_AL PLAN EMERGES .••••.••.•••••••••• ••••••••••••
 20

 A. Awareness of the Unifying Potential. •••••••••• •••••• 20

 B. tfOperat·ion Sunrise tf • • .. • • • • " •••••• " .0 • ••• e " CI ••••••
 22

 C. Other Early Progra.rn.s ......... ".. c . . . . . . " • " • • • • • • • • • " " 22

 D. At Last -- A National Plal"l •••• • ••• " •••••••• 0 •••••
 24

 E. Effect on U. S. Perception s ••••••.••••••••• ••••••••••
 24

 F. Differences Begin to Emerge •••••••••••••• ••••••••••• 30

VII. TIrE PAT1-1 TO TEE EN])....... ..". .. . ....... ".... 0 • • • • • • • ••••
 35

 A. Diem t s Position Hardens •• .... .... .... . .. " . " ... .....
 " " 35

 B. The Program Dies With the =Tgos . 35

VIII. AN INCONCLUSIVE SUMMARy .•••••.••••••••••••• •••••••••••••
 36

 b
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Numbe r: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. B.2 .

 THE STRATEGIC HAMLET PROGRAM, 1961-1963 :

 AN APPRAISAL

I. Il\lTRODUCTION

 A. §cope and Terminology

 The Strategic Hamlet Program in the Republic of Vietnam (RVN) - -
articulated and carried forward from late 1961 until late 1963 -- has cre-
ated some confus ion because of terminology . One source of confusion stems
from the similarity betvTeen the physical aspects of the program and earlier
fortified communities of one kind or another. Another source of confusion l1
rises b ecause of the loose usage of I1hamlet l1 as compared to I1 village and
because of the practice of referring to these communities as I1 defended, 11
I1secure ,11 and fortified l1 as well as I1 s trategic. 11 But the greatest source
of confusion lies in the distinction between a strategic hamJ_et }!er se
and the strategic hamlet program.

 The hamlet is the smallest organized community in rural South Viet-
nam . Several hamlets (typically 3-5) comprise a village . During the stra-
tegic hamlet program both hamlets and villages were fortified . The distinc -
tion is unimportant for the present analysis , except as it bears on the
defensibility of the com~lmity protected. The several adjectives coupled
with hamlet or village were occasionally us ed to differentiate communities
accord:i..ng to the extent of their defenses or the initial presumed loyalty
of their inhabitants . More often no such distinction was made; the terms
were used interchangeably . Where a distinction exists, the follo\<Ting ac-
count explains it .

 The phrase Strategic Hamlet Program when use d to represent the pro-
gram is much broader than the phrase applied to the haml ets themse lves .
The program, as explained below, envisioned a process of pacification of
which the construct ion of strategic hamlets was but part of one phase , al-
beit a very important part . This paper examines the program, not just
t he hamlets .

 B. Antecedents

 Population relocation into defended villages was by no means a
recent development in Southeast Asia. Parts of South Vietnam had experi-
ence with the physical aspects of fortified communities going back many

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 1
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

years . As the int ellectual godfather of the Strategic H~mlet Program has
put it, the concept's use as one of the measures to defeat communist insur-
gency " ... has only meant that the lessons of the past had to be relearn"; ." 2:.,/

 The aruninistration of President Diem had relearned thFse lessons
much earlier than late 1961. There I'Tas, in fact, no need to r.elearn them
b ecause they had never been forgotten . The French had made resettlement
and the development of "s ecure zones" an important element in their effort
near the end of the war with the Viet Minh. The government of newly-created
South Vietnam, headed since 195~· by President Diem, had continued res ettle -
ment schemes to accofimodate displaced persons, to control suspected rural
populations, and to safeguard loyal peasants in the threatened areas .
None of these efforts i nvolving resettlement had succeeded . Each had in-
spired antagonism among the peasants who were moved from their ancestral
lands and away from family burial plots.

 Diem ' s actions in late 1961 'w ere thus inescapably tied to earlier
actions by proximity in time, place, and the personal experiences of many
peasants . Chief among the earlier programs was that of the so-called
Agrovilles or "Rural Community Develo"pment Centers," launched in 1959 ·
The Agrovilles, groupments of 300-500- families, were designed to afford the
peasantry the social b enefits of city life (schools and services), to in-
crease their physical security, and to control certain key locations by
denying them to the communists.?J They were designed to improve simultane-
ously the security and well-being of their inhabitants and the government's
control over the rua l population and rural areas .

 The Agroville program was generally unsuccessful . The pea,sants
had many complaints about it ranging from clumsy, dishonest administration
to the physical hardship of being too far from their fields and the psy-
chological wrench of being separated from ancestral home s and burial plots . ;J
By 1960, President Di em had slowed the program in response to peasant com-
plaints and the Viet Cong ' s ability to exploit this dissatisfaction . !!J
 The transition from Agrovilles to strategic ha.mlets in 1961 was
marked by the so-called "Agro-hamlet " "lvhich attempted to meet some of the
peasants ' objections :

 The smaller 100 family Agro-hamlet was located more
 closely to lands tilled by the occupants . Construction vms
 carried out at a slower pace filled to the peasant ' s plant -
 ing and harvesting schedule ... By the end of 1961, the Agro-
 hamlet had become the prototype of a vast civil defense
 scheme known as strategic hamlets, ~ Chien Luoc . 21
It was inevitable, given this lineage , that the strategic hamlet program
be regarded by the peasants as old wine in ne\'I"ly-labelled bottles . The
successes and failures of the past were bound to condition its acceptance- -
and by l ate 1961 the Diem government "l8,S ha,ving more failures than successes .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 2
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 C. The Situation i n Late 1961

 By late 1961, if not earlier , it had become clear in both Siagon
and Washington that the yellow star of the Viet Cong \Va s in the ascendancy .
Following the 1960 North Vietnamese announcement of the twin goals of oust-
ing President Diem and reunifying Vietnam under communist rule, the Viet
Cong began sharply to i ncrease its guerrilla, subversive, and political
warfare . §/ Viet Cong regular forces, nOl'T estimated to have grown to
25,000, had been organized into larger formations and employed with increas-
ing fre~uency. The terrorist-guerrilla organization had grown to an esti -
mated 17,000 by November 1961. 11
 During the first half of 1961, terror-
i sts and guerrillas had assassinated over 500 local officials and civilians,
kidnapped more than 1,000, and killed almost 1,500 RVNAJI'" personnel. §/
The VC continued to hold the ini tia ti ve in the 'countrys ide , controlling
major portions of the populace and drawing an increasingly tight cinch
around Saigon . 21 The operative ~uestion was not whether the Diem govern-
ment as it was then moving could defeat the insurgents, but whether it could
save itself .

 Much of this deterioration of the situation in RVN vTas attributable,
in U. S. eyes, to the manner in which President Diem had organized his govern-
ment . The struggle -- vlhether viewed as one to gain loyalty or simply to
assert control -- was focused in and around the villages and hamlets in the
countrys ide. It was precis e ~·" in those areas that the bilineal GVN organi-
zation (ARVN and civilian province chiefs) most lacked the capability for
concerted and cohesive action. The Army of the Republic of Vietnam (ARVN)
was developing a potentially effective institutional framework under U.S.
tutelage, but that effectiveness against the VC, Diem realized, could po-
tentially be transferred into effectiveness against himself . The abortive
coup of late 1960 had made Diem even more reluctant than he had earlier
be en to permit power (especially coercive power) to be gathered into one
set of hands other than his own. Still, the establishraent of an effective
military chain of command which could operate where necessary in the country-
side remained the prime objective of U. S. military advisors . ~

 A unitary chain of command had recently been ordered into effect
within ARVN, but this had not solved the operational problems, for mili-
tary operations were inescapably conducted in areas under the control of
an independent political organizati on with it s own military forces and in-
fluence on operations of all kinds -- military, paramilitary, and civic
action . The province chiefs, personally selected by President Diem and
presumably loyal to him,controlled politically the territory in dispute
with the VC and within which ARVN must operate . They also controlled terri-
torial forces comprising the Civil Guard (CG) and Self Defense Corps (SDC) .

 For President Diem ' s purposes this bilineal organization offered
an opportunity to counterbalance the pOvler (and coup potential) of the
generals by the power of the province chiefs . It was a device for survival.
But the natural by-product of this duality, in terms of the effectiveness
of actions against the VC, was poor coordination and imperfect cooperation

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 3
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in intelligence collection and production, in planning, and in operational
execution in the countryside, where the ba ttles ~rere fought - - both the
"battle for men's minds" and the more eas ily understood battles for con-
trol of the hamlets, villages, districts, and provinces .
 (
 The U.S. and GVN were agreed that in order to defeat the insurgency
it was necessary that the rura.l populace identif'y with at lea.st the local
representatives of the central government. They were agreed, too , that
some measure of physical security must be provided the rural population
if thi s end were to be achieved. Both agreed that the GVN must be the
principal agent to carry out the actions which 1vould bring the insurgency
to an end.

 The high level U. S. -GVN discussions held during President Kennedy ' s
first year in office focused on wha.t the U. S. could provide GVN to assist
the latter 's counterinsurgency efforts and on Ivhat GVN should do organi-
zationally to make it s efforts more effective . A subsidiary and related
discussion revolved around the U.S. advisory organization to parallel the
GVN reorganization. The problem of how additional resources jn some im-
proved organizational framework were to be applied operationally was frag-
mented into many sub-issues ranging from securing the border to building
social infrastructure.

 The story of the Strategic Hamlet Program , as it came to be called,
is one in which an operatj.onal concept specif'ying a sequence of concrete
steps was introduced by an articulate advocate, nominally accepted by a ll
of the principal actors, and advanced to a position of apparent centrality
in which it became the operational bluepr int for ending the insurgency .
But it is also the story of an apparent consensus built on differing , some-
times competin& expectations and of an effort which was, in retrospect ,
doomed by the failure to resolve in one context the problem it was designed
to alleviate in another -- the .pr09lem of GVN stability.·

II . THE FORMULATION OF THE STRATEGIC HAMLET PROGRAM

 A. U. S. - GVN Consultations

 Beginning in May 1961, the U.S . and GVN conducted a series of high
l evel conferences to fashion r esponses to the insurgent challenge . The
first. of these was the visit to Saigon by the Vice President , Lyndon B.
Johnson. The Vice President ' s consultations were designed to reinforce
the U. S. commitment to RVN and to improve the image of President Di em ' s
government .

 In a comm1.mique issued jointly in Saigon, it was agreed that the
RVNAF was to be increased to 150 , 000 men, that the U.S . would support the
entire Civil Guard I'd th military a ss i stance funds, that Vietname se and
U. S. military specialists would be u sed to support village-level health
and public works activities, a,nd that the two governments vTould "discuss

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive

 4·
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Num ber: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

new economic and social measures to be undertaken in rural areas to
accompany the anti-guerrilla effort ... . "!Y These discussions implied
that more GVN effort should be devoted to rural pacification and civic action
and acknowledged that more regular military forces were needed, but they
did little to clarify the relationships of these parts to the whole or to
an overall scheme by which the process i.,rQuld develop.

 The Staley group, a joint economic and financial committee co-
cbair ed by Dr . A. Eugene Staley, Stanford Research Institute, and Vu Q,uoc
Tuc, GVN, followed much the same pattern . Meeting in Saigon in June 1961,
the corrrmittee agreed that RVNAF strength should be increased to 200,000
during CY 1962 and that U. S. funding should be provided to various emergency
economic and social programs . § But the group did noghing to tie together
the strands of what it recognized as the central problem : to achieve a
simultaneous "breakthrough" on both the military-internal security front
and the economic - social front. 13/ Its recormnendations "\-Tere restricted
(in part , no doubt, because of its limited charter) to specific program
increases and to a restatement of the dimensions of the problem .

 The devastation caused by the September monsoonal floods (3 20 ,000
r efugees, 1,000 kilometers of road destroyed, 10 million acres of rice and
other crops lost), combined with the losses attributable to incr eased insur-
gent 8.ctivity, led President Diem to declare a state of national emergency
on 19 October 1961 . This declaration coincided with the visit to Southeast
Asia (15 October - 3 November) of General Maxwell D. Taylor, heading a
mission asked by President Kennedy to appraise the situation in South Viet-
nam . The President stated the scope of Taylor ' s mission in the broadest
terms :

 While the military part of the problem is of great
 importance in South Viet-Nam, its political, social , and
 economic el ements are equally significant, and I shall ex-
 pect your appraisal and your recormnendations to take full
 account of them . ~

 I n his report to the President, General Taylor sketched out the
nature and aims of the Viet Cong threat and assessed the strengths and
weaknesses of the Diem government . He proposed a U.S . strategy for " turn-
i ng the tide and for assuming the offensive in Vietnam ." 15/ The report
warrants summarizing in some detail, not because it outlined the main
thrust of the pacification effort (it did not ), but because itr'epresents
t he best document to portray the range of U. S. concerns at the time the
U. S. was making a major comrnitment to South Vietnam and because it lays
out the major el ements of the U. S. strategy of response .

 The Viet Cong, Taylor judged, vTere militarily powerful and becom-
i ng more powerful . But they were not yet ready to move to the third ,
climactic phase of I~ao ' s classic format for guerrill a warfare :

 The military stra.tegy being pursued is , evidently, to
 pi n down the ARVN on defensive missions ; to create a per -
 vasive sense of insecurity and frustration by hit - and-run
 raids on self-defense corps and militia units , ambushing

 5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 the reserve forces if possible as they come up to defend;
 a,nd to dramatize the inability of the GVN to govern or to
 build, by the assassination of officials and the sabotage
 of public works . ~

The purpose of this military strategy, Taylor asserted, was apparently not
to capture the nation by force. Rather, in concert with non -military means ,
it was to produce a political crisis which would topple the goverrnnent
and bring to power a group willing to contemplate the unification of Viet-
nam on Hanoi I s terms. };])

 It was in the U. S. interest, Taylor reasoned, to act vigorously --
with advice as i'Tell as aid -- in order to buy the necessary time for Vi etnam
to mobilize and to organize its real assets so that the Vietnamese them-
selve s might "turn the tide " and assume the offensive . 18/ But U. S. aid
and U. S. advice on where to use it were not enough . TheDiem Government
i tself had to be reformed in order to permit i t to mobilize the nation .
Diem had, in Tayl or ' s assessment, allowed two vicious circles to develop
which vitiated goverrnnent effectiveness . In the first of these circles
poor military intelligence led to a defensive stance designed primarily to
guard against attacks , which in turn meant that most of the military forces
came under the control of the province chiefs whose responsibility it was
to protect the populace and installations . This control by province chiefs
meant that reserves could not , because of tangled lines of command and
control, be moved and controlled qui ckly enough to be effective . The effect
of high losses in unsuccessful defensive battles served further to dry up
the basic sources of i.ntelligence . W
 The second vicious circle stemmed from Diem's instinctive attempts
 to centralize power in his own hands while fragmenting it beneath him .
 His excessive mistrLlst of mB,ny intellectuals and younger Vietnamese , i.n-
 dividuals badly needed to give his administration vitality, served only
 to ali enate them and led them to stand aside from constructive participation
 thereby further increasing Diem ' s mistrust . ~ This administrative style
"fed back, too, into the military equation and through it, created another
 potentially explosive political-military problem :

 The inability to mobilize intelligence effectively for
 operational purposes directly flows from this fact LDi em ' s
 a dministrative practici7 as do the generally poor relations
 between the Province Chiefs and the military conwanders,
 the former being Diem I s r eliable agents , the latter a pmver
 base he fears. The consequent frustration of Diem I s mili -
 tary commanders -- a frustration well-knoi'm to Diem and
 heightened by the November 1960 coup -- l eads him to ac -
 tions which further complicate his problem ; e . g ., his un-
 willingness to del egate military operations clearly to his
 generals. 21/

 General Taylor ' s recommended actions for the U. S. were designed
to demonstrate U.S . commitment in order to strengthen Diem ' s stand and ,

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 6
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

simultaneously, to broaden U. S. participation in the hope of bringing
about necessary reforms in Diem's regime. The President ' s emissary rejected
the alternatives of a military takeover which would make the generals
dominant in all fields . He rejected, too, the alternative of r eplacing
Diem with a weaker figure l'lho l'lould be vlilling to delegate authority to
both military and civil leaders . 22/ The first course l'lould emphasize
the solution to only one set of problems while slighting others; the
second would permit action, but not coordinated action .

 "L;Ynl
 B. · . w u · ted Fa r t nership "

 In order to move in a coordinated way on the intermingled military,
politi cal , economic , and social problems facing South Vietnam, General
Taylor reconunended that the U. S. initiate a " limited partnership" ,'lhich
would stop short of direct U. S, action but would also, through persuasion
at many levels judiciously mixed vlith U,S. leverage , " ... force the Viet-
namese to get their .house in order in one area after another. " ?J.! In-
creased material assistance from the U. S. would be accompanied l'li th increased
U. S. participation at all l evels of government in which the American advisors
must " ... as friends and partners -- not as arms-length advisors -- show
them how the job might be done -- not tell them or do it for them . " If
strongly motivated, tactful Americans were assigned primarily outside
Saigon, thus avoiding the establishment of large headquarters not actually
engaged in operational tasks, Taylor thought that this increas ed U. S .
participation would not be " counter-productive" ; e .g ., lend substance to
claims of U. S. imperialism and dominance of the Diem Government . ~

 Thus, Taylor consciously opted for a U. S. cours e of action in which
 the major thrust of effort would be to i nduce Diem to do the things that
 the U. S. thought should be done : to dravl the disaffected into the national
 effort and to organize and equip so that effective action would be possible .
 General Taylor did not argue explicitly that success would follovl automatic-
 ally if Diem ' s practices could be r eformed and his operational capabilities
 upgraded, but he impli ed this outcome . The question of an overall strategy
. to defeat the insurgency came very close to being regarded as a problem
 in the organization and management of resources . Since GVN had no national
 plan,efforts were concentrated on inducing them to produce one . There was
 much less concern about the substance of the non- existent GVN plan. It
 was almost as though there had to be something to endorse or to criticize
 b efore substantive issues could be treated as relevant .

 C. U.S.-Propo sed National Plans

 This priority of business is r eflected in the U. S. ple,ns which
were propos ed to GVN for adoption by the latter. In l ate 1960 the U.S .
Country Team in Saigon produced an agreed "Counterinsurgency Plan for
Vi et - Nam" (CIP). The plan was an attempt to specify roles and relation-
ships within GVN in the counterinsurgency effort, to per suade Diem to
abandon his bilineal chain of conunand in favor of a single command line
with integrated effort at all levels within the government, and to create
the governmental machinery for coordinated national planning . ~ It

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 7
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was recognized that these recommendations were not palatable to President
Diem, but reorganization along the lines spe cified was regarded as essential
to successful accomplisl1ment of the counterinsurgent effort. ~ .

 The CIP 1-laS an indi ctment of GVN failure to organize effectively
and to produce coordinated nationa.l plans . ?:JJ It advanced no operational
concepts for adoption by GVN . This obvious omission ,·TaS corrected in the
"Geographically Phased National J.Jevel Operation Plan for Counterinsurgency"
which MAAG Vietnam published on 15 September 1961 . ?:§} Not only did this
plan specify the areas of primary interest for pacification operations --
as its title indicates - - it also set forth a conceptual outline of the
thre e sequential phases of actions 1-Thich must b e undertaken . In the first,
"preparatory phase, " the intelligence effort "ras to be concentrated in the
priority target areas , surveys were to be made to pinpoint needed economic
and political reforms , plans were to be drawn up, and military and politi -
cal cadres were to be trained for the specific objective area . ?!1I The
second, or "military phase, " would be devoted to clearing the objective area
with regular forces, then handing local security responsibility over to the
Civil Guard (CG) and to establishing GVN presence. 30/ In the final ,
"security phase, " the Self Defense Corps (SDC) "lYOuldassmne the civil
action-local security mission, the populace was to be "reoriented ," politi-
cal control was to pass to civilian hands, and economic and social pro-
grams 'were to be initiated to consolidate government control. Military
units would be withdrawn as security was achieved and the target area
would be " secured " by the loyalty of its inhabitants -- a l oyalty attribu-
table to GVN!s successful responses to the felt needs of the inhabitant s . ~

 First priority in thi s plan (1962 operations) was to go to six
provinces around Saigon and to the Kontum area. Second priority (1963 )
would be given to expansion southvrard into the Delta and southward in the
Central Highlands from Kontum. Third priority (1964 ) would continue the
spread of GVN control in the highlands and shift the emphasis in the south
to the provinces north and east of Saigon . Before any of these priority
ac tions were undertaken, however , it was proposed to conduct an ARVN sweep
in War Zone D, in the jungles northeast of Saigon , to r educe the danger
to the capital and to increase ARVN ! s self- confidence . 2
 (See Map 1.)

 The geographically phased plan compl emented the earlier CIP .
Together , these two U. S. efforts constituted an outline blueprint for
a ction . It is, of course, arguable that this was the b est conceivable
blueprint , but it was at least a comprehensive bas i s for r efi nement --
for arguments for different priorities or a changed " series of events "
in the process of pacification .

 D. Initial Vietnamese React i ons

 Thi s is not h01-7 matters proceeded, in the event . Ambassador
Durbrow, General McGarr , and others urged acceptance of the CIP upon
President Diem, but with only partial success . ~ Diem stoutly resisted
the adoption of a singl e , i ntegrated cha in of operat i onal cormnand , show'ed
no enthusiasm for detai l ed prior plamling, continued hi s practice of cen-
t ralized decision-making (sometimes tantamount to decision piegonholing),

 8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

i. . -( ..
 . '

 .•
 '

j
 . . :. • r ..

I
1j.'
 U.s. MAAG Geographically Phase'd Plan
 , ..
 , ,

 -l"0\
 \.
t . j.

 t
Ij I

 t
 <

I
I
 !
 r.
 \'"
 'II -IAI LAN D ",\

[1

 ..
t 1

It
 J
..
:1·,··
 I
 !

 [.
It
 I
 . ,
 '
 ,

 \ : 'l;~

r
 ".

 " -, ,

 I
 MAP 1
 .- - "

 i ··· L ..-:.--'-
 \
 1
 9

It ...
 - .. ----- -------- -----,. -,---------- -------- --~------- ---...:---'------~ ~---
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SEeRE~ - Sensitive

and continued to playoff the provin:::8 chiefs against the generals . Some
aspect p of the eIP were accepted, bu~ the basic organizational issues
remained unresolved and the strategic approach QDresolved by default .

 The unsuccessful U.S . atter::."Jts to secure organizational reforms
wi thin the Diem goverr1.1nent had asslJr::~d psychological pr:Lrnacy by the time
of General Taylor ' s Octob er 1961 mis3ion to Saigon . The Ameri.can posi-
tion ,'ras essentially that no operaticnal plan could succeed unless GVN
were reorganized to permit-effective i.mplementation . It was reorganiza-
tion that Taylor emphasized, as deta~led above . But General Taylor did
bring up the need for some coordinated ope rational plan i n his talks with
President Diem . Diem's r espons e is :::escribed in a cable to Washington
by Ambassador Nolting :

 Taylor several times stre3sed importance of overall
 plan -- military, politica.l, ecc::1omic, p sychological , etc .
 for dealing with guerrillas. D~em tended avoid clear re-
 sponse this suggestion but fine.=-ly indicated that he has
 a new strategic plan of his ovl::1 . Since it was not very clear
 in spite efforts to dra"T him 01:.~ Ivhat this plan is, Ta.ylor
 asked him to let us have a copy in vTri ting . W
 E. Thompson ' s CounterRroposals

 President Diem may have be e~'"l vlhistling in the dark about a new
plan of his own . It is likely, howe-,cer, that he I'Tas already conversant
with the ideas of a new high level 6.:::visor "Tho had been in Saigon for
several weeks and whose .approach to prosecuting the war he would soon en-
dorse officially as his own . The ad-,-isor vTas RGK Thompson, a Bri tish civil
servant who had come from the position of Permanent Secretary of Defense
i n Malaya . Thompson ' s British Advis cry Mission VTas in Saigon in response
to Diem ' s re~uest for experienced tt~rd country nationals to assist him
in his counter insurgent operations . There had been some i nitial U.S. ob -
j ection to British "advice without r espons ibility," but fears had been
temporarily alla.yed when it was agreed that Thompson ' s charter would be
limited to civic action matters .

 Thompson provided Diem his initial "appreciation" (or , i n U. S.
terminology, " estimate of the situation") in October 1961. 22.1
 His assess-
ment was well received by the Presi c.ent , I'rho asked him to fo l lov7 it up with
a specific plan . Thompson ' s response , an outline plan for the pacifica -
tion of the Delta area, was given to the ~resident on 13 November . Thus ,
Thompson was in the process of articulating one potentiall y comprehensive
strategic approach at the same time that the U. S. was deeply involved in
fashioning a major new phase in U. S.-Gv}T rel ations in which major new U. S.
a id would be tied to Diem ' s acceptance of specified reforms and , inferentially,
t o his willingness to pursue some agreed, coordinated strategy . Thompson ' s
plan was, in short, a potential rival to the American- advanced plans repre -
sented by the CIP and the geographically phased IVlAAG plan of September 1961.

 TOP SECRET - Sens it i ve
 10
 Declassified per Execut ive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 In order to assess the similarities and differences between t:re
U. S. plans and that advanced by the British Advisory Mission , it is neces-
sary to summarize Thompson l s argument and proposals. Like Taylor (with
whom he talked and to whom he gave a copy of his initial "apprecj.ation"
at the latter l s request), Thompson saw the VC objective to be one of politi-
cal denouement by combined military and political action rather than a mili -
t ary takeover of the entire nation . Like McGarr and the other U.S. military
advisors, he recognized the probability and danger of VC attempts to con-
trol the unpopulated areas and to use them both as a base form which to pro -
j ect an image of political strength and as secure areas from vlhich (in
the case of War Zone D, northeast of Saigon ) to threaten the capital.
But unlike the U:S : militar~ ~dvisors, Thompson viewed the primarj threat
t o b e to the polltJ..cal stablllty of the populated rural areas . 36 Con-
sequently, he regarded McGarr I s proposed ini tial operation in Wa,r Zone D
to be a step in the wrong direction .

 The main government target, Thompson argued , should not be simply
the destruction of VC forces . Rather, it should be to offer an attractive
and constructive alternative to communist appeals . This could only be done
by empha,sizj.ng national reconstruction and development in the populated
rural areas . To do so would r equire extensive and stringent secu.rity mea-
sures, to b e sure, but these measures required primarily police rather
than regular milj.tary forces . The police could establish a close rapport
with the populace; the army could not . The army should have the mission
to keep the VC off balance by mobile action in order to prevent insurgent
attacks on the limited areas in which GVN would concentrate its i nitial
pacification efforts . J1I
 This line of argwnent vIas more fully developed i n Thompson I s draft
plan for the pacification of the De l ta area, given to President Diem on
11 November.]§I The objective of the plan was to win l oyalt i es r ather
than to kill i nsurgents . For that reason Thompson selected a populous area
with r elatively l ittle VC main force activity . The thrust of his proposal
was that " clear and hold " operations should r eplace " search and destroy"
sweeps . ARVN might be used to protect the villages while the villages were
organizing to protect themselves and mobile ARVN forces must be available
to reinforce local defense units, but the process should be abandoned of
" sweeping" through an area - - and then l eaving it. The peasants must be
given the assurance of physical security so that economic and social im-
provements , the r eal object of the plan, could procced without interruption.

 The means by which the villagers would be protected was the II stra-
tegic hamlet," a lightly guarded village because i t was -- by definjtion --
in a relatively low risk area . More heavily defended centers , ca,lled "de_
fend ed hamlets" and involving more relocation, Ivould b e employed i n areas
under more VC influence, particularly along the Cambodian border .

 To control this effort i n the De lta , Thompson r ecommended that
the ARVN III Corps Headquarters be r einforced with paramilitary and civil
components, relieved of its r esponsibility for the area around and north
of Saigon , and function under the immediate supervision of t he National
Security Council - - presided over by Pr esident Diem . The province chiefs ,

 11
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

alr eady under Diem ' s personal direction, would be responsible on all
emergency matters to the r einforced III Corps Headquarters (to be called
the Combined Headquarters), but continue as before with respect to r outine
admini stration . J2/

 Thompson presented this Delta plan as a program of wide potential :

 ... It should lead by stages to a reorganization of
 the government machinery for directing and coordinating
 all action against the communists and to the production of
 an overall strategic operational plan for the country as
 a whole dehning responsibilities, tasks and priorities .
 At the same time i t will lead to the establishment of a static
 security framework which can be developed eventually into
 a National Polic e force into which can b e incorporated a
 single security intelligence organization for the direction
 and coordination of all intelligence activities against the
 communists . I agree with Your Excellency that it would be
 too disruptive at the present moment to try to achieve these
 immediately and that they should be developed gradually .
 Using a medical analogy, the remedy should be clinical
 r ather than surgical . ~

III. DEVELOPING A CONSENSUS AMONG THE ADVISORS

 A. Initial Reaction of U. S. Military Advi sors

 It is not difficult to imagine the shocked r eaction t o Thompson ' s
proposals , especially in U. S. military circles . In fact , one need not
imagine them ; General McGarr has recorded a detailed rejoinder to Thompson ' s
proposals . He was , to begin with, upset about the lack of prior coordina -
tion :

 Following Mr . Thompson ' s medical analogy .. . we have the
 case of a doctor called in for consultation on a clinical
 case , actually performing an amputation without consul ting
 the r esident physician -- and without b eing required to
 a ssume the overall responsibility for the patient . ~

 General McGarr ' s unhappiness with Thompson was not simply a case
of injured feelings . He had four r e lated categories of disagreements with
the plan proposed by the British Advisory Mission . First , Thompson ' s
r eco~mended command arrangements , if adopted, would demol ish the prospect
of a unitary chain of command within ARVN, an obj ecti ve tOY-lard which McGarr
had been working for over a year . Additionally, the Thompson proposal s
would l eave Diem as the ultimate manager of an operation dealing with only
a portion (the Delta ) of RVN. The el imination of practices such as this
had been an explicit ot j ective of the entire U. S. advisory effort for a
l ong time .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 12
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Second, the proposed priority in the Delta clashed with MCGarr ' s
priorities which placed War Zone D first, the area around Saigon second,
and the Delta third . There was a lack of unanimity among the U. S. advisors
about the relative importance of the War Zone D operation but the military,
in particular, were looking for an important operation to help the (hope-
fully) revitalized ARVN demonstrate its offensive spirit and mobile capabili-
ties. This desire gave ris e to the third and fourth objections -- or fears.

 The II static security frame"Tork" in the villages to which Thompson
referred struck General McGarr as an unwarranted dOlmgrading of the need
for a sizeable conventional military force to play an important role in
pacification. Thompson's stated desire to emphasize police forces in lieu
of regular military forces was regarded by the U.S. military advisory chief
as unrealistic -- a transferral of Malayan experience to a locale in which
the existing tools of policy were very different .

 Related to this obj ection "Tas a final set of disagreements.
Thompson had want ed to go slowly and to let a ne"T GVN organization grow
from the effort . The U. S . military advisory chief also wanted to go slow'ly
but not that SlO"Tly . Not only would the Viet Cong not wait, i t was simply
unsound policy not to use the tools at hand. It would not do to reduce the
ARVN and increas e police forces while the VC continued thier successes .
It was necessary, in sum, to act in a limited area but to act ~uickly.
Thompson ' s recommendations did not look to ~uick action, emphasized the wrong
area, were designed to emphasize the wrong operational agency, and proposed
unacceptable coro~and lines . ~

 It is important to note that in'spite of these explicit disagree-
ments there "Tere broad areas of apparent agreement between Thompson and
his U.S. counterparts . (Apparent, because the "areas of agreement " concealed '
differences, too .) The U.S . MAAG was amenab l e to the development of strate-
gic hamlets, General McGarr claimed . ~ Indeed, MAAG ' s long, diffuse doc-
trinal "handbook" for advisors in the field did devote three pages - - without
any particular emphasis -- to the "secure village concept ." 44/ MAAG did
not stress the centrality of strategic haro~ets per se, but neither did
Thompson . Strategic hamlets were to Thompson a ,.:ray station enroute to
hi s real objective -- winning the loyalty of the rural peasants . Thi s
was apparently compatible with the se~uential steps to pacitication out-
lined in MAAG ' s own Geographically Pha sed Counterinsurgency Plan . If the
competing approaches of the U. S. and British advisors had not been made
compatible,there was , at l east , some agreed ground from which to launch
the effort to make them compatible.

 B. Reactions in Washington

 That such ground existed was fortunate, for Thompson ' s evolutionary
plan was not only finding a warm reception at the Presidential Palace,
it was also winning an attentive ear in Washington. As already mentioned,
Thompson talked with General Taylor during the latter's October 1961 mission
to Saigon and provided Taylor a copy of the initial British "appreciation ."

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 13
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Copi es of the Thompson memorandmfi on the Delta were also forwarded to
Taylor at the latter's request. ~ Then in January 1962 , Thompson, again
r esponding to Taylor's request, sent the l atter a long letter outlining
his views. In l ess than a month, General Taylor could present to Presi-
dent Kennedy a plan entitled "A Strategic Concept for South Vietnam" by
Roger Hilsman which was an unabashed restatement of most of Thompson ' s
ma jor points and to\vard which President Kennedy had, not incidentally,
already expressed a favorable disposition. ~

 Hilsman ' s "strategic concept" avowedly flowed from three basic
principles : that the problem in Vietnam presented by the VC was political
rather than military in its essence; that an effective counterinsurgency
plan must provide the people and villages with protection and physical
security; and that counter guerrilla forces must adopt the same tactics
as tho se u sed by the guerrilla himself. ~

 To translate these principles into operational reality, Hilsman
called for "strategic villages" and "defended villages" a la Thompson ,
with first priority to the most populous areas; i.e., the Delta and in the
vicinity of Hue. 48/ ARVN would, much as in Thompson ' s proposal, secure
the initial effort, when necessary, and b e employed to keep the VC off
balance in those areas already under Viet Cong control. The plan envisaged
a three-phase process by which GVN control would progressively be expanded
from the least heavily VC-penetrated provinces with large populations
(phase I), into the more heavily penetrated population centers (phase II),
and finally into the areas along the I,aotian and Cambodian borders (phase
III).!t1/ Hilsman eschewed use of the "oil spot" analogy but the process
and rationale he put forth were the same . His plan moved "strategic vil -
lages " to a place of prominence greater than that in Thompson 's Delta plan
and far in excess of the offhanded acceptance which had thus far b een
afford ed them by U. S. military advisors . Strategic hamJ.ets were not the
heart of the Hilsman plan -- civic action was that - - but they were the symb cl,
the easily recogni zable, easily grasped initial step by which GVN could be-
gin, following Hilsman ' s second principle, to "provide the people and the
villages with protection and physical security ." zY

 C. The Advisors Reach Agreement

 Thompson's bas ic ideas were gaining wide dissemination at the
highest level within the U. S. government in early 1962 . What of his r el a -
t ions with the U. S. MAAG in Saigon? These had been significantly improved
as the resll1t of a meeting between Thompson , Ambassador Nolting, and
British Ambassador Hohler . Thompson agreed to revise his paper so as to
remove the objection to his propo sed command arrangements. Ambassador
Nolting r eported that Thompson 'i'laS nOlV' working "closely and amicably" with
MAAG. ~ This took care of one of MCGarr ' s objections . Thompson had
apparently decided, too, to allow the issue to drop for the time b e ing
of police primacy in pacification vis - a-vis ARVN. It was not, after all,
a change that could be made quickly; Pre sident Diem was convinced that
some start was needed to save his administration . Tha,t had been his rea-
son, after all, in reluctantly inviting increased American participation
in the war.

 TOP SECRET - S...;.dsiti ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Secretary McNama.ra played an important role in disposing of still
another issue in dispute -- that of ,·;here to b egin . In mid-December 1961,
after President Kennedy had decided to adopt essentially all of General
Taylor ' s November recom~endations except the introduction of major U.S .
forces into Vietnam, Secretary McNamara met in Honolulu with the U. S.
principals in Vietnam to discuss futuxe plans. A central question was that
of what could be done in the short term future. The Secretary of Defense
made it clear that RVN had "number one priority ." 5JJ...
 McNamara urged
concentration on one province : "I ' ll guarantee it7the money and equipmeny
provided you have a plan bas ed on one province . Take one place, sweep it
and hold it in a plan ." 2J./ Or , put another W8.y, let us demonstrate that
i n some place, in some way, we can achieve demonstrable gains .

 General McGarr , immediately upon his return to Saigon, wrote to
Secretary Thuan and passed on this proposal :

 I would like to suggest that you may wish to set aside
 one specific area, say a province, and use it as a "test
 area, " in establishing this type "pacification infrastruc -
 ture . " My thinking is th8.t all the various elements of this
 anti-VC groundwork be designated i mmed iately by your govern-
 ment and trained as a team or teams for the actual reoccupa-
 tion and holding of the designated commlmist infiltrated
 area when it has been cleared by RVN.A.F military action . 2!3J
Such teams would embrace, McGarr suggested, police, intelligence , financial ,
psychological, agricultural, medical, civic action, and civil political
functions . 55/

IV . THE ADVISORS " SELL" DIEM (OR VICE-VERSA).

 A. Where to Begin?

 GVN did indeed have a province in mind . It was not a Delta province ,
however . Nor 1-laS it a province relatively secure from VC infiltration .
~uite to the contrary, Binh Duong Province , extending north and northwest
of Saigon, had been heavily infiltrated. Its main communications axis
 (National Highw'ay 13, extending north\-Tard from Saigon into Cambodia ) sliced
di r ectly between War Zone D and War Zone C. The province was crossed
by important routes of communications , liaison , and supply between two
i nsurgen redoubts . Hardly the logical place to begin , one might say,
but "logic" was being driven by events and desires more than by abstract
r easoning .

 One desire was the widely held wish to do something concrete
and productive as a symbol of U. S. determination and GVN vitality . Another
desire was GVN ' s ,vish to commit the Amer icans to support of Diem ' s govern-
ment on terms which would b e in fact acceptable to that government and
would -- equally important -- aEpear to be U. S. support for GVN-initiated
actions . I f one were Vietnamese one might reason that Binh Duong was an

 15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ar ea of unquestionable strategic importance -- and one in which GVN had
already initiated some pacification efforts . If the Americans wis h to
concentrate in one province and i f they are willing to underwrite the effort
with r esources , why not begin in an important strategic ar ea where work .
is already underway?

 GVN had initiated , in August 1961, a "Rural Reconstruction Cam-
paign" in the Eastern Region of South Vietnam to secure the provinces of
Tay Ninh, Binh Duong, and Phuoc TUy. 2fJ Most of the effort prj_or to
Dec ember 1961 had b een concentrated in the Cu Chi District of Binh Duong .
Xom Hue Hamlet of Tan An Hoi was , during December , in the proce ss of being
fortifi ed as a strategic hamlet . 211 General McGarr was under the impres-
sion that " conSiderable progress " had already b een made in these three
province s in the establishment of the GVN village level activities so
necessary to winning popular support . 2§/

 In mid-January General McGarr met (just prior to his departure
for Honolulu ) with President Di em and Secretary Thuan to dis cuss pacifica-
tion plans . As McGarr told Secretary McNamara , Diem stressed that the
If.tAAG-endorsed military operation in War Zone D might merely close the
string on an empty bag . Such a failure would be detrimental to ARVN morale .
Besides, the President observed echoing Thompson, " sweeps " solved nothing;
the problem was to bold an area and to separate the VC from the rest of the
populace . Diem preferred a concentrated effort in Binh Duong, a heavily
infiltrated province , close to Saigon, of great strategic importance , and
in ''i'hich only 10 of 46 villages were under GVN control -- but in which the
groundwork for a sound governnlent infrastructure had already be en laid . )~

 The di scussions at the Secretary of Defense ' s Confer ence in
Honolulu turned on whether or not the War Zone D operation offered more
hope f or a concrete gain than a " single province" pacification scheme .
McNamara concluded that it did not. General McGarr dissented mildly from
the sel ection of Binh Duong . He would have favored Phuoc Tuy (where U.S.
troops were scheduled to land if a decision wer e ever made to commit them ).
But Bi nh Duong was GVN ' s plan and the "limited partners " finally agreed
to back Diem ' s preferred attempt . §2/ Thus, the U. S. cmae to a roundabout
decision t o support as a " test" of vlhat would l ater b e called the " strategic
hamJ_et program" an operation about whose details they kne'\v little , in an
area that all recognized to b e difficult, because it allegedly r epresented
a long-sought example of GVN i nitiative in planning and civil-military
pr eparation . Much of the public i mage of the strategic hamlet program was
to be established by thi s operation , as it turned out . It s name was
"Operation Sunri se .,t But it was not -- U.S. desires to the contrary --
the only strategic hamlet effort to be carr i ed fOY'\'i'ard during this peri od .
It was only one of several -- and several grew very quickly into many .

 B. Concurrent GVN Activity

 It has a l ready been suggested that President Diem responded wi th
some enthusiasm to the early propo sals from Thompson ' s Brit i sh Advisory
Mission. In mid-February 1962 , President Diem approved orally Thompson ' s

 16
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Delta Pacification Plan" and said he would like to see it executed with-
out delay. ~ Earlier, on 3 February, he had created by presidential
decree the Inter-Ministerial Committee for Strategic Hamlets (IMCSH),
comprising the heads of various ministries (Defense, Interior, Education,
Civic Action, Rural Affairs, etc .). 62/ The IMCSH was, as its membership
indicates, a coordinating body designed to give national direction and
guidance to the program . Its importance is not in its work -- for it
apparently did very little -- but as an indicator of Diem's early 1962
thinking of strategic hamlets as a national program and of the central
role which his brother, Ngo Dim1 Nhu , would play in this program .

 1~u was the real driving force behind GVN ' s uneven but discernible
movement toward adoption of the strategic hamlet theme as a unifying con-
cept in its pacification efforts. In the early period under discussion
he masked his central role, however. He was not announced as the Chairman
of the IMCSH (nobody was), but the committee was responsible to him. 63/
He did not, hO'trever, lead it actively . As two American observers remarked
at the time, " Nhu seems to have consulted the committee seldom and to have
shared his policy-making power with it even less frequently ." 64/

 C. Early Signs of GVN Expectations

 But although brother Nhu was behind the scenes in late 1961 and
early 1962, an occasional fleeting glimpse of his thinking and the direction
in which he was hea,ding has still managed to show through. A CIA report
from Saigon summarized Nhu ' s instructions to a dozen province chiefs from
the Delta in a meeting held on 14 December 1961. Primary emphasis was to
be placed on the strategic hamlet program, Nhu said, and this program was
to be coupled with a "social revolution" against "Viet-Nam ' s three enemies :
divisive forces, low standard of living, and communism ." 65/ The CIA
Task Force - Vietnam observed , in forwarding this report, that Nhu ' s "social
revolution and strategic hamlets appear to be fuzzy concepts with little
valv.e in the fight against the Communists ." f!J

 No doubt these concepts seemed fuzzy at the end of 1961. But
within another twelve months, as events would prove, they would be widely
recognized as the twin spearheads of GVN's counterinsurgent effort, fuzzy
or not . The strategic hamlet program would have broad support within the
U.S. gover~~ent and financial resources to underpin that support. The
"social revolution" to which Nhu referred in December 1961 would be surfaced
as Diem ' s "personalism" drive. The important thing for the present analysis
is that all of the expectations of the several participant groups -- both
U.S. and GVN -- were identif.iable by very early 1962 at the latest, and that
the concept of the strategic hamlet prograrn in the broad sense had been
fully adumbrated. The skeleton -- the rationale -- was complete; the body - -
operational programs -- had not yet taken form. Each group could, however,
work tOvlard construction of a slightly different body (and for differing
rea sons ) and claim ,vi th some plausibility to be 'Ivorking from the same
skeleton .

 17
 TOP SECRET - Se 1 iti ve
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

V. DIFFERING PERSPECTIVES AND EXPECTATIONS

 Thr ee somewhat different views may b e categorized which are of interest
to the present inq,uiry: those of the U. S. military advisors, of the U. S.
political leadership, and of the Diem government ' s leaders . Such generali-
zations are admittedly risky and easily overdrawn ; there were, of course,
differences betvleen the perceptions and expectations of, say, the U. S.
military advisors . For example , those farthest from Saigon tended to be
less patient -- 'Ivi th Diem and in expecting results -- than were those closer
to the area of operations . Still, discernible differences of outlook and
expectations may be said to represent the prevailing views in each of these
three groups .

 A. U. S. Military Advisors

 The U.S. military advisors mistrusted arguments which stressed
the Vietnamese struggle as essentially political rather than military .
They were q,uite willing to concede that the struggle was multi-di.mensional
but they feared instinctively any line of reasoning which might appear to
argue that military considerations were relatively unimportant in Vietnam .
So, too, they were wary of schemes which might lead ARVN to perpetuate its
defensive tactical stance . Both dangers were present in the strategic
hamlet program . The same military advisors were more forceful than others
in stressing the need for the Diem regime to rationalize its com~and arrange -
ments and to plan comprehensively and in detail from the highest to lm·rest
levels . Their operational interest concentrated on making ARVN not just
more mobile but more aggressive . Their creed , deve l oped through years of
exper ience and training (or vicarious experience ) was to " cl ose with and
destroy the enemy ." One could expect them, then, to be more than willing
to turn over the job of static defense to the CDC and CG at the earliest
opportunity, to keep a weather eye out for opportunities to engage major
VC format i ons in decisive batt le, and to chafe under the painfully slow
evolutionary proces s which was implicit even in their own 1961 geographically
phased plan .

 B. U.S. Political Leader ship

 The D. S. political l eadership , and to varying degrees the l eaders
i n the Saigon Embassy and in USOM, were more attuned to the political
problems -- b oth with r espect to GVN-U.S. r elations and t o the problem
of winning broad support among the Vietnamese for the Diem administration .
This made members of this group i nherently more sympathetic t o proposals
such as the Thompson pl an for the Delta than they were , for i nstance , to
i ncreasing ARVN ' s size and capabilities . They found compelling the logic
of analyses such as Hilsman ' s which cut to the political root rather than
treating only the military symptoms . One suspects -- though documentation
would never b e found to support it -- that they were attracted by an argu-
ment which did suggest some hope for "demilitarizing" the war, de - emphasiz i ng
U. S. operational participation, and increasing GVN ' s ability to sol ve it s
ovlD. interna l problems using primarily its own human resources .

 18
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 C. President Diem

 Ngo Dinh Diem's perspective and expectations were the most
 different of all . U.S. groups differed in dregre; Diem's eA~ectations were
 different in kind. He vmnted, first of 8.11, to obtain uneCluivocal U. S.
 support, not just to his nation but to his administration . It was essential~
 in his eyes , that this support not cc:npromise his authority or Vietnamese
 sovereignty. He did not want to give credence to communist claims that
 he was a puppet of the U.S., on one tand, or concentrate the coercive in-
 struments of power in the hand of poc.;ential antagonists, on the other.

 A r evealing assessment of Diem ' s frame of mind is provided by
 Ambassador Nolting . Diem invited increased U.S. aid and U. S. participa-
 tion because he feared that, especia2.1y vith an impending settlement in
 Laos, South Vietnam would come under increasing communist pressures.
 If Diem ' s government could not win o-rer these pressures -- and Diem feared
 it could not -- it had only the choi~e of going down fighting or of being
 overthrovTn by a coup . Thus, in reCluesting additional U. S. help, Diem had
 "adopted an expedient which runs ag2.inst his O"Tn convictions, and he is
 apparently willing to accept the att2ndant diminution of his own stature
 . as an independent and self-reliant nc.tional leader ." §J}

 But when Ambassador Nolting presented to Diem the U. S. Cluid pro
 CluO for its "limited partnership," this apparent acceptance of decreased
 stature and independence suddenly see~ed less apparent . §§j Then, as
 Nolting reported, President Diem feared the reaction even among his own
 cabinet aides . 69/ Secretary Thuan, in whom Diem did confide, said that
 the President was brooding over the fa.ct that the U. S. was asking great
 concessions of GVN in the realm of i ts sovereignty in exchange for little
 additional help . 121 Diem argued that U. S. influence over his govern-
 ment , once it was known, would play directly into the communists ' hands.
 The first priority task, he added, ,·;c.s to give the people security, not
 to make the government more popular. To try it the other way around was
 to place the cart before the horse. 71/ .

 Diem sa"l himself caught in a dilemma in which he was doomed if he
 did not get outside assistance and doomed if he got it only at the price
 of surrendering his independence . To him the trick was to get the U.S.
 committ ed without surrendering hi s independence. One possible solution
 lay in getting U.S. material aid for a program that would be almost wholly
 GVN-implemented . The strategic ham~et program offered a convenient vehi-
 cle for this purpose and one which ,·;as also appealing for other reasons .
 It put achieving security before "liL1.ing loyalty -- in an operational con-
 text in vlhich it "las difficult to di:::ferentiate between security for the
 r ural populace and control of that populace, since many of the actions
 to achieve one were almost identical to the acts to realize the other .

 D. The Central Issue

 The U. S., for its part, was asking Diem to forego independence by
 accepting the wisdom of the American r ecommendations for reform . The

--~
 19 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

central question was 1-Thether he would -- or could -- do so . Among those
who responded to this question in the negative, J. Kenneth Galbraith wasmost
trenchant:

 In my completely considered vie1-T . . • Diem 1-Till not
 reform either administratively or politically in any
 effective way . That is because he cannot. It is
 politically naive to expect it. He senses that he
 cannot let power go because he would be thrown out. 72/

The U.S. decided that Diem could make meaningful reforms and that he
would do so -- or at least it decided that i t was likely enough that he
would do so and that support for his administration constituted the best
availab l e policy alternative.

 E. The Problem of Assessment

 The differences in perspectives and expectations outlined above
are important in their own right. They 100m even l arger , hmfever, when
one considers the difficulty of assessing progress in the program about
to be undertaken. These groups \fere about to embark upon a long, arduous
j oint voyage. Their only chart had never been to sea. This was the
newly -articulated and imperfectly understood doctrine of counterinsurgency
which stressed the interaction and interdependence of political, military,
social, and psychological factors . It posited the necessity for certain
actions to follow' immediately and successfully behind others in order
for the process of pacification to succeed . Above a ll -- and this point
cannot be overstressed -- while this doctrine recognized the need for both
the carrot and the stick ( for coercive control and appealing programs )
it made gaining broad popular acceptal1ce the single ultimate criterion
of success. Neither kill ratios nor construction rates nor the frequency
of incidents was conclUSive , yet these were all indicators applicable to
phases within the larger process. The gains of doing well in one phase,
however, could be ¥Tiped out by inactivity or mistakes in a subsequent
phase . It was, in short , very difficult to know how well one was doing
until one was done.

VI . THE NATIONAL PLA..l'if EMERGES

 A. A1-Tareness of the Unifying Potential

 Before examining the quality of execution of the operational pro -
grams for which some detailed r ecord is available it will be useful to
outline the process by Ifhich the strategic hamlet program became -- by late
1962 -- a comprehensive national program embodying the major effort of GVN
in paCification .

 1t0peration Sunrise" in Bin,h Duong Province was launched on 22
March 1962 i n what was initially called the ItBen Cat Project. It 73/ The
 Delta project, however, l anguished in a "planning stage " until May, when
 it fir st became known that Diem was considering incorporating it into the
'Strategic Hamlet Program. 74/ By August the IMCSH proposed a priority
 plal1 for the construction of strategic hamlets on a nation-vide basis.

 20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Later the same month, the U.S. Inter-Agency Committee for Province
Rehabilitation concurred in this plan ( with minor reservations ) as a
basis for planning and utilization of U.S. assistance . 75/ By October,
the Diem government had made the Strategic Hamlet Program the explicit
focus and unifying concept of its' pacification effort . The government -
controlled Times of Viet Nam devoted an entire issue to !l1962 : The Year
of Strategic Hamlets .!I 76/ Ngo Dinh Nhu was unveiled as the !larchitect
and prj.rne mover!l of the program which was the Vietnamese answer to
communist strategy. As Nhu proclaimed : !lStrategic hamlets seek to
assure the security of the people in order that the success of the polit -
ical, social , and military revolution might be assured by the enthusiastic
movement of solidarity and self- sufficiency ." 77/ President Diem had
earlier put the same thought to an American visitor in clearer words:

 The importance of the strategic hamlets goes beyond the
 concept of hamlet self defense . They are a means to institute
 basic democracy in Vietnam. Through the Strategic Hamlet
 Program, the government intends to give back to the hamlet
 the right of self-government with its own charter and system
 of community law. This "l-Till realize the ideas of the consti -
 tution on a local scale which the people can understand. 78/
 By this time, too, influential American circles regarded the
Strategic Hamlet Program as the shorthand designation for a process which
represented a sensible and sound GVN effort . Roger Hilsman had said so
in February to President Kennedy, and found the latter highly receptive.
He continued to say so . 79/ As he advised Assistant Secretary of State
Averell Harriman in late 1962, "The government of Vietnam has finall
developed, and is now acting upon, an effective strategic concept.!I ..52/ B
Even so lukewarm an enthusiast as the CJCS, General Lyman L. Lemnitzer
could report that " the Strategic Hamlet Program promises solid
benefits , and may well be the vital key to success of the pacification
program. !I 81/

 The public rec ord also shows early support from high U.S. officials
for the Strategic Hamlet Program and recognition of its central role in
GVN!s pacification campaign. Speaking in late April 1962, Under Secretary
of State George W. Ball, commented favorably in the progressive develop -
ment of strategic hamlets throughout RVN as a method of combating
insurgency and as a means of bringing the entire nation "under control
of the government." 82/ Secretary McNamara told members of the press ,
upon his return to Washington from a Pacific meeting in July 1962, that
the Strategic Hamlet Program was the !lbackbone of President Diem ! s .
program for countering subversion directed against his state .1f 83/

 I t is reasonable to conclude from the evidence that official U. S .
awareness kept abreast of Diem ! s progressive adoption of the Strategic
Hamlet Program as the Ifunifying conceptlf in his counterinsurgent effort .
The same officials were constantly bombarded by a series of r epo rts
from a variety of sources describing the progress of the hamlet program
and assessing its efficacy .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 21
 . ;
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 B. 1I0peration Sunrise ll

 The first operational effort in which the U.S. had a hand,
1I0p eration Sunrise,1I got under way in Binh Duong Province on 22 March 1962
when work commenced on Ben Tuong, the first of five hamlets to be con-
structed for relocated peasants in the Ben Cat District in and around the
Lai Khe rubber plantation. ( See Map 2. ) Phase I of the operation - - the
military clearing phase - - was condu.cted by forces of the 5th ARVN Divi-
sion reinforced by ranger companies, a reconnaissance company, t'iw rein-
forced CG companies, and a psychological "Tarfare company . The Viet Cong
simply melted into the jungles.

 With the Viet Cong out of the way -- at least for the time be;Lng
the :::elocation and construction of the new hamlet commenced . The new
program got off to a bad start. The government was able to persuade only
seventy families to volunteer for resettlement. The 135 other families in
the half dozen settl ements "rere herded forcibly from their homes . 84/
Li 'ttle of the $300,000 in local currency provided by USOM had reached the
peasants ; the money was being withheld until the resettled families indi-
cated they Imuld not bolt the new hamlet. Some of them came ,vi th most of
their meager belongings. Others had little but the clothes on their backs.
Their old dwellings -- and many of their possessions -- were burned behind
them. 85/ Only 120 males of an age to bear arms were found among the more
than 200 families -- indic atin~ very clearly that a ~ar~e. num~er had epne
over to the VC, whether by cholce or as a result of lntlIDldatlon. 86/
 . C. Other Early Programs

 Progress in Binh Duong continued at a steady pace, beset by diffi-
culties. By midsummer 2900 persons had been regrouped into three strategic
hamlets. 87/ Elsewhere , the pace quickened. Although the Delta Plan, as
a coordinated effort, had not been implemented by the summer of 1962,
Secretary McNamara found in Mayan aggressive effort under way without U.S.
help near Ca Mao:
 Here the commander of the 31st Infantry Regiment had gone
 into an area 95% controlled by the VC, declared martial I m,r, and
 r esettled 11, 000 people ( some unde r duress) i n 9 strategic hamlets ,
 while fighting the VC wherever he found them. Since inception
 of the program, none of his villages have been attacked, and the
 freedom from VC taxation ( extortion ) i s proving most appealing to
 the people. It i s the commander fs hope ( doubtless optimistic)
 that he will be able to turn the whole area over to the civil guard
 and self defense corps ivi thin 6 months. 88/
 These resettlement efforts in areas which had been under VC domination
were not the extent of the early hamlet ttprogram,tt however . Manyexist-
i ng hamlets and villages were tt fortified tt in one degree or a..YJ.other early
in 1962 follmung no discernible pattern . This appears to have been the
natural product of the varied response to Nhu ' s i njunction to emphasize
strategic hamlets. In April, the GV"N Ministry of the Interior informed
the U.S. that 1300 such hamlets were already completed . 89/ ttOperation
Sunrise tt had by this time been broadened to embrace efforts in several
provinc es 0 90/ Several other Strategic Hamlet Programs i,rere begun :
ttOperation Hai Yen 1111 ( Sea SwallOlv) in Phu Yen Province with a goal of
281 hamlets, 157 of which were reported . as completed "¥ri thin two months:
 22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 ,," " .-.,.
 ~ ' ,'
 .'
 I ~' ..

 ..... :.":;, .. '
 "
 "
 ,
 , "
 '

 '.' j'"
 - II
 .~ ~ .. '. ; . I I ,

 . ." ~.

 ' '.
 :SImI DUONG PROVINCE
 . '.: , ~ . " '::
 'v
 , .'
 i .,' "
 .-.
 " '

 .,
 pP
 ~

 D,\U o/'NG 2 0

 EAU ~lJiG
 ,,
 ,.', !. "

 ; .'
 ..'
 BEN ~l; S
 ,:
 ,
 , Q

 , .'
 v- 0. BE?l TUCr;O /
 , c::> c?

 ~' .. " . ., ~oo ... CII.,., <lD
 .." ." 4: ' .
 •...1 ' , .

 .~ . ~ . .'..t_~'. ' . ,.
 < '. .. , '
- ~. f . ,
 .. ' ': . ,..~ ,
 .",
 , .
 .'!
 . · f .i~_ ';:~ _>,~i"~ ~. " "
 ...
 ~,'

 ' OJ
 • i
 t.: ....'..1; •••• i.'

 ~. .:. ;, ,, ','
 .. :-,.
 "'-'i"'.=':'
 ~ ". ' . . ~. ~ ' . , ;: _ ; :- . ' 1..~;~ , ~ '
 ',;.
 '. ';", '!; .,\. , . '

 •f J , ... .:..! .' ... .
 ,
 • t.' :'!..• .
 ' _. ' ,.
 • ' .. I
 . :-:",
 "

 -..
 ,,
 ,
 . .
 . .. ',I

 I':,
 , 't.

 '. :

 ~
 .. :....
 . .;
 "
 1\ OTHUUG "r_ ,.

 . ,'
 , . . . :.
 • • ' j '.

 -! ' . '
 PHUoe _.':" - • •1· .....

 vnm IllNHO ! :'

 :',._ , ~
 . ~.
 ,,
 '.! '..' .

 ..... '"

 " -..

 .... "" ,
 ' j" "
 -':'

 " ~
 ••
 ~ ..
 r -".
 .. .
 .
 . " ' III
 -. ' .: . . : ~ ',' ~ '; .
 : . '\ .'
 ~. ~: ; :::. ~
 .'. '\ .' .., ,,' I .,'
 :'; .. , .
 :i . . ';1: '" '.
 , 01;
 . 0.':' .: "
 ,:'0.:
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"Operation Dang Tien "(Let 1s go) ' in Binh Dinh Province with a goal of 328
strategic hamlets in its first year; and "Operati on Phuong Hoang" ( Royal
Phoenix) in Quang Nai Province with a goal of 125 strategic hamlets by
the end of 1962.

 D. At Last -- A National Plan

 The GVN drew all of the partialistic programs together in its
August 1962 national priority plan) mentioned earlier . The nation was
divided into four priority zones (Map 3). First priority was assigned
to the eleven provinces around Saigon . This included essentially the
area of the Thompson Delta plan plus the original area of "Ope ration
Sunri se fl plus Gia Dinh Province (Map 4). Priorities within each zone
were further specified . Within the zone of first national prior ity) for
example ) the provinces of Vinh Long) Long AD, and Phuoc Try were assigned
the highest priority; Binh Duong -- Hhere operations were already in
progress -- was given priority three (Map 5) . By the end of the summer
of 1962 GVN claimed that 3,225 of the plarmed 11, 316 hamlets had already
been completed and that over 33 percent of the nation 1s total population
was already living in completed hamlets ( See Table 1) .

 October 1962, when Diem made the StrategiC Hamlet Program the
avoi-Ted focus of his counterinsurgent campaign ) marks the second watershed
i n the development and implementation of the program . The first such
watershed had been the consensus ) on the potential value of such a pro-
gram, which had been developed at the end of 1961 and early 1962. There
would be no others until the program died with Diem .

 E. Effect on U.S . Perceptions

 The effect of the GVN 1s concentraion on strategic hamlets was to
make U. S. assessments focus on several sub - aspects of the pr oblem . Atten -
tion tended to be directed toward how I-Tell hamlets were being fortified and
whether or not the implementation phase was ,·Tell managed ; i . e ., whether
peasants were paid for their labor, reiInbursed for their losses , and given
adequate opportunity to attend their crops . Converse l y , attention was
directed away from the difficult - to - assess question of whether the follow' -
up actions to hamlet security were taking place - - the actions which would
convert the peasantry from apathy ( if not opposition ) to i dentification
with their central government .

 This focu s ing on details I-Thich diverted attention from the ultimate
objective took the form of reports , primarily statistical) which set forth
the construction rate for strategic hamlets ) the incident rate of VC
activities) and the geographical areas in which GVN control was and was not
i n the ascendancy . These flspecifics" "ere coupl ed to generalized assess -
ments which almost invariably pointed to shortcomings iB GVN 1s execution
of the program . The shortcomings) however ) were treated as prob l ems in
efficient management and operational organization; t he ine l uctability of
i ncreased control ( or security ) leading somehow to popular identification

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 .' .
 . .(
 :'
 ..
 GVN PRIORITIES FOR STRATEGIC HAMLE: TS BY ZONES !
 I
 r
':',

 I.

 t
 ," \.
 l~
 -
 TI 1/\1 LAND .

 0" .

 .,
 I

 1

 Yo

 :,:..'

 I,. ....... :~

 CON SO~ ( )
 SQUTH VI ET-NAM
 o
 . .. ,aWHIA I BOfJUD ARY
 " 0
 ~.
 f'ROV, 'NC[ BOU NDARY
 u ________L -_________________________~
 .j .,
 MAP 3
 ----------- ----
 ?5 .
 . ' .....
 " . L .

 4., . :t.
 ".
 ,. !
 ,0
 ~, .. ' ~(
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 t ·

 ' .~
 •
 ."".
 \.' ""I ,.
 .... • • .. lot
 .'
 .'

 .,' DELTA PLAN PRIORITIES
 ... ~. " "
 '" .·f
 .... .

 " '"
 "
 ....., : 17th PIIR ALLEL
 -I. " .' ,
 ! . (.
 ,"
:;, .
 ..
 . V

 'TI--IA I LA I") D.
 J . ' ..

 "

 t ·· : .

 . ,

','
 .'
 '. 1
 ,,"'.
 c· A M .'.J
 t: .

 I
 ,! r- [fi' AREA INCL.UDED IN THE
 c:: DEL. TA P~N
 . !fNI AREA IN~L.UDED IN THE NEW
 . . tff:< GVN PL.AN AS PRIORITY NO, 1

 . ~ 'f IN PROGRESS'
 , ""'-" r'-"'-;' PRIORITY . 1
 I "~
 -[ :=-=:--.. - " PRIORITY Z
 . t -' _' .
 CON SON./1 '. . '. '--'-.; :"; '," }:>R!,!I-S01,!R!,JI!,:TYCY.2 -1
 3 _ _ _ _ _-.;-:-::-:-_ _
 . cV .'_._.;-_. ~~:~ SOUTH VlET-NA M
 o
 NATIONAl BOU IIO hRY
 PROYIfIC! BOUHDARY
 ___~______________~____~MAP~
 . ~~~)~~________~__~----~--~~~--~
 ---
 26
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 ;. . ,
 ,. ..... .. .
 ' ..
 , "
 . .
 GVN PRIORITIES FOR STRATEGIC HArv1LETS WITHIN THE
 , c .~.
 FIRST PRIORITY ZONE ';
 ~

 p------~. :~~~~--~~----------~~.------~~----~--------~------------------~~--_,
 u _ 17th PA RALLEL

 ,"
 ; - ~.

 f
 }
 r
 ~,

1 ,!
 !-
 ,·',L/-\ C) S \ ....

 \1 , > '\.: ,,'

 ' . .,

 ,
 ,·C A MB .( )DIA
1
!j
 l .'r ,

 ', .' -.'
 . ~ .

1
 V
 , .
i
1
I '
IV -,

I
 ~,"'
 " ,

I
I" _1 ._ •

 PHU QUO'G ,
Ir ,',
 I PR IoR I TY 1/4

 CON SON './I •
 ~------~------~----~----~~
 ,
 , "
 °V
 0 '
 SOUTH :VIET·Ni'.?-.;i :'

 HATI 0 NALB 0 UND'H Y,
 PROVIH,E BOUNDARY
 'MAP S

 .' ,' ,
\ 27
I, '/" , ,

L~·,- -=·.~ ~- ~~-: 2~_:~~.~_~__._.·: ...-:. ~ '--.- '_. ,'" i 'i:-
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Secti on 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63 316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECREE Sensitive

 TABLE 1

 GVN HEPOn'l' ON STATUS OF STRA~('EGIC lL"l,jLSTS

 ,.
 Strategic Sh'etcgic Stn.tcgic
 Hamlets Hemlcts Hamlets Uncler Popub.tion in
 Are 0. Planned Completecl ConstI'uction
 --
 Cocnpleted HCJnlets

 SOUTIlERN:

 Saigon 433 105 115 261, 470
 East ern F'rov'i nces 1,595 291 501 423,060
 l vrestcl'n Provi nces 4,728 1,236 702 1,874,790

 SUB-TCYl'AL 6,756 1,632 1,318 2,559,320
 r
 I

 CENTR.4JJ :
 ,
 Ccnt:cal Lmrl anc1s 3, 630 1, 1~90 682 1,65 4,470
 High Plateau 930 103 217 108, 244

 . SUB-TOTP.L 4,560 1,593 899 1,762,714
 -'--

 GRAND TOTAL 11,316 3,225 2,217 4,322,034

 - Percent age of planne d hc'..mlets c emplete d •••••• • • , ••••••• • 28.49%

 - Percent aGe of t otal p opule.tion i n c omplete d hE:..llllets •••• • 33 . 39%

 * Adapted f ro:n :£he 'l'incs of Victn3..'U, 28 Octobe}.' 1962, p. 17.

 TOP SECRET - Sens i tive

 28 .
 /I. • • •

I .
l
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 TABLE 1

 GVN HE PORT ON STATUS OF S'l1J.iA'l"EGIC H.AHLE':rS

 As of 30 September 1962 *
 Strategic Str ;..tegic Strdegic
 Hamlets Hamlets EarnJ.ets Under Popule.tion in
Are£.\ Planned Completed Construction Completed H<:'mlets

SOUTHERN :
 Saigon 433 105 115 26J.,1~10

 Eastern Provinces 1,595 291 501 423,060

 vlestern Provinces 4,128 1,236 102 1,814,190

 SUB-TOTAL 6,156 1,632 1,318 2,559,3 20

CENTRlI.L :
 Central Lo\f1ands 3,630 1,490 682 1,654,410

 High Plateau . 930 103 211 108,241+

 SUB-TOTAL 4,560 1,593 899

 GRAND TOTAL 11,316 3,225 2,211

 - Percentage of planned hamJ.cts comp eted ••••••••• ••• •• •• .28.4%

 - Percentage of total popula.tion in completed b~unlets ••••• 33.39%

 oX- Adapted from f,l1.e 'r imes of Vietno..'1l, 28 octobe:c 1962, p. 11.

 TOP SECRET. - Sensitive

 28

 ,
 '0
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET Sensitive

by a process akin to the economic assumption of "flotation to stability
through development" Ivent unchallenged as a basic assumption. Cri tics
pointed to needed improvements ; the question of Fhether or not these
could be accomplished, or iVhy, almost never Has raised.

 "Operation Sunrise", for example, I,ras criticized in some detail
by the US MAAG. Much better planning and coor<Unation "\-Tas needed in order
to relocate effectively: Aerial surveys iVere necessary t o pinpoint the
number of families to be relocated; unanticipated expenditure s needed to
be provided for; preparation of sites shm.dd begin before the peasant s
were moved; and GVN resource commitments should be carefully checked by
U. S. advisors at all levels. 92/ There Ivas no discussion of the vulnera-
bility of the strategic he.mletsto VC infiltration ( as against VC attacks )
or of the subsequent steps to vrinning support. That vas not, one may
assume, the military's prime concern.

 Political observers who examined this follow-on aspect were
cautiously optimistic:

 The strategic hamlet program i s the heart of our effort
 and deserves top priority. While it has not -- and probably
 will not -- bring democracy to rural Vietnam, it provides t ruly
 local administration for the first time. Coupled with measures
 to i ncrease rice production and farmer i ncome , these loc al
 admini strations can work a revolution in rural Vietnam . 93/

The same tone was reflected in Michael Forrestal's report to President
Kennedy i n February 1963 following his visit to Vietnam va th Roger Hilsman. 9l~/
The visitors found Ambassador Nolting and his deputy , William C. Trueheart ,
optimistic about the r esults vrhich the program might achieve once the
materials for it, then just beginning to come in, r eached full volume. 95/

 The Department of Defense was devoting considerable effort to
insuring that these materials did r each Vietnam in, the quantities needed
and i n t imely fashion. Secretary McNamara had been stuck with this prob-
lem during his May 1962 visit to "Operation Sunrise" . He saw especi8~ly a
need to program SDC, CG, and Youth Corps training so that it ,{Quld match
the role of hamlet building and to insure the provision of proper commu-
nic ations for "rarning purposes 0 96/ A substantial amount of the MAAG-DoD
effort subsequently iVent into programming. The Agency for Internat ional
Development had agreed to fund the "Strategic Hamlet Kits " ( building
materials , barbed wire and sta..."k.es , light vreapons, arnmuni tion , and commu-
nication equipment ), but in August 1962 it demurred, stating that support-
ing assistance fu.Ylds in the MAP vrere i nadequate for the purpose 97/
 0

Secretary McNamara agreed to undertake the financing for 1500 kits""T13
million ) but asked if the additional 3500 kits requested iVere r eally
necessary and, if so , on I'That deltvery schedule . The target l evels and
delivery dates unclenrent more or less. continuouS revision from then until
the question becarne irrelevant in late 1963. 98/ A separate but relatecl
effort went into expediting the proclJ.r ern.en t , delivery, and inst allation of

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive

 29
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

radios in the strategic hamlets so that each would have the capability
to sound the alann and request the employment of mobile reserves when
attacked.

 F. Differences Begin to Emerge

 All of these IIprogram management II activities vTere based on the
unstated assumpt.ion that the strategic hamlet program vmuld lead to effec-
t i ve pacification if only Diem vlould mal<;,e it work. As it turned out,
there was some disagreement behreen what the U. S. considered needed to be
done and what President Diem knew very well he was doing. He was using
the Strategic Hamlet Program to carry fonTard his IIpersonalist philosophy. II 99/
As brother Nhu visibly took the reins controlling the program and began to
solidify control over the Youth Corps it became increasingly clear that
Diem was emphasizing government. control of the peasantry at the expense ( at
least in U.S. eyes ) of pacification. 100/

 As awareness in Washington increased that strategic hamlets could
serve several purposes , there developed also a divergent interpretation of
vThether or not the GVN was '\al1l1ing the ,yar. II When General Krulak, SAC SA,
and Joseph Mendenhall, an ex-counselor in Saigon then at State , visited
RVN i n September 1963, President Kennedy wryly asked upon receiving their
c onflicting reports, lIyou hID did vi sit the same country , didn ' t yoU?1I 101/
The ansl·rer is that they had, but the general stressed that the ~ilitary war
was going well while the diplomat asserted that the political war was being
l ost . The argumept vTaS not, it· should be stressed, one between the generals
and the diplomats; experienced diplomats disagreed fundamentally with
Mendenhall. The disagreement vTaS between those iyho poi nted to signs of
progress and those who heJdup examples of poor planning, corruption, and
alienation of the peasants vThose loyalty was the ob j ect of the exercise 0

Criticisms -- frequently accompanied by counterbalancing assertions that
"limited progress ll was being achieved __ mentioned corvee labor , GVN fail-
u res to reimburse the farmers for losses due to resettlement, the dishonesty
of some officials , and Diem's stress on exhortations rather than on the
provision of deSirable social services . 102/

 Those who emphasized that the prograrn '\-Tas shmving real progress --
usually ,vi th a caveat or two that there was considerable room for improve-
ment -- stressed statistical evidence to portray the exponential increase
i n strategic hamlet construction ( Table 2 ), the decli.ning trend in Viet
Cong-initiated incidents (T:able 3) , ther:Lse in VC defections ( Table l~ ), and
t he slovT but steady increase in GVN control of rural areas ( Table 5) .

 The J CS observation va th respect to the establisbrnent of strategic
h amlets , for instance, was that since fewer than hTO tenths of one percent
( 0.210 ) of them had been overrun by the VC , liThe Vietnamese peopl e must
surely be finding in them a measure of the tranquility ,'Thich they seek. 103/

 RGK Thompson later claimed that the very absence of attacks 'ioTaS
an indicator that the VC had succeeded in infiltrating the hamlets o 104/
The point is not Thompson ' s prescience but the diffi culty of reasoned-~
assessment to which this analysiS has already pointed . The U. S . course,

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 30
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 " .... .' ',' ",' " ;, ' "
 ~.
 .t;':' ", .. ~ • .'. I

 .... : .
 I • • \.. .
• . t '

 ", .. ', .

 . -'

 STRATEGIC HAMLET GROWTH SOUTH VIETNAM

 ,.'
 "

 9000-~-r~--+--r~~-~-+--~~-4--_~~-4~+I--~~_~--+--r~'--+--+~
 , I,
 8 500 STRATEG IC HAMLETS . .
 ESTI M AT E D TO IlE C OMPLE T E D
 g' BY' JUI_V .

 8000 -6--+~+-~--~~--~-~~-~j~~--I
 .
 --'-fl--~I--+--+--+--r--1--~--~~~~~-4 b

 .

 \J.
 o
 c5
 z

 0 ·. . N D J F M A M A
 M 5 0
 .\ 0 N D J F M A J J A

 ..1962 1963 1964

 \
 31 TABLE 2 ~

 ; ,\
 ", -- . .. "
 "

 ',), .
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 ...... ··i . ' . ,. I . ., . ' ,.
" . - '. :-~__.I VI ET CONG I NITI ATED I NCI DENTS BROKE.N DOWN I NTO CATEGORI ES
 I •

 . :-.
 ,_.-: .","::

 :,1
 (AHACKS, TERRORI SM, SAB OTAGE, PR OPAGANDA),
 tl OO I I I I ' I l'
 ATTf., CKS
 0= T E:RR ORISM
 II GII'" S AB OTAGE:

 s PROPAGAN DA
' .' .: .' tooo

 " ~ ....
 .'. .

 • .' . .' .. TEn ROR I S M

 '.. 900

 '.1 '.
 . ;;:

 700

 .. .,.

 , ', .
 . i'

 . . ,'.

 . I '

 . '. .
 , ----;-- , .--

 TAJ3LE 3
 ./ .,
 .1
 .1
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

.-,', '~

 , ,
 ' "
 " '.
 '" . .. - - ..
 " . VIET CONGDEFECTI,ONS,

 .
 ' 350 ca --+--+---l--+--+--~-+-'---+--f-,--t---t--t---r-fiT---t

 C'

 I ..
 '/
 h J--+,---I--+

 . ~'50 .J.--,-+--:'-+--+---l--+--1--J-:.-l--+-~-+-t--j---t---
 , , .
 ~ ..'
 ,
 , \ ",

 o
 . .. J 'F M A M J J ', A 5 0 ' N F M A/
 ,,'------..,...-..-~ J962 - - - - - - . . - . ; . - 19 63--./

 , ,
 : .: TABLE 4 . t.... \. '
 • j
 Declassified per Exec uti ve O rder 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 , By: NWD Date: 20 11

 -"

 :. .; ... ~OMPAR I SON OF CONTROL; GOVERNMENT OF VI ETNAM AND VI ET CONG
 JULY, OCTOBE R AND DECEMBER 1962,
 AND APR IL 1963

 ,GOVERNMENT OF GOVERNMENT OF NE ITHER GOVERI':MENT VIE T CONG V IE T CONG
 V IETNAM EFFECTI VE V IETNAM IN OF VIE T NAM NOR IN E FFE CTI VE
 ASCENDANC Y VI ET CONG CON TROL AS CENDANCY C ON T ROL
 CONTROL

 NUMBER OF 34 '. 422 4 54
 859 71 0
 VILLA GES
 SIT U AT ION
 RURA L 1,702,000 1,1 57 , 000
 AS OF
 I JULY 1962
 POPULATION
 5, 800, 000 3, 622, 000 137, 000
 -- --
 % OF RU RA L '
 POPULATI ON

 'NUMBER or-
 47 "10 29% 1%

 1"8
 14 %

 329
 9%

 437
 -
 9 29 61 3
 V I LLAGE S =
 SITUAT ION
 RUR AL 71 7. 000 1, 27 5,000 1,008 , 000
 ' AS OF 6, 07 1,000 3, 246 ,000
 I OCT 196 2
 POPULATI ON
 - ,
 %01" RURA L 10 % 8%
 49 % 27 "/0 6%
 POP ULATION

 NUMBER O F 120 340 445
 95 1

 S I TU ATI ON
 VI LLAGES
 -. 6GG

 RURAL I, 143,0 00 926, 000
 AS OF
 I DE C: 196 2
 POPULATION
 6,300 , 000 3,33 \, 000 643,000
 -
 %01" RU RAL , 9% 8%
 51 % 27% 5%
 POPULATION

 NUMBER OF
 "', :,.
 VI L LAGE S
 935 73 1 139
 . 348
 ,
 390
 ,
 SIT UATI ON
 RU RAL . 609.0 00 ' 9G2,OOO ' 857,000
 A S OF 6,724.000 3, 356, 000
 POPULATION
 I A PR IL 63
 "!o OF RU RAL 7%
 ": ' 7 %
 I 54 % 27%. 5%
 POPULATI ON
 ,',
 ' NUMBE R OF + 105 ':"'74 -64
 V1 L,LA GES
 + 76 + 21
 CHANGES
 RU RAL + 472, 000 '-He, 000 - 300,0 00
 JUL 62 TO
 A PR I L 63
 POP ULA TI ON
 +92 4, 000 . -2 66, 000

 % 0 1" RUR A L +1,% - 7% - 2%
 POPULATION
 .+ 7 % - 2%

 NO;;;:'; IN OR DER 1'0 PRESE NT A BE T TER-PICTURE OF CON TPOL OF
 OF RUR A L V IE TN AM , 1,600 ,000 P OPULATION OF AUT ONOMOUS '
 J CI TIES OF S A I GON, DANANG , HUE , AN:) DALAl' U"DER GVN

 CONTROL AS NOT USED I N T HIS S TUDY , ( POP ULAT I ONS ARE
 E STIMATESl. ' • ,'.' - ' .

 "';: ',?
 . '. ! '
 , " ..
 .: ,.
 • \ ',J
 -- .... ~. '.

 'J . '. '
 . .
, ., ,.-

 ,, : :•• :_':~ " , ,0 .

 v

 I.)

 v
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

in the face of these cautiously optimistic and hopefully pessimistic
reJ2ort~? was
 to continue its established program of material support
coupled with attempts to influence Diem to make desired changes.

VII. THE PATH TO THE EnD

 A. Diem's Posit ion Hardens

 The obvious U, S, alternatives, by mid-1963, remained the Salile
as they were in l ate 1901: (1) to induce changes within the strategic
Hamlet PiTogram ( among others ) by convincing Diem to make such changes;
( 2) to allow Diem to run things his own ,-my and hope for the best; and
( 3) to find an alternative to President Diem. The U.S. continued to
pursue the first course; Diem insisted increasingly on the second.
Finally, due to pressures from areas other than the Strategic Hamlet
Program, the U.S. pursued the third alternative . The Strategic H~mlet
Program, in the event, died with its sponsors.

 Far from becoming rnore reasonable, in U.S. eyes, President
Diem by mid-1963 had become more i ntractable . He insisted, for example,
that the U. S, cease to have an operational voice in the Strategic Hamlet
Program. 7he multiplication of U. S. advisors at many l evels, he claimed,
was the source of friction and dissension. The remedy was to remove the
advisors . 105/ The essence of Diem's position was that Taylor ' s
"limited partnership" would not vwrk .

 Other U,S . missions visited Vietnam to assess the conduct of
the war. The result was much the same as reported by Krulak and
Mendenhall. This was essentially the findings of the r1cIl:amara-Taylor
mission i n September ; the military campaign is progressing, political
di saffection is growing ; U, S. leverage is questionable. 106/

 B. The Program Dies With the Ngos

 The r est may be summarized: the U.S. attempted to i nsist on
a program with more emphasis on broad appeal r ather than control; Diem,
finding himse lf increasingly embroiled i n the Buddhist controversy,
increased repressive measures; a coup toppl ed the Diem regime on 1
November ; the deposed President and his brother I'J hu, "architect of the
Strategic Hamlet Program," were killed. The Strategic Hamlet Program--
or at l east the program under that name '\.,rhich they had made the un ifying
t heme of their counterinsurgent effort--died with them. The inhabitants
who had wanted to leave the hamlets did so in the absence of an effective
government . The VC took advantage of the confusion to attack and overrun
others. Some offerred little or no r esistance . The ruling-junta
attempted to resuscitate the program as "Eevl Life Haml ets" early in 1964 ,
but the failures of the past provid.ed a poor psychological basis upon
which to base hopes for the future.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 35
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECm-:;T - Sensitive

VIII. AJ:: INCm:CLUSIVE Sm10,lARY

 'Jlhe dominant U. S. vie"r has been that the Strategic Hamlet Program
 failed because of over-expansion and the establishment of hamlets in
 basically insecure areas. 107/ That there "Tas overexpansion and the
 establishment of many poorly defended hamlets is not questioned . This
 contributed, beyond doubt, to the failure of the progrrun. But this view
 finesses the problem of the process for \~hich t he strate(Sic hamlets were
 but the tangible symbol. The present analysis has sought to emphasize
 both the essentially political nature of the objective of the Strategic
'Hamlet Program and the political nature of the context in which the
 process evolved -- of expectations, bargaining, and attempts to exert
 i nfluence on other participants in policy formulation 811d implementation.
 In this context it is the U.S. in ability to exert leverage on Pres ident
 Diem (or Diem ' s i nability to reform) that emerges as the principal cause
 of failure.

 Yet, both of these attempts to pinpoiDt the reasons >",hy the
strategi c hamlet program did not succeed fai l to get at another v"hole
issue: the validity of that body of writings which one may call the
t heory and doctrine of counterinsurgency. Reither the military nor
the political aspects of this doctrine can be upheld (or proved false )
by an exmfrination of the strategic Hamlet Progrruu. Quite aside from
whether or not Diem was able to broaden the program ' s appeal to the
peasantry, what would have occurred had he made a determined and
sustained effort to do so? Would this have l ed in some more-or- l ess
direct way to stability or to even greater dissatisfaction? He simply
do not know. The quest ion is as unansvlerable as whether the appetite
grOlvs with the eating or is satisfied by i t . The contention here is
that claims of mismanagement are not sufficient to conc lude that better
management would necessarily have produced the desired resul.ts.

 In the military sphere the unanswerable questions are different.
It i s said that the military phase of the strategic Hamlet Program
progressed reasonably well i n many areas; the failure was in the political
end of the process . But did the military actions succeed? Might failures
to develop adequate i nte lligence ana. to ,,;eed out VC infrastructure in
th ese hamlets not as easily be attributable to' the fact that the
inhabitants knew they were not really safe from VC i ntimi dation and
reprisals? Does the analogy to an "oil spot" have operat ional meaning
when small bands can carry out hit and rQD raids or when many small
bands can concentrate in one location and achieve surprise? Hhere i s
t he key to this vicious circle -- or i s there a l,-ey?

 In concl usion , vlhile the abortive strategic Haml et Program of
1961-1963 may teach one something, the availab le record does not pernlit
one to conc lude either that the prograM fell because of the failure of
a given phase or that other phases "rere, i n fact, adequate to the
chal lenge. One may say that the program was doomed by poor execution
and by t he inability of the Ugo family to reform coupled with the i n-
ability of the U.S. to i nduce them to reform . The evidence does not
warrant one to proceed further .
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 "
 o
 o
 -i
 2:
 o
 -i
 m
 en
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number : NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET -Sensitive

IV. B. 2

 FOOTNOTES

1. Sir Robert Thompson, Defeating Comrmmist Tnsurger..cy ( New York:
 Praeger , 1966 ), p. 123 .

2. Seven Years of the Ngo Din}} Diem Admini.stra:tion, 125 4 ..12.§]:
 ( Saigon : 26 October 1961) , pp. 35'(- 3t30.

3. See J.J. L2,slo1'f , "Rural Resettlement in South Vietnam: Th2
 Argovi 11e P rogram", Pac:ific Affa irs, Vol. XXXV, Nr 4 (Winter
 1962-63 ), pp. 327-340.
4. Despatch, Saigon to State Nr 278 , 7 Ma.rch 1960 , Inte,llJ..gcnce
 Report, Hr 2137261, :p o 14· ( S/NF)

5. William A. Nighsvlonger , Rural Pacificatiol". i n Victncull ( NeVi York :
 Praeger , 1 966 ), p. 4.6 . '

6. SlUE 10-L~-61 , 7 November 1961 , Prob e.o l e Conrrn'.mi st Re8.ctio!.1s i n
 ,South Vietnam., p . 3 ( TS )

7. Bri efing Pape r, n. d ., The Nort h Vietmunese Role in t~e Or i gi n ,
 Directio:r:., and S'l'oportOfthe We.r in South Vietna~i1, p. i v ( S);
 Sta te Department Bureau of Inte lligence ,211d Res earch, RFE .-3,
 1 Nove~ber 1961, ComTIYl.Hlist Threat Mounts in South VietIl8111,
 1'. Lj. (8) .

8. ~., p. 5

9· l\TJE 50-61, 28 March 19 61 , Outlook i n Ma in l~md Southeg,st ASi8.,
 p. 7 (s)

10 . MAAG, Vietnam, 1 September 19 6 1, First 'I'l-relve M2nth R2po2;'t of
 . ~ef lfJAAG, Vietnam, p . 10 (S)

11. U:S. Senat e CO'ffir.dttee on Foreign Re l ations , 89th Congress ,
 2nd SeSSion , Background Tnfonnat -j on Re l 8.t i ng to Sot;.theast Asia
 and Vi etnillll ( 2nd ReYised Ed . ), Hashingto~'l , GPO, 19 66 , FP-:tSb-7.

12 . Letter of Transmittal to Pre sident Diem 8:(,d Presidel".t Kennedy,
 n.d. (JlJ.ne 1961), Joint .Actio·~ Program Proposea by the Vi e t rram-
 Unitee. States S'pecial F2:E~::"cial Groups (S)

13. See I bid ., I ntroQuction , p . 1, passim .

 TOP SECRET- Sel:.siti ve

 37
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRE~ - Sensitive

14. J..Jette:c, President Kennedy t o Gen.eral Haxvle ll D. Tayl or, 13 October
 1961 ( C)

1 5· Reuort on General Taylor ! s 11; ssion to SOljth Vi etnam , 3 November
 1961, bou.,'1d in loo'se l eaf "rith letter Oft ransmit tel , evaluations
 cnd c onclusions , and Appendices A-I. ( TS ) Cited hereaft e r as
 ,?~~rlo:c Reuort . All referer.ces are to the section on eval uations
 and c onc l usions .

16 . Ibid . , p . 2

17 . I bid . , p . 3

18 . I bid . , p . 8

19 · ~. , pp. 6-7.

20 . ~ ., p. 9

21. Ibid. , p . 7

22 . I bid. , p . 14

23. I bid . , See a l so pp . 1 1-16.
 ----.--

24 . ~ ., pp. 11-12

25 . The p l an, cited hereafte r as CIP-1960 , is contained as a.n i nc l osure
 to De s patch 1:Tr . 276 , SeigoLl t o State , l.~ J~(lU21j' 1961, Com."!ter
 I nS1.1..rge~lcy Plan for SOl'.th Vi etnam . (S)

26 . Despatch Nr . 276, Saigon to State , 9,E' cit., p.3

27 . See for exampl e , I b i d ., Annex B.

28 . HAAG Vietn2.ill, 15 S2y tember 19 61 , GeorgrEmhic ally Phase d. National
 Leve l Operation P12.ll for Cwnteril1surgenc;/ ( C) (Secret) } cited
 hereafter 2.S Georgraphie:all y Plnsed COlmt erinsurgen,cy Plan .

29 .. Ib i d . , pp . Al-A3 .

30 . I b i d . , pp . A3-AL1.

31. Ibid. . } l)P · A4-A7 .

32 . I bid . } p . C2 .

 TOP SECRET .. SE~mI'I'IVE
 38
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD D ate: 2011

 TOP SECRET .. Sensitive

33 . See , for eX3l!ll")le , Te1egrarn, Saigon to State Nr. 1~.66 , 1 6 March
 1.961 (S), snd Aie e Memoire , McGarr -Co Die.:ll, 3 July 1961, RevieH
 of Mili tB.ry Si tuat~on and Recormnenc1.atiol1s for COlltinued Improveme~l t ( S).

34 . Telegram, S2.igon t o State , Nr . 508 , 18 October 1961 ( S).

35 . Study, RGK Thompson to Pres i d.ent Diem, 27 October 1961, Appre~i at ion
 of Vietnam , November 1961 -April 1962 (S), Inc1. to letter Lt. Gen.
 Lionel C. McGarr to Secretary of Defense , 20 November 1951 , Se cDef
 Control j\l"r . 2654 ( s).

36 . I bi d .

37 . I bic1 .

38. Copie s of Thompson ' s covering l etter EJ:,1d memorandum to Diem a re
 .:.enclosed Vii th msS, Sa igon to State ~ Er. 205 , 20 Novembe r 19 51 ,
 'l'honrDson l'viiss ion Hecommenda tions to President Di em ( S ) . The
 mei:!lJr andtWl. is cited hereafter a s -..---
 Thoru11sonMemora:.1'lQum .
 ~-

39 . Ibid .

40. ~b i d . , l etter of transmitta L ( Emj?hasis added ) •.

41. Lett er , McGarr to Admira l H.D. Fe lt ( CHTCPAC ), 27 November 1961
 ( S), Inc1. to l ett e r , McGarr to Se cre t a r y' of Defense , 27 November
 1961 , op. ~if .

42 . I b id .

43 . Ibid.

44 . U. S. Militay.f Advisory Group , C:m.1AAG Gui dan ce Pape r to Field
 Advisors i n COULter I nsurgency, Fourth Revision, 10 Feb rua ry 19 62 ,
 T8.Ctics and Te chniq'.;.es of Counterins urgent Operations ( S)

h5 . De spa tch Hr . 205 , Sa i gon to State , 20 li;ov~mber 1961 , op. cit .

LI· 6 . D2partr.Jent of Ste.te, Bureau of Inte lligence and Re.search,
 2 Feoruary 1 962 , A Strateg j.c Concept for South Vietnam ( S ) ;
 on the Presi dent I s i nterest and Thompson 1 s effe ct on Hi l sma;'--l ,
 see Roger Rilsmau , To Eove a H2,tion : T:ne Politics of Foreign
 . 'Polic;! i n t he Administrat ion of Jo:b...n F . Kennedy (li"ei-f Yor!~ :
 Doub l eds.y, 1967 ), 1>:9 . 427 - 39 . ---~

 TOP SECEET - Ser:si tj.ve
 39
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensit ive

 A St ratefSic CC?,ncept for 5l::mth Vi etnam, oJ2. cit. , pp . 9-14.
 The third principle is Hi 1 sm821 I s own contribution , c1raving
 h eavi ly on his personal experiences ivi th the OSS o.uring
 World 'YTcor II.

 ~ ., pp . 15-19.
49. Ibid" pp . 15-24 .
50.

51. Departmel1t of St a te, Task Forc e Vietn81u, ll.~ De cember 19 6 1 ,
 St a h ,\s Report of Deve lopp1ents Since De.c:ember 8, p. 3 (8')

52. HQCINCPAC, 16 De c emb e r 19 61 , Tran script, First 8ecret ar:r.-2!
 De!ense Conference , pp. 1-2 (S)

53. Personal notes of Assistant SEcretary of De fense Arthur Sylvester,
 16 December 1961 , SecDef Conferen ce, Honolulu.

54. Memorandum, McGarr to Mr. Thuan , 18 De cembe r 1961, ~l . Government_
 P!"-ramilitary Infras tructu re (Organization ) Required as Int eg!ate d_
 Pr: Tt of ~Hli tary Pha s e ot
 Pec i!_ic;9.tiog :E;ffort_ rsT·
55· Ibid .

56. The GVN plan and ac tions are not well docwnented but are r eferred
 to i n U. S. MAAG Vietnam Repor!., 31 July 1962 , ~1S L~rne~
 !ir. 1,2,.
57. John C. Donne
 tf
 ll e.nd Gerald C. Hickey , The Vie-tnamese IIStrategic
 - - - - - - - . . . - - - .- -
 Hamlets: A PreliminarY' Report ( mum I-iemoTe.ndum Ri.1 3200~ARPA,
 30 August 1962), p. 24 (C).

 Le tter McGarr to Fe lt, 18 De cembe r 1961, op. c~.!.

59 · HQCINCPAC, 1 5 J antlaYT 1962 , Rec ord o::f~S~e__c...:o;,;...n~retary of Defense '
 Conference, pp . 5A-l - 5A-3 rs;-
60. ~., PI>. 6-1 - 6- 5.

61. Departmei.1t of State, R:; se arch Proj e ct 630 R'3 cent American Policy
 and Diplome.c;r. Conc e rnin/L.Vidnp.Jll., 1960-1963~99-'(TS)---'

62. Telegralrl , Sa igon to St ate , Nr . 1031, 10 Februe,rJ 1962 ( 8 ).

 Donne 11 and Hickey, op. cit., pp. 3 .. 4.

 40
 TOP SECP..ET ·· Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 _.
 TOP SECRET .- Sensitive

64 . Ibid.,:p. 4.

65 . Departmer.t of State, Ts.sk Force Vietmuu, 28 December 1961, Status
 Report of Dev e lopments Since Dec enioer 21, p. 2 (S).

66 . ~. , p . 3.
67. Telegram, Seigon to State Nr . 495, 16 October 1961 ( S ).

68 . The U.S. proposals are recorded in N2.tional Security Action
 Mcmora'1dulll No. 111, 22 November 1961 , First Phase of Vietnam
 ProgrelU ( TS).

69. Telegrcm, Saigon to State Nr. 687, 22 November 1961 ( S).

70 . Ibid.

71. TelE;'gr81u, Saigon to State Nr . 708, 25 November 1961 ( s).

72 . Telegram, CAS New Delhi to Director No 9941, from Ambassador
 Ga l brai th for t he President, 21 November 1961 (rrs ).

73 . See Homer C. Bigart , ItVi etnameseOpen a Drive on Reds , It New
 York Times 29 March 1962:

74. Telegram Saigon to State Nr . 1 367, 22 May 1962 (s).

75. Telegram, Saigon to State Nr . 133·, 8 August 1962 (C); Airgrmns ,
 Sa igon to State, Nrs . A-85 and A-llO, 9 August end 27 August 1962 (C).

76. "The Times of Vi etnam,"Vol IV, Nr 43, 28 October 1962 .

77. Ibid ., p. 6.

78. Rufus Phillips, A Report on Counter-Insurgency in Vietn8~,
 31 August 1962 , p , 5 (C) . ----

79 . See for eX81llple, Department of St8.te , Bureau of Intelligence and
 Research Re search Memorandum RFE.·2'1, 18 June 1962 , Progr~ss Report
 on South Vietn~ ( ShfF).

80 . DepartmeYlt of State , Bureau of Inte l ligence and Research , Research
 Memorandun RFE-E:2, 5 Dec2lTIDer 1962 , Saigon I S S!rategic Ccmc.ept for
 Counter-Tnsurgency 2. Prog:;ress Report (S/ NF) .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 41
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD D ate: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive

81. ~ to S92:l.!hesst Asia by the Secre t a,ry of Defen se, 8-11 May 19 62 ,
 p. 5 ( TS) , I nclos'-lre to lvlemo ~ CJCS to SecDef, 14 May 1962 , Visit
 to Southeast Asia.

82. Vte"tnam : li'ree-I'lorld Cha lleDg~ in So,~theast Asia ( Depa rtment of State
 Public a tion 7388) , pp. 16 ·-17 ..

83. Remarks to press, 24 J'J.ly 1962 , in OSD Historical Files .

' .
84 Homer. · r·t , "U'S Helps "VietD2lll 1n
 C B19a . Tes·
 t 0.,.f' StTSLegy 11 liT
 J.
 ~
 Yorl<:. Times , 27 ll,farch 1962 .

85 . Ibid.

86 . "No 'tlin,11 Th,e Ne:w Repub lic, 9 April19 62 .

87. US lflAAG, 31 July 1962 , Lessons Learned r-Tr . 19, p. 2. (C).

8S . Visit to Southeast Asia bl the Secretary ?f Defense., 8 ll May 1962 , n

 op . cit., p . 2

89 Bureau of Intelligence and Research, RFE-27 , 18 J une 19 62 , op. cit .

90 . VlAAG Lessons IJec.rned nr . 19, op. c it.

91. COMUSMACV Message DA IN 262596 , 8 September 1962 , Province
 ~e.hab ilit ation Prog~ ( S ).

92 . HAAG, Lessons Len.rned Nr . 19, 91:.' cit.

93. Theodore J. C. Heavner, Deputy Director Worldng Group V~etnam j
 Report on Visit to Vietnam" October l S··Kovember 26, 19 02 , p . 2 ( S )

 94 • MichaeLV. Forrestal , MemoranCl:. lm for the Pre sident , A Report on
 South ViehH3Jll. .

 95 . Hilsman , To Move a r\"e.tioI':, op. cit., p. 453 •

. 96. Visit to Southeast Asia, by the Secretexy of Defense , 8 ··11 Iviay 1962 ,
 op. ei t .

 97 . Memo , ASD lISA to SeeDe f , 9 August 1962 , Fu.r:.ding of Strateg.i e Hamlet
 Kits) Vietnam.

 98 . See , for exampl e, JCSIvl 734 -62 , 22 September 1962 , Funding of
 ,§trategic Hamlet r:i ts, Vietnam.

 42
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 201 1

 TOP
 , SECRET - Sensitive

 99 . CIA M~.rJ.o for SecDef, 28 September 1962 ( S).

 100. Department of State , Burea·oJ. of Intelligence 8nd Research, RFE~.42,
 27 l-iay 1 963, Implications of GVN Difficulties i n Viet~~ ( S ).

 101 • t I I 1 smen,
 -T' .LO F
 fjl
 1'10Vei T "
 a _~aTlon, op . t
 •
 ~. , p. 502_.

 1 02 . See, :for example, USOH Rure,l Affe,irs Office , 1 September 1 9 6 3,
 Second Informal Appreciation of the Status of the Strategic
" . HpJrrlet Progrs.m, IEcl. to Memora..ndmn, i·iichael V. Forrestal to
 SecretaI"J McNamer-a, 20 September 1963, Vietnam, Se cDef Contro l
 Nr . 4 97 .

 103. J'oint Chiefs of Steff, 11 Mey 1963, Tre:c.ds in the Counterinsurgency
 Effort in South Vietne.m, p. 60 ( sjrIT ).
 i

 104 . Thompson , Defeati ng Communist Insurgency, oJ2. . cit., p. 136.
 105 . Dep8Ttment of State , RFE-42, 27 Hay 1963 , op. cit.
 106 . Memorandum for the Pres ident , 2 October 1963 Report of the
 MdJamara.-Taylor I:lission to South Vietnam ( TS ).

 107 . See , for example , Depa.rtment of State , J;3ureau of Intelligence and
 Res ee..rch, RFE-102 , 20 December 1963, Trends in the War Effort i n
 South Vietnam ( S ); See a lso Hilliam A. NighsVTtJuger , ~ural Pacifi cation
 i n Vietnam .

 . 43
 TOP SECRET - S ?~sitive