The Pentagon Papers (Part -IV-C-5) (U.S. Department of Defense, 1971)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration: Report of the Office of the Secretary of Defense Vietnam Task Force (The Pentagon Papers) (https://nara-media-001.s3.amazonaws.com/arcmedia/research/pentagon-papers/Pentagon-Papers-Part-IV-C-5.pdf).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vols.)
Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968
 (16 Vols.)
5. Phase I in the Build-Up of U.S. Forces: March - July 1965
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By : NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 IV. C. 5.

PHASE I I N THE BUILD-UP OF U~S . FORCES

 THE DEBATE

 MARCH - JULy 1965

 2-9
 Sec Jo. v r. -- ------------
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. C. 6.

 PHASE I IN THE BUILD-UP OF U.S. FORCES, THE DEBATE

 MARCH - JULy 1965

 SUMMARy AND .ANALYSIS

 The U.S. decision to deploy 44 US/FW battalions to Vietnam was the
product of a debate over strategy, but more basically, a debate over
objectives. Once the consensus developed that the U.S. would neither
opt out of the conflict nor settle for a stalemate, 44 BLT' s made more
sense than 17 BLT's (agreed to at Honolulu in April) or fewer. When it
emerged that the U.S. objective was to defeat the VC/NVA on the ground
in order to assure an "independent, non-connnunist South Vietnam," an
aggressive search and destroy strategy had to prevail over the more
experimental and cautionary enclave approach.

 The decision was made swiftly and in an atmosphere of crisis. After
almost three months of euphoria (RVNAF was hQlding together and the Saigon
government was stable), four factors converged in late May and early June
to set the decision full speed in motion: (1) Rolling Thunder was recog-
nized in itself as insufficient to cQnvince Hanoi to negotiate; (2) on
12 June, the Quat government fell, and all the nightmares about no Saigon
political authority reappeared; (3) the Viet Cong, it was supposed, vlaS
about to launch an all-out offensive, cut the country in two, and es-
tablish an alternate government-in-country; and (4) RVNAF, faced with an
unfavorable force ratio, quickly demonstrated that it could not cope.

 The major participants in the decision knew the choices and under-
stood the consequences. Th~ strategy of ba~e security for the air war
against North Vietnam and the strategy of coastal enclaves were rejected
with the knmvledge that a quick solution was no longer possible. Unlike ·
the sending of Marines to Da Nang, the 44 BLT decision was perceived as
a threshold - - entrance into Asia..l1. land vrar. The conflict was seen to
be long, with further U.S. deploylUents to follow. The choice at that
time was not whether or not to negotiate, it was not whether to hold on
for a vrhile or let go -- the choice was viewed as wInning or losing ,.
South Vietnam. Should negotiations come, should North Vietnam or the
Viet Cong elect to settle before this victory, the U.S. would then be
in a position of strength.

 1 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

I. Evolution of the Situation

 In the history of the Vietnam War, the Year 1965 is notable for
momentous and fcteful U.S. decisions. In Feb.:'uary, after a dramatic
increase in activity initiated by the Viet Cong, the United States
responded by increasing its own level of commitment to the Republic of
Vietnam. For the first time, U.S. jet aircraft were authorized to
support the RVNAF in ground operations in the South without restriction.
In immediate retaliation for guerrilla raids . on U.S. installations in
the South, U.S. aircraft also began bombing targets in the southern
reaches of North Vietnam. In early March, the latter program evolved
into Rolling Thunder, the sustained bombing of the North. Also, during
March, two U.S. Marine battalions were landed at Da Nang on the coast
of Central Vietnam. The airbase at Da Nang was a major supporter of
the Roiling Thunder bombing, and the mission of the Marines "Tas to
strengthen its defenses. Those troops represented the first U.S. ground
combat commitment to the Asian mainland since Korea.

 While the pace of military activity in 1965 was on the rise, the
political situation in South Vietnam remained as unpredictable as it had
been throughout the previous year. A very confusing series of events in
the middle of February culminated in the departure from Vietnam of the
volatile General Nguyen Khanh. Left in his stead were two civilians,
Prime Minister Phan Huy Quat and Chief of State Phan Khac Suu.

 The rate of ground combat activity dropped off in March and remained
1010[ for the next month and a half. The Viet Cong eased the pressure on
the GVN considerably and yielded the initiative to the government armed
forces. The performance of the RVNAF, whose effectiveness was called
into question with the deployment of U.S. troops to look after major
bases, began to improve according to the statistical indicators used to
measure the progress of the war . ~menever the RVNAF succeeded in locat-
ing and fixing the Viet Cong, the government troops and their officers
seemed to demonstrate more offensive spirit and willingness to engage.

 Parallel to hopeful signs on the military side, Premier Quat, a
quietly determined man, shm. . ed promise that for the first time the
Vietnamese might be close to solving their frustrating political prob-
lems. Under Quat, the progressive deterioration in governmental
stability seemed at long last to have halted.

 The reaction of the U.S. co~munity to the period of quiescence in
the spring of 1~65 "as mixed . Pessimistic prc:dictions in March as to
the capability of the RVNAF to ',vithstand the next wave of Viet Cong
offensive activity were off set by convictions tha.t ongoing U. S. aid
programs were adequate to meet the situation provided the GVN resolved
its internal contradictions and devoted its energies to the war .

 2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Expressions of cautious optimism, and of conviction that radical changes
to U.S. strategy were unwarranted -- Ambassador Taylor's notable among
them -- continued to reach Washington from Saigon through April and May.
Among the less sanguine, even General Westmoreland expressed hope that
perhaps, with the aid of increased U.S. air activity and signs of greate+
RVNAF resolve, a corner had indeed been turned. In the absence of dra-
matic action in Vietnam, most observers were prepared to wait and see
what was to transpire when the military hiatus ended.

 The drop in activity during the spring of 1965 was not unprece-
dented. The Viet Cong had traditionally yielded the initiative to the
more highly mobile RVNAF during the dry season, and they were expected
to reappear "lith the advent of the summer season, or rainy season, in
May and June. The official estimates of the Viet Cong Order of Battle,
including in April confirmed presence in the South of at least one
battalion of the North Vietnamese Army, provided little cause for com-
fort. Coupled with reports that the Viet Cong were concentrating their
forces in a few critical areas, the estimates of enemy capability were
a sure· indication that the coming summer monsoon in 1965 would provide
a sore test of the RVNAF's ability.

 The test began in earnest in Mayas the Viet Cong mounted a
regiment-sized attack on the capital of Phuoc Long Y£ovince. The
enemy scored again with the successful ambush of an ARVN infantry
battalion and its rescue force near Quang Ngai in I Corps later that
month. The Quang Ngai action left two ARVN battalions decimated, and
American officers who had witnessed the battle went away with the dis-
tinct impression that the RVNAF were close to collapse. The impression
was confirmed during the battle of Dong Xoai in mid..June. In a textbook
display of tactical ineptitude, battalions of ARVN's finest reserves
were frittered away piecemeal during the fighting. The violence of the
action at Dong Xoai and the level of RVNAF casualties during the second
week of June 1965 were both unprecedented.

 As the summer wore on, the focus of the enemy campaign shifted to
the highlands of the II Corps. By early July, Viet Cong successes in
taking remote District Headquarters heralded the expected loss of the
entire highlands area and the possible establishment there of a National
Liberation Front government.

 Gen~ral Westmoreland responded immediately to the marked upsurge
in Viet Cong activity by requesting in June U.S. and Third Country •
reinforcements to spell the RVNAF during their time of trial and to
blunt the Viet Cong offensive by conducting operations throughout the
country against them. The collapse of the Quat government in mid-June
and its succession by an untested military regime further increased
the urgency associated w'ith Westmoreland's request. The debate in U.S.
official circles over the extent of American involvement in the ,'rar
a debate which had follmled a devious course all through the spring of
1965 -- moved onto a higher plane at this juncture.'

 3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II. Themes Germane to the Strategy Debate

 Official hopes were high that the Rolling Thunder program begun in
 March would rapiJly convince Hanoi that it sho'lid agree to negotiate a
 settlement to the war in the South. After a month of bombing with no
 response from the North Vietnamese, optimism began to wane. In the
 middle of April it was recognized that in addition to the bombing some
 manifestation of the Viet Cong's inability to win in the South was
 needed before the Communists would agree to negotiate. By the end of
 April, the North Vietnamese showed signs of preparing for a long seige
 under the bombing, while they 'Ivaited for what they saw as the inevitable
 victory of the Viet Cong in the South. Indeed, the North Vietnamese
 proved their intractab ility when they failed to respond meaningfully to
 overtures made during a week-long pause in the bombing in May. By June,
· U.S. officials reco gnized that something dramatic was going to have to
 be added to the bombing program if the Communists were ever to be per-
 suaded to call off their campaign in the South.

 All through early 1965, officials in the U.S. Government debated
the level of effort required of the United States in order to achieve
its objectives in South Vietnam. Generally stated, those objectives
were to insure that the Communist insurgents were defeated in their
efforts to take over the government of South Vietnam and that a stable
and friendly government was maintained in their place. The U.S. em-
barked on the Rolling Thunder bombing program in order to convince the
North Vietnamese to cease their direction and support of the insurgency
in the South. When the bombing program, which could have been halted
almost as easily as· it was initiated, gave . indication that it was not
going to succeed by itself, the U.S. was presented essentially with two
options: (1) to 'Ivithdra'lv unilaterally from Vietnam leaving the South
Vietnamese to fend for themselves, or (2) to commit ground forces in
pursuit of its objectives. A third option, that of drastically increas-
ing the scope and scale of the bombing, was rejected because of the
concomitant high risk of inviting Chinese intervention.

 This paper deals essentially with the decision by the U.S. Govern-
ment to intervene on the groQDd in South Vietnam. The debate over
ground strategy was characterized by an almost complete lack of con-
sensus throughout the first half of 1965. Proposals for levels of
commitment ranging from a couple of battalions to several divisions were
under consideration simultaneously. For each identifiable strategy -- •
and there are three discussed in this paper -- security, enclave, and
search and destr0y -- there were many proponents, some of them quite
vociferous. The announcements of decisions regarding the ground build-
up were invariably couched in terms which gave clear indication to more
aggressive proponents that their turn might yet come.

 4 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The initial steps in 'ground build-up appear to have been grudgingly
 taken, indicating that the President of the United States and his ad-
 visers recognized the tremendous inertial imp1ications of ground troop
 deployments. Halting ground involvement was seen to be a manifestly
 greater problem than halting air or naval activity. In addition, the
 early build-up may have been permitted some leisure because of the lack
 of'immediate urgency in the situation in Vietnam and the necessity to
 improve on an inadequate logistical base there.

 III. Strategies for Ground Force Employment

 A. Strategy of Security

 The strategy of security arose with the beginning of the bomb-
 ing programs and was designed simply to increase security of U.S. bases
 and installations supporting those programs. It was conceived at a
 time when enthusiasm for the bombing programs was high and its proponents
 were at pains to insure that U.S. troops did not get involved in the
 ground war. All 9 of the U.S. battalions deployed to Vietnam by June
 1965 had base security as their primary mission, and 21 of the 44 U.S.
 and Third Country battalions deployed by the end of 1965 were so oriented.
 In part, however, most of those units were deployed for far more ambitious
 reasons. At a maximum, four Marine and possibly two Army battalions
 were recommended for deployment solely under the provisions of the
 security strategy, and the strategy was a dead letter by the time most
 of those deployments had been approved. I

 The strategy of security expired along 'with the early hopes
 that Rolling Thunder could succeed by itself. The non-involvement of
 the "security troops" in the ground war was designed to keep U.S.
 casualties to a minimum and to facilitate withdrawal. By deploying its
 own troops to secure bases, the U.S. showed lack of confidence in the
 RVNAF, but by keeping U.S. troops out of the fighting it demonstrated
 at the same time belief that the RVNAF would be able to hold on until
 the other side decided it had had enough. Because of the well-known
 shibboleth about U.S. involvement in an Asian ground war and because
 of the ponderous nature of ground force deployments, it was inevitable
 that some observers would see in the strategy of security the crossing
 of a threshold.

 B. Enclave Strategy

 The President decided during NSC meetings on 1 and 2 April 1965
 to . get U.S. ground combat units involved in the war against the insurgents •

•
 5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

He did this in the sober awareness that Rolling Thunder was unlikely to
produce ilIlmediate results, but also with the caveat that U.S. troops
might not do too well in an Asian insurgency enviroro..ment. The enclave
strategy, which had been presented by Ambassador Taylor as a way to get
U.S. troops engaged at relatively low risk, was implicitly endorsed by
the President. The strategy proposed that U.S. troops occupy coastal
enclaves, accept full responsibility for enclave security, and be pre-
pared to go to the rescue of the RVNAF as far as 50 miles outside the
enclave 0 Initially, the U.S. was to experiment with four Marine battal-
ions in tw'o coastal enclaves to see if the concept and the rules for
operating with the RVNAF (which were to be worked out with the GVN) were
feasible 0

 Without the benefit of any experimentation the number of battalions
was increased at Honolulu in mid-April to 17 and the number of enclaves
to 5. The enclave strategy as formalized at Honolulu was designed to
frustrate the Viet Cong in the South while Rolling Thunder continued to
hammer the Northo The intent was not to take the war to the enemy but
rather to deny to him certain 'critical areas while simultaneously pro-
viding ready assistance to the RVNAF if they should run into difficulty.
The RVNAF were expected to continue aggressively prosecuting the war
against the enemy's main forces, thereby bearing the brunt of the casual-
ties.

 The enclave' strategy was controversial and expectations for it ran
the gamut from extreme optimism to deep pessimism. The Ambassador
expected it to buy some time for the Vietnamese to eventually save
themselves General Westmoreland and other military men expected it to
 0

guarantee defeat for the U.S. and the RVijAF, who were already demonstrat-
ing that they were incapable of defeating the enemy.

 A masterpiece of ambiguity, the enclave strategy implied a greater
commitment to the war on the part of the U.S., but simultaneously demon-
strated in the placing of the troops with their backs to the sea a
desire for rapid and early exit. While purporting to provide the basis
for experimentation with U.S. soldiers in an unfamiliar environment, it
mitigated against the success of the experiments by placing those troops
 in close proximity to the Vietnamese people, where the greatest difficulty
would be encounteredo In order to prove the viability of its reserve
reaction foundation, it required testing; but the rules for commitment •
were not worked out until the strategy was already overtru~en by events.
As a consequence of this delay, several opportunities were passed up
when the RVNAF really needed help and U.S. tr~ops were available. The
whole enclave concept implied that the RVNAF would ultimately prevail,
but in any case the Viet Cong could never win as long as certain areas
were denied to them. The enclave strategy tacitly yielded the initiative
to the enemy, but the initiative was not seen as the vital factor. The
 key ,,-TaS to be able to outlast the enemy at lowest cost to the United States.

 6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

C. Search &~d Destroy Strategy

 Almost in reaction to the dearth of proposals to seize the initia-
tive from the enemy, General Westmoreland provided consistent pressure
for a free hand to maneuver U.S. and Third Country forces in South
Vietnam. His search and destroy strategy, which was given Presidential
sanction during the summer of 1965, was articulated by both Westmoreland
and the JCS in keeping with sound military principles garnered by men
accustomed to ,.;inning. The bas ic idea behind the strategy was the desire
to take the war to the enemy, denying him freedom of movement anywhere
in the country and taking advantage of the superior firepower and maneu-
verability of U.S. and Third Country forces to deal him the heaviest
possible blows. In the meantime, the RVNAF, with superior knowledge of
the population and the role of the Viet Cong, would be free to concen-
trate their efforts in populated areas.

 The strategy of search and destroy was given approval at a time when
there was very little hope for results from the Rolling Thunder program.
The bombing became, therefore, an adjunct to the ground strategy as the
war in the South assumed first'priority. Accompanying the strategy was
a subtle change of emphasis -- instead of simply denying the enemy vic-
tory and convincing him that he could not win, the thrust became defeat-
ing the enemy in the South. This was sanctioned implicitly as the only
way to achieve the U.S. objective of a non-communist South Vietnam. It
was conceivable, of course, that sometime before total defeat the North
Vietnamese and the Viet Cong might decide that they had had enough. In
this event, the 'U.S. could halt its efforts short of complete defeat of
the insurgents and negotiate a settlement to the conflict from a much
stronger position than that offered by ally of the alternate strategies.

 The strategy described above with all its implications evolved in
piecemeal fashion during June ~nd July 1965. Westmoreland was first
given authority in June to commit U.S. ground forces anywhere in the
country when, in his judgment, they were needed to strengthen the rela-
tive position of the RVNAF. His first major operation with U.S. troops
under the new aegis was on 27 June, and that force made a deep penetration
into the Viet Cong base area of War Zone "D" NW of Saigon. Once the
forces had been liberated from the restrictions of the coastal enclaves;
the next step was to decide hovv much reinforcement was needed in order
to insure that the Viet Cong and their North Vietnamese allies could not
win. , The force decided upon was 44 U.S. and Third Country battalions,
and ,the President approved that number sometime in mid-July. Finally,
the amount of additional force required to seize the initiative from the
enemy and to commence the "win" phase of the sc::.'ategy was the next topic
o~ discussion after the 44 battalions had been approved. Secretary
McNamara received Westmoreland's first estimate during talks in Saigon,
16 to 20 July 1965. Based on what he knew then of Viet Cong and DRV
intentions and capabilities, Westmoreland asked for 24 additional

 7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

maneuver battalions and a healthy support package. The figure was revised
upward several times later in the year as increased intelligence.revealed
the extent of DRV infiltration and Viet Cong build-up.

 Force levels for the search and destroy strategy had no empirical
limits. The amount of force required to defeat the enemy depended en-
tirely on his response to the build-up and his ydllingness to continue the
fight. The 44 battalions seen in mid-summer 1965 as the amount required
to deny victory to the Viet Cong exceeded the amount forecast by the
enclavists to achieve that end for two reasons. First, the enemy had by
the end of June revealed that he 'H as much stronger than had originally
been surmised. Second, the 44 battalions had a dual mission: they were
not only to hold the fort, but yTere also to lay the groundwork for the
subsequent input of forces to implement the next phase of the strategy.

 Ambassador Taylor expected the search and destroy strategy and the
force associated with it to accomplish little more than would have been
accomplished by the enclave strategy at less cost. He ,vas convinced that
only the Vietnamese could save their own country, and too aggressive use
of foreign troops might even 1vork against them in that regard. George
Ball of the State Department wrote that there was no assurance no matter
what the U.S. did that it could defeat the enemy on the battlefield or
drive him to the conference table. The larger force associated "rith the
search and destroy strategy signified to Ball no more than acceptance by
the U.S. of a higher cost to ultimately be incurred. The 44 battalion
force seemed to William Bundy of State to be an ultimatum presented to
the DRV which would in all probability trigger some sort of dire response.
Westmoreland expected the 44 battalions and the search and destroy strategy
to hold things together long enough to prepare the way f .o r later input
of greater force. With enough force to seize the initiative from the
Viet Cong sometime in 1966, Westmoreland expected to take the offensive
and, with appropriate additional reinforcaments, to have defeated the
enemy by the end of 1967. Exactly what the President and his Secretary
of Defense expected is not clear, but there are manifold indications that
they were prepared for a long Ivar.

 The acceptance of the search and destroy strategy and the eclipse .
of the denial of victory idea associated with the enclave strategy left
the U.S. commitment to Vietnam open-ended. The implications in terms of
manpovrer and money are inescapable. Written allover the search and
destroy strategy was total loss of confidence in the RVNAF and a con-
comitant willingness on the part of the U.S. to take over the war effort.
U.S •. involvement in an Asian ground war was a reality.

IV. Caveats

 The bulk of this paper is taken up in describing the various propo-
sals put forward by exponents of the strategies. The numerous decision

 8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

points are identified and the expectations of decision-making principals
involved are analyzed. Ancillary reasons for advancing proposals a r e .
identified as such and discussed. The position of each of the principals
is described only as clearly as it emerges from the files of the Secretary
of Defense. Thus; the JCS are treated as a monolith, although it is
common knowledge that there is always considerable dissension and debate
amongst the Chiefs themselves. While they might have been unanimous in
their recognition that U.S. bases needed securing, the Chiefs did not
see eye to eye during ensuing debates over enclave or search and destroy.
The Chief of Staff of the Air Force and the Commandant of the Marine
Corps were known proponents of the enclave concept, but the Chairman of
the JCS and the Chief of Staff of the Army were equally determined to
see the deployment of several divisions of troops for unlimited combat
operations. The record of their debate, interesting though it may be,
remains in the JCS files.

 Through all of the strategy debate in early 1965 ran a common thread
 the concern with possible intervention in the conflict by elements of
the North Vietnamese Army or the Communist Chinese Army or a combination
of both. A variety of CINCPAC contingency plans were in existence at the
time which addressed the problem and called for various deployments, some
of them pre-emptive, to deal vlith it. The JCS consistently mentioned the '
problem as an additional justification for deployments they were advo-
cating, but the National Intelligence Board just as consistently dis-
counted the possibility of such intervention. Covert infiltration of
elements of the North Vietnamese Army, however, was another matter. It
was recognized early in the debate as something to be reckoned with even
though the real extent of the infiltration was not confirmed for some
time. In any case, contingency deployments were not intended to deal
with the latter type of provocation. -

v. Issues

 In conclusion, it seems clear that the debate over ground ~ommitments .
and accompanying strategy followed closely the course of expectations about
the Rolling Thunder bombing program and the development of the situation
in South Vietnam itself. The strategy of security was eclipsed because
Rolling Thunder was taking too long. The enclave strategy was never
unanimously endorsed and it never got off the ground. It was based on
the assumption that victory could be denied to the enemy in the South
while Rolling Thunder punished him in the North . Eventually, the U.S.
would achieve its objectives because the enemy in frustration would give
up. The whole enclave idea vlaS conceived in a period of relative quiet,
and certainly the experimentation aspect of it pre-supposed a relatively
stable situation. In the heat of the summer monsoon offensive, it became
a moot question whether or not a negative approach like the enclave
strategy could deny victory, and more important, whether or not there
would be an RVNAF left to shore up.

 9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 '. TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 In June, Rolling Thunder and the ground strategy switched places in
 the order of priorities as far as achieving U.S. objectives was concerned:
 First, a positive strategy for the employment of the forces, the search
 and destroy strategy, was approved. Secondly, a force of 44 battalions
 was recognized as sufficient to prevent collapse while the stage was being
 set for further deployments. 44 battalions was probably about the maxi-
 mum .the traffic would have borne at that juncture in any case. Final
 acceptance of the desirability of inflicting defeat on the enemy rather
 than merely denying him victory opened the door to an indeterminate amount
 of additional force.

 The 44 battalions, or Phase I as they were later called, were sup-
 posed to stem the tide of the Viet Cong insurgency and enable the friendly
 forces to assume the Offensive. As the GVN did not collapse, it can
 reasonably be concluded that they did stem the tide. It is just possible,
 however, that rather than stem the tide, they increased it through pro-
 vocation of greater infiltration from North Vietnam. In any case, it is
 debatable whether the allied forces actually did assume the offensive the
 following year.

 No further proof of the monumental implications of the endorsement .
 in the summer of 1965 of the search and destroy strategy, the 44 battalions,
 and the "win" concept is required beyond the present state of the war in
 . Vietnam. At this 1tlriting, the U.S. has reached the end of the time frame
 estimated by General Westmoreiand in 1965 to be required to defeat the
 enemy. It has committed 107 battalions of its own forces and a grand
 total of 525,000 men. The strategy remains search and destroy, but vic-
 tory is not yet in sight •

..
 10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 (')

 ~2:
 o
 r-
 o
 C)
 -<
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63 316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 CHRONOLOGY OF BUILD-UP ACTIVITY

 Number of
 Maneuver
 Battalions
 Document Physically
 Date 1965 or Event Agency & Action in Vietnam Disposition

 11 Feb JCSM 100-65 JCS recommended in con-
 junction with program for
 the 1st eight weeks of air
 activity against NVN the
 collatoral action of land-
 ing one MEB at Da Nang for
 security of the air base.

 20 Feb JCSM 121-65 JCS reiterated CINCPAC
 recommendation to land MEB
 at Da Nang. Presence of
 the Marines would serve to
 deter VC/DRV action against
 the base and "\wuld enhance ·
 readiness posture for other
 contingencies.
 22 Feb MACV 220743Z . Westmoreland recommended
 landing of 2/3 of MEB to
 secure base and installa-
 , tions at Da Nang.

 22 Feb :Elnbtel 2699 Taylor concurred in MACV's
 request to the extent of
 1/3 MEB for security but
 warned against further
 foreign troop deployments.

 23 Feb MACV 231230Z Westmoreland backed down
 to 1/3 MEB with proviso
 that more could follow
 after 1st battalion was
 in place.

 US/FW: U.S. and Free lilorld Maneuver Battalions in SVN

 Mfl.F: Marin~ Amphtbious Force

 MEB: Marine Expeditionarf Brigade

 MEF: Marine Expeditionarf Force

 13LT: Battalion Landing Team

. \1 SLF: Special Landing Force

 11 TOP SECRET Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 . TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 CllICPAC Sharp recommended 2/3 MEB for
 240315Z security at Da Nang.

24 Feb JCSM 130-65 JCS recommended 2/3 MEB for Appr.
 security. 25 Feb
26 Feb · Deptel 1840 State told Ambassador 2/3 MEB
 approved for landi~ contingent
 on GVN approval. Dep SecDef
 approval on 25 Feb~ Remaining
 elements of MEB deferred.
28 Feb Elnbtel 2789 Taylor told State he'd get GVN
 approval· for 2 BLTs to land at
 Da Nang. He said that should be
 all we send and that they would
 eventually be relieved by Viet
 forces.
2 Mar Deftel 6166 McNaughton told Taylor that it
 would be desirable to substitute
 173d Airborne for the Marines at
 Da Nang.
2 Mar Elnbtel 1954 Taylor supported Westmoreland in
 opposing substitution of 173d.
3 Mar CllICPAC CINCPAC opposed attempted sub-
 030230Z stitution citi~g seven OPLANS
 calling for Marines into De
 Nang.
4 Mar JCSM 121-65 JCS recommended deployment of
 entire MEB to Da Nang) one
 Army Bde to Thailand) recon-
 stitution of MEB in WestPac)
 and alert of III MEF (-) and
 25 Inf Divas insurance in
 support of deterrence deploy-
 ments.

4 Mar JCSM 144-65 JCS urged SecDef to reconsider Appr. by
 deferred funds for Chu Lai SecDef
 airstrip. Facility W3S needed 18 Mar 65
 ' to "prepare for a wide ,rariety
 of' courses of action."

 12 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - .Sensitive

6 Mar Press Release DOD said U.S. at request
 of GVN will put 2 BLTs
 . at Da Nang for security.

7 Mar JCS 070001Z JCS ordered CINCPAC to
 commence landing Marines
 and build up to two
 battalions ashore.

8 Mar. 3500 Marines landed at 2 US/FW
 Da Nang.

14 Mar CSA Memo for Gen Johnson recommended Pres. appr
 SecDef & JCS 21 separate measures for 21 pts.
 increased support of the 15 Mar &
 GVN. Measures merely were again on
 increases in the same vein 1 Apr;
 as previous steps. He also deferred
 proposed deployment of up the rest.
 to a full U. .S. division for
 security of various bases
 with the concomitant release
 of Viet troops from security
 mission for combat. The U.S.
 Division could go either to
 coastal enclaves and Saigon
 or into .the II Corps high-
 lands. Finally, Johnson
 proposed a four-division
 force comprised of U.S. and
 SEATO .t roops along the· DMZ
 and into Laos to contain
 NVN infiltration of men and
 supplies.

15 Mar JCS met President urged the JCS to
 w/Pres. come up with measures to
 "kill more VC"; he approved
 most of Gen Johnson's recom-
 mendations.

17 Mar "Strength of Joint CIA, DIA, State Memo
 VC Military showing VC Order of Battle
 Forces in (confirmed) as follows:
 SVN"
 37,000 Regular Forces
 100,000 ~ Irregulars and Militia

 Confirmed strength up 33% over 1964.
 5 Regimental Hq
 50 Battalions
 145 Separate Companies
• 35 Separate Platoons

 13 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

17 Mar MACV 170747Z Westmoreland recommended
 landing one Marine BLT
 at Phu Bai, near Hue, to
 secure airfield there and
 enable thereby moveme~t of
 helicopters from congested
 area at Da Nang to Phu Bai.
 Recommended a 4th BLT within
 a month.

18 Mar Embtel 3003 Taylor supported Westmoreland's
 Phu Bai re~uest above and went
 on to discuss pro's and con's
 of introduction of U.S. Divi-
 sion without offering a recom-
 mendation.

19 Mar CINCPAC Sharp recowEended to JCS
 192207Z that remainder of MEB be
 landed within a month and
 one BLT at Phu Bai be
 landed ASAP.
20 Mar JCSM 204-65 JCS proposed sending 2 US .
 and 1 ROK division to SVN
 for active operations against
 VC. Marines to I CTZ could
 be had ~uickly in concert
 with US/SEATO contingency
 plans for DRV!Chicom
 aggression •. (A portion of
 this proposal could have
 been construed as a deter-
 rent measure to Chicom
 aggression.) All forces
 were to engage in offensive
 operations with or without
 centralized command structure.
 Location for ROK Div not speci-
 fied, but Army Div was to go
 to II CTZ highlands to release
 ARVI~ battalions for operations
 along the coast. The JCS pro-
 posed resupplying it by air
 until Rte 19 could be opened.
 This recommendation considered
 by the JCS to be an essential
 component of the broader pro-
 gram to put pressure on the
 DRV/VC

 14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 25 Mar JCSM 216-65 . JCS reiterated CINCPAC's Appr~ by
 recommendation that 1 BLT Pres •. 1 Apr
 and remaining MEB elements & in NSAM
 be landed at Da Nang and 328 6 Apr.
 one BLT be landed at Fhu
 Bai -- all to improve
 security situation.
 ·26 Mar· "Commander's Westmoreland predicted that
 Estimate of air activity would not bear
 The Situation fruit in the next slx months,
 in SVN" and in the interim, RVNAF
 needed 3d country reinforce-
 ments to enable it to offset
 VC/DRV build-up and enjoy
 favorable force ratios while
 permitting an "orderly" build-
 up of its mm fbrces. MACV
 wanted the equivalent of two
 divisions by June '65 and
 possibly more thereafter if
 bombing failed. Westmoreland
 proposed deploying Marines
 as . described in JCSM 216-65,
 an Army brigade in Bien Hoal
 Vung ·Tau, and an Army division
 to the II CTZ highlands with
 a couple of battalions to pro-
 tect coastal bases. The mission
 of ·these forces was to be defense
 of vital installations and defeat
 of VC efforts to control KOntum,
 Pleiku, Binh Dinh region.

 27 Mar Embtel 3120 Taylor told State that if U.S.
 forces were to come in for combat,
 . he favored offensive enclave -
 mobile reaction concept of employ-
 ment rather than territorial clear
 and hold in highlands or defensive
 enclave.

 29 Mar- SecDef & JCS three division plan presented
 JCS met wi.th to Taylor. The latter inclined to
 Amb Taylor disfavor it because too many troops
 were involved, the need wasn't
 manifest,and the Viets would
 probably resent it. SecDef was
 inclined to favor the proposal
 but desired more information in
 reference to the Taylor qualifi-
• cations .

 15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

1-2 Apr NSC meetings President Johnson decided to ' NSAM 328
 with A.i:nb Taylor send two more Marine battalions 6 Apr
 present to Da Nang and Phu Bai and to
 alter the mission of U.S. com-
 ' bat forces "to permit. their
 more active use" under condi-
 tions to be established by the
 Secy of State in consultation
 with SecDef. He also approved
 18 to 20,000 man increase in U.S.
 forces to fill out existing
 units and provide needed logis-
 tic personnel. (All of these
 changes were to be contingent
 on GVN concurrence.) A slowly
 ascending tempo in response to
 rises in enemy rates of activity
 was approved for the Rolling
 Thunder program. The President
 agreed to overtures to GOA, GNZ,
 and to ROK, seeking combat sup-
 port from them.
2 Apr CIA Director McCone said present level of RT
 Memo to not hurting DRV enough to make
 SecDef & them quit. He warned against
 others putt.ing more U.S. troops into
 SVN for combat operations,
 since that would merely en-
 coUrage the USSR and China
 to support the DRV/VC at
 minimum risk. He predicted
 covert infiltration of PAVN
 and the U.S. getting mired
 down in a war it could not win.

2 Apr JCSM 238-65 JCS asked SecDef to clear the
 decks of "all administrative
 impediments that hamper us in
 the prosecution of this war."
 Specifically, they asked for:
 increases in funds, a separate
 MAP for SEA, improved communica-
 tions systems, quicker response
 to CINCPAC's requests, exempt.ion
 of SEA from balance of payments
 goals, authority to extend mili-
 tary terms of service and to
 consult with Congress on t~e use
 of Reserves, relaxation of civilian

 16 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 r

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 and military manpower ceilings,
 and a substantial increase in
 military air transport in and
 out of SVN.

 4 Apr CINCPAC Taylor told State that in absence
 042058z of further guidance, he will tell
 (For Taylor) GVN that Marine mission is now
 mobile counterinsurgency, plus
 reserve, in support of ARVN up
 to 50 miles of base~

 5 Apr SecDef Memo McNamara told Wheeler that he
 to CJCS understood the JCS to be planning
 for the earliest practicable
 introduction of 2-3 Div into
 SVN.
 8 Apr JCSM 265-65 JCS recommended RVNAF build-up SecDef
 be accelerated through an addi- appro
 tional 17,247 MAP-supported 12 Apr
 spaces . plus 160 advisors.

 9-10 Apr Planning PACOM and JCS representatives
 Conference recommended deployment of
 in Honolulu 173d 'Airborne Brigade to
 Bien Hoa/Vung Tau for secur-
 ity of the installations there
 and an Army brigade to Qui
 Nhon/Nha Trang to prepare for
 the later introduction of a
 division. They also recommended
 that the 173d be replaced by a
 CONUS brigade ASAP. They treated
 the two Marine BLTs of NruLM 328
 as approved and described as
 "in planning" the remainder of
 the JCS's three-division force
 (III MEF (-), ROK Div, and U.S.
 Army Div). They recommended
 that I MEF be deployed to WEST-
 PAC to improve r eadiness posture.

 11-14 Two Marine BLTs land at Phu Bai 4 US/TIT
 Apr and Da Nang.

 11 Apr MACV 110825Z Westmoreland told CINCPAC that
 he still wanted a U.S. division
 in the highlands , even though
 it was apparent Washington was

•
 17 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 not of a mind to approve it.
 He also reaffirmed the need
 for an Army brigade in the
 Bien Hoa/Vung Tau area for
 security, to strengtb~n the
 eastern flank of the Hop Tac
 area, ~Dd to act as a mobile
 reserve in case needed iri the
 highlands. To forestall
 political difficulty,
 Westmoreland said he'd like
 to see a joint staff with the
 RVNAF and an .International
 Military Assistance Force
 under U.S. hegemony in the
 Da Nang area.

 12 Apr Meeting, McNamara agreed with JCS
 SecDef & that .Marines' "EnclavT
 JCS . build-up plan would be
 adopted. Concept was to
 initially provide base
 security and then phase into
 combat operations from logis-
 tically supports,ble base areas.
 The logistics base extant at
 .that juncture was recognized
 to be inadequate.

 12 Apr Ernbtel 3372 Tatlor told Stat 'e that with
 the 18 to 20,000 man increase
 in support forces authorized
 by NSAM 328, "some preliminary
 work in anticipation of the
 arrival of additional U.S.
 forces l1 could be accomplished
 but that for II s ignificant
 progress toward ~heestablish­
 ment of a logistic base to
 support additional forces,1I
 about 5000 more engineers .
 would be required. He went
 on to say that despite studies
 dealing vTith ambitiOl.'S plans
 for reinforcement, he hoped that
 "they do not interfere with
 essential work in preparation
 for less ambitious but more
 probable deployments. II He
 indicated favorable disposi-
 tion toward the establishment
•
 18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 o~ brigade-sized enclaves at
 Qui Nhon and Bien Hoa/Vung Tau
 'ti~ the Marines demonstrate
 effectiveness ••• "
 · 13 Apr McNamara approved deploy-
 ment o~ 173d Airborne to
 Bien Hoa/Vung Tau subject
 to GVN concurrence (with
 Presidential sanction).
 14 Apr JCS 140050Z JCS asked CINCPAC to deploy
 the 173d to SVN as soon after
 GVN concurrence as possible.
 Their mission would be to
 initially secure Bien Hoa/
 Vung Tau and then phase into
 counterinsurgency operations •
 . 14 Apr Embtel 3373 Taylor surprised at decision
 to deploy the 173d. Here-
 quested a hold.

 Embtel 3374 Taylor & Westmoreland both .
 embarrassed at amount o~ heavy
 equipment~ not appropriate ~or
 counterinsurgency, brought
 ashore in Da Nang by Marines .

 Embtel 3384 Taylor advised ,Washington to
 keep additional U.S. forces
 out o~ SVN, Perhaps just off-
 shore, until need ~or them is
 incontrovertible.
 15 Apr JCSM 281-65 JCS replied to Taylor's traffic
 of the previous day. They said
 the 173d was needed for security
 o~ air operations and logistic
 bases and ~or subsequent phas-
 ing into counterinsurgency.
 operations. They added that
 the security of existing or
 propos ed bases at Chn Lai, Qui Nhon
 and Nha Trang required a battalion
 each. They added that to deploy
 the Marines without their ~ll
 complement o~ equipment would
 be imprudent. They (the Marines)
 were now prepared to meet any
 contingency .
•
 19. TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Secti on 3.3
 NND P roject Number: NND 633 16. B y: NWD Date: 2011

 /

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive '

 15 Apr Deftel 9164 McNaughton told Saigon that
 IIhighest authori tyl! felt si tua- .
 tion in SVN was deteriorating,
 and proposed seven actions to
 help remedy the situation, in-
 cluding: (1) encadrement of
 U.S. troops in ARVN units either
 50 u.s. to each of 10 ARVN
 battalions or combined opera-
 tions of 3 U.S. and . 3 ARVN
 battalions; (2) a brigade
 force into Bien Hoa/Vung Tau
 for security and subse~uent
 combat operations; (3)
 battalions into coastal
 enclaves for further experi-
 mentation with U.S. forces
 in counterinsurgency role;
 (4) application of U.S. re-
 cruiting techni~ues in RVN;
 (5) expansion of MEDCAP;
 (6) pilot experimentation
 in 2 or 3 provinces with a
 team of U.S. civil affairs
 personnel integrated into
 gov't structure; and (7)
 provision of food directly
 to RVNAF troops.

 17 Apr Embtel 3419 Taylor told McGeorge Bundy
 & 3421 that 7-point program plus
 all visiting firemen were
 rocking the boat and asked
 for respite.

 17 Apr Embtel 3423 Taylor sent to Washington the
 kind of guidance he felt he
 should have received in order
 to carry out all that Washington
 had proposed in the past week.

 17 Apr JCSM 288-65 JCS proposed sending one
 Marine BLT to Chu Lai to secure
 the CB's constructing the air-
 strip there.

 17 Apr JCS 171847Z JCS described to CINC?AC the
 concept for U.S. comba t units
 deploying to SEA as assistance

• 20 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

I

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 in arresting the deteriorating
 situation against the VC and as an
 assurance that the U.S. would he .
 ready to counter overt DRV or
 Chicom action should such occur.

 20 Apr Honolulu McNamara, McNaughton, W. Bundy,
 Conference Taylor, Wheeler, Sharp and
 Westmoreland reached concensus
 that: (1) the DRV was unlikely
 to ~uit in the next six months
 and probably would only give up
 because of VC "pain" in the
 South rather than bomb damage
 in the North; (2) RT was about
 right but wouldn't do the job
 alone; (3) best strategy would
 be to break the DRV/VC will by
 effectively denying them victory
 and bringing about negotiations
 through the 'enemy's impotence.
 They proposed establishing four
 brigade-sized enclaves, in addi-
 tion to Da Nang - Hue/Phu Bai,
 at Bien Hoa/Vung Tau (3 Army
 battalions plus 1 GOA battalion);
 Chu Lai (3 BLTs plus 3 Marine
 TFS); Qui Nhon (3 Army battalions);
 a~d Quang Ngai (3 ROK battalions).
 Added on to the 4 USMC BLTs
 (33,000 U.s. troops) and 2000
 ROK troops already in Vietnam,
 the total was to be-82,000 U. S.
 and 7250 3d country troops.
 Mentioned for possible later
 deployment were: a U.S. Air-
 mobile Division, a Corps H~,
 an ROK Div (-), and the remaind-
 der of the III MEF (2 battalions).
 It was agreed that ARVN and U.S.
 units would be "brigaded" for
 operations , that the U. S. "\-Tould
 try. single managers of U.S. effort
 in 3 provinces as an experiment,
 that }'1EDCAP would be expanded, .
 and that a study of fringe bene-
 fits for RVNAF "\-Tould be un.dertaken.

 21 Apr SecDef Memo McNamara sent the Honolulu
 for recommendat ions to the President
 The President essentially as described above.

 21 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 21 Apr CIA Memo McCone said the communists still
 to SecDef saw the tide going their way.
 & others They would see in the Honolulu
 expansions of U.S. involvement
 the acceptance by the U.S. of a
 greater commitment, but they would
 assume U.S. was reluctant to widen
 the war. The DRV and Chicoms might
 reinforce with men and equipment,
 but would not intervene.
 21 Apr CIA-DIA Memo The presence in Kontum Province
 "An Assessment since February 1965 of one regiment
 of Present VC of the 325th PAVN Division confirmed.
 Military Capa- As of late 1964 the supply of repatri-
 bili ties" . ated southerners infiltrated back from
 NVN had dried up and NVN volunteers
 were coming down the trail.
 22 Apr Deptel 2397 Unger told Taylor that if ~uat agrees
 to the Honolulu program, the U.S.
 intention was not to announce the
 whole thing at once "but rather to
 announce individual deployments at
 appropriate times."
 23 Apr CINCPAC Sharp recommended replacing the l73d,
 230423Z if it deployed, with a CONUS·brigade.
 23 Apr Embtel 2391 Taylor told State that ~uat was extremely
 reluctant to discuss foreign reinforce-
 ments. Taylor feared GVN reaction.

 30 Apr Deftel 1097 Saigon informed by McNaughton that
 the l73d and 3 BLTs to Chu Lai
 approved for deployment at Ambassa-
 dor's call.
 30 Apr JCSM 321-65 JCS as a result of Honolulu and 173d '
 subsequent discussions recommended &
 a detailed program to deplGy MEB
 48,000 u.S. and 5250 Free World appro
 troops to SVN. The forces included 30 Ap:
 two Army brigades, one MEB, an ROK
 Regt. Combat Team, and an ANZAC
 battalion. Tney were to bolster
 GVN forces during their continued
 build-up, secure bases and installa-
 tions, conduct combat operations in

• 22 . TOP SECRET - Sensit i ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 coordination with the RVNAF, and
 prepare for the later introduction
 of an airmobile division to the
 central plateau, the remainder of
 III MEF to the Da Nang area, -and
 the remainder of an ROK division
 to Quang Ngai.

5 May lSA Memo to McNaughton informed Vance that
 Dep SecDef a portion of the force package
 listed as "approved" by the JCS
 in JCSM 321-65 was in fact a
 part of the not-yet sanctioned
 three-division plan.

5 May Main body of l73d Airborne Brigade 6 US/FW
 arrived at Vung Tau.

7 May Marines began landing at Chu Lai 9 US/FW
7 May CINCPAC Sharp reminded JCS that he wanted Move-
 °72l30Z to reconstitute WESTPAC reserve ment
 after deployment of l73d and of
 additional Marines. I MAF
 to
 WEST PAC
 appr.
 by
 SecDef
 15 May.

8 May MACV 15182 Westmoreland with Taylor concur-
 rence forwarded concept of opera-
 tions by U.S./allied ground combat
 forces in support of RVNAF:

 Stage I - Security of base area (extended TAOR
 out to light artillery range).

 Stage II - Deep patrolling and offensive opera-
 tions (with RVNAF coordination
 and movement out of TAORs).

 -Stage III - Search and destroy plus reserve re-
 action operations. Westmoreland
 saw the U.S. role in the Vietnam
 war evolving through four phases:

 Fnase I - Securing and improving
 coastal enclaves
 Phase Ir - Ope:rations from the enclaves

 23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Phase III - Securing ip~and bases
 and areas

 Phase IV - Operations from inland bases '
 after occupying and im-
 proving them.

 Westmoreland recommended locations for
 various forces then being discussed for
 future deployment:

 III MEF - Da Nang, Hue, Chu Lai
 Airmobile Division - Qui Nhon, Nha Trang
 ROK Division - Quang Ngai, Chu Lai (relieve USMC)
 173d - Bien Hoa/Vung Tau (already landing)

 11 May Embtel 3727 Taylor described arrival of 173d and Marines;
 predicted boredom would be a problem.

 14 May JCS 142228z JCS told .CINCPAC that SecDef approved
 combined coordinating staff with RVNAF
 and knew that MACV was planning a Joint
 General Staff.

· 15 May MACV l50900Z Westmoreland told DA he was preparing
 concept for employment of a division-sized
 force, possibly the airmobile division,
 and requested experts ·to help plan.

. 17 May Embtel 3788 Taylor told State Quat was agreeable to
 deployment of an Army brigade to .Qui Nhon/
 Nha Trang. If build-up of Cam Ranh Bay \.

 as a base were to be approved, he said,
 Westmoreland wanted to divert one battalion
 there for security.

 19 May Embtel 3808 Taylor told State that RVN could absorb
 80,000 US/3d country troops. He recommended
 a pause before considering further expansion
 and wanted to hold off logistics support for
 contingency follow-on until there was a case
 of clear and indisputable necessity.

 21 May JCS recommended to S ~cDe f that Cam RaP~ Ap~r.
 Bay be developed to~ither (1) enable by
 further contingency deplo;yments, or (2) • SeeDef
 to fully support troops already there. 8 Jun '

 24 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive

 24 May Embtel 3855 Taylor told State that joint
 command structure was repugnant
 to Viets and should not be raised
 at that time. Problem of command
 needed to be sorted out, however,
 prior to input of large numbers of
 U.S. forces.

 24 May MACV 17292 Westmoreland told CINCPAC that
 despite SecDef approval of joint
 planning staff, the Viets were
 cool to the idea.

 27 May JCSM 417-65 JCS recommended approval of 2369 Appr.
 'MAP supported spaces for RVNAF to by
 organize a tenth division using SecDef
 assets of three existing regiments. 4Jun

 June 1st battalion, Royal Australian 10 US/FW
 Regiment, closed RVN in early
 June and joined the 173d at
 Vung Tau.

 5 June Embtel 4074 .Mission Intelligence Committee with
 concurrence of Taylor, Johnson, and
 Westmoreland told State that a series
 of recent ARVN defeats raised the
 possibility of collapse. To meet
 a shortage of ARVN reserves, U.S.
 ground troops would probably have
 to be committed to action.

 7 June 'MACV 19118 Westmoreland told CINCPAC that
 070335Z a summer offensive ,vas under way
 to destroy GVN forces and isolate
 and attack district and province
 towns. The enemy had yet to
 realize his full potential, and
 RVNAF's capability to cope was
 in grave doubt. RVN~F build-up
 was halted because of recent
 losses. No choice but to rein-
 force with additional US/3d
 country forces as r apidly as
 possible. Westmoreland asked
 that all forces then in the
 planning stages be approved for
 deployment, plus he identified
 more forces (9 maneuver battalions
 in a division (-) and one MEB)

•
 25 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By : NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 which might be :required later and
 for which planning should begin.
 He asked that the 173d be held in
 SVN until the Airmobile Division was
 operational.

7 June CINCPAC Sharp supported Westmoreland's
 072325Z request for more troops but added
 that he felt the airmobile division
 should go to Qui Nhon rather than
 inland and should operate in Binh
 Dinh instead of up in the highlands.
 He felt 600 to 800 tons of aerial
 resupply for the division if it went
 to the highlands was asking too much
 of air facilities. He also felt the
 ROK division should go to Quang Ngai
 rather than to Qui Nhon, where it
 would be unproductive, or to Cam Ranh
 a.s Westmoreland had suggested. '

8 June Press McCloskey, State Dept Press Office~,
 Conference told the press that U.S. troops
 would be made available to fight
 a.longside Viet forces when and if
 necessary.

9 June White House Statement released which said that
 Press there had b e ~n no recent change in
 Release mission of U.S. combat units. They
 would help the Vi ets if help was
 requested and COMUSMACV felt U.S.
 troops were required.

11 Ju..l1e CINCPAC Sharp elaborated on his earlier
 1l2210Z objections to airmobile division
 going into highlands and clarified
 his views on employment of the
 ROKs in either Quang Ngai, Nha Trang,
 or the Delta.

I I June JCSH 457-65 JCS, after discussing MA ~1 and
 CINCPAC requests \-Tith Tayl or,
 recommended that the aTrffiobile
 division go to Qui Nhon, and
 recommended everything else that
 Westmoreland had requested. Total
 strengths rec on~e nded were:
 U.S. - 116,793; FW - 19,750.

 26 TOP SECRET - Sensi t i ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

11 June JCS 112347Z JCS told Sbarp that somewhat
 less than MAeV's 19118 "ras close
 to being approved as an alterna-
 tive. Force described amounted to
 one additional Army brigade instead
 of the airmobile division. JCS
 wanted to kDOW where Westmoreland
 would put thebfigade were it to be
 approved.

13 June MACV 131515Z Westmoreland objected to Taylor's
 questioning of the seriousness of
 the situation and pointed out that
 to date ARVN had lost 5 battalions
 and the end was not in s{ght. He
 justified his request for troops by
 Corps area and asked for a ' free hand
 in maneuvering units. He included
 his concept for the employment of
 ROK and.ARVN troops.

15 June McNamara gave the green light for
 planning to deploy the airmobile
 division to SVN by 1 September.

16 June Press McNamara announced deployments to
 Conference SVN that would bring U.S. strength
 there to beb"een 70,000 and 75,000
 men. 20,000 of these would be com-
 bat troops and more would be sent
 if necessary. He said U.S. troops
 were needed because the R~\F to VC
 force ratio of less than 4 to 1 was
 too low to enable the GVN to cope
 with the threat. Total U.S. Bns
 after deployment s ,vau1d be 15.

17 June Embtel. 4220 Taylor confirmed to State the
 seriousness of the military situa-
 tion in SVN. GVN had to either
 give up outlying outposts or 'face .
 being ambushed trying to reinforce
 them.

18 June 1-lhite House McGeorge Bundy passed on to McNamara
 Memo to the President's concern that "we find
 SecDef more dramatic and effective actions
 in SVN ..• "

 27 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 18 June JCSM 482-65 JCS further ref'ined recommended
 troop list showip~ the airmobile
 division to deploy by 1 September
 1965 along with its support and
 the brigade of' the 101st airborne
 division to return to CONUS when
 the airmobile division was opera-
 tional. Total strength recommended
 was:
 U.S. - 120,839; FW - 19,75 0
. 22 June Unsigned McNamara told that the President
 Memo to could wait until 10 July to approve
 SecDe:f the deployment of' the airmobile
 division if' SecDef' is immediately
 given the go-ahead f'or readiness
 preparation. The question of' re-
 moval of' the tylO Army brigades
 was to be reconsidered in August.

 22 June JCS 2400 JCS told CINCPAC and Westmoreland
 that a f'orce of' 44 battalions was
 being considered for deployment
 to Vietnam. The Chairman wished
 to know if' that would be enough
 'to convince the DRV/VC they could
 not win.

 23 June Deptels 3078 Approval for landing of one Marine
 & 3079 BLT at Qui Nhon for security and
 an additional BLT at Da Nang sent'
 .to Saigon.

 24 June MACV 3320 Westmoreland told CI~CPAC and the
 ~ that there was no assurance
 the DRV/VC would change their plans
 regardless of what the U.S. did
 in the next 6 months. The 44
 battalions, hO¥Tever, should be
 enough to prevent collapse and
 establish a f'avorable balance
 . of power by year I send .

. 26 June Merro, Resor told McNamara that Air
 SecArmy to Cav Div muir have lts movement
 SecDef' directive by 8 July at the latest
 in order to meet its readiness
 deadlines. Security would be
 impossible after issuing the
 directive.

 28 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

26 June Deptel 3057 W. Bundy told Taylor that
 Westmoreland could commit
 U.S. troops to combat "in any
 situat.i on in which the use of
 such troops is required by an
 appropriate GvN commander and
 when, in COMUSMACV's judgment,
 their use is necessary to
 strengthen the relative posi-
 tion of GVN forces."

26 June 1SA Memo of On 25 June Alexis Johnson told
 Conversation McNaughton that in many respects
 wlDep Amb. the situation in SVN was no worse
 than the previous year. men if
 it were, large numbers of .foreign
 troops could do no more than hold
 a few enclaves. The Vietnamese
 feared massive inputs of foreign
 troops .would degrade their control
 over the country.

1 July Memo for Ball of State described the Vietnam
 The wa;-as one the U.S. cannot win re-
 President gardless of effort. Rather than
 have the U.S. pour its resources
 down the drain in the wrong place,
 he recommended that U.S. force
 levels be held to 15 battalions
 and 72, 000 men announced by SecDe.f
 in June. The combat role of the
 U.. S.· forces should be restricted
 to base security and reserve in
 support of ARVN. As rapidly as
 possible and in full realization
 of the diplomatic losses which
 might be incurred, the U.S. should
 exit from Vietnam and thereby cut
 its losses.

1 July Memo f'or W. Bundy of State proposed a
 The "middle way" to the President
 President which would avoid the ultimatum
 aspects of the 44 battalions
 request and also the Ball with-
 drawal proposal, both of which
 were \llldesirable. Bundy offered
 further experimentation with U.S.
 troops from coastal enclavep.

 29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The numbers "Tould be held to
 planned deployments of 18
 battalions and 85,000 men.
 The airmobile division and
 the 1st Infantry Division would
 be got ready but not deployed.
 Furious diplomatic activity
 concomitantly should find a
 gracious exit for the U.S.

 1 July One Marine BLT landed at Qui 11 US/FW
 Nhon to strengthen security
 there.

 2 July JCSM· 515-65 Pursuant to their meeting with
 SecDef on 28 June, the JCS for-
 warded a program for the deploy-
 ment of "such additional forces
 at this time as are required to
 insure that the VC/DRV cannot
 win in SVN at their present
 level of commitment." Concur-
 rently, the JCS recommended
 expansion of the air activity
 against NVN as an indispensable
 part of the overall program.
 Total U.S. strength at comple-
 tion of these deployments was
 to be 175,000.
 6 July One Marine BLT landed at Da Nang 12 US/FW
 to strengthen the defenses
 there.

 7 July Deftel 5319 McNamara informed Westmoreland
 that the purpose of the forth-
 coming visit to Saigon scheduled
 for 16-20 July was to "get your
 recommendations for forces to
 year's end and beyond."

 10 July Deftel 5582 McNaughton told Taylor that it
 had been decided to dep19Y 10,400
 logistic and support troops by
 15 August to s~pport current
 force levels and to receive the
 airmobile division, if deployed.
 GVN concurrence sought.

.. 30 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

II July Embtel 108 Estimate of the situation prepared
 by the Mission Intelli ence Committee
 reaffirmed the need for U.S. 3d coun-
 try forces to stem the tide then
 flowing against the RVN~.

12 July 2d Brigade, 1st Infantry Division 15 US/FW
 arrived in Vietnam

16-20 Conference McNamara and Wheeler met with
July in Saigon Westmoreland and Taylor, heard
 presentation of COMUSMACV's con-
 cept for operations in SVN. The
 44 battalions were to be the
 Phase I of the build-up and were
 enough to prevent defeat . . In
 order to move to Phase II and
 seize the initiative, Westmoreland
 tbld SecDef he'd require a further
 24 battalions in 1966.

17 July NMCC Vance told McNamara that the
 172042Z President had decided to go
 ahead with the plan to deploy
 34 U.S. battalions and that he
 was favorably disposed to the
 call-~p of reserves and exten-
 sion of tours of active duty
 personnel.

28 July Presidential The President told the pres~
 Pr.e ss that he had ordered the airmobile
 Conference · division and other units to SVN.
 . Strength after these deployments
 would be 125,000 and more would
 be sent if required. He also
 said he'd decided not to call up
 reserve at that juncture.

29 July 1st Brigade, 101st Airborne i8 US/FW
 Division arrived in Vietnam.

30 July JCSM 590-65 Annex showed 34 battalions and
 193,587 men as planned for de-
 ployment to RVNI

14-15 Marine BLTs landed at Chu Lai and 21 US/FW
Aug Da Nang. Coupled with the SLF .
 BLT, they brought USMC maneu'(er
 strength in RVN to 12 battalions,
 9 from III MAF and 3 from I MAF.

 31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

28 Sept 1st Air Cavalry Division closed 29 US/ru
 in RVN and assumed responsibility
 f'or its TAOR.

7 Oct Remainder of' the 1st Infantry 35 US/ru
 Division closed' in RVN.

8 Nov A full diyision of' ROK f'orces 44 US/FW
 closed into RVN.

10 Nov JCSM 811-65 Af'ter numerous adjustments in
 required support f'or Phase I
 deployments, the JCS proposed
 a f'inal ceiling of' 219,000 on ,
 that portion of' the build-up
 and then addressed on-going
 Phase II proposals.

31 Dec Phase I U.S. strength in RVN at
 year's end was 184,314.

 32 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET Sensitive

Iv.c .6. PHASE I IN THE BUILD-UP OF U. S. FORCES, THE DEBATE

 MARCH - JULy 1965

 TABLE OF CONTENTS AND OUTLINE

SlIDIlIlary and Analysis ....• 0 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •

 ..
 • • • • ·1

Ch.r'onology .... 0 •••••••••••••••••••••••••• 0 •••••••••••••••••• a.G ~ • • • • • 11

I. The Situation, Spring and Early Summer, 1965.................... 41
 A. The Political Situation ......... o.......•................ o... 41

 1. Khanh yielded to Quat and U. S. hopes went up.

 2. Quat came to ignominious grief at a bad time.
 , 1

 3. The military, the only stable element of the
 Viet body politic, took over with exaggerated
 confidence .

 B. The Military Situation ............................ ~ ........ . 42

 1. The VC lay low during March and April while
 the ARVN shined in their absence.

 2. Mission situation reports reflected umrarranted
 optimism despite the occasional hardheaded
 assessment.

 3 .. Honolulu conferees on 20 April 1965 recognized
 the calm before the storm but were not moved
 by it.

 4. There were plenty of indications in the spring
 that something awful ivas going to happen.

 5. The storm.

 a. Song Be cost both sides heavi:.y.

 b. Ba Gia signaled to some the signs of
 imminent ARVN collapse.

 c. Westmoreland 's 19118 of 7 June said. the RVNAF
 had had it and "\<Tere going UJ.'1der.

 33 TOP.SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 d. As though to confirm Westmoreland's dreary
 prediction, the ARVN wasted the elite of
 their force by committing it piecemeal
 ~gainst a clever and determinerr enemy at
 Dong Xoai.

 e. The long-expected highlands offensive in-
 creased the gloom as the RVN yielded full
 initiative to the VC.
 ...
 6. Force ratios turned against the RVNAF.
 c. Pacification.o ....................... o • • • • o • • • • • • • • o • • · ~ • • • o 51

 1. A lot of words added up to zero progr.ess.

 2. Hop Tac remained a query plus.

 Do Economic Si tuat ion ....... 0 ................................................. - . 0 ....... .' 0 .. 0 .. 54

 1. Without rice to eat the GVN loJ'o uld starve without
 losing the military '\var.

 2; The VC campaign to cut lines of communication
 threatened to bottle the GVN up in the urban
 centers.

II. The Brief Tenure of the Strategy of Security and Subsequent
 Developments . 0 ...... 0 0 .. 0 .. 0 0 .... 0 ................................................................ 0 .. .. 55
 A. SecUI"ity as a Rationale ................................................................... .. 55
 1. It was good enough to get two BLT's ashore in Marcho

 2. Close on its heels came proposals for more force for
 more ambitious purposes.

 3. The public remained in ignorance of any other rationale
 until June.

 Bo NSC Meetings of 1-2 April 1965 .•......... 0 •••••••••••••••• 56
 1. He stmore land , CINCPAC and the JCS, with Taylor's
 concurrence, requested some more Marines for
 security.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 2. Taylor's resistance to further troop increases
 blunted the JCS proposal for three divisions of
 combat troops. Instead, the President approved
 two Marine BLT's, and an ill-defined, but more
 aggressive, mission for them.

 3. NSAM 328

 a. Faced with a "trile:mma," the President elected
 to cautiously expand U.S. ground commitment
 rather than pullout of Vietnam or drastically
 increase air strikes on NVN.

 b. The way to disprove allegations about "white-
 faced" troops in the Vietnam war was to experi-
 ment with small numbers of them. It looked as
 though the situation 'T,VQuld permit it.

 c. A rather vague provision for an additio~al
 18-20,000 man increase "to fill out existing
 units and supply needed logistic personnel"
 was interpreted by various principals accord-
 ing to their own desires.

c. The Additional Marines Land •.••.••••.••.•••.•.••••.••.•••. 62

 1. Defensive security became offensive security.

 2. They watched Ivhile ARVN was beaten up in May.

D. Westmoreland Tried to Slide the 173d in for Security .•.••• 62

 1. Westmoreland asked again.

 2. The JCS approved it contingent upon GVN approval.

 3. The Ambassador was caught flat-footed and objected.

 4. There was some confusion as to whether or not the
 President had sanctioned the deployment of the 173d
 at the time it was ordered, but the Ambassador saw
 cleurly that Washington was impat~ent.

 5. The whole issue was taken to Honolulu.

E. Security was the Primary Mission for Most of :the
 Phas e I Unit s .......... G ••••••• 0 0 •••••••••••• 0 ••••••••• 0 •• 65

 35 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Page

III. The Strategy of ExPerimentation - Enclave Strategy .••••••••••• 66

 A. Geogr-aphy ••••.•.•••••••••••••••••• 0 0 •••••• 0 ••• 0 •••••••••••••
 66

 1. The long narrow waist of Vietnam lent itself
 to enclave strategists.
 ,
 2. Vung Tau was the southern anchor.

 B. Development of the Strategy ••••••.•.•••..•••••..••••••,.••••• 66

 1. CSA Johnson brought it back from Saigon but
 was clearly against it. ,
 2. Taylor adopted it as the next best thing to
 no troop input and defended it vigorously.

 3. The Ambassador's resistance to an expanded
 enclave s,trategy was overcome at Honolulu,
 where a marked increase of force was agreed
 to.

 C. Difficulties in Experimentation ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 79

 1. Even as the troops were landing, the U.S. had
 yet to '\vork out with a chary GVN the ground
 rules for their commitment to offensive action.

 2. Public and private speculation as to the purpose
 of the U.S. build-up exploded in a massive re-
 action to official silence and then clumsy
 revelation.

 3. By the time the U.S. decided how to commit its
 forces, the enclave strategy had died on the
 vine.

 D. Where U.S. Stood on 1 June 1965 .........•.....•...••......•. 8 3

 '1. U.S. approved combat strength was 13 battalions.

 2. Third Country forces approved added another 4.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

IV. The U.S. Moved to Take Over the Land War -- The Search
 and Destroy Strategy and the 44 Battalior. Debate............. 84
 A. Westmoreland Provided the Push •••.••••••••••••••••••••••• 84 I

 1. He accepted more than base security as implicit
 in the deployment of the first two Marine BLT's.

 2. He followed close on CSA Johnson's heels with a
 detailed and hardheaded assessment of the situa-
 tion in March. Force ratios dictated that the
 U.S. reinforce the RVNAF.

 3. RVNAF build-up described.
 4. Westmoreland submitted a reclama after the
 1-2 April NSC meetings and stirred up enough
 interest to get another brigade or t wo out
 of the Honolulu Conference . .

 5. Only one aberrant recommendation in May spoiled
 a splendid record of consistent appeal for a
 maximum force level and for offensive missions.

 6. The zenith appeared to be message 19118 of
 7 June, the "44 battalion request."
 B. CINCPAC Appeared to Back Into Enclaves................... 91

 1. The Airmobile Division should not rely entirely
 on aerial resupply in the highlands, but should
 go to Qui Nhon and secure Binh Dinh first.

 2. The troops needed to operate near the people.

 C. The JCS Yielded the Torch After an Early Lead............ 92

 1. JCSM 204-65, the "Three-Division" proposal, 1>laS
 too much to be swallowed.

 2 • . The' JCS kept ahead of the pack a~.l through the
 spring .

 3. They 'vere eclipsed by ~1ACV in June.

 37 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 D. Search and. Destroy as a Strategy and 44 Battalions
 as a Force ....... 0 ••••••••••••••••••••••••• 0 0 • • • • • • • • • • • • • •• 94
 1. Westmoreland wanted a f'ree hand to maneuver
 f'orces and he Ivanted U. S. troops kept alvay
 f'rom the people. He wanted it understood·
 that more than 44 battalions would be re-
 quired in order to seize the initiative.

 2. The strategy debate ended in June, but the
 n~bers game went on.

 3. The opposition made a last ef'f'ort.

 a. Taylor and Johnson stuck with the enclave
 approach.

 b. Ball said we should get out f'ast.

 c. Bundy didn't like any of' the alternatives,
 proposed we stick with enclaves f'or the
 moment.

 E. The Inf'luence of' the President and his Se cretary of' Def'ense.l06

 1. . The Secretary of' Def'ense wanted justif'ication
 and wouldn't yield the reins.

 2. The President wanted to resist aggression but
 simultaneously to manif'estly exercise moderation
 in the use of' power.

 3. By June he was getting impatie~t. .0

 F. Presidential Sanction f'or ~hase I •.•••••••••••••••••••••••• 110

 1. It was decided by the President sometime in mid-July.

 2. The press and the people were told about a part of'
 the coming deployments and were assured that neither
 policy nor objectives had changed.

 3. At f'inal count, Phase I was 44 battalions and
 219,000 U.S. personnel in size.

•
 TOP SECRET Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

. v. Expectations ....................... 0.................. 0......... 113

 A. The Strategy of Security .••.••••••••••• 0.'... 0.............. 113
 1. Nearly everybody accepted it at face value.

 2. The NIB said that other Communist states would
 not send "volunteers" in response.
 , I

 B. The Enclave Strategy- ............ ~ ................... 0 • • • • 113

 1. Taylor expected it to give the Vietnamese
 time to save themselves.

 2. Westmoreland expected a defeat if allied troops
 were restricted to enclaves. CINCPAC essentially
 agreed.

 3. The JCS never endorsed the enclave strategy.
 4. Bundy expected the enclave approach to buy
 enough time for the U.S. to exit gracefully
 or to experiment before committing large num-
 bers of troops.

 5. McCone argued that without stepping up air
 activity against NVN, the U.S. would accom-
 plish nothing except further i nvo lve itself
 in a war it could not win. He predicted
 covert infiltration of men and equipment by
 NVN but no overt intervention . '

 6. The NIB described an enemy ,vii{h.a hardened
 attitude. They estimated that for the moment,
 the enemy ,muld not break . ~

 C. The Search and Destroy Strategy •••••••••••••••••••••••••• 116

 1. It was aggres sive enough for the JCS, but
 even 44 batt alions were not enough to do
 mor; than deny victory.

 2. Westmoreland asked SecDef for 24 additional
 battalions over.and above Phase I in order
 to sei ze the initiative . His concept of
 operations spelled out his expectations .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 3. The Embassy thought it was far too much force.
 4. Ball clearly thought the U.S. was merely
 raising its ultimate losses.

 5. Bundy apparently expected the other side to
 react.

 6. McNaughton derived a probability of success.
 7. The Secretary of Defense and the President both
 seemed to expect a long war.

 8. The Intelligence Community predicted that the
 communists would step up support for the VC
 but would not intervene .

 9. Non-official reaction ran the gamut from right
 to left.

VI . NSAM 328............................ ~ . ..'. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 124

 .'

 ' 40 ". TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By : NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET -Sensitive

 PHASE I IN THE BUILD-UP OF U. S. FORCES, THE DEBATE

 MARCH - JULy 1965

1. The Situation, Spring and Early Summer, 1965

 Vietnam in February, 1965, saw a brief flurry of enemy activity and
the departure of the volatile General Nguyen Khanh as a result of ~Qother
coup. The installation of Phan Huy Quat as Prime Minister and Phan Khac
Suu as Chief of State was follOi'Ted by a period of ominous quiescence.
The drop in intensity of the fighting coincided ,'lith the dry season in the
southern parts of the country, with the beginning of the United States
Rolling Thunder program of continuous air strikes · against North Vietnam,
and vdth the arrival of the first U.S. ground combat troops committed to
Asian soil since Korea.

 A. The Political Situation

 Despite its rather inauspicious beginning in February, the govern-
ment had by early April convinced the CIA that for the first time the pro-
gressive deterioration in the South Vietnamese political situation had come
to a halt. l/ All the disruptive elements in the Vietnamese body politic
remained, but Quat displayed considerable talent in placating dissidents
and was setting about in his ovrn quiet manner to tidy up the chaotic Saigon
government. Quat was no charismatic leader. If anything, he ,vas the
opposite with his self-effacing, mild. manner. But he impressed Ambassador
Taylor with his businesslike approach, and the latter had high hopes for
Quat's success.

 By mid-May, to the dismay of the U.S. Mission, Quat's government
 began to manifest considerable strain. The Buddhists, a not always con-
 sistent pressure group, felt that Quat viaS too busy trying to please every-
 one instead of initiating a strong action program. The Catholics, on the
 other hand, were fearful of a BUddhist-dominated government and Saigon was
 full of rumors of the formation of Catholic paramilitary units. ~ Colonel
 Pham Ngoc Thao, a familiar plotter, "Tas said to have unsuccessfully attempted
. a coup on behalf of the Catholics around the 20th of May. 2/

 P.u~ apparently routine cabinet shuffle proposed by Premier Quat at
the end of May precipitated a crisis vihich led to the fall of his govern-
ment. Quat had intended to replace tr~ee cabinet ministers with souther-
ners; but the incumbents, i'Tith the support of Chief of State Suu, refused
to resign . All the dissident elements on the ~aigon political scene seized
on the incident as ~~ excuse to rain invectives on Quat and, finding Suu all
too ready to list en to their complaints, used him to effectively paralyze
the government .!!J The crisls came to a head on 9 June vThen Quat asked
the senior generals of the RVNAF to mediate the dispute beti·reen himself and
Suu. Instead, the generals forced Quat to resign and took over the govern-
ment themselves.

 41 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Following the military takeover, a National Leadership Committee
 was formed. On 21 June, Major General Nguyen Van Thieu was installed as
. Chief of state with Air Vice Marshall Nguyen Cao Ky as the new Prime
 Minister. The accession of Thieu-Ky ended for the moment any hopes of
 Ambassador Taylor and others for the establishment of effective civilian
 government in Vietnam. I

 The sole bright spot in an otherwise very gloomy situation was
the total absence of any violence associated with the military takeover.
The new leaders came to office with an announced determination to maintain
stability and to vigorously prosecute the war. 21
 Given the military
situation at that time, little credence could be lent to their pronounce-
ments.

 B. The Military Situation

 The Viet Cong were unusually inactive throughout March and Aprilo
There had been no major defeat of the enemy's forces and no signs of any
major shift in strategy on his parto Hence it was assumed that he was
merely pausing to regroup and to assess the effect of the changed American
participation in the war embodied in air strikes and in the Marines. §)

 During the spring months an emboldened ARVN displayed a new
offensive spirit and scored a few successes at the expense of an elusive
enemy. Most of the standard statistical indicators used by MACV to
measure ARVN effectiveness showed favorable trends. The rate of enemy to
friendly killed inclined in the government's favor, and for a brief but
encouraging spell the rate of weapons lost to the enemy compared with
weapons captured from him approached parity. 11 A major effort by the
GVN forces in March to open highway 19 from Qui Nhon in Binh Dinh Province
to Pleiku in the highlands met ,vi th surprisingly light enemy resistance.
Despite reports of heavy enemy force con~entration and an impending offen-
sive in that area, the road remained open. ~ Incremental gains allover
the country contributed to an air of euphoria manifested in the occasional
expression of cautious optimism which crept into weekly or monthly situation
reports, such as Ambassador Taylor's NODIS to the President (Saigon to
SecState 3359, 13 April 1965) quoted below: .

 '~e have just completed another quite favorable week in terms
 of losses inflicted upon the Viet Cong, 643 of whom were killed in
 action to 135 on the government side. Binh .Dinh Province which
 ",as considered to be in critical condition tyro months ago has now
 been restored to what might be called norrnalcy; that is to say,
 the fear of the loss of major t0 NnS appears to be past although
 1

 a large part of the province remains under Viet Cong controlo
 The success in Binh Dinh is attributable to three factors; a new
 and aggressive division commander, the commitment of five general
 reserve battalions to the province, and the improved· morale
 generated by the air actions in the North. .

 42 TOP SECRET :.. Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 ~e still have the feeling that the Viet Cong are regroup-
ing in the provinces in the northern half of the country and
are probably preparing some kind of offensive action. However,
there are a few indications that suggest that Viet Cong morale
may be dropping. They have given up four major arms caches
during the month yTi thout a sustained fight and the number of
defectors during the week (129 Viet Cong military personnel and
23 political cadre) is the highest defection figure since weekly
statistics w'ere initiated in January 1964.

 "On the manpO'tler side , unaudited figures indicate that
government military and paramilitary forces increased by some
10,000 during the month of March of whom two-thirds were ..
volunteers. This rate exceeds the target of ' S,OOO accessions
per month which we had considered the best the government could
do with a maximum effort.

 "Quat continued his program of provincial visits, making a
tour of the Delta area from which he returned full of new ideas
and bubbling with enthusiasm .. He was quite impressed with the
senior officers whom he met in the IV Corps and, as alYTays, en-
joyed talking to the country people yTho assembled to greet him.

 "His principal concern remains the unruly generals and the
 continued evidence of lack of unity in the senior officers corps.
 You have probably noted the case of insubordination in the Navy
 wherein several senior naval officers petitioned the removal of
 Admiral Cang, the Chief of Naval Operations. Quat is handling
 this matter routinely by a board of inquiry but is disturbed by
 this new' evidence of lack of discipline in the armed forces. In
 his campaign to bring the generals under some kind of control,
 he is about to take the step of abolishing the position of
. Commander-in-Chief, y[hile increasing the functions of the Minis-
 ter of National Defense. This is a move ' in the right direction
 but his troubles will not end as long as the military command
 structure is clouded by the presence of the Armed Forces Council.
 Quat is fully aware of this problem ~nd intends to resolve it~
 but slowly and cautiously.

 "Your John Hopkins speech and .the reply to the 17-nation
overture attracted much attention in Saigon ,where the reaction
was generally very favorable. As one might expect, the phrase
"uncon.ditio:-1al discussion!! brought forth considerable editorial
comment, but the conclusion was that the term suggested no real
difference in aims between the Vietnamese and the United States
Government. On tyro occ~sions, I have urged Quat to sit down with
Alex Johnson and me to discuss various alternative courses of
international political action YThich may requi1;-e consideration

 TOP. SECRET Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 during the coming weeks and months. He has not responded af-
 firmatively to this suggestion apparently because his own
 thoughts are not yet in order.

 "The mission has been very busy since my return with all
 agencies revie,ving their programs to see that they are aligned
 with the recent decisions taken in Washington. USOM Director
 Killen has discussed the 41 point non-military program. with Quat
 who has expressed particular interest in such projects as rural
 electrification, agricultural development, water supply and
 school construction. The Acting CAS Chief, Mr. Jorgensen, is
 gi~ing priority attention to the 12 outline projects which
 Mr. McCone tabled during our WaShington discussions and will
 soon have specific proposals for the Mission -Council."

and the following excerpts from CO~Jm~CV's Monthly Evaluations for Mar ch
and April 1965:

 "March, 1965 : Events in March were encouraging .•• RVNAF
 ground operations were highlighted by rene"Ted operational effort
 ••• VC activity was considerably below the norm of the preceding
 six months and indications were that the enemy was engaged in the
 re-supply and re-positioning of units possibly in preparation for
 a new offensive , probably in the II Corps area •.• In summary, March
 has given rise to some cautious optimism. The current government
 appears to be taking control of the situation and, if the present
 state of popular morale can be sustained and strengthened, the
 GVN, with continued U.S. support, should be able to counter future
 VC offenses successfully.

 "April, 1965: Fri endly forces retained the initiative during
 April and a review of events reinforces the feeling of optimism
 generated last month ..• In summary, current trends are highly en-
 couraging and the GVN may have actually turned the tide at long
 last. However, there are some disquieting factors which indicate
 a need to avoid overconfidence. A test of these trends should be
 forthcoming in the next few months if the VC launch their expected
 counter-offensive and the period may well be one of the most im-
 .portant of the war. II ffinphasis adde;Y'

 In view of the fact that nothing had basical·l y changed in the South,
it seems inconceiyable that anyone was really fooled by the dramatic drop
in enemy-initiatEd. activity . Most official obfoervers were hardheaded and
realistic following the l~~ding of the two Marine BDT's in March .
COMUSMACV certainly was in the long and detailed Commander's Estimate of
the Situation which he completed on 26 March and 'IoThich will be analyzed
at length later in this paper. In summary, General Westmoreland said in

 44 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the Estimate that the program of air activity against the North, while it
might ultimately succeed in causing the DRV to cease its support of the
war, would not in the short run have any major effect on the situation in
the South. The RVNAF, although at the moment performing fairly well,
would not be abl~ in the face of a VC summer offensive to hold in the
South long enough for the bombing to become effective. 21
 Realistic assessments of the situation in March notwithstanding,
some of the parlance in cables and messages betw'een Washington and Saigon
expressed conviction that the situation in Vietnam was well in hand, and
resisted radical changes or even urgent revision of ongoing U.S. programs.
Ambassador Taylor, for example, reacted strongly to proposals that U.S.
military-civil affairs personnel be introduced into the aid effort, and
told McGeorge Bundy that the GVN was winning the war without such help.
Taylor said:

 "I am greatly troubled by DOD 152339Z April 15 La cable ,-
 from McNaughton to Saigon containing a seven point program
 with 'highest authority' sancti.on~ First, it sho...rs no
 consideration for the fact that, as a result of decisions
 taken in ~lashington duri:t:lg my visit, this mission is charged
 with securing implementation by the two month old Quat govern-
 ment of a 21 point military program, a 41 point non-military
 program, a 16 point Rowan USIS program and a 12 point CIA
 program. Now this new cable opens up new' vistas of further
 points as if we can win here somehow on a point score. 'I)'e
 are going to stall the machine of government if we do not
 declare a moratorium on new programs for at least six months.

 "Next, it sho...rs a far greater willingness to get into the
 ground war than I had discerned in Washington during my recent
 trip. Although some additional U.S. forces should probably be
 introduced after ...re see how the Marines do in counterinsurgency
 operations, my own attitude is reflected in ElYIBTEL 3384, ...rhich
 I hope was called to the attention of the President.

 "My greatest concern arises over para 6 r~ftel which frankly
 bewilders me. il)'hat do the authors of this cable think the mission
 has been doing over the months and years? We have presumably the
 best qualified personnel the Washington agencies (state, AID, DOD,
 USIA, and CIA) can find 'Ivorking in the provinces seven days a week
 at precisely the tasks described in para 6. Is it proposed to
 withdraw these people and replace them by Army civil affairs types
 operating on the pattern of military occupation? If this is the
 thought, I would regard such a change in policy ...rhich will gain
 wide publicity, as disastrous in its likely efforts upon pacifi-
 cation in general and on US/GVN relations in particular.

 "Mac, can't we be better protected from our friends? I know
 that everyone wants to help, but there's such a thing as killing
 with kindness. In partic~ar, we ~ant to stay alive here because

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 we think we're winning -- and will continue to win unless helped
 to death." LEmphasis adde~7

 The conferees who met in Honolulu three days later reached a joint
 agreement which 'faS somewhat less optimistic than the Ambassador's pro-
 nouncement. Present in Honolulu were Secretary MCNamara, Assistant
 Secretaries William Bundy of State and JoP~ McNaughton of Defense,
 Ambassador Taylor, Generals Wheeler and Westmoreland, and Admiral Sharp. \

 Some of these men had helped produce the current optimism in situation
 reports and cables, and yet the concensus of their meeting was that the
 then present level of Viet Cong activity was nothing but the lull befOre
 the storm.

 The situation which presented itself to the Honolulu conferees was ~n
 many ways the whole Vietnam problem in microcosm. What was needed to gal-
 vanize everyone into action ,faS some sort of dramatic event within South
 Vietnam itself. Unfortunately, the very nature of the war precluded the '
 abrupt collapse of a front or the loss of large chunks of territory in
 lightning strokes by the enemy. The enemy in this war was spreading his
 control and influence slmdy and inexorably but "Tithout drama. The
 political infrastructure from which he derived his strength took years
 to create , and in most areas the expans ion of control "l'TaS hardly felt
 until it was a fait accompli. Only when he organized into units of bat-
 talion and regiment size, did the enemy vollmtarily lend some dramatic
 elements to the ,mr. Whenever these units appeared and engaged the RVNAF, .
 the government and its UoS. helpers had something they could handle.
 Unfortunately at the time of the April 1965 Honolulu Conference the Viet
 Cong Main Force units were underground and the conferees had little or
 no tangible threat to "Thich to react.

 There ,'Tere, hC)i,vever, plenty of indications in the early spring of 1965
 of what "las to come. There had been no major degradations in the Viet
 Cong strength nor in their order of battle. On the contrary, the enemy
 was recruiting apace and more than offsetting his losses. ~ From
 throughout the country came reports that Viet Cong troops and cadre were
 moving into Central Vietnam and into areas adjacent to the ring of pro-
 vinces comprising the "Hop Tac" area aroUnd Saigon. W
 Constant political turmoil involving many of the senior RVNAF officers
 and few significant victories combined to have a del~terious effect on the
 effectiveness of the GVN armed forces. The JCS on 20 March identified the
 degradation of RVNAF as a new phenomenQn after months of political insta-
 bility. They used the decline as justificat ion to argue for the deploy-
 ment of three divisions of reinforcements from the UoSo and Korea. ~

 Finally and most ominous of all, a CIA-DIA memorandum dated 21 April
 1965 'reflected the acceptance into the enemy order of battle of one regi-
 ment of the 325th PAvTI Division said to be located in Kontum Province. l1I .

• 46 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The presence of this regular North Vietnamese unit, Mhich had been first
 reported as early as February, was a sobering harbinger of things to come.

 The storm broke in earnest on 11 May when the Viet Cong attacked the
 capital of Phuoc Long Province, Song Be, using more than a regiment .of
 troops. The enemy overran the town and its MACV advisory compound, caus-
 ,
 ing heavy casualties among the U.S. and Vietnamese defenders. After holding
 the. tOvm for a day, the Viet Cong . .vi thdrew. Subsequent ARVN operations
 revealed that the enemy also had suffered heavily in the battle.

 Significantly, while the VietCong were preparing their attack on
 Song Be, the GVN was pushing to completion a nelV Special Forces camp at
 Dong Xoai not far away on the NW corner of War Zone C. 14/ That camp
 was opened in May, and in less than a month the epemy was to reveal his
 interest in it.

 Before May was over, however, the Viet Cong appeared again in strength,
 this time in Q.uang Ngai Province in the northern I Corps. Near the small
 outpost of Ba Gia a few kilometers west of Q.uang Ngai City, a battalion of
 the ARVN 51st Regiment was ambushed and overrun. Although the size of the
 enemy force was unknOlffi, the ARVN. commanders in the area rushed reinforce-
 ments out to the scene only to have them. ambushed in turn. The battle
 dragged on for several days and ended in total defeat for the ARV1r. Two
 battalions were completely decimated and, vThat VTaS ...'lOrse, the ARVN senior
 commanders on the scene had displayed tactical stupidity and cowardice in
 the face of large enemy forces. From Ba Gia came a sense of urgency, at
 least among some of the senior U.S. officers ,·rho had been witness to the
 battle. 15/ The very real possibility of ARVN collapse had been made
 manifest-.-

 On the 7th of-June, shortly after Ba Gia, General Westmoreland sent
 to CINCPAC this message (LIMDIS 19118, 070335Z Jun 65):

 "As indicated Ref A ffiOMUSMACV 041133Z NOTAY, a broad review
 of force requirements has been conducted in light of the changing
 situation in Southeast Asia and within RVN.

 "There are indications that the conflict in Southeast Asia
 is in the process of moving to a higher level. Some PAVN forces
 have entered SVN and more may well be on the way. Additional
 jet fighters and some jet light bombers have been deployed in
 the DRV.

 "Specif~cally, elements of the 325th ?AVN Division are in
 the northern zone of II Corps. It is quite possible that the
 major portion, if not all, of the Division is nO'IT deployed in
 the Kontum, Pleiku, PhuBon area. Elements of the 304th PAVN
 Division are suspected to be in the panhandle and, therefore,

... TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

capable of follo"ring the 325th. The recent heavy actions in
Phuoc Long and Quang Ngai, and VC initiatives in Pleiku,
Kontum, Phu Bon and Thua Thien are demonstrations of VC
strength and their apparent determination to employ their
forces aggressively. Recent events as we~l as captured VC
prisoners and documents suggest that a summer campaign is
now undenvay to destroy government forces and, concurrently,
to first isolate and then attack district and province towns.

 "So far, the VC have not employed their full capabilities
in this campaign. Only t"lO of the nine Viet Cong regiments
have been heavily engaged (one in Phuoc Long and one in Quang
Ngai), and probably only a similar proportion of their separate
battalions has been committed. In most engagements, VC Main
Force units have displayed improved training and discipline,
heavi er firepm·rer from the new family of weapons with which
most Main Force units have been equipped, and a "rillingness to
take heavy losses in order to achieve objectives.

 "In pressing their campaign, the Viet Cong are capable of
mounting regimental-size operations in all four ARVN Corps
areas, and at least battalion-sized attacks in virtually all
provinces. Known dispositions indicate major actions are
likely in the near future in the Binh Duong-Phuoc Thanh-Phuoc
Long area north of Saigon, in the Quang Ngai-Quang Tin area in
Central Vietnam, and in Kontum, Pleiku, Phu Bon and Binh Dinh
Provinces. Major attacks could occur also in other areas; the
Viet Cong have shown that they are capable of concentrating in
regimental strength with little or no warning. Whether or not
the 304th Div is in, or moving toward SVN, the DRV has a
:'doorstep I capability to reinforce the VC with sizable forces.

 "ARVN forces on the other hand are already experiencing
difficulty in coping with this increased VC capability. De-
sertion rates are inordinately high. Battle losses have been
higher than expected; in fact, four ARVN battalions have been
rendered ineffective by VC action in the I and II Corps zones.
Therefore, effective fighting strength of many infantry and
ranger battalions is unacceptably low. As a result, ARVN
troops are beginning to shoW' signs of reluctance to assume
the offensive and in some cases their steadfastness under
fire is coming into doubt; In order to bring existing bat-
talions up to acceptable battlefield strength, it will be
necess ary to declare at least a t~orary moratorium on the
activation of new battalions. Thus, the GVN/VC force ratios
upon which we based our estimate of the situation in March
have taken an adverse trend. You will recall that I recom-
mended the deployment of a U.S. - division i n II Corps to cover

 48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 the period of the RVNAF buildup and to "leight the force ratios
 in that important area. We assumed at that time that the ARVN
 battalions ,vould be brought to full strength by now and that
 the force buildup would proceed on schedule. Neither of these
 assumptions has materialized.

 "The problem of low battlefield strength in ARVN has forced
 us to plan the use of personnel now training in 11 new battalions
 as fillers for old battalions. In effect, these 11 battalions
 will be deferred and during the period from mid-July to early
 November no ne" ARVN battalions \-Till become available. Thus the'
 gap to be filled is both deeper and wider.

 "In surmnary, the force ratios continue to change in favor of
 the VC. I believe that the DRV wi ll commit whatever forces it
 deems necess ary to tip the balance and that the GVN cannot stand
 up successfully to this kind of pressure without reinforcement •
 .Even if DRV VC intentions are debatable, their capabilities must
 be acknowledged and faced. Additionally, it is prudent to con-
 sider possible enemy air action, leading to significant escala-
 tion and a broadening of the arena of conflict. We must be
 prepared to face such a contingency.

 "In order to cope ,vith the situation outlined above, I see
 no course of action open to us except to reinforce our efforts
 in SVN with additional U.S. or Third Country forces as rapidly
 as is practical during the critical w'eeks ahead. Additionally,
 studies must continue and plans developed to deploy even greater
 forces, if and' when required, to attain our objectives or counter
 enemy initiatives. Ground forces deployed to selected areas .
 along the coast and inland will be used both offensively and de-
 fensively. U.S. ground troops are gaining experience and thus
 far have performed well. Although they have not yet engaged the
 enemy in strength, I am convinced that U.S. troops with their
 energy, mobility, ~nd firepower can successfully take the fight
 to the VC. The basic purpose of the additional deployments
 recommended below is to give us a substantial and hard hitting
 LOffeE7sive capability on the ground to convince the VC that
 they cannot win .•• • "

 There ,,[ere some who thought COMUSMACV' s assessment of the situation
was a bit precipitous, 16/ but the dis.senters were effectively silenced
the follOiving week as the Viet Cong attacked the aforementioned Special
Forces camp and the adjoining district headquarters at Dong Xoai. ARVN
reinforcements "ere committed piecemeal to the fray and "ere devoured by
the enemy, "rho was on the scene with better ·than t,vo regiments of troops.
The battle, which lasted for five days and nearly saw the commitment of
the U.S. 173rd Airborne Brigade to bail the ARVN out, marked the bitterest
fighting of the war to date.

 TOP SECRET ~ Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive /
 Ir
 . f
 The GVN casualties of the second week in June were twice as high as
 8I1y previous week of the war. The VC casualties, which were reported to
 exceed the ARVN total of 1,672, were a mute testimony to the enemy's re-
 generative capability and to his willingness to pay a heavy price in .
 order to destroy the GVN's fighting power. ~ The success of his efforts
 so far was made explicit on the 26th of June when COMUSMACV rated 5 ARVN
 regiments and 9 separate battalions combat ineffective. At the end of May
 the .figure had been 2 regiments and 3 battalions. ~1§/
 ~
 By mid-June 1965, the Viet Cong summer offensive was in full stride.
 Shifting the emphasis a"ray from the areas of their early successes on the
 periphery of "Hop Tac" and in the southern portion of I Corps, they began
 the long-expected offensive in the highlands of II Corps. On the 25th of
 June the district headquarters at Tou Morong in K9ntum Province was in-
 vested and then taken by an enemy force said to be a PAVN regiment rein-
 forced with some Viet Cong troops. 19/ Other remote district headquarters
 came under enemy pressure in the enSUing ,.,reeks until by 7 July a total of
 six of them had been abandoned or overrun. The Viet Cong were systematically
 forcing the GVN to yield what little control it still exercised in rural
 areas outside the Mekong Delta.
 ,
 Summing up the situation at the end . of the \veek of 14 July, the CIA
 said: "The initiative and momentum of military operations continue in
 favor of the Viet Congo The impact of Viet Cong operations is being felt
 not only by the RVNAF but by the nation's internal economy as well.
 Nothing this ,-oJeek points to the RVN wresting the initiative from the VC."~
 ,!
 A major part of counterinsurgency thinking and planning in early 1965
 was based on the concept of force ratios. In order to defeat the insurgent,
 it was thought necessary to have a preponder~Dce of force in favor of the
 GVN of some"lhere around 10 to 1.:?JJ
 The actual ratio for that time period
 was considerably less than 10 to 1 and was inclining in favor of the insur-
 gents. In order to redress the situation, General Westmoreland advocated
 accelerating the build-up of the RVNAF.~ . To accomplish this, he said,
 measures to increase induction and to curtail the shocking rates of deser-
 tion would have to be found. Unfortunately, any ~uild-Up strategy was
 obviated by the events of late May-early June. General Westmoreland informed
 CINCPAC on 7 June that the RVNAF build-up ,vas to ~e suspended until November
 and that trainees would be used as fillers in heavily attrited units. 23/
 If force ratios still were of paramount importance, then reinforcementS-for
 the GVN side would have to come from other than domestic Vietnamese sources.

 The enemy side of the force ratio ·was open Jo
 question since histori-

 fOll0r:?];V
 cally Viet Cong 3trength tended to be understate d. The enemy order of
 battle as reported on 17 March 1965 was as

 I

 I
• 50 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Confirmed strength 37,000 Regular Troops
 100,000 Irregulars and Guerrillas (approx)

 5 Regimental Headquarters
 50 Battalion..;
 145 Separate Companies
 35 Separate Platoons

 All of these figures reflected sUbstantial increases over the previous
 year. In fact, the confirmed strength had risen no less than 3?f/o since
 1964. After the Viet Conghad demonstrated rather bluntly that the
 March 1965 statistics were a trifle conservative, the order of battle was
 revised and on 21 July appeared as follows: 25/

 Confirmed strength 53,000 Regular Troops
 100,000 Irregulars and Guerrillas (no change
 from previous figure which vTaS itself
 an estimate)

 10 Regional Headquarters
 72 Battalions
 192 Separate Companies
 101 Separate Platoons

 In light of subsequent information, even the above estimate, gloomy as it
 was, understated the enemy strength. Opposing the Viet Cong forces were
 the RVNAF Regular, Regional, and Popular Forces totaling some 570,000 men
 and boasting at best 133 infantry-type battalions. 26/ At a quick glance,
 the force ratios in July were seen to be about 3.8 to 1 in favor of the
 GVN in manpower (with the RVN Police and some paramilitary forces such as
 the Armed Combat youth not being counted and about 1.9 to 1 in favor of the
 GVN in maneuver battalions. Undoubtedly the force ratios as seen in mid-1965
 were far from optimum for theoretical counterinsurgency operations.

 C. Pacification

 The program to pacify, or extend government control over, the
 countryside never really recovered from the political turmoil of 1964 and
 early 1965. The 1965 master plan for "Rural Reconstruction" (one of many
 such euphemisms) was not approved by the RVNAF High Command until after
 the first quarter of the year: 27/ Situation repor"ts, both MACV and CIA,
\ described incremental plusses and minuses in vJhat was obviously overall a
I· stalled program.

 On 6 April, a MACV military spokesman gave the following ans'vers
 to questions from the press aft er a present~tion summing up the month of
 March 1965: ~

 •
 51 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 "Q. • . Have the figures on VC control of territory and popu-
 lation changed appreciably? A. The statistic that counts is
 people, and in the month of March the statistics that are here
 do not have percentiles. ·
 ,
 "Q.. Can you give us figures on the number of people
 brought under government control in January and in March -- or
 to the closest month? A. It's not significant. I'd say it was
 a slow gain basically in the Hop Tac area. Any place else, you've
 had a trade-off.

 "Q.. Would it be a fair assumption to say that, outside of
 Hop Tac the government held its own? A. In the overall, held
 its own.

 "Q.. Ther~ was no significant progress, then. .The government
 held its own? A. That's correct ..

 "Q.. It was a stalemate, then? A. No, I w-ou1dn't call it a
 stalemate . I don't consider the fact that you pacified, or
 asserted control over 20 additional hamlets which might house
 as many as six or seven thousand people a stalemate.

 "Q.. At the same time we lost... A. No, you misunderstand
 me ••• the losses and the gains were counter balanced outside the
 ."
 Hop Tac area. · I n th e Hop Tac area, there were galns.

CIA and MACV Situation Reports contained the following observations on
pacification:

CIA Monthly Report, 21 January 1965:

 "Pacification on ~ nationwide basis, has generally been stalled for
the past month. Although there are pacification plans in effect in all
provinces (except Con Son Island), there has been little significant
progress; in some areas there has been an appreciable deterioration of.
governmental control. Even though South Vietnamese officials report con-
tinuing progress in the high priority Hop Tac effort around Saigon, it
remains to be seen whether these are more than paper achievements. To
date there has been no major effort by the Viet Cong to strike at areas
which are now claimed as "secUre," and therefore the validity of govern-
ment claims remains untested. The Viet.Cong have increased their numbers
and the tempo of their operations in areas adjacent to Hop Tac and what
is apparently an attempt to draw off governmen-.; forces cOlIIDlitted to this
 .
major pacification effort."

CIA Monthly Report, 17 February 1965:

 "Nationwide , the pacification effort has barely moved ahead since
1 January; there has been a serious deterioration in some ~eas, mainly

 52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 the I and II Corps. The slowdow'n in the pace of pacification is due to
 several factors which include: the preoccupation of some senior com-
 manders with Saigon politics, the Tet holiday period, and VC strength,
 which in some areas has forced the GVN military forces into static or
 defensive roles. 1I

 MACV 'Monthly Evaluation Report for February 1965:

 "The only pacification progress during February was registered in
 Hop Tac and other areas of III Corps, while other sections of the country
 either held earlier gains or showed deterioration. Contributing factors
 were increased VC activity, especially in the I and II Corps and the
 administrative confusion associateu with the attempted coup of 19 February. '
 At month's end, the 1965 pacification plans w'ere still undergoing a revie'w',
 with the result that pacification funds had not yet been released to the
 provinces. A stopgap allocation of 3 million $VN per province ivas made by
 the New Rural Life Directorate to permit programs to continue pending
 release of regular funds ~ Even so, many province chiefs are reluctant to
 push forward without more specific authorization and direction from higher
 authorities. 1f

 MACV Monthly Evaluation Report for March ' 1965:

 "Although there was a lull in VC activity during the last half of the
 month, field commanders failed to capitalize on the situation and pursue
 pacification goals: vigorously. During the month the pacification generally
 experienced regression in I and II CTZ while parts of III and IV Corps
 recorded slow but steady progress.- In the Hop Tac area consistent gains
 were recorded throughout the month."

 CIA Weekly Report, 24 March 1965:

 "Pacification efforts during the past iveek remained stalled through-
 out most of the country. Some progress 'vas ' seen in II ,Corps in pacifica-
 tion efforts."

 MACV Monthly Evaluation for April 1965: ~

 "Despite improved psychological conditions and the continued lull in
 VC activity, there was little ,tangible evidence of progress in rural re-
 construction during the month .•. Overall, the slow but steady progress in
 III arid IV Corps was offset by losses in I and II Corps. Contributing
 factors to this standstill "ere the ' GVN delay in approving provincial
 budgets and a continued lack of aggressiveness in operations directly
 supporting rural reconstruction. There, was no appreciable increase in
 the number of refugees this month and ,relief mea3ures taken by the
 Minister of Social Welfare and the province chiefs appear to be progress-
 ing satisfactorily, particularly in Binh Dinh and Quang Ngai provinces."

•
 53 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The sole bright spot in all of this was the highly touted "Hop Tac" pro-
 gram which concentrated resources, h1.IDlan and material, on a fe1,v key
 provinces around the capital of Saigon. A lot of favorable things were
 being said about Hop Tac. McGeorge Bundy tolo. the President in an
 apparently pivotal memorand1.IDl dated 7 February 1965 that although
 American air power would have to be,used to buy time for us to break
 the Viet Cong hold on the countryside, the Hop Tac program offered
 hope for the future. ~ (See Section I.A. in the Study on The .
 Re-emphasis of Pacification.) During that 6th of April press conference,
 the MACV spokesman told the press that "Hop 'rac continues to move along
 a p 1 us curve ••• "30
 / .

 Even without the dogged optimism, it is difficult in the absence of
 hard data to accurately assess the real situation in the countryside in
 early 1965, or to tell how much of the Hop Tac program Ivas merely bluster
 and bravado. In regard to the latter, the Secretary of Defense sent to
 the Chairman of the JCS on 4 June 1965 the follovring query: "How did
 the Viet Cong mobilize a battalion to attack Binh Chanh district tOvm
 only 10 miles from S'aigon in the center of the Hop Tac area?" 31/
 Whatever the case, the pacification program was overtaken by events of
 May and June. Prior to this, the II Corps, including the coastal pro-
 vinces of Phu Yen and Binh Dinh and ~llof the highland provinces, was
 already in trouble. 32/

 D. Economic Situation

 The staple food of the Vietnamese is rice, and Vietnam has in
 time of peace traditionally been an exporter of that cownodity. The
 Viet Cong campaigned to control the countryside where the rice is grown
 and the routes of communication, land and water, over which it is moved
 to market. They 'vere so successful that by 1965 the GVN 'vas forced to
 contemplate massive imports of rice in order to feed the population and
 help stabilize prices. To illustrate the scope of the problem, the
 following statistics shoYT rice exports from the district of Thanh Phu to
 the capital of its province Kien Roa, one of the richest of the provinces
 in the Mekong Delta: 33/

 Metric tons of paddy rice exported from Thanh Phu to Kien Hoa
 1960-1965: .

 1960' 1,815 tons
 1961 2,609 tons
 1962 2,491 tons
 1963 2,451 tons
 196L~ 1,033 tons
 1965 745 tons

 By early 1965 the current crop of Delta rice had already been
 harvested, and it was obvious that th~ Viet Cong were not going to alloYT

..
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

it to reach the urban markets. By the end of 1965 the retail price
indices showed that for middle and ,-fOrking class families in Saigon
the cost of food was 41% higher than a year earlier. The general price
index, not including rent, for working class families was 33% higher
and for the midd'_e class, 3CP/o higher. J}}j Tb~ upsurge in overt enemy
military activity in May and June was ·accompanied by a major campaign
to interfere ,·rith GVN lines of communication. High,vay One and the rail-
way which parallel one another through the coastal provinces in I and II
Corps were both cut in numerous places. The road from Saigon to Da Lat~
over which moved much vegetable produce, was constantly harassed. By
the end of May, the tOvffi of Ben Cat in Binh Duong Province NW of Saigon
was isolated. 22./ In May the Viet Cong cut the Danhiem-to-Saigon pmver- I

line and effectively prevented its repair. l§/
 ...
 Through increased control in thE! agricultural producing areas,
very effective harassment of the primary means of communication within
the GVN, and selective application of military pressure, the Viet Cong
were waging a very successful campaign aimed at grinding the economy
of the GVN to a halt.

 There wasn't much the GVN could do about it. -The 11 battalions
of the Rv"NAF General Reserve were b.eing "whipsawed" back and forth react-
ing to enemy military activity. By June the Reserve ,vas already so
heavily committed that there was little additional combat power available
to the GVN ,vith which to influence a rapidly deteriorating situation,
military and economic. 37/

II. The Brief Tenure of the Strategy of Security

 A. Security as a Rationale

 The rationale that got two Marine BLT's into Da Nang in March
1965, which was publicly announced and which caused surprisingly little
outcry, was plausibly advanced on several subsequent occasions as
additional troops were deployed to various locations in Vietnam. Whether
or not it was publicly offered as a rationale, the strategy of deploying
troops for the security of bases was short-lived. The Marines hardly had
their feet dry when several. proposals were brought forward to get U.S.
troops actively engaged in the ground war. These proposals, the first of
which follo wed close on General Johnson's return from his Vietnam inspec-
tion trip of 5-12 March, J§/ were the center of much private debate in
the spring and e~ly summer of 1965 . . That debate went on largely behind
the scene while the American public was in igr.orance of the proceedings.
The strategy of security effectively became a dead letter on the first
of April, but the change in strategy was not revealed publicly until the
8th B.."'1d 9th of June.

 55 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 B. NSC Meetings of 1-2 April 1965

 On the 17th of March, General Westmoreland sought Ambas~ador
Taylor's concurrence in a Froposal to deploy an additional USMC BLT to
Phu Bai near Hue on the northern coast in I Ccrps. Westmoreland wanted
to cut down some of the density of aircraft at Da Nang by moving heli-
copters to the strip at Phu Bai. The Marine BLT was needed to protect
that strip. J2../ Taylor cabled to Hashington: (EMBTEL 3003, 18 Mar 65) .

 "General Hestmoreland has just sought my concurrence in
 his recommendation for the landing of the Third BDT of the
 9th MEB at Phu Bai for the purpose of protecting the 8th RRU
 and th~ air strip there. He intends to move helicopters from
 Da Nang to the strip 8...l1d thereby reduce field congestion "at
 Da Nang. Because of the military advantages of thus rounding
 out the MEB, I have no reluctance in agreeing to the merit
 of his recommendation which, of course, should receive the
 concurrence of the GVN after that of Hashington.

 "This proposal for introducing the BLT is a reriJ.inder of
 the strong likelihood of additional requests for increases
 in U.S. ground combat forces in SVN. Such requests may come
 from the U.S. side, from the GVN side or from both. All of
 us here are keenly aware of the GVN trained military manpower
 shortage which will exist throughout 1965 and which probably
 can be rectified only in part by an accelerated mobilization.
 We will soon have to decide whether to try to get by with
 inadequate indigenous forces or to supplement them with Third
 Country troops, largely if not exclusively U.S. This matter
 was discussed with General Johnson during his recent visit
 who no doubt has raised it follmving his return to Washing-
 ton. This message examines the pros and cons of such an
 action -- specifically defined as the introduction of a U.S.
 division (appropriately modified) into SVN.

 "The purpose of introducing of a division would be pri-
 marily to relieve the present shortage of ARVN units either
 by replacing ARVN in the defense of key installations or by
 engaging in active operations against the VC in conjunction
 with ARVN. Such a reinforcement 1-rould allow a strengthening
 of military efforts in the I and I I Corps areas where the
 situation is deteriorating and would give a boost to GVN
 morale, military and civilian. Likevlise, it should end any
 talk of a p,")ssible U.S. withd1;'a\'Ial and ccnvince Hanoi of the
 depth of our resolve to see this thing through to a success-
 :ful conclusion.

 "This statement of the purpose of introducing a U.S.
 division is, in effect, a tabluation of the arguments in
 favor of so doing. However , there are counter arguments

 56 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 on the other side of the case. The introduction of a U.S.
 division obviously increases U.S. involvement in the counter-
 insurgency, exposes greater forces and invites greater losses.
 It will raise sensitive command questions with our GVN a~lies
.and may encourage them to an attitude of "let the United
 States do it." It will increase our vulnerability to Com-
munist propaganda and Third Country criticism as we appear
 to assume the old French role of alien colonizer and con-
 queror. Finally, there is considerable doubt that the number
 of GVN forces which our action would relieve would have any
 great significance in reducing the manpow'er gap.

 "It is possible to reach a conclusion ''lith regard to the
overall merit of this action without first examining in .$ome
detail the possible missions which could be assigned a U.S.
division. There are t wo obvious possibilities; the first,
the assignment of the division to one or more of the provinces
of the high plateau where the climate is good, the terrain
relatively open, and the Montagnard population more readily
distinguishable from the alien Viet Congo Here, our forces
could utilize their mobility and firepower effectively and make
an important contribution in cutting off the growing infiltra-
tion into and through this area. For the most part, the
Montagnards are friendly to the U.S. and our forces would thus
be operating in a relatively friendly environment.

 "On the other hand, such a mission in the highlands would
place our forces in an area with highly exposed lines of com-
munication leading to the coast. Their location in this area
would create serious logistic problems because of the diffi-
culty of the movement of land transport through areas infested
by the Viet Congo There would be problems both of reinforce-
ment and of withdrawal because of this precariousness of land
communications. Finally, the GVN may question the introduc-
tion of sizeable U. S. forces into the Montagnard area w'here
we have often been accused of favoring the Montagnards over
the Vietnamese and of encouraging Montagnards separatism.

 "The other role which has been suggested for U.S. ground
forces is the occupation and defense of key enclaves along
the coast such as Quang Ngai, Qui Nhon, Tuy Hoa ~Dd Nha Trang.
Such a disposition would have the advantage of placing our
forces in areas of easy access and egress with minimum logis-
tic problems associated with supply and maintenance. The
presence of' our troops wo uld assure the defense of these im-
port ant key areas and would relieve some GVN forces for em-
ploymentelseTtThere . The troops would not be called upon to
engage in counterinsurgency operations except in their own
local defense and hence 'would be exposed to minimum losses.

 57 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND P roject Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 If~ theother hand, they would be engaged in a rather
inglorious static defensive mission unappealing to them and
unimpres sive in the eyes of the Vietnamese. Operating in
major ;population areas would maximize the points of contact
wi~h I' ietneme se ~~ ~ence maximize the possible points of
frlct on. The dlvlslon would be badly fragmented to the
extent that its command, control and supervision w2uld be
awkwar d.

 "the foregoing analysis leads me to the following tenta-
tive ~•onclusions. First, it is not desirable to introduce
a U.S % division into South Vietnam unless there are clear
and t angible advantages outweighing the numerous disadvan-
tages many of which have been noted above. One must make
a def~te determination of the numbers and , types of GVN
force s relieved by the introduction of the U.S. unit and
thus the effect of the increased U.S. presence in closing
the manpower gap of 1965. Obviously, our division would
make - orne contribution but it remains to be proved that it
will be sufficient to reverse the downward trend and give
such a lift to the GVN forces that they would perform better
by the stimulation of the U. S. presence rather than Ivorse in
a moo~ of relaxation at passing the Viet Cong burden to the
U.S. ~ .

 "If the evidence of the probable effectiveness of this
 '.
U.S. Fontribution is convincing, then the matter of mission
becomes the primary question. The inland mission in the
highlands is ~learly the more ambitious and, if well done,
will ~ake ~ greater contribution during the present critical
periqd. On the other hand, it is the more exposed and even
perm~s one to entertain the possibility of a kind of Dien
Bien fhu if the coastal provinces should collapse and our
forc~ were cut off from the coast except by air.

 , he coastal enclave mission is safer, simpler but less
impr sive and less productive than the inland mission. The
cont ~ast of the pros and cons of the two suggests the de-
Sir~ " ]ity of reexamining the question to see whether the
a~v tages of the inland disposition could not be combined
in s e way with the retention of a base coastal area, linked
with a po'sition inla..'1.d. In any case, considerable additional
stud is required before we are prepared to make a recommen-
dation eitber for the introduction of a division or for the
aSSi~ent of its mission. In the meantime, we should be
givi much thought both in South Vietnam and in Washington
as t the right course of action LItl
 and when this issue
becomes pressing -- as i t shortly will." .

 I 58 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

CINCPAC forwarded General Westmoreland's Phu Bai proposal to the JCS on
19 March and further recommended that the remainder of the 9th MEB, one
BLT plus headquarters elements, be landed at Da Nang within a month in
order to consolidate command and control and build up the defense of
that base. ~ The JCS recommended both mea8ures to the Secretary of
Defense on 25 March, ~ and they were discussed by the National
Security Council and Ambassador Taylor during the latter's visit to
the United States in late March-early April 1965. The President him-
self, in National Security Action Memorandum 328, approved the deploy-
ment of those two BLT's and at the same time, by changing the Marines'
mission to include offensive operations, he ended the strategy of
security. ~ (For full text of NSAM 328, see page 124.)

 NSAM 328 is a pivotal document. It marks the acceptance by
the President of the United States of the concept that U.S. troops
would engage in offensive ground operations against Asian insurgents.
It indicates as well the anxiety of the President -- his decision to
proceed very slowly and carefully so that U.S. policy should appear to
be wholly consistent. Thus the President only approved the deployment
of two Marine BLT' s, although he "TaS doubtless aware of , a JCS proposal
favored by the Secretary of Defense and forwarded by the Chiefs on
20 March, which called for the deployment of a three division force,
two U.S. and one Korean. ~ At the President's request, all NSC
members "lere admonished in NSAM 328 not to allow the release of any
premature publicity for the actions dealing with the Marines and their
mission. As a result, the change of mission was not publicized until
it crept out almost by accident in a State Department release on
8 June. ~
 Nor was the change of mission clearly defined in NSAM 328.
The Marine BLT's were to be permitted more active use "under conditions
to be established and approved by the Secretary of Defense in consulta-
tion with the Secretary of State " 45/ and, of course, their new mission
was subject to the approval of the~VN. During his return trip to
Saigon, Ambassador Taylor sent the following cable to the State Depart-
ment: !l§j

 "In Washington discussions of new Narine mission in Da Nang-
 Phu Bai area, it was my understanding that SecDef would provide
 text of revised mission. If no guidance beyond language of
 reftel LPeptel 2184 containing the summarized guidanc~ is to
 be provided by Washington, I propose to describe the new mis-
 sion to Quat as the use of Marines in a mobile counterinsurgency
 role in the vicinity of Da Nang for the 5~proved protection of
 that base and also in a strike role as 8 reserve in support of
 ARVN operations anywhere within fifty miles of the base. This
 latter employment '..;Quld follow acquisition of experience on
 local counterinsurgency' missions. 11

 59 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 It is pretty clear, then, that the President intended, after the early
 April NSC meetings, to cautiously and carefully experiment with U.S.
 forces in offensive roles. There was sober a'fareness that the North
 Vietnamese were not going to quit and that the U.S. was well on its
 way to being co:r:mti tted on the ground. The Rolling Thunder program,
 if it was going to bear any fruit at all, certainly was not going to
 do so in the next few months.

 The U.S. decision-makers really were on what Assistant Secre-
 tary of Defense McNaughton described as "the horns of a trilemma."
 While addreSSing General Johnson' s proposals· for action in South Vietnam,
 McNaughton jotted dmm some notes on 24 March >-Thich accurately described
 the predicament facing the U.S. Government. The question, according to
 McNaughton, was : "Can. the situation inside South Vietnam be bottomed out
 (a) without extreme measures against the DRV and (b) without deployment
 of large mnnbers of U. S. (and 3rd Country) combat troops inside SVN?"
 McNaughton's answer was "perhaps, but probably ill." Because that was
 the case, he >-Tent on, the U.S. was faced with the IItrilemma." Policy
 appeared to be drifting even though there was consensus that present
 action probably would not prevent collapse of the GVN. All three choices ·
 for remedial action so far presented had been rejected. These choices
 were (1) will-breaking strikes against the DRV which risked escalation
 flash and were thus too risky, (2) large U.S. troop input which raised
 the old spectre of an Asian land war and recalled memories of the French
 defeat, and (3) exit from the scene through negotiation 'fhich insured,
 because of the current situation, humiliation of the U.S.!iJJ The
 alternatives, as described above by Mr. McNaughton, ,vent into the
 National Security Council discussions which took place during the Am-
 bassador's visit. What came out of those discussions was NSAM 328 and
 the decision to proceed ahead very slowly with ground force involvement.

 Missing from NSAM 328 was the elucidation of a unified, coherent
 strategy. Ambassador Taylor, among others, had raised the question as to .
 whether or not Western troops could fight effectively in Vi etnam . No one
 could forget the French failure, and the Ambassador's reservations re-
 ceived due attention. Before devising a strategy for the use of U.S.
 ground forces, however, it was deemed necessary to experiment with small
 numbers of them to see how they would do. There ·\'Tas time to indulge the
 luxury of a leisurely build-up. The situation was bad, but currently the
 GVN was dOing a bit better, and nothing pointed to immediate collapse.

 The early April NSC meetings signalled the beginning of an
 enclave strategy. U.S. forces would operate within strictly limited
 boundaries (ori<sinally not to exceed 50 miles from base) and Ivould have
 their backs to the sea. No Dien Bien Phu's would be presented for the
 enemy to exploit as supplies and reinforcements could be brought in with
 ease over sea LaC's controlled entirely by the U.S. Navy. As a corollary,
 the U. S. forces could be ,vithdrawn with equal ease should the situation
 so dictate .

•
 60 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Although NSAM 328 only approved 2 Marine BLT's for deployment to
Vietnam, there was also included an 18-20,000 man increase in U.S. forces
in order to "fill out existing units and supply needed logistic personnel."
~ Just what the President's intent was in ~pproving that number of
personnel became the subject of some debate. The Secretary of Defense on
21 April told the President that 11,000 of the approved increase was to
augment various existing forces while a furth~r 7,000 were logistic troops
to support "previously approved forces If 0 ':!2./
 Accord ing to a memorandum
from McNaughton to Vance dated 5 May, the JCS misconstrued the add-ons to
mean logistic build-up for coastal enclaves and the possible later intro-
duction of two to three divisions. 2Q/ It isn't entirely clear from the
documents exactly "That the President did have in mind for the support
troop add-ons. What is clear, hm-rever, and was made explicit in a memo-
randum from the Secretary of Defense to the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of
Staff, on 5 April was that · the JCS were continuing to plan for the earliest,
possible introduction of two to three divisions into RVN. W The Aro.- , "
bassador indicated to the State Department in a cable on 12 April that he
too thought the 18-20,000 man increase was for something more than those
forces already approved 0Taylor said:

 "I have been follovTing with interest the logistic studies
 which are going on at PACOM and MACV in anticipation of the
 possible introduction of several divisions into SVN. Several
 comments occur to me which are passed on for vThat they are
 worth. There appears to be no question about the need for
 the 18,000-20,000 logistic build-Up (the Category A force)
 recommended by General Westmoreland. The introduction of
 this force has , been approved and should be implemented as
 rapidly as the elements can be moved and MACV can accept
 them. I am surprised to learn from ~~CV that May 1 is the
 earliest date for the arrival of the engineer element which
 paces the rate of arrival of the other components. If pos-
 sible, this date should be advanced.

 "The Category A package will provide support for about
 50,000 U.S. personnel in-country, i.e., the present strength
 plus the additional Marines nOvT landing in the Da Nang-Hue
 area and will permit some preliminary '\vork in anticipation of
 the arrival of additional U.S. forces. To make any signifi-
 cant progress toward the establishment of a logistic base to
 support additional forces, it will be necessary to bring in
 rapidly about 5,000 more engineers (above those in Category A).
 MACV estimates they could arrive about Au~st 1 (if the Cate-
 gory A engineers arrive on May 1). I would concur in the
 desirability of this reinforcement, feeling that these engi-
 neers can be very useful in SVN 'whether or not we ever intro-
 duce additional divisions."

Taylor went on in the same cable (as though he w'ere summing up the results
of the meetings which led to the NSAM):,

 61 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 "With regard to the imminence of the need for those
 divisions, I do not share the fear that the I and II Corps
 areas are about to fall apart which is expressed in some of.
 the traffic bearing on the logistic build-up. In any case,
 if a debacle is going to take place in tl.:e next few' months,
 the time factors developed in the logistic studies indicate
 that very little advance logistic preparation can be made in
 time. In such an unlikely contingency, U.S. combat reinforce-
 ments will have to deploy concurrently with their logistic
 units and build their base as they go.

 "While recognizing the importance of the current studies
 in developing the logistic facts of life as they bear on the
 reinforcement of SVN, I hope that they do not interfere With
 essential work in preparation for less ambitious but more
 probable developments. It was my understanding in Washington
 that, if the Marines demonstrate effectiveness in operating
 out of Da Nang in an offensive counterinsurgency role, other
 offensive enclaves may be established along the coast and
 garrisoned with brigade-sized contingents for employment
 similar to the Marines. General ifestmoreland is very anxious
 to establish such a force as soon as possible in the Bien
 Hoa-Vung Tau area. Qui Nhon is also well situated for similar
 purposes: I would recommend that logistic preparations be
 initiated at once to permit each of these two areas to receive
 a U.S. brigade. Whatever is done for this purpose will assist
 in accommodating any larger forces which may be subsequently .
 introduced. It is important that this lesser program be
 carried out rapidly enough to make a contribution to the situ-
 ation which is now unfolding. This requires rapid · action." ~

 C. The Additional Marines Land

 From the 11th through the 14th of April the two Marine BLT's .
approved by the President in NSAN 328 ,rere deployed to Hue/Phu Bai and
Da Nang. Their landing brought the total number of U.S. maneuver
battalions in South Vietnam to four, all Marines. Although security
was no longer the only authorized mission for these units, it certainly
was their primary mission. The Marines set about consolidating and
developing their two coastal base areas, and, although they pushed their
patrol perimeters out beyond their tactical wire and thereby conducted
active rather than passive defense, they did not engage in any offensive
operations in support of ARVN for the next few months. (Major General
"Rip" Collins, CG III HAF, ,,,as on the s.::ene w··J .ile ARVN ",as being beaten
at Ba Gia at the end of May, and his Marine troops were almost committed
to that fight). 53/

 D. Westmoreland Tried to Slide the 173rd in for Security

 As a kind of postscript to the strategy of security, it was used
by General Westmoreland as justificatio? for an attempt to get some Army

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

ground troops on the stage in early April. Westmoreland had recommended
in March that a separate Army Brigade (possibly the l73rd) be deployed to
the Bien Hoa/Vung Tau areas "in order to secure vital U.S. installations."
That recommendation accompanied Westmoreland's request for up to"two
divisions of for:::es and was contained in his "Commander's Estimate of the
Situation," which will be considered later in some detail. On the2!./
llth of April, Westmoreland cabled CINCPAC that he understood from news
of the Taylor meetings in Washington that the requested divisions of
forces 'tTere not immediately in the offing. Nevertheless, Westmoreland
wanted a brigade in the Bien Hoa-Vung Tau area because "it was as neces-
sary from a purely military standpoint as the deployments in the Da Nang-
Phu Bai area which have already ,von acceptance." (Security of Bien Hoa/
Vung Tau was not all COMUSMACV had in mind, hO>vever, for the same message
mentioned the need to offset a Viet Cong threat embodied in two regiments
and two separate battalions perched on the eastern flank of III Corps.
He also wanted a light reserve force which cOuld.be airlifted to the
Central Highlands in case of emergency.) 55/

 The l73rd, a two-battalion airborne brigade, "ras then located
in Okinawa. It constituted CINCPAC' s airmobile reserve,; When an
earlier attempt had been made to deploy the l73rd to Da Nang in place of
the Marines, CINCPAC had stringently opposed the removal of his only
quick-reaction force. 56/

 What followed General Westmoreland's request of 11 April, a re-
quest that Ambassador Taylor "had noted," was a rapid-fire series of
cables, proposals, and false starts which, if hothing else, indicated
that WaShington was 'tTell ahead of Saigon in its planning and in its
anxiety. The first event in the chain was a planning conference held
in Honolulu 8-10 April and attended by representatives oJ PACOM and the
Joint Staff. The conferees recommended the deployment of the l73rd and,
in deference to CINCPAC's concern for his airmobile reserve, they also
recommended that the l73rd be replaced by another brigade from CONUS as
soon as practicable. 211 The JCS ordered on 14 April that the l73rd be
deployed temporarily to Bien Hoa/Vung Tau for security of air operations
and logistical bases and at the same time tasked CINCSTRIKE to provide a
brigade to replace the l73rd. 2§/

 The decision to deploy the l73rd apparently caught the Ambassador
flatfooted, for he had quite obviously not been privy to it. He cabled
the State Department on the 14th and said: 22/
 "I have just learned by the reference JCS message to CINCPAC
 that the im"nediate deployment of the l73rd Airborne Brigade to
 Bien Hoa-Vung Tau has apparently been approved. This comes as a
 complete surprise in vie\v of the understanding reached in Hash-
 ingtori that ,ve would experiment with the Marines in a counterin-
 surgency role before bringing in other U.S. contingents •.••.••••

 63 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 This decision seemed sound to me at the time and continues to
 appear so. I recommend that this deployment be held up until
 we can sort out all matters relating to it. 1I

Whatever l-las moti.vating those in Washington wto had decided to make this
deployment, the Ambassador held the trump card as he had to clear the
move with the GVN before the troops could come in. The Prime Minister
had not been told at this juncture about the proposed landing of more
U.S. troops, and Taylor informed his superiors on 17 April that he did
not intend to tell Quat without clearer guidance explaining Washington's
intentions. ~

 That Washington Vias determined, with the President's sanction, to
go beyond what had been agreed to and formalized in NSAM 328 was manifested
unmistakably in a cable sent under joint Defense/State auspices by Mr.
McNaughton to the Ambassador on 15 April. ~ That message, which will
be treated in detail in a later section, contained the following preamble:
"Highest authority believes the situation in South Vietnam has been de- -
teriorating and that, in addition to actions against the North, something
new must be added in the South to achieve victory. As steps to that end,
we believe the following actions should be undertaken .•• " The message
goes on to list seven specific actions including the deployment of "a
brigade force" to Bien Hoa/Vung Tau "to act as a security force for our
installations and also to participate in counterinsurgency combat opera-
tions" · according to plans to be prepared by General Westmoreland.

 The documents do not reveal just exactly when Presidential .
sanction was obtained for the expanded scope of the above proposals. It
is possible that the Ambassador may have caught the Defense Department
and the JCS in a little cart-before-the-horsemanship. The day following
the order from the JCS to deploy the 173rd and the Ambassador's reclama
thereto, the JCS submitted a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense in
which they addressed the Ambassador's objection to the deployment and
offered their own position, which was that "the U.S. had need of the
173rd in Bien Hoa/Vung Tau to insure the security of air operations and
logistics bases as had been recommended by COMUSMACV and byCINCPAC in
CrnCPAC to JCS DTG 132235Z April 1965." The 173rd was also needed, they
said, for subsequent phasing into counterinsurgency operations. 62/
Whether or not the JCS v/Tote that memorandum with red faces, the Secretary
of Defense dates approval for final deployment of the 173rd as of the 30th
of April, vThich is considerably later. 63/ Even when the 173rd Ivas
finally ordered to deploy, it went on a~emporary duty basis. It remained
in that anamolo~s st atus well into the summer of 1965, expecting any day
to be recalled +,0 OkinavTa and replaced ')Y another unit. The troops con-
tinued to dra1,'T TDY pay, and their dependents remained at the permanent
base on Okinm.:r a inste ad of returning to the U.S. 64/

 With the l73rd successfully held in abeyance, the principals took
that issue, along with the seven points of the 15 April cable, to Honolulu,
where a conference convened on 20 April and structured the outlines of the
ever popular enclave strategy ••

 64 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 E. Security was the Primary Mission for Most of the Phase I Units

 The security of U. S. base s in mainland Southeast As ia may well
 have been dead as a basis for a strategy, but the bases nonetheless
 needed to be secured. The security rationale was consistently offered,
 along with other reasons, to justify the further deployment of ground
 combat units. In fact, looking back on the force deployments which
 were the main subject of this paper, the JCS in November 1965 stated
 that 21 of the original 44 "Phase I" U.S./3rd Country battalions, whose
 deployment to Vietnam vlaS accomplished in the latter half of 1965, were
 committed to base and installation security. ~

•
 TOP SECRET - Sensit~ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

III. The Strategy of Experimentation -- Enclave Strategy

 A. Geo'graphy

 The geography of Vietnam lends itself to enclave thinking --
that is, to operations based on coastal cities and ,-lith restricted
extension of lines of communication inland. The central portion of
Vietnam, encompassing the I and II Corps Tactical Zones and a portion
of the III Corps, is long and narrow. The area near the coast is for
the most part fairly flat and hospitable and contains the bulk of the
population. The interior is mountainous and is sparsely populated
throughout. In some places the mountains come right down to the coast,
but the coastal plain is well defined for most of the length of Central
Vietnam. Scattered along this coast are the mouths of numerous streams,
each with a small delta which serves as an area for rice production and
concentration of population, and as a focus for commercial activity.

 Several cities, such as Da Nang, Qui Nhon, and Nha Trang, are
located contiguous with the coastal population and have good deep water
anchorages for ocean-going maritime activity. All three of these cities
were, in early 1965, likely candidates for bases in an enclave strategy.
There were other areas along the coast 1~hich did not have deep water
anchorages but which 'YTere, nevertheless, readily accessible for amphib-
ious resupply from the sea. Chu Lai, little more then a sandy hamlet,
and Phu Bai fell into this category and ,,,ere very much a part of enclave
thinking.

 In between the centr al coast and the Mekong Delta -- which
itself offered no good coastal access and egress fu~d hence was never a
part of any enclave strategy -- was the port of Vung Tau. Located at
the end of the Cap St. Jacques peninsula and easily defended, Vung Tau
was the logical alternative to the port of Saigon, access to which
required a risky trip up the Saigon River from a point not far from
Vung Tau. Vung Tau could be called the southern limit of a chain of
coastal enclaves beginning with Hue/Phu Bai in I Corps.

 B. Development of the Strategy

 General Johnson, Chief of Staff of the Army, brought back from
his March 1965 inspection trip to Vietnam the germ 6f an idea to estab-
lish U.S. ground forces in coastal enclaves. The idea is included in
one of t iVO alternatives proposed by Johnson for the deployment of a
UoS. division t( Vietnam to supplant ARVN u..l1.i.. ·. s i n security missions and
free them for offensive operations against the Viet Congo One alterna-
tive proposed sending the division to secure bases at Bien Hoa/Ton Son
Nhut (near Saigon), Qui Nhon and Nha Trang (both coastal cities), and

 66 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Pleiku (in the highlands). The other alternative proposed the deploy-
 ment of a division to the highland provinces of Kontmn, Pleiku, and
 Darlac. 66/ Significantly, the coastal city deployment and the second
 alternative were the two principal contenders for the location of the
 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile) debated later in the year. The second
 alternative was the one favored by both Johnson and JCS Chairman Wheeler.~

 By far the most dogged protagonist of the enclave strategy was
 Ambassador Taylor. He was consistent in his opposition to the initial
 involvement of U•.S. forces in ground combat . As he saw his position
 being eroded on that question, it would seem natural for him to have
 fallen back in an only slightly less conservative posture. On- 18 March
 1965, in a cable already quoted in its entirety in Section II, Taylor
 brought up the question of the deployment of a U.S. division and presented
 the highland and coastal enclave alternatives. While not backing either
 alternative at that juncture, he did say that ITthe coastal enclave mis-
 sion is safer, simpler but less productive than the inland mission. IT In
 regard to the latter, he said: ITThe inland mission in the highlands is
 clearly the more ambitious and, if "lell done, will make a greater contri-
 bution during the present critical period. On the other hand, it is the
 more exposed and even permits one to entertain the possibility of a kind
 of Dien Bien Phu if the coastal provinces should collapse and our forces
 were cut off from the coast except by air. 1T 68/

 The Ambassador received no response from Washington to the
 cable quoted above. He sent another one on the 27th of March in which
 he reminded Washington that it was high time to make some decisions con-
 cerning U.S. strategy in Vietnam. According to Taylor, there were three
 choice s: (1) to carryon with the present level of commitment and hope
 that Rolling Thunder would cause the DRV to cease its support, (2) to
 try and reverse the trend at least in a few key areas, and (3) to try
 and win as quickly as possible. If U.S. forces were to come, Taylor
 offered three alternatives for their mission : (1) defensive or offen-
 sive enclave, (2) territorial clear and hold, and (3) general reserve.
 For himself, Taylor preferred a combination of the offensive enclave
 plus reserve in case of an emergency. 69/ This was essentially the
 position that he carried into the NSC meetings in ~lashington of 1-2 April
 1965.

 Ambassador Taylor met with Secretary McNamara and the JCS in
 Washington just prior to the NSC meetings . He was shown the JCS's plan
 to introduce three divisions of U.S. and Kore an troops into Vietnam for
 combat operations against the Viet Congo That plan, which Taylor was
 inclined to oppose but which had the qualified support of McN amara, "\-las
 undoubtedly also a focus of discussion within the NSC . 121
 NSAM 328, the product of the NSC meetings of 1-2 April 1965,
 had it s primary focus on air action against the DRV and Laos. In

•
 67 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

r~gard to that air activity the text of the NSAM said this:

 IfSubject to continuing review, the President approved
 the following general framework of continuing action against
 North Vietnam and Laos:

 IfWe should continue roughly the present slowly ascending

 tempo of ROLLING THUNDER operations, being prepared to add
 strikes in response to a higher rate of VC operations, or
 conceivably to slm[ the pace in the unlikely event VC slacked
 off sharply.for what appeared to be more than a temporary
 operational lull.

 If The target systems should continue to avoid the effective

 GCI range of MIGs. We should continue to vary the types of
 targets, stepping up attacks on lines of communication in the
 near future, and possibly moving in a few weeks to attacks on
 the rail lines north and northeast of Hanoi. If

And, also:

 IfAir operation in Laos, particularJy route blocking opera-

 tions in the Panhandle area, should be stepped up to the maximum
 remunerative rate. 1I

 Iri regard to action on the ground, N~l 328 said in relation
to force level increases:

 If The President approved an 18-20,000 man increase in U.S.

 military support forces to fill out existing units and supply
 needed logistic personnel.

 If The President approved the deployment of two additional

 Marine Battalions and one Marine Air Squadron and associated
 headquarters and support elements. II

And, also:

 .The President approved the urgent exploration, with the
 If

 Korean, Australian, and New Zealand Governments, of the possi-
 bility of rapid deployment of significant combat elements from
 their armed forces in parallel with the additional Marine
 deployment approved ...• 11

 NSM4 328 sanctioned a change in mission for U.S. ground forces
in Vietnam, but it did so in very cautious language:

 68 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 "The President approved a change of mission for all
 Marine battalions deployed to Vietnam to permit their more
 active use :mder conditions to be established and approved
 by the Secretary of Defense in consultation with the Secre-
 tary of State." III

This language may indicate that the President wanted to experiment very
carefully with a small amount of force before deciding whether or not
to accept any kind of ground war commitment. Implicit in the size of
that force and- in its location was the option to ~uickly evacuate it,
should the U.S. so desire.

 It appears that the Ambassador interpreted the NSAM change of
mission as approval of his 27 March recommendation. He cabled Washington
on the 4th of April that he would approach Quat with a proposal that the
Marines be permitted to conduct mobile operations within their TAOR1s
and that they be used by the RVNAF as a reserve for operations up to
50 miles from their bases. ~ The Vietnamese Prime Minister ac~uiesced
in the deployment of the two Marine BLT1s plus one Tactical Fighter
S~uadron (F4) on the 6th of April and in the change in mission on the
8th. 73/

 Taylor was at this juncture ~uite prepared to settle into a
period of careful experimentation with the level of combat power fixed
at four battalions. He said in a message dated 17 April that he had
about 60 days in mind as the appropriate period for the experiment, 74/
and he indicated he was chagrined by some apparent anxiety in Washington
to move considerably faster. In a message also dated 17' April he ~ues­
tioned the Washington panic manifested in a whole panoply of "hasty and
ill-conceived ll proposals for the deployment of more forces. In another
message he again cautioned against precipitous action and offered the .
palliative that "things weren1t going so badlyll out there. 75/

 Four Marine battalions were enough for experimentation, but not
so large as to alarm the xenophobic Vietnamese. In fact, the Arobassador1s
sensitivity to the proclivities of the Vietnamese Prime Minister on the
~uestion of foreign troops helps explain the Embassy1s footdragging during
this critical period of U.S . build-up debate. ThUS, the Ambassador was
surprised to discover that the Harines had come ashore with tanks, self-
propelled artillery, and various other items of weighty e~uipment not
II appropriate for counterinsurgency operations. 11 'J!d That e~uipment,
bland JCS explanc:.tions mentioning contine>;ency .;>lans and full TOE prudence
notwithstanding, 77/ implied a permanence not communicated to Quat
when clearance for-their entry had been sought. Similarly, the decision
to deploy the 173rd, had it been executed, would have placed Taylor in an
exceedingly embarrassing position as he had not mentioned it to the GVN.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 From analysis of the cable traffic of early April, it appears
that Taylor was the only major figure opposed to further expansion of
the U.S. combat role beyond what was agreed at the NBC meetings in
Washington. His defense was tenacious, but as proposals from Washington
got progressivel~r more radical, his patience began to wear thin. Then
Taylor communicated his ire to McGeorge Bundy in a message quoted in
full in Section T of this paper and in which he maintained that Quat's
government had quite enough to do without the addition of more U.S.
programs or more U.S. forces. 78/ The chorus of suggestions and programs
from Washington reached a crescendo with the joint State/Defense message
of 18 April which, with the blessing of Ifhighest authoritylf in Washington,
 lf
proposed the following measures be considered to add Ifsomething new to
the equation: 79/

 (1) Experimental encadrement of U.S '. troops into RVNAF -
either through the assignment of 50 U.S. soldiers to each of 10 ARVN
battalions or through the Ifbrigading lf of ARVN and US battalions for
operations;

 (2) The introduction of a brigade force into Bien Hoa/
Vung Tau for security of installations and later expansion into counter-
insurgency operations under conditions to be spelled out by General
Westmoreland;

 (3) The introduction of several battalions into coastal
enclaves such as Qui Nhon in accordance with proposals to be submitted
by the Ambassador and COMUSMACV. The purpose was If to further experi-
ment with US forces in the counterinsurgency rOle lf ; (SiC! The phrase
1ft 0 further experiment If is misleading since up to the date of this
cable, there had been no U.S. counterinsurgency operations worthy of
the name.) .

 (4) Expansion of Vietnamese recruiting, using proven U.S.
techniques j

 (5) Expansion of the MEDCAP program using mobile dispen-
saries under guidelines to be worked out behleen COMUSMACV and the
Surgeon General, U.S. Army;

 (6) Experimentation in two or three provinces with a team
of U.S. civil affairs personnel introduced into provincial government
structure under conditions to be worked out betHeen MG Peers and General
Westmore land;

 (7) The supplement of Imr RVNAF pay through a program to
p~oyide some of the troops with a food ration. General Timmes would be
seeing CO~ruSMACV to work out ,the details.

 70 TOP SECRET - Sensit~ve
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 303
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Although this cable was well-meaning in its intent, the Am-
bassador was amazed by its naivete and justifiably chagrined by its
impertinence. The following cable L!eproduced at pages 72 through 767
one of many Taylor sent to Washington during the tumultuous days jus~
prior to the April Honolul~ Conference, is worth quoting in its en-
tirety as it contains the kind of guidance the Ambassador felt he should
have been receiving from Washington~ §S})

 Thus was the Ambassador propelled into the conference of
20 April 1965, only one step ahead of the Washington juggernaut, which
was itself fueled by encouragement from Westmore land in Saigon. Taylor
was not opposed to the U.S. build-up per se, but rather was concerned
to move slowly ylith combat troop deployments, which tended to cause
alarm in an already delicate situation, while proceeding quietly with
the prerequisite development of logist ic bases to' support later troop
introduction. He was overtaken at Honolulu.

 Honolulu brought the Saigon and WaShington decision makers
together to sanctify an expanded enclave strategy. In the preliminary
discussions they agreed that: 81/

 (1) The DRV ,vas not likely to quit within the next six
months; and in any case, they were more likely to give up because of
VC failuroe in the South than because of bomb-induced IIpain ll in the
North. It could take up to t wo years to demonstrate VC failure.

 (2) The level of air activity through Rolling Thunder was
about right. The U.S. did not, in Ambassador Taylor's words, want lito
kill the hostage." Therefore, Hanoi and environs remained on the re-
stricted list. It was recognized that air activity would not do the
job alone.

 (3) Progress in the South would be sloYl, and great care
should be taken to avoid dramatic defeat. The current lull in Viet
Cong activity was merely the quiet before a storm.

 (4) The victory strategy was to "break the will of the
DRV/VC by denying them victory. " Impotence would lead eventually to
a political solution.

 Going into the Honolulu Conference the lev~l of approved U.S.
forces for Vietnam was 40,200. In-country strength of 33,500 showed
that not all the approved forces had closed. To accomplish the "Victory
strategy" descr:ibed above , the conferees agret:d that the following
additional U.S. deployments should be made:

 A. United States

 (1) An Army Brigade (3 Bns) to Bien Hoa - Vung Tau
 to close by 1 May

 71 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 tt"T!C : !.~_ L ~.!.m;r{ C': :.E:I.:,/iil C~:m:R
 --.-- -. - . ,.;- . - r,;i:S3 A::'E C£:ln:I\
". ! ' -'. SECTION OF' 9 Lt 9 h

 C.4.A !_J I'- .,....J .)')33-'I
 -~~~~~~ 7 /CS 35 2/R-2 .:/S:. ~" iiJ:(SJ~ .,
 Fe;:; F ' C::iHC ..
 -C' -
 ~': i f
 r' '. t l ,..... 1='
 · t"", . . . o
 .
 00 RUE1<DA ,,' .
 DE RUEHCR 14784 17/8935Z
 o 17g853Z ZEA 4 i 711] 24 Z
 Ft1 S EC5TA r E (-JASHD C
 INFO RUr:?~];)/('.:I1 IT£ HOUSE ATH! 11R BUNDY
 RU.o< DA ID OD
 RUE? lA/C 1A
 O_._17J'Il 'ZZ_ . ZL~ _. - . _~_
 \it1 A1:LEtt8 ;;SSY_ SA I GO;~ "
 TO SEC 5T AT E ~-lAS HD C I l'lt'! ED IAT I \34 g_~\
 STATE GRNC
 BT
 T ' O P SEC RET APRIL 17 SEONE OFTI'IO

 £1015
 . THIS l'lES3AGE u:m Ern A;\ ES TO S Ui1HP.Jn ZE INSTRUCT IO NS (·nn CE I HA;.! E
 RECEIVED CiJr:R THI LAST TEN DAYS \':ITH REGARD TO THE INTRODUCTI ~Z' lJ ::;f
 , ~~:HIRD comrmy
 COI·lBAT FORCES AND , TO · DISCUSS THE ?REFERRED I'JAY OF
 :":~. ~ESENT HiG THE SUBJECT TO THE GVN .
 ".
 AS THE: RESU::'T OF THE t-iEETING OF TEE PRESIDENT AND HIS ADVIS0;~S ON
 'APRIL 1 AND THE USC l-lEETING ON THE FOLLOi.JING DAY I LEFT ~';J'; S~ :~hI G'~' ,-: \:
 AND RETUFn:ED TO $,t..IGON t'!:!:TH THE UNDERSTAlmING T}1,h THe 2EINF02CE~'IE'-:';i
 OF TEE t1AR]:N2S ALREADY ASHORE BY Teo ADDITIONAL BLT'S AND A r·-4
 SQUADRCN AND THE PROGRESSIiJE INTRODUCTION OF lIA U? NPP? S;JP?ORT
 FORCES (,JERE APPROVED BYT THAT DECISION ON THE SEVE'RAL ?RG?OS ,lL S FJR
 BRINGH7G HI ['lORE us em'lBAT FORCES AND THEIR ?OSSI3LE l'iODE:S 0;: E':?L OY-
 (lENT (-:1:5 OITHHELD IN AN OFFENSIVE COUNTERI NS1J2GENCY ROLF:. S'i'ATE ('i AS
 TO EXPL ~\R ;;': vi:i:TH THE KOREA N , AUSTRALIAN AND NIP ZEAL.AND GO \}'TS :H~ ?OS-
 SIi3ILITY OF RAPID DEPLOY1'ENT OF SIGNIFICA NT COHBAT ELEl'I ENTS HI P;:'· ~;.L·~
..... - - ' - - - -- - _. ._. . . - .
........... ;:;\ "r; __ • ",::; .,;
 . --,_._--_. - --- .. - - - - - - -- - _. - ----;--;;-,_ ..
 ,..-_. - .. -

 INFO: CJCS:~'i(1; -2) DJS-l(3) SJCS-1(4) J3-1(5) J5-1(6) S.4CS~~ :( n

 ADV OSO CJCS N~CC

 ..
 72
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 ."

 .-:jEeRET DEPARTl\lENT OF DEFENSE
,.. - \
 . ' ,/
 -

 LEL (HTH THE i'iARINE REINFORCt:l1ENT.
 ,- -
 SIN:::E ARRIVING HmIE, I HAVE RECEIVED THE FOLLOlHNG INSTRUCTIO~S AND
 HAVE TAKEN THE INDICATED ACTIONS HITH RESPECT TO THIRD COU~;:RY
 eOi'lBAT FORC ES.

 APRIL 6 AND 8. RECEIVED GVN CONCURRENC E TO INTRODUCTION OF THE
 i1ARINE REINFORCE-lINTS AND TO AN EXPANDED iHSSION FOR ALL f:lARIl'IZS
 IN DANANG-?HU BAI AREA. ,~ .
 1'( r' 'J

 .. A
 APRIL 89 RECEIVED DEf'TEL 2229 DIRECTING APPROACH TO GVN SUG-
 GESTING RE QUL3 T TO AUSTRALIAN GO\rr FOR AN INFANTRY BATT.h,ION FG~ USE
 IN SVN. l'l'HILE At']AITING A PROPITIOUS 1';Or-IENT TO RAISE THE HATTER, I
 R EC EIVED D£PT EL 2287 D12EC TIN G APPR OAC H BE D ELP.Y Jill UN! IL FURl HU~
 ORDERS. NOTEIt~G FU2THER HAS BEEN RECEIVED SIUCE.
 ,-l j(tt ': )
 r . .
 APRIL lL~. I LEA RNED BYJCS 0092)12 TO CI~CPAC OF APPARENT DECISIO N
 TO DEPLOY 1732D AIRBORNE BRIGADE H1i'IEDIATELY TO BIEN HOA-
 VUNG lAU a BY fj':BTEL 3373, DELAY IN THIS DEPLOYl1H;T t-lAS URGENTLY
 ;):RECONi"lENDED BUT NO REPLY HAS BEEN RECEIVED a HOt'JEV ER, P ':\F~A 2 OF
(iI'. I -noc ' 152339 APPARHiTLY NAI\E:S REFERENCE TO THIS PROJEC'l n! TE~ ~·l .s
 tm·IC!1 SUGGr.~ST THAT IS SO:·iETHING LESS THAN AS AN APPROVED nH'lETJiATE
 ,f:- ~T ION" IN VIn'] OF THE UNCERTAINTY OF ITS STATUS, I H.i\VE NOT
 '- 'OAC HE] THE t-I,t..TTER vlITH QUAT.

 APRIL 15. RECEIVED DEPTEL 2314 DIRECTHJG THAT E!8ASSY SAIG.ON
 DISCUSS iHTH GVN INTROD LiC TIOlJ OF ROI( REGHIHiTAL COi'13AT IE-An AND
 SUGGEST GVN REQUEST SuCH A FORCE ASAP .. BECAUSE OF QUAT IS ABS ~NCE
 FRO!'1 SAIGON~ I HAVE NOT BEEN ABLE TO RAISE nATT ER. AS l'iATTER OF
 FACT 1 IT SHOULD NOT BE RAISrJ) UNTli. ~-JE HAVE A CLEAR CONCEPT OF
 B'IPLuYI'lEN1. . , \
 . ·,1(.!f;'
 APRIL 16. I HAVE JUST SEEN STATE-DEFENSE ~IESSAGE DOD 15 2339~1-'
 CITED ABOVE \~HICH INDICATES A FAVORABLE .4TTITUDE TO\'·:ARD SEVERAL
 POSSIBLE USES OF US COHB ,C..T FCF~CES BEYOND THE NSC DE C ISliJ~'JS OF APRIL 2 ..
 I Ai'i TOLD TO DISCUSS THESE AND CERTAIN OTHE2 NON-t':ILITARY l'lA'iTE::(S
 VRGDlTLY tnTH QUAT. THE SU3STAHC E OF THIS CALBE t.JILL BE ADDRESSED IN
 A SEPARATE l'i ~SSAG:t::e I CAN NOT RAISE THESE t1ATTERS ~oJITH QUAT ~-;ITEOUT
 FURTHER GU:::D.:"NCE.

 PAGE 2 OF 3 . 19494

 73 -
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 . -' y •

 --"Er nr -' DEP.A.RTIVlENT OF DEFENSE
 r··0 '.... r\.!: t NATIC:iAL ;.::UT ;~y c:r,::.l"'l: ~ C~EER
 -1;iESS:'SE Ct.'1W~

FACED ~nTH THIS RAPIDLY CHANGING PICTURE OF t'JASHINGTON DESIRES AND
INTENTIONS lnTH REGARD TO THE INTRODUCT ION OF THIRD COU~l'RY (AS
WELL AS US) COt-lBAT FOR:ES, I BADLY NEED .A CLARIFICATION OF OUR PUR-
POSES ANl) OBJECTIVES. BEFORE I CAN PRESENT OUR CASE TO GVN, I HAVE
TO KNOH m-!AT THAT CAS E IS AND t':ttY. IT IS NOT GOIN G TO BE EASY TO
 GET ?LADY CONCURRENCE FOR THE LARGE SCALE INTRODUCTION OF FOREIGN
TROOPS UNLESS THE NEED IS CLEAR AND EXPLICIT.

 LET HE SUGGEST THE KIND OF INSTRUCT ION TO THE Al1B tVHICH IT t·jOULD
 BE 1'1OST EELPFUL TO RZCEIVE FOR USE IN PRESENTING TO GVN ~;JHAT I
 TAKE TO BE A NEVI POLICY OF THIF~D COUNTRY PARTICIPATION IN GROU},fD
 CQl'iBAT. .-

 QUOTE THE USG H,Q.,S COl'lPLE.'!'ED A THOROUGH REVInl OF THE SITUATION .;
 IN SVN BOTH IN ITS NATIONAL AND HiTERtJATIONAL ASPECTS Ai\fJ) HAS REACHED
 CERTAIN H1PORTANT CONCLUSIONS 0 IT FEELS THAT IN RECENT t'!EDCS THERE
 HAS BEEN A SOdE;'iHA T FAVORABLE CHM-IGE IN THE OVERALL SITUATION AS
 THE RESULT OF THE AIR ATTACKS ON D2~J. THE RELATIVILY SllALL aU?
 rWl-IEROUS SUCCESSES IN THE FIELD AGAIN5'!' THE VC AND THE ENCOU~AGING
. PROGRESS OF THE QUAT COVT. HOt'IEVER t IT IS BECGrHNG I NCREA SI NGLY
 ' ;=:' EAR THAT ~ IN ALL PROBABILITY, THL PRH1ARY JBJE:CT IVE OF TEE GVN
 ' ~ 'm THE USG OF CH.A)jGHI G THE OILL OF THE DR1J TO SUPPORT THE VC
 ,3Ul~GENCY CAN NOT BE ATTAINED IN AN ACCEPTABLE TINE FFiAI-lE BY
 THE METHODS PRESENTLY D-PLOYED. THE AIR CJl.l1PAIG1'! IN THE NORTH IIUST
 BE SUPPLS-1ENTED m: SIGNAL SUCCESSES AGAINST THE VC IN THE SOUGH
. BE.FORE t'IE CAN HOPE TO CREATE: THAT FRAt'IE OF 11IND IN HNWI mnCH
 tHLL. LEA.D TO THE DYCISIONS ~'JE SE El<~ TAYLOR a
 BT
 CF

 . ,
 PAGE 3 OF 3

 ::

 74 ... -
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 SEC 2 OF 19494

 .... -"..
 -
 '.
 ~. ')~
 . .,... --
 ~) '.; .-::'
 C 24 1 11 7 I JC S 35 5/R 2 : -"

 .. ". _ .. _ roo

 "oJ. .: .-:"'"..:.- ~::. ~

 EHX842 1:,\:<;: ';) ::::·(:C,·;
 00 RUEKDA
 HE RUEHeR 14788 17/J925Z
 o 172J 904 Z ZEA 4tt 10 ' 23Z ~
 . Flyl SECSTATE t'.JASHDC
 INFO R UE?I':\V /\':H IT E HOUS E ATTN t·jR BUf';l)Y
 RUEKDA/DOD
 RUE? lAIC IA
 o 1 7-2J 71 7 Z ZEA . - ""'-
 FH A:-1Et'iBASSY SAIGO ~f ~ fr~~~\,FJ:1.~SZ nDT R2Ul~ EO .
 TO SECSTATE ~'JASHDC Ii-E'iED IAlE ~ i-1;F ~(!.~ESS. \-32 iit~~i:6~R ~N
 ':J'-JI'! '.'~~:·Cf::!"\ ~ ~"';--L\' t"\ :,".J."":. •• :';""'-~
 STATE GRNC . ,.,., i\r~~.:1 .!..,. t J' h.cr • 'r ".~' j;.t;: ! ~ __

 BT
 TOP SEC RET AP R ILl 7 SIT t-,'o 0 FTt.;Q

 EXDIS
 QUOTE THE JCS H A~JE RE'1IE}iED THE t'(ILITARY R:::sOURCES \'JHICH IELL
 BE AVA ILAB~. E IN SVN 3Y THE El!D OF 19.$5 AND HAVE CO NC LUi) ED THA'l D/DJ
 .. :;~TH AN ATTAINi"ID!T OF THE HIGHEST FEASI3LE t-lOBILIZATIOI~ GOALS, ARiJN
 "(_lLL HAVE nrSUFFICJ:E:~T FO~CES TO Cp.RRY OUT THE KIND OF SU C: CFSSFTJL
. r ' lPfilGN AGAINST THF. '}C (-,lHICE IS CONSIDERED ESSDITIAL FOR THE
 . t-vKPOSES DISCUSSED ABOVE. I~' THE G~ OUHD \'!AP. IS NOT TO D:::f:..G INTO 19G6
 AND EllEN BE~OND, THEY CONSIDER IT HF:CESSAR Y TO REI1~FORCE GV~J GROUND
 FORCES tETE AbOUT 20 BATTALION EQUI \f)"LENT S IN ADDITION TO THE

 INFO .... CJCS-2(1-2) OJS-l(3) SJCS-l(4) J3-1(S) J5-1(6) SACSA-l(7)
 NfvlCC-l(8) SECOEF-5(9-13) ASO/ISA-l(14) DIA-l(15) CSA-l( 16)
 CNO - 1 ( 17) CSt, F - 1 ( 18 ) Ci~ C- 1 ( 19) F I L ~ - 1 (20) J RT / S

 ADV CJCS OSD NMCC

 PAGE OF 2

 .'

 75
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316_ By: NWD Date: 2011

 DEP ART::,lENT OF DEfENSE

 FORCES NOt~ BEING RECRUITED IN S VN. SINCE THESE REINFORCEMENTS CAN
 NOT BE RAISED BY THE (.;IjN, THEY I'lUST UIEVIT ABLY COl-IE FRO~'i THIRD
 CQUt\lJRy SOURCES~

 QUOTE THE USG P.CCEPTS THE VALIDITY OF THIS REASONING OF THE ' JCS
 AND OFFERS ITS ASSISTANCE TO THE GVt'J TO RAISE THESE ADDITIONAL
 FOR:ES FOR THE PU~POSE OF BRINGING THE VC INSURGENCY T AN fND IN
 THE SHORTEST POS:; I SL E THIE. \')E ARE PR EPAR ED TO BR INC IN ADD IT iON,qL
 US GROUND FORCES P20VIDED t-lE CAN CIT A REASONABLE DEGREE OF PARrIeI.-
 PATION FRm; OTEE~ THIRD COUNTRIES. IF THE GVN tELL r-IAKE URGENT REPRE-
 SENTATIO NS TO THE~'I.9 viE BELIEVE IT ENTIRELY POSSIBLE TO OBTAJN THE
. FQLLmHl~G CONT~I3UTIO N Sj KORE.A, ONE REGlt'IENTAL COH3AT TEAt-!; AUS-
 ,TRALIA, ONE IUFP.i'iTRY BATTALION; Nn'l ZEALAND ~ ONE BATTERY Ai'lD 9NE
 CONPANY OF TA ULS~ PI, ONE BATTALION& IF FORCES OF THE FOREGOING
 NAGNITtJDE ARE FOKTHCOtHNG, THE USG IS PREPARED TO PROVIDE THE
 REi'iAIN1JER OF THE COl-13AT REINFOI~CEl'IE!HS AS \'JELL AS THE NECESSARY
 LOGIST IC P ERS O>rNEi.. TO SUP PORT THE TH IRD COTjNl' RY CO NT I NGEJIT' S ~ ALSO IT
 tILL USE ITS GOOD OFFICES AS DESIRED IN ASSISTING THE GVN
 APP ROACH T0 THESE GOVTS.

;( ':;OTE YO U <THE A~lBASSADOR ) ~.;rLL SED, THE CONCU2RENCE OF THE GVN
 " 1 THE GOREGOING PROGRAt'1 : RECOG:'H ZING THAT A L.ARGE NUrBER OF
 ",-uESTIONS SUCH AS CO;'!l'1AND RELATIONSHIPS 3 CO f\!C E?TS OF EdPLOYt'1El-:l AND
 DIS?OSI'fIOr,r OF FORCES i"l UST BE \':ORI<ED OUT SU8SEQUEi·-:l LY. UNQUOTL
 AR~E~ WITH AN INSTRUCTION SUCH AS THE FOREGOING. I WOULD FEEL
 ADEQUATELY EQUIPPED TO INITIATE t'!Hfl.T ~'lAY BE A SE ,;'~P IJE2P,TE \'! I:'E
 THE: GV N. I NEED SOnETHING LIKE THIS BEFORE TAl<ING UP THE PEt\'DING
 TROOP UATTEI<S I'1ITH QUAT. TAYLO;(o
 BT .

 P~,GE 20F 2

." ... . \

 '.l..

 76
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 (2) 3 USMC BLT's and 3 Tactical Fighter Squadrons
 to Chu Lai by 5 May

 (3) An Army Brigade (3 Bns) to Qui Nhon-Nha Trang
 to close by 15 June

 (4) Augmentations of existing forces and added
 logistical support

 If approved, these recommended forces 'tTould have brought U. S. strength
 to a grand total of 13 maneuver battalions and 82,000 men.
 I
 .~
 The U.S. Government also should approach the respective foreign
 governments and request:

 B. Third Country

 (1) An Australian Army Battalion to Vung Tau to close
 by 21 May

 (2) A Korean Regimental Combat Team to Quang Ngai
 by 15 June

 If approved, these recommended forces would bring Third Cotmtry strength
 toa grand total of 4 maneuver battalions and 7,250 men.

 As an adjunct to the units above, the conferees mentioned, but
 did not recommend , the possible later deployment of:

 C. United States

 (1) An Army Airmobile Division (9 Bns)

 . (2) The remainder of the III MEF (2 Bns)

 (3) . An Army Corps Headquarters

 D. Third Country

 An ROK Division (-) consisting of 6 Battalions

 The posited future add-ons comprised a further 17 maneuver battalions,
 which, if added to the approved totals, would have brought US/Third
 Country combat capability in South Vietnam to 34 battalions.

 After they had dealt vlith the questions of troop deployments,
 the conferees then turned to the remaining points contained in the joint
 State/Defense 7-point program. It was decided to drop the idea of en-
 cadrement of U.S. forces in ARVN i n favor of emphasis on combined

•
 77 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

operations. Recruiting, it ,.;as agreed, was less a problem of organiza-
tion and method than it was a product of the limited manpower base and
competing agencies (including the Viet Cong). The plan to improve
MEDCAP 'was endorsed with enthusiasm, and it was agreed to ex:periment
with a IIsingle m8Jlagerl! concept in three ·pilot provinces. Finally, the
proposed plan to distribute food to some RVNAF troops, an earlier ver-
sion of which had merely encouraged greater corruption, was quietly
deferred pending further study.

 As a final note, the conferees considered the guidance which
the Ambassador had prepared for himself in the event that more U.S. and
Third Country forces were to be committed in Vietnam. The text remained
essentially as Taylor had written it in his cable of 17 April. A few "

changes were made to reflect that the commitment was not limited to the
current proposed deployments and that the U.S. was anxious to seize the
initiative from the enemy. Taylor had said, "if the ground war is not to
drag into 1966 and even beyond.1! That phrase was changed to read, "if
the ground ,.;ar is not to drag on indefinitely." 82/ ffinphasis addeg
~he conferees appear to have reali zed not only that the forces they had
recommended be deployed to Vietnam might not be enough, .but also that
it would be unwise to attempt'to affix any time limit to the war.

 The President received the Honolulu recommendations in a memo-
randum from Secretary McNamara on the 21st of April. Noted therein, but
not recommended, 1,orere possible deployments of an Army Airmobile Division
and the remainder of the III ~lliF. 83/

 The Honolulu Conference omitted to provide for reconstitution
of CINCPAC's airborne reserve after the deployment of the 173rd to Bien
Hoa-Vung Tau, largely because the designation and type of brigade which
was to go to that location had not been specified. That the 173rd would
go, hOlvever, was common knowledge and, indeed, had been recommended by
the PACOM-JCS planning conference on 10 April and abortively approved by
the.JCS on the 14th. CINCPAC cabled the JCS on the 23rd to remind them
that the 173rd should be replaced by a CONUS brigade as soon as possible.84/

 Discussion and refinement of the Honolulu proposals continued
on after the Conference. On 30 April, a JCSM s11lIlr.l.arized the planning
as the Chiefs saw it and presented a detailed program for the deployment
to Vietnam of some 48,000 U.S. and 5,250 Third Country forces, all of
which "rere listed as approved. Included were all the units mentioned
in the Honolulu recommendation plus a healthy support package. These
forces were, according to the JCS, to "bolster GVN forces during their
continued build-up, secure bases and installations, conduct counterin-
surgency c~~bat operations in coordination with the RVNAF,wld prepare
for the later introduction of an airmobile division to the central
plateau, the remai nder of the III MEF to the Da Nang area, ~ld the
remainder of a ROK division to Quang Ngai." LEmphasis addeY Logistic
forces of. all services were "to strengthen support .of in-country forces,

 78 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 provide support for the new forces, prepare bases and installations for
 possible future deployments, and be prepared to support those additional
 forces." 85/ From the thrust of this JCSM it is apparent that the en-
 clave strategy was no stopping place as far as the Chiefs were concerned.
 They continued to push hard for the earliest possible input of three
 full divisions of troops. They were still well ahead of the pack in
 that regard. .

 None of the Honolulu recommendations had been approved at the
 time the 30 April JCSN was forwarded, although the 173rd ,vas approved for
 Bien Hoa-Vung Tau and three Marine battalions for Chu Lai on the same
 day. ~ Included in the logistics package list ed by the JCS as
 11 approved" 'Here some 4,700 troops later identified by Mr. McNaughton as
 belonging to the three division program and definitely not approved. ~
 Secretary McNamara replied to the JCSM on the 15th of May, after the
 landing of the 173rd on the 5th and the Marines at Chu Lai on the 7th.
 The Secretary said that he considered as approved only so much of the
 remainder of the Honolulu recommendations as applied to the Australian
 Battalion, the ROK Regimental Combat Team and some MACV augmentationso
 He went on to approve: (1) movement of the I MEF from California to
 WESTPAC to reconstitute CINCPAC's floating reserve, and (2) preparation
 for the deployment of an Army brigade to Qui Nhon-Nha Trang with final
 decision on 21 May and closure on 27 June. This latter move, when ap-
 proved, together with individual add-ons was to bring total permanent
 in-country strength to 69,143 (the 173rd having been deployed on a
 temporary basis). Secretary McNamara deferred decision on all JCS pro-
 posals dealing ,'lith the three division plan, §§} thereby giving the
 enclave strategy temporary respite.

 cC-.- -Difficul.ties in Experimentation

 As of the landings of the Marines at Chu Lai and the Airborne
 at Bien Hoa-Vung Tau, the U.S. forces in Vietnam with some nine maneuver
 battalions had yet to conduct a major offensive operation, with or
 without the RVNAF. The experimentation with U.S. forces in an offensive
 role, a large factor in the decision to accept the enclave concept, was
 delayed because some knotty problems involving command and control re-
- mained to be ironed out with the Vietnamese.

 In the early days when the Mar ines arrived to secure bases and
 inst alJ..at ions , the control measure devised for their emploYlllent was the
 Tactical Area of Responsibility (TAOR). Under the overall suzerainty of
 the Vietnamese Corps Commander , the Marines were given a ..Te ll-defined
 geographical area in which the U.S. exercised command authority over
 military for ces and for which the U.S. accepted defensive responsibility.
 T~e original Marine TAOR consisted litE;rally of their half of the Da Nang
 airfield and a portion of a couple of hills on 'which the Marines "rere
 entrenched and which they covered by the fields of fire of their small
 arms. Assured by this conservative assignation "ioTaS minimum contact be-
 tween UoS. troops and the Vietnamese population. In fact, there were
 only some 1,930 people living 'vithin the original ~,1arine TAOR. '§2/

 79 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET Sensitive

 From this humble beginning there followed a period of gradual expansion
 ~ltogether compatible "rith the security mission until by the end of
 March the Da Nang TAOR ,vas 12 square miles in size and incorporated
 some 11,141 Vietnamese souls. 221
 Accompanying the NSAM 328 change of mission of U.S. forces to
 permit limited offensive operations was a dilemma. Mere expansion of
 the TAOR's would not suffice since U.S. forces did not have enough com-
 bat power to adequately secure an area the size of which they desired
 for offensive operations. Some arrangement was needed to allow U.S.
 commanders to share tactical responsibility with the Vietnamese.

 Years of experience adviSing the Vietnamese armed forces was
 enough to convince kno'T,rledgeable U.S. officers that the U.S. did not
 want to relinquish command authority over its troops to the Vietnamese.
 Of equal import, it was felt, was the Vietnamese experience under the
 French and the resultant abhorrence of foreign command over their forces.
 As a further complication, the Viet Cong ,vere ready to cry "imperialist
 puppet" at the first sign of GVN weakness. WaShington was less sensitive
 to this problem than were the members of the Mission in Saigon. In May
 Secretary McNamara urged \vestmoreland and Taylor to form a joint command
 structure with the GVN. Unfortunately, both of those gentlemen were
 well aware that the GVN was very cool to the idea. 2!/ On the 23rd of
 April Taylor had visited with Prime Minister Quat for the first time
 since the Honolulu Conference. Although Quat was well aware of the
 Ambassador's intention to convey the text of the Honolulu recommendations,
 to Taylor's distress, he was reluctant to even discuss foreign reinforce-
 ments much less command arrangements. 92/

 In an attempt to get things unstuck, General Westmoreland pro-
 dU2ed a concept for the employment of U.S./Allied ground combat forces
 in support of RVNAF. With Ambassador Taylor's concurrence, he forwarded
 the concept through CINCPAC to Washington on 8 May. Westmoreland pro-
 posed,that the "basic concept underlying command relations between
 U.S./Allied forces and RVNAF will be one of combat support through
 coordination and cooperation in the mutual self-interest of both commands."
 That this tenuous arrangement might break down in the face of imminent
 disaster \Vas foreseen and included was an emergency escape clause '"Thereby
 alternate arrangements could be made through mutual agreement of the
 tactical commanders on the ground. Westmoreland suggested that U.S./Allied
 forces would pass through three distinct stages of eommitment to the war.
 Stage I (to which were already committed 9 U.S. battalions) entailed the
 security of base areas with TAOR's eA~ended out to the range of light
 artillery. Stae-e II called for deep patrollil'1g and offensive operations,
 both predicated on movement outside the TAOR in coordination with RVNAF.
 Finally, progress would be made into stage III with long range search and
 destroy and reserve reaction operations in concert, of course, with
 Vietnamese wishes and desires. 2l/

•
 80 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Along with the concept Westmoreland presented, without any time
 frame, a crude sketch showing the evolution of strategies for U.S./Allied
 forces in the Vietnamese war . The war was to evolve through four phases.
 During Phase I coastal enclaves were to be secured and improved.' In
 Phase II, operations would be conducted against the enemy from the above.
 In Phase III the forces vTould move inland to secure additional bases and
 areas, and finally in Phase IV would operate from the latter. At the
 time the concept was forwarded, the U.S. combat forces in Vietnam were
 in Phase I, Stage I. Progress to a more ambitious stage was stymied
 while negotiations went on with the GVN to refine the ground rules. In
 the meantime, the Ambassador observed that the troops would suffer from
 boredom and lose their edgeo ~

 The long official s.ilence beti,reen the sanction for U~-S. offensive
 operations contained in NSAM 328 and the final approval of the conditions
 under which U. S. troops could be committed '-las nQt without cost. The
 President had admonished each of the NSC members not to allow release of
 information concerning the provisions of the NSAM, but the unduly long
 interregnum inevitably led to leaks. The Marines incurred some 200
 casualties, including 18 killed, as they vTent about tidying up their
 TAOR's in April and May. The Command~Dt of the Marine Corps raised the
 tempo of speculation by saying to the press during an inspection trip to
 Vietnam in April that the Marines were not in Vietnam to "sit on their
 dittyboxes" -- they were there to "kill Viet Cong." 95/ An honest and
 superficially innocuous statement by Department of State Press Officer
 Robert McCloskey on 8 June to the effect that "American forces would be
 available for combat support together with Vietnamese forces when and if
 necessary" 96/ produced an immediate re sponse . The press re act ion to
 McCloskey's candor is best sQ1J'1..med up in this New York Times clip of
 9 June: W
 "The American people were told by a minor State Department
 official yesterday that, in effect, they w'ere in a land var on
 the continent of Asia. This is only one of the extr aordinary
 aspects of the first formal announcement that a decision has
 been made to commit American ground forces to open combat in
 South Vietnam: The nation is informed about it not by the
 President, not by a Cabinet member, not even by a sub-Cabinet
 official, but by a public relations officer. tI

. The White House 1-TaS hoisted by its oVil petard. In an attempt to quell the
 outcry, a statement was issued on the 9th of June which, because of its
 ambiguity, only served to further exacerbate the situation and to widen
 what was b'2ing d~scribed as "the credibility [ap." The White House state-
 ment said in part: 98/

 "There has been no change in the mission of United States
 ground combat units in Vietnam in recent days or w·eeks. The

 81 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 President has issued no order of any kind in this regard to
 General Westmoreland recently or at any other time. The pri-
 mary mission of these troops is to secure and safeguard im-
 portant military installations like the air base at Da Nang.
 They have the associated mission of ••• patrolling and securing
 actions in and near the areas thus safeguarded.

 tlIf help is requested by the appropriate Vietnamese com-
 mander, General Westmoreland also has authority within the
 assigned mission to employ these troops in support of Viet-
 namese forces faced with aggressive attack when other effective
 reserves are not available and when, in his judgment, the
 general military situation urgently requires it. If

 The documents do not reveal whether or not the ground rules for
engagement of U.S. forces ·had actually been worked out to everyone's
satisfaction at the time of the White House statement. There is good
indication that they had not o During at least two of the major battles
in late May and early June, Ba Gia and Dong Xoai, the RVNAF were des-
perately in need of assistance. Although U.S. troops .rere available in
both instances, the Marines at Ba Gia and the 173rd at Dong Xoai, .t hey
were not committed and the result in both cases was defeat for the RVNAF.

 The first major ground combat operation by Uo·S. forces in the
Vietnam War took place in War Zone D, NW of Saigon, from 27 to 30 June
1965. Participants were the 173rd Airborne Brigade, the 1st Battalion
of the Royal Australian Regiment, two battalions from the ARVN Airborne
Brigade, and the ARVN 48th Regiment. The operation could by no stretch
of definition have.been described as a reserve reaction. It was a search
and destroy operation into Viet Cong base areas and its purpose was to
deny to the enemy Iffreedom of actiono •• in these safe havenso" The War
Zone D excursion was a direct result of the sanction given to General
Westmoreland on the 26th of June to Ifcommit U.S. troops to combat, inde-
pendent of or in conjunction with GVN forces in any situation in '''hich
the use of such troops is requested by an appropriate GVN commander and
when, in COMUS~ACV's judgment, their use is necessary to strengthen the
relative position of GVN forces. If W

 At that juncture the 44 Battalion debate was in full swing ~Dd
'the enclave strategy, as a means to limit the amount and use of U.S.
combat force in Vietnam, was certainly overcome by events. It was not
Until the 18th of August that an operation fitting the paradigm des-
cription of the Taylor enclave concept, Operation STARLIGHT, was con-
ducted with drarnatic success 15 miles south of the Chu Lai enclave. 100/
It established the viability of enclave operations limited to the
northern coast of South Vietnam, a fact '''hich no one disputed, but such
operations were by that time only one facet of a much more ambitious
strategy s anctioned by the President and in the process of being imple-
mented by Hestmor e l and.

 82 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 D. Where U. S. Stood on 1 June 1965

 The beginning of the decisive month of June 1965 saw the U.S.
in the infant stages of its enclave strategy. Established in coastal
enclaves were Ma-r:-ine forces ' in Phu Bai, Da Nang and Chu Lai and .Army
forces in Vung Tau. Enclaves at Qui Nhon and Nha Trang were in the
planning as locations for an Army brigade, and Korean troops were
being considered for the defense of the provincial capital of Quang
Ngai near the coast and as possible relief for the Marines at Chu Lai.
The Secretary of Defense was also considering proposals from General
Westmoreland and others to open up a major logistics base and enclave
around the fine deep ..vater harbor at Cam Ranh Bay. 101/

 As of the 1st of June 1965, the U.S. had approved for perma-
nent deployment to South Vietnam forces which, when all had closed,
would bring total combat strength to approximately 70,000 and the
nmnber of maneuver battalions, Army and Marine, to 13. 102/ Included
in this total "Tere 7 Marine BLT' s already located at Phu Bai, Da Nang,
and Chu Laio Also included were 3 battalions in a brigade of the Army's
1st Division to be landed at Qui Nhon and 3 battalions in a brigade of
the Army's 101st Airborne Division scheduled to replace the l73rd. In
the planning stages but not yet approved 'Here a further 11 maneuver
battalions, the remaining 2 from the III MAF ("MEF was changed to ":M...AF"
because the word "Expeditionary" was offensive to the Vietnamese and
was therefore changeq. to "Amphibious") and 9 battalions pla..rmed for the
new Army Airmobile Division.

 Third COQDtry forces considered approved at this time amounted
to 7,250 men of which 1,250 were alre ady in-country in the 1st Battalion,
Royal Australian Regiment, 2,000 were Korean service troops also already
in-cbuntry, and the rest were to be deployed sometime later in a ROK
Regimental Combat Team of 3 battalions. Still in the talking stages
were a further 6 battalions of ROK troops totaling 12,000 men. The grand
total of approved U.S./3rd Country forces was 17 maneuver battalions and
approximately 77,250 men. If the additional forces then being discussed
were thrOlm in, the total "muld have been 34 maneuver battalions and
about 134,750 men. This, then, ,vas the state of the build-up when General
Westmoreland asked on 7 June for reinforcements from the U.S. and Third
Countries "as rapidly as pOSSible." 103/

 83 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 N. The U. S. Moved to Take Over the Land War -- The Search and Destroy
 Strategy and the 44 Battalion Debate

 General Hestmoreland' s message #19118, of 7 June 1965, already quoted
 in part in Section I of this paper, punctuated a very grim period of ARVN
 defeats in Vietnam and stirred up a veritable hornet's nest in Washington.
 Up to that time, most of the Washington decision makers had been content
 to indulge in relatively low-key polemics about the enclave strategy and
 to advocate some experimentation with small numbers of U.S. troops in
 Vietnam. Westmoreland's request for reinforcements on a large scale,
 accompanied as it was by a strategy to put the troops on the offensive -'
 against the Viet Cong, did not contain any of the comfortable restrictions
 and safeguards which had been part of every strat~gy debated ~o date.
 Washington saw that it was Westmoreland's intention to aggressively take
 the war to the enemy with other than Vietnamese troops, and in such a
 move the spectre of U.S. involvement in a major Asian ground 'var was there
 for all to see. With no provision for quick withdrawal, and there was
 none, the long-term implicat ions for the U. S. in terms of live s aDd money
 could not be averted. Temperatures rose rapidly after 7 June, and the
 debate was acrimonious and not without its casualties.

 Just as Ambassador Taylor was consistent in his resistance to pro-
 posed involvement of U.S. forces in the Vietnamese Har, so also was
 General Westmoreland equally determined to get enough DS/3rd COlli~try
 force into Vietnam to influence the situation. In addition to the level
 of force, Westmoreland was also bent on having a free hand in the use of
 it.

 A. Westmoreland Provided the Push

 -It has been suggested that COMUSMACV elected to interpret the
 landing of tlVO Marine BLT' s at Da Nang as the first step in a build-up
 of U.S. combat forces in Vietnmn. It seems . clear that General Westmore-
 land had reached the conclusion by early March that the RVNAF simply did
 not have the capability to overcome the Viet Cong by itself. Outside
 forces were going to be required to take up the slack lli~til the GV1T forces
 could be revamped and built up. It appears that General Westmoreland had
 a pmverful ally in the person of General Johnson, the Army Chief of Staff,
 who was in Saigon from the 5th through the 12th of March 1965, and who
 returned to Washington to submit the first of many recommendations that
 the U.S. send significant munbers of combat troops to Vietnam. 104/
 Westmoreland was not far behind Johnson tn su.bmitting to "\vashington his
 own ideas on the subject.

 The "Commander's Estimate of the Situation" prepared by General
 Westmoreland and his staff during the early weeks of J"farch and completed

..
 84 TOP SECRET - Sensitive'
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 on the 26th was a classic LeaveuvTorth-style analysis, detailed and
 thorough in its consideration of possible U.S. courses of action. 105/
 Copies of the Estimate, which in bulk amounted to a full half inch of
 foolscap paper, "rere delivered to Washington by Brigadier General De Puy,
 Westmoreland's J'-3, who was traveling with Ambassador Taylor to the NSC
 meetings of 1-2 April. 106/ If the awesome bulk of the Estimate deterred
 anyone from giving it the careful study it merited, that is most unfor-
 tunate. As Ivestmoreland himself said:

 "Recognizing recent marked changes in situation in SVN,
 we considered it appropriate to undertake a classical Comman-
 der's Estimate of the Situation to think through in a logical
 and precise manner strategy, objectives, enemy capabilities
 and our own possible courses of action before making what may
 prove to be in the light of history a momentous recommendation.
 In addition, by reducing the Estimate to writing we expose our
 thoughts to others, thus making possible careful review by
 higher authority and perhaps introduction of new considerations
 that were not apparent here." 107/

 The Estimate is as good as the Commander's word. The basic con-
 sideratiornto be analyzed are all laid out for the reader to see. First,
 the Mission as General Westmoreland interpreted it:

 "Forces of the Government of Vietnam supported and assisted
 by forces of the U.S. Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, to-
 gether with additional supporting U.S. and Free World forces,
 take as rapidly as possible those necessary actions to:

 "A. Cause the DRV to cease its political and military sup-
 port of the VC in SVN, and

 !lB. Enable an anti-communist GVN to survive so that ulti-
 mately it may defeat the VC insurgency inside SVN."

 Secondly, the Basic U.S. Strategy:

 "The analysis is predicated upon the assumption that basic
 strategy of retaliatory and PQDitive air strikes against NVN
 will, in time, bring about desired results, th~t is, supply
 and support of the insurgency will be terminated by DRV and
 hopefully DRV /VC High Command ,-rill direct the cessation of
 offensive operations. In any event, "rithout external support .
 the forces of RVNAF supported by U.S. WOuld be able at first j
 to contain and then to defeat VC. Therefore, Estimate addres-
 ses itself primarily to the interval in time between now and
 time at . . rhich basic strategy takes effect. If any time VC

•
 85 TOP SECRET - Sensitive ,
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive.

 unilaterally cease fire and effect a cessation of incidents,
 this would mark end of the interval and end of pressure on .
 GVN • . Until pressure eases, stability of GVN is a prime con-
 cern and objective. Consequently, coursss of action examined
 are measured as much in terms of their impact on stability and
 effectiveness as upon their purely military value, although,
 of course, these two matters are closely interwoven."

As an adjunct to this, Westmoreland said:

 "If basic strategy of punitive bombing in RVN (sic!) does
 not take effect by mid-year additional deployments of U.S. and
 3rd Country forces should be considered, including introduc-
 tion of full MEF into I Corps."

Third, Main VC Ca~abilities:

 "A. Continue with present strategy and build-up and conduct
 large att acks whenever favorable.

 liB. Above plus a major uprising to break the back of the GVN.

 tiC. By infiltration, commit PAVN up to a division in the
 I/n Corps.

 liD. Create peace movement through subversion of existing
 organizations; get neutral government established, dominate it,
 and sue the North for peace and reunification.

 liE. Unilaterally cease firing, causing the U.S. forces to
 leave and permitting the covert VC infrastructure to survive
 intact.

Courses of action in the Estimate were analyzed in relation to the main
enemy capabili tie s outlined above. Maximum >veight was given to the first
three, which 'Here considered to be the most likely. In addition, the
follm-ring considerations formed part of the analysis matrix:

 "A. Attainment of critical military objectives of

 (1) Security of bases and ports,

 (2.) Denial of critical areas to the Viet Cong (areas such
 as the highlands of II Corps),

 (3) Provision of a quick reaction reserve, and

 (4) Provision of a basis for a combined command.

 86 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 liB. Preservation of the stability and effectiveness of
 the GVN and of. its armed forces.

 IIC. . Improvement of force ratios as they changed with time ~

 liD. Remaining within the restrictions imposed by logistical
 limitations. II

In order to achieve its objectives, the U.S. was presented, as Westmore-
land saw it, essentially with three possible courses of action, there
being several variations on one of the choices. The choices were:

 "1. Accelerate the build-up of RVNAF, commit the 7th Fleet
 to quarantine the coast against infiltration, of men ani ams,
 and continue U.S. logistical support as required. No outside
 combat pm·r er other than Naval and Air support would be provided
 the GVN under this option.

 "2. The above plus the commitment of up to two U.S. divi-
 sions with their support, either

 "a. to secure vital U.S. installations and defeat
 VC efforts to control the Kontum, Pleiku, Binh Dinh region, or

 "b. to secure critical enclaves in coastal regions, or

 "c. to do a combination of both of the above.

 "3. Both 'of the major choices above plus a cordon across
 SVN and the Laotian panhandle manned by up to three U.S. di-
 visions coupled yith ARVN, Thai and Laos forces. 1I

 In his subsequent analysis and comparison of courses of action,
General Westmoreland gave each thorough coverage in light of all the
considerations already enumerated. Course of Action 1, RVNAF build-up
without outside ground force reinforcement, was certainly logistically
feasible, but it failed to promise improvement in any of the other areas
of consideration. Course of Action 3, the cordon plus the other courses,
promised to attain all the military objectives, to provide a basis for
improving GVN stability, and to improve force ratios in critical areas.
Because of port and inland communications difficulties, however, the
cordon force probably could not have been fully deployed before the end
of Calendar Ye ar' 1965, which would have been too late to take up the
slack during the critical phase of the RVNAF tuild-up. Also, if the
basic strategy of punitive bombing had be en successful, then the provi-
sion of a force of 165,000 men -- 132,000 of them from the U.S. -- would
have been out of proportion to the results expected. Should the bombing
strategy fail or take effect only very slowly, then Westmoreland felt
the cordon should be recon sidered.

 87 TOP SECF~T - Sens i tive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The most propitious course of action to emerge from the analysis
 in the Estimate ivas the second one dealing with the commitment of up to
 two U.S. divisions, including 17 maneuver battalions, ivith support. Over
 and above what was in or authorized to be in Vietnam, Course of Action 2
 called for an additional 33,000 men.

 In order to illustrate trends in force ratios, Westmoreland
 postulated that one · USMC BLT was the equivalent of three ARVN battalions,
 and one U. S. Army battalion 1-ras the equivalent of two ARVN battalions.
 Using that rationale, the combat battalions added on through Course of
 Action 2 would have amounted to 38 ARVN battalion-equivalents~ Input on
 that scale 1-TOuld have had a fair effect on force ratios overall and a very
 dramatic effect locally in the areas i-There they ivere to operate.

 Without the benefit of the increased battalion-equivalents pro-
 vided by Course of Action 2, the ratio of ARVN (and the tivo Marine BLT' s
 then in Vietnam) battalions to Viet Cong battalions wo uld have degraded,
 accordLDg to the Estimate, from 1.7 to 1 in March 1965 to 1.6 to 1 in
 December of that year. This would have been the case despite an acceler-
 ated RVNAF build-up and only a modest rate of Viet Cong build-up as in
 1964. With the input of Course of Action 2, the equivalent of a 10 month
 acceleration in the RVNAF build-up could have been accomplished by mid-
 year and by the end of the build-up period the forces could have been
 doubled -- that is, assuming that the forces in Course of Action 2 were
 introduced during April, May, and June, a proposal which was barely
 feasible logistically and which was urged b;y General Westmoreland.

 At the con.clusion of his Estimate, General Westmoreland recom-
 mended that the U.S. buildup its combat force in Vietnam to 17 'battalions
 by early June at the latest. He rejected the enclave alternative because
 it vras too negative, because it brought U. S. troops into too intimate
 contact with the population, and because it posed some almost insurmount-
 able problems in real estate acquisition. In the highlands the U.S. troops
. would have had no difficulty recognizing the enemy among the few montag-
 nards who lived there, therefore Westmoreland recommended that a full U.S.
 division be deployed along the Qui Nhon-Pleiku axis with a brigade each
 at An Khe, Pleiku, and Kontum. This deployment would have altered the
 force ratios in the critical II Corps from 1.9:1 to 2.9:1 in favor of the
 RVNAF immediately. The ports of Qui Nhon and Nha Trang, rather than
 serving as enclave bases, 1-Tould, according to the recommendation, have
 been developed as logistic support bases for the forces in the highlands
 and would have been provided with a battalion each for security. The
 rest of the 17 battalions were to provide base .and inst allation security
 in the Da Nang/Hue ( 4 USMC BLT's) and the Bien Hoa-Vung Tau (3 Army
 battalions) areas.

 This was the position'of COMUSMACV in March 1965. In concluding
his Estimate, Westmoreland recogni zed the possibility that the GVN might

 88 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 infer from either Course of Action 2 or Course of Action 3 that the U.S.
 was determined to fight on alone. That possibility was outweighed in his
 eyes, however, by the tactical benefits to be gained plus the guarantee
 of a "more orderly buildup" than could have bE~n the case under Course
 of Action 1.

 . In regard to the build-up of the RVNAF, MACV had in late 1964
 two alternative proposals under discussion. Alternative 1 called for
 increases of 30,309 in the regular forces, plus 35,387 in the Regional
 Force and 10,815 in the Popular Force. Alternative 2 called for the
 same increases in RF/PF but for an accelerated figure for the regular
 forces of 47,556. Taking into account the limited leadership resources
 available to the GVN and the restricted training facilities, General
 Westmoreland in January 1965 recommended the more modest Alternative 1
 build-up for Military Assistance Program funding. The Secretary of
 Defense approved the recommended increases on 23 January, thereby bring-
 ing the :r-IAP supported RVNAF to levels of 275,058 for the regulars, plus
 137,187 for RF and 185,000 for PF. 108/

 In response to COMUSMACV's Estimate of the Situation of March
 1965 and a memorandum from the Joint Chiefs which followed it, the
 Secretary of Defense approved the accelerated Alternative 2 force level
 for the regulars and authorized ~ffi2 funding for an additional 17,247
 spaces in RVNAF on 12 April 1965. Also provided was an increase in the
 MA~l JTD of 160 spaces for advisors to work with the enlarged RVNAF.I09/

 In late May, the JCS asked the Secretary of Defense to authorize
 MAP support for another 2,369 spaces for ARVN. The purpose was to fatten
 out a division base for the eventual organization of a tenth ARVN division
 from existing separate regiments. 110/ The request was approved on the
 4th of June. 111/ -

 Any further plans to build up the .RVNAF were torpedoed by the
 extremely heavy losses suffered in combat during late May and early JQDe.
 On 7 June, General Westmoreland told CINCPAC and Washington that a
 moratorium on RVNAF build-up was unavoidable as any trainees in the pipe-
 line would have to be used as fillers in existing units. No new ARVN
 battalions would be coming ori the scene until November of that year. 112/

 General Westmoreland "HaS not in attendance' at the NSC meetings
 of 1-2 April 1965. Having gone on record in his Estimate in favor of
 the earliest possible input of up to tyro division equivalents of U.S.
 forces, he was lmderstandably dis appo inted ,vi-':.h the very modest increases
 sanctioned by the President. He communicated to CINCPAC his concern that,
 while he understood that divisions were not immediately in the offing, he
 nevertheless felt a pressing n'eed for a division in the highlands. 113/
 Throughout the early part of April prior to the Honolulu Conference,

•
 89 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Westmoreland also kept up the pressure to get an Army brigade into
Bien Hoa-Vung Tau. The latter action happened to dovetail with the
current Washington strat e gy options and hence was favorably considered
at Honolulu whiJe, as has already been noted, proposals to deploy
divisions were not. .

 Only on one occasion through the spring of 1965 did General
Westmoreland display any inclination to abandon his aggressive high-
lands campaign in favor of the more conservative enclave strategy. On
8 May he cabled to CINCPAC, with Ambassador Taylor's concurrence, his
Concept of Operations by US/Allied Ground Combat Forces in Support of
RVNAF. 114/ The Concept, as spelled out in that message, has already
been discussed at length in an earlier section of this paper •. - Not dis-
cussed Ttlere some proposed deployments of U. S. and Third Country forces
included by Westmoreland. - Perhaps in deference to the Ambassador's
kno,m preference, Westmoreland suggested that the U. S. Airmobile Di-
vision be deployed to Qui Nhon and Nha Trang. In light of his previous
recommendations and subsequent ones to be discussed, it is difficult to
conclude that Westmoreland really seriously entertained this recommen-
dation or that it was anything other than an aberration. On the 15th
of the same month, \iestmoreland sent a mess age to the Department of
the Army indicating that, as far as he ,.;ras concerned, the concept for
employment of the Airmobile Division was still to be determined. Since
he preferred an Airmobile Division, he asked the Department of the Army
to send airmobile experts to Vietnam to assist him in the preparation
of "a concept of operations for a division size force." 115/ .

 In his message #19118 of 7 June, General I-Testmorela.l1d asked for
U.S. and Third Country reinforcements after he had explained that redress-
ing deteriorating force ratios was beyond the capability of the RVNAF.
He said, "the force ratios continue to change in favor of the VC. I
believe that the DRV will commit whatever force it deems necessary to
tip the balance and that theGVJ:IT cannot stand up successfully to this
kind of pressure without reinforcement. If Westmoreland was convinced that
U.S. troops could "successfully take the fight to the VC," and he explained
that the forces he was requesting were "to give us a substantial and hard-
hitting offensive capability on the ground to convince the VC that they
cannot Ttrin." LEmphasis adde~7

 At the time Westmo~eland submitted his recommendations in his
19118, Ttrhich has erroneously been dubbed lithe l~4 Battalion request, II
there were, in ~ddition to one Australian battalion, 7 U.S. Marine, and
2 U. S. Army batt.alions in Vietnam. In his me0sage, \<Testmoreland said
this:

 "In' sub-paragraph 'A' belOli, deployments and a~tions are
 recommended on which decisions should be made nOli . In sub-
 paragraph 'B' we have identified further actions on which
 planning should start and on 'ihich separ ate recommendations
 will be forthcoming.

 90 TOP SECRET. - Sen s itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 "(3) One additional MAE to reinforce the III MAF.

 "(4) Tactical ,air units for support of increased .
 U.S. force (additional airfields in ,SVN Rnd Thailand may be
 required) •

 "(5) Required combat and logistic support forces to
 include helicopter units to support the foregoing.

 "Message has been discussed with Ambassadors Taylor and Johnson.
 Ambassador Taylor is prepared to comment thereon during current
 visit to Washington."

 In his subparagraph 'A' General Westmore'land did no more than
 request expeditious approval of forces which had been in the planning
 stages for some time. If his request had been approved as written, the
 grand total of maneuver battalions so provided ivould have been 33. This
 is one less than the total indicated in Section II of this paper as
 approved and planned because the Airmobile Division, when it was finally
 organized, had 8 rather than 9
 Rirmobile battalions. If the 173d Airborne,
 which was only to be retained until the Airmobile Division was ready to
 begin operations, were counted, then the total of maneuver battalions
 requested by Westmoreland on 7 June vras 35. In subparagraph 'B' he iden-
 tified a further 9 battalions which might be needed and requested at some
 later date.

 B. CINCPAC Appeared to Back Into Enclaves

 The CINCPAC, Admiral Sharp, was by and large a ~onsistent sup-
 porter of General Westmoreland in the latter's drive to get more forces
 into South Vietnam. With regard to the momentous recommendation of
 7 June, CINCPAC concurred in General Westmoreland's evaluation of the
 situation and agreed also that Allied troops were needed to enable the
 friendly side to take the offensive. He said: "'We vTill lose by staying
. in enclaves defending coastal bases." Having said that, Admiral Sharp
 then ivent on to disagree with Westmoreland as to the proper place for the
 Airmobile Division. Rather than have it deployed inland on the Qui Nhon-
 Pleiku axis as planned by Westmoreland, CINCPAC would have had it based
 on Qui Nhon with the primary mission of clearing Binh Dinh Province before
 moving inland. Sharp was very concerned that logistic backup for the
 Airmobile Division be assured before it be sent into the highlands.
 Securing one division's LOC Ivith another division ('\'lestmoreland intended
 to send the ROK' s to Qui Nhon) vras counterproductive, and Sharp felt that
 600 to 800 tons of aerial resupply per day, should highway 19 be closed,
 w9uld overtax the already limited airfield facilities in the highland
 areas where the Airmobile Division viaS to go. 116/

 Sharp' s initial obj ections to \'lestmoreland.' s deployment plans
smacked of conservatism and may well have played into the hands of those

 91 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 who continued to advocate the enclave strategy. The Ambassador was in
 Washington on 9 June, and one of the questions put to him by the.Joint
 Chiefs was whether or not the Airmobile Division should go into the
 highlands. Taylur convinced them that it shol~d not. 117/ Perhaps
 without Sharp's backing for the coastal deployment, the Joint Chiefs
 might not have been convinced.

 It seems clear, however, that Admiral Sharp was not really an
 exponent of the enclave strategy. His insistence that the Airmobile
 Division stick to Binh Dinh was prompted by his conviction that the
 U.S. forces should operate in close proximity to the objective of the
 Viet war -- the people. He was consistent in this approach when he
 pushed for deployment of the ROK RCT to Quang Ng~i, where it was
 originally supposed to go and where there were plenty of people to be
. pacified, instead of to sparsely populated Cam Ranh for unremunerative
 security duty. He also recommended that the remaining ROK division (-),
 which would have been superfluous at Qui Nhon, be sent instead to Nha
 Trang or perhaps even into the Mekong Delta. 118/

 C. The JCS Yielded the Torch

 The JCS put the first major recommendation for ground troop
commitment on the docket, as it were , on 20 March , shortly after Chief
of Staff of the Army Johnson returned from Saigon. 119/ Because the
Viet Cong were stronger and because the leaders of the RVNAF were
overly involved in political matters, there had been, according to the
JCS, for the first time a downward turn in what had been a relatively
stable military situation. Unless the trend could be revers ed , the
Chiefs said, the war 'Hould be lost and it would be seen as a U.S. defeat.
That \vould be intolerable; hence, the Chiefs recommended that U. S. and
Allied forces be introduced with a new mission to stem the tide and
assume the offensive. The Chiefs were manifestly not interested in any
kind of holding action. As they said, "the requirement is not simply
to withstand the Viet Cong, however, but to gain effective operational
superiority and assume the offensive. To turn the tide of the war
requires an objective of destroying the Viet Cong, not merely to keep
pace "rith them, or slov; dmm their rate of adva..7J.ce ." 120/ The level
of force vrhich they recommended to carry. out this aggressive mission
and which they sm-r as an essential component of the broade r program to
put pressure on the DRV/VC and to deter Chinese CommQ7J.ist aggression,
was three divisions,one ROK and two U.S.

 In sumrrary, the JCS recommende~ that one U.S. Marine division
conduct, on order , offensive operations to kill Viet Cong vri th or wi th-
out centralized GVN/US command structure. The Marines should operate
out of the ir existing TAOR, 'and expand it as the force grew in size.
The U.S. Army division should go to Pleiku , where it should operate with

 92 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

the RF/PF and CIDG troops there under U.S. command. The ARVN battalions
thus released and shielded by a U.S. buffer along the Laotian border
should then move to the poputous coastal provinces. No location' was
specified for tre ROK division, but the ChiefR recommended that its mis-
sion be similar to that of the U.S. divisions. They felt the KoreanS'
presence vTould have good Itpsychological effect. It

 This Itthree-division plan,1t as it was dubbed, was discussed with
the Secretary of Defense and Ambassador Taylor on the 29th of March and
was undoubtedly the topic of some discussion during the subsequent NSC
meetings. 121/ In any case, even though the recommended deployments
were not sanctioned in NSAM 328, the JCS continued to plan for ultimate
implementation. 122/

 In earlier sections of this paper the possibility that the JCS
may have gotten ahead of some of the other decision-makers in the U.S.
Government was discussed. Thus, in early April they were forced to back
down on the deployment they had ordered of the 173rd Airborne to Bien
Hoa-Vung Tau, 123/ and in JCSM 321-65, 30 April 1965, they erroneou~ly
described as Itapproved ll a package of some 4,700 logistical troops which
were part of the three-division plan and still in the talking stage. 124/
 ll
The mission of forces listed in JCSM 321-65 as Ikpproved by the JCS was
to be as follows:

 ItThese forces are to bolster GVN forces during their con-
 tinued build-up, secure bases and installations, conduct
 counterinsurgency combat operations in coordination with the
 RVNAF, and prepare for the later introd'~ction of an airmobile
 division to the central plateau, the remainder of III MEF to
 the Da Nang area, and the remainder of a ROK division to
 Quang Ngai. It

 "Logistic forces of all services will strengthen support
 of in-country forces, provide support for the ne"T forces,
 prepare bases and installations for possible future develop-
 1t
 ments, and be prepared to support those additional forces.

 The tone of JCSM 321-65 was consistent with the JCS 1 advocacy
of a full three divisions of troops for Vietnam plus an aggressive
mission for those troops. It vlaS not in keeping, however, with the
cautious language of the "Victory Strategy" sanctioned at the Honolulu
Conference of 20 April. That strategy was the basis for the enclavists
and it promised success through denial of vict.ory to the Viet Congo
The enemy was to be denied victory because he would be unable to seize
a certain number of decisive areas held by U.S. and Third Country
forces, despite any successes he might enjoy throughout the rest of the
country. Realizing his own impotence, the enemy would be moved to seek
a negotiated settlement to the corillict. The level. of commitment

 93 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

recommended to the President after the Honolulu Conference and in keep-
ing with the ,"Victory Strategy" as described above was considerably
less than three divisions as ,has been pointed out in earlier sections
of this paper. The JCS should have been addressing the "Victory
Strategy" in their 30 April memorandum, but preferred instead to con-
tinue the push for three divisions. 125/

 COMUSMACV's request of 7 June altered drastically the role of
the JCS in the build-up debate. Up to that time the JCS had, if any-
thing, been ahead of General Westmoreland in advocating Allied forces
for Vietnam. The 27 battalions of their three-division plan ,;Tere in
themselves more than VTestmoreland ever requested until 7 June. After
that date, the big push came from Westmorel~Dd in Saigon, and -the JCS
were caught in the middle between the latter and 'the powerful and stri-
dent opposition his latest request for forces had surfaced in WaShington.
The JCS memoranda of June and July 1965 \V'ere numerous and reflected,
apparently without guiding, the 44 Battalion debat ers progress. They
showed the Airmobile Division in and out of Qui Nhon as the debate on
the strategy for its employment ebbed and flowed. The 173rd Airborne
Brigade and the brigade from the 101st Airborne Division were first
counted and then dropped and then counted again as the total permanent
force to be deployed to Vietnam approached 44 maneuver battalions as a
limit. On the 9th of June, the JCS favored the deployment of the
Airmobile Division to the highlands. 126/ On the 11th they favored its
going to Qui Nhon after discussing the matter with the Ambassador. 127/
On the 11th, the total recommended force was 33 battalions, 23 U. S. with
the 173rd coming out, and 10 Third Country. 128/ On the 18th of June,
the total, had dropped to 22 and 10 as the 173rd ,;Tas scheduled to stay
but the brigade from the 101st was to leave. 129/ Final sanction for
both airborne units to remain in Vietnam was not secured until August.130/

 D. Search and Destroy ~s a Strategy and 44 Battalions as a Force

 It was not at all clear that ,vith the advent of the 44 battalion
debate the vestiges of the enclave strategy and the conservatism ,vhich
had characterized it had expired. On the contrary, enclave thinking vlaS
still very much alive. On the 11th of June, the JCS cabled CINCPAC and
informed him that somewhat less than 'Hestmoreland's 19118 was very close
to being approved for deployment. The force described amounted to two
Marine BLT's and three Army brigades, t wo of which had already been
approved. , The JCS wanted to kno'\v where 'Ivestmoreland intended to put
this force in Vietnam. 131/ The implicit intention to keep a string on
every unit going into Vietnam was obviou.s to (!.eneral 'I-/estmoreland. In
reply to this query and in respons e to the rising volume of criticism'
d}rected at his estimate of the seriousness of the situation and his
proposed utilization of combat forces, Hestmoreland sent the follow'ing
cable to CINCPAC: 132/

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 "A. Actions recommended:

 "(1) Deploy at once to I CTZ the remaining two BLT's
of the 3d Marine Division and appropriate supporting division
and air elements (approximately 8,000 personnel). Reconstitute
the SLF as a floating reserve.

 "(2) Deploy bala..Dce of increment 1 and all of incre-
ment 2 (as defined in Reference C [Ref C was an earlier MACV
message of 26 May 19657 of Army logistic and other support
units in accordance with schedule set out in Reference D.
[Ref D was a U.S. Army Support Command Vietnam message of
31 Mail (Approximately 8,000 personnel)

 "(3) Deploy the U.s. Army Air Mobile Division (and
logistic increment 3) through Qui Nhon to An Khe, Pleiku and
Kontum (approximately 21,000 personnel). Qui Nhon will be
ready to receive the division approximately 1 August upon the
closure of increment 2 forces.

 "(4) Concurrently with the Air Mobile Division, deploy
I Corps Headquarters (approximately 1,500 personnel).

 "( 5) Deploy the ROK Marine RCT to Cam Ranh Bay as soon
after 1 July as the unit can be readied for movement (approxi-
mately 4,000 personnel). Deploy balance of the ROK division
force (approximately 14,500 personnel) plus U.S. logistic incre-
ment 4 (1,500.personnel), starting 15 September to the general
area of Qui Nhon. (This anmvers Ref E ffiINCPAC message of
5 Jun~ in part - separate message on pages 96 through 103.)

 "(6) Deploy additional tactical fighter squadrons to
Cam Ranh Bay when expeditionary landing field complete at that
location. Also provide naval aircraft carrier support of in-
country operations as required; we believe the latter will .
engage one carrier full time.
 rr(7) Hold the l73d Airborne Brigade in-coUllt ry un tel
 l
the Air M~bile Division has deployed and is ready for operations.

 "(8)Continue air attacks against the DRV. (Reference F
LMAcv messa?e of 20 Mail applies)
 liB. Additional deployment that m~ be required and on which
planning should begin: ZEmpha sis added

 "(1) Three U.S. Army Hawk battalions to TSN Bien Hoa,
Qui Nhon and Cam Ranh in that priority.

 "(2) The remainder of the 1st Infantry Division or the
101st.Airborne Division beginning 1 Octob er.

 .95 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 ,- 1 ....., I~:: " J ;'. ,- J A' ..'.] r:.) t,) ::~: C) . .. . .-.) U) H , -~ ';-:j (:> l :. ,J ·_..·r,\
r z--' j ~I.: t I J j C) :\. ~ [' :"1\ \ , !"'c: (:::
 ) ;\") ~r ,~' l '~-j ':'.~ C) I·: . .
 t·.·] .... "
 ( 'J .. . ~ ,
 t .; j ..... .. L "-.t 1\"
 (' J \'( .' : ' f~ /
 ~f~ '~ -

 I -I C~ ill <
 ~,J v ) ~ . l'J 1'1 n·u Gl
 I.. " C) "\!
 () (fll-- ' l -·.":' t ' J "J I" j Vl I" :;'·: ..::: ... ] ~(I (f,
 • lJ
 C) :". ' 0 C" ;:r; ~.tJ 1· '1 (,.
 -u '0 'i"~:y
 ..
 L,') j - I :, .. t ' J l--I ~ ~~ (/J 1-) .. G' ) , ._) •.. • t· J (~ C r) ,. - C o, C· () ....

 r
 'U '.?'. , ,, 1 lJ c, tU 1-' ,--I
 "U C> :.1; • '-J C,J ~U ;r :I:~: : V, :.;:: 1-·j·U .... . C)
 ~u :><
 I·· I t " I :t'.
 :~:'.: 1.,1) 1- ) 1-) : .l t- J .--1 :u I . j l .l:J c. , U) <.:: :): C '; , .. If) >: : I:: (d ~:(:J. Ua
 I'J :10. ';;-:
 C) C~ t " j , .) t" J c: ; :::::: ~r: ::1.' n ,.. ) tSJ ;, . UJ VI ::< l :.:'J .(: ... ~
 [I) n C· ) ~. '. UJ t'J t '" ;" V) t'J t,j 'lJ . .. ] < :;J: W:' " I-J :~ ............ ' l ..J : I> :J--- 0\ ( j ~ \ ~ il
 'r -.
 L C) VJ <: I' j ;>;: " j ' --1 C) :.J_: (") p 'j ( . . In l:.J :, .~ (/ ) V) ·C ...... C'') ,
 :;0
 ' .q
 C)
 U)
 r"'·
 \1.,
 . _ I
 V "I ·C_ c· -' I " C) l.J V} , .. , ;u I , ;.- . I··J " ..1 liJ t' J " . ;.J
 :J l,i) ~>', " 'J ' .c.: I '.: ( "'; l') ~..t": 1.. -' I .. J I· . t"-J C) j, Ij
 Cl It:JIC)
 :.< ><
 : L'; C) ()
 ........... t ·· I . .: . -:
 I' ~
 L::.!
 (\ ~ (,J
 < .. : (J~
 ji '"
 'C1'u •"
 ('U'
 I
 ~C-.Ji.l d
 '1-" l' <: (;;
 ....., •.-i
 ',., t·...) ( /1 ['J :1>·~· · !' J " J: <: )·"; C )v)·Ul:.)
 ;i:::
 l - l" ''' I''l l( ):U : ;,--: '--"'" \.1I

 \'.'~\, "ij \ ...
 I Vl C ) . - ) ~/, j -" ;::~ j .; .... ) . ;(1 :-1: :;":. ['J h ["" C, ( J t ,) ......
 h) \..0 :.:.: () ::1.:; t . J : -< .--\
 t-i : 'J j t : I ) : 1 - C' , J I . J ~: ! I ~- C.J .:::: ( ) • u l r j ( ) •U i... : :,,' ) .!,.... -~ .
 ,..-. . CD \ - I·/ " J · .··(") , .. , '.-' ·(") ·.,· ' ) ' , ' C) ' / Vj·v , .... ,J UJ :1 . t \1 . 1>...... -:,
 \..J'\ .-] Lf;' . '. ,~~ Ii· J : ; j ,- ) . ': -: ,. t·J - : U')
 :. f~ 1- ' .,'J LU !.> , ) I-~ : ': LJJ ..-J ___
 I: ,: -J ~" l: I CJ f· . : ... '-......
 1 , ....0
 \ :. ..~l!
 tl

 o " .... Vi :1:- II J ( ) ,__ Cd ~.....:_ u
 t
 \..n »I
 \...0
 CJ
 :).> I '"

 t:J :.,. :'- '''):u :.. ?' / .: <: () l/l H :,. J C):U I. ' J
 o t - j C)' ) 0 1- ' ,..] C," ) :~.:: ' '''; , . ) :~. ,'J' .c; I ' II ' J , '. VI']
 C ' !'. < .. J
 h'
 II" ........
 I·
 :l>
 ~j~
 :"L-:
 I') L c ~ ;.r:J t'J ,. ) ;·CI U) :'J ~. :1 > . - ] ... . : :,.00 ? : , .. lf i lei) 0 Jl- :" < ,...-, % ;AJt n
 ) :;.~ I". .. .
 \!)
 z
 -1:- (/) '-I t·'J ;,. I'- I 1- ' ,-<: :< <- tr:.·J Cl , ] I'j ,..) 1\1 \)1 "d 1\11 'U \),

 n
 ,.- ....
 .f:-
 ~l -
 1.- )
 (Jl
 I
 \..JJ U)
 L) C) t · , c.: :.<
 ',)1-\ : .:~
 :" - I ·J
 ( j' )
 :?: :, ,. 1\ " (, 1"" I· J 1\./ 1 •
 U:J ,') I ) C) n : l -' .-_. j ~ :' ;:: 1 -- · .~ :l.. j t· ..-
 r •I
 -J
 <.. ) :: \..II
 ~< UI..J
 l ':'~
 8e;,
 ,... "'CI~
 ::<. o (II , c· c') C) <: ',' c· . ..,( t -· c,
 '1 >
 :--J ;; ~(j j:j 0 ;,': :.> '- 3 t'11 .J
 t." Vl ;1.;'
 <: I .J ~0
 •• J "
 -, -., C)
 , ~J
 ~. [
 '"_.
 l l)'U l"J :', •. ; n
 (")
 I
 I
 ,f::- ,
 ).> Iv
 I (fl H ~.<J (f) 0 : '.> 1- ) <: (fl : I) In r I) L': :: l~ :' ..: 1/' H 0 ~: :~ ~E
 t-.,)
 ~
 ()

 \.>J V ', ·1:- ,.. ) :::-: <: • (J) :;. ,- I I -J tI) [,.! C l L) 1', .) ,.. ) ,. 0 ::< { '-J ';".: I . ~) ..... :=J
 Vl
 ,_/ ,--, '- ' ".. 0' I · ..' l ''') C· 1- ' [ " I .- .. ' ' .' ' ,> ' , ) ' - ' j
 .... _ . .. , _. , _ . t' • (" 1 1/: ., Cl
 ). ~
 ; ..0 UI
 -....... ) .. ~I·.v
 z c.. (tJ

 \)1
 ~.IJ :£
 r, )
 o (/)
 '.:.::'. C) :-'..1 ,. )
 . ..] •.; ~ ["I ;.1:
 1'1 t .. · 0 V) VJ
 :1; 1- j . ~ .• : t .. J 1 -] (;- ,
 t" j ' "J I) :'f: I'j l::'J
 .. . _J ~\.' /~ If)
 I :~

 :l;" :< - ·1
 ..<,.
 (1 :.;: )
 ~-.~ I .) 3
 IJ"~
 -0

 \J ......". c._ ' 1 '-' I (:'\J I "'~~ ; ::f' {J JIJl ()~ ' f:l ' l(:)t-rJ C",
 I
 ~
 ,.. 1• . . • ,
 j 'i
 ) ;.. V ', :c hJ C) ::< (/l : , ) I "' i UJ ;, - If) h" (') I ' J C:.: l ) c. .. :-? .. tri
 ><

 , \; l:i ( ~)
 :1" , ... ) ~~~
 c;) '-.J C..l 1-" (/) r '-':I;'JJ'" C') [ ~ l t/J (,-) , I (.~:~ t -' Ult) I ·1 '-JO :.:::: rn "1 z~
 () c. :,u » 1. 1
 IOJ C ~I > C) "U tIl C) ,':'.' ! ' J i -I, ......} l}: ; { J j lJ. j :'i I Iii
 ......... C) •~ • - -4 z8
 (11
 -- ;
 ( .: I . ) ~:l./ : 1 '" C. I ~ ..~; ' ; ! : <"_,". ~, ~" J 1 ' ;0
 ~<. -0
 c__ ~~~ :i '''.:J
 tI ::1'.
 "0') 11'1 . '-- ",- -~ .
 l/) ( oJ :u r.n :1 :>0 t;.J >~ :1-" ", :.~ :1.": .') (") In
 » -.. . . c:•• o-~
 ::<:: V 'I
 ......... ~t..J [- I " ' : f.' J ',::~ ,_ ] I · , , --, • - ] ' 0. :I" 1.. I' J : l~ -1 t , J 1'J ;0 Z
 n . ,.~ t" ')
 t30
 i\ ~i.... \ :,i
 ;,;~
 \0 CJ r- \ _J. ) (") () ,,,~ • :., ..' L' l:.J • J'" ( ) t..·· ["-1 I ..J [- ' "/ 'r~ (') - .- I rj
 ..........
 0'\ 'TI 1'1 C) o :::: ['.. j . . ' t •.j I ' j 1- ' L. . - J In ;=j :~.:: ;..v ,_.
 :.-:':. ( OO) ):.--
 0-0-
 . ~
 t, . :1
 -1'-- L.. :.0'. :". :.:: l'.1 H :'1: (") c::.: [''J () t' J III ·u .";:' r ~~ . ; tt:J ....
 .r.·- t,I "-' r.u r--! . . q t.! I ,
 \..>.l
 ......, , 'U) " ' J ' '' j :, .. ',,:-; I I '"' j '.. ~: ;J:J 0 " 'J t "J r) 0
 c-.-: t"..:"j ):>
 rtr (, in
 ~ . . .I
 l-, i
 '< t;:;
 \..f"I r- I',)
 :1>
 .....J (J
 VJ ' . J C) :1'> .- ) I' J 1-1 (fl '-'J C)
 ....J;0 0
 C) ' -.
 {)I n ' ell : 1 C' i ~' ~ ... z~
 CD ()' V -, , -, ~i.:-
 . .. ) ("J : L! .- )
 ~p.. l~ ' t C)
 "' J
 1-··1 t- ) '1> ·' 1' , • . .~ ~ ]. . :;- j
 1- I
 "·u V~ 0> ,..,; ,-" ,\,) .~
 ,,' ~ .0-
 ;;D ""q l:..·J tic/)
 0, (fl '~ ? t <J >:;' l:.::J [-' 0 ::;-' l~j.:6 · ·)C I , :'J

 .. t,j C'
 . ~;

 c/ [. j , :.;.j
 ..'U 0)
 , Q.~.,~, n (/)
 c :.~ t:=i "J .:-~:. ! )'J [, 1
 '1.) ("..:>
 ill' (),
 I I t ' J u) "I{J) -:' (I) U I
 .-. H Ii; : :<
 :' > ~ I r- J
 :z
 1· '1
 .
 (0 n
 ::~ .. J
 ~ --('"., --\;I
 ::1"
 Ij
 · '- 1
 t)·~) tI~
 ~ _.
 . 1i..... ,·.,Iij
 !~::,
 -~
 ...--.
 VI
 (/)
 J>
 1"',
 (")
 CJ
 L

 ,
 \ . <V
 .'·u ,-] :1;.. ~ I I ( ) 1. - 1 1--' ;'10' ; ',; ".j , .
 o t o. I - ): U ["j '< :1] ;.U
 ~;:. '; J III
 t:..J c) VJ
 :">
 ::~
 ' -1
 (") .~,
 n
 '0 :.r; ...i,
 .,'
 ",')
 . L-,j ..... 0
 (P ::l
 NVJ
 Ow
 I~
 (0 I ;0 (fl <.~ t ·) 1--' ' -J l' ~ (" 'j I'''' ;.(1 t'j [-J ;C' ......... t" t I
 l.. .~ · ., t, ) fer c .) ''''I t:-) . ·-1 l -) c:~ :,..,
 . .•."'{. V) ,..- -. -q ,..OJ.... .- J 1- -) Cl
 :., til : :::: 0 ~t'~ c-: I - I
 "J ')J () (7)
 "J t- ' t·,) [ ''-J
 .........
 ";lo. 1- ·
 '
 •
 ·.1:' '-.J
 () '.~< c) ' . J '7. ,--I :r-, til Vl UJ

 ;~<"!
 .. "
 (.) 0 0 tlJ (fl '7
 ......... --..J \.TI ,<
 , ~;<. l.~-) ~ ~' J ~ I J • :. ~ ._~ . , ) I J :;-:: t. j j ~:J "JI
 1t:::J
 f~:X:~~::,':r
 ,t" • .-....

 ... ~ 1,t' " I,-;J . n ''l l'' j I - I :U '"(I I )'j (I) '--J :-~< :;0
 r- !,-.J -j':'-
 :» :!":. VJ
~)
 ,~
 ~' '''''l
 ~ .. ......j
 )

 - -r:-
 0')
 .. -
 0'

 ,...-.
 .....1 c: Ilj
 :L; "(I

 ...
 ::<
 fi ")
 t• .: .: .... )

 :!':
 ~I;'- . _.~
 I ..) ;" I ~ :.. tj, ~ - j f.f)
 [,.J .- J r<J
 • -) :;::< 'T' (,J
 O '--Ji ;'j ~ l > .
 [}~w;·: ,;: :; c......,
 ) Ot( [" 'j If) , .; ] l ' J t J J '- + ,l-" 0)
 t.:) .j \. 1. ) L . ;0
 ) 1-- 1 : 1': c)
 .
 ·1 crJ :-~:. • -1
 t~ .s.., yJ c; I-
 C) , "1 C)
 . ~ . G'J CJ <:: :'[: 1--' t··J ':.1 nt..:J
 I
 r'" (,rlc-J »
 ::J t , J ; •.• t rJ : 1.;. 0 1 rfi ;<) j ' -
...' /
 \
 C) ',<V
 oc; ..
 'L ... ~ -~
 t, tJi t.') . f.. •
:" (i j> ".. . - ~

 t-.)
 I
 ( ,) '-J ::0 :: ~: r-.· o
 .,._.-' ( ) U:
")
.. ,
~ .... J
 ~.
 c..•J /~j;:? ' )
 , -~

 I:'"
 ~ :)
 '-
 V ', :..:<
 u
 ~ ~l' -I~;;I""
 r;j'tz(l • -.. J
 .'

 c O>; n v)
 \D

 ::- C; :-"-01 ;I;i:'-,;-'01 u-:-l2.'---,
 _ _ oJ •
 C':J

 · I ·;(); i"' I "-' () I
 \D
 -- I .-' . ,ll'l ><,.) 0,
 fr \~:\ i!n CJ)\ (I'I" '! .:::;
 !.:;'::' ,'.' I
 Ii .....-1 .1::..,
 ~.~
 ~ ("~.,,.~
 "\) \.f'I
 (/1
 ', :- .... _' ~ , I <:> i ~' iii .1,
 .... (., J "
 0
 I I':' I1 (.';" , )..'". '" CI.,~ I! s:lJ" if,. •
 f
 (U

 (/I
 11,
 v. .) , ~. 1.1 <.::.")
 ;.'; ( ,.) .
 • .. oJ \..0

 I
 L) I
 .~
 ... I
 VI VI 0 -., ._ I- "'''',\

 - -1- -/. ~ ..I_1_
 ./ \.() I .,Il l ' " •. ~t

 I
 I
 --·1·, I
 ... ' .. ; .. __. _.
 ,
 _ ._ ...c::: .,_ l ._'!' _. J ~.'. ·:~~. __1~~:... r.~ ~
 ~' I
 , _ t -- _.' -
 ,
 !~'
 -_.
 >~
 ;:;
 ~.
 i
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 ~. ;O}CE RSQU!~EM~~TS. ~ACV ~AS ~S~~D ?QR AD~ED FORCES IN
 ?.27 F.~ T~::S:: CO~<SIST O~ Ti~\;O 24~T7.~.~~O~,~S TO 20L::~JOUT TEE 3D L":.;;:I~·~S
 ~IVIS:O~, A ~O~ DIV!S~O~) A~ A!R~OSIL~ DIVISION, TH~ R~TS~TICN 07
 T:~ 173D .qI~30? L\:2 3?~I G.~.r;s~ TP.CT~Cl:.L ?I GE:!:::cS P. ~,~D 6 C02PS EE.:;.J-
 Q~~: ~~S 2L0S CO~3AT A~D LOGISTIC S~??OR~ ?02C~S • G~ HAVE A~SO

 ~ -. CO:~C:::?: C? ~:/I?~O'!~-::::: :·:T ~
 CINC?A: A~A~~SIS 07 TE~ SIT~AT!CN AND CONC~?T O?
 Q.
 O?ERA7IO~S I S ?~O?~~~~ ?OCUSS~J L?O~ T~~ ?O?ULATION- l~AT IS,
 L?O~\! Ih2 ?20?i..:::. 7~~ ? E IS ~JO JOU3~ ~·J:-:~~.TSO:::\/::R TrL~.T Tl-:S ll\:S:';~G==l~':Y
 II,l SC) Lrf~ VIZT ~·~:~.:·! ~-::JS'1:' :: ~j:=t'~!U.~. ~LY· 3~ D~?E:P.TED ..l.t1QNG TEL ?:::O?L E I~1
 Th~ H.l.:lLSTS .po. >!D TOl'~ ~IS~ :-:C:I~V2:2J ~I~ O?'J~~ TO DE;~.~J 7EE I~JSu2GEt·~CY
 p~!O~\:G T~-i::: ?EO?~E:; T~~~· 1~~~ST B~ ?:{O \]I2)~D S~~?(ITY Ot' TLIIO KI~\;DS:
 (1) SEC U:<IT~- 07 TE;:: COL~r:?Y .~.S .A. i.·:::OU:: ~~O:·l Lfl.RGE
WELL O~GANIZ;::D A ~ J ~QU!??ED ?C2C;::S :~C~UD! N G TEOS~ ~H~CH ~AY CO~E

 (~) SEC U~!TY 7RO~ T~E GU~~~ILLA! T~E ASSASS:N, TEZ
 i~:::RC?1 ST .~.~.:J :-i:: IN7 02.tC:::2 -
 3~ MA:V IS CONVI N C~D T~A7 US T2CG?S CAN CONT213UTE
 l.<T.:_~V~:"Y IN T:~E ?!2ST Cu_T:::G OR'! C? 5ECU?1-;:-Y .;S 101 ?A~.c,G?A?:-r 4-(1:)
·"'-'J~!\.i:"5 3U'! T:-r~.T C:JLY T:~2 \jI::lr\i;:'.:·~::=S::: C.':'.>l ~<.::'.:\:: ~:::.£;L ?20G~==SS 11~JD
 ~CC:: =D I· ~ . R.~~?::Cl TO l::E ?:t03~:::< I:,! ?~:< .~.G2 ..J.PE4.t.l~ C~) .6.2.C,:1.I"2.-
 :]~ ~rO~Llj?·~ ..;T~i-,'! , l:r~ .~~? V :~ IS B:=I :~ ':; D;:~w. ~,,:~; ~~t·J I\:~' :;::{ C~~ ~:-:~ ?20?LE .~:·I~
 T2ElR S:::CL7tIT Y 101 C~J2~ TO r!==~T :-~~ C~.;L:"2: )~G~ C? Tt":~ l'L~I~j ~C;}C~
vel J~V C77~~S=V~. :~~ 3~S~ I~~CST?ATION G? T~I5 ?OI N: IS T~~ ?A:r
 TE~ T~S II CO~?S CC:~ :l ~~~!J::F: :1.~.S :'=~S~/iO\jS~ ~·'~.~.ST OF T2~ TROC?S ?~or·:
T HE ?ROVI~C~ 07 3:~H D1N~ D:TH ITS N E A~L~ O~ ~ MILL!CN ?~O?L~ IN
 O?J)~~ TO D::~ E:N J Ti-:2 !tSL.; ·~I V r:L Y LSSS 1 :'i? O~·T P.~J T· ?RC)iJI t~CZ C4~'? ~ T.u.L S
 0:; KQL'IT·~:~ ~\~\:D ?~:::=KC T~2R==::'C:t:::) TI-!2: :-':.::'.'21 CONC~?T IS 3.~.S:C . ~.L:_Y
 TO ~:1?l... G~- CS ·?O?~C:-:S TOG2T::::~ (';1T:: v ~S:\,~. L·lE:S~ P.I~302 ~ :2: .~.~.~!) L< .C-.::= ~L::
 >\ ~ ·~ .' __
 i - u:.,,'::'
 .,,~'~ r'J~
 ·--; "':"::" "7 \: 7 :J'· ! :;7~7::l':7 Cl I~ ' 7 \-;::~ -;,;..:r.- ;..:·. CjT\r .o-:-':;' -:':J ij / ; j "
3 nl.:.-.. _ ... ;.~ \.:;_ . i _ ... ~.-..--o .,._--'_, '.v ..... . ,...::.-._ . .
 ..,.i.!. ~
 ....... _"i..)'-'
 ...- ...~ ... L - l .. " V

 ?c;:css I); ~2 .~CTIO~,1 .L. :!] S:::P;.~C:t .~. t<7 J:=S7?~OY O?:::R .~.TIO~\1S , .~~~J :~us
P E:?:'! IT I:-:£ C0 t\~ C~ ~'~T ?. .~ T I 0 ~"; . 07 \/ ::NTt< .:.t'I:: S ~ T~Q O? S I:,! T ~-:E H::~~. \] I L':.~
 ?C?U!..ATED A?~AS Al..O:-;G Ti-i~ COAS-=-:; .~~OUND S.::'.1GON .;~~j) IN T:~~ ::;~LTP-.·

 PAG~ 2 or: 3

 .. '

 ..
 97
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 c. ~S EAV: TA!LO~:D :OGIST!C SU??ORT F02C~S TO ?ROVI~E
 ?:i?( 50:-::: '?;.C7:C_t~L ~L~XI3ILITY S f] T;{~. ~ O .1C==S f/l~.'[ s:: SHI?TED 1~'J
 ,/ .~CCGRI;.::' Y CS ~'; !T:: T~:::: ST?::NG'T;-; .!.l.t,~J ~':OV ::: ['-; ~ ~;T 07 T::2: VC. CO NTI:!UOU S
 .;\J:-·lUS7:·:~r.;--:S .~.i<D :tE2jiST?'~3UiG~O~\S L!:<DO .U 3TEDL~ ·(·J :~L 3::: i\r::CSss.;?y .
 · 1:1 :S Llf:2:L'! 1:'~~."T IE::: ~'J.~.~ ~1:~LL CO :'~:INU:: TO 3:::C Ot~ ~ tt~8~-(E ?Ll~lJ AND
 r~:c~~ r'i03 =L2:~ L·::: 3ELI~ \j L TE.p.T TE~ rL~J·02 36~SSS .e..T D.D~ ~!p.. L\;G~ C:rU L!~ I9
 ::~:: ~,J HO~,I; C~~:/~ ~ .~~S~ .~~D SP.: GO:J - 3:2~J HOP. ?20'jID2 T~~ 9.~CI\ ~C; >l~
 S~i??O:~T C~ ~:~ ~:C~ i':03:~E ?O:<CZS C.':':-l B ~ SU??ORT2:D .t.~'~ J ?ROi'l ~·.:iICii

 D.' IT IS l'!O '! OU~ CO~;C :::?7 T::A~ Tr-:~ US &JCUL!) I.6.:<::::
 EXCLUSIVE CONT~OL O~ ~~SPO~SI3~LIIY ~ O~ ANY :~T:~= ? ~OV INC=
 ~~L::-?~OUG~ 9 :L i'i ?~.~.CTIC:::]
 O~~LY TOI<EL< G\j~; :ORC~.s. t·lI G !~~ R~f'~.~.~N. :-l-r US
 G~~·: ~R40';'LLY ) {:J: :-::;ST ~.~.~C:-! C!UR :O~C~S ~IJITl-i IiiE TE:<r(~l'ORlt\L C~GI~.~~~ZP.- ·
 lIO N 07 T~Z G VN ~ G= ~ GST STR= N GTE:::~ A~D SU?P O]T IEZ ~ VNA 7
 ST~ !.JCTU?: ::: '?O K:::=? 17 .:"L::V=· ~.ND O?::~.~'flij:::. (oJ::: S:-:OLjLD GE: r: :::?:.~L!..Y
 CC}~\: CZ~1 T?'~.6..1S TJS :~'O~C~S ?:l:.~y ~ ~O:'! ~'~_~jC;{ ?C?UL.~TIO t~ CE ~lTS~ S .~~JD
 f.iW';-·,,::'I.i:'D
 ,..~.~1 ' _V~ 1 '"
 :),]C:C::
 J. '
 7 :)r;::-
 >J--':....~~_
 Dur-
 ,
 ~
 ..J'-;:'
 .I. .. !.:...
 ':J
 _
 .• Ui((·
 _ ~\
 O~
 ;'"1
 "7,
 U1...J;-,
 .. :,.." ,- 'J'7"l"l\:r
 .;.\,;.il':' \.J
 T~l:
 _
 j'.:(',p':
 ", .. \".1 ... _
 O ~- '<u""· 'i-::
 ................... ......
 . . =p..S
 .,~. .:l
 :;. D~?LO~~ >! ::: r·:lS.
 Aa MACV RSCOG~~Z8S T~AT T::~ ~ N - CGJNT?:¥ LOC~T!C~ O?
 G~~ G0~\I D CO~'12AT ?O?(C:::S ::.,.s
 .!J. B~.~?::\l G l~ ?C; ~\~ Tl.J::: SIZSJ ~L:. TuJ.= .Q i'.1D
 ~LOCP.:IO~\1 0-; LO~ISTIC SU??C?T ? O~C::S) ?O~"TS, A~~;I==LJS A~·;r) ;(ELil£T~D

 '~ qr ~~ I~~~~~~~J ?~~;l i~I ~RE6g.~~:; O~:/·~gi ~~ £ ~~; g ~~.~ I~~?~~(~;"; ?6rTEig;: TI:'i E
 ;(=;;'~I?~~:·:=~·:TS Ti~::'~:J= ~2: \i 2: L~O?2J .. E:;L~ :: iJ ::R, ,~~S T:-I~ ~~ ~:<8~ ~( O? CC ~'iJ.~.T
 ~(~_ ::::S · ~~ Q:.J:::S~~D .t. ~}D 2::GLLi~~2:D I:IC~~.~..3~S ;.i"~ J !::~ ~!:~:/:3 ~~ 0: CC~':3I~':.~:­
,• . ~G\S A~D ?=~~U7A ~IO \ S R~GARJ:~G LOS~TIO~ CO?~~S?ONJINGL~ =NC~~AS~S •
 " '.7"-
 •..:. ~ \. !.i

 j ,~
 ;'1...
 7°
 -..

 REI~\~ ~C?:CE ~~G=:"::: i\1 TS' ~ Q~ I??:: D l;Jli:-: ~E.~.VY·l··.:::P.POt<S-- T::US~ t:J:: .q~::
 A?? ~OACE ~ ~G T~~ KING Ci WA2 ?C~= 70:~J 3Y T~~?R~~C~ IN !~[ L~7T:R
 ST"~GZS 07 THE:~~ £7?O?TS I-ER:·. IT IS ~ :~TLE:L~ ?OSS:SL::: T.~A-:- T::s
 !)s:V C_~.~·I P~),:!) (·jlLL DE:?LOY 7h~2::: OR :"IC?:S: D:;J'IDICr~S I r: "~~C SCJ--:t~ './ I~-::': ~~:i
 3 '[ =~~:ILT2~_~.7IO L\! ~ IT IS HIG2~Y L~:< ELY T:1.';l ON:: IS AL?:::A~~· ::::?::::~
 TERE?C~E9 !T ~ILL 3~ N~CESSA2Y TO ~:ACT TO TH~ IN:RODUCTIO N J?

 ..:::;-\,1 Cv, -,' vli r;- _~ _
 'J C.\ t, r ..
 \' 0/ '"''-' .\1V .~ r-: :\..,\..,

 .' PAGE. 3 c;: 3

 "A'I:-_ .,.."- ~ ~_

 ~.:~ ~ (,..::~
 .(") c .. .
 ." C' ~'-

J.)
 ,i ~?
 (/
 I
 \.n
 ,.
 »
 ,-. ,........
 I
 \.)

 I' )
 I
 , :z
 -q
 0
 ,

 . _) " 'j :'::': : ,'j
 :1: () I-Il ' J "": ,-I :'_ :<
 ( ,
 llJ UJ. :, I ! (') ef)
 '-.'; I· I
 (fl ' ) ;-U t .". I.·J to
 ( ,; ~:: C> 1" l ' J :~::. ~O
 , -) L:"J .- ) trl 1-- 1 1--)'-' 1 ('.J V) 0 .:: : '. J
 . • -) ~; " ; 0 ~,:~ , I"J 0 I' .j""
 .,-.
 .... , r -, ~ I 'J :UI ),' " (I):.( j . ,.) , -- ) :.', \' ) / ,1.,): - .-: C) <;-: C) I ," J t ," (H- '
 \', . Co C) ~(~ C) I:'i H 1"1 : U ::(1 C H ~:I ..: H I" I ' ''-J 1- ) 0 ;\ J 001 :"(1 : rl l'-l VJ
 \..1... ) . C) C . Lo l '-J I ', : :-_. :-0 [-,' c,) l ' ) ; 1, ' , ...) v (I) l:J 1-, 11 -- 1 I r j 'u c: C) \".h ( .: ( : ( J ....... \.
 n U ) , .. ... 'r.· , ' r ) 1 ~~ : ,.,·f l' J S;) 1 _) I.&.J f t, .. 1-) . >~ ( j (I t:1.:J "ll . ; \->1'- '" I JI'dl. h
 •
 \.Jl .!•. \.n VJ l') l~'i' (; '-- 0 -. r';: C:": I .. : 0 : 0 C)
 0 1 I :.·.. : ~I VJ
 i'l ;", '- i~_: !';'~ l.:': l" (J) ;>, :'<\(;1 l :."
 " - .1 \ I) 1,1 • .1 : , ; LrJ 1- ) :" , (.J I - I C'" (. I: ) , .; , -)(") :~~: l ' [ '" C J I - I; " Vl \.)1 .:< l. :J ' l "', (., )\ \
 ' .. '-.'" I ' · C) t.: : r~ ld , .. ) ;0 : ;~~ I' ) 1- ' !I: (Il LJ I , ) t '-J : ; . , ' < l -...J !, - :, -. (h C , I ., ' ~ -,

 ·tJ , ': I ' : ',,-1 ,- ~ I"-j l " 1", 1 ,,- I-' J ~~. : c : () I " J Cl !'.-- .
 -'1
 ,- VI
 ) ',
 r-.. <,.
 \',", ' j: :< [."., ( i 1 - ) 0 1"-) C' l "' - l::J 01,,,11-' 1 :'> :\J n l )" ;\ " 1 CJ
 ' t:J Vi <" )
 :' ~ I 1 0 1\',
 ( l.J
 '-~ 0J
 t.n l' . ~
 I. '
 :-1. ~ d :"... ~ ; : ~:~ '. J ( j " w) :..._: t-· U'J 1-; 1 l' j ~~< u ; :':-' -, ~ ...; ..::!
 4
 () ' -.... l"J
 I · .... l..l . .::' .! .:-
 (-
 c' (I , ~..:: l::l () \ . ~ ~~; J-. ) (.v; ~·d :"J~ C) ~ .. .J (J ~::: :.() I l _1 CJ \.JI ' \..1)
 1"11 r. : .I ' . l I I • ) \ .. , l'l 1' - 1 VJ () C' I' '. U'J ' LJ 1-'::: lJ) :.:~ I'· ; I"'! tfJ Ci l ) () 'U I, '. •......
 .:.:~: U.I C) \" U J '- J : • . I ···t l J J ~~ : L: (/J t~l
 1 VI
 II"( \) I
 1 C_
 (/ 1
 I·
 "J 1 "1 ~<
 ' .-j
 :,': 0 1-.1 [ :1: :"" ttJ I '~ : U U 0 1-· ' ' ''l
 VJ : •.-
 (")
 (: :
 ::< IU
 :0
 .\
 ,--. 1 r -" \ 1 C) :' : llJ '··:i VA :-~ : 0 l:) Cl c.' LII 1'1 l/.) 1- ; t" (J] l~ ! !,() I ,' ) 0 ' - ) l "· :, . ~' ...
 \.Jl \Jj 10 VJ L) , d l -' O l.6 Jt -':cJ:·lJ: '. , < UJ ( I} . .JI -J I : (,I !.l!
 CO .....-.. . (") , . - ... :0 C.;C) : O :,.·, l::.:1~'UC.1 C) 1-;1 ,',
 ( 1- )'-] LJ.1 !' -· '" '-... I.D
 ........ .!:- .\ ( ", :.:, " Vlbl VJI'IC) '-, ' : "'I-'J" ' I JI
 :;;'-" '-"-" \ .'• \.11
 .!:" I'.)
 I 10
 1
 '0
 (I, ('-i", ' H 1'"1 '- ) ' .. J , to (--') 1- 1 1- ; ':' ;, ::::: V; U i,; i' l _" \.)1 .. ) Z
 ~\.} I ··' :' : C) - ~t:- ;O
 (I)
 . ·1:'
 I .!:-
 ..... '
 .1".
 , .,'"
 ,; ,,:
 C) .-_.) (") I') \-I 1"1 :.(1 I .)
 ",' :d :'.: l -" I - l'UVJl'l
 'LJ (.) l"JJ 1- ' :' ~ 0 1" 1
 loll
 ~',' : UI \J, ?:~ 'I I t"\
 L'"
 \JI 80
 -
 ()
 '-. t . ! :J . C> ("") 17 'J C): I ' ; Ul (::: ~J" : d U J !?-! 1-- ' :J.: ~J) '=- (' I ~
 0' ,!',..1.1 ..,"'d
 (')
 0 :~ U) ~ 1-. ) l ' J: U 0 <: ':< I ' i H :'1.: .--J :.-< .--) I-··J ,. H 1'-' \-I "J :-- 0 C:' o ~
 :;( c. "0 :.< I"'J ~.i :.. U) v) :,"! , ) ,._) 01--'1 en 1-"' l- ' "J :. (1 \, i ~. fJl

 " :=J--
 1·- 1 "-:: U l.J t
 ~ fJl
 CI () ( ) . (I) I ·-J 1-'-1 v) ::( L.. \' 1-'1 V J I' -" ':':; C l (Il r' < ,- ) () 1'1 -:::: _
 . ...
 ;) .
 I
 I t_)1 ~
 VJ C) ' VI :1: f .:
 tJJ c-
 I - j 1- ) () 0 1- -'
 l- I I·'"
 1"11 '"1.:-'> :' ;;. () Cl
 l '~ 1 I /~ ' / l1J I l ' ' j ..
 :-< ""':: :'. :.
 n ) .~ ].: ~ , ~ ~. '.J z~
 Q.
 -U J ;~ (")
 t
 ' , . . . ....... 'J : 1(1 1- . C) }.o r-
 :t:. I ('; I':; : :_) t:) :-' ~ ' .- J : ~J :.-:~; t -:J :J> U i";-j 1- ) : 1': : < ; -< 0 <:: -...... )" • 'J 3u
 C;) I'.) ,,-.... ,. .... !d o "::: 1-'-1 a--) 'U '-LI H I ;"1 1.,/) tl:) :-,:: L:J " - ;A! ".< (f) t .. '., .~
 CT~
 ,.._.... ' 10 \..1"1 'li 0 ; '" I .) U C) :1:: (r) ~ =.-; :::-: .:::.: :J:- ~( - 0 0 (;) () lJ , . .. ,I
 i'; .. I ,' r i ~
 :;
 tTl
 1'1
 -I-' VI '-' VJ :lIl"'" :,_: 1-1'\) ; •.!-- l:J I ··: I ' ) ~',,-': (J) \ - 1 " ~oj ( ) 1-1 1--] I_ I
 U ;'.: I 'c ) ><
 .
 U) . " ::::
 ..J c.: !. 1 ~,< 1- " 1' l l ' J :·d :c:' 0 ~ ~ ; . ~ :.:.~..~ z~
 ,--,.
 ~ '- " ' '\! I') I ') 0 : 1; (J) 1 I :::-:; U •.• .

 0 , U)
 c..
 ( -,
 ,
 ,'.
 :' -.
 (/):, ;
 I } td <.:!
 !" 'H '""
 >:: :1 ':"
 1;1 o l:)OOUJI ' J , -")l:J:. ~ O()
 :' ~ " \.' tlJ r~ J I- I :.L: c :: ~~ ~ 1'_)
 ()-:'- Iol
 (J !.'? ):"
 f;'~ :1 i . )
 '( 'J '~ .'
 85. <
 \0
 - '1 CO 1, '1 I (J) 1· I ' : d ul, ")H~, : 'J Ul(/)VJI' II"' I O t ) I - I(1) '-.('2 ~ ) !'I ; : c) O\~

 \0
 ....... ,~
 C)
 ,.' .... ~-::~ C , l " 1 ' t"ll:) I ::0 I : I ' ; :'''''' Ul c: 1- ' efJ 1- ) ( ') IJ I .."- \J i,1 l: ; ;,) t30
 >- ..,
 \.J.) CJ " -j U f: U () ,-- ) c, 1 : '-,- C) t'J 1- ) 1- 1 ( ) :. ' (" J '< -::--
 C) Iii O~
 ,' ~
 :. 0; l ' J C) ; .:":" ~ /,;C_: :,-! l - J; -;~ : u~. ~u) ::':---::;~:l-" I - ) zI
 ,. J : .
 ii Vi .
 0\0-
 ~

 ::.:: .1'1
 , '-- ' :--t:: () : ;.-~ <.:.: ,J :- :1 ' . l-··J ! ~ , 1':.. I :.~ LJ) G) t -' I ·,,' :?: n
 fI I.~;:J co:'
 0
 I \)", (-
 o
 '()
 : ..f) ~~:-:~ I· J 1--1 : (J C-) I ,· 1 1--<:
 1'-11-"1 C-) I "' I I J II ~
 t -' J C'}
 <.~
 :r.-" <. I :) .....
 :,;. U1 C: (J)::<
 I-<! I d 0
 I" ':'::::
 ;;00
 '-.-u ,..
 • . 1 -,· 1
 ".)
 '< w
 "
 Z N
 U1

 ,
 10
 ... . \.J.J
 1-' 1 :' " I '~ I '"J ~.'-"'; Y. " :: <: "0 :~ (") IT } 0 .- .) :. ""
 ).>
 '-.
 !:J l:'
 ,- J, ~ .0\
 1'-> I l'-' (") :-lJ 1'") 1"1 I- -j C! :"tJ :-0 U ~I> :.1':: V.i t,J :.1.: ,< Iv .<~' I t::!CI:J
 .!:"' 0' cn 1·1 ' -·Jl- ' < !:C. 1 " I:~.:: l'" () l' ) ~-<-:: 1- 11'1 (,'" ~
 \.0
 , W
 I r --'"
 '-.J
 UJ
 Ul
 1- : ' - ll ' l l:-J l.:J:U C> :..:-:
 C) 1" " 1-11- 11;; I' i
 l .ll -:::
 :' - 11
 '--1 ,:.>
 :.--c:: l- '
 :.I, AU1 I - II -'-):~!. "jl'J
 00 I:' ,i t::!~
 ~
 ,.. -.
 0
 V -, 0 f0 .\.- \. , (J • /"J lJJ 11'1 ',::. .. ",' 1'- I ~ ::l
 l "" I :.. '" -0;-:""' f I J_'..
 (') ,--'
 ,,-:- I~ . ,. ;--~ 0 .:.:: : I ~~' ~ i,) : j~, l -' ::-: '. -) \.j 01- -' ::::: 'C I 1- ) (,I N:--'
 Ow
 '-/
 )-. .......... :\1 l - ' I , ) : j :> lJi ' 'lJ UJ liJ I-I :1: :'" 0 : ,;
 1--' Ol-' 'J\ · '" : ! ~J I · /I --· () ;"'<OC!lU:,U :UI ' 1
 (") Vl :,-. l I < ; l'l 0 0 ~U 1-' 1 l - J "J ," !() l" J " '-J
 I'
 U)
 :,. . .
 U L.
 -r:,-- :(J I ' I UJ c ) /.;~ <: <! 1-' ) 1< r-' :c-.
 OJ <:~
 I- " &1 '-. (; ) 1""1 ~U 1- : 1'1 I-- J 'LJ 1- ) "d :c..
 :<: :-0 ;1"- (')
 - II
 ,
 .()! VJ \'••1 1' 1 :, ~ ;l"'I' j:" ~":;
 : ". :: a- ou!r:~( J: I~
 () 1 - :.1:
 0 1"'-1
 U'II -' \ -'!J" l ' I V I "
 P}l ' ) C , I'} o Ul

. "-)
 ,
 J> r -'" c:) ··tJ en t-. ) C '.":::-, :1
 I... :1.,. ..:::: .....j 1-"'1 (,-) ( .I J : :/~ I-} i <! 1--1 :) :":'
 en - q , P -I
 u :_1.: . :-.< ,... ) :.:r: ;':::' )-:'::':~
 r ~.
 I ":: :'I ~ ' , ·1 : : ~< l::J ;-~ : : /~ ~ .< ::d ::LJ n
 , V -, \.() \'" - 1"1 r;)
 1- 1 <":":'::,: :1 .'1:1,' 1' 1 1'-1:,:· I - I C : LJ C)~<" :C: -- I
 t /~
 l \'; V 'I
 I
 r'""
 V .I
 '-.J
 I
 "J ,- ' ' -1 1" ' 1 :':_: >:: I···'
 : oj
 () l~-J
 :1.:"
 1-- )
 ,-<
 ._) LJ V)
 1'1
 :.~ ()
 ,. 1 I ' ")
 . -) "
 : .l! (')
 :J>
 : .~ 1--1 (J)
 l- '\o,
 1"- '
 .: i
 ~:i ;':::~~
 lAl
 (J) CI :; :,..
 P 'l ; ,;,,-..
 :":"J ::: ' , .•
 .!, 0
 1" 1 c-. ," p ,:,:,
 .,
 ( J',
 ;
 0)
 I ', )
 ....._, V .l
 I '-- '
 ,''-'., lt·, I ,< . ' U ("1
 ;, .
 ",'
 . ,
 [i . I ~. i.J
 r:' :.:,) ( ~':J
 -r,: c) (.) \
 . . _- 0(,,) ~o :\'-)
 l J;
 \0
 , I'" ' ( '5..:~':1 .' 1
 C) '-- C ) " . (,) I

 c)
 I ~'; i··( " .1
 L":. . ....' \'\ "'I--j
 ( ,:.',
 '" , ,, ..
 ....
 .f;::_
 ,' In : l~ c..)
 (") --4
 0'
 \.0
 -"
 V .)
 1•J • J' '~j

 '.
 .... :~ , ...- ,-

 w ",
 '>,
 (')

 ( .I \j
 , :I 1- ) ~~ , ..) H
 ,'j ~(J 0(Z) H U) ~~ :-::: ~'r', 1" 1 H 0 , . ) '() .
 :'-;, () (~)
 " "J :~~ ;-\'I 0 I '1 !' , :. ; , ... ] Ll:1 ,.. ] ,. ) t:J t: } 1--' ) : ,.:; ::u "0 " .. 1 ~,..!.' '
 tL! c.:.) lJ:J :l;· :r: ~ :., :p. ~' J ~ 1 '(") C') ( ..., t···: ~~ ~ t ..: ::::! l·... II .. \ :J: ~\, \
 <-.
 ~~I
 :1: ( -) "-1 ~~: " '~ I ~~:"; t:~ !'l! ,,,,,
 :' 0 I " ) C, : . . l " ~ -: I,) C,
 I,.j :.,: , .-) , . ) " <:1 c::
 ~I '; , .\'J L : : Jo ~ : .,~!
 C)
 ~": :::.:
 t:J ,. ) I " ] :.;<
 11')
 UJ
 , . ) VJ
 I ' ) OJ 1.. 1 ~ .: 1-' , .) "-~ c ; ~ ~ :.: ;
 V, \ - 1 ~~~
 ";; 0:;'; c:. H H ClI ') I ' ) 1"1
 Ul I's ) I' ) ;' " :" ~ ~.; "-"! 1" 1 1.. 1 ~ I ~ ,,, l\'11' I 1'1 ;,...
 . \.
 1: '0 ( .. J i ' l !'J! ( '.l J ~:;~.l. ' " :-0 () 1- 1 ~;. ': L:J :·d ~ Ilo \ --- t l "' j i " I I .oJ tJ. J · ~'.~ Uj (-) tlJ (fJ l :'(! ~,..-::~,.;.~ <:
 e) l -l .!..
 f. . :', . (/ J
 :I ~ ~ I ! ~· !:.l:tJ J I · ·'
 r···) ( .~ ,,' - I c) ' -J , .)
 ~,· ,· t.~:~-< l .~·jl· ' J~·' ~ " : ·~ l'J
 ::: .: { ,., I'l l t,J,,1 ~~:-; I-J.·J t ,
 t--s ! () l - "] t ·· l l··t {fJ
 t/J !"< !t ! ~:::: '- .. ! .
 I ;;: j : rJ
 , . )1,1.
 ~ ~ i d •• ) f:' J (.)
 l ' lt It ~ ~ t · )
 :.1'' ( ) () :: : . .
 , .·)( :.:1 "11 . ) en \
 ~·.i : ; \ '· 1, . ] \.: / ~".::: t~ l .) l:J C, 1<1 1"1 :-.. _~ I (', ~I~ 1- ...; : ";" ; I' -:I ~:: ~::'"_: ' ~. J
 () U <.. :: \ ,-JJ I-<! I wJ c> L't J
 I .- ~ j 1 lli ~ I: :.,. .. f· )
 .~ i ·' I J j ~ ·Ul ll: ; ; ·~ jl - : C i
 l' J : .~' j t - ~ t . . J ! '. i ; l:
 ; (J : I~ ~ :.~.;. C) i .:
 · ·J' · )I ·· J (j'!:'~--·<.~ J · ~
 (.,,,,~; , ' :~ "JI J J
 :"~-. : ..:1
 ,~ ...:: : •.
 1'" J t ..~ :J-.
 C)
 :' -» ( " I~ .<:U ' :< :d
 ,.
 ;1·.... . · U ~; : ()
 ~ d:.r '( ·'1
 «, .,))
 ( ; ·I J·J I.~-j I ' t ~ i c) ' ~j <'.: , ;. , :1 1' I ~· j ~::':: I J-j t .!.!
 \ " j t · ~ l ~ ' J ~j .... V .! f"O l:J,1 :..-:.::; :'J ' C:l l/) :'1 " !I.o t-- ' 1_] C.\ :.;': •..:~:
 / , 10
 t , ~~

 ~~ !ll-' ,~ :. : 1· : : .,: I J ~.-. ; (/J (/) U-~ : _:~ ~2: C.'~ ( " 2 (-.1 l ~ J l.J :·d ~ ;,
 l:J :.\.i ~,.~ ' .J ~ ,j 1<:; ~ 'l: l'U 1'' 11 :. , IJ tz ',1
 · I: ~. ::' · I-' -):' '' (;:' (.·J_' · , 1""")r· IC) . O.~ , l - i l "]I .. il"' 1 jC') 1·I U1 Vl l .: I ..·1 1 ·'I~' :.- (fJ:U , ·- , ,.
 '1
 I J {I) : , .. '.. ) !,., !., . .:-:: ~ d I ! tJJ :.\ i C'lc-:
 C J j~ j ( ) i ~") IJ ' j ~I': ' c"> U :! t, ) , ', :r. ,
 : :-.: :}:,-. r;"') C) l,'J I .<~ ,).; :I ~' lJJ ( J. J
 : t'! l '~': t'J ~ : Vl t J l"; (, I · : ,-,I :' _. t , ~ t U ( .~
 i :
 c.:~: t.'.; .....-' V.I ~ -!. ; t · t"J J j .. : : j (,) I 'J 1 " I r;-" ~i .. ! I I I I,\'j (") 1. 1 : . :. :

 t"J:, ,· l ~< ~ -: . ; ~ .:: :U: ·t1{U '- ~I I .cj~ r! t)~-;'-·: : < i ~ : , · ]:., , ! n(" )'J I' , ::< C)I :::: l !l - l \
 l'J.)I " :I .. 1 H ' 1~ '" :;-':' :'::I.:I -· t( ) I ··· )C~ 1·· ) . ..)' ·'·J;r· :'=- : " ·{,)I··I (::· " l · j; '·'· ,.. )L)(· ; t 'J I · I : d :.. .... ,..-J
 -u ~~J' :1 > ~. ; (I) ' '' j r~. )_ :.<-: D.J : ,; :~ ... 1. ) ~, ._: 1-- 1 ~~/,j (/) f·t · ::I~ ( : 1 :.. lJ.l < !J;.. (/.~ (, ;) ~. ~ : :1 -- 1 " '- 1 IJj :I _~ ;. - t ·, 'd l -,J "'_~ ~I.:
 ) :-.. ',. ~., ; ,- ) (,) ( .; C) :.1.1 (. <.; I 1 :~ .. ::L. I ' ) .:.:; 1" 1 t ·" l:.:-J , ..)1 · '1"- '1 ' ; : - ; ;l: , ... ) : ·-;:01 lJ ,. ) I'" ('1 1' 11')
 C,) I " l :.J <:> , .):d :r.. ' -j : ':"7~ I~ 1 ~<~ 1 t , .. )~ ' ::(J ~':: : C) C) 1<: \'.-1 ~)'~ ~d /.:; . ...::.: III \ : 1· I (/J I~J l~- ' I - ~ 1< 1 I: .! :d , ~
 z
 rn (/) () !I.! 1....' ~J: Ci) :... ~ C ' () l ~ J :1: ~-::-; c.: !cJ c ) :..-' :" ~t · !:-: [. . J l) :I." , :.! I ~ ) l) ( ') 1- ) :i " () ( :11 : ~I " :
 f'.,.)
 <! : .--:; •.~,) !r> , ~ ) 1-.1 I- ,) l ' j !J "~ :0. C·)
 !.c-; 1"1 ![! , ...) ~ L: ,.<. ~j ; t:J ~ ...:; :·U "I
 I I J ;i.', () (J :·11 C) ( ) ~ :" . ;
 ~ --:. :
 <.! l· .. f I ) :."
 1- : :) .. :..< (I.I!..cJ " J "J~ " : :. 1 ~,;... ; t . .·f
 (. 1 '--= (fJ l - I ~;:; () ...:::
 1-,: CJ 1-' : (n l'J II·.LJ I· ·, : ;~ IJJ I ~J
 I .. J
 80
 t:J I ~'I r'-I ,·"1 H L~) t.cJ 1" 1 : •..", ~l> H (j) (f) (" . 0 I ' ) 1-;'1 ~ :,: : <.: n :2; 0 ( n c,) U 1-" 0 H : U I , : ':;: < "'d It>
 "" n
 C) ~ ..~ , :, ~(! t.t.-J ',..1 (..-J l ~ ' 1''' 1 ~.. < ["" 4" 1 I < C~: :j~ :1:., U I.t. J 1" 1 c.) ~~: C) I.rj ~ ~: : ~';_": :J." :;. . ! I ).') t 'J ~, [
 'q

 \.JJ
 .:;:: :.r;I ·- tt:J (fJl:J;J: I · :O I · 1
 t::') 1-· ' H (i) 1·1 (fJ I e] I"' )~:":; : ' ~,,-;
 "_)(.'):',::1- '1 -') 0 ' :'::;:
 H"J U ,-- ) , ' )
 1" 1 ~T: ;' ..: :..~ t-- ' ' 0
 <' :O: ·rJi" )OI ·- : I - ~'d
 :1,, :.> Vl
 l::J :Y~ ~r- 0
 1--· :Ul".J;.,I(.)(JI " ':.' :1-I
 . I " ) "ll c'; 1..··1 :" .. 1' 1 :.-:;
 I-II S): ..:.:UlC:~- -;(f':"· :dl ·lL::J
 :1. . ,. ;,-.
 ~<
 VJ;,::< "J:' '' :','
 L- ) :.,1 , .) I , )
 lUt"I () I' : I ' 1
 , . I·d
 l ' ,
 J- .'
 I... ;
 J)I'
 ,I ~
 z~
 ::!).

 C c..
 :::: : :".; ~ ::: H ~::: l "~ Ul ,.. ~ :'d 1" 1 ~ ': ' I " I ,.,: c:: ell , .. ) l ' i <: 1::J U (fJ ' 0 C) :;:.-; :c:: I · ) 1'1 :;. : U '- J 1 1:1.1: < ( );u : I I

 ..
 J
 1.. 1 :. ::~ : :',. <: ,-) 0 ITI ;-1:: ::U 1'·'1 I - J I,,· : (.') VI I ''' ) ,'." 1·--/ c) I'· ) C i (. J 1' 1 U 1- ' ()'" ~L: , . j ~:"': ~ ~ I "- 3 u
 I "· I ·: >0 , <~ I"') 1.. 1 ,< () 1" 1 ~,;" I""
 {.J. t' ~J t · , :d ~p. :=..-: c~ ~:- : "'1
 I.-J , •. ; :,': C l : 1; 1- : v ) ;.(3
 ~' I' : c)
 til "J I') C) :.>; (,) t:;J
 1-'1c) r) I"J f -. ) ,.. .. l "J '0 ,, ) :r·. ~.:'; :,., :1 : Cj c)
 " :! ::.:: 1'1 :" :.-: ' -J ' .'J ,S": I -.-)', ./I
 1J(1)
 (1) ""
 :: tT1
 f !J :' "
 co: i':; r! j. -·1

 I
 l- 4 ;1 ,. 1. t, t ·, ...: l" I'Jj !--(1 it): r. .: t ~J l-"·J ( ~ C) :/ ~ ,. ) :.c~ ::' 1- ) C) :u I - } :'1: ! .~~ ( : 1·): 0 t · ) ( . : UJ ,::.~ : I' ) ef) ('I l :. - -:; :·0 z~
 ~
 ~~<; :u :-:; :,;.-; c) I·_·J :.1 ;" :J .; :l :-- :c " (-) : I: lJ :.1: : < I, ' !'..: I:, J
 1l.1 .- ) \0
 1' 1 ' . 'J 1'''1
 ~ 1 ~' 1 I q~ !)
 c) '"J , ) , -.)~:.:;
 c.::::!
 I· ) I .. '· 1' 1 c) 'u C > ;,> l:.)
 : :'~
 .,!J-- ''LI :.1,) 1-' 1 , _.) ~< ~, ,': .::::: :1. ' ''' :1.1
 C} {/}
 '- ' L: } :., : ' '' ]1'1
 (J ~, ) : '
 ,' ; "
 I -.... 1
 /
 z2
 t) :::!'.
 ' f-'
 6 c) ., ., :-; . I . ·j ( .J ,.<: 1' 1 ~.: : U u" I ' ): U t-- -) LU ~;:-:·U ':_.~ l.J ;,~. ''' ): '''1 , 1''1 (".1 1'11" 1 !,: UJ (:~ : . ~ ;") 0- <
 .0 :-\. 1 :-u c: l ."~ :-0 c ) ~u I',! ~ .) :.1.1 0 !lj : _:: I 'j ~-; 1'1 :;.- ; I " ) , J I·j :;..; ~ .; H lJ "0 <. j I~ I . ~,··; Vl 1' 1 t '~ r. )
 w(1)
 1' 1: < Ul"U ' · j C ):r- Uj (,),· } ' ·J': l ' -) C) ITII · IL) <; : :l::UUt/)(').··)I - '( ) ~,.. :~<:c: :,) ::..... !., f: C'> wO
 (.1 "''-J ,.. ) e ) '''1
 1.. · :-.-:; <
 "' j l " ..-::.~. , -< t:) : J~ :J: I - I , - ) :, ~ c: VI ·
 l ' j '''J UlI'll '' I'!
 ~/,"
 ~: : " .1
 tfl 1'1 1"'1 VI
 :I. -~ -:;"< I'I CJ
 c; I ' ) 1'1 ; 0 '- 1
 ()H' - ) ; UOI '· I:U;/ :,'~.
 t :J 0 1· " -:; d ;: I '~ j >- ""
 0-0.
 (1)
 Q.-.)!(J
 (;) !J:; () li:1 l ' j . le- ~CJ ~'IO' (fJ I--J
 1· 1 H
 -<.:.: ~U :'> t:J 2 ; 0 :' " I- I ,- ) ,---) ::: . ! <:: :'1': Cl :J.' ;,. ~ I" 10 :.0 L:J ,.< d 1" '1
 "'! .
 I .; t :J ' 11 to""
 '-< >-
 :;" : I" I ::'O< I , j' JJ
 I ,,·:
 L., O:UC::.J~
 0 U) 0 c...: I " ) :.> I'·' I
 H() ~l'." l.tI;l "' : ~<
 (fJ ,- ) :.tJ 1- ' ;.·0 :,:> U:J 1.. ·1
 VI C:: ~ ~:: H ,
 t--· ,.)
 .. ) :':: 1' 11 ' )
 ~i ~ 0 I .... ' ,- J ~y. , -J ' lJ ~:~
 :'>:';::'C::UI" 'U 01 -'
 I" I UJ 0 :{.l :1." n I.:~~I ..
 Zlll
 w

 (' J "'-J ~:;;;-: ~.>;::O c: :.(/,,, ) ;, ~ 1- ' 1-- · 1 <.:; 1' 1 1' 1 c , 1'1 , -) l:'J ;.0 (J 1'-" ' .' j 1-' :' ; 0 H 0 :.> 1" 1 "d ;·U I I >"'J ' ·-.1 lr) :'j I ;':'~
 " ~.~
 ( '·j: ·I O VI 'U IT) H ~ Cl (,) til ~ ~~. 0 H ,<: 0 I- I I"" 0 '''(1 ::; , _.) , ) ~:; :, ., ~J': :;.;~ !.--·I - ' U I..-,·j
 , .-:. :
 · t)cn
 U '-\'1 'rJU (") "0 C· C) l J c ) :,;., I'· ) 'l)) , .", ' CJ >0 -~ (,') '·U C) ',,> 'c ' 'I" ' ;.-' ',.> L- J '.<./ c ' ,...) ', ' .- ) ' ~.' 1'''1 / .. ~ I t)~
 VJ ;.:) , 1 c: (> c.i) \ ..,. >' J I: j :,.;, ... ( ) H 1' 1 (5 ,- i" ' j:j 1"'1 11.1 :'U :.<; . ::<~ ,~· i : l~ iJ) i -, :'U . j. " 0 • . : f~ (.~ ~ en PJ =.
 :1:0· , .. ) !J:: : ~.J ~u c.o (fJ IT) C.".l :-:::: ,- ] I"" I , ) :.<: :1.1 VI (f) <:: 0 ~::.: VI 1·'1 'U H ,-:; t::J 1' 1 I'sI I:,.J o
 ..
 0
 :J
 :-::-; 0 :·0 ,.. ) 'r J :'':: ' 1 : oj , -:. c: 0 ; ,> ....] 1"1 H (') <::; :1> :10> :'> : ri I"') 1'1 : '(J I - I :1"- NW
 U VI 0 ' 0 1'1 C> 1-1 \ .. ·1 ~,: 0 1-1 I,) ,-) V J !-e} (; ) v) C :·0 r;') :.<.1 ' . 'j I" I l ::J ,--] C/l :1> (') l.. ;·U ,:~ 1" 1 :::-; <: 0 1;:) o W
 ·
 1-", !U I') ~ < (') ;.\) (/) r~) 1-" ) "J (;) (/J :'1.: 1'1 r ' ) H I" 'J :1 · :'" 1· 1 ~, ~ ::1: 1.: 1 :'(: ~:-: , - ) '-. , . 1-1 ~l: 1- ' "J U
 U) r.J ~7, ,.. ) 'J ) CJ :J; :'-" :p. CJ f'~ Vi L:) , .. ) 1- ' U f'-) VI I') '-)\'2 H :I~ U l!1 ,ll~:-: .. . I' )" H
 c.. : ~:< VI ,. 1" '11 ·i : : ; I" , , .. ; l'J :, .. , .. ) L: ... J'. . :r~ l '~ 1" 1 c:: ,.. ) .L~ \- 1 (_ 1'-1 ;1""_ H () ""1,;0 ' .] lJ ,- ) ./ , ' - J
"' ~ to 1-- ' C> 0 1·-] U,) ...... ;1" '. ' ~ I, t· J ..... : I- J t·-: l - ~t t .o) i <: OJ l-, I"'-J <~ : .:~ :r:....-) ::=-:;: l:.:J ~ ~ '. :--:: :I ~ () '.' !t..J () 1--1
.) "U ' . j C: , ..) 0 :1 : 'l) ,.:: Id 1" 1 :);. ,·U ~r.; :-0 0 :::.-: ::() :1..1 ,< I· : ' -J I " : " I ' ) < .:;U (.,) :-< Co 0
... o H , .. ) : ,: ::< I") () 0 t- ' :r." I· I c) I' ; 1''1 I" j 1·'1 :,:. I ' j t ·) 1" 1 1- 1 ,--) U) VI 1·-1 () ,~~ I· ..: '--1 :<;
U
 c_ ~.Ij r) :.l: ( ,1 J ~(J t •. ~ ~< : 0 t ,·I. 0
 ,.]\0, -:
 1·-) "'.1 I. ~! !(j l- J ~)'J
 :,··c... l"1
 z:
 ;~{ (J) .- J :.l ·A l- ' .. ~ Z
 ~1:1-"l' . < . U
 i' ' ' :-- ) ,1 - 1 :.-.} <. ~ , :<: t'J-J ! .~_ I ~ ~ j : ~;
 Z:,0 . U ".l0. 0 .<' ~I.. ,. :, I
 (')
 If)
 " ')" ''' 1' : .\).' -' ()
 1'1 : :.:: / ,·), -) 0 '- ): 1...
 :·c: /..: ::::
 , :, OI , l l'"
 c.:
 . ' > (;.-'
 ',jVlI ' )
 l)
 I- ' >:';-" ~ !: :"" ' l I - IUJ
 0 1--1 I ' ) ~,_; :,,-.. :'7>elJ H I- I CJ ~~.;
 1" 11 '1 1' 1 Ull' -);'>'; ° ._,
 0 I' J :;'.•. , . •.<:
 1'- >
en c) ,.. ) 1--1 'U
 "J 1··1 0 C : 1'1 , ) 1' 1 ~ ;.;
 I") I ' ( ,--) () I ' J I"
 H I'j C: 0 :.0 (fJ i .. l ~.:.: :·U :r.. Cl 7 :' lsi ~;:.,; ~,-;:; , ... ) C·) 1\ ) ;.L:
 ,. )
 L:: :"" :":~"
'i ,, ::. . (1.1' V J '(I I '" (fJ H ' " Vl )'. I .:::.:: ..... ) >:; c) : () :'l! .-.J (" , .) :u t:J .
 ...
 , ,>
 'II :l.'· :'1:; :~: , .. ) () ..-:~! I c! ~T ~ ,,, : .. : t'J c': ~
 ~
 I ...\ : d l - )I '- I O (') "JI ' I 1' 1
 <: :
 , ..)1 ' 1 ::<
 C) (J) 1--1 (,-.' , ,,] c) "'1 '-' ,-<, 0 (I)
l
 / .
 •
 \ ,/
 1
 ,
 1 0 :,': "') 0
 ,~ .'') ' , 'J'
 -' ,
 \ I I
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 -:;. ;- ; -~'. ~ --' ''':

 ......,.. --- "'- - "- - -.::

 . ~ .,

/" C:-=_~~L~~\~~~ ~:~-:IC~--: ~':~ST 3E B~T ~ ~.:~ DO ri ~JT
 CA N ~O T!~ J03. IF :~E VC ELEC: rJ FIG2:

 - ...,
 ;J

 JCS lNl0 9S3

 101 . -- '~

 ~, ..-..::~
 " ,- ;'

 ~ '0' _--'
 ...
 - ~. -
 C'-'
 ( 'j
 :..<
 t.) \
 \., I
 .
\"'. C) ~I ; .
 ,. I
 c ' :' ,. :-, ' :;" ~;, lJ . .. ) ( ) , J U'I 1-- , , ) : ~ J c) I 1 0 ('-.1 ( ) "lJ I.',
 \'1
 I

 ' " ... .
 ~l
 .........
 ... . ,~
 I ',·
 " \

 C)
 \" " .. . . "
 '0;(1 (.' J ,- ) , · 1 C l'" '0
 o (. J '--J ~, :, <: I 'J l" ) 0
 , ..): < () , ".
 ' -'J .-,
 ( ' J L) I ' J () : J~ ' 1
 t ·· l U tIl <
 \.1') " ;- ~.
 OJ
 :;;,; :", :,;. l .J ( ' J .:() >
 () I C) (JI: U :U ~u Ul t:-.;
 w' ~ .... l:J 1-·, :< (") : .. , ~U ; " 0 ( ; 0 , ., ( ~C · Ai C~ \.Ii ~,l
 I
 I
 C)
 I · ,. ) 0 ;·-';0 :"' ( ") ' ] ;<1:, ::< V\:-~( ' J c ('J , .- 1
 ';'.:.: ;:.U :.:::-: crJ '.oJ ( t') (. ) I VJ c ~·~ :,. . : (.' : I • lrJ ;>~: : -< .:) ~ .::.:~ I ....
 UI v)
 ....... , c. (,') ( ) .' ("'j ;.u:<
 I
 (.J :, ., Vi \ .11: < U ViI: ) (,',
 \'0,
 ....... ·. 1 \ .. ) ti ,
 ,- ..
 () l ~ I L':J I - ~ :.t...) C') (, } t·) :"' ~ ......." :.-: I .... : :l > :J' :...: :'>. . . . . . . \,'
 - '1
 ----
 ... ;-
 VI
 )',
 (rl ~,<
 (.1 0
 C: ,.. j, ._] {- J (") C-:
 l) ;,-;;,.· C) 'lll -- '(")
 ~.J ( J : , .
 , \. ' 1 ' ( ' ) (\, :J
 :, . .
 :··.: Cl
 C, i C
 , . t,
 (' . y
 :1:
 ,-- c>c.: ( )
 , I
 l - I ... ~ {/ l (') c."; H ~::::
 UO ,. )t - ':-"'. ~U
 '-
 c,o
 :.< ~ L C:
 01:1;
 :', VI I'
 !l: ( " [ ., 2
 I'll )
 CO I .. ' :-:::'oJ ,.. , l::J , j) .- J (')'U (\ ' :,..; V) (,,1 ,. '')•
 '-'
 1-' Lt.; ,. 0 c,) . ;:r: 1' 1 tfJ :"" C : :' -' ( I> 0,

 "1
 VI
 .\ ' I
 I
 l:J '-I • ',; ;.(, ~,~; t u 0 ( ' j
 , - , [':J ( . J • ' -J 'J
 lJ
 •.,
 vi 0,
 ........
 t
 i.
 c_
 ,-....
 \.!'I
 (XI
 v.1
 I

 , .-., ".,
 " ....
 I' ')
 o
 (0
 I
 (")
 C)
 ;.l,'J
 ,
 ; ':
 ) " J "l I" J
 OO 'U' · J U (\~
 ( ' J' ) 1- ' :.U ;U :1·;;t.J l .:-i
 ~ ,_ : (,I
 ,
 I ·'
 :,'J,
 (\ 1
 V ,I
 ~~ ..... . . ~~: , ... . . . 'u :1.::'/. O ( ) I' JI)l'.' \11
 " .)
 Vi t..:'J :'> (,-) {. J <. ; : I: \ ) 1 ,. •
 r·-
 .. 1'-' :.,:1 ' -J ,. I ( \~ ( . J \.)1
 o <ro • • "'"
 I <; l'); t"l l : ) b ' : (J
 \),
 , ,~ Z
 '--
 l:J
 \)\
 '- . . . .1
 >< ...
 .{.'
 ~
 , J
 :1.:
 '<, V) I ·' J I ' J ( , J l ) ~o.~ I - J
 ;0
 l ) 80
 -
 1- I'U !'Jl:)
 :~:
 1 '1 I.' } t ··] I ~ I ( " : :I ~~ : ',: C~) L>J "'d~
 (') C) VI . . I ' ~' I ...,
 V) 'I' C"'" ( j 1-- 1 I · I I ... • :1 " ' .-' o CIJ
 ~
 i, j :,: '-< ;,) '...,: Li ('" 1'; 'I , =.
 (II (") C_
 00
 1-,
 ) ....
 I
 O
 VI C) u:. I- ~) ::< l~J I" j : ;c~ ) --. -,-.- ::, i I
 ~ ~
 (1)
 (')
 ~
 CIJ
 -,
 :'l
 c,') ,'V r'0, o ,. ; ,_. , t 'J L) 1- ) (\1 ;" :,1.:1 VI ~;
 I
 ;. ) Z ('!)
 r, '1 ,' , 1,-) :'lJ 0 :--:-: :J ~: {,J 0 c) :.:.< )::-. t·· " I c c..
 1'.- \.J't ...-.... 'Ll • I J, j ~ :~ I ~ ; • - ) l ,l J L'J ' .1. j L .. --('-- r ~ i 'i i; "\ 3 u
 ' ·, 1 ..... V} (~ () () ?: I'] l : I, ) CT~
 ~
 V ',
 ........ ;..c; (") ; ... : l/) l:::J 1--1 C) ::: ';1' . (I : 1 I ~ r I
 :. ." ~~: I
 ~
 •. tT1
 ><
 o
 . -'I
 (/) 1- ' ("") " j ' ( - J - ..' C) 1- ' I .. '
 ( ' j :,.; (" -' l ~-J C; <: ,,'J
 I
 :;0 ' u
 ()
 : .: : :~ I .) Z(1)
 '(0 rq (- . Vl z2
 I--' . . ... . C ', Vl :-::.; :1' (' J " "J ,- , (') 1-- ' ,--) ~ , t " rJ
 t) :::!".
 o Cl ~ J ' ''I :'(: Vl <..,) :,;. ', :<0:_'-- U.:·"""'''.. , !.)!: C) <
 I\) N tiJ !:,.,! ) , % ; 1 \: I , ) 0\(1)
 (")
 ;;0:
 1, '1
 ''' 1 ,., ..... '-. J
 :'-:: l·t J ( .tj

 r-'
 1- --1 ~O :' -.
 , -- , l/) Ul : ..... !v, C) '(i ( ...
 :--: :;Co: 'X. Ul
 ;,oJ " I ' :;;\.1
 c) ~ ' : '0'1
 t:yz:·.'; "I.
 .; ; l )
 ~O
 >- ...,
 c> 0'\ ,"- ' ! t .\ ~.:.t.'I,~~~1 0\0.
 I \J'" i ~ ...- {'J ( _. C) 1- ) l :J L,:J to en C) () ) -:--
 " :'.: '.:~: :" ". :'" (I) Ii [...1 • (1)
 to:'
 \'0
 .........
 " ........
 ~j'..) L
 :~
 ('J
 r'
 , ' :I
 ;.u O (, J
 t ~) S Vl ,.• ) C)
 (' J :J,.' ,oo] ( ' J () C) 'r'
 A I-'U
 "U ' . o
 (" ) ) ~ ,
 D
 rr .~:'~" :!; 111
 ()
 : I I .•)
 I" 1.1!
 '-< w
 .. l.Il
 t::;·.;~.~: : ,..!;
 '"
 . J J'
 . ~.~ ' \.)..J . Z tv
 :,
 :0'\ . -j
 \ '',\ ". t :J ~_ r: "J c:.: i-; 0 :.~ ?::',
 ~.O\
 \.!J
 I
 Vi U I'J ( ' J(- "-- l V) 'oj ~- ) I t ; ..... ~\ .• '" c) eJ t)cn
 ~~~.;~ .~~~~'.:.: .~
 (IJ
 I.' , U .--, ; (: t-.; :, .... L) ~~ I ~ , C) (", " ," %. l::J (1)
 o ~
 '.J
 i;'j ,- ! )-- .. ] rf) I .J :'> . .,:., 0J ---1 '0
 - .
 , t)~
 -.
 ",-, ... ' I
 :1:. -:j , - - , ,·U ' - I C)
 ~ .... ;u'-- - - I 1"';'-':'::' ;'(, \.)..J
 ~
 ~
 0.
 0
 » :.>~ t - ) () ,. _] : ~~ ~ :"") c: '--Z f11 ~~i~"~'~'~' ')i
 :J

 {-- Li ;'0:. ~ ,,; ~L .., ':2 0:~; lL..:j- ' )'" :l,;.. tvW
 (")
 1I1
 (n
 l .:J
 ..
 '-....- C) c..J .1.> ., .... ' ~_ I : ~. .-:: :c Ow
 :..; -< o
(,,'.:
 :r.., ....., ~:=::: [~ 0-) c) I " 'I;U o
 " 1 L. l) .... ' ;;.:1 t~J (' J 'T) (") c - II

r N
 I (n
 j .;.
 ,r··-
 I
 C) ' rj C)
 ~._J 0 ~?":~ :
 ('-J
 :,>; 1,,)
 ( "j
 C) 0"1
 ,-
 )':.
 (I)
 [1'1
 .......... C) .- ] ::< ! ; .: ~
 G) '--
 1..) vJ ; .J ~(J
 t\) V 'I ~.O
 I
 ..... -., ( ' J O ; J.;o- ~.I~·{) ·I- I VI cn
U, ".....,.. I ('-J l/) [ ' 1 t·", ....) -.( 'Ie)
 eJ) \ ) ) :- VI Ct ) ;,.
 • VJ Vl Ul I".-J
 r . -- I t..,-, rn :;1} ,_.
11' /
\.!' "I.
 [ '~ " I
 ;
 , -.:
 .j
 •
 \." '.J
 c) , ...
 - -I ............ ."<.:.::::>
 . . . ..
 :'):J ~!'". f ·-
 •__ .-1 ::
 ()

 \. () ~
 '-- (') _ ~:: (' J U I \.(1
 '--" .C) ~' ) C,.l
 ) ., . 0\
 nl'·~ (,)
 '-- CJ ' ) i::i Cd
 •.- J ~o
 t ·· '.
 f'..J 0,.,

 ~
 .
 '. l(! \" , 'L-) C) '1 J 1r J () ,- ) ;-- <,) ,.
 ,..
 ~ .
 ' -'J C) :1:. :.. > i ' : ' i ' -J 1" -1 0 tJ) ,. 1 I ._, ~~:: ', - ) , J I!J ,- ) ••: : : \-1 I ,
 ,-) 'u . \<.) I' J ;.,_:
 I
 r) ;--:
 '1I,I ·· " U 'I), : -. "lJ ~ )
 f1 ;1: . , i · J . Cl ;.lJ t · '
 ~.,J
 c-:: " .' '
 ,);1 ,....: ;[ '
 'J' 0 '.<
 (,"1
 ~/J ! "J : 'J' ::< ~ , ; I : 'I'
 I' , -·' 1' '·"(,I·J')[' J
 :1 . ; I : () !''-j , . )
 I - LI)
 ) 'O , Cr':'> 1"- ' 1'-' "''', t - ' LU' I - J C) 0)1' ) :. :, ;1 : 1" 1-1 ' ,. ) [. J ' _.J') u; :cl , - ) :, . C:J )

 \';) c) [... , 1'.1 () :, ~ ~ ,I '., ~ ( J C l (") I ' ) t: ) : '; C) C' :1 ' : !; : ,'., I - J ;r" L;J ,. ) " ) ' ;"
 <:: t i l .·.: I · JU.l": 'J" ·
 tJ J •
 trJ
 ~ i : • ) I 1 . ·1 t/i
 :' ·· 'JC; <: ; , ·I ' I · J:- -.
 (j) I - J I - ) ~ , J
 "J:,I;l)I'll 'j
 t. I : U
 [ " 1- 1")
 : I : ' ~ I I I : ~ J I. , I ) : d
 c)
 C) .- ] I. J !;', ,. J 1 , ' . 1 [ .j :' : I ' : ' .: •• J c: ;] ; l :J ,. ) "l " ) ' I ] ; ., 1-- 1 ' .' VI I- J :0) r ) I'j ( J C) "J ,
 ...< ;'1: ( ·)C>:.< C')' <: I · )' J[ -J VJ ;, .• 1 'e: . ~ ,: VJ <-:! -). j [ .) ' .' : ,: ': ! 1
 I ' J ;, . .- ) ' ~J ( . ' -J ;,-- 1.. 1 ( i [ . en t ' J (, ; ." "J VJ (.:J l/J ;,; I ' j f..
 - I :/; V) ;~. I <:) () Vi' '.J :1::< '." . c.: [' '" t - o:'': 0 C, :'-', (') [ ' J ; .. 1 I
 (,) " l.) ( . I '1 C I I J :, . c' I ; () (> [ . J ( , ) I '" () .1:' ;' - : -- ; '.J ~d () :' - >', I I ; , " , • },
 I i c :; ;' ·" ;JUJ' . · I:- ;I,) :;:1 o U ; ) C ; : : · v l · I, - ) C I;.I: I ') (,'l.O:··. : ':- ; l"
 ;..-: G) ::1I (~. () t' · :, -. () :-< c· ,< llJ to ' " : t1 :': I.J I I UJ ri; ·U ~I · l .j ' '-: :' -, ',i,
 I'

 :< . :(~ I'J I ·)' I c-: VJ t: J : ,. :·c l I ·J : ' " j :, ['J 1-- ' t ',JI ' ) I '" :' , I ' J: U:-< ( .) 'lJ : :.;:. . !
 ( ) l::Ju . ") '-·) c;c..: ·. : l ' ) VJ ; l)l!J c) ·) ·:..;C) .· )t ' ) I ' I 'JC JI - ' C: :' ;<-: u
 () ' t1 I') u , :'..; ; 1I 'u LJ (.-J , .J : ,' " J () :.1,) :,; ,:" \oj U) l/) t, J c: (' i
 \,
 I ' ,)' ) J I ')·" L') : :';11:1' , 1 1 "J ,,(,) :.< I I I ' ) C ) , ) ' u · · )'.-:'.C) 1- )
 !. l " ,: " I - '~ll" ll') "1: : (,-1 ' ) () I ' ): , I : ' ~ :':I ' ) ('lei !": '
 '·].C,' [ · I ' l()<-; ; U : "V) 1 -' L:J:' ; :'::' · · 'J;.U " -' (.1) 1' ) 1' )e):) 'I 'J ')l/)
 [ - ), ,,,:," ' ~< I-) () U) ' -") 1 -'1 - 11'- ' [ - JI " I ' )'U1 , I (); r J .J ,- ) o../;I ·" -' )' J
 VJ :~~ (f) ~v [.. J V J :'.) LU I.. ' : -. : ( ) 1',1 UJ <--: () :.. . I ' J Z
 :r> 1'1 • <: \. ,
 (-:-~tJ''' I '
 I' I; ') • ) ;,_1
 ' .~ : _;:. lll·JC)
 I ·- I: ..... ; . . ), ..::
 lri
 [ ; J ..I.)
 ( , ) , ) <.- '
 :1 :- ( ) : -<lJ
 . · ) ,. ,· , ' · '(,') 1 1 . ·.. :
 (. ) ! -': ' ·' I f) : < I I.!(")
 ()( )
 I- J(I '»~: <
 (".: ,:1 at;)
 :."I - II - Jt , , ' 1]:< 1- ' :, .. ;U ,·_)(, C-) :1 .. :' - l~Jt . j: J : l - J: " :I J J:l.J til ""0 ~
 . C : "JJ :.1) • J ' • l J ~' ,: ( . • - ) '.< :0 < : I ' J I -J I. ',J a '"~
 l/) C) ::O J(, llIJC)
 .- ) :;.~ C) c . 1'1 v) c: .-) :, .
 : 1.: (,) [ -JClC,
 U.J ,- ) ' " j t : )
 . · )1 - 1:,:
 I' , : <..1 C ' () :' : [ . [ ' ) ' - J V ) I ,~) c .
 I 'JL)
 I ') t ' J ')
 ' J " ) ' : : "(;)
 1-) : 1_' 'll

 :' ,_ J, "lJ C) : •.- :1 >
 : U 'U [ ""
 '.J
 1. 0 1 '-"-.
 o(') '"_.
 :, ,J -
 Z~
 ::'I
 I ' J'0"" ' )I--" ) ' " .. (,) C " " ' U ' -J I" JI, ', ' .-" "J , ) t.. ' L')'· · I- I· ··· ·.,J··
 LrJnl!J: '-~:I:LI ) t, j . " .-- ,il ;U , ) . - )j , j : , . I ::-" ;<' :': I - '[ : }I') I " ; ; , ):< I .1··
 c:: c.
 3 -0
 : ~ c:: . < I ') ' - )U; , - ]I " )! ' ) : l l'» ~ CJ: -< I - I U'J
 f
 I r JV) ('JI ' J(" , ] , .). ; ; 0 1'" O"~
 -0 lli:'< ; ·U I '·J: I :~l:J.) . ..) I ' Jt ' J: "'U:'-:: ; "'. I- ! ; I:' '') t - J I I ' '' Jt , )CJ()
 I "
 L' ..~ ~
 ) 'O. :r::J' C' : ~- : l J J --.-.; :,:!p L)v, (;) ~u I - I : , ..... ;.U ( ) ·U (1 ( -' J : '- •.:-: f' C .' I :< l .J (:. : :I .~ I " . . tTl
 ><
 r,') 1- j ~'d l' J C) '-: ' C·· ' , ' I ' ) ( .. , r'- " , ) " ." , ', , .,' ( - ' ' -' I - , C i ( , ' ,/ I · I I - J l''' ' ,./ Zo
 . ) ',<. J , i:'j v'i ~. ; C:1-' HI '" j .. , VJ U j .. ( I ' J' " I·· :,c: I ' ; :;,: /_. ;1.'- ():' Li
 :J- • i·.. i·J I '
 . .-.1
 zg
 1't'J
 I 1-'
 f-J
 1'-)
 l:.J •. J (.I '.) (') :;.:, . - ) : .::: ~:(, 'x. '-- 11- ·' C, "): d 1-" l - ' ' / :u
 , ,)'· 1 t) :::.
 <
 0 lI1 ' l ) ' , " ,·J . ) r ·. . . · / l/)'I ·· C) ' - ) '· ) ''>':; VJ ' _·' -) ''·I ·' ', . ["" I" 0-0
 W ·I ·~ l ~-J ~ I .. " ' (q 1-- ' CO) l ~:j l~; ~ ~I I II ·I·~ :.l.;'.) CO) t • ,< ~ I'~~
 >j ~o
 I ) 1- 11 - ) : ... / 1 J.'j '1 , , ·1 \.0.. :1 - ' t; , ( J
 Cl : ....-: '" ...::.;u) <- : 0 ; ·_:1 ~L:UJ l::-J t,J>:.; -':;:" i j·)i ·j :t l 0 (;: 1 ('" :'1 ! : ( ) ...... "'\
 ""1 L:'J ' ..' :, ~ 1- 1 'ul ' j: < I ·· J "J ' I: ,.) . ..J .- ] C) , " ~ ._ : <; 1-',; < ~ I ' . I ' 0-0.
 !'J I: .-,J
 ) ' 1

 1'-,)
 !'~ 'JI - JO ' ,'
 ' ... J ::.::: .- ) , .. ) '..:::, (') !r· 'l J VJ
 :1.'- C:('):1 ·:(') ;I.:. :I -· I- I:,:
 I ' J t 'J I'll ') lU Co 1- ,
 ' -J:'. ·I . ·, . )'-J~,~ ~~ :: .< :(;' ~ -:'~ I '"
 I ", -.) .--) I.-I /':: ::< • (j l J to:
 -

 '-<
 0

 nL,J
 J..;.)
 ~I-: I'J ~ I .· '. ' : (fJ ( ) ~::: t· · ' ...J :I ~ : U ~0 V) l/) l ) ~0 (,.1 ~r> '-J •.,) I r J • . ) t.:.) 1-- ' : , . .. Ul

 t' l c.": (') :0:' I-J :< U : "'1') ; u ...) <; ,_..) --_H ' J () t .J lJ:1 U Vi 0 0 1-' : < l/) l -)
 : i :.:J
 ZN
 <"::'~: ;: :'< I 'J~< ; (J 1") : " ' 0 : ''> .-- ) / :, 0 0 'lJ() ;U;'·, II" h l l.,O I'J ~9'
 () (,'J {/J I-J ,_.., 1- I ~" ', <::. ' :, ., 1- ' ,. I ':1: C):.(} C) I " ; 0 :, .. 1·-' () 1- , ~ -:: ;>; t -' l'.) !'J I..' J t)C/l
 o
 :. r~ ;'cl" U J VJ .- ) V J [ ' J , .. ) :::.: :;c~ .t"J ' () ;..tJ C) :,:,": 1-- ' . .. ) :, ~ [ ,) r,-) •._) I ~' :I ~ c..:: I ·· :
 ("~~ I
 t)~
 :1> I' J I' J :.~ l ·..J :1: () I ~ ;": :1;' Vi'U , < [ "J ~L:I VJ t ' J I " J :1> ('.I :» - .
 0
 [- ' U, J .- ) [ 'J t j :' " :' -. " 0:::; I ' ) r-:: '_.:(' (.) lJ) ," J L0 1- '( ' "-J :.::--: 0 L , l.:J ,.. ) L')
 M'
 ~ :J
 [ ., C) I,) ~r; :;.: 0 , .) : .:; :~ ';.< t.: J '; J I ~ U U C) l/) C- : 1-1 0 "J (- ; t' J
 :" ) ' .J I ' J t'J , .. ) C) : ;.-, , - ) c} I , :>, 1--' '" 1-- ' ;.0 1--\ :~', I') y , :'0. N:---'
 '.?~ ~ CJ : '< '.< ::0:-, .--J C' :':(j'''' ) [\) O I')VJ <~ : :::: :-?'. I '" l/)I');.\.I ;t .
 OJ..;.)

 \oj t." ) t-) ',< :'-- C) C > 10 ;T : , ] I ·: , :.0:' U'J ,,,' 0 ~.,,:-: ~7 : I - I I ' J C) .-) <: ::< 1- ) I-J
 t ' J 1·11') I') (') " ) , ) I ' ) I ' J ~:', VJ Ul <_:l:'JUJ I · )l/) ~ O :C :" _ ':':' :I ;' I -- I;' J VJ
r~ !: (" '. J :UC; ', ,< ' :.-:::: •. 1 -- '~r: . · )I')V)' · J I- 'L l! l/)I ' J ( i l-" ' -- 'C-: :I " J
f· ·...." o I .......~
 . -: l ·J.! CJ (,") U :1; ' ~(J :1' : ---: o ;u 0 c; to; 1- ' ,. ~U
 t .. J ....,
""-. . . f .-J : -0 () :0: "- ' I ' j .-..: : U I- I :,< 0 ::::, 1- ' 0 t;J ' ~--: C ' C'
'.
 d
 L :1.: " l :, ::- :I~ ~u I-J H n ,--) l:J C . \,):2: 1-- ' i--J ::< >-: tJ) .- j I"')
 ("')
 'l/)
 :1: 1·-' ;1 ' - :.~ t; J I ' ) <: () (I) I 1- ' :-t:.- U) < ; :1-' • , - ) :'r, Vi
 1-- ' UJ ,J •. / I · 'j. - ) , - ) 1--< : :~ (".) U I - I l -) '--)1 - ' ~-0 ;.C ~ P'l
~n i ( ,- ) I -'UI '-1'-1" l/) 'UI - ' "JI ' 'II - Il/) :,:.0-
I ., / -_1 ! '~I [-j :,; •._J
 • -J
 I :;..::
 ~. I :
 ,.,
 H 0 '-J (fJ . - ) I , '.)
 o
, '\ ': . .: , : 1,)
 ~J 'J C) (: ......) "X,) :'-, C~ C) c.: I>J
 h i: ~I~ ' ' " . -' 'I - Cl '.J ' o j ' / . ...) L:J
 l, _ • •11
 I'~j lii (.:j ; .~) : -.J , - J loJ - - c::
I C) "e:
., i
~. l \J)
 (I ,
 1...0
 til ; -' 1
 o
 ?'.
 I ' J L;
 ;,u.
 '"
 i'J
 '.
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 This message was extremely important, for in it COMUSMACV
spelled out the concept of keeping U.S. forces av-ray from the people.
The search and destroy strategy for U.S. and Third Country forces
which continues ~o this day and the p~imary focus of R~~AF on paci-
fication both stem from that concept. In addition, Westmoreland made
a big pitch in this cable for a free hand to maneuver the troops
around inside the country. That is the prerogative of a major field
commander -- t~ere is good indication that at this stage Westmoreland
saw himself in that light rather than as advisor and assister to the
Vietnamese armed forces.

 Ambassador Taylor returned to Vietnam from Washington shortly
after the battle at Dong Xoai, just as the new Thieu-Ky government was
being installed . His fir st report confirmed the 'seriousness of the
military situation as reported by General We stmoreland and also pointed
up the very tenuous hold the new government had on the country. 133/
This report apparently helped to remove the last obstacles to consider-
ation of all of the forces mentioned in Westmoreland's request of 7 June.
On 22 June, the Chairman of the JCS cabled We stmoreland and CINCPAC to
inform them that the ante had gone up from 35 to 44 battalions, count-
ing all forces planned and programmed and including the 173rd. West-
moreland was asked if 44 battalions would be enough to convince the
VC/DRV that they could not win . 174/ General Westmoreland replied
that there was no evidence the VC DRV would alter their plans regardless
of what the U.S. did in the next six months . The 44 battalion force
should, however, establish a favorable balance of pOl-ler by the end of
the year. If the U.S. was to seize the initiative from the enemy, then
further forces would be required into 1966 and beyond. 135/

 On the 26th of June, as has already been noted, General West-
moreland was given the authority to commit U.S. forces to battle in
support of RWAF "in any situation ..• when, in COMUSMACV's judgment,
their use is necessary to strengthen the relative position of GVN
forces." 136/ This was about as close to a free hand in managing the
forces as General Westmoreland was likely to get. The enclave strategy
"TaS finished, and the debate from then on centered on how much force
and to what end. There were some attempts to snatch the chestnuts from
the fire, however.

 Westmoreland 's opposition, while far from presenting a united
front, had its day in court during late June and early July 1965. The
Embassy in Saigon, "'lhile recognizing the ser iousness of the situation
in South Vietnam, vias less than sanguine about the prospects for success
if large numbers of foreign troops were brought in. Deputy Ambassador
U. Alexis Johnson told Assistant Secretary of Defense McNaughton on
25 June that the U.S. should not bring in more troops. The situation,
according to Johnson, was in many ways no more serious than the previous

 104 TOP SECRET- Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

year. Even if it were more serious, he went on, massive input of U.S.
troops was unlikely to make much difference. The best they could do
would be to hold a few enclaves. Johnson pointed out that the
Vietnamese were [f'raid they would lose authori~,y if more U.S. troops
were brought in. He advised that the U.S. allow the forces already
in the country to settle. After some experimentation with them, the
way would be much clearer. Once in, troops could not, without diffi-
culty, be -taken out again. 137/

 The views expressed by Johnson to McNaughton parallel those of .
Ambassador Taylor throughout the build-up debate. Both men were very
much concerned with the effect of the proposed build-up on the Viet-
namese; They were not directly opposed to the use of U.S. forces to
help the GVN; they merely wanted to go very slowly to insure against
loss of control.

 At the opposite end of the spectrum from General \~estmoreland
was Under Secretary of State George Ball. Convinced that the U.S. was
pouring it'S resources down the drain in the wrong place, Ball placed
himself in direct opposition to the build-up. In a dr aft memorandum
he circulated on the 28th of June, Ball stated that Westmoreland's
intention 1-TaS to go to Phase III combat (Phase III of the 8 May Concept
of Operations 1-rhich called for US/Allied forays inland to secure bases
and areas for further operations). In Ball's view there was absolutely
no assurancE2 that the U.S. could 1-Tith the provision of more ground forces
achieve its political objectives in Vietnam. Instead, the U.S. risked
illvolving itself in a costly and indeterminate struggle. To further
complicate matters,· it would be equally impossible to achieve political
objectives by expanding the bombing of the North -- the risks of involv-
ing .the USSR and the CPR "Tere too great, besides which such action would
alienate friends . No combination of the two actions offered any better '
prospect for success. Since the costs to achieve its objectives if the
U.S. embarked on an expanding program were indeterminate , the U.S.
should, in Ball's view, not elect to follow such a course of action.
It should instead "cut its losses" by restricting itself to the pro-
grammed 15 battalions and 72,000 men made public at a press conference
in mid-June by the Secretary of Defense. 138/ By holding those forces
to a very conservative Phase II strategy of base defense and reserve in
support of RVNAF, U.S. combat losses could be held to a minimum while
the stage was being set for wi thdra11Tal. 139/

 Ball waq cold-blooded in his analysis. He recognized that the
U.S. 1-iQuld not b(' able to avoid losing face before its Asian allies if
it staged some form of conference l eadi ng to \Vi thdra'lval of U. S. forces.
The loss would only be of short term duration, however, and the U.S. could
emerge from this period of travail as a ''".Tiser and more mature nation."
On 1 July, Ball sent to the President a memorandum entitled "A Compromise
Solution for South Vietnam." In that memorandum , Ball presented his case
for cutting lo sses essentially as it is described above. 140/

 105 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By : NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Assistant Secretary of State William Bundy, like so many others,
found hims elf i n betloreen Westmoreland and BalL The U. S. needed to avoid
the ultimatum aspects of. the .44 battalions and also the Ball withdrawal
proposal, both of which were undesirable in Bundy 's estimation . On
1 July , BQndy suggested to the President that the U.S. should adopt a
policy i'rhich yrould alloyr it to hold on without risking disasters of scale
if the war were lost despite deployment of the full 44 battalions. For
the moment, according to Bundy , the U.S. should complete planned deploy-
ments to bring i n - country forces to 18 maneuver battalions and 85,000
men . The Airmobile Division and the remainder of the 1st Division should
be brought to a high state of r eadiness , but the decision as to their
deployment should be deferred. By so acting the U.S. would gain time in
which to work diplomat ic ally to realign Southeast Asia and thereby salvage
its honor and credibility. The forces in Vi etnam , which Bundy assQmed
would be enough to preven.t collapse , '\oiQuld be restricted to reserve
r eaction in support of RVNAF . This would allow for some experimentation
,dthout taking over the war effort -- a fami l iar theme. Bundy felt, as
did Ambassador Tayl or, that there remained considerable uncertai nty as
to how ''lell U.S. troops would .perform in the Vietnam environment. \'le
needed to find out before going big . 141/

 E. The Influence of the President and This Secretary of Defense

 It is difficult to be precise about the position of the Secretary
of Defense during the build-up debate because there is so little of him
in t he fil es . In March , Ambassador Taylor sent to Saigon the follOlo[ing
description of the Secretary ' s views regarding the JCS's three -division
plan: · 142/

 "a. The .JCS has recom.mended to the Secretary of Defense
 the early deployment of a three division force i-lith appropriate
 combat and logistic support . This force would include the en-
 tire MEF arid I Corps area . An Army Division i n the high pl ateau ,
 and a Korean Division, location unspecified . The Cha i rman , JC S
 emphasized the urgent necessity to deploy a logistical command
 and the fonTard deployment of tactical fighter squadrons as we ll
 as the earliest poss ible construction of the airfield at Chu Lai
 and a runway at Da Nang .

 "b. Ambass ador Taylor indic ated that 3 divisions seemed
 . high; that Quat was not persuaded that more troops were neces -
 s ary; that anti-Arner ican sentiment lies just belmoJ' the surface
 and t .b.at fi'1 ally there are tIoro very real limitations on the
 number and rate of introduction of U.S. and Third Country
 forc es . First is the absorptive capacity of the country and
 s econd l ogistical limitations .

 "c . The Chairman, JCS outlined the importiIDce of estab-
 lishing a goal against ioJ'hich logistics pla.nning could proceed .

 106 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 lid. The Secretary of Dei'ense indicated that further U. S.
 deployments must be accompanied by deployment of Koreans for
 reasons of domestic reaction.

 !T e • After an exchange of views on the missions and
 oper ating methods of U.S. forces the Secretary of Defense
 stated that he ,-;as impressed '·lith the adverse force ratios
 and favored deployment of U.S. forces conditioned by:

 "( 1) political ( psychological) absorption capacity

 "(2) lo gistical absorption capacUy

 "(3) operational absorption - - (t hat is operational
 requirements) . II

 In his official reply to the JCS memorandum containing the three-division
 plan, the Secretary said this: l~3/

 III have considered the vievTs of the JCS presented in
 r eferenced memorandmn. As you are aware the substance of
 their recormnendations "!'vas considered in the high-l.evel
 discussions vThich took place in connection with the recent
 visit of Ambassador Taylor. I believe th&t the decisions
 made at that time reflect the vie1vs of the JCS to the extent
 r equired at this time."

 It has already been pointed out that ( after the NSC meetings of 1-2 April
 1965) 1.tc. 1JlcNamara Ivas interested in the JCS continuance of planning for
 the· earliest possible introduction of the three divisions. 11~4/ In reply
 to the JCS11 of 30 April in 'vhich the Chiefs surmned up the results of the
 Honolulu Conference a..'Tld subsequent discussions and in vThich they made
 another pitch for the three-division plan, the Secretary said. in r egard
 to the l atter : lif5/

 . "The other deployments described will. be cons idered in
 conjunction '.'lith continuing high-level deliberations on the
 Southeast Asia situation and as fm,ther requested by the JCS.!T

 In the files are several other· bits of information vI.hich , vThile perhaps
 not a l ivays directly attributable to the Secretary I s personal philosophy,
 nevertheless are an indication of ho,v he interpreted his guidance from
 the President. On 1 ~1arch he sent this memoraYldum to a ll departments: l~

 "I vmnt i t clearly understood that there is an unlimited
 appropriation available for the financing of aid to Vietnam.
 Under no circu.mstances is lack of money to stand in the ·way
 of aid to that nation.!:

•
 107 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 In response t.o a query by General JolLn.son, Army Chief of Staff, as to
hov[ much the U. S. must contribute directly to the security of South
VietnaJu, the Secretary said: 147/
 IIpolicy is: anything that l.,rill strengthen the position
 of the GVN 'will be sent. I!

 On 2 April , the JCS sent the Secretary a bold memorandum in which
 they recommended cle ar ing the decks of all lI administrative and procedural
 impediments that hamper us in the prosecution of this war . II They "rent
 on to list a I'Tho le panoply of problems 'which they felt "rere causing .
 1.lllnecessal'Y he adaches in providing support to General Westmoreland. lL~8/
 The JC Si\1 was a direct slap at some of the Secretary ' s management tech-
 niques and an appeal that the mi lita ry staff be allowed to run the shOl,r.
 McNamara ,vas silent for a long time . . He replied to the memorandum on
 lLf May and addressed each of the JCS recomT:lendat:Lons in turn . The gist
. of his reply \IaS that he 'Has not yet ready to yield the reins to the
 military. He said: 149/

 III am sure it is recognized that many of these recom-
 mendations have received, or are now receiving, separate
 action revie..-,.r in appropriate channels. Also, it appears
 clear t hat many of the actions recommended should be im-
 plemented only if execution of a major CINCPAC OPLAN lv-ere
 ordere d. I!

There are plenty of other indications in the fil es that the Secretary was
very carefully and personally insuring that the Defense Establishi'nent "Tas
ready to provide effj.cient and sufficient support to the fighting elements
in Vietnam. From the records, the Secretary comes out much more clearly
for good management than he does for any p articular strategy.

 During the more heated debate follOl'r ing Westmoreland I s request
of 7 June, there is hardly a trace i n the files of the Secretary's opinion.
In a letter to Representative Mahon of the House Appropriations Committee
on 9 Ju..'1e, McNamara indicated that the re serve stocks provided for combat
cons umption in the Fiscal Year 1966 Budget might have to be replenished.
as the situation in South Vietnam developed. He ,,!as not sure, hOI-rever,
and in any case could afford to ..-,.rait and see. Perhaps there would be a
request for a supplementary appropriation Ivhen the Congress reconvened
thefollow'ing J anuary . 15Q/ (The President asked for a 1. 7 billion
supplementary appropriation in August of 1965 for military operations in
Vietnam. )

 . Secretary McNamara 1,.<Tent out to Vi etnam for a firsth and look from
 16 t.O 20 July. He \-vanted to. hear 'iTestmor e land f s concept for the employ-
ment of the Lf4 battalions, and he sought the anST,-rers to a number of other
questions including i-lhat forces Hestmo reland though,t "rould be required

 108 TOP SECRET - Se nsitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

through Ja..rlUary 1 966 and beyond. 151/ When McNamara left l,'Tas hingtori ,
the 44 battalion debate remained unresolved.. While he was in Saigon ,
he r eceived a cable from Depvty Secretary of Defense Vance informing
him that the President had decided to go ahead Ivith the plan to deploy
all 34 of the U. S. battalions. 152/ The debate Ivas over. McNamara
left Saigon bearing Itlestmoreland recomInendations for an even greater
i ncrease in for ces ""hich ,.,rill be the subj ect of a l ater paper . 153/
"In IDany respects," McNamara told the press on le aving Vietnam , "it
fihe situat i on7 has deteriorated since 15 months ago when I l vaS l ast
here . II 15 4 / - .

 There is no question that the key fi gure in the early 1965
build-up was the President of the United States. - In NSPJ.f 328, he only
approved the modest i nput of two Marine battalions even though he vas
presented ,·rith a JCS recommendation that three full divisions be sent.
The ,·rhole tone of the NSAN i s one of caution . The President I"as deter-
mined that any changes author i zed in that. NS.M1 be 1..Ll1derstood as "being
gradual and vIholly consistent 'Nith existing policy." 155/ He vas
t erribly concerned with control over release- of informat ion to the
press, and a premature l eak from Saigon of some of the details of the
1-2 April NSC meetings brought. a sharp response from him. 15§/ The
subdued tones of NSPJ.f 328 notvri thsta..l1ding, the President apparently
l ent his sanction to the broader proposals contained in the joint
State/Defense 7-point cable of 15 April, and in so doing he upset the
Ambassador.' 157/

 Most of the recommendations vrhich c ame out of the Honolulu
Conference received' early attent ion by President Johnson , but during
l.fay things te nded to slOl'[ down as his focus vras diverted, no doubt, by
the situation in the Dominican Republic .

 On the 4th of May , the President s ent a special message to the
Congress in which he request e d a supplemental appropriation of $700
million " to meet mounting military r equi rements in Vietnam . " He de-
scribed in that message the l and ing of U. S. Marines at Da Nang and
Phu Bai the more re cent arrival of the 173rd Airborne . He went on to
say :

 "Nor c an I guarantee thi s "rill be the l ast request. If
 our need expands I ,vill turn again to the Congress . For we
 "rill do whatever must b e done to insure the s afety of South
 Vietnern from aggression. This is the fil"ID and irrevoc able
 commitment uf our people and Nation. "

Arid l ater in the same message :

 HI do ask for prompt support of our b as i c course : Re -
 si stance to aggression , model'ation i n the use of power ; and
 and a constant sed.rch for peace . 11 158/

 109 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 /

 TOP SECREr - Sensitive

 On 18 June, McGeorge Bundy sent this memorand:u..m to the Secretary
 of Defense: 159/

 liThe Pr~sident mentioned to me yester1ay his desi~e that
 we find more drmnatic and effective actions in South Vietnam.
 He also mentioned his desire for a report on the progress of
 his idea that Ive need more light planes for operations there.
 Finally, he asked if vre have enough helicopters . II

 On the 16th of June Secretary McNamara had given the Army permission
 to proceed vTith the organization of an Airmobile Division using the assets
 of the 11th Air Assault Division and the 2nd In fantry Division. 160/ On
 the 22nd, four days after the Bundy Memorandum, the Secretary proceeded
 vTith readiness preparation of the Airmobile Divis"ion for deployment to
 South Vietnam, and the number of maneuver battalions being considered for
 eventual deployment rose from 23 U.S. to 34 U.S. or 44 U.S./3rd Country
 tot al. 161/ On the 23rd of June the deploT~ents of one Marine BLT to
 Da Nang and one to Qui Nhon vlere approved. 162/ The l atter move pro-
 vided the needed security for the port of Q"lJi hhon in preparation for
 the arrival of the Airmobile Division and also allm'o'"ed Westmoreland to
 divert the Army brigade originally scheduled for Qui Nhon to Cam Ranh Bay
 and Bien Hoa. 163/

 F. Presidential Sanction for Phase I

 On 17 July, McNmna.ra was in Saigon with the new Ambassador,
 Mr. Lodge, I"hen he received the cable from Vance telling him that the
 Pre sident had decided to proceed l-lith the de:910yment of all 34 U. S.
 battalions then under consideration. At that time, the Chief Executive
 was said by Vance to be favorably inclined tmvard calling up r eserves
 to make the deployments a little less of a strain on the military estab-
 lishment. 16l~/

 Upon his return from Vietnrun, Secretary McNamara prepared a
 draft relea.se to the pre ss vThich stated that the total increase in U. S.
 forces with the l atest approved add-ons ,·rould be about 100,000. 165/
 That information was not given out. Instead , after a week of deliberation,
 the President held a press conference on the 28th of July in which he
 told the Ame rican people "the les son of historyll dictated that the U.S.
 commit its strength to resist aggression in South V1etnam. He said : 166/

 ill'Te did not choose to be the guardians at the gate , but
 there is no one else.

 IINor Iwuld surrender i n Vietnam bring peace, because we
 learned from Hitler at Munich that success only feeds the
 appeti te of aggression. The battle "ivould be renel,red in one
 country and then another country , bringing "i.Jith it perhaps
 even larger and crueler conflict, a.s ive have learned from
 the lessons of his.tory .
•
 110 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

r
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 ItMoreover , vre are in Vi etna..'11 to fulfill one of the most
 solemn pledges of the .~er ic an Nation . Three Presidents --
 President Eisenhm-Ter , President Kennedy, and your present
 President - . over 11 years have committed themselves and
 h ave promis ed to help defend this small and val iant nation .

 II Strengthened by that promise , the people of South
 Vietnarn. have foug.. 1-:tt for many long years . Thousands of them
 h ave diedo Thous ands more have be en crippled and scarred by
 war . \~e just cannot now dishonor our vTOrd, or abandon our
 commi tment, or leave those \-Tho believed us and vrho trusted
 u s to the terror and repression and murder that would follow .

 !'This, then, my fellow Americans , i s vThY ..Te are i n
 Viet nam. It

 As far as incre ase s in U.S o forces were concerned , th e President said
 this:

 "First, vTe intend to convince the Communists that ..re
 cannot be defeated by forc e of arms or ·by superior pm-rer .
 They are not easily convinced. In recent months they have
 greatly increased their fi ght ing forces and their attacks
 and the number of incidents. I have asked the commanding
 general, General Hestmoreland , "lhat more he needs to meet
 this mounting aggression. He has told me. He "Till meet
 his needs .

 "I have today ordered to Vietnam the Airmobile Division
 and certain other forces which ,-rill raise our fi ghting
 strength from 75,000' to 1 25,000 men almost limnediately .
 Additional forces "rill be needed later 9 and they vTill be
 sent as requested . This 1-ri11 make it necessary to increase
 our active fighting forces by rai sing the monthly draft c a ll
 from 17,000 over a period of time to 35,000 per month , and
 for us to step up our campaign for voluntary enlistments .

 "Aft er this past week of deliberat ions, I have concluded
 that it is not essential to order Reserve units i nto service
 nm-r. If that necessity should later be indicated , I will
 give the matter most careful consider at ion and I I·rill give
 t he country due and adequate notice before taking such action ,
 but 0:11y af'~er full preparations.

 "\ofe have also discussed wi th the Goverm.lent of South Vietnaru
 l ately the ste:ps that "Te .,rill t(L~e to substantially increase
 their own effort, both on the battlefield and tm·Tard reform and
 progress i n the villages . Ambassador Lodge is· nO..T forffiul at ing
 a new program to be tested upon his return to that area ."

 111 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Secti on 3.3
 NND P roject Number: NND 633 16. B y: NWD Date: 2011

 /

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Dlrring the questioning period which followed the President ' s presentation ,
the follo',dng dialogue behTeen the President and one of his interlocutors
i s r ecorded :

 IIQuestion : Mr. President, dOes the fact that you are sending
 additional forces to Vietnam imply any change in the existing
 policy of relying mainly on the South Vietnamese to carry out
 offensive operations and using American forces to guard installa-
 tions and to act as emergency backup?

 liThe President : It does not imply any change i n policy what-
 ever . It does not imply change of objective . 1I

 The Annex to JCSM 590-65, fOYi'larded by t'he JCS on 30 July 1965 , .
reflected the final Phase T package approved for deployment as 44 maneuver
battalions and a total strength in Sout.h Vietnam after all units had closed .
of 193,887 U.S. fighting men. During ensuing discussions concerning
Phase II of the build-up, the Phase I package Has further refined and i n-
creased. By 10 November, the Phase I package was fixed at 219 , 000 U. S .
personnel. 167/

 The buil d-up progressed apace ,'!hile the debate continued . In J uly
hro more Army brigades arrived follO\\Ted closely by a corps headquarters.
The 2d Brigade, 1st Infantry Division, which had origi nally been scheduled
to protect Qui Nhon, 'vent to Bien Hoa, leaving one battalion at Cam Ranh
Bay for security . 168/ That battalion rejoined its parent unit when
relieved at Cam Ranh by the 1st Brigade , 101st Airborne Division . I n
August the l anding .of the 7th Marine Regiment brought I II MAF to a total
strength of one Ma.r ine Divis ion p l us one regiment or 12 BLT ' s . 169/ The
airmobile diviSion, organized on 1 July as the 1st Air Cavalry Division ,
was fully deployed and responsible for its TAOR on 28 September . The r e -
mainder of the 1st Infantry Division closed on 7 October , 170/ and the ROK
forces vTere fully deployed by 8 November, bringing the US/3rd Couxltry
forces in- country to a total fight i ng force of l~4 maneuver battalions . 171/
u. S. strength in South Vietna.ro. at the end of 1965 '-las 184 , 314 men. 172/

 112 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 V. Expecta,tions

 The first four sections of this paper ha,ve presented the development
 of the situation in South Vietnam through the ,;arl y months of 1965 and
 discussed the three strategies ( 1) Strategy of Security, 2) Enclave
 Strategy, and 3) Search and Destroy Strategy) "lhich 'vere considered dur -
 ing the same time span for the employment of United States ground forces.
 Each of the strategies had its heyday and its proponents , and each was
 associated in the minds of the decision-making pr i ncipals who were weigh- .
 ing it "lith certain expectations .

 A. The strategy of Security

 The short-lived. strategy of security saw t,he deployments as a
 necessary evil to meet an immediate need -- the bolstering of base security
 in South Vietnam for the air effort against North Vietnam. Few of the
 prjncipals read any more into it than that .

 The only intelligence .estimate dealing "lith the ramifications of
 this strategy came when the intelligence community ,.;as tasked to predict
 probable communist r eactions to the input of an entire Korean division for
 base security duty in South Vietnam. The SNIE resulting, dated 19 March
 1965, indicated that input of Chinese or North Korean "volunteers " ..las
 very urllikely to Occur. Inevitably there I{ould be a great upsurge in
 propaganda and vilification directed against the Koreans and the U.S. for
 making such a move . In the main, hOTtTever, communist reaction depended on
 how the signal \Vas int erpreted . They would almost certainly estimate that
 the input of a ROK division \'iOuld "not in itself significantly alt er the
 military situation . They might consider, ho..,ever , that it portended a
 SUbstantial further build-up of foreign forces .. . e . g., Nationalist Chinese,
 Thai, Philippines, md U.S .... for ground combat." l7..JJ

 The strategy of security vTaS intimately tied to the Rolling
 Thunder bombing progr am . It r emained alive only so long as the decision-
 maki ng principals were reasonably confident that the bombing was going
. to produce the desired effects on the DRV Ivc will to persist. Expecta-
 tions for the security strategy 'tTere quite modest if the foot-in-the-door
 aspects of it are disc01..mted. No input of "volunteers " from China or other
 communist alli es of the DRV was expected to occur in response to the pro-
 vision of a fe,v f orejgn troops to l ook after the bases i n the South. It
 ,vas merely expected that those bases would be better prot ected from attack .

 B. The Encl, ,ve Str2~teg:.c

 At the NSC meetings of 1-2 April, those in attendance could see
 that Ho Chi Minh 'vas not quite ready to throH in the tovTel. The McNa.ughton

 113 TOP SECRBT - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 /

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

"trilemma" \-TaS addressed and it was decided to embark, albeit cautiously,
on a program of grolmd troop deployments in excess of the requirements of
base securtty. To insure control of troops untested in the environment
of Asian insurgclcy, to provide security for the orderly construction of
an eJl.-pandable logistics base, and to provide for rapid and easy exit if
the situation suddenly deteriorated, the forces vTere to be placed in
coastal enclaves yii th thetr backs to the sea .

 The proponents of the encl'ave strategy expected it to frustrate
the DRV/VC by denying them victory. This denial of victory strategy
spelled out at the Honolulu Conference, the high uater mark of the
enclave strategy, predicted that enemy irnpotence .-!ould lead eventually
to a polttical solutton. The enemy ,vould be denied victory simply
because a modtcum of U. S. and 3rd Country force '\-,ould enable the RVNAF
to be expanded at a controlled rate without undue risk of collapse , loss
of a key area, or a major defeat. The brunt of the I,Tar against the
enemy I s regular unit s lvould sttll be borne by the RVNAF . The Allied
fo rces, operating from their secure bases, "JQuld be prepared to come to
the aid of the Vietnamese if necessary. The relatively low intensity of
operations to which the Allied forces \vould be exposed would permtt lmv
risk experimentatj.on vii th them. The info:rrnation gained from such experi-
ments would be useful if the strategy failed and more forces had to be
brought in. If the experiments verified that foreign soldiers could not
fight effectively in the Vtetnrunese environment , a stronger case could
be made for resisting any future attempts to get foreign troops enmeshed
in the l'lar .

 Ambassador Taylor \'lanted to give the Vietnamese maximum oppor-
tl.mi ty to save themselves . He \vas quite sanguine about their prospects
in the spring of 1965 an0 therefore was predisposed to hold the foreign
troops dOl-ffi to the bare minimum. He thought thtngs would rematn stable
enough to permit leisurely experimentation \vith four U. S. Marine battal-
ions for t,vomonths before thought should be given to bringing in any
more. As Taylor saw the situation at that time, the enclave strategy
would buy enough time for the preparation of an ent ire logistics base .
Any additional foreign reinforcements needed could be brought i n l ater .
As far as the few U.S . troops already in the country were concerned ,
Taylor expected t heir most ser ious problem would be bor edom .

 General Westmoreland expected, and CINCPAC supported him tn
this, that the \'lar woul d be lost if the Allied forces vJere put into
enclaves. The d~fference behreen Westmoreland and Taylor \vas the
former I s insiste'1ce on using U. S . and 3rd. Coun-:'ry forces to t ake the
war to the enemy . Taylor lvaS quite content to let RVNAF do that \vi th
the occasional asstst from the Allied forces tf they got i nto difficulty .
Westmoreland did not thil1_I\. they could do it , and he \'TaS c;onvL'1ced that
no kind of victory could be had unless some pressure Here put on the
VC/DRV forces in South Vietn&~.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 \~ estmoreland ,vas convinced that there \-Tould be an enemy offen -
sive in the II Corps highlands sometime during the 1965 summer monsoon.
If Allied forces iveren I t there to meet it, he ,vas sure the highlands
would be lost to the DRV/VC forces, who ",ould then proceed to establish
a front government there. Vlestmoreland expected this to happen if U.S.
and 3rd Country forces 'Nent into coastal enclaves in lieu of moving
directly into the interior.

 CINCPAC expected the AinIlobile Division to exhaust its supply
lines if it were to move directly inland He was not convinced that it
 0

could be supplied adequately by air as Hestmoreland had suggested. The
Ambassador expected the VC/DRV to try for another Dien Bien Phu if a
U. S. division \Vere to go inla...l1d to the highlands.

 Westmoreland expected U.S" troops to have an abrasive effect on
the Vietn8J!lese population if they vTere in too close proximity to one
another. The Ambassador 1-TaS inclined to agree \-,ith him, but CINCPAC
expected U.S o and 3rd Country forces to concentrate their efforts in
areas \-There there \-Tere plenty of people, and he expected them to succeed .
The Ambassador was prepared to put up with the prospect of poor relations
betiveen foreign troops and the Vietnamese in return for the Imv risk pros-
pects offered by the enclave strategy.

 It is not at all clear that the JCS ever endorsed the enclave
strategy vrith any enthusiasm or that they eA.':pected much from it. From
analysis of their recommendations it seems that they strove constantly
to override the enclavists and get enough force into the country to do
some goodo In their three-division plan, they derided those who vTanted
to IImerely keep pace ll iViththe enemy or IIslO'w dO'/m the rate ll of his ad-
vance. The JCS said that to turn the tide of the ",ar required "an objec-
tive of destroying the VC." 174/ The only way to "'in ",as to provide
enough force to both stem the tide and assume the offensive. They
recommended three divisions to accomplish the latter. The enclave
strategists advocated neither the objective nor the amount of force .

 Probably the last enclavist to be heard during the build-up
debate "Tas llilliam Bundy. His IIA Middle 'H ay Course of Action in South
Vietnam" memorandum '. Tas submitted to the President on the 1st of Julyo
BQl1dy expected 18 battalions and 85,000 men oper ating in conservative
fashion from coast al enclaves to be enough to hold the whole facade
together "'hile the U.S. made concerted efforts to shore up Southeast
Asia and extricate itself honorably from South Vietnam. He did not
expect a victory from such a move , but he did not expect a loss either.

 The reaction of the intelligence commQl1ity to the enclave
strategy vias consistently less than optimistic. Immed i ate ly follo",ing
the NSC meetings of the 1st of April, CIA Director McCone circulated a
merJ.orandu..m in ivhich he argued that changing the mission of U. S. troops
in Vietnam to offensive operations i·rould merely lead to requests for

 1.1.5 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By : NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 more and more troops for a ..rar the U. S. II ca!1..l1ot ..Tin. II In the same memo -
 randum) McCone argued that a marked increased in the tempo of air opera-
 tions against NVN was an indispensable concomitant of a change in ground
 strategy. 1751 The NSAM which sanctioned the change of ground strategy
 called for no more than II s 10wl y ascending tempo" for Roll.ing Thunder
 operations. 176)

 McCone circulated another memorandum on the day after the
 Honolulu Conference in which he estimated probable enemy reactions to
 greater U. S . involvement in the war. The enemy, McCone said, still sa..r
 things essentially going his ..ray . An increased U. S. involvement on the
 ground would be seen by the enemy as an acceptance by the U. S. of a
 greater cormni t.ment, but he 1fTould also infer from the cautious enclave
 approach that the U. S. was quite reluctant to ,'Tiden the war. It was
 probable that theVC would be reinforced with men and equipment, but
 direct intervention by the DRV or the Chinese Communists '\V'as unlikely. 1771

 On the 28th of April, a SNIE entitled IICommunist Reactions to
 Certain U.S. Actions ll described what could be expected of the enemy :

 liThe policies and tactics of the Communist powers engaged
 by the Vietnamese crisis have settled into a fairly definitive
 pattern. It appears that the DRV, ...rith strong Chinese encourage-
 ment, is determined for the present to ride out the U.S. bombard-
 ment. Both the DRV and Communist China have hardened their
 attitude toward negotiations, without categorically excluding
 the possibility under all conditions. They apparentl.y calculate
 that the DRV can afford further punishment and that, in the
 meantime, U.S. determination to persist will weaken because of
 increasing DRV air defense capability, the threat of broader
 conflict, and the pressure of int ernational and U. S. domestic
 oplnlon . Moreover, they consider that the tide is running in
 their favor in the South ... 11

 If the enemy ' s attitudes were as hard as described above, then a great
 deal of patience vTaS going to be required of those '\vho . expected the
 Honolulu strategy to come to fruition.

 C. The Search and Destroy Strategy

 There are many aspects of the enclave strategy which ..rere galling
 to professional military men . Many of t.hose were brought out by the military
 men themselves i i documents quoted in this pa~sr . Probably the single most
 disturbing factor in the enclave approach ,vas the implicit failure to try and
 seize the initiative from the enemy. Instead, it was proposed tha.t the U. S.
 and the GVN try and ride out the "Tar by denying the enemy a victory. The

 116 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
. .
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 /'

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

The initiative to come to the conference table and thus end the fi ghting
was l eft strictly to the enemy and depended on his appreciation of his
mm impotence. It looked as though the c )rmnunists '·Tere to have 9-11 the
options.

 The JCS expected any strategy to fail if it did not include
among its courses of action some provision for the seizure of the i nitia-
tive. They said as much in each of their recow~endationso General
Westmoreland vTaS of a similar bent , and he stated explicitly that the
enclave strategy V{aS IItoo negative . II 178/ Nevertheless, both Westmore-
l and and the JCS are on record stating that 44 battalions would not be
enough to seize the initiative from the enemy either. Westmoreland to ld·
the JCS on 24 June that he felt sUbstantial increases of forces "Tould b e
required over and above the 4~· battalions in 1 9-66 . The U. S. ,vould be
to o busy building up its forces in 1965 to seize 'the initiative from the
enemy during that year. 179/ JC SM-515-65 of 2 July, '''hich contained the
JC S r ecommendation for the full 44 b attalions , i ncluded the folloliing
paragraph:

 IlPur suant to your discussions ,-rith the JCS on 28 Ju.ne 1 965 ,
 there is furnished in the Annex hereto a program for the deploy-
 ment of such additional forces to South Vietnam at this time as
 are required to insure that the VC/DRV cannot ,dn in South Viet-
 nam at their present level of commitment. II ZEmphasis adde~7

The JCS went on to recol1'JIlend the concurrent implementation of stepped-up
air action against the DRV as lIan indispensable cO" ponent of this over-
all program. II Thus, the JCS, \·rho in March 1 965 were re com:r.:lending 27
b att alions to IIs tem t he tide and assume the offensive, II 180/ 'Nere ready
to admit in July of that year that 44 battalions would only be enough to
hold the fort and that even greater effort ,vould be r equired to seize
the i nitiat ive .

 When the Secretary of Defense came to Saigon during the third
week of July 1 965 , he "as i ntroduced to General \vestmoreland I s latest
ideas concerning the empl oyment of U. S . and Free World Military Assistance
Forc e ( F','TMAF ) forces
 0 Westmoreland laid out for t he Secretary the force
requir ements projected i nto 1 966 . Force ratios based on estllDates of
 enemy build-up c apabi lity and projections of the RVNAF r ate of build -up
called for the 44 US-ft~ffiF battalions through the end of 1 965 . In con-
cert ,·ri th Westmoreland I s Concept of Operations, l ater formali zed and
publi shed on 30 August, the 44 battalions vrere l abeled Phase I for ces .
Secretary l<1dlaro.ara l eft Saigon ...,ith the first estimate by Westmoreland
of the requireme:lts for assuming the offensiv(: in 1966. Phase II '\'Tas
 anticipated by Westmoreland to require 24 additional maneuver b attalions .
181/

 As an indication of ldestmoreland I s expectations for the 44 Phase I
maneuver battalions 'vrhich are the subject of t his paper , there is no better

 117 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

source then his Concept of Operations . 182/ The Concept vas developed
thro ugh three distinct phases :

 Phase I _.. ~he commitment of US/HOOF forces necessary to halt the
lo sing trend by the end of 1965.

 Phase II -- The reswnption of the offensive by US/EWNAF forces
during the first half of 1966 in high priority areas necessary to destroy '
enemy forces, and reinstitution of rural construction activit ies.

 Phase III -- If the enemy persisted, a period of a year to a year
and a half follovring Phase II would be r equired for the defeat and de-
struction of the remaining enemy forces and base areas .

 vli thdra:vTal of US/YvlNAF forces ''lOuld conrrp.ence follm-ring Phase III
as the GVN became able to establi sh and maintain internal order and to
defend its borders.

 The overall Concept v.Tas based on some asslLrnptions :

 ( 1) That the VC ,,[ould fight until convinced that military victory
vlaS impossible and then ,wuld not be willing to endure further punishment.

 ( 2) That the Chinese Communists Ilould not int ervene except to
provide aid and advice.

 ( 3) That friendly forces would. maintain control of the air over
RVN.

 The specific military tasks associated with each phase of the
Conc ept wer e spe ll ed out as follows:

 Phase I

 (1 ) Secure t he major mi litary bases , airfields and c ommunicat ions
centers .
 -
 ( 2) Defend ma jor po litical and population centers .

 ( 3) Conduct offensive operations against ma jor VC base ar eas
in order to divert and destroy VC main forces.

 ( 4) Pr~vide adequate r eserve r eacticn forc es to prevent the loss
of secure and defended areas.

 ( 5) Preserve and s:trengthen t he RVNAF.

 (6) Provide adequate air support, both co~bat and logistic.

 118 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 ( 7) Maintain an anti-infiltration screen along the coast and
 support forces ashore Hith naval gunfire and amphibious lift.

 ( 8) Provide air and sea lifts necessary to transport the
 necessary but minirlllJ..rn supplies to the civil populace .

 ( 9) Open up necessary critical lines of communication for
 essential military and civil purposes.

 (10) Preserve and defend, to the extent possible , areas nOVT
 under effective governmental control.

 Phase II

 (1) All Phase I measures.

 ( 2) Resume and/or ex-pand pacification operations. Priority vlill
 be given to the Hop Tac area around Saigon, to that part of the Delta along
 an east-\vest axis from Go Cong to Chau Doc, and in the provinces of Quang
 Nam, Quang Tri, Quang Ngai, Binh Dinh and Phu Yen.

 ( 3) Participate in clearing, securing, reserve reaction and
 offensive operat ions as required to support and sustain the resumption
 of pacification.

 Phase III

 (1 ) All Phase I and II measures.

 ( 2) Provide those additional forces necessary to extend and
 expand clearing and securing operations throughout the entire populated
 area of the country and those forces necessary to destroy VC forces and
 their base areas.

 General \\Testmoreland ii'ent on in his Concept to layout the tactics
 to be associated vTi tli the various military tasks and to list explicit
 t asks to be accomplished vTithin each RVNAF Corps area. The above is suf-
 ficient for the ne eds of this paper, hOli'ever; as it shovTs that General
 Westmoreland expected by the end of 1965 to have effectively sterr@ed the
 tide of the VC insurgency through the input of 44 U~/F'WMAF maneuver
 battalions and their accompanying support. It further shows that in the
 fir st half of 1966, Ii'ith the input of more force, Hestmoreland expected
 to shift his emphasis from the strat egic defens ive to the strategic
 offensive.

 In his 25 June intervie,'T Hith McNaughton, Deputy .A.mbassador Johnson
 s~rned up the expectations for Ambassador Taylor and himself . 183/ In
 Johnson I s viei'[ vrhat 'Nas expected depended on how serious the situation

•
 119 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 actually vTaS. If it "rere as bad as ~vestmoreland said it ¥Tas, then large ,
 numbers of foreign troops could do little more than hold on to a few
 enclaves. If the situation "Jere not significantly worse than the year
 before (and Johm:on apparently felt in many wa~rs it was not) then the
 U. S . was merely br inging in more foreign troops than I'[ ere needed and
 could be expected to have difficulty getting them out again . Finally,
 Johpson expected the Vietnrunese reaction to the massive input of foreign
 troops to be a major problem.

 Under Secret ary George Ball clearly felt that the U.S . was already
 engaged in an indeterminate struggle in Vietnam. Raising the US/FHMAF
 force levels to 44 battalions would, he expected, accomplish nothing more
 than raise the cost to the U. S. when it finally 19st the l-rar 8...Yld pulled
 out.

 Assistant Secretary Bundy Sal;' in the 44 battalion request some
 ultimatLm aspects that he felt were undesirable. Apparently, although
 he did not say so, he expected approval of that request and announcement
 of it to trigger some kind of dire response from the other side .

 The person among the principals .,vhose views can be found in the
 files dared to attach a prob ability to his expectations. Assistant
 Secretary McNaughton gave Secretary McNamara on the 13th of July a memo-
 randum entitled tlAnalysis and Options for South Vietnrun . tI McNaughton
 described three possible cours'es the 'ivar could take :

 (1) Success for the US/GVN. (Actions one should expect to see
 i n such a case were the extension of GVN control throughout the country,
 . t he disarming of the VC armed units, the cessation of infiltration and
 other DRV support, and the relegation of the terror and other insurgent
 activity to little more than a rural police problem. )

 ( 2) Inconclusive for either side ( self-explanatory).

 ( 3) GVN collapse and concomitant U.S. defeat ( self-explanatory).

 McNaughton recommended to Secretary McNamara that the U. S . deploy the 44
 battalions and be prepared to send lnore force to try for a win as defined
 above . McNaughton ! s expectations for such a course, as expressed i n .
 probabilities, are laid out belmv. The assumed U. S .. force level to
 deve"l op these probabilities "las betvreen 200,000 and 400,000 men . v.7ith that
 amount of force, the probability of Success/Inconclusive/Collapse ''das
 for the yeur 196(): . 2/ . 7/ . i
 for the year 1967 : . 4/ . 45/.15 and
 for the year 1968 : . 5/ . 3/ . 2 -- no further projection being made .

 It is note,vorthy that "lhile McNaughton expected the probability of success
 to increase ,'iith each year of investment, he also expected the probability

•
 120 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

of failure to increase, although not by as much. The probability that
th e "lar "iorould end inconclusively was expected by HcNaughton to shrink
dr81natically after the first ye ar . In concluding his memorandum ,
McNaughton obserred that the U.S. might decide at anytime in mid-course
to try for a compromise so lution to the conflict. . Such an option, "i'Thile
not assigned a probability of achievement , was defined as a situat ion in ,
which the VC rema ined armed and in defense of areas they controlled in
the country, the NLF "ioTaS represented in the GVN, and the GVN agreed to
keep hands off the VC areas.

 Neither the President nor the Secretary of Defense i s on record
in 1 965 Hi th expectations as to the duration of the vrar or the impact of
the 44 battalions. It l ooks as though they both ,\Tere prepared for the
moment to go along vTith General Vlestmoreland r s pr'edictions about the
course of the "ivar. The decis ion not to call up the Reserves, which "i-ras
made some tirne during the ,-reek j ust prior to the President r s press con-
f erence of 28 J uly, indicated that the Pres ident expected the -~Tar to l ast
in Vietnam. well beyoncl a year. No doubt the Secretary of Defense told
h im that ,'lithout a dec l aration of national emergency - - a move the Pr es i-
d ent found politically unpal atable -- the Reserves as an asset would be
fully expended i n one year, leaving the military establishment in ,vor se
shape than before if the vTar still continued.

 The fina l element in the expectations matrix "i-las provided by the
NIB i n a SlnE issued on 23 Juiy entit l ed If Communist and Free Wor ld Re-
actions to a Possible U. S . Course of Action. If The analysis "laS pl'edicatoe d
on the following proposed action:

 (1) The U.S. would i ncrease its strength in SVN to 175,000 by
1 November~

 ( 2) 225,000 u. S. Reserves "Tould be called up,

 (3) 20,000 tour s of duty per month "ivould b e extended,

 ( 4) The r egular strength of the U. S. AYmed Force s vrould be
increased by 400,000 over the next year, and

 ( 5) UoS. draft calls would be doubled.

I n conj unction \'i'ith the above , the U. S. "Tould a l so make public . statements
reiterating its objectives and its readiness to negotiate. The fo rces
going to VietnsxiC '\vould be deployed so as not i.o threaten the 17th parc..llel.
Also considered 'Has a poss ible step -up of U.S. a ir activity against the
DRV l and lines of communication I'd th Chinao

 In r eact i on to the above, t he Communists would probably se e the
U. S. moves as indication that the U.S. held litt l e hope of negotiation.
They '\vould prob ab ly expect some increase i n US/3rd COlm.try f orces an,,:{vray

 121 l'OP SECRET - Sensii:, ive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

as they clearly felt they were winning. In order to offset the increases
of US/3rd Country forces in South Vietnam, the Communists would p'robably
build up their mm strength "Ti th the input of 20,000 to 30,000 PAVN regu-
l ars by the end \)f 1965. This, of course, they i{ere already in the pro-
cess of doing.

 It was seen as possible, but le ss probable , that the Communists
might attack GV1il" forces and installations in hopes of achieving victory
b efore the US/3rd Country build-up took effect .- Barring that, they might
avoid direct confrontation vlith U. S. forces and just peck m·ray at them
through harassing actions . By so dOing , they might hope to demonstrate
to the foreigner his ovm impotence in a Vietnamese war .

 If the situation in South Vietnam were go ing badly for the VC,
the DRV might ShO\-T some interest in negotiations . If the U. S. did in-
cr ease its air activity , the DRV was most likely to respond by asking
the Soviets for more air defense hardivare.

 As far as the Chinese Communists 'vere concerned', it i'Tas estimated
that they 'vere very unlikely to intervene in the air war over North
Vietnam . They might put service troops into North Vietnam, but they
would not be likely to i ntroduce combat troops. The Chinese, the Estimate
said, '\.,rould believe that the U. S. measures v~ere sufficient only to post-
pone defeat I"hile magnifying its eventual effect. II

 It could be expected that the Soviets iwuld step up their aid to
the DRV, especially in the field of air defense, and at the same time
harden their attitude to",vards the U.S. "tlithout ma.king any major chall enge
to U. S. interests around the Iwrld. It would come as no. surprise if the
Soviets raised the l evel of their military spending in r esponse to this
U. S. act ion.

 It vTaS felt that most of the allies of the United States realized
that the U.S. was going to have to increase its commitment in Vietnam .
It vTas recognized, hm'lever, that they vTould find it increasingly difficult
to give U.S. policy any public support.

 In order to mit i gate somewhat the crlSlS atmosphere that would
result from this major U.S. action, the Estimate concluded with the recom-
mendation that annoQncements about it be made piecemeal with no more high
level emphasis than necessary.

 P:..~edict ' 1.bly , the expectations of thos",= outside of the official'
pale ran the gamut from supporters of Oregon Senator "ra.yne Morse ( lithe
Aruministration policy is leading the United States to the abyss of total
war" -- "there are doubts beginning to shm'T at the grass rO'ots about our
policy there, jJ.n Vietn~ and i·rhen the coffins begin coming home those
doubts "Till grm'l" -- lithe vrar in Asia cannot be won ; ... in the end the
United States i-rill be kicked out") 184/ to equally misguided zealots on

 122 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 the other end of the spectrum, such as Jack Foisie of the Los Angeles
 Times ("I foresee the day of mixed American-Vietnamese units under
 Americ~n command -- to make our junior leadership stretch as far as
 possible l1 - - 11"\'1e are going to drive to. the Lao,1 border -- lying only
·50 to 75 miles inland in the central 1-mist of Vietnam. Everything
 taken will be held, initially I,rith firstline troops, and later -- as
 a rear area -- by second line militia" ). 185/

 l\Thatever their personal assessments of the ramifications of
the 44 battalion decision might have been, all interested observers
had one thing in comrnon -- they recognized the crossing of a major
thre shold and the embarkation on a major new' course the end of which
was not in sight.

 123 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

,.. . ,
 ~

 ..
 .,.i

 .' THE WHITE HOUSE
 WASHINGTON J .

 . <) ApJ.'iJ. 6, 1965 '
 \\
 TOP SECRET
 \ . '. '
 NATIONAL SECURITY ACTION MEMORANDUM NO. 328
 . '
 ", .

 M..EMORANDUM FOR

 THE SECRETARY OF STATE
 THE SE'CHETARY OF DEFENSE/
 THE DIRECTOR OF CENTR.AL INTELLIGENCE (

 On Thursday, April I, The President D1ade the follov/ing decisions with
 respect to Vietnam:

 1. Subject to modifications in the light of experience, and
 to coordination and directio~. both in Saigon and in Washington, the
 President approved the 41-point program of non-plilitary actions sub-
 mitted by Ambassador Taylor in a memorandum dated March 31, 1965. . '
 . 1

 2. The President gave gene ra1 a.pproval to the recormuenda-
 tions submitted by Mr. Rowa.n in his report dated March 16 1 with the
 exception that the President withheld appr oval of any reques t for sup-
 plemental fu nds at this time - - it is his decision that this prograrrl is to
 be energetically supported by all agencies and dep2.rtments and by the
 -'
 I · reprogramluing of available funds as necessary w.ithin USIA.

 3. The President approved the urgent exploration of the 12
 sugges tions for covert and other actions submitted by the Director of .
 Central Intelligence under date of March31. \"

 4. The President repeated his earlier approval of the 2~ ..
 point program of military actions submitted by General Harold K.
 Johnson under date of March 14 and re-emphasized his desire that
 , aircraft and hclicop'cB~' reWox-cements unc1.el' this prograHi be
 , ,
 accelerated.

 TOP SECRET
 . '. ~- . ' . -. . - --....-.,---~-
 -: "_. ' ~ -.' -~ .- - . . . -' . .
 ' ~- . ' -- -

 124 ' .
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

-- - .::;--
 i
 I TOP 3~CRET

1 5. The President approved an 18-20, 000 man increase in
 U. S. l:.-:.:1itary support forces to fjl1 out exisHng units and supply needed
 logistic pel'S onn e l.

 6. The Pre sident approved the deployment of two additional
 Marine Battalions and one Marine Air Squadron and associated he2.u.quartel'S
 and support elements.

 7. Tho. PrcDidcnt apPl"ovcc1 0. chan.Go of n'liooion for 0.11 Marino
 Battalions deployed to Vietnam to pennit their more active use under
 conditions to be es tabEs h e d and approved by the Secretary of Defens e in
 consultation wi tJ:i. the Secre tary of State.

 8. The Pre s ident approved the urgent exploration, -with the
 Korean, Austr alian , and -Nev, "Zealand Governments, of the possibility
 .. of rapid deployment of signiiicant comb at elements froln the ir armed
 forccs in paralle l with the additional Marine deployment approved in para-
 graph 6.

 9. Subject to continUing review, the 4Pr esident appr oved the
 following general framework of continuing actibn against North Vietnam
 and Laos:

 We should c ontinue ro ughly the present slowly as cending
 tempo of ROLLlJ.""l"G THUNDEH op era tions, being prepared to add strikeo .
 in response to a higher rate of VC operations, or conceivably" to slow 1/
 the pace in the unlikely /event VC slacked off sharply for. what appeared to
 be more than a temporary operational lull.
1 The tar get systems should continue to avoid the effective GCl
 range of MIGs. We should continue to vary the types of targets, stepping .
 up attacks On lines of conununication in the near future, and possibly ".. - /
 moving in a few weeks to attacks on the rail lines north and northeast
 of Hanoi.

 Leaflet operations should be expanded to obtain maximum
 praCticable psychological effect on the North Vietnamese population.
I
1 Blockade or aerial ~ining of North Vietnamese ports need furt.her
1 study and should be con s idered for future opel"aHone. It would have major
 political complications, especially in rClation to the Sovieta and other
 third countries, but <:\J.o·o offer 8 many advantagsa.

 TOP SECRET
 -----~

 . 125
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 / )
 . " ..
 , '

 . " TOP SECHET

 i Air operation in Laos, particularly route blocking operations ,./"
 I
 '1, in the Panhandle axea, flhoulcl be stepped up to the maximum remunera- .It,.,... .
 " '

 , tive rate.

 10 . . ,\mbassaclor Taylor will pron lptly seek the reactions of
 i the South Vietnamese Government to appropriate sections of this pro-
 ! .
 ! gram and their approval as ·necessa.ry, and in the event of clisapproval or
 difficulty at that end; these clecisions will be appropriately reconsidered.
 In any event, no action i nto Victn<1.n1. under pnl';1 grD.pho 6 nnd 7 nbovo
 shou " l take place without GVN approval or further Presidential authoriza-
 tion. ,I

 .1

I .'
 ,
j

 , "
 ..... • t, '

 . ' ', . . . ,;'. ,::' -. "',.'
 .. .....
 ; .. .

 " "
 : .;

 " "

 .•...
 "-"-.
 "
 "
 , 'fOP 5..B CnET

 126
 i
.1 _. .... '-"-- ' ,.. ---'" • 0
 " . . . .... ... 'r : . ':.1 . ....
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 -n
 o
 o
 '"--f
 Z
 o
 -i
 m
 (/)
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 /1
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Iv.c.6.
 FOOTNOTES

1. CIA Sitrep, 2 April 1965.

 2. CIA Monthly Report, 5 May 1965 .

 3. CIA Monthly Report, 4 ' June 1965.

 4. Robert She.plen, The Lost Revolution (New York: Harper & Row, 1965),
 pp. 344- 3L~5.

 5- CIA Sitrep, 23 June 1965 .

 6. CIA Monthly Report, 5 May 1965.

 7. Memo, McGeorge Bundy to SecDef, 12 April 1965.

 B. OASD(PA) Press Release 216-65 , 7 A~ri1 1965.

 9. Msg, COHUSMACV to CIl'TCPAC, 271338z March 1965.

10. Joint CIA-DIA-State t'lemo, " Strength of Viet Cong Military Forces in
 South Vietnam. !I

11. CIA Sitrep, 2 April 1965.

12. JCSlil 204-65, 20 March 1965.

13. CIA-DIA Memo , !IAn Assessment of Present VC Military Capability!l
 (SC #04 Lf64/65), 21 April 1965.

14. MACY- Monthly Evaluation, May 1965 .

15. Interview ,dth Ma j Gen William Du Puy (MACV J-3 at the time of
 Ba Gia) , 4 October 1967.

16. Deptel 2873, 11 JQne 1965.

17. CIA Sitrep, 16 June 1965.

lB. MAGll HilitarJ Report , 19- 26 June 1965.

19-. Ibid.

20. CIA.Sitrep, 14 July 1965.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 127
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

21. Shaplen, Ope cit ., p. 3Lf8.

· 22 . . MACV , "Commander s Estimate of The Situation," 26 March 1965.
 I

23. Msg, MACV to CINCPAC , 19118, 070335Z June 1965.
24. Joint CIA-DIA-State Memo , Ope cit.

25. CIA Sitrep, 21 July 1965.

26. OSD SEA Stat istical S~~ary, Table 2.

27. CIA Sitrep, 2 April 1965.

28. OASD(PA) Press Rele ase 216-65, Ope cit.

29. McGeorge Bundy, Memo for The President, 7 February 1965.
30. OASD(PA), Ope cit.

31. Memo, SecDef to Chairman, JCS, 4 June 1965 .

32. CIA Sitrep, February 1965.

33. Special Report prepared by the US}.1ACV Subsector Advisor, Thanh Phu
 District, 1 October 1965.

34. MACV Command History 1965, p. 21.
35. CIA Monthly Report, 4 June 1965.

36. MACV History, OPe cit., p. 5

37. EMBTEL 4074, 5 June 1965.

38. Chief of Staff, U. S. Army, Harold K. Johnson, Memo for SecDef and
 others , 14 March 1965.

39. Nsg,MACV to CINCPAC, 170747Z March 1965.
40. Msg, CINCPAC to JCS, 192207Z March 1965 .
41. JCSN 216-65, 25 March 1965.

42-. NSAN[ 328, 6 April 1965.

43. JCSM 204-65, 20 March 1965.

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 128
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

44. New York Times, 9 June 1965.

45. NSAM 328, ~ . cit.

46. Msg, CINCPAC (for Taylor) to State, 042058z April 1965.

47. McNaughton notes, "Annex -- Plan of Action for SVN," 24 March 1965.

48. NSN4 328, op. cit.

49. SecDef, Memo for The ~resident, 21 April 1965.

50. McNaughton, Nemo to Dep SecDef, 5 May 1965 . .
51. SecDef, Memo to Chairman, JCS, 5 April 1965.'

52. F)nbtel 3332, 12 April 1965.

53. Ed",rin H. Simmons, Monograph , "The Marine Corps Response to Vietnam
 and Santo Domingo," 15 May 1967, p. 32.

51~. liIACV" Commander's Estimate," oJ? cit.

55. Msg, MACV to CINCPAC , 110852Z April 1965.

56. Msg, CINCPAC to JCS 030230Z March 1965.

57. JCS t alking paper confirming r esults of Conference in Honolulu of
 10 April, 16 April 1965 .
58. MACV History, op. cit., p. 39; Msg, JCS to CINCPAC, 009012,
 140051Z April 1965.
59. Embtel 3373, 14 April 1965.

60. Embtel 3423, 17 April 1965.

61. Joint State-Defense Msg, 9164, 15 April 1965.

62. JCS~ 281-65, 15 April 1965.
63. Deftel 1097., 30 April 1965.

6~. l1sg, CINCPAC to JCS, 070246z July 1965.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 129
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 65. JCSM 811-65, 10 November 1965.

 66. CSA Johnson Memo, 14 }!larch 1965, op. cit.

 67. SecDef marginal notes in Johnson Memo of 14 March 1965.

 68. Embtel 3003, 18 March 1965.

 69. Embtel 3120, 27 March 1965.

 70. Deptel 2131, 30 March 1965.

 71. NSAM 32 8, op . cit .

 72. Msg, . CINCPAC to State (for Taylor), 042058z April 1965.

 73. Embtel 34 23, 17 April 1965.

 74. Embtel 3432, 17 April 1965.

 75. Embtel 3424, 17 April 1965.

 76. Embtel 3374, 14 April 1965.

 77. JCSM 281-65, 15 April 1965.

 78. Embtel 3419 and 3421, 17 April 1965.

 79. Joint State-Defense Msg , 9164, 15 April 1965.
 80. Embtel 3423, 17 April 1965.

 81; McNaughton minutes of 20 April 1965 Honolulu Meeting

 82. Embtel 3423 , op. cit., and McNaughton Minutes , op. cit.

 83. SecDef Memo for The President, 21 April 1965 .

 84. Msg, CINCPAC to JCS, 230423Z April 1965.

 85. JCSM 321-65, 30 April 1965.
 86 . . Deftel 1097, 30 April 1965.
 McNaughton Memo to Dep SecDef, 5 May 1965.

• TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 130
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 88. SecDef Memo to Chairman , JCS, 15 May 1965.

 S9. Simmons, op. cit., p. 91

 90.· JCSM Sll-65, 10 November 1965.
 91. Msg, ' MACV to CINCPAC , 17292, 24 May 1965, and Embtel 3855, 24 May 1965·

 92. Embtel 3491, 23 April 1965.

 93. Msg, COMUSMACV to CINCPAC , 15182, 8 May 1965·

 94. Ernbtel 372 7, 11 May 1965.

 95. Simmons, o~. cit., p. 33.

 96. Ibid.

 97. New' York Times, 9 June 1965.

 9S. Simmons, op. cit., p. 34.

 99. Deptel 3 057, 26 June 1965.

 100. Siw~ons , op. cit., p. 44~45.

 101. JCSM 634-65, 21 May 1965.

 102. JCS talking paper for coming Ta.ylor visit, 9 June 1965.

 103. Msg, MACV to CINCPAC, 1911S', 070335Z June 1965.

 104. CSA Johnson Memo, 14 March 1965, op. cit.

 105. MACV "Commander 's Estimate," 26 March 1965, op. cit.

 106. }.1sg, MACV to CINCPAC, 27133SZ March 1965.

 107. Ibid.

 lOS. MACV History, op. cit., p. 57-58.

 109. Ibid., p. 5), and SecDef Memo to Chairmar. , JCS, 12 April 1965.

 110. JCill.f 417-65, 27 Mary 1965.

• TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 131
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

111. SeeDef Memo to Chairman , JCS, 4 June 1965.

112. Msg, ~~CV, 19118, 7 June 1965, op. cit.

113. M~g, MACV to Sharp, Wheeler , J ohnson , waters (Eyes Only), 2029,
 12 April 1965.

114. Msg, COMUSMACV to CINCPAC, 15182, 8 May 1965.

115. Msg, MA.CV to DA. , 150900Z May 1%5.

116. Msg, CINCPAC to JCS 072325Z June 1965

117. JC SM 457-65, 11 June 1965.

118. Msg, CINCPAC to JCS, 112210Z June 1965.

119. JCSM 204-65, 20 March 1965.
120. Ibid.

121. Deptel 2131, 30 March 1965.

122. SeeDef Memo to Chairman, JCS, 5 April 1965.

123. Msg, JCS to CINCPAC, 140355Z April 1965.

124. JCSM 321-65, 30 April 1965.

125. SeeDef Memo to Chairman , JCS, 15 May 1965.

126. JCS talking paper for coming ~aylor visit, 9 June 1%5.

127. JCSM 457-65, 11 June 1965.
128. Ibid.

129. JCSM 482-65, 18 June 1965

130. MACV History, op. eit.~ p. 41

131. Msg, JSC to, CI NCPAC, 112347Z June 1965.

132. Msg, COMUSMACV to CINCPAC, 20055, 131515Z June 1965.

133. Embtel 4220, 17 June 1965.

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 132
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

134. Msg, JCS to CINCPAC, 2400, 22 June 1965.
135. Msg, V~CV to CINCPAC, 3320, 24 June 1965.
136. Deptel 3057, 26 J une 1965.

137. McNaughton Memo of conversation with Johnson, 26 June 1965.
138. ~SD (PA) text of SecDef Press Conference, 16 June 1965.
139. George Ball, draft summary of ~lemo, "Cutting Losses," 28 June 1965·

140. George Ball Memo for the President, 1 July 1965.

141. William Bundy Memo for the President, 1 July 1965.

142. .D eptel 2131, 30 March 1965.
143. SecDef r eply to JC SM 204-65, contained in draft J-:J paper dated
 5 November 1966.
144. SecDef Memo to Chairman, JCS, 5 April 1965.

145· SecDef Memo to Chairman , JCS, 15 May 1965.

146. SecDef Memo to all Departments, 1 March 1965.

147. SecDef marginal comments in CSA Johnson Memo , 14 March 1965, op. cit.

148. JCSM 238-65, 2 April 1965.

149. SecDef Memo to Chairman , JCS, 14 May 1965.

150. SecDef letter to Chairman , House Appropriat ions Committee, 9 June 1965.

151. Deptel 5319, 7 July 1965.

152. Msg, Vance to McNamara, 172042Z June 1965.
153. MACV History, op. cit., p. 42.
154. Simmons, op. cit., p. 37.

155. NSAM 32 8, ~it.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 133
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 156. McGeorge Bundy Memo to SecDef , 10 April 1965.

 157. Defte1 9164, 15 April 1965

 158. Committee on Foreign Relations, United States Senate, "Background
 Information relating to Southeast Asia and Vietnam" (Government
 Printing Office, March 1966), pp. 227-231.

 159. McGeorge Bundy Memo to SecDef, 18 Jlme .1965.

 160. OASD (PA) text of SecDef Press Conference, 16 June 1965.

 161. MACV History, op. cit., p. 41.

 162. Depte1s 3078 and 3079, 23 June 1965.

 163. I{A.CV History, 0p . cit., p. 41

 164. Msg, Vance to SecDef, 172042Z July 1965.

 165. SecDef draft Press Release, 22 July 1965.

 166. Committee on Foreign Relations , op. cit., pp. 238-243.

 167. JCSM 811-65, 10 November 1965 .

 168. MACV History, op. cit., p. 41

 169. Ibid., p. 35.

 170. Ibid., p. 44.

 171. Ibid., p. 72

 172. Ibid., p. 269.

 173. SNIE IIProbab1e Cormnunist Reactions to the Deployment of a ROK
 Division for Security Duty in SVN,II 19 March 1965.

 174. JCSM 204-65, 20 March 1965.

 175· McCone Memo to SecDef and others, 2 April 1965.

 176. NSA..M 328, 0p, cit.

 177· ~fcCone Memo , "Reactions to Greater U. S. Involvement, II 21 April 1965.

• TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 134
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

178. MACV "Comma:nder 's Estimate," opo cit.
179. Msg, MACV to CINCPAC, 3320, 24 June 1965.
180. JCSM 204-65, 20 M8J.~ch 1965.

181. MACV History, op. cit., p .420
182. Ibid., pp o 141-153.

1830 McNaughton Memo of Conversation, op o cito, 26 June 1965.
184. Ne,v York Times , 9 June 19650
185. Los·Ange les Times, 4 July 1965.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 135