The Pentagon Papers (Part -IV-C-2b) (U.S. Department of Defense, 1971)
Public domain. Sourced from the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration: Report of the Office of the Secretary of Defense Vietnam Task Force (The Pentagon Papers) (https://nara-media-001.s3.amazonaws.com/arcmedia/research/pentagon-papers/Pentagon-Papers-Part-IV-C-2b.pdf).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

================================================================================

Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 IV.C Evolution of the War (26 Vols.)
 Direct Action: The Johnson Commitments, 1964-1968
 (16 Vols.)
 2. Military Pressures Against NVN (3 Vols.)
 b. July - October 1964

 -

~ ."----- - -- ~---"'---" - - _. - ---~--...------------- - ~~-- --~-~- - - ~--~---~--
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TV , (~ . 2. ( h )

 EVOLUTlm~ OF' THE ViM

Milit ary Pressures Against ~:orth Vietnam

 July - October .~2.64

 ·0295
 Sec Def Cuut 1..1. X-_~ __ ..____"_
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 MILITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NVN: JULY - OCTOBER, 1964

 SUMMARY and ANALYSIS

 During tpe spring and summer of 1964, there was disquiet about
the situation in South Vietnam and disillusion with on- going U. S. actions
to right that situation. During the third quarter of 1964, a consensus
developed vTi thin the Johnson Administration that some form of continual
overt pressures mounting in severity against North Vietnam soon vTould be
required. The purpose of these pressures was t'rrofold : (1 ) to effect DRV
will and capabilities in order to persuade and force the leadership i n
Hanoi to halt their support and direction of the VTar in the South; and
(2) to induce negotiat~ons at some future point in time on our terms after
North Vietnam had been hurt and convinced of our resolve . This consensus
vlaS in an early formative stage - - it had become an idea, not a program
for action; it was a belief, not as yet fully staffed and considered .
Because of this and because of important tactical considerations (the
impending U.S. elections, the 'instability of the GVN, and the need to
produce further evidence of VC infiltration into the South) implementation
of such a policy was deferred. Nevertheless, the groundHork was being
laid. The Tonkin Gulf reprisal constituted an important firebreak, and
the Tonkin Gulf Resolution set U.S. public support for virtually any action .

 Since the fall of Diem in November 1963, the political situation in
South Vietnam had been deteriorating. The Khanh Government had succeeded
Min~ in January 1964, but had demonstrated only greater capacity for surviv-
abili ty, not more capacity for revers ing the trend to\·rard collapse . In
the wake of the Tonkin Gulf reprisals, vlhen South Vietnamese morale was
still temporarily inflated, Khanh made a pold bid to consolidate his personal
power and i mpose semi- dictatorial rule . He vTas brought to heel, hovvever, in
l ess than a month by the military junta which continued to operate behind
the scenes . By September, the most salient aspect of the confused political
situation in South Vietnam was the likelihood that it would continue its
dmmvTard slide into the foreseeable future .

 In this setting, a program of covert military pressures against North
Vietnam already had been set in process . These were basically of three
kinds : (1) low level recce with armed escort over Laos; (2) De Soto patrols
within 4 n . m. of the Iif\TN coast to acq.uire visual, electronic , and photo -
graphic intelligence ; and (3) Oplan 34-A vThich included a variety of anti -
i nfiltration, sabotage, and pSYl,rar measures . The portent of these actions
vlaS being conveyed to the North Vietnamese through private and public
cpannels . A Canadia.n, Blair Seaborn, vTas sent to Hanoi to state that U. S.
objectives Here limited but that our comrnitment was deep , and that "in the
event of escalation the greatest devastation "loJQuld of course result for the
DRVN itself . "

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 i
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECP3T - Sensitive

 Neither the situation in SVN nor the failure of Hanoi to acquiesce
to our threats diminished the basic U. S. cOllUnitment. NSAM 288 expounding
the need to do what ,'Tas necessary to preserve an "independent non- communist
South VietnamfT vlaS the guiding policy document. At no time in this period
was the NSAM 288 commitment brought into quest~on. Rather, American con-
 cern was focused on hO,'l the U. S. could retrieve the situation . The usual
palliatives - - more aid, more advice, more pressure on the GVN to reform,
and more verbal threats to Hanoi -- were no longer seen as satisfactory .
Nor did it appear to U. S. decision-makers that He faced a stark choice
behTeen complete U. S. ,vi thdraT.val from the struggle or a large scale intro -
duction of U.S. ground forces. Nor did the l eadership in Washington believe
that a massive bombing campaign against the North need be serious l y con-
sidered __ I although such a program vIas proposed by the JCS . With all these
alternati ves implicitly ruled out at this time, the choice vlas both obvious
and inevitable. Although it did not take the form of decision, it was agreed
that the U.S. should at an unspecified date in the future begin an incre -
mental series of gradually mounting strikes against North Vietnam. The only
real que stions were precisely Hhat actions should be taken and when? None
of these early fall discussions in lilashington really confronted the hard
issues of ,vhat a bomb ing campaign would buy and "That it vTould cost . These
hard - headed discussions, to some extent, took place in the last few months
of 1964.

 'The key events in this period were the Tonkin Gulf incidents of
August 2nd and 4th and the U. S. r eprisal on North Vietnam PT boats and
bases on August 5th . The explanation for the DRV attack on U. S. ships
remains puzzling (perhaps it ivas simply a Ivay of warning and warding off
U. S. patrols close to North Vietnam borders) . The svlift U. S. reaction was
to be expected . lilhile there was some momentary uncertainty about the
actuality of the second atta ck on August 4th, confirming evidence of the
atta.ck vTaS received before the U. S. repri sal vTas launched . The U. S. reprisal
represented the carrying out of reco®nendations made to the President by his
principal advisers earlier that summer and subsequently placed on the shelf .
The existence of the se previous reconL1'Jlendations 'tTi th plan_ning down to
detailed targeting made possible the immediate U. S. reaction when the crisis
came .

 At the same time as U. S. reprisals vrere taken, President Johnson decided
to act on another recommendat ion that had been under consideration since at
least May -- a Congre ss ional resolution of support for U. S. policy . ~ihereas
in the earlier discussions, such a r esolution had been proposed as a vehicle
for mobilizing Congressional and public support behind an escalating campaign
of pressures against the North, the President, in the midst of an election
campaign , nOvT felt i mpelled to use it to soli uify support for his overall
Vietnam policy. On August 5th he sent a message to Congress on the Tonkin
inci dents and asked for passage of a joint res olution endorsing hi s policy.
The resolution itself >vas o::ie prepared by the Administration and introduced
on its b ehalf by the Chairmen of the Foreign Affairs Cormni ttees in the tyro
Houses . It via.S passed vTi th near unanimous support · on August 7th .

 ii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The net effect af the sHift U.S. repri sals and the Cangressianal
Resolution was to dramat i cally demonstrate, publicly state and formally
record the corrullitments to South Vietnam a.nd within Southeast Asia. that had
been made internal U. S. policy by NSA1VI 288 in March 1964 . They were also
conceived and intended as a clear com.m.1.mica tiol" to Hanoi of "lvhat it could
expect if it continued to pursue its current course of action . They were
portents of the futUre designed to demonstrate the firr~ness of U. S. resol ve
and the direction its palicy "I·18.S tending . The psychological impact of the
raids on the Administration and the American public is also significant .
They marked the crossing of an important threshold in the war, and i t was
accomplished vTi th virtually no domestic criticism, indee d , I,Ti th an evident
increase in public su~~ort for the Administration . The precedent for strikes
against the North was-thus established and at very little apparent cost .
There "lms a real cost, ho\vever . The number of unused measures shart of dir ect
military action against the North ha.d been depleted , Greater visible commi t -
ment was purchased at the price of reduced flexibi l ity .

 But, a worried Administration went to some lengths to insure that the
strikes did nat bind or commit it to any future policies or actions and to
have it understood that the strikes had b een pure and simple reprisals of
the one of a kind variety . Yet, for all these reasons , when a decision to'
strike the Narth "lvas faced again, it "I'TaS much easier to take.

 The Tonkin reprisals "lvere Ividely regarded vTi thin the Administration as
an effective, although limited demonstration of the firmness of American
r esolve. However, they also served to stiffen that re so l ve and to deepen
the commitment. Several officials within the Aruninistration , incl uding
Ambassador Taylor, felt that to have any lasting impact this demonstration
of resolve ,vould have to be follO"lved up by other continuing actions, in an
i ncreasing tempo . The positive short - term effect of the reprisals in rai s ing
Sauth Vietnamese marale was noted as an important by - product of the strikes
and offered as ane just ification for cantinuing pressures against the North.
Also figuring importantly in calculations af resolve and intent was the
appreciable impravement in our position in Laos as a result of the vigorous
spring offensive by Laotian Gavernment farces . This i mprovement had led us
to' oppose a 14-nation conference on Laos for fear of placing the nevT gains
in jeopardy, and convinced many that only military measures were unambiguously
understaod by Hanoi! s corrmmnist rulers . This , h01dever, Has tempered by a
 countervailing concern not to' ~rovoke by U.S . action any communist military
escalation in Laos. -

 Quite another set of argu..rnents for strikes against the North were
advanced by 'i,l)"alt Rostm-T, then Counselor of the State Department, in a paper
that circulated v'idely through the Admin:'..strat~.on in August 1964 . The
!! Rostow Thesis rr argued that externally supported insurg enc ies could only
bE< successfully dealt "I-lith by striking at their sources of support and
neutralizing them. The objective of such attacks wauld be psychological
rathe r than purely military . They "l"Tould b e designed to alter the aggressar ! s
calculation of int erests in supporting the insurgency through the fear of

 iii TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECH}~i' - Sensitive

further military and economic damage, the fear of involvement in a I'T ider
conflict, the fear of internal political uphea.val and the fear of greater
dependence on a major communist power . Any incidental improvement in morale
in the country troubled by insurgency or improvement in bargaining leverage
were to be regar,led as bonuses. To achieve th2 desired effect, a care -
fully orchestrated series of escalating military measures, coupled \-lith
simultaneous political, economic and psychological pressures was called for .
The IIthesis II "\-las articulated in general terms, but the i mmediate case in
everyone's mind was, of course, Southeast Asia .

 A thorough critique of Rostow ' s paper was prepared in OSD/ISA with
 inputs from State 's Policy Planning Council. This analysis argued that
 the validity of the II thesis ll would depend on two variables : (1) the extent
of tbe conmitment of the nation supporting the insurgency; and (2) the
degree to which vital U. S. interests Ivere at stake in the conflict . The
latter question having been settled with respect to South Vietnam by
NS~~ 288, the remaining problem was whether the kinds of actions ROStovl
recormnended could succeed given the level of determined commitment of the
North Vietnamese . For the Rostow approach to succeed, the DRV "\-lOuld .have
to be persuaded that: (1) the U.S. was taking limited action to achieve
limited goals; (2) the U. S . commitment was total; and (3) the U. S. had estab -
lished a sufficient domestic consensus to see the policy through . If the
DRV was not so convinced, the approach would fail unless there were a major
U. S. military involvement in the war. The critique concluded that the
public opinion problems of suc~an approach, both domestic and international ,
would be very great, and that in vie,v of the inherent problems of imple -
menting and managing such a discriminating policy, it had poor chances of
success. These reservations notwithstanding, the outlook embodied in the
II RostO"\-l thesisll came to dominate a good deal of Administration thinking on
the question of pressures against the North in the months ahead .

 All of the pressures-against-the-North thinking came to a head in
 the strategy meeting of the principals on September 7th . It appears that
a rather narrOvl range of proposals "\-ms up for consideration. One program
proposal came from the JCS . It was a repeat of the 94- target list program
which the JCS had recommended on August 26th . The JCS called for deliberate
attempts to provoke the DRV into taking acts which could then be ansvlered
by a systematic U. S. air campaign . The JCS argued that such actions were
nOl'/' lIe ssential to preventing complete collapse of the U. S. position in the
RVN and SRA., II because "continuation of present or foreseeable programs
limi ted to the RVN will not produce the desired result . II The Chiefs were
supported by ISA in their provocation approach. For ISA, ASD McNaughton
argued that Our .acts and the DRV response "should be likely to provide .
good grounds fo~' us to escalate if we "\-r~~shed . II McNaughton's approach "\-las
for a "gradual squeeze , II not s i mply a. tit-for - tat contingency and unlike
the quick,. all-out proposals of the JCS .

 The prindpal conferees at this September meeting did not believe that
deliberate acts of provocation should be undertaken "in the immediate future
while the GVN is still struggling to its feet ." HOI'rever, they apparently
r eached a consensus that they might recommend such actions -- II depending on
GVN progress and communist reaction in the meantime ll -- by early October .

 iv TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

7
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 This deferral decision Has strongly supported by Mr . McCone of the CIA
 and Ambassador Taylor . Ambassador Taylor, revising his previous pos i tion ,
 believed that the conflict should not be escalated to a level beyond South
 Vietname se capacities to manage it. He opposed overt actions against
 North Vietnam as too risky and urged instead t:1at further measures to
 strengthen the GVN be taken first. Similarly, Secretary McN~mara affirmed
 his understanding that "He are not acting more strongly because there i s
 a clear hope of strengthening the GVN ." McNamara ivent on to urge, however ,
 that the Hay be kept open for stronger actions even if the GVN did not
 improve or in the event the Ivar ivere Hidened by the communists . In notes
 t aken at this meeting the President asked : tr Can He really strengthen the
 GVN?"

 It is important to differentiate the consensus of the principals at
 this September meeting from the vieHs Hhich they had urged on the President
 in the preceding spring . In the spring the use of force had been clearly
 contingent upon a major reversal -- principally in Laos -- and had been
 advanc ed with the apparent assumption that military act i ons hopefully vlOuld
 not be required . No,v, hOHever, their vieHs Here advanced Hi th a sense that
 such actions Here inevitable .

 The r esults of the September meeting Here recorded in NSN~ 314. The
 actions that Here approved against the DRV for the next three month period
 Here highly limited and marginal i n character . They included resQmption
 of the off- shore U. S. naval patrols , resumption of covert GVN coastal opera -
 tions against the North, limited air and ground operations in the Laotian
 corridor, and a preparedness to respond to any further DRV attacks on a
 tit-for-tat basis .

 From the September meeting forward, there i·m s little basic disagreement
 among the principals on the need for military actions against the North .
 What prevented action for the time being Has a set of tactical considerations .
 The President Ivas in the midst of an election campaign in which he vms
 presenting himself as the candidate of reason and restraint as oppos ed to
 the quixotic Barry GoldHater . Other concerns were the aforementioned shaki-
 ness of the GVN, the uncertainty as to China ' s response to an escalation ,
 the desire not to upset the delicate Laotian equation, the need to des i gn
 Hhatever actions Here taken so as to achieve the maximttm public and Con-
 gressional support, and the implicit belief that overt actions at this time
 might bring pressure for premature negotiations --that is, negotiations b efore
 the DRV VTas hurting . In su:nllnary, the period Salol the development of the
 consensus on military pressures against the North and the decis i on to defer
 them for temporary reasons of tactics.

 v TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

'i

 TOP SECRET - Sensit i ve

 MILITPulY PRESSURES AGAINST NORTH VIETNAM
 July~Octob~r 1964

 Table of Contc:nts l!nd Outline
 Page
 I. PROLOGUE : ACTIONS AND PROGFk\fS UNDER1-JAY •••••••• 0 ••••• 1

 II. THE TONKIN GULF CRISIS •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 5
 The First Incident •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 5
 The Second Incident ••••••••• •••••• •••• ~ ••••••••••• 6

 The Respons~ in 'Hashington •••••••••••• 0 • • • • .• • • • • • • 8
 Broa dening the Inpe,ct ••••••••••••• Q ••••••••••• 0 ••• 11
 III. POST-TONKIN POLICY ASSES$iENTS •• 0 0 ~ • • • • • • • 0 • • 0 • • • • • • • • 16

 DiJ-Aern!T\ilS in L~os e •• ~ e " 04' • 0 • 0 0 0 0 0 • • 0 eo • 0 0 • • • • • • • • • 0 • 16
 Concern over Pressures for Negotiations ••••••••••• 18
 Concern over Tonkin Reprisal Si&~a16 •••••••••••••• 19
 Rcasscr-'cion of the RostO'.-r Thesis •••••••••••••••••• 21
 (
 Accomp:inying Pa.use i n Pres stU' s •• 0 0 • • 0 • • • • 0 • • • • • • • 22
 IV 0 NK,{T COURSES OF ACTION •••••••• 0 • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 0 • • • • • 25
 Strc,t eg'j' Nect ing in S cptE..mb~r . 0 ••••••••• 0 ••••••••• 25
 Implcm~nting Act ions ••••••• • •••••••••••••••••••••• 27
 Nava1 Operat j.ons ••• 0 • • • • • • • • • • • • • 0 " • • • • o • • • • • • 27
 28

 Negotiating Postt~e Re Laos •• oo • • • • • • • • • • • o • • • o • • • 30
 Anticl.p,x tion of 1-lider Action ••••• 0 • 00.8' • 0 •• 0 ••• 0 • 32

 32
 Rescrlations 0 ••• 0 • 0 • 0 0 . 's. .. $ 0 0 0 • t. 0 0 • • o. e 0 ~ e _ •• & 0 34
 i
 TOP SECR"S"r - SE:nsiti'TC
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET Sensitive

Differing Agency Policy Vievs •••• oo • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 37
 37
 Saigon Embassy views •. ooo • • • o • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • 39
 OSD \"ie\is. 0 0 • • • 0 • 0 0 0 • • 0 • • • 0 0 • • • • 0 8 • • 0 • • • • 0 • • • • • 40

 41

 CIA. Vie1"lS ••• 0 • 0 • • " • , 0 • • 0 • • 0 0 • 0 • • • .0 0 • c • • • 0 • • • • • • 41

 TAB A ~ Te).t of Original Congress ional R:asolution,
 co May 1964

 TAB B - Secreta.ry McNamare. t s Prepared Test mony ~
 20 Fc'bru3.l"".)'" 1968

 TAB C - Text of Congrcssionnl Resolut ion ,
 7 August 1964

 ii
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 n
 ::x:
 ~
 z
 o
 5
 ~
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

12.
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 MILITARY PRESSURES AGAINST NV~, JULY - OCTOBER 1964

 CHRONOLOGY

 DATE EVEN'll OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 17 Jul 1964 DESOTO naval patrols Authority was given to re sume the
 off North Vietnam re- DESOTO destroyer patrols off North
 authorized Vi etnam . They had been suspended
 since March .

 30 Jul 1961.f Covert GVN attack on The night b efore the USS MADDOX
 North Vietnam is to resume her patrols off the
 North Vietnamese coast, South Viet-
 namese commandos r aid two North
 Vietnamese islands .

 31 Jul 1964 USS M.A.DDOX resumes After a s i x month suspens i on, the
 patrol off North USS MADDOX re sume d the DESOTO patrols
 Vietnam off the coast of North Vietnam.

 1 Aug 1964 British seek meeting Actiag on Souvanna Phouma's request,
 of three Laotian princes the Brit i sh government urged the
 ICC members to arrange a meet ing
 among the three Laotian p::Jlitical
 factions as represented by the three
 rival princes.
 2 Aug 1964 China urges USSR not The Chinese Communists urged the
 to r esign Geneva co - USSR not to carry out i ts threat
 chairmanship to abandon its co-chairman role in
 the Geneva settlements , apparently
 vie'tTi ng such a development as j eo -
 pardizing the possibilities of a
 Geneva settlement of the current
 Laotian crisis.

 DRV PT boats attack Apparentl y mistaking the MADDOX
 MADDOX for South Vietnamese , three DRV
 pa tro'. boats launched a torpedo
 and machine gun attack on h er.
 Responding :i.m.rned iat ely to the at -
 ta ck , and with the help of air
 support from the nearby carrier
 TICONDEROGA , the MADDOX de stroy ed

 1 TOP SECRET - Sens:i.tive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 one of the attacking boats and
 damaged the other two. The MADDOX,
 under 7th Fleet orders, retired
 to South Vietnamese waters where
 she is joined by the C. TURNER JOY .

3 Aug 1964 U. S. protest through A. stiff U. S. protest of the attack
 ICC on the MADDOX is dispatched to
 Hanoi through the ICC . It warns
 that "grave conseq,uences " will re -
 SQlt from any future attacks on
 U. S. forces .

 DESOTO patrol resumed The JCS approved a CINCPAC req,uest
 to resume the DESOTO patrol at
 1350 hours , ordered the C. TURNER
 JOY to be added to it and author -
 ized active defensive measures for
 the destroyers and their support -
 i ng aircraft . The President announced
 the action later that day .

3 Aug 1964 GVN again attacks The Rhon River estuary and the
 North Vietnam Vinh Sonh radar installation were
 bombarded QDder cover of darkness .
4 Aug 1964 Second DRV naval attack At about 2140 hours, after several
 on DESOTO patrol hours of shado'VTing, a second PT
 b oat attack on the augmented DESOTO
 task force was launched . This en-
 gagement in the dark lasted about
 three hours and resulted in two
 patrol boats destroyed .

 Reprisal alerts At 0030 hours (5 Aug 1964 Vietnam
 time ), "alert orders " for possi -
 ble reprisal air strikes were given
 to the TICOl\TDEROGA and a second
 carrier, the CONSTELL~TION , that
 had been steaming toward the area
 from Hong Kong since Aug 3 .

 NSC meeting At 1230, \-I!ashington time, the NSC
 convened after a brief meeting
 of the JCS ,vi th the President .
 The JCS, McNamara and others recom-
 mended r epr isals against the patrol
 craft and their bases . This the
 President approved.

 2 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCill.ffiNT DESCRIPTION

 2nd NSC meeting After a confusing afternoon in
 which the attacks were double-checked
 and verified, the NSC met again
 at 1700 , confirmed the reprisal
 order, and discussed incremental
 force deployments to the Western
 Pacific .

 Congress ional briefing At 1845 the President met with
 16 Congressional leaders, briefed
 them on the proposed attacks
 and informed them of his inten-
 tion to ask for a joint Congres -
 sional resolution of support .
 None raised objections.
5 Aug 1964 U Thant calls for lL~ ­ In an unrelated development ,
 nation conference on UN Secretary General U Thant
 Laos called for the rescheduling
 of the 14-nation conference
 to deal with the Laotian situa-
 tion.

 Presidential message In a formal message to both
 to Congress houses of Congress, the Presi -
 dent request ed passage of a
 joint resolution of support
 for U. S. policy in Southeast
 Asia. Concurrently, identical
 draft resolutions prepared by
 the executive branch were intro -
 duced in the Senate by Senator
 Fulbright, and in the House,
 by Representative Morgan .

6 Aug 1964 Tonkin Gulf Resolu- Both houses h eard top Adminis-
 tions discussed in ' tration officials , including
 committee Secretary McNamara, testify
 in behalf of the pending reso -
 lutions .

 Force deployments The additional forces deploy-
 ments, particularly air fo'rces,
 begin to move to the theatre .

7 Aug 1964 Tonkin Gulf Re-solu- The Tonkin Gulf resolution
 tion passes Congress Has passed in both houses by
 near unanimous vote.

 3 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve O rder 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND Project Num ber: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMEJIJ'I' DESCRIPI'ION

 Khanh proclaims himself Declaring a state of emergency,
 President General Khan~ proclai med him-
 sel f Pres i dent of South Viet -
 nam a!,d claims virtual dicta-
 t or ial po"Ters .

 State message 136, Concern over not pr ovoking a
 Rusk to Vientiane communi st military escalation
 and others in ~os , particularly in view
 of the Tonkin Gul f r eprisals ,
 prompted State to defer tempo -
 rarily approval of air and
 ground initiatives i n the
 Laotian panhandle .
9 Aug 1964 Embassy Saigon message Taylor opposes a 14- nation
 363 , Taylor to Rusk Geneva Conference as likel y
 to undermine the little stabi l ity
 the fragile GVN still has .
 He fUrther states that the
 reprisa,ls , while effective in
 the short run, do not deal with
 the continuing problem of DRV
 infiltration Ivhich must be
 confronted . He fe l t there
 was need for follow - up action
 to demonstrate to the DRV that
 the rules of the ga~e had
 changed .
10 Aug 1964 U. S. message to Hanoi Through the Canadian representa -
 t hrough Canadian ICC tive on the ICC, the U. S. com-
 r epresentative municated its uncertainty about
 DRV motives in the Aug 4 Tonkin
 Gul f raids , that additional
 air power deployed to SEA was
 precautionary , that U. S. offi -
 ,cial and public pa,tience "las
 i<Tearing thin , that the Congres -
 sional resolution demonstrated
 U. S. determination in SEA,
 and that if the DRV pursued its
 prese'1t course , it could expect
 to suffer the consequences .

11 Aug 1964 William Bundy memo to Assistant Secretary of State
 SecDef, "Next Courses Bundy felt that only a continu-
 of Action in Southeast ous combination of military
 Asia pressure and communication

 ,4 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 would convince Hanoi t~at they
 were facing a determined foe '
 and that they should get out
 of S01..lth Vietnam and Laos .
14 Aug 196 1r CJCS memo to SecDef, Positive assessment of the
 "Next Courses of Action i mpact of the reprisal actions
 in Southeast Asia" "ras given and a continuation
 of strikes against the Nor th
 was r ecommended .

 State message 439 In opposing both a new 14-
 to Vientiane, Saigon, nation Geneva Conference on
 CINCPAC , "Southeast Asia, Southeast Asia, and U. S. air
 August 1964" operations against the North,
 State stressed the shakiness
 of the GVN and the need to
 shore i t up internally before
 a ny such actions "rere started .
 For planning purposes , the
 message suggested that Ambassa -
 dor Taylor ' s suggested date
 of J anue,ry 1, 1965 , be used
 for any sustained U. S. air
 campaign against the North .
15 Aug 1964 JCS message 7947 to U.S . forces wer e authorized
 CINCPAC , "Rules of to attack any vessel s or air -
 Engagement " craft that attack or give
 positive i ndication of intent
 t o attack , and to pursue such
 attackers into territorial
 waters or air space of all
 Southeast Asian countries,
 including North Vietnam .
16 Aug 1964 COMUSMACV message to MACV requested authority to
 CINCPAC , " Cross - begin the Phase I of the covert
 Border Operations" cross -border operations into
 Laos and North Vietnam.
17 Aug 1964 CINCPAC message to JCS, The positive impact of the
 " Next Courses of Action repri 8al s on South Vietnamese
 in Southeast Asian mor ale i s noted, and a strong
 argument made for continui ng
 action s against the North to
 make clear to Hanoi and Peking
 the cost of their aggression .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

17

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 The momentu~ of the Aug 5
 raids must not be lost or the
 benefits of the initial attacks
 will disappear.
 k8 Aug 1964 Embassy Saigon message Taylor reiterates his belief
 465 that the reprisals must be
 follovTed up with other actions
 against the North .
 21 Aug 1964 Henry ROIV'en memo to Initially presented in Dec 1963 ,
 JCS, et al, liThe the IIRostolV' Thesisll was recir-
 RostowThesis" culated within the Administra-
 tion in mid -August. Its funda -
 mental argu.rnent was that military
 pressure against the external
 sources of an insurgency vTould
 bring the aggressor to an appre -
 ciation of the costs of his
 interference and he would reduce
 or eliminate his support for
 the insurgents. The exercise
 vTaS primarily psychological ,
 not necessarily strategic .
 The measures should greatly
 increase his uncertainty about
 the consequences of continued
 support of the insurgency .
 Rowen's critique raised serious
 questions about the general
 validity of the thesis , point -
 ing out the requirement for solid
 public and political support
 for such actions, and doubting
 that any\'There but in Southeast
 Asia U. S. interests were so
 critic8,lly at stake. Even in
 that area, it doubted the effec-
 tiveness of the proposal .
 26 Aug 1964 JCSM-746-64 In response to State's Aug 14
 analysis, the JCS proposed a
 continuous and escalating air
 campaign against the North
 designed to both the physical
 resources and the psychological
 "lV'ill to support the insurgency
 in the South . It called for

 6 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

Ig

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 DA':eE EVENT OR DOCUIvIEI'I.l'I' DESCRIPI'ION

 deliberate attempts to provoke
 the DRV into actions which
 could then be ans\·rered by
 a systematic air campaign.

 27 Aug 1964 Three Laotian Princes The three Laotian Princes
 meet met in Paris as a result of
 the British initiative to
 begin discussions on the cur-
 rent crisis.

 31 Aug 1964 CINCPAC message to JCS, CINCPAC reiterates the request
 IIImmediate Actions to for approval of covert cross-
 be taken in South border operati ons .
 Vietnamll

 3 Sep 1964 McNaughton paper, II Plan In anticipation of the 7 Septem-
 of Action for South ber strategy meeting, McNaughton
 Vietnam ll prepared a paper calling for
 actions that would provoke
 a DRV response that could
 be used as grounds for a U.S.
 escale.tion.

 Khanh reverts to His bid for dictatorial power
 Premiership having been rebuffed by the
 Army with popular support,
 Khanh reverted to his former
 tital of Premier 'I·rith greatly
 reduced pOl·rer . Minll is to
 playa larger role.

 7 Sep 1964 JCS Talking Paper for The JCS repeated its recommenda-
 CJCS, II Next Courses of tions of 26 Aug and detailed
 Action for RVN" it with a list of 94 targets
 for air strikes .

 White House strategy With A.mbassador Taylor returned
 meeting ; decisions in from Saigon, a full dress strategy
 William Bundy memo to revie'lO[ of actions against the
 SecDef, et al, II Courses North is held at the vfuite House .
 of Action-for South The Pentagon spokesmen , both
 Vietnam, " 8 Sep 1964 milite.ry and civilian, favored
 immediate initiation of an
 escalatory air campaign against
 the North . But this was rejected
 on the grounds that the GVN
 W8.S too io[e~k to sustain the

 7 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

· Ct
I /

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 DATE EVENT OR DOCUMENT DESCRIPTION

 expected intensification of
 the war in the South it would
 evoke . This was the view of
 CIA, State and the White House.
 But a decision vias made to
 reSQme the DESOTO patrols,
 the covert GVN coastal opera-
 tions against the North, and
 to authorize limited cross-
 border operations into Laos
 when Souvap~a approved . It
 was further agreed that we
 would respond to any future
 DRV attacks on U.S. emits on
 a tit - for - tat basis . These
 latter measures were to bolster
 GVN morale .
 10 Sep 1964 NSAM 314 Formal approval of the 7 Septem-
 ber decision was given in
 NSAM 314.
 11 Sep 1964 Saigon meeting on At a Saigon meeting of representa-
 cross-border opera - tives of the U. S. missions in
 tions Laos, Thailand, and Vietnam,
 it was agreed that the air
 operations in Southern Laos
 would be carried out by RLAF
 aircraft for the present . As
 to ground operations , while
 their desirability was recog-
 nized, they ,fere disapproved
 because of the flagrant viola -
 tion of the Geneva Accords they
 would constitute . This objection
 by Vienticme WB.S subsequently
 r emoved and company-size opera -
 tions up to 20 kilometers into
 Laos were approved.

 12 Sep 1964 DESOTO patrols The destroye rs USS MORTON and
 resumed USS EDi'JARDS re sumed the DESOTO
 patro:_s off North Vietnam .

 18 Sep 1964 3rd Tonkin Gulf On the night of the 18th, the
 incident third incident in the DESOTO
 patrols occurr ed . The two
 destroyers fired on radar identi-
 fied attackers and apparently
 . .

 .8 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

DATE EVENT OR DOCUNENT DESCRIPTION

 scored a nQmber of hits . No
 re turn fire "IaS received from
 . the "attackers ." later bn the
 18th the President suspended
 the DESOTO patrols vrhich were
 not to be resQmed until Febru-
 ary 1965 .
30 Sep 1964 CJCS memo to SecDef , The CJCS endorsed the proposals
 "cross-Border Opera- of the mission representatives
 tions " and r equested i nLmediate authority
 to implement air operations
 in the Laotian panhandle ,vi th
 RLAF T- 28s and U. S. aircraft
 for suppressive fire and attack-
 i ng heavily defended targets.
 Authori ty for G'/H ground intelli-
 gence acquisition patrols i n the
 laotian corridor "las also sought .

1 Oct 1964 SJ:ITE 53 - 2-6h The deterioration of GVN morale
 and effectiveness continued
 unabated and this intelligence
 estimate did not think that the
 hoped for civilian government
 "lOuld be able to reverse it .
 The VC ,vere not , hOi-lever, ex-
 pected to make an overt military
 effort to capttITe the govern -
 ment . .

4 Oct 1964 Cove:rt GVN coastal The P-.cesident authorized r ea.cti -
 operations against vation of the covert coastal
 DRV again authorized strikes by the GVN against the
 DRV, under very tight controls
 'vi th each action to be cleared
 in advance by OSD , State and
 the "\Ilhite House .

6 Oct 196h Joint State/Defense The Embassy is authorized to
 message 313 to urge the laotian Govern~ent
 Vientiane to begin T- 28 strikes as soon
 as possible against a 22 - target
 list ..rhich excluded the Mu Gia
 pass . Some of the targets
 ,vere designed for U. S. YAJllKEE
 TEAM strikes .

 9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

)J

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 DATE EVEiIJT OR DOCT.J};~r-TT DESCRIPI'ION
 9 Oct 1964 SNIE 10-3-64 In the evaluation of the likely
 North Vietnamese reactions to
 the actions approved in the
 Septem~)er 7 meeting , CIA con-
 cluded that these woul d probably
 be limited to defens ive and
 . propaganda measures with possi -
 bly some scaling do,m of opera -
 tions i n the South . China
 w'as not expected to enter the
 war as a r esult of even a
 systematic U. S. air campaign
 against the North .
 Embassy Saigon Taylor reported that the ARVN
 message 1068, would be unable to conduct
 Taylor to Rusk ground operations in the Laotian
 corridor in the foreseeable
 fut ure and therefore U.S. air
 operations are urged . At a
 minimLUn, combat air patrols
 supporting RLAF strike missions
 were re'luested.
 13 Oct 1964 Embassy Vientiane U. S. air strikes against four
 message 609, Unger defended targets are re'luested
 to Rusk and McNamara to accompany RLA_F T- 28 strikes
 in the northern panhandle .

 Washington approves Washington, responding to Unger ' s
 only combat air r e'luest, authorized only U.S .
 patrols combat air patrols in support
 of the RLAF' operations , not the
 U.S. strikes . U. S. air strikes
 against conmunist LOCs in the
 pa~handle are not authorized
 until much later.
 14- Oct 1964 RLAF makes intial U.S . The RL~F, with U.S. aircraft
 supported attacks in combat air patrol support,
 make the first strikes against
 the C0Il1..111unist LOCs in the pan-
 handIt .

 10 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 I

 PROLOGUE: ACTIONS AND PROGRAMS UNDERWAY

 Several form s of pressure were already being applied against
North Vietnam by July of 1964. Moreover) contingency plans for
other forms - - should political and military circumstances warrant
a ' decision to use them - - were continually being adjusted and modi-
fied as the situation in Southeast Asia developed .

 The best known of these pressures was being applied in Laos .
Since 21 May) U. S. aircraft had flmTn Imr- level r ec onnaissance missions
over communist - occupied areas. 1/ In early June Premier Souvanna
Phouma both gave and reaffirmed- his pel~ission for armed escort of
these missions) which included the right to retaliate against hostile
fire from the ground . 2/ This effort \-las supplemented at the end
of the month i-Then the Unit ed States decided to conduct transport and
night reconnaissance operations and furnish additional '1'- 28 aircraft
and munitions to support a Royal Laotian counteroffensive near Muong
Soui. This decision came in response to Souvanna ' s request ) in which
he equated the protection of Muong Soui i-Tith the survival of the Laotian
neutra list army. 3/ Air strikes conducted by the Royal. Lao Air Force)
with T- 28s obtained from the United States) ,vere lat er credited with
playing a major role in the success of the RLG's operations .

 Other actions obviously designed to forestall cowmunist aggressive
intentions i-Tere taken in different parts of Southeast Asia. In June)
follmTing the Honolulu strategy conference) state and Defense Depart -
ment sources made repeated l eaks to the press affirming U.S . intent ions
to support its allies and uphold its treaty commitments in Southeast
Asia . J::.../ U.S. contingency ground-force stockages in Thailand i-Tere
augmented and publicly acknoi-Tledged . 5/ Revelations i-Tere made that
USAF aircraft '\{ere operating out of a -nei-Tly constructed air base at
Da Nang . Moreover) the base was characterized as part of a network
of ne'·T air bases and operational facilities being developed in South
Vietnam and Thailand . 6/ On 10 July) the Da Nang base ,vas the site
of a well-publicized Air Force Day display of allied airpower ) including
aircraft from a B-57 i-ring recently acknmdedged to have been permanently
deployed to the Philj.ppines from Japan . 1/

 tess knovn \-lere parallel actions taken within the Government .
U.S. resolve to resist aggression in Southeast Asia was communicated
directly to North Vietnam by the ne'\vly appointed Canadian member of
the International ControJ. Commission) Blair Seaborn . Stressj.ng that
U.S. ambit j.ons were limited and its intentions I'Tere 'tessentially peace -
ful) It Seaborn told Pham Van Dong that the patience of the U.S . Govern-
ment I{as not limitless . He explained that the United States was
fully aware of the degreee to IoThich Hanoi controlled the Viet

 TOP SECliEJ' - Ser,sitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Cong i nsurgency and the Pathet Lao and might be obliged to carry
the .rar to the North if DRV- assisted pressures against South Vi etnam
c ontinued . He further cautioned that U. S . stakes in resisting a
North Vietnamese victory were high) since the United States saw the
c onflict in SOLltheast Asia as part of a gene:voal confrontation with
guerrilla subversion in other parts of the .rorld) and that "in the
event of escalation the greatest devastation .rould of course result
for the DRVN itself." F)/

 Al so ll..l1derway were efforts directed tmrard educating the American
public regarding our national interests in Southeast Asia and the
extent of the U.S . commitment there . In reporting to the President )
Administration officials who participated in the Honolulu Conference
stressed the need for a domestic information effort to "get at the
basic doubts" of the importance of the U.S. stake in Southeast Asia .
The program was to be focused both on key members of the Congress and
on the public . 9/ Thereafter ) .rork was begun under State Department
guidance to assemble information in ans.rer to ' some of the prevalent
public questions on the U.S. involvement . Of special concern was a
r ecent Ga11up poll sho,ving only 31 percent of the public to have some
interest in our Southeast Asian policies . Administration officials
viewed this group as consisting prnaarily of either those desiring our
.rithdrawal or those urging our striking at North Vietnam . A general
program was proposed with the aVOlved aims of eroding public support for
these polar positions and solidifying a large "center " behind the thrust
of current Administration policies . These aims Here to be accomplished
by directing public comment into discussions of the precise alternatives
available to the United States) greater exposure to \·rhich it Has believed
Hould alienate both "haHk " and "dove " supporters . 10/ Less than a
week after this proposal .ras submitted) the I'lhi te B-Ouse published a
NSAM) naming its proponent ) Robert Manning) as coordinator of all public
information activities for Southeast Asia and directing all agencies to
cooperate in furthering the Administration ' s information objectives . 11/
One of the principal foci of the subsequent infonnation program was --
the compilation of 'a public pamphlet of questions raised by critics of
Administration policy together Hith ansvers furnished and coordinated by
several i nterested Government agencies ~

 Unknown to more than a limited number of Government officials were
a variety of covert military or quasi-military operations being con-
ducted at the expense of North Vietnam . U.S. naval forces had undertaken
i nterraittent patrol operations in the Gulf of Tonkin designed to acquire
visual) e1ectronic and. photographic intelligence on infiltration activi -
ties and c03st~1 navigation from North Vietpgm to the South . To carry
out these missions) destroyers ",ere assigned to tracks betHeen fbced
points and according to stipulated schedules . Designated DE SOTO Patrols)
the first such operation of 19611. occurred during the period 28 February-
10 March . On this patrol the U.S.S. Craig was authorized to approach
to vithin 4 n .m. of the North Vietnamese mainland) 15 D.m . of the Chinese
mainland and 12 n.m . of Chinese-he1d Jslands . No j.ncidents "fere reported

 2 TOP SECR~ - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 as resulting from thi s action. The next DE SOTO Patrol did not occur vBtil
 31 July) on which the U.S.S. Maddox was restricted to a track not ~loser
 than 8 n.m. off the North Vietnamese ma inland . 12/ Its primary mission)
 assigned on 17 July) was "to determine DRV coa sta l activity along the
 full extent o~n the patrol track. " Other specific intelligence r equire -
 ments were assigned as follows:

 "( a ) location and identification of all radar transmitters )
 and estimate of range capabilities; (b ) navigational and hydro
 i nformation along the routes traversed and particular naviga -
 tional lights characteristics ) landmarks ) buoys) currents and
 tidal inforraat ion) river mouths and channel accessibility) (c )
 monitoring a junk force ,{ith density of surface traffic pattern)
 (d ) sampling electronic environment radars and navigation aids)
 ( e ) photography of opportunities in support of above .... "

 Separat e coastal patrol operations were being conducted by South
Vietnamese naval forces. The se were designed to uncover and int erdict
efforts to smuggle personnel and supplies into the South in support of
the VC insurgency . This operation had first been organized with U. S.
aSSistance in Dec ember 1961; to support it a fleet of motor ized junks
was built; partially financed with U.S. military assistance funds .
During 1964 these vessels operated almost continually in attempts to
interc ept communist s eaborne logis tica l operations . As Secretary
McNamara told Senate committees:

 " In the first seven months of this year /19647; they
 have searched 149;000 junks ; some 570;000 people~ This is
 a tremendous operation endeavoring to clos e the seacoasts
 of Over 900 miles . In the nrocess of that action) as the
 j unk patrol has increased i~ strength they LSi£7
 have moved
 farther and farth er north endeavor.i ng to find the source of
 the infiltrat ion ." 14/

 In addition to these ackno\-Tledged act ivities; the GVN .Tas also
conducting a number of operations against North Vietnam to which it
did not publicly admit . Covert operations ,{ere carried out by South
Vietnamese or hired personnel and supported by U.S. training and logis -
tic al efforts . Outlined .rithin OPLAN 3~A; t hese operations had been
unden18Y theoretically since February but had experienced what the JCS
called a "slow begiIming. i r Despite an ultimate objective of helping
"convinc e the North Vi etnamese l eadership that it is in i ts mm self-
int erest to d~sist from it s aggress ive policies )" feyT operat i ons designed
to harass the enemy ,·rere carried out succes~fully during the Februal'y-May
period. Nevertheless) citing DRV reac tions tending "to substantiate the
premise that Hanoi is expending substantial r esources in defensive measures-) "
the JCS concluded that the potential of the OPLAN 34A program r ema i ned
high and urged i ts continuation through Phase II ( JQne-September) . 15/
Operations i ncluding air-infiltration of sabotage teams) underl{8terdemo-
lition) and seizures of cOrtlI'lunist junks were approved for the period.) and
a fe,I ,{ere carried by specialJy trained GVN forc es during JQne and Jv~y . 16/
 ." -

 . 3 TOP SECRET - S~ns it ive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve O rder 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project N umber: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 In the process of combined GVlIT-U.S. planning) but not yet
approved for execution) ",ere cross - border operations against VC- North
Vietnamese logistical routes in Laos . This planning provided for both
air attacks by the VNAF and "ground operations up to battalion size " i n
the laotian Panhandle . Preparations for such actions had been approved
i n principle since March but since then l ittle further i nterest had been
sho"'n in them . Toward the end of July) the air force portion .Tas exami ned
seriously by Administration officials as a means not only to damage the
Communist logistical effort but also "primarily for reasons of morale i n
South Vietnam and to divert GVN attention from 187 proposal to strike
North Vietnam . II 17/ - -

 In addition to both the open and covert operations already under-
",ay) a number of other actions intended to bring pressure against North
Vietnam had been recommended to the IVhite House . Receiving considerabl e
attention among Administration officials during May and June vTaS a pro-
posed request for a Congress ional Resolution, reaffirming support by the
legislators for President ial action to resist Commlmist advances in
Southeast Asia during an election year /Tab A7.
 In some respects paral-
l eling this domestic initiative) the President was urged to present to the
United Nations the detailed case assembled by the Government supporting
the charges of DRV aggression against South Vietnam and Laos . He vlaS
also urged to authorize pertodic deployments of additional forc e s tOvTard
Southeast Asia as a means of demonstrating U.S. resolve to undertake
vThatever measures ",ere required to resist aggression in that region .
Moreover)' in OPLAN 37-64) there ",as fully developed a listing of forces to
be deployed as a deterrent to corrununist escalat i on in reaction to U. S . /GVN
actj_ons against North Vietnam . Finally) it was recommended that the
President make tlie decision to use liSelected and carefully graduated mili-
tary force against North Vietnam II if necessary to improve non-Communist
prospects in South Vietnmn and Laos . 18/

 The sourc e docwnents. available to this ",riter are not clear on the
exact decisions made in response to each of these recommendations ) or
i ndeed on the precise form or context in vrhich the r econunendations ,,,ere
presented . It i s evident that the proposal to seek a Congressional
Resolution "'as not favorably received, but as subsequent events indi cate
neither ",as it rejected out - of- hand . It proved very useful in largely the
same language just tvlO months later . Less certain are the decisions made
about the other proposals; Certainly they vTere not approved for immedi-
ate implementation . Ho",ever) it is not clear whether they "'ere (1 ) f l atly
disapproved ) ( 2 ) merely postponed) or ( 3) approved in principle) subject
to gradua l implementat ion . At the Honolulu Confere nce: "There many of the
proposed actions ",ere discussed with U.S. officials from the theatre ) man:,r
practical considerations Her e aired "Thich shov!ed that delayed implementa-
tion ,VGuld be a reasonable course of action . 19/ But such factors vTould
have provided e qually valid r easons for either-deciding against the pro-
posals or for merely deferring a decis ion until a later) more appropriate
time . The most significant point, for an understanding of the events and
decisions of the second half of 1964, is that these options rema ined lion
tho shelf " for possible implel1J.entation should favorable circumstances
aris e .

 .4 TOP SECRET - SenSitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 II

 THE TO~KIN GULF CRISIS

 Several o~ the pressuring measures recommended to the White House
i n Mayor June were implemented in conjunction with or in the immediate
aftermath of naval action in the Tonkin Gulf . I t is this fact and the
rapidity with which these measures were taken that has l ed critics to
doubt some aspects of the public account of the Tonkin incidents . It is
also this fact) together "Tith later Administratiop assessments of the
Tonkin Gulf experience ) that give the incidents greater significance
than the particular events seemed at first to "rarrant .

 THE FIRST INCIDENT

 What happened in the Gulf? As noted earlier) U.S.S. MADDOX com-
menced the second DE SOTO Patrol on 31 July. 'On the prior night South
Vietnamese coastal patrol forces made a midnight attack) including an0
amphibious "c ommando" raid ) on Hon Me and Hon Nieu Islands ) about 19 N.
latitude . At the time of this attack) U.S.S. MADDOX "\vas 120-130 miles
a'tray just heading into "raters off North Vietnam . On 2 August) having
reached the northernmost point on its patrol track and having headed
South) the destroyer was interc epted by three North Vietname se patrol
boats . Apparently) thes e boats and a fleet of junks had moved into the
area near the island to search for the attacking force and had mistaken
Maddox for a South Vietnamese escort vessel . (Approximately eleven hours
earlier) while on a northerly head ing) Maddox had altered course to avoid
the junk concentration ShOlVD on her radar ; about six hours after that - -
now headed South .__ Maddox had altered her course to the southeast to
avoid the ju...1J.ks a second time. ) When the PT boats began their high-speed
run at her) at a distanc e of approximately 10 miles) the destroyer "as
28 miles from the coast and heading farther into international waters .
'I'vTO of the boats closed to wit hin 5)000 yards) launching one torpedo each .
As they approached) Maddox fired on the boats i-Tith her 5- inch batteries
and altered course to avoid the torpedoes ) which i-Tere observed passing
the starboard side at a distance of 100 to 200 yards . The third boat
moved up abeam of the destroyer and took a direct 5- inch hit ; it managed
to launch a torpedo vThich failed to run. All three PT boats fired 50 -
caliber machine glUJ.S at Maddox as they made their firi ng ru...ns ) and a bullet
fra gment was recovered from the destroyer ' s superstructure . The attacks
occurred in mid-afternoon) and photographs were taken of the torpedo boats
as they attacked . 20/

 Upon first report of the PT boats ' apparently hostile intent ) four
F-:8 E aircraft ,'Tere launched from the aircraft carrier Ticonderoga) many
miles to the South) ,'Tith instructions to provide air cover but not to
fire unless they or Maddox were fired upon. As Maddox continued Ln a
southerly direction) Ticonderoga ' s aircraft attacked the ti-TO boats that
had initiat ed the action~th were damaged with Zuni rockets and 20mm
gunfire. The third boat) struck by the destroyer's 5-inch) 'Has already

 5 TOP SECRE,"T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 1'OP SECREf - Sensitive

dead i n the water . After about eight minutes ) the a i rcraft broke off
t he i r attacks . In the meantime) Maddox had been directed by the 7th
Fleet Commander to retire from the area to avoid hostil e fire . Following
their attacks on the PT 1s ) the aircraft joined Maddox and escorted her back
toward South Vietnamese waters where she joined a second destroyer)
C. Turner Joy . The two ships continued to patrol in international waters .
Approximat ely two hours after the action ) in early evening ) reconnaissance
aircraft from Ticonderoga locat ed the damaged PT 1s and obtained tWO/hoto-
graphs . The third boat was last seen burning and presumed sunk . 21

 On 3 August a note of protest was dispatched to the Hanoi Government )
r eportedly through the International Control Commission for Indo- China.
Directed by the PreSident ) the note stressed the unprovoked nature of the
North Vietnames e attack and clos ed with the following warning :

 liThe U. S . Government expects that the authorit i es of the
 regime in North Vietnam will be under no misapprehens i on as to
 the grave consequences Hhich would inevitably result from any
 further unprovoked offensive military action against U. S . forces . 1I

On that same day ) measures were taken to increase the security of the
DE SOTO Patrol) the approved schedule of which still had two days to run.
At 132 5 hours ( Washington time ) the JCS approved a CINCPAC request to
resume the patrol at a distance of 11 n .m. from the North Vietnamese
coast . 22/ Later in the day) President Johnson announced that he had
approved doubling the patroll ing force and authorized active defensive
measures on the part of both the destroyers and their escorting aircraft .
His press statement included the following:

 I have instructed the Navy :

 1. To c ontinue the patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin off the
 coast of North Viet nam .

 2 . To double the force by adding an additional destroyer to
 t he one already on patrol .

 3· To provide a combat air patrol over the destroyers ) and

 4. To issue orders to the commanders of the combat a irc raft
 and the two destroyers j ( a ) to attack any forc e which attacks them
 in international waters ) and (b ) to attack Hith the objective not
 only of drivj.ng off the force but of destroying it . 23/

 THE SECo.ND INCmENT

 Late the following evening the destroyers) Maddox and C. Turner Joy)
"\{ere involved i n a second encounter "lith hostile patrol boats . Like the
first incident ) this occurred follovling a South Vietnamese attack on North

 6 TOP SECRET - Sens i tive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

Vietnamese coastal targets -- thi s time the Rhon River estuary and
the Vinh Sonh radar installation, which were bombarded on the night
of 3 August . The more controversial of the two, this incident occUrred
under cover of darkness and seems to have been both t riggered and des -
cribed largel;,' by radar and sonar images . .After the act i on had been
j oi ned, hOlvever) both visual sightings and interc epted North Vietnamese
cornlllunications confirmed that an attack by hostile patrol craft Ivas i n
progress . 24/

 At 1940 hours , 4 August 1964 (Tonkin Gulf time ), while "proceeding
S.E. at best speed," Task Group 72 . 1 (Maddox and Turner Joy ) radioed
"RCVD INFO indj.cating attack by PGM p- 4 imminent ." Evidently this was
based on an int ercepted communication, later i dentified as 1Ian i ntelli-
gence source,lI indicating that 1I North Vietname se naval forces had been
ordered to attack the patrol ." At the time , radar contacts evaluat ed
as IIprobable torpedo boats " "\-rere observed about 36 miles to the northeast .
Accordingly, the Task Group Commander altered course and increased speed
to avoid what he evaluated as a trap . At approximately 2035 hours, "\-'hile
west of Hainan Island, the destroyers reported radar sight ings of three
unidentifi ed aircraft and tl-TO unidentified vessels in the patrol area .
On receiving the r eport , Ticonderoga immediately launched F- 8s a nd A- 4Ds
to provide a combat air patrol over the destroyers . Within minutes , the
unident ified aircraft disappeared from the radar screen, while the vessels
maintained a dista nce of about 27 miles . Actually, surface contacts on
a parallel cours e had been shadOlving the destroyers wi th radar for more
than three hours . ECM contacts maintained by the C. Turner Joy indicated
that the radar was that carried aboard DRV patrol boats . 25/

 New unident;i.fied surface contacts 13 miles distant ,{ere report ed
at 2134 hours . These vessels were clos ing at approximately 30 knots on
t he beam and were evaluated as II hostile" . Six minutes lat e r ( 2140 )
Maddox opened fire , and at 1242, by ,vhich time two of the new c ontacts
had closed to a distance of 11 miles, aircraft from Ticonderoga ' s CAP
began their attacks . Just before this, one of the PT boats launc hed
a torpedo, which was later reported as seen passing about 300 fe et off
the port beam) from aft to fOTITard ) of the C. Turner Joy . A searchlight
beam "\Vas observed to swing in an arc tm-Tard the C. Turner Joy by all of
the destroyer ' s signal bridge personnel . It was extinguished before i t
illu.minated the ship, preswnably upon detection of the approachj.ng air-
craft . Aboard the Maddox, Marine gunners saw 'ilhat were believed to be
cockpit lights of one or more small boats pass up the port side of the
ship and dm-rn the other . After approximately an hour ' s action, the
destroyers reported hTO enemy boats sunk and no damage or casualties
suff ered . 26/'

 In the meantime, tvo patrol craft from the initial surface contact
had closed to join the action, and the engagement was described for higher
headquarters -- largely on the basis of the destroyers ' radar and sonar
indications and on radio intercept information . In successive messages to
CINCPACFLT, beginning about 2150 hours ) the Commander of Task Group 72 . 1
radioed that he I·Tas "under continu.ous torp edo attack ll - - that at least
six and lat er ten torpedoes had been successfully evaded . Eventually)

 '7
 I TOP SgCRE L' .. Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 the count reached 22 torpedoes) a total which caused the Coramand ing
 Officer) once the engagement had ended) to question the validity of
 his report and communicate these doubts to his superiors :

 II Rev:i e".J of action makes many recoroed contacts and
 t orpedoes fired appear doubtful . Freak weather effects and
 overeager sonarman may have accounted for many reports . II

 I n addition to sonar readings) hmrever) the Task Group had also reported
 i ntercepting co~mQDications from North Vietnamese naval craft indicating
 that they were involved in an attack on U.S. (ll enemyll ) ships and that
 they had II sacrificed ll t"ro vessels i n the engagement . 27/

 THE RESPONSE IN WASHINGTON

 Sometime prior to the r eported termination of the engagement ) at
0030 hours) 5 August (Tonkin Gulf time)) lIalert orders ll to prepare for
possible reprisal raids were sent out by naval authorities to Ticonderoga
and t o a second aircraft carrier) Constellation) '\{hich started heading
South from Hong Kong late on 3 August . Such raids "rere actually ordered
and carried out later in the day . IIDefense officials disclosed /J-n public
testimony) 9 January 19687 that) when the first word was rec eived of the
second attack ' immed iat e- consideration "Tas given to r etaliation. ,II That
apparently began shortly after 0920 hours (Washington time )) vrhen the
task group message that a North Vietnamese naval attack "Tas imminent was
first relayed to Washington . From this time on ) amid a sequence of mes -
sages describing the attack) Secretary McNamara held "a series of meetings
with !fii~7 chief civilian and mil itary advisersll conc erning the engage -
ment and possibl~ U.S. retaliatory actions. As he testified before the
Fulbright Committee :

 IIWe identified and refined various options for a response to
 the attack) to be presented to the President . Among these options
 was the air strike against the attacking boats and the ir associated
 bases) which option was eventually selected . As the options ,{ere
 i dentified preliminary messages ,{ere sent to appropriate operational
 commanders alerting them to the several possibilities so that initial
 planning steps cou~d be undertaken . II 28/

 . At 12 30) the President met '\{ith the National Security Council.
Having just come from a brief meeting with the J CS) attended also by
Secretary Rusk and McGe orge Bl.mdy) Secretary McNamara briefed the NSC
on the reported details of the attack and the possibilities for reprisal.
Shortly thereafter ( presumably during a working lunch '\{ith the President)
Secretary Rusk and Bundy ) and after receiving by telephone the advice of
the JCS) McNamara and the others recommended specific reprisal actions .
It '\{as at this pOint that the President approved lIa response consisting
of an air strike on the PT and STrlATOH boat bases and their associated
facilities . II 29/

 8 . TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Returning from this session shortly after 1500) Secretary McNamara)
 along vrith Deputy Secretary Vance) joined with the JCS to r eviei-r all the
 evidence relating to the engagement . Included in this r eview was the
communications intelligence information which the Secretary reported)
containing North Vietnamese reports that (1) their vessels were engaging
the destroyers) and ( 2) they had lost hro craft in the fight . In the
meantime ) hOi-rever) messages had been relayed to the Joint Staff indicating
considerable confusion over the details of the attack . '1'he DE SO'1'O Patrol
Conrrnander ' s message) expressing doubts about ea rlier evidence of a large -
scale torpedo attack) arrived sometime after 1330 hours . Cons iderably
lat er ( it was not sent to CINCPACFLT until 1447 EDT)) another message
arrived to the effect that while details of the action were still confusing)
the co~mander of Task Group 72 .1 was c erta in that the ambush was genuine .
He had int erviewed the personnel who sighted the boat's cockpit lights
passing near the Maddox) and he had obtained a report from the C. Turner
Joy that two torpedoes were observed passing nearby. Accordingly) these
report s were discussed by telephone with CINCPAC) and he was instructed
by Secretary McNamara to make a careful check of the evidence and ascertain
whether there vTaS any doubt concerning the occurrence of an attack . CINCPAC
called the JCS at l east twice more) at 1723 and again at 1807 hours) to state
that he Ilas convinced on the basis of "additional i nformation II that the
attacks had taken place . 30/ At the time of the earlier call Secretary
McNamara and the JCS werediscussing possible force deployments to foliow
any reprisals . On the occasion of the first call) the Secretary was at
the White House attending the day ' s second NSC meeting . Upon being informed
of CINCPAC ' s call) he reports :

 "I spoke to the Director of the Joint Staff and asked him
 to make certain that the Commander in Chief) Pacific vTas vlilling
 to state that the attack had taken place) and therefore that he
 was free to release the Executive Order because earlier in the
 afternoon I had told him that under no circumstances would retali -
 atory action take place until we were ) to use my words) ' damned
 sure that the attacks had taken place. , " 31/

 At the meeting of the Nat ional Security Council) proposals to deploy
certa in increments of OPLAl'J 37-64 forces to the Western Pacific were dis-
cussed) and the order to retaliate against North Vi etnamese patrol craft
and t heir associated facilities was confirmed . Following this meeting)
at 1845) t he President met >lith 16 Congressional leaders from both parties
for a period of 89 minutes . Reportedly) he described the second incident
in the Gulf) explained his decisions to order reprisals) and informed the
l egisl ators of his intention to request a formal statement of Congress ional
support for tre se decisions. On the morninp; follmring the meeting) The
Washington Post carried a r eport that none of the Congressional leaders
present at the meeting had raised obj e ctions to the course of action
planned. Their only question) the report stated) "had to do with hm1
Congress could sho1-7 its agreement and concern in the cris is. " 32/

 9 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 In many ways the attacks on U.S . ships in the Tonkin Gulf provided
 the Administration vrith an opportunity to do a number of things that had
 been urged on it. Certa i nly it offered a politically acc eptable way of
 exerting direct punitive pressure on North Vietnam . In South Vietnam, t he
 U. S. response served to satisfy for a time the grO\oTing des i re f or some
 action to carry the war to the North . Relative to the election campaign,
 i t provided a means of ellininating any doubts about President Johnson ' s
 decisiveness that may have been encouraged by his preferred candidate ' s
 image as the r estra ined man of peace . The obvious convenience and the ways
 i n which it was exploited have been at the root of much of the suspi cion
 I-Ti th I-Thich critics of Administration policy have viel-Ted the incident .

 The documents available to this writer are not conclusive on this
 pOint , but the evidence indicates that the occurrence of a DRV p r ovocation
 at this time resu~ted from events over which the U. S . Government exerc i sed
 l i ttle control . It has been suggested that the incidents were related
 i n some I-ray to pressure coming from the GVN for U. S . action against North
 Vietnam . HOI-Teve r , the patrol was authorized on or prior to 17 Jul y, and
 General Khanh ' s oft - cited "Go North " appeal wasn ' t made until 19 July .
 The first attack almost certainly \las a case of mistaken judgment on the
 part of the local Vietnamese commander . His probable association of U. S . S .
 Maddox ITith the South Vietnamese raiding force is indicated by the circum-
 stances preceding the event, the brief duration and charact er of i t , and
 the long- del ayed ( not until 5 August ) and rather subdued DRV public com-
 ment . Moreover, there i s little reason to see anything more than coi nci -
 dence in the close conjunction behTeen the GVIT ' s maritime operations against
 the North Vietname se coast and the scheduling of the DE SOTO Patrol . The
 hTO operations I-Tere scheduled and monitored from different authorities
 and through separate channels of communication and command . Higher U. S .
 naval commands were informed of the operations against the hro islands
 by COMUSMACV) but the task group comJJ1.ander had no k....YlO\oTledge of where or
 Ivhen the specific operations had taken place . As Secretary McNamara
 told Senator Morse) in respons e to charge s that U. S. naval forces were
 supporting the GVN operation)

 "Our shi ps had absolutely no knO\oTledge of it , were not
 c onnected Ivith it; i n no sense of the word can be considered
 to have backstopped the effort ."

 In addition ) there Ivas no reason on the basis of earlier DE SOTO Patrol
 experience to even suspect that patrol activity might precipitate hostile
 action by North Vietnmn . 33/

 Although the events of the second attack I-iere less clear - cut ) the
. evidence does not support beliefs (which have been expressed ) that the
 incj.dent vas staged . On the contrary) the evidence l eads readily to
 other explanations) which'are at least equally as plausible .

 DRV motj.vations for the second attack are unclear ) but several
 possibilities provide rational explanat ions for a deliberate DRV decision .
 Thos e given credence at the time - - t.hat the DRV or Ch ina l-rant ed to

 10 TOP SECRET _. Sensitive
 - - -- - -
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 i ncrease pressures for an international conference or that the DRV
was testing U.S. reactions to a contemplated genera~offensive 34/
have l ost some cr edibil ity. Subsequent events and DRV actions have
appeared to lack any consistent relationship with such motives . Perhaps
closer to the mark i s the narrow purpose of :prompt retali at i on for an
embarrassing and .Tell-publicized rebuff by a much- maligned enemy . Inex-
perienced in modern naval operations , DRV leaders may have believed that
under cover of darkness it .Tould be possible to even the score or to pro-
vide at l east a psychological victory by severely damaging a U.S. ship .
Unlike the first inCident, the DRV was ready ( 5 August ) with a propaganda
blast denying its 0I.Jn provocation and claiming the destruction of U. S .
aircraft . Still, regardless of motive, there i s little question but t hat
the attack on the destroyers was deliberate . Havi ng followed the destroyers
f or hours, their course was well knOlm to the North Vietnamese naval f orce,
and it s advance units were l aying ahead to make an ambushing beam attack
fully 60 miles from shore .

 The reality of a North Vietnamese attack on 4 August has been corro-
borated by both visual and t echnical evidence . That i t may have been
deliberat ely provoked by the Unit ed States is belied to a considerable
degree by circumstant i al evidence . Operating r estr ictions for the DE saro
Patrol ivere made more stringent follovring the first attack . The 11 n .m.,
rather than 8 n.m., off-s hore patrolling track indicat es an intention to
avoid -- not provoke - - further contact . On 4 February the rules of engage -
ment were modified to restrict "hot pursuit " by the U. S . shi ps to no
clos er than 11 n .m. from the North Vietnamese coast ; aircraft were to
pursue no closer than 3 n .m. 35/ Given the first attack, t he President ' s
augmentation of the patrol force .Tas a normal · precaution, particularly
since both Ticonderoga and C. Turner J oy were already deployed in the
i nilllediate vicinity as supporting elements . Moreover, since the augmenta -
tion w'as coupled with a clear statement of int ent to continue the patrols
and a firm warning to the DRV that repetition vrould bring d i re consequences,
their addition to the patrol could be expected to serve more as a deterrent
than a provocation .

 The often alleged "poised II condition of the U. S. repri sal forces was
anything but extraordinary . U. S. S. Constellation .ras .Tell out of the
immediate operating area as the patroll{8s resumed on 3 August . I n fact ,
one r eason for delaying the launching of retaliatory air strikes ( nearly
1100 hours , 5 August -- Tonkin Gulf time) was to permit Constellat i on to
approach within reasonable range of the targets . Target lists from which to
make appropriate selections were already ava ilable as a result of routine
cont ingency planning accomplished i n June and July . In preparation for
the resumed DE SOTO Patrol- of 3- 5 August, the patrol track was moved farther
north to make (!learer the separation behreen it and the 34 - A operations . 36/
The "\orays in which the events of the second Tonkin Gulf incident came about'
give little indication of a deliberate provocation to provide opportunity
for reprisals .

 BROADENING THE 1MPACT

 There is no question, hovTever , that the second i nc ident "\oTas promptly
exploited by the .Administration . The' event .ras seized upon as an opportunity

 11 TOP SECR~' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 to take several measures that had been recomnlended earlier and which were
 now seen as us eful means of turning an essentially unique and localized
 incident into an event .rith broader strategic impact. The extent to which
 the strategic utility of these actions was perceived during the two days
 between the iLcidents is not clear . Certail.ly the disposition of U.S . S.
 Constellation does not suggest a picture of intensive preparation for a
 planned series of new military and political pressures against North
 Vietnam . Moreover) there is no record in the usual sources of the series
 of staff meetings) task assignments and memoranda that typically accompany
 preparations for coordinated political and. military initiatives . What -
 ever Ivas contemplated between 2 and 4 August) the deliberations imnlediately
 preceding the reprisal decision seem to have been largely ad hoc) both
 within DOD and among the President's prinCipal advisers .

 The most reasonable explanation for the actions which accompanied
 the r eprisals ) and for the rapidity of their implementation) is the fact
 that each of them had been proposed and staffed in detail months before .
 These "on the shelf" options had been recommended unanimously by the
 prinCipal officials r espons ible for security matters in Southeast Asia .
 T~e fact that they were implemented in August indicates that the President
 dld not disapprove of them but rather that the domestic and int ernational
political environments had) probably been judged i nappropriate earlier in
the summer . The measures apparently had been considered either too costly
o~ too risky (perhaps politically or p e rhaps in terms of communist reactions))
glven the President's election strategy and his policy theme of "maximum
effect with minimum escalat·ion ". The kind of circlJJnstanc es created by the
Tonkin Gulf affair enabled them to be carried out at 10lver cost and with
l ess risk. The promptness with Ivhich these actions were to be taken novr
is perhaps as much a direct result of the President's well-known political
astuteness and keen s ense of timing as any other single factor .

 One of the first actions taken was to deploy additional U.S. mili-
tary forces to the Western Pacific . This was done i n part as a measure
to deter any hostile responses by Hanoi or Peking to the reprisal raids .
~t also enabled making a stronger signal of U.S . resolve to defend its
lnterests. t hroughout Southeast Asia as recon~ended at the end of May .
 )

Orders dlrecting the deployment of selected 37-64 forces and the alerting
of others were dispatched from the Pentagon shortly after the President ' s
meeting with Congressional leaders on the evening of 4 August . Shortly
after midnight ) on 5 August, and again later in the day) Secretary McNamara
announced the specific measures by which UoS. military capabilities around
Southeast Asia were being augmented :

 "Fir:;t) an attack carrier group ha.., been transferred from
 the First Fleet on the Pacific coast to the Western Pacific .
 Secondly, interc eptor and fighter bomber aircraft have been
 moved into South Vietnam. Thirdly) fighter bomber aircraft have
 been moved into Thailand. Fourthly) int e rceptor and fighter

 12
 TOP SECRET - SenS itive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 bomb er squadrons have been transferred from the United States
 into advance bases in the Pacific . Fifthly) an antisubmarine
 task force group has been moved into the South China Sea . 37/

 It is Significant) relative to the broader purpose of the deploy-
ments) that fev of these additional units were removed from the Western
~acific when the immediate crisis subsided . In late September the fourth
attack aircraft carrier was authorized to resume its norma l station in
the Eastern Pacific as soon as the regularly assigned carrier compl et ed
repairs. The other forces remained in the vicinity of their August deploy-
ment. 38/

 Other actions taken by the Administration in the wake of Tonkin
Gulf were intended to communicate to various audiences the depth and
sincerity of the U.S. commitment . On the evening of 4 August ) in con-
j unctj.on with his testing of Congressional opinion regarding reprisal
action) President Johnson disclosed his intention to request a resolution
i n support of U.S. Southeast Asian policy . This he did through a formal
message to both houses on 5 August . Concurrently) ident ical draft
resolutions) the language of .Thich had been prepared by executive agencies )
were introduced in the Senate by J . William Fulbright ( D.) Ark .) and in
t he House by Thomas E. Morgan ( D.) Pa; ) and co-sponsored by bi- partisan
leadership . 39/ Discussed in committee on 6 August) in r esponse to
testimony by~eading Administration officials) the resolution was passed
the follOl-TiDj2. day -- by votes of 88 to 2 i n the Senate and 416 to 0 in
the House LTab f7.

 Despite the nearly unanimous votes of support for the Resolution)
Congressional opinions varied as to the policy implications and the
meaning of such support . The central belief seemed to be that the
occasion necessitated demonstrating the nation ' s unity and collective
will in support of the President ' s action and affirming U.S. determinat i on
to oppose further aggression . However) beyond that theme ) there was a
considerable variety of opinion . For example) in the House) express ions
of support varied from Congressman Laird ' s argument ) that while the
retaliation in the Gulf was appropriate such act i ons still l eft a policy
to be developed with respect to the land ,.,rar in Southeast Asia) to the
more reticent viewpoint of Congressman Alger . The latter characterized
his support as being primarily for purposes of shmving unity and expressed
concern over the dange r of being dragged into war by "other nations
seeking our help ." Several spokesmen stressed that the Resolut ion did
not constitute a declaration of >,rar) clid not abdicate Congressional
responsj.bilit:" for determining national pol i.cy commitments) and d i d not
give the President carte blanche to involve the nation in a major Asian
war . 40/ . .

 Similar express ions '{ere voiced in the senior chamb er . For example )
Senator Nelson sought assurances that the Resolution would not be exploited
to cormnit the United States further in the direction of a large land Har

 13 TOP SEC REI' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

i n Asia without an .express ion of specific Congress ional approval . In
r esponse) Senator Fulbright stated that he did not believe that the Res olu-
tion changed in any ",-Tay the Administration I s concept of keeping the
confl ict i n Vietnam as Ijmited as possible . He identified the purposes
of the Resolut::.on as being only ( 1 ) "to make it clear that the Congress
approves the action taken by the President to meet the attack on U.S.
fOTces •... " and ( 2 ) to declare SUppOTt fOT the r esolut e policy enunc i ated
b.y the President in order to pTevent further aggression) or to reta liat e
with suitable measures should such aggression take place ." 41/ However)
in subs equent discussion it was made clear .that prevent i ng or r etaliating
against further aggression was interpreted Tathe r bToadly at the t jme :

 "(Mr . Cooper ) •.. are we now giving the President advance
 authority to take whatever action he may deem necessaTY res -
 pecting South Vietnam and its defense ) or with Tespe ct to the
 defense of any other cOuntTY i ncluded in the LSR4TQ7 treaty?

 "(Mr . Fulbright) I think that is cOTTect .

 "( Mr . Cooper ) Then) looking ahead) i f the Pres ident
 decided that it vas necessary t o use such force as could lead
 into waT) we "'-Till give that authority by this resolution?

 "(Mr . Fulbright ) That is the way I ",-Tould i nterpret it .
 If a situation l ater developed i n which ve thought the approval
 should b e ,vi thdrawn it 'could be vithdTavn by conc urrent resolu-
 tion ." 42/

 The Congressional Resolution had several intended audiences . First )
i t was ajmed at the commun ist po",-Ters vho might not believe the President
vould risk legislative debate over strong military actions in an election
year . Second) it was int ended to reassure our allies ) particularly in
Asia) l-rho might doubt the ability of the President to rally the necessary
public r esolve should stTonger military measures be needed . :F'inally it
vas directed at the U.S. public ) vhose appreciation of nationa l i nterests
i n Southeast Asia might be strengthened through obseTvation of comb ined
executive -legislative and bipartisan political support . 43/

 The Unit ed Nations was t he target of a separate statement ) on
5 August) as A~bassador Stevenson described the events in the Gulf for
members of the Security Council and spec ifically relat ed the DRV provoca -
tion to the wider campaign of terror and i nfiltrat i on occurTing i n South
Vietnam and laos . 44/ This address was designed to establish the
l eg itjmacy of nur actions in the Gulf under ~rovisions of the UN Charter
and to reaffirm that U. S. policy in Southeast Asia hdd I jmited aims and
vffiZbased on upholding provi sions of exist i ng i nternational agr eements .

 The third communication ",-Tas directed specifically to HanOi ) on
10 August) through the Canadian I.C.C. repTesentative and was intended
to strengthen the warning which he conveyed on his initial visit . In

 14 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

addition to repeating points made earlier) Seaborn ' s second message
c onveyed the U.S . Government ' s QDcertainty over DRV intentions i n
the 4 August attack and explained that subsequent U. S. dep loym~nts of
additional airpower to South Vietnam and Thailand were "precautionary ."
In addition) tile new message stressed : (1) -';hat the Tonkin Gulf events
demonstrated that "U.S. public and official pat i ence " was wearing thin; (2)
that the Congress ional Resolution reaffirmed U.S. determination "to con-
tinue to oppose firmly) by all necessary means) DRV efforts to subvert
and conquer South Vietnam and Laos "; and ( 3 ) that "if the DRV persists
in it s present course) it can expect to suffer the consequences ." 45/

 Thus) i n the immediate aftermath of t he provocation handed · the U.S.
Governme nt in the Tonkin Gulf, the Administration was able to carry out
most of the actions recommended by its principal offic i als early in the
summer. By the same token) it was reducing the nlwber of unused measures
short of di rect military action that had been c.onceived as ava ilable for
exerting effective pressure on the DRV. In effect , as i t made its com-
mitments in Southeast Asia clearer it also deepened them, and i n the
process it denied it self access to some of the uncommitting opt i ons which
it had perceived earlier as .offering policy flexibility . 46/ Meamrhile,
other events were also having the effect of denying options which had
been considered useful alternatives to strikes against the North .

 15 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 III

 POST-TONKIN POLICY ASSESSMENTS

 The Tonkin Gulf incidents were important not only because of
what they enabled the United States to do in response -- but also
because of the way what was done began to be regarded by policy-
makers . The fact that U.S. forces had responded to hostile acts by
making direct attacks on North Vietnam) albeit limited ones under
unique circumstances) had rather significant impacts on the Adminis -
tration's policy judgments. These impacts appeared as it became
i ncreasingly evident that the United States actually had fewer options
than it once believed available .

 DILEMMAS IN hAOS

 One of the areas where the Administration first saw its freedom
of action being impaired was Laos .

 Prior to the events in Tonkin Gulf) the situation in Laos had
become increasingly complex) thus making U.S. policy choices increasingly
delicate. Since the end of May) U.S. hopes for a stabilized Laos had
been bas ed l argely on a Polish proposal to convene a preliminary con-
ference among six nations . 47/ Particularly promising 'vas the Soviet
Union ' s willingness to support the proposa l. TOI.ra rd the end of June)
as the Laotian government warned of the imminent threat of a major
communist offensive near Muong Soui ) the Soviet Union asked Great
Britain to postpone efforts toward such a conference) and the Poles
seemed to back 8\vay from their original initiative . On 25 July the
Soviet Union announced her return to the 14- Nation formula) and threatened
to resign her co-chairman role if a conference were not called . 48/ The
Soviet threat to withdrau from the international machinery that is basic
to the neutralist Laotian government ' s claim to legitimacy "ras a matter
of considerable mutual concern in Vientiane and Washington . 49/

 One of the major reasons for U.S. support of the Polish 6-Nation
preliminary conference \.,ras its value in forestalling pressure for a
Geneva - type meeting . It vas hoped that such a conference could be pro-
longed veIl into the autumn to give the political and mili tary situation
in South Vi etnam time to be improved) and to build a more favorable
political climate for an eventual 14-Nat ion conference on Laos . The
latter could be accomplished) it vas hoped) by : ( 1) demonst rating the
extent of comrr.u.nist responsibility for laot5an instabilityj ( 2) getting
the I.C.C. to function more effectively; (3) strengthen irrg internationa l
backing for Souvanna ' s position ; and (4) thereby obtaining support for
his insistence on Pathet Lao "rithdra\val from the Plaine des Jarres as a
precondition for a nev Geneva settlement . 50/ Insofar as Laos was
concerned) the Unit ed States recognized that a nei-l conferenc e "ras probably
desirable) as long as it did not occur too soon . HOIvever.) it also recog-
nized the suspicion vith vhich the GVN I-Tould regard any kind of negot iations

 . 16 TOP SECRP.f - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

over Southeast Asia and the likelihood that back- corridor discussions
of the Vietnamese problem would be an almost i nevitable by- product .
In time such a procedure might be useful) but for the balance of 1964
it was to be avoided in order to promote GVN stability and encourage
a more vigorous GVN war effort . 51/

 The pressure for a Geneva - type conference had been building ever
since the resumption of fighting in Laos in May. The chief protagonist
in the quest for negotiations was France) who first proposed reconvening
the 14 - Nation Conference to deal with the crisis on 20 May . What made
French policy so dangerous to U.S. interests) however) was that its
int erest in a Geneva solution applied to Vietnam as well . On 12 June)
DeGaulle publicly repeated his neutralization theme for all I ndo-China
and called for an end to all foreign intervention there; on 23 July he
propos ed reconvening the 1954 Geneva Conference to deal with the problems
of Vietnam.

 The Soviet Union ' s return to the 14- Nation formula in July (it
had endorsed the original French proposal before indicating willingness
to support the 6- Nation approach ) indicated solidarity in the communist
camp. The call was endorsed by North Vietnam on the follovring day .
Communist China first annoQnced support for a 14-Nation Conference ( on
Laos ) on 9 June ) repeating this through notes to the co- chairman calling
on the 13th for an "emergency meeting ." On 2 August) the Chinese urged
the USSR not to carry out its threat to abandon its co- chairman role)
apparently viel-ring such a development as jeopardizing the possibilities
for a Geneva settlement . 52/

 Great Britain also urged the Russians to stay on ) and during the
l ast days of July it attempted to make arrangements in Moscow to con-
vene a 14-Nation assembly on Laos . The negotiations failed because
Britian i nsisted on Souvanna ' s prerequisite that the communists withdraw
from positions taken in May and was Qnable to gain Soviet acquiescence .
However ) U.S. leaders Here aHare that Britain ' s support on this point
could not be counted on indefinit ely in the face of increasing pressure
in the direction of Geneva . 53/

 In the meantime) hovrever ) Laotian military efforts to counter the
con@unis t threat to key routes and control points west of the Plaine
des Jarres ,fere shOldng great success . As a result of a counteroffensive
( Operation Triangle)) government forces gained control of a considerable
amotmt of territory that gave promise of assuring access betHeen the
hro capitals ( Vientiane and Luang Prabang) for the first time in three
years . 2~/

 I n effect ) the government ' s nel-rly won control of territory and
communication rout es in Central Laos created a ne\{ and more favorable
balance of pOl{er in that country) which i n the perceptions of the Admin-
istration should not be jeopardized . A threat to this balance from
either (1 ) cownunist reactions to additional pressure ) or ( 2) Laotian
i nsistence on extending their offensive into the Plaine des Jarres ,I-ras
cited to discourage proposals near t~e end of July to permit the VNAF to

 , 17 TOP SECRl'iI' - Sens Hive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

bomb infiltration r outes in the Laotian Panhandl e . 55/ This "don 't
rock the boat " pol i cy was given added encouragementwhen} on 1 August }
Great Britain initiated a promising effort toward a new d i pl omat ic
solution . Acting on Souvanna Phouma ' s request } the British government
urged the I.C. ~ . members to arrange a meet i ug among the three Laotian
political factions. 56/

 Concern over not provoking a communist mili tary escalat i on that
would upset the relatively stabilized situation in Laos figured promi -
nently in a t entat ive analysis of U.S. strategy for Southeast Asia made
and circulated for comment by the State Department in mid- August . It
had a significant impact on the Administration ' s assessment of its opt i ons
in the post - Tonkin period . Among other effects } this concern caus ed i t
to i-Tithhold for several weeks it s approval of continuing proposals for
air and ground i nitiatives in the Panhandle as means to improve the
situation in South Vietnam . 57/

 CONCERN OVER PRESSURES FOR NEGOrrIATIONS

 One of the Tonkin Gulf impacts i'Thich was perceived i-Tithin the
Administration served to exacerbate its policy dilemmas r egardi ng Laos .
Administration official s Here apprehensive that the international crisis
precipitat ed by incidents in the Gulf might intensify the kind of Geneva
conference pressures generated previously . 58/ Administration conc ern
was apparently well founded . On 5 August UN Secretary General U Thant
stated that the 14- Nation assembly should be reconvened to deal ivith the
Tonkin Gulf debate then being urged on the UN Security Council . ( He
had earli er urged reconvening the 1954 Conference to negotiate a Vietnam
settlement .) THO days later) during the debate} the French delegation
urged the calling of a conference for the pacification of all of Indo-
China . Reports appeared on 10 August that the Chinese People ' s Daily
published an editorial arguing that a Geneva sett l ement ivaS the only
effective i-Tay to solve the problem of South Vietnam . On the 19th) in
a note r ejecting potential UN Security CouBc il findings regarding
r esponsibility for the Tonkin Gulf i ncidents } North Vietnam declared
its insistence on a Geneva conference . 59/

 Such Has the Administration ' s concern in the immediate aftermath
of the crisis } that it contemplated a diplomat ic i nitiative relating to
laos that i-TaS designed to count eract the expected pressure . Reflecting
a point of vieiv r eportedly also becoming attractive to Souvanna Phouma:,
the State Department sought reactions to a policy d:i_rection that i-TOuld
no longer insist. on Pathet Lao 'ivithdrawal from the Plaine des Jarres as
a precor"ditior. to an international conferem·e . The ga i ns r ecently
achieved through "Operation Triangle " i-rere so significant } it reasoned}
that they more than offset c ommlli~ist control of the Plaine . And it was
clear that any negot iations by which a conunu..."1.ist wHhdrmraJ might be
arranged iVQuld include rec iprocal demands for the government to r elinquish
it s recently won gains . 60/ Moreover) passage of the Congress ional
Resolution and the strongDRV naval attacks had accomplished the exact
kind of actions believed to be necessary earlier to demonstrate U.S.

 ,18 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Proj ect Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 firmness in the event negotiating pressure should become compelling . 61/

 Reactions to this tentative policy change were unfavorable : I t
 was seen as lik21y to have a demoralizing imract on the GVN . It was
 a l so seen as possibly eroding the impression of strong U. S . resolve )
 which the reprisal air strikes were believed to have created . For
 example ) Ambassador Taylor cabled :

 If • • • rush to conference table would serve to confirm to

 CHICOMS that U.S . retaliation for destroyer attacks was
 transient phenomenon and that firm CHICOM response in form of
 commitment to defend NVN has given U. S. "Paper tiger " second
 thoughts .. . .

 If In Vietnam sudden backdmm from previous l y strongly held

 U. S. position on [plaine des Jarre~7 YTithdravTal prior to con-
 ferenc e on laos \Vould have potentially disastrous effect .
 Morale and will to fight and particular lvillingness to push
 ahead with arduous pacifj.cation task ... would be undermined by
 YThat YTould look like evidence that U. S . seeking to take advantage of
 any slight improv~nent in non- Communist Eosition as excuse for
 extricating its elf from Indo- China via Lconferenc~7 route ....

 "Under Circumstances) I{e see very little hope that results
 of such a conference \-Tould b e advantageous to us . Moreover)
 prospects of limiting it to considerat ion of only laotian
 problem appear at this time juncture to be dimmer than ever .... " 62/

 CONCERN OVER TOEKIN REPRISAL SIGNALS

 Contained in Ambassador Taylor ' s vielvs was yet anothe r of the
Administration ' s reflections on the impact of the Tonkin Gulf incidents .
Officials developed mixed feelings regarding the effect of the Tonkin
r eprisals for Signaling firm U. S. commitments in Southeast Asia . On
one hand ) i t \Vas conceded that the reprisals and the actions 'i{hich accom-
panied them represented the most forceful expression of U.S . resolve to
date . Improvements vTere perceived in South Vietnamese morale ) and the
combinat ion of force and restraint demonstrated was believed effective
in interrupting communist momentum and forcing a reassessment of U.S .
intentions . 63/ On the other hand ) they r eflected concern that these
effects might not last and that the larger aspects of U.S . determination
might still b e unclear .

 Several officials and agencies i ndicated that our actions in the
.Tonkin Gulf represented only on e step along a continually demanding
 route for the Unit ed States . They expressed relief that if a persuasive
 impression of firrnness were to be created relative to the general security
 of Southeast ASia ) He could not rest on our laurels . Ambassador Taylor
 expressed the limited impact of the Tonkin Gulf action as follmTs :

 .19 TOP SECRE.I' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

'il
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 "It should be remembered that our retaliatory action
 in Gulf of Tonkin is in effect an isolated U.S .- DRV i ncident .
 Although this has relation ... to /the7 larger problem of DRV
 aggression by subvers i on in Vi et - Nam- and Laos , we have not
 ( repeat nl)t ) yet come to grips in a for ::eful way IoTith DRV
 over the i ssue of this l arger and much more complex problem . 64/

 Later, he described a need for subsequent actions that would convey
 to Hanoi that "the operational rul es Hith respect to the DRV are
 changing ." 65/ Assistant Secretary of State Bundy believed that Hanoi
 and Peking had probably been convinced only "that we will act strongly
 where U.S. force units are directly involved ... /that7 in other r espe cts
 the commun i st side may not be so persuaded that- we are prepared to take
 stronger action .... " He saH the need for a continuous "c ombination of
 military pressure and some form of communication " to cause Hanoi to
 accept the idea of "getting out" of South Vi etnam and Laos . 66/ CINCPAC
 stated that '\That we have not done and must do is make plain to Hanoi
 and Pe iping the cost of pursuing their current objectives and impeding
 ours .... Our actions of August 5 have created a momentum which can lead
 to the attainment of our objectives in S . E. As ia .... It is most important
 t hat He not lo se this momentum ." 67/ The JCS urged actions to "sustain
 the U. S. advantage ;recently7 gained, " and later caut ion ed : "Failure to
 r eswne and maintain-a program of pressure through military actions ...
 could si~nal a lack of resolve ." (J3/

 vlhat these advisors had in mind by vlay of actions varied somewhat
 but only in the extent to IoThich they were willing to go in the immedi-
 ate futur e . Bundy stressed that policy commitments must be such that
 U.S. and GVN hands could be kept free for military actions against DRV
 infiltration routes in Laos . Ambassador Taylor, CINCPAC and t he JCS
 urged prompt air and ground operations across the Laotian border to
 int errupt the current ( though modest ) southlorard flow of men and supplies .
 Both Taylor and CINCPAC ind icat ed the necessity of building up our
 "readiness posture " to undertake stronger actions -- through additional
 deployments of forces and l ogi stical support el ements and strengthening
 of the GVN poli tical base .

 The mood and attitudes reflected in these viewpoint s were concrete
 and dramatic expressions of the increased U.S. commitment stemming from
 the Tonkin Gu~f incidents . They were candidly summed up by CINCPAC in
 his statement :
 " ... pressures aga inst the other side . once institut ed should
 not b e relaxed by any actions or lack of them which would destroy
 the b enef it s of the reHarding steps previously taken .... 11 69/

 Incr eaSingly voiced by officials from many quarters of the Admin-
 i stration and from the professional agenc i es were arguments which said,
 i n effect , nml that Ile have gone this far we cannot afford to stop and
 go no farther; our original Signal must continually be reinforced . Vlhat

 20 ~[,OP SECREl' - Se n sit i ve
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

was not stated -- at l east not i n documentary form -- were estimates
of how long the process might have to continue or to what extent the
act i ons might have to be carried .

 RRASSERT ICN OF THE ROSTOW THESIS

 Soon after the Tonkin Gulf incidents State Department Couns elor
 Walt RoStm-T reformulated and circulated his earlier thesis that insurgencies
 supported by external pm-lers must be dealt with through measures to
 neutra lize the sources of that support . First presented to President
 J ohnson in December 1963, var iations on this theme had b een proposed by
 Rostow at various times throughout 1964, the most recent occasion being
. i n June, right after the Honolulu Conference . 70/ Nm-r in mi d- August ,
 his newl y articulated arguments were passed to~he White House, Depart-
 ment of State , Department of Defense and the JCS.

 The It Rostm·r thes is It vTaS generalized -- not explicitly dealing with
a particular insurgency - - but it was evident that cons iderat i ons of the
U.S. dilem~as in Southeast Asia affected its formulation. I t started wi th
a proposition:

 "By applying limit ed, graduated military act i ons reinforced
 by political and economic pressures on a nation providing
 external support for insurgency, we should be able to cause
 that nation to decide to r educe greatly or eliminat e altogether
 support for the i nsurgency. The objective of these pressures
 i s not necessarily to attack his ability to provide support,
 although economic and c erta in military actions vTQuld in fact
 do j ust that· . Rather, the objective is to affect his calculation
 of i nterests . Therefore, the threat that i s implicit i n initial
 U.S. actions vmuld be more important than the military effect of
 the actions themselves . II 71/

 In Rostow ' s view, the target government ' s Itcalculation of interests"
could be affected by a number of factors , none of which vlould pre clude,
havrever, the need for effective counterinsurgency programs vrithin the
country already under attack . The factors included : (1) loss, and fear
of further loss , of military and economic facilities; (2) fear of involve-
ment in a much larger conflict ; ( 3 ) fear of increased dependence upon,
and loss of independent action to, a ma j or communist country; and (4 ) fear
of internal political upheaval and los s of power . The coercive impacts
of the pressures vrere to be their principal objectives . Significant (in
vie\{ of currently espoused rationale for increased pre ssures on North
Vietnam ) vTaS t:le explicit caution that improred morale in the country
troubled by insurgency and Itimproved U. S. bargaining l everage in any
i nternational conference on the conflict lt were to be cons i dered merely
as "bonus effects.·"

 The coercive pressure vTaS to result from "damaging military actions It
coupled. with concurrent political, economic and psychological pressures .
The former could include selective or full naval blockade and It surgical lt

 21 TOP SECREr - SensUive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - SensHi ve

 destruction of specific targets by aerial bombardment or naval gunfire .
 They could be supported by such non- destructive military act i ons as
 aerial reconnai ssance ) harassment of civi l avi ation and maritime com-
 merce ) mock ai:" attacks) and time ly concentr:ltions of U. S . or allied
 forces at sea or near land borders . Foll owing a line of reasoning
 prevalent i n the Government during the early 60 1 s ) Rostow observed
 t hat a target government might well r educe its insurgency supporting
 role in the fac e of such pressures because of the communists I proverb i al
 "tactical flexibility . " 72/

 The thesis was sub j ected to a rather thorough analysis in OSD/ISA
 and coordinated with the Department of State . The nature of thi s revi ew
 wi ll be discuss ed on later pages and in a different context .

 ACCOMPANYING PAUSE IN PRESSURES

 The foregoing policy assessments were conducted in an atmosphere
re l atively free of even those pressure measures that preceded the
Tonkin Gulf crisis . Since the force deployments of 6 August ) l i ttle
mil itary activity had been direct ed at the DRV . U- 2 flights over North
Vietnam and r econnaissance of the Laotian Panhandle were continued .
Military oper ations ..lithin Laos ..Tere limHed to the consolidation of
ga ins achieved in Operation Triangl e . A deliberate stand- dmrn \las
adopted for all other activities -_ including DE SOTO Patrols and the
GVN ' s covert haraSSing operations . The purpose of this "holding phase ) I!
as it vas called) was to "avoid actions that would in any vay take .the
onus off the Communist side for ithe Tonki~7 escalation . I! 73/

 HmTever) during the "holding phase " some of the administratj.ve
 impediments to wider military action were cleared 8V18Y . One measure
that vTaS taken was to relax the operating restrictions and the rules
of engagement for U.S . forces in Southeast As ia . This vTaS accomplished
i n response to JCS urging that attacking forces not be permitted sanctuaries
from "Thich to regroup and perhaps repeat their hostile acts . 74/ Pr i or
rul es had not p ermitted pursuit of hostile aircraft outside South Vietnam
or authorized intercept of intruders over Thailand . 75/ Under the revi sed
rules of 15 August 1964) u. S . forces "Tere authorized to attack and destroy
any vess el or aircraft ''.,Thich attacks ) or gives positive indication of
i ntent to attack " U.S. forces operating in or over international waters
and in Laos ) to include hot pursuit into the territorial waters or air
space of North Vietnam and into the air space over other cOlLl1tries of
Southeast Asia . "Hostile aircraft over South Vietnam and Tha i land l! could
be engaged as ':rell and pursued into North Vi ~tnam) Laos and Cambodia . 76/

 Another prerequisit e to wider military action that was accomplished
was the comb ined GVN-U.S. planning for cross-border grolL71d operations .
By 16 August) this had proceeded to such an extent that COMUStvlACV believed
i t nec essary to seek approval of the conc ept and appropriat e to urge that
Phas e I of the prograni. get underway . Significant for understanding the
pressure for \Vider actions increas ingly being brought to bear on the

 .22 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Admini stration "\oras the fact that NACV made the request despite explicit
 comment that the concept ,.,ras "an overly ambitious scheme . If 77/ Presum-
 ably~ he considered it likely to be ineffect i ve militarily) but perhaps
 importa nt in stimulating more vigorous GVN efforts . Imatever his particu-
 lar r easons at the time) M_Acv repeated the recommendat ions later i n the
 month as part of several measures to be taken inside and outside South
 Vietnam . These vere designed "to give the VC a bloody nose) " to steady
 the neHly r eformed South Vietnamese government) and to raise the morale
 of the population . 78/ Ho,lever) the earlier MACV cable had already
 acknmvledged What must have been one of the Administrat;i.on ' s key inhibitions
 again st undertaking cross-border actions: Genera l Westmoreland stated)
 "It should be r ecognized that once this operation is initiated by the GVN)
 U. S . controls may be marginal. "

 The period of the If holding phase If ,.,ras also a period of significant
 developments "\orithin South Vietnam . Ambassador Taylor ' s initial report
 (10 August ) made clear that the political situation "\oras already precarious)
 giving Khanh only a 50- 50 chance of staying in pover and characterizing
 the GVN as ineffect ive and fraught vith conflicting purposes . In Taylor ' s
 viev) the leadership in Saigon shoved symptoms of "defeatism lf and a hesi -
 tancy to prosecute the pacification campaign Irithin South Vietnam . Mean -
 "\orhile) however) its popular support in the cOll..1'1tryside seemed to b e directly
 proport ional to the degree of protection ,.,rhich the govermnent provided . 79/
 In viev of this shaky political base) General Khanh seized upon the occasion
 of Post - Tonkin euphoria -- apparently "\orith Ambassador Taylor's encouragement
 to acquire additional executive authority . On 7 August) announcing the
 nece ss ity for c erta i n "emergency If pmrers to cope ,rith any heightened VC
 activity) he proclaimed himself President and promulgated the Vung Tau
 Chart er . This action) vhich gave him virtually dictatorial pover over
 several aspects of South Vi etnamese life) met vith hostile reactions . In
late August) Khanh ' s authority vas challenged in the streets of Saigon)
Hue and Da Nang) during several days of student protest demonstrations
and clashes betveen Buddhist and Catholic groups . In respons e to student
and Bud~hist pressures primarily) he resigned his recently assumed post
as Pres ldent and promised that a national assemblage would be called to
form a more popularly based government. On 3 September) Khanh returned
to assume the premiership) but clearly Fith veaker and more conditional
authority than before the government crisis.

 Neanvhile) as the GVN's lack of cohesion and stability vas being
 demonstrat ed) the infiltration of communist forces into South Vietnam may
ha ve been on the increase . At least) belief in an increase in the rate of
this infiltration apparently gained currency in various U.S. agencies at
thi s time . The documents ava ilable to this vrHer from the period neither
 r efute nor substantiate the i ncrease ) but sEvera l of them contained
 ref erences to this perception. For example) a State Department memo-
randum) dated 24 August; ack1'1o\dedged a "ris e and change in the nature
of infiltration in recent Iflonths . " 80/ I.8.ter analyses confirmed that
increas e s had taken place) but the pr ecise period "\orhen they began \-ras
not identified. 81/ Hence ) unless there Here other int ell igence data
to confirm them) any naplications regarding North Vietnamese policy deci -
sions '{ere largely spe culative.

 23 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECREI' - Sensi.t ive

 Po ss ibly influencing the judgments of August vas the fact that
increased communist movement of men and supplies to the South vas
expected) resulting in part from a DIA assessment (7 August) of the
most likely Dm- r eact ions to the Tonkin repr~ sals . 82/ Moreover) the
State Department ' s analysis of next courses of action in Southeast Asia
had made "clear evidence of greatly increased infiltration from the
N?rth" an expl icit condition for any policy judgment that "systemat ic
military action against DRV" vas requir~d during the balance of 1964 . 83/
And leading officials from several agencies. were beginning to fee l that
such action might be inevitab l e .

 The combined effects of the signs of increas ed VC infiltration and
of continuing upheaval in Saigon caused great concern in Washington .
The central perception vas one of impending chaos and possible failure
i n South Vietnam . Among severa l agencies) the emerging mood vas that
some kind of action ,vas urgently needed - - even if it had the effect merely
of improving the U.S . image prior to pulling out . I t vas this mood that
preva iled as the period of "paus e " drev to a close .

 24

 TOP SECRET - Sens itive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensit i ve

 IV

 NEXT COURSES OF ACT ION

 By early September a genera l consensus had developed among high-
 l evel Administrat i on officials that some form of addi tional and con-
 tinuous pressure should be exerted against North Vietnam . Though Laos
 was r elat i vely stabilized) the situation there Ims recognized as dependent
 ultimately on the degree of success ach i eved in solving the problems of
 Vietnam . Pacification efforts withi n South Vietnam were regarded as
 i nsufficient by themsel ves to reverse the deter iorating trends in that
 country . As a r esult) offic i a l s from both civilian and military agenc i es
 were anxious to resume and to extend the program of military actions against
 communi st forces outside its borders .

 STRATEGY MEETING IN SEPTEMBER

 How to go about this was a problem of great concern to top - level
 officials ( the PreS i dent) Secretary Rusk) Secretary McNamara ) General
 Wheeler) Ambassador Taylor) CIA Director McCone ) as they assembled in
 Washington on 7 September . The main purpose of the meeting was to dis -
 cuss with Ambassador Taylor future courses of U. S . and GVN action )
 particularly as related to the liaplications of the r ecent political up-
 hea val i n Saigon .

 The alternatives present ed for discussion were based large ly on
 r esponses to the tentative analysis circulated by the State Department
 in mid- August . Replies from CINCPAC and the Saigon and Vi entiane embass i es
 had been circulated) and they provided the basis for a number of questions
 which Ambassador Taylor ' s party was asked to be ready to di s cuss . 84/ JCS
 reactions to the analysis and to the earlier r eplies were submitted to the
 Secretary of Defense Hith the specifi c intent that they be cons idered at
 the meeting and presumably "Tere passed to other participating agencies . 85/
 OSD/I SA views "Tere prepared by Assistant Secretary McNaughton on 3 September
 and Here known at least to Assistant Secreta ry of State Bundy. 86/

 J ust prior to the meeting) the J CS urged that General Wheeler ) their
 Cha i rman) propose a course of action involving air strikes aga inst targets
 i n North Vietnam appear ing on the JCS-approved) 94 - target list . 90/ This
 kind of action had been recommended before - - most r ecently on 2~August )
 i n response to the Department of State analysis -- as a means of "destroying
 the DRV Ivill and capabilities ) as necessary) to continue to support the
 i nsurgencies in South Vietnam and Laos . " What made this proposal particu-
 larly significant "IoTas that it called for deliberate attempts to provoke the
 DRV into taking actions "IoThich could then be ansHered by a systematic U.S .
 air campaign . According to the JCS scheme ) the campa i gn ilwould b e continuous
 and in ascending severity)" "IoTith its tempo and int ens ity varied as required
 by enemy reactions . Targets Hou~d eventually include airfields ) bridges )
 railroads ) military installations) industrial facilities and armed route
 r econnaissance along the IDC' s . The JCS argued that such actions Here nOVT
 "essential to prevent a complete collapse of the U.S. position in the
.' Republic of Vietnm"fl and Southeast AsiC) ) " because "continuation of present
 or foreseeable programs Limited to the RVN \lill not produce the desired

 · 25 TOP. SECRET - Se nsitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

// '7
1I
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 r esult ." 88/ Quite similar language also appeared i n the 26 August
 memorandum .

 Whether or not or in ivhat form General Wheeler presented this pro-
 posal to the assembled officials on 7 September is not indicated i n the
 docwnentary sources available . The JCS belief in the necessity of bomb ing
 North Vietnam was discussed; as was some of their rationale . Made explicit;
 for example; was their argument that there was no reason to delay the
 bombing since (in their vie,., ) the situation in South Vietnam would only
 become worse . 89/ That the idea of deliberately provoking a DRV reaction
 was discussed in some form is indicated in a record of the consensus arrived
 at i n the discussions. 90/ However; the JCS were not the only offic i a l s
 who favored such an idea.- Assistant Secretary McNaughton ' s "Plan of Action "
 (3 September 1964 ) also called for actions that "should be likely at some
 point to provoke a military DRV r esponse ." The latter; in turn; "should be
 likely to provide good grounds for us to escalat e if we Hished ." 91/

 The principal confe reees d i d not beli eve that deliberatel y provocative
 actions should be undertaken "in the immediate future while the GVN is still
 struggling to its feet ." HO'iveve r; they apparently reached a consensus
 that they might reconLrnendsuch actions -- "depending on GVN progress and
 Communist reaction i n the meantime " - - by early October . 92/

 The reasons cit ed for their opposition to provocative acts were a ls o
 applied in r e jecting proposals for an immediate bombing campa ign . The
 GVN i-TaS expected to be too \-Teak for the United States to assume the "delib -
 erate risks of escalation that would involve a major role for; or threat
 to; South Vietnam. II 93/ In the discussion ; Mr . McCone observed that
 undertaking a sustained att ack on the DRV Hould be very dangerous; due to
 the Heakness and unpredictability of the polit i cal base in South Vietnam .
 Secretary Rusk stated the vieH that every means short of bombing must be
 exhausted . Secretary McNamara affirmed his understanding that IIwe are not
 acting more strongly because there is a clear hope of strengthening the
 GVN ." But he I·Tent on to urge that the i-TaY be kept open for stronger actions
 even if the GVN did not improve or in the event the ,mr "Tere wi dened by
 the commun i sts . It is int erest ing to note that the President asked speci-
 fically; IICan i-Te rea.lly strengthen the GVN?" 94/

 Even though the prinCipals did not a cc ept the JCS proposal and appar-
 ently did not agree vrith their assessment of the chances for improvement
 in South Vietnam; they did indicate accord Hith the JCS sense of the
 gravity of the U.S. predicament . In response to Gener al vmeeler ' s state-
 ments that lIif the Uni.ted Sta.tes loses in South Vietnam; it Hill lose a.ll
 of Southeast A[~ ta " and that its positi0D thrr'JUghout a ll of Asia i-Tould be
 damaged; both McCone and Rusk ind icat ed agreement . Ambassador Taylor
 . stated theviei-T that the United States could not afford to let Ho Chi Minh
 win in South Vietnam . Secreta ry Rusk added the considerat ion that the
 whole Horld doubted our a~ility to pull i t off . 95/

 26 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 The meeting resulted in consensus among the principals on certain
 cours es of prompt action to put additional pressure on North Vietnam .
 The following measures were recommended to the President for his decision :

 "1. U. S . naval patrols in the Gulf of Tonkin should be
 resumed immediately ( about September 12). They should operate
 i nitially beyond the 12- mile limit and be cl early di ssociated
 from 34A maritime operations ....

 112. 34A operations by the GVN should be resumed immediately
 t hereafter ( next week) . The maritime operations are by far the
 most important ....

 11 3 . Limited GVN air and ground operations into the corridor
 areas of Laos should be undertaken in the near future) together
 with Lao air strikes as soon as we can get Souvanna ' s permiss i on .
 These operations will have only limited effect , however .

 IIl~. We should be prepared to respond on a t it- for -tat basis
 again st the DRV L8gainst specific and related targ et~7 in the event
 of any attack on U.S. units or any spec i al DRV/VC action against SVN. 1I96/

The purposes for these measures were conc eived as : (1) "to assist morale
in SVN)" ( 2 ) to "show the Communists vre still mean business, " and (3)"t o
keep the risks Imr and under our control at each stage . II

 IMPL&~ENTING ACTIONS

 These recommendations ( and presumably the purposes ) were approved
by the PreSident and became the basis for a program of limited ( though
 not continuous ) pressures exerted against North Vietnam from mid- September
 to mid-December 1964. On 10 September) the White House is sued a National
 Secur ity Action Memorandum vhich authorized immedi ate resumption of t he
DE SOTO Patrols and prompt discussions vith the Government of Laos to
develop plans for cross - border operations . It also authorized r esumpt ion
of 34A operations folloving completion of the DE SOTO Patrol, vlith the
additional guidance that IIwe should have the GVN ready to admit that they
are taking place and to justify and legitimize them on the basis of the
facts of VC infiltration by sea ." 97/ It is significant that although
this order) in effect ) authorized the init iation of Phase III (October
through December ) of the covert operations under OPLAN 34A) it specified
contrary to the provisions of Phase III that "we should not consider air
strikes under '34A for the present. "

 Naval Operations . The resumption of naval patrol and covert
maritime operations off the coast of North Vietnam did not proceed exactly
as planned . The destroyers U.S.S. Morton and U.S.S. Edwards embarked on
the third DE saro Patrol on 12 September . On the night of the 18th) vrhile
on a southeasterly heading, the ships made a surface radar contact vrhich
vTaS observed to split into tvro images, increase speed and clos e rapidly .

 27 TOP SECRET - Sensiti ve
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Approximately 40 minutes after first contact and after firing a varning
 shot) Morton and Edvards opened fire) both scorLng hits . Subsequently)
 on tvo separate occasions after the target images had disappeared from
 the radar) nev ~ontacts appeared and vere fired on at a range of approxi-
 mately 8)500 yards) hits again being indicated for both vessels . In all)
 Morton fired 56 five-inch and 128 three-inch rounds; Edvards fired 152
 five-inch and 6 three-inch rounds . There vere no rounds or torpedoes
 report ed .coming from the radar contacts . 98/ Later on the 18th ( Washington
 time)) Pres i dent Johnson suspended the DESOTO Patrols; they vrere not to
 be resumed until February 1965 .

 In the aftermath of the third destroyer incident in the Tonkin
 Gulf) COvert GVN maritime operations vere not resumed until October .
 President Johnson authorized reactivation of this program on the 4th) under
 very tight controls. 99/ The proposed schedule of maritime operations had
 t~be submitted at the-beginning of each month for approval. Each opera -
 tlon vas approved in advance by OSD (Mr . Vance)) State (Mr . L. Thompson
 or Mr . Forrestal) and the White House (Mr . McGeorge Bundy) . 100/ During
 October) these included tvo probes) an attempted junk capture ) and ship -
 to-shore bombardment of North Vietnamese radar sites . Later) they included
 undenvat er demolition team assaults o~ bridges along coastal LOCfs . Unlike
 the DE SOTO Patrols ) these Qnacknovledged operations continued throughout
 the year .

 . Actions in Laos . Operations in the Laotian Panhandle took shape
 vlth fe,·re r unpredictable developments. On 11 September) r epresentat ives
 of the. U.S. missions in Laos Thailand and Vietnam met in Saigon to dis -
 )

 cuss llaplementation of th e NSAM 314 provisions for cross - border air and
 ground operations. Regarding air operations) they agreed that if their
 primary objective vas military in nature) ff sharp) heavyff and concentrated
 attacks would be needed and that U. S . and/or VNAF/FABMGATE forces ,-TQuld be
 r equired . If their impact ioTaS intended to be primarily psychological
 ( presumably affecting both communists and the GVN)) they believed that the
 01?erations could be more videly spac ed) relying primarily on Laotian T- 28s
 vlth some U. S. strikes on harde:!' targets. In viev of Souvanna Phouma f s
 report ed oPposition to VNAF strikes in the Panhandle ) the representatives
 conceded that the slOl-rer paced operation vith RIAF aircraft offered the
 best .:~urse . ~/ Hmvever) they savr a joint Lao) Thai) R~N and U:S .
. opera~lon as particularly desirable) vere it not for the tlille requlred
 to arrange it. As one means of symbolizing four pover support for the
 operation) they recommended that the Thai Government be approached r egarding
 use of the Kor~t base by participating U. S. aircraft . 102/

 Regarding.cross-border ground operations) the representatives
agreed that the southern and central Panhandle offered terrain and targets
consistent vrith the available GVN assets . Although it vas recognized that
accompanying U.S . advisors might be necessary to assure the success of the
operations) the planners acceded to Vientiane fs objections that such a

 28 TOP SECRET Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 flagrant violation of the Geneva Accords would endanger the credibility
 of our political stance in Laos . 103/ Subsequent to the meeting) the
 Vientiane Embassy removed a reservation expressed earlier and cleared
 the way for company- size penetrations of up to 20 km along Route 9) near
 Tchepone . 104/ At the confe r ence this operation was considered of high
 priority with respect to infiltration traffic into South Vietnam .

 The mission representatives agreed that) once the operations
b egan) they sho1.J~d not be acknmrledged publicly . In effect ) t hen) they
would supplement the other covert pressures being exerted aga i nst North
Vietnam . Moreover) while the Lao Government ,rould of course know about
the ope rations of their T-28s) Souvanna was not to be informed of the
GVN/U.S . op erations . The unacknowledged nature of these operations would
thus be easier to maintain . Accordingly) the r epresentatives r ecommended
to Washington that Vientiane be authorized to approach the Laotian Govern-
ment r egard ing initiation of T-28 operations . On the other hand) the
Administration was asked to approve ground operations in three specified
areas of the Panhandle . 105/

 Over two weeks passed before these recommendat i ons were acted on .
In the meantime) the JCS also submitted proposals for implementing NSfu~ 314 )
r equesting immediate authority to implement air operations in the Panhandle.
Endorsing the main theme of the mj.ssion representatives ) they called for
combined action by RLAF '1'- 28s and U.S. aircraft which would provide "sup_
pres sive fire " and attack heavily defended bridges . The JCS also sought
authority to initiate GVN ground intelligence collection and target r econ-
naissance patrols in the Laotian corridor. 106/

 On 6 October, authority was given the Vientiane Embassy to urge
the Laotian Government to b egin T-28 air strikes "as soon as possible ."
The RLAF targets were to be selected from a previously coordinated 22 -
target l ist) a f ew of which were designed for U.S. YANKEE TEAM strikes )
but they were to exclude Mu Gia Pass . The latter mission ,ras kno,rn to
require U.S. escort and suppressive fire, and a decision on whether to
authorize such U. S . operations had not yet been made in l"ashington . More -
over ) neither had the Admj.nistration authorized YANKEE TEAM strike missions
aga inst the t01.J~her Panhandle targets . lOTI .

 Administ rat ion rationale on the issue of U.S. participation i n
the Panhandle air strikes is not clear from the sources availabl e to this
,Triter. Contemporary int elligenc e estimates indicated the commun ist
r esponses ,,rere likely to be limit ed to (1) increases in antiaircraft deploy-
ments in the area) ( 2 ) propaganda attacks and (3) possible sabotage of U, S '/
GVN supporting bases . 108/ Hmrever ) Washington I S vievl])oint on another
Laotian request for a ir support may be significant . With respect to air
strikes against ta rgets along Route T) in support of the RLG campaign to
consolidate its holdings vest of the Plaine des Jarres ) Administration
rationa le ,.las as follmTs :

 "Since we wish to avoid the llrrpression that \{e are
 taking /the7 first step in escalatio~ ) 'de [j3.rr::..7 inclined

 . 29 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 303
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 /t07 defer decision on Route 7 strikes QDtil we have strong
 evidence /Of7 Hanoi's preparation for new attack in /the
 Plaine des Jarres7) some of \oThich might come from RIAF opera -
 tions over the Route . " 109/

 On 13 October, one day before the initial RLAF attacks) U.S . o
 strikes were again requested on four defended targets near Nape and
 Tchepone . They were to accompany T- 28 strikes on commlli~ist military
 installations and supply points in the northern part of the Panhandle. 110/
 The significance of these operations) and U. S . participation in them) was
 indicated a fel-1 days earlier in another meeting among representatives of
 the three missions. It was reported at this tLme that it was probable
 "that ARVN '{ill be uIlable /t07 afford detach..ment /Of7 any significant
 ground capability for /the-r8otian7 Corridor in /the; foreseeable future ."
 Therefore) air operations ,-TOuld offer the only dependable means of com-
 batting VC infiltration through laos . The participants recorded "unanimous
 agreement that U.S. participation in air operatOions in Fh:=? corridor is
 essential if such operations are to have desired military and psychological
 impact." Emphasizing that the initiative for these operations came from
 the United States Government) they pointed out that failure to participate
 could result in loss of contOrol over them and could even jeopardize their
 continuation. At minimum the group recommended that U. S. aircraft fly
 CAP ( combat air patrol ) over the RLAF aircraft) as requested by the
 laotian Government and as permitted by a "relatively minor extension "
 of eXisting U.S . rules of engagement . 111/

 CAP missions were approved) but U.S . air strikes against com-
 munist LOCs in the laotian Panhandle were not authorized until much later
 in the year . 112/ Cross-border ground operations did not receive auth-
 orization at any time during the period covered in this study .

 l';'EGOTL4TING POSTURE HE LAOS

 One reason for the delay in requesting laotian air strikes in the
 Panhandle was the need to a,·rait the uncertain outcome of discussions in
 Paris among leaders of the three laotian political factions . Since 27 August)
 when they first met) the three Princes (Souvanna PhoQma) Souphanouvang)
 and Boun Oum) had reached an impasse on conditions to accompany a cease-
 fire . Souvanna PhoQma insisted on communist withdrawal from positions
 \Olon in the May offensive and had proposed neutralization of the Plaine des
 Jarres under I.C.C. supervision . 113/ On 15 September) when it seemed
 that further negotiations had become fruitless) Prince Souphanouvang
 offered to withdraH cOll1..munist forces from the Plaine in return for dis -
 cussions l eading to a new 14-Nation Conference . The following day) Souvanna
 countered ,{ith a proposal that a cease-fire begin on 1 October and attempted
. to verify and make more expljocit the mutual concessions . The pro- coIlLmunist
 leader balked over stipulated
 o guarantees) such as I.C.C. supervision) that
 pro-communist forces 1-rould in fact 'i{ithdravr and be replaced by neutralists .
 HOHever) on the 21st) the leaders arrived at agreement for continued meetings
 at the ministerial level) based on an agenda ':lhich included a cease - fire

 30
 TOP SECRET - Se nsHive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

and prelLminary conditions for reconvening a C~neva conference . 114/

 The narrmr margin by which the cease - fire agreement failed: to come
about dramatized the delicate nature of the Administration ' s diplomatic
position in laos. Having agreed to support the tripartite discussions
prior to the Tonkin Gulf i ncidents and prior to the political upheaval
i n Saigon) it felt constrained to go along vlith them -- particularly
if they served to forestall movement toward a Geneva-type negotiation .
However) a laotian cease-fire was not compatible vith current perceptions
of U. So interest even if i t resulted in communist \·rithdrawal from the
Plaine des Jarres . Ambassador Unger pointed out the contradictory nature
of our position in his reply to the State Department ' s mid- August analys i s
of future U.S. courses of action . 115/ Ambassador Taylor emphasized the
need to maintain the option of operations in the Panhandle in his reply
also) and the September discussions in Ivashington confirmed that his view
was shared by most of the President's advisors . One could conclude that
the Unit ed States was fortunate that Prince Souphanouvang was so intransi-
gent on the issue of I.C.C. sunervision. It is also possible that in
i nSisting on this provision to"" the l eftist prince Souvanna Phouma "knew
his manit -- perhaps reflecting perceptive American advice .

 Certainly the course of the tripartite discussions followed a
pattern commensurate \-lith prior U.S. calculation . In an assessment of
future courses of action used as the basis for the policy analysis cabled
to affected interested embassies and CINCPAC by the State Department)
Assistant Secretary Bundy characterized U.S. strategy with the statement)
"we wouId wlsh
 ' to slmr dOvTn any progress tOlVard a con f erence .... It He th en
referred to a specific negotiating position proposed by AJnbassador Unger
( a proposal for tripartite administration of the Plaine des Jarres ) as
"a useful delaying gambit ." 116/ Significantly) this' proposal was
advanced at Paris by Souvanna Phouma on 1 September -- illustrating the fact
that Souvanna "\-Tas carefully advised by U. S . diplomats both prior to and
during the Paris meetings . 117/ Other features of Souvanna ' s negotiating
posture which apparently were encouraged as likely to have the effect of
drawing out the discussions vTere insistence on cow_munist acceptance of
(1 ) SOUVaQDa ' S political status as Premier and ( 2) lmhampered operations
by the loC.C. 118/ It will be recalled that the latter point was the
issue on IVhich progress tm18rd a cease - fire became stalled .

 It i s important to note here that the State Department recognized
that Souvanna Phouma might "\-Tell act on his own and feel compelled to
move toward a conference) even at the price of a cease-fire. I n such
an event, our position vTaS to be dependent on conditions in South Vietnam:

 "If the timing of the laos Conference) in relation to
 the degree of pressures Ive had then set in motion against the
 DRV) was such :that our attending or accepting the conference
 wou~d have major morale drawbacks in South Viet - Nam) \-le might
 well have to refuse to attend ourselves and to accept the dis -
 advantage of having no direct participation . In the last analysis}
 GVN morale would have to be the deciding factor ." 119/

 . 31 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 ",,~~:::
l- ...............

 TOP SECREr - Sensitive

 I t i s apparent from thi s and other documents that GVN stab ility and
 morale were perceived by the Administration as the principal pacing
 elements for Southeast Asian policy in the post - Tonkin period .

 ANTICIPATlON OF WIDER ACTION

 . Through most of the strategy discussions of early autumn) South
 Vletnam was the main focus of attent i on . However) 'I-iith i ncreasing fre -
 quency i ts political and military conditions "rere referred to in a ne"T
 way . More and more it was being evaluated in terms of its suit ab ility
 as a base for wider action . Ambassador Taylor cautioned that "we should
 ~ot get involved militarily with North Vietnam and poss i bly "Tith Red China
 If our base in South Viet Nam i s insecure and Khanh ! s army i s tied down
 everywhere by the VC insurgency ." 120/ At the September meeting) Mr .
 McCone criticized the actions recommended by the JCS as being very dangerous
 because of the current weakness of the GVN base . On 23 Septemb er) ~Talt
 Rostow "Trote to Ambassador Taylor of the need for bui lding a more viable
 political system in South Vietnam "which vill provide us "Tith an adequate
 base for Ivhat we may l ater have to do ." 121/

 General Scheme . The kind of operations for which "an adequate
 base" was increas i ngly considered essential is evident in a number of
 str~t:gy discussions of the period . Moreover) it i s clear that several
 ~fflclals shared the expectation that these operations would begin early
 In the new year . I t "Till be recalled that the series of actions recom-
 mended to President Johnson by his top advisors at the end of May -- most
 of "Thich had been completed Ivithin a fe"T days of the Tonkin Gulb incidents
 were intended to culminat e)
 ,
 if necessary
 )
 in a strike against North Vietnam
 accompanied by an active diplomatic offensive that i ncluded agreement to a
 negot i ated settlement . 122/ Further) Phas e I II of the approved contingency
 OPLAN 37-64) developed in response to NSAM 288) provided for the applicat i on
 of overt graduated pressures against North Vietnam -- primarily a ir strikes .
 T~ese were to be carried out by the GVN) but I'Thich "Tould also include opera -
 tlons by U.S. air and naval forces . Deployments of additional forces to
 Southeast Asia in early summer and i n the immediate aftermath of the Tonkin
 Gulf incidents were based on force requirements ident ified to support this
 plan . Its perceived significance during the post -Tonkin period vras indi-
 cated When Ambassador Taylor reported that the objectives of the U. S .
 Mission in Saigon included preparation to implement OPJ..AN 37- 64 "wi th opti-
 mum r eadiness by January 1) 1965 ." 123/

 Subsequent strategy discuss ions r eflected the extent to whic h
 'the nelV y ea r was antiCipated as the occasion for beginning overt military
 operations aga:'..nst North Vietnam . Both the '3tate Department I s mid- August
 strategy analysis and the vorking paper on "Thich it ,\·ras based indicated
 'that the "limited pressures " ( subs~guently authorized by NSAM 314) '\oTould
 extend "tentatively through December ." Hmrever) t hese actions "rereper-
 ceived as "foreshadoHing systematic military action against the DRV) " which
 "we might at some point conclude ... '\Ias required . ", ( Noteivorthy is the point
 of vie'd that these actions mj_ght be ordered "e i ther because of incidents
 arising from {the l imited pressure~7 ~r because of deterioration in the

 .32 TOP SECRET - Sensit i ve
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Proj ect Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 201 1

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 situation in South Vietnam) particularly if there were to be cl ear evi-
 dence of greatly increas ed infiltration from the north .") Should
 specific provocations not occur) a contingency target date of l, January
 1965 ~-ras indicated : 124/

 " ... in (the7 absence of such major ne\ol developments
 /incidents or-increased infiltration7) \ole should probably
 be thinking of a contingency date for planning purposes ) as
 suggested by Ambassador Taylor) of 1 January 1965 ." 125/

 The working paper elaborated more fully than the cab l e the k i nd
 of preliminary actions considered necessary to set the stage . Some of
 t his elaboration Has provided in suggested language changes penciled-in by
 OSD prior to an inter- agency meeting called to discuss its contents . Refer-
 r ing to air strikes in the Panhandle (proposed to begin in September ) ) a
 suggested OSD addition stated : "The strikes should probably be timed and
 plotted on the map to bring them to the borders of North Vietnam at the
 end of Decemb er ." The main body of the text suggested that the January
 operations include "action against infj.ltration routes and facilities " as
 "probably the best opening gambit. " I t explained that · "the family of
 i nfiltration- related targets starts 1-rith clear military insta l lations
 near the borders ;and7 can be extended almost at 1-rill northward ." The
 "next upward moveTr ~{as suggested to include action against IImilitary- related
 targets) II such. as "POL installations and the mj.ning of Haiphong Harbor " and
 "key bridges and railroads ." The purpose perceived for these operations
 was "to inflict progress ive damage- that would have a meaningful cumulative
 effect ." 126/

 Ambassador Taylor viewed 1 January 1965 as a "target D- Day " before
which the U. S. Mission and the GVN should develop "a PQsture of maximum
readiness for a deliberate escalat ion of pressure against North Viet Nam ."
The nature of this escalation was perceived as "a carefully orchestrated
bombing attack on NVN) directed primarily at infiltration and other mili -
t ary targets . " I t iwuld consist of

 "u.s. r econnaissance planes ) VN..4F/ FARMGATE air-
 craft against those targets 'tThich could be attacked
 safely in sp i te of the pres ence of the MIGs ) and addi-
 tional U.S . combat aircraft if necessary for the effective
 execution of the bombing programs . "

 He qualified this assessment with the observation) "We must always recog-
 nize) hmrever) that events may force (the7 U.S . to advance D- Day to a
 considerably e[1.rlier date , " The reason for t,his qualification was Taylor ' s
 concern that the GVN might not be able to sustain its authority until
. January . Thus) in order to "avoid the possible consequences of a collapse
 of national morale" it would be necessary) he felt) "to open the campaign
 against the DRV without delay . " The nature of the air campaign "would be
 essentially the same " as under the January scheme; except that it 1-rould
 rely "almost exclusively on U.S. military means ." 121/

 . 33 TOP SECRl']T - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 20 11

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Similar assessments of timing in relat i on to more vigorous .
military action against North Vietnam were made in OSD/ ISA . The immed-
i ate measures proposed in McNaughton ' s draft "Plan of Action for South
Vi etnam" (3 SeI-tembe r ) were conceived not on::Ly as means to provoke North
Vietnam into respons es justifying U. S . punitive actions. They were also
believed to make possible the postponement "probably until November or
December " of a decision regarding the more seri ous escalation . In
McNaughton ' s terminology the latter were r eferr ed to as "a Crescendo of
GVN- U. S . military actions against the DRV) " but they i ncluded a vari ety
of possibilities :

 "The escalating actions might be naval pressures
 or mining of harborsj or they might be made up of air
 strill:es against North Vietnam moving from southern to
 northern targets ) from targets associated with infiltration
 and by- then- disclosed DRV- VC radio com~and nets to targets
 of mi litary then industria l importance) and from missions
 which could be handled by the VNAF alone to those . . rhich
 c ould be carried out only by the U. S ." 128/

It i s clear ) howeve r) that what was contemplated was a pattern of gradu-
ally mOLmting pressures inte nded to impress the DRV with the increasing
gravity of its situation .

 Records of the September conference do not indicate that a
 decision was made relative to an explicit January contingency date . In
.several respects they do make clear that the possibility of escalation
 at the end of the' year . . ras considered . For example) hope was expressed
 that the GVN would grOl-r stronger over the following two to three months
 by implication ) strong enough to permit "major deliberate risks of
 escalation" or "deliberately provocative " U. S . actions . 129/ Directly
 r elated to this hope was the intention of having the GVN admit publicly
 to its conduct of maritime operations against North Vietnamese coastal
 insta11ations and communications . The aim Ylas "to justify and legitimize
 them on the basis of the facts of VC infi1tration by sea ." 130/ It \-las
 believed that this step would be useful in establishing a climate of
 opinion more receptive to expanded ( air ) operations against North Vi etnam
when they should become necessary . 131/

 Reservations . By October 1961f) therefore ) there vTaS a genera1
beli ef among the President ' s top advisors that it would probably be
necessary eventually to subject North Vietnam to overt military pressure .
Many . . rere convinc ed ) hOI-rever reluctantly). thl.t it would not be possible
to obtain an effective solution to the problem of DRV sponsorship of the
insurgency in South Vietnam or a permanent solution to the political strife -
in laos vTithout such direct pre ssure on the instigator of these problems .
Significantly) these views were dissimilar in character to the interest
in graduated pressures shOim in the Spring and to the determination "to
use force if nec essary " urged on the Pres j.dent at the end of May . For

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND P roject Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

most of the principal advisors , the earlier views had been c l early
c ontingent upon a major reversal-- principally in Laos -- and had been
advanced Hith the apparent assumption that military act i ons hopef~y
would not be required . Nmr , howeve r , the i r v iews ver e advanced" wi th
a sense that sl:ch actions were inevitable . lVloreover, they were advanced
despite the perspective afforded by a number of cri t i cal eval uat i ons of
t he use of military pressure . I n add i t i on to the studies made du r i ng
t he f i rst half of 1964, all of the principal advisory agencies had revieved
a detailed critique of the so- called IIRostovr thesis " j ust pri or to the
September strategy conference .

 The c r itique was accompl ished in OSD/ISA "rith i nputs and c oordi na -
t ion from State rs Policy Planning Council . The assigned task was to make
"a t horough ana l ysis of and report on the Rostm-r thesis that covert
a ggression justifies and must be fought by attacks on the source of t he
a ggression ." Copies were distributed to the Washington rec i pients of the
Rostow paper , i ncluding the Whi te House , Department of State , Department
of Defense , the JCS and each of t he services .

 In the i r summary analysis of the thes i s the crit iquer s emphas i zed
 t wo var i ables Ivhich would determine its utility : (1 ) the extent of the
 c omrai tment of the nation furnishing external support and ( 2 ) the extent
 to which the insurgency affected vital U. S . i nterests . With r egard to
 t he former variable , they described "three fundamental condit i ons" "rhich
would have to exist to achieve success " in cases where the external opponent
 i s committed to the extent of the North Vietnamese ." The opponents lvould
have to be persuaded that : ( 1) the United States "TaS "tak i ng limited
act i ons to achieve limi ted ob j ectives; " ( 2 ) "the commitment of the mil i tary
p m-rer of the United States to the limited objective i s a total commitment - -
a s total as our commitment to get the missiles out of Cuba i n October 1962;"
 ( 3) the United States has " established a suff i cient consensus to see
t hrough this course of action both at home and on the worl d scene . " Fur-
t her, unl ess such an opponent were so persuaded, "the approach might wel l
f ail to be effective short of a major U. S . military i nvolvement ." 132/

 Essential to creating the necessary conviction of U. S . i ntent
on the part of the oppos i ng govermnent , the anal ys i s argued, vas a finn
image that the President and the U. S . public "rere i n agreement that v i tal
national interests Ivere at stake . Unless vital i nterests "rere c learly
at s t ake ,

 tithe Ih"'lited military actions envisaged would
 not onl y involve much greater political costs at home and
 abroaC1.... but there would be m11ch grc:ater r isk that the
 progral'll Iwuld not be effective except at high levels of
 i nvolvement and risk, and that i t might be a l lowed to fa 11
 s hort of such levels ."

In the analysts t vie 1.'T ; "this requirement of vital. i nterest "Tould sharpl y
l imit the applicat ion of the thes is " among the "TOrl o. areas currently
threatened . It observed that "Laos- VietnGm seems the only one in \-Thicl!
a strong, l;mt not necessarily con clusiVe , cas e can be made that this
condition holds ." 133/

 , 35 TOP SECRET -· Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

.r"' rt
•.J (
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Assuming that vital U.S. interests I'Tere assessed as being
 at stake by an Administration in some unspecified case) the cr~tiquers
 went on to outline some additional "c onditions for success ." First ,
 an Administratlon would have to present a sO~.id case to the U.S.
 Congress and public and to our allies that the external support pro-
 vided by the target nation was instrumental i n sustaining the insurgency .
 In the interest of making its public case conclusive) "the U. S. would
 have to be prepared to expose intelligence data ." Second) it would have
 to ident ify enemy targets "such that limited attacks and the threat of
 further attacks would bring great pressure on him to comply ." Th ird )
 t he U. S. Government would have to be able to communicate its case to
 the target nation "including the high degree of U.S. commitment and the
 l imited nature of our objective. " This ,vould i nvolve controlling both
 the U.S. and its ally ! s actions "t o convey limited objectives) minimizing
 incentives to comply ." Finally) it would have to be capable of deter-
 mining enemy compliance with our demands . 134/

 The critiquers ! analysis included an assessment of the costs
 and risks to be incurred in applying the thesis and cautioned against
 its adoption as a general declaratory policy :

 "Given present attitudes ) application of the
 RostOlv approach risks domestic and internat ional oppos i-
 tion ranging from anxiety and protest to condemnat ion)
 efforts to d is associate from U.S. policies or alliances)
 or even strong cOlli~t e rm easures . ...

 IICurrently) then) it i s the RostOlv approach) rather
 than the measures it counters that would be seen generally
 as an "unstabilizing " change in the rules of the game ) an
 escalation of conflict) an increasing of shared) interna-
 tional risks) and quite possibly) as an open aggression
 demanding conderrLDation ... particularly in general terms or
 i n abstraction from a specific) lloc~ediately challenging
 situation .

 "On the other hand) the controlled) limited mili-
 tary actions implied in the RostovT approach vTould be far
 more acceptable to the extent that they Ivere seen to
 follOl-T from Presidential conviction of vital national
 nec ess ity in a specific cont ext ) and even more to the
 extent that this conviction vrere shared by Congress and the
 U. S •.:;rublic.

 "An attempt to l egitimize such actions in general
 t erms ) and in advance of an emergency situation) would
 not only be likely to fail ) but. might well evoke public
 expressions of domestic and allied oPPQs.it i on and denunci -
 ations ) vlarnings) counterthreats and binding commitments

 36 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 from opponents that would make it much more difficult
 for the President to contemplate this approach when
 an occasion actually arose .... "

They went on to point out that accepting the ROStOI-T thesis as a principle
of U. S. declaratory policy would require making it public before applying
it. The need to be assured of "C ongressj.onal and other public support
in carrying through the thesis in a given case" would require this.
Therefore ) the analysts concluded) "It would be exceedingly unwise to
make the Rostow thesis a declaratory policy unless the U. S. were prepared
to act on it" - - but then only if we were assured of the public commit -
ment and the capability to achieve success . 135/

 With regard to the applicability of the thesis to the contemporary
situation in Southeast Asia) the critiquers summarized their viel{s as
follows :

 " ... the situation in Vietnam and laos is the only
 one in I-lhich a strong case can be made that the two major
 indications for the Rostow approach are made: the ineffective-
 ness of alternatives and vital U.S. interests . Even in this
 case the degee of UoS . interest) the degree and acceptability
 of the risks) and the potential effectiveness of this approach
 are subject to question. In particular) the likelihood and
 the political costs of failure of the approach) and the
 Eressures for U.S. escalation if early moves should fail)
 require serious examination ." 136/

 Dll'FERING AGENCY POLICY vm.,rs

 In describing the evolut ion of Administration strategy this account
has previously emphasized the points of general agreement among the
President ' s advisors . Its purpose has been to describe the existence and
sense of a policy consensus that had emerged by mid-October . Hmvever)
signlflcant differences of opinion existed among the various advisory
agencies regarding ,vhat actions should be taken and how soon they should
be initiated . Thesedifferences can be discerned I-Jith respect to five
is sues : (1) whether and how soon the GVN maritime operations should be
acknowledged; (2) the desirability of tit - for-tat reprisals; (3) how
best to cope with enemy reactions to increased pressures on the DRV;
(4 ) the degree of GVN/U.S. readiness required before increasing the
pressures; and .( 5) the relationship perceived between incr eased pressures
and negotiatiors .

 JCS vie';.Ts . Senior military officials differed among themselves
on the first three issues . CINCPAC apparently perceived difficulties
resulting from official acknmvledgements of GVN maritime operations and
suggested that press leaks would achieve the desired effects on SVN morale .
General ifueeler saw official acknmTledgement as a means to legitii11ize the

 37 TOP SECREr - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

operations and thereby enable their scope and effectiveness to be
increased. However) he was not supported by the service chiefs . They
opposed surfacing the GVN operations until they could become associated
with the DE SOTO Patrols "or until the United States is prepared openly
to support MAROPS militarily . " 137/ All of these officials agreed that
it was necessary to undertake reprisals for a variety of host ile VC or
DRV actions . In particular they wanted U.S . responses to be greater
in degree) not necessarily matching in kind) than the provocations .
Where they came to differ was on the desirability of deliberately pro-
voking DRV actions to which we could then respond . After the September
White House meeting only the Air Force Chief of Staff and the Marine
Commandant favored this approach . 138/

 Differences "Tith respect to preparation for coping with enemy
reactions to harsher pressures centered around the i ssue of cow~itting
greater numbers of U.S. ground forces to South Vietnam . CINCPAC) sup-
porting General Westmoreland's request) urged provision for deployment
of Marine and Army units to provide security for U. S . /GVN operating
ba ses . The JCS disagreed and disapproved a request to make such adjust -
ments in OPLAN 37-64) on grounds that since VC capabilities were still
questionable it was preferable not to precommit U.S. forces in the manner
urged. At i ssue concurrently was an Air Force proposal to reduce the
number of ground forces provided for in the event of a large scaie DRV/
CHICOM intervention in Southeast Asia and to rely more heavily on tactical
air capabilities . The other chiefs disagreed) but the controversy con-
cerning the relative emphasis on ground and air forces for the defense of
Southeast Asia was to occupy JCS attention for several months to come . 139/

 Regarding the issue of readiness to increase pressures on North
 Vietnam and the role of negotiations) the military chiefs were in agree -
ment throughout the period . Soon after the Tonkin Gulf i ncidents they
urged prompt implementation of more serious pressures using U.S. air
 capabilities . They opposed B-57 training for the VNAF) citing its limited
pilot and supporting technical resources which would be needed for counter-
insurgency missions. In response to Harnings that we should not get
deeply involved in a conflict in Southeast Asia until we were surer of
the GVN's commitment) they replied that "the United States i s already
deeply involved ." They went on to recommend preparations for deploying
the remaining OPLAN 37-64 forces needed for mounting a U.S. air strike
program against North Vietnam . 140/ While the JCS did not address the
subj ect of negotiations explicitly during this period) their statements
implied a l ack of interest j.n a negotiated solution to the Vietnam prob -
l em . At every opportunity· they reiterated their recommendation that ..Ie
should attack North Vietnamese will and capabilities as necessary to
force a DRV deciSion to halt its support and direction of the insurgency .

 ~'OP SECREI' - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 Saigon Embassy views . Ambassador Taylor opposed the views
 of his former military colleagues on most issues . Prior to the Sep -
 tember meeting) he expressed objections to the idea of surfacing or
 leaking to the press the nature of GVN maritime operations . He also
 opposed tit-fo:"-tat retaliation bombing for "the reason that it was
 IIlikely to release a new order of military reaction from both sides)
 the outcome of which is impossible to predict . II He saw enemy ground
 assaults as a greater threat to U. S. bases in South Vietnam than enemy
 air attacks and supported the deployment of U. S. ground force units
 for base security purposes . Thi s was to occur after the beginning of
 GVN/U.S. ground and air cross - border operations into Laos . However,
 not unlike the Chi efs ) one of the criteria he employed in shap ing his
 recommendation vTas the avoidance of a major U.S. ground force commit-
 ment . 141/

 Ambassador Taylor's views were apparently based on an under-
 lying rationale that actions to counter the VC/ DRV aggression should not
 outstrip the GVN and that if it could be avoided, the conflict should not
 be escalated to a level beyond South Vietnamese capacities to manage it .
 Although believing firmly that the Unit ed States would have to apply
 direct pressur e against North Vietnam eventually) to force her to
 abandon her objectives) he felt that the major burden of this effort
 should be borne by the GVN. Thus ) his support for U.S. base security
 deployments was based in part on concern l est ARVN QDits be tied down
 in such roles and) thus) unavailable for more fr ee - ranging combat. Simi-
 larly, in August) the Embassy favored immediate initiation of B- 57
 ·training for the VNAF to enable it to play a substantial role in the
 overt air attacks envisioned for 1965 .

 This training - - like Saigon ' s discouragement of U. S. eagerness
 to negotiate in Laos -- was also advocated for its value in bolstering
 the GVN's morale and determination to continue fighting against its
 communist enemi es . This same con s iderat ion was at the root of the
 Ambassador ' s belief that any negotiations which affected South Vietnam
 should be avoided until North Vietnam was subjected to more forc eful
 military pressures . He also felt that commQDication with Hanoi should
 be prec eded by a thorough discussion and understand ing of our limited
 war aims with the GVN . 1~.2/

 The Ambassador ' s basic concern that the GVN be capable of
 and committed to supporting the evolving l evels of \wr effort against
 the commQDists Has indicated in his r esponse to the political upheaval
 in Saigon. Earlier) his recowmendations had included the option of
 opening lithe fji!.l campaign against the DRV vTithout delay, II in the event
 of threatened collapse of the Kha~D Government . The objective was to
 have been lito avoid- the ·possible consequences of a collapse of national
 morale·. II At the September meeting and subsequently) hOl·rever) after
. Kha~D had already been forced to step dOlm from GVN l eadersh ip once
 and his neH government Has even shakier than two months earlier) the
 Pmbassador opposed overt action against North Vietnam as too risky and
 urged instead that further measures t o strengthen the GVN be taken first . ll}3/

 39 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 ,OSD views . OSD and OSD/ISA views "rere clearer on some
i ssues than on others . For example) the source documents indicate
their consist ent support for surfacing the GVN maritime operations . 144/
Similarly) it is clear that OSD continua lly regarded negotiations as-a-
necessary process for terminating the insurgency in South Vietnam and
a program of increased pressures against the DRV as a means of improving
the U. S. bargaining position . Like other agencies) it saw negotiations
as something that should not be entered into until the pressures were
hurting North Vietnam) but it emphasized that the pattern of pressures
should make clear our limited aims . 145/ ' ,
 Equally consistent but less explicit were OSD views on GVN/ U. S .
readiness to mOQDt overt attacks on North Vietnam . Secretary McNamara
was concerned that too early initiation of air action aga inst North
Vietnam might find the Unit ed States unprepared to cope with the con-
sequenc es . At the end of August he directed the JCS to study and report
on POL and ordnance stocks available to carry out approved contingency
plans to combat a large -scale communist intervention after the expenditures
required for the pattern of attacks which they propos ed against North
Vietnam . He also asked for specific recommendations on next steps to be
taken in the event destruction of the proposed JCS targets did not destroy
the DRV will and capability to continue . Mr . McNaughton ' s "Plan of Action "
was int ended to make unnecessary any dec ision concerning larger operations
until l ate in the autu1lll1. Moreover) it was designed explicitly "to create
as little risk as possible of the kind of military action which would be
difficult to justify to the American public and to preserve where possible
the option to have no U.S. military action at all. " In September) OSD/ ISA
was on record as favoring the initiation of bombing against North Vietnam
after suitable provocation by Hanoi . But by mid-October the OSD view
was apparently that overt actions aga inst the North should be held off
at least until the ne\ol year. 146/

 With re spect to the other i ssues the most cons istent aspect of
OSD view's \olas their prudence . Its attitudes tmrard tit - for - tat reprisals
are not really clear. Soon after Tonkin Gulf OSD notified the JCS that
the events ther e precluded any further need for their \olork on reta liation
scenarios in support of NSAM 288 . Then) just three \oleeks later) the
McNaughton "Plan of Action " proposed deliberate provocation of DRV actions
to permit U.S . retaliation - - but as a means to begin a gradual squeeze
on North Vietnam) not merely tit-for-tat reprisals . Mr . McNamara ' s own
vieHs do not appear except by implication) in that he did not indicate
any opposition to them I-Then shmrn William Bundy ' s draft summation of the
Sept ember meet.ing consensus . 11.~1 / Prudence vras again the dominant feature
of OSD vie,·rs on preparations to cope with possible enemy reactions to the
harsher pressures . For example) lion several occasions " Secretary McNamara
expressed to the JCS his int erest in the po ss ibility of countering a
massive Chinese int erventi on in Southeast Asia \olithout the need to intro-
duce large numbers of U.S . ground forces . The OSD appraisal of the USAF

 40 TOP SECREr - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 proposal to reduce provisional ground force levels for Southeast
 Asian defense concluded that the i ssue remained "open ." It was crit-
 ical of that particular study because of its methodology and aspump-
 tions. Later) however) Mr. McNamara supported the JCS in their
 disapproval of the ~ACV request for allocaticn of additional ground
 force units for base security purposes . 148 /

 State views. Various documents make it clear that there \-Tere
 several different points of view prevalent i-rithin the State Department
 during the period in question . Reflected here are those channeled
 through the Secretary of State or communicated to the Department of
 Defense) usually through the Assistant Secretary for Far Eastern Affairs .
 With few exceptions , the courses of action followed by the Administration
 were those advocated by State. Its proposal for B- 57 training for the
 VNAF was apparently overruled on the basis of JCS recommendations) but
 otherwise its support for measures to further strengthen the GVN and for
 pressuring actions other than overt military attacks throughout 1964
 preva iled . 149/ Its support for the ack..l101dedgement of GVN maritime
 operations failed to materialize only because of objections on the part
 of the GVN itself . 150/

 State Department vie,·rs on the other issues) likewis e) were
reflect ed in U.S. policy positions . Reprisals for VC acts that could
be matched i-rith fitting responses were favored in principle but ,·rere not
necessarily to be carried out in all instances . Escalation through such
r esponses ,-laS seen as useful for purposes of ass isting GVN morale) but
State did not believe that steps should be taken to bring about such
situations just yet . It did) however) acknoHledge that deliberate
provocations might be useful in the future . Negotiation of a Vietnam
solution through an international conference IoTas vielved as inevitable,
but it should be permitted only after hurt i ng North Vi etnam and convincing
South Vietnam of U. S. resolve to achieve its objectives . Moreover)
Secretary Rusk) Assistant Secretary BQl1dy and Counselor Rostow were each
knmm to view avoidance of a commitment of U. S . ground forces to Southeast
Asia as an important element in policy . 151/

 CIA views . With the exception of Mr . McCone ' s oplnlons rendered
 in the September strategy meeting) available CIA documents provide no
 policy recow~endations. However) they do contain assessments b earing
 directly on the policy i ssues discussed previously -- particularly \-Tith
 respect to enemy reactions to the measures contemplated . For example)
 int elligence estimates indicated little likelihood that int ens ified
 maritime operations ,{Quld result in retaliation against GVN naval bases .
 Similarly) the~r predicted fel-T serious conseq'lences in response to U. S .
 limited tit - for - tat reprisal strikes . Rather) the CIA believed that
. communist responses I'Tould be liInited to' defensive measures) increased
 propaganda) and additional logistical assistance from China . In the
 event our reprisal actions I·rere "heavier and sustained) " the DRV "Tas
 expected first to attempt to dissuade the United States through inter -
 national political moves) apparent concessions) and efforts to underline
 communist solidarity and determination . They would probably also curb
 the VC from making nei-T provocative attacks "and might direct them to
 reduce temporarily the tempo and' size of their attacks." 152/

 41 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 CIA estimates of commQnist reaction to systematic U. S ./GVN
air attacks on North Vietnam were less certain . While acknowledging
"substantial danger " that the DRV might decide to send its own armed
forc es on a large scale to Laos and South Vietnam)

 ("Hanoi might assume that United States would
 b e unwilling to undertake a major ground war) or that
 if it was ) it could ultimately be defeated by the
 methods which were successfu~ against the French.")

they thought it more likely that Hanoi would choose a more conservative
cours e . They reasoned that "the DRV might calculate that it would be
bet~ e~ ~o stop VC activity temporarily than risk loss of its military
facllltl es and i ndustry " but that they VTould make no meaningful con -
:es~ions "such as agreeing to effective int ernational inspection of
ln~lltra~ion routes. " 153/ In any event) the CIA d i d not believe that
Chln ese mtervention was likely unless the United States should stri ke
the Chinese mainland or unless U. S./GVN forces should attempt to "occupy
~r e~s of the DRV or communist-held territory in Northern Laos ." 154/ I t
mdlcated that both North Vietnam and Co:m..llluni st China wished to avoid
direct conflict with the United States and ",ould probably "avoid actions
t hat would in their view unduly increase the chances of a major U.S.
respon se " against them .

 . Rather than outright military victory in South Vietnam) CIA
estlIDates indicated belief that the communists expected to gain control
through a "neutrali st coalition government dominated by pro-Communist
elements" that 'I-lOuld come about "s oon ." This concern over the threat of
neutralism had been voiced at the September meeting by Mr . McCone and
was quit e prevalent among i ntelligence discussions of the period . Alto-
gethe~ ) it created a rather gloomy impression of GVN readiness to support
sustalned overt operations against North Vietnam and absorb likely VC
c ounte~easures . In October the picture became even gloomier as a result
of an lnt elligence assessment "'hich described continuing deterioration
of the South Vietnamese political situation and predicted even more :

 " ... ve believe that the c ondit i ons favor a further
 decay of GVN will and effectiveness . The likely pattern
 of this decay viII be increasing defeatism) paralysis of
 leadership) friction with Americans) exploration of possible
 lines of political accomm.odation 'I"ith the other side ) and
 a general petering out of the war effort ." 155/

 42 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316, By: NWD Date: 2011

 :.{., '
 ~- ' TOP SECRET
 , .
 25 May 1964
 .'
 ',' 0 '
 -.
 DRAFT RESOLUTION 00: SOUTHEAST ASIA
 -----_._-----------------_.-

 Whereas the signatories of the Geneva Accords of 1954,

 including the Soviet Union, · the Communist regime in China,·

 ., and Viet Nam agreed to respect the independence an'd terri-

 torial integrity of South Viet Nam, Laos and Cambodia ; ahd

 the United St.ates , although not a signatory of the Accords,

 declared that it would view any renewal of aggression in

 violation of the Accord~ with grave conc ern and as seriously

 . threatening internationaJ. peace and security;

 \'lhereas the CorrIJlmist regime in North. Viet N£lm, \·:ith

 the aid and supporto£ the COITh,"lmist regime in China , has

 syst ematically flouted its obligations under these Accords

 and has enga~ed
 ~ ~
 in a~zression aqainst the independeGce and
 ~~ ~

 territoJ~ial integrity of South Viet Nam by carrying out a

 syst ematic plan for the subversioh of the Govern ment of

 Sout.h VietNam, by hll~n:i.shing direction, training, personnel

 and arms for the conduct of guerrilla warfare within South

 Viet Narn, and by the ruthless Dse of terror ag~inst the

 peaceful popu1.ation of that countr;;

 TOP SECRET
 ,.
 ~ : '. ,.
 .',
 . -< ~
 .-:.
:. ,- '. :. ' .' '-" .~ ',.. - ": . -, '" . .. .~ - .. '. .. , ~. .... .. .
 . .:. - . - . . i
 . .
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 J/
 L ~,
 .. -.
 o .
 TOP SECRET

 -'

 Hhereas in the face of this Corn.t111..ll1ist aggl:°ession and •
 . .
 subversion the Government and p~ople of South Viet Nam have

 . brc:8 vely '111c1er·t.."'al'e-
 ~ o
 n .L-L.h· e do~J.<-.
 f:"nse
 ~ ,
 oJ:: J. the1"
 1. r 1" Tlo1 °Dendel1ce
 ~'.. and L L

 - . t~rritoLi.al integrity, and at the request of that Government

 . the United
 . . States has , in accordance "\·]ith its Declaration of

 1954, provided military advice, economic aid and military
 eq"i..iiptnent;

 ~ - as 1" n th e Geneva agreernen
 rynere • - ts of~,
 lq62 the Url1"ted

 Stat es , the Soviet Union~ the Communist regime in China,

 North Viet Nam and others solemnly undertook to respect the

 soverei.gnty, independence, neutrality, unity and' territorial

 integrity of the Kingdom of Laos;

 Hhereas in violation of these uncLc~rtakings the Communist

 regime in North Vi et Nam) with the aid and support of the

 COmf~l1...mist regioe in Chin a , has engaged in aggression against

 - the independence, unity.and territorial int eg::ity o£: Laos by

 ma1nLaln~ng
 " .L- ""
 J.orces on Laotlan terrlLory, oy th e use oj.r:: th a L
 J:: " " '-- , .L-

 territory for the inf iltration of arms and equipQ2nt into

 South . Viet 1'\:: III , and by providing dil-ection, men and equipr.1cnt

 for persi~tent armed attacks against the Covernment of
 , . ",

 . 0' . - National Unification of the Kingdom of Laos;
 . . . ~ " , ', .
 ' . .'
 ,...:.
 . : t.
 - - '. • I '
 : i •

 , ... ~
 I. .' . ' . .: . i
 .' ,
 '. ,. ,'
 . :.
 , .;, ': . ' . '-
 '."' .. ."...... ':.: "1'0")' · C~Cl~~I.-'
 . .~ .- . . .' . ': " '. ' .. ...
 '.: .' .' . ' . . ..---......-_.__._-_ .. -- -
 .t J.
 UJ.J _ .•. ..}
 . :"
 .
 ~
 -- -' .

. . .:,
 ., .. ' . ..1: . . . " '. ,. '.
 ' '- j
 . -' .
 • ' -:- • •• : -. • .' " ~ : . ,. - • r
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET
 •• •• t

 3

 ltnereas in the face of this Communist aggression the

 Government of National Unification and the non-CoIlliJt.mist
 . .

 elements in Laos have striven to maintain the conditions
 .c
 OJ..
 "
 unlcy, • 1 1
 lTlOepencence anc1 ~1eutra lJlty enVJ_SlOne
 .. d f-or tneJ_r
 ,.

 coutitry in the Geneva Agreements of 1962;
 . 0

 Where as the United States 'has no territorial, military

 or po~itical ambitions in Southeast Asia~ bu~ desires only

 that the peoples of SOt.'.th Viet Nan, 1,aos and Cambodia

 should be left in peace by their neighbors to work out their

 m·m destini es in thei~· mm \'l ay , end, therefore, i~_s objective

 is that the status established for these countries in th e

 ·GenevaAccords of 1954 and the Geneva Agreements of 1962

 should be restored with effective means of enforceDent;

 Whereas it is esse.ntial that the v:orld fully und erst2.nd

 that the An12rican people are united in their determination to

 take all steps that ffiay be necessary to assist the peoples

 of South Vie~L ~l'i art! a n d L a 0 s to ma intain their independ ence

 and political integrity.

 Nm·] , the:::efore) be it resolved by the Senate and House

 of Representatives of the U;:lited States of America in COTl 2reSS ~

 ass en:bled :
 ." : . ' .. "

 That

. ---- -
 . ," ".
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND P roject Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

~" ~ . ..
 TOP SECRET . ; '.

 . ~ . '

 That the United States regards the preservation of

 the independence and integrity of the nations of South Viet

 Nam and Laos as vital to its riatidnjl interest and to world

 pe ace ;

 Sec. 2. To t~is end) if the Presid e nt determines the

 ne cessity thereof) the United States is prepared, upon the

 request of the Government of SOL-1th Viet Nam. or the Govern-

 ment of Laos , to use all measul:'es ) inch,ding the corn.n.d.tment
 .

 of armed .forces to assist that governme nt in the defense of
 '.
 .- ~ts independence and territorial integrity against aggression

 or subversion supported , controlled or directed from any

 . COIT.:nunist c ount ry ,

 Se.c. 3. ( a) The President is hereby authoriz e d to

 us e for assistance under this jo int resolution not to ex -

 cec: c1 $__ .._ _ ~_ dUl~ in g the fiscal year 196f~ , and n ot to

 excee d $- - _ _ _ _ _ durln ca the fiscal year 1965) from ~ny ap-

 for carrying out the provisions

 of t~1e :Fore;i.gn Assistance .Act of 1961) as aEler.ded, in ac-
 '.
 . ,'
 \ .] l e[l the provisio['.s of that .t;.c t )

 . , "
 in this joi.nt resolution • This authoriz ation
 • •• f ," . " 0" i'::
 . " . : . . ': . .' .
 ,i , : . . :.
 :,. : "" . . is in
 .; . .
 "
 '

 ' .
 . . ' . .. ...~. . ~ . ", ..
 .:', ' . . .. :' ',: : ,," :>;: " " ,,:,,- ,'l'0 P St: (~:(;S'J~ '
 , ' _ _ _ _ --O. _ __ .~ _ __ ~_ , .~ __

 ' . : I . ,' '
 " . ,;, . . . ..
 ", :
 "

 ;
 '
 ~ . ' I.' . .... . ,~ •.
 . . '. , ,:. ,' , . ",.
 '
 '
 '. " , ' ' ~" , ' " " .'
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 ../

 TOP SECRET
 ~l::';;'
 .'
 V\

 5

 . jc in
 . .,. a~'d~hl'OI1
 '-' L L. to oL'l ~. r
 L [ c e.XJ.~s~l'na
 L. 0 al_1LL'1~orl'zc~LLl'Ol~S
 • ''i~l'th respec'L- Ol l V

 to the use of ~uch appropriaiion~.

 (b) Obligations .inc~rred in carrying cut the pro-

 . visions of this joint resolution may be paid eith~r out of

 appropriations for military ~ssistance or appropl~iations

 for other than milit~ry assistance, . except that 2ppropria~

 tions made available for Titles I, III, and VI of Chapte~ 2,
 Pc::Jr'L'
 . I, orr: t'ne l~'oJ_-el' Q:n '
 F~ S S l . S L- 21.1 C e P. c
 .!- • ,.
 L- of :1961, as amended,
 v

 shall not be aV2i12~12 ~o~ payment of such obligations.

 (c) Notwithsta~ding any other provisi~n of the

 Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended, when the Presi-

 dent deteri1~ines it to be important to the.. security of tl-:e

 United ' States and in hlrtherance of the purposes of this

 joint resolution, he may Ci'-lthorize the use of up to $_____
'.
 . of funds available. under subsection Ca) in each of the fisc2.1
 ..
 years 1964 and 1965 under the authority of section 614(a) of

 the Foreign Assista~ce Act of 1961, as amended, and is

 authorized to use up to $_____ of such funds in each
 SllCh year pursuant to his certification that i.t is in3dvis·ab~.~

 to s})ecify the nzture of th e use of such funds, 'i\,hich cer~ifi.-

 cation shaJ.l be dee22d to be a sufficient voucher for such

 2P.WU~!ts .
 '..
 ~ . . " TO? SECRE'l
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 -. . .. -- . :.
 \
 '. ' . ..
 < .
 . .1
 . o .

 ' .' . ~ '.
 ..
 ·TOP

 6

 .(d) Upon determinatio~ by the head of any agency
 . ,

 personnel available au~norlLy
 ..... ' Ok.
 or seCLlon 6?7
 _
 ,.. ......

 '.

of the Foreig::>. AsS]_st:allc2 Act of 1961, as amended, . or C:::he;:--
 .! , . d' .
w~se UDGer ~nat Ac~, for purposes or aSSlSLance u~ er t01S
 't • . . , . . . .J-

joint resolution, any officer or e~?loyee so made available

'm~y
 '-'- be p_··-,OV-l·,C'!~('!
 <:: co ~e nsaL.10!."l
 . Hi}' ...... ~o'' allowances
 2~~ a~ rates other

than those provided by tte Foreig~ Service Act of 1946, as

amencled, 'the Career C02?2nsation Act of 1949, as aoendeci,

and the Overs~as Differend_als ' and Allm-72i.:ces Act_ to the ex-

te,1:.t nece.ss2ry to C2!::':CY out t~2 purposes of this' joint

resolution. The President shall pr~scrib2 regulations

be provided. In addition, the President may utilize such
provisions of the Forei~n
 ..... Service Act:of 1946, as amended,

cis he 'def~f!~S' a~ptopriate to apply to ;per.sonne1 of any agency

carrying out functions resoluti.ono

 '"

 ..
 ' .
 . ",
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 -.

 3
 In any en·nt, tll e illtere;;t of th e Committ ee is not in :l di;;cuso: ion of the st:lff
 study, lJut ill your tbtimouy of August 6, I!JG4, and ' _\ll1b:I :;~nclo r St e\"en~on'"
 statement to tb ~ 'Cnited :\at ions of August::; in light of a:1Y information your
 oflice may hr,ye aClluired since the illcidell ts in th e Gulf of Tonkin.
, . 1'herefore, in tl.t e interest oE a thorough c1iscus;:;ion 011 February 20, the Com-
 mittee will ll1:lke a '.':lil:lble to yo'ur otJice a copy of the trall script of the tcsti-
 mony of August 6, l!JCrl. (c\ruba ssador Stevenson's r,res entntion is, of cour.-e, a
 matter of l>ublic record .) I n'oulc1 bope that you II'ill be :lble to redell' this
 transcript and lJring th e Committee up to date on \\'h:lt II'e now ];:n on- of tlw
 inCident:; in thc Gulf of Tonkiu. 1'lte COlllmittee is p:1l'ticulnrly interested in c1b-
 cussing what l e~;>o ni han, becn lea rn ed about the probl ems of an :l lp:ing . in-
 formati on in thf.' Illi(~~t of 11 cri::;is Si[U;1tioll. .
 Filltlll;.-, ' n~ I mention ed t:J you c111rin~ our cOI1l'croation, I II'ouId like to :'eilE'\\'
 D1~- r equE'~t of .Janna ry 8th tha t thc Departmcnt of Defense prol'idc tlt~ COlll-
 llilttl.'e at the earli e~t pns",il.Jle date with a. report done by the Weapons ::;rdem
 P,"aluation Group on the snbjf.'ct "Command and Control of the Tonkin Gulf
 Incident. 4-;) -·\.ll~n ::;t 10G-1."
 I look f Ol'\I':ln1 to secing you 011 Fcl.Jruary 20.
 SinCf.'rely yonrs,
 J . ,Yo FULBI:IGflT, Chairlilall.
 The CHAIIDIAX. ~1r: Secre'tary, my O\,,-Y,1. "ie\\' is that this statement
 o~ yours sho~llclnot be made public llll~il after the commit\ee ha,s ha.d
 all OppOrtwllty to " '0 throu£:h the he.al'lIlO·s, and also to deCIde mlat It
 does ,about its omtstaif rel)Ol't and the l~arings. Thi.s is an execllt~\'e
 nwetlllg: ,mel I hope that you will be ,\'il1ing to reta m that. ~ realrze
 there ,oll be pressures upon you, as there ~1l'e ~lp~:m the C0I11lnlttee, for
 release of (hese documents, but I wou1d t hlllk It IS prematu re to do so.

 STATEl'iIEl'TT OF RON. ROBERT S. McNA?iIARA, SECRETARY OF
 DEFENSE; ACCOI>IPANIED BY GEl'!. EARLE G. \VHEELER, CHAIR-
 MAN OF THE JOINT C1UErS OF STAFF, AND CAPT. II. B. SV.JEITZER,
 U.S. NAVY, IvIIlITARY ASSISTANT TO THE CHAIR:r;IAN, JOINT
 CHIEFS OF STAFF

 Secretary :JIo~_DL\nA. ~Ir. Chairman, I ,-ery Dluch apprecia~e 'y?lll'
 personal klllc1 WIshe s and compl iments. It has ?cen it !,10St sa tlsfYll1g
 I years to me, made more so by the courtesy WIth whICh I ha,'e been
 treated by this committee on nlY nlllnerom occasions before it. .
 I might also say I share T. ·S. EIiofs belief that history may be
 freedom, and I look fon\'ard to the developm ent of our discussions
 here today in it, way that will make it free dom and not servitude . .
 I d.o h~y e a stateillent ""hich I \\-onlcllike to present to the comm.i ttee
 at thIS t1lne. I ha \'C not released it to the press. I told my.assocIates
 that w'e shoulc1not do so. lYe h[\,\'e submitted to the comnuttee some
 200 copies o! it so they may release it. I doubt Ycry ml~ch th::lt ""e ,:-il1
 .be H?le to "-lthstand the pressures of th? press today \nthout rele:l~lllg
 It. \\ e ha '-e been deluged by requests for It.

 RELEc\SIXG OF DOCU:,\IEXTS

 Senator ~~oc:SE. Can I only S<lY, .;\11'. Chairman, <?11 it, procedur~11
 matter, I qm·e agree ,,-ith the Secretary. I do not thmk we ought III
 any way to place any restrictions on the Secre tary in reg:nd to releas-
 ing anythi.Eg he WIlilts to r~lease. I know you dicl.n~t so imp]}.'. But I
 thmk the Jl~dgmE'l~t. of the :)ecrebuy should p~'e\'aIlI~ rega rd to ,,'hat
 the D~p'1l'tmellt of Dcfen:::e releases, and I th1l1k the Judgment. of the
 committee should pre\'1l il in regard to \\'hat \\'c should release.

 .. ---. -----~--~-.-.------ ---~-
 . ............. .. .__ ~~ I
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

. . - - - -- -- ·-- · - - -- · - _ _ _ _ ..: ~ ........ :.... _ ..:.............. _ .:..~ • •. _.. _...::..~.,;, _ _ " _
 ___ ·1 ~.• _-~.~ ~:..::... _ _..

 4
 The CH.UR=-'UX. The ollIy thing I was suggesting--
 Senator MOl~SE . It is in keepin o' ,,·ith the eli nsion of powers doctrine.
 The CI·U.ITI=-'L-l..X. I tholwht it ~'ollId be much fairer if ,ye could ar-
 range to release them sill~lt1taneously. For cxample, the staff r eport
 " woulc1 pi'esent <;mly. one side of the pich!l'e, ~s would the Secl'ebllfs
 statement. I tlllnk It ,,"ould be too bad If tIllS goes out and notll1ng
 else. That is a matter for the committee to determine, I gl'11l1t.
 Senator ::'IIor:sE. I still ' wouldnot want to-I would personally not
 be ~. pal;ty to pla ('.il~~ any !'estri cti01~ 0!1 the Secret~l'Y .
 . 1he C~L\n:)L\:" J.he pomt I am trylllg.to make 15 that much of the
 InfOrmatIOIl whlch 'ye haye is confidentlal and cannot be released.
 'I~hercas a grcat. many of the documents to which thc Secretary I'ders,
 !"JUt docs not incorpo rat e, are also confidential. I ·would submit that it
 IS a very one-sided picturc to rcl ease only the statCJ~lent. .
 Senator ::'IIonsE. It is onc-sieled only if the COl1l1l1lttCC lea "es It that
 way.
 Thc CU.-\I!O[.\x. I OTant that. But it is only a matter of time. 'Ire
 hay~ not had a chan~e to read the Secreta1'5-~s statement. lYe only
 recen-ed this statement. fill hour ao'o and it is a matter of timing.
 Senator ~1onsE. I understan d.'"
 . The CUAIlnux. D ocs the Senator object for the committee to ha \'C
 time to considCI· the statemcnt?
 Senator ~IonsE. I ,yould only object as to placing any restrictions on
 the S ecretary at all.
 The Cn.-\In=-'L\X. I do not consider it pIncing rest riction s. It is [t
 matter for us to alTi\"e at an understanding as to when "i-e do it.
 Senator GO RE . ::.\11'. Chairman.
 Thc CIIAIR1L\.X. Yes~
 S~nator GOHE. Thcre is a qucstion here. "Te .nre h,~ring an executi'<l
 seSSIOn. Could ',"e not defer judo'ment on thI S untIl "-0 han had a
 chance to read it? b

 The Cn.:\In=-'L\x. That is "'hat ,\-e 1l0nnaHy do. That is what I was
 suggcsting, until wc r ece i'-e it; the committee makes up its o\,-n mind
 usually afterward, this afternoon, for example.
 Senator GonE. The point I ,,,as attempting to raise, I find a great
 ~leal of appeal in ,,-hat Senator ::'I101's2 has said, but I think it must Le
 mterpretecl ill the }io'ht of the fact-, tlwt we are deali1l2' hero ,,"ith class-
 ified materials anct'ha "ing au c~,ecuti ve hearing. 'rhe release of a
 statemont. in executirc 11earino., used in an ('xecutiYC hea ring, has not,
 so far as I can rec all, been c101~ except by penni ssicn of the committee.
 I remember one time ,,-hen I ,,-as chail'lll::1.ll of a subcommittee, S(~c­
 retar), Hu.sk ,\"<1S appearing, and the question o~ releasing his st~lt e1l1ellt
 was subnuttec1 to the committee. and the COJl1l111ttee "oted unalll1l101lsh'
 to a~pI'or~ its release. I clare say it might do So-\\~ lllight do so, afte~'
 heal"lng tIllS, but I ,,-onldlike to defer judgment on It.
 The en.urDUX. That is all right.

 Senator ~IonsE . Can I take 30 :::econds morc? I do not ,,-ant to he a
 stickler or m[1ke a tempest in fI. tefl.pot, but I do think, gent lcmen, yon
 are dealing here "ith a procedural matter that you should not set a
 precedent on. I do not think that at allY time a committee of the CO!l-
 gress h!'.s the right to call into execntin·session a Cabinet ofrlcer or al1y-

~-----------.-----~-~----
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

7 {

 5
 one "'ho is really a sl;okesman for the ac1millistrntion and. see);: to im-
 pose .any restriction on tha't \\'jtness in regard to r..nythll1g that he
 says 1ll that executiye session in respect to his right to make any cum-
 ment after the meetino. is o\'er or release any statement. he wants to
 make aft.or the meetin¥"'is O\'er. .
 Spea}\lll~' ~lypothetically, although the SeCl'~tary has lly1.el~ :'ery
 clear Ius \\'~lll1lg11ess to oblige you, I am 110t talklllg .nbout Ius W1111l1g-
 ness. to oblIge but I am talkinrr about \\'lwt. I COllsIder to be n very,
 very imp ortant. basic procel1i.lr~l right of the administration " 'itness
 ~lllder t~e separation po\\'ers doctrine. I ~la\'e nen?r tl'a:lsgressccl upon
 It kno\\'lllgly, and I am not going to let. the ac1ministnltlOn at any t~me
 transgress upon our correspondino' rirrht llllc1cr the same doetrll1p..
 Therefore, I think \\'e olwht to deal "'ifh each othcl' on the basis that
 ';'e know what these resp~cti\'e rights arc and seek to pbce 110 restric-
 bon on each other. That is my point. .
 I took the same po.:;itioll, you ,,·ill recall, in the :'.IacArthm heanngs
 w~lell there ,,'a:') an. attempt,.in my judgmcn~, <;m th? part. of tJle COlll-
 m~ttee then to ll1frlllge the nghts of the aelmml:3tmtlOll under the c1oc-
 tnne there. I take tJle same position this mOl'lling.
 Senator HICKEXLOOPEn. ~Ir. Chairman.
 The Cn . uIDIAx. Senator IIickenlooper.

 RESl'OXSIBILTTY Fon m::LEASIXG ..\ S'L\TE:lfEXT

 :Senator IIIClmxLOoPEn. I think l ye haye a rather complicated situ-
 at.lOn here which is not necessarily one under the control of the Secre-
 tary ~r of the committee. It may be more under the control of the
 COlllI11lttCC than of the Secretary. .
 I would say that. the Secretary has no right \'\'hatsoen'.r uncler our
 p.rocedure to release a transcript of this record where members (]nes-
 tr~n the Secretary allc1 ans\,ers come in. On the other hand, I would say
 t!ll~,. that th~ reSl?ollsibility of releasing a stn t~n:ent 0!1 the ~o~e re.spot
 slbrllty .o! .tno Secretary or any other admll11stratl\'e officwl IS LlC
 responsIbllI~Y of that of11cial of that departlllent. ~ am. ll?t so sme \\'0
 can control It. ,Ye cnn control ",hat \Te release. I thInk It IS a. matter of
 some kind of an unc1erstanc1in o·. .
 I am thoro~lghly sympathetic with \ylwt. you hai'e said, ~Ir. Chair-
 man, about pIecemeal releases of these things. I hate to read about
 them ~i'e~ though they han~ not been rele,1secl-I hate to read about
 tl:om 111 TIme magazine or the:X ew York Times or other papers of that
 kll1d, where "'e hnre to O'et some of our information from there. That
 ~nakes us quite restless b~t app::trelltly there is nothing we can do about
 It., and sometimes ,,-hat (toes on in this committee at least seems to be
 approximatiye in some ~f those llC'>\' S rele,lses of certain columnists
 and so 011.
 So it is a prohlem that has its vn~'ious facets. But so far as a straight
 . ~tat.Cl~en~ of the Secretary, I would say that we han~ no authority ~o I

 mhI~It hIm from a stl'aig11t statement he want.s to !nake to the pubJlc
 on hIS O\,n responsibilit~· ,,'ithout reo·a.rel to qlle;/.lOlls or ans\\'er~ 01' I
 I
 what anyone eJse has sa.leI because \,}len that occurs, then there IS a
 dual responsibility there, n~t only on the questioner but the Secretary,
 and I hope lye can control that. .
 I .

 But I d~ no~ know; it is'a \'ery difficult thing, and I am thoroughly
 sympathetIc ,nth the piecemeal--- I
 !

 II
 I
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

76
 : ... ,
 - ., '~

 ,6

 - The CU",UR,:\L\X. I was not asserting any right to control it. It '\"113
 a
 merely sug.~estion if there was some comity--
 ~enator :J:.licru:xLooPER, If it is a question of comity, \,e can ani,'e
 ~~ . '

 The CHAIIDIAX. He can t:eep it \dthin his control.
 Go ahead, Hr. Secretary. ,

 XEWS1'.\ PEP.. 1: I::1'O,:,:S OF CL\SSIFIJ::D L\TOIDL\ nox

 , ,Senator LXl:S CIIE. ::JIl'. cilail'~11an, having listened to wh,tt. Sella tor
 Hlckenloopel' has jast s'lic1. I feel obliO'ed to 1l1,1ke a statement that this
 body, yested \yith SCC1'et iilfo nnationoof tIle most intimnte character,
 c1ealin f" "'ith the security of the United States, has been bronght
 scandalously into disreDtlte by the frcqu ency 'with which r eports are
 cal'l'ie~l in the l~e,,'spapers of "'hat is sllppo~cd to bf' c10l1C under .closed
 cxecllt 1\"e meetll1£,:s. alld I do not feel C'ontellt that \"e CHI! "wk at
 these le:l.ks that are comlllo' out of thi s committee, I am llot satis fied
 with the statement tl wt. the~'c is nothil1!l' ,,-e can do about. it. Somebody
 ,
 is leaking thillQ:S, whether it is a nH>m't;er, :Jlemoer,; of the Srnate, 0'1'
 whethe.r it j s n1embers of the ;::taff. I do not l,now who it is, out it is a
 terrible mistake that this body, related most intimately to mattcrs
 that deal with the seeurih' of the United States, finds itself ""ith
 nell'spapers l'c])ortil1~' w}1[1.( tnhs place under confidel~ti,1 1 disc ussions.
 It cannot b~. dcnied that the"e reports arc bcil!g' carried outside
 ,of the meetino'. HOII' do the)' cet. out'? I think \~-e oU2,'ht to make ;::n
 im'cstip:ation" "\re ol1~d1t to fil~l out ,,'hethcr it is fr~ll1 the start 01'
 where it emer~cs . ~.
 The ""hole ;;;'odd can hugh at us at what h appened, It seems you
 do not; lleed spies, all YOll han to do is look at t} lC p,~pers .and fully
 you \nll find renalecl "hat takes place confic1wtwll:v 111 tIllS rOOl1l.
 The CH.U[:,:\L\X. I wonrlel' if \,e could get on \lith the test Imony.
 Senator A1KEX. I \yoldcl like to obser',"e that sometimes the leaks
 appear ~ or 3 days after they come ont in the newspapers, \I'hich can
 hardly be in the cateO'ory of a leak.
 : The CH..\IF:':\L\X.L~t l~S r:et on,
 Senator LXC-S CIU:. The ~(:hairman wants to get on ,,,ith this matter,
 and I cnn lUlc1erst<md "Iylly he would want to g et 011, but I will say
 to you with "'hat YOll are tnino' to O'et on i.'3 not :IS si~·ni.fi cant as y;jwt
 I am trying to sea"rch out. S"om~thir{g· is \\Tong " ' ith t'his committee"
 Senator :JloI:sE. Mr. Chairman.
 - The CH.,\lP..~IAx. I wonder if "lye could proceed.
 Senator CLARK.. Let us go ahead.

 II Senator MonSE. T\'e are not !!oil1O' to lean this I'ecord in this cO!l(li-
 tion so far as the Senator from~Ol'egon is cOllcerned. I do not. think we
 ought to take up the Secl'eta~fs time ,,,ith qu,u'l'els of the committee,
 I bl:t, Frank, you were not here and you are Il-1t a\\,~1l'e of ,,"hat Senator
 Hlckenloopcr W,1S talkin~ about. I'·e are not talkmg about "'hat you
 \ are talking a bout. That 'V;-as not r aised. I had riscn to the defen se of
 what I think i;:; a n'rv imp ortant doctrine thn.t always ought to prcyail
 at our hearing's "'hell 'i'le h an a Cabinet onie'er or anyone else from
 the adminjstl'~ltjoll here; llamely, we should make 110 attempt to place
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By : NWD Date: 2011

 7
 anYl'estriction on the spokesman of th e administration regarding
 what he says to the press afterward and "'hat he l',eleases. The o~ly
 suggest.ion was a Wl'Y helpful intention by the cl1<11r:na!l suggestlllg
 th at the Secretary of Defcnse hold any statement 'when he goes ~:mt of
 this meeting snch as l'eleasino' the testimony he is about to grve us
 until ,ye will ha " e the whole r()~orc1 considered. '
 I. only ra i.::ed a point then', understanding the moti ntt ion. of the
 chrnrman to be of the hi o'hest, that I ,,'ouldnot support pLtClllg any
 restriction, under tIle s~p!lration-of-powers doctri!le, on Secretary
 'McXamal'a. That is how all this occul'red . ,Ye ',yere not t~.. ll;:in~', Frank,
 about the problem that you are raising, und I do not think we ought
 to be taking the time of the Secretary to be talking about th,.. t now,
 That is for us to handle in our 0\\'11 executi \-e session.
 The ClI,-\!R3L\X. ::'III'. Secretary, ,,,ill yon go ahead . I think Y.-e ought
 to proceed. , ' -
 Senator L_\USCHB. I ,,-ant to make this statement, ~tlld then I ,,,ill
 close.
 In the -repo rt that \\-as filed by the sUdl', : ther~ \\'as an addendum, ,
 and in the addendum there ,,'as stated that X contacted the staff aIld
 told about the truth that tlierc \\'ero no missiles seell fired at OUl'ships.
 Y spoke to th e stall:'. ",Yen as a member of the oe!lch for 10 \'Cars , when
 you begin oiYering that type of proof to esbblish a fa c't, I simply
 cannot accept it.
 The ClI,,\H:::-'L\X. Proceed, Mr. Secretary.
 STAFF STUDY m::F1::SELl

 Sccrctary :JlcX_DL\Rc\. :311'. Chairman, I han sought in Illy state-
 ment. tei hc as rcsponsi,-e as I can to what I believe to be are the ques-
 tions in the mind of the committee re"'al'Cl in 0' the Tonkin Gulf incident.
 I haye not had the adnmtao'e, ho,,~yer, o~ the priyi18ge of exposure
 to th e sta f1' study that I kno,,"'has beell completed and ci,rcnbted amOl!g
 you. I asked for that scnral ,,'eeks ao'o but was clemed ncce'3S to It,
 and I may, thorciore, not entirely respond to all of the information
 tlUtt you " 'ish to query me about. I ,yill be nry happy to take ques-
 tions concerning the statement. ' -
 Senator M,\XSFIELD. Do I understand the Secretary requested a
 copy of the study and ,ns denied?
 The CI-L\IID[AX. That is correct. I also requested their command and
 control documents and it ,,'as denied.
 , Senator :JhXSFL!-:l.D. I ,vas thinkinO' of those in ju:s:tapo:3ition.
 The CIL-\JR:'IAX. That is correct. '" , ' ;' "
 Sen!ltor GonE. Perhaps ,ye can exchange th02e' no\" That migJ:t
 solve It. ' ' '. '
 The CH.\TR:'L\X. I think , YC ollO'ht to 0'0 on. '"
 Go on, ::'I I I'. Secretary. <:> b

 , :Secretary i>IcXA3f.\R_\. Let me comment, ::\fr . Chairman. These ani
 not to be equated. Yon can hal-'e anv ra'" materinl we han\ ",\~e tried to
 supply all of it to you. Some of it'is yery highly classified, and, "e as-
 sume you ".-ill treat it with the Cit re that its cla'3sificatlOn deserYes. ",Ye
 also are quite willing to let you have e,'alnation reports: but only after
 ,ye 11a,-e asce rtained that the authors of tho3Cl reports had access to all
 the appropriate information. It tums out that the author of this par-
 ticular stGdy you mentioncd did not ha,-e access. I nenr heard, of the

---------- - - - .----~----- -' ---
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

... ,r'
'( I

 8
 study ",Len yourcquC'3tecl it. Gcneral \"iJccler w',s not. a'Yare of it. The
 author did not quC'l'.\' (,.C'llcml I\'heeler or me auout the actions we took
 today, or tile actions of the Joint Chiefs, the ::\atiollal Sccurity Conncil,
 or those the Prcsi dent took. .,
 .I do not think w)U \l'1ll1t e\'aluati,'e rcports sent o\'er llere that are
 incomplete. _'\.ll~' l:eport "'e lla\'c, yO~1 h;1,\'e access to, but only after it
 has,been properly re\'ic\\'ed as to its reliauility: .
 , lour stafl study is (luite a diflercnt matter. I consider it a \'Cry seri-
 ?llS handicap to me in appearing before 'yOll torby to. adclre~s thC'se
 I SSUCS t.hat lla\'e bcC'n rc\'ie\\'ccl amI ac1cll'e:-;scd and consiclerecllll your
 st~ff study, c\'iclence of ,,·hich is cxamined ill yoUI' staff study, ,,:hich
 c\~ld.ellce has ne\'Cr e\'Cll been brought to my attention, but if you are
 wll 1llIg to go "hcad \\'ith the hea ring on that basis, I am.
 TIl e CJL\flDL\X. All of the staff was based upon )11aterial that came
 from your oflke, all of it. "'Y e !:!:a\'e you a complete list of e\'ery docu-
 ment and e\'erything we hadl:Ccci\'cd, and it is anl.ilable to YOll as ~t ,
 \\'as to us. .
 ADDENDU)I '1'0 STAFF STUDY

 Secretary :UCX.DL\J!..\. Senator Lansche has j llst stnted it had an
 addendum to it that includcd information th~t \\'as not. ~ ,'ailable to me.
 The CJL\lr:)[.\x. That WQS not used in the preparation of the stafl'
 s~udy and it was purely an addendum of things that h~cl hapP'::'ne cl out -
 SIde of the docu ments \\'hich cam~ fr om th e Pentagon.
 ~enator L.\t.'SCIIE. Let me sa)', :\11'. Chail'm~n, that. the addendum
 r eCited a number of contacts J~la de by a stal11i1~m wlth persons un-
 I~IlO\::Il. X m\' it was oil'elwl as an addclldum supposedly ha \'illg an in·
 slglllficallt. importance, but it is then'. Three or four men ,,'110 \,ere
 supposecl to han:- been in the Tonkin Ba\' are alJcQ'ed to ha\'e sa id that
 there "'cre no miss iles ftre cl. Irho are tl{c men? {tow did they contact
 them? .
 Senator COOP):r.. IYh at. ,,'ei o·ht \\'as 9:i \'en to it 1
 Senator )L\XSFn:r.n. jfr. C]lail'mall, I apologize fol' the illt erruption
 but I ha \'e to be up here on the [JonI'.
 The CIf.\IJ!:lL\x. I would hope the Secretary ,\'QuId be allo'.nd to
 proceed.
 1\11'. Secreta1'Y ~
 ESSEXTL\I, J:'.\CTS AnE THE S.\)IE TODAY
 Secretary .:\[c ::\.,\)L\R,\. j[l'. Chairman, on Au gust 6, 196-4:, I appeared
 before this committee and tcst ified conce l'11in o' the attacks in the Ton-
 kin Gulf on the destroyers U.S.S. JJaddo;1] ~ncl U.S.S. TUi'n er Joy,
 and our response to tho8e attacks,
 OYer 3 112 years ha\'e passed since that time. Ho\\'e,'cr, en:l1 with the
 uch-antage. of hindshight, I find that the essential facts of the l\,o
 at.tacks. appea r today as the." did then, when they were funy explored
 ,nth tlllS committee and other jlembers of Congress.
 Tho relonlut e\'ellts, and t hei r si o-nificance, lI'ere the. subject of int en-
 sin debate in the House and S ell;te. Both my testimollY and that of
 other ofllcials of the Go,'cmm cnt reported the e\'idE'll ce th:lt. cstablished
 cOllclnsi \'eh- the occml'ence of these attncks on F,S. n<1 \'a1 n sse ls op·
 "erating in 'intcrnational wa t()l's . This e\'idcnce \\'as a\'illInblc to us at
 the time of the clecision to make a carefully tailored response to the

 ~ ''------~~-,------
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 9
 ~ttacks. In my testimony, I noted that, "'hilc SOllar and radar r ead-
. mgs may l'e subject to interpretation ::tnc1 argumc· lL because of sea and
 atmospheric condi.tions, \\'e hadintellig'ence reports of a highly classi-
 fied and unimpeachable nature '\\'hich established, without question,
 that the atta?ks took place on both August :2 and August +.

 PART l'L,\YED BY U.s. X,.\VAL n:sSELs
 Also fully explored at tIw'time was the question whether the attacks
 on the ill addox and T'Upner J O!J "erc' in any way pro\-okec1 by or re-
 lated to certa in South Vietnamese naTal activity "'hich occurred in the
 period from July 30 to Auo'ust 4. As I stated then, and repeat llOW,
 ol~r na\'~l Yes~el.s pbyed abs~lutely no part in, ~md ,vere not ass?ciatecl
 wIth, t.llls actlVIty. There was then, and there IS now, no questIOn but
 that. the U.S. Gonrllment knew, and that I knew personally, the gen-
 eral nature of some countermeasures beillg taken by the South Viet-
 namese in response to North Yietnam's aggression. As I informed ,
 Congress, the boats utilized Ly the South Vietnamese were financed by
 the United States. But I said then, and I repeat today, that th~ .lladdox
 anc~ ~.I~e TUi'/lU Joy did not participate in the ~outh VIetnamese
 a.ctlVltIeS, that they had no kno,ylec1ge of the detrllls of these opera-
 t.IOns, and that in no sense of the 'YOI'd could they be considered to
. have backstopped the efl:'ort. .
 'As the chairman noted in the Senate debates, he \\-as informed that
 "our boats did not. cOIn'oy 01' support or back up any South Vietnamese
 n.aval ve.sscls" and that they \\'ere "entirely unconnected or unasso-
 clated WIth am' coasta.l £Or,1YS the South Vietnam::se thcmsclns may
 haye conducted." He ,,-as so"informed and the information ,,-as com,
 pletely accur~lte. ",Yhen the South Yietnnmese conducted the first of
 th~ir 1:''''.0 nanl operations agclinst XOlth Yiclnamese targets ~lnrillg
 tIllS perIOd, the i11 addox patrol had not enl1 begun and the slup was
 at least 130 miles to the southeast. The attack on the Maddox on
 August 2 took place G3 hoUl's after completion of this South Viet-
 namese na\'al operation. 'When the South Vietllamcse boats conducted
 theil: secOl~d foray, t.he Jladdo~) and the TUl'lWI' Joy were at least 70
 nautical 11l1les to the ilorthea;:;t.
 S enator C.\SE. I wonder if YOU could go a little more slo\,h'. It is a
 little hard to understa nc1. " " .
 Secretary ::HCXX:HARA . Yes.
 The attack made arrainst them on Au~ust 4 ,,,as almost a full day
 after this second South Vietllamese opemtion. "
 The facts thus show today, as they showed 3% years ago, that at-
 tacks occurred against our ships both on A.Ugllst :2 and August 4,
 th at ,ye had available to u- incontl'o\-ertible e\'ic1ence of these attacks
'when the decision was made to make our limited and measured re-
 sponse, and that these attacks were in no sense proyoked or justified
by any particip;1tion or associ,ltion of am ships \\-ith South Vietnamese
 nayal operations. I ,,"ould like bl'ief~y to review these facts with you.

 REnEW OF F,-\CTS OF ATTACK

 On t.he 2d of August 1064, the r.s.s. J1addo;(' was enga9;ed in a
patrol in internatiOlul waters in the Gulf of Tonkin . _:-\..t no time dur-
ing the conduct of her patrol did J!addo,i] depart from international
 I
 I.
 I
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3_3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~~~~ ... -~.=--- .--..,;.~~-~.- ~-: ....--.-.:..... . .--,---,,-~- . . ~:.-.-,,- .....--~
 I
,!

 10
 waters, or engage in any host ile act. Yet, ,,-hile she ,ya3 28 miles from
 the CO,lSt of Xorth Vietnam, on a COlll'se a,yay from the coast, Jladclox
 was attacked by three Korth Vietnamese torp edo boat:::. _-\.t. least three
 torp~does ,.-ere directed by the boats at the i11 addo;,,:, as well as
 m~chil~egl1n fire. The Naddo x ayoided all tOl'l?e~loes. and. together
 WIth aU'craft arri..-ino' on the scene from the U.~.~ . Ti con deroga, re-
 pelled the attack anel ~l.nk or damaged the atta~kjng c~raft . ~_
 The attack ?n Llfaddo:c took place in dayhgh,t. ~ o~'th "\ letl:ame~e
 reports of theIl' pl ans had prenonsly been obt<l.llled h om an mtelh-
 gence source. The attackinsr craft \\'ere clearly seen by J1addox per-
 sonnel and ,;'ere photographed, The launching of the torpedoes . by
 these PI' boats ,,,as also oh~en-ed as "ere the torpedo \yakes passlllg
 ncar ?'/addoi:. }Iachine o- ull fire from the at tr,ckcrs "11S al"o obscITed
 and, indeed, one bullet ~\"as reco \'cred-it is in our pO;:;"l\~:;ion and I
 -han it here this morniwr if "l:ou \yish to inspect it. _
 -' 1'1n,s. ,yas an unproyoked;::, .J attack on .a SlllP
 , ' .c 1 l~ ' 1 ~ t ..
 o~ L1e~ ,lllrec~.~ ales on
 the lllgh seas. Xevert!lOless, no r epnsal by tn~ llll~2cl_ ::-rates \\'as
 undeytaken. Th~ il!addo;t!, fortull ately, had avolclecl_ygnlflcnllt ~lnm­
 age Itself, and mfhct ed damao-e on the attackers. ~Ill,:e 110 ratIOnal
 moth'e for the attack ,"as appn~'ent, ,ye belie\'CCl it possible that it had
 resulted from a miscalculation oc' an impulsin act of a local com -
 mander. After the second attack, the chairman cornm:'nled ill Sen-
 ate debate that I had stated. after the first attack on the Jladdo~c ,
 that I c1idnot expect it to bel'epeatecl. He also not ed that thi" showed
 how "Tong I ,\-as. __ . -
 On August 3, the cIa" followin o -, a note of prote.;:t \';~lS dIspatched
 to the X orih Vietnam .Jregime at"'the direction of the Presi dent. It
 concluded ,yith the \yords : "The U.S. GoYel'llment e:;:pects that the
 authorities of the reo-ime in X orth Vietnam \',-ill be under no mis-
 apprehension as to tIle crraye consequences which "'ol.llcl inevitably
 result from any further ~nprovokcd ofIensi\'e miliLll'!, ~lctioll against
 q.S. forces." At the same time, the Pre::;ident made pnbli(~ his instn~c­
 tlOns to the N [n-y to continue and to add another cle~troyer to It.S
 patrols in tho Gulf of Tonkin .
 . It wns ,yithin this context that \,e receincl, at about 9 :20 ~Ya sh­
 l!lgton time on the morning of August 4, information from an intel-
 lIgence source that North Vietnamese na nil forces had been ordcred
 to attack the pntrol. -
 Soon thereafter reports from tho 111addox ,yere recei \'Cd that the
 -patrol -was being approached by high speed surface radar contacts
 an? that an attack appeared imminent. Other amplifying messages
 qUIckly followed and by about 11 a.m., \ye reccind a flash report that
 our clestroyers, then located some 60 to 65 miles from the coast of X orth
 Vietnam, were actually under attack, During this 5flllle time. intelli-
 gence sources r eported that North Vietnamese yes.se ls stated they hacl
 our shi)5 under attack. ThrOlwhout ;::, the remainder of the moJ.'nin bo-
 ane1 ~ar y afternoon, fla sh message, reports of_ the engagement, some
 ambI:;uouS and some conflicting, continne.-l to pour in. Frequent
 telephone contflct 'YaS mnintainecl \yith the commander in chief of
 the Pacific Fleet, Hawaii. The Pl'esiclent was kept illfo~'mec1 of the:::e
 clevelopments.

L - - - - - - -----------
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

•..-_._ """'--- ~:.....~..:~~
 , -' -~- ---'- '.,-~--"-
 ' ._ --- -'

 11
 rOXTIU.DICTIO X S EXA:\IIXED AXD RECOXCILED

 During thi.s p eriod, I had a series of meetings "'it~l Jl~y. chief ci\"il-
 ian and military acl\'isers ill which the app,Hent <1ll1b;gllltles 111lll cop-
 traclictions in the relJorts ,yere eX11minecl and reconciled to om' satE-
 fnction. ,,-e identified and refined Yn rious options fOl' ::l l'espoll s~ to
 the attack, to be present ed to the President. Among t.hose Op~lOllS
 was the ~ir strike an-ainst the attackino' bo~ts and then' assocrated
 ba::;es, 'Yhich option ,~as eyc'n tualh: se1ect~c1. A s the options 'werE' iden-
 tified, preliminary meSS<1o-e:3 \\'ere sent ~o appropriate operatio~Ull C0111-
 m.anders alerting them t;'; the seYenll possibilities so that initial plan-
 nmg steps cquId bc undertaken.
 In the early afternoon the X ational Security Council met, at
 '\'hich tiil1e we briefed thd ')rrrtic il)ant:;, includiEo' the. Presidcnt, on
 '1 1. l ' 1 ,~ I'
 t I1e al"a;. aUle detml s of the ntlr:.ck. ::lhortly thereafter, lnnng r eCC lnc
 . 1
 the adnce of the .Joint Chiefs of Stal}' we recommt'!'llecl to the Pres-
 ident, and he appl'onc1 fl. resl)onse cOl~si~tin~' of all :'Iil' ;::trike on the
 l~ ~' 1 -. . , . , ~ 1 f' .,' .' D'
 1 anc :ji';ato".- L'oat brrses :1ild then' assoc):uec ac"m,e,~. Lll'll1g rll'1
 of this time, the lil cssage l'(:1)ol'ts of the eng110:C'mel,t f,'om the ships,
 plus other infonnrrtion of a \':cr ... !lin'hly cbs:,ifrecl Eatmc rec.::inxl elur-
 ing the attack, ,\,e,'e being l'e\'le\\-~l to p.liminatc any dOllht that an
 atta ck on the clf'stroYel'S in hc~ oc c~lrecl. '
 For eX1'mple, I Sri\\' a lllC:,,':1gc from the oascenC' Ulsk group COIll-
 mallller y,'hi ch exp;'C':;::iecl d O'!.1bts as to the yalidity or l.n:1,ny of the
 sOllar rcp orts. I dis cm:~ed this meSS:1f?,'C by telcphoEe y'.i.th the com -
 mander in chief, Jla cific, and infol'lnecl him that, although \\'e ,rould
 cOl1tinue "'i~h the prq)ar[1.tiolls, the reprisal strike " 'ould not be
 executecl until '\'e 'l'erG a\~;::olnt e lv rositiye of the attack. He of coursc
 agreed nnd in a lat er telephone Cttl inforllled me that he ":lS "'~tisfiec1,
 from all the reports he had on hand, that an attack on our shIps had
 taken place. .
 Finally, at. about G:30 p.m ., 'i'{nshington time, .t he :llessage. to
 . execute the st nke was transmitted by the comm:mdcl' III ch,ef, PaCific.
 Those are the essential d etai ls. To recapitulat e, on August 2, one
 of. our d estroyers ,,,as attacked by Sorth Vietnamese n,1\""l forces
 WIthout pro,"ocat ion "hilc on patrol on the hio'h o:eas. Since the de-
 stroyer had suffered no d amn O'e and had repul~cd ' and damaged her
 attacker~, and since the possiGility seemed to exist tha t the incident
 ,,·~s an lsola,ted act, no furt.her military response " ·:ls,.:nac1e. X orr h
 VIetnam \I'as . warllcd the next day . , hOlre\-er, of the "2'1'<1 \'e conse -
 ~

 quences ,\'Iuch would inevitabIv follo'w" another snch att:,ck. Fm·ther-
 more, the President- allJlolmc~·d tha t thc patrol \yollld continue and
 ,rould consist of h\-o destroyers. The next night, the t\YO destroyers
 w~re also attacked ,,,it-hout pro\'ocation on the high se:lS by X ort h
 V Ietname.sc nrrsul forces . '
 'iVhen these fact s were est<lblished to the 'complete satisfaction of
 all . r~~ponsi?l~ authorit.ies, we resP.ollded "i.th an air stl'iJ~e on the
 faclhtles Wl11;l1 supported th e attacklllg vessels. '

 90-1S7-GS-2
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

~- :"~ .. r _
~'~--:'~-"- "-.!...---",,:.- -~~_._ ' l... _",",_~_, _~ _ _ _ ~, ~ ~.:._

 12
 ACC17RACY OF DETAILS STILL QUESTIOXED

 Now, three and it half years later there again seems to be debate
 abont the essential aCCUnlC\' of the aboyo account. The questions that
 appear 110W to be raised al~e the same as those considered and settled
 at the t.ime :
 ,':as tho patrol in fact for legitimate plll'poses?'
 " ere the attacks unproyoked ~
 ,Vas therc indeed a sccond attack? . .
 If there ,yas a second attack ,,"as thGl:e sufficient evidence aTailable
 at the tim e of our response to sUl)port this conclusion?
 I \\ouldlike to address these questions.
 W.iS l'URPOSE OF PATIWL LEGITDL\TE?

 First, \yas the patrol in fact. for legiti!nate purposes ? . 1

 Patrols of the naturc of those carned on by .11 Cl(M ox and 7 U I'ller
 Joy \ycre initiated 'in the ,yestern Pa cific in 19G2. Thev wcre calTiecl
 out in international \yftters a.lOno· the coastlines of Cornmunist coun-
 tries in that area. They .werc ope~l patrols and no ho~tile ac~iolls \yere
 eYor taken by th e U.S. forces im'oll'cd. ProYocatll'e actIOns wE','e
 al'oided .. The pmpose \yas to learn \"hat. \yo could of military acth~ity
 ~nd ennronmental conditions in these part.') of the ,,'orId, opcratmg
 In waters ,,"here we had enry le£>:al right ·.to be. The primary pl~rpo~e
 of the Naddox \\' as to obselTe X orth VIe tnamese nantl actlnty III
 t~lose "aters: in ,'iew of the e\'idence \\'e had of infiltration by sea b:'
 North Yietnam into South Yietnam. Othor secollClary pmpo.3CS were
 area famili a l'ization and oDsernltion by \'i sual and electronic means of
 any other acti vit.v of military interest. lYe had the undisputed right
 to do this. In \'ie~'; of our assistance to South Yietnam, snch observit-
 tions were needed.
 ~he suggestion has appeared incidcntally t11a'tbe~ause .11ad({o.:c ,
 prIOr to commencement of its patrol, took abroad certalll COml1UllllCa -
 tions equipment, with personnt.'l to operate this equipment, it.') patrol
 hac~ some clift'ereIlt and presumably more sinistcr pU~'p~se than others
 ':'hwh h~d preceded it. This is simpl.:> not true. Th~ mISSIOn of Oosc1':-a-
 bon "'IlIch I hal'e outlined \la'" to be fulfill ed mth the re£>,1.darlv Ill-
 stalled equipmcnt of the ships.-The extra equipment brought ab·road
 ill acldox consisted in essence of standard shi pooard radio reeci nrs
 added to the ship's normal complement of such reccinl'S in order to
 give an added ca pabi-lity for detecting indications of a possible hostile
 attack on the patrol. .
 . The Congress, at the time of the debates on the Tonkin Gulf resolu-
 tion, \I'as a\\'are that yjsual and electronic sun;eillance of the area mlS
 one of the purposes sen'ed by the De Soto patrol. All)' suggestion
 now that the installation of passi"e radio recei 1;ing equipment changed
 the essenti.al nature of the patrol is unwarranted.
 I n'ight add that yirtual1y all of th e De Soto patrols, since their
 commencement in 1962, had been outfitted \\'lth similar equipment for
 the same primarily dcfensiYe purpose's . .

 Seconcl, were the attacks Ulll)l"O\-okec1?
 Senator ~IUXDT. Are you defining the De Soto pati'ol1,
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

51

 ---. :.....~:..:.:...-~---~----. ~.~- ~-.-
 . -~_.~' .:,... • _u,

 I
 13
 Secretary l\IC~.DL\R .\. The term as I am using it h ere refer.;; to the
 patrols in the Tonkin Gulf of "hich this was the fourth, one having
 occurred in 1962, one in lOG0, and the third in the early part of 1~6-1,
 and the fourti1. in August 1DG:!'. _\.cl ua 11)' it is a. generic term co:·erlll.g
 a broader range of patrols in the western PacIfic but as use d In thIS
 pa l!er i t refers to the fO~ll' patrols in t.he Tonkin Gulf.
 Second, \\-ere the attacks unjwo\'oked '?
 . I h aye l-:ea rd it suggested that the patrol pro:~oked the ~ttac1;:s by
 mtrudmg mto the territ oria l ,Yaters of :K or-tIl \ ·lCtnam. Tne facts, I
 think, are these. .'
 l~rior to the first atta ck, on August 2, the Maddox had been ~ngagecl
 O~llts pat.rol since July 31. At no time during the conduct of tIns pat~'ol
 dId the i1f addox depart from intemationa l "nte~·s. It had been m-
 stru~ted to. approach the X ort h Yietnamese coastlIne no clo?er th~n 8
 nautlcallm1es and any offshore island no closer than 4 na,utlca l mIles.
 Maddox adhered scrupulouslY to these instructions. ,Yhen the patrol
 resur~ec1 wit.h 111adelo.x and ill mel' Joy, the shiys werc. instructed to
 remaIn at. least 11 mIles from the coast. These mstructIOns also were I
 followed. The United States recocYJlizes no cIn im of a terri toria l sea,
 in excess ?f 3 miles. This consistel~t position of. the United States \yas
 r eemphaSIzed at the close of tho 19GO ConventIOn on Law of the Sea.
 I
 in Geneva. .
 There h:cye, howC\-er, been statements reported in the press tl!at !he
 II
 L1faddo;)) entered into waters claimed by X ol'th Yietl1!,lll as tern tonal.
 Snch statemen ts have no basis in f act. At no time pnor to the August i
 196-:1: Tonkin Gulf incidents' did the North Yiet.na mese Goyernm ent i
 i
 claim a width of territorial sen i.n excess of 3 miles. The X ortll Viet-
 namese Goyernm ent. sl1cceeded the French Goyernmcnt . \\'11ich adhered
 tothe 3-mile limit . Under the rules of i.nternationa lla\\-, no claim by
 I
 I
 N ort.h Viet.nam in excess of 3 mil es \yould be assulllec~ unless speci fi eally
 made and published. It shoHld be noted that Cambodia, a sister suc-
 ~essor state, publicly adopt ed th e French 3-mile rul e on ac!~ieying
 I
 mc~cpende~ce . L ater, i t proclaimed a 5-mile limit. S.onth \ letn,,!:l
 chums 3 mIles. ThE:' first statement of X orth Vietnam whIch approaches
 a claim in excess of 3 miles occurred ,Yell after the attacks on Septem-
 ber 1, 106·1, in the form of a broadcast from Radio Hanoi in " 'hich it,
 was .sta!ed, "~heDemocl'atic R epublic of Vietnam c1eclarec~ that the
 I
 ter~'ItorJa l sea IS 12 miles .'~ X o official documentary confirmatIOn of the
 claIm asserted in this broadcast is kI10'Yll to C'xist.
 In short,. a~ not time during the patrol did either Tof the ;~cstroye rs
 lea '-e the ,lllgI1 seas and enter areas claimed by the ~ orth , letnamese
 I
 or recoglllzecl by the United States as national waters.
 The question' mio'l1t be asked 110\,e.-or: Should not "e as a practical
 n.latter have assum~d a, clai.m of 12 miles since this is the l:niform pos i-
 . tron .of the Communist countries? The simple answer IS that Com-
 mUl1lst countries do not haye such a uniform position: Cuba and
 Pobnd eac 11 adhere to the traditional 3-mile limi.·, 'Thile Yugoslavia
 and Albania claim 10 miles.

 SOUTH nET X :Drr:SE OPET:.\ TroXS

 Ano~h er p oint relating to ':pro\ocation~' was discussed and disp?sed
 of .durIng the debates qn the Tonkin Gulf resolution and the hearmgs
 pnor thereto, but, of late, it seems to h8..-e been resurrected. It is tho
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

r'" _. ...

 14
 suggest-i.on that Ollr patrol ":as in some \yay connected. with certain
 reconnaIssance and bombardment activities of South Vlet.namese pa-
 trol <:l'aft against North Vietnamese. ' ...
 I mi'eH1ned members of this committee of these actlnties of the
 . South Vietnamese in an informal meetino' 011 August 0, 1DG:1, after the
 attack ~n t.he N addo~/). The subject \YIlS again raised in lesser. clebil in
 my testImony before this committee on August G, 19G:1:. Iyolllted out
 that these raids \"ere a le""iLim,tte attempt bv the South YletllltmeSC to
 counter and retaliate aO'ainst the systematicinfiltr<ttioll of their conn-
 try by sea 'w hich had b~en ca.rried out by 1\orth Vietnam f~l' the pl:evi-
 ous t.wo and a half years. I described the scope of that. lllfi1trfttlOr~;
 that IS, 1<10 kJlO\\'n incidenLs between .J uly and December 1031, an esti-
 mated 1,400 infiltrators havino' been lancled in South Vietnam dUl'ing
 that time. I:>

 , ,Yith l'espc~.'t to t.he legitin~ac:y of tllO;~ SOl:th Vietnamese opera tions,
 } ou, ~Il'. Chau'man, stated dUl'lng the Ionbn Gulf floor debates;
 . 'I.'he boats th f\t lI:a, haye st ru ck at the coa,:;t;1 1 areas of ::-;ort11 \'ietnam may
 h ave b~ell Supplied b;' us, lYe hC\\'c· l.Jeen IJelpillg South Vietn:\lll arlll it~el£. I do
 not knc;w about the spccitic uoats. . . . .! ' . ".
 I pc!·,;QrJfd ly think tlrh is <l perfec-tly ]('gitim:1le and propP!' \\'.~y to defe~ld
 oneself from tile kbel of aggre;;::;ion South Yiet n:lm has been subJected to for
 years.
 S~I:atol' Morso, at ,the hearing on August G, ~pecifically }'aisecl the
 que"tIon of a COll!lcction betwecn our patrol and [he ~onth "\ lctIw.mese
 bon~bal'Clment of two X orth Vie.tn.:t;nc;;e isbllC13 ,,'luch hncl occurred
 some t\yo and ,1 half days pi·jor to the nttack on .!!ad~loJ.·, anel I re-
 sponc1ed that tlle ~'e ,\yas no connection. The hro OPCl'l1t.LOllS ,,'ere sep-
 arate and distinct.. I informed YOU that our c1estroyers took no part
 whatsoe,"er in the South Victna~nesc operation, They did not com'oy,
 Support, 01' back up the South Vietnamese boats in any way ....A.s I
 stated during the hearings; . "
 .. * * " as I reported to you earlier this week. we understand that the South
 , letllallleSC sea fo'·.::e carried out vatrol action around tliese island;; allLl actaally
 shelled the paint::; the," felt were associatc:d with thi::; infiltration.
 Our ships had ab.,oiutely no kuo\\'J ec1;;e of it. \\'ere not connected ,lith it; in no
 sense of the \I'ord can ue considered to ha\'e backstopped the effort.
 That statement remains entirelv accurate, I can confirm today thnt
 neither the ship commanders !lor thc embarked task STOUp commander
 ~lac1 ar<y know1cdf"e of the South Yietname~e action against the two
 Is1an~s or of ~ny "'other specific South Vietname3e operations against
 t!le ~orth. Hlghel' nDxal commands were made aware of the opera-
 ~lOns by Commander, U.S. Militnry Assista nce Command, Vietnam,
 In order to avoid mutual interieren?l orconfusion between our pat.rols
 and those operntions. '

 n illECTlOXS TO u.S. DESTROYERS

 . Throughout the patrol conducted first by the i11 addo~tJ alone and
 ll1: ter by the .:.11acldox and the l'Hrne?' J O?/, tho U .S. destroyers were
 chrecteLl to remain in \y[tters which \",ould kel!p them from becoming
 operationally im'oh"ec1 \",ith the South Vietnamese actiyity. The re~­
 s~rictions this imposed on t.hc patrol \'\ere such thnt, at one time, C011 -
 slc1cratioa \las gi,'en to its nbandonment. The task group comlllanc1er
 kn e.w .only that, certain. South Vietnamese na\'al operations \\'(:re
 penoc1lcally cnlTied 011 111 the area. lIe had no detalled knowleclge
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

II

 I
.I
 15
 of their type or of where or ,yhen they '\'ou1cl be conducte(1. Indeed,
 his lack of blo,dedo'e ,vas such that he mistrtkenly identified t1le
 \ South Yietnamese cr~ft returnino' from their oper::ttion of July 31
 as Soyiet P-G class boats, ~ .
 ·~ .In point of fact, our patrols and the shore bOl:lbarc1men!~ by South
 "\ letnameS:-l forces \';e1'e sepa ra ted in both ti:ne :md space. "' '. hen South
 Vietnamese PTF's bombarded the islands of Hon Xieu and Hon :JIc
 011 the nigH of July 30-31, the :lladdox had not en~n commenced her
 p atrol, and y,as d least 130 miles to the southeast of the nearest of
 tho:~c is1::tnds . ..At the time of the attack-on the JJaddox on Angust
 2, the South Vietnainese boats had been back at their base in Da X ang
 fol' almost 33 hours.
 I learned suhsequent to my testimony of August 6, 196'1, t~lat an-
 other South . Yietnamese bomb:ur1ment tool: place on the lllght of
 August 3--"J.. At the time of tInt action, the ll1arldox and Tu,nwr Joy
 \\ere at. least 70 miles to the northeast. The X orth Vietnamese at-
 tack on 11!addoa: and TW'ner Joy on the night of August 4: occLllTed
 some ~~ hours later. ' ,
 I thinl.( it impOl'tant, too, in dealing with this issue, to r ecall that
 the Presic1e~lt had annolDcec1 publicly 011 August. ~ th~t our patrol
 ,youlc1. COnLllll1.e and COIFlst of bro destroyers. It I S chfficult to be-
 llen, III the face of that. lUlllOl!I;Cemenr . and its ob\'iou:" pnrpo::c of
 asserting our right to freedom of the sc;s, that enl1 the::\' orth Viet-
 namese could connect the patrol of the UadaM' and Tur'na J oy
 ,dtll a S outh Yi etna.mese action taking pla ce some 70 miles a ,\'ny.

 w~-\s TIIEm:: ,\ sJ:::coxn ATTACK'
 X 0"', thirdly, was there in~leec1 a second attack ~
 I know of no claim that the attack on J!addox on _'\ugu st 2 did not
 occur, As for the second attack, the incident occurred Oil !J. \'cry. (~ark,
 moonk:os, ovel'cast night. ~\.s would be expected umler these cO;lclttlOn;;;,
 som~ uncert.ainty existed, and to thi.s day exists, about sO:I",C of th e
 precise c1etatls of the attack. But there should be no lUlCel't:nnty about
 ~he. fact .that .an attack took place, Tile eyic1ence perbining to the
 mCldent IS ren~\ycc1 in the follo\ring pl1ragraphs. . .
 , On the cvellIno' of AU'ZllSt"l 19G-J., Task Group 7:2.1 consisting of
 U.S.S. ,~[addo~: l~ld U.S.S . 1'~I,1~ne1' foy, ,dtll CO:JIDESDf~~ 1£):2 eEL-
 barked III Jl addo;c and ftctin~ as CTG 7:2 .1, \\'as proceecllllg on an
 easterly course in the Gulf ofTonkin at i\. speed of 20 k:1ot" ...A.t abo'Lt
 7 :40 p,m., Tonbn Gulf time:' the task group commander, Cal?t. J .•J.
 H errick, US::\, ou:::eryec1 Oll the surface search radar at. least h\'e con-
 ta?ts, which he c"alllatecl as probable. torpedo boats, located.nbout 8i3
 mIles to the northeast of the two ships ..At 7 :46 p.lll" J! addox and
 T~l~n ei' J oy ch::tnged COlll'se to 130 and increa.sec1 speed to 28 knots to
 . aVOid ,yhat t}le task group commander had eyalu~\tec1 as a trap ..
 Shortly atter £) p.m" both ships: radars held conracts apl)rosm1atel:'
 14 miles to the ea:3t. These contacts "'ere Oil course 160. speed 30 knot<;.
 ~~t [hat!5 m~ the b\'o U.S. ships ,yere approximate;y 60 miles from the
 N ort h "\ letm.llle:3C coast.
 At abO\lt £) :;)1) p.m., both Jl/(lddo;z, and TW'lIei' J o!./ opened fire on the
 approachmg craft when it was e"ic1er:,t from their l11alleUnl'S that they

 lTo com' crt local 'IoDh-:in Gulf time to c.d.t. subtr~ct 12 hour,.

 -------_._-
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 "'ere pre.:;sing in for attack positions. _-\.t about this time, the boats wer8
 at a fange of C,OOO yards from Jladdo.l' wh~Jl the raclar tl'flcl~ing in ch-
 cated that tho cOlltact had turned awaY and begull to open III range.
 Torpedo noises \I'ore then heard by the Ji(lddox 's sonar. A_ reP?Ii: of
 th~ tol'p ~c1o noise was immediately passed .to the T 1O:llel' J oy by lllter-
 Sh1p radlO and both ships took ~"asiYe actIOn to a ,-old the torpedo.
 RJ~porii-soF EYE,YITXESSES

 A. torp edo wake " as then si2,'hted l)assi ng abeam TW']le ]' J oy from
 aft to forward, approxim(\tel!~ :JOO feet to port on the same bearing
 as that reported by J~addox . This sighting "-as made b:r at least fOlIl'
 of Ttfi'-ner Joy's topsIde personnel: the fOl'\\-ard gun dll:,ectOl' ofhcel.',
 Lt:. (J_g.)John J. BaITY, USXR i. the port lookout, E~l\Yln R. ~enjeJ,
 S~, DS); ; by a seaman who \\'as ill the fOl'\\',1l'd gun ehrector ,nth the
 dIrector officer, Larry O. Litton, SX, 'GSX; and by a seaman ,,-ho
 was op~ratol' of the aftel' gun director, Rogel' X. Bergland, SX, USX.
 At about 10 :24 p.m., one target was t aken under fi re by Turner Joy.
 N'umerous hits were obsen-ed O~l this target and it disappeared from all
 r adars. The commandino' officer and other Turn er J oy personnel ob -
 SCITed a thick column of black smoke from this t arget.
 L ater, 10 :-17 p.m., durino' the attack a, search1ight ,,-as obse rnd by
 all signal bric1 ~e and ma~euyerina bridge personnel including the
 c<?mmanding ofhcer of U.S.S . TU1'lle~' Joy. The beam of the sea rchlight
 elIcl not touch the ship, but ,"as seen to s\\'ing in an arc toward TW'iwr
 Joy and ,,-as ilnmec1iately e:stino'uishec1 ,,-hen ail'craft from the combat
 air pat.rol orbiting aboye th'e ~hips appl'oached the vicinity of the
 searchlight.. (,Walter L. Shishim, Q:.\[CS. USX ; Richard B . Johnson,
 S?lIl, US~ iRichard D . X ooks, Q:'\I 3, 'GSX: Ri chard M. Bacino, S:'\B,
 1!SX; an~l Gary D. Carroll, S';}I3, US~, stationed on the TI.lm e]' J ois
 SIgna 1 bndP'e all made \ni tten statements th at they SIghted the
 searchlight. )
 The silhouette of an attackinp' boat ,,-as seen by at least four T1t7'nei'
J.oy persolln el whe11 the. boat c~me behreen the flares dropped by an
aIrcTaft and the ship. l Yhen the.so f oul' men >fere asked to sketch \\·hat
they had seen, they accurately sketched P-!-t>'pe boats. (Xone of the
four had eyer seen a pictme of a P-! bO:lt. before). (Donald '/ . Shar-
key, B:'I1:3, -CSX; Kt'nn et h E. G:U'l'ison. SX. 'Cs~: Delner .Tones, G:'\IG
SN, USX, and Arthur B. Anderson, FT S X, USX, are the four per-
 sonnel from the Tu rne r J oy "'ho sizhted the boat. )
 In addition to the aom'e, a gll!1ncl"s mate second cbss stationed
aft of the siQ,'n:11 brido'e aboard U.S.S. Jiaddox saw th e outline of a
boat .rhich ·"-as silholfettecl by the lizht of a burst from the 3-ineh
projectile fired at it. (Jose n. San August in G:.\IG], USX.)
.. The commanding ofHcer of ..:-\.ttack Sqnadron 52 from the T /con -
del'oga (Comdr. G . H. Edmon dson, rSX) and his n-i ngman (Lt ..J. _-\..
~uTt ~m), \\-h ile flyin g at altitudes of behYeen 700 anc11,f'i00 feet in the
V}-c.l1ltv of the byo destroyers at the time of the torpedo attack both
sIg-Meet gun fla shes on the surface of the n'ater as Y,-ell as light antiair-
craft burst;; at their approximate altitude. On one pass ol"er the two
destro;r ers , both pilots positirely sighted~. "snakey" high speed wake
1% mIles ahcncl of the lead destroyer, u.:::; .S. 111add ox.
 1\,0 U .S . :.\Iarine Corps personnel ,,-ho were manning machineguns
on U.S .S. M addox sn\\' lights p ass up the port side of the ship, go out
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3_3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 ,
 f
 17
 ahead, and pass doml the starboard side. Thei l' written statement as- f
 serts their belid that this "-as 011e or more small boats at high speed. ~
 {These were ),Intthe\\' B. Allasre SGT rS.:\IC, and Dadd A. Prouty, I

 I
 L /CPL, US':\IC.) -" _
 INTELLIGEXCE HEPOItTS

 In. addi tion to .the abon, intelligence reports receind f1'9.111 a highly
 class.1 6ed and ulllmp eacha1;lle source reported that North V letlla m "'as I
 maklllg preparations to attack our destroyers with t:"o ~watow boats-
 and ,nth one PT boat if the PT could· be made r eady III tune. The same
 source reported, '"hile the el1O"a o-ement '''as in progress OIl August 4-,
 that the attack was Undel'\n1y.bII~llnediate ly after the attack. end~d, the
 I
 I
 SOurce reported that the X orth Yietnamese lost hyo shIps 111 the
 engagement. I
 . Xo one: -within the D epartment of Defcnse has r eyiewed all of this i
 m!ormatlOll withou t al'l'iying at the unqualified conc1usio:l tlwt a detey- f
 l1lmed attack '''as made 011 the J! addox and T.ZU'IW,· Joy III the Tonkm
 Gult on th e nio-ht of August 4, 196-:1:. Yi ce Adm. Roy L. Jol!nsOJ.l,
 US.N, com111anc1e1' of the U.S. 7th Fleet at the time, stated 1Il hIS
 !,
 f
 r en e,y of the combined chronology and t1'<'l C];: charts submit-ted by the
 task group commander: I
 COlllmander, Se"E'nth Fleet is conYillced be, and allY doubt that :'Ilac1dox and
 Turner Joy were subjected to' an tUlpro,-okec1 sllrface torpcc1o attack all the night
 I
 of 4 Augu st 1964.

 Adm.. 1'. H. Moorer , then commander in chief, Paci6c Flect, con- I
 CUl'l'eCI III that. apprais'll.
 In '}Yashington, the Director of the .Toint Staff, Lt. Gen. D a\·id _\..
 BUl'cllln~l, USAF, analyzed the incoming information froll~ messagc
 t~'affic, 'Ylth the assistance of the Joint StaIr. He then g,l\'c h IS e\'lll\H~­
 hon to the Secretary of D efense : ':1'he actun.lity of the attack IS
 confirmed."
 In th: face of t.his eddence, I can only conclude that many of
 the perSIstent questIOns as to ,,,hether 01' not an attack took place Illust
 ha\'e arisen from confusion between the ..:\uo-ust 4 attack and an-
 other in~ident \I'hi ch occurred on the 1Sth of S~ptembel' 19GJ; that is,
 about '10 days later. J .. t that time, the F .S . destroyers J! m·to-!! . and
 EdvJards were p~\trolling, at night, in the Gulf of ?,onk.in, al,lcllllltw1!y
 ~'ep~)l'tcd th elllselns under attack ,Yhile the ensuIng slttwtIOn r eports
 ~nchcated t!lC probability of hosti le cmft in the area of the patrol,
 It 'I'as deCIded at both the ,Yashingtoll and field commaJlCl lel'e1s
 that no credible eyidence of an attac];:-esistcd. It should be noteel that
the i!ltell igence source that confirmed the attacks of_-\.ugust 2 ancl J
pl'ondecl no edc1ellcc of any ellemy action on Septcmber IS. In "iew
?f ~)l~ r u lll'esoh'ed doub ts,' no rcfali ator}' action was ta,ken . .:\Iany
!Ucl.Indu[tls ,\'ho were HOt a'l'are of all of the facts about all thrce
l11:ldcnts, tha t .is, ;""\..ugust :2 and -1, and S eptembcr 18, 11a \'e Jl~ael~ the
mIstaken as~umptlOn th~~t descriptions of thr Septemher 18 lIlcrdent
"'ere l'efelTlllg to the second Tonkin Gulf incident.. .Aware of the
negatiye fir~c1illgs 011 September IS, they ha "e lIlistakcnl~' assumed that
there IS serlOUS doubt as to whE!thel' the "s€cond" Tonkm Gulf attrrck
in fact took place. I
 I
 l
 I!
 t
 ----- --- - -- - --
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

(J ' l
Ol

 is

 As a fin al point on this issue, U .S, Illln1 forces in the 31/2 yea rs which
 1u1.\'e eLq,secl since the Au,<:>'l1:;~ 1964 incidellts haye captured seyeral
 ~orth Yietnamese llaval p~'sol1nel . These p ersollnel were extensirely
 mter~·ogate(l. One of these, captured in July 19G6, stated ~10 had taken
 part In the ~\.l1glt"t 2, 19GJ, attack on the Jladdox, and Ills account of
 that attack coincided with omobselTations. He professed no knowl-
 edge of the Al12:u~t 4 attack nlld said that. he believed th a t PI' bonts
 ,wre not im'oh-c c1 in that attack. Hestatcd that S\l"<1tOI';,':; could haYe
 been USEd fOt· that athck !lis (li:::claimel' of PT pa,rticipation is con-
 tradi cted by information recei red from a later cnpti ve, A X orth Yiet-
 namese naval ofiicer captured in July 1067 proyjdecl the nam e of the
 C(:Hllmallcler of a PT sqnadron. In int elligence r eports rec~iye cl imme-
 chately aH.er the August '1 attnck, this cor~11!lanc1er and Ins squadron
 "-ere. Idenhfiec1 hy name and number as partlClpants~ , , '

 SCI'FICIEXT E\-WE X CE ,\,.ATL_\uLE TO SUPPOIlT COXCLlJSIOX

 NO I,", finally. if there was a second at'tack, Iras there sufficient e\"i-
 dence a.'-aib ble at th e tim B of our response to support this conclusion?
 .Some of tlle dct[l il5 citerl !lbon, particularly the statements of eye-
 'ntnesses, although g,lthered immediately aiter tho atbck, had not
 reach ed 'Yashil1!:'.ton at the time that the r eprisal air strikes were
 ordered execntec( SlImcient in TOl'matiol111 ,\"a:'> in the hand:; of te Pres i-
 dent, hov,2Y01', to e::tab1ic:h beyond any doubt th en or noy\- that an
 nttn.ck.kH1 tak en p1<lCC. : '-1] 0'" ~11? to rep'~at af'ain that 5nfol'In!ltioll:
 .An lllt ~ JJi ,~ence report of a highh- classified aJl~l unlmp~ ,~chnb ]e}ln­
 iure roc'cInd shol'tlr before the engngement, siatll1g th~t. ~orth '\ let-
 , namese Imval forces mtended to attack the J! addox and Tu rner Joy.
 Repor t s from the ships that their radars indicated they 'nre being
 shnclo\H:c1 by high speed surface nssels.
 _Reports from the shi.ps that they \\-e~'e b ~ing appronchec1 by the
 hIgh speed vessels and nil attack a,pp earec1 lmmment.
 Reports from th e ships that they \fere ur~der a~tack.. .
 ;~ rel?Ort hom th ~ ships that ' sea r chlIght lllur:lll1atlOn hnd been
 utilIzed oy the attackIng craft and th!lt gunfire nga1l1st the patrol had
 been obsen-e d.
 A l'epott. that hyo torpedoes had p asse d close to the TUJ'ner Joy and
 that th ere had heen posi ti'-e visual sightings of "hat appeared to b e
 c ockpi~ lights of patrol craft passing n ear the lJ{addox.
 An lI1t elli~'ence report statin£' that North VIetnamese naval forces
 had reportecl that. t.lley "ere im-olvecl in an engagement.
 Report s from the 'U.S. ships thnt they had sunk t\fO nnd possibly
 t hree of the attacking craft. '
 ,An int e1li!:':cnce r el)ort statiM: that Xorth Vietna,l11ese 11c1,nl forces
 had rpportecnosing two ships in-the engagement.
 A (cport from the onscene task group cOLlmanc1er that he was cer-
 tain tha t the n:nbush had taken place, although precise details of the
 l'ng'agenwllt \,e re stil1not known.
 ~\. i:epOl't fron~ the COE1!1l<l lldel' in chief, P,lcific, tbIt he had no doubt
 that. <l;l rtttnck had OCClIlTN1.
 .-\11 of th:;: infon~lati()n n'a:3 nn,ilnbJe prior to the time the Executi\'e
 order \\-"S is,;uc c1.

 --,,'-- ----- - - --
 Declassified per Executi ve Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

 19
 . )lOXSTP.OL'S I~SIXL, \TIOXS

 As a final point, I must :lc1c1ress the suggestion .th~t: in s~1;1e W~}:,
 the Go\'el'l1mellt. of the l~llited State~ induccd the lJ1Clc[cnt. OIl .-\'llgllSt
 4 ",ith the ~n tellt of proYiding' an ex cuse to ta~e the ret.~lli~ltorr action
 wInch we lJl fact. took, I C~l!l only ch,lractel'lze sueh lllSlllll<lLlOnS as
 monstrous. .
 TI~e effec~i\'e repulsion of the Angnst :? ath'.ck on~ the Jiudrlox ,,·!tll
 relatn'ely lngh cost to the small X orth Yietr,amese ~ a \'Y: cOllI~lecl \nth
 Cur protest which clearly and UllCq aj \'OC:11ly warned of the> serIous COll-
 seq~lCnc('s of n, reculTcncc, made. us confident that another atlack was
 unlikely, The published order of the President that the 112stroyers
 should continue to assert. the l'10'ht of the frcedom of t lIe s~as in the
 Gulf of Tonkin, amI setting fortII the composition of the pah'ol: should
 have sen'eel to a\'oid am' flll'thcr misllnclprstanc1~ng·. _\s the patrol rc-
 s,lImed the ships \\'e1'O oi~lerec1 to remain 11 miles f(ol1l t!\2 cO:lo'tline ill
 heu o~ the 8 m,iIes ol'del'id 011 the prC\'iOllS pi!trols~ hanlly i:,ld\c:at in
 ?f, a.1l 1,lltent. to lllc1uce another attack. As n matter of teet, OlllllC'Il' O\\,ll
 li1~tJatn'e . the h\:o ships approached the coastlin? ~10 clo3?r than IG
 mIles c1urlllg theIl' patrol. But beyond that, I fincllt lIlcol\cemlhle that
 anyone en:>n remoteh ral\\ili,ll' with our society and ~"stem of GO\'-
 emlnen! coulc1 Sl1SDcct the existence of a consPlracy ,,'11ich \':u,J1d in-
 dude almost, if no~t t,lI the entire ch['.in of miJitan romnu'.lld in the
 Pacific, the Chairman ~f the Joint Chiefs of SU'.1i·: thp .Joint Chiefs,
 the SecrC'tar} of Ddrnsc, and his chief ei,'iJiHIl assisr<lllts, the Secre-
 tar} of State, and the Pl'es iden t of the United States.
 }:[r, Chairman', that concludes m} st~l.ter!1('nt, and I \\'iiI be' \'ery hap -
 py to try to ans\\'er any qnestions.
 The CII.\I1~::\L-\X. Thallk you, }Ir. Secl'etary. , ,
 I \:'oulc~ llkc to han.~ a few preliminary qupstJon:; \nth rp~'<H'd, to
 the SItuatIOn under \\,ltich this "'hole ntTair tonk pla ce. I d')n t thlllk
 they are \'('~'Y c1ifl1cult to n11S\7e1'.

 !XTEJ:XAT, T}WUBL'ES OF KIL\Xn GO\,EnX~·IEXT

 Mr. SecretarY, is it true that the ()'o\'el'lllllent of Geaecll Kl umh
 which oyerthTe;y the }Iinh junta in J ~n1<1ry 1964 \\' :15 in serious tron-
 ble by the Spl'lng and early summer of 196-1 '1 , "
 Secreta ry ~lcX:DL\H.A. I think there \\'as C0l1':11c1emble CliSSCllSl0n
 among the members of the gonrnment, )11'. ChairmalL ~1l1d there was
 then ancllater a, series of ch,ulO'cS in the O'onrmnent ~1~ f1. result of that
 dissension. a '"

 The CR\IIOL\X. Did you not say recently 01\ ")Iee[ the Press':' and
 I quote : "Three and a half years ago th~ South Vietl\am~fe for('C's \I'ere
 on the .-erge of defeat. The X orth VlCtnnmese and '\ letcong forces
 were on the \'erge of "ictory," . . .
 Isthatnccurate? .
 S ecretai·y Mc:LDL\TI,\. ~Ir. Chairman, if I said that. I mi~ C'" till1ated
 the cl ate. IYha t. I "'as talkilJf" about-I think late: in that same brond-
 cast I specifically referred t~ it was July 1%.1. I should ha':e said two
 and a half years ago. That \,;as 'the refel'ence I was making,
 The CHAI1~:lI.\X, Tha,t is n quote from ju~t ~ \n~ek.:; ~1g0 .
 Secretary McN'.DL-\n:l. It may be, }11'. Chairman. I ,\'ould have to
 h~we the full transcript of ,d1,lt I sniel . I believe I mentally deducted

.- -......_._----
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

COpy

 SOUTHFJ\..ST ASIA HESOLUTImr 3::./

Whereas naval units of the Conrrmmist regime in Vietnarfl ) in violation Of
 the principles of the Charter of the United nations and of int ernatione,l
 l m-T) have deliberately and repeatedly att~(;ked. United St ates naval
 vessels lm·r:fully present in intel~national 'H aters ) and have thereby cree.ted
 a ' serious th1:e at to international peace ; and .
Hhereas these attacks are part of a deliberate and systematic campaign
 of' aggression that the COE!lllUnisi: re gime in N:)rth Vietnam has been "l-Taging
 against its neighbors and the nations joined ,·rlth them in the collective
 defense of their freedo~n j and .
vlhereas the United States is assisting the peoples of southeast Asia to
 protect their freedom and ha s nO territorial ) · military or politiccd
 ambitions in that area) but desires only that·these peoples should be
 left in peace to "\-Tork out their ml!1 destin:i.es in their 0'n'Yl ,·ray : NmT,
 there fore, be it

 Resolved by the Senate and House of Renres2ntatives of the Un:i.ted States
of Arnerica in Congress asserllblcd , That the Con~ress 2.pprove 2Dd s upport I
the determina.tion of the President , as Comme.nder in Chief, to take aJ.l
nec essary measures to repel any anned attack against the forces of the
United St ates and to prevent further aggressioll .

 Sec . 2. The United St2.tes regards as vit2~1 to its nat i onal int erest and
to .Torlc1 peace the maintcEance of int ernational peace and security in
southeast ASia. Consonant .ii th the Constitution of the United St 2.tes and
the Charter of the United Nations 2.ud in accordance .Tith it obligations
under the Southeast Asia Collec tive Defense Treaty, the United States is)
therefore ) prepared , as tn2 Pre ~;ic1en t determines ) to take all nec ess[~r.f
steps , including the use of anced force, to assist any member or protocol
st ate of -:~ i.'.:: 80i..:t~-:'::8. St Asi a Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance
in defen se of i is freedo1'1 .

 Sec . 3. This resolution shall expire1vhen the President shall determine
that the peace and. security of the aree. is ree.sorta8ly assured by
international condit ions created by action of the United Ne.tionsor
othenrise , except' that it may be termina ted earlier by concurrent
r esolution of the Congress .

 Text of Putlic Lai{ 88-1~08 LH.J. R8S . 11\5_7, 78 Stat . 381 ~ , approved
 Aug . 10) 1961~ .
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 "TI
 o
 S
 z
 o
 -of
 rn
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECP~ - Sensitive

 FOOTNOTES

 1 .. Baltimore Sun) 22 May 1964 .
 2.
 On 6 and 7 June two U. S . Navy reconnaissance aircraft were shot
 dOlvn Over laos by commQl1ist groQl1d-fire . The United States requested
 and received permission to furnish armed escort reconnaissance
 f~ights) and on 9 June) U. S. aircraft struck Pathet lao gun pos i-
 tlons and damaged a Pathet lao headquarters . Souvanna Phouma
 temporarily ,rithdrew his permission for armed escort in response
 to vigorous DRV and Chinese protests) but renevred it on 12 June.
 See Baltimore Sun) 7) 9) 10) 13 June 1964. Also, New York Times ,
 9, 10 June 1964 . .
 3· State/Defense message to Vientiane and Bangkok Embassies , 29 June
 1964 ( In Vietnam 381 ; 11- 30 June 1964 file ) ( SECRET) .
 4. See Baltimore Sun, 3 June 1964; New York Times, 7, 20, 23 , 24 June
 1964 .
 5· New York Times, 21 June 1964.
 6. Ne,v York Times) 22 June 1964; 1--1a shington Post, 23 June 1961~.
 7· New York Times , 11 July 1964; New York Herald Tribune and Washington
 ~, 9 June 1964 .
 8. Canadian delegation ( Saigon ) message to U. S . Department of State,
 20 June 1964 ( in Vietnam 381: 11-30 June 1964 ) (TOP SECRET) .
 9· See Bundy memorandum to Secretary Rusk, "Highl ights of Honolulu
 Conference) " 3 June 1964 ( in State Department Materials ) Vol. I)
 ( SECRET ). See also discussion in United States-Vietnam Relations)
 1945- 196 r, DT . C·5, "Military Pressures Against North Vietnam ; Action
 c

 and Debate, Feb - Jun 1964.)" pp . 34- 35 (TOP SECRET ).
10. Robert Manning memorandum to President Johnson, " Informatj.on Program
 for Southeast Asia )" 16 June 1964 (in Vietnam 381 ; 11- 30 June 1964)
 (TOP SECRET ).
11. NSAM 308) 22 June 1964 ( SECRET) .
12. From "Pertinent Historical Background) Rules of Engagement -- Southeast
 ASia, " ( Undated) 1966) notes compiled by Assistant Secretary of
 Defense ( ISA) McNaughton ( j.n McNaughton VIII ) (TOP SECRET ). .

 Secretary McNamara , before Senate Foreign Relations Committee)
 20 February 1968) Hearing Before the COIT@ittee on_Foreign Relations,
 U. S. Senate, Ninetieth Congress , Second Session, vlith the Honorable
 Robert S. McNamara) Secretary of Defen se on February 20, 1968
 {Washington : U.S. Government Printing Office , 1968)) p . 26 .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

9-3
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 14 . Secretary McNamara) before Senate Foreign Relations and Armed Services
 Committ ees) 6 August 1964 (in McNaughton VIII) (TOP SECRET ).

 15· CJCS memorandum to SecDef) "North Vietnam Operations ( S L II' 19 May
 1964 (JCSIvi 426- 64 ) (TOP SECRET ).

 16. SACSA memoranda to SecDef) "Operations Against North Vietnam)" .
 13 June 1964; 1 July 1964; 28 July 1964 ( in Vietnam 381 : Sensitive
 File) ( TOP SECRET).

 17. Rusk message to Vientiane Embassy) 26 July 19611· (State 89 ) ( in
 "Southeast Asia) June-July 1964) II CF 15 ) (TOP SECRET). See also)
 CJCS memorandum to SecDef) "u . s./G\TJ',T Combined Planning)" 24 June
 1964 (in Vietnam 381 : 11- 30 June 1964) (TOP SECRET) . The internal
 policy of controversy on cross-border operations during the first
 half of 1964 i s descr ib ed to some extent in United States-Vietnam
 Rel ations) IV . C. 5 . (TOP SECRET) .

 18. The specific recommendations appear in a McGeorge Bundy memorandum
 to Secretary Rusk) et . a1.) "Draft Basic Recommendation and Projected
 Course of Action on Southeast Asia)" 25 May 1964 (lollAttachment) (in
 State Department Material) Vol. I) (TOP SECREl') . The disposition of
 these recommendat ions is discussed in United States - Vietnam Relations)
 IV.C.5.) pp. 22-40 (TOP SECRET) .

 19· Proc eedings of the Honolulu Conference ) dealing with the question
 of pressures against North Vietnam) are discussed in United States -
 Vietnam Relations) IV. C. 5 .) pp. 28-34 (TOP SECRET).

 20. Secretary McNamara) op . cit .) 20 February 1968) pp . 9) 10, 15) 28 .
 See also Ted Sell in~he-washington Post) 8 August 1964 .

 21. ~) pp . 31, 32 . Assistant Secretary McNaughton) ' before the Senate
 Foreign Relations Committee) "Tonkin Gulf InCident) August 2 and 4)
 1964," 23 May 1966 (in McNaughton VIII ) (TOP SECRET) . See also U.S.
 Navy chronology in Neu York Times ) 4 August 1964 and officially
 released accounts in the New York Times , 9 and 10 January 1968.

 22. McNamara) op . cit .) 20 February 1968) pp . 10, 13; McNaughton)
 op. Cit.) Edwin L. Dale) Jr. ) Neu York Times) 4 August 1964.

 23· In New York Times) 4 August 1964.

 24. McNamara ) op. Cit . ) 20 February 1968) IP ' 17) 18 , 28 .

 . 25 · From "Proof of Attack) " notes compiled by Assistant Secretary
 McNaughton (in McNaughton VIII) (TOP SECRET ) and McNamara ) op . cit .)
 20 February 1968) pp . 10) 15) 17) 35- 37 .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 26 . Ibid. See also public accounts in New York Times and Baltimore
 Sun, 5 August 1964, in New York Herald Tribune, 9 August 1964,
 and in New York Times, 4 February 1968 .

 27 · McNamara, Ope cit., 20 February 1968, pp. 17, 18, 57, 66, 92 . See
 also CTG ~2.1 to CINCPACFLT, 041452Z, 0~~1515Z, 041542Z and 041727Z
 August 1964 (SECRET).
 28 . McNamara, Op e cit . , 20 February 1968, pp . 10, 11, 48; see also
 chronology of the Tonkin crisis in New York Herald Tribune, 9 August
 1964. Quotat ion from Finney, Op e cit . , 10 January 1969 .
 29· Ibid., pp. ll, 89.

 30. Ibid., pp . 58 -60, passim. See also CTG 72 . 1 to CINCPACFLT 041727Z,
 04IB48z August 1964; JCS to CINCPAC, 042119Z August 1964 ( JCS 7720 )
 ( TOP SECRET ).

 31. Before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, 20 February 1968.
 32. See accounts in the Ne,v York Times and The Washington Post , 5 August
 1964; also the Chronology, New York Herald Tribune, 9 August 1964 .
 33 · Quotations from Secretary McNamara's testimony before Congress ional
 Committees, 6 August 1964 (TOP SECRET) . See also McNamara, Op e cit .,
 20 February 1968, pp . 14, 15, 26, 29-31 .
34. See Paul W. Ward, Baltimore Sun, 6 August 1964 and James Reston,
 New York Times , 6 August 1964 .

35· McNamara, Op e cit . , 20 February 1968, pp. 32 (The date given in the
 testimony is in error ).
36 . Ibid .

37 · McNamara news conference, 5 August 1964, in New York Times, 6 August
 19G+ . See also JCS to CINCS, 050043Z 4 August 1964 ( JCS 7729) ( SECRET) .
38 . See Solbert memorandum to SecDef, "Alert Posture for Southeast Asia, "
 26 September 1964, approved by Secretary McNamara on that date ( in
 Vietnam 381: September file) (TOP SECRET ). See also JCS to CINCPAC
 and CINCSTRlKE/CINCMEA.FSA, 241630Z October 1964 (JCS 1177) ( SECRET) .
39 · The Washi:qgton Post,6 August 1964.

 CongreSSional Record House of Representatives, 7 August 1964, pp.
 1795 4- 1 7969, passim . '
41. Committee on Foreign Relations Report, "Promoting the Maintenance of
 International Peace and Security in Southeast Asia, " U.S. Senate ,
 88th Cong- :: ss , 2nd SeSSion, 6 August 1964.

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec uti ve Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

42. Floor debate on proposed Joint Congressional Resolution, U.S.
 Senate, 6 August 1964 .

 See United States - Vietnam Relations, IV.C.5·, pp. 26, 31, 38-40,
 for a di2cussion of the rationale behird. the initially proposed
 Congressional Resolution .

44. Text in New York Times.> 6 August 1964.

 Verbatim text of message handed directly to Canadian Embassy ,
 Washington, D.C., for transmittal to Mr . Seaborn. State Depart-
 ment Drafting Offic e copy, 8 August 1964 (in State Department
 Materials, Vol I.) (TOP SECRET).

46. See account of U.S. calculations and policy decision in early
 June 1964 in Unit ed States -Vietnam Relations, IV.C.5·, pp . 25- 27,
 34-40, (TOP SECRET).
 Great BrHain and the Soviet Union (Geneva Co-Chairmen ); Canada,
 India and Poland (Members of the Geneva - appointed I.C.C.); and the
 tripartite Laotian government . See Ibid., p. 27·

48. Henry Tanner, New York Times , 27 July 1964.

49· Unger message to Secretary Rusk, 27 July 1964 ( Vientiane 170)
 (in CF 15) (TOP SECRET ).

50. ';{illiam Bundy, IIMemorandum on the Southeast Asia Situation, II
 12 June 1964 (in State Department Materials , Vol. I) ( SECRET ).

51. This vie\vpoint reflected in Department of State message to
 Vientiane , Saigon embassies and CINCPAC, ll~ August 1964 ( State 439)
 (in IISoutheast Asia, August 1964, II CF 16) (TOP SECRET ).

52. The foregOing is available through public sources . See New York
 Times for the respect ive dates.

53 . Bundy memorandum, 12 June 1964 ( SECRET) .

54. See Jack Langguth, New York Times , 31 July 1964.·

55 . Unger to Rusk, 27 July 1964 (TOP SECRET ).

 56. Henry TaI'ner, New York Times , 2 August 1964 . .

57. Department of State message to many addressees , 14 August 1964 (TOP
 SECRET ). See also, Rusk message to Vientiane and other embassies ,
 7 August 1961~ ( State 136 ) (In IISoutheast Asia , August 196h, II CF 16)
 ( SECRET ) .

 46 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By : NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 58. Rusk to Vientiane) et. al.) 7 August 1964 ( SECRET ).

 59· See New York Times) 9 and 21 August 1964; Christian Science
 Monitor) 10 August 1964.
 w. Rusk to Vientiene) et . al . ) 7 August 1964 ( SECRET) .
 61. Compare l ast paragraph in Ibid . with argRments in Bundy memorandum)
 12 June 1964 (SECRET ).
 62 . Taylor message to Secretary Rusk) 9 August ( Saigon 363) (in CF 16)
 ( SECRET) .

 See ~; Rusk message to Vientiane) et . al .) 7 August 1964; CJCS
 memorandum to SecDef) "Next Courses of Action in Southeast Asia) "
 14 August 1964 (JCSM- 701-64 ) ( in Vietnam 381 : August file ); CINCPAC
 message to JCS) IINext Courses of Action in Southeast Asia) II 17 August
 1961~ ( in CG 16) (TOP SECRET) .
 64 . Taylor to Rusk) 9 August 1961i ( SECRET).

 u.S. MisSion message to Department of State ) 18 August 1964
 ( Saigon 465) ( in CF 16) (TOP SECRET ).
 66. William Bundy me..rnorandum to SecDef et . al . ) "Next Courses of Action
 in Southeast ASia) II 11 August 1964) (in Vietnam 381: August file )
 ( SECRHI') . These viel-Ts were later expressed in a Department of State
 message to several addressees ) requesting comments .
 67. C1NCPAC to JCS) 17 August 1964 (TOP SECRET) .
 68. CJCS memorandum to SecDef "Recommended Cours es of Action - Southeast
 ASia) " 26 August 1964 ( JCSrvt-746-64) (TOP SECRET ). See also JCSM- 701- 64 .

 CINCPAC to JCS) 17 August 1964 (TOP SECRET ).
 70. See Unit ed States - Vietnam Relations) IV .C. 5 .) pp . 35-36 (TOP SECRET ).

71. Excerpts from the Rostow thesis in t!Analysis of the Rostow Thes iS) "
 attachment to Rowen memorandum to JCS) et . a1. ) "The Rostow Thes is)"
 21 August 1964 ( 1-27278/64) (SECRET).

72. ~ .) p . 2 ( SECRET ).

'73 · Department of State to several addressees) 14 August 1964 (TOP SECRET ).-

74. McNaughton letter to Assistant Secretary of State Bill1dy) 11 August
 1964 ( in Vietnam 381: August file ) (TOP SECRET) .

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316. By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 75· CINCPAC message to JCS, "Rules of Engagement," 5 August 1964
 (in Vietnam 381: August file) (TOP SECRET).
 76. JCS message to CINCPAC:,"Rules of Engagement," 15 August 1964
 (JCS 7947) ( in Vietnam 381: August file) (TOP SECRET).
 77· COMUSMACV message to CINCPAC, "Cross -Border Operations, " 16 August
 1961+ (in CF 16) (TOP SECRET ).
 78. CINCPAC message to JCS, "I.mmediate Actions to be taken in South
 Vietnam," 31 August 1964 (in Vietnam 381: August file) (TOP SECRET).

 79· "Ambassador Taylor I s Situation Report on the RVN, " attachment to
 SACSA memorandum to Colonel Alfred J. Moody, Military Assistant
 to SecDef, 14 August 1964 (in Vietnam 381: August file) (SECRET ).
 See also Department of State to several addressees , 14 August 1964
 (TOP SECRET).
 80. Bureau of Intelligence and Research memorandum, Department of State,
 24 August 1961~ ( in Department of State Materials , "Working Papers")
 (SECRET) .
 81. Taylor message to Department of State, 14 October 1964 (Saigon 1129)
 (in "Southeast Asia -- October 1964," CF 18) (TOP SECRET). The data
 reflected in this cable may have been assembled for "Infiltration
 Study, Viet Cong Forces, Republic of Viet Nam," attachment to MACV
 (Asst cis, Intelligence) letter to JCS, "Viet Cong Ll1filtration, "
 31 October 1964 (JC S 2343/490, 13 November 1964) (SECRET ).
 82. Reported in JCSM-746-64 (TOP SECRET).
 83· Department of State to several addressees, 14 August 1961~ (TOP SECRET).
 84. Joint State/Defense message to Saigon Embassy, 20 August 1964
 (in CF 16) (SECRET ).

 85· JCSM-7 4 6-64, 26 August 1964 (TOP SECRET).
 86. Assistant Secretary McNaughton, "Plan of Action for South Vietnam"
 (2nd Draft), 3 September 1964 (in State Department Materials, Vol . II)
 (TOP SECRET).

 87· JCS Talking Paper for CJCS, "Next Courses of Action for RVN, "
 7 Septemb3r 1964 (in Vietnam 381: Sensitive files) (TOP SECRET) .
. 88 . Ibid., ( TOP SECRET ).

 Hand.iritten notes of the White House meeting, 7 September 1964 ( SECRET) .

 . 48 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Exec utive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 633 16. By: NWD Date: 2011

C?ot/
 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 90 . Wi lliam Bundy memorandum to SecDef) et . al . ) "Courses of Action
 of Action for South Vietnam) " 8 September 1964 ( in Vietnam 381:
 August file ) ( SECRET).

 91. McNaughtoll) "Plan of Action for South V~etnam) " (TOP SECREr ).

 92 . Bundy memo) 8 September 1964 ( SECRET ).
 93 · Ibid . ) ( SECRET ).

 94 . Hand\vritten notes ( SECRET ).
 95· Ibid .

 96. Bundy memo) 8 September 1964 ( SECRET ).
 97 · Whi te House memorandum to SecState and SecDef) "National Securi ty
 Action Memorandum No . 314)" 10 September 1964 ( NSAM 314 ) (in
 Vietnam 381: September file ) (TOP SECRET ).
 98 . CTU 77 .6/ 6 message to COMUSMACV) flAmplifying Report on DE SOTO
 181327g SITREP) " 18 September 1964 ( in McNaughton VIII ) ( SECRET ).
 99 · NSC Working Group I-Torking Paper ) Part VIII) "Immediate Actions i n
 the Period Prior to Decision )" 7 November 1964 ( in State Department
 Materials) Vol II ) (TOP SECRET ).
 100 . Vance memorandum to Assistant Secretary McNaughton) 30 September
 1964 . See also L . Thompson letter to Deputy Secretary Vance )
 25 September 1964 ( Both in Vietnam 381: September fil e ) ( SECRET).
 101. Taylor message to SecState) Section One ) 19 September 1964 ( Saigon
 913 ) ( in Vietnam 381: September file ) (TOP SECRET ).
 102 . Taylor to SecState ) Section Tlvo) 19 September 1964 (TOP SECREr ).
 103 · Ibid .

 104 . Vientiane Embassy message to Sec State ( Vientiane 448 )) described
 i n Section One) 19 September 1964 (TOP SECRET) .

 105· Section T\·ro ) 19 September 1961~ (TOP SECRET ).
 1 06 . CJCS memcrandu..m to SecDef) "Cross - Border Operations )" 30 September
 1964 (JCSM-835 - 64) (TOP SECRET ).
 107 · Joint State/Defense message to Vientiane Embassy) 6 October 1964
 ( State 313) ( in "Southeast Asia) September 1964)" C}!' 17 ) (TOP SECRET ).
 108. SNIE 10-3-64) "Probable Communist Reactions to Certain Possible
 U.S ./GVN Courses of ActiQn) " 9 October 1961+) p . 6 (TOP SECREt' ).

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Section 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 109· State/Defense to Vientiane) 6 October 1964 (TOP SECRET) .

 110. Unger message to Secretary Rusk and McNamara) .13 October 1964
 (Vient iane 609 ) (in Vietnam 381: October file) (TOP SECRET ).

 111. Taylor message to Secretary Rusk) 9 October 1964 ( Saigon 1068 )
 (in "Southeast Asia - October 1964)" CF 18) TOP SECRET ).

112. NSC Working Group Working Paper) Part VIII) 7 November 1964 (TOP SECRET).

113· Henry Kamm) New York Times) 3 and 8 September 1964.

114 . Drew Middleton) New York Times) 16) 17) 18 and 22 September 1964 .

115· Unger message to Department of State) 17 August 1964 (Vi entiane
 310) ( in CF 16) (TOP SECRET) . .

116 . Bundy memo to SecDef et . al .) 11 August 1964 ( SECRET ).
 For evidence of recognition by the Vientiane Embassy of the intent
 of U.S. policies) see Unger to Department of State) 17 August 1964
 (TOP SECRET) . .

li7· Ambassador Unger) in intervie\v vlith the writer) 6 March 1967
 (CONFIDENTLAL) .

118. Bundy memo) 11 August 1964 ( SECRET ).
119. Ibid .

120 . U.S. Mission ( Saigon ) to Department of State) 18 August 1964 ( TOP SECRET) .

121. Rostow letter to Ambassador Taylor) 23 September 1964) attachment
 to a Rostmr memorandum to Secretary McNamara, 23 September 1964
 (in Vietnam 381 : September file) ( SECRET) .

122 . See Unit ed States - Vietnam Relations) IV.C.5.) pp . 25-26 (TOP SECRh~ ).

123· Taylor message to White House) 10 August 19@~ ( Saigon 364 ) (in CF 16)
 (TOP SECRET ). See also Rusk message to Saigon Embassy) 20 AugUst 1964
 ( State 481 ) (in CF 16) ( SECRET) . . . .

124. Bund y memo to SecDef . et . a1., 11 August 1964; Department of State
 to several addressees: 14 August 1964 (TOP SECRET) .

125 · Department of State to several addressees ) 14 August 1964 (TOP SECRET) .
 The working paper omitted the phrase) "for planning purposes ."

126. Bundy to SecDef) et . al ., 11 August 1964 (SECRET ).

 50 'I'OP SECRET - Sensitive
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3,3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 , By: NWD Date: 2011

. /06
 TOP SECRET - Sens itive

 127 · U. S. Mission (Saigon ) to Department of State, 18 August 1964
 ( TOP SECRET) .

 128 . McNaughton, fr Plan of Action for South Vietnam, fr ( TOP SECRET ).

 129 · Bundy memo, 8 September 1964 ( SECRET ).

 130 . ~ .; see also NSAM 314, 10 September 1964 ( TOP SECRET ).

 131 . See Joint State/Defense message to Ambassador Taylor, 29 October
 1964 ( State 937 ) ( in CF 18 ) (TOP SECRET ).

 132 . IISummaryll in IIAnalysis of the Rostow Thes i s, II pp . 2- 3 ( SECRET ).

 133· Ibid . , p . 2 ( SECRET ).

 134 . ~ .. , pp . 3- 4 ( SECRET ).

 135 . IIAna 1YSlS
 . of the Rostow Thesis, II pp . 13-1,
 4 24 , 25 , ( SECRET ) .

 136 . "Summary ll.In _Ib l_
 'd. , p . 5.

 1 37 · CJCS memorandum to SecDef, IICourses of Action for South Vietnam, II
 9 September 1964 ( CM- 124-64 ) ( in Vietnam 381 : September file ). See
 also, CINCPAC to JCS) 17 August 1964 (TOP SECRET ).

 138 . JCSM- 7lf6-64, 26 August ' 1964 ; CJCS Talking Paper) 7 September 1964;
 CM-124-64 ; CM- 124-64) 9 September 1964 (TOP SECRET) .

 139 · McNaughton memorandum to Secretary McNama ra , "Air Force Study on
 Tactical Air Capability in Southeast Asia, II 8 August 1961t ( in Vietnam
 381: August file ); if~CV 150123~ and CINCPAC 18231lt~ , in William
 Bundy memorandum) "I ssues Concerning Next Cours es of Action,lI
 25 August 1964, Items G and H ( in State Department Materials , Book I );
 CINCPAC to JCS, 17 August 1964; CJCS memorandum to SecDef, " Improve-
 ment of U. S . Security Posture in South Vietnam) " 2lt August 1964 ( JCSM-
 73 1 -64 ); CJCS memorandum to SecDef, IIAir Force Tactical Air Relation-
 ships Study ( Southeast Asia ), II It September 1964 ( JCSM - 763 - 64 ) (TOP
 SECRET ) .

 l ltO . JCSM- 701-64 , llt August 1964; CINCPAC to JCS ) 17 August 1964; JCSM-
 7lt 6- 64 , 26 August 1964; CJCS Talking Paper, 7 September 1964 ( TOP
 SECREr ) .

 llt1- Saigon ltS7 and Saigon 538 cited in Bun(1.y memo, 25 August 1964;
 u. S . Mission ( Saigon ) to Department of State) 18 August 1964
 (TOP SECRET) .

 llt2 . U. S MiSSion to Depart ment of State , JB August 1964; Bundy memo,
 o

 25 August 1964; HandT.orr itten notes, 7 September 1964 (TOP SECRET ).

 51 TOP SECRET Sensiti 'Fe
 Declassified per Executive Order 13526, Sectio n 3.3
 NND Project Number: NND 63316 . By: NWD Date: 2011

 TOP SECRET - Sensitive

 143· UoS. Mission to Department of State)J6 August 1964; Handwritten
 notes) 7 September 1964 (TOP SECRET ).

 144 . Bundy memo) 25 August 1964; McNaughton draft ) "Aims and Options in
 Southeast Asia)" 13 October 1964 ( in "Drafts 1965) " McNaughton I I )
 (TOP SECRET ).

 145 · Penciled notes on Bundy memo to SecDef) et . al . ) 11 August 1964;
 McNaughton, op . cit . ; McNaughton) "Plan of Action for South Vietnam, "
 3 September 1964 (TOP SECRET) .

 146 . McNamara memorandum to CJCS) "JCSM- 729 - 64 : Target Study - North
 Vietnam ( SECRET)," 31 August 1964 ( in Vietnam 381: August file ) ;
 McNaughton) "Plan of Action for South Vietnam) " 3 September 1964;
 McNaughton draft) 13 October 1964 (TOP SECRET ).

147. ROche memorandum to JCS) "Draft Sc enar ios for Recommendation 12
 ( NSAM 288 ))" 14 August 1964 ( in Vietnam 381 : August file ) ; McNaughton)
 "Plan of Action for South Vietnam) " 3 September 1964; Bundy draft
 memorandum "Courses of Action for South Vietnam)" ( undated) l-lith
 penciled notations ) ( in' Vietnam 381 : September file ) ( TOP SECRET ).

148 . McNaughton to McNamara) 8 August 1964; Hitch memorandum to Secretary
 McNamara) "Reviel.T of USAF Study : Relationships of Tactical Air
 to Ground Forc es ) SEA; 1964 and 1969 (U») " 24 August 1964 (in Vietnam
 381: August file ) ; McNamara memorandum to CJCS) "Improvement of U. S .
 Sccurity Posture in South Vietnam)" 31 August 1964 ( in Vietnanl 381:
 August file ) (TOP SECRET) .

149 . Department of State to several addressees) 14 August 1964 ; Bundy
 memo) 25 August 1964; Handlvritten notes ) 7 September 196L~ (TOP SECRET ).

150 . NSAM 314) 10 September 1964 ; Joint State/Defense to Taylor) 29 October
 1964 ( TOP SECRET ).

151. See McNaughton to McNamara ) 8 August 1964 ; also) Department of State
 t o several addressees ) 14 August 1964 ; Bundy memo) 8 September 1964)
 part i cularly in comparison "rith Bundy draft memo ( undated) with
 penc il notes ) ( SECRET) .

152 . SNIE 10-3-64 ) 9 October 1964 ) pp. 5) 6 (TOP SECRET).

153 · ~) pp . 9 - 11 ( TOP SECRb~ ).

154 . Ibid . ) pp . 11- 12 ( TOP SECRET) .

155· Ibid .) p . 2; Handvlritten notes) 7 September 1964; SNlE 53- 2 - 64 )
 "The Situation in South Vietnam)" 1 October 1964) p . 1 (TOP SECRET ).

 52 TOP SECRET - Sensitive